ISTUDYlar31869_fm_i-1.indd i 12/01/22 11:25 AM
Personality Psychology
D O M A I N S 
O F 
K N O W L E D G E 
A B O U T 
H U M A N 
N A T U R E
E i g h t h E d i t i o n
Randy J. Larsen
W A S H I N G T O N U N I V E R S I T Y I N S T . L O U I S
David M. Buss
U N I V E R S I T Y O F T E X A S A T A U S T I N
Color changes
Final PDF to printerlar80987_fm_ise.indd ii 11/02/22 07:44 PM
PERSONALITY PSYCHOLOGY
Published by McGraw Hill LLC, 1325 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019. Copyright ©2024 
by McGraw Hill LLC. All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America. No part of this 
publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in a database or 
retrieval system, without the prior written consent of McGraw Hill LLC, including, but not limited to, in 
any network or other electronic storage or transmission, or broadcast for distance learning.
Some ancillaries, including electronic and print components, may not be available to customers outside the 
United States.
This book is printed on acid-free paper. 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 LWI 28 27 26 25 24 23 
ISBN 978-1-266-28098-6
MHID 1-266-28098-7
Cover Image: Tavis Wright/Image Source, Lightspring/Shutterstock, Svisio/Getty Images, Science Photo Library 
RF/Getty Images, Lightspring/Shutterstock, Athanasia Nomikou/Shutterstock
All credits appearing on page or at the end of the book are considered to be an extension of the copyright page.
mheducation.com/highered
The Internet addresses listed in the text were accurate at the time of publication. The inclusion of a website 
does not indicate an endorsement by the authors or McGraw Hill LLC, and McGraw Hill LLC does not 
guarantee the accuracy of the information presented at these sites.
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDYlar31869_fm_i-1.indd iii 12/01/22 11:25 AM
Dedication
To all my students of personality, especially 
Tim Bono, who is applying this knowledge to 
improve the lives of others.
RL
To my father Arnold H. Buss.
DB
Final PDF to printerlar31869_fm_i-1.indd iv 12/01/22 11:25 AM
Brief Contents
INTRODUCTION
1 Introduction to Personality Psychology 2
2 Personality Assessment, Measurement, and Research Design 22
PART I
The Dispositional Domain
3 Traits and Trait Taxonomies 56
4 Theoretical and Measurement Issues in Trait Psychology 86
5 Personality Dispositions over Time: Stability, Coherence, and Change 122
PART II
The Biological Domain
6 Genetics and Personality 154
7 Physiological Approaches to Personality 184
8 Evolutionary Perspectives on Personality 222
PART III
The Intrapsychic Domain
9 Psychoanalytic Approaches to Personality 260
10 Psychoanalytic Approaches: Contemporary Issues 296
11 Motives and Personality 330
PART IV
The Cognitive/Experiential Domain
12 Cognitive Topics in Personality 368
13 Emotion and Personality 400
14 Approaches to the Self 436
PART V
The Social and Cultural Domain
15 Personality and Social Interaction 468
16 Sex, Gender, and Personality 496
17 Culture and Personality 524
PART VI
The Adjustment Domain
18 Stress, Coping, Adjustment, and Health 554
19 Disorders of Personality 584
CONCLUSION
20 Summary and Future Directions 624
iv
Color changes
Color changes
Color changes
Color changes
Final PDF to printerlar31869_fm_i-1.indd v 12/01/22 11:25 AM
Contents
About the Authors xv | Preface xvii
INTRODUCTION
Chapter 1 Introduction to Personality Psychology 2
Personality Defined 4
Personality Is the Set of Psychological Traits . . .  5
And Mechanisms . . .  6
Within the Individual . . .  7
That Are Organized and Relatively Enduring . . .  7
And That Influence . . .  8
Their Interactions with . . .  8
And Adaptations to . . .  9
The Environment  9
Three Levels of Personality Analysis 10
Human Nature  11
Individual and Group Differences  11
Individual Uniqueness  12
A Fissure in the Field 12
Grand Theories of Personality  12
Contemporary Research in Personality  13
Six Domains of Knowledge About Human Nature 14
Dispositional Domain  15
Biological Domain  15
Intrapsychic Domain  16
Cognitive-Experiential Domain  16
Social and Cultural Domain  17
Adjustment Domain  18
The Role of Personality Theory 18
Standards for Evaluating Personality Theories 19
Is There a Grand Ultimate and True Theory of Personality? 21
KE Y T ERMS 2 1
Chapter 2 Personality Assessment, Measurement, and Research Design 22
Sources of Personality Data 24
Self-Report Data (S-Data)  24
Observer-Report Data (O-Data)  27
Test Data (T-Data)  29
Top Left: Tavis Wright/Image 
Source; Top Right: Svisio/Getty 
Images; Middle Left: Science Photo 
Library RF/Getty Images; Middle 
Right: Lightspring/Shutterstock; 
Bottom Left: Arthimedes/
Shutterstock; Bottom Right: 
Athanasia Nomikou/Shutterstock
Color changes
Color changes
Final PDF to printervi Contents
lar31869_fm_i-1.indd vi 12/01/22 11:25 AM
Life-Outcome Data (L-Data)  35
Issues in Personality Assessment  37
Evaluation of Personality Measures 38
Reliability  38
Response Sets  39
Validity  42
Generalizability  43
Research Designs in Personality 43
Experimental Methods  44
Correlational Studies  46
Case Studies  49
When to Use Experimental, Correlational, and Case Study Designs  51
SUMMARY AND EVALUATION 5 2
KE Y T ERMS 5 3
PART I
The Dispositional Domain
Chapter 3
Traits and Trait Taxonomies 56
What Is a Trait? Two Basic Formulations 58
Traits as Internal Causal Properties  58
Traits as Purely Descriptive Summaries  59
The Act Frequency Formulation of Traits—An Illustration of the Descriptive Summary 
Formulation 60
Act Frequency Research Program  60
Evaluation of the Act Frequency Formulation  62
Identification of the Most Important Traits 63
Lexical Approach  63
Statistical Approach  64
Theoretical Approach  66
Evaluating the Approaches for Identifying Important Traits  66
Taxonomies of Personality 67
Eysenck’s Hierarchical Model of Personality  67
Circumplex Taxonomies of Personality  71
Five-Factor Model  73
The HEXACO Model  83
SUMMARY AND EVALUATION 8 4
KE Y T ERMS 8 5
Chapter 4
Theoretical and Measurement Issues in Trait Psychology 86
Theoretical Issues 89
Meaningful Differences Among Individuals  89
Stability over Time  90
HOWARD BARTROP/
Image Source
Color changes
Color changes
Color changes
Color changes
Color changes
Color changes
Final PDF to printerContents vii
lar31869_fm_i-1.indd vii 12/01/22 11:25 AM
Consistency Across Situations  91
Person–Situation Interaction  94
Aggregation  98
Measurement Issues 101
Carelessness  102
Faking on Questionnaires  102
Beware of Barnum Statements in Personality Test Interpretations  104
Personality and Prediction 105
Applications of Personality Testing in the Workplace  105
Legal Issues in Personality Testing in Employment Settings  108
Personnel Selection—Choosing the Right Person for the Job  113
Selection in Business Settings—The Myers–Briggs Type Indicator: A Worst-Case 
Example  114
Selection in Business Settings—The Hogan Personality Inventory: A Best-Case 
Example  118
SUMMARY AND EVALUATION 120
KE Y T ERMS 121
Chapter 5 Personality Dispositions over Time: Stability, Coherence, and Change 122
Conceptual Issues: Personality Development, Stability, Coherence, and Change 124
What Is Personality Development?  124
Rank Order Stability  124
Mean Level Stability  125
Personality Coherence  125
Personality Change  127
Three Levels of Analysis 127
Population Level  127
Group Differences Level  128
Individual Differences Level  128
Personality Stability over Time 129
Stability of Temperament During Infancy  129
Stability During Childhood  130
Rank Order Stability in Adulthood  132
Mean Level Stability and Change in Adulthood  135
Personality Change 139
Changes in Self-Esteem from Adolescence to Adulthood  139
Autonomy, Dominance, Leadership, and Ambition  139
Sensation Seeking  140
Femininity  140
Independence and Traditional Roles  142
Personality Changes Across Cohorts: Assertiveness and Narcissism  143
Can You Intentionally Change Your Personality?  144
Personality Coherence over Time: Prediction of Socially Relevant Outcomes 145
Marital Stability, Marital Satisfaction, and Divorce  145
Alcoholism, Drug Use, and Emotional Disturbance  146
Religiousness and Spirituality  147
Final PDF to printerviii Contents
lar31869_fm_i-1.indd viii 12/01/22 11:25 AM
Education, Academic Achievement, and Dropping Out  147
Health, Retirement, and Longevity  148
Predicting Personality Change  149
SUMMARY AND EVALUATION 150
KE Y T ERMS 151
PART II
The Biological Domain
Chapter 6
Genetics and Personality 154
The Human Genome 156
Controversy About Genes and Personality 157
Goals of Behavioral Genetics 158
What Is Heritability? 159
Misconceptions About Heritability  160
Nature–Nurture Debate Clarified  161
Behavioral Genetic Methods 161
Selective Breeding—Studies of Humans’ Best Friend  162
Family Studies  163
Twin Studies  163
Adoption Studies  165
Major Findings from Behavioral Genetic Research 167
Personality Traits  167
Attitudes and Preferences  169
Drinking and Smoking  170
Marriage and Satisfaction with Life  172
Shared Versus Nonshared Environmental Influences: A Riddle 173
Genes and the Environment 175
Genotype–Environment Interaction  175
Genotype–Environment Correlation  176
Molecular Genetics 178
Behavioral Genetics, Science, Politics, and Values 180
SUMMARY AND EVALUATION 181
KE Y T ERMS 183
Chapter 7
Physiological Approaches to Personality 184
A Physiological Approach to Personality 190
Physiological Measures Commonly Used in Personality Research 191
Electrodermal Activity (Skin Conductance)  191
Cardiovascular Activity  192
The Brain  193
Other Measures  199
Svisio/Getty Images
Final PDF to printerContents ix
lar31869_fm_i-1.indd ix 12/01/22 11:25 AM
Physiologically Based Theories of Personality 200
Extraversion–Introversion  200
Sensitivity to Reward and Punishment  204
Sensation Seeking  207
Neurotransmitters and Personality  210
Morningness–Eveningness  212
Brain Asymmetry and Affective Style  217
SUMMARY AND EVALUATION 220
KE Y T ERMS 221
Chapter 8
Evolutionary Perspectives on Personality 222
Evolution and Natural Selection 224
Natural Selection  224
Sexual Selection  225
Genes and Inclusive Fitness  226
Products of the Evolutionary Process  226
Evolutionary Psychology 228
Premises of Evolutionary Psychology  228
Empirical Testing of Evolutionary Hypotheses  230
Human Nature 232
Need to Belong  232
Helping and Altruism  234
Universal Emotions  236
Sex Differences 238
Sex Differences in Aggression  239
Sex Differences in Jealousy  241
Sex Differences in Desire for Sexual Variety  245
Sex Differences in Mate Preferences  246
Individual Differences 248
Environmental Triggers of Individual Differences  249
Heritable Individual Differences Contingent on Other Traits  250
Frequency–Dependent Strategic Individual Differences  251
The Big Five, Motivation, and Evolutionarily Relevant Adaptive Problems 254
Limitations of Evolutionary Psychology 255
SUMMARY AND EVALUATION 256
KE Y T ERMS 257
PART III
The Intrapsychic Domain
Chapter 9
Psychoanalytic Approaches to Personality 260
Sigmund Freud: A Brief Biography 263
Fundamental Assumptions of Psychoanalytic Theory 264
Science Photo Library RF/Getty 
Final PDF to printerx Contents
lar31869_fm_i-1.indd x 12/01/22 11:25 AM
Basic Instincts: Sex and Aggression  265
Unconscious Motivation: Sometimes We Don’t Know 
Why We Do What We Do  265
Psychic Determinism: Nothing Happens by Chance  267
Structure of Personality 270
Id: Reservoir of Psychic Energy  270
Ego: Executive of Personality  271
Superego: Upholder of Societal Values and Ideals  275
Interaction of the Id, Ego, and Superego  275
Dynamics of Personality 276
Types of Anxiety  276
Defense Mechanisms  277
Psychosexual Stages of Personality Development 283
Personality and Psychoanalysis 286
Techniques for Revealing the Unconscious  287
The Process of Psychoanalysis  289
Why Is Psychoanalysis Important? 291
Evaluation of Freud’s Contributions 292
SUMMARY AND EVALUATION 294
KE Y T ERMS 295
Chapter 10
Psychoanalytic Approaches: Contemporary Issues 296
The Neo-Analytic Movement 299
Repression and Contemporary Research on Memory  299
False Memories from Fake News  304
Contemporary Views on the Unconscious  306
Ego Psychology 308
Erikson’s Eight Stages of Development  311
Karen Horney and a Feminist Interpretation of Psychoanalysis  317
Emphasis on Self and the Notion of Narcissism  318
Object Relations Theory 319
Early Childhood Attachment  320
Adult Relationships  323
SUMMARY AND EVALUATION 328
KE Y T ERMS 329
Chapter 11
Motives and Personality 330
Basic Concepts 332
Need  334
Press  335
Apperception and the TAT  336
Final PDF to printerContents xi
lar31869_fm_i-1.indd xi 12/01/22 11:25 AM
The Big Three Motives: Achievement, Power, and 
Intimacy 338
Need for Achievement  339
Need for Power  344
Need for Intimacy  347
Humanistic Tradition: The Motive to 
Self-Actualize 348
Maslow’s Contributions  350
Rogers’s Contributions  355
SUMMARY AND EVALUATION 363
KE Y T ERMS 365
PART IV
The Cognitive/Experiential Domain
Chapter 12
Cognitive Topics in Personality 368
Personality Revealed Through Perception 372
Field Dependence-Independence  372
Pain Tolerance and Sensation Reducing/Augmenting  378
Personality Revealed Through Interpretation 380
Kelly’s Personal Construct Theory  380
Locus of Control  382
Learned Helplessness  385
Personality Revealed Through Goals 387
Personal Projects Analysis  387
Cognitive Social Learning Theory  390
Intelligence 393
SUMMARY AND EVALUATION 397
KE Y T ERMS 399
Chapter 13
Emotion and Personality 400
Issues in Emotion Research 402
Emotional States Versus Emotional Traits  403
Categorical Versus Dimensional Approach to Emotion  403
Content Versus Style of Emotional Life 406
Content of Emotional Life  406
Style of Emotional Life  429
Interaction of Content and Style in Emotional Life  433
SUMMARY AND EVALUATION 434
KE Y T ERMS 435
Lightspring/Shutterstock
Final PDF to printerxii Contents
lar31869_fm_i-1.indd xii 12/01/22 11:25 AM
Chapter 14
Approaches to the Self 436
Descriptive Component of the Self: Self-Concept 439
Development of the Self-Concept  439
Self-Schemata: Possible Selves, Ought Selves, and Undesired Selves  443
Evaluative Component of the Self: Self-Esteem 448
Evaluation of Oneself  448
Research on Self-Esteem  449
Social Component of the Self: Social Identity 457
The Nature of Identity  458
Identity Development  458
Identity Crises  460
SUMMARY AND EVALUATION 463
KE Y T ERMS 465
PART V
The Social and Cultural Domain
Chapter 15
Personality and Social Interaction 468
Selection 470
Personality Characteristics Desired in a Marriage Partner  471
Assortative Mating for Personality: The Search for the Similar  473
Do People Get the Mates They Want? And Are They Happy?  475
Personality and the Selective Breakup of Couples  478
Shyness and the Selection of Risky Situations  479
Personality Traits and the Selection of Friends and Situations  480
Evocation 480
Aggression and the Evocation of Hostility  481
Evocation of Anger and Upset in Partners  481
Evocation of Likability, Pleasure, and Pain  485
Evocation Through Expectancy Confirmation  485
Manipulation: Social Influence Tactics 486
A Taxonomy of Eleven Tactics of Manipulation  486
Sex Differences in Tactics of Manipulation  488
Personality Predictors of Tactics of Manipulation  488
Panning Back: An Overview of Personality and Social Interaction 492
SUMMARY AND EVALUATION 494
KE Y T ERMS 495
Chapter 16
Sex, Gender, and Personality 496
The Science and Politics of Studying Sex and Gender 498
History of the Study of Sex Differences  498
Lightspring/Shutterstock
Final PDF to printerContents xiii
lar31869_fm_i-1.indd xiii 12/01/22 11:25 AM
Calculation of Effect Size: How Large Are the Sex Differences?  499
Minimalists and Maximalists  501
Sex Differences in Personality 501
Temperament in Children  501
Five-Factor Model  503
Basic Emotions: Frequency and Intensity  506
Other Dimensions of Personality  507
Masculinity, Femininity, Androgyny, and Sex Roles 509
The Search for Androgyny  511
Gender Stereotypes  514
Theories of Sex Differences 516
Socialization and Social Roles  517
Hormonal Theories  519
Evolutionary Psychology Theory  520
An Integrated Theoretical Perspective  521
SUMMARY AND EVALUATION 522
KE Y T ERMS 523
Chapter 17
Culture and Personality 524
Cultural Violations: An Illustration 526
What Is Cultural Personality Psychology? 527
Three Major Approaches to Culture 527
Evoked Culture  527
Transmitted Culture  531
Cultural Universals  542
SUMMARY AND EVALUATION 550
KE Y T ERMS 551
PART VI
The Adjustment Domain
Chapter 18
Stress, Coping, Adjustment, and Health 554
Models of the Personality–Illness Connection 556
COVID-19 and the Five Models of Personality–Illness Connection  562
The Concept of Stress 564
Stress Response  565
Major Life Events  565
Daily Hassles  567
Varieties of Stress  568
Primary and Secondary Appraisal  569
Coping Strategies and Styles 570
Attributional Style  570
Dispositional Optimism  571
Athanasia Nomikou/Shutterstock
Final PDF to printerxiv Contents
lar31869_fm_i-1.indd xiv 12/01/22 11:25 AM
Management of Emotions  573
Disclosure  575
Type A Personality and Cardiovascular Disease 577
Hostility: The Lethal Component of the Type A Behavior Pattern  580
How the Arteries Are Damaged by Hostile Type A Behavior  582
SUMMARY AND EVALUATION 582
KE Y T ERMS 583
Chapter 19
Disorders of Personality 584
The Building Blocks of Personality Disorders 586
The Concept of Disorder 588
What Is Abnormal?  588
The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders  589
What Is a Personality Disorder?  591
Specific Personality Disorders 593
The Erratic Cluster: Ways of Being Unpredictable, Violent, or Emotional  593
The Eccentric Cluster: Ways of Being Different  604
The Anxious Cluster: Ways of Being Nervous, Fearful, or Distressed  610
Prevalence of Personality Disorders 616
Gender Differences in Personality Disorders  617
Dimensional Model of Personality Disorders 617
Causes of Personality Disorders 619
SUMMARY AND EVALUATION 622
KE Y T ERMS 623
Chapter 20
Summary and Future Directions 624
Current Status of the Field 626
Domains of Knowledge: Where We’ve Been, Where We’re Going 627
Dispositional Domain  627
Biological Domain  628
Intrapsychic Domain  631
Cognitive/Experiential Domain  631
Social and Cultural Domain  632
Adjustment Domain  634
Integration: Personality in the Twenty-First Century 635
Glossary 636
References 665
Name Index 719
Subject Index 731
Final PDF to printerlar31869_fm_i-1.indd xv 12/01/22 11:25 AM
About the Authors
Randy J. Larsen received his MA in Clinical Psychology 
from Duquesne University and his PhD in Personality Psychology from 
the University of Illinois at Champaign-Urbana. Over the years, his 
clinical experiences include adolescent therapist (Illinois Department 
of Children and Family Services), prison psychologist (Pennsylvania 
Department of Corrections), police psychologist (Steel Valley Council 
of Governments), and prison educator (Missouri Eastern Correctional 
Center). As a college professor, he has served on the faculty of Purdue 
University, the University of Michigan (where he met David Buss 
and began collaborating on this book), and Washington University 
in St. Louis. His research awards include a Distinguished Scientific 
Achievement Award for Early Career Contributions to Personality Psychology from 
the American Psychological Association and a Research Scientist Development Award 
from the National Institute of Mental Health. He has been an associate editor at the 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, Cognition and Emotion, and the Personality 
and Social Psychology Bulletin and has been on the editorial boards of the Journal of 
Research in Personality, Review of General Psychology, and the Journal of Personality. He 
has authored over 150 scientific papers and book chapters in personality psychology and 
is on the Institute of Scientific Information’s list of the top 25 most cited scientists in 
his discipline. His books include The Science of Subjective Well-Being (with Michael Eid; 
Guilford Press), Taking Sides in Personality Psychology (with Laurel Newman; McGraw￾Hill), and Handbook of Personality Processes and Individual Differences (with Lynne 
Cooper; APA Press). Randy Larsen has served on several Scientific Review Groups for 
the National Institutes of Health and the National Research Council. His research on 
personality has been supported by the National Institute of Mental Health, the National 
Science Foundation, the National Institute of Aging, the National Institute of General 
Medical Sciences, the McDonnell Foundation for Cognitive Neuroscience, and the 
Solon Summerfield Foundation. Currently Randy Larsen is the William R. Stuckenberg 
Professor of Human Values and Moral Development at Washington University in St. 
Louis. His recent classes there include personality psychology, positive psychology, 
introductory psychology, and ethics for scientists. He lives in St. Louis with his wife, and 
their two children are currently in college.
Courtesy of Randy J. Larsen
Color changes
Final PDF to printerlar31869_fm_i-1.indd xvi 12/01/22 11:25 AM
xvi
David M. Buss received his PhD from the University of 
California at Berkeley. He served on the faculties of Harvard University 
and the University of Michigan before accepting a professorship at the 
University of Texas at Austin, where he currently teaches. Buss received 
the American Psychological Association (APA) Distinguished Scientific 
Award for Early Career Contribution to Personality Psychology, the APA 
G. Stanley Hall Award, and the APA Distinguished Scientist Lecturer 
Award. Books by David Buss include The Evolution of Desire: Strategies of 
Human Mating (Revised Edition) (Basic Books, 2016), which has been 
translated into 10 languages; Evolutionary Psychology: The New Science of 
the Mind (6th ed.) (Taylor & Francis, 2019), which was presented with the Robert W. 
Hamilton Book Award; The Dangerous Passion: Why Jealousy Is as Necessary as Love and 
Sex (Free Press, 2000), which has been translated into 13 languages; and two editions of 
The Handbook of Evolutionary Psychology (Wiley, 2005, 2016). Buss has authored more 
than 300 scientific publications and has also written articles for The New York Times and 
the Times Higher Education Supplement. He appears in the ISI List of Most Highly Cited 
Psychologists Worldwide, has been cited as one of the most eminent psychologists of the 
modern era, and has been cited as one of the 30 most influential living psychologists. 
The American Psychological Society (APS) awarded David Buss the Mentor Award for 
Lifetime Achievement in 2017. He lectures widely throughout the United States and 
abroad and has extensive cross-cultural research collaborations. David Buss greatly 
enjoys teaching and had the honor of winning the President’s Teaching Excellence 
Award at the University of Texas.
David M. Buss
Final PDF to printerlar31869_fm_i-1.indd xvii 12/01/22 11:25 AM
Preface
We have devoted our lives to the scientific study of personality. We believe this sub￾discipline, the scientific study of what it means to be a person, is one of the most exciting 
parts of psychology. Thus we were enormously gratified to see the volume of e-mails, 
letters, and comments from satisfied consumers of our first through seventh editions. 
At the same time, preparing the eighth edition proved to be a humbling experience. The 
cascade of exciting findings in the field of personality is formidable, requiring not merely 
updating but also the addition of major sections of new material. Moreover, in important 
ways, our first edition proved prescient in terms of changes in how the field is organized 
and taught.
Rather than organize our text around the traditional grand theories of personality, 
we devised a framework of six important domains of knowledge about personality func￾tioning. These six domains are the dispositional domain (traits, trait taxonomies, and per￾sonality dispositions over time), the biological domain (physiology, genetics, evolution), 
the intrapsychic domain (psychodynamics, motives), the cognitive-experiential domain
(cognition, emotion, and the self), the social and cultural domain (social interaction, 
gender, and culture), and the adjustment domain (stress, coping, health, and personality 
disorders). We believed these domains of knowledge best represented the state of affairs 
in personality psychology in the year 2000, as we were writing the first edition of this 
text. Progress in the field since then has continued to bear out that belief as new knowl￾edge has accumulated in each of these domains.
In addition to major organizing themes (the six domains), our previous editions 
also differed from other personality texts in the importance placed on culture, gender,
and biology, and these areas of personality have shown substantial growth in recent 
years. But we have also been fascinated to witness and describe growth in each of the six 
major domains of personality that form the organizational core of the book.
We have always envisioned our text as a reflection of the contemporary personal￾ity psychology. Our desire is to capture the excitement of what the science of personality 
is all about. For the eighth edition, we did our best to remain true to that vision. We 
believe that the field of personality psychology has entered a golden age, and we hope 
that the changes we’ve made to the eighth edition convey a discipline that is vibrant in a 
way it never has been before. After all, no other field is devoted to the study of all that it 
means to be human.
For this edition, each chapter has been streamlined through judicious trimming. 
This provided room for discussing new research conducted within the past three years, 
making length of this edition similar to the previous. Significant additions to the seventh 
edition are described below.
Chapter 1: Introduction to Personality Psychology
• Editing to streamline the writing and update the goals of personality research.
Chapter 2: Personality Assessment, Measurement, and Research Design
• Experience sampling used to identify the negative effects of being indoors and 
computer screen time usage on loneliness during the COVID-19 pandemic.
• A spouse or lover has access to privileged information often inaccessible through 
other sources, such as their sexual behavior.
• Even the facial expressions displayed during these laboratory conflicts predict 
subsequent marital outcomes.
Color changes
Final PDF to printerxviii Preface
lar31869_fm_i-1.indd xviii 12/01/22 11:25 AM
• T-data enable experimenters to test specific hypotheses, such as the predicted effect 
of Extraversion on social decision making.
• Actometer measures have been used to assess hyperactivity and ADHD in 
children.
• Traits such as Narcissism and Psychopathy are positively correlated with 
pornography consumption.
• Sensation seeking successfully predicted a variety of gambling behaviors, such 
as playing the lottery, betting on sporting events, playing video poker, using slot 
machines, and addiction to cocaine.
Chapter 3: Traits and Trait Taxonomies
• Frequency of suicidal ideation, for example, is a good predictor of depressive 
symptoms.
• One study found as many as eight factors from an analysis of personality nouns, 
including Dummy (twit, trash), Doll (beauty, sweetie), Philosopher (bookworm, 
nonconformist), Goof (joker, clown), Chatterbox (flirt, loudmouth), and Ladies’ 
man (stud, hunk).
• New exercise assessing the degree to which people are currently seeking short￾term mating (casual sex) versus long-term committed mating relationships.
• New book recommendation on the strengths of introverts: Cain, S. (2013). Quiet: 
The power of introverts in a world that can’t stop talking. Broadway Books.
• High-N scorers tend to express more dissatisfaction with their romantic 
relationships.
• Introverts also seem to cope better with being alone during the COVID-19 
pandemic, cope better with chronic pain, and suffer fewer sleep disturbances 
compared to extraverts.
• A recent review of 152 studies found that the HEXACO model provided broader 
coverage of the personality domain compared to the five-factor model.
Chapter 4: Theoretical and Measurement Issues in Trait Psychology
• Updated information and links on dating sites that use personality testing to 
match people
• Clarified how personality tests can be used in selection settings, and how 
measurement accuracy (reliability and validity) can influence success in selection 
efforts.
• Improved description of how a few primary traits can combine to create unique 
personalities.
• Introduce how a high test-retest correlation does not mean people did not change 
between testing, instead it confirms that people maintained their rank order over 
time.
• Include recent references to person–situation interaction.
• Since Walter Michel and Seymour Epstein recently passed away, reference to 
their important work and ideas is now described in the past tense.
• Clarified the concept of “aggregation” and added it as a key term in this edition.
• More detail provided on Barnum statements in personality feedback, using 
astrology and Bradley Cooper’s “mentalist” character in the movie “Nightmare 
Alley” as examples of how overly general statements can be believable.
• Provide a link to a Big Five assessment site where students can take the 
questionnaire and obtain personal testing feedback that is quantitative, specific, 
and based on empirical research.
Final PDF to printerPreface xix
lar31869_fm_i-1.indd xix 12/01/22 11:25 AM
• Updated research on the female underprediction effect with a report by the 
College Board (2019) on their SAT underpredicting college GPA for women 
compared to men.
• Material on using personality tests to select police officers is updated with 
reference to the George Floyd murder, plus newer references to specific scales in 
the 16PF that are used in police screening tests is provided.
Chapter 5: Personality Dispositions over Time: Stability, Coherence, and Change
• Cohort changes in sex ratio: In the United States, more than 56 percent of 
college students are women.
• Subsequent studies confirm that neuroticism predicts divorce.
• High conscientiousness is linked to later income and net worth.
• A study of 272 Japanese centenarians found that these long-lived individuals 
score high on extraversion and low on neuroticism.
• High conscientiousness and low neuroticism are linked to better coping with 
anxiety surrounding COVID-19.
• New section reporting research designed to effectively change personality traits, 
such as increasing one’s level of extraversion and decreasing one’s level of 
neuroticism, in desired directions.
Chapter 6: Genetics and Personality
• Many would-be parents are very interested in findings from genetic research. 
Some express a desire not to have children if they knew they would carry a 
genetic disposition for a mental disorder.
• A study of 12,117 dogs found that they differed greatly in boldness versus 
timidness, with bolder dogs exploring more, positively approaching unfamiliar 
people, and showing low levels of fear.
• A large-scale study of the HEXACO personality traits, which includes the Honest￾Humility factor, found heritabilities ranging from 34 to 58 percent.
• Genotype–environment correlations are becoming increasingly important in 
understanding the complex processes of how personality and social environments 
are connected.
• A recent study implicated DRD2, DRD4, and two other genes linked to sensation 
seeking among adolescents.
Chapter 7: Physiological Approaches to Personality
• Reference to some of Damasio’s recent work on the mind–body connection.
• New details on the case of Phineas Gage and the 2009 discovery of his photo 
with the iron rod that inflicted his head wound.
• Discussion of “wearable” technology sensors (e.g., watches, rings, micro￾recorders) that can monitor several physiological and behavioral systems, and 
their recent inclusion in personality research.
• Cautionary note attached to discussion of digit ratio, advising that empirical 
research published in peer-reviewed research should be weighted more heavily 
when evaluating results.
• New research on skin conductance and neuroticism.
• New material on heart rate variability (HRV) in section on cardiac measures, and 
the meaning of heart rate variability for research on stress and personality.
• New citations to studies on brain structure (volume) and personality as well as 
with intelligence.
Final PDF to printerxx Preface
lar31869_fm_i-1.indd xx 12/01/22 11:25 AM
• Update on the Human Connectome Project and its role in facilitating research on 
personality and brain connections between regions.
• New references to extraversion research and to MAO and sensation seeking.
• New example of a computer game to illustrate approach motivation by reward 
and avoidance motivation by punishment.
• Review of research on coping with the COVID-19 pandemic, with emphasis 
on punishment sensitivity relating to avoiding risks (e.g., not taking public 
transportation) and reward sensitivity relating to a reluctance to socially distance 
or isolate.
• Reference to studies on going against one’s chronotype (morningness or 
eveningness), and now have “chronotype” as a key term.
Chapter 8: Evolutionary Perspectives on Personality
• Characteristics that were probably adaptive in ancestral environments—such 
as xenophobia, or fear of strangers—are not necessarily adaptive in modern 
environments. This is an example of an evolutionary mismatch, a feature adaptive 
in the past that is no longer adaptive in the modern world.
• The need to belong theory has been used to explain a wide range of phenomena, 
including cheering for sports teams, joining religious groups, forming online 
gaming communities, conformity to the group, social identity, reputation 
management, creating political coalitions, and even the increased political 
polarization currently witnessed in some countries.
• Humans, of course, help people who are not close kin. We form friendships 
with non-kin, which sometimes can last a lifetime. We help friends who are in 
need, and they in turn help us when we are in need. This is the defining feature 
of reciprocal altruism—incurring costs to self to deliver benefits to other with the 
expectation that those benefits will be reciprocated or returned now or at some 
future time. The personality trait Agreeableness has been linked with a strong 
proclivity to be a good reciprocal altruist.
• A recent test of the universality of emotion expression examined the facial 
expressions of 63 sculptures created in the Americas dating back to 1500 
BCE prior to any contact with Western civilization. The authors conclude that 
modern Westerners share with ancient pre-contact peoples the links between 
facial expression of emotion and the social contexts in which these expressions 
commonly occur.
• Emotions can also be expressed by nonverbal body language. A prime example 
is the emotion of pride. When people win an athletic contest, for example, they 
commonly thrust both arms in the air, forming a V, perhaps symbolic for victory. 
The nonverbal expression of triumph appears to be recognized across cultures. 
The nonverbal V is also displayed by congenitally blind individuals who win 
athletic contests.
• Individual differences in the fearfulness facet of neuroticism are predicted 
by physical strength. Weaker people are more fearful, presumably because 
they are more vulnerable to threats and fear motivates them to avoid social 
confrontations.
Chapter 9: Psychoanalytic Approaches to Personality
• Update on the case of Ross Cheit described in chapter opening.
• Updated description of, and references to, research on blindsight and deliberation 
outside of awareness.
• New material on the scientific status of the ego depletion concept, including 
Final PDF to printerPreface xxi
lar31869_fm_i-1.indd xxi 12/01/22 11:25 AM
• Introduce a fourth form of anxiety, introduced by students of Freud, called self￾esteem anxiety, and include this as a new key term.
• Moved some material around to improve the flow of the chapter.
Chapter 10: Psychoanalytic Approaches: Contemporary Issues
• Update on the Holly Ramona case.
• New material on, and link to, the False Memory Syndrome Foundation, and its 
role in helping patients, families, and legal teams dealing with potentially false 
memories of abuse.
• New references to Loftus’ recent work on false memories (imagination inflation 
effect) as well as the effects of misinformation on beliefs in conspiracy theories.
• Include links to examples of subliminal advertisements.
• Reference to new work by Jonathon Bargh on unconscious priming effects.
• Report on a meta-analysis on narcissism and high levels of interpersonal conflict.
• Update on Kamala Harris, who is now the first female Vice President of the 
United States.
• More clear description of what are the “objects” in object relations theory.
• Include several new links to sites where students can take an assessment of their 
adult attachment style.
• Mention family separations in the current Ukraine conflict as an example of adult 
attachment disruption.
• “Caregiver” now used, along with mother or parent, in discussing childhood 
attachment.
• Clarify the connection between childhood separation anxiety and adult 
relationship disruption, and provide the example of couples in the current 
Ukraine conflict having to split up, with mothers (and children) leaving the 
country while fathers stay behind.
• More discussion of the possibility of change in adult attachment styles, with 
reference to current research.
Chapter 11: Motives and Personality
• Link to videos of Michael Johnson setting the 200-meter world record.
• New citation to definition of motives.
• Updated research on implicit and explicit motives.
• Include replication studies on gender differences in need for intimacy motive.
• Include research on Vladimir Putin’s high level of need for power, and suggest 
this motive may underly his 2022 war on Ukraine, and include studies that use 
politician’s motive scores from speeches to predict the start or end of wars.
• Update on Pete Buttigieg as an example of a high need for achievement person.
• Updated TAT references.
• New research on need for achievement and children’s beliefs that intelligence is 
fixed or malleable (from Carol Dweck’s theory).
• Mention social media use, instant messaging, and e-mail behaviors that relate to 
need for intimacy.
• Update research on Kenrick’s re-interpretation of Maslow’s need hierarchy.
Chapter 12: Cognitive Topics in Personality
• Updated research on racial bias and lethal force errors among police officers.
• Newer research on Field Dependence/Independence described.
• Reducer/augmenter section has three new studies cited.
• Current research linking locus of control to the COVID-19 pandemic (internals 
report less stress, more compliance with mitigation guidelines, and more likely to 
take the vaccine).
Final PDF to printerxxii Preface
lar31869_fm_i-1.indd xxii 12/01/22 11:25 AM
• Explicitly distinguish locus of control (pertains to positive/rewarding events) and 
attributional style (pertains to negative events).
• Newer citations for attributional style.
• Update on personal projects analysis and introduce the concept of well-doing.
• Newer studies establishing the Flynn Effect in college students, and another 
documenting that this trend has reversed (called the negative Flynn Effect) in the 
past two decades.
• Added birth and death dates for major figures in this area, and in other chapters 
as well.
Chapter 13: Emotion and Personality
• Newer citations for measuring positive emotions.
• Update with latest (2022) United Nations survey data on world happiness.
• New key term: eudaimonia—the view that happiness is attained by living a life of 
meaning and purpose.
• Numerous updates to happiness research.
• Several link errors fixed.
• New research presented on positive illusions.
• New research on personality trait predictors of happiness, plus the role of pro￾social behaviors.
• New research on treating depression with exercise.
• New research on the relation between violence and brain abnormalities, with new 
citations to work of Jonathan Pincus and Adrian Raine.
Chapter 14: Approaches to the Self
• Self-esteem is now a key term.
• Use of social media acronyms (e.g., IRL for In Real Life, FOMO for Fear of 
Missing Out).
• Several references to the COVID-19 pandemic in examples.
• New studies on social comparison as the toxic element of problematic social 
media use.
• New research on “helicopter parenting” and its effects on adolescent self-esteem.
• New “Application” on an Asian elephant in the Bronx Zoo who passed the dot￾and-mirror test of self-awareness.
• New studies on self-complexity, defensive pessimism, self-handicapping, self￾esteem variability, and domain-specific self-esteem.
• Updated links within the chapter.
• Connected self-schema to the concept of associative networks in memory first 
introduced in Chapter 10.
• Link the topic of social identity to the concept of “reputation.”
• Mention studies that question the concept of implicit self-esteem.
• Since Jerome Kagan passed away in 2021, reference to his work changed to past 
tense.
Chapter 15: Personality and Social Interaction
• Personality also influences our selection of friends. People high on extraversion 
and agreeableness, for example, tend to choose a larger number of friends on 
social networking sites compared to more introverted and disagreeable people.
• Vulnerable narcissists, who have somewhat shaky self-esteem, are especially 
prone to the hostile attribution bias.
Final PDF to printerPreface xxiii
lar31869_fm_i-1.indd xxiii 12/01/22 11:25 AM
• When marital conflicts arise, emotionally unstable partners tend to use avoidance
rather than compromise to deal with it, thus perpetuating the conflict.
• The link between agreeableness and social likability has been documented as 
early as adolescence.
• People sometimes try to manipulate their prospective in-laws for the goal of help 
in solidifying their mateship with their offspring.
• Dark Triad men are apt to use coercion as a tactic of manipulation to obtain sex 
from reluctant or unwilling women.
Chapter 16: Sex, Gender, and Personality
• Gender differences in emotional stability are especially important because they 
are linked with important life outcomes such as risk of eating disorders such as 
binging and purging, which are much more common in females.
• Low self-esteem in women predicts vulnerability to depression in adolescents and 
college students.
• Although the sexes differ overall in sexual aggression, it really appears to 
be limited to a subset of men—those who are high on Dark Triad traits, lack 
empathy, and display hostile masculinity, especially if they also pursue a short￾term mating strategy.
• Gender differences in empathizing, in turn, are linked to altruistic behavior such 
as helping those in need and sharing their belongings.
• Women score higher than men on objectified body consciousness, which involves 
becoming observers and critics of their bodies and feeling shame when their 
bodies to not match up with cultural idealized body standards.
• The current movement toward using gender-neutral pronouns such as they, them,
and theirs, or novel ones such as ze and xe, reflect people who do not identify 
with the gender binary.
• Most reviews conclude that gender stereotypes are well-calibrated to actual 
gender differences and are not exaggerated.
• Fetal exposure to hormones can have lasting effects on gender-linked interests 
and abilities.
Chapter 17: Culture and Personality
• A cultural perspective on personality is critical for testing the generalizability of 
both findings and theories of personality functioning.
• Cultural variation in the number of children a woman has appears to be evoked 
partly as a consequence of the cultural level of economic development and the 
cultural level of social support provided to women.
• A longitudinal study found that Australian children who experienced harsher and 
more unpredictable cultural environments engaged in more and earlier sexual activity.
• Experiments conducted in China and Canada show that when the threat 
of disease is made salient to people, they are more likely to conform on 
experimental tasks.
• Self-enhancement, which is culturally variable, shows up in considering oneself 
“better than average” and over-claiming credit for successful group outcomes.
• Higher exposure to culturally credible cues of religious commitment in others 
increases religious beliefs—an illustration of transmitted culture.
• A study in Spain concluded that beliefs about the traits of men being more 
agentic and the traits of women being more communal show remarkable stability 
over more than three decades, from 1985 to 2018.
Final PDF to printerxxiv Preface
lar31869_fm_i-1.indd xxiv 12/01/22 11:25 AM
Chapter 18: Stress, Coping, Adjustment, and Health
• COVID-19 is used to illustrate that, while many diseases are caused by microbes, 
their transmission is often through specific behaviors that can be modified.
• We streamlined content throughout in order to make room for a new section on 
personality and the COVID-19 pandemic. We now illustrate how the five models 
of the personality–illness link have been applied to the COVID-19 pandemic as 
well as to the restrictions recommended by public health officials.
• New key term: Allostatic Load, which refers to the total accumulated “wear and 
tear” on the body produced by stress over time.
• Covered new research on optimistic attributional style as a mediator of the effects 
of character strengths on risk for depression.
• Added a link to Carver and Scheier’s optimism questionnaire.
• Discuss research that separates the presence of optimism from the absence of 
pessimism to examine their separate effects on health.
• Describe an application of the Pennebaker expressive writing paradigm applied to 
college students’ personal struggles with the COVID-19 pandemic.
• Shortened the Closer Look on the role of positive emotions in coping with stress.
• Added a new study on Type A illustrating how this individual difference 
conforms more to a dimension (normally distributed) than to a true typology.
• Cite CDC data showing that heart disease remains the number one cause of 
death in the United States (though in 2022 COVID-19 was a close second).
Chapter 19: Disorders of Personality
• Update to the case of Kody Scott, which opens this chapter. Mr. Scott passed away 
from natural causes in 2021, a few months after release from a prison sentence 
following a 2017 assault conviction. While he had several opportunities to change 
his life of violence, his repeated convictions throughout his life illustrate that, for 
most people with a personality disorder, change is difficult and unlikely.
• Updated research on a dimensional (versus categorical) model of personality 
disorders.
• Description of the minor update to the DSM, which is now titled DSM 5-TR (for 
Text Revision).
• While the DSM 5-TR continues the categorical approach to personality disorders, 
we now describe the World Health Organization’s (WHO) International 
Classification of Diseases (ICD) system. In 2022 the ICD fully adopted a 
dimensional approach to personality disorders. The ICD was ratified by all 193 
member nations of the WHO, whereas the DSM is a product mainly of one 
country—the United States. For now, the DSM 5-TR is the standard for diagnosis 
in the United States, and so we present this approach to personality disorders. 
However, we wanted students to be aware of the alternative—the ICD—which is in 
use in most other developed countries around the world.
• Added detail to Table 19.11 describing the self-concept, emotional, behavioral, 
and social relationship disturbances associated with the 10 DSM 5-TR 
personality disorders.
Chapter 20: Summary and Future Directions
• Understanding the role of situations will generate efforts to form a taxonomy of 
situations, similar to how the field has developed a taxonomy of traits.
• Genetics of personality turning out to be more complex than initially envisioned.
• Progress in linking the six domains of human nature to each other via research 
collaborations.
Final PDF to printerPreface xxv
lar31869_fm_i-1.indd xxv 12/01/22 11:25 AM
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank our own mentors and colleagues who, over the years, generated 
in us a profound interest in psychology. These include Arnold Buss, Joe Horn, Devendra 
Singh, and Lee Willerman (University of Texas); Jack Block, Ken Craik, Harrison 
Gough, Jerry Mendelsohn, and Richard Lazarus (University of California, Berkeley); Roy 
Baumeister (Florida State University, Tallahassee); Brian Little, Harry Murray, and David 
McClelland (Harvard University); Sam Gosling, Bob Josephs, Jamie Pennebaker, and 
Bill Swann (now at University of Texas); Ed Diener (University of Illinois); Gerry Clore 
(University of Virginia); Chris Peterson (University of Michigan); Hans Eysenck and Ray 
Cattell (both deceased); Tom Oltmanns, Roddy Roediger, and Mike Strube (Washington 
University); Alice Eagly (Northwestern University); Janet Hyde (University of Wisconsin); 
and Robert Plomin (King’s College London), Lew Goldberg (Oregon Research Institute), 
and Jerry Wiggins (formerly University of British Columbia) as mentors from afar. Special 
thanks go to Bill Graziano and Ken Thompson, LtCol, USMC (retired), for helpful 
comments on the text. We would also like to thank our team at McGraw-Hill, including 
Product Developer Francesca King, Content Project Manager Lisa Bruflodt, Content 
Licensing Specialist Gina Oberbroeckling, Rights and Permissions Manager Janet 
Robbins, Project Manager Leslie Lahr, and the entire resource development team.
Finally, RL would like to acknowledge family members who supported him and 
tolerated his neglect while he concentrated on this book, including his wife, Zvjezdana, 
and his children, Tommy and Ana. DB would like to thank his “.50” genetic relatives: 
his parents Arnold and Edith Buss; his siblings Arnie and Laura Buss; and his children 
Ryan and Tara Buss.
A project of this scope and magnitude requires the efforts of many people. We are 
greatly indebted to our colleagues who reviewed this manuscript in its various stages. We 
sincerely appreciate the time and effort that the following instructors gave in this regard:
Jonathon D. Brown
University of Washington
Anse Daniel
Miami Dade College
Matthew Eisenhard
Rowan University
Jessica Fede
Johnson & Wales University
Juliana Lasser
Southern Connecticut State University
Kenneth Locke
University of Idaho
Lynda Mae
Arizona State University
Damian Murray
Tulane University
We also continue to be grateful to the reviewers of our previous editions for their valuable 
comments.
Alan J. Lambert
Washington University
Alan Roberts
Indiana University
Alisha Janowsky
University of Central Florida
Barbara Woike
Barnard College
Barry Fritz
Quinnipiac University
Bill E. Peterson
Smith College
Brian Little
Harvard University
Carolin Keutzer
University of Oregon
Charles Mahone
Texas Tech University
Christopher Hopwood
Michigan State University
Final PDF to printerxxvi Preface
lar31869_fm_i-1.indd xxvi 12/01/22 11:25 AM
Christopher Leone
University of North Florida
Christopher VerWys
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
David Harold Zald
Vanderbilt University
David Pincus
Chapman University
Eros DeSouza
Illinois State University
Evan Harrington
John Jay College of Criminal Justice
Forrest B. Tyler
University of Maryland at College 
Park
Fred B. Bryant
Loyola University Chicago
Gail A. Hinesley
Chadron State College
Gerald A. Mendelsohn
University of California at Berkeley
Gerald Matthews
University of Cincinnati
Glenn Geher
State University of New York—New 
Paltz
Irene Frieze
University of Pittsburgh
Jane E. Gordon
The McGregor School of Antioch 
College
Jeff Conte
San Diego State University
Jeff Conte
San Diego State University
Jeff Simpson
Texas A&M University
Jennifer R. Daniels
Lyon College
Jennifer Wartella
Virginia Commonwealth University
Jill C. Keogh
University of Missouri—Columbia
Joan Cannon
University of Massachusetts at Lowell
John E. Kurtz
Villanova University
Jonathan C. Smith
Roosevelt University
Jovan Hernandez
Metropolitan State University of Denver
Julie K. Norem
Wellesley College
Justin W. Peer
University of Michigan—Dearborn
Katherine Ellison
Montclair State University
Katherine Lau
SUNY Oneonta
Kathryn Erk
Fort Hays State University
Kenneth Locke
University of Idaho
Kristy Thacker
University at Albany
Lani Fujitsubo
Southern Oregon State College
Laura A. King
Southern Methodist University
Len B. Lecci
University of North Carolina at 
Wilmington
Lisa Rapalyea
University of California—Davis
Lynda Mae
Arizona State University
Lyra Stein
Rutgers University
Marcellus Merritt
University of Wisconsin—Milwaukee
Marjorie Hanft-Martone
Eastern Illinois University
Mark E. Sibicky
Marietta College
Mark R. Leary
Wake Forest University
Mark S. Chapell
Rowan University
Marvin W. Kahn
University of Arizona
Michael Ashton
Brock University
Michael D. Botwin
California State University—Fresno
Michael J. Lambert
Brigham Young University
Nicole E. Barenbaum
University of the South
Richard Ely
Boston University
Robert M. Stelmack
Final PDF to printerPreface xxvii
lar31869_fm_i-1.indd xxvii 12/01/22 11:25 AM
Sarah Wood
University of Wisconsin—Stout
Scott J. Dickman
University of Massachusetts at 
Dartmouth
Stephanie Sogg
Massachusetts General Hospital; 
Harvard Bipolar Research 
Program
Stephen G. Flanagan
University of North Carolina
Stephen J. Owens
Ohio University
Steven C. Funk
Northern Arizona University
Steven Kent Sutton
University of Miami
Susan B. Goldstein
University of Redlands
Tammy Crow
Southeastern Oklahoma State 
University
Tammy Crow
Southeastern Oklahoma State 
University
Timothy Atchison
West Texas A&M University
Todd Nelson
California State University—Stanislaus
Tracy Richards
Colorado State University
Vetta L. Sanders Thompson
University of Missouri at St. Louis
Wayne A. Dixon
Southwestern Oklahoma State 
University
William Pavot
Southwest Minnesota State University
The eighth edition of Personality Psychology is available online with Connect, McGraw￾Hill Education’s integrated assignment and assessment platform. Connect also offers 
SmartBook for the new edition, which is the first adaptive reading experience proven to 
improve grades and help students study more effectively. All of the title’s website and 
ancillary content is also available through Connect, including:
• An Instructor’s Manual for each chapter with chapter outlines, lecture topics and 
suggestions, ideas for classroom activities and demonstrations, questions for us 
in classroom discussions, ideas for student research papers, and lists of current 
research articles.
• A full Test Bank of multiple-choice questions that test students on central 
concepts and ideas in each chapter.
• PowerPoint Lecture Slides for instructor use in class.
Test Builder in Connect
Available within Connect, Test Builder is a cloud-based tool that enables instructors to 
format tests that can be printed, administered within a Learning Management System, 
or exported as a Word document. Test Builder offers a modern, streamlined interface 
for easy content configuration that matches course needs, without requiring a download.
Test Builder allows you to:
• Access all test bank content from a particular title.
• Easily pinpoint the most relevant content through robust filtering options.
• Manipulate the order of questions or scramble questions and/or answers.
• Pin questions to a specific location within a test.
• Determine your preferred treatment of algorithmic questions.
• Choose the layout and spacing.
• Add instructions and configure default settings.
Test Builder provides a secure interface for better protection of content and allows 
for just-in-time updates to flow directly into assessments.
®
Final PDF to printerlar31869_fm_i-1.indd xxviii 12/01/22 11:25 AM
Instructors
The Power of Connections
Solutions for 
your challenges
A product isn’t a solution. Real 
solutions are affordable, reliable, 
and come with training and ongoing 
support when you need it and how 
you want it. Visit supportateverystep.
com for videos and resources both 
you and your students can use 
throughout the term.
Every learner is unique
In Connect, instructors can assign an adaptive reading 
experience with SmartBook® 2.0. Rooted in advanced 
learning science principles, SmartBook 2.0 delivers 
each student a personalized experience, focusing 
students on their learning gaps, ensuring that the time 
they spend studying is time well-spent.
mheducation.com/highered/connect/smartbook
Affordable solutions, 
added value
Make technology work for you with 
LMS integration for single sign-on access, 
mobile access to the digital textbook, 
and reports to quickly show you how 
each of your students is doing. And with 
our Inclusive Access program, you can 
provide all these tools at the lowest 
available market price to your students. 
Ask your McGraw Hill representative for 
more information.
Laptop: Getty Images; Woman/dog: George Doyle/Getty Images
65%
Less Time
Grading
A complete course platform
Connect enables you to build deeper connections with your students through 
cohesive digital content and tools, creating engaging learning experiences. We 
are committed to providing you with the right resources and tools to support all 
your students along their personal learning journeys. 
Final PDF to printerlar31869_fm_i-1.indd xxix 12/01/22 11:25 AM
Effective tools for efficient studying
Connect is designed to help you be more productive with simple, flexible, intuitive tools that maximize 
your study time and meet your individual learning needs. Get learning that works for you with Connect.
Everything you need in one place 
Your Connect course has everything you need—whether reading your digital eBook 
or completing assignments for class—Connect makes it easy to get your work done.
“I really liked this 
app—it made it easy 
to study when you 
don't have your text￾book in front of you.”
- Jordan Cunningham, 
Eastern Washington University
Study anytime, anywhere
Download the free ReadAnywhere® app and 
access your online eBook, SmartBook® 2.0, 
or Adaptive Learning Assignments when it’s 
convenient, even if you’re offline. And since 
the app automatically syncs with your Connect 
account, all of your work is available every time 
you open it. Find out more at 
mheducation.com/readanywhere 
Students
Get Learning that Fits You
Learning for everyone 
McGraw Hill works directly with Accessibility 
Services Departments and faculty to meet the 
learning needs of all students. Please contact your 
Accessibility Services Office and ask them to email 
accessibility@mheducation.com, or visit 
mheducation.com/about/accessibility
for more information.
iPhone: Getty Images
Final PDF to printerlar31869_fm_i-1.indd xxx 12/01/22 11:25 AM
Final PDF to printerlar31869_fm_i-1.indd 1 12/01/22 11:25 AM
Personality Psychology
Final PDF to printer2
lar31869_ch01_002-021.indd 2 11/30/22 11:12 AM
Introduction to 
Personality Psychology
1
Personality Defined
Personality Is the Set of Psychological Traits . . .
And Mechanisms . . .
Within the Individual . . .
That Are Organized and Relatively Enduring . . .
And That Influence . . .
Their Interactions with . . .
And Adaptations to . . .
The Environment
Three Levels of Personality Analysis
Human Nature
Individual and Group Differences
Individual Uniqueness
A Fissure in the Field
Grand Theories of Personality
Contemporary Research in Personality
Six Domains of Knowledge About Human Nature
Dispositional Domain
Biological Domain
Intrapsychic Domain
Cognitive-Experiential Domain
Social and Cultural Domain
Adjustment Domain
The Role of Personality Theory
Standards for Evaluating Personality Theories
Is There a Grand Ultimate and True Theory of Personality?
KEY TERMS
Top Left: Tavis Wright/Image 
Source; Top Right: Svisio/Getty 
Images; Middle Left: Science Photo 
Library RF/Getty Images; Middle 
Right: Lightspring/Shutterstock; 
Bottom Left: Arthimedes/
Shutterstock; Bottom Right: 
Athanasia Nomikou/Shutterstock
Final PDF to printerlar31869_ch01_002-021.indd 3 11/30/22 11:12 AM
A
Each person is, in certain 
respects, like all other 
persons, like some other 
persons, and like no other 
person.
Ingram Publishing/SuperStock
Those who carry humor to excess are thought to be vulgar buffoons, striving after 
humor at all costs, not caring about pain to the object of their fun; . . . while those who 
can neither make a joke themselves nor put up with those who do are thought to be 
boorish and unpolished. But those who joke in a tasteful way are called ready-witted 
and tactful . . . and it is the mark of a tactful person to say and listen to such things as 
befit a good and well-bred person.
Source: Aristotle, The Nicomachean Ethics of Aristotle. K. Paul, Trench, Trubner & Company, Limited, 1893.
 ristotle, in The Nicomachean Ethics, expressed these wise observations 
on the subject of humor and the ways in which people do or do not express it. In 
this quote, we see Aristotle behaving much as a personality psychologist. Aristotle is 
analyzing the characteristics of persons who have an appropriate sense of humor. He 
is providing some details about what features are associated with a sense of humor. 
Aristotle adds to this description by comparing people who are extreme, having 
either too much or too little sense of humor. In his book on ethics, Aristotle analyzed 
many personality characteristics, including truthfulness, courage, intelligence, self￾indulgence, anger-proneness, and friendliness.
We might conclude that Aristotle was an amateur personality psychologist. But 
aren’t we all amateur personality psychologists to some extent? Aren’t we all curious 
about the characteristics people possess, including our own? Don’t we all use person￾ality characteristics in describing people? And haven’t we all used personality terms 
to explain behavior, either our own or others’?
INTRODUCTION 1
Final PDF to printer4
lar31869_ch01_002-021.indd 4 11/30/22 11:12 AM
Introduction
When we say that our friend goes to a lot of parties because she is extraverted, we 
are using personality to summarize and explain her behavior. When we refer to another 
friend as conscientious and reliable, we are describing features of his personality. When 
we characterize ourselves as thoughtful, intelligent, and ambitious, we are describing 
features of our personalities.
Features of personality make people different from one another, and these fea￾tures usually take the form of adjectives, such as John is lazy, Mary is optimistic, and 
Fred is anxious. Adjectives that can be used to describe characteristics of people are called
trait-descriptive adjectives. There are nearly 20,000 such trait-descriptive adjectives in 
the English language. This astonishing fact alone tells us that, in everyday life, there are 
compelling reasons for trying to understand and describe those we interact with, as well 
as ourselves.
Notice that the adjectives describing personality refer to several very different 
aspects of people. Words such as thoughtful refer to inner qualities of mind. Words such 
as charming and humorous refer to the effects a person has on other people. Words such 
as domineering are relational and signify a person’s position, or stance, toward others. 
Words such as ambitious refer to the intensity of desire to reach our goals. Words such 
as creative refer both to a quality of mind and to the nature of the products we produce. 
Words such as deceitful refer to the strategies a person uses to attain his or her goals. All 
of these features describe aspects of personality.
Think of someone you know well—say, a friend, family member, or roommate. Consider the 
many characteristics that make this person unique. List the five adjectives you think best cap￾ture this person’s personality. For example, if you were to describe this person to someone, 
what five adjectives would you use? Now, ask your target person to list the five adjectives he or 
she thinks best describe himself or herself. Compare your lists.
Exercise
Personality Defined
Establishing a definition for something as complex as human personality is difficult. The 
authors of the first textbooks on personality—Gordon Allport (1937) and Henry Murray 
(1938)—struggled with the definition. The problem is how to establish a definition that 
is sufficiently comprehensive to include all of the aspects mentioned earlier, including 
inner features, social effects, qualities of the mind, qualities of the body, relations to oth￾ers, and inner goals. Because of these complexities, some textbooks on personality omit 
a formal definition entirely. Nonetheless, the following definition captures the essen￾tial elements of personality: Personality is the set of psychological traits and mechanisms 
within the individual that are organized and relatively enduring and that influence their 
interactions with, and adaptations to, the intrapsychic, physical, and social environments.
Let’s examine the elements of this definition more closely.
Final PDF to printer5
lar31869_ch01_002-021.indd 5 11/30/22 11:12 AM
CHAPTER ONE Introduction to Personality Psychology 
Personality Is the Set of 
Psychological Traits . . . Psychological traits are character￾istics that describe ways in which 
people are different from each other. 
Saying that someone is shy is to 
mention one way in which he or she 
differs from others who are more 
outgoing. Traits also define ways in 
which people are similar to some 
others. For example, people who 
are shy are similar to each other in 
that they are anxious in social situa￾tions and perhaps blush easily, par￾ticularly when there is an audience 
focusing attention on them.
Consider another example—
the trait of talkativeness. This charac￾teristic can be meaningfully applied 
to people and describes a dimension 
of difference among them. Typically, a talkative person is that way from day to day, 
from week to week, and from year to year. Certainly, even the most talkative person 
can have quiet moments, quiet days, or even quiet weeks. Over time, however, those 
with the trait of talkativeness tend to emit verbal behavior with greater frequency than 
those who are low on talkativeness. In this sense, traits describe the average tendencies
of a person. On average, a high-talkative person starts more conversations than a low￾talkative person.
Research on personality traits asks four kinds of questions:
• How many traits are there?
• How are the traits organized?
• What are the origins of traits?
• What are the correlations and consequences of traits?
One primary question is how many fundamental traits there are. Are there dozens or 
hundreds of traits, or merely a few? The second research question pertains to the orga￾nization, or structure, of traits. For example, how is talkativeness related to other traits, 
such as impulsivity and extraversion? A third research question concerns the origins of 
traits—where they come from and how they develop. Does heredity, our genetic makeup, 
influence talkativeness? What sorts of cultural and child-rearing practices affect the 
development of traits such as talkativeness? A fourth key question pertains to the cor￾relations and consequences of traits for the experiences we have, the behavior we engage 
in, and the life outcomes we achieve or fail to achieve. Do talkative persons have many 
friends? Do they have a more extended social network to draw upon in times of trouble? 
Do they annoy people who are trying to study?
The four research questions constitute the core of the research program of many 
personality psychologists. Psychological traits are useful for at least three reasons. First, 
they help to describe people and help to understand the dimensions of difference among 
people. Second, traits are useful because they help explain behavior. The reasons people 
People are different from each other in many ways. The science of personality psychology provides 
an understanding of the psychological ways that people differ from one another.
Rawpixel.com/Shutterstock
Final PDF to printer6
lar31869_ch01_002-021.indd 6 11/30/22 11:12 AM
Introduction
act may be partly a function of their personality traits. 
Third, traits are useful because they can help predict
future behavior—for example, the sorts of careers indi￾viduals will find satisfying, who will tolerate stress better, 
and who is likely to get along well with others. Thus, per￾sonality is useful in describing, explaining, and predicting
differences among individuals. All good scientific theo￾ries enable researchers to describe, explain, and predict 
in their domains. Just as an economic theory might be 
useful in describing, explaining, and predicting fluctua￾tions in spending habits or the broader economy, per￾sonality traits describe, explain, and predict differences 
among persons.
And Mechanisms . . . Psychological mechanisms are like traits, except that the 
term mechanisms refers more to the processes of per￾sonality. For example, most psychological mechanisms 
involve an information-processing activity. Someone 
who is extraverted, for example, may look for and notice opportunities to interact with 
other people, such as in elevators or coffee shops. That is, an extraverted person is pre￾pared to notice and act on certain kinds of social information.
Most psychological mechanisms have three essential ingredients: inputs, decision 
rules, and outputs. A psychological mechanism may make people more sensitive to certain 
kinds of information from the environment (input), may make them more likely to think 
about specific options (decision rules), and may guide their behavior toward certain cat￾egories of action (outputs). For example, an extraverted person may look for opportunities 
to be with other people, may consider in each situation the possibilities for human contact 
and interaction, and may encourage others to interact with him or her. Our personalities 
contain many psychological mechanisms of this sort—information-processing procedures 
that have the key elements of inputs, decision rules, and outputs (see Figure 1.1).
Courage is an example of a trait that is activated and reveals itself only 
in specific situations. The current president of Ukraine, Volodymyr 
Zelensky, was an actor and comedian prior to his election as his 
country’s president. His high level of courage only became apparent when 
his country responded to widespread attacks by its neighbor, Russia.
Geopix/Alamy Stock Photo
Figure 1.1
Psychological mechanisms have three essential ingredients. Our personalities contain many such mechanisms. 
Input Output Decision rules
IF, THEN
Psychological mechanisms:
three key ingredients
Danger
Confront source
of danger.
Run from source
of danger.
If courageous, then face danger.
If cowardly, then run from danger.
Final PDF to printer7
lar31869_ch01_002-021.indd 7 11/30/22 11:12 AM
CHAPTER ONE Introduction to Personality Psychology 
This does not mean that all of our traits and psychological mechanisms are acti￾vated at all times. In fact, at any point in time, only a few are activated. Consider the trait 
of courageousness. This trait is activated only under particular conditions, such as when 
people face serious dangers and threats to their lives or the lives of others in their group. 
Some people are more courageous than others, but we will never know which people are 
courageous unless and until the right situation presents itself. Look around next time you 
are in class: Who do you think has the trait of courageousness? You won’t know until 
you are in a situation that provides the potential for courageous behavior.
Within the Individual . . . Within the individual means that personality is something a person carries with them 
over time and from one situation to the next. Typically, we feel that we are today the 
same people we were last week, last month, and last year. We also feel that we will con￾tinue to have these personalities in the coming months and years. And, although our per￾sonalities are certainly influenced by our environments, and especially by the significant 
others in our lives, we feel that we carry with us the same personalities from situation to 
situation in our lives. The definition of personality stresses that the important sources of 
personality reside within the individual. Hence, they are at least somewhat stable over 
time and somewhat consistent over situations, issues we will examine empirically in sub￾sequent chapters.
That Are Organized and Relatively Enduring . . . Organized means that the psychological traits and mechanisms for a given person are 
not simply a random collection of elements. Rather, personality is organized because the 
mechanisms and traits are linked to one another in a coherent fashion. Imagine the sim￾ple case of two desires—a desire for food and a desire for intimacy. If you have not eaten 
for a while and are experiencing hunger pangs, then your desire for food might override 
your desire for intimacy. On the other hand, if you have already eaten, then your desire 
for food may temporarily subside, allowing you to pursue intimacy. Our personalities 
are organized in the sense that they contain decision rules that govern which needs or 
motives are activated, depending on the circumstances.
Psychological traits are also relatively enduring over time, particularly in adult￾hood, and are somewhat consistent over situations. To say that someone is angry at 
this moment is not saying anything about a trait. A person may be angry now, but not 
tomorrow or may be angry in one situation, but not in others. Anger is more of a state
than a trait. To say that someone is anger prone or generally hot tempered, however, is 
to describe a psychological trait. Someone who is anger prone is frequently angry, relative 
to others, and shows this proneness time and time again in many different situations. For 
example, the person might be argumentative at work, hostile and aggressive while play￾ing team sports for recreation, and quarrelsome with family members.
There may be some occasions when this generalization about the consistency 
of personality from situation to situation does not hold. Some situations may be over￾powering and suppress the expression of psychological traits. People who are gener￾ally talkative, for example, may remain quiet during a lecture, at the movies, or in an 
elevator—although you undoubtedly have experienced someone who would not keep 
quiet in any of these circumstances!
The debate about whether people are consistent across situations in their lives 
has a long history in personality psychology. Some psychologists have argued that the 
Final PDF to printer8
lar31869_ch01_002-021.indd 8 11/30/22 11:12 AM
Introduction
evidence for consistency is weak (Mischel, 1968). For example, honesty measured in one 
situation (say, cheating on a test) may not correlate very highly with honesty measured 
in another situation (say, cheating on income taxes). We will explore this debate more 
fully later in the book. For now, we will simply say that most personality psychologists 
maintain that although people are not perfectly consistent, there is enough consistency 
to warrant including this characteristic in a definition of personality.
The fact that personality includes relatively enduring psychological traits and 
mechanisms does not preclude change over time. Indeed, describing precisely the ways 
in which we change over time is one goal of personality psychologists.
And That Influence . . . In the definition of personality, an emphasis on the influential forces of personality means 
that personality traits and mechanisms can have an effect on people’s lives. Personality 
influences how we act, how we view ourselves, how we think about the world, how we 
interact with others, how we feel, how we select our environments (particularly our 
social environments), what goals and desires we pursue in life, and how we react to our 
circumstances. People are not passive creatures merely responding to external forces. 
Rather, personality plays a key role in affecting how people shape their lives. It is in this 
sense that personality traits are forces that influence how we think, act, and feel.
Their Interactions with . . . This feature of personality is perhaps the most difficult to describe, because the nature 
of person–environment interaction is complex. In Chapter 15, we examine interactionism 
in greater detail. For now, however, it is sufficient to note that interactions with situa￾tions include perceptions, selections, evocations, and manipulations. Perceptions refer 
to how we “see,” or interpret, an environment. Two people may be exposed to the same 
objective event, yet what they pay attention to and how they interpret the event may be 
very different. And this difference is a function of their personalities. For example, two 
people can look at an inkblot, yet one person sees two cannibals cooking a human over 
a fire, whereas the other perceives a smiling clown waving hello. As another example, a 
stranger may smile at someone on the street; one person might perceive the smile as a 
smirk, whereas another person might perceive the smile as a friendly gesture. It is the 
same smile, just as it is the same inkblot, yet how people interpret these situations can be 
determined by their personalities.
Selection describes the manner in which we choose situations to enter—how we 
choose our friends, romantic partners, hobbies, college classes, and careers. How we go 
about making these selections is, at least in part, a reflection of our personalities. How 
we use our free time is especially a reflection of our traits. One person may take up the 
hobby of parachute jumping, whereas another may prefer to spend time quietly listen￾ing to a podcast alone. We select from what life offers us, and these choices are partly a 
function of personality.
Evocations are the reactions we produce in others, often quite unintentionally. To 
some extent, we create the social environment that we inhabit. A child with a high activ￾ity level, for example, may evoke in parents’ attempts to constrain the child, even though 
these attempts are not intended or desired by the child. A person who is physically large 
may evoke feelings of intimidation in others, even if intimidation is not the goal. Our 
evocative interactions are also essential features of our personalities.
Final PDF to printer9
lar31869_ch01_002-021.indd 9 11/30/22 11:12 AM
CHAPTER ONE Introduction to Personality Psychology 
Manipulations are the ways in which we intentionally attempt to influence others. 
Someone who is anxious or frightened easily may try to influence their group to avoid 
scary movies or risky activities. Someone who is highly conscientious may insist that 
everyone follow the rules. Or, someone who is very neat and orderly may insist that 
their spouse pick up their messy things. The ways in which we attempt to manipulate the 
behavior, thoughts, and feelings of others are essential features of our personalities. All 
of these forms of interaction—perceptions, selections, evocations, and manipulations—
are central to understanding the connections between the personalities of people and the 
environments they inhabit.
And Adaptations to . . . An emphasis on adaptation conveys the notion that a central feature of personality con￾cerns adaptive functioning—accomplishing goals, coping, adjusting, and dealing with the 
challenges and problems we face as we go through life. Few things are more obvious 
about human behavior than the fact that it is goal directed, functional, and purpose￾ful. Even behavior that does not appear functional—neurotic behavior such as excessive 
worrying, for example—may, in fact, be functional. For example, people who worry a 
lot may be better at detecting social signs of danger and correctly anticipating ways to 
cope with threat. Consequently, what appears on the surface to be maladaptive (exces￾sive worrying) may, in fact, have some adaptive functions. In addition, some aspects of 
personality processes represent deficits in normal adaptations, such as breakdowns in 
the ability to cope with stress, to regulate one’s social behavior, or to manage one’s emo￾tions. Although psychologists’ knowledge of the adaptive functions of personality traits 
and mechanisms is currently limited, it remains an indispensable key to understanding 
the nature of human personality.
The Environment
The physical environment often poses challenges for people. Some of these are direct 
threats to survival. For example, food shortages create the problem of securing adequate 
nutrients for survival. Extremes of temperature pose the problem of maintaining thermal 
homeostasis or body temperature. Heights, snakes, spiders, and strangers can all pose 
threats to survival. Human beings, like other animals, have evolved solutions to these 
adaptive problems. Hunger pangs motivate us to seek food, and taste preferences guide 
our choices of which foods to consume. Shivering mechanisms help combat the cold, 
and sweat glands help fight the sweltering heat. At a psychological level, our fears of 
heights, snakes, spiders, and strangers—the most common human fears—help us avoid or 
safely interact with these environmental threats to our survival.
Our social environment also poses adaptive challenges. We may desire the pres￾tige of a good job, but there are many other people competing for the same positions. 
We may desire interesting friends and mates, but there are many others competing for 
them. We may desire greater emotional closeness with others, but may not know how 
to achieve closeness. The ways in which we cope with our social environment—the chal￾lenges we encounter in our struggle for belongingness, love, and esteem—are central to 
an understanding of personality.
Personality partly determines the particular aspects of the environment that 
are important at any moment in time. A person who is talkative, for example, will 
notice more opportunities in the social environment to strike up conversations than 
Final PDF to printer10
lar31869_ch01_002-021.indd 10 11/30/22 11:12 AM
Introduction
will someone who is low on talkativeness. A person who is disagreeable, because they 
sometimes antagonize other people, will occupy a social environment where people 
frequently argue with them or avoid them. A person for whom status is very important 
will pay close attention to the relative hierarchical positions of others—who is up, who 
is down, who is ascending, and who is sliding. In short, among the potentially infinite 
dimensions of the environments we inhabit, our “effective environment” represents 
only the small subset of features that our psychological mechanisms direct us to attend 
and respond to.
In addition to our physical and social environments, we have an intrapsychic 
environment. Intrapsychic means “within the mind.” We all have memories, dreams, 
desires, fantasies, and a collection of private experiences that we live with each day. 
This intrapsychic environment, although not as objectively verifiable as our social 
or physical environment, is nevertheless real to each of us and makes up an impor￾tant part of our psychological reality. For example, our self-esteem—how good or bad 
we feel about ourselves at any given moment—may depend on our assessment of the 
degree to which we are succeeding in attaining our goals. Success at work and success 
at friendship may provide two different forms of success experience and, hence, form 
different intrapsychic memories. We are influenced by our memories of these experi￾ences whenever we think about our own self-worth. Our intrapsychic environment, as 
much as our physical and social environments, provides a critical context for under￾standing human personality.
Write a one-page essay about a good friend, someone you know well, in which you describe 
what is characteristic, enduring, and functional about that person. Include in this description 
those elements of the ways in which they interact with, or adapt to, the physical, social, and 
intrapsychic environments.
Exercise
Three Levels of Personality Analysis
Although the definition of personality used in this book is quite broad and encompass￾ing, personality can be analyzed at three levels. These three levels are well summarized 
by Kluckhohn and Murray, in their 1948 book on culture and personality, in which they 
state that every human being is, in certain respects,
1. Like all others (the human nature level),
2. Like some others (the level of individual and group differences), and
3. Like no others (the individual uniqueness level).
Another way to think of these distinctions is that the first level refers to “universals” (the 
ways in which we are all alike), the middle level refers to “particulars” (the ways in which 
we are like some people but unlike others), and the third level refers to “uniqueness” (the 
ways in which we are unlike any other person) (see Table 1.1).
Final PDF to printer11
lar31869_ch01_002-021.indd 11 11/30/22 11:12 AM
CHAPTER ONE Introduction to Personality Psychology 
Human Nature
The first level of personality analysis describes human nature in general—the traits and mech￾anisms of personality that are typical of our species and are possessed by everyone or nearly 
everyone. For example, nearly all humans have language skills, which allow them to learn 
and use a language. People in all cultures on earth speak a language, so spoken language 
is part of the universal human nature. At a psychological level, all humans possess funda￾mental psychological mechanisms—for example, the desire to live with others and belong 
to social groups—and these mechanisms are part of general human nature. There are many 
ways in which each person is like most or all other people, and by understanding those ways 
we may achieve an understanding of the general principles of human nature.
Individual and Group Differences
The second level of personality analysis pertains to individual and group differences. 
Some people are gregarious and love parties; others prefer a quiet evening’s reading. 
Some people take great physical risks by jumping out of airplanes, riding motorcycles, 
and driving fast cars; others shun physical risks. Some people enjoy high self-esteem 
and live life relatively free from anxiety; others worry constantly and are plagued by self￾doubt. These are dimensions of individual differences, 
ways in which each person is like some other people 
(e.g., extraverts, sensation seekers) and unlike others.
Personality can also be observed by studying 
differences among groups. That is, people in one group 
may have certain personality features in common, and 
these common features make that group of people dif￾ferent from other groups. Examples of groups studied 
by personality psychologists include different cultures, 
different age groups, different political parties, and 
groups from different socioeconomic backgrounds. 
Another important set of differences studied by per￾sonality psychologists concerns those between men 
and women. Although many traits and mechanisms of 
humans are common to both genders, a few are different 
for men and women. For example, there is accumulated 
evidence that, across cultures, men are typically more 
Level of Analysis Examples
Human nature Need to belong
Capacity for love
Individual and group differences Variation in need to belong (individual difference)
Men more physically aggressive than women (group 
difference)
Individual uniqueness Letisha’s unique way of expressing her love
John’s unique way of expressing aggression
Table 1.1 Three Levels of Personality Analysis
Personality psychologists sometimes study group differences, such as 
differences between men and women.
Prostock-studio/Alamy Stock Photo
Final PDF to printer12
lar31869_ch01_002-021.indd 12 11/30/22 11:12 AM
Introduction
physically aggressive than women. Men are responsible for most of the violence the 
world over. One goal of personality psychology is to understand why certain aspects of 
personality differ among groups, such as understanding how and why women are dif￾ferent from men (on average) and why people from one culture differ from those from 
another culture (on average).
Individual Uniqueness
No two individuals, not even identical twins raised by the same parents in the same 
home in the same culture, have exactly the same personalities. Every individual has per￾sonal qualities not shared by any other person in the world. One of the goals of personal￾ity psychology is to allow for individual uniqueness and to develop ways to capture the 
richness of unique individual lives.
One debate in the field focuses on whether individuals should be studied 
nomothetically—that is, as individual instances of general characteristics that are dis￾tributed in the population—or should be studied idiographically, as single, unique cases. 
Nomothetic research typically involves statistical comparisons of individuals or groups, 
requiring samples of participants on which to conduct research. Nomothetic research 
is typically applied to identify universal human characteristics and dimensions of indi￾vidual or group differences. Idiographic (translated literally as “the description of one”) 
research typically focuses on a single person, trying to observe general principles that 
are manifest in a single life over time. Often, idiographic research results in case stud￾ies or the psychological biography of a single person (Runyon, 1983). Sigmund Freud, 
for example, wrote a psychobiography of Leonardo da Vinci (1916/1947). An example 
of another version of idiographic research is provided by Rosenzweig (1986, 1997), in 
which he proposes to analyze people in terms of the sequence of events in their lives, 
trying to understand critical life events within each person’s own history. A more recent 
example is a personality analysis of President Donald Trump (McAdams, 2020).
The important point is that personality psychologists have been concerned with all 
three levels of analysis: the universal level, the level of individual and group differences, 
and the level of individual uniqueness. Each level contributes valuable knowledge to the 
total understanding of the nature of personality.
A Fissure in the Field
Different personality psychologists focus on different levels of analysis. And there is 
a gap within the field that has not yet been successfully bridged. It is the gap between 
the human nature level of analysis and the analysis of group and individual differences. 
Many psychologists have theorized about what human nature is like in general. However, 
when doing research, psychologists most often focus on individual and group differences 
in personality. As a consequence, there is a fissure or gap between the grand theories of 
personality and contemporary research in personality.
Grand Theories of Personality
Most of the grand theories of personality address the human nature level of analysis. 
These theories attempt to provide a universal account of the fundamental psychological 
processes and characteristics of our species. Sigmund Freud (1915/1957), for example, 
emphasized universal instincts of sex and aggression; a universal psychic structure of 
Final PDF to printer13
lar31869_ch01_002-021.indd 13 11/30/22 11:12 AM
CHAPTER ONE Introduction to Personality Psychology 
the id, ego, and superego; and universal stages of psychosexual development (oral, anal, 
phallic, latency, and genital). Statements about the universal core of human nature lie at 
the center of grand theories of personality.
Some of the textbooks used in teaching college courses in personality psychol￾ogy are structured around grand theories. These books have been criticized, however, 
because many of those theories are primarily of historical interest. Only parts of them 
have stood the test of time and guide personality research today. Although the grand 
theories are an important part of the history of personality psychology, there is much 
interesting personality research going on today that is not directly relevant to the histori￾cal grand theories.
Contemporary Research in Personality
Most of the empirical research in contemporary personality addresses the ways in 
which individuals and groups differ. For example, the extensive research literature 
on extraversion and introversion, on anxiety and neuroticism, and on self-esteem all 
focuses on the ways in which people differ from one another. The extensive research 
on masculinity and femininity deals with the psychological ways in which men and 
women differ (on average) and the ways in which people acquire sex-typed social roles. 
Cultural research shows that one major dimension of difference concerns whether indi￾viduals endorse a collectivistic versus an individualistic attitude. Eastern Asian cul￾tures, for example, tend to be more collectivistic and Western cultures tend to be more 
individualistic (see Chapter 17).
One way to examine personality psychology would be to pick a dozen or so current 
research topics and explore what psychologists have learned about each. For example, 
a lot of research has been done on self-esteem—what it is, how it develops, how people 
maintain high self-esteem, and how it influences social relationships. There are many 
other interesting topics in contemporary personality psychology—shyness, aggression, 
trust, dominance, hypnotic susceptibility, depression, intelligence, attributional style, 
goal setting, anxiety, temperament, sex roles, self-monitoring, extraversion, sensation 
seeking, agreeableness, impulsivity, sociopathic tendencies, morality, locus of control, 
optimism, creativity, leadership, prejudice, and narcissism.
A course that just surveys current topics in personality research seems unsatisfac￾tory. It would be like going to an auction and bidding on everything—soon you would be 
overwhelmed. Just picking topics to cover would not result in an understanding of the 
connections among the aspects of personality. Indeed, the field of personality has been 
criticized for containing too many independent areas of investigation, with no sense of 
the whole person behind the separate topics of investigation. What holds personality 
together as a coherent field would be missing in such an approach.
You have probably heard the ancient legend of the three visually impaired men who 
were presented with an elephant. They tried to figure out what the whole elephant was 
like. The first visually impaired man approached cautiously; walking up to the elephant 
and putting his hands and then arms around the animal’s leg, he proclaimed, “Why, the 
whole elephant is much like a tree, slender and tall.” The second man grasped the trunk of 
the elephant and exclaimed, “No, the whole elephant is more like a large snake.” The third 
visually impaired man grasped the ear of the elephant and stated, “You are both wrong; 
the whole elephant more closely resembles a fan.” The three visually impaired men pro￾ceeded to argue with one another, each insisting that his opinion of the whole elephant 
was the correct one. In a sense, each visually impaired man had a piece of the truth, yet 
each failed to recognize that his perceptions of the elephant captured only a narrow part 
Final PDF to printer14
lar31869_ch01_002-021.indd 14 11/30/22 11:12 AM
Introduction
of the truth. Each failed to grasp the whole elephant. Working together, however, the visu￾ally impaired men could have assembled a deeper understanding of the whole elephant.
The topic of personality is like the elephant, and personality psychologists are 
somewhat like the visually impaired people examining only one perspective at a time. 
For example, some psychologists study the biological aspects of personality. Others 
study the ways in which culture promotes personality differences among people and 
among groups. Still other psychologists study how various aspects of the mind inter￾act and work together to produce personality. And others study relationships among 
people and believe that social interaction is where personality manifests its most impor￾tant effects. Each of these perspectives on personality captures elements of truth, yet 
each alone is inadequate to describe the entire realm of human personality—the whole 
elephant, so to speak.
Six Domains of Knowledge About Human Nature
The various views of researchers in personality stem not from the fact that one perspec￾tive is right and the others wrong, but rather from the fact that they are studying different 
domains of knowledge. A domain of knowledge is a specialty area of science and scholar￾ship in which psychologists have focused on learning about some specific and limited 
aspects of human nature. A domain of knowledge delineates the boundaries of research￾ers’ knowledge, expertise, and interests.
This degree of specialization is reasonable. Indeed, specialization characterizes 
many scientific fields. The field of medicine, for example, has heart specialists, skin 
specialists (dermatologists), and brain specialists, focusing in great detail on their own 
domains. It is likewise reasonable for the field of personality psychology to have intra￾psychic specialists, trait origins specialists, cultural specialists, and personality and social 
interaction specialists. Each of these domains of personality has accumulated its own 
base of knowledge. Nonetheless, it is desirable to integrate these diverse domains to see 
how they all fit together.
The whole personality, like the whole elephant, is the sum of the various parts 
and the connections among them. For personality, each part is a domain of knowledge 
representing a collection of knowledge about certain aspects of personality. How are 
the domains of knowledge defined? For the most part, natural boundaries have devel￾oped in the field of personality psychology. That is, researchers have formed natural 
clusters of topics that fit together and are distinct from other clusters of knowledge. 
Within these identifiable domains, researchers have developed common methods for 
asking questions, have accumulated a foundation of known facts, and have developed 
theoretical explanations that account for what is known about personality from the per￾spective of each domain.
The field of personality can be cleaved into six distinct domains of knowledge 
about human nature: personality is influenced by traits the person is born with and how 
they develop over time (dispositional domain); by biological events (biological domain); 
by processes within the person’s own mind (intrapsychic domain); by personal and 
private thoughts, feelings, desires, beliefs, and other subjective experiences (cognitive￾experiential domain); by social, cultural, and gendered positions in the world (social and 
cultural domain); and by the adjustments or adaptations that people make to the inevi￾table challenges of life (adjustment domain).
Personality psychologists working within each domain often use different theo￾retical perspectives and focus on different facts. As a consequence, psychologists from 
Final PDF to printer15
lar31869_ch01_002-021.indd 15 11/30/22 11:12 AM
CHAPTER ONE Introduction to Personality Psychology 
different domains can sometimes appear to contradict one another. The psychoanalytic 
perspective of Sigmund Freud, for example, views the personality as consisting of irratio￾nal sexual and aggressive instincts that motivate human activity. The cognitive perspec￾tive on personality, in contrast, views humans as rational “scientists,” calmly trying to 
anticipate, predict, and control the events that occur in their worlds.
On the surface, these perspectives appear incompatible. How can humans be both 
irrational and rational? How can humans be driven by desire yet be cool and detached 
in their quest for accurate prediction? On deeper examination, the contradictions may 
be more apparent than real. It is entirely possible, for example, that humans have both 
powerful sexual and aggressive motivations and cognitive mechanisms designed to per￾ceive and predict events accurately. It is entirely possible that sometimes basic emotions 
and motivations are activated and at other times the cool cognitive mechanisms are acti￾vated. And it is possible that the two sets of mechanisms sometimes become linked with 
one another, such as when the rational mechanisms are used in the service of fulfilling 
fundamental desires. In short, although each theoretical perspective may be focused on 
a critically important part of human psychological functioning, each perspective by itself 
does not capture the whole person.
This book is organized around the six domains of personality functioning—
dispositional, biological, intrapsychic, cognitive-experiential, social and cultural, and 
adjustment. Within each of these domains of personality, we focus on two key ele￾ments: (1) the theories that have been proposed within each domain, including the basic 
assumptions about human nature, and (2) the empirical research that has been accumu￾lating within each of these domains. In an attempt to bridge the gap between theory and 
research in personality, we focus primarily on the theories that have received the greatest 
research attention and the topics within each domain for which there is the greatest 
cumulative knowledge base.
Dispositional Domain
The dispositional domain deals centrally with the ways in 
which individuals differ from one another. As such, the 
dispositional domain cuts across all the other domains. 
The reason is that individuals can differ in their habitual 
emotions, their enduring concepts of self, their physi￾ological propensities, and even their intrapsychic mech￾anisms. However, what distinguishes the dispositional 
domain is an interest in the number, nature, and conse￾quences of fundamental dispositions. The central goal 
of personality psychologists working in the dispositional 
domain is to identify and measure the most important 
ways in which individuals differ from one another. 
They are also interested in the origins of the important 
individual differences and in how they develop and are 
maintained.
Biological Domain
The core assumption within the biological domain is that humans are, first and fore￾most, collections of biological systems, and these systems provide the building blocks 
for behavior, thought, and emotion. As personality psychologists use the term, biological 
Identical twins Alvin (left) and Calvin (right) Harrison, age 26, celebrate 
their first and second place finishes in the 400-meter race in Brisbane, 
Australia, August 8, 2000. Psychologists are studying twins to determine 
whether some aspects of personality are influenced by genetics.
Comstock Images/SuperStock
Final PDF to printer16
lar31869_ch01_002-021.indd 16 11/30/22 11:12 AM
Introduction
approaches typically refers to three areas of research within this general domain: genet￾ics, psychophysiology, and evolution.
The first area of research consists of the genetics of personality. Because of 
advances in behavioral genetic research, a fair amount is known about the genetics of 
personality. Some questions this research addresses include the following: Are identical 
twins more alike than fraternal twins in their personalities? What happens to identical 
twins when they are reared apart versus when they are reared together? Can we identify 
the specific genes underlying traits using molecular genetic methods? How do genetic 
and environmental influences interact with each other? Behavioral genetic research per￾mits us to ask and provisionally answer these questions.
The second biological approach is best described as the psychophysiology of per￾sonality. Within this domain, researchers summarize what is known about the basis of 
personality in terms of nervous system functioning. Examples of such topics include 
cortical arousal and neurotransmitters, cardiac reactivity, strength of the nervous system, 
pain tolerance, circadian rhythms (whether you are a morning or night person), and the 
links between hormones, such as testosterone and estrogen, and personality.
The third component of the biological approach concerns how evolution may have 
shaped human psychological functioning. This approach assumes that the psychological 
mechanisms that constitute human personality have evolved over thousands of years 
because they were effective in solving adaptive problems linked to survival and reproduc￾tion. An evolutionary perspective sheds light on the functional aspects of personality, and 
research in this domain has mushroomed over the past decade (e.g., Buss, 2019). We also 
highlight some fascinating research on personality in nonhuman animals (Sih et al., 2015; 
Vazire & Gosling, 2003; White, Pascall, & Wilson, 2020).
Intrapsychic Domain
The intrapsychic domain deals with mental mechanisms of personality, many of which 
operate outside of conscious awareness. The dominant theory in this domain is Freud’s 
theory of psychoanalysis. This theory begins with fundamental assumptions about the 
instinctual system—the sexual and aggressive forces that are presumed to drive and ener￾gize much of human activity. Considerable research reveals that sexual and aggressive 
motives are indeed powerful, and their manifestations in actual behavior can be studied 
empirically. The intrapsychic domain also includes defense mechanisms, such as repres￾sion, denial, and projection—some of which have been examined in laboratory studies. 
Although the intrapsychic domain is most closely linked with the psychoanalytic theory 
of Sigmund Freud, there are modern versions as well. For example, much of the research 
on the power motives, achievement motives, and intimacy motives is based on a key intra￾psychic assumption—that these forces often operate outside the realm of consciousness.
Cognitive-Experiential Domain
The cognitive-experiential domain focuses on thought processes and subjective experi￾ence, such as conscious ideas, feelings, beliefs, and desires about oneself and others. The 
psychological mechanisms involved in subjective experience differ, however, in form 
and content from one another. One important element of our experience entails the 
self and self-concept. Descriptive aspects of the self organize how we view ourselves: 
knowledge of ourselves, images of past selves, and images of possible future selves. Do 
we see ourselves as good or as evil? Are our past successes or past failures prominent 
in our self-views? Do we envision ourselves in the future as married with children or as 
Final PDF to printer17
lar31869_ch01_002-021.indd 17 11/30/22 11:12 AM
CHAPTER ONE Introduction to Personality Psychology 
successful in a career? How we evaluate ourselves—our self-esteem—is another facet of 
the cognitive-experiential domain.
A somewhat different aspect of this domain pertains to the goals we strive for. 
Some personality psychologists, for example, view human nature as inherently goal￾directed, stressing the organizing influence of fundamental needs or strivings, such 
as the need for affiliation and the striving for status. Research within this tradition 
includes approaching personality through the personal projects, that is the tasks that 
individuals are trying to accomplish in their daily lives. These can range from the com￾monplace, such as getting a date for Saturday night, to the grandiose, such as changing 
global social injustice.
Another important aspect of subjective experience entails our emotions. Are we 
happy or sad? What makes us angry or fearful? Do we keep our emotions bottled up 
inside, or do we express them at the drop of a hat? Joy, sadness, feelings of triumph, 
and feelings of despair all are essential elements in our subjective experience and are 
subsumed by the cognitive-experiential domain.
Social and Cultural Domain
One of the special features of this book is an emphasis on the social 
and cultural domain of personality. The assumption is that personal￾ity is not something that merely resides within the heads, nervous 
systems, and genes of individuals. Rather, personality affects, and is 
affected by, the social and cultural context.
At a cultural level, it is clear that groups differ tremendously 
from one another. Cultures such as the Yanomamö of Venezuela 
are somewhat aggressive; indeed, historically a Yanomamö man 
would not achieve full status as a man until he had killed another 
man. In contrast, cultures such as the !Kung San of Botswana are 
relatively peaceful and agreeable. Overt displays of aggression are 
discouraged and bring social shame on the perpetrator. Personality 
differences among these groups are most likely due to cultural 
influences. In other words, different cultures may bring out dif￾ferent facets of our personalities in manifest behavior. Everyone 
may have the capacity to be peaceful as well as the capacity to be 
aggressive, as documented by the dramatic changes in violence and 
peacefulness over time (Pinker, 2012). Which one of these capaci￾ties we display may depend on what is acceptable in, and encour￾aged by, the culture?
At the level of individual differences within cultures, person￾ality plays itself out in the social sphere. Whether we are dominant 
or submissive affects such diverse parts of our lives as the conflicts 
we get into with our partners and the tactics we use to manipulate 
others. Whether we tend to be anxious and depressed or buoyant 
and optimistic affects the likelihood of social outcomes, such as 
marital stability and divorce. Whether we are introverted or extra￾verted affects how many friends we will have and our popularity within the group. 
Many important individual differences are played out in the interpersonal sphere.
One important social sphere concerns relationships between men and women. At the 
level of differences between the genders, personality may operate differently for men than 
for women. Gender is often, although not always, an important part of our identities.
By studying people in different cultures, psychologists are 
learning how society shapes personality by encouraging 
or discouraging specific behaviors. An indigenous man 
along the Amazon River, near Iquitos, Peru.
hadynyah/Vetta/Getty Images
Final PDF to printer18
lar31869_ch01_002-021.indd 18 11/30/22 11:12 AM
Introduction
Adjustment Domain
The adjustment domain refers to the fact that personality plays a key role in how we cope, 
adapt, and adjust to the ebb and flow of events in our day-to-day lives. Evidence, for 
example, shows that personality is linked with important health outcomes, such as heart 
disease. Personality is also linked with health-related 
behaviors, such as smoking, drinking, illegal drug￾taking, and risk-taking. Some research has even demon￾strated that personality is linked with how long we live.
In addition to health, many important problems 
in coping and adjustment can be traced to personality. 
In this domain, certain personality features are related 
to poor adjustment and have been designated as person￾ality disorders. Chapter 19 is devoted to the personal￾ity disorders, such as narcissistic personality disorder, 
antisocial personality disorder, and avoidant personal￾ity disorder. An understanding of “normal” personality 
functioning can be deepened by examining the disor￾ders of personality, much as in the field of medicine, in 
which an understanding of normal physiological func￾tioning is often illuminated by the study of disease.
Personality relates to health by influencing health-related behaviors, such 
as smoking.
Martin Novak/Alamy Stock Photo
Think of a behavior pattern or characteristic that you find interesting in yourself or some￾one you know. Characteristics such as procrastination, narcissism, and perfectionism are good 
examples, but any personality characteristic that catches your interest is good. Then write six 
sentences about this characteristic, one to represent each of the six domains: dispositional, bio￾logical, intrapsychic, cognitive-experiential, social and cultural, and adjustment. Each sentence 
should make a statement or ask a question about the characteristic from the perspective of a 
particular domain.
Exercise
The Role of Personality Theory
One of the central aims of this book is to highlight the interplay between personality 
theory and research. In each domain of knowledge, there are some prevailing theories, 
so we close this chapter with a discussion of theories. Theories are essential in all scien￾tific endeavors, and they serve several useful purposes. A good theory is one that fulfills 
three purposes in science:
• Provides a guide for researchers,
• Organizes and explains known findings, and
• Makes predictions.
One of the most important purposes of theories is that they serve as a guide for research￾ers, directing them to important questions within an area of research.
Final PDF to printer19
lar31869_ch01_002-021.indd 19 11/30/22 11:12 AM
CHAPTER ONE Introduction to Personality Psychology 
A second useful function of theories is to organize and explain known findings. In 
physics, for example, there is a bewildering array of events—apples fall from trees, planets 
exert attraction on each other, black holes suck down light. The theory of gravity neatly 
and powerfully accounts for all these observations. By accounting for and explaining 
known findings, theories bring both coherence and understanding to the known world. 
The same applies to personality theories. Theories are viewed as powerful if they suc￾ceed in accounting for known findings, in addition to guiding psychologists to important 
domains of inquiry.
A third purpose of theories is to make predictions about behavior and psychologi￾cal phenomena that no one has yet documented or observed. Einstein’s theory of relativ￾ity, for example, predicted that light will bend around large stars long before we had the 
technology to test this prediction. When researchers finally confirmed that light does, 
indeed, bend when going around stars such as our sun, that finding confirmed the power 
of Einstein’s theory in predicting outcomes.
Finally, we need to distinguish between scientific theories and beliefs. For exam￾ple, astrology is a collection of beliefs about the relationship between personality and the 
position of the stars at birth. Some people hold that such relationships are true, even in 
the absence of supporting evidence. To date, psychologists have not found reliable fac￾tual support, using standard research methods and systematic observations, for the idea 
that the positions of the stars at a person’s birth influence personality. As such, astrology 
remains a belief, not a scientific theory. Beliefs are often personally useful and crucially 
important to some people, but they are based on faith, not on reliable facts and system￾atic observations. Theories, on the other hand, are tested by systematic observations that 
can be repeated by other researchers who attempt to replicate the findings (sometimes 
successfully, sometimes not).
In sum, three key criteria of personality theories highlight the interplay of the￾ory and research. They guide researchers to important domains of inquiry, explain and 
account for known findings, and make predictions about new phenomena.
Standards for Evaluating Personality Theories
As we explore each of the six domains, it will be useful to bear in mind five scientific 
standards for evaluating personality theories:
• Comprehensiveness
• Heuristic value
• Testability
• Parsimony
• Compatibility and integration across domains and levels
The first standard is comprehensiveness—does the theory do a good job of explain￾ing all of the facts and observations within its domain? Theories that explain more empir￾ical findings are generally superior to those that explain fewer findings.
A second evaluative standard is heuristic value—does the theory provide a guide to 
important new discoveries about personality that were not known before? Theories that 
steer scientists to making these discoveries are generally superior to theories that fail to 
provide this guidance. Plate tectonic theory in geology, for example, guided researchers 
to discover regions of volcanic activity that were unknown prior to the theory. Similarly, 
a good personality theory will guide personality researchers to make discoveries that 
were previously unknown.
Final PDF to printer20
lar31869_ch01_002-021.indd 20 11/30/22 11:12 AM
Introduction
A third important standard for evaluating theories is testability—does the theory pro￾vide precise predictions that can be tested empirically? Some theories—for example, cer￾tain aspects of Freud’s theory of intrapsychic conflict—have been criticized on the grounds 
that they are difficult or impossible to test; other aspects of Freud’s theory are testable (see 
Chapters 9 and 10). As a general rule, the testability of a theory rests with the precision of 
its predictions. Precise theoretical predictions aid progress in the science because they allow 
inadequate theories to be discarded (those whose predictions are falsified) and good theo￾ries to be retained (those whose predictions are empirically confirmed). If a theory does not 
lend itself to being tested empirically, it is generally judged to be a poor theory.
A fourth standard for evaluating personality theories is parsimony—does the theory 
contain few premises and assumptions (parsimony) or many premises and assumptions 
(lack of parsimony)? As a general rule, theories that require many premises and assump￾tions to explain a given set of findings are judged to be poorer than theories that can explain 
the same findings with fewer premises and assumptions. Although parsimony is important, 
bear in mind that this does not mean that simple theories are always better than complex 
theories. Indeed, simple theories often crash and burn because they fail to meet one or more 
of the other five standards described here; for example, they may fail to be comprehensive 
because they explain so little. It is our view that human personality is genuinely complex, 
and so a complex theory—one containing many premises—may ultimately be necessary.
A fifth standard is compatibility and integration across domains and levels. A theory 
of cosmology in astronomy that violated known laws of physics, for example, would 
be incompatible across levels and hence judged to be fundamentally flawed. A theory 
of biology that violated known principles of chemistry similarly would be judged to be 
fatally flawed. In the same way, a personality theory in one domain that violated well￾established principles in another domain would be judged highly problematic. For exam￾ple, a theory of the development of personality dispositions that was inconsistent with 
well-established knowledge in physiology and genetics would be judged to be problem￾atic. Similarly, a theory of evolutionary influences on personality that contradicted what 
is known about cultural influences, or vice versa, would be problematic. Although the 
criterion of compatibility and integration across domains and levels is a well-established 
principle in most sciences (Tooby & Cosmides, 1992), it has rarely been used to evalu￾ate the adequacy of personality theories. We believe that the “domains” approach taken 
in this book highlights the importance of the evaluative criterion of compatibility across 
levels of personality analysis.
In sum, as you progress through the six domains of personality functioning, keep 
in mind the five standards by which theories within each domain can be evaluated—
comprehensiveness, heuristic value, testability, parsimony, and cross-domain compatibil￾ity (see Table 1.2).
Standard Definition
Comprehensiveness Explains most or all known facts.
Heuristic value Guides researchers to important new discoveries.
Testability Makes precise predictions that can be empirically tested.
Parsimony Contains few premises or assumptions.
Compatibility and integration Consistent with what is known in other domains; can be 
Table 1.2 Five Standards for Evaluating Personality Theories
Final PDF to printer21
lar31869_ch01_002-021.indd 21 11/30/22 11:12 AM
CHAPTER ONE Introduction to Personality Psychology 
Is There a Grand Ultimate and True 
Theory of Personality?
The field of biology contains a grand unifying theory—the theory of evolution by natural 
selection, originally proposed by Darwin (1859) and further refined in its neo-Darwinian 
form as inclusive fitness theory (Hamilton, 1964). This theory is comprehensive, guides 
biologists to new discoveries, has led to thousands of empirical tests, is highly parsimoni￾ous, and is compatible with known laws in adjacent scientific disciplines. Evolutionary 
theory provides the grand unifying framework within which most biologists conduct 
their work. Ideally, the field of personality psychology would also contain such a grand 
unifying theory. Alas, at the current time, it does not.
Perhaps Sigmund Freud, the inventor of psychoanalytic theory, provided the most 
ambitious attempt at a grand unifying theory of personality (see Chapter 9). And many 
grand theories have followed Freud’s. But over the past several decades, most personal￾ity researchers have come to the realization that the field currently lacks a grand unifying 
theory. Instead, most have focused on more specific domains of functioning. It is pre￾cisely for this reason that our book is organized around the six domains—these represent 
the domains in which progress, scientific findings, and new discoveries are being made.
In our view, an ultimate grand theory of personality psychology will have to unify 
all six domains. It will have to explain personality characteristics and how they develop 
over time (dispositional domain). It will have to explain evolutionary, genetic, and physi￾ological underpinnings of personality (biological domain). It will have to explain deeply 
rooted motives and dynamic intrapsychic processes (intrapsychic domain). It will have 
to explain how people experience the world and process information about it (cognitive￾experiential domain). It will have to explain how personality affects, and is affected by, 
the social and cultural context in which people conduct their lives (social and cultural 
domains). And it will have to explain how people cope and function—as well as how 
adjustment fails—as they encounter the numerous adaptive challenges they face over the 
sometimes bumpy course of their lives (the adjustment domain).
Although the field of personality psychology currently lacks a grand theory, we 
believe that work in these six domains will ultimately provide the foundations on which 
such a unified personality theory will be built. We are excited to report that there have 
been tremendous developments and discoveries in all six domains. We hope you share 
our excitement about discovering these domains of human personality.
trait-descriptive adjectives 4
personality 4
psychological traits 5
average tendencies 5
psychological mechanisms 6
within the individual 7
organized 7
enduring 7
influential forces 8
person–environment interaction 8
adaptation 9
environment 9
KEY TERMS
good theory 18
theories 19
beliefs 19
scientific standards for evaluating 
personality theories 19
comprehensiveness 19
heuristic value 19
testability 20
parsimony 20
compatibility and integration across 
domains and levels 20
human nature 11
individual differences 11
differences among groups 11
nomothetic 12
idiographic 12
domain of knowledge 14
dispositional domain 15
biological domain 15
intrapsychic domain 16
cognitive-experiential domain 16
social and cultural domain 17
adjustment domain 18
Final PDF to printer22
lar31869_ch02_022-053.indd 22 11/30/22 11:13 AM
2
Personality Assessment, 
Measurement, and 
Research Design
Sources of Personality Data
Self-Report Data (S-Data)
Observer-Report Data (O-Data)
Test Data (T-Data)
Life-Outcome Data (L-Data)
Issues in Personality Assessment
Evaluation of Personality Measures
Reliability
Response Sets
Validity
Generalizability
Research Designs in Personality
Experimental Methods
Correlational Studies
Case Studies
When to Use Experimental, Correlational, and Case Study Designs
SUMMARY AND EVALUATION
KEY TERMS
Top Left: Tavis Wright/Image 
Source; Top Right: Svisio/Getty 
Images; Middle Left: Science 
Photo Library RF/Getty Images; 
Middle Right: Lightspring/
Shutterstock; Bottom Left: 
Arthimedes/Shutterstock; Bottom 
Right: Athanasia Nomikou/
Shutterstock
Final PDF to printerlar31869_ch02_022-053.indd 23 11/30/22 11:13 AM
INTRODUCTION
Imagine that a presidential election is looming. You are faced with a choice 
between two candidates. The personalities of the candidates may prove to be critical 
to your decision. How will they hold up under stress? What are their attitudes toward 
abortion or gun control? Will they stand tough in negotiating with leaders from other 
countries? This chapter focuses on the means by which we gain information about 
other people’s personalities—the sources from which we gather personality data and 
the research designs we use in the scientific study of personality.
When deliberating between the two presidential candidates, you might want to know 
what they say about their values and attitudes—through a self-report. You might want 
to know what others say about their strengths in dealing with foreign leaders—through 
an observer report. You also might want to place the candidates in a more controlled 
situation, such as a debate, and see how each performs—to acquire test data (T-data). 
Furthermore, you might want to know about certain events in their lives, such as whether 
they have ever used illegal drugs, been arrested, dodged the draft, been divorced, filed for 
bankruptcy, or been caught in an embarrassing sexual scandal—life history data.
Each of these sources of data reveals something about the personalities of the 
presidential candidates, yet each alone is incomplete and may be biased. (For fascinat￾ing personality analyses of presidential candidates, see Immelman, 2002; O’Donnell & 
Rutherford, 2016; Post, 2003; and Renshon, 1998, 2005.) The candidate may self￾report a grandiose record of successful business dealings, for example, but then the 
actual records show a history of bankruptcy filings and unpaid bills. Observers may 
report that the candidate is honest, yet be unaware of lies the candidate has told. A 
debate may show one candidate in a positive light, but perhaps the other candidate 
had a cold that day. And the public record of serving in the military reserve may 
not reveal the family connections that enabled the candidate to avoid combat. Each 
source of data provides important information. But each source, by itself, is of limited 
value, an incomplete picture.
This chapter covers three topics related to personality assessment and research. 
The first concerns where we get our information—the sources of personality data and 
the actual measures that personality psychologists use. The second topic is how we 
evaluate the quality of those measures. The third topic pertains to how we use these 
measures in actual research designs to study personality.
Much of the discussion 
surrounding political 
candidates involves their 
personalities.
Left: Action Sports Photography/
Shutterstock; Right: Matt Smith 
Photographer/Shutterstock
2
Final PDF to printer24
lar31869_ch02_022-053.indd 24 11/30/22 11:13 AM
Introduction
Sources of Personality Data
Self-Report Data (S-Data)
Perhaps the most obvious source of information about a person is self-report data 
(S-data)—the information a person reveals. Clearly, individuals may not always provide 
accurate information about themselves for a variety of reasons, such as the desire to 
present themselves in a positive light. Nevertheless, the journals that publish the latest 
research in personality reveal that self-report is the most common method for measuring 
personality (Connelly & Ones, 2010).
Self-report data can be obtained through a variety of means, including interviews 
that pose questions to a person, periodic reports by a person to record the events as they 
happen, and questionnaires. The questionnaire method, in which individuals respond to 
a series of items that request information about them, is by far the most commonly used 
self-report assessment procedure.
There are good reasons for using self-report. The most obvious is that individuals 
have access to a wealth of information about themselves that is inaccessible to anyone 
else, such as their habitual level of anxiety (e.g., Vazire, 2010). Individuals can report 
about their feelings, emotions, desires, beliefs, and private experiences. They can report 
about their self-esteem. They can report about their innermost fears and fantasies. And 
they can report about immediate and long-term goals. Because of this potential wealth of 
information, self-report is an indispensable source of personality data.
Self-report can take a variety of forms, ranging from open-ended “fill in the blanks” 
to forced-choice true-or-false questions. Sometimes these are referred to as unstructured
(open-ended, such as “Tell me about the parties you like the most”) and structured (“I like 
loud and crowded parties”—answer “true” or “false”) personality tests. A prime example 
of the open-ended form of self-report is called the Twenty Statements Test (TST) (see A 
Closer Look for more information). In this test, a participant receives a sheet of paper 
that is essentially blank, except for the words “I am” repeated 20 times. There is a space 
after each of these partial statements, and participants are asked to complete them. For 
example, a person might say, in this order: I am a woman; I am 19 years old; I am shy; I 
am intelligent; I am someone who likes quiet nights at home; I am introverted; and so on. 
Personality instruments that use open-ended formats require coding schemes for classify￾ing the responses they obtain. In other words, psychologists must devise a way to score 
or interpret the participant’s open-ended responses. To get an idea of how outgoing the 
woman in our example is, the psychologist might count how many statements refer to 
social characteristics.
More common than open-ended questionnaires are structured personality ques￾tionnaires, in which the response options are provided. The simplest form of the struc￾tured self-report questionnaire involves a series of trait-descriptive adjectives, such as 
active, ambitious, anxious, arrogant, artistic, generous, gregarious, greedy, good-natured, 
xenophobic, and zany. Individuals indicate whether each adjective describes them. The 
simplest format for presenting these terms is a checklist, such as the Adjective Check 
List (ACL) (Gough, 1980). In completing the ACL, the individuals place a check 
beside adjectives that they feel accurately describe them and leave blank items that don’t 
describe them. A more complex method involves requesting participants to indicate 
in numerical form the degree to which each trait term characterizes them, say on a 
7-point rating scale of 1 (least characteristic) to 7 (most characteristic). This is called 
Final PDF to printer25
lar31869_ch02_022-053.indd 25 11/30/22 11:13 AM
CHAPTER Two Personality Assessment, Measurement, and Research Design
The TST was published by a pair of soci￾ologists. Manford Kuhn and Thomas 
McPartland were interested in attitudes 
people had toward themselves. In 1954, 
they published the “Who am I?” test. This 
test asked the participant to simply answer 
this question by completing the phrase 
“I am _____” 20 times. Kuhn and McPartland 
developed a way of scoring the test by 
analyzing the content of the person’s 
responses. The order of each response was 
thought to be significant (e.g., something 
mentioned earlier might be more important 
to the self-definition than something men￾tioned later).
In early use by psychologists, the TST 
was applied mainly to clinical and personality 
research questions. For example, one study 
used the TST to see if the self-concepts of 
persons in “unadjusted” marriages differed 
from the self-concepts of persons in “well￾adjusted” marriages (Buerkle, 1960). People 
in adjusted marriages tended to mention 
their partner, their marriage, and their fam￾ily more often in their self-definitions than 
those in unadjusted marriages. This finding 
implies that part of a successful marriage is 
incorporating the marriage role into one’s 
definition of oneself.
1994). One cross-cultural study using the 
TST compared people from Kenya with 
people from the United States. Several 
groups were compared on the percent￾age of responses that included refer￾ences to social group categories (e.g., I 
am a member of the local school board or 
I am a player on the local softball team). 
U.S. college students mentioned social 
groups in their self-definitions 12 percent 
of the time. In Kenya, university students 
mentioned social groups 17 percent of 
the time. However, for traditional rural 
Kenyan citizens, results were quite dif￾ferent. Massai tribespersons in Kenya 
mentioned social groups 80 percent of 
the time in their responses, and Samburu 
tribespersons mentioned social groups 84 
percent of the time in their TST responses 
(Ma & Schoeneman, 1997). Results such as 
these show how culture may influence how 
we view ourselves. The TST has proven 
especially effective at identifying the 
most important components of a person’s 
identity—the ingredients that provide a per￾son with a sense of self-esteem, meaning 
in life, and sense of belonging in the world 
of other people (Liquete, Dekoninck, & 
Wisker, 2021; Vignoles et al., 2006).
In the 1970s, researchers turned a 
more critical eye on the TST. It is an open￾ended questionnaire, so people with low 
verbal ability do not complete it as quickly 
or as thoroughly as persons with high ver￾bal ability, leading the test scores to be 
biased by intelligence differences in par￾ticipants (Nudelman, 1973). However, if 
people are given enough time to complete 
the 20 questions—at least 15 minutes—
then the intelligence bias is eliminated. The 
TST survived and emerged as a measure 
that the field deemed useful for assessing 
how people defined themselves.
In the 1980s, the TST was used in 
the study of timely personality topics, 
such as the influence of gender and other 
social roles in people’s self-definitions. 
For example, one study compared married 
and single women (Gigy, 1980). Married 
women tended to respond to the “Who am 
I?” question by mentioning relationships 
(I am a mother, I am a wife), acquired roles 
in family life (I am the one who feeds the 
children), and household activities (I am the 
one who buys groceries). Clearly, marriage 
can mean a large change in self-concept.
Culture and ethnicity are sometime 
important in self-definitions (Bochner, 
A Closer Look Who Am I?
a Likert rating scale (after the person who invented it). It is simply a way for someone to 
express with numbers the degree to which a particular trait describes him or her. A typi￾cal Likert rating scale looks like this:
ENERGETIC
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
Least characteristic Most characteristic
Most commonly, a personality scale consists of summing the scores on a series of 
individual rating scales. A personality scale for activity level, for example, might consist 
of summing up scores from rating scales on energetic, active, and vigorous.
Final PDF to printer26
lar31869_ch02_022-053.indd 26 11/30/22 11:13 AM
Introduction
More common than adjective checklists, however, are self-report questionnaires 
in the form of statements. Examples of widely used self-report inventories are the 
NEO Personality Inventory (Costa & McCrae, 2005) and the California Psychological 
Inventory (CPI) (Gough, 1957/1987). Sample items from the CPI are I enjoy social 
gatherings just to be with people; I looked up to my father as an ideal man; A person needs 
to “show off” a little now and then; I have a very strong desire to be a success in the world; I 
am very slow in making up my mind. Participants read each statement and then indicate 
whether they agree with the statement and feel that it is true of them or disagree with the 
statement and feel that it is false about them. Sample items from the NEO Personality 
Inventory are I like most people I meet; I laugh easily; I often get disgusted with people I 
have to deal with. Participants indicate the degree to which they agree the item describes 
them, using a 1–5 Likert scale, with 1 anchored with the phrase strongly disagree and 5 
anchored with strongly agree.
? DIRECTIONS: This list contains a series of adjectives. Please read them quickly and put an X 
in the box beside each one you consider to be self-descriptive. Try to be honest and accurate.
Exercise
absent-minded
active
adaptable
adventurous
affected
affectionate
soft-hearted
cheerful
civilized
clear-thinking
clever
coarse
cold
touchy
dependent
despondent
determined
dignified
discreet
disorderly
zany
? Pick a personality characteristic you would like to measure. Start by writing down a clear defini￾tion of that characteristic. For example, you might choose characteristics such as friendly, con￾scientious, anxious, or narcissistic. Then write a short questionnaire, about five items long, to 
measure this characteristic. Your items can be statements or adjectives, and they can be open￾ended, true–false, or on a Likert response scale. Then give your questionnaire to other people. 
How easy was it to write items? Do you think your measure accurately assesses the trait?
Exercise
Self-report measures, like all methods, have limitations and weaknesses. For the 
self-report method to be effective, respondents must be both willing and able to answer 
the questions put to them. Yet people are not always honest, especially when asked about 
Final PDF to printer27
lar31869_ch02_022-053.indd 27 11/30/22 11:13 AM
CHAPTER Two Personality Assessment, Measurement, and Research Design
undesirable traits. Some people may lack accurate self-knowledge. Because of these limi￾tations, personality psychologists often use sources of data that do not rely on the hon￾esty or insight of the participant. One of those sources is observers.
Application
Experience sampling—a wrinkle in self-report. One source of data in personality research is called 
experience sampling (e.g., Barrantes-Vidal & Kwapil, 2014; Hormuth, 1986; Larsen, 1989; Mehl & 
Pennebaker, 2003). In this method, people answer some questions, perhaps about their moods or 
physical symptoms, every day for several weeks or longer. People are usually contacted electroni￾cally one or more times a day at random intervals to complete the measures. In one study, 74 
college students reported on their moods every day for 84 consecutive days (Larsen & Kasimatis, 
1990). The investigators were interested in discovering the links between the day of the week and 
mood. They found a strong weekly cycle in the moods of the college students. Positive moods 
peaked on Friday and Saturday and negative moods peaked on Tuesday and Wednesday (Monday 
was not the worst day of the week). The introverts turned out to have a much more regular weekly 
mood cycle than extraverts. That is, the moods of the introverts were more predictable from this 
7-day rhythm than the moods of the extraverts. This difference was probably due to the fact that 
extraverts are less likely to wait for the weekend to do things that put them in a good mood—
partying, socializing, or going out for a special meal with friends. Extraverts typically avoid routine 
in their daily lives, and introverts typically lead more predictable lives. Experience sampling has 
also been used to identify the negative effects of being indoors and computer screen time usage on 
loneliness during the Covid pandemic (Stieger, Lewetz, & Swami, 2021).
Although experience sampling uses self-report as the data source, it differs from more 
traditional self-report methods in being able to detect patterns of behavior over time. Thus, experi￾ence sampling provides information not readily available using questionnaires taken at just one 
point in time. It’s an excellent method, for example, for obtaining information about how a per￾son’s self-esteem may go up and down over time or how a person reacts to the stress of life day 
after day. Experience sampling is increasingly being used in personality research using technolo￾gies such as smartphones, Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram postings, and even Fitbit records. 
One study in Korea, for example, found that people high on narcissism posted more selfies and 
updated their profile pictures more often than those low on narcissism (e.g., Moon et al., 2016).
Observer-Report Data (O-Data)
In everyday life, we form impressions of others with whom we come into contact. For 
each individual, there are typically dozens of observers who form impressions. Our 
friends, families, teachers, and casual acquaintances are all potential sources of informa￾tion about our personalities. Observer-report data (O-data) capitalizes on these sources 
for gathering information about a person’s personality.
Observer reports offer both advantages and disadvantages as sources of personal￾ity data. One advantage is that observers may have access to information not attain￾able through other sources. For example, observers can report about the impressions 
people make on others, their social reputation, whether interactions with others are 
smooth or conflict-ridden, and their status within the group hierarchy. Indeed, one study 
found that altruistic traits can be identified by observers with some accuracy by a mere 
20-second exposure (Fetchenhauer, Groothuis, & Pradel, 2010). As noted by Santayana 
(1905/1980), “[The observer] sometimes reaches truths about people’s character and 
destiny which they themselves are far from divining” (p. 154).
Final PDF to printer28
lar31869_ch02_022-053.indd 28 11/30/22 11:13 AM
Introduction
A second advantage of observer-reports is that multiple observers can be used 
to assess each individual, whereas in self-report only one person provides information 
(Connelly & Ones, 2010; Paunonen & O’Neill, 2010). The use of multiple observers 
allows investigators to evaluate the degree of agreement among observers—also known 
as inter-rater reliability. Furthermore, statistical procedures, such as averaging the assess￾ments of multiple observers, have the advantage of reducing the idiosyncratic features 
and biases of single observers. A more valid and reliable assessment of personality typi￾cally can be achieved using multiple observers.
Selection of Observers
A key decision point that researchers face when using 
observers is how to select them. Personality research￾ers have developed two strategies. One strategy is to use 
professional personality assessors who do not know the 
participant in advance. The other strategy is to use indi￾viduals who actually know the target participants.
One setting in which professional observers are 
used is the Institute for Personality and Social Research 
(IPSR) at the University of California at Berkeley. 
Participants go to the institute for periods of time rang￾ing from one to five days so that a wide variety of in￾depth personality assessments can take place. One study 
contacted a set of architects who were judged by their 
peers to be highly creative, to determine the personality 
predictors of creativity. Another study looked at novelists 
judged to be creative. A third assessed graduate students 
in an MBA program to determine the personality predic￾tors of success in business. During studies at the IPSR, 
trained personality assessors observe the participants in 
many contexts. Subsequently, each observer provides an 
independent personality description of the participants.
A second strategy for obtaining observational 
data is to use individuals who actually know the tar￾get participants. For example, close friends, spouses, 
mothers, and roommates have all been used to pro￾vide personality data on participants (e.g., Buss, 1984; 
Connelly & Ones, 2010; Vazire & Mehl, 2008). The use 
of observers who have existing relationships with a per￾son has advantages and disadvantages when compared with professional assessors. 
One advantage is that such observers are in a better position to observe the target’s 
natural behavior. In the relatively public context of an IPSR assessment, in contrast, 
professional observers cannot witness the more private actions of a person and must 
settle for observing public actions. A spouse or lover has access to privileged informa￾tion often inaccessible through other sources, such as their sexual behavior (Meston 
et al., 2020).
A second advantage of using intimate observers is that multiple social personalities
can be assessed (Craik, 1986, 2008). Each of us displays different sides of ourselves to 
different people—we may be kind to friends, ruthless to enemies, loving to a spouse, and 
conflicted toward parents. Our personalities can vary from one social setting to another, 
depending on the nature of relationships we have with other individuals (Lukaszewski & 
Observer reports can be used as one source of personality information.
Bananastock/AGE Fotostock
Final PDF to printer29
lar31869_ch02_022-053.indd 29 11/30/22 11:13 AM
CHAPTER Two Personality Assessment, Measurement, and Research Design
Roney, 2010). The use of multiple observers provides a method for assessing the many 
aspects of an individual’s personality (Sun, Harris, & Vazire, 2020).
Although there are advantages in using intimate observers in personality assess￾ment, there are also drawbacks (Vazire, 2010). Because intimate observers have relation￾ships with the target person, they may be biased in certain ways. A participant’s mother, 
for example, may overlook the negative and emphasize the positive features of her child.
Naturalistic Versus Artificial Observation
In addition to deciding the type of observers to use, personality researchers must deter￾mine whether the observation occurs in a natural or an artificial setting. In naturalistic 
observation, observers witness and record events that occur in the normal course of the 
lives of their participants. For example, a child might be followed throughout an entire 
day, or an observer may sit in a participant’s home. In contrast, observation can take place 
in artificial settings, such as occur at the IPSR. Experimenters can instruct participants to 
perform a task, such as participation in a group discussion, and then observe how individu￾als behave in these constructed settings. For example, psychologists John Gottman and 
Robert Levenson have had married couples come to their laboratories and discuss a topic 
on which they disagree. The psychologists then observe the couple having a small argu￾ment. The way in which a couple conducts an argument can predict the likelihood that the 
couple will remain together or get divorced (Gottman, 1994). Even the facial expressions 
displayed during these laboratory conflicts predict subsequent marital outcomes (Coan & 
Gottman, 2007; Gottman, Levenson, & Woodin, 2001; Otero et al., 2020).
Naturalistic observation offers researchers the ability to secure information in the 
realistic context of a person’s everyday life, but at the cost of not being able to control 
the events and behavioral samples witnessed. Studies are being conducted by observing 
people’s behavior on the internet (Gosling & Mason, 2015). One study, for example, 
found that extraverts tend to engage in more cyberbullying on the internet than do intro￾verts (Semerci, 2017). Observation in experimenter-generated situations has the advan￾tage of controlling conditions and eliciting the relevant behavior. But this advantage 
comes at a cost—sacrificing the realism of everyday life.
In summary, there are many dimensions along which O-data differ, such as deci￾sions about whether to use (1) professional assessors or intimate observers and (2) a 
naturalistic or an artificial setting. The strengths and weaknesses of the options must be 
evaluated with the goals of the investigation in mind. No single method is ideally suited 
for all assessment purposes.
Test Data (T-Data)
Beyond self-report and O-data, a third common source of personality-relevant information 
comes from standardized tests—test data (T-data). Participants are placed in a standardized 
testing situation. The idea is to see if different people react differently to an identical situ￾ation. The situation is designed to elicit behaviors that serve as indicators of personality 
variables (Block, 1977). An interesting example is the bridge-building test found in Henry 
Murray’s (1948) classic book The Assessment of Men. In this test, the person being assessed 
is given two assistants and a collection of wood, rope, and tools, and they have to build a 
bridge over a small creek. The person being assessed cannot do the work alone, but must 
instruct the two assistants on how to build the bridge. Unbeknownst to the person being 
assessed, the two assistants are role-playing: One is has trouble understanding instructions; 
the other is a “know-it-all,” who has their own ideas about how the bridge should be built 
and often contradicts the person being assessed. These two “helpers” actually are there to 
Final PDF to printer30
lar31869_ch02_022-053.indd 30 11/30/22 11:13 AM
Introduction
frustrate the person being assessed. Although the person being assessed thinks he or she is 
being observed on leadership skills, the person is actually being evaluated on tolerance of 
frustration and performance under adversity.
One fascinating example of the use of T-data is Edwin Megargee’s (1969) study 
of manifestations of dominance. Megargee wanted to devise a laboratory test situation 
to examine the effect of dominance on leadership. He first administered the California 
Psychological Inventory Dominance scale to a large group of men and women. He then 
selected only men and women who scored either very high or very low on dominance. 
Megargee then took pairs of individuals into the laboratory, in each case pairing a high￾dominant participant with a low-dominant participant. He created four conditions: (1) 
a high-dominant man with a low-dominant man, (2) a high-dominant woman with a 
low-dominant woman, (3) a high-dominant man with a low-dominant woman, and (4) a 
high-dominant woman with a low-dominant man.
Megargee then presented each pair with a large box containing many red, yellow, 
and green nuts, bolts, and levers. Participants were told that the purpose of the study was 
to explore the relationship between personality and leadership under stress. Each pair had 
to work as a team of troubleshooters to repair the box as fast as possible—by removing nuts 
and bolts with certain colors and replacing them with other colors. They were told that 
one person from the team had to be the leader, a position which entailed giving instruc￾tions. The second person was to be the follower, who had to go inside the box and carry 
out the menial tasks requested by the leader. The experimenter then told the participants 
that it was up to them to decide who would be the leader and who would be the follower.
The key variable of interest for Megargee was who 
would become the leader and who would become the 
follower. He simply recorded the percentage of high￾dominant participants within each condition who became 
leaders. He found that 75 percent of the high-dominant 
men and 70 percent of the high-dominant women took 
the leadership role in the same-sex pairs. When high￾dominant men were paired with low-dominant women, 
however, 90 percent of the men became leaders. But the 
most startling result occurred when the woman was high 
in dominance and the man was low in dominance. In this 
condition, only 20 percent of the high-dominant women 
assumed the leadership role.
Megargee tape-recorded the conversations while 
they were deciding who would be the leader. When 
he analyzed these tapes, he made a startling finding: 
the high-dominant women were appointing their low￾dominant partners to the leadership position. In fact, the 
high-dominant women actually made the final decision about the roles 91 percent of 
the time. This finding suggests that women were expressing their dominance in a differ￾ent manner than the men in the mixed-sex condition.
Megargee’s study highlights several key points about laboratory studies. First, it 
shows that it is possible to set up conditions to reveal key indicators of personality. Second, 
it suggests that laboratory experimenters should be sensitive to manifestations of person￾ality that occur in incidental parts of the experiment, such as the discussions among the 
participants. And, third, there are often interesting links between S-data obtained through 
questionnaires and T-data obtained through controlled testing conditions. Such links help 
to establish the validity of both the questionnaire and the laboratory test of dominance.
Who takes the leadership role when people work together is often a 
function of personality.
Sam Edwards/AGE Fotostock
Final PDF to printer31
lar31869_ch02_022-053.indd 31 11/30/22 11:13 AM
CHAPTER Two Personality Assessment, Measurement, and Research Design
Like all data sources, T-data have limitations. First, some participants might try 
to guess what trait is being measured and then alter their responses to create a spe￾cific impression of themselves. A second challenge is the difficulty in verifying that the 
research participants define the testing situation in the same way as the experimenter. 
An experiment designed to test for “obedience to authority” might be misinterpreted as a 
test for “intelligence,” perhaps raising anxiety in ways that distort subsequent responses. 
Failure to confirm the correspondence between the conceptions of experimenters and 
those of participants may introduce error.
A third caution in the use of T-data is that these situations are inherently inter￾personal, and a researcher may inadvertently influence how the participants behave. A 
researcher with an outgoing and friendly personality, for example, may elicit more coop￾eration from participants than a cold or aloof experimenter (see Kintz et al., 1965). The 
choice of who runs the experiment, including the personality of the experimenter, may 
inadvertently introduce effects that alter the obtained results.
Despite these limitations, T-data remain a valuable and irreplaceable source of 
personality information. Procedures used to obtain T-data can be designed to elicit behav￾ior difficult to observe in everyday life. They allow investigators to control the context
and to eliminate extraneous sources of influence. And they enable experimenters to test 
specific hypotheses, such as the predicted effect of extraversion on social decision mak￾ing (Tolnai, 2021). For these reasons, T-data procedures remain an indispensable set of 
tools for the personality researcher (Elfenbein et al., 2008).
Mechanical Recording Devices
Personality psychologists have been enterprising in adapting technological innovations. 
An example is the use of the “actometer” to assess personality differences in activity or 
energy level. The actometer is essentially a modified self-winding watch, which can be 
strapped to the arms or legs of participants (typically, children). Movement activates 
the winding mechanism, registering the person’s activity on the hands of the dial. Of 
course, day-to-day and even hour-to-hour fluctuations in mood, physiology, and set￾ting limit the usefulness of any single sample of activity level. However, several samples 
can be recorded on different days to generate composite scores, reflecting, for each per￾son, whether he or she is hyperactive, normally active, or sedentary (Buss, Block, & 
Block, 1980).
Preschool children ages 3 and 4 wore actometers on the wrist of the nonfavored 
hand for approximately two hours (Buss, Block, & Block, 1980). The dial of each actom￾eter was covered with tape, so the children would not be distracted. Indeed, in pretesting, 
the children who could observe the dial became preoccupied with it—sitting in one spot, 
shaking the device back and forth—a practice that interfered with the usefulness of the 
measure. Several separate recording sessions were held, and the actometer readings were 
aggregated to obtain a more reliable index of each child’s activity level.
The experimenters then sought answers to three questions: (1) Does activity 
level measured with the actometer yield the same results as activity level measured 
through observation? (2) To what extent is activity level stable over time? and (3) Do 
activity level measurements using this mechanical recording device relate to observer￾based judgments of personality functioning? To answer these questions, the children’s 
teachers provided observer evaluations using the children’s version of the California 
Q-Sort—an instrument designed to produce a wide-ranging description of children’s 
personality characteristics (Block & Block, 1980). Examples of items on the Q-Sort 
include is a talkative individual; behaves in a giving way toward others; is basically sub￾missive; is guileful and deceitful, manipulative, opportunistic; has a high energy level.
Final PDF to printer32
lar31869_ch02_022-053.indd 32 11/30/22 11:13 AM
Introduction
These observations were made when the children were 
3, 4, and 7 years old, whereas the actometer measures 
were recorded at ages 3 and 4.
There was a strong correspondence between 
actometer measures of activity level and the observer￾based measures. Activity level also is moderately stable 
over time. For example, actometer measures at age 3 
showed a moderate correspondence with actometer mea￾sures at age 4. Is there any relationship between actom￾eter measurements of activity level and observer-based 
judgments of personality? The highly active children, as 
assessed with the actometer, were judged by their teach￾ers to be vital, energetic, and active. Highly active chil￾dren also were judged to be restless and fidgety. Teachers 
saw the active children as uninhibited, assertive, compet￾itive, aggressive physically and verbally, attention-getting, 
and manipulative of others. Thus, actometer-based activity scores are linked to other per￾sonality characteristics, traits that have important consequences for social interaction. 
Actometer measures have also been used to assess hyperactivity and ADHD in children 
(Dekkers et al., 2021).
In sum, some aspects of personality can be assessed through mechanical record￾ing devices, such as the actometer (Dekkers et al., 2021). These forms of T-data have 
several advantages and disadvantages. They provide a mechanical means of assessing 
personality, unhampered by the biases that might be introduced when a human observer 
is involved. A second advantage is that they can be obtained in relatively naturalistic 
settings—such as a children’s playground. Their primary disadvantage is that few person￾ality dispositions lend themselves to being assessed by mechanical devices. There are no 
mechanical devices, for example, to directly measure introversion or conscientiousness.
Electronic and Internet Recording Devices
Electronic recording devices are increasingly being used in personality assessment. 
These include monitoring through smartphones, Instagram, Facebook, Twitter, and fit￾ness devices such as Fitbit. One study using the Electronic Activated Recorder found 
that moral behavior, as indicated by showing sympathy and gratitude, was highly stable 
over time (Bollich et al., 2016). Another found that people high on narcissism updated 
their Instagram profile pictures with great regularity (Moon et al., 2016).
Electronic and internet recordings cut across the categories of T-data, S-data, 
and O-data. For example, experimenters can introduce an experimental manipulation 
(T-data), such as prompting participants to discuss a traumatic experience and compare 
that group with a control group simply asked to write about their day, and then compare 
the two groups on subsequent physical and psychological health (e.g., Pennebaker & 
Chung, 2011). Or researchers can ask participants to self-report what they are doing 
when prompted (S-data) or simply observe behavior such as number of selfies and cor￾relate those with self-reported narcissism (O-data).
Electronic recording devices have the strong advantages in that they can assess 
naturally occurring behavior in ways not obtainable through laboratory or self-report 
methods. Nonetheless, because participants are aware that they are being monitored 
electronically, their behavior may still be sensitive to what they think experimenters want 
to see, and so act in ways they think are socially desirable.
Activity level is stable over time and correlates with teacher ratings of 
vital, energetic, and active.
FatCamera/iStock/Getty Images Plus/Getty Images
Final PDF to printer33
lar31869_ch02_022-053.indd 33 11/30/22 11:13 AM
CHAPTER Two Personality Assessment, Measurement, and Research Design
Physiological Data
A critical source of personality data is physiological measurement. Physiological mea￾sures can provide information about a person’s level of arousal, reactivity to various stim￾uli, and the speed at which he or she takes in new information—all potential indicators 
of personality. Sensors can be placed on different parts of a person’s body, for example, 
to measure sympathetic nervous system activity, blood pressure, heart rate, and muscle 
contraction. Brain waves, such as reactivity to stimuli, also can be assessed. And even 
physiological changes associated with sexual arousal can be measured via instruments 
such as a penile strain gauge (Geer & Head, 1990) or a vaginal bloodflow meter (Handy, 
Freihart, & Meston, 2020).
In Chapter 7, we go into some detail on physiological measures. For our pur￾poses here—examining alternative ways of measuring personality—we look at only one 
example of using physiological data as a source of personality information. Psychologist 
Christopher Patrick (1994, 2005) has been studying psychopaths, particularly men in 
prison who have committed serious crimes against other people. One theory about psy￾chopaths is that they do not have the normal fear or anxiety response that most people 
have. Things that might make most people anxious may not make the psychopath anx￾ious. To test this idea, Patrick used a technique called the “eyeblink startle reflex,” which 
had previously been used in studies of fear.
When people are startled by a loud noise, they show the startle reflex, which con￾sists of blinking their eyes, lowering the chin toward the chest, and inhaling suddenly. 
If people are already anxious, they exhibit the startle reflex faster than when feeling 
normal. It makes adaptive sense that they will be prepared to have a faster defensive 
startle if they are already in a fearful or anxious state. You can demonstrate this by show￾ing people pictures of frightening or unpleasant scenes, such as a snake, a vicious dog, 
or spiders, which most people find make them a little anxious. If they are startled while 
looking at these scenes, they will startle faster than when looking at nonfeared objects, 
such as a house, a tree, or a table. Interestingly, Patrick found that psychopaths who 
were in prison for violent crimes did not exhibit the faster eyeblink response while view￾ing the anxiety-producing photographs. Psychopaths may commit their crimes because 
they don’t have the normal level of anxiety or guilt that prevents most of us from doing 
anything wrong. This is a good example of how physiological measures can be used to 
examine and understand various personality characteristics.
A more recent physiological data source comes from functional magnetic reso￾nance imaging (fMRI), a technique used to identify the areas of the brain that “light up” 
when performing certain tasks such as verbal problems or spatial navigation problems. It 
works by gauging the amount of oxygen brought to particular places in the brain. When 
a certain part of the brain is highly activated, it draws large amounts of blood. the oxygen 
carried by the blood accumulates in that region of the brain. The fMRI is able to detect 
concentrations of iron carried by the oxygen contained in the red blood cells and thus 
determine the part of the brain that is used in performing certain tasks. The colorful 
images that emerge from fMRI brain scans are often quite dramatic.
In principle, fMRI provides a physiological data source that can be linked with per￾sonality dispositions, intelligence, or psychopathology. In practice, however, the method 
has limitations. Because fMRI must compare the “activated” state with a “resting” state, 
it becomes critical to know what the resting state really is. If men’s resting state turns 
more to sports and women’s resting state turns more to social interactions, for example, 
it is possible that a comparison of a task such as looking at faces to the resting state 
would suggest that men and women are performing the task differently, when in fact the 
Final PDF to printer34
lar31869_ch02_022-053.indd 34 11/30/22 11:13 AM
Introduction
difference is due entirely to a sex difference in the resting 
state (Kosslyn & Rosenberg, 2004).
One of the key benefits of physiological data is that 
it is difficult for participants to fake responses, particu￾larly on measures of arousal or reflexive responses, such 
as the eyeblink startle reflex. Nonetheless, physiological 
recording procedures share most of the same limitations 
as other laboratory T-data. In particular, recording is 
typically constrained by a relatively artificial laboratory 
situation.
Projective Techniques
Another type of T-data is projective techniques, in which 
the person is given a standard stimulus and asked what 
they see. The most famous projective technique for 
assessing personality is the set of inkblots developed by 
Hermann Rorschach. The hallmark of any projective 
technique is that the person is presented with an ambiguous stimulus, such as an inkblot, 
and then asked to impose structure on this stimulus by describing what they see—for 
example, what is in the inkblot. The idea behind projective techniques is that what the 
person sees in the stimulus reveals something about his or her personality. Presumably, 
people “project” their concerns, conflicts, traits, and ways of seeing or dealing with the 
world onto the ambiguous stimulus.
Projective techniques are considered T-data because all people are presented with 
a standard testing situation, all are given the same instructions, and the test situation 
elicits behaviors that are thought to reveal personality.
Measures of physiological responses, such as these fMRI brain scans, are 
a source of data in personality research.
NIH-National Institute on Drug Abuse
A person interpreting an inkblot may project his or her personality into what is “seen” in the image.
Andrey_Popov/Shutterstock
Final PDF to printer35
lar31869_ch02_022-053.indd 35 11/30/22 11:13 AM
CHAPTER Two Personality Assessment, Measurement, and Research Design
To the psychologist interpreting responses to 
the inkblots, the content of those responses is impor￾tant. Someone with a “dependent personality,” for 
example, might produce a high frequency of responses 
such as food, food providers, passively being fed, nur￾turers, oral activity, passivity, helplessness, and “baby 
talk”(Bornstein, 2005).
In sum, all projective measures present partici￾pants with ambiguous stimuli, asking them to provide 
structure by interpreting, drawing, or telling a story 
about the stimuli. Psychologists who advocate projec￾tive measures argue that they are useful for getting at 
wishes, desires, fantasies, and conflicts that the partici￾pants themselves may be unaware of and so could not 
report on a questionnaire. Others are critical of projec￾tives, questioning their validity and reliability as accu￾rate measures of personality (Areh, Verkampt, & Allan, 
2021; Wood, Nezworski, & Stejskal, 1996).
Life-Outcome Data (L-Data)
Life-outcome data (L-data) refers to information that 
can be gleaned from the events, activities, and out￾comes in a person’s life that are available to public 
scrutiny. For example, marriages and divorces are 
a matter of public record. Personality psychologists 
can sometimes secure information about the clubs 
a person joins, how many speeding tickets a person 
has received, and whether he or she owns a handgun. 
Whether a person gets arrested for a violent or white￾collar crime is a matter of public record. Success at 
one’s job, whether one is upwardly or downwardly 
mobile, and the creative products one produces, such 
as books published and music recorded, are often important outcomes in a person’s 
life. These can all serve as important sources of information about personality.
Personality psychologists often use S-data and O-data to predict L-data. An exam￾ple that illustrates how O-data can be used to predict important life events is provided 
by Avshalom Caspi and his colleagues (Caspi, Elder, & Bem, 1987). Based on clinical 
interviews with mothers of children aged 8, 9, and 10, researchers created two personal￾ity scales to measure ill-temperedness. One was based on the severity of temper tantrums; 
it noted physical behaviors such as biting, kicking, striking, and throwing things and 
verbal expressions such as swearing, screaming, and shouting. The other scale assessed 
the frequency of these temper tantrums. Caspi and his colleagues summed these two 
scales to create a single measure of temper tantrums. This measure represents O-data 
because it is based on the mothers’ actual observations. Then, in adulthood, when the 
participants were 30–40 years old, the researchers gathered information about life out￾comes, such as education, work, marriage, and parenthood. They examined whether ill￾temperedness, measured in childhood as O-data, predicted significant life outcomes two 
to three decades later, measured as L-data.
The tendency to have frequent temper outbursts in childhood 
has been linked with negative adult outcomes, such as increased 
likelihood of divorce.
Chris Knapton/Alamy Stock Photo
Final PDF to printer36
lar31869_ch02_022-053.indd 36 11/30/22 11:13 AM
Introduction
The results proved to be remarkable. For the men, early temper tantrums were linked 
with many negative outcomes in adult life. The men who had exhibited temper tantrums in 
childhood achieved significantly lower rank in their military service. They tended to have 
erratic work lives—changing jobs more frequently and experiencing more unemployment 
than those who had not been judged to be ill-tempered as children. Furthermore, such 
men were less likely than their even-tempered counterparts to have a satisfying marriage. 
Fully 46 percent of the ill-tempered men were divorced by age 40, whereas only 22 percent 
of the men in the low-temper-tantrum category were divorced by the age of 40.
For the women, early temper tantrums did not have a bearing on their work lives, in 
contrast to the men. However, the women who had temper tantrums as children tended 
to marry men who were significantly lower than themselves in occupational status; fully 
40 percent of the women who had showed temper tantrums as children “married down,” 
compared with only 24 percent of the women who had been even-tempered as children. 
As with the men, childhood temper tantrums were linked with frequency of divorce for the 
women. Roughly 26 percent of the women who had childhood tantrums were divorced by 
age 40, whereas only 12 percent of the even-tempered women were divorced by that age.
In addition to empirical studies that predict marriage and divorce outcomes, life￾outcome data are used in other ways that affect our everyday lives. Our driving records, 
including speeding tickets and traffic accidents, are used by insurance companies to deter￾mine how much we pay for car insurance. Our histories of credit card usage are some￾times tracked by businesses to determine our behavioral preferences, which influence the 
advertisements we get exposed to on social network sites such as Facebook. Advertisers 
sometimes track the websites we visit and use e-mail “spam” and pop-up advertisements 
based on our patterns of internet surfing. Indeed, even a person’s e-mail address can reveal 
personality. People who adopt e-mail addresses such as honey.bunny77@hotmail.com tend 
to be somewhat more extraverted than those who adopt blander e-mail addresses (Back, 
Schmukle, & Egloff, 2008). Driving records, credit card usage, and patterns of internet 
usage are modern sources of L-data. Do you think we can predict these patterns of pub￾licly traceable data from personality variables, such as impulsivity (more driving accidents), 
status striving (credit card purchase of prestige possessions), and sex drive (more frequent 
visiting of pornography websites)? Indeed, traits such as Narcissism and Psychopathy are 
positively correlated with pornography consumption (Burtaverde et al., 2021).
In sum, L-data can serve as an important source of real-life information about per￾sonality. Personality characteristics measured early in life are often linked to important 
life outcomes several decades later. In this sense, life outcomes, such as work, marriage, 
and divorce, are, in part, manifestations of personality. Nonetheless, it must be recog￾nized that life outcomes are caused by a variety of factors, including gender, culture, eco￾nomic status, and ethnicity and the opportunities to which one happens to be exposed. 
Personality characteristics represent only one set of causes of these life outcomes.
Think of a personality characteristic that you find interesting. For example, you might consider 
such characteristics as activity level, risk taking, temper, or cooperativeness. Using the four 
main data sources, think of ways that you might gather information on this characteristic. Give 
specific examples of how you could assess this characteristic using S-, O-, T-, and L-data as 
sources of information on people’s level of this characteristic. Be specific in providing exam￾ples of how and what you might do to assess your chosen personality characteristic.
Exercise
Final PDF to printer37
lar31869_ch02_022-053.indd 37 11/30/22 11:13 AM
CHAPTER Two Personality Assessment, Measurement, and Research Design
Issues in Personality Assessment
Now that we have outlined the basic data sources, it is useful to take a step back and con￾sider two broader issues in personality assessment. The first issue involves using two or 
more data sources within a single personality study. What are the links among the vari￾ous sources of personality data? The second issue involves the fallibility of personality 
measurement and how the use of multiple data sources can correct some of the problems 
associated with single data sources.
Links Among Various Data Sources
A key issue that personality psychologists must address is how closely the findings 
obtained from one data source correspond to findings from another data source. If, 
for example, a person rates herself as dominant, do observers, such as her friends and 
spouse, also view her as dominant? Do findings obtained from electronic recording 
devices, such as Facebook or Instagram, correspond to data obtained from observer 
reports or self-reports of narcissism?
Depending on the personality variable under consideration, agreement across data 
sources tends to range from low to moderate. Ozer and Buss (1991) examined the rela￾tionships between self-report and spouse report for eight dimensions of personality. They 
found that the degree of agreement varied depending on the particular trait and on the 
observability of the trait. Traits such as extraversion showed moderate agreement across 
data sources. The trait of “calculating,” on the other hand, showed low self-spouse agree￾ment. Traits that are easily observable (such as extraversion) show a higher degree of 
self-observer agreement than do traits (such as calculating) that are difficult to observe 
and require inferences about internal mental states (see Vazire, 2010).
One of the central advantages of using multiple measures is that each measure has 
unique idiosyncrasies that have nothing to do with the underlying construct of interest. 
By using multiple measures from various data sources, researchers are able to average 
out these idiosyncrasies and home in on the key variable under study.
A major issue in evaluating linkages among the sources of personality data is 
whether the sources are viewed as alternative measures of the same construct or as assess￾ments of different phenomena. A person self-reporting about her relative dominance, for 
example, has access to a wealth of information—namely, her interactions with dozens 
of other people in her social environment. Any particular observer—a close friend, for 
example—has access to only a limited and selective sample of relevant behavior. Thus, if 
the friend rates a woman as highly dominant, whereas the woman rates herself as only 
moderately dominant, the disagreement may be due entirely to the different behavioral 
samples on which each person is basing the ratings. Thus, lack of agreement does not 
necessarily signify an error of measurement (although it might).
In summary, the interpretation of links among the sources of personality data 
depends heavily on the research question being posed. Strong agreement between two 
sources of data leads researchers to be confident that their alternative measures are tap￾ping into the same personality phenomenon, as proves true with extraversion and activ￾ity level. Lack of strong agreement, on the other hand, may mean that the different data 
sources are assessing different phenomena, or it may indicate that one or more data 
sources have problems—an issue to which we now turn.
The Fallibility of Personality Measurement
Each data source has problems and pitfalls that limit its utility. This is true of all methods in 
science. Even so-called objective scientific instruments, such as telescopes, are less than per￾fect because minor flaws, such as a slight warping in the lens, may introduce errors into the 
Final PDF to printer38
lar31869_ch02_022-053.indd 38 11/30/22 11:13 AM
Introduction
One powerful strategy of personality assessment, therefore, is to examine results 
that transcend data sources—a procedure sometimes referred to as triangulation. If a par￾ticular effect is found—for example, the influence of dominance on the assumption of 
leadership—does the effect occur when dominance is measured with self-report as well 
as with observer reports? If extraverts are more easily bored than introverts, does this 
show up when boredom is assessed with physiological recording devices as well as via 
self-report? Throughout this book, we pay special attention to findings that transcend the 
limitations of single-data-source assessment.
Evaluation of Personality Measures
Once personality measures have been identified, the next task is scientific scrutiny to 
determine how good the measures are. In general, three standards are used to evaluate 
personality measures: reliability, validity, and generalizability. Although these three stan￾dards are discussed here in the context of evaluating personality questionnaires, these 
standards are applicable to all measurement methods within personality research, not 
merely to those involving self-report personality questionnaires.
Reliability
Reliability can be defined as the degree to which an obtained measure represents the true 
level of the trait being measured. Assume for a moment that each person has some true 
amount of the trait you wish to measure and that you could know this true level. If your 
measure is reliable, then it will correlate with the true level. For example, if a person has 
a true IQ of 115, then a perfectly reliable measure of IQ will yield a score of 115 for that 
person. Moreover, a reliable measure of IQ will yield the same score of 115 each time 
it is administered to the person. A less reliable measure would yield a score, say, in a 
range of 112–118. An even less reliable measure would yield a score in an even broader 
range, between 100 (which is average) and 130 (which is borderline genius). Personality 
psychologists prefer reliable measures, so that the scores accurately reflect each person’s 
true level of the personality characteristic.
There are several ways to estimate reliability. One is through repeated measurement. 
There are different forms of repeated measurement. A common procedure is to repeat a 
measurement over time—for example, at intervals of one month—for the same people. If 
the two tests are highly correlated, yielding similar scores for most people, the resulting 
measure is said to have high test-retest reliability.
A second way to gauge reliability is to examine the relationships among the 
items themselves at a single point in time. If the items within a test—viewed as a form 
of repeated measurement—all correlate well with each other, then the scale is said to 
have high internal consistency reliability. The reliability is internal because it is assessed 
within the test itself. The rationale for using internal consistency as an index of reli￾ability is that psychologists constructing various measures assume that all items on a 
scale are measuring the same characteristic. If they are, then the items should correlate 
positively with each other.
A third way to measure reliability—applicable only to observer-based personality 
measures—is to obtain measurements from multiple observers. When different observers 
agree with each other, the measure is said to have high inter-rater reliability. When differ￾ent raters fail to agree, the measure has low inter-rater reliability.
Final PDF to printer39
lar31869_ch02_022-053.indd 39 11/30/22 11:13 AM
CHAPTER Two Personality Assessment, Measurement, and Research Design
It is important to demonstrate that a personality measure is reliable, whether 
through test-retest, internal consistency, or inter-rater reliability. One factor that can 
reduce measurement reliability, especially for self-report questionnaires, is response sets, 
to which we now turn.
Response Sets
When participants answer questions, psychologists typically assume that they are 
responding to the content of the questions. For example, when people are confronted 
with the item “I have never felt like smashing things,” psychologists assume that par￾ticipants think of all the times when they were angry and then recall whether on those 
occasions they have ever felt like smashing something. Psychologists also assume that 
participants make a deliberate and conscious effort to consider the content of the ques￾tion and then answer “True” or “False” to honestly reflect their behavior. This assump￾tion may sometimes be incorrect.
The concept of response sets refers to the tendency of some people to respond to 
the questions on a basis that is unrelated to the question content. Sometimes this is also 
referred to as noncontent responding. One example is the response set of acquiescence, or 
yea saying. This is the tendency to simply agree with the questionnaire items, regardless 
of the content of those items. Psychologists counteract acquiescence 
by intentionally reverse-scoring some of the questionnaire items, 
such as an extraversion item that states, “I frequently prefer to be 
alone.” Extreme responding is another response set, which refers to 
the tendency to give endpoint responses, such as “strongly agree” or 
“strongly disagree” and to avoid the middle part of response scales, 
such as “slightly agree” or “slightly disagree.”
Personality psychologists worry about the effects of response 
sets on the reliability of measurement. Response sets may invalidate 
self-report measures of personality, so psychologists have looked for 
ways to detect and counteract their effects.
The response set known as social desirability has received the 
greatest amount of research by personality psychologists. Socially 
desirable responding is the tendency to answer items in such a way 
as to come across as socially attractive or likable. People respond￾ing in this manner want to make a good impression, to appear to 
be well adjusted, to be good citizens. For example, imagine being 
asked to answer “True” or “False” to the statement “Most of the 
time I am happy.” A person might actually be happy only 45 per￾cent of the time yet answer “True” because this is the well-adjusted 
thing to say in our culture. People like happy people, so the socially 
desirable response is “Yes, I am happy most of the time.” This is 
an example of responding not to the content of the item but to the 
kind of impression a “True” or “False” answer would create, and 
it represents a response set. An interesting study found that highly 
religious individuals were more prone to exaggerate their level of 
agreeableness, in part because they saw agreeableness as a highly 
desirable trait (Ludeke & Carey, 2015).
There are two views regarding the interpretation of social desir￾ability. One is that it represents distortion and should be eliminated 
Some rare individuals, like the late Mother Teresa of 
Calcutta, might score high on social desirability because 
they are in fact truly good, not because they want to 
create a good impression of themselves by lying on a 
personality questionnaire.
David Bagnall/Alamy Stock Photo
Final PDF to printer40
lar31869_ch02_022-053.indd 40 11/30/22 11:13 AM
Introduction
or minimized. The other view is that social desirability is a valid part of other desirable 
personality traits, such as happiness, conscientiousness, or agreeableness.
Viewing social desirability as distortion does not assume that the person is con￾sciously trying to create a positive impression. A social desirability response set may 
not actually be an outright effort to distort responses and, so, is different from faking 
or lying. Some people may have a distorted view of themselves or have a strong need to 
have others like them. For these reasons, most psychologists have resisted calling this 
response set “lying” or “faking” (cf. Eysenck & Eysenck, 1972, for a different opinion). 
Nevertheless, many personality psychologists believe that socially desirable responding 
introduces inaccuracies into test scores and should be eliminated or controlled.
One approach to the problem of socially desirable responses is to assume that 
they are erroneous or deceptive, to measure this tendency, and to remove it statistically 
from the other questionnaire responses. There are several social desirability measures 
available. Items from a popular measure developed by Crowne and Marlowe (1964) 
are shown in Table 2.1. Crowne and Marlowe thought of social desirability as reflecting 
a need for approval, and they published the social desirability scale in their book The 
Approval Motive. Looking at the items on their scale, you can see that they typically refer 
to minor transgressions that most of us have committed or inadequacies that many of 
us suffer from. In addition, some items refer to almost saintlike behavior. To the extent 
that a person denies common faults and problems and endorses a lot of perfect and well￾adjusted behaviors, they will get a high score on social desirability. A person’s score on 
social desirability can be used to statistically adjust his or her scores on other question￾naires, thereby controlling for this response set.
A second way to deal with the problem of social desirability is by developing ques￾tionnaires that are less susceptible to this type of responding. For example, in choosing 
questions to put on a questionnaire, the researcher may select only the items that have 
been found not to correlate with social desirability.
A third approach to minimizing the effects of socially desirable responding is 
to use a forced-choice questionnaire format. In this format, test takers are confronted 
with pairs of statements and are asked to indicate which statement in each pair is more 
true of them. Each statement in the pair is selected to be similar to the other in social 
Instructions: Listed below are a number of statements concerning personal attitudes and traits. 
Read each item and decide whether the statement is true or false as it pertains to you personally.
True False
 1. I’m always willing to admit it when I make a mistake. ____ ____
 2. I always try to practice what I preach. ____ ____
 3. I never resent being asked to return a favor. ____ ____
 4. I have never been irked when people expressed ideas very 
different from my own.
____ ____
 5. I have never deliberately said something that hurt someone’s 
feelings.
____ ____
 6. I like to gossip at times. ____ ____
Source: Crowne & Marlowe, 1964.
Table 2.1 Crowne/Marlowe Scale for Measuring Social Desirability
Final PDF to printer41
lar31869_ch02_022-053.indd 41 11/30/22 11:13 AM
CHAPTER Two Personality Assessment, Measurement, and Research Design
desirability, forcing participants to choose among statements that are equally socially 
desirable (or undesirable). The following items from the Vando Reducer Augmenter 
Scale (Vando, 1974) illustrate the forced-choice format: Which would you most prefer 
(a or b)?
1. a. To read the book
b. To see the movie
2. a. Eat soft food
b. Eat crunchy food
3. a. Continuous anesthesia
b. Continuous hallucinations
4. a. A job that requires concentration
b. A job that requires travel
If one answers all bs, this scale measures the preference for arousing or strong stimula￾tion. The two choices presented in each item are of approximately the same value in 
terms of social desirability. Consequently, participants must decide on an answer based 
on something other than social desirability. They should respond to the content of the 
item and hence provide accurate information about their personalities.
Although many psychologists view socially desirable responding as error to be 
eliminated, others see it as an important trait, one that is correlated with positive traits 
such as happiness, adjustment, and conscientiousness. These psychologists suggest that 
being mentally healthy may, in fact, entail possessing an overly positive view of one￾self and one’s abilities. In her book Positive Illusions, social psychologist Shelly Taylor 
(1989) summarizes much research suggesting that self-enhancing illusions about oneself, 
the world, and one’s future can promote psychological adjustment and mental health. 
Indeed, research finds that unrealistic beliefs about the self (positive illusions) are 
related to better physical health, such as slower progression of disease in men infected 
with HIV. If psychologists were to measure such positive illusions in the form of social 
desirability and remove them from other personality measures, they might, in effect, be 
throwing the baby out with the bathwater. That is, social desirability may be part of being 
high on adjustment and positive mental health.
Work on social desirability has attempted to disentangle self-deceptive opti￾mism from impression management. Psychologist Delroy Paulhus has developed a 
social desirability inventory called the Balanced Inventory of Desirable Responding, 
which contains two separate subscales (Paulhus, 1984, 1990). The Self-Deceptive 
Enhancement subscale was designed to tap self-deceptive overconfidence and contains 
items such as “My first impressions of other people are always right.” The Impression 
Management subscale was designed to measure the tendency to present oneself favor￾ably, as in the distortion interpretation of social desirability, and contains items such 
as “I don’t gossip about other people’s business.” This subscale was intended to be 
sensitive to self-presentation motives, such as those that lead someone to want to cre￾ate a good impression in others.
To the extent that response sets, such as social desirability, are considered error, 
they can reduce measurement reliability (Paulhus & Vazire, 2007). That is, a personal￾ity questionnaire that is influenced by response sets would not reflect the true level of 
the trait being measured. Personality psychologists worry about response sets for this 
reason, especially for self-report questionnaires. Indeed, new measures of personality are 
often designed in ways that minimize participants’ efforts to fake or present themselves 
in a socially desirable light (e.g., McDaniel et al., 2009). Response sets also can influ￾ence a measure’s validity, a topic to which we now turn.
Final PDF to printer42
lar31869_ch02_022-053.indd 42 11/30/22 11:13 AM
Introduction
Validity
Validity refers to the extent to which a test measures what it claims to measure (Cronbach & 
Meehl, 1955; Wiggins, 2003). Establishing whether a test actually measures what it is 
designed to measure is a complex and challenging task. There are five types of validity: 
face validity, predictive validity, convergent validity, discriminant validity, and construct 
validity. The simplest type of validity is face validity, which refers to whether the test, on 
the surface, appears to measure what it is supposed to measure. For example, a scale 
measuring manipulativeness might include the following face-valid items: I made a friend 
just to obtain a favor; I tricked a friend into giving me personal information; I managed to 
get my way by appearing cooperative; I pretended that I was hurt to get someone to do me a 
favor. Because most people agree that these acts are manipulative, the scale containing 
them is highly face valid.
A more important component of validity is predictive validity, which refers to 
whether the test predicts criteria external to the test (thus it is sometimes called criterion 
validity). A scale intended to measure sensation seeking, for example, should predict 
which individuals actually take risks to obtain thrills and excitement, such as parachute 
jumping or motorcycle riding. One study, for example, found that a measure of sensa￾tion seeking successfully predicted a variety of gambling behaviors, such as playing the 
lottery, betting on sporting events, playing video poker, using slot machines, and even 
addiction to cocaine (O’Connor, Aston-Jones, & James, 2021)—attesting to the predic￾tive validity of the sensation-seeking measure (McDaniel & Zuckerman, 2003). A scale 
created to measure conscientiousness should predict which people actually show up on 
time for meetings and follow rules. Scales that successfully predict what they should 
predict have high predictive validity.
A third aspect of validity, convergent validity, refers to whether a test correlates 
with other measures that it should correlate with. For example, if a self-report measure 
of tolerance corresponds well with peer judgments of tolerance, then the scale is said 
to have high convergent validity. Early in this chapter, we described a study of “activity 
level,” in which mechanical recordings of activity level correlated highly with observer￾based judgments of activity level—another example of convergent validity. Convergent 
validity is high to the degree that alternative measures of the same construct correlate or 
converge with the target measure.
A fourth kind of validity, called discriminant validity, is often evaluated simulta￾neously with convergent validity. Whereas convergent validity refers to what a measure 
should correlate with, discriminant validity refers to what a measure should not corre￾late with. For example, a psychologist might develop a measure of life satisfaction, the 
tendency to believe one’s life is happy, worthwhile, and satisfying. However, there is 
another trait called social desirability, the tendency to say nice things about oneself; 
thus the psychologist might be concerned with the discriminant validity of his or her 
life-satisfaction measure and try to show that this measure is different from measures of 
social desirability. Part of knowing what a measure actually measures consists of know￾ing what it does not measure.
A final type of validity is construct validity, defined as a test that measures what 
it claims to measure, correlates with what it is supposed to correlate with, and does not 
correlate with what it is not supposed to correlate with. Construct validity is the broadest 
type of validity, subsuming face, predictive, convergent, and discriminant validity. This 
form of validity is called construct validity because it is based on the notion that person￾ality variables are theoretical constructs. If asked to “show your intelligence” or “show 
your extraversion,” you would be hard-pressed to respond. That is because there is not 
Final PDF to printer43
lar31869_ch02_022-053.indd 43 11/30/22 11:13 AM
CHAPTER Two Personality Assessment, Measurement, and Research Design
any one thing you can produce and say, “This is my intelligence” or “This is my extra￾version.” Intelligence and extraversion, like almost all personality variables, are abstrac￾tions. Nevertheless, these theoretical constructs are useful to psychologists in describing 
and explaining differences among people. Determining whether actual measures can 
claim to be valid ways of assessing the constructs is the essence of construct validity.
How do we know if a measure has construct validity? If a measure converges with 
other measures of the same construct, if it relates to other variables that a theory of 
the construct says it should, and if it does not relate to phenomena that the theory says 
it should not relate to, then we have the beginnings of construct validity. For exam￾ple, say that a researcher has developed a questionnaire measure of creativity. Do the 
questionnaire scores correlate with other measures of creativity gathered on the same 
sample, such as ratings of creativity provided by friends (convergent validity), or awards 
or grades obtained in fine arts classes (predictive validity)? Do the results correlate 
with behavioral tests in which participants are asked to name creative uses for common 
objects, such as a hammer and string?
Finally, if creativity is hypothesized to be different from intelligence, it will be 
important to prove that the measure of creativity does not correlate with measures of 
intelligence (discriminant validity). When a large number of known relations are built up 
around a measure, then we begin to believe that the measure is credible as a measure of 
a specific personality construct.
Generalizability
A third criterion for evaluating personality measures is generalizability (Cronbach & 
Gleser, 1965; Wiggins, 1973). Generalizability is the degree to which the measure retains 
its validity across various contexts. One context of interest might be different groups of 
persons. A personality psychologist, for example, might be interested in whether a ques￾tionnaire retains its predictive validity across age groups, genders, cultures, or ethnic 
groups. Is a particular scale equally valid when used on men versus women? Is a test 
equally valid for African Americans and European Americans? Is it equally valid among 
Japanese and Javanese? Does the scale measure the same trait or quality among col￾lege students as among middle-aged adults? If the scale is widely applicable across these 
person and cultural contexts, then the scale is said to have high generalizability across 
populations of people.
Another facet of generalizability refers to different conditions. Does a dominance 
scale, for example, predict who becomes the leader in business settings as well as in 
informal, after-work settings? Does a scale designed to measure conscientiousness pre￾dict who will show up for class on time, as well as who will keep their bedrooms tidy? 
Scales have high generalizability to the degree that they apply widely over different per￾sons, situations, cultures, and times.
Research Designs in Personality
In this chapter, we have examined the types of personality measures and the means for 
evaluating the quality of those measures. The next step in personality research is to use 
these measures in actual research designs. Although the variations are nearly infinite, 
there are three basic research designs in the field of personality psychology: experimen￾tal, correlational, and case study. Each has strengths and weaknesses. Each provides 
information that complements the information provided by the others.
Final PDF to printer44
lar31869_ch02_022-053.indd 44 11/30/22 11:13 AM
Introduction
Experimental Methods
Experimental methods are typically used to determine causality—that is, to find out 
whether one variable influences another variable. A variable is simply a quality that can 
take different values for different people. Height, for example, is a variable because indi￾viduals differ in height. Aggressiveness is a variable because individuals differ in their 
levels of aggressiveness. Personality characteristics, such as extraversion and agreeable￾ness, are other examples of variables. In order to establish the influence of one vari￾able on another, two key requirements of good experimental design must be met: (1) 
manipulation of one or more variables and (2) ensuring that participants in each experi￾mental condition are equivalent to each other at the beginning of the study.
In the first requirement, manipulation, the variable thought to be the influence is 
manipulated as part of the experiment. For example, if a drug is hypothesized to influ￾ence memory, then some participants get the drug and other participants get pills con￾taining no active substances; then all participants have their memories tested. The second 
requirement, equivalence, is accomplished in one of two ways. If the experiment has 
manipulation among groups, then the random assignment of participants to experimental 
groups is a procedure that helps ensure that all groups are the same at the beginning 
of the study. However, in some experiments, manipulation is within each single group. 
For example, in the memory experiment, participants might get the drug and have their 
memories tested, then later take the blank pills and have their memories tested again. 
In this case, each participant is in both conditions. In this kind of experiment (called a 
within-participant design), equivalence is obtained by counterbalancing the order of the 
conditions, with half of the participants getting the drug first and blank pill second, and 
the other half getting the blank pill first and the drug second.
The meaning of each of these features will become clear through an example of 
a personality experiment. Perhaps you are curious about why some people like to study 
with music or a TV on, whereas others need total silence for studying. A personality 
theory predicts that extraverts prefer lots of stimulation and introverts prefer very little. 
Imagine being interested in testing the hypothesis that extraverts function best under con￾ditions of high external stimulation, whereas introverts function best under conditions 
of low stimulation. To test this hypothesis, you could first give a group of participants 
a self-report questionnaire that measures extraversion–introversion. Then you could 
select only those who score at either extremes—as very introverted or very extraverted—to 
participate in your experiment. Next you would take these participants into the labora￾tory and have them work on math and sentence comprehension problems under two 
different conditions—in one condition, a radio would be blaring in the background, and 
in the other there would be total silence. Half of each group (i.e., half of the extraverts 
and half of the introverts) should be randomly placed in the noisy condition first and the 
quiet condition second. The other half should be placed in the quiet condition first and 
the noisy condition second. Then, you would measure the number of errors each group 
makes under each of the two conditions. If the personality theory you are testing is cor￾rect, you should get a pattern of results like that in Figure 2.1. The hypothetical results 
in Figure 2.1 show that the extraverts made few errors in the noisy condition and more 
errors when it was quiet. The introverts showed the opposite pattern—noise hurt their 
performance, whereas they functioned best under conditions of silence. 
This study, although hypothetical, highlights the key features of good experimental 
design. The first is manipulation. The external condition (the independent variable) was 
manipulated—whether there was a lot of or a little ambient noise in the laboratory. The 
second feature is counterbalancing—half of the participants received the noisy condition 
Final PDF to printer45
lar31869_ch02_022-053.indd 45 11/30/22 11:13 AM
CHAPTER Two Personality Assessment, Measurement, and Research Design
first, and the other half received the quiet condition 
first. Counterbalancing is critical because there might 
be order effects as a consequence of being exposed to 
one condition first. Counterbalancing allows the exper￾imenter to rule out order effects as an explanation for 
the results. The third feature is random assignment—
all people have an equal chance of being selected for a 
given condition. Randomization can occur by flipping 
a coin or, more commonly, by the use of a table of 
random numbers. Randomization ensures that there 
are no predetermined patterns linked with condition 
assignment that could account for the final results.
In experimental designs, it is desirable to estab￾lish whether the groups in the different conditions are 
significantly different. In the introversion–extraversion 
example, we want to know if the performance of intro￾verts and extraverts in the noisy condition is signifi￾cantly different. Is the performance of the introverts 
significantly different from that of the extraverts in the 
quiet condition? To answer these questions, we need to know five things: the sample 
size, the mean, the standard deviation, the t-test, and the p-value (significance of the dif￾ferences among the conditions).
The mean refers to the average—in this case, the average number of errors within 
each condition. The standard deviation is a measure of variability within each condition. 
Because not all participants make the same average number of errors, we need a way to 
estimate how much participants within each condition vary; this estimate is the stan￾dard deviation. Using these numbers, we can use a statistical formula—called the t-test—to 
calculate the difference between two means.
The next step is to see whether the difference is large enough to be called a statis￾tically significant difference (the p-value). Although “large enough” is a somewhat arbi￾trary concept, psychologists have adopted the following convention: If the difference 
between the means would be likely to occur by chance alone (i.e., due to random fluc￾tuations in the data) only one time out of 20 or less, then the difference is statistically 
significant at the p < .05 level (the .05 refers to 5 percent chance level, or one time in 20). 
Figure 2.1
Performance on math and reading problems.
Performance
on math and
reading
problems
Noisy condition Quiet condition
= Introverts
= Extraverts
People who study alone in a library are likely to be introverted, whereas those who do their studying in groups tend to be extraverted.
Left: Stockbroker/Purestock/SuperStock; Right: Leah Warkentin/Design Pics
Final PDF to printer46
lar31869_ch02_022-053.indd 46 11/30/22 11:13 AM
Introduction
A difference between means that is significant at the .05 level implies that the finding 
would be likely to occur by chance alone only five times out of 100. Another way to 
think about this is to imagine that, if the experiment were repeated 100 times, we would 
expect to find these results by chance alone only five times.
In sum, the experimental method is effective at demonstrating relationships among 
variables. Experiments similar to the one described, for example, have established a link 
between extraversion–introversion and performance under conditions of high versus low 
noise. The procedures of manipulating the conditions, counterbalancing the order in which 
the conditions occur, and randomly assigning participants to conditions help to ensure 
that extraneous factors are canceled out. Then, after calculating means and standard devia￾tions, t-tests (or other more complicated statistics) and p-values are used to determine 
whether the differences between the groups in the two conditions are statistically signifi￾cant. These procedures determine whether personality influences how people perform.
Correlational Studies
A second major type of research design in personality is the correlational study. In 
the correlational method, a statistical procedure is used for determining whether there 
is a relationship between two variables. For example, do people with a high need for 
achievement in college go on to earn higher salaries in adulthood than people lower 
on need for achievement? Correlational research designs attempt to identify the rela￾tionships between two or more variables, without imposing the sorts of manipulations 
seen in experimental designs. Correlational designs typically try to determine what goes 
with what in nature. We might be interested, for example, in the relationship between 
self-esteem, as assessed through S-data, and the esteem in which a person is held by 
others, as assessed through O-data. Or we might be interested in how achievement 
motivation relates to grade point average. A major advantage of correlational studies is 
that they allow us to identify relationships among variables as they occur naturally. To 
continue the example of extraversion–introversion and performance under noise con￾ditions, we might measure people’s preferences for studying with or without music in 
real life, and then see whether there is a correlation with their scores on a measure of 
introversion–extraversion.
The most common statistical procedure for gauging relationships between vari￾ables is the correlation coefficient. Consider the relationship between height and weight. 
We can take a sample of 100 college students and measure their height and weight. If we 
chart the results on a scatterplot, we see that people who are tall also tend to be relatively 
heavy and that people who are short tend to be less heavy. But there are exceptions, as 
you can see in Figure 2.2.
Correlation coefficients can range from +1.00 through 0.00 to −1.00. That is, the 
variables of interest can be positively related to each other (+.01 to +1.00), unrelated to 
each other (0.00), or negatively related to each other (−.01 to −1.00). Height and weight 
happen to be strongly positively correlated with each other—with a calculated correlation 
coefficient of +.60, for the data shown in Figure 2.2.
Consider a more psychological example. Suppose we are interested in the relation￾ship between people’s self-esteem and the amount of time they are unhappy. We might 
see a scatterplot as depicted in Figure 2.3. This scatterplot was obtained from a sample 
of college students using a standard questionnaire measure of self-esteem. As the second 
variable, a measure of unhappiness, the participants were asked to keep a diary for two 
months, noting for each day whether that day was generally good (felt happy) or gener￾ally bad (felt unhappy). Then we calculated the percentage of days for each participant 
Final PDF to printer47
lar31869_ch02_022-053.indd 47 11/30/22 11:13 AM
CHAPTER Two Personality Assessment, Measurement, and Research Design
Figure 2.2
Fifty-five cases plotted, showing a strong positive correlation between height and weight. Each symbol 
(∙) represents one person who was measured on both height and weight. Heavier people tend to be taller; 
lighter persons tend to be shorter. 
240
220
200
180
160
140
120
100
80
Weight in pounds
4.6 5.0 5.4 5.8
Height in feet
6.2 6.6 7.0
Figure 2.3
Fifty-eight cases plotted to illustrate the negative correlation between self-esteem and the percentage of 
time reported as being unhappy over two months. The correlation is −.60, indicating that people with 
higher self-esteem tend to be less unhappy than people with low self-esteem. 
0 10 30 50
Percentage of time unhappy over 60 days
70 90
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
Self-esteem
Final PDF to printer48
lar31869_ch02_022-053.indd 48 11/30/22 11:13 AM
Introduction
being unhappy. As you can see, as self-esteem goes up, the percentage of time a person 
is unhappy tends to go down. In contrast, those with low self-esteem tend to be unhappy 
a lot. In short, there is a negative correlation between self-esteem and the percentage of 
time unhappy—in this case, approximately −.60.
As a final example, suppose we are interested in the relationship between extraver￾sion and emotional stability (the tendency to be calm and secure). The relationship is 
depicted in Figure 2.4. As you can see, there is no relationship between extraversion and 
emotional stability; as one variable goes up, the other may go up, down, or stay the same. 
In this case, the correlation coefficient is 0.00. This means that you can find people with 
all the different combinations of extraversion and emotional stability, such as those who 
are outgoing and sociable but also highly neurotic and unstable. In sum, relationships 
between variables can be positive, negative, or neither, as signified by positive, negative, 
or zero correlations. 
Most researchers are not merely interested in the direction of the relationship; 
they are also interested in the magnitude of the relationship, or how large or small it is. 
Although what is considered large or small depends on many factors, social scientists 
have adopted a general convention. Correlations around .10 are considered small; those 
around .30 are considered medium; and those around .50 or greater are considered large 
(Cohen & Cohen, 1975). Using the examples in Figures 2.2 and 2.3, the +.60 correla￾tion between height and weight is considered large, as is the −.60 correlation between 
self-esteem and percentage of time unhappy. These correlations have the same magni￾tude but are different in sign.
The concept of statistical significance can also be applied to correlation values. 
This is basically part of the statistical calculation, and it results in a numerical statement 
Figure 2.4
Fifty-seven cases plotted to show the relationship between emotional stability and extraversion. The 
correlation between these two variables is essentially 0.00, meaning that there is no relationship. 
Consequently, in the scatterplot, people fall fairly equally in all sections of the plot, with no clear pattern.
1.5 2.5 3.5 4.5
Emotional stability
6.55.5 7.5
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
Extraversion
Final PDF to printer49
lar31869_ch02_022-053.indd 49 11/30/22 11:13 AM
CHAPTER Two Personality Assessment, Measurement, and Research Design
about how likely you are to find a correlation this size by chance, given the variables 
measured and the size of the sample. Here psychologists also require a probability of .05 
or less before referring to a correlation as statistically significant.
It is important to keep in mind that one cannot infer causation from correlations. 
There are at least two reasons correlations can never prove causality. One is called the 
directionality problem. If A and B are correlated, we do not know if A is the cause of B or 
if B is the cause of A. For example, we know there is a correlation between extraversion 
and happiness. From this fact alone, we do not know if being extraverted causes people 
to be happy or if being happy causes people to be extraverted.
The second reason that correlations can never prove causality is the third variable 
problem. Two variables might be correlated because a third, unknown variable is causing 
both. For example, the amount of ice cream sold on any given day may be correlated 
with the number of people who drown on that particular day. Does this mean eating ice 
cream causes drowning? Not necessarily, because there is most likely a third variable at 
work: hot weather. On very hot days, many people eat ice cream. Also, on very hot days 
many people go swimming who otherwise don’t swim very much, so more are likely to 
drown. Drowning has nothing to do with eating ice cream; rather, these two variables are 
likely to be caused by a third variable: hot weather.
Case Studies
Sometimes a personality researcher is interested in examining the life of one person 
in-depth as a case study. There are advantages to the case study method. Researchers 
can find out about personality in great detail, which rarely can be achieved if the study 
includes large samples. Case studies can give researchers insights into personality that 
can then be used to formulate a more general theory to be tested on a larger population. 
They can provide in-depth knowledge of particularly outstanding individuals, such as 
Mahatma Gandhi or Martin Luther King. Case studies also can be useful in studying 
rare phenomena, such as a person with a photographic memory or a person with mul￾tiple personalities.
One case study occupied an entire issue of the 
Journal of Personality (Nasby & Read, 1997), the case of 
Dodge Morgan, who, at the age of 54, completed a non￾stop solo circumnavigation of the earth by a small boat. 
The case study is a highly readable account of this inter￾esting man undertaking an almost impossible task. The 
focus is on how Morgan’s early life experiences formed 
a particular adult personality, which led him to under￾take the extreme act of going around the world alone 
in a small boat. The psychologists used Morgan’s voy￾age log book, autobiographical material, interviews, and 
even standard personality questionnaires in conducting 
their case study. The report is noteworthy in that the psy￾chologists also discussed the strengths and weaknesses 
of the case study method for advancing the science of 
personality psychology. The authors concluded that per￾sonality theories provide a language for discussing indi￾vidual lives; analysis of individual lives, in turn, provides 
a means for evaluating personality theories on how they 
help us understand specific individuals.
Dodge Morgan was 54 when he completed a nonstop, solo 
circumnavigation of the earth in his boat American Promise. An 
extensive case study of this fascinating man was conducted by 
psychologists William Nasby and Nancy Read and reported in their 
paper “The Voyage and the Voyager” published in the Journal of 
Personality, 1997, volume 65, pages 823–852.
Portland Press Herald/Getty Images
Final PDF to printer50
lar31869_ch02_022-053.indd 50 11/30/22 11:13 AM
Introduction
Case study design can use a wide array of tools. One can develop coding systems 
to be applied to written texts, such as personal letters and correspondence. One can 
interview dozens of people who know the individual. One can interview the participant 
for hours and at great depth. One can follow the person around with a video camera and 
record, with sound and image, the actions in his or her everyday life.
Case Study: An Attention-Seeking Boy
One of the strongest advocates of the case study method was Gordon Allport, one of 
the founders of the field of modern personality psychology. Allport firmly believed that 
important hypotheses about personality could come from examining single individuals 
in great depth. He also believed that one could test hypotheses about the underlying 
personality characteristics of a single individual using case study methods. The following 
example illustrates this sort of hypothesis formation and testing:
A certain boy at school showed exemplary conduct; he was orderly, industrious, 
and attentive. But at home he was noisy, unruly, and a bully toward the younger 
children . . . .
Now the psychologist might create the hypothesis: This boy’s central disposition 
is a craving for attention. He finds that he gains attention best at school by 
conforming to the rules; at home, by disobeying them.
Having made this hypothesis, the psychologist could then actually count the 
boy’s acts during the day (being checked by some independent observer) to see how 
many of them were “functionally equivalent,” i.e., manifested a clear bid for attention. 
If the proportion is high, we can regard the hypothesis as confirmed, and the p.d. 
[personality disposition] as established. (Allport, 1961, p. 368)
Source: Allport, G. Pattern and Growth in Personality, 1961.
Case Study: The Serial Killer Ted Bundy
Although Ted Bundy was convicted of killing three women, he was 
suspected of raping and killing as many as 36 women during his half￾decade murder spree in the states of Oregon, Washington, Colorado, 
and Florida in the 1970s (Rule, 2000). Case studies have been 
devoted to explaining what drove Bundy to rape and kill. Some traced 
it back to the fact that he was adopted and felt a burning shame over 
the fact that he never knew his biological parents. Some tied it to 
his failed aspirations as a lawyer—where a status-striving motive was 
frustrated. Some traced it to the fact that he developed a deep-seated 
hostility toward women after being rejected by his fiancée—a woman 
who was considerably higher than he in socioeconomic status and 
who he felt was impossible to replace. All case studies of Bundy 
revealed, however, that he shared many traits with other serial killers. 
He had a “classic” sociopathic personality—characterized by grandi￾osity, extreme sense of entitlement, preoccupation with unrealistic 
fantasies of success and power, lack of empathy for other people, 
a long history of deceitfulness, repeated failures to meet normally 
expected obligations of school and work, and high levels of inter￾personal exploitativeness. Furthermore, Ted Bundy showed early 
behavior and personality dispositions that are known to be associated 
with serial killers, the so-called serial killer triad: (1) torturing ani￾mals while young, (2) starting destructive fires, and (3) bedwetting 
Ted Bundy, a convicted serial killer, showed the 
personality characteristics of a classic sociopath.
Bill Frakes/The LIFE Images Collection/Getty Images
Final PDF to printer51
lar31869_ch02_022-053.indd 51 11/30/22 11:13 AM
CHAPTER Two Personality Assessment, Measurement, and Research Design
(although this third element has recently been called into question because it is not char￾acteristic of all serial killers). Case studies such as those of Ted Bundy can reveal unique 
aspects of his life (e.g., being rejected by a higher status fiancée, failure to achieve status 
as an attorney), as well as the common personality dispositions that are often linked 
with serial killers (e.g., torturing animals, setting fires; see also the case of Keith Hunter 
Jesperson, who confessed to raping and killing eight women, in Olson, 2002).
Despite the strengths of the in-depth case study method, it has some critical limita￾tions. The most important one is that findings based on one individual cannot be gen￾eralized to other people. A case study is to the other research designs what a study of 
the planet Mars is to the study of planetary systems. We may find out a great deal about 
Mars (or a particular person), but what we find out may not be applicable to other 
planets (or other people). For this reason, case studies are most often used as a source of 
hypotheses and as a means to illustrate a principle by bringing it to life.
When to Use Experimental, Correlational, and Case Study Designs
Each of the three major types of research designs has strengths and weaknesses or, more 
precisely, questions that each is good at answering and questions that each is poor at 
answering. The experimental method is ideally suited for establishing causal relation￾ships among variables. For example, it can be used to determine whether noisy condi￾tions hamper the performance of introverts, but not of extraverts. On the other hand, 
the experimental method is poor at identifying the relationships among variables as they 
occur naturally in everyday life. Moreover, it may be impractical or unethical to use the 
experimental method for some questions. For example, if a researcher is interested in the 
role of nutrition in the development of intelligence, it is unethical to conduct an experi￾ment in which half of the participants are put on a starvation diet for several years as 
children to see if it affects their IQs as adults.
Think of a question about one aspect of personality. Most questions take the form of “Is vari￾able A related to or caused by variable B?” For example, are extraverted persons better than 
introverts at coping with stress? Are people with high self-esteem more likely to be success￾ful than people with low self-esteem? Do narcissistic persons have problems getting along 
with others? Write down your question about personality. Now think about how you might 
approach your question using an experiment, using the correlational method, and doing a case 
study. Briefly describe how you would use each of these three research designs to try to answer 
your question.
?
Exercise
However, there are people who, for whatever unfortunate circumstances, have 
had several years of very poor nutrition. Thus a correlational study could be done on 
whether level of nutrition is related to the development of intelligence. The weakness 
of the experimental research design is precisely the strength of the correlational design. 
Correlational designs are ideally suited for establishing the relationships between two 
or more variables that occur in everyday life, such as between height and dominance, 
conscientiousness and grade point average, or anxiety and frequency of illness. But cor￾relational designs are poor at establishing causality.
Final PDF to printer52
lar31869_ch02_022-053.indd 52 11/30/22 11:13 AM
Introduction
Case studies are ideally suited for generating hypotheses that can be tested sub￾sequently using correlational or experimental methods. Case studies can be used to 
identify patterns in individual psychological functioning that might be missed by the 
more rigorous but artificial experimental approach and the limited correlational designs. 
Furthermore, case studies are wonderful in depicting the richness and complexity of 
human experience. Despite these strengths, case studies cannot establish causality, as 
can experimental methods, nor can they identify patterns of covariation across individu￾als as they occur in nature. Case studies also cannot be generalized to anyone beyond 
the single individual being studied. Together, all three designs provide complementary 
methods for exploring human personality.
SUMMARY AND EVALUATION
Personality assessment and measurement start with identifying the sources of personal￾ity data—the places from which we obtain information about personality. The four major 
sources of personality data are self-report (S-data), observer report (O-data), labora￾tory tests (T-data), and life history outcomes (L-data). Each of these data sources has 
strengths and weaknesses. In self-report, for example, participants might fake or lie. 
Observers in the O-data mode may lack access to the relevant information. Observational 
studies of people’s behavior on the internet, however, are creating new research oppor￾tunities, such as predicting Facebook or Instagram postings or cyberbullying from per￾sonality traits. Laboratory tests may be inadequate for identifying patterns that occur 
naturally in everyday life. Each source of personality data is extremely valuable, however, 
and each provides information not attainable through the other sources. Furthermore, 
new measurement techniques continue to be invented and explored; recent examples 
include assessments through electronic and internet technologies such as smartphones, 
Instagram, and Facebook.
Once sources of data have been selected for measuring personality, the researcher 
then evaluates their quality. Personality measures, ideally, should be reliable in the sense 
of attaining the same scores through repeated measurement. They should be valid, mea￾suring what they are supposed to measure. And researchers should establish how gen￾eralizable their measures are—determining the people, settings, and cultures to which 
the measure is most applicable. Scales applicable only to college students in the United 
States, for example, are less generalizable than scales applicable to people of differing 
ages, economic brackets, ethnic groups, and cultures.
The next step in personality research involves selecting a particular research 
design within which to use the measures. There are three basic types of research 
designs. The first, the experimental research design, which involves controlling or 
manipulating the variables of interest, is best suited to determining causality between 
two variables. The second, correlational research design, is best for identifying rela￾tionships between naturally occurring variables but is poorly suited to determining 
causality. The third is the case study method, which is well suited to generating new 
hypotheses about personality and to understanding single individuals.
Perhaps the most important principle of personality assessment and measurement 
is that the decisions about data source and research design depend heavily on the pur￾pose of the investigation. There are no perfect methods; there are no perfect designs. 
But there are data sources and methods that are better suited for some purposes than 
for others.
Final PDF to printer53
lar31869_ch02_022-053.indd 53 11/30/22 11:13 AM
CHAPTER Two Personality Assessment, Measurement, and Research Design
self-report data (S-data) 24
unstructured 24
structured 24
Likert rating scale 25
experience sampling 27
observer-report data (O-data) 27
inter-rater reliability 28
multiple social personalities 28
naturalistic observation 29
test data (T-data) 29
functional magnetic resonance imaging 
(fMRI) 33
projective techniques 34
life-outcome data (L-data) 35
KEY TERMS
construct validity 42
theoretical constructs 42
generalizability 43
experimental methods 44
manipulation 44
random assignment 44
counterbalancing 44
statistically significant 45
correlational method 46
correlation coefficient 46
directionality problem 49
third variable problem 49
case study method 49
reliability 38
repeated measurement 38
response sets 39
noncontent responding 39
acquiescence 39
extreme responding 39
social desirability 39
forced-choice questionnaire 40
validity 42
face validity 42
predictive validity 42
criterion validity 42
convergent validity 42
discriminant validity 42
Final PDF to printerlar31869_ch03_054-085.indd 54 09/28/22 11:08 AM
The 
Dispositional Domain
PART ONE
The dispositional domain focuses 
on aspects of personality that are 
stable over time, are relatively 
consistent over situations, and 
make people different from each 
other. For example, some people 
are outgoing and talkative; others 
are introverted and shy. The intro￾verted and shy person tends to be 
that way most of the time (is stable 
over time) and tends to be intro￾verted and shy at work, at play, 
and at school (is consistent over 
situations).
The study of traits makes up 
the dispositional domain. The term 
disposition is used because it refers 
to an inherent tendency to behave 
in a specific way. The term trait is 
used interchangeably with the term 
disposition. The major questions for 
psychologists working in the disposi￾tional domain are these: How many 
personality traits exist? What is the 
best taxonomy, or classification 
system, for traits? How can we best 
discover and measure these traits? 
Tavis Wright/Image Source
Final PDF to printerlar31869_ch03_054-085.indd 55 09/28/22 11:08 AM
How do personality traits develop? How 
do traits interact with situations to 
produce behaviors?
In this domain, traits are seen 
as the building blocks of personality. 
A person’s personality is viewed as 
being built out of a set of common 
traits. Psychologists try to identify 
the most important traits, the ones 
out of which all differences among 
people can be formed.
The next step is to develop tax￾onomies, or classification systems. 
Taxonomies are very useful in all 
areas of science. Currently, the most 
popular taxonomy of personality 
has five fundamental traits: extra￾version, neuroticism, agreeableness, 
conscientiousness, and openness to 
experience.
In the dispositional domain, 
there is a unique conception of how 
people change yet remain stable at 
the same time. We will discuss how 
the traits that underlie behavior can 
remain stable, yet how the traits 
expressed in behavior can change over 
a person’s life span. Consider the trait 
of dominance. Suppose that a child 
who is dominant at age 8 grows into 
an adult who is dominant at age 20. 
As an 8-year-old, this person might 
display her high level of dominance 
by showing a readiness for rough-and￾tumble play, referring to less domi￾nant peers as sissies, and insisting 
on monopolizing whatever interest￾ing toys are available. By age 20, 
however, they manifest dominance 
in quite different behaviors, perhaps 
by persuading others to accept their 
views in political discussions, boldly 
asking others out on dates, and 
deciding on the restaurants they will 
go to on these dates. Consequently, 
trait levels can stay the same over 
long time periods, yet the behaviors 
expressing those traits can change as 
the person ages.
We will discuss the ways in 
which personality psychologists have 
studied the development of disposi￾tions as well as studies of how disposi￾tions can change across the life span.
I
Final PDF to printer56
lar31869_ch03_054-085.indd 56 09/28/22 11:08 AM
What Is a Trait? Two Basic Formulations
Traits as Internal Causal Properties
Traits as Purely Descriptive Summaries
The Act Frequency Formulation of Traits—An Illustration of the Descriptive 
Summary Formulation
Act Frequency Research Program
Evaluation of the Act Frequency Formulation
Identification of the Most Important Traits
Lexical Approach
Statistical Approach
Theoretical Approach
Evaluating the Approaches for Identifying Important Traits
Taxonomies of Personality
Eysenck’s Hierarchical Model of Personality
Circumplex Taxonomies of Personality
Five-Factor Model
The HEXACO Model
SUMMARY AND EVALUATION
KEY TERMS
Traits and Trait 
Taxonomies
3
Tavis Wright/Image Source
Final PDF to printerlar31869_ch03_054-085.indd 57 09/28/22 11:08 AM
THE DISPOSITIONAL DOMAIN
Suppose that you walk into a party with a friend, who introduces you to 
the host, an acquaintance of theirs. The three of you chat for 10 minutes, and then 
you mingle with the other guests. Later, as you leave the party with your friend, 
they ask what you thought of the host. As you mull over the 10-minute interaction, 
what springs to mind? Perhaps you describe the host as friendly (smiled a lot), gener￾ous (told you to help yourself to the bountiful spread of food), and poised (was able 
to juggle the many demands of guests as they came and went). These words are all 
examples of trait-descriptive adjectives—words that describe traits, attributes of a person 
that are reasonably characteristic of the person and perhaps enduring over time. Just as 
you might describe a glass as brittle or a car as reliable (enduring characteristics of the 
glass and the car), trait-descriptive adjectives imply consistent and stable characteris￾tics. For much of the past century, psychologists have focused on identifying the basic 
traits that make up personality and identifying the nature and origins of those traits.
Most personality psychologists hypothesize that traits (also called dispositions) 
are reasonably stable over time and at least somewhat consistent over situations. The 
host of the party just described, for example, might be friendly, generous, and poised 
at other parties later on—illustrating stability over time. And they might also show 
these traits in other situations—perhaps showing friendliness by smiling at people on 
elevators, generosity by giving homeless people money, and poised by maintaining her 
composure when called on in class. However, the actual degree to which traits show 
stability over time and consistency across situations has been the subject of consider￾able debate and empirical research.
People readily form impressions 
of others that can be described 
using a few traits of personality, 
such as whether the person 
is friendly, generous, and 
poised. Portrait of large group 
of students cheering at college 
sporting event.
Hero Images/Hero Images/Corbis
3
Final PDF to printer58
lar31869_ch03_054-085.indd 58 09/28/22 11:08 AM
PART ONE The Dispositional Domain 
Three fundamental questions guide those who study personality traits: The first 
question is “How should we conceptualize traits?” Every field needs to define its key 
terms explicitly. In biology, for example, species is a key concept, so the concept of spe￾cies is defined explicitly (i.e., a group of organisms capable of reproducing with each 
other). In physics, the basic concepts of mass, weight, force, and gravity are defined 
explicitly. Because traits are central concepts in personality psychology, they, too, must 
be precisely formulated.
The second question is “How can we identify which traits are the most important traits 
from among the thousands of ways in which individuals differ?” Individuals differ in many 
ways that are both characteristic and enduring. Some individuals are extremely extraverted, 
enjoying loud and crowded parties; others are introverted, preferring quiet evenings spent 
reading. Some like rock music, whereas others like rap music. A crucial goal of personality 
psychology is to identify the most important ways in which individuals differ.
The third question is “How can we formulate a comprehensive taxonomy of traits—a 
system that includes within it all of the major traits of personality?” Once the impor￾tant traits have been identified, the next step is to formulate an organized scheme—a 
taxonomy—within which to assemble the individual traits. The periodic table of elements, 
for example, is not merely a random list of all the physical elements that have been dis￾covered. Rather, it is a taxonomy that organizes the elements using a coherent principle—
the elements are arranged according to their atomic numbers (which refer to the number 
of protons in the nucleus of a given atom). Within biology, to use another example, the 
field would be hopelessly lost if biologists were to merely list all of the thousands of 
species that exist, without relying on an underlying organizational framework. Thus, the 
individual species are organized into a taxonomy—all the species of plants, animals, and 
microbial species are linked systematically through a single tree of descent. Likewise, a 
central goal of personality psychology is to formulate a comprehensive taxonomy of all 
important traits. This chapter describes how personality psychologists have addressed 
these three fundamental questions of trait psychology.
What Is a Trait? Two Basic Formulations
When you describe someone as impulsive, unreliable, and lazy, what specifically are you 
referring to? Personality psychologists differ in their formulations of what these traits mean. 
Some personality psychologists view these traits as internal (or hidden) properties of persons 
that cause their behavior. Other personality psychologists make no assumptions about cau￾sality and simply use these trait terms to describe the enduring aspects of a person’s behavior.
Traits as Internal Causal Properties
When we say that Dierdre has a desire for material things, that Dan has a need for 
stimulation, or that Dominick wants power over others, we are referring to something 
inside of each that causes them to act in particular ways. These traits are presumed 
to be internal in the sense that individuals carry their desires, needs, and wants from 
one situation to the next (e.g., Alston, 1975). Furthermore, these desires and needs 
are assumed to be causal in the sense that they explain the behavior of the individuals 
who possess them. Dierdre’s desire for material things, for example, might cause her 
to spend a lot of time at the shopping mall, work extra hard to earn more money, and 
Final PDF to printer59
lar31869_ch03_054-085.indd 59 09/28/22 11:08 AM
CHAPTER THREE Traits and Trait Taxonomies 
acquire many household possessions. Internal desire influences her external behavior, 
causing her to act in certain ways.
Psychologists who view traits as internal dispositions do not equate traits with 
the external behavior in question. This distinction is most easily explained using a 
food example. Harry may have a strong desire for a large hamburger and french fries. 
However, because he is trying to lose weight, he refrains from expressing his desire in 
behavior—he looks at the food hungrily but resists the temptation to eat it. Similarly, 
Dominick may have a desire to take charge in most social situations, even if he does 
not always express this desire. For example, some situations may have an already identi￾fied leader, such as in a class discussion with his psychology professor. Note that this 
formulation assumes that we can measure Dominick’s need for power independently of 
measuring Dominick’s actual behavioral expressions.
These examples are analogous to that of a glass, which has the trait of being brittle. 
Even if a particular glass never shatters (i.e., expresses its brittleness), it still possesses 
the trait of being brittle. In sum, psychologists who view traits as internal dispositions 
believe that traits can lie dormant in the sense that the capacities remain present even 
when particular behaviors are not actually expressed. Traits—in the sense of internal 
needs, drives, desires, and so on—are assumed to exist, even in the absence of observable 
behavioral expressions.
The scientific usefulness of viewing traits as causes of behavior lies in ruling out 
other causes. When we say that Joan goes to lots of parties because she is extraverted, 
we are implicitly ruling out other potential reasons for her behavior (e.g., that she might 
be going to a lot of parties simply because her boyfriend drags her to them, rather than 
because she herself is extraverted). The formulation of traits as internal causal properties 
differs radically from an alternative formulation that considers traits as merely descrip￾tive summaries of actual behavior.
Traits as Purely Descriptive Summaries
Proponents of this alternative formulation define traits simply as descriptive summaries of 
attributes of persons; they make no assumptions about internality or causality (Chapman 
& Goldberg, 2017; Hampshire, 1953; Saucier & Goldberg, 2001). Consider an example 
in which we ascribe the trait of jealousy to a young man named George. According to 
the descriptive summary view, this trait merely describes George’s expressed behavior.
For example, George might glare at other men who talk to his girlfriend, insist that she 
wear his ring, and require her to spend all of her free time with him. The trait of jealousy 
accurately summarizes the general trend in George’s behavior, yet no assumptions are 
made about what causes George’s behavior.
Although it is possible that George’s jealousy stems from an internal cause, perhaps 
deeply rooted feelings of insecurity, his jealousy might instead be due to social situations.
George’s expressions of jealousy might be caused by the fact that other men are flirting 
with his girlfriend and she is responding to them (a situational cause), rather than because 
George is intrinsically a jealous person. The important point is that those who view traits 
as descriptive summaries do not prejudge the cause of someone’s behavior. They merely 
use traits to describe, in summary fashion, the trend in a person’s behavior. Personality psy￾chologists of this persuasion (e.g., Chapman & Goldberg, 2017; Saucier & Goldberg, 1998; 
Wiggins, 1979) argue that we must first identify and describe the important individual dif￾ferences among people, then subsequently develop causal theories to explain them.
Final PDF to printer60
lar31869_ch03_054-085.indd 60 09/28/22 11:08 AM
PART ONE The Dispositional Domain 
The Act Frequency Formulation of Traits—An 
Illustration of the Descriptive Summary Formulation
A number of psychologists who endorse the descriptive summary formulation of traits 
have explored the implications of this formulation in a program of research called the 
“act frequency approach” (Amelang, Herboth, & Oefner, 1991; Angleiter, Buss, & 
Demtröder, 1990; Buss & Craik, 1983; Chapman & Goldberg, 2017; Church et al., 
2007; Jackson et al., 2010; Romero et al., 1994).
The act frequency approach starts with the notion that traits are categories of acts.
Just as the category “birds” has specific birds as members of the category (e.g., robins, 
sparrows), trait categories such as “dominance” or “impulsivity” have specific acts as 
members. The category of dominance, for example, might include specific acts such as 
the following:
They issued orders that got the group organized.
They managed to control the outcome of the meeting without the others being 
aware of it.
They assigned roles and got the game going.
They decided which programs they would watch on TV.
Dominance is a trait category with these and hundreds of acts as members. A 
dominant person, according to the act frequency approach, is someone who performs 
a large number of dominant acts relative to others. For example, if we videotaped Mary 
and a dozen of her friends over a period of three months and then counted up how many 
times each person performed dominant acts, Mary would be considered dominant if she 
performed more dominant acts than her friends. Thus, in the act frequency formulation, 
a trait such as dominance is a descriptive summary of the general trend in a person’s 
behavior—a trend that consists of performing a large number of acts within a category 
relative to other persons.
Act Frequency Research Program
The act frequency approach to traits involves three key elements: act nomination, proto￾typicality judgment, and the recording of act performance.
Act Nomination
Act nomination is a procedure designed to identify which acts belong in which trait 
categories. Consider the category of “impulsive.” Now think of someone you know who 
is impulsive. Then list the specific acts or behaviors this person has performed that exem￾plify his or her impulsivity. You might say, “He decided to go out with friends on the 
spur of the moment, even though he had to study,” “He immediately accepted the dare 
to do something dangerous, without thinking about the consequences,” or “He blurted 
out his anger before he had time to reflect on the situation.” Through act nomination 
procedures such as this one, researchers can identify dozens or hundreds of acts belong￾ing to various trait categories.
Prototypicality Judgment
The second step involves identifying which acts are most central to, or prototypical of, each 
trait category. Consider the category of “bird.” When you think of this category, which 
Final PDF to printer61
lar31869_ch03_054-085.indd 61 09/28/22 11:08 AM
CHAPTER THREE Traits and Trait Taxonomies 
birds come to your mind first? Most people think of birds such as robins and sparrows. They 
do not think of turkeys and penguins. Even though penguins and turkeys are members of the 
category bird, robins and sparrows are considered to be more prototypical of the category—
they are better examples, more central to what most people mean by “bird” (Rosch, 1975).
In a similar way, acts within trait categories differ in their prototypicality of the 
trait. Panels of raters judge how prototypical each act is as an example of a particular 
concept. For example, raters find the acts She controlled the outcome of the meeting with￾out the others being aware of it and She took charge after the accident to be more prototypi￾cally dominant than the act She deliberately arrived late for the meeting.
Recording Act Performance
The third and final step in the research program consists of securing information on 
the actual performance of individuals in their daily lives. As you might imagine, obtain￾ing information about a person’s daily conduct is difficult. Most researchers have used 
self-reports of act performance or reports from close friends or spouses. As shown 
in Table 3.1, you can provide your own responses to this measure of everyday and 
artistic creative acts. Similar measures have been developed for conscientious acts 
(Jackson et al., 2010) and extraverted acts (Rauthmann & Denissen, 2011). In the 
same way, observational measures of dominant acts have been developed in the con￾text of face-to-face groups (Anderson & Kilduff, 2009). Interestingly, traditional trait 
measures do a moderately good job of predicting manifest behavior in everyday life 
(Fleeson & Gallagher, 2009). The act frequency approach has also been applied to 
thought frequencies. Frequency of suicidal ideation, for example, is a good predictor of 
depressive symptoms (Chang & Chang, 2016).
Instructions. Following is a list of acts. Read each act and circle the response that most accurately 
indicates how often you typically perform each act. Circle “0” if you never perform the act; circle 
“1” if you occasionally perform the act; circle “2” if you perform the act with moderate frequency; 
and circle “3” if you perform the act very frequently.
Circle Acts
0 1 2 3 1. I came up with a funny nickname for someone.
0 1 2 3 2. I sat down and drew or painted from my imagination.
0 1 2 3 3. I took photos just for fun.
0 1 2 3 4. I carried a sketchpad all day long.
0 1 2 3 5. I listened to a great variety of musical styles.
0 1 2 3 6. I wrote a song.
0 1 2 3 7. I made a card for someone.
0 1 2 3 8. I kept a journal of thoughts and turned them into poems.
0 1 2 3 9. I told a joke that made people laugh.
0 1 2 3 10. I gave self-made drawings as presents for people’s birthdays.
Source: Adapted from Ivcevic, 2007. From among the most prototypical everyday and artistic creative acts. Items 1, 3, 5, 7, and 9 are 
prototypical everyday creative acts. Items 2, 4, 6, 8, and 10 are artistic creative acts. According to the act frequency approach, you 
would be judged to be “creative” if you performed a high overall frequency of these creative acts, relative to your peer group.
Table 3.1 Self-Report of Creative Acts
Final PDF to printer62
lar31869_ch03_054-085.indd 62 09/28/22 11:08 AM
PART ONE The Dispositional Domain 
Evaluation of the Act Frequency Formulation
The formulation of traits as purely descriptive summaries, as in the act frequency 
approach, has been criticized on several grounds (see Angleitner & Demtroder, 1988; 
Block, 1989). Most of the criticisms have been aimed at the technical implementation 
of the approach. For example, the act frequency approach does not specify how much 
context should be included in the description of a trait-relevant act. Consider the follow￾ing dominant act: He insisted that the others go to his favorite restaurant. To understand 
this act as a dominant act, we might need to know (1) the relationships among the 
people involved, (2) the occasion for going out to eat, (3) the history of restaurant going 
for these people, and (4) who is paying for the dinner. How much context is needed to 
identify the act as a dominant act?
Another criticism of the approach is that it seems applicable to overt actions, but 
what about failures to act and covert acts that are not directly observable? For example, 
a person may be very courageous, but we will never know this under ordinary life circum￾stances in which people have no need to display courageousness.
Despite these limitations, the act frequency approach has produced some note￾worthy accomplishments. It has been especially helpful in making explicit the behavioral 
phenomena to which most trait terms refer—after all, the primary way that we know about 
traits is through their expressions in actual behavior. As noted by several prominent 
personality researchers, “Behavioral acts constitute the building blocks of interpersonal 
perception and the basis for inferences about personality traits” (Gosling et al., 1998). 
Thus, the study of behavioral manifestations of personality remains an essential and 
indispensable part of the agenda for the field, despite the difficulties entailed by their 
study (Furr, 2009). The act frequency approach is also helpful in identifying behavioral 
regularities—phenomena that must be explained by any comprehensive personality the￾ory (Furr, 2009). And it has been helpful in exploring the meaning of some traits that 
have proven difficult to study, such as impulsivity (Romero et al., 1994), conscientious￾ness (Jackson et al., 2010), and creativity (Amelang et al., 1991). It has also proven use￾ful in identifying cultural similarities and differences in the behavioral manifestation of 
traits (Church et al., 2007). Initiating a conversation with a shy person, for example, is 
a greater reflection of extraversion in the Philippines than in the United States, whereas 
smiling at a stranger is a greater reflection of extraversion in the United States than in 
the Philippines.
Explorations of the act frequency approach have helped to identify the domains 
in which it provides insight into personality. One study, for example, examined the rela￾tionship between self-reported act performance and observer codings of the individual’s 
actual behavior (Gosling et al., 1998). Some acts showed high levels of self-observer 
agreement, such as “Told a joke to lighten a tense moment,” “Made a humorous remark,” 
and “Took charge of things at the meeting.” Acts that reflect the traits of extraversion 
and conscientiousness tend to show high levels of self–observer agreement. Acts that 
reflect the trait of agreeableness, on the other hand, tend to show lower levels of self￾observer agreement. The more observable the actions, the higher the agreement between 
self-report and observer codings.
Other research has demonstrated that the act frequency approach can be used to 
predict important outcomes in everyday life such as job success, salary, and how rapidly 
individuals are promoted within business organizations (Kyl-Heku & Buss, 1996; Lund 
et al., 2006). Others have used the act frequency approach to explore topics such as acts 
of deception in social interaction (Tooke & Camire, 1991) and acts of “mate guarding”
that predict violence in dating and marital relationships (Shackelford et al., 2005).
Final PDF to printer63
lar31869_ch03_054-085.indd 63 09/28/22 11:08 AM
CHAPTER THREE Traits and Trait Taxonomies 
In sum, there are two major formulations of traits. The first considers traits to be 
internal causal properties of persons that affect overt behavior. The second considers traits 
to be descriptive summaries of overt behavior, with the causes of those trends in conduct 
to be determined subsequently. However, traits are formulated, all personality psycholo￾gists must confront the next vexing challenge—identifying the most important traits.
Identification of the Most Important Traits
Three fundamental approaches have been used to identify important traits. The first is 
the lexical approach. According to this approach, all traits listed and defined in the dic￾tionary form the basis of describing differences among people (Allport & Odbert, 1936). 
The logical starting point for the lexical strategy is the natural language. The second 
method of identifying important traits is the statistical approach. This approach uses 
factor analysis, or similar statistical procedures, to identify major personality traits. The 
third method is the theoretical approach in which researchers rely on theories to identify 
important traits.
Lexical Approach
The lexical approach to identifying important personality traits starts with the lexical 
hypothesis: All important individual differences have become encoded within the natural lan￾guage. Over time, differences among people that are important are noticed, and words 
are invented to talk about those differences. People invent words such as dominant, 
creative, reliable, cooperative, hot-tempered, or self-centered to describe these differences. 
People find these trait terms helpful in describing people and for communicating infor￾mation about them. And so, usage of these trait terms spreads and becomes common 
within the group. Trait terms not useful to people in describing and communicating with 
others fail to become encoded within the natural language.
If we consider the English language, we find an abundance of trait terms codified 
as adjectives, such as manipulative, arrogant, slothful, and warm. A perusal of the diction￾ary yields about 18,000 trait-descriptive adjectives (Norman, 1967). The key implication 
of this finding, according to the lexical approach, is clear: trait terms are extraordinarily 
important for people in communicating with others.
The lexical approach yields two criteria for identifying important traits—synonym 
frequency and cross-cultural universality. The criterion of synonym frequency means that if 
an attribute has not merely one or two trait adjectives to describe it but rather many words, 
then it is a more important dimension of individual difference. “The more important is 
such an attribute, the more synonyms and subtly distinctive facets of the attribute will be 
found within any one language” (Saucier & Goldberg, 1996, p. 24). Consider individual 
differences in “dominance.” There are many terms to describe it: dominant, bossy, asser￾tive, powerful, pushy, forceful, leaderlike, domineering, influential, ascendant, authoritative,
and arrogant. The prevalence of many synonyms, each term conveying a subtle difference 
in dominance, suggests that dominance is an important trait and that different shades of 
dominance are important in social communication. In short, synonym frequency provides 
one criterion of importance (see Wood, 2015, for a contrary position).
Cross-cultural universality is the second key criterion of importance within the 
lexical approach: “The more important is an individual difference in human transac￾tions, the more languages will have a term for it” (Goldberg, 1981, p. 142). The logic is 
that if a trait is sufficiently important in all cultures that its members have codified terms 
Final PDF to printer64
lar31869_ch03_054-085.indd 64 09/28/22 11:08 AM
PART ONE The Dispositional Domain 
to describe the trait, then the trait must be universally important in human affairs. In 
contrast, if a trait term exists in only one or a few languages, then it may be of only local 
or limited relevance. Such a term is unlikely to be a candidate for a universal taxonomy 
of personality traits (McCrae & Costa, 1997).
The Yanomamö Indians of Venezuela, for example, have the words unokai and 
“non-unokai,” which mean, roughly, “a man who has achieved manhood by the killing of 
another man” (unokai) and “a man who has not achieved manhood status by the killing 
of another man” (non-unokai) (Chagnon, 1983). In Yanomamö culture, this individual 
difference is of critical importance. The unokai have elevated status, are widely feared, 
have more wives, and assume leadership. In mainstream American culture, by contrast, 
there is the generic killer, but there is no single word that has the specific connotations 
of unokai. Thus, although this individual difference is important to the Yanomamö, it is 
unlikely to be part of a universal taxonomy of personality traits.
One problem with the lexical strategy concerns the fact that personality is conveyed 
through different parts of speech, including adjectives, nouns, and adverbs. For example, 
there are dozens of noun terms encoded within the English language to describe someone 
who is not too smart: birdbrain, blockhead, bonehead, chucklehead, cretin, deadhead, dim￾wit, dolt, dope, dullard, dumbbell, dummy, dunce, jughead, lunkhead, moron, peabrain, pin￾head, softhead, thickhead, and woodenhead. One study found as many as eight factors from 
an analysis of personality nouns, including Dummy (twit, trash), Doll (beauty, sweetie), 
Philosopher (bookworm, nonconformist), Goof (joker, clown), Chatterbox (flirt, loud￾mouth), and Ladies’ man (stud, hunk) (Saucier, 2003). Personality nouns remain a viable 
source of potential information about important dimensions of individual differences.
The lexical strategy has proven to be a remarkably generative starting point for 
identifying important individual differences (Ashton & Lee, 2005). To discard this 
information “would require us needlessly to separate ourselves from the vast sources of 
knowledge gained in the course of human history” (Kelley, 1992, p. 22). Two other com￾monly used approaches are the statistical and theoretical strategies.
Statistical Approach
The statistical approach to identifying important traits starts with a pool of personality items. 
These can be trait words or questions about behavior, experience, or emotion. Most research￾ers using the lexical approach turn to the statistical approach to group trait adjectives into 
basic categories of personality traits. However, the starting point can also be self-ratings on a 
large collection of personality-relevant sentences (e.g., I find that I am easily able to persuade 
people to my point of view). Once a large and diverse pool of items is assembled, the statistical 
approach is applied. It consists of having people rate themselves (or others) on the items, 
then using a statistical procedure to identify groups or clusters of items. The goal of the statis￾tical approach is to identify the major dimensions, or “coordinates,” of the personality map, 
much the way latitude and longitude provide the coordinates of the map of Earth.
The most commonly used statistical procedure is factor analysis. Although the 
complex mathematical procedures underlying factor analysis are beyond the scope of 
this text, the essential logic is simple. Factor analysis identifies groups of items that 
covary (i.e., go together) but tend not to covary with other groups of items. Consider, as 
a spatial metaphor, the office locations of physicists, psychologists, and sociologists on 
your campus. Although these may be spread out, in general the offices of the psycholo￾gists tend to be closer to one another than they are to the offices of the physicists or 
sociologists. The physicists are closer to one another than they are to the sociologists or 
psychologists. A factor analysis reveals three clusters of professors.
Final PDF to printer65
lar31869_ch03_054-085.indd 65 09/28/22 11:08 AM
CHAPTER THREE Traits and Trait Taxonomies 
Similarly, a major advantage of identifying clusters of personality items that covary 
is that it provides a means for determining which personality variables have some com￾mon property. Factor analysis can also be useful in reducing the large array of diverse 
personality traits into a smaller and more useful set of underlying factors. It provides a 
means for organizing the thousands of personality traits.
Let’s examine how factor analysis works in an example shown in Table 3.2. This 
table summarizes the data obtained from a sample of 1,210 subjects who rated themselves 
on a series of trait-descriptive adjectives. Among the adjectives rated were humorous, 
amusing, popular, hard-working, productive, determined, imaginative, original, and inventive.
The numbers in Table 3.2 are called factor loadings, indexes of how much of the 
variation in an item is “explained” by the factor. Factor loadings indicate the degree to 
which the item correlates with, or “loads on,” the underlying factor. In this example, 
three clear factors emerge. The first is an “extraversion” factor, with high loadings on 
humorous, amusing, and popular. The second is an “ambition” factor: hard-working, pro￾ductive, and determined. The third is a “creativity” factor, with high loadings on imagina￾tive, inventive, and original. Factor analysis is quite useful in identifying three distinct 
groups of trait terms that covary with each other but are relatively independent of (tend 
not to covary with) other groups. Without this statistical procedure, a researcher might 
be forced to consider the nine traits as all separate from each other. Factor analysis tells 
us that hard-working, productive, and determined all covary sufficiently that they can be 
considered a single trait, rather than three separate traits.
Here is a cautionary note about using the statistical approach for identifying impor￾tant traits: you get out of it only what you put into it. If an important personality trait 
happens to be left out of a factor analysis, it will not show up in the subsequent results. 
Thus, it is critical that researchers pay close attention to their initial selection of items.
Factor analysis and similar statistical procedures have been extremely valuable to 
personality researchers. Perhaps their most important contribution has been the ability 
to reduce a large, cumbersome array of diverse personality items into a smaller, more 
meaningful set of broad, basic factors.
Adjective 
Rating
Factor 1 
(Extraversion)
Factor 2 
(Ambition)
Factor 3 
(Creativity)
Humorous .66 .06 .19
Amusing .65 .23 .02
Popular .57 .13 .22
Hard-working .05 .63 .01
Productive .04 .52 .19
Determined .23 .52 .08
Imaginative .01 .09 .62
Original .13 .05 .53
Inventive .06 .26 .47
Note: The numbers refer to factor loadings, which indicate the degree to which an item correlates with the underlying factor (see text).
Source: Adapted from Matthews & Oddy, 1993.
Table 3.2 A Sample Factor Analysis of Personality Adjective Ratings
Final PDF to printer66
lar31869_ch03_054-085.indd 66 09/28/22 11:08 AM
PART ONE The Dispositional Domain 
Theoretical Approach
The theoretical approach to identifying important dimensions of individual differences 
starts with a theory that determines which variables are important. In contrast to the 
statistical strategy, which can be described as atheoretical in the sense that there is no 
prejudgment about which variables are important, the theoretical strategy dictates which 
variables are important to measure.
To a Freudian, for example, it is critical to measure “the oral personality” and 
“the anal personality” because these represent important, theory-driven constructs. Or, 
to a self-actualization theorist such as Maslow (1968), it is critical to measure individual 
differences in the degree to which people are motivated to self-actualize (see Williams & 
Page, 1989, for one such measure). The theory, in short, strictly determines which vari￾ables are important.
As an example of the theoretical strategy, consider the theory of sociosexual ori￾entation (Simpson & Gangestad, 1991; Penke & Asendorph, 2008a). According to the 
theory, men and women will pursue one of two alternative sexual relationship strategies. 
The first entails seeking a single committed relationship characterized by monogamy 
and tremendous investment in children. The second sexual strategy is characterized by a 
greater degree of promiscuity, more partner switching, and less investment in children. 
(When applied to men, one easy way to remember these two strategies is to label them as 
“dads” and “cads.”) Because the theory of sociosexual orientation dictates that the mat￾ing strategy one pursues is a critical individual difference, Gangestad and Simpson have 
developed a measure of sociosexual orientation (see the following Exercise).
Please use the following rating scales to record your answers.
To what degree are you currently seeking short-term mates (i.e., casual sex partners):
To what degree are you currently seeking, or are currently in, a committed romantic relationship:
Source: Buss, D.M. (2022). Unpublished research.
Exercise
Very little 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 A lot
Very little 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 A lot
Evaluating the Approaches for Identifying Important Traits
In sum, the theoretical approach lets the theory determine which dimensions of indi￾vidual differences are important. Like all approaches, the theoretical approach has 
strengths and limitations. Its strengths coincide with the strengths of the theory. If we 
have a powerful theory that tells us which variables are important, then it saves us from 
wandering aimlessly like a sailor without a map or compass. A theory charts the course 
to take. At the same time, its weaknesses coincide with the weaknesses of the theory. To 
the extent that the theory contains gaps or biases, the subsequent identification of impor￾tant individual differences will reflect omissions and distortions.
Final PDF to printer67
lar31869_ch03_054-085.indd 67 09/28/22 11:08 AM
CHAPTER THREE Traits and Trait Taxonomies 
The current state of the field of personality trait psychology is best characterized as 
“letting a thousand flowers bloom.” Some researchers start with a theory and let their mea￾surement of individual differences follow from that theory. Others believe that factor analysis 
is the only sensible way to identify important individual differences. Still other researchers 
believe that the lexical strategy, by capitalizing on the collective wisdom of people over the 
ages, is the best method of ensuring that important individual differences are captured.
In practice, many personality researchers use a combination of the three strate￾gies. Norman (1963), Goldberg (1990), and Saucier (2009), for example, started with 
the lexical strategy to identify their first set of variables for inclusion. They then applied 
factor analysis to this initial selection of traits to reduce the set to a smaller, more man￾ageable number (five or six). This solved two problems that are central to the science 
of personality (Saucier & Goldberg, 1996): the problem of identifying the domains of 
individual differences and the problem of figuring out a method for describing structure 
that exists among the individual differences identified. The lexical strategy can be used 
to sample trait terms, and then factor analysis supplies a powerful statistical approach to 
providing structure and order to those trait terms.
Taxonomies of Personality
Over the past century, dozens of taxonomies of personal￾ity traits have been proposed. Many have been merely 
lists of traits, often based on the intuitions of personality 
psychologists. As personality psychologist Robert Hogan 
observed, “The history of personality theory consists of 
people who assert that their private demons are public 
afflictions” (Hogan, 1983). Indeed, two editors of a book 
on personality traits (London & Exner, 1978) expressed 
despair at the lack of agreement about a taxonomy of 
traits, so they simply listed the traits alphabetically. 
Clearly, we can develop a firmer basis for organizing per￾sonality traits. The taxonomies of traits presented in the 
rest of this chapter are not random samplings from the 
dozens available. Rather, they represent taxonomies that 
have solid empirical and theoretical justification.
Eysenck’s Hierarchical Model of Personality
Of all the taxonomies of personality, the model of Hans 
Eysenck, born in 1916, is most strongly rooted in biology. 
Eysenck was raised in Germany at the time when Hitler 
was rising to power. Eysenck showed an intense dislike 
for the Nazi regime, so at age 18 he migrated to England. 
Although intending to study physics, Eysenck lacked the 
needed prerequisites, so almost by chance he began to 
study psychology at the University of London. He received 
his PhD in 1940 and after World War II became director of the psychology department at 
the Maudsley Hospital’s new Institute of Psychiatry in London. Eysenck’s subsequent pro￾ductivity was enormous, with more than 40 books and 700 articles. Eysenck was the most 
cited living psychologist until he died in 1998.
Hans Eysenck at his London office.
Courtesy of Randy J. Larsen
Final PDF to printer68
lar31869_ch03_054-085.indd 68 09/28/22 11:08 AM
PART ONE The Dispositional Domain 
Eysenck developed a model of personality based on traits that he believed were 
highly heritable (see Chapter 6) and had a likely psychophysiological foundation. 
The three main traits that met these criteria, according to Eysenck, were extraversion–
introversion (E), neuroticism–emotional stability (N), and psychoticism (P). Together, they 
can be easily remembered by the acronym PEN.
Description
Let us begin by describing these three broad traits. Eysenck conceptualizes each of them 
as sitting at the top of its own hierarchy, as shown in Figure 3.1. Extraversion, for example, 
subsumes a large number of narrow traits—sociable, active, lively, venturesome, dominant, 
and so forth. These narrow traits are all subsumed by the broader trait of extraversion 
because they all covary sufficiently to load on the same large factor. Extraverts typically 
like parties, have many friends, and like having people around them to talk to (Eysenck & 
Eysenck, 1975). Many extraverts love playing practical jokes on people. They display a 
carefree and easy manner. They also tend to have a high activity level. 
Introverts, in contrast, like to spend more time alone. They prefer quiet time and 
pursuits such as reading. Introverts are sometimes seen as aloof and distant, but they 
often have a small number of intimate friends. Introverts tend to be more serious than 
extraverts and to prefer a more moderate pace. They tend to be well organized, and they 
prefer a routine, predictable lifestyle (Larsen & Kasimatis, 1990). For a superb book on 
the nature and strengths of introverts, see Cain (2013). Quiet: The power of introverts in a 
world that can’t stop talking. Broadway Books.
The trait of neuroticism (N) consists of a cluster of more specific traits, includ￾ing anxious, irritable, guilty, lacking self-esteem, tense, shy, and moody. Conceptually, 
narrow traits such as anxious and irritable might be viewed as very different from each 
other. Empirically, however, men and women who feel anxious also tend to get easily 
irritated. Thus, factor analysis has proven to be a valuable tool in showing that these two 
narrow traits are actually linked together, tending to co-occur in people.
The typical high scorer on neuroticism (N) tends to be a worrier. Frequently 
anxious and depressed, the high-N scorer has trouble sleeping and experiences a wide 
array of psychosomatic symptoms. A study of 5,847 individuals found that those high 
on neuroticism tend to be especially prone to the disorders of depression and anxiety 
(Weinstock & Whisman, 2006). One of the hallmarks of the high-N scorer is overreactiv￾ity on the negative emotions. The high-N scorer experiences more arousal than the low-N 
scorer in response to the normal stresses of everyday life. They have more trouble return￾ing to an even keel after an emotionally arousing event. Those high on neuroticism also 
stay angry longer after a perceived transgression and are less likely to forgive someone 
who they perceived has violated them (Maltby et al., 2008). They are more likely to be 
vigilant to threats, particularly social threats such as being socially excluded (Denissen & 
Penke, 2008b; Tamir, Robinson, & Solberg, 2006). High-N scorers tend to express 
more dissatisfaction with their romantic relationships (Kruezer & Gollwitzer, 2021).
The low-N scorer is emotionally stable, even-tempered, calm, slower to react to stressful 
events, returns to his or her normal self quickly after an upsetting event, and expresses 
more satisfaction with their romantic relationships.
The third large trait in Eysenck’s taxonomy is psychoticism (P). As shown in Figure 3.1, 
P consists of the constellation of narrower traits that includes aggressive, egocentric, 
creative, impulsive, lacking empathy, and antisocial. Factor analysis proves valuable in 
grouping together narrower traits. Factor analyses show, for example, that impulsivity 
and lack of empathy tend to co-occur in individuals. That is, people who tend to act 
without thinking (impulsivity) also tend to lack the ability to see situations from other 
people’s perspectives (lack of empathy).
Final PDF to printer69
lar31869_ch03_054-085.indd 69 09/28/22 11:08 AM
CHAPTER THREE Traits and Trait Taxonomies 
Figure 3.1
Eysenck’s hierarchical structure of major personality traits. Each “super-trait” (P, E, and N) occupies the 
highest level in the hierarchy, representing broad personality traits. Each of these broad traits subsumes 
more narrower traits in the hierarchy. (a) The hierarchical structure of psychoticism (P); (b) the hierarchical 
P
Aggressive Cold Egocentric
Antisocial Unempathic Creative
Impersonal Impulsive
Tough-minded
(a) The hierarchical structure of psychoticism (P).
E
Sociable Lively Active
Carefree Dominant Surgent
Assertive Sensation-seeking
Venturesome
(b) The hierarchical structure of extraversion–introversion (E).
N
Anxious Depressed Guilt feelings
Irrational Shy Moody
Low self-esteem Tense
Emotional
(c) The hierarchical structure of neuroticism (N).
Final PDF to printer70
lar31869_ch03_054-085.indd 70 09/28/22 11:08 AM
PART ONE The Dispositional Domain 
The high-P scorer is typically a solitary individual, often described by others as a 
“loner.” Because they lack empathy, high-P scorers may be cruel or inhumane. Men tend 
to score twice as high as women on P. Often, such people have a history of cruelty to 
animals. The high-P scorer may laugh, for example, when a dog gets hit by a car or when 
someone accidentally gets hurt. High-P scorers show insensitivity to the pain and suffer￾ing of others, including their own kin. They are aggressive, both verbally and physically, 
even with loved ones. The high-P scorer has a penchant for the strange and unusual and 
may disregard danger in pursuit of novelty. They like to make fools of other people and 
are often described as having antisocial tendencies.
The P-scale predicts a number of fascinating criteria. Those high on P tend to show 
a strong preference for violent films and rate violent scenes more enjoyable than those 
who score low on P (Bruggemann & Barry, 2002). High-P individuals prefer unpleasant 
paintings and photographs more than do low-P individuals (Rawlings, 2003). Men, but 
not women, who score high on Machiavellianism (which is highly correlated with P) 
endorse promiscuous and hostile sexual attitudes—they divulge sexual secrets to third 
parties, pretend to be in love when they are not, ply potential sex partners with alcoholic 
drinks, and even report trying to force others into sex acts (McHoskey, 2001). Those 
high in P are more likely to become sexual predators (O’Connell & Marcus, 2016). 
Those low in P tend to be more deeply religious, whereas high-P scorers tend to be 
somewhat cynical about religion (Saroglou, 2002). Finally, high-P scorers are disposed 
to getting into dangerous activities, such as violence, theft, and vandalism (Carrasco et al., 
2006; Pickering et al., 2003).
The labels Eysenck has given to these super-traits, especially P, have generated 
controversy. Some suggest that more accurate and appropriate labels for psychoticism 
might be “antisocial personality” or “psychopathic personality.” Regardless of the label, 
P has emerged as an important trait in normal-range personality research. In modern 
personality research, P has made a resurgence in the form of “the dark triad,” which 
consists of psychopathy, narcissism, and Machiavellianism (Furnham et al., 2013). Dark 
triad traits have been linked to bad bosses and toxic leadership in the workplace; cheat￾ing in the classroom; deception and coercion in the mating domain; and a host of other 
forms of antisocial behaviors, including white-collar crime.
Let’s look more closely now at two aspects of Eysenck’s system that warrant fur￾ther comment—its hierarchical nature and its biological underpinnings.
Hierarchical Structure of Eysenck’s System
Figure 3.1 shows the levels in Eysenck’s hierarchical model, with each super-trait at the 
top and narrower traits at the second level. Subsumed by each narrow trait, however, is 
a third level—that of habitual acts. For example, one habitual act subsumed by sociable 
might be talking on the phone; another might be taking frequent breaks to socialize with 
other students. Narrow traits subsume a variety of habitual acts.
At the lowest level in the hierarchy are specific acts (e.g., I talked with my friend 
during class and I took a coffee break to chat at 10:30 a.m.). If enough specific acts are 
repeated frequently, they become habitual acts at the third level. Clusters of habitual acts 
become narrow traits. Clusters of narrow traits become super-traits at the tops of the 
hierarchy. This hierarchy has the advantage of locating each specific personality-relevant 
act within a precise nested system. Thus, the fourth-level act I danced wildly at the party
can be described as extraverted at the highest level, sociable at the second level, and part 
of a regular habit of party-going behavior at the third level.
Final PDF to printer71
lar31869_ch03_054-085.indd 71 09/28/22 11:08 AM
CHAPTER THREE Traits and Trait Taxonomies 
Biological Underpinnings
There are two aspects of the biological underpinnings of Eysenck’s personality system: 
heritability and identifiable physiological substrate. For Eysenck, a key criterion for a 
“basic” dimension of personality is that it has reasonably high heritability. The behav￾ioral genetic evidence confirms that all three super-traits in Eysenck’s taxonomy—P, E, 
and N—do have moderate heritabilities, although this is also true of many personality 
traits (see Chapter 6).
The second biological criterion is that basic personality traits should have an iden￾tifiable physiological substrate—properties in the brain and central nervous system that 
are presumed to be part of the causal chain that produces personality traits. In Eysenck’s 
formulation, extraversion is supposed to be linked with central nervous system arousal 
or reactivity. Eysenck predicted that introverts would be more easily aroused (and be 
more autonomically reactive) than extraverts (see Chapter 7). In contrast, he proposed 
that neuroticism was linked with the degree of lability (changeability) of the autonomic 
nervous system. Finally, high-P scorers were predicted to be high in testosterone levels 
and low in levels of MAO, a neurotransmitter inhibitor.
In sum, Eysenck’s personality taxonomy has many distinct features. It is hierarchi￾cal, starting with broad traits, which subsume narrower traits, which subsume specific 
actions. The broad traits show moderately heritability. And Eysenck has attempted to 
link these traits with physiological functioning—adding an important level of analysis not 
included in most personality taxonomies.
Despite these admirable qualities, Eysenck’s personality taxonomy has several 
limitations. One is that many other personality traits also show moderate heritability, 
not just extraversion, neuroticism, and psychoticism. A second limitation is that Eysenck 
may have missed some important traits in his taxonomy—a point argued by other per￾sonality psychologists, such as Raymond B. Cattell, and more recently by authors such 
as Lewis Goldberg, Paul Costa, and Robert McCrae. Nonetheless, Eysenck’s taxonomy 
continues to be used in modern personality testing that includes the development of new 
assessment questionnaires that are superior to previous ones (Ruch et al., 2021).
Circumplex Taxonomies of Personality
People have been fascinated with circles for centuries. They have no beginning and no 
end, and they symbolize wholeness and unity. Circles have also fascinated personality 
psychologists as representations of the personality sphere.
In the twentieth century, the two most prominent advocates of circular repre￾sentations of personality were Timothy Leary (also known for his LSD experiments at 
Harvard) and Jerry Wiggins, who formalized the circular model with modern statistical 
techniques. (Circumplex is simply a fancy name for circle.)
Wiggins (1979) started with the lexical assumption—the idea that all important 
individual differences are encoded within the natural language. But he went further in his 
efforts at taxonomy by arguing that trait terms specify different kinds of ways in which 
individuals differ. One kind of individual difference pertains to what people do to and 
with each other—interpersonal traits.
Other kinds of individual differences are specified by the following types of traits: 
temperament traits, such as nervous, gloomy, sluggish, and excitable; character traits, 
such as moral, principled, and dishonest; material traits, such as miserly and stingy; atti￾tude traits, such as pious and spiritual; mental traits, such as clever, logical, and percep￾tive; and physical traits, such as healthy and tough.
Final PDF to printer72
lar31869_ch03_054-085.indd 72 09/28/22 11:08 AM
PART ONE The Dispositional Domain 
Because Wiggins was concerned primarily with interpersonal traits, he carefully 
separated these from the other categories of traits. Then, based on the earlier theorizing 
of Foa and Foa (1974), he defined interpersonal as interactions among people involving 
exchanges. The two resources that define social exchange are love and status: “inter￾personal events may be defined as dyadic interactions that have relatively clear-cut social 
(status) and emotional (love) consequences for both participants” (Wiggins, 1979, p. 398, 
italics original). Hence, the dimensions of status and love define the two major axes of 
the Wiggins circumplex, as shown in Figure 3.2. 
There are three clear advantages to the Wiggins circumplex. First, it provides an 
explicit definition of interpersonal behavior. It should be possible to locate any transac￾tion in which the resources of status or love are exchanged within a specific area of the 
circumplex pie. These include not just giving love (e.g., giving a friend a hug) or granting 
status (e.g., showing respect or honor to a parent). They also include denying love (e.g., 
yelling at a boyfriend) and denying status (e.g., dismissing someone as too inconsequen￾tial to talk to). The Wiggins circumplex model has the advantage of providing an explicit 
and precise definition of interpersonal transactions.
The second advantage is that the circumplex specifies the relationships between each 
trait and every other trait within the model. There are basically three types of relationships 
specified by the model. The first is adjacency, or how close the traits are to each other in 
Figure 3.2
The circumplex model of personality.
Source: Adapted from “Circular Reasoning About Interpersonal Behavior,” by J. S. Wiggins, N. Phillips, and P. Trapnell, 
1989, Journal of Personality & Social Psychology, 56, p. 297. Copyright 1989 by the American Psychological Association. 
Reprinted with permission.
180° 0°
-.8 -.4
-.4
.4
.8
-.8
.4 .8
Cold-hearted
(Hostile,
quarrelsome)
Warm-agreeable
(Nurturance)
Aloof-introverted Unassuming-ingenuous
Unassured-submissive
Arrogant-calculating
Assured-dominant
Status
Love
Gregarious￾extraverted
90°
135°
45°
225° 315°
270°
Final PDF to printer73
lar31869_ch03_054-085.indd 73 09/28/22 11:08 AM
CHAPTER THREE Traits and Trait Taxonomies 
the circumplex. The variables that are adjacent, or next, to each other within the model 
are positively correlated. Thus, gregarious-extraverted is correlated with warm-agreeable. 
Arrogant-calculating is correlated with hostile-quarrelsome.
The second type of relationship is bipolarity. Traits that are bipolar are located 
at opposite sides of the circle and are negatively correlated with each other. Dominant 
is the opposite of submissive, so the two are negatively correlated. Cold is the opposite 
of warm, so they are negatively correlated. Specifying this bipolarity is useful because 
nearly every interpersonal trait has another trait that is its opposite.
The third type of relationship is orthogonality, which specifies that traits that are 
perpendicular to each other on the model (at 90° of separation, or at right angles to each 
other) are entirely unrelated to each other. In other words, there is a zero correlation 
between such traits. Dominance, for example, is orthogonal to agreeableness, so the two 
are uncorrelated. This means that dominance can be expressed in a quarrelsome manner 
(e.g., I yelled in order to get my way) or in an agreeable manner (e.g., I organized the group 
in order to get help for my friend). Similarly, aggression (quarrelsome) can be expressed 
in an active/dominant manner (e.g., I used my position of authority to punish my enemies) 
or in an unassured/submissive way (e.g., I gave him the silent treatment when I was upset). 
Orthogonality allows one to specify with greater precision the different ways in which 
traits are expressed in actual behavior.
The third key advantage of the circumplex model is that it alerts investigators to 
gaps in investigations of interpersonal behavior. For example, whereas there have been 
many studies of dominance and aggression, personality psychologists have paid little 
attention to traits such as unassuming and calculating. The circumplex model, by pro￾viding a map of the interpersonal terrain, directs researchers to these neglected areas of 
psychological functioning.
In sum, the Wiggins circumplex model provides an elegant map of major individ￾ual differences in the social domain. The circumplex structure of interpersonal traits has 
been discovered in children as well as adults (Di Blas, 2007). It has been used to discover 
interpersonal sensitivities (Hopwood et al., 2011). For example, people tend to find oth￾ers unpleasant who have personalities that are the polar opposite of their own. And it has 
been used to identify some maladaptive aspects of interpersonal functioning: Those who 
are submissive and agreeable, for example, may be overly accommodating (e.g., allowing 
themselves to be shortchanged at the store without saying anything) or passively aggres￾sive (e.g., giving others the “silent treatment”) (Hennig & Walker, 2008). Despite these 
positive qualities, the circumplex also has some limitations. The most important limita￾tion is that the interpersonal map is limited to two dimensions. Other traits, not captured 
by these two dimensions, also have important interpersonal consequences. The trait of 
conscientiousness, for example, is interpersonal in that persons high on this trait are very 
dependable in their social obligations to friends, mates, and children. Even a trait such as 
neuroticism or emotional stability may show up most strongly in interpersonal transac￾tions with others (e.g., He overreacted to a subtle interpersonal slight when the host took too 
long to acknowledge his presence and He insisted that he and his partner leave the party). A 
more comprehensive taxonomy of personality that includes these dimensions is known 
as the five-factor model.
Five-Factor Model
In the past few decades, the taxonomy of personality traits that has received the most 
attention and support from personality researchers has been the five-factor model—
variously labeled the five-factor model, the Big Five, and even in a humorous vein The 
Final PDF to printer74
lar31869_ch03_054-085.indd 74 09/28/22 11:08 AM
PART ONE The Dispositional Domain 
High Five (Costa & McCrae, 1995; Goldberg, 1981; McCrae & John, 1992; Saucier & 
Goldberg, 1996). The broad traits composing the Big Five have been provisionally 
named (I) surgency or extraversion, (II) agreeableness, (III) conscientiousness, (IV) emo￾tional stability, and (V) openness-intellect. This five-dimensional taxonomy of personality 
traits has accrued some persuasive advocates (e.g., John, 1990; McCrae & John, 1992; 
Rammstetd, Goldberg, & Borg, 2010; Saucier & Goldberg, 1998; Wiggins, 1996), as well 
as some strong critics (e.g., Block, 1995; McAdams, 1992).
The five-factor model was originally based on a combination of the lexical 
approach and statistical approaches. The lexical approach started in the 1930s, with the 
pioneering work of Allport and Odbert (1936), who laboriously combed the English dic￾tionary and identified 17,953 trait terms. Allport and Odbert then divided the trait terms 
into four lists: (1) stable traits (e.g., secure, intelligent); (2) temporary states, moods, and 
activities (e.g., agitated, excited); (3) social evaluations (e.g., charming, irritating); and (4) 
metaphorical, physical, and doubtful terms (e.g., prolific, lean).
The terms from the first category, 4,500 presumably stable traits, were subse￾quently used by Cattell (1943) as a starting point for his lexical analysis of personality 
traits. Because of the limited power of computers at the time, however, Cattell could not 
subject this list to a factor analysis. Instead, he reduced the list to a smaller set of 171 
clusters (groups of traits) by eliminating some and lumping together others. He ended up 
with a smaller set of 35 clusters of personality traits.
Fiske (1949) then took a subset of 22 of Cattell’s 35 clusters and discovered, 
through factor analysis, a five-factor solution. However, this single study of relatively 
small sample size was hardly a robust foundation for a comprehensive taxonomy of per￾sonality traits. In historical treatments of the five-factor model, therefore, Fiske is noted 
as the first person to discover a version of the five-factor model, but he is not credited 
with having identified its precise structure.
Tupes and Christal (1961) made the next major contribution to the five-factor taxon￾omy. They examined the factor structure of the 22 simplified descriptions in eight samples 
and emerged with the five-factor model: surgency, agreeableness, conscientiousness, emo￾tional stability, and culture. This factor structure was subsequently replicated by Norman 
(1963), then by a host of other researchers (e.g., Botwin & Buss, 1989; Digman & Inouye, 
1986; Goldberg, 1981; Costa & McCrae, 1985; Rammstetd et al., 2010). The key markers 
that define the Big Five, as determined by Norman (1963), are shown in Table 3.3.
The past 30 years have witnessed an explosion of research on the Big Five. Indeed, 
the Big Five taxonomy has achieved a greater degree of consensus than any other trait 
taxonomy in the history of personality trait psychology. But it has also generated some 
controversy. We consider three key issues: (1) What is the empirical evidence for the 
five-factor taxonomy of personality? (2) What is the identity of the fifth factor? (3) Is 
the Big Five taxonomy really comprehensive, or are there major trait dimensions that lie 
beyond the Big Five?
What Is the Empirical Evidence for the Five-Factor Model?
The five-factor model has proven to be astonishingly replicable in studies using English￾language trait words as items (Goldberg, 1981, 1990; McCrae & Costa, 2008). The five fac￾tors have been found by dozens of researchers using different samples. This model has been 
replicated in every decade for the past half-century. It has been replicated in different lan￾guages and in different item formats (Rammstetd et al., 2010). These replications include 
many countries, such as Belgium, Brazil, China, France, Germany, India, Indonesia, Italy, 
Final PDF to printer75
lar31869_ch03_054-085.indd 75 09/28/22 11:08 AM
CHAPTER THREE Traits and Trait Taxonomies 
Japan, Korea, Mexico, Nigeria, the Philippines, Russia, Thailand, Turkey, the United 
Kingdom, the United States, and Vietnam (Minkov, van de Vijver, & Schachnerf, 2019).
In its modern form, the Big Five taxonomy has been measured in two major ways. 
One way is based on self-ratings of single-word trait adjectives, such as talkative, warm, 
organized, moody, and imaginative (Goldberg, 1990), and one way is based on self-ratings 
of sentence items, such as “My life is fast-paced” (McCrae & Costa, 1999). We will dis￾cuss these in turn.
Lewis R. Goldberg has done the most systematic research on the Big Five using 
single-word trait adjectives. According to Goldberg (1990), key adjective markers of the 
Big Five are as follows:
1. Surgency or extraversion: talkative, extraverted, assertive, forward, outspoken versus 
shy, quiet, introverted, bashful, inhibited.
2. Agreeableness: sympathetic, kind, warm, understanding, sincere versus 
unsympathetic, unkind, harsh, cruel.
3. Conscientiousness: organized, neat, orderly, practical, prompt, meticulous versus 
disorganized, disorderly, careless, sloppy, impractical.
4. Emotional stability: calm, relaxed, stable versus moody, anxious, insecure.
5. Intellect or imagination: creative, imaginative, intellectual versus uncreative, 
unimaginative, unintellectual.
In addition to measures that use single-trait words as items, the most widely used 
measure using a sentence-length item format has been developed by Paul T. Costa and 
Robert R. McCrae. It’s called the NEO-PI-3: the neuroticism-extraversion-openness 
(NEO) Personality Inventory (PI) Revised (R) (McCrae, Costa, & Martin, 2005). 
Sample items from the NEO-PI-3 are neuroticism (N): I have frequent mood swings; extra￾version (E): I don’t find it easy to take charge of a situation (reverse scored); openness 
(O): I enjoy trying new and foreign foods; agreeableness (A): Most people I know like me;
and conscientiousness (C): I keep my belongings neat and clean.
Source: Norman, 1963.
Table 3.3 Norman’s Markers for the Big Five
    I. Extraversion or Surgency
Talkative–silent
Sociable–reclusive
Adventurous–cautious
Open–secretive
   IV. Emotional stability
Calm–anxious
Composed–excitable
Not hypochondriacal–hypochondriacal
Poised–nervous/tense
 II. Agreeableness
Good-natured–irritable
Cooperative–negativistic
Mild/gentle–headstrong
Not jealous–jealous
 V. Culture—Intellect, Openness
Intellectual–unreflective/narrow
Artistic–non-artistic
Imaginative–simple/direct
Polished/refined–crude/boorish
  III. Conscientiousness
Responsible–undependable
Scrupulous–unscrupulous
Persevering–quitting
Fussy/tidy–careless
Final PDF to printer76
lar31869_ch03_054-085.indd 76 09/28/22 11:08 AM
PART ONE The Dispositional Domain 
You might be thinking at this point that five factors may be too few to capture all of 
the fascinating complexity of personality. And you may be right. But consider this. Each 
of the five global personality factors has a host of specific “facets,” which provide a lot of 
subtlety and nuance. The global trait of conscientiousness, for example, includes these six 
facets: competence, order, dutifulness, achievement striving, self-discipline, and delibera￾tion. The global trait of neuroticism has these six facets: anxiety, angry hostility, depres￾sion, self-consciousness, impulsivity, and vulnerability. These facets of each global factor 
go a long way toward adding richness, complexity, and nuance to personality description.
Source: Exercise original, created for this book.
Openness–intellect
Emotional stability
Conscientiousness
Agreeableness
Extraversion
Very low Somewhat low Average Somewhat high Very high
Your job is to develop a way to measure the Big Five traits in someone you know, such as a 
friend, a roommate, or a family member. Read the adjectives in Table 3.3 carefully until you 
have an understanding of each of the Big Five traits. Then, consider the different sources of 
personality data described in Chapter 2:
1. Self-report—typically, asking questions on a questionnaire.
2. Observer-report—typically, asking someone who knows the subject to report 
what the subject is like.
3. Test data—typically, objective tasks, situations, or physiological recordings that 
get at manifestations of the trait in question.
4. Life-outcome data—aspects of the person’s life that may reveal a trait, such as 
introverted people selecting careers in which there is little contact with others. 
Your job is to assess your target person on each of the Big Five traits, using a combination of 
data sources. You should first list, for each of the five traits, the way you measured that trait, 
such as the items on your questionnaire or interview or the life-outcome data. Then, in the 
second part of your report, indicate how high or low you think your examinee is on each of the 
five traits.
Exercise
Final PDF to printer77
lar31869_ch03_054-085.indd 77 09/28/22 11:08 AM
CHAPTER THREE Traits and Trait Taxonomies 
Although the NEO-PI-3 traits are presented in a different order (N, E, O, A, and C) 
than the Goldberg order, and in a few cases the traits are given different names, the 
underlying personality traits being measured are nearly identical to those found by 
Goldberg. This convergence between the factor structures of single-trait item formats 
and sentence-length item formats provides support for the robustness and replicability of 
the five-factor model (Rammstedt et al., 2010).
What Is the Identity of the Fifth Factor?
Although the five-factor model has achieved impressive replicability across samples, 
investigators, and item formats, there is some disagreement about the content and rep￾licability of the fifth factor. Different researchers have variously labeled this fifth factor 
as culture, intellect, intellectance, imagination, openness, openness to experience, and even 
fluid intelligence and tender-mindedness (see Brand & Egan, 1989; De Raad, 1998). A 
major cause of these differences is that different researchers start with different item 
pools to factor analyze. Those who start with the lexical strategy and use adjectives as 
items typically endorse intellect as the meaning and label of the fifth factor (Saucier & 
Goldberg, 1996). In contrast, those who use questionnaire items tend to prefer openness
or openness to experience because this label better reflects the content of those items 
(McCrae & Costa, 1997, 1999, 2008).
One way to resolve these differences is to go back to the lexical rationale to begin 
with and to look across cultures and across languages. According to the lexical approach, 
traits that emerge universally in different languages and cultures are more important 
than those that lack cross-cultural universality. What do the cross-cultural data show? In 
a study conducted in Turkey, a clear fifth factor emerged that is best described as open￾ness (Somer & Goldberg, 1999). A different Dutch study found a fifth factor marked by 
progressive at one end and conservative at the other (De Raad et al., 1998). In German, 
the fifth factor represents intelligence, talents, and abilities (Ostendorf, 1990). In Italian, 
the fifth factor is conventionality, marked by the items rebellious and critical (Caprara & 
Perugini, 1994). Looking across all these studies, the fifth factor has proven difficult to 
pin down, although openness and intellect best describe the most common content (John & 
Naumann, 2010).
In summary, although the first four factors are highly replicable across cultures 
and languages, there is uncertainty about the content, naming, and replicability of the 
fifth factor (De Raad et al., 2010). Perhaps some individual differences are more rel￾evant to some cultures than to others—intellect in some cultures, conventionality in other 
cultures, and openness in yet other cultures. Clearly, more extensive cross-cultural work 
is needed, particularly in African cultures and in more traditional cultures that are mini￾mally influenced by Western culture.
What Are the Empirical Correlates of the Five Factors?
Over the past 20 years, a tremendous volume of research has been conducted on the 
empirical correlates of each of the five factors. This section summarizes some of the 
most recent interesting findings.
Extraversion. Extraverts love to party—they engage in frequent social interac￾tion, take the lead in livening up dull gatherings, and enjoy talking a lot. Indeed, evi￾dence suggests that social attention is the cardinal feature of extraversion (Ashton, Lee, & 
Paunonen, 2002). From the perspective of the extravert, “the more the merrier.” 
Extraverts have a greater impact on their social environment, often assuming leader￾ship positions, whereas introverts tend to be more like wallflowers (Jensen-Campbell & 
Graziano, 2001). Extraverted men are more likely to be bold with women they don’t 
Final PDF to printer78
lar31869_ch03_054-085.indd 78 09/28/22 11:08 AM
PART ONE The Dispositional Domain 
know, whereas introverted men tend to be shy with women (Berry & Miller, 2001). 
This may explain why introverts are more likely than extraverts to meet their romantic 
partners online, a context in which their interpersonal shyness is less of a handicap 
(Danielsbacka, Tanskanen, & Billari, 2019).
Extraverts tend to be happier, and this positive affect is experienced most intensely 
when a person acts in an extraverted manner with other people (Fleeson, Malanos, & 
Achille, 2002; Oelermns & Bakker, 2014). Extraversion also has an impact in the work￾place. Extraverts tend to be more involved and enjoy their work (Burke, Mattheiesen, & 
Pallesen, 2006) and show more commitment to their work organization (Erdheim, Wang, 
& Zickar, 2006). Extraverts are more cooperative than introverts (Hirsh & Peterson, 
2009), which might contribute to their positive work experiences. Extraverts tend to 
be physically stronger than introverts, in part because they engage in more vigorous 
and frequent physical activity (Fink et al., 2016; Tolea et al., 2012). But there are also 
downsides—extraverts like to drive fast and listen to music while driving, and as a con￾sequence, tend to get into more car accidents, and even road fatalities, than their more 
introverted peers (Lajunen, 2001). They are less likely than introverts to save money for 
retirement (Hirsh, 2015). When given a choice, extraverts prefer to spend leisure time 
on beaches and near oceans, whereas introverts enjoy the solitude of mountains (Oishi, 
Talhelm, & Lee, 2015). Introverts also seem to cope better with being alone during the 
Covid-19 pandemic, cope better with chronic pain, and suffer fewer sleep disturbances 
compared to extraverts (Flowers et al., 2021).
Agreeableness. Whereas the motto of the extravert might be “let’s liven things up,” 
the motto of the highly agreeable person might be “let’s all get along.” Those who score 
high on agreeableness favor using negotiation to resolve conflicts; low-agreeable persons 
try to assert their power to resolve social conflicts (Graziano & Tobin, 2002; Jensen￾Campbell & Graziano, 2001). The agreeable person is also more likely to withdraw from 
social conflict. Agreeable individuals like harmonious social interaction and cooperative 
family life. They are also highly prosocial and empathic and enjoy helping others in need 
(Caprara et al., 2010). They value prosocial behaviors in others, but at the same time 
tend to judge harshly those who commit antisocial acts (Kammrath & Scholer, 2011). 
Agreeable children tend to be less often victimized by bullies during early adolescence 
(Jensen-Campbell et al., 2002). As you might suspect, politicians, at least in Italy, tend 
to score high on scales of agreeableness (Caprara et al., 2003). Those high on agree￾ableness seem to be good at reading other people’s minds (Nettle & Liddle, 2008), an 
empathic ability that leads to more forgiveness of the transgressions of other people 
(Strelan, 2007).
At the other end of the scale of agreeableness lies aggressiveness. Wu and Clark 
(2003) found that aggressiveness was strongly linked to many everyday behaviors. 
Examples include hitting someone else in anger, blowing up when things don’t work 
properly, slamming doors, yelling, getting into arguments, clenching fists, raising voices, 
being intentionally rude, damaging someone’s property, pushing and hitting others, and 
slamming down the phone. So the next time you think about getting into an argument 
with someone, you might want to find out where they are on the agreeable–aggressiveness 
disposition.
Agreeable individuals, in short, get along well with others, are well liked, avoid 
conflict, strive for harmonious family lives, and may selectively prefer professions in 
which their likeability is an asset. Disagreeable individuals are aggressive and seem to get 
themselves into a lot of social conflict.
Conscientiousness. If extraverts party up and agreeable people get along, then con￾scientious individuals are industrious and get ahead. The hard work, punctuality, and 
Final PDF to printer79
lar31869_ch03_054-085.indd 79 09/28/22 11:08 AM
CHAPTER THREE Traits and Trait Taxonomies 
reliable behavior exhibited by conscientious individuals result in a host of life outcomes 
such as a higher grade point average (Conrad, 2006; Noftle & Robins, 2007; Poropat, 
2009), greater job satisfaction, greater job security, and more positive and committed 
social relationships (Langford, 2003). Highly conscientious individuals are also more 
likely to delay gratification, save money, and invest their money wisely over their life 
spans (Furnham & Cheng, 2019a, 2019b). Those who score low on conscientiousness, 
in contrast, are likely to perform more poorly at school and at work. The fact that highly 
conscientious individuals succeed in the work domain is likely due to three key corre￾lates. They do not procrastinate, in contrast to their low-conscious peers whose motto 
might be “never put off until tomorrow what you can put off until the day after tomor￾row” (Lee, Kelly, & Edwards, 2006). Second, they tend to be perfectionists, setting high 
standards for themselves (Cruce et al., 2012; Stoeber, Otto, & Dalbert, 2009) and score 
high on achievement motivation (Richardson & Abraham, 2009). And those high in 
conscientiousness are exceptionally industrious, putting in the long hours of diligent 
hard work needed to get ahead (Lund et al., 2006). Those high on conscientiousness are 
more likely to stick with good plans for physical exercise (Bogg, 2008) and consequently 
are less likely to gain weight when they reach middle age (Brummett et al., 2006). High 
scorers on conscientiousness also display more passion and perseverance for long-term 
goals (Duckworth et al., 2007). They are more likely to do volunteer work when they 
retire from their jobs (Mike, Jackson, & Oltmanns, 2014). Having a romantic partner 
who is highly conscientious is linked with being more physically healthy (Williams et al., 
2019).
Low C is linked with risky sexual behaviors, such as failing to use condoms 
(Trobst et al., 2002) and being more responsive to other potential partners while already 
in an existing romantic relationship (Schmitt & Buss, 2001). Among a sample of prison￾ers, low-C scorers tend to have frequent arrests (Clower & Bothwell, 2001). The high-C 
individual, in sum, tends to perform well in school and work, avoids breaking the rules, 
and has a more stable and secure romantic relationship. But there does appear to be at 
least one downside to being highly conscientious—high scorers, compared to low scorers, 
experience a more substantial drop in psychological well-being when they are unem￾ployed for extended periods of time (Boyce, Wood, & Brown, 2010).
Emotional stability. Life poses stresses and hurdles that everyone must confront. 
The dimension of emotional stability taps into the way people cope with these stresses. 
Emotionally stable individuals are like boats that remain on course through choppy 
waters. Emotionally unstable people get buffeted about by the waves and are more likely 
to get knocked off course. The hallmark of emotional instability, or neuroticism, is vari￾ability of moods over time—such people swing up and down more than emotionally sta￾ble individuals (Murray, Allen, & Trinder, 2002).
Emotionally unstable individuals experience more fatigue over the course of the 
day (De Vries & Van Heck, 2002) and experience more grief and depression after the 
death of a loved one (Winjgaards-de Meij et al., 2007). Psychologically, emotionally 
unstable individuals are more likely to have dissociate experiences such as an inability 
to recall important life events, feeling disconnected from life and other people, and feel￾ing like they’ve woken up in a strange or unfamiliar place (Kwapil, Wrobel, & Pope, 
2002). Those high on neuroticism also tend to have more frequent thoughts of suicide 
(Chioqueta & Stiles, 2005; Stewart et al., 2008). Those high on neuroticism report 
poorer physical health, more physical symptoms, and fewer attempts to engage in health￾promoting behaviors (Williams, O’Brien, & Colder, 2004). They also engage in health￾impairing behaviors, such as drinking alcohol as a means of coping with their problems 
(Theakston et al., 2004).
Final PDF to printer80
lar31869_ch03_054-085.indd 80 09/28/22 11:08 AM
PART ONE The Dispositional Domain 
Interpersonally, those high on emotional instability have more ups and downs 
in their social relationships. In the sexual domain, for example, emotionally unstable 
individuals experience more sexual anxiety (e.g., worry about performance) as well as 
a greater fear of engaging in sex (Heaven et al., 2003; Shafer, 2001). And with highly 
stressful events, such as an unwanted loss of a pregnancy, emotionally unstable individu￾als are more likely to develop “posttraumatic stress disorder,” in which the psychological 
trauma of the loss is experienced profoundly and for a long time (Engelhard, van den 
Hout, & Kindt, 2003).
Emotional instability augers poorly for professional success. This may be partly 
due to the fact that emotionally unstable people are thrown off track by the everyday 
stresses and strains that we all go through. It may be partly due to their experience of 
greater fatigue. But it may also be attributable to the fact that they engage in a lot of 
“self-handicapping” (Ross, Canada, & Rausch, 2002). Self-handicapping is defined as a 
tendency to “create obstacles to successful achievement in performance or competitive 
situations in order to protect one’s self-esteem” (Ross et al., 2002, p. 2). One such obsta￾cle might be problematic alcohol consumption, which is linked with emotional instabil￾ity in young adults (Pocuca et al., 2019). Emotionally unstable individuals are also more 
likely to choke under pressure, such as a time deadline to complete a task (Byrne, Silasi￾Mansat, & Worthy, 2015). Nonetheless, those high on neuroticism actually outperform 
their more emotionally stable counterparts in an office setting when changes in the work 
needs create an unusually busy work environment (Smillie et al., 2006). In sum, the 
affective volatility that comes with being low on emotional stability affects many spheres 
of life, from sexuality to achievement.
Intellect-openness. Would you agree or disagree with the following? “Upon awak￾ening during the night, I am unsure whether I 
Personality characteristics predict who will climb mountains, literally and metaphorically.
OJO Images/Getty Images
Final PDF to printer81
lar31869_ch03_054-085.indd 81 09/28/22 11:08 AM
CHAPTER THREE Traits and Trait Taxonomies 
dreamed about it,” “I am aware that I am dreaming, even as I dream,” “I am able to con￾trol or direct the content of my dreams,” “A dream helped me to solve a current problem 
or concern” (Watson, 2003). If you tend to agree, you probably score high on openness. 
Those high on openness tend to remember their dreams more, and have more waking 
dreams, more vivid dreams, more prophetic dreams (dreaming about something that 
later happens), and more problem-solving dreams (Watson, 2003).
Openness has been linked to experimentation with new foods, a liking for novel 
experiences, and even “openness” to having extramarital affairs (Buss, 1993). One possi￾ble cause of openness may lie in individual differences in the processing of information. 
Those high in openness have more difficulty ignoring previously experienced stimuli 
(Peterson, Smith, & Carson, 2002). It’s as though the perceptual and information pro￾cessing “gates” of highly open people are literally more “open” to receiving information 
coming at them from a variety of sources. Perhaps that is why high openness is linked 
with measures of creativity (Nusbaum & Silva, 2011). Less-open people have more 
tunnel vision and find it easier to ignore competing stimuli. Those high in openness 
exhibit less prejudice against minority groups and are less likely to hold negative racial 
stereotypes (Flynn, 2005). They also are more likely to get tattoos and body piercings 
(Nathanson, Paulhus, & Williams, 2006; Tate & Shelton, 2008). Highly open people 
tend to be more politically liberal, especially when there is an external threat such as 
terrorism (Sibley, Osborne, & Duckitt, 2012). They excel in achievement in the arts 
(Kaufman et al., 2016) and show higher levels of musical sophistication (Greenberg et 
al., 2015). Openness also predicts more cross-sex friendships on social networks such 
as Facebook (Lönnqvist et al., 2014). In sum, openness has been correlated with a host 
of other fascinating variables from intrusive stimuli to possible alternative sex partners.
Combinations of Big Five variables. Many life outcomes, of course, are better pre￾dicted by combinations of personality dispositions than by single personality disposi￾tions. Here are a few examples.
• Good grades are best predicted by Conscientiousness (high) and Emotional 
Stability (high) (Chamorro-Premuzic & Furnham, 2003a, 2003b). One reason 
might be that emotionally stable and conscientious people are less likely to 
procrastinate (Watson, 2001).
• Academic dishonesty is more likely among those low in Conscientiousness and 
low in Agreeableness (Giluk & Postlethwaite, 2015).
• What makes a good computer wiz? High Conscientiousness, high Openness, and 
Introversion (Gnambs, 2015).
• Obedience to authority in a Milgram-like experiment is more likely among people 
high in Conscientiousness and high in Agreeableness (Bègue et al., 2014).
• Educational attainment and earnings are predicted by high Emotional Stability, 
Openness, and Conscientiousness (O’Connell & Sheikh, 2011).
• Risky sexual behaviors, such has having many sex partners and not using condoms, 
are best predicted by high Extraversion, high Neuroticism, low Conscientiousness, 
and low Agreeableness (Miller et al., 2004; Trobst et al., 2002).
• While frequency of sexual intercourse per week is best predicted by extraversion in 
women, for men the combined traits of extraversion, emotional stability, and low 
agreeableness best predict sexual frequency (Whyte et al., 2019).
• Alcohol consumption is best predicted by high Extraversion and low 
Conscientiousness (Hong & Paunonen, 2009; Paunonen, 2003). A study of more 
than 5,000 workers in Finland found that low Conscientiousness also predicts 
increases in alcohol consumption over time, that is, who ends up becoming a 
heavy drinker (Grano et al., 2004).
Final PDF to printer82
lar31869_ch03_054-085.indd 82 09/28/22 11:08 AM
PART ONE The Dispositional Domain 
• Substance abuse disorders, such as illegal drug abuse, are linked to high 
Neuroticism and low Conscientiousness (Kotov et al., 2010).
• Pathological gambling is best predicted by a combination of high Neuroticism and 
low Conscientiousness (MacLaren et al., 2011; Myrseth et al., 2009).
• Aggression against other people when angry is well predicted by Neuroticism, but 
being high on Agreeableness appears to cool the tempers that these emotionally 
unstable people sometimes experience (Ode, Robinson, & Wilkowski, 2008).
• Violent criminals tend to be low on Agreeableness and high on Extraversion 
(Shimotsukasa et al., 2019).
• Mount Everest mountain climbers tend to be extraverted, emotionally stable, and 
high on Psychoticism (Egan & Stelmack, 2003).
• Happiness and experiencing positive affect in everyday life are best predicted by 
high Extraversion and low Neuroticism (Cheng & Furnham, 2003; Steel & Ones, 
2002; Stewart, Ebmeier, & Deary, 2005; Yik & Russell, 2001).
• Proclivity to engage in volunteer work, such as community services, is best 
predicted by a combination of high Agreeableness and high Extraversion (Carlo 
et al., 2005).
• Forgiveness, the proclivity to forgive those who have committed some wrong, 
characterizes individuals who are high on Agreeableness and high on Emotional 
Stability (Brose et al., 2005; Steiner, Allemand, & McCullough, 2012).
• Leadership effectiveness in business settings is best predicted by high Extraversion, 
high Agreeableness, high Conscientiousness, and high Emotional Stability 
(Silverthorne, 2001).
• Propensity to migrate within and among states within the United States is 
predicted by high Openness and low Agreeableness (Jokela, 2009), although 
some studies show that high Openness combined with high Extraversion predicts 
intentions to emigrate to a new country (Canache et al., 2013).
• Propensity to have children is predicted by high Extraversion (sociability) and high 
Emotional Stability (Jokela et al., 2009).
• Favorable attitudes toward being touched by an intimate partner are most strongly felt 
by those high in Agreeableness and Openness (Dorros, Hanzel, & Segrin, 2008).
We should not be surprised that combinations of personality variables often do better 
than single variables in predicting important life outcomes, and we can expect future 
research to focus increasingly on these combinations.
Is the Five-Factor Model Comprehensive?
Critics of the five-factor model argue that it leaves out important aspects of personality. 
Almagor, Tellegen, and Waller (1995), for example, present evidence for seven factors. 
Their results suggest the addition of two factors: positive evaluation (e.g., outstanding
vs. ordinary) and negative evaluation (e.g., awful vs. decent). Goldberg, one of the propo￾nents of the five-factor model, has discovered that factors such as religiosity and spiritual￾ity sometimes emerge as separate factors, although these are smaller in size (accounting 
for less variance) than those of the Big Five (Saucier & Goldberg, 1998).
Lanning (1994), using items from the California Adult Q-Sort, has found a repli￾cable sixth factor, which he labels attractiveness, including the items physically attractive, 
sees self as attractive, and charming. Schmitt & Buss (2000) have found reliable indi￾vidual differences in the sexual sphere, such as sexiness (e.g., sexy, stunning, attractive, 
alluring, sensual, and seductive) and faithfulness (e.g., faithful, monogamous, devoted). 
These individual difference dimensions are correlated with the five factors: Sexiness is 
Final PDF to printer83
lar31869_ch03_054-085.indd 83 09/28/22 11:08 AM
CHAPTER THREE Traits and Trait Taxonomies 
positively correlated with Extraversion, and faithfulness is positively correlated with both 
Agreeableness and Conscientiousness. But these correlations leave much of the individual 
variation unaccounted for, suggesting that these individual differences in sexuality are 
not completely subsumed by the five-factor model.
Paunonen and colleagues have identified 10 personality traits that appear to fall 
outside of the five-factor model: Conventionality, Seductiveness, Manipulativeness, 
Thriftiness, Humorousness, Integrity, Femininity, Religiosity, Risk Taking, and Egotism 
(Paunonen, 2002, 2003). Other researchers have confirmed that these traits are not 
highly correlated with the Big Five and that they highlight many interesting facets of per￾sonality at a more specific level than the “global” factors represented by the five-factor 
model (Lee, Ogunfowora, & Ashton, 2005).
Proponents of the five-factor model are typically open-minded about the potential 
inclusion of factors beyond the five factors, if and when the empirical evidence warrants 
it (Costa & McCrae, 1995; Goldberg & Saucier, 1995). Nonetheless, these researchers 
have not found the evidence for additional factors beyond the Big Five to be compelling. 
Positive and negative evaluation, some have argued, are not really separate factors but, 
rather, false factors that emerge simply because raters tend to evaluate all things as either 
good or bad (McCrae & John, 1992). With respect to the attractiveness factor found 
by Lanning (1994), Costa & McCrae (1995) argue that attractiveness is not ordinarily 
considered to be a personality trait, although the charming item that loads on this factor 
surely would be considered part of personality.
One approach to personality factors beyond the Big Five has been to explore 
personality-descriptive nouns rather than adjectives. Saucier (2003) has discovered 
eight fascinating factors within the domain of personality nouns such as: Dumbbell
(e.g., dummy, moron, twit), Babe/Cutie (e.g., beauty, darling, doll), Philosopher (e.g., 
genius, artist, individualist), Lawbreaker (e.g., pothead, drunk, rebel), Joker (e.g., clown, 
goof, comedian), and Jock (e.g., sportsman, tough, machine). As Saucier concludes, 
“Personality taxonomies based on adjectives are unlikely to be comprehensive, because 
type-nouns have different content emphases” (Saucier, 2003, p. 695).
The HEXACO Model
Another approach to personality factors beyond the Big Five has been to go back to 
the lexical approach, focusing on large pools of trait adjectives in different languages 
(De Raad & Barelds, 2008). In an exciting development, several studies have converged 
on six rather than five factors. One study of seven languages (Dutch, French, German, 
Hungarian, Italian, Korean, and Polish) found variants of the Big Five, plus a sixth fac￾tor, Honesty–Humility (Ashton, Lee, & de Vries, 2014). At one end of the Honesty–
Humility factor lie trait adjectives such as honest, sincere, trustworthy, and unselfish; 
the other end is anchored by adjectives such as arrogant, conceited, greedy, pompous, 
self-important, and egotistical. Independent investigators have found this sixth factor in 
Greece (Saucier et al., 2005) and Italy (Di Blas, 2005).
So much evidence has accumulated that some argue that the most comprehen￾sive cross-language taxonomy of personality is best captured by the HEXACO model: 
Humility-Honesty (H), Emotionality (E), Extraversion (X), Agreeableness (A), 
Conscientiousness (C), and Openness to Experience (O) (Ashton et al., 2014). In this 
model, five of the six factors are very close to those of the Big Five, although there 
are subtle differences. The largest difference, of course, is the addition of the Honesty–
Humility factor. This six-factor taxonomy has emerged in lexical-based studies of the 
major world languages, the most recent emerging from Poland (Gorbaniuk et al., 2013) 
Final PDF to printer84
lar31869_ch03_054-085.indd 84 09/28/22 11:08 AM
PART ONE The Dispositional Domain 
and among Portuguese Brazilians (Costa et al., 2019). The Honesty–Humility factor 
has also accrued strong construct validity. High scorers are more likely to offer sincere 
and humble apologies (Dunlop et al., 2015), even though they are less likely to violate 
social rules. It predicts cooperation in experimental games (Ashton et al., 2014). Those 
high on Honesty–Humility are more likely to be sincerely religious (Silvia, Nusbaum, & 
Beaty, 2014) and more easily show sexual and moral disgust (Tybur & de Vries, 2013). 
High scorers are also more likely to pursue what is called a slow life-history mating strat￾egy marked by long-term commitment to one partner and high investment in children 
(Davis et al., 2019).
Those low on Honesty–Humility tend to be interpersonally exploitative, are more 
likely to sabotage others in their work environment, and are even more likely to engage 
in criminal activity (Johnson, Rowatt, & Petrini, 2011; Zettler & Hilbig, 2010). They are 
more likely to violate social contracts and cheat in games (Fiddick et al., 2016). They 
are more boastful (Hilbig, Heydasch, & Zettler, 2014). Moreover, be wary of romanti￾cally rejecting someone low on Honesty–Humility; such people are more likely to seek 
revenge against their former romantic partner (Sheppard & Boon, 2012).
The low end of Honesty–Humility captures several unpleasant interpersonal 
traits, including egotism, narcissism, and an exploitative interpersonal style. This clus￾ter, sometimes called “the dark triad” (narcissism, Machiavellianism, and psychopathy), 
increasingly appears to be an important dispositional domain beyond that captured by 
the five-factor model (Paulhus & Williams, 2002; Veselka, Schermer, & Vernon, 2012). 
These findings point to an expansion of the basic factors of personality within the dispo￾sitional domain (Lee & Ashton, 2008, 2010; Lee & Ashton, 2008).
The expansion of the five-factor model to the six-factor HEXACO model is an 
exciting new development in personality psychology and is being validated in many dif￾ferent cultures. Evidence continues to accumulate that Honesty–Humility is not well 
captured by the five-factor model (Ashton, Lee, & Visser, 2019). A recent review of 
152 studies found that the HEXACO model provided broader coverage of the personal￾ity domain compared to the five-factor model (Thielmann et al., 2021). This illustrates 
important progress in the vibrant science of personality psychology.
SUMMARY AND EVALUATION
This chapter focused on three fundamental issues for a personality psychology based on 
traits: how to conceptualize traits, how to identify the most important traits, and how to 
formulate a comprehensive taxonomy of traits.
There are two basic conceptualizations of traits. The first views traits as the inter￾nal properties of persons that cause behavior. In this conception, traits cause the outward 
behavioral manifestations. The second conceptualization views traits as descriptive sum￾maries of overt behavior. The summary view does not assume that traits cause behavior; 
rather, it treats the issue of cause separately, to be examined after the behavioral sum￾maries are identified.
There have been three major approaches to identifying the most important traits. 
The first is the lexical approach, which views all the important traits as captured by the 
natural language. The lexical approach uses synonym frequency and cross-cultural uni￾versality as criteria for identifying important traits. The second approach, the statistical 
approach, adopts statistical procedures, such as factor analysis, and attempts to identify 
Final PDF to printer85
lar31869_ch03_054-085.indd 85 09/28/22 11:08 AM
CHAPTER THREE Traits and Trait Taxonomies 
clusters of traits that covary. The third approach, the theoretical approach, uses an exist￾ing theory of personality to determine which traits are important. In practice, personality 
psychologists use blends of these three approaches—for example, by using the lexical 
approach to identify the universe of traits and then applying statistical procedures to 
identify groups of traits that covary and form larger factors.
The third fundamental issue—formulating an overarching taxonomy of personality 
traits—has yielded several solutions. Eysenck developed a hierarchical model in which 
the broad traits extraversion, neuroticism, and psychoticism subsume more narrow traits, 
such as activity level, moodiness, and egocentricity. Eysenck’s taxonomy is based on a 
factor analysis but is also anchored in biological underpinnings-—a heritable basis for the 
traits and the identification of the underlying physiological basis for the traits.
Circumplex taxonomies of personality have been more narrowly targeted toward 
the domain of interpersonal traits as opposed to the entire personality sphere. Circumplex 
models are circular arrangements of traits organized around two key dimensions—status 
(dominance) and love (agreeableness).
The five-factor model of personality is a taxonomy that subsumes the circumplex 
in that the first two traits in the model—extraversion and agreeableness—are roughly the 
same as the circumplex dimensions of dominance and agreeableness. In addition, how￾ever, the five-factor model includes conscientiousness, emotional stability, and openness–
intellect. The five-factor model has been criticized for not being comprehensive and for 
being inadequate for understanding underlying psychological processes. Recent evidence 
points to the exciting discovery of a sixth factor—honesty–humility—that necessitates an 
expansion of the Big Five. Some now argue for the cross-cultural robustness of a six-factor 
personality structure, the HEXACO Model: Honesty–Humility (H), Emotionality (E), 
Extraversion (X), Agreeableness (A), Conscientiousness (C), and Openness to 
Experience (O). This development is likely the most important advance in personality 
taxonomy in the past 25 years.
lexical approach 63
statistical approach 63
theoretical approach 63
lexical hypothesis 63
synonym frequency 63
cross-cultural universality 63
factor analysis 64
factor loadings 65
KEY TERMS
agreeableness 78
conscientiousness 78
emotional stability 79
intellect-openness 80
combinations of Big Five variables 81
personality-descriptive nouns 83
honesty–humility 83
HEXACO model 83
sociosexual orientation 66
interpersonal traits 71
adjacency 72
bipolarity 73
orthogonality 73
five-factor model 73
extraversion 77
social attention 77
Final PDF to printer86
lar31869_ch04_086-121.indd 86 09/28/22 11:46 AM
Tavis Wright/Image Source
4
Theoretical and 
Measurement Issues 
in Trait Psychology
Theoretical Issues
Meaningful Differences Among Individuals
Stability over Time
Consistency Across Situations
Person–Situation Interaction
Aggregation
Measurement Issues
Carelessness
Faking on Questionnaires
Beware of Barnum Statements in Personality Test Interpretations
Personality and Prediction
Applications of Personality Testing in the Workplace
Legal Issues in Personality Testing in Employment Settings
Personnel Selection—Choosing the Right Person for the Job
Selection in Business Settings—The Myers–Briggs Type Indicator: A Worst-Case Example
Selection in Business Settings—The Hogan Personality Inventory: A Best-Case Example
SUMMARY AND EVALUATION
KEY TERMS
Final PDF to printerlar31869_ch04_086-121.indd 87 09/28/22 11:46 AM
THE DISPOSITIONAL DOMAIN
Sarah was a senior in college with a double major in math and computer 
science. She was a bit shy, especially with men her own age. Although she wanted to 
date more, she was very particular about the characteristics she looked for in a part￾ner. She decided that a Web-based dating service might be an efficient way to find 
someone to date. She signed up with an internet dating service and discovered that 
the first step was to complete an extensive personality questionnaire. She answered a 
lot of questions about her likes and dislikes, her habits, traits, and what others thought 
of her. She even answered questions about the kind of car she owned and her driving 
style. After this, the site returned the personality profiles of a few men who, the site 
claimed, would be good matches for her. One looked particularly interesting, so she 
spent a couple of hours with him online. Sarah decided to call him a couple of times 
on the phone. They had a lot in common, and Sarah found it easy to talk to him. She 
enjoyed the conversations, as did he, so they decided to take the next step and meet in 
person for a dinner date. When they made arrangements to meet, she was surprised 
to learn that they lived in the same apartment complex and that they had probably 
already seen one another, perhaps had even spoken to one another. But it took an 
internet dating service, using a program that matches people according to personality, 
for them to actually find each other.
Signing up for an internet 
dating service often involves 
answering a personality trait 
questionnaire.
Wavebreak Media LTD/123RF
4
Final PDF to printer88
lar31869_ch04_086-121.indd 88 09/28/22 11:46 AM
PART ONE The Dispositional Domain
There are many internet-based dating services, 
and many of these use personality questionnaires to 
help them do a better job of matching people. The 
dating site EliteSingles.com uses a version of the Big 
Five trait inventory by Costa and McCrae (1995) 
that we discussed in the previous chapter. This dating 
site uses an algorithm that matches people on their 
five personality trait scores. SoSyncd.com (www.
sosyncd.com) is a dating site that matches people 
according to their scores on the Myers–Briggs Type 
Indicator, a personality measure that we review later 
in this chapter. Other internet dating services, such 
as Chemistry.com, eHarmony.com, and okcupid.
com also gather personality data and employ sophis￾ticated matching algorithms. Personality psycholo￾gists have been accumulating evidence over the past 
half-century that personality similarity is a signifi￾cant predictor of whether people will be attracted to each other (see Chapter 15) and 
whether they will be satisfied with their relationship once it is established (Decuyper, De 
Bolle, & De Fruyt, 2012).
Matching on personality traits sounds like a great idea, but it works only to the 
extent that the personality measures are valid. Not answering the questions honestly 
can invalidate the measure. A person might, for example, try to cover up an aggressive, 
abusive personality. A person might lie about other characteristics as well, such as 
saying he is single when in fact he is married, or saying she is 5′ 11″ when in fact she 
is 5′ 5″. A study by the Pew Research Center found that, among users of dating sites, 
54 percent felt that someone else had misrepresented themselves online. Someone who 
misrepresents themselves online is commonly called a “catfish” (UrbanDictionary.
com), and dating sites often try to remove the “catfish” from their “pool” of users. 
Consequently, some sites use techniques developed by personality psychologists for 
detecting impression management efforts on questionnaires. For example, some sites 
ask about common faults or minor misbehaviors that practically everyone would 
endorse, such as “I have, on occasion, told a white lie.” People who deny a lot of these 
common faults raise a red flag because they are probably misrepresenting themselves 
on their other answers as well.
This use of testing brings into focus several questions about the measurement of 
personality traits. Do traits represent consistent behavior patterns, such that we could 
make accurate predictions about a person’s future behavior based on her or his trait 
standings? How do personality traits interact with situations, particularly social situa￾tions? Are there ways to detect that someone is not telling the truth on a personality 
questionnaire? Are some people motivated to fake good or to fake bad on questionnaires?
Choosing a dating partner is one example of personality in a selection context. 
Personality measures are also used in other selection settings, such as for jobs or for 
prison parole or for placement within an organization. What are some of the legal 
issues in using personality measures to make such consequential decisions? Are there 
some common problems with selection procedures? Can an employer use a measure 
of “integrity” to screen out potentially dishonest employees? What about selecting peo￾ple for admission into college, law school, or medical school on the basis of personal 
characteristics?
A key task for a first date is determining what you have in common with the 
other person—that is, how similar your personalities are.
monkeybusinessimages/iStock /Getty Images Plus
Final PDF to printer89
lar31869_ch04_086-121.indd 89 09/28/22 11:46 AM
CHAPTER FOUR Theoretical and Measurement Issues in Trait Psychology
Although many of these questions seem abstract, they are important for how we 
think about personality traits. They are important for understanding controversial issues, 
such as the use of personality measures in business, industry, and education for the selec￾tion, training, and promotion of candidates.
Theoretical Issues
Trait theories of personality offer a collection of viewpoints about the fundamental build￾ing blocks of human nature. As we saw in Chapter 3, there are differences among the 
various theories concerning what constitutes a trait, how many traits exist, and what 
are the best methods for discovering basic traits. Despite their differences, trait theo￾ries share three important assumptions about personality traits. These assumptions go 
beyond any one theory or taxonomy of personality traits and, so, form the basic founda￾tion for trait psychology. These three important assumptions are
• meaningful individual differences,
• stability over time, and
• consistency across situations.
Meaningful Differences Among Individuals
Trait psychologists are primarily interested in determining the ways in which people are 
different from each other. Any meaningful way in which people differ from each other 
may potentially be identified as a personality trait. Some people like to talk a lot; others 
don’t. Some people are active; others are couch potatoes. Some people enjoy working on 
difficult puzzles; others avoid mental challenges. Because of its emphasis on the study 
of differences among people, trait psychology has sometimes been called differential 
psychology in the interest of distinguishing this field from other branches of personality 
psychology (Anastasi, 1976). Differential psychology includes the study of other forms 
of individual differences in addition to personality traits, such as abilities, apti￾tudes, and intelligence. In this chapter, however, we focus mainly on personal￾ity traits.
The trait perspective historically has been concerned with accurate mea￾surement. It takes a quantitative approach, which emphasizes how much a given 
individual differs from the average person. Of all the perspectives and strategies 
for studying personality, the trait approach is the most mathematically and statis￾tically oriented due to its emphasis on amount (Paunonen & Hong, 2015).
You might be wondering how the many differences among people could be 
captured and represented by a few key personality traits. How is it that the unique￾ness of every individual can be portrayed by just a few traits? Trait psychologists 
are somewhat like chemists in this regard. They argue that by combining a few 
primary traits in various amounts, they can recreate the unique personalities of 
every individual. This process is analogous to that of combining the three primary 
colors. Every visible color in the spectrum, from dusty mauve to burnt umber, is 
created through various combinations of the three primary colors: red, green, and 
blue. According to trait psychologists, every unique personality, no matter how 
complex or unusual, can be thought of as the product of a particular combination 
of a few basic or primary traits.
The Color Wheel. The infinite hues of 
color are created from a combination 
of three primary colors. Similarly, trait 
psychologists hold that the infinite 
variety of personalities is created from a 
combination of a few primary traits.
Final PDF to printer90
lar31869_ch04_086-121.indd 90 09/28/22 11:46 AM
PART ONE The Dispositional Domain
Stability over Time
The second assumption made by all trait theories is that there is a degree of stability in 
personality over time. If someone is highly extraverted during one period of observation, 
trait psychologists tend to assume that he or she will be extraverted tomorrow, next week, 
a year from now, or even decades from now. The view that many broad-based personal￾ity traits show considerable stability over time has been supported by a large number of 
research studies, which we review in Chapter 5. Traits such as intelligence, emotional reac￾tivity, impulsiveness, shyness, and aggression show high test-retest correlations, even with 
years or decades between measurement occasions. Personality traits that are thought to 
have a biological basis, such as extraversion, sensation seeking, activity level, and shyness, 
also show remarkable consistency over time. Attitudes, however, are much less stable over 
time, as are interests and opinions (Conley, 1984a, 1984b). Of course, people do change 
in important behavioral ways throughout adulthood, especially after encountering some 
important life “turning point,” such as serving in the military. For example, Jackson and 
colleagues (2012) showed that people lower in agreeableness and openness in high school 
were more likely to enter the military upon graduation. After training, the military recruits 
were even lower on agreeableness, and this low agreeableness persisted at least five years 
after training, when most of the recruits were no longer in the military and had either 
started college or entered the labor force. However, in the absence of major life “turning 
points,” when it comes to broad personality traits, stability over time is more often the rule 
than the exception (Allemand, Gomez, & Jackson, 2010).
Although a trait might be stable over time, the way in which it manifests itself in 
actual behavior might change substantially. Consider the trait of disagreeableness. As a 
child, a highly disagreeable person might be prone to temper tantrums and fits of breath 
holding, fist pounding, and undirected rage. As an adult, a disagreeable person might 
be difficult to get along with and hence might have trouble sustaining personal relation￾ships or holding down a job. Researchers have found, for example, a correlation of −.45 
between throwing temper tantrums in childhood and being able to hold a job as an adult 
20 years later (Caspi, Elder, & Bem, 1987). This finding is evidence of stability in the 
underlying trait (disagreeableness), even though the manifestation of that trait changes 
over time.
The Hartshorne and May (1928) study examined cross-situational consistency in academic and play situations in children. While they found little 
evidence for cross-situational consistency in such traits as honesty, the study has been criticized for measuring behavior on one occasion in each situation. 
Studies that aggregate measurements over several occasions in each situation find much higher levels of cross-situational consistency.
Left: Oksana Kuzmina/Shutterstock; Right: Africa Studio/Shutterstock
Final PDF to printer91
lar31869_ch04_086-121.indd 91 09/28/22 11:46 AM
CHAPTER FOUR Theoretical and Measurement Issues in Trait Psychology
What about traits that decrease in intensity with age, such as activity level, impul￾siveness, or sociopathy? For example, criminal tendencies usually decrease with age, 
so a 20-year-old sociopath becomes much less dangerous to society as he or she ages. 
The answer to this question lies in the concept of rank-order stability. If all people show 
a decrease in a particular trait at the same rate over time, they could still maintain the 
same rank order relative to each other. Accounting for general change with age can be 
compared to subtracting or adding a constant to each participant’s score on the trait 
measure. Figure 4.1 illustrates how a general decrease in impulsiveness with age might 
have no real effect on the correlation between measures obtained 20 years apart. People 
in general can show a decrease in impulsiveness as they get older, yet those individuals 
who were the most impulsive at an earlier age are still the ones who are most impul￾sive at a later age, even as everyone declined on impulsiveness as they grew older. We 
revisit the idea of rank-order stability, as well as the whole notion of stability and change, 
in Chapter 5.
Consistency Across Situations
The third assumption made by trait psychologists is that traits will exhibit some 
consistency across situations. Although the evidence for stability in traits over time is 
substantial, the question of consistency in traits from situation to situation has been more 
hotly debated (for a review, see Leikas, Lonnqvist, & Verkasalo, 2012). Trait psycholo￾gists have traditionally believed that people’s personalities show consistency from situ￾ation to situation. For example, if a young man is “really friendly,” he is expected to be 
Figure 4.1
Hypothetical regression lines between impulsiveness measured 20 years apart. Line A represents an age 
change in impulsiveness, with all persons scoring as less impulsive in later life (e.g., those scoring “medium” 
in 2023 score as “low” 20 years later). Line B represents no change in impulsiveness over 20 years (e.g., 
those scoring “low” in 2023 also score “low” in 2043). Both lines represent rank-order stability, however, and 
thus high test-retest correlations across 20 years would be found for both group A and group B. 
High
Low
Medium
A
B
Low HighMedium
Impulsiveness measured in 2043
Impulsiveness measured in 2023
Final PDF to printer92
lar31869_ch04_086-121.indd 92 09/28/22 11:46 AM
PART ONE The Dispositional Domain
friendly at work, friendly at school, and friendly during recreation activities. This person 
might be friendly toward strangers, toward people of different ages and ethnicities, and 
toward professors or supervisors at work.
Even though someone is “really friendly,” there are, of course, situations in which 
the individual will not act friendly. Perhaps a particular situation exerts an influence 
on how friendly most people will be. For example, people are more likely to start con￾versations with strangers if they are at a party than if they are at a library. If situations 
largely control how people behave, then the idea that traits are consistent across situa￾tions holds less promise in explaining their behavior.
The issue of cross-situational consistency has a long history in personality psychol￾ogy. Hartshorne and May (1928) studied a large group of elementary school students 
at summer camp, focusing especially on the trait of honesty. They observed honest and 
dishonest behavior in several situations. For example, they observed which children 
cheated while playing field games at summer camp and, again, which children cheated 
during some written exams in school. The correlation between honesty measured in each 
of these two situations was rather low. Knowing that a child cheated one night while 
playing kick-the-can at summer camp tells us very little about whether this child is likely 
to copy from a neighbor during a test at school. Hartshorne and May reported similar 
low cross-situational correlations for the traits of helpfulness and self-control.
Forty years later, in 1968, Walter Mischel (1930–2018) published an influen￾tial book entitled Personality and Assessment. In it, he summarized the results of the 
Hartshorne and May study, as well as the results of many other studies reporting low 
correlations between similar behaviors measured in different situations. After reviewing 
many such findings, Mischel concluded that “behavioral consistencies have not been 
demonstrated, and the concept of personality traits as broad predispositions is thus 
untenable” (p. 140).
Mischel’s 1968 book became a classic because it questioned the very foundation 
of personality traits—the notion that people are consistent from situation to situation. He 
suggested that personality psychologists should abandon their efforts to explain behavior 
in terms of personality traits and recommended that they shift their focus to situations. 
If behavior differs from situation to situation, then it must be situational differences, 
rather than underlying personality differences, that determine behavior. This position, 
called situationism, can be illustrated with the following examples. A young woman may 
be friendly at school with people she knows but reserved with strangers. Or a young man 
may want to achieve good grades at school but may not care whether he excels in sports 
(see the Closer Look box on “Situationism Today”).
Mischel’s challenge to the trait approach preoccupied the field of trait psychol￾ogy for the 30 years following publication of his 1968 book. Many researchers felt that 
Mischel was wrong about personality traits, yet data supporting cross-situational consis￾tency was difficult to find. As such, they began formulating new theoretical perspectives 
and gathering new data designed to rescue the idea of traits (e.g., Buss, 1989; Endler & 
Magnusson, 1976). Mischel, in turn, countered with new ideas and new data of his own, 
intended to reinforce his position that the trait concept was limited in its usefulness (e.g., 
Mischel, 1984, 1990; Mischel & Peake, 1982).
Although the dust is still settling from this long-running debate (for a recent sum￾mary, see Benet-Martinez et al., 2015), it is safe to say that both trait psychologists and
Mischel modified their views as a result of these efforts. Mischel tempered his position, 
saying that situations are not always the strongest determinants of behavior. However, he 
maintained that trait psychologists overstated the importance of broad traits (Mischel & 
Shoda, 2010). Prior to Mischel’s critique, it was common for trait psychologists to make 
Final PDF to printer93
lar31869_ch04_086-121.indd 93 09/28/22 11:46 AM
CHAPTER FOUR Theoretical and Measurement Issues in Trait Psychology
broad statements about the predictability of people’s behavior from their scores on person￾ality tests. Mischel pointed out that psychologists simply are not very good at predicting 
how an individual will behave in particular situations. Trait psychologists, too, have modi￾fied their views. Two of the most lasting changes that trait psychologists have embraced as 
a result of Mischel’s critique have been the notion of person–situation interaction and the 
practice of aggregation, or averaging, as a tool for assessing personality traits.
The popular science writer Malcolm 
Gladwell (author of The Tipping Point and 
Blink, and other books) came out with a 
book in 2008, titled Outliers. (The term 
outlier comes from statistics and refers to 
an individual in a sample who is markedly 
different from all others in that sample.) 
In this book, Gladwell tackles the issue of 
being exceptional: Why some people are 
exceedingly successful in some areas of 
life, such as sports, science, or business, 
whereas most others are only mediocre. 
This question embodies the very concept of 
individual differences and lies at the heart 
of personality psychology. It also is a use￾ful example to illustrate the extreme situ￾ational perspective.
Gladwell takes the position that most 
exceptional people get that way because 
of special opportunities or life situations 
that give them some advantage. His view 
is that the successful among us were pre￾sented with a beneficial life situation and 
ran with it. For example, the founders of 
many major computer companies (e.g., 
Microsoft, Apple, Sun Microsystems) were 
all born between 1953 and 1956 and 
therefore were exposed to early prototype 
computers when they were geeky teenage 
boys with lots of time on their hands. They 
all spent countless hours with these early 
prototypes and grew up to be exceptionally 
successful in the computing industry.
Gladwell presents case after case like 
this, arguing that exposure to critical life 
situations, at the right time, is what matters 
most in understanding why some people are 
these personal characteristics that deter￾mined why we became personality psy￾chologists and why Jobs and Gates became 
computing tycoons. This would be a strictly 
personality position, arguing that personal 
characteristics—ability, intelligence, inter￾est, personality—entirely determine life 
outcomes. Books presenting this perspec￾tive, which are as one-sided as Gladwell’s, 
have also been written by nonscientists 
(e.g., The Personality Code, by Travis 
Bradberry, Putnam Press, 2007).
The real answer to understanding 
most life outcomes can be found in the 
interaction between personal character￾istics and life situations: Exceptional life 
outcomes happen when chance situations 
meet the prepared person. If someone had 
all the personal characteristics of Bill Gates 
or Steve Jobs, yet was from a poor, inner￾city school that did not get those early pro￾totype computers, he or she would most 
likely not go into this career. However, if 
someone had the exact same life experi￾ences as Jobs and Gates, yet differed from 
them in basic interests, aptitudes, and per￾sonality (like us), then it is also likely that 
he or she would not go into computing as 
a career. It takes the right situations hap￾pening to people with the right personal 
characteristics to produce the exceptional 
outcome. Gladwell’s book tells only half of 
the story, the situational half. The whole 
story is more complicated—and more 
interesting—than he portrays. For an inte￾grated perspective on person–situation 
interaction, see Funder (2006).
so successful. This is an entirely situational 
explanation, in that the cause of the success 
lies not in the person but in the situations to 
which she or he was exposed. In Gladwell’s 
view, success is all about opportunity, tim￾ing, luck, and hard work. It has nothing to 
do with traits within the person, such as 
aptitude, intelligence, interest, motivation, or 
personality. Gladwell is a modern situation￾ist, presenting a one-sided perspective on 
understanding exceptional success.
The authors of the book you are pres￾ently reading were also both born between 
1953 and 1956, just like Bill Gates, Steve 
Jobs, and Bill Joy. We also were exposed to 
primitive computers when we were geeky 
teenager boys with lots of discretionary 
time on our hands. However, neither of 
us grew up to be corporate giants in the 
computing industry, even though we were 
exposed to the same kinds of life situations 
Gladwell argues were responsible for the 
exceptional success of these computing 
magnates. What explains this discrepancy? 
Well, we are both extremely interested in 
people, and we both were motivated to 
learn as much as we could about human 
nature when we were growing up. We must 
have had some innate ability in this field 
because we both went on to earn PhDs in 
psychology and to conduct award-winning 
research in the field of personality. Clearly, 
our interests, motivations, abilities, and 
personalities are very different from those 
of Bill Gates and Steve Jobs, even though 
we experienced many of the same life situ￾ations. We might argue that it is precisely 
A Closer Look Situationism Today
Final PDF to printer94
lar31869_ch04_086-121.indd 94 09/28/22 11:46 AM
PART ONE The Dispositional Domain
Person–Situation Interaction
We first looked at the topic of person–situation interaction in Chapter 1. In this section, 
we examine this topic in a bit more detail, focusing on interactionism as a response to 
Mischel’s challenge to trait consistency. As Mischel’s debate with trait psychologists 
made clear, there are two possible explanations for behavior, or why people do what they 
do in any given situation:
1. Behavior is a function of personality traits,  B = f(P).
2. Behavior is a function of situational forces,  B = f(S).
Clearly, there is some truth in both of these statements. For example, people behave 
differently at funerals than they do at sporting events, illustrating that situational forces 
direct behavior in certain ways, as Mischel emphasized. Some people, however, are con￾sistently quiet, even at sporting events, whereas other people are talkative and sociable, 
even at funerals. These examples lend support to the trait position, which stresses that 
personality determines why people do what they do.
The obvious way to integrate these two points of view is to declare that both per￾sonality and situations interact to produce behavior, or
B = f(P × S)
This formula suggests that behavior is a function of the interaction between per￾sonality traits and situational forces. Consider, for example, the trait of having a hot 
temper, a tendency to respond aggressively to minor frustrations. Acquaintances of a 
person high on this trait might be unaware of her short temper as long as they did not 
encounter her having to deal with a frustrating situation. The trait of having a short tem￾per might be expressed only under the right situational conditions, such as in frustrating 
situations. If a person is frustrated by a situation (e.g., a vending machine takes the per￾son’s money but does not give him or her the product) and the person happens to have 
a quick temper (personality forces), then he or she will become upset and perhaps strike 
out at the source of the frustration (e.g., kick the vending machine repeatedly while curs￾ing loudly). Any explanation of why such people get so upset would have to take into 
account both particular situations (e.g., frustration) and personality traits (e.g., hot tem￾per). This point of view is called person–situation interaction, and it has become a fairly 
standard view in modern trait theory. Another way to view this is in the form of “If . . . , 
if . . . , then . . . .” statements (Shoda, Mischel, & Wright, 1994). For example, “If the situ￾ation is frustrating, and if the person has a hot temper, then aggression will be the result.”
In the interactional view, differences among people are understood to make a dif￾ference only under the right circumstances. Some traits are specific to certain situations. 
Consider the trait of test anxiety. A young man might be generally easygoing and con￾fident. However, under a set of very specific situational conditions, such as when he has 
to take an important exam, he becomes very anxious. In these particular circumstances, 
someone who is otherwise easygoing might become distressed, anxious, and quite upset. 
This example illustrates how certain very specific situations can provoke behavior that is 
otherwise out of character for the individual. This is referred to as situational specificity, 
in which a person acts in a specific way under particular circumstances implying that his 
or her behavior is caused by the situation.
Some trait–situation interactions are rare because the kinds of situations that elicit 
specific behaviors are themselves rare. For example, you would find it difficult to identify 
which of your classmates were high in courageousness. It would take a certain kind of 
Final PDF to printer95
lar31869_ch04_086-121.indd 95 09/28/22 11:46 AM
CHAPTER FOUR Theoretical and Measurement Issues in Trait Psychology
situation, such as an earthquake, tornado, or an active shooter situation at your school, 
for you to find out just who is courageous and who is not.
The point is that personality traits interact with situational forces to produce behavior. 
Personality psychologists have given up the hope of predicting “all of the people all of 
the time” and have settled on the idea that they can predict “some of the people some 
of the time.” For example, given the trait of anxiety, we might be able to predict who is 
likely to be anxious in some situations (e.g., evaluation situations, such as tests) but not 
anxious in other situations (e.g., when relaxed at home with family).
An interesting example of person X situation interaction is provided in a study 
by Debbie Moskowitz (1993). It has long been thought that the personality traits of 
dominance (the disposition to try to influence others) and friendliness (the degree to 
which a person is cordial and congenial) show large gender differences, with men being 
more dominant than women, and women being more friendly than men (Eagly, 1987). 
However, the study by Moskowitz showed that these traits interact with situation vari￾ables. Specifically, a person’s level of dominance or friendliness may depend on who he 
or she is interacting with at the time, for example, whether the individual is interacting 
with a same-sex or opposite-sex person, and whether that person is someone known or 
a stranger. Moskowitz’s (1993) study showed that women are more friendly than men, 
but only when they are interacting with other women; when interacting with opposite-sex 
strangers, women were not more friendly than men. As for dominance, the men were 
more dominant than women, but only when interacting with a same-sex friend; when 
interacting with opposite-sex strangers, the men were not more dominant than women. 
This study shows that who a person is interacting with will influence the expression of 
the personality traits of dominance and friendliness, and that this expression may or 
may not differ for men and women, depending on the social setting. A summary of her 
research on person–situation interaction, along with additional examples, can be found 
in Moskowitz and Fournier (2015).
Some situations are so strong, however, that nearly everyone behaves or reacts 
in similar ways. For example, in a study of emotional reactions to life events, Larsen, 
Diener, and Emmons (1986) were interested in finding out who tended to overreact 
emotionally to everyday events. Participants in this study kept a daily diary of life events 
for two months. They also rated their emotions each day. Based on a trait measure of 
emotional reactivity, these researchers were able to predict who would overreact to a 
minor or moderately stressful event, such as getting a flat tire, being stood up for a date, 
or having an outdoor event gets rained out. When really bad things happened, such as 
the death of a pet or loosing valuable possessions, virtually everyone reacted with strong 
emotions. Researchers have coined the term strong situation to refer to situations in 
which nearly all people react in similar ways.
Certain strong situations, such as funerals, religious services, and crowded eleva￾tors, seem to pull for uniformity of behavior. By contrast, when situations are weak or 
ambiguous, personality has its strongest influence on behavior. The Rorschach inkblot 
cards are a classic example of a weak or ambiguous situation. A person being asked to 
interpret these inkblots is, in effect, being asked to provide structure by describing what 
he or she sees in the inkblot. Many situations in real life are also somewhat ambigu￾ous. When a stranger smiles at you, is it a friendly smile or is there a bit of a sneer 
in the smile? When a stranger looks you right in the eye and holds the stare for a bit 
too long, what does it mean? Many social situations, like these two, require us to inter￾pret the actions, motives, and intentions of others. As with interpretations of inkblots, 
how we interpret social situations may reveal our personalities. For example, people 
with a Machiavellian character (e.g., the tendency to use others, to be manipulative and 
Final PDF to printer96
lar31869_ch04_086-121.indd 96 09/28/22 11:46 AM
PART ONE The Dispositional Domain
calculating) often think others are out to get them (Golding, 1978). Especially in ambig￾uous social interactions, Machiavellian persons are likely to be suspicious of others. This 
is a rather straightforward version of P × S interaction; not all people react the same to 
a given situation. Kihlstrom (2013) called this the static version of interaction, where 
personality traits and situational characteristics are thought of as separate influences 
that, when acting together, explain more than either situations or personality considered 
separately (i.e., the interaction of P × S is more than the sum of its parts).
Situational Selection
There are, however, more dynamic forms of P × S interaction, where the situation is 
not really separate from personality (Kihlstrom, 2013). In these dynamic versions, per￾sonality plays a role in constructing the situations that people find themselves in. We 
call this “dynamic” because the causal effects between personality and situations run in 
both directions. That is, situations are, in part, a function of personality just as much as 
personality is, in part, a function of situations.
There are at least three distinct kinds of dynamic P × S interactions, and they 
each refer to different ways that personality affects situations. These concepts come up 
in later chapters, so we’ll spend some time on them now. The first form of dynamic 
interactionism is situational selection, the tendency to choose the situations in which 
one finds oneself (Ickes, Snyder, & Garcia, 1997; Snyder & Gangestad, 1982). In other 
words, people typically do not find themselves in random situations. Instead, they select 
the situations in which they will spend their time. Snyder (1983) states this idea con￾cisely: “Quite possibly, one’s choice of the settings in which to live one’s life may reflect 
features of one’s personality; an individual may choose to live his or her life in serious, 
reserved, and intellectual situations precisely because he or she is a serious, reserved, and 
thoughtful individual” (p. 510).
Some personality questionnaires assess personality by inquiring about the situations 
a person frequently selects; “Do you frequently attend crowded social events like parties 
or sporting events?” Researchers have examined whether specific personality traits pre￾dict how often people enter into specific situations (Diener, Larsen, & Emmons, 1984). 
These researchers had participants wear pagers so that the participants could be signaled 
Personality plays a role in determining which situations a person chooses to enter. For example, whether one chooses team activities for recreation, such 
as playing on a soccer team, or individual activities, such as long-distance running, is a function of one’s level of extraversion. Studies show that extraverts 
prefer team activities and introverts prefer solitary activities for recreation.
Left: Peathegee Inc/Blend Images LLC; Right: Paolo Bona/Shutterstock
Final PDF to printer97
lar31869_ch04_086-121.indd 97 09/28/22 11:46 AM
CHAPTER FOUR Theoretical and Measurement Issues in Trait Psychology
electronically throughout the day for six weeks. They were paged twice each day, result￾ing in a sample of 84 occasions for each participant. Each time the pager went off, the 
participants had to complete a brief questionnaire. One question inquired about the kind 
of situation each participant was in when the pager went off. Over the 84 times when the 
participants were “caught,” the researchers predicted that certain personality traits would 
predict how many times they were caught in certain situations. For example, the research￾ers found that the trait of need for achievement correlated with spending more time in 
work situations, the need for order with spending time in more familiar situations, and 
extraversion with choosing social forms of recreation (e.g., team sports, such as baseball 
or volleyball) more often than solitary sports, (e.g., long-distance running or swimming).
The idea that personality influences the kinds of situations in which people spend 
their time suggests that we can investigate personality by studying the choices people 
make in life. When given a choice, people typically choose situations that fit their person￾alities (Snyder & Gangestad, 1982). The personality effect does not have to be large to 
result in substantial life-outcome differences. For example, choosing to enter into work 
situations just 10 percent more of the time (e.g., studying 10 percent longer, or working 
10 percent more hours) may result in very large differences in real-life outcomes, such as 
achieving better grades, a higher salary, or faster promotions. Think, for example, about 
how you choose to spend your free time and about whether your choices reflect your 
own personality, to a degree.
The relationship between persons and situations goes in both directions. So far, 
we have been emphasizing how personality affects situational selection. However, once 
in the situation, that situation can affect the person’s personality. A study by psycholo￾gist Will Fleeson and colleagues (Fleeson, Malanos, & Achille, 2002) illustrates how 
situations can influence personality. It has long been known that the trait of extraver￾sion is related to positive emotions. We discuss this more in Chapter 13, but for now it 
is important simply to know that a strong correlation exists between extraversion and 
frequently feeling high levels of positive emotions. In their study, Fleeson and colleagues 
had subjects come to the lab in groups of three to participate in a group discussion. They 
were randomly assigned to an “introverted” or an “extraverted” condition. Instructions 
for the extraverted condition emphasized that they should behave in a talkative, bold, 
and energetic manner for the group discussion. Instructions for the introverted condi￾tion emphasized that they should behave in a reserved, compliant, and unadventurous 
manner for the group discussion. They were then asked to have a discussion of either the 
10 most important items needed after an airplane crash or to come up with 10 possible 
solutions to the parking problem on their campus.
During the discussion, observers rated how positive each participant appeared. 
Also, following the discussion, each participant self-reported how positive he or she felt 
during the discussion. For both of these variables—observed positivity and self-reported 
positive feelings—the participants assigned to the extraverted condition were substan￾tially higher than those assigned to the introverted condition. Moreover, this effect did 
not depend on the person’s actual levels of trait extraversion. This study shows that 
being in an extraverted situation (being with a group of energetic, talkative people) can 
raise a person’s level of positive affect. The study clearly illustrates that, when it comes to 
person × situation interactions, situations can influence persons just as much as persons 
can influence situations.
Evocation
The second form of dynamic person–situation interaction is evocation, the idea that cer￾tain personality traits may evoke specific responses from the environment. For example, 
Final PDF to printer98
lar31869_ch04_086-121.indd 98 09/28/22 11:46 AM
PART ONE The Dispositional Domain
people who are disagreeable and manipulative may evoke certain reactions in others, 
such as hostility and avoidance. In other words, people may evoke or create their own 
environments by eliciting certain responses from others. Consider the case of a male 
patient who had trouble sustaining relationships with women, such that he was divorced 
three times (Wachtel, 1973). He complained to his therapist that every woman with 
whom he became involved turned out to be bad-tempered, vicious, and spiteful. He com￾plained that his relationships started out satisfying but always ended with the women 
becoming angry and leaving him. Wachtel (1973) speculated that the man must have 
been doing something to evoke this response from the women in his life.
The idea of evocation is similar to the idea of transference, to be discussed in 
Chapter 9 on psychoanalysis. Transference occurs when a patient in psychoanalysis recre￾ates, with the analyst, the interpersonal problems he or she is having with significant oth￾ers. In doing so, the patient may evoke in the therapist the reactions and feelings that he or 
she typically evokes in other persons. Malcolm (1981) reported on a male psychoanalyst 
who found one female patient to be particularly boring. The analyst could hardly stay 
awake during the therapy sessions because the patient and her problems seemed so dull 
and trivial to him. After experiencing this reaction for a few weeks, however, the analyst 
realized that the patient was making him feel bored, just as she made other men in her life 
feel bored. She made herself dull, he concluded, to avoid the attentions of men and drive 
them away. However, she was in therapy, in part, because she complained of being lonely.! 
This case illustrates how people can evoke reactions in others—creating and re-creating 
certain kinds of social situations over and over again in their everyday lives.
Manipulation
A third form of dynamic person–situation interaction is manipulation, which can 
be defined as the various means by which people influence the behavior of others. 
Manipulation is the intentional use of certain tactics to coerce, influence, or change 
others. Manipulation changes the social situation. Manipulation differs from selection 
in that selection involves choosing existing environments, whereas manipulation entails 
altering those environments already inhabited. Individuals differ in the tactics of manipu￾lation they use. Researchers have found, for example, that some individuals use a charm 
tactic—complimenting others, acting warm and caring, and doing favors to influence 
others. Other people use a manipulation tactic sometimes referred to as the silent treat￾ment, ignoring or failing to respond to the other person. A third tactic is coercion, which 
consists of making demands, yelling, criticizing, cursing, and threatening the other to get 
what one wants (Buss et al., 1987). We discuss the interpersonal aspects of manipulation 
tactics in more detail in Chapter 15.
Aggregation
We’ve seen how their debate with Mischel led trait psychologists to appreciate that 
behavior is an outcome of the interaction between personality traits and situations. 
Another important lesson learned by trait psychologists is the value of aggregation when 
it comes to measuring personality traits. Aggregation is the process of adding up, or aver￾aging, several single observations, resulting in a better (i.e., more reliable) measure of a 
personality trait than a single observation of behavior. This approach usually provides 
psychologists with a better measure of a personality trait than does using a single obser￾vation. Consider the concept of batting average, which is seen as a measure of a base￾ball player’s batting ability (a trait). It turns out that batting average is not a very good 
predictor of whether or not a player will get a hit during any single time at bat. In fact, 
Final PDF to printer99
lar31869_ch04_086-121.indd 99 09/28/22 11:46 AM
CHAPTER FOUR Theoretical and Measurement Issues in Trait Psychology
psychologist Abelson (1985) analyzed single batting occasions over the whole season. 
He found that batting average accounted for only .3 percent of the variance in getting a 
hit. This is a remarkably poor relationship, so why do people pay such close attention 
to batting average, and why do players with a good batting average earn so much more 
money? Because what matters is how a player performs over the long run, over an entire 
season. This is the principle of aggregation in action.
To draw another analogy, let’s say you decide to marry someone, in part, because 
of that person’s cheerful disposition. Clearly, there will be days when your partner is not 
going to be cheerful. However, what matters to you is your partner’s behavior over the 
long term (i.e., how cheerful your spouse will be in general) and not his or her mood on 
any given day or occasion.
As another example of aggregation, imagine taking an intelligence test that has 
only one item. Do you think this one-item test would be a good measure of your overall 
intelligence? You would be right if you concluded that a single question was probably 
not a very accurate or fair measure of overall intelligence. A related example might be 
if the instructor in your personality course were to decide that your entire grade for a 
course would be determined by asking you only one question on the final exam. Surely 
one question could not possibly measure your breadth of knowledge of the course mate￾rial. Single questions or single observations are rarely good measures of anything. This 
is really worth repeating: Single questions or single observations of behavior are rarely 
good measures of any personality trait or ability.
Recall the Hartshorne and May (1928) study in which the researchers measured 
honesty by assessing whether or not a child cheated during a game on one occasion 
during summer camp. Do you think this one-item measure of honesty was an accurate 
reflection of the participants’ true levels of honesty? It probably was not. This is likely 
the main reason why Hartshorne and May found such small correlations among their 
various measures of honesty (i.e., because they were all based on single observations).
Personality psychologist Seymour Epstein (1924–2016) published a series of 
papers (1979, 1980, 1983) showing that aggregating several questions or observations 
results in better trait measures. Longer tests (or multiple observations) are more reli￾able than shorter ones (reliability was introduced in Chapter 2) and hence are better 
measures of traits. If we want to know how conscientious a person is, we should observe 
many conscientious-related behaviors (e.g., how neat he or she is, how punctual they are, 
whether they use a calendar to schedule their life) on many occasions and aggregate, or 
average, the observations. Any single behavior on any single occasion may be influenced 
by all sorts of extenuating circumstances unrelated to personality. But the average, or 
trend, of the person’s behavior may be the best indicator of his or her personality. Most 
personality psychologists today view traits as average tendencies.
Imagine that a trait psychologist is developing a questionnaire to measure how help￾ful, caring, and conscientious respondents are. She includes the following item on the 
questionnaire: “How often in the past few years have you stopped to help a person whose 
car was stuck in the snow?” Imagine further that you live in a place where it rarely snows. 
You answer “never,” even though you are generally a helpful person. Now imagine being 
asked a whole set of questions, such as how often you donate money to charity, participate 
in blood donation programs, and do volunteer work in your community. Your answers to 
that whole series of questions provide a better indicator of your true level of helpfulness 
than your answer to any single question. This is why aggregation is important.
Psychologists “rediscovered” aggregation in the 1980s. Charles Spearman 
(1863–1945), an influential British psychologist, published a paperback in 1910, explain￾ing that tests with more items are generally more reliable than tests with fewer items. 
Final PDF to printer100
lar31869_ch04_086-121.indd 100 09/28/22 11:46 AM
PART ONE The Dispositional Domain
Spearman provided a formula—now called the Spearman-Brown prophesy formula—for 
determining precisely how much a test’s reliability would increase as it was made longer. 
Although this formula appeared in all the major textbooks on measurement and statis￾tics, personality psychologists seemed to have forgotten about the principle of aggrega￾tion until Epstein (1980, 1983) published his reminders in the early 1980s. Since then, 
other researchers have provided ample demonstrations of how the principle of aggrega￾tion works to increase the strength of correlations between measures of personality and 
measures of behavior. For example, according to a study by Diener and Larsen (1984), 
measures of activity level on one day correlated with activity level on another day at a 
correlation of only .08. However, when activity level was averaged over a three-week 
period and then correlated with activity level averaged over another three-week period, 
that correlation went up to .66. Clearly, aggregation provides a more stable and reliable 
measure of a person’s average standing on a trait than any single observation can.
Besides being an important measurement principle, the notion of aggregation has 
profound implications for how we conceptualize personality traits and their effects in our 
daily lives. The biggest implication is that traits are really about averages, not about what a 
person does at any given point in time. In other words, traits are best at predicting trends 
or averages, and will never be good at predicting single behaviors on single occasions. If we 
say a person is punctual, for example, it means they are usually on time when they have an 
appointment. However, from time to time they might show up late (e.g., if they got a flat 
tire on the way to the appointment). We will never know ahead of time if they will be on 
time for the appointment tomorrow (on one occasion), but our best guess, knowing they 
are a punctual person, would be to predict that they will be on time. We would be wrong 
on those occasions when something happens to disrupt their schedule. Nevertheless, what 
matters most is a person’s average tendency. When we are writing a letter of recommenda￾tion, for example, we might say that this person is highly reliable and punctual, ignoring 
the few occasions they showed up late through no fault of their own. Traits are about aver￾age tendencies, not about what happens on any given occasion.
The notion of traits as density distributions of states was developed by psychologist 
Will Fleeson (e.g., 2001, 2004) to understand the implications of aggregation for how we 
think about personality traits. Take the trait of extraversion, for example, which is associ￾ated with frequently engaging in specific behaviors like talking a lot, acting vigorously, being 
enthusiastic, etc. Focus on one of those behaviors, say talking, and imagine measuring that 
by outfitting 100 people with wearable micro-recorders that assesses how much each person 
talked during each waking hour for a month straight. For each person, you could count 
how many words they spoke each hour, and plot a frequency distribution of their talking 
behavior. Figure 4.2 illustrates two hypothetical density distributions of talking behavior 
from such a study. Person A’s distribution in this figure has a lower mean level of talking 
behavior than Person B’s, so we say that Person B is likely higher on the trait of extraver￾sion (they talk more, and more frequently). However, Person A has some hours during 
this period when they actually talked quite a bit, even more than Person B’s mean level. In 
other words, viewing each persons’ talking behavior as a distribution illustrates that people 
vary quite a bit over time; sometimes a person is talkative, sometimes they are not. But 
what really matters is their mean level, how much they talk on average. Implicit in this is 
the acknowledgment that a person will sometimes behave below, and sometimes above, 
their own mean level on any given trait. Situations likely explain much of this within-person 
variability around their own mean level, whereas personality traits likely determine a per￾son’s mean level over time (Fleeson & Law, 2015). Viewing traits as density distributions 
of states over time in a person’s daily life acknowledges that in real-life people are variable, 
their behavior varies from moment to moment, hour to hour, and day to day. Nevertheless, 
within this variability is the person’s true mean, his or 
Final PDF to printer101
lar31869_ch04_086-121.indd 101 09/28/22 11:46 AM
CHAPTER FOUR Theoretical and Measurement Issues in Trait Psychology
conception is really about average tendencies. This is similar to the set-point concept in 
body weight; a person’s weight fluctuates day to day, but it fluctuates around their set-point, 
or average level, to which he or she typically returns. 
Measurement Issues
More than any other approach to personality, the trait 
approach relies on self-report questionnaires to mea￾sure personality. Although trait psychologists can use 
other measurement methods (e.g., reports from peers, 
behavioral observation), self-report questionnaires 
are the most frequently used method for measuring 
traits (Craik, 1986). Personality psychologists assume 
that people differ from each other in the amounts of 
various traits they possess, so the key measurement 
issue is determining how much of a particular trait a 
person possesses.
Traits are represented as dimensions along which 
people differ from each other. One of the most efficient 
ways to assess people’s standing on any personality trait 
dimension is simply to ask them several questions about 
their behaviors, thoughts, and emotions. If the right 
questions are asked, as the trait view holds, an accurate 
Figure 4.2
Two hypothetical density distributions of talking behavior showing differences in mean level. Note, 
however, a great deal of overlap, with the more talkative person (B) sometimes talking less than the less 
talkative person’s (A) mean level, and vice versa.
20
15
10
5
0
250 500 750 10000
Number of hours
Words spoken per hour
Person A Person B
Personality tests are frequently administered in large group settings. In 
such settings, some people may be careless or even fake their responses. 
Psychologists have developed ways of detecting faking and carelessness 
in the answers from individual test takers.
Final PDF to printer102
lar31869_ch04_086-121.indd 102 09/28/22 11:46 AM
PART ONE The Dispositional Domain
(i.e., reliable and valid) assessment of a person’s standing on the trait dimension will be 
obtained when their responses are averaged.
As compelling as this view of trait assessment is, it assumes that people generally 
are willing and able to report accurately on their behavior. However, some people may 
be unwilling to disclose information about themselves or may be motivated for some rea￾son to distort or otherwise falsify their self-reports, such as during an employment inter￾view or a parole hearing. Trait psychologists have long concerned themselves with the 
circumstances that affect the accuracy, reliability, validity, and utility of trait measures. 
We will now consider some important measurement considerations.
Carelessness
Some participants filling out a trait questionnaire might not be motivated to answer 
carefully or truthfully. For example, some colleges and universities require introductory 
psychology students to participate in psychology experiments, many of which involve 
personality questionnaires. These volunteer participants may not be motivated to com￾plete the questionnaires carefully; they may rush through the questionnaire, answering 
randomly. Other participants may be motivated to answer correctly but might acciden￾tally invalidate their answer sheets. For example, when participants are asked to put their 
answers on optical scanning sheets by filling in circles with a number 2 lead pencil, it is not 
uncommon for participants to inadvertently neglect to fill in a circle or two, which means 
that all subsequent answers are then out of order. Another problem arises when, for some 
reason, the participant is not reading the questions carefully but is nevertheless providing 
answers. Perhaps the participant has difficulty reading, is tired, or even is hallucinating.
A common method for detecting these problems is to embed an infrequency 
scale within the set of questionnaire items. An infrequency scale contains items that 
all or almost all people will answer in a particular way. Using such items, if a person 
endorses more than one or two of these items in the “wrong” direction, then his or her 
test is flagged as suspicious. For example, on the Personality Research Form (Jackson 
& Messick, 1967), the infrequency scale contains items such as the following: “I do not 
believe that wood really burns,” “I make all my own clothes and shoes,” and “Whenever 
I walk up stairs, I always do so on my hands.” These questions are answered “False” by 
over 95 percent of the people in samples from the United States and Canada. If a par￾ticipant answers more than one or two of these items as “True,” we may begin to suspect 
that none of his or her other answers are believable.
Another technique used to detect carelessness is to include duplicate questions 
spaced far apart in the questionnaire. The psychologist can then determine the num￾ber of times the participant answered identical questions with different responses. 
If this happens often, the psychologist might suspect carelessness or another problem 
that invalidates the person’s answers.
Faking on Questionnaires
Faking involves the motivated distortion of answers on a questionnaire. When personal￾ity questionnaires are used to make important decisions about people’s lives (e.g., hire 
them for a job, promote them, decide that they are not guilty by reason of insanity, 
or allow prisoners to be paroled), then there is always the possibility of faking. Some 
people may be motivated to “fake good” in order to appear to be better off or better 
adjusted than they really are. Others may be motivated to “fake bad” in order to appear 
to be worse off or more maladjusted than they really are. For example, a worker suing a 
Final PDF to printer103
lar31869_ch04_086-121.indd 103 09/28/22 11:46 AM
CHAPTER FOUR Theoretical and Measurement Issues in Trait Psychology
company for mental anguish caused by a poor working conditions might be motivated to 
appear very distressed to the court-appointed psychologist. 
Questionnaire developers have devised ways to detect faking good and faking bad. 
In constructing the 16 Personality Factor questionnaire, for example, Cattell, Eber, and 
Tatsouoka (1970) had groups of participants complete the questionnaire under specific 
instructions. One group of participants was instructed to fake good, to appear to be 
as well-adjusted as possible. Another group of participants was instructed to fake bad, 
to try to appear as maladjusted as possible. The data for these two groups were then 
used to generate a “faking good profile” and a “faking bad profile.” The data from real 
participants can then be compared with those in these two faking profiles, and the psy￾chologist can calculate just how much a person’s responses fit the profile of the groups 
asked to fake their answers. This approach offers psychologists an imperfect but never￾theless empirical method for determining the likelihood that a person is faking his or her 
responses to the questionnaire.
A study of military cadets applying for pilot training clearly illustrates that, when 
an important outcome is based on personality scores, people are motivated to “fake 
good” while answering the questions (Galic, Jerneic, & Kovacic, 2012). These research￾ers showed in samples of military cadets applying to pilot school, that the applicant’s 
scores were similar to scores obtained by persons who were instructed to fake the most 
desirable responses. These authors warn that whenever important decisions are based on 
responses to questionnaires, care must be taken to account for desirable responding, or 
“faking good,” on the part of the test takers.
There are two ways for psychologists to make a mistake when seeking to distin￾guish between genuine and faked responses. They may conclude that a truthful person 
was faking and reject that person’s data (called a false negative). Or they may decide 
that a person who was faking was actually telling the truth (called a false positive). 
Psychologists do not know for certain how well their faking scales perform when it 
comes to minimizing the percentages of false positives and false negatives. Because of 
this problem of undetected faking, many psychologists are suspicious of results based 
solely on self-report questionnaire measures of personality.
Two ways to make a mistake when deciding whether a person was faking his or her responses to a personality 
questionnaire.
Dishonest
The psychologist
concludes he 
or she is . . .
Honest Correct False positive
“incorrect”
False negative
“incorrect” Correct
Honest
The person being tested really is being . . .
Dishonest
Final PDF to printer104
lar31869_ch04_086-121.indd 104 09/28/22 11:46 AM
PART ONE The Dispositional Domain
Beware of Barnum Statements in Personality Test Interpretations
“We have something for everyone.”
—P. T. Barnum
Barnum statements are generalities—statements that could apply to anyone. In the 2021 
movie “Nightmare Alley” Bradley Cooper plays a carnival mentalist who convinces people 
he knows them personally by using what we would call Barnum statements (e.g., “you are 
comfortable being alone, but also enjoy socializing with your friends.”) When Barnum 
statements appear in personality testing feedback (e.g., “you value your friends”) people 
tend to accept such statements as applying to them personally and hence are believable. 
Barnum statements can account for the popularity and believability of astrology predic￾tions, which are very popular online (e.g., Horoscope.com). For example, one of the 
authors recently received the following horoscope: “You sometimes have doubts about 
whether you have done the right thing” and “Although you are able to deal with confronta￾tion in a pinch, you typically like to avoid it if you can.” While these statements appeared 
believable to the author, they are nevertheless Barnum statements because they apply 
to just about anyone. People read such general statements and think, “Yes, that’s me all 
right,” when in fact such general statements really could apply to most people. Such overly 
general statements don’t really provide specific information about this person.
Personality test interpreters also sometimes offer interpretations that consist of 
Barnum statements. To illustrate this, one of the authors of this textbook completed an 
online version of the Meyers-Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI), a very popular personality 
questionnaire. He then submitted his answers to two different online interpretation ser￾vices to get feedback about his personality. Reading the results of the first interpretation, 
he felt it had him right: “You advance toward good and retreat from evil; you hate to 
miss out on what is going on around you; you always try to tell the truth to those around 
you; you strive to be authentic and genuine, and you communicate well with others.” 
The second interpretation also sounded accurate: “You want to be liked and admired by 
others; you are interested in new ideas; at times your attention span can be short; you 
dislike bureaucracy.”
These two interpretations sounded personally relevant and accurate to the author 
who took the test. The only problem was that he filled in his answers to the questionnaire 
at random. That is, the author of this book did not read the questions, but merely clicked 
“true” or “false” randomly while taking the MBTI. How then did these test interpreta￾tions seem to apply so personally and directly to him? Read the interpretations again and 
you will see that they are Barnum statements. They could apply to just about anyone.
This example is not meant to suggest that the MBTI is not a good test. Recall that 
these interpretations were obtained from free online services. So this example could also 
be an illustration of the advice “you get what you pay for.” Most reliable test interpreta￾tion services charge a fee for this service.
Reliable test interpretation services typically make statements that are quantitative 
and/or that provide information about a person’s standing on a trait relative to others. 
So, for example, an interpretation might state: “Your scores on extraversion put you in 
the highest, or most extraverted, 10% of the population.” Or the statement might refer 
to research results on the correlates of extraversion score, such as: “Persons with extra￾version scores such as yours are found to be extremely satisfied in careers that involved 
frequent social contacts, such as salespersons, teachers, or public relations work.” To see 
Final PDF to printer105
lar31869_ch04_086-121.indd 105 09/28/22 11:46 AM
CHAPTER FOUR Theoretical and Measurement Issues in Trait Psychology
what specific and quantitative feedback on a personality questionnaire looks like, you 
can take a version of Big Five questionnaire online, and receive feedback on your results 
for each of the five traits.
Reliable test interpretation services also typically include checks for careless 
responding, as discussed earlier in this chapter. They typically provide an assessment of 
how suspicious one should be regarding the validity of a person’s answers to the ques￾tions. Neither of the free test interpretation services used in the above MBTI example 
provided such checks, and so did not detect that the answers submitted were random. 
A few repeated items or some infrequency scale items would have quickly detected and 
flagged the author’s random answers as suspicious.
So far we have discussed some of the theoretical and measurement issues in trait 
psychology. Trait psychologists do not only concern themselves with these somewhat 
abstract issues. Trait psychology also has some real-world applications. We turn now to 
a consideration of the practical uses to which personality trait measures have been put.
Personality and Prediction
Personality measures have a long history of use in industry and government. They are 
used in the federal and state prison systems to make decisions about inmates. They are 
also widely used in industry to match people with particular jobs, to help screen people 
for employment, and to select people for promotion. An employer may feel that emo￾tional stability is a requirement for a specific job (e.g., firefighter) or that the personality 
trait of honesty is especially important (e.g., for a clerk in a jewelry store or for a driver 
of a money delivery truck). Other jobs may require strong organizational skills, the abil￾ity to work in a distracting environment, or to be a cooperative team member. Whether 
someone does well in employment settings may be determined, in part, by whether the 
individual’s personality traits mesh with the job requirements. In short, personality traits 
may predict who is likely to do well in a particular job.
Applications of Personality Testing in the Workplace
In an increasingly competitive business environment, many employers resort to employ￾ment testing to improve their workforce. The majority of the Fortune 100 companies use 
some form of employment selection that includes psychological testing. A survey by the 
American Management Association revealed that 44 percent of its responding members 
used testing to screen or select employees. Although cognitive ability testing (e.g., com￾prehension, reading speed) is the most commonly used form of psychological testing in 
the workplace, personality tests are being used more and more frequently. 
Personality measures are useful in work settings to the degree that they predict 
performance at, or satisfaction with, a particular job. For example, Harris (2019) reports 
that sales managers with higher scores on the trait of assertiveness achieved an average 
of 35% more sales growth than managers who were less assertive. In addition to using 
personality in screening and selecting employees for specific jobs, personality is starting 
to be used in organizations in efforts to change corporate culture, build inclusiveness, 
in coaching employees, and in leadership development and work-life balance programs.
In the last few decades, the major uses of personality assessment in the workplace 
fall into three main categories: personnel selection, integrity testing, and concerns over 
negligent hiring.
Final PDF to printer106
lar31869_ch04_086-121.indd 106 09/28/22 11:46 AM
PART ONE The Dispositional Domain
Personnel Selection
Employers use personality tests to select people especially suitable for a specific job. For 
example, an insurance company might use a measure of extraversion–introversion to 
select applicants high on extraversion for a sales job so that their characteristics match 
successful incumbents in their sales department. Alternatively, the employer may want 
to use personality assessments to deselect, or screen out, people with specific traits. For 
example, a police department might use the MMPI or a similar test to screen out appli￾cants who have high levels of emotional instability or psychopathology. A number of 
personality tests and applications can aid employers in personnel selection.
Integrity Testing
Personality tests that assess honesty or integrity are the most widely used form of person￾ality assessment in the business world today. They are commonly used in the retail and 
financial services industries in selecting people for entry-level jobs where the employee 
handles money or merchandise in an unsupervised setting. You might think a lie detec￾tor test would be useful, but these can no longer be used in the private-sector workplace 
(see the Closer Look box on “Lying, Lie Detection, and Integrity Testing”). Self-report 
questionnaires measuring integrity are used instead.
Throughout history, employers have been 
concerned about employee theft. Such 
thefts could be avoided or at least mini￾mized if there were a way to tell whether a 
person was generally honest or dishonest 
before hiring him or her. Over two centuries 
ago, the Chinese developed a test to deter￾mine whether a person was dishonest. The 
test consisted of asking the suspect a ques￾tion, waiting for the answer, and then plac￾ing rice powder in the suspect’s mouth. If 
the suspect could not swallow the rice pow￾der, it was viewed as a sure sign that he or 
she was lying. This may sound like supersti￾tion, but if you think of the dry mouth that 
usually accompanies nervousness, then 
there might be some face validity to this 
early lie detection technique.
The modern lie detector, a polygraph, 
is a mechanical device that relies on psy￾chophysiological measures, such as heart 
rate, respiration, and skin conductance (see 
Chapter 7). The use of physiological mea￾sures for lie detection started early in the 
1900s in the United States. The idea behind 
this approach is that physiological measures 
in the 1930s when it was introduced in the 
trial of Bruno Hauptman, who was accused 
of murdering the Lindbergh baby. Businesses 
began using the polygraph widely in the 
1970s.
may be useful in detect￾ing the nervous arousal 
(e.g., guilt and anxiety) 
that often accompanies 
lying. The origin of the 
modern lie detection 
machine is shrouded 
in mystery. Some attri￾bute it to a police officer 
from Berkeley, California, 
named Larson, who con￾structed the prototype 
of the multichannel poly￾graph between 1917 and 
1921 and also published a 
manual on how to use the 
machine. Others trace the 
idea of using psychophys￾iological recordings—in 
particular, systolic blood 
pressure—to measure 
deception in laboratory and legal settings to 
William Moulton Marston, who worked on this 
problem while he was a graduate student at 
Harvard University from 1915 to 1921. The 
lie detector gained widespread attention 
A Closer Look Lying, Lie Detection, and Integrity Testing
Polygraph exams were widely used in employment screening 
until they were banned by Congress in 1988 from use in private￾sector employment settings. The government, however, still uses 
polygraphs in employment screening as well as periodic honesty 
verification of persons in sensitive positions. In fact, the U.S. 
government runs several training institutes that certify persons to 
administer standard polygraph exams.
Andrey Burmakin/Shutterstock
Final PDF to printer107
lar31869_ch04_086-121.indd 107 09/28/22 11:46 AM
CHAPTER FOUR Theoretical and Measurement Issues in Trait Psychology
The polygraph was originally designed 
to detect guilt reactions that arise from deny￾ing specific criminal acts. However, many 
employers began to use polygraph and 
other so-called lie detector tests to screen 
potential employees for general honesty.
That is, the original purpose was to assess 
a state (guilt), whereas the polygraph was 
often pressed into usage to assess a trait 
(honesty). At any rate, participants were con￾nected to these devices and asked various 
incriminating questions, such as whether 
they had ever taken anything that did not 
belong to them. If they showed any signs 
of nervousness or arousal (e.g., increased 
heart rate or shallower breathing), they 
might not have been hired. Employers also 
routinely used lie detector tests to question 
employees who were already on the job. 
Fast-food chains were among the largest 
users of polygraph tests in employment set￾tings during this era (1970–88). Managers 
hired polygraphers to connect employees 
to these devices, then ask questions such as 
whether they had taken any hamburgers or 
money in the past few months. If the poly￾graphs indicated any signs of nervousness, 
the employee might have been fired.
Through the 1970s and 1980s, more 
than 3 million polygraph tests were admin￾istered each year in the United States alone 
(Murphy, 1995). If you went into a large 
class of college students in the 1980s and 
asked if anyone had ever taken a polygraph 
exam, it was common to see at least a 
couple of hands go up for every hundred 
or so persons. Most said that they took the 
polygraph test as part of an employment 
personality test publishing companies have 
developed and promoted questionnaire 
measures to use in place of the polygraph 
(DeAngelis, 1991). These questionnaires, 
called integrity tests, are designed to assess 
whether a person is generally honest, trust￾worthy, reliable, helpful, and dependable. 
Many of these tests are reliable and valid 
and so may be legally used for employment 
screening (DeAngelis, 1991).
One review of integrity questionnaires 
(Ones & Viswesvaran, 1998) concluded that 
the measures can predict the following neg￾ative workplace criteria: (1) supervisors’ rat￾ings of employees’ dishonesty, (2) applicants 
who are likely to get caught stealing once 
hired, (3) applicants who have a criminal 
history, and (4) applicants who are likely to 
commit theft in an anonymous testing situ￾ation. Another review examined 28 studies 
on workplace absenteeism and found that 
personality-based integrity tests reliably 
predicted higher rates of absenteeism, and 
therefore could be used to screen out job 
applicants who might have more unexcused 
absences from work (Ones, Viswesvaran, & 
Schmidt, 2003). A more recent review (Van 
Iddekinge et al., 2012) found that integrity 
tests (reverse scored, so high scores mean 
less integrity) correlated in the range of .26 
to .32 with counterproductive work behav￾iors such as stealing from the workplace, 
harassing co-workers, and loafing. Because 
Integrity tests are widely used in industry, 
the professional Society for Industrial and 
Organizational Psychology contains use￾ful information about these tests on their 
website.
screening procedure, often when applying 
for jobs in fast-food outlets.
A scientific evaluation of the polygraph 
as a lie detector was undertaken in 1983 
by the U.S. federal government’s Office of 
Technology Assessment. Its report con￾cluded that there was no such device as a 
lie detector. Technically, this is true, as the 
polygraph detects physiological arousal, 
and sometimes lying is not accompanied by 
physiological arousal. In addition, sometimes 
physiological arousal is not accompanied by 
lying. The government evaluators also con￾cluded that none of the methods used for lie 
detection were foolproof and that there were 
several effective ways to beat the device. 
Moreover, the polygraph’s use in employ￾ment settings to screen for honesty may 
have resulted more in employment discrimi￾nation than in honesty detection.
In 1988, the U.S. Congress banned 
the use of the polygraph for most employ￾ment purposes in the private sector. 
Interestingly, the government still uses 
polygraphs for employee selection in sev￾eral government service branches, such 
as the Secret Service, the CIA, the FBI, the 
DEA, Customs, and even the Postal Service. 
The government also maintains several 
polygraph schools, where people go to 
be trained in the use of the polygraph. In 
the private sector, however, the use of the 
polygraph in employment settings is highly 
restricted at this time.
This leaves the private-sector employer 
with no mechanical means for detecting 
whether potential employees are honest. 
However, since the ban on polygraphs, many 
Annual economic losses to American business from counterproductive work 
behaviors (e.g., theft, loafing, harassment) are estimated at between $15 billion and 
$25 billion per year. Because of this, many employers are interested in any technique 
that could detect those job candidates low on integrity during preemployment screening. 
There are two kinds of integrity tests—overt and covert integrity tests. Both are based on 
self-report. Overt measures ask about past counterproductive workplace behaviors, such 
as theft and absenteeism, as well as general criminal history, childhood delinquency, or 
school disciplinary problems. They are called overt measures because they ask directly 
about bad behaviors. Covert measures, on the other hand, do not directly ask about 
Final PDF to printer108
lar31869_ch04_086-121.indd 108 09/28/22 11:46 AM
PART ONE The Dispositional Domain
counterproductive behaviors (hence are covert), but rather assess personality traits that 
are correlated with counterproductive work behaviors. Of the Big Five traits, conscien￾tiousness has the strongest correlations (negatively) with workplace problems (Berry, 
Sackett, & Wiemann, 2007), and so covert integrity measures will include many consci￾entiousness items. Agreeableness and Emotional Stability are also correlated (again neg￾atively) with workplace problems (Viswesvaran & Ones, 2016), and so covert integrity 
tests also include items about getting along with others (agreeableness) and not being 
irritable and anxiety- or anger-prone (emotional stability). In U.S. corporations, today 
there is a growing emphasis on integrity and ethics in the workplace, and using integrity 
tests to help make hiring decisions is one way personality psychology is having an impact 
on society.
Concerns over Negligent Hiring
A third reason some employers use personality testing arises from the fact that should 
an employee assault a customer or another coworker on the job, the employer may be 
held accountable in a court case. In such a case, the employer could be charged with 
negligent hiring, that is, when an employer fails to verify that a candidate employee may 
represent a danger in the workplace, that is, unstable or prone to violence. With cases 
of negligent hiring now being tried in the courts of most states, employers are defending 
themselves against a growing number of suits seeking compensation for crimes commit￾ted by their employees. Such cases hinge on whether the employer should have reason￾ably discovered dangerousness ahead of time, before hiring such a person into a position 
where he or she posed a threat to others. Personality testing may provide evidence that 
the employer did in fact try to reasonably investigate an applicant’s fitness for the work￾place, and thus lessen the employer’s exposure to a negligent hiring charge.
Legal Issues in Personality Testing in Employment Settings
Legal issues surrounding the use of personality and other tests in employment settings 
can be traced to the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which barred racial discrimination in 
public places, including theaters, restaurants, hotels, and polling places. Title VII of 
the Civil Rights Act of 1964 also required employers to provide equal employment 
opportunities to all persons. The first test of the Civil Rights Act in employment law 
occurred in the case of Griggs v. Duke Power. Prior to 1964, the Duke Power Company 
had used clearly discriminatory practices in hiring and work assignment, including 
barring Blacks from certain jobs. After passage of the Civil Rights Act, Duke Power 
instituted various requirements for such jobs, including passing certain aptitude tests. 
The effect was to perpetuate discrimination. In 1971 the Supreme Court ruled that the 
seemingly neutral testing “aptitude” practices used by Duke Power were unacceptable 
because they operated to maintain discrimination. Moreover, the court ruled that any 
selection procedure could not produce disparate impact for a group protected by the 
act (e.g., racial groups, women). This Supreme Court decision put the burden of proof 
on the employer to demonstrate that selection procedures, including aptitude and per￾sonality measures, were not discriminatory, that is, did not produce disparate impact 
on specific groups.
The next major event in employee selection occurred in 1978 when the Department 
of Labor released the Uniform Guidelines on Employee Selection Procedures. These 
guidelines were widely adopted and are still in use today by the Department of Justice. 
The purpose of the guidelines is to provide a set of principles for employee selection that 
meet the requirements of all federal laws, especially those that prohibit discrimination 
Final PDF to printer109
lar31869_ch04_086-121.indd 109 09/28/22 11:46 AM
CHAPTER FOUR Theoretical and Measurement Issues in Trait Psychology
on the basis of race, color, religion, gender, sexual orientation, or national origin. They 
provide details on the proper use of personality tests and other selection procedures in 
employment settings. The guidelines define discrimination and adverse impact, describe 
how to evaluate and document the validity evidence for tests, and instruct employers on 
what records to keep.
Another important legal case in employment law is that of Ward’s Cove Packing 
Co. v. Atonio. Ward’s Cove Packing Co. was a salmon cannery operating in Alaska. 
Production line jobs at the cannery were filled predominantly by non-Whites, whereas 
administrative, or white-collar, jobs were filled predominantly with White workers. 
Virtually all of the administrative jobs paid more than cannery line positions. In 1974 
the non-White cannery workers started legal action against the company, alleging that 
a variety of the company’s hiring and promotion practices—for example, nepotism, a 
rehire preference, a lack of objective hiring criteria, and separate hiring channels—were 
responsible for the racial stratification of the workforce. The claim was advanced under 
the disparate impact portion of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act. In 1989 the Supreme 
Court decided that employees filing discrimination lawsuits must expose specific hiring 
practices that led to disparities in the workplace. However, the Court also decided that 
even if the employees can prove discrimination, the hiring practices may still be consid￾ered legal if they serve “legitimate business goals of the employer.”
The Ward’s Cove case watered down the effects of the Griggs decision and allowed 
companies a loophole to continue with discriminatory employment practices, as long 
as they could prove such practices served the needs of the company. For example, if 
a test excluded most Black applicants, yet the company could prove that the test was 
job-relevant, then the company could continue using this test. This situation prompted 
Congress to pass the Civil Rights Act of 1991, which contained several important modi￾fications to Title VII of the original act. The 1991 act expanded protected groups to 
include those based on race, color, religion, gender, or national origin. The new act also 
prohibited the use of different cutoff scores based on race or gender in employment tests 
(see the A Closer Look box titled “The Female Underprediction Effect”). Most impor￾tant, however, the new act shifted the burden of proof onto the employer by requiring 
that it must prove a close connection between disparate impact and the ability to actually 
perform the job in question.
Another important case, one with clear personality connections, was the case of 
Price Waterhouse v. Hopkins, also decided in 1989 by the Supreme Court. Ann Hopkins 
was a senior manager at an accounting firm, who was being considered for promotion to 
partner. Following its usual promotion practice, the firm asked each existing partner to 
evaluate Ms. Hopkins. Many of the evaluations came in as negative, criticizing her inter￾personal skills and accusing her of being abrasive and too masculine for a woman (they 
felt she needed to wear more makeup, to walk and talk more femininely). She sued the 
company, charging that it had discriminated against her on the basis of sex, on the the￾ory that her evaluations had been based on sexual stereotyping. The case eventually rose 
to the Supreme Court. Price Waterhouse acknowledged discrimination but maintained 
that sexual stereotypes were just one factor and argued that there were other reasons 
to deny partnership to Hopkins. They argued that even without any sex discrimination, 
Hopkins still would have been passed over.
The other legal issue, the one that won the case for Hopkins, was that she had 
been passed over for partner because of gender stereotyping within the company. In 
essence, she argued, the voting partners compared her to a cultural stereotype of how a 
woman is supposed to behave in the workplace, and they decided that Hopkins did not 
fit that image. The American Psychological Association joined the case and provided 
Final PDF to printer110
lar31869_ch04_086-121.indd 110 09/28/22 11:46 AM
PART ONE The Dispositional Domain
If you are reading this book for a college 
course, then a selection situation you are 
familiar with is selection into college. Most 
colleges and universities select students 
for admission based, in part, on entrance 
exam scores, typically the SAT or ACT. 
These tests are thought to predict per￾formance in college and so colleges and 
universities believe they are useful for 
selecting students who will likely to do 
well if admitted.
College entrance exams typically 
predict college grade point average (GPA) 
in the range of .30 to .45 correlations 
between SAT scores and college grade 
point average or GPA (College Board 
Online, 2009; Dahlke, Sackett, & Kuncel, 
2019). In a recent analysis of students 
at Washington University in St. Louis, for 
example, one of the authors found that SAT 
scores correlated .33 with first-semester 
GPA among freshmen. Hence, we conclude 
that SAT scores do have a modest degree 
of predictive validity when it comes to fore￾casting grades in college.
However, the prediction of college 
GPA from admissions test scores works a 
bit differently for women than for men. It 
turns out that admissions scores underpre￾dict GPA for women relative to men. That 
is, women tend to attain higher college 
GPAs than men with the same admissions 
tests scores. This has been known for over 
30 years and has come to be called the 
female underprediction effect (Hyde & 
Kling, 2001). A review of research stud￾ies found this underprediction effect for 
women in 130 separate samples containing 
approximately 500,000 college students 
for, in large part, by the personality trait of 
conscientiousness.
One study (Kling, Noftle, & Robins, 
2013) examined three large samples of 
college students and found the female 
underprediction effect in each. When the 
researchers then entered students’ scores 
on conscientiousness into the prediction 
equation, those scores mediated the link 
between gender and the underprediction 
of college grades. Another study (Keiser 
et al., 2016) reported similar results in 
two large samples of college students; the 
female underprediction effect is reduced 
substantially when conscientiousness is 
included in prediction of college GPA. 
These studies show that: (1) women are 
higher in conscientiousness than men, 
(2) students who are more conscien￾tious earn higher grades in college, and 
(3) the higher conscientiousness of 
women account, in part, for why they do 
better in college than expected based on 
their entrance exam scores alone.
This research clearly shows that 
academic outcomes (i.e., GPA) are influ￾enced by cognitive factors and person￾ality factors. This is why universities and 
colleges consider a wide array of infor￾mation about each applicant, in addition 
to his or her ACT or SAT test scores. For 
example, many colleges consider let￾ters of reference, personal statements, 
extracurricular activities, leadership posi￾tions, and pro-social activities. It may 
well be that these other pieces of infor￾mation reflect, in part, an applicant’s 
personality, especially his or her level of 
conscientiousness.
(Fischer, Schult, & Hell, 2013). On average, 
women earned GPAs that were .24 points 
higher (on the standard 4-point GPA scale) 
than men with the same admissions test 
scores. Other studies also show that the 
validity of the SAT to predict college grades 
is different for men and women (Dahlke 
et al., 2019).  A 2019 report by the College 
Board (publisher of the SAT) also highlights 
how its own test underpredicts college GPA 
for women compared to men.
Does the female underprediction 
effect mean that entrance exams are 
biased? Not necessarily. It may mean that 
some other variable, other than what is 
measured by the SAT/ACT, is contributing 
to women generally outperforming men 
with the same SAT/ACT scores in college. 
Any variable that women score higher on, 
and that also predicts college grades, could 
account for the underprediction effect. 
Researchers have identified conscien￾tiousness as a likely candidate, because it 
significantly predicts college GPA, indepen￾dent of what is measured by SAT/ACT, and 
is a trait that is higher in women than men 
(Noftle & Robins, 2007).
The personality trait of conscientious￾ness refers to being industrious, organized, 
diligent, thorough, and self-disciplined. 
Moreover, in college age samples, women 
are slightly higher on conscientiousness 
than men. Does this slight edge in con￾scientiousness account for women doing 
better than men in college, better than one 
would expect from their entrance exams 
alone? Several large and well-done stud￾ies now provide strong evidence that the 
female underprediction effect is accounted 
A Closer Look Conscientiousness Explains the Female 
Underprediction Effect
expert evidence that such stereotypes do exist and that women who deviate from the cul￾tural expectations are often penalized for violating these standards. The Supreme Court 
accepted the argument that gender stereotyping does exist and that it can create a bias 
against women in the workplace that is not permissible. By court order, Ann Hopkins 
Final PDF to printer111
lar31869_ch04_086-121.indd 111 09/28/22 11:46 AM
CHAPTER FOUR Theoretical and Measurement Issues in Trait Psychology
was made a full partner in her accounting firm. She went on to describe her long court 
case, both from a legal and personal perspective, in a book titled So Ordered: Making 
Partner the Hard Way by Ann Branigar Hopkins (Amherst: University of Massachusetts 
Press, 1996).
Disparate Impact
To prove a case of disparate impact, a plaintiff must show that an employment practice 
disadvantages people from a protected group. The Supreme Court has not defined 
the size of the disparity necessary to prove disparate impact. Most courts define 
disparate impact as a difference that is sufficiently large that it is unlikely to have 
occurred by chance. Tests of statistical significance are generally used to establish this. 
Some courts, however, have preferred the 80 percent rule contained in the Uniform 
Guidelines on Employee Selection Procedures. Under this rule, adverse impact is 
established if the selection rate for any race, sex, ethnic group, or any other protected 
class of people is less than four-fifths (or 80 percent) of the rate for the group with the 
highest selection rate.
Once the court accepts that disparate impact has occurred, the burden shifts to the 
employer to prove that the selection practice is job-related and consistent with business 
necessity. The Uniform Guidelines suggest three methods by which an employer can 
show job-relatedness: content validity, criterion validity, and construct validity. Content 
validity is used when the test closely approximates the job, as in a typing exam for a 
typist position. This form of validation is not generally applicable to personality test￾ing because such tests measure general personality traits not specific abilities. Criterion 
validity compares performance on the test with performance on critical or important job 
behaviors. It is the preferred method of validation under the Uniform Guidelines but 
is not always technically feasible. Construct validity establishes relationships between 
aspects of satisfactory job performance and a specific trait, then measures of that trait 
are used for selection. For example, the job of a customer service representative may 
require a specific interpersonal style to function effectively. This form of validation is 
the most appropriate for personality testing because it focuses on the link between a par￾ticular trait and different aspects of job performance. If a test is job-related and satisfies 
the validity requirements of the Uniform Guidelines, then, in most cases the disparate 
impact claim is dropped by the court.
There have been relatively few disparate impact cases involving personality tests 
because such tests generally do not disadvantage any protected group. Integrity tests may 
have the best record of any selection technique in demonstrating freedom from disparate 
impact. Moreover, integrity test publishers typically have extensive statistical evidence 
demonstrating the validity of integrity tests in predicting theft and job-relevant counter￾productive behavior, which would satisfy the employer’s burden. Similar data support￾ing the job relevance for other personality tests also exist. In some cases, however, an 
employer may need to perform its own validity studies.
Race or Gender Norming
The Civil Rights Act of 1991 forbids employers from using different norms or cutoff 
scores for different groups of people. For example, it would be illegal for a company 
to set a higher threshold for women than men on their selection test. A few personality 
test publishers, including versions of the MBTI, recommend different scoring practices 
based on race or gender norming. This practice is clearly illegal, and employers should 
avoid tests of this sort in employee selection settings, in favor of personality tests with 
standard norms applied equally to all applicants.
Final PDF to printer112
lar31869_ch04_086-121.indd 112 09/28/22 11:46 AM
PART ONE The Dispositional Domain
Americans with Disabilities Act
The Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) states that an employer cannot conduct a 
medical examination, or even make inquiries as to whether an applicant has a disability, 
during the selection process. Moreover, even if a disability is obvious, the employer can￾not ask about the nature or severity of that disability. Consequently, employers should 
be careful when they administer psychological testing to job applicants to make sure that 
the testing is not a medical examination. Psychological testing can be considered a medi￾cal examination if it provides evidence that would lead to a diagnosis or the identifica￾tion of mental disorder or impairment.
Consider the following example: A psychological test (like the MMPI) is con￾structed to diagnose mental illnesses, but a particular employer says she does not use 
the test to disclose mental illness. Instead, the employer says she uses the test to dis￾close preferences and habits of job applicants. However, the test also is interpreted by 
a psychologist working for the company. In addition, the test is routinely used in clini￾cal settings to provide evidence that would lead to a diagnosis of a mental disorder or 
impairment (e.g., whether a person has paranoid tendencies or is depressed). Under 
these conditions, this test might be considered a medical examination and hence violate 
the ADA laws.
Right to Privacy
Perhaps the largest issue of legal concern for employers using personality testing is pri￾vacy. The right to privacy in employment settings grows out of the broader concept of 
the right to privacy. In general, cases that charge an invasion-of-privacy claim against an 
employer can be based on the federal constitution, state constitutions and statutes, and 
common law.
In the case of McKenna v. Fargo, a federal district court in New Jersey upheld the 
right of a city fire department to use personality testing to select applicants for the posi￾tion of firefighter. The case was based on an invasion-of-privacy claim. The court deter￾mined that, although the test did infringe on the applicant’s right to privacy, the city’s 
interest in screening out applicants who would be unstable under the pressures of the job 
was sufficient to justify the intrusion. The McKenna ruling establishes that personality 
test questions that inquire about an applicant’s sexual, religious, or political attitudes 
may intrude on an applicant’s right to privacy. However, the ruling also recognizes that 
a government can justify this intrusion if it has a compelling need, such as the need for 
firefighters who can protect the safety of the public.
In another case, a California Court of Appeals found that certain items on a 
personality test administered to security guard applicants violated the state consti￾tutional right to privacy. In Saroka v. Dayton Hudson, the plaintiff had applied for a 
security guard position with the Target Stores chain and was required to complete 
both the MMPI and the California Psychological Inventory (CPI). The two tests are 
widely used to assess personality traits and adjustment, and they contain items ask￾ing about very personal topics such as religion, sexual behavior, and political beliefs. 
The plaintiff argued that the questions required him to reveal very private thoughts 
and highly personal behaviors and were not job-related. The court agreed. Target 
tried to mount a defense by arguing that they had a compelling business interest in 
the outcome of the selection process. The court ruled that Target did not show how 
questions about an applicant’s religious beliefs or sexual orientation would have any 
bearing on his or her emotional stability. Because Target Stores could not provide 
evidence on the construct or criterion validity of the specific items in question, they 
lost the case.
Final PDF to printer113
lar31869_ch04_086-121.indd 113 09/28/22 11:46 AM
CHAPTER FOUR Theoretical and Measurement Issues in Trait Psychology
Personnel Selection—Choosing the Right Person for the Job
The job of a police officer can illustrate the importance of selecting the right person for 
the job. Recent high-profile deaths of unarmed suspects by police, such as the George 
Floyd killing in May of 2020, highlight the importance of selecting the right persons for 
the occupation of police officer (or equally important, screening the wrong ones out). 
According to data assembled by the Mapping Police Violence project, with 2 weeks left 
in the 2021 calendar year, police in the United States were involved in the deaths of 
1,033 people this year, a rate that has been this high for the past several years. Selecting 
the right persons for the job of police officer is literally a life-or-death decision for people 
in the community. Personality tests are frequently used to screen out the wrong individu￾als from the pool of applicants for police officers. One of the most frequently given tests 
is the revised Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI II). The MMPI II 
has 550 items, and its primary use is to identify persons with significant psychological, 
social, and adjustment problems. Individuals with elevated scores indicating mental or 
emotional difficulties, or aggression and impulse control problems, can be screened out 
of the pool of potential officers (Barrick & Mount, 1991).
Little was known about which personality traits contribute to the successful per￾formance of the job of police officers until Hargrave and Hiatt (1989) examined the 
California Psychological Inventory (CPI) in relation to police officer performance. In 
their study, they found that 13 percent of the cadets in training were found to be “unsuit￾able” by their instructors. Moreover, these unsuitable cadets differed from the “suitable” 
group on 9 scales of the CPI, including the conformity and social presence scales. In 
another sample of 45 officers on the job who were having serious problems, Hargrave 
and Hiatt (1989) found that the CPI also discriminated this group from other police 
officers who were not having problems. These findings provided evidence that the CPI 
is useful in the selection of police officers, and it, as well as other personality question￾naires, are being used for this purpose (e.g., Black, 2000; Coutts, 1990; Grant & Grant, 
1996; Lowry, 1997; Mufson & Mufson, 1998).
The 16 Personality Factor (16 PF) questionnaire, described in Chapter 3, is also 
being used in vocational advising and selection. The 16 PF profile that best matches police 
officers is one that emphasizes boldness and self-confidence, qualities that facilitate one’s 
abilities to direct or control others and to achieve goals (Institute for Personality and 
Think of a job or career where personality might play a role in how well a person does in that 
job, or how satisfied they would be in that career. It can be any job or career—investment bank￾ing, programming, car salesperson—just pick one for this exercise. Now, think about the require￾ments for doing well in this career or job and make a list of two or three key requirements. This 
step is called job analysis, and in it you try to identify the key requirements associated with a 
particular job. For example, social skills might be a key part of being a car salesperson. Now 
take each of the key requirements and see if you can identify a personality or ability trait that 
might contribute to that job requirement. For example, look over the material on selecting 
police officers in the section on “Personnel Selection.” If you can link the key requirements 
identified in your job analysis with specific personality traits, then there is a good chance the 
personality measures would be useful in selecting employees for that job. This exercise is one 
of the real-world applications that personality psychologists working in industry do all the time.
Exercise
Final PDF to printer114
lar31869_ch04_086-121.indd 114 09/28/22 11:46 AM
PART ONE The Dispositional Domain
Ability Testing, 2015). A heightened need for adventure and a 
strong need to influence others are linked with the enjoyment of 
careers that provide challenge and opportunities to take charge. 
The police officer personality profile is low on the need for sup￾port from others, which suggests a very self-assured personality. 
In terms of the Big 5 personality traits, norms for police officers 
are high levels of Conscientiousness and Extraversion, and low 
levels of Neuroticism (Detrick & Chibnall, 2013).
Selection in Business Settings—The Myers–Briggs 
Type Indicator: A Worst-Case Example
Businesses confront critical decisions, especially hiring decisions, 
on which their success depends. Different jobs pose different 
demands, and it’s likely that personality plays a critical role in 
determining success in different positions. According to recent 
estimates (e.g., Emre, 2018), personality testing is a two-billion 
dollar business in the United States. One of the most widely used 
personality tests is the Myers–Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI)
(Myers et al., 1998). The test was developed by a mother-daughter 
team, Katherine Briggs and Isabel Myers, who were fascinated 
with Jungian concepts (see Chapter 10). Neither mother nor 
daughter had any training in psychology or statistics or measure￾ment. Instead, thinking up questions to get at different personal￾ity types was a hobby for them, something they enjoyed doing 
together. The interesting history of how the MBTI went from a 
“home-cooked” set of questions (Menand, 2018) to one of the 
most widely used personality tests today is presented by Merve 
Emre (2018). We present the MBTI in some detail here as a worst￾case example. The test has a number of serious problems that 
severely limit its usefulness for selection purposes. Understanding 
these problems should help students recognize better tests, and we present a best-case 
example in the section following our critique of the MBTI.
The MBTI provides information about personality by testing for eight fundamen￾tal preferences. A sample item: “Do you usually value sentiment more than logic, or 
value logic more than sentiment?” This type of item is an example of a “forced-choice” 
format, in which individuals must respond in one way or another, even if they feel that 
their preferences might be somewhere in the middle. The eight fundamental preferences 
are shown in Table 4.1.
These eight preferences reduce to four scores—you are either extraverted OR intro￾verted; sensing OR intuitive; thinking OR feeling; judging OR perceiving. These four scores 
are then combined to yield 16 types. Indeed, each person is placed into one of the 16 types 
yielded by his or her four scores. For example, you could be an ESTP type: Extraverted, 
Sensing, Thinking, and Perceiving. This type, according to the MBTI authors, has a distinc￾tive leadership style in business settings. She likes to take charge when a crisis occurs; she’s 
good at persuading others to adopt her point of view; she is assertive and leads the group to 
the most direct route to the goal; and she wants to see immediate results.
Contrast this with another type, an INFJ: Introverted, Intuitive, Feeling, and 
Judging. This type, according to the authors of the instrument, has a fundamentally 
different leadership style. Rather than take charge 
The 16PF personality profile that characterizes police officers 
emphasizes boldness and self-confidence (qualities that facilitate the 
direction or control of others), a heightened need for adventure, and 
a low need for support from others (suggestive of self-assurance). 
The personality traits associated with being a good police officer are 
distributed equally among men and women (Krug, 1981).
David Hiller/Getty Images
Final PDF to printer115
lar31869_ch04_086-121.indd 115 09/28/22 11:46 AM
CHAPTER FOUR Theoretical and Measurement Issues in Trait Psychology
to develop a vision for the organization; get others to cooperate rather than demand 
cooperation; work to inspire others rather than command others; and work solidly and 
with integrity and consistency to achieve business goals. One can readily imagine that 
different types of business leaders would be better in different organizational settings. 
In a time of crisis, for example, an ESTP might be better at organizing others to deal 
with immediate threats. On a plateau in business, an INFJ might be better at pausing to 
reflect on a long-term vision for the organization.
By some estimates, between two to three million people a year take the MBTI 
(Gardner & Martinko, 1996; Vox, 2015). Although it was developed for applications 
in education, counseling, career guidance, and workplace team-building, it is also used in 
personnel selection settings (Pittenger, 2005). Its wide use most likely comes from its 
intuitive appeal; people can readily understand the relevance of the personality traits 
supposedly measured by this test.
There are, however, several problems with the MBTI. The first problem is that the 
theory on which it is based—Jung’s theory of psychological types—is not widely endorsed 
by academic or research-oriented psychologists. For one thing, people don’t come in 
“types,” such as extraverted types and introverted types. Instead, most personality traits 
are normally distributed. Figure 4.3 illustrates the difference between data that would 
support a type model of introversion–extraversion (called a bimodal distribution) and 
the real data on introversion–extraversion, which is normally distributed according to 
a bell-shaped curve. Very few characteristics of persons follow a typological or bimodal 
distribution. Biological sex is one characteristic that does conform to a bimodal distribu￾tion; there are many female-type people, as well as many male-type people, and fewer 
(though not zero) people in between. The distribution of extraversion–introversion is 
not like a type distribution at all; it has only one peak, right in the middle, suggesting 
that the majority of people are neither purely introverted nor purely extraverted, but are 
somewhere in between. Virtually, all personality traits follow this normal distribution, so 
the concept of personality “types” is simply not justified when it comes to personality.
One consequence of forcing a typology onto a trait that is normally distributed 
concerns the importance of cutoff scores for classifying people into one category or 
the other (e.g., as introverted or extraverted). Most users of the MBTI use the median 
score (the score at which 50 percent fall above and 50 percent fall below) 
Table 4.1 Eight Fundamental Preferences Measured by the 
Myers–Briggs Type Indicator
Extraversion
Draws energy from the outside; involved 
with people; likes action and activity
Introversion
Draws energy from internal world of thoughts and 
ideas
Sensing
Prefers taking in information through all five 
senses; attends to what actually exists
Intuition
Prefers information derived from a “sixth sense”; 
notices what’s possible rather than what is
Thinking
Prefers logic, organization, and clean 
objective structure
Feeling
Prefers a person- and value-oriented way of 
processing information
Judging
Prefers living a well-ordered and controlled 
life
Perceiving
Prefers to live spontaneously, with room for 
flexible spur-of-the-moment activities
Source: Myers et al. (1998); Hirsh & Kummerow (1990).
Final PDF to printer116
lar31869_ch04_086-121.indd 116 09/28/22 11:46 AM
PART ONE The Dispositional Domain
standardization sample as the cutoff. The problem lies in the fact that a large percentage 
of people in any sample will be clustered right around the median score. If that median 
score moves a point or two in either direction, because of differences in sample charac￾teristics used to determine the cutoff score, a very large number of people will be reclas￾sified into their opposite category. In fact, a person with an introversion–extraversion 
score of 20 might be classified as an introvert in one sample (if it had a median of 21) 
and classified as an extravert in another sample (if it had a median of 19). So, the same 
individual score (a 20) will be interpreted very differently depending on the median 
used to perform the cutoff for classification. Despite this problem with cutoff scores and 
typologies, the majority of users of the MBTI continue to follow the scoring system that 
classifies persons into letter category groups, a practice that has been soundly criticized 
in the professional consulting literature (e.g., Pittenger, 2005).
A related consequence of using a typology scheme for scoring the MBTI is that the 
scores will be unreliable. Reliability is often estimated by testing a group of people twice, sep￾arated by a period of time. With the MBTI, because cutoff scores are used to categorize peo￾ple into groups, and because many people are very close to the cutoff scores, slight changes 
in people’s raw scores on retesting can result in a large percentage being reclassified into dif￾ferent personality types. Indeed, a study of the test-retest reliability of the MBTI (McCarley 
& Clarskadon, 1983) showed that, across a five-week test-retest interval, 50 percent of the 
participants received a different classification on one or more of the type categories. Other 
researchers find a similar lack of validity and reliability findings (Stein & Swan, 2019). These 
results are not surprising, and this is one reason most scientific personality psychologists do 
not recommend using typological scoring systems for any personality measure.
Another problem with typological scoring systems is that it assumes large between￾category differences, and no within-category differences, among people. For example, 
all extraverted types are assumed to be alike, and introverted types are assumed to be 
very different from extraverted types. This, however, is not necessarily the case. Imagine 
two people who score as extraverted types, yet one of these is just one point above the 
median and the other is 31 points above the median. 
Figure 4.3
Examples illustrating what the trait of introversion–extraversion would look like in terms of distributions 
in the population if it followed a type model (Panel A) or a normal distribution model (Panel B). Real data 
support the normal distribution model, not the type model. 
Introverted
60
40
20
0
Extraverted
Percent of population
A. Hypothetical data on the trait of introversion–
extraversion if it followed a truly typelike distribution
in the population. There would be a large number of
introverts, a large number of extraverts, and few
people in between.
Introversion–Extraversion
30
20
10
0
Percent of population
B. Typical data on the trait of introversion–
extraversion, which follows a bell curve or normal
distribution in the population. There are a large
number of people in between the relatively rare
extreme introverts and extreme extraverts.
Final PDF to printer117
lar31869_ch04_086-121.indd 117 09/28/22 11:46 AM
CHAPTER FOUR Theoretical and Measurement Issues in Trait Psychology
likely to be very different from each other (they differ by 30 points on the scale yet are 
given the same type category). Now imagine an introverted type who scored one point 
below the median, and an extraverted type who scored one point above the median. This 
introvert and this extravert are likely to be indistinguishable from each other (they differ 
by only 2 points on the scale yet are given different type categories). This is another rea￾son psychologists who know about measurement issues avoid using type scoring systems 
for any personality test.
Dozens of validity studies of the MBTI have been published, mostly relating type 
categories to occupational preferences. These studies have been criticized, however, 
because most fail to report statistical details necessary to determine whether the differ￾ences are significant. For example, Gardner and Martinko (1996) review 13 studies that 
examined the distribution of MBTI types in managerial professions. All of these studies 
reported the frequencies of types in different categories, yet none reported scale score 
means that would have allowed strong statistical tests of mean personality differences 
among the different managerial categories. Moreover, other reviewers (e.g., Hunsley, 
Lee, & Wood, 2003) point out that no adequate tests have been done on the predic￾tive validity of the MBTI (e.g., that the MBTI can predict future career choices or job 
satisfaction). Also, a recent study examining the incremental validity of the MBTI (e.g., 
whether the MBTI can add meaningfully to the prediction of career choice or job sat￾isfaction above and beyond that obtained with more traditional personality measures) 
showed that the MBTI added no predictive power beyond that obtained with a more 
traditional personality measure (the Strong Interest Inventory; Pulver & Kelly, 2008).
Every few years psychologists take a fresh look at the evidence for the MBTI and 
summarize what they find. In 1991, Bjork and Druckman reviewed the evidence and 
concluded: “At this time, there is not sufficient, well-designed research to justify the use 
of the MBTI in career counseling programs” (p. 99). A few years later, Boyle (1995) 
also reviewed the literature and found no strong scientific evidence supporting the util￾ity of the MBTI. In 2003, Hunsley, Lee, and Wood reviewed the accumulated evidence 
and summarized their findings: “One can only conclude that the MBTI is insufficient 
as a contemporary measure of personality” (pp. 63–4). And in a more recent review 
paper, Pittenger (2005) evaluated all of the scientific literature on the MBTI and con￾cluded: “Using the MBTI to select employees, to assign employees to work groups or 
assignments, or for other forms of employment evaluation are [sic]not justified for the 
simple reason that there are no available data to recommend such decisions” (p. 219). 
A recent article in a mainstream personality science journal suggests that the best use of 
the MBTI is to educate students and the public about flaws in personality tests (Stein & 
Swan, 2019), which is exactly how we are discussing the MBTI here.
Given the highly negative reviews on the scientific merit of the MBTI, why does 
it continue to be a hugely popular tool in consulting and career counseling? There are 
probably several reasons. First, the popularity of the MBTI may reflect the success of 
the publisher’s marketing campaign (Emre, 2018). In addition, the test comes with 
rather simple scoring and interpretation instructions, making it usable and understand￾able by people without advanced training. Moreover, the interpretations the test offers 
are readily translated into seemingly sensible predictions about work and interpersonal 
relations. Like the popularity of horoscopes, people like hearing about themselves and 
their futures, even if little or no scientific evidence exists for those descriptions and 
predictions.
Is there any legitimate use for the MBTI? Although it should definitely not be 
used as the single piece of evidence on which to base employment selections or career 
decisions, it may have a role in such areas as team-building, career exploration, or rela￾tionship counseling. The test can get people thinking about differences 
Final PDF to printer118
lar31869_ch04_086-121.indd 118 09/28/22 11:46 AM
PART ONE The Dispositional Domain
People with vastly different personalities see the world differently, and if the test fosters 
an appreciation for this diversity, then it may be useful. The test might also be useful if 
it gets people thinking about the relationship between personality and behavior. If we 
understand that how we act toward others, and they toward us, is influenced in part by 
our personalities, then this increases our ability to understand and relate well to others. 
For example, if teachers take the MBTI as part of a “teacher development workshop,” 
they may think about their own teaching style or may gain an awareness that not all 
pupils are alike in how they relate to teachers. So the test may indeed have some util￾ity for getting people to think about personality, even though the test does not appear 
adequate as an instrument for selection.
Selection in Business Settings—The Hogan Personality Inventory: 
A Best-Case Example
If the MBTI is not useful for selection, which tests are good alternatives? There are 
literally thousands of published personality tests (Spies & Plake, 2005) and hundreds 
of companies that use personality tests to help other companies select employees. We 
have chosen one of these companies and one of their personality tests to describe here, 
mainly because the procedures this company uses are based on a solid scientific founda￾tion. The company is called Hogan Assessment Systems, and its main personality test is 
called the Hogan Personality Inventory.
The founder of this assessment company, Robert Hogan, was a professor of psy￾chology at the University of Tulsa for many years. He had been teaching and doing 
research in personality psychology through the 1970s and 1980s, even becoming the 
head editor of the most prestigious scientific journal in personality psychology, the 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. During this time, Hogan’s own research 
concerned efforts to identify aspects of personality important in contemporary business 
settings. He started with the Big Five model of personality but focused on how these 
traits might work in the business world. He developed a theory about the social aspects 
of personality that are important to business and concluded that the dominant themes in 
social life are the motive to get along with others and the motive to get ahead of others.
In most business settings, people work in groups, and every group has a status 
hierarchy. Hogan’s theory states that, within such groups, people want three things: (1) 
acceptance, including respect and approval; (2) status and the control of resources; and 
(3) predictability (Hogan, 2005). Some of Hogan’s research showed that business prob￾lems often occur when a manager violates one or more of these motives within a work 
group, for example, by treating staff with disrespect, by micromanaging in a way that 
takes away the staff’s sense of control, or by not communicating or providing feedback, 
thereby making the workplace unpredictable.
Hogan developed a questionnaire measure of personality, called the Hogan 
Personality Inventory (HPI), that measures aspects of the Big Five traits that are rel￾evant to the above three motives important to business. For the details on why and 
how this inventory was developed, see Hogan and Hogan (2002) or visit the company’s 
website (www.hoganassessments.com). The traits this inventory measures are described 
in Table 4.2. Hogan and his wife, Joyce Hogan, also a research psychologist, started 
using this inventory in research on the effectiveness of people working in a variety of 
businesses. They began to look at how specific job requirements fit with specific combi￾nations of these personality traits. Soon they were doing validity studies, exploring how 
the personality test predicted how well people fit into specific business cultures. They 
also conducted outcome studies to see how well the 
Final PDF to printer119
lar31869_ch04_086-121.indd 119 09/28/22 11:46 AM
CHAPTER FOUR Theoretical and Measurement Issues in Trait Psychology
occupational performance in a wide variety of jobs. Across a large number of studies, 
the test achieved high levels of reliability and validity, predicting a number of important 
occupational outcomes, including organizational fit and performance. Joyce Hogan and 
J. Holland (2003) provide a meta-analysis of 28 validity studies on the Hogan Personality 
Inventory, the results of which strongly support the validity of the personality scales for 
predicting several important job-relevant criteria.
In 1987, Robert and Joyce Hogan started their company, Hogan Assessment 
Systems, to consult with businesses that wanted to use personality measures to select 
employees. Soon afterward, Robert Hogan left his position at the University of Tulsa to 
devote his full effort toward helping companies successfully use personality measures in 
business applications. The Hogans continue to use a scientific approach to improve and 
validate the use of their personality inventory in the business community. For a recent 
review of predicting career success from personality, with an interesting discussion of 
how some traits predict getting a job whereas other traits predict keeping a job, see 
Hogan and Chamorro-Premuzic (2015).
Why is the Hogan Personality Inventory (HPI) a better choice than the MBTI 
when it comes to employee selection? First, the HPI is based on theoretically agreed￾upon model of personality, the Big Five trait model, which enjoys a great deal of consen￾sus in personality science today. The construction and development of the HPI followed 
standard statistical procedures, resulting in an inventory with a high level of measure￾ment reliability (test–retest correlations range from .74 to .86). To date, there have been 
more than 500 validity studies of the HPI. These studies have examined the ability of the 
test to predict a wide variety of important business outcomes in a large number of job cat￾egories, such as employee turnover, absenteeism, improved sales performance, customer 
service, employee satisfaction, customer satisfaction, and overall business performance. 
The test has been able to predict occupational success in a wide variety of job categories. 
Personality profiles on the HPI are available for more than 200 different work categories 
that span the range of jobs in the U.S. economy. The company maintains a database 
from over a million people who have taken the HPI. It meets all the 
Table 4.2 The Hogan Personality Inventory (HPI) Contains Seven 
Primary Scales and Six Occupational Scale
Primary Scales Occupational Scales
Adjustment—self-confidence, self-esteem, and 
composure under pressure. The opposite of 
neuroticism.
Service Orientation—being attentive, pleasant, 
and courteous to customers.
Ambition—initiative, competitiveness, and the 
desire for leadership roles.
Stress Tolerance—being able to handle stress, 
remaining even-tempered and calm under fire.
Sociability—extraversion, gregariousness, and 
a need for social interaction.
Reliability—honesty, integrity, and positive 
organizational citizenship.
Interpersonal Sensitivity—warmth, charm, and 
the ability to maintain good relationships.
Clerical Potential—following directions, 
attending to detail, and communicating clearly.
Prudence—self-discipline, responsibility, and 
conscientiousness.
Sales Potential—energy, social skills, and the 
ability to solve customers’ problems.
Inquisitiveness—imagination, curiosity, vision, 
and creative potential.
Managerial Potential—leadership ability, 
planning, and decision-making skills.
Learning Approach—enjoying learning, and 
staying current on business and technical matters.
Final PDF to printer120
lar31869_ch04_086-121.indd 120 09/28/22 11:46 AM
PART ONE The Dispositional Domain
statistical standards held by the American Psychological Association and the Society for 
Organizational and Industrial Psychologists, whereas the MBTI does not.
The HPI itself consists of true–false items and takes about 20 minutes to admin￾ister. None of the items are invasive or intrusive, and none of the scales show adverse 
impact on the basis of gender, race, or ethnicity. Hogan Assessment Systems maintains 
a research archive and record-keeping practice that scrupulously follows the procedures 
outlined by the Uniform Guidelines on Employee Selection Procedures discussed ear￾lier. If a company using the HPI is sued by a job applicant, Hogan Assessment Systems 
will provide reports and records on test development and validity necessary to defend 
the case in court. In over 30 years of use in business, personality assessments done with 
Hogan systems have never been successfully challenged in court.
While Hogan Assessment Systems provides other services, such as employee devel￾opment, we will describe one case example of the use of the HPI in a specific employee 
selection application. A leading financial services company approached Hogan Assessment 
Systems to develop a preemployment assessment procedure to select financial consul￾tants. The job requirements were analyzed and compared to known validity research on 
performance in related jobs, and a personality selection profile was determined. After new 
people were hired and on the job for a few years, the company evaluated the effectiveness 
of the selection procedure by comparing the performance of financial consultants hired 
before and after the selection procedure went into effect. They found that those finan￾cial consultants hired on the basis of their personality profiles earned 20 percent more 
in commissions annually, conducted 32 percent more volume in dollar terms annually, 
and made 42 percent more trades annually. Obviously, selecting those applicants with the 
“right stuff” was beneficial to this company. Other business examples of the use of the HPI 
in selecting employees can be found at www.hoganassessments.com.
It is clear that personality factors can play an important role in predicting who 
does well in specific employment settings. When it comes to using personality tests to 
select employees for specific positions, one should realize that not all personality tests 
do the job equally well. Clearly, those assessment systems with a strong scientific base, 
grounded in an accepted theory of personality, with acceptable reliability and strong 
evidence of validity relative to the needs of the company will have the best potential for 
helping business users achieve positive results.
SUMMARY AND EVALUATION
This chapter described some important issues and concepts that the various trait theo￾ries have in common. The hallmark of the trait perspective is an emphasis on differences 
among people. Trait psychology focuses on the study and measurement of differences 
between people, as well as the consequences of these differences in real life. Trait psy￾chology assumes that people will be relatively consistent over time in their behavior 
because of the various traits they possess. Trait psychologists also assume a degree of 
cross-situational consistency for traits. Nevertheless, some situations are very strong in 
terms of their influence on behavior. Some situations are so strong that they overpower 
the influence of personality traits. One important lesson is that traits are more likely to 
influence a person’s behavior when situations are weak and ambiguous and don’t push 
for conformity from all people.
Most trait psychologists agree that personality trait scores refer primarily to aver￾age tendencies in behavior. A score on a trait measure refers to how a person is likely 
to behave, on average, over a number of occasions and situations. Trait psychologists 
Final PDF to printer121
lar31869_ch04_086-121.indd 121 09/28/22 11:46 AM
CHAPTER FOUR Theoretical and Measurement Issues in Trait Psychology
are better at predicting average tendencies in behavior than specific acts on specific 
occasions. For example, from a person’s high score on a measure of trait hostility, a 
personality psychologist could not predict whether this person is likely to get into a fight 
tomorrow. However, the psychologist could confidently predict that such a person is 
more likely to be in more fights in the next few years than a person with a lower score on 
hostility. Traits represent average tendencies in behavior.
Trait psychologists are also interested in the accuracy of measurement. More than any 
other personality perspective, trait psychology has occupied itself with efforts to improve 
measurement, particularly through self-report questionnaire measures. Psychologists who 
devise questionnaires work hard at making them less susceptible to lying, faking, and care￾less responding and more valid in terms of predicting real-world outcomes.
A particularly important measurement issue is social desirability, or the tendency to 
exaggerate the positivity of one’s personality. Currently, trait psychologists hold that one 
motive for socially desirable responding is impression management, akin to lying. However, 
another view on social desirability is that socially desirable responding is a valid response 
by some people who simply view themselves as better or more desirable than most, or who 
actually have deceived themselves into thinking they are better off psychologically than 
they probably are. As is typical, trait psychologists have devised measures to identify and 
distinguish between these two types of socially desirable responding.
Finally, their interest in measurement and prediction has led trait psychologists to 
apply these skills to the selection and screening of job applicants and other real-world 
applications of personality. There are legal issues employers must keep in mind when 
using trait measures as a basis for making important hiring or promotion decisions. For 
example, tests must not discriminate unfairly against protected groups, such as women 
and certain minorities. In addition, the tests must be shown to be related to important 
real-life variables, such as job performance. We considered a number of important legal 
cases in employment law that are relevant to personality testing. We also considered two 
specific personality questionnaires that are popular in employment selection settings. 
One instrument, the MBTI, is widely used but also widely criticized in the scientific 
literature for its low levels of measurement reliability and unproven validity. The other 
instrument, the Hogan Personality Inventory, can be considered a “best practice” case 
when it comes to the use of personality in employee selection.
differential psychology 89
rank-order stability 91
consistency 91
situationism 92
person–situation interaction 93
aggregation 93
situational specificity 94
strong situation 95
situational selection 96
evocation 97
manipulation 98
Aggregation 98
density distributions of states 100
KEY TERMS
Ward’s Cove Packing Co. v. Atonio 109
Price Waterhouse v. Hopkins 109
female underprediction effect 110
disparate impact 111
race or gender norming 111
Americans with Disabilities Act 
(ADA) 112
right to privacy 112
job analysis 113
Myers–Briggs Type Indicator 
(MBTI) 114
psychological types 115
Hogan Personality Inventory 
infrequency scale 102
faking 102
false negative 103
false positive 103
Barnum statements 104
personnel selection 106
integrity tests 107
overt and covert integrity tests. 107
negligent hiring 108
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 
1964 108
Griggs v. Duke Power 108
Uniform Guidelines on Employee 
Selection Procedures 108
Final PDF to printer122
lar31869_ch05_122-151.indd 122 09/28/22 12:16 PM
Tavis Wright/Image Source
5
Personality Dispositions 
over Time: Stability, 
Coherence, and Change
Conceptual Issues: Personality Development, Stability, Coherence, and Change
What Is Personality Development?
Rank Order Stability
Mean Level Stability
Personality Coherence
Personality Change
Three Levels of Analysis
Population Level
Group Differences Level
Individual Differences Level
Personality Stability over Time
Stability of Temperament During Infancy
Stability During Childhood
Rank Order Stability in Adulthood
Mean Level Stability and Change in Adulthood
Personality Change
Changes in Self-Esteem from Adolescence to Adulthood
Autonomy, Dominance, Leadership, and Ambition
Sensation Seeking
Femininity
Independence and Traditional Roles
Personality Changes Across Cohorts: Assertiveness and Narcissism
Personality Coherence over Time: Prediction of Socially Relevant Outcomes
Marital Stability, Marital Satisfaction, and Divorce
Alcoholism, Drug Use, and Emotional Disturbance
Religiousness and Spirituality
Education, Academic Achievement, and Dropping Out
Health, Retirement, and Longevity
Predicting Personality Change
SUMMARY AND EVALUATION
KEY TERMS
Final PDF to printerlar31869_ch05_122-151.indd 123 09/28/22 12:16 PM
THE DISPOSITIONAL DOMAIN
Think back to your days in middle school. Can you remember what you 
were like then? Try to recall what you were most interested in, how you spent your 
time, what things were important to you. If you are like most people, you probably feel 
that, in many ways, you are a different person now than you were in middle school. 
Your interests have probably changed somewhat. Different things may be impor￾tant to you. Your attitudes about school, family, and relationships have probably all 
changed at least a bit. Perhaps now you are more mature and have a more experienced 
view of the world.
As you think about what you were like then and what you are like now, you prob￾ably also feel that there is a core of “you” that is essentially the same over the years. 
If you are like most people, you have a sense of an enduring part of you, a feeling that 
you are “really” the same person now as then. Certain inner qualities seem the same 
over these several years.
In this chapter, we explore the psychological continuities and changes over time, 
which define the topic of personality development. When it comes to personality, 
“Some things change; some things stay the same.” In this chapter, we discuss how 
psychologists think about personality development, with a primary focus on personal￾ity traits or dispositions.
Even though people change 
and develop as they age, 
each person still has a 
sense of self as the same 
person from year to year. 
As we see in this chapter on 
development, when it comes 
to personality, some things 
change and some things 
stay the same.
Rawpixel.com/Shutterstock
5
Final PDF to printer124
lar31869_ch05_122-151.indd 124 09/28/22 12:16 PM
PART ONE The Dispositional Domain
Conceptual Issues: Personality Development, 
Stability, Coherence, and Change
This section defines personality development, examines the major ways of thinking 
about personality stability over time, and explores what it means to say that personality 
has changed. The study of personality development has attracted a lot of research atten￾tion, with two entire scientific journals devoting special issues to the topic, one in the 
Journal of Personality (Graziano, 2003) and one in the European Journal of Personality
(Denissen, 2014; Specht et al., 2014).
What Is Personality Development?
Personality development is defined as the continuities, consistencies, and stabilities in 
people over time and the ways in which people change over time. Each of these two 
facets—stability and change—requires definitions and qualifications. There are many 
forms of personality stability and many forms of personality change. The three most 
important forms of stability are rank order stability, mean level stability, and personality 
coherence. We discuss each of these. Then we examine personality change.
Rank Order Stability
Rank order stability is the maintenance of individual position within a group. Between 
ages 14 and 20, most people become taller, but the rank order of heights tends to remain 
fairly stable because this form of development affects all people pretty much the same, 
adding a few inches to everyone. The tall people at age 14 fall generally toward the tall end 
of the distribution at age 20. The same can apply to personality traits. If people tend to ? To illustrate the phrase “Some things change; some things stay the same,” consider the period 
just before high school (your middle school years) and compare that with the period just after 
high school—typically, your college years. Identify three characteristics that have changed notice￾ably during that period. These characteristics might be your interests, your attitudes, your values, 
and what you like to do with your time. Then list three characteristics about you that have not 
changed. Again, these characteristics could reflect certain traits of your personality, your interests, 
your values, or even your attitudes about various topics. Write them down in the following format:
Exercise
Characteristics that have 
changed
What I was like in 
middle school:
1. ____________
2. ____________
3. ____________
What I was like after 
high school:
1. ____________
2. ____________
3. ____________
Characteristics that have 
not changed
1. ____________
2. ____________
3. ____________
Final PDF to printer125
lar31869_ch05_122-151.indd 125 09/28/22 12:16 PM
CHAPTER FIVE Personality Dispositions over Time: Stability, Coherence, and Change
maintain their positions on dominance or extraversion relative to the others over time, then 
there is high rank order stability to those personality characteristics. Conversely, if people 
fail to maintain their rank order—if the submissive people rise up and put down the domi￾nants, for example—then the group is displaying rank order instability, or rank order change.
Mean Level Stability
Another kind of personality stability is constancy of level, or mean level stability. Consider 
political orientation. If the average level of liberalism or conservatism in a group remains 
the same over time, the group exhibits high mean level stability. If the average degree 
of political orientation changes—for example, if people tend to get more conservative as 
they get older—then that population shows mean level change.
Personality Coherence
A more complex form of personality development involves changes in the manifestations
of a trait. Consider the trait of dominance. Suppose that the people who are dominant 
at age 8 are the same people who are dominant at age 20. The 8-year-old boys, however, 
manifest their dominance by showing toughness in rough-and-tumble play, calling their 
rivals “sissies,” and insisting on monopolizing the computer games. At the age of 20, 
they manifest their dominance by persuading others to accept their views in political dis￾cussions, boldly asking someone out on a date, and insisting on the restaurant at which 
the group will eat.
This form of personality development—maintaining rank order in relation to other 
individuals but changing the manifestations of the trait—is called personality coherence. 
Notice that this form of personality coherence does not require that the precise behav￾ioral manifestations of a trait remain the same. Indeed, the manifestations may be so dif￾ferent that there is literally no overlap between age 8 and age 20. The act manifestations 
The manifestation of disagreeableness may differ across the life span, ranging from temper tantrums in infancy to being argumentative and 
having a short temper in adulthood. Even though the behaviors are different at the different ages, they nevertheless express the same underlying 
trait. This kind of consistency is called personality coherence.
Left: Kristy-Anne Glubish/Design Pics; Right: Chris Ryan/OJO Images/age fotostock
Final PDF to printer126
lar31869_ch05_122-151.indd 126 09/28/22 12:16 PM
PART ONE The Dispositional Domain
Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi was born 
in 1869 to a family of modest means in 
India. His mother was devoutly religious, 
and she impressed young Mohandas with 
her beliefs and practices. The Gandhi 
family practiced traditional Hinduism, but 
also practiced Buddhist chants, read from 
the Koran, and sang traditional Christian 
hymns. Mohandas developed a personal 
philosophy that led him to renounce all per￾sonal desires and to devote himself to the 
service of his fellow human beings.
After studying law in England, and 
practicing for a few years in South Africa, 
Gandhi returned to India. At that time, 
India was under British rule, and most 
Indians resented the oppression of their 
colonial rulers. Gandhi devoted himself to 
the ideal of Indian self-rule and to freedom 
from British oppression. When the British 
decided to fingerprint all Indians, for exam￾ple, Gandhi came up with an idea he called 
passive resistance—he encouraged all 
Indians to simply refuse to go in for finger￾printing. During the period of 1919–1922, 
Gandhi led widespread but nonviolent 
strikes and boycotts throughout India. He 
coordinated campaigns of peaceful nonco￾operation with anything British—he urged 
Indians not to send their children to the 
British-run schools, not to participate in the 
courts, even not to adopt the English lan￾guage. In their frustration, British soldiers 
sometimes attacked crowds of boycotting 
or striking Indians, and many were killed. 
The people of India loved Gandhi. They 
followed him in droves, recording every￾thing he did and said. He became a living 
legend, and the people referred to him as 
Maha Atma, or the Great Soul. We know 
him today as Mahatma Gandhi.
In 1930, Gandhi led the people in 
nonviolent defiance of the British law for￾bidding Indians from making their own salt. 
He started out with a few of his followers 
This most nonviolent and tolerant man 
became a victim of violence.
Even though Gandhi became the 
“Father of India,” he remained essentially the 
same person throughout his adult life. Each 
day of his life, he washed himself in ashes 
instead of expensive soap, and he shaved 
with an old, dull straight razor rather than with 
expensive blades. He cleaned his own house 
and swept his yard daily. Each afternoon he 
spun thread on a hand-wheel for an hour or 
two. He made cloth for his own clothes and 
for those of his followers. He practiced the 
self-denial and self-sufficiency he learned 
early in his life. In most ways, his personal￾ity was remarkably stable over his life, even 
though he was at the center of one of the 
most tumultuous social revolutions in history.
on a march to the coast of India, 
intending to make salt from sea￾water. By the time Gandhi had 
reached the sea, several thousand 
people had joined him in this act of 
civil disobedience. By this time, the 
British had jailed more than 60,000 
Indians for disobedience to British 
law. The jails of India were burst￾ing with native people put there by 
foreign rulers for breaking foreign 
laws. The British rulers were finally 
coming to some sense of embar￾rassment and shame for this situa￾tion. In the eyes of the world, this 
frail man Gandhi and his nonviolent 
followers were shaking the founda￾tion of the British Empire in India.
Gandhi was not an offi￾cial of the Indian government. 
Nevertheless, the British began 
negotiations with him to free India 
from British rule. During nego￾tiations, the British played tough 
and put Gandhi in jail. The Indian 
people demonstrated and nearly 
a thousand of them were killed by 
the British, bringing shame on the colonial 
rulers in the eyes of the world. Gandhi was 
finally freed. A few years later, in 1947, 
Britain handed India its independence.
Gandhi negotiated a mostly peace￾ful transition from British rule to self-rule 
for the people of India. In his lifetime, he 
was one of the most influential leaders in 
the world. His ideas have influenced the 
struggles of many oppressed groups since.
In 1948, an assassin fired three bul￾lets into Gandhi at point-blank range. The 
assassin was a Hindu fanatic who believed 
that Gandhi should have used his position 
to preach hatred of the Muslims of India. 
Gandhi instead preached tolerance and 
trust, urging Muslims and Hindus to par￾ticipate together in the new nation of India. 
A Closer Look A Case of Personal Stability
Mahatma Gandhi lived in a tumultuous period and 
led one of the largest social revolutions in human 
history. Despite the changing conditions of his life, his 
personality remained remarkably stable. For example, 
he practiced self-denial and self-sufficiency throughout 
his adult life, preferring a simple loincloth and shawl to 
the suit and tie worn by most leaders of the world’s great 
nations.
Dinodia Photos/Alamy Stock Photo
Final PDF to printer127
lar31869_ch05_122-151.indd 127 09/28/22 12:16 PM
CHAPTER FIVE Personality Dispositions over Time: Stability, Coherence, and Change
have all changed, but something critical has remained the same—the overall level of dom￾inant acts relative to others of the same age. Thus, personality coherence includes both 
elements of continuity and elements of change—continuity in the underlying trait but 
change in the outward manifestation of that trait.
Personality Change
The notion of personality development in the sense of change over time also requires 
elaboration. To start with, not all change qualifies as development. For instance, if 
you walk from one classroom to another, your relationship to your surroundings has 
changed. But we do not speak of your “development” in this case because the change is 
external to you and not enduring.
And not all internal changes can properly be considered development. When 
you get sick, for example, your body undergoes important changes: your temperature 
may rise, your nose may run, and your head may ache. But these changes do not con￾stitute development because the changes do not last—you soon get healthy, your nose 
stops running, and you spring back into action. In the same way, temporary changes in 
personality—due to taking alcohol or drugs, for example—do not constitute personality 
development unless they produce more enduring changes in personality.
If you become consistently more conscientious or responsible as you aged, how￾ever, this would be a form of personality development. If you become gradually less 
energetic as you aged, this also would be a form of personality development.
In sum, personality change has two defining qualities. First, the changes are typi￾cally internal to the person, not merely changes in the external surroundings, such as 
walking into another room. Second, the changes are relatively enduring over time, rather 
than being merely temporary.
Three Levels of Analysis
We can examine personality over time at three levels of analysis: the population as a 
whole, group differences within the population, and individual differences within groups. 
As we examine the empirical research on personality development, it is useful to keep 
these three levels in mind.
Population Level
Several personality psychologists have theorized about the changes that we all go through 
in navigating from infancy to adulthood. Freud’s theory of psychosexual development, 
for example, contained a conception of personality development that was assumed to 
apply to everyone on the planet. All people, according to Freud, go through an invariant 
stage sequence, starting with the oral stage and ending with the mature genital stage of 
psychosexual development (see Chapter 9).
This level of personality development deals with the changes and constancies that 
apply more or less to everyone. For example, almost everyone in the population tends to 
increase in sexual motivation at puberty. Similarly, there is a general increase in impul￾sive and risk-taking behaviors as people enter the teen years. This is why auto insurance 
rates go down as people age—because a typical 30-year-old is less likely than a typical 
16-year-old to drive dangerously. This change in impulsivity is part of the population 
level of personality change.
Final PDF to printer128
lar31869_ch05_122-151.indd 128 09/28/22 12:16 PM
PART ONE The Dispositional Domain
Group Differences Level
Some changes over time affect different groups of people differently. Sex differences 
are one type of group differences. In the realm of physical development, for example, 
females go through puberty, on average, two years earlier than males. At the other end of 
life, men in the United States tend to die five to seven years earlier than women. These 
are sex differences in development.
Analogous sex differences can occur in the realm of personality development. 
As a group, men and women suddenly develop differently from one another dur￾ing adolescence in their average levels of risk taking (men become more risk tak￾ing). Men and women also develop differently in empathy toward others (women 
develop a stronger awareness and understanding of others’ feelings). These forms 
of personality development are properly located at the group differences level of 
personality analysis.
Other group differences include cultural or ethnic group differences. For exam￾ple, in the United States, there is a large difference in body image satisfaction between 
European American women and African American women. European American women 
tend, as a group, to be less satisfied with their bodies than are African American women 
with theirs. Consequently, European American women are much more at risk for devel￾oping eating disturbances, such as anorexia or bulimia, compared with women in other 
groups. This group difference emerges primarily around puberty.
Individual Differences Level
Personality psychologists also focus on individual differences in personality develop￾ment. For example, can we predict which individuals will go through a midlife crisis? 
Can we predict who will be at risk for a psychological disturbance later in life based on 
early personality? Can we predict who will change over time and who will remain the 
same? These issues focus on individual differences in personality.
Some changes affect different groups of people differently. For example, European American women tend to be, 
as a group, less satisfied with their bodies than are African American women with theirs. Consequently, European 
American women have a higher risk for developing eating disorders, such as anorexia or bulimia, compared with 
women in other groups.
Left: wavebreakmedia/Shutterstock; Right: Sam Edwards/Glow Images
Final PDF to printer129
lar31869_ch05_122-151.indd 129 09/28/22 12:16 PM
CHAPTER FIVE Personality Dispositions over Time: Stability, Coherence, and Change
Personality Stability over Time
This section examines the research on the stability of personality over the lifetime. We 
first examine stability in infancy, then explore stability during childhood, and finally look 
at stability during the decades of adulthood.
Stability of Temperament During Infancy
Many parents with two or more children will tell you that their children had distinctly 
different personalities from the day they were born. For example, Albert Einstein, the 
Nobel Prize–winning father of modern physics, had two sons with his first wife. These 
two boys were quite different. The older boy, Hans, was fascinated with puzzles as a 
child and had a gift for math. He went on to become a distinguished professor of hydrau￾lics. The younger son, Eduard, enjoyed music and literature. As a young adult, however, 
he ended up in a Swiss psychiatric hospital, where he died. Although this is an extreme 
example, many parents notice differences among their children, even as infants. Do the 
intuitions of parents square with the scientific evidence?
By far the most commonly studied personality characteristics in infancy and child￾hood fall under the category of temperament. Although there is some disagreement 
about what the term means, most researchers define temperament as the individual dif￾ferences that emerge very early in life, are likely to have a heritable basis (see Chapter 6), 
and are often involved with emotionality or arousability.
Mary Rothbart (1981, 1986; Rothbart & Hwang, 2005) studied infants at different 
ages, starting at three months of age. She examined six factors of temperament, using 
ratings completed by the caregivers:
1. Activity level: the infant’s overall motor activity, including arm and leg movements.
2. Smiling and laughter: How much does the infant smile or laugh?
3. Fear: the infant’s distress and reluctance to approach novel stimuli.
4. Distress to limitations: the child’s distress at being refused food, being dressed, 
being confined, or being prevented access to a desired object.
5. Soothability: the degree to which the child reduces stress, or calms down, as a 
result of being soothed.
6. Duration of orienting: the degree to which the child sustains attention to objects in 
the absence of sudden changes.
The caregivers, mostly mothers, completed observer-based scales designed to measure 
these six aspects of temperament. Table 5.1 shows the cross-time correlations over dif￾ferent time intervals. If you scan the correlations in the table, you will notice first that 
they are all positive. This means that infants who tend to score high at one time period 
on activity level, smiling and laughter, and the other personality traits, also tend to score 
high on these traits at later time periods.
Next, the correlations in the top two rows of Table 5.1 tend to be higher than those 
in the bottom four rows. This means that activity level and smiling and laughter tend to 
show higher levels of stability over time than the other personality traits.
Now notice that the correlations in the right-most two columns are generally 
higher than those in the left-most columns. This suggests that personality traits tend to 
become more stable toward the end of infancy (from 9 to 12 months), compared with 
the earlier stages of infancy (from 3 to 6 months).
Final PDF to printer130
lar31869_ch05_122-151.indd 130 09/28/22 12:16 PM
PART ONE The Dispositional Domain
Like all studies, this one has limitations. Perhaps most important, the infants’ care￾givers may have developed certain conceptions of their infants, and it may be their con￾ceptions rather than the infants’ behaviors that show stability over time. Nonetheless, 
these findings reveal four important points. First, stable individual differences appear to 
emerge very early in life, when they can be assessed by observers. Second, for most tem￾perament variables, there are moderate levels of stability over time during the first year 
of life. Third, the stability of temperament tends to be higher over short intervals of time 
than over long intervals of time—a finding that occurs in adulthood as well. And, fourth, 
the level of stability of temperament tends to increase as infants mature (Goldsmith & 
Rothbart, 1991; Rothbart & Hwang, 2005).
Stability During Childhood
Longitudinal studies, which examine the same groups of individuals over time, are costly 
and difficult to conduct. As a result, there are few studies to draw on. A major exception 
is the Block and Block Longitudinal Study, which initiated the testing of a sample of 
more than 100 children from the Berkeley-Oakland area of California when the children 
were 3 years old (see, e.g., Block & Robbins, 1993). Since that time, the sample has been 
followed and repeatedly tested at ages 4, 5, 7, 11, and into adulthood.
One of the first publications from this project focused on individual differences 
in activity level (Buss, Block, & Block, 1980). When the children were 3 years old, and 
then again at 4, their activity levels were assessed in two ways. The first was through 
the use of an actometer, a recording device attached to the wrists of the children dur￾ing several play periods. Motoric movement activated the recording device—essentially 
a self-winding wristwatch. Independently, the children’s teachers completed ratings of 
their behavior and personalities. The behavioral measure of activity level contained three 
items directly relevant: “is physically active,” “is vital, energetic, active,” and “has a rapid 
personal tempo.” These items were summed to form a total measure of teacher-observed 
activity level. This observer-based measure was obtained when the children were 3 and 4 
and then again when they reached age 7.
Table 5.2 shows the correlations among the activity level measures, both at the 
same ages and across time to assess the stability of activity level during childhood. The 
correlations between the same measures obtained at two different points in time are 
Table 5.1 Stability Correlations for Temperament Scales
MONTHS
Scale 3–6 3–9 3–12 6–9 6–12 9–12
AL—activity level 0.58 0.48 0.48 0.56 0.60 0.68
SL—smiling and laughter 0.55 0.55 0.57 0.67 0.72 0.72
FR—fear 0.27 0.15 0.06 0.43 0.37 0.61
DL—distress to limitations 0.23 0.18 0.25 0.57 0.61 0.65
SO—soothability 0.30* 0.37* 0.41 0.50 0.39 0.29
DO—duration of orienting 0.36* 0.35* 0.11 0.62 0.34 0.64
Source: Adapted from Rothbart, 1981.
*Correlations based on only one cohort.
Final PDF to printer131
lar31869_ch05_122-151.indd 131 09/28/22 12:16 PM
CHAPTER FIVE Personality Dispositions over Time: Stability, Coherence, and Change
called stability coefficients (these are also sometimes called test-retest reliability coef￾ficients). The correlations between different measures of the same trait obtained at the 
same time are called validity coefficients.
Several key conclusions about validity and stability can be drawn from these find￾ings. First, the actometer-based measurements of activity level have significant positive 
validity coefficients with the judge-based measurements of activity level. Activity level 
in childhood can be validly assessed through both observational judgments and activity 
recordings from the actometers. The two measures are moderately correlated at each 
age, providing cross-validation of each type of measure.
Second, notice that the correlations of the activity level measurements are all posi￾tively correlated with measurements of activity level taken at later ages. Activity level 
shows moderate stability during childhood. Children highly active at age 3 are also likely 
to be active at ages 4 and 7. Their less active peers at age 3 are likely to remain less active 
at ages 4 and 7. A 21-year study tracking physical activity of Finish boys and girls found 
that this level of moderate stability carries throughout childhood and into adulthood 
(Telama et al., 2005).
Finally, the size of the correlations tends to decrease as the time interval between 
the different testings increases. As a general rule, the longer the time between testings, 
the lower the stability coefficients. Measures taken early in life can predict personality 
later in life, but the predictability decreases over time.
These general conclusions apply to other personality characteristics as well. 
Aggression and violence have long been a key concern of our society from school shoot￾ings to suicide bombers. What causes some children to act so aggressively?
As it turns out, numerous studies of childhood aggression have been conducted by 
personality psychologists. Olweus (1979) reviewed 16 longitudinal studies of aggression 
during childhood. The studies varied widely on many aspects, such as age at which the 
children were first tested (2–18), length interval between first testing and final testing 
(half a year to 18 years), and the specific measures of aggression used (e.g., teacher rat￾ings, direct observation, and peer ratings).
Figure 5.1 shows a summary graph of the results of all these studies. The graph 
depicts the stability coefficients for aggression as a function of the interval between first 
Table 5.2 Intercorrelations Among Activity Measures
ACTOMETER JUDGE-BASED
Age 3 Age 4 Age 3 Age 4 Age 7
Actometer:
 Age 3 . . . . . . . . . . .44* .61*** .56*** .19
 Age 4 . . . . .  .  .43** . . . .66*** .53*** .38**
Judge-based:
 Age 3 . . . . .  .  .50*** .36** . . . .75*** .48***
 Age 4 . . . . . . . .34* .48*** .51*** . . . .38**
 Age 7 . . . . . . . .35* .28* .33* .50*** . . .
Source: Buss, Block, & Block, 1980.
*p < .05. **p < .01. ***p < .001 (two-tailed). Correlations above the ellipses (. . .) are based on boys’ data, those below the ellipses (. . .) are 
based on girls’ data.
Final PDF to printer132
lar31869_ch05_122-151.indd 132 09/28/22 12:16 PM
PART ONE The Dispositional Domain
and final testing. Marked individual differences in aggression emerge very early in life, 
certainly by the age of 3 (Olweus, 1979). Individuals retain their rank order stability on 
aggression to a substantial degree over the years. Moderate levels of rank order stability 
have also been documented for major personality traits from early childhood to adoles￾cence (Hampson et al., 2007), from middle childhood to adolescence (Tackett et al., 
2008), and from adolescence to early adulthood (Blonigen et al., 2008). Longitudinal 
studies of aggression continue to support the conclusion of moderate levels of stability 
(Piquero et al., 2012). And, as we have seen with infant temperament and childhood 
activity level, the stability coefficients tend to decline as the interval between the two 
times of measurement increases. 
In sum, we can conclude that individual differences in personality emerge very 
early in life—most likely in infancy for some traits and by early childhood for other traits, 
such as aggression. These individual differences tend to be moderately stable over time, 
so that people who are high on a particular trait tend to remain high. Indeed, child￾hood personality at age 3 turns out to be a good predictor of adult personality at age 26 
(Caspi et al., 2003). Finally, the stability coefficients gradually decline over time as the 
distance between testings increases.
Rank Order Stability in Adulthood
Many studies have been conducted on the stability of adult personality. Longitudinal 
studies span as many as four decades of life. Furthermore, many age brackets have been 
examined, from age 18 through older cohorts ranging up to age 84.
A summary of these data is shown in Table 5.4, assembled by Costa and McCrae 
(1994; see also McCrae & Costa, 2008). This table categorizes the measures of personal￾ity into the five-factor model of traits, described in Chapter 3. The time intervals between 
the first and last personality assessments for each sample range from a low of three years 
Figure 5.1
The figure shows the stability of aggression in males over different time intervals. Aggression shows the 
highest levels of stability over short time intervals such as from one year to the next. As the time interval 
between testings increases, however, the correlation coefficients decline, suggesting that aggressiveness 
changes more over long time intervals than over short time intervals.
Source: Olweus, 1979.
1.00
.90
.80
.70
.60
.50
.40
.30
.20
.10
.00
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21
Correlation coefficient
Time interval in years
X
Y
Final PDF to printer133
lar31869_ch05_122-151.indd 133 09/28/22 12:16 PM
CHAPTER FIVE Personality Dispositions over Time: Stability, Coherence, and Change
The individual differences that emerge 
early in life sometimes have profound con￾sequences, both for the life outcomes of 
individuals and for the impact on the social 
world. Norwegian psychologist Dan Olweus 
has conducted longitudinal studies of “bul￾lies” and “whipping boys” (Olweus, 1978, 
1979, 2001). The meanings of these terms 
are precisely what they sound like. Bullies 
pick on and victimize other children. They 
trip victims in the hallway, push them into 
lockers, elbow them in the stomach, demand 
their lunch money, and call them names.
Although the victims, or “whipping 
boys,” do not have many external character￾istics that appear to set them apart, they do 
have certain psychological characteristics. 
Most commonly, victims tend to be anxious, 
fearful, insecure, and lacking in social skills. 
They are emotionally vulnerable and may be 
physically weak as well, making them easy 
targets who don’t fight back. The victims 
suffer from low self-esteem, lose interest in 
school, and often show difficulties establish￾ing or maintaining friendships. They seem to 
lack social support that might buffer them 
against bullies. It has been estimated that 
10 percent of all schoolchildren are afraid of 
bullies during the school day, and most chil￾dren have been victimized by bullies at least 
once (Brody, 1996).
In one longitudinal study, bullies and 
victims were identified through teacher 
nominations in Grade 6. A year later, the chil￾dren attended different schools in different 
settings, having made the transition from 
elementary school to junior high school. At 
this different setting during Grade 7, a dif￾ferent set of teachers categorized the boys 
on whether they were bullies, victims, or 
neither. The results are shown in Table 5.3. 
As you can see from looking at the circled 
numbers in the diagonal in Table 5.3, the 
vast majority of the boys received similar 
classifications a year later, despite the dif￾ferent school, different setting, and different 
teachers doing the categorizing.
The bullying, however, does not 
appear to stop in childhood. When Olweus 
followed thousands of boys from grade 
school to adulthood, he found marked 
continuities. The bullies in childhood were 
more likely to become juvenile delinquents 
in adolescence and criminals in adulthood. 
An astonishing 65 percent of the boys who 
were classified by their Grade 6 teachers 
as bullies ended up having felony convic￾tions by the time they were 24 years old 
(Brody, 1996). Many of the bullies appar￾ently remained bullies throughout their lives. 
Unfortunately, we don’t know the fate of the 
victims, other than that they tended not to 
get involved in criminal activities.
A study of 228 children, ranging in age 
from 6 to 16, found several fascinating per￾sonality and family relationship correlates of 
bullying (Connolly & O’Moore, 2003). A total 
of 115 children were classified as “bullies” 
based on both their own self-ratings and on 
the basis of at least two of their classmates 
A Closer Look Bullies and Whipping Boys from Childhood 
to Adulthood
categorizing them as bullies. These were then 
compared with 113 control children, who both 
did not nominate themselves as bullies and 
were not categorized as bullies by any of their 
classmates. The bullies scored higher on the 
Eysenck scales of Extraversion, Neuroticism, 
and Psychoticism (see Chapter 3). Bullies, in 
short, tended to be more outgoing and gre￾garious (extraversion); emotionally volatile 
and anxious (neuroticism); and impulsive and 
lacking in empathy (psychoticism). In addition, 
the bullies, relative to the controls, expressed 
more ambivalence and conflict with their fam￾ily members, including their brothers, sisters, 
and parents. Conflicts in the home, in short, 
appear to be linked to conflicts these children 
get into during school, pointing to a degree of 
consistency across situations.
The good news is that anti-bullying 
intervention programs work to curtail bul￾lying (Fraguas et al., 2021). These work by 
first recognizing the problem via surveys 
of students and teachers. The second step 
involves classroom training in which teach￾ers educate students about a zero-tolerance 
policy for any form of victimization. The third 
step involves educating all adults in schools, 
from cafeteria workers to bus drivers, about 
how to spot bullying and. how to report it. 
These intervention programs, developed 
by Dan Olweus himself and implemented in 
many schools in Europe and North America, 
dramatically reduce bullying rates and the 
harmful consequences of bullying (Fraguas 
et al., 2021).
Table 5.3 Longitudinal Classification of Boys in Aggressive Behaviors
GRADE 7
Grade 6 Bully Neither Victim
Bully 24 9 2
Neither 9 200 15
Victim 1 10 16
Final PDF to printer134
lar31869_ch05_122-151.indd 134 09/28/22 12:16 PM
PART ONE The Dispositional Domain
to a high of 30 years. The results yield a strong general conclusion: across self-report mea￾sures of personality, conducted by different investigators and over differing time inter￾vals of adulthood, the traits of Neuroticism, Extraversion, Openness, Agreeableness, and 
Conscientiousness all show moderate to high levels of stability. The average correlation 
across these traits, scales, and time intervals is roughly +.65. These basic findings have 
been replicated recently in a large British sample (Furnham & Cheng, 2019c).
These studies all rely on self-report. What are the stability coefficients when other 
data sources are used? In one six-year longitudinal study of adults using spouse ratings, 
Table 5.4 Stability Coefficients for Selected Personality Scales 
in Adult Samples
Factor/Scale Interval r
Neuroticism
NEO-PI N
16PF Q4: Tense
ACL Adapted Child
Neuroticism
GZTS Emotional Stability (low)
MMPI Factor
 6
10
16
18
24
30
Median:
.83
.67
.66
.46
.62
.56
.64
Extraversion
NEO-PI E
16PF H: Adventurous
ACL Self-Confidence
Social Extraversion
GZTS Sociability
MMPI Factor
 6
10
16
18
24
30
Median:
.82
.74
.60
.57
.68
.56
.64
Openness
NEO-PI O
16PF I: Tender-Minded
GZTS Thoughtfulness
MMPI Intellectual Interests
 6
10
24
30
Median:
.83
.54
.66
.62
.64
Agreeableness
NEO-PI A
Agreeableness
GZTS Friendliness
MMPI Cynicism (low)
 3
18
24
30
Median:
.63
.46
.65
.65
.64
Conscientiousness
NEO-PI C
16PF G: Conscientious
ACL Endurance
Impulse Control
GZTS Restraint
 3
10
16
18
24
Median:
.79
.48
.67
.46
.64
.67
Note: Interval is given in years; all retest correlations are significant at p < .01. NEO-PI = NEO Personality Inventory, ACL = Adjective Check 
List, GZTS = Guilford Zimmerman Temperament Survey, MMPI = Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory.
Source: Costa & McCrae, 1994. These stability coefficients are similar to those of all subsequent studies. A longitudinal study in 
Finland, for example, found that the five factors showed adult rank order stability ranging from .65 to .97 (Rantanen et al., 2007).
Final PDF to printer135
lar31869_ch05_122-151.indd 135 09/28/22 12:16 PM
CHAPTER FIVE Personality Dispositions over Time: Stability, Coherence, and Change
stability coefficients were +.83 for Neuroticism, +.77 for Extraversion, and +.80 for 
Openness (Costa & McCrae, 1988). Another study used peer ratings of personality to 
study stability over a seven-year interval. Stability coefficients ranged from +.63 to +.81 
for the five-factor taxonomy of personality (Costa & McCrae, 1992). In sum, moder￾ate to high levels of personality stability, in the individual differences sense, are found 
whether the data source is self-report, spouse-report, or peer-report.
Studies continue to confirm the rank order stability of personality during the adult 
years. In one study, Robins and his colleagues (Robins et al., 2001) studied 275 col￾lege students during their freshman year, and then again in their senior year. Across 
the four years of college, the rank order stability obtained was .63 for Extraversion, 
.60 for Agreeableness, .59 for Conscientiousness, .53 for Neuroticism, and .70 for 
Openness. A study of 2,141 German students tested over a two-year period from college 
to employment found stabilities of .70 for Extraversion, .65 for Agreeableness, .69 for 
Conscientiousness, .65 for Neuroticism, and .75 for Openness (Ludtke, Trautwein, & 
Husemann, 2009). In sum, the moderate levels of rank order stability of the Big Five are 
highly replicable across different populations and investigators.
Similar findings emerge for personality dispositions that are not strictly sub￾sumed by the Big Five. In a massive meta-analytic study of the stability of self-esteem—
how good people feel about themselves—Trzesniewski, Donnellan, and Robins (2003) 
found high levels of continuity over time. Summarizing 50 published studies involving 
29,839 individuals and four large national studies involving 74,381 individuals, they 
found stability correlations ranging from the .50s to the .70s. How people feel about 
themselves—their level of self-confidence—appears very consistent over time. Similar 
findings have been obtained with measures of prosocial orientation and interpersonal 
empathy (Eisenberg et al., 2002). In sum, personality dispositions, whether the stan￾dard Big Five or other dispositions, show moderate to considerable rank order stability 
over time in adulthood.
Researchers have posed an intriguing question about rank order personality stabil￾ity in the individual differences sense: When does personality consistency peak? That is, 
is there a point in life when people’s personality traits become so firm that they don’t 
change much relative to those of other people? To address this question, Roberts and 
DelVecchio (2000) conducted a meta-analysis of 152 longitudinal studies of personality. 
The key variable they examined was personality consistency, defined as the correlation 
between Time 1 and Time 2 measures of personality (e.g., the correlation between a per￾sonality trait at age 15 and the same trait at age 18).
Roberts and DelVecchio (2000) found two key results. First, personality consis￾tency tends to increase with increasing age. For example, the average personality con￾sistency during the teenage years was +.47. This jumped to +.57 during the decade of 
the twenties and +.62 during the thirties (see Vaidya et al., 2008, for similar results). 
Personality consistency peaked during the decade of the fifties at +.75. As the authors 
conclude, “trait consistency increases in a linear fashion from infancy to middle age 
where it then reaches its peak after age 50” (p. 3). As people age, personality appears to 
become more and more “set.”
Mean Level Stability and Change in Adulthood
The five-factor model of personality also shows fairly consistent mean level stability over 
time, as shown in Figure 5.2. Especially after age 50, there is little change in the aver￾age level of stability in Openness, Extraversion, Neuroticism, Conscientiousness, and 
Agreeableness. 
Final PDF to printer136
lar31869_ch05_122-151.indd 136 09/28/22 12:16 PM
PART ONE The Dispositional Domain
Little change, however, does not mean no change. In fact, there are small but 
consistent changes in these personality traits, especially during the decade of the twen￾ties. As you can see in Figure 5.2, there is a tendency for Openness, Extraversion, and 
Neuroticism to gradually decline with increasing age until around age 50. At the same 
time, Conscientiousness and Agreeableness show a gradual increase over time—effects 
found in Switzerland, Germany, as well as in the United States (Anusic, Lucas, & 
Donnellan, 2012; Specht, Egloff, & Schmukle, 2011). The magnitude of these age effects 
is not large.
Studies confirm that mean level personality traits change in slight, but nonetheless 
important, ways during adulthood. By far the most consistent change is a good one—
people score lower on Neuroticism or Negative Affect as they grow older. From fresh￾man to senior years in college, for example, students show a decrease in Neuroticism 
corresponding to roughly half a standard deviation (d = −.49) (Robins et al., 2001). 
Students reported experiencing less negative affect and more positive affect over time 
(Vaidya et al., 2002). A study from adolescence to midlife also found a decrease in the 
experience of Negative Affect—individuals feel less anxious, less distressed, and less irri￾table as they move into midlife (McCrae et al., 2002). Emotional stability even increases 
from middle adulthood (ages 42–46) to older age (ages 60–64) (Alleman, Zimprich, & 
Hertzog, 2007). Similar findings were obtained in a longitudinal study of 2,804 individu￾als over a 23-year time span—Negative Affect decreased consistently as the participants 
got older (Charles, Reynolds, & Gatz, 2001).
Figure 5.2
The figure shows the mean level of five traits over the life span. Although the average scores on each trait 
are quite stable over time, Openness, Extraversion, and Neuroticism show a gradual decline from age 30 
to 50. In contrast, Agreeableness shows a gradual increase over these ages.
Source: Costa & McCrae, 1994.
O
E
N
C (n.s.)
A
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
Very low Low Average
Mean level of trait
High Very high
Very lowLowAverageHighVery high
30 40 50
Age (years) 
60 70 80
N = Neuroticism, E = Extraversion, O = Openness, A = Agreeableness, C = Conscientiousness
Final PDF to printer137
lar31869_ch05_122-151.indd 137 09/28/22 12:16 PM
CHAPTER FIVE Personality Dispositions over Time: Stability, Coherence, and Change
A meta-analysis of 92 different samples found that both women and men gradu￾ally become more emotionally stable as they grow older, with the largest changes 
occurring between the ages of 22 and 40 (Roberts, Walton, & Viechtbauer, 2006). 
Increases in emotional stability (or decreases in Neuroticism) with age also have been 
found in Germany (Lehmann et al., 2013) and Japan (Kawamoto, 2016). A study 
of 1,600 men found that those who got married showed above-average increases in 
emotional stability compared to their bachelor peers (Mroczek & Spiro, 2003). In 
sum, most people become less emotionally volatile, less anxious, and generally less 
neurotic as they mature—a nice thing to look forward to for people whose current 
lives contain a lot of emotional turmoil.
Some people, however, change more than others (Johnson et al., 2007; Neyer, 
2006; Vaidya et al., 2008). People who experience very few stressful life events show 
the largest decreases in Neuroticism over time (Jeronimus et al., 2014). In contrast, 
those who experience a lot of stressful life events tend to increase in Neuroticism 
over time. Being high on Neuroticism seems to cause people to get themselves into 
stressful life events. So the link between Neuroticism and stress seems to be bidi￾rectional. Entering into a stable romantic relationship, transitioning to becoming a 
parent, and investing heavily in work all seem to have the effect of increasing lev￾els of Conscientiousness compared to those who do not enter into these adult roles 
(Bleidorn, 2012; Hudson & Roberts, 2016; van Scheppingen et al., 2016; Wagner, 
Lüdtke, & Trautwein, 2015).
While Neuroticism and Negative Affect decline with age, people score higher on 
Agreeableness and Conscientiousness as they grow older. One study found an increase 
in Agreeableness of nearly half a standard deviation (d = +.44), and Conscientiousness 
increased roughly one-quarter of a standard deviation (d = +.27) (Robins et al., 2001). 
The facets of Conscientiousness that increase most with age are industriousness (working 
hard), impulse control, and reliability (Jackson et al., 2009). Similar findings have been 
discovered by other researchers: College students become more agreeable, extraverted, 
and conscientious from freshman year to two and a half years later (Vaidya et al., 2002); 
Agreeableness and Conscientiousness increase throughout early and middle adulthood 
(Srivastava et al., 2003); Positive Affect increases from the late teen years through the 
early fifties (Charles et al., 2001). Increases in Agreeableness over the course of adult￾hood have been found in Germany and Japan (Lehmann et al., 2013; Kawamoto, 2016). 
Some studies find increases in the trait of Openness with age, although these are less 
robust than changes in traits such as emotional stability. One study found an increase in 
Openness from adolescence to young adulthood (Pullman, Raudsepp, & Allik, 2006), 
whereas another study found this Openness increase in a similar age group only for 
women (Branje, van Lieshout, & Geris, 2006). Perhaps a good summary of the mean 
level personality changes comes directly from the longitudinal researchers: “The person￾ality changes that did take place from adolescence to adulthood reflected growth in the 
direction of greater maturity; many adolescents became more controlled and socially 
more confident and less angry and alienated” (Roberts, Caspi, & Moffitt, 2001, p. 670). 
These personality changes have been dubbed the maturity principle (Caspi, Roberts, & 
Shiner, 2005).
Finally, the Big Five personality dispositions may be changeable through 
therapy. Piedmont (2001) evaluated the effects of an outpatient drug rehabilita￾tion program on personality dispositions, as indexed by the Big Five. The therapy, 
administered to 82 men and 50 women over a six-week period, revealed fascinating 
findings. Those who went through the program showed a decrease in Neuroticism 
and increases in Agreeableness and Conscientiousness (d = .38). These personality 
Final PDF to printer138
lar31869_ch05_122-151.indd 138 09/28/22 12:16 PM
PART ONE The Dispositional Domain
changes were largely maintained in a follow-up assessment 15 months later, although 
not quite as dramatically (d = 28). Programs to help people change their personality 
traits when they want change, notably to become lower on Neuroticism, have met 
with some success (Hudson & Fraley, 2015).
In sum, although personality dispositions generally show high levels of mean 
stability over time, predictable changes occur with age and perhaps also with 
therapy—lower Neuroticism and Negative Affect, higher Agreeableness, higher 
Conscientiousness.
? Each person’s personality is, in some ways, stable over time; however, in other ways, it changes 
over time. In this exercise, you can evaluate yourself in terms of what describes you now and 
how you think you will be in the future (Markus & Nurius, 1986). Following is a list of items. 
For each one, simply rate it on a 1–7 scale, with 1 meaning “does not describe me at all” to 
7 meaning “is a highly accurate description of me.” Give a rating for each of two questions: (1) 
Does this describe me now? and (2) Will this describe me in the future?
Exercise
Items Describes Me 
Now
Will Describe Me in the 
Future
Happy
Confident
Depressed
Lazy
Travels widely
Has lots of friends
Destitute (poor)
Sexy
In good shape
Speaks well in public
Makes own decisions
Manipulates people
Powerful
Unimportant
Compare your answers to the two questions. Items you gave the same answers to indicate that 
you believe this attribute will remain stable over time. The items that change, however, may 
reflect the ways in which your personality will change over time.
You can view your possible self in a number of ways, but two are especially important. 
The first pertains to the desired self—the person you wish to become. Some people wish to 
become happier, more powerful, or in better physical shape. The second pertains to your feared 
self—the sort of person you do not wish to become, such as poor or rigid. Which aspects of your 
possible self do you desire? Which aspects do you fear?
Final PDF to printer139
lar31869_ch05_122-151.indd 139 09/28/22 12:16 PM
CHAPTER FIVE Personality Dispositions over Time: Stability, Coherence, and Change
Personality Change
Global measures of personality traits, such as the five-factor model, give us hints that per￾sonality can change over time. But researchers who have focused heavily on personality 
stability have not explicitly designed studies to assess personality change. It is important 
to remember that knowledge about personality change is sparse.
One reason for the relative lack of knowledge about change is that there might be 
a bias among researchers against even looking for personality change (Helson & Stewart, 
1994). As Block (1971) notes, even the terms used to describe stability and change are 
laden with evaluative meaning. Terms that refer to absence of change tend to be positive: 
consistency, stability, continuity, and constancy all seem like good things to have. On the 
other hand, inconsistency, instability, discontinuity, and inconstancy all seem undesirable 
or unpredictable.
Changes in Self-Esteem from Adolescence to Adulthood
In a unique longitudinal study, Block and Robbins (1993) examined self-esteem and the 
personality characteristics associated with those whose self-esteem had changed over 
time. Self-esteem was defined as “the extent to which one perceives oneself as relatively 
close to being the person one wants to be and/or as relatively distant from being the kind 
of person one does not want to be, with respect to person-qualities one positively and 
negatively values” (Block & Robbins, 1993, p. 911). Self-esteem was measured by use of 
an overall difference between a current self-description and an ideal self-description: the 
researchers hypothesized that the smaller the discrepancy, the higher the self-esteem. 
Conversely, the larger the discrepancy between current and ideal selves, the lower the 
self-esteem.
The participants were first assessed on self-esteem at age 14, roughly the first year 
of high school. They were assessed again at age 23, roughly five years after high school.
For the sample as a whole, there was no change in self-esteem with increasing age. 
However, when males and females were examined separately, a startling trend emerged. 
Over time, the genders departed from each other, with men’s self-esteem tending to 
increase and women’s self-esteem tending to decrease. The males tended, on average, 
to increase in self-esteem by roughly a fifth of a standard deviation, whereas the females 
tended, on average, to decrease in self-esteem by roughly a standard deviation. This is an 
example of personality change at the group level—the two subgroups (females and males) 
changed in different directions over time.
In sum, the transition from early adolescence to early adulthood appears to be 
harder on women than on men, at least in terms of self-esteem. As a whole, females tend 
to decrease in self-esteem, an increasing gap between their current self-conceptions and 
their ideal selves. Males tend to show a smaller discrepancy between their real and ideal 
selves over the same time period.
Autonomy, Dominance, Leadership, and Ambition
Another longitudinal study examined 266 male managerial candidates at the business 
AT&T (Howard & Bray, 1988). The researchers first tested these men when they were in 
their twenties (in the late 1950s) and then followed them up periodically over a 20-year 
time span when they were in their forties (in the late 1970s).
Final PDF to printer140
lar31869_ch05_122-151.indd 140 09/28/22 12:16 PM
PART ONE The Dispositional Domain
Several dramatic personality changes were 
observed. The most startling change was a steep 
drop in the ambition score. This drop was steepest 
during the first eight years but continued to drop 
over the next 12 years. The drop was steepest for 
the college men, less so for the non-college men, 
although note that the college men started out 
higher on ambition than did the non-college men. 
Supplementary interview data suggested that the 
men had become more realistic about their limited 
possibilities for promotion in the company. It is not 
that these men lost interest in their jobs or became 
less effective. Indeed, their scores on autonomy, 
leadership motivation, achievement, and dominance
all increased over time (see Figure 5.3). 
Sensation Seeking
Conventional wisdom suggests that people 
become more cautious and conservative with age. 
Studies of sensation seeking confirm this. The 
Sensation-Seeking Scale (SSS) contains four subscales, each containing items as a 
forced-choice between two distinct options. First is thrill and adventure seeking, with 
items such as “I would like to try parachute jumping” versus “I would never want to 
try jumping out of a plane, with or without a parachute.” The other scales are experi￾ence seeking (e.g., “I am not interested in experience for its own sake” versus “I like to 
have new and exciting experiences and sensations even if they are a little frightening, 
unconventional, or illegal”); disinhibition (e.g., “I like wild, uninhibited parties” ver￾sus “I prefer quiet parties with good conversation”); and boredom susceptibility (e.g., 
“I get bored seeing the same old faces” versus “I like the comfortable familiarity of 
everyday friends”).
Sensation seeking increases with age from childhood to adolescence and peaks in 
late adolescence around 18–20; then it falls as people get older (Zuckerman, 1974). This 
age trend of sensation seeking has been replicated within the United States and across 
many cultures (Chan et al., 2012; Steinberg et al., 2008). Parachute jumping and wild, 
uninhibited parties seem to be less appealing to older folks.
Femininity
In a study of women from Mills College in the San Francisco bay area, Helson and 
Wink (1992) examined changes in personality between the early forties and early 
fifties. They used the California Psychological Inventory at both time periods. The 
most dramatic change occurred on the femininity scale (now called the femininity/
masculinity scale). High scorers on femininity are described by observers as depen￾dent, emotional, feminine, gentle, high-strung, mild, nervous, sensitive, sentimental, 
submissive, sympathetic, and worrying (Gough, 1996). Low scorers (i.e., those who 
score in the masculine direction) tend to be described as aggressive, assertive, boastful, 
confident, determined, forceful, independent, masculine, self-confident, strong, and 
tough. In terms of acts performed (recall the act frequency approach from Chapter 3), 
as reported by the spouses of these women, high scorers on the femininity scale tend 
Figure 5.3
The figure shows change with age in autonomy scores of men in the 
AT&T study. Both college-educated and non-college-educated men tend 
to become more autonomous or independent as they grow older.
College Non-college
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Autonomy percentile
0 8 20
Study year
0 8 20
Final PDF to printer141
lar31869_ch05_122-151.indd 141 09/28/22 12:16 PM
CHAPTER FIVE Personality Dispositions over Time: Stability, Coherence, and Change
Most personality psychologists who study 
self-esteem focus on a person’s average 
level, whether the person is generally 
high, low, or average in their self-esteem. 
A few studies have examined changes in 
self-esteem over long time spans in peo￾ple’s lives—for example, in the years from 
adolescence to adulthood. However, with 
some reflection, most of us would realize 
that we often change from day to day in 
how we feel about ourselves. Some days 
are better than other days when it comes 
to self-esteem. Some days we feel incom￾petent, that things are out of our control, 
and that we even feel a little worthless. 
Other days we feel satisfied with our￾selves, that we are particularly strong or 
competent, and that we are satisfied with 
who we are and what we can become. 
Feelings of self-esteem can change not 
just from year to year but also from day 
to day.
Psychologist Michael Kernis studied 
how changeable or variable people are in 
two qualities of self-esteem as in the figure 
below.
Kernis and colleagues (1991, 1992) 
have suggested that self-esteem variabil￾ity is related to how much one’s self-view 
is influenced by events, particularly social 
events. Some people’s self-esteem is 
pushed and pulled by the happenings of life 
more than other people’s. For example, for 
some people, self-esteem might soar with 
a compliment and plummet with a social 
slight. Others, who can better roll with 
the punches of life, might be more stable 
in their self-esteem, weathering both the 
downs and ups of life without much change 
in their self-view.
Several studies have examined 
whether self-esteem variability predicts life 
outcomes, such as depressive reactions to 
stress. In one study (Kernis et al., 1991), 
self-esteem level was related to depres￾sion, but this relation was much stronger for 
those higher in self-esteem variability than 
for those lower in self-esteem variability. 
their self-esteem in terms of day-to-day 
fluctuations. Self-esteem variability is the 
magnitude of short-term changes in ongo￾ing self-esteem (Kernis, Grannemann, & 
Mathis, 1991).  Variability is measured by 
having people keep records of how they 
feel about themselves for several consecu￾tive days, sometimes for weeks or months. 
From these daily records, the researchers 
can determine just how much each person 
fluctuates, as well as their average level of 
self-esteem.
Researchers make a distinction 
between level and variability of self￾esteem. These two aspects of self-esteem 
turn out to be unrelated to each other and 
are hypothesized to interact in predicting 
important life outcomes, such as depres￾sion (Kernis, Grannemann, & Barclay, 1992). 
For example, variability in self-esteem is 
an indicator that the person’s self-esteem, 
even if high, is fragile, and the person is 
vulnerable to stress. Consequently, we can 
think of level and variability as defining 
A Closer Look Day-to-Day Changes in Self-Esteem
Level of self-esteem (whether one is high or low) and variability in self-esteem (whether one is stable or variable from 
day to day) are unrelated to each other. This makes it possible to find people with different combinations, such as a 
person who has a high level of self-esteem but is also variable.
Variable
Self-esteem
variability
Stable
Low
Self-esteem level
High
(Continued)
Final PDF to printer142
lar31869_ch05_122-151.indd 142 09/28/22 12:16 PM
PART ONE The Dispositional Domain
to do such things as send cards to friends on holidays and remember an acquaintance’s 
birthday. Low scorers tend to take charge of committee meetings and take initiative in 
sexual encounters (Gough, 1996).
A fascinating change occurred in this sample of educated women—they showed a 
consistent drop in femininity as they moved from their early forties to their early fifties—
a group level change in this personality variable. Women who choose not to have chil￾dren also score lower in femininity than women who do have children, although this 
may not reflect change so much as choices made based on this preexisting personality 
dimension (Newton & Stewart, 2013).
Independence and Traditional Roles
The longitudinal study of Mills College women 
(Helson & Picano, 1990) yielded another fasci￾nating finding. The women were divided into four 
distinct groups: (1) homemakers with intact mar￾riages and children, (2) working mothers with chil￾dren (neotraditionals), (3) divorced mothers, and 
(4) non-mothers (Helson & Picano, 1990). Figure 
5.4 shows the results for the CPI Independence 
scale, which measures two related facets of person￾ality. The first is self-assurance, resourcefulness, 
and competence. The second is distancing self from 
others and not bowing to conventional demands of 
society. The act frequency correlates of this scale 
reflect these themes (Gough, 1996). Those high on 
the Independence scale tend to set goals for groups 
they are in, talk to many people at parties, and take 
charge of the group when the situation calls for it. 
High scorers also tend to interrupt conversations 
and do not always follow instructions from those 
who are in a position to lead (hence, distancing 
themselves from others in these ways). 
In other words, at all levels of self-esteem, 
the participants who were low in vari￾ability showed less of a relation between 
self-esteem and depression than did the 
participants who were high in variability. 
Similar results were obtained by Butler, 
Hokanson, and Flynn (1994), who showed 
that self-esteem variability is a good pre￾dictor of who would become depressed six 
months later, especially when there was life 
stress in the intervening months. Variability 
have suggested that variable individuals 
are dependent for their self-worth on the 
approval of others. They are very sensitive 
to social feedback, and they judge them￾selves through the eyes of others. High￾variability individuals show (1) an enhanced 
sensitivity to evaluative events, (2) an 
increased concern about their self-concept, 
(3) an over-reliance on social sources for 
self-evaluation, and (4) anger and hostility 
when things don’t go their way.
indicates that the person may have a frag￾ile sense of self-value and that, with stress, 
he or she may become more chronically 
depressed than someone whose self￾esteem is more stable. 
Researchers have come to view 
self-esteem variability as a vulnerability 
to stressful life events (Roberts & Monroe, 
1992). That is, variability is thought to result 
from a particular sensitivity in one’s sense of 
self-worth. Psychologists Ryan & Deci (2000) 
A Closer Look (Continued )
Figure 5.4
Means on the CPI Independence scale at ages 21 and 43 for homemakers 
(n = 17) and three groups of women with less traditional role paths: 
neotraditional, n = 35; divorced, n = 26; and non-mothers, n = 26.
22
21
20
19
18
CPI Independence
Age 21 Age 43
Divorced
Homemakers
Non-mothers
Neotraditionals
Final PDF to printer143
lar31869_ch05_122-151.indd 143 09/28/22 12:16 PM
CHAPTER FIVE Personality Dispositions over Time: Stability, Coherence, and Change
For the divorced mothers, non-mothers, and working mothers, independence 
scores increased significantly over time. Only the traditional homemakers showed no 
increase in independence over time. These data, of course, are correlational, so we can￾not infer causation. It is possible that something about the roles affected the degree to 
which the women became more independent. It is also possible that the women who 
were less likely to increase in independence were happy to remain in the traditional 
homemaking role. Regardless of the interpretation, this study illustrates the utility of 
examining subgroups within the population.
In sum, there are enough empirical clues to suggest that personality traits show 
some predictable changes with age. First, impulsivity and sensation seeking show pre￾dictable declines with age. Second, men tend to become somewhat less ambitious with 
age. There are indications that both men and women become somewhat more compe￾tent and independent with increasing age. Finally, there are hints that changes in inde￾pendence are linked with the role and lifestyle adopted, with traditional homemaking 
women increasing less on independence than women who get divorced or pursue work 
and careers.
Personality Changes Across Cohorts: Assertiveness and Narcissism
One interest issue in exploring personality change over time is determining whether the 
changes observed are due to true personal change that all people undergo as they age 
or, conversely, changes in the cohort effects—the social times in 
which they lived. Jean Twenge (2000, 2001a, 2001b) has been 
at the forefront in exploring personality change that is likely to 
be caused by cohort effects. She argues that American society 
has changed dramatically over the past nine decades. One of 
the most dramatic changes centers on women’s status and roles. 
During the depression era of the 1930s, for example, women 
were expected to be self-sufficient, but during the 1950s and 
1960s, women assumed a more domestic role. Then from 1968 
through 1993, women surged into the workforce and American 
society increasingly adopted norms of sexual equality. For exam￾ple, from 1950 to 1993, the number of women obtaining bach￾elor’s degrees doubled roughly from 25 to 50 percent. And the 
number of women obtaining PhDs, medical degrees, and law 
degrees all more than tripled. As of 2021, women now outnum￾ber men in attending college in many countries. In the United 
Kingdom, to take one example, 36 percent more women than 
men apply to universities (Bilton, 2018), and women tend to be 
more qualified for entrance than men, based on their superior 
grades. In the United States, more than 56 percent of college 
students are women (Renn & Reason, 2021). Have these societal 
changes impacted women’s personality?
Twenge (2001a) discovered that women’s trait scores on 
assertiveness rose and fell dramatically, depending on the cohort 
in which the woman was raised. Women’s assertiveness scores 
generally rose half a standard deviation from 1931 to 1945; 
fell by roughly that amount from 1951 to 1967; and then rose 
again from 1968 to 1993. On measures such as the California 
Women’s assertiveness scores rose from 1968 to 1993, pointing 
to a cohort effect.
Tetra Images/Corbis
Final PDF to printer144
lar31869_ch05_122-151.indd 144 09/28/22 12:16 PM
PART ONE The Dispositional Domain
Psychological Inventory scale of Dominance, for example, women increased +.31 of a 
standard deviation from 1968 to 1993. Men, in contrast, did not show significant cohort 
differences in their levels of assertiveness or dominance. Twenge (2001a) concludes that 
“social change truly becomes internalized with the individual . . . girls absorb the cultural 
messages they received from the world around them, and their personalities are molded 
by these messages” (p. 142).
Older people sometimes complain that the younger generation is too self-centered 
(“The kids these days!”). Is there any truth to these laments? Twenge et al., (2008) 
explored this issue by analyzing the personality syndrome labeled narcissism—those who 
tend to be self-centered, exhibitionistic, self-aggrandizing, interpersonally exploitative, 
grandiose, lacking empathy, and having an undue sense of entitlement (Buss & Chiodo, 
1991). Twenge et al., (2008) found that scores on narcissism increased by about a third 
of standard deviation between 1982 and 2006. Based on a study of 30,073 individuals, 
critics of this analysis concluded that the evidence for major cohort changes in narcis￾sism is actually weak (ranging from +.02 to +.04) and that there is little evidence for “an 
emerging epidemic of narcissism” (Donnallan, Trzesniewski, & Robins, 2009). Similar 
debates occur in studies of narcissism in China. One study found that younger Chinese 
individuals were more narcissistic than older cohorts, and children from single-child fami￾lies were slightly more narcissistic than children from multiple-child families (Cai, Kwan, & 
Sedikedes, 2012). In contrast, a recent meta-analysis of multiple studies published from 
2008 to 2017 concluded that younger Chinese were actually slightly less narcissistic than 
older Chinese (Gao et al., 2019). Although the debate about narcissism continues, cau￾tious readers may wish to wait for further evidence before concluding that today’s youth 
are truly more self-centered than their elders.
Can You Intentionally Change Your Personality?
A fascinating question is whether people can actively and intentionally change their 
personality traits in the directions they desire in order to promote positive life out￾comes. To address this question, researchers designed a three-month-long digital 
intervention using a Smartphone application (Steiger, Lewetz, & Swami, 2021). They 
described for participants each of the Big Five personality traits, and asked them 
to pick one for which they desired change. For example, if the goal was to increase 
Extraversion: “I want to be more extraverted, which means to be more sociable; to have 
more energy and zest for action; to be less quiet; to be more active and enterprising; to 
take the lead more often” (Steiger, Lewetz, & Swami, 2021, p. 8). The interventions 
consisted of a set of tools on the Smartphone app, including a daily diary, reminders 
of their implementation goals, educational video clips, and two active contacts from 
per day for three months.
Compared to a control group who did not receive the active intervention, those 
who did succeeded in changing some personality traits over the course of three months. 
Those who desired to increase their extraversion, agreeableness, and conscientiousness 
succeeded in doing so over the course of three months. Perhaps even more impressive, 
people who desired to decrease their level of neuroticism also succeeded in doing so. 
Because these traits are linked with important life outcomes, such as success in the work￾place, successful mateships, and overall life satisfaction, changing traits in directions 
desired should increase the odds of these successful life outcomes.
The authors attribute the success of the personality change intervention to 
several factors: (1) the Smartphone app was specifically designed to provide micro￾interventions to achieve the personality change goals each person identified; (2) the 
Final PDF to printer145
lar31869_ch05_122-151.indd 145 09/28/22 12:16 PM
CHAPTER FIVE Personality Dispositions over Time: Stability, Coherence, and Change
app allowed daily contact, which typically cannot be achieved with a live in-person 
coach; (3) participants were highly motivated to work on the aspects of their personal￾ity that they wished to change.
The success of this personality change intervention suggests that personality traits 
may not be as “set in plaster” as previously thought. At least some personality traits can 
be actively changed through an intensive digital intervention in the directions people 
desire to change.
Personality Coherence over Time: Prediction 
of Socially Relevant Outcomes
The final form of personality development is called personality coherence, defined as 
predictable changes in the manifestations or outcomes of personality factors over time, 
even if the underlying characteristics remain stable. We focus on the consequences of 
personality for socially relevant outcomes, such as marital stability and divorce; alcohol￾ism, drug use, and emotional disturbance; and job outcomes later in life.
Marital Stability, Marital Satisfaction, and Divorce
In a longitudinal study of unprecedented length, Kelly and Conley (1987) studied a sam￾ple of 300 couples from their engagements in the 1930s all the way through their status 
later in life in the 1980s. At the final testing, the median age of the subjects was 68 years. 
Within the entire sample of 300 couples, 22 couples broke their engagements and did 
not get married. Of the 278 couples who did get married, 50 ended up getting divorced 
sometime between 1935 and 1980.
During the first testing in the 1930s, acquaintances rated each participant’s per￾sonality on many dimensions. Three aspects of personality proved to be strong predic￾tors of marital dissatisfaction and divorce—the neuroticism of the husband, the lack of 
impulse control of the husband, and the neuroticism of the wife. High levels of neuroti￾cism proved the strongest. Neuroticism predicted marital dissatisfaction of both the men 
and the women in the 1930s, again in 1955, and yet again in 1980. Subsequent studies 
confirm that neuroticism predicts divorce (Spikic & Mortelmans, 2021).
The couples who had a stable and satisfying marriage had neuroticism scores 
roughly half a standard deviation lower than the couples who subsequently got divorced.
The reasons for divorce themselves appear to be linked to the personality char￾acteristics measured earlier in life. The husbands with low impulse control when first 
assessed, for example, tended later in life to have extramarital affairs—breaches of the 
marital vows that loomed large among the major reasons cited for the divorce. The men 
with higher impulse control appear to have been able to refrain from having sexual flings, 
which are so detrimental to marriages (Buss, 2016). Another study of Chinese married 
couples found that the traits of Machiavellianism (high interpersonal exploitativeness) 
and psychopathy (low empathy) predicted high levels of marital instability (He et al., 
2018). Beyond these main effects, personality similarity with one’s marriage partner is 
linked with longer and more stable marriages; couples more dissimilar in personality are 
more likely to break up (Rammstedt et al., 2013).
These results point to an important conclusion about personality coherence. 
Personality may not be destiny, but it leads to important and predictable life outcomes, 
such as infidelity, marital unhappiness, and divorce.
Final PDF to printer146
lar31869_ch05_122-151.indd 146 09/28/22 12:16 PM
PART ONE The Dispositional Domain
Interestingly, neuroticism also plays a role in another important life outcome—
resilience after losing a spouse. A fascinating longitudinal study showed that one of the 
best predictors of coping well with the death of a spouse was the personality disposition 
of emotional stability (Bonanno et al., 2002). A total of 205 individuals were assessed 
several years prior to the death of their spouse and again 18 months after their spouse’s 
demise. Those high on emotional stability grieved less, showed less depression, and dis￾played the quickest psychological recovery. Individuals low on emotional stability (high 
on neuroticism) were still psychologically anguished a year and a half later. Personality, 
in short, affects many aspects of romantic life: who is likely to get involved in a success￾ful romantic relationship (Shiner, Masten, & Tellegen, 2002); which marriages remain 
stable and highly satisfying (Kelly & Conley, 1987); which people are more likely to get 
divorced (Kelly & Conley, 1987); and how people cope following the loss of a spouse 
(Bonanno et al., 2002).
Alcoholism, Drug Use, and Emotional Disturbance
Personality also predicts the later development of alcoholism and emotional disturbance 
(Conley & Angelides, 1984). Of the 233 men in one longitudinal study, 40 were judged 
to develop a serious emotional problem or alcoholism. These 40 men had earlier been 
rated by their acquaintances as high on neuroticism. Specifically, they had neuroti￾cism scores roughly three-fourths of a standard deviation higher than men who did not 
develop alcoholism or a serious emotional disturbance.
Early personality characteristics also were useful in distinguishing between the 
men who had become alcoholic and those who developed an emotional disturbance. 
Impulse control was the key factor. The alcoholic men had impulse control scores a 
full standard deviation lower than those who had an emotional disturbance. Other stud￾ies also find that those high on Sensation Seeking and Impulsivity, and low on traits 
such as Agreeableness and Conscientiousness, tend to abuse alcohol more than their 
peers (Cooper et al., 2003; Hampson et al., 2001; Markey, Markey, & Tinsley, 2003; 
Ruchkin et al., 2002). A study of more than 600 women and men found that high 
levels of impulsivity were linked with over-drinking and problem drinking of alcohol 
(Aluja et al., 2019). Low levels of Agreeableness and Conscientiousness are also linked 
Psychologists have identified personality variables that predict whether a marriage will turn out to be happy and satisfying or whether it will end in divorce. 
Although personality is not destiny, it does relate to important life outcomes, such as marital unhappiness and divorce.
Left: Ariel Skelley/Blend Images LLC; Right: Image Source/Alamy Stock Photo
Final PDF to printer147
lar31869_ch05_122-151.indd 147 09/28/22 12:16 PM
CHAPTER FIVE Personality Dispositions over Time: Stability, Coherence, and Change
to substance abuse (prescription and illegal drugs) in mid-life (Turiano et al., 2012). 
In sum, neuroticism and impulsivity are coherently linked with socially relevant out￾comes later in life.
Religiousness and Spirituality
Another important life outcome pertains to spirituality—the degree to which individu￾als embrace religion or seek to lead a spiritual life. Personality traits in adolescence 
predict these outcomes in late adulthood. Adolescents who scored high on conscien￾tiousness and agreeableness were more likely to score high on religiousness later in life 
(Wink et al., 2007). Openness to experience, in contrast, was the only personality trait in 
adolescence that predicted spirituality seeking in late life. Personality in youth appears 
to influence spirituality and religiousness later in life, regardless of the early socialization 
practices to which people are exposed.
Education, Academic Achievement, and Dropping Out
Impulsivity plays a key role in education and academic achievement. Kipnis (1971) had a 
group of individuals self-report on their levels of impulsivity. He also obtained their SAT 
scores, which are regarded as measures of academic achievement and potential. Among 
those with low SAT scores, there was no link between impulsivity and subsequent grade 
point average. Among those with high SAT scores, however, impulsive people had con￾sistently lower GPAs than their less impulsive peers. Impulsive individuals were more 
likely to flunk out of college than were those who were less impulsive. Impulsivity (or 
lack of self-control) also affects workplace performance. One longitudinal study looked 
at personality dispositions at age 18 and work-related outcomes at age 26 (Roberts, 
Caspi, & Moffitt, 2003). They found that those who were high on self-control at age 
18 had higher occupational attainment, greater involvement with their work, and more 
financial security at age 26. Conversely, the impulsive 18-year-olds were less likely to 
progress in their work, showed less psychological involvement, and experienced lower 
financial security.
The personality trait of Conscientiousness turns out to be the single best predictor 
of successful achievement in school and work. High Conscientiousness at age 3 predicts 
successful academic performance nine years later (Abe, 2005). Observer-based assess￾ment of children’s conscientiousness at ages 4–6 predicts school grades nine years later 
(Asendorpf & Van Aken, 2003). Conscientiousness of children assessed between the 
ages of 8 and 12 predicts academic attainment two decades later (Shiner, Masten, & 
Roberts, 2003). Although other personality traits also predict successful academic 
performance, such as Emotional Stability (Chamorro-Premuzic & Furnham, 2003a, 
2003b), and Agreeableness and Openness (Hair & Graziano, 2003), Conscientiousness 
is the most powerful longitudinal predictor of success in school and work. The predic￾tive power of Conscientiousness on educational outcomes has been replicated in other 
countries such as Luxembourg (Spengler et al., 2013).
A relatively new and much-hyped personality trait purported to predict education 
and achievement is Grit—defined by both perseverance and passion toward long-term 
goals (Duckworth et al., 2007). A massive meta-analysis of the Grit literature shows that 
it is highly correlated with Conscientiousness (Crede et al., 2016). Even after controlling 
for Conscientiousness, however, the perseverance facet of Grit does predict academic 
success, although the passion for long-term goals facet does not. Persistence seems to 
pay off more than pure passion when it comes to achievement.
Final PDF to printer148
lar31869_ch05_122-151.indd 148 09/28/22 12:16 PM
PART ONE The Dispositional Domain
Interestingly, work experiences also have an effect on personality change (Roberts 
et al., 2001). Those who attain high occupational status at age 26 have become happier, 
more self-confident, less anxious, and less self-defeating since they were 18 years old. 
Those who attain high work satisfaction also become less anxious and less prone to 
stress in their transition from adolescence to young adulthood.
Finally, what about people who attain financial success in the workplace? These 
individuals not only become less alienated and better able to handle stress, but they 
also increase their levels of social closeness—they like people more, turn to others for 
comfort, and like being around people. High conscientiousness continues to predict later 
income and net worth (Exley, 2021). In sum, just as personality at age 18 predicts work 
outcomes at age 26 (e.g., self-control and conscientiousness predict income), work out￾comes predict personality change over time. We see again that impulsivity is a critical 
personality factor that is linked in meaningful ways with later life outcomes.
Health, Retirement, and Longevity
How long people live and how healthy or sickly they become during their years of life are 
exceptionally important developmental outcomes. It may come as a surprise that your 
personality actually predicts how long you are likely to live. The most important traits 
conducive to living a long life are high conscientiousness, positive emotionality (extraver￾sion), low levels of hostility, and low levels of neuroticism (Danner, Snowdon, & Friesen, 
2001; Friedman et al., 1995; Miller et al., 1996; Mroczek, Spiro, & Turiano, 2009). 
Among these, Conscientiousness and Emotional Stability are the strongest predictors 
of living a long life (Jokela et al., 2019). What about centenarians, those who live to be 
100 years or more? A study of 272 Japanese centenarians found that these long-lived 
individuals score high on extraversion and low on neuroticism (da Rosa et al., 2021). 
There are several paths through which these personality traits affect longevity (Ozer & 
Benet-Martinez, 2006).
First, conscientious individuals engage in more health-promoting practices, such as 
maintaining a good diet and getting regular exercise; they also avoid unhealthy practices 
such as smoking and becoming a “couch potato.” Conscientious children in elementary 
school, for example, end up smoking less and drinking less alcohol when they are adults 
fully 40 years later (Hampson et al., 2006). Conscientiousness at age 17 also predicts 
refraining from engaging in legal (nicotine, alcohol) and illegal drug use three years later 
(Elkins et al., 2006). Those low on Conscientiousness in adolescence are more likely to 
get addicted in young adulthood to drugs of all sorts. Moreover, conscientious individuals 
are more likely to follow doctors’ orders and adhere to the treatment plans they recom￾mend. Being low on Conscientiousness (being impulsive or low on self-control) during 
the preschool years predicts high levels of risk-taking during adolescence (Honomichl & 
Donnellan, 2012). Being impulsive (undercontrolled) in childhood predicts an increased 
likelihood of high blood pressure and stroke 40 years later (Chapman & Goldberg, 
2011). Being impulsive also predicts unhealthy weight gain and weight fluctuations in later 
adulthood (Sutin et al., 2011). High conscientiousness and low neuroticism also predict 
better coping with anxiety surrounding Covid-19 (Nikčević et al., 2021).
Second, extraverts are more likely to have lots of friends, leading to a good social 
support network—factors linked with positive health outcomes. And third, low levels of 
hostility, a component of neuroticism, put less stress on the heart and cardiovascular 
system—a topic explored in greater detail in Chapter 18.
High levels of neuroticism are also linked with poor health behaviors, such as 
smoking, although neuroticism predicts mortality even after statistically controlling for 
smoking (Mroczek, Spiro, & Turiano, 2009). Those 
Final PDF to printer149
lar31869_ch05_122-151.indd 149 09/28/22 12:16 PM
CHAPTER FIVE Personality Dispositions over Time: Stability, Coherence, and Change
be at greater risk of suicide when they perceive they are a burden to others (Hartley 
et al., 2019). Neuroticism also affects adjustment to retirement from jobs. High scor￾ers on neuroticism experience more adjustment problems in retirement and more dif￾ficulty in coping with this critical transition that involves the loss of some social support 
(Hansson et al., 2019). High childhood intelligence predicts lower mortality risk over 
40 years (Wrulich et al., 2015). In sum, the personality traits of conscientiousness, 
positive emotionality (extraversion), low hostility, and high intelligence predict positive 
health outcomes and longevity.
Predicting Personality Change
Can we predict who is likely to change in personality and who is not? In a fascinat￾ing longitudinal study, Caspi and Herbener (1990) studied middle-aged couples over 
an 11-year period. The couples were tested twice, once in 1970 and again in 1981. 
All the subjects had been born in either 1920–1921 or 1928–1929 and were part of a 
larger longitudinal project.
The key question was this: Is the choice of a marriage partner a cause of personal￾ity stability or change? If you marry someone similar to you, do you tend to remain more 
stable over time than if you marry someone different from you? They reasoned that similar￾ity between spouses would support personality stability, because the couple would tend to 
reinforce one another on their attitudes, seek similar external sources of stimulation, and 
In a longitudinal study spanning 40 years, 
Caspi, Elder, & Bem (1987) explored the 
implications of childhood personality for 
adult occupational status and job out￾comes. They identified a group of explo￾sive, undercontrolled children, using 
interviews with their mothers as the data 
source. When the children were 8, 9, and 
11, their mothers rated the frequency and 
severity of their temper tantrums. Severe 
tantrums were defined as behaviors 
involving biting, kicking, striking, throw￾ing things, screaming, and shouting. From 
the sample, 38 percent of the boys and 
29 percent of the girls were classified as 
having frequent and uncontrolled temper 
tantrums.
These children were followed 
throughout life, and the adult manifesta￾tions of childhood personality for men 
were especially striking. The men who as 
children had frequent and severe temper 
compared with only 22 percent of the men 
without a childhood history of temper tan￾trums. In sum, early childhood personality 
shows coherent links with important adult 
social outcomes, such as job attainment, 
frequency of job switching, unemployment, 
military attainment, and divorce.
It is easy to imagine why explosive, 
undercontrolled individuals tend to achieve 
less and get divorced more. Life consists 
of many frustrations, and people deal 
with their frustrations in different ways. 
Explosive undercontrollers are probably 
more likely to blow up and yell at the boss, 
for example, or to quit their jobs during 
an impulsive moment. Similarly, explosive 
undercontrollers are probably more likely 
to vent their frustrations on their spouses or 
perhaps even to impulsively have an extra￾marital affair. All of these events are likely 
to lead to lower levels of job attainment 
and higher levels of divorce.
tantrums achieved lower levels of educa￾tion in adulthood. The occupational sta￾tus of their first job was also consistently 
lower than that of their calmer peers. The 
explosive children who had come from 
middle-class backgrounds tended to be 
downwardly mobile, and by midlife their 
occupational attainment was indistin￾guishable from that of their working-class 
counterparts. Furthermore, they tended to 
change jobs frequently, showed an erratic 
work pattern with more frequent breaks 
from employment, and averaged more 
months being unemployed.
Because 70 percent of the men in 
the sample served in the military, their 
military records could also be examined. 
The men who as children had been classi￾fied as having explosive temper tantrums 
attained a significantly lower military rank 
than their peers. Finally, 46 percent of 
these men were divorced by the age of 40, 
A Closer Look Adult Outcomes of Children with Temper Tantrums
Final PDF to printer150
lar31869_ch05_122-151.indd 150 09/28/22 12:16 PM
PART ONE The Dispositional Domain
attitude clashes and exposure to different social and environmental 
events, and it may generally create an environment uncomfortable 
to maintaining the status quo.
Using personality measures obtained on both husbands 
and wives, Caspi and Herbener divided the couples into three 
groups: those who were highly similar in personality, those who 
were moderately similar in personality, and those who were low 
in similarity. Then they examined which individuals showed 
stability in personality over the 11-year period of midlife. The 
results are shown in Figure 5.5.
Figure 5.5. The people married to spouses highly similar to 
themselves showed the most personality stability. Those married 
to spouses least similar to themselves showed the most personal￾ity change. The moderate group fell in between. This study is 
important in pointing to a potential source of personality stability 
and change—the selection of spouses. It will be interesting to see 
whether future research can document other sources of personality 
stability and change—perhaps by examining the selection of similar 
or dissimilar friends, or by selecting college or work environments 
that show a good “fit” with one’s personality traits upon entry into 
these environments (Roberts & Robins, 2004).
SUMMARY AND EVALUATION
Personality development includes both the continuities and changes over time. There are 
three forms of personality stability: (1) rank order stability is the maintenance of one’s 
relative position within a group over time; (2) mean level stability is the maintenance of 
the average level of a trait or characteristic over time; and (3) personality coherence is 
predictable changes in the manifestations of a trait. We can examine personality develop￾ment at three levels of personality analysis: the population level, the group differences 
level, and the individual differences level.
There is strong evidence for personality rank order stability over time. Temperaments 
such as activity level and fearfulness show moderate to high levels of stability during infancy. 
Activity level and aggression show moderate to high levels of stability during childhood. 
Bullies in childhood tend to become juvenile delinquents in adolescence and criminals 
in adulthood. Personality traits, such as those of the five-factor model, show moderate to 
high levels of stability during adulthood. In general, the stability coefficients decrease as the 
length of time between the two periods of testing increases.
Personality also changes in predictable ways over time. On the Big Five, Neuroticism 
generally decreases over time; people become a bit more emotionally stable as they age. 
Agreeableness and Conscientiousness tend to increase over time. These changes suggest 
increased maturity, as the sometimes tumultuous times of adolescence settle out into the matu￾rity of adulthood. Moving into adult roles such as a serious romantic relationship, becoming a 
parent, and investing heavily in work appears to increase people’s level of Conscientiousness. 
From early adolescence to early adulthood, men’s self-esteem tends to increase, whereas 
women’s self-esteem tends to decrease. Sensation seeking declines predictably with age. In 
women, femininity tends to decrease over time, notably from the early forties to the early fif￾ties. Several studies suggest that the personality characteristics of autonomy, independence, 
Figure 5.5
The figure shows the stability of personality over time as 
a function of the similarity (low, medium, or high) of the 
person to their spouse. Those married to someone similar 
show the highest levels of personality stability over time.
Source: Caspi & Herbener, 1990.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Stability correlations
Females
(25 per group)
Males 
(25 per group)
0.41
0.46
0.58
0.45
0.50
0.61
Low similarity
Moderate similarity
High similarity
Final PDF to printer151
lar31869_ch05_122-151.indd 151 09/28/22 12:16 PM
CHAPTER FIVE Personality Dispositions over Time: Stability, Coherence, and Change
personality development 124
rank order stability 124
mean level stability 125
mean level change 125
KEY TERMS
stability coefficients 131
validity coefficients 131
self-esteem 139
personality coherence 125
temperament 129
longitudinal studies 130
actometer 130
In addition to personality change due to age, there is also evidence that mean per￾sonality levels can be affected by the social cohort in which one grows up. Jean Twenge 
has documented several such effects, most notably on women’s levels of assertiveness 
or dominance. Women’s assertiveness levels were high following the 1930s, in which 
women had to be extremely independent; they fell during the 1950s and 1960s, when 
women were largely homemakers and fewer became professionals. From 1967 to 1993, 
however, women’s levels of assertiveness increased, corresponding to changes in their 
social roles and increasing participation in professional occupations. Twenge also pres￾ents some evidence for a general increase in narcissism among younger cohorts, although 
this conclusion has been challenged by others who find no cohort changes in narcissism.
Personality shows evidence of coherence over time. Early measures of personality 
can be used to predict socially relevant outcomes later in life. High levels of neuroticism in 
both sexes and impulsivity in men, for example, predict marital dissatisfaction and divorce. 
Neuroticism early in adulthood is also a good predictor of later alcoholism and the develop￾ment of emotional problems. Impulsivity plays a key role in the development of alcoholism 
and the failure to achieve one’s academic potential. Highly impulsive individuals tend to get 
poorer grades and drop out of school more than their less impulsive peers. Children with 
explosive temper tantrums tend to manifest their personalities as adults through downward 
occupational mobility, more frequent job switching, lower attainment of rank in the mili￾tary, and higher frequencies of divorce. People who are impulsive at age 18 tend to do more 
poorly in the workplace—they attain less occupational success and less financial security. 
Work experiences, in turn, appear to affect personality change. Those who attain occupa￾tional success tend to become happier, more self-confident, and less anxious over time.
What explains these forms of personality stability and coherence over time? One 
possibility pertains to our choices of romantic partners. People tend to choose those who 
are similar to themselves in personality, and the more similar our partners, the more 
stable our personality traits remain over time. Selecting a mate with a similar personality 
is also linked with experiencing a longer and more stable marriage.
How can we best reconcile the findings of considerable personality stability over 
time with evidence of important changes? First, longitudinal studies have shown conclu￾sively that personality traits, such as those subsumed by the Big Five, show substantial 
rank order stability over time. These personality traits also show evidence of coherence 
over time. Bullies in middle school, for example, tend to become criminals in adulthood. 
Those with self-control and conscientiousness in adolescence tend to perform well aca￾demically and well in the workplace later in life. In the context of these broad patterns of 
stability, people also show mean level changes with age—as a group people become less 
neurotic, less anxious, less impulsive, lower in sensation seeking, more agreeable, and 
more conscientious. Some changes are more pronounced in women—they become less 
feminine and more competent and autonomous over time. And some personality change 
affects only some individuals, such as those who succeed in the workplace. In short, 
although personality dispositions tend to be stable over time, they are not “set in plaster” 
in the sense that some change occurs in some individuals some of the time.
Final PDF to printerlar31869_ch06_152-183.indd 152 10/17/22 07:24 AM
PART TWO The 
Biological Domain
The biological domain refers to those 
physical elements and biological sys￾tems within our bodies that influence 
or are influenced by our behaviors, 
thoughts, and feelings. For example, 
one type of physical element within 
our bodies that may influence our 
personalities is our genes. Our genetic 
makeup determines whether our hair 
is curly or straight; whether our eyes 
are blue or brown; and whether we 
have large, heavy bones or a slight 
build. Our genetic makeup influences 
how active we are, whether we are 
hot-tempered and disagreeable, and 
whether we like to be with others or 
prefer solitude. Understanding how 
genes and their interactions with 
environments contribute to personal￾ity falls squarely within the biological 
domain (see Chapter 6).
Svisio/Getty Images
Final PDF to printerlar31869_ch06_152-183.indd 153 10/17/22 07:24 AM
Another area in which biol￾ogy and personality intersect is in 
physiological systems, such as the 
brain, where differences among 
people might contribute to personal￾ity differences. For example, some 
people might have more activity in 
the right half than in the left half 
of their brains. Empirically, this 
imbalance of activation is linked 
with a tendency to experience dis￾tress and other negative emotions 
more strongly. Here, physical differ￾ences among people are associated 
with differences in emotional style. 
Because these differences represent 
enduring and stable ways that people 
differ from one another, these physi￾ological features represent aspects 
of personality (see Chapter 7).
The literature contains many 
examples of physiological mea￾sures that are correlates of per￾sonality. The finding that shy 
children show elevated heart rates 
when in the presence of strangers, 
compared to non-shy children, is 
one example (Kagan & Snidman, 
1991). Would eliminating the heart 
rate reactivity make the shy child 
less shy? Probably not. This is 
because the physiological response 
is a correlate of the traits in ques￾tion, rather than an underlying sub￾strate that produces or contributes
to the personality trait.
This is not to say that studying 
physiological correlates of personal￾ity is a worthless endeavor. On the 
contrary, physiological measures 
often reveal important consequences
of personality. For example, the 
high cardiovascular reactivity of 
Type A persons may have serious 
consequences for developing heart 
disease. For this reason, identifying 
physiological measures that are cor￾relates of personality is a scientifi￾cally useful and important task.
On the other hand, there are 
several modern theories of personal￾ity in which underlying physiology 
plays a more central role in gener￾ating or forming the substrate of 
specific personality differences. In 
Chapter 7, we consider several of 
these theories in detail. Each shares 
the notion that specific personality 
traits are based on underlying physi￾ological differences. Each theory 
also assumes that if the underlying 
physiological substrate is altered, 
the behavior pattern associated with 
the trait will be altered as well.
The third biological approach 
we cover is based on Charles 
Darwin’s theory of evolution. 
Adaptations that helped individu￾als to survive and reproduce were 
passed on as evolved characteristics. 
For example, primates who could 
walk upright could colonize open 
fields, and their hands were freed for 
using tools. Evidence for the evolu￾tion of such physical characteristics 
is solid.
Psychologists are now consid￾ering evidence for the evolution of 
psychological characteristics. They 
are taking the principles of evolu￾tion, such as natural selection, and 
applying them to an analysis of 
psychological traits. For example, 
natural selection may have operated 
on our ancestors to select for group 
cooperation; early humans who 
were able to cooperate and work in 
groups were more likely to survive 
and reproduce; those who preferred 
not to cooperate were less likely to 
become an ancestor. Adaptations 
for cooperation are evolved psycho￾logical characteristics that present 
in modern humans. Evolutionary 
perspectives on personality are dis￾cussed in Chapter 8.
II
Final PDF to printer154
lar31869_ch06_152-183.indd 154 10/17/22 07:24 AM
Svisio/Getty Images
Genetics and 
Personality
The Human Genome
Controversy About Genes and Personality
Goals of Behavioral Genetics
What Is Heritability?
Misconceptions About Heritability
Nature–Nurture Debate Clarified
Behavioral Genetic Methods
Selective Breeding—Studies of Humans’ Best Friend
Family Studies
Twin Studies
Adoption Studies
Major Findings from Behavioral Genetic Research
Personality Traits
Attitudes and Preferences
Drinking and Smoking
Marriage and Satisfaction with Life
Shared Versus Nonshared Environmental Influences: A Riddle
Genes and the Environment
Genotype–Environment Interaction
Genotype–Environment Correlation
Molecular Genetics
Behavioral Genetics, Science, Politics, and Values
SUMMARY AND EVALUATION
KEY TERMS
6
Final PDF to printerlar31869_ch06_152-183.indd 155 10/17/22 07:24 AM
THE BIOLOGICAL DOMAIN 6
The Jim twins are identical twins separated at birth and raised in different 
adoptive families. They met for the first time when they were 39 years old, having 
been apart for their entire lives. One of the twins, Jim Springer, made the first phone 
call on February 9, 1979, after learning that he had a twin brother, Jim Lewis, who 
was living in the Midwest. They had an instant connection; three weeks after the 
phone call, Jim became the best man at his brother’s wedding.
When they first met, the Jim twins displayed an astonishing set of similarities. 
Both weighed 180 pounds. Both were 6 feet tall. They had each been married twice, 
and in each case their first wives were named Linda and their second wives named 
Betty. Each had a son named James. Their jobs were also similar—each worked part￾time as a sheriff. Both smoked Salem cigarettes and drank Miller Lite beer. Both suf￾fered from the same kind of headache syndrome, and both had a habit of biting their 
fingernails. Both left love notes for their wives scattered around the house. And both 
had remarkably similar personality scores on standardized tests (Segal, 1999).
The Jim twins were not identical in all ways, of course. One was a better writer, 
the other a better speaker. They wore their hair differently; one combed his hair down 
over his forehead, and the other combed his hair back. But overall, the similarities 
were striking, especially since they had grown up from infancy in entirely different 
families. This is a single twin pair, and of course no conclusions can be drawn from 
one case. But the case of the Jim twins raises the intriguing question, “What is the 
role of genetics in influencing personality?”
A record of the past is 
written in the genetic 
blueprint.
Lonely/Shutterstock
Final PDF to printer156
lar31869_ch06_152-183.indd 156 10/17/22 07:24 AM
PART TWO The Biological Domain
The Human Genome
Genome refers to the complete set of genes an organism possesses. The human genome 
contains between 20,000 and 25,000 genes. All these genes are located on 23 pairs of 
chromosomes. Each person inherits one set of each pair of chromosomes from the 
mother and one set from the father. One way to think about the human genome is to 
consider it to be a book containing 23 chapters, with each chapter being a chromosome 
pair. Each one of the chapters contains hundreds or thousands of genes. And each gene 
consists of long sequences of DNA molecules. One astonishing fact is that the nucleus 
of each cell within the body contains two complete sets of the human genome, one from 
the mother and one from the father. The only exceptions are red blood cells, which do 
not contain any genes, and female egg cells and male sperm cells, each of which contains 
only one copy of the human genome. Because the body contains roughly 100 trillion 
cells (a million times a million), each of which is smaller than the head of a pin, each of 
us has roughly 100 trillion copies of our genome within our bodies.
The Human Genome Project is a multibillion-dollar research endeavor dedicated 
to sequencing the entire human genome—that is, to identifying the particular sequence 
of DNA molecules in the human species. On June 26, 2000, scientists made headlines 
by announcing that they had completed the first draft of the complete human genome. 
Identifying the sequence of DNA molecules does not mean identifying all the functions 
of these DNA molecules. Scientists now have the “book” of life, but they must still figure 
out what role the genes play in the body, mind, and behavior.
Some findings appear to be changing standard assumptions about the human 
genome. Two findings are especially noteworthy. First, although the number of genes 
humans possess is similar to the number of genes estimated for mice and worms, the 
manner in which human genes get decoded into proteins turns out to be far more vari￾able than in other species. These alternative forms of decoding create a tremendous 
variety of proteins—many more than seen in mice or worms—and may account for the 
complex differences we observe between rodents and humans (Plomin, 2002). Second, 
these protein-coding genes, making up roughly 2 percent of the human genome, are only 
part of the story. Many parts of the other 98 percent of the DNA in the human chromo￾somes used to be viewed as “genetic junk” because scientists believed that these parts 
were functionless residues that served no purposes. Genetic researchers are discovering 
that this “junk DNA” is not junk at all. Rather, parts of these chunks of DNA have an 
impact on humans, potentially affecting everything from a person’s physical size to per￾sonality (Gibbs, 2003; Plomin, 2002). These hidden layers of complexity in the human 
genome—given names such as “pseudogenes” and “riboswitches”—mean that we have a 
long way to go before understanding the complex and mysterious links between genes 
and human behavior.
Most of the genes within the human genome are the same for each person on the 
planet. That is why all normally developing humans have many of the same characteris￾tics: 2 eyes, 2 legs, 32 teeth, 10 fingers, a heart, a liver, 2 lungs, and so on. A small number 
of these genes, however, are different for different individuals. Thus, although all humans 
have two eyes, some people have blue eyes, some have brown eyes, and a few even have 
violet eyes. Some of the genes that differ from individual to individual influence physical 
characteristics, such as eye color, height, and bone width. Some genes that differ across 
individuals influence the behavioral characteristics that define human personality.
Final PDF to printer157
lar31869_ch06_152-183.indd 157 10/17/22 07:24 AM
CHAPTER SIX Genetics and Personality 
Controversy About Genes and Personality
Perhaps no other area of personality psychology has been fraught with as much contro￾versy as the study of behavioral genetics. Researchers in this field attempt to determine 
the degree to which individual differences in personality are caused by genetic and 
environmental differences. Scientific reports on behavioral genetic studies often make 
headlines and cover stories. On January 2, 1996, for example, The New York Times
caused a stir with reports of a scientific breakthrough: “Variant Gene Is Connected 
to a Love of the Search for New Thrills.” It reported the discovery of a specific gene 
for novelty seeking—the tendency to be extraverted, impulsive, extravagant, quick￾tempered, excitable, and exploratory. A November 5, 2012, news article proclaimed 
that “Being Perfectionist Lies in Your Genes” (http://www.newstrackindia.com/
newsdetails/2012/11/05/161-Being-perfectionist-lies-in-your-genes.html). Some popu￾lar media sources are proposing “designer babies,” where parents select from a genetic 
checklist the characteristics they would like in their children. These ideas are contro￾versial because they suggest that genetic differences among individuals, rather than dif￾ferences in parental socialization or personal experience, are responsible for shaping 
some core features of human personality.
Part of the reason for the controversy is ideological. Many people worry that find￾ings from behavioral genetics will be used or misused to support particular political agen￾das. If individual differences in thrill seeking, for example, are caused by specific genes, 
then does this mean that we should not hold juvenile delinquents responsible for stealing 
cars for joy rides? If scientists trace a behavior pattern or personality trait to a genetic 
component, some people worry that such findings might lead to pessimism about the 
possibilities for change.
Part of the controversy concerns the idea of eugenics. Eugenics is the notion that 
we can design the future of the human species by fostering the reproduction of people 
with certain traits and by discouraging the reproduction of persons without those traits. 
Many are concerned that findings from genetic studies might be used to support pro￾grams to prevent some individuals from reproducing or, even worse, to bolster the cause 
of those who would advocate that some people should not reproduce in order to create a 
“superior human species.” On the other hand, many would-be parents are very interested 
in findings from genetic research, and some express a desire not to have children if they 
knew they would carry a genetic disposition for a mental disorder and even not choose a 
mate with such a known genetic proclivity (Morosoli et al., 2021).
However, modern psychologists who study the genetics of personality are typi￾cally extremely careful in their attempts to educate others about the use and potential 
misuse of their findings (Harden, 2021; Plomin et al., 2013). Knowledge is better than 
ignorance, they argue. If people believe that hyperactivity, for example, is caused by par￾enting behaviors when in fact hyperactivity turns out to be primarily influenced by genes, 
then attempts to influence hyperactive behavior by altering parental practices could 
cause frustration and resentment on the part of the parents. Furthermore, psychologists 
maintain that genetic findings need not lead to the evil consequences that some worry 
about. Finding that a personality characteristic has a genetic component, for example, 
does not mean that the environment is powerless to modify that characteristic. Let’s now 
turn to the field of genetics and personality to discover what lies beneath the swirling 
controversy.
Final PDF to printer158
lar31869_ch06_152-183.indd 158 10/17/22 07:24 AM
PART TWO The Biological Domain
Goals of Behavioral Genetics
To understand the primary goals of behavioral genetics, let’s look at a concrete 
example—individual differences in height. Some individuals are tall, such as basketball 
player LeBron James (6 feet, 8 inches). Other individuals are short, such as actor Danny 
DeVito (around 5 feet). Geneticists focus on the key question, “What causes some indi￾viduals to be tall and others to be short?”
In principle, there can be many causes of height differences. Differences in diet 
while growing up can cause differences in height. Genetic differences can also account 
for some of the differences in height. One of the central goals of genetic research is to 
determine the percentage of an individual difference that can be attributed to genetic dif￾ferences and the percentage due to environmental differences.
In the case of height, both environmental and genetic factors are important. 
Clearly, children tend to resemble their parents in height—generally, tall parents have 
taller than average children and short parents have shorter than average children. And 
genetic research has confirmed that roughly 90 percent of the individual differences 
in height are indeed due to genetic differences. The environment, which contributes 
10 percent to individual differences in height, is far from trivial. In the United States, 
average adult height has increased in the entire population by roughly 2 inches over 
the past century, most likely due to increases in the nutritional value of the food eaten 
by U.S. citizens. This example brings home an important lesson: Even though some 
observed differences among people can be due to genetic differences, this does not mean 
that the environment plays no role in modifying the trait.
In determining height, genetics accounts for 90 percent of the variation, and environmental factors, such as diet, 
account for 10 percent of the variation. The actor Danny DeVito is nearly 2 feet shorter than basketball player 
LeBron James.
Left: Helga Esteb/Shutterstock; Right: Jason Miller/Getty Images
Final PDF to printer159
lar31869_ch06_152-183.indd 159 10/17/22 07:24 AM
CHAPTER SIX Genetics and Personality 
The methods used by behavioral geneticists examined in this chapter can be 
applied to any individual difference variable. They can be used to identify the causes of 
differences in height and weight, differences in intelligence, differences in personality 
traits, and even differences in attitudes, such as liberalism or conservatism.
Behavioral geneticists sometimes try to figure out the percentage of variance due 
to genetic and environmental causes. Percentage of variance refers to the fact that indi￾viduals vary, or are different from each other, and this variability can be partitioned into 
percentages that are due to different causes. Behavioral geneticists also are interested in 
determining the ways in which genes and the environment interact and correlate with 
each other. And they are interested in figuring out precisely where in the environment 
the effects are taking place—in parental socialization practices, for example; in the teach￾ers to whom children are exposed; or even in peer influences (Harris, 2007). We turn to 
these more complex issues toward the end of this chapter. First, we must examine the 
fundamentals of behavioral genetics: What is heritability, and what methods do geneti￾cists use to get their answers?
What Is Heritability?
Heritability is a statistic that refers to the proportion of observed variance in a group of 
individuals that can be accounted for by genetic variance (Plomin, 2019). It describes 
the degree to which genetic differences among individuals cause differences in an 
observed property, such as height, extraversion, or sensation seeking. Heritability may be 
one of the most frequently misunderstood concepts in psychology. If precisely defined, 
however, it provides useful information for identifying the genetic and environmental 
determinants of personality.
Heritability has a formal definition: the proportion of phenotypic variance that is 
attributable to genotypic variance. Phenotypic variance refers to observed individual dif￾ferences, such as in height, weight, or personality. Genotypic variance refers to individual 
differences in the total collection of genes possessed by each person. Thus a heritabil￾ity of .50 means that 50 percent of the observed phenotypic variation is attributable to 
genotypic variation. A heritability of .20 means that only 20 percent of the phenotypic 
variation is attributable to genotypic variation. In these examples, the environmental com￾ponent is simply the proportion of phenotypic variance that is not attributable to genetic 
variance. Thus, a heritability of .50 means that the environmental component is .50. 
Can you think of some human characteristics that you consider to be mostly under genetic 
influence? Consider, for example, individual differences in eye color. Can you think of other 
characteristics that are not very much influenced by genetic factors? Consider, for example, 
individual differences in eating with forks versus eating with chopsticks. How might you 
go about testing whether some individual differences are, or are not, influenced by genetic 
differences?
Exercise
Final PDF to printer160
lar31869_ch06_152-183.indd 160 10/17/22 07:24 AM
PART TWO The Biological Domain
A heritability of .20 means that the environmental component is .80. These examples 
illustrate the simplest cases and assume that there is no correlation or interaction 
between genetic and environmental factors.
The environmental contribution is defined in a similar way. Thus, the percentage 
of observed variance in a group of individuals that can be attributed to environmental 
(nongenetic) differences is called environmentality. Generally speaking, the larger the 
heritability, the smaller the environmentality and vice versa.
Discuss the meaning of the following statement: “All normally developing humans have lan￾guage, but some people speak Chinese, others French, and others English.” To what degree is 
variability in the language spoken due to variability in genes or variability in the environment 
in which one is raised?
Exercise
Misconceptions About Heritability
One common misconception about heritability is that it can be applied to a single indi￾vidual. It can’t. It is meaningful to say that individual differences in height are 90 per￾cent heritable, but it makes absolutely no sense to say, “Meredith’s height is 90 percent 
heritable.” You cannot say, for example, that the first 63 inches of her height are due to 
genes and the other 7 inches are due to the environment. For an individual, genes and 
environment are inextricably intertwined. Both play a role in determining height, and 
they cannot be separated. Thus, heritability refers only to differences in a sample or 
population, not to an individual.
Another common misconception about heritability is that it is constant. In fact, it 
is nothing of the sort. Heritability is a statistic that applies only to a population at one 
point in time and in a particular array of environments. If the environments change, then 
heritability can change. For example, in principle, heritability can be high in one popula￾tion (e.g., among Swedes) but low in another (e.g., among Nigerians). And heritability 
can be low at one time and high at another time. Heritability always depends on both 
the range of genetic differences in the population and on the range of environmental dif￾ferences in that population. To draw on a concept from Chapter 2, heritability does not 
always generalize across persons and places.
A final common misconception is that heritability is an absolutely precise statistic 
(Plomin et al., 2001). Nothing could be further from the truth. Error or unreliability 
of measurement, for example, can distort heritability statistics. And because heritabil￾ity statistics are typically computed using correlations, which themselves fluctuate from 
sample to sample, further imprecision creeps in. In sum, heritability is best regarded 
merely as an estimate of the percentage of phenotypic differences due to genetic differ￾ences. It is not precise. It does not refer to an individual. And it is not eternally fixed 
(see Johnson, Penke, & Spinath, 2011, for a more detailed treatment of what heritability 
means and its limits).
Final PDF to printer161
lar31869_ch06_152-183.indd 161 10/17/22 07:24 AM
CHAPTER SIX Genetics and Personality 
Nature–Nurture Debate Clarified
Clarifying the meaning of the term heritability—what it is and what it is not—allows us 
to think more clearly about the nature–nurture debate—the arguments about whether 
genes or environments are more important determinants of personality. The clarification 
comes from distinguishing between two levels of analysis: the level of the individual and 
the level of a population of individuals.
At the level of an individual, there is no nature–nurture debate. Every individual 
contains a unique constellation of genes. And those genes require environments during 
one’s life to produce a recognizable individual. At this moment, each person reading 
these pages is the product of an inseparable intertwining of genes and environment. 
It makes no sense to ask “Which is more important, genes or environment, in accounting 
for Sally?” At the individual level of analysis, there is simply no issue to debate. As an 
analogy, consider baking a cake. Each particular cake consists of flour, sugar, eggs, and 
water. It makes no sense to ask whether the finished cake is “caused” more by the flour 
or more by the eggs. Both are necessary ingredients, inextricably combined and insepa￾rable in the finished cake. Genes and environment for one individual are like flour and 
eggs for one cake—both ingredients are necessary, but we cannot logically disentangle 
them to see which is more important.
At the level of the population, however, we can disentangle the influence of genes 
and environments. This is the level of analysis at which behavioral geneticists operate. 
It makes sense to ask, “Which is more important in accounting for individual differences 
in trait X—genetic differences or environmental differences?” At the population level, 
we can partition the differences into these two sources: differences in genes and differ￾ences in environments. And for a particular population at a given point in time, we can 
make sensible statements about which is more important in accounting for the differences.
Consider the cake example. If you have 100 cakes, it makes sense to ask whether the dif￾ferences among the cakes in, say, sweetness is caused more by differences in the amount 
of flour used or by differences in the amount of sugar used.
Now consider physical differences among people. Individual differences in height, 
for example, show a heritability of roughly .90. Individual differences in weight show 
a heritability of roughly .50. And individual differences in mate preferences—the quali￾ties we desire in a marriage partner—show very low heritabilities of roughly .10 (Waller, 
1994). Thus, it is meaningful to say that genetic differences are more important than 
environmental differences for height. Genetic and environmental factors are roughly 
equal when it comes to weight. And environmental differences are overwhelmingly 
important for mate preferences.
The next time you get into a debate with someone about the nature-nurture issue, 
be sure to ask, “Are you asking the question at the level of the individual or at the level of 
individual differences within a population?” Only when the level of analysis is specified, 
can the answers make any sense.
Behavioral Genetic Methods
Behavioral geneticists have developed an array of methods for teasing apart the contri￾butions of genes and environments as causes of individual differences. Selective breed￾ing with animals is one method. Family studies provide a second method. A third, and 
perhaps the most well-known, method is that of twin studies. Adoption studies provide a 
Final PDF to printer162
lar31869_ch06_152-183.indd 162 10/17/22 07:24 AM
PART TWO The Biological Domain
fourth behavioral genetic method. We briefly discuss the logic of each of these methods, 
exploring where heritability estimates come from.
Selective Breeding—Studies of Humans’ Best Friend
Artificial selection—as occurs when dogs are bred for certain qualities—can take place 
only if the desired characteristics are under the influence of heredity. Selective breeding
occurs by identifying the dogs that possess the desired characteristic and having them 
mate only with other dogs that also possess the characteristic. Dog breeders have been 
successful precisely because many of the qualities they wish specific dog breeds to have 
are moderately to highly heritable.
Some of these heritable qualities are physical traits such as size, ear length, 
wrinkled skin, and coat of hair. Other characteristics are more behavioral and can be 
considered personality traits (Gosling, Kwan, & John, 2003). Some dogs, such as pit 
bulls, are, on average, more aggressive than most other dogs. Other breeds, such as 
the Labrador, are, on average, very sociable and agreeable. And others, such as the 
Chesapeake Bay retriever, have a strong desire to please their owners by retrieving 
objects. A recent study of 12,117 dogs found that they differed greatly in boldness 
versus timidness, with bolder dogs exploring more, positively approaching unfamiliar 
people, and showing low levels of fear (Svartberg, 2021). All of these traits are charac￾teristics that have been selectively bred.
If the heritability for these personality traits in dog breeds is literally zero, then 
attempts to breed dogs selectively for such traits will be doomed to fail. On the other 
hand, if the heritability of these personality traits is high (e.g., >80 percent), then selec￾tive breeding will be highly successful and will occur rapidly. The fact that selective 
breeding has been so successful with dogs tells us that heredity must be a factor in the 
personality traits, such as boldness, aggressiveness, agreeableness, and desire to please, 
that were successfully selected. For obvious ethical reasons, we cannot do selective breed￾ing experiments on people. Fortunately, however, there are other methods of behavioral 
genetics that can be used to study humans.
The Labrador retriever and the Chesapeake Bay retriever have been selectively bred for certain characteris￾tics. Both have webbed feet, for example, which makes them strong swimmers and excellent water retrievers. 
They have also been selectively bred for certain personality characteristics. The Labrador was bred to be 
sociable and friendly, whereas the Chesapeake Bay was bred to be loyal to only one owner and suspicious of 
strangers. Consequently, the Chesapeake Bay retriever makes a good watch dog in addition to its skills as a 
sporting dog. The Labrador, however, is the most popular family dog in America, most likely due to the friend￾liness and cheerful disposition of this breed.
Left: Comstock Images/Alamy Stock Photo; Right: Courtesy of Randy J. Larsen
Final PDF to printer163
lar31869_ch06_152-183.indd 163 10/17/22 07:24 AM
CHAPTER SIX Genetics and Personality 
Family Studies
Family studies correlate genetic relatedness among family members with the degree of 
personality similarity. They capitalize on the fact that there are known degrees of genetic 
relatedness among family members. Parents are usually not related to each other geneti￾cally. However, each parent shares 50 percent of their genes with each of their children. 
Similarly, siblings share 50 percent of their genes, on average. Grandparents and grand￾children share 25 percent, as do uncles and aunts with their nieces and nephews. First 
cousins share 12.5 percent of their genes.
If a personality characteristic is heritable, then family members with greater genetic 
relatedness should be more similar to each other than family members with less genetic 
relatedness. If a personality characteristic is 
not at all heritable, then even family mem￾bers who are closely related genetically, such 
as siblings, should not be any more similar 
to each other than those who are less geneti￾cally related to each other.
Family members who share the same 
genes also typically share similar environ￾ments. Two members of a family might be 
similar not because a given personality char￾acteristic is heritable, but rather because of 
a shared environment. For example, cer￾tain brothers and sisters may be similar on 
shyness not because of shared genes, but 
because of shared parents. For this reason, 
results from family studies alone are never 
definitive. A more compelling behavioral 
genetic method is that of twin studies.
Twin Studies
Twin studies estimate heritability by gauging whether identical twins, who share 100 
percent of their genes, are more similar to each other than are fraternal twins, who share 
only 50 percent of their genes. Twin studies, and especially studies of twins reared apart, 
have received tremendous media attention. The Jim twins, described earlier, are identical 
twins given up for adoption at birth. Because they were adopted into different families, 
they were unaware that they had a twin. When they met for the first time, to everyone’s 
astonishment these men shared many behavioral habits—having the same favorite TV 
shows, using the same brand of toothpaste, owning a Jack Russell terrier dog, and so on. 
They also shared many personality traits, such as being highly conscientious and emo￾tionally stable. Is this coincidence? Perhaps, but these coincidences seemed to happen 
with regularity in studying twins (Segal, 1999).
Twin studies take advantage of a fascinating quirk of nature. Nearly all individuals 
come from a single fertilized egg, and humans—as contrasted with some other mammals, 
such as mice—typically give birth to a single child at a time. Occasionally, however, twins 
are born, occurring only once in 83 births (Knopik et al., 2022). Twins come in two dis￾tinct types: identical and fraternal.
Identical twins, technically called monozygotic (MZ) twins, come from a single fer￾tilized egg (or zygote—hence, monozygotic), which divides into two at some point during 
The family study method assumes that for traits with a large genetic component, the 
degree of similarity among relatives on that trait will be in proportion to the amount of 
genetic relatedness or degree of kinship, among them.
John Lund/Tiffany Schoepp/Blend Images LLC
Final PDF to printer164
lar31869_ch06_152-183.indd 164 10/17/22 07:24 AM
PART TWO The Biological Domain
gestation. No one knows why fertilized eggs occasionally divide. They just do. Identical 
twins are remarkable in that they are genetically identical, like clones, coming from the 
same single source. They share literally 100 percent of their genes.
The other type of twin is not genetically identical to the co-twin; instead, such 
twins share only 50 percent of their genes. They are called fraternal twins, or dizygotic 
(DZ) twins, because they come from two eggs that were separately fertilized (di means 
“two,” so dizygotic means “coming from two fertilized eggs”). DZ twins can be same sex 
or opposite sex. In contrast, identical twins are always the same sex because they are 
genetically identical. Dizygotic twins are no more alike than regular siblings in of genetic 
relatedness. They just share the same womb at the same time and have the same birth￾day; otherwise, they are no more similar than are ordinary brothers and sisters. Of all the 
twins born, two-thirds are dizygotic and one-third are monozygotic.
The twin method capitalizes on the fact that some twins are genetically identical, 
sharing 100 percent of their genes, whereas other twins share only 50 percent of their 
genes. If fraternal twins are just as similar to each other as identical twins are on a per￾sonality characteristic, then we can infer that the characteristic under consideration is 
not heritable: The greater genetic similarity of identical twins, in this case, is not causing 
them to be more similar in personality. Conversely, if identical twins are substantially 
more similar to each other than are DZ twins, then this provides evidence that is com￾patible with a heritability interpretation. In fact, studies have shown that identical twins 
are more similar than fraternal twins in dominance, height, and the ridge count on their 
fingertips (Knopik et al., 2022), suggesting that heritability plays a causal role in influ￾encing these individual differences. For dominance, identical twins are correlated +.57, 
whereas fraternal twins are correlated only +.12 (Loehlin & Nichols, 1976). For height, 
identical twins are correlated +.93, whereas fraternal twins are correlated only +.48 
(Mittler, 1971).
There are several formulas for calculating heritability from twin data, each with its 
own problems and limitations. One simple method, however, is to double the difference 
between the MZ correlation and DZ correlation:
heritability2 = 2(rmz – rdz)
In this formula, rmz refers to the correlation coefficient computed between pairs of mono￾zygotic twins, and rdz refers to the correlation between the dizygotic twins. Plugging 
Twins come in two varieties: monozygotic and dizygotic. Can you identify which of these two pairs of twins is more 
likely to be monozygotic? Which pair is definitely dizygotic? What is the clue that helps you answer these questions?
Left: golf9c9333/Getty Images; Right: Digital Vision/Getty Images
Final PDF to printer165
lar31869_ch06_152-183.indd 165 10/17/22 07:24 AM
CHAPTER SIX Genetics and Personality 
in the correlations for height, for example, leads to the following heritability estimate: 
heritability of height = 2(.93 – .48) = .90. Thus, according to this formula, height is 
90 percent heritable and 10 percent environmental. The basic logic of this method can 
be applied to any characteristic: personality traits, attitudes, religious beliefs, sexual ori￾entation, drug use habits, and so on.
We must note an important assumption of the twin method. This assumption is 
known as the equal environments assumption. The twin method assumes that the envi￾ronments experienced by identical twins are no more similar to each other than are the 
environments experienced by fraternal twins. If they are more similar, then the greater 
similarity of the identical twins could be due to the fact that they experience more similar 
environments rather than the fact that they have more genes in common. If identical 
twins are treated by their parents as more similar than fraternal twins are treated by 
their parents—for example, if the parents of identical twins dress them in more similar 
clothing than do the parents of fraternal twins—then the greater similarity of the identical 
twins might be due to more similar treatment.
Behavioral geneticists have been worried about the validity of the equal environ￾ments assumption and so have designed studies to test it. One approach is to exam￾ine twins who have been misdiagnosed as identical or fraternal (Scarr, 1968; Scarr & 
Carter-Saltzman, 1979). That is, some twins who were believed to be identical by their 
parents were really just fraternal. And some twins whose parents believed them to be 
fraternal turned out to be identical. These mistakes in labeling allowed the researchers 
to examine whether fraternal twins who were believed to be identical were in fact more 
similar to each other than accurately labeled fraternal twins. Similarly, it allowed the 
researchers to examine whether the identical twins, believed to be fraternal, were in 
fact less similar to each other than identical twins correctly labeled as identical. The 
findings on a variety of cognitive and personality tests supported the validity of the 
equal environments assumption. The parents’ beliefs and labeling of the twins did not 
affect their actual similarity on the personality and cognitive measures. This means 
that, however twins are labeled, the environments experienced by identical twins do 
not seem to be functionally more similar to each other than the environments experi￾enced by fraternal twins.
Additional studies over the years have continued to support the equal environ￾ments assumption (Knopik et al., 2022). Although identical twins do tend to dress more 
alike than fraternal twins, spend more time together, and have more friends in common, 
there is no evidence that these environmental similarities cause them to be any more 
similar in their personalities than they are to begin with (Plomin et al., 2008).
Adoption Studies
Adoption studies provide one of the most powerful behavioral genetic methods available. 
In adoption studies, one can examine the correlations between adopted children and 
their adoptive parents, with whom they share no genes. If one finds a positive correlation 
between adopted children and their adoptive parents, then this provides evidence for 
environmental influences on the personality trait in question.
We can also examine the correlations between adopted children and their genetic 
parents, who had no influence on the children’s environments. If we find a zero correla￾tion between adopted children and their genetic parents, this is evidence for a lack of 
heritable influence on the personality trait in question. Conversely, if we find a positive 
Final PDF to printer166
lar31869_ch06_152-183.indd 166 10/17/22 07:24 AM
PART TWO The Biological Domain
correlation between parents and their adopted-away children, with whom they have had 
no contact, then this provides evidence for heritability.
Adoption studies are especially powerful because they allow us to get around the 
equal environments assumption, which must be made in twin studies. In twin studies, 
because parents provide both genes and environments to their children, and may provide 
more similar environments for identical than for fraternal twins, there is a potential com￾promise of the equal environments assumption. In adoption studies, however, genetic 
parents provide none of the environmental influences on their children, thus uncon￾founding genetic and environmental causes.
Adoption studies, however, have potential problems of their own. The most impor￾tant potential problem is the assumption of representativeness. Adoption studies assume 
that adopted children, their birth parents, and their adoptive parents are representative 
of the general population. For example, these studies assume that couples who adopt 
children are not any different from couples who do not adopt children. Fortunately, the 
assumption of representativeness can be tested directly. Several studies have confirmed 
that the assumption of representativeness holds for cognitive abilities, personality, edu￾cation level, and even socioeconomic status (Plomin & DeFries, 1985; Plomin, DeFries, 
& Fulker, 1988).
Another potential problem with adoption studies is selective placement. If adopted 
children are placed with adoptive parents who are similar to their birth parents, then this 
may inflate the correlations between the adopted children and their adoptive parents. 
Fortunately, there does not seem to be selective placement, so this potential problem is 
not a real problem in actual studies (Plomin, DeFries, & McClearn, 2008).
One of the most powerful behavioral genetic designs is one that combines the 
strengths of twin and adoption studies at the same time, by studying twins reared apart. 
The correlation between identical twins reared apart can be interpreted directly as an 
index of heritability. If identical twins reared apart show a correlation of +.65 for a per￾sonality trait, then that means that 65 percent of the individual differences are heritable. 
Identical twins reared apart are exceedingly rare. Painstaking efforts have been under￾taken to find such twins and study them (Segal, 1999). The effort has been well worth 
it, as such studies have yielded a bounty of fascinating results, to which we now turn. A 
summary of the traditional behavioral genetic methods, along with their advantages and 
limitations, is shown in Table 6.1.
Table 6.1 Summary of Traditional Behavioral Genetic Methods
Method Advantages Limitations
Selective breeding studies Can infer heritability if selective 
breeding works
Are unethical to conduct on 
humans
Family studies Provide heritability estimates Violate equal environments 
assumption
Twin studies Provide both heritability and 
environmentality estimates
Sometimes violate equal 
environments assumption
Adoption studies Provide both heritability and 
environmentality estimates; get 
around the problem of equal 
environments assumption
Adopted kids might not be 
representative of population; 
problem of selective 
placement
Final PDF to printer167
lar31869_ch06_152-183.indd 167 10/17/22 07:24 AM
CHAPTER SIX Genetics and Personality 
Major Findings from Behavioral Genetic Research
This section summarizes what is known about the heritability of personality. The results 
may surprise you.
Personality Traits
The most well-studied personality traits in behavioral genetic designs are Extraversion 
and Neuroticism. Recall that Extraversion is a dimension comprising people who are 
outgoing and talkative at one end and people who are quiet and withdrawn at the other 
(introverted) end. Neuroticism is a dimension with one end characterized by people who 
are anxious, nervous, and emotionally volatile and at the other end people who are calm 
and emotionally stable. Henderson (1982) reviewed the literature on more than 25,000 
pairs of twins. He found substantial heritability for both traits. In one study involving 
4,987 twin pairs in Sweden, for example, the correlations for Extraversion were +.51 for 
identical twins and +.21 for fraternal twins (Floderus-Myrhed, Pedersen, & Rasmuson, 
1980). Using the simple formula of doubling the difference between the two correlations 
yields a heritability of .60.
The findings for Neuroticism are similar (Floderus-Myrhed et al., 1980). The 
identical twin correlation for Neuroticism is +.50, whereas the fraternal twin correla￾tion is only +.23. This suggests a heritability of .54. Twin studies have yielded very 
similar results, suggesting that Extraversion and Neuroticism are traits that are approxi￾mately half due to genetics. A large-scale twin study conducted in Australia found a 
heritability for Neuroticism of 47 percent (Birley et al., 2006). Similar moderate heri￾tabilities continue to be found for Neuroticism and Extraversion in more samples using 
diverse measurement methods (Loehlin, 2012; Moore et al., 2010). A massive study of 
253,015 individuals from 58,645 families from the Netherlands found a heritability of 
Neuroticism of 47 percent (Boomsma et al., 2018).
The findings for Extraversion and Neuroticism from adoption studies suggest 
somewhat lower heritabilities. Pedersen (1993), for example, found heritability estimates 
based on comparisons of adoptees and their biological parents of about 40 percent for 
Extraversion and about 30 percent for Neuroticism. Correlations between adoptive parents 
and their adopted children tend to be around zero, suggesting little direct environmental 
influence on these traits.
Individual differences in activity level have also 
been subjected to behavioral genetic analysis. You may 
recall from Chapter 5 that individual differences in activ￾ity level, measured with a mechanical recording device 
called an actometer, emerge early in life and show sta￾bility in children over time. Activity level was assessed 
in adults from 300 monozygotic and dizygotic twin 
pairs in Germany (Spinath et al., 2002). The research￾ers measured the physical energy each individual 
expended through body movements, recorded mechani￾cally with motion recorders analogous to self-winding 
wristwatches. Movement of a person’s limbs activates 
the device, which records the frequency and intensity of 
body activity. Activity level showed a heritability of .40; 
a moderate proportion of differences in motor energy are 
due to genetic differences.
The trait of activity level—how vigorous and energetic a person is—shows 
a moderate degree of heritability.
Final PDF to printer168
lar31869_ch06_152-183.indd 168 10/17/22 07:24 AM
PART TWO The Biological Domain
Activity level is one among several temperaments that show moderate heritability. 
A study of 1,555 twins in Poland found 50 percent heritability, on average, for all tem￾peraments, including activity, emotionality, sociability, persistence, fear, and distract￾ibility (Oniszczenko et al., 2003). A study of Dutch twins, at ages 3, 7, and 10, found 
heritabilities for aggressiveness, from 51 to 72 percent (Hudziak et al., 2003).
Behavioral genetic studies also have examined other personality dispositions. The 
trait of shyness shows a moderate heritability of 44 percent at age 6, and these genetic 
factors are largely responsible for the stability of the shyness trait over time (Morneau￾Vaillancourt et al., 2019). Using 353 male twins from the Minnesota Twin Registry, 
researchers explored the heritability of psychopathic personality traits (Blonigen et al., 
2003). These include traits such as Machiavellianism (e.g., enjoys manipulating other 
people), Coldheartedness (e.g., has a callous emotional style), Impulsive Nonconformity 
(e.g., indifferent to social conventions), Fearlessness (e.g., a risk taker; lacks anticipatory 
anxiety concerning harm), Blame Externalization (e.g., blames others for one’s problems), 
and Stress Immunity (e.g., lacks anxiety when faced with stressful life events). All of these 
“psychopathic” personality traits showed moderate to high heritability. For example, for 
Coldheartedness, the rmz was +.34, whereas the rdz was −.16; for Fearlessness, the rmz was 
+.54, whereas the rdz was only .03. Using the method of doubling the difference between 
the MZ and DZ correlations suggests substantial heritability to all of these psychopathic￾related personality dispositions (Vernon et al., 2008; Niv et al., 2012). The heritability of 
psychopathic personality traits, which predispose individuals to criminal activity, may be 
the key reason that a study from Sweden of more than a million individuals showed the 
heritability of violent crime to be roughly 50 percent (Frisell et al., 2012).
Interestingly, heritability of personality might not be limited to our own species. 
In a study of chimpanzees, Weiss, King, and Enns (2002) explored the heritability of 
dominance (high extraversion, low neuroticism) and well-being (e.g., seems happy and 
contented), as indexed by trained observer judgments. Individual differences in chim￾panzee well-being showed a moderate heritability of .40, whereas dominance showed an 
even stronger heritability of .66. These findings suggest that the importance of genes in 
influencing personality may extend to other primates.
Behavioral genetic studies using more comprehensive personality inventories have 
been carried out in many different countries as personality research expands to include 
more and more cross-cultural work. A study of 296 twin pairs in Japan revealed moder￾ate heritability for Cloninger’s seven-factor model of temperament and character, which 
includes dispositions such as novelty seeking, harm avoidance, reward dependence, 
and persistence (Ando et al., 2002). A study of twins in Germany, using observational 
methodology, revealed a 40 percent heritability to markers of the Big Five (Borkenau et 
al., 2001). Similar findings for the Big Five personality traits have been documented in 
Canada and Germany using self-report measures (Jang et al., 2002; Moore et al., 2010).
One of the most fascinating studies to examine personality traits is the Minnesota 
Twin Study (Bouchard & McGue, 1990; Tellegen et al., 1988). This study examined 
45 sets of identical twins reared apart and 26 sets of fraternal twins reared apart. The 
researchers found the correlations shown in Table 6.2 between identical twins reared 
apart. These findings startled many people. How could traditionalism, for example, which 
reflects a preference for the established ways of doing things, show such strong heritabil￾ity? Traits that we intuitively think of as environmentally determined, such as self-esteem, 
have moderate heritabilities (Kamakura, Ando, & Ono, 2007). Even character traits that 
we sometimes think of as instilled by parents and teachers—compassion, integrity, cour￾age, and tolerance—turn out to be strongly linked to traditional personality traits and show 
moderate heritabilities (Steger et al., 2007). And how could neuroticism have such a high 
Final PDF to printer169
lar31869_ch06_152-183.indd 169 10/17/22 07:24 AM
CHAPTER SIX Genetics and Personality 
heritability, given the traditional view that it is parents who make their children neurotic by 
their inconsistency of reinforcement and improper attachment? These behavioral genetic 
findings caused some researchers to question long-held assumptions about the origins of 
individual differences, a topic we consider later in this chapter.
Summaries of the behavioral genetic data for many of the major personality traits—
Extraversion, Agreeableness, Conscientiousness, Neuroticism, Openness to experience—
yield heritability estimates of approximately 50 percent (Bouchard & Loehlin, 2001; 
Caspi, Roberts, & Shiner, 2005). A large-scale study of the HEXACO personality traits, 
which includes the Honest-Humility factor, found heritabilities ranging from 34 to 
58 percent (de Vries et al., 2021). A meta-analysis of personality traits in more than 
100,000 participants revealed a slightly lower heritability of 40 percent (Vukasovic & 
Bratko, 2015). A different meta-analysis, however, showed heritabilities of 48 percent 
for Neuroticism and 49 percent for Extraversion (van den Berg et al., 2014). The herita￾bility of personality may be responsible for the fact that personality traits remain fairly 
stable over time (Blonigen et al., 2006; Briley & Tucker-Drob, 2014; Caspi et al., 2005; 
Johnson, McGue, & Krueger, 2005; Kamakura, Ando, & Ono, 2007; Kandler et al., 
2010; van Beijsterveldt et al., 2003). Overall, major personality traits show a modest 
degree of heritability. The same studies, however, also suggest that a substantial portion 
of the variance in personality traits is environmental in origin.
Attitudes and Preferences
Stable attitudes are generally regarded to be part of personality: They show wide individ￾ual differences; they tend to be stable over time; and, at least sometimes, they are linked 
with actual behavior. Behavioral geneticists have examined the heritability of attitudes. 
The Minnesota Twin Study showed that traditionalism—as evidenced by attitudes favor￾ing conservative values over modern values—showed a heritability of .59.
Table 6.2 Correlations Between Identical Twins Reared Apart
Personality Trait Twin Correlation
Sense of well-being .49
Social potency .57
Achievement orientation .38
Social closeness .15
Neuroticism .70
Sense of alienation .59
Aggression .67
Inhibited control .56
Low risk taking .45
Traditionalism .59
Absorption or imagination .74
Average twin correlation .54
Sources: Bouchard & McGue, 1990; Tellegen et al., 1988.
Final PDF to printer170
lar31869_ch06_152-183.indd 170 10/17/22 07:24 AM
PART TWO The Biological Domain
A longitudinal study of 654 adopted and nonadopted children from the Colorado 
Adoption Project revealed significant genetic influence on conservative attitudes 
(Abrahamson, Baker, & Caspi, 2002). Markers of conservative attitudes included 
whether participants agreed or disagreed with specific words or phrases such as “death 
penalty,” “gay rights,” “censorship,” and “Republicans.” Significant genetic influence 
emerged as early as 12 years of age in this study. Other studies confirm the moderate 
heritability of values (Renner et al., 2012). For example, twin studies of 19 measures of 
political ideologies from five different countries revealed heritabilities ranging between 
30 and 60 percent (Hatemi et al., 2014).
Genes also appear to influence occupational preferences. Occupational preferences 
are not mere whims, but can have important effects on a person’s life work, wealth, and 
eventual social status. In a study of 435 adopted and 10,880 genetic offspring residing in 
Canada and the United States, Ellis and Bonin (2003) had participants respond to 14 dif￾ferent aspects of prospective jobs, using a scale ranging from 1 (not at all appealing) to 
100 (extremely appealing). The 14 job aspects were high income, competition, prestige, 
envied by others, taking risks, element of danger, controlling others, feared by others, little 
supervision, independence, job security, part of a team, clear responsibilities, and help oth￾ers. These occupational preferences were then correlated with seven measures of paren￾tal social status, including mother’s and father’s education level, occupational status, and 
income. A full 71 percent of the correlations were statistically significant for the genetic 
children, whereas only 3 percent were significant for the adopted children (suggesting that 
rearing environment does not create the effect). The authors conclude that “this study not 
only suggests that the genes influence various preferences related to occupations, but that 
these preferences have an effect on social status attainment” (p. 929). In short, occupa￾tional preferences such as desire for competition and wealth can lead to choosing occupa￾tions in which more status and income are actually achieved. The jobs in which we spend 
a large portion of our lives and the prestige and income that comes from those jobs are at 
least partly influenced by the genes we inherit from our parents.
Not all attitudes and beliefs show these levels of moderate heritability, however. 
One study of 400 twin pairs yielded heritabilities of essentially zero for beliefs in God 
and involvement in religious affairs (Loehlin & Nichols, 1976). A study of adopted and 
nonadopted children confirmed that there is no evidence of a heritable influence on reli￾gious attitudes (Abrahamson et al., 2002). Another study also found low heritability (12 
percent) for religiousness, measured by items such as “frequency of attending religious 
services,” during adolescence (Koenig et al., 2005). In adulthood (average age of 33), 
however, the heritability of religiousness had increased to 44 percent. These findings sug￾gest that genes have an increasingly important role in religiousness as people move from 
adolescence into adulthood (Button et al., 2011).
No one knows why some attitudes appear to be partly heritable. Are there specific 
genes that predispose people to be more conservative? Or are these heritabilities merely 
incidental byproducts of genes for other qualities? Future research in behavioral genet￾ics will be able to address these questions and provide an answer to the mystery of why 
some attitudes appear to be partly heritable.
Drinking and Smoking
Drinking and smoking are often regarded as behavioral manifestations of personality 
dispositions, such as Sensation seeking (Zuckerman & Kuhlman, 2000), Extraversion 
(Eysenck, 1981), and Neuroticism (Eysenck, 1981). Individuals differ widely in their 
smoking and drinking habits, and although consumers sometimes quit for good and 
Final PDF to printer171
lar31869_ch06_152-183.indd 171 10/17/22 07:24 AM
CHAPTER SIX Genetics and Personality 
Sexual orientation refers to the object of 
a person’s sexual desires, whether the 
person is sexually attracted to those of the 
same sex or the opposite sex or both. These 
differences tend to be relatively stable over 
time. These differences are linked with 
important life outcomes, such as the social 
groups one affiliates with, the leisure activi￾ties pursued, and the lifestyle adopted. By 
the definition of personality provided in 
Chapter 1, sexual orientation clearly falls 
well within the scope of personality.
Is sexual orientation heritable? 
Psychologist Michael Bailey has conducted 
the most extensive studies of this issue. 
Bailey and his colleagues examined the 
twin brothers of a sample of homosexuals, 
as well as the adoptive brothers of another 
sample of homosexuals. Heritability esti￾mates from all studies ranged from 30 per￾cent to a strikingly high 70 percent. Similar 
heritabilities were found in a sample of 
lesbians and their adoptive sisters (Bailey 
et al., 1993).
These heritability findings came on 
the heels of another startling discovery, 
which was published in Science magazine 
(LeVay, 1991). Brain researcher Simon 
LeVay discovered that homosexual and 
heterosexual men differ in a specific area 
of the brain known as the hypothalamus. 
One area of the hypothalamus, the medial 
preoptic region, appears to be partially 
responsible for regulating male-typical sex￾ual behavior (LeVay, 1993, 1996). LeVay 
obtained the brains of gay men who had 
died of AIDS and compared them with the 
brains of heterosexual men who had died 
of AIDS or other causes. He found that 
the size of the medial preoptic region of 
the hypothalamus—the region believed to 
regulate male-typical sexual behavior—was 
two to three times smaller in the gay men 
than in heterosexual men. Unfortunately, 
given the extremely expensive nature of 
outcomes across the life span, and for both 
sexes, too” (Bem, 1996, p. 323).
Bailey set out to clear up these 
weaknesses—unrepresentative samples 
and lack of accounting for childhood gender 
nonconformity—by conducting one of the 
largest twin studies of adult sexual orientation 
to date (Bailey, Dunne, & Martin, 2000). The 
participants were from a sample of almost 
25,000 twin pairs in Australia, out of which 
approximately 1,000 MZ and 1,000 DZ twins 
participated. Their average age at time of 
participation was 29 years. The participants 
completed a questionnaire about childhood 
participation in gender-stereotyped activi￾ties and games. They completed a detailed 
brain research, the samples 
in this study were quite 
small. Moreover, no one has 
yet replicated these findings.
Behavioral geneticist 
Dean Hamer has published 
some evidence that male 
sexual orientation is influ￾enced by a gene on the 
X chromosome (Hamer & 
Copeland, 1994). However, 
this finding also needs to 
be replicated, and several 
researchers have debated 
its validity (e.g., see Bailey, 
Dunne, & Martin, 2000).
Obviously, this research 
area is controversial, and the 
findings are hotly debated. 
Moreover, the genetic stud￾ies of sexual orientation have 
attracted their share of crit￾ics. The studies have been 
challenged on the grounds 
that the samples, which were 
secured from advertisements 
in lesbian and gay publica￾tions, were unrepresentative 
(Baron, 1993).
Another weakness in 
past studies was a neglect of the correlates 
of sexual orientation. For example, child￾hood gender nonconformity is strongly 
related to adult sexual orientation. Gay 
men as adults recall having been feminine 
boys, and lesbian women as adults recall 
being masculine girls. This association 
has been established with many sources 
of data (e.g., using peer reports of child￾hood gender nonconformity). Regarding 
the importance of gender nonconformity 
in childhood, a leading researcher has 
remarked that “it is difficult to think of 
other individual differences that so reliably 
and so strongly predict socially significant 
A Closer Look Sexual Orientation
Results of more recent, well-controlled studies find 
concordance rates for homosexual orientation to be about 20 
percent, lower than previously thought.
Jakob Helbig/Getty Images
(Continued )
Final PDF to printer172
lar31869_ch06_152-183.indd 172 10/17/22 07:24 AM
PART TWO The Biological Domain
abstainers sometimes start, these differences tend to be stable over time. Individual dif￾ferences in drinking and smoking habits also show evidence of heritability. In one study 
of Australian twins, an MZ twin who smoked was roughly 16 times more likely than an 
MZ twin who did not smoke to have a twin who also smoked (Hooper et al., 1992). The 
comparable figures for DZ twins were only a sevenfold increase, suggesting evidence of 
heritability. Similar findings were obtained in a sample of 1,300 Dutch families of adoles￾cent Dutch twins (Boomsma et al., 1994). These studies also point simultaneously to the 
importance of environmental factors—a point taken up in the following section.
Heritability studies of alcohol drinking are more mixed. Some studies find herita￾bility for boys, but not for girls (Hooper et al., 1992). Other studies find heritability for 
girls, but not for boys (Koopmans & Boomsma, 1993). Most studies, however, show 
moderate heritability for both sexes, ranging from .36 to .56 (Rose, 1995).
Heritability studies of alcoholism, as opposed to everyday drinking habits, show 
even stronger heritabilities. Indeed, nearly all show heritabilities of .50 or greater 
(Kendler et al., 1992). In one study, the heritabilities of alcoholism were 67 percent in 
women and 71 percent in men (Heath et al., 1994). Interestingly, the same study found 
a genetic linkage between alcoholism and “conduct disorder” (antisocial behavior), sug￾gesting that the genes for both tend to occur in the same individuals. This possibility is 
also supported by a study finding that the personality traits of impulsivity and sensation 
seeking predict antisocial behavior, and this link appears to be due to genes that predis￾pose some individuals to these traits (Mann et al., 2017).
Marriage and Satisfaction with Life
Genes can even influence the propensity to marry or stay single (Johnson et al., 2004). 
The heritability estimate for propensity to marry turned out to be an astonishing 68 
percent! One causal path is through personality characteristics. Men who got married, 
compared to their single peers, scored higher on social potency and achievement—traits 
linked with upward mobility, success in careers, and 
questionnaire on adult sexual orientation 
and activity, such as “when you have sexual 
daydreams, how often is your sexual partner 
male? how often female?”
Women were more likely than men 
to have slight homosexual feelings without 
being exclusively homosexual, whereas 
men tended to be either exclusively hetero￾sexual or exclusively homosexual. Just over 
3 percent of the men, but only 1 percent of 
the women, were predominantly or exclu￾sively homosexual in sexual attraction and 
sexual fantasy.
Regarding whether sexual orienta￾tion runs in families, this study found lower 
rates than previous studies, at 20 percent 
concordance for the identical twin men and 
percent heritability) and women (37 percent 
heritability). This finding provides some sup￾port for Bem’s (1996) theory that childhood 
gender nonconformity may be the inherited 
component of adult sexual orientation.
Recent studies have also discovered 
a modest heritability to gender identity—
“A person’s deeply-felt, inherent sense 
of being a boy, a man, or a male; a girl, 
a woman, or a female; or an alternative 
gender (e.g., genderqueer, gender non￾conforming, gender neutral) that may or 
may not correspond to a person’s sex 
assigned at birth or to a person’s pri￾mary or secondary sex characteristics” 
(American Psychological Association, 2015; 
Polderman et al., 2018, p. 95).
24 percent concordance for the identical 
twin women. Concordance is the probabil￾ity that one twin is gay if the other is also 
gay. Previous studies typically found con￾cordance rates ranging between 40 and 
50 percent. Bailey argues that previous 
studies overestimate genetic contributions 
due to selecting participants by advertising 
in gay and lesbian magazines.
In the Bailey, Dunne, & Martin (2000) 
study, participants were randomly selected 
from a large pool of twins, so there was no 
selection bias. It seems likely that the real 
rate of genetic contribution to sexual orien￾tation is lower than that previously thought. 
Childhood gender nonconformity did show 
significant heritability for both men (50 
A Closer Look (Continued )
Final PDF to printer173
lar31869_ch06_152-183.indd 173 10/17/22 07:24 AM
CHAPTER SIX Genetics and Personality 
also highly valued by women in selecting marriage partners (Buss, 2016). Thus, a genetic 
proclivity to marry occurs, at least in part, through heritable personality traits that are 
desired by potential marriage partners.
Genes also play an interesting role in marital satisfaction (Beam et al., 2018). First, 
individual differences in women’s marital satisfaction are roughly 50 percent heritable 
(Spotts et al., 2004; this study could not evaluate the heritability of a husband’s marital 
satisfaction). Second, the personality characteristics of wives, notably dispositional opti￾mism, warmth, and low aggressiveness, accounted for both their own marital satisfaction 
and their husband’s marital satisfaction (Spotts et al., 2005). Thus, the marital satisfaction 
of both women and men seems partly to depend on the moderately heritable personality 
dispositions of the wives. Interestingly, husbands’ personality did not explain as much of 
their own or their wives’ marital satisfaction. Taken together, these results suggest that 
genes play a role in the quality of marriages, and even who gets divorced versus staying 
married (Jerskey et al., 2010), in part through heritable personality characteristics.
If heritable personality contributes to marital satisfaction, what about overall sat￾isfaction with life overall? Heritable personality characteristics play a key role here too 
(Bartels, 2015). Four moderately heritable personality factors—having a sense of pur￾pose, an orientation toward personal growth, feeling your life is under your own control, 
and having positive social relationships—predict psychological well-being and overall 
satisfaction with life (Archontaki, Lewis, & Bates, 2013). Nonetheless, the same stud￾ies show that environmental influences also play a key role in life satisfaction (Hahn, 
Johnson, & Spinath, 2013), a topic to which we now turn.
Shared Versus Nonshared Environmental 
Influences: A Riddle
With all of the findings on the moderate heritability of so many personality characteris￾tics, it is important not to lose sight of one important fact: The same studies that suggest 
moderate heritability also provide the best evidence for the importance of environmen￾tal influences. If personality characteristics show heritabilities in the range of 30 to 50 
percent, this means that the same characteristics show a substantial degree of environ￾mentality—as much as 50 to 70 percent. This conclusion must be tempered, however, 
by the fact that all measures contain errors of measurement; some of the differences in 
personality might be attributable to neither environmental nor genetic differences, but 
rather to errors of measurement.
One critical distinction behavioral geneticists make is between shared and non￾shared environmental influences. Consider siblings—brothers and sisters in the same fam￾ily. Some features of their environment are shared: the number of books in the home; the 
presence or absence of a TV, DVD player, or computer; the quality and quantity of food 
in the home; the parents’ values and attitudes; and the schools, church, synagogue, or 
mosque the parents and children attend. All of these are features of the shared environ￾ment. On the other hand, the same brothers and sisters do not share all features of their 
environment. Some children might get special treatment from their parents. They might 
have different groups of friends. They might occupy different rooms in the house. One 
might go to summer camp, whereas the others stay home each summer. All of these fea￾tures are called nonshared because they are experienced differently by different siblings.
We know that the environment exerts a major influence on personality. But which
environment matters most—the shared or the nonshared environment? Some behavioral 
Final PDF to printer174
lar31869_ch06_152-183.indd 174 10/17/22 07:24 AM
PART TWO The Biological Domain
shared or from nonshared sources. The details of how this is done are too technical to 
examine in this book, but, if you are interested, you can check out Plomin et al., (2013) 
for more details.
The bottom line is this: For most personality variables, the shared environment 
has either little or no impact. Adoption studies show that the average correlation for 
personality variables between adopted siblings who share much of their environment, 
but who share no genes, is only .05. This suggests that even though these siblings grow 
up together—with the same parents, same schools, same religious training, and so on—
whatever is happening in their shared environment (e.g., parenting, rearing practices, 
values) is not causing them to be similar in personality.
Most environmental causes appear to stem from the aspects of the environment 
that siblings experience differently. Thus, it’s not the number of books in the home. It’s 
not parental values or parental attitudes toward child rearing. In fact, it’s not what most 
psychologists have long believed it is. Rather, the critical environmental influences on 
personality appear to lie in the unique nonshared experiences of individual children.
Which unique experiences are important? Well, here we run into a brick wall. Most 
theories of socialization over the decades have focused exclusively on the shared envi￾ronment, such as poverty and parental attitudes toward child rearing. It is only recently 
that psychologists have begun to study nonshared environments.
There are two possibilities of what they will find. One possibility is a major break￾through—a discovery of a critically important environmental variable that has been over￾looked by psychologists who for years focused only on the shared environment. Different 
peer influences may be one good candidate (Golsteyn et al., 2021; Harris, 2007). The 
other possibility is less satisfying. It is conceivable that there are so many environmental 
variables that exert an impact on personality that each one alone might account only for 
a tiny fraction of the variance (Willerman, 1979). If this is the case, then we are stuck 
with the discovery of many small effects.
Does this mean that the shared environment accounts for nothing? Have psy￾chologists been entirely misguided in their thinking by their focus on shared effects? 
The answer is no. In some areas, behavioral genetic studies have revealed tremendously 
important shared environmental influences: attitudes, religious beliefs, political orien￾tations, health behaviors, and to some degree verbal intelligence (Segal, 1999). As an 
example, adoptive siblings reared together but genetically unrelated are correlated .41 
(girls) and .46 (boys) in their patterns of smoking and drinking (Willerman, 1979). 
Thus, although smoking and drinking have a substantial genetic component, there is also 
a large shared environmental component.
Another study found that shared environments accounted for several personality 
clusters in the “adjustment” domain (Loehlin, Neiderhiser, & Reiss, 2003). These include 
antisocial behavior (e.g., showing behavior problems and breaking rules), depressive symp￾toms (e.g., moody, withdrawn), and autonomous functioning (e.g., being able to care for 
Make a list of five shared environmental influences you have in common with your siblings (or, 
if you are an only child, what things might be shared environmental influences if you had sib￾lings). Then list five nonshared environmental influences. Which had the strongest influence 
on your personality, attitudes, or behavior?
Exercise
Final PDF to printer175
lar31869_ch06_152-183.indd 175 10/17/22 07:24 AM
CHAPTER SIX Genetics and Personality 
self in basic needs and recreational activities). And a study of adult twins using observa￾tional measurement—trait ratings of videotaped behaviors—suggests that shared environ￾ment might be more important in explaining Big Five personality traits than is typically 
revealed by studies using self-report (Borkenau et al., 2001). If this study is replicated 
by future research, it may have the far-reaching consequence of challenging the now￾conventional wisdom that shared environments have little effect on personality traits.
In summary, environments shared by siblings are important in some domains. But, 
for many personality traits, such as extraversion and neuroticism, shared environments 
do not seem to matter. It is the unique environment experienced by each sibling that car￾ries the causal weight.
Discuss what you think might be shared environmental influences contributing to the tendency 
to smoke. That is, what in the environment might have influenced most people who start to 
smoke and maintain their smoking habit?
Exercise
Genes and the Environment
As important as it is to identify sources of environmental and genetic influence on per￾sonality, the next step requires an understanding of how genetic and environmental fac￾tors interact. More complex forms of behavioral genetic analysis involve the concepts of 
genotype–environment interaction and genotype–environment correlation.
Genotype–Environment Interaction
Genotype–environment interaction refers to the differential response of individuals with 
different genotypes to the same environments. Consider introverts and extraverts, who 
have somewhat different genotypes. Introverts tend to perform well on cognitive tasks 
when there is little stimulation in the room, but they do poorly when there are distrac￾tions, such as music blaring or people walking around. In contrast, extraverts do just fine 
with the music blasting, the phone ringing, and people walking in and out. But the same 
extraverts make a lot of errors in these cognitive tasks when there is little stimulation—
when the task they are working on is boring or monotonous.
Extraversion–introversion is a perfect example of genotype–environment interac￾tion, whereby individuals with different genotypes (introverts and extraverts) respond 
differently to the same environment (e.g., noise in the room). Individual differences 
interact with the environment to affect performance. You may want to take this into con￾sideration when you arrange your studying environment. Before turning on the music, 
first determine whether you lie on the introverted or extraverted end of the continuum. 
If you are an introvert, you would likely do better studying in a quiet environment with 
few interruptions.
Studies have identified other genotype–environment interactions. One examined 
the effects of abusive parenting on whether children developed antisocial personalities 
(Caspi et al., 2003). Abused children who had a genotype that produced low levels of 
Final PDF to printer176
lar31869_ch06_152-183.indd 176 10/17/22 07:24 AM
PART TWO The Biological Domain
the brain neurotransmitter monoamine oxidase A (MAOA) frequently developed con￾duct disorders, antisocial personalities, and violent dispositions. In contrast, maltreated 
children who had high levels of MAOA were far less likely to develop aggressive anti￾social personalities. This study and replications of it (Kim-Cohen et al., 2006) provide 
excellent examples of genotype–environment interaction—exposure to the same envi￾ronment (abusive parenting) produces different effects on personality, depending on 
the differences in genotype. Interestingly, this suggests that violent parents may create 
violent children only if the children have a genotype marked by low levels of MAOA. 
Similar genotype–environment interactions have been discovered between the 5-HTT 
gene and childhood maltreatment in predicting persistent depression later in life. Only 
individuals with two short 5-HTT forms of the gene who had experienced maltreatment 
as children developed persistent depression (Uher et al., 2011). The empirical study of 
genotype–environment interactions represents one of the most exciting developments 
in the behavior genetics of personality (Jang et al., 2005; Moffitt, 2005); psychologi￾cal disorders (Bornovalova et al., 2010); depression linked with early puberty in girls, 
depending on socioeconomic status (Mendle et al., 2016; Johnson, 2007); and the ways 
in which personality is expressed in satisfied versus dissatisfied romantic relationships 
(South et al., 2016).
Genotype–Environment Correlation
Just as interesting is the concept of genotype–environment correlation, the differential 
exposure of individuals with different genotypes to different environments. Consider, 
for example, a child who has a genotype for high verbal ability. Her parents may notice 
this and provide her with lots of books to read, engage in intellectual discussions with 
her, and give her word games and crossword puzzles. Parents of children with less verbal 
skill, who presumably have different genotypes than those with high verbal abilities, may 
be less inclined to provide this stimulation. This is an example of genotype–environment 
correlation; individuals with different genotypes (e.g., those with high versus low verbal 
abilities) are exposed to different environments (e.g., high versus low stimulation). In 
another example, parents might promote sports activities for athletically inclined chil￾dren more than for less athletically inclined children.
Plomin, DeFries, and Loehlin (1977) describe three very different kinds of 
genotype–environment correlation: passive, reactive, and active. Passive genotype–
environment correlation occurs when parents provide both genes and the environment 
to children, yet the children do nothing to obtain that environment. Suppose, for exam￾ple, that parents who are verbally inclined pass on genes to their children that make 
them verbally inclined. However, because the parents are highly verbal, they buy a lot of 
books. Thus, there is a correlation between the children’s verbal ability and the number 
of books in their home, but it is passive in the sense that the child has done nothing to 
cause the books to be there.
In sharp contrast, the reactive genotype–environment correlation occurs when 
parents (or others) respond to children differently, depending on the child’s genotypes. 
A good example is cuddlers versus noncuddlers. Some babies love to be touched—they 
giggle, smile, laugh, and show great pleasure when they are handled. Other babies are 
more aloof and simply do not like to be touched very much. Imagine that a mother 
starts out touching and hugging each of her two children a lot. One child loves it; the 
other hates it. Over the course of several months, the mother reacts by continuing to 
hug the cuddler but cuts down on hugging the noncuddler. This example illustrates 
the reactive genotype–environment correlation, which is achieved because people 
Final PDF to printer177
lar31869_ch06_152-183.indd 177 10/17/22 07:24 AM
CHAPTER SIX Genetics and Personality 
react to children differently, based in part on the 
children’s heritable dispositions. Another possible 
example is a study that found that parents who are 
warm toward their children have children who are 
higher in Agreeableness (Ayoub et al., 2019). The 
behavioral genetic design allowed researchers to 
conclude that the most likely causal pathway was 
a genetic influence of the children’s personality 
on parental warmth (see Ramos et al., 2019, for 
a similar demonstration of reactive genotype–envi￾ronment correlation). In short, it seems like par￾ents react to highly agreeable children with greater 
warmth—an example of reactive genotype–environ￾ment correlation.
Active genotype–environment correlation occurs 
when a person with a particular genotype creates 
or seeks out a particular environment. High sensa￾tion seekers, for example, expose themselves to risky 
environments: skydiving, motorcycle jumping, and 
drug taking. Highly intellectual individuals are likely to attend lectures, read books, and 
engage others in verbal discussions. This active creation and selection of environments 
has also been called “niche picking” (Scarr & McCartney, 1983). Active genotype–
environment correlation highlights the fact that we are not passive recipients of our 
environments; we mold, create, and select the environments we subsequently inhabit, 
and some of these actions are correlated with our genotypes.
These genotype–environment correlations can be positive or negative. That is, the 
environment can encourage the expression of the disposition, or it can discourage its 
expression. Adolescents who have personalities marked by positive emotionality (e.g., an 
upbeat, optimistic stance) tend to evoke high levels of helpful and affirmative regard from 
their parents, so that genotypes for positive emotionality are positively correlated with 
environments of high parental regard (Krueger et al., 2008). The positive link between per￾sonality and parenting, in short, is genetically mediated (South et al., 2008). Conversely, 
parents of highly active children may try to get them to sit still and calm down, and parents 
of less active children may try to get them to perk up and be more lively. This example 
illustrates a negative genotype–environment correlation because the parents’ behavior 
opposes the children’s expression of traits (Buss, 1981). One meta-analysis found that 
children showing antisocial behavior, a moderately heritable trait, tend to elicit harsh disci￾pline from parents who attempt to curb their behavior (Avinun & Knafo, 2014). Another 
example of negative genotype–environment correlation occurs when people who are too 
arrogant or dominant elicit negative reactions from others, who try to “cut them down” 
(Cattell, 1973). The key point is that environments can go against a person’s genotype, 
resulting in a negative genotype–environment correlation, or they can facilitate the per￾son’s genotype, creating a positive genotype–environment correlation.
A study of 180 twins reared apart points to an intriguing potential example of 
genotype–environment correlation (Krueger, Markon, & Bouchard, 2003). The study 
assessed personality traits through the Multidimensional Personality Questionnaire 
(MPQ), which identifies three major factors of personality: Positive Emotionality 
(happy, content), Negative Emotionality (anxious, tense), and Constraint (controlled, 
conscientious). The researchers evaluated each individual’s perceptions of the fam￾ily environments in which they were raised, which yielded two main factors: Family 
Modern views on the nature–nurture debate suggest more complex answers 
to the question of the origins of personality. One view is that genes and 
environments interact in determining personality.
Shutterstock
Final PDF to printer178
lar31869_ch06_152-183.indd 178 10/17/22 07:24 AM
PART TWO The Biological Domain
Cohesion (e.g., parental warmth, absence of family conflict) and Family Status (e.g., 
parents provided intellectual and cultural stimulation, active recreational activities, and 
financial resources). The intriguing results were that the correlations between personal￾ity and perceptions of family environment were genetically mediated. In other words, the 
perceived environment in which the individuals were raised was largely due to heritable 
personality traits. Specifically, experiencing a cohesive family was explained by genetic 
influence on the personality traits of Constraint and lack of Negative Emotionality. In 
contrast, recalling a family environment high in cultural and intellectual activity was 
explained by the personality trait of Positive Emotionality.
These results may be subject to several interpretations. One interpretation is 
that personality affects the subjective manner in which people remember their early 
environments. Perhaps calm, controlled individuals are more likely to forget about 
real family conflict that was present during their childhood, and so may simply recall 
greater family cohesion than actually existed. An alternative interpretation is in terms 
of genotype–environment correlation: Individuals with calm, controlled personalities 
(high Constraint, low Negative Emotionality) may actually promote cohesion among 
family members—in essence, creating a family environment that further fosters their 
calm, controlled personality. Another study found genetic mediation of the link between 
Neuroticism and perceived environmental stress (Luo et al., 2017). Perhaps those high 
in Neuroticism create precisely the stressful environments that they then inhabit. Future 
studies of personality, parenting, and perceived family environments offer the promise 
of unraveling the complex ways in which genes interact and correlate with environments 
(Spinath & O’Connor, 2003).
Another promising avenue for exploring genotype–environment correlations is 
through peers (Burt, 2009; Loehlin, 2010). One study found a GE correlation for ado￾lescent alcohol consumption based on the differential selection of peers, especially for 
females (Loehlin, 2010). Another found evidence for GE correlation between impulsiv￾ity, which leads to mild forms of rule breaking (e.g., drinking, smoking, vandalism), and 
popularity during adolescence (Burt, 2009). Thus, genes predispose some individuals to 
break rules, which in turn leads to greater popularity during adolescence—an example of 
reactive gene–environment correlation. Genes for impulsivity, in short, are correlated 
with a social environment of being popular—a correlation established, in part, through 
acts of rule breaking. Genotype-environment correlations are becoming increasingly 
important in understanding the complex processes of how personality and social envi￾ronments are connected (Persson, 2020).
Molecular Genetics
The most recent development in the science of behavioral genetics has been the explora￾tion of molecular genetics. The methods of molecular genetics are designed to identify the 
specific genes or combinations of genes associated with personality traits. The details are 
quite technical, but the most common method, called the association method, is to identify 
whether individuals with a particular gene (or allele) have higher or lower scores on a par￾ticular trait than individuals without the gene (Benjamin et al., 1996; Ebstein et al., 1996).
The most frequently examined is the DRD4 gene, located on the short arm of chro￾mosome 11. This gene codes for a protein called a dopamine receptor. The function of 
this dopamine receptor, as you might guess, is to respond to the presence of dopamine, 
a neurotransmitter. When the dopamine receptor encounters dopamine from other neu￾rons in the brain, it discharges an electrical signal, activating other neurons.
Final PDF to printer179
lar31869_ch06_152-183.indd 179 10/17/22 07:24 AM
CHAPTER SIX Genetics and Personality 
The most frequently examined association between the DRD4 
gene and a personality trait has involved novelty seeking, the tendency 
to seek out new experiences, especially those considered risky, such as 
drug experiences, risky sexual experiences, gambling, and high-speed 
driving (Zuckerman & Kuhlman, 2000). Individuals with so-called 
long repeat versions of the DRD4 gene are higher on novelty seeking 
than those with the short repeat versions of this gene (Benjamin et al., 
1996). The researchers hypothesized that the reason for this associa￾tion is that people with long DRD4 genes tend to be relatively unre￾sponsive to dopamine. This causes them to seek out novel experiences 
that give them a “dopamine buzz.” In contrast, those with the short 
DRD4 genes tend to be highly responsive to whatever dopamine is 
already present in their brains, so they tend not to seek out novel expe￾riences, which might boost their dopamine to uncomfortable levels.
Although the association between DRD4 and novelty seeking 
has been replicated several times, there have also been several fail￾ures to replicate (Plomin & Crabbe, 2000). One study found that high 
novelty seeking was linked with a different allele of a different gene—the A1 allele of 
the D2 dopamine receptor gene (DRD2) (Berman et al., 2002). A more recent study 
implicated DRD2, DRD4, and two other genes linked to sensation seeking among ado￾lescents (Aluja et al., 2019).
Part of the problem is that the size of the associations is very small. It has been 
speculated that there may be 10 other genes that are equally important in novelty seek￾ing. And perhaps there are 500 genes that vary with other aspects of human personality 
(Knopik et al., 2022; Ridley, 1999). It seems unlikely that any single gene will ever be 
found to explain more than a small percentage of variation in personality.
As an illustration, one experiment found that men with the 7-repeat (7R) allele of 
the DRD4 gene were more likely to engage in financial risk taking than men lacking the 
7R allele, but the effect size is small, even though statistically significant (Dreber et al., 
2009), as shown in Figure 6.1. 
Interestingly, the 7R allele of the DRD4 gene occurs at dramatically different rates 
in different geographical regions. It occurs at higher rates in America than in Asia and 
has been hypothesized to be favored by evolutionary selection (see Chapter 7) when 
people migrate to new environments or inhabit resource-rich environments (Chen et al., 
1999; Penke, Denissen, & Miller, 2007). Empirical evidence for this hypothesis comes 
from a study of the migration patterns of 2,320 individuals from 39 groups (Chen et al., 
1999). Migratory populations show a higher proportion of the 7R allele of the DRD4 
gene than do sedentary populations, which could be caused by selective migration of 
individuals carrying those genes, selective favoring of those genes in the new environ￾ments, or both. Evidence on sedentary and nomadic populations favors the hypothesis 
that the 7R allele of the DRD4 gene is more advantageous among nomadic than settled 
populations (Eisenberg et al., 2008). Men with the 7R allele may also have an advantage 
in highly competitive societies in resource competition and in direct competition for 
access to mates (Harpending & Cochran, 2002).
As exciting as the results are from these molecular genetic methods, it is important 
to exercise caution when interpreting them. In several cases, researchers have found an 
association between a particular gene and personality-related traits, such as anxiety and 
attention deficit disorder, but subsequent researchers have failed to replicate these asso￾ciations (Plomin & Crabbe, 2000; Turkheimer, Pettersson, & Horn, 2014). Furthermore, 
some gene-personality links are found for one gender, but not for the other. For example, 
Figure 6.1
Men with DRD4 7R+ invest more money in a 
financial risk game.
Source: Dreber et al. (2009).
7R+ (DRD4)
200
150
100
50
0
7R– (DRD4)
Risk (U.S. dollars)
p=.0232
Final PDF to printer180
lar31869_ch06_152-183.indd 180 10/17/22 07:24 AM
PART TWO The Biological Domain
one study found that women with one copy of the A allele at OXTR rs2254298 experi￾enced greater attachment anxiety than did women with two copies of the G allele (Chen 
& Johnson, 2012). Nonetheless, this gene-personality link was not found among men. 
Research over the next decade or two, however, should reveal the degree to which spe￾cific genes for specific personality traits can be found.
A promising method known as genome-wide association studies (GWAS), 
which can rapidly examine the entire genome for links with personality, may yield 
faster scientific advances (Turkheimer et al., 2014). A GWAS study of Extraversion 
produced one promising candidate (van den Berg et al., 2016). But it appears likely 
that personality traits are linked to a large number of genes, each accounting for only 
tiny effects. This has led to explorations of measures of polygenic risk scores, which 
are mathematical sums of many genetic variants. As an example, researchers recently 
discovered that a polygenic risk score could be used to partially predict the so-called 
well-being spectrum—a triad of traits marked by depression, neuroticism, and a low 
sense of well-being (Baselmans et al., 2019). People low on this triad experience a lot 
of loneliness and rate themselves low on physical healthiness. Understanding the full 
scientific story of the molecular genetics of personality may be possible many years 
in the future.
Finally, rather than looking for direct links between single genes and personality or 
behavior, modern research is beginning to explore gene–environment interactions using 
molecular genetic techniques (e.g., Caspi et al., 2003; South & Krueger, 2008). Stressful 
life events can cause depressive symptoms but only in people who carry the short version 
of the serotonin transporter (5-HTT) gene (Uher et al., 2011). For those carrying other 
variants of this gene, stressful life events do not produce depressive symptoms. This pro￾vides an illustration of the power of combining molecular genetic techniques with the 
important concept of gene–environment interaction.
Behavioral Genetics, Science, Politics, and Values
The history of behavioral genetic research has taken some fascinating twists and turns, 
which are worth noting (see Knopik et al., 2022 for an excellent summary of this his￾tory). During the past century in the United States, behavioral genetic research received 
what can be phrased as a “frosty reception.” Findings that some personality traits were 
moderately heritable seemed to violate the dominant paradigm, which was environ￾mentalism (and, especially, behaviorism). The prevailing environmentalist view was that 
personality was determined by socialization practices, such as parenting style. People 
worried about the potential misuse of findings from behavioral genetics. Images of Nazi 
Germany sprang to mind, with the evil notions of a master race.
A large part of the controversy over genetic research has centered around studies 
of intelligence, which has often been considered to be a personality variable. Many peo￾ple have worried that findings from genetic studies will be misused to label some people 
intrinsically superior or inferior to others (e.g., see Herrnstein & Murray, 1994). Others 
worry that findings will be misused to give some people preferential treatment in educa￾tion or job placement. Still others are concerned that standard tests of intelligence fail to 
capture many of the multiple facets of intelligence, such as social intelligence, emotional 
intelligence, and creativity. All of these are legitimate concerns. Findings from behav￾ioral genetics must be viewed with caution and interpreted responsibly in the context of 
the larger picture of human nature and society.
Final PDF to printer181
lar31869_ch06_152-183.indd 181 10/17/22 07:24 AM
CHAPTER SIX Genetics and Personality 
In the past decade or so, attitudes have shifted, and the field of psychology now 
considers the findings from behavioral genetics as fairly mainstream. Behavioral genetic 
studies tend not to generate the intense controversy that they did in prior decades. 
Indeed, findings from sophisticated behavioral genetic research on personality are now 
seen as critical in combating important individual and social problems, such as the 
effects of stressful life events on depression.
The links between science and politics, between knowledge and values, are com￾plex, but they need to be confronted. Because scientific research can be misused for 
political goals, scientists bear a major responsibility for presenting findings carefully and 
accurately. Science can be separated from values. Science is a set of methods for dis￾covering what exists. Values are notions of what people want to exist—to be desired or 
sought after. Although scientists clearly can be biased by their values, the virtue of the 
scientific method is that it is self-correcting. The methods are public, so other scientists 
can check the findings, discover errors in procedure, and over time correct any biases 
that creep in. This does not imply that scientists are unbiased. The history of science 
is filled with cases in which values influenced the nature of the questions posed and 
the acceptance or rejection of particular findings or theories. Nonetheless, the scientific 
method provides a system for correcting biases in the long run.
SUMMARY AND EVALUATION
The behavioral genetic study of personality has a fascinating history. Early on, when 
behavioral genetic methods were being developed, the field of psychology was dominated 
by the behaviorist paradigm. In this context, findings from behavioral genetic research 
were not warmly received. Social scientists worried that findings from behavioral genetic 
research might be misused for ideological purposes.
Over the past few decades, the empirical evidence on heritability has become 
stronger and stronger, in part because of the convergence of evidence across behavioral 
genetic methods. There are four traditional behavioral genetic methods: selective breed￾ing studies, family studies, twin studies, and adoption studies. Selective breeding studies 
cannot be ethically conducted on humans. Family studies are problematic because the 
genetic and environmental factors are often confounded. Twin studies have potential 
problems, such as violations of the equal environments assumption (the assumption that 
identical twins are not treated any more alike than fraternal twins) and the assumption 
of representativeness (the notion that twins are just like non-twins). Adoption studies 
also have potential problems, such as the non-random placement of adopted-away chil￾dren into particular families. Empirical tests of these assumptions suggest that they are 
not violated much or are violated in ways that do not seem to make much difference. 
However, the most compelling evidence on the heritability of personality comes from 
looking across methods that do not share methodological problems. Thus, if the findings 
from twin studies and adoption studies converge on the same results, then we can have 
more confidence in the findings than we can when only a single method is used.
The study of large samples of twins reared together, the study of smaller samples 
of identical twins reared apart, and sound adoption studies have added greatly to the 
credibility of behavioral genetic research. The empirical findings clearly show that per￾sonality variables, such as Extraversion and Neuroticism, as well as the other dimensions 
Final PDF to printer182
lar31869_ch06_152-183.indd 182 10/17/22 07:24 AM
PART TWO The Biological Domain
of the Big Five, have moderate heritability. Perhaps even more striking are the findings 
that drinking, smoking, attitudes, occupational preferences, and even sexual orientation 
appear to be somewhat heritable. Equally important, however, is the finding that the 
same studies provide the best evidence for the importance of environmental influences. 
Overall, personality characteristics are 30 to 50 percent heritable and 50 to 70 percent 
environmental.
The environmental causes appear to be mostly of the nonshared variety—that is, 
the different experiences that siblings have even though they are in the same family. 
This finding is startling because nearly all theories of environmental influence—such as 
those that posit the importance of parental values and child-rearing styles—have been 
of the shared variety. Thus, behavioral genetic research may have provided one of the 
most important insights into the nature of nurture—the location of the most important 
environmental influences on personality. The next decade of personality research should 
witness progress in identifying the precise locations of these nonshared environmental 
influences. Separating perceived environments from objective environments will be an 
important part of this research program.
In interpreting the research findings, it is important to keep in mind the meaning 
of heritability and the meaning of environmentality. Heritability is the proportion of 
observed individual differences that are linked with genetic differences in a particular 
population or sample. It does not pertain to an individual; genetic and environmental 
influences are inextricably interwoven at the individual level and cannot be separated. 
Heritability does not mean that the environment is powerless to alter the individual dif￾ferences. And heritability is not a fixed statistic—it can be low in one group and high 
in another, low at one time and high at another. Environmentality is the proportion of 
observed individual differences that is caused by environmental differences. Like herita￾bility, environmentality is not a fixed statistic. It, too, can change over time and across 
situations. The discovery of a powerful environmental intervention, for example, could, 
in principle, dramatically increase environmentality while lowering heritability. The key 
point is that neither heritability nor environmentality is fixed in space and time.
Some behavioral genetic research examines the interactions and correlations 
among genetic and environmental variables. There are three major types of genotype–
environment correlations: passive, reactive, and active. Passive genotype–environment 
correlation occurs when parents provide both genes and environment to their children 
in ways that just happen to be correlated—for example, parents who pass on genes for 
verbal ability and stock their houses with a lot of books. Books and verbal ability become 
correlated, but in a passive way because the children did not do anything for the correla￾tion to occur. Reactive genotype–environment correlation occurs when parents, teach￾ers, and others respond differently to some children than to others. Parents generally 
tickle and coo at smiley babies more than at nonsmiley babies, creating a correlation 
between genotypes for smiling and a cuddly social environment. The correlation occurs 
because parents react to babies differently. Active genotype–environment correlation 
occurs when individuals with certain genotypes seek out environments nonrandomly. 
Extraverted individuals might throw a lot of parties, thus surrounding themselves with a 
different social environment than that of the more reclusive introverts. The correlation 
occurs because individuals actively create it.
The more complex and interesting behavioral genetic concepts such as genotype–
environment correlation have received relatively little research attention. One excep￾tion is the fascinating finding that individuals low on Negative Emotionality and high 
on Constraint recall their early family environment as being extremely cohesive. One 
Final PDF to printer183
lar31869_ch06_152-183.indd 183 10/17/22 07:24 AM
CHAPTER SIX Genetics and Personality 
interpretation is in terms of genotype–environment correlation: Calm, nonneurotic indi￾viduals may promote calmness and cohesion in their families, thus creating an upbring￾ing that further fosters their calm, controlled personality.
Molecular genetics represents the most recent development in the realm of person￾ality psychology. The research techniques attempt to establish an association between 
specific genes and collections of genes and scores on personality traits. The DRD4 gene, 
for example, is linked with novelty seeking. One of the most promising new developments 
is combining molecular genetics with the search for gene–environment interactions—the 
ways in which people with different genes react differently to the same environment. 
Stressful environments, for example, appear to produce depressive symptoms, but pri￾marily in people with the short version of the serotonin transporter (5-HTT) gene.
genome 156
genetic junk 156
eugenics 157
percentage of variance 159
heritability 159
phenotypic variance 159
genotypic variance 159
environmentality 160
nature–nurture debate 161
selective breeding 162
family studies 163
KEY TERMS
passive genotype–environment 
correlation 176
reactive genotype–environment 
correlation 176
active genotype–environment 
correlation 177
molecular genetics 178
DRD4 gene 178
environmentalist view 180
twin studies 163
monozygotic (MZ) twins 163
dizygotic (DZ) twins 164
equal environments assumption 165
adoption studies 165
selective placement 166
shared environmental influences 173
nonshared environmental 
influences 173
genotype–environment interaction 175
genotype–environment correlation 176
Final PDF to printer184
lar31869_ch07_184-221.indd 184 10/14/22 01:05 PM
Svisio/Getty Images
7
Physiological Approaches 
to Personality
A Physiological Approach to Personality
Physiological Measures Commonly Used in Personality Research
Electrodermal Activity (Skin Conductance)
Cardiovascular Activity
The Brain
Other Measures
Physiologically Based Theories of Personality
Extraversion–Introversion
Sensitivity to Reward and Punishment
Sensation Seeking
Neurotransmitters and Personality
Morningness–Eveningness
Brain Asymmetry and Affective Style
SUMMARY AND EVALUATION
KEY TERMS
Final PDF to printerlar31869_ch07_184-221.indd 185 10/14/22 01:05 PM
THE BIOLOGICAL DOMAIN
Elliot was a successful businessman, a proud father, and a good husband. 
At his business firm, he was a role model for his younger colleagues. Personally, he 
was charming and pleasant. His social skills were such that he often was called on 
to settle disputes at work. Elliot was respected by others. His position in the com￾munity, his satisfying personal life, and his prosperity and professional status were all 
enviable.
One day Elliot began to have severe headaches. After a few days, he went to his 
doctor, who suspected a brain tumor. This suspicion was confirmed when a small 
tumor was found growing not on his brain, but on the lining of tissue that covers the 
brain. The location was just above his eyes, behind his forehead. The tumor was, how￾ever, pushing against his brain and had damaged a small portion of the front of his 
brain, part of the prefrontal cortex, which had to be removed with the tumor.
The operation went smoothly and Elliot recovered quickly, with no apparent last￾ing damage, at least none that could be found with standard tests. Elliot’s IQ was 
tested after the operation and was found to be superior, as it was before his operation. 
His memory was tested and was found to be excellent. His ability to use and under￾stand language was also unaffected by the operation. His ability to do arithmetic, to 
memorize lists of words, to visualize objects, to make judgments, and to read a map 
all remained unaffected by the operation. All his cognitive functions remained nor￾mal or above normal, completely unaffected by the removal of a small portion of his 
prefrontal cortex.
Brain imaging techniques 
have enabled researchers 
to learn more about the 
brain’s role in behavior and 
personality than previously 
thought possible.
SpeedKingz/Shutterstock
7
Final PDF to printer186
lar31869_ch07_184-221.indd 186 10/14/22 01:05 PM
PART TWO The Biological Domain
Elliot’s family, however, reported that his personality had changed. He began to 
behave differently at work as well. He could not seem to manage his time properly. He 
needed lots of prompting from his wife to get going in the morning. Once at work, he 
had problems finishing tasks. If he was interrupted in a task, he had difficulty starting 
back up where he had left off. Often he would get captivated by one part of a task and 
get side-tracked for hours. For example, in refiling some books, which should have taken 
15 minutes, he stopped to read one of the books and returned to his desk hours later. 
He knew his job, but just had trouble putting all the actions together in the right order.
Soon Elliot lost his job. He tried various business schemes on his own and finally 
took his life savings and started an investment management business. He teamed up with 
a disreputable character, against the advice of many of his friends and family members. 
This business went bankrupt, and he lost all his savings. To his wife and children, Elliot 
appeared to be behaving impulsively, and they had trouble coping with all the difficulties he 
was getting into. A divorce soon followed. Elliot quickly remarried, but to a woman whom 
none of his friends or family approved. This marriage ended quickly in another divorce. 
Without a source of income, and without a family to support him, Elliot became a drifter.
Elliot came to the attention of Dr. Antonio Damasio, then a neurologist at the 
University of Iowa, who later wrote a book about Elliot’s condition (Damasio, 1994). 
It seems that the small bit of brain matter destroyed by Elliot’s tumor was essential in 
transmitting emotional information to the higher reasoning centers of the brain. Elliot 
reported that the only change in himself that he noticed was that, after his operation, he 
did not feel any strong emotion, or much of any emotion for that matter.
The case of Elliot shows us that the body and the mind are intimately connected. 
Indeed, after Elliot’s operation, the biggest change in him was in his personality, not in 
his memory, his reasoning, or his knowledge. Dr. Antonio Damasio discusses Elliot, as 
well as the brain findings underlying personality change, in several YouTube.com videos. 
In addition, Dr. Damasio describes other interesting cases of brain damage and personal￾ity change in more recent books (e.g., Damasio, 2018, 2021).
Studies have shown that traumatic brain injury can lead to large changes in personal￾ity (Edmundson et al., 2015). One of the most common changes in personality following 
brain injury is a diminished ability to inhibit or control one’s impulses. This has been found 
in children who experienced brain trauma (Gerring & Vasa, 2016), in adults with trau￾matic brain injuries (Kim, 2002), and in elderly persons whose brains have been injured 
by stroke (Freshwater & Golden, 2002). This increased impulsivity and lack of self-control 
is most likely due to disruptions between the frontal lobes, which serve as the executive 
control center of the brain, and other parts of the brain. As a result, persons with extensive 
brain injury can retain most of their cognitive abilities, yet lose some degree of self-control 
(Lowenstein, 2002). Persons with personality changes following traumatic brain injuries 
often have spontaneous outbursts, sudden changes in mood, and episodes of aggression 
and can become quite disruptive to their families (Beer & Lombardo, 2007). Indeed, this is 
the personality profile of one of the most famous brain injury patients, Phineas Gage, who 
was injured by an iron rod that was blasted through his brain while he was working as a 
railway builder in the mid-1800s (see A Closer Look).
An advantage of the physiological approach is that physiological characteristics 
can be measured mechanically and reliably. The term physiological characteristics refers 
to the functioning of organ systems within the body. Examples of physiological systems
are the nervous system (including the brain and nerves), the cardiac system (including 
the heart, arteries, and veins), and the musculoskeletal system (including the muscles 
and bones, which make all movements and behaviors possible). To get an idea of the 
importance of these physiological systems, imagine the result of removing any one of 
Final PDF to printer187
lar31869_ch07_184-221.indd 187 10/14/22 01:05 PM
CHAPTER SEVEN Physiological Approaches to Personality 
Phineas Gage (1823–1860) was a nine￾teenth-century rail worker, serving as fore￾man on a construction gang preparing the 
way for the Rutland and Burlington Railroad 
in Vermont. His work involved blasting 
large rocks with dynamite, and one day he 
was injured in a serious accident. Prior to 
his accident, Phineas was an industrious 
worker, highly agreeable and conscien￾tious, and seen by his employers as one of 
their most capable and efficient foremen. 
On September 13, 1848, he was tamping 
dynamite into a hole in a rock using an iron 
rod. The dynamite accidentally ignited and 
the explosion shot the iron rod out of the 
hole like a bullet. Phineas was bending over 
the work area. The iron rod he was work￾ing with was 1¼ inches in diameter, was 
3 feet, 7 inches long, and weighed almost 
14 pounds. It was tapered at one end 
almost to a point. The heavy iron rod came 
out of the tamping hole point first. It shot 
up through Gage’s left cheek and passed 
behind his left eye and exited the top of his 
skull, landing approximately 75 feet away. 
Gage was knocked off his feet but did not 
lose consciousness. The iron rod destroyed 
a portion of the left frontal part of his brain 
and blinded his left eye. Remarkably, Gage 
survived this accident. He spent 10 weeks 
under a doctor’s care, then returned to 
his home in New Hampshire. Even more 
read the inscription engraved on it, saying it 
was the rod that inflicted the grave injury on 
Mr. Gage (Wilgus & Wilgus, 2009).
remarkably, most of his intellectual 
functions remained intact. However, 
his personality changed dramatically. 
His doctor, John Harlow, described 
the new Phineas Gage as “obsti￾nate, capricious, and vacillating, 
devising many plans of future opera￾tions which are no sooner arranged 
than they are abandoned, a child, 
yet with the passions of a strong 
man” (cited in Carter, 1999). He 
lacked the ability to prioritize daily 
tasks, nor could he devise plans to 
achieve goals. He was impulsive and 
aggressive. He started using profane 
language and disregarded social 
conventions, behaving impolitely 
toward those around him. Women 
were advised to avoid him. He never 
worked as a foreman again. Instead, 
he had various farm jobs, mostly car￾ing for horses and cleaning stables. 
He died on May 21, 1860, almost 
12 years after his devastating 
accident. His skull and the iron rod 
are on display at Harvard’s Countway 
Library of Medicine. See Macmillan 
(2000) for a modern perspective on 
this famous case. The accompany￾ing photo of Phineas Gage was con￾firmed as him in 2009 when historians were 
able to digitally magnify the iron rod and 
A Closer Look The Brain Injury of Phineas Gage
Photo of Phineas Gage. He is holding the iron rod 
that inflicted the serious head injury described in 
this Closer Look.
History and Art Collection/Alamy
them. Without a brain, a person could not think or respond to the environment; with￾out the musculoskeletal system, a person could not move or act on the environment; 
and without a cardiac system, the result is obvious. All of the physiological systems are 
important to the maintenance of life, and their study has resulted in the fields of medi￾cine, anatomy, and physiology.
From the perspective of personality psychology, physiology is important to the 
extent that differences in physiology create, contribute to, or indicate differences in per￾sonality. For example, people differ from one another in how sensitive their nervous 
systems are to stimulation. Given exposure to loud noise, for example, your roommate 
playing loud music while you try to study, some people find it quite distracting and irritat￾ing, whereas other people are not bothered at all. A person who is particularly sensitive 
might frequent quiet environments (e.g., study in the library), avoid crowds (e.g., not 
Final PDF to printer188
lar31869_ch07_184-221.indd 188 10/14/22 01:05 PM
PART TWO The Biological Domain
go to loud parties), and limit the amount of stimulation in their environments (e.g., 
never play loud rock-and-roll music). The physiologically oriented personality psycholo￾gist would say that this person is introverted (a psychological characteristic) because he 
or she has an overly sensitive nervous system (a physiological characteristic). Thus, this 
approach assumes that differences in physiological characteristics are related to differ￾ences in important personality characteristics and behavior patterns.
Application
Individual Differences in Digit Ratio 
Scholars have speculated on connections between bodily shapes and personality traits for cen￾turies. Most simple theories have been discredited (Stelmack & Stalkas, 1991), such as the 
system of phrenology that related bumps on the head to aspects of personality. However, one 
bodily difference that is receiving attention these days is the ratio of the index finger to the ring 
finger, commonly called the “digit ratio” index. This ratio is easy to calculate by measuring the 
length of the index finger (2 digit or 2D) and ring finger (digit 4 or 4D, see graphic) and then 
dividing 2D by 4D. This is called the 2D:4D ratio, and if it is less than 1.0 it means the ring 
finger is longer than the index finger, and if the 2D:4D ratio is greater than 1.0 the ring finger 
is shorter than the index finger. People differ from one another in this simple measure, and 
personality psychologists are curious about whether this measure reflects anything meaningful. 
To address this question, researchers gather data to see what might correlate with digit ratio.
One common and reliable finding is that women have a higher digit ratio than men. 
Women tend, on average, to have index fingers that are longer than their ring fingers, resulting 
in a 2D:4D ratio greater than 1.0, whereas men tend to have index fingers that are shorter than 
their ring fingers, resulting in a 2D:4D ratio less than 1.0. Why might this be so? Research with 
humans and animals (those with measurable digits, such as mice and monkeys) has confirmed 
that digit ratio is determined prior to birth through exposure of the fetus to testosterone in the 
mother’s womb (in utero). Consequently, the digit ratio after birth is thought to be a lifelong indi￾cator of the amount of prenatal testosterone that the fetus was exposed to. The more testosterone 
exposure, the smaller the index finger relative to the ring finger (i.e., the smaller the digit ratio).
Prenatal testosterone exposure is greater for male fetuses than female fetuses—hence the 
lifelong difference between the sexes in digit ratio. However, even within a single gender, differ￾ences in digit ratio appear related to the kinds of personality traits hypothesized to be related 
to testosterone. These traits are described by Wilson and Daly (1985) as the “young male 
syndrome” and include risk taking, assertiveness, and competitiveness. Using terms more con￾nected with personality psychology, some of which are discussed in this chapter, the relevant 
personality traits would have to do with impulsivity, sensation seeking, and extraversion/asser￾tiveness/social dominance. Although males do score higher on all of these traits, on average, 
compared to women, research linking digit ratio to these traits is mixed.
A study by Wacker, Mueller, and Stemmler (2012) hypothesized that more specific traits 
related to aspects of the “young male” syndrome might correlate with digit ratio. Moreover, 
they thought this relationship might be stronger in males than females. In a study of more than 
200 young adult males, they administered a large number of personality scales related to the 
“young male” syndrome and used factor analysis to distill relatively pure and specific measures of 
these traits. They found a strong relationship between lower digit ratio and impulsive sensation 
seeking (men with longer ring fingers relative to their index fingers scored higher in impulsive 
Final PDF to printer189
lar31869_ch07_184-221.indd 189 10/14/22 01:05 PM
CHAPTER SEVEN Physiological Approaches to Personality 
Another characteristic of the physiological approach to personality is simplicity 
or parsimony. Physiological theories often propose to explain a good deal of behavior 
with a few constructs. Often the theories state that a physiological difference results in 
a given personality difference or a difference in an important behavior pattern. Why, 
for example, do some people take up skydiving, motorcycle racing, and other high-risk 
hobbies? One theory (covered later in this chapter) states that they do so because they 
have a deficiency of a certain chemical in their nervous systems that gives rise to sensa￾tion-seeking behavior. Despite the obvious simplicity of theories such as these, human 
nature is actually more complicated. For example, two people could be equally high on 
sensation seeking, yet one of them satisfies this need in a socially approved manner (e.g., 
by becoming an emergency room physician), whereas the other satisfies it in a socially 
sensation seeking). This finding is consistent with 
a number of other studies that found lower digit 
ratio was associated with risk taking, such as par￾ticipating in riskier lotteries (Garbarino, Slonim, 
& Sydnor, 2011), receiving more traffic violations 
(Schwerdtfeger, Heims, & Heer, 2010), and choos￾ing riskier careers in finance (Sapienza, Zingales, 
& Maestripieri, 2009). Results with women tend 
to be less clear, though some studies have reported 
that, in females, a lower digit ratio (similar to the 
male digit ratio) is associated with higher levels of 
risk taking (Honekopp, 2011). In a recent study 
of more than 1,000 people, Bönte et al. (2017) 
found that lower digit ratio correlated with com￾petitiveness in both male and female participants. 
In another study of college female athletes in the 
United Kingdom, researchers found that having 
a lower digit ratio correlated with the participant 
obtaining a higher national ranking in her sport, 
a finding that also held for male college athletes 
(Tester & Campbell, 2007). One study of female 
rhesus macaque monkeys found that females with 
lower digit ratios achieved a higher dominance sta￾tus in their group (Nelson et al., 2010).
There is a vast amount of information on digit ratio on the internet. Just enter this term in 
an internet search and you will find many reports and articles. However, much of this information 
should be viewed skeptically, with an eye toward evaluating the quality of the data, if any, that are 
reported. Studies that are peer reviewed and published in scientific journals should be given much 
more weight than the large amount of commentary and quasi- or pre-scientific (not peer reviewed) 
information found on the web. Looking at the published peer reviewed studies, we conclude that 
this bodily difference is very likely a lifelong signature of testosterone exposure prenatally and 
that it does correlate modestly with risk taking and sensation seeking as well as forms of social 
dominance in adulthood. There is a large gender difference in digit ratio, and within genders the 
correlates tend to be similar, though somewhat weaker for women. We return to a discussion of 
testosterone in Chapter 16 when we cover sex and gender in personality psychology. 
To calculate digit ratio, divide index finger length by ring finger length.
Source: Michael Hanlon, “What the Length of Your Index Finger Says About You,” Daily 
Mail, December 3, 2010.
HOW TO MEASURE YOUR FINGER
 With your palm up and fingers straight, measure
the base of your index finger to its tip.
RING
INDEX
 Do the same with your ring finger.
Final PDF to printer190
lar31869_ch07_184-221.indd 190 10/14/22 01:05 PM
PART TWO The Biological Domain
unacceptable manner (e.g., illegal gambling, drug use, reckless driving). Most physiologi￾cally oriented psychologists would not argue that “physiology is destiny.” Most would 
agree that physiology is only one cause among many for explaining behavior.
As you know from Chapter 1, Gordon Allport, who wrote one of the first textbooks 
on personality (1937), argued that “[t]he organization (of personality) entails the opera￾tion of both body and mind, inextricably fused into a personal unity” (p. 48). Because 
personality consists of both bodily and mental aspects, its study can be approached from 
either direction. In this chapter, we focus on an approach to personality that focuses on 
underlying bodily systems.
A Physiological Approach to Personality
Most physiological personality psychologists today focus on measures of distinct physi￾ological systems, such as heart rate or brain activation. The typical research question 
posed by contemporary psychologists concerns whether some people will exhibit more 
or less of a specific physiological response than others under certain conditions. For 
example, people who are introverted may avoid loud parties because they easily become 
overwhelmed by the social and physical stimulation at such parties. Notice that this 
statement specifies: (1) which particular environmental conditions (i.e., loud parties) 
affect (2) which particular personality trait (i.e., introversion) to produce (3) which par￾ticular physiological response (i.e., increased heart rate), (4) which then promotes a spe￾cific behavioral response (i.e., avoidance). These connections are depicted in Figure 7.1. 
Figure 7.1
Theoretical bridge between personality and physiology: Connections among environmental conditions, 
personality traits, and responses build a theoretical bridge that links personality to specific situations in 
terms of evoking a certain psychological response, which can be identified and measured using specific 
physiological measures. A theory specifies which conditions or stimuli will interact with which personality 
traits to produce specific responses, which can be observed physiologically.
Specific environmental
conditions
(e.g., loud parties)
Personality
characteristic
(e.g., introversion)
Physiological
indicator
(e.g., increased
heart rate)
Psychological
response
(e.g., overstimulation)
Behavioral
response
(e.g., avoidance)
Final PDF to printer191
lar31869_ch07_184-221.indd 191 10/14/22 01:05 PM
CHAPTER SEVEN Physiological Approaches to Personality 
Specific statements—about which traits are connected to which psychological reac￾tions under which conditions or in response to which stimuli—are now the way personality 
psychologists talk about physiology. Researchers must be able to build such a theoretical 
bridge between the personality dimension of interest and physiological variables in order 
to use physiological concepts to help explain personality (Allen & DeYoung, 2017; 
Levenson, 1983; Yarkoni, 2015). Let’s turn now to a brief review of physiological vari￾ables, with an emphasis on how they are measured in personality research.
Physiological Measures Commonly Used in 
Personality Research
Most of the common physiological measures in personality research are obtained from 
electrodes, or sensors placed on the surface of a participant’s skin. They are noninvasive in 
that they do not penetrate the skin, and these electrodes cause practically no discomfort. 
One drawback to such measures in the past has been that participants are literally wired 
to the physiological recording machine (often called a polygraph), so movement was con￾strained. A new generation of sensors has overcome this limitation through the use of 
telemetry, a process whereby physiological data signals are sent from the participant to 
storage devices through Bluetooth, Wi-Fi, or other radio waves instead of by wires. There 
are many “wearable” sensors (e.g., watches, rings, audio microphones, one’s phone) that 
are starting to be used in personality research (Ihsan & Furnham, 2018; Mehl & Wrzus, 
2021). Wearable sensor technology is a rapidly advancing field, and it will have an impact 
on personality science as more researchers incorporate this technology into their studies. 
Three physiological measures of particular interest to personality psychologists are electro￾dermal activity (skin conductance of electricity), cardiovascular activity, and measures of 
the brain. We will discuss each of these in turn, though other biological measures, such as 
the amounts of hormones or neurotransmitters in the blood, are also of interest.
Electrodermal Activity (Skin Conductance)
The skin on the palms of the hands (and the soles of the feet) contains a high concen￾tration of sweat glands. These sweat glands are directly influenced by the sympathetic 
nervous system, the branch of the autonomic nervous system that prepares the body for 
action—that is, the fight-or-flight mechanism. When the sympathetic nervous system is 
activated (such as during episodes of anxiety, startle, or anger), the sweat glands begin 
to fill with salty water. If the activation is sufficiently strong or prolonged, the sweat 
may actually spill out onto the palms of the hands, causing the person to develop sweaty 
palms. Interestingly, all mammals have a similarly high concentration of sweat glands on 
the friction surfaces of their hands/paws.
Even before the sweat is visible, however, it can be detected by the clever applica￾tion of a small amount of electricity because water (i.e., sweat) conducts electricity. The 
more water present in the skin, the more easily the skin carries, or conducts, electricity. 
This bioelectric process, known as electrodermal activity (dermal means “of the skin”), 
or skin conductance, makes it possible for researchers to indirectly measure sympathetic 
nervous system activity.
In this technique, two electrodes are placed on the palm of one hand or on a 
finger. A very low voltage of electricity is then put through one electrode into the skin, 
and the researcher measures how much electricity is present at the other electrode. 
Final PDF to printer192
lar31869_ch07_184-221.indd 192 10/14/22 01:05 PM
PART TWO The Biological Domain
The difference in the amount of electricity passed into the skin at one electrode and the 
amount detected at the other electrode tells researchers how well the skin is conducting 
electricity. The more sympathetic nervous system activity there is, the more water is 
produced by the sweat glands in the skin, and the better the skin conducts the electricity. 
The levels of electricity involved are so small that the participant does not feel anything. 
In the past, electrodermal recording required a polygraph that was connected to the 
research participant with wires. These days, electrodermal activity can be recorded from 
a wearable ring or sensors attached to a watch, which conveys the data via Wi-Fi or 
Bluetooth to the internet for recording and analysis.
Electrodermal responses can be elicited by all sorts of stimuli, including sudden 
noises, emotional images, conditioned stimuli, mental effort, pain, and emotional reac￾tions such as anxiety, fear, and guilt (as in the so-called lie detector test, which uses skin 
conductance). One phenomenon of interest to personality psychologists is the observa￾tion that some people show skin conductance responses in the absence of any external 
stimuli. Imagine a participant sitting quietly in a dimly lit room who is instructed to just 
relax. Most people in this situation exhibit very little in the way of autonomic nervous 
system activity. However, some participants in this situation exhibit spontaneous electro￾dermal responses, even though there is nothing objectively causing these responses. Not 
surprisingly, the personality trait most consistently associated with nonspecific electro￾dermal responding is neuroticism (Cruz & Larsen, 1995). Later research showed that 
neuroticism is associated with larger and longer-lasting electrodermal responses while 
viewing unpleasant images (Norris, Larsen, & Cacioppo, 2007). A person who is high 
on neuroticism appears to have a sympathetic nervous system that is in a state of chronic 
activation and that also exhibits stronger and more prolonged responses to aversive or 
unpleasant stimuli. That is, part of being a “high-strung” (high on neuroticism) person is 
to have the flight-or-fight branch of one’s nervous system more activated than it is with 
most other people. This is just one example of how electrodermal measures have been 
used by personality psychologists to ascertain differences in personality among people.
Cardiovascular Activity
The cardiovascular system involves the heart and associated blood vessels, and exam￾ples of measures of cardiovascular activity include blood pressure and heart rate. Blood 
pressure is the pressure exerted by the blood on the inside of the artery walls, and it is 
typically expressed with two numbers: diastolic and systolic pressure. The systolic pres￾sure is the larger number, and it refers to the maximum pressure within the cardiovas￾cular system produced when the heart muscle contracts. The diastolic pressure is the 
smaller number, and it refers to the resting pressure inside the system between heart 
contractions. Blood pressure can increase in a number of ways—for example, the heart 
may pump with larger strokes generating more volume, or through a narrowing of the 
artery walls. Blood pressure is responsive to a number of physical (e.g., exercise) and 
psychological (e.g., stress, fear, mental effort) conditions, and personality researchers 
have been especially interested in blood pressure response to stress.
Another easily obtained cardiovascular measure is heart rate, often expressed 
in beats-per-minute (BPM). Heart rate can change beat by beat, so a technique with a 
degree of sophistication is needed to ensure accurate measurement. One approach is to 
measure the time interval between successive beats. If that interval is exactly one second, 
then the heart rate is 60 BPM. As the time interval between beats becomes shorter, the 
heart is beating faster, and vice versa. By measuring the intervals between successive 
heartbeats, the psychologist can get a readout of heart rate on a beat-by-beat basis. Heart 
Final PDF to printer193
lar31869_ch07_184-221.indd 193 10/14/22 01:05 PM
CHAPTER SEVEN Physiological Approaches to Personality 
rate is important because as it increases, it indicates that the person’s body is prepar￾ing for action—to flee or to fight, for example. It tells us that the person is distressed, 
anxious, fearful, or otherwise more aroused than normal. Heart rate also increases with 
cognitive effort, as when people try to solve a difficult math problem. People differ from 
each other in heart rate responses, with some showing large increases and others only 
minor increases in response to the same stimuli or task.
A cardiovascular measure being used in contemporary research, and available with 
many wearable sensors, is heart rate variability (HRV). This measure assesses how much 
ones heart rate differs from beat to beat over a given time period. A healthy and well￾rested person, who is not under any stress, will typically show elevated HRV. Higher 
HRV is normal and occurs when the sympathetic and parasympathetic branches of the 
nervous system are in balance. Conversely, a person under stress, or who is fatigued 
or overtrained, will show decreased HRV. Decreased HRV occurs when one of the 
branches of the nervous system predominates the other (as with sympathetic activation 
during fight-or-flight reactions) and produces a more steady or unchanging heart rate 
over time (lower variability). Some research shows that persons experiencing dysregu￾lated emotions, or who are under stress, show decreased HRV. Consequently personality 
traits associated with stress or emotionality can be negatively correlated with HRV.
Researchers have been interested in what happens to a person’s cardiovascular 
system when he or she is challenged by having to perform a stressful task in front of an 
audience. Techniques used to induce temporary stress range from having participants 
sing a song in front of an audience, to having participants perform backward serial sub￾traction (e.g., “take the number 784 and subtract 7, take the result and subtract 7, and 
keep doing so until you are told to stop”). Participants report that performing such tasks 
is stressful and, not surprisingly, everyone’s blood pressure and heart rate goes up during 
these tasks. However, some people show much larger increases in heart rate than oth￾ers. This phenomenon has been called cardiac reactivity and has been associated with 
the Type A personality—a behavior pattern characterized by impatience, competitiveness, 
and hostility. Evidence suggests that chronic cardiac reactivity contributes to coronary 
artery disease, which may be why the Type A personality trait is associated with a higher 
likelihood of heart disease and heart attacks (see Chapter 18). The relation between 
cardiovascular reactivity and Type A is one example of how physiological measures have 
been used in the study of personality.
The Brain
The last decade of the last century (1990–1999) was designated the “Decade of the 
Brain” by then president George H. W. Bush. As a result, research on the brain became 
a priority at the National Institutes of Health during that decade. This resulted in major 
advances in the scientific technology for studying the brain as well as increases in our 
understanding of how the brain works. The field of neuroscience, which is the scientific 
study of the nervous system, particularly the brain, expanded greatly during that decade 
and after.
From a personality perspective, an important outcome of the Decade of the Brain 
was to make brain imaging technology more user-friendly, more widely available due 
to lower costs, as well as improving the speed, resolution, and information value of 
brain imaging data. This resulted in researchers being able to include brain imaging in 
studies of very large samples of individuals. Because personality is the study of differ￾ences between individuals, large samples sizes are necessary. Scientists are now able to 
analyze differences in brain measures in sample sizes large enough to focus on reliable 
Final PDF to printer194
lar31869_ch07_184-221.indd 194 10/14/22 01:05 PM
PART TWO The Biological Domain
differences between individuals. The result has been a very rapid 
increase in research on individual differences and the creation of 
a new scientific discipline called “personality neuroscience.”
In 2018, a new scientific journal—Personality Neuroscience—was 
created to serve as an outlet for the increasing amount of research 
on personality and the brain. This journal is open access, meaning 
that articles published there can be read online for free (https://
www.cambridge.org/core/journals/personality-neuroscience). 
This journal also has a Twitter account (@PNeuroscience) 
for short updates or breaking news of interest to followers. The 
fact that the field of personality neuroscience has its own scien￾tific journal indicates that this field has achieved a critical mass of 
researchers and known findings and indicates scientific maturity 
(McNaughton, 2020).
In terms of brain measures used in personality research, 
there are four distinct categories of measures: brain function, 
brain structure, brain connections, and brain electrical activity. 
We turn now to a brief introduction to each of these categories.
Brain Function
If someone tells you their phone number, and you hold it in your 
memory long enough to type it into your phone, the working 
memory center in your brain will be activated. If you go to put 
on your shoes, and a large spider jumps out onto your hand, the 
fear center in your brain will be activated. Brain function refers 
to changes (increases or decreases) in the activation of various 
regions of the brain in response to specific cognitive activity (like 
working memory) or environmental events (like a spider scaring 
you). Scientists can measure these changes in brain activation pat￾terns through the use of imaging techniques.
Two important techniques used to measure brain activation are positron emission 
tomography (PET) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). These powerful 
imaging tools, which were developed primarily for medical diagnosis, allow physicians 
and psychologists to look inside the working brains of their patients and subjects. Images 
show exactly which portions of the brain are active. For example, if we wanted to know 
what part of the brain is involved in working memory, we would have a sample of people 
perform a memory task (such as remembering a phone number) while their brains are 
scanned by fMRI. The fMRI measures activity level in areas of the brain in terms of 
glucose consumption; more glucose consumption in a region indicates that the neurons 
there are more active. It provides very fine spatial resolution and is able to pinpoint spe￾cific areas of activation that are associated with specific cognitive, motor, or emotional 
tasks. It turns out, for example, that working memory occurs in the prefrontal cortex, 
whereas long-term memory is in the hippocampus.
An early study of personality and brain activation was published by Canli, 
Mangum, and Wells (2001), in which they used fMRI to scan the brains of people as 
they looked at 20 negative images (e.g., spiders, people crying) and 20 neutral images (a 
cup, a lamp). Canli and colleagues found that the personality trait of neuroticism cor￾related with increased frontal brain activation to the negative images. A later review of 
18 published studies on the neural correlates of neuroticism (Servaas et al., 2013) found 
that tasks that evoke anxiety or fear produce more brain activation in the appropriate 
fMRI imagery tracks brain activation by monitoring glucose 
metabolism in the brain. When an area of the brain is 
used, it consumes energy in the form of glucose (Beer & 
Lombardo, 2007).
BSIP/Universal Images Group via Getty Images
Final PDF to printer195
lar31869_ch07_184-221.indd 195 10/14/22 01:05 PM
CHAPTER SEVEN Physiological Approaches to Personality 
brain regions in persons high in neuroticism. An important point relevant to these 
studies—and to all the studies mentioned in this section—is that neuroticism does not 
correlate with resting brain activity. Rather, personality correlates with brain activation 
during tasks that involve psychological processes relevant to the trait, consistent with 
the notion of a “theoretical bridge” mentioned earlier in this chapter. Neuroticism corre￾lates with increased brain activation during fear conditioning, anticipation of an aversive 
event like punishment, or the processing of negative emotions and images. This illus￾trates the concept of the theoretical bridge presented in Figure 7.1 earlier in this chap￾ter. Psychologist Colin DeYoung (2015) describes a theoretical bridge for each of the 
Big Five personality traits, specifying how each trait can be broken down into specific 
underlying mechanisms that are responsive to specific conditions and can be related to 
specific brain measures. DeYoung’s (2015) proposals are likely to guide neuroscientific 
research on the Big Five personality traits for several years to come (Allen & DeYoung, 
2017; Fajkowska & Kreitler, 2018; McNaughten & Smillie, 2018).
What about brain activation research outside of the Big Five traits? A study (Izuma 
et al., 2018) examined self-esteem, which concerns differences between people in how 
positively they feel about themselves, how much they like themselves (see Chapter 14 for 
more detail on self-esteem). The study by Izuma and colleagues started with the known 
finding that the reward centers of the brain are activated when people think about or 
look at something they prefer or like (e.g., their favorite ice cream, money). However, in 
this experiment, participants’ brains were scanned while they looked at various images, 
some of which were images of themselves. Researchers found that persons with higher 
self-esteem showed more activation in their brain reward centers while looking at images 
of themselves than persons lower in self-esteem. Other studies have examined activity in 
brain centers involved in processing reward and punishment in relation to personality 
(Standen et al., 2022). Tools that measure brain activation are very likely to revolution￾ize what we know about the brain and personality over the next few decades, making this 
a particularly exciting area of research (DeYoung, Grazioplene, & Allen, 2021).
Brain Structure
A relatively newer use of imaging techniques is to assess brain structure instead of func￾tion, to see whether personality correlates with the size of various areas of the brain 
(DeYoung et al., 2010). So, instead of measuring how active a region is, MRI can be 
used to measure the volume or thickness of various brain areas. In one study, DeYoung 
and colleagues (2012) used the Big Five model of personality to generate predictions 
about which areas of the brain would be responsible for generating the behaviors or 
responses relevant to each trait. They then assessed brain structure in a large (for neuro￾science studies; N = 116 subjects) sample of healthy young adults. They found support 
for many of their predictions about the volume of certain brain regions being associated 
with specific personality traits. For example, extraversion correlated with the volume 
of medial orbitofrontal cortex, a brain region involved in processing reward informa￾tion. Neuroticism correlated with the volume of brain regions that have been associated 
with threat and punishment. Other researchers are reporting robust correlations between 
extraversion and neuroticism and other measures of brain structures, including cortical 
surface area (Privado et al., 2017). In a particularly large sample (578 participants), 
Lewis and colleagues (2018) found that conscientiousness correlated with having a 
thicker cortex across several brain regions. Even larger studies (over 1,000 participants 
in each) have shown that all of the big five traits are correlated with the structural vol￾ume of various regions, with correlations that range from small to moderate (Hyatt et al., 
2021; Owens et al., 2019).
Final PDF to printer196
lar31869_ch07_184-221.indd 196 10/14/22 01:05 PM
PART TWO The Biological Domain
Application
Bigger Is Better?
When Albert Einstein passed away in 1955, the physician Thomas Stoltz Harvey performed an 
autopsy on his body at Princeton Hospital. During the autopsy, Dr. Harvey removed Einstein’s 
brain. Rumors abounded that Einstein’s brain was much larger than average, accounting for 
his genius. However, the overall weight of Einstein’s brain (1230 grams) fell completely within 
normal limits. After weighing the brain and taking several photos of it from different angles, 
Harvey dissected Einstein’s brain into 240 pieces, which he preserved in formalin. In the 
accompanying photo, Dr. Harvey displays a jar with portions of Einstein’s brain. Harvey and 
his colleagues were more interested in the cellular level than in overall structure. Consequently, 
observations about the structure of Einstein’s brain made by other physicians and anthropolo￾gists were based on the photos, not examination of the whole brain. While it appears that 
Einstein’s brain may have had deeper or more folds in his brain (which would result in larger 
surface area), making such conclusions without examining the whole brain is unreliable. Other 
scientists have argued that any conclusions about genius and the structure of the brain require 
the study of many brains, not just one. This can be done now with neuroimaging of brain 
structure and does not require an autopsy. One large study (over 7,000 participants) found that 
total brain volume correlated .28 with general intelligence (after controlling for age and gender 
differences in brain volume; Cox et al., 2019). Though exploratory, these researchers report 
even higher correlations with several specific brain regions. Other researchers have found that 
the degree of interconnectedness between brain regions correlated with intelligence (Krupnik, 
Yovel, & Assaf, 2021). Another study of specific brain structure and IQ (Grazioplene et al., 
2015) found that the volume in a particular part of the brain involved in learning (caudate 
nucleus) correlates with measured IQ. So, general results suggest that it is not overall brain 
size, but rather the size of particular portions of the brain involved in learning that is likely 
to be well developed in people like Einstein. However, what is not known is whether having a 
larger caudate leads to more learning (and hence higher IQ) or whether more learning leads to 
a larger caudate.
Medical Pathologist Dr. Thomas Harvey (1912–2007) holds a jar 
containing portions of Albert Einstein’s brain preserved in formalin.
Michael Brenna/Getty Images
Final PDF to printer197
lar31869_ch07_184-221.indd 197 10/14/22 01:05 PM
CHAPTER SEVEN Physiological Approaches to Personality 
Brain Connections
An even newer brain imaging technique is to focus not on the function or structure of brain 
regions per se, but on the connections between specific regions. For example, there is a 
brain region associated with emotion and another region associated with decision making. 
Researchers are now able to image the circuitry that connects these two regions and mea￾sure the size and activation of the connectivity between these regions. These connectivity 
measures relate to the amount of communication or interaction between two or more brain 
regions. Personality correlates may be found in the strength of connections between brain 
areas. For example, some people may have more of a connection between reason and emo￾tion, whereas for others emotion and reason are less connected (i.e., emotions figure very 
little, if at all, in their decision making). This new approach, focusing on the functional con￾nectivity between brain regions, is an important development in neuroscience and is just 
now being extended into personality psychology, where the emphasis will be on individual 
differences in the strength of connections between brain regions.
As an example of one interesting finding emerging from this brain connectivity 
approach, variation in the default brain network—the background total spontaneous 
communication between the brain’s many regions—has been related to the personality 
trait of openness to experience (Beaty et al., 2016). This finding suggests that the brains 
of people high on openness (who tend to be imaginative, creative, and enjoy abstract 
reasoning) show more total connectivity among all their brain regions than persons low 
on openness. In a different study, researchers looked at the degree of connectivity link￾ing to the executive control centers and found that conscientiousness correlated with 
more connectivity (Toschi et al, 2018). This finding is consistent with the observation 
that conscientious people are reliable and efficient at setting goals, prioritizing, and 
planning, so it makes sense that their frontal brain areas are more connected to other 
areas of their brain. Understanding the brain as a network, with a focus on the connec￾tions among brain areas, is an exciting new approach within personality neuroscience 
(Market, Montag, & Reuter, 2018). This new area of research holds much promise for 
understanding the biological foundation of personality traits (see A Closer Look on The 
Human Connectome Project).
Mapping the human brain has been one 
of the greatest scientific challenges of this 
century. Much work has already been done 
identifying key areas of the brain associ￾ated with various functions, such as mem￾ory, perception, and emotion. However, 
mapping the neural pathways that connect 
these various regions is just getting started. 
As an analogy, think about the electrical 
system of a house, where you know about 
the various electrical devices (e.g., lights, 
TV, computer, refrigerator, etc.), but the 
goal was to comprehensively map the 
human brain circuitry of 1,200 healthy adults 
and make the data public. After achieving 
this goal, dozens of other research cen￾ters (e.g., University of Southern California) 
joined the effort, targeting other popula￾tions, such as the elderly, infants, children, 
and persons with mental disorders. The orig￾inal project team now runs the Connectome 
Coordinating Facility, which manages an 
open-source Web-accessible neuroinfor￾matics platform to allow others to access 
actual wiring of the house, the connections 
between devices, remains a mystery to 
you. Decoding the complex wiring diagram 
within the human brain is an amazingly 
challenging task, like determining the wir￾ing diagram for major city.
The Human Connectome Project was 
started in 2011 as an effort to decode the 
wiring diagram of the human brain and was 
initially formed as a consortium of three uni￾versities (Washington University, University 
of Minnesota, and Oxford University). Their 
A Closer Look The Human Connectome Project
(Continued )
Final PDF to printer198
lar31869_ch07_184-221.indd 198 10/14/22 01:05 PM
PART TWO The Biological Domain
and work with the truly vast amount of data 
being generated. The goal is not just to have 
a wiring diagram for the human brain (the 
structure of circuitry), but to also know the 
functions of the connections and whether 
there are meaningful individual differences 
in those connections.
A large part of the project has been 
directed at understanding individual dif￾ferences—that is, understanding that not 
everyone’s brain is wired the same. There 
is variation from person to person in brain 
circuitry, and this variation may relate to 
personality differences or to various medi￾cal conditions. Some of the initial publica￾tions coming out of this project focus on 
such individual differences. One important 
paper (Smith, Williams, & Segerstrom, 2015) 
assesses the link between positive life out￾comes and patterns of brain connectivity 
in 460 participants between the ages of 
22 and 35. The researchers defined posi￾tive life outcomes by grouping measures of 
positive characteristics like vocabulary, intel￾ligence, education, life satisfaction, and finan￾cial income and then subtracting negative 
characteristics like smoking, trait anger, and 
vocabulary, etc. It could well be that devel￾oping a larger vocabulary, or becoming 
more intelligent by staying in school and 
learning, causes the brain connections to 
develop. So there is a lot left to be learned 
about the development of both brain con￾nectivity and the development of individual 
differences, and how the two are linked. 
Nevertheless, this kind of work illustrates 
the promise of a physiological approach to 
personality, with the possibility in the future 
of using brain scans to predict the kinds of 
skills, abilities, and personalities we might 
expect from a particular individual. If the 
causal influences of biology and environ￾ment are understood well enough, it may 
lead to the design of better schools or other 
interventions to help people change their 
behavior (and their brains) toward the more 
positive end of the life-outcome dimension.
self-reports of delinquency or rule breaking. 
Each subject receives a ranking on this single 
positive-negative life outcome dimension, 
with higher rank indicating more positive 
outcomes in the person’s life. They then cor￾related the strength of connections between 
various brain regions to this global positive 
life outcome. They found that the connectivity 
strength of more than 30 brain circuits corre￾lated with higher rank on the positive life out￾come dimension. In general, those persons 
with stronger or more overall brain connectiv￾ity had more positive characteristics, such as 
larger vocabulary, better memory, higher life 
satisfaction, larger income, and better educa￾tion. Conversely, those with weaker network 
connections in their brains had more of the 
negative characteristics, such as anger, rule 
breaking, and substance use.
While these initial results sound prom￾ising, we need to remind ourselves that 
correlation does not estab￾lish causation, and it does 
not prove that the stronger 
brain connections “cause” 
the person to be more 
intelligent, have a better 
A map of the average “functional connectivity” in the human 
cerebral cortex collected on healthy subjects while “at rest” in the 
MRI scanner. Regions in yellow/red are functionally connected 
to the “seed” location in the right frontal cortex (black circle, 
arrow), whereas regions in green and blue are weakly connected 
or not connected at all.
Source: M. F. Glasser and S. M. Smith for the WU-Minn HCP 
consortium—http://humanconnectome.org
3D probabilistic trajectories of white matter fibers arising from a 
seed in the left frontal cortex, superimposed on the right cortical gray 
matter surface for reference. The orientation vectors are color-coded 
(red: left-right; green: anterior posterior; blue: inferior-superior) and 
have opacity representative of the underlying number of streamlines 
that took the particular fiber orientation brain scan.
Source: S. Sotiropoulos and T. E. J. Behrens for the WU-Minn HCP 
consortium—http://humanconnectome.org
A Closer Look (Continued )
Final PDF to printer199
lar31869_ch07_184-221.indd 199 10/14/22 01:05 PM
CHAPTER SEVEN Physiological Approaches to Personality 
Brain Electrical Activity
It has been known for more than a century that the brain spontaneously produces small 
amounts of electricity, which can be measured by electrodes placed on the scalp. This 
measure is called the electroencephalogram (EEG), and EEG recordings can be obtained 
for various regions of the brain while the participant is asleep, is relaxed but awake, or 
is doing a task. Such measures of regional brain activity can provide useful informa￾tion about patterns of activation in various parts of the brain, which may be associ￾ated with different types of medical conditions or cognitive tasks (e.g., processing verbal 
versus spatial information, as in receiving directions from someone verbally or being 
shown a map of where to go). Personality psychologists have been especially interested 
in whether different regions of the brain show different patterns of electrical activity for 
different people. Later in this chapter we review left-right asymmetry in EEG activation 
as it relates to emotional traits.
Another technique in measuring brain electrical activity is called the evoked poten￾tial technique, in which the brain EEG is measured but the participant is given a stimu￾lus, such as a tone or a flash of light, and the researcher assesses the participant’s brain 
responsiveness to that stimulus. As discussed below, researchers have found the traits 
of extraversion and sensation seeking to be related to diminished reactivity, including 
diminished evoked potentials using EEG recording.
Other Measures
Although skin conductance, heart rate, and brain assessments are commonly used mea￾sures in physiological studies of personality, other biological measures have also proven 
useful (see Table 7.1). One important class of measures includes biochemical analyses of 
blood and saliva. For example, from saliva samples, biochemists can extract indicators of 
how competently a person’s immune system is functioning (Miller & Cohen, 2001). The 
quality of immune system functioning may go up and down with stress or emotions and 
thereby may relate to personality. Hormones, such as testosterone and oxytocin, play a 
role in important behaviors and can also be extracted from saliva samples. Testosterone 
has been linked to uninhibited, aggressive, and risk-taking behavior patterns (Dabbs & 
Dabbs, 2000). Oxytocin is a hormone related to affiliation and social bonding and has 
been found to be higher in extraverts than introverts (Andari, 2015). Cortisol, a byproduct 
of the hormone noradrenaline, can be readily assessed from saliva samples. Researchers 
have found, for example, that shy children have high levels of cortisol in their systems 
(Kagan & Snidman, 1991), suggesting that they experience more stress than less shy chil￾dren. Monoamine oxidase (MAO) is an enzyme found in the blood that is known to regu￾late neurotransmitters, the chemicals that carry messages between nerve cells. MAO may 
be a causal factor in the personality trait of sensation seeking. Other theories of personality 
are based directly on different amounts of neurotransmitters in the nervous system. One 
particular neurotransmitter—dopamine—plays a role in several neurological functions, one 
of which is responding to rewarding or pleasurable stimuli and is associated with such 
psychological states as “liking,” “wanting,” and “enjoyment” (Smillie & Wacker, 2014) 
and promotes exploration by prompting the person to seek out rewards and follow cues of 
rewards (DeYoung, 2013). Evidence is accumulating that the personality trait of extraver￾sion is related to increased dopamine function, with extraversion scores significantly pre￾dicting how people respond to drugs that manipulate dopamine levels (Wacker & Smillie, 
2015). Researchers have known for some time that extraverts tend to have more positive 
emotions and are happier than introverts (see Chapter 13 on Emotions and Personality), 
and this may be due in part to dopamine function in extraverts being different from 
Final PDF to printer200
lar31869_ch07_184-221.indd 200 10/14/22 01:05 PM
PART TWO The Biological Domain
introverts. A special issue of the journal Frontiers in Human Neuroscience (2014, vol. 8) 
published 16 papers on individual differences in the dopamine system, primarily in refer￾ence to the personality trait of extraversion. There are, however, several other physiologi￾cal theories of extraversion, to which we now turn.
Physiologically Based Theories of Personality
Now that we have covered basic physiological measures used in personality research, we 
turn to some of the biological theories that have generated interest and attention among 
personality psychologists. We begin with what is perhaps the most widely studied physi￾ological theory of personality—the theory that proposes a biological explanation for why 
some people are introverted and others extraverted.
Extraversion–Introversion
Among the people you know, someone probably fits the following description: is talk￾ative and outgoing, likes meeting new people and going new places, is active, is some￾times impulsive and venturesome, gets bored easily, and hates routine and monotony. 
Table 7.1 Common Physiological Measures Used in Personality Research
Physiological 
Measure
Physiological 
System
Psychological Response 
System
Examples of Stimuli 
Used in Research
Electrodermal activity Sweat gland activity controlled 
by sympathetic nervous system
Anxiety, startle, guilt, effort, pain Noise, mental effort, 
emotional stimuli, painful 
stimuli
Cardiovascular activity Blood pressure and heart 
rate controlled by autonomic 
nervous system
Flight-or-fight response, mental 
effort, stress
Stress, social anxiety, 
effort, high cognitive load
Electroencephalogram 
(EEG)
Brain’s spontaneous electrical 
activity
Brain activation, alertness Resting with eyes closed, 
reading
Evoked EEG Brain’s electrical activity in 
response to specific stimuli
Attention, recognition, cognitive 
processing
Brief sensory stimuli, 
emotional stimuli
Neuroimaging
 (e.g., fMRI, PET)
Brain’s energy metabolism Specific brain areas responsible 
for cognitive control, emotion, 
memory, pain, decision making, 
sensory processing
Wide variety of tasks 
that activate these 
psychological response 
systems
Antibodies Immune system Immune response to infection, 
stress
Virus, bacteria, stress
Testosterone Hormone system (steroid) Aggression, competitiveness, 
psychological drive and libido, 
muscle bulk
Tasks involving 
competition, aggression, 
attraction
Cortisol Hormone system (adrenal) Stress response Life events, stress, anxiety 
stimuli
Serotonin, dopamine, 
MAO, etc.
Neurotransmitters Transmission of specific nerve 
signals
Rewarding stimuli, 
emotions
Final PDF to printer201
lar31869_ch07_184-221.indd 201 10/14/22 01:05 PM
CHAPTER SEVEN Physiological Approaches to Personality 
Such a person would score as an extravert on an extraversion–introversion question￾naire. See Table 7.2 for items from a popular extraversion–introversion questionnaire—
the Eysenck Personality Inventory.
You probably also know someone who is just the opposite, someone who is quiet 
and withdrawn, who prefers being alone or with a few friends to being in large crowds, 
who prefers routines and schedules, and who prefers the familiar to the unexpected. 
Such a person would score in the introverted direction on an extraversion–introversion 
questionnaire. If you are wondering why introverts and extraverts are so different from 
each other, physiologically minded personality psychologists have an intriguing explana￾tion: Eysenck’s theory.
An early example of a physiologically based theory of personality was put for￾ward by H. J. Eysenck (1916–1997) in his 1967 book The Biological Basis of Personality.
While we covered Eysenck’s descriptive taxonomy of personality traits in Chapter 3, 
here we go into detail on his biological explanation for individual differences on the 
dimension that ranges from introversion to extraversion. Eysenck proposed that intro￾verts are characterized by higher levels of activity in the brain’s ascending reticular 
activating system (ARAS) than are extraverts. The ARAS is a structure in the brain stem 
thought to control overall cortical arousal. In the 1960s, the ARAS was thought of as a 
gateway through which nervous stimulation from the sense organs entered the brain’s 
cortex. If the gate were somewhat closed, then the resting arousal level of the cortex 
would be lower, and if the gate were more open, then the resting arousal level would be 
higher. Introverts, according to this theory, have higher resting levels of cortical arousal 
because their ARAS lets in too much stimulation. Introverts engage in introverted behav￾iors (are quiet and seek low-stimulation settings, such as libraries) because they need to 
keep their already heightened level of arousal in check. Conversely, extraverts engage 
in extraverted behaviors because they need to increase their level of arousal (Claridge, 
Donald, & Birchall, 1981).
Table 7.2 Items from the Eysenck Personality Questionnaire 
Extraversion Scale
Extraversion Items
For every question, circle just one response.
YES NO Are you a talkative person?
YES NO Are you rather lively?
YES NO Can you usually let yourself go and enjoy yourself at a lively party?
YES NO Do you enjoy meeting new people?
YES NO Do you tend to keep in the background on social occasions? 
(reversed)
YES NO Do you like going out a lot?
YES NO Do you prefer reading to meeting people? (reversed)
YES NO Do you have many friends?
YES NO Would you call yourself happy-go-lucky?
Scoring directions: Reverse your answers to the items marked “reversed”; then count how many questions you endorsed with a “yes.” The 
average college student scores about 6 on this questionnaire.
Source: Eysenck, Eysenck, and Barrett (1985).
Final PDF to printer202
lar31869_ch07_184-221.indd 202 10/14/22 01:05 PM
PART TWO The Biological Domain
Eysenck also incorporated Hebb’s (1955) notion of “optimal level of arousal” into 
his theory. By optimal level of arousal, Hebb meant a level that is just right for any given 
task. For example, imagine going into a final exam in an underaroused state (e.g., sleepy, 
tired). Being sleepy and underaroused would be just as bad for your performance as going 
into the exam in an overaroused state (e.g., extremely anxious and agitated). There is an 
optimal level of arousal for taking an exam—not too much, not too little—one in which you 
are focused, alert, and attentive but not aroused to the point of anxiety or panic.
If introverts have a higher baseline level of arousal than extraverts (i.e., level of 
arousal while at rest), then introverts are above their optimal level of arousal more often 
than extraverts. According to the theory, the generally overaroused condition of intro￾verts leads them to be more restrained and inhibited. They avoid active social inter￾actions that might aggravate their already overstimulated condition. Extraverts, on the 
other hand, need to get their arousal level higher and so seek out stimulating activi￾ties and engage in more unrestrained behaviors. The qualities that typically characterize 
introverts (e.g., quiet, withdrawn) and extraverts (e.g., outgoing, engaging) are under￾stood to be attempts to regulate arousal downward (in the case of introverts) or upward 
(in the case of extraverts) to maintain an optimal level of arousal.
In the decades following publication of Eysenck’s theory, many studies were con￾ducted to test it (see reviews by Eysenck, 1991; Matthews & Gilliland, 1999; Stelmack 
& Rammsayer, 2008). If it is true that introverts are more cortically aroused than extra￾verts, then introverts should display enhanced responsiveness on measures of cortical 
activity, such as the electroencephalogram (EEG), as well as on measures of autonomic 
nervous system activity, such as electrodermal response. Studies designed to test this 
hypothesis typically have taken the form of comparing introverts with extraverts on phys￾iological measures gathered under conditions of various degrees of stimulation (Gale, 
1986). In conditions where participants were presented with either no stimulation or 
very mild stimulation, differences between introverts and extraverts turned out to be 
small or nonexistent. However, in studies that looked at nervous system responsiveness 
to moderate levels of stimulation, introverts showed larger or faster responses than extra￾verts, as predicted by Eysenck’s theory (Bullock & Gilliland, 1993; Gale, 1983).
Do you like telling jokes and funny stories to your friends? Do you like 
mixing with people? Can you get a party going? Answering yes to such 
questions suggests an extraverted personality. Interestingly, Eysenck’s 
extraversion–introversion theory is based not on a need to be with people, 
but rather on a need for arousal and stimulation.
Rawpixel.com/Shutterstock
Are you a talkative person? Do you like mixing with people? Do you 
like plenty of bustle and excitement around you? Answering no to such 
questions suggests an introverted personality.
everst/Shutterstock
Final PDF to printer203
lar31869_ch07_184-221.indd 203 10/14/22 01:05 PM
CHAPTER SEVEN Physiological Approaches to Personality 
An important corollary of the theory is that, when given a choice, extraverts should 
prefer higher levels of stimulation than do introverts. Indirect evidence supports this pre￾diction. For example, laboratory studies have shown that extraverts will press a button 
at a higher rate than introverts when the button pressing produces changes in the visual 
environment (such as change the channel on a TV, change the image in a slide show) 
(e.g., Brebner & Cooper, 1978). In a more naturalistic study, done in a university library, 
persons studying in a noisy reading room scored as more extraverted than did students 
studying in the quieter rooms (Campbell & Hawley, 1982). Findings such as these sug￾gest that, when given a choice, extraverts tend to seek greater levels of stimulation than 
introverts (Campbell, 1983).
A clever study designed by psychologist Russell Geen (1984) tested the hypothesis 
that, when allowed to control the noise level during a learning task, extraverts would 
choose a louder level than introverts. In this experiment, participants were told they 
would engage in a learning task in a noisy environment (like studying with the TV on). 
However, they were allowed to control the volume of the noise (though they could not 
turn it completely off). Extraverts did choose a louder noise level than introverts. In 
their preferred noise levels (the levels chosen), the performance of extraverts and intro￾verts did not differ. However, in another condition, the introverts were given the higher 
noise level chosen by the extraverts, and in this condition their performance declined. 
Similarly, when the extraverts were given the lower noise level chosen by the introverts, 
The fact that introverts and extraverts are not different at resting levels, but are
different under moderate levels of stimulation, led Eysenck to revise his arousal theory 
(Eysenck & Eysenck, 1985). When he first stated his theory in 1967, Eysenck did not 
distinguish between resting, or baseline, levels of arousal and arousal responses to stimu￾lation. A good deal of evidence now suggests that the real difference between introverts 
and extraverts lies in their arousability, or arousal response, not in their baseline arousal 
level. Extraverts and introverts do not differ in their level of brain activity while sleeping, 
for example, or while lying quietly in a darkened room with their eyes shut (Stelmack, 
1990). However, when presented with moderate levels of stimulation, introverts show 
enhanced physiological reactivity compared with extraverts (De Pascalis, 2004; Doucet 
& Stelmack, 2000; Gale, 1987).
The Lemon Juice Demonstration: This demonstration is designed to illustrate that introverts 
are more reactive to stimulation than extraverts. Although some teachers have tried this in the 
classroom, it can be a bit messy and so might best be done as a thought experiment. Here is 
how it would go: Take a double-tipped cotton swab and tie a thread exactly in its center so that 
it hangs perfectly in balance (i.e., is horizontal). Swallow three times and put one end on your 
tongue for exactly 20 seconds. After removing the swab, place 4 drops of lemon juice under 
your tongue. Place the other end of the cotton swab on your tongue for 20 seconds. Remove 
the swab and let it hang by the thread. If you are an extravert, it is likely that the swab will 
remain horizontal, indicating that you did not react strongly to the lemon juice by producing 
more saliva. If you are an introvert, it is likely that the swab will no longer balance horizontally 
and will instead be heavier on the end placed on the tongue following the lemon juice. This 
would indicate that you produced more saliva in response to the lemon juice. Eysenck con￾ducted a similar experiment (Eysenck & Eysenck, 1967) as did Corcoran (1964).
Exercise
Final PDF to printer204
lar31869_ch07_184-221.indd 204 10/14/22 01:05 PM
PART TWO The Biological Domain
their performance also declined. This study shows not only that extraverts prefer more 
intense stimulation than introverts but also that stimulation outside of their preferred 
level (higher for introverts, lower for extraverts) resulted in performance declines, sup￾porting the notion of an optimal level of stimulation, which differs for extraverts (where 
optimal is more intense) and introverts (where optimal is less intense).
Sensitivity to Reward and Punishment
Jeffrey Gray (1934–2004) proposed an influential alternative biological theory of per￾sonality (Gray, 1972, 1990), called reinforcement sensitivity theory. Based on brain func￾tion research with animals, Gray has constructed a model of human personality based 
on two hypothesized biological systems in the brain. The first is the behavioral activation 
system (BAS), which is responsive to incentives, such as cues for reward, and regulates 
approach behavior, most likely through the dopamine system (DeYoung, 2013). When 
the BAS recognizes a stimulus as potentially rewarding, it triggers approach behavior. 
For example, in playing an electronic game, a teenager might notice mainly the possible 
rewards in the game, and focus mainly on working to earn those rewards (approach 
motivation). The other system in the brain postulated by Gray (1975) is the behavioral 
inhibition system (BIS), which is responsive to cues for punishment, frustration, and 
uncertainty. The effect of BIS activation is to cease or inhibit behavior or to bring about 
avoidance behavior. As an example of this, a different teenager playing the same com￾puter game might notice mainly the potential threats, and focus more on avoiding the 
threats (avoidance motivation) than earning the rewards. A rough analogy is that the 
BAS is like an accelerator that motivates approach behavior, whereas the BIS is like 
brakes that inhibit behavior or help a person avoid threats.
According to Gray, people differ from each other in the relative sensitivity of their 
BIS or BAS systems. A person with a reactive BIS is especially sensitive to cues of pun￾ishment, frustration, and uncertainty. He or she is vulnerable to unpleasant emotions, 
including anxiety, fear, and sadness. According to Gray, the BIS is responsible for the 
personality dimension of anxiety. A person with a reactive BAS, on the other hand, is espe￾cially sensitive to reward cues in the environment. Such a person is predisposed to positive 
emotions and tends to approach stimuli. The ability of an individual with a reactive BAS to 
inhibit behavior decreases as he or she approaches a goal. According to Gray, the BAS is 
responsible for the personality dimension of impulsivity, the inability to inhibit behaviors.
Some debate has focused on exactly where to locate BAS (impulsivity) and BIS 
(anxiety) in existing trait taxonomies, especially that defined by Eysenck’s dimensions 
of extraversion and introversion (see Figure 7.2). In fact, one of the authors of this book 
has had a series of exchanges with Gray and his colleagues about this issue (Pickering, 
Corr, & Gray, 1999; Rusting & Larsen, 1997, 1999). It appears that the relation between 
Gray’s constructs and Eysenck’s constructs is direct, with BAS being equivalent to extra￾version and BIS being equivalent to neuroticism. Many researchers (e.g., Wilt & Revelle, 
2017) argue that extraverts (compared to introverts) are more reactive to cues of reward 
and incentives (“wanting”), not necessarily the consumption of rewards (“liking”) and, 
as such, extraversion and BAS have the same reward-seeking behavior as a main feature. 
Similarly, neuroticism is thought to overlap with the BIS in that it (neuroticism) includes 
increased sensitivity to threat, punishment, and uncertainty and a readiness to respond 
to such stimuli with defensive (flight-or-fight) or stress (cortisol) reactions (Allen & 
DeYoung, 2017). Many researchers view the BIS and BAS constructs as identical to neu￾roticism and extraversion in that both refer to dispositional tendencies to withdraw from 
punishment or to approach reward, respectively (e.g., Davidson et al., 2003; Kosslyn et al., 
Final PDF to printer205
lar31869_ch07_184-221.indd 205 10/14/22 01:05 PM
CHAPTER SEVEN Physiological Approaches to Personality 
Figure 7.2
Relation between Eysenck’s dimensions of extraversion and neuroticism and Gray’s dimensions of 
impulsivity and anxiety.
Emotionally
stable Neurotic
Behavior
inhibition
system
(BIS)
Low
anxiety
High
impulsivity
Low
impulsivity
High
anxiety
Behavior
activation
system
(BAS)
Extraversion
Introversion
2002; Knutson & Bhanji, 2006; Sutton, 2002). Gray revised his model to locate BIS much 
closer to neuroticism and locate BAS much closer to extraversion (Pickering et al., 1999). 
Gray believed that differences among people in sensitivity to reward and punish￾ment are responsible for generating wide variety of behaviors and emotions associated 
approach and avoidance. If we ask why some people are more susceptible than others 
to anxiety attacks, fears, worry, depressions, phobias, obsessions, or compulsions, Gray 
would argue that this is due to an overly sensitive behavioral inhibition system. Such 
people tend to notice and are sensitive to punishment cues and frustration. Moreover, 
they are distressed by uncertainty and novelty. Then, if we ask why some people are 
more susceptible than others to positive emotions, to approach behaviors, and to seeking 
out and interacting with others, Gray would argue that this is due to an overly sensitive 
behavioral activation system.
Psychologist Charles Carver (1947–2019) and his colleagues (Carver, Sutton, 
& Scheier, 1999; Carver & White, 1994) developed and validated a questionnaire to 
measure individual differences in the strength of the BIS and BAS. Other research￾ers have added to the validity evidence behind this scale. For example, Zelenski and 
Larsen (1999) found this scale to be one of the best measures of BIS and BAS. Carver, 
Sutton, and Scheier (1999) reviewed Gray’s theory, emphasizing individual differences 
in approach or incentive motivation (extraversion or impulsivity) and individual differ￾ences in withdrawal or aversive motivation (neuroticism or anxiety). They showed how 
several programs of research can be integrated into the theme that humans appear to 
possess separate systems for responding to incentives and threats. For example, these 
systems show reliable individual differences, they relate to major affective dispositions, 
they may be lateralized in our cerebral architecture, and they may relate differently to 
learning by punishment and learning by reward. Carver and his colleagues referred to the 
BIS and BAS as the “Big Two” personality dimensions.
Final PDF to printer206
lar31869_ch07_184-221.indd 206 10/14/22 01:05 PM
PART TWO The Biological Domain
Gray himself primarily conducted research with animals. With animals, you can 
use drugs or surgery to eliminate certain areas of the brain, then test whether this affects 
the animal’s ability to learn through punishment or reward. Gray’s theory relates anxiety 
and impulsivity to the two principles of learning: reinforcement (both positive and nega￾tive) and punishment (and the loss of reinforcement). There is some evidence that these 
two forms of learning are under separate neural control. It appears likely that different 
brain mechanisms may be involved when a person or an animal learns through reinforce￾ment or through punishment (Gray, 1991). Thus, there should be people with varying 
degrees of sensitivity (high, medium, or low) to punishment and to reward.
In a study of reward and punishment, participants were required to complete hun￾dreds of trials of a difficult reaction time task (Larsen, Chen, & Zelenski, 2003). They 
had to name the colors of color words (the word “RED” written in yellow, also known as 
the Stroop task) that popped up on a computer screen, as accurately as possible within 
a half-second. It is a difficult task, and people can get only about half the trials correct 
given that they have to respond so quickly on each trial. One group was rewarded for each 
correct and fast response, and they earned $5 during the course of a 20-minute experi￾ment. Another group was punished after incorrect or slow responses, and, although they 
started the experiment with $10, proceeded to lose $5. As such, everyone finished the 
experiment with $5, but one group was rewarded on a trial-by-trial basis, whereas the 
other group was punished on a trial-by-trial basis. It turned out that BAS scores predicted 
better performance in the reward condition, with high-BAS persons becoming more 
accurate when they were working for reward. BIS scores, on the other hand, predicted 
performance in the punishment condition, with high-BIS persons responding with better 
performance when they were being punished, compared to low-BIS participants.
Much of the work carried out to test Gray’s theory has focused on impulsivity 
(the inability to inhibit responses). Our jails are full of people who are deficient in the 
ability to control their behavior, especially behavior that may be immediately rewarding. 
For example, a 17-year-old male sees an expensive sports car parked on the street. As 
he looks at the car and thinks about how much fun it would be to drive, he notices that 
the keys are in the ignition. The owner appears nowhere in sight and the street is fairly 
deserted. He starts to reach for the door handle. The ability to stop this approach behav￾ior, even though it promises a brief but thrilling reward, separates the average person 
from the impulsive car thief.
Impulsive individuals can be characterized as having stronger approach than 
avoidance tendencies and are less able to inhibit approach behavior, especially in the 
presence of desirable goals or rewards. You probably know people who often say things 
that get them into trouble or who hurt other people’s feelings without even thinking. 
Even though they know they might hurt someone’s feelings and feel bad themselves (i.e., 
are “punished” by feelings of remorse), why can’t they control what they do and say?
According to Gray’s theory, impulsive people do not learn well from punishment 
because they have a weak behavioral inhibition system. If this is true, then researchers 
should be able to demonstrate that in a task that involves learning from punishment, 
impulsive persons do less well than nonimpulsive persons. Studies have been conducted 
on impulsive college students, juvenile delinquents, psychopaths, and criminals in jail 
(Newman, 1987; Newman, Widom, & Nathan, 1985). The typical finding is that such 
persons are, in fact, deficient in learning through punishment. Impulsive persons, it 
seems, do not learn as well from punishment as from reward.
The COVID-19 pandemic has brought new threats to consider (situations where 
transmission is more likely), as well as highlighting rewards that we took for granted 
(e.g., spontaneous socializing). Researchers have begun to test whether personality 
Final PDF to printer207
lar31869_ch07_184-221.indd 207 10/14/22 01:05 PM
CHAPTER SEVEN Physiological Approaches to Personality 
Sensation Seeking
Sensation seeking is another dimension of personality postulated to have a physiological 
basis. Sensation seeking is the tendency to seek out thrilling and exciting activities, take 
risks, and avoid boredom. Research on the need for sensory input grew out of studies on 
sensory deprivation. Let’s begin, then, with a description of sensory deprivation research.
Imagine volunteering for a study in which you are put into a small chamber where 
there is no light, no sound, and only minimal tactile sensations. Imagine further that 
you agree to do this for 12 hours straight. What would this experience be like? Research 
suggests that at first you would feel relaxed, then bored, then anxious as you started to 
have unusual sensory experiences. Deprived of all sensory input, the brain will create its 
own activation which is experienced as sensory events. Early research by Hebb (1955) 
showed that in such a situation, college students chose to 
listen over and over to a taped lecture intended to con￾vince 6-year-olds about the dangers of alcohol. Other par￾ticipants in those early sensory deprivation experiments 
who were offered a recording of an old stock market 
report opted to listen to it over and over again, appar￾ently to avoid the unpleasant consequences of sensory 
deprivation. Persons in sensory-deprived environments 
appear motivated to acquire any sensory input, even if 
ordinarily such input would be perceived as boring.
Hebb’s Theory of Optimal Level of Arousal
Hebb developed the theory of optimal level of arousal, 
which was used by Eysenck in his theory of extraversion. 
Hebb’s theory states that people are motivated to reach 
an optimal level of arousal. If they are underaroused, 
relative to this level, an increase in arousal is rewarding; 
conversely, if they are overaroused, a decrease in arousal 
relates to how people cope with the pandemic. A recent review of this research (Bacon 
et., 2021) concluded that fear-driven compliance was correlated with BIS measures, and 
BAS measures correlated with more difficulty with social isolation and a desire to return 
toward normality.
Think of a situation in which you are trying to teach someone something new. For example, 
perhaps you want to teach your roommate to keep her part of the room neat and tidy. Think 
of a way you might use reward to teach her that behavior. For example, every time she picked 
up her clothes off the floor you compliment her or offer her a piece of candy. Now think of a 
way you might use mild punishment to teach the same behavior. For example, each time she 
leaves dirty dishes in the sink, you can try scolding and yelling at her. Which do you think 
would work better? Do you think she would be more affected by the reward or by the punish￾ment? Could the effectiveness of the reward or the punishment depend on the personality of 
your roommate?
Exercise
The theory of sensation seeking was proposed to explain why some 
people routinely seek out thrilling experiences, even though such 
experiences may come with certain risks.
Glow Images
Final PDF to printer208
lar31869_ch07_184-221.indd 208 10/14/22 01:05 PM
PART TWO The Biological Domain
is rewarding. For its time, Hebb’s theory was controversial because most researchers 
thought that tension reduction was the goal of all motives, yet Hebb was saying that we 
are motivated to seek out tension and stimulation. How else can we explain the fact that 
people like to work on puzzles, enjoy mild frustration, and occasionally take risks or 
do something to arouse mild fears, such as going on a roller coaster ride or to a scary 
movie. Hebb’s belief that people need stimulation and sensory input is consistent with 
the results of sensory deprivation research. The nervous system appears to need at least 
some sensory input.
Sensation Seeking Research Started by Marvin Zuckerman (1928–2018)
Early on in sensory deprivation research, Zuckerman and Haber (1965) noted that some 
people were not as distressed as others by the sensory deprivation experience. In these 
early experiments, some people found sensory deprivation extremely unpleasant. These 
participants requested lots of sensory material (tapes, reading material) during the exper￾iment and quit the experiment relatively early. Zuckerman believed that such persons 
had a particularly high need for sensation because they were the least tolerant of sensory 
deprivation. He called them sensation seekers because they appeared to seek out stimula￾tion, not just in the sensory deprivation experiment but in their everyday lives as well.
Zuckerman developed a questionnaire designed to measure the extent to which a 
person needs novel or exciting experiences and enjoys the thrills and excitement associ￾ated with them. He called the questionnaire the Sensation-Seeking Scale, and items from 
it appear in Table 7.3 (Zuckerman & Aluja, 2015).
As it turned out, Zuckerman’s questionnaire about preferences for stimulation in 
everyday life predicted how well people tolerated the sensory deprivation sessions. High 
sensation seekers found sensory deprivation to be particularly unpleasant, whereas low 
sensation seekers were able to tolerate it for longer periods of time. In the early 1960s, 
Zuckerman left the sensory deprivation laboratory and began to study the other unique 
characteristics associated with the personality dimension of sensation seeking. Notice 
that this theoretical explanation of sensation seeking is very similar to that Eysenck 
offered for extraversion. In fact, while the theoretical explanations of Zuckerman and 
Eysenck differ, there is a moderately strong positive correlation between extraversion 
and sensation seeking (Zuckerman & Glicksohn, 2016).
Table 7.3 Items from the Sensation-Seeking Scale
There are several aspects of sensation seeking that are reflected in the items on this scale.
Thrill and adventure seeking—reflected in items that ask about desire for outdoor sports or activities involving elements of risk, 
such as flying, scuba diving, parachute jumping, motorcycle riding, and mountain climbing—for example, “I sometimes like to do 
things that are a little frightening” (high) versus “A sensible person avoids activities that are dangerous” (low).
Experience seeking—reflected in items that refer to the seeking of new sensory or mental experiences through unconventional 
or nonconforming lifestyle choices—for example, “I like to have new and exciting experiences and sensations even if they are 
frightening, unconventional, or illegal” (high) versus “I am not interested in experience for its own sake” (low).
Disinhibition—reflected in items indicating a preference for getting “out of control” or an interest in wild parties, gambling, and 
sexual variety—for example, “Almost everything enjoyable is illegal or immoral” (high) versus “The most enjoyable things are 
perfectly legal and moral” (low).
Boredom susceptibility—reflected in items that refer to a dislike for repetition, routine work, monotony, predictable and dull 
people, and a restlessness when things become unchanging—for example, “I get bored seeing the same old faces” (high) versus 
“I like the comfortable familiarity of everyday friends” (low).
All of the items on the Sensation-Seeking Scale, as well as scoring instructions, can be found in Zuckerman (1978).
Final PDF to printer209
lar31869_ch07_184-221.indd 209 10/14/22 01:05 PM
CHAPTER SEVEN Physiological Approaches to Personality 
In the 40-plus years that Zuckerman and his colleagues conducted research on sen￾sation seeking, many interesting findings emerged. Police officers who volunteer for riot 
duty have higher sensation-seeking scores than officers who do not volunteer for riot duty. 
Skydivers score higher on sensation-seeking measures than non-skydivers. In a study of 
550 motorcycle riders, sensation seeking correlated with a tendency to speed and do high￾risk stunts (Antoniazzi & Klein, 2019). Among college students who volunteered to be 
in psychology experiments, the students with high sensation-seeking scores volunteered to 
participate in the more unusual studies (studies on ESP, hypnosis, or drugs) than in the typ￾ical studies (on learning, sleep, or social interaction). In studies of gambling behavior, the 
participants with high sensation-seeking scores tended to make riskier bets. High sensation 
seekers also report having a larger number of sex partners, engaging in a wider variety of sex 
acts, and start having sex at an earlier age than low sensation seekers. The list of correlates 
of sensation seeking is quite long, and you may consult various reviews to learn more about 
this personality trait (e.g., Zuckerman, 1978, 1984, 1991b).
According to Zuckerman, there is a physiological basis for sensation-seeking 
behavior. Zuckerman’s more recent work (1991b, 2005, 2006) focused primarily on 
the role played by neurotransmitters in bringing about differences in sensation seeking. 
Neurotransmitters are chemicals in the nerve cells that are responsible for the transmis￾sion of a nerve impulse from one cell to another. As you may recall from your introduc￾tory psychology class, nerve cells are separated from one another by a slight gap, called 
a synapse. A nerve impulse must jump across this gap if it is to continue toward its 
destination. Neurotransmitters are the chemicals released by the nerves that allow nerve 
impulses to jump across the synapse and continue on their way.
The neurotransmitter must be broken down after the impulse has passed, or too 
many nerve transmissions would occur. As an analogy, think of the turnstyle at a sports 
arena or subway, which lets in one person at a time. If it were left open, many people 
could run through, allowing too many people in. If it were stuck closed, however, no one 
could get through. The neurotransmitter system is similar in that the chemical balance in 
the synapse has to be just right in order for the correct amount of nervous transmission 
to get through and continue on. 
Certain enzymes, particularly monoamine oxidase (MAO), are responsible for 
maintaining the proper levels of neurotransmitters. MAO works by breaking down the 
neurotransmitter after it has allowed a nerve impulse to pass. If an excessive amount of 
MAO were present, it would break down too much of the neurotransmitter, and nerve 
transmission would be diminished. If there were too little MAO present, an excessive 
amount of the neurotransmitter would be left in the synapse, allowing for too much ner￾vous transmission to take place. Suppose that you had to do a fine movement with your 
fingers, such as pick up a dime off a flat surface. With too little MAO in your system, 
your fingers might be shaking and your movements jerky (too much nervous transmis￾sion). With too much MAO, however, your fingers might be clumsy because of dulled 
sensation and lethargic movement control. When MAO levels are just right, neurotrans￾mitter levels are regulated appropriately, and the nervous system works properly to con￾trol the muscles, thoughts, and emotions.
High sensation seekers tend to have low levels of MAO in their bloodstream, com￾pared with low sensation seekers. Across studies, the correlation tends to be small to 
moderate but is consistently negative (Zuckerman, 1991b, 2005). If high sensation seek￾ers tend to have low MAO levels, and low MAO means more neurotransmitter available 
in the nerve cells, then perhaps sensation seeking is caused by or is maintained by having 
high levels of neurotransmitters in the nervous system. A recent review of the research 
supports this neurotransmitter theory of sensation seeking (Norbury & Husain, 2015). 
Final PDF to printer210
lar31869_ch07_184-221.indd 210 10/14/22 01:05 PM
PART TWO The Biological Domain
One study compared imprisoned violent offenders with a normal community sample, 
and found the violent offenders scored higher on sensation seeking AND had lower 
levels of MAO in their blood (Skondras et al., 2004). MAO acts like the brakes of the 
nervous system by decomposing neurotransmitters in the synapse and thereby inhibiting 
neurotransmission. With low MAO levels, high sensation seekers have less inhibition in 
their nervous systems and therefore less control over behavior, thoughts, and emotions. 
According to Zuckerman’s (1991a) theory and research, sensation-seeking behaviors 
(e.g., illicit sex, drug use, wild parties) are not due so much to seeking an optimal level of 
arousal, but to having too little of the biochemical brakes in their synapses.
Neurotransmitters and Personality
Whereas Zuckerman’s theory concerns levels of MAO, which breaks down neurotrans￾mitters, other researchers hypothesize that levels of neurotransmitters themselves are 
Illustration of a synapse, the junction between two nerve cells. Synapses transmit electrical signals from one nerve cell to the next. When an electrical signal 
reaches a synapse, it triggers the release of chemicals called neurotransmitters (pink) from vesicles (purple). The vesicles burst through the membrane, and 
neurotransmitters cross a microscopic gap called the synaptic gap and bind to the receptor nerve cell, causing it to propagate an electrical impulse.
Direction of 
nerve impulse
Axon
Dendrites
Axon of sending
neuron
Terminal button
Synaptic vesicle 
containing 
neurotransmitters
Synaptic gap
Dendrite of 
receiving neuron
Synaptic vesicle
releases neurotransmitters.
Neurotransmitters attach at 
the receptor binding site; 
channel opens.
Receptor with
binding site
Channel
Neurotransmitters
In the terminal button, the impulse triggers the release 
of neurotransmitters into the synaptic gap.
At a receptor site on the dendrite of the receiving 
neuron, the neurotransmitter causes channels to 
open and creates an action potential.
Terminal
button
The neural impulse travels down the
axon toward dendrites of the next neuron.
A
B
C
Final PDF to printer211
lar31869_ch07_184-221.indd 211 10/14/22 01:05 PM
CHAPTER SEVEN Physiological Approaches to Personality 
directly responsible for specific individual differences (Depue, 2006; DeYoung, 2013). 
One neurotransmitter, dopamine, appears to be associated with pleasure and pleasure￾seeking behaviors. For example, animals will work to obtain increases in their dopamine 
levels, much as they would work to obtain food or addictive drugs. As such, dopamine 
appears to function like a reward system and has even been called the feeling good chem￾ical (Hamer, 1997). Drugs of abuse, such as cocaine, mimic dopamine in the nervous 
system, which accounts for the pleasure associated with taking them. However, such 
drugs deplete a person’s natural levels of dopamine, leading to unpleasant feelings after 
the drug leaves the nervous system, creating a drive or urge to obtain more of the drug 
(i.e., addiction).
A second important neurotransmitter is serotonin. Researchers have documented 
the role of serotonin in depression and other mood disorders, such as anxiety. Specifically, 
drugs such as Prozac, Zoloft, and Paxil block the reuptake of serotonin, leaving it in the 
synapse longer, leading depressed persons to feel less depressed. In one study, Prozac 
was given to nondepressed subjects. Over several weeks of observation, they reported 
less negative affect and engaged in more outgoing and social behavior than did those in 
a control group (Knutson et al., 1998). In studies of monkeys, the monkeys that were 
higher in dominance and that engaged in more grooming had higher levels of serotonin. 
The monkeys low in serotonin were more fearful (Rogness & McClure, 1996).
A third important neurotransmitter, norepinephrine, is involved in activating the 
sympathetic nervous system for fight-or-flight. Not surprisingly, personality theories have 
been proposed based on the neurotransmitters dopamine, serotonin, and norepineph￾rine. Probably the most comprehensive is Cloninger’s tridimensional personality model
(Cloninger, 1986, 1987; Cloninger, Svrakic, & Przybeck, 1993), in which three personal￾ity traits are tied to levels of the three neurotransmitters. The first trait, novelty seeking, is 
based on low levels of dopamine. Recall that low levels of dopamine create a drive state 
to obtain substances or experiences that increase dopamine. Novelty, thrills, and excite￾ment can make up for low levels of dopamine, so novelty-seeking behavior is thought to 
result from low levels of this neurotransmitter.
The second personality trait identified in Cloninger’s model is harm avoidance, 
which he associates with abnormalities in serotonin metabolism. People low in harm 
avoidance are described as energetic, outgoing, and optimistic, whereas people high in 
harm avoidance are described as cautious, inhibited, shy, and apprehensive. Although 
various descriptions of the theory indicate increased or decreased serotonin levels are 
associated with increased harm avoidance, Cloninger himself (personal communication, 
October 2003) states that the correlation between harm avoidance and absolute levels 
of serotonin is not linear (one-to-one). Low levels of serotonin metabolite are associated 
with depression, but serotonin levels can also be elevated in states of anxiety or stress. 
The selective serotonin uptake inhibitors (like the antidepressants Prozac, Zoloft, or 
Paxil) result in increased levels of serotonin at synapses, which may increase anxiety 
initially but then lead to lowered stress responses, probably by decreasing sensitivity to 
serotonin when it is released in response to stress.
The third trait in Cloninger’s model is reward dependence, which Cloninger sees 
as related to low levels of norepinephrine. People high on this trait are persistent; they 
continue to act in ways that produce reward. They work long hours, put a lot of effort 
into their work, and often continue striving after others have given up.
Genes Work Through Neurotransmitter Systems to Influence Personality
Although we discussed behavior genetics in more detail in Chapter 6, it is worth men￾tioning here that many researchers interested in personality and genetics are focusing on 
Final PDF to printer212
lar31869_ch07_184-221.indd 212 10/14/22 01:05 PM
PART TWO The Biological Domain
the genes involved in regulating neurotransmitter systems. For example, if low levels of 
dopamine are related to novelty seeking, then perhaps the genes involved in dopamine 
transmission would be a good place to start in the search for the genetic basis of this 
personality trait. Keltikangas-Järvinen and her colleagues (2003) in Finland found that 
the type 4 dopamine receptor gene (DRD4) is associated with heightened levels of nov￾elty seeking. An early meta-analysis of genetic studies of novelty seeking has suggested 
that very specific types of repeated genetic codes on the DRD4 gene (Schinka, Letsch, 
& Crawford, 2002) are reliably associated with novelty seeking. A later meta-analysis 
(Munafo et al., 2008) concluded that specific variants of DRD4 are reliably associated 
with novelty seeking and impulsivity, implying that genetic variations of DRD4 are 
involved in this personality trait. These findings imply that many genes are involved in 
the creation of any single personality trait. So, although looking for one gene as the basis 
of a personality trait is like looking for the proverbial needle in the haystack, the reality 
is that researchers are now looking for many different—and interacting—needles in the 
same big haystack. That is, they are looking for multiple genes that interact in complex 
ways to influence neurotransmitter systems. Personality traits, as well as other individual 
characteristics such as height and eye color, are likely to be massively polygenic (made 
up of tens or even hundreds of individual genetic variations). As new technology for ana￾lyzing gene sequences is developed, the search for the molecular genetic basis of various 
personality traits (and other characteristics) will likely become more tractable (Jarnecke 
& South, 2017). Nevertheless, any answers that are found in the future are likely to 
reveal complicated and multiple interacting genetic contributions, possibly requiring 
environmental triggers, for the expression of any biologically based personality trait.
It is probably clear that Cloninger’s model has much in common with Gray’s, 
Eysenck’s, and Zuckerman’s. For example, novelty seeking seems a lot like the reward 
sensitivity associated with the BAS of Gray’s theory. All of these theories have different 
explanatory bases for the traits (Depue & Collins, 1999). For example, Gray suggests 
that brain systems involved in learning through reward and punishment are impor￾tant in determining these traits. Eysenck also implicates the brain and nervous system. 
Zuckerman focuses on the synapse and the neurochemicals found there. And Cloninger 
specifies particular neurotransmitters. All are perhaps describing the same behavioral 
traits but focusing on different levels of explanation within the body, ranging from the 
synapse to the brain that influences reactivity to various kinds of stimuli.
Let’s turn now to a consideration of two other personality dimensions that appear 
to have a biological base yet are not related to physiological reactivity—morningness–
eveningness and brain asymmetry.
Morningness–Eveningness
Perhaps you are the kind of person who likes to sleep late and stay up late each day, 
saving your important schoolwork for late afternoon or evening, when you are feeling 
at your peak. Or maybe you are more of a morning person, regularly getting up early 
without the aid of an alarm clock. Moreover, perhaps you tend to do all your important 
work early in the day, when you are feeling at your best, and get to sleep fairly early in the 
evening. Being a morning type or an evening type of person appears to be a stable char￾acteristic. Personality psychologists have become interested in such stable differences 
among persons in preferences for different times of the day and have coined the term 
morningness–eveningness to refer to this dimension (Horne & Ostberg, 1976).
Differences between morning and evening types of persons, sometimes called 
“larks” and “owls,” appear to be due to differences in underlying biological rhythms. 
Final PDF to printer213
lar31869_ch07_184-221.indd 213 10/14/22 01:05 PM
CHAPTER SEVEN Physiological Approaches to Personality 
Many biological processes have been found to fluctuate around an approximate 24- to 
25-hour cycle. These have been called circadian rhythms (circa means “around,” dia
means “day,” or “24 hours”). Of particular interest have been circadian rhythms in body 
temperature and endocrine secretion rates. For example, on average, body temperature 
shows a peak around mid-evening (between 8 and 9 p.m.) and a trough in the early morn￾ing (around 6 a.m.). Figure 7.3 presents a graph of body temperature by time of day. 
Researchers use a temporal-isolation design to study such circadian rhythms. In 
this design, participants volunteer to live in an environment totally controlled by the 
experimenter with respect to time cues. There are no windows, so the participants do not 
know if it is day or night. There are no regularly scheduled meals, so the participants do 
not know if it is breakfast-, lunch-, or suppertime. Participants are given food whenever 
they ask for it. There is no access to live internet, TV, or radio. Instead, the partici￾pants have a large collection of streaming video or streaming audio for entertainment 
on demand. Volunteers live in this “time free” environment for several weeks or months. 
Often, the participants are students who want to use the time in isolation as an opportu￾nity to study for an important exam or who need to write a PhD thesis.
Imagine being a participant in such a study. You would go to sleep whenever you 
wanted, sleep as long as you wanted, eat whenever you felt like it, work or watch movies 
as the inclination struck, and so on. This is called free running in time, in which there are 
no time cues to influence your behavior or biology. If you were in such a situation and 
your temperature were taken every hour, and if you were like the average person, you 
would find that your temperature followed an approximate 24- to 25-hour cycle, starting 
to rise before waking up and falling before going to sleep (Aschoff, 1965; Finger, 1982; 
Wever, 1979).
Note that 24- to 25-hour rhythms are the average; there are wide differences among 
persons in the actual length of their biological rhythms (Kerkhof, 1985). Circadian 
rhythms in temporal-isolation studies have been found to be as short as 16 hours in one 
person and as long as 50 hours in another person (Wehr & Goodwin, 1981). While free 
running in a temporal-isolation experiment, the first person would complete a sleep-wake 
cycle every 16 hours, whereas the second person’s sleep-wake cycle would last 50 hours. 
Imagine sleeping for 18 hours straight, then staying awake for 32 hours straight, which is 
what the person with the 50-hour “day” settled into when there were no external time cues.
Such wide differences among persons are evident only in a temporal isolation situ￾ation. In real life, there are time cues all around us that fluctuate in a 24-hour rhythm—
most notably, the light-dark cycle. These cues entrain us and make us fit into the 24-hour 
day. Even though people with short and long biological cycles entrain quite well to the 
24-hour cycle, there nevertheless are differences among those people in terms of the 
Figure 7.3
Circadian rhythm in body temperature.
38°
37°
36°
C°
Body temperature
2 4 6 8 10
Time (days)
sleep wakefulness
Final PDF to printer214
lar31869_ch07_184-221.indd 214 10/14/22 01:05 PM
PART TWO The Biological Domain
Research on individual differences in circadian rhythms provides the groundwork 
for understanding why some people are morning types and others are evening types. 
As you know, those with shorter biological rhythms tend to be morning persons, and 
those with longer biological rhythms tend to be evening persons. Horne and Ostberg 
(1976, 1977) developed a 19-item questionnaire to measure morningness–eveningness 
(see Table 7.4). The items ask about preferences for activities earlier or later in the day. 
In a sample of 48 participants, who took their body temperature every hour for several 
days, the researchers found that the scores on this questionnaire correlated –.51 with 
time of day that peak body temperature was reached. While the original study was done 
in Sweden, the negative correlation between self-reported preferences for activities in the 
morning and timing of peak body temperature has been replicated in the United States 
(Monk et al., 1983), Italy (Mecacci, Scaglione, & Vitrano, 1991), Spain (Adan, 1991, 
1992), Croatia (Vidacek et al., 1988), and Japan (Ishihara, Saitoh, & Miyata, 1983).
These cross-cultural replications are consistent with the idea that preferences for 
morning or evening activities, and the time of day people are at their best, is a stable dis￾position with a biological basis. Scores on the Horne and Ostberg measure of morning￾ness–eveningness are stable over time. Croatian researchers tested 90 college students 
on this measure and then tested them again seven years later, when they had finished 
college (Sverko & Fabulic, 1985). They found a significant positive correlation, suggest￾ing that the morningness–eveningness characteristic is fairly stable over time. There 
timing of peaks and valleys in their biological rhythms. Imagine someone with a slightly 
long circadian rhythm (such as 26 hours) and someone with a slightly short rhythm 
(such as 22 hours). They both may entrain to the same 24-hour day, but the peak in body 
temperature might occur relatively late for the first person (perhaps at 10 p.m.), whereas 
the peak would occur relatively early for the second person (perhaps around 6 p.m.).
Individuals with short biological rhythms hit their peak body temperature and 
alertness levels earlier in the day and thus begin to get sleepy earlier than do persons with 
longer circadian rhythms (Bailey & Heitkemper, 1991). A person with a 26-hour rhythm 
would have a harder time getting up at 6 in the morning, because his or her 26-hour bio￾logical rhythm still has 2 hours to go, even though the 24-hour clock is telling him or her 
to start a new day. A person with a 22-hour rhythm would have an easier time getting up 
early because he or she has completed a biological “day” in 22 hours and is ready to start 
another day even before the 24-hour clock is up.
Do you know someone who you think is a morning type of person? What specific evidence 
makes you come to this conclusion? Do you think people with a morning type of rhythm are 
different in other ways from evening-type people? For example, are there other personality 
characteristics associated with being a morning type? Benjamin Franklin is quoted as saying 
that “early to bed, early to rise, makes a person healthy, wealthy, and wise.” Do you think it 
is possible that morning types are actually wiser, or have better grades in college, or that they 
have better outcomes in life? Do morning people have better financial outcomes than evening 
people? How would you design a study to test if Benjamin Franklin was correct?
Exercise
Final PDF to printer215
lar31869_ch07_184-221.indd 215 10/14/22 01:05 PM
CHAPTER SEVEN Physiological Approaches to Personality 
was, however, a general shift in the whole sample toward morningness, which might be 
expected in a group that moves from being college students to persons having jobs. The 
positive correlation indicates that people maintain their rank order, even as people shift 
toward morningness with increasing age.
Many studies have been done on the validity of the morningness–eveningness con￾struct. In one study (Larsen, 1985), college students completed a report every day for 84 
consecutive days, stating what time they felt at their best each day and what time they got 
up and went to bed each day. The Horne and Ostberg questionnaire correlated strongly 
with average rise and retire times, as well as with the time of day the participants reported 
feeling at their best. The morning persons got up earlier, went to bed earlier, and report￾edly felt at their best earlier, on average over the three months, than the evening persons.
Table 7.4 Items from the Morningness–Eveningness 
Questionnaire
Instructions
Please read each question carefully before answering. Each question should be answered 
independently of others. Do not go back and change or check your answers.
All questions have a selection of answers. For each question, circle the number in front of only one 
answer. Please answer each question as honestly as possible.
1. Considering only your “feeling best” rhythm, at what time would you get up if you were entirely 
free to plan your day?
1. between 11:00 a.m. and noon
2. between 9:30 a.m. and 11 a.m.
3. between 7:30 a.m. and 9:30 a.m.
4. between 6:00 a.m. and 7:30 a.m.
5. before 6:00 a.m.
2. Considering only your “feeling best” rhythm, at what time would you go to bed if you were 
entirely free to plan your evening?
1. after at least 1:30 in the morning
2. between midnight and 1:30 a.m.
3. between 10:30 p.m. and midnight
4. between 9:00 p.m. and 10:30 p.m.
5. before 9:00 p.m.
3. On the average, how easy do you find getting up in the morning?
1. not at all easy
2. not very easy
3. fairly easy
4. very easy
4. How alert do you feel during the first half-hour after having awakened in the morning?
1. not at all alert
2. not very alert
3. fairly alert
4. very alert
5. How is your appetite during the first half-hour after having awakened in the morning?
1. very poor
2. fairly poor
3. fairly good
4. very good
Source: Adapted from Horne and Ostberg (1976).
Final PDF to printer216
lar31869_ch07_184-221.indd 216 10/14/22 01:05 PM
PART TWO The Biological Domain
What would happen if people who had to live 
together, such as college roommates, were mismatched 
on morningness–eveningness? One person likes to stay 
up late and sleep late, whereas the other likes to get 
up early, even on weekends, as well as go to bed early. 
How happy do you think these people would be with 
their rooming situation? This was the topic of a study by 
Watts (1982), who selected first-year college students 
living on the campus of Michigan State University. The 
participants had to have only one roommate. The room￾mate pairs completed the Morningness–Eveningness 
Questionnaire (MEQ), and they rated various aspects 
of their roommate relationship. Watts found that, the 
greater the difference between the roommates’ MEQ 
scores, the lower ratings they gave to the quality of 
their relationship. Roommates who were very different 
on morningness–eveningness said that they did not get 
along very well with each other, that they did not enjoy their relationship and were not 
good friends, and that they were unlikely to continue living together. It appears that 
differences in morningness–eveningness, or chronotype incompatibility, create stress 
for people having to live together. Many colleges and universities now have students 
consider their level of morningness or eveningness, and communicate about their time 
preferences, when going through the roommate selection process.
It is not surprising that chronotype compatibility is also found in intimate relation￾ships. Randler and Kretz (2011) studied 84 couples and found a correlation between the 
couples’ scores on a M–E questionnaire, implying that couples pair up on chronotype. 
This correlation did not change as a function of length of the relationship, implying that 
selective mating on M–E occurs at the start of the relationship. The authors speculate 
that, because morning-types and evening-types inhabit different temporal environments, 
they are likely to meet and mate with others who have similar time-of-day preferences. 
For example, morning types have been found to start social contact earlier in the day 
than evening types (Randler & Jankowski, 2014). Who are they likely to find available at 
that early time of day? Other morning-types, most likely.
Being a morning type or evening type refers to preferences for time of day that 
may have a biological basis; however, sometimes situations occur that go against such 
preferences. Imagine a college student who is definitely an evening type, yet a class he or 
she needs to take is offered only at 8 a.m., or a morning type of person who takes a job in 
a factory and is assigned to the late shift (4 p.m. to midnight). Going against one’s natu￾ral circadian preferences is stressful, but not impossible. People can adjust to shift work 
and changes in sleep-wake schedule, though it is taxing and takes effort (Ishihara et al., 
1992). Such disruptions as transmeridian airline flights (which create jet lag) or working 
all night without sleeping (i.e., pulling an all-nighter) will be experienced as more stress￾ful to some people than others, depending on underlying circadian rhythm length and 
whether the disruption involves a shortening or lengthening of the day. Several studies 
have used heart rate variability (HRV) as a measure of biological stress, and found that 
going against one’s chronotype (e.g., an evening type required to get up early for some 
important task) is associated with greater stress and strain on the HRV measures (i.e., 
lowered HRV; reviewed by Honkalampi et al., 2021).
In summary, the preference for being active and doing important or demand￾ing work earlier or later in the day may be rooted in the length of a person’s inherent 
Based on research described in the text, many universities take 
morningness or eveningness preferences into account when matching 
students up as roommates.
aphrodite74/Getty Images
Final PDF to printer217
lar31869_ch07_184-221.indd 217 10/14/22 01:05 PM
CHAPTER SEVEN Physiological Approaches to Personality 
biological circadian rhythm length. This is a good example of a physiological approach 
to personality because it highlights the notion of a consistent behavior pattern (i.e., pref￾erence for different times of the day) being based on an underlying physiological mecha￾nism (i.e., circadian rhythms).
Brain Asymmetry and Affective Style
As you are probably aware, the left and right sides of the brain are specialized, with 
asymmetry in the control of various psychological functions. One type of asymmetry 
that has received research attention is the relative amount of electrical activity in the 
front part of the left and right brain hemispheres. As mentioned earlier in this chapter, 
the recording of such electrical activity is called an electroencephalograph, or EEG. 
Moreover, such electrical activity is rhythmic and exhibits waves that are fast or slow, 
depending on neurological activation in the brain. One particular type of brain wave, 
called an alpha wave, oscillates at 8 to 12 times a second. The amount of alpha wave 
present in a given time period is an inverse indicator of brain activity during that time 
period. In other words, alpha waves are given off when a person is calm and relaxed, 
perhaps feeling a bit sleepy and not attentive to the environment. In a given time 
period of brain wave recording, the less alpha wave activity present, the more we can 
assume that part of the brain was active.
In this research, psychologists focus on the frontal part of the brain, comparing 
the amount of activation in the right and left frontal hemispheres. Study results suggest 
that the left hemisphere is relatively more active than the right when a person is experi￾encing pleasant emotions and vice versa, that the right frontal hemisphere is more active 
when the person is experiencing unpleasant emotions. For example, in an early study by 
Davidson and colleagues (1990), they showed film clips to the participants in an attempt 
to amuse some of the participants and disgust the others. The participants were also 
videotaped while they watched the funny or disgusting films. EEGs were taken while 
the participants looked at the films. When the participants were smiling at the amusing 
films, they had relatively more activation in their left than right frontal hemispheres. 
Similarly, when the participants were exhibiting a facial expression of disgust (lower lip 
pulled down, tongue protruding, nose wrinkled) while watching the disgusting film, their 
brains were more active in the right than left hemispheres.
Similar results have also been obtained in very young children. Instead of using 
pleasant and unpleasant films, Fox and Davidson (1986) used sweet and bitter solu￾tions placed in the mouths of 10-month-old infants to produce pleasant and unpleasant 
affective reactions. The infants showed relatively more left- than right-brain activation 
to the sweet solution and more right- than left-brain activation to the bitter solution. In 
another study, the infants’ mothers left them alone in the testing room, whereupon a 
stranger entered the room (Fox & Davidson, 1987). In this standard anxiety-producing 
procedure, some infants become distressed but some do not; some infants cry and fuss 
but others do not. The researchers divided their sample of infants into those who cried 
during separation from their mothers and those who did not cry. They found that the 
criers exhibited more right-brain activation, relative with the left, compared with the 
noncriers. These results suggest that this tendency to become distressed or not (and 
the associated brain EEG asymmetry) is a stable characteristic of infants. Fox and col￾leagues (1992) studied a group of infants at age 7 months and again at age 12 months 
and found that the EEG measures of hemisphere asymmetry taken at those two time 
periods were highly correlated, suggesting stability over time in frontal brain asymmetry. 
Similar results have been found with adults, showing that measures of EEG asymmetry 
Final PDF to printer218
lar31869_ch07_184-221.indd 218 10/14/22 01:05 PM
PART TWO The Biological Domain
show test-retest correlations in the range of .66 to .73 across studies (Davidson, 1993, 
2003). These findings suggest that individual differences in frontal brain asymmetry
exhibit enough stability and consistency to be considered as indicative of an underlying 
biological disposition or trait.
Other studies suggest that EEG asymmetry indicates a predisposition to experi￾ence pleasant or unpleasant emotional states. Tomarken, Davidson, and Henriques 
(1990) and Wheeler, Davidson, and Tomarken (1993) examined the relation between 
individual differences in frontal asymmetry and reactions to affective film clips in 
normal participants. In these studies, EEG asymmetry was measured while the par￾ticipants were resting. Then the participants were shown either happy and amusing 
films or disgusting and fearful films. For the dependent variable, the participants 
were asked to rate how the films made them feel. The hypothesis was that the partici￾pants with greater right-side activation at rest (measured before watching the films) 
would report more intense negative affective reactions to the fear and disgust films, 
compared with the participants with relatively more left-side activation. The opposite 
prediction was made for the participants with greater left-side activation—they should 
report stronger positive emotions in response to the happy and amusing films. The 
predictions were essentially supported, with frontal asymmetry measures taken before
the films were seen predicting the participants’ subsequent self-reported affective reac￾tions to the films, with the right-side-dominant participants reporting more distress to 
the unpleasant films and the left-side-dominant participants reporting more pleasant 
reactions to the films.
Similar results have also been found with monkeys. Because monkeys cannot 
answer questions about how positive or negative they are feeling, researchers have used 
measures of cortisol to assess negative emotions. As mentioned earlier in this chapter, 
cortisol is a stress hormone that prepares the body to fight or flee, and increases in cor￾tisol mean that the animal has recently experienced stress. Davidson and his colleagues 
(reviewed in Kosslyn et al., 2002) have found that monkeys with greater right-sided acti￾vation had higher levels of cortisol. Identical results have been found with 6-month-old 
children. These researchers induced fear in the infants by having a male stranger enter 
the room, slowly approach the infant, and stare at the infant for two minutes. Those 
infants who had greater right-sided activation at baseline showed increased cortisol 
responses to the stranger. Also, those infants who showed the most right-sided activation 
during the stranger approach phase also displayed more crying and facial expressions of 
fear, and tried to escape more, compared to infants with less right-sided activation (Buss 
et al., 2003).
More than 100 studies of frontal EEG asymmetry have been published to date, 
most of them treating asymmetry as an individual difference variable related to differ￾ences in emotional responding to positive or negative situations or stimuli (e.g., Ma et 
al., 2021). One useful way to think about frontal asymmetry is as a moderator of the 
relation between an emotional stimulus and emotional response (Coan & Allen, 2004). 
A positive stimulus should produce a positive emotional response for most people, but 
this effect will be especially strong (i.e., produce a higher correlation) for people with a 
left frontal asymmetry. For example, Wheeler, Davidson, and Tomarken (1993) showed 
that the correlation between watching happy and amusing video and self-reported posi￾tive emotions was much stronger among people with left frontal asymmetry (compared 
to right frontal asymmetry). Similarly, a negative stimulus should produce a negative 
emotional response for most people, but this effect will be especially strong for persons 
with right frontal asymmetry. An example of this is that going away to college for the 
Final PDF to printer219
lar31869_ch07_184-221.indd 219 10/14/22 01:05 PM
CHAPTER SEVEN Physiological Approaches to Personality 
Figure 7.4
These gaze patterns illustrate left and right gaze direction, associated with opposite 
brain hemisphere activation, for use in completing the exercise described in this 
application.
Mark Dierker
Application
Assessing Brain Asymmetry Without an EEG
An EEG is not the only way to obtain an index of asymmetry in brain activation. Research 
suggests that a person’s characteristic level of left- or right-sided activation may be indicated 
by the direction in which their eyes drift as they concentrate on answering difficult questions. 
When answering a difficult question (e.g., “Make up a sentence using the words rhapsody and 
pleasure”), people’s eyes drift one way or the other as they reflect on their answer (Davidson, 
1991). Among right-handed persons, eyes drifting to the right signify left-sided activation, and 
eyes drifting to the left signify right-sided activation. If you ask a person several difficult ques￾tions (e.g., “How many turns do you make from your house or apartment to the nearest store?”) 
and note which way his or her eyes usually drift, you may get an indication of whether he or she 
tends to be right- or left-sided asymmetric. Of course, this quick measure is not as reliable as an 
EEG. It nevertheless may be a rough gauge of whether a person is left- or right-side asymmetric.
Perhaps you could make some observations of a few friends or acquaintances, asking 
them several difficult questions and observing which way they move their eyes as they think 
through their answers. Most people will not show completely consistent patterns of going one 
way or the other. That is why it is important to ask several questions and see which way they 
usually move their eyes. You will also need to decide whether they are more vulnerable to posi￾tive or negative emotions (see Figure 7.4). Persons who glance frequently to the right are more 
likely to be left-hemisphere dominant and should be more vulnerable to the pleasant emotions 
(e.g., happiness, joy, enthusiasm). Persons who frequently glance to the left while engaging in 
reflective thought are more likely to be right-hemisphere dominant and, by implication, should 
be more vulnerable to the negative emotions (e.g., distress, anxiety, sadness).
Final PDF to printer220
lar31869_ch07_184-221.indd 220 10/14/22 01:05 PM
PART TWO The Biological Domain
first time often causes the negative emotion of homesickness, and homesickness has 
been found to be stronger in college freshmen who have more right (compared to left) 
frontal asymmetry (Steiner & Coan, 2011). The point of this information is that frontal 
asymmetry, a measure of underlying brain physiology, acts much like a traditional per￾sonality trait when it comes to explaining differences in how people respond emotionally 
to pleasant and unpleasant events in their lives.
The importance of brain asymmetry research is that different portions of the brain 
may respond with pleasant or unpleasant emotions, given the appropriate affective stim￾ulus. Fox and Calkins (1993) discuss this notion in terms of thresholds for responding. 
The concept of thresholds implies that persons with a left- or right-sided pattern require 
less of the affective stimulus to evoke the corresponding emotion. The person who dis￾plays a right-frontal-activation pattern may have a lower threshold for responding with 
negative emotions when an unpleasant event happens. It may take less of a negative 
event to evoke unpleasant feelings for right-dominant persons. For an individual who 
displays a left-frontal-activation pattern, the threshold for experiencing pleasant emo￾tions in response to positive events is lowered. A person’s affective lifestyle may have 
its origins in, or at least may be predicted by, his or her pattern of asymmetry in frontal 
brain activation.
SUMMARY AND EVALUATION
The study of personality can be approached biologically. Theorizing about the bio￾logical influences on personality has a long history, and there are two ways to think 
about how physiological variables can be useful in personality theory and research. 
One way to view physiological measures is as variables that may be correlated with 
personality traits. For example, in a sample of college students, there may be a positive 
correlation between spontaneous skin conductance responses and scores on a neuroti￾cism questionnaire (perhaps due to the heightened level of chronic anxiety associated 
with neuroticism). Here a physiological variable is seen as a correlate of a personal￾ity dimension, as something that is associated with being high on neuroticism. Does 
elevated skin conductance cause a person to become neurotic? Probably not. Instead, 
a chronic activation of the fight-or-flight nervous system goes along with, or is a cor￾relate of, being neurotic.
A second way to think about physiological approaches to personality is to view 
physiological events as contributing to, or providing the physiological substrate for, the 
personality characteristic. This chapter covered six such examples of theories about the 
biological underpinnings of specific personality dimensions: extraversion (and nervous 
system reactivity or arousability), sensitivity to cues of reward and punishment (based 
on brain circuits of the BIS and BAS systems), sensation seeking (and level of MAO and 
hormones in the bloodstream), tridimensional personality theory (based on neurotrans￾mitters), morningness–eveningness (and circadian rhythms in body temperature), and 
affective style (and hemispheric asymmetry in the frontal cortex of the brain). In these 
theories, the physiological variables are assumed to be more than just correlates of the 
personality traits; they are assumed to be the biological underpinnings of the those per￾sonality traits (see Table 7.5).
Final PDF to printer221
lar31869_ch07_184-221.indd 221 10/14/22 01:05 PM
CHAPTER SEVEN Physiological Approaches to Personality 
Table 7.5 Biological Theories of Specific Personality Traits
RELATED TO PHYSIOLOGICAL REACTIVITY
Personality Trait Biological Underpinnings
Extraversion–introversion Arousal level of brain (early theory)
Arousability of nervous system
Sensitivity to reward and punishment Behavioral activation system (BAS) responds to 
incentives and reward
Behavioral inhibition system (BIS) responds to 
threat and punishment
Sensation seeking Optimal arousal level (early theory)
Monoamine oxidase (MAO) levels
Tridimensional personality model
  Novelty seeking   Dopamine
  Harm avoidance   Serotonin
  Reward dependence   Norepinephrine
NOT RELATED TO PHYSIOLOGICAL REACTIVITY
Personality Trait Biological Underpinnings
1. Morningness–eveningness Length of circadian rhythm
  Shorter = morning type
  Longer = evening type
2. Affective style Asymmetry in frontal brain activation
  Left = tendency toward positive
  Right = tendency toward negative
physiological systems 186
theoretical bridge 191
electrodes 191
telemetry 191
sympathetic nervous system 191
autonomic nervous system 191
electrodermal activity 191
heart rate variability (HRV) 193
cardiac reactivity 193
Type A personality 193
neuroscience 193
electroencephalograph (EEG) 199
ascending reticular activating system 
(ARAS) 201
KEY TERMS
serotonin 211
norepinephrine 211
tridimensional personality model 211
novelty seeking 211
harm avoidance 211
reward dependence 211
morningness–eveningness 212
circadian rhythms 213
free running 213
chronotype 216
alpha wave 217
frontal brain asymmetry 218
cortisol 218
arousal level 201
arousability 203
reinforcement sensitivity theory 204
behavioral activation system (BAS) 204
behavioral inhibition system (BIS) 204
anxiety 204
impulsivity 204
sensation seeking 207
sensory deprivation 207
optimal level of arousal 207
neurotransmitters 209
monoamine oxidase (MAO) 209
dopamine 211
Final PDF to printer222
lar31869_ch08_222-257.indd 222 11/01/22 11:00 AM
Svisio/Getty Images
8
Evolutionary 
Perspectives on 
Personality
Evolution and Natural Selection
Natural Selection
Sexual Selection
Genes and Inclusive Fitness
Products of the Evolutionary Process
Evolutionary Psychology
Premises of Evolutionary Psychology
Empirical Testing of Evolutionary Hypotheses
Human Nature
Need to Belong
Helping and Altruism
Universal Emotions
Sex Differences
Sex Differences in Aggression
Sex Differences in Jealousy
Sex Differences in Desire for Sexual Variety
Sex Differences in Mate Preferences
Individual Differences
Environmental Triggers of Individual Differences
Heritable Individual Differences Contingent on Other Traits
Frequency–Dependent Strategic Individual Differences
The Big Five, Motivation, and Evolutionarily Relevant Adaptive Problems
Limitations of Evolutionary Psychology
SUMMARY AND EVALUATION
KEY TERMS
Final PDF to printerlar31869_ch08_222-257.indd 223 11/01/22 11:00 AM
THE BIOLOGICAL DOMAIN
Imagine living as our ancestors did a million years ago. You awaken at dawn 
and shrug off the coldness of night. A few warm embers glow in the fire, so you stoke 
it with kindling. The others in your group gather around the fire as the sun breaks the 
horizon. Stomachs start growling. Your thoughts turn to food. Small groups set off in 
search of berries, nuts, and small game animals.
After a long day of hunting and gathering, the members converge back at their 
temporary home site. As night begins to fall, the group gathers around the fire. The 
day’s foraging has been successful and the mood is warm and animated. Tales of 
the hunt are reenacted, the bounty of gathered goods admired. With bellies full, 
discussion turns to whether the group should move the next day or stay a bit longer. 
A successful hunter makes eye contact with his young lover, but she shyly looks 
away. Others notice this flirtation. Mating universally draws interest. As people 
grow sleepy and children are put to sleep, the young lovers quietly slip away from 
the group to be alone. Their warm embrace echoes millions of past events as people 
partake of life’s cycle.
Evolutionary psychology is a rapidly growing scientific perspective, and it offers 
important insights into human personality. In this chapter, we look at some of these 
insights in three areas: human nature, sex differences, and individual differences. We 
will see how theories of evolutionary psychology fit with the discoveries of personality 
psychologists and generate new lines of research. We begin by reviewing some basic 
information about the theory of evolution.
How much of human 
nature today is the result 
of behavior patterns that 
evolved as our ancestors 
solved the problems of 
surviving and reproducing?
Prisma/UIG/Getty Images
8
Final PDF to printer224
lar31869_ch08_222-257.indd 224 11/01/22 11:00 AM
PART TWO The Biological Domain
Evolution and Natural Selection
All of us come from a long and unbroken line of ancestors who accomplished two criti￾cal tasks: They survived to reproductive age, and they reproduced. If any one of your 
ancestors had failed at reproduction, you would not be here today to contemplate their 
existence. In this sense, every living human is an evolutionary success story. As descen￾dants of successful ancestors, we carry with us the genes for the adaptations that led to 
their success. From this perspective, our human nature—the collection of adaptations 
that defines us as human—is the product of the evolutionary process.
Long before Charles Darwin, it was known that change takes place over time in 
organic structures. The fossil record showed the bones of long extinct dinosaurs, suggest￾ing that not all species in the past are with us today. The paleontological record showed 
changes in animals’ body forms, suggesting that nothing remains static. Moreover, the 
structures of species seemed extraordinarily well adapted to their environments. The 
long necks of giraffes enabled them to eat leaves from tall trees. The turtle’s shell seemed 
designed for protection. The beaks of birds seemed well-suited for cracking local nuts 
to get at their nutritious seeds. What could account for change over time and apparent 
adaptation to environmental conditions?
Natural Selection
Darwin’s contribution was not in observing change over time, nor in noticing the adap￾tive design of mechanisms. Rather, Darwin proposed a theory of the process by which 
adaptations are created and change takes place over time. He called it the theory of 
natural selection.
Darwin noticed that species seemed to produce many more offspring than could 
possibly survive and reproduce. He reasoned that changes, or variants, that better 
enabled an organism to survive and reproduce would lead to more descendants. The 
descendants would inherit the variants that led to their ancestors’ survival and repro￾duction. Through this process, the successful variants were selected and unsuccessful 
variants weeded out. Natural selection, therefore, results in gradual changes in a species 
over time, as successful variants increase in frequency and eventually spread throughout 
the gene pool, replacing the less successful variants. Over time, these successful variants 
come to characterize the entire species; unsuccessful variants decrease in frequency and 
vanish from the species.
This process of natural selection, sometimes called survival selection, led Darwin 
to focus on the events that impede survival, which he called the hostile forces of nature. 
These hostile forces included food shortages, diseases, parasites, predators, and extremes 
of weather. Variants that helped organisms successfully combat these hostile forces of 
nature led to an increased likelihood of surviving to reproductive age. Food preferences 
for substances rich in fat, sugar, and protein, for example, helped organisms survive 
food shortages. An immune system teeming with antibodies helped organisms survive 
diseases and parasites. The behavioral immune system, including the emotion of dis￾gust, helped to avoid contact with disease-carrying organisms, including other humans 
(Schaller, 2016). Fear of snakes and spiders helped them to avoid poisonous bites. These 
mechanisms, resulting from a long and repeated process of natural selection, are called 
adaptations, inherited solutions to the survival and reproductive problems posed by the 
hostile forces of nature.
Final PDF to printer225
lar31869_ch08_222-257.indd 225 11/01/22 11:00 AM
CHAPTER EIGHT Evolutionary Perspectives on Personality
Even after Darwin came up with his theory of natural selection, there remained 
many mysteries that puzzled him. He noticed that many mechanisms seemed contrary 
to survival. The elaborate plumage, large antlers, and other conspicuous features dis￾played by the males of many species seemed costly in terms of survival. He wondered 
how the brilliant plumage of peacocks could evolve when it posed such an obvious 
threat to survival, acting as a neon sign to predators advertising fast food. In response 
to puzzles of this sort, Darwin proposed a second evolutionary theory—the theory of 
sexual selection.
Sexual Selection
Darwin’s answer to the mysteries of the peacock’s tail and the stag’s antlers was that 
they evolved because they contributed to an individual’s mating success, providing 
an advantage in the competition for desirable mates. The evolution of characteris￾tics because of their mating benefits, rather than because of their survival benefits, is 
known as sexual selection.
Sexual selection, according to Darwin, takes two forms. In one form, members 
of the same sex compete with each other, and the outcome of their contest gives the 
winner greater sexual access to members of the opposite sex. Two stags locking horns 
in combat is the prototypical image of this intrasexual competition. The characteristics 
that lead to success in contests of this kind, such as greater strength, intelligence, or 
attractiveness to allies, evolve because the victors are able to mate more often and, 
hence, pass on their genes.
In the other type of sexual selection—intersexual selection—members of one sex 
choose a mate based on their preferences for particular qualities. These characteristics 
evolve because those that possess them are chosen more often as mates, and their genes 
thrive. Animals lacking the desired characteristics fail to mate, and their genes perish.
Success at same-sex competition leads to success at mating; traits that help to win these battles are passed on in 
greater numbers and hence evolve in the population.
Source: NPS photo by Jeff Foot
Final PDF to printer226
lar31869_ch08_222-257.indd 226 11/01/22 11:00 AM
PART TWO The Biological Domain
Genes and Inclusive Fitness
Genes are packets of DNA that are inherited by children from their parents in distinct 
chunks. Genes are the smallest discrete units that are inherited by offspring intact, without 
being broken up. According to modern evolutionary biologists, evolution operates by the 
process of differential gene reproduction, defined by reproductive success relative to oth￾ers. The genes of organisms that reproduce more than others get passed down to future 
generations at a greater frequency than do the genes of those that reproduce less. Survival 
is usually critical for reproductive success, so characteristics that lead to greater survival 
get passed along. Success in mating is also critical for reproductive success, and the quali￾ties that lead to success in same-sex competition or to success at being chosen as a mate 
get passed along. Successful survival and successful mate competition, therefore, are both 
paths to differential gene reproduction. The characteristics that lead to the greater repro￾duction of genes that code for them are selected and, hence, evolve over time.
The modern evolutionary theory based on differ￾ential gene reproduction is called inclusive fitness theory
(Hamilton, 1964). The “inclusive” part refers to the fact 
that the characteristics that facilitate reproduction need 
not affect the personal production of offspring. They can 
affect the survival and reproduction of genetic relatives as 
well. For example, if you take a personal risk to defend or 
protect your sister or another close relative, then this might 
enable them to better survive and reproduce. Because you 
share genes with your kin—50 percent on average in the 
case of siblings—then helping kin survive and reproduce 
will also lead to successful gene reproduction.
A critical condition for such helping to evolve is 
that the cost to your own reproduction as a result of the 
helping must be less than the benefits to the reproduc￾tion of your genes that reside in your relative. If helping 
your sister survive—for example, by jumping into rushing 
rapids to save her from drowning—puts your own life at 
risk, the odds of saving her must exceed twice the odds 
of your dying in order for evolution to select for mecha￾nisms underlying this helping behavior. Thus, inclusive 
fitness can be defined as one’s personal reproductive suc￾cess (roughly, the number of children you produce) plus
the effects you have on the reproduction of your genetic 
relatives, weighted by the degree of genetic relatedness. 
Inclusive fitness can lead to adaptations that incline you 
to take some risk for the welfare of your genetic relatives, 
but not too great a risk. Inclusive fitness theory, as an 
expansion and elaboration of Darwin’s theory, repre￾sented a major advance in understanding human traits, 
such as some forms of altruism.
Products of the Evolutionary Process
All living humans are products of the evolutionary process, the descendants of a long 
line of ancestors who succeeded in surviving, reproducing, and helping their genetic 
Traits for helping can evolve through inclusive fitness.
UpperCut Images/Getty Images
Final PDF to printer227
lar31869_ch08_222-257.indd 227 11/01/22 11:00 AM
CHAPTER EIGHT Evolutionary Perspectives on Personality
relatives. The evolutionary process acts as a series of filters. In each generation, only a 
small subset of genes passes through the filter. The recurrent filtering process lets only 
three things pass through: adaptations; byproducts of adaptations; and noise, or random 
variations.
Adaptations
Adaptations are the primary product of the selective process. An adaptation can be 
defined as a “reliably developing structure in the organism, which, because it meshes 
with the recurrent structure of the world, causes the solution to an adaptive problem” 
(Tooby & Cosmides, 1992, p. 104). Known human adaptations include a taste for sweet 
and fatty foods, the drive to defend close relatives, and preferences for specific mates, 
such as those who are healthy.
Let’s examine the components of the definition of adaptation. The focus on reli￾ably developing structure means that an adaptation tends to emerge with regularity dur￾ing the course of a person’s life. The mechanisms that allow humans to see, for example, 
develop reliably. But this does not mean that vision develops invariantly. The develop￾ment of the eye can be perturbed by genetic anomalies or by environmental trauma. 
The emphasis on reliable development suggests that evolutionary approaches are not
forms of “genetic determinism.” Environments are always needed for the development 
of an adaptation, and environmental events can always interfere with or enhance such 
development.
The emphasis on meshing with recurrent structures of the world means that adap￾tations emerge from, and are structured by, the selective environment. Features of the 
environment must be recurrent over time for an adaptation to evolve. The venomous 
snakes must be recurrently dangerous, ripe fruit must be recurrently nutritious, and 
enclosed caves must be recurrently protective before adaptations to them can emerge.
Finally, an adaptation must facilitate the solution to an adaptive problem. An 
adaptive problem is anything that impedes survival or reproduction, or anything whose 
solution increases the odds of survival or reproduction. Stated differently, all adaptations 
must contribute to fitness during the period of time in 
which they evolve by helping an organism survive, repro￾duce, or facilitate the reproductive success of genetic 
relatives.
The hallmark of adaptation is special design. That 
is, the features of an adaptation are recognized as compo￾nents of specialized problem-solving machinery. Factors 
such as efficiency in solving a specific adaptive problem, 
precision in solving the adaptive problem, and reliability
in solving the adaptive problem are key criteria in recog￾nizing the special design of an adaptation. Adaptations 
are like keys that fit only specific locks. The tines of the 
key (adaptation) show special design features, which 
mesh with the specific mirror-image elements within the 
lock (adaptive problem).
All adaptations are products of a history of selec￾tion. In this sense, we live with an ancient brain in a mod￾ern world, which is in some ways different from the world 
in which we evolved. For example, ancestral humans 
evolved in relatively small groups of 50 to 150, using 
both hunting and gathering as methods of acquiring food 
For most of our evolutionary past, humans lived in small, close-knit 
groups, usually of perhaps 150 people. This form of group living is 
relatively rare today.
ranplett/Vetta/Getty Images
Final PDF to printer228
lar31869_ch08_222-257.indd 228 11/01/22 11:00 AM
PART TWO The Biological Domain
(Dunbar, 1993). In the modern world, by contrast, many people live in large cities sur￾rounded by thousands or millions of people. Characteristics that were probably adaptive 
in ancestral environments—such as xenophobia, or fear of strangers—are not necessarily 
adaptive in modern environments. This is an example of an evolutionary mismatch—a 
feature adaptive in the past that is no longer adaptive in the modern world (Li, van Vugt, 
& Colarelli, 2018). Some of the personality traits that make up human nature may be 
vestigial adaptations to an ancestral environment that no longer exists.
Byproducts of Adaptations
The evolutionary process also produces things that are not adaptations—such as 
byproducts of adaptations. Consider the design of a lightbulb. A lightbulb is designed to 
produce light—that is its function. But it also may produce heat, not because it is designed 
to produce heat, but rather because heat is an incidental byproduct, which occurs as a 
consequence of design for light. In the same way, human adaptations can also have 
evolutionary byproducts, or incidental effects that are not properly considered to be adap￾tations. The human nose, for example, is clearly an adaptation designed for smelling. But 
the fact that we use our noses to hold up our eyeglasses is an incidental byproduct. The 
nose was designed for smelling odors, not for holding up glasses. Notice that the hypoth￾esis that something is a byproduct (e.g., by holding up eyeglasses) requires specifying the 
adaptation (e.g., the nose) of which it is a byproduct. Thus, both sorts of evolutionary 
hypotheses—adaptation and byproduct hypotheses—require a description of the nature of 
the adaptation.
Noise, or Random Variations
The third product of the evolutionary process is evolutionary noise, or random variations 
that are neutral with respect to selection. In the design of a lightbulb, for example, there 
are minor variations in the surface texture of the bulb that do not affect the functioning 
of the design elements. Neutral variations introduced into the gene pool through muta￾tion, for example, are perpetuated over generations if they do not hinder the functioning 
of adaptations.
In sum, there are three products of the evolutionary process: adaptations, byprod￾ucts, and noise. Adaptations are the primary product of the selective process, so 
evolutionary psychology is primarily focused on identifying and describing human psy￾chological adaptations. The hypothesis that something is a byproduct requires specifying 
the adaptation of which it is a byproduct. The analysis of byproducts, therefore, leads 
us back to the need to describe adaptations. And noise is the residue of nonfunctional 
variation that is selectively neutral.
Evolutionary Psychology
The basic elements of the evolutionary perspective apply to all forms of life, from insects 
to people. We turn now to the application of this perspective to human psychology. This 
branch of psychology is referred to as evolutionary psychology.
Premises of Evolutionary Psychology
Evolutionary psychology involves three key premises: domain specificity, numerousness, 
and functionality.
Final PDF to printer229
lar31869_ch08_222-257.indd 229 11/01/22 11:00 AM
CHAPTER EIGHT Evolutionary Perspectives on Personality
Domain Specificity
Most adaptations are hypothesized to be domain specific because they are designed 
by the evolutionary process to solve a particular adaptive problem. Consider the 
problem of food selection—choosing the right foods to eat from among a large array 
of possible objects in the world. A general decision rule, such as “eat the first thing 
you encounter,” would be highly maladaptive because it would fail to guide you to 
choose the small subset of objects that are edible and nutritious. Such a general rule 
would result in the consumption of poisonous plants, twigs, dirt, or feces, which 
would interfere with successful survival. The mechanisms favored by the evolution￾ary process are more specialized. In food selection, functional specificity is seen in 
our preferences for calorically rich fat and in our evolved sweet tooth, which leads 
us to foods rich in sugar, such as ripe fruit. General mechanisms cannot guide us to 
the small islands of successful adaptive solutions that are surrounded by oceans of 
maladaptive solutions.
Another reason for domain specificity is that different adaptive problems require 
different sorts of solutions. Our taste preferences, which guide us to successful food 
choices, do not help us solve the adaptive challenge of choosing high-quality mates. If 
we were to use our food preferences as a general guide to the choice of mates, we would 
select strange mates indeed. Successful mate choices require different specialized adap￾tations. Domain specificity implies that selection tends to fashion at least somewhat 
specialized mechanisms for each adaptive problem.
Numerousness
Our ancestors faced many sorts of adaptive problems in the course of human evolution, 
so we have numerous adaptive mechanisms. If you look at a textbook on the body, for 
example, you will discover a large number of physiological and anatomical mechanisms. 
We have a heart to pump our blood, a liver to detoxify poisons, a larynx to prevent us 
from choking, and sweat glands to keep the body thermally regulated.
Evolutionary psychologists suggest that the human mind, our evolved psy￾chology, also contains a large number of mechanisms—psychological adaptations. 
Consider the most common fears and phobias. We tend to be scared of snakes, 
heights, darkness, spiders, cliff edges, and strangers. We have a large number of psy￾chological mechanisms because the number of hazardous hostile forces of nature has 
been so large. We also have psychological adaptations for the selection of mates, the 
detection of cheaters in social exchanges, the favoring of habitats offering resources 
and protection, the rearing of children, and the formation of strategic alliances. 
Evolutionary psychologists expect there to be a large number of psychological adapta￾tions to correspond to the large number of distinct adaptive problems humans have 
recurrently confronted.
Functionality
The third key premise of evolutionary psychology is functionality, the notion that 
our psychological mechanisms are designed to accomplish particular adaptive tasks. 
If you were a medical researcher studying the liver, you could not get very far in 
your understanding unless you understood the functions of the liver (e.g., breaking 
down toxins). Evolutionary psychologists suggest that understanding adaptive func￾tion offers insight into our evolved psychological mechanisms. We can’t understand 
our preferences for certain mates, for example, without inquiring about the function 
of such preferences (e.g., to select a healthy or fertile mate). The search for function 
Final PDF to printer230
lar31869_ch08_222-257.indd 230 11/01/22 11:00 AM
PART TWO The Biological Domain
involves identifying the specific adaptive problem for which the mechanism is an 
evolved solution.
Empirical Testing of Evolutionary Hypotheses
To understand how evolutionary psychologists test hypotheses, it is necessary to con￾sider the hierarchy of levels of evolutionary analysis depicted in Figure 8.1. At the top 
of the hierarchy is evolution by selection. The theory has been tested directly in many 
cases. New species can be formed in the laboratory by its application, and dogs can be 
selectively bred using its principles. Because there has never been a single case in which 
the general theory proved to be incorrect, most scientists take the general theory for 
granted and proceed with more specific forms of hypothesis testing. 
At the next level down are middle-level evolutionary theories, such as the theory 
of parental investment and sexual selection. According to this theory, the sex (male 
or female) that invests more in offspring is predicted to be more discriminating or 
“choosy” about its mating partners. And the sex that invests less in offspring is pre￾dicted to be more competitive with members of its own sex for sexual access to the 
high-investing sex. From these hypotheses, specific predictions can be derived and 
tested empirically. In the human case, women bear the heavy parental investment 
Figure 8.1
The evolutionary analysis hierarchy depicts the conceptual levels of evolutionary analysis. At the top of the 
hierarchy is natural selection theory. At the next level down are middle-level evolutionary theories from 
which specific hypotheses and predictions can be derived. Each level of the hierarchy is evaluated by the 
cumulative weight of the empirical evidence from tests of the predictions derived from it.
Source: Adapted from Buss, 1995a.
Evolution by selection
Theory of reciprocal
altruism
Theory of parental
investment and sexual
selection
Theory of parasite-host
co-evolution
H1
: higher investing
sex is more selective
H2: females select
based on ability and
willingness to invest
H3: lower investing 
sex competitive for 
access
P1
: evolved 
preferences for 
ambition and status
P2: evolved
preferences for
willingness to invest
P3: women divorce 
men who fail to 
contribute resources
Final PDF to printer231
lar31869_ch08_222-257.indd 231 11/01/22 11:00 AM
CHAPTER EIGHT Evolutionary Perspectives on Personality
burdens of internal fertilization and nine-month pregnancy. Women are the high￾investing sex; thus, according to the theory, they should exert more selectivity in 
their choice of mates than should men, who require only the contribution of sperm 
in order to reproduce. Two specific predictions can be derived from this hypothesis: 
(1) Women will choose as mates men who are willing to invest resources in them and 
their children, and (2) women will divorce or break up with men who fail to continue 
providing resources to them and their children.
Using this method of deriving specific testable predictions, researchers can carry 
out the normal scientific business of empirical research. If the findings fail to support the 
predictions and hypotheses, then the middle-level theory from which they were derived 
is called into question. If the findings support the predictions and hypotheses, then the 
middle-level theory from which they were derived increases in credibility.
The deductive reasoning approach, or the “top down,” theory-driven method of 
empirical research is one approach to scientific investigation. Another method, which is 
equally valid, is called the inductive reasoning approach, or the “bottom-up,” data-driven 
method of empirical research. In the inductive reasoning approach, a phenomenon is 
first observed, and then the researchers develop a theory to fit the observations. Just as 
astronomers observed the galaxies in the universe expanding before they had a theory 
to explain why, psychologists notice and empirically document a number of phenomena 
before they have theories to explain them. In the domain of personality, for example, 
we might notice that men tend to be more physically aggressive than women. Although 
nothing in the theory of evolution by selection would have predicted this sex difference 
in advance, it is fair game for subsequent theorizing. The dual inductive and deductive 
approaches, of course, can apply to all theories in personality psychology, not just evo￾lutionary theories.
Once a theory is proposed to explain the sex difference in aggression, however, 
we can ask, “If the theory is true, then what further predictions follow from it that we 
have not already observed?” It is in these further predictions that the value and ten￾ability of the theory rest. If the theory generates a wealth of new predictions, which 
are then confirmed empirically, we know that we are on the right explanatory track. 
If the theory fails to generate further testable predictions, or if its predictions fail 
to be confirmed empirically, then the theory is called into question. For example, 
one theory of sexual aggression against women has proposed that men who have 
experienced deprivation of sexual access to women are more likely to use aggressive 
tactics. This has been called the mate deprivation hypothesis (Lalumiere et al., 1996). 
The evidence so far, however, has failed to support this hypothesis—men who have 
difficulty attracting women are no more likely to use sexual aggression than are men 
who are highly successful at attracting women. The mate deprivation hypothesis, in 
short, appears to be false (Buss, 2016, 2021).
Evolutionary hypotheses have sometimes been criticized as being vague, specula￾tive “just-so stories,” implying that they are like fairy tales that have little scientific value. 
Most evolutionary hypotheses have been framed in a precise and testable manner, so this 
criticism is not valid (Confer et al., 2010; Lewis et al., 2017). Individual scientists bear a 
responsibility to formulate evolutionary (and nonevolutionary) hypotheses in as precise 
and testable manner as possible.
With this theoretical background in mind, let’s now turn to the implications of an 
evolutionary perspective for the three key levels of personality analysis: human nature, 
sex differences, and individual differences.
Final PDF to printer232
lar31869_ch08_222-257.indd 232 11/01/22 11:00 AM
PART TWO The Biological Domain
Human Nature
In the history of psychology, “grand” theories of personality were proposed about the 
universal contents of human nature. Sigmund Freud’s theory of psychoanalysis, for 
example, proposed that humans had the core motives of sex and aggression. Alfred 
Adler proposed that humans had the striving for superiority as a core motive. Robert 
Hogan suggests that humans are driven by the desire for status and acceptance by the 
group—getting ahead and getting along. Even the most radical behaviorist, B. F. Skinner, 
had a theory of human nature, consisting of a few domain-general learning mechanisms. 
Thus, all personality theories attempt to answer the question: If humans have a nature 
that is different from the nature of gorillas, dogs, rats, or cats, what are its contents and 
how can we discover them?
The perspective of evolutionary psychology offers a set of tools for discovering 
the human nature component of personality. From this perspective, human nature is the 
primary product of the evolutionary process. Psychological mechanisms that are suc￾cessful in helping humans survive and reproduce tend to out-replicate those that are less 
successful. Over evolutionary time, these successful mechanisms spread throughout the 
population and come to characterize a species. Let’s examine a few evolutionary hypoth￾eses about the contents of human nature.
Need to Belong
Hogan (1983) argues that the most basic human motivators are status and acceptance 
by the group. The most important social problems early humans had to solve in order to 
survive and reproduce involved establishing cooperative relations with other members 
of the group and climbing status hierarchies. Achieving status and popularity likely con￾ferred many reproductively relevant resources on an individual, including better protec￾tion, more food, and more desirable mates.
Being ostracized from a group would have been extremely damaging. Therefore, it 
can be predicted that humans have evolved psychological adaptations to prevent being 
excluded. Baumeister and Tice (1990) propose that this is the origin and function of 
social anxiety, defined as distress or worry about being negatively evaluated in social 
situations. They propose that social anxiety is a species-typical adaptation that prevents 
social exclusion. People who were indifferent to being excluded by others may have suf￾fered in the currency of survival by lacking the protection of the group. They may also 
have suffered by failing to find mates. These individuals may have experienced lower 
reproductive success than those whose maintained inclusion in the group by avoiding 
doing things that elicit criticism.
If this hypothesis is correct, what testable predictions might follow from it? One 
set of testable predictions pertains to the events that elicit social anxiety (Buss, 1990). 
Groups shun those who inflict costs on others within the group. Showing cowardice in 
the face of danger, displaying aggression toward in-group members, trying to lure away 
the mates of in-group members, and stealing from in-group members would all have 
inflicted costs on particular members of the group.
Much empirical evidence exists that the need to belong is a central motive of 
human nature (Allen et al., 2022; Baumeister & Leary, 1995). The group serves several 
key adaptive functions for individuals. First, groups can share food, information, and 
other resources. Second, groups can offer protection from external threat, or defense 
against rival groups. Third, groups contain concentrations of mates, which are needed 
Final PDF to printer233
lar31869_ch08_222-257.indd 233 11/01/22 11:00 AM
CHAPTER EIGHT Evolutionary Perspectives on Personality
for reproduction. And fourth, groups usually contain kin, which provide opportunities to 
receive altruism and to invest in genetic relatives.
Several lines of empirical research support the theory about the need to belong. First, 
external threats increase group cohesion (Stein, 1976). In one study, World War II veterans 
were examined for enduring social ties (Elder & Clipp, 1988). Remarkably, their stron￾gest social ties 40 years after the war were with comrades who had experienced combat 
together. This effect was intensified among the units in which some comrades had died, 
suggesting that the more intense the external threat, the greater the social bonding.
Further support for the importance of the need to belong as a fundamental human 
motive comes from a cross-cultural study on the effects of social interactions on self￾esteem (Denissen et al., 2008). Those who spend a lot of time with others enjoy higher 
self-esteem. Day-to-day fluctuations in self-esteem are linked with quality and quantity 
of social interactions. And even at the level of nations, countries whose inhabitants fre￾quently interact with friends and relatives enjoy higher self-esteem than countries with 
less frequent social interactions. These findings point to the notion that self-esteem 
functions, at least in part, as an internal tracking device that monitors social inclusion 
(Denissen et al., 2008).
Humans evolved to live in groups. Consequently, an individual who is shunned by a group will feel anxious.
SW Productions/Getty Images
Final PDF to printer234
lar31869_ch08_222-257.indd 234 11/01/22 11:00 AM
PART TWO The Biological Domain
Failure to meet the need to belong can lead to negative health consequences. People 
who feel rejected or shunned by others experience worse physical health, higher blood 
pressure, higher levels of perceived stress, and higher cortisol levels (a stress hormone) 
(Beekman, Stock, & Marcus, 2016; Gere & MacDonald, 2010). Studies of people’s life 
regrets find that most regrets involve social relationships and lack of social connected￾ness (Morrison, Epstude, & Roese, 2012). Friends provide benefits (Lewis et al., 2011).
Adaptations for the need to belong appear to emerge quite early in life. In a clever 
laboratory study of children 5 to 6 years old, some were ostracized from a video game 
that others were apparently playing; another group was socially included in the game 
(Watson-Jones, Whitehouse, & Legare, 2016). Subsequently, the ostracized children 
showed more anxiety, conformity, and imitation. These reactions, the authors argue, 
function to motivate in-group inclusion after being shunned.
The need to belong theory has been used to explain a wide range of phenomena, 
including cheering for sports teams, joining religious groups, forming online gaming 
communities, conformity to the group, social identity, reputation management, creating 
political coalitions, and even the increased political polarization currently witnessed in 
some countries (Gabriel, 2021).
Researchers have begun to identify the underlying brain circuitry for the pain 
caused by social exclusion (MacDonald & Leary, 2005; Panksepp, 2005). Social rejec￾tion has often been described as literally painful. Brain research suggests that social 
exclusion is mediated by components of the physical pain system, such as the anterior 
cingulate cortex. The fact that people use words like hurt, wounded, and damaged when 
they are socially excluded may reflect the shared brain circuitry through which physically 
induced pain and socially induced pain are mediated.
Humans have always been intensely living in groups, and lack 
of a group almost surely would have meant death in ancestral environ￾ments, so it is not surprising that we have a strong need to belong—a 
part of our human nature.
Helping and Altruism
An evolutionary perspective provides a straightforward set of predictions 
about the human nature of helping and altruism (Burnstein, Crandall, 
& Kitayama, 1994). Burnstein and colleagues hypothesized that help￾ing others is a direct function of the recipients’ ability to enhance the 
inclusive fitness of the helpers. Helping should decrease, according to 
this hypothesis, as the degree of genetic relatedness decreases between 
the helper and the recipient. Thus, you should be more likely to help 
your sibling, who shares 50 percent of your genes, on average, than your 
nieces and nephews, who share only 25 percent of your genes, on aver￾age. Helping should be lower between individuals who share only 12.5 
percent of their genes, such as first cousins. No other theory in psychol￾ogy generates this precise helping gradient as a function of genetic relat￾edness or specifies kinship as a key principle for altruism.
Studies in the United States and Japan support these predic￾tions. In one study, participants were asked to imagine different 
individuals asleep in different rooms of a rapidly burning build￾ing. The participants imagined that they had time to rescue only 
one of them. They circled the target they were most likely to help. 
As shown in Figure 8.2, the tendency to help is a direct function 
Figure 8.2
Tendency to help kin under life-or-death versus 
everyday conditions. Genetic overlap predicts the 
tendency to help, especially under life-or-death 
conditions.
Source: Adapted from “Some Neo-Darwinian Decision 
Rules for Altruism: Weighing Cures for Inclusive 
Fitness as a Function of the Biological Importance 
of the Decision,” by E. Burnstein, C. Crandall, and 
S. Kitayama, 1994, Journal of Personality & Social 
Psychology, 67, pp. 773–789, Figure 2, p. 778. Copyright 
© 1994 by the American Psychological Association. 
Reprinted with permission. 
0.50 0.25
KinshipHighly
related
Not
related
0.125 0.00
Everyday
Life or death
Tendency to help
3.0
2.8
2.6
2.4
2.2
2.0
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
Final PDF to printer235
lar31869_ch08_222-257.indd 235 11/01/22 11:00 AM
CHAPTER EIGHT Evolutionary Perspectives on Personality
of the degree of genetic relatedness. This is especially true in a 
life-or-death context, as confirmed by independent researchers 
(Fitzgerald & Colarelli, 2009).
Genetic relatedness represents just the start of an evolution￾ary analysis of the altruistic component of human nature. Burnstein, 
Crandall, and Kitayama (1994) predicted that people should help 
younger relatives more than older relatives because helping older kin 
would have less impact, on average, on their reproductive success 
than would helping a younger person. Furthermore, individuals of 
higher reproductive value (ability to produce children) should be 
helped more than individuals of lower reproductive value.
In one study, 1-year-olds were helped more than 10-year-olds, 
who in turn were helped more than 45-year-olds (Burnstein, Crandall, 
& Kitayama, 1994). Least helped were 75-year-old individuals. These 
findings, replicated across both Japanese and American samples, 
provide further support for the hypothesis that life-or-death helping 
decreases as the kin member gets older. Interestingly, these results 
were strongest in the life-or-death situation, but showed a reversal in 
a trivial helping condition. For everyday helping, such as running a 
small errand for someone, the 75-year-olds were helped more than 
the 45-year-olds (see Figure 8.3). 
The tendency to help younger people depended on a criti￾cal survival context—famine conditions (Burnstein, Crandall, & 
Kitayama, 1994). When the participants imagined themselves liv￾ing in a sub-Saharan African country that suffered widespread fam￾ine and disease, they reported a curvilinear relationship between 
age and helping. Infants in this condition were helped less than 
10-year-olds, who were helped the most. But then helping began to 
drop, with the least helped being the 75-year-olds. Another study 
found that people are willing to endure more physical pain—maintaining a painfully 
awkward physical position for as long as possible—as a function of closeness of kin￾ship (Madsen et al., 2007). Studies confirm that in real-life situations in which life 
is in danger, having kin in close proximity literally increases the odds of surviving 
compared to people in the same situation who lack kin in close proximity (Grayson, 
1993; Sear & Mace, 2008). Moreover, people who write wills leave their cash and 
other assets to close genetic relatives more than to distant ones (Judge & Hrdy, 1992; 
Elinder et al., 2021).
Humans, of course, help people who are not close kin. We form friendships 
with non-kin which sometimes can last a lifetime. We help friends who are in need, 
and they in turn help us when we are in need. This is the defining feature of reciprocal 
altruism—incurring costs to self to deliver benefits to other with the expectation that 
those benefits will be reciprocated at some future time (Trivers, 1971). The personality 
trait Agreeableness has been linked with a strong proclivity to be a good reciprocal altru￾ist (Ashton et al., 1998). We select our friends in part based on their potential as cooper￾ative reciprocity partners, and sometimes end friendships then when they fail us in times 
of need (Apostolou et al., 2021a, 2021b). We also distinguish between “true friends” 
who stay with us through thick and thin and “fair weather friends” (Apostolou et al., 
2021; Tooby & Cosmides, 1996). We even help total strangers sometimes, although this 
form of helping is sometimes aimed at enhancing our social reputation, which in turn 
increases our desirability as a friend or coalition partner.
Figure 8.3
Tendency to help as a function of the recipient’s 
age under life-or-death versus everyday conditions. 
When helping is relatively trivial, people tend to 
help those most in need, such as the young and the 
elderly. Under costly forms of help, however, the 
young are helped more than the old.
Source: Adapted from “Some Neo-Darwinian Decision 
Rules for Altruism: Weighing Cures for Inclusive Fitness as 
a Function of the Biological Importance of the Decision,” 
by E. Burnstein, C. Crandall, and S. Kitayama, 1994, 
Journal of Personality & Social Psychology, 67, pp. 773–789, 
Figure 3, p. 779. Copyright © 1994 by the American 
Psychological Association. Reprinted with permission.
Everyday
Life or death
2.6
2.4
2.2
2.0
1.8
1.6
1.4
Tendency to help
> 1 yr. 10 yrs. 18 yrs.
Age of target
45 yrs. 75 yrs.
Final PDF to printer236
lar31869_ch08_222-257.indd 236 11/01/22 11:00 AM
PART TWO The Biological Domain
These studies suggest that a central 
component of human nature is helping other 
people, but in highly domain-specific ways. 
We help friends, who are likely to recipro￾cate and help us in times of need. And we 
help close kin. And we help strangers in ways 
that can enhance our social reputation. The 
ways in which humans help others—the dis￾tribution of helping acts across individuals—
is highly predictable from an evolutionary 
perspective.
Universal Emotions
Evolutionary psychologists have taken three 
distinct perspectives on the study of emotions, 
such as fear, rage, and jealousy. One view is 
to examine whether facial expressions of emo￾tion are interpreted in the same ways across 
cultures, on the assumption that universality 
is one criterion for adaptation (Ekman, 1973, 
1992a, 1992b). If all humans share an adapta￾tion, such as smiling to express happiness, that 
adaptation is likely to be a core part of human 
nature. A second evolutionary view is that 
emotions are adaptive psychological mecha￾nisms that signal various “fitness affordances” 
in the social environment (Ketelaar, 1995). 
According to this perspective, emotions guide 
the person toward goals that would have con￾ferred fitness in ancestral environments (e.g., 
the pleasure one feels having one’s status rise within a group) or to avoid conditions 
that would have interfered with fitness (e.g., getting beaten up or abused or ostracized). 
A third evolutionary perspective on social emotions is the “manipulation hypothesis,” 
which suggests that emotions are designed to exploit the psychological mechanisms 
of other people. For example, expressions of rage might be designed to make a verbal 
threat more credible than the same threat made without displaying rage (Sell, Tooby, & 
Cosmides, 2009).
All these evolutionary perspectives on emotions hinge on the proposition that they 
are universal and universally recognized in the same way. Ekman (1973, 1992a, 1992b) 
pioneered the cross-cultural study of emotions. He assembled pictures of several differ￾ent faces, each of which showed one of seven emotions: happiness, disgust, anger, fear, 
surprise, sadness, and contempt. When these pictures were shown to subjects in Japan, 
Chile, Argentina, Brazil, and the United States, all showed tremendous agreement on 
which emotions corresponded to which face. Subsequent research has confirmed the 
universal recognition of these emotional expressions in Italy, Scotland, Estonia, Greece, 
Germany, Hong Kong, Sumatra, and Turkey (Ekman et al., 1987).
Especially impressive is the study of the Fore of New Guinea—a cultural group 
with practically no contact with outsiders. They spoke no English, had seen no TV or 
movies, and had never lived with Caucasians. Nonetheless, the Fore also showed the 
Images of the seven emotional expressions that are correctly identified by people from 
many diverse cultures. Can you identify which image is associated with the following 
emotions: happiness, disgust, anger, fear, surprise, sadness, and contempt?
Final PDF to printer237
lar31869_ch08_222-257.indd 237 11/01/22 11:00 AM
CHAPTER EIGHT Evolutionary Perspectives on Personality
universal pairing of emotions and faces. Subsequent research has also shown the univer￾sality of the facial expression of contempt (Ekman et al., 1987).
A recent test of the universality of emotion expression examined the facial expres￾sions of 63 sculptures created in the Americas dating back to 1500 BCE prior to any 
contact with Western civilization (Cowen & Keltner, 2020). Researchers isolated the 
facial expressions from the social context in which the expressions occurred, and then 
had Western participants judge the emotion for each. They found strong correspon￾dence between the perceived emotional expression and the social context in which it 
The emotion of disgust is a hypothesized 
adaptation that serves as a defense against 
microbial attacks, protecting people from 
the risk of disease (Curtis, Aunger, & Rabie, 
2004; Oaten, Stevenson, & Case, 2009). 
Disgust is an emotion that involves feelings 
of revulsion and sometimes nausea. It moti￾vates strong withdrawal from the disgust￾producing stimulus. If the emotion of disgust 
is an evolved defense against disease, sev￾eral predictions follow. One is that disgust 
should be evoked most strongly by disease￾carrying substances. The second is that these 
disgust elicitors should be universal across 
cultures. Empirical research supports both 
predictions (Curtis & Biran, 2001). People 
from cultures ranging from the Netherlands 
to West Africa find foods potentially contami￾nated by parasites or unhygienic preparation 
to be exceptionally disgusting. Examples are 
rotting flesh, dirty food, bad-smelling food, 
food leftovers, moldy food, dead insects in 
food, and witnessing food preparation by 
someone with dirty hands. Foods that have 
had contact with worms, cockroaches, or 
feces evoke especially strong disgust reac￾tions. A third prediction is that disgust should 
activate the immune system. Showing peo￾ple images of contaminated food actually 
elevated their body temperature—one of the 
key features of immune response to disease 
(Stevenson et al., 2012).
A cross-cultural study asked Americans 
and Japanese to list things they found most 
individuals who score high on a measure of 
pathogen disgust find relatively unattract￾ive faces to be especially unattractive com￾pared with people low on pathogen disgust 
(Park, van Leeuwen, & Stephen, 2012).
Potential contact with people who 
have poor hygiene, who appear diseased, 
or have body boundary violations such 
as gaping wounds, and who engage in 
practices such as anal sex—all of which 
are possible conduits for disease trans￾mission—often evokes disgust (Tyber, 
Lieberman, & Griskevicius, 2009). Indeed, 
sexual contact is an important source of 
disease transmission (Tyber et al., 2013). 
The mouth, the skin, the anus, and the 
genitals are all key entry and exit points 
for microorganisms to move from host 
to host. Kissing, touching, oral–genital 
contact, genital–genital contact, and 
other sexual behaviors put individuals at 
risk of contracting diseases. Sexual dis￾gust may be a specialized adaptation to 
avoid potentially infected sex partners, 
above and beyond the disgust adaptation 
designed to avoid contaminated food and 
infectious animals and insects (Al-Shawaf, 
Lewis, & Buss, 2018; Crosby et al., 2020). 
Much empirical evidence, in short, sup￾ports the disease-avoidance hypothesis 
of disgust. It is an emotion that evolved to 
avoid predictable classes of disease con￾duits that jeopardized survival, and is part 
of human nature.
disgusting. Feces and other body wastes 
were the most frequently mentioned 
(Rozin, 1996). Feces are known to harbor 
harmful elements, including parasites and 
toxins, and are dangerous to humans. 
Students refuse to drink from a glass that 
has been thoroughly cleaned and sterilized 
when told that it once held dog feces (Rozin 
& Nemeroff, 1990). The facial expression 
of disgust is universally recognized; it is 
expressed by people who are blind from 
birth; and it is interpreted correctly by peo￾ple who are born deaf (Oaten, Stevenson, & 
Case, 2009).
Another prediction from the disease￾avoidance hypothesis of disgust is a gen￾der difference: Since women typically care 
for their infants and children, they need to 
protect them from disease, as well as them￾selves (Al-Shawaf, Lewis, & Buss, 2018; 
Crosby et al., 2020). And indeed, women 
find images depicting disease-carrying 
objects to be more disgusting than men do, 
and also perceive that the risk of disease 
is greater from those objects than men do 
(Curtis, Aunger, & Rabie, 2004). Individuals 
differ in disgust sensitivity—a prime candi￾date for an important personality variable. 
Individuals who have especially heightened 
sensitivity to contamination and who were 
most easily disgusted have significantly 
fewer infections—a finding that provides 
evidence for the protective function of dis￾gust (Stevenson et al., 2012). Interestingly, 
A Closer Look The Emotion of Disgust: The Disease￾Avoidance Hypothesis
Final PDF to printer238
lar31869_ch08_222-257.indd 238 11/01/22 11:00 AM
PART TWO The Biological Domain
was expressed. For example, when the judges said that the emotion of “pain” was being 
expressed, this was linked to the social context of “torture.” “Anger” was linked to the 
social context of “combat.” And “sadness” was linked to the social context of “defeat.” 
The authors conclude that modern Westerners share with ancient pre-contact peoples 
the links between facial expression of emotion and the social contexts in which these 
expressions commonly occur.
Emotions can also be expressed by nonverbal body language. A prime example is 
the emotion of pride. When people win an athletic contest, for example, they commonly 
thrust both arms in the air, forming a V, perhaps symbolic for victory (Matsumoto & 
Hwang, 2012). The nonverbal expression of triumph appears to be recognized across 
cultures. The nonverbal V is also displayed by congenitally blind individuals who win 
athletic contests (Tracy & Matsumoto, 2008).
This work suggests that emotions, as central components of personality, are uni￾versally expressed and recognized, thus fulfilling an important criterion for adaptation. 
They are good candidates for evolved components of human nature.
We have reviewed only a few hypotheses about the components of human nature 
from an evolutionary perspective: the need to belong, social anxiety about ostracism, 
the urge to help, and the universality of emotions. An evolutionary perspective may 
shed light on many other components of human nature, such as childhood fears of loud 
noises, darkness, spiders, and strangers; emotions such as envy, passion, and love; the 
universality of play among children; retaliation and revenge for perceived personal viola￾tions; status striving as a fundamental motive; and many more. Human nature, however, 
represents only one level of personality analysis. We now turn to the second level—sex 
differences.
Sex Differences
Evolutionary psychology predicts that males and females will be the same or similar in 
domains in which the sexes have faced the same or similar adaptive problems. Both 
sexes have sweat glands because both sexes have faced the adaptive problem of thermal 
regulation. Both sexes have similar taste preferences for fat, sugar, and salt because both 
sexes have faced similar food consumption problems.
In other domains, men and women have faced different adaptive problems over 
evolutionary history. Women dealt with childbirth; men did not. Women, therefore, have 
evolved particular adaptations that are lacking in men, such as mechanisms for produc￾ing labor contractions through the release of oxytocin into the bloodstream.
Men and women have also faced different information-processing problems in some 
adaptive domains. Because fertilization occurs internally within the woman, for example, 
men have faced the adaptive problem of uncertainty of paternity in their offspring. Men 
who failed to solve this problem risked investing resources in children who were not 
their own. We are all descendants of a long line of ancestral men whose characteristics 
led them to behave in ways that increased their likelihood of paternity and decreased the 
odds of investing in children who were presumed to be theirs but whose genetic fathers 
were other men.
This does not imply that men were or are consciously aware of the problem of 
compromised paternity. A man does not think, “Oh, if my wife has sex with someone 
else, then my certainty that I’m the genetic father will be jeopardized, and this will 
endanger the replication of my genes; I’m really mad.” Or if a man’s wife is taking birth￾control pills, he does not think, “Well, because Joan is taking the pill, it doesn’t really 
Final PDF to printer239
lar31869_ch08_222-257.indd 239 11/01/22 11:00 AM
CHAPTER EIGHT Evolutionary Perspectives on Personality
matter whether she has sex with other men; after all, my certainty in paternity is secure.” 
Instead, jealousy is a blind passion, just as our hunger for sweets and disgust at contami￾nated food are blind passions. The “wisdom” of jealousy is passed down to us over mil￾lions of years by our successful forebears (Buss, 2000a).
Women faced the problem of securing a reliable or replenishable supply of 
resources to carry them through pregnancy and lactation, especially when food resources 
were scarce, such as during droughts and harsh winters. We are all descendants of a long 
and unbroken line of women who successfully solved this adaptive challenge—for exam￾ple, by preferring mates who showed the ability to accrue resources and the willingness 
to channel them toward particular women (Buss, 2016). The women who failed to solve 
this problem failed to survive, imperiled the survival chances of their children, and hence 
failed to become our ancestors.
Evolutionary-predicted sex differences hypothesis holds that the sexes will differ in 
precisely those domains where women and men have faced different sorts of adaptive 
problems (Buss, 2009a, 2009b). To an evolutionary psychologist, the likelihood that the 
sexes are psychologically identical in domains in which they have recurrently confronted 
different adaptive problems over the long expanse of human evolutionary history is 
essentially zero (Symons, 1992). The key question therefore is not “Are men and women 
different psychologically?” Rather, the key questions about gender differences, from an 
evolutionary psychological perspective, are the following:
1. In what domains have women and men faced different adaptive problems?
2. What are the sex-differentiated psychological adaptations of women and men that 
have evolved in response to these sex-differentiated challenges?
3. Which social and cultural contexts affect the magnitude of sex differences?
This section reviews some of the key domains in which the sexes have been predicted to 
differ: aggression, jealousy, desire for sexual variety, and mate preferences.
Sex Differences in Aggression
The earliest known homicide victim was a Neanderthal man who died 50,000 years ago 
(Trinkaus & Zimmerman, 1982). He was stabbed in the left front of his chest, indicat￾ing a right-handed attacker. As paleontological detective work has become increasingly 
sophisticated, evidence of prehistoric violence among 
our forebears has mushroomed (Buss, 2005b). Ancient 
skeletal remains contain cranial and rib fractures that 
appear inexplicable except by the force of clubs and 
weapons that stab. Weapon fragments are occasionally 
found lodged in skeletal rib cages. Humans apparently 
have a long evolutionary history of violence.
A global study of homicides in 2013 revealed that 
95 percent of homicides are committed by males and 
70 percent of homicide victims are males (UNODC, 
2014). Although the exact percentages vary from cul￾ture to culture, cross-cultural homicide statistics reveal 
strikingly similar findings. In all cultures studied, men 
are overwhelmingly the killers, and most of their vic￾tims are other men. Among chimpanzees, our closest 
primate cousins, the lethal killing of one chimpanzee 
by others reveal similar statistics—92 percent of the 
Men tend to engage in riskier tactics of competition, such as aggression 
and violence.
Ollyy/Shutterstock
Final PDF to printer240
lar31869_ch08_222-257.indd 240 11/01/22 11:00 AM
PART TWO The Biological Domain
attackers are male and 73 percent of the victims are male (Wilson et al., 2014). Any 
complete theory of aggression must explain both facts—why males engage in violent 
forms of aggression so much more often than females do and why males comprise the 
majority of their victims.
An evolutionary model of intrasexual competition provides the foundation for 
the explanation. It starts with the theory of parental investment and sexual selection 
(Archer, 2009; Trivers, 1972). In species in which females invest more heavily in off￾spring than males do, females become the valuable limiting resource on reproduction for 
males. Males become constrained in their reproduction not so much by their own ability 
to survive but rather by their ability to gain mating access to the high-investing females. 
In a species in which females can bear only a small number of offspring, such as humans, 
females express great care in their choice of mates, and males will be forced to compete 
with each other for access.
Because female mammals bear the physical burden of gestation and lactation, there 
is a considerable sex difference in minimum obligatory parental investment. Therefore, 
males can have many more offspring than females can. Stated differently, the ceiling on 
reproduction is much higher for males than for females. This difference leads to differences 
in the variances in reproduction between the sexes. The differences between the haves and 
have-nots become greater for males than for females. Among males, a few males will sire 
multiple offspring, whereas some will have none at all. This is known as effective polygyny.
As a general rule, the greater the variance in reproduction, the more ferocious the 
competition within the sex that shows higher variance. In an extreme case such as the ele￾phant seals off the coast of northern California, 5 percent of the males sire 85 percent of 
all offspring produced in a given breeding season (Le Boeuf & Reiter, 1988). Species that 
show high variance in reproduction within one sex tend to be highly sexually dimorphic, 
highly different in size and structure. The more intense the effective polygyny, the more 
dimorphic the sexes are in size and form (Plavcan, 2012; Trivers, 1985). Elephant seals 
are highly size dimorphic: males are four times heavier than females (Le Boeuf & Reiter, 
1988). Chimpanzees are less sexually dimorphic: males are roughly twice as large as 
females. Humans are mildly dimorphic, with males roughly 12 percent larger than females, 
although some specific body components, such as upper body strength, show much larger 
sexual dimorphism (Lassek & Gaulin, 2009). Within primate species, the greater the effec￾tive polygyny, the more the sexual dimorphism and the greater the reproductive variance 
between the sexes (Alexander et al., 1979; Plavcan, 2012).
Effective polygyny means that some males gain a disproportionate share of copu￾lations, whereas other males are shut out entirely, banished from contributing to the 
ancestry of future generations. Such a system leads to ferocious competition within the 
high-variance sex. In essence, polygyny selects for risky strategies, including those that 
lead to violent combat with rivals and those that lead to increased risk taking to acquire 
the resources needed to attract members of the high-investing sex.
The greater body size and strength in males is also likely due to a long history of 
females who select as mates males with these qualities (Buss, 2012; Plavcan, 2012). One 
study found that women who fear crime are especially likely to prefer long-term mates 
who are aggressive and physically formidable (Snyder et al., 2011). Another study found 
that men with more muscle mass had a larger number of sex partners and an earlier age 
of first sexual intercourse (Lassek & Gaulin, 2009). A third study found that men who 
experienced aggressive victimization in adolescence at the hands of other males have 
fewer sex partners (Gallup et al., 2009).
This evolutionary account provides an explanation for facts revealed in the cross￾cultural homicide record. Males are more often the perpetrators of violence because they 
Final PDF to printer241
lar31869_ch08_222-257.indd 241 11/01/22 11:00 AM
CHAPTER EIGHT Evolutionary Perspectives on Personality
are the products of a long history of effective polygyny. Throughout human evolution, 
male strategies have been characterized by risky intrasexual competition for females or 
for the social status and resources that attract females. The fact that men die, on average, 
five to seven years earlier than women is one of the many markers of this aggressive risk￾taking intrasexual strategy (Promislow, 2003).
Men are the victims of aggression more than women because men are in competi￾tion primarily with other men. Men block other men’s access to women. With increased 
aggression comes a greater likelihood of injury and early death. The patterns of aggres￾sion are well predicted by the evolutionary theory of intrasexual competition (Buss & 
Duntley, 2006; Griskevicius et al., 2009). Even psychologists who argue that most psy￾chological and behavioral sex differences are due to social roles concede that sex dif￾ferences in aggression are likely caused by a long evolutionary history in which women 
and men have confronted different adaptive problems in the context of mating and mate 
competition (Archer, 2009).
Sex Differences in Jealousy
Another difference between the sexes in the nature of the adaptive problems they have 
faced stems from the fact that fertilization occurs internally and unseen within women. 
This means that ancestral men have risked investing in children who were not their own. 
Few women, however, have ever been uncertain about which children were their own. A 
reproductively damaging act, from an ancestral man’s point of view would have been if 
his mate had a pregnancy from sexual intercourse with another man. That is the act that 
jeopardized his paternity certainty and hence his reproductive success.
From an ancestral woman’s point of view, however, the fact that her mate was hav￾ing sex with another woman, by itself, would not jeopardize her certainty in that she is 
the mother of her own children. Such an infidelity, however, could be extremely risky to 
the woman’s reproductive success: she could risk losing her mate’s resources, time, com￾mitment, and investment, all of which could be diverted to another woman.
For these reasons, evolutionary psychologists have predicted that men and women 
should differ in the weighting they give to cues that trigger jealousy. Specifically, men 
have been predicted to become relatively more jealous than women in response to cues 
to a sexual infidelity. Women have been predicted to become relatively more jealous 
than men in response to cues to the long-term diversion of a mate’s commitment, such 
as emotional involvement with someone else. To test these predictions, participants were 
put in an agonizing dilemma, which you can participate in as well. Take a look at the 
Exercise that follows.
Think of a serious, committed romantic relationship that you had in the past, that you currently 
have, or that you would like to have. Imagine that you discover that the person with whom 
you’ve been seriously involved has become interested in someone else. Of the following, what 
would distress or upset you more?
1. Imagining your partner forming a deep emotional attachment to that person.
2. Imagining your partner enjoying passionate sexual intercourse with that other 
person.
Exercise
Final PDF to printer242
lar31869_ch08_222-257.indd 242 11/01/22 11:00 AM
PART TWO The Biological Domain
As shown in Figure 8.4, men are far more distressed than 
women when imagining their partners having sexual intercourse 
with someone else (Buss et al., 1992). The overwhelming majority of 
women, in contrast, are more distressed when imagining their part￾ners becoming emotionally involved with someone else. This does not 
mean that women are indifferent to their partners’ sexual infidelities 
or that men are indifferent to their partners’ emotional infidelities—
far from it. Both events upset both sexes. However, when forced to 
choose which one is more upsetting, a large sex difference emerges, 
precisely as predicted by the evolutionary hypothesis of sex differ￾ences in the nature of the adaptive problems. These results also show 
up in measures of physiological distress (Buss et al., 1992; Pietrzak 
et al., 2002). When imagining partners having sex with someone else, 
men’s heart rate goes up five beats per minute, which is like drinking 
three cups of coffee at one time. Their skin conductance increases, 
and their frown response is visible. Women, in contrast, show greater 
physiological distress at imagining their partners becoming emotion￾ally involved with someone else. 
Are these sex differences found across cultures? Thus far, 
researchers have replicated these sex differences in Germany, the 
Netherlands, and Korea (Buunk et al., 1996), as shown in Figure 8.5. 
Other researchers have replicated these sex differences in Korea and 
Japan (Buss et al., 1999). The sex differences in jealousy appear to be 
robust across a range of cultures. 
Not every psychologist agrees with the evolutionary expla￾nation. DeSteno and Salovey (1996) have proposed that men and 
women differ in their “beliefs” about sexual and emotional involve￾ment. When a man thinks that his partner is becoming sexually involved with a rival, for 
example, he might also think that his partner will be getting emotionally involved—a so￾called double shot of infidelity. The reason men get more upset about sexual rather than 
emotional infidelity, DeSteno and Salovey argue, is not because men are really more jeal￾ous about sexual infidelity—it’s because men “believe” that a sexual infidelity will result 
in the double shot of infidelity, which includes emotional infidelity.
Women, DeSteno and Salovey (1996) argue, have different beliefs, although they 
fail to explain why. Women believe in a reverse double-shot, that if their partners become 
emotionally involved with a rival, they will also become sexually involved. It’s women’s 
beliefs about this double shot of infidelity that upset them, DeSteno and Salovey argue, 
and not that women really are more upset about an emotional betrayal.
The evolutionary explanation opposes the double-shot explanation. Given the large 
sex differences stemming from fundamental differences in reproductive biology, accord￾ing to evolutionary psychologists, it would be unlikely for selection to have failed to 
produce psychological sex differences about the two forms of infidelity. The hard hand 
of data, however, usually settles scientific disagreements. Buss and his colleagues (1999) 
conducted four empirical studies in three different cultures to pit the predictions of evo￾lutionary theory against the predictions of the double-shot hypothesis. One of the studies 
involved 1,122 participants from a liberal arts college in the southeastern United States. 
Researchers asked them to imagine their partners becoming interested in someone else: 
What would upset or distress you more: (1) imagining your partner forming a deep emo￾tional (but not sexual) relationship with that person? or (2) imagining your partner enjoy￾ing a sexual (but not emotional) relationship with that person? Men and women differed 
Figure 8.4
Percentage reporting more distress to sexual infidelity 
than to emotional or love infidelity. A large sex 
difference is found, with far more men than women 
reporting more distress to sexual infidelity, and the 
overwhelming majority of women reporting more 
distress to emotional or love infidelity.
Source: From “Sex Differences in Jealousy: Evolution, 
Physiology, and Psychology,” by D. M. Buss, R. Larsen, J. 
Semmelroth, and D. Weston, 1992, Psychological Science, 
3, pp. 251–255, Figure 1, top panel, p. 252. Copyright © 
1992 Association for Psychological Science. Reprinted by 
permission of SAGE Publications, Inc.
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
70
Percentage reporting more
distress to sexual infidelity
Sexual infidelity
versus deep
emotional infidelity
Sexual infidelity
versus
love infidelity
Male
Female
Final PDF to printer243
lar31869_ch08_222-257.indd 243 11/01/22 11:00 AM
CHAPTER EIGHT Evolutionary Perspectives on Personality
by 35 percent, as predicted by the evolutionary model. Women continued to express 
greater upset about a partner’s emotional infidelity, even if it did not involve sex. Men 
continued to show more upset than the women about a partner’s sexual infidelity, even if 
it did not involve emotional involvement. If the double-shot hypothesis were the correct 
explanation, the sex difference should have disappeared when the sexual and emotional 
components of infidelity were isolated. It did not.
In a second study of 234 women and men (Buss et al., 1999), the researchers used 
a different strategy for pitting the competing hypotheses against each other. They asked 
participants to imagine that their worst nightmare had occurred—that their partners had 
become both sexually and emotionally involved with someone else. They then asked the 
participants to state which aspect they found more upsetting. The results were conclusive. 
The researchers found large gender differences, precisely as predicted by the evolution￾ary explanation—63 percent of the men but only 13 percent of the women found the 
sexual aspect of the infidelity to be more upsetting. In contrast, 87 percent of the women, 
but only 37 percent of the men, found the emotional aspect of the infidelity to be more 
upsetting. No matter how the questions were worded, no matter which method was 
used, the same gender difference emerged in every test. Several other scientists have now 
Figure 8.5
Sex differences in jealousy across four cultures. In all four cultures, more men than women are distressed 
about imagining a partner’s sexual infidelity; most women are more distressed by a partner’s emotional 
infidelity.
Source: From “Sex Differences in Jealousy in Evolutionary and Cultural Perspective: Tests from the Netherlands, 
Germany, and the United States,” by A. P. Buunk, A. Angleitner, V. Oubaid, and D. M. Buss, 1996, Psychological Science, 
7, pp. 359–363, Figure 1, p. 361. Copyright © 1996 Association for Psychological Science. Reprinted by permission of 
SAGE Publications, Inc.
Men
Women
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Percentage reporting more distress to sexual infidelity
United
States
(N = 224)
Germany
(N = 200)
The
Netherlands
(N = 207)
Korea
(N = 200)
Final PDF to printer244
lar31869_ch08_222-257.indd 244 11/01/22 11:00 AM
PART TWO The Biological Domain
confirmed these results using somewhat different methods and different cultures, such 
as Sweden (e.g., Wiederman & Kendall, 1999). Wiederman and Kendall concluded that, 
“contrary to the double-shot explanation, choice of scenario was unrelated to attitudes 
regarding whether the other gender was capable of satisfying sexual relations outside of 
a love relationship” (p. 121).
These and similar sex differences have now been replicated in China, Germany, 
the Netherlands, Korea, Japan, England, and Romania (Brase, Caprar, & Voracek, 
2004). The gender differences emerge robustly in cultures that are highly sexually egali￾tarian such as Sweden and Norway (e.g., Bendixen, Kennair, & Buss, 2015), as well is 
in traditional cultures such as the Himba of Namibia (Scelza, 2014). Scelza also found 
that men’s upset about sexual infidelity increased in cultures in which men invest heavily 
in their children (Scelza et al., 2019). The cross-cultural findings support the theory that 
these are universal sex differences. The double-shot theory cannot explain why these sex 
differences are universal. Based on the available evidence, the double-shot theory has 
failed to be supported both from the cross-cultural findings and from the studies that test 
its predictions in direct competition with those from the evolutionary theory.
In an ingenious study, Schutzwohl and Koch (2004) used an entirely new method 
that has never been used in jealousy research. They had participants listen to a story 
about their own romantic relationship in which an infidelity was said to have occurred. 
Embedded within the story were five cues that had been previously determined to be 
cues highly diagnostic of sexual infidelity (e.g., He suddenly has difficulty becoming sexu￾ally aroused when you and he want to have sex) and five cues diagnostic of emotional 
infidelity (e.g., He doesn’t respond any more when you tell him that you love him). In 
a surprise recall test a week later, men spontaneously remembered more cues to sexual 
than to emotional infidelity (42 percent vs. 29 percent), whereas women remembered 
more cues to emotional than to sexual infidelity (40 percent vs. 24 percent). These find￾ings support the hypothesis that sex differences in jealousy are real and not “experimen￾tal artifacts” (Schutzwohl & Koch, 2004).
Other studies have discovered other design features of sex differences in the psy￾chology of jealousy. One found that women experienced more psychological relief when 
they discovered that their partner was not emotionally unfaithful, whereas men experi￾enced greater relief upon the disconfirmation of a partner’s sexual infidelity (Schutzwohl, 
2008). Women more than men inquire about the emotional nature of a partner’s extra￾pair relationship, whereas men more than women inquire about the sexual nature of a 
partner’s extra-pair relationship (Kuhle, Smedley, & Schmitt, 2009). And those who are 
chronically more jealous tend to show even larger sex differences in jealous responses to 
sexual versus emotional infidelity (Miller & Maner, 2009). This latter finding highlights 
the importance of integrating stable individual differences with evolutionary theories of 
sex differences in personality (Miller & Maner, 2009).
The gold standard in science is independent replication, and by this criterion the 
evolutionary explanation has fared well. After each challenge, additional research by 
independent scientists has continued to find support for the existence of sex differences 
in jealousy and the evolutionary explanations for them (e.g., Brase, Caprar, & Voracek, 
2004; Buss & Haselton, 2005; Cann, Mangum, & Wells, 2001; Dijkstra & Buunk, 2001; 
Fenigstein & Pelz, 2002; Geary et al., 2001; Maner & Shackelford, 2008; Murphy et al., 
2006; Pietrzak et al., 2002; Sagarin, 2005; Sagarin et al., 2003, 2009; Schutzwohl & Koch, 
2004; Shackelford, Buss, & Bennett, 2002; Shackelford et al., 2004; Strout et al., 2005). 
Indeed, a meta-analysis of 47 independent samples provided strong support for the evolu￾tionarily predicted sex differences across methods, including studies that evaluated reac￾tions to actual infidelities (Sagarin et al., 2012; Zengel, Edlund, & Sagarin, 2013).
Final PDF to printer245
lar31869_ch08_222-257.indd 245 11/01/22 11:00 AM
CHAPTER EIGHT Evolutionary Perspectives on Personality
Finally, in using a novel method of content coding jealous inter￾rogations of romantic partners, Kuhle (2011) discovered that men 
tended to interrogate partners more about the sexual aspects (“Did you 
have sex with him?”), whereas women interrogated partners about the 
emotional aspects (“Do you love her?”) (see Figure 8.6). In sum, the 
predicted gender differences in jealousy are robust across many meth￾ods and many cultures (Buss, 2018; Frederick & Fales, 2016). 
Sex Differences in Desire for Sexual Variety
Another gender difference predicted by evolutionary theories is a 
difference in the desire for sexual variety (Figure 8.7). This predic￾tion stems from parental investment and sexual selection theory. The 
members of the sex that invests less in offspring are predicted to be 
less discriminating in their selection of mates and more inclined to 
seek multiple mates. In ancestral times, men could increase their 
reproductive success by gaining sexual access to a variety of women. 
If you were given your ideal wish, how many sex partners would 
you like to have in the next month? How about the next year? How 
about over your entire lifetime? When unmarried college students were asked these ques￾tions, the women indicated that they wanted about one in the next month and four or 
five in their entire lifetimes (Buss & Schmitt, 1993). The men, in contrast, thought that 2 
would be about right in the next month, 8 over the next couple of years, and 18 in their 
lifetimes. In terms of expressed desires, men and women differ in the ways predicted by 
the evolutionary account.
The sex differences in number of partners desired have been replicated in a 
cross-cultural study. Schmitt and his colleagues (2003) studied 16,288 individuals 
from 10 world regions, representing 52 different nations from Argentina to Slovakia to 
Zimbabwe. They used instruments identical to those used for Figure 8.7, translated into 
Figure 8.6
Men and women differ in which aspects of their 
partner’s infidelity they focus on more.
Source: Kuhle, 2011.
80
60
40
20
0
100
Percentage of cases
Sexual aspect
of affair
Aspect of cheater’s affair that
victim focused on more
Emotional aspect
of affair
Men
Women
Figure 8.7
“Ideally, how many different sexual partners would you like to have in the next month?” Total sample size 16, 288.
Source: Data from International Sexuality Description Project, courtesy of David P. Schmitt.
40
30
20
10
0
% Desiring “more than one” sex partner
North
America
South
America
Western
Europe
Eastern
Europe
Southern
Europe
Middle
East
Africa Oceania South/SE
Asia
East Asia
Men
Women
Final PDF to printer246
lar31869_ch08_222-257.indd 246 11/01/22 11:00 AM
PART TWO The Biological Domain
the appropriate language for each culture. For the time interval of the next 30 years, men 
worldwide expressed a desire for roughly 13 sex partners, whereas women expressed a 
desire for roughly 2.5 partners (see Figure 8.7 for illustrative findings). The sex differ￾ence in the desire for sexual variety, in short, appears to be large and universal. The sex 
difference extends to how often men and women think about sex. One study found that 
women, on average, think about sex nine times per week; men, on average, think about 
sex 37 times per week (Regan & Atkins, 2006).
Sex Differences in Mate Preferences
Evolutionary psychologists have also predicted that men and women differ in the qualities 
they desire in a long-term mate. Because women bear the burden of the heavy obligatory 
parental investment, they are predicted to place more value on a potential mate’s financial 
resources and the qualities that lead to such resources. Men, in contrast, are predicted to 
place greater value on a woman’s physical appearance, which provides a wealth of observ￾able cues to her fertility. Among college students, men ranked physical attractiveness an 
average of 4.04, whereas the women ranked it lower, giving it 6.26 (the highest possible 
rank would be a “1,” whereas the lowest possible rank would be “13”). On the dimension 
of good earning capacity, the women ranked it 8.04, whereas the men ranked it 9.92 (Buss 
& Barnes, 1986). Thus, it is clear that women and men both place many qualities above 
looks and resources. In particular, “kind and understanding” (rank: 2.20) and having an 
“exciting personality” (rank: 3.50) are more valued by both sexes. Interestingly, people 
prefer the trait of “kindness” in mates when the kindness is directed toward them, but not 
necessarily when it is directed toward others (Lukaszewski & Roney, 2010). Personality, 
in short, plays a key role in what people want in a marriage partner.
Nonetheless, in the study, the men and women differed in their rankings of looks 
and resources in the predicted direction. These sex differences have been found across 37 
cultures (Buss, 1989; Kamble et al., 2014; Souza, 
Conroy-Beam, & Buss, 2016). Zambian, Chinese, 
Indonesian, Brazilian, Indian, and Norwegian men 
rank physical attractiveness as more important than 
do their female counterparts, just like the American 
samples. Worldwide, women rank a potential partner’s 
good financial prospects to be more important than do 
their male counterparts. These psychological gender 
differences are large, roughly the same magnitude as 
gender differences in height and upper body muscle 
strength (Conroy-Beam et al., 2015; see Figure 8.8). 
Importantly, these gender differences have remained 
robust throughout all cultures studied over the past 
decade, including Brazil, China, India, and Iran. 
Perhaps even more important, the personality charac￾teristics that contribute to financial success—ambition, 
industriousness, and dependability—are also highly 
valued by women worldwide. Whereas men prioritize 
physical attractiveness, women prioritize social sta￾tus as a “necessity” in selecting long-term mates (Li, 
Valentine, & Patel, 2011). 
In summary, personality plays a key role in 
mate preferences across the globe, and on a few 
Figure 8.8
We can predict biological sex, whether one is male or female, with 92.4 
percent accuracy solely from knowing a person’s expressed preferences 
for good financial prospects, good looks, chastity, ambition, and age in a 
potential mate.
Source: Findings and graph courtesy of Daniel Conroy-Beam; for more 
information, see Conroy-Beam, Buss, Pham, & Shackelford, 2015.
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
Frequency
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
Predicted gender probability
Final PDF to printer247
lar31869_ch08_222-257.indd 247 11/01/22 11:00 AM
CHAPTER EIGHT Evolutionary Perspectives on Personality
The sex difference in desire for sexual vari￾ety shows up in behavioral data. In one 
study conducted at a university in Florida, 
experimental confederates approached 
people of the opposite sex (Clark & Hatfield, 
1989). After introducing themselves, they 
said, “Hi, I’ve been noticing you around 
campus lately, and I find you very attrac￾tive. Would you go out on a date with me 
tonight?” A different group was asked, 
“Would you go back to my apartment with 
me tonight?” And a third group was asked, 
“Would you have sex with me tonight?”
Experimenters simply recorded the 
percentage of people approached who 
agreed to the request. Of the women who 
were approached by the male confederate, 
55 percent agreed to the date, 6 percent 
agreed to go back to the man’s apartment, 
and 0 percent agreed to have sex with him. 
Of the men approached by the female con￾federate, 50 percent agreed to go out on 
the date, 69 percent agreed to go back to 
her apartment, and 75 percent agreed to 
have sex with her.
The reactions of the two sexes were 
very different in the sex condition. Women 
approached for sex often felt insulted; 
many thought the request was strange. 
Men, in contrast, were typically flattered.
These studies and many others sup￾port the evolutionary hypothesis that men 
and women differ in their desire for sexual 
variety. Men tend to have more sexual fan￾tasies than do women, and they engage 
more often in “partner switching” during 
the course of those fantasies—they fanta￾size about two or more sex partners during 
a single fantasy episode (Buss, 2016). A 
meta-analysis found that attitudes toward 
casual sex were one of the largest sex dif￾ferences sexuality, with men typically much 
more positive than women about casual 
sex (Oliver & Hyde, 1993).
The majority of both sexes agreed to 
the date—91 percent of the women and 
96 percent of the men. In the sex con￾dition, however, a large sex difference 
emerged—50 percent of the men but only 
5 percent of the women agreed. Not a sin￾gle woman indicated a concern for safety. 
Clearly, making conditions safer for women 
increases the odds that they will consent to 
sex with a stranger—from 0 to 5 percent—
so safety concerns are not irrelevant, but 
the sex difference remains large. Most 
women agree to date strangers when a 
close friend vouches for the man’s warmth 
and integrity, but 95 percent still refuse to 
consent to sex.
It’s not that women lack interest in 
sex. The evidence is compelling, however, 
that most women are careful about whom 
they choose to sleep with and for the most 
part avoid jumping into bed with total 
strangers. Men are more willing.
These findings have now been rep￾licated in a study involving three coun￾tries—Italy, Germany, and the United States 
(Schutzwohl et al., 2009). The new twist in 
this study involved varying the attractiveness 
of the requestor, which increased accep￾tance rates for both sexes. For the “excep￾tionally attractive” requestor, 83 percent of 
the men agreed to sex, whereas 24 percent 
of the women agreed to sex. So although 
there are indeed circumstances in which 
some women consent to sex with strangers, 
men are still much more likely to do so.
These differences hold with equal 
force in lust for affairs. In one study by 
Johnson (1970) of Sacramento State 
College, 48 percent of American men, 
but only 5 percent of American women, 
expressed a desire to engage in extra￾marital sex. In a classic older study by 
Terman (1938) of 769 American men and 
770 American women, 72 percent of the 
Journalist Natalie Angier questions 
these results, arguing that women would 
hop into bed as easily as men in these 
situations but are deterred by a concern 
for their personal safety (Angier, 1999). 
Russell Clark explored this possibility 
(Clark, 1990). First, he replicated the “sex 
with strangers” study on a different sample 
in a different part of the country, and the 
results were virtually identical—more men 
than women were willing to have sex with 
a virtual stranger. Second, Clark noted that 
roughly half of the women in each study 
were quite willing to go out on a date with 
the strangers, which seemed puzzling if 
they were concerned about their safety. 
Third, when Clark’s experimenters asked 
the participants to describe the reason for 
their refusal (if they refused), women’s and 
men’s answers were nearly identical—both 
mentioned that they had a boyfriend or girl￾friend or that they did not know the person 
well enough.
Importantly, the gender differences 
in consenting to sex with strangers have 
been robustly replicated in other countries, 
including France, Germany, and Denmark 
(e.g., Hald & Hogh-Olesen, 2010).
Perhaps a date seems safer than sex, 
and women really do want sex with strang￾ers, if only they could be assured of their 
safety. To explore this possibility, Clark 
(1990) conducted yet another experiment. 
Men and women were contacted by close 
personal friends who testified about the 
integrity and character of the stranger. The 
participants were assured by their friends 
that the stranger was warm, sincere, trust￾worthy, and attractive. The participants 
were then asked one of two questions: 
“Would you be willing to go on a date?” or 
“Would you be willing to go to bed?” After 
being debriefed, the participants were 
asked for their reasons for their decisions.
A Closer Look Consenting to Sex with a Stranger
(Continued )
Final PDF to printer248
lar31869_ch08_222-257.indd 248 11/01/22 11:00 AM
PART TWO The Biological Domain
dimensions there are universal gender differences in what people want in a marriage 
partner. Although the evolutionary hypotheses for these sex differences have so far 
received support in cross-cultural research, competing hypotheses have been proposed 
to explain them, and these are currently being tested.
men, but only 27 percent of the women, 
admitted that they sometimes desired sex 
with someone outside of their marriage. 
Germans revealed similar tendencies—46 
percent of married men but only 6 percent 
of married women admit that they would 
underestimate women’s sexual urges. 
Nonetheless, the gender difference proves 
so robust across studies and methods of 
inquiry that there is no reason to doubt 
that men and women differ, on average, in 
desire for a variety of sex partners.
take advantage of a casual sexual opportu￾nity with someone else if the chance arose 
(Sigusch & Schmidt, 1971).
Women, of course, may be more 
reluctant to confide their sexual desires 
to a surveyor, so the figures are likely to 
A Closer Look (Continued )
Individual Differences
The study of individual differences has been the most challenging level of analysis for 
evolutionary psychologists. Unlike sex differences, for which scientists have an impres￾sive conceptual and empirical foundation, there is less of a foundation for adaptive 
individual differences. Thus, this section must necessarily be more speculative than 
previous sections.
There are several ways in which individual differences can be explained from the 
vantage point of evolutionary psychology (Buss, 2009b; Buss & Hawley, 2011; Penke, 
Denissen, & Miller, 2007). The most common is explaining individual differences as 
a result of environmental differences acting on species-typical (human nature) psycho￾logical mechanisms. An analogy is the phenomenon of calluses that people sometimes 
Following is a list of characteristics that might be present in a potential mate or marriage 
partner. Rank them on their desirability in someone you might marry. Give a 1 to the most 
desirable characteristic in a potential mate, a 2 to the second most desirable characteristic in a 
potential mate, a 3 to the third most desirable characteristic, and so on down to 13 for the 13th 
most desirable characteristic in a potential mate.
Exercise
_____ kind and understanding _____ good housekeeper _____ college graduate
_____ religious _____ intelligent _____ physically attractive
_____ exciting personality _____ good earning capacity _____ healthy
_____ creative and artistic _____ wants children
_____ easygoing _____ good heredity
Final PDF to printer249
lar31869_ch08_222-257.indd 249 11/01/22 11:00 AM
CHAPTER EIGHT Evolutionary Perspectives on Personality
develop on their hands and feet. Individual differences in calluses can be explained by 
proposing that different individuals are exposed to different amounts of repeated fric￾tion to their skin. All humans have essentially the same callus-producing mechanisms, 
so individual differences are the result of the environmental differences that activate the 
mechanisms to differing degrees. Evolutionary psychologists invoke a similar form of 
explanation to account for psychological individual differences. Individual differences in 
jealousy, for example, may be explained by differences in the degree to which individuals 
are exposed to evoking conditions, such as cues to a partner’s infidelity or the presence 
of “mate poachers” (Buss, 2012).
Second, individual differences can emerge from contingencies among traits
(Bouchard & Loehlin, 2001). For example, “a hair-trigger temper may be advantageous 
if one is big and strong but not if one is small and weak” (p. 250). Rather than the trait’s 
expression being contingent on the environment, however, its expression is contingent 
on other traits the person has—in this case, the size and strength of one’s body.
A third source of individual difference stems from frequency–dependent selection:
the process whereby the reproductive success (fitness) of a trait depends on its fre￾quency relative to other traits in the population. For example, in a large population 
of people with a cooperative disposition, selection may favor those with a cheating 
disposition as long as they are not too common. As the frequency of cheaters gets 
more common, cooperators evolve defenses to punish cheaters, and so the success 
of cheating goes down. Thus, heritable individual differences can be created through 
frequency–dependent selection.
A fourth source of individual differences comes from the fact that the optimum 
level of a personality trait can vary over time and space. Consider as an example differences 
over evolutionary time or space in the abundance of food, perhaps due to droughts or ice 
ages. In times of food scarcity, selection favors a risk-taking personality trait—one that 
prompts a person to risk encountering predators in order to venture widely to get food 
and prevent starvation. In times of food abundance, selection favors a more cautious 
personality to reduce the risk of venturing widely. These variations in the optimum level 
of a trait can create heritable individual differences in personality.
In sum, the evolutionary framework identifies several sources of individual dif￾ferences: (1) those that arise from individuals possessing universal adaptations whose 
expression is contingent on the environment, (2) those that arise from contingencies 
with other traits, (3) those due to variation over time and space in the optimum value 
of a trait, and (4) those due to frequency–dependent selection. Next we explore some 
examples of these individual differences.
Environmental Triggers of Individual Differences
According to one theory, the critical event of early father presence versus father absence 
triggers specific sexual strategies in individuals (Belsky, Steinberg, & Draper, 1991). 
Children who grow up in father-absent homes during the first five years of life, accord￾ing to this theory, develop expectations that parental resources will not be reliably or 
predictably provided. These children expect that adult pair bonds will not be enduring. 
Such individuals cultivate a sexual strategy of early sexual maturation, early sexual ini￾tiation, and frequent partner switching—a strategy designed to produce many offspring. 
An extraverted personality trait may accompany and facilitate this sexual strategy, and 
there is indeed evidence that extraverted people have more offspring over their lifetimes 
(Berg et al., 2016).
Final PDF to printer250
lar31869_ch08_222-257.indd 250 11/01/22 11:00 AM
PART TWO The Biological Domain
In contrast, individuals who experience a reliable, investing father during the first 
five years of life, according to the theory, develop a different set of expectations about 
the nature and trustworthiness of others. People are seen as reliable and trustworthy, 
and relationships are expected to be enduring. These early environmental experiences 
predispose individuals toward a long-term mating strategy, marked by delayed sexual 
maturation; a later onset of sexual activity; a search for long-term, securely attached 
adult relationships; and heavy investment in a small number of children.
There is some empirical support for this theory. Children from divorced homes, 
for example, are more sexually promiscuous than children from intact homes (Belsky, 
Steinberg, & Draper, 1991). Furthermore, girls from father-absent homes reach men￾arche (age of first menstruation) earlier than girls from father-present homes (Kim, 
Smith, & Palermiti, 1997). Nonetheless, these findings are correlational, so causation 
cannot be inferred. Men or women who are genetically predisposed to pursue a short￾term mating strategy may be more likely to get divorced and more likely to pass on to 
their children genes for that strategy (Bailey et al., 2000). However, despite the current 
lack of conclusive data (Del Giudice & Belsky, 2011), this theory and modest provisional 
support for it nicely illustrates one evolutionary approach to the emergence of consistent 
individual differences—in this case, the effects of differ￾ent environments on species-typical mechanisms.
Heritable Individual Differences Contingent 
on Other Traits
Another type of evolutionary analysis of personality 
involves evaluating one’s personal strengths and weak￾nesses. Suppose, for example, that men could pursue two 
different strategies in social interaction—an aggressive 
strategy marked by the use of physical force and a nonag￾gressive strategy marked by cooperativeness. The success 
of these strategies, however, hinges on an individual’s size, 
strength, and fighting ability. Those who happen to be 
muscular in body build can more successfully carry out an 
aggressive strategy than those who are skinny or chubby. 
If humans have evolved ways to evaluate themselves on 
their physical formidability, they can determine which 
social strategy is the more successful to pursue—an aggres￾sive strategy or a cooperative strategy. Adaptive self-assess￾ments, therefore, can produce stable individual differences 
in aggression or cooperativeness. In this example, the ten￾dency toward aggression is not directly heritable. Rather, 
it is reactively heritable: It is a secondary consequence of 
heritable body build (Tooby & Cosmides, 1990).
There is some evidence to support this idea 
(Ishikawa et al., 2001). Body weight, which is highly cor￾related with strength, predicts aggression both among 
pro hockey players and among young men more gener￾ally (Archer & Thanzami, 2009; Deaner et al., 2012). 
Physically stronger males are also quicker to anger and 
According to reactive heritability, a man with a slim, wiry build is less 
likely than a stocky muscular man to engage in aggressive behavior.
Radius Images/Alamy Stock Photo
Final PDF to printer251
lar31869_ch08_222-257.indd 251 11/01/22 11:00 AM
CHAPTER EIGHT Evolutionary Perspectives on Personality
are more likely to believe in the utility of warfare (Sell, Hone, & Pound, 2012). Even 
more interesting when it comes to personality, the combination of physical strength 
and physical attractiveness predicted the traits of extraversion, leadership orientation, 
and amount of bargaining power in social interactions—a prime example of how a per￾sonality trait can be contingent on other traits (Lukaszewski, 2013; Lukaszewski & 
Roney, 2011; von Rueden, Lukaszweski, & Gurven, 2015). These traits, in turn, predict 
men’s (but not women’s) proclivity to be oriented toward a short-term mating strategy 
(Lukaszewski et al., 2014). The notion of self-assessment of heritable qualities remains 
a fascinating avenue for understanding the adaptive patterning of individual differ￾ences, and is now being extended beyond traits like aggressiveness and extraversion to 
a wider array of condition-dependent models of personality (Lewis, 2015; Lukaszewski 
et al., 2020). For example, individual differences in the fearfulness facet of neuroticism 
are predicted by physical strength (Rodriguez & Lukaszewski, 2020). Weaker people 
are more fearful, presumably because they are more vulnerable to threats and fear moti￾vates them to avoid social confrontations.
Frequency–Dependent Strategic Individual Differences
The process of evolution by selection tends to use up heritable variation. Heritable vari￾ants that are more successful tend to replace those that are less successful, resulting in 
species-typical adaptations that show little or no heritable variation.
In some contexts, two or more heritable variants can evolve within a population. 
The most obvious example is biological sex. Within sexually reproducing species, the 
two sexes exist in roughly equal numbers because of frequency–dependent selection. If 
one sex becomes rare relative to the other, evolution will produce an increase in the 
numbers of the rarer sex. Frequency–dependent selection causes the frequency of men 
and women to remain roughly equal.
Some propose that human individual differences in women’s mating strategies 
have been caused by frequency–dependent selection (Gangestad & Simpson, 1990; 
Gangestad & Thornhill, 2008). Competition tends to be most intense among individu￾als who are pursuing the same mating strategy (Maynard Smith, 1982). This lays the 
groundwork for the evolution of alternative strategies.
According to Gangestad and colleagues, women’s mating strategies should center 
on two key qualities of potential mates: the parental investment a man could provide and 
the quality of his genes. A man who is able and willing to invest in a woman and her chil￾dren can be an extraordinarily valuable reproductive asset. Women could also benefit by 
selecting men who have high-quality genes, which can be passed down to her children. 
Men may carry genes for good health, physical attractiveness, or sexiness, which are 
then passed on to the woman’s sons or daughters.
There may be a trade-off, however, between selecting a man for his parenting abilities 
and selecting a man for his genes. Men who are highly attractive to many women, for exam￾ple, may be reluctant to commit to any one woman. Thus, a woman who is seeking a man for 
his genes may have to settle for a short-term sexual relationship without parental investment.
These various selection forces, according to theorists, gave rise to two alterna￾tive female mating strategies. A woman seeking a high-investing mate would adopt a 
restricted sexual strategy marked by delayed intercourse and prolonged courtship. This 
would enable her to assess the man’s level of commitment, detect the existence of his 
prior commitments to other women or children, and simultaneously signal to the man 
her sexual fidelity and hence assure him of his paternity of future offspring.
Final PDF to printer252
lar31869_ch08_222-257.indd 252 11/01/22 11:00 AM
PART TWO The Biological Domain
A woman seeking a man for the quality of his genes, on the other hand, has less 
reason to delay sexual intercourse. A man’s level of commitment to her is irrelevant, so 
prolonged assessment of his prior commitments is not necessary. This is referred to as 
an unrestricted mating strategy.
According to this theory, the two mating strategies of women—restricted and 
unrestricted—evolved and are maintained by frequency–dependent selection. As the 
number of unrestricted females in the population increases, the number of “sexy sons” 
in the next generation also increases. As the number of sexy sons increases, however, 
the competition among them also increases. Then, because there are so many sexy sons 
competing for a limited pool of women, their average success declines.
Now consider what happens when the number of restricted females seeking invest￾ing men increases in the population. Because there are now so many women seeking 
investment, they end up competing with each other for men willing to invest. Therefore, 
as the number of women seeking investment increases, the average success of their 
strategy declines. In short, the key idea behind frequency–dependent selection is that 
the success of each of the two strategies depends on how common each strategy is in 
the population. As a given strategy becomes more common, it becomes less successful; 
when it becomes less common, it becomes more successful.
There is some evidence for this theory (Thornhill & Gangestad, 2008). 
Individual differences in female mating strategy have been shown to be heritable. 
Women who pursue an unrestricted sexual strategy place more value on qualities of 
men linked with good genes, such as physical attractiveness and good health (Greiling 
& Buss, 2000; Thornhill & Gangestad, 2008). Sexual strategies are somewhat flexible 
and responsive to aspects of the social situation. Thus, people shift in the restricted
direction of sociosexual desire when they enter a new relationship and become more 
unrestricted again when they break up with an existing romantic partner and enter the 
mating market (Penke & Asendorpf, 2008a). Nonetheless, the dispositional compo￾nents of sociosexual desire are reflected in the findings that unrestricted individuals 
tend to dissolve romantic relationships more quickly, become sexually involved with 
new partners more readily, and are more likely to be sexually unfaithful within exist￾ing mateships (Penke & Asendorpf, 2008a).
Another example of personality differences originating from frequency–dependent 
selection centers on psychopathy—a cluster of personality traits marked by irresponsible 
and unreliable behavior; egocentrism; impulsivity; an inability to form lasting relation￾ships; superficial social charm; and a deficit in social emotions such as love, shame, 
guilt, and empathy (Cleckley, 1988; Lalumiere, Harris, & Rice, 2001). Psychopaths pur￾sue a deceptive “cheating” strategy in social interactions. Psychopathy is more common 
among men than women, but occurs in both sexes (Mealey, 1995). Psychopaths pursue 
a strategy of exploiting the cooperative proclivities of others. After feigning cooperation, 
psychopaths typically defect, cheat, or violate the trust. This cheating strategy might be 
pursued by those who are unlikely to out-compete others in more mainstream or tradi￾tional social hierarchies (Mealey, 1995).
According to one evolutionary theory, a psychopathic strategy can be maintained 
by frequency–dependent selection. As the number of cheaters increases, and hence the 
average cost to the cooperative hosts increases, adaptations will evolve in cooperators 
to detect and punish cheating, thus lowering its overall effectiveness (Price, Cosmides, 
& Tooby, 2002). As psychopaths get detected and punished, the average success of the 
strategy declines. As long as the frequency of psychopaths is not too large, however, it 
can be maintained in a population composed primarily of cooperators.
Final PDF to printer253
lar31869_ch08_222-257.indd 253 11/01/22 11:00 AM
CHAPTER EIGHT Evolutionary Perspectives on Personality
There is some empirical evidence consistent with this theory. First, behavioral 
genetic studies suggest that psychopathy is moderately heritable (Willerman, Loehlin, 
& Horn, 1992). Second, psychopaths often pursue an exploitative sexual strategy, 
which could be the primary route by which genes for psychopathy increase or are 
maintained (Rowe, 2001). Psychopathic men, for example, tend to be more sexually 
precocious, have sex with more women, have more illegitimate children, and be more 
likely to get divorced if they marry other than nonpsychopathic men (Rowe, 2001). 
This short-term exploitative sexual strategy would increase in populations marked by 
high geographic mobility, in which the costs to reputation are often avoided (Buss, 
2012). This leads to the alarming idea that we may be witnessing an increase in psy￾chopaths in modern times as society becomes increasingly geographically mobile. 
Evidence supports the frequency–dependent theory of this individual difference 
cluster—that it is part of normal personality variation and is not due to “pathology” 
(Lalumiere, Harris, & Rice, 2001). In sum, individual differences in this cluster of 
personality traits—unreliability, egocentrism, impulsivity, superficial social charm, 
and a deficit in empathy and other social emotions—may originate evolutionarily from 
frequency–dependent selection.
The most recent effort to explore individual differences from the perspective of 
frequency–dependent selection focuses on life history strategy (Figueredo et al., 2005a, 
2005b, 2012; Gladden, Figueredo, & Jacobs, 2009). According to this approach, indi￾viduals have evolved differences in the effort they allocate to reproductively relevant 
problems, such as survival, mating, and parenting. The core idea is that there are trade￾offs among these problems. Effort allocated to mating, for example, is effort taken 
away from parenting. On one end of the continuum, individuals favor what is called a 
K-strategy—greater effort is allocated to survival and heavy parenting over effort allo￾cated to obtaining many mates (van der Linden, 2012). These high-K individuals are 
hypothesized to have strong attachments to their biological parents, avoid risk taking 
that would imperil survival, pursue long-term mating, and invest heavily in children. 
Low-K individuals are hypothesized to form weaker attachments to their biological 
parents, have a risk-taking personality, pursue short-term mating, and invest little in 
their children. Some empirical research supports the hypothesis that these variables 
do indeed covary or cluster together (Figueredo et al., 2005b; Gladden et al., 2009; 
Templer, 2008). Others have criticized this theory on conceptual grounds (e.g., Penke 
et al., 2007). And other researchers have evidence that exposure to harsh environ￾ments during childhood is linked with pursuing a fast life history strategy marked by 
risk taking and short-term mating (Chua et al., 2016).
In sum, we have examined several ways in which evolutionary psychologists 
study individual differences that might be adaptively patterned. First, different envi￾ronments can direct individuals into different strategies, as in the case of father 
absence directing individuals toward a short-term sexual strategy. Second, there can 
be adaptive self-assessment of heritable traits, as is the case when individuals who are 
muscular in body build pursue a more aggressive strategy than those who are skinny. 
Third, two heritable strategies can be supported by frequency–dependent selection.
Fourth, the forces of selection can be different in different places or differ￾ent times. This can result in evolved individual differences caused by different evo￾lutionary selection pressures in different local ecologies. Although no individual 
differences in personality have yet been definitively traced to this particular evolu￾tionary source, it remains a viable theoretical possibility in the evolutionary arsenal 
of explanatory options.
Final PDF to printer254
lar31869_ch08_222-257.indd 254 11/01/22 11:00 AM
PART TWO The Biological Domain
The Big Five, Motivation, and Evolutionarily 
Relevant Adaptive Problems
Evolutionary psychologists have attempted to understand the importance of the Big 
Five personality dispositions within an evolutionary framework (Buss, 1991b, 1996; 
Buss & Greiling, 1999; Denissen & Penke, 2008a; Ellis, Simpson, & Campbell, 2002; 
Nettle, 2006). One approach views stable individual differences on the five-factor 
model as individual differences in “motivational reactions,” or solutions, to partic￾ular classes of adaptive problems (Buss, 2009a; Denissen & Penke, 2008a, 2008b; 
Ellis, Simpson, & Campbell, 2002; Nettle, 2006). Thus, Agreeableness reflects differ￾ences in the proclivity to cooperate versus to act selfishly in conflicts over resources. 
Emotional Stability reflects differences in sensitivity to the adaptive problem of social 
exclusion; high neuroticism, for example, can be beneficial in causing increased vigi￾lance to social danger but at a cost of increased stress and depression (Nettle, 2006; 
Tamir, Robinson, & Solberg, 2006). Extraversion reflects pursuit of a risk-taking social 
strategy marked by success in short-term mating versus adopting a more stable family 
life marked by long-term mating (Nettle, 2006). Conscientiousness reflects a long-term 
strategy of delayed gratification and goal pursuit versus an impulsive strategy marked 
by grabbing immediate adaptive benefits.
Heritable individual differences on these dimensions can be maintained in the 
population because different levels are adaptive under different conditions; the optimum 
level varies over time and space. In technical terms, these personality differences are 
maintained by balancing selection (Penke, Denissen, & Miller, 2007), which occurs when 
genetic variation is maintained by selection because different levels on a trait dimension 
are adaptive in different environments.
A complementary evolutionary approach is to conceptualize major factors of per￾sonality as clusters of the most important features of the “adaptive landscape” of other 
people (Buss, 1991b, 2011). Humans, according to this perspective, have evolved “dif￾ference-detecting mechanisms” designed to notice and remember individual differences 
that have the most relevance for solving social adaptive problems. Specifically, the five 
factors may provide important answers to questions such as these:
• Who is likely to rise in the social hierarchy and hence gain access to status and 
position in the social hierarchy? (Dominance, Extraversion)
• Who is likely to be a good cooperator and reciprocator, and who will be a loyal 
friend or romantic partner? (Agreeableness)
• Who will be reliable and dependable in times of need and work industriously to 
provide resources? (Conscientiousness)
• Who will drain my resources, encumber me with their problems, monopolize my 
time, and fail to cope well with adversity? (Emotional Instability)
• Who can I go to for sage advice? (Openness, Intellect)
Ellis, Simpson, and Campbell (2002) developed a theoretical synthesis of the Big 
Five and evolutionary psychology and conducted studies to see whether positioning on 
the five factors was correlated with these adaptively relevant individual differences. They 
included two additional individual differences that are relevant to romantic relationships: 
physical attractiveness (a sign of health and fertility) and physical prowess (a sign of the 
ability to protect a friend or romantic partner from danger). Using factor analysis, they 
discovered that the Big Five were indeed closely linked with solutions to these critical 
Final PDF to printer255
lar31869_ch08_222-257.indd 255 11/01/22 11:00 AM
CHAPTER EIGHT Evolutionary Perspectives on Personality
adaptive problems. In romantic relationships, those who were high on Agreeableness, 
for example, were also judged to be highly cooperative, devoted to their partners, and 
in love with their partners. Those who were high on Extraversion were also judged to 
be socially ascendant, taking leadership roles in the group, and showing proclivities to 
elevate themselves in social hierarchies. People highly responsible and efficient (signs of 
Conscientiousness) were dependable in times of need, were well organized, and showed 
good potential for future earning.
This study is just the start of exploring the five-factor model within an evolution￾ary framework. But it does highlight the important point that individual differences of 
people who inhabit one’s social environment are adaptively consequential. It is reason￾able to hypothesize that humans have evolved psychological sensitivities to noticing, 
detecting, naming, and remembering precisely those individual differences that are most 
relevant to solving critical social adaptive problems—problems ultimately linked to sur￾vival and reproduction.
Limitations of Evolutionary Psychology
Like all approaches to personality, the evolutionary perspective carries a number of 
important limitations. First, adaptations are forged over the long expanse of thousands 
or millions of generations, and we cannot go back in time and determine with absolute 
certainty what the precise selective forces on humans have been. Scientists make infer￾ences about past environments and past selection pressures. Nonetheless, our current 
mechanisms provide windows for viewing the past. Our fear of snakes and heights, for 
example, suggests that these were hazards in our evolutionary past. Humans seem to 
come into the world prepared to learn some things quite easily (e.g., fear of snakes, 
spiders, and strangers) (Seligman & Hager, 1972). Intense male sexual jealousy suggests 
that uncertain paternity was an adaptive problem in our evolutionary past. The intense 
pain we feel on being ostracized from a group suggests that group membership was criti￾cal to survival and reproduction in our evolutionary past. Learning more and more about 
our evolved mechanisms is thus a major tool for overcoming the limitation of sparse 
knowledge of the environments of our ancestors.
A second limitation is that evolutionary scientists have just scratched the surface 
of understanding the nature and design features of evolved psychological adaptations. In 
the case of jealousy, for example, there is a lack of knowledge about the range of cues 
that trigger it, the precise nature of the thoughts and emotions that are activated when 
a person is jealous, and the range of behaviors, such as vigilance and violence, that are 
manifest outcomes. More research will ultimately circumvent this limitation.
A third limitation is that modern conditions differ from ancestral conditions in 
many respects. What was adaptive in the past might not be adaptive in the present. 
Ancestral humans lived in small groups of perhaps 50 to 150 in the context of close 
extended kin (Dunbar, 1993). Today we live in large cities in the context of thousands of 
strangers. Thus, it’s important to keep in mind that selection pressures have changed. In 
this sense, humans can be said to live in the modern world with an ancient brain.
A fourth limitation is that it is sometimes easy to come up with different and com￾peting evolutionary hypotheses for the same phenomena. To a large extent, this is true 
of all of science, including personality theories that do not invoke evolutionary explana￾tions. The existence of competing theories is not an embarrassment but rather is an 
essential element of science. The critical obligation of scientists is to render their hypoth￾eses in a precise manner so that specific empirical predictions can be derived from them. 
Final PDF to printer256
lar31869_ch08_222-257.indd 256 11/01/22 11:00 AM
PART TWO The Biological Domain
SUMMARY AND EVALUATION
Selection is the primary key to evolution, or change in life forms over time. Variants that 
lead to greater survival, reproduction, or the reproductive success of genetic relatives 
tend to be preserved and spread through the population.
Evolutionary psychology starts with three fundamental premises. First, adapta￾tions are presumed to be domain specific; they are designed to solve specific adaptive 
problems. Adaptations good for one adaptive problem, such as food selection, offer little 
help in solving other adaptive problems, such as mate selection. Second, adaptations are 
numerous, corresponding to the many adaptive problems humans have faced over evolu￾tionary history. Third, adaptations are functional. We cannot understand them unless we 
figure out what they were designed to do—the adaptive problems they evolved to solve.
The empirical science of testing evolutionary hypotheses proceeds in two ways. 
First, middle-level evolutionary theories, such as the theory of parental investment and 
sexual selection, can be used to derive specific predictions in a top-down method of 
investigation. Second, we can observe a phenomenon and then develop a theory about 
its function in a process known as bottom-up investigation. Specific predictions are then 
derived, based on the hypothesis, about phenomena not yet observed.
Evolutionary psychological analysis can be applied to all three levels of personality 
analysis: human nature, sex differences, and individual differences. At the level of human 
nature, there is good evidence that people have evolved the need to belong to groups; 
to help specific others, such as genetic relatives; and to possess basic emotions, such as 
happiness, disgust, anger, fear, surprise, sadness, and contempt. Disgust is a universal 
human emotion that functions to avoid disease vectors, including contaminated food 
and disease-infected people. At the level of sex differences, men and women diverge only 
in domains in which they have faced recurrently different adaptive problems over evo￾lutionary history. Examples include proclivities toward violence and aggression, desire 
for sexual variety, events that trigger jealousy, and specific mate preferences for qualities 
such as physical appearance and resources.
Individual differences can be understood from an evolutionary perspective using 
several approaches. First, individual differences can result from different environmental 
inputs into species-typical mechanisms. Second, individual differences can be contingent 
on other traits, such as when being large and strong inclines one to an aggressive disposi￾tion, whereas being small and weak inclines one to be less aggressive. Third, individual 
In this way, the competing theories can be pitted against each other, and the hard hand 
of empirical evidence can be used to evaluate the competing theories.
Finally, evolutionary hypotheses have sometimes been accused of being untestable 
and hence unfalsifiable. The specific evolutionary hypotheses on aggression, jealousy, 
and so on presented in this chapter illustrate that this accusation is certainly false for 
some of them (see Buss, 2019, for others). Nonetheless, some evolutionary hypotheses 
(like some standard “social” hypotheses) have indeed been framed in ways that are too 
vague to be of much scientific value. The solution to this problem is to hold the same 
high scientific standards for all competing theories. To be scientifically useful, theories 
and hypotheses should be framed as precisely as possible, along with attendant predic￾tions, so that empirical studies can be conducted to test their merits.
Final PDF to printer257
lar31869_ch08_222-257.indd 257 11/01/22 11:00 AM
CHAPTER EIGHT Evolutionary Perspectives on Personality
differences can result from frequency–dependent selection. Fourth, individual differ￾ences can be caused by variations over time or space in the optimum value for a trait.
The Big Five personality dispositions have begun to be examined through the lens 
of evolutionary psychology. One approach is to view individual differences as varia￾tions in strategic solutions to adaptive problems. Agreeableness, for example, reflects 
individual differences in adopting a strategy of cooperation versus acting selfishly when 
there are conflicts over resources. Emotional Instability reflects high levels of vigilance 
to social threats, which can be adaptive under some circumstances but carries a cost of 
high levels of stress and fatigue. These adaptive individual differences can be maintained 
by balancing selection, which occurs when genetic variation is maintained by selection 
because different levels on a trait dimension are adaptive in different environments.
A second approach proposes that evaluating other people on the five factors pro￾vides adaptively relevant information to solving key problems of social living: Whom 
can I trust for cooperation, devotion, and reciprocation (those high on Agreeableness)? 
Who is likely to ascend social hierarchies (those high on Extraversion)? Who will be 
likely to work hard, be dependable, and accrue resources over time (those high on 
Conscientiousness)? Future evolutionary research will undoubtedly explore individual 
differences in the social adaptive problems humans face in the context of group living.
Evolutionary psychology has several critical limitations at this stage of scientific 
development. The first is the lack of precise knowledge about the environments in which 
humans evolved and the selection pressures our ancestors faced. We are also limited in 
our knowledge about the nature, details, and workings of evolved mechanisms, including 
the features that trigger their activation and the manifest behavior that they produce as 
output. Nonetheless, the evolutionary perspective adds a useful set of theoretical tools to 
the analysis of personality at the levels of human nature, sex differences, and individual 
differences.
natural selection 224
hostile forces of nature 224
sexual selection 225
intrasexual competition 225
intersexual selection 225
genes 226
differential gene reproduction 226
inclusive fitness theory 226
adaptive problem 227
xenophobia 228
KEY TERMS
effective polygyny 240
sexually dimorphic 240
reactively heritable 250
frequency–dependent selection 251
restricted sexual strategy 251
unrestricted mating strategy 252
psychopathy 252
balancing selection 254
byproducts of adaptations 228
evolutionary byproducts 228
evolutionary noise 228
domain specific 229
functionality 229
deductive reasoning approach 231
inductive reasoning approach 231
social anxiety 232
evolutionary-predicted sex 
differences 239
Final PDF to printerlar31869_ch09_258-295.indd 258 10/17/22 10:17 AM
We now turn to the intrapsychic 
domain. This domain concerns the 
factors within the mind that influ￾ence behavior, thoughts, and feel￾ings. The pioneer of this domain 
was Sigmund Freud. Freud was a 
medical doctor and neurologist and 
was highly influenced by biology. He 
often applied biological metaphors 
to the mind—for example, proposing 
that the mind had separate “organ 
systems,” which operated inde￾pendently from each other yet that 
influenced each other. His goal was 
to analyze the elements within the 
mind and describe how the elements 
worked together. He named this 
enterprise psychoanalysis, which 
refers both to his intrapsychic the￾ory of personality and his method of 
helping people change.
In this domain, we devote 
two chapters to psychoanalysis. In 
Science Photo Library RF/Getty Images
PART THREE The 
Intrapsychic Domain
Final PDF to printerlar31869_ch09_258-295.indd 259 10/17/22 10:17 AM
of classical psychoanalysis, primarily 
in terms of Freud’s original ideas and 
formulations. We will present Freud’s 
most influential contributions includ￾ing the notion that the human mind 
is divided into two parts, the part we 
are aware of (the conscious part) 
and the part we are not aware of 
(the unconscious part). Moreover, 
Freud proposed three forces in the 
human mind—the id, the ego, and the 
superego—and these forces were con￾stantly interacting over taming the 
twin motives of sex and aggression, or 
the life and death instincts. We also 
present Freud’s ideas on personality 
development and how he stressed 
the importance of childhood events 
in determining the adult personality. 
Besides introducing a psychoanalytic 
theory of personality, Freud also 
developed a system of helping people 
change their personalities. This form 
of psychotherapy, called psychoanal￾ysis, is also described in this chapter.
Some of Freud’s ideas, such as 
repression, unconscious processing, 
and recalled memories, have stood 
the test of time and are active research 
topics in personality today. However, 
many students of Freud have modi￾fied some of his ideas, so we devote 
Chapter 10 to a discussion of con￾temporary topics in psychoanalytic 
theory. These include the idea of 
personality development as continu￾ing through adulthood rather than 
stopping in childhood as Freud origi￾nally proposed. Another key develop￾ment in contemporary psychoanalysis 
concerns the importance of a child’s 
attachments to caregivers in influenc￾ing his or her subsequent relationships.
The intrapsychic domain differs 
from all the other domains in that it is 
concerned with the forces within the 
mind that work together and interact 
with each other and the environment. 
To some extent, this domain is similar 
to the biological domain in that the 
biological domain also emphasizes 
forces within the person. However, in 
the intrapsychic domain, the concern 
is with aspects of psychic functioning. 
In the biological domain, we are con￾cerned with aspects of physical func￾tioning, such as the brain, genes, and 
the chemicals in the bloodstream.
One fundamental assumption of 
psychologists working in the intrapsy￾chic domain is that there are areas of 
the mind that are outside awareness. 
Within each person, there is a part 
of him- or herself that even he or she 
does not know about. This is called 
the unconscious mind. Moreover, 
according to classical psychoanaly￾sis, the unconscious mind is thought 
to have a life of its own, with its own 
motivation, its own will, and its own 
energy. According to Freud, when 
people have mental problems like 
depression or anxiety, the cause can 
likely be found in their unconscious.
Another assumption within the 
intrapsychic domain is that most 
things do not happen by chance. That 
is, every behavior, every thought, and 
every experience means something or 
reveals something about the person’s 
personality. A slip of the tongue, for 
example, occurs not by accident, but 
because of an intrapsychic conflict. 
A person forgets someone’s name not 
by accident, but because of something 
about the person whose name cannot 
be remembered. Or a person dreams 
of flying, not because dreams are ran￾dom, but because of an unconscious 
wish or desire being expressed in the 
dream. Everything a person does, 
says, or feels has meaning and can be 
analyzed in terms of intrapsychic ele￾ments and forces.
In Chapter 11, we examine work 
on motivational aspects of personal￾ity. Here psychologists emphasize the 
common motives that most people 
have to varying degrees. Individual dif￾ferences in motives help psychologists 
answer the question “Why do people 
want what they want?” The three 
most common motives studied in this 
domain are the need to achieve, the 
need to have close relationships with 
other people, and the need to have 
power and influence over others. We 
present some of the basic findings on 
each of these three motives, as well 
as describe a projective technique 
that has been developed for assessing 
these needs. We also describe a con￾temporary notion that suggests that 
motives can be conscious or uncon￾scious and that unconscious motives 
affect different kinds of behavior than 
conscious motives.
Most of the research on motives 
emphasizes deficit motives—that is, 
motives that arise because some￾thing is lacking. There is, however, 
the notion that one particular motive 
is not based on a deficit, but rather is 
based on growth and change. This 
motive refers to the more abstract 
need to become who we are, to actu￾alize our potential as the persons 
we were meant to be. The need to 
self-actualize can also operate out￾side awareness, and we may engage 
in certain behaviors, not because we 
have thought everything through, 
but because it just feels like the right 
thing to be doing at the moment.
In Part 3 of this book, we explore 
some of the major ideas and find￾ings from the intrapsychic domain 
of personality. As you read, it is 
important to keep in mind that the 
intrapsychic domain, as well as all the 
other domains, refers to just one set 
of factors that influence personality. 
Personality is determined by many 
factors; like a jigsaw puzzle, it is made 
up of many parts. Let’s now consider 
III
Final PDF to printerlar31869_ch09_258-295.indd 260 10/17/22 10:17 AM
260
Psychoanalytic 
Approaches 
to Personality
9
Sigmund Freud: A Brief Biography
Fundamental Assumptions of Psychoanalytic Theory
Basic Instincts: Sex and Aggression
Unconscious Motivation: Sometimes We Don’t Know Why We Do What We Do
Psychic Determinism: Nothing Happens by Chance
Structure of Personality
Id: Reservoir of Psychic Energy
Ego: Executive of Personality
Superego: Upholder of Societal Values and Ideals
Interaction of the Id, Ego, and Superego
Dynamics of Personality
Types of Anxiety
Defense Mechanisms
Psychosexual Stages of Personality Development
Personality and Psychoanalysis
Techniques for Revealing the Unconscious
The Process of Psychoanalysis
Why Is Psychoanalysis Important?
Evaluation of Freud’s Contributions
SUMMARY AND EVALUATION
KEY TERMS
Science Photo Library RF/Getty 
Images
Final PDF to printerlar31869_ch09_258-295.indd 261 10/17/22 10:17 AM
The following seven paragraphs describe an incident of childhood sexual abuse.
Dr. Ross Cheit is a professor of political science and international and public 
affairs at Brown University. In 1992, he received a phone call from his sister, saying 
that his nephew had joined a boys’ choir, just as Professor Cheit had done when he 
was a boy. Instead of being happy at the news that his nephew was following in his 
footsteps, Professor Cheit was strangely unhappy. Over the next few weeks, Professor 
Cheit became increasingly depressed and irritable and began to have marital difficul￾ties. He did not connect any of his troubles to the phone call from his sister.
Shortly thereafter, Professor Cheit recalled a memory of a man he had not 
seen or thought about for 25 years. The man he remembered was William Farmer. 
Mr. Farmer had been a staff member at the San Francisco Boys Chorus summer 
camp, which Professor Cheit had attended between the ages of 10 and 13. Professor 
Cheit was now 38, and for the first time in 25 years he was recalling how Mr. Farmer 
would come into his cabin at night, sit on his bed, and begin stroking his chest and 
then his stomach, and then reach into his pajamas.
Intent on gathering objective information about his abuse, Professor Cheit hired 
a private investigator. The director of the boys’ chorus at the time Professor Cheit was 
there, Madi Bacon, now 87 years old, was located in Berkeley. When Professor Cheit 
first talked to her and mentioned Farmer’s name, she spontaneously remarked how 
she had almost had to fire Farmer for “hobnobbing” with the boys. For the first time, 
Professor Cheit felt that his memory of being molested was authentic. Moreover, after 
talking with Madi Bacon, he realized that he might not have been the only young boy 
abused by Farmer.
THE INTRAPSYCHIC DOMAIN
Events from childhood 
often form the topics for 
discussion during therapy 
sessions.
Blend Images/Alamy Stock 
Photo
9
Final PDF to printer262
lar31869_ch09_258-295.indd 262 10/17/22 10:17 AM
PART THREE The Intrapsychic Domain
Using chorus records, Professor Cheit located dozens of the 118 boys who had been 
at camp with him 25 years earlier. In contacting them, he soon found that others had been 
molested by Mr. Farmer but had kept quiet. A professor at a university in Michigan, a 
librarian in the Midwest, and a homeless man living in San Francisco—all had allegedly 
been abused by Mr. Farmer. The camp nurse at the time recalled catching Mr. Farmer in 
bed with a sick child in the camp infirmary. The nurse claims to have reported the incident 
to the camp director, Madi Bacon, who took no action. Professor Cheit obtained documen￾tation that, on at least four occasions, the camp director was informed of molestation of the 
boys by staff members but took no steps to address the problem.
Now more sure than ever that his memory of abuse was authentic, Professor Cheit 
wanted to talk directly with Mr. Farmer, who was finally located in the tiny town of 
Scio, Oregon. Professor Cheit phoned him. Mr. Farmer had no trouble remembering 
Professor Cheit as one of the boys in summer camp 25 years earlier. “What can I do for 
you?” Farmer inquired. “You can tell me whether you have any remorse for what you 
did to me and the other boys at summer camp,” replied Professor Cheit. With a tape 
recorder running, Professor Cheit kept Mr. Farmer on the phone for nearly an hour. 
Mr. Farmer admitted molesting Professor Cheit in his cabin at night, and he acknowl￾edged that the camp director had known of the abuse but had allowed him to stay on at 
the camp. He also admitted that he had since lost other jobs for molesting children and 
conceded that he knew the acts he had committed with children were criminal.
On August 19, 1993, Professor Cheit and his parents filed a lawsuit against the 
San Francisco Boys Chorus, charging that the chorus had “negligently or intentionally” 
allowed staff members to molest children in its care. Lawyers for the chorus at first 
denied the charges. Professor Cheit’s lawsuit asked the Boys Chorus to meet three condi￾tions: to apologize, thereby admitting guilt; to institute protective measures for current 
campers; and to pay $450,000 to Professor Cheit as financial compensation. During the 
litigation, Professor Cheit produced five corroborating witnesses and the tape-recorded 
admission from Mr. Farmer himself. Just over a year later, the lawsuit was settled. The 
boys chorus agreed to apologize to Professor Cheit, to put safeguards in place to protect 
present chorus members from possible molestation, and to pay Professor Cheit $35,000.
Professor Cheit was fortunate in that the state of California had just changed its 
statute of limitations laws, allowing for criminal charges of child abuse to be filed any 
time within three years of the time that the alleged victim remembered the abuse, with 
independent corroboration. On July 12, 1994, Mr. Farmer was arrested at his home, 
then in Texas, and extradited to Plumas County, California, the site of the Boys Chorus 
camp. According to the county district attorney, Mr. Farmer was charged with six counts 
of child molestation involving three boys, including Professor Cheit, in 1967 and 1968. 
Mr. Farmer was charged with committing crimes over a quarter of a century earlier. 
He pleaded not guilty. The details of this fascinating case are discussed in several books, 
including Chu (1998) and Schachter (1997).
Professor Cheit is currently on the faculty at Brown University, where he is a 
Professor of International and Public Affairs and Political Science. He is also a board 
director of the Center for Institutional Courage. He maintains various social media 
accounts. He has authored several important papers and book chapters about childhood 
sexual abuse (e.g., Cheit, Shavit, & Reiss-Davis, 2010) and motivated forgetting (e.g., 
DePrince et al., 2012). In 2014 Professor Cheit published a major book about social and 
legal responses to contested cases of childhood sexual abuse in America.
Is it possible that a person can forget something as traumatic as sexual abuse? Can a 
forgotten memory lie dormant for years, only to be aroused later by an event, such as 
Final PDF to printer263
lar31869_ch09_258-295.indd 263 10/17/22 10:17 AM
CHAPTER NINE Psychoanalytic Approaches to Personality 
a chance phone call? Once aroused, can such a memory cause a person to start having 
symptoms, such as feelings of depression and irritability, without his or her knowing 
the cause of those difficulties? Some psychologists believe that people sometimes are 
unaware of the reasons for their own problematic behaviors. When treating a person for 
a psychological problem, some therapists believe that the cause of the problem resides 
in the person’s unconscious, the part of the mind outside the person’s immediate aware￾ness. They contend that a memory of a past traumatic event can be completely forgot￾ten yet nevertheless cause a psychological problem years later (Bass & Davis, 1988). 
This reasoning has led many states, such as California, to place the statute of limita￾tions on child abuse at three years from when the abuse is remembered by the person. 
Furthermore, such therapists believe that if they can help make this unconscious mem￾ory conscious—that is, if they can help the patient recall a forgotten traumatic memory—
they can put the patient on the road to recovery (Baker, 1992).
This perspective on the causes and cures of psychological problems has its origin 
in a theory of personality developed by Sigmund Freud (1856–1939), commonly called 
psychoanalysis. In this chapter, we examine the basic elements of classical psychoana￾lytic theory and explore some of the empirical studies conducted to test certain aspects 
of the theory. We consider the scientific evidence for the repression of childhood memo￾ries, for the concept of unconscious motivation, and for other aspects of psychoanalytic 
theory. Whereas many of Freud’s ideas have not stood the test of time, other ideas are 
still with us and are topics of contemporary research. Because this theory is so much the 
result of one person’s thinking, let’s first look at a brief biographical sketch of Freud.
Sigmund Freud: A Brief Biography
Although Freud was born in 1856 in Freiberg, Moravia (now part of the Czech 
Republic), his family moved to Vienna when he was 4 years old, and he spent 
virtually the remainder of his life there. Freud excelled in school and obtained 
his medical degree from the University of Vienna. Although he started out as 
a researcher in neurology, he realized that he could make more money to sup￾port his wife and growing family if he entered into private medical practice. After 
studying hypnosis with Jean-Martin Charcot in Paris, Freud returned to Vienna 
and started a private practice, treating patients with “nervous disorders.” During 
that time, Freud began developing the idea that portions of the human mind 
were outside conscious awareness. The unconscious is the part of the mind about 
which the conscious mind has no awareness. Freud sought to explore the impli￾cations of the unconscious for understanding people’s lives and their problems 
with living. From his early contact with patients, Freud began to surmise that the 
unconscious mind operated under its own power, subject to its own motivations 
and according to its own logic. Freud devoted the rest of his life to exploring the 
nature and logic of the unconscious mind.
Freud’s first solo-authored book, The Interpretation of Dreams, was pub￾lished in 1900. In it, he described how the unconscious mind was expressed 
in dreams and how dreams contained clues to our innermost secrets, desires, 
and motives. The analysis of dreams became a cornerstone of his treatment of 
patients. This book sold poorly at first but nevertheless attracted the attention of 
other medical doctors seeking to understand psychological problems. By 1902, 
there was a small group of followers (e.g., Alfred Adler) who met with Freud 
every Wednesday evening. At these meetings, Freud talked about his theory, 
Sigmund Freud at age 82. This photo was taken 
upon his arrival in London after fleeing from the 
Nazi invasion of Austria. While he set up an office 
and began seeing patients in London, he was 
gravely ill with cancer of the jaw and throat.
Keystone/Getty Images
Final PDF to printer264
lar31869_ch09_258-295.indd 264 10/17/22 10:17 AM
PART THREE The Intrapsychic Domain
shared insights, and discussed patients’ progress, all the while smoking one of the 20 or 
so cigars he smoked each day. During this period, Freud was systematically building his 
theory and testing its acceptance by knowledgeable peers. By 1908, the membership of 
the Wednesday Psychological Circle had grown significantly, prompting Freud to form 
the Vienna Psychoanalytic Society (Grosskurth, 1991).
In 1909, Freud made his only visit to the United States, to present a series of lec￾tures on psychoanalysis at the invitation of psychologist G. Stanley Hall, who was then 
president of Clark University. Rosenzweig (1994) describes Freud’s trip to the United 
States in fascinating detail. In 1910, the International Psychoanalytic Association 
was formed, and in 1911 the American Psychoanalytic Association was formed, with 
Freud’s support. Freud’s theories were gaining recognition around the world and in 
the United States.
Freud and his work drew both praise and criticism. Whereas some accepted his 
ideas as brilliant insights into the workings of the human mind, others opposed his views 
on various scientific and ideological grounds. To some, his treatment approach (the so￾called talking cure) was absurd. Freud’s theory that the adult personality was a result of 
how the person as a child coped with his or her sexual and aggressive urges was consid￾ered politically incorrect by the standards of Victorian morality. Even some of the found￾ing members of his Vienna Psychoanalytic Society grew to disagree with developments 
in his theory. Nevertheless, Freud continued to refine and apply his theory, writing 
20 books and numerous papers during his career.
Germany invaded Austria in 1938, and the Nazis began their persecution of 
the Jews there. Freud, who was Jewish, had reasons to fear the Nazis. The Nazi party 
burned his books and the books of other modern intellectuals. With the assistance of 
wealthy patrons, Freud, his wife, and their six children fled to London. Freud died 
the following year after a long, painful, and disfiguring battle with cancer of the jaw 
and throat.
Freud’s London house continued to be occupied by his daughter, Anna Freud, 
herself a prominent psychoanalyst, until her death in 1982. The house is now part of the 
Freud Museum in London. Visitors can walk through Freud’s library and study, which 
remain largely as he left them when he died. The study, which is where Freud treated 
his patients, still contains his celebrated couch, covered with an Oriental rug. It also 
contains the many ancient artifacts and small statues and icons that seemed to fascinate 
him and reveal his passion for archeology. Freud has been referred to as an archeologist 
of the human mind.
Fundamental Assumptions of Psychoanalytic 
Theory
Freud’s model of human nature relied on the notion of psychic energy to motivate all 
human activity. What were the forces that motivated people to do one thing and not 
another or that motivated people to do anything at all? Freud proposed a source of 
energy that is within each person and used the term psychic energy to refer to this well￾spring of motivation. Freud believed that psychic energy operated according to the law of 
conservation of energy: The amount of psychic energy an individual possessed remained 
constant throughout his or her lifetime. Personality change was viewed as a redirection 
of a person’s psychic energy.
Final PDF to printer265
lar31869_ch09_258-295.indd 265 10/17/22 10:17 AM
CHAPTER NINE Psychoanalytic Approaches to Personality 
Basic Instincts: Sex and Aggression
What was the source of all psychic energy? Freud believed that there were strong innate 
forces that provided all the energy in the psychic system. He called these forces instincts. 
Freud’s original theory of instincts was profoundly influenced by Darwin’s theory of 
evolution. Darwin had published his book on evolution just a few years after Freud was 
born. In Freud’s initial formulation, there were two fundamental categories of instincts: 
self-preservation instincts and sexual instincts. Curiously, these corresponded exactly to 
two major components of Darwin’s theory of natural selection: selection by survival and 
selection by reproduction. Thus Freud’s initial classification of instincts could have been 
borrowed from Darwin’s two forms of evolution by selection (Ritvo, 1990).
In his later formulations, however, Freud collapsed the self-preservation and sex￾ual instincts into one, which he called the life instinct. And due in part to his witnessing 
the horrors of World War I, he developed the idea of a death instinct. Freud postulated 
that humans had a fundamental instinct toward destruction and that this instinct was 
often manifest in aggression toward others. The two instincts were usually referred to 
as libido for the life instinct and thanatos for the death instinct. Although the libido was 
generally considered sexual, Freud also used this term to refer to any need-satisfying, 
life-sustaining, or pleasure-oriented urge. Similarly, thanatos was considered to be the 
death instinct, but Freud used this term in a broad sense to refer to any urge to destroy, 
harm, or aggress against others or oneself. Freud wrote more about the libido early in his 
career, when this issue was perhaps relevant to his own life. Later in his career, Freud 
wrote more about thanatos, when he faced his own impending death.
Although Freud initially believed that the life and death instincts worked to oppose 
one another, he later argued that they could combine in various ways. Consider the act 
of eating. Eating obviously serves the life instinct, entailing the consumption of nutrients 
necessary for survival. At the same time, eating also involves acts of tearing, biting, and 
chewing, which Freud thought could be seen as aggressive manifestations of thanatos. As 
another example, Freud viewed rape as an expression of extreme death instinct, directed 
toward another person in a manner that is fused with sexual energy. The combination 
of erotic and aggressive instincts into a single motive is a particularly volatile mixture.
Because each person possesses a fixed amount of psychic energy, according to Freud, 
the energy used to drive one type of behavior is not available to drive other types of behaviors. 
The person who directs his or her death instinct into a socially acceptable channel, such as 
competitive sports, has less energy to expend toward more destructive manifestations of this 
instinct. Because psychic energy exists in a fixed and limited amount within each person, it 
can be directed and redirected in various ways. But it is always a zero-sum system, meaning 
that the more energy used for one behavior, the less available for another behavior.
Unconscious Motivation: Sometimes We Don’t Know 
Why We Do What We Do
According to Freud, the human mind consists of three parts. The conscious mind is the 
part that contains all the thoughts, feelings, and perceptions that you are presently aware 
of. Whatever you are currently perceiving or thinking about is in your conscious mind. 
These thoughts represent only a small fraction of the information available to you.
You also have a vast number of memories, ideas, pieces of information, and 
thoughts that you could easily bring to mind if you so desired. What were you wearing 
yesterday? What was the name of your best friend in senior year of high school? What is 
Final PDF to printer266
lar31869_ch09_258-295.indd 266 10/17/22 10:17 AM
PART THREE The Intrapsychic Domain
the earliest memory you have of your mother? This information is stored 
in the preconscious mind. Any piece of information that you are not pres￾ently thinking about, but that could be retrieved and made conscious with 
some effort, is found in the preconscious mind.
The unconscious is the third and, according to Freud, largest 
part of the human mind. Residing in the unconscious mind is unac￾ceptable information hidden from conscious view so well that it can￾not even be considered preconscious. A person cannot just bring some 
unconscious memory into conscious experience. What is stored in the 
unconscious are secrets that even the person him- or herself cannot 
access. Those memories, feelings, thoughts, or urges are so troubling 
or even distasteful or frightening that being aware of them would over￾whelm the person. For Freud, the unconscious is the largest and most 
important part of the human mind. And the form of psychotherapy 
developed by Freud was a collection of techniques designed to dis￾cover what is in the patient’s unconscious and help the person cope 
with that in a mature adult fashion. Many of the cases reported in 
the psychoanalytic literature involve distressing unconscious themes—
such as incest (real or desired); hatred toward siblings, parents, or 
spouses; and memories of childhood traumas.
The metaphor of an iceberg is often used to describe the topog￾raphy of the mind according to Freud. The part of the iceberg above 
the water represents the conscious mind. The part that you can see just 
below the water surface is the preconscious mind. And the part of the 
iceberg totally hidden from view (the vast majority of it) represents the 
unconscious mind. See Figure 9.1. 
Society does not allow people to express freely all of their sexual and aggressive 
instincts. Individuals must learn to control their urges. One way to control these urges, 
according to Freud, is to keep them from entering conscious awareness in the first place. 
Consider a child who has gotten extremely angry with a parent. This child might have a 
fleeting wish that the parents die. Such thoughts would be very distressing to a child—so 
distressing that they might be held back from conscious awareness and banished instead 
to the unconscious—the part of the mind holding thoughts and memories about which the 
person is unaware. All kinds of unacceptable sexual and aggressive urges, thoughts, and 
feelings might accumulate in the unconscious during the course of a typical childhood.
Figure 9.1
The iceberg metaphor of the human mind; the 
conscious part is what is above the waterline, 
the preconscious is what is below water but still 
visible from above, and the unconscious, the 
largest part, is that part hidden well below the 
surface.
Conscious
Preconscious
Unconscious (repressed memories, S
desires, wishes)
u
p
er ego
Ego
Id
? Think back to the first house or apartment you lived in as a child. If you are like most people, you 
can probably remember as far back as your fourth or fifth year of age. Try to recall the structure of 
the house or apartment, the location of the rooms relative to each other. Draw a floor plan, start￾ing with the basement if there was one, then the first floor, then the upstairs rooms (if the house 
had a second floor). On your floor plan, label each room. Now think about each room, letting 
the memories of events that happened in each of them come back to you. It is likely that you will 
recall some people and events that you have not thought about for a decade or more. You also 
might notice that many of your memories have an emotional quality; some memories are pleas￾ant, whereas others are unpleasant. The memories that you can bring to conscious awareness are 
in your preconscious. You may have memories of events that occurred that do not come back to 
you during this exercise because they are in your unconscious.
Exercise
Final PDF to printer267
lar31869_ch09_258-295.indd 267 10/17/22 10:17 AM
CHAPTER NINE Psychoanalytic Approaches to Personality 
Psychic Determinism: Nothing Happens by Chance
Freud maintained that nothing happens by chance or by accident. There is a reason 
behind every act, thought, and feeling. Everything we do, think, say, and feel is an expres￾sion of the mind—the conscious, preconscious, or unconscious mind. In his 1904 book 
The Psychopathology of Everyday Life, Freud introduced the idea that the little “acci￾dents” of daily life are often expressions of the motivated unconscious, such as calling 
someone by the wrong name, missing an appointment, and breaking something that 
belongs to another. Slips of the tongue (also known by linguists as parapraxis) were 
thought by Freud to be examples of the unconscious breaking through into conscious 
speech. Such verbal blunders, he held, can bring to light some element of the uncon￾scious that they person normally keeps hidden from themselves. Freud analyzed sev￾eral verbal “mistakes” in his writings, and so today they are sometimes called “Freudian 
slips.” Oftentimes such verbal mistakes are caught and called out by the media. For 
example, Texas Republican Dick Armey once referred to the openly homosexual con￾gressman from Massachusetts, Barney Frank, as “Barney Fag.” Once, a psychology pro￾fessor referred to Sigmund Freud as “Sigmund Fraud.” Another psychology professor, in 
her introductory lecture, said: “Psychology is the study of the individual orgasm . . ., uh, 
organism . . . .” Such mix-ups can often be embarrassing, but, according to Freud, they 
portray the motivated and autonomous activity of the unconscious breaking through. 
There is a reason for every slip of the tongue, for being late, for forgetting a person’s 
name, and for breaking something that belongs to another. The reasons can be discov￾ered if the contents of the unconscious can be examined.
Freud taught that most symptoms of mental illnesses are also caused by uncon￾scious material. He held that every psychological problem—from depression to 
obsessions to sexual dysfunction—had as its root cause some form of unconscious 
motivation. Freud provided detailed case histories of 12 patients, as well as dozens 
of shorter discussions of specific patients. In these case studies, he found support for 
his theory that psychological problems were caused by unconscious memories, urges, 
or desires. For example, Freud wrote about the case of Anna O. Although Freud did 
not directly treat or even meet Anna O., her physician, Joseph Breuer, consulted with 
Freud on her treatment.
At the time, Anna O. was a 21-year-old woman who had fallen ill while taking 
care of her sick father who eventually died of tuberculosis. Anna O.’s illness began with 
a severe cough and later included the loss of movement in her right side, disturbances 
of vision and hearing, and the inability to drink liquids. Dr. Breuer diagnosed Anna O.’s 
illness as hysteria and developed a form of therapy that appeared effective in relieving 
her symptoms. This form of therapy consisted of Breuer talking with Anna O. about 
her symptoms and, in particular, about her memories of events that happened before 
the onset of the symptoms. For example, in talking about her severe cough, they talked 
about her memories of caring for her father and the severe cough he had from his tuber￾culosis. As she explored these memories, and especially her feelings toward her father 
and about his death, her own cough lessened and disappeared. Similarly, when talking 
about her inability to drink liquids (she had been quenching her thirst with fruit and 
melons), she suddenly recalled the memory of seeing a dog drink from a woman’s glass, 
an incident that completely disgusted her at the time but about which she had forgotten.
To Breuer, and to Freud, hysterical symptoms did not occur by chance. Rather, 
they were physical expressions of traumatic experiences that were banished to the uncon￾scious mind and forgotten. However, once in the unconscious such repressed material 
can come out in the form of symptoms. From the experience treating Anna O., Breuer 
concluded that the way to cure hysterical symptoms was to help the 
Final PDF to printer268
lar31869_ch09_258-295.indd 268 10/17/22 10:17 AM
PART THREE The Intrapsychic Domain
memory of the incident that had originally led to the symptoms. By the patient’s recall￾ing the traumatic incident (e.g., her father’s death), an emotional catharsis or release can 
be achieved by having her or him express any feelings associated with that memory. This 
then removes the cause of the symptom and hence the symptom disappears.
Following an injury or stroke that damages 
the primary vision center in the brain, people 
will lose their ability to see. In this kind of 
blindness the eyes still work fine; it is just 
that the brain center responsible for object 
recognition fails. People who suffer this kind 
of “cortical” blindness often display an inter￾esting capacity to make certain judgments 
about objects that they truly cannot see. This 
phenomenon is termed blindsight, and it has 
fascinated psychologists since it was first doc￾umented in the 1960s (Leopold, 2012). While 
reports of patients with blindsight increas￾ingly appear in the literature (e.g., Burra 
et al., 2019; Kletenik et al., 2022), neurolo￾gists are still debating the underlying mecha￾nism (Michel & Lau, 2021; Philips, 2021).
Imagine having a person with corti￾cal blindness as a subject. You could hold a 
red ball in front of her open eyes and ask if 
she can see it. She would reply no, which is 
consistent with the fact that she is blind. Now 
you ask her to point to the red ball (which she 
has just denied seeing). What happens? She 
points directly to the red ball even though 
she does not have the ability to see it!
Blindsight is taken as evidence of 
the unconscious. One part of the mind 
knows about something that another part 
of the mind does not know about. There 
are many demonstrations of people with 
blindsight. For example, when an object 
is placed in front of a person with cortical 
blindness, that person can guess the color 
of that object at levels much better than 
merely by chance. In other words, such a 
condition illustrates that information that is 
even though the subject was blind (Hamm 
et al., 2003). These researchers argue that 
emotional conditioning does not require 
a conscious representation of the feared 
object in the mind of the subject. Other 
studies of people with cortical blindness 
demonstrate that, when “shown” pictures 
of facial expressions, they can “guess” the 
emotions expressed in the faces even when 
they cannot see the faces being presented. 
Obviously, a lot of emotional processing 
occurs at some level in the brain that does 
not involve the primary visual center. People 
could have feelings about (i.e., like or dislike) 
something that they are not even aware of.
Another example of the unconscious 
at work concerns the phenomenon of 
deliberation-without-awareness, or the “let 
me sleep on it” effect. The notion here is, if 
a person confronted with a difficult decision 
can put it out of his or her conscious mind for 
a period of time, then the unconscious mind 
will continue to deliberate on it outside of the 
person’s awareness, helping him or her to 
arrive at a “sudden” and often correct deci￾sion sometime later. This is called “uncon￾scious decision making.” Banks (2021) 
provides a modern review of unconscious 
thought, including deliberation outside of 
awareness. Other researchers demonstrate 
unconscious decision making among online 
e-commerce customers (Shen et al., 2020).
The phenomenon of unconscious deci￾sion making was the topic of several clever 
studies published in the prestigious journal 
Science by a team of Dutch researchers 
(Dijksterhuis et al., 2006). These researchers 
unconscious (in this case, the object’s color) 
is actually being processed somewhere in 
the mind (because the person can guess 
the color at better than chance levels).
An explanation for such “unconscious” 
perception has been offered in terms of 
nerve pathways from the eyes into the brain. 
The optic nerve carries information from the 
eye into the brain, and the majority of this 
information is transferred to the primary 
visual center in the striate cortex at the back 
of the brain. However, minor pathways split 
off of the optic nerve before getting to the 
visual center and carry some of this visual 
information to other parts of the brain. These 
other centers are involved in movement rec￾ognition, color recognition, and even emo￾tional evaluation. If the vision center were 
completely destroyed, the person would not 
recognize what the object was, but the per￾son might know if it was moving, what color 
it is, or how he or she feels about it.
One of the most interesting and robust 
examples of blindsight concerns the per￾ception of the emotional significance of 
something that one does not see. In one 
study, a person with blindsight underwent a 
conditioning procedure where a visual cue 
that the person could not see (a picture of a 
circle) was accompanied by an unpleasant 
shock, whereas other visual cues (pictures 
of squares, rectangles, etc.) were not paired 
with shock. Following a period of condition￾ing, the stimuli shapes were later “shown” to 
the blind subject, and the subject exhibited 
a fear response (electrodermal response) to 
the circle but not the squares or rectangles, 
A Closer Look Examples of the Unconscious: Blindsight 
and Deliberation-Without-Awareness
Final PDF to printer269
lar31869_ch09_258-295.indd 269 10/17/22 10:17 AM
CHAPTER NINE Psychoanalytic Approaches to Personality 
hypothesized that, for simple decisions, con￾scious deliberation would work best, but 
when decisions were complex, involving 
many factors, then unconscious deliberation 
would work best. They presented subjects 
with the task of deciding on the best car out 
of four different cars. Subjects in the simple 
condition considered 4 attributes of the 
cars, whereas subjects in the complex con￾dition considered 12 attributes of the cars. 
In all cases, one car was characterized by 
75 percent positive attributes (i.e., the best 
car), two by 50 percent positive attributes, 
and one by 25 percent positive attributes. 
After reading all the information about the 
cars, half of the subjects were assigned to 
the conscious deliberation condition and the 
other half were assigned to the unconscious 
deliberation condition. In the conscious 
deliberation condition, subjects were asked 
to think about the information for four min￾utes before deciding on the best car. In the 
unconscious deliberation condition, subjects 
were distracted for four minutes by being 
asked to solve anagram puzzles, then imme￾diately asked to decide on the best car.
As shown in Figure 9.2, in the simple 
decision condition, with only 4 attributes 
to consider on each car, subjects who con￾sciously deliberated made the best deci￾sions. However, when the decision was 
complex, involving 12 different attributes of 
the cars, subjects in the “unconscious” delib￾eration condition made the best decisions. 
The authors demonstrate similar effects in 
three additional studies. Even though the 
studies concern consumer items (e.g., cars), 
there is reason to believe that the uncon￾scious deliberation effect might apply to any 
type of decision (e.g., what career path to pur￾sue, who to vote for, whom to marry, etc.). The 
being distracted so they could not deliber￾ate, nevertheless showed brain activation 
patterns consistent with the notion that they 
were in fact deliberating in one part of their 
brains, while other parts of their brains were 
occupied with the distractor task.
Research on deliberation without 
awareness is not without its critics (Newell & 
Shanks, 2014). Some have argued that 
the results do not prove that the subjects’ 
“unconscious” actively arrives at the correct 
decision (Aczel et al., 2011). Others have 
argued that decisions are memory based 
and thus offer an explanation for the findings 
that do not rely on anything like an “uncon￾scious” (Lassiter et al., 2009). As you will see 
throughout this chapter, much that is con￾nected with psychoanalysis is contentious 
and a matter of debate. Nevertheless, psy￾choanalytic ideas are stimulating research 
into novel and interesting phenomena.
authors (Dijksterhuis 
et al., 2006) argue 
that, with any decision, 
it would “benefit the 
individual to think con￾sciously about simple 
matters and to del￾egate thinking about 
more complex matters 
to the unconscious” 
(p. 1007). 
A recent review 
of the unconscious 
decision-making lit￾erature urges caution 
in interpreting results, 
and shows how alter￾native explanations 
(other than that the 
unconscious is an 
intelligent decision maker) can account for 
some findings (Newell & Shanks, 2014). 
However, this review leaves out several 
recent studies that have employed functional 
brain imaging to investigate unconscious 
decision making (Brooks & Stein, 2014). 
For example, one study (Creswell, Bursley, & 
Satpute, 2013) used brain imaging while 
half the subjects were consciously delib￾erating on a decision, and the other half 
were doing a distractor task and supposedly 
unconsciously deliberating (since they knew 
they would have to make a decision when 
finished with the distractor task). A third 
group just did the distractor task. When the 
researchers subtracted out the brain activa￾tion pattern identified in the distractor task 
group, from the distractor task/unconscious 
deliberation group, they found residual brain 
activation that matched the deliberation 
group. In other words, the group that was 
Figure 9.2
Percentage of participants who correctly chose the most desirable 
car as a function of complexity of decision and mode of thought.
Source: Dijksterhhuis, A., M. W. Bos, L. F. Nordgren, and R. B. van Baaren 
(2006). On Making the Right Choice: The Deliberation Without-attention Effect. 
Science, 311, 1005–1007.
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Percentage of participants
4 Aspects 12 Aspects
Conscious
Unconscious
Freud adopted and refined the technique developed by Breuer for effecting the 
“talking cure.” Freud believed that for a psychological symptom to be cured, the uncon￾scious cause of the symptom must first be discovered. Often the process involves dis￾covering a hidden memory of an unsettling, disagreeable, or even repulsive experience 
that has been repressed or pushed into the unconscious (Masson, 1984). Freud always 
Final PDF to printer270
lar31869_ch09_258-295.indd 270 10/17/22 10:17 AM
PART THREE The Intrapsychic Domain
acknowledged the importance of the case of Anna O. on his thinking, and gave credit to 
the careful observations of Dr. Breuer:
If it is a merit to have brought psychoanalysis into being, that merit is not mine. I 
had no share in its earliest beginnings. I was a student and working for my final 
examinations at the time when another Viennese physician, Dr. Josef Breuer, first 
made use of this procedure on a girl who was suffering from hysteria. (From Freud’s 
lectures presented at Clark University in Massachusetts, 1909.)
Freud is uncharacteristically modest in the preceding quote. He adapted the notions of 
symptom formation and the talking cure from Breuer and combined these with other 
ideas about the unconscious, repression, stages of development, and many other notions; 
from these, he formulated a grand theory of personality that has yet to be rivaled by a 
single unitary theory of personality.
Structure of Personality
Psychoanalytic personality theory describes how people cope with their sexual and 
aggressive instincts within the constraints of a civilized society. Sexual and aggressive 
instincts often lead to drives and urges that conflict with society and with reality. One 
part of the mind creates these urges, another part has a sense of what civilized soci￾ety expects, and another part tries to satisfy the urges within the bounds of reality and 
society. How is it that the mind can have so many parts, and how do these parts work 
together to form personality?
A metaphor may be helpful in answering this question. Think of the mind as a 
plumbing system, which contains water under pressure. The pressure is the metaphor 
for the psychic energy from the sexual and aggressive instincts, which builds up and 
demands release or redirection. According to Freud’s theory, when it comes to this inter￾nal pressure, there are three schools of plumbing: one plumber suggests that we open all 
the valves at the slightest pressure, another offers ways to redirect the pressure so that 
the strain is relieved without making much of a mess, and the third plumber wants to 
keep all the valves closed. Let’s discuss each of these “psychic plumbers” in some detail, 
using Freud’s terminology.
Id: Reservoir of Psychic Energy
Freud taught in the beginning there was id, the most primitive part of the human mind. 
Freud saw the id (German for “it”) as something we are born with and as the source of 
all drives and urges. As portrayed in Figure 9.1, the location of the id is entirely uncon￾scious. Using the plumbing metaphor, the id is the plumber who wants to let off all 
pressure at the slightest hint of strain or tension. The id is like a spoiled child—selfish, 
impulsive, and pleasure-loving. According to Freud, the id operates according to the 
pleasure principle, which is the desire for immediate gratification. The id cannot tolerate 
any delays in satisfying its urges. During infancy, the id dominates. When an infant sees 
an attractive toy, it will reach for the toy and will cry and fuss if it cannot get it. Infants 
can sometimes appear unreasonable in their demands. Because the id operates accord￾ing to the pleasure principle, it does not listen to reason, does not follow logic, has no 
values or morals (other than immediate gratification), and has very little patience.
The id also operates with primary process thinking, which is thinking without logi￾cal rules of conscious thought or an anchor in reality. Dreams and fantasies are exam￾Final PDF to printer271
lar31869_ch09_258-295.indd 271 10/17/22 10:17 AM
CHAPTER NINE Psychoanalytic Approaches to Personality 
normal rules of reality (e.g., in dreams, people fly and walk through walls), Freud believed 
that there were principles at work in primary process thought and that these principles 
could be discovered. If an urge from the id requires an external object or person, and 
that object or person is not available, the id may create a mental image or fantasy of that 
object or person to satisfy its needs. Mental energy is invested in that fantasy, and the 
urge is temporarily satisfied. This process is called wish fulfillment, whereby something 
unavailable is conjured up and the image of it is temporarily satisfying. Someone might 
be very angry, for example, but the target of the anger is too powerful to attack. In this 
case, engaging in wish fulfillment might produce an imagined fantasy of revenge for past 
wrongs. This strategy of wish fulfillment works only temporarily to gratify the id because 
the need is not satisfied in reality. A person must find other ways to gratify id urges or 
hold them in check.
Ego: Executive of Personality
The ego is the plumber who works to redirect the pressure produced by the id instincts 
into acceptable or at least less problematic outlets. The ego is the part of the mind that 
constrains the id to reality. According to Freud, it develops within the first two or three 
years of life (after the “terrible 2s”). The ego comes with self-awareness and so is located 
in the conscious and preconscious areas of the mind. The ego operates according to the 
reality principle. Perhaps you have heard the phrase “reality check” which comes from 
the notion that the ego, while trying to satisfy the id, has to take the reality of the person’s 
situation into account, it cannot just focus on the childlike urges of the id. The ego under￾stands that the urges of the id are often in conflict with social and physical reality. A child 
In the psychoanalytic theory of personality, conflicts between children and parents are normal, necessary, and an 
important part of personality development.
georgerudy/123RF
Final PDF to printer272
lar31869_ch09_258-295.indd 272 10/17/22 10:17 AM
PART THREE The Intrapsychic Domain
In Freud’s structure of the mind, the ego 
is that part that must deal with reality by 
resolving conflicts between inner and outer 
pressures. For example, a man walking 
through a “red-light” district in a city might 
feel the urge of his id to walk over to a pros￾titute, and he might simultaneously feel the 
urge from his superego to find a church. It 
is up to his ego, however, to start him mov￾ing in one direction or the other. Freud also 
taught that the mind is a closed energy 
system; the more energy used by one self￾control activity, the less energy is available 
for other self-control activities. This implies 
that the psychic energy used to resolve 
one conflict would leave less psychic 
energy available for resolving subsequent 
conflicts.
Psychologist Baumeister and his col￾leagues (1998, 2007, 2018) have sub￾jected this basic notion—that psychic 
energy can be depleted by efforts toward 
self-control, leaving less energy available 
for subsequent self-control situations—to 
a series of experimental tests. There are 
many studies where the findings are sup￾portive of Freud’s basic notion about the 
ego and psychic energy. However, the 
scientific literature now contains several 
significant failures to replicate such ego 
depletion effects (e.g., Hagger et al., 2016). 
This has led to controversy surrounding 
this phenomenon, making it worth a closer 
look. We begin by reviewing some early 
studies that established the ego depletion 
effect.
In one early experiment, participants 
signed up for a study on taste perception 
and were asked to skip a meal just prior 
to their session (to ensure that they would 
be hungry). Arriving at the laboratory, 
self-control task, and the second group per￾forms a similar task that does not require 
self-control. Next, all participants go on to 
perform a second, unrelated self-control 
task. If self-control depletes a limited psy￾chic resource, then performing the first self￾control task should deplete this groups’ 
psychic energy, leaving less available for 
the second self-control task (Baumeister, 
Vohs, & Tice, 2007).
As research accumulated, some fail￾ures to find the ego depletion effect came 
to light. A paper reviewing published and 
unpublished studies (Carter et al., 2015) 
found that published studies tended to 
report an effect, whereas unpublished 
studies were less likely to find an effect. 
In 2016 a large replication study was 
reported (Hagger et al, 2016), in which 23 
laboratories around the world conducted 
the same ego depletion experiment. The 
depletion manipulation (called the “e” 
task) was a task where subjects were pre￾sented with words on a computer screen 
in quick succession. Subjects had to press 
a button as quickly as possible if there 
was the letter “e” in the word. After they 
practiced this, the depletion subject’s task 
was made much more difficult; they had 
to withhold responding to the “e” if it was 
next to or one letter away from a vowel. 
It takes a lot of effort to change strategy 
after a simple task is well learned, so the 
complicated “e” task was assumed to 
induce depletion by demanding effortful 
self-control. The control group continued 
with the simple “e” detection task. Both 
did 150 speeded trials of either the simple 
or complicated “e” task, which took about 
7 minutes. Then a subsequent reaction 
time task, also requiring self-control, was 
participants were left alone in a room; on 
the table was a bowl of radishes and a 
stack of freshly baked chocolate chip cook￾ies (Baumeister et al., 1998). One group of 
participants was instructed to “eat two or 
three radishes and avoid eating the cook￾ies while waiting for the experiment to 
start.” Another group was instructed to 
“eat two or three cookies and avoid eat￾ing the radishes.” And a third group, the 
control group, was not exposed to any 
food while waiting. Following this waiting 
period, where presumably the “radish eat￾ing” group would have had to exercise self￾control over the immediate gratification of 
eating some cookies, the participants then 
were instructed to solve a geometrical puz￾zle that was, unbeknown to them, impos￾sible to solve. Participants were told that 
they could quit working on the puzzle at 
any time. Results showed that participants 
in the radish condition gave up on the puz￾zle sooner than participants in either the 
cookie condition or the noneating control 
condition. Participants in the radish condi￾tion also reported being more tired after 
the puzzle task than those in the cookie or 
noneating conditions. These findings are 
consistent with the psychic energy theory 
of ego depletion. In the radish condition, 
the participants’ exertion of self-control 
in the face of temptation to eat cookies 
resulted in a decrease of psychic energy 
available to work on the difficult puzzle, 
leading them to give up sooner and report 
being more tired after the experiment.
Hundreds of studies have been pub￾lished on ego depletion since these early 
studies (Baumeister, 2014). Most take the 
form of breaking research participants 
into two groups: one group performs a 
A Closer Look The Ego Depletion Controversy: 
Is Self-Control a Limited Resource?
Final PDF to printer273
lar31869_ch09_258-295.indd 273 10/17/22 10:17 AM
CHAPTER NINE Psychoanalytic Approaches to Personality 
used to measure ego depletion (subjects 
had to identify specific digits in a string 
of digits presented on the screen). If sub￾ject’s self-control was depleted by the 
complicated “e” task, they should have 
more lapses of attention on the subse￾quent digit task, resulting in poorer overall 
performance. Across the 23 replications of 
this experiment, involving 2,141 subjects, 
the average ego depletion effect was 
trivial and not significantly different from 
zero. In other words, the experiment failed 
23 times.
This significant failure to replicate 
the ego depletion effect has gotten a lot 
of attention in the field. On the one hand, 
it is hard to argue with the evidence; the 
experiment failed to find an effect 23 times. 
On the other hand, the replication effort 
has been criticized in term of procedures 
(run entirely on computers, using a purely 
cognitive task) and in terms of results. For 
example, a Swedish researcher (Dang, 
2016) re-analyzed the replication data set 
(it is publicly available), controlling for how 
much “effort” subjects reported they put 
into the complicated “e” task (the depletion 
phase). For subjects who considered this 
task to demand a lot of their effort (i.e., who 
reported exerting a lot of effort in complet￾ing that task) an ego depletion effect was 
found, which is exactly what the theory of 
ego depletion would predict!
Commenting on the “failure to repli￾cate” controversy, Baumeister, Tice, and 
Vohs (2018) make the point that labora￾tory experiments using simple cognitive 
tasks are different from everyday life, and 
that ego depletion can be observed out￾side the laboratory. For example, he cites a 
study (Sievertsen, Gino, & Piovesan, 2016) 
showing that schoolchildren’s scores on 
standardized testing are worse if exams 
are administered later in the day (com￾pared to earlier or after a break). Another 
exercise programs in the workplace (ten 
Brummelhuis et al., 2021), continue to 
demonstrate the ego depleting effects of 
self-control efforts.
All of us have to resist unacceptable 
impulses all the time: resist falling asleep 
in a boring class, resist eating forbidden 
foods, playing when we should be working, 
resting when we should be exercising, say￾ing something that might hurt a relationship 
partner, engaging in inappropriate aggres￾sive or sexual activities, or any one of a 
long list of problematic behaviors (such a 
list of everyday temptations, can be found 
in Hoffman et al., 2012, and in Hoffman, 
Vohs, & Baumeister, 2012). To resist these 
behaviors, we call upon our powers of self￾control, which Freud taught was the main 
function of the ego.
Are we doomed to go through life 
with a chronically exhausted ego due 
to the serial temptations we encoun￾ter? Baumeister is optimistic about our 
self-control ability and has introduced a 
muscle metaphor of ego depletion (e.g., 
Baumeister, Vohs, & Tice, 2007). In this 
metaphor, self-control is like a muscle. If 
it is overused, it can become temporarily 
weak and unable to respond adequately to 
self-control challenges. However, like train￾ing a muscle, Baumeister believes that self￾control can be strengthened over the long 
term through practice. People who practice 
mild but regular self-control in one area of 
life (e.g., dieting) exhibit better self-control 
in other areas of their lives (e.g., regular 
exercise). Moreover, Baumeister has iden￾tified conditions that can counteract the 
effects of ego depletion, including states of 
positive emotion and humor, forming plans 
for how to behave in tempting situations 
prior to entering them, and being guided by 
a strong set of social values. In Table 9.1 
we list several of the key variables identi￾fied in the research on ego depletion.
study he sites (Dai et al., 2015) showed 
that hospital workers were more likely to 
skip mandatory hand washing later in their 
12-hour shifts compared to earlier in their 
shift. Baumeister, Tice, and Vohs (2018) 
conclude that ego depletion has been dem￾onstrated enough in the lab and in the field 
to be taken seriously as a potential expla￾nation for why people have difficulty with 
effortful self-control under conditions of 
depletion.
Besides studies using cold cognitive 
self-control tasks (e.g., letter identification), 
other studies in the literature have exam￾ined self-control of more id-like urges of 
pleasure, sex (Gailliot & Baumeister, 2007), 
and aggression (DeWall et al., 2007). After 
all, the ego’s control of id urges was what 
Freud talked about. In one experiment on 
aggression, the ego depletion group had 
to resist the urge to eat tempting food, 
whereas the control group could eat as 
much as they wanted. Later, in a second 
task, the ego depletion group reacted more 
aggressively to an insult than did the con￾trol group (Stucke & Baumeister, 2006). In 
studies of sexual restraint, ego-depleted 
subjects were found to be less likely than 
a group that did not undergo ego deple￾tion to stifle inappropriate sexual thoughts 
and were more likely to consider engaging 
in sexual activity with someone other than 
their primary relationship partner (Gailliot & 
Baumeister, 2007).
There have now been several multi￾laboratory replication studies showing 
small to moderate effects of various ego 
depletion tasks (Dang et al., 2021; Vohs 
et al., 2021). A recent review of the lit￾erature (Forestier et al., 2022) summa￾rizes how different laboratory definitions 
of self-control can lead to differing results. 
However, studies of real-world self-control 
situations, such as the online learning bur￾den during COVID (Greene et al., 2022) or 
(Continued )
Final PDF to printer274
lar31869_ch09_258-295.indd 274 10/17/22 10:17 AM
PART THREE The Intrapsychic Domain
Table 9.1 Key Variables Identified in Research on Ego Depletion
Responses That Require Self-Control
• Controlling thoughts
• Managing emotions
• Overcoming unwanted impulses
• Controlling attention
• Guiding behavior
• Making many choices
Behaviors That Are Sensitive to Ego Depletion
• Eating among dieters
• Overspending
• Aggression after being provoked
• Sexual thoughts, feelings, behaviors
• Logical and intelligent decision making
Social Behaviors That Demand Self-Control
• Self-presentation for impression management
• Kindness in response to bad behavior
• Dealing with demanding or difficult people
• Interracial interactions
Ways to Counteract the Harmful Effects of Ego Depletion
• Humor and laughter
• Other positive emotions
• Cash incentives
• Implementing intentions to cope with temptations with a specific plan
• Pursuing social values (e.g., wanting to help people, wanting to be a good relationship partner)
A Closer Look (Continued )
cannot just grab a candy bar off the shelf at the grocery store or hit his sister whenever she 
makes him angry. Although such acts might reduce immediate tension in the child, they 
conflict with society’s and parents’ rules about stealing and beating up little sisters. The 
ego understands that such actions can lead to problems and that direct expression of id 
impulses must therefore be avoided, redirected, or postponed, depending on the situation.
The ego works to postpone the discharge of id urges until an appropriate situation 
arises. The ego engages in secondary process thinking, which is the development of strat￾egies for solving problems and obtaining satisfaction. Often this process involves taking 
into account the constraints of physical reality about when and how to express a desire 
or an urge. For example, teasing one’s sister is more acceptable than hitting her, and this 
can perhaps satisfy the id’s aggressive urge almost as well. There may be some urges, 
however, that simply remain unacceptable according to social reality or conventional 
morality, regardless of the situation. The third part of the mind, the superego, is respon￾sible for upholding social values and ideals.
Final PDF to printer275
lar31869_ch09_258-295.indd 275 10/17/22 10:17 AM
CHAPTER NINE Psychoanalytic Approaches to Personality 
Superego: Upholder of Societal Values and Ideals
Around the age of 5, a child begins to develop the third part of the mind, which Freud 
called the superego. The superego is the part of the mind that internalizes the values, mor￾als, and ideals of society. Usually, these are instilled into the child by society’s various 
socializing agents, such as parents, schools, and organized religions. Freud emphasized 
the role of parents in particular in children’s development of self-control and conscience, 
suggesting that the development of the superego was closely linked to a child’s identifica￾tion with his or her parents.
To return to the plumbing metaphor, the superego is the plumber who wants to 
keep the valves closed all the time and even wants to add more valves to keep the pres￾sure under control. The superego is the part of personality that makes us feel guilty, 
ashamed, or embarrassed when we do something “wrong” and makes us feel pride when 
we do something “right.” The superego sets moral goals and ideals of perfection and so 
is the source of our judgments that some things are good and some are bad. It is what 
some refer to as conscience. The main tool of the superego in enforcing right and wrong 
is the emotion of guilt. As portrayed in Figure 9.1, the superego operates at all levels of 
the mind; conscious, preconscious, and unconscious.
Like the id, the superego is not bound by reality. It is free to set standards for vir￾tue and for self-worth, even if those standards are perfectionistic, unrealistic, and harsh. 
Some children develop low moral standards and consequently do not feel guilty when 
they hurt others. Other children develop very powerful internal standards, due to a super￾ego that demands perfection. The superego burdens them with almost impossibly high 
standards. Such persons might suffer from a chronic level of shame and guilt because of 
their continual failures to meet their unrealistic standards.
Interaction of the Id, Ego, and Superego
The three parts of the mind—id, ego, and superego—are in constant interaction. They have 
different goals, provoking internal conflicts within an individual. Consequently, one part 
of a person can want one thing, whereas another part wants something else. For example, 
imagine that a young woman is last in line at a fast-food counter. The man in front of her 
unknowingly drops a $20 bill from his wallet and does not notice. The woman sees the 
money on the floor in front of her. The situation sets off a conflict among the three parts of 
her personality. The id says, “Take it and run! Just grab it; push the person out of the way 
if you have to.” The superego says, “Thou shalt not steal.” And the ego is confronted with 
the reality of the situation as well as the demands from the id and the superego, saying “Did 
the clerk see the $20 fall? Do any of the other customers see the $20 on the floor? Could I 
put my foot over it without being noticed? Maybe I should just pick it up and return it to the 
person; perhaps he will even give me a reward.” The young woman in this situation is bound 
to experience some anxiety. Anxiety is an unpleasant state, which acts as a signal that things 
are not right and something must be done. It is a signal that the control of the ego is being 
threatened by reality, by impulses from the id, or by harsh controls exerted by the superego. 
Such anxiety might be expressed as physical symptoms, such as a rapid heart rate, sweaty 
palms, and irregular breathing. A person in this state might also feel herself on the verge of 
panic. Regardless of the symptoms displayed, a person whose desires are in conflict with 
reality or with internalized morals will appear more anxious in such a situation.
A well-balanced mind, one that is free from anxiety, is achieved by having a strong 
ego. It is the ego that balances the competing forces of the id, on the one hand, and the 
superego on the other. If either of these two competing forces overwhelms the ego, then 
anxiety is the result.
Final PDF to printer276
lar31869_ch09_258-295.indd 276 10/17/22 10:17 AM
PART THREE The Intrapsychic Domain
Dynamics of Personality
Because anxiety is an unpleasant experience, people try to resolve the conditions that 
give rise to anxiety. These efforts to defend oneself from anxiety are called defense 
mechanisms, and they are used to defend against all forms of anxiety.
Types of Anxiety
Freud identified three types of anxiety: objective, neurotic, and moral anxiety.
Objective anxiety is fear. Such anxiety occurs in response to a real, external threat 
to the person. For example, being confronted by a large, aggressive-looking man with 
a knife while taking a shortcut through an alley would elicit objective anxiety (fear) in 
most people. In this case, the control of the ego is being threatened by an external factor 
rather than by an internal intrapsychic conflict. In the other two types of anxiety, the 
threat comes from within.
The second type of anxiety, neurotic anxiety, occurs when there is a direct con￾flict between the id and the ego. The danger is that the ego may lose control over an 
unacceptable urge arising from the id. For example, a woman who becomes anxious 
whenever she feels sexually attracted to someone—who panics at even the thought of 
sexual arousal—is experiencing neurotic anxiety. As another example, a man who worries 
excessively that he might blurt out an unacceptable word or phrase in public is also beset 
by neurotic anxiety.
The third type of anxiety, moral anxiety, is caused by a conflict between the ego 
and the superego. For example, a person who suffers from chronic shame or feelings 
of guilt over not living up to “proper” standards, even though such standards might not 
be attainable, is experiencing moral anxiety. A young woman with bulimia, an eating 
disorder, might run 3 miles and do 100 sit-ups in order to make up for having eaten a 
“forbidden” food. People who punish themselves, who have low self-esteem, or who feel 
worthless and ashamed most of the time are most likely suffering from moral anxiety, 
from an overly powerful and demanding superego, which constantly challenges the per￾son to live up to higher and higher expectations.
There is a fourth type of anxiety introduced not by Freud but by his followers. 
A student of Freud’s named Fenichel (1945) expanded the types of anxiety to include 
self-esteem anxiety. That is, people have a preferred and generally positive view of them￾selves, and they will defend against any unflattering blows to that self-view. Obviously, 
realizing that one has unacceptable sexual or aggressive wishes might be a blow to one’s 
self-view, especially for persons in the Victorian era. However, in today’s society there 
may be other events that threaten self-esteem, such as failure, embarrassment, or being 
“unfriended” on Facebook. Most modern psychologists believe that people defend them￾selves against these threats to their self-esteem (Baumeister & Vohs, 2004). Much of the 
contemporary research on self-esteem maintenance can thus be thought of as having roots 
in the psychoanalytic concept of anxiety defense (Baumeister, Dale, & Sommer, 1998).
The ego faces a difficult task in attempting to balance the impulses of the id, the 
demands of the superego, and the realities of the external world. The id, ego, and superego 
are constantly interacting within each person. The id might be saying, “I want it now!” The 
superego is saying, “You shall never have it!” And the poor ego is caught in the middle, 
saying, “Maybe, if I can just work things out.” Most of the time, this conversation is going 
on outside a person’s awareness. Sometimes the conflicts among the id, ego, and super￾ego are expressed in a disguised way in various thoughts, feelings, and behaviors. In most 
Final PDF to printer277
lar31869_ch09_258-295.indd 277 10/17/22 10:17 AM
CHAPTER NINE Psychoanalytic Approaches to Personality 
cases, such conflicts are accompanied by anxiety, and so we turn now to a discussion of 
various mechanisms that people use to defend themselves against anxiety.
Defense Mechanisms
In all three types of anxiety, the function of the ego is to cope with threats and to defend 
against the dangers they pose in order to reduce anxiety. The ego accomplishes this task 
through the use of various defense mechanisms, which enable the ego to control anxiety, 
even objective anxiety. Defense mechanisms serve two functions: (1) to protect the ego 
and (2) to minimize anxiety and distress. Let’s turn now to a discussion of one of the 
defense mechanisms that Freud wrote about extensively and that has received a good 
deal of attention from researchers in personality psychology.
Repression
Early in his theorizing, Freud used the term repression to refer to the process of pre￾venting unacceptable thoughts, feelings, or urges from reaching conscious awareness. 
Repression is the forerunner of all other forms of defense mechanisms. Repression is 
defensive in the sense that, through it, a person avoids the anxiety that would arise if 
unacceptable material were made conscious. From his clinical practice, Freud learned 
that people often tend to remember the pleasant circumstances surrounding an event 
more easily than the unpleasant ones, a finding supported by modern researchers finding 
a positivity bias in memory. What happens to negative memories? Freud concluded that 
unpleasant memories were often repressed, forgotten, as if they never happened.
Freud first developed the concept of repression as a general strategy that the ego 
uses to maintain forbidden impulses in the unconscious. The term is still used today to 
refer to “forgotten” wishes, urges, or events—recall the account of “repressed” traumatic 
memories with which the chapter opened. Later, Freud articulated several more specific 
kinds of defense mechanisms. All of these specific forms involved a degree of repression 
in that some aspect of reality is denied or distorted in the service of reducing anxiety and 
protecting the control of the ego within the psychic system.
Other Defense Mechanisms
Freud’s daughter Anna Freud (1895–1982), herself an accomplished psychoanalyst, 
played a large role in identifying and describing other mechanisms of defense (Freud, 
1936/1992). She believed that the ego could muster some very creative and effective 
mechanisms to protect against blows to self-esteem and threats to psychic existence. A 
few of these defense mechanisms will be described in detail in this section.
There is a questionnaire measure of defense mechanisms (Cramer, 1991) and a 
good deal of empirical research has accumulating on defense mechanisms (Cramer, 
2015). For example, people begin using defense mechanisms as early as 6 years of age, 
and children’s self-confidence level is lower if they use denial as a defense mechanism 
(Cramer, 2018). During adolescence and adulthood, the defense mechanism of denial, 
covered next, becomes a commonly used defense mechanism (Cramer, 2012).
Denial When the reality of a situation is anxiety provoking, a person may resort to 
the defense mechanism of denial. In contrast to repression, which involves keeping an 
experience out of memory (“It never happened”), a person in denial insists that things 
are not the way they seem (“It’s not what it looks like”). Denial involves refusing to see 
the facts. A man whose wife has left him might still set a place at the dinner table for her 
and insist that she is supposed to come home at any time. Playing out this scenario night 
Final PDF to printer278
lar31869_ch09_258-295.indd 278 10/17/22 10:17 AM
PART THREE The Intrapsychic Domain
after night might be more acceptable than acknowledging that she is, in reality, gone. 
He acknowledges that she is gone, so it is not repression, but he insists she is not gone 
for good, denying the reality of his situation. Denial can also be less extreme, as when 
someone reappraises an anxiety-provoking situation so that it seems less threatening. For 
example, a man might convince himself that his wife had to leave him for some reason, 
that it really was not her fault, and that she would return if only she could. In this case, he 
is denying that his wife freely chose to leave him.
A common form of denial is to dismiss unflattering feedback as wrong or irrel￾evant. When people are given a poor evaluation, say by a supervisor, some will reject 
the evaluation rather than change their view of themselves. They might blame their dif￾ficulties on bad luck or problems with the supervisor, anything but accepting personal 
responsibility and having to alter their view of themselves. Indeed, the tendency to blame 
events outside one’s control for failure but to accept responsibility for success is so com￾mon that psychologists refer to this as the fundamental attribution error. It may be inter￾preted, however, as a specific form of denial.
Health psychologists are also interested in denial. How can a person smoke two 
packs of cigarettes a day and not worry about his or her health? One answer would be to 
deny one’s personal vulnerability, or to deny the evidence linking smoking to illness, or 
to deny that one wants to live a long and healthy life. Baumeister and colleagues (1998) 
review evidence that people often minimize the risks they see in the various unhealthy 
behaviors that they engage in.
Denial often shows up in daydreams and fantasies. Daydreams are frequently 
about how things might have been. To some extent, daydreams deny the present situa￾tion by focusing on how things could have been otherwise. In doing so, they may lessen 
or defend against the potentially anxiety-provoking circumstances of one’s present situ￾ation. For example, a person who has done something embarrassing might daydream 
about how things might have gone had he or she not done that stupid, embarrassing 
thing. Like dreaming, daydreams can be based on primary process thinking (see above) 
and hence don’t need to be anchored to reality, and fantasy can replace the reality of 
some threat to self-esteem, at least temporarily.
Displacement In displacement, a threatening or an unacceptable impulse is channeled or 
redirected from its original source to a nonthreatening target. Consider, for example, a 
woman who has an argument with her supervisor at work. She is really angry with the 
supervisor, but her ego keeps her in check because, after all, the supervisor is her boss 
and can make her work life difficult. So, instead of arguing with her supervisor, she 
goes home and displaces her anger onto her husband, perhaps yelling and belittling him. 
Although this approach may contribute to marital problems, it will most likely avoid the 
difficulties associated with losing one’s temper at one’s boss. Sometimes displacement 
has a domino effect, whereby one spouse berates another, who in turn yells at the chil￾dren, who then abuse the family dog. Moreover, although displacement is often thought 
of as a defense mechanism involving the redirection of aggressive instincts, it can also 
involve sexual urges that are redirected from a less acceptable to a more acceptable 
target. For example, a man may have a strong sexual attraction toward a woman who is 
subordinate to him at work, but this woman has no interest in him. Rather than make a 
pass at this woman at work, and risk a harassment complaint, he may redirect his sexual 
energy toward his wife and rediscover that he is still attracted to her. Freud also noted 
that sometimes even fears are redirected through displacement and cited as an example 
the case of a boy who feared his father but who redirected that fear toward horses.
Although these examples seem to involve conscious awareness and a calculat￾ing choice of how to express the unacceptable 
Final PDF to printer279
lar31869_ch09_258-295.indd 279 10/17/22 10:17 AM
CHAPTER NINE Psychoanalytic Approaches to Personality 
Although psychoanalysts have been inter￾ested in repression since Freud introduced 
the concept, empirical research on this 
topic has been relatively sparse until the 
1990s. Perhaps this has been due to the 
difficulty of defining repression in such 
a way that it may actually be measured 
for research purposes. Researchers have 
developed questionnaires to identify indi￾viduals who typically use repression as a 
mechanism for coping with threatening, 
stressful, or anxiety-producing situations.
Freud held that the essential aspect 
of repression was the motivated unavail￾ability of unpleasant, painful, or disturb￾ing emotions (Bonanno, 1990). He wrote 
that repression was a process whereby 
unpleasant emotions are turned away and 
kept “at a distance from the conscious” 
(Freud, 1915/1957, p. 147). Almost 65 
years later, Weinberger, Schwartz, and 
Davidson (1979) were the first to propose 
that repression, as a style of coping with 
unpleasant emotions, can be measured by 
examining various combinations of scores 
on questionnaires of anxiety and defen￾siveness. These researchers administered 
a questionnaire measure of anxiety and a 
questionnaire measure of defensiveness to 
a group of subjects. The anxiety question￾naire contained items that inquired about 
whether one has strong symptoms of anxi￾ety (e.g., heart pounding) when engaging in 
various behaviors, such as public speaking. 
The defensiveness questionnaire contained 
items inquiring about common faults, such 
as whether respondents had ever gos￾siped, had ever become so angry that they 
wanted to break something, or had ever 
resented someone’s asking them for a 
favor. Clearly, almost everyone is guilty of 
these minor offenses at one time or another. 
Therefore, subjects who consistently deny 
engaging in these somewhat undesirable 
behaviors score high on defensiveness. The 
researchers combined the subjects’ anxiety 
emotions. This is exactly what psycholo￾gists Penelope Davis and Gary Schwartz did 
in 1987. They asked their subjects to recall 
and describe childhood experiences that 
they associated with happiness, sadness, 
anger, fear, and wonder. The researchers’ 
findings showed that the repressors, defined 
as high defensive–low anxious persons, did 
recall fewer negative emotional experiences 
than the other subjects and that the repres￾sors were substantially older at the time of 
their earliest negative emotional memories. 
Somewhat surprisingly, the repressors also 
had limited access to positive memories. 
This finding illustrates what may be one of 
the costs of repression—pleasant as well 
as unpleasant emotional memories may be 
diminished or lost to conscious recall.
Davis (1987) expanded on the general 
idea that repressors have limited access to 
emotional memories. First, she found that 
the effect is strongest for memories about 
the self. The repressors in her study had no 
trouble remembering bad things that had 
happened to other people (e.g., siblings), 
but they did have limited recollection about 
unpleasant events that had happened to 
them. Second, the effects of repression 
and defensiveness scores, which 
resulted in the fourfold typology 
portrayed in Figure 9.3. Most of the 
subsequent research on repression 
involved comparing the repressor 
group to the other three groups on 
a dependent measure. 
In the initial study, after sub￾jects had completed the question￾naires, Weinberger, Schwartz, and 
Davidson (1979) had the subjects 
engage in a phrase association 
task in which they match phrases 
in one list with phrases in another 
list that have similar meaning; sev￾eral phrases contained angry and 
sexual overtones. As the subjects 
attempted to match the phrases, 
the researchers measured their 
physiological reactions. The researchers 
also measured the subjects’ self-reported 
levels of distress immediately after their 
performance. They found that the repres￾sors reported the lowest levels of subjec￾tive distress yet were found to exhibit the 
highest levels of physiological arousal (heart 
rate, skin conductance). In short, repres￾sors verbally say they are not distressed yet 
physiologically appear to be very distressed. 
Other researchers have obtained similar 
findings (e.g., Asendorpf & Scherer, 1983; 
Davis & Schwartz, 1987). These experi￾mental results are consistent with Freud’s 
view that repression keeps unpleasant 
experiences out of conscious awareness. 
Moreover, the results are consistent with 
Freud’s ideas that such repressed unpleas￾ant experiences still affect the individual, in 
spite of being outside of awareness (in this 
case, the repressed experiences affect the 
person’s level of physiological arousal, even 
though the person is not consciously aware 
of being anxious).
Another way to examine repression is to 
ask subjects to recall childhood experiences 
associated with pleasant and unpleasant 
A Closer Look Empirical Studies of Repression
Figure 9.3
Finding repressors by measuring anxiety and 
defensiveness. The subjects who deny being 
anxious, but who are high on defensiveness, are 
most likely repressors.
High
Low
Low
Self-reported anxiety
High
Self-reported
defensiveness
Repressors Defensive
high anxious
True low
anxious
True high
anxious
Final PDF to printer280
lar31869_ch09_258-295.indd 280 10/17/22 10:17 AM
PART THREE The Intrapsychic Domain
appeared to be strongest for the memories 
associated with feelings of fear and embar￾rassment. Although Freud (1915/1957) 
wrote “the motive and purpose of repres￾sion was nothing else than the avoidance 
of unpleasure” (p. 153), according to Davis, 
the motive to repress is particularly strong 
for experiences associated with fear and 
embarrassment. Why might this be the 
case? These emotions are often evoked in 
situations where the focus of attention is 
on the self in an evaluative or threatening 
way. In fear, for example, there is a threat 
to the very existence of the self. In embar￾rassment, the threat of being negatively 
evaluated by others looms large, leading a 
person to feel exposed and vulnerable.
Hansen and Hansen (1988) found that 
repressors’ memories are relatively less 
elaborate when it comes to emotion than are 
those of nonrepressors. That is, repressors 
have memories for emotional events that are 
less developed, less refined, and less rich 
than those of nonrepressors. These authors 
raise the intriguing question of what might 
account for this impoverished emotional 
memory on the part of repressors. It could 
come about in one of two ways. First, repres￾sors may have limited recall of their emo￾tional experiences. That is, repressors may 
have actually had varied emotional experi￾ences and those experiences may actually 
be in their memories, but they just have trou￾ble retrieving or recalling them. Alternatively, 
repressors could actually have blocked cer￾tain emotional experiences from entering 
into their memories in the first place. The 
effect of repression could have occurred at 
the encoding rather than the recall stage.
Although most studies of repression 
have examined memory for past events, 
unpleasant events, whereby repressors 
somehow dampen their emotional reac￾tions to bad events.
Forty years after Weinberg and col￾leagues (1979) proposed measuring repres￾sion as a combination of high defensiveness 
and low anxiety, a good amount of empiri￾cal research has accumulated validating the 
concept of repressive coping style (Oskis 
et al., 2019). Much of it has focused on the 
negative consequences of this way of cop￾ing. More recent research, however, has 
focused on the potential benefits of repres￾sion. For example, a study of rescue workers 
in Israel, whose work often involves han￾dling human remains after terrorist attacks, 
found that those workers with a repressive 
coping style displayed more resilience, and 
fewer stress symptoms, than workers with￾out a repressive style (Solomon, Berger, & 
Ginzburg, 2007). Other work has confirmed 
that the effects of repression occur more 
at encoding experiences than at recall 
(Derakshan, Eysenck, & Myers, 2007; Myers, 
2010; Myers & Derakshan, 2015), suggest￾ing that repression is not so much about a 
failure of memory as it is about an inhibited 
experience of negative emotions in the first 
place. And finally, researchers are beginning 
to uncover the brain circuits associated with 
the trait of repressive coping style (Klucken 
et al., 2015).
Freud taught that the function of 
repression was to keep unpleasant experi￾ences out of conscious awareness. We now 
know more specifically that the blunting 
effect of repression occurs primarily during 
the reaction to bad events. Repressors do 
not have bad memories; rather, somehow 
they keep unpleasant events from entering 
into their memories in the first place.
a few studies (e.g., Hansen, Hansen, & 
Shantz, 1992) suggest that the effect of 
repression may occur not only as dimin￾ished memory for negative events but also 
in the person’s actual reaction to negative 
events when they occur. This is what Freud 
would have predicted, that repressors actu￾ally do not experience negative emotions 
as strongly as nonrepressors do. We can 
ask whether repressors simply have poor 
memories for bad events or whether, when 
bad events happen, they actually experi￾ence less negative emotion than nonre￾pressors do, or both.
In a study by Cutler, Larsen, and 
Bunce (1996), repressors and nonrepres￾sors kept daily diaries of 40 different 
emotions for 28 consecutive days. After 
reporting on their emotions every day for 
a month, the subjects were then asked 
to think back over the month and to rate 
how much of each emotion they recalled 
experiencing, on average, during the 
course of that month. The researchers 
thus had a measure of actual day-to-day 
emotion, recorded close to the time when 
the subjects experienced the emotions, 
as well as a measure of recalled emotion. 
This approach allowed the researchers to 
test whether the repressors reported less 
negative emotion, recalled less negative 
emotion, or both. The results showed 
that the repressors, compared with the 
nonrepressors, actually reported experi￾encing fewer and less intense unpleas￾ant emotions on a day-to-day basis. The 
repressors’ memories for unpleasant 
emotions, however, were only slightly 
less accurate than the memories of the 
nonrepressors. The effect of repression 
seems to occur during the experience of 
takes place outside of awareness. Recall that the ego spans the preconscious and the 
unconscious. Deliberately redirecting one’s anger, for example, is not displacement, even 
though someone might do this to manage a situation. Real displacement takes place out￾side of awareness, as a means of avoiding certain inappropriate or unacceptable feelings 
(e.g., anger or sexual attraction) toward a specific other person or object. Those feelings 
A Closer Look (Continued )
Final PDF to printer281
lar31869_ch09_258-295.indd 281 10/17/22 10:17 AM
CHAPTER NINE Psychoanalytic Approaches to Personality 
Researchers have tried to study the displacement of aggressive impulses. In one 
study, student participants were frustrated (or not, if they were in the control group) by the 
experimenter. Later they had the opportunity to act aggressively toward the experimenter, 
the experimenter’s assistant, or another participant. The frustrated participants were more 
aggressive, but they were equally aggressive toward the experimenter, the assistant, or the 
other student (Hokanson, Burgess, & Cohen, 1963). The target did not matter. Other 
studies have replicated this finding. In one study subjects were angered, not by the experi￾menter, but by another participant, then given an opportunity to act aggressively toward 
that subject or toward a friend of that participant. Again, angered participants were more 
aggressive in general, it did not seem to matter who the target was.
Are these results evidence for displacement? Baumeister and colleagues (1998) 
conclude they are not. Angered people act aggressively, they argue, and there is no 
evidence that it is defensive. They argue that, although displacement is an interesting 
dynamic concept, there is little empirical support for the idea that urges are like hydrau￾lic fluid in a closed system being shunted this way or that depending on displacement.
Rationalization Another common defense mechanism, especially among educated per￾sons, such as college students, is rationalization. It involves generating acceptable rea￾sons for outcomes that might otherwise appear socially unacceptable. In rationalization, 
the goal is to reduce anxiety by coming up with an explanation for an event that is easier 
to accept than the real reason. For example, a student who receives a failing grade on 
a term paper might explain it away by insisting that the teacher did not give clear direc￾tions for how to write the paper. Or perhaps a woman whose boyfriend has broken up 
with her explains to her friends that she never really liked him that much to begin with. 
These reasons are a lot more emotionally acceptable than the alternatives that one is not 
as smart or as desirable as one thinks.
Reaction Formation In an attempt to stifle the expression of an unacceptable urge, a per￾son may continually display a flurry of behavior that indicates the opposite impulse. Such 
a tactic is known as reaction formation. For example, imagine the woman who is angry 
with her supervisor, described in the discussion of displacement. If, instead of displacing 
her anger, her ego unconsciously resorts to reaction formation, then she might go out of 
her way to be overly kind to her boss, to show the boss special courtesy and consideration.
An interesting example of reaction formation is provided by Cooper (1998), who 
discusses the concept of “killing someone with kindness.” Consider a man who is angry 
with his girlfriend, but the anger is not conscious; he is not aware of how angry he really 
is. It is raining outside so he offers her his umbrella. She refuses to take it, but he insists. 
She keeps refusing, and he keeps insisting that she take it. Here he is replacing his hostil￾ity with apparent kindness. However, his aggression is coming out in his persistent insis￾tence and his ignoring her wishes not to take the umbrella. According to psychoanalysis, 
this dynamic can often be found when defenses are being used; people may try to cover 
up their wishes and intention and yet unwittingly express them.
The mechanism of reaction formation makes it possible for psychoanalysts to pre￾dict that sometimes people will do exactly the opposite of what you might otherwise think 
they would do. It also alerts us to be sensitive to instances when a person is doing some￾thing in excess, such as when someone is being overly nice to us for no apparent reason. 
Perhaps in such cases the person really means the opposite of what he or she is doing.
Projection Another type of defense mechanism, projection, is based on the notion that 
sometimes we see in others the thoughts, feelings, or behaviors we find most upsetting 
in ourselves. We literally “project” (i.e., attribute) our own unacceptable 
Final PDF to printer282
lar31869_ch09_258-295.indd 282 10/17/22 10:17 AM
PART THREE The Intrapsychic Domain
others. We can then hate them, instead of hating 
ourselves, for having those unacceptable qualities. 
At the same time, we can disparage the tendencies 
or characteristics in question without admitting that 
we possess them. Other people become the target 
by virtue of their having qualities that we intensely 
dislike in ourselves. For instance, a thief is often 
worried about the prospect of others stealing from 
him and claims that others are not to be trusted. 
Or a woman denies having any interest in sexuality 
yet insists that all the men she knows “have noth￾ing but sex on their minds.” Married men who have 
affairs are more suspicious than other husbands that 
their wives are unfaithful. What a person intensely 
dislikes in or gets upset about with others is often 
revealing of his or her innermost insecurities and 
conflicts. A person who always insults others by call￾ing them “stupid” may, in fact, harbor some insecu￾rity about his or her own intelligence.
As another example, consider people who become involved in anti-homosexuality 
campaigns. Some people publicly express moral outrage towards persons with this sexual 
orientation. Trent Lott was Senate Majority Leader in June 1998 when he stated on televi￾sion that homosexuals had an illness similar to alcoholism or kleptomania. At the same time, 
Christian fundamentalists were airing TV advertisements stating that homosexuality was a 
disease and that gay persons should be cured. Pat Robertson, a fundamentalist preacher on 
the Christian Broadcasting Network, said that a hurricane might strike Orlando, Florida, 
because of a Gay Pride event there. Could it be that homophobic persons are engaging pro￾jection as a defense mechanism against their own insecure sexual orientation?
In modern psychological research there is an effect, similar to projection, called 
the false consensus effect. This was first described by Ross, Greene, and House in 1977. 
It refers to the tendency many people have to assume that others are similar to them. 
That is, extraverts think many other people are extraverted, and conscientious persons 
think many other people are conscientious. To think that many other people share your 
own preferences, motivations, or traits is to display the false consensus effect.
Baumeister and colleagues (1998) argue that having a false consensus about one’s 
unflattering traits could be ego defensive. For example, to be the only person whose credit 
card is over the limit would imply that one is unique in this moral deficiency. But if one 
believes that many people are over their credit limits, or close to it, then this false consen￾sus belief might be protective of one’s self-concept. The adolescent who explains some 
misbehavior with the phrase, “Gee, everyone else was doing it,” is perhaps engaging in 
defensive false consensus, essentially saying, “I’m not so bad because everyone is bad too.”
Sublimation According to Freud, sublimation is the most adaptive defense mecha￾nism. Sublimation is the channeling of unacceptable sexual or aggressive instincts into 
socially desired activities. A common example is going out to chop wood when you are 
angry rather than acting on that anger or even engaging in other less adaptive defense 
mechanisms, such as displacement. Watching Mixed Martial Arts (MMA) fight is more 
desirable than beating someone up. Mountain climbing or volunteering for combat duty 
in the army might be forms of sublimating a death wish. Freud, during his only visit to 
the United States, reportedly remarked about all the sublimated sexual energy that must 
have gone into building the skyscrapers of New York City. One’s choice of occupation 
In projection, we see in others those traits or desires we find most upsetting 
in ourselves. We can then disparage them for having the undesirable 
characteristic, without admitting that we have that very characteristic.
Prostock-studio/Shutterstock
Final PDF to printer283
lar31869_ch09_258-295.indd 283 10/17/22 10:17 AM
CHAPTER NINE Psychoanalytic Approaches to Personality 
(e.g., athlete, mortician, or emergency room nurse) might be interpreted as the sublima￾tion of certain unacceptable urges. The positive feature of sublimation is that it allows 
for some limited expression of id tendencies, so the ego does not have to invest energy in 
holding the id in check. Freud maintained that the greatest achievements of civilization 
were due to the effective sublimation of sexual and aggressive urges.
Defense Mechanisms in Everyday Life
Life provides each of us with plenty of psychological bumps and bruises. We don’t get a 
job we badly wanted; an acquaintance says something hurtful; someone “unfriends” us; 
another person posts photos that capture you in an unflattering light. In short, we must 
face unexpected or disappointing events all the time. Defense mechanisms may be useful 
in coping with these occurrences and the emotions they generate (Larsen, 2000a, 2000b; 
Larsen & Prizmic, 2004). We all have to deal with stress, and to the extent that defense 
mechanisms help, so much the better (see Valliant, 1994, for a discussion and an alterna￾tive classification system for defense mechanisms).
It is not too difficult, however, to imagine circumstances that are made worse by 
the use of defense mechanisms (Cramer, 2000, 2002). Others may avoid a person who 
projects a lot. A person who displaces frequently may have few friends. Moreover, the 
use of defense mechanisms takes psychic energy that is therefore not available for other 
pursuits. How do you know when the use of defense mechanisms is becoming a prob￾lem? The answer is twofold: You know a behavior is becoming a problem if it begins 
inhibiting the ability to be productive at your work (whatever your work is) or if it begins 
limiting the ability to maintain relationships. If either one of these areas in life is nega￾tively affected—work or relationships—then you could consider the behavior maladap￾tive. Moreover, there is much to be said in favor of directly confronting difficult issues 
and taking action directed at solving problems. Saying a person needs a “reality test” is 
to say that they are doing something that that conflicts with the way things really are. 
Nevertheless, sometimes problems simply cannot be solved or a person simply does not 
have the energy or resources to directly confront a problem. Under these temporary cir￾cumstances, defense mechanisms may be very useful. When used occasionally, defense 
mechanisms most likely will not interfere with work or important relationships.
According to Freud, the hallmark of mature adulthood is the ability to work pro￾ductively and to develop and maintain satisfying relationships. Being well-adjusted, 
according to Freud, means that the mature person is able to work and to love others. 
Reaching mature adulthood, however, involves passing through several rocky stages of 
personality development, a topic to which we now turn.
Psychosexual Stages of Personality Development
Freud believed that all persons passed through a set series of stages in personality develop￾ment. Each of these stages involves a conflict, and how the person resolves this conflict 
gives rise to various aspects of his or her personality. So in psychoanalytic theory, the 
source of individual differences lies in how the child comes to resolve conflicts in each 
of the stages of development. The positive end result, after going through all the stages, 
is a fully formed personality, someone who is able to love and to work. Because all of the 
action happens in childhood, the famous phrase “The child is father to the man” captures 
a key Freudian idea; the development stages in childhood determine the adult personality.
At each of the first three stages, young children must face and resolve specific 
conflicts. The conflicts revolve around ways of obtaining a type of sexual gratification. 
Final PDF to printer284
lar31869_ch09_258-295.indd 284 10/17/22 10:17 AM
PART THREE The Intrapsychic Domain
For this reason, Freud’s theory of development is called the psychosexual stage theory. 
According to the theory, children seek sexual gratification at each stage by investing 
libidinal energy in a specific body part. Each stage in the developmental process is 
named after the body part in which sexual energy is invested.
If a child fails to fully resolve a conflict at a particular stage of development, he or 
she may get stuck in that stage, a phenomenon known as fixation. Each successive stage 
represents a more mature mode of obtaining sexual gratification. If a child is fixated at a 
particular stage, he or she exhibits a less mature approach to obtaining sexual gratifica￾tion. In the final stage of development, mature adults obtain pleasure from healthy inti￾mate relationships and from work. The road to this final stage, however, is fraught with 
developmental conflicts and the potential for fixation. Let’s examine these stages and the 
conflicts that arise, as well as the consequences of fixation at each stage.
The first stage, which Freud called the oral stage, occurs during the initial 
18 months after birth. During this time, the main sources of pleasure and tension reduc￾tion are the mouth, lips, and tongue. You don’t have to be around many babies to realize 
how busy they are with their mouths (e.g., whenever they come across something new, 
such as a rattle or toy, they usually put it into their mouths first). The main conflict 
during this stage is weaning, withdrawing from the breast or bottle. This conflict has 
both a biological and a psychological component. From a biological standpoint, the id 
wants the immediate gratification associated with taking in nourishment and obtaining 
pleasure through the mouth. From a psychological perspective, the conflict is one of 
excessive dependency, with the fear of being left to fend for oneself. Sometimes a child 
has a painful or traumatic experience during the weaning process, resulting in a degree 
of fixation at the oral stage. Adults who still obtain pleasure from “taking in,” especially 
through the mouth, might be fixated at this stage (e.g., people who overeat or smoke). 
Problems with nail biting, thumb sucking, or pencil chewing might also occur. At a psy￾chological level, people who are fixated at the oral stage may be overly dependent: they 
may want to be babied, to be nurtured and taken care of, and thus to have others make 
decisions for them. Some psychoanalysts also believe that drug addiction (because it 
involves pleasure from “taking in”) is a sign of oral fixation.
There is another possible conflict of the oral stage that is associated with biting. 
This conflict can occur after the child grows teeth and finds that he or she can obtain 
pleasure from biting and chewing. Parents typically discourage a child from biting, 
particularly if the child bites other children or adults. Thus, the child has the conflict 
between the urge to bite and parental restrictions. People who fixate during this stage 
might develop adult personalities that are hostile, quarrelsome, or mocking. They con￾tinue to draw gratification from being psychologically “biting” and verbally attacking.
The second stage of development is the anal stage, which typically occurs 
between the ages of 18 months and 3 years of age. At this stage, the anal sphincter is 
the source of sexual pleasure. During this time, the child obtains pleasure from first 
expelling feces and then, during toilet training, from retaining feces. At first, the id 
desires immediate tension reduction whenever there is any pressure in the rectum. This 
is achieved by defecating whenever and wherever the urge arises. Parents, however, 
work to instill in the child a degree of self-control through the process of toilet training. 
Many conflicts arise around this issue of the child’s ability to achieve some self-control. 
Some children achieve too little control and grow up to be sloppy and dirty. Other 
children have the opposite problem: They develop too much self-control and begin to 
take pleasure in little acts of self-control. Adults who are compulsive, overly neat, rigid, 
and never messy are, according to psychoanalysts, likely to be fixated at the anal stage. 
After all, toilet training usually presents a child with the first opportunity to exercise 
Final PDF to printer285
lar31869_ch09_258-295.indd 285 10/17/22 10:17 AM
CHAPTER NINE Psychoanalytic Approaches to Personality 
choice and willpower. When a parent puts the child on the potty seat and says, “Now, 
do your business,” the child has the opportunity to say, “No!” and to withhold. This 
might signal the beginnings of being stingy, holding back, not giving others what they 
want, and being overly willful and stubborn.
The third stage, which occurs between 3 and 5 years of age, is called the phallic stage
because the child discovers that he has (or she discovers that she does not have) a penis. In 
fact, the major event during this stage is children’s discovery of their own genitals and the 
realization that some pleasure can be derived from touching them. This is also the awaken￾ing of sexual desire directed outward, and according to Freud, it is first directed toward the 
parent of the opposite sex. Little boys fall in love with their mothers, and little girls fall in 
love with their fathers. But children feel more than just parental love, according to Freud’s 
theory. A little boy lusts for his mother and wants to have sex with her. His father is seen as 
the competitor, as the one who is preventing the little boy from possessing his mother and 
receiving all of her attention. For the boy, the main conflict, which Freud called the Oedipal 
conflict, is the unconscious wish to have his mother all to himself by eliminating the father. 
(Oedipus is a character in Greek mythology who unknowingly kills his father and marries 
his mother.) Daddy is the competitor for Mommy’s attention, and he should be beaten and 
driven from the home or killed. But killing or beating Daddy is wrong.
Part of the Oedipal conflict, then, is that the male child loves, yet is compet￾ing with, the parent of the same sex. Moreover, the little boy grows to fear his father 
because surely this big and powerful person could prevent this all from happening. 
In fact, Freud argued that little boys come to believe that their fathers might make a 
preemptive strike by taking away the thing that is at the root of the conflict: the boy’s 
penis. This fear of losing his penis, which Freud (incorrectly) called castration anxiety, 
drives the little boy into giving up his sexual desire for Mommy. The boy decides that 
the best he can do is to become like the guy who has Mommy—in other words, like his 
father. This process of wanting to become like Daddy, called identification, marks the 
beginning of the resolution of the Oedipal conflict and the successful resolution of the 
phallic stage of psychosexual development for boys. Freud believed that the resolution 
of the Oedipal conflict was the beginning of both the superego and morality, as well as 
the male gender role.
For little girls, the situation is at once similar and different. One similarity is that 
the conflict centers on the penis, or actually the lack thereof, on the part of the little girl. 
According to Freud, a little girl blames her mother for the fact that she lacks a penis. She 
desires her father yet at the same time envies him for his penis. This is called penis envy, 
and it is the counterpart of castration anxiety. Penis envy is different in that the little girl 
does not necessarily fear the mother, as the boy fears the father. Thus, for girls, there is 
no strong motivation to give up her desire for her father.
Freud’s student Carl Jung termed this stage the Electra complex, for girls. Electra 
was also a character in a Greek myth. Electra convinced her brother to kill their mother 
after the mother had murdered the father. Freud actually rejected the idea of the Electra 
complex, and he was vague about how the phallic stage is resolved for girls. He wrote 
that it drags on later in life for girls and may never fully be resolved. Because successful 
resolution results in the development of the superego, Freud believed that women must 
therefore be morally inferior to men. This aspect of Freud’s developmental theory is not 
widely accepted today, and Freud has been strongly criticized for his beliefs about gen￾der differences (e.g., Helson & Picano, 1990).
The next stage of psychosexual development is called the latency stage. This stage 
occurs from around the age of 6 until puberty. Little psychological development is pre￾sumed to occur during this time. It is mainly a period when the child is going to school 
Final PDF to printer286
lar31869_ch09_258-295.indd 286 10/17/22 10:17 AM
PART THREE The Intrapsychic Domain
and learning the skills and abilities necessary to take on the role of an adult. Because of 
the lack of specific sexual conflicts during this time, Freud believed that it was a period 
of psychological rest, or latency. Subsequent psychoanalysts have argued instead that 
much development occurs during this time, such as learning to make decisions for one￾self, learning to interact and make friends with others, developing an identity, and learn￾ing the meaning of work. Because this is a more contemporary modification of Freud’s 
theory, we examine it in Chapter 10.
The latency period ends with the sexual awakening brought about by puberty. If 
the Oedipus or Electra complex has been resolved, the person goes on to the next and 
final stage of psychosexual development, the genital stage. This stage begins around 
puberty and lasts through one’s adult life. Here the libido is focused on the genitals, but 
not in the manner of fantasy or self-manipulation associated with the phallic stage. This 
differs from the earlier stages in that it is not accompanied by a specific conflict. People 
reach the genital stage only if they have resolved the conflicts at the prior stages. It is 
in this sense that personality development, according to Freud, is largely complete at 
around the age of 5 or 6 years.
Freud’s psychosexual stage theory is a theory about personality development, both 
normal and abnormal. In a nutshell, the theory states that we are all born with a drive for 
sexual pleasure (the id) but that the constraints of civilized society limit the ways we can 
satisfy that drive. We all go through a series of predictable clashes or conflicts between 
our desire for pleasure and the demands placed on us by our parents and by society in 
general. The nature of the conflicts and the stages we go through are universal, but the 
specific outcomes are each unique. Parts of our personalities are shaped at each stage by 
the particular ways we resolve the conflict. If, for example, at the oral stage, a person did 
not receive enough gratification (was weaned early) or received too much gratification 
(was weaned too late), then he or she might continue to have inappropriate demands for 
oral gratification throughout the rest of his or her life (perhaps in the form of being a 
dependent personality or developing an eating disorder or developing an alcohol or drug 
addiction problem).
Freud developed the metaphor of an army whose troops are called into battle at 
each stage of psychosexual development. If the resolution of a stage is incomplete, then 
some soldiers must be left behind to monitor that particular conflict. It is as if some psy￾chic energy must stand guard, lest the psychosexual conflict break out again. The poorer 
the resolution at a particular stage, the more psychic soldiers have to be left behind. 
One consequence of this is that less psychic energy is available for the subsequent tasks 
of maturity. The more soldiers brought forward to the genital stage, the more psychic 
energy that can be invested in mature intimate and productive relationships and the 
better the adult personality adjustment. It is interesting to note that neither happiness 
nor life satisfaction was directly a part of Freud’s conception of the mature personality. 
Successful personality development instead was defined by the ability to be productive 
(work) and to maintain mature adult relationships (love).
Personality and Psychoanalysis
Psychoanalysis, besides being a theory of personality, is also a method of psychother￾apy, a technique for helping individuals who are experiencing a mental disorder or even 
relatively minor problems with living. Psychoanalysis can be thought of as a method for 
deliberately restructuring the personality. The connection between the psychoanalytic 
Final PDF to printer287
lar31869_ch09_258-295.indd 287 10/17/22 10:17 AM
CHAPTER NINE Psychoanalytic Approaches to Personality 
theory of personality and psychoanalytic therapy is very strong. Principles of psycho￾analytic therapy are based directly on the psychoanalytic theory about the structure, 
development, and functioning of personality. Freud refined his theory of personality 
while treating patients in therapy. Similarly, many modern psychoanalysts, even those 
in academic settings, maintain a practice of seeing patients. Most psychoanalysts have 
themselves undergone psychoanalytic psychotherapy, which Freud held to be a require￾ment for becoming a psychoanalyst.
Techniques for Revealing the Unconscious
The goal of psychoanalysis is to make the unconscious conscious. Mental illness, prob￾lems with living, and unexplained physical symptoms can all be viewed as the result 
of unconscious conflicts. Thoughts, feelings, urges, or memories have been forced into 
the unconscious because of their disturbing or threatening nature. Due to the dynamic 
nature of the human mind, and the motivated unconscious, these conflicts or repressed 
urges or emotions may slip out of the unconscious in ways that cause trouble.
The first aim of psychoanalysis is to identify these unconscious thoughts and 
feelings. Once the patient can be made aware of this material, the second aim is to 
enable the person to deal with the unconscious urges, memories, or thoughts realisti￾cally and maturely. The major challenge facing the psychoanalyst is determining how 
to penetrate the unconscious mind of the patient. By its very definition, the uncon￾scious mind is the part of which the person has no awareness. How can one person 
(the therapist) come to know something about another person (the patient) which that 
other person does not even know? Freud and other psychoanalysts have developed 
a set of standard techniques that can be used to dredge up material from the uncon￾scious minds of patients.
Free Association
If you were to relax, to sit back in a comfortable chair, to let your mind wander, and then 
to say whatever came into your mind, you would be engaging in free association. Chances 
are, you would say some things that would even surprise you, and you might be embar￾rassed by what comes out. If you were able to resist the urge to censor your thoughts 
before speaking, then you would have an idea of how a patient spends much of his or her 
time in psychoanalysis. The typical psychoanalytic session lasts 50 minutes and may be 
repeated several times a week; the sessions may continue for months or years.
By relaxing the censor that screens our everyday thoughts, the technique of free 
association allows potentially important material into conscious awareness. This takes 
some practice. Patients are encouraged to say whatever comes to mind, no matter how 
absurd, trifling, or obscene. The technique is a bit like looking for a needle in a haystack 
in that the psychoanalyst is likely to be subjected to a barrage of trivial material before 
stumbling on an important clue to an unconscious conflict.
In free association, the psychoanalyst must be able to recognize the subtle signs 
that something important has just been mentioned—a slight quiver in the way a word is 
pronounced, a halting sentence, the patient’s immediate discounting of what he or she 
has just said, a false start, a nervous laugh, or a long pause. An effective psychoanalyst 
will detect such signs and intervene to ask the patient to stick with that topic for a while, 
to free associate further on that issue. Archeology is a good metaphor for this type of 
work, as the psychoanalyst is digging through all sorts of ordinary material in search of 
clues to past conflicts and trauma.
Final PDF to printer288
lar31869_ch09_258-295.indd 288 10/17/22 10:17 AM
PART THREE The Intrapsychic Domain
Dreams
Thinkers have always speculated about the meaning of dreams, and it has long been 
thought that dreams are messages from deep regions of the mind that are not accessible 
during waking life. In 1900, Freud published his book The Interpretation of Dreams, in 
which he presented his theory of the meaning and purpose of dreaming. He held that the 
purpose of dreaming was to satisfy urges and to fulfill unconscious wishes and desires, 
all within the protection of sleep. But aren’t most dreams absurd and nonsensical? How, 
then, can they have anything to do with desires and wishes? For example, a person might 
have a dream about riding a white horse that suddenly begins to fly. Does this mean the 
person wishes to have a flying horse? No, Freud would argue, because the dream con￾tains wishes and desires in disguised form. Dream analysis was a technique Freud taught 
for uncovering the unconscious material in a dream by interpreting the dream’s content. 
Freud maintained that we must distinguish between the manifest content of a dream 
(what the dream actually contains) and the latent content (what the elements of the 
dream represent). He believed that the direct expression of desires and wishes would be 
so disturbing that it would waken the dreamer. The ego is still somewhat at work during 
sleep, and it succeeds in disguising the disturbing content of our unconscious. Having 
a dream about killing one’s father, for example, might be so disturbing that it would 
awaken a young boy who has an Oedipal fixation. However, a dream about a king who 
has a garden containing a fountain that is disabled by a small animal, so that it no longer 
shoots its plume of water up into the air, might make the same psychological point yet 
allow the sleeper to remain asleep.
Thus, although our dreams often appear to be ridiculous and incomprehensible 
to us, to a psychoanalyst, a dream may contain valuable clues to the unconscious. 
Freud called dreams “the royal road to the unconscious.” The psychoanalyst interprets 
dreams by deciphering how the unacceptable impulses and urges are transformed by 
the unconscious into symbols in the dream. Parents may be represented as a king and 
queen. Children may be represented as small animals. Hence, a dream about a king 
whose fountain is broken by a small animal can be interpreted as wish fulfillment with 
an Oedipal overtone.
According to Freud, dreaming serves three functions. First, it allows for wish ful￾fillment and the gratification of desires, even if only in symbolic form. Second, dreams 
provide a safety valve by allowing a person to release unconscious tension by expressing 
his or her deepest desires, although in disguised form. And third, dreams are guardians 
of sleep. Even though a lot is going on in dreams, such as the expression of wishes and 
desires, the person remains asleep. Although tension is being released, no anxiety is 
being aroused, and the person sleeps without interruption.
In many of his writings, Freud provided interpretations of common dream sym￾bols. Not surprisingly, most symbols have sexual or aggressive connotations for Freud. 
This may be because Freud was influenced by the Victorian era in which he lived, when 
most people were very inhibited about sexual matters. Freud believed that because peo￾ple repressed their sexual feelings and desires, these inhibited urges came out in sym￾bolic form in dreams.
Projective Techniques
You’ve undoubtedly seen drawings that can be interpreted in two or more ways (e.g., the 
picture of a vase that, when looked at differently, looks like two faces). Imagine that you 
give a person a picture of something totally ambiguous, such as an inkblot, and ask him 
or her what he or she sees. A person might see all sorts of things in the shapes created 
Final PDF to printer289
lar31869_ch09_258-295.indd 289 10/17/22 10:17 AM
CHAPTER NINE Psychoanalytic Approaches to Personality 
by the ink splatter: two fish swimming, a clown, the male sexual organ, two dead animals 
run over by cars, etc. The idea that what a person sees in an ambiguous figure, such as 
an inkblot, reflects his or her personality, is called the projective hypothesis. People are 
thought to project their own personalities into what they report seeing in an ambigu￾ous stimulus. A hostile and aggressive person might see teeth, claws, dead animals, or 
blood in an inkblot. Someone with an oral fixation might see food or people eating. The 
inkblot technique, developed by Hermann Rorschach (1884–1922), is often criticized 
by research psychologists for the scant scientific evidence as to its validity or reliability 
(Wood et al., 2003). While Sigmund Freud and Hermann Rorschach were contempo￾raries, Freud himself did not use inkblots. Rorschach designed the inkblots in 1921 to 
diagnose severe mental illnesses, but in the 1940s they were used by psychoanalysts to 
assess aspects of personality, based mainly on the Freudian projective hypothesis; that 
what people see in an ambiguous stimulus is a projection of their own personalities—
their unconscious motives, desires, and conflicts.
Another class of projective techniques involves asking the person to produce 
something, such as a drawing of a person or geometric figures, with minimal instruction. 
What someone draws might be a projection of his or her own conflicts or concerns. 
Consider a young man who, when asked to draw a person, draws only a head. When 
asked to draw another person, but this time of someone of the opposite sex, he draws 
another head. Finally, when asked to draw a picture of himself, he again draws only a 
head. We might presume that this person has an unconscious conflict about his body 
image. As with dreams and free association, the goal of projective techniques is to bypass 
the patient’s conscious censor and reveal his or her unconscious conflicts and repressed 
urges and desires.
The Process of Psychoanalysis
With the help of free association, dream analysis, and projective techniques, the psy￾choanalyst gradually comes to understand the unconscious source of the patient’s prob￾lems. The patient must also come to understand the unconscious dynamics of his or her 
situation. Toward this end, the psychoanalyst offers the patient interpretations of the 
psychodynamic causes of the problems. The patient is led to view problematic thoughts, 
dreams, behaviors, symptoms, or feelings as all having unconscious roots and as expres￾sions of unconscious conflicts or repressed urges. The psychoanalyst might say, “Could 
For a few days, keep your phone by your bedside. Immediately on awakening each morning, 
record on your phone anything you can remember about the dreams you had the night before. 
After a few days, listen to your dream diary and look for themes. Do you see any recurring 
themes or elements in your collection of dreams? What are some of the common symbols in 
your dreams, and what do you think they represent? To help you answer these questions, try 
free associating to your dream content. That is, find a quiet place and relax. Start by describing 
your dream aloud, and then just keep talking, saying anything that comes to mind, no matter 
how foolish or trivial. After doing this exercise, have you learned anything about yourself or 
about what is important to you?
?
Exercise
Final PDF to printer290
lar31869_ch09_258-295.indd 290 10/17/22 10:17 AM
PART THREE The Intrapsychic Domain
it be that the reason you feel so sleepy when 
you go out with your boyfriend is that you are 
afraid of being sexually attractive to him?” 
The patient is confronted with an explana￾tion of something she has been keeping from 
herself. Through many interpretations, the 
patient is gradually led to an understanding 
of the unconscious source of her problems. 
This is the beginning of insight. Insight, in 
psychoanalysis, is more than a simple cogni￾tive understanding of the intrapsychic basis of 
one’s troubles, though this certainly is a part 
of insight. Insight refers to an intense emo￾tional experience that accompanies the release 
of repressed material. When this material is 
integrated into conscious awareness, and the 
person experiences the emotions associated 
with that previously repressed material. When 
the patient uses psychoanalytic interpretations 
to understand his or her problems, then we say 
that some degree of insight has been achieved.
As you might imagine, none of this is easy. The patient, or at least the patient’s 
ego, has expended much energy to repress the root of the problem in order to keep anxi￾ety at bay. As the therapist pokes at the unconscious material through free association 
and dream analysis, and begins to offer interpretations, the patient typically feels threat￾ened. The forces that have worked to repress the disturbing impulse or trauma now work 
to resist the psychoanalytic process, in a stage of psychoanalysis called resistance. As the 
patient’s defenses are threatened by the probing psychoanalyst, the patient may uncon￾sciously set up obstacles to progress. The patient may come up with all sorts of clever 
ways to misdirect or derail the psychoanalyst. The patient may forget appointments, not 
pay the analyst’s bill, or go very late to a session. Sometimes during a session, a patient 
in resistance might spend a great deal of time on trivial matters, thereby avoiding impor￾tant issues. A patient might waste a lot of time recalling the names of and other details 
about every classmate he or she knew in grade school, a process that could take weeks 
of session time. Or a patient who is being pressed by the analyst and confronted with 
interpretations might become angry and insult the analyst.
When an analyst detects a patient’s resistance, it is usually a welcome sign that 
progress is being made. Resistance signifies that important unconscious material is com￾ing to the fore. The resistance itself then becomes an integral part of the interpretations 
the analyst offers to the patient. For example, the analyst might say, “Perhaps you are 
insulting me because you want to avoid discussing the various ways in which you have 
been trying to make yourself sexually unattractive to men. Let’s talk some more about 
what you are trying to avoid by starting an argument with me.”
Another important step in most analyses is called transference. In this stage, the 
patient begins reacting to the analyst as if he or she were an important figure from the 
patient’s own life. The patient transfers past or present feelings toward someone from 
his or her own life onto the analyst. For example, a patient might feel and act toward his 
analyst the way he felt or acted toward his father. The feelings that the patient transfers 
onto the analyst can be either positive or negative. For example, a patient may express 
her admiration for the analyst’s powerful intellect and keen mind and offer the sort of 
Projective techniques, such as the inkblots developed by the Swiss psychiatrist Hermann 
Rorschach, are popular methods for assessing unconscious aspects of personality, such 
as repressed desires, wishes, or conflicts.
zmeel/E+/Getty Images
Final PDF to printer291
lar31869_ch09_258-295.indd 291 10/17/22 10:17 AM
CHAPTER NINE Psychoanalytic Approaches to Personality 
adoration that a child is likely to have toward a parent. Old conflicts and old reactions 
then are played out during the therapy sessions.
The idea behind transference is that the interpersonal problems between a patient 
and the important people in his or her life will be reenacted in the therapy session 
with the analyst. Freud called this the repetition compulsion, whereby the person reen￾acts his or her interpersonal problems with new people, including the psychoanalyst. 
Transference may be one source of clues about the person’s unconscious conflicts, and it 
provides the analyst with opportunities for offering additional interpretations about the 
patient’s behavior.
Transference can occur in everyday life as well as in psychoanalysis. The nature of our everyday 
interactions with others can be influenced by past relationship patterns. For example, a student 
might work hard on a paper to please a favorite professor. Earning less than a perfect grade on 
that paper—say, a B+—might cause distress, a tearful scene with the professor, or a temper tan￾trum. The surprised professor might wonder what this person is really reacting to, since a B+
is actually a pretty good grade. Perhaps the student is replaying a childhood pattern of reacting 
immaturely whenever he or she disappoints a person from whom he or she desperately seeks 
approval, such as a demanding parent.
Think of a time when you or someone you know overreacted to an event. Once you have 
identified such a situation, can you think of any similarities it has to past situations, particularly 
from childhood? Are there any reasons to suppose that you or someone you know who is over￾reacting is repeating a conflict from the past?
?
Exercise
Movies and other modern media often portray psychoanalysis as resulting in a 
flash of insight, in which the patient is suddenly and forever cured. Real life is not so sim￾ple. A thorough psychoanalysis can take years. The analyst provides interpretation after 
interpretation, illustrating to the patient the unconscious source of his or her problems. 
Along the way, the patient may exhibit resistance. Transference also typically becomes 
an issue for interpretation. Through long and laborious work by both patient and analyst, 
the patient gradually gains insight. The successfully analyzed patient then has available 
the psychic energy that his or her ego has formerly been expending in repressing con￾flicts. This energy may be directed into those twin pursuits Freud said were the hall￾marks of adult personality development—to love and to work.
Why Is Psychoanalysis Important?
Throughout much of the twentieth century, Freud’s ideas had a profound influence on 
how the mind was understood to operate. His continuing influence can be seen in several 
areas. First, psychoanalytic ideas influence the practice of psychotherapy even today. 
The second largest division of the American Psychological Association is the Division 
of Psychoanalysis. The basic idea of the “talking cure” can be traced back to Freud. 
Final PDF to printer292
lar31869_ch09_258-295.indd 292 10/17/22 10:17 AM
PART THREE The Intrapsychic Domain
Even if a psychotherapist does not engage in classic psychoanalysis, many rely on a 
few psychoanalytic ideas, such as free association (saying whatever comes to mind as a 
part of therapy) or transference (that the patient will re-create interpersonal problems 
with the therapist) in their practice of therapy. Despite its limitations (see next section), 
psychoanalysis has left an important legacy in psychiatry and psychology, which is the 
importance of listening to the patient and considering their personal life history when 
forming a diagnosis or treatment plan (Paris, 2017).
Another area of influence concerns the resurgence of interest in some Freudian 
ideas on the part of research psychologists. Research psychologists are showing a revival 
of interest in such topics as the unconscious (e.g., Bornstein, 1999), psychic energy 
(Baumeister, Vohs, & Tice, 2007), and defense mechanisms (Cramer & Davidson, 
1998). Although they may not endorse the whole of Freudian theory, such researchers 
are nevertheless finding empirical support for several of his ideas, either in their original 
form or as they have been modified by others.
A third area of influence can be found in our popular culture, where many of 
Freud’s ideas have been incorporated into everyday language and the logic of under￾standing our own and others’ behavior. For example, if someone says, “He cannot get 
along with his teacher because he has a conflict with authority,” this comment draws on 
Freudian ideas. Or if someone explains a person’s current problems as being the result of 
poor parenting, this is a Freudian interpretation. Or if you think a person is avoiding in￾person dating and putting all her time Facebook chatting because she is conflicted over 
sexuality, then you are following a Freudian theme. Many of Freud’s ideas have made 
it into everyday explanations of behavior and everyday forms of speech, such that you 
probably know more about Freud’s theory than you actually realize.
A final reason Freud’s ideas are important is that he laid the foundation for many 
of the topics and questions that psychologists are still addressing. He proposed a devel￾opmental sequence in the growth of personality. He devised a method to resolve internal 
conflicts. He proposed a structure of the basic elements of personality and described 
what he thought were the main dynamic relationships among these elements. He noted 
that the mind has regions about which it does not itself have awareness. All these ideas 
have continued to be areas of inquiry among contemporary psychologists.
Freud started one of the more interesting though controversial approaches to 
understanding human nature. Consequently, no student of personality should skip over 
this theory, even if the theory does not play a large role in contemporary studies of 
personality. Pieces of it have survived and inform various parts of current personality 
research and theory, so it is worth taking a good look at Freud’s classic theory as well as 
the contemporary modifications of it.
Evaluation of Freud’s Contributions
Among contemporary personality psychologists, Freud’s theory of personality remains 
controversial. Some personality psychologists (e.g., Eysenck, 1985; Kihlstrom, 2003b) 
suggest that psychoanalysis be abandoned. Others contend that psychoanalysis is alive 
and well (Westen, 1992, 1998; Weinberger, 2003). Opinions among personality psy￾chologists differ dramatically on the accuracy, worth, and importance of psychoanalytic 
theory, and discussions about the merits of psychoanalysis often provoke passionate 
debate among those on both sides of the issue (Barron, Eagle, & Wolitsky, 1992).
The controversy surrounding psychoanalysis is covered in Taking Sides: Clashing 
Views in Personality Psychology, by Newman and Larsen (2011). Indeed, that book, or at 
Final PDF to printer293
lar31869_ch09_258-295.indd 293 10/17/22 10:17 AM
CHAPTER NINE Psychoanalytic Approaches to Personality 
least Chapter 11 in that book, would make excellent supplementary reading to the cur￾rent chapter. At one extreme are the critics who hold that psychoanalysis is a stupendous 
con job by Freud and is totally and completely without merit. At the other extreme are 
the proponents who argue that it is the most complete theory of human nature to have 
arisen in recent centuries. Of course, like most controversies, the truth is likely some￾where between these extreme.
Proponents of psychoanalysis point to the major impact that Freud’s theory has 
had on Western thought. Many psychoanalytic terms—id, ego, superego, Oedipal con￾flict, penis envy, anal character, etc.—have entered our everyday language. In addition to 
their influence in psychology, Freud’s writings have played a significant role in sociol￾ogy, literature, fine arts, history, anthropology, and medicine, to name only a few disci￾plines. Within psychology, Freud’s works are among the most frequently cited sources 
in the literature. Many subsequent developments in the discipline of psychology have 
borrowed or built on the foundation laid by Freud. Freud shaped modern personality 
psychology and set the course of advancement for perhaps half a century, and Freud’s 
ideas on psychosexual development played a significant role in initiating the field of 
developmental psychology. His views on anxiety, defense, and the unconscious show up 
in modified forms across many areas of modern clinical psychology. The psychotherapy 
techniques he pioneered are frequently practiced, even if sometimes in modified form. 
Although many modern therapists have done away with the couch, they still inquire 
about their patients’ dreams, ask their patients to free associate, identify and interpret 
forms of resistance, and work through transference. Moreover, if we think Freud over￾emphasized sex and aggression, we need merely to look at the popular movies, violent 
video games, and the proliferation of internet pornography.
Critics of psychoanalysis also have strong arguments (e.g., Kihlstrom, 2003b). 
They maintain that Freud’s theory is primarily of historical value, that it does not inform 
much of the contemporary research in personality psychology. If you were to look in the 
pages of mainstream personality journals that publish scientific research, you would find 
very little that had direct relevance to classical psychoanalysis. Critics insist that without 
holding psychoanalysis up to scrutiny from outsiders, its merits cannot be fairly evalu￾ated on scientific grounds. Freud himself did 
not believe in the value of experimentation or 
hypothesis testing in establishing the validity 
of psychoanalysis (Rosenzweig, 1994). The 
scientific method is self-correcting in that 
experiments are conducted to try to disprove 
theories. If psychoanalysis is not examined 
scientifically and is not subjected to tests of 
disproof, then it is simply not supported by 
scientific fact. Consequently, in the view of 
some psychologists, psychoanalysis is more a 
matter of belief than scientific fact.
Another criticism of psychoanalysis per￾tains to the nature of the evidence on which it 
was built. Freud relied primarily on the case 
study method, and the cases he studied were 
his patients. Who were his patients? They 
were primarily wealthy, highly educated, and 
highly verbal women who had lots of free time 
to spend in frequent sessions with Freud and 
According to classic Freudian theory, human nature is powered by the twin motives of 
sex and aggression. These two motives are woven throughout much of contemporary 
literature, movies, video games, and internet content.
Andrey Popov/Shutterstock
Final PDF to printer294
lar31869_ch09_258-295.indd 294 10/17/22 10:17 AM
PART THREE The Intrapsychic Domain
lots of disposable income to pay his bills. His observations were made during the therapy 
sessions only. These are limited observations, obtained on a narrow segment of humanity. 
However, from these observations, Freud constructed a universal theory of human nature. 
In his writings, he provided as evidence not original observations, but his interpretations
of those observations. Scientists provide their raw observations (data) so that their conclu￾sions can be verified by others. Freud, however, often provides his interpretations of his 
patients’ behavior, rather than reporting raw observations of their behavior per se. If the 
actual raw observations were made available, it would be interesting to see if other sci￾entists would come to the same conclusions that Freud did. Psychoanalysts today could 
record therapy sessions for use as evidence. This is rarely done, however, as analysts argue 
that patients who know they are being recorded do not respond naturally.
There are other specific disagreements with Freudian theory. For example, many 
believe that Freud’s emphasis on sexual drives in his theory of childhood development 
is inappropriate and perhaps reflects more of a preoccupation of Freud, and the times 
in which he lived, than an actual topic of childhood development. Others disagree with 
the notion that personality development pretty much ends at around the age of 5, as 
Freud held. Those psychologists point to the sometimes profound changes in personality 
that can occur in adolescence and even throughout adulthood. In Chapter 10, we take 
up alternative conceptions of personality development that build on, but significantly 
extend, Freud’s ideas. We examine other issues in contemporary psychoanalytic thought 
as well, including a modern view of the unconscious and the importance of relationships 
in determining personality development (Kihlstrom, Barnhardt, & Tataryn, 1992).
Some personality psychologists take issue with Freud’s generally negative view of 
human nature. At heart, Freud’s theory suggests that human nature is violent, sexual, 
self-centered, primitive, and impulsive. Freud suggested, in effect, that without the inhib￾iting influence of society, mediated by the superego, humans would self-destruct. Other 
personality psychologists suggest a more neutral or even positive core to human nature, 
which we cover in Chapter 11.
Finally, Freud’s view of women, when he wrote about them at all, implied that 
they were inferior to men (Kofman, 1985). He suggested that women developed weaker 
superegos than men (making them more primitive, with weaker moral character), that 
women’s problems were more difficult to cure than men’s, and even that women univer￾sally had an unconscious wish to become like men (the penis envy component of the 
Electra complex). Karen Horney, an early American psychoanalyst, criticized Freud for 
neglecting women. Horney (1937, 1939) was among the first to take women’s issues 
seriously from a psychoanalytic perspective. She developed a feminist interpretation of 
Freud’s ideas and was one of the first scholars to distinguish between gender (a social 
role concept) and biological sex. Other feminist writers have criticized Freud for confus￾ing women’s true capacities and potential with the role they were assigned in an oppres￾sive, male-dominated society, an idea we discuss further in Chapter 10. For a strong 
feminist critique of Freud, see Feminism and Psychoanalytic Theory (Chodorow, 1989).
SUMMARY AND EVALUATION
Freud proposed a theory of human nature that has become highly influential. The the￾ory is unique in its emphasis on how the psyche is compartmentalized into conscious 
and unconscious portions. Freud’s theory holds that there are three main forces in the 
psyche—the id, ego, and superego—which constantly interact in taming the two motives 
of sex and aggression. These motives may generate urges, thoughts, and memories that 
Final PDF to printer295
lar31869_ch09_258-295.indd 295 10/17/22 10:17 AM
CHAPTER NINE Psychoanalytic Approaches to Personality 
arouse so much anxiety that they are banished to the unconscious. Keeping these unac￾ceptable thoughts, desires, and memories out of conscious awareness requires defense 
mechanisms, such as repression. Several of these defense mechanisms are topics of con￾temporary research by academic personality psychologists. Freud also theorized about a 
series of developmental stages that all persons went through, with each stage involving a 
conflict over expressions of sexuality. How the person resolves these conflicts and learns 
to satisfy his or her desires within the constraints of a civilized society is the develop￾ment of personality. That is, adults are different from each other because as children 
they learned different strategies for dealing with specific kinds of conflicts.
Freud also developed a theory and technique of psychotherapy, also called psy￾choanalysis. The goals of this form of therapy are to make the patient’s unconscious 
conscious and to help the patient understand the traumatic basis of his or her problems. 
There has been a lively debate in the field about the value of psychoanalysis. However, as 
psychoanalytic ideas undergo more scientific examination, and as researchers undertake 
tests on psychoanalytic hypotheses using controlled laboratory experiments, they will 
undoubtedly learn more about the value and validity of Freud’s theory.
The theory of personality proposed by Freud is one of the most comprehensive 
views on the working of human nature ever proposed; however, most modern personality 
psychologists do not totally and uncritically accept the entire theory as it was proposed, 
word for word, by Freud. Instead, most psychologists accept portions of the theory or 
agree with modifications to Freud’s theory. For example, many psychologists agree that 
there is an unconscious mind that exists outside awareness, yet many disagree that it is 
motivated in the way Freud proposed. In Chapter 10, we discuss how this influences the 
debate over repressed memories.
psychic energy 264
instincts 265
libido 265
thanatos 265
conscious 265
preconscious 266
unconscious 266
motivated unconscious 267
blindsight 268
deliberation-without-awareness 268
id 270
pleasure principle 270
primary process thinking 270
wish fulfillment 271
ego 271
reality principle 271
secondary process thinking 274
superego 275
ego depletion 272
defense mechanisms 276
objective anxiety 276
neurotic anxiety 276
moral anxiety 276
repression 277
denial 277
fundamental attribution error 278
displacement 278
rationalization 281
reaction formation 281
projection 281
false consensus effect 282
sublimation 282
psychosexual stage theory 284
fixation 284
oral stage 284
anal stage 284
phallic stage 285
Oedipal conflict 285
castration anxiety 285
identification 285
penis envy 285
Electra complex 285
latency stage 285
genital stage 286
psychoanalysis 286
free association 287
dream analysis 288
manifest content 288
latent content 288
symbols 288
projective hypothesis 289
interpretations 289
insight 290
resistance 290
transference 290
repetition compulsion 291
KEY TERMS
Final PDF to printerlar31869_ch10_296-329.indd 296 10/17/22 08:50 AM
296
The Neo-Analytic Movement
Repression and Contemporary Research on Memory
False Memories from Fake News
Contemporary Views on the Unconscious
Ego Psychology
Erikson’s Eight Stages of Development
Karen Horney and a Feminist Interpretation of Psychoanalysis
Emphasis on Self and the Notion of Narcissism
Object Relations Theory
Early Childhood Attachment
Adult Relationships
SUMMARY AND EVALUATION
KEY TERMS 10
Psychoanalytic 
Approaches: 
Contemporary Issues
Science Photo Library RF/
Getty Images
Final PDF to printerlar31869_ch10_296-329.indd 297 10/17/22 08:50 AM
THE INTRAPSYCHIC DOMAIN
The following information is drawn from a case decided in a California 
court in 1994 (Ramona v. Isabella, California Superior Court, Napa, C61898). The case 
is described in detail in Johnston (1999) and concerns a case of alleged rape and incest.
Holly Ramona was a 23-year-old woman being treated through counseling for 
bulimia. One of her counselors, Marche Isabella, acknowledges telling Holly Ramona 
that an overwhelming majority of women with bulimia were sexually abused during 
childhood. During the course of therapy, which included sessions during which a 
hypnotic drug (sodium amytal) was administered, Holly Ramona began recalling inci￾dents of sexual abuse that had occurred during her childhood. More specifically, in 
response to leading questions from her therapists, Holly began “recovering” memo￾ries of her father repeatedly raping her between the ages of 5 and 8. The therapist 
admitted telling Holly that, because sodium amytal is a “truth serum,” if she recalled 
sexual abuse while under its influence, it must have really taken place.
Holly’s father, Gary Ramona, was severely affected by his daughter’s accusations. 
When Holly went public with the allegations of incest, his wife divorced him, the rest 
of his family left him, he lost his well-paying job as an executive at a large winery, and 
his reputation in the community was ruined. Mr. Ramona claimed he was innocent and 
accused his daughter’s therapists of implanting false memories of incest in her mind.
In an unprecedented legal case, Gary Ramona decided to sue the therapists for 
the damage they had caused him and his family. He charged that his daughter’s recov￾ered memories of being raped by him were, in fact, created by the therapists through 
repeated suggestions that this was the cause of her bulimia and that she wouldn’t 
Gary Ramona, left, and 
his attorney walk to Napa 
County Superior Court on 
March 24, 1994, for the 
start of a trial accusing 
his daughter’s therapist 
of implanting molestation 
memories using improper 
suggestion and drugs.
Al Francis/AP Images
10
Final PDF to printer298
lar31869_ch10_296-329.indd 298 10/17/22 08:50 AM
PART THREE The Intrapsychic Domain
get better until she actually remembered having been abused. Mr. Ramona held that 
implanting these false memories was a form of negligence on the part of the therapists, 
so he filed a malpractice suit against them.
The therapists claimed that Gary Ramona had no legal standing to sue for mal￾practice because he was not their patient. In an important landmark decision, however, 
the trial judge held that, as a family member of the patient, and especially as one who 
had been substantially affected by the therapists’ alleged malpractice, Mr. Ramona did
have the right to file a malpractice suit against the defendants.
During the trial, which lasted seven weeks, Mr. Ramona denied abusing his 
daughter, whereas Holly repeated her allegations that he had raped her many times 
during her childhood. It appeared to be a classic case of one person’s word against 
another’s. As often happens in such cases, expert witnesses were called in to try to 
clarify the issues. Psychologist Elizabeth Loftus, a prominent memory researcher, 
testified during the trial that “there is no support for the idea that you can be 
raped . . . over a period of years and totally forget about it.” A psychiatrist special￾izing in legal issues, Park Dietz, testified that although Holly Ramona recalled being 
abused, she could not at first recall who the abuser was. It was only after the sodium 
amytal session, during which the therapists suggested to Holly that the abuser was 
her father, that she “remembered” it was her father. Martin Orne, a psychiatrist, psy￾chologist, and authority on hypnosis, also testified that sodium amytal interviews are 
“inherently untrustworthy and unreliable” and that “Holly Ramona’s memory is so 
distorted that she no longer knows what the truth is.” Finally, Harvard psychiatry 
professor Harrison Pope offered his opinion that Holly Ramona had been “grossly 
and negligently treated, with catastrophic results.”
The jury decided that the therapists were guilty of malpractice and awarded 
Mr. Ramona $475,000 in damages. The jury foreman was quoted in media sources as 
having said that the verdict was intended to “send a message about false child abuse 
memories.” Mr. Ramona’s attorney saw the verdict as a warning to other therapists, 
especially to those who believe that adult psychological problems are the result of 
repressed childhood traumas. Holly Ramona went on to graduate school and is currently 
a Marriage and Family Therapist, practicing in California under a different name.
Why did this case turn out so differently from the case of Ross Cheit, described 
at the start of Chapter 9? The major difference between the two cases is that Ross Cheit 
provided substantial corroborating evidence in support of his recovered memory. Unlike 
Holly Ramona, Ross Cheit’s memory fragment was corroborated by many other persons 
and even by a tape-recorded confession from the abuser himself.
But what do these cases tell us about the psychoanalytic idea of the motivated 
unconscious, the idea that the mind can bury memories of horrifying events and 
then, decades later, accurately retrieve those memories? By themselves, single cases 
do not prove anything for or against unconsciously motivated repression. People 
forget all sorts of things. Can you, for example, remember what you ate for dinner 
last Tuesday?
What is the difference between ordinary forgetting and motivated repression? Is 
there good scientific evidence for motivated repression? Could people be motivated to 
“remember” events that did not actually happen, as apparently was the case with Holly 
Ramona? To answer these questions we examine contemporary revisions to classical 
psychoanalysis, collectively known as the neo-analytic movement.
Final PDF to printer299
lar31869_ch10_296-329.indd 299 10/17/22 08:50 AM
CHAPTER TEN Psychoanalytic Approaches: Contemporary Issues
The Neo-Analytic Movement
As proposed by Freud, and described in the previous chapter, classical psychoanalysis 
is a detailed and comprehensive theory, developed in the early 1900s, of the totality of 
human nature. Many of Freud’s ideas are out of date; however, contemporary psychoana￾lyst Westen (1998) argues that they should be out of date; after all, Freud died in 1939 and 
“he has been slow to undertake further revisions” (p. 333) of his theory. Westen goes on 
humorously to note that “Freud, like Elvis, has been dead for a number of years but con￾tinues to be cited with some regularity” (p. 333). Whereas many of Freud’s ideas have not 
stood the test of time, others have and have been incorporated into a contemporary ver￾sion of psychoanalysis. Today, psychoanalysis is probably best thought of as a theory con￾taining ideas variously inspired by Sigmund Freud but modified and advanced by others.
Westen (e.g., 1990, 1998) is a proponent of contemporary psychoanalysis. Writing 
on the legacy of Freud, Westen notes that contemporary psychoanalysts no longer write 
much about id, superego, and repressed sexuality; nor do they liken treatment to an 
archeological expedition in search of forgotten memories. Instead, most contemporary 
psychoanalysts focus their attention on childhood relationships and adult conflicts with 
others, such as difficulties becoming intimate or readily becoming intimate with the 
wrong kinds of persons (Greenberg & Mitchell, 1983). Westen (1998) defines contem￾porary psychoanalysis as being based on the following five postulates:
	 1.	 The unconscious still plays a large role in life, although it may not be the 
autonomous influence that Freud held it was.
	 2.	 Behavior often reflects compromises in conflicts among mental processes, such 
as emotions, motivations, and thoughts (Westen & Gabbard, 2002a).
	 3.	 Childhood plays an important part in personality development, particularly in 
terms of shaping adult relationship styles.
	 4.	 Mental representations of the self and relationships developed early in life guide 
our interactions with others later in life (Westen & Gabbard, 2002b).
	 5.	 Personality development involves not just regulating sexual and aggressive 
feelings but also moving from an immature, socially dependent way of relating to 
others to a mature, independent relationship style.
This neo-analytic viewpoint has wider appeal and better scientific support, in some cases, 
than Freud’s original ideas. To start our coverage of more contemporary psychoanalysis, 
we begin with a discussion of repression and memory.
Repression and Contemporary Research on Memory
It is easy to find conflicting opinions among respected psychologists on the issue of moti￾vated repression. One review of the clinical literature on motivated repression concluded 
“the evidence for repression is overwhelming and obvious” (Erdelyi & Goldberg, 1979, 
p. 384). Another review of the same literature concluded “the concept of repression has 
not been validated with experimental research” (Holmes, 1990, p. 97).
Elizabeth Loftus, a professor of psychology and world-renowned memory 
researcher, has perhaps conducted the most research on the authenticity of recovered 
memories. Loftus has been the one psychologist most connected to the repressed mem￾ory debate, and summarizes the scientific status of the concepts of “repressed” and 
Final PDF to printer300
lar31869_ch10_296-329.indd 300 10/17/22 08:50 AM
PART THREE The Intrapsychic Domain
“recovered” memories of sexual abuse (Davis & Loftus, 
2009). In her article titled “The Reality of Repressed 
Memories” (1993), Loftus discusses many cases of indi￾viduals who suddenly recover memories of important 
events: some of these turn out to be true memories, 
whereas others are false or inaccurate accounts, which are 
later recanted. However, she argues that we should not 
conclude that all recovered memories are false ­memories
just because some, such as Holly Ramona’s, have turned 
out to be false. Similarly, we should not assume that all
recovered memories are true, just because some, such as 
Ross Cheit’s that we explored in Chapter 9, have turned 
out to be true. Loftus believes that what is important is 
being aware of the processes that may contribute to the 
creation of inaccurate or false memories. Loftus (1992, 
1993, 2011) suggests that many variables contribute to 
the construction of false memories.
One factor that might influence people to have false memories is the popular press. 
Many books purport to be guides for survivors of abuse; these are undoubtedly of some 
comfort to people who have been living with painful memories of abuse. For those who 
have no such memories, these books often provide strong suggestions that abuse could 
have happened, even if there is no memory of the abuse. For example, one book in this 
category is The Courage to Heal (Bass & Davis, 1988), which states:
You may think you don’t have memories. . . . To say, “I was abused,” you don’t need 
the kind of recall that would stand up in a court of law. Often the knowledge that 
you were abused starts with a tiny feeling, an intuition. . . . Assume your feelings are 
valid. . . . If you think you were abused and your life shows the symptoms, then you 
were. (p. 22)
What are some of the symptoms The Courage to Heal suggests indicate a person was 
abused? The book lists, among other things, low self-esteem, self-destructive thoughts, 
depression, and sexual dysfunction. This book, and others like it, provides a strong mes￾sage that even in the absence of a specific memory, many people should conclude that 
they have been abused. However, there are many causes of low self-esteem, depression, 
and sexual dysfunction. In addition, these symptoms are associated with many other 
psychological disorders, such as phobias and anxieties, and these disorders certainly can 
occur without a history of abuse.
The above quote is also a powerful suggestion that may lead some persons to con￾clude that they must have been abused. A person who starts with this idea may embellish 
this suggestion by filling in details to make a convincing or consistent story of abuse. If 
he or she is led further along these lines by a questioning therapist, his or her false mem￾ories may become more and more convincing. Loftus (1993) has demonstrated in the 
lab that subjects questioned in a leading manner after watching a video of a car accident 
can be led to conclude that one car ran a stop sign, even though there was no stop sign 
in the video. And with more leading questioning, subjects increase their confidence that 
one car is to blame because it ran the stop sign (Bernstein & Loftus, 2009).
Another factor that may contribute to false memories is the behavior of some 
therapists. Loftus tells of a woman who wrote to her after the woman’s therapist had 
concluded that her depression was caused by childhood sexual abuse. The patient stated 
that her therapist was certain of that diagnosis, even though the patient had no memory 
Professor Elizabeth Loftus testified in the Ramona trial and has 
contributed a good deal of scientific information to the debate over 
repressed memories.
Jodi Hilton/AP Images
Final PDF to printer301
lar31869_ch10_296-329.indd 301 10/17/22 08:50 AM
CHAPTER TEN Psychoanalytic Approaches: Contemporary Issues
of abuse. The patient further stated that she could not understand how something so ter￾rible could have happened without her being able to remember the event. Loftus tells of 
another case of a man who went to a therapist because he was distraught over his father’s 
suicide. The patient talked about painful events in his life, but the therapist kept sug￾gesting that there must be something else. Not knowing what this “something else” was, 
the patient became even more depressed. Then, during a therapy session, the therapist 
stated that “you display the same kinds of characteristics as some of my patients who are 
victims of . . . ritualistic abuse” (cited in Loftus, 1993, p. 528).
A variety of techniques are used in therapy that encourages patients to reflect on 
their childhoods. Hypnosis is one technique used to get patients to recall freely child￾hood experiences within the protection of a relaxed, suggestion-induced, trancelike 
state. An extensive scientific literature, however, shows that hypnosis does not improve 
memory (Nash, 1987, 1988). This explains why hypnotizing witnesses are not allowed 
in courts of law; hypnotized witnesses do not recall facts with any greater accuracy than 
non-hypnotized witnesses (Kihlstrom, 2003b; Wagstaff, Vella, & Perfect, 1992). In fact, 
hypnosis may be associated with increased distortions in memory (Spanos & McLean, 
1986). In one case, a highly suggestible man was led under hypnosis to develop “mem￾ories” for crimes that had not even been committed (Ofshe, 1992). Under hypnosis, 
people are often more imaginative, more spontaneous, and more emotional and often 
report unusual bodily sensations (Nash, 2001). After being taken back to childhood 
through hypnosis, people have been known to recall being abducted by alien creatures 
with fantastic spaceships (Loftus, 1993).
Loftus and colleagues have pointed to other techniques in psychotherapy that can 
contribute to the creation of false memories (Loftus, 2000; Lynn et al., 2003). These 
include the use of suggestive interviewing, the interpretation of symptoms as signs of past 
trauma, and pressure from an authority figure (the therapist) to recall trauma. Such prac￾tices can be used to foster the recollection of events that did not actually happen (Tsai, 
Loftus, & Polage, 2000). In laboratory studies, Loftus and colleagues have shown that 
having persons imagine various events can lead them to later rate those events as more 
familiar, leading subjects to have a more elaborate memory representation, which in turn 
leads them to rate those imagined events as likely to have happened (Thomas, Bulevich, 
& Loftus, 2003). This effect is called the imagination inflation effect, and it occurs when 
a memory is elaborated upon through leading questions, which prompt the person to 
imagine an event, regardless of whether or not it happened. This can lead the person to 
confuse the imagined event with events that actually happened. For example, by show￾ing people an advertisement suggesting that they shook hands with Mickey Mouse as a 
child, those people later had higher confidence that they had personally shaken hands 
with Mickey as a child. Another study had persons imagining shaking hands with Bugs 
Bunny and produced a similar effect (Braun, Ellis, & Loftus, 2002). Having persons 
imagine something, even something as unusual as shaking hands with Bugs Bunny, can 
lead them to have a false confidence that it actually may have happened. Loftus and oth￾ers have pointed out the implications of this research for the admissibility of allegedly 
repressed memories in courts (Hyman & Loftus, 2002; Loftus, 2003). Loftus has also 
shown that this technique can alter memory for even very personally stressful events 
(Morgan et al., 2012) and that such false memories were found to persist over a one-and￾a-half years later when subjects were followed up (Zhu et al., 2012).
Why would some therapists suggest false memories to their patients? Many thera￾pists believe that effective treatment must lead the patient to recall and maturely pro￾cess unconscious memories of traumatic events. Therapists, like many other people, can 
suffer from a confirmatory bias—the tendency to look only for evidence that confirms 
Final PDF to printer302
lar31869_ch10_296-329.indd 302 10/17/22 08:50 AM
PART THREE The Intrapsychic Domain
Imagine you are a subject in a psychol￾ogy experiment in which you are assigned 
to listen carefully to a list of 15 words, 
knowing that you will later be tested on 
your memory for these words. The words 
are bed, rest, awake, tired, dream, wake, 
snooze, blanket, doze, slumber, snore, 
nap, peace, yawn, and drowsy. Now cover 
the list of words you just read, and indicate 
below whether or not each of the following 
words was on the list:
A Closer Look So, You Want to Have a False Memory
when people are asked for the first word 
that comes to mind from some other word 
(e.g., bed). In fact, psychologists have 
determined lists of common associates 
to a whole variety of words, and the sum 
of association strength of the listed items 
to the critical item is what determines 
the probability of false recall (Roediger, 
Balota, & Watson, 2001).
How is this material related to the 
psychoanalytic idea of false memories? 
First, this material highlights how most 
cognitive psychologists, even those with 
strong scientific values, believe that 
false memories can occur. It is accepted 
as fact that humans have a constructive 
memory; that is, the human mind con￾tributes to or influences in various ways 
(adds to, subtracts from, and so on) what 
is recalled. Rather than referring to pris￾tine and objective retrieval of facts, human 
memory is fallible and open to error and 
corruption. Moreover, the corruption is 
most likely to occur when elements with 
strong associations to each other con￾verge repeatedly in experience. In this 
condition, the person is likely to recognize 
or recall something associated to those 
elements, even if that new element never 
occurred. For example, during interroga￾tion, imagine that a person is repeatedly 
asked about an event in many different 
leading ways. After some time, the person 
is asked something that is new but related 
to the repeated information. The person 
may then be more likely to recall this new 
event as happening, not because it did 
happen, but because it is associated with 
the previously presented information. This 
is how innocent mistakes of recognition 
on word lists might help us understand the 
larger and more dramatic false memories 
that have been documented in certain 
legal cases, such as that of Holly Ramona.
elements (such as words or images or emo￾tional experiences) are stored in memory 
along with associations to other elements 
in memory. For example, doctor is associ￾ated with nurse in most people’s memories 
because of the close connection or similarity 
between these concepts. The mental asso￾ciation between these two concepts can be 
demonstrated easily; the speed of deciding 
that a letter string (doctor) is a word or not is 
faster if it is preceded by an associated con￾cept (nurse) relative to an unrelated word 
(table). The explanation is that the activation 
of nurse in your memory spreads through 
an association network and activates other 
related concepts, such as doctor, allowing 
them to be recognized faster.
How does this explain the false mem￾ory for sleep in the exercise? Like any con￾cept, sleep is stored in your memory in a 
network of associations to other words, such 
as bed, rest, awake, tired, dream, wake, 
snooze, blanket, and doze. This network of 
associations is depicted in Figure 10.1. 
Activation from the multiple words 
on the first list spreads or primes the criti￾cal concept on the recall list (sleep) in the 
memory network of the person studying 
the list. The activation from all the words 
related to sleep (e.g., bed, rest, and tired) 
sums up and makes the concept of sleep
more likely to be recalled or recognized 
later, even though the actual word sleep
was not on the original list.
Researchers have also shown that 
the probability of a false memory in this 
task is a function of the number of words 
on the first list that are associated with 
the critical word (e.g., sleep). That is, the 
sum of the association strength from the 
list items to the critical item determines 
false recall of the critical item. Association 
strength is determined by how frequently 
the critical word (e.g., sleep) is named 
If you are like most people, you 
checked yes following the word sleep.
Indeed, many people are so certain that 
sleep was on the first list that they argue 
with the experimenter when they are 
told that, in fact, it was not. Thus, if you 
checked yes, indicating that sleep was on 
the original list during the recall phase of 
the task, and you really remember seeing 
the word sleep, then you just had a false 
memory. Approximately 80 percent of nor￾mal subjects are induced to have this false 
memory—that is, they believe that sleep
was on the original list (Roediger, Balota, 
& Watson, 2001; Roediger, McDermott, & 
Robinson, 1998).
The procedure you just completed 
was developed by psychologists Henry 
Roediger and Kathleen McDermott (1995). 
They devised the technique based on the 
spreading activation model of memory. 
This model of memory holds that mental 
On the List?
Yes No
snooze —— ——
mother —— ——
bed —— ——
television —— ——
sleep —— ——
chair —— ——
Final PDF to printer303
lar31869_ch10_296-329.indd 303 10/17/22 08:50 AM
CHAPTER TEN Psychoanalytic Approaches: Contemporary Issues
Figure 10.1
Hypothetical network of concepts related to the word sleep.
Source: Adapted from Roediger, Balota, & Watson, 2001.
Nap Slumber
Tired
Rest Dream
Doze Yawn
Bed
Snooze
Drowsy
Snore
Blanket
Wake
Sleep
previous beliefs and to not look for evidence that might disconfirm their beliefs. If a ther￾apist believes that childhood trauma is the cause of adult psychological problems, he or 
she will most likely probe for memories of childhood trauma. Compliant and suggestible 
patients are then induced to spend long periods of time trying to imagine what events 
must have happened in their childhoods to produce their current difficulties. Meanwhile, 
the therapist relates stories of other patients with similar problems who were helped by 
recalling and coping with memories of childhood abuse. The therapist, as an “authority” 
on how to get better, stands ready to authenticate any possible memory of trauma that 
the patient might produce.
Around the time of the Holly Ramona case, a private foundation was formed to 
gather scientific information on repressed memories. Called the False Memory Syndrome 
Foundation (FMSF), this organization had a scientific advisory board consisting of the 
top scientists in the field of memory research, including Elizabeth Loftus. In the decade 
of the 1990s there was a proliferation of legal cases involving “recalled” memories, 
many of which devastated many families. The FMSF provided research summaries and 
expert witnesses to legal teams defending against recalled sex abuse. The foundation also 
wanted to prevent therapists from unknowingly (or knowingly) implanting false memo￾ries in their patients through suggestion, hypnosis, or so-called truth serum therapy. The 
foundation also worked to assist families who, like Holly Ramona’s, were torn apart 
by false memories. Due to a sharp decline of false memory cases in the 2010s, and a 
lack of funding, the foundation was closed in 2019 after 27 years of effectively helping 
to correct the harm being done to patients and families by therapists who insisted that 
Final PDF to printer304
lar31869_ch10_296-329.indd 304 10/17/22 08:50 AM
PART THREE The Intrapsychic Domain
traumatic events were at the core of adult mental disorders. Although formally no longer 
active, the FMSF web page is still online (as of 3/1/2022) and contains a great deal of 
information about their work and the topic of recalled memories.
While some memories of childhood trauma have turned out to be false, this posi￾tion must be balanced by the documented rates of various forms of child abuse. Surveys 
suggest that a remarkable amount of trauma is inflicted on children. For example, in 
2017 there were approximately 674,000 child victims of maltreatment in the United 
States. Of these, 75 percent were for neglect, 18 percent involved physical abuse, and 
9 percent were sexual abuse cases. In this reporting year, an estimated 1,750 children 
died of abuse and neglect. Of these fatalities, 72 percent were under the age of 3 years! 
[All statistics are from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services].
While Loftus continues to publish important research on real versus false memo￾ries (e.g., Otgaar et al., 2021), she has also turned her scientific attention to the topic of 
misinformation (i.e., fake news) and how it can impact people’s memories, beliefs, and 
opinions about facts (Bailey, Olaguez, Klemruss & Loftus, 2021), a topic to which we 
now turn.
False Memories from Fake News
The validity of memories has been a topic within psychoanalysis for decades. A 
related, but more recent topic, concerns the validity of information people are 
exposed to, an issue summed up by the term “fake news.” We process information 
presented to us and store some in memory. We use this stored information to build 
our beliefs and opinions about events, the world, and other people. Some of our 
beliefs may be flawed or incorrect because the information they are based on is 
false. How can psychology help us understand, detect, and potentially counteract the 
effects of fake news?
Psychology has documented several principles of information processing and 
memory formation. People who are interested in influencing public opinion can “weap￾onize” these principles and use them in systematic misinformation campaigns to influ￾ence the population. For example, they might want most people in the population to 
recall some event or information as true, when in fact it is false or never happened. Or 
they might want to “spin” some event so that most people recall it in a certain way. What 
are these principles that are “weaponized” by public opinion manipulators to influence 
what or how people recall specific information?
The construction of a memory takes three steps:
	 1.	 Attend to the information. This step seems obvious and straightforward—a person 
must pay attention to information for it to have any chance at all of entering his 
or her memory. When a grade school teacher says: “Pay attention!” he is trying 
to get his students to take this first step toward remembering the material being 
taught. Several psychological factors can influence attention, such as fatigue, 
interest, cognitive overload, competing demands, or distractions.
	 2.	 Encode the information. In this step a memory trace is recorded, representing 
the information being attended to. The mind records, in some fashion and some 
imperfect form, the information in the brain. Neuroscientists have documented 
encoding in several areas of the brain but mostly in the hippocampus. There are 
several factors that influence the likelihood that information will be encoded, 
and it is mostly these factors that are “weaponized” in misinformation campaigns 
(elaborated below).
Final PDF to printer305
lar31869_ch10_296-329.indd 305 10/17/22 08:50 AM
CHAPTER TEN Psychoanalytic Approaches: Contemporary Issues
	 3.	 Recall the information. We know a memory has been successfully made if a person 
can recall, more or less accurately, the information attended to. Memory is never 
perfect and is a reconstruction of the original information. Many psychological 
factors influence recall, including cues, current state, leading questions, length of 
time since encoding, and the amount of information being recalled.
The step in memory formation that is most often “weaponized” in misinformation 
campaigns is the encoding step. Here we focus on five factors that influence encoding. 
These can be used to increase the likelihood that people will encode some bit of informa￾tion as true, regardless of whether it is true or false.
	 1.	 Repetition. Every student knows that cramming—repeated exposure to the same 
information—can increase memory for that information. Skillful manipulators 
of public opinion also know the power of repetition. Politicians, for example, 
can repeat an idea over and over, within the same speech, and across speeches. 
They could also have their surrogates use the same “talking points” so that they 
all are repeating the same idea. Staying “on message” refers to repeating the key 
information they want the public to remember. They know that many people, if 
they hear the same information repeated often enough, will come to remember it 
as true: “It must have happened that way.”
	 2.	 Source expertise. If the source of the information is seen as an “expert,” then 
that information is more likely to be encoded as true. In the early days of the 
internet, for example, many people assumed that the internet itself was a form 
of expertise: “It must be true, I read it on the internet.” These days, most people 
know that the internet contains information from charlatans as well as experts, 
perhaps more of the former than the latter. Nevertheless, many internet sites 
strive for an air of expertise or to be seen as legitimate news sites when, in fact, 
they may be a channel for misinformation. The internet simply is not curated; 
the information there is not objectively reviewed and corroborated by experts, 
like it is in scientific publications. Whenever someone is using misinformation to 
influence public opinion, they often invoke some vague expert as the source. For 
example, if a politician refers to an ambiguous authority or expert or some hastily 
assembled committee to back up some bit information, it is wise to check the 
credentials of those experts. In general, whenever an “expert” is being invoked to 
back up or endorse some bit of information, it is a good idea to be on guard and 
to evaluate the claim and the expertise.
	 3.	 Familiarity. One effect of repetition is to develop a sense of familiarity for a 
piece of information, “I think I’ve heard that before, so it must be true” or even 
“Yes, this just sounds true.” Besides repetition, familiarity can also come from 
the information being similar to something you already know or a possible 
consequence of what you already know. “I know that X and Y are true, and Z is 
a likely consequence, so Z must also be true.” If it feels familiar enough, through 
repetition or similarity to existing memories, it will be encoded as true.
	 4.	 Fluency. This refers to the fact that, other things being equal, the easier it is to 
process of bit of information, the higher the likelihood it will be encoded. Keep 
it simple, and people are more likely to remember it. This explains why people 
who see the movie remember the details better than people who read the book. 
Movies are more fluent; they take less effort to process than reading a book. 
This is why “a picture is worth a thousand words.” A piece of information that 
is nuanced, complex, and has several qualifiers (e.g., the Mueller report) will 
simply not be encoded by most people. However, a very simple bit of information 
Final PDF to printer306
lar31869_ch10_296-329.indd 306 10/17/22 08:50 AM
PART THREE The Intrapsychic Domain
(e.g., “No collusion!”), especially if repeated over and over, is more likely to be 
encoded. Some politicians have learned the value of presenting information in 
small chunks, using simple language, and developing short and catchy slogans.
	 5.	 Consensus. If people are led to believe that others think some information is 
true, then they are more likely to encode it as true themselves. When a politician 
states, “Lots of people are saying . . .,” it might be a sign they are employing the 
consensus effect. If you are being presented with a consensus statement along 
with some information, you should question the consensus. Where did those 
observations come from? Who exactly are the people being referred to? Who 
gathered that information? Often, a consensus statement will be attached to 
information with no way to verify that consensus. The consensus statement might 
simply be made up to lend credibility to the information. Questionable consensus 
statements can come in many forms, but once you see a consensus element 
attached to some bit of information, you should be on alert for misinformation 
and question how that consensus might be verified.
The issue of fake news (misinformation) is important in today’s society and is 
relevant to the notion of false memories. Given the proliferation of sources of news and 
information, as well as the willingness of many influencers to present false or mislead￾ing information, it is a challenge to separate factual information from misinformation. 
Once encoded as true, a bit of false information can contribute to flawed beliefs and 
misinformed opinions. The phrase, “Once you’ve seen something, it’s hard to un-see it” 
refers also to encoded misinformation—once information is encoded as true, it goes on to 
influence beliefs and opinions, an outcome that is difficult to correct.
Contemporary Views on the Unconscious
The idea of a motivated unconscious is at the core of classical psychoanalytic theory. 
Most contemporary psychologists also believe in the unconscious, although it is a dif￾ferent version of the unconscious than that found in classical psychoanalytic theory. 
Consider the views of psychologist Bargh (2005), a social psychologist whose research 
on unconscious processes has had a large impact on psychology: “People are often 
unaware of the reasons and causes of their own behavior. In fact, recent experimen￾tal evidence points to a deep and fundamental dissociation between conscious aware￾ness and the mental processes responsible for one’s behavior” (p. 38). This position 
is summarized in the title of a recent book by Bargh (2017): Before You Know It: The 
Unconscious Reasons We Do What We Do. His view on the unconscious can be illus￾trated with one of Bargh’s own experiments, in which college student subjects took 
part in what they thought was an experiment on language, where they were presented 
with many different words. Half of the participants were presented with words syn￾onymous with rudeness; the other half were presented with words synonymous with 
politeness. After finishing the language experiment, they went to another experiment 
in another room and encountered a staged situation where it was possible to act in 
either a rude or polite way. Although the participants showed no awareness of the 
possible influence of the language experiment, they nevertheless behaved in a manner 
that was consistent with the kinds of words they were exposed to in the “previous” 
experiment (Bargh, 2005). Most psychologists believe that the unconscious can influ￾ence our behavior, but not all agree with Freud that the unconscious can have its own 
autonomous motivation (Bargh, 2006, 2008).
Final PDF to printer307
lar31869_ch10_296-329.indd 307 10/17/22 08:50 AM
CHAPTER TEN Psychoanalytic Approaches: Contemporary Issues
We can term these two differing views on the unconscious: the cognitive
unconscious view and the motivated unconscious view. Those with the cognitive uncon￾scious view readily acknowledge that information can get into our memories without our 
ever being aware of that information (Kihlstrom, 1999). For example, in the phenom￾enon of subliminal perception, some information—such as the phrase “Buy a Coke”—is 
flashed on a screen so quickly that you don’t recognize the actual words. That is, you 
would say that you had seen a flash but were not able to distinguish what was written. 
Indeed, you could not even guess that the word Coke was presented better than chance 
compared to guessing that some other non-presented word—say, House— was presented. 
However, if you were asked to judge whether a string of letters is a word or not a word, 
and the dependent variable was reaction time (how quickly you can make this judg￾ment), then you would judge Coke as a word faster than words unrelated to Coke or soft 
drinks in general. Thus, subliminal information primes associated material in memory. 
Priming makes that associated material in memory more accessible to conscious aware￾ness than comparable material that is not primed. Results such as these clearly demon￾strate that information can get into the mind and have some influence, without going 
through conscious experience. (An online demonstration of priming can be found at 
https://www.millisecond.com/download/library/.)
If someone were given the subliminal message “Buy a Coke,” would they be more 
likely to spontaneously go out and do so? After all, this is consistent with the psychoana￾lytic idea of the motivated unconscious—that something in the unconscious can motivate 
complex behavior. Can advertisers use subliminal messages to unconsciously motivate 
consumers? Similar questions arise concerning the influence of subliminal rock music 
messages that supposedly advocate suicide or violence. The vast majority of research on 
subliminal perception, however, suggests that unconscious information does not influ￾ence people’s motivations or unleash complex behaviors (Bargh, 2016), like getting up 
from one’s seat, finding a place that sells Coke, and actually purchasing one. Similarly, 
the average teen exposed to subliminal messages of violence in a rock song is unlikely to 
go out and commit a violent act.
In the cognitive view of the unconscious, the content of the unconscious mind is 
assumed to operate just like thoughts in consciousness. Thoughts are unconscious because 
they are not in conscious awareness, not because they have been repressed or because 
they represent unacceptable urges or wishes. For example, we might say that buttoning 
a shirt is unconscious because we can do it without focusing any conscious attention on 
the act. Typing can also be unconscious for the person who is good at it. Other kinds of 
mental content, such as beliefs and values, might also be unconscious. Such elements are 
not in our unconscious because they are threatening; nor do they exert a large influence 
on our behavior. And although unconscious material can influence subsequent thoughts 
or behavior, as in the priming examples, these influences are not consistent with the moti￾vated unconscious of classical psychoanalytic theory (Kihlstrom, 2003b; Nash, 1999). As 
such, the cognitive unconscious as viewed by contemporary psychologists is quite different 
from the motivated unconscious put forward by Sigmund Freud 120 years ago. According 
to Freud, the unconscious was a torrid and fuming cauldron of anger and eroticism. It had 
a life of its own and operated according to its own primitive and irrational rules, and had 
broad, sweeping influence over our conscious behavior, thoughts, and feelings. In con￾temporary psychology, the unconscious is peaceful, gentle, and much more rational than 
Freud’s version. Moreover, although the unconscious is still viewed as having an influence 
on behavior, thoughts, and feelings, that influence is seen as quite limited, rule governed, 
and specific compared to Freud’s version (Bargh & Morsella, 2008, 2010).
Final PDF to printer308
lar31869_ch10_296-329.indd 308 10/17/22 08:50 AM
PART THREE The Intrapsychic Domain
Ego Psychology
Another major modification to psychoanalysis concerns a shift in focus from id to ego. 
Freud’s version of psychoanalysis focused on the id, especially the twin instincts of sex 
and aggression, and how the ego responds to the demands of the id. We might charac￾terize Freudian psychoanalysis as id psychology. Later psychoanalysts felt that the ego 
deserved more attention, that it performed many constructive functions. One promi￾nent student of Freud—Erik Erikson (1902–1994)—emphasized the ego as a powerful, 
independent part of personality. Moreover, Erikson noted that the ego was involved in 
mastering the environment, achieving one’s goals, and hence establishing one’s identity. 
It is no wonder, then, that the approach to psychoanalysis started by Erikson is called 
ego psychology.
Establishing a secure identity is seen as the primary function of the ego. Identity
can be thought of as an inner sense of who we are, of what makes us unique, and a sense 
of continuity over time and a feeling of wholeness. You have probably heard the term 
identity crisis. This term comes from Erikson’s work, and it refers to the desperation and 
confusion a person feels when he or she has not developed a strong sense of self. Maybe 
you have even felt such feelings when you were uncertain about yourself, uncertain about 
who you were or how you wanted others to view you, what you valued and wanted out of 
life, and where you were going in terms of the direction of your life. A period of identity 
crisis is a common experience during adolescence and emerging adulthood. For some 
people an identity crisis also occurs later in life—the so-called midlife crisis—discussed 
more in Chapters 11 and 14, (Sheldon & Kasser, 2001).
One of Erikson’s lasting contributions was developing the notion of identity as an 
important developmental achievement in everyone’s personality. Identity has been thought 
of as a story that a person develops about himself or herself (McAdams, 1999, 2008, 
In the 2000 U.S. presidential election campaign, a Republican commercial described some of the questionable 
fund-raising efforts of Al Gore, the Democratic opponent. During the commercial, the word RATS was subliminally 
presented, along with information about Gore. After the ensuing outrage, he Bush campaign pulled the commercial. 
The full commercial, as well as other subliminal advertisements, can be found at: https://www.wordstream.com/
blog/ws/2017/10/24/subliminal-advertising. The fact that both campaign teams believed that such subliminal 
messages would have an impact on voter motivation shows that many people believe in unconscious motivation. 
Researchers are debating the power of subliminal political advertisements to influence public opinion (Weinberger & 
Westen, 2007).
REUTERS TV/REUTERS/Newscom 
Final PDF to printer(Continued )
309
lar31869_ch10_296-329.indd 309 10/17/22 08:50 AM
CHAPTER TEN Psychoanalytic Approaches: Contemporary Issues
In 1998, a scientific paper appeared in the 
journal Psychological Bulletin titled “A Meta￾analytic Examination of Assumed Properties 
of Child Sexual Abuse (CSA) Using College 
Samples” and authored by psychologists 
Bruce Rind, Philip Tromovitch, and Robert 
Bauserman. The authors’ goal was to deter￾mine whether child sexual abuse (CSA) 
causes intense or long-term psychological 
harm for both genders. They reviewed 59 
studies on this topic, all conducted on col￾lege students. By meta-analyzing these 
studies, Rind and colleagues found that stu￾dents with a history of CSA were, on aver￾age, slightly less well adjusted than students 
without a history of CSA. However, poor 
family environment also correlated with a 
history of CSA, making it impossible to argue 
that CSA in itself causes adjustment prob￾lems (independent from poor family envi￾ronment). In general, the authors concluded 
that CSA does not appear to cause as much 
intense or long-lasting psychological harm 
as might be assumed.
This paper ignited a firestorm of con￾troversy that took several years to play out. 
Most people assume that the sexual abuse 
of children is bad because of the long-term 
harm such abuse holds for children. Yet 
here was a study saying that it was difficult 
to document any substantial harm over the 
long run for childhood sexual abuse. Many 
people entered the debate because they 
were simply outraged over the conclusions 
that childhood sexual abuse was not so bad.
Other groups were outraged by 
the Rind and colleagues paper for other 
reasons. For example, psychoanalysts 
have the assumption that psychological 
problems in adulthood have their roots in 
concern is that the data were based on 
college students. Such a sample would 
exclude victims of CSA who were so trauma￾tized that they did not go on to attend col￾lege. By excluding non-college-attending 
persons from their research, the authors 
may have severely underestimated the 
effect of CSA on adult adjustment. Another 
methodological concern is the broad defini￾tion they used of CSA, which included acts 
ranging from forced sexual intercourse to 
being verbally propositioned. By including 
such “mild” abuses as being verbally prop￾ositioned (without sexual contact) in their 
definition of CSA, it could be that Rind and 
colleagues diluted the effects of real CSA 
on adjustment.
A final methodological concern 
involves the fact that most of the studies 
analyzed by Rind and colleagues relied 
completely on retrospective self-report of 
college students as the only source of data. 
A much better (though also much more dif￾ficult) approach would be a prospective 
design, where children identified as having 
been recently abused would be followed 
over the years until they are adults and 
then adjustment is assessed and compared 
with a control group that was not abused.
One can also disagree with how Rind 
and colleagues interpreted their findings. 
One issue, for example, concerns the mean￾ing of “small” when the authors describe 
the relation between CSA and such adjust￾ment outcomes as anxiety, depression, 
suicide, or divorce. It is true that the effect 
sizes conform to the statistical definition 
of small (e.g., effect sizes less than .30). 
However, even small effects can reflect 
very important consequences for some 
childhood trauma. The Rind and colleagues 
paper goes against this critical assumption 
by suggesting that the link between adult 
difficulties and sexual abuse in childhood is 
weak to nonexistent.
Organizations that endorse pedo￾philia (sexual contact between children and 
adults) applauded the Rind publication on 
their websites, citing this paper as support￾ing their moral position that sexual relations 
between children and adults is acceptable. 
In 1999 the publisher of the Psychological 
Bulletin—the American Psychological asso￾ciation—issued a statement saying that 
they do not endorse pedophilia, and that 
“the sexual abuse of children is wrong and 
harmful to its victims.” In 1999 the U.S. 
House of Representatives passed a resolu￾tion condemning the Rind and colleagues 
paper, declaring that child–adult sex was 
inherently “abusive and destructive” and 
the resolution was passed unanimously in 
the Senate.
What can we say about this paper 
in light of the controversy it started? The 
authors attacked a common assumption 
that CSA causes harm and leads to long￾term problems. Most cultures around the 
world consider it wrong for adults to have 
sexual contact with children. However, Rind 
and colleagues argued that the “wrongful￾ness” of CSA may be in question because 
its “harmfulness” is in dispute. In other 
words, because the act may not produce 
harmful consequences, we might question 
whether CSA is actually wrong.
The rebuttals of the Rind and col￾leagues paper fall into two categories: 
methodological and interpretational. On 
the methodological side, one important 
A Closer Look Does Childhood Sexual Abuse Cause 
Problems in Adulthood? Anatomy of a 
Controversy Started by a Scientific Paper
Final PDF to printerA Closer Look (Continued )
310
lar31869_ch10_296-329.indd 310 10/17/22 08:50 AM
PART THREE The Intrapsychic Domain
2011). The story answers the following questions: Who am I? What is my place in the 
adult world? What are the unifying themes of my life? What is the purpose of my exis￾tence? McAdams (e.g., 2016, McAdams & Manczak, 2015) sees identity as a narrative 
story that a person constructs. Although a person may rearrange and reconstruct the 
plot of his or her life story, it nevertheless takes on importance as the person’s unique 
story. According to McAdams, once the story has evolved to have coherent themes, 
the person may make very few changes to his or her story. However, certain events 
can cause large changes to identity and are incorporated into the narrative, such as 
graduation, marriage, birth of a child, turning 40, or retirement. Unexpected events 
can become a part of the story too, such as the death of a marriage partner, loss of a 
job, or unexpected wealth. A study by Cox and McAdams (2012) showed that even 
volunteering over spring break to work with people living in poverty can transform 
the narrative identity that college students write about themselves. McAdams (2008) 
describes how all of us construct a life story, and that part of becoming an adult is tak￾ing ownership of this story:
People begin to construct narrative identities in adolescence and young adulthood 
and continue to work on these stories across the adult life course. . . . The stories we 
construct to make sense of our lives are fundamentally about our struggle to reconcile 
who we imagine we were, are, and might be in our heads and bodies with who we 
were, are, and might be in the social contexts of family, community, the workplace, 
ethnicity, religion, gender, social class, and culture writ large. The self comes to terms 
with society through narrative identity (pp. 242–243).
people. Moreover, individuals may exhibit 
elevated levels of one type of symptom, 
but the symptoms may differ from person 
to person such that any one symptom may 
not be very elevated in the CSA population 
as a whole. In certain ways, statistical effect 
sizes do not convey the clinical or “real-life” 
significance of individual suffering and, in 
this regard, can be misleading.
Another interpretation issue concerns 
the fact that, because their data suggest 
that CSA is not related to adult problems, 
Rind and colleagues (1998) go on to allude 
that CSA is not, in itself, morally wrong. 
However, this is a slippery slope. Such a 
position holds that in order for something 
to be morally wrong, it must be shown to 
be harmful. It confuses a moral standard 
with a scientific standard, and science can 
only document facts, not decide on right 
public letter written by the then American 
Psychological Association CEO Raymond 
Fowler to Congressman Delay, holding “that 
children cannot consent to sexual activity 
with adults” and that such activity “should 
never be considered or labeled as harm￾less or acceptable” (American Psychological 
Association, 1999). Because society 
believes that children lack the maturity to 
make important life decisions, they need to 
be protected from those who would exploit 
their immaturity. In this sense, the data from 
the Rind and colleagues article are irrelevant 
to whether CSA is morally wrong. The huge 
controversy surrounding the article was not 
so much an attempt to censure unpopular 
and surprising results. Much of the contro￾versy can be traced to the authors’ use of 
science to replace morality; they confused 
“harmfulness” with “wrongness.”
and wrong. Ultimately, the question boils 
down to how we decide if something is mor￾ally wrong. Legally, the definition of most 
wrongs is given by society’s norms, by what 
most people feel is wrong or inappropriate. 
When it comes to children, society generally 
believes that they are incapable of making 
rational and informed life decisions. For 
example, in U.S. society, children are not 
allowed to enter into financial contracts, to 
decide whether they want to attend school, 
or to consent to medical procedures. Add 
to this list society’s belief that children can￾not consent to sexual relations. The moral 
basis is that children cannot consent to sex 
because they have little knowledge about 
what is being consented to. Also, when an 
adult forces the issue, the child may not 
have the freedom to accept or decline. 
This position is well summarized in a 1999 
Final PDF to printer311
lar31869_ch10_296-329.indd 311 10/17/22 08:50 AM
CHAPTER TEN Psychoanalytic Approaches: Contemporary Issues
Erikson’s Eight Stages of Development
Whereas Freud taught that our personalities were formed by around the age of 5 years, 
Erikson disagreed and felt that important developmental changes occurred throughout 
the life span, from birth to old age. For example, Freud called the period from age 6 to 
puberty the latency period because he believed nothing psychologically important was 
happening. However, Erikson points out that this is a period when children are start￾ing to go to school; they are learning to work and to gain satisfaction from success and 
from accomplishments; they are learning to be sociable, to share, and to cooperate with 
peers; and they are learning about social structures, such as the fact that teachers are in 
charge and represent authorities. Erikson (1963, 1968) argued that much development 
occurred during the years that Freud called “latency.” Indeed, Erikson believed that the 
development of personality lasted well into adulthood and even into old age (Erikson, 
1975). He outlined his theory of personality growth into eight stages of development
through which people all pass (Figure 10.2). 
So Erikson disagreed strongly with Freud about the time span of personality 
development. In addition, Erikson also disagreed with Freud about the conflict, or 
crisis, that occurs at each stage. Whereas Freud felt that the crises were inherently 
Figure 10.2
Erikson’s eight stages of development.
 Despair vs. integrity 
Maladaptive
resolutions
Adaptive
resolutions
Stagnation vs. generativity 
Isolation vs. intimacy 
Role confusion vs. identity 
Inferiority vs. industry 
Guilt vs. initiative 
Shame and doubt vs. autonomy 
Mistrust vs. trust 
Old age
Adulthood
Young adult
Adolescence
Elementary
school
Young childhood
Toddlerhood
Infancy
Final PDF to printer312
lar31869_ch10_296-329.indd 312 10/17/22 08:50 AM
PART THREE The Intrapsychic Domain
sexual in nature, Erikson believed that the crises were of a social nature. After all, he 
argued, the persons with whom we have our first social relationships are our parents. 
Thus, there could be crises of learning to trust our parents, learning to be autonomous 
from them, learning from them how to act as an adult. Developing children also learn 
to relate to authority figures (e.g., teachers), to peers in various ways, and develop 
special bonds of intimacy with one or a few special others. He called these psycho￾social conflicts rather than the psychosexual conflicts that formed Freud’s theory of 
developmental stages.
Although Erikson disagreed with Freud on these two issues of development 
(the time frame and the nature of the crises encountered), he did agree with Freud on 
three general points of development. First, like Freud, Erikson kept a stage model of
development, implying that people go through the stages in a certain order, at particu￾lar time points in life, and that there is a specific issue that characterizes each stage. 
Secondly, Erikson believed that at each stage the person encountered a specific conflict, 
a developmental crisis, that needed to be resolved in an adaptive way that allowed them 
to advance to the next stage. Third, Erikson maintained the notion of fixation, meaning 
that if the crisis was not successfully and adaptively resolved, then personality develop￾ment could become hampered and the person would continue to be preoccupied with 
issues at that stage of development. Let’s now briefly consider each of the eight stages.
Trust Versus Mistrust
When children are born, they are completely dependent on those around them. Their 
first questions would most likely be “Who’s going to take care of me, and will they do a 
good job? Can I trust that they will feed me when I am hungry, warm me when I am cold, 
comfort me when I cry, and generally take care of me?” If children are well taken care 
of, if their basic needs are met, then they will develop a sense of trust in their caregivers. 
This sense of trust, according to Erikson, forms the basis of all future relationships, with 
trusting children growing up believing that other people are approachable, trustable, and 
generally good and loving. However, some infants are not well taken care of, for various 
reasons, and they never receive the love and care they need and are not trusting of their 
caregiver. Such infants develop a sense that others are not to be trusted and may develop 
a lifelong pattern of mistrust in others, suspiciousness, and feelings of estrangement, 
isolation, or social discomfort when around others.
Autonomy Versus Shame and Doubt
Around the second year, most children are on their feet and on the go. This is the stage 
many parents call the “terrible twos.” Children begin experimenting with their new abili￾ties, including running when the parents tell them to walk, screaming when the parents 
tell them to “use your inside voice.” Children at this stage test parental limits as they try 
to answer the question “How much of the world do I control?” A good outcome is when 
a child feels a sense of control and mastery over things and develops self-confidence 
and a sense of autonomy that lets the child explore and learn. If parents inhibit such 
autonomy, perhaps by being strict, restrictive, or punishing when the child is indepen￾dent, then the child may feel shame and doubt over the goals he or she is contemplating. 
Overly protective parents can also cause problems, according to Erikson, in that they 
can hinder the child’s natural urge to explore and to encounter a wide variety of life 
events and experiences. For example, parents who prevent their child from rough-and￾tumble play with other children may cause their child to grow up doubting his or her 
physical ability.
Final PDF to printer313
lar31869_ch10_296-329.indd 313 10/17/22 08:50 AM
CHAPTER TEN Psychoanalytic Approaches: Contemporary Issues
Initiative Versus Guilt
Children at this stage—around 3 years of age—often imitate adults, dressing in adult 
clothes, playing adults, and acting as adults. Children at this stage receive their first 
practice in adult tasks during play. As adults, we must learn how to work together, to 
follow leaders, and to resolve disputes. When children play, they practice these skills by 
organizing games, choosing teams and leaders, and forming goals. Then, during school 
activities they also take the initiative to accomplish goals and to work with a distinct 
purpose in mind. If all goes well, children at this stage develop a sense of initiative, which 
translates into ambition and goal seeking. Such children strive to attain their goals. If 
things do not go well, children may come to expect they will fail in adult tasks and may 
feel guilty when they try, or even think of trying, to act like an adult. An adult might 
scold the child “Who do YOU think you are?” making the child feel guilty over the goals 
they are contemplating. The child might dampen their initiative and become resigned to 
feeling guilty over wanting to become an adult.
Industry Versus Inferiority
This stage is about experiencing some success in childhood. Of course, children have 
limited abilities, and there is a lot of competition in school, in sports, and in most areas 
of their young lives. Starting around age 4, children begin comparing themselves to 
each other, especially those their own age, and many (although not all) develop a sense 
of competence and achievement: “I’m the fastest runner in my class” or “I’m the best 
speller.” If children have enough success experiences, then they believe in their strength 
and abilities and assume that if they just work hard enough, they can do most things 
they desire to do. This sense of industry—feeling as if they can work to achieve what they 
want—sets children on their way to being productive members of society. However, with 
enough failure experiences, children might develop a sense of inferiority, feeling that 
they don’t have the talent or ability to get ahead in life. If a child believes their efforts 
don’t pay off, that no matter how much they work they don’t succeed, then they become 
pessimistic, anticipating failure and inferior results for their future.
Identity Versus Role Confusion
During adolescence, people go through a whole series of dramatic physical changes that 
accompany puberty. This can be an especially confusing time of life, in which people 
emerge from childhood into adulthood, whether they are ready or not. Erikson gave this 
period special attention in his work, referring to identity achievement as one of the most 
important goals of development.
At this stage, adolescents begin to ask themselves the questions “Who am I?” and 
“Do others recognize me for who I think I am?” Many people do a lot of experimenta￾tion at this stage, trying on many different identities. One semester, a high school student 
might try on the role of athlete; the next semester, the role of punk rocker; the next 
semester, born-again Christian; and the next semester, Goth. Experimenting with identi￾ties is common at this time of life, with teenagers searching for identity in all sorts of 
ways and places. One student said he was going to Hawaii to “find himself.” In actuality, 
no matter where you go, there you are, so the search for identity really has no special 
place. But many people at this stage join groups; drift around socially; commit them￾selves to various causes or ideals; or experiment with drugs, politics, or religion—all in an 
effort to find the true “me.” Eventually, most people make some decisions about what 
is important and what they value and want out of life, and they acquire a sense of “who 
they are,” achieving some degree of consistent self-understanding. People who fail in this 
Final PDF to printer314
lar31869_ch10_296-329.indd 314 10/17/22 08:50 AM
PART THREE The Intrapsychic Domain
stage develop role confusion and enter adulthood without a solid sense of who they are 
or what they think is the meaning of their lives. Such people bounce around among all 
sorts of roles and are generally unstable in their relationships, in their jobs, and in their 
goals and values.
People differ from one another in the extent to which they commit themselves to 
their values, careers, relationships, and ideologies (Marcia, 2002). Most people will pass 
through a period of identity confusion, which refers to not having a strong sense of who 
one really is. Some cultures institute a rite of passage ritual, usually around adolescence, 
which typically is a ceremony that initiates a child into adulthood. For example, some 
southwestern American Indians send adolescent males to be alone in the wilderness, fast￾ing, until they have a vision. After such ceremonies, the adolescent is sometimes given 
a new name, bestowing a new adult identity. Secular American culture does not provide 
common rite of passage rituals, though certain religions do, such as the Confirmation 
ritual in Roman Catholicism or Bar/Bat Mitzvah in Judaism.
In resolving the identity crisis, some persons develop a negative identity, an iden￾tity founded on undesirable social roles, such as street gang member. Unfortunately, 
modern culture provides many undesirable role models. Because this is a time of life 
when youngsters are looking for models, most are very impressionable. This is one rea￾son most states keep their juvenile court system separate from the adult court system, so 
that young persons do not come into contact with adult criminals to use as role models.
Identity is something that must be achieved. If a person commits to an identity 
they did not work for or that was handed to them, then that identity is likely to be shal￾low or changeable (Marcia, 1966). Indeed, Marcia (2002) holds that mature identity 
development involves going through a crisis and emerging with a firm sense of commit￾ment to one’s values, relationships, or career. If a person does not have a crisis, or if he 
or she forms an identity without exploring alternatives, such as accepting the values of 
parents, then this is called identity foreclosure. People in identity foreclosure are often 
moralistic and conventional, but when asked to back up their positions, they often can￾not provide a good rationale for their beliefs and opinions.
A final concept relevant to identity development, especially to college students, 
concerns the notion of a moratorium. This refers basically to taking time to explore 
options before making a commitment to an identity. In some ways, college can be 
thought of as a socially approved period in which a young person is able to explore a vari￾ety of roles and responsibilities before taking any one set on “for real.” One can change 
majors, change social groups, explore different relationships, meet people from diverse 
backgrounds, spend a semester studying abroad, and learn about a variety of fields of 
study before committing to any ideals and values. Erikson himself emphasized exploring 
alternatives before making a commitment to a particular identity (1968). He held that 
only after considering alternatives and spending time “shopping around” was a person 
ready to make commitments and to spend the rest of his or her life honoring those com￾mitments. This is what it means to say that the development of an identity takes work 
(Newman & Newman, 1988).
Intimacy Versus Isolation
Connecting with others, both in terms of friendships and intimate relationships, becomes 
a prime concern toward the latter half of the teenage years. People at this stage appear 
to have a need to develop relationships that are mutually satisfying and intimate. In such 
relationships, people grow emotionally and develop into caring, nurturing, and provid￾ing adults. For many people, this takes the form of making a commitment to one person 
Final PDF to printer315
lar31869_ch10_296-329.indd 315 10/17/22 08:50 AM
CHAPTER TEN Psychoanalytic Approaches: Contemporary Issues
Lee Malvo (Left) and John Muhammad were convicted of the sniper murders of several 
people in the Washington, D.C., area in 2002. Lee Malvo, who was 17 years old at the 
time of the crimes, pled that he was so much under the influence of the older man, John 
Muhammad, that he, Lee Malvo, should not be held responsible for any of the shootings. 
Malvo was most likely in a period of identity confusion. Malvo was sentenced to, and is 
currently serving, six consecutive life terms in a Virginia supermax prison without the 
possibility of parole. The older man with whom Malvo identified—John Muhammad—was 
executed by lethal injection according to Virginia law on November 10, 2009.
Left: Davis Turner-Pool/Getty Images News/Getty Images; Right: Jahi Chikwendiu-Pool/Getty 
Images News/Getty Images
through marriage. But many others find intimacy without the social contract of mar￾riage. And of course, marriage is no guarantee of intimacy, as it is certainly possible to 
have a marriage that is devoid of intimate feelings.
Isolation is the result of a failure to find or maintain intimacy. In the United States, 
the percentage of married people has dropped, from 72 percent in 1970 to 59 percent in 
2000. The total number of divorced persons in the United States was 4.3 million in 1970, 
but that number had risen to 20 million by 2000. In 2006, the number of never-married 
persons aged 18 and over reached 55 million. Certainly, being single has its benefits 
(DePaulo, 2006); however, most people report that a satisfying intimate relationship 
is something they desire. Failing to achieve this level of relationship is often a serious 
impairment to one’s happiness and life satisfaction (Diener & Biswas-Diener, 2008).
Generativity Versus Stagnation
At this stage, occupying most of the adult years, the main question concerns whether 
or not the person has generated something that he or she really cares about in life. 
Often this takes the form of a career that one cares about. Other times, it is a family 
that has generated children that the parent cares about. Sometimes caring is achieved 
in a hobby or a volunteer activity that is particularly generative and that gives the 
Final PDF to printer316
lar31869_ch10_296-329.indd 316 10/17/22 08:50 AM
PART THREE The Intrapsychic Domain
person something to care about. The crisis at this stage is that when people step back 
and look at their adult years, they might get the feeling they are just spinning their 
wheels, stagnating. In other words, without anything to really care about, people may 
feel that their lives really don’t matter or have any meaning or purpose. Some adults 
are just “going through the motions,” and they really don’t care about anything. The 
people who don’t really care about what they are doing, who are just going through 
the motions, are easily seen as phonies. For example, maybe you’ve had a teacher 
who really didn’t care about the course material, who just came in, lectured blandly, 
and left. You have probably also had teachers who cared deeply about their topic, 
whose lectures were enlivened by their interest and enthusiasm, and who obviously 
drew satisfaction and meaning from their role as teacher or professor (see Professor 
Randy Pausch’s “Last Lecture” on YouTube). This is the difference between genera￾tivity and stagnation.
Integrity Versus Despair
This is the last stage of development, occurring toward the end of life, and even this 
stage contains a crisis, a final issue, to face. This occurs when we let go of the genera￾tive role; maybe we retire from the jobs we loved, maybe the children we loved and 
raised leave home and start their own lives, or maybe the hobbies or volunteer activi￾ties we found so meaningful are no longer possible for us. We start the process of with￾drawing from life, pulling back from our adult roles, and preparing to face death. At 
this stage, we look back on our lives and ask: “Was it all worth doing?” “Did I accom￾plish most of what I wanted to do in life?” If we can take some satisfaction in our lives, 
then we can face the inevitability of our passing with a measure of integrity (again, see 
Professor Randy Pausch’s “Last Lecture” on YouTube for an example of integrity at 
the end of life). However, if we are dissatisfied with our lives, have regrets, if we wish 
we had more time to make changes or repair relationships, then we experience despair. 
People who have a lot of regrets at the end of their lives become bitter old people who 
in despair. On the other hand, if people feel that their one go-around was acceptable, 
that they pretty much did it all up right and have no regrets, then they face their end 
with integrity.
Freidrich Nietzsche (1844–1900), a German 
philosopher, wrote a story in his book Thus Spoke 
Zarathustra (1891/1969) about a person walking 
on a mountain trail. Along the trail, a troll suddenly 
jumps out and kills the person. The person, however, 
is immediately reborn to the same parents, is given 
the same name, and lives the same life as before. Then 
one day, again the person is walking on a mountain 
trail and a troll suddenly jumps out and slays the 
person, who is reborn to the same parents, is given 
the same name as before, and lives the same life. The 
point, Nietzsche says, concerns what a person would 
think about this eternal return of the same life. If you 
would not want to live your life over and over again, 
then perhaps you should make some changes to it 
now, as you are living it. The person who says, “Yes, I 
wouldn’t mind another go-around of my life, even if it 
were all the same,” is someone who would go through 
Erikson’s last stage and achieve integrity.
Late in life there is still one more developmental stage, one more set of 
questions to be faced: “Was it all worthwhile? Did I accomplish most of what I 
wanted out of life?” How one answers these questions determines whether the 
remaining time is filled with bitterness and despair or satisfaction and integrity.
Ronnie Kaufman/Blend Images LLC
Final PDF to printer317
lar31869_ch10_296-329.indd 317 10/17/22 08:50 AM
CHAPTER TEN Psychoanalytic Approaches: Contemporary Issues
Karen Horney and a Feminist Interpretation of Psychoanalysis
Karen Horney (1885–1952; pronounced Horn-eye) was another early proponent of ego 
psychology. Like Erikson, she was an American doctor who became strongly influenced 
by Freud and his theory of personality development and change. Horney was a psycho￾analyst at a time when most doctors and practically all psychoanalysts in America were 
men, practicing from the 1930s up to about 1950. She questioned some of the more 
paternalistic notions of Freudian psychoanalysis and reformulated some of the ideas 
to generate a more feminist perspective on personality development. For example, she 
reacted against Freud’s notion of penis envy. Recall that Freud interpreted the phallic 
stage for women as a sexual conflict, starting when a little girl realizes she does not have 
a penis. Horney taught that the penis was a symbol of social power rather than an organ 
women actually desired. Horney wrote that girls realize, at an early age, that they are 
being denied social power because of their gender. She argued that girls did not really 
have a secret desire to become boys. Rather, she taught, girls desired the social power 
and preferences given to boys in the culture. Culture is a set of shared standards for 
many behaviors. For example, whether a person should feel ashamed about promiscuous 
sexual behavior is determined by a cultural norm. Moreover, culture might contain dif￾ferent standards for males and females, such that girls should be ashamed if they engage 
in promiscuous sex, whereas boys should be proud of such behavior, with it being cultur￾ally acceptable at that time in history for them to even brag about such behavior.
Horney was among the first psychoanalysts to stress the cultural and historical 
determinants of personality, which we explore in more detail in Chapters 16 and 17. 
Horney noted that many gender roles were defined by culture. For example, she coined 
the phrase fear of success to highlight a gender difference in response to competition and 
achievement situations. Many women, she argued, felt that if they were to succeed they 
would lose their friends. Consequently many women, she thought, harbored an uncon￾scious fear of success. She held that men, on the other 
hand, believed they would actually gain friends by being 
successful and hence were not at all afraid to strive and 
pursue achievement. This points to an important cultural 
influence on gendered behavior.
Horney stressed the point that, although biology 
determines sex, cultural norms are used to determine 
what is acceptable for a typical male and female in that 
culture. Partly because of Horney, today we use the terms 
masculine and feminine to refer to traits or roles typi￾cally associated with being male or female in a particu￾lar culture, and we refer to differences in such culturally 
ascribed roles and traits as gender differences, not sex dif￾ferences. This distinction, important to modern feminism, 
can be traced back to Karen Horney. It is unfortunate 
that Horney died in 1952 and did not see the progress 
made by the women’s movement, of which she can truly 
be counted as an early leader.
Horney had very personal knowledge of the social 
and cultural forces that oppressed women in her era. 
Colleagues in the male-dominated profession of psy￾choanalysis were disapproving of her skeptical attitudes 
toward classical Freudian ideas. In 1941, the members of 
Feminist psychoanalysts recognize that cultural forces, not biology, 
restrict the social roles that women may fill. Cultural forces can change 
as the social roles deemed appropriate for women change. One place 
this is evident is in the role of “Presidential Candidate,” a social role 
traditionally deemed appropriate only for men. In the 2020 U.S. 
presidential primaries, a record-setting number (6) of women competed 
for the democratic nomination. Kamala Harris, attorney general for 
the state of California at the time and depicted here, was one of those 
women. While the “glass ceiling” was not completely broken in the 
2020 presidential election, Kamala Harris was elected Vice President 
of the United States. She is the first woman to serve in this important 
and influential social role.
Final PDF to printer318
lar31869_ch10_296-329.indd 318 10/17/22 08:50 AM
PART THREE The Intrapsychic Domain
the New York Psychoanalytic Institute voted to remove Horney from her position as 
instructor there. Horney left immediately and went on to establish her own American 
Institute for Psychoanalysis, which was very successful. Indeed, she went on to develop a 
major reconceptualization of psychoanalysis, which stressed social influences over biol￾ogy and gave special attention to interpersonal processes in the creation and mainte￾nance of mental disorders and other problems with living. Her intriguing theories were 
laid out in a series of highly readable books (Horney, 1937, 1939, 1945, 1950).
Emphasis on Self and the Notion of Narcissism
Ego psychology generally emphasizes the role of identity, which is experienced by the 
person as a sense of self. Contemporary psychoanalysts Kernberg (1975) and Kohut 
(1977) are important contributors to the psychoanalytic conception of the role of the 
self in normal personality functioning and in disorders. In normal personality func￾tioning, most people develop a stable and relatively high level of self-esteem, they have 
some pride in what they have so far accomplished, they have realistic ambitions for the 
future, and they feel that they are getting the attention and affection from others that 
they deserve. Most of us have a healthy level of self-esteem; we consider ourselves worth￾while, we like ourselves, and we believe that others like us as well. And most of us engage 
in self-serving biases, which refers to the common tendency for people to take credit for 
successes yet to deny responsibility for failure.
Some take self-esteem too far, however, trying to increase their self-worth in vari￾ous problematic ways. For example, they may constantly try to appear more powerful 
than others, more independent, or more liked by others. This style of inflated self-admi￾ration and constant attempts to draw attention to the self and to keep others focused on 
oneself is called narcissism. Sometimes narcissism is carried to extremes and becomes 
narcissistic personality disorder (see Chapter 19). However, narcissistic tendencies can 
be found in normal range levels, characterized as an extreme self-focus, a sense of being 
special, feelings of entitlement (that one deserves treatment without having to earn it), 
and a constant search for others who will serve as one’s private fan club and provide 
unqualified admiration and praise.
There is a paradox, however, commonly called the narcissistic paradox: Although 
a narcissist appears high in self-esteem, he or she actually has doubts about his or her 
worth as a person. Although the narcissist appears confident and sure of him-or herself, 
the person needs constant praise, reassurance, and attention from others. Although the 
narcissist appears to have a grandiose sense of self-importance, he or she is nevertheless 
very vulnerable to blows to his or her self-esteem and cannot handle criticism very well. 
In contemporary psychoanalysis, narcissism is seen as disturbance in the sense of self 
that has many implications for creating problems with living and relating to others.
An example of one problem associated with narcissism is that when narcissists are 
criticized or challenged, they may behave aggressively, trying to achieve some respect by 
attacking or belittling their critics. The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual V (APA, 2013) 
suggests that persons with narcissistic personality disorder can be at risk for violence fol￾lowing blows to their self-esteem, such as getting reprimanded at work or having been 
left by a spouse. This tendency toward violence in response to criticism was illustrated 
in a laboratory study conducted by psychologists Bushman and Baumeister (1998). The 
subjects came to the laboratory and wrote a short essay on a topic given to them. Another 
person then commented on the essays they had just written, providing strong criticism of 
the subjects’ opinions. Later in the experiment, the subjects were given the opportunity 
to play a computer game with their critic and were allowed to “blast” their opponent with 
Final PDF to printer319
lar31869_ch10_296-329.indd 319 10/17/22 08:50 AM
CHAPTER TEN Psychoanalytic Approaches: Contemporary Issues
loud bursts of noise during the game; that is, subjects could distract their opponents with 
irritating blasts of noise during the competition. The narcissistic subjects who had been 
insulted blasted the critic much more aggressively than did either the non-narcissistic per￾sons or the narcissistic persons who had not received criticism. This finding suggests that 
narcissism can lead to vengeful aggression when the narcissist is provoked or criticized. 
People with secure and normally healthy levels of self-esteem, however, do not become 
vengeful and aggressive when criticized (Rhodenwalt & Morf, 1998).
A questionnaire measure of narcissism. The following items are from the Narcissistic 
Personality Inventory (NPI) (Raskin & Hall, 1979).
Exercise
	 1.	 I think I am a special person. True or False
	 2.	 I expect a great deal from other people. True or False
	 3.	 I am envious of other people’s good fortune. True or False
	 4.	 I will never be satisfied until I get all that I deserve. True or False
	 5.	 I really like to be the center of attention. True or False
In one interesting study of narcissism, it was found that the number of first￾person pronouns a person used in an essay (I, mine, me) was correlated positively 
with narcissism scores (Emmons, 1987). In another study it was found that when 
given the opportunity to watch themselves on videotape or to watch a tape of some￾one else, the narcissists spent more time watching the tape of themselves (Robins & 
John, 1997). This study also showed that narcissists rate their own performance on 
the videotape much more positively than it is rated by others, implying an inflated 
sense of their own abilities.
In sum, narcissism is not the same as having high self-esteem (Brown & Ziegler￾Hill, 2004). Studies have confirmed the theoretical notions that narcissists are preoc￾cupied with self, are vulnerable to criticism and blows to their self-worth, and respond 
to such challenges with anger and aggression. Although narcissists appear to have 
high self-esteem, their internal or private self-representations are fragile and vulner￾able. Clearly, an important notion from contemporary psychoanalytic thought is that 
one’s internal representation of self plays an important role in how one interacts 
with, and reacts to, the social environment. In the next section, you see how contem￾porary psychoanalysis also focuses on the internal representation of other persons 
and how this influences social relationships later in life.
Object Relations Theory
Other changes to Freud’s original ideas have been so sweeping that one new approach 
drops the term “analytic” altogether: object relations theory. Recall that Freud empha￾sized sexuality in the development of personality. He viewed the adult personality as 
the result of how people accommodate the inevitable conflicts between their desires 
for sexual pleasure from various body parts and the constraints of parents, social 
Final PDF to printer320
lar31869_ch10_296-329.indd 320 10/17/22 08:50 AM
PART THREE The Intrapsychic Domain
institutions, and civilized society. Freud’s empha￾sis on sexuality has been completely rethought by 
recent generations of psychoanalysts. This new 
movement—object relations theory—emphasizes 
social relationships and their origins in childhood.
Consider the Phallic phase of development. 
Freud stressed the sexual attraction for the parent 
of the opposite sex and the accompanying fear, rage, 
anger, and jealousy toward the parent of the same 
sex. Psychoanalysts after Freud looked at the same 
childhood situation and saw, instead, the importance 
of forming social relationships to the developing 
personality. Later analysts emphasized not sexuality 
but, instead, the development of meaningful social 
relationships as the task that occurs at this stage of 
development. After all, the first persons with whom 
we have meaningful relationships are usually our par￾ents, and in particular the primary caregiver.
Although object relations theory has several ver￾sions, which differ from each other in emphasis, all the 
versions have at their core a set of basic assumptions. 
One assumption is that the internal wishes, desires, 
and urges of the child are not as important as his or her 
developing relationships with significant external others, particularly parents or caregivers. A 
second important assumption is that the others, particularly the mother, become internalized
by the child in the form of mental objects. The child creates an unconscious mental represen￾tation of the mother. The child, thus, has an unconscious “mother” within, to whom he or she 
can relate. This allows the child to have a relationship with this internalized object, even in the 
absence of the real mother—hence the term object relations theory.
The relationship object the child internalizes is based on his or her developing 
relationship with the mother or primary caregiver. If things are going well between the 
mother and the infant, the infant internalizes a caring, nurturant, trustworthy mother 
object. This image then forms the fundamentals for how children come to view others 
with whom they develop subsequent relationships. If the child internalizes a mother 
object who is not trustworthy, perhaps because the real mother has left the child alone 
too often or has not fed or soothed the child regularly, then the child might have diffi￾culty learning to trust other people later in life. Children who are traumatically separated 
from their parents during infancy or early childhood—who experience an attachment 
disruption—often become adults with distinct personality problems (Malone, Westen, 
& Levendosky, 2011). The first social attachments that the infant develops form the 
templates for all meaningful relationships in the future. This is consistent with the classic 
psychoanalytic idea that the “child is father to the man,” in the sense that what develops 
in childhood determines the outcomes in adulthood. However, in the neo-analytic case, 
it is early childhood experience with caregivers, especially attachment to the primary 
caregiver, that determines adult personality.
Early Childhood Attachment
Work on early childhood attachment has drawn on a couple of lines of research in develop￾mental psychology. The first line of research was the work by Harry Harlow (1905–1981) 
and others on infant monkeys. Harlow’s well-known 
In 2019, the U.S. government instituted a policy of separating immigrant 
families in an effort to deter the flow of migration across the southern U.S. 
border. Many U.S. citizens were outraged at the images of infants and young 
children being taken from their parents and put in detention in the United 
States while the parents were deported. Object relations theory emphasizes the 
importance of the attachment bond between children and parents and points to 
the long-term consequences of disrupting that bond along with the separation 
anxiety it causes the children and their parents.
David J. Phillip/AP Images
Final PDF to printer321
lar31869_ch10_296-329.indd 321 10/17/22 08:50 AM
CHAPTER TEN Psychoanalytic Approaches: Contemporary Issues
monkeys away from their real mothers and raising them 
with models of mother monkeys made of wire or cloth. 
These fake mothers did not provide the grooming, cud￾dling, holding, or social contact of the real mothers. The 
infant monkeys raised with the unresponsive fake mothers 
developed problems in adolescence and adulthood, grow￾ing into adults who were socially insecure, were generally 
anxious, and did not develop normal sexual relations as 
adults (Harlow, 1958; Harlow & Suomi, 1971; Harlow & 
Zimmerman, 1959). Moreover, the infant monkeys pre￾ferred their real mothers to the fake mothers, and they pre￾ferred the cloth mother to the wire mother when given the 
choice. Harlow concluded that attachment between infant 
and primary caregiver required physical contact with a 
warm and responsive mother and that it is vitally important 
to the psychological development of the infant.
Attachment to the mother or caregiver during the 
first six months of life appears to be crucial to all pri￾mates, including humans. Attachment in the human 
infant begins when he or she develops a preference for 
people over objects. For example, the child prefers to look 
at a human face rather than at a toy. Then the preference 
begins to narrow to familiar persons so that the child pre￾fers to see people he or she has seen before, compared 
with strangers. And finally the preference narrows even 
further so that the child prefers the mother or primary 
caregiver over anyone else.
The ways in which young children develop attach￾ments to their parents and caregivers was the primary 
topic of research for British psychologist John Bowlby 
(1907–1990) (1969a, 1969b, 1980, 1988). Bowlby 
focused on the attachment relationship with the mother 
and how that relationship meets the needs of the infant for protection, nurturance, and 
support. Bowlby studied what happens when this attachment relationship is temporarily 
broken, as when the mother has to leave the infant alone for a short time. He noticed that 
some infants seem to trust that the mother will return and provide uninterrupted care—
these infants are happy when the mother returns. Other infants, in contrast, react nega￾tively to separation and become agitated and distressed when the mother leaves. They 
can be calmed only by the return of the mother. Bowlby said these infants experience 
separation anxiety. Bowlby also observed a third type of infants, who seem to become 
depressed when their mothers leave. Even when the mother returns, these infants seem 
to remain detached from, or angry at, their mothers.
Psychologist Mary Ainsworth (1913–1999) and her colleagues developed a 
20-minute procedure for studying separation anxiety—a procedure used for identifying 
differences among children in how they react to separation from their mothers. This is 
called the strange situation procedure. In this procedure, a mother and her baby enter 
the laboratory room, which is like a comfortable living room. The mother sits down, and 
the child is free to explore the toys and other things in the room. After a few minutes, a 
stranger, an unfamiliar but friendly adult, enters the room. The mother then gets up and 
leaves the baby alone with this unfamiliar adult. After a few minutes, the mother returns 
The strong bond between infant and primary caregiver, called attachment, 
is important in the development of all primates, including humans.
IMPALASTOCK/iStock/Getty Images
Final PDF to printer322
lar31869_ch10_296-329.indd 322 10/17/22 08:50 AM
PART THREE The Intrapsychic Domain
minutes. All the while, the infant is being videotaped, so that his or her reactions can 
later be analyzed.
Across many studies, Ainsworth and her colleagues (e.g., Ainsworth, 1979; 
Ainsworth, Bell, & Stayton, 1972) found essentially the same three patterns of behavior 
noted by Bowlby. One group of infants, called securely attached, stoically endured the 
separation and went about exploring the room, waiting patiently or even approaching the 
stranger and sometimes wanting to be held by the stranger. When the mothers returned, 
these infants were glad to see them, typically interacted with them for a while, then went 
back to exploring the new environment. These infants seemed confident their mothers 
would return, hence the term secure. This group of infants was the largest of the three 
(66 percent fell into this securely attached group).
The second group, called the avoidantly attached group, consisted of infants who 
avoided the mothers when they returned. The infants in this group typically seemed unfazed 
when the mothers left and typically did not give them much attention when they returned, 
as if aloof from their mothers. Approximately 20 percent of the babies fell into this category.
Ainsworth called the third category of infant response to separation the ambiva￾lently attached group. The infants in this group were very anxious about the mothers’ 
leaving. Many started crying and protesting vigorously before the mothers even got out 
of the room. When the mothers were gone, these infants were difficult to calm. On the 
mothers’ return, however, the infants behaved ambivalently. Their behavior showed both 
anger and a desire to be close to the mothers; they approached their mothers but then 
resisted by squirming and fighting against being held.
Mothers of babies in these three groups appear to behave differently. According 
to subsequent research, reviewed by Ainsworth and Bowlby (1991), mothers of securely 
attached infants provide more affection and stimulation to their babies, and are gener￾ally more responsive, than mothers of infants in the other two groups. These studies 
have provided clear evidence that a caregiver’s responsiveness to infants leads to a more 
harmonious relationship later in life between the child and parents. For example, in one 
study, responsiveness to infant crying in the early months of life was associated with less 
(not more) crying at 1 year of age. Although this finding was greeted with disbelief at 
first, especially by learning theorists, it eventually influenced recommendations for par￾enting practices (Bretherton & Main, 2000).
Mothers of babies from both the ambivalent and the avoidant groups tend to be 
less attentive to their children, less responsive to their needs. Such mothers appear to be 
less in tune or less engaged with their babies. Some children react to these less responsive 
mothers by becoming angry themselves (the ambivalent infants) or becoming emotion￾ally detached (the avoidant infants). Fraley, Roisman, and Haltigan (2013) showed that 
maternal insensitivity assessed when the child was 3 years old was related to lower social 
competence and academic skills when the child was 15 years old. Although there may 
be alternative explanations for these findings, they are nevertheless consistent with the 
notion that the lack of maternal responsiveness can have negative childhood outcomes.
These early experiences and reactions of the infant to the parents, particularly the 
mother, become what Bowlby called working models for later adult relationships. These 
working models are internalized in the form of unconscious expectations about relation￾ships. If children experience that they are not wanted, or that their mothers cannot be 
trusted to respond to them, then they may internalize the expectation that probably no 
one else wants them either, or that no one else can be trusted. On the other hand, if 
children’s needs are met, and they are confident that their parents really love them, then 
they will expect that others will find them lovable as well (Bowlby, 1988). These expec￾tations about future relationships, which are developed in our first contacts with our 
Final PDF to printer323
lar31869_ch10_296-329.indd 323 10/17/22 08:50 AM
CHAPTER TEN Psychoanalytic Approaches: Contemporary Issues
caregivers, are thought to become part of our unconscious and thereby exert a powerful 
influence on our adult relationships.
We might believe that the “strange situation” paradigm is useful only for thinking 
about how children cope with a temporary separation from their caregivers. However, 
some researchers are studying an adult analogue of this paradigm, where married couples 
are temporarily separated by life circumstances (Cafferty et al., 1994). These researchers 
conducted a longitudinal study on members of the National Guard and other military 
reserve units who were separated from their spouses and deployed overseas. They found 
that attachment styles predicted individual differences in emotional reactions to partner 
separation (securely attached persons were not as distressed) and to post-reunion adjust￾ments (ambivalently attached persons had the most difficulty). When adult marital rela￾tionships are temporarily disrupted, it may be that the persons in those relationships will 
react in ways that resemble how they coped with their earliest attachment separations. 
In this way the attachment bonds developed in infancy and early childhood may lay the 
foundation for adult romantic attachment bonds developed decades later.
Adult Relationships
Research on attachment has tested object relations ideas by examining whether the 
attachment style developed in childhood is related to later adult relationship styles. In 
2010, an entire issue of the Journal of Social and Personal Relationships was dedicated 
to research on how childhood attachment styles are related to adolescent and adult 
relationships (Shaver & Mikulincer, 2010). In a study that started this line of research, 
psychologists Hazan and Shaver (1987) showed that there are patterns of adult relation￾ships that look similar to the secure, avoidant, and ambivalent childhood attachment 
patterns. In the adult secure relationship style, the person has few problems developing 
satisfying friendships and relationships. Secure people trust others and develop bonds 
with them. The adult avoidant relationship style is characterized by difficulty in learning 
to trust others. Avoidant adults remain suspicious of the motives of others, and they are 
afraid of making commitments. They are afraid of depending on others because they 
anticipate being disappointed, being abandoned, or being separated. Finally, the adult 
ambivalent relationship style is characterized by vulnerability and uncertainty about rela￾tionships. Ambivalent adults become overly dependent and demanding on their partners 
and friends. They display high levels of neediness in their relationships. They are high 
maintenance, in the sense that they need constant reassurance and attention.
Psychologist Philip Shaver and his colleagues have shown that there is a positive 
correlation between the parent–infant attachment style and the later relationship style 
developed in adulthood. In one study, for example, adults with an avoidant relationship 
style more frequently reported that their parents had unhappy marriages compared to 
adults with a secure relationship style (Brennan & Shaver, 1993). The adults with a 
secure relationship style, on the other hand, tended to report coming from a trusting 
and supportive family, with parents who were happily married. Those with an avoidant 
relationship style tended to report that their family members were aloof and distant, and 
that they did not feel very much warmth or trust either from or toward their parents.
You may recall from Chapter 4, we said that personality dimensions rarely were 
types; that people do not come in categories, but are best represented by dimensions, 
usually normal-curve shaped dimensions. Yet in the attachment style area, there are 
three categories that people are put into: secure, avoidant, ambivalent. Are attachment 
styles really categories? Recent research shows how attachment style can be better repre￾sented by underlying dimensions, for example, degrees of security, degrees of avoidance, 
Final PDF to printer324
lar31869_ch10_296-329.indd 324 10/17/22 08:50 AM
PART THREE The Intrapsychic Domain
degrees of ambivalence (Fraley et al., 2015). Indeed, a measure based on dimensions 
of attachment styles was a better fit to real data than a measure based on categorical 
distinctions. This new approach to thinking about and measuring attachment styles as 
dimensions will likely have a large impact on how research is done, and on how psy￾chologists think about and measure attachment style.
Determining which adult attachment style a person has can be accomplished by having them 
report which style is most like them. Consider the following statements, and choose which is 
most descriptive of you:
	 1.	 I am typically comfortable with others and find it easy to become close friends 
with people. I can easily come to rely on others and enjoy it when they rely on 
me. I don’t worry about being left out or abandoned and find it easy to let others 
get close to me.
	 2.	 I am sometimes tense when I get too close to others. I don’t like to trust other 
people too much, plus I don’t like it when people have to depend on me for 
something. It makes me anxious when people get close or want me to make an 
emotional commitment to them. People often want me to be more personal and 
intimate than I feel like being.
	 3.	 In relationships, I often worry that the other person does not really want to stay 
with me or that he or she doesn’t really love me. I often wish that my friends 
would share more and be more of a confidante than they seem willing to be. 
Maybe I scare people away with my readiness to become close and make them 
the center of my world.
The first description is associated with a secure relationship style, the second with an 
avoidant relationship style, and the third with an ambivalent relationship style. It is possible 
that you have different styles with different people, or that none of these descriptions applies 
perfectly to your relationships.
Exercise
A dominant theme of attachment theory is that a person’s romantic attachments 
in adulthood will be a reflection of his or her attachment patterns in the past, especially 
with their earliest relationships (for review, see Fraley & Roisman, 2015). Mental rep￾resentations of the earliest relationships (i.e., the “objects” in Object Relations Theory) 
can serve as prototypes (or working models) for later relationships, with the early experi￾ences retaining their influential role in attachment behaviors throughout the life span. 
The psychologist Chris Fraley has published meta-analyses of studies examining the long￾term influence of attachment styles (Fraley, 2002a, 2002b). After reviewing a great deal 
of research, and evaluating different models of change and stability, Fraley concludes 
that the data are consistent with a moderate degree of stability in attachment security 
from infancy to adulthood. His best estimate of the correlation between early attachment 
security and attachment security at any later point in time is approximately .39, which 
can be described as significantly larger than zero but moderate in magnitude. In a study 
that followed people for a year and assessed adult attachment style, peoples’ attachment 
style was found to be fairly stable over that time period, about as stable as each of the 
Final PDF to printer325
lar31869_ch10_296-329.indd 325 10/17/22 08:50 AM
CHAPTER TEN Psychoanalytic Approaches: Contemporary Issues
people can take to assess the similarity among their attachment styles with different 
people in their lives (see www.yourpersonality.net/relstructures/). Another site where 
you can take a questionnaire and receive feedback on your adult attachment style can 
be found at: https://www.npr.org/2022/02/09/1079587715/whats-your-attachment-style￾quiz, and another at: http://www.web-research-design.net/cgi-bin/crq/crq.pl
Adult relationship styles may be most important for understanding romantic rela￾tionships. What do people look for in a romantic relationship? What do people expect 
from their romantic partners? How do people cope with separation from or abandon￾ment by their romantic partners, either real or imagined? Research suggests that indi￾viduals with different attachment styles will answer these questions very differently from 
each other (e.g., Hazan & Shaver, 1987). Those with an avoidant attachment style tend 
to shun romance, believing that real love is rare and never lasts. They fear intimacy and 
rarely develop deep emotional commitments. They tend not to be very supportive of 
their partners, at least not emotionally, and they expect little support in return.
Adults with an ambivalent attachment style tend to have frequent, but short-lived, 
romantic relationships. They fall in and out of love easily but rarely say that they are 
happy with their relationships. They develop a sort of desperation in their adult rela￾tionships and show fear of losing their partners. Their focus is often on keeping the 
other happy, and so they are quick to compromise, to change themselves for the sake of 
avoiding conflict with the other. As you might guess, ambivalent adults report that being 
separated from their partners is very stressful.
Object relations theorists believe that the characteristics and quality of adult romantic relationships are determined by, in part, attachment bonds developed in 
infancy with a primary caregiver.
Left: Purestock/SuperStock; right: Alexander Benz/Purestock/SuperStock
Final PDF to printer326
lar31869_ch10_296-329.indd 326 10/17/22 08:50 AM
PART THREE The Intrapsychic Domain
Adults with a secure attachment style can be separated from their partners without 
stress, just as securely attached children can remain calm when their mothers leave the 
room. Secure adults are generally more warm and supportive in their romantic relation￾ships, and their partners report more satisfaction with the relationship than do the part￾ners of avoidant or ambivalent adults (Hazan & Shaver, 1994). Secure adults are also 
more likely to give emotional support to their partners when it is needed. Secure adults 
also seek support when they need it more than do ambivalent or avoidant adults. In gen￾eral, secure adults do a good job of navigating through the treacherous waters of adult 
romantic relationships. They have a roadmap for satisfying relationships in the mental 
representation they carry of their childhood attachment bond. A study by Fraley and col￾leagues (Holland, Fraley, & Roisman, 2012) showed that the effects of attachment style 
on romantic relationships are more observable after the relationship has been develop￾ing for awhile, with stronger effects observed one year into the relationship than at the 
very start of the relationship. It takes awhile to really get a relationship started and new 
attachments formed.
An interesting study by psychologist Jeff Simpson illustrates the working of attach￾ment styles in adult relationships (Simpson et al., 2002). In this study heterosexual dating 
couples served as subjects. The couple was told that the male would undergo a stressful 
and unpleasant experience as part of the experiment. They were separated and the male 
was taken to a room where an experimenter recorded his pulse while saying the following:
In the next few minutes you are going to be exposed to a situation and set of 
experimental procedures that arouse considerable anxiety and distress in most 
people. Due to the nature of these procedures, I cannot tell you any more at this 
moment. (Simpson, 2012, p. 603)
Source: Simpson, J. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology. Academic Press, 2012.
The purpose of this statement was to make the male subject anxious. Moreover, he 
was taken to a darkened, windowless room that contained some polygraphs. The experi￾menter remarked that the equipment was “not quite 
ready yet” and that the subject would have to wait 
a few minutes before the “stress phase” could start. 
Meanwhile, the female was told that her partner was 
going to be involved in a “stress and performance 
session” that would start in 5 or 10 minutes. The 
couple was brought together to wait, and during this 
time together, they were unobtrusively videotaped 
for 5 minutes. After 5 minutes the experimenter 
entered the room and told the subjects the experi￾ment was over, explained the purpose of the experi￾ment, and told the subjects that they could erase the 
videotape if they so desired (none did).
The experimenters coded the videotape for a 
number of behaviors. Mostly they were interested 
in the degree to which the women offered support 
to their partners, and the degree to which the men 
asked for support from their partners. Prior to the 
start of the experiment, the experimenters used an 
interview method to assess childhood recollections 
of experiences with parents and other attachment 
Families are currently fleeing from the fierce fighting going on in Ukraine. 
Most of the fathers, however, once they see their family to the border, 
are returning to fight in the conflict. This is a real-life example of severe 
relationship disruption, where each partner will undergo extreme danger and 
stress while separated from their partner.
Visar Kryeziu/AP Photo
Final PDF to printer327
lar31869_ch10_296-329.indd 327 10/17/22 08:50 AM
CHAPTER TEN Psychoanalytic Approaches: Contemporary Issues
figures. From these interviews the experimenters rated the degree to which each subject 
was avoidantly or securely attached to his or her primary caregivers in early childhood.
Results showed that women who had avoidant attachment experiences with their 
parents were significantly less likely to offer support and encouragement to their male 
partners, even if the male asked for that. The securely attached women did provide sup￾port if the partner asked for it but provided less if he did not ask for it. This is a contin￾gent pattern of support, what some researchers consider ideal in relationships (George & 
Solomon, 1996). Very similar results have been obtained when roles are reversed and the 
female partner was to undergo stress (Thompson, Simpson, and Berlin, 2022).
The study just described employed an anticipated laboratory stressor, which was 
not very intense or long-lasting. Studies of real, intense, and chronic stress (persons under 
missile attacks, persons undergoing combat training) have found that attachment styles 
do relate to help seeking (Mikulincer, Florian, & Weller, 1993; Mikulincer & Florian, 
1995). Specifically, secure men and women seek support from their partners when in 
distressing conditions, whereas avoidantly attached persons try to distance themselves 
from others, want to spend time alone when under stress, and distract themselves from 
the stressors. When stress is severe or chronic, it appears that a person’s attachment 
style might relate to her or his pattern of support seeking.
Individual differences in attachment style may have implications beyond those for 
romantic relationships. Any area of life that involves closeness, getting along with others, 
confiding in others, and seeking or giving social support might be negotiated differently 
by persons with different attachment styles (Elliot & Reis, 2003). Attachment theory has 
been applied to understanding relationships between twins (Fraley & Tancredy, 2012), 
relationships with pets (Zilcha-Mano, Mikulincer, & Shaver, 2012), and even one’s rela￾tionship with one’s God (Granqvist et al., 2012). Of particular interest, how one was 
parented as a child may influence how one, later in life, parents one’s own children. 
Szepsenwol and colleagues (2015) showed that this effect was strongest for men, with 
men who had an insecure attachment style when they were infants going on to develop 
a more negative and unsupportive parenting style when they became parents. Karantzas 
and Simpson (2015) extend the implications of attachment style theory to the situation 
where adult children become caregivers to their own aging parents, a situation that has 
been likened to role reversal; the children becoming caregivers to the parents. Any life 
situation that involves close, caring relationships may be affected by how it went with the 
very first relationship that was experienced in life.
We want to close this chapter on a hopeful note with the answer to the follow￾ing question: If a person develops a particular childhood attachment style, is he or she 
destined to live out the adult version of that style? This important question has been 
the topic of much theoretical debate and empirical research (Cassidy & Shaver, 1999; 
Simpson & Rholes, 1998). Attachment theorists believe that even the poorest childhood 
experiences with relationships can be overcome. Ainsworth and Bowlby (1991) argued 
that children were not necessarily damaged forever because of unfortunate parenting 
experiences in infancy. They felt that subsequent positive experiences could compensate 
for earlier negative relationships. Despite a bad start in life, a person exposed to a loving, 
nurturant relationship as an adult can revise his or her working model of object rela￾tions. While this is difficult, and takes a patient and understanding partner, even insecure 
childhood attachment can be overcome in adulthood. If the relationship is positive and 
supportive enough, the person could internalize a new mental version of relationships, 
one that is more secure and trusting, with positive expectations for relationships (Fraley, 
2007; Fraley, Gilath, & Deboeck, 2021).
Final PDF to printer328
lar31869_ch10_296-329.indd 328 10/17/22 08:50 AM
PART THREE The Intrapsychic Domain
SUMMARY AND EVALUATION
In this chapter, we explored updated and contemporary versions of some of Freud’s 
original ideas, which can be called the Neo-Analytic movement. We began with an evalu￾ation of repressed memories, examining a case in which the recalled memory turned out 
to be false, at least as determined in a court of law. This case should not put doubt on the 
possibility that real trauma can be forgotten or repressed. Indeed, such cases do exist and 
conform to the notion that traumatic experiences can be pushed out of consciousness. 
However, the material in this chapter is meant to lead you to a more balanced and skep￾tical approach to the topic of repressed memories. Although repressed memories can
occur, some “forgotten” memories are false. Such memories can be implanted by well￾meaning therapists and others interrogating a subject about an event. We also discussed 
how to discriminate real from false memories. The crucial element is corroboration, 
finding someone who can support the subject’s version of the remembered event. We 
also touched on the topic of fake news and the “weaponization” of memory principles to 
influence what people come to believe about an event or a person or conspiracy theories.
The view of repressed memories also highlights a more contemporary version of 
the unconscious. Although most modern cognitive psychologists believe in the uncon￾scious, they do not believe in the motivated version of the unconscious proposed by 
Freud. Certainly, material can get into the mind without conscious experience, as 
through subliminal perception or priming, but that material does not have the kind of 
sweeping motivational effects suggested by Freud.
Another reconstruction of Freud’s theory concerns the emphasis on the role of the 
ego relative to the id. This is in stark contrast to Freud’s emphasis on aggressive and sex￾ual id urges as the twin engines powering psychic life. We discussed two proponents of 
ego psychology. The first, Erik Erikson, was well known for his alternative theory of per￾sonality development, which differed from Freud’s in two important ways: an emphasis 
on social tasks and an extension of development through the entire life span. A second 
important figure in ego psychology was Karen Horney, who was among the first psycho￾analysts to consider the role of culture and social roles as central features in personality 
development. Horney also started a feminist reinterpretation of Freud’s theories, which 
continues to this day. Ego psychology also generated an interest in the development of 
sense of self, the protection of self, and the paradoxical self-concept in Narcissism.
Object relations theory is another contemporary development in this area, having 
been called the most important theoretical development in psychoanalysis since Freud’s 
death. The term object relations is used to refer to enduring patterns of behavior in rela￾tionships with intimate others, as well as to the emotional, cognitive, and motivational 
processes that generate those patterns of behavior. The theory is about how relationship 
behaviors are determined by mental representations laid down in childhood through 
experiences with caregivers. This theory began with studies of attachment between chil￾dren and primary caregivers—typically, mothers. This bond may set a pattern that con￾tinues into adulthood.
Parts and versions of Freud’s psychoanalytic theory are alive and well today. 
However, instead of focusing on unconscious conflicts over id urges, contemporary psy￾choanalysts are more likely to focus on interpersonal patterns of behavior and the emo￾tions and motives that accompany those. Instead of seeing personality as the result of 
a sequence of sexual conflicts with the parents, contemporary psychoanalysts are more 
likely to see personality as the result of solving a series of social crises and the ensuing 
movement toward increasingly mature forms of relating to others. And, finally, unlike 
Final PDF to printer329
lar31869_ch10_296-329.indd 329 10/17/22 08:50 AM
CHAPTER TEN Psychoanalytic Approaches: Contemporary Issues
false memories 306
imagination inflation effect 301
confirmatory bias 301
constructive memory 302
spreading activation 302
cognitive unconscious 307
motivated unconscious 307
subliminal perception 307
priming 307
id psychology 308
ego psychology 308
identity 308
identity crisis 308
Erikson’s eight stages of 
development 311
KEY TERMS
self-serving biases 318
narcissism 318
narcissistic paradox 318
object relations theory 320
internalized 320
attachment 321
separation anxiety 321
strange situation procedure 321
securely attached 322
avoidantly attached 322
ambivalently attached 322
working models 322
secure relationship style 323
avoidant relationship style 323
ambivalent relationship style 323
psychosocial conflicts 312
stage model of development 312
developmental crisis 312
fixation 312
identity confusion 314
rite of passage 314
negative identity 314
identity foreclosure 314
moratorium 314
social power 317
culture 317
fear of success 317
masculine 317
feminine 317
gender differences 317
much of classical psychoanalytic theory, which was based on one man’s views, much of 
contemporary psychoanalytic theory is connected to empirical studies and corroborated 
observations of many persons, including female psychologists, working to improve and 
expand on some of themes first described by Freud.
Final PDF to printerlar31869_ch11_330-365.indd 330 10/18/22 01:36 PM
330
11
Motives and 
Personality
Basic Concepts
Need
Press
Apperception and the TAT
The Big Three Motives: Achievement, Power, and Intimacy
Need for Achievement
Need for Power
Need for Intimacy
Humanistic Tradition: The Motive to Self-Actualize
Maslow’s Contributions
Rogers’s Contributions
SUMMARY AND EVALUATION
KEY TERMS
Science Photo Library RF/
Getty Images
Final PDF to printerlar31869_ch11_330-365.indd 331 10/18/22 01:36 PM
THE INTRAPSYCHIC DOMAIN
One hot August night in 1996, a gun went off in Atlanta. It started the 
final of the 200-meter Olympic race. Michael Johnson, who had won a gold medal 
in the 400-meter race just a few days earlier, exploded from the starting blocks. 
Would he become the first man in history to win both the 400- and 200-meter races 
at the Olympics? Michael stumbled slightly at the start of the race but soon assumed 
the upright style that had come to characterize his running style. As he went 
around the turn, his trademark golden shoes flashing, it became obvious to the 
crowd that he was running for more than just the gold medal. As Michael widened 
his lead over his opponents, people knew they were witnessing something special. 
Michael finished a full 5 meters ahead of his nearest competitor, and as he crossed 
the finish line, the timer read 19.32 seconds. People who knew the significance of 
that time, including Michael himself, gasped in disbelief. He had beaten the previ￾ous world record, which he had set earlier, by almost three-tenths of a second, a 
remarkable gap in short-distance running. You can view this amazing athletic perfor￾mance at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zOZajO0rCP4
How did Michael motivate himself to set a world record in the 200-meter race 
and win a gold medal in the 400-meter race? The 400- and 200-meter races are very 
different, according to runners. In the 400-meter race, the runners can be strategic 
and take some time to plan a tactic. The 200, on the other hand, demands that the 
runners run flat-out and aggressive.
Olympic Gold-medalist 
Michael Johnson, who 
used different strategies to 
motivate himself before a 
200-meter race and a 
400-meter race.
HASLIN Frederic/Corbis via 
Getty Images
11
Final PDF to printer332
lar31869_ch11_330-365.indd 332 10/18/22 01:36 PM
PART THREE The Intrapsychic Domain
Before the 400-meter race, Michael reportedly listens to jazz on his headset; before 
the 200, he listens to gangsta rap. He tries to make himself feel aggressive before the 
200-meter race. He tries to get into what he calls the “danger zone.” In warming up for 
the 200-meter race at Atlanta, Michael pulled on a T-shirt that read DANGER ZONE. 
“Now I have to think about the 200,” he said. “I’ve got to get into the danger zone. I’ve 
got to get more aggressive.” He approached the 200-meter race with a fighting instinct, 
taking the offense by running not just to beat his competitors but to beat them badly. As 
Michael approached the finish line in the 200-meter race, the aggression could be seen 
in his face, an expression that looked as if he could assault his opponents. The only thing 
he assaulted, however, was the world record. He had just motivated himself to run faster 
than any other living person.1
We saw in Chapter 1 that personality psychologists ask, “Why do people do what 
they do?” Motivational psychologists phrase the question a bit differently—“What do 
they want?” All personality psychologists seek to explain behavior. Personality psycholo￾gists interested in motivation, however, look specifically for a desire or motive that pro￾pels people to do the things they do (Winter, 2018).
In this chapter, we cover some of the major theories on human motivation, and 
we examine some research findings on these theories. Some theories that we will look at 
are quite different from each other, such as the theories of Henry Murray and Abraham 
Maslow. In fact, most texts in personality cover these two theories in different chap￾ters. However, all the theories we examine here have two features in common. First, all 
view personality as consisting of a few general motives, which all people have to various 
degrees. Second, these motives operate mainly through mental processes, either inside 
or outside of awareness, generating an intrapsychic influence on a person’s behavior 
(King, 1995).
Basic Concepts
Motives are internal states that arouse and direct behavior toward specific objects or goals. 
A motive is often caused by a deficit, a lack of something; for example, if a person has not 
eaten for many hours, he or she is motivated by hunger. Motives differ from each other 
in both type and amount. Hunger differs from thirst, for example, and both of these differ 
from the motive to achieve and excel. Motives differ in intensity, depending on the person 
and his or her circumstances. For example, the strength of the hunger motive varies con￾siderably, depending on whether a person has merely skipped a meal or has not eaten for 
several days. Also, motives are often based on needs, states of tension within a person. As 
a need is satisfied, the state of tension is reduced. The need to eat creates the motive of 
hunger. The motive of hunger in turn causes the person to seek out food, to think about 
food constantly, and perhaps even to see food in objects not normally thought of as food. 
For example, a hungry person gazing at the sky might exclaim, “Wow, that cloud looks 
just like a hamburger!” Motives propel people to perceive, think, and act in specific ways 
that satisfy the need. Figure 11.1 illustrates the relation between needs and motives. Most, 
though not all, needs are based on deficits, and we begin with those deficit-based needs. 
Motives belong in the intrapsychic domain for several reasons. First, researchers 
who study motives have stressed the importance of internal psychological needs and 
1
In the 2000 Olympics at Sydney, Michael Johnson again won the gold medal in the 400-meter race but had to drop out 
of competition in the 200-meter race. Johnson subsequently retired from competition. However, he remains the only male 
athlete in history to have won both the 200- and 400-meter events at the same Olympics.
Final PDF to printer333
lar31869_ch11_330-365.indd 333 10/18/22 01:36 PM
CHAPTER ELEVEN Motives and Personality 
urges that propel people to think, perceive, and act in certain predictable ways. Motives 
can be unconscious, in the sense that the person does not know explicitly what he or 
she wants. Just as people may not be fully aware of why they engage in particular fan￾tasies, they may not be consciously aware of what compels them to act in certain ways. 
This similarity leads to another feature shared by psychologists interested in motives 
and other intrapsychic constructs—the reliance on projective techniques. Motive psy￾chologists believe that fantasies, free associations, and responses to projective tech￾niques reveal the unconscious motivation behind many thoughts, feelings, and behaviors 
(Schultheiss & Kollner, 2021).
Motive psychologists also share some core ideas with dispositional psychologists, 
whose work we covered in Part One of this book. Like dispositional psychologists, motive 
psychologists stress that (1) people differ from one another in the type and strength of 
their motives; (2) these differences are measurable; (3) these differences cause or are asso￾ciated with important life outcomes, such as business success or marital satisfaction; (4) 
differences among people in the relative amounts of various motives are stable over time; 
and (5) motives may provide one answer to the question, “Why do people do what they 
do?” The motive approach can be thought of as a halfway point between the intrapsychic 
domain and the dispositional domain (Winter et al., 1998). We place motives in the intra￾psychic domain because of the view that motives exist within the psyche and can operate 
outside of conscious awareness to affect everyday behaviors, thoughts, and feelings.
One of the first researchers to develop a modern theory of human needs was Henry 
Murray (1893–1988), a psychologist active in research from the 1930s through the 
1960s. The path that ultimately led Murray to a career in psychology was quite unique. 
He went to medical school, became a physician, and interned in surgery. Murray then 
pursued research in embryology, followed by a PhD in biochemistry from Cambridge 
University. While studying in England, Murray went to Zurich during spring break in 
1925, to visit the famous psychoanalyst Carl Jung (1875–1961); (who learned psy￾choanalysis directly from Freud and even modified some of Freud’s ideas about the 
unconscious). Murray met with Jung every day for three weeks, meetings from which 
he “emerged a reborn man” (Murray, reprinted in Shneidman, 1981, p. 54). Murray’s 
Figure 11.1
Deficits lead to a need, which leads to a motive to satisfy that need, either in reality, by fostering specific 
actions, or in fantasy, by creating thoughts that are satisfying.
Deficit
(have not eaten
today)
Need
(for food)
Motive
(hunger)
Thoughts and fantasies
(thinking about food, fantasizing 
about a big meal, perceiving 
that a rock looks like a loaf of 
bread, etc.)
Behaviors intended to
satisfy the need
(go to the store, buy food,
bring it home, cook it)
Final PDF to printer334
lar31869_ch11_330-365.indd 334 10/18/22 01:36 PM
PART THREE The Intrapsychic Domain
encounter with psychoanalysis through those meetings with Carl Jung had a profound 
impact on him, leading Murray to abandon his medical practice and research career 
and turn his attention entirely to psychology. Murray then obtained formal training in 
psychoanalysis and accepted a position at Harvard in 1923. In 1937 Murray became 
director of the Harvard Psychological Clinic, where he remained until his retirement in 
1962 (Murray, 1967). During World War II, Murray briefly left Harvard for a position in 
the Office of Strategic Services, the forerunner of the Central Intelligence Agency. There 
he did research on the selection of secret operators and later published his need theory 
in several groundbreaking books.
Need
Murray began by defining the term need, a concept he viewed as similar to the analytic 
concept of drive. In a nutshell, according to Murray, a need is a “potentiality or readiness 
to respond in a certain way under certain given circumstances. . . . It is a noun which 
stands for the fact that a certain trend is apt to recur” (Murray, 1938, p. 124). Needs 
organize perception, guiding us to see what we want (or need) to see. For example, 
someone who has a high need for power, a need to influence others, may see even every￾day social situations as opportunities to boss others around.
A need also organizes action by compelling a person to do what is necessary to 
fulfill the need. A person who has a need to achieve, for example, often makes sacrifices 
and works hard at the task in which he or she wants to excel. Murray believed that needs 
referred to states of tension and that satisfying the need reduces the tension. According 
to Murray, however, it was the process of reducing tension that the person found satisfy￾ing, not the tensionless state per se. Murray believed that people might actually seek to 
increase tension (e.g., by going on a roller-coaster ride or viewing a horror movie) in 
order to experience the pleasure of reducing that tension (i.e., to end the roller-coaster 
ride or the horror movie).
Based on his research with the Office for Strategic Services, Murray proposed a 
list of fundamental human needs, some of which are described in Table 11.1. Each need 
is associated with (1) a specific desire or intention, (2) a particular set of emotions, 
(3) specific action tendencies, and (4) can be described with trait-like names. Consider 
the need for affiliation, which is the desire to win and maintain associations with people. 
The primary set of emotions associated with this need are interpersonal warmth, cheer￾fulness, and cooperativeness, and the associated action tendencies are accepting people, 
spending time with others, and making efforts to maintain contact with others. The asso￾ciated traits that characterize people with a strong need for affiliation are attributes such 
as agreeableness, friendliness, loyalty, and goodwill.
Murray believed that each person had a unique hierarchy of needs. An individual’s 
various needs can be thought of as existing at different levels of strength—for instance, 
a person might have a high need for dominance, an average need for affiliation, and 
a low need for achievement. Each need interacts with the various other needs within 
each person. This interaction is what makes the concept of motive dynamic. The term 
dynamic is used to refer to the mutual influence of forces within a person—in this case, 
the interaction of various motives within a person. To return to our person with a high 
need for dominance, it would make a big difference in her overall behavior if her need 
for dominance were accompanied with a high or low need for affiliation. If her high 
need for dominance were coupled with a high need for affiliation (e.g., a strong desire to 
develop and maintain relationships), then she would most likely develop the social and 
leadership skills to make others comfortable with her dominance. If her high need for 
Final PDF to printer335
lar31869_ch11_330-365.indd 335 10/18/22 01:36 PM
CHAPTER ELEVEN Motives and Personality 
dominance were combined instead with a weak need for affiliation, then she might sim￾ply exercise power over others without regard to their feelings. She might impress others 
as being disagreeable, quarrelsome, or just plain bossy.
Press
Another important contribution of Murray to personality psychology was a specific way 
of thinking about the environment. For example, a person with a high need for affiliation 
might be sensitive to the social aspects of his or her environment, such as how many people 
Table 11.1 A Brief Description of Several of Murray’s Needs, 
Organized into Five Higher-Level Categories
Ambition Needs
• Achievement: To master, manipulate, or organize others, objects, or ideas. To accomplish dif￾ficult tasks, and to do this as rapidly and independently as possible. To overcome obstacles and 
excel. To surpass rivals by exercising talent.
• Exhibition: To be seen and heard, to be the center of attention. To make an impression on oth￾ers. To excite, fascinate, entertain, intrigue, amuse, entice, or amaze others.
• Order: To put things in orderly arrangement, to desire cleanliness, organization, balance, neat￾ness, and precision.
Needs to Defend Status
• Dominance: To seek to influence or direct the behavior of others by persuasion, command, 
suggestion, or seduction. To control one’s environment, particularly the social environment. To 
restrain or prohibit others.
Needs Related to Social Power
• Abasement: To accept injury, criticism, and blame. To submit passively to external force, to 
resign oneself to fate. To admit inferiority, error, or wrongdoing. To confess and atone and seek 
pain and misfortune.
• Aggression: To overcome opposition forcefully. To avenge an injury. To attack, injure, or kill 
another. To forcefully punish or oppose another.
• Autonomy: To shake off restraint, break out of confines. To get free, to resist coercion and 
restriction. To avoid being domineered. To be free to act according to one’s wishes and to remain 
unattached.
• Blame-avoidance: To avoid humiliation at all costs. To avoid situations that may lead to embar￾rassment or belittlement. To refrain from action because of fear of failure or worry over the scorn, 
derision, or indifference from others.
Social Affection Needs
• Affiliation: To enjoy cooperation or reciprocal interaction with similar others. To draw near to oth￾ers. To please and win affection of those you like. To remain loyal to friends.
• Nurturance: To take care of others in need, to give sympathy and gratify the needs of helpless 
others, such as a child, or someone who is weak, disabled, inexperienced, infirm, humiliated, 
lonely, dejected, or confused. To assist persons in danger. To help, support, console, protect, 
comfort, nurse, feed, and heal others.
• Succor: To receive aid from others. To have one’s needs gratified by another, to be nursed, 
supported, protected, advised, indulged, loved, and consoled. To always have a supporter or a 
devoted protector.
Source: Adapted from Explorations in Personality, by J. H. Murray, New York: Oxford University Press, 1938.
Final PDF to printer336
lar31869_ch11_330-365.indd 336 10/18/22 01:36 PM
PART THREE The Intrapsychic Domain
are present, whether they are interacting, and whether they look approachable and outgoing. 
Murray used the term press to refer to need-relevant aspects of the environment. A person’s 
need for affiliation, for example, won’t affect that person’s behavior without an appropriate 
environmental press (such as the presence of friendly people). People with a high need for 
affiliation would be more likely to notice other people, and to see more opportunities for 
friendly interaction with others, compared to someone with a low need for affiliation.
Murray also introduced the notion that there is a so-called real environment 
(which he called alpha press, or objective reality) and a perceived environment (called 
beta press, or reality as it is perceived). In any given situation, what one person sees may 
be different from what other people see. Consider what might happen if two people are 
walking down the street and a third person approaches and smiles at each of them. One 
person who is high on the need for affiliation might see the smile as a sign of warmth 
and openness and a nonverbal invitation to start a conversation. The other person who 
is low on the need for affiliation might observe the same smile yet see it as a smirk and 
consequently become suspicious that the stranger is laughing at them. Objectively (alpha 
press), it was the same smile. Subjectively (beta press), it was a very different event for 
these two persons, due to their differences in the need for affiliation. Psychologists are 
more interested in beta press, the subjective experience of a situation by a person.
Apperception and the TAT
Murray held that a person’s needs influenced how he or she experiences the environ￾ment. In short, needs create beta press, especially when the environment is ambiguous 
and needs to be interpreted (as when a stranger smiles at the person). The act of inter￾preting the environment and perceiving the meaning of what is 
going on in a situation is termed apperception (Murray, 1933). 
Because our needs and motives influence apperception, if we 
want to know about a person’s primary motives, we might ask 
that individual to interpret what is going on in a variety of situa￾tions, especially ambiguous situations.
The simple insight that needs and motives influence how 
we perceive the world led Murray and his research associate 
Christiana Morgan to develop a formal technique for assessing 
needs (Morgan & Murray, 1935). They called this technique the 
thematic apperception test (or TAT, for short). The TAT consists 
of a set of black-and-white images that are ambiguous. The per￾son being assessed is then asked to make up a story about what 
is happening in the picture. For example, one TAT image is a 
drawing of a person on a windowsill. Some people might “see” 
the person in the drawing as going in (to rob the house?) Others 
might “see” the person in the drawing as going out (jumping to 
commit suicide or maybe running away after committing a crime 
in the house?). A few TAT images contain no people at all, such 
as a picture of a rowboat on the shore of a small creek. Such 
pictures are perhaps the most ambiguous: Who put the rowboat 
there? Are they coming or going? Why did they stop the boat in 
that particular place? Why are they not in the picture right now? 
Where are they and what are they doing? It is easy to make up a 
story because the picture is so ambiguous with respect to what 
could be happening. The idea is that the story they just make up 
This photo, obtained from U.S. government archives, was used 
by Morgan and Murray as one of the TAT pictures. Can you 
make up a story about the child in this photo? What do you 
believe he is thinking about? What happens next? What does 
he go on to do with his life?
Source: Farm Security Administration—Office of War Information 
Photograph Collection, Library of Congress, LC-USF34-055829-D.
Final PDF to printer337
lar31869_ch11_330-365.indd 337 10/18/22 01:36 PM
CHAPTER ELEVEN Motives and Personality 
In administering the TAT, a person is shown each picture and told to be cre￾ative and make up a short story, interpreting what is happening in each picture. He 
or she is encouraged to tell a story that has a beginning, a middle, and an end. The 
psychologist then codes the stories for the presence of various types of imagery asso￾ciated with particular motives. For example, a subject might write the following about 
the TAT card of the boat on the shore: “The boat in the picture is being used by a 
young boy to take produce to market. The boy has stopped to gather some wild ber￾ries to take to the market to sell along with his farm produce. This boy works very 
hard and eventually grows up, puts himself through college, and becomes a famous 
scientist, specializing in the study of plants, primarily agricultural crops.” This story 
has a lot of achievement imagery, so the subject who wrote it would be seen to have 
a high need for achievement.
Morgan and Murray published the TAT in 1935. Since then, many researchers 
have modified its administration (e.g., using fewer cards, selecting other drawings, and 
using a data projector or computers to display the images to many people at once). 
Because the pictures in the original TAT are dated (e.g., clothing and hair styles are from 
the 1930s), newer versions of TAT-type pictures have been developed and found to func￾tion similarly to the original set in terms of soliciting need-relevant themes (Schultheiss 
& Brunstein, 2001). The essential features of the TAT and similar projective techniques 
are that (1) the subject is given an ambiguous stimulus, usually a picture, and (2) he or 
she is asked to describe and interpret what is going on.
Take the need for achievement motive, which can be scored by counting up the num￾ber of references in the person’s story to wanting to do things better, anticipating success, 
feeling positive about succeeding, and overcoming obstacles (Schultheiss & Brunstein, 
2001; Schultheiss & Pang, 2007). Studies of the TAT suggest that people do respond differ￾entially to the themes of the picture, with, for example, high need for achievement people 
responding to the achievement pictures differently than low need for achievement people 
(Kwon, Campbell, & Williams, 2001; Tuerlinckz, De Boeck, & Lens, 2002).
Some personality researchers argue that projective tests in general, and the TAT in 
particular, are less reliable as measures of personality than other methods, such as self￾report questionnaires and informant report. Some even argue that the term test should 
not be used to refer to projective methods (McGrath & Carroll, 2012). Nevertheless, 
the TAT continues to be used particularly to assess psychoanalytic constructs, such as 
defense mechanisms (Cramer, 2017; Hibbard et al., 2010), attachment styles (Berant, 
2009), and psychosexual stages (Huprich, 2008), as well as for needs and motives. 
Research shows that, as measures of individual differences in motivation, the TAT 
(McAdams et al., 1996) and other picture story completion exercises (Schultheiss & 
Schultheiss, 2014) can be both reliable and valid when scored using specific criteria to 
identify themes of achievement, power, and intimacy.
We can make a distinction between using the TAT to assess state levels of needs 
and trait levels of needs. State levels of a need refer to a person’s momentary amount 
of a specific need, which can fluctuate with specific circumstances. For example, a per￾son who is failing at a task (e.g., a player on a baseball team that is down 5 to 4 in the 
ninth inning) might experience a sharp increase in the state of achievement motivation. 
The TAT has been shown to be sensitive to changes in state levels of various motives, 
particularly the needs for achievement, power, and intimacy (Moretti & Rossini, 2004). 
The assessment of trait levels of a need refers to measuring a person’s average tendency, 
or their set point or characteristic level, on the specific trait. The idea is that people dif￾fer from each other in their typical or average amount of specific needs. Assessing trait 
levels of needs is the most frequent goal of personality psychologists who use such mea￾sures (Schultheiss, Liening, & Schad, 2008).
Final PDF to printer338
lar31869_ch11_330-365.indd 338 10/18/22 01:36 PM
PART THREE The Intrapsychic Domain
The TAT remains a useful personality assessment technique among psychologists 
with a psychoanalytic orientation (e.g., Verdon & Azoulay, 2020), even though some 
researchers argue that it has low test-retest reliability (see, however, Smith & Atkinson, 
1992). In addition, several researchers have reported extremely low correlations between 
TAT measures of certain needs and questionnaire measures of the same needs, leading 
them to question whether the TAT is a valid measure. This is the topic of our A Closer 
Look discussion of the TAT.
The Big Three Motives: 
Achievement, Power, and Intimacy
Although Murray proposed several dozen motives, researchers have focused most of 
their attention on a smaller set. These motives are the needs for achievement, power, and 
intimacy. Let’s review what we know about each of these fundamental human motives.
Psychologist David McClelland (1917–
1998) and his colleagues focused primar￾ily on the TAT. Critics have argued that 
the TAT demonstrates poor test-retest reli￾ability and that responses to one picture 
may not correlate with responses to other 
pictures—that is, the TAT has poor internal 
reliability (Entwisle, 1972). Moreover, when 
the TAT is used to predict actual motive￾related behaviors (such as when TAT need 
for achievement scores are used to pre￾dict overall college grade point averages 
or performance on an achievement test), 
the correlations are frequently low and 
inconsistent (Fineman, 1977). Smith and 
Atkinson (1992) reviewed the major criti￾cisms of the TAT, as well as responses from 
its proponents.
These undesirable properties of the 
TAT have led some researchers to develop 
questionnaire measures of motives 
(Jackson, 1967). These questionnaires 
simply ask people directly about their 
motives and desires and about whether 
measures do. He argued that the question￾naire measures are better at predicting short￾term behaviors, such as how competitive a 
person will behave while playing a game in 
a psychology laboratory. McClelland argued 
that the TAT measure and the questionnaire 
measures are uncorrelated because they 
measure two different types of motivation.
Let’s discuss each in turn.
One type of motive is called implicit 
motivation. These motives are based on 
needs, such as the need for achievement 
(nAch), the need for power (nPow), and the 
need for intimacy (nInt), as they are mea￾sured in fantasy-based (i.e., TAT) measures. 
When the TAT is used to measure these 
motives, they are called implicit, because 
the persons writing the stories are not 
explicitly telling the psychologist about 
themselves. Instead, they are telling stories 
about other people. The stories are thought 
to reflect the implied motives of the per￾sons writing the stories—their unconscious 
motives, their unspoken needs and desires 
they engage in the kinds of behaviors that 
indicate high levels of the motives. These 
questionnaires turn out to have desirable 
measurement properties, such as adequate 
test-retest reliability and predictive valid￾ity (Scott & Johnson, 1972). A troubling 
finding, however, is that TAT measures of 
motives and questionnaire measures of 
the same motives are often uncorrelated 
(Fineman, 1977; for an exception, see 
Thrash & Elliot, 2002). Many researchers 
therefore suggest that the TAT measure 
and other projective measures should be 
abandoned.
McClelland and his colleagues did not 
silently accept these criticisms (McClelland, 
1985; Weinberger & McClelland, 1990; 
Winter, 1999). In response, McClelland 
argued that, when the TAT is properly admin￾istered and scored, the motive scores do
show acceptable test-retest reliability. In 
addition, he asserted that the TAT predicts 
long-term real-life outcomes, such as busi￾ness success, better than questionnaire 
A Closer Look TAT and Questionnaire Measures of Motives: 
Do They Measure Different Aspects of Motives?
Final PDF to printer339
lar31869_ch11_330-365.indd 339 10/18/22 01:36 PM
CHAPTER ELEVEN Motives and Personality 
(Schüler, Sheldon, & Fröhlich, 2010). What 
people write in response to the TAT pic￾tures is presumed to reflect their real, 
although unconscious, motivations (Hofer, 
Bond, & Li, 2010).
The other type of motivation is called 
explicit, or self-attributed motivation, 
which McClelland argued reflects primarily 
a person’s self-awareness of his or her own 
conscious motives (McClelland, Koestner, 
& Weinberger, 1989). These self-attributed 
motivations, sometimes called explicit 
motivations, reflect a person’s conscious 
awareness about what is important to him 
or her. As such, they represent part of the 
individual’s conscious self-understanding.
McClelland argued that implicit and 
self-attributed (explicit) motives represent 
fundamentally different aspects of moti￾vation and that they should predict differ￾ent life outcomes. Implicit motives predict 
long-term, spontaneous behavioral trends 
over time. For example, compared with 
questionnaire measures, TAT-assessed 
need for achievement is the better predic￾tor of long-term entrepreneurial success, 
and TAT-assessed need for power is the 
better predictor of long-term success as a 
business manager (Chen, Su, & Wu, 2012; 
McAdams, 1990). Self-attributed motives, 
on the other hand, are better predictors of 
(e.g., lifetime income, job level attained in 
an organization, number of publications 
by research scientists, and participation in 
community organizations). Spangler found 
that the TAT-based measure was a better 
predictor of the long-term outcomes than 
was the questionnaire measure, whereas 
the questionnaire was a better predictor 
of the short-term responses. Understanding 
the congruence of implicit and explicit mea￾sures of motives is receiving a good deal 
of attention from personality psychologists 
(e.g., Perugini et al., 2021; Runge et al., 
2020; Schultheiss, Wiemers, & Wolf, 2014; 
Thrash et al., 2019).
Spangler’s meta-analysis suggests 
that both the TAT and questionnaire mea￾sures may play important roles in helping 
psychologists understand the short- and 
long-term effects of motives. If you want to 
know how someone will react to achieve￾ment demands today or tomorrow, you 
might be best advised to use a question￾naire or to just ask the person about his 
or her achievement needs. However, if 
you want to make a prediction about who 
in a group of people will earn the largest 
lifetime income or climb the highest in an 
organizational setting, you might be bet￾ter off using the TAT measure of need for 
achievement.
responses to immediate and specific situa￾tions and to choice behaviors and attitudes 
(because they measure the person’s con￾scious desires and wants). For example, 
questionnaire-assessed need for achieve￾ment is the better predictor of how hard 
a person will work to obtain a reward in a 
psychology experiment, and questionnaire￾assessed need for power is the better 
predictor of a person’s self-reported atti￾tudes about social inequality (Koestner & 
McClelland, 1990; Woike, 1995).
The research literature supports a 
distinction between implicit and explicit 
motives, at least for achievement motiva￾tion (Spangler, 1992; Thrash & Elliot, 2002). 
Spangler examined more than 100 studies 
of need for achievement and performed 
a meta-analysis of these studies. Half the 
studies meta-analyzed by Spangler used 
TAT measures (implicit motives), and the 
other half used questionnaire measures 
(self-attributed motives) of the achievement 
motive. Spangler then looked carefully at 
the variables being predicted by achieve￾ment. He sorted the studies into those that 
looked at short-term responses to specific 
tasks (e.g., grades in college courses, per￾formance on ability tests, and performance 
in laboratory achievement tests) and those 
that looked at long-term achievements 
Need for Achievement
Behavior that is motivated by the need for achievement has long interested psycholo￾gists. Because it has received the most research attention, we begin with this motive.
Doing Things Better
Following Murray at Harvard, psychologist David McClelland (1917–1998) carried on 
the tradition of motive research. McClelland was best known for his research on the 
need for achievement (nAch), defined as the desire to do better, to be successful, and to 
feel competent. Like all motives, we assume that the need for achievement will energize 
behavior in certain (achievement-related) situations. It is energized by the incentives 
of challenge and variety; it is accompanied by feelings of interest and surprise; and it 
is associated with the subjective state of being curious and exploratory (McClelland, 
1985). People motivated by a high nAch obtain satisfaction and pride from accomplish￾ing a task or from the anticipation of accomplishing a task. They cherish the process of 
being engaged in challenging activities.
Final PDF to printer340
lar31869_ch11_330-365.indd 340 10/18/22 01:36 PM
PART THREE The Intrapsychic Domain
In terms of trait levels, high nAch individuals pre￾fer moderate levels of challenge, neither too high nor 
too low. This preference makes sense given that the 
high nAch person is motivated to do better than others. 
A task that is almost impossible to accomplish will not 
be attractive because it will not provide the opportunity 
to do better if everyone does poorly. A task that is too 
easy will be easy for everyone; the high nAch person will 
not do better if everyone is successful. Theoretically, we 
expect high nAch persons to have a preference for mod￾erately challenging tasks. Dozens of studies have found 
support for this idea. One study examined children’s pref￾erence for challenge in a variety of games (e.g., the ring￾toss game, in which children attempt to toss rings around 
sticks that are placed at varying distances). Children 
high in nAch preferred a moderate challenge (e.g., tossed 
their rings at the sticks in the middle), whereas children 
low in nAch tried either the very easy levels of the games 
(closer sticks) or the levels at which success was almost 
impossible (McClelland, 1958). This relationship has 
also been demonstrated outside the laboratory. Young 
adults high in nAch have been found to choose college 
majors that are of intermediate difficulty and to pur￾sue careers that are of moderate difficulty (reviewed in 
Koestner & McClelland, 1990).
To summarize the characteristics of persons high 
in nAch from the research literature, (1) they prefer 
activities that provide some, but not too much, chal￾lenge; (2) they enjoy tasks in which they are personally 
responsible for the outcome; and (3) they prefer tasks for 
which feedback on their performance is available.
As the leader of two successful companies, Apple Computer and Pixar 
Animation, the late Steve Jobs (1955–2011) was constantly striving to 
do things better. He is a good example of someone high in achievement 
motivation.
Anton_Ivanov/Shutterstock
Have a look at the TAT picture presented earlier, under Apperception and the TAT. Write a 
short story about what is happening in this picture. However, instead of writing off the top of 
your head, try to write a story that would score high on the need for achievement. What themes 
would you put in such a story? What actions and outcomes might be interpreted as indicating 
high nAch? What you consciously try to put into such a story are the themes and acts that psy￾chologists look for in the stories of people writing naturally. Some put plenty of such themes 
and acts into their stories quite naturally and so seem to see achievement-related themes and 
behaviors all around. Others reveal that their stories and the characters therein act in very non￾striving, non-achieving ways. And this comes perfectly naturally to them when they make up a 
story about the image under Apperception and the TAT.
Exercise
Final PDF to printer341
lar31869_ch11_330-365.indd 341 10/18/22 01:36 PM
CHAPTER ELEVEN Motives and Personality 
Increasing the Need for Achievement
Research on the achievement motive typically takes the form of correlating TAT need for 
achievement (nAch) scores with other measures related to achievement. Demonstrating 
the relationship between nAch and success in entrepreneurial activities is one example 
of this type of research. Starting and managing a small business appears to offer a high 
degree of satisfaction for the person with a strong need to achieve. It provides an oppor￾tunity to engage in a challenging pursuit, assume responsibility for making decisions 
and taking action, and obtain swift and objective feedback about the success of one’s 
performance. Studies in several countries have found that persons with a high nAch 
are more attracted to business occupations than are their peers who have a low nAch 
(McClelland, 1965). A study of farmers (who are, in effect, small business operators) 
showed those with a high need to achieve were more likely than low nAch farmers to 
adopt innovative farming practices and to show improved rates of production over time 
(Singh, 1978). A study comparing self-employed entrepreneurs to workers for large cor￾porations found that the self-employed were significantly higher on need for achieve￾ment (Lee-Ross, 2015).
Research on entrepreneurial talent has not been limited to business activities. 
Some studies have examined the work habits of college students. Students with high 
nAch appear to be more deliberate in their pursuit of good grades: they are more likely to 
investigate course requirements before enrolling in a class, speak with a professor prior 
to exams, and contact the professor about the exam after it was given to obtain feedback 
about their performance (Andrews, 1967). In a very different subject sample, blue-collar 
workers with high nAch engaged in more problem-solving activities after being laid off 
than did unemployed workers lower in nAch: they started looking for a new job sooner 
and used a greater number of job-seeking strategies (Koestner & McClelland, 1990).
More recent studies on entrepreneurial orientation examined achievement motives 
in a group of students of small business (a major considered to have high entrepreneurial 
potential) and compared them to a group of students of economics (considered to have 
much less entrepreneurial potential). Results showed that small business students were sig￾nificantly higher on achievement motivation than the economics students (Sagie & Elizur, 
1999). A study by Langens (2001) also supports the notion that training for high need for 
achievement can promote success in business. It seems that persons with high achievement 
motives are drawn to careers that have more potential risk and uncertainty, where success 
is a matter of personal responsibility and where emergency problem solving is routine.
There are also cultural differences in how the need for achievement is expressed. 
In the United States, most high-achieving high school students strive for good grades for 
themselves. Many students, and their parents, go to great lengths to achieve. Cheating 
can be common, and some students do not view cheating as wrong. The psychologist 
Demerath (2001) even reports that some parents of high-achieving students sought to 
have them classified as special-education students, which would entitle them to extra 
time on standardized tests. When he went to Papua New Guinea, Demerath found a 
very different norm among students. There, school is seen as a noncompetitive place 
where it is important for all to do well. Doing well as an individual, especially if it is at 
the expense of others, is frowned upon. In fact, New Guineans call this “acting extra” 
and view it as a form of vanity. Given the cultural differences between New Guinea and 
the United States, such differences in how the need for achievement is expressed make 
sense. People in Papua, New Guinea, make their living at farming and fishing, and they 
need to know that if they get sick or something happens and they cannot work their 
fields or nets, others will pitch in and help. In collectivist cultures, individual achieve￾ment is less valued than the person who helps his or her group achieve.
Final PDF to printer342
lar31869_ch11_330-365.indd 342 10/18/22 01:36 PM
PART THREE The Intrapsychic Domain
Determining Sex Differences
Much of the research on nAch, particularly that done in the 1950s and 1960s, was con￾ducted on males only. Perhaps this was due to the fact that Harvard (where both Murray 
and McClelland did much of their research) was primarily a male institution at that time. 
Or it might have been due to the biased belief of that period that achievement was impor￾tant only in the lives of men. Whatever the reason, little was known about achievement 
strivings in women until the 1970s and 1980s. Since then, some similarities and some 
differences have been found between men and women. Men and women high in nAch 
are similar in their preference for moderate challenge, personal responsibility for the 
outcome, and tasks with feedback. The major differences between such men and women 
occur in two areas: the life outcomes predicted by nAch and childhood experiences. 
Let’s consider each of these in turn.
Research on men has focused primarily on achievement in business as a typical 
life outcome predicted by nAch. Research on women, however, has identified different 
“achievement trajectories,” depending on whether the women value having a family or 
value having both family and work goals. Among women who value both work and fam￾ily, nAch is related more to achieving better grades and to completing college, marrying, 
and starting a family later than it is among women low in nAch with career and family 
interests. Among women who are more exclusively focused on family, nAch is seen in 
the women’s investment in activities related to dating and courtship, such as placing 
greater emphasis on physical appearance and talking with friends about their boyfriends 
more frequently (Koestner & McClelland, 1990).
The second major difference between men and 
women has been in the childhood experiences associated 
with nAch. Among women, nAch is associated with a 
stressful or difficult early family life. The mothers of girls 
high in nAch were found to be critical of their daughters 
and to be aggressive and competitive toward them (Kagan 
& Moss, 1962). The mothers of high-achieving schoolgirls 
were also less nurturant and affectionate toward their 
daughters than the mothers of less academically success￾ful girls (Crandall et al., 1964). In contrast, the early lives 
of males high in nAch are characterized by parental sup￾port and care. An interesting related finding concerns 
the levels of nAch in children who come from families in 
which the parents have divorced or separated. A nation￾ally representative study found that women whose par￾ents had divorced or separated when they were children 
had higher nAch scores than women whose parents had 
stayed together. The opposite outcome was found for men 
(Veroff et al., 1960). Living with a single mom may pro￾vide an achieving role model for young girls, whereas for 
boys it may demonstrate that men are unnecessary to fam￾ily life and perhaps even to be resented.
Several studies have examined gender differences 
in competitive achievement settings. In one study the 
researchers had 40 men and 40 women solve simple 
addition problems as quickly as they could, paying 
them 50 cents for each correct answer (Niederle & 
Vesterlund, 2005). In one condition the participants 
Profile in nAch: Pete Buttigieg (born 1982) was valedictorian at his high 
school and, the year he graduated, he won the JFK Profiles in Courage 
essay contest. He went on to Harvard and, after graduating with a 
BA in History and Literature, was awarded a Rhodes Scholarship to 
attend Oxford, where he obtained a BA degree in Philosophy, Politics, 
and Economics. He then served 8 years as a Naval Intelligence officer. 
At age 29 he became the youngest mayor of a large (over 100,000) 
U.S. city—South Bend, Indiana. He ran for president in 2020 and, 
while he dropped out during the primary, he was appointed Secretary 
of Transportation by the winner (Joe Biden). Buttigieg is currently 
the youngest member of the Presidential Cabinet. This high achieving 
politician has a bright future in public service.
Scott Olson/Getty Images
Final PDF to printer343
lar31869_ch11_330-365.indd 343 10/18/22 01:36 PM
CHAPTER ELEVEN Motives and Personality 
simply played against the clock, trying to solve as many problems as they could. 
In another condition the game was changed to a tournament, where subjects were 
divided into teams of two women or two men each, and they played against each other. 
The winning team received $2.00 for each problem they solved and the losing team 
received nothing. The researchers found that men and women performed equally well 
in both conditions: the tournament setting and the individual setting. The experiment￾ers then had a third round, where each person could choose whether he or she wanted 
to play individually against the clock or in a tournament setting against the other play￾ers. Interestingly, only 35 percent of the women chose the tournament setting, whereas 
75 percent of the men chose the tournament setting. The authors concluded that even 
in settings where women perform just as well as men, they are less likely than men 
to want to engage in direct competition with others. Women may be more selective 
in how they express their achievement strivings, especially when winning for oneself 
means that others lose (zero-sum competition).
Promoting Achievement Motivation in Children
Despite the sex differences in childhood antecedents of achievement, McClelland 
believed that certain parental behaviors could promote high achievement motivation 
in children. One of these parenting practices is placing an emphasis on independence 
training. Parents can behave in ways that promote autonomy and independence in their 
children. For example, a young child who is taught to feed him- or herself becomes inde￾pendent of the parents during meal times; a child who is toilet trained no longer relies on 
his or her parents for assistance with this task. One longitudinal study found that strict 
toilet training in early childhood is associated with high need for achievement 26 years 
later (McClelland & Pilon, 1983). Training a child to be independent in various tasks of 
life promotes a sense of mastery and confidence in the child. This may be one way that 
parents can promote a need for achievement in their children.
A second parental practice associated with need for achievement is setting chal￾lenging standards for the child (Heckhausen, 1982). Parents need to let the child know 
what is expected of him or her. These expectations should not exceed the child’s abili￾ties, however, or else the child may give up. The idea is for parents to provide age￾appropriate goals that challenge the child, support the child in working toward these 
goals, and reward the child when the goal is attained (see Table 11.2). The difficulty 
of the goals increases with the child’s age and growing abilities. Having success experi￾ences in age-appropriate tasks appears to be part of the prescription for developing a 
heightened need for achievement. For example, learning the ABCs is a challenging 
task for a 4-year-old; parents might encourage a young child to undertake this task, 
enthusiastically sing the ABC song with the child, and reward the child with praise 
and hugs when he or she recites the alphabet independently for the first time. But for 
Table 11.2 Raising High Need for Achievement Children
• Set tough but age-appropriate standards.
• Applaud successes and celebrate accomplishments.
• Acknowledge but don’t dwell on failures; stress that failures are part of learning.
• Avoid instilling a fear of failure, and instead emphasize the motive to succeed.
• Stress effort over ability: Instead of saying “You can do it because you are smart” say “You can do 
it if you really try.”
Final PDF to printer344
lar31869_ch11_330-365.indd 344 10/18/22 01:36 PM
PART THREE The Intrapsychic Domain
a 6-year-old, the challenges should increase, such as learning to read basic words or to 
add and subtract simple numbers.
A developmental theory of achievement motivation has been proposed by the psy￾chologist Carol Dweck (2002). This theory emphasizes the beliefs that people develop 
about their abilities and competencies. Briefly, the theory holds that the most adaptive 
belief system is that abilities are not fixed, but that they are malleable and can be devel￾oped through effort. Dweck (2002) argues that sometimes even “smart” people succumb 
to the belief that their abilities are fixed or given or genetically determined and that truly 
gifted persons do not need effort to achieve. She argues that this set of beliefs is “dumb” 
in the sense that people who hold such beliefs will consequently have a low need for 
achievement. It is more adaptive, Dweck holds, to believe that abilities are changeable, 
that one’s performance is a temporary indicator of where one is, not where one will 
ultimately be, and that one’s true potential will be realized only through sustained effort. 
This theory is having an impact on schools and other educational settings (Elliot & 
Dweck, 2005). Dweck (2006) has also written a popular book on how this theory relates 
to achievement in sports, business, and relationships.
In a large-scale study, Dweck and her colleagues (Paunesku et al., 2015) showed 
that training students to view intelligence as a malleable and changeable quality, rather 
than viewing it as fixed or hereditary, leads to measurable increases in grades. We’ll have 
more to say about Dweck’s theory in the Chapter 12, when we discuss cognition and per￾sonality, but for now we’ll simply say that believing one can become smarter with effort 
appears to be a prerequisite for actually becoming smarter (or at least achieving better 
grades; Goudeau & Cimpian, 2021).
Need for Power
Another motive of interest to psychologists is based on the need for power—the desire to 
have an impact on others.
Impact on Others
Although McClelland was known primarily for his studies of the achievement motive, 
both he and several of his students went on to study other motives. One of his students, 
David Winter, focused a good deal of his research on the need for power (nPow). 
Winter (1973) defines the need for power as a readiness or preference for having an 
impact on other people. A more detailed definition is provided by Fodor (2009): per￾sons high on need for power have a need to impress, influence, or control other people 
and to be recognized by others for their power-oriented actions. They achieve impact 
on others through various means, but most notably through forceful actions toward or 
against others, strong efforts to control others, or ostentatious displays of valued per￾sonal possessions. They want others to react to them, either with admiration, astonish￾ment, or fear. One study investigated the hypothesis that high nPow individuals would 
be faster at recognizing facial expressions of emotions in others (Donhauser, Rösch, & 
Schultheiss, 2015). Because of their desire to impact others, and because this impact 
often is registered in the faces of those around them, the high need for power person 
gauges the strength of their dominance by reading the emotions displayed by others. 
The researchers showed that need for power did correlate with faster recognition of 
facial expressions of emotions in others. This is most likely how high need for power 
people monitor whether they are being successful in having an impact: by reading the 
emotions displayed by those around them. As with the need to achieve, the need for 
power is assumed to energize and direct behavior when the person is in opportune 
Final PDF to printer345
lar31869_ch11_330-365.indd 345 10/18/22 01:36 PM
CHAPTER ELEVEN Motives and Personality 
situations for exerting power. The TAT has likewise been the predominant assessment 
tool for research on nPow. The subjects’ stories are scored for the presence of images 
related to themes of power. These include descriptions of strong or vigorous actions, 
behaviors that bring about strong reactions in others, statements that emphasize status 
or reputation, and displays of desirable possessions (flamboyant jewelry, sports cars, 
yachts, mansions, etc.).
Research Findings
Many studies have examined the correlates of individual differences in nPow (e.g., Kuhl 
& Kazén, 2008). The need for power correlates positively with having arguments with 
others, being elected to student office in college, taking larger risks in gambling situa￾tions, behaving assertively and actively in a small-group setting, and acquiring more of 
what Winter calls “prestige possessions,” such as sports cars, credit cards, and name￾plates for dormitory doors (Winter, 1973).
It appears that an individual high in nPow is interested in control—control of situa￾tions and other people (Assor, 1989). Men high in nPow rate their “ideal wives” as those 
who are under the men’s control and dependent on them, perhaps because such relation￾ships offer them a sense of superiority (Winter, 1973). Men high in nPow are also more 
likely to abuse their spouses (Mason & Blankenship, 1987). A person with a high need 
for power prefers as friends people who are not well known or popular, perhaps because 
such people do not compete for prestige or status (Winter, 1973).
Sex Differences
Research on the power motive has found no sex differences in average levels of nPow 
or in the kinds of situations that arouse the power motive. Men and women also do not 
differ in the life outcomes that are associated with nPow, such as having formal social 
power (e.g., holding office), having power-related careers (e.g., being a manager), or 
gathering prestige possessions (e.g., sports cars).
The largest and most consistent sex difference is that high nPow men, but not 
women, perform a wide variety of impulsive and aggressive behaviors. Men high in nPow 
are more likely than men low in nPow to have dissatisfying dating relationships, argu￾ments with others, and higher divorce rates. Men high in nPow are also more likely to 
engage in the sexual exploitation, have more frequent sex partners, and engage in sex at 
an earlier age than do their counterparts who are lower in nPow. Men with a strong need 
for power also tend to abuse alcohol more than those with a low need for power (feelings 
of power often increase under the influence of alcohol). None of these correlates have 
been found for women.
“Profligate impulsive” behaviors (drinking, aggression, and sexual exploita￾tion) are less likely to occur if an individual has had responsibility training (Winter & 
Barenbaum, 1985). Taking care of younger siblings is an example of responsibility train￾ing. Having one’s own children provides another opportunity to learn to behave respon￾sibly. Among people who have had such responsibility training, nPow is not related to 
profligate impulsive behavior (Winter, 1988). These findings have led Winter and others 
(e.g., Jenkins, 1994) to assert that socialization experiences, not biological sex per se, 
determine whether nPow will be expressed in these maladaptive behaviors.
Health Status and the Need for Power
As you might imagine, people high in nPow do not deal well with frustration and con￾flict. When high nPow people do not get their way or when their power is challenged or 
blocked, they are likely to show strong stress responses. McClelland (1982) called such 
Final PDF to printer346
lar31869_ch11_330-365.indd 346 10/18/22 01:36 PM
PART THREE The Intrapsychic Domain
obstacles power stress and hypothesized that people 
high in nPow were vulnerable to various ailments 
and diseases because of the stresses associated with 
inhibited power. In a study of college students, when 
power motives were inhibited or stressed, the sub￾jects’ immune function became less efficient, and 
they reported more frequent illnesses, such as colds 
and the flu (see McClelland & Jemmott, 1980). A 
later study of male prisoners found similar results, 
with prisoners high in nPow showing the highest 
levels of illness and the lowest levels of immune anti￾bodies (McClelland, Alexander, & Marks, 1982). 
Other studies have demonstrated that inhibiting the 
power motive among people high in nPow is linked 
with high blood pressure. This relationship was also 
found in a longitudinal study, which revealed that 
the inhibited power motive measured in men in their 
early thirties significantly predicted elevated blood 
pressure and signs of hypertension 20 years later 
(McClelland, 1979).
An interesting laboratory study induced power 
stress by having people lead a group discussion 
without knowing that the group’s members were 
coached ahead of time to disagree with the leader and to display a lot of conflict (Fodor, 
1985). The group leader was assessed for muscle tension. Consistent with McClelland’s 
theory, the greatest tension responses were found for those leaders in the group conflict 
condition who were high in nPow.
War and Peace and Power
In a fascinating line of research, psychologist Winter (1993, 2002) investigated nPow on 
a national level and related it to the broad areas of war and peace. Traditionally, nPow 
is measured by evaluating stories written in response to TAT pictures. However, nPow 
(as well as any motive) can be determined by assessing just about any written docu￾ment, ranging from children’s fairy tales to presidential speeches. Winter analyzed the 
content of 300 years of State of the Parliament speeches given by the prime ministers 
of England. Each of the speeches was rated for the presence of power images. He then 
used these image scores to predict warfare activity in these three centuries of British 
history. Winter found that wars were started when power imagery in the parliamentary 
speeches was high. Once under way, wars ended only after the levels of power imagery 
in the speeches ended. Similar analyses were done on the British–German communica￾tions during World War I, as well as on U.S.–Soviet communications during the Cuban 
missile crisis of the 1960s (Winter, 1993). Similar research coding need for power in the 
speeches of US senators shows that these scores predict their votes for or against war 
(Richardson & Winter, 2021). In a similar study, Semenova and Winter (2020) analyzed 
the speeches of Russian presidents over the past 30 years to code for nPow. In all these 
cases, increases in power imagery preceded military actions, whereas decreases in power 
imagery preceded decreases in military threat.
In an extension of this research, Winter and his students examined how power 
images in communications may lead to escalation in conflict (Peterson, Winter, & Doty, 
1994). Subjects were asked to write replies to letters taken from real conflict situations. 
Speeches delivered by Russian presidents have been analyzed for themes 
related to achievement, power, and affiliation (Semenova & Winter, 2020). 
The current (2022) president of Russia—Vladimir Putin—was extremely high 
on need for power. Research discussed in the text shows that a leader’s words 
are often followed by actions, with the presence of high power imagery in 
national speeches often being followed by the onset of wars. This is proving to 
be the case with Putin and his 2022 war on Ukraine
Abaca Press/Alamy Live News
Final PDF to printer347
lar31869_ch11_330-365.indd 347 10/18/22 01:36 PM
CHAPTER ELEVEN Motives and Personality 
The letters the subjects were responding to were altered to create two versions: one with 
high power imagery and the other with low power imagery. Otherwise, the content of 
the letters remained the same. The subjects’ responses were then analyzed for themes of 
power. Subjects responded to power imagery with power images of their own. Assuming 
that the other side would similarly respond with more power images, it is easy to see how 
conflicts might escalate.
Later studies of communications among governments involved in crises have 
revealed similar motive patterns (Langner & Winter, 2001). Analyzing official docu￾ments during four international crises, Langner and Winter found that making conces￾sions was associated with affiliative motives expressed in the communications, whereas 
power images were associated with making fewer concessions. In a laboratory study, 
they found that power or affiliative motives could be primed by having the subjects read 
different communications from their negotiation partner and that these primed motives 
predicted the likelihood that they would make a concession during the negotiation. Such 
personality research may have wide implications for understanding how governments 
could respond to each other to avoid crises.
To summarize, the need for power is the desire to have an impact on others. It 
can be measured from the TAT and from other verbal documents, such as speeches and 
other forms of communication, by looking for themes related to status seeking, con￾cerns about reputation, or attempts to make others do what one wants. For example, 
Winter (1988) provides an interesting analysis of Richard Nixon’s speeches in terms of 
the needs for achievement, power, and intimacy. Winter (1998) applies a similar analy￾sis to the speeches of former president Bill Clinton, linking Clinton’s motives to some 
of his problems as well as to his popularity. Winter (2018) also analyzed then presi￾dent Trump’s speeches for nPow, finding high levels. Krasno (2015) also analyzed the 
motives of president Bill Clinton, and found him to be particularly high on both the need 
for achievement as well as the need for intimacy, a motive to which we now turn.
Need for Intimacy
The last of the “Big Three” motives is based on the desire for warm and fulfilling relation￾ships with others.
Intimacy
The third motive receiving a good deal of research attention is the need for intimacy 
(nInt). The researcher most closely associated with this motive is Dan McAdams, 
another McClelland student. McAdams defines the need for intimacy as the “recurrent 
preference or readiness for warm, close, and communicative interaction with others” 
(McAdams, 1990, p. 198). People high in nInt want more intimacy and meaningful 
human contact in their day-to-day lives than do those who are low in nInt.
Research Findings
McAdams and others have conducted a number of studies of nInt over the years in 
an effort to determine how people high and low in nInt differ from each other. As 
with the other motives, the TAT is often used to measure the strength of the intimacy 
motive. People high in nInt (compared to those who are low) have been found to (1) 
spend more time during the day thinking about relationships; (2) report more pleas￾ant emotions when they are around other people; (3) smile, laugh, and make more 
eye contact; and (4) start up conversations more frequently and write more text mes￾sages, e-mails, and social media posts. We might think that the people high in nInt 
Final PDF to printer348
lar31869_ch11_330-365.indd 348 10/18/22 01:36 PM
PART THREE The Intrapsychic Domain
are simply extraverts, but the findings do not support this interpretation. Rather than 
being the loud, outgoing, life-of-the-party extravert, the person high in nInt is more 
likely to be someone with a few very good friends, who prefers sincere and meaningful 
conversations over wild parties. When asked to describe a typical time with a friend, 
people high in nInt tend to report one-on-one interactions instead of group interac￾tions. When they get together with friends, people high in nInt are likely to listen to 
their friends and to discuss intimate or personal topics with them, such as their feel￾ings, hopes, beliefs, and desires. Perhaps this is why people who are high in nInt are 
rated by their peers as especially “sincere,” “loving,” “not dominant,” and “not self￾centered” (McAdams, 1990).
A few studies have examined the relationship between nInt and well-being. In a 
longitudinal study, nInt measured at age 30 in a sample of Harvard graduates was signifi￾cantly related to overall adjustment (e.g., having a satisfying job and family life, coping 
well with life’s stress, being free from alcohol problems) 17 years later (McAdams & 
Vaillant, 1982). Other studies have shown that nInt is associated with certain benefits 
and positive life outcomes for both men and women. Among women, nInt is associated 
with happiness and satisfaction with life. Among men, nInt is associated with less strain 
in life. Unlike the motives for power and achievement, for which no sex differences have 
been found as far as level of need is concerned, there does exist a consistent sex differ￾ence in average need for intimacy—women have, on average, a higher level of nInt than 
men (McAdams, 1990; McAdams & Bryant, 1987).
To summarize, the need for intimacy is the desire for warm and intimate relation￾ships with others. Individuals with a strong nInt enjoy the company of others and are more 
expressive and communicative toward others compared with people low in nInt. The inti￾macy motive is distinguished from extraversion in that persons high in nInt prefer having a 
few close friends to being a member of a rowdy group. In contrast to the need for achieve￾ment and power, for which men and women show comparable levels, women’s need for 
intimacy is, on average, higher than men’s (Dreschure & Schultheiss, 2016).
The motives we have covered so far—the needs for power, intimacy, and 
achievement—all fall within the tradition of academic personality psychology. There is, 
however, another motivational tradition, one that is rooted more in clinical psychol￾ogy than in academic personality research. This tradition has come to inform the field 
of personality psychology, and concepts from this tradition are present or implied in 
several areas of contemporary research. We turn now to the humanistic tradition within 
personality psychology.
Humanistic Tradition: The Motive to Self-Actualize
In 1995, an American legend passed away—Jerry Garcia, lead guitarist of the Grateful 
Dead—reportedly of heart failure, at the age of 53. In the many newspaper stories 
recounting his life and times, reporters often suggested that Garcia lived longer than he 
should have, given his lifestyle. His band was constantly on the road for three decades, 
and Garcia was known to have abused a multitude of drugs, including cocaine, heroin, 
and alcohol, on a regular basis.
Other entertainers from the past have also abused drugs and alcohol—and died as a 
result—at much younger ages than Garcia, such as John Belushi (died at 33), Kurt Cobain 
(died at 27), Jimi Hendrix (died at 27), Janis Joplin (died at 27), Jim Morrison (died 
at 27), Keith Moon (died at 31), Elvis Presley (died at 42), Tupac Shakur (died at 25), 
Final PDF to printer349
lar31869_ch11_330-365.indd 349 10/18/22 01:36 PM
CHAPTER ELEVEN Motives and Personality 
Sid Vicious (died at 21), and Amy Winehouse (died at 27). With each 
such death, the public engages briefly in an age-old debate about per￾sonal responsibility and the self-destructiveness often seen in artists. 
Some people argue that such artists are victims of their times or their 
culture. Garcia, for example, was thought to carry the burden of rep￾resenting the best (and worst) of the 1960s counterculture; he and his 
band were often viewed as a time capsule from that era.
Another view of the same situation is that Garcia did kill him￾self, that he slowly self-destructed through harmful life choices. This 
view implies that Garcia was responsible for his own demise. In an 
MTV interview the week of Garcia’s death, then-President Bill Clinton 
represented this view: “While he had great talent, he also had a terrible 
problem [heroin addiction]. . . . You don’t have to have a destructive 
lifestyle to be a genius.” The implication is that Garcia’s genius and 
his self-destructive tendencies were two separate parts of his personal￾ity and that one did not necessarily produce the other. Garcia killed 
himself by his own free will, in President Clinton’s perspective, and he 
was responsible for his own death due to the lifestyle choices he had 
made over the years.
Earlier, in our A Closer Look section, we discussed unconscious 
(implicit) motives. These are motives that a person is largely unaware 
of yet guide his or her behavior and life choices. Choices based on 
unconscious motives are, in most respects, made without free will. The 
Garcia question really becomes whether or not he was aware of his 
motives, whether he knew what he was doing when he made his many 
self-destructive life choices.
An emphasis on conscious awareness of needs, choice, and 
personal responsibility is one of the characteristics of the humanistic 
tradition approach to motivation. Humanistic psychologists emphasize 
the role of choice in human life, as well as the influence of responsibility
in creating a meaningful and satisfying life. The meaning of any person’s life, according 
to the humanistic approach, is found in the choices that person makes and the respon￾sibility he or she takes for those choices. In midlife, for example, some people come to 
realize that they are not exercising much choice in their daily lives, that they have fallen 
into a rut in their careers, their personal relationships, or both. This is the theme of much 
of the existential literary tradition, such as the book The Stranger by Albert Camus.
A second major characteristic of the humanistic tradition is an emphasis on the 
human need for growth and the realization of one’s full potential. Human nature, accord￾ing to this view, is positive and life-affirming. This view stands in marked contrast to 
psychoanalysis, which takes a rather pessimistic view of human nature, one that views 
humans as seething cauldrons of primitive sexual and aggressive instincts. The humanis￾tic tradition provides an optimistic counterpoint, one that stresses the process of positive 
growth toward a desired or even an idealized human potential. That human potential is 
summed up in the concept of the self-actualization motive.
We will define self-actualization shortly. First, we must note a third characteristic 
of the humanistic tradition that distinguishes it from other motivational approaches. 
The humanistic tradition views much of motivation as being based in a need to grow,
to become who one is meant to be. The other traditions, including those of Freud, 
Murray, and McClelland, view motivation as coming from a specific deficit, or lack. 
Amy Winehouse, who died of alcohol poisoning in 
2011 at the age of 27. Some argue she was a victim of 
the entertainment culture portrayal of her as a “bad 
girl” star. Others argue that Winehouse was a musical 
prodigy who also chose to live a destructive lifestyle. 
The issue of choice and personal responsibility is 
important in the humanistic approach to motivation.
Rosie Greenway/Getty Images
Final PDF to printer350
lar31869_ch11_330-365.indd 350 10/18/22 01:36 PM
PART THREE The Intrapsychic Domain
This is a subtle but important distinction, and it represents a historical break in motiva￾tion theory and research. All the motives we have discussed—achievement, power, and 
intimacy—are deficiency motives. In the humanistic tradition, the most human of all 
motivations—the motive to self-actualize—is seen as not based on a deficit of something. 
Rather, it is a growth-based motive, a motive to develop, to flourish, and to become 
more and more what one is destined to become. In the words of Maslow (1970), who 
coined the term in the 1960s, self-actualization is the process of becoming “more and 
more what one idiosyncratically is, to become everything that one is capable of becom￾ing” (p. 46).
Maslow’s Contributions
Any discussion of the motive to self-actualize has to begin with Maslow’s contributions 
(see Maslow & Hoffman, 1996). Several of his ideas form the foundation for theory and 
research in this area.
Hierarchy of Needs
Maslow (1908–1970) began with the concept of need but defined needs primarily by 
their goals. Maslow believed that needs were hierarchically organized, with more basic 
needs found toward the bottom of the hierarchy and the self-actualization need at the top 
(see Figure 11.2). He divided the hierarchy of needs into five levels.
At the base of Maslow’s need hierarchy are the physiological needs. These include 
needs that are of prime importance to the immediate survival of the individual (the need 
Figure 11.2
Maslow’s hierarchy of needs in his theory of motivation. The needs are organized hierarchically into levels. 
Lower-level needs are more pressing when not satisfied (indicated by larger, bolder fonts) than are higher￾level needs. 
Self￾actualization
Esteem
Belongingness
Safety
Physiological
Final PDF to printer351
lar31869_ch11_330-365.indd 351 10/18/22 01:36 PM
CHAPTER ELEVEN Motives and Personality 
Psychologist Doug Kenrick and colleagues 
(Kenrick et al., 2010) proposed a reinter￾pretation of Maslow’s hierarchical model 
of fundamental human needs. Because 
this is the first major overhaul of Maslow’s 
key contribution, we chose it for a closer 
look. Although this reformulation merges 
Maslow’s ideas with basic concepts from 
evolutionary psychology (covered in 
Chapter 8), only time will tell whether it pro￾vides a more useful framework for studying 
human needs and motives.
Maslow published his hierarchy of 
needs in 1943, and it had a large impact 
on many subfields of psychology, includ￾ing personality and developmental psy￾chology. However, today many see it as 
a quaint bit of armchair theorizing that, 
the notion that certain motives take pre￾cedence over others. Hence the needs 
are arranged in a specific order. Also, the 
needs lower in the pyramid are, when 
unsatisfied, are stronger and more persis￾tent than needs higher in the pyramid, pre￾sumably because they are more important 
for survival. Additionally, the needs are also 
related to development, such that as a per￾son matures, he or she shifts from needs 
lower to higher in the hierarchy.
All of these elements are retained by 
Kenrick and colleagues’ 2010 reinterpreta￾tion. The basic needs related to physiologi￾cal, safety or self-protection, affiliation, and 
esteem motives are also retained because 
they are important to survival, a major 
evolutionary goal. But, as we learned 
although interesting, is largely discon￾nected from any contemporary theory. 
Kenrick and colleagues suggest that it can 
take on new significance if the hierarchy 
can be renovated by incorporating theo￾retical and empirical developments from 
evolutionary psychology. They propose a 
new model that retains several of Maslow’s 
key ideas (i.e., it remains a hierarchical 
model, several original needs are retained, 
and it presumes a developmental order to 
the needs). However, what is added is a 
theoretical explanation for the model that is 
based on the evolutionary function of each 
particular need. This model is presented in 
the accompanying Figure 11.3. 
A novel and enduring part of Maslow’s 
model of needs is the idea of a hierarchy, 
A Closer Look A Reinterpretation of Maslow’s Hierarchy of 
Needs: An Evolution-Based Model
Figure 11.3
An updated hierarchy of fundamental human motives.
Source: “Renovating the Pyramid of Needs: Contemporary Extensions Built upon Ancient Foundations,” by D. T. Kenrick 
et al., Perspectives on Psychological Science, 5 (2010), 292–314.
Mate retention
Parenting
Mate acquisition
Status/esteem
Aliation
Self-protection
Immediate physiological needs
(Continued )
Final PDF to printer352
lar31869_ch11_330-365.indd 352 10/18/22 01:36 PM
PART THREE The Intrapsychic Domain
for food, water, air, and sleep), as well as to the long-term survival of the species (e.g., the 
need for sex). At the next highest level are the safety needs. These have to do with shel￾ter and security, such as having a place to live and being free from the threat of danger. 
Maslow believed that building a life that was orderly, structured, and predictable also fell 
under safety needs. Having your automobile inspected prior to a long trip might be seen 
as an expression of your safety needs.
With only two levels mentioned so far, we can make a few important observa￾tions. One is that we typically must satisfy the lower needs before we proceed to sat￾isfy the higher needs. One of Maslow’s enduring contributions is that he assembled the 
needs in a specific order, providing an understanding of how they relate to one another. 
Obviously, we have to have enough food and water before we will worry about earning 
esteem and respect from our peers. It is possible, of course, to find examples of people 
who do not follow the hierarchy (e.g., starving artists, who frequently go without ade￾quate food to continue expressing themselves in their art). Maslow’s theory, like most 
personality theories, is meant to apply to the average person or to describe human nature 
in general. Although there are always exceptions to the rule, people appear, on average, 
to work their way up Maslow’s hierarchy from the lowest to the highest level. Maslow 
also taught that the need hierarchy emerges during the course of human development, 
with the lower-level needs emerging earlier in life than the higher-level needs.
A second observation is that needs lower in the hierarchy are more powerful or 
more pressing when not satisfied than the needs toward the top of the hierarchy. The 
higher-level needs are less relevant to survival, so they are less urgent when not satisfied 
than the lower needs. Another way to put this is that when people are working on satisfy￾ing their higher needs, their motivation is weak and easily ignored. Maslow (1968) stated 
that “this inner tendency [toward self-actualization] is not strong and overpowering and 
unmistakable like the instincts of animals. It is weak and delicate and subtle and easily 
overcome by habit, cultural pressures, and wrong attitudes toward it.”
in Chapter 8, survival is only part of the 
evolutionary process. More important is 
reproduction, since survival without repro￾duction is an evolutionary dead end. So 
Kenrick and colleagues add the important 
needs to find and retain a mate, and to suc￾ceed at parenting by raising one’s children 
so that they may, in turn, reproduce, ensur￾ing one’s genes into future generations.
Kenrick and colleagues use functional 
explanations for each need in the hierar￾chy, with each need fulfilling a particular 
function with regard to evolution. Maslow’s 
ultimate need—the need to self-actualize—
has no apparent function with respect to 
surviving and reproducing, and so Kenrick 
and colleagues leave that need out of their 
model.
and colleagues’ model (Ackerman & Bargh, 
2010). Kenrick and colleagues provide a 
thoughtful reply to these criticisms (Schaller 
et al., 2013), illustrating why and how evo￾lution can be relevant to our understanding 
of uniquely human needs and motives.
The Kenrick and colleagues (2010) 
model of human needs does have a unify￾ing theory it is built upon, something that 
was lacking in Maslow’s version. Also, the 
theory on which the Kenrick model is based 
(evolution) has a great deal of empirical 
support and is almost universally accepted 
among scientists. Cook, Krems, and Kenrick 
published a paper in 2021 describing a 
decade of research testing various aspects 
of this model. It is turning out to be a useful 
framework for viewing human motivation.
The journal that published Kenrick and 
colleagues’ revised model of needs also 
published four articles critical of this new 
model. One criticism (Kesebir, Graham, & 
Oishi, 2010) argued that a theory of human 
needs should be human-centered, and 
not animal-centered. After all, the Kenrick 
and colleagues’ model applies to rats and 
lizards as much as it applies to humans, 
ignoring what might be distinctively human 
about human nature. Others argued that 
self-actualization can be viewed as evo￾lutionarily important and should not be 
dropped off of the list of fundamental 
human needs (Peterson & Park, 2010). 
Others argued that the purpose of life, 
other than ensuring one’s genes into future 
generations, is missing from the Kenrick 
A Closer Look (Continued )
Final PDF to printer353
lar31869_ch11_330-365.indd 353 10/18/22 01:36 PM
CHAPTER ELEVEN Motives and Personality 
People typically work at satisfying multiple needs at 
the same time. It is easy to find examples of people engag￾ing in a variety of tasks that represent different needs in 
a given period of time (e.g., eating, installing a new lock 
on the front door, going to a family reunion, and studying 
for an exam to earn a better grade). At any given time, 
however, we can determine the level at which a person is 
investing most of his or her energy. The point is that, even 
if we are working primarily on self-actualization needs, we 
need to do certain things (e.g., buy groceries) to make sure 
the lower needs continue to be satisfied.
The plots of many novels and movies, particularly 
adventure stories, involve people who find themselves in 
situations that force them to take a step downward on 
the hierarchy of needs—circumstances that require a sud￾den shift in focus to safety or even physiological needs. 
The series of Alien and Die Hard movies are examples 
of films that illustrate this phenomenon. In the film The 
Edge, actors Anthony Hopkins and Alec Baldwin take a few steps down the hierarchy of 
needs when their plane crashes in the wilderness and they are pursued by a large, hungry, 
and very persistent grizzly bear.
The third level in Maslow’s hierarchy consists of belongingness needs. Humans are 
a very social species, and most people possess a strong need to belong to groups (families, 
sororities/fraternities, churches, clubs, teams, etc.) (Baumeister & Leary, 1995). Being 
accepted by others and welcomed into a group represents a somewhat more psychologi￾cal need than the physiological needs or the need for safety. Some observers have argued 
that modern society provides fewer opportunities for satisfying our need to belong than 
it did in the past, when ready-made groups existed and people were automatic members 
(e.g., multigenerational extended families and small towns in which virtually everyone 
felt like a member of the community). Loneliness is a sign that these needs are not being 
satisfied; alienation from one’s social group or culture is another. The popularity of so￾called street gangs is a testament to the strength of belongingness needs. Gang member￾ship can fulfill belongingness needs for people who might otherwise feel alienated or 
excluded from groups available to members of the dominant culture.
One reason the need to belong is so basic comes from the theory of evolution. 
In our evolutionary past, belonging to a social group was essential to survival. People 
hunted in groups, lived in groups, shared food gathered by individuals in the group, and 
moved around in nomadic groups. Belonging to a group allowed the individual members 
to share the workload and to protect each other, raise each others’ young, and share 
important resources. Belonging to a group had survival value. Not only was each indi￾vidual ensuring his or her own survival by living in a group, but all members of the group 
were invested in each other’s survival because each member played an important role in 
the group. Today it is not necessarily the case that group living fosters survival; never￾theless, modern humans still have a strong desire to belong to groups, such as church 
groups, work groups, clubs, fraternities and sororities, and various interest groups.
The fourth level of need in Maslow’s hierarchy concerns esteem needs. There are 
really two types of esteem—esteem from others and self-esteem, the latter often depend￾ing on the former. We want to be seen by others as competent, strong, and able to 
achieve. We want to be respected by others for our achievements and our abilities. We 
also want this respect to translate into self-esteem; we want to feel good about ourselves, 
In the movie The Edge, the plot involves two high-esteem men who are 
suddenly knocked several steps down on Maslow’s hierarchy of needs by 
a large and persistent grizzly bear.
United Archives GmbH/Alamy
Final PDF to printer354
lar31869_ch11_330-365.indd 354 10/18/22 01:36 PM
PART THREE The Intrapsychic Domain
to feel that we are worthwhile, valuable, and competent. Much of the activity of adult 
daily life is geared toward achieving recognition and esteem from others and bolstering 
self-confidence.
The pinnacle of Maslow’s need hierarchy is the self-actualization need, the need 
to develop one’s potential, to become the person one was meant to be. You might think 
this is difficult, as it assumes that one must first figure out who one was meant to be. 
However, self-actualizers seem to just know who they are and have few doubts about the 
direction their lives should take (Bauer, Schwab, & McAdams, 2011).
Research Findings
Maslow developed his theory based on his ideas and thoughts about motivation, not on 
empirical research. He never, for example, developed a measure of self-actualization, 
though others did (Flett, Blankstein, & Hewitt, 1991; Jones & Crandall, 1986). How 
has his theory fared in the hands of researchers? Although not all the studies sup￾port Maslow’s theory (e.g., Wahba & Bridwell, 1973), some studies support its main 
tenets (e.g., Hagerty, 1999). One group of researchers tested the idea that lower-level 
needs in the hierarchy are stronger than the higher-level needs when deprived (Wicker 
et al., 1993). These researchers presented subjects with a variety of goals that mapped 
onto Maslow’s theory: having enough to eat and drink, feeling safe and unafraid, being 
part of a special group, being recognized by others as an outstanding student, and 
being mentally healthy and making full use of one’s capabilities. They then asked sub￾jects several questions about each goal, including “How good would you feel if you 
attained it?” and “How bad would you feel if you did not attain it?” What the research￾ers found is that the negative reactions were strongest when subjects thought about 
not attaining the lower-level goals. Subjects were more upset when they contemplated 
their safety needs not being met than they were when they thought about not meet￾ing their self-actualization needs. Just the opposite pattern was found for the posi￾tive reaction ratings. When subjects were asked about attaining goals, they reported 
more positive emotions in response to contemplating the attainment of goals higher in 
the hierarchy. For example, acquiring esteem from others makes one feel better about 
oneself than having enough to eat and drink. This study supports Maslow’s hierarchi￾cal arrangement of motives, while highlighting differences in how people react to the 
attainment or frustration in the various need levels. Maslow’s idea that the lower needs 
are “prepotent”—imperative for sheer survival—and therefore stronger than the higher 
needs when unfulfilled was supported.
One study compared groups defined in terms of where they stood on Maslow’s 
need hierarchy in terms of overall happiness (Diener, Horowitz, & Emmons, 1985). 
All the subjects were asked, “What is it that most makes you happy?” The researchers 
assumed that the answer to this question would reveal each subject’s level of need in 
Maslow’s hierarchy. For example, one subject said, “A good meal and the ability to 
digest it,” which was scored as being at the physiological level. The results showed no 
relationship between level of need and overall happiness (which was gauged in this 
study by a questionnaire measure). For happiness, it does not appear to matter what 
level of need a person is working on. People working on self-actualization needs are 
not any more likely to be happier than people working on other needs. Maslow also 
notes in his book that happiness does not necessarily come with working on the self￾actualizing need.
Given these findings, we might ask, “What are the characteristics that distinguish 
self-actualized persons from others?” Let’s turn to a discussion of Maslow’s research on 
the particular traits that best describe self-actualizing persons.
Final PDF to printer355
lar31869_ch11_330-365.indd 355 10/18/22 01:36 PM
CHAPTER ELEVEN Motives and Personality 
Characteristics of Self-Actualizing Persons
To learn more about self-actualization, Maslow conducted case studies of a number of 
people who he thought were self-actualizers. Maslow estimated about 1 percent of the 
population are growth motivated and are working on becoming all that they can become. 
Maslow’s list of self-actualizing people whom he investigated included several living 
persons whom he kept anonymous. He also studied several historical figures through 
their writings and other biographical information, including Albert Einstein, Eleanor 
Roosevelt, and Thomas Jefferson. Maslow then looked for common characteristics that 
could be identified in this group. From this study, he produced a list of 15 characteristics 
that he suggested are commonly found among self-actualizers (see Table 11.3). Most of the 
people Maslow studied were famous, and many had made great contributions to science, 
politics, or the humanities. When reading over the list of characteristics in Table 11.3, 
bear in mind that the theory does not say “you must be famous or make great contribu￾tions to humanity” to become self-actualized. Students of personality often make this 
misinterpretation because of the special nature of the people studied by Maslow. It is 
possible for ordinary, as well as extraordinary, people to achieve self-actualization.
A notion related to self-actualization is the concept of flow, proposed by psycholo￾gist Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi (e.g., Csikszentmihalyi, Abuhamdeh, & Nakamura, 2005). 
Flow is defined as a subjective state that people report when they are completely involved 
in something to the point of forgetting time, fatigue, themselves, and everything else but 
the activity itself. In states of flow, a person is functioning at his or her fullest capac￾ity. Although flow experiences are somewhat rare, they occur under specific conditions; 
there is a balance between the person’s skills and the challenges of the situation, there 
is a clear goal, and there is immediate feedback on how one is doing. The experience of 
flow itself can be a powerful motivating force and can be an indication that, at least for 
the moment, one is engaging in self-actualization.
Rogers’s Contributions
Maslow focused on the characteristics of self-actualizing individuals, and he taught that 
only about 1 percent of humanity reached the self-actualizing level of motivation. The 
psychologist Carl Rogers (1902–1987), on the other hand, focused on ways to foster 
self-actualization and developed a form of therapy that helped people to move toward 
self-actualization. During the four decades of his productive career, Rogers developed 
a theory of personality and a method of psychotherapy (client-centered therapy). 
Like Maslow, Rogers believed that people were basically good and that human nature 
was fundamentally benevolent and positive. He felt that the natural human state was to be 
fully functioning, but under certain conditions people become stalled in their movement 
Think of a person you know or have met who deeply impresses you. Try to identify someone 
who you think might be a self-actualizer. Review Maslow’s list of the 15 characteristics he 
associated with self-actualized individuals (Table 11.3), and identify the characteristics that the 
person you’ve chosen appears to possess. Try to provide concrete examples from the person’s 
life to illustrate the 15 characteristics.
?
Exercise
Final PDF to printer356
lar31869_ch11_330-365.indd 356 10/18/22 01:36 PM
PART THREE The Intrapsychic Domain
toward self-actualization. His theory explains how people lose their direction. Moreover, 
he proposed techniques for helping people get back on track toward achieving their 
potential. His general approach to self-actualization—the person-centered approach—has 
been expanded and applied to groups, to education, to corporate organizations, and even 
to government (see Rogers, 2002, for his posthumously published autobiography).
Table 11.3 Characteristics of Self-Actualizers 
from Maslow’s Case Studies
 1. Efficient perception of reality. They do not let their own wishes and desires color their 
perceptions. Consequently, they are able to detect the deceitful and the fake.
 2. Acceptance of themselves, others, and nature or fate. They realize that people, including 
themselves, make mistakes and have frailties, and they accept this fact. They accept natural 
events, even disasters, as part of life.
 3. Spontaneity. Their behavior is marked by simplicity and honest naturalness. They do not put on 
airs or strain to create an effect. They trust their impulses, their actions are genuine.
 4. Problem focus. They have an interest in the larger philosophical and ethical problems of their 
times. Petty issues hold little interest for them.
 5. Affinity for solitude. They are comfortable with being alone.
 6. Independence from culture and environment. They do not go in for fads. They prefer to follow 
their self-determined interests.
 7. Continued freshness of appreciation. They have a “beginner’s mind,” for which every event, no 
matter how common, is experienced as if for the first time. They appreciate the ordinary and 
find pleasure and awe in the mundane.
 8. More frequent peak experiences. A peak experience is a momentary feeling of extreme 
wonder, awe, and vision, sometimes called the “oceanic feeling.” These are special 
experiences that appear to be very meaningful to the person who has one.
 9. Genuine desire to help the human race. All self-actualizers tend to have a deep and sincere 
caring for their fellow humans.
10. Deep ties with relatively few people. Although they care deeply about others, they have 
relatively few very good friends. They tend to prefer privacy and allow only a few people to 
really know them.
11. Democratic values. They respect and value all people and are not prejudiced in terms of 
holding stereotypes about people based on superficial characteristics, such as race, religion, 
sex, and age. They treat others as individuals, not as members of groups.
12. Ability to discriminate between means and ends. They enjoy doing something for its own sake 
rather than simply doing something for the goals the activity can fulfill.
13. Philosophical sense of humor. Most humor is an attempt to make fun of a perceived inferiority 
of a person or group of people. Self-actualizers do not think such jokes are funny. Instead, what 
they find funny are examples of human foolishness in general, even their own.
14. Creativity. Creativity can be thought of as the ability to see connections among things—
connections that no one has seen before. They are more likely to be creative because of their 
fresh perception of even ordinary things.
15. Resistance to enculturation. Cultures tell us how to behave, how to dress, and even how to 
interact with each other. Self-actualizers remain detached from culture-bound rules. They often 
appear and act differently from the crowd.
Source: Adapted from Maslow, 1954/1987.
Final PDF to printer357
lar31869_ch11_330-365.indd 357 10/18/22 01:36 PM
CHAPTER ELEVEN Motives and Personality 
At the core of Rogers’s approach is the concept of the fully functioning person, the 
person who is on his or her way toward self-actualization. The fully functioning person 
may not actually be self-actualized yet, but he or she is not blocked or sidetracked in 
moving toward this goal. Several characteristics describe the fully functioning person. 
Such persons are open to new experiences, and they enjoy diversity and novelty in their 
daily lives. Fully functioning individuals are also centered in the present. They do not 
dwell on the past or their regrets. Neither do they live in the future. Fully functioning 
individuals also trust themselves, their feelings, and their own judgments. When faced 
with a decision, they don’t automatically look around to others for guidance (e.g., “What 
would make my parents happy?”). Instead, they trust themselves to do the right thing. 
Fully functioning individuals are often unconventional, setting their own obligations and 
accounting to themselves.
How does someone become fully functioning? This is where Rogers’s theory of 
the development of the self comes into play. An entire chapter of this book is devoted 
to an exploration of the self, and much of the work covered in Chapter 14 can be traced 
back to Carl Rogers, who strongly believed that there was one primary motive in life—the 
motive to self-actualize, to develop the self that was meant to be.
Journey into Selfhood: Positive Regard and Conditions of Worth
According to Rogers, all children are born wanting to be loved and accepted by their 
parents and others. He called this inborn need the desire for positive regard. Parents 
frequently make their positive regard contingent on conditions, such as the conditions 
expressed in the statements “Show me you are a good child and earn all as on your 
report card” or “I will really like it if you earn the star role in your school play.” In 
another example, parents push children into sports, and the children might stay in the 
sports, not because they like sports, but to earn the love and positive regard of their 
parents. Of course, it is good for parents to have expectations for their children, but not 
to make their love contingent on the child’s meeting those expectations. Parents should 
love their children unconditionally, but unfortunately many parents implicitly put condi￾tions on their children for earning that love and positive regard.
The requirements set forth by parents or significant others for earning their posi￾tive regard are called conditions of worth. Children may become preoccupied with living 
up to these conditions of worth rather than discovering what makes them happy. They 
behave in specific ways to earn the love, respect, and positive regard of parents and other 
significant people in their lives. Positive regard, when it must be earned by meeting cer￾tain conditions, is called conditional positive regard.
Children who experience many conditions of worth may lose touch with their own 
desires and wants. They begin living their lives in an effort to please others. They become 
what others want them to become, and their self-understanding contains only qualities 
that others condone. They are moving away from the ideals of a fully functioning person. 
What matters most is pleasing others. “What will they think?”—not “What do I really 
want in this situation?”—is a question such people ask themselves repeatedly.
As they reach adulthood, they remain preoccupied with what others think of them. 
They work primarily for approval from others; they want to accumulate “likes” from 
important others; they pay attention to what the “influencers” say and do. They lose any 
sense of self-direction and are directed, instead, by what others want or what they think 
others want. They act in ways that make everybody, except themselves, happy. They have 
been working to please others for so long that they have forgotten what they want out of 
life. They have lost self-direction and are no longer moving toward self-actualization and 
may not even know it. Some might feel that “likes are not enough” (Bono, 2018), but they 
Final PDF to printer358
lar31869_ch11_330-365.indd 358 10/18/22 01:36 PM
PART THREE The Intrapsychic Domain
don’t know what can replace them. Others might feel that their life is somehow inauthen￾tic, that they’ve lost their way, but they are not sure how to get back to an authentic life.
How can one avoid this outcome? Rogers believed that positive regard from parents 
and significant others should have no strings attached. It should be given freely and liberally 
without conditions or contingencies. Rogers called this unconditional positive regard—when 
the parents and significant others accept the child without conditions, communicating that 
they love and value the child because the child just is. Parents need to show unconditional 
acceptance of the child, even when providing discipline or guidance. For example, if a child 
has done something wrong, the parent can still provide correction in combination with 
unconditional positive regard: “You have done something bad. You are not bad, and I still love
you; it’s just that the thing you have done is bad, and I don’t want you to do that anymore.”
With enough unconditional positive regard, children learn to accept experiences 
rather than deny them. They don’t have to engage in efforts to distort themselves for 
others or alter their behaviors or experiences to fit a mold or model of what others want. 
Such persons are free to accept themselves, even their own weaknesses and shortcom￾ings, because they have experienced unconditional positive self-regard. They are able 
to give themselves unconditional positive regard and accept themselves for who they 
are. They trust themselves, follow their own interests, and rely on their feelings to guide 
them. In short, they begin to take on the characteristics of a fully functioning person, 
they begin to actualize the self that they were meant to be.
Promotion of Self-Actualization in Self and Others
People who are not moving forward in terms of self-actualization experience frequent 
episodes of anxiety. Anxiety, according to Rogers, is the result of having an experience 
that does not fit with one’s self-conception. Imagine a young woman who worked hard 
all through grade school and high school to earn good grades in an effort to make her 
parents happy. Part of her self-concept is that she “is smart and gets good grades.” Then 
she enters college and obtains some less than perfect grades in some of her courses. This 
experience is alien; it does not fit with her self-concept as a person who is smart and gets 
good grades, so it makes her anxious. “What will they think,” she says to herself, refer￾ring to her parents, “when they find out about these grades?” This new experience is a 
threat to her self-image, and that self-image is vitally important to her because in the past 
it brought her the positive regard of her parents. Rogers believed that people needed to 
defend themselves against anxiety, to reduce the discrepancy between their self-concept 
and their experiences. A fully functioning person could change his or her self-concept to 
incorporate the experience (e.g., “Perhaps I’m not so smart after all, or perhaps I don’t 
always need to get perfect grades”).
A less functional response to anxiety is to alter the experience by using a defense 
mechanism. Rogers emphasized the defense mechanism of distortion. Persons who 
engage in distortion modify their experience rather than their self-image to reduce the 
threat. For example, a person might say, “The professors in these classes are unfair,” or 
“The grades really don’t reflect how well I did,” or in another way distort the experience. 
Or perhaps the person decides to take only “easy” classes, in which she is likely to earn 
high grades. Her decisions about which classes to take are based not on her own interests 
and desires (as would be the case for a self-actualizing reason) but on which classes are 
more likely to result in better grades to make her parents happy (a condition-of-worth 
reason). Taking classes merely to obtain easy grades is at odds with her self-concept of 
someone who is smart, and she may become anxious over the fact that so many of her 
experiences do not fit exactly with the way she would like to see herself.
People may get off the path toward self-actualization, not because they lack IQ or 
education but because they have gotten out of touch 
Final PDF to printer359
lar31869_ch11_330-365.indd 359 10/18/22 01:36 PM
CHAPTER ELEVEN Motives and Personality 
found a relationship between the self-actualizing tendency and emotional intelligence 
(Bar-On, 2001). Emotional intelligence is a relatively new construct that has five com￾ponents: the ability to know one’s own emotions, the ability to regulate those emotions, 
the ability to motivate oneself, the ability to know how others are feeling, and the ability 
to influence how others are feeling. This may be an especially adaptive form of intelli￾gence, which we describe in more detail in Chapter 12 on cognitive approaches. In the 
Bar-On (2001) study, the self-actualizing tendency was defined as working on actualizing 
one’s talents and skills, and it was found that emotional intelligence correlated with this 
tendency. The author argues that emotional intelligence is more important for fostering 
self-actualizing than IQ, or cognitive intelligence.
Self-actualizers are in touch with their feelings and use their own emotions to 
guide their choices and decisions in life. This is positive self-regard in action. But many 
people, once they have gotten off track, have trouble finding their way back to them￾selves. Rogers designed a form of psychotherapy to help people get their lives back on 
track toward self-actualization.
Application
Paul Gauguin is most famous for his paintings of South Pacific islanders using lush color, the 
denial of perspective, and the use of flat, two-dimensional forms. His powerfully expressive yet 
stylistically simple paintings helped form the basis of modern art. Gauguin was not always an 
artist, however. In 1872, Gauguin started a very successful career as a stockbroker in Paris. 
His marriage to his Danish wife Mette produced five children, and they led a content, upper￾middle-class life in Paris. Gauguin always wanted to paint, however. He felt he could be a great 
painter, but his job as a stockbroker consumed all of his time (Hollmann, 2001).
In 1874, Gauguin attended the first Impressionist painting exhibition in Paris. He was 
entranced with this style of painting. He had a strong desire to become a painter, but instead he 
put all of his energy into his stockbroker’s job and used the proceeds to purchase some paint￾ings by Monet, Pissarro, and Renoir. This was the closest he could come, he felt, to realizing 
his potential as an artist.
Fortunately or unfortunately, the bank that employed Gauguin began having difficulties 
in 1884. Gauguin began to take time away from work and started painting. His income went 
down, and he had to move his family from expensive Paris to the town of Rouen, where the 
cost of living was lower. As Gauguin devoted more time to painting and less time to stockbro￾kering, his income went even lower and his marriage started to suffer. Neither Paul nor his 
wife were happy with their current situation, but for different reasons; Paul wanted more of the 
new life of painting he was discovering, and his wife wanted more of the old life and for him to 
return to the Paris life of stockbrokers, banks, and the upper middle class.
After a period of some marital discord, Paul Gauguin left his wife and five children and, 
with absolute sincerity and clarity of purpose, began to realize his potential as an artist. He 
fell in with the likes of van Gogh, Degas, and Pissarro, who mentored him in impressionism. 
In 1891, he decided to flee civilization in search of a new way of life, one that more matched 
his painting style: primitive, bold, and sincere. He sailed to Tahiti and the islands of the South 
Pacific, where, except for a brief visit back to France, he remained until his death in 1903 
(Gauguin, 1985). In Tahiti, his paintings of indigenous people grew more powerful and distinc￾tive, and on a large scale he achieved his potential as one of the modern world’s greatest artists.
The ethical questions in Gauguin’s life concern the competing responsibilities that are 
so evident; he had one life as a responsible banker and stockbroker, complete with a loving 
Final PDF to printer360
lar31869_ch11_330-365.indd 360 10/18/22 01:36 PM
PART THREE The Intrapsychic Domain
wife and five dependent children. On the other hand, Gauguin felt (correctly) that he had the 
potential to become a truly outstanding artist. Should he have been true to this inner calling, 
or should he have been true to his responsibilities as husband, father, and provider for his fam￾ily? How should we judge his decision to abandon his family to pursue his self-actualization? 
What role does his success as an artist have in our judgment? What if, for example, he had 
abandoned his family then failed miserably as an artist? What should get priority in life when 
there is a conflict between one’s immediate responsibilities and one’s inner calling to realize 
a very different self? These are the difficult ethical questions of choice and responsibility that 
sometimes come to people on their way toward self-actualization.
Application (Continued)
A painting by Paul Gauguin titled “Self-Portrait with Yellow Christ” (1890), from a private collection. The life of 
Paul Gauguin raises several complicated ethical questions about responsibility, choice, and self-actualization.
Paul Gauguin/Art Images/Getty Images
Rogers’s form of psychotherapy, sometimes called client-centered therapy, is 
very different from Freudian psychoanalysis. In client-centered therapy, the client 
(a term Rogers preferred over patient) is never given an interpretation of his or her 
problem. Nor is a client given any direction about what course of action to take to 
solve the problem. The therapist makes no attempts to change the client directly. 
Final PDF to printer361
lar31869_ch11_330-365.indd 361 10/18/22 01:36 PM
CHAPTER ELEVEN Motives and Personality 
Instead, the therapist tries to create the right conditions in which the client can 
change him- or herself.
There are three core conditions for client-centered therapy (Rogers, 1957). 
These conditions must be present in the therapy context in order for progress to 
occur. A film of Carl Rogers conducting a therapy session with “Gloria” is widely 
available on the internet and is sometimes used in training therapists. In this film, 
Rogers expertly sets up these three conditions in his conversation with Gloria (see 
the analysis of this film by Wickman & Campbell, 2003). The first core condition is 
an atmosphere of genuine acceptance on the part of the therapist. The therapist must 
be genuinely able to accept the client. Second, the therapist must express uncondi￾tional positive regard for the client. This means that the therapist accepts everything 
the client says without passing judgment on the client. Clients trust that the therapist 
will not reject them if they say the “wrong” thing, or if something unflattering comes 
out in the course of therapy. The atmosphere is safe for clients to begin exploring 
their concerns.
The third condition for therapeutic progress is empathic understanding. The cli￾ent must feel that the therapist understands him or her. A client-centered therapist 
attempts to know the client’s thoughts and feelings as if they were his or her own. 
Empathy is understanding the other person from his or her point of view (Rogers, 
1975). The therapist conveys empathic understanding by restating the content and 
feelings of what the client has said. Instead of interpreting the meaning behind what 
the client says (e.g., “You have a harsh superego, which is punishing you for the 
actions of your id”), the client-centered therapist simply listens to what the client says 
and reflects it back. It is analogous to looking in a mirror; a good Rogerian therapist 
reflects back the person’s feelings and thoughts, so that the person can examine them 
in full and undistorted detail. The client comes to understand him- or herself better by 
making the therapist understand. The therapist expresses this understanding by restat￾ing the content (“What I heard you say is . . .”) and by reflecting back the person’s 
feelings (“It sounds as if you are feeling . . .”). This may sound simple, but it is a very 
effective approach to helping people understand themselves and helping them change 
how they think about themselves.
Empathic listening is a technique of conversation that can be rather easily developed. You 
might practice with a friend. Find someone to role-play with you, and ask the person to start 
by describing a small problem from his or her life. Your job is to role-play a client-centered 
approach in the conversation. That is, you will try to do the two activities involved in reflecting 
back: first, try to just restate the content of what your friend says. That is, paraphrase back what 
the person has said, exactly as you understand it (e.g., “What I hear you saying is . . .”). The 
second reflecting-back action is to restate your friend’s feelings. That is, take any feelings the 
friend mentions or implies and state them back to him or her exactly as you understand those 
feelings (e.g., “It seems you are feeling . . . about this situation”). The friend will correct you or 
elaborate on the situation or feelings. After a few minutes, switch the roles and have your friend 
be the empathic listener while you describe a small problem. If done correctly, you should feel 
that your friend is really understanding you and that you are encouraged to explore your prob￾lem situation and your feelings about that situation.
?
Exercise
Final PDF to printer362
lar31869_ch11_330-365.indd 362 10/18/22 01:36 PM
PART THREE The Intrapsychic Domain
Ever since Rogers published his classic article describing empathy as one of the 
necessary conditions for therapeutic change (Rogers, 1957), many psychologists have 
attempted to understand the nature of empathy. Are some people natural-born empathiz￾ers, or is empathy a skill that can be acquired and improved with training? A study of 
839 twin pairs suggests that the ability to take the perspective of another person is not 
significantly heritable (Davis, Luce, & Kraus, 1994). This finding implies that people 
are not necessarily born with a predisposition to be good at the empathic understand￾ing of others’ points of view. Other studies have demonstrated that empathy can be 
taught effectively. For example, in one study the researchers measured empathic ability 
Application
The metaphor of a mirror is a useful one that can help us appreciate how the client-centered 
techniques work. Imagine that you want to adjust your outward appearance, so you look in a 
mirror to examine your appearance and see how the adjustment looks. Similarly, if you want 
to change your inner self, you can use the positive atmosphere and empathic understanding 
of a client-centered therapist to examine yourself and to contemplate changes. The following 
example demonstrates the technique of reflecting back:
Client: I just don’t know which classes to take next year. I wish someone could make those 
decisions for me.
Therapist: You are looking for someone to tell you what to do.
Client: Yes, but I know that’s impossible [sigh]. Nobody can decide what’s right for me if even 
I don’t have a clue.
Therapist: You find it exasperating that you are having so much trouble deciding on a class 
schedule.
Client: Well, none of my friends have this much trouble making decisions.
Therapist: You feel that your situation is not normal; it’s not like the experience of your 
friends.
Client: Yeah, and it makes me mad. I should just be able to pick four or five courses and stick 
with my decision, but I can’t seem to. I know it’s silly.
Therapist: You think it is a trivial thing, yet it makes you angry that you cannot seem to make 
the decision.
Client: Well, you know, it really is trivial, isn’t it? I know I can always change classes if they 
don’t work out. I guess I just need to try them out.
Therapist: You see some options, that you can get out of a class if it isn’t right for you.
The therapist never directs the client or offers an interpretation of the problem. This is why 
Rogerian therapy is sometimes called non-directive therapy—the focus is on the client’s under￾standing of the situation, not the therapist’s interpretation. The client works to clarify the thera￾pist’s understanding and, in so doing, increases his or her self-understanding. The client may 
come to accept that he or she has been denying or distorting experiences, such as taking classes 
for grades rather than for their own intrinsic interest. In helping the therapist understand why 
she is having so much trouble deciding on a class schedule, the person in the example may 
come to the realization that she has been taking classes primarily to make her parents happy. In 
an accepting atmosphere, she may come to this unflattering realization, and she might go on to 
explore how she can change her self-concept to accept this new understanding.
Final PDF to printer363
lar31869_ch11_330-365.indd 363 10/18/22 01:36 PM
CHAPTER ELEVEN Motives and Personality 
both before and after training in peer counseling (Hacher et al., 1994). They found that 
the training program, which emphasized listening skills (such as those in the previous 
Exercise and Application), produced significant increases in overall empathy scores. 
The training especially helped college and high school students improve their abilities 
to take the perspectives of other people and understand others’ concerns. Interestingly, 
these researchers found that, although college women initially had higher starting levels 
of empathic ability, men and women were equally teachable.
In another study, empathic ability increased with practice (Marangoni et al., 
1995). College students watched videotapes of three individuals undergoing an inter￾view about a personal problem (e.g., a recent divorce or the difficulties of being both a 
wife and a career woman). The researchers’ hypothesis was supported; the subjects with 
more empathy were more accurate in their hunches about what the videotaped person 
was thinking and feeling, compared with the subjects who had less empathic ability. 
Moreover, the more practice the subjects had, the better they became at discerning what 
the videotaped individual was thinking and feeling. Finally, some subjects were simply 
better than others at empathic understanding. Even though everyone’s performance 
could improve with practice, some subjects were consistently better than others. Trying 
to understand the characteristics that make someone particularly adept at empathic 
understanding is an important topic for future research.
Rogers’s theory is important to personality psychology for a number of reasons 
(Bohart, 2013). His theory concerns the development of the self over the life span and 
includes specific processes that can interrupt or facilitate that development. He offers a 
new perspective on the importance of early experiences, similar to secure attachment, 
but which he calls unconditional positive regard. As in psychoanalysis, he assigns an 
important role to anxiety as a signal that things are not going well with the psychologi￾cal system. Also as in classical psychoanalysis, he offers a system of psychotherapy for 
helping persons overcome personal setbacks on the road toward actualizing their full 
potential. His work has had a large impact on the practice of psychotherapy over the last 
half century (see Patterson, 2000).
SUMMARY AND EVALUATION
Motives can be used to explain why people do what they do. Motive explanations 
are unique in that they imply a goal that pulls people to think, act, and feel in certain 
ways. Many motives grow out of deficits. For example, someone motivated to achieve 
must feel that he or she has not yet achieved enough in life. The three motives dis￾cussed in detail—achievement, power, and intimacy—are all deficit motives. The fourth 
major motive—the motive to self-actualize—is not a deficit motive, but rather a growth 
motive because it refers to the desire to become more and more what one is destined 
to become.
Henry Murray was among the first to catalog the variety of human needs. He 
assumed that individuals differed in the strength of these needs and that the intensity of 
the needs also fluctuated over time and in different situations. Murray’s emphasis was 
on how individuals differ from each other in terms of the basic needs, such as how some 
people have a more intense and lasting need for achievement than do other people.
Individual differences in the need for achievement have received a good deal of 
systematic attention from researchers. The need for achievement is the need to do things 
Final PDF to printer364
lar31869_ch11_330-365.indd 364 10/18/22 01:36 PM
PART THREE The Intrapsychic Domain
better and to overcome obstacles in the quest to attain one’s goals. Those with high 
levels of the need for achievement differ from those low in this need in many important 
ways, such as the preference for moderate levels of challenge, the tendency to do well 
in situations where they have control and responsibility, and the interest in receiving 
feedback on their performance.
The need for power, another deficit motive, has also received research atten￾tion. This motive is the desire to have an impact on other people, to make other people 
respond, and to impress and dominate others. Individuals who have a high need for 
power seek out positions in which they can influence others and acquire possessions 
that have all the markings of power, such as sports cars and expensive electronic gad￾gets. They prefer friends who are not particularly powerful or popular. Men with a high 
need for power may sometimes engage in social influence tactics that are irresponsible, 
abusive, or unethical.
The need for intimacy is the motive to acquire warm and communicative relation￾ships. People high in this need tend to think about, and spend more time with, other 
people. Communication and self-disclosure characterize their interactions, and they pre￾fer one-to-one interactions to large group activities.
The TAT is a projective technique for assessing levels of motivation in people. 
The technique is based on the idea that what people see is influenced by their needs. For 
example, a lonely person might see all situations as opportunities to be with people. The 
TAT was validated by showing that arousing a need in a person influences the person 
to write TAT stories consistent with that aroused need. Recent reviews of the literature 
suggest that the TAT assesses implicit motives, and it might be best suited for predicting 
long-term consequences of motives rather than short-term behaviors.
The need to self-actualize represents a distinct tradition in the psychology of moti￾vation, fundamentally different from the tradition that emphasizes deficit motivation. 
This humanistic approach emphasizes taking responsibility for decisions and making 
efforts to move and grow in a positive direction. The humanistic tradition assumes that 
human nature is positive and life-affirming and that most people would become fully 
functioning human beings if left to their own devices.
Abraham Maslow developed a hierarchical theory of motivation, the pinnacle 
of which is self-actualization, ranging from lower-level needs (physiological needs and 
safety needs) to higher-level needs (need for esteem and self-actualization). Maslow also 
studied the characteristics of self-actualizing persons and developed a list of the traits 
and behavior patterns that are common among the small percentage of the population 
working on becoming more of who they were meant to be.
Psychologist Carl Rogers theorized about obstacles to self-actualization and the 
therapeutic techniques that help people overcome those obstacles. Client-centered 
therapy is designed to help people regain their potential for growth and positive 
change. The therapist creates an atmosphere of unconditional positive regard and 
communicates empathic understanding to the client in order to enhance therapeutic 
effectiveness. It is clear from research that empathy is a skill that can be learned, sup￾porting Rogers’s theory.
Final PDF to printer365
lar31869_ch11_330-365.indd 365 10/18/22 01:36 PM
CHAPTER ELEVEN Motives and Personality 
motives 332
needs 332
hierarchy of needs 334
dynamic 334
press 336
alpha press 336
beta press 336
apperception 336
thematic apperception test 336
state levels 337
trait levels 337
implicit motivation 338
self-attributed motivation 339
KEY TERMS
fully functioning person 357
positive regard 357
conditions of worth 357
conditional positive regard 357
unconditional positive regard 358
positive self-regard 358
anxiety 358
distortion 358
emotional intelligence 359
client-centered therapy 361
core conditions 361
empathy 361
need for achievement 339
independence training 343
need for power 344
responsibility training 345
power stress 346
need for intimacy 347
humanistic tradition 349
physiological needs 350
safety needs 352
belongingness needs 353
esteem needs 353
self-actualization need 354
flow 356
Final PDF to printerlar31869_ch12_366-399.indd 366 12/01/22 11:27 AM
Part Four covers the cognitive/expe￾riential domain, which emphasizes 
an understanding of people’s percep￾tions, thoughts, feelings, desires, and 
other conscious experiences. The 
focus here is on understanding expe￾rience, especially from the person’s 
point of view. However, distinctions 
can be made in terms of the kinds of 
experiences that people have.
One kind of experience that 
people have concerns cognitive 
experiences; what they perceive and 
pay attention to, how they interpret 
the events in their lives, and their 
goals and strategies and plans for 
getting what they want in the future.
People differ from each other 
when it comes to cognitively interpret￾ing or making sense out of life events. 
We introduce a theory based on the 
idea that people construct their experi￾ences by applying personal constructs 
to their sensations. A related theory 
concerns how people decide on the 
causes of life events. Often people 
interpret events by making attribu￾tions of responsibility for those events. 
That is, “Why did this happen?” and 
“Whose fault is this?” Personality 
psychologists have extensively stud￾ied how people make attributions of 
responsibility, and how there may be 
stable individual differences in the 
tendency to blame oneself or to blame 
PART FOUR
The 
Cognitive/Experiential Domain
Lightspring/Shutterstock
Final PDF to printerlar31869_ch12_366-399.indd 367 12/01/22 11:27 AM
Cognitive experiences can also 
be studied in terms of the plans 
and goals that people formulate 
for themselves and for the strate￾gies they develop for reaching their 
goals. People anticipate different 
futures and strive for different goals. 
Understanding people’s goals and 
how their goals are expressions 
of personality as well as social 
standards also forms a part of the 
cognitive/experiential domain of 
knowledge about human nature.
A topic related to cognitive 
experience, and included in this part 
of the book, is intelligence. There are 
several controversies about the con￾cept of intelligence. For example, 
what is the best definition of intel￾ligence—the accumulation of what 
a person has learned or the ability 
to learn new information? Is intelli￾gence one quality, or are there sev￾eral different kinds of intelligence?
A second broad but important 
category of experience, one that is 
associated with, but distinct from, 
cognition, is emotion. Psychology 
has seen a sharp rise in research on 
emotion in the past few decades. 
We can ask a straightforward ques￾tion about emotional lifestyle: Is a 
person generally happy or generally 
sad? What makes a person anxious 
or fearful? Why is it that some peo￾ple become enthusiastic so easily? 
What makes people angry, and why 
can some people control their anger, 
whereas others cannot?
Emotional experiences are 
often thought of as states that come 
and go; now you are anxious, now 
you are not, or now you are angry, 
now you are not. However, emotions 
can also be thought of as traits, as 
the frequent experiences of specific 
states. For example, a person may 
become anxious frequently or have 
a lower threshold for experiencing 
anxiety. And so we might talk of 
anxiety proneness as a personality 
trait—the tendency to easily and fre￾quently become anxious.
When it comes to emotions as 
traits, we can divide the main topics 
into variables that refer to the con￾tent and variables that refer to the 
style of emotional life. The content 
of emotional life can be divided into 
pleasant and unpleasant emotions. 
In terms of pleasant emotions, the 
typical personality-relevant trait 
is happiness. Psychologists have 
recently become very interested in 
happiness, part of a general move￾ment, called Positive Psychology, 
that focuses on the positive features 
of human nature.
When it comes to unpleasant 
emotion traits, the research can be 
divided into three different dispo￾sitional emotions: anger, anxiety, 
and depression. Depression is a 
syndrome that is experienced by a 
significant portion of the popula￾tion, and it is of great importance in 
terms of public mental health. Trait 
anxiety has many different names in 
the personality literature, including 
neuroticism, negative affectivity, and 
emotional instability. Anger prone￾ness is also a traitlike tendency, but 
this one refers to the tendency to 
easily or frequently become angry, a 
characteristic personality psycholo￾gists are keenly interested in.
People also differ from each 
other in the style of their emotional 
lives. Emotional style refers to how 
their emotions are typically experi￾enced. Some people, for example, 
tend to experience their emotions 
at a higher intensity than other per￾sons. For such high affect-intensity 
persons, a positive event makes 
them very happy, and a negative 
event makes them very unhappy. 
Consequently such people experi￾ence wider emotional swings from 
day to day or even within a day.
A third major category of expe￾rience is distinct from cognition 
and emotion yet is very important 
to the average person. This category 
of experience refers to experiences 
of the self. These experiences are 
unique in that individuals can focus 
on themselves as an object, pay 
attention to themselves, come to 
know themselves. The experience of 
self is unlike all of our other experi￾ences, because in the experience of 
the self the knower and the known 
are one and the same. Psychologists 
have paid a great deal of attention 
to this unique object of our experi￾ence, self-knowing, and research 
and theorizing on the self has a long 
and rich tradition in personality 
psychology.
There are some useful distinc￾tions among types of self-experi￾ences. First there are descriptive 
aspects of the self: Who are we, 
what are the important images we 
have of our past self, and what are 
the images of possible future selves? 
A second main component of the 
experience of self is evaluative: Do 
we like or dislike who we are? This is 
called self-esteem, and it is a central 
organizing force in much of what 
we do. A third component of our 
self-experience concerns the social 
roles we inhabit, the social selves 
we show to others, which we call 
identity. For example, many college 
students show one identity to their 
parents and another identity to their 
companions at school. And people 
sometimes go through identity cri￾ses, especially during transitions in 
life, such as starting college, getting 
IV
Final PDF to printerlar31869_ch12_366-399.indd 368 12/01/22 11:27 AM
368
12
Cognitive Topics in 
Personality
Personality Revealed Through Perception
Field Dependence
Pain Tolerance and Sensation Reducing/Augmenting
Personality Revealed Through Interpretation
Kelly’s Personal Construct Theory
Locus of Control
Learned Helplessness
Personality Revealed Through Goals
Personal Projects Analysis
Cognitive Social Learning Theory
Intelligence
SUMMARY AND EVALUATION
KEY TERMS
Lightspring/Shutterstock
Final PDF to printerlar31869_ch12_366-399.indd 369 12/01/22 11:27 AM
T H E C O G N I T I V E / E X P E R I E N T I A L 
DOMAIN
On February 4, 1999, just past midnight, Amadou Diallo, a 22-year-old 
immigrant from West Africa, was standing on the front stoop of his Bronx home 
after putting in a full day at work. An unmarked car carrying four plainclothes offi￾cers from the NYPD Street Crime Unit cruised by. The police officers were investi￾gating crimes that had plagued that particular area, including a series of gunpoint 
rapes. This South Bronx neighborhood was one of the most dangerous in New York 
City. As they passed Mr. Diallo, he backed into a dark doorway. On noticing this, the 
officer driving put the car into reverse and backed up to a point directly in front of 
Mr. Diallo’s home.
As Mr. Diallo stood in the doorway, the plainclothes officers exited their vehicle, 
and two approached Mr. Diallo saying, “Police Department. We’d like to have a word 
with you.” At this point, Mr. Diallo backed further into the vestibule and the two offi￾cers then added the commands “Stay where you are,” and “Keep your hands where 
we can see them.”
Mr. Diallo reached his right hand into his front pocket. He turned toward the 
officers while pulling a black object out of his pocket and bringing his hands together. 
One officer yelled, “Gun!” Two officers fired. The closest officer, trying to back away 
from Mr. Diallo, fell backward down the steps. The other officers thought he had 
been shot.
In the next four seconds, the police officers fired a total of 41 bullets, 19 of 
which struck Mr. Diallo, killing him almost instantly. When the officers approached 
Mr. Diallo’s body, they found him holding not a gun, but his wallet.
Mourners in New York 
City after the shooting of 
Amadou Diallo. Protests 
erupted over the killing of 
an unarmed African male 
by the police. The court 
ruled that what occurred 
the night Mr. Diallo 
was shot was a series of 
terrible accidents, errors in 
perception, and cognition 
on the part of the police 
officers.
Spencer Platt/Getty Images
12
Final PDF to printer370
lar31869_ch12_366-399.indd 370 12/01/22 11:27 AM
PART FOUR The Cognitive/Experiential Domain
The details of this tragic case were made public during the subsequent trial of 
the police officers. Key documents from this trial, as well as news articles on which 
the above description is based, are available on the web. The jury concluded that what 
occurred that night was a series of terrible accidents—errors in perception and cogni￾tion that had catastrophic results. The officers “saw” a gun, they “thought” one of 
their own had been shot, and they “thought” Mr. Diallo was returning gunfire, when in 
fact it was their own ricocheting bullets. Their behavior then followed these cognitive 
errors. Many police academies now analyze the Diallo case during the training of new 
officers. Researchers are also trying to learn what factors contribute to such a tragic 
misperceptions in police officers (e.g., Andersen et al., 2021). The final chapter of the 
Diallo case closed in January 2004 when the City of New York settled a civil rights 
lawsuit by paying Mr. Diallo’s family $3 million and offering an apology for the tragic 
misunderstanding.
The case of Mr. Diallo, and many other subsequent and similar cases, illustrates 
the connection between cognitive factors and behavior. People perceive and think and 
then act. Sometimes this all happens very quickly, as in the case of police officers mak￾ing split-second decisions, and sometimes we take our time thinking things through. We 
are processing information all the time and using this information to guide our actions. 
Most of the time, our information processing is fairly accurate, resulting in appropriate 
actions. Occasionally errors of information processing occur, and mistakes are made, 
sometimes with tragic consequences. Personality psychologists are interested in how 
people differ from each other in processing information, including errors in perception 
and interpretation.
The following case illustrates individual differences in perception. It is not as dra￾matic as the Diallo case, but it nevertheless illustrates how two people can look at the 
same object and “see” two very different things.
There were several women from the same sorority in one class. The professor 
had heard that the sorority had adopted a new dog. Curious, he asked one sorority 
member what kind of dog it was. She said, “He is big and friendly and loves to go for 
walks and likes to jump up and lick my face. I just love him.” The next day, he had 
an opportunity to ask a different sorority member the same question. She responded, 
“Our new dog is a 3-year-old male golden retriever. He weighs about 90 pounds, is tall 
for the breed, and is rusty-red colored.” It is interesting that the same question elicited 
such different information from these two people. The first student offered no informa￾tion about the breed of dog; instead, she told how she felt about the dog. The second 
student gave factual details about the dog but said nothing about what she thought of 
the dog. These two women obviously processed quite different information when asked 
about the new dog. And it is also quite likely that they think very differently from each 
other about many things in life. Such differences in how people think are the focus of 
cognitive approaches to personality.
Many years ago, a study was done on what people think about when they are 
exposed to emotion-provoking stimuli (Larsen, Diener, & Cropanzano, 1987). The 
researchers showed people images of emotion-provoking scenes, then asked the par￾ticipants what they thought about when they looked at each image (a technique called 
thought sampling). For example, one image was of a mother holding a child who was 
bleeding from a severe head wound. In this study, the researchers were interested not 
in what the participants felt but in what they thought about—in the information that 
went through their minds—when exposed to such emotional scenes. One participant 
said, “My brother once had a bad gash on his head just like that, and I remember 
Final PDF to printer371
lar31869_ch12_366-399.indd 371 12/01/22 11:27 AM
CHAPTER TWELVE Cognitive Topics in Personality 
all the blood, and how upset my mother became, and my brother screaming and 
my mother trying to stop the bleeding, and me feeling helpless and confused.” The 
next participant looked at the same image and said, “Head wounds bleed quite a bit 
because, in the head, there is a high concentration of blood vessels close to the surface 
of the skin. I was thinking about the major artery groups in the head when I looked at 
that photo.” The first person who looked at the emotional image engaged in what is 
called personalizing cognition. That is, the scene prompted him to recall a similar event 
from his own life. The second subject looked at the same image and engaged in what 
is called objectifying cognition. That is, the scene prompted her to recall objective facts 
about the distribution of blood vessels in the human head. The difference between 
these two persons is a difference in cognition.
Cognition is a general term referring to awareness and thinking, as well as to 
specific mental acts such as perceiving, attending to, interpreting, remembering, 
believing, judging, deciding, and anticipating. All these mental behaviors add up to 
what is called information processing, or the transformation of sensory input into 
mental representations and the manipulation of such representations. If you have 
ever wondered whether other people think about things the same way you do, then 
you are a budding cognitive personality psychologist. Perhaps you have wondered if 
other people see colors the same as you do. Is the perception of green, for example, 
the same for everyone?
In this chapter, we cover three levels of cognition that are of interest to person￾ality psychologists. The first level is perception, or the process of imposing order on 
the information our sense organs take in. You might think that there are few, if any, 
differences in how people perceive the world because our sensory and perceptual sys￾tems are all the same and what we perceive is an accurate representation of what is out 
there. But this is not true; two people can look at the same situation and actually see 
very different things.
Consider Figure 12.1. If you look at this illustration, you can see it in three dimen￾sions. That is, instead of being a two-dimensional, flat drawing, you perceive it as hav￾ing depth, as coming out of the page. This is because your perceptual system interprets 
cues of depth as representing a three-dimensional object. Another aspect of this figure—
known as the Necker Cube—is that you may perceive the cube as extending out and 
upward to the right of the base, whereas others perceive the cube as extending outward 
and downward toward the left. Thus, not everyone sees the same object, even though the 
drawing is objectively the same.
Imagine how people might differ in what they see when they look at the much 
more complicated social world. Even at the level of perception, what we see in the world 
can be quite different from person to person. Moreover, these dif￾ferences in what people see may be related to their personalities. 
It is this reasoning that underlies the rationale for such projective 
assessment techniques as the Rorschach inkblots. As we discussed in 
Chapters 2 and 9, what people see in the inkblots can be a function 
of their personalities. When looking at the same inkblot, one person 
might see a family of butterflies landing on a garden of flowers, and 
another person, looking at the same inkblot, might see a dog that has 
been hit by a car, with blood splattered all over the street. Do you 
think these two people might have different personalities?
The second level of cognition of interest to personality psy￾chologists is interpretation, or the making sense of, or explaining, 
Figure 12.1
The Necker Cube.
Final PDF to printer372
lar31869_ch12_366-399.indd 372 12/01/22 11:27 AM
PART FOUR The Cognitive/Experiential Domain
various events in the world. Interpretation gives meaning to events. When you are 
confronted with an event and you are asked, “What does this mean?” or “How did 
this happen?” and “Whose fault is this?” you are likely to engage in the act of inter￾pretation. For example, suppose you have a small mishap while driving your car, 
driving up a curb, and scratching your fender. Someone might ask you, “Why did this 
happen?” You quickly make an interpretation and offer it to your inquisitor as a fact: 
“The street there is poorly laid out. It’s too narrow and the curve is too sharp, and 
lots of people jump the curb there. It’s the fault of the road department.” However, 
maybe you offer a different interpretation, equally certain that it represents a fact: 
“I’m really a clumsy driver; I just can’t handle the car. Maybe I should quit driving.”
These are two of many possible interpretations, and which ones people offer may 
reveal aspects of their personalities. This notion of differences in interpretation underlies 
the rationale for such projective techniques as the thematic apperception test (TAT), 
discussed in Chapter 11.
The third level of cognition that is of interest to personality psychologists is peo￾ple’s conscious goals, the standards that people develop for evaluating themselves and 
others. People develop specific beliefs about what is important in life and which tasks 
they want to pursue. These tasks may be age specific and/or culture specific, such as, 
in Western cultures, establishing independence from one’s family in early adulthood. A 
final topic in cognitive approaches is intelligence. Because this is a large and controver￾sial topic in psychology, the student of personality should have some grasp of the basic 
issues and concepts in the area of intelligence.
Personality Revealed Through Perception
Most people assume there is reality out there and that the representation we have of it in 
our minds is a precise duplicate, a flawless grasp of the facts. This is simply not true; the 
perceiver contributes to the mental representations such that, even in perception, there 
are differences among people in what they see when they look at a scene. In this chapter, 
we expand on this notion and cover two topics that explore individual differences in 
perception. These topics show how perceptual differences can be stable, consistent, and 
meaningfully related to other areas of life.
Field Dependence-Independence
Have you ever heard the phrase that someone “can’t see the forest for the trees”? This 
usually refers to the idea that someone cannot look beyond the details to get the big pic￾ture about a situation, that he or she is so focused on the specifics they cannot grasp the 
gist of the situation. Psychologist Herman Witkin (1916–1979) studied such differences 
in perceptual style for almost 30 years. He came to call this topic field dependence versus 
field independence. Witkin’s first book was titled Personality Through Perception (Witkin 
et al., 1954), and this title captures the idea that personality can be revealed through dif￾ferences in how people perceive their environment.
Witkin was first interested in the cues that people use in judging orientation in 
space. If you see an object that is tilted, how do you know it is the object, and not 
your body or the background, that is tilted? To make such judgments, some people rely 
on cues from the environment surrounding the object (are other things tilted as well?), 
Final PDF to printer373
lar31869_ch12_366-399.indd 373 12/01/22 11:27 AM
CHAPTER TWELVE Cognitive Topics in Personality 
whereas other people rely more on bodily cues that tell them that they are upright and 
therefore it must be the object that is tilted. To investigate this individual difference, 
Witkin devised an apparatus called the rod and frame test (RFT). Using this apparatus, 
the participant sits in a darkened room and is instructed to watch a glowing rod sur￾rounded by a square frame, which is also glowing. The experimenter can adjust the tilt 
of the rod, the frame, and the tilt of the participant’s chair. The participant’s task is to 
adjust the rod by turning a dial, so that the rod is perfectly upright. To do this accurately, 
the participant has to ignore cues in the visual field in which the rod appears (i.e., the 
square frame surrounding the rod). If the participant adjusts the rod so that it is lean￾ing in the direction of the tilted frame, then that person is said to be dependent on the 
visual field, or field dependent. Other people disregard the external cues (the frame) and, 
instead, use information from their bodies in adjusting the rod to upright. Such partici￾pants are said to be independent of the field, or field independent; they appear to rely on 
their own sensations, not the perception of the field, to make the judgment.
The rod and frame test is a difficult and time-consuming way to measure field 
dependence/independence, so Witkin sought more efficient ways to measure this percep￾tual difference (Witkin et al., 1962). One clever way of measuring field dependence/inde￾pendence is to create a complex figure that contains many simple figures or shapes. You 
may have seen children’s puzzles that consist of a large drawing with several smaller, 
hidden figures within it. An example of hidden figures is given in Figure 12.2. Witkin 
devised a similar test, but with geometric figures, called the embedded figures test (EFT). 
Some people, when given the EFT, have trouble locating the simple figures embedded 
within the more complex surrounding figure, apparently being bound up in the “forest” 
and unable to see the “trees.” These people are said to be field dependent. Other people 
quickly spot many or all of the embedded figures and, so, are able to disengage from the 
background. Such people are said to be field independent. Performance on the EFT cor￾relates strongly with performance on the RFT (Witkin, 1973). 
Field Dependence/Independence and Life Choices
Just before his death in 1979, Witkin wrote several papers summarizing his research 
in two broad domains in which field dependence/independence appears to have conse￾quences: education and interpersonal relations. In one large study, 1,548 students were 
followed from their entry into college until several years after graduation. Choice of 
major in college was found to be related to field independence/dependence: the field￾independent students tended to favor the natural sciences, math, and engineering, 
whereas the more field-dependent students tended to favor the social sciences and edu￾cation (Witkin, 1977; Witkin et al., 1977). Field dependence-independence has also 
been related to career choice, and therefore has some utility in vocational counseling 
(Guisande, Páramo & Soares, 2007).
A second area of research reviewed by Witkin and Goodenough (1977) con￾cerns the interpersonal correlates of field independence/dependence. Field-dependent 
people, as might be predicted, tend to rely on social information and frequently ask 
other people for their opinions. They are attentive to social cues and, in general, are 
oriented toward other people. They show a strong interest in others, prefer to be physi￾cally close to other people, gravitate to social situations, and get along well with oth￾ers. Field-independent people, on the other hand, function with more autonomy and 
display a more impersonal or detached orientation toward others. They are not very 
interested in others’ opinions, keep their distance from others, and show a preference 
for less social situations and activities.
Final PDF to printer374
lar31869_ch12_366-399.indd 374 12/01/22 11:27 AM
PART FOUR The Cognitive/Experiential Domain
Figure 12.2
An embedded figures test, in which the objective is to find as many of the smaller figures hidden in the 
larger figure as quickly as possible.
high-heeled
boot
Can you find these
Hidden Pictures?
cap
eel
eyeglasses
horseshoe
kangaroo
mitten
moon
parrot
screwdriver
shark squirrel
Final PDF to printer375
lar31869_ch12_366-399.indd 375 12/01/22 11:27 AM
CHAPTER TWELVE Cognitive Topics in Personality 
Current Research on Field Dependence/Independence
After Witkin’s death in 1979, little research was done on field independence/depen￾dence for about a decade. However, starting in the 1990s, new research began to 
appear in the literature (Messick, 1994). One new area of research concerns how peo￾ple react to situations that are rich in sensory stimulation and whether field-indepen￾dent people can focus on a task and screen out distracting information from the field. 
For example, one study of police officers examined their ability to disregard noise 
and distractions in simulated, though naturalistic, shooting situations. Similarities 
can be drawn between this study and the Diallo case presented at the beginning of 
this chapter. That night in the Bronx, the officers were trying to focus on Mr. Diallo. 
However, the light was dim, other people were around, the four officers needed to 
be aware of each other and aware of the commands being given, and so on. In short, 
they were in a stimulus-rich environment. Field-independent persons are predicted to 
be better at ignoring distracting information and focusing on the important details of 
the event. The researchers conducting the study of 100 police officers in simulated 
high-stimulation settings (Vrij, van der Steen, & Koppelaar, 1995) made exactly this 
prediction—that the more field-independent officers would perform better by notic￾ing details more accurately, would be less distracted by the noise and activity, and 
would be more accurate in deciding when to shoot. Results confirmed predictions, 
with Field Independent officers performing better under high stimulation conditions. 
Presumably, the field-independent officers could better focus on the target with￾out being distracted by the noise and activity going on in the field around them. In 
another study, researchers tracked subjects’ eye movements as the subjects scanned 
visual scenes (Nisiforou & Laghos, 2016). Field dependent subjects displayed more 
disorganized eye movements, with fixations all around the visual images, compared to 
field independent persons.
Another area of high stimulation is in hypermedia- and multimedia-based com￾puter instruction, such as educational materials on the World Wide Web, which come 
with sound and streaming video. Field independence is related to a higher preference 
for stimulus rich web-based instruction (Clewley, Chen, & Liu, 2011) (see Table 12.1). 
Field independent subjects also perform better than field dependent subjects in such 
high stimulation environments as Air Traffic Control simulations (Van Eck, Fu, & 
Drechsel, 2015) and complex three-dimensional navigational displays (Li, Zhang, Wu 
& Mei, 2016).
In a study of eighth-graders, researchers found that the field-independent stu￾dents learned more effectively than the field-dependent subjects in a hypermedia￾based instructional environment. Presumably, the field-independent students more 
easily found the thread that ran through the various media presentations of infor￾mation. The experimenters concluded that field-independent students are able to 
get the points embedded within high stimulus media faster and are able to switch 
between educational media or sensory fields faster, compared with field-dependent 
students (Weller et al., 1995). Many studies of this perceptual difference suggest 
that it leads to different styles of learning—for example, field-independent persons 
are good at selective attention in stimulus-rich environments (at processing specific 
information while blocking out distractions), whereas field-dependent persons tend 
to process information in chunks and are good at seeing connections among catego￾ries of information (Nicolaou & Xistouri, 2011; Oughton & Reed, 1999; Richardson 
& Turner, 2000).
Some interesting research has also been done on the relation between field 
dependence and the ability to “read” or decode facial expressions. On the one hand, 
Final PDF to printer376
lar31869_ch12_366-399.indd 376 12/01/22 11:27 AM
PART FOUR The Cognitive/Experiential Domain
because field-dependent people tend to be more 
socially oriented, we might predict they should do 
especially well in reading emotional expressions. 
On the other hand, if we think of facial expres￾sions as complex arrays of information, then 
maybe the field-independent persons would be bet￾ter at analyzing facial patterns. In a study on this 
topic, psychologists Linda Bastone and Heather 
Wood (1997) had subjects indicate the emotion 
expressed in 72 different faces. However, to make 
the task difficult, some emotion displays showed 
only the eyes, and some showed only the mouth. 
The field-independent subjects were significantly 
better at interpreting facial expressions than the 
field-dependent subjects, but only when the tasks 
were difficult. This finding reinforces the notion 
that field-independent persons are good at tasks 
that require finding patterns in complex displays 
of information.
Table 12.1 Summary of research on the personality trait of Field Dependence/
Independence
Field Dependent Field Independent
Rod and frame test Influenced by frame Disregards frame, influenced by body position
Embedded figures test Slow to locate hidden figures Quickly locates hidden figures
Focused on the whole Focused on the parts
Common college majors Favors social sciences, education, humanities Favors natural sciences, engineering, math 
(STEM)
Social relations Oriented toward others More impersonal and detached from others
Strong social interests and skills Lower social interests and skills
Simulated shooting studies Attentive to social context but overloaded in 
stimulus-rich situations
Can ignore distracting stimuli, focus on the 
details in stimulus-rich situations
Learning styles Learns more effectively when info comes in 
chunks, or in single media or streams
Learns more effectively in multimedia 
environments
Other observations Good at seeing the big picture, gets the gist Good at detecting patterns in visual and 
auditory stimuli
Less accuracy using electronic maps Better at using 3-dimensional navigational 
displays
More disorganized eye movements in visual 
search
Experienced Air Traffic Controllers are more 
Field Independent
Faster to learn new languages
Studies have shown that individuals serving in bomb disposal units score 
higher in field independence than other terrorist response units. The ability 
to stay focused in a distracting environment would be an asset to a bomb 
disposal technician.
guvendemir/iStock/Getty Images Plus
Final PDF to printer377
lar31869_ch12_366-399.indd 377 12/01/22 11:27 AM
CHAPTER TWELVE Cognitive Topics in Personality 
Application
The Metaverse Is Coming…
At this point, the Metaverse is more of a concept than a reality. But many computer scientists 
and corporations are working toward building it, whatever “it” turns out to be. Some have sug￾gested that the 2018 movie Ready Player One provides a vision of what the Metaverse may be 
like. It will be the successor to the mobile Internet and will provide each person with an immer￾sive experience of a graphically rich virtual space. It will likely have high verisimilitude (it will 
feel quite real). The person won’t ‘watch’ it, but rather they will ‘be’ in it and have a sense of 
presence inside the Metaverse. Others will also be there, and interactions with them (or their 
avatars most likely) will also feel real. It will likely stimulate several senses, including hearing 
and sight and perhaps touch, taste, and olfaction. If it is anything like Ready Player One it will 
be a world with high information flow and plenty of stimulation and place demands on our 
information processing capacities.
Virtual reality can provide a stimulus-rich environment for applications in 
education, science, and elsewhere. It may be that field-independent people are 
more able to function effectively in stimulus-rich virtual realities.
Andriy Onufriyenko/Moment/Getty Images
Personality psychologists might be interested in whether the trait of Field Dependence 
versus Independence might play a role in who is attracted to the Metaverse, or who func￾tions well in such high information rate virtual environments. While the exact nature of the 
Metaverse is yet to be determined (e.g., will it be one world or many worlds, will it be accessed 
through Virtual Reality or through Augmented Reality, etc.), it is a certainty that the Metaverse 
is coming.
Is it better to be field independent or field dependent? Like most personality 
dimensions, there are pros and cons associated with both endpoints (and remember, 
we are describing points along a continuum, not two categories of people). Field￾independent people are skillful at analyzing complex situations and extracting informa￾tion from the clutter of background distractions. Field-independent people also tend 
Final PDF to printer378
lar31869_ch12_366-399.indd 378 12/01/22 11:27 AM
PART FOUR The Cognitive/Experiential Domain
to be more creative (Miller, 2007). However, they are 
somewhat low on social skills and prefer to keep their 
distance from others. Field-dependent people, on the 
other hand, have strong social skills, gravitate toward 
others, and are more attentive to the social context 
than are field-independent persons (Tamir & Nadler, 
2007). On the downside, field independent people dis￾play more disorganized eye movements when searching 
visual displays. It appears that each of these contrast￾ing perceptual styles is adaptive in particular situations, 
making it impossible to state which orientation is more 
valuable (Collins, 1994; Mathes et al., 2011).
Pain Tolerance and Sensation 
Reducing/Augmenting
The way in which people perceive their surroundings 
and navigate through information—whether they tend to 
focus on the whole or tend to notice the particulars—is a 
perceptual style. What about other individual differences 
in perception? One perceptual difference among people 
is in pain tolerance, in which people undergo the same 
physical stimulus (e.g., having to get an injection from 
the doctor) but react quite differently from each other in 
terms of the pain they report experiencing. This differ￾ence among people in their pain tolerance attracted the 
interest of psychologist Aneseth Petrie (1914–2001), 
whose book Individuality in Pain and Suffering describes 
her research on and theory of individual differences in 
tolerance for sensory stimulation (Petrie, 1967).
Petrie’s Research
Petrie studied people in hospitals undergoing painful 
operations, as well as normal subjects in whom she induced pain—through applying heat 
or by piling weights on the middle joint of her subjects’ fingers. In these studies, she 
was able to quantify how well each subject could tolerate pain. She developed a theory 
that people with low pain tolerance had a nervous system that amplified, or augmented, 
the subjective impact of sensory cues. In contrast, people who could tolerate pain well 
were thought to have a nervous system that dampened, or reduced, the effects of sen￾sory stimulation. For these reasons, her theory came to be called the reducer/augmenter 
theory. This term refers to the dimension along which people differ in their reaction to 
sensory stimulation; some appear to reduce sensory stimulation, whereas some appear to 
augment or amplify stimulation.
Petrie believed that individual differences in pain tolerance originated in the ner￾vous system. A few studies have examined nervous system reactivity directly in relation 
to augmenting/reducing. For example, researchers reported that reducers show relatively 
small brain responses to flashes of lights (Spilker & Callaway, 1969) as well as smaller 
brain responses to bursts of noise (Schwerdtfeger & Baltissen, 1999) in comparison with 
augmenters. In this last study, conducted in Germany, reducers also reported that the 
Understanding individual differences in pain tolerance to medical 
procedures is what led psychologist Aneseth Petrie to develop her 
theory of sensory reducing/augmenting.
monkeybusinessimages/iStock/Getty Images Plus
Final PDF to printer379
lar31869_ch12_366-399.indd 379 12/01/22 11:27 AM
CHAPTER TWELVE Cognitive Topics in Personality 
noise was less loud, compared with augmenters, though the noise was, in fact, identical 
for all the participants.
The brain evoked response increases with increasing stimulus intensity, but the 
rate of change differs for different individuals, with augmenters showing a steeper rate of 
change with increasing stimulus intensity (Schwerdtfeger & Baltissen, 2002). Moreover, 
the brain evoked potential augmenting/reducing measure shows high test-retest reliabil￾ity, similar to other personality traits (Beauducel et al., 2000). Individual differences in 
brain augmenting/reducing have also been studied in other animals, including cats and 
rats (Siegel, 1997). In fact, rats that have been bred to be sensation seeking or sensation 
avoiding have been shown to display brain evoked responses that indicate reducing and 
augmenting, respectively (Siegel & Driscoll, 1996). Given that this individual difference 
in sensory reactivity can be observed in other mammals, it is not surprising that studies 
also show that this individual differences arises in infancy in humans (Evans, Nelson, & 
Porter, 2012; Fox & Polak, 2004).
Reducers should be motivated to seek strong stimulation to compensate for their 
lower sensory reactivity, related to optimal level of arousal, discussed in Chapter 7. 
Supporting this prediction, reducers have been found to drink more coffee, smoke more, 
and have a lower threshold for boredom, compared with augmenters (Clapper, 1990, 
1992; Larsen & Zarate, 1991). Reducers also have been found to more frequently con￾sume psychoactive drugs and listen to music at a louder level compared to augment￾ers (Schwerdtfeger, 2007). Several studies replicate the finding that reducers (measured 
by questionnaire) have a higher tolerance for pain compared to augmenters (e.g., 
Schwerdtfeger, Gertzmann & Baltissen, 2004).
Researchers have developed questionnaire measures to assess people’s standing on the reduc￾ing/augmenting dimension. One example is the questionnaire developed by Vando (1974) 
and modified by Clapper (1992), called the Revised Reducer Augmenter Scale (RRAS). This 
measure is based on the notion that if reducers dampen down stimulation, then they have a 
relatively high need for stimulation, compared with augmenters. Items on Clapper’s RRAS 
questionnaire present test takers with a choice between a relatively stimulating and a nonstimu￾lating experience. The test taker indicates his or her preference for either the stimulating or the 
nonstimulating experience. Subjects who prefer many of the stimulating choices are assumed 
to be reducers. Examples of these items follow. For each pair of activities or events, circle a 
number that best indicates your preference:
?
Exercise
Hard-rock music 1 2 3 4 5 6 Soft pop music
Action movies 1 2 3 4 5 6 Comedy movies
Contact sports 1 2 3 4 5 6 Noncontact sports
A drum solo 1 2 3 4 5 6 A flute solo
Too much exercise 1 2 3 4 5 6 Too little exercise
Final PDF to printer380
lar31869_ch12_366-399.indd 380 12/01/22 11:27 AM
PART FOUR The Cognitive/Experiential Domain
Many researchers see a strong similarity between the augmenting/reducing con￾struct and other personality constructs related to individual differences in responding 
to stimulation, such as those covered in Chapter 7 (e.g., sensation seeking), as well 
as Eysenck’s theory of extraversion, covered in Chapters 3 and 7. For our purposes 
here, the reducer/augmenter research illustrates how personality psychologists have 
studied individual differences in perception, the most basic form of cognition. Let’s 
turn now to a consideration of how people differ from one another in a higher level of 
cognition—interpretation.
Personality Revealed Through Interpretation
Trial lawyers are familiar with the fact that two or more people can witness the same event 
yet offer differing interpretations of that event. Trials often hinge on having the jury arrive 
at a particular interpretation of the facts, such as whether the suspect intended to harm 
someone, whether the suspect had planned the crime ahead of time, or whether the suspect 
is capable of appreciating the consequences of his or her behavior at the time of the criminal 
act. Many defense lawyers do not dispute that their clients committed their acts, but rather 
argue that the clients did not possess the required intention to be found guilty of a crime.
Everyday life may not be as dramatic as the cases that make their way into court￾rooms. Nevertheless, we often find ourselves interpreting everyday events: Why did I get 
a poor grade on my test? Can I really do anything to lose weight? Whose fault is it that I 
can’t seem to get along with my girlfriend/boyfriend? Such interpretations often concern 
responsibility or blame—such as whose fault it is when someone gets a poor grade. Other 
times, such interpretations inquire about expectations for the future—such as if someone 
can lose weight. Both of these kinds of interpretations—about responsibility and about 
expectations for the future—have been studied by personality psychologists. However, 
before covering these topics, let’s examine the theory that started the cognitive revolu￾tion in personality psychology: the work of George Kelly.
Kelly’s Personal Construct Theory
Psychologist George Kelly (1905–1967), who spent most of his career at Ohio State 
University, played an important role in starting the cognitive tradition within personality 
psychology. Although a clinical psychologist, Kelly believed that all people are motivated 
to understand their circumstances and to be able to predict what will happen to them in 
the near future. He viewed psychoanalysis as effective because it provided people with 
a system for explaining psychological problems (e.g., “You are depressed because you 
have a hostile and sadistic superego, probably as the result of an improper anal stage 
resolution”). Kelly believed that the content of explanations was not as important as the 
fact that people believed them and could use them to understand their circumstances. 
Kelly felt that a primary motivation for all people was to find meaning in their life cir￾cumstances, and to use this meaning to predict their own future, to anticipate what is 
likely to happen next in their lives (Fransella & Neimeyer, 2003).
Kelly’s view of human nature was that of humans as scientists. He felt that, just 
like scientists, people in general engage in efforts to understand, predict, and control the 
events in their lives. When people do not know why some event happened (e.g., “Why 
did my girlfriend break up with me?”), they experience greater distress than if they had 
an explanation. Thus, people seek explanations for the events in their lives, just the way 
scientists seek explanations for phenomena in the laboratory.
Final PDF to printer381
lar31869_ch12_366-399.indd 381 12/01/22 11:27 AM
CHAPTER TWELVE Cognitive Topics in Personality 
Scientists employ constructs to interpret observations. A construct does not exist 
in itself; it is a word that summarizes a set of observations and conveys the meaning of 
those observations. Gravity, for example, is a scientific construct. We cannot show you 
gravity, but we can demonstrate the effects of gravity by observing other things, such as 
an apple falling from a tree. There are lots of constructs that could be applied to people: 
smart, outgoing, arrogant, shy, deviant. Like scientists interpreting the physical world, 
we use constructs all the time to give meaning to, or to interpret, the social world.
The constructs a person routinely uses to interpret and predict events are called, 
in Kelly’s theory, personal constructs. Kelly’s idea was that people have a few key con￾structs that they habitually apply in interpreting their world, particularly the social world. 
No two people have the same personal construct system and so have their own unique 
interpretation of the world. For Kelly, personality consisted in differences in the way 
people construe the world, particularly the social world. These differences were the 
result of differences in the personal constructs that people habitually employed. What 
do you tend to notice when you meet a person for the first time? For you, it might be 
important how athletic versus nonathletic a person is, and this plays a large role in how 
you first construe the person. Another person, however, might apply the construct of 
intelligent versus nonintelligent to the same target person. As a result, that person will 
have a different construal of the target person than you have because you are each view￾ing the target person through the unique “lens” of your preferred construct systems (Hua 
& Epley, 2012).
For Kelly all constructs are bipolar. That is, they consist of some characteristic 
understood against its opposite, or what the person takes to be its opposite. So, a few 
typical constructs might be smart–not smart, cooperative–uncooperative, tall–short, and 
boring–interesting. People develop characteristic sets of constructs that they frequently 
use in interpreting the world. A person might apply smart–not smart to most people they 
meet and use this construct to parse their social world into groups. Moreover, they then 
behave differently toward people in the smart category compared to the not-so-smart 
category. However, it is the person’s own construal that puts the acquaintances into 
those categories to begin with. People create their social world, in part, by applying their 
personal constructs.
In many ways, Kelly was ahead of his times. He was postmodern before post￾modernism became popular. Postmodernism is an intellectual position grounded in 
the notion that reality is constructed, that every person and certainly every culture 
has a version of reality that is unique, and that no single version of reality is any more 
privileged than another (Gergen, 1992). Kelly’s emphasis on how personal constructs 
serve to create each person’s psychological reality puts him in the postmodern camp 
(Raskin, 2001).
Kelly presented a highly complex but systematic theory of personality and per￾sonal constructs, which the interested student can pursue in Kelly’s own work (e.g., 
1955) or in summaries of his work (e.g., Fransella, 2003). We present some of the basic 
ideas here. His most basic idea was the fundamental postulate, which refers to the state￾ment that “a person’s processes are psychologically channelized by the ways in which 
he anticipates events” (Kelly, 1955, p. 46). To this fundamental postulate, Kelly added 
a number of corollaries. For example, if two people have similar construct systems, they 
would be psychologically similar (the commonality corollary). Some couples might be 
quite different in many ways, but if their personal construct systems are similar, then 
they are likely to get along well because they interpret the world similarly.
Like many personality theorists, Kelly also devoted a special place in his theory to 
the concept of anxiety. For Kelly, anxiety was the result of not being able to understand 
Final PDF to printer382
lar31869_ch12_366-399.indd 382 12/01/22 11:27 AM
PART FOUR The Cognitive/Experiential Domain
and predict life events. In his terms, anxiety is the result of our personal constructs fail￾ing to make sense of our circumstances. People are anxious when they don’t understand 
what is happening to them and when they feel that events are unpredictable, outside of 
their control. How do constructs fail? Sometimes they are too rigid and impermeable 
to new experiences. Something comes along that they just cannot understand. Imagine 
a woman who, after raising the children and shipping them off to college, decides she 
wants to work. Her husband, whose conception of a good marriage is one in which “the 
wife does not have to work,” cannot understand this experience. His construct of good 
versus bad marriage cannot make sense out of his wife’s newfound desire for employ￾ment. Another way that constructs fail is if they are too permeable, if the person applies 
them too liberally. If a person categorizes everyone she encounters as either smart or not 
smart, and once categorized refuses to change her mind about them, even in the face of 
contradictory information, then her construct is too rigidly applied. A person knows that 
her construct system is in trouble when she starts having experiences that she cannot 
understand (“I just can’t understand why you are leaving”) or cannot anticipate (“That 
caught me by surprise”).
Kelly’s ideas about how people construct their experiences based on construct sys￾tems that they “carry” through life were part of a cognitive revolution within personality 
psychology. Several self-report methods exist for the assessment of a person’s personal 
construct system (e.g., Caputi, 2012; Hardison & Neimeyer, 2012). Another example of 
this cognitive emphasis can be seen in learning theory at about the same time that Kelly 
was formulating his theory. We turn now to this other important development in the 
cognitive approach to personality.
Locus of Control
Locus of control is a concept that describes a person’s interpretation of responsibility for 
the events in his or her life. More specifically, locus of control refers to whether people 
tend to locate that responsibility internally, within themselves, or externally, in fate, luck, 
or chance. For example, when you see a person who gets good grades, do you think it is 
because she is just plain lucky or because of her personal efforts? When you see someone 
in good health, do you think it is because of fate or genes, or is it because she puts effort 
into living a healthy life? Your answers to such questions may reveal your standing on 
the personality dimension of locus of control—the tendency to believe that events are or 
are not under one’s personal control and responsibility.
Locus of control research started in the mid-1950s, when psychologist Julian 
Rotter was developing his social learning theory. Rotter was working within traditional 
learning theory, which emphasizes that people learn because of reinforcement. Rotter 
expanded these notions to suggest that learning also depended on the degree to which 
the person expected reinforcement—that obtaining a reward was under his or her con￾trol. Some people expect that certain behaviors will result in obtaining a reinforcer. 
In other words, they believe that they are in control of the positive outcomes of life. 
Other people fail to see the link between their behavior and reinforcement. This is 
Rotter’s “expectancy model” of learning behavior. Interestingly, the expectation part 
involves characteristics that the individual brings to each situation. That is, the expec￾tancy of reinforcement refers to characteristics that distinguish specific individuals. For 
example, suppose a person expects that acting in an assertive and demanding manner 
will get her what she wants. She wants a raise at work, so she expects that if she is 
assertive and demanding toward her boss, she will get her raise. Another person may 
have the opposite expectation, that acting in such a manner will be counterproductive, 
Final PDF to printer383
lar31869_ch12_366-399.indd 383 12/01/22 11:27 AM
CHAPTER TWELVE Cognitive Topics in Personality 
so he believes that being assertive will not produce the desired raise. These two indi￾viduals have different expectations for the outcome associated with the same assertive 
behavior pattern. She thinks she can do something to obtain a raise; he thinks he must 
just wait for the boss to make the decision. Differences in the subsequent behavior of 
these two people—for example, she is assertive and he is submissive at work—may be 
due to differences in their expectations of whether a certain behavior (assertiveness) 
will bring reinforcement (the desired raise).
Rotter published a questionnaire measure of internal versus external locus of con￾trol in 1966. Some items from that questionnaire are presented in Table 12.2.
Rotter emphasized that a person’s expectations for reinforcement held across 
a variety of situations, what he called generalized expectancies (Rotter, 1971, 1990). 
When people encounter a new situation, they base their expectancies about what will hap￾pen on their generalized expectancies about whether they have the ability to influence 
events. For example, if a young man generally believes that he can do little to influence 
events, then in a new situation, such as entering college, he would have a generalized 
expectancy that things are outside of his control. He may, for example, assume that his 
grades will be due to luck or chance or fate, not to anything that he can actually control.
Such a generalized expectancy that events are outside of one’s control is called an 
external locus of control. An internal locus of control, on the other hand, is the general￾ized expectancy that reinforcing events are under one’s control and that one is respon￾sible for the major outcomes in life. The Locus of Control (LOC) construct is really a 
trait dimension, ranging from people who are more internal at one end to people who are 
more external at the other end. Every person falls at some point along this LOC dimen￾sion. People toward the internal LOC end believe that outcomes depend mainly on their 
own personal efforts, whereas people more toward the external LOC end believe that 
outcomes largely depend on forces outside of their personal control. An internal locus of 
control is, in general, conducive to well-being (Heidemeier & Göritz, 2013).
Internal LOC has been found to be predictive of a variety of real-world outcomes. 
For example, people who displayed an internal LOC at age 10 were found to have a 
reduced risk of obesity at age 30 compared to people with an external LOC (Gale, 
Batty, & Deary, 2008). In another study of college students, those with an internal 
LOC completed their degrees in a more timely manner than students with an external 
Table 12.2 Sample Items from the Locus of Control Scale
Yes No
1. Are some people just born lucky?
2. Most of the time do you feel that getting good grades means a 
great deal to you?
3. Do you believe that if somebody studies hard enough he or she 
can pass any subject?
4. Do you feel that most of the time it doesn’t pay to try hard 
because things never turn out right anyway?
5. Do you feel that if things start out well in the morning, it’s going 
to be a good day no matter what you do?
6. Do you believe that wishing can make good things happen?
Source: Adapted from Rotter, 1982.
Final PDF to printer384
lar31869_ch12_366-399.indd 384 12/01/22 11:27 AM
PART FOUR The Cognitive/Experiential Domain
LOC (Hall, Smith, & Chia, 2008). Another interesting study showed that adults with 
a more internal LOC had higher credit ratings than those with a more external LOC 
(Perry, 2008). In many ways, internal LOC is associated with a tendency toward feeling 
more in charge of one’s life, ranging from better control over one’s weight to better con￾trol over one’s spending habits and hence credit rating.
Can you think of situations in which having an internal LOC is a disadvantage? Under what 
circumstances would a person with an internal orientation experience relatively more stress 
than someone with an external orientation? What characteristics or situations would match 
the expectations of the person with an external LOC? When might it be healthy to have an 
external LOC?
Some situations are truly beyond our control and cannot be influenced by us, no mat￾ter what we do. For example, a loved one may be dying from an incurable disease. This is not 
anyone’s fault, and there is nothing anyone can do to prevent the outcome. However, even in 
such situations some people, particularly close relatives, can feel that they are somehow to 
blame. In such situations, an internal locus of control might be a handicap to personal coping 
with the outcome.
Another example is the “survivor syndrome” often reported by persons who have lived 
through a tragedy in which many others were severely injured or killed, such as in a terrorist 
bombing or a mass shooting. Often, survivors report feeling that “if only” they had done some￾thing differently, they could have helped others make it to safety. They often report some feel￾ings of personal responsibility for the outcome, even though the event was horrifically outside 
of their control.
Exercise
In an interesting case study, a 29-year-old man who sailed around the world solo in 
260 days (Kjærgaard, Leone, & Venables, 2015) was found, as you might have guessed, 
to have a very internal score on an LOC measure, quite literally the captain of his fate. 
Another activity where people’s control over outcomes is sometimes at risk is stage 
acting, and a study of professional actors found that those with a more external LOC 
suffered more from stage fright than actors with a more internal LOC (Goodman & 
Kaufman, 2014).
It is important to remember that historically the LOC concept grew out of learning 
theory and referred to feeling in control of positive reinforcements. Conceptually, LOC 
was primarily about expectancies for control over positive outcomes. For example, does 
a person view positive outcomes, such as good grades, a career promotion, or financial 
success, as primarily due to fate and luck (an external LOC) or primarily due to one’s 
own efforts and abilities (an internal LOC). While LOC historically referred to control 
of good outcomes, it has been broadened to refer to feelings of control in general; does 
one take credit for creating for his or her own life outcomes and hence feels in control 
of life, or does the person believe that most things in life happens by chance or fate. This 
focus on positive outcomes and general feelings of control makes LOC different from 
the topic we take up in the next section—learned helplessness and attributional style—
which is primarily about where a person places the blame for bad events and negative 
outcomes in life.
Final PDF to printer385
lar31869_ch12_366-399.indd 385 12/01/22 11:27 AM
CHAPTER TWELVE Cognitive Topics in Personality 
When it comes to locus of control, the general 
finding is that an internal style is the more adaptive 
one, to see oneself as being in control of one’s fate. 
Recently, researchers have examined LOC in relation 
to the COVID-19 pandemic. Studies show that internal 
LOC college students cope better, and experience less 
academic stress, during COVID-19 lockdowns (Ganjoo 
et al., 2021). Krampe and colleagues (2021) found that 
internal LOC persons were less likely to report men￾tal distress during the COVID-19 pandemic. In a large 
(N=341) study of college students, Origlio and Odar 
Stough (2022) looked at changes in depressive symp￾toms from pre-pandemic levels. They found that, while 
depressive symptoms (e.g., feelings of helplessness, 
lose of interest, sadness) increased overall during the 
COVID-19 pandemic, the increase was smallest for 
students with an internal LOC. Another study showed 
that subjects with an internal LOC were more likely to 
adhere to COVID-19 mitigation guidelines (e.g., social 
distancing, mask wearing, hand washing) than those with an external LOC (Deveraux, 
Miller, & Kirshenbaum, 2021).
What about situations that require giving up control? For example, the willing￾ness to use autonomous cars requires that a person give up control of the driving to a 
machine, to turn over one’s fate to a computer. People with a highly internal LOC may 
be reluctant to try an autonomous car. Researchers have shown that persons with an 
internal locus of control were more unwilling to try autonomous vehicles than persons 
with an external locus of control (Choi & Ji, 2015). Like with other personality traits, 
we can never say that one extreme of the dimension is entirely good or entirely bad; one 
can always find strengths and weakness associated with either high or low levels of any 
particular trait. As computers and machines do more and more for us, it may be adaptive 
to relinquish control for some aspects of our lives, and people with a more external locus 
of control may be more willing and able to do so.
Learned Helplessness
We now turn to another individual difference in how people interpret the world—learned 
helplessness. Research on this topic also had its start in learning theory, similar to 
Rotter’s start. Work on learned helplessness began when psychologists were studying 
unconditional punishment and avoidance learning in dogs. The researchers subjected 
the dogs to foot shocks, by running electricity through the wire floor of their cages. The 
shocks were intermittent, but the dogs could not escape. During the first few shocks, the 
dogs would pull at their harnesses, jump and twist, and try to escape from the unpleasant 
shocks. Eventually, however, the dogs would give up, they seemed to accept the shocks 
and no longer tried to escape. The dogs, apparently knowing that they could not escape, 
would passively accept the shocks.
The dogs were then put into a different cage, a cage where they could escape the 
foot shocks by simply jumping over a small barrier into a different part of the cage. 
However, the dogs that had received inescapable shocks earlier did not even try to escape 
in this new situation. It was as if they had learned that their situation was hopeless, and 
Will persons who have an internal locus of control have difficulty getting 
into the back seat of an autonomous vehicle and turning over complete 
driving control to a computer? For a thoughtful discussion, pro and con, of 
autonomous driving vehicles, see Michael Crawford’s book Why We Drive.
metamorworks/Getty Images
Final PDF to printer386
lar31869_ch12_366-399.indd 386 12/01/22 11:27 AM
PART FOUR The Cognitive/Experiential Domain
they gave up seeking to avoid their painful circumstance. Other dogs that had not been 
shocked earlier quickly learned to avoid the shocks in the new cage by jumping over the 
barrier. The researchers were surprised that the learned helplessness dogs did not even 
try to escape, so they turned off the shock after one minute.
Next, the researchers tried lifting the dogs over the barrier to the safe part of the 
cage. After being shown how to reach safety, the dogs quickly learned to jump over and 
avoid the shocks. However, without such coaching, the learned helplessness dogs simply 
accepted their painful fates without attempting to remove themselves from the unpleas￾ant situation.
Numerous studies document the learned helplessness phenomenon with humans 
(Seligman, 1992, 1994). Using unpleasant noise rather than shock, researchers set up 
the following learned helplessness situation. Participants are told that they will be 
given problems to solve and that they can avoid or turn off the blasts of unpleasant 
noise by solving the problems (e.g., by pressing buttons in a correct order) (Garber & 
Seligman, 1980; Hiroto & Seligman, 1975). Some participants (the learned helpless￾ness subjects) are given problems without solutions. Consequently, for these partici￾pants, the unpleasant blasts of noise are inescapable—nothing they can do will stop 
the irritating and aversive blasts of noise. But do these participants generalize their 
helplessness to new situations?
Participants are then taken to a new situation and given a new set of problems to 
solve. This time there is no unpleasant noise. The researchers tell the participants that 
they are simply interested in how the participants will work on these new problems. 
Participants who were exposed to the learned helplessness condition in the earlier tri￾als usually perform much worse on the subsequent problems. It is as if they are saying, 
“What’s the use in trying to solve these problems? They are too difficult.” Such partici￾pants appear to generalize their experiences of helplessness from one problem-solving 
situation to another.
In real life, learned helplessness can result whenever people are stuck in an 
unpleasant situation that is apparently outside of their control. For example, imagine a 
woman who tries everything she knows to get her husband to stop abusing her. She tries 
being nice to him, and it works for a while, but soon he is abusive again. She threatens 
to leave, and this works for a while, but he starts abusing her again. No matter what she 
does, nothing seems to solve the problem. A woman in such circumstances may develop 
learned helplessness. She may give up even trying to solve the problem: “What’s the 
use,” she may say, “nothing I do seems to help, so maybe I just have to take it.”
However, people in learned helplessness don’t have to “take it.” They need an 
outside perspective, like coaching the learned helpless dogs to jump over the barrier to 
escape. They need someone who can see the situation objectively and who can recom￾mend strategies for solving the problem. Whenever a problem situation looks as if it has 
no solution or is inescapable, that is the time to ask others for help, to seek an outside 
opinion (Seligman & Csikszentmihalyi, 2000).
The original model of learned helplessness began with experiments on dogs and 
was generalized to humans through experimental studies. Humans are more complex 
than dogs, at least when it comes to thinking about the unpleasant events in their lives 
and forming expectations. What factors determine whether feelings of helplessness 
in one situation will spill over to other situations? What cognitive factors influence 
people to decide that they do or do not have the ability to take control of an unpleas￾ant situation? In seeking answers to these questions, psychologists began to study what 
was going on in the minds of people who underwent learned helplessness conditioning 
Final PDF to printer387
lar31869_ch12_366-399.indd 387 12/01/22 11:27 AM
CHAPTER TWELVE Cognitive Topics in Personality 
(Peterson, Maier, & Seligman, 1993). In the “Closer Look” section that follows, 
we present the main way that the learned helplessness concept was reformulated to 
account for distinctively human cognitions. This important development is called attri￾butional style, and it has proven to be a useful way to understand human depression (a 
topic we take up in Chapter 13) and how people respond to stressful events (a topic in 
Chapter 18). While Attributional Style may at first seem very similar to LOC (as both 
are about causal interpretations), they are different in that the former (attributional 
style) is about attributions for negative life events and the latter (LOC) is mostly about 
causal attributions for positive or rewarding events.
Personality Revealed Through Goals
So far in this chapter, we have considered aspects of personality related to how a person 
perceives and interprets the world. We turn now to a third aspect of cognition, a person’s 
goals and how these are related to personality. Such goals may range from minor ones, 
such as buying groceries for the week, to the more lofty, such as reducing world hunger. 
The focus in this approach is on intention, on what persons want to happen, on what they 
want to achieve in their lives. People differ in their goals, and these differences are part 
of their personalities.
Different psychologists have offered different terms, such as personal strivings 
(Emmons, 1989), current concerns (Klinger, 1977a, 1977b), personal projects (Little, 
1999), and life tasks (Cantor, 1990). All of these constructs emphasize what people believe 
is worth pursuing in life, as well as the kinds of goal-directed behaviors they enact to achieve 
these desires. Other personality theories in this section emphasize self-guides, or the stan￾dards that people strive to meet (Higgins, 1996); their understanding of their own abilities 
and motivations (Dweck, Chiu, & Hong, 1995); or their internal abilities related to goals, 
including people’s expectations, beliefs, plans, and strategies (Mischel, 2004).
Personal Projects Analysis
A personal project is a set of relevant actions intended to achieve a goal that a person 
has selected. Psychologist Brian Little (e.g., Little, 2007, 2011) believes that personal 
projects make natural units for understanding the workings of personality because they 
reflect how people face up to the serious business of navigating through daily life. Most 
people, if asked, are able to make a list of the important projects that they work on in 
their daily lives, such goals as to lose weight, do homework, make new friends, start 
and maintain an exercise program, search the web for graduate schools to apply to, 
develop a better relationship with God, or find some principles to live by. People typi￾cally have many goals that come and go in their day-to-day lives—one project is more 
important today, and a different one is important tomorrow—as well as other projects 
that are more ongoing.
Little developed the Personal Projects Analysis method for assessing personal 
projects. Participants first generate a list of their personal projects, as many or as few as 
they deem relevant. Most college student participants list an average of 15 personal proj￾ects that are currently important in their daily lives. Next, participants rate each project 
on several scales, such as how important the project is to them, how difficult it is, how 
much they enjoy working on it, how much progress they have made on it, and the nega￾tive and positive impacts it has had in their lives (Little & Gee, 2007).
Final PDF to printer388
lar31869_ch12_366-399.indd 388 12/01/22 11:27 AM
PART FOUR The Cognitive/Experiential Domain
The reformulation of learned helpless￾ness theory focuses on the cognitions, or 
thoughts, a person has that may lead to 
feelings of helplessness. More specifically, 
the focus is on the explanations that people 
give for events in their lives, particularly 
the unpleasant events (Peterson, Maier, 
& Seligman, 1993). Imagine that you had 
submitted a paper in your class and that 
you received a surprisingly low grade on 
that paper. A common question you might 
ask yourself is “What caused the low grade 
on my paper?” Your explanation for the 
cause of the low grade might reveal some￾thing about your explanatory style. When 
things go wrong, who or what typically 
gets the blame? Psychologists prefer the 
term causal attribution to refer to a per￾son’s explanation of the cause of an event. 
To what cause would you attribute your 
paper’s low grade? Was it because you 
happened to be in a rush and submitted a 
quickly written paper? Was it because you 
are simply a poor writer? Was it because 
the professor who graded it was unduly 
harsh in her grading? Or was it because 
your dog ate your original paper, so you 
quickly wrote another, which was not 
nearly as good as the one your dog ate? 
All of these explanations are causal attribu￾tions for the event.
Psychologists use the term attri￾butional style to refer to tendencies 
some people have to frequently use cer￾tain explanations for unpleasant events. 
Explanations for the causes of events can 
be broken down along three broad dimen￾sions. First, explanations for events can be 
either internal or external. The poor paper 
grade could be due to something pertain￾ing to you (internal, such as your lack of 
skill) or something pertaining to the envi￾ronment (external, such as the professors 
being unduly harsh). Some people blame 
specific causes, and so forth. However, 
some people develop a consistent explana￾tory style. For example, suppose some￾one consistently blames herself whenever 
anything goes wrong. After arriving at 
her destination on a plane that was late, 
the woman apologizes to her friend who 
picked her up at the airport, saying, “I’m 
sorry I’m late,” when, in fact, she was not 
at all responsible for being late. She might 
say to her friend instead, “I’m sorry that the 
plane I was on was late and that you had 
to be inconvenienced. Next time I’ll use 
a different airline.” This might be a more 
appropriate external explanation for the 
real cause of being late.
The attributional style that most puts 
a person at risk for feelings of helplessness 
and poor adjustment is one that empha￾sizes internal, stable, and global causes 
for bad events. This has been called the 
pessimistic explanatory style. This style 
is in contrast to the optimistic explanatory 
style, which emphasizes external, tem￾porary, and specific causes of events. For 
example, one scenario on the Attributional 
Style Questionnaire (Peterson, 1991) asks 
you to imagine being on a date that goes 
badly, in which both you and your date 
have a lousy time. You are then asked why 
this might happen to you. If your explana￾tion involves an external attribution to an 
unstable and highly specific cause (e.g., “I 
happened to choose a movie that neither 
one of us liked, then we went to a restau￾rant where the service was poor, and after￾ward my car got stuck in the mud”), then 
you are scored as more optimistic than 
someone who offers an internal, stable, 
and global interpretation (e.g., “I just have 
trouble relating to people, I cannot keep a 
conversation going, and I am completely 
shy when it comes to the opposite sex”) 
(see Figure 12.3). 
themselves for all sorts of events and are 
constantly apologizing for events that are 
outside their control. The more internal 
your explanation, the more likely you are to 
blame yourself for unpleasant events, even 
those events over which you have little or 
no control.
A second dimension concerns 
whether the cause of the event is stable or 
unstable. For example, if you were tempo￾rarily set back by your dog eating the origi￾nal version of your paper, then that would 
be an unstable cause (a one-off event that 
is unlikely to repeat). However, an expla￾nation that concerns your lack of writing 
skill is a more or less permanent, or stable, 
characteristic. When bad events happen, 
some people tend to think that the causes 
of such situations are long-lasting, that the 
causes are stable or permanent.
The third important dimension of 
causal attributions for negative events 
concerns whether the cause is global or 
specific. A specific cause is one that affects 
only the particular situation (e.g., writing 
papers), whereas a global cause affects 
many situations in life (all areas involving 
intellectual skills). For example, you might 
have explained the cause of your poor 
paper grade like this: “I am just unable to 
write; I can hardly put a noun and a verb 
together to form a sentence.” This is a 
global explanation and might imply that you 
would be expected to do poorly in what￾ever task required writing, not just in writ￾ing this specific paper.
Whenever someone offers an expla￾nation for an event, that explanation can be 
analyzed in terms of the three dimensions: 
internal–external, stable–unstable, and 
global–specific. Most people use different 
combinations of explanations—sometimes 
blaming themselves, sometimes blam￾ing external causes, sometimes blaming 
A Closer Look Reformulated Learned Helplessness: 
Attributional Style
Final PDF to printer389
lar31869_ch12_366-399.indd 389 12/01/22 11:27 AM
CHAPTER TWELVE Cognitive Topics in Personality 
Is attributional style a stable charac￾teristic? One study examined attributional 
style over the life span (Burns & Seligman, 
1989). A group of participants, whose aver￾age age was 72 years, completed a ques￾tionnaire on attributional style and provided 
diaries or letters written in their youth, an 
average of 52 years earlier. The diaries 
and letters were content analyzed for attri￾butional style. The correlation between 
these two measures of attributional style 
for negative life events that were gener￾ated five decades apart was .54, indicating 
a significant amount of rank order stability 
in attributional style.
Because an optimistic explanatory 
style correlates with beneficial effects in 
many areas of life, including earning better 
grades in college (Bastounis et al., 2016; 
Maleva et al., 2014), programs have been 
developed to train people to have a more 
optimistic explanatory style. For example, 
one program for college students (Gerson & 
examined survivors of the 2004 tsunami 
that devastated two-thirds of the coast of Sri 
Lanka (Levy, Slade, & Ranasinghe, 2009) and 
found that a pessimistic explanatory style 
was associated with more symptoms of post￾traumatic stress disorder.
An interesting extension of the con￾cept of attributional style is to extend it 
from individuals to groups. For example, 
recent studies have examined the attri￾butional style of sports teams (Carron, 
Shapcott, & Martin, 2014) and the explana￾tory style of business organizations (Smith, 
Caputi, & Crittenden, 2013). Results gener￾ally mirror those found with individuals, that 
team optimism was associated with better 
outcomes (higher percentage of winning, 
business success).
In Chapter 13, we discuss the role 
of explanatory style in depression, and in 
Chapter 18 we return to the topic of explan￾atory style, again in some detail, with refer￾ence to stress and health.
Fernandez, 2013) is a three-session program 
that teaches students to adopt an optimistic 
explanatory style and has been shown to 
increase student reports of optimism, resil￾ience, and thriving in college. Another study 
of college students found that students with 
an optimistic explanatory style were more 
likely to use academic resources, such as 
peer mentoring and attending review ses￾sions (Quinn-Nilas, Kennett, and Maki, 
2019). Studies of elementary school children 
found that an optimistic explanatory style 
was related to more positive peer relation￾ships and higher levels of psychological 
well-being (Li, Chu, & Yu, 2017). A study 
of working adults found that a optimistic 
explanatory style was related to less burn￾out in the workplace (Paquet et al., 2021). 
A large amount of research on explana￾tory style focuses on how people adapt to 
traumatic events, with the general finding 
that an optimistic style is associated with 
better response. For example, researchers 
Figure 12.3
The three dimensions underlying attributional style, with their pessimistic and optimistic versions.
Optimistic
style
Pessimistic
style
Internal/external Stable/unstable Global/specific
External:
“My girlfriend
broke up with me
because her parents
forced her.”
Unstable:
“My girlfriend broke
up with me because
she needs all her
time right now to 
devote to the charity
drive, which only
lasts one month.”
Specific:
“My girlfriend
broke up with me
because she found
out I dated Julie
last weekend.”
Internal:
“My girlfriend
broke up with me
because I’m from a
low-class family,
I’m not going to
college, and I have
very little ambition
in life.”
Stable:
“My girlfriend broke
up with me because
I’m shorter than her,
and she wants
someone who is
taller.”
Global:
“My girlfriend broke
up with me because
I’m an inconsiderate,
two-timing, unfaithful
jerk who couldn’t
keep a relationship
going if his life
depended on it.”
Final PDF to printer390
lar31869_ch12_366-399.indd 390 12/01/22 11:27 AM
PART FOUR The Cognitive/Experiential Domain
Personal Projects Analysis has a number of interesting implications for under￾standing personality. Researchers have investigated the relation between the Big Five 
personality traits (discussed in Chapter 3) and aspects of personal projects. For exam￾ple, people who score high on the trait of neuroticism are also likely to rate their per￾sonal projects as stressful, difficult, likely to end in failure, and outside of their control 
(Little, 1999). Such people are also likely to state that they have made little progress 
toward achieving their goals. Apparently, part and parcel of being high on the neuroti￾cism dimension is experiencing difficulty and dissatisfaction in accomplishing one’s per￾sonal projects (Little, Lecci, & Watkinson, 1992).
Researchers have also been interested in which specific aspects of personal proj￾ects are most closely related to overall reports of life satisfaction and happiness. Little 
(1999, 2007) summarizes research suggesting that overall happiness is most related to 
feeling in control of one’s personal projects, feeling unstressed about those projects, and 
being optimistic that projects will be successful. These aspects of personal projects have 
also been found to predict well-being in an elderly sample (Lawton et al., 2002). These 
aspects of Personal Project Analysis (low stress, high control, high optimism) do indeed 
predict overall levels of happiness and life satisfaction (Palys & Little, 1983). Such find￾ings have led Little to conclude that “bringing our personal projects to successful com￾pletion . . . seems to be a pivotal factor in whether we thrive emotionally or lead lives 
of . . . quiet desperation” (Little, 1999, p. 25). Findings on personal project analyses are 
presented in an edited volume by Little, Salmela-Aro, and Phillips (2007). A summary of 
4 decades of research on personal projects is found in Little and Balsari-Palsule (2021). 
Professor Brian Little (2020) argues that personal projects are the vehicles through 
which we give our lives meaning, and he calls this “well-doing” rather than well-being.
Cognitive Social Learning Theory
A number of modern personality theories have expanded on the notion that person￾ality is expressed in goals and in how people think about themselves relative to their 
goals. Collectively, these theories form what has been called the cognitive social learning 
approach to personality, an approach that emphasizes the cognitive and social processes 
whereby people learn to value and strive for certain goals over others.
Albert Bandura and the Notion of Self-Efficacy Albert Bandura (1925–2021) was trained 
in classical behavioral psychology, popular in the 1940s, which viewed humans, and all 
organisms, as passive responders to the external environment, completely determined 
by external reinforcements. Bandura helped change this view by emphasizing the active 
nature of human behavior. He argued that people have intentions and forethought; they 
are reflective and can anticipate future events; they monitor their behavior and evaluate 
their own progress; plus they learn by observing others. Because he expanded on clas￾sical learning theory by adding cognitive and social variables, he helped start the cogni￾tive social learning theory approach to personality. Bandura referred to these distinctly 
human cognitive and social activities under the rubric of the self-system. The self-system 
exists for the self-regulation of behavior in the pursuit of goals (Bandura, 1997).
In Bandura’s theory, one of the most important concepts is that of self-efficacy, 
which refers to the belief that one can execute a specific course of action to achieve a 
goal. For example, a child learning to bat a baseball may believe she can hit most balls 
pitched to her. We would say she has high self-efficacy beliefs for batting. A child who 
doubts his hitting ability, on the other hand, has low self-efficacy beliefs in this area. As 
it turns out, high self-efficacy beliefs often lead to effort and persistence on tasks, and to 
Final PDF to printer391
lar31869_ch12_366-399.indd 391 12/01/22 11:27 AM
CHAPTER TWELVE Cognitive Topics in Personality 
setting higher goals, compared to people with low self-efficacy beliefs (Bandura, 1989). 
As another example, college students who have higher self-efficacy beliefs about their 
studies are more persistent in their academic work and perform better in their classes 
than students with lower self-efficacy (Multon, Brown, & Lent, 1991).
Self-efficacy and performance mutually influence one another. Self-efficacy leads 
to better performance; then better performance leads to further increases in self-efficacy. 
As such, high self-efficacy is most important when starting out on some particular task. If 
the task is complex, it can be broken down into parts or subgoals, which can be accom￾plished. Accomplishing each subgoal along the way can increase overall self-efficacy. 
Self-efficacy can also be influenced by modeling, by seeing others engage in the perfor￾mance with positive results.
Carol Dweck and the Theory of Mastery Orientation We introduced the work of psy￾chologist Carol Dweck (1946–) in Chapter 11. Her early research focused on helpless 
and mastery-oriented behaviors in schoolchildren (Deiner & Dweck, 1978, 1980). She 
noted that some students persist in the face of failure, whereas others quit as soon as they 
encounter difficulties or their first failure. She started investigating the cognitive beliefs, 
particularly beliefs about ability, that lie behind these behavior patterns. For example, 
she discovered that students’ implicit beliefs about the nature of intelligence had a signif￾icant impact on the way they approach challenging intellectual tasks: Students who view 
their intelligence as an unchangeable and fixed internal characteristic (what Dweck calls 
an “entity theory” of intelligence) tend to shy away from academic challenges, whereas 
students who believe that their intelligence can be increased through effort and persis￾tence (what Dweck calls an “incremental theory” of intelligence) seek them out (Dweck, 
1999a, 2002; Dweck, Chiu, & Hong, 1995).
It may sound like such a small thing, simply believing that intelligence is a fixed 
trait that cannot change, yet this belief is associated with putting less effort into school, 
with giving up earlier on academic challenges, and with lower academic success. Dweck’s 
research illustrates the power of this belief in many studies of school children and college 
students (see review in Dweck, 2009, 2012). Having the opposite mindset—that intelli￾gence is malleable and is something that can be changed with effort—is associated with 
better academic motivation and higher grades (Romero et al., 2014). Moreover, Dweck 
and colleagues have designed and tested several school-based interventions to change 
student’s beliefs about their own intelligence, with students who have been trained to 
view intelligence as malleable subsequently putting more 
effort into academic performance and doing better in 
terms of grades (reviewed in Rattan et al., 2015).
Dweck’s theory also has implications for how the 
praise of teachers and parents may unwittingly lead chil￾dren to accept an entity view of intelligence. Praising a 
child for his or her intelligence may reinforce the notion 
that success and failure depend on something beyond 
the child’s control. Comments such as “I’m so happy 
you got an A+ on your biology test, Mary! You are such 
a smart girl!” are interpreted by the child as “If good 
grades means that I’m intelligent, then poor grades must 
mean I am dumb.” Or when trying to comfort a student, 
a teacher might say, “It’s okay—not everyone can be good 
at math.” This can reinforce an entity theory of math 
ability in the child, leading her to have lower motivation 
Research by Carol Dweck and colleagues clearly shows that praising a 
child for her effort is more effective than praising her for her intelligence. 
See text for the explanation of this.
Andy Dean Photography/Shutterstock
Final PDF to printer392
lar31869_ch12_366-399.indd 392 12/01/22 11:27 AM
PART FOUR The Cognitive/Experiential Domain
and lower expectations for her own math performance (Rattan, Good, & Dweck, 2012). 
When children with an entity view of intelligence do perform well, they have high self￾esteem, but self-esteem diminishes as soon as they hit an academic plateau or challenges 
that make them falter. Children who are admired for their effort are much more likely to 
view intelligence as changeable, and their self-esteem remains stable regardless of how 
hard they have to work to succeed. According to Dweck, it is much better to praise chil￾dren for their effort (“Congratulations, your effort really paid off!”) than for their ability 
(“Congratulations, you are really smart!”). Children who are praised for their effort learn 
to associate success with effort, not ability.
E. Tory Higgins and the Theory of Regulatory Focus Psychologist E. Tory Higgins (1946–) 
has also developed a motivational theory concerning goals, called regulatory focus theory 
(Higgins, 2012). His theory adds the notion that people regulate their goal-directed behav￾iors in two distinct ways that serve two different needs. One focus of regulation is called 
promotion focus, in which the person is concerned with advancement, growth, and accom￾plishments. Behaviors with a promotion focus are characterized by eagerness, approach, 
and “going for the gold.” The other focus of regulation is called prevention focus, in which 
the person is concerned with protection, safety, and the prevention of failure. Working hard 
to maximize gains (promotion focus) is a very different motivation than working hard to 
minimize loses (prevention focus). Behaviors with a prevention focus are characterized by 
vigilance, caution, and attempts to prevent negative outcomes.
When examined from a trait perspective, promotion focus correlates with such 
traits as extraversion and behavioral activation (which we discussed in Chapter 7). 
Prevention focus correlates with such traits as neuroticism and harm avoidance and 
(negatively) with impulsivity (Grant & Higgins, 2003). However, the concepts of preven￾tion and promotion focus are more concerned with motivation and goal behaviors than 
the standard personality traits with which they correlate.
Walter Mischel and the Cognitive-Affective Personality System (CAPS) As discussed in 
Chapter 4, psychologist Walter Mischel (1930–2018) had a huge impact on personality 
psychology when he wrote a book in 1968, titled Personality and Assessment, that was 
highly critical of the evidence for personality traits. Recall that he argued that people’s 
behavior was more strongly influenced by the situations they were in than by the person￾ality traits they brought to those situations. In more recent years, Mischel and his former 
student—Youchi Shoda—proposed a theory that personality variables (though not neces￾sarily traits) do have an influence on behavior, mainly by interacting with and modifying 
the psychological meaning of situations.
In Mischel and Shoda’s cognitive-affective personality system (CAPS), they recon￾ceptualize personality not as a collection of traits, but as an organization of cognitive 
and affective activities that influence how people respond to certain kinds of situations 
(Mischel, 2000, 2004; Shoda et al., 2013, 2015; Smith & Shoda, 2009). The emphasis 
is more on personality processes than on static traits. These cognitive and affective pro￾cesses consist of such mental activities as construals (how one views a situation), goals, 
expectations, beliefs, and feelings as well as self-regulatory standards, abilities, plans, 
and strategies. According to this theory, each individual is characterized by a relatively 
stable network of such mental activities. Individuals acquire their specific set of these 
mental abilities through their learning history, their particular culture and subculture, 
their genetic endowment, and their biological history.
The CAPS theory argues that people differ from each other in the distinct organi￾zation of their cognitive and affective processes. As people move through the different 
situations in their lives, different cognitive and affective processes will be activated and 
Final PDF to printer393
lar31869_ch12_366-399.indd 393 12/01/22 11:27 AM
CHAPTER TWELVE Cognitive Topics in Personality 
mediate the impact of specific situations. For example, if a situation engenders frustra￾tion (e.g., being blocked from a goal), and the person has a specific cognitive-affective 
system (e.g., high expectations for success, the belief that aggression is permissible 
to obtain what you want), then he or she may respond with hostility. So, it is not the 
case that aggressive people would be aggressive in all situations (the trait view) but that 
aggressive people are sensitive to certain kinds of situations (e.g., frustration), and only 
then will they behave aggressively.
Mischel and Shoda present a contextualized view of personality as expressed in 
“if . . . then . . .” propositions: If situation A, then the person does X; but if situation B, 
then the person does Y. Personality leaves its signature, Mischel argues, in terms of the 
specific situational ingredients that prompt behavior from the person. To illustrate his 
approach, Mischel (2004) presents data gathered at a summer camp for delinquent chil￾dren. All of the children had impulse control problems and had been aggressive in the 
past. The children were observed over many days and in many different situations in the 
summer camp. The researchers were interested in verbal aggression. They broke down 
the situations into five categories: when the child was “teased by a peer,” “warned by an 
adult,” “punished by an adult,” “praised by an adult,” and “approached by a peer.” The 
children showed distinct profiles of verbal aggression across these different situations. 
For example, some children were aggressive only after being warned by an adult. Other 
children were aggressive only when approached by a peer. Mischel points out that ver￾bal aggression was not consistent across all five situations and that specific “if . . . then 
. . .” profiles could be discerned for each child. These profiles were consistent, however, 
in the sense that kids who were aggressive when warned by an adult behaved that way 
repeatedly (Mischel, Shoda, & Mendoza-Denton, 2002).
The CAPS theory offers an important new way to think about personality, a way 
that emphasizes cognitive and affective processes that influence a person’s behaviors 
relative to specific situational characteristics in terms of “if. . ., then . . .” propositions 
(for another example, see Smith et al., 2009). We present this theory in the chapter on 
cognitive approaches because it emphasizes the internal processes that people engage in 
to regulate their behavior. It is interesting that Mischel first argued that situations exert 
the most control over people’s behavior, but later came to believe that it is the psycholog￾ical situation—that is, the meaning of the situation from the individual’s perspective—that 
organizes behavior (Mischel, 2004, 2010).
Intelligence
No discussion of individual differences in cognition and information processing would 
be complete without at least some mention of intelligence. Intelligence has been defined 
in many ways, and there may be many different kinds of intelligence. One definition of 
intelligence is associated with educational attainment, how much knowledge a person 
has acquired relative to others in his or her age cohort. This is an achievement view of 
intelligence. Other definitions view intelligence less as the product of education and more 
as an ability to become educated, as the ability or aptitude to learn. This is the aptitude view 
of intelligence. Traditional measures of intelligence—so-called IQ tests—often have been 
used and interpreted as aptitude measures. For much of the past century, IQ tests were 
used to predict school performance and to select persons for educational opportunities. 
They are still used in this aptitude fashion today. For example, one study on college under￾graduates found that general intelligence predicted 16 percent of the variability in grades, 
which translates into a correlation of about .40 between IQ and grades. Interestingly, need 
Final PDF to printer394
lar31869_ch12_366-399.indd 394 12/01/22 11:27 AM
PART FOUR The Cognitive/Experiential Domain
for achievement, which we discussed in Chapter 11, accounted for 11 percent of the vari￾ability in grades, beyond the variability accounted for by IQ (Lounsbury et al., 2003).
Early in the study of intelligence, most psychologists thought of this characteristic in 
trait-like terms, as a property of the individual. And individuals were thought to differ from 
each other in amount, in how much intelligence they possessed. Moreover, intelligence 
was thought of as a single broad factor—often called g for general intelligence. As tests were 
developed, however, researchers began to identify separate abilities—such as verbal ability, 
memory ability, perceptual ability, and arithmetic ability. The Scholastic Aptitude Test 
(SAT) and the American College Test (ACT) are examples that most college students are 
familiar with because they have taken one or both of these tests. The SAT and ACT each 
give multiple scores for example, English, Math, Reading, Science, Writing, Reasoning—
and thus are both examples of the separate abilities notion. Also, as their names imply, 
many believe the SAT and ACT are aptitude measures, that they measure the ability to 
learn and acquire new information. This is why they have been used to select applicants 
for admission to higher educational institutions. However, the makers of the SAT and 
ACT hold that the tests are really measures of achievement, how much the test takers 
have learned in their lives so far. Certainly the SAT and ACT contain questions that only 
persons with an already thorough high school education can answer, and so, many argue, 
they are achievement tests. In use, however, the SAT and ACT both predict future college 
grade point average, so they are used as ability tests. In general, ACT and SAT scores 
correlate with college GPA in the range of .30 correlations, and thus have some validity 
as aptitude measures. Moreover, studies that have used general intelligence measures and 
correlated them with ACT or SAT scores typically find those correlations in the range of 
.48 to .82 (depending on what IQ measure was used), suggesting that ACT and SAT test 
performance relates fairly strongly to general intelligence (e.g., Frey & Detterman, 2003). 
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, many colleges have made the ACT/SAT optional 
in applying for admission, though it is unknown if that change will be permanent.
Like the SAT and ACT, most intelligence tests yield multiple scores. For exam￾ple, the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children—Revised (revised in 1991, originally 
published by Wechsler, 1949) yields 11 subtest scores, six of which require or depend 
on verbal ability and five of which are nonverbal, such as finding missing elements in 
a picture and assembling a puzzle. Also, the test yields two broad scores to represent 
verbal and performance intelligence. Psychologists use the multiple scores to evaluate a 
person’s strengths and weaknesses, as well as to understand how the individual uniquely 
approaches and solves problems.
A widely accepted definition of intelligence, proposed by Gardner (1983), is that it is 
the application of cognitive skill and knowledge to solve problems, learn, and achieve goals 
that are valued by the individual and the culture. With intelligence defined this broadly, 
it is obvious that there are many kinds of intelligence, perhaps several more beyond the 
traditional verbal, mathematical, and performance distinctions. Howard Gardner has pro￾posed a theory of multiple intelligences, which includes seven forms, such as interpersonal 
intelligence (social skills, ability to communicate, and get along with others) and intra￾personal intelligence (insight into oneself, one’s emotions, and one’s motives). Gardner 
also includes kinesthetic intelligence—describing the abilities of athletes, dancers, and 
acrobats—and musical intelligence (Gardner, 1999). Other experts are adding to the grow￾ing list of forms of intelligence, such as the concept of emotional intelligence, proposed 
by psychologists Peter Salovey and Jack Mayer (1990) and popularized by journalist Dan 
Goleman (1995). The concept of emotional intelligence is also receiving a great deal of 
attention from researchers (see Zeidner et al., 2003, for a general review of emotional 
intelligence; and Miao, Humphrey, & Qian, 2017, and O’Boyle et al., 2011, for a review of 
Final PDF to printer395
lar31869_ch12_366-399.indd 395 12/01/22 11:27 AM
CHAPTER TWELVE Cognitive Topics in Personality 
Gardner’s concept of multiple intelligences is controversial. Some intelligence 
researchers feel that these separate abilities are correlated enough with each other 
(implying that they tend to co-occur in the same persons) to justify thinking of intel￾ligence as g, a general factor (e.g., Herrnstein & Murray, 1994; Petrill, 2002; Rammsayer 
& Brandler, 2002). Other experts acknowledge a few broad distinctions, such as the 
verbal and mathematical intelligences that are so much a part of school systems in the 
United States. Other experts, including many educators, are examining the implications 
of the multiple intelligences notion. Some universities are considering using “noncog￾nitive” measures of personality characteristics, like persistence, initiative, and consci￾entiousness, in addition to the traditional SAT scores, to inform admissions decisions 
(Hoover, 2013). Some schools are making curriculum changes designed to develop and 
strengthen various forms of intelligence in their students. For example, some schools are 
teaching units in emotional intelligence. Other schools offer classes for those high on 
nonverbal intelligence. Other schools are fostering character education, 
The concept of emotional intelligence has been proposed to explain why some people with a lot 
of academic intelligence do not appear to have a lot of practical intelligence, people skills, or what 
might be called street smarts. Goleman (1995), in his highly readable book Emotional Intelligence,
presents many cases of people who have high levels of traditional intelligence yet fail in various 
areas of their lives, such as in relationships. Goleman also reviews the psychological literature 
and comes to the conclusion that traditional measures of intelligence, although predicting school 
performance fairly well, actually do a rather poor job of predicting later life outcomes, such as 
occupational attainment, salary, professional status, and quality of marriage (e.g., Vaillant, 1977). 
Emotional intelligence, Goleman argues, is more strongly predictive of these life outcomes.
Emotional intelligence is proposed as a set of five specific abilities:
• Awareness of one’s own feelings and bodily signals and an ability to identify 
one’s own emotions and to make distinctions (such as realizing the fear that 
lies behind anger).
• Ability to manage and regulate emotions, especially negative emotions, and 
to manage stress.
• Control of one’s impulses—directing one’s attention and effort, delaying grati￾fication, and staying on task toward goals.
• Ability to decode the social and emotional cues of others, to listen, and to 
take the perspective of others (empathy).
• Leadership, the ability to influence and guide others without their becoming 
angry or resentful, the ability to elicit cooperation, and skill in negotiation 
and conflict resolution.
It is easy to see how these skills and abilities relate to positive life outcomes and how 
they are so different from traditional concepts of intelligence, such as scholastic achievement 
and scholastic ability. Can you think of someone you know who is very high on scholastic abil￾ity yet deficient in one or more of the aspects of emotional intelligence? Such a person might be 
successful in school yet have problems in other areas of life, such as making friends or becom￾ing independent from his or her family. Alternatively, can you think of someone you know who 
is high on emotional intelligence yet low on scholastic ability?
?
Exercise
Final PDF to printer396
lar31869_ch12_366-399.indd 396 12/01/22 11:27 AM
PART FOUR The Cognitive/Experiential Domain
thought of as a form of civic intelligence. These modern educational efforts are the direct 
outcomes of research being conducted by personality psychologists exploring the basic 
nature of intelligence.
We cannot leave the concept of intelligence without looking at the cultural context 
of intelligence. What is defined as “intelligent behavior” will obviously differ across cul￾tures. For example, among the people who live on the islands of Micronesia, the ability 
to navigate the ocean and other maritime skills are considered superior forms of intel￾ligence. Among Inuit who hunt along the shores in their kayaks, the ability to develop a 
cognitive map of the complex shoreline in Alaska is a valued ability. Many psychologists 
define culture, in part, as the shared notions about what counts as efficient problem 
solving (Wertsch & Kanner, 1992). These skills then become part of the way successful 
people think in that culture. Western cultures, for example, emphasize verbal skills, both 
written and oral, as well as the mathematical and spatial skills necessary in a technologi￾cally advanced culture. Other cultures, however, might guide their members to develop 
different problem-solving skills, such as developing a sense of direction, knowledge of 
animal behavior, or emphasis on a team approach to problem solving.
Because of these cultural considerations, we should always view intelligence as 
comprised of the skills valued in a particular culture. However, Western culture—along 
with its economic, social, and political systems—is proliferating into countries around 
the world. This proliferation of Western culture is sometimes called “globalization,” and 
some thinkers worry that globalization will erase cultural distinctiveness. Will the world 
become a monoculture? If so, will there become one form of intelligence, which is uni￾versally valued? Or will cultures maintain separate identities and define differences in 
what counts as intelligent behavior? For example, currently most people in Europe speak 
more than one language, and many speak three or more because of the problem-solving 
advantage a multilingual person has in Europe. Many Europeans consider Americans 
to be linguistically challenged or, less charitably, verbally unintelligent because most 
Americans know only one language.
Interestingly, average IQ scores around the world have risen steadily the past sev￾eral decades, at the rate of approximately one IQ point every four of five years within 
populations (Flynn, 2007, 2012). This rise in population IQ scores is known as the Flynn 
effect, named after the person who first documented this observation (Flynn, 1984), 
though many other researchers have confirmed this observation (Shakeel & Peterson, 
2022). Various explanations have been put forward for rising world population IQ 
scores, such as better nutrition around the world. Flynn’s own explanation (2007, 2012) 
focuses on access to, and improvements in, quality of education around the world over 
those decades. However, despite steady increases in average IQ over the last half of the 
twentieth century, psychologists have since observed a steady decline in population IQ 
scores over the last 20 years, starting around 1998, in specific countries (Teasdale & 
Owen, 2008) as well as worldwide (Lynn & Harvey, 2008, Dutton, van der Linden, & 
Flynn, 2016), a phenomenon called the reverse or negative Flynn effect.
This decline in world population IQ over the past two decades worries intelligence 
researchers because the average IQ in a country is correlated with many indicators of 
national well-being, including gross domestic product, which measures the wealth of the 
nation (Gelade, 2008; Hunt & Wittmann, 2008); educational attainment; and techno￾logical advancements (Rindermann, 2008). Lower population IQ within countries has 
also been associated with the prevalence of juvenile delinquency, adult crime, single par￾enthood, and poverty (Gordon, 1997). Each decline of one IQ point is associated with a 
reduction of income of about $425 per year (Zagorsky, 2007). Lynn and Harvey (2008) 
attribute this decline in national IQ scores around the world to increasing fertility rates, 
Final PDF to printer397
lar31869_ch12_366-399.indd 397 12/01/22 11:27 AM
CHAPTER TWELVE Cognitive Topics in Personality 
generalizing from the often-replicated observation that IQ and fertility are negatively 
correlated (i.e., people with lower IQ scores tend to produce more offspring than people 
with higher IQ scores) (Shatz, 2008; Vining, 1982).
One behavioral variable in intelligence research is called inspection time, which 
refers to the time it takes a person to make a simple discrimination decision regard￾ing two displayed objects. For example, two lines appear on a computer screen and 
the subject’s task is to simply decide which one is longer. The time it takes the subject 
to inspect the two lines, measured in milliseconds (thousandths of a second), before 
making the decision is the measure of inspection time. This variable is highly related to 
standard measures of general intelligence (Osmon & Jackson, 2002). Inspection time 
correlates with other measures of perceptual speed and reaction time to make deci￾sions (Jensen, 2011), and these mental speed abilities appear to contribute to higher IQ 
scores (Johnson & Deary, 2011). Inspection time is also a sensitive leading indicator of 
the normal cognitive decline that occurs with old age for most people (Gregory et al., 
2008). Another similar measure is the ability to discriminate auditory intervals that dif￾fer only by a few milliseconds, which also is related to general intelligence (Rammsayer 
& Brandler, 2002). A review of 172 studies of the relationship between IQ and speed of 
information processing (Sheppard & Vernon, 2008) concluded that measures of intel￾ligence are correlated with mental speed, with smarter people being generally faster on 
a wide variety of mental tasks. Findings such as these suggest that brain mechanisms 
specifically involved in information processing are more efficient in persons scoring high 
on general intelligence measures.
There are many interesting debates about intelligence that are beyond the scope of 
an introductory personality text. If you are interested, you can go to advanced sources, 
such as the journal Intelligence, or to books, such as Neisser’s (1998) or Herrnstein and 
Murray’s controversial The Bell Curve (1994) and the direct responses to the controversy 
created by The Bell Curve—such as Fraser (1995), Jacoby and Glauberman (1995), and 
Lynn (2008). Other alternatives to the Herrnstein and Murray position include works by 
Sternberg (1985), Gardner (1983), and Simonton (1991). You should know that there 
are several current debates about intelligence, including whether it can be measured 
accurately, whether measures of intelligence are biased to favor persons from the domi￾nant majority group in the culture, the extent to which intelligence is heritable and the 
implications of heritability, whether different racial groups differ with respect to intel￾ligence, and whether race differences should be interpreted as social class or economic 
differences. These issues are politicized and have many implications for social and gov￾ernment policy, and so generate heated debate. Personality psychologists are playing an 
important role by doing the research necessary to provide a scientific approach to these 
socially important issues.
SUMMARY AND EVALUATION
Cognitive topics in personality psychology are a broad class of subject matter. People 
differ from each other in many ways, in how they think as well as in how they perceive, 
interpret, remember, want, and anticipate the events in their lives. In this chapter, we 
organized the coverage into four broad categories: perception, interpretation, goals, and 
intelligence.
Final PDF to printer398
lar31869_ch12_366-399.indd 398 12/01/22 11:27 AM
PART FOUR The Cognitive/Experiential Domain
We began by examining some ways in which personality is related to perceptual 
differences among people. Field independence/dependence concerns the ability to see 
the trees despite the forest, to see the specifics or patterns within a complex field of 
stimuli. This individual difference in perceptual style has to do with the ability to focus 
on the details despite the clutter of background information. This style of perceiving may 
have important implications for learning styles, career choices, and perhaps how people 
will respond to the Metaverse when it arrives.
The second perceptual difference we discussed was sensory reducing/augmenting. 
This dimension originally referred to the tendency to reduce or augment painful stimuli 
and was first related to individual differences in pain tolerance. It is now more generally 
used to refer to individual differences in sensitivity to sensory stimulation, with some 
individuals (augmenters) being more sensitive than others (reducers). This individual 
difference may have important implications for the development of problem behaviors 
associated with seeking stimulation, such as smoking or other forms of drug abuse.
Another aspect of cognition is how people interpret events in their lives. This 
approach to personality has its roots in the work of George Kelly. His personal construct 
theory emphasizes how people construct their experiences by using their constructs to 
make sense out of the world. Another general difference among people is in locus of 
control, the tendency to interpret events either as under one’s control or as not under 
one’s control. The locus of control construct began as control over rewards and positive 
outcomes but is now expanded to control over one’s life in general. This makes it differ￾ent from learned helplessness and attributional style, which refers specifically to negative 
events and unpleasant outcomes.
Learned helplessness is the feeling engendered when a person experiences an 
inescapable aversive or punishing situation. The feeling of helplessness may also gen￾eralize to new situations so that the person continues to act helplessly and fails to seek 
solutions to his or her new problems. The theory of learned helplessness was refor￾mulated to incorporate how people think about the causes of negative events in their 
lives, an individual difference construct called attributional style. Psychologists have 
focused on specific dimensions of people’s attributions for negative events, such as 
whether the cause of the negative event is internal or external to the person, whether 
it is stable or unstable, and whether it is global or specific. A pessimistic explanatory 
style is internal, stable, and global, and an optimistic explanatory style is just the oppo￾site: external, temporary, and specific.
Personality can also be revealed by how people select projects and tasks to pursue 
in life. If you know what a person really wants out of life, then you probably know that 
person fairly well. Our goals define us, and the strategies with which we pursue those 
desires illustrate the active aspects of personality in our daily lives.
Cognitive social learning theory was introduced and several specific examples of 
this approach were described. All of the example theories incorporate the concept of 
goals and related cognitive activities, such as expectancies, strategies, and beliefs about 
one’s abilities. These theories are important additions to the psychology of personality 
because they emphasize how the psychological situation is a function of characteristics 
of the person (e.g., their self-efficacy beliefs).
Intelligence was also discussed in this chapter, along with different views on intel￾ligence (as academic achievement versus an aptitude for learning). We reviewed the his￾torical development of intelligence as starting with the view of this as a single and general 
trait up to today’s trend toward a multiple intelligences view. We also noted that culture 
influences which skills and achievements contribute toward intelligence and presented 
Final PDF to printer399
lar31869_ch12_366-399.indd 399 12/01/22 11:27 AM
CHAPTER TWELVE Cognitive Topics in Personality 
some results on a biological interpretation of intelligence. We touched on the concept 
of emotional intelligence, which has turned out to be a better predictor than IQ for 
some positive life outcomes, like having satisfying relationships. In addition, we briefly 
reviewed some of the controversies that are being debated in the area of intelligence.
cognitive approaches 370
personalizing cognition 371
objectifying cognition 371
cognition 371
information processing 371
perception 371
interpretation 371
conscious goals 372
rod and frame test (RFT) 373
field dependent 373
field independent 373
embedded figures test (EFT) 373
pain tolerance 378
KEY TERMS
personal project 387
cognitive social learning approach 390
self-efficacy 390
modeling 391
promotion focus 392
prevention focus 392
“if . . . then . . .” propositions 393
achievement view of intelligence 393
aptitude view of intelligence 393
general intelligence 394
multiple intelligences 394
cultural context of intelligence 396
inspection time 397
reducer/augmenter theory 378
constructs 381
personal constructs 381
postmodernism 381
locus of control 382
generalized expectancies 383
external locus of control 383
internal locus of control 383
learned helplessness 385
causal attribution 388
attributional style 388
pessimistic explanatory style 388
optimistic explanatory style 388
Final PDF to printerlar31869_ch13_400-435.indd 400 10/17/22 09:31 AM
400
13
Emotion and 
Personality
Issues in Emotion Research
Emotional States Versus Emotional Traits
Categorical Versus Dimensional Approach to Emotion
Content Versus Style of Emotional Life
Content of Emotional Life
Style of Emotional Life
Interaction of Content and Style in Emotional Life
SUMMARY AND EVALUATION
KEY TERMS
Lightspring/Shutterstock
Final PDF to printerlar31869_ch13_400-435.indd 401 10/17/22 09:31 AM
T H E C O G N I T I V E / E X P E R I E N T I A L 
DOMAIN
Imagine you are traveling to visit a friend in a city to which you’ve never 
been before. You’ve taken a train to this city and are walking to your friend’s apart￾ment. You arrived in the evening, so it is dark as you begin to make your way in the 
unfamiliar neighborhood. You are using Google Maps on your phone to find your 
way, and it tells you to turn into a darkened street, which looks more like an alley. 
The alley is dark, but short, and it may take you to your friend’s place faster, so you 
start down the alley. You are alert and a bit on edge. You look over your shoulder 
and notice that someone has followed you down the alley. Your heart is pounding. 
You turn and look ahead, and you see that someone else has entered the alley in 
front of you as well. You suddenly feel trapped and you freeze. You are in a real 
predicament, your way is blocked in both directions. Your breathing is rapid and 
you feel light-headed. Your mind is racing, but you are not sure what to do as the 
two people close in on you from both directions. Your palms are sweating and you 
feel the tension in your neck and throat, as if you might scream at any second. The 
two people are getting closer and closer. You feel nervousness in your stomach as 
you look first in front, then behind. You want to run but cannot decide which way 
to go. You are paralyzed with fear; you stand there, trembling, not knowing whether 
you can run away or whether you will have to fight for your life. Suddenly, one of 
the persons calls out your name.
The emotion of fear is 
characterized by a distinct 
facial expression. Fear also 
has a distinctly unpleasant 
subjective feeling. There 
are also the associated 
changes in physiology, such 
as heart rate increases and 
increases in blood flow to 
the large muscles of the legs 
and arms. These changes 
prepare the frightened 
person for the intense action 
tendency associated with 
fear—to flee or to fight.
PeopleImages/Getty Images
13
Final PDF to printer402
lar31869_ch13_400-435.indd 402 10/17/22 09:31 AM
PART FOUR The Cognitive/Experiential Domain
You realize it is your friend, who has come with his roommate to look for you between 
the train station and the apartment. You breathe a sigh of relief, and quickly your state 
of fear subsides, your body calms, your mind clears, and you greet your friend with an 
enthusiastic, “Am I glad to see you!”
In this example, you experienced the emotion of fear. You also experienced the 
emotion of relief, and perhaps even elation, at being rescued by your friend. Emotions can 
be defined by their three components. First, emotions have distinct subjective feelings, 
or affects, associated with them. Second, emotions are accompanied by bodily changes, 
mostly in the nervous system, and these produce associated changes in breathing, heart 
rate, muscle tension, blood chemistry, and facial and bodily expressions. And third, emo￾tions are accompanied by distinct action tendencies, or increases in the probabilities of 
certain behaviors. With the emotional feeling of fear, there are subjective feelings of anxi￾ety, confusion, and panic. There are also associated changes in bodily function, such as 
increased heart rate, decreased blood flow to the digestive system (making for stomach 
queasiness), and increased blood flow to the large muscles of the legs and arms. These 
changes prepare you for the intense activity sometimes associated with fear. The activity, 
or action tendency, associated with fear is to flee or to fight.
Why are personality psychologists interested in emotions? People differ from each 
other in their emotional reactions, even to the same events, so emotions are useful in dis￾tinguishing among persons. For example, imagine losing your wallet, which contains a 
large sum of money, your credit card, and all your identification, including your driver’s 
license. What emotions do you think you would feel—anger, embarrassment, hopeless￾ness, frustration, panic, fear, shame, guilt? Different people would have different emo￾tional reactions to this life event, and understanding how and why people differ in their 
emotional reactions is part of understanding personality.
Other theories of emotion emphasize the functions that emotions play, such as 
generating short-term adaptive actions that help us survive. For example, the emotion of 
disgust has the adaptive value of prompting us to quickly spit out something that is not 
good for us. Interestingly, the expression of disgust, even when the feeling is evoked by a 
thought or something that is only psychologically distasteful, is to wrinkle the nose, open 
the mouth, and protrude one’s tongue as if spitting something out.
In his 1872 book The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals, Charles 
Darwin proposed a functional analysis of emotions and emotional expressions. His analy￾sis focuses on the “why” of emotions and expressions, in particular in terms of whether 
they increase the fitness of individuals (see Chapter 8 of this text). How do emotions 
increase evolutionary fitness? Darwin concluded that emotional expressions rapidly 
communicate information from one animal to another about what is likely to happen. 
The dog baring its teeth and bristling the hair on its back is communicating to others that 
he is likely to attack. If others recognize this communication, they may choose to back 
away, thereby avoiding the attack. Many modern emotion theorists accept this func￾tional emphasis, but most personality psychologists approach emotion with an interest 
in how people differ from each other in terms of emotions.
Issues in Emotion Research
Several major issues divide the field of emotion research (Davidson, Scherer, & 
Goldsmith, 2003). Psychologists typically hold an opinion on each of these issues. We 
consider two of these issues, beginning with the distinction between emotional states 
and emotional traits.
Final PDF to printer403
lar31869_ch13_400-435.indd 403 10/17/22 09:31 AM
CHAPTER THIRTEEN Emotion and Personality 
Emotional States Versus Emotional Traits
We typically think of emotions as states that come and go (similar to motives, as we saw 
in Chapter 11). A person gets angry, then gets over it. A person becomes sad, then snaps 
out of it. Emotional states are transitory. Moreover, emotional states depend more on 
the situation a person is in than on the specific person. A man is angry because he was 
unfairly treated. A woman is sad because her bicycle was stolen. Most people would be 
angry or sad in these situations. Emotions as states are transitory; they have a specific 
cause, and that cause typically originates outside of the person (something happens in 
the environment).
We can also think of emotions as dispositions, or traits. For example, we often 
characterize people by stating what emotions they frequently experience or express: 
“Mary is cheerful and enthusiastic,” or “John is frequently angry and often loses his 
temper.” Here we are using emotions to describe dispositions, characteristic emotional 
traits. Emotional traits are consistencies in a person’s emotional life. Traits, as you’ll 
recall from Chapter 3, are patterns in a person’s behavior or experience that are at least 
somewhat consistent from situation to situation and that are at least somewhat stable 
over time. Thus, an emotional trait is a pattern of emotional reactions that a person con￾sistently experiences across a variety of life situations.
Categorical Versus Dimensional Approach to Emotion
Emotion researchers can be divided into two camps based on their answers to the fol￾lowing question: What is the best way to think about emotions? Some suggest emotions 
are best thought of as a small number of primary and distinct emotions (anger, joy, 
anxiety, sadness). Others suggest that emotions are best thought of as broad dimensions 
of experience (e.g., a dimension ranging from pleasant to unpleasant). Those who think 
that primary emotions are the key are said to take the categorical approach. Hundreds of 
terms describe different categories of emotions. Averill (1975), for example, compiled a 
list of 550 terms that describe different feeling states. This is similar to the situation with 
basic trait terms, in which psychologists started with thousands of trait adjectives and 
searched for the fundamental factors that underlie those many variations, concluding 
that there are probably about five primary personality traits that underlie the huge list of 
trait adjectives.
Emotion researchers who take the categorical approach have tried to reduce the 
complexity of emotions by searching for the primary emotions that underlie the great 
variety of emotional terms (Levenson, 2003). They have not reached the kind of consen￾sus that is found in the personality trait domain, however. The lack of consensus found 
in this area of psychology results from different criteria that researchers use for defining 
emotion as primary. Ekman (1992a), for example, requires that a primary emotion has 
a distinct facial expression that is recognized across cultures. The experience of sadness 
is accompanied by frowning and knitting the brow. This facial expression is universally 
recognized as depicting the emotion of sadness. Similarly, clenching and baring the teeth 
is associated with anger and is universally recognized as anger. In fact, people who are 
blind from birth frown when sad, clench and bare their teeth when angry, and smile 
when they are happy. Because persons blind from birth have never seen the facial expres￾sions of sadness, anger, or joy, it is not likely that they learned these expressions. Rather, 
it seems likely that the expressions are part of human nature. Based on these criteria of 
distinct and universal facial expressions, Ekman’s list of primary emotions contains dis￾gust, sadness, joy, surprise, anger, and fear.
Final PDF to printer404
lar31869_ch13_400-435.indd 404 10/17/22 09:31 AM
PART FOUR The Cognitive/Experiential Domain
Other researchers hold different criteria for counting emotions as primary. For 
example, Izard (1977) suggests that the primary emotions are distinguished by their 
unique motivational properties. That is, emotions are understood to guide behaviors by 
motivating a person to take specific adaptive actions. Fear is included as a primary emo￾tion on Izard’s list because it motivates a person to avoid danger and seek safety. Interest 
is similarly a fundamental emotion because it motivates a person to learn and acquire 
new skills. Izard’s criteria result in a list of 10 primary emotions. In Table 13.1, various 
lists of primary emotions are based on various criteria.
Another approach to understanding emotion has been based on empirical research 
rather than on theoretical criteria. In this dimensional approach, researchers gather data 
by having subjects rate themselves on a wide variety of emotions, then apply statistical 
techniques (usually some form of factor analysis) to identify the basic dimensions under￾lying the ratings.
There is a remarkable consensus among researchers on the basic dimensions that 
underlie self-ratings of affect (Judge & Larsen, 2001; Larsen & Diener, 1992; Watson, 
2000). Most of the studies suggest that people categorize emotions using just two pri￾mary dimensions: how pleasant or unpleasant the emotion is and how high or low on 
arousal the emotion is. When these two dimensions are arrayed as axes in a two-dimen￾sional coordinate system, the adjectives that describe emotions fall in a circle around the 
two dimensions, as shown in Figure 13.1. 
This model of emotion suggests that every feeling state can be described as a com￾bination of pleasantness/unpleasantness and arousal. For example, a person can feel 
unpleasant feelings in a very high-arousal way (nervous, anxious, terrified) or in a very 
low-arousal way (bored, fatigued, tired). Similarly, a person can feel pleasant feelings in 
a high-arousal way (excited, enthusiastic, elated) or in a low-arousal way (calm, relaxed). 
Thus the two dimensions of pleasantness and arousal are seen as fundamental dimen￾sions of emotion.
The dimensional view of emotion is based on research studies in which subjects 
rate their emotional experiences. Emotions that occur together, which are experienced 
as similar to each other, are understood as defining a common dimension. For example, 
the emotions of distress, anxiety, annoyance, and hostility are very similar in terms of 
Happiness can be thought of as a state or as a trait. People high in trait happiness experience frequent happiness 
states, or have a lower threshold for becoming happy. Moreover, happiness is recognized around the world through 
the expression of smiling. People from all cultures smile when they are happy.
Ollyy/Shutterstock
Final PDF to printer405
lar31869_ch13_400-435.indd 405 10/17/22 09:31 AM
CHAPTER THIRTEEN Emotion and Personality 
Table 13.1 A Selection of Theorists Who Provide Lists of Primary Emotions
Theorists Basic Emotions Criteria
Ekman, Friesen, and Ellsworth (1972) Anger, disgust, fear, joy, sadness, surprise Universal facial expression
Frijda (1986) Desire, happiness, interest, surprise, wonder, 
sorrow
Motivation to take specific 
actions
Gray (1982) Rage, terror, anxiety, joy Brain circuits
Izard (1977) Anger, contempt, disgust, distress, fear, guilt, 
interest, joy, shame, surprise
Motivation to take specific 
actions
James (1884) Fear, grief, love, rage Bodily involvement
Mower (1960) Pain, pleasure Unlearned emotional states
Oatley and Johnson-Laird (1987) Anger, disgust, anxiety, happiness, sadness Little cognitive involvement
Plutchik (1980) Anger, acceptance, joy, anticipation, fear, disgust, 
sadness, surprise
Evolved biological processes
Tomkins (2008) Anger, interest, contempt, disgust, fear, joy, shame, 
surprise
Density of neural firing
Source: Adapted from Ortony and Turner (1990).
Figure 13.1
The dimensional approach to emotion, showing two primary dimensions: high to low activation and 
pleasantness to unpleasantness with emotions falling in a circular array. This is sometimes called the 
circumplex model of emotion.
Sad
Grouchy
Unhappy
Blue
Happy
Delightful
Cheerful
Pleased
Unpleasant Pleasant
Distressed
Anxious
Annoyed
Hostile
Elated
Excited
Lively
Enthusiastic
Bored
Drowsy
Sluggish
Dull
Relaxed
Content
Calm
At rest
Low
activation
High
activation
Negative
aect
Positive
aect
Final PDF to printer406
lar31869_ch13_400-435.indd 406 10/17/22 09:31 AM
PART FOUR The Cognitive/Experiential Domain
experience and thus seem to anchor one end of a dimension of high-arousal negative 
affect. The dimensional approach to emotion refers more to how people experience
their emotions compared to how researchers think about emotions. The dimensional 
approach suggests that what we experience as emotions are various degrees of pleasant￾ness and arousal and that every emotion we are capable of experiencing can be described 
as a combination of pleasantness and arousal (Larsen & Fredrickson, 1999; Larsen & 
Prizmic, 2006).
Some researchers prefer the categorical perspective, finding it useful to think 
about emotions as distinct categories rather than dimensions. For example, the emotions 
of anger and anxiety, although similar in terms of being high-arousal negative emotions, 
are nevertheless associated with distinctly different facial expressions, different subjec￾tive feelings, and different action tendencies. There are also personality psychologists 
who prefer to think about how people differ with respect to the primary dimensions of 
emotion. For example, who are the people who have a good deal of pleasantness in their 
lives? Who are the people who have frequent bouts of high-arousal unpleasant emotions? 
In this chapter, we cover the research and findings from both of these perspectives.
Content Versus Style of Emotional Life
Another distinction that is useful to personality psychologists is between the content of 
a person’s emotional life and the style with which that person experiences and expresses 
emotion. Content refers to the specific kinds of emotions that a person experiences, 
whereas style is the way in which an emotion is experienced. For exam￾ple, saying that someone is cheerful is to say something about the con￾tent of that person’s emotional life. However, to say that someone is 
high on mood variability is to say something about the style of his or 
her emotional life—that his or her emotions change frequently. Each of 
these facets of emotion—content and style—exhibits traitlike properties 
(stable over time and situations and meaningful for making distinctions 
among people). Content and style provide an organizational theme for 
discussing personality and emotion. We first discuss the content of 
emotional life, focusing on various pleasant and unpleasant emotions.
Content of Emotional Life
Content of emotional life means the typical emotions a person is likely 
to experience over time. For example, someone characterized as an 
angry or hot-tempered person should have an emotional life that con￾tains frequent bouts of anger, irritability, and hostility. Someone whose 
emotional life contains a lot of pleasant emotions we might character￾ize as happy, cheerful, and enthusiastic. Thus, the notion of content 
leads us to consider the kinds of emotions a person is likely to experi￾ence over time and across situations in their lives. We begin with a 
discussion of the pleasant emotional dispositions.
Pleasant Emotions
In lists of primary emotions, happiness or joy is typically the only 
pleasant emotions mentioned (though some theorists include inter￾est as a pleasant emotion). In trait approaches to emotion, the major 
Aristotle wrote that happiness resulted from living a 
virtuous life. Modern theories that emphasize that 
living a life of meaning and purpose leads to happiness 
are following Aristotle’s tradition.
Dimitris Tavlikos/Alamy Stock Photo
Final PDF to printer407
lar31869_ch13_400-435.indd 407 10/17/22 09:31 AM
CHAPTER THIRTEEN Emotion and Personality 
pleasant disposition is happiness and the associated feelings of being satisfied with one’s 
life. We begin with these concepts.
Definitions of Happiness and Life Satisfaction Over 2,000 years ago, the Greek philoso￾pher Aristotle wrote that happiness was the supreme good and that the goal of life was 
to attain happiness. Moreover, he taught that happiness was attained by living a virtuous 
life and being a morally good person. Some modern researchers similarly emphasize 
eudaimonia, the creation of a life of meaning and purpose, as the route to happiness 
(e.g., King & Hicks, 2012). Other scholars and philosophers have offered other theories 
on the sources of human happiness. For example, unlike Aristotle, eighteenth-century 
French philosopher Jean-Jacques Rousseau speculated that the road to happiness lies in 
the satisfaction of one’s desires and the hedonistic pursuit of pleasure. In the late nine￾teenth century, the founder of psychology in America, William James, taught that hap￾piness was the ratio of one’s accomplishments to one’s aspirations. One could achieve 
happiness, James thought, in one of two ways: by accomplishing more in life or by lower￾ing one’s aspirations.
Although philosophers have speculated about the roots of happiness for centuries, 
the scientific study of happiness by psychologists is relatively recent (see Eid & Larsen, 
2008, for a review). Psychologists began the serious study of happiness (also called 
subjective well-being) in the mid-1970s. Since then, scientific research on the topic has 
grown by leaps and bounds. In recent years, hundreds of scientific articles on happiness 
have been published annually in the psychological literature (Diener & Seligman, 2002). 
Indeed, a new journal started in the year 2000, titled Journal of Happiness Research, and 
publishes six volumes a year dedicated to the science of happiness. Another journal, the 
Journal of Positive Psychology, also publishes many scientific studies on happiness.
One way to define happiness is to examine how researchers measure it. Several 
questionnaire measures are widely used in surveys and other research. Because happi￾ness is a subjective quality—it depends on an individual’s own judgment of his or her 
life—researchers have to rely on self-report, mainly through questionnaires. Some of these 
questionnaires focus on judgments about one’s life, such as “How satisfied are you with 
your life as a whole these days?” Other questionnaires focus on emotion, particularly on 
the balance between pleasant and unpleasant emotions in a person’s life. An example of 
this type of questioning was developed and published by Fordyce (1978), in which the 
subject is asked the following questions “Over the past six months:”
What percent of the time were you happy?
What percent of the time were you neutral?
What percent of the time were you unhappy?
   Make sure your percents add up to: 100 percent
Among college students, data indicate that the average person reports being happy 
about 65 percent of the time, neutral 15 percent, and unhappy 20 percent (Larsen & 
Diener, 1985). The percent happy scale is one of the better measures of happiness in 
terms of construct validity (see Chapter 2). For example, it predicts a wide range of 
other happiness-related aspects of a person’s personality, such as day-to-day moods and 
peer reports of overall happiness (Tay, Diener, Lucas, & Larsen, 2019).
Researchers conceive of happiness as having two complementary components. 
One is more cognitive and consists of judgments that one’s life has purpose and meaning 
and has been called the life-satisfaction component. The other component is affective 
and consists of the ratio of a person’s positive emotions to his or her negative emotions 
averaged over time. This has been called the hedonic component and really refers to 
Final PDF to printer408
lar31869_ch13_400-435.indd 408 10/17/22 09:31 AM
PART FOUR The Cognitive/Experiential Domain
the balance of positive to negative emotions in a person’s life over time. The two com￾ponents—life satisfaction and hedonic balance—tend to be highly correlated. Although 
we can think of cases where a person could be high on one and low on the other (e.g., 
a starving artist who feels her life has a great deal of purpose and meaning, yet is suffer￾ing greatly day to day to produce her art), the fact is that most people who have a life 
of meaning and purpose also have more positive than negative emotions in their life. 
Consequently, most psychologists refer to the general construct of happiness to talk 
about this characteristic.
Can it be that happy people are just deluding themselves and others by denying 
negative feelings when they report on their emotional lives? This is the idea of social 
desirability, as discussed in Chapter 4. It turns out that measures of happiness do corre￾late with social desirability scores. In other words, people who score high on self-reported 
happiness measures also score high on social desirability scales. Moreover, social desir￾ability measures also correlate with non-self-report happiness scores, such as peer reports 
of happiness. This finding suggests that having a positive view of oneself is part of being 
a happy person. Said differently, part of being happy is to have positive illusions about 
the self, an inflated view of one’s own characteristics as a good, able, and desirable per￾son (Taylor, 1989; Taylor et al., 2000). Research is showing that, while some positive 
illusions about the self can contribute to happiness (through interpersonal appeal and 
self-fulfilling prophecies), too much self-deception can lead to negative effects (Schutz 
& Baumeister, 2017).
Despite the correlation of self-report measures of happiness with social desir￾ability, other findings suggest that these happiness measures are valid (Diener, Oishi, 
& Lucas, 2003). These findings concern the positive correlations found between 
self-report and non-self-report measures of happiness. People who report that they 
are happy tend to have friends and family members who agree (Sandvik, Diener, & 
Seidlitz, 1993). In addition, studies of the daily diaries of happy people find that they 
report many more pleasant experiences than unhappy people (Larsen & Diener, 1985). 
When different clinical psychologists interview a sample of people, the psychologists 
tend to agree strongly about which are happy and satisfied and which are not (Diener, 
2000). And, in an interesting experiment, Seidlitz and Diener (1993) gave the partici￾pants five minutes to recall as many happy events in their lives as possible and then 
gave them five minutes to recall as many unhappy events in their lives as possible. 
They found that the happy people recalled more pleasant events, and fewer unpleasant 
events, than did the unhappy people.
Questionnaire measures of happiness and well-being also predict other aspects 
of people’s lives that we would expect to relate to happiness (Diener, Lucas, & Larsen, 
2003), implying that measures of happiness have good construct validity (see Chapter 4). 
For example, compared with unhappy people, happy people are less abusive and hostile, 
are less self-focused, and report fewer instances of disease. They also are more helpful 
and cooperative, have more social skills, are more creative and energetic, are more for￾giving, and are more trusting (Myers, 1993, 2000; Myers & Diener, 1995; Veenhoven, 
1988). In summary, self-reports of happiness appear to be valid and trustworthy (Larsen 
& Prizmic, 2006). After all, who but the persons themselves are the best judge of their 
subjective well-being? See Table 13.2 for a sample “life satisfaction” questionnaire.
What Good Is Happiness? It has long been known that happiness correlates with 
many positive outcomes in life, such as marriage quality, longevity, self-esteem, and 
satisfaction with one’s job (Diener & Tay, 2015; Myers & Diener, 2018). These corre￾lations between desirable outcomes in life and happiness are often interpreted to mean 
Final PDF to printer409
lar31869_ch13_400-435.indd 409 10/17/22 09:31 AM
CHAPTER THIRTEEN Emotion and Personality 
that success in some area of life (e.g., a good marriage) will make a person happy. 
As another example, the small correlation between personal wealth and happiness is 
often interpreted as meaning that having money can make one (slightly more) happy. 
The majority of researchers in this area have gone on the assumption that successful 
outcomes foster happiness and that the causal direction goes from being successful 
leading to increased happiness.
However, a group of researchers (Lyubomirsky, King, & Diener, 2005) questioned 
this assumption about the causal direction going from success to happiness. They sug￾gested that there may be areas of life where the causality goes in the opposite direction, 
from happiness to success. For example, it could be that being happy leads one to get 
married, or to have a better marriage, instead of having a good marriage leading one to 
become happy.
In an extremely large meta-analysis of the happiness and well-being literature, 
Lyubomirsky and colleagues (2005) reviewed many studies that might be used to disen￾tangle the causal direction between happiness and several different outcomes. Two kinds 
of studies are most useful in assessing causal direction. One type of study is longitudinal, 
in which people are measured on at least two occasions separated in time. If happiness 
precedes success in life, then we have some evidence that the causal direction might go 
from happiness to the outcome. The second type of study is experimental, in which hap￾piness is manipulated (people are put in a good mood) for half the sample (the other 
half is the control group), and some outcome is measured. If the outcome is higher in the 
group undergoing the happiness induction than in the control group, then we have some 
evidence that the causal direction might go from happiness to the outcome.
Lyubomirsky and colleagues (2005) found that longitudinal studies provided 
evidence that happiness leads to, or at least comes before, positive outcomes in many 
areas of life, including fulfilling and productive work, satisfying relationships, and better 
mental and physical health and longevity. Experimental studies also provide evidence 
that happiness can lead to several positive outcomes, including being more helpful and 
altruistic, wanting to be with others, increases in self-esteem and liking of others, a better 
functioning immune system, and more effective conflict resolution.
Although happiness has been shown to lead to many positive outcomes in life, the 
situation with some outcomes might be more complex and involve reciprocal causality, 
Table 13.2 Satisfaction with Life Scale
Below are five statements with which you may agree or disagree. Using the scale below, indicate your agreement with each item by 
placing the appropriate number on the line preceding that item. Please be open and honest in your responses.
Strong 
Disagreement 
1
Moderate 
Disagreement 
2
Slight 
Disagreement 
3
Slight 
Agreement 
4
Moderate 
Agreement 
5
Strong 
Agreement 
6
1. _____ In most ways, my life is close to my ideal.
2. _____ If I could live my life over, I would change almost nothing.
3. _____ I am satisfied with my life.
4. _____ So far I have gotten the important things I want in life.
5. _____ The conditions of my life are excellent.
Source: Diener et al., 1985.
Final PDF to printer410
lar31869_ch13_400-435.indd 410 10/17/22 09:31 AM
PART FOUR The Cognitive/Experiential Domain
which refers to the idea that causality can flow in both directions. For example, we 
know that happy people are more likely to help others who are in need. Also, from the 
experimental literature, we know that helping someone in need can lead to increase in 
happiness. This kind of reciprocal causality may apply to many areas of life, including 
having a satisfying marriage or intimate relationship, having a fulfilling job, or having 
high self-esteem.
What Is Known About Happy People In recent decades, many scientists have asked and 
answered basic questions about the differences between happy and unhappy people (e.g., 
Eid & Larsen, 2008). For example, are women happier than men, or are men the happier 
gender? Haring, Stock, and Okun (1984) analyzed 146 studies on global well-being and 
found that gender accounted for less than 1 percent of the variation in people’s happi￾ness. This finding of minuscule differences between men and women appears across cul￾tures and countries as well. Michalos (1991) obtained data on 18,032 university students 
from 39 countries. He found that roughly equal proportions of men and women rated 
themselves as being satisfied with their lives. Diener (2000) also reports gender equality 
in overall happiness.
Is happiness more likely among young, middle-aged, or older people? We often 
think that certain age periods of life are more stressful than others, such as the midlife 
crisis or the stress of adolescence. This might lead us to believe that certain times of life 
are happier than others. Inglehart (1990) addressed this question in a study of 169,776 
people from 16 nations. He found that the circumstances that make people happy change 
with age. For example, financial security and health are important for happiness later in 
life, whereas, for younger adults, success at school or work and satisfying intimate rela￾tionships are important for happiness. Also, there is some evidence that older people, 
Does having a positive relationship cause a person to be happy? Or, does being happy cause one to have positive 
relationships?
Antonio Guillem/Shutterstock
Final PDF to printer411
lar31869_ch13_400-435.indd 411 10/17/22 09:31 AM
CHAPTER THIRTEEN Emotion and Personality 
as long as they remain healthy, report lower levels of negative emotions than younger 
people (Carstensen et al., 2011). This may be due to older people having developed 
better coping or emotion management skills. Nevertheless, in looking at overall levels of 
happiness, many researchers (e.g., Inglehart, 1990) conclude that there is little evidence 
to suggest that any one time of life is happier than any other.
Is ethnicity related to happiness? Are some ethnic groups happier than others? 
Many surveys have included questions about ethnic identity, so a wealth of data exists on 
this question. Summarizing many such studies, Myers and Diener (1995, 2018) conclude 
that ethnic group membership is unrelated to subjective well-being. For example, African 
Americans report roughly the same amount of happiness as European Americans and 
in fact have slightly lower rates of depression (Diener et al., 1993). Crocker and Major 
(1989) suggest that people from disadvantaged social groups maintain their happiness 
by valuing the activities they are good at and by comparing themselves with members of 
their own group.
What about national differences in well-being? Are people from certain nations 
happier than people from other nations? The answer here seems to be yes. The hap￾piness levels in countries around the world have been tracked by the United Nations 
(UN) for the past 20 years. In Table 13.3, we present some of the results from their 2022 
report and list the 20 most happy and the 20 least happy countries. Looking at the rank￾ings, what do you think might account for the differences among the countries that are 
high compared to low on well-being?
While nations may move a few ranks up or down from year to year, the constant 
finding over the years, which you see in Table 13.3, is that people in countries with a 
higher standard of living (and wealth) are happier than the people from countries with 
a lower standard of living. Diener and colleagues (1995) statistically analyzed similar 
international data on the wealth of nations in relation to the mean happiness of the 
population and concluded that differences in the economic development of nations may 
be a source of differences in the subjective well-being of nations. Researchers who con￾ducted similar but smaller-scale national surveys have offered similar findings (Easterlin, 
1974; Veenhoven, 1991a, 1991b).
Such findings might lead us to think that money or income makes people happy. 
People often think that if they had a bit more money or if they had a few more mate￾rial goods, they would be happier. Some believe that if they win the lottery they will be 
happy for the rest of their lives. Researchers have found that there is no simple answer 
to the question about whether money makes people happy (Diener & Biswas-Diener, 
2002, 2008). We present some of the complexity in A Closer Look: Does Money Make 
People Happy?
Instead of looking at national mean levels of happiness, where it seems richer 
countries are happier, if we look within a country at individual levels of happiness 
and personal income or wealth, the association between happiness and money practi￾cally disappears. In fact, research on the objective circumstances of a person’s life—
age, sex, ethnicity, income, and so on—shows that these matter very little to overall 
happiness. Yet we know that people differ from each other and that, even through 
life’s struggles and disappointments, some people are consistently happier than oth￾ers. Costa, McCrae, and Zonderman (1987) found, in a study of 5,000 adults, that 
the people who were happy in 1973 were also happy 10 years later, in spite of under￾going many changes in life. What else might explain why some people are consis￾tently happier than others?
Final PDF to printer412
lar31869_ch13_400-435.indd 412 10/17/22 09:31 AM
PART FOUR The Cognitive/Experiential Domain
Table 13.3 Twenty Highest and 20 Lowest Countries in Terms of 
Average Happiness Levels Based on 2019–21 from 
United Nations Surveys
Source: United Nations World Happiness Report, 2019.
0.000 1.000 2.000 3.000 4.000 5.000 6.000 7.000 8.000 9.000
Finland
Denmark
Iceland
Switzerland
Netherlands
Luxembourg*
Sweden
Norway
Israel
New Zealand
Austria
Australia
Ireland
Germany
Canada
United States
United Kingdom
Czechia
Belgium
France
Sri Lanka
Madagascar*
Egypt
Chad*
Ethiopia
Yemen*
Mauritania*
Jordan
Togo
India
Zambia
Malawi
Tanzania
Sierra Leone
Lesotho*
Botswana*
Rwanda*
Zimbabwe
Lebanon
Afghanistan
Happiness score
Final PDF to printer413
lar31869_ch13_400-435.indd 413 10/17/22 09:31 AM
CHAPTER THIRTEEN Emotion and Personality 
Pop singer Madonna, also known as “the 
Material Girl,” has sung the praises of mate￾rialism. Americans are often thought of as 
materialistic. In fact, in surveys, the goal of 
being very well off financially is often rated 
as the top goal in life by first-year college 
students, surpassing other goals, such as 
being helpful to others, realizing potential 
as a person, and raising a family (Myers, 
2000). This attitude is summarized by a 
bumper sticker seen on an expensive car 
towing a large boat, which read, “When the 
game is over, the person with the most toys 
wins.” Does having more make one a win￾ner? Does money lead to happiness?
Looking at in terms of national data, as 
in Table 13.3, the answer seems to be that 
wealthier countries do indeed have higher 
average levels of life satisfaction than poorer 
countries. Myers and Diener (1995) report 
that the correlation between a nation’s 
well-being score and its gross national prod￾uct (adjusted for population size) is +.67. 
However, national wealth is confounded 
with many other variables that influence 
well-being, such as health care services, civil 
rights, women’s rights, care for the elderly, 
and education. This is a classic example of 
how potential third variables might explain 
why two variables are correlated (see discus￾sion of this problem in Chapter 2). For exam￾ple, wealthier countries may have higher 
well-being because they also provide better 
health care for their citizens.
To counteract this research problem, 
we must look at the relationship between 
income and happiness within specific coun￾tries. Diener and Diener (1995) report that, 
in very poor countries, such as Bangladesh 
and India, financial status is a moderately 
good predictor of well-being. However, 
once people can afford life’s basic neces￾sities, it appears that increasing one’s 
financial status matters very little to one’s 
well-being. In countries that have a higher 
standard of living, where most people have 
income (at a slower rate, but still income 
has been trending upward), but there has 
been a significant decrease in average hap￾piness in the United States. This can be seen 
in the last 10 years (since 2012) of UN World 
Happiness Reports. In 2019, the UN World 
Report on Happiness included two papers 
offering potential explanations for declining 
happiness in the United States (one implicat￾ing digital media, the other citing high rates of 
addiction). At any rate, this declining level of 
happiness in the face of improving economic 
conditions reinforces the notion that wealth, 
in itself, is mostly unrelated to happiness. The 
2022 UN world happiness report shows that 
the correlation between income and happi￾ness was .11; not exactly zero, but very small.
This finding of a tiny relationship 
between wealth and happiness contradicts 
the views of many politicians, economists, 
and policymakers. For example, people 
in the lowest levels of the economy have 
the highest rates of depression (McLoyd, 
1998). Economic hardship takes a toll on 
people, increasing stress and conflict in 
people’s lives (Kushlev, Dunn, & Lucas, 
2015). Poverty is associated with eleva￾tions in a variety of negative life outcomes, 
ranging from infant mortality to increased 
violent crimes, such as homicide (Belle 
et al., 2000). How can poverty be associ￾ated with such unfortunate circumstances, 
yet income not be related to happiness? 
The answer, in part, lies in the notion of a 
threshold of income, below which a per￾son is very unlikely to be happy. Once a 
person is above this threshold, however, 
the notion that having more money would 
make one happier does not seem to hold 
(Diener & Biswas-Diener, 2002).
Myers and Diener (2018) make the 
analogy between wealth and health: the 
absence of either health or wealth can bring 
misery, but their presence is no guarantee 
that happiness will follow. An interesting 
thought experiment would be to consider 
their basic needs met (such as in Europe or 
the United States), income “has a surpris￾ingly weak (virtually negligible) effect on 
happiness” (Inglehart, 1990, p. 242).
What if we were to look within a 
country and examine changes in affluence 
over time, within a single economy, to see 
if people become happier as the country 
becomes more affluent? The United States, 
for example, has undergone huge increases 
in national wealth, income, and affluence 
over the past half-century. For example, 
from 1957 to the late 1990s, the aver￾age person’s after-tax income more than 
doubled, going from $8,000 to $20,000 
annually (after-tax income expressed in con￾stant 1990 dollars). Are Americans happier 
today than they were in 1957? Myers (2000) 
reports that Americans were not any hap￾pier in 2000 than they were in 1957. This is 
illustrated in Figure 13.2, which shows that 
the percentage of Americans who describe 
themselves as very happy has stayed fairly 
constant over the decades, fluctuating right 
around 30 percent. This constant rate of 
personal happiness stands in contrast to the 
corresponding large increase in personal 
income experienced during those decades. 
Data like that portrayed in Figure 
13.2, showing no relation between personal 
income and national happiness, stands in 
contrast to Table 13.3, which shows that 
richer countries have higher happiness. This 
was first pointed out by Richard Easterlin 
(1974), and has come to be called the 
Easterlin paradox: At any point in time, hap￾piness varies with income across nations, but 
over time within a country, happiness does 
not trend upward with increases in income.
While many theories have been pro￾posed to explain the Easterlin paradox, the 
simplest is that, at an individual level, increas￾ing wealth (income, living standard) does 
not have an impact on happiness. Indeed, in 
the United States over the past 20 years, we 
have seen a continued upswing in average 
A Closer Look Does Money Make People Happy?
Final PDF to printer414
lar31869_ch13_400-435.indd 414 10/17/22 09:31 AM
PART FOUR The Cognitive/Experiential Domain
whether giving random people huge sums 
of money—millions of dollars—would make 
them happier. This study is actually run 
hundreds of times each year in the United 
States. With the advent of state lotteries in 
the United States, many people become 
millionaires overnight. Brickman, Coates, 
and Janoff-Bulman (1978) conducted a 
study of lottery winners, comparing their 
happiness levels with those of people from 
similar backgrounds who had not won large 
amounts of money. Within six months of 
winning, the newly rich lottery winners 
were found to be no more happy than the 
subjects in the control group. Apparently, 
winning the lottery is not as good as it 
sounds, at least not in terms of making a 
person permanently happy. External life cir￾cumstances have a surprisingly small effect 
on happiness and subjective well-being 
(Lucas, 2007).
of .19 between median hourly wage and 
happiness in U.S. data between 1972 and 
2004. Although these correlations, like 
that reported the 2022 UN data (.11), are 
not zero, they are hardly large enough to 
think that having a huge income, in itself, 
will make you happy. What wealthy people 
choose to do with their money has more to 
do with their happiness than does the mere 
fact of having a lot of money. For example, 
Dunn, Aknin, and Norton (2008) have shown 
that spending money on others can have a 
larger positive impact on happiness than 
spending the same amount on oneself. 
Across three separate studies, using data 
from 136 countries, Aknin et al. (2013) 
and Kushlev, Radosic, and Diener (2021) 
showed that using one’s money to help oth￾ers (called pro-social spending) may be a 
universally rewarding experience that con￾What can we conclude about money 
and happiness? Probably the most reason￾able conclusion is that below a very low￾income level, a person is very unlikely to be 
happy. Being able to meet the basic needs 
of life (e.g., the needs on Maslow’s hierarchy 
that are discussed in Chapter 11, includ￾ing food, shelter, and security) appears 
crucial. However, once those needs are 
met, research suggests that there is little 
to the notion that further wealth will bring 
increased happiness. Support for this idea 
is provided in a study by Diener and col￾leagues (2010) that is based on a very large 
sample representative of almost everyone 
on planet Earth. These researchers found 
that the correlation between personal 
income and happiness is +.12 in the United 
States. In a German sample, that correlation 
was found to be .20 (Lucas & Schimmack, 
2009). Fischer (2008) reports a correlation 
Figure 13.2
Has the large growth in average income been accompanied by an increase in average happiness within the 
United States? Keep in mind that the income data is averaged, and we know that there is great income 
inequality in the U.S. population.
Source: Adapted from “The Funds, Friends, and Faith of Happy People,” by D. G. Myers, 2000, American Psychologist,
55, pp. 56–67, Figure 5.
A Closer Look (Continued )
Personal income
Percent very happy
16,000
15,000
14,000
13,000
12,000
11,000
10,000
9,000
8,000
7,000
6,000
5,000
4,000
3,000
Per-person after-tax income in 1990 dollars
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Percentage describing themselves as very happy
1930 1940 1950 1960
Year
1970 1980 1990 1991
Final PDF to printer415
lar31869_ch13_400-435.indd 415 10/17/22 09:31 AM
CHAPTER THIRTEEN Emotion and Personality 
Personality and Well-Being In 1980, psychologists Paul Costa and Robert McCrae con￾cluded that demographic variables, such as gender, age, ethnicity, and income, accounted 
for only about 10–15 percent of the variation in happiness, an estimate more recently 
confirmed by others (Lucas & Diener, 2021; Lyubomirski, 2007). This leaves a lot of the 
variance in subjective well-being unaccounted for. Costa and McCrae (1980) proposed 
that personality traits might have something to do with disposing certain people to be 
happy and so looked into that research. The few studies existing at that time suggested 
that happy people were outgoing and sociable (Smith, 1979), emotionally stable, and 
low on neuroticism (Wessman & Ricks, 1966).
Recall and describe in writing a recent time when you purchased something for someone else. 
After writing a brief description of this, think of a time when you spent an equivalent amount 
of money on something for yourself. Now consider which of these two events produced the 
higher level of happiness in you? If you are like the participants in research reported in Science
by Dunn, Aknin, and Norton (2008), you will find that spending one’s money on other people 
has a larger effect on happiness than spending money on oneself. Why do you think this might 
be so? The effect is so reliable that these authors even found that participants randomly assigned 
to spend money on others experienced greater happiness than participants randomly assigned to 
spend money on themselves.
Exercise
Costa and McCrae used such information to theorize that there may be two per￾sonality traits, out of the Big 5, that influence happiness: extraversion (positively) and 
neuroticism (negatively). Their idea was both simple and elegant. They began with the 
notion that happiness was the presence of relatively high levels of positive affect, and 
relatively low levels of negative affect, in a person’s life over time. Extraversion, they 
held, was associated with more frequent positive emotions, whereas emotional stability 
(the opposite of neuroticism) was associated with less frequent negative emotions.
Costa and McCrae (1980; McCrae & Costa, 1991) found that their model was 
supported by research. Extraversion and neuroticism predicted the amounts of positive 
and negative emotions in people’s lives and hence correlated with subjective well-being. 
In fact, extraversion and neuroticism accounted for up to three times as much of the vari￾ation in happiness among people compared with all of the common demographic vari￾ables (e.g., age, income, gender, education, ethnicity, religion) put together. It appears 
that having the right combination of personality traits (high extraversion and low neu￾roticism) contributes much more to happiness than gender, ethnicity, age, and all the 
other demographic characteristics taken together. Their model of well-being is portrayed 
in Figure 13.3.
Since Costa and McCrae’s original study in 1980, dozens of published studies 
have replicated the finding that extraversion and neuroticism are strong personality 
correlates of well-being (summarized in Lucas & Diener, 2021 and Rusting & Larsen, 
1998b). All of these studies have been correlational, however, usually taking the form of 
administering personality and well-being questionnaires, then examining the correlations 
(Lucas & Dyrenforth, 2008).
Correlational studies cannot determine whether there is a direct causal connection 
Final PDF to printer416
lar31869_ch13_400-435.indd 416 10/17/22 09:31 AM
PART FOUR The Cognitive/Experiential Domain
and that lifestyle in turn makes one happy. For example, being neurotic may lead one to be 
a worrier and complainer. Other people dislike being around someone who worries a lot 
and is always complaining, so people may avoid the person who is high on neuroticism. 
Consequently, that person may be lonely and unhappy; however, that unhappiness may be 
due to the fact that the person drives people away by complaining all the time. The person’s 
neuroticism leads him or her to create certain life situations, such as making others uncom￾fortable, and these situations in turn make the person unhappy (Hotard et al., 1989).
We can contrast this with a different view of the causal relation between person￾ality and well-being, in which personality is viewed as directly causing people to react 
to the same situations with different amounts of positive or negative emotions, hence 
directly influencing their well-being. A neurotic person may respond with more nega￾tive emotion, even to the identical situation, compared to a person low in neuroticism. 
These two different models of the relation between personality and well-being—the direct 
and the indirect models—are portrayed in Figure 13.4. In the indirect model (Panel b), 
personality causes the person to create a certain lifestyle, and the lifestyle, in turn, causes 
the emotional reaction. In the direct model (Panel a), even when exposed to identical 
situations, certain people respond with more positive or negative emotions, depending 
on their level of extraversion and neuroticism.
Larsen and his colleagues (e.g., Larsen, 2000a; Larsen & Ketelaar, 1989, 1991; 
Rusting & Larsen, 1998b; Zelenski & Larsen, 1999) have conducted several studies on 
whether the personality traits of extraversion and neuroticism have a direct effect on emo￾tional responding. In these studies, the participants underwent a mood induction in the 
laboratory. In one study, the subjects listened to guided images of very pleasant scenes (a 
walk on the beach) or very unpleasant scenes (having a friend dying of an incurable dis￾ease). In other studies, the participants’ emotions were manipulated by having them look 
at pleasant or unpleasant images. Prior to the laboratory session, their personality scores 
on extraversion and neuroticism were obtained by questionnaire, and mood was measured 
before and after the mood induction. The researchers were then able to determine if extra￾version and neuroticism scores predicted responses to the laboratory mood inductions. 
Across several studies, the best predictor of responsiveness to the positive mood induc￾tion was the personality variable of extraversion. The best predictor of responses to the 
negative mood induction was neuroticism. It seems that it is easy to put an extravert into 
a good mood, and easy to put a high-neuroticism person into a bad mood. Moreover, 
these laboratory studies suggest that personality acts as an amplifier of life events, with 
Figure 13.3
The influence of extraversion and neuroticism on subjective well-being by making a person susceptible to 
positive and negative affect.
Source: Adapted from Costa and McCrae, 1980.
Extraversion
traits
Positive
aect
Subjective
well-being
Neuroticism
traits
Negative
aect
Final PDF to printer417
lar31869_ch13_400-435.indd 417 10/17/22 09:31 AM
CHAPTER THIRTEEN Emotion and Personality 
Figure 13.4
Two models of the relationship between personality variables and subjective well-being. Panel a: Model 
showing a direct effect of personality on emotional life, where life events are amplified by the personality 
traits, resulting in stronger positive or negative emotions for high extraversion or neuroticism subjects, 
respectively. Panel b: Model of the indirect relation between personality and emotional life. Here 
personality causes one to develop a lifestyle, and that lifestyle in turn fosters positive or negative affect for 
the high extraversion or neuroticism persons, respectively. 
Situations
potentially able 
to elicit positive 
aect
Situations
potentially able 
to elicit negative
aect
Extraversion
traits
Positive
aect
Subjective
well-being
Neuroticism
traits
Negative
aect
(a)
Lifestyle that fosters 
more positive 
outcomes
Lifestyle that fosters
more negative
outcomes
Extraversion
traits
Positive
aect
Subjective
well-being
Neuroticism
traits
Negative
aect
(b)
Final PDF to printer418
lar31869_ch13_400-435.indd 418 10/17/22 09:31 AM
PART FOUR The Cognitive/Experiential Domain
extraverts showing amplified positive emotions to 
good events and high-neuroticism subjects showing 
amplified emotions to bad events. These findings 
are important because they suggest that personality 
has a direct effect on emotions and that, even under 
controlled circumstances, people respond differently 
to the emotional events in their lives, depending on 
their personalities (Margolis & Lyubomirsky, 2020).
The finding that extraverts get more positive 
emotional “bang” out of the emotion-inducing “buck” 
(or event) has been replicated in several other psycho￾logical laboratories (e.g., Gomez, Cooper, & Gomez, 
2000; Gross, Sutton, & Ketelaar et al., 1998). Some 
researchers, however, have failed to find the effect 
of extraversion on positive affective reactivity. For 
example, Lucas and Baird (2004) used clips of stand￾up comedy to induce positive emotions and did not 
find that extraversion scores predicted a larger posi￾tive response (at least not in two out of four studies, 
whereas the fourth study did find the extraversion effect). Smillie and colleagues (2012) 
argued that the positive affect induction must involve a rewarding stimuli, such as winning 
a lottery or finding some money. Smillie and colleagues (2012) went on to demonstrate 
that, across five experiments, extraverts are more reactive to rewards (e.g., money), situa￾tions involving desired outcomes (e.g., achievement, success feedback), or appetitive stimuli 
(delicious food). Having subjects do something that is merely pleasant, such as imagine they 
are relaxing at the beach or watch a “feel-good” movie clip, although enjoyable, does not 
involve rewards or appetitive stimuli and hence does not produce the larger positive emo￾tional response in extraverts compared to introverts.
People high on the personality trait of neuroticism tend to worry frequently. 
They may worry about their health, their social interactions, their work, their 
future, or just about anything. Worrying and complaining takes up a great 
proportion of their time.
Steve Prezant/Image Source
Application
A program to increase happiness. Psychologists know a great deal about what correlates with 
happiness, but what can they recommend for the average person who wants to maintain or 
increase his or her levels of trait happiness? Buss (2000b) has identified several strategies for 
improving one’s chances of being happy. In addition, Fordyce (1988) (see also Swanbrow, 
1989) has developed a practical program for applying what is known about happiness in every￾day life. And Larsen (2000a; Larsen & Prizmic, 2004) proposes a collection of strategies for 
coping and improving one’s emotional life. Most psychologists believe that happiness is some￾thing that people must work at (Kennon & Lyubomirsky, 2021). The following is a summary of 
much of the advice given by these psychologists:
1. Spend time with other people, particularly friends, family, and loved ones. The one charac￾teristic common to most happy people is a disposition to be sociable, to draw satisfac￾tion from being with other people. Cultivate an interest in other people. Go out of your 
way to spend time with friends and loved ones. Try to get to know those around you.
2. Seek challenge and meaning in work. If satisfying relationships are the first priority, the 
second is having work that you find enjoyable. Happy people enjoy their work and 
work hard at what they do. If you do not find your current work (or college major) 
rewarding, then consider switching to something that you find more worthwhile. Work 
that is challenging, but within your skill level, is usually the most satisfying.
Final PDF to printer419
lar31869_ch13_400-435.indd 419 10/17/22 09:31 AM
CHAPTER THIRTEEN Emotion and Personality 
3. Look for ways to be helpful to others. Helping others can make you feel good about 
yourself and give you the feeling that your life is meaningful. Helping others thereby 
provides a boost in self-esteem. Helping has a second benefit as well; helping some￾one else can take your mind off your own problems or can make your problems 
seem little by comparison. There are plenty of worthy causes and plenty of organiza￾tions that welcome volunteers.
4. Take time out for yourself; enjoy the activities that give you pleasure. Don’t wait to find 
time for your favorite hobby or activity. Instead, make time. Many people learn to 
keep a calendar while in college to schedule work and other obligations. Use it to 
schedule fun things as well. Set aside time to read a book, take in a movie, exercise 
regularly, or do whatever else you enjoy. Think about what gives you pleasure, and 
build time into your busy schedule for those activities.
5. Stay in shape. Exercise is positively associated with emotional well-being. Exercise 
need not be intense or all that frequent to provide the emotional benefit. Playing 
on team sports, dancing, biking, swimming, gardening, or even walking, if done at a 
brisk pace, is about all it takes. It doesn’t seem to matter what the activity is, as long 
as you move around enough to keep in shape.
6. Have a plan, but be open to new experiences. Having an organized life allows a per￾son to accomplish much. However, sometimes the most fun moments in life are 
unplanned. Be open to trying different things or having different experiences—try 
going somewhere you have never been, try doing a routine activity a little differ￾ently, or try doing something on the spur of the moment. Be flexible, rather than 
rigid, and try to avoid getting stuck in any ruts.
7. Be optimistic. Put on a smiling face, whistle a happy tune, look for the silver lining 
in every cloud. Sure, it sounds too good to be true, but acting happy and trying to 
look on the bright side of things can go a long way toward making you feel happy. 
Try to avoid negative thinking. Don’t make pessimistic statements, even to yourself. 
Convince yourself that the cup really is half full.
8. Don’t let things get blown out of proportion. Sometimes when something bad happens, it 
seems like the end of the world. Happy people have the ability to step back and see things 
in perspective. Happy people think about their options and about the other things in their 
lives that are going well. They think about what they can do to work on their problems 
or what to avoid in the future. But they don’t think it is the end of the world. Often asking 
yourself “What’s the worst that can come of this?” will help put things in perspective.
Just wishing for happiness is not likely to make it so. Psychologists agree that people have to 
work at being happy; they have to work at overcoming the unpleasant events of life, the losses 
and failures that happen to everyone. The strategies in the previous list can be thought of as a 
personal program for working on happiness.
Unpleasant Emotions
Unlike pleasant emotions, the unpleasant emotions come in several distinct varieties. 
We discuss three important unpleasant emotions that are viewed by psychologists as hav￾ing dispositional characteristics: anxiety, depression, and anger.
Trait Anxiety and Neuroticism Recall that people who exhibit the trait of neuroticism 
are vulnerable to negative emotions. Neuroticism is one of the Big Five dimensions of 
Final PDF to printer420
lar31869_ch13_400-435.indd 420 10/17/22 09:31 AM
PART FOUR The Cognitive/Experiential Domain
Different researchers have used different terms for neuroticism, such as emotional 
instability, anxiety-proneness, and negative affectivity (Watson & Clark, 1984). Adjectives 
useful for describing persons high on the trait of neuroticism include moody, touchy, irrita￾ble, anxious, unstable, pessimistic, and complaining. Hans Eysenck (1967, 1990; Eysenck 
& Eysenck, 1985) suggested that individuals high on the neuroticism dimension tend to 
overreact to unpleasant events, such as frustrations or problems, and that they take longer 
to return to a normal state after being upset. They are easily irritated, worry about many 
things, and seem to be constantly complaining. You may have heard the phrase “She is not 
happy unless she has something to worry about.” Well, it is unlikely that worrying actu￾ally makes a person happy. But the fact that some people worry almost all the time sug￾gests that worrying is a characteristic of their personalities. Some people worry about their 
health (“Is this nagging cough really a sign that I have lung cancer? Could this headache 
really be a brain tumor?”). Others worry about their social interactions, ruminating after 
every conversation. And still, others worry about their work.
In addition to worry and anxiety, the person high on the neuroticism dimension fre￾quently experiences episodes of irritation. An interesting way to illustrate this is to ask peo￾ple to list all the things that have irritated them in the past week. Perhaps seeing someone 
spit in public is irritating to many people. Or seeing someone with a pierced nose and eye￾brows might be mentioned as irritating. Or seeing a couple kissing in public might be men￾tioned. If people were to write down all the things that irritated them, you would find that 
people high on neuroticism would have much longer lists than people low on neuroticism.
Eysenck’s biological theory As discussed in Chapter 3, Eysenck (1967, 1990) argued 
that neuroticism has a biological basis. In his theory of personality, neuroticism is due 
primarily to a tendency of the limbic system in the brain to become easily activated. 
The limbic system is the part of the brain responsible for emotion and the fight-or-flight 
reaction. If someone has a limbic system that is easily activated, then that person prob￾ably has frequent episodes of emotions associated with flight (such as anxiety, fear, and 
worry) or with fight (such as anger, irritation, and annoyance). High-neuroticism per￾sons are anxious, irritated, and easily upset, so the theory goes, because their limbic 
systems are more easily aroused to produce such emotions.
Because the limbic system is located deep within the brain, its activity is not easily 
measured by EEG electrodes placed on the surface of the scalp. Newer brain imaging 
technologies, such as MRI or PET, are allowing personality researchers to test this theory 
directly (DeYoung, 2010). Eysenck (1990) made several logical arguments in favor of 
a biological basis for neuroticism. First, many studies have shown a remarkable level of 
stability in neuroticism. For example, Conley (1984a, 1984b, 1985) found that neuroti￾cism showed a high test-retest correlation even after a period of 45 years. Although this 
does not prove a biological basis for neuroticism, stability is nevertheless consistent with a 
biological explanation. A second argument is that neuroticism is a major dimension of per￾sonality that is found in many different kinds of data sets (e.g., self-report, peer report) in 
many different cultures and environments by many different investigators. Again, although 
this ubiquity does not prove a biological basis, the fact that neuroticism is so widely found 
across cultures and data sources is consistent with a biological explanation. And the third 
argument in favor of a biological explanation is that many genetic studies find that neuroti￾cism shows one of the higher heritability values. Trait negative affect shows relatively high 
levels of heritability, whereas trait positive affect shows a significant shared environment 
component (Goldsmith, Aksan, & Essex, 2001). A predisposition to be neurotic appears 
to be modestly heritable. Most behavior geneticists believe that what is heritable in emo￾tional traits is individual differences in neurotransmitter function, such as dopamine trans￾port or serotonin reuptake (Canli, 2008).
Final PDF to printer421
lar31869_ch13_400-435.indd 421 10/17/22 09:31 AM
CHAPTER THIRTEEN Emotion and Personality 
Other biologically based research on emotion traits examines which areas of the 
brain are active when processing emotion information, such as looking at sad pictures or 
thinking about something that makes one anxious or angry (Sutton, 2002). Most of the 
studies reveal that emotion is associated with an increased activation of the anterior cin￾gulate cortex (Bush, Luu, & Posner, 2000; Whalen, Bush, & McNally, 1998). The anterior 
cingulate is the portion of the brain located deep inside toward the center of the brain, 
and it most likely evolved early in the evolution of the nervous system. DeYoung and 
colleagues (2010) measured the volume of brain tissue in different regions of the brain. 
Neuroticism was correlated with the volume of brain regions associated with the evalua￾tion of threat and punishment and the production of negative emotions. Other studies of 
neuroticism and brain structure find it associated with larger (Kapogiannis et al., 2013) 
and thicker (Wright et al., 2006) prefrontal cortex regions, areas that are involved in the 
regulation of negative emotions and impulses. A meta-analysis of brain imaging studies 
and neuroticism (Servaas et al., 2013) concluded that neuroticism is associated with differ￾ences in brain activation during fear learning, anticipation of aversive events (e.g., shocks), 
and during the processing of unpleasant information (e.g., images).
Other researchers have focused on the biological basis of the self-regulation of nega￾tive emotions. For example, Levesque, Fanny, and Joanette (2003) had subjects watch a sad 
film. Half of them were told to do whatever they could to stop or prevent the sad feelings 
and to not show any emotional reactions during the film. Subjects who were successful at 
inhibiting their negative emotions showed increased activity in the right ventral medial pre￾frontal cortex, part of the so-called executive control center of the brain. Other studies also 
have identified this area as highly active in the control of emotion (Beauregard, Levesque, 
& Bourgouin, 2001). When specifically told to try to dampen their emotional responses to 
unpleasant images, the amount of activity in the prefrontal area correlated positively with 
neuroticism. This suggests that the high-neuroticism persons were putting in extra effort to 
regulate their negative emotions (Harenski, Kim, & Hamann, 2009). Schuyler et al. (2014) 
looked at recovery time in amygdala activation following exposure to unpleasant images. 
Subjects higher in neuroticism showed slower amygdala recovery, implying that, at least at 
the level of amygdala activity, negative emotions last longer for high-neuroticism individuals.
Cognitive theories Another way to think about neuroticism is as a cognitive phenom￾enon. Some personality psychologists have argued that trait neuroticism is caused by 
certain styles of information processing (such as attending, thinking, and remembering). 
Lishman (1972), for example, was among the first to show that high-N (neuroticism) 
subjects were more likely to recall unpleasant information than were low-N subjects. 
There was no relation between neuroticism and the recall of pleasant information. 
After studying lists of pleasant and unpleasant words, high-N subjects also recalled the 
unpleasant words faster than the pleasant words. Martin, Ward, and Clark (1983) had 
subjects study information about themselves and about others. When asked to recall 
that information, the high-N subjects recalled more of the negative information about 
themselves but did not recall more negative information about others. There appear to 
be a very specific information-processing characteristics associated with neuroticism: it 
appears to relate to the preferential processing of negative (but not positive) information 
about the self (but not about others). Martin and colleagues (1983) state that “high-N 
scorers recall more self-negative words than low-N scorers because memory traces for 
self-negative words are stronger in the high-N scorers” (p. 500).
As a related explanation for the relation between neuroticism and selective 
memory for unpleasant information, researchers use a version of the spreading acti￾vation concept, which was discussed in Chapter 10. Recall that this notion suggests 
that 
Final PDF to printer422
lar31869_ch13_400-435.indd 422 10/17/22 09:31 AM
PART FOUR The Cognitive/Experiential Domain
Many psychologists hold that emotional experiences are also stored in memory. Moreover, 
some individuals—those high in neuroticism—have richer networks of association sur￾rounding memories of negative emotion. Consequently, for them, unpleasant material 
is more accessible, leading them to have higher rates of recall for unpleasant information.
One type of unpleasant information in memory concerns memory for illnesses, 
injuries, and physical symptoms. If high-N subjects have a richer network of associa￾tions surrounding unpleasant information in memories, then they are also likely to recall 
more instances of illness and bodily complaints. Try asking a high-N person the follow￾ing question: “So, what’s your health been like the past few months?” Be prepared for 
a long answer, with a litany of complaints and many details about specific symptoms. 
Study after study has established a link between neuroticism and self-reported health 
complaints. For example, Smith and colleagues (1989) asked subjects to recall whether 
they had experienced each of 90 symptoms within the past three weeks. Neuroticism 
correlated with the self-reported frequencies of symptoms, usually in the range of r =
.4 to .5. This means that roughly 16–25 percent of the variation in self-reported health 
symptoms could be attributed to the personality trait of neuroticism.
Larsen (1992) examined the sources of bias in neurotics’ reports of physical ill￾nesses. He asked participants to report every day on whether they experienced any physi￾cal symptoms, such as a runny nose, cough, sore throat, backache, stomachache, sore 
muscles, headache, and loss of appetite. The participants made daily health reports for 
two months, providing the researcher with detailed day-by-day running reports of physi￾cal symptoms. After the daily report phase was complete, Larsen then asked the partici￾pants to recall, as accurately as they could, how many times they reported each symptom 
during the two months of daily reporting. This unusual research design allowed the 
researcher to calculate the subjects’ “true” total number of symptoms, as reported on a 
daily basis, as well as their remembered number of symptoms. It turned out that both of 
these scores were related to neuroticism. That is, the high-N participants reported more 
daily symptoms, and they recalled more symptoms, than did the stable low-N subjects. 
Moreover, even when controlling for the number of day-to-day symptoms reported, neu￾roticism was still related to elevated levels of recalled symptoms.
High-neuroticism persons recall and self-report more symptoms, but are they more 
likely than stable low-N individuals to actually have more physical illnesses? This is a 
tricky question to address, as even medical doctors rely on a person’s self-reports of 
symptoms to establish the presence of physical disease. The answer is to look at objec￾tive indicators of illness and disease and to see if those are related to neuroticism. Major 
disease categories, such as coronary disease, cancer, or premature death, appear to have 
little, if any, relation to neuroticism (Watson & Pennebaker, 1989). Costa and McCrae 
(1985) reviewed this literature and concluded that “neuroticism influences perceptions 
of health, but not health itself” (p. 24). Similar conclusions were reached by Holroyd 
and Coyne (1987), who wrote that neuroticism reflects “a biased style of perceiving 
physiological experiences” (p. 372).
Research on the immune system, however, is showing that neuroticism does 
appear to be related to diminished immune function during stress (Herbert & Cohen, 
1993). In a fascinating study by Marsland and colleagues (2001), subjects underwent 
vaccination for hepatitis B, and their antibody response to the injection was measured 
(this is a measure of how well the immune system responds to antigens in a vaccine). It 
was found that the subjects low in neuroticism mounted and maintained the strongest 
immune response to the vaccine. This finding suggests that persons high in neuroticism 
may, in fact, be more susceptible to immune-mediated diseases.
The immune system plays a role in many diseases (see Chapter 18), suggesting 
that neuroticism may affect health through 
Final PDF to printer423
lar31869_ch13_400-435.indd 423 10/17/22 09:31 AM
CHAPTER THIRTEEN Emotion and Personality 
off foreign cells. In a study of neuroticism and lung cancer, Augustine and colleagues 
(2008) found that age of onset of lung cancer was negatively related to neuroticism. This 
finding held even after statistically controlling for the age of subjects when they started 
smoking and the number of cigarettes smoked per day prior to contracting lung can￾cer. Smoking history and amount smoked were strongly related to earlier onset of lung 
cancer, but neuroticism was an additional and independent risk factor for earlier onset 
of this disease. Examining differences between persons one standard deviation above 
and below the mean on neuroticism showed that the high-N subjects contracted lung 
cancer an average of 4.33 years earlier than the low-N subjects. The authors speculate 
that neuroticism is related to the speed of cancer progression due to its impact on the 
immune system. The chronic stress associated with neuroticism can lead to depletion of 
the immune system (Irwin, 2002), which in turn can make a person less able to fight off 
the progression of cancer.
Psychologists have proposed a theory that high-neuroticism subjects pay more 
attention to threats and unpleasant information in their environment (e.g., Dalgleish, 
1995; Matthews, 2000; Matthews, Derryberry, & Siegle, 2000). High-N subjects are 
thought to have a stronger behavioral inhibition system, compared to low-N persons, 
making them particularly vulnerable to cues of punishment and frustration and prompt￾ing them to be vigilant for signs of threat. These researchers argue that high-N subjects 
are on the lookout for threatening information in their environment, constantly scanning 
for anything that might be menacing, unsafe, or negative. This is called an attentional 
bias to threatening information.
Researchers have incorporated a version of the Stroop effect into investigations 
of attentional bias and neuroticism. The Stroop effect (Stroop, 1935) describes the 
increased time it takes to name the color in which a word is written when that word 
names a different color, relative to when it is a matching color word or a patch of color. 
For example, if the word blue is written in red ink, then it takes longer to name the color 
of the ink (red) than it would take if the word red were written in red ink. Researchers 
agree that the relevant dimension (color of ink) and the irrelevant dimension (name of 
the word) produce a conflict within the attentional system. If a person’s attentional sys￾tem can efficiently suppress the irrelevant dimension (the word), then he or she should 
be faster in naming the color than someone who cannot suppress the word information.
The Stroop task has been modified to study individual differences in attention 
to emotion words. In the so-called emotional Stroop task, the content of the words is 
typically anxiety- or threat-related, such as fear, disease, cancer, germs, vomit, death, fail￾ure, grief, or coffin (Larsen, Mercer, & Balota, 2006). The words are written in colored 
ink, and the subject is asked to name the color of the ink and ignore the content of the 
words. Attentional bias is confirmed when the time it takes to name the colors of the 
threat words is longer than the time it takes to name the colors of neutral words (Algom, 
Chajut, & Lev, 2004). Applied to neuroticism, the idea is that high-N persons have an 
attentional bias such that certain stimuli (the threat words) are more salient, or atten￾tion-grabbing. The threat words should be more difficult for them to ignore when naming 
the color. Therefore, neuroticism should correlate with longer response times to name 
the colors when the words refer to threat (e.g., disease, failure).
A thorough review of this literature was published by Williams, Mathews, and 
MacLeod (1996). These researchers reviewed more than 50 experiments that used a 
version of the emotional Stroop task. Many of the studies show that high-N groups (or 
participants with anxiety disorder) are often slower to name colors of anxiety- and threat￾related words, compared with the color naming of control, nonemotion words. The 
explanation given for this effect is that the threatening words capture the attention of the 
high-N participants, but not of the low-N participants.
Final PDF to printer424
lar31869_ch13_400-435.indd 424 10/17/22 09:31 AM
PART FOUR The Cognitive/Experiential Domain
In summary, neuroticism is a trait that relates to a variety of negative emotions, 
including anxiety, fear, worry, annoyance, irritation, and distress. Persons high in neu￾roticism are unstable in their moods, are easily upset, and take longer to recover after 
being upset. There are both biological and cognitive theories about the causes of nega￾tive emotions in neuroticism, and each has some supportive evidence in the scientific 
literature. One particularly well-known finding concerns the tendency of persons high in 
neuroticism to complain of health problems. In addition, high-N persons are thought to 
be on the lookout for threatening information; they pay more attention to negative cues 
and events in life, however minor, compared with more emotionally stable persons.
Depression Depression is another traitlike dimension. In this chapter, we cover only a 
small part of what is known about depression. There is a huge body of literature on the 
topic of depression, as is befitting a psychological disorder that is estimated to strike 20 
percent of the people in the United States at some time in their lives (American Psychiatric 
Association, 1994). There are entire books on depression, graduate courses devoted to this 
topic, and clinicians who specialize primarily in the treatment of depression. There are 
thought to be several distinct varieties of depression (e.g., Rusting & Larsen, 1998a). For 
example, most depressed persons have sleep disturbance; some have difficulty falling asleep 
(initial insomnia) whereas others have trouble staying asleep (waken early and cannot fall 
back to sleep, called terminal insomnia). This may suggest different types of depression. 
See Table 13.4 for a list of symptoms that define depression.
Diathesis-stress model One way to view depression is through a diathesis-stress model. This 
model suggests that there is a preexisting vulnerability, or diathesis, that is present among 
people who later become depressed. In addition to this vulnerability, a stressful life event must 
occur in order to trigger the depression, such as the loss of a loved one, a career failure, or 
another major negative life event. Neither element alone—the diathesis or the stress—is suffi￾cient to trigger depression. Rather, they must occur together in order for depression to result.
Beck’s cognitive theory Many researchers have emphasized certain cognitive styles 
as one type of diathesis that makes people vulnerable to depression (Larsen & Cowan, 
1988). One of these researchers is Aaron Beck (1921–2021), who has written extensively 
on his cognitive theory of depression. He suggests that the vulnerability lies in a particular 
cognitive schema, or way of looking at the world. A cognitive schema is a way of process￾ing incoming information, a way of organizing and interpreting the events of daily life. 
Table 13.4 Signs of Depression
The signs of depression include having five or more of the following symptoms during the same 
two-week period:
• Depressed mood most of the day, nearly every day
• Diminished interest or pleasure in most activities
• Change in weight: significant weight loss when not dieting or a weight gain
• Change in sleep pattern: insomnia or sleeping much more than usual
• Change in movements: restlessness and agitation or feeling slowed down
• Fatigue or loss of energy nearly every day
• Feelings of worthlessness or guilt nearly every day
• Diminished ability to concentrate or make decisions nearly every day
• Recurrent thoughts of death or suicide
Source: Adapted from American Psychiatric Association (2013).
Final PDF to printer425
lar31869_ch13_400-435.indd 425 10/17/22 09:31 AM
CHAPTER THIRTEEN Emotion and Personality 
The cognitive schema involved in depression, according to Beck, distorts the incoming 
information in a negative way, a way that makes the person vulnerable to depression.
According to Beck, three important areas of life are most influenced by the depres￾sive cognitive schema. This cognitive triad includes information about the self, the world, 
and the future. Information about these important aspects of life is distorted in specific 
ways by the depressive cognitive schema. For example, after doing poorly on a practice 
exam, a depressive person might say to himself, “I am a total failure.” This is an exam￾ple of the overgeneralizing distortion applied to the self. Overgeneralizing is taking one 
instance and generalizing to many or all other instances. The lay term for this is “blowing 
things out of proportion.” The person might have failed at one exam, but that does not 
mean he is a total failure. The same overgeneralizing style can be applied to the world 
(“If anything can go wrong, it will.”) and the future (“Why bother trying, when every￾thing I do is doomed to fail?”). In Beck’s (1976) theory, there are many other cognitive 
distortions, such as making arbitrary inferences (jumping to a negative conclusion, even 
when the evidence does not support it), personalizing (assuming that everything is your 
fault), and catastrophizing (thinking that the worst will always happen). These cognitive 
elements are portrayed in Figure 13.5. 
Figure 13.5
Beck’s cognitive model of depression, showing how distortions are applied to processing information about the 
“I received a bad
grade on this
paper . . . , I just
can’t seem to do
anything right.”
“If anything can go
wrong with this
project, it probably
will.”
“Why bother trying?
Everything I do 
turns out to be a
failure.”
The worldThe self One’s future
Overgeneralizing
“The teacher
didn’t have time to
see me today. She
probably doesn’t
like me.”
“This teacher
doesn’t care . . . ,
probably none of
the teachers care
about students.”
“I’m sure all the 
teachers I’ll have
will be lousy, just
like this one.”
Arbitrary
inferences
“My softball team
lost today . . . , and
it’s all my fault.”
“This reminds me
of all the times my 
team lost when I
was in grade
school.”
“I’ll probably
never be on a
Personalizing winning team . . .”
“Failing this exam
means I’m
incapable of
learning.”
“Failing this exam
probably means I
won’t get into
medical school . . .”
“Because I probably
won’t get into
medical school, I
should just quit
college right now.”
Catastrophizing
Information processing about:
Final PDF to printer426
lar31869_ch13_400-435.indd 426 10/17/22 09:31 AM
PART FOUR The Cognitive/Experiential Domain
According to Beck’s influential theory, depression is the result of applying these 
cognitive distortions to the information from daily life. These distortions are applied 
quickly and outside of immediate awareness, resulting in a stream of automatic negative 
thoughts, which deeply affect how the person feels and acts (“I’m no good. The world is 
against me. My future is bleak.”). The person who thinks he is a total failure will often 
act like a total failure and may even give up trying to do better, creating a self-fulfilling 
prophecy. Moreover, depressive feelings lead to more distortions, which in turn lead to 
more bad feelings, and so on, in a self-perpetuating cycle. Beck devised a form of therapy 
for changing people’s cognitive distortions. In a nutshell, this involves challenging the 
person’s distortions, such as by asking, “Does it really mean that you are a total failure
because you flunked just this one exam?”
Biology of Depression Nerve cells in the body communicate with each other by way 
of chemical messengers called neurotransmitters (Chapter 7). These neurotransmitters 
are delivered from one neuron across a gap—called the synapse—to another neuron 
(Figure 13.6). The first neuron is called the presynaptic neuron, and the second neu￾ron is called the postsynaptic neuron. If the neurotransmitter reaches the postsynaptic 
neuron in sufficient strength, the nerve signal continues on its way toward completing 
the action for which it is intended, for instance, changing the channel on the remote, 
reading another sentence in a book, casting a flirting glance at someone you like. When 
someone is depressed, this biological theory holds that there are diminished levels 
of neurotransmitters in the nervous system. Depressed persons often describe feeling 
slowed down, as if they don’t have energy to do what they want to do. The neurotrans￾mitter theory of depression holds that this emotional problem may be the result of 
Figure 13.6
Diagram of synapse between two neurons, illustrating how neurotransmitters must 
be released, cross the synapse, and bond with the receptors on the postsynaptic 
neuron in order for a nerve impulse to pass on its way to completion.
Neurotransmitter
Presynaptic
neuron
Synaptic vesicles 
Postsynaptic neuron
Receptors
Synapse
Final PDF to printer427
lar31869_ch13_400-435.indd 427 10/17/22 09:31 AM
CHAPTER THIRTEEN Emotion and Personality 
neurotransmitter imbalance at the synapses of the nervous system. The neurotransmit￾ters thought to be most involved in depression include norepinephrine (also called 
noradrenaline), serotonin, and, to a lesser degree, dopamine. Many of the drugs used 
to treat depression target exactly these neurotransmitters. For example, Prozac, Zoloft, 
and Paxil inhibit the reuptake of serotonin in the synapse, resulting in increased levels 
of this neurotransmitter in the synapses, facilitating nerve transmission. The medica￾tion Tofranil works to maintain a better balance between levels of both serotonin and 
norepinephrine. While helpful to many people, not all persons with depression are 
successfully treated with these kinds of medications, suggesting again that there may 
be varieties of depression, some more biologically based, others more related to stress 
or cognitively biases. 
Studies suggest that exercise might also be usefully applied to the treatment 
of depression, at least for some persons (Dubbert, 2002). In his 1996 annual report, 
Surgeon General of the United States David Satcher documented the benefits of exer￾cise for health promotion and disease prevention—including depression prevention. The 
use of exercise in counseling people with depression is described by Dixon, Mauzey, 
and Hall (2003). A meta-analysis published in 2016 showed that exercise produced a 
reduction in depression that was of a similar magnitude to that found for antidepressant 
medications
Anger Proneness and Potential for Hostility Another important negative emotion is 
anger and feelings of hostility. Psychologists have long been interested in what makes 
people hostile and aggressive. Social psychologists, for example, have examined condi￾tions under which the average person will become aggressive (Baron, 1977). One find￾ing is that most people are willing to strike out against someone who has treated them 
unfairly. Here the emphasis is on how certain situations, such as being treated unfairly, 
are likely to evoke aggression in most people. Personality psychologists agree that some 
circumstances tend to make most people angry, but their interest is more in terms of 
individual differences in anger proneness. Two people, for example, are fired (perhaps 
unjustly) from their jobs; one accepts it and plans a job search strategy, and the other 
flies into a rage at the workplace or in the community. Personality psychologists begin 
with the position that some people are characteristically more hostile than others in 
response to the same kinds of situations, such as frustration. Hostility is defined as a 
tendency to respond to everyday frustrations with anger and aggression, become irritable 
easily, feel frequent resentment, and act in a rude, critical, antagonistic, and uncoopera￾tive manner in everyday interactions (Dembrowski & Costa, 1987).
The scientific objectives, from the personality psychologist’s perspective, are (1) 
to understand how hostile people became that way, what keeps them that way, and in 
what other ways they differ from nonhostile people and (2) to examine the consequences 
of hostility in terms of important life outcomes.
One consequence of hostility is its relation to coronary heart disease. We cover 
this topic in more detail in Chapter 18 on Type A behavior and health. It turns out 
that chronic hostility is the component of the Type A behavior pattern that most con￾tributes to heart disease. Hostility as a personality trait can be measured with question￾naires that ask about the frequency and duration of anger episodes, whether anger is 
triggered by minor events (e.g., having to wait in line), or how easily one is bothered 
or irritated in everyday life (Siegel, 1986). For most people, even those high on the 
hostility dimension, the trait produces feelings and urges that are uncomfortable and 
that create a negativistic and brooding outlook. For some, these urges spill over into 
acts of aggression. Many of the mass shootings in the United States, such as the one in 
Final PDF to printer428
lar31869_ch13_400-435.indd 428 10/17/22 09:31 AM
PART FOUR The Cognitive/Experiential Domain
Uvalde, Texas, in May of 2022, were done by young adult 
males whose level of anger proneness prompted them to 
unimaginable acts of aggression, killing and wounding 
large numbers of bystanders.
Anger is an emotion that causes some people to 
lose control. Most of the violent inmates in our prisons 
have trouble with the self-regulation of this potent emo￾tion. Researchers have long speculated that there may 
be biological differences, particularly in brain function, 
between violent and nonviolent persons. The psychologist 
Adrian Raine has spent many years examining some of the 
most violent and aggressive members of our society (e.g., 
Raine, 2002; Brennan & Raine, 1997). He has focused 
on the brain structures associated with individual differ￾ences in violence and aggression, and has started a field 
called “neurocriminology” (Glenn & Raine, 2014; Wagels, 
Habel, Raine, and Clemens, 2022). In one study of espe￾cially violent murderers, Raine, Meloy, and Bihrle (1998) 
found that these persons showed decreased activity in the 
prefrontal areas of their brains, those areas mentioned 
earlier that are associated with normal emotional regulation. Psychologist Jonathan 
Pincus has also specialized in the study of violent criminals. In his book Base Instincts: 
What Makes Killers Kill, Pincus (2001) presents information on the lives of numerous 
serial killers, and in virtually all cases, these murderers suffered from some damage to 
their brains, through violence, accidental injuries, or excessive drug or alcohol abuse. In 
addition, practically all of these murderers came from severely abusive families. Pincus 
(1999) presents data that the presence of brain damage in violent criminals is most often 
in the prefrontal areas. Again, these are the areas involved in self-control (Denson et al., 
2009). Interestingly, this is the area that was severely damaged in the case of Phineas 
Gage, discussed in Chapter 6.
In large studies, not every violent or sadistic person is found to have brain abnor￾malities. However, the rates of brain abnormalities are much higher in violent persons 
than in those persons without a history of violence. For example, in a study of 62 crimi￾nals in Japan, the researchers divided the inmates into those convicted of murder and 
those convicted of nonviolent offenses. Brain abnormalities were much more frequent 
among the murderers than among the nonviolent offenders (Sakuta & Fukushima, 1998). 
In a study done in Austria, a group of high-violence offenders was were compared to a 
group of low-violence offenders. In the high-violence group, 66 percent were found to 
have brain abnormalities, whereas in the low-violence group only 17 percent were found 
to have the same brain abnormalities (Aigner et al., 2000). In a study of sexual offend￾ers, criminals were divided into those who physically harmed their victims (e.g., raped 
and/or murdered) and those who did not physically harm their victims (e.g., exposed 
themselves). In the group of violent sex offenders, 41 percent were found to have brain 
abnormalities, a rate significantly higher than in the nonviolent sex offenders (Langevin 
et al., 1988). In a particularly strong longitudinal study, a group of 110 hyperactive and 
76 normal boys had their brain activity assessed when they were between 6 and 12 years 
of age. They were followed up between the ages of 14 and 20 years, with special atten￾tion to arrest records. Those adolescent boys with a history of delinquency turned out 
to have had unusual brain patterns in childhood compared to those adolescents without 
subsequent delinquency (Satterfield & Schell, 1984).
Would a person with a long history of extreme violence be able 
to change completely into a gentle, loving father and pillar of his 
community?
Twin Design/Shutterstock
Final PDF to printer429
lar31869_ch13_400-435.indd 429 10/17/22 09:31 AM
CHAPTER THIRTEEN Emotion and Personality 
More recent studies (e.g., Hawes et al., 2016) document the trajectory of having 
poor anger management in childhood, leading to higher rates of violence and aggression 
in adulthood. Such findings highlight the importance of developing anger control strate￾gies which, for most people, naturally develop in childhood. Could it be that the brain 
abnormalities often seen in violent adults involve those brain regions that are responsible 
for self-control and the management of emotions, especially anger?
The kind of brain damage most often observed in hostile aggressive persons 
involves areas in the frontal lobe and, to a lesser extent, the temporal lobe. These 
areas are important in regulating impulses, particularly aggressive impulses, and fear 
conditioning. The damage may be developmentally caused or caused by injury. For 
example, sniffing glue or inhaling butane gas, which can induce intoxication similar 
to alcohol, can cause the kind of brain damage that has been related to antisocial 
behavior (Jung, Lee, & Cho, 2004). Another example is a case report where a man 
developed a cyst in his brain. Prior to this development, he was not a violent person. 
However, after the cyst grew, and presumably caused damage to his brain, he strangled 
his wife to death after she scratched his face (Paradis et al., 1994). A similar case is 
reported in Glenn and Raine (2014), along with actual brain scans, of a 40-year-old 
man who, with no prior history, suddenly became sexually aggressive and was arrested. 
He was found to have a large tumor in his prefrontal cortex and, when it was removed, 
his behavior returned to normal, with none of the sexual inappropriateness that got 
him into trouble with the police. The kind of brain abnormalities found in violent and 
aggressive persons appears to involve decrements in the person’s ability to inhibit or 
control aggressive impulses.
Style of Emotional Life
So far in this chapter, we have discussed people’s emotional lives in terms of emotional 
content, or the various characteristic emotions that define how one person is different from 
others. We examined four emotional traits: happiness, anxiety, depression, and anger. Now 
we turn to a discussion of emotional style. As a quick distinction, we might say that content 
is the what of a person’s emotional life, whereas style is the how of that emotional life.
Affect Intensity as an Emotional Style
When we think about how emotions are experienced, probably the major stylistic distinc￾tion is one of intensity. You know from experience with your own emotional reactions 
that emotions can vary greatly in terms of magnitude. Emotions can be weak and mild, 
or strong and almost uncontrollable. To characterize a person’s emotional style, we must 
inquire about the typical intensity of his or her emotional experiences. For emotional 
intensity to be useful to personality theory, we must establish that it describes a stable 
characteristic useful for making distinctions among persons.
Affect intensity can be defined by a description of persons who are either high or 
low on this dimension. Larsen (2009) describes high affect intensity individuals as people 
who typically experience their emotions strongly and are emotionally reactive and vari￾able. High affect intensity subjects typically go way up when they are feeling up and go 
way down when they are feeling down. They also alternate between these extremes more 
frequently and rapidly than do low affect intensity individuals. Low affect intensity indi￾viduals, on the other hand, typically experience their emotions only mildly and with only 
gradual fluctuations and minor reactions. Such persons are stable and calm and usually 
do not suffer the troughs of negative emotions. But they also tend not to experience the 
peaks of enthusiasm, joy, and other strong positive emotions.
Final PDF to printer430
lar31869_ch13_400-435.indd 430 10/17/22 09:31 AM
PART FOUR The Cognitive/Experiential Domain
Note that these descriptions of high and low affect intensity persons make use of 
the qualifying terms typically and usually. This is because certain life events can make 
even the lowest affect intensity person experience relatively strong emotions. For exam￾ple, being accepted into one’s first choice of schools can cause elation in almost any￾one. Similarly, the death of a loved pet can cause strong sadness in almost everyone. 
However, because such events are fairly rare, we want to know what people are usually 
or typically like: how they characteristically react to the normal sorts of everyday positive 
and negative life events.
Figure 13.7 presents daily mood data for two subjects from a study by Larsen and 
Diener (1985). These subjects kept daily records of their moods for 84 consecutive days. 
Note that Subject A’s emotions were fairly stable and did not depart too far from his 
baseline level of mood over the entire three-month reporting period. Actually, he had a 
bad week at the beginning of the semester, which is denoted by the several low points at 
the left side of the graph. Otherwise, things were pretty stable for this subject. 
Subject B, on the other hand, exhibited extreme changes in mood over time. This 
subject was hardly ever near his baseline level of mood. Instead, Subject B appears to 
have experienced both strong positive and strong negative affect frequently and to alter￾nate between these extremes frequently and rapidly. In other words, this high affect 
intensity person exhibited a good deal of variability in his daily moods, fluctuating back 
and forth between positive and negative affect from day to day.
Assessment of Affect Intensity and Mood Variability
In early studies of affect intensity (e.g., Diener, Larsen, et al., 1985), this characteristic 
of emotional life was assessed using a daily experiential sampling method. That is, data 
were gathered much like that presented in Figure 13.7, panels a and b. Researchers 
would then compute a total score for each subject to represent how intense or variable 
that person was over the time period.
This longitudinal method of measuring affect intensity is straightforward and face 
valid, and it represents the construct of affect intensity quite well. However, it takes 
several weeks or longer of daily mood reporting to generate a reliable composite affect 
intensity score for each individual. Consequently, a questionnaire measure of affect 
intensity has been developed that allows a relatively quick assessment of a person’s emo￾tional style in terms of intensity. Table 13.5 lists 10 items from this questionnaire, called 
the Affect Intensity Measure (AIM) (Larsen & Diener, 1987).
An important aspect of the affect intensity trait is that we cannot really say whether 
it is bad or good to be low or high on this trait. Both positive and negative consequences 
are related to scoring either high or low. High-scoring persons, for example, get a lot of 
zest out of life, enjoying peaks of enthusiasm, joy, and positive emotional involvement. On 
the other hand, when things are not going well, high-scoring persons are prone to strong 
negative emotional reactions, such as sadness, guilt, and anxiety. In addition, because 
high-scoring persons have frequent experiences of extreme emotions (both positive and 
negative), they tend to suffer the physical consequences of this emotional involvement. 
Emotions activate the sympathetic nervous system, making the person aroused. Even 
strong positive emotions activate the sympathetic nervous system and produce wear and 
tear on the nervous system. High-scoring persons tend to exhibit physical symptoms that 
result from their chronic emotional lifestyles, such as muscle tension, stomachaches, 
headaches, and fatigue. An interesting finding is that, even though they report more of 
these physical symptoms, high-scoring persons are not particularly unhappy or upset by 
them (Larsen, Billings, & Cutler, 1996). Interviews with high-scoring persons usually 
show that they have no desire to change their level of emotional intensity. They seem to 
Final PDF to printer431
lar31869_ch13_400-435.indd 431 10/17/22 09:31 AM
CHAPTER THIRTEEN Emotion and Personality 
Figure 13.7
Data from individual subjects who kept a mood diary every day for three consecutive months. (a) Data 
from subject A. (b) Data from Subject B, who has much more intense moods and larger day-to-day mood 
swings than Subject A.
Source: Adapted from Larsen 1991.
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
–1
–2
–3
–4
–5
–6
0 10 20 30 40
Day number
50 60 70 80 90
Positive
Negative
Mood
(a)
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
–1
–2
–3
–4
–5
–6
0 10 20 30 40
Day number
50 60 70 80 90
Positive
Negative
Mood
(b)
Final PDF to printer432
lar31869_ch13_400-435.indd 432 10/17/22 09:31 AM
PART FOUR The Cognitive/Experiential Domain
prefer the emotional involvement, the ups and downs, and the physiological arousal that 
accompanies their highly emotional lifestyle (Larsen & Diener, 1987).
Low affect intensity individuals, on the other hand, are stable and do not typi￾cally get upset very easily. Even when negative events happen, they maintain an even 
emotional state and avoid the troughs of negative affect. The price such people pay for 
this emotional stability, however, is that they fail to experience their positive emotions 
very strongly. They lack the peaks of zest, enthusiasm, emotional engagement, and joy 
that energize the lives of their high-affect intensity peers. Low affect intensity individu￾als, however, do not pay the price of the physical and psychosomatic symptoms that go 
along with the high affect intensity personality.
Research Findings on Affect Intensity
In a daily study of mood, Larsen, Diener, and Emmons (1986) had subjects record the 
events in their daily lives. Sixty-two subjects recorded the best and the worst events 
of the day for 56 consecutive days, resulting in almost 6,000 event descriptions. The 
subjects also rated these events each day in terms of how subjectively good or bad the 
events were for them. The same event descriptions were also rated later by a team of 
raters for how objectively good or bad they would be for the average college student. 
Results showed that the subjects high on the affect intensity dimension rated their 
life events as significantly more severe than did the low affect intensity subjects. That 
is, events that were rated as only “moderately good” by the objective raters (such as 
receiving a compliment from a professor) were rated as “very good” by the high affect 
intensity subjects. Similarly, events that were rated as only “moderately bad” by the 
objective raters (such as losing a favorite pen) tended to be rated as “very bad” by 
the high affect intensity subjects. Thus, the high affect intensity subjects tended to 
evaluate the events in their lives—both good and bad events—as having significantly 
Table 13.5 AIM Questionnaire
INSTRUCTIONS: The following statements refer to emotional reactions to typical life events. Please indicate how you react to these 
events by placing a number from the following scale in the blank space preceding each item. Please base your answers on how you
react, not on how you think others react or how you think a person should react.
Never 
1
Almost Never 
2
Occasionally 
3
Usually 
4
Almost Always 
5
Always 
6
 1.   When I accomplish something difficult, I feel delighted or elated.
 2.   When I feel happy, it is a strong type of exuberance.
 3.   I feel pretty bad when I tell a lie.
 4.   When I solve a small personal problem, I feel euphoric.
 5.   My emotions tend to be more intense than those of most people.
 6.   My happy moods are so strong that I feel as if I were in heaven.
 7.   I get overly enthusiastic.
 8.   If I complete a task I thought was impossible, I am ecstatic.
 9.   My heart races at the anticipation of an exciting event.
10.   Sad movies deeply touch me.
Source: Copyright 1984, Randy J. Larsen, PhD.
Final PDF to printer433
lar31869_ch13_400-435.indd 433 10/17/22 09:31 AM
CHAPTER THIRTEEN Emotion and Personality 
more emotional impact than did the low affect intensity subjects. High affect intensity 
individuals are thus more emotionally reactive to common emotion-provoking events 
in their lives, both the good and the bad events.
An aspect of these findings worth emphasizing is that high affect intensity individ￾uals are more reactive to both positive and negative events in their lives. Consequently, 
high affect intensity individuals should exhibit more mood variability, or more frequent 
fluctuations in their emotional lives over time. Larsen (1987) found that individuals 
high on the affect intensity dimension do, in fact, exhibit more frequent changes in their 
moods and that these changes tend to be larger in magnitude than are the mood changes 
of low affect intensity individuals.
During an interview, a high affect intensity subject reported that, to her, the worst 
thing in life was to be bored. She reported that she often did things to liven up her life, 
such as playing practical jokes on her roommates. Although such activities sometimes 
backfired and got her into trouble, she felt that it was worth it to obtain the stimulation. 
Another high affect intensity subject described himself as an “intensity junkie,” hooked 
on the need for an emotionally stimulating lifestyle. A review of what else is known 
about individual differences in affect intensity can be found in Larsen (2009).
Interaction of Content and Style in Emotional Life
People differ from each other in terms of the relative amounts of positive and negative 
emotional content in their lives over time, as well as in terms of the stylistic intensity 
of their emotional experiences. In trying to understand emotional life as an aspect of 
personality, it appears that the hedonic balance—the ratio of pleasant to unpleasant emo￾tions in a person’s life over time—represents the content of emotional life. For example, 
Larsen (2000b) reported that the average college student had a positive hedonic balance 
on 7 out of 10 days. That is, out of every 10 days, 7 of them contained predominantly 
positive emotions, and 3 of them contained a predominance of negative emotions. 
However, there were wide individual differences, so that some people had as few as 
20 percent positive days, whereas others had as many as 95 percent positive days. This 
hedonic balance between positive and negative affect, between the good and bad days in 
a person’s life over time, represents the hedonic content of emotional life (Zelenski & 
Larsen, 2000).
Affect intensity represents the style of emotional life and refers to the magnitude 
of a person’s typical emotional reactions. Together, these two characteristics—content 
and style—provide a good deal of descriptive and explanatory power. An interesting 
aspect of these two dimensions is that hedonic balance and affect intensity are unrelated 
to each other (Larsen & Diener, 1985). This means that there are people who have fre￾quent positive affect of low intensity and others who have frequent positive affect of high 
intensity. Similarly, there are people who have frequent negative affect of low intensity 
and others who have frequent negative affect of high intensity. In other words, hedonic 
balance interacts with affect intensity to produce specific types of emotional lives that 
may characterize different personalities. The effects of this interaction of hedonic bal￾ance and affect intensity in creating emotional life are illustrated in Figure 13.8. 
In Figure 13.8, you can see that individuals high and low on the affect intensity 
dimension typically experience the content of their emotional lives in very different ways. 
A person low in affect intensity has an emotional life that is characterized by its endur￾ingness, evenness, and lack of fluctuation. If such a person also happens to be a happy 
person (more positive than negative emotional content in life), then he or she experi￾ences this happiness as a tranquil sort of enduring contentment. If he or she happens to 
Final PDF to printer434
lar31869_ch13_400-435.indd 434 10/17/22 09:31 AM
PART FOUR The Cognitive/Experiential Domain
be an unhappy person (less positive than negative emotional content in life), then his or 
her emotional life consists of a chronic and somewhat annoying or irritating level of neg￾ative affect over time. On the other hand, a person high on the affect intensity dimension 
has an emotional life characterized by abruptness, changeableness, and volatility. If this 
kind of person also happens to be a happy person, then he or she experiences this happi￾ness as enlivened and animated spikes of enthusiasm and exhilaration. If this high affect 
intensity person is, instead, an unhappy person, then he or she experiences troughs of 
a variety of strong negative emotions, such as anxiety, guilt, depression, and loneliness.
Figure 13.8
Quality of emotional life as a function of content (hedonic balance) and style (affect intensity).
Emotional life experienced
as contentment, easygoing
composure, serenity, and
tranquil calmness
Emotional life experienced
as exuberance, animated
joyfulness, and zestful
enthusiasm
Emotional life experienced
as chronic melancholia, mild
but persistent unhappiness,
dejection, and discontentment
Emotional life experienced
as acute and agitated
negative aect, distress,
aggravation, depression, and
episodes of strong anxiety
Low aect
intensity
High aect
intensity
Frequent
positive
aect
Frequent
negative
aect
SUMMARY AND EVALUATION
Emotions can be thought of either as states or as traits, and both of these are patterns 
of experience, physiological changes, and changes in behavior, or action tendencies. 
Emotional states are short-lived and are typically caused by an event in the environ￾ment. As traits, however, emotions are consistent and stable patterns of experience in 
a person’s life, where these patterns are due mostly to the person’s personality. In this 
chapter, we looked at emotions as traits. For example, people differ from each other in 
how often they are angry, happy, or depressed. Such differences can be useful in describ￾ing aspects of personality.
Emotional content is the type of emotional experience that a person is likely to 
have. If we know, for example, the typical content of a person’s emotional life, then we 
know the kinds of emotions he or she is likely to experience over time.
Emotional content can be broadly divided into the pleasant and the unpleasant 
emotions. In the pleasant emotion category, are happiness and the associated judgment 
of life satisfaction. On most people’s lists of primary emotions, there is only one major 
pleasant emotion, whereas there are many varieties of unpleasant emotions. From a trait 
perspective, under pleasant emotions, we discussed dispositional happiness. Some peo￾ple are happier than others, and psychologists are developing theories and gathering data 
Final PDF to printer435
lar31869_ch13_400-435.indd 435 10/17/22 09:31 AM
CHAPTER THIRTEEN Emotion and Personality 
to understand why people differ on happiness and how people might increase their level 
of trait happiness.
In terms of dispositional negative emotions, we discussed three emotion traits: 
anxiety, depression, and anger. Trait anxiety has many names in the personality litera￾ture, including neuroticism and negative affectivity. This trait appears to have distinct 
cognitive components and is related to ongoing health, especially self-reported health. 
Depression is another emotional trait that is also defined as a syndrome of associated 
experiences and behaviors, and we examined several cognitive theories of depression, as 
well as a neurotransmitter theory of depression. Anger proneness and aggression were 
also discussed as trait affects, and we examined brain abnormalities associated with this 
disposition. Anxiety, depression, and anger are currently topics of intense interest for 
neuroscientists, and data are accumulating on the brain centers involved in the experi￾ence, as well as the regulation, of each of these emotions.
Emotional style is the typical way in which a person experiences emotions. We 
focused on the stylistic component of affect intensity, or the typical magnitude with 
which people experience emotions. Persons who score high on the affect intensity 
dimension have larger emotional reactions to the events in their lives, are reactive to 
both pleasant and unpleasant events, and are more variable in their day-to-day moods. 
Content and style interact within persons to produce distinct varieties of emotional lives.
emotions 402
action tendencies 402
functional analysis 402
emotional states 403
emotional traits 403
categorical approach 403
dimensional approach 404
content 406
style 406
happiness 407
KEY TERMS
cognitive schema 425
cognitive triad 425
self-fulfilling prophecy 426
neurotransmitter theory of 
depression 427
hostility 427
affect intensity 430
mood variability 433
positive illusions 408
reciprocal causality 409
Easterlin paradox 413
mood induction 416
neuroticism 419
limbic system 420
anterior cingulate 421
prefrontal cortex 421
depression 424
diathesis-stress model 404
Final PDF to printerlar31869_ch14_436-465.indd 436 10/17/22 09:38 AM
436
14
Approaches to the Self
Descriptive Component of the Self: Self-Concept
Development of the Self-Concept
Self-Schemata: Possible Selves, Ought Selves, and Undesired Selves
Evaluative Component of the Self: Self-Esteem
Evaluation of Oneself
Research on Self-Esteem
Social Component of the Self: Social Identity
The Nature of Identity
Identity Development
Identity Crises
SUMMARY AND EVALUATION
KEY TERMS
Lightspring/Shutterstock
Final PDF to printerlar31869_ch14_436-465.indd 437 10/17/22 09:38 AM
T H E C O G N I T I V E / E X P E R I E N T I A L 
DOMAIN
“K now thyself!” was the advice given by the Greek Oracle at 
Delphi. Do you know yourself? Who are you? How would you answer this question? 
Would you define yourself first as a student, as a son or daughter, or as someone’s 
spouse or boy- or girlfriend? Or would you define yourself by listing your various 
characteristics: “I am smart, optimistic, and confident”? Or would you instead give 
a physical description: “I am a male, 6 feet 6 inches tall, about 200 pounds, with red 
hair and a ruddy complexion”? No matter how you respond to this question, your 
answer is an important part of your self-concept, and your understanding of yourself. 
Moreover, some people are satisfied with who they are, whereas others are dissat￾isfied with their self-concept. How you feel about who you are is your self-esteem.
On top of this, you have a social identity as you present yourself to others. Sometimes 
social identity does not match our self-concept, and the selves we present to others 
are not the selves we know ourselves to be, leading some of us to feel false or phony 
in our relationships.
In this chapter, we explore how psychologists have approached the notion of the 
self. We do this by considering the three main components of the self: self-concept, 
self-esteem, and social identity.
Why might we want to learn about the self? To most people, their sense of self 
is their anchor, their frame of reference for interpreting everything around them. For 
example, when you look at a group photo on a friend’s Facebook page, whom in the 
group do you look at first? If you are like most people, you will say that you look at 
yourself first. And when looking at the photo of yourself, you immediately engage in
There are many aspects to 
the self: the way we see and 
define ourselves, or our self￾concept; the evaluation we 
make of that self-concept, 
which is called self-esteem; 
and our social identities, 
which are the outward 
reflections we show other 
people.
B2M Productions/Getty Images
14
Final PDF to printer438
lar31869_ch14_436-465.indd 438 10/17/22 09:38 AM
PART FOUR The Cognitive/Experiential Domain
an evaluation. You might think the picture is not a good representation, that it does not 
show you in the best light. Maybe you think that you have a nicer smile than that and 
that you are, in fact, a happier person than this picture portrays. Or you might think that 
you have put on a few pounds during the COVID pandemic, that you are heavier than 
your friends in the photo. Maybe you dislike the fact that you have gotten heavier, and a 
small blow to your self-esteem occurs when you look at the photo. Or maybe you wonder 
how certain other people would view this photo of you. Would your parents like to see 
you this way? A potential employer?
Our sense of self is changing all the time. In infancy, we first distinguished ourselves 
from the world around us and began the lifelong process of constructing, evaluating, and 
presenting to others our sense of who we are. During this process, we constantly undergo 
challenges and changes to our self-concept. For example, in high school, a young man 
might try out for the basketball team and do poorly. His sense of himself as an athlete is 
challenged by this experience of failure. He will have to search for other ways of defin￾ing himself. Maybe he will dye his hair purple and start wearing a trench coat to school, 
beginning to define himself in terms of an alternative teen lifestyle. High school and 
college are years in which many people struggle with defining their self-concept, and it 
is a time when people are especially sensitive to events that challenge their sense of self.
Once people have a fairly stable sense of themselves, they begin to use that to evalu￾ate events and objects in the world. For example, when something happens to a person, 
such as a young woman’s breakup with a boyfriend, she evaluates that event from the 
perspective of her self-concept and whether the event is good or bad for who she thinks 
she is. If having this boyfriend was an important part of her self-concept (“I’m nothing 
without him.”) (Aron et al., 2004), then she evaluates the breakup as devastating. On the 
other hand, if the young woman has a sense of herself that is rooted in other areas of her 
life (e.g., academics, friendships, sports) that are mostly independent of her relationship 
with the young man, then the breakup is less devastating.
Our sense of who we are leads us to evaluate events in the world in certain ways. 
Only events that are important to our sense of self will have any strong impact either 
way, as very good or very bad. For example, if doing well in school is not part of your 
self-concept (maybe you are in college for other reasons), then doing poorly on an aca￾demic assignment will not affect you much.
People do not always like or value what they see when they turn inward and evaluate 
(like–dislike) their self-concept. Liking one’s self-concept is high self-esteem. For example, 
two people may both tend to save money rather than spend it, to not leave tips at restau￾rants, and to always buy the cheapest things. One of these persons views herself as frugal 
and conservative, and she evaluates this self-as-thrifty to be a positive characteristic. She has 
positive self-esteem, at least as far as these attributes go. The second person may see himself 
as stingy, ungenerous, and without compassion. He views these characteristics as negative. 
Consequently, he has low self-esteem, at least as far as these attributes go. Both have the 
same self-concept, of being thrifty and hoarding their money, but differ in how they evalu￾ate those characteristics and hence in their self-esteem.
Finally, social identity is the self that is shown to other people. This is the relatively 
enduring part of ourselves that we use to create an impression, to let other people know 
who we are and what can be expected from us. For instance, your driver’s license, which 
is often used for social identification purposes, contains information about your social 
identity: your family name; your first name; your gender and racial identity; your date 
of birth; your address; your physical description, such as height, weight, and eye color. 
These characteristics differentiate you from other people and form some of the more vis￾ible and socially available aspects of your social identity. Other, less available aspects of 
Final PDF to printer439
lar31869_ch14_436-465.indd 439 10/17/22 09:38 AM
CHAPTER FOURTEEN Approaches to the Self 
your social identity include how you are perceived by others, your social reputation, and 
the impression that others have of your personality. Maybe you are the kind of person 
who wants to be taken seriously, so it is important for you to have a very businesslike 
social identity. Maybe you are the kind of person who wants to be liked by most people, 
so you strive to have a social identity as a friendly and agreeable person.
The three components of the self—self-concept, self-esteem, and social identity—are 
all vitally important in our day-to-day lives. Personality psychologists have studied these 
aspects of the self and have generated a good deal of knowledge about them. We begin 
this chapter with a focus on the descriptive component of the self—the self-concept.
Descriptive Component of the Self: Self-Concept
Knowledge of the self does not happen all at once. It develops over years, starting in 
infancy, accelerating in adolescence, and reaching completion in old age. The self-concept 
is the basis for self-understanding, and it forms the answer to the question “Who am I?”
Development of the Self-Concept
The first glimmer of a self-concept occurs in infancy, when the child learns that some 
things are always there (e.g., its body) and some things are there only sometimes (e.g., 
the mother’s breast). The child makes a distinction between its own body and every￾thing else: It discovers that boundaries exist between what is “me” and what is “not me.” 
Gradually, the infant comes to realize that it is distinct from the rest of the world. This 
distinction forms the rudimentary sense of self, and awareness of one’s body.
Have you ever seen a dog bark at its own reflection in a mirror? The dog barks 
because it does not recognize that the image is a reflection of itself. Dogs soon get bored 
with mirrors and ignore their reflections. Humans, some primates, and at least one ele￾phant (see Application) do recognize that the mirror is a self-reflection. Psychologists 
have devised a clever technique for studying whether a human or animal recognizes its 
own reflection. It is called the “dot and mirror” test. They place a small mark on the face 
that cannot be seen without a mirror, such as a dot on the forehead. Then, when faced 
with the mirror, the psychologists look to see if the human or animal uses the reflection to 
touch the mark on its own face. Chimpanzees and orangutans do exhibit self-recognition 
with the dot and mirror test and will find the mark after about two to three days with the 
mirror (Gallup, 1977a). Studies of lower primates, such as the macaque, do not find that 
they exhibit self-recognition with mirrors, even after 2,400 hours of exposure to the mir￾ror (Gallup, 1977b). Animals that have passed the dot and mirror test of self-recognition 
include all of the great apes (bonobos, chimpanzees, gorillas, orangutans, and humans), 
and at least one elephant. Researchers using a modified version of the dot and mirror 
test argue that bottlenose dolphins, orcas, and one species of magpie demonstrate self￾recognition (Prior, Schwarz, & Güntürkün, 2008).
In normal children, self-recognition with the dot and mirror test occurs on average 
at the age of 18 months (Lewis & Ramsay, 2004). There is, however, some variability 
in the age of onset of self-recognition, with 15 months being the earliest documented 
case, and age 24 months being the point at which all or almost all children demon￾strate self-recognition. Interestingly, pretend play appears to require self-recognition 
(Lewis & Ramsay, 2004). A child pretending to feed a doll imaginary food or a child 
drinking an imaginary liquid from a cup must know that what he or she is doing is not 
real. Pretending behavior requires that the child distinguish “this is what I pretend to 
Final PDF to printer440
lar31869_ch14_436-465.indd 440 10/17/22 09:38 AM
PART FOUR The Cognitive/Experiential Domain
be doing” from “this is what I actually am doing.” In a study of children aged 15–21 
months, only those children who exhibited self-recognition to a mirror were capable of 
pretend play (Lewis & Ramsay, 2004). Moreover, children do not begin using personal 
pronouns (I, me, mine) until they gain self-recognition abilities in the mirror test. Self￾recognition is therefore an important cognitive developmental achievement that allows 
the child to go on to more complex manifestations of self-awareness, such as engaging in 
pretend play and representing the self in language with personal pronouns.
Application
Happy, an Asian Elephant who passed the 
dot and mirror test
Happy is a female Asian elephant at the Bronx Zoo. In 2005 scientists set up a camera overlook￾ing the elephant pen there to conduct the dot-test for self-recognition. Happy and two of her 
pen-mates—Maxine and Patty, also Asian elephants—were in the pen and participated in the testing. 
The scientists bolted a large mirror to the wall and gave the elephants time to get used to it. After 
that, they painted a large white X on the right forehead of each elephant. When they next faced the 
mirror, neither Patty nor Maxine seemed to notice. Happy, on the other hand, did. She paused to 
look at herself several times in the mirror. She then repeatedly touched the X on her right forehead 
with her trunk. Happy returned to the mirror many times. In all, she touched the mark on her fore￾head 12 times that day. This made Happy the first elephant to clearly pass this self-recognition test.
Happy was back in the news in 2022 (see The New Yorker, March 7, 2022). Lawyers for 
the Nonhuman Rights Project filed a suit on her behalf, saying that she should have the right not 
to be illegally detained by the Zoo. Known as a writ of habeas corpus—the right not to be illegally 
detained—it has only been applied to persons in the United States. The lawyers argued, in part, 
that Happy clearly has the human-like capacity for self-recognition, and therefore, she should have 
the same rights as a person, at least the right not to be detained. Basically, they were making the 
case that Happy should be considered, in the eyes of the legal system, a person. While the lawyers 
filing her case ultimately lost, the ruling judge did agree that “Happy is more than just a legal 
‘thing,’ or property.” And while the judge agreed that Happy is smart and self-aware and should be 
treated with respect and dignity, she (the judge) concluded that “Happy is not a ‘person,’ and is 
not being illegally imprisoned” by the Bronx Zoo.
Photo of Happy, an Asian elephant in the Bronx zoo, who has passed a 
test of self-recognition.
Bebeto Matthews/AP Photo
Final PDF to printer441
lar31869_ch14_436-465.indd 441 10/17/22 09:38 AM
CHAPTER FOURTEEN Approaches to the Self 
Although very young children are fascinated with their reflections, it takes a while 
for a child to be able to recognize photographs of him- or herself in a group. A child 
needs to be about 2 years old before he or she can pick his or her picture out of a crowd 
(Baumeister, 1991). Around this time, the second year of life, children begin to grasp the 
idea that other people have expectations for them. For example, this is about the time 
when children can follow rules set up by parents. Children learn that some behaviors are 
good and other behaviors are bad, and they evaluate their own behavior against these 
standards. They will smile when they do something good and frown when something 
bad occurs. They clearly are developing a sense of themselves relative to standards. This 
is the beginning of self-esteem as well as the beginnings of a conscience (sense of right 
and wrong).
Among the first aspects of the self that people learn to identify and associate with 
themselves are sex and age. This typically occurs between 2 and 3 years of age, when a 
child begins to call himself a boy or herself a girl and to refer to other children as boys 
or girls. A rudimentary knowledge of age also develops, with a child often learning to 
hold up the number of fingers that designate age. Children at this age also expand their 
self-concept to include references to a family. “I’m Sarah’s brother,” a child might say, 
implying that part of his self-concept includes being in the same family as Sarah.
From age 3 to about 12, children’s self-concepts are based mainly on developing 
talents and skills. The child thinks of him- or herself as someone who can do this or can￾not do that, such as reciting the alphabet, tying his own shoes, reading, walking to school 
by herself, telling time, or writing in cursive handwriting. At this age, the self-concept is 
defined mainly in terms of sex, age, family of origin, and what the child believes he or 
she can or cannot do.
Starting with the school years, ages 5 or 6 onward, children increasingly begin to 
compare their skills and abilities with those of others. They are now either better than 
or worse than other children. This is the beginning of social comparison, which most 
people engage into varying degrees for the rest of their lives (Baumeister, 1997). Social 
comparison is the evaluation of oneself or one’s performance in terms of a comparison 
with a reference group. “Am I faster, smarter, more popular, more attractive, and so on 
than my friends?” is the question that children repeatedly ask themselves during this 
period of development.
Also during this time, children learn that they can lie and keep secrets. This is 
based on the realization that there is a hidden side to the self, a side that includes pri￾vate attributes, such as thoughts, feelings, and desires. The realization that “Mommy 
doesn’t know everything about me” is a big step. The development of an inner, private 
self-concept is a major but often difficult development in the growth of the self-concept. 
It may start out with children developing an imaginary friend, someone only they can 
see or hear. This imaginary friend may actually be the children’s first attempt to com￾municate to their parents that they know there is a secret part, an inner part, to their 
understanding of the self. Later, children develop the full realization that only they have 
access to their own thoughts, feelings, and desires and that no one else can know this 
part of themselves unless the child chooses to tell others. Because they now know that 
some information is private, not known by others, they have the newly acquired ability 
to lie or hide information. Telling their first lie is a big step forward in the development 
of a child’s self-concept.
As children grow from childhood to adolescence, their self-concept changes from 
one based on such concrete characteristics as physical appearance, abilities, and family 
relationships to one that is based on more abstract psychological terms. We illustrate 
this below with examples drawn from Montemayor and Eisen (1977). The statements 
are from children of different ages all answering the question “Who am I?”
Final PDF to printer442
lar31869_ch14_436-465.indd 442 10/17/22 09:38 AM
PART FOUR The Cognitive/Experiential Domain
The following is from a 9-year-old boy in the 4th grade. Notice how concrete his 
description is and that he uses mostly tangible concepts such as age, sex, name, address, 
and other aspects of his physical self:
My name is Bruce. I have brown eyes and brown hair. And I have brown eyebrows. 
I am nine years old. I LOVE sports. I have seven people in my family. I have great 
eyesight and I have lots of friends. I will be 10 in September. I live at 1923 Pinecrest. 
I am a boy. I have an uncle that is almost 7 feet tall. My school is Pinecrest and my 
teacher is Mrs V. I play Hockey.
The next statement is from a girl aged 11½ in the 6th grade. Notice that she fre￾quently refers to her likes and also emphasizes more abstract personality and social 
characteristics:
My name is Alice. I am a human being. I am a girl. I am a truthful person. I am 
not pretty. I do so-so in my studies. I am a very good cellist and a very good pianist. 
I am a little bit tall for my age. I like several boys and girls. I am old-fashioned. I 
play tennis and am a very good swimmer. I try to be helpful. I am always ready to be 
friends with anybody. Mostly I am good, but I lose my temper. I am not well-liked by 
some girls. I don’t know if I’m liked by boys or not.
The final example is from a 17-year-old girl in the 12th grade. Notice how she 
emphasizes interpersonal characteristics, her typical mood states, and several ideologi￾cal and belief references in her self-description:
I am a human being. I am a girl. I am an individual. I don’t know who I am. I am a 
Pisces. I am a moody person. I am an indecisive person. I am an ambitious person. 
I am a very curious person. I am not an individual. I am a loner. I am an American 
(God help me). I am a Democrat. I am a liberal person. I am a radical. I am a 
conservative. I am a pseudoliberal. I am an atheist. I am not a classifiable person 
(i.e., I don’t want to be classified).
A final unfolding of the self-concept, during the teen years, involves perspective taking:
the ability to take the perspectives of others, or to see oneself as others do, to step out￾side of oneself and imagine how one appears to other people. This is why many teen￾agers go through a period of extreme self-consciousness during adolescence, focusing 
much of their concerns on how they appear to others. You might vividly recall this 
period of your life, the strong emotions involved in episodes of objective self-awareness, 
of seeing yourself as an object of others’ attention. Remember going to gym class in your 
funny gym uniform or that first trip to the beach in your new swimsuit? Often, objective 
self-awareness is experienced as shyness, and for some people this is a chronic problem.
Because shyness is such a common problem, especially during the adolescent 
years, we added A Closer Look on this topic. We will mention here that, because shy 
people are anxious about interacting with others, they often avoid opportunities to social￾ize. One way to avoid face-to-face interaction is to socialize online, where the interaction 
is more controllable, proceeds more slowly, and provides limited information exchange 
(e.g., no nonverbal information). Also, when with others, one way to avoid having to 
interact with them is to take out your cell phone and give the device all your attention. 
Researchers have found that young adults with social anxiety (shyness) are more likely 
Final PDF to printer443
lar31869_ch14_436-465.indd 443 10/17/22 09:38 AM
CHAPTER FOURTEEN Approaches to the Self 
to use the internet excessively (Weinstein et al., 2015). 
In fact, internet use can reach problematic proportions 
for shy individuals, such that they can appear “addicted” 
to their smartphones (Bian & Leung, 2015)—that is, they 
become preoccupied and have trouble controlling their 
phone use, experience productivity loss, feel anxiety or 
“lost” without their phone, and report FOMO (Fear of 
Missing Out). Other studies of young adults focused on 
excessive use of Facebook (to the point of interfering 
with school work) and found that social anxiety was 
correlated with problematic Facebook usage (Lee-Won, 
Herzog, & Park, 2015). Other researchers have exam￾ined excessive online gaming and again found that per￾sons high in social anxiety spent more hours gaming per 
week than persons without social anxiety (Lee & Leeson, 
2015). Several recent studies show that the strongest 
personality predictor of problematic internet use is shy￾ness or social anxiety (e.g., Carli & Durkee, 2016; Huan 
et al., 2014). While there are certainly socially beneficial 
ways to use the internet (for communication, to stay in 
touch, to gather information), we all have had the experience of being socially ignored 
by someone preoccupied with their smartphone. Shy persons are at risk for developing 
these preoccupations, presumably because it gives them a means to avoid IRL (In Real 
Life) socializing, the very behavior they should work on increasing.
In summary, the self-concept is a distinct knowledge structure made up of many 
different elements and stored in our memories much as we might store a cognitive map 
of our hometown. Part of developing a sense of self lies in being able to see yourself 
through the eyes of others and, while this perspective can be a valuable skill to have, it 
can sometimes make a person feel uncomfortable and produce shyness.
Self-Schemata: Possible Selves, Ought Selves, and Undesired Selves
So far, we have considered some of the main steps in the development of a self-concept. 
Once formed, the self-concept provides a person with a sense of continuity and a frame￾work for understanding the past and present and for guiding future behavior.
The self-concept is a network of information in our memories (similar to the net￾work model of memory introduced in Chapter 10), 
which organizes and provides coherence to the ways 
in which we experience the self (Markus, 1983). 
The self-concept also guides how each person pro￾cesses information about him- or herself (Markus 
& Nurius, 1986). For example, people more easily 
process information that is consistent with their self￾concepts; if you see yourself as highly masculine, 
then you will quickly agree with statements such as 
the following: “I am assertive” and “I am strong.”
The term self-schema (schema is singular; sche￾mata is plural) refers to the specific knowledge struc￾ture, or cognitive representation, of the self-concept. 
For example, a person might have a schema about 
In the development of the self, children learn to compare themselves 
to others. “I’m faster than you” is a phrase commonly heard whenever 
a group of young children gather. This is the beginning of social 
comparison, whereby people define and evaluate themselves in 
comparison to others.
Sergey Novikov/Shutterstock
One way some people avoid social interaction is by directing all their attention 
to their smartphone. Studies show that shyness is often associated with 
smartphone “addiction.”
DisobeyArt/Shutterstock
Final PDF to printer444
lar31869_ch14_436-465.indd 444 10/17/22 09:38 AM
PART FOUR The Cognitive/Experiential Domain
Garrison Keillor, the popular host of the 
Prairie Home Companion radio show, suf￾fers from acute shyness and has openly 
discussed this in articles and in interviews. 
He says that when shy persons have to be 
in an interaction, they just want to become 
invisible. They dislike conversation because 
they lack social confidence, are made terri￾bly anxious by the interaction, and are not 
good at promoting themselves. Because of 
these feelings, the shy person withdraws 
from social interaction.
Many accomplished people are shy, 
including singers Barbra Streisand and Lady 
GaGa and writer J.K. Rowling. Abraham 
Lincoln was said to be painfully shy. What 
shy persons have in common is that they 
desire friendships and social interactions 
but are held back by their insecurities 
and fears. Consequently, they avoid the 
speaking to unfamiliar people, and not 
approaching others, they deny themselves 
the opportunities to learn and practice the 
very social skills they need to overcome 
their shyness (see Table 14.1).
Psychologist Jerome Kagan (1929–2021) 
was a psychologist at Harvard who stud￾ied shyness for several decades (Kagan, 
1981, 1994, 1999). In his studies of 
infants, he found that about 20 percent of 
4-month-old babies exhibit signs of shy￾ness—they flail their arms and legs and cry 
when presented with an unfamiliar object 
or person. Following up these infants for 
several years, Kagan found that most of 
them exhibited signs of shyness as young 
children. For example, in play situations, 
they often did not move very far from their 
parents, and some even clung to their par￾ents, not leaving their sides at all when 
spotlight; avoid face-to-face interaction; 
and ruminate excessively after conversa￾tions, worrying about whether they said the 
right things, made a good impression, or 
sounded stupid. The inner experience of a 
shy person in an interaction is quite differ￾ent from that of someone else in the same 
interaction who is not shy.
Shy people are not necessarily intro￾verts (Cheek, 1989). Introverts prefer to 
be alone; they enjoy the peace and quiet 
of solitude. Shy people, on the other hand, 
want to have contact with others, to be 
socially involved, and to have friends and 
be part of the group. But shy persons’ 
self-doubt and self-consciousness prompt 
them to pass up opportunities to socialize 
(Henderson & Zimbardo, 2001a, 2001b; 
see www.shyness.com). They handicap 
themselves; by not entering groups, not 
A Closer Look Shyness: When Objective Self-Awareness 
Becomes Chronic
Table 14.1 Example Items from the Henderson/Zimbardo Shyness Questionnaire
INSTRUCTIONS: Rate each item using a number from the following scale to indicate how characteristic that statement is of you.
Not at all 
Characteristic 
1
Somewhat 
Characteristic 
2
Often 
Characteristic 
3
Very 
Characteristic 
4
Extremely 
Characteristic 
5
 1. I am afraid of looking foolish in social situations.
 2. I often feel insecure in social situations.
 3. Other people appear to have more fun in social situations than I do.
 4. If someone rejects me I assume that I have done something wrong.
 5. It is hard for me to approach people who are having a conversation.
 6. I feel lonely a good deal of the time.
 7. I tend to be more critical of other people than I appear to be.
 8. It is hard for me to say “no” to unreasonable requests.
 9. I do more than my share on projects because I can’t say no.
10. I find it easy to ask for what I want from other people.
Source: Adapted from “The Henderson Zimbardo Shyness Questionnaire: A New Scale to Measure Chronic Shyness,” by L. Henderson and P. Zimbardo, 2000, The Shyness 
Institute, 644 Cragmont Ave., Berkeley, CA 94708. Copyright 2000 by The Shyness Institute. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission of The Shyness Institute.
Final PDF to printer445
lar31869_ch14_436-465.indd 445 10/17/22 09:38 AM
CHAPTER FOURTEEN Approaches to the Self 
there were unfamiliar children around. 
Following them for a few more years, 
Kagan found that roughly half of the shy 
children were transformed and were no 
longer shy in later childhood. In looking 
at parenting practices, Kagan found that 
the parents of these formerly shy children 
had encouraged their children to socialize. 
That is, these parents often pushed their 
children to join groups and to talk to other 
children, and they had given their chil￾dren lots of praise for socializing. Kagan 
referred to this as “tough love,” in that 
the parents had to push the reluctant and 
complaining children to play with peers. 
However, a few years later, the result 
was children who were much less shy. 
The parents of the children who remained 
shy often had given in to the children’s 
reluctance to join groups. That is, when 
the children complained or resisted join￾ing a group, the parents typically gave in, 
not pushing the children to socialize. As 
a result, such children never learned that 
they could overcome their self-doubt and 
lack of social confidence (Kagan, 1999).
Other research has shown that par￾ents who are too controlling and protective 
toward their children often have children 
who are shy and anxious (Wood et al., 
2003). Being over-protective is captured by 
the phrase “helicopter” parenting or “battle￾ship” parenting (parents who pro-actively 
remove all obstacles for their children). A 
recent study of “helicopter” parents has 
shown that, while such parents think pro￾tecting their children from the challenges 
of childhood is good, ultimately children of 
such parents often develop social difficulties 
in adolescence, such as shyness and social 
anxiety (Srivastav & Mathur, 2020).
Psychologists studying shyness some￾times prefer the term social anxiety, which is 
defined as discomfort related to social inter￾actions, or even to the anticipation of social 
interactions (Chavira, Stein, & Malcarne, 
2002). Adults with social anxiety report that 
they are nervous or that they feel awkward 
the very opportunities they need to over￾come their shyness.
What makes shy people so socially 
anxious? Kagan held that some of it is due 
to genetics. After all, shyness shows up in 
some infants very early in life. However, 
some of this social anxiety must also be 
learned. What most researchers believe is 
that shy persons have learned to put too 
much stock in other people’s judgments of 
them. This is called evaluation apprehen￾sion, the idea that shy persons are appre￾hensive about being evaluated by others. 
As a consequence, just the thought of going 
out on stage or leading a group meeting fills 
them with dread. And so they avoid such 
situations. When forced into interaction, 
they try to limit it or cut it short. They avoid 
eye contact, which indicates to others that 
they prefer to end the conversation. When 
forced into conversation, they try to keep it 
impersonal and nonthreatening. They do a 
lot of agreeing, nodding their heads, without 
getting too involved in the conversation. In 
sum, researchers believe that at the root of 
shyness is a fear of being evaluated nega￾tively by others (Leary & Kowalski, 1995), 
which translates into a lack of confidence in 
social interactions and feeling that they lack 
the social skills necessary to navigate social 
situations (Cheek & Melchior, 1990).
Recent surveys estimate that 7–13 
percent of persons in Western countries will 
experience social phobia, or extreme shy￾ness, during their lifetime (Furmark, 2002). 
This suggests that shyness is not uncom￾mon in the general population. Schmidt and 
Fox (2002) provide a review of the devel￾opmental course of shyness, as well as the 
varieties of shyness. For example, some 
shy persons are high in sociability and are 
distinguished by being especially anxious 
and fearful. Another type is shy persons 
who are low in sociability, who simply 
avoid others because of their excessive 
self-consciousness (Cheek & Krasnoperova, 
1999). Empirically, however, it is difficult 
to distinguish owing to the overlap in the 
when talking to others, especially people 
with whom they are unfamiliar (Cheek & 
Buss, 1981). Socially anxious persons appear 
to be overly concerned about what others 
will think. After a conversation, they often 
conclude that they said something wrong, 
sounded foolish, or looked stupid (Ritts & 
Patterson, 1996). Sometimes the social 
anxiety is so strong that it shows in various 
outward signs, such as a trembling voice or 
jittery movements. Other people interacting 
with a socially anxious person often interpret 
their behavior as unfriendliness, rather than 
as shyness (Cheek & Buss, 1981). Sometimes 
shy persons are so overcome with anxiety 
that it hinders their ability to carry on a con￾versation. They may spend time staring at 
their shoes, rather than talking, because they 
cannot think of a thing to say.
In an interesting study, researchers 
asked participants to work on a unique 
task, one that could not be completed 
without having to ask another person for 
help (DePaulo et al., 1989). The research￾ers deliberately created this task so they 
could investigate whether shy persons 
would reach out to others when they really 
needed to. They found that the socially 
anxious participants were reluctant to ask 
for help from another person, presumably 
because the shy person is anxious that the 
other may rebuff a request for help.
Shy people also tend to interpret 
social interactions negatively; they are 
more likely to interpret a comment as a 
criticism than as a helpful suggestion. For 
example, DePaulo et al. (1987) had stu￾dents work in groups, then write reports 
on each other’s performance. They were 
then individually interviewed about what 
they thought the others had said about 
them. It turns out that the shy participants 
thought that the others liked them less 
and that the others thought they were less 
competent. It seems that shy people also 
expect that others will dislike them. These 
expectations may lead them to avoid inter￾actions or cut conversations short, losing 
(Continued)
Final PDF to printer446
lar31869_ch14_436-465.indd 446 10/17/22 09:38 AM
PART FOUR The Cognitive/Experiential Domain
characteristics. Self-reports of shyness do 
correlate strongly with peer reports of shy￾ness, suggesting that this characteristic is 
visible to others (Zarevski et al., 2002).
Psychologists studying the brain have 
suggested that shy persons have a more 
reactive amygdala, which is a section of the 
limbic or emotional system of the brain that is 
most responsible for fear. A study by Kagan 
and colleagues followed up a group of adults 
who, at age 2 years, had been assessed for 
shyness. They found that the adults who 
were shy as children showed a greater fMRI 
response within the amygdala to novel ver￾sus familiar faces, compared to the nonshy 
adults (Schwartz et al., 2003). In another 
interesting study, researchers assessed corti￾sol (the stress hormone described in Chapter 
7) on the first and fifth days of school among 
35 first-graders (Bruce, Davis, & Gunnar, 
2002). They found that most children showed 
an elevated cortisol response on the first day 
of school. However, the shy children showed 
an elevated and extended cortisol response 
even on the fifth day of school.
Whatever its causes, shyness can have 
problematic social implications for the shy 
person. Several studies have examined how 
shy persons use the internet to avoid face-to￾face social interaction (e.g., Caplan, 2002). 
One study found that shy persons were more 
likely to use the internet for recreation rather 
than interact with others IRL (In Real Life) 
(Scealy, Phillips, & Stevenson, 2002).
meeting, try to ask a question during the 
actual meeting by speaking up. The point 
is to set small goals and experience some 
small successes along the way.
4. Give unto others. Shy people, because 
they are nervous, are focused on them￾selves during conversations. Shift your 
attention to others; look at them when 
they talk, listen carefully to what they 
say, try to find something interesting 
and connect to that, ask questions, and 
give a compliment or a word of support. 
Paying attention outwardly toward other 
people will also get your attention off 
yourself and your own nervousness.
5. Exude warmth. The nervousness that shy 
people feel is often interpreted by others 
as unfriendliness or tension. Try to cre￾ate a more positive nonverbal impres￾sion by smiling, making eye contact, and 
staying relaxed.
6. Anticipate failure. Overcoming shyness 
is a learning process. It will take practice, 
and small failures are inevitable. If you 
say something wrong in a conversation, 
chalk it up to the learning process, and 
get on with more practice.
7.Join the crowd. Nobody is perfect all the 
time. There are lots of people who are not 
perfect conversationalists. Also, you might 
think that making small talk is a big deal. 
However, when you really listen to other 
people’s small talk, you’ll realize that it 
really is just that—small talk, nothing more.
Stocker (1997) reviewed much of 
what is known about helping shy persons 
overcome their difficulties. She offers seven 
concrete steps a shy person can take:
1. Show up. Shy persons want to avoid 
the situations that make them anxious. 
However, if you really want to overcome 
shyness, you’ve got to enter those uncom￾fortable situations: Go to a party or strike 
up a conversation with a stranger. Often, 
shy persons overestimate how uncomfort￾able they will feel; however, once they 
engage in an interaction, they find that it 
is not as bad as they had expected.
2. Give yourself credit. Stop being your 
own worst critic. In scorning or deriding 
their own social performance after the 
fact, shy persons are often very hard on 
themselves. If they make one little social 
faux pas, they often blow that misstep 
out of proportion, ignoring the fact that 
99 percent of the interaction went well.
3. Take baby steps. It is useful to take big 
goals and break them into smaller steps. 
Instead of wanting to “become an engag￾ing conversationalist,” maybe try to set 
some smaller goals, such as going to a 
meeting of a group you’ve been wanting 
to join. The first time, you don’t have to 
talk; just go and listen. The second time, 
maybe your goal will be to talk, not dur￾ing the meeting but maybe to someone 
after the meeting is over. At the third 
what it means to be masculine, and this schema might include such attributes as asser￾tiveness, strength, and independence. As such, self-schemata are cognitive networks of 
associations that are built on past experiences and that guide the processing of informa￾tion about the self.
Self-schemata usually refer to past and current aspects of the self. However, there 
are also schemata for future selves, which people are able to imagine. The term possible 
selves describe the many ideas people have about who they might become, who they 
hope to become, or who they fear they will become (Markus & Nurius, 1987). People 
often have specific desires, anxieties, fantasies, fears, hopes, and expectations about their 
own future selves (Oyserman, Destin, & Novin, 2015). Although possible selves are not 
based on actual past experiences, they nevertheless are part of the overall self-concept. 
A Closer Look (Continued )
Final PDF to printer447
lar31869_ch14_436-465.indd 447 10/17/22 09:38 AM
CHAPTER FOURTEEN Approaches to the Self 
For example, are you the kind of person who could envision yourself becoming a scien￾tist—that is, is this a possible self for you? Buday, Stake, and Petersen (2012) showed that 
possessing such a possible self as a scientist in high school predicted whether the par￾ticipants were actually in a science career 10 years later. Other researchers have shown 
that future career selves in college predicted proactive career behaviors (e.g., visiting the 
job center on campus, signing up early for career fairs, and so forth; Strauss, Griffin, & 
Parker, 2012). One’s future work self can be a strong motivating force for engaging in 
behaviors that prepare one for specific careers. Even older persons who are retired can 
have possible selves, such as future images of themselves as healthier, slimmer, and with 
several new and satisfying hobbies (Bolkan, Hooker, & Coehlo, 2015).
Because they play a role in defining the self-concept, possible selves may influ￾ence a person’s behavior in certain ways. For example, a high-school student may have 
no idea what it would be like to be an astronaut. Nevertheless, because this is one of 
her possible selves, she has many thoughts and feelings about this image of herself as 
an astronaut. Information about astronauts, the space agency, aviation science, and so 
forth has personal significance for her, and she seeks it out every chance she gets. Thus, 
this possible self will influence her here and now in terms of her current decisions (e.g., 
to take an extra math course). Possible selves are like bridges between our present and 
our future; they are our working models of ourselves in the future (Oyserman & Markus, 
1990). Such a working model might lead to problem behaviors, however, as when the 
possible self is a poor role model. In studying a group of juvenile delinquents, Oyserman 
and Saltz (1993) found that a high proportion had a possible self of criminal, and rela￾tively few had such conventional possible selves as having a job or getting along well in 
school. A study of 8th graders found that those who could imagine themselves as prob￾lem drinkers (i.e., had a “problem drinker” possible self) were more likely, as 9th grad￾ers, to have experienced problematic alcohol use (Lee et al., 2015).
Possible selves allow us to stay on schedule, and to work toward self-improvement. 
Behaviors that stem from possible selves (desired or undesired) can activate a host of 
intense feelings and emotions. For example, to a person who does not have a possible 
self with coronary artery disease, missing a few weeks of an exercise program will not be 
as distressing as it is to a person who has such a possible self.
Psychologist Tory Higgins (1987, 1997, 1999) has elaborated on the possible 
selves notion by distinguishing the ideal self, which is what persons themselves want to 
be, from the ought self, which is persons’ understanding of what others want them to be. 
The ought self is built on what people take as their responsibilities and commitments to 
others—what they ought to do. It is related to Carl Rogers’ notion of conditions of worth, 
which we covered in Chapter 11. The ideal self is built on one’s own desires and goals—
what one wants to become. Higgins refers to the ought and the ideal selves as self-guides, 
standards that one uses to organize information and motivate appropriate behavior. The 
self-guides get their motivating properties from emotions. Higgins argues that these two 
types of possible selves are at the root of different emotions. If one’s real self does not 
fit one’s ideal self, then one will feel sad, despondent, and disappointed. If, on the other 
hand, one’s real self does not fit one’s ought self, then one will feel guilty, distressed, or 
embarrassed.
To summarize, self-schemata are cognitive networks of association built around 
elements of the self-concept. These include past, present, and future aspects of the self. 
The self-concept is the sum of people’s self-schemata, what they know and believe and 
associate with themselves. One part of the self-concept concerns possible selves, future 
selves that people strive to attain or avoid. Who have I been, what am I like now, and what 
do I want to be like in the future—the answers to these questions define the self-concept.
Final PDF to printer448
lar31869_ch14_436-465.indd 448 10/17/22 09:38 AM
PART FOUR The Cognitive/Experiential Domain
Evaluative Component of the Self: Self-Esteem
The first glimmer of self-esteem occurs when children identify standards or expecta￾tions for behavior and live up to them. For example, parents have expectations for toilet 
training. When children finally master these expectations, it is a source of pride and 
self-esteem, at least until more demanding expectations and responsibilities are encoun￾tered. In later childhood, the next shift in the source of self-esteem occurs when children 
begin to engage in social comparison; children compare themselves to others, and if they 
are doing better than others, then they feel good about themselves. And later, people 
develop a set of internal standards, part of what they hold to be important to their self￾concept. Behavior or experiences inconsistent with these internal standards can lead to 
decreases in self-esteem. In all cases, self-esteem results from an evaluation of oneself 
and one’s behavior.
Evaluation of Oneself
Self-esteem is a general evaluation of self-concept elements along with a good–bad or 
like–dislike dimension: Do you generally like yourself and feel that you are a worthwhile, 
good person? Do you feel that others respect you? Do you feel that you are basically a 
decent, fair person? Do you take pride and satisfaction in what you have done, in who 
you are, and in who you would like to become? Self-esteem is the sum of your positive 
and negative evaluations of all the aspects of your self-concept.
Most of us have a mixed reaction to ourselves; we have to take the bad with the 
good, and we acknowledge that we have both strengths and weaknesses. How we feel 
about ourselves can change from day to day and even from hour to hour. When we 
do something that is not consistent with our self-concept, such as hurt someone’s feel￾ings, then we may experience a dip in self-esteem. Such fluctuations, however, occur 
around our average level of self-esteem. Most personality psychologists are interested in 
self-esteem in terms of a person’s average level. Average levels of self-esteem do fluctu￾ate across the lifespan in predictable ways. The average low point in self-esteem usu￾ally occurs in adolescence, followed by a gradual rise through midlife for most people 
(Donnellan et al., 2012; Wagner et al., 2013). Increases in self-esteem over time tend to 
accompany other positive life events, such as the development of intimate relationships, 
educational achievements, and career success (Wagner et al., 2013).
Personality researchers have begun to acknowledge that people can evaluate them￾selves positively or negatively in different areas of their lives. For example, you may feel 
pretty good about your intellectual and academic abilities, but perhaps you are shy with 
members of the opposite sex. Consequently, you may have high academic self-esteem 
but lower self-esteem when it comes to dating or feeling attractive to others. Global self￾esteem may be a composite of several individual areas of self-evaluation. Each of these 
subareas can be assessed separately, and researchers can examine self-esteem about 
various domains of the self-concept. For example, there is a scale for measuring three 
aspects of self-esteem: performance self-esteem, appearance self-esteem, and social self￾esteem (Rentzch & Schroeder-Abe, 2022).
Although there are distinct areas of life in which people can feel more or less 
confident of themselves—such as friendships, finances, academics, and appearance—self￾esteem measures of these content areas are moderately correlated. This means that peo￾ple who tend to have high self-esteem in one area also tend to have high self-esteem in the 
other areas. Sometimes researchers find it useful to examine specific areas of self-esteem, 
Final PDF to printer449
lar31869_ch14_436-465.indd 449 10/17/22 09:38 AM
CHAPTER FOURTEEN Approaches to the Self 
such as appearance self-esteem in persons at risk for eating disorders. However, the 
majority of researchers find it useful to think of self-esteem as the person’s global or 
average evaluation of their whole self-concept. Table 14.2 shows a global self-esteem 
questionnaire that is widely used by researchers in this area. This measure assesses a 
person’s overall self-esteem, and by reading and answering the items for yourself you 
will get an idea of what self-esteem means in terms of the measures used to assess this 
construct. High scores on self-esteem are obtained by answering items 1–4 as “True” and 
items 5–7 as “False.”
Research on Self-Esteem
Much of the research on self-esteem concerns how people respond to evaluation. Being 
evaluated is a very common occurrence, especially during the high-school and college 
years. Homework is evaluated, tests are given, and students receive regular reports on 
their performance. Even outside school, a lot of play also involves evaluation, such as 
occurs with competitive games. In adulthood, the games change but the evaluation con￾tinues. At most jobs, there is usually some form of evaluation done on a regular basis, 
and employees receive regular feedback on their performance. There is also competition 
and evaluation in many other areas of adult life, such as finances, marriage, and children, 
where people often compare how they are doing with their peers and neighbors (i.e., 
keeping up with the Jonses). Because self-esteem is linked to evaluation and social com￾parison, much of the research on this topic concerns how people react to criticism and 
judging themselves relative to others.
Reactions to Criticism and Failure Feedback
Many laboratory studies have been conducted on how people high and low on self￾esteem react to failure and criticism. In general, participants are taken into the labora￾tory and instructed to complete an important task. For example, they may be given an 
intelligence test and told that norms are being developed and that they should try to do 
the very best they can. Usually, this gets the participants very involved and motivates 
them to want to perform well. The researcher then “scores” the test when the subjects 
are finished, and the researcher is critical of the participants’ performance, saying that 
they did very poorly. The research question is “How are high and low self-esteem persons 
affected by this criticism and personal failure?” The research has looked mainly at how 
Table 14.2 Items in a Global Self-Esteem Questionnaire
1. True False I feel good about myself.
2. True False I feel I am a person of worth, the equal of other people.
3. True False I am able to do things as well as most other people.
4. True False On the whole, I am satisfied with myself.
5. True False I certainly feel useless at times.
6. True False At times I think I am no good at all.
7. True False I feel I do not have much to be proud of.
Source: Adapted from Marsh, 1996.
Final PDF to printer450
lar31869_ch14_436-465.indd 450 10/17/22 09:38 AM
PART FOUR The Cognitive/Experiential Domain
Recall the Closer Look from Chapter 11 on 
implicit motivation and research that com￾pares peoples’ explicit and implicit levels on 
particular motives. Implicit motivation was 
used to refer to the person’s unconscious 
desires and aspirations, their unspoken 
needs and wants. A similar situation has 
arisen in the literature on self-esteem, with 
researchers developing an implicit measure 
of self-esteem to get at a person’s uncon￾scious view of their self-worth and to contrast 
this to the explicit level he or she reports on a 
questionnaire measure of self-esteem.
Greenwald and Farnham developed an 
implicit measure of self-esteem in 2000. It 
consists of a task done on the computer and 
does not rely on self-reports of how positively 
people see themselves. Instead, the task, 
called the Self-Esteem Implicit Association 
Test (SE-IAT), measures how quickly and 
consistently people associate positive words 
to themselves compared to how quickly and 
consistently they associate negative words to 
themselves. The task is described in detail in 
Greenwald and Farnham (2000).
Before actually undertaking the task, 
the participant is asked to generate 18 
“me-type” items and 18 “not-me-type” 
items. Me-type items are things such as first 
and last name, phone number, birth month, 
birth year, and the zip code in which one 
lives. Not-me-type items are things like 
a state where one does not live, a street 
name that one does not live on, and so 
forth. The researcher also has two lists of 
words; one list contains positive words 
(e.g., smart, nice, joy, lucky) and the other 
list contains unpleasant words (e.g., stupid, 
despised, filth, poison).
When the task begins, the researcher 
presents pairs of words on the computer 
screen, with each pair containing either a 
me-type item or a not-me-type item paired 
with either a positive or a negative word. 
questionnaires, such as that presented in 
Table 14.2. One particularly interesting line 
of research examines individuals who have 
high explicit self-esteem (they say they feel 
pretty good about themselves) yet have a 
low level of implicit self-esteem (they more 
quickly associate negative than positive 
words to themselves). This discrepancy in 
how one “really” feels about him- or herself 
is correlated with narcissism (Jordan et al., 
2003). That is, on the outside, narcissists 
appear to have high self-esteem, but on 
the inside, they are insecure about their 
self-esteem. While some researchers have 
replicated these findings (e.g., Gregg & 
Sedikides, 2018), others have failed to find 
that narcissists have low implicit self-esteem 
(Mota et al., 2019). Further research is 
clearly needed to more fully understand the 
self-esteem dynamics of narcissists.
Other studies have examined dis￾crepancies where explicit self-esteem is 
low (the person says they don’t feel very 
good about themselves) yet implicit levels 
remain high (unconsciously they remain 
positive). This kind of discrepancy is asso￾ciated with emotional problems, such as 
depression and feeling worthless (Leeuwis 
et al., 2015). Not all predicted effects for 
implicit self-esteem are found, however 
(e.g., Hawkins, Lesick & Zell, 2021), lead￾ing some researchers to question how this 
construct is conceptualized and measured 
(Jusepeitis & Rothermund, 2022).
As research accumulates on implicit 
and explicit self-esteem, and the discrepan￾cies between the two, we will gain a better 
understanding of the dynamics of inner and 
outer manifestations of how people feel 
about themselves. Starting with a measure 
of some new concept, and then proceeding 
to ask questions about that new concept 
(and measure), is exactly how science pro￾gresses in personality psychology.
The participant is instructed to catego￾rize each pair, as quickly as he or she can, 
according to some rules, such as “If a me 
item is paired with a positive word, press 
the left key, and if a not-me item is paired 
with a positive word, press the right key.” 
Participants are presented with many pairs 
of words and categorize each pair as quickly 
as they can according to the rule. The time it 
takes them to perform the categorization is 
measured by the computer in milliseconds.
An implicit self-esteem score is cal￾culated by taking the average time it takes 
to categorize me-pleasant word pairs and 
subtracting the average time it takes to 
categorize me-unpleasant word pairs. 
A person with a small number is someone 
who is fast at categorizing me with pleas￾ant words and relatively slow at categoriz￾ing me with unpleasant words, and we say 
that he or she has high implicit self-esteem. 
Such persons easily associate positive attri￾butes to themselves. We say the measure is 
“implicit” because it does not rely on some 
conscious evaluation of themselves.
Studies have established that this 
implicit self-esteem measure has some 
degree of construct validity. For example, 
Izuma and colleagues (2018) conducted a 
study based on the idea that self-esteem 
is a positive attitude toward the self. 
Moreover, neuroscientists have shown that 
the reward centers in the brain are acti￾vated when a person views an image of an 
object they feel positively toward. Izuma 
and colleagues hypothesized that implicit 
self-esteem should correlate with reward 
center activation when people are view￾ing an image of their own face compared 
to viewing a stranger’s face. This is exactly 
what the researchers found.
Other researchers have compared 
people’s level of implicit to their level of 
explicit self-esteem. Explicit measures are 
A Closer Look “But How Do You Really Feel?” Measuring 
Implicit Self-Esteem
Final PDF to printer451
lar31869_ch14_436-465.indd 451 10/17/22 09:38 AM
CHAPTER FOURTEEN Approaches to the Self 
failure feedback affects subsequent performance on similar tasks, and whether failure 
affects high and low self-esteem persons differently (Brown & Dutton, 1995; Stake, Huff, 
& Zand, 1995). The findings suggest that, following failure, low self-esteem persons are 
more likely to give up earlier on subsequent tasks. For high self-esteem persons, on the 
other hand, failure feedback seems to spur them into action on subsequent tasks, and 
they are less likely to give up and more likely to work just as hard or harder on the sec￾ond task as they did on the first (Brown & Dutton, 1995).
Why is it that failure seems to incapacitate low self-esteem persons but seems to 
encourage high self-esteem persons into renewed effort? Researchers think that people 
readily accept feedback that is consistent with their self-concept, so for low self-esteem 
persons, failure feedback on the first task is consistent with their self-concept, and it 
confirms their views that they are the kind of people who fail more than succeed. And 
so, when confronted with the second task, low self-esteem persons, who have just had 
their negative self-view confirmed with failing on the first task, believe they will also fail 
on the second task, and so do not try so hard or just give up. For high self-esteem per￾sons, however, failure is not consistent with their existing self-concept, so they are more 
likely not to accept this feedback. Also, it is likely that they will discount the feedback, 
perhaps thinking that failure on the first task must have been an accident or a mistake. 
Consequently, they are motivated to try just as hard the second time, and not to give up, 
because they do not see their self-concept as the kind of people who fail. Psychologist 
Roy Baumeister and his colleagues (e.g., Baumeister, Tice, & Hutton, 1989) argue that 
high self-esteem persons are concerned with projecting a successful, prosperous, and 
thriving self-image. Low self-esteem persons, on the other hand, are most concerned with 
avoiding failure. It is a difference of emphasis: high self-esteem persons fear not succeed￾ing; low self-esteem persons fear failure.
Self-Esteem and Social Media Use: Social Comparison
One type of feedback results from social comparison, a process whereby a person com￾pares his or her standing on some characteristic to that of relevant others, and judges 
himself or herself based on how that comparison turns out. Social media gives us access 
to a vast amount of information on relevant others. It thereby creates almost unlimited 
opportunities to engage in social comparison. A person looking through the weekend 
posts from friends can hardly resist comparing what they did this weekend with what 
their friends did. And because people usually post only their best experiences, only their 
most flattering information, someone else who is making social comparisons is very 
likely to come to a negative judgment of themselves: “My weekend was pretty lame, 
compared to my friends who went to that awesome music festival.”
Facebook started in 2004. A year later, in 2005, approximately 5 percent of 
Americans reported using social media. By 2021 that percentage had exploded to 
72 percent of Americans reporting regular social media use (Pew Research Center, 
2021). Age of user is a large factor; among Americans aged 18–29 years, 84 percent 
are regular social media users, with that percentage dropping with increasing age (81 
percent for ages 30–49, 73 percent for ages 50–64, and 45 percent for ages 65 and up). 
Studies that focus on the under 30 age group typically report that social comparisons 
were a frequent outcome of social media use, and that such social comparisons result in 
declines in self-esteem, mood, and life satisfaction (Midgley et al., 2021). These research￾ers also showed that social comparisons occur much more frequently online than they 
do in face-to-face interaction. While numerous studies report that frequent use of social 
media is correlated with negative outcomes (e.g., lower self-esteem, lower well-being; 
Miljeteig & von Soest, 2022), many studies document that the toxic ingredient in social 
Final PDF to printer452
lar31869_ch14_436-465.indd 452 10/17/22 09:38 AM
PART FOUR The Cognitive/Experiential Domain
media use is upward social comparison (Wirtz et al., 2021). The list of life domains 
about which one might engage in online social comparison is almost limitless, including: 
one’s appearance, popularity, romantic relationships, athletics, social activities, grades, 
friendships, finances, career, and more. Because people post information on all these 
life domains, others viewing those posts might naturally compare themselves to relevant 
others on these domains. Before social media, we rarely had this much information on 
this many relevant others. With social media, people have a flood of social comparison 
opportunities every time they sign onto social media. Social media use, especially for 
social comparison purposes, is related to lower self-esteem, effects that are especially 
strong for women (Barthorpe et al., 2020).
Studies on self-esteem and social media use make two additional points. The 
first point is that using social media for social comparison is almost automatic, occur￾ring in a high percentage of social media use sessions (Faelens et al., 2019). Social 
media “influencers,” for example, invite users to engage in social comparison and 
allow themselves (and perhaps their self-esteem) to be influenced by the “influencer.” 
People can certainly use social media to gather information or to learn something 
and not engage in social comparison at all. However, studies suggest that social 
media seems to “pull” for social comparison, triggering an almost automatic natu￾ral tendency to compare ourselves to others. And because social media is available 
24/7/365, and is so easy to access, a person can engage in social comparison self￾judgments hundreds of times a day.
The second main research finding is that frequent social media use for social 
comparison self-judgments is associated with (Verduyn et al., 2017), or causes 
(Verduyn et al., 2015), lowered self-esteem. Studies of Facebook use (e.g., Hanna 
et al., 2017), Instagram use (Stapelton, Lutz, & Chatwin, 2017), and social network￾ing site use (e.g., LinkedIn; Wang et al., 2017) all confirm that using social media 
sites frequently for social comparison purposes does bring about a negative impact 
on self-esteem and lowers other aspects of psychological well-being. Clearly, there are 
beneficial ways to use online social media (to gather information, to learn new things, 
to check on something like an order or if a request is being acted on, and to check 
hours or read reviews of a business). However, to use social media habitually to make 
social comparison judgments of oneself is not beneficial. Resisting and overcoming 
the “pull” of social comparison when using social media will be a challenge for many 
people. [See “When Likes Are Not Enough” by Tim Bono (2018) for way to adap￾tively use social media.]
Self-Esteem and Coping with Negative Events
Other research on high self-esteem persons has examined the strategies these people 
use to get through life. Unpleasant events happen to everyone. High self-esteem persons 
appear to maintain their positive evaluation through the ups and downs of everyday 
life. Have high self-esteem persons somehow figured out how to cope more effectively 
with these challenges of life? How do high self-esteem persons overcome the disap￾pointments, shortcomings, losses, and failures that are a normal part of being human?
One strategy identified by Brown and Smart (1991) is that, following failure in 
one area of life, the high self-esteem person often will focus on other areas of life in 
which things are going well. Larsen (2000a; Larsen & Prizmic, 2004) identifies this 
strategy as one of the most effective strategies for overcoming feelings of failure. For 
example, imagine you are a research psychologist and you are evaluated in this job by 
the number of research articles you publish each year. Imagine then that one of your 
Final PDF to printer453
lar31869_ch14_436-465.indd 453 10/17/22 09:38 AM
CHAPTER FOURTEEN Approaches to the Self 
articles is rejected by a publisher. This represents a small failure in your life. If you 
were a low self-esteem person, this failure would have a large effect, confirming your 
view that you are generally a failure in most things that you do, that this is just one 
more instance of how you are unworthy and inadequate. On the other hand, if you 
were a high self-esteem person, you would likely remind yourself that you are still a 
good teacher, a good faculty member at your university, a good spouse, and a good par￾ent to your children; that you still play a good game of squash; and that your dog still 
loves you. Larsen and Prizmic (2004) have suggested that in order to cope with such 
failures, people should make a list of all the things in their lives that are going well and 
that they keep this list on their phones. Then, if a failure occurs in one area of life—for 
instance, at work—they can pull up this list and review it, just as a high self-esteem per￾son might do naturally. This can help people cope with the inevitable bumps, bruises, 
and failures of everyday life.
This idea of compartmentalizing the self is consistent with the research on self￾complexity started by psychologist Patricia Linville (1987). She holds the view that 
we have many roles and many aspects to our self-concept. However, for some of us, 
our self-concept is rather simple, being made up of just one or two categories, such 
as when a man says, “I am nothing without her,” meaning that his whole self-concept 
is wrapped up in this one relationship. Or someone else might have her or his self￾concept wrapped up by her or his career. Other people may have a more complex, or 
differentiated, self-concept. Such a person would say he or she has many parts to his 
or her self-concept: relationships, family, career, hobbies, friends, sports, and so forth. 
For people with high self-complexity, a failure in any one aspect of the self (such as 
a failure on some job-related task or a breakup in a relationship) is buffered because 
there are many other aspects of the self that are unaffected by that event. However, if 
a person is low in self-complexity, the same event might be seen as devastating because 
the person defines him- or herself mainly in terms of this one aspect. The relationship 
between having a complex self-concept and fairing better in the face of negative life 
events has been replicated by many researchers (e.g., Banas & Smyth, 2021; Martins & 
Calheiros, 2012; McConnell et al., 2009). Some researchers have proposed programs 
for expanding the self-concept with the goal of improving a person’s functioning in the 
face to threats to self-esteem, such as failures or losses (Walton, Paunesku, & Dweck, 
2012). The old phrase “Don’t put all your eggs into one basket” seems to apply to the 
self-concept; don’t view yourself only in terms of one dimension. A meta-analysis and 
review of the self-complexity research (Rafaeli-Mor & Steinberg, 2002) concluded that 
under conditions of objective and identifiable stress, higher self-complexity is associ￾ated with better well-being, including higher overall self-esteem.
Protecting Versus Enhancing the Self
Imagine you are a graduating college senior; you have majored in computer science 
and have a lot of expertise in web-based programming. You are being recruited by a 
hot internet start-up company for a job managing its information technology depart￾ment. You know there is a lot of potential for you in this company. In fact, it could 
make you a millionaire within a few years if the company were to go public. However, 
you also know that it will be a lot of hard work. You will have to put in lots of hours 
and dedicate yourself almost entirely to the company for several years. You know you 
will also need to have some luck to get the right team together, to have some successes 
on your first few projects. It is a high-stakes but also a high-risk position. Would you 
take this job?
Final PDF to printer454
lar31869_ch14_436-465.indd 454 10/17/22 09:38 AM
PART FOUR The Cognitive/Experiential Domain
Most people naturally try to enhance and 
protect their self-esteem, believing that 
it is important to psychological health. In 
America in the past decade, there has been 
a growing national concern with develop￾ing self-esteem, believing it is related to all 
manner of good things in life. For example, 
the State of California set up a task force on 
self-esteem, which ultimately produced a 
report titled “The Social Importance of Self￾Esteem.” In it the task force argued that 
“many if not most of the major problems 
plaguing society have roots in the low self￾esteem of many of the people who make 
up society” (Smelser, 2004). As a result, 
self-esteem courses found their way into 
the grade schools and high schools around 
the country, fostering a “feel-good” ver￾sion of self-esteem (e.g., feel good about 
yourself).
The Association of Psychological 
Science set up a task force charged with 
reviewing the scientific literature on self￾esteem, particularly with respect to objec￾tive behaviors and outcomes. The report 
was published in 2003 (Baumeister et al., 
2003). We have taken this report and dis￾tilled the findings into a series of myths 
about self-esteem that are not supported 
by scientific research.
Myth One: High self-esteem is cor￾related with all manner of positive charac￾teristics, such as being physically attractive, 
smart, kind, and generous. It is true that, 
for example, when both self-esteem and 
physical attractiveness are assessed using 
self-report (e.g., rate how attractive you 
are, rate your self-esteem), then strong 
correlations are typically found. However, 
when objective measures of attractiveness 
are used, such as having raters rate photo￾graphs of people in terms of attractiveness, 
then the correlation between self-reported 
results, and none of them indicate that 
improving self-esteem offers students 
much benefit. In fact, some studies show 
that artificially boosting self-esteem 
(e.g., through unconditional praise) may 
actually lower subsequent performance 
(Baumeister et al., 2003).
Myth Three: High self-esteem pro￾motes success on the job. The same basic 
issues about causality apply here: Does 
self-esteem promote success on the job, 
or vice versa? When people rate their own 
job performance, there is often a modest 
correlation with self-esteem, but when job 
performance is assessed objectively (e.g., 
supervisor ratings), the correlations drop to 
close to zero.
Myth Four: High self-esteem makes 
a person likable. Again, if we use self￾reports of popularity (e.g., How much do 
other people like you?), then these self￾ratings of likability do correlate with self￾esteem (i.e., high self-esteem persons 
regard themselves as being popular and 
believe they have many friends). However, 
these self-perceptions do not reflect real￾ity. Baumeister and colleagues (2003) 
report on a study of high-school students 
who were asked to nominate their most￾liked peers. The person in the class receiv￾ing the most votes was ranked as most 
popular, the person with the second-most 
votes was ranked as second-most popu￾lar, and so on. When self-esteem scores 
were correlated with the objective peer￾ranking of popularity, that correlation 
was approximately zero. Similar findings 
have been found in college students. In 
another study reported by Baumeister 
and colleagues (2003), college students 
self-reported their own interpersonal skills 
in several domains (e.g., initiating rela￾tionships, self-disclosure, being assertive 
self-esteem and other-rated physical 
attractiveness drops to zero. Those with 
high self-esteem may be gorgeous in their 
own eyes, but they are not necessarily gor￾geous in the eyes of others. These kinds 
of findings are also obtained with a vari￾ety of other positive characteristics. For 
example, high self-esteem people may rate 
themselves as smart or high in kindness 
or generosity as well, yet others do not 
necessarily see them as being this way. In 
a sense, persons high in self-esteem may 
have an inflated or unrealistic view of their 
positive characteristics, a view that is not 
necessarily supported by those who know 
the person well.
Myth Two: High self-esteem pro￾motes success in school. The issue here 
is really one of causality and causal direc￾tion; does self-esteem cause people to 
achieve success or does achieving suc￾cess lead to self-esteem? Many of the edu￾cational movements imply that if only we 
could raise children’s self-esteem then we 
would help them on their way to achieving 
success in life. Consequently, teachers are 
sometimes taught to praise students all 
the time, even if they are not successful. 
However, there is very little empirical sci￾ence to support the idea that self-esteem 
leads to academic success. For example, 
Baumeister and colleagues (2003) review 
a study that tested more than 23,000 high 
school students, first in the 10th grade, 
then again in the 12th grade. They found 
that self-esteem in the 10th grade only 
weakly predicted academic achievement 
in the 12th grade. Academic achieve￾ment in the 10th grade correlated higher 
with self-esteem in the 12th grade. Thus, 
these results suggest that success causes 
increases in self-esteem, not the other 
way around. Many studies show similar 
A Closer Look The Six Myths of Self-Esteem
Final PDF to printer455
lar31869_ch14_436-465.indd 455 10/17/22 09:38 AM
CHAPTER FOURTEEN Approaches to the Self 
when necessary, providing emotional sup￾port to their friends, and managing inter￾personal conflict). The researchers also 
had the subject’s roommates report what 
the subject was like on each of the above 
interpersonal skill domains. Although the 
subject’s self-esteem scores correlated 
with all of the self-reported interpersonal 
skill domains, the correlations between 
self-esteem and the roommates’ ratings 
were essentially zero for four out of five 
of the interpersonal skills. The only inter￾personal skill area that the roommates 
noticed that was associated with self￾esteem was the subject’s ability to initiate 
new social contacts and friendships. This 
does seem to be the one area in which the 
confidence associated with self-esteem 
really matters. People who think that 
they are desirable and attractive should 
be good at striking up conversations with 
strangers. Persons with low self-esteem 
may shy away from trying to make new 
friends, perhaps fearing rejection. In most 
other areas of interpersonal skills, how￾ever, self-esteem is not associated with 
having an advantage over other people.
Myth Five: Low self-esteem puts a 
person at risk for drug and alcohol abuse 
and premature sexual activity. The scien￾tific studies reviewed by Baumeister and 
colleagues (2003) do not support the 
idea that low self-esteem predisposes 
young people to more or earlier sexual 
activity. If anything, persons with high 
self-esteem are less inhibited, more will￾ing to disregard risks, and more prone 
to engage in sex. There is, however, 
evidence that unpleasant sexual experi￾ences and unwanted pregnancies appear 
to lower self-esteem. As for alcohol and 
illicit drugs, preventing these behaviors 
has been a major rationale for those call￾ing for programs to promote self-esteem. 
The data, however, do not conclusively 
show that low self-esteem causes, or even 
In several empirical studies, Baumeister, 
Bushman, and colleagues have demon￾strated that, when their self-esteem is 
threatened, persons who are narcissistic 
are more likely to retaliate or aggress 
against the source of the threat (e.g., 
Baumeister, Bushman, & Campbell, 2000; 
Bushman & Baumeister, 1998). In a study 
of men in prison, Bushman and Baumeister 
(2002) found that those prisoners who 
had a history of violent offenses were 
significantly higher on narcissism than 
those prisoners with no history of vio￾lence. All of these findings run counter 
to the notion that low self-esteem causes 
aggression and instead point to the 
counterintuitive notion that threatened 
egotism is a likely cause of aggression 
and violence.
After crushing these myths about 
self-esteem, we can ask the question: So, 
what good is self-esteem? As described 
elsewhere in this chapter, self-esteem 
improves persistence in the face of fail￾ure. Persons high in self-esteem perform 
better in groups than those with low self￾esteem. Also, having a poor self-image is 
a risk factor for developing certain eating 
disorders, especially bulimia. Low self￾esteem is also related to depression, with 
evidence suggesting that low self-esteem 
can lead to depression rather than the 
other way around (Sowislo & Orth, 2013). 
High self-esteem also is related to social 
confidence and taking the initiative in 
making new friends. It is most likely the 
case that successes in academics, in the 
interpersonal domain or in one’s career, 
lead to both happiness and self-esteem. 
Consequently, efforts to artificially boost 
children’s self-esteem (e.g., through 
unconditional praise) might fail. Rather, 
we should encourage and praise chil￾dren when they put effort into learning or 
achieving the skills necessary to succeed 
in the various areas of life.
correlates with, the abuse of illicit drugs 
or alcohol. For example, in a longitudinal 
study, no correlation was found between 
self-esteem at age 13 and drinking or 
drug abuse at age 15. A few other stud￾ies have found small correlations between 
low self-esteem and drinking, but other 
studies have found the opposite. All in all, 
the results are not conclusive to make any 
statements about self-esteem protecting 
people from the dangers of drug and alco￾hol use or risky sexual behavior.
Myth Six: Only low self-esteem 
people are aggressive. For decades 
many psychologists thought that low self￾esteem was an important factor under￾lying aggressive behavior. Under their 
tough exteriors, aggressive people were 
thought to suffer from insecurities and 
self-doubt. However, recent research has 
shown that aggressive persons often have 
quite favorable views of themselves. In 
fact, extremely high self-esteem can blend 
into narcissism, which has been associ￾ated with bouts of anger and aggression 
when the narcissist does not get his or 
her way. If self-esteem is threatened or 
disputed by someone or some event, 
especially among high self-esteem per￾sons, then they may react with hostility 
or violence. People with a highly inflated 
view of their own superiority, those with 
narcissistic tendencies, may be the most 
prone to violent reactions. After a chal￾lenge to self-esteem (e.g., getting beaten 
at a game), people might protect their 
self-concept by directing their anger out￾ward, attacking the victor. Baumeister and 
colleagues (2003) review the literature 
on bullying and conclude that bullies are 
often very self-confident and less socially 
anxious than average. The general pat￾tern in these studies and those on adults 
is that even high self-esteem, especially 
when it blends into narcissism, can be 
associated with interpersonal aggression. 
Final PDF to printer456
lar31869_ch14_436-465.indd 456 10/17/22 09:38 AM
PART FOUR The Cognitive/Experiential Domain
Some people may decline this opportunity to try for a big success because they are 
motivated to protect their self-esteem. That is, they are concerned with not failing, and, in 
situations in which failure is a possibility, they prefer not to take the risk. In other words, 
for some people, not failing is much more important than succeeding wildly. It turns out 
that people low in self-esteem are like this, in that they are motivated to protect their 
self-concept by avoiding failure much more than they are motivated to enhance it with 
success (Tice, 1991, 1993).
Low self-esteem persons sometimes put a lot of energy into evading any new nega￾tive information about themselves. One strategy is to simply expect to fail; then, when it 
happens, it is not anything new. Defensive pessimism is a strategy in which a person fac￾ing a challenge, such as an upcoming test, expects to do poorly. Defensive pessimists are 
motivated by their fear of failure, but they take this gloomy outlook because the impact 
of failure can be lessened if it is expected in advance. For example, a little boy who 
strikes out at bat is not so upset with himself if he expects to strike out in the first place. 
Psychologist Julie Norem, who has done most of the research on defensive pessimism, 
sees a positive side to this characteristic: defensive pessimists use their worry and pes￾simism in a constructive way, to motivate themselves to work on the thing they are pes￾simistic about. She gives the example of a man who must give a public speech (Norem, 
1995). Even though he has done a lot of public speaking, and all his speeches have gone 
well, he nevertheless is anxious and convinces himself that this time he is surely going to 
make a fool of himself. Thus, he decides to work extra hard on this speech; he rehearses 
and rehearses, and prepares and prepares. When it comes time to give the speech, he 
does great, as usual. By reflecting on the worst outcome, defensive pessimists work 
through ways to keep that worst case from happening. The downside to defensive pes￾simism is that the negativity of defensive pessimists annoys others (Norem, 1998, 2001). 
Defensive pessimism is strongly correlated with neuroticism (Bajcar & Babiek, 2020) 
as well as with trait anxiety, pessimism, and frequent negative affect (Ramirez-Maestre 
et al., 2020).
Sometimes people go to great lengths to set up their own failure. This is called 
self-handicapping (e.g., Tice & Baumeister, 1990). Self-handicapping is a process in 
which a person deliberately does things that increase the probability that he or she will 
fail (Tice & Bratslavsky, 2000). For example, a young woman may have a pessimistic 
attitude toward her upcoming exam, so she uses this as an excuse for not studying. 
However, not studying for the exam provides a handicap, an excuse for failure. By not 
studying, she increases the chances that she will fail, but it also gives her an excuse for 
that failure. When she fails, she can then say that she was simply unprepared, not that 
she is unintelligent or lacks the ability to do well in her classes. For low self-esteem 
persons, failing is bad, but failing without an excuse is worse. Other researchers have 
shown that self-handicapping is correlated with low conscientiousness and high neu￾roticism (Schwinger et al., 2021), with worse performance on academic tests (Putwain, 
2019), and that in the workplace it predicts lower performance ratings from supervi￾sors (Bakker & Wang, 2020).
Self-Esteem Variability
Most of the research on self-esteem concerns the average level, or what people’s evalu￾ations of themselves are like on average. But we also know from Chapter 5 that people 
fluctuate on their self-esteem from day to day and even from hour to hour. Self-esteem 
variability is an individual difference characteristic; it is the magnitude of short-term fluc￾tuations in ongoing self-esteem (Kernis, Grannemann, & Mathis, 1991). In this section, 
Final PDF to printer457
lar31869_ch14_436-465.indd 457 10/17/22 09:38 AM
CHAPTER FOURTEEN Approaches to the Self 
we stress two main points. First, researchers make a distinction between level and vari￾ability of self-esteem. These two aspects of self-esteem are unrelated to each other. 
Moreover, level and variability in self-esteem are hypothesized to be based on different 
psychological mechanisms and are often found to interact in predicting important life 
outcomes (Kernis, Grannemann, & Barclay, 1992).
A second point is that self-esteem variability is related to the extent to which one’s 
self-evaluation is changeable. That is, some people’s self-esteem is pushed and pulled by 
the events of life much more than other people’s self-esteem. Studies have shown that 
people whose self-esteem hinges on the feedback they receive from others show higher 
levels of self-esteem variability (Leitner et al., 2014). Trying to make other people happy, 
as Carl Rogers said (see Chapter 11), can interfere with one’s self-development. When 
one’s self-esteem is contingent on positive feedback from others, that self-esteem can be 
fragile and variable. Psychologist Michael Kernis, who has written extensively about this 
characteristic (Kernis, 2006; Kernis & Lakey, 2008), believes that self-esteem variability 
is high in some people because they:
• have an enhanced sensitivity to social evaluation.
• have an increased concern about their self-view.
• over-rely on social sources of evaluation.
• react negatively to social evaluation and become defensive easily.
Several studies have been conducted to examine whether self-esteem variability moder￾ates the relation between self-esteem level and other variables, such as depression (Gable 
& Nezlak, 1998). In several study (Kernis et al., 1991; Kernis, 2006), self-esteem level 
was related to depression, but this relation was much stronger for persons higher in self￾esteem variability. Based on such findings, researchers have come to view variability as 
a vulnerability (or diathesis) to depression (Roberts & Monroe, 1992). Women tend to 
have higher self-esteem variability than men, and they have higher rates of depression 
than men (Wagner, Ludtke, & Trautwein, 2015), a finding discussed in Chapter 13.
Other studies are exploring the health correlates of chronic self-esteem variability, 
and typically finding that this characteristic is associated with various health risk factors 
(Ross et al., 2013; Geukes et al., 2017). All in all, variability in self-esteem is turning out 
to be as consequential as level of self-esteem.
Social Component of the Self: Social Identity
Social identity is the self that is shown to other people. This is the part of ourselves that 
we use to create an impression, to let other people know who we are and what they can 
expect from us. Social identity is different from self-concept because identity contains 
elements that are socially observable, publicly available outward expressions of the self. 
Gender and ethnicity are aspects of social identity. This may or may not figure into a per￾son’s self-concept, but gender and ethnicity are parts of one’s social self, one’s identity 
that is available to others.
Identity has an element of continuity because many of its aspects, such as gender 
and ethnicity, are constant. People are recognized as being the same from day to day, 
week to week, and year to year. If you were asked for your “identification,” you might 
produce a passport or a driver’s license. These documents contain socially available facts 
about you, such as your height, weight, age, and eye color. They also contain your family 
name and your address. All of these pieces of information are aspects of your identity, 
Final PDF to printer458
lar31869_ch14_436-465.indd 458 10/17/22 09:38 AM
PART FOUR The Cognitive/Experiential Domain
and they provide others with a brief sketch of who you are. Identity also contains your 
reputation, and what other people know about you.
The Nature of Identity
Identity has two important features: continuity and contrast. Continuity means that 
people can count on you to be the same person tomorrow as you are today. Obviously, 
people change in various ways, but many important aspects of social identity remain 
relatively stable, such as gender, surname (though some women elect to change this 
when they marry), language, ethnicity, socioeconomic status, and reputation.
Other aspects of identity can change but do so gradually, lending some sense 
of continuity (e.g., education, occupation, and marital status). Other aspects of iden￾tity refer to behavior patterns that are public, such as being an athlete, a delinquent, 
or a “party animal,” which also contribute to a sense of continuity in one’s reputation 
(Baumeister & Muraven, 1996).
Contrast means that your social identity differentiates you from other people. An 
identity is what makes you unique in the eyes of others. The combination of characteris￾tics that make up your identity differentiates you from everyone else. For example, there 
may be other students who speak the way you do and work where you do, but you are the 
only one who likes a particular type of music and has your ethnic background and eye 
color. Some characteristics are more important to social identity for some people than 
others. We now turn to how people develop identity by selecting what they choose to 
emphasize about themselves in their social identities.
Identity Development
Although anything that provides a sense of continuity and contrast can potentially 
become part of identity, people have some latitude to choose what they want to be 
known for (or not known for). For example, a student may try out for the swimming 
team, thereby choosing the identity of an athlete. Another might break a lot of rules, 
thereby choosing the identity of a delinquent. One person might choose to “come out,” 
making their gay sexual orientation a part of their public social identity, whereas another 
gay person might choose to “stay in the closet” and not have their sexual orientation 
part of their public identity. People also differ from each other in the strength of their 
identities. Some people feel a strong sense of reputation, whereas others feel adrift in 
their social relations, not knowing who they are expected to be. In fact, most people go 
through a period, usually in high school or college, in which they experiment with vari￾ous identities. For many people, this is an uncomfortable time. They may feel socially 
insecure or sensitive while developing their social identity.
As mentioned in Chapter 10, the term identity was popularized in the 1960s 
by the psychoanalyst Erik Erikson (1968). He believed that identity resulted from 
efforts to separate oneself from one’s parents, to stop relying on one’s parents to 
make decisions about what values to hold and what goals to pursue in life. Erikson 
believed that achieving an identity took effort and work and that there was always 
a risk that an identity achieved could come undone, resulting in what he called role 
confusion. People need to continually work on achieving and maintaining their iden￾tity, Erikson taught.
Identity can be achieved in several ways, according to Erikson (1968). Many peo￾ple struggle with identities, particularly during late adolescence and early adulthood. 
Experimenting with various identities can be compared to trying on different hats to see 
Final PDF to printer459
lar31869_ch14_436-465.indd 459 10/17/22 09:38 AM
CHAPTER FOURTEEN Approaches to the Self 
Application
Identity Theft: The Case of Martin Guerre
The true story of Martin Guerre is so interesting that several film depictions have been 
made based on this story. In the real story, which took place in the late middle ages in 
France, a peasant, Martin Guerre, leaves his wife to fight in the “Hundred Years War.” 
His wife waits patiently for him, but after nine years without a word, she presumes that 
Martin is dead. Believing herself a widow, she is astonished when Martin returns suddenly 
after being away so long. Although the neighbors have a big homecoming celebration for 
Martin, several are suspicious that the man who has returned is an impostor, that he is 
not really Martin, but someone who knew Martin well enough to steal his identity. To the 
lonely wife, however, he looks like her Martin, sounds like her Martin, and has a working 
knowledge of the intimate details of their prior relationship. In addition, the man in her 
house now is nicer, gentler, more loving, and more attentive than the man who went to 
war almost a decade earlier. And so she very much wants this man to be her Martin.
Telltale signs of a forged identity emerge bit by bit and unravel the clever 
facade around Martin’s social self. The neighbors get the local magistrate involved. 
His wife tries to defend Martin as her husband, and even if he is not, she wants 
him to stay anyway. Nevertheless, the case is made that he is an impostor, that this 
Martin is not really Martin Guerre. The impostor is believed to have forced the real 
Martin to reveal details of his self-concept and social identity and then to have used 
this knowledge to create a social identity so similar to Martin’s that he fooled even 
Martin’s wife into believing he was truly her returning husband. The magistrate, 
convinced that this is not the “real” Martin, charges the impostor with adultery, 
a crime punishable by death. Martin’s wife is not similarly charged because she 
believed this was her husband.
The 1993 French film based on this story, The Return of Martin Guerre, starring 
Gerard Depardieu, won three French Academy Awards. It is a stunningly filmed study 
in the portrayal of the self and social identity. In it, we see the small details that go into 
making a social identity. It shows how people form expectations for social behavior 
from others based on identity and how small violations of those expectations can cre￾ate doubts and suspicions.
The French movie The Return of 
Martin Guerre, starring Gerard 
Depardieu, portrays a true story from 
medieval times about the theft of social 
identity. The scene here shows the 
“new” Martin, who has just returned 
from a nine-year absence, embracing 
the “old” Martin’s wife. The film won 
three French Academy Awards.
Jacky Coolen/Gamma-Rapho/Getty Images
which one fits. In trying on identities, a young man in college might one semester be an 
athlete and the next semester join the debate and chess clubs; the following semester, he 
gets a tattoo, has some body parts pierced, and starts hanging with a crowd of similarly 
pierced and tattooed persons. People actively struggle to find a social identity that fits, 
one they are comfortable with. Usually, after a period of experimentation, most people 
settle into a comfortable social identity and attain some stability.
For other people, the route to identity is not through experimentation. Instead, 
some people attain an identity by accepting and adopting ready-made social roles. 
Typically, such people adopt an identity that is practiced and provided by their parents 
or significant others. For example, they may take over the family business, buy a house 
in their hometown, and join the same church or synagogue as their parents. Such people 
Final PDF to printer460
lar31869_ch14_436-465.indd 460 10/17/22 09:38 AM
PART FOUR The Cognitive/Experiential Domain
appear stable and mature in their identities and have mature values, plans, and objectives 
even when they are teenagers. Another identity adoption example is arranged marriages, 
in which the parents decide whom their children will marry and the children accept this 
decision willingly, a practice still found in India today.
These kinds of instant identity adoptions can be risky, however, as they may be 
achieved with a certain amount of rigidity, making the person closed to new ideas or life￾styles. Such people may be inflexible and stubborn in their social roles, especially when 
they are under stress. For some, the decision to adopt a ready-made identity is fragile, 
not based on careful consideration of alternatives, and can fall apart when challenged. 
Nevertheless, for many people, this route to identity can be an acceptable and reason￾able alternative, one that can provide an identity for life.
Identity Crises
A person’s identity is challenged from time to time. The answer to the question “Who do 
others think I am?” can change. For example, when a woman gets divorced, her social 
identity changes from “I am married” to “I am divorced and newly single.” Or a man 
gives up a career as a business executive to pursue a vocation in small-scale farming, 
so his identity changes from “I am an executive” to “I am a farmer.” Other challenges 
to identity would be events that change one’s reputation, change one’s family life, or 
change one’s economic status.
Erikson (1968) coined the phrase identity crisis (see Chapter 10), meaning the 
feelings of anxiety that accompany efforts to define or redefine one’s own individuality 
and social reputation. For most people, the process of going through an identity crisis is 
an important and memorable phase of life. Sometimes it happens early, in adolescence; 
sometimes it happens later, in midlife. And some people have identity crises multiple 
times in their lives. Psychologist Roy Baumeister suggests that there are two distinct 
types of identity crises: identity deficit and identity conflict (Baumeister, 1986, 1997).
Identity Deficit
An identity deficit arises when a person has not formed an adequate identity and thus has 
trouble making major decisions: Should I go to college or not? If I go to college, what major 
should I choose? Should I join the military service? Should I get married? A person without 
a secure, established identity would have trouble making such major decisions because he 
or she has no inner foundation. When facing a tough decision, many people turn inward to 
find the answer. In doing so, many people arrive at a course of action right away, because 
they know their own values and preferences very well; they know what “a person like me” 
would do in such situations. When people who have an identity deficit turn inward, how￾ever, they find little in the way of a foundation on which to base such life choices.
Identity deficits often occur when a person discards old values or goals. For 
example, college students often reject old opinions in favor of new ideas and new val￾ues to which they are exposed in college. In fact, some college courses are designed to 
encourage students to doubt or challenge their previous assumptions about themselves 
or the world. A popular bumper sticker, often seen on college campuses, is “Question 
Authority.” But questioning authority by rejecting old beliefs and assumptions can create 
an identity deficit, which is accompanied by feelings of emptiness and uncertainty. Such 
feelings prompt people to search for new beliefs, for new values and goals. People who 
are trying to fill this identity deficit may try on new belief systems, explore new relation￾ships, and investigate new ideas and values.
Final PDF to printer461
lar31869_ch14_436-465.indd 461 10/17/22 09:38 AM
CHAPTER FOURTEEN Approaches to the Self 
People with identity deficits are particularly vulnerable to the propaganda of vari￾ous groups. They are often very curious about other belief systems, so they are vulnerable 
to influence by cults or conspiracy theories. Because of their feelings of emptiness and 
their search for new values and ideas, they tend to be very persuadable during this period. 
Current research on conspiracy theories shows that many people who believe in such ques￾tionable theories are themselves in a period of identity deficit (Robertson et al., 2022).
Identity Conflict
An identity conflict involves an incompatibility between two or more aspects of iden￾tity. This kind of crisis often occurs when a person is forced to make an important 
and difficult life decision. For example, a person who immigrates to the United States 
may have an identity conflict between wanting to assimilate into the majority culture 
and wanting to maintain his or her ethnic identity. A similar identity conflict arises 
in working persons who also want to have a family. A person with a strong com￾mitment to building a family might experience an identity conflict if he or she were 
offered a promotion at work that involved longer hours or frequent out-of-town travel. 
Whenever two or more aspects of identity clash (such as being both a high-power 
career woman and a dedicated mother of multiple children), there is a potential for 
an identity conflict crisis. Some people, however, are able to balance the demands of 
different identity components, achieving an integration that is recognized and admired 
by others.
Identity conflicts are “approach–approach” conflicts, in that the person wants to 
reach two goals that appear to be in conflict. Although these conflicts involve want￾ing two desirable identities, not much pleasure is experienced during identity conflicts. 
Identity conflicts usually involve intense feelings of guilt or remorse over perceived 
unfaithfulness to an important aspect of the person’s identity. People in an identity con￾flict may feel as if they are letting themselves and others down.
Overcoming an identity conflict is often a difficult and painful process. One course 
of action is to modify a part of one’s identity, to revise a formerly important aspect of 
the self. This may allow them to better balance the components of their identity. For 
example, a college professor may accept a lighter teaching load (and hence less pay) to 
have more time with his children; a business executive may telecommute to her job two 
days a week in order to spend more time with her children. Some people partition their 
lives in ways that prevent such conflicts from arising. For example, some people keep 
their work lives and their private lives entirely separate.
Resolution of Identity Crises
Identity crises—both deficits and conflicts—commonly occur during adolescence, 
though not all adolescents experience identity crises. Those who do find that resolu￾tion involves two steps (Baumeister, 1997). First, they decide which values are most 
important to them. Second, they transform these abstract values into desires and 
actual behaviors. For example, a person might arrive at the conclusion that what is 
really important is to have a family. The second step is to translate this value into 
actions, such as finding the right spouse, someone who also wants a family; working 
hard to maintain this relationship; preparing a career with which to support a family; 
and so forth. As the person begins working toward these goals, he or she assumes 
a secure identity and is unlikely to experience an identity crisis, at least during this 
phase of life.
Final PDF to printer462
lar31869_ch14_436-465.indd 462 10/17/22 09:38 AM
PART FOUR The Cognitive/Experiential Domain
A second phase of life in which identity crises commonly occur is during mid￾dle age. For some people, this is a period in which they experience dissatisfaction 
with their existing identities, perhaps at work or in a marriage. Whatever the reason, 
people undergoing a midlife identity crisis begin to feel that things are not work￾ing out as they wished. They may feel that their lives are inauthentic. People in the 
In the Oscar-winning movie American Beauty, actor Kevin Spacey plays Lester, a man undergoing a severe 
midlife identity crisis. In his effort to transform his social identity, Lester changes the way he interacts with his 
wife, his boss, his child, and even his neighbors. Although he makes some rash decisions along the way, toward 
the end of the movie we get a sense that Lester is finally forming a positive new identity.
TM & DREAMWORKS/SEBASTIAN, LOREY/Album/Alamy
Application
The movie character Lester, played by Kevin Spacey in the Oscar-winning film American 
Beauty, undergoes an acute midlife identity crisis. In fact, the movie is about the havoc Lester 
wreaks on his family, neighbors, and co-workers during his identity crisis. Lester goes from 
being a complacent husband, a neglecting but “good-enough” father, and a submissive worker 
to someone who wants things his own way at home and at work. One day, Lester decides that 
he does not like what he has become and decides to make drastic changes in his life. During 
his transformation, Lester ruins his marriage, drives his daughter to contemplate running away, 
loses his job, experiments with drugs, pushes an unstable neighbor over the brink, and contrib￾utes to the delinquency of two minor children. Clearly, Lester’s attempts to redefine himself are 
adolescent and dysfunctional throughout most of the movie. However, toward the end, Lester 
appears to be starting on the right track; he has finally found some integrity and is heading in 
a positive direction. It is the scene in which Lester decides not to have sex with his daughter’s 
teenage girlfriend that we learn that his new identity will at least be that of a mature adult.
Final PDF to printer463
lar31869_ch14_436-465.indd 463 10/17/22 09:38 AM
CHAPTER FOURTEEN Approaches to the Self 
midlife identity crisis begin to doubt that they made the right choices early in life, and 
they reconsider those commitments: “If only I had done . . .” is a frequent complaint. 
It is a period of regret over time spent pursuing goals that turned out to be unsatisfy￾ing or impossible. Many people in this predicament decide to abandon their goals and 
experience an identity deficit because they give up the principles that have guided 
their lives so far.
People who undergo midlife crises often act as adolescents again. That is, an iden￾tity crisis often looks the same, whether it occurs at adolescence or at midlife: the per￾son experiments with alternative lifestyles, forms new relationships and abandons old 
ones, and gives up previous ambitions and responsibilities. In midlife crises, people often 
change their careers, change their spouses, change their religions, change where they 
live, or do various combinations of these. Sometimes they simply change their priori￾ties—for example, a woman might keep her job and her spouse but decide to spend more 
time with her spouse and less time working. A midlife identity crisis can be just as much 
of an emotional roller-coaster ride as an adolescent identity crisis.
To summarize, a social identity consists of the social or public aspects of yourself, 
the impression that you typically create in others. Many of your more visible charac￾teristics—such as gender, ethnicity, and occupation—contribute to your identity. Other 
characteristics, including those that make up reputation, also go into the formation of 
identity. Your identity is what gives you and others a sense of continuity, of being the 
same person tomorrow as today. It also makes you unique in the eyes of others.
SUMMARY AND EVALUATION
This chapter presented an outline of what personality psychologists know about the 
self. This knowledge is neatly divided into three broad areas: self-concept, self-esteem, 
and social identity. These aspects of the self are important to understanding personal￾ity. The notion of a self makes sense in terms of our everyday lives and our experience. 
We frequently use terms such as selfish, self-worship, selfless, self-conscious, and self￾esteem in everyday life. In the evolution of language, we developed a rich vocabulary 
for talking about the self. This reflects people’s general preoccupation with themselves. 
Another reason psychologists are interested in the self is that it plays an important role 
in organizing a person’s experiences of the world. What a person deems important, for 
example, are the things that are relevant to his or her self-concept. Moreover, people 
behave differently when they are self-involved than when they are not, so the concept 
of the self is important for understanding how people construe their world, their expe￾riences, their priorities, and their future. The self is a major organizing force within 
the person.
Self-concept is a person’s self-understanding—his or her own story. The self-con￾cept has its start in infancy, when the child first makes a distinction between its body 
and everything else. This glimmer of self-concept goes on to develop, through repeated 
experiences of self-awareness, into a collection of characteristics that the child uses for 
self-definition, such as gender, age, and membership in a particular family. Children 
acquire skills and talents and start comparing themselves with others. This is the begin￾ning of social comparison and is an activity that most people engage in, to various 
degrees, throughout their lives. They also develop a sense of privacy and the ability to 
keep secrets. They develop a private self-concept, things they know about themselves 
Final PDF to printer464
lar31869_ch14_436-465.indd 464 10/17/22 09:38 AM
PART FOUR The Cognitive/Experiential Domain
that no one else knows. For the first time, they are able to tell a lie or misrepresent 
facts. Cognitive schemata then develop around aspects of the self; these knowledge 
structures are collections of characteristics associated with the self-concept. People 
also develop views of themselves in the future, their possible selves, which include both 
desirable (ideal self) and undesirable features. All in all, the self-concept is the person’s 
answer to the questions “Who have I been, what am I like now, and who do I want to 
be in the future?”
Self-esteem is the evaluation a person makes of his or her self-concept along a 
good–bad dimension. People differ from each other in terms of whether they see them￾selves as worthwhile, valuable, and good. Research on self-esteem has emphasized how 
people respond to failure, and findings suggest that high self-esteem persons persevere 
in the face of failure, whereas low self-esteem persons often give up following failure. 
High self-esteem people seem particularly good at deflecting the bumps and bruises of 
everyday life. One strategy they seem particularly adept in using is, when something bad 
happens in one area of their lives, to remind themselves that other areas in their lives are 
going well. This puts negative events in perspective and helps them cope. We reviewed 
social comparison as a self-esteem strategy but noted that it often results in negative 
outcome (there are always people who have more friends, who are better looking, and 
who have more money, on any characteristic you can think of). We also noted that social 
media use can result in lowered self-esteem, but mainly when social media is used for 
social comparison purposes.
Extremely high self-esteem, associated with narcissistic tendencies, can sometimes 
result in aggressive responses to threats to that self-esteem. Researchers have shown that 
narcissistic persons often retaliate following negative feedback. Another clinical prob￾lem associated with self-esteem is extreme shyness. Shyness does have some biologi￾cal correlates, but it is also associated with an over-controlling parenting style. Shyness 
can often be changed through treatment efforts. Another area of research shows that 
high self-esteem people are often concerned with enhancing their self-concept (focus 
on success), whereas low self-esteem persons are often concerned with protecting their 
self-concept from harm (focus on avoiding failure). Finally, in terms of self-esteem vari￾ability, variable persons seem especially sensitive to evaluative life events, such as social 
slights and public failures.
The final aspect of the self-discussed in this chapter was social identity, as a 
person’s outward manifestation or the impression he or she gives others. Identity 
develops over time through relations with others. For many people, the development 
of an identity follows a period of experimentation, but for others it happens more 
easily by adopting ready-made social roles. There are periods in life when some peo￾ple undergo identity crises and have to redefine their social identities. Developing 
an identity is a lifelong task, as identity changes with the changing social roles that 
come with age.
Erikson coined the term identity crisis to refer to the anxiety that comes with hav￾ing to redefine one’s social reputation. There are two kinds of crises: identity deficit, 
not forming an adequate identity; and identity conflict, in which two or more aspects of 
identity come into conflict. Despite crises and challenges, most people develop a solid 
identity, and other people know them for their unique characteristics.
Final PDF to printer465
lar31869_ch14_436-465.indd 465 10/17/22 09:38 AM
CHAPTER FOURTEEN Approaches to the Self 
self-concept 437
social identity 437
self-esteem 437
social comparison 441
private self-concept 441
perspective taking 442
objective self-awareness 442
KEY TERMS
defensive pessimism 456
self-handicapping 456
self-esteem variability 456
continuity 458
contrast 458
identity deficit 460
identity conflict 461
self-schema 443
amygdala 445
possible selves 446
ideal self 447
ought self 447
self-guides 447
self-complexity 453
Final PDF to printerlar31869_ch15_466-495.indd 466 10/25/22 01:57 PM
Lightspring/Shutterstock
In the social and cultural domain, 
the emphasis is on personality as it 
is affected by and expressed through 
social institutions, social roles and 
expectations, and relationships with 
other people in our lives.
We saw in Chapter 3 that sev￾eral taxonomies of traits emphasize 
interpersonal traits, such as domi￾nance versus submissiveness or love 
versus hate. Many trait adjectives in 
language are important for describ￾ing how people behave with other 
people. Interpersonal traits have 
long-term outcomes in our lives. 
For example, whether a person is 
controlling or easy-going affects 
such different aspects of life as con￾flicts with spouse and work partners 
and the strategies used to achieve 
goals. Whether a person tends to 
be nervous or optimistic affects 
the likelihood of diverse social out￾The 
Social and 
Cultural Domain
PART FIVE
Final PDF to printerlar31869_ch15_466-495.indd 467 10/25/22 01:57 PM
in a sales career. Many of the most 
important individual differences and 
personality traits are played out in 
our interpersonal relationships.
We describe three key pro￾cesses whereby personality affects 
social interactions. The first process 
is through selection, in which people 
may choose specific social environ￾ments according to their personali￾ties. A second process is evocation.
We examine how people evoke dis￾tress, as well as positive feelings, in 
others. A final process whereby per￾sonality affects social interactions is 
through manipulations for influenc￾ing others. What are the strategies 
that people use to get what they 
want from others?
One important interpersonal 
context concerns relationships 
between men and women. An essen￾tial part of our social identity is our 
gender. Differences between men 
and women in personality have 
long been of interest to personal￾ity psychology. Some researchers 
prefer to minimize the differences 
between men and women, emphasiz￾ing that gender differences are small 
and that the variability within a sex 
exceeds the variability between the 
sexes. Other researchers focus on 
the differences between the sexes 
and emphasize that some are large 
and are found in different cultures. 
Men tend to score higher on aggres￾siveness, whereas women tend to 
score higher on empathy. Where do 
these sex differences come from?
Some of what we call gender 
may have its origins in culture—that 
is, in how society makes up differ￾ent rules and expectations for men 
and women. Other theories empha￾size differences between men and 
women that may be due to hor￾mones. Testosterone levels, for 
example, differ greatly between men 
and women, and testosterone has 
been reliably associated with the per￾sonality traits of dominance, aggres￾sion, and sexuality.
Another theory is evolutionary 
and suggests that men and women 
faced different challenges and have 
evolved solutions to these different 
challenges. Whatever their origins, 
gender differences have long been of 
interest to personality psychologists 
and are clearly part of the social and 
cultural domain because they refer 
to and are played out in interper￾sonal relations.
Another socially important 
difference among people derives 
from their culture, the system of 
social rules, expectations, and ritu￾als in which a person is raised. 
For example, in one culture it might 
be expected that a crying baby is 
always picked up and comforted 
by its parents, whereas in another 
culture crying babies are left to cry. 
Could it be that being raised in these 
two different cultures results in dif￾ferences in adult personality? Do 
people in different cultures have dif￾ferent personalities?
An important goal of personal￾ity psychology is to understand how 
cultures shape personality and how 
specific cultures differ from each 
other. Cultural personality psychol￾ogists have also looked for similari￾ties among cultures. One example 
of a cultural universal appears to be 
the expression of specific emotions. 
Another aspect of personality that 
may show cultural universality is 
described by the five-factor model 
of traits.
In this part of the book, we 
focus on the broader social-interper￾sonal, gendered, and cultural aspects 
of personality.
V
Final PDF to printerlar31869_ch15_466-495.indd 468 10/25/22 01:57 PM
468
15
Personality and 
Social Interaction
Selection
Personality Characteristics Desired in a Marriage Partner
Assortative Mating for Personality: The Search for the Similar
Do People Get the Mates They Want? And Are They Happy?
Personality and the Selective Breakup of Couples
Shyness and the Selection of Risky Situations
Other Personality Traits and the Selection of Situations
Evocation
Aggression and the Evocation of Hostility
Evocation of Anger and Upset in Partners
Evocation of Likability, Pleasure, and Pain
Evocation Through Expectancy Confirmation
Manipulation: Social Influence Tactics
A Taxonomy of Eleven Tactics of Manipulation
Sex Differences in Tactics of Manipulation
Personality Predictors of Tactics of Manipulation
Panning Back: An Overview of Personality and Social Interaction
SUMMARY AND EVALUATION
KEY TERMS
Lightspring/Shutterstock
Final PDF to printerlar31869_ch15_466-495.indd 469 10/25/22 01:57 PM
THE SOCIAL AND CULTURAL DOMAIN
Sue and Joan sipped coffee while discussing their dates from the previous 
evening. “Michael seemed like a nice guy, at least at first,” Sue noted. “He was polite, 
asked me what kind of food I liked, and seemed genuinely interested in knowing me 
as a person. But I was a little turned off by the rude way he talked to the waitress. He 
also insisted in choosing the food for me and selected a pork dish I didn’t like. Over 
dinner, he talked about himself the whole time. At the end of the evening, he tried to 
invite himself back to my room, but I told him that I was tired and wanted to call it a 
night.” “Did you kiss him?” asked Joan. “Well, yes, I started to give him a good-night 
kiss, but he began to get really aggressive with me, and I had to push him away. All the 
politeness disappeared, and he stormed off angry. I guess he wasn’t such a nice guy 
after all. How did your date go?”
In the course of this conversation, Sue revealed a treasure trove of information 
about her date, Michael—information that figures prominently in the social decisions 
we make. Michael displayed aggressiveness, both toward the waitress and toward Sue 
during the good-night kiss. He displayed self-centeredness, focusing on himself during 
the course of the dinner. He showed a lack of empathy, as illustrated by his uncaring 
attitude toward the feelings of the waitress and his abrupt sexual aggressiveness. The 
thin veneer of politeness quickly gave way over the evening, revealing an abrasive 
interpersonal disposition that turned Sue off.
This episode illustrates several key ways in which personality influences social 
interaction. Personality interacts with situations in three ways: through selection, evo￾cation, and manipulation of the situation. These three mechanisms can be applied 
Profiles at online dating 
websites often mention 
personality characteristics 
that the person is seeking in 
a mate (e.g., caring, sense 
of humor, affectionate). 
Personality plays an 
important role in social 
interaction.
Brent Lewin/Bloomberg 
via Getty Images
15
Final PDF to printer470
lar31869_ch15_466-495.indd 470 10/25/22 01:57 PM
PART FIVE The Social and Cultural Domain
to an understanding of how personality affects interpersonal situations. First, the person￾ality characteristics of others influence whether we select them as our dates, friends, and 
even marriage partners. In this episode, Sue was turned off by Michael’s aggressive and 
self-centered personality characteristics. People’s personality characteristics also play a 
role in the kinds of interpersonal situations they select to enter and stay in. For example, 
someone with a personality different from Sue’s might actually be attracted to a guy like 
Michael and could put up with his self-centeredness.
Second, the personality qualities of others evoke certain responses in us. Michael’s 
aggressiveness upset Sue, evoking an emotional response that would not have been 
evoked if he had been kinder and more caring. Behaviors related to personality can 
evoke many responses in others, ranging from aggression to social support, and from 
marital satisfaction to marital infidelity.
Third, personality affects the tactics people use to influence or manipulate others. 
Michael first tried the charm tactic. Then he pulled out the boasting tactic. Finally, he 
used coercion, trying to force himself on Sue. A man with a different personality would 
use different tactics, such as reason or reward.
These three processes—selection, evocation, and manipulation—are key ways in 
which personality interacts with the social environment. Individuals in everyday life are 
not exposed to all possible social situations; individuals with certain personality disposi￾tions seek out and avoid social situations selectively. Personality also influences how 
we evoke different reactions from other people and how others in turn evoke differ￾ent responses from us, sometimes quite unintentionally. And personality affects how we 
purposefully influence, change, exploit, and manipulate the others with whom we have 
chosen to be associated.
Selection
In everyday life, people choose to enter some situations and avoid other situations. These 
forms of situation selection can hinge on personality dispositions and how we view our￾selves. The following story illustrates the process of selection. In this example, a couple 
inadvertently entered a situation and then chose a rapid exit from it.
Chip and Priscilla, a Yuppie couple from Chicago, have just moved to Dallas and 
are sampling some of the trendier nightspots on Lower Greenville Avenue. As they 
push through the swinging doors of what appears to be a quaint little Western saloon 
right out of the TV series Gunsmoke, they are confronted by six huge bikers from the 
motorcycle gang, who turn on their barstools to glare at them. The bikers have an 
average of more than two tattoos and three missing teeth. The fumes they emit smell 
flammable. Two of them stare with contempt at Chip, and one leers evilly at Priscilla. 
“This doesn’t look like our kind of place,” Chip says to Priscilla, as they prepare to 
beat a hasty retreat. (Ickes, Snyder, & Garcia, 1997, p. 165)
Social selections permeate daily life. Choices range from the seemingly trivial 
(“Should I attend this party tonight?”) to the profound (“Should I select this person as 
my marriage partner?”). Social selections are decision points that direct us to choose 
one path and avoid others. These decisions, which determine the nature of our social 
environments and social worlds, are often based on the personality characteristics of the 
selector. Extraverts choose to spend more time in social situations, whereas highly con￾scientious people select more work-related activities—choices that continue from adoles￾cence through young adulthood (Wrzus, Wagner, & Riediger, 2016). Agreeable people 
Final PDF to printer471
lar31869_ch15_466-495.indd 471 10/25/22 01:57 PM
CHAPTER FIFTEEN Personality and Social Interaction 
choose to spend more time looking at photos and media depicting positive images; dis￾agreeable people expose themselves to more negative photos and media images (Bresin 
& Robinson, 2015). People high in Dark Triad traits, particularly psychopathy, gravitate 
toward the bright lights of big cities—geographical preferences that influence environ￾ments people subsequently inhabit (Jonason, 2018).
Mate choice provides an especially dramatic example of the mechanism of selec￾tion. When you select a long-term mate, you place yourself into close and prolonged 
contact with one particular person. This alters the social environment to which you are 
exposed and in which you will reside. By selecting a mate, you are selecting the social 
acts you will experience and a network of friends and family.
Which personality characteristics do people seek as potential mates? Are there 
traits that are highly desired by everyone? Do we look for potential mates who have per￾sonalities similar to our own or different from our own? And how is the choice of a mate 
linked to the likelihood that a couple will stay together over time?
Personality Characteristics Desired in a Marriage Partner
What do people want in a long-term partner? This was the focus of an international inves￾tigation of 10,047 individuals located on six continents and five islands from around the 
world (Buss et al., 1990). A total of 37 samples were chosen from 33 countries, repre￾senting every major racial group, religious group, and political system. Samples ranged 
from the coastal-dwelling Australians to the South African Zulus. The economic status of 
the samples varied from middle- and upper-middle-class college students to lower socio￾economic groups, such as the Gujarati Indians and Estonians. Fifty researchers collected 
data. Standard questionnaires were translated into the language of each culture and then 
administered by native residents of each culture. This study, the largest conducted on what 
people want in a long-term mate, revealed that personality characteristics play a central 
role in mate selection. In the Exercise below, you can complete this questionnaire yourself 
and see how your selection preferences compare with those of the worldwide sample.
As you can see in Table 15.1, mutual attraction or love was the most favored 
characteristic, viewed as indispensable by almost everyone in the world. It turns out that 
feeling loved is linked to personality traits. People who feel loved tend to be higher on 
Extraversion and lower on Neuroticism, as well as scoring higher on a general sense of 
well-being (Oravecz et al., 2020). After mutual attraction or love, personality characteris￾tics loom large in people’s mate selection preferences—dependable character, emotional 
stability, and pleasing disposition. You may recall that these are quite close to the labels 
INSTRUCTIONS: Evaluate the following factors in choosing a mate or marriage partner. 
If you consider the factor to be
Exercise
indispensable, give it 3 points
important, but not indispensable, give it 2 points
desirable, but not very important, give it 1 point
irrelevant or unimportant, give it 0 points
Final PDF to printer472
lar31869_ch15_466-495.indd 472 10/25/22 01:57 PM
PART FIVE The Social and Cultural Domain
Table 15.1 Summary of Ratings by Sex Using Entire International Sample
RATINGS BY MALES RATINGS BY FEMALES
Ranked 
Value Variable Name Mean
Std. 
Dev. Variable Name Mean
Std. 
Dev.
1. Mutual attraction or love 2.81 0.16 Mutual attraction or love 2.87 0.12
2. Dependable character 2.50 0.46 Dependable character 2.69 0.31
3. Emotional stability and maturity 2.47 0.20 Emotional stability and maturity 2.68 0.20
4. Pleasing disposition 2.44 0.29 Pleasing disposition 2.52 0.30
5. Good health 2.31 0.33 Education and intelligence 2.45 0.25
6. Education and intelligence 2.27 0.19 Sociability 2.30 0.28
7. Sociability 2.15 0.28 Good health 2.28 0.30
8. Desire for home and children 2.09 0.50 Desire for home and children 2.21 0.44
9. Refinement, neatness 2.03 0.48 Ambition and industriousness 2.15 0.35
10. Good looks 1.91 0.26 Refinement, neatness 1.98 0.49
11. Ambition and industriousness 1.85 0.35 Similar education 1.84 0.47
12. Good cook and housekeeper 1.80 0.48 Good financial prospect 1.76 0.38
13. Good financial prospect 1.51 0.42 Good looks 1.46 0.28
14. Similar education 1.50 0.37 Favorable social status or rating 1.46 0.39
15. Favorable social status or rating 1.16 0.28 Good cook and housekeeper 1.28 0.27
16. Chastity (no previous experience 
in sexual intercourse)
1.06 0.69 Similar religious background 1.21 0.56
17. Similar religious background 0.98 0.48 Similar political background 1.03 0.35
18. Similar political background 0.92 0.36 Chastity (no previous experience in 
sexual intercourse)
0.75 0.66
Source: Adapted from Buss et al. (1990), p. 19, Table 4.
Now compare your ratings with the ratings given by the international sample of 10,047 men 
and women, shown in Table 15.1.
1. Good cook and housekeeper
2. Pleasing disposition
3. Sociability
4. Similar educational background
5. Refinement, neatness
6. Good financial prospect
7. Chastity (no prior intercourse)
8. Dependable character
9. Emotional stability
10. Desire for home and children
11. Favorable social status
12. Good looks
13. Similar religious background
14. Ambition and industriousness
15. Similar political background
16. Mutual attraction or love
17. Good health
18. Education and intelligence
Exercise (Continued)
Final PDF to printer473
lar31869_ch15_466-495.indd 473 10/25/22 01:57 PM
CHAPTER FIFTEEN Personality and Social Interaction 
given to three of the factors in the five-factor model of personality (see Chapter 3). 
Dependability is close to Conscientiousness. Emotional stability is identical to the fourth 
factor on the five-factor model. And pleasing disposition is quite close to Agreeableness. 
Other personality factors rated highly include sociability, refinement and neatness, and 
ambition and industriousness.
Note that the respondents’ top choices, except for love, were personality character￾istics. Thus, personality factors play a central role in what people worldwide are looking 
for in a long-term mate—findings that have now been documented over many decades of 
research (e.g., Fletcher et al., 2004; Kamble et al., 2014; Lei et al., 2011; Souza, Conroy￾Beam, & Buss, 2016). The priority placed on personality traits such as Agreeableness, 
Conscientiousness, and Emotional Stability occurs regardless of sexual orientation; they 
are as strong among nonheterosexual men and women as they are among heterosexual 
men and women (Valentova et al., 2016). Low scores on these personality traits tend to 
be relationship “deal-breakers” (Jonason et al., 2015). Other research has confirmed that 
people who score higher on Conscientiousness, both women and men, tend to be higher 
in overall mate value or desirability on the mating market (Strouts, Brase, & Dillon, 2017).
These strong effects of personality apply primarily to traits people seek in a long￾term mate. When it comes to short-term mating, the traits of high Extraversion is linked 
with frequency of sex and number of different sex partners (Whyte et al., 2019).
Assortative Mating for Personality: The Search for the Similar
Over the past century, two fundamentally competing scientific theories have been advanced 
for who is attracted to whom. Complementary needs theory postulates that people are 
attracted to those who have different personality dispositions than they have (Murstein, 
1976; Winch, 1954). People who are dominant, for example, might have a need for some￾one whom they can control and dominate. People who are submissive, according to com￾plementary needs theory, choose a mate who can dominate and control them. One easy 
way to think about complementary needs theory is with the phrase “opposites attract.”
In contrast, attraction similarity theory postulates that people are attracted to those 
who have similar personality characteristics. People who are domi￾nant might be attracted to those who are also dominant because they 
like someone who “pushes back.” People who are extraverted might 
like partners who are also extraverted so that they can party together. 
One easy way to remember this theory is with the phrase “birds of a 
feather flock together.” Although there have been many proponents 
of both theories over the past century, the results are now in. They 
provide overwhelming support for the attraction similarity theory and 
no support for the complementary needs theory (Buss, 2016). The 
only characteristic on which “opposites attract” that has been reli￾ably documented is biological sex: Men tend to be attracted to women 
and women tend to be attracted to men, although of course there are 
individual differences in sexual orientation. The research shows that 
people are generally drawn to those who share their personalities.
One common finding in mate selection—that people are mar￾ried to people who are similar to themselves—is a phenomenon 
known as assortative mating. For nearly every variable that has been examined—from 
single actions to ethnic status—people seem to select mates who are similar to them￾selves. Even for physical characteristics such as height, weight, and, astonishingly, nose 
breadth and earlobe length, couples show positive correlations. Couples who have been 
People often are attracted to others who are similar 
to themselves. This refers to the concept of assortative 
mating.
Andrew Rich/Vetta/Getty Images
Final PDF to printer474
lar31869_ch15_466-495.indd 474 10/25/22 01:57 PM
PART FIVE The Social and Cultural Domain
together the longest appeared most similar in personality, a finding that results from 
the initial selection process and from dissimilar couples breaking up more often (e.g., 
Humbad et al., 2010).
But are these positive correlations caused by the active selection of mates who are 
similar? Or are these positive correlations merely byproducts of other causal processes? 
Sheer proximity, for example, could, in principle, account for some of the positive correla￾tions. It is known that people tend to marry those who are close by. Notions of romantic 
love aside, the “one and only” often lives within driving distance, although internet dating 
sites have reduced this effect. And because people in close proximity may have certain 
common characteristics, the positive correlations found between married couples may be 
merely a side effect of mating with those who are close by rather than the active selection 
of partners who are similar. Cultural institutions, such as colleges and universities, may 
promote assortative mating by preferentially admitting those who are similar with respect 
to certain variables, such as intelligence, motivation, and social skills.
To test these competing predictions, Botwin, Buss, and Shackleford studied two 
samples of subjects: dating couples and newlywed couples (Botwin, Buss, & Shackleford, 
1997). The participants expressed their preferences for the personality characteristics in 
a potential mate on 40 rating scales, which were scored on five dimensions of personal￾ity: Extraversion, Agreeableness, Conscientiousness, Emotional Stability, and Intellect–
Openness. The next step was to assess personality dispositions on these dimensions, 
using the same 40 rating scales. Three data sources were used for this second stage: self￾reports; reports by their partners; and independent reports by interviewers. Correlations 
with mate preferences were computed between two sets of personality ratings: the ones 
made by the participant (self) and the average of the peer and interviewer ratings of the 
participant (aggregate).
As shown in Table 15.2, these correlations were consistently positive. People scor￾ing high on Extraversion wanted to select an extraverted person as a mate. Those who 
scored high on Conscientiousness desired a conscientious mate. The conclusions from 
this study, of course, must be qualified by one important consideration—perhaps the pref￾erences people express for the personalities of their ideal mates might be influenced by 
Table 15.2 Personality Correlated with Mate Preferences
DATING COUPLES MARRIED COUPLES
MEN WOMEN MEN WOMEN
Trait Self Aggregate Self Aggregate Self Aggregate Self Aggregate
Extraversion .33*  .42** .59***  .35** .20*  .15 .30**  .25**
Agreeableness .37*  .17 .44***  .46*** .30**  .12 .44***  .31**
Conscientiousness .34**  .45*** .59***  .53*** .53***  .49*** .61***  .53***
Emotional Stability .29*  .36** .52***  .30* .27**  .21* .32***  .27**
Intellect–Openness .56***  .54*** .63***  .50*** .24*  .31** .48***  .52****
*p < .05
**p < .01
***p < .001
Note: Each correlation in the table refers to the relationship between the personality trait of the individual and the corresponding personality trait desired in a mate. Thus, under Men, 
Self-Report column, the .33* indicates that men who are highly extraverted tend to prefer mates who are also extraverted. The fact that all the correlations in the table are positive, 
many significantly so, indicates that people generally want mates who are similar to themselves in personality.
Source: Botwin, Buss, & Shackelford (1997).
Final PDF to printer475
lar31869_ch15_466-495.indd 475 10/25/22 01:57 PM
CHAPTER FIFTEEN Personality and Social Interaction 
the mates they already have. If an emotionally stable person is already mated to an emo￾tionally stable person, perhaps the choice is justified by claiming that he or she is truly 
attracted to the person chosen. This could result in positive correlations between one’s 
own personality and the personality people express for a desired mate. Studies of individu￾als who are not mated already find the same pattern of results—people prefer those who 
are similar to themselves (e.g., Buss, 2012), supporting the attraction similarity theory.
These data provide evidence that positive correlations on personality variables 
between husbands and wives are due, at least in part, to social preferences based on 
the personality characteristics of those doing the selecting. Subsequent studies have 
confirmed that people actively prefer romantic partners who are similar to themselves 
on Extraversion, Agreeableness, Conscientiousness, Emotional Stability, and Intellect–
Openness. However, most people consider the “ideal” romantic partner personality to be 
someone who is slightly higher on Extraversion, Conscientiousness, Agreeableness, and 
Emotional Stability than they are (Figueredo, Sefcek, & Jones, 2006). In sum, personal￾ity characteristics appear to play a pivotal role in the social mechanism of selection.
Do People Get the Mates They Want? And Are They Happy?
People do not always get what we want, and this is true of mate selection. You may want 
a mate who is kind, understanding, dependable, emotionally stable, and intelligent, but 
these desirable mates are always in short supply compared with the numbers of people 
who seek them. Many people end up mated with individuals who fall short of their ide￾als. Are people whose mates differ from their ideal mates less satisfied than those whose 
mates embody their desires?
Table 15.3 shows the correlations between the preferences that individuals express 
for the ideal personality characteristics of their mates and the actual personality char￾acteristics of their obtained mates (Botwin, Buss, & Shackelford, 1997, p. 127). Across 
three of the four subsamples—women who are dating, women who are married, and men 
who are married—there are modest but consistently positive correlations between the 
personality desired in a partner and the actual personality characteristics displayed by 
Table 15.3 Personality Mate Preferences and Personality of Partner Obtained
DATING COUPLES MARRIED COUPLES
W O M E N ’ S 
PREFERENCES
M E N ’ S 
PREFERENCES
M E N ’ S 
PREFERENCES
W O M E N ’ S 
PREFERENCES
Partner’s 
Personality Self Aggregate Self Aggregate Self Aggregate Self Aggregate
Extraversion .25 .39** .28* .24 .39*** .49*** .31*** .32**
Agreeableness .28* .32 .24 .02 .20* .40*** .03 .25
Conscientiousness .28* .29* .24 .26 .36*** .46*** .13 .24
Emotional Stability .36** .12 .40** .10 .27** .37** .07 .12
Intellect–
Openness
.33** .41** .40** .11 .24** .39*** .14 .39****
*p < .05
**p < .01
***p < .001
Source: Botwin, Buss, & Shackelford (1997).
Final PDF to printer476
lar31869_ch15_466-495.indd 476 10/25/22 01:57 PM
PART FIVE The Social and Cultural Domain
the partner. The correspondence between what one wants and what one gets is especially 
strong for Extraversion and Intellect–Openness. In sum, as a general rule, people seem 
to get the mates they want in terms of personality.
Are people who get what they want happier with their marriages than people who 
do not? To examine this issue, Botwin, Buss, and Shackelford (1997) created differ￾ence scores between the preferences expressed for the ideal personality of a mate and 
assessments of the spouse’s actual personality. These difference scores were then used 
to predict satisfaction with the marriage, after first controlling for the main effects of 
the spouse’s personality. The results were consistent—one’s partner’s personality had a 
substantial effect on marital satisfaction. People were especially happy with their rela￾tionships if they were married to partners who were high on Agreeableness, Emotional 
Stability, and Intellect–Openness. But the difference scores between the partner’s per￾sonality and one’s ideal for that personality did not predict marital satisfaction. In other 
words, the key to marital happiness is having a partner who is agreeable, emotionally 
stable, and open, regardless of whether the partner departs in specific ways from what 
one wants (Luo et al., 2008).
The correlations between the participants’ marital satisfaction scores and the part￾ners’ personality scores, obtained through the partners’ self-reports, are shown in Table 
15.4. Having a partner who is agreeable is an especially strong predictor of being happy 
with one’s marriage for both men and women. People married to agreeable partners are 
more satisfied with their sex lives and view their spouses as more loving and affectionate, 
a source of shared laughter, and a source of stimulating conversation. People married to 
disagreeable partners are the most unhappy with the marriage and perhaps are most at 
risk of getting divorced.
The other personality factors that are consistently linked with marital satisfaction 
are Conscientiousness, Emotional Stability, and Intellect–Openness. Men whose wives 
score high on Conscientiousness are significantly more sexually satisfied with the mar￾riage than are other husbands. Women whose husbands score high on Conscientiousness 
are generally more satisfied and happier with their spouses as sources of stimulating 
conversation—a finding replicated in a study of 125 long-wed couples (Claxton et al., 
2011). People whose spouses score high on Emotional Stability are more satisfied, view 
their spouses as sources of encouragement and support, and enjoy spending time with 
their partners. Low emotional stability scores are linked with relationship dissatisfac￾tion among dating college students and among older adults in committed relationships 
(Slatcher & Vazire, 2009). A meta-analysis of 19 samples found that emotional stabil￾ity and agreeableness were the strongest predictors of satisfaction in intimate romantic 
relationships (Malouff et al., 2010). High neuroticism in one or both members of the 
couple leads to relationship dissatisfaction (Schaffhuser, Allemand, & Martin, 2014). 
On a positive note for those married to individuals low on emotional stability, one study 
found that having frequent sexual intercourse seems to protect couples from the negative 
marital consequences of neuroticism (Russell & McNulty, 2011).
Another link between personality and marital satisfaction emerges over the years 
following the newlywed year of marriage. As a general rule, in the newlywed year, peo￾ple rate their spouses high on Agreeableness, Conscientiousness, Extraversion, and 
Intellect–Openness (Watson & Humrichouse, 2006). Over the ensuing two years, how￾ever, ratings of spouse’s personalities become increasingly negative on these dimensions, 
illustrating a “honeymoon effect.” And those who show the most marked negative ratings 
of their spouse’s personality over time show the largest decreases in marital happiness. 
One speculation is that spouses in progressively unhappy marriages actually display pro￾gressively more unpleasant personalities, such as lower levels of Agreeableness, but only 
Final PDF to printer477
lar31869_ch15_466-495.indd 477 10/25/22 01:57 PM
CHAPTER FIFTEEN Personality and Social Interaction 
Table 15.4 Facet of Marital Satisfaction and Spouse’s Self-Reported Trait Ratings
S P O U S E’S S E L F–R E P O R T E D 
TRAIT RATINGS
Marital Satisfaction E A C ES I–O
Husband’s marital satisfaction
General .12 .32*** .06 .27** .29**
Spouse as someone to confide in –.05 .27** .07 .11 .05
Sexual –.08 .31** .32*** .25** .04
Spouse as source of encouragement 
and support
.03 .29** .11 .26** .18
Love and affection expressed .07 .31** .14 .21* .26**
Enjoyment of time spent with spouse .11 .30** .13 .28** .08
Frequency of laughing with spouse .19* .23* .19 .11 .24**
Spouse as source of stimulating 
conversation
.06 .12 –.04 .21* .17
Wife’s marital satisfaction
General .07 .37*** .20* .23* .31***
Spouse as someone to confide in .06 .25** .15 .24** .27**
Sexual .08 .19* .14 .09 .13
Spouse as source of encouragement and 
support
.04 .47*** .06 .20* .31***
Love and affection expressed –.04 .29** .14 .28** .33***
Enjoyment of time spent with spouse .06 .27** .06 .33*** .18
Frequency of laughing with spouse –.02 .27** –.02 .10 .08
Spouse as source of stimulating 
conversation
.23* .24** .25** .18 .45***
Note: E = Extraversion; A = Agreeableness; C = Conscientiousness; ES = Emotional Stability; I–O = Intellect–Openness.
* p < .05
** p < .01
*** p < .001
Source: Botwin, Buss, & Shackelford (1997).
within the marital context itself. Those who maintain positive illusions about their part￾ner’s personality, in contrast, maintain high levels of satisfaction (Barelds & Dijkstra, 
2011). Another key predictor of marital satisfaction is mate value—whether one suc￾ceeds in selecting a mate whose personality embodies qualities most people want. Those 
mated with high mate value individuals tend to be happier in their relationship than 
those mated with lower mate value individuals (Conroy-Beam, Goetz, & Buss, 2016).
In summary, the personality of one’s spouse plays an important role in marital sat￾isfaction. Those who select mates high on Agreeableness, Conscientiousness, Emotional 
Stability, and Intellect–Openness show the greatest happiness with their marriages. 
These are qualities linked with high mate value, since most people desire them. Those 
who select mates low on these personality factors are the most unhappy with their mar￾riages. Differences from each person’s individual ideal, however, do not appear to con￾tribute to marital satisfaction.
Final PDF to printer478
lar31869_ch15_466-495.indd 478 10/25/22 01:57 PM
PART FIVE The Social and Cultural Domain
Personality and the Selective Breakup of Couples
We have examined two ways in which personality plays a role in the mate selection pro￾cess. First, there appear to be universal selection preferences—personality characteristics 
that everyone desires in a potential mate, such as dependability and emotional stability. 
Second, beyond the desires shared by everyone, people prefer partners who are similar to 
themselves in personality—dominant people prefer other dominant people, conscientious 
people prefer other conscientious people, and so on. But there is a third role that personal￾ity plays in the process of selection—its role in the selective breakup of marriages.
According to one theory of conflict between the sexes, breakups should occur 
more when one’s desires are violated than when they are fulfilled (Buss, 2016). 
Following the violation of desire theory, we would predict that people married to others 
who lack desired characteristics, such as dependability and emotional stability, will more 
frequently dissolve the marriage. We would also predict that couples who are dissimilar 
on personality will break up more often than those who fulfill desires for similarity. Are 
these predictions borne out in the research findings?
Across a wide variety of studies, emotional instability has been the most consis￾tent personality predictor of marital instability and divorce, emerging as a significant 
predictor in nearly every study that has included a measure of it (Kelly & Conley, 1987; 
Solomon & Jackson, 2014). One reason is that emotionally unstable individuals display 
high levels of jealousy—they worry more about a partner’s infidelity, try to prevent social 
contact between their partner and others, and react more explosively when their partner 
does in fact have sex with others (Dijkstra & Barelds, 2008). Those high on Neuroticism 
also create more conflict and disagreement and their emotional upset after a fight tends 
to last longer (Solomon & Jackson, 2014). Low impulse control, or low conscientious￾ness (i.e., being impulsive and unreliable), particularly as exhibited by husbands, also 
emerges as a good predictor of divorce (Bentler & Newcomb, 1978; Kelly & Conley, 
1987). Low agreeableness predicts marital dissatisfaction and divorce, although this 
result is less consistent and less powerful than that found for emotional instability and 
low conscientiousness (Burgess & Wallin, 1953; Kelly & Conley, 1987). One reason for 
these breakups may be found in another link between personality and social behavior. 
A study of 52 nations found that the personality traits of low agreeableness and low 
conscientiousness (high impulsivity) were linked with higher rates of sexual infidelity 
in romantic relationships (Schmitt, 2004). Interestingly, extraversion and dominance 
are linked with higher levels of sexual promiscuity (Markey & Markey, 2007; Schmitt, 
2004), although these personality traits are not related to marital satisfaction or break￾ups. A study of 8,206 individuals found that high Openness also predicted relationship 
breakups (Solomon & Jackson, 2014). High Openness may lead to “a wandering eye,” 
more sexual openness to others, and greater boredom with the relationship.
Being married to someone who lacks the personality characteristics that most peo￾ple desire—dependability, emotional stability, and pleasing disposition—puts one most at 
risk for breakup. People actively seek mates who are dependable and emotionally stable, 
and those who fail to choose such mates are more at risk for divorce.
Another study examined the fate of 203 dating couples over the course of two 
years (Hill, Rubin, & Peplau, 1976). Over that time, roughly half of the couples broke up 
and half stayed together. Similarity in personality and values predicted staying together. 
Those who were most dissimilar were more likely to break up.
In summary, personality plays key roles in mate selection. First, as part of the 
initial selection process, it determines the mates to whom we are attracted and the mates 
whom we desire. Second, personality affects satisfaction with one’s mate and therefore 
influences the selective breakup of couples. Those 
Final PDF to printer479
lar31869_ch15_466-495.indd 479 10/25/22 01:57 PM
CHAPTER FIFTEEN Personality and Social Interaction 
similar, agreeable, conscientious, and emotionally stable tend to break up more often 
than those who succeed in selecting such mates.
Shyness and the Selection of Risky Situations
Several other domains of selection have also been explored. One pertains to the effects 
of the personality disposition of shyness. Shyness is defined as a tendency to feel tense, 
worried, or anxious during social interactions (Addison & Schmidt, 1999). Shyness is 
a common phenomenon; more than 90 percent of the population experience shyness 
at some point during their lives (Zimbardo, 1977). Some people, however, seem to be 
dispositionally shy—they tend to feel awkward in many social situations and so tend to 
avoid situations in which they will be forced to interact with people.
The effects of shyness on the selection of situations have been well documented. 
During high school and early adulthood, shy individuals tend to avoid social situations, 
resulting in some isolation (Schmidt & Fox, 1995). Shy women are more likely to avoid 
going to the doctor for gynecological exams, putting themselves at greater health risk 
(Kowalski & Brown, 1994). They are less likely to bring up contraception with their 
partners before sexual intercourse, and so put themselves in potentially dangerous sexual 
situations (Bruch & Hynes, 1987).
Shyness also affects willingness to select risky situations in the form of gambles 
(Addison & Schmidt, 1999). In one experiment, shy people were identified through the 
Cheek (1983) shyness scale, which contains items such as “I find it hard to talk to 
strangers” and “I feel inhibited in social situations.” On entry into the laboratory, each 
participant received the following instructions: “During this part of the experiment, you 
have a chance to win some money by picking a poker chip out of this container. There 
are 100 poker chips in this box that are numbered from 1 to 100. . . .” The participants 
Shy individuals often feel tense or anxious in social situations and avoid entering situations in which they would be 
forced to interact with others.
4774344sean/Wavebreakmedia/iStockphoto/Getty Images
Final PDF to printer480
lar31869_ch15_466-495.indd 480 10/25/22 01:57 PM
PART FIVE The Social and Cultural Domain
were given a choice to pick a gamble that they would most likely win (95 percent odds of 
winning) but from which they would receive only a small amount of money (e.g., 25¢), 
or to pick a riskier gamble, perhaps with only a 5 percent chance of winning but from 
which, if they won, they would receive $4.75. The experimenters also recorded the heart 
rate of the participants during their choice of gambles.
Shy women differed substantially from their non-shy counterparts in choosing the 
smaller bets that were linked with a higher likelihood of winning. The non-shy women, in 
contrast, chose the riskier bets with a lower likelihood of winning but with a larger payoff 
if they did win. During the task, the shy participants showed a larger increase in heart 
rate, suggesting that fearfulness might have led them to avoid the risky gambles.
These studies illustrate the importance of the personality disposition of shyness 
in the selection of, or avoidance of, certain situations. Shy women tend to avoid others, 
creating social isolation, and to avoid choosing risky gambles. They also avoid going to 
the doctor for gynecological exams and avoid obtaining condoms, thus putting them at 
greater health risk than less shy women. Shyness, in short, appears to have an impact on 
the selective entry into, or avoidance of, situations.
Personality Traits and the Selection of Friends and Situations
Personality also influences our selection of friends. People high on extraversion and 
agreeableness, for example, tend to choose a larger number of friends on social network￾ing sites compared to more introverted and disagreeable people (Zhou et al., 2021).
Other personality traits have been shown to affect selective entry into, or avoidance 
of, certain situations (Ickes, Snyder, & Garcia, 1997). Those who are more empathic 
are more likely to enter situations such as volunteering for community activities (Davis 
et al., 1999). Those high on psychoticism choose volatile and spontaneous situations 
more than formal or stable ones (Furnham, 1982). Those high on Machiavellianism pre￾fer face-to-face situations, perhaps because these offer a better chance to ply their social 
manipulative skills to exploit others (Geis & Moon, 1981). People high on Extraversion 
tend to select more friends; however, people high on Agreeableness tend to be selected 
more often by others as friends (Selfhout et al., 2010).
High sensation seekers are more likely to volunteer for unusual experiments, such 
as studies involving drugs or sex (Zuckerman, 1978). High sensation seekers more fre￾quently choose to enter risky situations (Donohew et al., 2000). High school students 
high in sensation seeking more frequently attend parties where alcohol or marijuana is 
available to be consumed. They also more often have unwanted sex when drunk. Those 
who are high in sensation seeking also tend to select social situations characterized by 
high-risk sexual behavior (McCoul & Haslam, 2001). In a study of 112 heterosexual 
men, those who scored high on sensation seeking were more likely than their low-scoring 
peers to have unprotected sex more frequently. High sensation seekers have sexual inter￾course with many more different partners than low sensation seekers. Those high on sen￾sation seeking gravitate toward risky gambling bets and risky sexual situations (Webster 
& Crysel, 2012). Personality, in sum, affects the situations to which people are exposed 
through their selective entry into, or avoidance of, certain kinds of activities.
Evocation
Once we select others to occupy our social environment, a second process is set into 
motion—the evocation of reactions from others. Evocation may be defined as the ways 
in which features of personality elicit reactions from 
Final PDF to printer481
lar31869_ch15_466-495.indd 481 10/25/22 01:57 PM
CHAPTER FIFTEEN Personality and Social Interaction 
study of highly active children. Compared with their less active peers, highly active 
children tend to elicit hostility and competitiveness from others. Parents and teachers 
tend to get into power struggles with these active children. The social interactions of 
less active children are more peaceful and harmonious. This is a perfect example of the 
process of evocation at work—a personality characteristic (in this case, activity level) 
evokes a predictable set of social responses from others (hostility and power struggles). 
Another example comes from the evocation of trust and cooperativeness by those high 
on Honesty-Humility (Thielmann & Hilbig, 2014). Perhaps because high scorers tend to 
trust others, they evoke trustworthy expectations in others.
Aggression and the Evocation of Hostility
It is well known that aggressive people evoke hostility from others (Dodge & Coie, 1987). 
People who are aggressive expect that others will be hostile toward them. One study found 
that aggressive people chronically interpret ambiguous behavior from others, such as being 
bumped into, as intentionally hostile (Dill et al., 1999). This is called a hostile attributional 
bias, the tendency to infer hostile intent on the part of others in the face of ambiguous 
behavior from them. Vulnerable narcissists, who have somewhat shaky self-esteem, are 
also prone to the hostile attribution bias (Hansen-Brown & Freis, 2021).
Because they expect others to be hostile, aggressive people tend to treat others 
in an aggressive manner. People who are treated in an aggressive manner often aggress 
back. In this case, the aggressive reactions of others confirm what the aggressive person 
suspected all along—that others have hostility toward them. What the aggressive person 
fails to realize is that the hostility from others is a product of their own making—the 
aggressor evokes it from others by inferring hostile intent in others.
Evocation of Anger and Upset in Partners
There are at least two ways in which personality can play a role in evoking conflict in close 
relationships. First, a person can perform actions that cause an emotional response in a 
partner. A dominant person, for example, might act in a condescending manner, habitu￾ally evoking upset in the partner. Or a husband low in conscientiousness might neglect 
personal grooming and throw clothes on the floor, which might upset his wife. In short, 
personality characteristics can evoke emotions in others through the actions performed.
A second form of evocation occurs when a person elicits actions from another that 
in turn upsets the original elicitor. An aggressive man, for example, might elicit the silent 
treatment from his mate, which in turn upsets him because she won’t speak to him. A 
condescending wife might undermine the self-esteem of her husband and then become 
angry because he lacks self-confidence. In sum, people’s personality characteristics can 
upset others either directly by influencing how they act toward others or indirectly by 
eliciting actions from others that are upsetting.
Research on these forms of evocation requires studies that assess the personality 
characteristics of both persons involved. In one study, the personality characteristics of 
both husbands and wives were assessed through three data sources: self-report, spouse￾report, and independent reports by two interviewers (Buss, 1991a). An instrument 
assessed multiple sources of anger and upset in close relationships (Buss, 1989). A short 
version of this instrument is shown in the following Exercise.
Statistical analyses determined personality traits that predicted spouse upset. The 
results were similar for men and women, so for economy of presentation we will use 
men’s personality traits that upset women to highlight the results.
Final PDF to printer482
lar31869_ch15_466-495.indd 482 10/25/22 01:57 PM
PART FIVE The Social and Cultural Domain
Men high on dominance tended to upset their partners by being condescending—
treating their wives’ opinions as stupid or inferior and placing more value on their own 
opinions. The husbands who scored low on conscientiousness, in contrast, tended to 
upset their partners by having extramarital affairs—seeing someone else intimately or 
having sex with another. Husbands low on openness tended to evoke upset in their wives 
by acting rejecting (ignoring the wife’s feelings), abusive (slapping or hitting the wife), 
physically self-absorbed (focusing too much on his face and hair), sexually withholding 
(refusing the wife’s sexual advances), and abusing alcohol (getting drunk).
By far the strongest predictors of evoked anger and upset, however, were the 
personality characteristics of disagreeableness and emotional instability. Disagreeable 
husbands evoked anger and upset in their wives in the following ways: being condescend￾ing, such as treating them as if they were inferior; neglecting and rejecting them, such 
as failing to spend enough time with them and ignoring their feelings; abusing them, 
? INSTRUCTIONS: We all do things that upset or anger other people from time to time. Think 
of a close romantic partner or close friend with whom you have been involved. Following is 
a list of things this person might have done that evoked anger or upset in you. Read the list, 
and place a check by the things your partner or close friend has done in the past year that have 
irritated, angered, annoyed, or upset you.
Exercise
These acts represent items from the larger instrument of 147 acts that one can do to upset or 
anger a member of the opposite sex. The acts correspond to the following factors: (1) conde￾scending, (2) possessive/jealous, (3) neglecting/rejecting, (4) abusive, (5) unfaithful, (6) incon￾siderate, (7) physically self-absorbed, (8) moody, (9) sexually withholding, (10) sexualizing of 
others, (11) abusive of alcohol, (12) disheveled, (13) insulting of partner’s appearance, (14) 
sexually aggressive, and (15) self-centered. It turns out that the personality of the person we are 
close to is a reasonably good predictor of whether that person will perform these upsetting acts.
Source: Buss (1991a).
 1. He/she treated me as if I were stupid or inferior.
 2. He/she demanded too much of my time.
 3. He/she ignored my feelings.
 4. He/she slapped me.
 5. He/she saw someone else intimately.
 6. He/she did not help clean up.
 7. He/she fussed too much with his/her appearance.
 8. He/she acted too moody.
 9. He/she refused to have sex with me.
10. He/she talked about members of the opposite sex as if they were sex objects.
11. He/she got drunk.
12. He/she did not dress well or appropriately for a social gathering.
13. He/she told me that I was ugly.
14. He/she tried to use me for sexual purposes.
15. He/she acted selfishly.
Final PDF to printer483
lar31869_ch15_466-495.indd 483 10/25/22 01:57 PM
CHAPTER FIFTEEN Personality and Social Interaction 
such as slapping, hitting, or spitting; committing infidelity; abusing alcohol; insulting 
their appearance, such as calling them ugly; and exhibiting self-centeredness. Low agree￾ableness was a better predictor of evoking upset in the wife than any other personality 
variable in the study. Low agreeable individuals, because of their anger, jealousy, and 
antisocial behavior, tend to evoke much relationship conflict (Lemay & Dobush, 2015).
The emotionally unstable husbands also evoked anger and upset in their wives. In 
addition to being condescending, abusive, unfaithful, inconsiderate, and abusing alcohol, 
these husbands also upset their wives by being moody (acting irritable) as well as jealous 
and possessive. For example, the emotionally unstable men tended to upset their wives 
by demanding too much attention, monopolizing the wife’s time, being too dependent, 
and flying into jealous rages. Moreover, when marital conflicts arise, emotionally unsta￾ble partners tend to use avoidance rather than compromise to deal with it, thus perpetuat￾ing the conflict (Delatorre et al., 2021).
In another study that used both hypothetical and daily diary assessments of con￾flict, those high in agreeableness tended to evoke less interpersonal conflict (Jensen￾Campbell & Graziano, 2001). Highly agreeable individuals tend to use compromise in 
dealing with conflict, whereas those low in agreeableness are less willing to compromise 
and are more likely to use verbal insults and physical force to deal with conflict. Married 
couples with highly agreeable wives tend to have more frequent sex, perhaps because 
they are receptive to, or evoke more, sexual overtures (Meltzer & McNulty, 2016). The 
role of low agreeableness in evoking conflict extends to a variety of interpersonal rela￾tionships, including those in the workplace (Bono et al., 2002).
These links between personality and conflict show up at least as early as adolescence—
young teenagers low in agreeableness not only evoke more conflict, but also are more 
likely to become victimized by their peers in high school (Jensen-Campbell et al., 2002). 
The strongest predictors of a wife’s anger and dissatisfaction with marriage are the personality traits of 
disagreeableness and emotional instability on the part of the husband.
Stuart Jenner/iStockphoto/Getty Images
Final PDF to printer484
lar31869_ch15_466-495.indd 484 10/25/22 01:57 PM
PART FIVE The Social and Cultural Domain
Agreeable individuals tend to use effective conflict resolution tactics, a path leading to 
harmonious social interactions (Jensen-Campbell et al., 2003). Agreeable people evoke 
trust and cooperation in laboratory-based economic games (Zhao & Smillie, 2016). 
Those high in negative emotionality (high neuroticism) were also likely to experience 
greater conflict in all their relationships, whereas those high in positive emotional￾ity (a close cousin of agreeableness) experienced less conflict in all of their relation￾ships (Robins, Caspi, & Moffitt, 2002). Studies from the United States, Australia, 
the Netherlands, and Germany reveal that agreeableness and emotional stability are 
the traits that most consistently evoke satisfaction in relationships (Barelds, 2005; 
Donnellan, Larsen-Rife, & Conger, 2005; Heaven et al., 2003; Neyer & Voigt, 2004; 
White, Hendrick, & Hendrick, 2004).
Within romantic relationships, one tactic of manipulation that evokes a strong 
emotion is jealousy induction, such as intentionally flirting with someone else in order 
to make one’s partner jealous or upset. Those high on the dark triad traits of narcissism 
and psychopathy are especially prone to using jealousy induction (Massar et al., 2017; 
Tortoriello et al., 2017). They do so with the goals of gaining control over the part￾ner or extracting revenge on them. So the next time you experience jealousy in your 
romantic relationship, you may wonder whether your romantic partner is intentionally 
evoking it in you.
In summary, personality plays a key role in the process of evocation—in this case, 
the evocation of anger and upset. By far, the strongest predictors of this upset are low 
agreeableness and emotional instability. It would be premature to conclude that this 
provides a recipe for choosing whom not to marry or whom not to choose as a close 
friend (in other words, avoid emotionally unstable and disagreeable people). But it does 
suggest that if you marry or befriend someone with these personality attributes, they will 
be likely to behave in anger-evoking ways.
Application
Psychologist John Gottman has been conducting research on married people for three decades. 
His main question has been “What distinguishes the happily married couple from the dissatis￾fied, unhappy couple?” After studying thousands of marital pairs, some of whom have been 
happily married for years and others of whom were applying for divorce, he has found many 
ways that the happy and unhappy couples differ. He distilled his research findings in an applied 
book on how to make marriage work (Gottman & Silver, 1999). His seven principles of posi￾tive relationships are summarized below. Several of these principles concern behaviors related 
to evoking responses in the partner.
1. Develop an empathic understanding of your partner (see Chapter 11 for a discussion 
of empathy). Get to know their “world,” their preferences, and the important events 
in their life. As an example, once a day try to find out one important or significant 
event for your partner: what they are looking forward to or what important event hap￾pened to them. Trivial as it sounds, try asking, “How was your day?” each day.
2. Remain fond of each other and try to nurture your affection for your partner. 
Remember why you like this person, and tell her about it. As an example, keep a 
photo album together and go over it once in a while, reminding yourself of the fun 
times you had together and how much you enjoy being with this special person.
Final PDF to printer485
lar31869_ch15_466-495.indd 485 10/25/22 01:57 PM
CHAPTER FIFTEEN Personality and Social Interaction 
Evocation of Likability, Pleasure, and Pain
One of the most important effects a person can have on the social world is the evocation 
of likability. Being liked by others is linked with higher levels of adjustment, mental health, 
and even academic performance (Wortman & Wood, 2011). Some personality traits consis￾tently evoke likability in others—those linked with agreeableness, the sociable component of 
extraversion, and the honesty–humility factor (Wortman & Wood, 2011). The link between 
agreeableness and social likability has been documented as early as adolescence (de Vries 
et al., 2020). People with these qualities evoke pleasure in others, leading to their liking 
(Saucier, 2010). Being extraverted increases likability in online social networks (Stopfer et 
al., 2013). People low on agreeableness and honesty–humility evoke pain in others. They 
cause others to be offended, annoyed, irritated, and even intimidated. Personality, in short, 
creates a footprint on one’s social world by evoking liking, pleasure, or pain in other people.
Evocation Through Expectancy Confirmation
Expectancy confirmation is a phenomenon whereby people’s beliefs about the personality 
characteristics of others cause them to evoke in others actions that are consistent with the 
initial beliefs. The phenomenon of expectancy confirmation has also been called self-fulfilling 
prophecy. Can mere beliefs have such a powerful role in evoking behavior from others?
In a study of expectancy confirmation, Snyder and Swann (1978) led individuals 
to believe that they would be dealing with a hostile and aggressive individual and then 
introduced the two individuals. They found that people’s beliefs led them to act in an 
aggressive manner toward the unsuspecting target. Then the behavior of the unsuspect￾ing target was examined. The intriguing finding was that the unsuspecting target actually 
acted in a more hostile manner, behavior that was evoked by the person who was led to 
expect hostility. Beliefs about the personality of the other actually created the behavior 
that confirmed those initial beliefs (Snyder & Cantor, 1998).
3. In times of stress, turn toward, rather than away, from each other. During the good times, 
do things together. Don’t take your partner for granted, and never ignore him, even in 
day-to-day life. Pay attention, stay connected, touch each other, and talk frequently.
4. Share power, even if you think you are the expert. Let your partner influence you. 
Ask them for help once in a while. Ask for their opinion. Let them know that their 
views matter to you.
5. You will undoubtedly have arguments. However, try to argue only about the solv￾able problems. When arguing:
• Start gently.
• Proceed with respect.
• If feelings get hurt, stop and try to repair those hurt feelings.
• Be willing to compromise.
6. Realize that some problems may never be solved. For example, perhaps one of you 
is religious and the other is not, and both intend to stay this way. Avoid gridlock on 
unsolvable problems and don’t let them become permanent arguments. Agree to 
disagree sometimes.
7. Become a “we” instead of “I” and “I.” Make the relationship important. Think 
about what is best for “us” rather than only what is best for “me.”
Source: Adapted from Gottman & Silver, 1999.
Final PDF to printer486
lar31869_ch15_466-495.indd 486 10/25/22 01:57 PM
PART FIVE The Social and Cultural Domain
Expectancies about personality have widespread evocation effects in everyday life. 
After all, we often hear information about a person’s reputation prior to actual encoun￾ters with the person. We hear that a person is smart, socially skilled, egocentric, a player, 
or manipulative. Beliefs about the personality characteristics of others may have far￾reaching effects on evoking behavior that confirm our initial beliefs. It is sometimes said 
that, in order to change your personality, you must move to a place where people don’t 
already know you. Through the process of expectancy confirmation, people who already 
know you may unwittingly evoke in you behavior that confirms their beliefs, thereby 
constraining your ability to change.
Manipulation: Social Influence Tactics
Manipulation, or social influence, includes all the ways in which people intentionally 
try to change the behavior of others. No malicious intent need be implied by the term 
manipulation, although such intent is not excluded either. A parent might influence a 
child not to cross between parked cars, but we would not call this behavior malicious. 
Indeed, part of social living is that we influence others all the time. The term manipula￾tion is used here descriptively, with no negative connotation.
From an evolutionary perspective (see Chapter 8), natural selection favors people 
who successfully manipulate objects in their environment. Some manipulable objects are 
inanimate, such as the raw materials used to build shelters, tools, clothing, and weapons. 
Other manipulable objects are alive, including predators and prey of different species 
and mates, parents, children, rivals, and allies of the same species. The manipulation of 
other people can be summarized as the various means by which we influence the psy￾chology and behavior of other people.
The process of manipulation can be examined from two perspectives within per￾sonality psychology. First, we can ask, “Are some individuals consistently more manipu￾lative than others?” Second, we can ask, “Given that all people attempt to influence 
others, do stable personality characteristics predict the sorts of tactics that are used?” Do 
extraverted people, for example, more often use the charm tactic, whereas introverts use 
the silent treatment tactic?
A Taxonomy of Eleven Tactics of Manipulation
A taxonomy is simply a classification scheme—the identification and naming of groups 
within a particular subject field. Taxonomies of plants and animals, for example, have been 
developed to identify and name all the major plant and animal groups. The periodic table 
is a taxonomy of elements in the known universe. The Big Five personality traits that we 
examined in Chapter 3 are a taxonomy of major dimensions of personality. In this section, 
we look at the development of a taxonomy of tactics of manipulation—an attempt to iden￾tify and name the major ways in which people try to influence others in their social world.
A taxonomy of tactics of manipulation was developed through a two-step procedure: 
(1) nominations of acts of influence and (2) factor analysis of self-reports and observer￾reports of the previously nominated acts (Buss, 1992; Buss et al., 1987). The act nomina￾tion procedure (see Chapter 2) was as follows: “We are interested in the things that people 
do to influence others in order to get what they want. Please think of your [romantic part￾ner, close friend, mother, father, etc.]. How do you get this person to do something? What 
do you do? Please write down specific behaviors or acts that you perform in order to get 
this person to do things. List as many different sorts of acts as you can.”
Final PDF to printer487
lar31869_ch15_466-495.indd 487 10/25/22 01:57 PM
CHAPTER FIFTEEN Personality and Social Interaction 
Researchers then converted the nominations into a questionnaire administered via 
self-report or observer report. You can see for yourself how this was done by taking the 
test in the following Exercise to find out what tactics of social influence you use.
INSTRUCTIONS: When you want your partner to do something for you, what are you likely to 
do? Look at each of the following items and rate how likely you are to do each when you are trying to 
get your partner to do something. None of them will apply to all situations in which you want your 
partner to do something, so rate how likely you are, in general, to do what is described. If you are 
extremely likely to do it, write a “7” in the blank next to the item. If you are not at all likely to do 
it, write a “1” in the blank next to the item. If you are somewhat likely to do it, write a “4” in the 
blank. Give intermediate ratings for intermediate likelihood of performing the behaviors.
You can find out your scores by simply adding up your scores in clusters of four: items 1–4 5 
charm tactic; items 5–8 5 silent treatment tactic; items 9–12 5 coercion tactic; items 13–16 
5 reason tactic; items 17–20 5 regression tactic; items 21–24 5 self-abasement tactic. The 
tactics you tend to use the most are those with the highest sums. The tactics you use the least 
are those with the lowest sums. This is an abbreviated version of the instrument used in the 
studies by Buss (1992).
?
Exercise
 1. I compliment her/him so that she/he will do it.
2. I act charming so she/he will do it.
 3. I try to be loving and romantic when I ask her/him.
 4. I give her/him a small gift or card before I ask.
 5. I don’t respond to her/him until she/he does it.
 6. I ignore her/him until she/he does it.
 7. I am silent until she/he does it.
 8. I refuse to do something she/he likes until she/he does it.
 9. I demand that she/he do it.
10. I yell at her/him until she/he does it.
11. I criticize her/him for not doing it.
12. I threaten her/him with something if she/he does not do it.
13. I give her/him reasons she/he should do it.
14. I point out all the good things that will come from doing it.
15. I explain why I want her/him to do it.
16. I show her/him that I would be willing to do it for her/him.
17. I pout until she/he does it.
18. I sulk until she/he does it.
19. I whine until she/he does it.
20. I cry until she/he does it.
21. I allow myself to be debased so that she/he will do it.
22. I lower myself so that she/he will do it.
23. I act humble so that she/he will do it.
24. I act submissive so that she/he will do it.
Final PDF to printer488
lar31869_ch15_466-495.indd 488 10/25/22 01:57 PM
PART FIVE The Social and Cultural Domain
A large number of participants completed versions of an expanded instrument, 
consisting of 83 acts of influence. Factor analysis was then used to identify clusters of 
acts of influence, or tactics. In all, 11 tactics were discovered through this procedure, as 
shown in Table 15.5. Although this taxonomy identifies manipulation tactics used across 
many contexts, it is important to remember that some tactics will depend on the goal of 
the tactician. For example, parents sometimes try to manipulate the mate choices of their 
sons and daughters, and use tactics specific to that context such as “chaperoning,” for 
example, sticking around when the daughter or son is with a potential mate (Apostolou 
& Papageorgi, 2014). And people sometimes try to manipulate their prospective in-laws 
for the goal of help in solidifying their mateship with their offspring (Apostolou, 2017).
Sex Differences in Tactics of Manipulation
Do men and women differ in their usage of tactics of manipulations? Buss (1992) found 
that, by and large, the answer is no. Women and men equally performed almost all of the 
tactics of social influence. There was only one small exception: the regression tactic. In 
samples of dating couples and married couples, women more than men reported more 
frequent use of the regression tactic, including crying, whining, pouting, and sulking to 
get their way. The difference was quite small, supporting the overall conclusion that 
men and women, in general, are similar in their performance of tactics of manipulation. 
Parents also use somewhat different tactics of manipulation with regard to the mate 
choices of their sons and daughters. They are more likely to monitor their daughters, 
control the clothing choices of their daughters, and prevent their daughters from see￾ing a potential mate the parents do not like (Apostolou & Papageorgi, 2014; Perilloux, 
Fleischman, & Buss, 2008).
Personality Predictors of Tactics of Manipulation
Are people with certain personality traits are more likely to use certain tactics of manipu￾lation? A sample of more than 200 participants rated each act of influence on the degree 
to which they used it in each of four relationships: spouse, friend, mother, and father 
Table 15.5 Taxonomy of Eleven Tactics of Manipulation
Tactic Sample Act
Charm I try to be loving when I ask her to do it.
Coercion I yell at him until he does it.
Silent treatment I don’t respond to her until she does it.
Reason I explain why I want him to do it.
Regression I whine until she does it.
Self-abasement I act submissive so that he will do it.
Responsibility invocation I get her to make a commitment to doing it.
Hardball I hit him so that he will do it.
Pleasure induction I show her how much fun it will be to do it.
Social comparison I tell him that everyone else is doing it.
Monetary reward I offer her money so that she will do it.
Note: These tactics then formed the basis for subsequent analyses, such as whether there are sex differences in the tactics of manipulation 
and whether personality traits are associated with the tactics of manipulation that people use.
Final PDF to printer489
lar31869_ch15_466-495.indd 489 10/25/22 01:57 PM
CHAPTER FIFTEEN Personality and Social Interaction 
The term Machiavellian originates from 
an Italian diplomat, Niccolo Machiavelli, 
who wrote a classic treatise, The Prince, in 
1513 (Machiavelli, 1513/1966). Machiavelli 
observed, in his diplomatic role, that lead￾ers come and go, rising and falling as they 
gain and lose power. The Prince is a book 
of advice on acquiring and maintaining 
power, which Machiavelli wrote to ingrati￾ate himself with a new ruler after the one 
that he had served had been overthrown. 
The advice is based on tactics for manipu￾lating others and is entirely lacking in tra￾ditional values, such as trust, honor, and 
decency. One passage in the book, for 
example, notes that “men are so simple and 
so much inclined to obey immediate needs 
that a deceiver will never lack for victims for 
his deceptions” (p. 63). Machiavellianism 
eventually came to be associated with a 
manipulative strategy of social interaction 
and with a personality style that uses other 
people as tools for personal gain.
best in social situations when there is room 
for innovation, rather than those that are 
highly constrained by rules. Political con￾sulting or the world of an independent 
entrepreneur might be relatively uncon￾strained, allowing much latitude for the 
high Mach to operate. The more structured 
world of universities, on the other hand, 
might allow fewer opportunities for the 
high Machs to ply their skills.
The low Mach pursues a strategy of 
cooperation, sometimes called tit-for-tat. This 
strategy is based on reciprocity—you help 
me, and I’ll help you in return, and we will 
both be better off as a result. This is a long￾term win–win social strategy, in contrast to 
the short-term strategy of the high Mach.
The success of the high Mach depends 
on the context. One study examined a real￾world setting by studying the sales perfor￾mance of stockbrokers from two different 
organizational contexts (Shultz, 1993). One 
organizational context, the NYNEX, is a 
highly structured stock brokerage and rule 
bound, with little room for the salespeople 
to innovate or improvise. Employees are 
required to follow a two-volume manual of 
rules. The second organizational context, 
represented by stock brokerages such as 
Merrill Lynch, is more loosely structured 
and allows more opportunities for wheeling 
and dealing.
The sales success of stockbrokers was 
evaluated by the size of the commissions 
earned by the individuals in the two organi￾zational contexts. In the loosely structured 
organizations, such as Merrill Lynch, the 
high Machs had more clients and earned 
fully twice as many commissions as the low 
Machs. However, in the more tightly struc￾tured organizations, the low Machs earned 
twice as much money on commissions as 
the high Machs. This study illustrates a 
key point about the Machiavellian social 
strategy of influence—its success is highly 
Two psychologists—Richard Christie 
and Florence Geis—developed a self-report 
scale to measure individual differences in 
Machiavellianism (Christie & Geis, 1970). 
The following are some sample items from 
the test, with the Machiavellian direction 
noted in parentheses:
• The best way to handle people is to tell 
them what they want to hear (true).
• Anyone who completely trusts anyone 
else is asking for trouble (true).
• Honesty is the best policy in all cases
(false).
• Never tell anyone the real reason you 
did something unless it is useful to do so
(true).
• Most people who get ahead in the world 
lead clean, moral lives (false).
• The biggest difference between most crim￾inals and other people is that criminals are 
stupid enough to get caught (true).
• It is wise to flatter important people (true).
As you can see, the high scorer on 
the Machiavellianism scale (called a “high 
Mach”) is manipulative, has a cynical world￾view, treats other people as tools to be 
used for personal ends, does not trust other 
people, and lacks empathy. The low scorer 
on the Machiavellianism scale (called a 
“low Mach”) is trusting, empathic, believes 
that things are clearly either right or wrong, 
and views human nature as basically good.
High and low scorers represent two 
alternative strategies of social conduct 
(Wilson, Near, & Miller, 1996). The high 
Mach represents an exploitative social 
strategy—one that betrays friendship and 
uses other people opportunistically. For 
example, high Machs are especially likely 
to undermine their coworkers in order to 
boost their own status in the workplace, 
often to the detriment the organization they 
work for (Castille, Kuyumcu, & Bennett, 
2017). Theoretically, this strategy works 
A Closer Look The Machiavellian Personality
Niccolo Machiavelli, after whom the trait of 
Machiavellianism was named, wrote a book 
on strategies for manipulating others.
G. NIMATALLAH/De Agostini Picture Library/
Getty Images Plus
(Continued )
Final PDF to printer490
lar31869_ch15_466-495.indd 490 10/25/22 01:57 PM
PART FIVE The Social and Cultural Domain
context-dependent. Machiavellianism is not 
a social strategy that works all the time. 
Social situations with lots of rules do not 
allow high Machs to con others, tell lies, 
and betray those who trust them with impu￾nity. In these situations, the high Machs 
get caught, sustain damage to their repu￾tations, and often are fired. In more fluid 
occupational contexts, high Machs succeed 
because they can wheel and deal, move 
quickly from one situation to another, and 
exploit the opportunities available in these 
less rule-bound settings.
Machiavellianism is a social strategy 
in which practitioners are quick to betray 
others (Wilson, Near, & Miller, 1996). In 
one laboratory study, participants were 
given an opportunity to steal money in 
a worker–supervisor situation (Harrell & 
Hartnagel, 1976). The participants played 
the role of workers. They were supervised 
by a person who acted trusting, stating 
that he or she did not need to monitor the 
workers closely. A full 81 percent of the 
high Machs stole money, as contrasted with 
only 24 percent of the low Machs. The high 
Machs who did steal took a larger amount 
of money than those few low Machs who 
stole, they tended to conceal their theft, 
and they lied more often to the supervisor 
when questioned about the theft.
Not only do high Machs lie and betray 
others’ trust more than low Machs, but 
Hughs, 2015). High Machs are more likely 
to cheat on their romantic partner and to be 
sexually unfaithful with other people (Jones 
& Weiser, 2014). Interestingly, these links 
between Machiavellianism and specific 
tactics of manipulation are stronger for the 
male than for the female sample.
The Machiavellian strategy has 
many advantages, but it also has costs. 
By betraying, cheating, and lying, the 
high Mach runs the risk of retaliation and 
revenge by those who were exploited. 
The high Mach is more likely to incur dam￾age to his or her reputation. Once people 
acquire reputations as exploitative, other 
people are more likely to avoid them and 
refuse to interact with them.
This discussion of the Machiavellian 
strategy also illustrates the three key pro￾cesses by which personality affects social 
interaction, bringing us back full circle to 
the three central processes of personality 
and social interaction. First, the high Mach 
tends to select situations that are loosely 
structured, untethered by rules that would 
restrict the deployment of an exploitative 
strategy. Second, the high Mach tends to 
evoke specific reactions from others, such 
as anger and retaliation for having been 
exploited. Third, the high Mach tends to 
manipulate other people in predictable 
ways, using tactics that are exploitative, 
self-serving, and deceptive.
there is also evidence that they make more 
believable liars (Exline et al., 1970; Geis & 
Moon, 1981). In one study, high and low 
Machs were instructed to cheat on a task 
and then to lie to the experimenter about 
having cheated (Exline et al., 1970). The 
experimenter then became increasingly 
suspicious and questioned the participants 
about whether they had cheated. The high 
Machs were able to maintain greater eye 
contact than the low Machs. Fewer of the 
high Machs than the low Machs confessed. 
Finally, the high Machs were judged to be 
better liars than the low Machs.
The manipulative tactics used by the 
high Machs extend to the romantic and 
sexual domains. High Machs, compared 
to their low Mach peers, are more likely to 
feign love in order to get sex (e.g., “I some￾times say ‘I love you’ when I don’t really 
mean it to get someone to have sex with 
me”), get a partner drunk in order to induce 
the partner to have sex, and express a will￾ingness to use force to achieve sex with 
an unwilling partner (McHoskey, 2001). 
Women high in Machiavellianism are prone 
to faking sexual orgasm in order to manipu￾late or deceive their partner (Brewer, Abell, 
& Lyons, 2016). They are more prone to 
committing sexual harassment (Zeigler￾Hill, Myers, & Clark, 2016). They tend to 
maliciously gossip about their mating rivals 
(Goncalves & Campbell, 2014; Lyons & 
A Closer Look (Continued )
(Buss, 1992). Correlations were computed between the personality traits of the partici￾pants and their use of each tactic of manipulation.
Those scoring relatively high in dominance (extraversion) tended to use coercion, 
such as demanding, threatening, cursing, and criticizing, in order to get their way. Highly 
dominant people also tended to use responsibility invocation, getting others to commit 
to a course of action and saying that it was their duty to do it.
Those low in dominance (relatively submissive individuals) used the self-abase￾ment tactic as a means of influencing others. They lowered themselves, for example, or 
tried to look weak or sickly to get others to do what they wanted. Interestingly, these sub￾missive individuals also tended to use the hardball tactic—deception, lying, degradation, 
and even violence—more often than their dominant counterparts.
Final PDF to printer491
lar31869_ch15_466-495.indd 491 10/25/22 01:57 PM
CHAPTER FIFTEEN Personality and Social Interaction 
The two main tactics of influence used by highly agreeable peo￾ple are pleasure induction and reason. Agreeable individuals show 
others how enjoyable the activity will be, explain the rationale for 
wanting others to do it, and point out all the good things that will 
come from doing it. A study of how children manipulate their parents 
on their choice mates revealed that highly agreeable children used 
the reason tactic, convincing their parents to trust them (Apostolou, 
Zacharia, & Frantzides, 2015).
Those who are disagreeable, in contrast, frequently use 
coercion and the silent treatment—results also found in a Croatia 
(Butkovic & Bratko, 2007). Not only do they threaten, criticize, 
yell, and scream in order to get their way, they also give the stony 
silent look and refuse to speak to the other until he or she complies. 
Low-agreeable individuals are also likely to seek revenge on people 
they perceive have wronged them; they use cost-inflicting rather than benefit-bestowing 
tactics of manipulation (McCullough et al., 2001). Low-agreeable individuals tend to 
be more selfish in their use of collective resources, whereas high-agreeable individuals 
exercise more self-restraint when the group’s resources are scarce or threatened (Koole 
et al., 2001).
Conscientiousness is associated with reason. Conscientious individuals explain 
why they want the other person to do something and provide logical explanations for 
wanting it done. Low-conscientious individuals are more likely to use criminal strategies 
in gaining resources, as indicated by arrest records and recidivism (being rearrested after 
being let out of prison) (Clower & Bothwell, 2001).
Emotionally unstable individuals use a wide variety of tactics to manipulate 
others—hardball and coercion, but also reason and monetary reward. The tactic most 
commonly used by emotionally unstable people, however, is regression. These people 
pout, sulk, whine, and cry to get their way (see Butkovic & Bratko, 2007). This kind of 
behavior comes close to the core definition of emotional instability—the display of vola￾tile emotions, some positive and some negative. Emotional volatility seems strategically 
motivated—it is used to influence others to get what they want.
Which tactics do people high on Intellect–Openness use? Not surprisingly, these 
smart and perceptive people tend to use reason above all other tactics. They also use 
pleasure induction and responsibility invocation, however—findings not as intuitively 
obvious. Can you guess which tactic those low on Intellect–Openness use? They use 
social comparison—saying that everyone else is doing it and comparing the partner with 
someone else who would do it.
The Dark Triad personality traits (narcissism, psychopathy, and Machiavellianism) 
are linked with tactics of social influence (Jonason & Webster, 2012). Those scoring high 
on these dark traits tended to manipulate others through a wide variety of tactics—coercion, 
hardball, reciprocity, social comparison, monetary reward, and even charm. High Dark 
Triad scorers favor the hardball tactic; they tend to bully other people (Baughman et al., 
2012). Those high on Dark Triad traits engage in stronger and more varied forms of mate 
retention, including providing benefits and inflicting costs to keep their partner (Chegeni, 
Pirklani, & Dehshiri, 2018). And Dark Triad men are apt to use coercion as a tactic of 
manipulation to obtain sex from reluctant or unwilling women (Prusik et al., 2021).
In summary, these results provide strong evidence that personality dispositions are 
not static entities residing passively in the heads of people. They have profound implica￾tions for social interaction—in this case, for the tactics people use to manipulate others 
in their social environment.
The “silent treatment” is a manipulation strategy often 
employed by persons high on the trait of disagreeableness.
Wavebreak Media ltd/Alamy Stock Pho
Final PDF to printer492
lar31869_ch15_466-495.indd 492 10/25/22 01:57 PM
PART FIVE The Social and Cultural Domain
Panning Back: An Overview of Personality and 
Social Interaction
The important message from this chapter is that personality does not reside passively 
within individuals, but rather profoundly affects each person’s social environment. The 
three processes by which personality can influence an individual’s social environment—
selection, evocation, and manipulation—are highlighted in Table 15.6.
These fundamental mechanisms operate in the physical as well as the social envi￾ronment. Let’s consider selection first. In the physical domain, an introvert is more likely 
to choose to live in a rural habitat, whereas an extravert is more likely to choose city 
living with all the opportunities for social interaction urban life provides. In the social 
domain, an extravert is more likely to select an extraverted mate; an introvert is more 
likely to choose an introverted mate so that they can read books quietly side by side.
For the process of evocation, a loud, heavy person who treads clumsily is more 
likely to evoke an avalanche while climbing a snowy mountain. In the social domain, 
narcissistic people evoke admiration from followers and contempt from those who 
dislike their unbridled self-centeredness. For the process of manipulation, person￾ality affects how people modify the rooms in which they live (Gosling et al., 2002). 
Conscientious individuals, for example, keep their rooms tidy, neat, and free of clutter. 
Those low on Conscientiousness have more messiness in their rooms. Those high in 
Intellect–Openness decorate their rooms with stylish and unconventional objects and 
have many books that are highly varied in genre. Those low on Intellect–Openness have 
fewer and more conventional decorations, a narrower range of books, and a narrower 
collection of music. In the social domain, disagreeable individuals are more likely than 
stable individuals to use “the silent treatment” as a tactic of manipulation. Those high in 
Intellect–Openness tend to use reason and rationality to get their way. And narcissists 
try to transfer blame for their failures onto others.
Table 15.6 Causal Mechanisms That Create Links Between 
Personality and Environment: Examples from the 
Physical and Social Domains
Mechanism Physical Environment Social Environment
Selection Introvert selects rural habitat Extravert chooses extraverted mate
Avoidance of cold climates Emotionally stable person chooses 
stable roommate
Evocation Person who treads heavily elicits an 
avalanche
Disagreeable people evoke relationship 
conflict
Clumsy person creates, elicits more 
noise and clatter
Narcissistic people evoke admiration 
from followers
Manipulation Conscientious person creates clean 
and neat room
Disagreeable person uses “the silent 
treatment”
Person high on openness creates 
stylish, colorful room with varied art 
and books
Narcissists transfer blame to others
Final PDF to printer493
lar31869_ch15_466-495.indd 493 10/25/22 01:57 PM
CHAPTER FIFTEEN Personality and Social Interaction 
Narcissism is a personality dimension that 
involves, at the upper end, high levels of 
self-absorption and conceitedness, placing 
one’s own wants and needs above those 
of others, displaying unusual grandiosity, 
showing a profound sense of entitlement, 
and lacking empathy for other people’s 
feelings, needs, and desires (see Chapters 
10 and 14; Raskin & Terry, 1988). Those 
high on narcissism tend to be exhibition￾istic (e.g., flaunting money to impress oth￾ers), grandiose (e.g., talking about how 
great they are), self-centered (e.g., taking 
the best piece of food for themselves), and 
interpersonally exploitative (e.g., using oth￾ers for selfish ends) (Buss & Chiodo, 1991). 
Interestingly, celebrities such as women on 
reality TV shows tend to be more narcis￾sistic than average (Young & Pinsky, 2006). 
Nonetheless, it is also true that narcis￾sistic individuals think they are hot (good 
looking), but empirical evidence suggests 
that they are only slightly more attractive 
than average (Bleske-Rechek, Remicker, 
& Baker, 2008; Holtzman & Strube, 2010). 
Personality psychologists have docu￾mented the impact of narcissism on social 
interaction, providing a fascinating illustra￾tion of the influence of personality on social 
selection, evocation, and manipulation.
In terms of selection, narcissists tend 
to choose people who admire them, who 
will reflect the positive view they hold about 
themselves. They don’t want people around 
who will view them as anything other than as 
extraordinary, beautiful, or brilliant. Because 
narcissists view themselves as excep￾tional, they tend to select social situations 
in which they perceive that their “opportu￾nity for glory” will be enhanced, and avoid 
situations in which their self-perceived 
magnificence will not be noticed by others 
(Wallace & Baumeister, 2002). Although 
they tend to appoint themselves to positions 
of power, they avoid social situations that 
don’t afford the chance to show off their bril￾liance (Wallace & Baumeister, 2002). Life, 
on others to make a point. Narcissists also 
evoke reactions from others through their 
behavior and dress. They tend to create 
Facebook pages that are more self-pro￾moting (Buffardi & Campbell, 2008; Ong et 
al., 2011), including posting sexy images of 
themselves (DeWall et al., 2011) and shar￾ing sexy photos of their attractive partners 
(Seidman, Roberts, & Zeigler-Hill, 2019). 
Narcissists post more “selfies,” update 
their online profile photos more often, and 
spend more time on Instagram (Marshall, 
Lefringhausen, & Ferenczi, 2015; Moon et 
al., 2016; Sorokowski et al., 2015; Weiser, 
2015). They are more likely to wear expen￾sive and flashy clothes; if they are female, 
they wear more makeup and show more 
cleavage—actions that may evoke sexual 
overtures in others (Vazire et al., 2008).
Narcissists also use predictable 
tactics of manipulation. They are exploit￾ative of others and would be described as 
“users.” They use friends for their wealth or 
connections. When in positions of power, 
they use their positions to exploit subor￾dinates and show no hesitation in pulling 
rank to humiliate someone else in front of 
others. They react to failure by derogating 
other people, possibly to transfer the blame 
for their failure onto others (Park & Colvin, 
2015; South, Oltmanns, & Turkheimer, 
2003). In mating, they engage in manipu￾lative game-playing and are more likely 
to use sexually coercive and aggressive 
tactics (Blinkhorn, Lyons, & Almond, 2015; 
Haslam & Montrose, 2015; Lamarche & 
Seery, 2019). They also lash out in anger 
and aggression against others when con￾fronted with their own failure. The entitle￾ment and exploitativeness components of 
narcissism are especially good predictors 
of aggression (Reidy et al., 2008). In sum, 
the personality dimension of narcissism 
shows many links to the social selections 
they make, the reactions they evoke from 
others, and the tactics of manipulation they 
however, sometimes has a way of crashing 
in, and narcissists are sometimes rejected. 
When they are rejected, narcissists tend to 
lash out with great anger at those they per￾ceive to have wronged them (Carpenter, 
2012; Horton & Sedikides, 2009; Jones 
& Paulhus, 2010), perhaps because their 
self-esteem is a bit fragile in response to 
failure (Zeigler-Hill, Myers, & Clark, 2010). 
Interestingly, narcissists are highly selective 
in their social perceptions—they view them￾selves as victims of interpersonal transgres￾sions far more frequently than those low on 
narcissism (McCullough et al., 2003).
In the mating domain, narcissists tend 
to be low on commitment to their partner, 
perhaps because they view themselves as 
better or more desirable than their partner 
(Campbell & Foster, 2002; Campbell, Rudich, & 
Sedikedes, 2002). Because they chose mates 
who admire them, narcissists do not doubt 
the commitment of their romantic partners 
(Foster & Campbell, 2005). When asked in an 
experiment to list possible reasons why their 
current romantic partner might be less com￾mitted than they are to the relationship, narcis￾sists had great difficulty even completing the 
task! After the task, narcissists (compared with 
those low on narcissism) indicated substan￾tially lower levels of their own commitment to 
their romantic partner and a greater willing￾ness to accept a dating invitation from some￾one else. Narcissistic entitlement has also 
been linked to an inability to forgive others, a 
quality that could also impair the functioning 
of romantic relationships (Exline et al., 2004).
Narcissists also evoke predictable 
responses from others. Because they are 
exhibitionistic and thrust themselves into 
the center of attention, narcissists some￾times split people in their evocations—some 
view them as brilliant, entertaining, and 
“not boring,” whereas others view them 
as selfish and boorish (Campbell, Rudich, 
& Sedikides, 2002). They sometimes evoke 
anger in others because of their self￾aggrandizing actions, such as pulling rank 
A Closer Look Narcissism and Social Interaction
Final PDF to printer494
lar31869_ch15_466-495.indd 494 10/25/22 01:57 PM
PART FIVE The Social and Cultural Domain
Personality, in short, affects the mates and friends a person chooses and the envi￾ronments a person decides to enter or avoid (selection), the reactions elicited from oth￾ers and from the physical environment (evocation), and the ways in which one’s physical 
and social environments are altered once inhabited (manipulation). These three pro￾cesses are shown in Figure 15.1. 
Further research is needed to determine whether the causal arrows in Figure 15.1 
run in both directions. Does the choice of a mate who is similar in personality, for exam￾ple, create a social environment that reinforces that personality and makes it more stable 
over time (Neyer & Lehnart, 2007)? Does the conflict evoked by disagreeable people 
create a social environment in which they receive a lot of negative feedback, hence main￾taining their disagreeable personality? Does the wide variety of manipulative tactics used 
by emotionally unstable individuals—from hardball to threats to sulking, whining, and 
pouting—create a social environment that is indeed rocked with turmoil, thus maintain￾ing the personality disposition of neuroticism? Research within the next decade will 
undoubtedly answer these questions.
Figure 15.1
Personality and social interaction.
Evocation Social Environment
Selection
Manipulation
Personality
SUMMARY AND EVALUATION
The personality characteristics we carry with us affect how we interact with other people 
occupying our social world. The reciprocal influences of personality and social interac￾tions have brought the fields of personality psychology and social psychology closer 
together (Swann & Selye, 2005).
This chapter described three key processes by which personality affects social interac￾tion. First, we select people and environments, choosing the social situations to which we 
expose ourselves. In selecting a mate, people worldwide look for mates who are dependable, 
are emotionally stable, and have a pleasing disposition. We tend to select mates who are 
similar in personality to ourselves, a process known as assortative mating. Complementary 
needs theory—the idea that opposites attract when it comes to human mating—has received 
no empirical support. Those who fail to get what they want—for example, ending up with 
mates who are emotionally unstable or disagreeable—tend to be unhappy with their mar￾riages and tend to divorce more often than those who succeed in choosing what they want.
The process of selection extends beyond the choice of romantic partners. The 
personality trait of shyness, for example, is linked with avoiding gynecological exams, 
entering risky sexual situations by failing to bring up the topic of contraception, and 
avoiding risky situations that involve gambling money. Similarly, high sensation-seeking 
heterosexual males tend to choose risky sexual situations, such as having unprotected 
sex and sex with a larger number of partners.
Final PDF to printer495
lar31869_ch15_466-495.indd 495 10/25/22 01:57 PM
CHAPTER FIFTEEN Personality and Social Interaction 
Second, we evoke emotions and actions in others. These evocations are based, 
in part, on our personality characteristics. The strongest predictors of angering and 
upsetting a partner are low Agreeableness and low Emotional Stability. Those low on 
Agreeableness, for example, tend to create a lot of conflict in their social situations, 
including with friends and romantic partners, and they tend to be socially victimized 
during their high school years. In a phenomenon known as expectancy confirmation, 
our beliefs about the personality characteristics of others sometimes evoke in others 
precisely the behaviors we expect. A belief that someone is hostile, for example, tends to 
elicit hostile behavior from that person.
Manipulation is the third process—defined as the ways in which people intentionally 
influence and exploit others. Humans use many tactics for influencing others, including charm, 
silent treatment, coercion, reason, regression, and self-abasement. Men and women use these 
tactics approximately equally, with the exception of regression, which is used slightly more 
often by women. Personality characteristics play a key role in which tactics we use to influence 
others. Emotionally unstable people, for example, tend to use regression and the silent treat￾ment. They also tend to use reason and monetary reward, though, suggesting some nonintui￾tive links between personality and tactics of manipulation. People high on Intellect–Openness 
tend to use reason; those low on this dimension tend to use the social comparison tactic.
One personality trait linked with manipulation tactics is Machiavellianism. The 
high Machs tend to tell people what they want to hear, use flattery to get what they want, 
and frequently lie and deceive. In mating, for example, high Machs are more likely to 
feign love in order to get sex, use drugs and alcohol to render a potential sex partner 
more vulnerable, and even express a willingness to use force to get sex. High Machs also 
betray the trust of others, sometimes feigning cooperation before defecting. They are 
also more likely than low Machs to steal and then to lie about stealing when they are 
caught. The success of the high Mach depends heavily on context. In loosely structured 
social situations and work organizations, high Machs can wheel and deal, using their 
manipulative, conning strategies to great effect. In more tightly structured, rule-bound 
situations, however, low Machs outperform high Machs.
All three processes have been documented with the personality disposition of nar￾cissism. Narcissists tend to select others who admire them and avoid those who are skep￾tical of their claims of greatness. They selectively enter social situations in which there 
are opportunities for glory and avoid situations in which their brilliance will not be seen 
by others. Narcissists evoke admiration and respect from those who fawn over them, 
while evoking anger from those who are victims of their scorn and conceit. In terms 
of manipulation, narcissists are interpersonally exploitative, using friends for wealth or 
connections and blaming others when things go wrong. Examining all these processes 
with respect to narcissists highlights the ways in which personality is connected with the 
social interactions we create and the environments we inhabit.
In summary, personality is predictably and systematically linked with social inter￾action through the ways in which we select our partners and social worlds, the ways in 
which we evoke responses from people we have initially chosen, and the ways in which 
we influence those people to attain our desired ends.
complementary needs theory 473
attraction similarity theory 473
assortative mating 473
violation of desire 478
KEY TERMS
expectancy confirmation 485
taxonomy 486
shyness 479
Machiavellianism 480
evocation 480
hostile attributional bias 481
Final PDF to printerlar31869_ch16_496-523.indd 496 10/31/22 08:17 AM
496
16
Sex, Gender, and 
Personality
The Science and Politics of Studying Sex and Gender
History of the Study of Sex Differences
Calculation of Effect Size: How Large Are the Sex Differences?
Minimalists and Maximalists
Sex Differences in Personality
Temperament in Children
Five-Factor Model
Basic Emotions: Frequency and Intensity
Other Dimensions of Personality
Masculinity, Femininity, Androgyny, and Sex Roles
The Search for Androgyny
Gender Stereotypes
Theories of Sex Differences
Socialization and Social Roles
Hormonal Theories
Evolutionary Psychology Theory
An Integrated Theoretical Perspective
SUMMARY AND EVALUATION
KEY TERMS
Lightspring/Shutterstock 
Final PDF to printerlar31869_ch16_496-523.indd 497 10/31/22 08:17 AM
T H E S O C I A L A N D C U L T U R A L 
DOMAIN
“Despite the advances of feminism, escalating levels of sexism 
and violence—from undervalued intelligence to sexual harassment in elementary 
school—cause girls to stifle their creative spirit and natural impulses, which ulti￾mately destroys their self-esteem” (Pipher, 1994, bookjacket). This is a quotation from 
the book Reviving Ophelia, which remained on the best-seller list for an astonishing 
135 weeks (Kling et al., 1999). The sentiment expresses widespread belief that women 
suffer lower self-esteem than men do and that this difference in adult personality is 
caused by destructive events during development.
Although we cannot know with certainty why Reviving Ophelia remained popular 
for so long, several possibilities warrant consideration. First, people are intrinsically 
fascinated with psychological sex differences: average differences between women and 
men in personality or behavior. Second, many people are concerned with the political 
implications of findings of sex differences. Will such findings be used to foster gender 
stereotypes? Will findings be used to oppress women? Third, people are concerned with 
the practical implications of sex differences for their everyday lives. Will knowledge of 
sex differences help people to communicate better and reduce conflict between genders?
This chapter focuses centrally on the scientific issues, but it also discusses the 
broader debate about the scientific findings. Are women and men basically different or 
basically the same when it comes to personality? Have the differences been exaggerated 
because of stereotypes people have about what women and men are like? Which theories 
provide compelling explanations for sex-linked features of personality? As used in this 
text, the phrase sex differences simply refers to an average difference between women and 
men on certain characteristics, such as height, body fat distribution, or personality char￾acteristics, with no prejudgment about the cause of the difference.
Some differences in 
personality between adult 
men and women are 
hypothesized to result from 
environmental events that 
occur during adolescence.
Monashee Frantz/AGE Fotostock
16
Final PDF to printer498
lar31869_ch16_496-523.indd 498 10/31/22 08:17 AM
PART FIVE The Social and Cultural Domain
We begin by briefly sketching the history of the study of sex differences in per￾sonality. This background information will show how complex this topic is: We will see 
that the definition of gender, or social interpretations of what it means to be a man or 
a woman, can change over time. Next, we look at some of the techniques psychologists 
use to identify sex differences from research data. We examine sex differences in traits 
such as assertiveness, criminality, and sexuality, and use these differences to explore the 
fascinating topic of gender stereotypes: beliefs about how men and women differ or are 
supposed to differ, in contrast to what the actual differences are. Finally, we explore 
theories that attempt to explain the origins of these sex differences.
The Science and Politics of Studying Sex and Gender
“Few topics in psychology can rival sex differences in their power to stir controversy and 
captivate both scientists and the public” (Del Guidice, 2019). Some worry, for example, 
that findings of sex differences might be used to support certain political agendas, such as 
excluding women from leadership or work roles. Some argue that findings of sex differ￾ences merely reflect gender stereotypes rather than real differences. Some argue that any 
discovery of sex differences merely reflects the biases of the scientists and are not objec￾tive descriptions of reality. Roy Baumeister, for example, advocated stopping research 
on sex differences entirely because findings of sex differences might conflict with ideals 
of egalitarianism (Baumeister, 1988), although he has since reversed his views on this 
(personal communication, May 17, 2006) and has published several key articles on sex 
differences in the domain of sexuality (e.g., Baumeister, Catanese, & Vohs, 2001).
Others argue, however, that both scientific psychology and social change will be 
impossible without coming to terms with the real sex differences that exist. Feminist psy￾chologist Alice Eagly (1995), for example, argues that sex differences exist, they are con￾sistent across studies, and they should not be ignored merely because they are perceived 
to conflict with certain political agendas. Indeed, Eagly argues that feminists who try to 
minimize these differences or pretend that they do not exist hamper the feminist agenda 
by presenting a dogma that is out of touch with reality. Still others, such as Janet Hyde, 
argue that sex differences have been exaggerated, that there is so much overlap between 
the sexes on most personality traits, and that the actual differences are minimal (Hyde, 
2005; Hyde & Plant, 1995). In contrast, recent studies using sophisticated multivariate 
statistical techniques find that sex differences in personality are considerably larger than 
previous reviews concluded that relied solely on considering one personality trait at a 
time (Kaiser et al., 2020). We will examine these contrasting positions in more detail.
History of the Study of Sex Differences
Before 1973, relatively little attention was paid to sex differences. Indeed, in psychology 
research, it was common practice to use participants of only one sex, most often males. 
And even when both men and women were studied, few articles actually analyzed or 
reported whether the effects differed for men and women.
All of this changed in the early 1970s (Eagly, 1995; Hoyenga & Hoyenga, 1993). 
In 1974, Eleanor Maccoby and Carol Jacklyn published a now-classic book, The 
Psychology of Sex Differences, in which they reviewed hundreds of studies and drew sev￾eral key conclusions about how men and women differed. They concluded that women 
were slightly better than men at verbal ability. Men were slightly better than women 
in mathematical ability (e.g., geometry, algebra) and spatial ability (e.g., ability to 
Final PDF to printer499
lar31869_ch16_496-523.indd 499 10/31/22 08:17 AM
CHAPTER SIXTEEN Sex, Gender, and Personality
visualize what a three-dimensional object would look like if it were rotated in space by 
90 degrees). In terms of personality characteristics, they concluded that only one sex dif￾ference existed: Men were more aggressive than women. With other aspects of personal￾ity and social behavior, they concluded that there was not enough evidence to determine 
whether men and women differed. Overall, they concluded that sex differences were few 
in number and trivial in importance.
The Psychology of Sex Differences set off an avalanche of research. The book itself 
was criticized on various grounds. Some argued that many more sex differences existed 
than were portrayed by Maccoby and Jacklyn (Block, 1983). Others challenged the con￾clusion that men were more aggressive than women (Frodi, Macauley, & Thome, 1977). 
Furthermore, the methods by which the authors drew their conclusions, although stan￾dard practice at that time, were crude by today’s standards.
Following the publication of The Psychology of Sex Differences, psychology jour￾nals changed their reporting practices. They started to require authors to calculate and 
report sex differences. Claims that many of the findings in psychology were based pri￾marily on studies of men led to calls for the greater inclusion of women as participants. 
There followed an explosion of research on sex differences. Literally thousands of stud￾ies were conducted on the ways in which men and women did or did not differ. By 1992, 
the federal government of the United States required both sexes to be represented in 
federally funded research (unless there was a legitimate reason to limit the research to 
one sex, such as studies of ovarian or prostate cancer).
Since Maccoby and Jacklyn’s early work, researchers have developed more precise 
quantitative procedures for examining conclusions across studies and thus for determin￾ing sex differences, called meta-analyses. Recall that meta-analysis is a statistical method 
for summarizing the findings of large numbers of individual studies. Meta-analysis allows 
researchers to calculate with greater objectivity whether a particular difference is consis￾tent across studies. Furthermore, it allows researchers to estimate how large the differ￾ence actually is—called the effect size.
Calculation of Effect Size: How Large Are the Sex Differences?
The most commonly used statistic in meta-analysis is the effect size, or d statistic. The d
statistic is used to express a difference in standard deviation units (see Chapter 2). A d of 
0.50 means that the average difference between two groups is half a standard deviation. 
A d of 1.00 means that the difference between the groups is one full standard deviation. 
A d of 0.25 means that the difference between the groups is one-quarter of a standard 
deviation. An effect size can be calculated for each study of sex differences and then 
averaged across studies to give a more precise and objective assessment of whether the 
sexes differ and, if so, by how much.
Most meta-analyses have adopted a convention for interpreting effect sizes 
(Cohen, 1977):
d Score Meaning
0.20 or −0.20 Small difference
0.50 or −0.50 Medium difference
0.80 or −0.80 Large difference
When comparing men to women, assume that positive d scores, such as 0.20 or 0.50, 
indicate that men score higher than women. Negative d scores, such as −0.20 or −0.50, 
indicate that women score higher than men. For example, a d score of −0.85 means that 
women score much higher on a particular trait.
Final PDF to printer500
lar31869_ch16_496-523.indd 500 10/31/22 08:17 AM
PART FIVE The Social and Cultural Domain
To get a feel for effect sizes, let’s examine a few 
findings outside the realm of personality. Which sex can 
throw a ball farther, men or women? Although there are 
great individual differences within each sex, it is clear 
that men can, on average, throw farther than women. 
The d is approximately 2.00 (Ashmore, 1990). This 
means that the sexes differ, on average, by two full stan￾dard deviations, which is quite large. Which sex has a 
higher grade point average in college? The d for grade 
point average is −0.04, which is very close to zero. This 
means that men and women are essentially the same in 
their grade point average, although women have a very 
slight advantage.
Which sex scores higher in verbal ability? It turns 
out that women are slightly better than men, but the d
is only −0.11. Are men better at math? The d here also 
turns out to be quite small, only 0.15. These findings are 
in line with a vast literature that now documents that 
men and women are essentially the same (or do not 
differ by much) on most measures of cognitive ability 
(Hyde, 2005, 2014). About the only well-documented 
exception pertains to spatial rotation ability, such as the 
spatial ability involved in throwing a spear (or football) 
so that it correctly anticipates the trajectory of a moving 
object, such as an animal or a receiver. The d for this 
sort of spatial ability is 0.73, which comes close to the 
standard for “large” (Ashmore, 1990).
Even large effect sizes for average sex differences do 
not necessarily have implications for any particular indi￾vidual. Even with a d of 2.00 for throwing distance, some 
women can throw much farther than the average man, and 
some men cannot throw as far as the average woman. This 
overlap in the distributions of the sexes must be kept in 
mind when evaluating effect sizes (see Figure 16.1). 
When it comes to who can throw a ball farther, the effect size for 
the difference between men and women is 2.00, in favor of the 
men. Although this is a large difference in average ability, there will 
nevertheless be some women who can throw farther than most men 
because the distributions still overlap.
Carson Granci/Design Pics/SuperStock
Figure 16.1
Overlap between the sexes in context of a mean difference. Even when one sex greatly 
exceeds the other in a particular ability, there is a large area of overlap. Women whose 
throwing ability falls in the shaded area exceed the throwing ability of the average man. Number of women or men
Women Men
Throwing ability
Final PDF to printer501
lar31869_ch16_496-523.indd 501 10/31/22 08:17 AM
CHAPTER SIXTEEN Sex, Gender, and Personality
Minimalists and Maximalists
One focus of the debate on sex differences centers on effect sizes—on whether sex dif￾ferences are small and relatively inconsequential or substantial and important. Those 
who describe sex differences as small and inconsequential take the minimalist position 
and offer two arguments. The first is that, empirically, most findings of sex differences 
show small magnitudes of effect (Deaux, 1984; Hyde, 2005, 2014; Hyde & Plant, 1995). 
Minimalists tend to emphasize that the distributions of men and women on any given 
personality variable show tremendous overlap, which reflect their small magnitude of 
effect (see Figure 16.1 for an example of distribution overlap). A second argument 
advanced by minimalists is that whatever differences exist do not have much practical 
importance for behavior in everyday life. If the sex differences are small and don’t have 
consequences for people’s lives, then perhaps we should concentrate on other psycho￾logical issues that are more important.
In contrast, those who take the maximalist position tend to argue that the mag￾nitude of sex differences is comparable to the size to many other effects in psychology 
and should not be trivialized (Eagly, 1995). Some sex differences tend to be small in 
magnitude, others are large in magnitude, and some are in the moderate range, accord￾ing to this view. Eagly also notes that even small sex differences can have large practical 
importance. A small sex difference in helping behavior, for example, could result in a 
large sex difference in the number of lives women and men aid over the long run. As you 
read this chapter, keep in mind the range of positions psychologists have taken on sex 
differences, from the minimalist stance to the maximalist stance.
Sex Differences in Personality
We begin by examining sex differences in temperament in children. The five-factor model 
of personality provides a convenient framework for organizing a number of findings 
about sex differences (see Table 16.1). Then we discuss sex differences in other domains 
such as sexuality, criminality and physical aggression, depression and psychopathy, and 
the interaction patterns of men and women in groups.
Temperament in Children
The importance of sex differences in temperament is aptly summarized by the authors of 
a meta-analysis: “The question of gender differences in temperament is arguably one of 
the most fundamental questions in gender differences research in the areas of personal￾ity and social behavior. Temperament reflects biologically based emotional and behav￾ioral consistencies that appear early in life and predict—often in conjunction with other 
factors—patterns and outcomes in numerous other domains such as psychopathology 
and personality” (Else-Quest et al., 2006, p. 33). These authors conducted the most mas￾sive meta-analysis ever undertaken of sex differences in temperament in children ranging 
in age from 3 to 13.
The sex differences they discovered ranged from substantial to negligible. Inhibitory 
control showed the largest sex difference, with a d = −0.41, which is considered in the 
moderate range. Inhibitory control refers to the ability to control inappropriate responses 
or behaviors. One study found very large gender differences on the trait of impulsivity, 
with boys being less able to control their impulses (d = −0.72) (Olino et al., 2013). 
Final PDF to printer502
lar31869_ch16_496-523.indd 502 10/31/22 08:17 AM
PART FIVE The Social and Cultural Domain
As the authors summarize, “these findings may represent an overall better ability of 
girls to regulate or allocate their attention” and suppress socially undesirable behavior 
(Else-Quest et al., 2006, p. 61). Perceptual sensitivity—the ability to detect subtle stimuli 
from the environment—also showed a sex difference favoring girls (d = −0.38). Girls, 
on average, appear to be more sensitive than boys to subtle and low-intensity signals 
from their external world. Inhibitory control is related to the later development of 
Conscientiousness. Interestingly, the sex difference appears to fade, because adult men 
and women do not differ much in conscientiousness.
Surgency, a cluster including approach behavior, high activity, and impulsivity, 
showed a sex difference (d = 0.38), with boys scoring higher than girls. Perhaps the 
combination of high surgency and low inhibitory control accounts for the fact that boys 
tend to get into more disciplinary difficulties in school in the early years of their lives. 
Some subcomponents of surgency showed slightly smaller sex differences, such as activ￾ity level (d = 0.33) and high-intensity pleasure (d = 0.30), which is consistent with the 
finding that boys more than girls engage in rough-and-tumble play.
The combination of low inhibitory control and high surgency may account for 
another reliable gender difference—a difference in the domain of physical aggressiveness.
Using an act frequency measure based on codings of actual behavior, Zakriski, Wright, 
and Underwood (2005) found a d = 0.60, indicating that boys were more physically 
aggressive than girls (approximate age 13). Boys hit other kids more than girls do.
Girls and boys showed virtually no difference in a summary variable called negative 
affectivity, which includes components such as anger, difficulty, amount of distress, and 
sadness. A more fine-grained analysis of negative emotions, however, reveals that girls 
Table 16.1 Effect Sizes for Gender Differences in Facets of 
Personality within the Five Factor Model
Dimension Effect Size
Extraversion
Gregariousness −0.26
Warmth −0.29
Assertiveness 0.24
Activity 0.09
Excitement Seeking 0.25
Agreeableness
Trust −0.25
Tender-mindedness −0.97
Modesty −0.26
Aggressive Ideation 0.84
Conscientiousness
Order −0.24
Emotional Stability
Anxiety −0.54
Fearfulness −1.04
Intellect-Openness
Ideas 0.03
Fantasy –0.31
Feelings –0.42
Note: Positive numbers indicate that men score higher than women; negative numbers indicate that women score higher than men.
Final PDF to printer503
lar31869_ch16_496-523.indd 503 10/31/22 08:17 AM
CHAPTER SIXTEEN Sex, Gender, and Personality
are slightly higher on fearfulness (d = −0.34), whereas boys are slightly higher on anger 
expression (d = −0.34) (Olino et al., 2013).
In summary, meta-analysis of temperament in children between the ages of 3 and 
13 suggests a few sex differences of small to moderate magnitude. Girls show more 
inhibitory control and higher fearfulness. Boys show higher surgency, higher levels of 
activity, more impulsivity, and more anger in emotional expression. These are average 
sex differences, however, which means that the distributions overlap considerably.
Five-Factor Model
The five-factor model provides a broad set of personality traits within which we can 
examine whether women and men differ.
Extraversion
Three facets of extraversion have been examined for sex differences: gregariousness, 
assertiveness, and activity. Women score slightly higher on gregariousness than men, 
but the difference is quite small. Similarly, men score slightly higher on activity level. A 
study of personality in 50 different cultures revealed a relatively small gender difference 
(d = 0.15) on extraversion (McCrae et al., 2005b). A facet analysis of gender differences 
in extraversion reveals a more interesting picture (De Bolle et al., 2015). Women score 
higher on the facets of Warmth (d = −0.29) and Gregariousness (d = −0.26), whereas 
men score higher on Assertiveness (d = 0.24) and Excitement Seeking (d = 0.25). 
A related finding, emerging from a study of 127 samples in 70 countries (N = 77,528), is 
that men place a greater importance on the value of power than do women (Schwartz & 
Rubel, 2005). That is, men tend to value social status and dominance over other people 
more than women.
The medium-size sex difference in assertiveness may show up in social behavior 
in group contexts. Men interrupt others in conversation more than women do in mixed￾sex groups (Hoyenga & Hoyenga, 1993). An important source of conflict between the 
sexes—unwanted interruptions of dialogue—may stem from this moderate sex difference 
in assertiveness.
Agreeableness
A study of 50 cultures revealed a small to medium 
gender difference (d = −0.32) on Agreeableness, indi￾cating that women score higher than men (McCrae et 
al., 2005b; Schmitt et al., 2008). Older adults ranging 
in age from 65 to 98 also show a gender difference 
in Agreeableness (d = −0.35), with women scoring 
higher than men (Chapman et al., 2007; Wood, Nye, & 
Saucier, 2010). Two facets of agreeableness have been 
examined: trust and tender-mindedness. Trust is the 
proclivity to cooperate with others, giving others the 
benefit of the doubt, and viewing one’s fellow human 
beings as basically good at heart. Tender-mindedness
is a nurturant proclivity—having empathy for others 
and being sympathetic with those who are disadvan￾taged. As you can see in Table 16.1, women score as 
more trusting than men. Women are also substantially 
more tender-minded and compassionate than men 
Studies show that women naturally smile more than men. Researchers 
disagree, however, on what this sex difference means; some suggest 
smiling is a sign of agreeableness, whereas others hold that smiling is a 
form of submissiveness or a way to ease tension in social situations.
Realistic Reflections
Final PDF to printer504
lar31869_ch16_496-523.indd 504 10/31/22 08:17 AM
PART FIVE The Social and Cultural Domain
(e.g., caring, giving), with an effect size of −0.97, which is large (León et al., 2017). 
Another facet of Agreeableness is Modesty; women are more modest than men in gen￾eral (d = −0.26) (De Bolle et al., 2015). Some research has focused on the context￾specificity of these sex differences. Women seem to be more cooperative than men in 
mixed-sex social interactions (Balliet et al., 2011). In contrast, men are slightly more 
cooperative than women in same-sex social interactions (Balliet et al., 2011).
Another finding related to Agreeableness pertains to smiling. Meta-analyses show 
that women smile more often than men, with an effect size of −0.60 (Hall, 1984). If 
smiling reflects an agreeable personality disposition, we can conclude that women are 
more agreeable than men. However, some researchers view smiling as a sign of submis￾siveness rather than agreeableness (Eagly, 1995). Furthermore, some argue that it is low￾status people who do a lot of smiling. It’s possible that smiling reflects agreeableness in 
some contexts and submissiveness in other contexts.
It will not surprise you that men are more physically aggressive than women. This 
shows up in personality tests, in aggressive fantasies, and in actual measures of behavior 
(Hyde, 1986). In general, the effect sizes for aggression are largest for projective tests, 
such as the TAT (d = 0.86), the next largest for peer report measures of aggression (d =
0.63), and the smallest for self-report measures of aggression (d = 0.40). Fantasy mea￾sures of aggression, which assess how often people imagine aggressing against others, 
show large sex differences, with an effect size of 0.84.
Worldwide, men commit roughly 90 percent of all homicides, and most of the vic￾tims of these homicides are other men (Buss, 2005b; Daly & Wilson, 1988). Furthermore, 
men commit more violent crimes of all sorts, ranging from assaults to gang wars. Figure 
16.2 shows the arrest rate for violent crimes within the United States as a function of 
age and sex. The sex differences show up just after puberty, peaking in adolescence and 
Figure 16.2
Arrest rates for violent crime in the United States as a function of age and gender.
1100
1000
900
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
 0
≤10 13 –
14
17–
18
21–
22
27–
28
32–
33
37–
38
42–
43
47–
48
52–
53
57–
58
62–
63
≥65
Males
Females
Age of oender
Rate of violent crime (arrests/100,000 persons)
Final PDF to printer505
lar31869_ch16_496-523.indd 505 10/31/22 08:17 AM
CHAPTER SIXTEEN Sex, Gender, and Personality
the early 20s. After age 50, violent crimes start to decline, and men and women become 
much more similar to each other in criminal aggressiveness. 
In all cultures for which there are data, the vast majority of killings and other 
violent crimes are committed by young men (Daly & Wilson, 1988; Pinker, 2012). 
Psychologically, a key reason for the gender difference is that women are much more 
sensitive than men to punishment (d = −.33), whereas men seem more inclined to 
take risks, oblivious to the punishments they may receive (Cross, Copping, & Campbell, 
2011). Another psychological contributor to men’s aggression is men’s low level of 
empathy compared to women (Dryburgh & Vashon, 2019). Men are less likely to put 
themselves in the shoes of the victim and experience the pain that victims of aggression 
suffer. These culturally universal findings lend credence to theories that offer evolution￾ary explanations for some of the sex differences (see Chapter 8). It is important to keep 
in mind that these forms of aggression refer to physical violence. Other forms of aggres￾sion, such as relational aggression (verbal insults and gossip about others), show either 
no gender differences or a slight tendency for women to score higher (e.g., Hess et al., 
2010; Ostrov & Godleski, 2010).
Conscientiousness
The 50-culture study revealed a negligible sex difference (d = −0.14) on overall levels 
of Conscientiousness (McCrae et al., 2005b). Only one facet of Conscientiousness has 
been scrutinized for sex differences—order. Women score slightly higher than men on 
order, with an effect size of −0.13, although a larger cross-cultural study revealed a 
slightly larger gender difference in order (d = −0.24) (De Bolle et al., 2015). This is 
small enough to conclude that men and women are essentially the same on this dimen￾sion. Nonetheless, even very small effects can sometimes have large cumulative effects 
over time. For example, a small difference in order between marriage partners may result 
in many arguments about housecleaning over the course of a year.
Emotional Stability
Emotional Stability may be the most value-laden dimension of the five-factor model. 
As you will recall from Chapter 3, at one end of the dimension are those who are 
steady, calm, and stable, the “emotionally stable” end. The opposite end is character￾ized by volatility and changeability of mood. Although many have labeled this end of 
the dimension “emotionally unstable” or “neurotic,” one could just as easily label it as 
“emotionally expressive.”
The 50-culture study revealed that Emotional Stability shows the largest sex differ￾ence (d = −0.49) in the five-factor model, indicating that women are moderately lower 
than men (McCrae et al., 2005b; see also Schmitt et al., 2008). A study of 10 Arab coun￾tries—Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, Emirates, Oman, Egypt, Syria, Lebanon, Palestine (Nablus 
and Gaza), Jordan, and Iraq—found similar sex differences using a measure of anxiety 
(Abdel-Khalek & Alansari, 2004). Older adults ranging in age from 65 to 98 also show 
a mean sex difference in Emotional Stability (d = −0.52), with women scoring lower 
than men (Chapman et al., 2007). The Anxiety facet of this factor shows the largest 
gender difference across cultures, with women scoring more in the anxious direction 
(d = −0.54) (De Bolle et al., 2015). And more detailed measures show that women 
are especially high on fearfulness (d = −1.04) (Campbell et al., 2016) and feelings 
of vulnerability (Kajonius & Johnson, 2018). Sex differences in emotional stability are 
especially important because they are linked with important life outcomes such as risk of 
eating disorders such as binging and purging, which are much more common in females 
(Brown, Hochman, & Micali, 2020).
Final PDF to printer506
lar31869_ch16_496-523.indd 506 10/31/22 08:17 AM
PART FIVE The Social and Cultural Domain
Intellect–Openness to Experience
The 50-culture study revealed essentially no sex differences (d = −0.07) in Intellect–
Openness to experience (McCrae et al., 2005b), similar to a 55-culture study that 
found a d = −0.05 (Schmitt et al., 2008). Botwin, Buss, and Shackelford (1997) 
examined sex differences in Intellect–Openness to experience using three data sources: 
self-report, spouse-report, and independent interviewer reports (one male and one 
female interviewer). Analyses of these three data sources yielded no sex differences in 
Openness–Intellect. A cross-cultural study of adolescents, college students, and adults 
reveals essentially no gender differences in Openness to Experience at the global trait 
level. Nonetheless, a facet analysis reveals that women score higher on two facets of 
Openness—Fantasy and especially Ideas (De Bolle et al., 2015).
Table 16.1 summarizes the key findings of gender differences in the key facets of 
the five factor model of personality. Recent studies using multivariate statistics, that is 
examining gender differences in multiple personality traits simultaneously, conclude that 
the differences are considerably larger overall than when considering single traits one at 
a time (Kaiser et al., 2020). A good analogy is studying male and female facial features 
one at a time (e.g., nose breadth, eye spacing, chin size) versus studying overall faces. It 
is relatively easy to glance at a face and determine with 95 percent accuracy whether it is 
a man or woman, but it would be difficult to make this classification by examining only 
one feature of the face at a time (Kaiser et al., 2019). When it comes to sex differences 
across multiple traits, one can determine with 85 percent accuracy whether the personal￾ity profile comes from a man or a woman (Del Guidice, 2019; Kaiser et al., 2019).
Basic Emotions: Frequency and Intensity
Emotions are central to personality, so much so that we devoted an entire chapter to 
them (Chapter 13). Cross-cultural research has revealed precisely where the sexes differ 
in their experiences of emotions and where the sexes are similar. One study examined 
2,199 Australians and an international sample of 6,868 participants drawn from 41 dif￾ferent countries (Brebner, 2003). Eight emotions were examined, four “positive” emo￾tions (Affection, Joy, Contentment, Pride) and four “negative” emotions (Fear, Anger, 
Sadness, Guilt). Participants rated (1) how frequently they experienced each emotion 
and (2) the intensity with which they experienced each emotion. The basic findings are 
summarized in Table 16.2.
There are small, but statistically significant differences in the experience of emo￾tions in this international sample. All point to women experiencing both positive emo￾tions and negative emotions more frequently and intensely than do men. In the positive 
domain, affection and joy show the largest sex differences. Pride, in contrast, shows no 
sex difference in either frequency or intensity. In the negative domain, women experience 
fear and sadness more than men, especially in the reported intensity of the experience. 
They also experience the emotion of disgust more than men (Al-Shawaf, Lewis, & Buss, 
2018). Guilt, in contrast, shows a minimal gender difference in intensity and no difference 
in frequency—perhaps contradicting the stereotype that women are more guilt prone than 
men. These results must be qualified in two ways. First, the effect sizes are generally small. 
Second, other research has documented that more specialized explorations of emotions 
reveal some reversals of these sex differences, such as women experiencing more intense 
jealousy in response to the emotional infidelity of a partner (see Chapter 8).
One of the most common complaints that women express about men is that 
they don’t express their emotions enough (Buss, 2016). Men, in contrast, often com￾plain that women are too emotional. The results point to one possible reason for these 
Final PDF to printer507
lar31869_ch16_496-523.indd 507 10/31/22 08:17 AM
CHAPTER SIXTEEN Sex, Gender, and Personality
complaints—perhaps men don’t express their emotions because they literally don’t experi￾ence emotions as frequently or as intensely as do women.
Other Dimensions of Personality
Several dimensions of personality are related to, but not directly subsumed by, the five￾factor model of personality. We will examine three: self-esteem, sexuality and mating, 
and the people–things dimension.
Self-Esteem
A topic of major interest to women and men is self-esteem, or how good we feel about 
ourselves. This is reflected in the many popular books on the topic, such as 10 Simple 
Solutions for Building Self-Esteem (Schiraldi, 2007). Although researchers have explored 
many facets of self-esteem, such as esteem of one’s athletic abilities and esteem of 
one’s social skills, by far the most frequently measured component is global self-esteem, 
defined as “the level of global regard that one has for the self as a person” (Harter, 1993, 
p. 88). Global self-esteem can range from highly positive to highly negative and reflects 
an overall evaluation of the self (Kling et al., 1999).
Global self-esteem is linked with many aspects of functioning and is central to mental 
health. Those with high self-esteem cope better with the stresses and strains of daily life. In 
laboratory studies, when faced with negative feedback about one’s performance, those with 
high self-esteem perform better on cognitive tasks. Those with high self-esteem tend to take 
credit for their successes but deny responsibility for their failures (Kling et al., 1999).
Meta-analyses yield an interesting pattern of sex differences (Feingold, 1994; Kling 
et al., 1999). The overall effect size is relatively small (d = 0.21), with males scoring 
slightly higher than females in self-esteem (Kling et al., 1999). The fascinating finding, 
however, emerged when the researchers analyzed sex differences in self-esteem according 
to the age of the participants. Young children (ages 7–10) showed only a slight sex differ￾ence in self-esteem (d = 0.16). As the children approached adolescence, however, the gap 
Table 16.2 Sex Differences in Experience of Emotions
Emotion Frequency Intensity
Positive Emotions −0.20 −0.23
Affection −0.30 −0.25
Joy −0.16 −0.26
Contentment −0.13 −0.18
Pride ns ns
Negative Emotions −0.14 −0.25
Fear −0.17 −0.26
Anger −0.05 −0.14
Sadness −0.16 −0.28
Guilt ns 0.07
Note: Entries in the table are effect sizes (d). The designation “ns” indicates that the sex difference was not significant. Negative values 
indicate that women report experiencing the emotion more frequently or intensely than do men.
Source: Brebner (2003).
Final PDF to printer508
lar31869_ch16_496-523.indd 508 10/31/22 08:17 AM
PART FIVE The Social and Cultural Domain
between the sexes widened. At ages 11–14, d was 0.23. 
And the sex difference peaked during the ages of 15–18 
(d = 0.33). Females seem to suffer from lower self￾esteem than males as they hit their mid- to late teens. The 
good news is that in adulthood the self-esteem gap starts 
to close. During the ages of 19–22, the effect size shrinks 
to 0.18. During the ages of 23–59, the sexes come even 
closer, with a d of 0.10. And during older age, from 60 on 
up, the d is only −0.03, which means that the males and 
females are virtually identical in self-esteem.
The magnitudes of all these effects are relatively 
small, even during adolescence, when the gap between 
the sexes is the widest. The widespread fear that wom￾en’s self-esteem is permanently damaged seems some￾what exaggerated in light of this empirical evidence. 
Nonetheless, even small differences in self-esteem can 
be extremely important to day-to-day well-being. For example, low self-esteem in women 
predicts vulnerability to depression in adolescents and college students (Gao et al., 2022). 
It is important for researchers to explore why females lose self-esteem relative to males in 
adolescence and whether programs that attempt to raise self-esteem are successful.
Sexuality, Emotional Investment, and Mating
As we saw in Chapter 3, individual differences in sexuality show some overlap with the five￾factor model of personality, but not perfect overlap (Schmitt & Buss, 2000). Two reviews 
concluded that there exist large sex differences in the desire for sexual variety (Schmitt et 
al., 2012; Petersen & Hyde, 2010). Men are more likely to have more permissive attitudes 
toward casual sex (d = .45) and view pornography more often (d = .63)—sex differences 
that seem to remain stable over generations (e.g., Wright & Vangeel, 2019). Men more than 
women also desire a larger number of sex partners, have more frequent sexual fantasies, and 
are more willing to accept offers of sex from a stranger (Hald & Hogh-Olesen, 2010).
Can men and women be “just friends”? Men have more difficulty in being friends 
with the opposite sex. Men are more likely than women to initiate friendship with some￾one of the opposite sex because they are attracted to them, are more likely to become 
sexually attracted to their opposite-sex friends, and are more likely to dissolve such 
friendships if their attraction is not reciprocated (Bleske-Rechek & Buss, 2001).
Men are more likely to be sexually aggressive in the sense of trying to force someone 
to have sex when that person expresses an unwillingness to have sex (Buss, 2016). Not all 
men are sexually aggressive. Men high on “hostile masculinity” (domineering and degrading 
attitudes toward women), men high on Dark Triad traits, and men low on empathy are most 
likely to report using sexual aggression (Jonason, Girgis, & Milne-Home, 2017; Wheeler, 
George, & Dahl, 2002). Furthermore, men who are narcissistic are especially likely to 
express rape-supportive beliefs and to lack empathy for rape victims (Bushman et al., 2003). 
So, although the sexes differ overall in sexual aggression, it really appears to be limited to a 
subset of men—those who are high on Dark Triad traits, lack empathy, and display hostile 
masculinity, especially if they also pursue a short-term mating strategy (Buss, 2021).
If men score higher in desire for sexual variety, women typically score higher in 
“emotional investment,” a cluster of items including loving, lovable, romantic, affection￾ate, cuddlesome, compassionate, and passionate (Schmitt & Buss, 2000). A study of 48 
nations found an average effect size of −.39 (Schmitt et al., 2009). This sex difference 
may stem from the evolution of sex differences in attachment: women show higher 
When it comes to attitudes about casual sex, men tend to be more 
interested in women than women are in men, on average.
Dmytro Zinkevych/Shutterstock
Final PDF to printer509
lar31869_ch16_496-523.indd 509 10/31/22 08:17 AM
CHAPTER SIXTEEN Sex, Gender, and Personality
levels of emotional attachment both to children and to romantic partners (Schmitt et al., 
2009). Women between the ages of 18 and 39 also report greater life longings for family 
and romantic partners (Kotter-Gruhn et al., 2009).
People–Things Dimension
Another dimension of personality has been labeled the people–things dimension (Lippa, 
1998; Little, 1972a, 1972b). This refers to the nature of vocational interests. People who 
score toward the “things” end of the dimension prefer vocations that deal with imper￾sonal objects—machines, tools, or materials. Examples include carpenters, auto mechan￾ics, building contractors, tool makers, and farmers. Those scoring toward the “people” 
end of the dimension prefer social occupations, which involve thinking about others, car￾ing for others, or directing others. Examples include high school teachers, social work￾ers, nurses, and religious counselors.
The sex difference on the people–things dimension is roughly a d of 1.35; men are 
more likely to score at the things end of the dimension, and women are more likely to 
score at the people end (Lippa, 1998). A study of more than half a million people found a 
d of 0.93, which is considered quite large (Su, Rounds, & Armstrong, 2009). Another study 
of 1,283,110 individuals also found large sex differences, with women preferring people￾oriented occupations and men preferring thing-oriented occupations (Morris, 2016). When 
girls are asked to describe themselves spontaneously, they are more likely than boys to make 
references to their close relationships. They are more likely to value personal qualities linked 
to group harmony, such as sensitivity to others. And they are more likely to identify their 
personal relationships as central to their identity as a person (Gabriel & Gardner, 1999).
The people–thing distinction is similar to the empathizing–systemizing distinc￾tion. Empathizing refers to tuning in to other people’s thoughts and feelings. Systemizing
is the drive to comprehend how things work, how systems are built, and how inputs 
produce outputs (Baron-Cohen, 2003). Women score higher on empathizing, men 
higher on systemizing, which may partially explain gender differences in occupational 
preferences—women men prefer the teaching and helping professions; men gravitate 
toward construction and engineering (Wright, Eaton, & Skagerberg, 2015). Gender dif￾ferences in empathizing are also linked to altruistic behavior such as helping those in 
need and sharing their belongings (Chaidir et al., 2019).
These results are not surprising; they fit with our stereotypes of women and men. 
Still, it is interesting that they were correctly identified more than a century ago: “. . . the 
greatest difference between men and women [occurs] in the relative strength of the inter￾est in things and their mechanisms [stronger in men] and the interest in persons and 
their feelings [stronger in women]” (Thorndike, 1911, p. 31).
Masculinity, Femininity, Androgyny, and Sex Roles
Women and men differ in a few dimensions: assertiveness, tender-mindedness, and anxiety, 
as well as in aggression, sexuality, and depression. But do these differences mean that there 
is such a thing as a masculine or feminine personality? This section explores conceptions 
of masculinity and femininity and how the treatment of these topics has changed over time.
In the 1930s, personality researchers began to notice that men and women differed 
in their responses to a number of personality items on large inventories. For example, when 
asked whether they preferred to take baths or showers, women indicated that they pre￾ferred baths, whereas men indicated that they preferred showers. Based on these sex differ￾ences, researchers assumed that the differences could be described by a single personality 
Final PDF to printer510
lar31869_ch16_496-523.indd 510 10/31/22 08:17 AM
PART FIVE The Social and Cultural Domain
Depression is marked by low self-esteem, 
pessimism (expecting the worst to happen), 
and the perception that one has little control 
over one’s life. It’s one of the most common 
psychological maladies of modern humans, 
and there is evidence that the rate of depres￾sion is increasing. Five studies that com￾prised 39,000 individuals living in five areas 
of the world revealed that young people are 
more likely than older people to have experi￾enced at least one major episode of depres￾sion (Nesse & Williams, 1994). Moreover, 
the incidence of depression appears to be 
higher in more economically developed cul￾tures (Nesse & Williams, 1994).
Adult men and women differ in the 
incidence of depression and in the nature 
of their depressive symptoms, but the sexes 
don’t start out different. In childhood, there 
are no sex differences in depression. After 
puberty, however, women show a depres￾sion rate roughly twice that of men—a finding 
replicated in 25 different European countries 
(Van de Velde, Bracke, & Levecque, 2010). 
Roughly 25 percent of all women have at 
least one depressive episode in their life￾times. In contrast, only 10 percent of all men 
will have a depressive episode. The larg￾est sex differences in depression show up 
between the ages of 18 and 44. After that, 
the sexes start to converge.
The following list contains some of 
the critical aspects of sex differences in 
depressive symptoms:
1. Depressed women more than depressed 
men report excessive eating and weight 
gain as one of the symptoms (although 
loss of appetite is the most common 
symptom of depression in both sexes).
2. Women are more likely to cry when 
depressed; men are more likely to 
become aggressive when depressed.
3. Depressed women are more likely than 
men to seek treatment; depressed men 
are more likely to miss work.
4. Nervous activity (e.g., fidgeting) is more 
common in depressed women than in 
heterosexual interactions start to increase. 
And it is well documented that men place 
a greater value on physical appearance in 
their mate selections worldwide, suggest￾ing that women are under greater pressure 
to compete in the realm of attractiveness 
(Buss, 2016). Body dissatisfaction increases in 
women around puberty, as does the onset of 
eating disorders such as binging and purging 
and dissatisfaction with current weight (Hankin 
& Abramson, 2001). Moreover, women score 
higher on objectified body consciousness,
which involves becoming observers and critics 
of their bodies and feeling shame when their 
bodies do not match up with cultural idealized 
body standards (Hyde & Mezulis, 2020). The 
final link is that a woman’s dissatisfaction with 
her body and physical appearance is linked 
with increases in depression. If a woman’s 
self-worth is in part tied up in her physical 
appearance in the mating market, then wom￾en’s pubertal onset of depression could stem 
partly from the intensity of mate competition 
after women hit puberty.
An evolutionary adaptationist theory 
proposes that moderate levels of depression 
send signals of distress to social partners to 
elicit help or prompt partners to invest more 
in the relationship (Hagen & Rosenström, 
2016). For example, a mother of a newborn 
baby might experience postpartum depres￾sion if she is not receiving as much help as 
she needs from her husband or kin, inducing 
these social partners to invest more (Hagen 
& Rosenström, 2016). The birth of a child is 
indeed a time in women’s lives in which they 
are most at risk for experiencing depression 
(Eid, Gobinath, & Galea, 2019). Whereas 
men are more likely to get angry to induce 
partners to invest more, women, having 
generally lower upper body strength to back 
up anger, are more likely to get depressed 
as an unconscious bargaining tactic.
Whatever the multiple origins, sex dif￾ferences in depression represent one of the 
largest and most consequential differences 
in personality.
depressed men; inactivity is more com￾mon in depressed men.
5. Among depressed college students, men 
are more socially withdrawn, and more 
likely to use drugs; women are more 
likely to experience hurt feelings and a 
decline in self-esteem.
6. Men are more likely to commit suicide 
“successfully,” perhaps because men are 
more likely to use guns as the method; 
women are more likely to make nonfatal 
suicide attempts, perhaps because they 
use less lethal methods, such as over￾dosing on pills.
One clue to the sex difference in depres￾sion comes from a study of 1,100 community￾based adults (Nolen-Hoeksema, Larson, & 
Grayson, 1999). The researchers speculated 
that women’s greater vulnerability to depres￾sive symptoms may stem from factors such 
as their lower power in the workplace, their 
relative lack of control over important areas 
of their lives, work overload, and lower status 
in heterosexual relationships. Because they 
are searching for ways to control their lives, 
women may start to ruminate. Rumination
involves repeatedly focusing on one’s symp￾toms or distress (e.g., “Why do I continue to 
feel so bad about myself?” or “Why doesn’t my 
boss like me?”). Because their rumination can 
fail to lead to effective solutions, according to 
this theory, women continue to ruminate, and 
rumination is a key contributor to women’s 
greater experience of depressive symptoms. 
Women ruminate more than men, and rumina￾tion in turn contributes to the perseverance of 
the depressive symptoms. Nonetheless, the 
gender difference in rumination is small (d =
−0.24) and so unlikely to provide the whole 
explanation (Johnson & Whisman, 2013).
Another theory is that women’s greater 
depression is linked with entering mate 
competition and is caused by dissatisfac￾tion with their physical appearance (Hankin 
& Abramson, 2001). The onset of women’s 
depression and the emergence of the sex dif￾ference appears around the age of 13, when 
A Closer Look Sex Differences in Depression
Final PDF to printer511
lar31869_ch16_496-523.indd 511 10/31/22 08:17 AM
CHAPTER SIXTEEN Sex, Gender, and Personality
dimension, with masculinity at one end and femininity at the other end. A person who scored 
high on masculinity was assumed to score low on femininity, and vice versa. Researchers 
assumed that all people could be located on this single masculinity–femininity dimension. 
Items that showed large sex differences, such as “I enjoy reading Popular Mechanics” (men 
scored higher), and “I would enjoy the work of a librarian” (women scored higher), were 
used to construct a single scale of masculinity–femininity. But does a single scale with mas￾culinity at one end and femininity at the other end really capture the important individual 
differences? Can’t someone be both masculine and feminine? This question led to a new 
conception of sex-linked personality differences—androgyny.
The Search for Androgyny
In the early 1970s, with the rise of the feminist movement, researchers challenged the 
assumption of a single masculinity–femininity dimension. Masculinity and femininity 
are independent dimensions. You can be high on both masculinity and femininity, or 
low on both. Or you can be stereotypically masculine: high on masculinity, low on femi￾ninity; or you can be stereotypically feminine: high on femininity, low on masculinity. 
This shift reconceptualized masculinity, femininity, and sex roles.
Two major personality instruments were published to assess people using this 
new conception of sex roles (Bem, 1974; Spence, Helmreich, & Stapp, 1974). The 
masculinity dimension contained items reflecting assertiveness, boldness, dominance, 
self-sufficiency, and instrumentality. Those who agreed with personality trait terms con￾noting these qualities scored high on masculinity. The femininity dimension contained 
items that reflected nurturance, expression of emotions, and empathy. People agreeing 
with these personality items scored high on femininity. Those who scored high on both 
dimensions were labeled androgynous, to reflect the notion that a single person could 
possess both masculine and feminine characteristics. Table 16.3 shows the four possible 
scores these instruments can yield.
The researchers who developed these questionnaires viewed the androgynous per￾son as the most highly developed. Androgynous persons presumably embody the most 
valuable elements of both sexes, such as the assertiveness to take positive steps in one’s 
job and interpersonal sensitivity to the feelings of others. Androgynous people were pre￾sumed to be liberated from the shackles of traditional notions of sex roles. Before pro￾ceeding with our analysis, however, pause briefly to determine where you are located on 
these measures. To find out, fill out the following Exercise.
The popularity of this new conception of sex roles is a testament to the influence of 
feminism in America. With the rise of the women’s movement, traditional ideas about the 
roles of men and women were cast aside. Women started entering the workforce in record 
numbers. Some men opted for more nurturant roles. John Lennon, of former Beatles fame, 
decided to stay at home and raise his son, Sean, while his wife, Yoko Ono, went to work, 
overseeing a massive financial empire (Coleman, 1992). Many people applauded Lennon for 
his new liberated role. This political movement reinforced the idea that men were supposed 
to become more nurturant, caring, and empathic. At the same time, women were supposed 
to become more assertive as they entered many professions traditionally reserved for men.
Table 16.3 Conception of Sex Roles Developed in the 1970s
Low Masculinity High Masculinity
Low Femininity Undifferentiated Masculine
High Femininity Feminine
Final PDF to printer512
lar31869_ch16_496-523.indd 512 10/31/22 08:17 AM
PART FIVE The Social and Cultural Domain
INSTRUCTIONS: Forty items follow. Each one contains a pair of statements describing con￾tradictory characteristics; that is, you cannot be both at the same time, such as very artistic 
and not at all artistic. The letters form a scale between the two extremes. Select the letter that 
describes where you fall on the scale. For example, if you think that you are not at all aggres￾sive, you would choose A. If you think you are very aggressive, you would choose E. If you are 
in between, you would choose C, or possibly B or D. Be sure to make a choice for every item. 
Mark your choice by drawing an X through the letter that you select.
Exercise
1. Not at all aggressive A. . . . .B. . . . .C. . . . .D. . . . .E Very aggressive
2. Very whiny A. . . . .B. . . . .C. . . . .D. . . . .E Not at all whiny
3. Not at all independent A. . . . .B. . . . .C. . . . .D. . . . .E Very independent
 4. Not at all arrogant A. . . . .B. . . . .C. . . . .D. . . . .E Very arrogant
 5. Not at all emotional A. . . . .B. . . . .C. . . . .D. . . . .E Very emotional
 6. Very submissive A. . . . .B. . . . .C. . . . .D. . . . .E Very dominant
 7. Very boastful A. . . . .B. . . . .C. . . . .D. . . . .E Not at all boastful
 8. Not at all excitable in a major
crisis
A. . . . .B. . . . .C. . . . .D. . . . .E Very excitable in a 
major crisis
 9. Very passive A. . . . .B. . . . .C. . . . .D. . . . .E Very active
10. Not at all egotistical A. . . . .B. . . . .C. . . . .D. . . . .E Very egotistical
11. Not at all able to devote self 
completely to others
A. . . . .B. . . . .C. . . . .D. . . . .E Able to devote self 
completely to others
12. Not at all spineless A. . . . .B. . . . .C. . . . .D. . . . .E Very spineless
13. Very rough A. . . . .B. . . . .C. . . . .D. . . . .E Very gentle
14. Not at all complaining A. . . . .B. . . . .C. . . . .D. . . . .E Very complaining
15. Not at all helpful to others A. . . . .B. . . . .C. . . . .D. . . . .E Very helpful to others
16. Not at all competitive A. . . . .B. . . . .C. . . . .D. . . . .E Very competitive
17. Subordinates oneself to others A. . . . .B. . . . .C. . . . .D. . . . .E Never subordinates 
oneself to others
18. Very home-oriented A. . . . .B. . . . .C. . . . .D. . . . .E Very worldly
19. Very greedy A. . . . .B. . . . .C. . . . .D. . . . .E Not at all greedy
20. Not at all kind A. . . . .B. . . . .C. . . . .D. . . . .E Very kind
21. Indifferent to others’ approval A. . . . .B. . . . .C. . . . .D. . . . .E Highly needful of 
others’ approval
22. Very dictatorial A. . . . .B. . . . .C. . . . .D. . . . .E Not at all dictatorial
23. Feelings not easily hurt A. . . . .B. . . . .C. . . . .D. . . . .E Feelings easily hurt
24. Doesn’t nag A. . . . .B. . . . .C. . . . .D. . . . .E Nags a lot
25. Not at all aware of feelings of 
others
A. . . . .B. . . . .C. . . . .D. . . . .E Very aware of 
feelings of others
26. Can make decisions easily A. . . . .B. . . . .C. . . . .D. . . . .E Has difficulty making 
decisions
27. Very fussy A. . . . .B. . . . .C. . . . .D. . . . .E Not at all fussy
28. Gives up very easily A. . . . .B. . . . .C. . . . .D. . . . .E Never gives up easily
29. Very cynical A. . . . .B. . . . .C. . . . .D. . . . .E Not at all cynical
30. Never cries A. . . . .B. . . . .C. . . . .D. . . . .E Cries very easily
Final PDF to printer513
lar31869_ch16_496-523.indd 513 10/31/22 08:17 AM
CHAPTER SIXTEEN Sex, Gender, and Personality
The new androgynous conception, however, was not without its critics. One criti￾cism goes to the heart of the androgyny concept. Several studies found that masculinity 
and femininity indeed consist of a single, bipolar trait. Those who score high on mascu￾linity, for example, tend to score low on femininity. Those who score high on femininity 
tend to score low on masculinity (e.g., Deaux & Lewis, 1984).
The originators of the new conceptions of sex roles changed their views. Janet 
Spence, author of one measure, no longer believed that her questionnaire assessed 
sex roles (Swann, Langlois, & Gilbert, 1999). Instead, she suggested that her scales 
really measure the personality characteristics of instrumentality and expressiveness. 
Instrumentality consists of personality traits that involve working with objects, getting 
tasks completed in a direct fashion, showing independence from others, and displaying 
self-sufficiency. Expressiveness, in contrast, is the ease with which one can express emo￾tions, such as crying, showing empathy for the troubles of others, and showing nurtur￾ance to those in need.
Sandra Bem also changed her views on sex roles. She considered her measure 
(the Bem Sex Role Inventory; Bem, 1974) to assess gender schemata, or cognitive ori￾entations that lead individuals to process social information on the basis of sex-linked 
associations (Hoyenga & Hoyenga, 1993). According to this conception, the ideal is not 
to be androgynous but, rather to be gender-aschematic. That is, the ideal is not to use gen￾der at all in one’s processing of social information. The current movement toward using 
gender-neutral pronouns such as they, them, and theirs, or novel ones such as ze and xe,
reflect people who do not identify with the gender binary (Sun et al., 2021). Sweden has 
even introduced the gender-neutral pronoun hen as a replacement for hon (she) and han
(he) (Gustafsson Sendén, Bäck, & Lindqvist, 2015).
Although most researchers assume that masculinity, femininity, and “gender 
schema” are personality attributes absorbed from socialization, parents, the media, or the 
culture, studies have challenged this view. Cleveland, Udry, and Chantala (2001) found 
that sex-typed behaviors and attitudes themselves tend to show moderate heritability within 
sex. Among women, for example, 38 percent of the variance in proclivity to engage in 
31. Not at all self-confident A. . . . .B. . . . .C. . . . .D. . . . .E Very self-confident
32. Does not look out only for 
self, principled
A. . . . .B. . . . .C. . . . .D. . . . .E Looks out only for 
self, unprincipled
33. Feels very inferior A. . . . .B. . . . .C. . . . .D. . . . .E Feels very superior
34. Not at all hostile A. . . . .B. . . . .C. . . . .D. . . . .E Very hostile
35. Not at all understanding of 
others
A. . . . .B. . . . .C. . . . .D. . . . .E Very understanding 
of others
36. Very cold in relations with 
others
A. . . . .B. . . . .C. . . . .D. . . . .E Very warm in 
relations with others
37. Very servile A. . . . .B. . . . .C. . . . .D. . . . .E Not at all servile
38. Very little need for security A. . . . .B. . . . .C. . . . .D. . . . .E Very strong need for 
security
39. Not at all gullible A. . . . .B. . . . .C. . . . .D. . . . .E Very gullible
40. Goes to pieces under pressure A. . . . .B. . . . .C. . . . .D. . . . .E Stands up well under 
pressure
Source: Spence et al. (1974).
Exercise (Continued)
Final PDF to printer514
lar31869_ch16_496-523.indd 514 10/31/22 08:17 AM
PART FIVE The Social and Cultural Domain
sex-typical behaviors such as crying, expressing emotions, 
sensitivity to the feelings of others, taking risks, and even 
fighting was explained by genetic differences. Another 
study found moderate (roughly 50 percent) heritabilities 
for measures of “gender atypicality” in boys and girls—
that is, masculinity in girls and femininity in boys (Knafo, 
Iervolino, & Plomin, 2005). These findings still leave large 
room for environmental influences to affect sex roles, but 
they suggest that genes also play a role, even within each 
gender, in the degree to which the sex roles are adopted.
Research on masculinity and femininity is moving 
beyond these issues and beginning to explore the real￾life consequences of masculinity and femininity. One 
study, for example, found that masculine and feminine 
traits affect sexual behavior and relationships (Udry & 
Chantala, 2004). Adolescent couples containing a highly 
masculine male and a highly feminine female tend to 
have sex sooner than other pairings. Couples in which 
both members are average for their sex tend to break up 
compared with other pairings. Future research can be 
expected to yield more interesting real-life consequences 
of masculinity and femininity.
Gender Stereotypes
Much of this chapter so far has been concerned with 
the ways in which men and women differ. An important 
related topic pertains to the beliefs about how the sexes 
differ, regardless of whether these beliefs are accurate 
reflections of the sex differences that empirically exist. 
The beliefs that we hold about men and women are 
sometimes called gender stereotypes.
Gender stereotypes have three components (Hoyenga & Hoyenga, 1993). The first 
is cognitive and deals with the ways in which we form social categories. For example, 
we may categorize men into “cads” or “dads,” those who play around and are reluctant 
to commit versus those who are faithful and invest heavily in their children. The sec￾ond component of gender stereotypes is affective. You may feel hostile or warm toward 
someone because you place that person in a particular social category. The third compo￾nent of gender stereotypes is behavioral. You may discriminate against someone simply 
because they belong in the social category of “woman” or “man.” We discuss all three 
components of gender stereotypes—cognitive, affective, and behavioral—in the following 
sections, to illuminate how social categorizing shows up in everyday life.
The Content and Accuracy of Gender Stereotypes
Although there are some variations from culture to culture, it is remarkable that the con￾tent of gender stereotypes—the attributes that we believe men and women possess—is 
highly similar across cultures. In the most comprehensive set of studies yet conducted, 
Williams and Best (1982, 1990) studied gender stereotypes in 30 countries around 
the world. In all these studies, men, compared with women, were commonly viewed 
as more aggressive, autonomous, achievement oriented, dominant, exhibitionist, and 
persevering. Women, compared with men, were 
The distinctions between what behavior is appropriate for a woman and 
what behavior is appropriate for a man in our culture—social roles—have 
changed dramatically in the past few decades.
Darren Greenwood/Design Pics
Final PDF to printer515
lar31869_ch16_496-523.indd 515 10/31/22 08:17 AM
CHAPTER SIXTEEN Sex, Gender, and Personality
deferent, nurturant, and self-abasing. These general gender stereotypes have a common 
theme. Women in all 30 countries tend to be perceived as more communal—oriented 
toward the group. Men, in contrast, are perceived to be more instrumental—asserting 
their independence from the group.
How accurate are these stereotypes? Gender stereotypes correspond in many ways 
to the actual sex differences that have been discovered. A study of 26 nations concluded 
that gender stereotypes are in fact remarkably accurate, based on actual differences 
between women and men (Löckenhoff et al., 2014). Some scholars speculate that people 
overestimate sex differences in personality, showing exaggerated beliefs about how large 
they actually are (Krueger et al., 2003; Wood & Eagly, 2010). Most reviews, however, 
conclude that gender stereotypes are well-calibrated to actual gender differences and are 
not exaggerated (e.g., Jussim et al., 2021).
Stereotypic Subtypes of Men and Women
In addition to general gender stereotypes, studies show that most people have more 
finely differentiated stereotypic views of each sex. Six and Eckes (1991) examined the 
structure of their participants’ cognitive categories of men and women and came up with 
several subtypes, as shown in Figure 16.3. Men were viewed as falling into five subtypes. 
The playboy subtype, for example, includes males who are cool, casual, “players,” lady 
killers, and macho. The career man subtype includes men who are social climbers and 
managers. Stereotypes of women fell into a smaller number of subtypes. One might be 
called the “classically feminine” subtype, which includes housewives, secretaries, and 
maternal women. In the modern world, these women might be “soccer moms,” highly 
devoted to their husbands and children. A second subtype is defined by short-term or 
overt sexuality. This subtype includes sex bombs, tarts, and vamps. These two female 
subtypes correspond roughly to the “Madonna–whore” dichotomy, which is commonly 
made in everyday life (Buss, 2016). That is, these two stereotypes correspond to women 
who would make good mothers and women who exude sexuality. 
Figure 16.3
The structure of cognitive sexual categories. The structure of cognitive categories of various male and female subtypes, where distance 
between subtypes on the graphs is assumed to correspond to cognitive “distances” in people’s stereotypic concepts. Some subtypes are 
closely related to each other, as indicated by the dashed lines that surround them to form the various clusters.
Source: Six and Eckes (1991).
Social climber
Career man
Manager
CLUSTER C
CLUSTER E
CLUSTER D
CLUSTER A
CLUSTER B
Bureaucrat
Bourgeois
Egoist
Pasha Cool
Harry
Flash
Macho Playboy
Lady killer
Mr. Casual Gambler
Gay 
Quiet
Softy
Philanthropist
Alternative
No future
Confident
Intellectual
Vamp
Sex bomb
Tart
CLUSTER C
Spoiled child
Society lady
Nasty piece
of work
Career woman
CLUSTER A
Intellectual
Libb Confident
Lefty ecologist
Femin
Naive
Secretary
House￾wife
Busy
Lizzie
Maternal
Housework maniac
Conformist
CLUSTER B
Straightforward
Part B. Female SubtypesPart A. Male Subtypes
Final PDF to printer516
lar31869_ch16_496-523.indd 516 10/31/22 08:17 AM
PART FIVE The Social and Cultural Domain
A third stereotype of women, however, involves a subtype that 
may have emerged relatively recently, perhaps over the past 20 or 30 
years—the confident, intellectual, liberated career woman. Hillary 
Rodham Clinton would be a perfect illustration of this category—she 
scored at the top of her class in law school and developed an impressive 
influential career in politics. Also included in this cluster are feminist 
and lefty ecologists, perhaps suggesting that these political orientations 
tended to go along with independent, confident career women.
The key point is that, cognitively, most people do not hold only a 
single gender stereotype. Rather, cognitive categories are differentiated 
into subtypes of women and subtypes of men. It remains to be seen 
whether these stereotypical subtypes have any empirical basis. That is, 
are “playboy” men actually cooler, more casual, and more macho than 
other men? Are homemakers more naive, busy, and conformist than 
other women? Answers to these questions must await future research.
Prejudice and Gender Stereotypes
The stereotypes associated with gender are not merely cognitive 
constructions that rattle around inside people’s heads. They have 
real-world consequences. Prejudiced behavior is one damaging con￾sequence of gender stereotypes. These damaging effects can be found 
in many important activities: in legal decisions, medical treatment, car purchases, check 
cashing, and job hunting (Wood & Eagly, 2010).
In wrongful death lawsuits, for example, the families of the victim receive more 
money if a man was killed than if a woman was killed (Goodman et al., 1991). In medi￾cine, men are more likely to be recommended for coronary bypass surgery than women, 
even when they show the same amount of heart damage (Khan et al., 1990). A study in 
which men and women called car dealerships to request prices for particular cars found 
that the women were quoted higher prices than were the men for exactly the same car 
(Larrance et al., 1979). Women are subjected to more sexual harassment in the work￾place, a form of gender discrimination (Buss, 2016).
Not all sex discrimination favors men. In a study of book reviews published in the 
journal Contemporary Psychology, male authors were at the receiving end of more nega￾tive reviews (Moore, 1978). In another study of reviews by men and women of manu￾scripts submitted to refereed journals for publication, women gave more positive reviews 
to women authors than to men authors (Lloyd, 1990). Male reviewers did not show this 
bias. In five hiring experiments of hypothetical faculty applicants in the fields of biology, 
economics, engineering, and psychology, female applicants were preferred 2:1 over iden￾tically qualified male applicants (Williams & Ceci, 2015).
In summary, gender stereotypes can have important consequences for men and 
women. These consequences can damage people where it counts most—in their health, 
their jobs, their chances for advancement, and their social reputations.
Theories of Sex Differences
So far in this chapter, we have seen that there are some differences in personality between 
the sexes but also many similarities. This section examines the major theories that have 
been proposed for explaining how sex differences arise. These include traditional theo￾ries of socialization, theories of social roles, hormonal theories, and theories anchored 
in evolutionary psychology.
Hillary Rodham Clinton illustrates a relatively new 
gender stereotype—women who are intellectual, 
assertive, liberated, and career-minded.
Airman Devin Doskey/USA
Final PDF to printer517
lar31869_ch16_496-523.indd 517 10/31/22 08:17 AM
CHAPTER SIXTEEN Sex, Gender, and Personality
Socialization and Social Roles
Socialization theory—the notion that boys and girls 
become different because boys are reinforced by par￾ents, teachers, and the media for being “masculine” 
and girls for being “feminine”—is probably the most 
widely held theory of sex differences in personality. 
The theory can be summarized as follows: Boys are 
given baseball bats and trucks. Girls are given dolls. 
Boys are praised for engaging in rough-and-tumble 
play. Girls are praised for being cute and obedient. 
Boys are punished for crying. Girls are comforted 
when they cry. Over time, according to socialization 
theory, children learn behaviors deemed appropriate 
in their culture for their sex.
In Bandura’s (1977) social learning theory, a vari￾ant of socialization theory, boys and girls also learn by 
observing the behaviors of others, called models, of their 
own sex. Boys watch their fathers, male teachers, and 
male peers. Girls watch their mothers, female teachers, 
and female peer models. Boys see their fathers work. Girls see their mothers cook. Over 
time, even in the absence of direct reinforcement, these models provide a guide to behav￾iors that are masculine or feminine.
Some empirical evidence supports socialization and social learning theories of 
sex differences. Studies of socialization practices have found that both mothers and 
fathers encourage dependency more in girls than in boys (Block, 1983). Parents encour￾age girls to stay close to home, whereas boys are permitted and encouraged to roam. 
Fathers engage in more physical play with their sons than with their daughters (Fagot 
& Leinbach, 1987). Parents provide “gendered toys” to their children. Boys generally 
receive a greater variety of toys, more cars and trucks, more sports equipment, and more 
tools than girls do (Rheingold & Cook, 1975). Girls receive more dolls, pink clothing 
and furnishings, strollers, swings, and household appliances. This empirical evidence is 
consistent with socialization and social learning theories.
Cross-cultural evidence for different treatment of boys and girls exists as well. In 
many cultures, fathers interact less with their daughters than with their sons (Whiting 
& Edwards, 1988). Girls in most cultures tend to be assigned more domestic chores 
than boys. Boys are permitted in most cultures to stray farther from home (Hoyenga & 
Hoyenga, 1993). Boys in most cultures are socialized to be more competitive than are 
girls (Low, 1989). In a large study of socialization practices across cultures, Low (1989) 
found that in 82 percent of the cultures, the girls were trained to be more nurturant than 
the boys. In the majority of the cultures, the girls were socialized to be more sexually 
restrained than the boys—the parents tried to teach their daughters to delay having sexual 
intercourse (Perilloux, Fleischman, & Buss, 2011), whereas the boys were encouraged 
to have sexual intercourse (Low, 1989). These patterns are also found among modern 
college populations (Perilloux, Fleischman, & Buss, 2008), explained by what has been 
called the “daughter-guarding hypothesis.”
One potential difficulty pertains to the direction of effects—whether parents are 
socializing children in sex-linked ways or whether children are eliciting their parents’ 
behavior to correspond to their existing sex-linked preferences (e.g., Scarr & McCartney, 
1983). Perhaps the interests of the children drive the parents’ behavior rather than the 
other way around. Parents may start out by giving a variety of toys to 
Both socialization and social learning theories hold that gender roles 
have their roots in early sex-differentiated learning experiences—in 
short, boys are encouraged in one direction, and girls are encouraged in 
another direction.
RozochkaIvn/Shutterstock
Final PDF to printer518
lar31869_ch16_496-523.indd 518 10/31/22 08:17 AM
PART FIVE The Social and Cultural Domain
however, if boys show no interest in dolls and girls show no interest in trucks, then over 
time parents may stop purchasing masculine toys for their daughters and feminine toys 
for their sons.
Another problem for traditional theories of socialization is that they provide no 
account of the origins of differential parental socialization practices. Why do parents 
want their boys and girls to grow up differently? Ideally, a comprehensive theory of the 
origins of sex differences should be able to account for the origins of sex-linked socializa￾tion practices. In sum, parents undoubtedly treat boys and girls differently, supporting 
the theory of sex-linked socialization of personality, but the origins of these practices 
currently remain a mystery.
Closely related to traditional socialization theories is social role theory (Eagly, 
1987; Eagly & Wood, 1999; Wood & Eagly, 2010). According to social role theory, 
sex differences originate because men and women are distributed differently into differ￾ent occupational and family roles. Men are expected to assume the breadwinning role. 
Women are expected to assume the homemaker role. Over time, children presumably 
learn the behaviors that are linked to these roles. Girls learn to be nurturing and emo￾tionally supportive because these qualities are linked with the maternal role. Boys learn 
to be tough and aggressive, qualities expected of the breadwinner.
There is some evidence supporting social role theory (Eagly, 1987, 1995). Men and 
women in the United States have assumed different occupation and family roles, with 
women found more often in domestic and child care roles and men more often in occu￾pational roles. An event-sampling procedure explored how men’s and women’s behavior 
varied as a function of the social role to which they were assigned—a supervisor role, a 
co-worker role, or the role of someone being supervised by someone else. Social role 
assignment had a large impact on the dominant behaviors that were expressed. Those 
assigned to the supervisor role displayed more dominance; those assigned the super￾visee role displayed significantly more submissiveness (Moskowitz, Suh, & Desaulniers, 
1994). When roles were reversed, people who formerly displayed dominance displayed 
submissiveness when they were put in a supervisee role, whereas the people who for￾merly were submissive became more dominant.
Like socialization theory, however, social role theory fails to provide an account 
of the origins of sex-linked roles (Gangestad, Haselton, & Buss, 2006). Who assigns 
the different roles? Why should men and women passively accept the roles they are 
assigned? Why don’t children follow the role of sitting quietly on airplanes or eating 
their spinach? Why do women assume domestic roles more than men? Are these roles 
found in all cultures?
Social role theory, however, is becoming increasingly testable as family and occu￾pational roles change. Women are assuming breadwinning roles more often than in 
the past, and men are assuming greater responsibility for domestic duties. With these 
changes, if social role theory is correct, sex differences should diminish as well: “A 
key prediction of social role theory is that sex differences should shrink as societies 
adopt more gender egalitarian values and socialization patterns” (Kaiser, 2019, p. 12). 
Interestingly, the largest test of this prediction, a study of 17,637 individuals in 55 differ￾ent cultures, has found precisely the opposite pattern (Schmitt et al., 2008). The most 
sexually egalitarian countries—those with equal access to education, knowledge, and 
economic wealth—show the largest, not the smallest, sex differences in personality. The 
findings have been replicated several times (e.g., Schmitt, 2015; Mac Giolla & Kajonius, 
2018). This surprising result contradicts the social role theory of sex differences in per￾sonality, although future empirical tests are needed.
Final PDF to printer519
lar31869_ch16_496-523.indd 519 10/31/22 08:17 AM
CHAPTER SIXTEEN Sex, Gender, and Personality
Hormonal Theories
Hormonal theories propose that men and women differ not because of 
the external social environment, but rather because they have different 
hormones (Hooven, 2021). Physiological differences, not differential 
social treatment, cause boys and girls to diverge in personality. Studies 
have sought to identify links between hormones such as testosterone 
(present in greater amounts in men) and sex-linked behavior.
There is some evidence that hormonal influences on sex dif￾ferences begin in utero. The hormonal bath that the developing fetus 
is exposed to, for example, might affect both the organization of the 
brain and consequently the gendered interests and activities of the 
individual. Some of the best evidence for this comes from a condi￾tion called congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH), in which the female 
fetus has an overactive adrenal gland. This results in the female being 
hormonally masculinized. Young girls with CAH show a marked pref￾erence for “male” toys, such as Lincoln logs and trucks (Berenbaum 
& Beltz, 2011; Berenbaum & Snyder, 1995; Cohen-Bendahan, van de 
Beek, & Berenbaum, 2005). As adults, CAH females show superiority 
in traditionally masculine cognitive skills, such as spatial rotation abil￾ity and throwing accuracy, as well as preferring traditionally masculine 
occupations (Kimura, 2002). These findings suggest that fetal expo￾sure to hormones can have lasting effects on gender-linked interests 
and abilities (Berenbaum & Beltz, 2021).
Men and women differ in their levels of circulating hormones. 
Women’s level of circulating testosterone typically falls between 200 and 
400 picograms per milliliter of blood at the lowest part of the menstrual 
cycle and between 285 and 440 at the highest part of the menstrual cycle 
(just prior to ovulation). Men have circulating testosterone ranging from 
5,140 to 6,460 picograms per milliliter of blood. After puberty, there is 
no overlap between the sexes in their levels of circulating testosterone. 
Men typically show more than 10 times the level of women.
Sex differences in circulating testosterone are linked with some tra￾ditional sex differences in behavior, such as aggression, dominance, and career choice. In 
women, high levels of testosterone are linked with pursuing a more masculine career and 
having greater success within the chosen career. Among lesbian women, testosterone 
has been associated with erotic role identification; more “masculine” lesbian partners 
having higher levels of testosterone than more “feminine” partners (Singh et al., 1999). 
Higher testosterone levels are associated with greater dominance and aggressiveness in 
both sexes. Female prison inmates who had more frequent disciplinary infractions had 
higher testosterone (Dabbs & Hargrove, 1997). Members of college fraternities who 
were more rambunctious had higher levels of testosterone than those in fraternities who 
behaved better (Dabbs, Hargrove, & Heusel, 1996).
Sexual desire is linked to levels of circulating testosterone, but only in women (van 
Anders, 2012). Women’s testosterone levels peak just prior to ovulation, and women 
report a peak in their sexual desire at precisely the same time. At this peak, women 
report initiating sexual intercourse and experience more desire for sex (Sherwin, 1988). 
Just thinking about sex increases testosterone in women, but not in men (Goldey & van 
Anders, 2012). So the links between hormones and sexuality are more complicated than 
scientists initially believed (van Anders, 2012).
Testosterone is associated with dominance and 
aggressiveness, as well as with the massive buildup of 
muscular tissue. Here, U.S. Olympic weightlifter Tim 
McRae rejoices after setting a new U.S. record in the 
snatch of 145 kg, a feat no woman in his weight class 
is likely to ever match. Olympic athletes are tested to 
make sure their testosterone levels are within normal 
ranges for their sex.
Kathy Willens/AP Images
Final PDF to printer520
lar31869_ch16_496-523.indd 520 10/31/22 08:17 AM
PART FIVE The Social and Cultural Domain
These findings do not prove that the differences between men and women in sexu￾ality, dominance, aggression, and career choices result from differences in testosterone 
levels. Correlation does not mean causation. Indeed, there is some evidence in non￾human primates that rises in testosterone levels follow rises in status and dominance 
within the group rather than leading to them (Sapolsky, 1987). Furthermore, sexual 
arousal itself can increase in testosterone levels (Hoyenga & Hoyenga, 1993). Sports 
fans whose team had just won had higher levels of testosterone than fans whose team 
had lost (Bernhardt et al., 1998). The link between hormones and behavior is bidirec￾tional (Edwards, Wetzel, & Wyner, 2006). Higher testosterone may result from, as well 
as cause, behavior changes.
An additional limitation of hormonal theories of sex differences in personality is 
one shared with socialization theories—namely, neither of these theories identifies the 
origins of the differences. Precisely why do men and women differ so dramatically in 
their levels of circulating testosterone? Is this merely an incidental effect of being male 
versus being female? Or, is there a systematic process that causes men and women to 
differ in testosterone precisely because testosterone differences lead to behavioral dif￾ferences in dominance and sexuality? One theoretical perspective that argues for this 
possibility is evolutionary psychology.
Evolutionary Psychology Theory
According to the evolutionary psychology perspective (see Chapter 8), men and women 
differ only in some domains of personality and show large similarities in most domains. 
The sexes are predicted to be similar in all the domains in which they have faced similar
adaptive problems over human evolutionary history. The sexes are predicted to differ only 
in the domains in which men and women have confronted different adaptive challenges
over human evolutionary history (Buss & Schmitt, 2011).
Adaptive problems are problems that need to be solved in order for an individual 
to survive and reproduce or whose solution increases overall reproductive success. For 
example, both sexes have similar taste preferences for sugar, salt, fat, and protein. That’s 
why fast-food restaurants are so popular—they package food with fat and sugar that both 
men and women desire. Food preferences reflect a solution to an important adaptive 
problem—getting calories and nutrients to survive.
In the domains of mating and sexuality, according to evolutionary psychologists, 
men and women have confronted somewhat different adaptive problems (Buss, 1995b). 
In order to reproduce, women must gestate a fetus for nine months. Men can reproduce 
through a single act of sex. Women historically faced the adaptive problem of securing 
resources to carry them through harsh winters or droughts, when resources might be 
scarce and a woman’s mobility might be restricted by pregnancy. The costs of making 
a poor choice of a mate, according to this logic, would have been more damaging to 
women than to men. Because of the heavy investment women require for reproduction, 
women evolved mate preferences for men who showed signals of the ability and willing￾ness to invest in them and their children.
This line of reasoning predicts that men will be more sexually indiscriminate and 
more aggressive with other men about pursuing opportunities for sex. Because of wom￾en’s heavy investment, they become the extraordinarily valuable reproductive resource 
over which men compete. Women are predicted to be more selective about sex partners. 
A woman who had made a hasty or poor mate choice in the past would have been faced 
with the difficulties of bearing and raising a child without the help of an investing man. A 
motivation for casual sex, in short, was more reproductively beneficial to ancestral men 
than to ancestral women.
Final PDF to printer521
lar31869_ch16_496-523.indd 521 10/31/22 08:17 AM
CHAPTER SIXTEEN Sex, Gender, and Personality
Much empirical evidence for sex differences corresponds to these predictions. 
Men clearly have a greater desire for sexual variety than women do (Buss & Schmitt, 
1993, 2011; Symons, 1979). Men desire a larger number of sex partners, seek sex after a 
shorter time period has elapsed in knowing a potential partner, and have more fantasies 
about casual sex than do women (Schmitt et al., 2012). Men tend to take more risks to 
secure the resources and status that women find desirable in mates (e.g., Byrnes, Miller, 
& Schafer, 1999; Wilson & Daly, 2004). The findings that men are more aggressive, 
more willing to take physical risks, and more interested in casual sex are precisely the 
findings predicted by evolutionary psychology (Archer, 2009).
Despite this support, evolutionary psychology theory, like the other theoretical 
perspectives, leaves unanswered questions: What accounts for individual differences 
within each sex? Why are some women keenly interested in casual sex? Why are some 
men meek, dependent, and nurturing, whereas others are callous and aggressive? Some 
of these questions are beginning to be answered. It turns out, for example, that some 
women benefit greatly from pursuing a short-term sexual strategy, which can result in 
obtaining more and better resources, switching to a mate who is better than her regular 
mate, and possibly securing better genes for her offspring (Buss et al., 2017; Gangestad 
et al., 2002; Gangestad & Thornhill, 2008). Ultimately, a comprehensive theory of sex 
differences must account for these differences within each sex, as well as the average dif￾ferences between the sexes.
An Integrated Theoretical Perspective
The theoretical accounts we have examined seem very different, but they are not neces￾sarily incompatible. Indeed, to some extent, they operate at different levels of analysis. 
Evolutionary psychology suggests why the sexes differ, but it does not always specify 
how they became different. Hormonal and socialization theories specify how the sexes 
became different but do not specify why the sexes are different.
An integrated theory would take all of these levels of analysis into account because 
they may be compatible with each other. Parents, for example, clearly have an interest 
in socializing boys and girls differently, and these socialization differences are, to some 
degree, universal (Low, 1989; Perilloux, Fleischman, & Buss, 2008). There is evidence 
that both men and women change their behavior as a function of the roles they adopt. 
Both sexes become more dominant when in supervisory roles; both become more sub￾missive when being supervised. Socialization, in short, must play a role in an integrated 
theory of sex differences, although some evidence contradicts social role theory.
Men and women clearly differ in circulating testosterone levels, and these differ￾ences are linked with differences in sexuality, aggression, dominance, and career inter￾ests (Edwards et al., 2006; Hoyenga & Hoyenga, 1993). Nonetheless, we cannot ignore 
the causal possibility, for which there is some evidence, that being in a dominant posi￾tion actually causes testosterone to rise. Thus, social roles and hormones may be closely 
linked, and these links may be necessary for an integrated theory of sex differences.
These proximate paths—socialization and hormones—might provide the answers 
for how the sexes differ, whereas evolutionary psychology provides the answers for why
the sexes differ. Are there evolutionary reasons that parents encourage greater aggres￾siveness and dominance in boys but more nurturance in girls? Are there evolutionary 
reasons for surges in testosterone when a person ascends a dominance hierarchy? At 
this point in the science of sex differences, there are no clear answers to these questions. 
Nonetheless, it’s a good bet that all three levels of analysis—social factors, hormonal and 
other physiological influences, and evolutionary processes—are needed for a complete 
understanding of gender and personality.
Final PDF to printer522
lar31869_ch16_496-523.indd 522 10/31/22 08:17 AM
PART FIVE The Social and Cultural Domain
SUMMARY AND EVALUATION
The study of sex, gender, and personality has provoked heated debate over the past sev￾eral decades. Perhaps in no other area of personality psychology do politics and values 
get so intermingled with science. Some researchers, called minimalists, emphasize the 
great similarities between the sexes, pointing out that the effect size differences are small 
and the distributions overlapping. Other researchers, called maximalists, emphasize that 
sex differences are real and replicable and stress the effect size differences rather than 
the overlap of the distributions.
When we take a step back, it is possible to gain a more accurate understanding 
of sex, gender, and personality. The past few decades have witnessed an explosion of 
research on sex differences, along with the development of meta-analytic statistical pro￾cedures, which allow for firm conclusions grounded in empirical data.
Some sex differences are real and not artifacts of particular investigators or meth￾ods. Some sex differences have remained relatively constant over generations and across 
cultures. Nonetheless, the magnitudes of sex differences vary tremendously. When ques￾tions about sex differences are posed, therefore, we must always ask the questions: In 
what domains? And how large are the differences?
The domains that show large and small sex differences are now fairly clear. Men 
score consistently higher on the personality attributes of assertiveness, aggressiveness 
(especially physical aggressiveness), and casual sexuality. Women consistently score 
higher on measures of anxiety, trust, and tender-mindedness (nurturance). Women are 
more likely than men to experience both positive emotions (e.g., affection, joy) and nega￾tive emotions (e.g., fear, sadness), although the magnitude of these differences is not 
large. Men are more likely to be sexually aggressive, trying to force women to have sex, 
although these findings appear to be limited to a subset of men—those who are narcis￾sistic, psychopathic, lack empathy, and show hostile masculinity. Women tend to score 
higher on emotional investment—a cultural universal likely linked to attachment and 
bonding in romantic and other social relationships.
Although no sex differences are reported in depression rates prior to puberty, at 
around age 13 women tend to show higher rates of depression than do men. This sex 
difference has been tied to theories suggesting that women ruminate more than men and 
theories linked to the importance of physical appearance in the domain of mate competi￾tion. One adaptationist theory proposes that women’s depression signals to social part￾ners that they need help. For example, women are especially vulnerable to depression 
after they give birth to a child. If she feels like she is not getting enough help from her 
husband or her relatives, depression may send a signal that these social partners need to 
pitch in more. No single theory is likely to completely explain the large sex differences in 
depression found across cultures.
Men score toward the things end of the people–things dimension; women tend 
to score more toward the people end. Within each of these domains, however, there is 
overlap. Some women are more assertive, aggressive, and things oriented than the major￾ity of men. Some men are more anxious, tender minded, and people oriented than the 
majority of women.
In the 1970s, much attention was focused on the concept of androgyny. However, 
it became clear as more empirical evidence was gathered that masculinity and feminin￾ity were not independent, as the androgyny researchers had asserted. Those who score 
high on masculinity, or instrumentality, tend to score low on femininity, or expressive￾ness, and vice versa. Many the original androgyny researchers came to believe that these 
Final PDF to printer523
lar31869_ch16_496-523.indd 523 10/31/22 08:17 AM
CHAPTER SIXTEEN Sex, Gender, and Personality
sex differences 497
gender 498
gender stereotypes 498
effect size 499
minimalist 501
maximalist 501
inhibitory control 501
perceptual sensitivity 502
surgency 502
negative affectivity 503
KEY TERMS
instrumentality 513
expressiveness 513
gender schemata 513
social categories 514
socialization theory 517
social learning theory 517
social role theory 518
hormonal theories 519
trust 503
tender-mindedness 503
global self-esteem 507
people–things dimension 509
empathizing 509
systemizing 509
rumination 510
masculinity 511
femininity 511
androgynous 511
dimensions capture the essence of sex differences. Men tend to be more instrumental. 
Women tend to be more expressive. Nonetheless, there is much overlap, and many 
women are highly instrumental and many men are expressive.
Another important topic centers on gender stereotypes, or beliefs that people hold 
about each sex, regardless of their accuracy. Cross-cultural research has revealed some 
universality of gender stereotypes. In all cultures, men are believed to be more aggres￾sive, autonomous, dominant, achievement oriented, and exhibitionistic, and women are 
believed to be more affiliative, deferent, nurturing, and self-abasing. These stereotypes 
correspond in many ways to the actual sex differences. Although some argue that ste￾reotypes exaggerate the differences, others conclude that people’s gender stereotypes 
are remarkably accurate in corresponding to actual gender differences. People also hold 
stereotypes about the subtypes within each sex. Men are viewed as playboys, career men, 
or losers; women as feminists, housewives, or sex bombs.
Traditional theories of sex differences have emphasized social factors—socialization 
by parents, observational learning from social models, and social roles. They have some 
support. Cross-cultural studies reveal that boys are universally socialized to be achieve￾ment strivers, and girls are universally socialized to be more restrained, especially in the 
sexual domain. On the other hand, a key prediction from social role theory is that sex 
differences should shrink in cultures that have become increasingly egalitarian in gender 
socialization and opportunities. Surprisingly, sex differences in personality appear to be 
larger, not smaller, in highly gender egalitarian cultures, contradicting this key prediction 
from social role theory.
Studies of hormones suggest that social factors do not tell the whole story. 
Testosterone, for example, has been implicated in the personality factors of dominance, 
aggression, and sexuality. Because men and women differ substantially in their levels of 
circulating testosterone, it is possible that some of the personality differences are caused 
by hormonal differences.
According to evolutionary psychologists, men and women differ in domains in 
which the sexes have faced different adaptive problems over human evolutionary history. 
In other domains, the sexes are the same or highly similar. Aggression and orientation 
toward casual sex are two domains in which the sexes differ, according to this theory, 
and these predictions are empirically supported. What is needed is an integrative theory 
of sex, gender, and personality that takes into account all of these factors: social factors, 
physiological factors, and evolutionary factors.
Final PDF to printerlar31869_ch17_524-551.indd 524 10/22/22 09:27 AM
524
Lightspring/Shutterstock
17
Culture and 
Personality
Cultural Violations: An Illustration
What Is Cultural Personality Psychology?
Three Major Approaches to Culture
Evoked Culture
Transmitted Culture
Cultural Universals
SUMMARY AND EVALUATION
KEY TERMS
Final PDF to printerlar31869_ch17_524-551.indd 525 10/22/22 09:27 AM
T H E S O C I A L A N D C U L T U R A L 
DOMAIN
The Yanomamö Indians of Venezuela set up temporary shelters, from 
which they forage for food and hunt for game. When these shelters become depleted 
of food, they push on and settle elsewhere. On one particular day, the men gather at 
early dawn, preparing to raid a neighboring village. The group is tense. The men in the 
raiding party risk injury, and a fearful man might turn back, excusing himself from the 
raid by telling the others that he has a thorn in his foot. Men who do this too often 
risk damaging their reputation (Chagnon, 1983).
Not all Yanomamö men are the same. There are at least two discernible groups 
that differ profoundly in personality. The lowland Yanomamö men are highly aggres￾sive. They do not hesitate to hit their wives with sticks for “infractions” as minor as 
serving tea too slowly. They often challenge other men to club fights or ax fights. And 
they sometimes declare war on neighboring groups, attempting to kill the enemy men 
and capture their wives. Yanomamö men shave the tops of their heads to reveal the 
scars from club fights, sometimes painting the scars red to display them as symbols of 
courage. Indeed, one is not regarded as a true man until one has killed another man—
acquiring the honor of being called an unokai. The men who are unokai have the most 
wives (Chagnon, 1988).
The Yanomamö Indian 
tribes are among the last 
truly traditional societies 
on earth, living a hunter￾gatherer existence in 
the isolated jungles of 
Venezuela.
robertharding/Alamy Stock 
Photo
17
Final PDF to printer526
lar31869_ch17_524-551.indd 526 10/22/22 09:27 AM
PART FIVE The Social and Cultural Domain
In the highlands reside a different group of Yanomamö. These people are more 
peaceful and dislike fighting. The high levels of agreeableness can be seen on their faces. 
These Yanomamö do not raid neighboring villages, do not engage in ax fights, and rarely 
engage in club fights. They stress the virtues of cooperation. Unfortunately, though, food 
resources are more plentiful in the lowlands, where the aggressive Yanomamö dominate.
How can we understand cultural differences in personality between the highland 
and lowland Yanomamö? Did those who were temperamentally more disposed to aggres￾sion drive those who were more agreeable up to the highlands and away from the food 
resources? Or did the two groups start out the same, and only subsequently did cultural 
values take hold in one group different from those that took hold in the other? These 
questions form the subject matter of this chapter. What is the effect of culture on person￾ality? What is the effect of personality on culture? And how can we understand patterns 
of cultural variation amid patterns of human universals?
Personality psychologists explore personality across cultures for several important 
reasons (Allik & Realo, 2009; Church, 2000; Paunonen & Ashton, 1998). One is to 
discover whether concepts of personality in one culture, such as American culture, are 
also applicable in other cultures. A second is to find out whether cultures differ, on aver￾age, in the levels of particular personality traits. Are Japanese, for example, really more 
agreeable than Americans, or is this merely a stereotype? A third reason is to discover 
whether the factor structure of personality traits varies across cultures or is universal. 
Will the five-factor model of personality discovered in American samples, for example, 
be replicated in Holland, Germany, and the Philippines? A fourth reason is to discover 
whether certain features of personality are universal, corresponding to the human nature 
level of personality analysis (see Chapter 1).
In this chapter, we explore the features of personality common to everyone but dif￾ferentially elicited only in some cultures; which features of personality are transmitted so 
that they become characteristic of some local groups, but not others; and which features 
of personality are common to everyone in all cultures. We start by examining just how 
different cultures can be.
Cultural Violations: An Illustration
Consider the following events:
	 1.	 One of your family members eats beef regularly. (your beef-eating family member)
	 2.	 A young married woman goes alone to see a movie without informing her 
husband. When she returns home, her husband says, “If you do it again, I will 
beat you black and blue.” She does it again; he beats her black and blue. (the 
wife-beating husband)
	 3.	 A poor man goes to the hospital after being seriously hurt in an accident. The 
hospital refuses to treat him because he cannot afford to pay. (the refusing hospital)
Now examine each event and decide whether you think the behavior on the part of 
the person or institution in parentheses is morally wrong. If so, is it a serious violation, a 
minor offense, or not a violation at all?
If you are a Brahman Hindu, you are likely to believe that the first event—eating 
beef—is a serious violation but that the second event—the husband beating the wife for 
disobeying him—is not (Shweder, Mahapatra, & Miller, 1990). If you are an American, 
however, the odds are that your views are the reverse: Unless you are a vegetarian, you 
see nothing wrong with eating beef, but you view it as very wrong for the husband to beat 
Final PDF to printer527
lar31869_ch17_524-551.indd 527 10/22/22 09:27 AM
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN Culture and Personality 
his wife. Both Brahman Hindus and Americans, however, agree that the hospital that 
denies treatment to the badly injured man is committing a serious violation.
This example highlights a fascinating question for personality psychologists. Some 
aspects of personality (e.g., attitudes, values, self-concepts) are highly variable across cul￾tures. But other aspects of personality are universal—features that are shared by people 
everywhere. The central questions addressed by this chapter are “How do people from 
different cultures differ in personality, and how are people from all cultures the same?”
What Is Cultural Personality Psychology?
Before proceeding further, it is useful to briefly define culture. Let’s start with an obser￾vation: “Humans everywhere show striking patterns of local within-group similarity in 
their behavior and thought, accompanied by profound intergroup differences” (Tooby 
& Cosmides, 1992, p. 6). Within-group similarities and between-group differences can 
be of any sort—physical, psychological, behavioral, or attitudinal. These phenomena are 
called cultural variations.
Consider the example of eating beef. Beef eating is common among Americans 
but is rare and viewed with abhorrence among Hindus. Among Hindus in India, the 
values and behaviors are shared for the most part. But they differ from the widely shared 
American attitudes toward beef eating. This difference—a local within-group similarity 
and between-group difference—is an example of a cultural variation.
Attaching the label of “culture” or “cultural variation” to phenomena such as these 
is best treated as a description, not an explanation. Labeling attitudes toward beef eating 
as “cultural” certainly describes the phenomenon. It tells us that we are dealing with a 
within-group similarity and a between-group difference. But it doesn’t explain what has 
caused the cultural difference or why the groups differ. Cultural personality ­psychology
generally has three key goals: (1) to discover the principles underlying the cultural diver￾sity, (2) to discover how human psychology shapes culture, and (3) to discover how 
cultural understandings in turn shape our psychology (Fiske et al., 1997). A cultural 
perspective on personality is also critical for testing the generalizability of both findings 
and theories of personality functioning (Oishi, Kushlev, & Benet-Martínez, 2021).
Three Major Approaches to Culture
Certain traits are common to all people, but others display remarkable variation. Cultural 
variants are the personality attributes that vary from group to group. Psychologists have 
developed three major approaches to explaining and exploring personality across cul￾tures: evoked culture, transmitted culture, and cultural universals.
Evoked Culture
Evoked culture is defined as cultural differences created by differing environmental con￾ditions activating a predictable set of responses. Consider the physical examples of skin 
calluses and sweat. There are undoubtedly cultural differences in the thickness and dis￾tribution of calluses and in the amount people sweat. The traditional !Kung Bushmen of 
Botswana, for example, tend to have thicker calluses on their feet than most Americans 
because they walk around without shoes. These differences are aspects of evoked culture—
different environments have different effects on people’s callus-producing mechanisms. 
Final PDF to printer528
lar31869_ch17_524-551.indd 528 10/22/22 09:27 AM
PART FIVE The Social and Cultural Domain
People who live near the equator are exposed to more intense heat than those who live 
in more northern climates, such as Canada. The observation that residents of Zaire sweat 
more than residents of Canada is properly explained as an environmentally evoked dif￾ference that operates on sweat glands, which all humans possess. A behavioral example 
would be cultural variation in the number of children a woman has, which appears to be 
evoked partly as a consequence of the cultural level of economic development and the 
cultural level of social support provided to women (Hyafil & Baumard, 2020).
Note that two ingredients are necessary to explain cultural variations: (1) a uni￾versal underlying mechanism (sweat glands possessed by all people; desire for children) 
and (2) environmental differences in the degree to which the underlying mechanism is 
activated (differences in ambient temperature; cultural level of economic development). 
Neither element alone is adequate for a complete explanation.
The same explanatory logic applies to other environmentally triggered phenomena 
shared by members of one group, but not by other groups. Drought, plentiful game, and 
poisonous snakes are all environmental events that affect some groups more than others. 
These events activate mechanisms in some groups that lie dormant in others. In the next 
section, we discuss several psychological examples of evoked culture and show how they 
may result in differences in personality traits among groups.
Evoked Cooperation
Whether someone is cooperative or selfish is a central part of personality, but these 
proclivities may differ from culture to culture. A concrete example of evoked culture 
consists of the patterns of cooperative food sharing found among 
different bands of hunter-gatherer tribes (Cosmides & Tooby, 1992). 
Different classes of food have different variances in their distribu￾tion. High-variance foods differ greatly in their availability from day 
to day. For example, among the Ache tribe of Paraguay, meat from 
hunting is a high-variance resource. On any given day, the probabil￾ity that a hunter will come back with meat is only 60 percent. On 
any particular day, therefore, one hunter will be successful, whereas 
another hunter will come back empty-handed. Gathered food, on the 
other hand, is a lower-variance food resource. The yield from gather￾ing depends more on the skill and effort a person expends than on 
luck. Under high-variance conditions, there are tremendous benefits 
to sharing. You share your meat today with an unlucky hunter, and 
next week they will share meat with you. The benefits of engaging in 
cooperative food sharing increase under conditions of high variance. 
In this example, the benefits of sharing are increased by the fact that 
a large game animal contains more meat than one person or family 
can consume. Some of the meat would spoil if it were not shared 
with others.
Kaplan and Hill (1985) found that, indeed, within the Ache 
tribe, meat is communally shared. Hunters deposit their kill with a 
“distributor,” a person who allocates portions to families based on 
family size. In the same group, gathered food is not shared outside 
the family. In short, cooperative sharing seems to be evoked by the 
environmental condition of high food variance.
Halfway around the world, in the Kalahari Desert, Cashden 
(1980) found that some San groups are more egalitarian than others. 
The degree of egalitarianism is closely correlated with the variance 
Yanomamö Indians butchering a giant anteater. In 
their culture, the successful hunter shares his catch with 
the whole group. The benefits of such cooperative food 
sharing are high in their environment (Chagnon, 1983).
Claudia Andujar/Science Source
Final PDF to printer529
lar31869_ch17_524-551.indd 529 10/22/22 09:27 AM
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN Culture and Personality 
in food supply. The !Kung San’s food supply is highly variable, and they share food and 
express egalitarian beliefs. To be called a “stinge” (stingy) is one of the worst insults, and 
the group imposes strong social sanctions for stinginess and gives social approval for food 
sharing. Among the Gana San, in contrast, food variance is low, and they show more eco￾nomic inequality. Gana San rarely share it outside their extended families.
Environmental conditions can activate some behaviors, such as cooperation and shar￾ing. Everyone has the capacity to share and cooperate, but cultural differences in the degree 
to which groups do share and cooperate depend, to some extent, on the external environ￾mental conditions, such as variance in the food supply (Henrich & Muthukrishna, 2021).
Early Experience and Evoked Mating Strategies
Another example of evoked culture comes from the work of Jay Belsky and his colleagues 
(Belsky, 2000; Belsky et al., 2012). They argue that harsh, rejecting, and inconsistent 
child-rearing practices, erratically provided resources, and marital discord foster a per￾sonality of impulsivity and a mating strategy marked by early reproduction. In contrast, 
sensitive, supportive, and responsive child rearing, combined with reliable resources and 
spousal harmony, foster a personality of conscientiousness and a mating strategy of com￾mitment, delayed reproduction, and stable marriage. Children in uncertain and unpre￾dictable environments, in short, seem to learn that they cannot rely on a single mate, 
and so opt for a sexual life that starts early and inclines them to seek multiple mates. 
In contrast, children growing up in stable homes with parents who predictably invest 
in their welfare opt for a strategy of long-term mating because they expect to attract a 
stable, high-investing mate. The evidence from children of divorced homes supports this 
theory. Such children tend to be more impulsive, tend to reach puberty earlier, engage 
in sexual intercourse earlier, and have more sex partners than do their peers from intact 
homes. A longitudinal study found that Australian children who experienced harsher 
and more unpredictable cultural environments also engaged in more and earlier sexual 
activity (Maranges & Strickhouser, 2021).
The sensitivity of personality and mating strategies to early experiences may help 
explain the differences in the value placed on chastity across cultures. In China, for 
example, marriages are lasting, divorce is rare, and parents invest heavily in their chil￾dren over extended periods (Lei et al., 2011). In Sweden, many children are born out 
of wedlock, divorce is common, and fewer fathers invest consistently over time. These 
cultural experiences may evoke in the two groups different mating strategies, with the 
Swedes more than the Chinese tending toward short-term mating and more frequent 
partner switching (Buss, 2016).
Although more evidence is needed to confirm this theory, this example illustrates 
how a consistent pattern of individual differences can be evoked in different cultures, 
producing a local pattern of within-group similarities and between-group differences. All 
humans presumably have within their mating menu a strategy of short-term mating, marked 
by frequent partner switching, and a strategy of long-term mating, marked by enduring 
commitment and love (Buss, 2016). These mating strategies may be differentially evoked 
in different cultures, resulting in enduring cultural differences in mating strategies.
Honors, Insults, and Evoked Aggression
Why are people in some cultures prone to aggression at the slightest provocation, 
whereas people in other cultures resort to aggression only reluctantly? Why do people in 
some cultures kill one another at relatively high rates, whereas people in other cultures 
kill one another at relatively low rates? Nisbett (1993) has proposed a theory to account 
for these cultural differences—a theory based on the evoked culture.
Final PDF to printer530
lar31869_ch17_524-551.indd 530 10/22/22 09:27 AM
PART FIVE The Social and Cultural Domain
Nisbett proposed that the economic means of subsistence of a culture affects the 
degree to which the group develops a culture of honor. In cultures of honor, insults are 
viewed as highly offensive public challenges, which people who are insulted must con￾front aggressively. The theory is that differences in the degree to which honor becomes 
a central part of the culture rests ultimately with economics—specifically, the manner 
in which food is obtained. In herding economies, one’s entire stock could be lost sud￾denly to thieves. Cultivating a reputation as willing to respond with violent force—by 
physically aggressing when publicly insulted—deters thieves who might steal one’s prop￾erty. In more settled agricultural communities, an aggressive reputation is less important 
because one’s means of subsistence, crops, cannot be easily stolen.
Nisbett tested his theory by using homicide statistics from different regions within 
the United States and experiments in which subjects from the northern and southern 
United States were insulted. Southerners (historically using animal herding for subsistence) 
did not endorse more positive attitudes toward the use of violence in general, compared 
with the northerners (historically using farming or agriculture for subsistence). The south￾erners, however, were more likely to endorse violence for the purposes of protection and in 
response to insults. Furthermore, the homicide rates in the South were far higher than those 
in the North, particularly for murders triggered by efforts to defend one’s reputation.
Nisbett found a similar pattern in the lab, where the northern and southern partici￾pants were insulted by an experimenter. The experimenter intentionally bumped into the 
participants and then said “asshole.” Subsequently, the participants were asked to com￾plete a series of incomplete word stems, such as “h _____.” Southerners who had been 
insulted wrote more aggressive words, such as hate, than did the northerners, suggesting 
that the insults had evoked in the southerners a higher level of anger and aggression. 
When southerners and northerners were threatened in a laboratory study, southerners 
had elevated testosterone and responded with greater aggression (Nisbett & Cohen, 
1996). Another study found that White populations living in Southern states as well as in 
Western states (considered to score high in cultures of honor) experienced more school 
shootings and higher rates of intimate partner violence (Gul, Cross, & Uskul, 2021).
Presumably, all humans have the capacity to develop a high sensitivity to public 
insults and a capacity to respond with violence. These capacities are evoked in certain 
cultures, however, and presumably lie dormant in others.
Cultural Differences in Conformity
Pressures to conform with social norms are widespread. Individuals sometimes pay a 
steep social price for deviating from the group. Children are expected to obey parents 
and are sometimes punished if they rebel. On the other hand, uniqueness and novelty 
are sometimes celebrated, and those who resist the tyrannical dictates of a culture are 
sometimes seen as heroes. Could cultural differences in conformity be an example of 
evoked culture?
One hypothesis stems from evolutionary psychology and suggests that the preva￾lence of disease-causing pathogens cause cultural pressure to conform (Murray, Trudeau, 
& Schaller, 2011). The logic is that infectious diseases historically posed a great threat to 
human survival. Consequently, humans have evolved defenses to defend against disease￾causing pathogens. These include physiological defenses such as the immune system. 
They also include a behavioral immune system that functions to prevent contact with 
disease-causing agents. This system may include avoiding people with open sores, people 
who cough, and those who show other signs of disease. When the threat of pathogen 
infection becomes especially salient, people become more introverted, avoiding contact 
with other people (Murray, Trudeau, & Schaller, 2011).
Final PDF to printer531
lar31869_ch17_524-551.indd 531 10/22/22 09:27 AM
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN Culture and Personality 
Conformity to group norms may also help to avoid diseases. Deviating from cultural 
norms of food preparation, for example, may increase one’s risk of a food-borne disease. 
In an innovative set of studies, Murray, Trudeau, and Schaller (2011) found that people in 
cultures with a high prevalence of pathogens tended to be more conformist than those with 
a lower pathogen prevalence. In cultures with low pathogen prevalence, people expressed 
greater tolerance for nonconformity. Experiments conducted in China and Canada show 
that when the threat of disease is made salient to people, they are more likely to conform 
on experimental tasks (Schaller, Murray, & Hofer, 2021). Differences in conformity may 
be prime examples of evoked culture—one that rests on a universal psychology that is dif￾ferentially activated by environmental differences in pathogen prevalence.
The concept of evoked culture provides one model for understanding and explain￾ing cultural variations in personality traits, such as conformity, cooperativeness, or 
aggression. It rests on the assumption that all humans have the same potentials or capa￾bilities. The aspects of these potentials that get evoked depend on features of the social 
or physical environment.
Transmitted Culture
Transmitted culture consists of ideas, values, attitudes, and beliefs that exist originally 
in at least one person’s mind that are transmitted to other people’s minds through 
their interaction with the original person (Tooby & Cosmides, 1992; Henrich, 2015). 
The view that it is wrong to eat beef, for example, is an example of transmitted culture. 
This value presumably originated in the mind of one person, who then transmitted it to 
others. Over time, the view that eating beef is a serious violation came to characterize 
Hindus. Although we do not know much about how culture is transmitted or why certain 
ideas spread but others do not, the discovery of large cultural differences in seemingly 
arbitrary values provides evidence for the existence of transmitted culture. People in 
some cultures view eating beef as wrong; people in other cultures view eating pork as 
wrong. Others see nothing wrong with eating beef or pork, others eat no meat at all, and 
others avoid meat and dairy products.
Cultural Differences in Moral Values
Cultures differ in their beliefs about what is morally right and wrong. As an example, 
consider whether you agree or disagree with the following statement: “It is immoral for 
adults to disobey their parents” (Rozin, 2003, p. 275). If you are a Hindu Indian, the 
odds are great that you will agree with this statement (80 percent of the Hindu women 
and 72 percent of the Hindu men). If you are an American, the odds are that you will 
disagree (only 13 percent of American women and 19 percent of American men agree).
Views of moral behavior—what is right and what is wrong—are important prin￾ciples that guide behavior, and they are central to personality. Cultures clearly differ in 
their views of what is right and wrong, sometimes in seemingly arbitrary ways. Among 
the Semang of Malaysia, for example, it is considered sinful to comb one’s hair during 
a thunderstorm, to watch dogs mate, to tease a helpless animal, to kill a sacred wasp, to 
have sexual intercourse during the daytime, to draw water from a fire-blackened vessel, 
or to act casually or informally with one’s mother-in-law (Murdock, 1980).
There may also be universals in what is considered right and wrong. Both Brahman 
Indians and Americans, for example, agree about the following wrongs: ignoring an acci￾dent victim, breaking a promise, kicking a harmless animal, committing brother–sister 
incest, and stealing flowers (Shweder, Mahapatra, & Miller., 1990). Most cultures con￾sider it wrong to kill without cause. Most cultures consider it wrong to commit incest 
Final PDF to printer532
lar31869_ch17_524-551.indd 532 10/22/22 09:27 AM
PART FIVE The Social and Cultural Domain
What happens when people from different 
cultures meet and fall in love? We might 
expect that the more differences between 
the cultures, the greater the potential dif￾ficulties in the marriage. Large cultural 
differences—those in language, religion, 
race, politics, and class—may create major 
divides that may separate a cross-cultural 
couple.
Sociologists Rosemary Breger and 
Rosanna Hill (1998) present a detailed look 
at cross-cultural marriages. Throughout the 
book, they emphasize how cultural differ￾ences create challenges in marriages. For 
example, many cultural rituals surround 
food and eating. In some cultures, men 
are served first and begin eating before 
women. A man from a different culture 
might politely wait and not touch his food 
until his wife begins to eat. If the wife 
comes from a culture in which men eat first, 
she might suspect that her husband is dis￾satisfied with the meal because he is not 
eating before her. A polite social behavior 
in one culture can thus be seen as a signal 
of dissatisfaction in another.
In some cultures, the extended family 
becomes a part of the couple’s life, some￾times sharing sleeping space. In some cul￾tures, you don’t just marry the person; you 
marry their extended family.
According to Larsen and Prizmic￾Larsen (1999), one of the largest chal￾lenges in cross-cultural marriages results 
from differences in native languages. They 
report a case where the wife, who was from 
Eastern Europe, said to the husband, “You 
are boring,” when her real intent was to 
ask, “Are you bored?” Good communica￾tion is essential to marriage. When one per￾son has to conduct the marriage in a foreign 
language, there exists potential misunder￾standings between the spouses. A heavy 
accent can lead to verbal mis￾understandings. Communicating 
in a foreign language also takes 
mental effort and, when tired or 
angry, one may not be able to 
communicate very well in a sec￾ond language.
There are at least two 
lines of inquiry that interest 
personality psychologists about 
cross-cultural marriages. One 
concerns who is the most likely 
to marry outside their own cul￾ture. Are some personality vari￾ables involved in being attracted 
to those who are different from 
oneself? A second concerns 
process. What happens in cross￾cultural marriages that might 
make them different from mono￾cultural marriages? How do two 
people with cultural differences 
accommodate and adapt to 
each other? Are there ways that 
people can free themselves of 
cultural bonds and more eas￾ily function in a cross-cultural 
relationship? How do people 
maintain their identities and 
sense of self, even when living 
in a foreign country and conduct￾ing their marriage in a foreign 
language?
Cross-cultural marriages 
have existed throughout history. 
In the past, the difficulties were 
most likely connected with social 
class differences (e.g., Romeo 
and Juliet), non-acceptance by 
one’s extended family, religion, 
or race. Throughout much of the 
twentieth century, interracial marriage was 
illegal in many U.S. jurisdictions, but today 
A Closer Look Reaching Across the Great Divide: The 
Psychology of Cross-Cultural Marriages
MinDof/Shutterstock
Darren Greenwood/DesignPics
Relationships that bridge two cultures bring unique 
challenges, as well as unique opportunities, to the couple.
Don Hammond/Design Pics
it is widely regarded as a matter of personal 
choice and widely accepted.
Final PDF to printer533
lar31869_ch17_524-551.indd 533 10/22/22 09:27 AM
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN Culture and Personality 
(Lieberman & Lobel, 2012). But even these seeming universals are violated in some 
cultures. Among certain subcultures, for example, killing is viewed as justified if one has 
been publicly insulted (Nisbett, 1993). In certain royal dynasties, incest between brother 
and sister was actively encouraged as a way to preserve the family’s wealth and power. 
Statements about universality are relative in the sense that there are always some cultural 
or subcultural exceptions.
The key point is that many moral values are specific to particular cultures and are 
likely to be examples of transmitted culture. They appear to be passed from one genera￾tion to the next, not through genes but through the teachings of parents and teachers 
or through observations of the behavior of others within the culture. Now we turn to 
another possible example of transmitted culture—the self-concept.
Cultural Differences in Self-Concept
The ways in which we define ourselves—our self-concepts—are the core components of 
human personality. Self-concepts influence behavior. A person who defines self as con￾scientious, for example, may take pains to show up for classes on time, return all phone 
calls from friends, and remember to spell-check her term paper. A person who defines 
self as agreeable may ensure that the wishes of others are taken into account when decid￾ing where to eat, may give much to charity, and may wait until all others have feasted at 
the buffet table before serving self. Our self-concepts, in short, affect how we present our￾selves to others and how we behave in everyday life. Research shows that self-concepts 
differ substantially from culture to culture.
Markus and Kitayama (1991, 1994, 1998) propose that each person has two fun￾damental “cultural tasks,” which have to be confronted. The first is communion, col￾lectivism, or interdependence. This cultural task involves how you are affiliated with or 
engaged in the larger group. Interdependence includes your relationships with other 
members of the group and your embeddedness within the group. The second task—
agency, individualism, or independence—involves how you differentiate yourself from the 
group. Independence includes your unique abilities, your personal internal motives and 
personality dispositions, and the ways you separate yourself from the group.
Boundaries between cultures are 
becoming more permeable, especially in the 
European community. On the other hand, 
there are many wars and ethnic conflicts 
based on animosities associated with cultural 
differences. Those animosities may deter 
opportunities for certain cultural combina￾tions in marriage. A good example can be 
found in the countries of former Yugoslavia, 
where cross-cultural marriages between, 
say, Muslims and Serbs or between Serbs 
and Croats were once common and accept￾able. However, the conflicts set in motion in 
1991 with the breakup of former Yugoslavia, 
and continuing in Kosovo, Bosnia, and 
Montenegro, have 
resulted in a reversal of 
social diversity. A new 
term has even entered 
the English language: 
Balkanization, mean￾ing social resegrega￾tion following a time 
of peaceful integration 
and social diversity. 
Balkanization in various 
countries around the 
world may make life dif￾ficult for cross-cultural 
marriages.
Former United Nations Secretary General Kofi Annan, born in Ghana, 
met Swedish attorney Nane Lagergren when they both worked for the 
U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees. They remained married from 
1984 until his death in 2018.
Richard Corkery/NY Daily News Archive via Getty Images
Final PDF to printer534
lar31869_ch17_524-551.indd 534 10/22/22 09:27 AM
PART FIVE The Social and Cultural Domain
People from different cultures differ profoundly in how they balance these two 
tasks. Western cultures, according to this theory, are characterized by independence. 
Conversations emphasize individual choices (e.g., “Where do you want to eat tonight?”). 
The system of salaries puts a premium on individual merit—your salary is specifically 
pegged to your performance.
In contrast, many non-Western cultures, such as Japan and China, are characterized 
by interdependence. These cultures emphasize the fundamental interconnectedness within 
the group. The self is meaningful only with reference to the larger group of which the per￾son is a part. The major tasks in these cultures are to fit in and to promote harmony and 
group unity. Personal desires are constrained rather than expressed in a selfish manner (e.g., 
“Where do we want to eat tonight?”). Conversational scripts emphasize sympathy, deference, 
and kindness. Pay is often determined by seniority rather than by individual performance.
To illustrate the contrasting orientations of independence and interdependence, 
consider the following descriptions, the first from an American student and the second 
from a Japanese student, in response to the instruction “describe yourself briefly”:
I like to live life with a lot of positive energy. I feel like there is so much to do and 
see and experience. However, I also know the value of relaxation. I love the obscure. 
I play ultimate Frisbee, juggle, unicycle, and dabble on the recorder and concertina. 
I have a taste for the unique. I am very friendly and in most situations very self￾confident. (Markus & Kitayama, 1998, p. 63)
I cannot decide quickly what I should do, and am often swayed by other people’s 
opinions, and I cannot oppose the opinions of people who are supposed to be 
respected because of age or status. Even if I have displeasure, I compromise myself 
to the people around me without getting rid of the displeasure. Also, I am concerned 
about how other people think about me. (p. 64)
Notice the different themes that run through the self-descriptions of these individ￾uals. The American tends to use global and largely context-free trait descriptions, such as 
friendly, self-confident, and happy. The Japanese tends to use self-descriptions embedded 
in a social context, such as responding to elders or those higher in status and using the 
social group as a means of calming down. These illustrate the themes of independence 
and interdependence. The independence theme is characterized by a self-view as autono￾mous, stable, coherent, and free from the influences of others. The interdependence 
theme is characterized by a self-view as connected, interpersonally flexible, and commit￾ted to being bound to others (Markus & Kitayama, 1998).
Is there empirical evidence that the way we define ourselves—something funda￾mental to personality—depends on the culture in which we reside? Using the Twenty 
Statements Test, researchers found that North Americans tend to describe themselves 
using abstract internal characteristics, such as smart, stable, dependable, and open-minded
(Rhee et al., 1995). Chinese participants more often describe themselves with social 
roles, such as “I am a daughter” or “I am Jane’s friend” (Ip & Bond, 1995).
Another study administered the Twenty Statements Test to samples of Asians in 
Seoul, Korea; to Asian Americans in New York City; and to European Americans in 
New York City (Rhee et al., 1995). It examined cultural differences in self-concept, but 
with an interesting twist: Do Asians living in New York who self-identify as Asian differ 
in self-concept from Asians living in the same place who do not self-identify as Asian? 
Do some people shift their self-concepts and adopt ones similar to those of the adopted 
culture? The process of adapting to one’s new culture is called acculturation.
Final PDF to printer535
lar31869_ch17_524-551.indd 535 10/22/22 09:27 AM
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN Culture and Personality 
The Asian Americans living in New York who did not self-identify as Asian 
described themselves using highly abstract and autonomous self-statements, similar to 
the responses of European Americans residing in New York. These Asian Americans 
used even more trait terms in their self-descriptions (45 percent) than did the European 
Americans (35 percent).
In contrast, the New York–dwelling Asians who identified themselves as Asian 
used more socially embedded self-descriptions, much as the Chinese respondents did. 
They often referred to themselves by describing their role status (e.g., student) and their 
family status (e.g., son). Moreover, they were more likely to qualify their self-concepts 
with contextual information. Rather than describing themselves as reliable, they 
described themselves as “reliable when I’m at home.”
Another study examined how frequently Japanese and European American stu￾dents endorsed a variety of attributes as descriptive of themselves (Markus & Kitayama, 
1998). A full 84 percent of the Japanese students described themselves as ordinary,
whereas only 18 percent of the American students used this self-description. Conversely, 
96 percent of the Americans described themselves as special, whereas only 55 percent of 
the Japanese described themselves with this term (see Table 17.1).
This theme of standing out versus fitting in and going along with the group is 
seen in the folk sayings of American and Japanese cultures. In American culture, people 
sometimes say, “The squeaky wheel gets the grease,” signifying that asserting oneself 
as an individual is the way to pursue one’s interests. In Japan, it is sometimes said that 
“the nail that stands out gets pounded down,” which suggests that the American social 
strategy would fail in Japan. These themes even show up in language usage. Those with 
an interdependent/collectivist orientation tend to use “we,” whereas those with an inde￾pendent/individualistic orientation tend to use “I” (Na & Choi, 2009).
The trait of narcissism appears to manifest differently depending on culture. 
One study compared a German sample (independent culture) with Japan (interdepen￾dent culture) on expressions of narcissism (Jauk et al., 2021). The German partici￾pants scored higher on grandiose narcissism, which involves seeking admiration and 
A refugee family from Somalia experiences the Arizona State Fair. After entering a new culture, acculturation is the 
process of adopting the ways of life and beliefs common in that culture.
Christophe Calais/Contributor/Getty Images
Final PDF to printer536
lar31869_ch17_524-551.indd 536 10/22/22 09:27 AM
PART FIVE The Social and Cultural Domain
displaying exhibitionism—traits that make the self stand out. The Japanese, in contrast, 
scored higher on vulnerable narcissism, which involves self-construals as more anxious 
and hypersensitive about the opinions of others.
These cultural differences are linked to how people process information. Japanese 
tend to explain events holistically—with attention to relationships, context, and the links 
between the focal object and the field as a whole (Nisbett et al., 2001). Americans, in 
contrast, tend to explain events analytically—with the object detached from its context, 
attributes of people assigned to categories, and a reliance on rules about the categories to 
explain behavior. When watching animated scenes of fish swimming around, for exam￾ple, the Japanese made more statements about contextual information, linking the fish’s 
behavior to their surroundings (Masuda & Nisbett, 2001). These cultural differences 
even show up as differences in neural activity in studies of Western and Eastern cultures, 
suggesting a brain basis for different forms of processing information (Kim et al., 2021). 
Thus, the cultural differences in the personality attributes of independence–interdepen￾dence may be linked to underlying cognitive proclivities in the ways in which individuals 
attend to, and explain, events in their world.
In sum, there is empirical support for the claim that people in different cultures 
have different self-concepts and process information differently. These differences are 
culturally transmitted through parents and teachers to children.
Criticisms of the Interdependence–Independence and 
Collectivist–Individualist Concepts
Several have criticized the Markus–Kitayama theory that Western views of self are inde￾pendent, whereas Asian views of self are interdependent, both on theoretical and eviden￾tiary grounds. Matsumoto (1999) and Church (2009) contend that the evidence for the 
theory comes almost exclusively from North America and East Asia (notably, Japan) 
and may not generalize to other cultures. There is far more overlap in the self-concepts 
Table 17.1 Most Frequently Endorsed Attributes “I am”
EUROPEAN AMERICANS JAPANESE
Attribute Percentage of Responses Attribute Percentage of Responses
Responsible 100% Happy 94%
Persistent 100 Fun-loving 94
Cooperative 98 Relaxed 92
Special 96 Direct 92
Happy 95 Assertive 90
Unique 95 Laid-back 86
Fun-loving 93 Calm 86
Sympathetic 93 Free-spirited 86
Hardworking 93 Undisciplined 84
Ambitious 93 Ordinary 84
Reliable 93
Independent 93
Source: Adapted from Markus and Kitayama (1998), p. 79, Table 1.
Final PDF to printer537
lar31869_ch17_524-551.indd 537 10/22/22 09:27 AM
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN Culture and Personality 
of people from different cultures than Markus and Kitayama imply. Many in collectivist 
cultures, for example, do use global traits (e.g., agreeable, fun-loving) when describing 
themselves. Many in individualist cultures use relational concepts (e.g., “I am the daugh￾ter of . . .”). The cultural differences are more a matter of degree.
On theoretical grounds, Church (2000) notes that “attempts to characterize cul￾tures of individuals in terms of such broad cultural dichotomies may be overly simplistic” 
(p. 688). Views of self in all cultures incorporate both independent and interdependent 
self-construals, and self-concepts in all cultures vary somewhat across social contexts.
A meta-analysis of dozens of studies suggests even more caution in generaliz￾ing about cultural differences in individualism and collectivism (Oyserman, Coon, & 
Kemmelmeier, 2002a). It found that although European Americans tended to be some￾what more individualistic (valuing independence) and less collectivistic (valuing interde￾pendence) than those from some other cultures, the effect sizes proved to be small and 
qualified by important exceptions. European Americans were not more individualistic 
than either African Americans or Latinos, for example. Nor were European Americans 
less collectivistic than Japanese or Koreans—two cultures presumed to anchor one end 
of the interdependence continuum. The Chinese, rather than the Japanese or Koreans, 
stand out as being unusually collectivistic and non-individualistic in self-concept. Other 
studies have found little support for the influence of transmitted culture on self-concept. 
One study of two presumably individualistic (the United States, Australia) and two pre￾sumably collectivistic (Mexico, the Philippines) cultures found that (1) people in all 
four cultures described themselves in trait terms with a high level of frequency; and (2) 
people in all four cultures mentioned personal rather than social or collective identity to 
be more important to their sense of self (del Prado et al., 2007).
Characterizations such as independent–interdependent also have been criticized 
on the grounds that they are too general (Chen & West, 2008), combining different kinds 
of social relationships and ignoring the context specificity in which they are expressed 
(Fiske, 2002). Americans, for example, may be individualistic and independent while 
playing computer games, but interdependent while with their families or in church.
Despite these criticisms, there are real differences across cultures, and these must 
be explained. Most researchers have assumed that cultural differences in dimensions 
such as independence–interdependence are instances of transmitted culture—ideas, 
attitudes, and self-concepts that are passed from one mind to another within a culture, 
down through the generations. Others have proposed a different explanation involv￾ing evolutionary psychology and evoked culture (Oyserman, Coon, & Kemmelmeier, 
2002b). They hypothesize that humans have evolved psychological mechanisms for both
types of self-concepts and can switch from one mode to another, depending on fitness 
advantages. Specifically, when one’s group is low in mobility, is limited in resources, 
and has many relatives in close proximity, it has paid survival dividends to be highly 
collectivistic and interdependent. One’s genetic relatives, often the recipients of these 
collectivist proclivities, tend to benefit. On the other hand, when mobility is high and 
people move frequently from place to place, when resources are relatively abundant, 
and when few genetic relatives live close by, it has paid survival dividends to adopt a 
more individualistic and independent proclivity. This hypothesis is best summed up by 
its authors: “Thus, an evolutionary perspective suggests both the ‘basicness’ of indepen￾dent and interdependent processing as well as the likelihood that all social systems are 
inhabited by individuals who can do both and draw on one or the other depending on 
their immediate contexts” (Oyserman, Coon, & Kemmelmeier, 2002b, p. 116). Research 
is increasingly exploring this fascinating fusion of evolutionary psychology and cultural 
psychology (e.g., Henrich, 2015).
Final PDF to printer538
lar31869_ch17_524-551.indd 538 10/22/22 09:27 AM
PART FIVE The Social and Cultural Domain
Cultural Differences in Self-Enhancement
Self-enhancement is the tendency to present oneself using positive 
or socially valued attributes, such as kind, understanding, intelli￾gent, and industrious. Self-enhancement tends to be stable over time 
(Baumeister, 1997). North Americans tend to maintain a generally 
positive evaluation of themselves (Fiske et al., 1997). The self-con￾cepts of American adults contain more than four times as many posi￾tive attributes as negative ones (Herzog et al., 1995). The Japanese 
make fewer spontaneous positive statements about themselves. The 
Japanese score lower than Americans on translations of self-esteem 
scales (Fiske et al., 1997). Japanese respondents tend to give more 
negative descriptions of themselves, such as “I think too much” and 
“I’m a somewhat selfish person” (Yeh, 1995). Even the positive 
self-descriptions of the Japanese respondents tend to be in the form 
of negations, such as “I’m not lazy.” American respondents would 
express a similar sentiment with the phrase “I’m a hard worker.”
Korean and American respondents also differ (Ryff, Lee, & 
Na, 1995). Koreans are more likely to endorse negative statements 
about themselves, whereas American respondents are more likely to 
endorse positive statements. Differences in self-enhancement also 
show up in parents’ self-descriptions of the quality of their parenting 
practices (Schmutte, Lee, & Ryff, 1995). American parents describe 
their parenting practices in generally glowing terms; Korean par￾ents give mostly negative self-evaluations. Another study found that 
Chinese individuals self-enhance less than U.S. Americans, but only 
on some traits (Church et al., 2014). Self-enhancement also shows up 
in considering oneself “better than average” and over-claiming credit 
for successful group outcomes (Sedikedes & Alicke, 2021).
Cultural differences in self-enhancement extend to evaluations 
of one’s group compared with other groups. Heine and Lehman 
(1995) asked Japanese and Canadian students to compare their own 
university with a rival university within their own culture. Among the Canadian respon￾dents, there was a strong tendency toward in-group enhancement, with the rival univer￾sity evaluated negatively by comparison. Among the Japanese respondents, there was 
no favoritism in the evaluation of one’s own university in comparison with the rival 
university. Japanese and Asian-Canadians also tend to be more self-critical than Euro￾Canadians (Falk et al., 2009), again suggesting cultural differences in self-enhancement.
Psychologists have advanced two explanations for cultural differences in self￾enhancement. One is that the Asians are engaging in impression management (see 
Chapter 4)—deep in their hearts, perhaps, they truly evaluate themselves positively, but 
to express these views publicly would damage their reputation. A second explanation 
is that these cultural differences accurately reflect people’s deep experiences. Asians, 
due to profound cultural differences in values, truly evaluate themselves more negatively 
than do North Americans. There has been only one empirical test of these compet￾ing explanations (Fiske et al., 1997). When self-evaluations are made in conditions of 
total anonymity, where no one would be able to identify the respondent, researchers 
still found that the self-enhancement commonly seen among Americans does not occur 
among Asian respondents. This supports the theory that cultural differences reflect the 
actual subjective experiences and are not merely surface differences due to impression 
management by Asians.
Toshiyuki Tanaka, a former umpire in the Japanese 
baseball league, during an interview. In his culture, 
harmony is valued over conflict. To keep the peace 
during a heated game, Tanaka often played the role 
of diplomat. He rarely penalized a team or ejected a 
player from the game, events common in American 
baseball. Moreover, Tanaka sometimes admitted it 
when he made a mistake, which is practically unheard 
of among American umpires.
Itsuo Inouye/AP Images
Final PDF to printer539
lar31869_ch17_524-551.indd 539 10/22/22 09:27 AM
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN Culture and Personality 
Cultural differences are matters of degree; people in all cultures appear to display 
a self-enhancement bias to some extent (Kurman, 2001). In a study of three cultures—
Singaporeans, Druze Israelis, and Jewish Israelis—Kurman (2001) asked participants whether 
they considered themselves below or above average for their sex and age group on six traits: 
intelligence, health, and sociability (agentic traits) and cooperation, honesty, and generosity 
(communal traits). Although Singaporeans showed slightly more self-enhancement than the 
other two cultures, it applied only to the agentic traits, and people in all cultures showed a 
self-enhancement bias. On the communal traits, 85 percent of the participants in all three 
cultures viewed themselves as “above average” for their age and sex group. On the agentic 
traits, although the Druze and Jewish Israeli samples showed a self-enhancement level of 90 
percent and 87 percent, respectively, the Singaporeans showed a self-enhancement level of 
nearly 80 percent. Thus, people across cultures show a self-enhancement bias, so the cultural 
differences must be interpreted within the context of this overall similarity.
Religion—An Example of Transmitted Culture
Religious beliefs vary widely across cultures and change over time, from the polytheis￾tic Greek gods of Zeus, Apollo, and Aphrodite to modern monotheistic religions that 
follow a Christian God or Islamic Allah. Religious beliefs are examples of transmitted 
culture—representations in some minds that are transmitted to other minds. The religious 
domain is difficult to define crisply, but it typically contains elements such as mental 
representations of unobservable agents such as gods, ghosts, and souls; artifacts linked 
with unobservable agents such as statues and crosses; rituals linked with agents such as 
prayer and song; elements of morality linked to conduct considered to be good or evil; 
and coalitional processes such as identification with a particular religious group, initiation 
procedures that induct people into the group, and practices aimed at maintaining loyalty 
and punishing defection (Boyer & Bergstrom, 2008). Given their pervasiveness across 
cultures (e.g., more than 74 percent of Americans believe in a god or higher spiritual 
power), religious beliefs are of central importance in our species.
Belief in supernatural agents may seem puzzling. We expect humans to have adap￾tations that accurately understand the real world in which challenges, such as survival 
and reproduction, must be solved in real time. Why would people believe in supernatural 
agents they cannot see, that defy scientific principles of physical causality, and that risk 
potentially nonadaptive behavior?
Psychologists have advanced two competing theories. One is that there are special￾ized adaptations for religious phenomena—that they are costly signals of commitment 
or hard-to-fake signals of altruism (Bulbulia, 2004). By committing to a religious group, 
individuals gain adaptive benefits of group membership, such as protection, powerful 
allies, and potential mates. The competing theory is that religious phenomena are not 
adaptions, but are byproducts of other cognitive adaptations designed for nonreligious 
functions (Boyer, 1992; Kirkpatrick, 2005; Thompson & Aukofer, 2011).
So what are the cognitive adaptations of which religion is hypothesized to be a 
byproduct? The first is our hyperactive agency detection device, which leads us to infer 
that unseen forces are human agents (Thompson & Aukofer, 2011). This likely evolved 
as a protection or precaution adaptation (Boyer, 1992). We mistake a shadow for a bur￾glar but never mistake a burglar for a shadow—a proclivity that helps us to avoid costly 
errors such as being robbed or mugged. This proclivity leads to misapplied anthropo￾morphisms, as when we say “the sun is trying to come out” or “the clouds look angry.” 
Clouds and skies, of course, don’t have agency, yet we attribute humanlike motivations 
to them as if they were agents with goals and intentions. It is a small step to infer a god 
with humanlike agency—a god that wants us to pray to him, worship him, and sacrifice 
Final PDF to printer540
lar31869_ch17_524-551.indd 540 10/22/22 09:27 AM
PART FIVE The Social and Cultural Domain
for him and that will punish us if we disobey him. Even children have what is called 
promiscuous teleology—the tendency to attribute purposes to abstract entities such as cul￾tures, mother earth, the universe, and god.
A second class of cognitive mechanisms is theory of mind adaptations—we infer 
unseen beliefs, desires, and intentions in other people. Theory of mind adaptations are 
extremely useful in predicting the behavior of other people—that is, their proper func￾tion. It is a small extrapolation to go from “there are people watching me who have a 
desire for my well-being” to “there is an all-seeing god watching me who has a desire for 
my well-being.” We imbue these agents with beliefs and desires.
Next comes the attachment system, which originally evolved in the context of 
mother–child bonds for protection and nurturance (Kirkpatrick, 2005). A 2-year-old 
reaching out to a mother to be soothed bears resemblance to a worshiper reaching out 
to a god: “ . . . we never lose the longing for a caretaker . . . [and] a god is always there 
for us” (Thompson & Aukofer, 2011, p. 45). Adaptations to form attachments, in short, 
get transferred to supernatural agents. Reciprocity adaptations are also activated, as when 
we make sacrifices for gods or make covenants with gods and expect that the gods will 
provide us with benefits in return.
Religions also commonly activate our evolved kin psychology. In Catholicism, for 
example, nuns are “sisters” and priests are “fathers,” even though they are not our real 
genetic relatives. Religious recruiters of some suicide terrorists foment outrage at the ter￾rible treatment of their “brothers” and “sisters.” And religions hijack our mating psy￾chology, whether in the form of prohibiting adultery, exhorting men not to covet their 
neighbor’s wives, or promising 72 virgins in the afterlife. It comes as no surprise that religious 
leaders—almost always men—sometimes use their positions to secure mating opportunities 
with women, who in turn tend to be attracted to men high in status and power (Buss, 2002). 
Finally, the content of what people the world over pray for is predictable from our evolved 
psychology: recuperation from illness, triumph in love, a boon for one’s business, rain for 
one’s crops, the success of one’s children, and bad times to befall one’s enemies.
These psychological processes, of course, do not exhaust the list for which reli￾gious phenomena are hypothesized to be byproducts. Others include emotionally arous￾ing rituals that get culturally transmitted due to their attention-grabbing nature and 
group-oriented loyalty that minimizes within-group conflict (Boyer & Bergstrom, 2008; 
Kirkpatrick, 2005; Legare & Souza, 2012; Thompson & Aukofer, 2011). Some studies 
find that higher exposure to culturally credible cues of religious commitment in others 
increases religious beliefs—a perfect illustration of transmitted culture (Gervais, Najile, 
& Caluori, 2021). Religion, in short, is a collection of diverse phenomena, possibly 
byproducts of many evolved psychological adaptations.
Religious beliefs are excellent examples of transmitted culture—they are passed 
down from cultural institutions such as churches or mosques or temples to individuals, 
from parents to children, from religious leaders to their followers, and from one person’s 
mind to the minds of others. Cultures differ tremendously in their religious views. If 
you happen to grow up in Brazil, you have a 65 percent probability of being Catholic; 
in Indonesia, 87 percent are Muslim; in India, 80 percent are Hindu. Religious views, in 
short, are prime examples of transmitted culture.
Personality traits play a key role in receptivity to culturally transmitted religious 
beliefs. Among Muslims living in Iran, for example, those high on Conscientiousness 
and Agreeableness were more likely to hold strong religious beliefs, perform religious 
rituals, and express gratitude toward God (Aghababaei, 2013). Among Belgians, who 
are predominantly Christian, Conscientiousness and Agreeableness also were positively 
linked with religiosity (Saroglou & Fiasse, 2003). Personality, in short, influences recep￾tivity to culturally transmitted religious views.
Final PDF to printer541
lar31869_ch17_524-551.indd 541 10/22/22 09:27 AM
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN Culture and Personality 
Do Cultures Have Distinctive Personality Profiles?
People have long been fascinated with the question of whether cultures have distinc￾tive personality profiles. Are people from the Mediterranean region of Europe really 
more emotionally expressive, or is this merely an incorrect stereotype? Are people from 
Scandinavia really more calm and stoic, or is this merely an incorrect stereotype? Most 
studies reveal that stereotypes about national personality rarely correspond to average 
levels of actual assessed personality (Allik, 2012).
McCrae and 79 colleagues from around the world studied the personality pro￾files of 51 different cultures, using 12,156 participants (McCrae et al., 2005a). They 
translated the Revised NEO Personality Inventory into the appropriate language and 
then examined the aggregate Big Five personality scores for each culture. The larg￾est difference across cultures centered on Extraversion. Americans and Europeans 
scored higher than Asians and Africans. A few examples will illustrate these dif￾ferences. With the cross-cultural average set to 50, the average Extraversion score 
was 52 for Americans, 54 for Australians, 54 for the English, and 52 for Belgians. 
In contrast, the average Extraversion scores were 47 for Ugandans, Ethiopians, 
and the People’s Republic Chinese. Some have questioned the validity of these 
findings because they rely exclusively on self-report (Ashton, 2007; Perugini & 
Richetin, 2007).
Studies confirm personality stereotypes in some domains but not in other domains. 
For example, stereotypes about gender differences across culture appear to be fairly 
accurate (Löckenhoff et al., 2014). Women are stereotyped as a bit more agreeable, con￾scientious, and anxious in a study of 26 cultures, and findings from both self-report and 
observer-report studies bear this out. On the other hand, many national character stereo￾types appear to be inaccurate (McCrae et al., 2013). Some Chinese people stereotype 
Malays as “friendly, but lazy,” but the empirical findings do not support this. The study 
of 26 countries found little support for national character stereotypes (McCrae et al., 
2013). Even when cultural differences in personality are found, they are relatively small. 
Most of the differences in personality occur within cultures, not among cultures. Indeed, 
the most striking finding is how similar cultures actually are in their overall scores on the 
five-factor model.
Personality Variations Within Culture
Another dimension of transmitted culture pertains to within-culture variations, although 
these have not received the same degree of attention as cross-cultural variations. Within￾culture variations can arise from several sources, including differences in growing up 
in various socioeconomic classes, differences in historical era, and differences in local 
evoked or transmitted culture.
There is some evidence that social class can have an effect on personality (Kohn 
et al., 1990). Lower-class parents tend to emphasize the importance of obedience to 
authority, whereas higher-status parents tend to emphasize self-direction and noncon￾formity. According to Kohn, these socialization practices stem from the sorts of occu￾pations that parents expect their children to enter. Higher-status jobs (e.g., manager, 
start-up company founder, doctor, lawyer) often require greater self-direction, whereas 
lower-status jobs (e.g., factory worker, gas station employee) more often require the need 
to follow rules and permit less latitude for innovation. In studies of American, Japanese, 
and Polish men, men from higher social classes in all cultures tended to be more self￾directed, showed lower levels of conformity, and had greater intellectual flexibility than 
men from lower social classes. Interestingly, those from lower classes tend to be more 
generous and charitable than those in the upper classes, giving more even though they 
have less (Piff et al., 2010).
Final PDF to printer542
lar31869_ch17_524-551.indd 542 10/22/22 09:27 AM
PART FIVE The Social and Cultural Domain
These findings are correlational, so direction of effects cannot be assumed. 
Perhaps people with personalities marked by self-direction and intellectual flexibility 
gravitate toward the higher social classes. Or perhaps the socialization practices of 
higher-social-class parents produce children with personalities that are different from 
the personalities of lower-social-class children. In either case, this example highlights 
the importance of within-culture differences. Figure 17.1 shows the distribution of 
individualism–collectivism in two cultures. The shaded part shows the overlap among 
cultures. Consequently, even though cultures can differ in their average level on a par￾ticular trait, many individuals within the one culture can be higher (or lower) than 
many individuals in the other culture. 
Another type of within-culture variation pertains to the historical era. People raised in 
the Great Depression of the 1930s, for example, might be more anxious about job security, 
adopting a conservative spending style. Those growing up during the sexual revolution of 
the 1960s and 1970s might show more openness to experimentation. Those growing up dur￾ing the internet spend more time interacting with others in distant places, expanding social 
horizons in ways that might influence personality. Many people in modern times find mates 
through internet dating sites, a phenomenon virtually absent a generation ago (Buss, 2016). 
Disentangling the effects of historical era on personality is difficult because most currently 
used personality measures were not used in earlier eras. One exception examined changes 
in average personality scores over a period of 25 years in the Netherlands (Smits et al., 
2011). They found small increases in Extraversion, Agreeableness, and Conscientiousness, 
and small decreases in Neuroticism over generations.
Cultural Universals
A third approach to culture and personality is to identify features of personality that are 
universal, or present in most or all human cultures. As described in Chapter 1, these 
universals constitute the human nature level of analyzing personality.
Figure 17.1
Individualism versus collectivism in American and Asian cultures. The distribution of two 
groups may be significantly different from each other in terms of the group mean yet have 
much overlap. This means that many individuals from one group are higher (or lower) than 
many members of the other group, in a pattern opposite that of the mean difference. Asians 
score higher on collectivism than Americans do, yet there will always be some Americans who 
score higher than some Asians (those in the shaded area) on this measure.
Frequency of occurrence
Individualistic Intermediate
Lo
Hi
Collectivistic
American
average
Asian
average
Final PDF to printer543
lar31869_ch17_524-551.indd 543 10/22/22 09:27 AM
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN Culture and Personality 
In the history of the study of personality and culture, the study of cultural universals
has long been in disfavor. For most of the twentieth century, the focus was almost exclu￾sively on cultural differences. This emphasis was fueled by anthropologists who reported 
on seemingly exotic cultures. Margaret Mead, for example, purported to discover cultures 
entirely lacking in sexual jealousy, cultures in which sex roles were reversed and adoles￾cence was not marked with stress and turmoil (Mead, 1928, 1935). On sex roles, for exam￾ple, Mead presumed to discover “a genuine reversal of the sex-attitudes of our culture, with 
the woman the dominant, impersonal, managing partner, the man the less responsible and 
the emotionally dependent person” (Mead, 1935, p. 279). Human nature was assumed to 
be infinitely variable, infinitely flexible, and not constrained by a universal human nature: 
“We are forced to conclude that human nature is almost unbelievably malleable, respond￾ing accurately and contrastingly to contrasting cultural conditions” (p. 280).
Over the past few decades, the pendulum has swung toward a more moderate 
view. Anthropologists who visited the islands Mead had visited failed to confirm Mead’s 
findings (e.g., Freeman, 1983). In cultures in which sexual jealousy was presumed to 
be entirely absent, it turned out that sexual jealousy was the leading cause of spousal 
battering and spousal homicide. In cultures such as the Chambri, where the sex roles 
were presumed to be reversed, anthropologists instead found that men were considered 
to be in charge (Brown, 1991; Gewertz, 1981). Furthermore, the Chambri considered 
men to be more aggressive than women and women to be more submissive than men. 
Behavioral observations of social interactions among the Chambri confirmed these 
conceptions (Gewertz, 1981). All available evidence back to 1850, including some of 
Mead’s recorded observations (as opposed to the inferences she made), suggest that the 
Chambri’s sex roles are, in fact, strikingly similar to those of Western cultures. Brown 
(1991), Pinker (1997), and Ardila (2021) list practices and attitudes that are good can￾didates for cultural universals—see Table 17.2.
In this section, we consider three examples of cultural universals: beliefs about the 
personality characteristics of men and women, the expression of emotion, and the pos￾sible universality of the five-factor model of personality traits.
Beliefs About the Personality Characteristics of Men and Women
In the largest study undertaken to examine beliefs about the personality characteristics 
of men and women, Williams and Best (1990) examined 30 countries over a period of 15 
years. These included western European countries such as Germany, the Netherlands, 
Table 17.2 Culturally Universal Practices and Attitudes
Incest avoidance
Facial expressions of basic emotions
Favoritism toward in-group members
Favoritism toward kin over non-kin
Collective identities
Division of labor by sex
Revenge and retaliation
Self distinguished from others
Sanctions for crimes against the collectivity
Reciprocity in relationships
Envy, sexual jealousy, and love
Sources: Ardila (2021), Brown (2004), and Pinker (1997).
Final PDF to printer544
lar31869_ch17_524-551.indd 544 10/22/22 09:27 AM
PART FIVE The Social and Cultural Domain
and Italy; Asian countries such as Japan and India; South American countries such 
as Venezuela; and African countries such as Nigeria. In each country, university stu￾dents examined 300 trait adjectives (e.g., aggressive, emotional, dominant) and indicated 
whether each trait is more often linked with men, women, or both sexes. The responses 
of the subjects within each culture were then summed. The big shock was this: many of 
the trait adjectives were highly associated with one or the other sex, and there proved to 
be tremendous consensus across cultures. Table 17.3 shows sample trait adjectives most 
associated with men and with women across cultures.
How can we summarize and interpret these differences in beliefs about men 
and women? Williams and Best (1994) scored each of these adjectives on the follow￾ing dimensions: favorability (How desirable is the trait?), strength (How much does the 
trait indicate power?), and activity (How much does the trait signify energy?). These 
dimensions originate from older classical work in the field that discovered three univer￾sal semantic dimensions of evaluation (good–bad), potency (strong–weak), and activity
(active–passive) (Osgood, Suci, & Tannenbaum, 1957). Overall, the traits ascribed to 
men and women are equally favorable. Some “masculine” traits, such as serious and inven￾tive, were viewed as favorable, whereas others, such as arrogant and bossy, were viewed 
as unfavorable. Some “feminine” traits, such as charming and appreciative, were viewed 
as favorable, whereas others, such as fearful and affected, were viewed as unfavorable.
How can we interpret these cultural universals in beliefs about the personality 
characteristics of men and women? One way is that these beliefs represent stereotypes 
based on the roles men and women assume universally. Williams and Best (1994) argue 
that society assumes that men are stronger than women and therefore assigns men to 
roles and occupations such as soldier and construction worker.
A second possibility is that traits ascribed to men and women in all 30 cultures reflect 
actual observations of real sex differences in personality. Studies of the five-factor model, for 
example, do find that women score lower on Emotional Stability, suggesting that they are 
more fearful and emotional. A study in Spain concluded that beliefs about the traits of men 
being more agentic and the traits of women being more communal show remarkable stability 
over more than three decades, from 1985 to 2018 (Moya et al., 2021). And does anyone 
really doubt that men are, on average, more physically aggressive or violent than women (see 
Chapter 16)? In short, the universal beliefs about the differences between men and women 
in personality reflect actual differences in personality (Löckenhoff et al., 2014).
Table 17.3 Pancultural Traits Linked with Men or Women
Traits Associated with Men Traits Associated with Women
Active Loud Affected Modest
Adventurous Obnoxious Affectionate Nervous
Aggressive Opinionated Appreciative Patient
Arrogant Opportunistic Cautious Pleasant
Autocratic Pleasure-seeking Changeable Prudish
Bossy Precise Charming Sensitive
Coarse Quick Dependent Sentimental
Conceited Reckless Emotional Softhearted
Enterprising Show-off Fearful Timid
Hardheaded Tough Forgiving Warm
Source: Adapted from Williams and Best (1994). Cross-cultural views of women and men. In W. J. Lonner and R. S. Malpass (Eds.), 
Psychology and culture
Final PDF to printer545
lar31869_ch17_524-551.indd 545 10/22/22 09:27 AM
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN Culture and Personality 
Expression of Emotion
It is commonly believed that people in different cultures experience different emotions. 
As a consequence, personality psychologists have argued that different cultures have 
different words to describe emotional experience. The Tahitians, some have argued, do 
not experience grief, longing, or loneliness, so they have no words in their language 
to express these emotions. For example, when a Tahitian boy dies in combat, according 
to legends reported by anthropologists, the parents smile and experience no grief, unlike 
the profound sadness felt by people in the modern Western world who experience simi￾lar events. Cultural variability in the presence or absence of emotional words has been 
interpreted by some personality psychologists to mean that cultures differ in the pres￾ence or absence of actual experiences of these emotions.
However, are emotions really this culturally variable? Or are there cultural univer￾sals in the experience of emotions? Psychologist Steven Pinker summarizes the evidence 
in this way: “Cultures surely differ in how often their members express, talk about, and 
act on various emotions. But that says nothing about what their people feel. The evi￾dence suggests that the emotions of all normal members of our species are played on the 
same keyboard” (Pinker, 1997, p. 365).
The earliest evidence of cultural universals in emotions came from Charles Darwin. 
In gathering evidence for his book on emotions, The Expression of Emotions in Man and 
Animals, Darwin (1872/1965) asked anthropologists and travelers who interacted with peo￾ples on five continents to give detailed information about how the natives expressed various 
emotions, such as grief, contempt, disgust, fear, and jealousy. He summarized the answers he 
received: “The same state of mind is expressed throughout the world with remarkable unifor￾mity; and this fact is in itself interesting as evidence of the close similarity in bodily structure 
and mental disposition of all the races of mankind” (Darwin, 1872/1965, pp. 15, 17).
Darwin’s methods, of course, were crude by today’s scientific standards, but sub￾sequent research has confirmed his basic conclusions. Psychologist Paul Ekman cre￾ated a set of photographs of people expressing six basic emotions and then showed 
them to people in various cultures (Ekman, 1973). Some cultures, such as the Fore 
foragers of New Guinea, had almost no contact with Westerners. The Fore spoke no 
English, had seen no TV or movies, and had never lived with Caucasians. He also 
administered the tests to people in Japan, Brazil, Chile, Argentina, and the United 
States. Ekman asked each subject to label the emotion expressed in each photograph 
and to make up a story about what the person in the photograph had experienced. The 
six emotions—happiness, sadness, anger, fear, disgust, and surprise—were universally 
recognized by people in the various cultures. These findings have been subsequently 
replicated in other countries, such as Italy, Scotland, Estonia, Greece, Germany, Hong 
Kong, Sumatra, and Turkey (Ekman et al., 1987). Further research by Ekman and his 
colleagues has expanded the list of universal emotions to include contempt, embarrass￾ment, and shame (Ekman, 1999).
In addition to finding that people of different cultures effortlessly recognized the 
emotions expressed on the faces in the photographs, Ekman reversed the procedure. He 
asked the Fore participants to act out scenarios, such as “Your child has died” and “You 
are angry and about to fight,” and then photographed them. The emotions expressed in 
these photographs were easily recognized by facial expressions and were strikingly similar 
to the expressions of the same emotions seen in the photographs of the Caucasian par￾ticipants. Further evidence for the universality, and possible evolutionary origins, of these 
basic emotions comes from the finding that children who are blind from birth display the 
same facial expressions of emotions that those with full sight display (Lazarus, 1991).
Pinker notes that whether a language has a word for a particular emotion or not mat￾ters little if the question is whether people experience
Final PDF to printer546
lar31869_ch17_524-551.indd 546 10/22/22 09:27 AM
PART FIVE The Social and Cultural Domain
are said not to have a word for grief; however, “when a Tahitian woman says 
‘My husband died and I feel sick,’ her emotional state is hardly mysterious; she 
is probably not complaining about acid indigestion” (Pinker, 1997, p. 367).
Another example is the German word Schadenfreude: “When English￾speakers hear the word Schadenfreude for the first time, their reaction is 
not, ‘Let me see . . . pleasure in another’s misfortunes . . . what could that 
possibly be? I cannot grasp the concept; my language and culture have not 
provided me with such a category.’ Their reaction is, ‘You mean there’s a 
word for it? Cool!’” (Pinker, 1997, p. 367). People universally may experi￾ence the emotion of pleasure in an enemy’s misfortunes, even if all cultures 
do not have a single word in their language to capture it.
The view that language is not necessary for people to experience emo￾tions may be contrasted with what has been called the Whorfian hypothesis
of linguistic relativity, which contends that language creates thought and 
experience. The Whorfian hypothesis argues that ideas that people think 
and emotions they feel are constrained by the words that happen to exist in 
their language and culture (Whorf, 1956).
The difference between experiencing an emotion and expressing that 
emotion in public may be critical to resolving this debate. Ekman (1973) 
performed an ingenious experiment to explore the difference between 
the experience of emotion and its expression in public. He secretly vid￾eotaped the facial expressions of Japanese and American students while 
they watched a graphic film of a primitive puberty rite involving genital 
mutilation. In one condition, an experimenter wearing a white lab coat was present in 
the room. In the other condition, the participants were alone. When the experimenter 
was present (a public context), the Japanese students smiled politely during the film, 
but the American students expressed horror and disgust. However, when the students 
were filmed when they were alone in the room watching the film, both the Japanese 
and American faces expressed equal horror. This suggests that Japanese and American 
students experience this emotion in the same way, even if they differ in their expression of 
it in a more public setting. Higher emotional expression is linked to the personality trait 
of Extraversion (Matsumoto, 2006). And because Americans are more extraverted than 
Japanese, these cultural differences in emotional expression may be due to these cultural 
differences in personality.
Other cross-cultural work has confirmed the universality of some basic forms of 
emotional expression (e.g., Cowen & Keltner, 2020). One study compared non-verbal 
emotional vocalizations (e.g., “yuck,” “huh”) of the “basic emotions” of anger, disgust, 
fear, joy, sadness, and surprise among Namibian and Western participants (Sauter et al., 
2010). These vocal expressions were bi-directionally recognized—Namibians correctly 
identified the emotion that corresponded with the nonverbal vocalizations uttered by 
Westerners and vice versa. These findings lend support to the notion that some emotions 
are universal across cultures, although some researchers question the results of these 
studies on methodological grounds and argue that emotional expression may be more 
culturally variable than previously believed (Feldman Barrett, 2021).
Five-Factor Model of Personality
A fascinating question is whether there is a universal structure of personality, such as the 
five-factor model, or whether different models exist in different cultures. It is helpful to 
outline the conceptual positions that have been advanced.
According to some, even the concept of personality lacks universality. Hsu, for 
example, argues that “the concept of personality is 
Disgust appears to be an emotion universally 
experienced by humans.
Tetra Images/Shutterstock
Final PDF to printer547
lar31869_ch17_524-551.indd 547 10/22/22 09:27 AM
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN Culture and Personality 
of individualism” (Hsu, 1985, p. 24). Shweder argues that “the data gathered from . . . 
personality inventories lends illusory support to the mistaken belief that individual dif￾ferences can be described in language consisting of context-free global traits, factors, or 
dimensions” (Shweder, 1991, pp. 275–276).
These views have been elaborated on: “Universal [personality] structure does not 
by itself imply that ‘personality’ as understood within a European-American framework 
is a universal aspect of human behavior . . . nor does it imply that the variability that 
appears as an obvious feature of human life is a function of an internal package of attri￾butes called ‘personality’” (Markus & Kitayama, 1998, p. 67). Finally, cultural anthro￾pologist Lawrence Hirschfeld argues that “in many, perhaps most, cultures there is a 
marked absence of discourse that explains human behavior in terms of trans-situationally 
stable motivational (or intentional) properties captured by explanations of trait and dis￾position” (Hirschfeld, 1995, p. 315).
Reflected in these quotations is a fundamental challenge to personality psychology—
whether the core concept of traits is universal or, instead, is a local concept applicable 
only in Western cultures. The most extreme of these perspectives suggests that the very 
notion of personality, as an internal set of psychological characteristics, is an arbitrary 
construction of Western culture (Church, 2000). If this extreme position were really 
true, then any attempt to identify and measure personality traits in non-Western cultures 
would be doomed to failure (Church, 2000). At the other extreme is the position that 
personality traits are universal in their applicability and that precisely the same person￾ality structure will emerge across cultures. As two personality researchers noted, “The 
most important dimensions . . . [of] personality judgment are the most invariant and 
universal dimensions” (Saucier & Goldberg, 2001, p. 851).
The first source of evidence bearing on this debate pertains to the existence of trait 
terms in other cultures. Many non-Western psychologists have, in fact, described trait￾like concepts that are indigenous to non-Western cultures and that appear strikingly like 
those that appear in Western cultures. Following are some examples: the Filipino con￾cepts of pakikiramdam (sensitivity, empathy) and pakikisama (getting along with others); 
the Korean concept of chong (human affection); the Japanese concept of amae (indul￾gent dependence); the Chinese concept of ren qin (being relationship oriented); and the 
Mexican concept of simpatico (being harmonious and avoiding conflict) (Church, 2000). 
Many non-Western cultures, in short, appear to have trait-like concepts embedded in their 
languages in much the same way that the American culture and English language do.
A second source of evidence bearing on the debate concerns whether the same 
factor structure of personality traits is found across cultures. Do different cultures have 
roughly the same broad categories of traits? The trait perspective on personality, of 
course, does not require the existence of precisely the same traits in all cultures. Indeed, 
the trait perspective might be extremely useful even if cultures were to differ radically in 
terms of which trait dimensions they used. Nonetheless, the most powerful support for 
the trait perspective across cultures would occur if the structure of personality traits were 
found to be the same across cultures (Church, 2000).
Two approaches have been taken to exploring this issue. In the first approach, which 
can be labeled the “transport and test” strategy, psychologists have translated existing ques￾tionnaires into other languages and then administered them to native residents in other 
cultures. This strategy has generated some findings supporting the five-factor model. The 
five-factor model (Extraversion, Agreeableness, Conscientiousness, Emotional Stability, 
and Intellect–Openness) has now been replicated in France, Holland, and the Philippines 
and in languages from entirely different language families, such as Sino-Tibetan, Hamito￾Semitic, Uralic, and Malayo-Polynesian (McCrae et al., 1998). The five-factor model also 
has been replicated in Spain (Salgado, Moscoso, & Lado, 2003) and 
Final PDF to printer548
lar31869_ch17_524-551.indd 548 10/22/22 09:27 AM
PART FIVE The Social and Cultural Domain
Ostendorf, 2005). A study of 13 different countries—from Japan to Slovakia—also found 
support for the five-factor model (Hendriks et al., 2003).
Perhaps the most impressive was a massive study of 50 different cultures (McCrae 
et al., 2005b). This study, involving 11,985 participants, had college-age individuals rate 
someone they knew well using the Revised NEO Personality Inventory. Factor analyses 
of observer-based ratings yielded the five-factor model, with only minor variations in 
factor structure across cultures. This study suggests that cross-cultural evidence for the 
five-factor model is not limited to self-report data, but extends to observer-based data as 
well. Using the transport and test strategy, the five-factor structure of personality appears 
to be general across cultures. Table 17.4, for example, shows the factor structure from a 
Filipino sample.
A more powerful test of generality, however, would come from studies that start 
out using indigenous personality dimensions first, then testing whether the five-factor 
structure still emerges. This approach has been tried in Dutch, German, Hungarian, 
Italian, Czech, and Polish (De Raad et al., 1998). In each case, the trait terms in the 
language were identified. The absolute numbers of personality trait terms varied from 
language to language—Dutch has 8,690 trait terms, whereas Italian has only 1,337 trait 
terms. But the percentage of words that constituted trait terms was remarkably consis￾tent, averaging 4.4 percent of all dictionary entries. You may recall the lexical hypothesis 
from Chapter 3, which states that the most important individual differences have been 
encoded within the natural language.
The next step in the De Raad and colleagues (1998) study was to reduce this 
list to a manageable number of several hundred trait terms, identified as indigenous to 
each culture, which could then be tested in each culture. Factor analyses of each sample 
within each culture showed that there was tremendous replicability of four of the five 
factors of the five-factor model: Extraversion (talkative, sociable versus shy, introverted), 
Agreeableness (sympathetic, warm versus unsympathetic, cold), Conscientiousness (orga￾nized, responsible versus disorganized, careless), and Emotional Stability (relaxed, imper￾turbable versus moody, emotional).
Despite cross-cultural agreement on these four factors, this study found some differ￾ences in what constituted the fifth factor, as noted in Chapter 3. In some cultures, such as 
Polish and German, the fifth factor resembled the American fifth factor (Intellect–Openness), 
with intelligent and imaginative anchoring one end and dull and unimaginative anchoring the 
other end. A study in the Philippines also found a replicated five-factor model, including the 
fifth factor resembling Intellect–Openness, although there are a few indigenous constructs 
that are less successfully subsumed by the Big Five, such as social curiosity, obedience, and 
capacity for understanding (Katigbak et al., 2002). Other languages, however, revealed differ￾ent fifth factors. In Dutch, the fifth factor seemed more like a dimension of political orienta￾tion, ranging from conservative at one end to progressive at the other. In Hungarian, the fifth 
factor seemed to be one of truthfulness, with just, truthful, and humane anchoring at one end 
and greedy, hypocritical, and pretending at the other (De Raad et al., 1998). The fifth factor, in 
summary, appeared to be somewhat variable across cultures.
Cross-cultural research using the lexical approach, as you may recall from Chapter 3, 
has found compelling evidence for six factors, rather than five (Ashton, Lee, & de Vries, 
2014; Saucier et al., 2005). The new sixth factor—honesty–humility—represents a major 
discovery across cultures (Ashton & Lee, 2005). By starting with the natural language 
within each culture, researchers were able to capture an important dimension of person￾ality that was missed using the “transport and test” research strategy.
Clearly, further indigenous tests are needed to determine whether the five-factor or 
six-factor trait models of personality structure are universal (e.g., Thalmayer et al., 2020). 
Final PDF to printer549
lar31869_ch17_524-551.indd 549 10/22/22 09:27 AM
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN Culture and Personality 
Table 17.4 Factor Analysis of the Filipino NEO-PI-R
NEO-PI-R Facet Scale N E O A C
N1: Anxiety 76 −08 00 00 06
N2: Angry hostility 67 −19 01 −44 −10
N3: Depression 73 −23 03 −02 −25
N4: Self-consciousness 68 −14 −15 22 −04
N5: Impulsiveness 40 20 04 −37 −47
N6: Vulnerability 70 −22 −23 04 −30
E1: Warmth −21 69 17 28 08
E2: Gregariousness −29 65 −02 07 04
E3: Assertiveness −28 42 23 −29 35
E4: Activity −15 51 10 −24 25
E5: Excitement seeking −08 51 26 −29 −12
E6: Positive emotions −16 66 14 15 01
O1: Fantasy 16 27 47 −06 −27
O2: Aesthetics 14 20 65 14 22
O3: Feelings 30 32 53 03 12
O4: Actions −39 −03 46 01 04
O5: Ideas −04 −01 69 01 30
O6: Values −13 −06 62 −05 −16
A1: Trust −20 41 09 52 −10
A2: Straightforwardness −03 −22 −02 57 10
A3: Altruism −12 27 13 65 31
A4: Compliance −20 −10 −09 75 12
A5: Modesty 18 −27 −03 55 −13
A6: Tender-mindedness 22 27 09 49 20
C1: Competence −38 22 16 −10 69
C2: Order −04 −15 −08 10 73
C3: Dutifulness −08 12 07 21 69
C4: Achievement striving −12 06 01 11 83
C5: Self-discipline −24 02 00 07 81
C6: Deliberation −27 −20 03 24 65
Note: N = 696. Decimal points are omitted; loadings greater than 40 in absolute magnitude are given in boldface; N = Neuroticism, 
E = Extraversion, O = Openness, A = Agreeableness, C = Conscientiousness.
Source: McCrae et al. (1998).
the extreme positions outlined at the beginning of this section but closer to those that 
argue for universality. Trait terms appear to be present in all languages. Factor structures 
based on instruments developed in the United States, and then translated and transported 
to other cultures, show great similarity across cultures. Using the more rigorous standard 
of instruments developed indigenously, four of the five factors emerge consistently across 
cultures. The fifth factor is somewhat variable across cultures and therefore may reflect an 
important lack of universality of personality trait structure. And a sixth factor, honesty–
Final PDF to printer550
lar31869_ch17_524-551.indd 550 10/22/22 09:27 AM
PART FIVE The Social and Cultural Domain
SUMMARY AND EVALUATION
People living in different cultures differ in key personality traits, such as self-concept, 
the prevailing levels of aggressiveness, and the moral values they hold. The differences 
are called cultural variations—patterns of local within-group similarity and between￾group difference.
There are two major approaches to examining cultural variations. The first, evoked 
culture, involves the capabilities present in all people that are elicited only in some cul￾tural contexts. Evoked cooperation provides one example—people tend to share food 
when there is high variability in success at obtaining it. Presumably, all people have 
the capacity to cooperate and share, but these dispositions are evoked only in certain 
cultural circumstances. Evoked aggression provides a second example of evoked culture. 
All people have the capacity to be aggressive at times; however, if one grows up in a cul￾ture of honor, then aggression is more likely to be evoked in response to public insults.
The second major way of conceptualizing cultural variants is called transmitted 
culture—representations originally in the mind of one or more people that are transmit￾ted to the minds of other people. Four examples of cultural variants that appear to be 
forms of transmitted culture are differences in moral values, self-concept, levels of self￾enhancement, and religious beliefs. Patterns of morality, such as whether it is considered 
appropriate to disobey one’s parents or to eat beef, or wrong for a wife to go to the mov￾ies without her husband, are specific to certain cultures. These moral values appear to be 
transmitted from person to person within the culture. Cultural differences in self-concept 
are another example of transmitted culture. Many Asian cultures, for example, appear 
to foster self-concepts that are highly interdependent and contextual, emphasizing the 
embeddedness of the self within the group. European American culture, in contrast, 
appears to promote a self-concept that is more independent, stressing the separateness 
of the person from the group.
Religious beliefs provide another example of transmitted culture. These include 
beliefs about supernatural agents, rituals, and artifacts linked with those unobservable 
agents such as statues and crosses. Psychologists have proposed two competing theories 
to explain religious phenomena—an adaptationist theory and a byproduct theory. The 
personality traits of Conscientiousness and Agreeableness are linked with higher levels 
of religiosity, suggesting individual differences in the degree to which this form of trans￾mitted culture is adopted.
Cross-cultural work on interdependence–independence has been criticized on 
several grounds. First, the magnitudes of effect are sometimes quite small. Second, 
the dichotomies may be overly simplistic because they ignore context specificity (e.g., 
Americans might be independent at work and interdependent at home with their fami￾lies) as well as individual differences within culture (e.g., some Koreans are more individ￾ualistic, others more collectivistic). Nonetheless, some cultural differences are real and 
must be explained. Most researchers have assumed that these differences are instances 
of transmitted culture. An alternative explanation proposes that all humans have evolved 
psychological mechanisms capable of acting both individualistically and collectively, as 
well as a psychology that allows them to switch from one mode to the other, depending 
on the fitness advantages. This fascinating fusion of evolutionary psychology and cul￾tural psychology holds much promise.
Culture appears to influence our self-concepts. Using the Twenty Statements Test, 
researchers found that North Americans tend to describe themselves using abstract 
internal characteristics, such as “I am smart,” “I am dependable,” and “I am friendly.” 
Final PDF to printer551
lar31869_ch17_524-551.indd 551 10/22/22 09:27 AM
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN Culture and Personality 
Asians, in contrast, tend to define themselves more often using social roles, such as 
“I am the son of . . .” or “I am Liu’s friend.” These differences in self-concept appear 
to be examples of transmitted culture, passed down from person to person through the 
generations. It’s important to keep in mind that these cultural differences are a matter of 
degree. People in collectivist cultures use some global traits to describe themselves, and 
people in individualist cultures use some relational terms to describe themselves.
Another reliable cultural difference pertains to self-enhancement, or the tendency 
to view oneself using positive or socially valued attributes. Korean and Japanese respon￾dents are more likely than American respondents to endorse negative statements about 
themselves, such as “I am lazy” or “I am a somewhat selfish person.” Americans, in 
contrast, tend to endorse more positive statements about themselves, such as “I’m a hard 
worker” or “I’m quite creative.” Another study found that Chinese individuals tend to 
be somewhat less self-enhancing than Americans. These differences in self-enhancement 
also appear to be examples of transmitted culture.
Some elements of personality appear to be culturally universal. One example of 
a cultural universal is people’s beliefs about the personality traits that characterize men 
and women. Worldwide, people regard men as having personalities that are more active, 
loud, adventurous, obnoxious, aggressive, opinionated, arrogant, coarse, and conceited. 
Women are regarded as having personalities that are more affectionate, modest, nervous, 
appreciative, patient, changeable, charming, fearful, and forgiving. There is some evi￾dence that these cross-cultural gender stereotypes are accurate.
Another cultural universal appears to be the experience and recognition of specific 
emotional states, such as fear, anger, happiness, sadness, disgust, and surprise. People 
from Italy to Sumatra recognize and describe these emotions when viewing photographs 
expressing them, even if the photographs are of people from other cultures. There is also 
evidence for the cross-cultural recognition of nonverbal vocal expressions of emotions 
such as anger, disgust, and joy.
Finally, there is some evidence that the structure of personality traits, as repre￾sented by the five-factor model of personality, may be universal, at least for four of the 
five traits—Extraversion, Agreeableness, Conscientiousness, and Emotional Stability. 
There is evidence for the five-factor model using the “transport and test” strategy model 
of personality, using observer-based data from 50 cultures. Nonetheless, studies that 
begin with the natural language within each culture, using the lexical strategy to identify 
important trait terms, have discovered a six-factor structure. In addition to the five major 
factors, the new honesty–humility factor is in contention for being an important personal￾ity factor. This discovery attests to the importance of cross-cultural research, particularly 
work that uses a strategy that begins within each culture.
cultural variations 527
cultural personality psychology 527
evoked culture 527
high-variance conditions 528
egalitarianism 528
culture of honor 530
transmitted culture 531
KEY TERMS
within-culture variations 541
social class 541
historical era 542
cultural universals 542
Whorfian hypothesis of linguistic 
relativity 546
Balkanization 533
interdependence 533
independence 533
acculturation 534
holistic 536
analytic 536
self-enhancement 538
Final PDF to printerlar31869_ch18_552-583.indd 552 10/25/22 07:33 AM
This domain is different from the 
others discussed in the book so far. 
The first five domains each referred 
to a collection of specific explana￾tions of personality. That is, each 
gave a perspective on, and a collec￾tion of knowledge about, the causes 
of personality and individual differ￾ences. In this last domain—the adjust￾ment domain—we examine some of 
the consequences of personality. 
We focus on adjustment because, in 
many ways, personality functions to 
help us adjust to the challenges and 
demands of life, albeit in a unique 
way for each of us. We focus on two 
important outcomes in this domain: 
physical health and mental health.
Day by day, all of us are adjust￾ing to the demands of life and react￾ing to life events. A recent major life 
Athanasia Nomikou/Shutterstock
The 
Adjustment Domain
PART SIX
Final PDF to printerlar31869_ch18_552-583.indd 553 10/25/22 07:33 AM
event that we all are coping with is the 
COVID-19 pandemic, plus the many 
public health efforts to contain the 
virus. This situation has been stress￾ful for practically everyone. Plus 
there are other sources of stress in 
our daily lives. It is important to real￾ize, however, that stress is not “out 
there” in our life events; rather, stress 
mostly refers to how we respond to 
those life events. How we interpret 
some event determines whether we 
feel it as stressful. The tendency to 
interpret events in a way that evokes 
a stress response is influenced by 
our personalities. Personality plays 
a key role in how we appraise and 
interpret events and cope, adapt, and 
adjust to the stress in our day-to-day 
lives. Moreover, some people dis￾play patterns of behavior, emotion, 
and interpersonal relations that cre￾ate problems for them and for those 
around them. These problematic per￾sonality profiles form the collection 
of personality disorders. These two 
areas—coping with stress and disor￾ders of personality—define the adjust￾ment domain because they refer to 
how effectively people interact with 
and cope with challenges from the 
environment.
Considerable evidence has 
been accumulating that personal￾ity is linked with important health 
outcomes, such as heart disease or 
early mortality. Psychologists have 
developed several theories for how 
and why these relationships exist, as 
well as have offered ways to change 
health-harming behavior patterns. 
Personality is also linked with a vari￾ety of health-related behaviors such 
as smoking, drinking, and risk tak￾ing. Some research has even demon￾strated that personality is correlated 
with how long we live (Peterson, 
1995, 2000; Strickhouser, Zell, & 
Krizan, 2017).
We also introduce two impor￾tant new concepts in the material on 
health: moderation and mediation. 
These concepts describe two specific 
ways that variables work together to 
produce some effect. Moderation is 
where two variables are related (e.g., 
stress and illness) yet the degree of 
relationship is influenced by a third 
variable, for example, personality 
(say, the link between stress and 
illness is stronger for some people 
than others). Mediation is where the 
influence of one variable on another 
(say, personality and longevity) 
works by going through a third vari￾able (say, health behaviors, such 
that personality predicts longevity 
because personality is associated 
with behaviors that lead to a lon￾ger life, such as exercise and proper 
diet). While we discuss mediation 
and moderation within the context 
of personality and health, these are 
general ideas that can be found in 
other areas of personality psychol￾ogy as well.
In addition to maintaining 
health and coping with stress, many 
of the important problems in living 
can be traced to personality. In this 
domain of knowledge there is the 
concept of disorder, the idea that 
certain personality profiles can be 
so problematic that they create clear 
difficulties in the person’s life, par￾ticularly in terms of work and social 
relationships. Certain personality fea￾tures related to poor adjustment and 
poor outcomes in life are described 
as personality disorders. We devote 
an entire chapter to the personality 
disorders, such as the antisocial per￾sonality and the narcissistic personal￾ity. We believe that an understanding 
of “normal” personality functioning 
can be enhanced by examining what 
can go wrong with personality. This 
is similar to the field of medicine, in 
which an understanding of normal 
physiological functioning is often 
illuminated by the study of disorders 
and disease. We begin our coverage 
of the adjustment domain with the 
topics of stress, coping, adjustment, 
and health.
VI
Final PDF to printerlar31869_ch18_552-583.indd 554 12/02/22 04:57 PM
554
Models of the Personality–Illness Connection
COVID-19 and the Five Models of Personality–Illness Connection
The Concept of Stress
Stress Response
Major Life Events
Daily Hassles
Varieties of Stress
Primary and Secondary Appraisal
Coping Strategies and Styles
Attributional Style
Dispositional Optimism
Management of Emotions
Disclosure
Type A Personality and Cardiovascular Disease
Hostility: The Lethal Component of the Type A Behavior Pattern
How the Arteries Are Damaged by Hostile Type A Behavior
SUMMARY AND EVALUATION
KEY TERMS
18
Athanasia Nomikou/Shutterstock
Stress, Coping, 
Adjustment, and Health
Final PDF to printerlar31869_ch18_552-583.indd 555 10/25/22 07:33 AM
While the pandemic of 
COVID-19 is caused by 
a virus, its transmission 
from person to person is 
caused by specific behaviors. 
Psychology can play a role 
in helping society change 
those behaviors as well as 
cope with the social and 
emotional impact of those 
changes.
Brian Lawless-PA Images/
Getty Images
For much of history, humans have been battling microbes in an effort 
to overcome disease and illness. For example, in 1520, the Spanish conquistadors 
landed in Mexico with several slaves brought from Spanish Cuba. One of the slaves 
had smallpox. The illness spread to the native Aztec tribes, who had no immunity 
to smallpox. It quickly killed half of the Aztec people, including their emperor, 
Cuitlahuac. Aided by the microbe that causes smallpox, the Spanish (who had immu￾nity) had no trouble conquering all of Mexico. The native population of Mexico, 
estimated at 20 million when the Spaniards arrived, fell to 1.6 million in less than 
100 years (Diamond, 1999).
The world is currently experiencing a pandemic of another highly infectious dis￾ease: COVID-19. The microbe that causes COVID-19 resides in respiratory fluids, 
primarily mucus in the mouth and nose. It passes from person to person when mucus 
from an infected person, even a microscopic amount, gets into the respiratory tract 
of another. Because this virus was new to humans, there was no immunity to it in the 
human population when it first appeared in late 2019. Its explosive spread around the 
world surprised many, except perhaps a few public health experts. We now have a vac￾cine against the Coronavirus, which limits the severity of the illness. But the main way 
to stop the spread of this illness is still to lessen or eliminate behaviors that transmit 
the virus (by practicing social distancing, not gathering in groups, coughing into a tis￾sue or one’s elbow, self-isolating if exposure is suspected, and so on).
THE DISPOSITIONAL DOMAIN 18
Final PDF to printer556 PART SIX The Adjustment Domain
lar31869_ch18_552-583.indd 556 10/25/22 07:33 AM
The world-wide pandemic of COVID-19 illustrates a very important distinction; 
although its cause is a virus, its transmission is through specific behaviors. For example, 
gathering with strangers of unknown vaccination status in tightly packed rooms greatly 
increase the likelihood of transmitting COVID-19. Psychologists can contribute to a 
discussion of the best ways to change people’s behavior, such as practicing social dis￾tancing, working from home, and coping with social isolation. The point is that, in the 
modern approach to health and illness, understanding the role of human behavior can be 
as important as understanding microbes.
This is only one example of the importance of behavior in understanding illness. 
Today, many of the leading causes of illness, disability, and death are related not to 
microbes as much as to lifestyle behaviors, such as smoking, poor diet, inadequate exer￾cise, and stress. Now that we are curing microbial infections, behavioral factors have 
emerged as important contributors to the development of illness.
The realization that behavioral factors have important health consequences has 
given rise to the field of health psychology. Researchers in this area of psychology study 
the relationship between the mind and the body, as well as the ways in which these 
two components respond to challenges from the environment (e.g., stressful events, 
germs) to produce either illness or health. Many of the psychological variables of inter￾est have to do with stable patterns of behavior—for example, whether a person copes 
well with stress, exercises some or not at all, sleeps seven to eight hours each night, 
drinks alcohol only in moderation, routinely wears a seat belt, keeps his or her weight 
at a desirable level, avoids drugs, practices safe sex, and avoids unnecessary risks. 
Researchers find that such behaviors, called health behaviors, are correlated with life 
expectancy. In fact, in the United States, researchers suggest that health behavior defi￾cits contribute to more than half of all premature deaths—that is, death before age 65 
(Taylor, 1991).
Personality can have an impact on health in many ways, and personality psycholo￾gists are developing new methodological approaches to the study of this link. Current 
research has led to several detailed models of the mechanisms underlying the links 
between personality and health (Friedman, 2019; Smith & Spiro, 2002; Smith, Williams, 
& Segerstrom, 2015). Explaining how personality can influence health is the goal of 
these models, and we will present five of the models found in the personality and health 
psychology literature. Each of these models proposes the key variables, and the links 
between them, in understanding the personality–health association.
Models of the Personality–Illness Connection
Researchers have proposed several ways of thinking about how personality can relate 
to health. These models can take the form of diagrams of key variables, with the causal 
relations among those variables depicted by arrows. Models are useful to researchers in 
guiding their thinking about how those variables influence one another (Smith, 2006; 
Wiebe & Smith, 1997). In most of the models we will discuss, one variable—stress—will 
be important. Stress is the subjective feeling produced by events that are perceived to be 
uncontrollable and threatening to one’s goals. It is important to realize that stress is a 
response to the perceived demands in some situation. Stress is not in the situation; stress 
refers to how people respond to a particular situation.
An early model of the personality health relationship, called the interactional 
model, is depicted in Figure 18.1(a). This model suggests that objective events hap￾pen to people, but personality factors determine the impact or stressfulness of those 
Final PDF to printerCHAPTER EIGHTEEN Stress, Coping, Adjustment, and Health 557
lar31869_ch18_552-583.indd 557 10/25/22 07:33 AM
events by influencing people’s ability to cope. In this model, personality has its effects 
on coping responses—that is, on how people respond to the event. It is called the inter￾actional model because personality is assumed to moderate (influence) the relationship 
Figure 18.1
Three models specifying the role of personality in moderating the effects of stress on illness: (a) the 
interactional model, which specifies that personality influences how people cope; (b) the transactional 
model, which specifies that personality influences how people cope, as well as how they appraise and 
influence situations; and (c) the health behavior model, which specifies that personality influences how 
people cope, appraise, and influence situations, as well as the likely health behaviors that people practice.
Illness
Objective
events capable
of producing
stress
Coping
responses
Personality
Physiological
arousal
(a) Interactional Model
Appraisal of
events as
threatening and/
or uncontrollable
Personality
Physiological
arousal
Illness
Objective
events capable
of producing
stress
Coping
responses
(b) Transactional Model
Objective
events capable
of producing
stress
Appraisal of
events as
threatening 
Personality Health
behaviors
Illness
Coping
responses
Physiological
arousal
(c) Health Behavior Model
Final PDF to printer558 PART SIX The Adjustment Domain
lar31869_ch18_552-583.indd 558 10/25/22 07:33 AM
between stress and illness. Events such as exposure to microbes or chronic stress cause 
illness, but personality factors make a person more or less vulnerable to those events. 
For example, not everyone exposed to a cold virus will go on to develop a cold. 
Similarly, not everyone studying for their final exams will become exhausted or over￾whelmed by stress. Some people are better at coping, and they respond to challenging 
life events with less stress.
A good example of the interactional model is the research on susceptibility to 
the common cold by psychologist Sheldon Cohen and colleagues. They recruited sev￾eral hundred people who agreed to let the researchers expose them to the common 
cold virus (in nose drops). Only about 25 percent of the subjects exposed to the virus 
went on to develop a full-blown cold. Examining measures of immune system response 
to the virus, the researchers found that the higher a participant’s score on the personal￾ity trait of sociability, the stronger their immune system response to the virus (Cohen 
et al., 2003). Cohen later concluded that it was the high levels of positive affect that 
sociable people have that is most associated with a vigorous immune response to 
viruses (Cohen & Pressman, 2006). Other researchers also report that recent levels of 
positive affect predict stronger immune response to an antigen injection (Segerstrom 
& Sephton, 2010). 
The interactional model has been very useful for conceptualizing how personal￾ity can influence risk for specific illnesses. One of its limitations, however, is that it 
does not specifically explain the psychological mechanisms underlying the interactions 
(Lazarus, 1991). As such, researchers developed a second model—the transactional 
model, depicted in Figure 18.1(b). In this model, personality has three potential effects: 
(1) It can influence coping, as in the interactional model; (2) it can influence how the 
person appraises or interprets the events; and (3) it can influence the events them￾selves. These last two processes deserve special attention because they are what make 
the transactional model different from the interactional model. But first we want to 
clarify a couple of terms.
In describing the interactional model, we stated; “Personality is assumed to mod￾erate (influence) the relationship between stress and illness.” Because moderation is 
an important concept, we want to take some time to explain what this term means. 
A variable is called a moderator when it influences the direction or degree of relationship 
between two other variables. So, for example, if stress is correlated with illness, yet this 
correlation is stronger for some people compared to others (say, those high in neuroti￾cism), then we would say that the personality trait of neuroticism is a moderator of the 
relationship between stress and illness. Examples of moderator effects are common in 
personality and health. For example, a strong predictor of whether a person will use ille￾gal drugs is if they have friends who use illegal drugs (self-use and peer use is correlated). 
However, for people low on the personality trait of sensation seeking, this correlation is 
not found, so the trait of sensation seeking is said to moderate the relationship between 
own use and peer use of illegal drugs (Marschall-Lévesque et al., 2014). A moderator is 
sometimes thought of as a risk multiplier; in this case, the trait of high sensation seeking 
multiplies the risk of having peers who use drugs on the probability that the person will 
themselves use drugs. While we introduce the concept of personality as a moderator in 
the context of health psychology, the concept of moderation is general and can be found 
in other areas of personality psychology.
In the transactional model, an important component is how the event is appraised, 
or interpreted, by the person. You will recall from Chapter 12 that interpretation influ￾ences behavior. An event, such as getting stuck in traffic on the way to a job interview, 
Final PDF to printerCHAPTER EIGHTEEN Stress, Coping, Adjustment, and Health 559
lar31869_ch18_552-583.indd 559 10/25/22 07:33 AM
can happen to two people, yet the two people can interpret the event differently and thus 
experience it differently. One person might interpret getting stuck as a major frustration 
and hence might respond with a great deal of worry, stress, and anxiety. The other per￾son might interpret getting stuck in traffic as an opportunity to relax, enjoy some music 
on the radio, and use their cell phone to reschedule the job interview.
The third point on the transactional model at which personality can have an impact 
consists of the events themselves. That is, people don’t just respond to situations; they 
also create situations through their choices and actions, as we discussed in Chapter 4.
For example, a disagreeable person may create interpersonal situations in which he or 
she gets into a lot of arguments. A recent five-year longitudinal study of life events, based 
on a large and nationally representative sample of young adults, found several “life event 
selection effects” due to personality (Denissen et al., 2019). That is, some life events 
(e.g., being fired from a job) were more likely to happen to certain people (e.g., low 
agreeableness) compared to others.
These two parts of the transactional model—appraisal and the person’s influence 
on events—are why the model is called transactional. These two elements of the model 
imply that stressful events don’t just influence persons; persons also influence events. 
And this influence comes about through the appraisal of events, as well as the selection 
and modification of events.
A third model, the health behavior model, adds another factor to the transactional 
model. It is important to realize that so far the two models are simply extensions of 
the theme that personality influences the stress–illness link. In the third model, which 
is depicted in Figure 18.1(c), personality does not directly influence the relationship 
between stress and illness. Instead, in this model, personality affects health indirectly 
through health-promoting or health-degrading behaviors. Everyone knows that poor 
health behaviors—such as eating too much fat, smoking, and practicing unsafe sex—
increase the risk of developing certain illnesses. This model suggests that personality 
influences the degree to which a person engages in various health-promoting or health￾degrading behaviors. For example, individuals who are low in the trait of conscientious￾ness engage in a variety of health-damaging behaviors, including smoking, unhealthy 
eating habits, dangerous driving, and lack of exercise (Bogg & Roberts, 2004).
This brings us to the concept of mediation. Mediation is similar to moderation, 
in that both describe specific ways that three variables are related to one another. 
Mediation is different, however, in that it specifies that the effect of one variable on 
another “goes through” a third variable. So, for example, the effect of conscientiousness 
on longevity goes through, or is due to, specific health behaviors (e.g., regular exercise, 
frequent doctor exams, etc.). Mediation is a way of understanding the observed relation￾ship (i.e., that conscientiousness is correlated with longevity) by specifying the underly￾ing mechanism or process captured by the mediator variable (i.e., health behavior). This 
is not just a made up example. Turiano and colleagues (2015) used a national sample of 
over 6,000 people over a 14-year period and found that Conscientiousness predicted a 
13 percent reduction in mortality in the time period. Moreover, when health behaviors 
were examined as mediators, they found that heavy drinking, smoking, and greater waist 
circumferences (all negatively related to conscientiousness) significantly mediated the 
conscientiousness–mortality association. Findings such as these show how mediation 
can be a powerful way to explain how personality effects might work. Like moderation, 
mediation is often used in personality and health research, but its application as a way 
of thinking about how personality might have its effects extends to many other areas of 
personality psychology.
Final PDF to printer560 PART SIX The Adjustment Domain
lar31869_ch18_552-583.indd 560 10/25/22 07:33 AM
Conscientiousness is one of the Big Five personality traits that is reliably related 
to good health (e.g., Hill & Roberts, 2011). In fact, the importance of conscientiousness 
to health has been described as “indisputable” (Jackson & Hill, 2019). As a personal￾ity trait, conscientiousness is manifest in such behaviors as making lists before grocery 
shopping, keeping a calendar to plan activities, keeping one’s work area neat and tidy, 
using a to-do list, and dressing up for special occasions. A list of several hundred behav￾ioral indicators of conscientiousness can be found in Jackson and colleagues (2010) and 
also in Stephan and colleagues (2019). Why is it that conscientiousness predicts health 
and living longer? Researchers conclude that conscientious persons routinely practice 
good health behaviors. They tend to floss and brush regularly, engage in regular exer￾cise, watch their diets, use a seat belt consistently, and adhere to other behaviors that 
are linked to better health (see their doctor and dentist regularly). Conscientiousness 
thus appears to affect health primarily through mediation mechanisms described by the 
health behavior model.
A fourth model of the link between personality and health, the predisposition 
model, is shown in Figure 18.2(a). The previous three models were all variations on 
the same theme that personality influences the relationship between stress and illness 
Figure 18.2
Additional models of the relationship between personality and health: (a) the predisposition model, which 
holds that personality and health are related due to a common predisposition; and (b) the illness behavior 
model, which specifies how personality might influence whether a person would seek medical attention or 
report illness symptoms.
Personality
Physiological responsiveness
Illness
Predisposition
(a) Predisposition Model
Health
behaviors,
such as going 
to the doctor
Personality
Reports of
symptoms
Normal
physiological
sensations
Heightened
perception of
and attention
to sensations
Labeling of
sensations as
illness
(b) Illness Behavior Model
Final PDF to printerCHAPTER EIGHTEEN Stress, Coping, Adjustment, and Health 561
lar31869_ch18_552-583.indd 561 10/25/22 07:33 AM
either directly (interactional and transactional mod￾els) or indirectly (health behavior model). The fourth 
model is completely different and holds that personal￾ity and illness are both expressions of an underlying 
predisposition. This model is a very simple concep￾tion, suggesting that associations might exist between 
personality and illness because of a third variable, 
which causes them both. For example, enhanced sym￾pathetic nervous system reactivity may be the cause of 
subsequent illnesses, as well as cause the behaviors and 
emotions that lead a person to be called “high neuroti￾cism.” The predisposition model has not been applied 
much, though it seems likely that this model may guide 
future investigators interested in the genetic basis of 
illnesses. It may well turn out that some genetic pre￾dispositions are expressed both in terms of a stable 
individual difference and in terms of susceptibility to 
specific illnesses (Bouchard & McGue, 1990). For example, some researchers specu￾late that there is a genetic cause of novelty seeking (a trait like sensation seeking) 
and that this genetic sequence also causes, or makes a person more likely to develop, 
addiction to illicit drugs (Cloninger, 1999). Consequently, the correlation between the 
novelty-seeking personality trait and addiction to illicit drugs (e.g., opioids, cocaine, 
meth, heroin) may be due to the fact that these two variables (novelty seeking and 
addiction) are both caused by a third variable—genes. This simple model may be useful 
as the human genome project (see Chapter 6) progresses toward understanding what 
specific genes control. 
The final model for consideration—called the illness behavior model—is not a 
model of illness per se, but rather a model of illness behavior. Illness itself is defined 
as the presence of an objectively measurable abnormal physiological process, such as 
fever, high blood pressure, or a tumor. Illness behavior, on the other hand, refers to 
actions a person might take when they think they have an illness, such as complaining 
to others, visiting a doctor, or taking the day off from school or work. Illness behaviors 
are related to actual illnesses, but not perfectly. Some individuals may tough out an 
illness, stoically refusing to engage in illness behaviors (e.g., refusing to take the day 
off from work when ill). Other people engage in all sorts of illness behaviors even in 
the absence of actual illness.
Figure 18.2(b) portrays the illness behavior model. It suggests that personality 
influences the degree to which a person perceives and pays attention to bodily sensations 
and the degree to which the person interprets and labels those sensations as an illness. 
The way in which a person perceives and labels those sensations, then, influences the 
person’s illness behaviors, such as reporting the symptoms and going to a doctor. As dis￾cussed in Chapter 13, the personality trait of neuroticism is associated with a tendency 
to complain about physical symptoms.
Neuroticism correlates moderately with objective health outcomes (Friedman, 
2019; Graham et al., 2017). However, the strongest correlations are with self-reports 
of health, such as reporting frequencies of different symptoms (Strickhouser, Zell, & 
Krizan, 2017). This may suggest that high neuroticism persons pay more attention to 
physical symptoms, or are more likely to interpret bodily sensations as signs of illness, 
which is consistent with the illness behavior model.
Conscientiousness has its effects on health through its association with 
health behaviors, such as brushing and flossing regularly.
Moodboard-Mike Watson Images/Brand X Pictures/Getty Images
Final PDF to printer562 PART SIX The Adjustment Domain
lar31869_ch18_552-583.indd 562 10/25/22 07:33 AM
While most of the health associations with neuroticism are negative, there may be 
some ways that being high on neuroticism might be beneficial. The concept of healthy 
neuroticism (Friedman, 2019; Weston & Jackson, 2016) is a new idea that stresses the 
possible benefits of neuroticism. For example, being constantly vigilant for threat, on 
the lookout for things that can go wrong, might prove useful when it comes to threaten￾ing health information. A person high on neuroticism might notice symptoms of dis￾ease sooner or might interpret them as more serious and take action sooner. Such early 
action on a disease like cancer can lead to better outcomes. Augustine and colleagues 
(2008) found that, among a large sample of lung cancer patients, neuroticism correlated 
with noticing the symptoms sooner and going to the doctor at a younger average age, 
even after controlling for smoking history. Ristvedt and Trinkaus (2005) found that, 
in a group of rectal cancer patients, neuroticism predicted a shorter time in going from 
first noticing symptoms to making an appointment with a doctor. So, while the negative 
health associations with neuroticism are substantial, there may be some ways, under 
some conditions, that being a little higher in neuroticism could be beneficial.
It is important to note that these models linking personality to physical health or 
illness are not mutually exclusive. That is, they may all apply, depending on the personal￾ity trait and the illness under consideration. We now illustrate how these models have 
been applied to understand the role of personality in the COVID-19 pandemic.
COVID-19 and the Five Models of Personality–Illness Connection
COVID-19 is a global health event of unprecedented proportions, disrupting the lives of 
practically every person on Earth. Efforts to contain the spread of the Coronavirus have 
also placed unique behavioral and psychological demands on people. Every reader of 
this textbook has been impacted in some way by COVID-19 and the public health mea￾sures it brought about. Consequently, every reader should find some personal relevance 
in the research examples that follow.
Personality psychologists mobilized their efforts early in the pandemic to examine 
the role of personality within this global health crisis. As this edition goes to press, we 
are a little over two years into the pandemic. In this time, almost 600 research studies 
have been published on personality and various aspects of the COVID-19 pandemic. 
Summarizing all this research is beyond the scope of an introductory personality text￾book. However, this research can be used to illustrate each of the five models of the 
personality–health connection described above.
The Interactional Model emphasizes how personality influences coping with 
a stressor. Coping with the novel Coronavirus, as well as the many mitigation efforts 
imposed by public health authorities, has been the topic of much of the COVID-19 
research concerning the role of personality. For example, some studies have found that 
high levels of neuroticism predicted poorer coping during the pandemic (Bacon et al., 
2021). In addition, people high on neuroticism worried more about the disease, showed 
increases in anxiety and loneliness as the pandemic progressed, reported feeling more 
threatened by the virus, and showed a larger negative impact on mental health and psy￾chological well-being. Persons high in neuroticism paid more attention to COVID-19 
news, at times even to the point of being preoccupied with the crisis and ruminating 
over the various risk factors (Kroencke et al., 2020). In general, the uncertainty of the 
COVID-19 pandemic, and the shifting demands of guidelines, was more stressful to 
those higher on neuroticism (compared to those low on neuroticism).
The Transactional Model emphasizes how personality can influence people’s 
appraisal or interpretation of stressful events. Many of the studies on personality and 
Final PDF to printerCHAPTER EIGHTEEN Stress, Coping, Adjustment, and Health 563
lar31869_ch18_552-583.indd 563 10/25/22 07:33 AM
the COVID pandemic illustrate this model, especially those examining how people 
interpret the many mitigation strategies put in place by public health authorities. 
For example, Bellingtier, Mund, and Wrzus (2021) showed that social distancing and 
social isolation were perceived as especially stressful by subjects high on the socia￾bility component of extraversion. Research before COVID-19 often found that extra￾verts coped better with stress by tapping their social support network. However, the 
unique social isolation demands of the COVID-19 pandemic made it more stressful for 
people high on sociability. Highly sociable people found social isolation to be more 
difficult and more stressful, precisely because isolation goes against their natural ten￾dency to want to be with others. Another example of the transactional model can be 
seen in studies that showed, early in the pandemic, that persons high on neuroticism 
believe the pandemic will last significantly longer than subjects low on neuroticism 
(Aschwanden et al., 2020). Subjects high in neuroticism worried more about infec￾tion and transmission but were also more likely to take a fatalistic interpretation of 
the situation, taking fewer precautions and making fewer preparations to get through 
it. People low on agreeableness were more likely to perceive public health guidelines 
(e.g., mask wearing) to be restrictions on their personal freedom, and consequently 
were less likely to comply. Persons high on conscientiousness, on the other hand, were 
more likely to perceive public health guidelines as consensual norms, believing that 
most others agree with the guidelines. Conscientious people expressed a greater sense 
of responsibility toward others and were more likely to report feeling an obligation to 
help society contain the virus. Many studies show that perceptions matter, and that 
personality predicts perceptions of responsibility, risk, and the reasonableness of pub￾lic health guidelines for containing COVID-19.
The Health Behavior Model emphasizes how personality can influence specific 
behaviors that, in turn, directly promote (or impede) healthy outcomes. For example, 
very specific behaviors (e.g., social distancing, hand washing, mask wearing) are known 
to lessen the odds of catching and transmitting the Coronavirus. Several studies ask 
the question of whether personality predicts the likelihood of engaging in these specific 
behaviors. For example, one study (Bacon et al., 2021) found that, during the high points 
of the pandemic, high conscientious persons were more likely to avoid crowds, to stay 
out of restaurants and bars, to practice social distancing and hand washing, and were 
less likely to engage in panic stockpiling. More conscientious persons were also quicker 
to transition to online meetings and classes (Audet et al., 2021) and to comply with 
self-isolation after suspected exposure to the virus. High conscientious persons were also 
more likely to fact check information and were less likely to pass on or share misinfor￾mation about COVID-19 (Lawson & Kakkar, 2021). In the early phase of the pandemic, 
high conscientious persons took more precautions (e.g., wiping down items brought into 
the home) and engaged in more preparatory actions (e.g., set up Zoom on their comput￾ers, stocked up on necessary supplies). The most consequential single health behavior 
during the pandemic is, of course, taking the vaccination. Because the public availability 
of the vaccination is so recent, few studies have been completed comparing vaccinated 
to unvaccinated groups in terms of personality. Studies have been done on the intention
to vaccinate and aspects of personality (e.g., greater intention to vaccinate is associated 
with more internal locus of control, with more empathy toward others, and with more 
liberal political attitudes).
The Predisposition Model emphasizes how personality and illness could both be 
the result of some third variable. None of the COVID-19 research on personality con￾forms directly to this model. However, researchers are perplexed by variability in the 
course of the illness following infection by the Coronavirus; some people have few if any 
Final PDF to printer564 PART SIX The Adjustment Domain
lar31869_ch18_552-583.indd 564 10/25/22 07:33 AM
symptoms, whereas others have serious lung disease and become gravely, if not mortally, 
ill. Predicting the course of COVID-19 continues to be a challenge. Some researchers 
are looking for a genetic marker or other biological predisposition (e.g., inflammatory 
response, immune system status) that puts a person at greater risk for serious symptoms. 
If some personality variable were linked to such a biological predisposition, then this 
model might prove useful. However, to date, identifying additional biological predisposi￾tions to serious symptoms (other than age, vaccination status, and immune system func￾tioning, which are unrelated to personality) has proven elusive.
The Illness Behavior Model emphasizes actions people take when they believe they 
may be sick. Applied to the COVID-19 pandemic, this model might be useful for under￾standing when people seek out COVID-19 testing, whether they decide to self-isolate or 
not, or whether and when they seek medical treatment for the illness. At this stage of 
the pandemic, few researchers have directly applied the Illness Behavior Model to tradi￾tional personality traits. Some studies have linked COVID-19 testing to economic status 
(less available to poor) or racial group (less available to minority groups) or to fear of the 
disease (fearful persons more likely to seek out testing), but not to traditional measures 
of personality. Similarly, the decision to self-isolate is associated with greater fear of the 
virus or a greater concern for the health of others, but has not been related to measures 
of personality. It is very likely that data on personality and illness behaviors during the 
COVID-19 pandemic will emerge in future research.
In these examples, the Coronavirus and associated public health demands are 
viewed as stressful events to which we all must respond. The above models depict 
how personality may play a role in responding to those contemporary stressors.
Because the concept of stress is so important, and so general, we next go into some 
detail about stress.
The Concept of Stress
Microbes stress the body (usually the immune system), but from a psychological 
perspective there are many, many other sources of stress. Deadlines that are fast 
approaching, evaluative tasks that we cannot avoid 
(like exams), being “unfriended” online, or having to 
deal with an unpleasant or harassing co-worker; all of 
these and many more can be sources of psychological 
stress. Stress is a general feeling of being overwhelmed 
by events that you cannot control and that threaten a 
goal that is important to you. Events that cause stress 
are called stressors, and they appear to have these com￾mon attributes:
 1. Stressors are perceived as uncontrollable events, 
outside our power to influence, such as an exam we 
cannot avoid or a deadline we cannot change.
 2. Stressors threaten an important goal, they call 
into question something important to us, such 
as the goal of doing well in a college course or 
maintaining friendships with important others.
 3. Stressors are extreme, in the sense that they 
produce feelings of being overwhelmed or 
overloaded or “on the edge.”
Studying for an exam can be stressful or not, depending on whether 
the situation controls you or you control the situation. Stress occurs 
when events seem uncontrollable and threatening to your goals. Taking 
control by keeping up with homework, planning each day, and preparing 
in a timely fashion can make studying less stressful.
Tom Merton/Caia Images/Glow Images
Final PDF to printerCHAPTER EIGHTEEN Stress, Coping, Adjustment, and Health 565
lar31869_ch18_552-583.indd 565 10/25/22 07:33 AM
Stress Response
When a stressor appears, people typically experience a pattern of emotional and physi￾ological reactions. For example, if someone were to startle you by unexpectedly honk￾ing an automobile horn as you walked in front of their car, you would experience some 
startle: Your heart would beat faster and your blood pressure would go up, and your 
palms and the soles of your feet would begin to sweat. This pattern of reaction has com￾monly been called the fight-or-flight response. This physiological response is caused by 
an increase of sympathetic nervous system activity (see Chapter 7 for more details on 
nervous system responses). The increase in heart rate and blood pressure prepares you 
for action, such as fighting or fleeing. The sweaty palms and feet are perhaps a prepara￾tion for using a weapon or running away. This physiological response is usually very 
brief, and if the stressor is as minor as someone honking a car horn to see you jump, you 
will likely glare at the person who startled you, but then return to your normal state in a 
minute or less.
If, however, a person is exposed to a particular stressor day in and day out, 
then this physiological fight-or-flight response is just the first step in a chain of events 
termed the general adaptation syndrome (GAS) by Hans Selye (1976), a pioneer in 
stress research. Selye proposed that the GAS followed a stage model, as depicted 
in Figure 18.3. The first stage, called the alarm stage, consists of the fight-or-flight 
response of the sympathetic nervous system and the associated peripheral nervous system 
reactions. These include the release of hormones that prepare the body for challenge. If 
the stressor continues, then the next stage begins, the resistance stage. The body is using 
its resources at an above average rate, repeatedly activating the fight-or-flight response. 
At this point, stress is being resisted, but it is taking a lot of effort and energy. If the stressor 
remains constant, the person eventually enters the third stage, the exhaustion stage. Selye 
felt that this was the stage in which a person is most susceptible to illness and disease, as 
his or her physiological resources are depleted. Research on stress and the immune system 
generally supports the GAS stage model (Cohen et al., 2012). A stage model of stress 
(Cohen, Gianaros, & Manuck, 2016) keeps the basic framework of the GAS, but elabo￾rates on the psychological and biological mechanisms that occur in the resistance stage, 
and how resistance can transition to the exhaustion stage. 
Major Life Events
What are some common stressors, events that are likely to evoke stress in most persons? 
Holmes and Rahe (1967) studied various major life events, those events that require people 
to make major adjustments in their lives. In their research, Holmes and Rahe wanted to 
estimate the potential stress value of a wide variety of life events. They started with a long 
Figure 18.3
The three stages of the general adaptation syndrome proposed by Selye.
Alarm
Fight-or-flight
response
Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3
Resistance
Depletion of
bodily resources
Exhaustion
Susceptibility to
illness and disease
Final PDF to printer566 PART SIX The Adjustment Domain
lar31869_ch18_552-583.indd 566 10/25/22 07:33 AM
list of events such as the death of a family member, loss of a job, or being put in jail. They 
then had a large number of subjects rate each of the events for how much stress each was 
likely to provoke. Each event was then assigned stress “points,” and by counting up the 
events a person had experienced and adding up the stress points for all of those events, a 
good estimate of the total amount of stress experienced by that person could be obtained.
In Table 18.1, we present a student version of the stressful event schedule based 
on the original Holmes and Rahe research. It has been modified for teaching purposes 
to apply to college-age adults and should be considered a rough indication of stress lev￾els. In this scale, the number following the event refers to the stress “points” associated 
Table 18.1 The Student Stress Test
DIRECTIONS: On the list below, check off each event that has happened to you in the past year. To 
determine your stress score, add up the number of points corresponding to the events you have 
experienced in the past year. If your score is 300 or higher, you are at risk for developing a health 
problem from stress. If your score is between 150 and 300, you have a 50-50 chance of experiencing 
a health problem in the next few years if the stress persists. If your score is below 150, you have a 
relatively low risk of a serious health change due to stress (DeMeuse, 1985; Insel & Roth, 1985).
STUDENT STRESS SCALE
1. Death of a close family member 100
2. Death of a close friend 73
3. Divorce between parents 65
4. Jail term 63
5. Major personal injury or illness 63
6. Marriage 58
7. Fired from job 50
8. Failed important course 47
9. Change in health of a family member 45
10. Pregnancy 45
11. Sex problems 44
12. Serious argument with a close friend 40
13. Change in financial status 39
14. Change of major at college 39
15. Trouble with parents 39
16. New girl- or boyfriend 38
17. Increased workload 37
18. Outstanding personal achievement 36
19. First quarter/semester in college 35
20. Change in living conditions 31
21. Serious argument with instructor 30
22. Lower grades than expected 29
23. Change in sleeping habits 29
24. Change in social activities 29
25. Change in eating habits 28
26. Chronic car trouble 26
27. Change in number of family get-togethers 26
28. Too many missed classes 25
29. Change of college 24
30. Dropped more than one class 23
31. Minor traffic violations 20
TOTAL
Source: Based on “The Social Adjustment Rating Scale,” by T. H. Holmes and R. H. Rahe, 1967, Journal of Psychosomatic Research,
vol. 11, pp. 213–217.
Final PDF to printerCHAPTER EIGHTEEN Stress, Coping, Adjustment, and Health 567
lar31869_ch18_552-583.indd 567 10/25/22 07:33 AM
with that event. You can see that death of a close family member, death of a friend, 
and divorce of parents are the events likely to evoke the most stress. Interestingly, 
getting married is also likely to be stressful, as are other “positive” events, such as 
starting college or making some major achievement. This highlights the fact that stress 
is the subjective response to an event and that even though an event is positive, it may 
have the three characteristics associated with stressors: intensity, threat to a goal, and 
uncontrollability.
In their initial research, Holmes and Rahe tallied up the stress points that each of 
the research participants had accumulated in the prior year. They found that the persons 
with the most stress points were also the most likely to have had a serious illness during 
that year. This research was among the first systematic demonstrations that elevated 
stress—a psychological phenomenon—was associated with elevated risk for a number of 
illnesses. These findings persuaded medical researchers to take seriously the notion that 
factors other than microbes and organ malfunctions contribute to illness. Researchers 
following Holmes and Rahe have consistently found linkages between major life events 
and illness (reviewed in Schwarzer & Luszczynska, 2013).
Other researchers have taken a more experimental approach to see if stress is 
related to susceptibility to disease. For example, Cohen, Tyrrell, and Smith (1997) 
obtained reports of stressful life events for a group of volunteers and were able to sum 
each participants’ points for various events. With the permission of the participants, 
these researchers then tried to infect half the participants with a cold by giving them 
nose drops containing the cold virus. The other half of the research participants were 
given saline nose drops; they served as the control group in this experiment. What hap￾pened? The participants with more stressful life events in the previous year were more 
likely to develop a cold after being given the cold virus than were the participants with 
fewer stressors in their lives. The researchers interpreted this finding as consistent with 
the general adaptation syndrome: persons under chronic stress eventually deplete bodily 
resources and become vulnerable to microbial infections.
The relationship between increased stress and lowered resistance to viral and bac￾terial infection has been demonstrated repeatedly (e.g., Cohen et al., 1995). Currently, 
most researchers interpret such findings as illustrating the effects of stress on the 
immune system. That is, stress is thought to lower the functional ability of the immune 
system to mount an effective response to the presence of microbes, thereby leading to 
lowered immunity to infection and resulting illness (Marsland et al., 2001; Miller & 
Cohen, 2001).
Daily Hassles
Major life events are, thankfully, fairly infrequent in our lives. It seems that the major 
sources of stress in most people’s lives are what are termed daily hassles (Delongis, 
Folkman, & Lazarus, 1988; Lazarus, 1991). Although only minor, daily hassles can be 
chronic and repetitive. Examples of daily hassles are having too much to do all the time, 
having to fight the crowds while shopping, getting stuck regularly in heavy traffic, having 
to wait in lines all the time, having an unpleasant boss at work, having a long commute, 
and having to worry over money. Such daily hassles can be chronically irritating, and 
can add up to significant stress. The results of research on daily hassles have shown that, 
similar to major life events, persons with a lot of minor stress in their lives suffer more 
than expected from psychological and physical symptoms. The top 10 most common 
daily hassles are listed in Table 18.2.
Final PDF to printer568 PART SIX The Adjustment Domain
lar31869_ch18_552-583.indd 568 10/25/22 07:33 AM
Varieties of Stress
Stress is a physical and psychological response to perceived demands and pressures. In 
the stress response, people mobilize physical and emotional resources to cope with the 
demands and pressures. Psychologists distinguish four varieties of stress:
• Acute stress is what most people associate with the term stress. Acute stress 
results from a sudden onset of threat. It produces the flight-or-fight response, 
which can be experienced as tension, headache, emotional upset, gastrointestinal 
disturbances, feelings of agitation, and pressure. September 11, 2001, was a day 
of acute stress for many people. Even for persons not directly involved in the 
terrible events of that day, many experienced the stress that comes from feeling 
that events are not under control (Peterson & Seligman, 2003).
• Chronic stress can be a serious form of stress. It refers to stress that does not 
end. Day in and day out, chronic stress grinds us down until our resistance is 
gone. Serious systemic illnesses, such as those associated with decreased immune 
system functioning, or cardiovascular disease, can result from chronic stress.
• Traumatic stress refers to a massive instance of acute stress, the effects of 
which can reverberate for years or even a lifetime (e.g., Bunce, Larsen, & 
Peterson, 1995). Traumatic stress is defined mainly in terms of the symptoms 
associated with it. That is, we know it is traumatic stress when the person 
experiences posttraumatic stress symptoms. This collection of symptoms, called 
posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), is a syndrome that occurs in some persons 
after experiencing or witnessing life-threatening events, such as military combat, 
natural disasters, terrorist incidents, serious accidents, or violent personal assaults 
such as rape. Many persons in New York City experienced symptoms of PTSD 
after the September 11 terrorist tragedy. People who suffer from PTSD often 
relive the experience through nightmares or intense flashbacks, have difficulty 
sleeping, have physical complaints, have flattened emotions, and feel detached 
Table 18.2 The 10 Most Commonly Experienced Daily Hassles
Hassles Percentage*
Concerns about weight 52%
Health of a family member 48
Rising prices of common goods 43
Home maintenance 43
Too many things to do 39
Misplacing or losing things 38
Yard work or outside home maintenance 38
Property, investment, or taxes 37
Crime 37
Physical appearance 36
*Over a nine-month period, these percentages represent the average percentages of people indicating that the hassle was a significant 
source of stress in daily life.
Source: Adapted from Kanner et al., 1991.
Final PDF to printerCHAPTER EIGHTEEN Stress, Coping, Adjustment, and Health 569
lar31869_ch18_552-583.indd 569 10/25/22 07:33 AM
or estranged from others. These symptoms can be severe enough 
and last long enough to significantly impair the person’s daily 
life, such as having trouble with personal relationships or 
difficulty holding down a job.
Health psychologists believe that stress has additive effects; that is, 
the effects of stress add up and accumulate in a person over time, simi￾lar to the concept of aggregation introduced in Chapter 4. Researchers 
have even coined a word—allostatic load—which refers to the cumulative 
burden of chronic stress over time and involves the physiological conse￾quences of exposure to repeated or prolonged stress. It can be thought 
of as the total “wear and tear” on one’s body from stress, and is assumed 
to add up over time.
Primary and Secondary Appraisal
Not all people respond to stressors in the same way. Two people can 
experience the same event, yet one is devastated and completely over￾whelmed, whereas the other accepts the event as a challenge and is 
mobilized into positive action. Differences among people in how they 
respond to the same event are possible because stress is not “out there” 
in the environment. Rather, stress is in the subjective reaction of the per￾son to potential stressors (Lazarus & Folkman, 1984). This is worth 
emphasizing, because many people refer to an event as stressful, as if 
stress were a characteristic of the event. Instead, stress is actually the 
response to that event. For example, two people are taking the same 
organic chemistry course; they take the same exam, and they both fail. 
One person may be very stressed by this event, whereas the other may 
take it in stride and not feel stressed at all by the failure. How can the same event happen 
to two people, yet one responds with stress and the other does not?
According to psychologist Richard Lazarus (1922–2002), in order for stress to be 
evoked in a person, two cognitive events must occur (Lazarus, 1991). The first cognitive 
event, which Lazarus called primary appraisal, is for the person to perceive that the event 
is a threat to his or her personal goals. The second necessary cognitive event, secondary 
appraisal, is when the person concludes that he or she does not have the resources to 
cope with the demands of the threatening event. Note that secondary appraisal refers to 
whether the event is under a person’s control, and primary appraisal refers to whether 
the event is a threat to their goals. If either of these appraisals is absent—if the person 
does not perceive the event as threatening something important to them, or if the per￾son feels he or she has plenty of resources for coping with the threat—then stress is not 
evoked. For example, if an event, such as an upcoming exam, is perceived as threatening 
to someone’s goals, yet the person feels he or she has the resources demanded by that 
event (i.e., the person has been studying and otherwise preparing for the exam), then the 
person might experience the event more as a challenge than as stress. Alternatively, the 
person might feel he or she does not have the resources demanded by the event (second￾ary appraisal) but might not think that the event is important to his or her long-term 
goals (primary appraisal) and so might not respond with stress.
What might lead some individuals to consistently avoid the stress response? What 
are some of the strategies that people use to overcome stress and the accompanying anxi￾ety and feelings of being overwhelmed? Next we consider several personality dimensions 
that have been associated with resistance to stress.
On September 11, 2001, many people in and 
around the World Trade Center in New York 
experienced traumatic stress. Many of them went 
on to develop posttraumatic stress disorder.
Thomas Nilsson/Getty Images
Final PDF to printer570 PART SIX The Adjustment Domain
lar31869_ch18_552-583.indd 570 10/25/22 07:33 AM
Coping Strategies and Styles
Everyone has unpleasant events happen in their lives. We all have temporary setbacks, 
losses, and frustrations in our day-to-day lives. However, some people seem better able 
to cope, to get over stressful events, or to somehow see such events as challenges rather 
than as sources of stress. One personality dimension that has been studied in relation to 
stress is attributional style.
Attributional Style
Attributional style is a dispositional way of explaining the causes of bad events. As intro￾duced in Chapter 12, the three important dimensions of attributional style are external 
versus internal, unstable versus stable, and specific versus global. Various measures have 
been developed for assessing people’s typical attributional style. One such measure is 
the Attributional Style Questionnaire (ASQ), developed by psychologist Chris Peterson 
(1950–2012) and his colleagues (1982). However, another very useful technique for 
scoring attributional style is by analyzing the content of people’s written or spoken expla￾nations. People often spontaneously provide explanations for events in their everyday 
conversations, social media posts, blogs, e-mails, or Twitter posts, It is possible to ana￾lyze the explanations a person uses in verbatim material and to rate those explanations 
along the attributional dimensions of internality, stability, and globality. This technique 
for measuring attributional style was also developed by Peterson and his colleagues 
(1992), who called it the Content Analysis of Verbatim Explanations (CAVE).
Find an online article, social media post, or twitter thread in which a person is explaining an 
event—perhaps a story about an accident, an incident with another person, or some sporting 
event. Analyze their description, paying particular attention to the explanations the person uses 
(why things happened that way). Next, analyze those explanations in terms of the three dimen￾sions of explanatory style:
• Internal versus external: Was it her or his fault, or due to something beyond 
his or her control?
• Stable versus unstable: Was the cause something long lasting or temporary?
• Global versus specific: Was the cause something general, affecting a large 
part of his or her life, or something specific, limited in impact?
Come up with a characterization of the person’s style of attribution, how they assign blame for 
life events. This is essentially what researchers using the CAVE technique do, in a structured 
way, when they apply the coding system to peoples’ explanations.
Exercise
The CAVE technique has the advantage of assessing attributional style using any 
material containing causal explanations (Peterson, Seligman, & Vaillant, 1988). For 
example, presidential speeches, particularly the State of the Union addresses, often con￾tain explanations for a great many events. As another example, movie stars often do 
Final PDF to printerCHAPTER EIGHTEEN Stress, Coping, Adjustment, and Health 571
lar31869_ch18_552-583.indd 571 10/25/22 07:33 AM
interviews that contain explanations for events in their lives. Psychotherapy tapes can 
be analyzed with CAVE, as they often contain persons’ attributions for why things hap￾pened to them. Similarly, song lyrics, children’s stories, descriptions of sports events, 
and myths and religious texts all contain explanations for events that can be rated for 
how internal, stable, and global they are.
Some psychologists, including Chris Peterson, prefer the term attributional 
optimism to refer to a specific combination of attributions (Peterson, 2000). The opti￾mistic person tends to explain bad events as not being due to them, as temporary, and 
as having a limited impact on their lives. For good events, however, optimists tend to do 
the opposite, they see the causes as due to themselves, as longer lasting, and as having 
a larger impact on their lives. So optimism is about specific ways of thinking: expecting 
good events, taking credit for good events, seeing good events as lasting and having a 
larger impact, and doing the opposite for negative events.
Like many traits, optimism refers to a bipolar dimension, even though we use only 
one end of that dimension to refer to it. While optimists are people who score high on 
this dimension, at the opposite end of the dimension are pessimists. Pessimists engage 
in the opposite kinds of cognitive activity; they tend to blame themselves when negative 
events happen and to see negative events as long lasting (expect more negativity in the 
future) and impactful (blowing negative events out of proportion). Some researchers view 
attributional optimism as a mediator. For example, Lee and colleagues (2019) found that 
character strengths (e.g., hope, perseverance) predict a lower likelihood of depression, but 
that optimistic attributional fully mediates the effects of character strengths.
Much of the early research on attributional optimism and health has been 
reviewed in detail by Peterson and colleagues (Peterson & Bossio, 1991; Peterson & 
Seligman, 1987). As a summary, attributional optimism in general has been shown 
to predict better health as measured by self-report, ratings of general health made by 
the physicians, fewer visits to the doctor, and living longer. For example, a study by 
Peterson and colleagues (1998) examined more than 1,000 individuals over a 50-year 
period. The researchers found that the participants who scored in the more pessimistic 
direction were more likely to die at an earlier age than the optimistic participants were. 
When the researchers looked at the causes of death, they found the largest differences 
between optimists and pessimists in the categories of “accidental death” and “violent 
death.” This result has been replicated, with pessimistic attributional style correlating 
with the frequency of occurrence of fatal accidents, as well as with other health prob￾lems (Peterson & Bossio, 2001).
Because an optimistic attributional style appears to have health benefits, psychol￾ogist Marty Seligman and his colleagues developed a training program to increase peo￾ple’s level of attributional optimism (2002; Seligman & Peterson, 2003). In particular, 
Seligman also introduced a “pessimism prevention” program for use in grade schools, the 
details of which can be found in Weissberg, Kumpfer, and Seligman (2003) as well as at 
Dr. Seligman’s Authentic Happiness website, hosted by the University of Pennsylvania,http://
www.authentichappiness.sas.upenn.edu. The program has been found to be effective at pre￾venting symptoms of depression in low-income minority middle-school students (Cardemil, 
Reivich, & Seligman, 2002) and mainland Chinese adults (Yu & Seligman, 2002).
Dispositional Optimism
Optimism can have different meanings depending on what the psychologist is emphasiz￾ing (Peterson & Chang, 2003). The attributional optimism we just discussed refers to 
a specific explanatory style for negative events. However, a slightly different definition 
Final PDF to printer572 PART SIX The Adjustment Domain
lar31869_ch18_552-583.indd 572 10/25/22 07:33 AM
of optimism is offered by Scheier and Carver (1992; Carver & Scheier, 2000). These 
researchers use the term dispositional optimism as the expectation that good events will 
be plentiful in the future, and that bad events will be rare in the future. While these two 
forms of optimism are empirically correlated, they are at least conceptually distinct and 
each has its own body of research, especially concerning health.
There are several short questionnaire measures of dispositional optimism, with 
items asking about a person’s expectations for good and bad events in his or her future.
A widely used 10-item measure of dispositional optimism—the Life Orientation Test 
(LOT: Scheier & Carver, 1985)—can be found on the web (https://positivepsychology.
com/life-orientation-test-revised/). It has proven reliable and valid, and most of the 
research on disposition optimism is based on this measure.
Scheier and Carver (2018) provide a detailed recent review of this research going 
back 30 years. The early research—from 1985 to the early 2000s—consisted of mostly 
small studies establishing a link between optimism and both self-reported and objective 
measures of health. For example, one study followed people recovering from coronary 
bypass surgery (Scheier et al., 1999) and found that optimists (assessed by question￾naire) suffered fewer objective complications during recovery from bypass surgery than 
pessimists. In another study, healthy subjects volunteered to receive a small wound (a 
4-mm punch wound similar to a tissue biopsy; Ebrecht et al., 2004). Researchers then 
assessed the rate of healing from this standardized wound over several weeks time. 
Subjects were divided into “fast healers” and “slow healers” based on whether they were 
above or below the median wound healing rate. The researchers found that the fast heal￾ers were significantly higher on optimism (measured by questionnaire) than the slow 
healers. Many similar studies examining disease progression and recovery rates have 
established that optimists generally have better health outcomes than pessimists across 
a wide variety of medical conditions (e.g., pregnancy, HIV, stroke, cancer; reviewed in 
Scheier & Carver, 2018).
Starting in the early 2000s, researchers began conducting large-scale epidemiological 
studies of optimism and health. Epidemiological studies typically enroll a large number 
of subjects who are initially healthy; then they are followed over time to see who devel￾ops specific diseases. For example, Tindle and colleagues (2009) followed over 97,000 
working-age adult women over an eight-year period. They found that optimists were less 
likely than pessimists to develop coronary heart disease during the follow-up period. In 
fact, optimists were less likely to die from any cause during the eight-year period than 
pessimists. Taken in combination with the earlier studies, there is a remarkable body of 
evidence showing that optimism is consistently associated with positive health outcomes.
Given the evidence that optimism and health are related, the next question 
becomes: How does this relationship come about? How does it work? This is where the 
personality–health models, introduced at the start of this chapter, are useful. One new 
approach to optimism research (Scheier et al, 2021) has been to score separately items 
referring to an optimistic outlook, and items referring to a pessimistic outlook. This 
allows researchers to test whether effects on health are due to the presence of optimism 
or the absence of pessimism. Results show that, while both optimism and the absences 
of pessimism both significantly predict better health, the effects for the absence of pes￾simism were greater than the presence of optimism. While this is an interesting new 
development, the vast majority of research on optimism and health uses the total of all 
the items (i.e., sum of optimism items minus the sum of the pessimism items).
A segment of the research on optimism and health conforms to the “transactional 
model” (discussed earlier). Optimism is thought to influence how a person appraises 
stressful events, or copes with stressful events, and thereby lessens the health impact of 
Final PDF to printerCHAPTER EIGHTEEN Stress, Coping, Adjustment, and Health 573
lar31869_ch18_552-583.indd 573 10/25/22 07:33 AM
those adverse events. Such events as starting college, being in high-level athletic competi￾tion, caring for a partner with a terminal disease, undergoing a medical procedure such 
as a bone marrow donation or having major surgery oneself, or being in an active combat 
zone have all been shown to be stressful for most people. However, research on these 
events also shows that they are less stressful for optimists than pessimists (reviewed in 
Scheier & Carver, 2018). The finding that the association between optimism and health 
is moderated by a diminished stress response among optimists, suggests that the transac￾tional model is one way to understand how optimism works to improve health outcomes.
Another way to understand how optimism works to promote health is through the 
health behavior model. That is, a number of studies focus on health behavior differences 
between optimists and pessimists that may have long-term health consequences. Studies 
have found, for example, that optimists engage in more exercise, are more likely to eat a 
lower-fat diet, take vitamins more regularly, use less tobacco, use more safe sex practices, 
consume alcohol in moderation, and seek out knowledge about health risk factors than 
pessimists (studies reviewed in Scheier & Carver, 2018).
Another health behavior that optimists do more than pessimists is building social 
support networks. Psychologists have known for quite some time that having a network 
of others one can go to for support during times of stress has benefits in terms of better 
health. It turns out that optimists, perhaps due to their upbeat social style, are especially 
good at building social support networks (Scheier & Carver, 2018). For example, when 
starting college, optimists have more close friends at the end of their first semester at 
school than pessimists (Brissette, Scheier, & Carver, 2002). In summary, several stud￾ies provide results consistent with the health behavior model of optimism; optimists are 
more likely to engage in specific health behaviors (e.g., exercise, eat well, make good 
friends), and these behaviors in turn promote more healthy outcomes over the longer 
term. The relationship between optimism and health is, at least in part, mediated by 
specific health behaviors.
The research on optimism provides a window on how personality can relate to, 
or influence, physical health. There are other personality processes, quite different from 
optimism, that have also been related to health, and it is to these that we now turn.
Management of Emotions
Sometimes we have emotions, and sometimes emotions have us. Emotions, especially 
negative ones, can be particularly difficult to control. We can try to inhibit the expres￾sion of negative emotions, to keep our feelings under control. Imagine that your school 
team just lost an important championship, and you are really unhappy, distressed, and 
in an irritable mood, angry at the referees and disappointed by your team. However, 
you have an important exam tomorrow, so you must inhibit your distracting unpleasant 
emotions and concentrate on studying. You can think of similar examples of emotional 
inhibition, such as controlling your anxiety or hiding the fact that you are disappointed.
We all have to cover up or inhibit disappointments once in a while. But what about 
people who routinely suppress their emotions, who keep everything inside? What are 
the consequences of chronically inhibiting one’s emotions? Some theorists suggest that 
emotional inhibition leads to undesirable consequences. For example, Sigmund Freud 
(see Chapter 9) believed that most psychological problems were the result of inhibited 
(repressed) negative emotions and motivations. Repression, the pushing of unacceptable 
desires or urges into the unconscious, was thought to be the root of all psychological 
problems. Psychoanalytic therapy, or the talking cure, was designed to bring inhibited 
emotion into conscious awareness, so that it could be experienced and expressed and 
Final PDF to printer574 PART SIX The Adjustment Domain
lar31869_ch18_552-583.indd 574 10/25/22 07:33 AM
dealt with in a mature manner. Moreover, the therapeutic relationship was seen as a 
place to experience and express emotions that had long been inhibited. There are other 
therapies that might be called “expressive therapies” because their goal is to get the per￾son to release inhibited emotions.
Other theorists see emotional inhibition more positively. From a developmental 
perspective, the ability to inhibit emotions is acquired at an early age, at around 3 years, 
and is seen as a major developmental achievement. This is when children, though sad, 
are able to stop themselves from crying or, when angry, can inhibit themselves from 
striking back (Kopp, 1989; Thompson, 1991). The ability to inhibit negative emotion is 
seen as a very useful skill to learn in childhood and marks a developmental achievement.
What does the research conclude about the effects of chronically inhibited emo￾tion? Surprisingly, there have been only a few well-done studies that directly address this 
question. For example, psychologists James Gross and Robert Levenson (1993, 1997; 
Gross, 2002) designed studies in which some of the participants were asked to suppress 
the expression of any emotions they were feeling while they watched a video designed 
to evoke the emotions of happiness (a comedy routine), then sadness (scenes from the 
funeral of a child, showing a distraught and highly emotional mother). Half of the par￾ticipants were randomly assigned to the suppression condition, in which they were told, 
“If you have any feelings as you watch the [video] please try your best not to let those 
feelings show.” The other half of the participants were assigned to the no-suppression 
condition, in which they were simply told to watch the video and were given no instruc￾tions to inhibit their emotions.
While the participants watched the video, the researchers videotaped them to deter￾mine how much they expressed their emotions while watching it. The researchers also col￾lected several physiological measures, such as those we discussed in Chapter 7. They also 
asked the participants to report on their feelings after each segment of the video.
Results showed that the participants who were instructed to suppress their 
emotions did exactly that; video recordings showed no facial expression of emotion. 
However, the suppression participants showed heightened physiological activity during 
the video, indicating increased sympathetic nervous system arousal, com￾pared with the no-suppression participants. The researchers suggested that 
suppression of emotion takes effort and exerts physiological costs above 
and beyond the emotional arousal. The participants in the suppression 
condition showed less outward expression of emotion than did the control 
participants, but they showed more inward expression of nervous system 
activation. Results like these are suggestive that, at least in the short term, 
keeping one’s emotions from showing exerts a physiological cost in terms of 
increased autonomic nervous system activation. If emotions are chronically 
suppressed, then the autonomic nervous system, the flight-or-fight response, 
is also chronically activated, leading to more wear and tear and perhaps 
more physiological stress.
Sometimes it is necessary to inhibit feelings. Perhaps you do not want 
to hurt someone’s feelings; perhaps you do not want to antagonize someone 
in a position of power; or perhaps you do not want to anger someone who 
is already acting aggressively (Larsen & Prizmic, 2004). For example, your 
boss may be upset with you for the wrong reason, and you may feel angry 
toward her. However, you cannot act out that anger because she is your boss 
and has a lot of power over you in terms of raises, workload, and working 
conditions. Quite simply, there are some situations in life in which it is wise 
to choose to hide your feelings.
Which woman is genuinely happy? The 
woman on the left, Kelli Bradshaw from North 
Carolina, reacts to hearing her name called as 
the first runner-up (second place) in the Miss 
America Pageant in 1998. By implication, 
the woman on the right, Nicole Johnson from 
Virginia, simultaneously realizes that she is 
the next Miss America.
Charles Rex Arbogast/AP Images
Final PDF to printerCHAPTER EIGHTEEN Stress, Coping, Adjustment, and Health 575
lar31869_ch18_552-583.indd 575 10/25/22 07:33 AM
Problems can arise when emotional inhibition becomes chronic, when a person rou￾tinely hides her or his emotions. Someone who characteristically inhibits the free expres￾sion of emotion may suffer the effects of chronic sympathetic nervous system arousal. For 
example, Levy and colleagues (1985) have shown that people who keep their negative 
emotions to themselves are more likely than expressive persons to have a higher mortality 
rate, a greater likelihood of recurrence of cancer after treatment, and a suppressed immune 
system. Cancer patients who express their negative emotions, and who emotionally fight 
their disease, sometimes live longer than patients who accept their situation, inhibit their 
emotions, and quietly accept their treatment (Levy, 1990; Levy & Heiden, 1990).
The importance of emotional expression was illustrated in a study done by Noller 
(1984) on emotional expressiveness in romantic relationships. Noller found that the 
more people expressed their feelings to their partners, the fewer problems they reported 
in their relationships. Knowing how your partner feels allows you to adjust your behavior 
accordingly. If your partner never expresses how he or she feels, then it is difficult to 
know what makes him or her happy or sad or angry.
Other studies bolster the idea that emotional expressiveness is good for our psy￾chological health. King and Emmons (1990) had participants keep daily records of how 
they were feeling each day for three consecutive weeks. The participants completed a 
questionnaire measure of emotional expressiveness. The researchers found that, on days 
when subjects reported being more emotionally expressive, they also reported higher 
levels of happiness over the 21 days of the study. A similar study by Katz and Campbell 
(1994) found that emotional expressiveness was correlated with higher self-esteem.
Disclosure
Related to emotional expressiveness is the topic of disclosure, or telling someone about 
a private aspect of oneself. Many theorists have suggested that keeping things to our￾selves, not opening up to other people, may be a source of stress and ultimately may 
lead to psychological distress and physical disease. These theorists have further argued 
that being open to others with our feelings may be curative, that talk therapy may work 
in part because through it we uncover secrets and reveal what we have been keeping to 
ourselves. Letting that out in a trusting relationship is considered a healthy activity.
Psychologist James Pennebaker has been a pioneer in researching the effects of 
disclosure. In a typical study, he asks participants to recall an upsetting or traumatic event 
that has happened to them, something they have not discussed with anyone. He asks them 
to write down these secrets. People write about many different unpleasant events, such as 
various embarrassing moments, sexual indiscretions, illegal or immoral behaviors, humili￾ations, and so on. It is interesting that all participants quickly come up with a secret that 
they have been keeping. This suggests that probably all of us have some secrets.
Early in his research, Pennebaker argued that not discussing traumatic, negative, 
or upsetting events can lead to problems. It takes physical energy, he says, to inhibit the 
thoughts and feelings associated with such events. In other words, it is not easy to keep a 
secret to ourselves, and keeping something in, especially if it is a major trauma, is upsetting 
and takes a lot of energy. Over time, this stress builds and, like all stress, can increase the 
likelihood of stress-related problems, such as trouble sleeping, irritability, physical symp￾toms (e.g., stomachaches and headaches), and even illness resulting from lowered immune 
system functioning. Telling the secret, according to Pennebaker, relieves this stress.
Pennebaker and his colleagues have conducted many studies on the topic of disclosure. 
In one study (Pennebaker & O’Heeron, 1984), they contacted participants who had lost a 
spouse through accident or suicide. Clearly, such a sudden and complete loss of a loved one 
Final PDF to printer576 PART SIX The Adjustment Domain
lar31869_ch18_552-583.indd 576 10/25/22 07:33 AM
through an unexpected and traumatic death must have a 
huge impact on the surviving spouse (recall that death of 
a spouse was the most stressful life event on the Holmes 
and Rahe list). The survivors were asked how much they 
discussed the tragedy with friends, family, or other help￾ing professionals, such as a priest, rabbi, minister, or 
therapist. The researchers also did a thorough assessment 
of the participants’ health since the death of the spouse. 
They discovered that the more the participants had talked 
about the tragedy with others, the better their subsequent 
health. Of course, this is correlational research, so we 
cannot know for certain if talking about one’s problems 
causes better health. To pin this down, researchers needed 
to do experiments where disclosure is randomly assigned 
in one condition, and in the control condition participants 
do not disclose their personal reactions (e.g., they may 
be instructed to talk or write about some neutral topic). 
We now describe some of these experiments.
In an experimental study on this topic (Pennebaker, 1990), the participants were col￾lege students randomly assigned to one of two groups. One group was asked to recall and 
write about an experience from their past that they found distressing. The other group was 
asked to write about a trivial topic, such as what they normally ate for breakfast. The stu￾dents wrote about their assigned topic for 15 minutes each night for four consecutive nights. 
Six months later, the participants were contacted again and a health history was obtained. 
Students who had written about a trauma for those four days had fewer illnesses in the 
subsequent six months, compared with the students who had written about trivial topics. 
Moreover, student records from the health services showed that the participants who had 
written about trauma had indeed gone to the campus health center less often than the par￾ticipants who had written about trivial topics. Interestingly, just the act of writing about an 
upsetting event, even if no one ever reads the writing, may have a beneficial effect on health.
In another study by Pennebaker, Colder, and Sharp (1990), the participants were 
also just starting college. For three nights in a row, they were asked to write about their dif￾ficulties and their feelings about the challenges of leaving family and friends at home and 
starting an independent life at college. Other participants (the control group) wrote about 
trivial topics. Health measures were then obtained after the students had been in college 
for at least a semester: the students who had written about their feelings and problems had 
gone to the student health center fewer times during the subsequent semester than had 
those who had written about trivial topics. A recent experiment (Robinson et al., 2020) 
mostly replicated this design, but had students write about their personal struggles with the 
COVID pandemic (or write about everyday events in the control condition), and found that 
the personal disclosure group reported reduced levels of anxiety during spikes in COVID.
Psychotherapists will sometimes ask their clients, especially those who have expe￾rienced a trauma or another extreme event, to talk or write about that trauma. Some 
psychologists even recommend keeping a diary of the events in one’s life and how one is 
reacting to those events. Such a daily self-disclosure helps put one’s feelings into perspec￾tive and make some sense out of the events in one’s life. The process provides insight 
into oneself and the events in one’s life.
How does disclosure work to promote healthy adjustment? Pennebaker’s first theory 
of the mechanism concerned the relief that results from telling a secret. In other words, 
keeping the information inside takes effort and is stressful, and disclosing that infor￾mation removes the strain and relieves the stress 
Research started by psychologist Jamie Pennebaker has repeatedly 
shown that sharing one’s difficulties and traumas with others is better 
than keeping your problems to yourself.
New Africa/Shutterstock
Final PDF to printerCHAPTER EIGHTEEN Stress, Coping, Adjustment, and Health 577
lar31869_ch18_552-583.indd 577 10/25/22 07:33 AM
More recently, Pennebaker (2003a) put forward a second explanation for how disclo￾sure promotes adjustment. This explanation concerns how writing about an event allows 
a person to reinterpret and reframe the meaning of that event. In other words, a per￾son writing or talking about a past traumatic event can try to better understand that 
event, search for some positive meaning in the event (the positive re-appraisal process 
discussed in the A Closer Look). Both processes—relief from inhibition and reinterpreta￾tion of the event—may be occurring, and so both explanations may be correct. Indeed, 
Pennebaker (2003b) has speculated that this combination may be the basic ingredient 
that underlies most forms of successful talking therapy.
In summary, research on disclosure suggests that keeping traumatic events and 
the feelings about those events to ourselves can be stressful. Expressing our emotions 
in words can, in fact, produce some stress-reducing effects. Moreover, it appears that it 
does not matter how we put our feelings into words—whether we talk to a trusted friend 
or relative, go to a caring psychotherapist, go to confession at our church or have a talk 
with our minister or rabbi, have a discussion with our husband or wife, or write it in a 
diary. One study, designed to test how little disclosure is necessary to still achieve health 
benefits, found that two minutes of writing on two consecutive days produced measur￾able health benefits assessed four to six weeks later (Burton & King, 2008). Whatever 
form it takes, the disclosure of traumatic events, and our personal reactions to them, is 
much better for our health than keeping it all to ourselves.
Type A Personality and Cardiovascular Disease
Cardiovascular disease is the number one cause of death the United States today 
(https://www.cdc.gov/heartdisease/facts.htm, though in 2022 COVID-19 was a very 
close second to heart disease as the most frequent cause of death). Health professionals 
have been searching for the factors that put people at risk for this cardiovascular disease. 
Known risk factors for developing cardiovascular disease include high blood pressure, 
obesity, smoking, family history of heart disease, inactive lifestyle, and high cholesterol. 
In the 1970s, physicians began to consider a new risk factor, a specific personality trait. 
As mentioned in Chapter 13, this grew out of the observation by some physicians that 
the patients who had heart attacks often behaved differently, and seemed to have dif￾ferent personalities, compared with other patients. Heart attack patients 
Try keeping a record of your health every day for two weeks. Record each day whether you have 
a stomachache, a headache, muscle aches, a sore throat, or a runny nose. After this baseline 
period of recording your health, start keeping a diary each day for two weeks, writing down and 
describing the stresses and challenges you experience each day and reflecting on how these make 
you feel. Pay attention to any difficulties, stress, or even embarrassing or trying moments. When 
the two weeks are over, stop keeping the diary and begin recording your daily health again. Now 
compare your health reports before the writing phase with your health reports after the writing 
phase. Do you see any improvement? While this is not a true experiment (you are both the sub￾ject and the experimenter, which is not done in true experiments), you can nevertheless get a feel 
for how research on this topic is done, and you might see a change in your health for the better as 
a function of keeping a diary of your personal reactions to challenges and stressors.
Exercise
Final PDF to printer578 PART SIX The Adjustment Domain
lar31869_ch18_552-583.indd 578 10/25/22 07:33 AM
The vast majority of the research on per￾sonality and health focuses on negative 
emotions and how they contribute to stress 
and illness. However, in recent years, some 
researchers have taken an interest in the 
positive emotions and health and cop￾ing (for a review, see Tedeschi, Park, & 
Calhoun, 1998). The general hypothesis is 
that positive emotions and positive apprais￾als may lead to a lowered impact of stress 
on health (Lyubomirsky, 2001).
Several decades ago, Lazarus, 
Kanner, and Folkman (1980) speculated 
that positive emotions played three impor￾tant roles in the stress process: (1) They may 
sustain coping efforts; (2) they may provide 
a break from stress; and (3) they may give 
people time and opportunity to restore 
depleted resources, including the restora￾tion of social relationships. However, few 
researchers followed up and gave serious 
attention to the role of positive emotions in 
health for almost two decades.
Psychologist Barbara Fredrickson 
led the way in the search for the effects 
of positive emotions on stress and illness. 
She has proposed a broaden and build 
model of positive emotions, suggesting 
that positive emotions broaden the scope 
of cognition, and build up resources for 
coping. The “broaden” part refers to posi￾tive emotions helping a person become 
more creative, which helps the person 
see more options in stressful situations, 
and try different ways of coping with the 
stress. The “build” part of her model sug￾gests that positive emotions help a per￾son build up reserves of energy, as well 
as build up social resources, especially in 
terms of building a social support network. 
She proposes that positive emotions are 
important in facilitating adaptive coping 
and adjustment to stress (Fredrickson, 
1998, 2000). In experimental research, 
Fredrickson and Levenson (1998) found 
appear uncontrollable. In the AIDS care￾giver study, many of the caregivers were 
caring for partners who were dying, a situ￾ation that could not be stopped, reversed, 
or even slowed at that time. However, even 
in these seemingly uncontrollable condi￾tions, some caregivers were able to focus 
on the little things they could control. For 
example, many created “to-do” lists of little 
things, such as getting prescriptions filled, 
administering medications, and changing 
their partners’ bed linens. Keeping such 
lists, and ticking off the completed items, 
gave the caregivers opportunities to feel 
effective and in control in an otherwise 
overwhelming situation. In short, focusing 
on solving problems, even little ones, can 
give a person a positive sense of control.
The third positive strategy is called 
creating positive events and is defined 
as creating a positive time-out from the 
stress. This can be done in a number of 
ways. Often, all it takes is to pause and 
reflect on something positive, such as 
a compliment received, a pleasing or 
humorous memory, or a sunset. Taking 
time out for a hug has even been shown to 
help people cope with interpersonal con￾flict (Murphy, Janicki-Deverts, & Cohen, 
2018). These sorts of time-outs can give 
a person a momentary respite from the 
chronic stress. Many of the AIDS caregiv￾ers took time to reminisce about pleasant 
times or to plan positive events with their 
partner, such as taking their partners for 
scenic drives or planning a time to tell 
jokes or funny stories each week. Some 
of the caregivers reported using humor 
to find some positive relief. It has long 
been thought that humor can be a tension 
reducer and that it may contribute to men￾tal and physical health (Menninger, 1963).
This focus on positive emotions and 
their role in health and illness is new. 
Many of the early findings are intriguing 
that the experience of positive emotions, 
following a period of acute stress, facili￾tated recovery from that stress. 
Psychologists Susan Folkman and Judith 
Moskowitz (2000)  built on Fredrickson’s 
ideas and have suggested several impor￾tant mechanisms in determining whether 
people will experience positive emotions 
during periods of severe stress. They 
give examples of these positive coping 
mechanisms from their study of gay men 
who were caregivers of partners dying 
from AIDS. Caring for someone with a 
chronic debilitating disease, such as AIDS 
or Alzheimer’s disease, often leads the 
caregiver to suffer physical costs from the 
stress and strain. From their study of such 
caregivers, Folkman and Moskowitz identi￾fied three coping mechanisms capable of 
generating positive emotion during stress.
The first positive emotion coping strat￾egy is called positive reappraisal, a cogni￾tive process whereby a person focuses 
on the good in what is happening or has 
happened. Forms of positive reappraisal 
(also called “benefit finding”) include see￾ing opportunities for personal growth and 
seeing how one’s own efforts can benefit 
other people. In their study of AIDS care￾givers, Folkman and Moskowitz found that 
the caregivers who were able to positively 
reappraise the situation (e.g., “This illness 
has brought my partner and I even closer” 
or “I will emerge from this challenge a 
stronger and better person”) showed bet￾ter adjustment both during caregiving and 
after the death of their partners (Moskowitz 
et al., 1996).
The second positive strategy identi￾fied by Folkman and colleagues (1997) is 
problem-focused coping, using thoughts 
and behaviors to manage or solve the 
underlying cause of the stress. Folkman 
and Moskowitz note how this strategy can 
be useful in situations that, on the surface, 
A Closer Look The Role of Positive Emotions 
in Coping with Stress
Final PDF to printerCHAPTER EIGHTEEN Stress, Coping, Adjustment, and Health 579
lar31869_ch18_552-583.indd 579 10/25/22 07:33 AM
more competitive and aggressive, more active and energetic in their actions and speech, 
and more ambitious and driven about their careers and other interests (Friedman & 
Rosenman, 1974). They called this collection of behaviors the Type A personality.
Before examining some of the research findings on Type A, let us look at a few 
misconceptions. Although researchers often refer to Type A and Type B persons, most 
psychologists think of it as a dimension, not as a categorical typology. As noted in 
Chapter 4, few personality variables are truly categorical, whereby people fall into dis￾tinct categories. Blood type is an example of a truly categorical variable. However, very 
few, if any, personality traits are categorical. Instead, most are dimensional, ranging from 
one extreme to the other, with most people falling somewhere around the middle (i.e., 
follow a normal bell curve). It is distributed normally, as in Figure 18.4(a), not as a cat￾egory variable, which would look like Figure 18.4(b). Psychologists frequently describe 
normally distributed traits by reference to one end (e.g., Type A). A recent study by 
Wilmot and colleagues (2019) presents strong empirical data that conforms more to a 
dimension than a true categorical distinction.
Another misconception is that Type A is a single trait; in actuality, Type A is a 
syndrome of several traits. More specifically, it is a collection of three subtraits, which 
together make up the Type A dimension. One of these three subtraits is competitive 
achievement motivation. Type A persons like to work hard and achieve goals. They like 
recognition, power, and the defeat of obstacles. And they feel that they are at their best 
when competing with others. A person who shows up to a charity bike-a-thon ready 
for the Tour de France bicycle race is exhibiting competitive achievement motivation. 
Time urgency is the second subtrait of the Type A dimension. Type A persons hate wast￾ing time. They are always in a hurry and feel under pressure to get the most done in the 
least amount of time. Often, they do two or more things at once, called multi-tasking, 
such as eating while reading a book. They also hate waiting in line. The third subtrait of 
Type A is hostility. When blocked from attaining one of their goals, which is the defini￾tion of frustration, Type A persons become frustrated and may react aggressively. They 
get frustrated easily, and this frustration may propel them to act out their irritation. If 
the frustrating object is an unresponsive vending machine, for example, they might swear 
and punch or kick the machine. If the frustrating object is another person, they might 
behave in an unfriendly, malicious, or even hurtful manner. People who are known to 
have a “hot temper” usually have this hostility subtrait of this Type A dimension.
Early studies of the Type A personality, mainly conducted by cardiac physicians, 
found that it was an independent risk factor for developing cardiovascular disease. An inde￾pendent risk factor operates independently from other known risk factors, such as being 
overweight or smoking. Thus, for example, it is not true that Type A persons just smoke 
more and that their smoking causes the heart disease. Instead, the Type A personality is 
independent of smoking, and someone who is Type A and
but also raise new questions for research. 
For example, do different kinds of posi￾tive emotions—such as excitement, 
happiness, or contentment—play differ￾ent roles in the stress process? Are the 
positive emotions most helpful in cop￾ing with particular kinds of stress? And, 
finally, of particular interest to personality 
to positive emotion coping styles? Can 
psychologists develop brief and targeted 
interventions to increase positive affect 
for persons experiencing chronic life 
stress? Preliminary studies suggest that 
positive affect interventions are feasible 
and may be effective at helping people 
cope with stress (Moskowitz, 2011).
psychologists are questions about differ￾ences among people in the ability to gen￾erate positive emotions while coping with 
stress (Affleck & Tennen, 1996). Who are 
the people who can generate humor, for 
example, during periods of coping? Are 
specific personality traits, such as extra￾version or optimism, uniquely related 
Final PDF to printer580 PART SIX The Adjustment Domain
lar31869_ch18_552-583.indd 580 10/25/22 07:33 AM
heart disease than someone who just smokes or who is just Type A. 
In fact, one study found that the Type A personality was a better 
predictor of heart disease than the person’s history of smoking or the 
person’s cholesterol level (Jenkins, Zyzanski, & Rosenman, 1976).
Physicians conducted most of the early studies of Type A 
personality, and to measure this personality variable, they devel￾oped a structured interview to assess the Type A pattern. Standard 
questions were asked, and the interviewer noted the participants’ 
answers and how they reacted to the questions. For example, did 
they frequently interrupt the interviewer or put words in the inter￾viewer’s mouth? Did they fidget during the interview? Did they 
make frequent and vigorous gestures with their hands and heads? 
Did they disagree or argue with the interviewer? In one part of the 
interview, the interviewer tries to aggravate the participants by . . . 
talking . . . . very . . . . . . slowly. Type A people are especially aggra￾vated when other people talk slowly, and they interrupt, talk out of 
turn, or finish sentences for people in order to speed them up.
As research on Type A personality gained momentum 
in the 1980s, researchers tried to devise a more efficient mea￾sure. Interviews are slow; they can measure only one person at 
a time, and it takes one interviewer to measure each participant. 
In short, interviewing is a relatively expensive and time-consuming 
way to measure any personality trait. Questionnaires are much 
cheaper because they are generally faster, they can be given to whole 
groups of participants, and can be administered online and scored 
automatically. Thus, researchers in this area put some effort into 
developing a questionnaire measure for Type A personality. One of 
the most widely used questionnaire measures of Type A personality 
is the Jenkins Activity Survey. It contains questions that tap into each 
of the three components of the Type A syndrome—for example, “My 
work improves as the deadline approaches,” “I have been told that I 
eat too fast,” and “I enjoy a good competition.”
Early researchers using the structured interview often found 
a relationship between Type A personality and risk for heart attack, cardiovascular dis￾ease, and cardiac complications. Later research, mostly using the Jenkins questionnaire, 
quite often failed to replicate this finding. This puzzled researchers for several years. Some 
psychologists began to take a close look at the research, searching for a reason why some 
studies found a relationship but others didn’t. A pattern quickly emerged; studies using the 
questionnaire measure were less likely to find a relationship between Type A and heart 
disease than the studies using the structured interview (Suls & Wan, 1989; Suls, Wan, & 
Costa, 1996). Researchers have concluded that the questionnaire measure taps into, or 
weights differently, the different subtraits of Type A, compared to the structured interview 
measures. Apparently, the structured interview gets more at the lethal component of Type 
A, and so finds an association with heart disease. But which subtrait of the Type A dimen￾sion is the most toxic, the part that is most related to heart disease?
Hostility: The Lethal Component of the Type A Behavior Pattern
When the interview measures of Type A were developed by physicians, they tended 
to emphasize the assessment of hostility and aggressiveness. For example, it assessed 
Figure 18.4
Type A and Type B are not really types at all and do 
not refer to categories of people. Rather, Type A refers 
to a normal distribution of people, anchored at one 
end by persons showing a lot of Type A behavior and 
at the other end by persons showing very little (a). 
Most people, however, are in the middle, or average, 
range. This is the case with almost all personality 
traits. A true type, or categorical variable, would be 
distributed as in (b), with most people at one end or 
the other and very few people in the middle. This is 
not the case with the Type A personality. 
(a)
(b)
Type B Average Type A
Type B
Few people
Many people
Few people
Many people
Average Type A
Frequency
distribution
Frequency
distribution
Final PDF to printerCHAPTER EIGHTEEN Stress, Coping, Adjustment, and Health 581
lar31869_ch18_552-583.indd 581 10/25/22 07:33 AM
whether the participants got frustrated when the phy￾sicians talked slowly, whether they swore during the 
interview, or whether they actively gestured or pounded 
the table. Later, when questionnaire measures were 
developed, more of an emphasis was placed on the time 
urgency and achievement components. For example, 
did the participants say they were always in a hurry, that 
they worked better as deadlines got closer, or that they 
achieved more than their peers? Researchers began test￾ing the hypothesis that it was the specific component of 
hostility, rather than the time urgency or achievement 
motivation components, that was the specific risk factor 
for heart disease.
What do researchers mean by the hostility com￾ponent? People high in hostility are not necessarily vio￾lent or outwardly aggressive. They are not necessarily 
even assertive or demanding of others. Instead, such 
people are likely to react disagreeably to disappoint￾ments, frustrations, and inconveniences. Frustration can be understood as the subjec￾tive feeling that comes when you are blocked from attaining a goal. A hostile person 
reacts to such frustrations, even minor ones, with anger and disagreeable behavior. 
Hostile people are easily irritated, even by small frustrations, such as when they mis￾place their car keys or have to wait in a long line at store. In such situations, hostile 
people can become visibly agitated and upset, sometimes becoming rude, uncoopera￾tive, or belligerent.
Several studies have now established that hostility is a strong predictor of car￾diovascular disease (see meta-analysis by Chida & Steptoe, 2009). In fact, psycholo￾gists Dembrowski and Costa (1987) have demonstrated that even a questionnaire 
measure of the specific trait of hostility is a better predictor of artery disease than 
are questionnaire measures of general Type A. Studies have also shown that hostil￾ity is associated with systemic inflammation, as indicated by elevated blood leuko￾cyte counts, also known as white blood cell counts (Surtees et al., 2003). Hostility 
has also been associated with elevated biomarkers of systemic inflammation such as 
C-reactive protein (Toussaint et al., 2018). Physicians have long known that chronic 
inflammation is related to risk for coronary disease risk, and so have recommended 
that persons at risk take an aspirin a day to reduce systemic inflammation. Chronic 
inflammation may be one biological pathway whereby hostility is linked to the health 
endpoint of cardiovascular disease.
The good news about this research is that not everything about being Type A is bad 
for the heart and arteries. Given that hostility is apparently the lethal component, can we 
envision a “healthy” version of the Type A personality? It seems okay to strive for success 
and achievement, but don’t be hostile and aggressive along the way. It’s okay to strive to 
attain goals and even to be a workaholic, but don’t get frustrated by the inevitable setbacks 
that come with everyday life. It’s okay to be in a hurry and strive to get as much done as 
possible, but don’t get frustrated and angry when you can’t accomplish everything. It’s 
okay to enjoy a competition as long as it’s friendly, not hostile. Sometimes it may be good 
therapy to get into the longest and slowest line at the store and just try to relax, take it easy, 
and not feel hostile or angry in such situations (Wright, 1988). Davidson and colleagues 
(2007) estimate that brief hostility-management therapy can result in cost savings for hos￾pitals by reducing hospitalization expenses associated with coronary care.
Frequently doing two activities at once is a component of the Type A 
personality. Time urgency, however, is not the part of Type A that is most 
associated with heart disease.
Vera Petrunina/Shutterstock
Final PDF to printer582 PART SIX The Adjustment Domain
lar31869_ch18_552-583.indd 582 10/25/22 07:33 AM
How the Arteries Are Damaged by Hostile 
Type A Behavior
How does the hostility component produce its toxic effects 
on the heart and arteries? Strong feelings of hostility and 
aggression produce the fight-or-flight response. Part of this 
response is an increase in blood pressure, accompanied by 
a constriction of the arteries. The person’s body suddenly 
pumps more blood, but through arteries that are now nar￾rower. This can produce wear and tear on the inside lining 
of the arteries, causing microscopic tears and abrasions. 
These tears then become sites at which cholesterol and 
fat can become attached. In addition to this mechanical 
wear and tear on the artery walls, stress hormones released 
into the blood during the fight-or-flight response may lead 
to artery damage and subsequent buildup of fatty deposits 
on the artery walls. As these fat molecules build up on the 
inside of the arteries, the arteries become progressively narrower. This narrowing is perma￾nent and is called arteriosclerosis, or hardening or blocking of the arteries. When the arteries 
that feed the heart muscle itself become blocked, the subsequent shortage of blood to the 
heart is called a heart attack. Common surgeries to treat heart attacks involve unblocking 
(with stents or mechanical clearing) or replacing the blocked arteries to the heart muscle. 
In summary, research on the Type A personality has taken some interesting twists 
and turns. It all began with a couple of cardiologists noticing certain personality differ￾ences between heart attack patients compared to other medical patients. This led them to 
define the Type A personality as consisting of three subtraits: competitive achievement 
motivation, time urgency, and hostility. After several decades of research, psychologists 
have found that trait hostility is the most toxic component of the Type A personality, 
and most research on cardiovascular disease and personality today is focusing on this 
specific trait. Understanding how hostility develops and is maintained, how exactly it 
damages the arteries, how it is evoked by specific situations, and how it can be overcome 
or managed are all important questions for future personality researchers.
A cross-section of a human coronary artery, the artery that feeds the 
heart muscle itself, showing extreme arteriosclerosis. Here the artery 
diameter has narrowed dramatically by the buildup of plaque on the 
inside artery wall.
MedicalRF.com
SUMMARY AND EVALUATION
This chapter focused on the part of personality psychology related to physical well-being 
and health. We began with several models of the personality and illness link. We also 
introduced the important concepts of moderation and mediation, which describe spe￾cific ways that personality can produce its effects on health and illness. We used recent 
research on COVID-19 to illustrate each of the five models of the personality–health con￾nection. We then examined the concept of stress as the subjective reaction to events that 
the person sees as threatening to their goals and as being beyond their control. The stress 
response comes in three distinct varieties: acute, chronic, and traumatic. Traumatic stress 
can evolve into a disorder, called posttraumatic stress disorder, in which the person experi￾ences nightmares or flashbacks, difficulties sleeping and other somatic problems, avoid￾ance of similar events, and feelings of being detached from reality or estranged from other 
people. It is important to realize that stress is not “out there” in the environment but in 
Final PDF to printerCHAPTER EIGHTEEN Stress, Coping, Adjustment, and Health 583
lar31869_ch18_552-583.indd 583 10/25/22 07:33 AM
how one reacts to an event. Two kinds of appraisals of events are important to understand￾ing stress. Primary appraisal concerns an evaluation of how threatening the event is with 
respect to a person’s goals and desires. Secondary appraisal concerns an evaluation of the 
person’s own resources for coping with the threatening event, do they have what it takes 
to control the event. Both of these appraisals are important for understanding how events 
come to elicit the stress response. Researchers are also exploring the role of positive emo￾tions in coping with chronic stress, which we summarized in A Closer Look.
Much of the work on personality and stress began with a focus on major life 
events, such as losing a loved one or getting fired from one’s job. Although serious, such 
events are relatively rare. More insidious are daily hassles, the relatively minor but com￾mon frustrations and disappointments of daily life. Stress researchers have also focused 
on these daily hassles in terms of their impact on health.
Personality psychologists have been concerned with understanding why some 
people appear more resistant to stress than others. That is, some people appear to take 
frustration and disappointment more in stride and do not suffer the deleterious health 
consequences often associated with chronic stress. One personality dimension in this 
regard is optimism, which has a wealth of findings associating it with stress resistance, 
good health, competent immune functioning, and longer life expectancy. Psychologists 
are developing training programs to teach people to become more optimistic. Some 
related personality processes associated with generally better health prognosis are emo￾tional expressivity and personal disclosure.
This chapter also focused on a specific disease, cardiovascular disease, which is 
the most common death in the United States. We covered the history of the search for 
a personality dimension that might be a risk factor for developing heart disease. Type A 
personality provides an interesting example of progressive research, in which findings 
are gradually refined until the field becomes more and more certain about a specific 
effect. In the case of Type A personality, most researchers now agree that the hostility 
component is most associated with the tendency to develop heart disease. Fortunately, 
people can be competitive workaholics and strive to do more and more in less and less 
time, just as long as they do not have the hostile part of the Type A syndrome.
health psychology 556
stress 556
interactional model 556
transactional model 558
moderator 558
health behavior model 559
mediation 559
predisposition model 560
illness behavior model 561
healthy neuroticism 562
stressors 564
general adaptation syndrome (GAS) 
565
alarm stage 565
resistance stage 565
KEY TERMS
disclosure 575
broaden and build model of positive 
emotions 578
positive reappraisal 578
problem-focused coping 578
creating positive events 578
competitive achievement 
motivation 579
time urgency 580
hostility 580
frustration 580
independent risk factor 580
leukocyte 582
arteriosclerosis 582
exhaustion stage 565
major life events 565
daily hassles 567
acute stress 568
traumatic stress 568
posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) 
568
chronic stress 568
additive effects 569
primary appraisal 569
secondary appraisal 569
attributional optimism 571
dispositional optimism 572
epidemiological studies 572
emotional inhibition 573
Final PDF to printerlar31869_ch19_584-623.indd 584 12/02/22 04:57 PM
584
Athanasia Nomikou/Shutterstock
19
Disorders of 
Personality
The Building Blocks of Personality Disorders
The Concept of Disorder
What Is Abnormal?
The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
What Is a Personality Disorder?
Specific Personality Disorders
The Erratic Cluster: Ways of Being Unpredictable, Violent, or Emotional
The Eccentric Cluster: Ways of Being Different
The Anxious Cluster: Ways of Being Nervous, Fearful, or Distressed
Prevalence of Personality Disorders
Gender Differences in Personality Disorders
Dimensional Model of Personality Disorders
Causes of Personality Disorders
SUMMARY AND EVALUATION
KEY TERMS
Final PDF to printer19
lar31869_ch19_584-623.indd 585 10/26/22 01:03 PM
THE ADJUSTMENT DOMAIN
K ody Scott grew up in South Central Los Angeles. When he was 
12 years old, he was initiated into the Eight-Tray Gangster CRIPS street gang. He shot 
his first victim the night he was initiated. He went on to earn the nickname “Monster” 
for particularly violent beatings he inflicted on people. For example, as a young teen￾ager, Kody severely beat a victim who resisted when Kody attempted to mug him. 
Kody beat him far beyond what was necessary to make the victim submit. In fact, 
Kody seemed to enjoy hurting other people.
Kody’s biological father was a professional football player with whom his mother 
had had a brief affair. His mother had an unstable and violent marriage with Kody’s 
stepfather, who left the home for good when Kody was 6 years old. Kody’s mother 
raised her six children in a two-bedroom house in a gang-infested ghetto neighborhood.
Kody was an intelligent and muscular boy who enjoyed thrills and excitement. He 
might have gone on to become a professional athlete, or he could have succeeded in 
a career involving adventure and plenty of action, such as a policeman, a soldier, or 
maybe even an astronaut. Instead, Kody grew up to become Monster, a violent indi￾vidual who feared nothing, had no feelings of guilt or remorse, and craved excitement.
Kody Scott was one of the most notorious gangbangers in South Central L.A. For 
the early part of his life, he aspired to be the most feared member of the CRIPS. He 
was sent to prison in 1993 to serve a seven-year sentence for shooting a drug dealer in 
the kneecap. In prison, he was classed as a maximum security threat and was housed 
away from other inmates. He wrote his autobiography, Monster: The Autobiography of 
an L.A. Gang Member, while in solitary confinement in San Quentin prison, under 
Kody Scott, a.k.a. 
“Monster,” in Pelican 
Bay prison in 1993, 
photographed 
through Plexiglas. His 
autobiography, which he 
wrote while in solitary 
confinement, provides a 
real-life account of the mind 
of a person with antisocial 
personality disorder.
Susan Ragan/AP Images
Final PDF to printer586 PART SIX The Adjustment Domaine
lar31869_ch19_584-623.indd 586 10/26/22 01:03 PM
the name Sanyika Shakur (1994), which is also the name of his Facebook page. Even 
after attaining celebrity status for his book, which sold over 100,000 copies, Kody Scott 
could not escape the gang culture or his own violent personality. In 2007, already wanted 
by the L.A. police for parole violations, Scott was arrested again, this time for beating an 
acquaintance, taking the keys to his Jaguar, and leaving the scene in the victim’s vehicle. 
In May 2008, Kody Scott, age 44, was convicted of carjacking and robbery and sen￾tenced to another six years in Pelican Bay State Prison. He was released two years early, 
in 2012, and in 2013 published a book of essays. In 2017, however, Kody Scott was again 
convicted of assault and served his sentence at Centinela State Prison in California. In 
2021 he was released from prison. He had plans to write another book and start a series 
of podcasts. It looked like he might be turning his life around. However, on June 6, 2021, 
his body was found at a homeless encampment in Oceanside, California. His death was 
due to natural causes, most likely a stroke. He was 57 years old.
We open this chapter with the case of Kody Scott because he illustrates one of the 
personality disorders we will cover in this chapter: the antisocial personality disorder. 
We chose him as a case example because his book “Monster” is a fascinating first-person 
account into the mind and inner workings of a sociopath. His book confirms that he 
meets all the criteria for a diagnosis of antisocial personality disorder as well as psychop￾athy. We have been following him for almost 25 years, throughout all the editions of this 
textbook. While we hoped he could change and turn his life around, his repeated convic￾tions for violent acts throughout his life illustrates that, for most people with a personal￾ity disorder, change is difficult and unlikely. While Kody Scott had several opportunities 
to leave his life of violence (a best-selling book, work as a motivational speaker, involve￾ment with social justice causes) he could not resist the pull of his antisocial disorder.
The Building Blocks of Personality Disorders
Many of the topics we covered in previous chapters come together to describe and 
understand the various personality disorders. The symptoms of personality disorders can 
be seen as maladaptive variations within several of the domains we have covered. These 
include traits, emotions, cognitions, motives, interpersonal behavior, and self-concepts. 
The 10 personality disorders we present in this chapter are built on the foundation of 
these broader concepts, and so we briefly discuss the relevance of each to this chapter.
Traits of personality describe consistencies in behavior, thought, or action and rep￾resent meaningful differences among persons, as we described in Chapter 4. Personality 
disorders can be thought of as maladaptive variations or combinations of normal person￾ality traits. Widiger and colleagues describe how extremes on either end of specific trait 
dimensions can be associated with personality disorders (Trull & Widiger, 2013; Widiger, 
Costa, & McCrae, 2002a; Widiger et al., 2002b). For example, a person with extremely 
low levels of trust and extremely high levels of hostility might be disposed to paranoid per￾sonality disorder. A person very low on sociability but very high on anxiety might be prone 
to avoidant personality disorder. A person with the opposite combination—extremely high 
on sociability and low on anxiety—might be prone to histrionic personality disorder. Thus, 
the concept of traits, such as the five-factor model of traits, can be especially useful for 
describing personality disorders (Trull & McCrae, 2002).
Motivation is another basic building block of personality that is important to under￾standing personality disorders. Motives describe what people want and why they behave in 
particular ways. In the intrapsychic domain, Chapters 9 to 11, we discussed several different 
kinds of motives, ranging from the sexual and aggressive basis of Freud’s theory to modern 
Final PDF to printerCHAPTER NINETEEN Disorders of Personality 587
lar31869_ch19_584-623.indd 587 10/26/22 01:03 PM
research on the need for intimacy, achievement, and power. A common theme in several 
personality disorders concerns maladaptive variations on these common motives, especially 
need for power and need for intimacy. One important variation concerns an extreme lack 
of motivation for intimacy, which is seen in certain personality disorders. Another theme is 
an exaggerated need for power over others, which, at an extremely high level, can result in 
a maladaptive personality disorder. Other motives can be involved in personality disorders, 
such as the extreme need to be superior and receive the praise of others that is found in 
narcissistic personality disorder. The person with obsessive-compulsive personality disorder 
might be seen as having an extremely high motivation for order and detail.
Cognition also provides a building block for understanding personality disorders. 
As covered in Chapter 12, cognition consists of mental activity involved in perceiving, 
interpreting, and planning. These processes can become distorted in personality disor￾ders. Some disorders involve routine and consistent misinterpretations of the intentions 
of others. Personality disorders typically involve an impairment of social judgment, such 
as when the paranoid thinks others are out to get her or when the histrionic person 
thinks others actually like being with him. The person with a borderline personality dis￾order may misinterpret innocent comments as signs of abandonment or criticism or 
rejection. In various ways, each of the personality disorders involves some distortion in 
the perception of other persons and altered social cognition.
Emotion is another area that is important to understanding personality disorders. 
We discussed normal range individual differences in emotion in Chapter 13. With sev￾eral personality disorders there is extreme variation in experienced emotions. Some dis￾orders involve extreme volatility in emotions (e.g., borderline), whereas other disorders 
involve extremes of specific emotions, such as anxiety (avoidant personality disorder), 
fear (paranoid personality disorder), or rage (narcissistic personality disorder). Most 
personality disorders have an emotional core.
The self-concept is another building block in personality disorders. As described 
in Chapter 14, the self-concept is the person’s own collection of self-knowledge—one’s 
understanding of oneself. With most personality disorders, there is some distortion in 
the self-concept. Most of us are able to build and maintain a stable and realistic image 
of ourselves; we know our own opinions, we know what we value, and we know what we 
want out of life. With many of the disorders, there is a lack of stability in the self-concept, 
such that the person may feel she or he has no “core” or has trouble making decisions or 
needs constant reassurance from others. Self-esteem is also an important part of the self, 
and some disorders are associated with extremely high (e.g., narcissism) or extremely 
low (e.g., dependent personality disorder) levels of self-esteem. The self provides an 
important perspective on understanding personality disorders.
Social relationships are frequently disturbed or maladaptive in personality dis￾orders. Thus, the material we covered in the social and cultural domain, Chapters 15 
through 17, is important for understanding and describing personality disorders. For 
example, a mutually satisfying sexually intimate relationship with another person 
involves knowing when sexual behavior is appropriate and expected and when it is inap￾propriate and unwanted. Problems with intimacy, either staying too distant from others 
or becoming too intimate too quickly, are frequent features of several personality disor￾ders. An important element of interpersonal skill involves empathy, knowing how the 
other person is feeling. Most personality disorders involve a deficit in empathy, such that 
the disordered person either misinterprets others or does not care about the feelings of 
others. Many disorders involve what might be called poor social skills, such as the schiz￾oid person who stares at people without starting a conversation, or the histrionic person 
who behaves in an inappropriately flirtatious manner.
Final PDF to printer588 PART SIX The Adjustment Domaine
lar31869_ch19_584-623.indd 588 10/26/22 01:03 PM
Biology can also form a building block for personality disorders. The material 
covered in the biological domain, Chapters 6 through 8, is thus relevant. Some of the 
personality disorders have been found to have a genetic component. Others have been 
studied via physiological components, such as examining the brain structure or function 
of antisocial persons. There has even been an evolutionary theory proposed to explain 
the existence of personality disorders (Millon, 2000a).
Most personality texts do not cover personality disorders. We feel, however, that 
knowing how normal personality works can inform our understanding of how personal￾ity can become broken and disordered. Plus, we believe that the concept of personality 
disorders really ties together all the different components and domains of personality. As 
such, it is a fitting topic with which to end this book because it applies much of what has 
come before to an understanding of how the human personality can become disordered.
The Concept of Disorder
Today, a psychological disorder is a pattern of behavior or experience that is distressing 
and painful to the person or those around him or her; that leads to disability or impair￾ment in important life domains (e.g., problems with work, marriage, or relationship dif￾ficulties); and that is associated with increased risk for further suffering, loss of function, 
death, or confinement (American Psychiatric Association, 2013). The idea that some￾thing can go wrong with a person’s personality has a long history. Some of the earliest 
writings in medical psychiatry included classifications and descriptions of personality 
and mental disorders (e.g., Kraeplin, 1913; Kretschmer, 1925). A very early concept 
derived by French psychiatrist Philippe Pinel was manie sans delire, or madness without 
loss of reason. This was applied to individuals who demonstrated disordered behavior 
and emotions but who did not lose contact with reality (Morey, 1997). A related concept, 
popular in the early 1900s, was called “moral insanity,” to emphasize that the person did 
not suffer any impairment of intellect, but rather was impaired in terms of feelings, tem￾perament, or habits. An influential psychiatrist named Kurt Schneider (1958) proposed 
the term psychopathic personality to refer to behavior patterns that caused the person and 
the community to suffer. Schneider also emphasized statistical rarity, along with behav￾iors that have an adverse impact on the person and the community in which that person 
lives. This definition highlights the notion that all forms of personality disorder involve 
impaired social relationships; other people suffer as much as or more than the person 
with the disorder.
A disorder is a conceptual entity that, although abstract, is nevertheless useful. It 
helps guide thinking about the distinction between what is normal and what is abnor￾mal, or pathological. The field of abnormal psychology is the study of the various mental 
disorders, including thought disorders, emotional disorders, and personality disorders. 
In this chapter, we focus on disorders of personality and the ways in which they affect 
functioning.
What Is Abnormal?
There are many ways to define abnormal. One simple definition is that whatever is differ￾ent from normal is abnormal. This is a statistical definition in the sense that researchers 
can statistically determine how often something occurs and, if it is rare, call it abnormal. 
In this sense, color blindness or polydactyly (having more than 10 fingers) is considered 
abnormal. Another definition of abnormal is a social definition based on what society 
Final PDF to printerCHAPTER NINETEEN Disorders of Personality 589
lar31869_ch19_584-623.indd 589 10/26/22 01:03 PM
tolerates (Shoben, 1957). If we define the term in this sense, behaviors that society 
deems unacceptable are labeled as abnormal. In this sense, incest and child abuse are 
both considered abnormal. Both the statistical and the social definitions of abnormal￾ity suffer from changing times and changing social or cultural norms (Millon, 2000a, 
2000b). Behaviors deemed offensive or socially inappropriate 20 years ago might be 
acceptable today. For example, 20 or 30 years ago, homosexuality was considered to be 
both rare and socially unacceptable, a form of abnormal behavior or even a mental ill￾ness. Today, homosexuality is not considered abnormal in itself (American Psychiatric 
Association, 2013) and is protected under civil rights laws in the United States. Thus, the 
statistical and social definitions of abnormality are always somewhat tentative because 
society changes.
Psychologists have consequently looked to other ways of identifying what is abnor￾mal in behavior and experience. They have looked within persons, inquiring about sub￾jective feelings, such as anxiety, depression, dissatisfaction, and feelings of loneliness. 
They have looked at how people think and experience themselves and their worlds. 
Psychologists have found that some people have disorganized thoughts, disruptive per￾ceptions, or unusual beliefs and attitudes that do not match their circumstances. They 
have identified ways in which people fail to get along with one another and ways people 
have trouble living in the community. They have analyzed patterns of behavior that rep￾resent ineffective efforts at coping or that put people at higher risk for other problems, 
behaviors that harm more than help. From a psychological perspective, any of these may 
be considered abnormal.
Combining all these approaches to abnormality (statistical, social, and psycho￾logical), psychologists and psychiatrists have developed the field of psychopathology,
or the study of mental disorders. The diagnosis of mental disorders is both a scientific 
discipline and an important part of the clinical work of many psychiatrists and psycholo￾gists. Knowing how to define and how to identify a disorder is the first step in devising 
treatment or in designing research on that disorder.
The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
The most widely used system for diagnosing mental disorders, including personality dis￾orders, is the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, published by the 
American Psychiatric Association (APA) and currently in its fifth edition (called the 
DSM-5). The DSM-5 sets the standards for diagnoses, and its system is the one taught by 
almost all psychiatry and psychology doctoral training programs, the system that is used 
in medical record-keeping, and the diagnostic system most insurance companies require 
for reimbursement purposes.
Because society standards change over time and because new research accu￾mulates, the DSM undergoes revision from time to time. The current version—the 
DSM-5—was published in 2013. The APA began working on this revision a decade earlier 
and appointed various working groups of experts to assist in each broad area of mental 
disorders. The personality disorders working group consisted of active personality psy￾chologists and psychiatrists. During the decade they worked on the revision for DSM-5,
the personality disorders working group considered several broad changes to personality 
disorders that might be incorporated into DSM-5.
One change the personality disorders working group considered was to make diag￾nosis less categorical and more dimensional. The previous edition—DSM-IV—was based 
on a categorical view of personality disorders; a person either had the disorder or did 
not have the disorder. The categorical view held that there is a qualitative break between 
Final PDF to printer590 PART SIX The Adjustment Domaine
lar31869_ch19_584-623.indd 590 10/26/22 01:03 PM
people who are, for example, antisocial and people who are not. Categorical thinking 
was applied to all the personality disorders, viewing disorders as distinct and qualita￾tively different from normal extremes on each personality trait.
In contrast to this categorical view is the dimensional view of personality disorders. In 
the dimensional view, each disorder is seen as a continuum, ranging from normality at one 
end to severe disability or disturbance at the other. According to this view, people with and 
without the disorder differ in degree only. For example, part of being antisocial is disregard￾ing the rights of others. But there are degrees to which this disregard can manifest in behav￾ior. For example, some people might simply be aloof and unconcerned about the feelings 
of others. Farther out on this dimension, a person might lack a desire to help others, being 
both aloof and uncaring. Even farther out on this dimension is the person who actively 
hurts or takes advantage of others. And finally, at the greatest extreme of disregard for 
others is someone like “Monster,” the person introduced at the beginning of this chapter.
The dimensional view implies that certain patterns of behavior, in various 
amounts, comprise each of the personality disorders. It is only at the extreme ends of the 
dimensions that the person becomes a problem to themselves and to others. Moreover, 
extremes of different personality traits can combine in ways that create unique forms 
of disorder. For example, someone who has an obsessive compulsive personality would 
score extremely high on the five-factor traits of Conscientiousness and Neuroticism. 
Modern personality theorists (e.g., Costa & Widiger, 1994; Widiger, 2000) argued that 
the dimensional view provides a more reliable and meaningful way to describe the per￾sonality disorders.
In 2012, a year before the DSM-5 was published, the well-regarded Journal of 
Personality released a special issue dedicated to the latest research on whether a dimen￾sional view of personality disorders was scientifically valid and clinically useful. Every 
paper in this special issue provided strong support for the dimensional view. For exam￾ple, Mullins-Sweatt and Lengel (2012) discussed the clinical utility of a five-factor model 
view on disorders and concluded that such an approach was more efficient to use, easier 
to communicate, and provided more specific guidance as to treatment. Similarly, Miller 
(2012) pointed out the many advantages of using the five-factor model to characterize 
degrees of personality disorders, as opposed to simply concluding that a person does or 
does not have a disorder. In various ways, and using a variety of data and argument, every 
article published in this 2012 special issue pointed to the advantages of applying a dimen￾sional view to personality disorders (see especially Trull, 2012; Widiger & Costa, 2012).
As the DSM-5 revision work progressed, the personality disorders working group 
considered this and several other changes to the way personality disorders are defined 
and diagnosed. The top personality psychologists and psychiatrists were involved, many 
meetings were held, data were collected, public input was solicited and obtained, and 
many proposals were written and considered. However, to make a long story very short, 
the final outcome of the revision effort was the decision, on the part of the APA Board 
of Trustees, to make no changes to the way personality disorders are defined from the 
fourth to the fifth edition. The DSM-5 therefore maintains the categorical model of 
personality disorders and retains the same criteria for 10 specific personality disorders 
that were described in the previous edition. The DSM-5 does contain a section—Section 
III—that describes which issues need further research. It is in this section—essentially 
an appendix to the DSM-5—where the dimensional model of personality disorders is 
detailed and a call for further research on the utility of viewing personality disorders as 
dimensions rather than distinct categories is issued. Later in this chapter, cover the 10 
personality disorders that are included in the DSM-5, but first we consider the general 
notion of “disorder.”
Final PDF to printerCHAPTER NINETEEN Disorders of Personality 591
lar31869_ch19_584-623.indd 591 10/26/22 01:03 PM
What Is a Personality Disorder?
A personality disorder is an enduring pattern of experience and behavior that differs 
greatly from the expectations of the individual’s culture (DSM-5). As discussed in 
Chapter 3, traits are patterns of experiencing, thinking about, and interacting with one￾self and the world. Traits are observed in a wide range of social and personal situations. 
For example, a person who is high on Conscientiousness is hardworking and persever￾ing. If a trait becomes maladaptive and inflexible and causes significant impairment or 
distress, then it is considered to be a personality disorder. For example, if someone were 
so conscientious that he or she checked the locks on the door 10 times each night and 
checked every appliance in the house 5 times before leaving in the morning, then we 
might consider the possibility of a disorder.
The essential features of a personality disorder, according to the DSM-5, are pre￾sented in Table 19.1. A personality disorder is usually manifest in more than one of the 
following areas: in how people think, in how they feel, in how they get along with others, 
or in their ability to control their own behavior. The pattern is rigid and is displayed 
across a variety of situations, leading to distress or problems in important areas in life, 
such as at work or in relationships. For example, an overly conscientious man might 
drive his wife crazy with his repeated checking the household appliances. The pattern 
of behavior that defines a particular personality disorder typically has a long history in 
the person’s life and can often be traced back to manifestations in adolescence or even 
childhood. To be classed as a personality disorder, the pattern must not result from drug 
abuse, medication, or a medical condition, such as head trauma.
Culture, Age, and Gender: The Effect of Context
A person’s social, cultural, and ethnic background also must be taken into account when￾ever there is a question about personality disorders. Immigrants, for example, often have 
problems fitting into a new culture. Persons who originate in a different culture often 
have customs, habits, expressions, and values that are at odds with, or that create social 
problems within, a new culture. For example, the U.S. culture is very individualistic, and 
Table 19.1 General Criteria for Personality Disorders
1. A personality disorder is an enduring pattern of inner experience and behavior that deviates 
markedly from the expectations of the individual’s culture. This pattern is manifest in two or 
more of the following areas:
• Cognition (i.e., ways of perceiving and interpreting the self, others, and events)
• Affectivity (i.e., the range, intensity, and appropriateness of emotional responses)
• Interpersonal functioning
• Impulse control
2. The enduring pattern is inflexible and pervasive across a broad range of personal and social 
situations.
3. The enduring pattern leads to clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, 
or other important areas of functioning.
4. The pattern is stable and of long duration, and its onset can be traced back to adolescence or 
early adulthood.
5. The enduring pattern is not better accounted for as a manifestation or consequence of another 
mental disorder.
6. The enduring pattern is not due to the direct physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of 
abuse, a medication) or a general medical condition, such as head trauma.
Source: American Psychiatric Association, 2013.
Final PDF to printer592 PART SIX The Adjustment Domaine
lar31869_ch19_584-623.indd 592 10/26/22 01:03 PM
it values and rewards individuals for standing out from the crowd. To societies that are 
more collectivistic and value fitting in with the group, efforts to stand out from the crowd 
might be interpreted as self-centered and individualistic in an unwanted sense. Indeed, 
the U.S. culture has been called a narcissistic culture; therefore, efforts to draw attention 
to the self are not socially abnormal in this society.
Before judging that a behavior is a symptom of a personality disorder, we must 
first become familiar with a person’s cultural background, especially if it is different from 
the majority culture. A study of Third World immigrants to Norway (Sam, 1994) found 
that many exhibited adjustment problems that might have appeared to be personality 
disorders. Many young male immigrants, for example, exhibited antisocial behaviors. 
These behaviors tended to diminish as the immigrants acculturated to their new social 
environment.
Age also is relevant to judgments about personality disorder. Adolescents, for 
example, often go through periods of instability that may include identity crises (see 
Chapter 14), a symptom that is often associated with certain personality disorders. Most 
adolescents experiment with various identities yet do not have a personality disorder. 
For this reason, the American Psychiatric Association (1994) cautions against diagnos￾ing personality disorders in persons under age 18. Also, adults who undergo severe loss, 
such as the death of a spouse or the loss of a job, sometimes undergo periods of instabil￾ity or impulsive behavior that may look like a personality disorder. For example, a per￾son who loses his job might do some impulsive act, like take off on a cross-country trip 
without a firm destination, which normally he would never do. So we need to consider 
the context when evaluating a behavior as a sign of disorder. A person’s age and life cir￾cumstances must be considered to be sure that the person is not simply going through a 
phase or reacting to some extreme life event.
Finally, gender is another context in which to frame our understanding of per￾sonality disorders. Certain disorders, such as the antisocial personality disorder, are 
diagnosed much more frequently in men than women. Other personality disorders are 
diagnosed more frequently in women than men. These gender differences may reflect 
underlying gender differences in how people cope. For example, in a study of more 
than 2,000 individuals, Huselid and Cooper (1994) found that males exhibit externaliz￾ing problems, such as fighting and vandalism, whereas females tend to exhibit relatively 
more internalizing problems, such as depression and self-harm. Similar findings were 
obtained by Kavanagh and Hops (1994). These differences in how men and women 
cope with problems most likely contribute to gender differences in the behaviors asso￾ciated with the personality disorders. Psychologists need to be careful not to look for 
evidence of certain kinds of disorders just because of a person’s gender.
In this chapter, you will read about specific personality disorders. For each, try to think of 
examples of how culture, gender, or age might influence whether a person’s behavior is seen 
as evidence of a disorder. For example, are persons from low socioeconomic groups likely to 
be seen by others as having particular disorders? How does this correspond to the topic of 
stereotypes and prejudice? How does this fit with the use of “profiles” by police and other law 
enforcement agencies?
Exercise
Final PDF to printerCHAPTER NINETEEN Disorders of Personality 593
lar31869_ch19_584-623.indd 593 10/26/22 01:03 PM
Specific Personality Disorders
The following sections describe specific personality disorders, including the criteria for 
diagnosing someone with each disorder. The 10 disorders naturally cluster in three cate￾gories, and we use a descriptive title for each cluster to capture the characteristics shared 
across the disorders in each cluster. We also focus this material by giving some real-life 
examples of each personality disorder.
The Erratic Cluster: Ways of Being Unpredictable, 
Violent, or Emotional
Persons who are diagnosed with disorders belonging to the erratic group tend to have 
trouble with emotional control and to have specific difficulties getting along with others. 
People with disorders in this cluster are unpredictable, their behavior is not guided by 
social norms or expectations that most people bring to social interaction. This group con￾sists of four disorders: antisocial, borderline, histrionic, and narcissistic personality disorders.
Antisocial Personality Disorder
The antisocial person shows a general disregard for others and cares very little about the 
rights, feelings, or happiness of other people. The antisocial person has also been referred 
to as a sociopath or a psychopath (Zuckerman, 1991a), though we cover the distinction 
between sociopath and psychopath below. Adults with antisocial disorder typically had 
a childhood that was fraught with behavioral problems. Such early childhood behavioral 
problems generally take the form of violating the rights of others (such as minor thefts) 
and breaking age-related social norms (such as smoking at an early age or fighting with 
other children). Other common childhood behavioral problems include behaving aggres￾sively or cruelly toward animals, threatening and intimidating younger children, stealing or 
destroying property, lying, and breaking rules. Behavioral problems in childhood are often 
first noticed in school, but such children also come to the attention of the police and tru￾ant officers. Sometimes even very young children, during an argument with another child, 
use a weapon that can cause serious physical harm, such as a baseball bat or a knife.
Once childhood behavioral problems become an established pattern, the possi￾bility of an antisocial personality disorder becomes more likely (American Psychiatric 
Association, 1994). As a child with behavioral problems grows up, the problems tend 
to worsen as the child develops physical strength, cognitive power, and sexual maturity. 
Minor problems, such as lying, arguing, and petty theft, evolve into more serious ones, 
such as breaking and entering, assault, and grand theft. Severe aggression, such as rape 
or cruelty to a mugging victim, might also follow. Some children with these behavioral 
problems rapidly develop to a level of dangerous and even sadistic behavior. For exam￾ple, we sometimes hear in the news about preteen children (usually male) who murder 
other children in cold blood and without remorse. In one study, children who grew into 
severe delinquency as teenagers were already identifiable by kindergarten teachers’ rat￾ings of impulsiveness and antisocial behavior at age 5 (Tremblay et al., 1994). Studies of 
children ages 6–13 also find that some children exhibit a syndrome of antisocial behav￾iors, including impulsivity, behavioral problems, callous social attitudes, and lack of feel￾ings for others (Frick et al., 1994).
If a child exhibits no signs of conduct problems by age 16, it is unlikely that he 
or she will develop an antisocial personality as an adult. Moreover, even among chil￾dren with conduct problems, the majority simply grow out of them by early adulthood 
Final PDF to printer594 PART SIX The Adjustment Domaine
lar31869_ch19_584-623.indd 594 10/26/22 01:03 PM
(American Psychiatric Association, 1994). However, a percentage of children with con￾duct problems go on to develop full-blown antisocial personality disorder in adulthood. 
Children with earlier-onset conduct problems (e.g., by age 6 or 7) are much more likely 
to grow into an antisocial personality disorder as an adult than are children who dis￾played a few conduct problems in high school (Laub & Lauritsen, 1994).
The antisocial adult continues with the same sorts of conduct problems started 
in childhood, but on a much grander scale. The term antisocial implies that the person 
has a lack of concern for social norms. Antisocial persons have very little respect for laws 
and may repeatedly engage in acts that are grounds for arrest, such as harassing others, 
fighting, destroying property, and stealing. “Cold-hearted” is a good description of their 
interactions with others. Antisocial persons may manipulate and deceive others to gain 
rewards or pleasure (e.g., money, power, social advantage, or sex).
Repeated lying is another feature of the antisocial personality. The pattern of lying 
starts early in life with minor deceptions and grows into a pattern of deceitfulness. Lying 
becomes a common part of social interaction for the antisocial personality. Some make 
a living conning others out of money. “Getting over” on people, especially authorities, 
through deception may even be pleasurable to the antisocial person.
Another common characteristic of the antisocial personality is impulsivity, which 
is manifest as a failure to plan ahead. The antisocial person might start a chain of 
behavior without a clear plan or sequence in mind: For example, the person might enter 
a gas station and decide on the spot to rob the attendant, even though he or she has not 
planned a getaway. Prisoners with antisocial personalities often complain that their lack 
of planning led to their arrest, and they are often more remorseful about getting caught 
than about committing the crime.
A more common form of impulsivity is to simply make everyday decisions without 
much forethought or without considering consequences. For example, an antisocial man 
might leave his wife and baby for several days without calling to say where he is. This 
often results in trouble in relationships and in employment settings. Generally, antiso￾cial persons change jobs often, change relationships often, and move often. This is one 
reason why the question “How long have you lived at this address” appears on many job 
applications.
Antisocial persons also tend to be easily irritated and to respond to even minor 
frustrations with aggression. Antisocial persons tend to be assaultive, particularly to those 
around them, such as spouses or children. Fights and physical attacks are common. 
Application
Kenneth Lay was the founder and former CEO of Enron, a large energy company that went 
bankrupt in 2001, creating $60 billion in investment losses and wiping out $2.1 billion in the 
pension plan of the Enron employees. Lay was charged with 11 counts of conspiracy, insider 
trading, securities fraud, and lying to auditors. Prosecutors charged that he knew his company 
was in deep trouble and was aware of fraudulent accounting practices and that he hid losses 
from investors until the company collapsed. During this time, Lay began dumping his own 
stock before Enron collapsed, even while encouraging others, including company workers, to 
buy more. During his trial, Lay claimed he never knew of the accounting fraud. He portrayed 
himself as a trusting man who was let down by corrupt staff, especially former finance chief 
Final PDF to printerCHAPTER NINETEEN Disorders of Personality 595
lar31869_ch19_584-623.indd 595 10/26/22 01:03 PM
Recklessness is another characteristic, with antisocial persons showing little regard for 
their own safety and that of others. Driving while intoxicated or speeding is indicative of 
recklessness, as is having unprotected sex with multiple partners.
Irresponsibility is another key feature of the antisocial personality. Antisocial per￾sons get bored easily and find monotony or routine to be unpleasant. An antisocial per￾son may, for example, decide on the spur of the moment to abandon his or her job, with 
no plan for getting another right away. Repeated unexplained absences from work are 
a common sign of the antisocial character. Irresponsibility in financial matters is also 
common, with the antisocial person often running up unpaid debts, or borrowing money 
from one person to pay a debt owed to another, staying one step ahead of the bill collec￾tor. Such a person may squander the money needed to feed his or her children or gamble 
away the money needed to buy his kids new clothes and shoes.
Lack of remorse and guilt feelings and indifference to the suffering of others are the 
hallmarks of the antisocial mind. The antisocial person can be ruthless, without normal 
levels of human compassion, charity, or social concern. See A Closer Look for current 
theories and research on how people become antisocial and the psychological forces 
that keep them that way. Table 19.2 summarizes the key characteristics of the antisocial 
personality disorder. Also included are typical beliefs or thoughts that someone with this 
disorder might have.
Andrew Fastow, who served over five years in prison for 
his role in the Enron collapse. At times during his trial, 
Lay became combative and hostile, insisting that oth￾ers were responsible. At other times he claimed that the 
collapse of Enron was the most painful experience of 
his life, even going so far as to say the experience was 
equivalent to the death of a loved one. In 2006, he was 
convicted and might have served up to 45 years in jail 
if he had not died suddenly of a heart attack before sen￾tencing took place.
Kenneth Lay exhibited several characteristics 
consistent with the antisocial personality and psychopa￾thy. He was a charming person who could convince 
others to buy his company’s stock, even though he was 
secretly selling his own shares. Self-assured and confi￾dent, he used his personal charisma to dupe others out 
of billions of dollars. He repeatedly tried to shift the 
blame for his company’s collapse onto others. When 
faced with evidence of his responsibility, he was easily 
irritated on the witness stand. He expressed no remorse 
for destroying the life savings of thousands of Enron 
workers. And finally, he tried to play the “poor me” card 
to garner sympathy from the jury by pointing out all the 
pain and suffering he had endured.
Ron Edmonds/AP Images
Final PDF to printer596 PART SIX The Adjustment Domaine
lar31869_ch19_584-623.indd 596 10/26/22 01:03 PM
Here we compare two theories about the 
origins of psychopathy: a biological expla￾nation and a social learning explanation. 
Many psychologists have argued that psy￾chopathy is caused by a biological deficit or 
abnormality (e.g., Cleckley, 1988; Fowles, 
1980; Gray, 1987a, 1987b). Research 
along these lines has focused on the idea 
that psychopaths are deficient in their abil￾ity to experience fear (Lykken, 1982). Being 
deficient in fear would help explain why 
psychopaths do not learn as well from pun￾ishment as from reward (Newman, 1987). 
Psychopaths may pursue a career in crime 
and lawlessness because, in part, they 
are simply not afraid of the punishment 
because they are insensitive to fear.
The theory of Jeffrey Gray (1990) has 
been influential on a number of research￾ers looking for a biological explanation of 
psychopathy. Recall from Chapter 7 that 
Gray proposed a system in the brain that 
is responsible for inhibiting behavior. The 
behavioral inhibition system (BIS) acts as a 
psychological brake, responsible for inter￾rupting ongoing behavior when cues of 
punishment are present. According to Gray, 
the BIS is the part of the brain that is espe￾cially sensitive to signals of punishment 
coming from the environment. People who 
sense that a punishment is likely to occur 
typically stop what they are doing and look 
for ways to avoid the punishment.
Researchers are beginning to exam￾ine the emotional lives of psychopaths, 
especially with respect to their experience 
of fear and its related emotion—anxiety. 
Psychologist Chris Patrick and his col￾leagues are following an interesting line of 
research. One study examined a group of 
prisoners, all of whom were convicted of 
sexual offenses (Patrick, Bradley, & Lang, 
1993). Even in this group of severe offend￾ers, some individuals were more psycho￾pathic than others, as measured by Hare’s 
Psychopathy Checklist (Hare, Hart, & Harpur, 
1991). Patrick and his colleagues had the 
not differ in terms of their self-reports of 
fear and anxiety—all reported more of these 
emotions in response to the fear images 
than in response to neutral images such as 
walking across the yard. Large differences, 
however, were found in their physiological
responses to the fear images. The less anti￾social prisoners were more aroused by the 
fear imagery than were the antisocial sub￾jects. In other words, the antisocial prisoners 
displayed a deficit in fear responding when 
their fear responses were assessed with 
physiological measures, which are less sus￾ceptible to being faked than the self-report 
measures. These results are consistent with 
the idea that the psychopath is deficient in 
the ability to experience fear and anxiety. 
In a review of the literature, Patrick (1994) 
argued that the core problem with psycho￾paths is a deficit in the fear response. As a 
consequence, the psychopath is not moti￾vated to interrupt his or her ongoing behav￾ior to avoid punishment or other unpleasant 
consequences.
Other researchers have deempha￾sized biological explanations for psychopa￾thy and argue instead that the emotional 
unresponsiveness of the psychopath is 
learned (Levenson, Kiehl, & Fitzpatrick, 
1995). The observed fearlessness of the 
prisoners look at unpleasant pictures (e.g., 
injured people, threatening animals) to try to 
bring about feelings of anxiety. While they 
were looking at the pictures, the prisoners 
were startled by random bursts of a loud 
noise. People typically blink their eyes when 
they are startled by a loud noise. Moreover, 
a person who is in an anxious or fearful state 
when startled will blink faster and harder 
than a person in a normal emotional state. 
This means that eye-blink speed when 
startled may be an objective physiological 
measure of how anxious or fearful a per￾son is feeling. That is, the eye-blink startle 
method may allow researchers to measure 
how anxious persons are without actually 
having to ask them.
The results from this study of prison￾ers showed that the more psychopathic 
offenders displayed less of the eye-blink 
effect when startled, indicating that they 
were experiencing relatively less anxiety 
to the same unpleasant pictures. However, 
when asked about how distressing the pic￾tures were, both the psychopaths and the 
nonpsychopaths reported that the pictures 
were distressing. Overall, these results sug￾gest that psychopaths will say that they are 
feeling anxious or distressed, yet direct 
nervous system measures suggest that 
they are actually experi￾encing less anxiety than 
nonpsychopaths in the 
same situation.
In another study, 
Patrick, Cuthbert, and 
Lang (1994) again used 
a group of prisoners 
who differed from each 
other in terms of anti￾social behaviors. This 
time, the prisoners were 
asked to imagine fearful 
scenes such as having 
to undergo an opera￾tion. The low- and high￾antisocial prisoners did 
A Closer Look Theories of the Psychopathic Mind
This is the kind of image used in the study by psychologist Chris 
Patrick, who found that psychopaths did not exhibit the normal 
fear response to such threatening stimuli.
Thomas Duerrenberger/Shutterstock.com
Final PDF to printerCHAPTER NINETEEN Disorders of Personality 597
lar31869_ch19_584-623.indd 597 10/26/22 01:03 PM
A concept related to antisocial personality disorder is psychopathy, a term coined 
in the middle of the twentieth century (Cleckley, 1941) to describe people who are super￾ficially charming and intelligent, but are also deceitful; unable to feel remorse or care for 
others; impulsive; and lacking in shame, guilt, and fear. Psychopathy and antisocial per￾sonality are similar notions, but there are important distinctions so they should not be 
used interchangeably. The antisocial personality designation places emphasis on observable 
behaviors, such as chronic lying, repeated criminal behavior, and conflicts with authority. 
The psychopathy designation places emphasis on more subjective characteristics, such as 
the incapacity to feel guilt, a high degree of superficial charm, or having 
psychopath may be the result of a desen￾sitization process. If a person is repeatedly 
exposed to violence or other antisocial 
behavior (such as childhood abuse or gang 
activities), he or she may become desen￾sitized to such behaviors. That is, the cal￾lous disregard for others—the hallmark of 
psychopathy—may result from desensitiza￾tion, a well-known form of learning. A pro￾spective study of more than 400 victims of 
childhood abuse found that, compared with 
a control group, the abused children had 
significantly higher rates of psychopathy 
20 years later (Luntz & Widom, 1994). By 
being victims of abuse, the argument goes, 
people learn that abusing others is a means 
of achieving power and control and obtain￾ing what they want. Many psychopaths are 
motivated by interpersonal dominance and 
appear to enjoy having power over others. 
that the best therapy for the psychopath is to 
grow older while in prison. The incidence of 
antisocial behaviors dramatically decreases 
in persons age 40 and older (DSM-5). It has 
been widely known that, among criminals, 
those who make it to their fourth decade 
are much less likely to be rearrested for 
antisocial acts than are those in their twen￾ties or thirties. For example, a study of 809 
male prison inmates aged 16–69 found that 
deviant social behaviors, impulsivity, and 
antisocial acts were much less prevalent in 
the older prisoners (Harpur & Hare, 1994). 
There was less of an age decline in antiso￾cial beliefs and callous social attitudes. Thus, 
although older psychopaths still don’t care 
much about other people or their feelings, 
they nevertheless are less likely to impul￾sively act out these beliefs or to engage in 
actual antisocial behaviors.
This can sometimes be seen in board meet￾ings of corporations, in police stations, in 
politics, and wherever else one person has 
an opportunity to bully others. The point of 
this research, however, is that people who 
grow up to be bullies were themselves fre￾quently bullied and abused as children.
Levenson (1992) has used results 
such as these to argue for a social learn￾ing model of psychopathy. He holds that 
at some point people decide to engage 
in antisocial behavior because they have 
learned from observing others that this is 
one way to get what they want.
Psychologists are currently debating 
the relative merits of viewing psychopathy as 
biological or as learned. Whatever the cause 
of psychopathy, the frequency and sever￾ity of antisocial behaviors almost always 
decrease as a person ages. It has been said 
Table 19.2 Characteristics of Persons with Antisocial 
Personality Disorder
Fails to conform to social norms, for example, breaks the law
Repeated lying or conning others for pleasure or profit
Impulsivity
Irritable and aggressive, for example, frequent fights
Reckless disregard for safety of others and self
Irresponsible, for example, truant from school, cannot hold a job
Lack of remorse, for example, indifferent to pain of others, rationalizes having hurt or mistreated others
Typical Thoughts Associated with the Antisocial Personality
“Laws don’t apply to me.”
“I’ll say whatever it takes to get what I want.”
“I think I’ll skip work today and go to the racetrack.”
“That guy I beat up deserved every bit of it.”
“She had it coming, she asked for it . . .”
“I’m the one you should feel sorry for here . . .”
Final PDF to printer598 PART SIX The Adjustment Domaine
lar31869_ch19_584-623.indd 598 10/26/22 01:03 PM
attitudes. The distinction can get blurred because the DSM-5 also includes a subjective 
criterion, “lack of remorse,” in its definition of antisocial personality disorder. However, 
the concept of psychopathy is mainly a research construct, pioneered by the scientific 
work of psychologist Robert Hare. He developed a measure of the construct called the 
Psychopathy Checklist, which contains two major clusters of symptoms. One cluster 
refers to emotional and interpersonal traits, such as incapacity for fear, superficial charm, 
lack of empathy and care for others, being egocentric, and having callous social attitudes 
and shallow emotions. The second cluster assesses the social deviance associated with 
an antisocial lifestyle, such as displaying poor self-control, possessing a high need for 
excitement, and having early and chronic behavioral problems. The major distinction 
between psychopathy and antisocial personality disorder mainly lies in the first cluster of 
emotional and interpersonal traits that define psychopathy. Consequently, most extreme 
psychopaths would meet criteria for a diagnosis of antisocial personality disorder, but 
not all people with antisocial personality disorder are psychopaths (if they don’t have 
the subjective characteristics of superficial charm, egocentricity, lack of empathy, and 
shallow emotions).
One interesting concept is the notion of the “successful” psychopath (Smith, 
Watts, & Lilienfeld, 2014). Certainly there are some features of psychopathy that may be 
adaptive in some circumstances, such as interpersonal charm and charisma, fearlessness, 
and a willingness to take risks. Some psychologists have speculated that these features of 
psychopathy may facilitate success in certain professions, such as financial consulting, 
politics, and contact sports. A recent review of research on the “successful” psychopath 
(Lillenfeld, Watts, & Smith, 2015) concludes that it is a controversial and elusive con￾cept, fought with alternative interpretations, and requires additional research to deter￾mine if a positive manifestation of psychopathy can exist without the truly maladaptive 
and negative elements.
For the next week, read through at least one online news source each day. Look for stories on 
persons who might be examples of the antisocial personality disorder, for example, white-collar 
criminals or con artists. Look for background information on the person, and bring it in for 
discussion. Look for evidence from the person’s life and actual behaviors that match up with 
the characteristics of the antisocial personality listed in Table 19.2.
Exercise
When evaluating the antisocial personality profile, it is good to keep in mind 
the social and environmental contexts in which some people live. Psychologists have 
expressed concern that the antisocial label is sometimes applied to people who live in 
settings where socially undesirable behaviors (such as fighting) are viewed as protec￾tive. For example, in a high-crime area, some of the antisocial attitudes may safeguard 
people against being victimized. Thus, the term antisocial should be used only when the 
behavior pattern is indicative of dysfunction and is not simply a response to the immedi￾ate social context. The economic and social contexts must be taken into account when 
deciding whether undesirable behaviors are signs of dysfunction.
Final PDF to printerCHAPTER NINETEEN Disorders of Personality 599
lar31869_ch19_584-623.indd 599 10/26/22 01:03 PM
Borderline Personality Disorder
The lives of persons with borderline personality disorder are marked by instability. Their rela￾tionships are unstable, their behavior is unstable, their emotions are unstable, and even their 
images of themselves are unstable. Let’s consider each of these, starting with relationships.
The relationships of borderline individuals tend to be intense, emotional, and 
potentially violent. They suffer from strong fears of abandonment. If such persons sense 
separation or rejection in an important relationship, profound changes in their self￾image and in how they behave may result, such as becoming very angry at other people. 
Borderline individuals show marked difficulties in their relationships. Sometimes, in their 
efforts to manipulate people back into their relationships, they engage in self-mutilating 
behavior (burning or cutting themselves) or suicide attempts. A study of 84 hospital 
patients with a diagnosis of borderline personality disorder found that 72 percent had a 
The thriller Fatal Attraction stars Michael 
Douglas and Glenn Close. Douglas plays Dan, 
a rich and powerful lawyer who is happily 
married to a beautiful woman. The couple 
has a wonderful daughter whom they both 
love. At a business dinner, Dan meets Glenn 
Close’s character, Alex, who is an attractive, 
intriguing, single woman who catches Dan’s 
eye. Dan is with his wife, however, and noth￾ing happens with Alex at the dinner. A few 
weeks later, Dan is on a business trip with￾out his wife one weekend and he sees Alex 
again. They flirt for some time, and there is 
definitely some attraction between them. 
Dan does not know at this point, but it is a 
fatal attraction. During the weekend, Dan 
and Alex have sex several times, and they 
appear to enjoy each other very much. In one 
scene, Dan and Alex are together in bed after 
sex, and the camera turns to a pot of coffee 
that is boiling on the stove. This is a subtle 
visual hint of the dangerous consequences 
about to boil over from their adulterous affair.
After this weekend infidelity, Dan 
returns to his wife. Alex is upset that Dan just 
seems to want to forget about her. She feels 
she loves him, yet she hates him at the same 
time for leaving her. Over the next several 
weeks, she calls Dan at his home and even 
stalks him on several occasions. Finally, she 
confronts Dan and tells him she is pregnant 
with his baby and feels he should leave his 
solely in terms of their relationships 
(“I’m nothing without you”), they fear los￾ing those relationships. However, because 
of their strong and unpredictable emotions, 
their relationships tend to be unstable and 
unsatisfying and end prematurely. They 
bring about that which they fear the most.
wife for her. Dan, however, tells Alex to get 
an abortion and to forget about his ever 
leaving his wife. He makes it clear that he 
does not want to be a part of her life. She 
then alternates between extreme love and 
extreme hate for him. She wants Dan for 
herself and decides that the best way to get 
him is to destroy what is standing between 
her and Dan, which is his wife and child. The 
movie becomes a thriller when Alex begins 
terrorizing Dan and his family.
When this movie first came out, many 
reviewers referred to the Alex character 
incorrectly as a “psycho lover” or as “a nut￾case.” In fact, Alex exhibits several of the 
symptoms of borderline personality disor￾der. She exhibits the incredible relationship 
difficulties that are the hallmark of the bor￾derline style. She vacillates between want￾ing to have and then wanting to destroy 
those she loves. She balances on the edge 
between destroying herself and harming 
those who are causing her emotional trou￾bles. She becomes progressively angrier 
during the movie, and we don’t know if 
she will direct this anger toward harming 
herself or harming others. All of this is trig￾gered by feelings of abandonment, another 
hallmark of the borderline character. Being 
left out, left behind, or abandoned is a 
critical issue for persons with this disor￾der. Because they often define themselves 
A Closer Look Fatal Attraction
In the movie Fatal Attraction, Glenn Close 
plays the character Alex, who has many of the 
characteristics of borderline personality disorder.
Entertainment Pictures/Alamy Stock Photo
Final PDF to printer600 PART SIX The Adjustment Domaine
lar31869_ch19_584-623.indd 600 10/26/22 01:03 PM
history of attempting suicide (Soloff et al., 1994). In fact, among this sample, the average 
borderline patient had attempted suicide on at least three occasions. The relationships 
of borderline individuals are unpredictable and intense. They may go from idealizing the 
other to ridiculing and demeaning the other. They are prone to sudden shifts in their 
views of relationships, behaving at one time in a caring manner and at another time in a 
punishing and cruel manner. They may go from being submissive to being an avenger for 
past wrongs. The movie Fatal Attraction contains a character with several features of the 
borderline personality disorder. See A Closer Look for a discussion of how this personal￾ity disorder was portrayed in classic Oscar-nominated movie.
Borderline persons also have shifting views of themselves. Their values and goals are 
shallow and change easily. They base their views more on their impressions than facts. 
At times, they view themselves as evil or worthless. Self-harming acts can occur and may 
increase when others threaten to leave them.
Strong emotions are common in the borderline personality, including panic, anger, 
and despair. Mostly, these emotions are caused by interpersonal events, especially 
abandonment or neglect. When stressed by others, the borderline person may lash out, 
becoming bitter, sarcastic, or aggressive. Periods of anger are often followed by shame, 
guilt, and feelings of being evil or bad. Borderline persons often complain of feeling 
empty. They also have a way of undermining their own best efforts, such as dropping out 
of a training program just before finishing or destroying a caring relationship just when 
it starts going smoothly.
The borderline person is characterized by huge vacillations in both mood and 
feelings about the self and others. People with borderline personality disorder can shift 
quickly from loving another to hating that same person. They are very demanding on 
their friends, relatives, lovers, and therapists. They are also manipulative toward others. 
For example, they may threaten suicide or self-harm when they don’t get their way.
Table 19.3 lists the major features of the borderline personality disorder, along 
with examples of beliefs and thoughts that persons with this disorder might commonly 
have. Persons with borderline personality disorder, compared with those without, have 
a higher incidence rate of childhood physical or sexual abuse, neglect, or early parental 
loss. Many researchers believe that borderline disorder is caused by an early loss of love 
from parents, as may happen in parental death, abuse, severe neglect, or parental drug or 
alcohol abuse (Millon et al., 2000). Early loss may affect a child’s capacity to form rela￾tionships. Children in such circumstances may come to believe that others are not to be 
trusted. Although borderline persons have difficulty with relationships, they may form 
Table 19.3 Characteristics of Borderline Personality Disorder
Instability of relationships, emotions, and self-image
Fears of abandonment
Aggressiveness
Proneness to self-harm
Strong emotions
Typical Thoughts or Beliefs Associated with the Borderline Personality
“I’m nothing without you.”
“I’ll just die if you leave me.”
“If you go, I’ll kill myself.”
“I hate you, I hate you, I HATE YOU.”
“I love you so much that I’ll do anything or be anything for you.”
“I feel empty inside, as if I don’t know who I am.”
Final PDF to printerCHAPTER NINETEEN Disorders of Personality 601
lar31869_ch19_584-623.indd 601 10/26/22 01:03 PM
stable relationships if given enough structure and support. If they find someone who is 
accepting and stable, who is very patient, who meets their expectations for commitment, 
and who is caring and can diffuse trouble as it occurs, then the borderline personality 
may experience a satisfying relationship.
Histrionic Personality Disorder
The hallmarks of histrionic personality disorder are excessive attention seeking and emo￾tionality. Often such persons are overly dramatic, preferring to be the center of attention. 
They may appear charming or even flirtatious. Many are inappropriately seductive or 
provocative. And this sexually provocative behavior is often undirected and occurs in 
inappropriate settings, such as in professional settings. Physical appearance is often very 
important to histrionic persons, and they work to impress others and obtain compli￾ments. Often, however, they overdo it and appear gaudy or flamboyant.
Histrionic individuals express their opinions frequently and dramatically. However, 
their opinions are shallow and easily changed. Such a person may say, for example, that 
some political official is a great and wonderful leader yet be unable to give any supporting 
details or actual examples of leadership. Such persons prefer impressions to facts (Millon et 
al., 2000). They may display strong emotions in public, sometimes to the embarrassment of 
friends and family. They may throw temper tantrums over minor frustrations or cry uncon￾trollably over a sentimental little event. To others, their emotions appear insincere and exag￾gerated, to the point of being theatrical. Histrionic individuals are also highly suggestible.
Because their opinions are not based on facts, they can be easily swayed.
Socially, histrionic individuals are difficult to get along with, due to their excessive 
need for attention. They may become upset when not given the attention they think they 
deserve. Such persons may use self-harm to get attention from others. Their seductive￾ness may put them at risk for sexual victimization. They crave excitement and novelty, 
and although they may start relationships or projects with great enthusiasm, their inter￾est does not last long. They may forgo long-term gains to make way for short-term excite￾ment. Histrionic traits are maladaptive because they can interfere with relationships and 
cause difficulties with the individual being a productive member of society.
Table 19.4 lists the main characteristics of histrionic personality disorder, along 
with typical beliefs and thoughts persons with this disorder might have. As with all per￾sonality disorder criteria, the standards for appropriate behavior differ greatly among 
cultures, generations, and genders. Therefore, we must ask whether specific behaviors 
Table 19.4 Characteristics of Histrionic Personality Disorder
Excessive attention seeking
Excessive and strong emotions
Sexual provocativeness
Shallow opinions
Suggestibility
Strong need for attention
Typical Thoughts or Beliefs Associated with the Histrionic Personality
“Hey, look at me!”
“I am happiest when I am the center of attention.”
“Boredom is the pits.”
“I usually go with my intuition; I don’t have to think things through.”
“I can amuse, impress, or entertain anyone, mainly because I am so interesting and exciting.”
“If I feel like doing something, I go ahead and do it.”
Final PDF to printer602 PART SIX The Adjustment Domaine
lar31869_ch19_584-623.indd 602 10/26/22 01:03 PM
cause social impairment or distress before concluding that those behaviors are signs or 
symptoms of histrionic personality disorder. For example, behavior that is considered 
seductive in one culture may be viewed as acceptable behavior in another. A woman 
from the southern coast of Italy may appear flirtatious in the United States, when, in 
fact, in her culture people are much more friendly and at ease with each other, and 
teasing flirtation is a common form of interaction. Consider also the culture of gender. 
The expression of histrionic personality disorder may depend on gender stereotypes. A 
male with this personality may behave in a “hyper-macho” fashion and attempt to be 
the center of attention by boasting of his skills in seduction or how much influence and 
power he has in his workplace. A woman with the histrionic style may express it with 
hyperfemininity, seeking to be the center of attention by adorning herself with bright, 
sexy clothes and wearing lots of gaudy accessories and makeup.
Narcissistic Personality Disorder
The calling cards of narcissistic personality disorder are a strong need to be admired, a 
strong sense of self-importance, and a lack of insight into other people’s feelings. Narcissists 
see themselves in a very favorable light, inflating their accomplishments and undervalu￾ing the work of others. Narcissists daydream about prosperity, victory, influence, adora￾tion from others, and power. They routinely expect adulation from others, believing that 
homage is generally long overdue. They exhibit feelings of entitlement, believing that they 
should receive special privileges and respect, even though they have done nothing in 
particular to earn that special treatment.
A sense of superiority also pervades the narcissistic personality. They feel that they 
are special and should associate only with others who are similarly unique or gifted. 
Such a person may insist on having the best lawyer or attending the best university, view￾ing him- or herself as unique, different from, and better than everyone else.
Application
A case of histrionic personality disorder. Roxann was a student who also worked in the evenings 
as a dancer at an adult club. She would tell people that this was temporary and that she was 
different from the other women who worked there. She readily admitted, however, that the job 
met her two most important needs: money and attention, “two things I cannot live without.” 
Roxann decided to take some psychology courses for self-improvement. She typically showed 
up to classes dressed to kill and seemed out of place even among students her own age. Once 
she went to her professor’s office yet did not seem to have any direct questions to discuss. 
Instead, she seemed just to want to talk about herself and her extracurricular job. After this 
meeting, she was overheard telling other students that she was on a first-name basis with her 
professor and that he was actually her good friend. In class, she frequently behaved in ways that 
drew attention to herself, such as sighing loudly when the professor made a point, or blurting 
out answers to rhetorical questions. Toward the end of the course, Roxann quit going to class 
and missed the final exam. She e-mailed the professor, saying that she had been experiencing a 
debilitating condition and frequently had to lie down to avoid fainting. She said she had been to 
several doctors, but none were able to find any medical basis for her condition. The professor 
never heard from her again.
Final PDF to printerCHAPTER NINETEEN Disorders of Personality 603
lar31869_ch19_584-623.indd 603 10/26/22 01:03 PM
People with narcissistic disorder expect a lot from those around them. They must 
receive regular praise from others and devoted admiration from those close to them. 
Many narcissistic persons prefer as friends those who are socially weak or unpopular 
so that they will not compete with the narcissists for attention. The narcissistic paradox
is that, although narcissists appear to have high self-esteem, their grandiose self-esteem 
is actually quite fragile. That is, even though they appear self-confident and strong, they 
need constant admiration and recognition and praise from others. You might think 
that someone with truly high self-esteem would not have such an unreasonable need 
for praise and admiration from others. When narcissists show up at a party, they expect 
to be welcomed with great fanfare. When they go to a restaurant or store, they assume 
that waiters or clerks will rush to their attention. Narcissists thus depend on others to 
validate their self-importance.
To say that narcissists’ self-esteem is vulnerable does not mean that they are cover￾ing up low self-esteem, they have plenty of self-esteem. Rather, they are exquisitely sensi￾tive to criticism, they can fly into a rage when they don’t get the praise or recognition 
that they think they deserve. Their self-esteem is real; narcissists fully expect others to 
recognize how special, unique, and superior they are, even in the absence of any objec￾tive supportive evidence. Their vulnerability is exhibited as a thin-skinned, bristling kind 
of sensitivity, similar to childish temper tantrums and pouting.
Further making the narcissist socially difficult is an inability to recognize the needs or 
desires of others. In conversation, they tend to talk mostly about themselves—“I” this and 
“my” that. Narcissists use first-person pronouns (I, me, mine) more frequently in everyday 
conversation than does the average person (Raskin & Shaw, 1987). Psychologists Richard 
Robins and Oliver John (1997) found that persons scoring high on a narcissism ques￾tionnaire evaluate their performances much more positively than those performances are 
evaluated by others, demonstrating the self-enhancement component of narcissism.
A final social difficulty that creates problems for narcissists is the ease with 
which they become envious of others. When hearing of the success or accomplishment 
of acquaintances, narcissists may disparage that achievement. They may feel that they 
deserve the success more than the persons who worked to attain it. Narcissists may 
disdain others’ accomplishments, particularly in public. A veneer of snobbery may hide 
strong feelings of envy and rage over the successes of others.
Table 19.5 lists the main characteristics of the narcissistic personality disorder, 
along with examples of some typical beliefs and thoughts persons with this disorder 
might have. Narcissists sometimes reach positions of high achievement, due primarily 
to their self-confidence and ambition. Nevertheless, their interpersonal lives are usually 
fraught with the problems that come with feelings of entitlement, an excessive need for 
praise and recognition, and an impaired recognition of others’ needs. They have diffi￾culty maintaining intimate relationships.
Everyone knows someone who is narcissistic, maybe not to the point of a disorder, but nev￾ertheless with several of the characteristics. Think of the most narcissistic person you know. 
List five of his or her characteristics or behaviors that make you think that this person is a 
narcissist. How do the acts and characteristics you have listed fit with the symptoms of the 
narcissistic personality disorder?
Exercise
Final PDF to printer604 PART SIX The Adjustment Domaine
lar31869_ch19_584-623.indd 604 10/26/22 01:03 PM
The Eccentric Cluster: Ways of Being Different
A second cluster of personality disorders contains traits that make people ill at ease 
socially. Other people often see them as odd and unusual. Most of the oddness in these 
disorders has to do with how the person interacts with others. People with schizoid disor￾der have no interest in others; people with schizotypal disorder are extremely uncomfort￾able with others; and people with paranoid personality disorder are suspicious of others. 
Disorders in this cluster are associated with interpersonal problems, trouble relating to 
others. They can also impact job performance, or limit the kinds of work a person can do.
Schizoid and schizotypal personality disorders both share their root with the term 
“schizophrenia,” and both of these personality disorders are closely tied to the history 
of this diagnostic category. Schizophrenia literally means cutting the mind off (schism) 
from itself and from reality. Schizophrenia is a serious mental illness that involves hal￾lucinations, delusions, and perceptual aberrations. The personality disorders of schizoid 
and schizotypal exhibit some low-grade, non-psychotic symptoms of schizophrenia. For 
example, the schizotype is eccentric and is interested in odd and unusual beliefs, whereas 
the schizoid displays extreme social apathy. In the case of schizotypal disorders, persons 
are likely to possess the genotype that makes them vulnerable to schizophrenia. A large 
proportion of the family members of persons with schizophrenia exhibit odd and unusual 
behaviors that would contribute to a diagnosis of schizotypal personality disorder.
Schizoid Personality Disorder
The schizoid personality is split off (schism), or detached, from normal social relations.
The schizoid person simply appears to have no need or desire for intimate relationships 
or even friendships. Family life usually does not mean much to such people, and they 
do not obtain satisfaction from being part of a group. They have few or no close friends, 
and they would rather spend time by themselves than with others. They typically choose 
hobbies that can be done and appreciated alone, such as stamp collecting. They also typi￾cally choose solitary jobs, often with mechanical or abstract tasks, such as machinists 
or computer programmers. Usually, the schizoid personality experiences little pleasure
from bodily or sensory experiences, such as eating or having sex. The person’s emotional 
life is typically impoverished, and what emotions they might have are very low intensity.
At best, the schizoid person appears indifferent to others, neither bothered by criti￾Table 19.5 Characteristics of Narcissistic Personality Disorder
Need to be admired
Strong sense of self-importance
Lack of insight into other people’s feelings and needs
Sense of entitlement
Sense of superiority
Self-esteem that is strong but paradoxically fragile
Envy of others
Typical Thoughts or Beliefs Associated with the Narcissistic Personality
“I’m special and deserve special treatment.”
“The typical rules don’t apply to me.”
“If others don’t give me the praise and recognition I deserve, they should be punished.”
“Other people should do my bidding.”
“Who are you to criticize me?”
“I have every reason to expect that I will get the best that life has to offer.”
Final PDF to printerCHAPTER NINETEEN Disorders of Personality 605
lar31869_ch19_584-623.indd 605 10/26/22 01:03 PM
emotional life. Often, the schizoid person does not 
respond to social cues and so appears inept or socially 
clumsy. For example, such a person may walk into a 
room where there is another person and simply stare 
at that person, apparently not motivated to start a 
conversation. Sometimes the schizoid person is pas￾sive in the face of unpleasant happenings and does 
not respond effectively to important events. Such a 
person may appear directionless.
People from some cultures react to stress in 
a way that looks like schizoid personality disorder. 
That is, without actually having the disorder, some 
people under stress may appear socially numb and 
passive. For example, people who move out of 
extremely rural environments into large cities may 
react in a schizoid fashion for several weeks. Such 
a person, overwhelmed by noise, lights, and over￾crowding, may prefer to be alone, have constricted 
emotions, and manifest other deficits in social skills. Also, people who emigrate from 
other countries are sometimes seen as cold, reserved, or aloof. For example, people who 
emigrated from Southeastern Asia during the 1970s and 1980s were sometimes seen as 
being aloof by people in mainstream urban American culture. These are cultural differ￾ences and should not be interpreted as personality disorders.
Application
The case of Roger, a schizoid research assistant. Roger was an undergraduate who had volun￾teered to help out in the laboratory of one of his psychology professors. He was responsible, 
showing up on time and doing the work he was given. However, he seemed detached from the 
work, never getting too excited or appearing to be even interested, though he volunteered to 
work for several semesters. Roger often worked in the lab at night. On several occasions, some 
of the graduate students complained to the professor that Roger was “staring” at them. When 
pressed for details, these students said that, when they left their office doors open, they would 
sometimes turn around and find Roger standing in the doorway, looking at them. Several 
female graduate students complained that he was “creepy” and kept their office doors locked.
Roger lived with his younger brother, who also went to the same university. The brother 
apparently handled all the daily chores, such as dealing with the landlord, buying groceries, and 
arranging for utilities. Roger thus had a protected life and spent most of his time studying, read￾ing, or exploring the internet. In class, he never talked or participated in discussion. Outside 
of class, he appeared to have no friends, nor did he participate in any extracurricular activities. 
The professor he worked for thought he might be on medication but, after inquiring, learned 
that Roger took no medication. After graduating with a degree in psychology, Roger returned 
to live with his parents. He remodeled the space above his parents’ garage and was living there 
rent-free. Every few years, he would e-mail his professor with an update on his rather stable life. 
However the professor’s return e-mails bounced back with the message that “no such e-mail 
address exists.” The professor never knew if Roger did not want to be contacted, or if Roger 
just had some setting wrong in his e-mail app. After about 10 years Roger stopped e-mailing 
and the professor lost all contact with him.
The famous surrealist painter Salvador Dali displayed many of the 
characteristics associated with the schizotypal personality disorder.
Slim Aarons/Slim Aarons/Getty Images
Final PDF to printer606 PART SIX The Adjustment Domaine
lar31869_ch19_584-623.indd 606 10/26/22 01:03 PM
Schizotypal Personality Disorder
Whereas the schizoid person is indifferent to social interaction, the schizotypal person 
is acutely uncomfortable in social relationships. Schizotypes are anxious in social situa￾tions, especially if those situations involve strangers. Schizotypal persons also feel that 
they are different from others or that they do not fit in with the group. Interestingly, 
when such persons have to interact with a group, they do not necessarily become less 
anxious as they become more familiar with the group. For example, while attending a 
group function, the schizotype will not become less anxious as time wears on, but instead 
will become more and more tense. Schizotypes tend to be aloof from others and are not 
prone to trust others or to relax in their presence.
Another characteristic of people with schizotypal personalities is that they are odd
and eccentric. It is not unusual for them to harbor many superstitions such as believing 
in ESP and many other psychic or paranormal phenomena that are outside of the norms 
for their culture. They may believe in magic or that they possess some extrasensory or 
other extraordinary power, such as the ability to control other people or animals with 
their thoughts. They may have unusual perceptions that border on hallucinations, such 
as feeling that other people are looking at them or claiming to feel energy fields coming 
from a rock, perceptions that other people do not share.
Because of their social discomfort, and general oddness, schizotypal persons have 
difficulty with social relationships. They often are at odds with common social conven￾tions, for example, not making eye contact, dressing in unkempt or unusual clothing, or 
wearing clothing that does not go together. In many ways, the schizotype simply does 
not fit into the social group.
Because of their similarity in terms of avoiding social relations, the characteristics 
of schizoid and schizotypal personality disorders are presented together in Table 19.6. 
Some beliefs and thoughts, mostly concerned with other people, which characterize per￾sons with these disorders, are also listed.
Table 19.6 Characteristics of Schizoid and Schizotypal 
Personality Disorders
Schizoid
Detached from normal social relationships
Pleasureless life
Inept or socially clumsy
Passive in the face of unpleasant events
Schizotypal
Anxious in social relations and avoids people
“Different” and nonconforming
Suspicious of others
Eccentricity of beliefs, such as in ESP or magic
Unusualness of perceptions and experiences
Disorganized thoughts and speech
Typical Thoughts or Beliefs Associated with the Schizoid and Schizotypal Personalities
“I hate being tied to other people.”
“My privacy is more important to me than being close to others.”
“It’s best not to confide too much in others.”
“Relationships are always messy.”
“I manage best on my own and set my own standards.”
“Intimate relations are unimportant to me.”
Final PDF to printerCHAPTER NINETEEN Disorders of Personality 607
lar31869_ch19_584-623.indd 607 10/26/22 01:03 PM
In 1996, Theodore Kaczynski was arrested 
for murder in a long line of bombings. He 
had been mailing bombs to unsuspecting 
university professors and scientists (hence his 
FBI code name—Unabomber) for 17 years. 
Many of his targets were computer scien￾tists, but he did injure one psychology pro￾fessor with a mail bomb (Professor James 
McConnell at the University of Michigan). 
Police knew the bombs were all from the 
same person, but they had no idea of his 
motives or why he was targeting univer￾sity professors. After a 17-year period of 
anonymous killing and maiming from a dis￾tance, he decided to make the nature of his 
grievances clear. He sent several taunting 
letters to the FBI and a long rambling mani￾festo to the Washington Post and The New 
York Times, which published his diatribe 
against technology and modern society. 
This was his undoing. Kaczynski’s brother 
recognized the nature of the complaints in 
the manifesto and notified the police, who 
arrested Kaczynski at his isolated 10-by￾12-foot shack in Montana.
A reporter—Maggie Scarf—writing 
in the New Republic magazine (June 10, 
1996, p. 20), presented her view that 
Ted Kaczynski most likely had a narcis￾sistic personality disorder. Scarf used the 
DSM-IV description of narcissistic disor￾der to explain Kaczynski’s behavior. For 
example, as an undergraduate at Harvard, 
Kaczynski isolated himself so much that his 
classmates remember very little about him. 
He saw himself as a misunderstood genius 
whom the world would one day recognize. 
As a mathematics graduate student at the 
University of Michigan, he isolated himself 
even more. In his isolation he probably nur￾tured fantasies of prestige and power and 
revenge on those who refused to praise 
him. As a promising young professor of 
manifesto to the world, he was really say￾ing, “You had better realize you are dealing 
with someone unprecedented in the his￾tory of the human race. I am so clever and 
powerful and smart that I will tell you all 
the problems with the world and how to fix 
them, and if you ignore my commands you 
do so at your own risk” (p. 20). His entire 
ranting manifesto is easily located on the 
mathematics at U.C., Berkeley, he suddenly 
bolted from his faculty position in 1969. No 
one, apparently, was recognizing his supe￾riority. People did not realize, as he did, that 
he possessed a phenomenal intellect and 
superior vision of how everything worked. 
His colleagues were fools, he must have 
concluded, because they could not see his 
obvious superiority. His students, however, 
complained loudly 
about his teach￾ing style. In their 
course evaluations, 
they indicated that 
his lectures were 
boring and useless 
and that he ignored 
questions from 
the students. They 
too must be fools, 
Kaczynski probably 
concluded.
In her article, 
Scarf argued that 
when Kaczynski 
struck out at soci￾ety, he was really 
saying, “I’m special 
and I deserve your 
respect” (1996, 
p. 20). When he 
began taunting 
the police to try 
to capture him, he 
was really saying, 
“I am so extraordi￾nary that I operate 
with impunity; you 
haven’t been able 
to catch me for 
17 years and you 
never will.” Finally, 
when he gave his 
A Closer Look The Unabomber: Comorbidity of Personality 
Disorders
Former University of California at Berkeley math professor Theodore 
Kaczynski was convicted in several of the “Unabomber” attacks, which 
occurred over a 17-year period. Kaczynski displays characteristics 
associated with a number of personality disorders.
Ralf-Finn Hestoft/Getty Images (Continued )
Final PDF to printer608 PART SIX The Adjustment Domaine
lar31869_ch19_584-623.indd 608 10/26/22 01:03 PM
World Wide Web by entering “Unabomber” 
in a search engine.
Scarf is a journalist, not a psycholo￾gist, so her diagnosis is based on her 
speculation. Kaczynski certainly does have 
some features of the narcissistic personal￾ity disorder, but most narcissists are not 
serial murderers. What other possible clues 
might we have to his abnormal behavior? It 
turns out that the entire text of the court￾appointed psychiatrist’s report on Ted 
Kaczynski is available on the Web at https://
paulcooijmans.com/psychology/unabom￾breport.html (as of October 2019). This 
report, prepared by government-appointed 
psychiatrist Sally Johnson, provides another 
perspective on Kaczynski. While at Harvard, 
Kaczynski was involved in a study by Henry 
Murray, whom we discussed in Chapter 
11. Personality test results from his under￾graduate days at Harvard indicate that he 
was extremely introverted and somewhat 
depressive, even at that early age. During 
his psychological evaluation 30 years later, 
the main finding was that he suffered from 
schizophrenia, paranoid type, which is a 
severe mental illness. However, he also 
had an IQ of 136, which puts him in the top 
1 percent of the population. As for person￾ality disorders, the psychiatrist concluded 
that Kaczynski had paranoid personality 
disorder along with many features of the 
avoidant and antisocial personality disor￾ders as well. The following is a quote from 
her official report:
Mr. Kaczynski is also diagnosed as 
suffering from a Paranoid Personal￾ity Disorder with Avoidant and Anti￾social Features. Review of his 
developmental history, adolescence 
and early adult life draws a picture 
consistent with the symptomatology 
associated with this type of person￾ality disorder. Consistent with this 
type of personality disordered 
grounds for arrest. This description 
is based on his own account of his 
behavior in his writings and inter￾views. Also consistent with his Anti￾social Personality Traits is the 
characteristic of deceitfulness, as 
indicated by his persistent and 
elaborate efforts to conceal his be￾haviors. He has demonstrated a 
reckless regard for the safety of 
others. He demonstrates a lack of 
remorse as indicated in his writings 
by being indifferent to having hurt, 
mistreated, or stolen from others. 
Mr. Kaczynski falls short of carrying 
a diagnosis of Antisocial Personal￾ity Disorder in that he does not 
have evidence of a conduct disor￾der before the age of 15. (Excerpted 
from the report of Sally C. Johnson, 
M.D., Chief Psychiatrist, Associate 
Warden of Health Services, Federal 
Correctional Institution, Butner, 
North Carolina, January 1996.)
In 2020 Netflix released a 4-part 
documentary on the life of Ted Kaczynski 
titled “Unabomber: In His Own Words.” 
It contains audio of the only interview 
he has given since his arrest in 1996. It 
illustrates how features of his antisocial, 
paranoid, and avoidant disorders can 
be seen quite early in his life. Kaczynski 
shows features of at least three different 
personality disorders, with the prominent 
one being paranoid personality disor￾der. This disorder occurred along with 
paranoid schizophrenia, which involves 
delusions and elaborate belief systems. 
The presence of two or more disorders in 
one person is called comorbidity, which 
can occur when two or more personality 
disorders are diagnosed in the same per￾son. Comorbidity is fairly common, and it 
makes for difficulty in diagnosing disor￾ders (Krueger & Markon, 2006).
function, Mr. Kaczynski historically 
has shown pervasive distrust of oth￾ers such that their motives are inter￾preted as malevolent. Symptoms 
consistent with Paranoid Personal￾ity Disorders that are evident in Mr. 
Kaczynski’s presentation include 
that he suspects, without sufficient 
basis, that others are exploiting, 
harming, or deceiving him; that he 
reads demeaning or threatening 
meanings into benign remarks or 
events; that he persistently bears 
grudges and is unforgiving of in￾sults, injuries or slights; and that he 
perceives attacks on his character 
or reputation that are not apparent 
to others, and is quick to react an￾grily or to counterattack.
In addition to meeting the cri￾teria for Paranoid Personality Disor￾der, Mr. Kaczynski also has features 
of two other personality disorder 
types. Support for Avoidant Person￾ality Disorder Traits includes that 
he has demonstrated a pervasive 
pattern of social inhibition, feelings 
of inadequacy and hypersensitivity 
to negative evaluations, beginning 
in his early life. Consistent with 
this, he has shown restraint within 
intimate relationships because of 
his fear of being shamed or ridi￾culed; he has been preoccupied 
with being criticized or rejected in 
social situations; and is inhibited in 
new interpersonal situations be￾cause of feelings of inadequacy. 
Consistent with Antisocial Personal￾ity Disorder Traits is his pervasive 
pattern of disregard for and viola￾tion of the rights of others. This in￾cludes his failure to conform to 
social norms with respect to lawful 
behaviors, as indicated by repeat￾edly performing acts that are 
A Closer Look (Continued )
Final PDF to printerCHAPTER NINETEEN Disorders of Personality 609
lar31869_ch19_584-623.indd 609 10/26/22 01:03 PM
Paranoid Personality Disorder
Whereas the schizotype is uncomfortable with others, the paranoid person is extremely 
distrustful of others and sees others as a threat. Such persons assume that others are 
out to exploit and deceive them, even though there is no good evidence to support this 
assumption. Paranoid persons feel that they have been unfairly treated by others and are 
preoccupied with questioning the motives of others.
People with this disorder typically do not reveal personal information to others, 
preferring to remain private. They often fear that their personal information will be used 
against them. Their reaction to others is “Mind your own business.” Also, the paranoid 
person often misinterprets social events. For example, someone makes an off-hand com￾ment and the paranoid interprets it as a demeaning or threatening remark (e.g., won￾dering, “What did he mean by that?”). Paranoids are reluctant to trust others, and are 
constantly on the lookout for hidden meanings and disguised motives in the comments 
and behaviors of others.
The person with a paranoid personality disorder often holds resentments toward 
others for slights or perceived insults. Such a person is reluctant to forgive and forget 
even minor altercations. Paranoid persons often become involved in legal disputes, suing 
others for the slightest reasons. Sometimes paranoid persons plead with those in power 
to intervene on their behalf, such as writing to congresspersons or calling the local police 
over perceived wrongs.
Mason, Claridge, and Jackson (1995) published a questionnaire for assessing 
schizotypal traits and validated it in several British samples. One of the scales contains 
items that get at the presence of unusual experiences: “Are your thoughts sometimes so 
strong you can almost hear them? Have you sometimes had the feeling of gaining or los￾ing energy when certain people look at you or touch you? Are you so good at controlling 
others that it sometimes scares you?” Another scale contains items that assess cognitive 
disorganization: “Do you ever feel that your speech is difficult to understand because 
the words are all mixed up and don’t make any sense? Do you frequently have diffi￾culty starting to do things?” Another set of items measures the tendency to avoid people:
“Are you much too independent to really get involved with people? Can you usually let 
yourself go and enjoy yourself at a party?” And, finally, there is a scale for assessing the 
nonconformity aspect of schizotypy: “Do you often feel like doing the opposite of what 
people suggest, even though you know they are right? Would you take drugs that might 
have strange or dangerous effects?”
Many famous persons have been odd or eccentric. Artists (e.g., Salvador Dali, perhaps Van 
Gogh), writers (e.g., Tennessee Williams, Emily Dickinson), creative entrepreneurs (Howard 
Hughes, Nikola Tesla), musicians, and film stars have exhibited some fairly eccentric behav￾iors. Can you think of examples of public figures who have displayed odd beliefs or eccentric 
actions recently? Would they fit the rest of the characteristics of the schizotypal personality? In 
what ways might being a little bit schizotypal be beneficial, could there be a form of “healthy” 
schizotypal personality. Studies often find a correlation between creativity and unconventional 
thinking and schizotypal tendencies.
Exercise
Final PDF to printer610 PART SIX The Adjustment Domaine
lar31869_ch19_584-623.indd 610 10/26/22 01:03 PM
Pathological jealousy is a common manifestation of paranoid personality disorder 
within relationships. For example, a pathologically jealous woman suspects that her hus￾band or partner is unfaithful, even though there is no objective evidence of infidelity. 
She may go to great lengths to find support for her jealous beliefs. She may restrict the 
activities of her partner or constantly question him as to his whereabouts. She might 
hide an AirTag in his car to track his movements. She likely will not believe her partner’s 
accounts of how he spent his time or believe his claims of faithfulness.
People with paranoid personality disorder are at risk of harming those who they 
see as threatening. Their argumentative and hostile nature may provoke others to a com￾bative response. This hostile response from others, in turn, validates the paranoids’ 
original suspicion that others are out to get them. Their extreme suspiciousness and the 
unreasonableness of their beliefs make people with this disorder particularly difficult in 
social relations. Table 19.7 presents the main characteristics of the paranoid personal￾ity disorder, along with some examples of beliefs and thoughts commonly found among 
persons with this disorder.
The Anxious Cluster: Ways of Being Nervous, Fearful, or Distressed
The final cluster of personality traits consists of patterns of behavior that are geared 
toward avoiding anxiety. The disorders in this cluster, like all the other disorders, illus￾trate the neurotic paradox: Although a particular behavior might make them feel less 
anxious, it may create another equally or more severe problem. For example, an overly 
dependent person might make so many demands on their partner that it eventually alien￾ates or drives them away. The paradox is that disordered behavior, while solving one 
problem, often creates another. This is the logic behind the saying that “Sometimes peo￾ple are their own worst enemy.”
Avoidant Personality Disorder
The major feature of the avoidant personality disorder is a pervasive feeling of inadequacy
and sensitivity to criticism from others. Clearly, no one likes to be criticized. However, avoid￾ant persons will go to great lengths to avoid situations in which others may have opportuni￾ties to criticize their performance or character, such as in school, at work, or in other group 
settings. The main reason for this social anxiety is an extreme fear of criticism or rejection 
from others. Such persons may avoid making new friends or going to new places, due to his 
Table 19.7 Characteristics of Paranoid Personality Disorder
Is distrustful of others
Misinterprets social events as threatening
Harbors resentments toward others
Is prone to pathological jealousy
Is argumentative and hostile
Typical Thoughts or Beliefs Associated with the Paranoid Personality
“Get them before they get you.”
“Other people always have ulterior motives.”
“People will say one thing but do another.”
“Don’t let them get away with anything.”
“I have to be on guard all the time.”
“When people act friendly toward you, it is probably because they want something. Watch out!”
Final PDF to printerCHAPTER NINETEEN Disorders of Personality 611
lar31869_ch19_584-623.indd 611 10/26/22 01:03 PM
or her fear of criticism or disapproval. Friends may have to plead and promise lots of sup￾port and encouragement in order to get them involved in new activities.
Because avoidant persons fear criticism, they may restrict their activities to avoid 
potential embarrassments. For example, an avoidant man may cancel a blind date at 
the last minute because he can’t find just the right clothes to wear. Avoidant individuals 
cope with anxiety by avoiding the risks of everyday social life. However, by avoiding the 
anxiety, they create other problems (the neurotic paradox again), often in the form of 
missed opportunities. In addition, avoidant individuals are typically seen by others as 
meek, quiet, shy, lonely, and solitary.
Avoidant persons are sensitive to what others think of them. Their feelings are 
easily hurt, and they appear vulnerable and inhibited in social interactions, withholding 
their own views, opinions, or feelings out of fear of being ridiculed. They typically have 
very low self-esteem and feel inadequate to many of life’s social challenges (e.g., making 
new friends, joining new groups). Because of their social isolation, they typically do not 
have many sources of social support. Even though they typically desire to be involved 
with others, and may even fantasize about relationships, they tend to avoid intimate 
Application
The case of Ellen, avoidant university student. Ellen was a 21-year-old university student who had 
gone to the university’s psychological clinic with the general complaint that she was uncomfort￾able in social settings. Because she was so shy and nervous, she kept her contact with others to 
a minimum. She worried about starting new classes each semester and having to be in rooms 
with total strangers. She was especially worried about her psychology courses, where “they 
might find out I am a nutcase.” She adds, “They are going to think I am a dysfunctional idiot 
because I am so shy and I go into a panic at the thought of speaking up in a group of strangers.” 
She adds that she was thinking of switching her major from psychology to computer science. 
Although she was curious about people, and therefore liked psychology, she nevertheless felt 
awkward around them. Computers, she thought, were much easier to get along with and did 
not reject or criticize her.
Ellen reported that, as a child, she was teased mercilessly by the other children in her 
school. She remembers withdrawing from others at about this time in her life. She says that in 
grade school she would try to make herself small and inconspicuous, so others would not notice 
her. As a teenager, she took some jobs babysitting, but she has never held a job working with a 
team of others. At the university, she apparently has no friends, or at least cannot name any. She 
says she is afraid others will not like her “when they find out what I am really like,” so she avoids 
social contact. In fact, she never once makes eye contact with the interviewer at the clinic.
At the university, Ellen followed a pattern of letting work pile up, then working hard to 
get it all done. She tried to do a few errands each day, kept her apartment neat, and went to 
the grocery store twice a month. She described her life as “not very happy, but at least predict￾able.” She liked exploring the internet on her home computer. She said she enjoys viewing the 
Facebook pages of others, but the account she set up for herself has no photos and very little 
information. When pressed on this, she confessed that she just mainly liked to see “what people 
are up to” but does not enjoy messaging or interacting on these sites. She prefers staying in the 
background, watching others: “When they don’t even know I’m there, then I can be pretty sure 
they are not laughing at me.”
Final PDF to printer612 PART SIX The Adjustment Domaine
lar31869_ch19_584-623.indd 612 10/26/22 01:03 PM
contact out of their fear of rejection and criticism. The paradox is that, in avoidantly cop￾ing with their social anxiety, they shun the supportive relationships with caring others 
that could actually help boost their self-esteem. Table 19.8 presents the main features of 
the avoidant personality disorder, along with several examples of thoughts and beliefs 
that might occur in someone with this disorder.
Dependent Personality Disorder
Whereas the avoidant person avoids others to an extreme, the dependent person 
seeks out others to an extreme. The hallmark of the dependent personality disorder
is an excessive need to be taken care of, to be nurtured, coddled, and told what to do. 
Dependent persons act in submissive ways so as to encourage others to take care of 
them or take charge of the situation. Such individuals need lots of encouragement 
and advice from others and would much rather turn over responsibility for their deci￾sions to someone else. Where should they live, what schools should they attend, what 
courses should they take, with whom should they make friends? The dependent per￾sonality has great difficulty making such decisions and seeks out reassurance from 
others. However, such a person tends to seek advice about even minor decisions, such 
as whether to carry an umbrella today, what color clothes to wear, and what entrée to 
order at a restaurant. The dependent person rarely takes the initiative. Others might 
describe them as “needy.”
Because of their fear of losing the help and advice of others, dependent persons 
avoid disagreements with those on whom they are dependent. Because of their extreme 
need for support, dependent personalities might even agree with decisions or opinions 
that they feel are wrong to avoid angering the persons on whom they depend.
Because of their low self-confidence and need for constant reassurance, dependent 
persons may not work well independently. They may wait for others to start projects or may 
need direction often during a task. They may demonstrate how inept they are, so as to trick 
others into assisting them. They may avoid becoming proficient at a task, so as to keep oth￾ers from seeing that they are competent to work by themselves. Because they rely on others 
to solve their problems they never learn the skills of living or working independently.
Persons with dependent personalities may tolerate extreme circumstances to obtain 
reassurance and support from others. Such people may submit to unreasonable demands, 
may tolerate abuse, or may stay in a distorted relationship. People who believe that they 
are unable to take care of themselves may tolerate a lot of abuse in order to maintain 
bonds with people who will take care of them. The unfortunate aspect of the depen￾dent personality is that by giving over responsibility and depending on other people, 
Table 19.8 Characteristics of Avoidant Personality Disorder
Feelings of inadequacy
Sensitive to criticism
Activities are restricted to avoid embarrassment
Low self-esteem
Typical Thoughts or Beliefs Associated with the Avoidant Personality
“I am socially inept and undesirable.”
“I wish you would like me, but I think you really hate me.”
“I can’t stand being criticized; it makes me feel miserable.”
“I must avoid unpleasant situations at all costs.”
“I don’t want to attract attention to myself.”
“I’d much rather be ignored than criticized.”
Final PDF to printerCHAPTER NINETEEN Disorders of Personality 613
lar31869_ch19_584-623.indd 613 10/26/22 01:03 PM
dependent persons may never discover that they can take care of themselves. Table 19.9 
presents the main characteristics of the dependent personality disorder along with asso￾ciated beliefs and thoughts that persons with this disorder might have.
Obsessive-Compulsive Personality Disorder
The obsessive-compulsive person is preoccupied with order and strives to be perfect. The 
high need for order can manifest itself in the person’s attention to details, however trivial, 
and fondness for rules, rituals, schedules, and procedures. Such persons may, for exam￾ple, plan out which clothes they will wear every day of the week or clean their apartments 
every Saturday and Wednesday from 5 until 7 p.m. People with obsessive-compulsive 
personality disorder hold very high standards for themselves. However, they may work so 
hard at being perfect that they are never satisfied with their work. For example, a student 
might never turn in a research paper because it is never quite perfect enough. The desire 
for perfection can actually stifle a person’s productivity.
Another characteristic is a devotion to work at the expense of leisure and friendships.
Obsessive-compulsive persons tend to work harder than they need to. They may work at 
Application
The case of Edward, a dependent personality. Edward was a university professor who had 
achieved some success in his field. One day, a psychologist friend stopped by his office to 
invite Edward and his wife to dinner. Edward said he had to call his wife to see if they could 
go, and his wife agreed and told Edward to invite the friend to stop by their house for a drink 
before going to dinner. That night, the friend arrived at the house before Edward was ready, 
and he noticed Edward asked his wife for advice on what to wear. It was raining that night, 
and Edward asked his wife if he should wear a jacket or a raincoat. He also asked his wife if 
he should bring an umbrella. At dinner, the friend noticed that Edward asked his wife what he 
should drink and, as he looked over the menu, Edward asked his wife what he should order 
for dinner. Edward even asked his wife; “What kind of food do I like?” At this point, the psy￾chologist friend began to think Edward was displaying several diagnostic characteristics of a 
dependent personality disorder.
Table 19.9 Characteristics of Dependent Personality Disorder
Has an excessive need to be taken care of
Is submissive
Seeks reassurance from others
Rarely takes initiative and rarely disagrees with others
Does not work well independently
May tolerate abuse from others to obtain support
Typical Thoughts or Beliefs Associated with the Dependent Personality
“I am weak and need support.”
“The worst possible thing would be to be abandoned and left alone.”
“I must not offend those on whom I depend.”
“I must be submissive to obtain their help.”
“I need help making decisions.”
“I hope someone will tell me what to do.”
Final PDF to printer614 PART SIX The Adjustment Domaine
lar31869_ch19_584-623.indd 614 10/26/22 01:03 PM
night and on weekends and rarely take time off. In his book on adult personality devel￾opment, George Vaillant (1977) saw it as a sign of positive mental adjustment when 
his adult subjects reported taking at least a one-week vacation each year. Obsessive￾compulsives tend not to meet this criterion for adjustment. When they do take time off 
for recreation, they prefer serious activities, like chess, sudoku, or cross-word puzzles. 
For hobbies, they often pick demanding tasks or activities that require great attention to 
detail, such as cross-stitch sewing or computer programming. Even their play looks a lot 
like work.
The obsessive-compulsive person may also appear inflexible with regard to ethics 
and morals. Such persons set high principles for themselves and tend to follow the letter 
of the law. They are highly conscientious and expect others to be that way as well. There 
is usually only one right way, according to them, to do something—their way. They often 
have trouble working with others because they are stubborn and reluctant to delegate 
tasks; “If you want something done right, you have to do it yourself” is a common com￾plaint from obsessive-compulsive persons. They become irritated when others don’t take 
their work as seriously as they do.
A few other unusual characteristics are often present in the obsessive-compulsive 
person. One is the preference to hang on to worn-out or useless things; many obses￾sive-compulsive people have trouble throwing things away. Many are miserly or stingy,
hoarding their money and things. And finally, along with being inflexible, obsessive￾compulsives can be frustratingly stubborn. They may stubbornly insist, for example, that 
they cannot complete their work because of the imperfections of others. As you might 
imagine, they often cause difficulties for others at the workplace. Table 19.10 presents 
the essential features of obsessive-compulsive personality disorder, along with some typi￾cal beliefs and thoughts that characterize persons with this disorder.
There is another disorder—obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD)—that is often con￾fused with obsessive-compulsive personality disorder (OCPD). OCD is an anxiety disor￾der that is, in several ways, more serious and debilitating than OCPD. In OCD a pattern 
of unwanted and intrusive thoughts is recurrent and troubling to the person, such as the 
persistent thought that he or she may harm someone. In addition, OCD is characterized 
by the presence of ritualistic behaviors, such as frequent hand washing or the tendency to 
repeat actions a set number of times (e.g., having to touch an object three times before leav￾ing a room or repeating words to oneself three times). Obsessive-compulsive personality 
Table 19.10 Characteristics of Obsessive-Compulsive 
Personality Disorder
Preoccupied with order
Perfectionistic
Devoted to work, seeking little leisure time or friendship
Frequently miserly or stingy
Rigid and stubborn
Typical Thoughts or Beliefs Associated with the Obsessive-Compulsive Personality
“I believe in order, rules, and high standards.”
“Others are irresponsible, casual, and self-indulgent.”
“Details are important; flaws and mistakes are intolerable.”
“My way is the only right way to do things.”
“If you can’t do it perfectly, don’t do it at all.”
“I have only myself to depend on.”
Final PDF to printerCHAPTER NINETEEN Disorders of Personality 615
lar31869_ch19_584-623.indd 615 10/26/22 01:03 PM
disorder, on the other hand, really involves a collection of traits, such as excessive need for 
order or extremely high conscientiousness. People with OCPD are at risk for developing 
OCD as well as other kinds of anxiety disorders (Oltmanns & Emery, 2004).
Many of the characteristics of obsessive-compulsive personality, considered one 
at a time, can be seen as adaptive up to some point. For example, wanting to perform 
a task as perfectly as possible is, up to a point, desirable and rewarded. Holding one’s 
opinions firm is, up to a point, desirable and indicates character. Keeping everything 
neat and orderly is, up to a point, useful. How can one tell when such characteristics 
and behaviors go over the line and indicate an obsessive-compulsive personality? The 
clearest way to know when obsessiveness is becoming a disorder is when this pattern of 
behavior starts to interfere with a person’s ability to be productive or to maintain satisfy￾ing relationships. In the case study of Rita presented here, you’ll see that her obsessive 
and compulsive personality led her to behave in ways that seriously interfered with both 
of these aspects of her life.
Application
The case of Rita, an obsessive-compulsive personality. Rita was a 39-year-old computer program￾mer who had been married for 18 years. She was always orderly and kept a very neat house. 
It was so neat, in fact, that she noticed when the books were in the wrong order on the book￾shelves or if a knick-knack had been moved on a table or shelf. She vacuumed the house every 
day, whether it needed it or not. This resulted in the need for a new vacuum cleaner almost 
every year. Her husband thought this odd but concluded that she simply had a low threshold 
for what counted as dirty. She was constantly nagging him or angry at him because he did not 
seem to care as much as her that things be so neat, clean, and orderly. They did not have chil￾dren because, according to Rita, children would disrupt the order, predictability, and neatness 
of her life.
Over the years, Rita added to her list of things she needed to do each day but never took 
anything off the list. In addition to vacuuming, she added dusting each day. Then she added 
cleaning the sinks with strong cleaners each day. She had to get up earlier in the mornings to 
get all of this cleaning done before going to work at her programming job.
Her boss often complained that she was slow. The boss did not appreciate the fact that 
Rita checked her work over and over again before turning it in. Rita also had difficulties work￾ing as part of a team because none of the other programmers met her standards. They did 
not check their work thoroughly enough, she thought, and were sloppy and imprecise, writ￾ing “amateurish” code. Her boss eventually had to isolate her and give her independent work 
because she could not work well with her co-workers.
Before leaving the house each morning, Rita checked the windows and doors, the gas, 
the water faucets, and all the light fixtures. After a few months of this, one check was not suf￾ficient, and she began to check everything twice. Her husband complained about this, so she 
made him wait in the car while she checked each sink, light, door, window, and so on. Her 
husband dutifully waited each day, but as the months went on, the wait grew longer and longer. 
He was now sitting in the car for an hour each morning, waiting for Rita to finish checking. 
One morning, after checking the house thoroughly, she went outside to find that her husband 
had left without her. That afternoon she received an e-mail from him saying that he could not 
take it any longer and had decided to divorce her.
Final PDF to printer616 PART SIX The Adjustment Domaine
lar31869_ch19_584-623.indd 616 10/26/22 01:03 PM
Prevalence of Personality Disorders
Figure 19.1 indicates the prevalence rates of the 10 personality disorders in Western cul￾tures. Prevalence is a term that refers to the total number of cases that are present within 
a given sample at a particular point in time. For example, at a particular time, what per￾cent of the people in a sample are diagnosable with paranoid personality disorder? The 
answer would be the prevalence rate. The data in Figure 19.1 are prevalence rates based 
on a summary and meta-analysis of nine large adult community samples from the United 
States, Europe, and Australia (Volkert, Gablonski, & Rabung, 2018). The horizontal 
bars represent prevalence rates of each disorder in the combined sample (which totaled 
113,998 people).
Prevalence data show that obsessive-compulsive personality disorder is the most 
common, at a 3.2 percent prevalence rate. Certainly orderliness, punctuality, and neat￾ness are often rewarded in Western cultures, so perhaps it should not be surprising that 
disordered levels of these characteristics form the most common personality disorder. 
The next most common disorder is antisocial personality disorder, with a 2.76 percent 
prevalence rate. The least common personality disorders are histrionic, dependent, and 
narcissistic, each affecting less than 1 percent of the population. 
The total prevalence rate for having at least one personality disorder is about 
11 percent. That is, at any given time, approximately 11 percent of the population is 
diagnosable with a personality disorder of one or more types. This brings up the issue of 
Figure 19.1
Estimates of the Prevalence of Personality Disorders in Western Countries (United States, Australia, 
Sweden, Germany, United Kingdom, Netherlands).
Source: Volkert, J., Gablonski, T., and Rabung, S. (2018). Prevalence of personality disorders in the general adult 
population in Western countries: Systematic review and meta-analysis. British Journal of Psychiatry 213, 709–715.
0123
Percent
Erratic ClusterEccentric ClusterAnxious Cluster
4
Prevalence of Personality Disorders
Antisocial
Borderline
Histrionic
Narcissistic
Schizoid
Schizotypal
Paranoid
Avoidant
Dependent
Obsessive-Compulsive
Final PDF to printerCHAPTER NINETEEN Disorders of Personality 617
lar31869_ch19_584-623.indd 617 10/26/22 01:03 PM
comorbidity, which is when two or more disorders occur at the same time in the same 
person. We also mentioned comorbidity in A Closer Look on the Unabomber. A sub￾stantial proportion—between 25 and 50 percent—of the people who meet the criteria for 
a diagnosis with one personality disorder also meet the criteria for diagnosis on another 
personality disorder (Volkert, Gablonski, & Rabung, 2018). Many of the personality dis￾orders contain common features. For example, several disorders involve social isolation, 
including schizotypal, schizoid, and avoidant. Uninhibited and irresponsible behavior is 
one of the criteria for a diagnosis of borderline, histrionic, and antisocial personality dis￾orders. As such, differential diagnoses are often challenging in personality disorders. A 
differential diagnosis is one in which, out of two or more possible diagnoses, the clinician 
searches for evidence in support of one diagnostic category over all the others.
Gender Differences in Personality Disorders
The overall prevalence rate for personality disorders is fairly equal in men and women. 
A few specific disorders, however, show a tendency to be more prevalent in men or in 
women. The one disorder with the most disparate gender distribution is antisocial per￾sonality disorder, which occurs in men with a prevalence rate of about 4.5 percent and 
in women at only about a 0.8 percent prevalence rate. As such, about one out of every 
20 adult men has antisocial personality disorder, whereas it is less than one in 100 for 
women (Alegria et al., 2013). Studies show that in many ways, female psychopaths are 
similar to their male counterparts (both show fear, empathy, and remorse deficits; con￾duct disorder in childhood; history of deceitfulness, impulsivity, recklessness, and irre￾sponsibility). However, female antisocial adults were more likely to have suffered severe 
physical, emotional, and sexual abuse than male antisocial adults (Alegria et al., 2013).
A few other personality disorders show tendencies to be more common among 
men or among women. Borderline and dependent personality disorders are somewhat 
more prevalent in women than men, though the differences are not large. Paranoid and 
obsessive-compulsive personality disorder may be more common in men than women, but 
again the differences are not large. One important issue concerns gender biases in diag￾noses. For example, in dependent personality disorder, a few of the distinguishing traits 
might be viewed as traditionally feminine characteristics, such as putting others’ needs 
ahead of one’s own or being unassertive. Consequently, if the criteria for this disorder 
are based on feminine stereotypes, then gender bias may influence this diagnosis, even 
if a particular woman is not suffering significant impairment from those particular traits. 
Clinicians need to be aware of how stereotypes affect the ways they diagnose their clients.
A related issue is gender differences in the manifestation of the different disorders. 
For example, in histrionic personality disorder a main issue concerns excessive attention 
seeking. A woman might manifest this through hyperfemininity, perhaps being sexually 
provocative and flirtatious. A male might manifest this disorder through hypermasculin￾ity, including shows of strength and bragging about his assets and accomplishments. 
Each is engaging in excessive attention seeking but doing it in ways that are gender 
stereotyped.
Dimensional Model of Personality Disorders
As discussed at the beginning of this chapter, modern theorists are arguing for a dimen￾sional, as opposed to a categorical, view of personality disorders. In the dimensional 
model of personality, the only distinctions made between normal personality traits and 
Final PDF to printer618 PART SIX The Adjustment Domaine
lar31869_ch19_584-623.indd 618 10/26/22 01:03 PM
disorders are in terms of extremity, rigidity, and maladaptiveness. For example, Widiger 
(1997) argues that disorders simply are maladaptive variants and combinations of nor￾mal-range personality traits. The personality traits most studied as sources of disorders 
are the five traits of the five-factor model, which we reviewed in Chapter 3. Costa and 
Widiger (1994) edited an influential book supporting the idea that the Big Five traits 
provide a useful framework for understanding disorders. Widiger (1997) presents data 
arguing that, for example, borderline personality disorder is extreme narcissism, and 
schizoid disorder is extreme introversion accompanied by low neuroticism (Emotional 
Stability). Extreme introversion accompanied by extremely high neuroticism can, on the 
other hand, result in avoidant personality disorder. Histrionic disorder is characterized 
as extreme extraversion. Obsessive-compulsive disorder is a maladaptive form of extreme 
conscientiousness. Schizotypal personality disorder is a complex combination of intro￾version, high neuroticism, low agreeableness, and extreme openness.
The dimensional view is somewhat like chemistry: Add a little of this trait and 
some of that trait, amplify to extremely high (or low) levels, and the result is a specific 
disorder. Dimensional models may have certain advantages, such as accounting for why 
people in the same diagnostic category can be so different from each other in how they 
express the disorder (because they differ on extremity or in terms of particular combi￾nations of trait dimensions). In addition, the dimensional model allows for a person to 
have multiple disorders of personality. The dimensional model also explicitly acknowl￾edges that the distinction between what is normal and what is abnormal is more a matter 
of degree than a clear and qualitative break (Trull & Widiger, 2013). One line of research 
that is currently active is developing measures of the Five Factor Model that have higher 
precision at the tails of the distributions; that is, at the extremely high and extremely low 
ends (Miller & Lynam, 2015; Samuel & Gore, 2012). The original measures of the Five 
Factor Model were developed with the most precision in the middle of the distribution, 
which is where most people are (picture a normal curve, with its bell-shaped distribu￾tion). However, if one is interested in the extreme on these personality traits, then new 
measures will need to be developed that have adequate discrimination and accuracy way 
out on the tails of the distribution, at the extremes. This is currently an active area of 
research.
As mentioned at the beginning of the chapter, the American Psychiatric 
Association decided to continue its application of a categorical view in the definition 
and diagnosis of personality disorders. The decade of work that went into revising the 
DSM-IV into the DSM-5 has amounted to essentially “no change” to the way we under￾stand personality disorders. The report of the personality disorders working group does, 
however, appears in Section III of the DSM-5.
While the DSM-5 is the standard developed and adopted in the United States, a 
different system for diagnosis has been developed and adopted by the World Health 
Organization (WHO). This system—called the International Classification of Diseases 
(ICD)—was developed using data from around the world. Its most recent revision in 
2022 completely changed the diagnosis of personality disorders from a categorical to 
a dimensional system. The dimensional approach of the ICD is based on a severity 
rating for personality disorder, plus includes a descriptive rating on one or more of five 
personality traits. The dimensional model of the ICD is in alignment with the appendix 
in the DSM-5 supporting a dimensional approach. While most countries in the world 
employ the ICD criteria for mental disorders, psychiatrists and psychologists in the 
United States mainly employ the DSM-5 categorical approach to personality disorders. 
Perhaps the U.S. diagnostic standards will change at some point in the future, for now 
Final PDF to printerCHAPTER NINETEEN Disorders of Personality 619
lar31869_ch19_584-623.indd 619 10/26/22 01:03 PM
the consensus in the United States is the categorical model portrayed in the DSM-5. As 
such, we followed the DSM-5 standards in this chapter, even though we feel the dimen￾sional system of the ICD may prove more useful for clinicians and for researchers.
Causes of Personality Disorders
The material covered in this chapter so far has been mainly descriptive, drawing from 
and expanding on the diagnostic criteria in the DSM-5. Abnormal psychology is a 
strongly descriptive science, and efforts are mainly to develop classification systems 
and taxonomies of disorders. This does not mean, however, that there are no attempts 
to understand how personality disorders develop or what causes one person to have a 
particular disorder. Researchers generally examine both biological and environmental 
factors that contribute to the development of personality disorders (Nigg & Goldsmith, 
1994). For example, it is clear that persons who suffer with borderline personality disor￾der frequently experienced poor attachment relationships in childhood (Kernberg, 1975, 
1984; Nigg & Goldsmith, 1994) and that many borderline persons were the target of 
sexual and/or physical abuse in childhood (Westen, 1990). There is abundant evidence 
that most people with borderline personality disorder grew up in chaotic homes, with a 
lot of exposure to the behavior of impulsive adults (Millon, 2000b).
It appears that genetic factors play little role in borderline personality disorder. 
Instead, most of the evidence implicates loss of, or neglect by, the parents in early child￾hood (Guzder et al., 1996).
When it comes to schizotypal personality disorder, the evidence is more in 
line with genetic causes. A variety of family, twin, and adoption studies suggest that 
schizotypal disorder is genetically similar to schizophrenia (Nigg & Goldsmith, 1994). 
Moreover, the first-degree relatives of persons with schizophrenia are much more likely 
to exhibit features of schizotypal personality disorder than persons in the general popu￾lation. However, prevalence rates for paranoid and avoidant personality disorders were 
also elevated among the relatives of the schizophrenia patients, suggesting that these 
disorders may be genetically related to schizophrenia (Kendler et al., 1993).
Antisocial personality disorder also has several explanatory theories. For example, 
many antisocial persons were themselves abused and victimized as children (Pollock 
et al., 1990), leading to social learning and psychoanalytic theories of the cause of this 
disorder. A high proportion of antisocial persons also abuse multiple illegal drugs or 
alcohol, leading some researchers to propose that biological changes associated with 
drug abuse are responsible for antisocial behavior. There are also clear familial trends 
suggesting that antisocial personality disorder is due, in part, to genetic causes (Lykken, 
1995). Others have proposed learning theories of antisocial personality disorder, due 
mainly to research showing that such persons are deficient in learning through punish￾ment (e.g., Newman, 1987).
The neurological underpinnings of antisocial and psychopathic traits are also 
being investigated. A useful model here is the triarchic model, which characterizes psy￾chopaths in terms of three distinguishable components: boldness, meanness, and lack 
of inhibition (Patrick, Drislane, & Strickland, 2012). A measure of this triarchic model 
provides better coverage of these three components than previous inventories (Drislane, 
Patrick, & Arsal, 2014). Moreover, this new measure correlates with neuroscience find￾ings in quite sensible ways. For example, “boldness” is related to an underreactivity in 
the brain’s defensive motivational system. The “lack of inhibition” component is related 
Final PDF to printerTable 19.11 The Personality Disorders Described According to Unique 
Characteristics Associated with Self-Concept, Emotional Life, 
Behavior, and Social Relations
Specific Disorders Self-Concept Emotion Behavior Social Relations
Antisocial Personality Self as unfettered by rules Lack of remorse, quick￾tempered, easily irritated, 
aggressive
Reckless, impulsive, 
irresponsible
Callous and indifferent 
to rights of others, lacks 
empathy
Borderline Personality Self as vague, diffuse, 
changing, unstable, with no 
strong feeling of identity
Highly variable, intense, with 
frequent  anger, shame, and 
guilt
Unpredictable, can be 
harmful to self or others
Intense, volatile, unstable, 
fearing abandonment
Histrionic Personality Self as desirable and 
charming
Flamboyant in public displays Attention seeking, 
extravagant
Attention seeking, 
demanding, ‘high 
maintenance’
Narcissistic Personality Self as unique, admirable, 
special
Feelings of entitlement, 
vengeful when not 
recognized
Self-displaying, admiration 
seeking
Envious, lacking in empathy
Schizoid Personality Self as loner, without 
ambition
Bland, taking little pleasure 
in life
Passive, lack of drive or 
ambition
Detached, socially inept, 
having no or few friends
Schizotypal Personality Self as different, self as 
outsider
Uncomfortable, high social 
anxiety
Odd, eccentric with unusual 
beliefs
Socially anxious, avoiding 
others
Paranoid Personality Self as victim Feels threatened, 
argumentative, suspicious, 
jealous
Distrustful, self-protective, 
resentful
Sensitive, prone to 
misinterpretations, socially 
on guard
Avoidant Personality Self as inadequate Frequently embarrassed, 
fearing criticism and rejection
Quiet, shy, solitary Withdrawing, sensitive to 
criticism
Dependent Personality Self as needy, lacking 
direction
Meek, indecisive, insecure, 
uncertain
Reassurance seeking, rarely 
taking initiative
Submissive, needs 
nurturance, avoids conflict
Obsessive-Compulsive 
Personality
Self as rigid, with high 
standards and expectations
Easily irritated, stubborn, 
without much pleasure
Workaholic, likes repetition, 
details
No time for friends, others 
don’t meet standards
620
Final PDF to printerCHAPTER NINETEEN Disorders of Personality 621
lar31869_ch19_584-623.indd 621 10/26/22 01:03 PM
to deficits in the frontal cortical regions involved in self-regulation, cognitive control, 
and moral reasoning. Both of these components—boldness and lack of inhibition—are 
also associated with brain circuits that process rewards (Seara-Cardoso & Viding, 2015). 
The third component—“meanness”—is thought to be related to dysfunction in brain sys￾tems important to empathy, perspective taking, and perhaps even to lower levels of oxy￾tocin, a neurally active hormone related to social bonding.
Explanations of the other personality disorders also follow this pattern. There are 
biological explanations, learning explanations, psychodynamic explanations, and cul￾tural explanations. There may be some truth to each of these views, that personality dis￾orders, like normal-range personality variables, have multiple causes. Moreover, it is very 
difficult to separate biology from learning, to separate nature from nurture. For example, 
an individual’s early experiences—such as with an abusive parent—may lead to neurologi￾cal changes in certain brain centers, such as the abnormalities in the hypothalamus and 
pituitary functioning (e.g., Mason et al., 1994).
Several large epidemiological and longitudinal studies of personality disorders 
have been undertaken (e.g., Skodol, 2012). In the decades to come, these studies are 
likely to pay off with results that improve our understanding of the life course of people 
with specific disorders. Such results will also suggest likely causal pathways that lead to 
various disorders.
Most of the research on personality disorders to date is descriptive or correla￾tional. True experiments, where people would be randomly assigned to either have or 
not have a disorder, are impossible. Because the research is mostly correlational, it 
cannot pin down the causal direction of relationships that are identified. For example, 
suppose people with a specific disorder are found to have a high level of a particular 
neurotransmitter in their system. From these results we know something descriptive, but 
we don’t know whether having a high level of that neurotransmitter causes the disorder, 
or whether having the disorder causes high levels of the neurotransmitter (or whether 
a third unknown variable causes both the neurotransmitter changes and the disorder, a 
problem we discussed in Chapter 2). Longitudinal and epidemiological studies, because 
they take place over long time periods, can pinpoint which characteristics come before 
or after other characteristics, and thereby examine one important aspect of causality—
temporal order.
Clearly, biology and experience are tightly intermingled, making it difficult to attri￾bute a disorder to only one kind of cause. Efforts to reduce the cause of personality 
disorders to one factor—say, genetics—are likely to be an oversimplification. Thus, we 
have to be comfortable with the notion that something as complicated as the human 
personality—and its disorders—likely has multiple causes. Table 19.11 presents all of the 
personality disorders along with descriptions of the self-concept, emotional life, behav￾ior, and social relations of persons who have the disorder.
Final PDF to printer622 PART SIX The Adjustment Domaine
lar31869_ch19_584-623.indd 622 10/26/22 01:03 PM
SUMMARY AND EVALUATION
We began this chapter with a discussion of how disorders of personality draw on 
almost all the other topics studied so far. The concept of disorder relies on mak￾ing a distinction between what is normal and what is abnormal. There are several 
definitions of abnormality. One is statistical and relies on how frequently a condition 
appears among a population of people. Another definition is sociological and has to 
do with how much a society tolerates particular forms of behavior. A psychological 
definition emphasizes to what extent a behavior pattern causes distress for the person 
or for others. The hallmark of the psychological definition of abnormal is anything 
that prevents a person from having satisfying relationships or from carrying on pro￾ductive work. Most of the personality disorders result in problems with relationships 
because they impair the person’s ability to get along with others. Many of the disor￾ders also impair the person’s ability to engage in productive work. All of the personal￾ity disorders refer to symptoms that cause significant problems with relationships or 
with work, or both.
The study of abnormal psychology, also called psychopathology, has evolved 
into a distinct discipline within psychology and psychiatry. A major goal of this dis￾cipline is to develop reliable taxonomies for mental disorders. The most widely used 
system for classifying abnormal psychological conditions, at least in the United States, 
is the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, fifth edition (DSM-5), pub￾lished in 2013. In going from the fourth to fifth edition of the DSM, no major changes 
were made in how personality disorders are defined or diagnosed.
Personality disorders are enduring patterns of experience and behavior that dif￾fer greatly from the norm and the expectations of the individual’s social group and 
lead to distress for the person or those around him or her. Disorders typically can 
be seen in abnormalities in how people think, in how they feel, in how they get along 
with others, and in their ability to control their own actions. The patterns are typically 
displayed across a variety of life situations, leading to distress, for either themselves 
or others, in important areas in life, such as at work or in relationships. Personality 
disorders typically have a long history in a person’s life and can often be traced back 
to adolescence.
In this chapter, we covered the 10 personality disorders contained in the 
DSM-5. We organized these 10 disorders into three clusters: the erratic cluster (disor￾ders pertaining to ways of being unpredictable), the eccentric cluster (disorders per￾taining to ways of being odd), and the anxious cluster (disorders pertaining to ways of 
being nervous or distressed). Each disorder consists of a unique combination of ways 
of thinking, experiencing, and acting. Future developments are likely to emphasize 
the dimensional view of personality disorders, which sees disorders as extreme levels 
of normal personality traits, or combinations of extreme levels of various traits. This 
change from categorical to dimensional diagnosis of personality disorders was made 
in 2022 to the World Health Organization’s Internal Classification of Diseases. While 
this system is used in most countries around the world, the United States and a couple 
other countries rely on the categorical guidelines promoted by the DSM-5. Research 
on the causes of personality disorders was presented, and an appropriate conclusion 
is that most personality disorders likely have multiple causes. A more complete causal 
understanding of personality disorders awaits further epidemiological research.
Final PDF to printerCHAPTER NINETEEN Disorders of Personality 623
lar31869_ch19_584-623.indd 623 10/26/22 01:03 PM
disorder 588
abnormal psychology 588
abnormal 588
psychopathology 597
categorical view 589
dimensional view 590
personality disorder 591
antisocial personality disorder 593
eye-blink startle method 596
KEY TERMS
neurotic paradox 610
avoidant personality disorder 610
dependent personality disorder 612
obsessive-compulsive personality 
disorder 613
prevalence 616
comorbidity 617
differential diagnosis 617
psychopathy 597
borderline personality disorder 599
histrionic personality disorder 601
narcissistic personality disorder 602
narcissistic paradox 603
schizoid personality disorder 604
schizotypal personality disorder 604
paranoid personality disorder 609
Final PDF to printerlar31869_ch20_624-635.indd 624 12/02/22 04:58 PM
624
Athanasia Nomikou/Shutterstock
20
Summary and Future 
Directions
Current Status of the Field
Domains of Knowledge: Where We’ve Been, Where We’re Going
Dispositional Domain
Biological Domain
Intrapsychic Domain
Cognitive/Experiential Domain
Social and Cultural Domain
Adjustment Domain
Integration: Personality in the Twenty-First Century
Final PDF to printerlar31869_ch20_624-635.indd 625 10/22/22 09:27 AM
CONCLUSION
After reading the first 19 chapters of this book, you should be able to 
provide answers the next time someone asks, “Why does this person behave that 
way?” Personality psychology seeks to open this mystery to scientific investigation. 
If you are fascinated by the variety of human behavior, by the clever or silly things 
that people do, by the ways people solve or create problems for themselves, or by the 
variety of potential explanations for people’s behavior, then you have something in 
common with personality psychologists—a deep curiosity about human nature.
Understanding the whole 
behind all the parts is the 
ultimate goal of personality 
psychology.
classicpaintings/Alamy Stock 
Photo
20
Final PDF to printer626 Conclusion
lar31869_ch20_624-635.indd 626 10/22/22 09:27 AM
Current Status of the Field
This is an exciting time for the field of personality psychology. Advances have led to 
some consensus regarding the nature, structure, and development of personality, result￾ing in several decades of sustained growth. The field is thriving. One hallmark that a field 
is hitting its stride is the existence of a handbook. Personality psychology has several 
handbooks (e.g., Buss & Hawley, 2011; Corr & Matthews, 2020; DeYoung et al., 2014), 
as well as handbooks in personality disorders. Another indicator that a field is thriving 
is the existence of professional societies dedicated to its improvement. In personality 
psychology there are several societies, including the Society for Personality and Social 
Psychology, the European Society of Personality Psychology, and the Association for 
Research in Personality. This latter society, founded in 2001, is devoted to the inter￾disciplinary study of personality. It promotes scientific research on personality through 
an annual conference and through the official scientific journal of the association, the 
Journal of Research in Personality.
Personality psychologists doing research today typically focus on specific com￾ponents of personality, such as self-esteem; specific traits, such as Extraversion or 
Agreeableness; or specific processes, such as the unconscious processing of information. 
This is the direction toward which the field of personality psychology has shifted over 
the past 100 years. The early personality theorists, such as Sigmund Freud, constructed 
theories about the whole person. These grand theories focused on universal properties of 
human nature, such as Freud’s theory that all behavior is motivated by sexual or aggres￾sive impulses.
Starting about 60 years ago, personality psychologists began turning away from 
grand theories of personality. Personality psychologists began constructing mini-theories 
of specific parts of personality. They began to focus on distinct components of the whole 
person. This allowed psychologists to focus their research on very specific questions. For 
example, how do people develop and maintain self-esteem? In what ways do high- and 
low-self-esteem persons differ from each other? Why do females drop in self-esteem, on 
average, shortly after puberty? How might a person with low self-esteem increase self￾esteem? Certainly, self-esteem is only part of personality. Nevertheless, understanding 
self-esteem contributes to knowledge about the whole person.
The whole of personality is the sum of its parts and the connections among those 
parts. Understanding the parts is required for an understanding of the whole. Most 
research in personality is on specific parts of the proverbial elephant. When these parts 
are assembled—from the dispositional to the biological, to the intrapsychic, to the cogni￾tive/experiential, to the social and cultural, to the adjustment domains—then we have the 
foundation for understanding the whole personality.
Understanding the whole elephant requires understanding all of its parts. Then 
the blind men, working together, begin to assemble a reasonable understanding of the 
whole elephant. They communicate to each other and work together to build a reason￾able understanding of what a whole elephant is like. They use diverse methods and 
approaches and communicate clearly with each other about how they see the elephant. 
Personality psychologists are like these blind men. They typically focus only on one 
domain of personality at a time. However, personality psychologists do an excellent 
job of working together, and increasingly identifying connections among the different 
domains. Personality traits, for example, are linked to the cultural transmission of reli￾gious beliefs, showing important link between the dispositional domain and the cultural 
domain. We can get an idea of the whole by knowing the diverse domains of knowledge 
about human nature and their important connections.
Final PDF to printerCHAPTER TWENTY Summary and Future Directions 627
lar31869_ch20_624-635.indd 627 10/22/22 09:27 AM
All of the contemporary research and theorizing appears to fit into the six major 
domains of knowledge. Because they formed the basic structure of this book, let’s briefly 
review each domain that you have read about.
Domains of Knowledge: Where We’ve Been, Where 
We’re Going
Each of the six domains of knowledge represents a specialty within the field of personality 
psychology. When any field of knowledge grows large and complex, workers in that field 
tend to specialize. For example, there once was a time when the field of medicine was 
more simple and all doctors were general practitioners. The knowledge base of medicine 
was small enough so that each practitioner could generally master all of it. Today the 
field of medicine is so large and complicated that no one person can know it all, so most 
doctors today are specialists. Personality psychology is much the same—a field in which 
people tend to specialize in one of the six domains of knowledge outlined in this book. In 
the remainder of this chapter, we review the main features of each of these domains of 
knowledge, ending with some predictions about likely developments in each domain.
Dispositional Domain
The dispositional domain concerns the aspects of personality that are relatively stable 
and that make people different from each other. For example, some people are outgoing 
and talkative; others are introverted and shy. Some are emotionally reactive and moody; 
others are calm and cool. Some people are conscientious and reliable; others are unde￾pendable. There are many ways in which people differ from one another, and many of 
these differences can be described as personality traits.
Major questions for psychologists working in this domain include: How many per￾sonality traits exist? How can we discover and measure them? How do personality traits 
develop? How do traits interact with situations to produce behaviors?
Trait psychologists will continue to focus on the interaction of persons and situa￾tions. Psychologists realize that behaviors always occur within a context. A formulation 
offered by Shoda and Mischel (1996) is the idea of “if . . . then . . .” relations. Shoda and 
Mischel argue that personality is a specific pattern of 
“if . . . then . . .” relationships. For example, if an adoles￾cent is aggressive, it means that certain behaviors (e.g., 
verbal insults) are likely to occur if certain situations are 
created (e.g., teased by a peer). Individual persons may 
be characterized by distinct profiles of “if . . . then . . .” 
relationships. What are the conditions under which a 
particular person will become depressed, angry, or frus￾trated? Each person has a distinct psychological signa￾ture in terms of specific “if . . . then . . .” relationships: 
The person will do behavior A when situation X occurs, 
but behavior B when situation Z occurs. Two people 
may be equally high on aggressiveness, but the situations
that trigger their aggression may differ. Understanding 
the role of situations will generate efforts to form a tax￾onomy of situations (Guillaume et al., 2016), similar to 
how the field has developed a taxonomy of traits.
Personality psychologists will likely refine their understanding of the 
conditions or situations under which certain behaviors, such as arguing, 
will be evoked in people with certain traits, such as hostility.
Final PDF to printer628 Conclusion
lar31869_ch20_624-635.indd 628 10/22/22 09:27 AM
A major emphasis of the dispositional domain concerns accurate measurement of 
traits. The dispositional domain emphasizes quantitative techniques for measuring per￾sonality. This trend will continue, with trait psychologists developing new methods for 
efficiently and accurately measuring personality characteristics, as well as new statistics 
for evaluating personality research. We will likely see an increasing amount of online 
research activity, allowing for sample sizes of a million or more people in future studies. 
As more of us spend more of our lives online, validation studies of specific dispositions 
will likely begin to assess online behaviors, such as how people use social media. Life 
outcome data (L-data introduced in Chapter 2) will include aspects of our digital or 
online life outcomes. For example, are people’s Facebook or Meta pages a reflection of 
their personality traits?
Future developments in measurement theory will impact how measures of person￾ality traits are developed and evaluated. For example, efforts are under way to allow test 
makers to assess the accuracy and validity of individual items on a personality test; in the 
past this was only done for total test scores. Other statistical developments are enabling 
personality researchers to examine causal connections between variables, even in the 
absence of experimental procedures. Statistics are being developed to better capture 
changes in personality at a population level, as well as to assess changes within individu￾als. Continued progress in statistics, measurement, and testing will be a key part of the 
dispositional domain of the future.
Different trait theories are associated with different procedures for identifying the 
most important individual differences. Some use the lexical strategy—starting with the thou￾sands of trait terms embedded within language. Others use statistical techniques to identify 
important individual differences. The future will see cooperation among these researchers 
to test whether specific trait structures are found using different procedures. Indeed, the 
search will continue for other traits not yet identified by these strategies. For example, in 
the lexical approach, early researchers deleted adjectives related to sex or that applied to 
one sex more than to the other. Examples are charming, sexy, coy, chaste, monogamous, 
and lustful (Schmitt & Buss, 2000). As a consequence of deleting these adjectives, research￾ers may have missed one or more traits related to sexuality or sex differences. The recent 
discovery of a sixth factor, honesty–humility, obtained from extensive cross-cultural research, 
represents an exciting new discovery in the dispositional domain (Thielmann et al., 2021).
Trait researchers are also beginning to look for positive aspects to otherwise “nega￾tive” traits. The concept of “healthy” neuroticism is one such example, where research￾ers are identifying the conditions under which it might be beneficial to be above average 
in neuroticism. In one of the first textbooks in personality psychology, Allport (1937) 
said that no personality trait was entirely good or entirely bad per se. Other examples of 
finding positive aspects of otherwise negative traits include the concept of “successful” 
sociopaths and positive aspects of narcissism (e.g., leadership potential).
Biological Domain
The core assumption of biological approaches to personality is that humans are bio￾logical systems. This domain concerns components within the body that influence or 
are related to personality, as well as the evolutionary causal processes responsible for 
creating those bodily mechanisms. This domain is not any more fundamental than the 
other domains, nor is knowledge about this domain any closer to the truth about per￾sonality than is the knowledge in other domains. The biological domain simply contains 
the biological systems that influence or are influenced by behaviors, feelings, and social 
Final PDF to printerCHAPTER TWENTY Summary and Future Directions 629
lar31869_ch20_624-635.indd 629 10/22/22 09:27 AM
environments. Biological processes may give rise to observable individual differences, or 
they may correlate with observable individual differences. Biological differences among 
people cause personality differences (as in the biological theory of extraversion) or may 
be the result of personality differences (as in heart disease being the long-term conse￾quence of the hostile Type A personality style).
The advent of “wearables” is also likely to influence biological studies of personal￾ity. Wearables are small physiological sensors that a person can wear that produce a con￾tinuous record of some underlying physiological process—for example, heart rate, blood 
pressure, or physical activity. Personality psychologists are just starting to use wearables 
in research on the biological aspects of personality. More and more of our physiological 
systems will be measured with wearable devices. Someday it might be possible to assess 
brain function with a wearable device that resembles headphones rather than the 7- to 
9-ton magnets that makes up today’s brain imaging devices.
One area of research likely to be active in the future concerns the psychology of 
approach and avoidance. Many current researchers on biological bases of behavior rec￾ognize two tendencies that underlie human behavior and emotion: (1) the tendency to 
feel positive emotions and to approach and (2) the tendency to feel negative emotions 
and to avoid or withdraw. Much of the research reviewed in Chapter 7 concerns exam￾ples of this theme. Examples include the work on separate brain areas associated with 
positive and negative emotions, Gray’s theory about behavioral approach and behavioral 
inhibition, and the work on sensitivity to reward and punishment. We predict that the 
motives to approach and to avoid will continue as one of the prominent themes in per￾sonality psychology.
Another major physical element within the body that influences personality is our 
genes. Our genetic makeup contributes to whether we are tall or short, have blue eyes 
or brown eyes, or tend toward being skinny or plump. Our genetic makeup influences 
behavior and personality, such as how active we are, whether we are aggressive, and 
whether we like to be with others or prefer to spend time by ourselves.
Behavioral genetics research has come a long way from the simple nature versus 
nurture question. Most of the major personality traits are now known to show some 
moderate amount of heritability (in the range of .30 to .50). With 30 to 50 percent of 
the variance in these traits due to genetic differences, that leaves 50 to 70 percent due 
to either measurement error or the environment. The environment can be broken down 
into shared and nonshared components. The shared environment is what siblings have 
in common, such as the same parents, the (presumably) same parental rearing style, the 
same schools and religious institutions, and so on. The nonshared environment con￾sists of such factors as different friends or peers outside the family, different teachers, 
different parental treatment, and random factors, such as accidents and illnesses and 
important but random life events. Researchers are pinpointing shared and nonshared 
environmental factors that appear important to personality. Thus, we will see the coun￾terintuitive scenario in which genetics researchers will focus on identifying environmen￾tal influences.
Other researchers concentrate on genetics at the molecular level. The Human 
Genome Project, which began in the 1990s, was one of the largest and most expensive 
scientific projects ever undertaken in the course of human history. The goal was to map 
the entire human genome, which was accomplished. More recently, genetics research 
has focused on molecular techniques to learn what every strand of the DNA map is 
responsible for. Progress will continue to link variation among people (including person￾ality variation) to specific locations in the human genome.
Final PDF to printer630 Conclusion
lar31869_ch20_624-635.indd 630 10/22/22 09:27 AM
Twin and adoption studies, the primary meth￾ods of behavioral genetics, use indirect methods 
that only estimate the genetic component of traits 
by assessing the resemblance of relatives. Molecular 
genetic studies, on the other hand, are able to 
directly identify the DNA markers of genetic dif￾ferences among individuals. Already, researchers 
have begun to focus these molecular techniques on 
the search for genes related to alcoholism, certain 
cognitive abilities, criminality, and impulse control. 
Personality psychologists will team with molecular 
geneticists to locate specific genes, and especially 
interactions among genes and interactions between 
genes and environments, that will relate to personal￾ity dimensions (Plomin & Davis, 2009). The genet￾ics of personality is turning out to be much more 
complicated than initially envisioned. Hundreds of genes appear to each contribute small 
amounts to explaining any personality dimension, defying simple one-gene-one-disposition 
explanations. Personality variation will turn out to be interactions between networks of 
genes that are themselves influenced (i.e., turned off or on) by environmental conditions. 
A Nobel Prize likely awaits the scientist (or scientists) who solves this puzzle.
The biological domain also includes evolutionary perspectives on personality. 
From the perspective of evolutionary psychology, personality can be analyzed at three 
levels: human nature, sex differences, and individual differences. At each of these levels, 
an evolutionary perspective poses two related questions: What adaptive problems have 
humans confronted over human evolutionary history? What psychological solutions 
have evolved in response to solve these adaptive problems?
Because adaptive problems tend to be specific—for example, the problem of food 
selection differs from the problem of mate selection—the psychological solutions also 
tend to be specific. Thus, an evolutionary perspective leads us to expect that personality 
will be quite complex, consisting of a large collection of evolved psychological mecha￾nisms, each corresponding to a specific adaptive challenge. Mate preferences, jealousy, 
fears and phobias, altruistic feelings, and dozens more all may be parts of evolved psy￾chological mechanisms, according to the evolutionary perspective.
This perspective does not claim that humans are optimally adapted, or even well 
adapted, to the conditions of modern living. Given the slow pace of evolution, we possess 
Stone Age brains inhabiting a New Age world of the internet, global travel, and modern 
medical miracles. Problems can arise when mismatches exist between the ancient world 
in which our adaptations evolved and the modern world we inhabit.
The evolutionary perspective will continue to gain in importance, although it will 
not supplant other perspectives (Buss & Hawley, 2011). Instead, evolutionary psychol￾ogy will add a new layer of questions and hence a necessary set of insights when these 
questions are answered empirically. Perhaps most critically, an evolutionary perspec￾tive asks, “What is the adaptive function of each psychological mechanism?” Posing 
questions about adaptive function lead to the discovery that human personality is even 
more complex and contains even more psychological mechanisms about which we are 
currently unaware. Rather than being motivated merely by sex and aggression, as Freud 
envisioned, humans will be found to be motivated by a dozen or more drives. But it 
should not surprise us that human personality will turn out to be so complex. After all, if 
personality were really simple, consisting of a small number of easily understood psycho￾A technician works with DNA sequence information.
Don Farrall/Getty Images
Final PDF to printerCHAPTER TWENTY Summary and Future Directions 631
lar31869_ch20_624-635.indd 631 10/22/22 09:27 AM
Intrapsychic Domain
The intrapsychic domain concerns factors within the mind that influence behavior, 
thoughts, and emotions. The pioneer of this domain was Sigmund Freud, though new 
perspectives have advanced beyond his original ideas. This domain deals with the basic 
psychological mechanisms of personality, many of which operate outside of conscious 
awareness. Theories within this domain often start with fundamental assumptions about 
the motivational system—for example, the sexual and aggressive forces that Freud pre￾sumed energized much of human activity. Research has shown that motives, even those 
outside of awareness, can be powerful and that their manifestations in actual behavior 
can be studied empirically. The intrapsychic domain also includes defense mechanisms, 
such as repression, denial, and projection, some of which have been examined in labora￾tory studies.
The contributions of psychoanalysis can be divided into two areas: classical psy￾choanalytic theory, as put forward by Freud and his direct disciples; and contempo￾rary psychoanalytic theory, consisting of extensions of and changes to these basic ideas. 
Newer views emphasize social crises rather than purely sexual conflict in personality 
development. Modern views also emphasize the importance of internalized representa￾tions of important relationships. These views see childhood as crucial to understanding 
the adult personality, but emphasize relationships, such as the attachment between an 
infant and the primary caregiver.
A fundamental assumption of psychologists working in the intrapsychic domain is 
that there are areas of the mind outside awareness. Within each person, there is a part 
of the mind that even the individual does not know about, the unconscious. In classical 
psychoanalysis, the unconscious is thought to have a life of its own. It has its own moti￾vation, its own will, and its own energy. It can interfere with the functions of the rest of 
the mind. It is thought to be the source of all psychological problems. Modern research 
on motives (e.g., the power motive, achievement motive) also draws on the notion that 
motive forces can operate outside of conscious awareness.
Psychologists will continue to be interested in unconscious psychological pro￾cesses. Many psychologists view the unconscious as an automatic information-processing 
mechanism, which can influence conscious awareness. They also see aspects of everyday 
behavior as automatic, as outside of conscious control. Impressive methods exist for 
studying the unconscious (also called the automatic parts of our behavior, thoughts, and 
emotions), including such techniques as priming and subliminal exposure. We are on the 
verge of learning much about how cognitive activity occurs outside of awareness and the 
extent to which unconscious thoughts influence behavior.
Psychoanalysis as a form of personality change and therapy is alive and well, 
with institutes and centers for psychoanalysis in most major cities in the United States. 
Despite rumors to the contrary, psychoanalysis as a form of personality change is not 
dead, and we are likely to see more empirical research evaluating the process and effec￾tiveness of contemporary psychoanalytically inspired forms of therapy. There are even 
rudimentary apps for smartphones that simulate various forms of therapy, though it is 
hard to envision how a transference relationship could happen to one’s phone!
Cognitive/Experiential Domain
The cognitive/experiential domain centers on subjective experience and other mental 
processes, such as thoughts, feelings, beliefs, and desires about oneself and others. One 
central concept in this domain is the self. Some aspects of the self describe how we 
Final PDF to printer632 Conclusion
lar31869_ch20_624-635.indd 632 10/22/22 09:27 AM
possible future selves. Do we see ourselves as good or as 
evil? Are our past successes or past failures prominent 
in our self-views? Do we envision ourselves in a positive 
future? Psychologists will continue to focus their atten￾tion on self-concept and identity. It is likely that virtual 
reality will include virtual selves, and allow people to 
experience very different self-concepts than their innate 
self-concept. Indeed, the engineered experiences that 
make up virtual realities will likely prove useful in study￾ing how personality shapes our experience of reality, vir￾tual or otherwise.
A modern metaphor informing personality psy￾chology is the information-processing, or computer, 
metaphor. Humans take in sensory information; process 
it through an elaborate cognitive system, which selects 
and modifies from the vast array of information avail￾able; then store it in memories, which do not bear a 
one-to-one relationship with the original events. At every 
step along the way—from attention and perception to 
memory and recall—there are opportunities for personal￾ity to influence the process. Using this information pro￾cessing framework, personality can be thought of as the consistent errors in information 
processing that a person makes. For example, one person might consistently see others 
as more trustworthy than they really are, or another person might consistently over-react 
to minor life events. Artificial intelligence (AI) systems can process information faster, 
more accurately, and more reliably than any human. But if you designed an AI system 
with a personality, what would you add into that system? Would you add in some error 
or biases to tilt the outcome one way or the other?
A different aspect of the cognitive/experiential domain pertains to the goals peo￾ple strive for. This tradition views personality through the personal projects of individu￾als. Goal concepts will continue to be important within personality psychology. Goals 
are often individual expressions of social or institutional norms or standards, so the goal 
concept may be one route whereby psychologists can study relationships between indi￾viduals and broader social systems such as culture.
Another aspect of subjective experience entails emotions. Is a person habitually 
happy or sad? What makes a person angry or fearful? Joy, sadness, feelings of triumph, and 
feelings of despair are all elements in our subjective experience subsumed by the cognitive￾experiential domain. If you want to learn what is important to a person, really important, ask 
about their emotions. When was the last time he or she was angry? What makes him or her 
sad? What does he or she fear? Emotions are likely to continue to be important concepts in 
personality. If you designed an AI system, and wanted to give it emotions, what would you 
program into that system? Would it be possible to give Alexa or Siri emotions? Would it be 
possible to give Alexa or Siri a self-concept? Personality psychologists will likely play a role 
in designing more human-like AI systems and digital assistants of the future.
Social and Cultural Domain
One of the novel features of this text is an emphasis on the social and cultural aspects of 
personality. Personality is not something that merely resides within the heads, nervous 
systems, and genes of individuals. Rather, personality affects, and is affected by, the sig￾nificant others in our lives.
American actor Richard Gere, who often plays violent characters on film, 
leads a very different private life. As a practicing Buddhist, Gere believes 
in the principle of nonviolence. He is shown here speaking at an event 
for the National Day of Action for Tibet, 1998, in Washington, D.C. The 
development of the self and social identity, especially in complex and 
contradictory lives, will continue to fascinate personality psychologists.
Tom Williams/CQ Roll Call/Getty Images
Final PDF to printerCHAPTER TWENTY Summary and Future Directions 633
lar31869_ch20_624-635.indd 633 10/22/22 09:27 AM
Humans are not passive recipients of their environments, and personality plays a 
key role in social interaction. We selectively enter some interpersonal environments and 
selectively avoid others. We actively choose our mates and friends. We evoke reactions 
from others, sometimes quite unintentionally. And we actively influence or manipulate 
those occupying our social worlds. Personality influences these processes of selection, 
evocation, and manipulation. Emotionally unstable individuals, for example, tend to 
choose similarly unstable persons as romantic partners; they evoke predictable forms 
of anger in those partners through their moodiness; and they more often use the “silent 
treatment” as a tactic for influencing their partners. Personality, in short, expresses itself 
through our social selections, evocations, and manipulations.
One important social sphere concerns relations between men and women. 
Personality may operate differently for men than for women in some domains. An essen￾tial part of our identity is gender. Much of what we call gender may have its origins in 
culture, in how society makes up different rules, roles, and expectations for men and 
women. Cultural expectations around gender change slowly, but they are changing. One 
example is the non-binary view, the idea that a person need not feel entirely male or 
entirely female, or indeed feel that the gender binary does not apply to them at all. As 
culture changes, people tend to think about themselves and others in entirely new ways.
Other aspects of gender may lie in evolved behavior patterns that represent adapta￾tions to different pressures that faced men and women in the past. Gender differences 
will continue to be a compelling interest of personality psychologists. In an effort to 
understand gender differences, it is likely that personality psychologists will enlist the 
help of specialists from other disciplines, such as anthropologists, animal behaviorists, 
sociologists, and biologists.
At the cultural level, it is clear that groups differ from one another. Some cultures 
are individualistic: People prefer to make their own decisions, be responsible primarily 
for themselves, and emphasize individual rights. Other cultures are more collectivistic 
or more interdependent. People see themselves as part of a social group and think less 
of their individual needs and more about their group’s needs. Personality differences 
among these groups may be instances of transmitted culture or evoked culture. Some 
psychologists assume that such differences are caused by transmitted culture—ideas, 
values, and representations passed on from parents and socializing agents to children 
within their culture, down the generations. Other psychologists, however, propose that 
these are instances of evoked culture. According to this view, everyone may have the 
evolved capacity to be individualistic and preoccupied with their self. And everyone may 
also have the evolved capacity to be communal and concerned with the greater good of 
the group. Which of these capacities any one individual displays may depend on whether 
one lives in a culture that is highly mobile, with few kin in close proximity (evoking an 
individualistic proclivity), or highly stable, with many kin in close proximity (evoking 
a collectivistic proclivity). Environmental variables such as pathogen prevalence may 
influence an evoked culture of group conformity. This fascinating new direction repre￾sents a theoretical fusion of cultural psychology and evolutionary psychology.
The study of culture and cross-cultural differences and similarities will continue to 
grow in personality psychology. Our world is increasingly becoming a global community. 
Diversity is a fact of daily life in many nations or in certain areas within a nation. Many 
of us encounter people from different cultures at our schools, our jobs, our social lives, 
and in our communities. There is a growing interdependence among people from dif￾ferent backgrounds. An important goal of personality psychology will be to understand 
how cultures shape personality and how specific cultures are different from, or similar 
to, each other. This will grow in importance as more and more people from different 
cultures come into contact with each other.
Final PDF to printer634 Conclusion
lar31869_ch20_624-635.indd 634 10/22/22 09:27 AM
Adjustment Domain
Personality plays a key role in how we cope, adapt, and adjust to the ebb and flow of 
events in our lives. Personality is linked with important health outcomes, such as heart 
disease. Personality is linked to a variety of health-promoting (regular exercise, healthy 
eating habits, regular medical exams) and health-suppressing (smoking, alcohol abuse, 
risk taking) behavior. Personality is even linked to how long we live. The role of per￾sonality in relation to health and well-being will continue to occupy personality psy￾chologists of the future. There has been a shift toward looking at the role of positive 
emotions, and this emphasis on the positive in psychology is likely to be a part of per￾sonality psychology. In addition, several longitudinal studies were started decades ago 
in various communities around the United States. Participants in these longitudinal 
projects are now aging adults, with many experiencing the long-term effects of various 
health-promoting or health-suppressing behaviors. To the extent that personality influ￾ences whether a person engages in those behaviors, research will uncover the long-term 
health effects of personality.
Another trend in health is the development of “big data,” data sets that contain 
a large amount and variety of information on a large number of persons. For example, 
Google recently announced “Project Nightingale,” an artificial intelligence program that 
will seek out and harvest extensive medical and lifestyle information on up to 50 million 
people, a data set that will be both deep (much information) and wide (many people). 
While many worry about privacy issues regarding their personal medical information, 
Google argues that its big data approach will make better and more personalized medi￾cal care possible. Big data sets can be used to answer questions about personality and 
health and will be able to detect novel findings or effects that might have been missed by 
smaller studies. In 2019 Google purchased the company Fitbit, a wearable device maker. 
It is likely that Google will integrate physical data 
Interacting with people from different cultures is a fact of daily life in many parts of the world. Understanding how 
people from different cultures are different from, or similar to, each other will continue to be an important part of 
personality psychology.
Rawpixel.com/Shutterstock
Final PDF to printerCHAPTER TWENTY Summary and Future Directions 635
lar31869_ch20_624-635.indd 635 10/22/22 09:27 AM
data approach. Other companies with AI plans (e.g., Apple, Amazon) are also moving to 
a big data to study and understand the factors that influence health, illness, and medical 
care, including personality factors.
Some important problems in coping and adjustment can be traced to personal￾ity disorders. An understanding of “normal” personality functioning can be deepened 
by examining disorders of personality, and vice versa. Psychologists have applied the 
trait approach to understanding personality disorders. This will sharpen our descriptive 
understanding of personality disorders. In terms of causal understanding, we predict the 
future will likely see breakthroughs in our understanding of the causes of these disorders. 
This will be made possible by long-term epidemiological studies using extensive data 
sources, such as whole genome sequencing information and neuroimaging data, along 
with other life experience and life outcome data.
Integration: Personality in the Twenty-First Century
The six domains of knowledge are complementary, not conflicting. People have many 
facets, and these facets can be observed and studied from many different perspectives. 
To say that people have evolved psychological mechanisms to solve social problems 
does not imply that the principles of psychoanalysis are wrong. Similarly, to say that a 
portion of the variance in personality traits is due to genetics does not in any way imply 
that people do not develop or change their personalities in adulthood.
Exciting personality research will occur at the boundaries of domains. Examples 
include collaborations among brain researchers using functional magnetic resonance 
imaging (fMRI) technology to conduct brain scans and psychologists studying inter￾personal dispositions, collaborations between cultural and evolutionary psycholo￾gists to study the causal origins and nature of cultural differences, and collaborations 
between dispositional researchers and cognitive psychologists to study the information￾processing mechanisms underlying stable individual differences. The most interesting 
efforts involve making to make connections among domains or between personality psy￾chology and other scientific fields.
Progress in this millennium will depend on researchers’ willingness and ability to 
reach across domains. The most exciting progress will occur when researchers, perhaps 
working on multidisciplinary teams, combine different levels of analysis and different 
methods in approaching central questions of importance to the field. Building bridges 
that link domains of knowledge together in new and interesting ways will have the most 
impact on how we understand human nature.
If we look at the field of personality psychology today, we can find examples of 
bridges that are already being built among domains. For example, with approach and 
avoidance motivation, psychologists are studying this phenomenon through brain activ￾ity, exploring the developmental course of these motives, examining cultural differences 
evoked by predictable environmental factors, and delving into how these traits contrib￾ute to disorders. It is likely that centers of research will be a model for progress, with 
groups of diverse scientists—such as trait psychologists, biological psychologists, cultural 
psychologists, and health psychologists—all working together on questions important to 
the field of personality psychology. It is not hard to imagine interesting possibilities. For 
example, it probably won’t be long before psychologists interested in repressed mem￾ories approach the topic with fMRI brain scans or before psychologists interested in 
self-esteem begin looking both at neurochemistry and at cultural and evolutionary influ￾ences. As we move forward in the twenty-first century, the possibilities for increasing our 
knowledge of human nature are truly exciting.
Final PDF to printer636
lar31869_glo_636-664 636 10/22/22 10:21 AM
Glossary
a
abnormal Broadly defined, the term 
abnormal is based on current levels of 
societal tolerance. In this sense, 
behaviors that society deems 
unacceptable would be labeled as 
abnormal (e.g., incest and child abuse). 
Because tolerance levels (e.g., toward 
homosexuality) can change over time, 
psychologists have started directing 
their attention toward people’s 
subjective views and experiences. 
Anxiety, depression, and feelings of 
loneliness may be linked to disorganized 
thought patterns, disruptive perceptions, 
or unusual beliefs. These may inhibit a 
person’s ability to work or socialize, and 
may all be considered abnormal.
abnormal psychology The study of the 
various mental disorders, including 
thought disorders (such as 
schizophrenia), emotional disorders 
(such as depression), and personality 
disorders (such as the antisocial 
personality).
acculturation The process of, after 
arriving in a new culture, adapting to 
the ways of life and beliefs common in 
that new culture.
achievement view of intelligence The 
achievement view of intelligence is 
associated with educational attainment—
how much knowledge a person has 
acquired relative to others in his or her 
age cohort.
acquiescence (also known as yea 
saying) A response set that refers to the 
tendency to agree with questionnaire 
items regardless of the content of those 
items.
action tendencies Increases in the 
probabilities of certain behaviors that 
accompany emotions. The activity, or 
action tendency, associated with fear, 
for example, is to flee or to fight.
active genotype–environment 
correlation Occurs when a person 
with a particular genotype creates or 
seeks out a particular environment.
actometer A mechanical motion￾recording device, often in the form of a 
watch attached to the wrist. It has been 
used, for example, in research on the 
activity level of children during several 
play periods. Motoric movement 
activates the recording device.
acute stress Results from the sudden 
onset of demands or events that seem to 
be beyond the control of the individual. 
This type of stress is often experienced 
as tension headaches, emotional upsets, 
gastrointestinal disturbances, and 
feelings of agitation and pressure.
adaptations Inherited solutions to the 
survival and reproductive problems 
posed by the hostile forces of nature. 
Adaptations are the primary product of 
the selective process. An adaptation is a 
“reliably developing structure in the 
organism, which, because it meshes 
with the recurrent structure of the 
world, causes the solution to an 
adaptive problem” (Tooby & Cosmides, 
1992, p. 104).
adaptive problem Anything that 
impedes survival or reproduction. All 
adaptations must contribute to fitness 
during the period of time in which they 
evolve by helping an organism survive, 
reproduce, or facilitate the reproductive 
success of genetic relatives. Adaptations 
emerge from and interact with recurrent 
structures of the world in a manner that 
solves adaptive problems and hence 
aids in reproductive success.
additive effects The effects of different 
kinds of stress that add up and 
accumulate in a person over time.
adjacency In Wiggins circumplex 
model, adjacency indicates how close 
the traits are to each other on the 
circumference of the circumplex. Those 
variables that are adjacent or next to 
each other within the model are 
positively correlated.
adjustment domain Personality plays a 
key role in how we cope, adapt, and 
adjust to the ebb and flow of events in 
our day-to-day lives. In addition to 
health consequences of adjusting to 
stress, certain personality features are 
related to poor social or emotional 
adjustment and have been designated as 
personality disorders.
adoption studies Studies that examine 
the correlations between adopted 
children and their adoptive parents, 
with whom they share no genes. These 
correlations are then compared to the 
correlations between the adopted 
children and their genetic parents, who 
had no influence on the environments 
of the children. Differences in these 
correlations can indicate the relative 
magnitude of genetic and environment 
contributions to personality traits.
affect intensity Larsen and Diener 
(1987) describe high affect intensity 
individuals as people who typically 
experience their emotions strongly and 
are emotionally reactive and variable. 
Low affect intensity individuals typically 
experience their emotions only mildly 
and with only gradual fluctuations and 
minor reactions.
aggregation Adding up or averaging 
several single observations, resulting in 
a better (i.e., more reliable) measure of 
a personality trait than a single 
observation of behavior. This approach 
implies that personality traits refer to 
average tendencies in behavior, how 
people behave on average.
agreeableness Agreeableness is the 
second of the personality traits in the 
five-factor model, a model which has 
proven to be replicable in studies using 
English-language trait words as items. 
Some of the key adjective markers for 
Agreeableness are “good natured,” 
“cooperative,” “mild/gentle,” “not 
jealous.”
alarm stage The first stage in Selye’s 
general adaptation syndrome (GAS). 
The alarm stage consists of the flight-or￾fight response of the sympathetic 
nervous system and the associated 
peripheral nervous system reactions. 
These include the release of hormones, 
which prepare our bodies for challenge.
allostatic load Refers to the 
cumulative burden of chronic stress 
over time and involves the physiological 
consequences of exposure to repeated 
or prolonged stress. It can be thought of 
as the total “wear and tear” on one’s 
body from stress, and is assumed to add 
up over time.
alpha and beta press Murray 
introduced the notion that there is a 
real environment (what he called alpha 
press or objective reality) and a 
perceived environment (called beta 
press or reality as it is perceived). In any 
Final PDF to printerGLOSSARY
lar31869_glo_636-664 637 10/22/22 10:21 AM
637
id, or harsh controls exerted by the 
superego. Freud identified three 
different types of anxiety: neurotic 
anxiety, moral anxiety, and objective 
anxiety. According to Rogers, the 
unpleasant emotional state of anxiety is 
the result of having an experience that 
does not fit with one’s self-conception.
apperception The notion that a 
person’s needs influence how he or she 
perceives the environment, especially 
when the environment is ambiguous. 
The act of interpreting the environment 
and perceiving the meaning of what is 
going on in a situation.
aptitude view of intelligence The 
aptitude view of intelligence sees 
intelligence less as the product of 
education and more as an ability to 
become educated, as the ability or 
aptitude to learn.
arousal level and arousability In 
Eysenck’s original theory of 
extraversion, he held that extraverts had 
lower levels of cortical or brain arousal 
than introverts. More recent research 
suggests that the difference between 
introverts and extraverts lies more in 
the arousability of their nervous 
systems, with extraverts showing less 
arousability or reactivity than introverts 
to the same levels of sensory 
stimulation.
arteriosclerosis Hardening or blocking 
of the arteries. When the arteries that 
feed the heart muscle itself become 
blocked, the subsequent shortage of 
blood to the heart is called a heart 
attack.
ascending reticular activating system 
(ARAS) A structure in the brain stem 
thought to control overall cortical 
arousal; the structure Eysenck originally 
thought was responsible for differences 
between introverts and extraverts.
assortative mating The phenomenon 
whereby people marry people similar to 
themselves. In addition to personality, 
people also show assortative mating on 
a number of physical characteristics, 
such as height and weight.
attachment Begins in the human 
infant when he or she develops a 
preference for people over objects. 
Then the preference begins to narrow to 
familiar persons so that the child 
prefers to see people he or she has seen 
before, compared to strangers. Finally, 
the preference narrows even further so 
anal stage The second stage in Freud’s 
psychosexual stages of development. 
The anal stage typically occurs between 
the ages of 18 months and three years. 
At this stage, the anal sphincter is the 
source of sexual pleasure, and the child 
obtains pleasure from first expelling 
feces and then, during toilet training, 
from retaining feces. Adults who are 
compulsive, overly neat, rigid, and never 
messy are, according to psychoanalytic 
theory, likely to be fixated at the anal 
stage.
analytic To describe something 
analytically is to explain the event with 
the object detached from its context, 
attributes of objects or people assigned 
to categories, and a reliance on rules 
about the categories to explain behavior.
androgynous In certain personality 
instruments, the masculinity dimension 
contains items reflecting assertiveness, 
boldness, dominance, self-sufficiency, 
and instrumentality. The femininity 
dimension contains items that reflect 
nurturance, expression of emotions, and 
empathy. Those persons who scored 
high on both dimensions are labeled 
androgynous, to reflect the notion that a 
single person can possess both 
masculine and feminine characteristics.
anterior cingulate Located deep 
toward the center of the brain, the 
anterior cingulate cortex most likely 
evolved early in the evolution of the 
nervous system. In experiments utilizing 
fMRI to trace increased activation of 
parts of the brain, the anterior cingulate 
cortex seems to be an area of the brain 
associated with affect, including social 
rejection.
antisocial personality disorder A person 
suffering from antisocial personality 
disorder has a general disregard for 
others and cares very little about the 
rights, feelings, or happiness of other 
people. Also referred to as a sociopath 
or psychopath, a person suffering from 
antisocial personality disorder is easily 
irritated, assaultive, reckless, 
irresponsible, glib or superficially 
charming, impulsive, callous, and 
indifferent to the suffering of others.
anxiety An unpleasant, high-arousal 
emotional state associated with 
perceived threat. In the psychoanalytic 
tradition, anxiety is seen as a signal that 
the control of the ego is being 
threatened by reality, impulses from the 
situation, what one person “sees” may 
be different from what another “sees.” If 
two people walk down a street and a 
third person smiles at each of them, one 
person might “see” the smile as a sign 
of friendliness while the other person 
might “see” the smile as a smirk. 
Objectively (alpha press), it is the same 
smile; subjectively (beta press), it may 
be a different event for the two people.
alpha wave A particular type of brain 
wave that oscillates 8 to 12 times a 
second. The amount of alpha wave 
present in a given time period is an 
inverse indicator of brain activity during 
that time period. The alpha wave is 
given off when the person is calm and 
relaxed. In a given time period of brain 
wave recording, the more alpha wave 
activity present the more we can assume 
that part of the brain was less active.
ambivalent relationship style In Hazan 
and Shaver’s ambivalent relationship 
style, adults are vulnerable and 
uncertain about relationships. 
Ambivalent adults become overly 
dependent and demanding on their 
partners and friends. They display high 
levels of neediness in their relationships. 
They are high maintenance partners in 
the sense that they need constant 
reassurance and attention.
ambivalently attached Ambivalently 
attached infants, as determined by 
Ainsworth’s strange situation paradigm, 
are very anxious about the mother 
leaving. They often start crying and 
protesting vigorously before the mother 
even gets out of the room. While the 
mother is gone, these infants are 
difficult to calm. Upon her return, 
however, these infants behave 
ambivalently. Their behavior shows 
both anger and the desire to be close to 
the mother; they approach her but then 
resist by squirming and fighting against 
being held.
Americans with Disability Act 
(ADA) The ADA states that an 
employer cannot conduct a medical 
examination, or even make inquiries as 
to whether an applicant has a disability, 
during the selection process. Moreover, 
even if a disability is obvious, the 
employer cannot ask about the nature 
or severity of that disability.
amygdala A section of the limbic or 
emotional system of the brain that is 
responsible for fear.
Final PDF to printerGLOSSARY
lar31869_glo_636-664 638 10/22/22 10:21 AM
638
are a very social species, and most 
people possess a strong need to belong 
to groups. Being accepted by others and 
welcomed into a group represents a 
somewhat more psychological need than 
the physiological needs or the need for 
safety.
beta press See alpha and beta press.
biological domain The core 
assumption of biological approaches to 
personality is that humans are, first and 
foremost, collections of biological 
systems, and these systems provide the 
building blocks (e.g., brain, nervous 
system) for behavior, thought, and 
emotion. Biological approaches 
typically refers to three areas of 
research within this general domain: the 
genetics of personality, the 
psychophysiology of personality, and 
the evolution of personality.
bipolarity In Wiggins circumplex 
model, traits located at opposite sides of 
the circle and negatively correlated with 
each other. Specifying this bipolarity is 
useful because nearly every 
interpersonal trait within the personality 
sphere has another trait that is its 
opposite.
blindsight Following an injury or 
stroke that damages the primary vision 
center in the brain, a person may lose 
some or all of his or her ability to see. 
In this blindness the eyes still bring 
information into the brain, but the brain 
center responsible for object 
recognition fails. People who suffer this 
“cortical” blindness often display an 
interesting capacity to make judgments 
about objects that they truly cannot see.
blood pressure The pressure exerted 
by the blood on the inside of the artery 
walls, and is typically expressed with 
two numbers: diastolic and systolic 
pressure. The systolic pressure is the 
larger number, and it refers to the 
maximum pressure within the 
cardiovascular system produced when 
the heart muscle contracts. The 
diastolic pressure is the smaller number, 
and it refers to the resting pressure 
inside the system between heart 
contractions.
borderline personality disorder The life 
of the borderline personality is marked 
by instability. Their relationships are 
unstable, their emotions are unstable, 
their behavior is unstable, and even 
their image of themselves is unstable. 
others. Avoidant adults remain 
suspicious of the motives of others, and 
they are afraid of making commitments. 
They are afraid of depending on others 
because they anticipate being 
disappointed, let down, abandoned, or 
separated.
avoidantly attached Avoidantly 
attached infants in Ainsworth’s strange 
situation avoided the mother when she 
returned. Infants in this group typically 
seemed unfazed when the mother left 
and did not give her much attention 
when she returned. Avoidant children 
seem to be aloof from their mothers. 
Approximately 20 percent of infants fall 
into this category.
b
Balancing selection When genetic 
variation is maintained by selection 
because different levels of a personality 
trait are adaptive in different 
environments.
Balkanization Social resegregation 
following a time of peaceful integration 
and social diversity. The term is derived 
from the breakup of Yugoslavia on the 
Balkan peninsula during the 1990s, in 
which national groups split apart and 
resegregated the formerly integrated 
countries in the Balkans.
Barnum statements Generalities or 
statements that could apply to anyone. 
A good example is the astrology column 
published in daily newspapers.
behavioral activation system (BAS) In 
Gray’s reinforcement sensitivity theory, 
the system that is responsive to 
incentives, such as cues for reward, and 
regulates approach behavior. When 
some stimulus is recognized as 
potentially rewarding, the BAS triggers 
approach behavior. This system is 
highly correlated with the trait of 
extraversion.
behavioral inhibition system (BIS) In 
Gray’s reinforcement sensitivity theory, 
the system responsive to cues for 
punishment, frustration, and 
uncertainty. The effect of BIS activation 
is to cease or inhibit behavior or to 
bring about avoidance behavior. This 
system is highly correlated with the trait 
of neuroticism.
beliefs See theories and beliefs.
belongingness needs The third level of 
Maslow’s motivation hierarchy. Humans 
that the child prefers the mother or 
primary caretaker over anyone else.
attraction similarity theory States that 
individuals are attracted to those whose 
personalities are similar to their own. In 
other words, “birds of a feather flock 
together” or “like attracts like.” As of 
2003, attraction similarity has been 
proven to be the dominant attraction 
theory except in biological sex choices 
(i.e., women tend to be attracted to men 
and vice versa).
attributional optimism A specific 
combination of attributions.
attributional style Whenever someone 
offers a cause or explanation for some 
negative event, that cause can be 
analyzed in terms of the three categories 
of attributions: internal–external, 
stable–unstable, and global–specific. 
The tendency a person has to employ 
certain combinations of attributions in 
explaining events (e.g., internal, stable, 
and global causes) is called their 
attributional, or explanatory, style.
autonomic nervous system (ANS) That 
part of the peripheral nervous system 
that connects to vital bodily structures 
associated with maintaining life and 
responding to emergencies (e.g., storing 
and releasing energy), such as the 
beating of the heart, respiration, and 
controlling blood pressure. There are 
two divisions of the ANS: the 
sympathetic and parasympathetic 
branches.
average tendencies Tendency to 
display a certain psychological trait with 
regularity. For example, on average, a 
high-talkative person will start more 
conversations than a low-talkative 
person. This idea explains why the 
principle of aggregation works when 
measuring personality.
avoidant personality disorder The 
major feature is a pervasive feeling of 
inadequacy and sensitivity to criticism 
from others. The avoidant personality 
will go to great lengths to avoid 
situations in which others may have 
opportunities to criticize his or her 
performance or character, such as 
school or work or other group settings. 
Such a person may avoid making new 
friends or going to new places because 
of fear of criticism or disapproval.
avoidant relationship style In Hazan 
and Shaver’s avoidant relationship style, 
the adult has difficulty learning to trust 
Final PDF to printerGLOSSARY
lar31869_glo_636-664 639 10/22/22 10:21 AM
639
cognitive approaches Differences in 
how people think form the focus of 
cognitive approaches to personality. 
Psychologists working in this approach 
focus on the components of cognition, 
such as how people perceive, interpret, 
remember, and plan, in their efforts to 
understand how and why people are 
different from each other.
cognitive schema A schema is a way of 
processing incoming information and of 
organizing and interpreting the facts of 
daily life. The cognitive schema 
involved in depression, according to 
Beck, distorts the incoming information 
in a negative way that makes the person 
depressed.
cognitive social learning approach A 
number of modern personality theories 
have expanded on the notion that 
personality is expressed in goals and in 
how people think about themselves 
relative to their goals. Collectively 
these theories form an approach that 
emphasizes the cognitive and social 
processes whereby people learn to 
value and strive for certain goals over 
others.
cognitive triad According to Beck, 
there are three important areas of life 
that are most influenced by the 
depressive cognitive schema. This 
cognitive triad refers to information 
about the self, about the world, and 
about the future.
cognitive unconscious In the cognitive 
view of the unconscious, the content of 
the unconscious mind is assumed to 
operate just like thoughts in 
consciousness. Thoughts are 
unconscious because they are not in 
conscious awareness, not because they 
have been repressed or because they 
represent unacceptable urges or wishes.
cognitive-experiential domain This 
domain focuses on cognition and 
subjective experience, such as conscious 
thoughts, feelings, beliefs, and desires 
about oneself and others. This domain 
includes our feelings of self, identity, 
self-esteem, our goals and plans, and 
our emotions.
cohort effects Personality change over 
time as a reflection of the social times in 
which an individual or group of 
individuals live. For example, American 
women’s trait scores on assertiveness 
have risen and fallen depending on the 
social and historical cohort in which 
terms. An example of a categorical 
approach to emotion is that of Paul 
Ekman, who applies criteria of distinct 
and universal facial expressions, and 
whose list of primary emotions contains 
disgust, sadness, joy, surprise, anger, 
and fear.
categorical view In psychiatry and 
clinical psychology today, the dominant 
approach to viewing personality 
disorders in distinct categories. There is 
a qualitative distinction made in which 
people who have a disorder are in one 
category, whereas people who do not 
have the disorder are in another 
category.
causal attribution A person’s 
explanation of the cause of some event.
chronic stress Stress that does not 
end, like an abusive relationship that 
grinds the individual down until his or 
her resistance is eroded. Chronic stress 
can result in serious systemic diseases 
such as diabetes, decreased immune 
system functioning, or cardiovascular 
disease.
chronotype Refers to a person’s 
preference for morningness or 
eveningness, and is related to that 
person’s underlying circadian rhythm 
length, with a longer circadian rhythm 
related to the chronotype of 
evenineness, and a shorter circadian 
rhythm related to the chronotype of 
morningness.
circadian rhythm Many biological 
processes fluctuate around an 
approximate 24- to 25-hour cycle. These 
are called circadian rhythms (circa =
around; dia = day). Circadian rhythms in 
temporal isolation studies have been 
found to be as short as 16 hours in one 
person, and as long as 50 hours in another 
person (Wehr & Goodwin, 1981).
client-centered therapy In Rogers’s 
client-centered therapy, clients are never 
given interpretations of their problem. 
Nor are clients given any direction 
about what course of action to take to 
solve their problem. The therapist 
makes no attempts to change the client 
directly. Instead, the therapist tries to 
create an atmosphere in which the 
client may change him- or herself.
cognition A general term referring to 
awareness and thinking as well as to 
specific mental acts such as perceiving, 
interpreting, remembering, believing, 
and anticipating.
Persons with borderline personality 
disorder, compared to those without, 
have a higher incidence rate of 
childhood physical or sexual abuse, 
neglect, or early parental loss.
broaden and build model of positive 
emotions A model that suggests that 
positive emotions broaden the scope of 
cognition, and build up resources for 
coping.
byproducts of adaptations Evolutionary 
mechanisms that are not adaptations, 
but rather are byproducts of other 
adaptations. Our nose, for example, is 
clearly an adaptation designed for 
smelling. But the fact that we use our 
nose to hold up our eyeglasses is an 
incidental byproduct.
c
cardiac reactivity The increase in 
blood pressure and heart rate during 
times of stress. Evidence suggests that 
chronic cardiac reactivity contributes to 
coronary artery disease.
case study method Examining the life 
of one person in particular depth, which 
can give researchers insights into 
personality that can then be used to 
formulate a more general theory that is 
tested in a larger population. They can 
also provide in-depth knowledge of a 
particularly outstanding individual. 
Case studies are useful when studying 
rare phenomena, such as a person with 
a photographic memory or a person 
with multiple personalities—cases for 
which large samples would be difficult 
or impossible to obtain.
castration anxiety Freud argued that 
little boys come to believe that their 
fathers might make a preemptive 
Oedipal strike and take away what is at 
the root of the Oedipal conflict: the 
boy’s penis. This fear of losing his penis 
is called castration anxiety; it drives the 
little boy into giving up his sexual desire 
for his mother.
categorical approach Researchers who 
suggest emotions are best thought of as 
a small number of primary and distinct 
emotions (anger, joy, anxiety, sadness) 
are said to take the categorical 
approach. Emotion researchers who 
take the categorical approach have tried 
to reduce the complexity of emotions by 
searching for the primary emotions that 
underlie the great variety of emotion 
Final PDF to printerGLOSSARY
lar31869_glo_636-664 640 10/22/22 10:21 AM
640
emotions is someone who might be 
characterized as happy, cheerful, and 
enthusiastic. Thus, the notion of 
content leads us to consider the kinds of 
emotions that people are likely to 
experience over time and across 
situations in their lives.
continuity Identity has an element of 
continuity because many of its aspects, 
such as gender, ethnicity, 
socioeconomic status, educational level, 
and occupation, are constant. Having 
an identity means that others can count 
on you to be reliable in who you are and 
how you act.
contrast Identity contrast means that 
a person’s social identity differentiates 
that person from other people. An 
identity is the combination of 
characteristics that makes a person 
unique in the eyes of others.
convergent validity Whether a test 
correlates with other measures that it 
should correlate with.
core conditions According to Carl 
Rogers, in client-centered therapy three 
core conditions must be present in 
order for progress to occur: (1) an 
atmosphere of genuine acceptance on 
the part of the therapist, (2) the 
therapist must express unconditional 
positive regard for the client, and (3) 
the client must feel that the therapist 
understands him or her (empathic 
understanding).
correlation coefficient (its direction and 
magnitude) Researchers are interested 
in the direction (positive or negative) 
and the magnitude (size) of the 
correlation coefficient. Correlations 
around .10 are considered small; those 
around .30 are considered medium; and 
those around .50 or greater are 
considered large (Cohen & Cohen, 
1975).
correlational method A statistical 
procedure for determining whether 
there is a relationship between two 
variables. In correlational research 
designs, the researcher is attempting to 
directly identify the relationships 
between two or more variables, without 
imposing the sorts of manipulations 
seen in experimental designs.
cortisol A stress hormone that 
prepares the body to flee or fight. 
Increases in cortisol in the blood 
indicate that the animal has recently 
experienced stress.
conditions of worth According to 
Rogers, the requirements set forth by 
parents or significant others for earning 
their positive regard are called 
conditions of worth. Children may 
become preoccupied with living up to 
these conditions of worth rather than 
discovering what makes them happy.
confirmatory bias The tendency to 
look only for evidence that confirms a 
previous hunch and not to look for 
evidence that might disconfirm a belief.
conscientiousness The third of the 
personality traits in the five-factor 
model, which has proven to be 
replicable in studies using English￾language trait words as items. Some of 
the key adjective markers for 
Conscientiousness are “responsible,” 
“scrupulous,” “persevering,” “fussy/
tidy.”
conscious goals A person’s awareness 
of what he or she desires and believes is 
valuable and worth pursuing.
conscious That part of the mind that 
contains all the thoughts, feelings, and 
images that a person is presently aware 
of. Whatever a person is currently 
thinking about is in his or her conscious 
mind.
consistency Trait theories assume 
there is some degree of consistency in 
personality over time. If someone is 
highly extraverted during one period of 
observation, trait psychologists tend to 
assume that she will be extraverted 
tomorrow, next week, a year from now, 
or even decades from now.
construct validity A test that measures 
what it claims to measure, correlates 
with what it is supposed to correlate 
with, and does not correlate with what it 
is not supposed to correlate with.
construct A concept or provable 
hypothesis that summarizes a set of 
observations and conveys the meaning 
of those observations (e.g., gravity).
constructive memory It is accepted as 
fact that humans have a constructive 
memory; that is, memory contributes to 
or influences in various ways (adds to, 
subtracts from, etc.) what is recalled. 
Recalled memories are rarely distortion￾free, mirror images of the facts.
content The content of emotional life 
refers to the characteristic or typical 
emotions a person is likely to 
experience over time. Someone whose 
emotional life contains a lot of pleasant 
they have lived. Jean Twenge has 
posited that individuals internalize 
social change and absorb the cultural 
messages they receive from their 
culture, all of which, in turn, can affect 
their personalities.
combinations of Big Five 
variables “Traits” are often examined 
in combinations. For example, two 
people high in extraversion would be 
very different if one was an extraverted 
neurotic and the other was extraverted 
but emotionally stable.
comorbidity When two or more 
disorders occur at the same time in the 
same person.
compatibility and integration across 
domains and levels A theory that takes 
into account the principles and laws of 
other scientific domains that may affect 
the study’s main subject. For example, a 
theory of biology that violated known 
principles of chemistry would be judged 
fatally flawed.
competitive achievement 
motivation Also referred to as the need 
for achievement, it is a subtrait in the 
Type A behavior pattern. Type A people 
like to work hard and achieve goals. 
They like recognition and overcoming 
obstacles and feel they are at their best 
when competing with others.
complementary needs theory Theory of 
attraction that postulates that people 
are attracted to people whose 
personality dispositions differ from 
theirs. In other words, “opposites 
attract.” This is especially true in 
biological sex choices (i.e., women tend 
to be attracted to men and vice versa). 
Other than biological sex choices, the 
complementary needs theory of 
attraction has not received any 
empirical support.
comprehensiveness One of the 
five scientific standards used in 
evaluating personality theories. 
Theories that explain more empirical 
data within a domain are generally 
superior to those that explain fewer 
findings.
conditional positive regard According 
to Rogers, people behave in specific 
ways to earn the love and respect and 
positive regard of parents and other 
significant people in their lives. Positive 
regard, when it must be earned by 
meeting certain conditions, is called 
conditional positive regard.
Final PDF to printerGLOSSARY
lar31869_glo_636-664 641 10/22/22 10:21 AM
641
often focus on worse-case outcomes. 
This strategy overcomes anticipatory 
anxiety and transforms it into 
motivation.
deliberation-without-awareness The 
notion that, when confronted with a 
decision, if a person can put it out of 
their conscious mind for a period of 
time, then the “unconscious mind” will 
continue to deliberate on it, helping the 
person to arrive at a “sudden” and often 
correct decision some time later.
denial When the reality of a particular 
situation is extremely anxiety provoking, 
a person may resort to the defense 
mechanism of denial. A person in 
denial insists that things are not the way 
they seem. Denial can also be less 
extreme, as when someone reappraises 
an anxiety-provoking situation so that it 
seems less daunting. Denial often shows 
up in people’s daydreams and fantasies.
density distribution of states Refers to 
the idea that traits are distributions of 
states in a person’s life over time, and 
the mean of that distribution is the 
person’s level of the trait.
dependent personality disorder The 
dependent personality seeks out others 
to an extreme. The hallmark of the 
dependent personality is an excessive 
need to be taken care of, to be nurtured, 
coddled, and told what to do. 
Dependent persons act in submissive 
ways so as to encourage others to take 
care of them or take charge of the 
situation. Such individuals need lots of 
encouragement and advice from others 
and would much rather turn over 
responsibility for their decisions to 
someone else.
depression A psychological disorder 
whose symptoms include a depressed 
mood most of the day; diminished 
interest in activities; change in weight, 
sleep patterns, and movement; fatigue or 
loss of energy; feelings of worthlessness; 
inability to concentrate; and recurrent 
thoughts of death and suicide. It is 
estimated that 20 percent of Americans 
are afflicted with depression at some 
time in their lives (American Psychiatric 
Association, 2013).
developmental crisis Erikson believed 
that each stage in personality 
development represented a conflict, or a 
developmental crisis, that needed to be 
resolved before the person advanced to 
the next stage of development.
psychological, behavioral, or attitudinal. 
These phenomena are often referred to 
as cultural variations. Two ingredients 
are necessary to explain cultural 
variations: (1) a universal underlying 
mechanism and (2) environmental 
differences in the degree to which the 
underlying mechanism is activated.
culture of honor Nisbett (1993) 
proposed that the economic means of 
subsistence of a culture affects the 
degree to which the group develops 
what he calls “a culture of honor.” In 
cultures of honor, insults are viewed as 
highly offensive public challenges that 
must be met with direct confrontation 
and physical aggression. The theory is 
that differences in the degree to which 
honor becomes a central part of the 
culture rests ultimately with economics, 
and specifically with the manner in 
which food is obtained.
culture A set of shared standards for 
many behaviors. It might contain 
different standards for males and 
females, such that girls should be 
ashamed if they engage in promiscuous 
sex, whereas boys might be proud of 
such behavior, with it being culturally 
acceptable for them to even brag about 
such behavior.
d
daily hassles The major sources of 
stress in most people’s lives. Although 
minor, daily hassles can be chronic and 
repetitive, such as having too much to 
do all the time, having to fight the 
crowds while shopping, or having to 
worry over money. Such daily hassles 
can be chronically irritating though they 
do not initiate the same general 
adaptation syndrome evoked by some 
major life events.
deductive reasoning approach The top￾down, theory-driven method of 
empirical research.
defense mechanisms Strategies for 
coping with anxiety and threats to 
self-esteem.
defensive pessimism Individuals who 
use a defensive pessimism strategy have 
usually done well on important tasks 
but lack self-confidence in their ability 
to handle new challenges. A defensive 
pessimist controls anxiety by preparing 
for failure ahead of time; they set low 
expectations for their performance and 
counterbalancing In some 
experiments, manipulation is within a 
single group. For example, participants 
might get a drug and have their memory 
tested, then later take a sugar pill and 
have their memory tested again. In this 
kind of experiment, equivalence is 
obtained by counterbalancing the order 
of the conditions, with half the 
participants getting the drug first and 
sugar pill second, and the other half 
getting the sugar pill first and the drug 
second.
creating positive events Creating a 
positive time-out from stress. Folkman 
and Moskowitz note that humor can 
have the added benefit of generating 
positive emotional moments even 
during the darkest periods of stress.
criterion validity Whether a test 
predicts criteria external to the test.
cross-cultural universality In the lexical 
approach, cross-cultural universality 
states that if a trait is sufficiently 
important in all cultures so that its 
members have codified terms within 
their own languages to describe the 
trait, then the trait must be universally 
important in human affairs. In contrast, 
if a trait term exists in only one or a few 
languages but is entirely missing from 
most, then it may be of only local 
relevance.
cultural context of intelligence Looks 
at how the definition of intelligent 
behavior varies across different cultures. 
Because of these considerations, 
intelligence can be viewed as referring 
to those skills valued in a particular 
culture.
cultural personality 
psychology Cultural personality 
psychology generally has three key 
goals: (1) to discover the principles 
underlying the cultural diversity, (2) to 
discover how human psychology shapes 
culture, and (3) to discover how cultural 
understandings in turn shape our 
psychology (Fiske et al., 1978).
cultural universals Features of 
personality that are common to 
everyone in all cultures. These 
universals constitute the human nature 
level of analyzing personality and define 
the elements of personality we share 
with all or most other people.
cultural variations Within-group 
similarities and between-group 
differences can be of any sort—physical, 
Final PDF to printerGLOSSARY
lar31869_glo_636-664 642 10/22/22 10:21 AM
642
feelings (e.g., anger, sexual attraction) 
toward a specific other. Those feelings 
then get displaced onto another person 
or object that is more appropriate or 
acceptable.
dispositional domain Deals centrally 
with the ways in which individuals differ 
from one another. As such, the 
dispositional domain connects with all 
the other domains. In the dispositional 
domain, psychologists are primarily 
interested in the number and nature of 
fundamental dispositions, taxonomies 
of traits, measurement issues, and 
questions of stability over time and 
consistency over situations.
dispositional optimism The expectation 
that in the future good events will be 
plentiful and bad events will be rare.
distortion A defense mechanism in 
Roger’s theory of personality; distortion 
refers to modifying the meaning of 
experiences to make them less 
threatening to the self-image.
dizygotic twins (also called fraternal 
twins) Twins who are not genetically 
identical. They come from two eggs that 
were separately fertilized (“di” means 
two; so dizygotic means “coming from 
two fertilized eggs”). Such twins share 
only 50 percent of their genes with their 
co-twin, the same amount as ordinary 
brothers and sisters. Fraternal twins can 
be of the same sex or of the opposite 
sex.
domain of knowledge A specialty area 
of science and scholarship, where 
psychologists have focused on learning 
about some specific and limited aspect 
of human nature, often with preferred 
tools of investigation.
domain specific Adaptations are 
presumed to be domain specific in the 
sense that they are “designed” by the 
evolutionary process to solve a 
specialized adaptive problem. Domain 
specificity implies that selection tends 
to fashion specific mechanisms for each 
specific adaptive problem.
dopamine A neurotransmitter that 
appears to be associated with pleasure. 
Dopamine appears to function 
something like the “reward system” and 
has even been called the “feeling good” 
chemical (Hamer, 1997).
DRD4 gene A gene located on the 
short arm of chromosome 11 that codes 
for a protein called a dopamine receptor. 
The function of this dopamine receptor 
the ratings. Almost all the studies 
suggest that subjects categorize 
emotions using just two primary 
dimensions: how pleasant or unpleasant 
the emotion is, and how high or low on 
arousal the emotion is.
dimensional view The dimensional 
view approaches a personality disorder 
as a continuum that ranges from 
normality at one end to severe disability 
and disturbance at the other end. 
According to this view, people with and 
without the disorder differ in degree 
only.
directionality problem One reason 
correlations can never prove causality. 
If A and B are correlated, we do not 
know if A is the cause of B, or if B is the 
cause of A, or if some third, unknown 
variable is causing both B and A.
disclosure Telling someone about 
some private aspect of ourselves. Many 
theorists have suggested that keeping 
things to ourselves may be a source of 
stress and ultimately may lead to 
psychological distress and physical 
disease.
discriminant validity What a measure 
should not correlate with.
disorder A pattern of behavior or 
experience that is distressing and 
painful to the person, leads to some 
disability or impairment in important 
life domains (e.g., work, marriage, or 
relationship difficulties), and is 
associated with increased risk for 
further suffering, loss of function, death, 
or confinement.
disparate impact Any employment 
practice that disadvantages people from 
a protected group. The Supreme Court 
has not defined the size of the disparity 
necessary to prove disparate impact. 
Most courts define disparity as a 
difference that is sufficiently large that it 
is unlikely to have occurred by chance. 
Some courts, however, prefer the 80 
percent rule contained in the Uniform 
Guidelines on Employee Selection 
Procedures. Under this rule, adverse 
impact is established if the selection 
rate for any race, sex, or ethnic group is 
less than four-fifths (or 80 percent) of 
the rate for the group with the highest 
selection rate.
displacement An unconscious defense 
mechanism that involves avoiding the 
recognition that one has certain 
inappropriate urges or unacceptable 
diathesis-stress model of 
depression Suggests that a preexisting 
vulnerability, or diathesis, is present 
among people who become depressed. 
In addition to this vulnerability, a 
stressful life event must occur in order 
to trigger the depression, such as the 
loss of a loved one or some other major 
negative life event. The events must 
occur together—something bad or 
stressful has to happen to a person who 
has a particular vulnerability to 
depression—in order for depression to 
occur.
differences among groups See group 
differences.
differential diagnosis A differential 
diagnosis is arrived at when, out of two 
or more possible diagnoses, the 
clinician searches for evidence in 
support of one diagnostic category over 
all the others.
differential gene 
reproduction Reproductive success 
relative to others. The genes of 
organisms who reproduce more than 
others get passed down to future 
generations at a relatively greater 
frequency than the genes of those who 
reproduce less. Because survival is 
usually critical for reproductive success, 
characteristics that lead to greater 
survival get passed along. Because 
success in mate competition is also 
critical for reproductive success, 
qualities that lead to success in same-sex 
competition or to success at being 
chosen as a mate get passed along. 
Successful survival and successful mate 
competition, therefore, are both part of 
differential gene reproduction.
differential psychology Due to its 
emphasis on the study of differences 
between people, trait psychology has 
sometimes been called differential 
psychology in the interest of 
distinguishing this subfield from other 
branches of personality psychology 
(Anastasi, 1976). Differential 
psychology includes the study of other 
forms of individual differences in 
addition to personality traits, such as 
abilities, aptitudes, and intelligence.
dimensional approach Researchers 
gather data by having subjects rate 
themselves on a wide variety of 
emotions, then apply statistical 
techniques (mostly factor analysis) to 
identify the basic dimensions underlying 
Final PDF to printerGLOSSARY
lar31869_glo_636-664 643 10/22/22 10:21 AM
643
motivate oneself, (4) know how others 
are feeling, and (5) influence how 
others are feeling. Goleman posited 
that emotional intelligence is more 
strongly predictive of professional 
status, marital quality, and salary than 
traditional measures of intelligence and 
aptitude.
emotional stability The fourth of the 
personality traits in the five-factor 
model, which has proven to be 
replicable in studies using English￾language trait words as items. Some of 
the key adjective markers for Emotional 
Stability are “calm,” “composed,” “not 
hypochondriacal,” “poised.”
emotional states Transitory states that 
depend more on the situation or 
circumstances a person is in than on the 
specific person. Emotions as states have 
a specific cause, and that cause is 
typically outside of the person 
(something happens in the 
environment).
emotional traits Stable personality 
traits that are primarily characterized by 
specific emotions. For example, the trait 
of neuroticism is primarily 
characterized by the emotions of 
anxiety and worry.
emotions Emotions can be defined by 
their three components: (1) Emotions 
have distinct subjective feelings or 
affects associated with them; (2) 
emotions are accompanied by bodily 
changes, mostly in the nervous system, 
and these produce associated changes 
in breathing, heart rate, muscle tension, 
blood chemistry, and facial and bodily 
expressions; (3) emotions are 
accompanied by distinct action 
tendencies or increases in the 
probabilities of certain behaviors.
empathizing Tuning in to other 
people’s thoughts and feelings.
empathy In Rogers’s client-centered 
therapy, empathy is understanding the 
person from his or her point of view. 
Instead of interpreting the meaning 
behind what the client says (e.g., “You 
have a harsh superego that is punishing 
you for the actions of your id.”), the 
client-centered therapist simply listens 
to what the client says and reflects it 
back.
enduring When psychological traits 
are stable over time.
environment Environments can be 
physical, social, and intrapsychic 
according to the reality principle. The 
ego understands that the urges of the id 
are often in conflict with social and 
physical reality, and that direct 
expression of id impulses must therefore 
be redirected or postponed.
Electra complex Within the 
psychoanalytic theory of personality 
development, the female counterpart to 
the Oedipal complex; both refer to the 
phallic stage of development.
electrode A sensor usually placed on 
the surface of the skin and linked to a 
physiological recording machine (often 
called a polygraph) to measure 
physiological variables.
electrodermal activity (also known as 
galvanic skin response or skin 
conductance) Electricity will flow 
across the skin with less resistance if 
that skin is made damp with sweat. 
Sweating on the palms of the hands is 
activated by the sympathetic nervous 
system, and so electrodermal activity is 
a way to directly measure changes in the 
sympathetic nervous system.
electroencephalogram (EEG) Refers to 
recording the minute electrical activity 
produced by the human brain using 
electrodes placed on the surface of the 
scalp. The EEG is useful for diagnosing 
brain disorders (e.g., epilepsy) but can 
also be used to identify brain activation 
patterns associated with psychological 
states and functions.
electroencephalograph (EEG) The 
brain spontaneously produces small 
amounts of electricity, which can be 
measured by electrodes placed on the 
scalp. EEGs can provide useful 
information about patterns of 
activation in different regions of the 
brain that may be associated with 
different types of information 
processing tasks.
embedded figures test (EFT) A method 
of assessing field dependence/
independence by seeing how quickly a 
person can identify smaller figures 
hidden inside larger and more complex 
figures.
emotional inhibition Suppression of 
emotional expressions; often thought of 
as a trait (e.g., some people chronically 
suppress their emotions).
emotional intelligence An adaptive 
form of intelligence consisting of the 
ability to (1) know one’s own emotions, 
(2) regulate those emotions, (3) 
is to respond to the presence of 
dopamine, which is a neurotransmitter. 
When the dopamine receptor encounters 
dopamine from other neurons in the 
brain, it discharges an electrical signal, 
activating other neurons.
dream analysis A technique Freud 
taught for uncovering the unconscious 
material in a dream by interpreting the 
content of a dream. Freud called 
dreams “the royal road to the 
unconscious.”
dynamic The interaction of forces 
within a person.
e
Easterlin paradox At any point in 
time, happiness varies with income 
across nations, but over time within a 
country, happiness does not trend 
upward with increases in income.
effect size How large a particular 
difference is, or how strong a particular 
correlation is, as averaged over several 
experiments or studies.
effective polygyny Because female 
mammals bear the physical burden of 
gestation and lactation, there is a 
considerable sex difference in minimum 
obligatory parental investment. This 
difference leads to differences in the 
variances in reproduction between the 
sexes: most females will have some 
offspring, whereas a few males will sire 
many offspring, and some will have 
none at all. This is known as effective 
polygyny.
egalitarianism How much a particular 
group displays equal treatment of all 
individuals within that group.
ego depletion When exertion of self￾control results in a decrease of psychic 
energy.
ego psychology Post-Freudian 
psychoanalysts felt that the ego 
deserved more attention and that it 
performed many constructive functions. 
Erikson emphasized the ego as a 
powerful and independent part of 
personality, involved in mastering the 
environment, achieving one’s goals, and 
hence in establishing one’s identity. The 
approach to psychoanalysis started by 
Erikson was called ego psychology.
ego The part of the mind that 
constrains the id to reality. According 
to Freud, it develops within the first two 
or three years of life. The ego operates 
Final PDF to printerGLOSSARY
lar31869_glo_636-664 644 10/22/22 10:21 AM
644
called self-fulfilling prophecy and 
behavioral confirmation.
experience sampling People answer 
some questions, for example, about 
their mood or physical symptoms, every 
day for several weeks or longer. People 
are usually contacted electronically 
(“beeped”) one or more times a day at 
random intervals to complete the 
measures. Although experience 
sampling uses self-report as the data 
source, it differs from more traditional 
self-report methods in being able to 
detect patterns of behavior over time.
experimental methods Typically used 
to determine causality—to find out 
whether one variable influences another 
variable. Experiments involve the 
manipulation of one variable (the 
independent variable) and random 
assignment of subjects to conditions 
defined by the independent variable.
expressiveness The ease with which 
one can express emotions, such as 
crying, showing empathy for the 
troubles of others, and showing 
nurturance to those in need.
external locus of control Generalized 
expectancies that events are outside of 
one’s control.
extraversion The first fundamental 
personality trait in the five-factor model, 
a taxonomy which has proven to be 
replicable in studies using English￾language trait words as items. Some of 
the key adjective markers for 
Extraversion are “talkative,” 
“extraverted” or “extraverted,” 
“gregarious,” “assertive,” “adventurous,” 
“open,” “sociable,” “forward,” and 
“outspoken.”
extreme responding A response set 
that refers to the tendency to give 
endpoint responses, such as “strongly 
agree” or “strongly disagree” and avoid 
the middle part of response scales, such 
as “slightly agree,” “slightly disagree,” or 
“am indifferent.”
eye-blink startle method People 
typically blink their eyes when they are 
startled by a loud noise. Moreover, a 
person who is in an anxious or fearful 
state will blink faster and harder when 
startled than a person in a normal 
emotional state. This means that eye￾blink speed when startled may be an 
objective physiological measure of how 
anxious or fearful a person is feeling. 
The eye-blink startle method may allow 
eudaimonia A philosophical position 
that holds that living a life of meaning 
and purpose will lead to happiness
eugenics The notion that the future of 
the human race can be influenced by 
fostering the reproduction of persons 
with certain traits and discouraging 
reproduction among persons without 
those traits or who have undesirable 
traits.
evocation A form of person–situation 
interaction discussed by Buss. It is 
based on the idea that certain 
personality traits may evoke consistent 
responses from the environment, 
particularly the social environment.
evoked culture A way of considering 
culture that concentrates on phenomena 
that are triggered in different ways by 
different environmental conditions.
evolutionary byproduct Incidental 
effects evolved changes that are not 
properly considered adaptations. For 
example, our noses hold up glasses, but 
that is not what the nose evolved for.
evolutionary noise Random variations 
that are neutral with respect to 
selection.
evolutionary-predicted sex 
differences Evolutionary psychology 
predicts that males and females will be 
the same or similar in all those domains 
where the sexes have faced the same or 
similar adaptive problems (e.g., both 
sexes have sweat glands because both 
sexes have faced the adaptive problem 
of thermal regulation) and different 
when men and women have faced 
substantially different adaptive 
problems (e.g., in the physical realm, 
women have faced the problem of 
childbirth and have therefore evolved 
adaptations that are lacking in men, 
such as mechanisms for producing 
labor contractions through the release 
of oxytocin into the bloodstream).
exhaustion stage The third stage in 
Selye’s general adaptation syndrome 
(GAS). Selye felt that this was the stage 
where we are most susceptible to illness 
and disease, as our physiological 
resources are depleted.
expectancy confirmation A 
phenomenon whereby people’s beliefs 
about the personality characteristics of 
others cause them to evoke in others 
actions that are consistent with the 
initial beliefs. The phenomenon of 
expectancy confirmation has also been 
(within the mind). Which aspect of the 
environment is important at any 
moment in time is frequently 
determined by the personality of the 
person in that environment.
environmentalist 
view Environmentalists believe that 
personality is determined by 
socialization practices, such as 
parenting style and other agents of 
society.
environmentality The percentage of 
observed variance in a group of 
individuals that can be attributed to 
environmental (nongenetic) differences. 
Generally speaking, the larger the 
heritability, the smaller the 
environmentality. And vice versa, the 
smaller the heritability, the larger the 
environmentality.
epidemiological studies Studies that 
typically enroll a large number of 
subjects who are initially healthy, then 
they are followed over time to see who 
develops specific diseases.
equal environments assumption The 
assumption that the environments 
experienced by identical twins are no 
more similar to each other than are the 
environments experienced by fraternal 
twins. If they are more similar, then the 
greater similarity of the identical twins 
could plausibly be due to the fact that 
they experience more similar 
environments rather than the fact that 
they have more genes in common.
Erikson’s eight stages of 
development According to Erikson, 
there are eight stages of development: 
trust versus mistrust, autonomy versus 
shame and doubt, initiative versus guilt, 
industry versus inferiority, identity 
versus role confusion, intimacy versus 
isolation, generativity versus stagnation, 
and integrity versus despair.
esteem needs The fourth level of 
Maslow’s motivation hierarchy. There 
are two types of esteem: esteem from 
others and self-esteem, the latter often 
depending on the former. People want 
to be seen by others as competent, as 
strong, and as able to achieve. They 
want to be respected by others for their 
achievements or abilities. People also 
want to feel good about themselves. 
Much of the activity of adult daily life is 
geared toward achieving recognition 
and esteem from others and bolstering 
one’s own self-confidence.
Final PDF to printerGLOSSARY
lar31869_glo_636-664 645 10/22/22 10:21 AM
645
The first psychologist to use the terms 
“five-factor model” and “Big Five” was 
Warren Norman, based on his 
replications of the factor structure 
suggesting the following five traits: 
Surgency (or extraversion), Neuroticism 
(or emotional instability), 
Agreeableness, Conscientiousness, and 
Intellect-Openness to Experience (or 
intellect). The model has been criticized 
by some for not being comprehensive 
and for failing to provide a theoretical 
understanding of the underlying 
psychological processes that generate 
the five traits. Nonetheless, it remains 
heavily endorsed by many personality 
psychologists and continues to be used 
in a variety of research studies and 
applied settings.
fixation A concept found in both 
Freud’s and Erikson’s developmental 
theories, implying that an immature 
resolution of a developmental crisis 
results in a portion of a person’s psychic 
energy needing to be used to maintain 
that resolution, appearing as a 
preoccupation with that stage, and 
hence less psychic energy going forward 
to the next developmental stage.
flow A subjective state that people 
report when they are completely 
involved in an activity to the point of 
forgetting time, fatigue, and everything 
else but the activity itself. While flow 
experiences are somewhat rare, they 
occur under specific conditions; there is 
a balance between the person’s skills 
and the challenges of the situation, 
there is a clear goal, and there is 
immediate feedback on how one is 
doing.
forced-choice questionnaire Test takers 
are confronted with pairs of statements 
and are asked to indicate which 
statement in the pair is more true of 
them. Each statement in the pair is 
selected to be similar to the other in 
social desirability, forcing participants 
to choose between statements that are 
equivalently socially desirable (or 
undesirable), and differ in content.
free association Patients relax, let their 
minds wander, and say whatever comes 
into their minds. Patients often say 
things that surprise or embarrass them. 
By relaxing the censor that screens 
everyday thoughts, free association 
allows potentially important material 
into conscious awareness.
family studies Family studies correlate 
the degree of genetic overlap among 
family members with the degree of 
personality similarity. They capitalize 
on the fact that there are known degrees 
of genetic overlap between different 
members of a family in terms of degree 
of relationship.
fear of success Horney coined this 
phrase to highlight a gender difference 
in response to competition and 
achievement situations. Many women, 
she argued, feel that if they succeed, 
they will lose their friends. 
Consequently, many women, she 
thought, harbor an unconscious fear of 
success. She held that men, on the other 
hand, feel that they will actually gain 
friends by being successful and hence 
are not at all afraid to strive and pursue 
achievement.
female underprediction effect On 
average, college entrance exam scores 
underpredict grade point average for 
women relative to men with the same 
entrance exam scores. Women tend to 
do better in college than one would 
predict from their entrance exam scores 
alone.
feminine Traits or roles typically 
associated with being female in a 
particular culture.
femininity A psychological dimension 
containing traits such as nurturance, 
empathy, and expression of emotions 
(e.g., crying when sad). Femininity 
traits refer to gender roles, as distinct 
from biological sex.
field dependent and field independent In 
Witkin’s rod and frame test, if a 
participant adjusts the rod so that it is 
leaning in the direction of the tilted 
frame, that person is said to be 
dependent of the visual field, or field 
dependent. If a participant disregards 
the external cues and instead uses 
information from his body in adjusting 
the rod to upright, he is said to be 
independent of the field, or field 
independent; appearing to rely on his 
own sensations, not the perception of 
the field, to make the judgment. This 
individual difference may have 
implications in situations where people 
must extract information from complex 
sensory fields, such as in multimedia 
education.
five-factor model A trait taxonomy that 
has its roots in the lexical hypothesis. 
researchers to measure how anxious 
persons are without actually having to 
ask them.
f
face validity Whether the test, on the 
surface, measures what it appears to 
measure.
factor analysis A commonly used 
statistical procedure for identifying 
underlying structure in personality 
ratings or items. Factor analysis 
essentially identifies groups of items 
that covary (i.e., go together or 
correlate) with each other, but tend not 
to covary with other groups of items. 
This provides a means for determining 
which personality variables share some 
common underlying property or belong 
together within the same group.
factor loadings Indexes of how much 
of the variation in an item is “explained” 
by the factor. Factor loadings indicate 
the degree to which the item correlates 
with or “loads on” the underlying factor.
faking The motivated distortion of 
answers on a questionnaire. Some 
people may be motivated to “fake good” 
in order to appear to be better off or 
better adjusted than they really are. 
Others may be motivated to “fake bad” 
in order to appear to be worse off or 
more maladjusted than they really are.
false consensus effect The tendency 
many people have to assume that others 
are similar to them (i.e., extraverts think 
that many other people are as 
extraverted as they are). Thinking that 
many other people share your own 
traits, preferences, or motivations.
false memories Memories that have 
been “implanted” by well-meaning 
therapists or others interrogating a 
subject about some event.
false negative and false positive There 
are two ways for psychologists to make 
a mistake when making decisions about 
persons based on personality tests (e.g., 
when deciding whether or not to hire a 
person, to parole a person, or that the 
person was lying). When trying to 
decide whether a person’s answers are 
genuine or faked, the psychologist 
might decide that a person who was 
faking was actually telling the truth 
(called a false positive). Or they might 
conclude that a truthful person was 
faking. This is called a false negative.
Final PDF to printerGLOSSARY
lar31869_glo_636-664 646 10/22/22 10:21 AM
646
necessarily based on reality. Gender 
stereotypes can have important real-life 
consequences for men and women. 
These consequences can damage people 
where it most counts—in their health, 
their jobs, their odds of advancement, 
and their social reputations.
gender Social interpretations of what 
it means to be a man or a woman.
general adaptation syndrome 
(GAS) GAS has three stages: When a 
stressor first appears, people experience 
the alarm stage. If the stressor 
continues, the stage of resistance begins. 
If the stressor remains constant, the 
person eventually enters the third stage, 
the stage of exhaustion.
general intelligence Early on in the 
study of intelligence, many 
psychologists thought of intelligence in 
traitlike terms, as a property of the 
individual. Individuals were thought to 
differ from each other in how much 
intelligence they possessed. Moreover, 
intelligence was thought of as a single 
broad factor, often called “g” for general 
intelligence. This stands in contrast to 
those views of intelligence as consisting 
of many discrete factors, such as social 
intelligence, emotional intelligence, and 
academic intelligence.
generalizability The degree to which a 
measure retains its validity across 
different contexts.
generalized expectancies A person’s 
expectations for reinforcement that 
hold across a variety of situations 
(Rotter, 1971, 1990). When people 
encounter a new situation, they base 
their expectancies about what will 
happen on their generalized 
expectancies about whether they have 
the abilities to influence events.
genes Packets of DNA that are 
inherited by children from their 
parents in distinct chunks. They are the 
smallest discrete unit that is inherited 
by offspring intact, without being 
broken up.
genetic junk The 98 percent of the 
DNA in human chromosomes that are 
not protein-coding genes; scientists 
believed that these parts were 
functionless residue. Recent studies 
have shown that these portions of DNA 
may affect everything from a person’s 
physical size to personality, thus adding 
to the complexity of the human 
genome.
analysis of emotions and emotional 
expressions focusing on the “why” of 
emotions and expressions. Darwin 
concluded that emotional expressions 
communicate information from one 
animal to another about what is likely to 
happen. For instance, a dog baring its 
teeth, growling, and bristling the fur on 
its back is communicating to others that 
he is likely to attack. If others recognize 
the dog’s communication, they may 
choose to back away to safety.
functional magnetic resonance imaging 
(fMRI) A noninvasive imaging 
technique used to identify specific areas 
of brain activity. As parts of the brain are 
stimulated, oxygenated blood rushes to 
the activated area, resulting in increased 
iron concentrations in the blood. The 
fMRI detects these elevated 
concentrations of iron and prints out 
colorful images indicating which part of 
the brain is used to perform certain tasks.
functionality The notion that our 
psychological mechanisms are designed 
to accomplish particular adaptive goals.
fundamental attribution error When 
bad events happen to others, people 
have a tendency to attribute blame to 
some characteristic of the person, 
whereas when bad events happen to 
oneself, people have the tendency to 
blame the situation.
g
gender differences The distinction 
between gender and sex can be traced 
back to Horney. Horney stressed the 
point that, while biology determines sex, 
cultural norms determine what is 
acceptable for typical males and females 
in that culture. Today we use the terms 
masculine and feminine to refer to traits 
or roles typically associated with being 
male or female in a particular culture, 
and we refer to differences in such 
culturally ascribed roles and traits as 
gender differences. Differences that are 
ascribed to being a man or a woman per 
se are, however, called sex differences.
gender schemata Cognitive 
orientations that lead individuals to 
process social information on the basis 
of sex-linked associations (Hoyenga & 
Hoyenga, 1993).
gender stereotypes Beliefs that we hold 
about how men and women differ or are 
supposed to differ, which are not 
free running A condition in studies of 
circadian rhythms in which participants 
are deprived from knowing what time it 
is (e.g., meals are served when the 
participant asks for them, not at 
prescheduled times). When a person is 
free running in time, there are no time 
cues to influence behavior or biology.
frequency–dependent selection In some 
contexts, two or more heritable variants 
can evolve within a population. The 
most obvious example is biological sex 
itself. Within sexually reproducing 
species, the two sexes exist in roughly 
equal numbers because of frequency–
dependent selection. If one sex becomes 
rare relative to the other, evolution will 
produce an increase in the numbers of 
the rarer sex. Frequency–dependent 
selection, in this example, causes the 
frequency of men and women to remain 
roughly equal. Different personality 
extremes (e.g., introversion and 
extraversion) may be the result of 
frequency dependent selection.
frontal brain asymmetry Asymmetry in 
the amount of activity in the left and 
right part of the frontal hemispheres of 
the brain. Studies using EEG measures 
have linked more relative left brain 
activity with pleasant emotions and 
more relative right brain activity with 
negative emotions.
frustration The high-arousal 
unpleasant subjective feeling that comes 
when a person is blocked from attaining 
an important goal. For example, a 
thirsty person who just lost his last bit 
of money in a malfunctioning soda 
machine would most likely feel 
frustration.
fully functioning person According to 
Rogers, a fully functioning person is on 
his or her way toward self-actualization. 
Fully functioning persons may not 
actually be self-actualized yet, but they 
are not blocked or sidetracked in 
moving toward this goal. Such persons 
are open to new experiences and are not 
afraid of new ideas. They embrace life 
to its fullest. Fully functioning 
individuals are also centered in the 
present. They do not dwell on the past 
or their regrets. Fully functioning 
individuals also trust themselves, their 
feelings, and their own judgments.
functional analysis In The Expression 
of the Emotions in Man and Animals,
Charles Darwin proposed a functional 
Final PDF to printerGLOSSARY
lar31869_glo_636-664 647 10/22/22 10:21 AM
647
when one branch predominates, and is 
often associated with stress, fatigue, 
poor sleep, or over-training. HRV 
assessment is available with several of 
the popular wearable sensors, including 
watches and rings.
heart rate Refers to how rapidly the 
heart is beating, usually expressed in 
beats per minute. It can be assessed 
beat by beat by measuring the time 
interval between successive heart beats 
and converting that to beats per minute
heritability A statistic that refers to 
the proportion of observed variance in 
a group of individuals that can be 
explained or “accounted for” by 
genetic variance (Plomin, DeFries, & 
McClearn, 1990). It describes the 
degree to which genetic differences 
between individuals cause differences 
in some observed property, such as 
height, extraversion, or sensation 
seeking. The formal definition of 
heritability is the proportion of 
phenotypic variance that is attributable 
to genotypic variance.
heuristic value An evaluative scientific 
standard for assessing personality 
theories. Theories that steer scientists to 
important new discoveries about 
personality are superior to those that 
fail to provide this guidance.
HEXACO model Humility-Honesty 
(H), Emotionality (E), Extraversion 
(X), Agreeableness (A), 
Conscientiousness (C), and Openness 
to Experience (O).
hierarchy of needs Murray believed 
that each person has a unique 
combination of needs. An individual’s 
various needs can be thought of as 
existing at a different level of strength. 
A person might have a high need for 
dominance, an average need for 
intimacy, and a low need for 
achievement. High levels of some needs 
interact with the amounts of various 
other needs within each person.
high-variance conditions One key 
variable triggering communal food 
sharing is the degree of variability in 
food resources. Specifically, under high￾variance conditions, there are 
substantial benefits to sharing.
historical era One type of intracultural 
variation pertains to the effects of 
historical era on personality. (People 
who grew up during the great economic 
depression of the 1930s, for example, 
impact for a group protected by the Act 
(e.g., racial groups, women).
h
happiness Researchers conceive of 
happiness in two complementary ways: 
in terms of a judgment that life is 
satisfying, as well as in terms of the 
predominance of positive compared to 
negative, emotions in one’s life (Diener, 
2000). It turns out, however, that 
people’s emotional lives and their 
judgments of how satisfied they are with 
their lives are highly correlated. People 
who have a lot of pleasant emotions 
relative to unpleasant emotions in their 
lives tend also to judge their lives as 
satisfying, and vice versa.
harm avoidance In Cloninger’s 
tridimensional personality model, the 
personality trait of harm avoidance is 
associated with low levels of serotonin. 
People low in serotonin are sensitive to 
unpleasant stimuli or to stimuli or 
events that have been associated with 
punishment or pain. Consequently, 
people low in serotonin seem to expect 
that harmful and unpleasant events will 
happen to them, and they are constantly 
vigilant for signs of such threatening 
events.
health behavior model Personality does 
not directly influence the relation 
between stress and illness. Instead, 
personality affects health indirectly, 
through health-promoting or health￾degrading behaviors. This model 
suggests that personality influences the 
degree to which a person engages in 
various health-promoting or health￾demoting behaviors.
health psychology Researchers in the 
area of health psychology study 
relations between the mind and the 
body, and how these two components 
respond to challenges from the 
environment (e.g., stressful events, 
germs) to produce illness or health.
healthy neuroticism A new idea that 
stresses the possible benefits of 
neuroticism.
Heart Rate Variability (HRV) Refers 
to how much heart rate changes on a 
beat-by-beat basis, with higher HRV 
being normal and an indicator of 
balance between the sympathetic and 
parasympathetic branches of the 
nervous systems. Lower HRV results 
genital stage The final stage in Freud’s 
psychosexual stage theory of 
development. This stage begins around 
age 12 and lasts through one’s adult life. 
Here the libido is focused on the 
genitals, but not in the manner of self￾manipulation associated with the phallic 
stage. People reach the genital stage 
with full psychic energy if they have 
resolved the conflicts at the prior stages.
genome The complete set of genes an 
organism possesses. The human 
genome contains somewhere between 
20,000 and 30,000 genes.
genotype–environment correlation The 
differential exposure of individuals with 
different genotypes to different 
environments.
genotype–environment interaction The 
differential response of individuals with 
different genotypes to the same 
environments.
genotypic variance Genetic variance 
that is responsible for individual 
differences in the phenotypic expression 
of specific traits.
global self-esteem By far the most 
frequently measured component of self￾esteem; defined as “the level of global 
regard that one has for the self as a 
person” (Harter, 1993, p. 88). Global 
self-esteem can range from highly 
positive to highly negative, and reflects 
an overall evaluation of the self at the 
broadest level (Kling et al., 1999). 
Global self-esteem is linked with many 
aspects of functioning and is commonly 
thought to be central to mental health.
good theory A theory that serves as a 
useful guide for researchers, organizes 
known facts, and makes predictions 
about future observations.
Griggs v. Duke Power Prior to 1964, 
Duke Power Company had used 
discriminatory practices in hiring and 
work assignment, including barring 
blacks from certain jobs. After passage 
of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, Duke 
Power instituted various requirements 
for such jobs, including passing certain 
aptitude tests. The effect was to 
perpetuate discrimination. In 1971 the 
Supreme Court ruled that the seemingly 
neutral testing practices used by Duke 
Power were unacceptable because they 
operated to maintain discrimination. 
This was the first legal case where the 
Supreme Court ruled that any selection 
procedure could not produce disparate 
Final PDF to printerGLOSSARY
lar31869_glo_636-664 648 10/22/22 10:21 AM
648
successful resolution of the phallic stage 
of psychosexual development. Freud 
believed that the resolution of the 
phallic stage was both the beginning of 
the superego and morality and the start 
of the adult gender role.
identity conflict According to 
Baumeister, an identity conflict involves 
an incompatibility between two or more 
aspects of identity. This kind of crisis 
often occurs when a person is forced to 
make an important and difficult life 
decision. Identity conflicts are 
“approach–approach” conflicts, in that 
the person wants to reach two mutually 
contradictory goals. Although these 
conflicts involve wanting two desirable 
identities, identity conflicts usually 
involve intense feelings of guilt or 
remorse over perceived unfaithfulness 
to an important aspect of the person’s 
identity.
identity confusion A period when a 
person does not have a strong sense of 
who she or he really is in terms of 
values, careers, relationships, and 
ideologies.
identity crisis Erikson’s term refers to 
the desperation, anxiety, and confusion 
a person feels when he or she has not 
developed a strong sense of identity. A 
period of identity crisis is a common 
experience during adolescence, but for 
some people it occurs later in life, or 
lasts for a longer period. Baumeister 
suggests that there are two distinct types 
of identity crises, which he terms 
identity deficit and identity conflict.
identity deficit According to 
Baumeister, an identity deficit arises 
when a person has not formed an 
adequate identity and thus has trouble 
making major decisions. When people 
who have an identity deficit look toward 
their social identity for guidance in 
making decisions (e.g., “What would a 
person like me do in this situation?”), 
they find little in the way of a 
foundation upon which to base such life 
choices. Identity deficits often occur 
when a person discards old values or 
goals.
identity foreclosure A person does not 
emerge from a crisis with a firm sense 
of commitment to values, relationships, 
or career but forms an identity without 
exploring alternatives. An example 
would be young people who accept the 
hostility A tendency to respond to 
everyday frustrations with anger and 
aggression, to become irritable easily, to 
feel frequent resentment, and to act in a 
rude, critical, antagonistic, and 
uncooperative manner in everyday 
interactions (Dembrowski & Costa, 
1987). Hostility is a subtrait in the Type 
A behavior pattern.
human nature The traits and 
mechanisms of personality that are 
typical of our species and are possessed 
by everyone or nearly everyone.
humanistic tradition Humanistic 
psychologists emphasize the role of 
choice in human life and the influence 
of responsibility on creating a 
meaningful and satisfying life. The 
meaning of any person’s life, according 
to the humanistic approach, is found in 
the choices that people make and the 
responsibility they take for those 
choices. The humanistic tradition also 
emphasizes the human need for growth 
and realizing one’s full potential. In the 
humanistic tradition it is assumed that, 
if left to their own devices, humans will 
grow and develop in positive and 
satisfying directions.
i
id psychology Freud’s version of 
psychoanalysis focused on the id, 
especially the twin instincts of sex and 
aggression, and how the ego and 
superego respond to the demands of the 
id. Freudian psychoanalysis can thus be 
called id psychology, to distinguish it 
from later developments that focused 
on the functions of the ego.
id The most primitive part of the 
human mind. Freud saw the id as 
something we are born with and as the 
source of all drives and urges. The id is 
like a spoiled child: selfish, impulsive, 
and pleasure loving. According to 
Freud, the id operates strictly according 
to the pleasure principle, which is the 
desire for immediate gratification.
ideal self The self that a person wants 
to be.
identification A developmental process 
in children. It consists of wanting to 
become like the same-sex parent. In 
classic psychoanalysis, it marks the 
beginning of the resolution of the 
Oedipal or Electra conflicts and the 
might be more anxious about job 
security or adopt a more conservative 
spending style.) Disentangling the 
effects of historical era on personality is 
an extremely difficult endeavor because 
most current personality measures were 
not in use in earlier eras.
histrionic personality disorder The 
hallmark of the histrionic personality is 
excessive attention seeking and 
emotionality. Often such persons are 
overly dramatic and draw attention to 
themselves, preferring to be the center 
of attention or the life of the party. They 
may appear charming or even flirtatious. 
Often they can be inappropriately 
seductive or provocative.
Hogan Personality Inventory (HPI) A 
questionnaire measure of personality 
based on the Big Five model but 
modified to emphasize the assessment 
of traits important in the business 
world, including the motive to get along 
with others and the motive to get ahead 
of others.
holistic A way of processing 
information that involves attention to 
relationships, contexts, and links 
between the focal objects and the field 
as a whole.
honesty-humility High scorers on 
Honesty-Humilty are individuals who 
show a lot of prosocial behavior, 
treating other people reasonably and 
fairly, and not being overly concerned 
with self-promotion.
hormonal theories Hormonal theories 
of sex differences argue that men and 
women differ not because of the 
external social environment but because 
the sexes have different amounts of 
specific hormones. It is these 
physiological differences, not 
differential social treatment, that causes 
boys and girls to diverge over 
development.
hostile attributional bias The tendency 
to infer hostile intent on the part of 
others in the face of uncertain or unclear 
behavior from others. Essentially, people 
who are aggressive expect that others 
will be hostile toward them.
hostile forces of nature Hostile forces 
of nature are what Darwin called any 
event that impedes survival. Hostile 
forces of nature include food shortages, 
diseases, parasites, predators, and 
extremes of weather.
Final PDF to printerGLOSSARY
lar31869_glo_636-664 649 10/22/22 10:21 AM
649
items that most or all people would 
answer in a particular way. If a 
participant answered more than one or 
two of these unlike the rest of the 
majority of the participants, a 
researcher could begin to suspect that 
the participant’s answers do not 
represent valid information. Such a 
participant may be answering randomly, 
may have difficulty reading, or may be 
marking his or her answer sheet 
incorrectly.
inhibitory control The ability to 
control inappropriate responses or 
behaviors.
insight In psychoanalysis, through 
many interpretations, a patient is 
gradually led to an understanding of the 
unconscious source of his or her 
problems. This understanding is called 
insight.
inspection time A variable in 
intelligence research; the time it takes a 
person to make a simple discrimination 
between two displayed objects or two 
auditory intervals that differ by only a 
few milliseconds. This variable suggests 
that brain mechanisms specifically 
involved in discriminations of extremely 
brief time intervals represent a sensitive 
indicator of general intelligence.
instincts Freud believed that strong 
innate forces provided all the energy in 
the psychic system. He called these 
forces instincts. In Freud’s initial 
formulation there were two fundamental 
categories of instincts: self-preservation 
instincts and sexual instincts. In his 
later formulations, Freud collapsed the 
self-preservation and sexual instincts 
into one, which he called the life 
instinct.
instrumentality Personality traits that 
involve working with objects, getting 
tasks completed in a direct fashion, 
showing independence from others, and 
displaying self-sufficiency.
integrity tests Because the private 
sector cannot legally use polygraphs to 
screen employees, some companies 
have developed and promoted 
questionnaire measures to use in place 
of the polygraph. These questionnaires, 
called integrity tests, are designed to 
assess whether a person is generally 
honest or dishonest.
intellect–openness The fifth 
personality trait in the five-factor model, 
independence training McClelland 
believes that certain parental 
behaviors can promote high 
achievement motivation, autonomy, 
and independence in their children. 
One of these parenting practices is 
placing an emphasis on independence 
training. Training a child to be 
independent in different tasks 
promotes a sense of mastery and 
confidence in the child.
independence Markus and Kitayama 
propose that each person has two 
fundamental “cultural tasks” that have 
to be confronted. One such task, agency 
or independence, involves how you 
differentiate yourself from the larger 
group. Independence includes your 
unique abilities, your personal internal 
motives and personality dispositions, 
and the ways in which you separate 
yourself from the larger group.
independent risk factor Operates 
independently from other known risk 
factors, such as being overweight or 
smoking.
individual differences Every individual 
has personal and unique qualities that 
make him or her different from others. 
The study of all the ways in which 
individuals can differ from others, the 
number, origin, and meaning of such 
differences, is the study of individual 
differences.
inductive reasoning approach The 
bottom-up, data-driven method of 
empirical research.
influential forces Personality traits and 
mechanisms are influential forces in 
people’s lives in that they influence our 
actions, how we view ourselves, how we 
think about the world, how we interact 
with others, how we feel, our selection 
of environments (particularly our social 
environment), what goals and desires 
we pursue in life, and how we react to 
our circumstances. Other influential 
forces include sociological and 
economic influences, as well as physical 
and biological forces.
information processing The 
transformation of sensory input into 
mental representations and the 
manipulation of such representations.
infrequency scale A common method 
for detecting measurement technique 
problems within a set of questionnaire 
items. The infrequency scale contains 
values of their parents or their cultural 
or religious group without question.
identity An inner sense of who we are, 
of what makes us unique, and a sense of 
continuity over time and a feeling of 
wholeness.
idiographic The study of single 
individuals, with an effort to observe 
general principles as they are manifest 
in a single life over time.
“if . . . then . . .” propositions A 
component of Walter Mischel’s theory 
referring to the notion that, if situation 
A, the person does X, but if situation B, 
then the person does Y. Personality 
leaves its signature, Mischel argues, in 
terms of the specific situational 
ingredients that prompt behavior from 
the person.
illness behavior model Personality 
influences the degree to which a person 
perceives and pays attention to bodily 
sensations, and the degree to which a 
person will interpret and label those 
sensations as an illness.
imagination inflation effect A memory 
is elaborated upon in the imagination, 
leading the person to confuse the 
imagined event with events that actually 
happened.
implicit motivation Motives as they are 
measured in fantasy-based (i.e., TAT) 
techniques, as opposed to direct self￾report measures. The implied motives of 
persons scored, for example, from TAT 
stories, are thought to reveal their 
unconscious desires and aspirations, 
their unspoken needs and wants. 
McClelland has argued that implicit 
motives predict long-term behavioral 
trends over time, such as implicit need 
for achievement predicting long-term 
business success.
impulsivity A personality trait that 
refers to lowered self-control, especially 
in the presence of potentially rewarding 
activities, the tendency to act before one 
thinks, and a lowered ability to anticipate 
the consequences of one’s behavior.
inclusive fitness theory Modern 
evolutionary theory based on 
differential gene reproduction 
(Hamilton, 1964). The “inclusive” part 
refers to the fact that the characteristics 
that affect reproduction need not affect 
the personal production of offspring; 
they can affect the survival and 
reproduction of genetic relatives as well.
Final PDF to printerGLOSSARY
lar31869_glo_636-664 650 10/22/22 10:21 AM
650
j
job analysis When assisting a business 
in hiring for a particular job, a 
psychologist typically starts by 
analyzing the requirements of the job. 
The psychologist might interview 
employees who work in the job or 
supervisors who are involved in 
managing the particular job. The 
psychologist might observe workers in 
the job, noting any particular oral, 
written, performance, or social skills 
needed. He or she may also take into 
account both the physical and social 
aspects of the work environment in an 
effort to identify any special pressures 
or responsibilities associated with the 
job. Based on this job analysis, the 
psychologist develops some hypotheses 
about the kinds of abilities and 
personality traits that might best equip a 
person to perform well in that job.
l
latency stage The fourth stage in 
Freud’s psychosexual stages of 
development. This stage occurs from 
around the age of six until puberty. 
Freud believed few specific sexual 
conflicts existed during this time, and 
was thus a period of psychological rest 
or latency. Subsequent psychoanalysts 
have argued that much development 
occurs during this time, such as learning 
to make decisions for oneself, 
interacting and making friends with 
others, developing an identity, and 
learning the meaning of work. The 
latency period ends with the sexual 
awakening brought about by puberty.
latent content The latent content of a 
dream is, according to Freud, what the 
elements of the dream actually 
represent.
learned helplessness Animals 
(including humans), when subjected to 
unpleasant and inescapable 
circumstances, often become passive 
and accepting of their situation, in effect 
learning to be helpless. Researchers 
surmised that if people were in an 
unpleasant or painful situation, they 
would attempt to change the situation. 
However, if repeated attempts to change 
the situation failed, they would resign 
themselves to being helpless. Then, 
temperament traits, such as nervous, 
gloomy, sluggish, and excitable; 
character traits, such as moral, 
principled, and dishonest; material
traits, such as miserly or stingy; 
attitude traits, such as pious or spiritual; 
mental traits, such as clever, logical, and 
perceptive; and physical traits, such as 
healthy and tough.
interpretation One of the three levels 
of cognition that are of interest to 
personality psychologists. 
Interpretation is the making sense of, 
or explaining, various events in the 
world. Psychoanalysts offer patients 
interpretations of the psychodynamic 
causes of their problems. Through 
many interpretations, patients are 
gradually led to an understanding of 
the unconscious source of their 
problems.
intersexual selection In Darwin’s 
intersexual selection, members of one 
sex choose a mate based on their 
preferences for particular qualities in 
that mate. These characteristics evolve 
because animals that possess them are 
chosen more often as mates, and their 
genes thrive. Animals that lack the 
desired characteristics are excluded 
from mating, and their genes perish.
intrapsychic domain This domain deals 
with mental mechanisms of personality, 
many of which operate outside the 
realm of conscious awareness. The 
predominant theory in this domain is 
Freud’s theory of psychoanalysis. This 
theory begins with fundamental 
assumptions about the instinctual 
system—the sexual and aggressive forces 
that are presumed to drive and energize 
much of human activity. The 
intrapsychic domain also includes 
defense mechanisms such as repression, 
denial, and projection.
intrasexual competition In Darwin’s 
intrasexual competition, members of the 
same sex compete with each other, and 
the outcome of their contest gives the 
winner greater sexual access to 
members of the opposite sex. Two stags 
locking horns in combat is the 
prototypical image of this. The 
characteristics that lead to success in 
contests of this kind, such as greater 
strength, intelligence, or attractiveness 
to allies, evolve because the victors are 
able to mate more often and hence pass 
on more genes.
which has proven to be replicable in 
studies using English-language trait 
words as items. Some of the key 
adjective markers for Openness are 
“creative,” “imaginative,” “intellectual.” 
Those who rate high on Openness tend 
to remember their dreams more and 
have vivid, prophetic, or problem￾solving dreams.
inter-rater reliability Multiple 
observers gather information about a 
person’s personality, then investigators 
evaluate the degree of consensus 
among the observers. When different 
observers agree with one another, the 
degree of inter-rater reliability 
increases. When different raters fail to 
agree, the measure is said to have low 
inter-rater reliability.
interactional model Objective events 
happen to a person, but personality 
factors determine the impact of those 
events by influencing the person’s 
ability to cope. This is called the 
interactional model because personality 
is assumed to moderate (i.e., influence) 
the relation between stress and illness.
interdependence Markus and Kitayama 
propose that each person has two 
fundamental “cultural tasks” that have 
to be confronted. The first is 
communion or interdependence. This 
cultural task involves how you are 
affiliated with, attached to, or engaged 
in the larger group of which you are a 
member. Interdependence includes your 
relationships with other members of the 
group and your embeddedness within 
the group.
internal locus of control The 
generalized expectancy that reinforcing 
events are under one’s control, and that 
one is responsible for the major 
outcomes in life.
internalized In object relations theory, 
a child will create an unconscious 
mental representation of his or her 
mother. This allows the child to have a 
relationship with this internalized 
“object” even in the absence of the 
“real” mother. The relationship object 
internalized by the child is based on his 
or her developing relationship with the 
mother. This image then forms the 
fundamentals for how children come to 
view others with whom they develop 
subsequent relationships.
interpersonal traits What people do to 
and with each other. They include 
Final PDF to printerGLOSSARY
lar31869_glo_636-664 651 10/22/22 10:21 AM
651
(the manipulated or independent 
variable) on another (the dependent 
variable).
masculine Traits or roles typically 
associated with being male in a 
particular culture.
masculinity Traits that define the 
cultural roles associated with being 
male. Two major personality 
instruments were published in 1974 to 
assess people using this new conception 
of gender roles (Bem, 1974; Spence, 
Helmreich, & Stapp, 1974). The 
masculinity scales contain items 
reflecting assertiveness, boldness, 
dominance, self-sufficiency, and 
instrumentality. Masculinity traits refer 
to gender roles, as distinct from 
biological sex.
maximalist Those who describe sex 
differences as comparable in magnitude 
to effect sizes in other areas of 
psychology, important to consider, and 
recommend that they should not be 
trivialized.
mean level change Within a single 
group that has been tested on two 
separate occasions, any difference in 
group averages across the two occasions 
is considered a mean level change.
mean level stability A population that 
maintains a consistent average level of a 
trait or characteristic over time. If the 
average level of liberalism or 
conservatism in a population remains 
the same with increasing age, we say 
that the population exhibits high mean 
level stability on that characteristic. If 
the average degree of political 
orientation changes, then we say that 
the population is displaying mean level 
change.
mediation Describes a situation 
whereby the effects of one variable on 
another “go through” a third variable 
(the mediator). For example, we know 
that conscientiousness in correlated 
with longevity. However, it is not 
conscientiousness in itself that causes a 
longer life. Instead, researchers have 
determined that, in this relation to 
longevity, the effects of 
conscientiousness go through (are 
mediated by) various health behaviors 
such as exercising regularly and eating a 
sensible diet.
minimalist Those who describe sex 
differences as small and 
inconsequential.
3 = agree slightly, and 4 = strongly 
agree.
limbic system The part of the brain 
responsible for emotion and the “flight￾fight” reaction. If individuals have a 
limbic system that is easily activated, we 
might expect them to have frequent 
episodes of emotion, particularly those 
emotions associated with flight (such as 
anxiety, fear, worry) and those 
associated with fight (such as anger, 
irritation, annoyance). Eysenck 
postulated that the limbic system was 
the source of the trait of neuroticism.
locus of control A person’s perception 
of responsibility for the events in his or 
her life. It refers to whether people tend 
to locate that responsibility internally, 
within themselves, or externally, in fate, 
luck, or chance. Locus of control 
research started in the mid-1950s when 
Rotter was developing his social 
learning theory.
longitudinal study Examines 
individuals over time. Longitudinal 
studies have been conducted that have 
spanned as many as four and five 
decades of life and have examined many 
different age brackets. These studies are 
costly and difficult to conduct, but the 
information gained about personality 
development is valuable.
m
Machiavellianism A manipulative 
strategy of social interaction referring to 
the tendency to use other people as 
tools for personal gain. “High Mach” 
persons tend to tell people what they 
want to hear, use flattery to get what 
they want, and rely heavily on lying and 
deception to achieve their own ends.
major life events According to Holmes 
and Rahe, major life events require that 
people make major adjustments in their 
lives. Death or loss of a spouse through 
divorce or separation are the most 
stressful events, followed closely by 
being jailed, losing a close family 
member in death, or being severely 
injured.
manifest content The manifest content 
of a dream is, according to Freud, what 
the dream actually contains.
manipulation Researchers conducting 
experiments use manipulation in order 
to evaluate the influence of one variable 
even if the situation did improve so that 
they could escape the discomfort, they 
would continue to act helpless.
leukocyte A white blood cell. When 
there is an infection or injury to the 
body, or a systematic inflammation of 
the body occurs, there is an elevation in 
white blood cell counts. Surtees et al., in 
a 2003 study, established a direct link 
between hostility and elevated white 
blood cell counts.
lexical approach The approach to 
determining the fundamental 
personality traits by analyzing language. 
For example, a trait adjective that has 
many synonyms probably represents a 
more fundamental trait than a trait 
adjective with few synonyms.
lexical hypothesis The lexical 
hypothesis—on which the lexical 
approach is based—states that important 
individual differences have become 
encoded within the natural language. 
Over ancestral time, the differences 
between people that were important 
were noticed and words were invented 
to communicate about those 
differences.
libido Freud postulated that humans 
have a fundamental instinct toward 
destruction and that this instinct is 
often manifest in aggression toward 
others. The two instincts were usually 
referred to as libido, for the life instinct, 
and thanatos, for the death instinct. 
While the libido was generally 
considered sexual in nature, Freud also 
used this term to refer to any need￾satisfying, life-sustaining, or pleasure￾oriented urge.
life-outcome data (L-data) Information 
that can be gleaned from the events, 
activities, and outcomes in a person’s 
life that are available to public scrutiny. 
For example, marriages and divorces 
are a matter of public record. 
Personality psychologists can 
sometimes secure information about the 
clubs, if any, a person joins; how many 
speeding tickets a person has received 
in the last few years; whether the person 
owns a handgun. These can all serve as 
sources of information about 
personality.
Likert rating scale A common rating 
scale that provides numbers that are 
attached to descriptive phrases, such as 
0 = disagree strongly, 1 = disagree 
slightly, 2 = neither agree nor disagree, 
Final PDF to printerGLOSSARY
lar31869_glo_636-664 652 10/22/22 10:21 AM
652
intelligence. This position is in contrast 
to the theory of “g,” or general 
intelligence, which holds that there is 
only one form of intelligence.
multiple social personalities Each of us 
displays different sides of ourselves to 
different people—we may be kind to our 
friends, ruthless to our enemies, loving 
toward a spouse, and conflicted toward 
our parents. Our social personalities 
vary from one setting to another, 
depending on the nature of 
relationships we have with other 
individuals.
Myers–Briggs Type Indicator 
(MBTI) One of the most widely used 
personality tests in the business world. 
It was developed by a mother-daughter 
team, Katherine Briggs and Isabel 
Myers, based on Jungian concepts. The 
test provides information about 
personality types by testing for eight 
fundamental preferences using 
questions in a “forced-choice” or 
either/or format. Individuals must 
respond in one way or another, even if 
their preferences might be somewhere 
in the middle. Although the test is not 
without criticism, it has great intuitive 
appeal.
n
narcissism A style of inflated self￾admiration and the constant attempt to 
draw attention to the self and to keep 
others focused on oneself. Although 
narcissism can be carried to extremes, 
narcissistic tendencies can be found in 
normal range levels.
narcissistic paradox The fact that, 
although narcissistic people appear to 
have high self-esteem, they actually have 
doubts about their self-worth. While 
they appear to have a grandiose sense of 
self-importance, narcissists are 
nevertheless very fragile and vulnerable 
to blows to their self-esteem and cannot 
handle criticism well. They need 
constant praise, reassurance, and 
attention from others, whereas a person 
with truly high self-esteem would not 
need such constant praise and attention 
from others.
narcissistic paradox Although 
narcissists appear to have high self￾esteem, their grandiose self-esteem is 
actually quite fragile. Even though they 
appear self-confident and strong, they 
suffers from chronic shame or feelings 
of guilt over not living up to “proper” 
standards, even though such standards 
might not be attainable, is experiencing 
moral anxiety.
moratorium The time taken to explore 
options before making a commitment to 
an identity. College can be considered a 
“time out” from life, in which students 
may explore a variety of roles, 
relationships, and responsibilities before 
having to commit to any single life path.
morningness–eveningness The stable 
differences between persons in 
preferences for being active at different 
times of the day. The term was coined 
to refer to this dimension (Horne & 
Osterberg, 1976). Differences between 
morning and evening types of persons 
appear to be due to differences in the 
length of their underlying circadian 
biological rhythms.
motivated unconscious The 
psychoanalytic idea that information 
that is unconscious (e.g., a repressed 
wish) can actually motivate or influence 
subsequent behavior. This notion was 
promoted by Freud and formed the 
basis for his ideas about the 
unconscious sources of mental 
disorders and other problems with 
living. Many psychologists agree with 
the idea of the unconscious, but there is 
less agreement today about whether 
information that is unconscious can 
have much of an influence on actual 
behavior.
motives Internal states that arouse and 
direct behavior toward specific objects or 
goals. A motive is often caused by a 
deficit, by the lack of something. Motives 
differ from each other in type, amount, 
and intensity, depending on the person 
and his or her circumstances. Motives 
are based on needs and propel people to 
perceive, think, and act in specific ways 
that serve to satisfy those needs.
multiple intelligences Howard 
Gardner’s theory of multiple 
intelligences includes several forms: 
interpersonal intelligence (social skills, 
ability to communicate and get along 
with others), intrapersonal intelligence 
(insight into oneself, one’s emotions 
and motives), kinesthetic intelligence 
(the abilities of athletes, dancers, and 
acrobats), and musical intelligence. 
There are several other theories 
proposing multiple forms of 
modeling By seeing another person 
engage in a particular behavior with 
positive results, the observer is more 
likely to imitate that behavior. It is a 
form of learning whereby the 
consequences for a particular behavior 
are observed, and thus the new behavior 
is learned.
moderation Describes a situation 
whereby one variable (the moderator) 
influences the degree or correlation 
between two other variables. For 
example, if people high in neuroticism 
showed a strong correlation between 
stress and illness, and people low in 
neuroticism showed a weak or no 
correlation between stress and illness, 
then we would say that neuroticism is a 
moderator of the stress–illness 
relationship.
molecular genetics Techniques 
designed to identify the specific genes 
associated with specific traits, such as 
personality traits. The most common 
method, called the association method, 
identifies whether individuals with a 
particular gene (or allele) have higher 
or lower scores on a particular trait 
measure.
monoamine oxidase (MAO) An 
enzyme found in the blood that is 
known to regulate neurotransmitters, 
those chemicals that carry messages 
between nerve cells. MAO may be a 
causal factor in the personality trait of 
sensation seeking.
monozygotic twins Identical twins that 
come from a single fertilized egg (or 
zygote, hence monozygotic) that divides 
into two at some point during gestation. 
Identical twins are always the same sex 
because they are genetically identical.
mood induction In experimental 
studies of mood, mood inductions are 
employed as manipulations in order to 
determine whether the mood differences 
(e.g., pleasant versus unpleasant) effect 
some dependent variable. In studies of 
personality, mood effects might interact 
with personality variables. For example, 
positive mood effects might be stronger 
for persons high on extraversion, and 
negative mood effects might be stronger 
for persons high on neuroticism.
mood variability Frequent fluctuations 
in a person’s emotional life over time.
moral anxiety Caused by a conflict 
between the id or the ego and the 
superego. For example, a person who 
Final PDF to printerGLOSSARY
lar31869_glo_636-664 653 10/22/22 10:21 AM
653
problems. For example, borderline 
personality disordered persons, who are 
generally concerned with being 
abandoned by friends and intimate 
others, may throw temper tantrums or 
otherwise express anger and rage in a 
manner that drives people away. The 
paradox refers to doing behaviors that 
make their situation worse.
neuroticism A dimension of 
personality present, in some form, in 
every major trait theory of personality. 
Different researchers have used 
different terms for neuroticism, such as 
emotional instability, anxiety-proneness, 
and negative affectivity. Adjectives 
useful for describing persons high on 
the trait of neuroticism include moody, 
touchy, irritable, anxious, unstable, 
pessimistic, and complaining.
neurotransmitter theory of 
depression According to this theory, 
an imbalance of the neurotransmitters 
at the synapses of the nervous system 
causes depression. Some medications 
used to treat depression target these 
specific neurotransmitters. Not all 
people with depression are treated 
successfully with drugs. That suggests 
that there may be varieties of 
depression; some are biologically based, 
while others are more reactive to stress, 
physical exercise, or cognitive therapy.
neurotransmitters Chemicals in the 
nerve cells that are responsible for the 
transmission of a nerve impulse from 
one cell to another. Some theories of 
personality are based directly on 
different amounts of neurotransmitters 
found in the nervous system.
nomothetic The study of general 
characters of people as they are 
distributed in the population, typically 
involving statistical comparisons 
between individuals or groups.
noncontent responding (also referred 
to as the concept of response sets) The 
tendency of some people to respond to 
the questions on some basis that is 
unrelated to the question content. One 
example is the response set of 
acquiescence or yea saying. This is the 
tendency to simply agree with the 
questionnaire items, regardless of the 
content of those items.
nonshared environmental 
influences Features of the 
environment that siblings do not share. 
Some children might get special or 
They cherish the process of being 
engaged in a challenging task.
need for intimacy McAdams defines 
the need for intimacy as the “recurrent 
preference or readiness for warm, close, 
and communicative interaction with 
others” (1990, p. 198). People with a 
high need for intimacy want more 
intimacy and meaningful human 
contact in their day-to-day lives than do 
those with a low need for intimacy.
need for power A preference for 
having an impact on other people. 
Individuals with a high need for power 
are interested in controlling situations 
and other people.
needs States of tension within a 
person; as a need is satisfied, the state 
of tension is reduced. Usually the state 
of tension is caused by the lack of 
something (e.g., a lack of food causes a 
need to eat).
negative affectivity Includes 
components such as anger, sadness, 
difficulty, and amount of distress.
negative identity Identities founded on 
undesirable social roles, such as 
“gangstas,” girlfriends of street toughs, 
or members of street gangs.
negligent hiring A charge sometimes 
brought against an employer for hiring 
someone who is unstable or prone to 
violence. Employers are defending 
themselves against such suits, which 
often seek compensation for crimes 
committed by their employees. Such 
cases hinge on whether the employer 
should have discovered dangerous traits 
ahead of time, before hiring such a 
person into a position where he or she 
posed a threat to others. Personality 
testing may provide evidence that the 
employer did in fact try to reasonably 
investigate an applicant’s fitness for the 
workplace.
neuroscience The scientific study of 
the nervous system.
neurotic anxiety Occurs when there is a 
direct conflict between the id and the 
ego. The danger is that the ego may lose 
control over some unacceptable desire of 
the id. For example, a man who worries 
excessively that he might blurt out some 
unacceptable thought or desire in public 
is beset by neurotic anxiety.
neurotic paradox The fact that people 
with disorders or other problems with 
living often exhibit behaviors that 
exacerbate, rather than lessen, their 
need constant admiration and 
recognition and praise from others.
narcissistic personality disorder The 
calling card of the narcissistic 
personality is a strong need to be 
admired, a strong sense of self￾importance, and a lack of insight into 
other people’s feelings. Narcissists see 
themselves in a very favorable light, 
inflating their accomplishments and 
undervaluing the work of others. 
Narcissists daydream about prosperity, 
victory, influence, adoration from 
others, and power. They routinely 
expect adulation from others, believing 
that homage is generally long overdue. 
They exhibit feelings of entitlement, 
even though they have done nothing in 
particular to earn that special treatment.
natural selection Darwin reasoned that 
variants that better enabled an organism 
to survive and reproduce would lead to 
more descendants. The descendants, 
therefore, would inherit the variants 
that led to their ancestors’ survival and 
reproduction. Through this process, the 
successful variants were selected, and 
unsuccessful variants weeded out. 
Natural selection, therefore, results in 
gradual changes in a species over time, 
as successful variants increase in 
frequency and eventually spread 
throughout the gene pool, replacing the 
less successful variants.
naturalistic observation Observers 
witness and record events that occur in 
the normal course of the lives of their 
participants. For example, a child 
might be followed throughout an entire 
day, or an observer may record 
behavior in the home of the participant. 
Naturalistic observation offers 
researchers the advantage of being able 
to secure information in the realistic 
context of a person’s everyday life, but 
at the cost of not being able to control 
the events and behavioral samples 
witnessed.
nature–nurture debate The ongoing 
debate as to whether genes or 
environment are more important 
determinants of personality.
need for achievement According to 
McClelland, the desire to do better, to 
be successful, and to feel competent. 
People with a high need for 
achievement obtains satisfaction from 
accomplishing a task or from the 
anticipation of accomplishing a task. 
Final PDF to printerGLOSSARY
lar31869_glo_636-664 654 10/22/22 10:21 AM
654
smoke or talk too much) might be 
fixated at this stage.
organized and enduring “Organized” 
means that the psychological traits and 
mechanisms for a given person are not 
simply a random collection of elements. 
Rather, personality is coherent because 
the mechanisms and traits are linked to 
one another in an organized fashion. 
“Enduring” means that the 
psychological traits are generally 
consistent over time, particularly in 
adulthood, and over situations.
orthogonality Discussed in terms of 
circumplex models, orthogonality 
specifies that traits that are 
perpendicular to each other on the 
model (at 90 degrees of separation, or 
at right angles to each other) are 
unrelated to each other. In general, the 
term “orthogonal” is used to describe a 
zero correlation between traits.
ought self A person’s understanding of 
what others want them to be.
overt and covert integrity 
measures Both are self-report 
measures of integrity used in business 
and industry. Overt measures include 
questions directly related to past 
violations of workplace integrity, such 
as excessive absenteeism or theft. 
Covert measures include questions that 
are indirectly related to integrity, such 
as questions about personality traits that 
are correlated with workplace integrity, 
such as conscientiousness.
p
pain tolerance The degree to which 
people can tolerate pain, which shows 
wide differences between persons. 
Petrie believed that individual 
differences in pain tolerance originated 
in the nervous system. She developed a 
theory that people with low pain 
tolerance had a nervous system that 
amplified or augmented the subjective 
impact of sensory input. In contrast, 
people who could tolerate pain well 
were thought to have a nervous system 
that dampened or reduced the effects of 
sensory stimulation.
paranoid personality disorder The 
paranoid personality is extremely 
distrustful of others and sees others as a 
constant threat. Such a person assumes 
that others are out to exploit and 
deceive them, even though there is no 
oneself from an outside perspective is 
the beginning of a social identity.
observer-report data (O-data) The 
impressions and evaluations others 
make of a person whom they come into 
contact with. For every individual, there 
are dozens of observers who form such 
impressions. Observer-report methods 
capitalize on these sources and provide 
tools for gathering information about a 
person’s personality. Observers may 
have access to information not 
attainable through other sources, and 
multiple observers can be used to assess 
each individual. Typically, a more valid 
and reliable assessment of personality 
can be achieved when multiple 
observers are used.
obsessive-compulsive personality 
disorder The obsessive-compulsive 
personality is preoccupied with order 
and strives to be perfect. The high need 
for order can manifest itself in the 
person’s attention to details, however 
trivial, and fondness for rules, rituals, 
schedules, and procedures. Another 
characteristic is a devotion to work at 
the expense of leisure and friendships. 
Obsessive-compulsive persons tend to 
work harder than they need to.
oedipal conflict For boys, the main 
conflict in Freud’s phallic stage. It is a 
boy’s unconscious wish to have his 
mother all to himself by eliminating the 
father. (Oedipus is a character in a 
Greek myth who unknowingly kills his 
father and marries his mother.)
optimal level of arousal Hebb believed 
that people are motivated to reach an 
optimal level of arousal. If they are 
underaroused relative to this level, an 
increase in arousal is rewarding; 
conversely, if they are overaroused, a 
decrease in arousal is rewarding. By 
optimal level of arousal, Hebb meant a 
level that is “just right” for any given 
task.
optimistic explanatory style A style 
that emphasizes external, temporary, 
and specific causes of events.
oral stage The first stage in Freud’s 
psychosexual stages of development. 
This stage occurs during the initial 18 
months after birth. During this time, the 
main sources of pleasure and tension 
reduction are the mouth, lips, and 
tongue. Adults who still obtain pleasure 
from “taking in,” especially through the 
mouth (e.g., people who overeat or 
different treatment from their parents, 
they might have different groups of 
friends, they might be sent to different 
schools, or one might go to summer 
camp while the other stays home each 
summer. These features are called 
“nonshared” because they are 
experienced differently by different 
siblings.
norepinephrine A neurotransmitter 
involved in activating the sympathetic 
nervous system for flight or fight.
novelty seeking In Cloninger’s 
tridimensional personality model, the 
personality trait of novelty seeking is 
based on low levels of dopamine. Low 
levels of dopamine create a drive state 
to obtain substances or experiences 
that increase dopamine. Novelty and 
thrills and excitement can make up for 
low levels of dopamine, and so novelty￾seeking behavior is thought to result 
from low levels of this 
neurotransmitter.
o
object relations theory Places an 
emphasis on early childhood 
relationships. While this theory has 
several versions that differ from each 
other in emphasis, all the versions have 
at their core a set of basic assumptions: 
that the internal wishes, desires, and 
urges of the child are not as important 
as his or her developing relationships 
with significant external others, 
particularly parents, and that the others, 
particularly the mother, become 
internalized by the child in the form of 
mental objects.
objectifying cognition Processing 
information by relating it to objective 
facts. This style of thinking stands in 
contrast to personalizing cognitions.
objective anxiety Fear occurs in 
response to some real, external threat to 
the person. For example, being 
confronted by a large, aggressive￾looking man with a knife while taking a 
shortcut through an alley would elicit 
objective anxiety (fear) in most people.
objective self-awareness Seeing oneself 
as an object of others’ attention. Often, 
objective self-awareness is experienced 
as shyness, and for some people this is a 
chronic problem. Although objective 
self-awareness can lead to periods of 
social sensitivity, this ability to consider 
Final PDF to printerGLOSSARY
lar31869_glo_636-664 655 10/22/22 10:21 AM
655
personality-descriptive nouns differ in 
their content emphases from personality 
taxonomies based on adjectives and 
may be more precise. In Saucier’s 2003 
work on personality nouns, he 
discovered eight factors, including 
“Dumbbell,” “Babe/Cutie,” 
“Philosopher,” “Lawbreaker,” “Joker,” 
and “Jock.”
personality The set of psychological 
traits and mechanisms within the 
individual that are organized and 
relatively enduring and that influence 
his or her interactions with, and 
adaptations to, the environment 
(including the intrapsychic, physical, 
and social environment).
personalizing cognition Processing 
information by relating it to a similar 
event in your own life. This style of 
processing information occurs when 
people interpret a new event in a 
personally relevant manner. For 
example, they might see a car accident 
and start thinking about the time they 
were in a car accident.
personnel selection Employers 
sometimes use personality tests to 
select people especially suitable for a 
specific job. Alternatively, the 
employer may want to use personality 
assessments to deselect, or screen out, 
people with specific traits. In both 
cases an employer is concerned with 
selecting the right person for a specific 
position from among a pool of 
applicants.
person–environment interaction A 
person’s interactions with situations 
include perceptions, selections, 
evocations, and manipulations. 
Perceptions refer to how we “see” or 
interpret an environment. Selection
describes the manner in which we 
choose situations—such as our friends, 
our hobbies, our college classes, and our 
careers. Evocations refer to the reactions 
we produce in others, often quite 
unintentionally. Manipulations refer to 
the ways in which we attempt to 
influence others.
person–situation interaction The 
person–situation interaction trait theory 
states that one has to take into account 
both particular situations (e.g., 
frustration) and personality traits (e.g., 
hot temper) when understanding a 
behavior.
perception One of the three levels of 
cognition that are of interest to 
personality psychologists. Perception is 
the process of imposing order on the 
information our sense organs take in. 
Even at the level of perception, what we 
“see” in the world can be quite different 
from person to person.
perceptual sensitivity The ability to 
detect subtle stimuli from the 
environment.
personal construct A belief or concept 
that summarizes a set of observations or 
version of reality, unique to an 
individual, which that person routinely 
uses to interpret and predict events.
personal project A set of relevant 
actions intended to achieve a goal that 
a person has selected. Psychologist 
Brian Little believes that personal 
projects make natural units for 
understanding the working of 
personality, because they reflect how 
people face up to the serious business 
of navigating through daily life.
personality coherence Changes in the 
manifestations of personality variables 
over time, even as the underlying 
characteristics remain stable. The 
notion of personality coherence 
includes both elements of continuity 
and elements of change: continuity in 
the underlying trait but change in the 
outward manifestation of that trait. For 
example, an emotionally unstable child 
might frequently cry and throw temper 
tantrums, whereas as an adult such a 
person might frequently worry and 
complain. The manifestation might 
change, even though the trait stays 
stable.
personality development The 
continuities, consistencies, and 
stabilities in people over time, and the 
ways in which people change over time.
personality disorder An enduring 
pattern of experience and behavior that 
differs greatly from the expectations of 
the individual’s culture. The disorder is 
usually manifest in more than one of 
the following areas: the way a person 
thinks, feels, gets along with others, or 
controls personal behavior. To be 
classed as a personality disorder, the 
pattern must not result from drug abuse, 
medication, or a medical condition such 
as head trauma.
personality-descriptive nouns As 
described by Saucier, 
good evidence to support this 
assumption. Paranoid personalities feel 
that they have been injured by other 
persons and are preoccupied with 
doubts about the motivations of others. 
The paranoid personality often 
misinterprets social events and holds 
resentments toward others for slights or 
perceived insults.
parsimony The fewer premises and 
assumptions a theory contains, the 
greater its parsimony. This does not 
mean that simple theories are always 
better than complex ones. Due to the 
complexity of the human personality, a 
complex theory—that is, one containing 
many premises—may ultimately be 
necessary for adequate personality 
theories.
passive genotype–environment 
correlation Occurs when parents 
provide both genes and environment to 
children, yet the children do nothing to 
obtain that environment.
penis envy The female counterpart of 
castration anxiety, which occurs during 
the phallic stage of psychosexual 
development for girls around 3–5 years 
of age.
people–things dimension Brian Little’s 
people–things dimension of personality 
refers to the nature of vocational 
interests. Those at the “things” end of 
the dimension like vocations that deal 
with impersonal tasks—machines, tools, 
or materials. Examples include 
carpenter, auto mechanic, building 
contractor, tool maker, or farmer. 
Those scoring toward the “people” end 
of the dimension prefer social 
occupations that involve thinking about 
others, caring for others, or directing 
others. Examples include high school 
teacher, social worker, or religious 
counselor.
percentage of variance Individuals vary 
or are different from each other, and 
this variability can be partitioned into 
percentages that are related to separate 
causes or separate variables. An 
example is the percentages of variance 
in some trait that are related to genetics, 
the shared environment, and the 
unshared environment. Another 
example would be the percentage of 
variance in happiness scores that are 
related to various demographic 
variables, such as income, gender, and 
age.
Final PDF to printerGLOSSARY
lar31869_glo_636-664 656 10/22/22 10:21 AM
656
power stress According to David 
McClelland, when people do not get 
their way, or when their power is 
challenged or blocked, they are likely to 
show strong stress responses. This stress 
has been linked to diminished immune 
function and increased illness in 
longitudinal studies.
preconscious Any information that a 
person is not presently aware of, but 
that could easily be retrieved and made 
conscious, is found in the preconscious 
mind.
predictive validity Whether a test 
predicts criteria external to the test 
(also referred to as criterion validity).
predisposition model In health 
psychology, the predisposition model 
suggests that associations may exist 
between personality and illness because 
a third variable is causing them both.
prefrontal cortex Area of the brain 
found to be highly active in the control 
of emotions. Many people who have 
committed violent acts exhibit a 
neurological deficit in the frontal areas, 
portions of the brain assumed to be 
responsible for regulating negative 
emotions.
press Need-relevant aspects of the 
environment. A person’s need for 
intimacy, for example, won’t affect that 
person’s behavior without an 
appropriate environmental press (such 
as the presence of friendly people).
prevalence The total number of cases 
that are present within a given 
population during a particular period of 
time.
prevention focus One focus of self￾regulation where the person is 
concerned with protection, safety, and 
the prevention of negative outcomes 
and failures. Behaviors with a 
prevention focus are characterized by 
vigilance, caution, and attempts to 
prevent negative outcomes.
primary appraisal According to 
Lazarus, in order for stress to be evoked 
for a person, two cognitive events must 
occur. The first cognitive event, called 
the primary appraisal, is for the person 
to perceive that the event is a threat to 
his or her personal goals. See also 
secondary appraisal.
primary process thinking Thinking 
without the logical rules of conscious 
thought or an anchor in reality. Dreams 
and fantasies are examples of primary 
appears to be part of emotional well￾being (Taylor, 1989; Taylor et al., 
2000).
positive reappraisal A cognitive 
process whereby a person focuses on 
the good in what is happening or has 
happened to them. Folkman and 
Moskowitz note that forms of this 
positive coping strategy include seeing 
opportunities for personal growth or 
seeing how one’s own efforts can benefit 
other people.
positive regard According to Rogers, 
all children are born wanting to be 
loved and accepted by their parents and 
others. He called this inborn need the 
desire for positive regard.
positive self-regard According to 
Rogers, people who have received 
positive regard from others develop a 
sense of positive self-regard; they accept 
themselves, even their own weaknesses 
and shortcomings. People with high 
positive self-regard trust themselves, 
follow their own interests, and rely on 
their feelings to guide them to do the 
right thing.
possible selves The notion of possible 
selves can be viewed in a number of 
ways, but two are especially important. 
The first pertains to the desired self—the 
person we wish to become. The second 
pertains to our feared self—the sort of 
person we do not wish to become.
postmodernism In personality 
psychology, the notion that reality is a 
construct, that every person and culture 
has its own unique version of reality, 
and that no single version of reality is 
more valid or more privileged than 
another.
posttraumatic stress disorder 
(PTSD) A syndrome that occurs in 
some individuals after experiencing or 
witnessing life-threatening events, such 
as military combat, natural disasters, 
terrorist attacks, serious accidents, or 
violent personal assaults (e.g., rape). 
Those who suffer from PTSD often 
relive the trigger experience for years 
through nightmares or intense 
flashbacks; have difficulty sleeping; 
report physical complaints; have 
flattened emotions; and feel detached or 
estranged from others. These symptoms 
can be severe and last long enough to 
significantly impair the individual’s 
daily life, health, relationships, and 
career.
perspective taking A final unfolding of 
the self-concept during the teen years; 
the ability to take the perspectives of 
others, or to see oneself as others do, to 
step outside of one’s self and imagine 
how one appears to other people. This 
is why many teenagers go through a 
period of extreme self-consciousness 
during this time, focusing much of their 
energy on how they appear to others.
pessimistic explanatory style Puts a 
person at risk for feelings of 
helplessness and poor adjustment, and 
emphasizes internal, stable, and global 
causes for bad events. It is the opposite 
of optimistic explanatory style.
phallic stage The third stage in 
Freud’s psychosexual stages of 
development. It occurs between 3 and 5 
years of age, during which time the 
child discovers that he has (or she 
discovers that she does not have) a 
penis. This stage also includes the 
awakening of sexual desire directed, 
according to Freud, toward the parent 
of the opposite sex.
phenotypic variance Observed 
individual differences, such as in height, 
weight, or personality.
physiological needs The base of 
Maslow’s need hierarchy. These include 
those needs that are of prime 
importance to the immediate survival of 
the individual (the need for food, water, 
air, sleep) as well as to the long-term 
survival of the species (the need for 
sex).
physiological systems Organ systems 
within the body; for example, the 
nervous system (including the brain and 
nerves), the cardiac system (including 
the heart, arteries, and veins), and the 
musculoskeletal system (including the 
muscles and bones which make all 
movements and behaviors possible).
pleasure principle The desire for 
immediate gratification. The id operates 
according to the pleasure principle; 
therefore, it does not listen to reason, 
does not follow logic, has no values or 
morals (other than immediate 
gratification), and has very little 
patience.
positive illusions Some researchers 
believe that part of being happy is to 
have positive illusions about the self—an 
inflated view of one’s own 
characteristics as a good, able, and 
desirable person—as this characteristic 
Final PDF to printerGLOSSARY
lar31869_glo_636-664 657 10/22/22 10:21 AM
657
their behavior toward certain categories 
of action (outputs).
psychological traits Characteristics 
that describe ways in which people are 
unique or different from or similar to 
each other. Psychological traits include 
all sorts of aspects of persons that are 
psychologically meaningful and are 
stable and consistent aspects of 
personality.
psychological types A term growing 
out of Carl Jung’s theory implying that 
people come in types or distinct 
categories of personality, such as 
“extraverted types.” This view is not 
widely endorsed by academic or 
research-oriented psychologists because 
most personality traits are normally 
distributed in the population and are 
best conceived as dimensions of 
difference, not categories.
psychopathology The study of mental 
disorders that combines statistical, 
social, and psychological approaches to 
diagnosing individual abnormality.
psychopathy The psychopathy 
designation places emphasis on more 
subjective or inner characteristics, such 
as the incapacity to feel shame, guilt, 
and fear, a lack of empathy toward 
others, or having callous social beliefs. 
In contrast, the sociopathy designation 
refers more to observable or outward 
behaviors, such as chronic lying, 
repeated criminal behavior, and 
conflicts with authority.
psychosexual stage theory According 
to Freud, all persons pass through a set 
series of stages in personality 
development. At each of the first three 
stages, young children must face and 
resolve specific conflicts, which revolve 
around ways of obtaining a type of 
sexual gratification. Children seek 
sexual gratification at each stage by 
investing libidinal energy in a specific 
body part. Each stage in the 
developmental process is named after 
the body part in which sexual energy is 
invested.
psychosocial conflicts As posited by 
Erik Erikson, psychosocial conflicts 
occur throughout a person’s lifetime 
and contribute to the ongoing 
development of personality. He defined 
psychosocial conflicts as the crises of 
learning to trust our parents, learning to 
be autonomous from them, and learning 
from them how to act as an adult.
see in others those traits and desires 
that we find most upsetting in ourselves. 
We literally “project” (i.e., attribute) our 
own unacceptable qualities onto others.
projective hypothesis The idea that 
what a person “sees” in an ambiguous 
figure, such as an inkblot, reflects his or 
her personality. People are thought to 
project their own personalities into 
what they report seeing in such an 
ambiguous stimulus.
projective techniques A person is 
presented with an ambiguous stimulus 
and is then asked to impose some order 
on the stimulus, such as asking what the 
person sees in an inkblot. What the 
person sees is interpreted to reveal 
something about his or her personality. 
The person presumably “projects” his or 
her concerns, conflicts, traits, and ways 
of seeing or dealing with the world onto 
the ambiguous stimulus. The most 
famous projective technique for 
assessing personality is the Rorschach 
inkblot test.
promotion focus One focus of self￾regulation whereby the person is 
concerned with advancement, growth, 
and accomplishments. Behaviors with a 
promotion focus are characterized by 
eagerness, approach, and “going for the 
gold.”
psychic energy According to Sigmund 
Freud, a source of energy within each 
person that motivates him or her to do 
one thing and not another. In Freud’s 
view, it is this energy that motivates all 
human activity.
psychoanalysis A theory of personality 
and a method of psychotherapy (a 
technique for helping individuals who 
are experiencing some mental disorder 
or even relatively minor problems with 
living). Psychoanalysis can be thought 
of as a theory about the major 
components and mechanisms of 
personality, as well as a method for 
deliberately restructuring personality.
psychological mechanisms Similar to 
traits, except that mechanisms refer 
more to the processes of personality. For 
example, most personality mechanisms 
involve some information-processing 
activity. A psychological mechanism 
may make people more sensitive to 
certain kinds of information from the 
environment (input), may make them 
more likely to think about specific 
options (decision rules), or may guide 
process thinking. Although primary 
process thought does not follow the 
normal rules of reality (e.g., in dreams 
people might fly or walk through walls), 
Freud believed there were principles at 
work in primary process thought and 
that these principles could be 
discovered.
priming Technique to make associated 
material more accessible to conscious 
awareness than material that is not 
primed. Research using subliminal 
primes demonstrates that information 
can get into the mind, and have some 
influence on it, without going through 
conscious experience.
Price Waterhouse v. Hopkins A 
Supreme Court case in which Ann 
Hopkins sued her employer, Price 
Waterhouse, claiming that it had 
discriminated against her on the basis of 
sex in violation of Title VII of the Civil 
Rights Act, on the theory that her 
promotion denial had been based on 
sexual stereotyping. The Supreme Court 
accepted the argument that gender 
stereotyping does exist and that it can 
create a bias against women in the 
workplace that is not permissible under 
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act. By 
court order Ann Hopkins was made a 
full partner in her accounting firm.
private self-concept The development 
of an inner, private self-concept is a 
major but often difficult development in 
the growth of the self-concept. It may 
start out with children developing an 
imaginary friend, someone only they 
can see or hear. This imaginary friend 
may actually be children’s first attempt 
to communicate to their parents that 
they know there is a secret part, an 
inner part, to their understanding of 
their self. Later, children develop the 
full realization that only they have 
access to their own thoughts, feelings, 
and desires, and that no one else can 
know this part of them unless they 
choose to tell them.
problem-focused coping Thoughts and 
behaviors that manage or solve the 
underlying cause of stress. Folkman and 
Moskowitz note that focusing on 
solving problems, even little ones, can 
give a person a positive sense of control 
even in the most stressful and 
uncontrollable circumstances.
projection A defense mechanism 
based on the notion that sometimes we 
Final PDF to printerGLOSSARY
lar31869_glo_636-664 658 10/22/22 10:21 AM
658
interval of a month apart, for the same 
sample of persons. If the two tests are 
highly correlated between the first and 
second testing, yielding similar scores for 
most people, then the resulting measure 
is said to have high test-retest reliability.
repetition compulsion The idea that 
people recreate or repeat their 
interpersonal problems over and over 
with different people in their lives. This 
notion underlies the psychoanalytic 
transference, wherein the patient 
recreates the interpersonal difficulties 
they have in their everyday life with the 
analyst during the course of their 
treatment.
repression One of the first defense 
mechanisms discussed by Freud; refers 
to the process of preventing 
unacceptable thoughts, feelings, or 
urges from reaching conscious 
awareness.
resistance stage The second stage in 
Selye’s general adaptation syndrome 
(GAS). Here the body is using its 
resources at an above-average rate, even 
though the immediate fight-or-flight 
response has subsided. Stress is being 
resisted, but the effort is making 
demands on the person’s resources and 
energy.
resistance When a patient’s defenses 
are threatened by a probing 
psychoanalyst, the patient may 
unconsciously set up obstacles to 
progress. This stage of psychoanalysis is 
called resistance. Resistance signifies 
that important unconscious material is 
coming to the fore. The resistance itself 
becomes an integral part of the 
interpretations the analyst offers to the 
patient.
response sets The tendency of some 
people to respond to the questions on 
some basis that is unrelated to the 
question content. Sometimes this is 
referred to as noncontent responding. 
One example is the response set of 
acquiescence or yea saying. This is the 
tendency to simply agree with the 
questionnaire items, regardless of the 
content of those items.
responsibility training Life experiences 
that provide opportunities to learn to 
behave responsibly, such as having 
younger siblings to take care of while 
growing up. Moderates the gender 
difference in impulsive behaviors 
associated with need for power.
reactive genotype–environment 
correlation Occurs when parents (or 
others) respond to children differently 
depending on their genotype.
reactively heritable Traits that are 
secondary consequences of heritable 
traits.
reality principle In psychoanalysis, it is 
the counterpart of the pleasure 
principle. It refers to guiding behavior 
according to the demands of reality and 
relies on the strengths of the ego to 
provide such guidance.
reciprocal causality The notion that 
causality can move in two directions; 
for example, helping others can lead to 
happiness, and happiness can lead one 
to be more helpful to others.
reducer/augmenter theory Petrie’s 
reducer/augmenter theory refers to the 
dimension along which people differ in 
their reaction to sensory stimulation; 
some appear to reduce sensory 
stimulation, some appear to augment 
stimulation.
reinforcement sensitivity theory Gray’s 
biological theory of personality. Based 
on recent brain function research with 
animals, Gray constructed a model of 
human personality based on two 
hypothesized biological systems in the 
brain: the behavioral activation system 
(which is responsive to incentives, such 
as cues for reward, and regulates 
approach behavior) and the behavioral 
inhibition system (which is responsive 
to cues for punishment, frustration, and 
uncertainty).
reliability The degree to which an 
obtained measure represents the “true” 
level of the trait being measured. For 
example, if a person has a “true” IQ of 
115, then a perfectly reliable measure of 
IQ will yield a score of 115 for that 
person. Moreover, a truly reliable 
measure of IQ would yield the same 
score of 115 each time it was 
administered to the person. Personality 
psychologists prefer reliable measures 
so that the scores accurately reflect each 
person’s true level of the personality 
characteristic being measured.
repeated measurement A way to 
estimate the reliability of a measure. 
There are different forms of repeated 
measurement, and hence different 
versions of reliability. A common 
procedure is to repeat the same 
measurement over time, say at an 
r
race or gender norming The Civil 
Rights Act of 1991 forbids employers 
from using different norms or cutoff 
scores for different groups of people. 
For example, it would be illegal for a 
company to set a higher threshold for 
women than men on their selection 
test.
random assignment Assignment in an 
experiment that is conducted randomly. 
If an experiment has manipulation 
between groups, random assignment of 
participants to experimental groups 
helps ensure that each group is 
equivalent.
rank-order stability Maintaining one’s 
relative position within a group over 
time. Between ages 14 and 20, for 
example, most people become taller. 
But the rank order of heights tends to 
remain fairly stable because this form of 
development affects all people pretty 
much the same. The tall people at 14 
fall generally toward the tall end of the 
distribution at age 20. The same can 
apply to personality traits. If people 
tend to maintain their position on 
dominance or extraversion relative to 
the other members of the group over 
time, then we say that there is high rank 
order stability to the personality 
characteristic. Conversely, if people fail 
to maintain their rank order, we say that 
the group has displayed rank order 
instability or rank order change.
rationalization A defense mechanism 
that involves generating acceptable 
reasons for outcomes that might 
otherwise be unacceptable. The goal is 
to reduce anxiety by coming up with an 
explanation for some event that is easier 
to accept than the “real” reason.
reaction formation A defense 
mechanism that refers to an attempt to 
stifle the expression of an unacceptable 
urge; a person may continually display 
a flurry of behavior that indicates the 
opposite impulse. Reaction formation 
makes it possible for psychoanalysts to 
predict that sometimes people will do 
exactly the opposite of what you might 
otherwise think they would do. It also 
alerts us to be sensitive to instances 
when a person is doing something in 
excess. One of the hallmarks of 
reaction formation is excessive 
behavior.
Final PDF to printerGLOSSARY
lar31869_glo_636-664 659 10/22/22 10:21 AM
659
devising of strategies for problem 
solving and obtaining satisfaction. Often 
this process involves taking into 
account the constraints of physical 
reality, about when and how to express 
some desire or urge. See primary process 
thinking.
secure relationship style In Hazan and 
Shaver’s secure relationship style, the 
adult has few problems developing 
satisfying friendships and relationships. 
Secure people trust others and develop 
bonds with others.
securely attached Securely attached 
infants in Ainsworth’s strange situation 
stoically endured the separation and 
went about exploring the room, waiting 
patiently, or even approaching the 
stranger and sometimes wanting to be 
held by the stranger. When the mother 
returned, these infants were glad to see 
her, typically interacted with her for a 
while, then went back to exploring the 
new environment. They seemed 
confident the mother would return. 
Approximately 66 percent of infants fall 
into this category.
selective breeding One method of 
doing behavior genetic research. 
Researchers might identify a trait and 
then see if they can selectively breed 
animals to possess that trait. This can 
occur only if the trait has a genetic 
basis. For example, dogs that possess 
certain desired characteristics, such as 
a sociable disposition, might be 
selectively bred to see if this 
disposition can be increased in 
frequency among offspring. Traits that 
are based on learning cannot be 
selectively bred for.
selective placement If adopted children 
are placed with adoptive parents who 
are similar to their birth parents, this 
may inflate the correlations between the 
adopted children and their adoptive 
parents. In this case, the resulting 
inflated correlations would artificially 
inflate estimates of environmental 
influence because the correlation would 
appear to be due to the environment 
provided by the adoptive parent. There 
does not seem to be selective 
placement, and so this potential 
problem is not a problem in actual 
studies (Plomin et al., 1990).
self-actualization need Maslow 
defines self-actualization as becoming 
“more and more what one 
do I continue to feel so bad about 
myself?” or “Why doesn’t my boss like 
me?”). Rumination is a key contributor 
to women’s greater experience of 
depressive symptoms.
s
safety needs The second to lowest 
level of Maslow’s need hierarchy. These 
needs have to do with shelter and 
security, such as having a place to live 
and being free from the threat of 
danger. Maslow believed that building a 
life that was orderly, structured, and 
predictable also fell under safety needs.
schizoid personality disorder The 
schizoid personality is split off (schism) 
or detached from normal social 
relations. The schizoid person simply 
appears to have no need or desire for 
intimate relationships or even 
friendships. Family life usually does not 
mean much to such people, and they do 
not obtain satisfaction from being part 
of a group. They have few or no close 
friends, and they would rather spend 
time by themselves than with others.
schizotypal personality 
disorder Whereas the schizoid person 
is indifferent to social interaction, the 
schizotypal personality is acutely 
uncomfortable in social relationships. 
Schizotypes are anxious in social 
situations, especially if those situations 
involve strangers. Schizotypal persons 
also feel that they are different from 
others, or that they do not fit in with the 
group. They tend to be suspicious of 
others and are seen as odd and 
eccentric.
scientific standards for evaluating 
personality theories The five key 
standards are comprehensiveness, 
heuristic value, testability, parsimony, 
and compatibility and integration across 
domains and levels.
secondary appraisal According to 
Lazarus, in order for stress to be evoked 
for a person, two cognitive events must 
occur. The second necessary cognitive 
event, called the secondary appraisal, is 
when the person concludes that he or 
she does not have the resources to cope 
with the demands of the threatening 
event. See primary appraisal.
secondary process thinking The ego 
engages in secondary process thinking, 
which refers to the development and 
restricted sexual strategy According to 
Gangestad and Simpson (1990), a 
woman seeking a high-investing mate 
would adopt a restricted sexual strategy 
marked by delayed intercourse and 
prolonged courtship. This would enable 
her to assess the man’s level of 
commitment, detect the existence of 
prior commitments to other women 
and/or children, and simultaneously 
signal to the man the woman’s sexual 
fidelity and, hence, assure him of his 
paternity of future offspring.
reward dependence In Cloninger’s 
tridimensional personality model, the 
personality trait of reward dependence 
is associated with low levels of 
norepinephrine. People high on this 
trait are persistent; they continue to act 
in ways that produced reward. They 
work long hours, put a lot of effort into 
their work, and will often continue 
striving after others have given up.
right to privacy Perhaps the largest 
issue of legal concern for employers 
using personality testing is privacy. The 
right to privacy in employment settings 
grows out of the broader concept of the 
right to privacy. Cases that charge an 
invasion-of-privacy claim against an 
employer can be based on the federal 
constitution, state constitutions and 
statutes, and common law.
rite of passage Some cultures and 
religions institute a rite of passage ritual, 
usually around adolescence, which 
typically is a ceremony that initiates a 
child into adulthood. After such 
ceremonies, the adolescent is 
sometimes given a new name, bestowing 
a new adult identity.
rod and frame test (RFT) An 
apparatus to research the cues that 
people use in judging orientation in 
space. The participant sits in a darkened 
room and is instructed to watch a 
glowing rod surrounded by a glowing 
square frame. The experimenter can 
adjust the tilt of the rod, the frame, and 
the participant’s chair. The participant’s 
task is to adjust the rod by turning a dial 
so that the rod is perfectly upright. To 
do this accurately, the participant has to 
ignore cues in the visual field in which 
the rod appears. This test measures the 
personality dimension of field 
dependence–independence.
rumination Repeatedly focusing on 
one’s symptoms or distress (e.g., “Why 
Final PDF to printerGLOSSARY
lar31869_glo_636-664 660 10/22/22 10:21 AM
660
exciting activities, to take risks, and to 
avoid boredom.
sensory deprivation Often done in a 
sound-proof chamber containing water 
in which a person floats, in total 
darkness, such that sensory input is 
reduced to a minimum. Researchers use 
sensory deprivation chambers to see 
what happens when a person is 
deprived of sensory input.
separation anxiety Children 
experiencing separation anxiety react 
negatively to separation from their 
mother (or primary caretaker), 
becoming agitated and distressed when 
their mothers leave. Most primates 
exhibit separation anxiety.
serotonin A neurotransmitter that 
plays a role in depression and other 
mood disorders. Drugs such as Prozac, 
Zoloft, and Paxil block the reuptake of 
serotonin, leaving it in the synapse 
longer, leading depressed persons to 
feel less depressed.
sex differences An average difference 
between women and men on certain 
characteristics such as height, body fat 
distribution, or personality 
characteristics, with no prejudgment 
about the cause of the difference.
sexual selection The evolution of 
characteristics because of their mating 
benefits rather than because of their 
survival benefits. According to Darwin, 
sexual selection takes two forms: 
intrasexual competition and intersexual 
selection.
sexually dimorphic Species that show 
high variance in reproduction within one 
sex tend to be highly sexually dimorphic, 
or highly different in size and structure. 
The more intense the effective polygyny, 
the more dimorphic the sexes are in size 
and form (Trivers, 1985).
shared environmental 
influences Features of the 
environment that siblings share; for 
example, the number of books in the 
home, the presence or absence of a TV 
and VCR, quality and quantity of the 
food in the home, the values and 
attitudes of the parent, and the schools, 
church, synagogue, or temple the 
parents send the children to.
shyness A tendency to feel tense, 
worried, or anxious during social 
interactions, or even when anticipating 
a social interaction (Addison & 
Schmidt, 1999). Shyness is a common 
self-esteem anxiety People have a 
preferred and generally positive view of 
themselves, and they will defend against 
any unflattering blows to that self-view 
to protect their self-esteem.
self-esteem variability An individual 
difference characteristic referring to 
how much a person’s self-esteem 
fluctuates or changes over time. It is 
uncorrelated with mean level of 
self-esteem.
self-esteem “The extent to which one 
perceives oneself as relatively close to 
being the person one wants to be and/or 
as relatively distant from being the kind 
of person one does not want to be, with 
respect to person-qualities one positively 
and negatively values” (Block & 
Robbins, 1993, p. 911).
self-fulfilling prophecy The tendency 
for a belief to become reality. For 
example, a person who thinks he or she 
is a “total failure” will often act like a 
total failure and may even give up trying 
to do better, thus creating a self-fulfilling 
prophecy.
self-guides The ideal self and the ought 
self-act as self-guides, providing the 
standards that one uses to organize self￾relevant information and motivate 
appropriate behaviors to bring the self 
in line with these self-guides.
self-handicapping Situations in which 
people deliberately do things that 
increase the probability that they will fail.
self-report data (S-data) Information a 
person verbally reveals about 
themselves, often based on 
questionnaire or interview. Self-report 
data can be obtained through a variety 
of means, including interviews that pose 
questions to a person, periodic reports 
by a person to record the events as they 
happen, and questionnaires of various 
sorts.
self-schema (schemata is plural, 
schema is singular) The specific 
knowledge structure, or cognitive 
representation, of the self-concept. Self￾schemas are the network of associated 
building blocks of the self-concept.
self-serving bias The common 
tendency for people to take credit for 
success yet to deny responsibility for 
failure.
sensation seeking A dimension of 
personality postulated to have a 
physiological basis. It refers to the 
tendency to seek out thrilling and 
idiosyncratically is, to become 
everything that one is capable of 
becoming” (1970, p. 46). The pinnacle 
of Maslow’s need hierarchy is the need 
for self-actualization. Maslow was 
concerned with describing self￾actualization; the work of Carl Rogers 
was focused on how people achieve 
self-actualization.
self-attributed motivation McClelland 
argued that self-attributed motivation is 
primarily a person’s self-awareness of 
his or her own conscious motives. 
These self-attributed motives reflect a 
person’s conscious awareness about 
what is important to him or her. As 
such, they represent part of the 
individual’s conscious self￾understanding. McClelland has argued 
that self-attributed motives predict 
responses to immediate and specific 
situations and to choice behaviors and 
attitudes. See implicit motivation.
self-complexity The view that each of 
us has many roles and many aspects to 
our self-concepts. However, for some of 
us, our self-concepts are rather simple, 
being made up of just a few large 
categories. Other people may have a 
more complex or differentiated self￾concept. For people with high self￾complexity, a failure in any one aspect 
of the self (such as a relationship that 
breaks apart) is buffered because there 
are many other aspects of the self that 
are unaffected by that event. However, 
for persons low in self-complexity, the 
same event might be seen as devastating 
because they define themselves mainly 
in terms of this one aspect.
self-concept The way a person sees, 
understands, and defines himself or 
herself.
self-efficacy A concept related to 
optimism and developed by Bandura. 
The belief that one can behave in ways 
necessary to achieve some desired 
outcome. Self-efficacy also refers to the 
confidence one has in one’s ability to 
perform the actions needed to achieve 
some specific outcome.
self-enhancement The tendency to 
describe and present oneself using 
positive or socially valued attributes, 
such as kind, understanding, intelligent, 
and industrious. Tendencies toward self￾enhancement tend to be stable over 
time, and hence are enduring features of 
personality (Baumeister, 1997).
Final PDF to printerGLOSSARY
lar31869_glo_636-664 661 10/22/22 10:21 AM
661
they are being denied social power 
because of their gender. She argued that 
girls did not really have a secret desire to 
become boys. Rather, she taught, girls 
desire the social power and preferences 
given to boys in the culture at that time.
social role theory According to social 
role theory, sex differences originate 
because men and women are distributed 
differentially into occupational and 
family roles. Men, for example, are 
expected to assume the breadwinning 
role. Women are expected to assume 
the housewife role. Over time, children 
presumably learn the behaviors that are 
linked to these roles.
socialization theory The notion that 
boys and girls become different because 
boys are reinforced by parents, teachers, 
and the media for being “masculine,” 
and girls for being “feminine.” This is 
probably the most widely held theory of 
sex differences in personality.
sociosexual orientation According to 
Gangestad and Simpson’s theory of 
sociosexual orientation, men and women 
will pursue one of two alternative sexual 
relationship strategies. The first mating 
strategy entails seeking a single 
committed relationship characterized by 
monogamy and tremendous investment 
in children. The second sexual strategy is 
characterized by a greater degree of 
promiscuity, more partner switching, and 
less investment in children.
spreading activation Roediger and 
McDermott applied the spreading 
activation model of memory to account 
for false memories. This model holds 
that mental elements (like words or 
images) are stored in memory along 
with associations to other elements in 
memory. For example, doctor is 
associated with nurse in most people’s 
memories because of the close 
connection or similarity between these 
concepts. Consequently, a person 
recalling some medical event might 
falsely recall a nurse rather than a 
doctor doing something.
stability coefficients The correlations 
between the same measures obtained at 
two different points in time. Stability 
coefficients are also called test-retest 
reliability coefficients.
stage model of development Implies 
that people go through stages in a 
certain order, and that a specific issue 
characterizes each stage.
social categories The cognitive 
component that describes the ways 
individuals classify other people into 
groups, such as “cads” and “dads.” This 
cognitive component is one aspect of 
stereotyping.
social class Variability between people 
based primarily on economic, 
educational, and employment variables. 
In terms of within-culture variation, 
social class can have an effect on 
personality (Kohn et al., 1990). For 
example, lower-class parents tend to 
emphasize the importance of obedience 
to authority, whereas higher-status 
parents tend to emphasize the 
importance of self-direction and not 
conforming to the dictates of others.
social comparison A process whereby 
a person compares his or her standing 
on some characteristic to that of 
relevant others, and judges himself or 
herself based on how that comparison 
turns out.
social desirability Socially desirable 
responding refers to the tendency to 
answer items in such a way as to come 
across as socially attractive or likable. 
People responding in this manner want 
to make a good impression, to appear to 
be well adjusted, to be a “good citizen.”
social identity Identity refers to the 
social aspects of the self, that part of 
ourselves we use to create an 
impression, to let other people know 
who we are and what can be expected 
from us. Identity is different from the 
self-concept because identity refers 
mainly to aspects of the self that are 
socially observable or publicly available 
outward, such as ethnicity or gender or 
age. Nevertheless, the social aspects of 
identity can become important aspects 
of the self-concept.
social learning theory A general 
theoretical view emphasizing the ways 
in which the presence of others 
influence people’s behavior, thoughts, 
or feelings. Often combined with 
learning principles, the emphasis is on 
how people acquire beliefs, values, 
skills, attitudes, and patterns of behavior 
through social experiences.
social power Horney, in reinterpreting 
Freud’s concept of penis envy, taught 
that the penis was a symbol of social 
power rather than some organ that 
women actually desired. Horney wrote 
that girls realize, at an early age, that 
phenomenon, and more than 90 percent 
of the population reports experiencing 
shyness at some point during their lives 
(Zimbardo, 1977). Some people, 
however, seem to be dispositionally 
shy—they tend to feel awkward in most 
social situations and so tend to avoid 
situations in which they will be forced 
to interact with people.
situational selection A form of 
interactionism that refers to the 
tendency to choose or select the 
situations in which one finds oneself. In 
other words, people typically do not 
find themselves in random situations in 
their natural lives. Instead, they select 
or choose the situations in which they 
will spend their time.
situational specificity The view that 
behavior is determined by aspects of the 
situation, such as reward contingencies.
situationism A theoretical position in 
personality psychology that states that 
situational differences, rather than 
underlying personality traits, determine 
behavior. For example, how friendly a 
person will behave or how much need 
for achievement a person displays will 
depend on the situation, not the traits a 
person possesses.
social and cultural domain Personality 
affects, and is affected by, the social 
and cultural context in which it is 
found. Different cultures may bring out 
different facets of our personalities in 
manifest behavior. The capacities 
we display may depend to a large 
extent on what is acceptable in and 
encouraged by our culture. At the level 
of individual differences within 
cultures, personality plays itself out in 
the social sphere. One important social 
sphere concerns relations between men 
and women.
social anxiety Discomfort related to 
social interactions, or even to the 
anticipation of social interactions. 
Socially anxious persons appear to be 
overly concerned about what others will 
think. Baumeister and Tice (1990) 
propose that social anxiety is a species￾typical adaptation that functions to 
prevent social exclusion.
social attention The goal and payback 
for surgent or extraverted behavior. By 
being the center of attention, the 
extravert seeks to gain the approval of 
others and, in many cases, through tacit 
approval controls or directs others.
Final PDF to printerGLOSSARY
lar31869_glo_636-664 662 10/22/22 10:21 AM
662
parents may be represented as a king 
and queen; children may be represented 
as small animals.)
sympathetic nervous system That 
branch of the autonomic nervous system 
that supports the fight-or-flight response. 
The sympathetic nervous system is 
activated when a person feels threatened 
or experiences strong emotions such as 
anxiety, guilt, or anger.
synonym frequency In the lexical 
approach, synonym frequency means 
that if an attribute has not merely one 
or two trait adjectives to describe it, but 
rather six, eight, or ten words, then it is 
a more important dimension of 
individual difference.
Systemizing The drive to comprehend 
how things work, how systems are built, 
and how inputs into systems produce 
outputs.
t
taxonomy A technical name given to a 
classification scheme—the identification 
and naming of groups within a 
particular subject field.
telemetry The process by which 
electrical signals are sent from 
electrodes to a polygraph using radio 
waves instead of wires.
temperament Individual differences 
that emerge very early in life, are likely 
to have a heritable basis, and are often 
involved in behaviors linked with 
emotionality or arousability.
tender-mindedness A nurturant 
proclivity, having empathy for others, 
and being sympathetic with those who 
are downtrodden.
test data (T-data) A common source 
of personality-relevant information 
comes from standardized tests (T-data). 
In these measures, participants are 
placed in a standardized testing 
situation to see if different people react 
or behave differently to an identical 
situation. Taking an exam, like the 
Scholastic Aptitude Test, would be one 
example of T-data as a measure used to 
predict success in school.
testability The capacity to render 
precise predictions that scientists can 
test empirically. Generally, the 
testability of a theory is dependent upon 
the precision of its predictions. If it is 
impossible to test a theory empirically, 
the theory is generally discarded.
influence, such as the exam that we 
cannot avoid.
strong situation Certain situations that 
prompt similar behavior from everyone.
structured and unstructured Self-report 
can take a variety of forms, ranging 
from open-ended questions to forced￾choice true-or-false questions. 
Sometimes these are referred to as 
unstructured (open-ended, such as “Tell 
me about the parties you like the most”) 
and structured (“I like loud and crowded 
parties”; answer true or false) 
personality tests.
style of emotional life How emotions 
are experienced. For example, saying 
that someone is high on mood 
variability is to say something about the 
style of his or her emotional life, that 
his or her emotions change frequently. 
Compare to the content of emotional 
life.
sublimation A defense mechanism 
that refers to the channeling of 
unacceptable sexual or aggressive 
instincts into socially desired activities. 
For Freud, sublimation is the most 
adaptive defense mechanism. A 
common example is going out to chop 
wood when you are angry rather than 
acting on that anger or even engaging in 
other less adaptive defense mechanisms 
such as displacement.
subliminal perception Perception that 
bypasses conscious awareness, usually 
achieved through very brief exposure 
times, typically less than 30 
milliseconds.
superego That part of personality that 
internalizes the values, morals, and 
ideals of society. The superego makes us 
feel guilty, ashamed, or embarrassed 
when we do something wrong, and 
makes us feel pride when we do 
something right. The superego sets 
moral goals and ideals of perfection and 
is the source of our judgments that 
something is good or bad. It is what 
some people refer to as conscience. The 
main tool of the superego in enforcing 
right and wrong is the emotion of guilt.
surgency A cluster of behaviors 
including approach behavior, high 
activity, and impulsivity.
symbols Psychoanalysts interpret 
dreams by deciphering how 
unacceptable impulses and urges are 
transformed by the unconscious into 
symbols in the dream. (For example, 
state levels A concept that can be 
applied to motives and emotions, state 
levels refer to a person’s momentary 
amount of a specific need or emotion, 
which can fluctuate with specific 
circumstances.
statistical approach Having a large 
number of people rate themselves on 
certain items, and then employing a 
statistical procedure to identify groups 
or clusters of items that go together. 
The goal of the statistical approach is to 
identify the major dimensions or 
“coordinates” of the personality map.
statistically significant Refers to the 
probability of finding the results of a 
research study by chance alone. The 
generally accepted level of statistical 
significance is 5 percent, meaning that, 
if a study were repeated 100 times, the 
particular result reported would be 
found by chance only five times.
strange situation procedure Developed 
by Ainsworth and her colleagues for 
studying separation anxiety and for 
identifying differences between children 
in how they react to separation from 
their mothers. In this procedure, a 
mother and her baby come into a 
laboratory room. The mother sits down 
and the child is free to explore the 
room. After a few minutes an 
unfamiliar though friendly adult enters 
the room. The mother gets up and 
leaves the baby alone with this adult. 
After a few minutes, the mother comes 
back into the room and the stranger 
leaves. The mother is alone with the 
baby for several more minutes. All the 
while, the infant is being videotaped so 
that his or her reactions can later be 
analyzed.
stress The subjective feeling that is 
produced by uncontrollable and 
threatening events. Events that cause 
stress are called stressors.
stressors Events that cause stress. 
They appear to have several common 
attributes: (1) stressors are extreme in 
some manner, in the sense that they 
produce a state of feeling overwhelmed 
or overloaded, that one just cannot take 
it much longer; (2) stressors often 
produce opposing tendencies in us, 
such as wanting and not wanting some 
activity or object, as in wanting to study 
but also wanting to put it off as long as 
possible; and (3) stressors are 
uncontrollable, outside of our power to 
Final PDF to printerGLOSSARY
lar31869_glo_636-664 663 10/22/22 10:21 AM
663
is considered appropriate to eat beef or 
wrong for a wife to go to the movies 
without her husband, are specific to 
certain cultures. These moral values 
appear to be transmitted from person to 
person within the culture.
traumatic stress A massive instance of 
acute stress, the effects of which can 
reverberate within an individual for 
years or even a lifetime. It differs from 
acute stress mainly in terms of its 
potential to lead to posttraumatic stress 
disorder.
tridimensional personality 
model Cloninger’s tridimensional 
personality model ties three specific 
personality traits to levels of the three 
neurotransmitters. The first trait is 
called novelty seeking and is based on 
low levels of dopamine. The second 
personality trait is harm avoidance, 
which he associates with low levels of 
serotonin. The third trait is reward 
dependence, which Cloninger sees as 
related to low levels of norepinephrine.
trust The proclivity to cooperate with 
others, giving others the benefit of the 
doubt, and viewing one’s fellow human 
beings as basically good at heart.
twin studies Twin studies estimate 
heritability by gauging whether identical 
twins, who share 100 percent of their 
genes, are more similar to each other 
than fraternal twins, who share only 
50 percent of their genes. Twin studies, 
and especially studies of twins reared 
apart, have received tremendous media 
attention.
Type A personality In the 1960s, 
cardiologists Friedman and Rosenman 
began to notice that many of their 
coronary heart disease patients had 
similar personality traits—they were 
competitive, were aggressive 
workaholics, were ambitious 
overachievers, were often hostile, were 
almost always in a hurry, and rarely 
relaxed or took it easy. Friedman and 
Rosenman referred to this as the Type 
A personality, formally defined as “an 
action-emotion complex that can be 
observed in any person who is 
aggressively involved in a chronic, 
incessant struggle to achieve more and 
more in less and less time, and if 
required to do so, against the opposing 
efforts of other things or other persons” 
(1974, p. 37). As assessed by 
personality psychologists, Type A refers 
done in the least amount of time. Often 
they do two things at once, such as eat 
while reading a book. Waiting is 
stressful for them.
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 
1964 A specific section of the Civil 
Rights Act of 1964 that requires 
employers to provide equal employment 
opportunities to all persons, regardless 
of sex, race, color, religion, or national 
origin.
trait levels A concept that can be 
applied to motives and emotions, trait 
levels refer to a person’s average 
tendency, or his or her set point, on the 
specific motive or emotion. The idea is 
that people differ from each other in 
their typical or average amount of 
specific motives or emotions.
trait-descriptive adjectives Words that 
describe traits, attributes of a person 
that are reasonably characteristic of the 
individual and perhaps even enduring 
over time.
transactional model In the 
transactional model of personality and 
health, personality has three potential 
effects: (1) it can influence coping, as in 
the interactional model; (2) it can 
influence how the person appraises or 
interprets the events; and (3) it can 
influence exposure to the events 
themselves.
transference A term from 
psychoanalytic therapy. It refers to the 
patient reacting to the analyst as if he 
or she were an important figure from 
the patient’s own life. The patient 
displaces past or present (negative and 
positive) feelings toward someone 
from his or her own life onto the 
analyst. The idea behind transference 
is that the interpersonal problems 
between a patient and the important 
people in his or her life will be 
reenacted in the therapy session with 
the analyst. This is a specific form of 
the mechanism of evocation, as 
described in the material on person￾situation interaction.
transmitted culture Representations 
originally in the mind of one or more 
persons that are transmitted to the 
minds of other people. Three examples 
of cultural variants that appear to be 
forms of transmitted culture are 
differences in moral values, self-concept, 
and levels of self-enhancement. Specific 
patterns of morality, such as whether it 
thanatos Freud postulated that 
humans have a fundamental instinct 
toward destruction and that this instinct 
is often manifest in aggression toward 
others. The two instincts were usually 
referred to as libido, for the life instinct, 
and thanatos, for the death instinct. 
While thanatos was considered to be 
the death instinct, Freud also used this 
term to refer to any urge to destroy, 
harm, or aggress against others or 
oneself.
thematic apperception test Developed 
by Murray and Morgan, this is a 
projective assessment technique that 
consists of a set of black and white 
ambiguous pictures. The person is 
shown each picture and is told to write 
a short story interpreting what is 
happening in each picture. The 
psychologist then codes the stories for 
the presence of imagery associated with 
particular motives. The TAT remains a 
popular personality assessment 
technique today.
theoretical approach The theoretical 
approach to identifying important 
dimensions of individual differences 
starts with a theory, which then 
determines which variables are 
important. The theoretical strategy 
dictates in a specific manner which 
variables are important to measure.
theoretical bridge The connection 
between two different variables 
(e.g., dimensions of personality and 
physiological variables).
theoretical constructs Hypothetical 
internal entities useful in describing 
and explaining differences between 
people.
theories and beliefs Beliefs are often 
personally useful and crucially 
important to some people, but they are 
based on leaps of faith, not on reliable 
facts and systematic observations. 
Theories, on the other hand, are based 
on systematic observations that can be 
repeated by others and that yield similar 
conclusions.
third variable problem One reason 
correlations can never prove casuality. 
It could be that two variables are 
correlated because some third, 
unknown variable is causing both.
time urgency A subtrait in the Type A 
personality. Type A persons hate 
wasting time. They are always in a hurry 
and feel under pressure to get the most 
Final PDF to printerGLOSSARY
lar31869_glo_636-664 664 10/22/22 10:21 AM
664
constrained by the need locate words 
that happen to exist in their language 
and culture and with which they use to 
express them.
wish fulfillment If an urge from the id 
requires some external object or person, 
and that object or person is not 
available, the id may create a mental 
image or fantasy of that object or 
person to satisfy its needs. Mental 
energy is invested in that fantasy and 
the urge is temporarily satisfied. This 
process is called wish fulfillment, 
whereby something unavailable is 
conjured up and the image of it is 
temporarily satisfying.
within the individual The important 
sources of personality reside within 
the individual—that is, people carry 
the sources of their personality 
inside themselves—and hence are 
stable over time and consistent over 
situations.
within-culture variation Variations 
within a particular culture that can arise 
from several sources, including 
differences in growing up in various 
socioeconomic classes, differences in 
historical era, or differences in the racial 
context in which one grows up.
working models Early experiences and 
reactions of the infant to the parents, 
particularly the mother, become what 
Bowlby called “working models” for 
later adult relationships. These working 
models are internalized in the form of 
unconscious expectations about 
relationships.
x
xenophobia The fear of strangers. 
Characteristics that were probably 
adaptive in ancestral environments, 
such as xenophobia, are not necessarily 
adaptive in modern environments. 
Some of the personality traits that make 
up human nature may be vestigial 
adaptations to an ancestral environment 
that no longer exists.
violation of desire According to the 
violation of desire theory of conflict 
between the sexes, breakups should 
occur more frequently when one’s 
desires are violated than when they are 
fulfilled (Buss, 2003). Following this 
theory, we would predict that people 
married to others who lack desired 
characteristics, such as dependability 
and emotional stability, will more 
frequently dissolve the marriage.
w
Ward’s Cove Packing Co. v. 
Atonio Ward’s Cove Packing Co. was 
a salmon cannery operating in Alaska. 
In 1974 the non-White cannery workers 
started legal action against the 
company, alleging that a variety of the 
company’s hiring and promotion 
practices were responsible for racial 
stratification in the workplace. The 
claim was advanced under the disparate 
impact portion of Title VII of the Civil 
Rights Act. In 1989 the Supreme Court 
decided on the case in favor of Ward’s 
Cove. The court decided that, even if 
employees can prove discrimination, 
the hiring practices may still be 
considered legal if they serve “legitimate 
employment goals of the employer.” 
This decision allowed disparate impact 
if it was in the service of the company. 
This case prompted Congress to pass 
the Civil Rights Act of 1991, which 
contained several important 
modifications to Title VII of the original 
act. Most important, however, the new 
act shifted the burden of proof onto the 
employer by requiring that it must prove 
a close connection between disparate 
impact and the ability to actually 
perform the job in question.
Whorfian hypothesis of linguistic 
relativity In 1956, Whorf proposed the 
theory that language creates thought 
and experience. According to this 
hypothesis, the ideas that people can 
think and the emotions they feel are 
to a syndrome of several traits: (1) 
achievement motivation and 
competitiveness, (2) time urgency, and 
(3) hostility and aggressiveness.
u
unconditional positive regard The 
receipt of affection, love, or respect 
without having done anything to earn it. 
For example, a parent’s love for a child 
should be unconditional.
unconscious The unconscious mind is 
that part of the mind about which the 
conscious mind has no awareness.
Uniform Guidelines on Employee 
Selection Procedures The purpose of 
the guidelines is to provide a set of 
principles for employee selection that 
meet the requirements of all federal 
laws, especially those that prohibit 
discrimination on the basis of race, 
color, religion, sex, or national origin. 
They provide details on the proper use 
of personality tests and other selection 
procedures in employment settings.
unrestricted mating strategy According 
to Gangestad and Simpson (1990), a 
woman seeking a man for the quality of 
his genes is not interested in his level of 
commitment to her. If the man is 
pursuing a short-term sexual strategy, 
any delay on the woman’s part may 
deter him from seeking sexual 
intercourse with her, thus defeating the 
main adaptive reason for her mating 
strategy.
v
validity coefficients The correlations 
between a trait measure and measures 
of different criteria that should relate to 
the trait. An example might be the 
correlation between a self-report 
measure of agreeableness and the 
person’s roommate’s reports of how 
agreeable they are.
validity The extent to which a test 
measures what it claims to measure.
Final PDF to printerlar31869_ref_665-718 665 10/22/22 10:41 AM
References
Abdel-Khalek, A. M., and Alansari, B. M. 
(2004). Gender differences in anxiety 
among undergraduates from ten Arab 
countries. Social Behavior and Personality, 
32, 649–656.
Abe, J. A. A. (2005). The predictive validity 
of the five-factor model of personality 
with preschool age children: A nine year 
follow-up study. Journal of Research in 
Personality, 39, 423–442.
Abelson, R. P. (1985). A variance explana￾tion paradox: When a little is a lot. 
Psychological Bulletin, 97, 129–133.
Abrahamson, A. C., Baker, L. A., and Caspi, 
A. (2002). Rebellious teens? Genetic and 
environmental influences on the social 
attitudes of adolescents. Journal of Per￾sonality and Social Psychology, 83(6), 
1392–1408.
Ackerman, J. M., and Bargh, J. A. (2010). 
The purpose-driven life: Commentary on 
Kenrick et al. (2010). Perspectives on Psy￾chological Science, 5, 323–326.
Aczel, B., Lukacs, B., Komlos, J., and 
Aitken, M. R. F. (2011). Unconscious 
intuition or conscious analysis? Critical 
questions for the deliberation-without￾attention paradigm. Judgment and Deci￾sion Making, 6, 351–358.
Adan, A. (1991). Influence of morningness￾eveningness preference in the relation￾ship between body temperature and 
performance: A diurnal study. Personality 
and Individual Differences, 12,
1159–1169.
Adan, A. (1992). The influence of age, work 
schedule and personality on morningness 
dimension. International Journal of Psy￾chophysiology, 12, 95–99.
Addison, T. L., and Schmidt, L. A. (1999). 
Are women who are shy reluctant to take 
risks? Behavioral and psychophysiologi￾cal correlates. Journal of Research in Per￾sonality, 33, 352–357.
Affleck, G., and Tennen, H. (1996). Constru￾ing benefits from adversity: Adaptational 
significance and dispositional underpin￾nings. Journal of Personality, 64,
899–922.
Aghababaei, N. (2013). Between you and 
God, where is the general factor of per￾sonality? Exploring personality-religion 
relationships in a Muslim context. Per￾sonality and Individual Differences, 55(2), 
196–198.
Aigner, M., Eher, R., Fruenhwald, S., 
Frottier, P., Gutierrez-Lobos, K., and 
Dwyer, S. M. (2000). Brain abnormali￾ties and violent behavior. Journal of Psy￾chology and Human Sexuality, 11, 57–64.
Ainsworth, M. D. (1979). Infant–mother 
attachment. American Psychologist, 34,
932–937.
Ainsworth, M. D., and Bowlby, J. (1991). An 
ethological approach to personality 
development. American Psychologist, 46,
333–341.
Ainsworth, M. D., Bell, S. M., and Stayton, 
D. J. (1972). Individual differences in the 
development of some attachment behav￾iors. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 18,
123–143.
Aknin, L. B., Barrington-Leigh, C. P., Dunn, 
E. W., Helliwell, J. F., Burns, J., 
Biswas-Diener, R., and . . . Norton, M. I. 
(2013). Prosocial spending and well￾being: Cross-cultural evidence for a psy￾chological universal. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 104(4), 
635–652.
Alegria, A. A. et al. (2013). Sex differences 
in antisocial personality disorder: Results 
from the National Epidemiological Sur￾vey on Alcohol and Related Conditions. 
Personality Disorders, 4, 214–222.
Alexander, R. D., Hoodland, J. L., Howard, 
R. D., Noonan, K. M., and Sherman, P. 
W. (1979). Sexual dimorphisms and 
breeding systems in pinnipeds, ungulates, 
primates, and humans. In N. A. Chagnon 
and W. Irons (Eds.), Evolutionary biology 
and human social behavior. North Scitu￾ate, MA: Duxbury Press.
Algom, D., Chajut, E., and Lev, S. (2004). A 
rational look at the emotional Stroop 
phenomenon: A generic slowdown, not a 
Stroop effect. Journal of Experimental 
Psychology: General, 133, 323–338.
Alleman, M., Zimprich, D., and Hertzon, C. 
(2007). Cross-sectional age differences 
and longitudinal age changes in middle 
adulthood and old age. Journal of Person￾ality, 75, 323–358.
Allemand, M., Gomez, V., and Jackson, J. J. 
(2010). Personality trait development in 
midlife: Exploring the impact of psycho￾logical turning points. European Journal 
of Aging, 7, 147–155.
Allen, K. A., Gray, D. L., Baumeister, R. F., 
and Leary, M. R. (2022). The need to 
belong: A deep dive into the origins, 
implications, and future of a foundational 
construct. Educational Psychology Review, 
34(2), 1133–1156.
Allen, T. A., and DeYoung, C. G. (2017). 
Personality neuroscience and the Five 
Factor Model. In T. A. Widiger (Ed.), 
Oxford Handbook of the Five Factor Model
(pp. 319–349). New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Allik, J. (2012). National differences in per￾sonality. Personality and Individual Differ￾ences, 53, 114–117.
Allik, J., and Realo, A. (2009). Editorial: Per￾sonality and culture. European Journal of 
Personality, 23, 149–152.
Allport, G. W. (1937). Personality: A psycho￾logical interpretation. New York: Holt, 
Rinehart and Winston.
Allport, G. W. (1961). Pattern and growth in 
personality. New York: Holt, Rinehart 
and Winston.
Allport, G. W., and Odbert, H. S. (1936). 
Trait-names: A psycho-lexical study. 
Psychological Monographs, 47 (1, Whole 
No. 211).
Almagor, M., Tellegen, A., and Waller, N. G. 
(1995). The big seven model: A cross￾cultural replication and further explora￾tion of the basic dimensions of natural 
language trait descriptors. Journal of Per￾sonality and Social Psychology, 69,
300–307.
Al-Shawaf, L., Lewis, D. M., and Buss, D. M. 
(2018). Sex differences in disgust: Why 
are women more easily disgusted than 
men?. Emotion Review, 10(2), 149–160.
Alston, W. P. (1975). Traits, consistency and 
conceptual alternatives for personality 
theory. Journal for the Theory of Social 
Behavior, 5, 17–48.
Aluja, A., Balada, F., Blanco, E., Fibla, J., 
and Blanch, A. (2019). Twenty candidate 
genes predicting neuroticism and 
sensation seeking personality traits: 
A multivariate analysis association 
approach. Personality and Individual Dif￾ferences, 140, 90–102.
Aluja, A., Lucas, I., Blanch, A., and Blanco, 
E. (2019). Personality and disinhibitory 
psychopathology in alcohol consump￾tion: A study from the biological-factorial 
personality models of Eysenck, Gray and 
Zuckerman. Personality and Individual 
Differences, 142, 159–165.
Amelang, M., Herboth, G., and Oefner, I. 
(1991). A prototype strategy for the 
construction of a creativity scale. 
European Journal of Personality, 5,
261–285.
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). 
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Men￾tal Disorders (5th ed.). Washington, DC: 
Author.
Anastasi, A. (1976). Psychological Testing.
New York: Macmillan.
Andari, E. (2015). Editorial: Oxytocin’s 
routes in social behavior: Into the 21st 
century. Frontiers in Behavioral Neurosci￾ence, 9, ArtID: 224
Final PDF to printerREFERENCES
lar31869_ref_665-718 666 10/22/22 10:41 AM
666
and Social Psychology Review, 18(2), 
139–152.
Ashton, M. C., Lee, K., and Paunonen, S. V. 
(2002). What is the central feature of 
extraversion? Social attention versus 
reward sensitivity. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 83(1), 245–252.
Ashton, M. C., Lee, K., and Visser, B. A. 
(2019). Where’s the H? Relations 
between BFI-2 and HEXACO-60 scales. 
Personality and Individual Differences, 
137, 71–75.
Ashton, M. C., Paunonen, S. V., Helmes, E., 
and Jackson, D. N. (1998). Kin altruism, 
reciprocal altruism, and the Big Five per￾sonality factors. Evolution and Human 
Behavior, 19(4), 243–255.
Assor, A. (1989). The power motive as an 
influence on the evaluation of high and 
low status persons. Journal of Research in 
Personality, 23, 55–69.
Audet, É. C., Levine, S. L., Metin, E., 
Koestner, S., and Barcan, S. (2021). 
Zooming their way through university: 
Which Big 5 traits facilitated students’ 
adjustment to online courses during the 
COVID-19 pandemic. Personality and 
Individual Differences, 180. https://doi￾org/10.1016/j.paid.2021.110969
Augustine, A. A., Larsen, R. J., Walker, M. 
S., and Fisher, E. B. (2008). Personality 
predictors of the time course for lung 
cancer onset. Journal of Research in Per￾sonality, 42, 1448–1455.
Averill, J. R. (1975). A semantic atlas of 
emotional concepts. Catalog of Selected 
Documents in Psychology, 5, 30.
Avinun, R., and Knafo, A. (2014). Parenting 
as a reaction evoked by children’s geno￾type a meta-analysis of children-as-twins 
studies. Personality and Social Psychology 
Review, 18, 87–102.
Ayoub, M., Briley, D. A., Grotzinger, A., 
Patterson, M. W., Engelhardt, L. E., 
Tackett, J. L., . . . and Tucker-Drob, E. 
M. (2019). Genetic and environmental 
associations between child personality 
and parenting. Social Psychological and 
Personality Science, 10(6), 711–721.
Back, M. D., Schmukle, S. C., and Egloff, B. 
(2008). How extraverted is honey.
bunny77@hotmail.de? Inferring personal￾ity from email addresses. Journal of 
Research in Personality, 42, 1116–1122.
Bacon, A. M., Krupić, D., Caki, N., and 
Corr, P. J. (2021). Emotional and behav￾ioral responses to COVID-19: Explana￾tions from three key models of 
personality. European Psychologist, 26,
334–347. https://doi-org.libproxy.wustl.
edu/10.1027/1016-9040/a000461
Bailey, J. M., Dunne, M. P., and Martin, N. 
G. (2000). Genetic and environmental 
influences on sexual orientation and its 
correlates in an Australian twin sample. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychol￾Archer, J. (2009). Does sexual selection 
explain human sex differences in aggres￾sion? Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 32,
249–311.
Archer, J., and Thanzami, V. (2009). The 
relation between mate value, entitlement, 
physical aggression, size and strength 
among a sample of young Indian men. 
Evolution and Human Behavior, 30,
315–321.
Archontaki, D., Lewis, G. J., and Bates, T. C. 
(2013). Genetic influences on psycholog￾ical well-being: A nationally representa￾tive twin study. Journal of Personality, 
81(2), 221–230.
Ardila, A. (2021). Cultural Universals. 
Encyclopedia of Evolutionary Psychological 
Science, 1677–1680.
Areh, I., Verkampt, F., and Allan, A. (2021). 
Critical review of the use of the 
Rorschach in European courts. Psychia￾try, Psychology and Law, 1–23.
Aron, A., Aron, E. N., Tudor, M., and 
Nelson, G. (2004). Close relationships as 
including other in the self. In H. T. Reis 
and C. E. Rustbult (Eds.), Close relation￾ships: Key readings (pp. 365–379). 
Philadelphia: Taylor and Francis.
Aschoff, J. (1965). Circadian rhythms in 
man. Science, 143, 1427–1432.
Aschwanden, D., Strickhouser, J. E., Sesker, 
A. A., Lee, J. H., Luchetti, M., Stephan, 
Y., Sutin, A. R., and Terracciano, A. 
(2020). Psychological and behavioural 
responses to coronavirus disease 2019: 
The role of personality. European Journal 
of Personality. https://doi-org.libproxy.
wustl.edu/10.1002/per.2281
Asendorpf, J. B., and Scherer, K. R. (1983). 
The discrepant repressor: Differentiation 
between low anxiety, high anxiety, and 
repression of anxiety by autonomic–
facial-verbal patterns of behavior. Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology, 45,
1334–1346.
Asendorpf, J. B., and Van Aken, M. A. G. 
(2003). Validity of five personality judg￾ments in childhood: A 9-year longitudinal 
study. European Journal of Personality, 
32, 649–656.
Ashmore, R. D. (1990). Sex, gender, and the 
individual. In L. A. Pervin (Ed.), Hand￾book of personality: Theory and research
(pp. 486–526). New York: Guilford 
Press.
Ashton, M. C. (2007). Self-reports and ste￾reotypes: A comment on McCrae et al. 
European Journal of Personality, 21,
983–986.
Ashton, M. C., and Lee, K. (2005). A 
defense of the lexical approach to the 
study of personality. European Journal of 
Personality, 19, 5–24.
Ashton, M. C., Lee, K., and de Vries, R. E. 
(2014). The HEXACO honesty-humility, 
agreeableness, and emotionality factors a 
review of research and theory. Personality 
Andersen, J. P., Di Nota, P. M., Boychuk, E. 
C., Schimmack, U., and Collins, P. I. 
(2021). Racial bias and lethal force 
errors among Canadian police officers. 
Canadian Journal of Behavioural Science.
https://doi.org/10.1037/cbs0000296.
Anderson, C., and Kilduff, G. J. (2009). Why 
do dominant personalities attain 
influence in face-to-face groups? The 
competence-signaling effects of trait dom￾inance. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 96, 491–503.
Ando, J., Ono, Y., Yoshimura, K., Onoda, 
N., Shinohara, M., Kanba, S., and Asai, 
M. (2002). The genetic structure of Clon￾inger’s seven-factor model of tempera￾ment and character in a Japanese sample. 
Journal of Personality, 70(5), 583–610.
Andrews, J. D. W. (1967). The achievement 
motive in two types of organizations. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychol￾ogy, 6, 163–168.
Angier, N. (1999). Woman: An intimate geog￾raphy. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Angleitner, A., and Demtroder, A. I. (1988). 
Acts and dispositions: A reconsideration 
of the act frequency approach. European 
Journal of Psychology, 2, 121–141.
Angleitner, A., Buss, D., and Demtröder, A. 
I. (1990). A cross-cultural comparison 
using the act frequency approach (AFA) 
in West Germany and the United States. 
European Journal of Personality, 4,
187–207.
Antoniazzi, D., and Klein, R. (2019). Risky 
riders: A comparison of personality theo￾ries on motorcyclist riding behaviour. 
Transportation Research Part F: Traffic 
Psychology and Behaviour, 62, 33–44.
Anusic, I., Lucas, R. E., and Donnellan, M. 
B. (2012). Cross-sectional age differences 
in personality: Evidence from nationally 
representative samples from Switzerland 
and the United States. Journal of 
Research in Personality, 46, 116–120.
Apostolou, M. (2017). Stay away, but I may 
need your help! Mate choice and manipu￾lation of prospective parents-in-law. 
Personal Relationships, 24(2), 323–335.
Apostolou, M., and Keramari, D. (2021b). 
Why friendships end: An evolutionary 
examination. Evolutionary Behavioral 
Sciences.
Apostolou, M., and Papageorgi, I. (2014). 
Parental mate choice manipulation tac￾tics: Exploring prevalence, sex and per￾sonality effects. Evolutionary Psychology, 
12, 588–620.
Apostolou, M., Keramari, D., Kagialis, A., 
and Sullman, M. (2021). Why people 
make friends: The nature of friendship. 
Personal Relationships, 28(1), 4–18.
Apostolou, M., Zacharia, M., and Frantzides, 
N. (2015). Children’s tactics of mate 
choice manipulation: Exploring sex dif￾ferences and personality effects. Personal￾ity and Individual Differences, 80, 6–11.
Final PDF to printerREFERENCES
lar31869_ref_665-718 667 10/22/22 10:41 AM
667
and meta-analysis of heritability studies. 
Behavior Genetics, 45(2), 137–156.
Barthorpe, A., Winstone, L., Mars, B., and 
Moran, P. (2020). Is social media screen 
time really associated with poor adoles￾cent mental health? A time use diary 
study. Journal of Affective Disorders, 274,
864–870
Baselmans, B. M. L., van de Weijer, M. P., 
Abdellaoui, A., Vink, J. M., Hottenga, J. 
J., Willemsen, G., . . . and Bartels, M. 
(2019). A genetic investigation of the 
well-being spectrum. Behavior Genetics, 
49(3), 286–297.
Bass, E., and Davis, L. (1988). The courage 
to heal: A guide for women survivors of 
child sexual abuse. New York: Perennial 
Library/Harper and Row.
Bastone, L. M., and Wood, H. A. (1997). 
Individual differences in the ability to 
decode emotional facial expressions. Psy￾chology: A Journal of Human Behavior, 34,
32–36.
Bastounis, A., Callaghan, P., Banerjee, A., 
and Michail, M. (2016). The effective￾ness of the Penn Resiliency Program 
(PRP) and its adapted versions in reduc￾ing depression and anxiety and improv￾ing explanatory style: A systematic review 
and meta-analysis. Journal of Adolescence, 
52, 37–48 .
Bauer, J. J., Schwab, J. R., and McAdams, D. 
P. (2011). Self-actualizing: Where ego 
development finally feels good? The 
Humanistic Psychologist, 39, 121–136.
Baughman, H. M., Dearing, S., Giammarco, 
E., and Vernon, P. A. (2012). Relation￾ship between bullying behaviours and the 
Dark Triad: A study with adults. Person￾ality and Individual Differences, 52,
571–575.
Baumeister, R. F. (1986). Identity: Cultural 
Change and the Struggle for Self. New 
York: Oxford University Press.
Baumeister, R. F. (1988). Should we stop 
studying sex differences altogether? 
American Psychologist, 43, 1092–1095.
Baumeister, R. F. (1991). The self against 
itself: Escape or defeat? In R. C. Curtis 
(Ed.), The Relational Self: Theoretical 
Convergences in Psychoanalysis and Social 
Psychology (pp. 238–256). New York: 
Guilford Press.
Baumeister, R. F. (1997). Identity, self￾concept, and self-esteem: The self lost 
and found. In R. Hogan, J. Johnson, and 
S. Briggs (Eds.), Handbook of Personality 
Psychology (pp. 681–711). New York: 
Academic Press.
Baumeister, R. F. (2014). Self-regulation, ego 
depletion, and inhibition. Neuropsycholo￾gia, 65, 313–319.
Baumeister, R. F., and Leary, M. R. (1995). 
The need to belong: Desire for interper￾sonal attachments as a fundamental 
human motivation. Psychological Bulletin, 
Portsmouth, NH: William Heinemann 
Publishing.
Bargh, J. A. (2005). Bypassing the will: 
Toward demystifying the nonconscious 
control of social behavior. In R. R. Hassin, 
J. S. Uleman, and J. A. Bargh (Eds.), The 
new unconscious (pp. 37–60). New York: 
Oxford University Press.
Bargh, J. A. (2006). The new unconscious.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Bargh, J. A. (2008). Free will is un-natural. 
In J. Baer, J. C. Kaufman, and R. F. 
Baumeister (Eds.), Are we free? Psychol￾ogy and free will (pp. 128–154). New 
York: Oxford University Press.
Bargh, J. A. (2016). Awareness of the prime 
versus awareness of its influence: Impli￾cations for the real-world scope of uncon￾scious higher mental processes. Current 
Opinion in Psychology, 12, 49–52.
Bargh, J. A., and Morsella, E. (2008). The 
unconscious mind. Perspectives on Psycho￾logical Science, 3, 73–79.
Bargh, J. A., and Morsella, E. (2010). 
Unconscious behavioral guidance sys￾tems. In C. R. Agnew, D. E. Carlston, W. 
G. Graziano, and J. R. Kelly (Eds.), Then 
a miracle occurs: Focusing on behavior in 
social psychological theory and research
(pp. 89–118). New York: NY: Oxford 
University Press.
Baron, M. (1993). Genetics and human sex￾ual orientation. Biological Psychology, 33,
759–761.
Bar-On, R. (2001). Emotional intelligence 
and self-actualization. In J. Ciarrochi and 
J. P. Forgas (Eds.), Emotional intelligence 
in everyday life: A scientific inquiry (pp. 
82–97). Philadelphia, PA: Psychology 
Press.
Baron, R. A. (1977). Human Aggression. New 
York: Plenum Press.
Baron-Cohen, S., Richler, J., Bisarya, D., 
Gurunathan, N., and Wheelwright, S. 
(2003). The systemizing quotient: an 
investigation of adults with Asperger syn￾drome or high–functioning autism, and 
normal sex differences. Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society of Lon￾don. Series B: Biological Sciences,
358(1430), 361–374.
Barrantes-Vidal, N., and Kwapil, T. R. 
(2014). The application of experience 
sampling methodology for the study of 
individual differences in real life. Person￾ality and Individual Differences, 60, S6.
Barrick, M. R., and Mount, M. K. (1991). 
The Big Five personality dimensions and 
job performance: A meta-analysis. Person￾nel Psychology, 44, 1–25.
Barron, J. W., Eagle, M. N., and Wolitzky, 
D. L. (1992). Interface of psychoanalysis 
and psychology. Washington, DC: 
American Psychological Association.
Bartels, M. (2015). Genetics of wellbeing 
and its components satisfaction with life, 
happiness, and quality of life: A review 
Bailey, J. M., Kirk, K. M., Zhu, G., Dunne, 
M. P., and Martin, N. G. (2000). Do 
individual differences in sociosexuality 
represent genetic or environmentally con￾tingent strategies? Evidence from the 
Australian Twin Registry. Journal of Per￾sonality and Social Psychology, 78,
537–545.
Bailey, J. M., Pillard, R. C., Neale, M. C., 
and Agyei, Y. (1993). Heritable factors 
influence sexual orientation in women. 
Archives of General Psychiatry, 50,
217–223.
Bailey, N. A., Olaguez, A. P., Klemfuss, J. Z., 
and Loftus, E. F. (2021). Tactics for 
increasing resistance to misinformation. 
Applied Cognitive Psychology, Mar 3, 
2021, DOI: /10.1002/acp.3812
Bailey, S. L., and Heitkemper, M. M. (1991). 
Morningness–eveningness and early￾morning salivary cortisol levels. Biologi￾cal Psychology, 32, 181–192.
Bajcar, B., and Babiak, J. (2020). Neuroti￾cism and cyberchondria: The mediating 
role of intolerance of uncertainty and 
defensive pessimism. Personality and Indi￾vidual Differences, 162. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.paid.2020.110006.
Baker, R. A. (1992). Hidden memories. Buf￾falo, NY: Prometheus Books.
Bakker, A. B., and Wang, Y. (2020). Self￾undermining behavior at work: Evidence 
of construct and predictive validity. Inter￾national Journal of Stress Management, 
27, 241–251.
Balliet, D., Li, N. P., Macfarlan, S. J., and 
Van Vugt, M. (2011). Sex differences in 
cooperation: A meta-analytic review of 
social dilemmas. Psychological Bulletin, 
137, 881–909.
Banas, K., and Smyth, L. (2021). Structure, 
content and inter-relationships between 
self-aspects: Integrating findings from the 
social identity and self-complexity tradi￾tions. European Journal of Social Psychol￾ogy. https://doi.org/10.1002/ejsp.2760.
Bandura, A. (1977). Social learning theory.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Bandura, A. (1989). Human agency in social 
cognitive theory. American Psychologist, 
44, 1175–1184.
Bandura, A. (1997). Self-efficacy: The exer￾cise of control. W H Freeman/Times 
Books/ Henry Holt & Co.
Banks, A. P. (2021). Mechanisms of uncon￾scious thought: Capacities and limits. 
Journal of Mind and Behavior, 42, 
317–346.
Barelds, D.P.H. (2005). Self and partner per￾sonality in intimate relationships. European 
Journal of Personality, 19, 501–518.
Barelds, D.P.H., and Dijkstra, P. (2011). 
Positive illusions about a partner’s per￾sonality and relationship quality. Journal 
of Research in Personality, 45, 37–43.
Bargh, (2017). Before you know it: The uncon￾scious reasons we do what we do.
Final PDF to printerREFERENCES
lar31869_ref_665-718 668 10/22/22 10:41 AM
668
Baumeister, R. F., and Muraven, M. (1996). 
Identity as adaptation to social, cultural 
and historical context. Journal of Adoles￾cence, 19, 405–416.
Baumeister, R. F., and Tice, D. M. (1990). 
Anxiety and social exclusion. Journal of 
Social and Clinical Psychology, 9,
165–195.
Baumeister, R. F., and Vohs, K. (2004). 
Handbook of self-regulation. New York: 
Guilford Press.
Baumeister, R. F., Bratslavsky, E., Muraven, 
M., and Tice, D. M. (1998). Ego deple￾tion: Is the active self a limited resource? 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychol￾ogy, 74, 1252–1265.
Baumeister, R. F., Bushman, B. J., and 
Campbell, W. K. (2000). Self-esteem, 
narcissism, and aggression: Does vio￾lence result from low self-esteem or from 
threatened egotism? Current Directions in 
Psychological Science, 9, 26–29.
Baumeister, R. F., Campbell, J. D., Krueger, 
J. I., and Vohs, K. D. (2003). Does high 
self-esteem cause better performance, 
interpersonal success, happiness, or 
healthier lifestyles? Psychological Science 
in the Public Interest, 4, 1–44.
Baumeister, R. F., Catanese, K. R., and 
Vohs, K. D. (2001). Is there a gender dif￾ference in strength of sex drive? Theoreti￾cal views, conceptual distinctions, and a 
review of relevant evidence. Personality 
and Social Psychology Review, 5(3), 
242–273.
Baumeister, R. F., Dale, K., and Sommer, K. 
L. (1998). Freudian defense mechanisms 
and empirical findings in modern social 
psychology: Reaction formation, projec￾tion, displacement, undoing, isolation, 
sublimation, and denial. Journal of Per￾sonality, 66, 1061–1081.
Baumeister, R. F., Tice, D. M., and Hutton, 
D. G. (1989). Self-presentational motiva￾tions and personality differences in self￾esteem. Journal of Personality, 57,
547–579.
Baumeister, R. F., Tice, D. M., and Vohs, 
K. D. (2018). The strength model of 
self-regulation: Conclusions from the 
second decade of willpower research. 
Perspectives on Psychological Science, 13,
141–145.
Baumeister, R. F., Vohs, K. D., and Tice, D. 
M. (2007). The strength model of self￾control. Current Directions in Psychologi￾cal Science, 16, 396–403.
Beam, C. R., Marcus, K., Turkheimer, E., 
and Emery, R. E. (2018). Gender differ￾ences in the structure of marital quality. 
Behavior Genetics, 48(3), 209–223.
Beaty, R. E., Kaufman, S. B., Benedek, M., 
Jung, R. E., Kenett, Y. N., Jauk, E., . . . 
and Silvia, P. J. (2016). Personality and 
complex brain networks: The role of 
openness to experience in default 
network efficiency. Human Brain 
Mapping, 37(2), 773–779.
Beauducel, A., Debener, S., Brocke, B., and 
Kayser, J. (2000). On the reliability of 
augmenting/reducing: Peak amplitudes 
and principal component analysis of 
auditory evoked potentials. Journal of 
Psychophysiology, 14, 226–240.
Beauregard, M., Levesque, J., and Bourgouin, 
P. (2001). Neural correlates of conscious 
self-regulation of emotion. Journal of Neu￾roscience, 21, RC165 (1–6).
Beck, A. T. (1976). Cognitive therapy and the 
emotional disorders. New York: Interna￾tional Universities Press.
Beekman, J. B., Stock, M. L., and 
Marcus, T. (2016). Need to belong, not 
rejection sensitivity, moderates cortisol 
response, self-reported stress, and nega￾tive affect following social exclusion. 
Journal of Social Psychology, 156(2), 
131–138.
Beer, J. S., and Lombardo, M. V. (2007). 
Patient and neuroimaging methods. In R. 
W. Robins, R. C. Fraley, and R. F. 
Krueger (Eds.), Handbook of research 
methods in personality psychology (pp. 
360–369). New York: Guilford Press.
Bègue, L., Beauvois, J. L., Courbet, D., 
Oberlé, D., Lepage, J., and Duke, A. A. 
(2015). Personality predicts obedience in 
a Milgram paradigm. Journal of Personal￾ity, 83(3), 299–306.
Belle, D., Doucet, J., Harris, J., Miller, J., 
and Tan, E. (2000). Who is rich? Who is 
happy? American Psychologist, 55,
116–117.
Bellingtier, J. A., Mund, M., and Wrzus, C. 
(2021). The role of extraversion and neu￾roticism for experiencing stress during 
the third wave of the covid-19 pandemic. 
Current Psychology: A Journal for Diverse 
Perspectives on Diverse Psychological 
Issues. https://doi-org.libproxy.wustl.
edu/10.1007/s12144-021-02600-y.
Belsky, J. (2000). Conditional and alterna￾tive reproductive strategies: Individual 
differences in susceptibility to rearing 
experience. In. J. Rodgers, D. Rowe, and 
W. Miller (Eds.), Genetic influences on 
human fertility and sexuality: Theoretical 
and empirical contributions from the 
biological and behavioral sciences
(pp. 127–146). Boston: Kluwer.
Belsky, J., Schlomer, G. L., and Ellis, B. J. 
(2012). Beyond cumulative risk: distin￾guishing harshness and unpredictability 
as determinants of parenting and early 
life history strategy. Developmental Psy￾chology, 48(3), 662.
Belsky, J., Steinberg, L., and Draper, P. 
(1991). Childhood experience, interper￾sonal development, and reproductive 
strategy: An evolutionary theory of 
socialization. Child Development, 62,
647–670.
Bem, D. J. (1996). Exotic becomes erotic: 
A developmental theory of sexual orien￾tation. Psychological Review, 103,
320–333.
Bem, S. L. (1974). The measurement of psy￾chological androgyny. Journal of Con￾sulting and Clinical Psychology, 42,
153–162.
Bendixen, M., Kennair, L. E. O., and Buss, 
D. M. (2015). Jealousy: Evidence of 
strong sex differences using both forced 
choice and continuous measure para￾digms. Personality and Individual Differ￾ences, 86, 212–216.
Benet-Martinez, V., Donnellan, M. B., 
Fleeson, W., Fraley, R. C., Gosling, S. 
D., King, L. A., Robins, R. W., and 
Funder, D. C. (2015). Six visions for the 
future of personality psychology. In L. 
Cooper and R. J. Larsen (Eds.), Hand￾book of Personality and Social Psychology: 
Personality Processes and Individual Differ￾ences (pp. 665–690). Washington, DC: 
American Psychological Association.
Benjamin, J., Li, L., Patterson, C., 
Greenberg, B. D., Murphy, D. L., and 
Hamer, D. H. (1996). Population and 
familial association between the D4 
dopamine receptor gene and measures of 
novelty seeking. Nature Genetics, 12,
81–84.
Bentler, P. M., and Newcomb, M. D. (1978). 
Longitudinal study of marital success and 
failure. Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology, 46, 1053–1070.
Berant, E. (2009). Attachment styles, the 
Rorschach, and the Thematic Appercep￾tion Test: Using traditional projective 
measures to assess aspects of attachment. 
In J. J. Obegi and E. Berant (Eds.), 
Attachment theory and research in clinical 
work with adults (pp. 181–206). New 
York: Guilford Press.
Berenbaum, S. A., and Beltz, A. M. (2011). 
Sexual differentiation of human behavior: 
Effects of prenatal and pubertal 
organizational hormones. Frontiers in 
Neuroendocrinology, 32(2), 183–200.
Berenbaum, S. A., and Beltz, A. M. (2021). 
Evidence and Implications From a Natu￾ral Experiment of Prenatal Androgen 
Effects on Gendered Behavior. Current 
Directions in Psychological Science, 30(3), 
202–210.
Berenbaum, S. A., and Snyder, E. (1995). 
Early hormonal influences on childhood 
sex-typed activity and playmate prefer￾ences: Implications for the development 
of sexual orientation. Developmental Psy￾chology, 31, 31–42.
Berg, V., Lummaa, V., Rickard, I. J., Silven￾toinen, K., Kaprio, J., and Jokela, M. 
(2016). Genetic associations between 
personality traits and lifetime reproduc￾tive success in humans. Behavior Genetics, 
46(6), 742–753.
Final PDF to printerREFERENCES
lar31869_ref_665-718 669 10/22/22 10:41 AM
669
Berman, S., Ozkaragoz, T., Yound, R. M., 
and Noble, E. P. (2002). D2 dopamine 
receptor gene polymorphism discrimi￾nates two kinds of novelty seeking. Per￾sonality and Individual Differences, 33,
867–882.
Bernhardt, P. C., Dabbs, J. M., Jr., Fielden, 
J., and Lutter, C. (1998). Testosterone 
changes during vicarious experiences of 
winning and losing among fans at sport￾ing events. Physiology and Behavior, 65,
59–62.
Bernstein, D. M., and Loftus, E. F. (2009). 
How to tell if a particular memory is true 
or false. Perspectives on Psychological Sci￾ence, 4, 370–374.
Berry, C. M., Sackett, P. R., and Wiemann, 
S. (2007). A review of recent develop￾ments in integrity test research. Personnel 
Psychology, 60, 271–301.
Berry, D. S., and Miller, K. M. (2001). When 
boy meets girl: Attractiveness and the 
five-factor model in opposite-sex interac￾tions. Journal of Research in Personality, 
35, 62–77.
Bian, M., and Leung, L. (2015). Linking 
loneliness, shyness, smartphone addic￾tion symptoms, and patterns of smart￾phone use to social capital. Social Science 
Computer Review, 33(1), 61–79.
Bilton, I. (2018). https://www.studyinterna￾tional.com/news/
record-high-numbers-women-outnumber￾ing-men-university-globally/.
Birley, A. J., Gillespie, N. A., Heath, A. C., 
Sullivan, P. F., Boomsma, D. I., and 
Martin, N. G. (2006). Heritability and 
nineteen-year stability of long and short 
EPQ-R Neuroticism scales. Personality 
and Individual Differences, 40, 737–747.
Black, J. (2000). Personality testing and 
police selection: Utility of the Big Five. 
New Zealand Journal of Psychology, 29,
2–9.
Bleidorn, W. (2012). Hitting the road to 
adulthood short-term personality devel￾opment during a major life transition. 
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 
38(12), 1594–1608.
Bleske-Rechek, A. L., and Buss, D. M. 
(2001). Opposite-sex friendship: Sex dif￾ferences and similarities in initiation, 
selection, and dissolution. Personality and 
Social Psychology Bulletin, 27,(10),
1310–1323.
Bleske-Rechek, A., Remiker, M. W., and 
Baker, J. P. (2008). Narcissistic men and 
women think they are so hot—But they 
are not. Personality and Individual Differ￾ences, 45, 420–424.
Blinkhorn, V., Lyons, M., and Almond, L. 
(2015). The ultimate femme fatale? Nar￾cissism predicts serious and aggressive 
sexually coercive behaviour in females. 
Personality and Individual Differences, 87,
219–223.
Block, J. (1971). Lives through time. Berke￾ley, CA: Bancroft Books.
Block, J. (1977). Advancing the psychology 
of personality: Paradigmatic shift or 
improving the quality of research. In D. 
Magnusson and N. S. Endler (Eds.), Per￾sonality at the crossroads (pp. 37–63). 
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Block, J. (1989). Critique of the act fre￾quency approach to personality. Journal 
of personality and social psychology, 
56(2), 234–245.
Block, J. (1995). A contrarian view of the five￾factor approach to personality description. 
Psychological bulletin, 117(2), 187–215.
Block, J. H. (1983). Differential premises 
arising from differential socialization of 
the sexes: Some conjectures. Child Devel￾opment, 54, 1335–1354.
Block, J. H., and Block, J. (1980). The 
California Child Q-Set. Palo Alto, CA: 
Consulting Psychologists Press.
Block, J., and Robbins, R. W. (1993). A lon￾gitudinal study of consistency and change 
in self-esteem from early adolescence to 
early adulthood. Child Development, 64,
909–923.
Blonigen, D. M., Carlson, M. D., Hicks, B. 
M., Kreuger, R. F., and Iacono, W. G. 
(2008). Stability and change in personal￾ity traits from late adolescence to early 
adulthood: A longitudinal twin study. 
Journal of Personality, 76, 229–266.
Blonigen, D. M., Carlson, S. R., Krueger, R. 
F., and Patrick, C. J. (2003). A twin 
study of self-reported psychopathic per￾sonality traits. Personality and Individual 
Differences, 35, 179–197.
Blonigen, D. M., Hicks, B. M., Krueger, R. 
F., Patrick, C. J., and Iacono, W. G. 
(2006). Continuity and change in psy￾chopathic traits as measured via normal￾range personality: A longitudinal–
biometric study. Journal of Abnormal Psy￾chology, 115(1), 85.
Bochner, S. (1994). Cross-cultural differ￾ences in the self-concept: A test of 
Hofstede’s individualism/collectivism dis￾tinction. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychol￾ogy, 25, 273–283.
Bogg, T. (2008). Conscientiousness, the 
transtheoretical model of change, and 
exercise: A neo-socioanalytic integration 
of trait and social-cognitive frameworks 
in the predictions of behavior. Journal of 
Personality, 76, 775–802.
Bogg, T., and Roberts, B. W. (2004). Consci￾entiousness and health behaviors: A 
meta-analysis of the leading behavioral 
contributors to mortality. Psychological 
Bulletin, 130, 887–919.
Bohart, A. C. (2013). The actualizing person. 
In M. Cooper, M. O’Hara, P. F. Schmid, 
A. C. Bohart, M. Cooper, M. O’Hara, . . . 
and A. C. Bohart (Eds.), The handbook of 
person-centred psychotherapy and 
counselling (2nd ed., pp. 84–101). New 
York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Bolkan, C., Hooker, K., and Coehlo, D. 
(2015). Possible selves and depressive 
symptoms in later life. Research On 
Aging, 37(1), 41–62.
Bollich, K. L., Doris, J. M., Vazire, S., Rai￾son, C. L., Jackson, J. J., and Mehl, M. 
R. (2016). Eavesdropping on character: 
Assessing everyday moral behaviors. 
Journal of Research in Personality, 61,
15–21.
Bonanno, G. A. (1990). Repression, accessi￾bility, and the translation of private expe￾rience. Psychoanalytic Psychology, 7,
453–473.
Bonanno, G. A., Wortman, C. B., Lehman, 
D. R., Tweed, R. G., Haring, M., 
Sonnega, J., Carr, D., and Nesse, R. M. 
(2002). Resilience to loss and chronic 
grief: A prospective study from preloss 
to 18-months postloss. Journal of Person￾ality and Social Psychology, 83(5), 
1150–1164.
Bono, J. E., Boles, T. L., Judge, T. A., and 
Lauver, K. J. (2002). The role of person￾ality in task and relationship conflict. 
Journal of Personality, 70, 311–344.
Bono, T. (2018). When Likes Aren’t Enough: 
A Crash Course in the Science of Happi￾ness. New York: Grand Central Life & 
Style.
Bönte, W., Procher, V. D., Urbig, D., and 
Voracek, M. (2017). Digit ratio (2D:4D) 
predicts self-reported measures of general 
competitiveness, but not behavior in eco￾nomic experiments. Frontiers in Behav￾ioral Neuroscience, 11, 238.
Boomsma, D. I., Helmer, Q., Nieuwboer, H. 
A., Hottenga, J. J., de Moor, M. H., van 
Den Berg, S. M., . . . and Willemsen, G. 
(2018). An extended twin-pedigree study 
of neuroticism in the Netherlands Twin 
Register. Behavior Genetics, 48(1), 1–11.
Boomsma, D. I., Koopmans, J. R., Van 
Doornen, L. J. P., and Orlebeke, J. M. 
(1994). Genetic and social influences on 
starting to smoke: A study of Dutch ado￾lescent twins and their parents. Addiction, 
89, 219–226.
Borkenau, P., Riemann, R., Angleitner, A., 
and Spinath, F. M. (2001). Genetic and 
environmental influences on observed 
personality: Evidence from the German 
observational study of adult twins. Jour￾nal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
80(4), 655–668.
Bornovalova, M. A., Hicks, B. M., Iacono, 
W. G., and McGue, M. (2010). Familial 
transmission and heritability of child￾hood disruptive disorders. American Jour￾nal of Psychiatry, 167(9), 1066–1074.
Bornstein, R. F. (1999). Source amnesia, 
misattribution, and the power of uncon￾scious perceptions and memories. Psycho￾analytic Psychology, 16, 155–178.
Final PDF to printerREFERENCES
lar31869_ref_665-718 670 10/22/22 10:41 AM
670
Bornstein, R. F. (2005). The dependent 
patient: Diagnosis, assessment, and treat￾ment. Professional Psychology: Research 
and Practice, 36, 82–89.
Botwin, M. D., and Buss, D. M. (1989). 
Structure of act-report data: Is the five￾factor model of personality recaptured? 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychol￾ogy, 56, 988–1001.
Botwin, M., Buss, D. M., and Shackelford, T. 
(1997). Personality and mate prefer￾ences: Five factors in mate selection and 
marital satisfaction. Journal of Personal￾ity, 65, 107–136.
Bouchard, T. J., and Loehlin, J. C. (2001). 
Genes, evolution, and personality. Behav￾ior Genetics, 31, 243–273.
Bouchard, T. J., and McGue, M. (1990). 
Genetic and rearing environmental influ￾ences on adult personality: An analysis of 
adopted twins reared apart. Journal of 
Personality, 58, 263–292.
Bowlby, J. (1969a). Attachment and loss: 
Vol. 1: Attachment. New York: Basic 
Books.
Bowlby, J. (1969b). Attachment and loss: Vol. 
2: Separation, anger, and anxiety. New 
York: Basic Books.
Bowlby, J. (1980). Attachment and loss: Vol. 
3: Loss, sadness, and depression. New 
York: Basic Books.
Bowlby, J. (1988). A secure base: Parent–child 
attachment and healthy human develop￾ment. New York: Basic Books.
Boyce, C. J., Wood, A. M., and Brown, 
G.D.A. (2010). The dark side of consci￾entiousness: Conscientious people experi￾ence greater drops in life satisfaction 
following unemployment. Journal of Per￾sonality, 44, 535–539.
Boyer, P. (1992). Explaining religious ideas: 
Elements of a cognitive approach. 
Numen, 39(1), 27–57.
Boyer, P., and Bergstrom, B. (2008). Evolu￾tionary perspectives on religion. Annual 
Review of Anthropology, 37, 111–130.
Brand, C. R., and Egan, V. (1989). The “Big 
Five” dimensions of personality? Evi￾dence from ipsative, adjectival self￾attributions. Personality and Individual 
Differences, 10, 1165–1171.
Branje, S. J. T., van Lieshout, C. F. M., and 
Geris, J. R. M. (2006). Big Five personal￾ity development in adolescence and 
adulthood. European Journal of Personal￾ity, 21, 45–62.
Brase, G. L., Caprar, D. V., and Voracek, M. 
(2004). Sex differences in responses to 
relationship threats in England and 
Romania. Journal of Social and Personal 
Relationships, 21, 763–778.
Braun, K. A., Ellis, R., and Loftus, E. F. 
(2002). Make my memory: How advertis￾ing can change our memories of the past. 
Psychology and Marketing, 19, 1–23.
Brebner, J. (2003). Gender and emotions. 
Personality and Individual Differences, 34,
387–394.
Brebner, J., and Cooper, C. (1978). 
Stimulus- or response-induced excitation: 
A comparison of the behavior of intro￾verts and extraverts. Journal of Research 
in Personality, 12, 306–311.
Breger, R., and Hill, R. (Eds.). (1998). Cross￾cultural marriage: Identity and choice.
New York: Berg.
Brennan, K. A., and Shaver, P. R. (1993). 
Attachment styles and parental divorce. 
Journal of Divorce and Remarriage, 21,
161–175.
Brennan, P. A., and Raine, A. (1997). Bioso￾cial bases of antisocial behavior: Psycho￾physiological, neurological, and cognitive 
factors. Clinical Psychology Review Special 
Issue: Biopsychosocial Conceptualizations 
of Human Aggression, 17, 589–604.
Bresin, K., and Robinson, M. D. (2015). You 
are what you see and choose: Agreeable￾ness and situation selection. Journal of 
Personality, 83(4), 452–463.
Bretherton, I., and Main, M. (2000). Obitu￾ary: Mary Dinsmore Salter Ainsworth 
(1913–1999). American Psychologist, 55,
1148–1149.
Brewer, G., Abell, L., and Lyons, M. (2016). 
Machiavellianism, pretending orgasm, 
and sexual intimacy. Personality and Indi￾vidual Differences, 96, 155–158.
Brickman, P., Coates, D., and Janoff-Bulman, 
R. J. (1978). Lottery winners and acci￾dent victims: Is happiness relative? Jour￾nal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
36, 917–927.
Briley, D. A., and Tucker-Drob, E. M. 
(2014). Genetic and environmental con￾tinuity in personality development: A 
meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 
140(5), 1303–1331.
Brissette, I., Scheier, M. F., and Carver, C. S. 
(2002). The role of optimism in social 
network development, coping, and psy￾chological adjustment during a life transi￾tion. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 82, 102–111.
Brody, J. E. (1996, March 27). Personal 
health. The New York Times, Section B.
Brooks, S. J., and Stein, D. J. (2014). Uncon￾scious influences on decision making: 
Neuroimaging and neuroevolutionary 
perspectives. Behavioral and Brain Sci￾ences, 37(1), 23–24.
Brose, L. A., Rye, M. S., Lutz-Zois, C., and 
Ross, S. R. (2005). Forgiveness and per￾sonality traits. Personality and Individual 
Differences, 39, 35–46.
Brown, D. E. (1991). Human universals. New 
York: McGraw-Hill.
Brown, J. D., and Dutton, K. A. (1995). The 
thrill of victory, the complexity of defeat: 
Self-esteem and people’s emotional 
reactions to success and failure. Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology, 68,
712–722.
Brown, J. D., and Smart, S. A. (1991). The 
self and social conduct: Linking self￾representations to prosocial behavior. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychol￾ogy, 60, 368–375.
Brown, M., Hochman, A., and Micali, N. 
(2020). Emotional instability as a trait 
risk factor for eating disorder behaviors 
in adolescents: sex differences in a large￾scale prospective study. Psychological 
Medicine, 50(11), 1783–1794.
Brown, R. P., and Zeigler-Hill, V. (2004). 
Narcissism and the non-equivalence of 
self-esteem measures: A matter of domi￾nance. Journal of Research in Personality, 
38, 585–592.
Bruce, J., Davis, E. P., and Gunnar, M. R. 
(2002). Individual differences in chil￾dren’s cortisol response to the beginning 
of a new school year. Psychoneuroendro￾crinology, 27, 635–650.
Bruch, M. A., and Hynes, M. J. (1987). Het￾erosexual anxiety and contraceptive 
behavior. Journal of Research in Personal￾ity, 21, 343–360.
Bruggemann, J. M., and Barry, R. J. (2002). 
Eysenck’s P as a modulator of affective 
and electrodermal responses to violent 
and comic film. Personality and Individual 
Differences, 32, 1029–1048.
Brummett, B. H., Babyak, M. A., Williams, 
R. B., Barefoot, J. C., Costa, P. T., and 
Siegler, I. C. (2006). NEO personality 
domains and gender predict levels and 
trends in body mass index over 14 years 
during midlife. Journal of Research in Per￾sonality, 40, 222–236.
Buday, S. K., Stake, J. E., and Peterson, Z. 
D. (2012). Gender and the choice of a 
science career: The impact of social sup￾port and possible selves. Sex Roles, 66,
197–209.
Buerkle, J. V. (1960). Self attitudes and mari￾tal adjustment. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 
6, 114–124.
Buffardi, L. E., and Campbell, W. K. (2008). 
Narcissism and social networking web 
sites. Personality and Social Psychology 
Bulletin, 34, 1303–1314.
Bulbulia, J. (2004). Religious costs as adapta￾tions that signal altruistic intention. Evo￾lution and Cognition, 10(1), 19–38.
Bullock, W. A., and Gilliland, K. (1993). 
Eysenck’s arousal theory of introversion￾extraversion: A converging measures 
investigation. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 64, 113–123.
Bunce, S. C., Larsen, R. J., and Peterson, C. 
(1995). Life after trauma: Personality 
and daily life experiences of traumatized 
persons. Journal of Personality, 63,
165–188.
Final PDF to printerREFERENCES
lar31869_ref_665-718 671 10/22/22 10:41 AM
671
Burgess, E. W., and Wallin, P. (1953). 
Engagement and marriage. New York: 
Lippincott.
Burke, R. J., Mattheiesen, S. B., and Pal￾lesen, S. (2006). Personality correlates of 
workaholism. Personality and Individual 
Differences, 40, 1223–1233.
Burns, M. O., and Seligman, M. E. (1989). 
Explanatory style across the life span: 
Evidence for stability over 52 years. Jour￾nal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
56, 471–477.
Burnstein, E., Crandall, C., and Kitayama, S. 
(1994). Some neo-Darwinian decision 
rules for altruism: Weighing cures for 
inclusive fitness as a function of the bio￾logical importance of the decision. Jour￾nal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
67, 773–789.
Burra, N. D., Hervais-Adelman, A., Celeghin, 
A., de Gelder, B. and. Pegna, A. J. 
(2019). Affective blindsight relies on low 
spatial frequencies. Neuropsychologia, 
128, 44–49.
Burt, S. A. (2009). A mechanistic explana￾tion of popularity: Genes, rule breaking, 
and evocative gene–environment correla￾tions. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 96, 783–794.
Burtăverde, V., Jonason, P. K., Giosan, C., 
and Ene, C. (2021). Why do people 
watch porn? An evolutionary perspective 
on the reasons for pornography con￾sumption. Evolutionary Psychology, 
19(2), 14747049211028798.
Burton, C. M., and King, L. A.(2008). 
Effects of (very) brief writing on health: 
The two-minute miracle. British Journal 
of Health Psychology, 13, 9–14.
Bush, G., Luu, P., and Posner, M. I. (2000). 
Cognitive and emotional influences in 
anterior cingulated cortex. Trends in Cog￾nitive Sciences, 4, 215–222.
Bushman, B. J., and Baumeister, R. F. 
(2002). Does self-love or self-hate lead to 
violence? Journal of Research in Personal￾ity, 36, 543–545.
Bushman, B. J., Bonacci, A. M., van Dijk, 
M., and Baumeister, R. F. (2003). Nar￾cissism, sexual refusal and aggression: 
Testing a narcissistic reactance model of 
sexual coercion. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 84(5), 
1027–1040.
Bushman, B., and Baumeister, R. (1998). 
Threatened egotism, narcissism, self￾esteem, and direct and displaced aggres￾sion: Does self-love or self-hate lead to 
violence? Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 75, 219–229.
Buss, A. H. (1989). Personality as traits. 
American Psychologist, 44, 1378–1388.
Buss, D. M. (1981). Predicting parent–child 
interactions from children’s activity level. 
Developmental Psychology, 17 59–65.
Buss, D. M. (1984). Toward a psychology of 
person-environment (PE) correlation: 
The role of spouse selection. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 47,
361–377.
Buss, D. M. (1989). Sex differences in 
human mate preferences: Evolutionary 
hypotheses tested in 37 cultures. Behav￾ioral and Brain Sciences, 12, 1–49.
Buss, D. M. (1990). The evolution of anxiety 
and social exclusion. Journal of Social 
and Clinical Psychology, 9, 196–201.
Buss, D. M. (1991a). Conflict in married 
couples: Personality predictors of anger 
and upset. Journal of Personality, 59,
663–688.
Buss, D. M. (1991b). Evolutionary personal￾ity psychology. Annual Review of Psychol￾ogy., 42, 459–491.
Buss, D. M. (1992). Manipulation in close 
relationships: Five personality factors in 
interactional context. Journal of Personal￾ity, 60, 477–499.
Buss, D. M. (1993). Strategic individual dif￾ferences: The role of personality in creat￾ing and solving adaptive problems. In J. 
Hettema and I. Deary (Eds.), Social and 
biological approaches to personality
(pp. 175–189) New York: Wiley.
Buss, D. M. (1995b). Psychological sex 
differences: Origins through sexual 
selection. American Psychologist, 50,
164–168.
Buss, D. M. (1996). Social adaptation and 
five major factors of personality. In J. S. 
Wiggins (Ed.), The five-factor model of 
personality: Theoretical perspectives
(pp. 180–207). New York: Guilford 
Press.
Buss, D. M. (2000a). The dangerous passion: 
Why jealousy is as necessary as love and 
sex. New York: Free Press.
Buss, D. M. (2000b). The evolution of happi￾ness. American Psychologist, 55, 15–23.
Buss, D. M. (2003). The evolution of desire
(rev. ed.). New York: Basic Books.
Buss, D. M. (2005b). The murderer next door: 
Why the mind is designed to kill. New 
York: Penguin.
Buss, D. M. (2009a). The great struggles of 
life: Darwin and the emergence of evolu￾tionary psychology. American Psycholo￾gist, 64, 140–148.
Buss, D. M. (2009b). How can evolutionary 
psychology successfully explain personal￾ity and individual differences? Perspec￾tives in Psychological Science, 5.
Buss, D. M. (2011). Personality and the 
adaptive landscape: The role of individ￾ual differences in creating and solving 
social adaptive problems. In D.M. Buss 
and P. Hawley (Eds.), The evolution of 
personality and individual differences
(pp. 29–60). New York: Oxford Univer￾sity Press.
Buss, D. M. (2012). Evolutionary Psychology: 
The New Science of the Mind (4th ed.). 
Boston: Allyn & Bacon.
Buss, D. M. (2016). The evolution of desire: 
Strategies of human mating (Revised and 
updated ed.). New York: Basic Books.
Buss, D. M. (2018). Sexual and emotional 
infidelity: Evolved gender differences in 
jealousy prove robust and replicable. Per￾spectives on Psychological Science, 13(2), 
155–160.
Buss, D. M. (2019). Evolutionary psychology: 
The new science of the mind (6th ed.).
Routledge.
Buss, D. M., Abbott, M., Angleitner, A., 
Asherian, A., Biaggio, A., et al. (1990). 
International preferences in selecting 
mates: A study of 37 cultures. Journal of 
Cross-Cultural Psychology, 21, 5–47.
Buss, D. M., and Barnes, M. L. (1986). Pref￾erences in human mate selection. Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology, 50,
559–570.
Buss, D. M., and Chiodo, L. M. (1991). Nar￾cissistic acts in everyday life. Journal of 
Personality, 59(2), 179–215.
Buss, D. M., and Craik, K. H. (1983). The 
act frequency approach to personality. 
Psychological Review, 90, 105–126.
Buss, D. M., and Duntley, J. D. (2006). The 
evolution of aggression. In M. Schaller, 
D. T. Kenrick, and J. A. Simpson (Eds.), 
Evolution and social psychology
(pp. 263–286). New York: Psychology 
Press.
Buss, D. M., and Greiling, H. (1999). Adap￾tive individual differences. Journal of 
Personality, 67, 209–243.
Buss, D. M., and Haselton, M. G. (2005). 
The evolution of jealousy. Trends in Cog￾nitive Science, 9, 506–507.
Buss, D. M., and Hawley, P. (2011). The 
evolution of personality and individual dif￾ferences. New York: Oxford University 
Press.
Buss, D. M., and Schmitt, D. P. (1993). Sex￾ual strategies theory: An evolutionary 
perspective on human mating. Psychologi￾cal Review, 100, 204–232.
Buss, D. M., and Schmitt, D. P. (2011). Evo￾lutionary psychology and feminism. Sex 
Roles, 64, 768–787.
Buss, D. M., Block, J. H., and Block, J. 
(1980). Preschool activity level: Personal￾ity correlates and developmental implica￾tions. Child Development, 51, 401–408.
Buss, D. M., Goetz, C., Duntley, J. D., 
Asao, K., and Conroy-Beam, D. (2017). 
The mate switching hypothesis. Person￾ality and Individual Differences, 104,
143–149.
Buss, D. M., Gomes, M., Higgins, D. S., and 
Lauterbach, K. (1987). Tactics of manip￾ulation. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 52, 1219–1229.
Final PDF to printerREFERENCES
lar31869_ref_665-718 672 10/22/22 10:41 AM
672
Buss, D. M., Larsen, R. J., Semmelroth, J., 
and Westen, D. (1992). Sex differences 
in jealousy: Evolution, physiology, and 
psychology. Psychological Science, 3,
251–255.
Buss, D. M., Shackelford, T. K., Kirkpatrick, 
L. A., Choe, J., Hasegawa, M., Hasegawa, 
T., and Bennett, K. (1999). Jealousy and 
the nature of beliefs about infidelity: 
Tests of competing hypotheses about sex 
differences in the United States, Korea, 
and Japan. Personal Relationships, 6,
125–150.
Buss, D.M. (2021). When men behave badly: 
The hidden roots of sexual deception, 
harassment, and assault. New York: Lit￾tle Brown Sparks.
Buss, K. A., Schumacher, J. R. M., Dolski, I., 
Kalin, N. H., Goldsmith, H. H., and 
Davidson, R. J. (2003). Right frontal 
brain activity, cortisol, and withdrawal 
behavior in 6-month-old infants. Behav￾ioral Neuroscience, 117, 11–20.
Butkovic, A., and Bratko, D. (2007). Family 
study of manipulation tactics. Personal￾ity and Individual Differences, 43,
791–801.
Butler, A. C., Hokanson, J. E., and Flynn, H. 
A. (1994). A comparison of self-esteem 
lability and low trait self-esteem as vul￾nerability factors for depression. Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology, 66,
166–177.
Button, T. M. M., Stallings, M. C., Rhee, S. 
H., Corley, R. P., and Hewitt, J. K. 
(2011). The etiology of stability and 
change in religious values and religious 
attendance. Behavior Genetics, 41,
201–210.
Buunk, B., Angleitner, A., Oubaid, V., and 
Buss, D. M. (1996). Sexual and cultural 
differences in jealousy: Tests from the 
Netherlands, Germany, and the United 
States. Psychological Science, 7, 359–363.
Byrne, K. A., Silasi-Mansat, C. D., and 
Worthy, D. A. (2015). Who chokes 
under pressure? The Big Five personality 
traits and decision-making under pres￾sure. Personality and Individual Differ￾ences, 74, 22–28.
Byrnes, J. P., Miller, D. C., and Schafer, W. 
D. (1999). Gender differences in risk 
taking: A meta-analysis. Psychological 
Bulletin, 125, 367–383.
Cafferty, T. P., Davis, K. E., Medway, F. J., 
O’Hearn, R. E., and Chappell, K. D. 
(1994). Reunion dynamics among cou￾ples separated during Operation Desert 
Storm: An attachment theory analysis. In 
K. Bartholomew and D. Perlman (Eds.), 
Attachment processes in adulthood (pp. 
309–330). Philadelphia, PA: Jessica 
Kingsley.
Cai, H., Kwan, V. S., and Sedikides, C. 
(2012). A sociocultural approach to nar￾cissism: The case of modern China. 
European Journal of Personality, 26(5), 
529–535.
Cain, S. (2013). Quiet: The power of introverts 
in a world that can’t stop talking. Broad￾way Books.
Campbell, A., Coombes, C., David, R., Opre, 
A., Grayson, L., and Muncer, S. (2016). 
Sex differences are not attenuated by a 
sex-invariant measure of fear: The situ￾ated fear questionnaire. Personality and 
Individual Differences, 97, 210–219.
Campbell, J. B. (1983). Differential relation￾ships of extraversion, impulsivity, and 
sociability to study habits. Journal of 
Research in Personality, 17, 308–314.
Campbell, J. B., and Hawley, C. W. (1982). 
Study habits and Eysenck’s theory of 
extraversion–introversion. Journal of 
Research in Personality, 16, 139–146.
Campbell, W. K., and Foster, C. A. (2002). 
Narcissism and commitment in romantic 
relationships: An investment model anal￾ysis. Personality and Social Psychology 
Bulletin, 28(4), 484–495.
Campbell, W. K., Rudich, E. A., and 
Sedikides, C. (2002). Narcissism, self￾esteem, and the positivity of self-views: 
Two portraits of self-love. Personality and 
Social Psychology Bulletin, 28(3) 
358–368.
Canache, D., Hayes, M., Mondak, J. J., and 
Wals, S. C. (2013). Openness, extraver￾sion and the intention to emigrate. Jour￾nal of Research in Personality, 47(4), 
351–355.
Canli, T. (2008). Toward a neurogenetic the￾ory of neuroticism. In D. W. Pfaff and B. 
L. Kieffer (Eds.), Molecular and Biophysi￾cal Mechanisms of Arousal, Alertness, and 
Attention (pp. 153–174). Malden: 
Blackwell.
Cann, A., Mangum, J. L., and Wells, M. 
(2001). Distress in response to relation￾ship infidelity: The roles of gender and 
attitudes about relationships. Journal of 
Sex Research, 38, 185–190.
Cantor, N. (1990). From thought to behav￾ior: “Having” and “doing” in the study of 
personality and cognition. American Psy￾chologist, 45, 735–750.
Caplan, S. E. (2002). Problematic Internet 
use and psychosocial well-being: 
Development of a theory-based, cognitive￾behavioral measurement instrument. Com￾puters in Human Behavior, 18, 553–575.
Caprara, G. V., Alessandri, G., De Giunta, 
L., Panerai, L., and Eisenberg, N. 
(2010). The contribution of agreeable￾ness and self-efficacy beliefs to proso￾ciality. European Journal of Personality, 
24, 36–55.
Caprara, G. V., and Perugini, M. (1994). Per￾sonality described by adjectives: General￾izability of the Big Five to the Italian 
lexical context. European Journal of Psy￾chology, 8, 357–369.
Caprara, G. V., Barbaranelli, C., Consiglio, 
C., Picconi, L., and Zimbardo, P. G. 
(2003). Personalities of politicians and 
voters: Unique and synergistic relation￾ships. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 84(4), 849–856.
Caputi, P. (2012). An introduction to grid￾based methods. In P. Caputi, L. L. Viney, 
B. M. Walker, and N. Crittenden (Eds.), 
Personal construct methodology
(pp. 149–158). Hoboken, NJ: John 
Wiley & Sons.
Cardemil, E. V., Reivich, K. J., and Selig￾man, M. E. P. (2002). The prevention of 
depressive symptoms in low-income 
minority middle school students. Preven￾tion and Treatment, 5, np.
Carli, V., and Durkee, T. (2016). Pathologi￾cal use of the Internet. In D. Mucic, D. 
M. Hilty, D. Mucic, and D. M. Hilty 
(Eds.), e-Mental Health (pp. 269–288). 
Cham, Switzerland: Springer Interna￾tional Publishing.
Carlo, G., Okun, M. A., Knight, G. P., and 
de Guzman, M. R. T. (2005). The inter￾play of traits and motives on volunteer￾ing: Agreeableness, extraversion and 
prosocial value motivation. Personality 
and Individual Differences, 38,
1293–1305.
Carpenter, C. J. (2012). Narcissism on Face￾book: Self-promotional and anti-social 
behavior. Personality and Individual Dif￾ferences, 52, 482–486.
Carrasco, M., Barker, E. D., Trembley, R. E., 
and Vitaro, J. (2006). Eysenck’s person￾ality dimensions as predictors of male 
adolescent trajectories of physical aggres￾sion, theft, and vandalism. Personality 
and Individual Differences, 41,
1309–1320.
Carron, A. V., Shapcott, K. M., and Martin, 
L. J. (2014). The relationship between 
team explanatory style and team success. 
International Journal of Sport And Exer￾cise Psychology, 12(1), 1–9.
Carstensen, L. L., Turan, B., Scheibe, S., 
Ram, N., Ersner-Hershfield, H., Samanez￾Larkin, G. R., . . . Nesselroade, J. R. 
(2011). Emotional experience improves 
with age: Evidence based on over 10 
years of experience sampling. Psychology 
and Aging, 26, 21–33.
Carter, E. C., Kofler, L. M., Forster, D. E., 
and McCullough, M. E. (2015). A series 
of meta-analytic tests of the depletion 
effect: Self-control does not seem to rely 
on a limited resource. Journal of Experi￾mental Psychology: General, 144, 796–815.
Carter, R. (1999). Mapping the mind. Berke￾ley: University of California Press.
Carver, C. S., and Scheier, M. F. (2000). 
Autonomy and self regulation. Psychologi￾cal Inquiry, 11, 284–291.
Carver, C. S., and White, T. L. (1994). 
Behavioral inhibition, behavioral 
Final PDF to printerREFERENCES
lar31869_ref_665-718 673 10/22/22 10:41 AM
673
activation, and affective responses to 
impeding reward and punishments: The 
BIS/BAS scales. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 67, 319–333.
Carver, C. S., Sutton, S. K., and Scheier, M. 
F. (1999). Action, emotion, and person￾ality: Emerging conceptual integration. 
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 
26, 741–751.
Cashden, E. (1980). Egalitarianism among 
hunters and gatherers. American Anthro￾pologist, 82, 116–120.
Caspi, A., and Herbener, E. S. (1990). Conti￾nuity and change: Assortative mating and 
the consistency of personality in adult￾hood. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 58, 250–258.
Caspi, A., Elder, G. H., Jr., and Bem, D. J. 
(1987). Moving against the world: 
Life-course patterns of explosive 
children. Developmental Psychology, 23,
308–313.
Caspi, A., Harrington, H., Milne, B., Amell, 
J. W., Theodore, R. F., and Moffitt, T. E. 
(2003). Children’s behavioral styles at 
age 3 are linked to their adult personality 
traits at age 26. Journal of Personality, 71,
495–513.
Caspi, A., Roberts, B. W., and Shiner, R. L. 
(2005). Personality development: Stabil￾ity and change. Annual Review of Psychol￾ogy, 56, 453–458.
Caspi, A., Sugden, K., Moffitt, T., Taylor, A., 
Craig, I. W., Harringon, H., et al. (2003). 
Influence of life stress on depression: 
Moderation by a polymorphism in the 
5-HTT gene. Science, 301, 386–389.
Cassidy, J., and Shaver, P. (1999). Handbook 
of attachment: Theory, research, and clinical 
applications. New York: Guilford Press.
Castille, C. M., Kuyumcu, D., and Bennett, 
R. J. (2017). Prevailing to the peers’ det￾riment: Organizational constraints moti￾vate Machiavellians to undermine their 
peers. Personality and Individual Differ￾ences, 104, 29–36.
Cattell, R. B. (1943). The description of 
personality: Basic traits resolved into 
clusters. Journal of Abnormal and Social 
Psychology, 38, 476–507.
Cattell, R. B. (1973). Personality and mood 
by questionnaire. San Francisco: 
Jossey-Bass.
Cattell, R. B., Eber, H. W., and Tatsouoka, 
M. M. (1970). Handbook for the 16 PF.
Champaign, IL: Institute for Personality 
and Ability Testing.
Chagnon, N. (1983). Yanomamö: The fierce 
people (3rd Ed.). New York: Holt, Rine￾hart and Winston.
Chagnon, N. (1988). Life histories, blood 
revenge, and warfare in a tribal popula￾tion. Science, 239, 985–992.
Chamorro-Premuzic, T., and Furnham, A. 
(2003a). Personality predicts academic 
performance: Evidence from two 
longitudinal university samples. Journal 
of Research in Personality, 37, 319–338.
Chamorro-Premuzic, T., and Furnham, A. 
(2003b). Personality traits and academic 
examination performance. European Jour￾nal of Personality, 17, 237–250.
Chan, W., McCrae, R. R., De Fruyt, F., Jus￾sim, L., Löckenhoff, C. E., De Bolle, M., 
. . . and Nakazato, K. (2012). Stereotypes 
of age differences in personality traits: 
Universal and accurate? Journal of Per￾sonality and Social Psychology, 103,
1050–1066.
Chang, E. C., and Chang, O. D. (2016). 
Development of the Frequency of Sui￾cidal Ideation Inventory: Evidence for 
the validity and reliability of a brief mea￾sure of suicidal ideation frequency in a 
college student population. Cognitive 
Therapy and Research, 40(4), 549–556.
Chapman, B. P., and Goldberg, L. R. (2011). 
Replicability and 40-year predictive 
power of childhood ARC types. Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology, 101,
593–606.
Chapman, B. P., and Goldberg, L. R. (2017). 
Act-frequency signatures of the Big Five. 
Personality and Individual Differences,
116, 201–205.
Chapman, B. P., Dubestein, P. R., Sorensen, 
S., and Lyness, J. M. (2007). Gender dif￾ferences in five factor model of personal￾ity traits in an elderly cohort. Personality 
and Individual Differences, 43,
1594–1603.
Charles, S. T., Reynolds, C. A. and Gatz, M. 
(2001). Age-related differences and 
change in positive and negative affect 
over 23 years. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 80(1), 136–151.
Chavira, D. A., Stein, M. B., and Malcarne, 
V. L. (2002). Scrutinizing the relation￾ship between shyness and social phobia. 
Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 16, 585–598.
Cheek, J. M. (1983). The revised Cheek and 
Buss Shyness Scale. Unpublished manu￾script, Department of Psychology, 
Wellesley College, Wellesley, MA.
Cheek, J. M. (1989). Conquering Shyness.
New York: Dell.
Cheek, J. M., and Buss, A. H. (1981). Shy￾ness and sociability. Journal of Personal￾ity and Social Psychology, 41, 330–339.
Cheek, J. M., and Krasnoperova, E. N. 
(1999). Varieties of shyness in adoles￾cence and adulthood. In L. A. Schmidt 
and J. Schulkin (Eds.), Extreme Fear, 
Shyness, and Social Phobia: Origins, Bio￾logical Mechanisms, and Clinical Out￾comes (pp. 224–250). London: Oxford 
University Press.
Cheek, J. M., and Melchior, L. A. (1990). Shy￾ness, self-esteem, and self–consciousness. 
In H. Leitenberg (Ed.), Handbook of Social 
and Evaluation Anxiety (pp. 47–82) New 
York: Plenum Press.
Chegeni, R., Pirkalani, R. K., and Dehshiri, 
G. (2018). On love and darkness: The 
Dark Triad and mate retention behaviors 
in a non-Western culture. Personality and 
Individual Differences, 122, 43–46.
Cheit, R. (2014). The Witch-Hunt Narrative: 
Politics, Psychology, and the Sexual Abuse 
of Children. New York: Oxford University 
Press.
Cheit, R. E., Shavit, Y., and Reisse-Davis, Z. 
(2010). Magazine coverage of child sex￾ual abuse, 1992–2004. Journal of Child 
Sexual Abuse: Research, Treatment, & Pro￾gram Innovations for Victims, Survivors, 
and Offenders, 19, 99–117.
Chen, C., Burton, M., Greenberger, E., and 
Dmitrieva, J. (1999). Population migra￾tion and the variation of dopamine D4 
receptor (DRD4) allele frequencies 
around the globe. Evolution and Human 
Behavior, 20, 309–324.
Chen, F. F., and West, S. G. (2008). Measur￾ing individualism and collectivism: The 
importance of considering differential 
components, reference groups, and mea￾surement invariance. Journal of Research 
in Personality, 42, 259–294.
Chen, F. S., and Johnson, S. C. (2012). An 
oxytocin receptor gene variant predicts 
attachment anxiety in females and 
autism-spectrum traits in males. Social 
Psychological and Personality Science, 3,
93–99.
Chen, S., Su, X., and Wu, S. (2012). Need 
for achievement, education, and entrepre￾neurial risk-taking behavior. Social 
Behavior and Personality, 40, 1311–1318.
Cheng, H., and Furnham, A. (2003). Person￾ality, self-esteem, and demographic pre￾dictions of happiness and depression. 
Personality and Individual Differences, 34,
921–942.
Chida, Y., and Steptoe, A. (2009). The asso￾ciation of anger and hostility with future 
coronary heart disease: A meta-analytic 
review of prospective evidence. Journal of 
the American College of Cardiology, 53,
774–778.
Chioqueta, A. P., and Stiles, T. C. (2005). 
Personality traits and the development of 
depression, hopelessness, and suicidal 
ideation. Personality and Individual Differ￾ences, 38, 1283–1291.
Chodorow, N. J. (1989). Feminism and psy￾choanalytic theory. New Haven, CT: Yale 
University Press.
Choi, J. K., and Ji, Y. G. (2015). Investigat￾ing the importance of trust on adopting 
an autonomous vehicle. International 
Journal of Human–Computer Interaction, 
31(10), 692–702.
Christie, R., and Geis, F. L. (1970). Studies 
in Machiavellianism (pp. 53–76). New 
York: Academic Press.
Chu, J. A. (1998). Rebuilding shattered lives: 
The responsible treatment of complex 
Final PDF to printerREFERENCES
lar31869_ref_665-718 674 10/22/22 10:41 AM
674
post-traumatic and dissociative disorders.
New York: Wiley.
Chua, K. J., Lukaszewski, A. W., Grant, D. 
M., and Sng, O. (2016). Human life his￾tory strategies: Calibrated to external or 
internal cues? Evolutionary Psychology, 
15(1), 1474704916677342.
Church, A. T. (2000). Culture and personal￾ity: Toward an integrated cultural trait 
psychology. Journal of Personality, 68,
651–703.
Church, A. T. (2009). Prospects for an inte￾grated trait and cultural psychology. 
European Journal of Personality, 23,
153–182.
Church, A. T., Katigbak, M. S., Mazuera 
Arias, R., Rincon, B. C., Vargas-Flores, J. 
D. J., Ibáñez-Reyes, J., . . . Ortiz, F. A. 
(2014). A four-culture study of self￾enhancement and adjustment using the 
social relations model: Do alternative 
conceptualizations and indices make a 
difference? Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 106, 997–1014.
Church, A. T., Katigbak, M. S., Miramontes, 
L. G., del Prado, A. M., and Cabrera, H. 
F. (2007). Culture and the behavioural 
manifestations of traits: An application 
of the act frequency approach. European 
Journal of Personality, 21, 389–417.
Clapper, R. L. (1990). Adult and adolescent 
arousal preferences: The revised reducer 
augmenter scale. Personality and Individ￾ual Differences, 11, 1115–1122.
Clapper, R. L. (1992). The reducer￾augmenter scale, the revised reducer aug￾menter scale, and predicting late 
adolescent substance use. Personality and 
Individual Differences, 13, 813–820.
Claridge, G. S., Donald, J., and Birchall, P. 
M. (1981). Drug tolerance and 
personality: Some implications for 
Eysenck’s theory. Personality and Individ￾ual Differences, 2, 153–166.
Clark, R. D. (1990). The impact of AIDS on 
gender differences in willingness to 
engage in casual sex. Journal of Applied 
Social Psychology, 20, 771–782.
Clark, R. D., and Hatfield, E. (1989). Gen￾der differences in receptivity to sexual 
offers. Journal of Psychology and Human 
Sexuality, 2, 39–55.
Claxton, A., O’Rourke, N., Smith, J. Z., and 
DeLongis, A. (2011). Personality traits 
and marital satisfaction within enduring 
relationships: An intra-couple discrep￾ancy approach. Journal of Social and Per￾sonal Relationships, 29, 375–396.
Cleckley, H. (1941). The mask of sanity: An 
attempt to reinterpret the so-called psycho￾pathic personality. Oxford, England: 
Mosby.
Cleckley, H. (1988). The mask of sanity.
Augusta, GA: Emily S. Cleckley.
Cleveland, H. H., Udry, J. R., and Chantala, 
K. (2001). Environmental and genetic 
influences on sex-types behaviors and 
attitudes of male and female adolescents. 
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 
27(12), 1587–1598.
Clewley, N., Chen, S. Y., and Liu, X. (2011). 
Mining learning preferences in Web￾based instruction: Holists vs. serialists. 
Journal of Educational Technology and 
Society, 14, 266–277.
Cloninger, C. R. (1986). A unified biosocial 
theory of personality and its role in the 
development of anxiety states. Psychiatric 
Developments, 3, 167–226.
Cloninger, C. R. (1987). A systematic 
method for clinical description and clas￾sification of personality variants: A pro￾posal. Archives of General Psychiatry, 44,
573–588.
Cloninger, C. R. (1999). Personality and psy￾chopathology. Washington, DC: 
American Psychiatric Press.
Cloninger, C. R., Svrakic, D. M., and Przy￾beck, T. R. (1993). A psychobiological 
model of temperament and character. 
Archives of General Psychiatry, 50,
975–990.
Clower, C. E., and Bothwell, R. K. (2001). 
An exploratory study of the relationship 
between the Big Five and inmate recidi￾vism. Journal of Research in Personality, 
35, 231–237.
Coan, J. A., and Allen, J. B. (2004). Frontal 
EEG asymmetry as a moderator and 
mediator of emotion. Biological Psychol￾ogy, 67(1–2), 7–49.
Coan, J. A., and Gottman, J. M. (2007). 
Sampling, experimental control, and gen￾eralizability in the study of marital pro￾cess models, Journal of Marriage and 
Family, 69, 73–80.
Cohen, J. (1977). Statistical power analysis 
for the behavioral sciences. San Diego, 
CA: Academic Press.
Cohen, J., and Cohen, P. (1975). Applied 
Multiple Regression/Correlation Analysis 
for the Behavioral Sciences. Hillsdale, NJ: 
Erlbaum.
Cohen, S., Doyle, W. J., Turner, R. B., Alper, 
C. M., and, Skoner, D. P. (2003). Emo￾tional style and susceptibility to the com￾mon cold. Psychosomatic Medicine, 65, 
652–657.
Cohen, S., and Pressman, S. D. (2006). Posi￾tive Affect and Health. Current Directions 
in Psychological Science, 15(3), 122–125.
Cohen, S., Doyle, W. J., Skoner, D. P., Fire￾man, P., Gwaltney, J. M., Jr., and New￾som, J. T. (1995). State and trait negative 
affect as predictors of objective and sub￾jective symptoms of respiratory viral 
infections. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 68, 159–169.
Cohen, S., Gianaros, P., and Manuck, S. B. 
(2016). A stage model of stress and dis￾ease. Perspectives in Psychological Science, 
11, 456–463.
Cohen, S., Janicki-Deverts, D., Doyle, W. J., 
Miller, G. E., Frank, E., Rabin, B. S., and 
Turner, R. B. (2012). Chronic stress, glu￾cocorticoid receptor resistance, inflam￾mation, and disease risk. PNAS,
doi/10.1073/pnas.1118355109.
Cohen, S., Tyrrell, D. A. J., and Smith, A. P. 
(1997). Psychological stress in humans 
and susceptibility to the common cold. 
In T. W. Moller (Ed.), Clinical disorders 
and stressful life events (pp. 217–235). 
Madison, CT: International Universities 
Press.
Cohen-Bendahan, C. C., van de Beek, C., 
and Berenbaum, S. A. (2005). Prenatal 
sex hormone effects on child and adult 
sex-typed behavior: Methods and find￾ings. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral 
Reviews, 29(2), 353–384.
Coleman, R. (1992). Lennon: The definitive 
biography. New York: Perennial.
College Board Online. (2009). SAT validity 
studies. Retrieved from http://profession￾als.collegeboard.com/data-reports￾research/sat/validity-studies.
Collins, J. N. (1994). Some fundamental 
questions about scientific thinking. 
Research in Science and Technological 
Education, 12, 161–173.
Confer, J. C., Easton, J. E., Fleischman, D. 
S., Goetz, C., Lewis, D. M., Perilloux, C., 
and Buss, D. M. (2010). Evolutionary 
psychology: Controversies, questions, 
prospects, and limitations. American Psy￾chologist, 65, 110–126.
Conley, J. J. (1984a). The hierarchy of con￾sistency: A review and model of longitu￾dinal findings on adult individual 
differences in intelligence, personality, 
and self-opinion. Personality and Individ￾ual Differences, 5, 11–25.
Conley, J. J. (1984b). Longitudinal consis￾tency of adult personality: Self-reported 
psychological characteristics across 45 
years. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 47, 1325–1333.
Conley, J. J. (1985). Longitudinal stability of 
personality traits: A multitrait￾multimethod–multioccasion analysis. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychol￾ogy, 49, 1266–1282.
Conley, J. J., and Angelides, M. (1984). Per￾sonality antecedents of emotional disorders 
and alcohol abuse in men: Results of a 
forty-five-year prospective study. Unpub￾lished manuscript: Wesleyan University, 
Middletown, CT.
Connelly, B. S., and Ones, D. S. (2010). 
Another perspective on personality: 
Meta-analytic integration of observers’ 
accuracy and predicative validity. Psycho￾logical Bulletin, 136, 1092–1122.
Connolly, I., and O’Moore, M. (2003). Per￾sonality and family relations of children 
who bully. Personality and Individual Dif￾ferences, 35, 559–567.
Final PDF to printerREFERENCES
lar31869_ref_665-718 675 10/22/22 10:41 AM
675
Conrad, M. A. (2006). Aptitude is not 
enough: How personality and behavior 
predict academic performances. Journal 
of Research in Personality, 40, 339–346.
Conroy-Beam, D., Buss, D. M., Pham, M. N., 
and Shackelford, T. K. (2015). How sex￾ually dimorphic are human mate prefer￾ences? Personality and Social Psychology 
Bulletin, 41, 1082–1093.
Conroy-Beam, D., Goetz, C. D., and Buss, D. 
M. (2016). What predicts romantic rela￾tionship satisfaction and mate retention 
intensity: Mate preference fulfillment or 
mate value discrepancies? Evolution and 
Human Behavior, 37, 440–448.
Cook, C. L., Krems, J. A., and Kenrick, D. T. 
(2021). Fundamental motives illuminate 
a broad range of individual and cultural 
variations in thought and behavior. Cur￾rent Directions in Psychological Science, 
30, 242–250.
Cooper, M. L., Wood, P. K., Orcutt, H. K., 
and Albino, A. (2003). Personality and 
the predisposition to engage in risky or 
problem behaviors during adolescence. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychol￾ogy, 84(2), 390–410.
Cooper, S. H. (1998). Changing notions of 
defense within psychoanalytic theory. 
Journal of Personality, 66, 947–965.
Corcoran, D. W. J. (1964). The relation 
between introversion and salivation. 
American Journal of Psychology, 77,
298–300.
Corr, P. J., and Matthews, G. (Eds.). (2020). 
The Cambridge handbook of personality 
psychology. Cambridge University Press.
Cosmides, L., and Tooby, J. (1992). Cogni￾tive adaptations for social exchange. In J. 
Barkow, L. Cosmides, and J. Tooby 
(Eds.), The adapted mind (pp. 163–228). 
New York: Academic Press.
Costa, A. R. L., Jesuíno, A. D. S. A., de 
Souza Lima, N. R., and Shu, F. (2019). 
Adaptation and validation of HEXACO￾PI-R to a Brazilian sample adaptation of 
HEXACO-PI-R to Brazilian sample. Per￾sonality and Individual Differences, 147,
280–284.
Costa, P. T., and McCrae, R. R. (1980). 
Influence of extraversion and neuroticism 
on subjective well-being: Happy and 
unhappy people. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 38, 668–678.
Costa, P. T., and McCrae, R. R. (1985). 
Hypochondriasis, neuroticism, and aging: 
When are somatic complaints 
unfounded? American Psychologist, 40,
19–28.
Costa, P. T., and Widiger, T. A. (Eds.). 
(1994). Personality disorders and the five￾factor model of personality. Washington, 
DC: American Psychological 
Association.
Costa, P. T., Jr., and McCrae, R. R. (1988). 
Personality in adulthood: A six-year 
longitudinal study of self-reports and 
spouse ratings on the NEO Personality 
Inventory. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 54, 853–863.
Costa, P. T., Jr., and McCrae, R. R. (1992). 
Trait psychology comes of age. In T. B. 
Sonderegger (Ed.), Nebraska symposium 
on motivation: Psychology and aging
(pp. 169–204). Lincoln: University of 
Nebraska Press.
Costa, P. T., Jr., and McCrae, R. R. (1994). 
Set like plaster? Evidence for the stability 
of adult personality. In T. F. Heatherton 
and J. L. Weinberger (Eds.), Can person￾ality change? Washington, DC: American 
Psychological Association.
Costa, P. T., Jr., and McCrae, R. R. (1995). 
Solid ground in the wetlands of personal￾ity: A reply to Block. Psychological Bulle￾tin, 117, 216–220.
Costa, P. T., Jr., and McCrae, R. R. (1995). 
Solid ground in the wetlands of personal￾ity: A reply to Block. Psychological Bulle￾tin, 117, 216–220.
Costa, P. T., Jr., and McCrae, R. R. (2005). 
The NEO-PI-3: A more readable revised 
NEO personality inventory. Journal of 
Personality, 84, 261–270.
Costa, P. T., McCrae, R. R., and Zonderman, 
A. B. (1987). Environmental and disposi￾tional influences on well-being: Longitu￾dinal follow-up of an American national 
sample. British Journal of Psychology, 78,
299–306.
Coutts, L. M. (1990). Police hiring and 
promotion: Methods and outcomes. 
Canadian Police College Journal, 14,
98–122.
Cowen, A. S., and Keltner, D. (2020). Uni￾versal facial expressions uncovered in art 
of the ancient Americas: A computa￾tional approach. Science Advances, 6(34), 
eabb1005.
Cox, K., and McAdams, D. P. (2012). The 
transforming self: Service narratives and 
identity change in emerging adulthood. 
Journal of Adolescent Research, 27,
18–43.
Cox, S. R., Ritchie, S. J., Fawns-Ritchie, C., 
Tucker-Drob, E. M.; Deary, I. J. (2019). 
Structural brain imaging correlates of 
general intelligence in UK Biobank. Intel￾ligence, 76, ArtID: 101376.
Craik, K. H. (1986). Personality research 
methods: An historical perspective. Jour￾nal of Personality, 54, 18–51.
Craik, K. H. (2008). Reputation: A network 
analysis. New York: Oxford University 
Press.
Cramer, P. (1991). The development of 
defense mechanisms: Theory, research, and 
assessment. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Cramer, P. (2000). Defense mechanisms in 
psychology today: Further processes for 
adaptation. American Psychologist, 55,
637–646.
Cramer, P. (2002). Defense mechanisms, 
behavior, and affect in young adulthood. 
Journal of Personality, 70, 103–126.
Cramer, P. (2012). Psychological maturity and 
change in adult defense mechanisms. Jour￾nal of Research in Personality, 46, 306–316.
Cramer, P. (2015). Defense mechanisms: 40 
years of empirical research. Journal of 
Personality Assessment, 97, 114–122.
Cramer, P. (2017). Using the TAT to assess 
the relations between gender identity and 
the use of defense mechanisms. Journal 
of Personality Assessment, 99, 265–274
Cramer, P. (2018). Change in children’s self 
confidence and the use of defense mecha￾nisms. Journal of Nervous and Mental Dis￾ease, 206, 593–597.
Cramer, P., and Davidson, K. (1998). 
Defense mechanisms in contemporary 
personality research. Special Issue of the 
Journal of Personality, 66.
Crandall, V., Dewey, R., Katkovsky, W., and 
Preston, A. (1964). Parents’ attitudes and 
behaviors and grade-school children’s 
academic achievements. Journal of 
Genetic Psychology, 104, 53–66.
Crawford, M. B. (2020). Why we drive: 
Toward a philosophy of the open road.
New York: William Morrow.
Crede, M., Tynan, M. C., and Harms, P. D. 
(2016). Much ado about Grit: A meta￾analytic synthesis of the Grit literature. 
Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology.
Creswell, J. D., Bursley, J. K., and Satpute, 
A. B. (2013). Neural reactivation links 
unconscious thought to decision-making 
performance. Social Cognitive and 
Affective Neuroscience, 8(8), 863–869.
Crocker, J., and Major, B. (1989). Social 
stigma and self-esteem: The self￾protective properties of stigma. Psycho￾logical Review, 96, 608–630.
Cronbach, L. J., and Gleser, G. C. (1965). 
Psychological tests and personnel decisions.
Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
Cronbach, L. J., and Meehl, P. E. (1955). 
Construct validity in psychological tests. 
Psychological Bulletin, 52, 281–302.
Crosby, C., Durkee, P., Meston, C., and 
Buss, D. M. (in press). Six dimensions of 
sexual disgust. Personality and Individual 
Differences.
Cross, C. P., Copping, L. T., and Campbell, 
A. (2011). Sex differences in impulsivity: 
A meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 
137, 97–130.
Crowne, D. P., and Marlowe, D. (1964). The 
approval motive: Studies in evaluation 
dependence. New York: Wiley.
Cruce, S. E., Pashak, T. J., Handal, P. J., Munz, 
D. C., and Gfeller, J. D. (2012). 
Conscientious perfectionism, self-evaluative 
perfectionism, and the five-factor model of 
personality traits. Personality and Individual 
Differences, 53, 268–273.
Final PDF to printerREFERENCES
lar31869_ref_665-718 676 10/22/22 10:41 AM
676
Cruz, M., and Larsen, R. J. (1995). Personal￾ity correlates of individual differences in 
electrodermal lability. Journal of Social 
Behavior and Personality, 23, 93–104.
Csikszentmihalyi, M., Abuhamdeh, S., and 
Nakamura, J. (2005). Flow. In A. J. Elliot 
and C. S. Dweck (Eds.), Handbook of com￾petence and motivation (pp. 598–608). 
New York: Guilford Press.
Curtis, V., and Biran, A. (2001). Dirt, dis￾gust, and disease: Is hygiene in our 
genes? Perspectives in Biology and Medi￾cine, 44(1), 17–31.
Curtis, V., Aunger, R., and Rabie, T. (2004). 
Evidence that disgust evolved to protect 
from risk of disease. Proceedings of the 
Royal Society of London B: Biological Sci￾ences, 271(Suppl 4), S131–S133.
Cutler, S. S., Larsen, R. J., and Bunce, S. C. 
(1996). Repressive coping style and the 
experience and recall of emotion: A natu￾ralistic study of daily affect. Journal of 
Personality, 65, 379–405.
da Rosa, G. D., Martin, P., Kim, J., Russell, 
D., Abraham, W. T., Gondo, Y., . . . 
Poon, L. W. (2021). A cultural compari￾son of personality profiles of US and 
Japanese centenarians. The International 
Journal of Aging and Human Develop￾ment, 93(1), 562–583.
Dabbs, J. M., Jr., and Dabbs, M. G. (2000). 
Heroes, rogues, and lovers: Testosterone 
and behavior. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Dabbs, J. M., Jr., and Hargrove, M. F. 
(1997). Age, testosterone, and behavior 
among female prison inmates. Psychoso￾matic Medicine, 59, 477–480.
Dabbs, J. M., Jr., Hargrove, M. F., and 
Heusel, C. (1996). Testosterone differ￾ences among college fraternities: Well￾behaved vs. rambunctious. Personality 
and Individual Differences, 20, 157–161.
Dahlke, J. A., Sackett, P. R., and Kuncel, N. 
R. (2019). Effects of range restriction 
and criterion contamination on differen￾tial validity of the SAT by race/ethnicity 
and sex. Journal of Applied Psychology. 
104, 814–831.
Dai, H., Milkman, K. L., Hofmann, D. A., 
and Staats, B. R. (2015). The impact of 
time at work and time off from work on 
rule compliance: The case of hand 
hygiene in health care. Journal of Applied 
Psychology, 100, 846–862.
Dalgleish, T. (1995). Performance on the 
emotional Stroop task in groups of anx￾ious, expert, and control subjects: A com￾parison of computer and card 
presentation formats. Cognition and Emo￾tion, 9, 341–362.
Daly, M., and Wilson, M. (1988). Homicide.
New York: Aldine de Gruyter.
Damasio, A. (2018). Feelings and knowing: 
Making minds conscious. New York: 
Pantheon Books.
Damasio, A. (2021). The strange order of 
things: Life, feelings, and the making of 
culture. New York: Pantheon Books.
Damasio, A. R. (1994). Descartes’ error: Emo￾tion, reason, and the human brain. New 
York: Putnam.
Dang, J. (2016). Commentary: A multi-lab 
preregistered replication of the ego￾depletion effect. Frontiers in Psychology, 
7, 1155.
Dang, J., Barker, P., Baumert, A., 
Bentvelzen, M., Berkman, E., Buchholz, 
N. et al. (2021). A multilab replication 
of the ego depletion effect. Social Psy￾chological and Personality Science, 12,
14–24.
Danielsbacka, M., Tanskanen, A. O., and Bil￾lari, F. C. (2019). Who meets online? 
Personality traits and sociodemographic 
characteristics associated with online 
partnering in Germany. Personality and 
Individual Differences, 143, 139–144.
Danner, D. D., Snowdon, D. A., and Friesen, 
W. V. (2001). Positive emotions in early 
life and longevity: Findings from the nun 
study. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 80, 804–813.
Darwin, C. (1859). The origin of species.
London: Murray.
Darwin, C. (1872/1965). The expression of 
the emotions in man and animals.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Davidson, K. W., Gidron, Y., Mostofsky, E., 
and Trudeau, K. J. (2007). Hospitaliza￾tion cost offset of a hostility intervention 
for coronary heart disease patients. Jour￾nal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 
75, 657–662.
Davidson, R. J. (1991). Cerebral asymmetry 
and affective disorders: A developmental 
approach. In D. Cicchetti and S. L. Toth 
(Eds.), Internalizing and externalizing 
expressions of dysfunction: Rochester sym￾posium and developmental psychopathol￾ogy (Vol. 2, pp. 123–154). Hillsdale, NJ: 
Erlbaum.
Davidson, R. J. (1993). The neuropsychol￾ogy of emotion and affective style. In M. 
Lewis and J. M. Haviland (Eds.), Hand￾book of emotions (pp. 143–154). New 
York: Guilford Press.
Davidson, R. J., Ekman, P., Saron, C. D., 
Senulis, J. A., and Friesen, W. V. (1990). 
Approach/withdrawal and cerebral asym￾metry: Emotional expression and brain 
physiology. I. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 58, 330–341.
Davidson, R. J., Kabat-Zinn, J., Schumacher, 
J., Rosenkranz, M., Muller, D., 
Santorelli, S. F., Urbanowski, F., 
Harrington, A., Bonus, K., and Sheridan, 
J. F. (2003). Alterations in brain and 
immune function produced by mindful￾ness meditation. Psychosomatic Medicine, 
65, 564–570.
Davidson, R. J., Scherer, K. R., and 
Goldsmith, H. H. (2003). Handbook of 
Affective Sciences. New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Davis, A. C., Visser, B., Volk, A. A., Vaillan￾court, T., and Arnocky, S. (2019). Life 
history strategy and the HEXACO model 
of personality: A facet level examination. 
Personality and Individual Differences, 
150, 109471.
Davis, D., and Loftus, E. F. (2009). The scien￾tific status of ‘repressed’ and ‘recovered’ 
memories of sexual abuse. In J. L. Skeem, 
K. S. Douglas, and S. O. Lilenfeld (Eds), 
Psychological Science in the Courtroom: 
Consensus and Controversy, pp. 55–79. 
New York, Guilford Press.
Davis, M. H., Luce, C., and Kraus, S. J. 
(1994). The heritability of characteristics 
associated with dispositional empathy. 
Journal of Personality, 62, 369–391.
Davis, M. H., Mitchell, K. V., Hall, J. A., 
Lothert, J., Snapp, T., and Meyer, M. 
(1999). Empathy, expectations, and situ￾ational preferences: Personality influ￾ences on the decision to participate in 
volunteer helping behaviors. Journal of 
Personality, 67, 469–503.
Davis, P. J. (1987). Repression and the inac￾cessibility of affective memories. Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology, 53,
585–593.
Davis, P. J., and Schwartz, G. E. (1987). 
Repression and the inaccessibility of 
affective memories. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 52, 155–162.
De Bolle, M., De Fruyt, F., McCrae, R. R., 
Löckenhoff, C. E., Costa, Jr, P. T., 
Aguilar-Vafaie, M. E., . . . Avdeyeva, T. 
V. (2015). The emergence of sex differ￾ences in personality traits in early adoles￾cence: A cross-sectional, cross-cultural 
study. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 108, 171–185.
De Pascalis, V. (2004). On the psychophysi￾ology of extraversion. In R. M. Stelmack 
(Ed), On the Psychobiology of Personality: 
Essays in Honor of Marvin Zuckerman.
pp. 295–327; New York: Elsevier.
De Raad, B. (1998). Five big, big five issues: 
Rationale, content, structure, status, and 
crosscultural assessment. European Psy￾chologist, 3, 113–124.
De Raad, B., and Barelds, D. P. H. (2008). A 
new taxonomy of Dutch personality traits 
based on a comprehensive and unre￾stricted list of descriptors. Journal of Per￾sonality and Social Psychology, 94,
347–364.
De Raad, B., Barelds, D. P. H., Levert, E., 
Ostendof, F., Mlacic, B., De Blas, L., 
Hrebickova, M., et al. (2010). Only three 
factors of personality description are 
fully replicable across languages: A com￾parison of 14 trait taxonomies. Journal of 
Final PDF to printerREFERENCES
lar31869_ref_665-718 677 10/22/22 10:41 AM
677
Personality and Social Psychology, 98,
1060–1173.
De Raad, B., Perugini, M., Hrebickova, M., 
and Szarota, P. (1998). Lingua Franca of 
personality: Taxonomies and structures 
based on the psycholexical approach. 
Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 29,
212–232.
De Vries, J., and Van Heck, G. L. (2002). 
Fatigue: relationships with basic person￾ality and temperament dimensions. Per￾sonality and Individual Differences, 
33(8), 1311–1324.
de Vries, R. E., Pronk, J., Olthof, T., and 
Goossens, F. A. (2020). Getting along 
and/or getting ahead: Differential 
HEXACO personality correlates of like￾ability and popularity among adolescents. 
European Journal of Personality, 34(2), 
245–261.
de Vries, R. E., Wesseldijk, L. W., Karinen, 
A. K., Jern, P., and Tybur, J. M. (2021). 
Relations between HEXACO personality 
and ideology variables are mostly genetic 
in nature. European Journal of Personal￾ity, 08902070211014035.
Deaner, R. O., Goetz, S. M. M., Shattuck, 
K., and Schnotala, T. (2012). Body 
weight, not facial width-to-height ratio, 
predicts aggression in pro hockey play￾ers. Journal of Research in Personality, 
46, 235–238.
DeAngelis, T. (1991). Honesty tests weigh in 
with improved ratings. APA Monitor, 
22, 6.
Deaux, K. (1984). From individual differ￾ences to social categories: Analysis of a 
decade’s research on gender. American 
Psychologist, 39, 105–116.
Deaux, K., and Lewis, L. L. (1984). Struc￾ture of gender stereotypes: Interrelation￾ships among components and gender 
label. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 46, 991–1004.
Decuyper, M., De Bolle, M., and De Fruyt, 
F. (2012). Personality similarity, percep￾tual accuracy, and relationship satisfac￾tion in dating and married couples. 
Personal Relationships, 19, 128–145.
Deiner, C. I., and Dweck, C. S. (1978). An 
analysis of learned helplessness: Continu￾ous changes in performance, strategy, 
and achievement cognitions following 
failure. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 36, 451–462.
Deiner, C. I., and Dweck, C. S. (1980). An 
analysis of learned helplessness (II): The 
processing of success. Journal of Person￾ality and Social Psychology, 39, 940–952.
Dekkers, T. J., Rapport, M. D., Calub, C. A., 
Eckrich, S. J., and Irurita, C. (2021). 
ADHD and hyperactivity: The influence 
of cognitive processing demands on gross 
motor activity level in children. Child 
Neuropsychology, 27(1), 63–82.
Del Giudice, M. (2019). Measuring sex dif￾ferences and similarities. Gender and sex￾uality development: Contemporary theory 
and research. New York: Springer.
Del Giudice, M., and Belsky, J. (2011). The 
development of life history strategies: 
Toward a multi-stage theory. In D. M. 
Buss and P. Hawley (Eds.), The evolution 
of personality and individual differences.
New York: Oxford University Press.
del Prado, A. M., Church, A. T., Katigbak, 
M. S., Miramontes, L. G., Whitty, M. T., 
Curtis, G. J., et al. (2007). Culture, 
method, and the content of self-concepts: 
Testing trait, individual-self primacy, and 
cultural psychology perspectives. Journal 
of Research in Personality, 41,
1119–1160.
Delatorre, M. Z., Wagner, A., and Bedin, L. 
M. (2021). Dyadic relationships between 
personality, social support, conflict reso￾lution, and marital quality. Personal 
Relationships.
Delongis, A., Folkman, S., and Lazarus, R. S. 
(1988). The impact of daily stress on 
health and mood: Psychological and 
social resources as mediators. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 54,
986–995.
Dembrowski, T. M., and Costa, P. T. (1987). 
Coronary-prone behavior: Components 
of the Type A pattern and hostility. Jour￾nal of Personality, 55, 211–235.
Demerath, P. (2001). The social cost of act￾ing “extra”: Students’ moral judgments of 
self, social relations, and academic suc￾cess in Papua New Guinea. American 
Journal of Education, 108, 3.
DeMeuse, K. (1985). The relationship 
between life events and indices of class￾room performance. Teaching of Psychol￾ogy, 12, 146–149.
Denissen, J. J. (2014). A roadmap for further 
progress in research on personality devel￾opment. European Journal of Personality, 
28, 213–215.
Denissen, J. J. A., and Penke, L. (2008a). 
Motivational individual reaction norms 
underlying the five-factor model of per￾sonality: First steps toward a theory￾based conceptual framework. Journal of 
Research in Personality, 42, 1285–1302.
Denissen, J. J. A., and Penke, L. (2008b). 
Neuroticism predicts reactions to cues of 
social exclusion. European Journal of Per￾sonality, 22, 497–517.
Denissen, J. J. A., Luhmann, M., Chung, J. 
M., and Bleidorn, W. (2019). Transac￾tions between life events and personality 
traits across the adult lifespan. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 116,
612–633.
Denissen, J., Penke, L., Schmitt, D. P., and 
van Aken, M. (2008). Self-esteem reac￾tions to social interactions: Evidence for 
sociometer mechanisms across days, peo￾ple, and nations. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 95, 181–196.
Denson, T. F., Pedersen, W. C., Ronquillo, 
J., and Nandy, A. S. (2009). The angry 
brain: Neural correlates of anger, angry 
rumination, and aggressive personality. 
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 21,
734–744.
DePaulo, B. (2006). Singled out: How singles 
are stereotyped, stigmatized, and ignored, 
and still live happily ever after. New York: 
St. Martin’s Press.
DePaulo, B. M., Dull, W. R., Greenberg, J. 
M., and Swaim, G. (1989). Are shy peo￾ple reluctant to ask for help? Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 56,
834–844.
DePaulo, B. M., Kenny, D. A., Hoover, C. 
W., Webb, W., and Oliver, P. V. (1987). 
Accuracy of person perception: Do peo￾ple know what kinds of impressions they 
convey? Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 52(2), 303–315.
DePrince, A. P., Brown, L. S., Cheit, R. E., 
Freyd, J. J., Gold, S. N., Pezdek, K., and 
Quina, K. (2012). Motivated forgetting 
and misremember: Perspectives from 
betrayal trauma theory. In R. F. Belli 
(Ed.), True and false recovered memories: 
Toward a reconciliation of the debate
(pp. 193–242). New York: Springer.
Depue, R. A. (2006). Interpersonal behavior 
and the structure of personality: Neu￾robehavioral foundations of agentic extra￾version and affiliation. In T. Canli (Ed.), 
Biology of personality and individual differ￾ences (pp. 60–92). New York: Guilford 
Press.
Depue, R. A., and Collins, P. F. (1999). Neu￾robiology of the structure of personality: 
Dopamine, facilitation of incentive moti￾vation, and extraversion. Behavioral and 
Brain Sciences, 22, 491–517.
Derakshan, N., Eysenck, M. W., and Myers, 
L. B. (2007). Emotional information pro￾cessing in repressors: The vigilance￾avoidance theory. Cognition and Emotion, 
21(8), 1585–1614.
DeSteno, D. A., and Salovey, P. (1996). 
Evolutionary origins of sex differences 
in jealousy: Questioning the “fitness” of 
the model. Psychological Science, 7,
367–372.
Detrick, P., and Chibnall, J. T. (2013). 
Revised NEO Personality Inventory nor￾mative data for police officer selection. 
Psychological Services, 10, 372–377.
Devereux, P. G.. Miller, M. K.. and 
Kirshenbaum, J. M. (2021). Moral disen￾gagement, locus of control, and belief in 
a just world: Individual differences relate 
to adherence to COVID-19 guidelines. 
Personality and Individual Differences, 
182, Nov, 2021. ArtID: 111069.
Final PDF to printerREFERENCES
lar31869_ref_665-718 678 10/22/22 10:41 AM
678
DeWall, C. N., Baumeister, R. F., Stillman, 
T. F., and Gailliot, M. T. (2007). Vio￾lence restrained: Effects of self-regulatory 
capacity and its depletion on aggressive 
behavior. Journal of Experimental Social 
Psychology, 33, 1547–1558.
DeWall, C. N., Buffardi, L. E., Bosner, I., and 
Campbell, W. K. (2011). Narcissism and 
implicit attention seeking: Evidence from 
linguistic analyses of social networking 
and online presentation. Personality and 
Individual Differences, 51, 57–62.
DeYoung, C. G. (2010). Personality neuro￾science and the biology of traits. Social 
and Personality Psychology Compass, 4,
1165–1180.
DeYoung, C. G. (2013). The neuromodula￾tor of exploration: A unifying theory of 
the role of dopamine in personality. Fron￾tiers in Human Neuroscience, 7, 762.
DeYoung, C. G. (2015b). Cybernetic big five 
theory. Journal of Research in Personality, 
56, 33–58.
DeYoung, C. G., Cooper, M. L., and Larsen, 
R. J. (2014). APA handbook of personal￾ity and social psychology: Personality 
processes and individual differences. 
Washington, D.C: American Psychologi￾cal Association Press.
DeYoung, C. G., Grazioplene, R. G., and 
Allen, T. A. (2021). The neurobiology of 
personality. In O.P. John and R. W. 
Robbins (Eds.), Handbook of personality: 
Theory and research, Fourth Edition. 
New York: Guilford Press.
DeYoung, C. G., Grazioplene, R. G., and 
Peterson, J. B. (2012). From madness to 
genius: The openness/intellect trait 
domain as a paradoxical simplex. Journal 
of Research in Personality, 46, 63–78.
DeYoung, C. G., Hirsh, J. B., Shane, M. S., 
Rajeevan, N., and Gray, J. R. (2010). 
Testing predictions from personality neu￾roscience: Brain structure and the big 
five. Psychological Science, 21, 820–828.
Di Blas, L. (2005). Personality-relevant attri￾bute-nouns: A taxonomic study in the 
Italian language. European Journal of Per￾sonality, 19, 537–557.
Di Blas, L. (2007). A circumplex model of 
interpersonal attributes in middle child￾hood. Journal of Personality, 75,
863–897.
Diamond, J. (1999). Guns, germs, and steel.
New York: Norton.
Diener, E. (2000). Subjective well-being: The 
science of happiness and a proposal for a 
national index. American Psychologist, 55,
34–43.
Diener, E., and Biswas-Diener, R. (2002). 
Will money increase subjective well￾being? A literature review and guide to 
needed research. Social Indicators 
Research, 57, 119–169.
Diener, E., and Biswas-Diener, R. (2008). 
Happiness: Unlocking the Mysteries of 
Psychological Wealth. Malden, MA: 
Blackwell.
Diener, E., and Diener, M. (1995). Cross￾cultural correlates of life satisfaction and 
self-esteem. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 68, 653–663.
Diener, E., and Larsen, R. J. (1984). Tempo￾ral stability and cross-situational consis￾tency of affective, behavioral, and 
cognitive responses. Journal of Personal￾ity and Social Psychology, 47, 871–883.
Diener, E., and Seligman, M. E. P. (2002). 
Very happy people. Psychological Science, 
13, 80–83.
Diener, E., and Tay, L. (2015). Subjective 
well-being and human welfare around the 
world as reflected in the Gallup World 
Poll. International Journal of Psychology, 
50, 135–149.
Diener, E., Diener, M., and Diener, C. 
(1995). Factors predicting the subjective 
well-being of nations. Journal of Personal￾ity and Social Psychology, 69, 851–864.
Diener, E., Horowitz, J., and Emmons, R. A. 
(1985). Happiness of the very wealthy. 
Social Indicators Research, 16, 263–274.
Diener, E., Larsen, R. J., and Emmons, R. A. 
(1984). Person X situation interactions: 
Choice of situations and congruence 
response models. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 47, 580–592.
Diener, E., Larsen, R. J., Levine, S., and 
Emmons, R. A. (1985). Intensity and fre￾quency: Dimensions underlying positive 
and negative affect. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 48, 1253–1265.
Diener, E., Lucas, R. E., and Larsen, R. J. 
(2003). Measuring positive emotions. In 
C. R. Snyder, and S. J. Lopez (Eds.), The 
Handbook of Positive Psychological Assess￾ment (pp. 201–218). Washington, DC: 
American Psychological Association.
Diener, E., Ng, W., Harter, J., and Arora, R. 
(2010). Wealth and happiness across the 
world: Material prosperity predicts life 
evaluation, whereas psychosocial pros￾perity predicts positive feeling. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 99,
52–61.
Diener, E., Oishi, S., and Lucas, R. E. 
(2003). Personality, culture, and subjec￾tive well-being: Emotional and cognitive 
evaluations of life. Annual Review of Psy￾chology, 54, 403–425.
Diener, E., Sandvik, E., Seidlitz, L., and 
Diener, M. (1993). The relationship 
between income and subjective well￾being: Relative or absolute? Social Indica￾tors Research, 28, 195–223.
Digman, J. M., and Inouye, J. (1986). Fur￾ther specification of the five robust fac￾tors of personality. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 50, 116–123.
Dijksterhhuis, A., Bos, M. W., Nordgren, L. 
F., and van Baaren, R. B. (2006). On 
making the right choice: The 
deliberation-without-attention effect. Sci￾ence, 311, 1005–1007.
Dijkstra, P., and Barelds, D. P. H. (2008). 
Self and partner personality and 
responses to relationship threat. Journal 
of Research in Personality, 42,
1500–1511.
Dijkstra, P., and Buunk, B. P. (2001). Sex 
differences in the jealousy-evoking nature 
of a rival’s body build. Evolution and 
Human Behavior, 22, 335–341.
Dill, K. E., Anderson, C. A., Anderson, K. 
B., and Deuser, W. E. (1999). Effects of 
aggressive personality on social expecta￾tions and social perceptions. Journal of 
Research in Personality, 31, 272–292.
Dixon, W. A., Mauzey, E. D., and Hall, C. R. 
(2003). Physical activity and exercise: 
Implications for counselors. Journal of 
Counseling and Development, 81,
502–505.
Dodge, K. A., and Coie, J. D. (1987). Social￾information-processing factors in reactive 
and proactive aggression in children’s 
peer groups. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 53, 1146–1158.
Donhauser, P. W., Rösch, A. G., and Schul￾theiss, O. C. (2015). The implicit need 
for power predicts recognition speed for 
dynamic changes in facial expressions of 
emotion. Motivation and Emotion, 39(5), 
714–721.
Donnellan, M. B., Kenny, D. A., Trzesniewski, 
K. H., Lucas, R. E., and Conger, R. D. 
(2012). Using trait-state models to evaluate 
the longitudinal consistency of global self￾esteem from adolescence to adulthood. 
Journal of Research in Personality, 46,
634–645.
Donnellan, M. B., Larsen-Rife, D., and Con￾ger, R. D. (2005). Personality, family 
history, and competence in early adult 
romantic relationships. Journal of Per￾sonality and Social Psychology, 88,
562–576.
Donnellan, M. B., Trzesniewski, K. H., and 
Robins, R. W. (2009). An emerging epi￾demic of narcissism or much ado about 
nothing? Journal of Research in Personal￾ity, 43, 498–501.
Donohew, L., Zimmerman, R., Cupp, P. S., 
Novak, S., Colon, S., and Abell, R. 
(2000). Sensation seeking, impulsive 
decision-making, and risky sex: Implica￾tions for risk-taking and design interven￾tions. Personality and Individual 
Differences, 28, 1079–1091.
Dorros, S., Hanzal, A., and Segrin, C. 
(2008). The big five personality traits and 
perceptions of touch to intimate and non￾intimate body regions. Journal of 
Research in Personality, 42, 1067–1073.
Doucet, C., and Stelmack, R. M. (2000). An 
event-related potential analysis of extra￾version and individual differences in cog￾nitive processing speed and response 
Final PDF to printerREFERENCES
lar31869_ref_665-718 679 10/22/22 10:41 AM
679
execution. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 78, 956–964.
Dreber, A., Apilcella, C. L., Eisenberg, D. T. 
A., Garcia, J. R., Zamore, R. S., Lum, J. 
K., and Campbell, B. (2009). The 7R 
polymorphism in the dopamine receptor 
D4 gene (DRD4) is associated with 
financial risk taking in men. Evolution 
and Human Behavior, 30, 85–92.
Drescher, A., and Schultheiss, O. C. (2016). 
Meta-analytic evidence for higher implicit 
affiliation and intimacy motivation scores 
in women, compared to men. Journal of 
Research in Personality, 64, 1–10.
Drislane, L. E., Patrick, C. J., and Arsal, G. 
(2014). Clarifying the content coverage 
of differing psychopathy inventories 
through reference to the Triarchic Psy￾chopathy Measure. Psychological Assess￾ment, 26(2), 350–362.
Dryburgh, N. S., and Vachon, D. D. (2019). 
Relating sex differences in aggression to 
three forms of empathy. Personality and 
Individual Differences, 151, 109526.
Dubbert, P. M. (2002). Physical activity and 
exercise: Recent advances and current 
challenges. Journal of Consulting and 
Clinical Psychology Special Issue: Behav￾ioral Medicine and Clinical Health Psy￾chology, 70, 526–536.
Duckworth, A. L., Peterson, C., Matthews, 
M. D., and Kelly, D. R. (2007). Grit: Per￾severance and passion for long-term 
goals. Journal of Personality and Individ￾ual Differences, 92, 1087–1101.
Dunbar, R. I. M. (1993). Coevolution of neo￾cortical size, group size, and language in 
humans. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 
16, 681–735.
Dunlop, P. D., Lee, K., Ashton, M. C., 
Butcher, S. B., and Dykstra, A. (2015). 
Please accept my sincere and humble 
apologies: The HEXACO model of per￾sonality and the proclivity to apologize. 
Personality and Individual Differences, 79,
140–145.
Dunn, E. W., Aknin, L. B., and Norton, M. I. 
(2008). Spending money on others pro￾motes happiness. Science, 319, 1687–1688.
Dutton, E., van der Linden, D., and Lynn, R. 
(2016). The negative Flynn Effect: A sys￾tematic literature review. Intelligence, 59,
163–169.
Dweck, C. S. (1999a). Caution—Praise can 
be dangerous. American Educator, 23,
4–9.
Dweck, C. S. (2002). Beliefs that make smart 
people dumb. In R. J. Sternberg (Ed.), 
Why smart people can be so stupid (pp. 
24–41). New Haven, CT: Yale University 
Press.
Dweck, C. S. (2006). Mindset. New York: 
Random House.
Dweck, C. S. (2012). Mindset: How You 
Can Fulfill Your Potential. Constable & 
Robinson Limited.
Dweck, C. S. (2017). From needs to goals 
and representations: Foundations for a 
unified theory of motivation, personality, 
and development. Psychological Review,
124(6), 689–719.
Dweck, C. S., Chiu, C., and Hong, Y. 
(1995). Implicit theories and their role in 
judgments and reactions: A world from 
two perspectives. Psychological Inquiry, 6,
267–285.
Eagly, A. H. (1987). Sex Differences in Social 
Behavior: A Social-Role Interpretation.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Eagly, A. H. (1995). The science and politics 
of comparing women and men. American 
Psychologist, 50, 145–158.
Eagly, A., and Wood, W. (1999). A social 
role interpretation of sex differences in 
human mate preferences. American Psy￾chologist, 54, 408–423.
Easterlin, R. A. (1974). Does economic 
growth improve the human lot: Some 
empirical evidence. In P. A. David and 
W. R. Levin (Eds.), Nations and House￾holds in Economic Growth (pp. 98–125). 
Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University Press.
Ebrecht, M., Hextall, J., Kirtley, L. G., 
Taylor, A., Dyson, M., and Weinman, J. 
(2004). Perceived stress and cortisol lev￾els predict speed of wound healing in 
healthy male adults. Psychoneuroendocri￾nology, 29(6), 798–809.
Ebstein, R., Novick, O., Umansky, R., Priel, B., 
Osher, Y., Blaine, D., Bennett, E. R., 
Nemanov, L., Katz, M., and Belmaker, R. 
H. (1996). Dopamine D4 receptor 
(D4DR) exon III polymorphism associated 
with the human personality trait of novelty 
seeking. Nature Genetics, 12, 78–80.
Edmundson, M., Berry, D. R., High, W. M., 
Shandera-Ochsner, A. L., Harp, J. P., and 
Koehl, L. M. (2015). A meta-analytic 
review of Minnesota Multiphasic Person￾ality inventory—2nd edition (mmpi-2) 
profile elevations following traumatic 
brain injury. Psychological Injury and 
Law, 9, 121–142.
Edwards, D. A., Wetzel, K., and Wyner, D. 
R. (2006). Intercollegiate soccer: Saliva 
cortisol and testosterone are elevated 
during competition, and testosterone is 
related to status and social connected￾ness with teammates. Physiology and 
Behavior, 30, 135–143.
Egan, S., and Stelmack, R. M. (2003). A per￾sonality profile of Mount Everest climb￾ers. Personality and Individual Differences, 
34, 1491–1494.
Eid, M., and Larsen, R. J. (2008). The Sci￾ence of Subjective Well-Being. New York: 
Guilford Press.
Eid, R. S., Gobinath, A. R., and Galea, L. A. 
(2019). Sex differences in depression: 
Insights from clinical and preclinical 
studies. Progress in Neurobiology, 176, 
86–102.
Eisenberg, D. T. A., Campbell, B., Gray, P. 
B., and Soronson, M. D. (2008). Dopa￾mine receptor genetic polymorphisms 
and body composition in undernourished 
pastoralists: An exploration of nutrition 
indices among nomadic and recently set￾tled Ariaal men of northern Kenya. BMC 
Evolutionary Biology, 8, 173.
Eisenberg, N., Guthrie, I. K., Cumberland, 
A., Murphy, B. C., Shepard, S. A., Zhou, 
Q., and Carlo, G. (2002). Prosocial 
development in early adulthood: A longi￾tudinal study. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 82(6), 993–1006.
Ekman, P. (1973). Cross-cultural studies of 
facial expression. In P. Ekman (Ed.), 
Darwin and facial expression: A century of 
research in review (pp. 169–222). New 
York: Academic Press.
Ekman, P. (1992a). An argument for basic 
emotions. Cognition and Emotion, 6,
169–200.
Ekman, P. (1992b). Facial expressions of 
emotion: New findings, new questions. 
Psychological Science, 3, 34–38.
Ekman, P., (1999). In T. Dalgleish and M. 
Power (Eds.), Handbook of cognition and 
emotion. Sussex, U.K: John Wiley & 
Sons.
Ekman, P., Friesen, W. V., and Ellsworth, P. 
(1972). Emotion in the Human Face: 
Guidelines for Research and an Integration 
of Findings. New York: Pergamon Press.
Ekman, P., Friesen, W. V., O’Sullivan, M., 
Chan, A., Diacoyanni-Tarlatzis, I., 
Heider, K., Krause, R., et al. (1987). Uni￾versals and cultural differences in the 
judgments of facial expressions of emo￾tions. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 53, 712–717.
Elder, G. H., and Clipp, E. C. (1988). War￾time losses and social bonding: Influence 
across 40 years in men’s lives. Psychiatry, 
51, 117–198.
Elfenbein, H. H., Curhan, J. R., Eisenkraft, 
N., Shirako, A., and Baccaro, L. (2008). 
Are some negotiators better than others? 
Individual differences in bargaining out￾comes. Journal of Research in Personality, 
42, 1463–1475.
Elinder, M., Engström, P., and Erixson, O. 
(2021). The last will: Estate divisions as a 
testament of to whom altruism is 
directed. Plos one, 16(7), e0254492.
Elkins, I. J., King, S. M., McGue, M., and 
Iacono, W. G. (2006). Personality traits 
and the development of nicotine, alcohol, 
and illicit drug disorders: Prospective 
links from adolescence to young adult￾hood. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 
115, 26–39.
Elliot, A. J., and Dweck, C. S. (2005). Hand￾book of competence and motivation. New 
York: Guilford Press.
Elliot, A. J., and Reis, H. T. (2003). Attach￾ment and exploration in adulthood. 
Final PDF to printerREFERENCES
lar31869_ref_665-718 680 10/22/22 10:41 AM
680
Journal of Personality and Social Psychol￾ogy, 85(2), 317–331.
Ellis, B. J., Simpson, J. A., and Campbell, L. 
(2002). Trait-specific dependence in 
romantic relationships. Journal of Person￾ality, 70, 611–660.
Ellis, L., and Bonin, S. L. (2003). Genetics 
and occupation-related preferences. Evi￾dence from adoptive and nonadoptive 
families. Personality and Individual Differ￾ences, 35, 929–937.
Else-Quest, N. M., Hyde, J. S., Goldsmith, H. 
H., and Van Hulle, C. A. (2006). Gender 
differences in temperament: A meta￾analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 132,
33–72.
Emmons, R. A. (1987). Narcissism: Theory 
and measurement. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 52, 11–17.
Emmons, R. A. (1989). The personal striving 
approach to personality. In L. Pervin et al. 
(Eds.), Goal concepts in personality and 
social psychology (pp. 87–126). Hillsdale, 
NJ: Erlbaum.
Emre, M. (2018). The Personality Brokers: 
The Strange History of Myers-Briggs and 
the Birth of Personality Testing. New 
York: Doubleday.
Endler, N. S., and Magnusson, D. (1976). 
Toward an interactional psychology of 
personality. Psychological Bulletin, 83,
956–974.
Engelhard, I. M., van den Hout, M. A., and 
Kindt, M. (2003). The relationship 
between neuroticism, pre-traumatic 
stress, and post-traumatic stress: A pro￾spective study. Personality and Individual 
Differences, 35, 381–388.
Entwisle, D. R. (1972). To dispel fantasies 
about fantasy-based measures of achieve￾ment motivation. Psychological Bulletin, 
77, 377–391.
Epstein, S. (1979). The stability of behavior: 
I. On predicting most of the people much 
of the time. Journal of Personality and 
Psychology, 37, 1097–1126.
Epstein, S. (1980). The stability of behavior: 
II. Implications for psychological 
research. American Psychologist, 35,
790–806.
Epstein, S. (1983). Aggregation and beyond: 
Some basic issues on the prediction of 
behavior. Journal of Personality, 51,
360–392.
Erdelyi, M. H., and Goldberg, B. (1979). 
Let’s not sweep repression under the 
rug: Toward a cognitive psychology of 
repression. In J. G. Kihlstrom and F. J. 
Evans (Eds.), Functional disorders of 
memory (pp. 355–402). Hillsdale, NJ: 
Erlbaum.
Erdheim, J., Wang, M., and Zickar, M. J. 
(2006). Linking the Big Five personality 
constructs to organizational commit￾ment. Personality and Individual Differ￾ences, 41, 959–970.
Erikson, E. H. (1963). Childhood and society
(2nd ed.). New York: Norton. (Original 
work published 1950.)
Erikson, E. H. (1968). Identity: Youth and 
Crisis. New York: Norton.
Erikson, E. H. (1975). Life history and the 
historical moment. New York: Norton.
Evans, C. A., Nelson, L. J., and Porter, C. L. 
(2012). Making sense of their world: Sen￾sory reactivity and sensory awareness as 
predictors of social interaction in early 
childhood. Infant and Child Development,
21, 503–520.
Exley, J. (2021). OCEAN: How Does Per￾sonality Predict Financial Success? Jour￾nal of Financial Planning.
Exline, J. J., Baumeister, R. F., Bushman, B. 
J., Campbell, W. K., and Finkel, E. J. 
(2004). Too proud to let go: Narcissistic 
entitlement as a barrier to forgiveness. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychol￾ogy, 87, 894–912.
Exline, R. V., Thiabaut, J., Hickey, C. B., and 
Gumpart, P. (1970). Visual interaction in 
relation to expectations, and situational 
preferences: Personality influences on the 
decision to participate in volunteer help￾ing behaviors. Journal of Personality, 67,
470–503.
Eysenck, H. J. (1967). The Biological Basis of 
Personality. Springfield, IL: Charles C 
Thomas.
Eysenck, H. J. (1985). The decline and fall of 
the Freudian empire. London: Viking 
Press.
Eysenck, H. J. (1990). Biological dimensions 
of personality. In L. Pervin (Ed.), Hand￾book of Personality Theory and Research
(pp. 244–276). New York: Guilford 
Press.
Eysenck, H. J. (1991). Biological dimensions 
of personality. In L. A. Pervin (Ed.), 
Handbook of personality (pp. 244–276). 
New York: Guilford Press.
Eysenck, H. J. (Ed.). (1981). A model for per￾sonality. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Eysenck, H. J., and Eysenck, M. W. (1985). 
Personality and Individual Differences: A 
Natural Science Approach. New York: Ple￾num Press.
Eysenck, H. J., and Eysenck, S. B. (1967). 
On the unitary nature of extraversion. 
Acta Psychologica, 26, 383–390.
Eysenck, H. J., and Eysenck, S. B. G. (1972). 
Manual of the Eysenck personality ques￾tionnaire. San Diego: Educational and 
Industrial Testing Service.
Eysenck, H. J., and Eysenck, S. B. G. (1975). 
Eysenck personality questionnaire manual.
San Diego: Educational and Industrial 
Testing Service.
Faelens, L., Hoorelbeke, K., Fried, E., De 
Raedt, R., and Koster, E. H. W. (2019). 
Negative influences of Facebook use 
through the lens of network analysis. 
Computers in Human Behavior, 96, 13–22.
Fagot, B. I., and Leinbach, M. D. (1987). 
Socialization of sex roles within the fam￾ily. In D. B. Carter (Ed.), Current concep￾tions of sex roles and sex typing. New 
York: Praeger.
Fajkowska, M., and Kreitler, S. (2018). Sta￾tus of the trait concept in contemporary 
personality psychology: Are the old ques￾tions still the burning questions? Journal 
of Personality, 86, 5–11.
Falk, C. F., Heine, S. J., Yuki, M., and Take￾mura, K. (2009). Why do Westerners 
self-enhance more than East Asians? 
European Journal of Personality, 23,
183–203.
Feingold, A. (1994). Gender differences in 
personality: A meta-analysis. Psychologi￾cal Bulletin, 116, 429–456.
Feldman Barrett, L. (2021, January). AI 
weighs in on debate about universal facial 
expressions. Nature, 589.
Fenichel, O. (1945). The psychoanalytic the￾ory of neurosis. New York: Norton.
Fenigstein, A., and Peltz, R. (2002). Distress 
over the infidelity of a child’s spouse: A 
crucial test of evolutionary and socializa￾tion hypotheses. Personal Relationships, 
9, 301–312.
Fetchenhauer, D., Groothuis, T., and Pradel, 
J. (2010). Not only states but traits—
Humans can identify permanent altruistic 
dispositions in 20s. Evolution and Human 
Behavior, 31, 80–86.
Fiddick, L., Brase, G. L., Ho, A. T., Hiraishi, 
K., Honma, A., and Smith, A. (2016). 
Major personality traits and regulations 
of social behavior: Cheaters are not the 
same as the reckless, and you need to 
know who you’re dealing with. Journal of 
Research in Personality, 62, 6–18.
Figueredo, A. J., de Baca, T. C., and Wood￾ley, M. A. (2012). The measurement of 
Human Life History strategy. Personality 
and Individual Differences, 55, 251–255.
Figueredo, A. J., Sefcek, J. A., and Jones, D. 
N. (2006). The ideal romantic personal￾ity. Personality and Individual Differences, 
41, 431–441.
Figueredo, A. J., Sefcek, J. S., Vasquez, G., 
Brumbach, B. H., King, J. E., and Jacobs, 
W. J. (2005a). Evolutionary personality 
psychology. In D. M. Buss (Ed.), The 
handbook of evolutionary psychology (pp. 
851–877). New York: Wiley.
Figueredo, A. J., Vasquez, G., Brumbach, B. 
H., Sefcek, J. A., Kirsner, B. R., and 
Jacobs, W. J. (2005b). The K-factor: Indi￾vidual differences in life history strategy. 
Personality and Individual Differences, 39,
1349–1360.
Fineman, S. (1977). The achievement motive 
and its measurement: Where are we now? 
British Journal of Psychology, 68, 1–22.
Finger, F. W. (1982). Circadian rhythms: 
Implications for psychology. New 
Zealand Psychologist, 11, 1–12.
Final PDF to printerREFERENCES
lar31869_ref_665-718 681 10/22/22 10:41 AM
681
Fink, B., Weege, B., Pham, M. N., and 
Shackelford, T. K. (2016). Handgrip 
strength and the Big Five personality fac￾tors in men and women. Personality and 
Individual Differences, 88, 175–177.
Fischer, C. S. (2008). What wealth-happiness 
paradox? A short note on the American 
case. Journal of Happiness Studies, 9(2), 
219–226.
Fiske, A. P. (2002). Using individualism and 
collectivism to compare cultures: A cri￾tique of the validity and measurement of 
the constructs. Psychological Bulletin, 
128, 78–88.
Fiske, A. P., Kitayama, S., Markus, H. R., and 
Nisbett, R. E. (1998). The cultural matrix 
of social psychology. In D. Gilbert, S. 
Fiske, and G. Lindzey (Eds.), Handbook 
of Social Psychology (pp. 915–981). New 
York: McGraw-Hill.
Fiske, A. P., Kitayama, S., Markus, H., and 
Nisbett, R. E. (1997). The cultural matrix 
of social psychology. In D. Gilbert, S. 
Fiske, and G. Lindzey (Eds.), Handbook 
of social psychology (3rd ed.). New York: 
McGraw-Hill.
Fiske, D. W. (1949). Consistency of the fac￾torial structures of personality ratings 
from different sources. Journal of Abnor￾mal and Social Psychology, 44, 329–344.
Fitzgerald, C. J., and Colarelli, S. M. 
(2009). Altruism and reproductive limi￾tations. Evolutionary Psychology, 7(2), 
234–252.
Fleeson, W. (2001). Toward a structure- and 
process-integrated view of personality: 
Traits as density distributions of states. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychol￾ogy, 80, 1011–1027.
Fleeson, W. (2004). Moving personality 
beyond the person-situation debate: The 
challenge and the opportunity of within￾person variability. Current Directions, 13,
83–87.
Fleeson, W., and Gallagher, P. (2009). The 
implications of Big Five standing for the 
distribution of trait manifestation in 
behavior: Fifteen experience-sampling 
studies and a meta-analysis. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 97,
1097–1114.
Fleeson, W., and Law, M. K. (2015). Trait 
enactments as density distributions: The 
role of actors, situations, and observers 
in explaining stability and variability. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychol￾ogy, 109, 1090–1104.
Fleeson, W., Malanos, A. B., and Achille, N. 
M. (2002). An intraindividual process 
approach to the relationship between 
extraversion and positive affect: Is acting 
extraverted as “Good” as being extra￾verted? Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 83(6), 1409–1422.
Fletcher, G. J. O., Tither, J. M., O’Loughlin, 
C., Friesen, M., and Overall, N. (2004). 
Warm and homely or cold and beautiful? 
Sex differences in trading off traits in 
mate selection. Personality and Social Psy￾chology Bulletin, 30, 659–672.
Flett, G. L., Blankstein, K. R., and Hewitt, P. 
L. (1991). Factor structure of the Short 
Index of Self-Actualization. Journal of 
Social Behavior and Personality Special 
Issue: Handbook of self-actualization, 6,
321–329.
Floderus-Myrhed, B., Pedersen, N., and 
Rasmuson, I. (1980). Assessment of 
heritability for personality based on a 
short form of the Eysenck Personality 
Inventory: A study of 12,898 twin pairs. 
Behavior Genetics, 10, 153–162.
Flowers, K. M., Colebaugh, C. A., Hruschak, 
V., Azizoddin, D. R., Meints, S. M., 
Jamison, R. N., . . . and Schreiber, K. L. 
(2021). Introversion buffers pandemic￾related increases in chronic pain impact. 
The Journal of Pain, 22(5), 611–612.
Flynn, F. J. (2005). Having an open mind: 
The impact of openness to experience on 
interracial attitudes and impression for￾mation. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 88, 816–826.
Flynn, J. R. (1984). The mean IQ of Ameri￾cans: Massive gains 1932 to 1978. Psy￾chological Bulletin, 95, 29–51.
Flynn, J. R. (2007). What is intelligence? 
Beyond the Flynn effect. New York: 
Cambridge University Press.
Flynn, J. R. (2012). Are we getting smarter? 
Rising IQ in the twenty-first century. New 
York: Cambridge University Press.
Foa, U. G., and Foa, E. B. (1974). Societal 
structures of the mind. Springfield, IL: 
Charles C Thomas.
Fodor, E. M. (1985). The power motive, 
group conflict, and physiological arousal. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychol￾ogy, 49, 1408–1415.
Fodor, E. M. (2009). Power motivation. In M. 
R. Leary, R. H. Hoyle, M. R. Leary, R. H. 
Hoyle (Eds.), Handbook of individual dif￾ferences in social behavior (pp. 426–440). 
New York: Guilford Press.
Folkman, S., and Moskowitz, J. T. (2000). 
Stress, positive emotion, and coping. Cur￾rent Directions in Psychological Science, 9,
115–118.
Folkman, S., Moskowitz, J. T., Ozer, E. M., 
and Park, C. L. (1997). Positive meaning￾ful events and coping in the context of 
HIV/AIDS. In B. H. Gottlieb (Ed.), Cop￾ing with chronic stress (pp. 293–314). 
New York: Plenum Press.
Fordyce, M. W. (1978). Prospectus: The self￾descriptive inventory [Unpublished manu￾script]. Fort Myers, FL: Edison 
Community College.
Fordyce, M. W. (1988). A review of results 
on the happiness measures: A 60-second 
index of happiness and mental health. 
Social Indicators Research, 20, 355–381.
Forestier, C., de Chanaleilles, M., Boisgontier, 
M. P., and Chalabaev, A. (2022). From 
ego depletion to self-control fatigue: A 
review of criticisms along with new per￾spectives for the investigation and replica￾tion of a multicomponent phenomenon. 
Motivation Science, 8, 19–32.
Foster, J. D., and Campbell, W. K. (2005). 
Narcissism and resistance to doubts 
about romantic partners. Journal of 
Research in Personality, 39, 550–557.
Fowles, D. C. (1980). The three arousal 
model: Implications of Gray’s two-factor 
learning theory for heart rate, electroder￾mal activity, and psychopathy. Psycho￾physiology, 17, 87–104.
Fox, N. A., and Calkins, S. D. (1993). 
Multiple-measure approaches to the study 
of infant emotion. In M. Lewis and J. M. 
Haviland (Eds.), Handbook of emotions
(pp. 167–185). New York: Guilford Press.
Fox, N. A., and Davidson, R. J. (1986). 
Taste-elicited changes in facial signs of 
emotion and the asymmetry of brain elec￾trical activity in human newborns. Neuro￾psychologia, 24, 417–422.
Fox, N. A., and Davidson, R. J. (1987). Elec￾troencephalogram asymmetry in 
response to the approach of a stranger 
and maternal separation. Developmental 
Psychology, 23, 233–240.
Fox, N. A., and Polak, C. P. (2004). The role 
of sensory reactivity in understanding 
infant temperament. In R. DelCarmen￾Wiggins and A. Carter (Eds.), Handbook 
of infant, toddler, and preschool mental 
health assessment (pp. 105–119). New 
York: Oxford University Press.
Fox, N. A., Bell, M. A., and Jones, N. A. 
(1992). Individual differences in 
response to stress and cerebral asymme￾try. Developmental Neuropsychology, 8,
165–184.
Fraguas, D., Díaz-Caneja, C. M., Ayora, M., 
Durán-Cutilla, M., Abregú-Crespo, R., 
Ezquiaga-Bravo, I., . . . Arango, C. 
(2021). Assessment of school anti￾bullying interventions: a meta-analysis of 
randomized clinical trials. JAMA Pediat￾rics, 175(1), 44–55.
Fraley, R. C. (2002a). Attachment stability 
from infancy to adulthood: Meta-analysis 
and dynamic modeling of developmental 
mechanisms. Personality and Social Psy￾chology Review, 6, 123–151.
Fraley, R. C. (2002b). Introduction to the 
special issue: The psychodynamics of 
adult attachments—Bridging the gap 
between disparate research traditions. 
Attachment and Human Development Spe￾cial Issue: The Psychodynamics of Adult 
Attachments—Bridging the Gap Between 
Disparate Research Traditions, 4,
131–132.
Fraley, R. C. (2007). A connectionist 
approach to the organization and 
Final PDF to printerREFERENCES
lar31869_ref_665-718 682 10/22/22 10:41 AM
682
continuity of working models of attach￾ment. Journal of Personality, 75,
1157–1180.
Fraley, R. C., and Roisman, G. I. (2015). 
Early attachment experiences and roman￾tic functioning: Developmental pathways, 
emerging issues, and future directions. In 
J. A. Simpson, W. S. Rholes, J. A. Simp￾son, and W. S. Rholes (Eds.), Attachment 
theory and research: New directions and 
emerging themes (pp. 9–38). New York: 
Guilford Press.
Fraley, R. C., and Tancredy, C. M. (2012). 
Twin and sibling attachment in a nation￾ally representative sample. Personality 
and Social Psychology Bulletin, 38,
308–316.
Fraley, R. C., Gilath, O., and Deboeck, P. R. 
(2021). Do life events lead to enduring 
changes in adult attachment styles? A 
naturalistic longitudinal investigation. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychol￾ogy, 120, 1567–1606.
Fraley, R. C., Hudson, N. W., Heffernan, M. 
E., and Segal, N. (2015). Are adult 
attachment styles categorical or dimen￾sional? A taxometric analysis of general 
and relationship-specific attachment ori￾entations. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 109(2), 354–368.
Fraley, R. C., Roisman, G. I., and Haltigan, 
J. D. (2013). The legacy of early experi￾ences in development: Formalizing alter￾native models of how early experiences 
are carried forward over time. Develop￾mental Psychology, 49, 109–126.
Fraley, R. C., Vicary, A. M., Brumbaugh, C. 
C., and Roisman, G. I. (2011). Patterns 
of stability in adult attachment: An 
empirical test of two models of continu￾ity and change. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 101, 974–992.
Fransella, F. (2003). International handbook 
of personal construct psychology. New 
York: Wiley.
Fraser, S. (1995). The bell curve wars: Race, 
intelligence, and the future of America.
New York: Basic Books.
Frederick, D. A., and Fales, M. R. (2016). 
Upset over sexual versus emotional infi￾delity among gay, lesbian, bisexual, and 
heterosexual adults. Archives of Sexual 
Behavior, 45(1), 175–191.
Fredrickson, B. L. (1998). What good are 
positive emotions? Review of General Psy￾chology, 2, 300–319.
Fredrickson, B. L. (2000). Cultivating posi￾tive emotions to optimize health and 
well-being. Prevention and Treatment
(online), 2. Retrieved from http://
journals.apa.org/prevention.
Fredrickson, B. L., and Levenson, R. W. 
(1998). Positive emotions speed recovery 
from the cardiovascular sequelae of nega￾tive emotions. Cognition and Emotion, 12,
191–220.
Freeman, D. (1983). Margaret Mead and 
Samoa: The making and unmaking of an 
anthropological myth. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press.
Freshwater, S. M., and Golden, C. J. (2002). 
Personality changes associated with local￾ized brain injury in elderly populations. 
Journal of Clinical Geropsychology, 8,
251–277.
Freud, A. (1936/1992). The ego and mecha￾nisms of defense. In Vol. 2 of The writ￾ings of Anna Freud. New York: 
International Universities Press.
Freud, S. (1915/1957). The unconscious. In 
J. Strachey (Ed. and Trans.), The stan￾dard edition of the complete psychological 
works of Sigmund Freud (Vol. 14, 
pp. 166–204). London: Hogarth Press.
Freud, S. (1916/1947). Leonardo da Vinci, a 
study in psychosexuality. New York: Ran￾dom House.
Frey, M. C. and Detterman, D. K. (2003). 
Scholastic assessment or g? The relation￾ship between the scholastic assessment 
test and general cognitive ability. Psycho￾logical Science, 15, 373–378.
Frick, P. J., O’Brien, B. S., Wootton, J. M., 
and McBurnett, K. (1994). Psychopathy 
and conduct problems in children. Jour￾nal of Abnormal Psychology, 103,
700–707.
Friedman, H. S. (2019). Neuroticism and 
health as individuals age. Personality Dis￾orders: Theory, Research, and Treatment, 
10, 25–32.
Friedman, H. S., Tucker, J. S., Schwartz, J. 
E., Tomlinson-Keasey, C., and Martin, L. 
R., et al. (1995). Psychosocial and behav￾ioral predictors of longevity. American 
Psychologist, 50, 69–78.
Friedman, M., and Rosenman, R. H. (1974). 
Type A behavior and your heart. New 
York: Knopf.
Frijda, N. H. (1986). The emotions. New 
York: Cambridge University Press.
Frisell, T., Pawitan, Y., Langstrom, N., and 
Lichtenstein, P. (2012). Heritability, 
assortative mating and gender differences 
in violent crime: Results from a total pop￾ulation sample using twin, adoption, and 
sibling models. Behavior Genetics, 42,
3–18.
Frodi, A., Macauley, J., and Thome, P. R. 
(1977). Are women always less aggres￾sive than men? A review of the experi￾mental literature. Psychological Bulletin, 
84, 634–660.
Funder, D. C. (2006). Towards a resolution 
of the personality triad: Persons, situa￾tions, and behaviors. Journal of Research 
in Personality, 40, 21–34.
Furmark, T. (2002). Social phobia: Overview 
of community surveys. Acta Psychiatrica 
Scandinavica, 105, 84–93.
Furnham, A. (1982). Psychotocism, social 
desirability, and situation selection. 
Personality and Individual Differences, 3,
43–51.
Furnham, A., and Cheng, H. (2019a). Fac￾tors influencing adult savings and invest￾ment: Findings from a nationally 
representative sample. Personality and 
Individual Differences, 151, 109510.
Furnham, A., and Cheng, H. (2019b). The 
Big-Five personality factors, mental 
health, and social-demographic indica￾tors as independent predictors of gratifi￾cation delay. Personality and Individual 
Differences, 150, 109533.
Furnham, A., and Cheng, H. (2019c). The 
change and stability of NEO scores over 
six-years: A British study and a short 
review. Personality and Individual Differ￾ences, 144, 105–110.
Furnham, A., Richards, S. C., and Paulhus, 
D. L. (2013). The Dark Triad of person￾ality: A 10 year review. Social and Person￾ality Psychology Compass, 7(3), 199–216.
Furr, R. M. (2009). Personality psychology 
as a truly behavioural science. European 
Journal of Personality, 23, 369–401.
Gable, S. L., and Nezlak, J. B. (1998). Level 
and instability of day-to-day psychologi￾cal well-being and risk for depression. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychol￾ogy, 74, 129–138.
Gabriel, S. (2021). Reflections on the 25th 
anniversary of Baumeister & Leary’s sem￾inal paper on the need to belong. Self and 
Identity, 20(1), 1–5.
Gabriel, S., and Gardner, W. L. (1999). Are 
there “his” and “hers” types of interde￾pendence? The implications of gender 
differences in collective versus relational 
interdependence for affect, behavior, and 
cognition. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 77, 642–655.
Gailliot, M. T., and Baumeister, R. F. (2007). 
Self-regulation and sexual restraint: Dis￾positionally and temporarily poor self￾regulatory abilities contribute to failures 
at restraining sexual behavior. Personality 
and Social Psychology Bulletin, 33,
173–186.
Gale, A. (1983). Electroencephalographic 
studies of extraversion-introversion: A 
case study in the psychophysiology of 
individual differences. Personality and 
Individual Differences, 4, 371–380.
Gale, A. (1986). Extraversion–introversion 
and spontaneous rhythms of the brain: 
Retrospect and prospect. In J. Strelau, F. 
Farley, and A. Gale (Eds.), The biological 
basis of personality and behavior (Vol. 2). 
Washington, DC: Hemisphere.
Gale, A. (1987). The psychophysiological 
context. In A. Gale and B. Christie 
(Eds.), Psychophysiology and the electronic 
workplace (pp. 17–32). Chichester, Eng￾land, UK: Wiley.
Gale, C. R., Batty, G. D., and Deary, I. J., 
(2008). Locus of control at age 10 years 
Final PDF to printerREFERENCES
lar31869_ref_665-718 683 10/22/22 10:41 AM
683
and health outcomes and behaviors at 
age 30 years: The 1970 British cohort 
study. Psychosomatic Medicine, 70,
397–403.
Galic, Z., Jerneic, Z., and Kovacic, M. P. 
(2012). Do applicants fake their person￾ality questionnaire responses and how 
successful are their attempts? A case of 
military pilot cadet selection. Interna￾tional Journal of Selection and Assessment, 
20, 229–241.
Gallup, A. C., O’Brien, D. T., White, D. D., 
and Wilson, D. S. (2009). Peer victimiza￾tion in adolescence has different effects 
on the sexual behavior of male and 
female college students. Personality and 
Individual Differences, 46, 611–615.
Gallup, G. G. (1977a). Self-recognition in 
primates: A comparative approach to the 
bidirectional properties of consciousness. 
American Psychologist, 32, 329–338.
Gallup, G. G. (1977b). Absences of self￾recognition in a monkey (Macaca fascicu￾laris) following prolonged exposure to a 
mirror. Developmental Psychobiology, 10,
281–284.
Gangestad, S. W., and Simpson, J. A. 
(1990). Toward an evolutionary history 
of female sociosexual variation. Journal 
of Personality, 58, 69–96.
Gangestad, S. W., and Thornhill, R. (2008). 
Human oestrus. Proceedings of the Royal 
Society of London, B, 275, 991–1000.
Gangestad, S. W., Haselton, M. G., and Buss, 
D. M. (2006). Evolutionary foundations 
of cultural variation: Evoked culture and 
mate preferences. Psychological Inquiry, 
17, 75–95.
Ganjoo, M., Farhadi, A., Baghbani, R., 
Daneshi, S., and Nemati, R. (2021). 
Association between health locus of 
control and perceived stress in college 
students during the COVID-19 
outbreak: A cross sectional study in 
Iran. BMC Psychiatry, 21, Oct 26, 2021. 
ArtID: 529.
Gao, S., Thomaes, S., Van Den Noortgate, 
W., Xie, X., Zhang, X., and Wang, S. 
(2019). Recent changes in narcissism of 
Chinese youth: A cross-temporal meta￾analysis, 2008–2017. Personality and 
Individual Differences, 148, 62–66.
Gao, W., Luo, Y., Cao, X., and Liu, X. 
(2022). Gender differences in the rela￾tionship between self-esteem and depres￾sion among college students: A 
cross-lagged study from China. Journal of 
Research in Personality, 104202.
Garbarino, E., Slonim, R., and Snydor, J. 
(2011). Digit ratios (2D:4D) as predic￾tors of risky decision making for both 
sexes. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 42,
1–26.
Garber, J., and Seligman, M. E. P. (1980). 
Human helplessness: Theory and applica￾tions. New York: Academic Press.
Gardner, H. (1983). Frames of mind: The the￾ory of multiple intelligences. New York: 
Basic Books.
Gardner, H. (1999). Intelligence reframed: 
Multiple intelligences for the 21st century.
New York: Basic Books.
Gardner, W. I., and Martinko, M. J. (1996). 
Using the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator to 
study managers: A literature review and 
research agenda. Journal of Management, 
22, 45–83.
Garver, C. E., Gangestad, S. W., Simpson, J. 
A., Cousins, A. J., and Christensen, P. N. 
(2002). Women’s preferences for male 
behavioral displays change across the 
cycle. In Annual Meeting of the Human 
Behavior and Evolution Society, New 
Brunswick, New Jersey.
Gauguin, P. (1985). Noa Noa: The Tahitian 
Journal. Mineola, NY: Dover.
Geary, D. C., DeSoto, M. C., Hoard, M. K., 
Skaggs, S., and Cooper, M. L. (2001). 
Estrogens and relationship jealousy. 
Human Nature, 12, 299–320.
Geen, R. (1984). Preferred stimulation levels 
in introverts and extraverts: Effects on 
arousal and performance. Journal of Per￾sonality and Social Psychology, 46,
1303–1312.
Geer, J. H., and Head, S. (1990). The sexual 
response system. In J. T. Cacioppo and 
L. G. Tassinary (Eds.), Principles of psy￾chophysiology (pp. 599–630). Cambridge, 
England: Cambridge University Press.
Geis, F. L., and Moon, T. H. (1981). Machia￾vellianism and deception. Journal of Per￾sonality and Social Psychology, 41,
766–775.
Gelade, G. A. (2008). IQ, cultural values, 
and the technological achievement of 
nations. Intelligence, 36, 711–718.
George, C., and Solomon, J. (1996). Repre￾sentational models of relationships: 
Links between caregiving and attach￾ment. Infant Mental Health Journal, 17,
198–216.
Gere, J., and MacDonald, G. (2010). An 
update of the empirical case for the need 
to belong. Journal of Individual Psychol￾ogy, 66(1), 93–115.
Gergen, K. J. (1992). Toward a postmodern 
psychology. In S. Kvale (Ed.), Psychology 
and postmodernism (pp. 17–30). London: 
Sage.
Gerring, J. P., and Vasa, R. A. (2016). Head 
injury and externalizing behavior. In T. P. 
Beauchaine, S. P. Hinshaw, T. P. 
Beauchaine, S. P. Hinshaw (Eds.), The 
Oxford handbook of externalizing spectrum 
disorders (pp. 403–415). New York: 
Oxford University Press.
Gerson, M. W., and Fernandez, N. (2013). 
PATH: A program to build resilience and 
thriving in undergraduates. Journal of 
Applied Social Psychology, 43(11), 
2169–2184.
Gervais, W. M., Najle, M. B., and Caluori, N. 
(2021). The origins of religious disbelief: 
A dual inheritance approach. Social Psy￾chological and Personality Science, 12(7), 
1369–1379.
Geukes, K., Nestler, S., Hutteman, R. R., 
Dufner, M., Küfner, A. C. P., Egloff, B., 
. . . Back, M. D., (2017). Puffed-up but 
shaky selves: State self-esteem level and 
variability in narcissists. Journal of Per￾sonality and Social Psychology, 112,
769–786.
Gewertz, D. (1981). A historical reconsidera￾tion of female dominance among the 
Chambri of Papua New Guinea. 
American Ethnologist, 8, 94–106.
Gibbs, W. (2003). The unseen genome: 
Gems among the junk. Scientific 
American, 289, 49.
Gigy, L. L. (1980). Self-concept in single 
women. Psychology of Women Quarterly, 
5, 321–340.
Giluk, T. L., and Postlethwaite, B. E. (2015). 
Big Five personality and academic 
dishonesty: A meta-analytic review. Per￾sonality and Individual Differences, 72,
59–67.
Gladden, P. R., Figueredo, A. J., and Jacobs, 
W. J. (2009). Life history strategy, psy￾chopathic attitudes, personality, and gen￾eral intelligences. Personality and 
Individual Differences, 46, 270–275.
Glenn, A. L., and Raine, A. (2014). Neuro￾criminology: Implications for the punish￾ment, prediction and prevention of 
criminal behavior. Nature Reviews Neuro￾science, 15(1), 54–63.
Gnambs, T. (2015). What makes a computer 
wiz? Linking personality traits and pro￾gramming aptitude. Journal of Research 
in Personality, 58, 31–34.
Goldberg, L. R. (1981). Language and indi￾vidual differences: The search for univer￾sals in personality lexicons. In L. 
Wheeler (Ed.), Review of personality and 
social psychology (Vol. 2, pp. 141–165). 
Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Goldberg, L. R. (1990). An alternative 
“description of personality”: The Big-Five 
factor structure. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 59, 1216–1229.
Goldberg, L. R., and Saucier, G. (1995). So 
what do you propose we use instead? A 
reply to Block. Psychological Bulletin,
117, 221–225.
Goldey, K. L., and van Anders, S. M. (2012). 
Sexual arousal and desire: Interrelations 
and responses to three modalities of sex￾ual stimuli. Journal of Sexual Medicine, 9,
2315–2329.
Golding, S. L. (1978). Toward a more ade￾quate theory of personality: Psychologi￾cal organizing principles. In H. London 
(Ed.), Personality: A New Look at 
Metatheories (pp. 69–96). New York: 
Wiley.
Final PDF to printerREFERENCES
lar31869_ref_665-718 684 10/22/22 10:41 AM
684
Goldsmith, H. H., Aksan, N., and Essex, M. 
(2001). Temperament and socioemo￾tional adjustment to kindergarten: A 
multi-informant perspective. In T. Wachs 
and G. A. Kohnstamm (Eds.), Tempera￾ment in Context (pp. 103–138). Mahwah, 
NJ: Erlbaum.
Goldsmith, H. H., and Rothbart, M. K. 
(1991). Contemporary instruments for 
assessing early temperament by question￾naire and in the laboratory. In J. Strelau 
and A. Angleitner (Eds.), Explorations in 
temperament. New York: Plenum Press.
Goleman, D. (1995). Emotional intelligence: 
Why it can matter more than IQ. New 
York: Bantam.
Golsteyn, B. H., Non, A., and Zölitz, U. 
(2021). The impact of peer personality 
on academic achievement. Journal of 
Political Economy, 129(4), 1052–1099
Gomez, R., Cooper, A.J., and Gomez, A. 
(2000). Susceptibility to positive and neg￾ative mood states: test of Eysenck’s, 
Gray’s and Newman’s theories. Personal￾ity and Individual Differences, 29, 
351–365.
Goncalves, M. K., and Campbell, L. (2014). 
The Dark Triad and the derogation of 
mating competitors. Personality and Indi￾vidual Differences, 67, 42–46.
Goodman, G., and Kaufman, J. C. (2014). 
Gremlins in my head: Predicting stage 
fright in elite actors. Empirical Studies of 
the Arts, 32(2), 133–148.
Goodman, J., Lofts, E. F., Miller, M., and 
Greene, E. (1991). Money, sex, and 
death: Gender bias in wrongful death 
damage awards. Law and Society Review, 
25, 263–285.
Gorbaniuk, O., Budzińska, A., Owczarek, M., 
Bożek, E., and Juros, K. (2013). The fac￾tor structure of Polish personality￾descriptive adjectives: An alternative 
psycho-lexical study. European Journal of 
Personality, 27(3), 304–318.
Gordon, R. A. (1997). Everyday life as an 
intelligence test: Effects of intelligence 
and intelligence context. Intelligence, 24,
203–320.
Gosling, S. D., and Mason, W. (2015). Inter￾net research in psychology. Annual 
Review of Psychology, 66, 877–902.
Gosling, S. D., John, O. P., Craik, K. H., and 
Robins, R. W. (1998). Do people know 
how they behave? Self-reported act fre￾quencies compared with on-line codings 
by observers. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 74, 1337–1349.
Gosling, S. D., Ko, S. J., Mannarelli, T., and 
Morris, M. E. (2002). A room with a cue: 
Personality judgments based on offices 
and bedrooms. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 82, 379–398.
Gosling, S. D., Kwan, V. S. Y., and John, O. 
P. (2003). A dog’s got personality: A 
cross-species comparative approach to 
evaluating personality judgments. Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology, 85,
1161–1169.
Gottman, J. (1994). Why marriages succeed 
or fail. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Gottman, J. M., and Silver, N. (1999). The 
seven principles for making marriage work.
New York: Three Rivers Press.
Gottman, J., Levenson, R., and Woodin, E. 
(2001). Facial expressions during marital 
conflict. Journal of Family Communica￾tion, 1, 37–57.
Goudeau, S., and Cimpian, A. (2021). How 
do young children explain differences in 
the classroom? Implications for achieve￾ment, motivation, and educational equity 
Perspectives on Psychological Science, 16,
533–552.
Gough, H. G. (1957/1987). California Psy￾chological Inventory: Administrator’s guide.
Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists 
Press.
Gough, H. G. (1980). The Adjective Check 
List manual. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting 
Psychologists Press.
Gough, H. G. (1996). California psychologi￾cal inventory manual (3rd ed.). Palo Alto, 
CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.
Graham, E. K., Rutsohn, J. P., Turiano, N. 
A., Bendayan, R., Batterham, P. J., 
Gerstorf, D., . . . Mroczek, D. K. (2017). 
Personality predicts mortality risk: An 
integrative data analysis of 15 interna￾tional longitudinal studies. Journal of 
Research in Personality, 70, 174–186.
Grano, N., Virtanen, M., Vahtera, J., 
Elovainio, M., and Kivimaki, M. (2004). 
Impulsivity as a predictor of smoking and 
alcohol consumption. Personality and 
Individual Differences, 37, 1693–1700.
Granqvist, P., Mikulincer, M., Gewirtz, V., 
and Shaver, P. R. (2012). Experimental 
findings on God as an attachment figure: 
Normative processes and moderating 
effects of internal working models. Jour￾nal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
103, 804–818.
Grant, H., and Higgins, E. T. (2003). Opti￾mism, promotion pride, and prevention 
pride as predictors of quality of life. Per￾sonality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 
29, 1521–1532.
Grant, J. D., and Grant, J. (1996). Officer 
selection and the prevention of abuse of 
force. In W. Geller and H. Toch (Eds.), 
Police Violence: Understanding and 
Controlling Police Abuse of Force
(pp. 150–164). New Haven, CT: Yale 
University Press.
Gray, J. (1990). Brain systems that mediate 
both emotion and cognition. Motivation 
and Emotion, 4, 269–288.
Gray, J. A. (1972). The psychology of fear and 
stress. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Gray, J. A. (1975). Elements of a two-process 
theory of learning. Oxford, England: 
Academic Press.
Gray, J. A. (1982). The Neuropsychology of 
Anxiety. Oxford, England: Oxford Univer￾sity Press.
Gray, J. A. (1987a). The psychology of fear 
and stress. Cambridge, England: 
Cambridge University Press.
Gray, J. A. (1987b). Perspectives on anxiety 
and impulsivity: A commentary. Journal 
of Research in Personality, 21, 493–509.
Gray, J. A. (1991). The neuropsychology of 
temperament. In J. Strelau and A. 
Angleitner (Eds.), Explorations in temper￾ament: International perspectives on theory 
and measurement (pp. 105–128). New 
York: Plenum Press.
Grayson, D. K. (1993). Differential mortality 
and the Donner Party disaster. Evolution￾ary Anthropology, 2, 151–159.
Graziano, W. G., (2003). Personality devel￾opment: An introduction toward process 
approaches to long-term stability and 
change in persons. Journal of Personality, 
71, 893–903.
Graziano, W. G., and Tobin, R. M. (2002). 
Agreeableness: Dimension of personality 
or social desirability artifact? Journal of 
Personality, 70, 695–727.
Grazioplene, R. G., Ryman, S. G., Gray, J. 
R., Rustichini, A., Jung, R. E., and 
DeYoung, C. G. (2015). Subcortical 
intelligence: Caudate volume predicts IQ 
in healthy adults. Human Brain Mapping, 
36, 1407–1416.
Greenberg, D. M., Müllensiefen, D., Lamb, 
M. E., and Rentfrow, P. J. (2015). Per￾sonality predicts musical sophistication. 
Journal of Research in Personality, 58,
154–158.
Greenberg, J. R., and Mitchell, S. (1983). 
Object relations in psychoanalytic theory.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press.
Greene, J. A., Freed, R., Dragnić-Cindrić, D., 
and Cartiff, B. M. (2022). Effects of an 
ego-depletion intervention upon online 
learning. Computers & Education, 177,
Feb, 2022. ArtID: 104362.
Greenwald, A. G., and Farnham, S .D. 
(2000). Using the Implicit Association 
Test to measure self-esteem and self￾concept. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 79, 1022–1038.
Gregg, A. P., and Sedikides, C. (2018). 
Essential self-evaluation motives: Caring 
about who we are. In M. van Zomeren 
and J. F. Dovidio (Eds.), The Oxford 
Handbook of the Human Essence 
(pp. 59–70). Oxford University Press.
Gregory, T., Nettelbeck, T., Howard, S., and 
Wilson, C. (2008). Inspection time: A 
biomarker for cognitive decline. Intelli￾gence, 36, 664–671.
Final PDF to printerREFERENCES
lar31869_ref_665-718 685 10/22/22 10:41 AM
685
Greiling, H., and Buss, D. M. (2000). Wom￾en’s sexual strategies: The hidden dimen￾sion of extra-pair mating. Personality and 
Individual Differences, 28, 929–963.
Griskevicius, V., Tybur, J. M., Gangestad, S. 
W., Perea, E. F., Shapiro, J. R., and 
Kenrick, D. T. (2009). Aggress to 
impress: Hostility as an evolved context￾dependent strategy. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 96, 980–994.
Gross, J. J. (2002). Emotion regulation: 
Affective, cognitive, and social conse￾quences. Psychophysiology, 39, 281–291.
Gross, J. J., and Levenson, R. W. (1993). 
Emotional suppression: Physiology, self￾report, and expressive behavior. Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology, 64,
970–986.
Gross, J. J., and Levenson, R. W. (1997). 
Hiding feelings: The acute effects of 
inhibiting positive and negative emotions. 
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 106,
95–103.
Gross, J. J., Sutton, S. K., and Ketelaar, R. 
(1998). Relations between affect and per￾sonality: Support for the affect-level and 
affective reactivity views. Personality and 
Social Psychology Bulletin, 24, 279–288.
Grosskurth, P. (1991). The secret ring: 
Freud’s inner circle and the politics of psy￾choanalysis. Reading, MA: 
Addison-Wesley.
Guillaume, E., Baranski, E., Todd, E., 
Bastian, B., Bronin, I., Ivanova, C., . . . 
Funder, D. C. (2016). The world at 7: 00: 
Comparing the experience of situations 
across 20 countries. Journal of Personal￾ity, 84(4), 493–509.
Guisande, M. A., Páramo, M. F., and Soares, 
A. P. (2007). Field-dependence￾independence and career counseling: 
Directions for research. Perceptual and 
Motor Skills, 104, 654–662.
Gul, P., Cross, S. E., and Uskul, A. K. 
(2021). Implications of culture of honor 
theory and research for practitioners and 
prevention researchers. American Psychol￾ogist, 76(3), 502.
Gustafsson Sendén, M., Bäck, E. A., and 
Lindqvist, A. (2015). Introducing a gen￾der-neutral pronoun in a natural gender 
language: The influence of time on 
attitudes and behavior. Frontiers in Psy￾chology, 6, 893.
Guzder, J., Paris, J., Zelkowitz, P., and 
Marchessault, K. (1996). Risk factors for 
borderline personality in children. Jour￾nal of the American Academy of Child and 
Adolescent Psychiatry, 35, 26–33.
Hacher, S. L., Nadeau, M. S., Walsh, L. K., 
and Reynolds, M. (1994). The teaching 
of empathy for high school and college 
students: Testing Rogerian methods with 
the Interpersonal Reactivity Index. Ado￾lescence, 29, 961–974.
Hagen, E. H., and Rosenström, T. (2016). 
Explaining the sex difference in depres￾sion with a unified bargaining model of 
anger and depression. Evolution, Medi￾cine, and Public Health, 2016(1), 
117–132.
Hagerty, M. R. (1999). Testing Maslow’s 
hierarchy of needs: National quality-of￾life across time. Social Indicators 
Research, 46, 249–271.
Hagger, M. S., Chatzisarantis, N. L. D., 
Alberts, H., Anggono, C. O., Batailler, 
C., Birt, A. R., . . . Zwienenberg, M. 
(2016). A multi-lab preregistered replica￾tion of the ego-depletion effect. Perspec￾tives on Psychological Science, 11,
546–573.
Hahn, E., Johnson, W., and Spinath, F. M. 
(2013). Beyond the heritability of life sat￾isfaction–The roles of personality and 
twin-specific influences. Journal of 
Research in Personality, 47(6), 757–767.
Hair, E. C., and Graziano, W. G. (2003). 
Self-esteem, personality, and achievement 
in high school: A prospective longitudi￾nal study in Texas. Journal of Personality, 
71, 971–994.
Hald, G. M., and Hogh-Olesen, H. (2010). 
Receptivity to sexual invitations from 
strangers of the opposite gender. Evolu￾tion and Human Behavior, 31, 453–458.
Hall, J. A. (1984). Nonverbal sex differences.
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University 
Press.
Hamer, D. (1997). The search for personal￾ity genes: Adventures of a molecular biol￾ogist. Current Directions in Psychological 
Science, 6, 111–114.
Hamer, D., and Copeland, P. (1994). The sci￾ence of desire: The search for the gay gene 
and the biology of behavior. New York: 
Simon and Schuster.
Hamilton, W. D. (1964). The evolution of 
social behavior. Journal of Theoretical 
Biology, 7, 1–52.
Hamm, A. O., Weike, A. I., Schupp, H. T., 
Treig, T., Dressel, A., and Kessler, C. 
(2003). Affective blindsight: Intact fear 
conditioning to a visual cue in a corti￾cally blind patient. Brain, 126(2), 
267–275.
Hampshire, S. (1953). Dispositions. Analysis, 
14, 5–11.
Hampson, S. E., Andrews, J. A., Barckley, 
M., and Peterson, M. (2007). Trait stabil￾ity and continuity in childhood: Relating 
sociability and hostility to the five-factor 
model of personality. Journal of Research 
in Personality, 41, 507–523.
Hampson, S. E., Goldberg, L. R., Vogt, T. 
M., and Dubanoski, J. P. (2006). Forty 
years on: Teachers’ assessments of chil￾dren’s personality traits predict self￾reported health behaviors and outcomes 
at midlife. Health Psychology, 25, 57–64.
Hampson, S. E., Severson, H. H., Burns, W. 
J., Slovic, P., and Fisher, K. J. (2001). 
Risk perception, personality factors and 
alcohol use among adolescents. Personal￾ity and Individual Differences, 30,
167–181.
Handy, A. B., Freihart, B. K., and Meston, C. 
M. (2020). The Relationship between 
Subjective and Physiological Sexual 
Arousal in Women with and without 
Arousal Concerns. Journal of Sex & 
Marital Therapy, 46(5), 447–459.
Hankin, B. L., and Abramson, L. Y. (2001). 
Development of gender differences in 
depression: An elaborated cognitive vul￾nerability transactional stress theory. Psy￾chological Bulletin, 127,(6) 773–796.
Hanna, E., Ward, L. M., Seabrook, R. C., 
Jerald, M., Reed, L., Giaccardi, S., and 
Lippman, J. R. (2017). Contributions of 
social comparison and self-objectification 
in mediating associations between Face￾book use and emergent adults’ psycholog￾ical well-being. Cyberpsychology, Behavior, 
and Social Networking, 20, 172–179.
Hansen, C. H., Hansen, R. D., and Schantz, 
D. W. (1992). Repression at encoding: 
Discrete appraisals of emotional stimuli. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychol￾ogy, 63, 1026–1035.
Hansen, R. D., and Hansen, C. H. (1988). 
Repression of emotionally tagged memo￾ries: The architecture of less complex 
emotions. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 55, 811–818.
Hansen-Brown, A. A., and Freis, S. D. 
(2021). Assuming the worst: Hostile 
attribution bias in vulnerable narcissists. 
Self and Identity, 20(2), 152–164.
Hansson, I., Henning, G., Buratti, S., 
Lindwall, M., Kivi, M., Johansson, B., 
and Berg, A. I. (2019). The role of per￾sonality in retirement adjustment: Longi￾tudinal evidence for the effects on life 
satisfaction. Journal of Personality.
Harden, K. P. (2021). The genetic lottery: why 
DNA matters for social equality. Princeton 
University Press.
Hardison, H. G., and Neimeyer, R. A. 
(2012). Assessment of personal con￾structs: Features and functions of con￾structivist techniques. In P. Caputi, L. L. 
Viney, B. M. Walker, and N. Crittenden 
(Eds.), Personal construct methodology
(pp. 3–51). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & 
Sons.
Hare, R. D., Hart, S. D., and Harpur, T. J. 
(1991). Psychopathy and the DSM-IV 
criteria for antisocial personality disor￾der. Journal of Abnormal Psychology Spe￾cial Issue: Diagnosis, Dimensions, and 
DSM-IV; The Science of Classification, 
100, 391–398.
Harenski, C. L., Kim, S. H., and Hamann, S. 
(2009). Neuroticism and psychopathy 
Final PDF to printerREFERENCES
lar31869_ref_665-718 686 10/22/22 10:41 AM
686
predict brain activation during moral and 
nonmoral emotion regulation. Cognitive, 
Affective and Behavioral Neuroscience, 9,
1–15.
Haring, M. J., Stock, W. A., and Okun, M. A. 
(1984). A research synthesis of gender 
and social class as correlates of subjec￾tive well-being. Human Relations, 37,
645–657.
Harlow, H. F. (1958). The nature of love. 
American Psychologist, 13, 673–685.
Harlow, H. F., and Suomi, S. J. (1971). Pro￾duction of depressive behaviors in young 
monkeys. Journal of Autism and Child￾hood Schizophrenia, 1, 246–255.
Harlow, H. F., and Zimmermann, R. R. 
(1959). Affectionate responses in the 
infant monkey. Science, 130, 421–432.
Harpending, H., and Cochran, G. (2002). In 
our genes. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States 
of America, 99, 10–12.
Harpur, T. J., and Hare, R. D. (1994). 
Assessment of psychopathy as a function 
of age. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 
103, 604–609.
Harrell, W. A., and Hartnagel, T. (1976). 
The impact of Machiavellianism and the 
trustfulness of the victim on laboratory 
theft. Sociometry, 39, 157–165.
Harris, J. R. (2007). No two alike: Human 
nature and human individuality. New 
York: Norton.
Harter, S. (1993). Causes and consequences 
of low self-esteem in children and adoles￾cents. In R. Baumeister (Ed.), Self￾esteem: The puzzle of low self-regard
(pp. 87–111). New York: Plenum Press.
Hartley, E. L., Stritzke, W. G., Page, A. C., 
Blades, C. A., and Parentich, K. T. 
(2019). Neuroticism confers vulnerability 
in response to experimentally induced 
feelings of thwarted belongingness and 
perceived burdensomeness: Implications 
for suicide risk. Journal of Personality, 
87(3), 566–578.
Hartshorne, H., and May, M. A. (1928). 
Studies in the Nature of Character: Vol. 1. 
Studies in Deceit. New York: Macmillan.
Haslam, C., and Montrose, V. T. (2015). 
Should have known better: The impact of 
mating experience and the desire for mar￾riage upon attraction to the narcissistic 
personality. Personality and Individual 
Differences, 82, 188–192.
Hatemi, P. K., Medland, S. E., Klemmensen, 
R., Oskarsson, S., Littvay, L., Dawes, C. 
T., . . . and Christensen, K. (2014). 
Genetic influences on political ideolo￾gies: Twin analyses of 19 measures of 
political ideologies from five democracies 
and genome-wide findings from three 
populations. Behavior Genetics, 44(3), 
282–294.
Hawes, S. W., Perlman, S. B., Byrd, A. L., 
Raine, A., Loeber, R., and Pardini, D. A. 
(2016). Chronic anger as a precursor to 
adult antisocial personality features: The 
moderating influence of cognitive con￾trol. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 
125(1), 64–74.
Hawkins, H. C., Lesick, T. L., and Zell, E. 
(2021). Implicit self-esteem following a 
romantic partner’s success: Three replica￾tions and a meta-analysis. Personal Rela￾tionships, http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/
pere.12408.
Hazan, C., and Shaver, P. R. (1987). Roman￾tic love conceptualized as an attachment 
process. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 52, 511–524.
Hazan, C., and Shaver, P. R. (1994). Attach￾ment as an organizational framework for 
research on close relationships. Psycho￾logical Inquiry, 5, 1–22.
He, Q., Wang, Y., Xing, Y., and Yu, Y. 
(2018). Dark personality, interpersonal 
rejection, and marital stability of Chinese 
couples: An actor–partner interdepen￾dence mediatio model. Personality and 
Individual Differences, 134, 232–238.
Heath, A. C., Bucholz, K. K., Dinwiddie, S. 
H., Madden, P. A. F., and Slutske, W. W. 
(1994). Pathways from the genotype to 
alcoholism risk in women. Paper pre￾sented at the annual meeting of the 
Behavioral Genetics Association, Barce￾lona, Spain.
Heaven, P. C. L., Crocker, D., Edwards, B., 
Preston, N., Ward, R., and Woodbridge, 
N. (2003). Personality and sex. Personality 
and Individual Differences, 35, 411–419.
Hebb, D. O. (1955). Drives and the CNS 
(conceptual nervous system). Psychologi￾cal Review, 62, 243–259.
Heckhausen, H. (1982). The development of 
achievement motivation. In W. W. 
Hartup (Ed.), Review of child development 
research (Vol. 6, pp. 600–668). Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press.
Heidemeier, H., and Göritz, A. S. (2013). 
Perceived control in low-control circum￾stances: Control beliefs predict a greater 
decrease in life satisfaction following job 
loss. Journal of Research in Personality, 
47, 52–56.
Heine, S. J., and Lehman, D. R. (1995). Cul￾tural variation in unrealistic optimism: 
Does the West feel more invulnerable 
than the East? Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 68, 595–607.
Helson, R., and Picano, J. (1990). Is the tra￾ditional role bad for women? Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 59,
311–320.
Helson, R., and Stewart, A. (1994). Personal￾ity change in adulthood. In T. F. Heather￾ton and J. L. Weinberger (Eds.), Can 
personality change? Washington, DC: 
American Psychological Association.
Helson, R., and Wink, P. (1992). Personality 
change in women from the early 40s to 
the early 50s. Psychology and Aging, 7,
46–55.
Henderson, L., and Zimbardo, P. (2001a). 
Shyness as a clinical condition: The Stan￾ford model. In W. R. Crozier and L. E. 
Alden (Eds.), International Handbook of 
Social Anxiety: Concepts, Research and 
Interventions Relating to the Self and Shy￾ness (pp. 431–447). New York: Wiley.
Henderson, L., and Zimbardo, P. (2001b). 
Shyness, social anxiety, and social pho￾bia. In S. G. Hofmann and P. M. 
DiBartolo (Eds.), From Social Anxiety 
to Social Phobia: Multiple Perspectives
(pp. 46–85). Needham Heights, MA: 
Allyn and Bacon.
Henderson, N. D. (1982). Human behavioral 
genetics. Annual Review of Psychology, 33,
403–440.
Hendriks, A. A. J., Perugini, M., Angleitner, 
A., Ostendorf, F., Johnson, J. A., De 
Fruyt, F., Hrebickova, M., et al. (2003). 
The five-factor personality inventory: 
Cross-cultural generalizability across 13 
countries. European Journal of Personal￾ity, 17, 347–373.
Hennig, K. H., and Walker, L. J. (2008). The 
darker side of accommodating others: 
Examining the interpersonal structure of 
maladaptive constructs. Journal of 
Research in Personality, 42, 2–21.
Henrich, J. (2015). The secret of our success: 
How culture is driving human evolution, 
domesticating our species, and making us 
smarter. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univer￾sity Press.
Henrich, J., and Muthukrishna, M. (2021). 
The origins and psychology of human 
cooperation. Annual Review of Psychology,
72, 207–240.
Herbert, T. B., and Cohen, S. (1993). 
Depression and immunity: A meta￾analytic review. Psychological Bulletin, 
113, 472–486.
Herrnstein, R., and Murray, C. (1994). The 
bell curve: Intelligence and class structure 
in American life. New York: Free Press.
Herzog, A. R., Franks, X., Markus, H. R., 
and Holmberg, X. (1995). The American 
self in its sociocultural variations. Unpub￾lished manuscript.
Hess, N., Helfrecht, C., Hagen, E., Sell, A., 
and Hewlett, B. (2010). Interpersonal 
aggression among Aka hunter-gatherers 
of the Central African Republic: Assess￾ing the effects of sex, strength, and anger. 
Human Nature, 21, 330–354.
Hibbard, S., Porcerelli, J., Kamoo, R., 
Schwartz, M., and Abell, S. (2010). 
Defense and object relational maturity on 
Thematic Apperception Test Scales indi￾cate levels of personality organization. 
Journal of Personality Assessment, 92,
241–253.
Higgins, E. T. (1987). Self-discrepancy: A 
theory relating self to affect. Psychological 
Review, 94, 319–340.
Higgins, E. T. (1996). The “self digest”: Self￾Final PDF to printerREFERENCES
lar31869_ref_665-718 687 10/22/22 10:41 AM
687
functions. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 71, 1062–1083.
Higgins, E. T. (1997). Beyond pleasure and 
pain. American Psychologist, 52,
1280–1300.
Higgins, E. T. (1999). Persons and situa￾tions: Unique explanatory principles or 
variability in general principles? In D. 
Cervone and Y. Shoda (Eds.), The Coher￾ence of Personality (pp. 61–93). New 
York: Guilford Press.
Higgins, E. T. (2012). Regulatory focus 
theory. In P. A. M. Van Lange, A. W. 
Kruglanski, and T. E. Higgins (Eds.), 
Handbook of theories of social psychology
(pp. 483–504). Thousand Oaks, CA: 
Sage.
Hilbig, B. E., Heydasch, T., and Zettler, I. 
(2014). To boast or not to boast: Testing 
the humility aspect of the Honesty–
Humility factor. Personality and Individ￾ual Differences, 69, 12–16.
Hill, C. T., Rubin, Z., and Peplau, L. A. 
(1976). Breakups before marriage: The 
end of 103 affairs. Journal of Social 
Issues, 32, 147–168.
Hill, P. L., and Roberts, B. W. (2011). The 
role of adherence in the relationship 
between conscientiousness and perceived 
health. Health Psychology, 30, 797–804.
Hiroto, D. S., and Seligman, M. E. P. (1975). 
Generality of learned helplessness in 
man. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 102, 311–327.
Hirschfeld, L. A. (1995). Anthropology, psy￾chology, and the meaning of social cau￾sality. In D. Sperber, D. Premack, and A. 
J. Premack (Eds.), Causal cognition: A 
multidisciplinary debate (pp. 313–344). 
Oxford, England: Clarendon Press.
Hirsh, J. B. (2015). Extraverted populations 
have lower savings rates. Personality and 
Individual Differences, 81, 162–168.
Hirsh, J. B., and Peterson, J. B. (2009). 
Extraversion, neuroticism, and the pris￾oner’s dilemma. Personality and Individ￾ual Differences, 46, 254–256.
Hofer, J., Bond, M. H., and Li, M. (2010). 
The implicit power motive and sociosexu￾ality in men and women: Pancultural 
effects of responsibility. Journal of Person￾ality and Social Psychology, 99, 380–394.
Hoffman, W., Baumeister, R. F., Forster, G., 
and Vohs, K. E. (2012). Everyday temp￾tations: An experience sampling study of 
desire, conflict, and self-control. Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology, 102,
1318–1335.
Hoffmann, W., Vohs, K. D., and Baumeister, 
R. F. (2012). What people desire, feel 
conflicted about, and try to resist in 
everyday life. Psychological Science, 23,
582–588.
Hogan, J., and Holland, B. (2003). Using 
theory to evaluate personality and job 
performance relations. Journal of Applied 
Psychology, 88, 100–112.
Hogan, R. (1983). A socioanalytic theory of 
personality. In M. Page and R. Dienstbier 
(Eds.), Nebraska Symposium on motiva￾tion, 1982 (pp. 55–89). Lincoln: Univer￾sity of Nebraska Press.
Hogan, R. (2005). In defense of personality 
measurement: New wine for old whiners. 
Human Performance, 18, 331–341.
Hogan, R., and Chamorro-Premuzic, T. 
(2015). Personality and career success. 
In L. Cooper and R. Larsen (Eds.), 
Handbook of Personality and Social Psy￾chology: Personality Processes and Individ￾ual Differences (pp. 619–638). 
Washington, DC, American Psychologi￾cal Association.
Hogan, R., and Hogan, J. (2002). The Hogan 
personality inventory. In B. de Raad and 
M. Perugini (Eds.), Big Five Assessment
(pp. 329–346). Ashland, OH: Hogrefe & 
Huber Publishers.
Hokanson, J. E., Burgess, M., and Cohen, M. 
F. (1963). Effect of displaced aggression 
on systolic blood pressure. Journal of 
Abnormal and Social Psychology, 67,
214–218.
Holland, A. S., Fraley, R. C., and Roisman, 
G. I. (2012). Attachment styles in dating 
couples: Predicting relationship function￾ing over time. Personal Relationships, 19,
234–246.
Hollmann, E. (2001). Paul Gaugin: Images 
from the South Seas. New York: Prestel 
USA.
Holmes, D. (1990). The evidence for repres￾sion: An examination of sixty years of 
research. In J. Singer (Ed.), Repression 
and dissociation: Implications for personal￾ity, theory, psychopathology, and health
(pp. 85–102). Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press.
Holmes, T. H., and Rahe, R. H. (1967). The 
Social Readjustment Rating scale. Journal 
of Psychosomatic Research, 11, 213–218.
Holroyd, K. A., and Coyne, J. (1987). Per￾sonality and health in the 1980s: Psycho￾somatic medicine revisited? Journal of 
Personality, 55, 359–375.
Holtzman, N. S., and Strube, M. J. (2010). 
Narcissism and attractiveness. Journal of 
Research in Personality, 44, 133–136.
Honekopp, J. (2011). Relationships between 
digit ratio 2D:4D and self-reported 
aggression and risk taking in an online 
study. Personality and Individual Differ￾ences, 51, 77–80.
Hong, R. Y., and Paunonen, S. V. (2009). 
Personality traits and health-risk behav￾iours in University students. European 
Journal of Personality, 23, 675–696.
Honkalampi, K., Järvelin-Pasanen, S., Tar￾vain, M. P., Saaranen, T., Vauhkonen, A., 
Kupari, S., Perkiö-Mäkelä, M., Rasanen, 
K., and Oksanen, T. (2021). Heart rate 
variability and chronotype—A systematic 
review. Chronobiology International, 38,
1786–1796.
Honomichl, R. D., and Donnellan, M. B. 
(2012). Dimensions of temperament in 
preschoolers predict risk taking and 
externalizing behaviors in adolescents. 
Social Psychological and Personality Sci￾ence, 3, 14–22.
Hooper, J. L., White, V. M., Macaskill, G. T., 
Hill, D. J., and Clifford, C. A. (1992). 
Alcohol use, smoking habits and the 
Junior Eysenck Personality Question￾naire in adolescent Australian twins. Acta 
Geneticae Medicae et Gemellologiae: Twin 
Research, 41, 311–324.
Hooven, C. (2021). T: The Story of Testoster￾one, the Hormone that Dominates and 
Divides Us. Henry Holt and Company.
Hoover, E. (2013). Colleges seek “noncogni￾tive” gauges of applicants. The Chronicle 
of Higher Education, 56, 1.
Hopwood, C. J., Ansell, E .B., Pincus, A. L., 
Wright, A. G. C., Lukowitsky, M. R., and 
Roche, M. J. (2011). The circumplex 
model of interpersonal sensitivities. Jour￾nal of Personality, 79, 707–739.
Hormuth, S. E. (1986). The sampling of 
experiences in situ. Journal of Personality, 
54, 262–293.
Horne, J. A., and Ostberg, O. (1976). A self￾assessment questionnaire to determine 
morningness–eveningness in human cir￾cadian rhythms. International Journal of 
Chronobiology, 4, 97–110.
Horne, J. A., and Ostberg, O. (1977). Indi￾vidual differences in human circadian 
rhythms. Biological Psychology, 5,
179–190.
Horney, K. (1937). The neurotic personality 
of our time. New York: Norton.
Horney, K. (1939). New ways in psychoanaly￾sis. New York: Norton.
Horney, K. (1945). Our inner conflicts: A con￾structive theory of neurosis. New York: 
Norton.
Horney, K. (1950). Neurosis and human 
growth: The struggle toward self￾realization. New York: Norton.
Horton, R. S., and Sedikedes, C. (2009). 
Narcissistic responding to ego threat: 
When the status of the evaluator matters. 
Journal of Personality, 77, 1493–1526.
Hotard, S. R., McFatter, R. M., McWhirter, 
R. M., and Stegall, M. E. (1989). Interac￾tive effects of extraversion, neuroticism, 
and social relationships on subjective 
well-being. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 57, 321–331.
Howard, A., and Bray, D. (1988). Manage￾rial lives in transition: Advancing age and 
changing times. New York: Guilford 
Press.
Hoyenga, K. B., and Hoyenga, K. T. (1993). 
Gender-Related Differences: Origins and 
Outcomes. Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
Hsu, F. K. K. (1985). The self in cross￾cultural perspective. In J. J. Marsella, G. 
De Vos, and F. L. K. Hsu (Eds.), Culture 
Final PDF to printerREFERENCES
lar31869_ref_665-718 688 10/22/22 10:41 AM
688
Hua, H., and Epley, C. H. (2012). Putting 
the “personal” into personal construct 
theory. Journal of Constructivist Psychol￾ogy, 25, 269–273.
Huan, V. S., Ang, R. P., Chong, W. H., and 
Chye, S. (2014). The impact of shyness 
on problematic Internet use: The role of 
loneliness. The Journal of Psychology: 
Interdisciplinary and Applied, 148(6), 
699–715.
Hudson, N. W., and Fraley, R. C. (2015). 
Volitional personality trait change: Can 
people choose to change their personality 
traits? Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 109(3), 490–507.
Hudson, N. W., and Roberts, B. W. (2016). 
Social investment in work reliably pre￾dicts change in conscientiousness and 
agreeableness: A direct replication and 
extension of Hudson, Roberts, and 
Lodi-Smith (2012). Journal of Research 
in Personality, 60, 12–23.
Hudziak, J. J., van Beijhsterveldt, C. E. M., 
Bartels, M., Rietveld, J. J. J., Rettew, D. 
C., Derks, E. M., and Boomsma, D. I. 
(2003). Individual differences in aggres￾sion: Genetic analyses by age, gender, 
and informant in 3-, 7-, and 10-year-old 
Dutch twins. Behavior Genetics, 33,
575–589.
Humbad, M. N., Donnellan, M. B., Iacono, 
W. G., McGue, M., and Burt, S. A. 
(2010). Is spousal similarity for personal￾ity a matter of convergence or selection? 
Personality and Individual Differences, 49,
827–830.
Hunsley, J., Lee, C. M., and Wood, J. M. 
(2003). Controversial and questionable 
assessment techniques. In S. O. Lilien￾feld, S. J. Lynn, and J. M. Lohr (Eds.), 
Science and Pseudoscience in Clinical Psy￾chology (pp. 39–76). New York: Guilford 
Press.
Hunt, E., and Wittmann, W. (2008). 
National intelligence and national pros￾perity. Intelligence, 36, 1–9.
Huprich, S. K. (2008). TAT oral dependency 
scale. In S. R. Jenkins (Ed.), A handbook 
of clinical scoring systems for thematic 
apperceptive techniques (pp. 385–398). 
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Huselid, R. F., and Cooper, M. L. (1994). 
Gender roles as mediators of sex differ￾ences in expressions of pathology. Jour￾nal of Abnormal Psychology, 103,
595–603.
Hyafil, A., and Baumard, N. (2020). Evoked 
and Transmitted Culture models: Using 
bayesian methods to infer the evolution 
of cultural traits in history.
Hyatt, C. S., Sharpe, B. M., Owens, M. M., 
Listyg, B. S., Carter, N. T., Lynam, D. R., 
and Miller, J. D. (2021). Searching high 
and low for meaningful and replicable 
morphometric correlates of personality. 
Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology. https://doi.org/10.1037/
pspp0000402
Hyde, J. S. (1986). Gender differences in 
aggression. In J. S. Hyde and M. C. Linn 
(Eds.), The psychology of gender: Advances 
through meta-analysis. Baltimore: Johns 
Hopkins University Press.
Hyde, J. S. (2005). The gender similarities 
hypothesis. American Psychologist, 60,
581–592.
Hyde, J. S. (2014). Gender similarities and 
differences. Annual Review of Psychology, 
65, 373–398.
Hyde, J. S., and Kling, K. C. (2001). 
Women, motivation, and achievement. 
Psychology of Women Quarterly, 25,
364–378.
Hyde, J. S., and Mezulis, A. H. (2020). Gen￾der differences in depression: biological, 
affective, cognitive, and sociocultural fac￾tors. Harvard review of psychiatry, 28(1), 
4–13.
Hyde, J. S., and Plant, E. A. (1995). Magni￾tude of psychological gender differences: 
Another side to the story. American Psy￾chologist, 50, 159–161.
Hyman, I. E., and Loftus, E. F. (2002). False 
childhood memories and eyewitness 
memory errors. In M. L. Eisen (Ed.), 
Memory and suggestibility in the forensic 
interview (pp. 63–84). Mahwah, NJ: 
Erlbaum.
Ickes, W., Snyder, M., and Garcia, S. (1997). 
Personality influences on the choice of 
situations. In R. Hogan, J. A. Johnson, 
and S. Briggs (Eds.), Handbook of Person￾ality Psychology (pp. 165–195). San 
Diego: Academic Press.
Ihsan, Z., and Furnham, A. (2018). The new 
technologies in personality assessment: A 
review. Consulting Psychology Journal: 
Practice and Research, 70, 146–166.
Immelman, A. (2002). The political person￾ality of U.S. president George W. Bush. 
In L. O. Valenty and O. Feldman (Eds.), 
Political leadership for the new century: 
Personality and behavior among American 
leaders (pp. 81–103). Westport, CT: 
Praeger.
Inglehart, R. (1990). Culture Shift in 
Advanced Industrial Society. Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press.
Insel, P., and Roth, W. (1985). Core concepts in 
health (4th ed.). Palo Alto, CA: Mayfield.
Ip, G. W. M., and Bond, M. H. (1995). Cul￾ture, values, and the spontaneous self￾concept. Asian Journal of Psychology, 1,
30–36.
Irwin, M. (2002). Psychoneuroimmunology 
of depression: Clinical implications. 
Brain, Behavior, and Immunity, 16, 1–16.
Ishihara, K., Miyake, S., Miyasita, A., and 
Miyata, Y. (1992). Morningness–eve￾ningness preference and sleep habits in 
Japanese office workers of different ages. 
Chronobiologia, 19, 9–16.
Ishihara, K., Saitoh, T., and Miyata, Y. 
(1983). Short-term adjustment of oral 
temperature of 8-hour advanced-shift. 
Japanese Psychological Research, 25,
228–232.
Ishikawa, S. S., Raine, A., Lencz, T., Bihrle, 
S., and LaCasse, L. (2001). Increased 
height and bulk in antisocial personality 
disorder and its subtypes. Psychiatry 
Research, 105, 211–219.
Izard, C. E. (1977). Human Emotions. New 
York: Plenum Press.
Izuma, K., Kennedy, K., Fitzjohn, A., 
Sedikides, C., and Shibata, K. (2018). 
Neural activity in the reward-related 
brain regions predicts implicit self￾esteem: A novel validity test of psycho￾logical measures using neuroimaging. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychol￾ogy, 114, 343–357.
Jackson, D. N. (1967). Personality research 
form manual. Goshen, NY: Research Psy￾chologists Press.
Jackson, D. N., and Messick, S. (1967). 
Problems in Human Assessment. New 
York, McGraw-Hill.
Jackson, J. J., and Hill, P. L. (2019). Lifes￾pan development of conscientiousness. 
In D. P. McAdams, R. L. Shiner, and J. 
L. Tackett (Eds.), Handbook of personal￾ity development. (pp. 153–170). New 
York: Guilford Press.
Jackson, J. J., Bogg, T., Walton, K. E., 
Wood, D., Harms, P. D., Lodi-Smith, J., 
Edmonds, G. W., and Roberts, B. W. 
(2009). Not all conscientiousness scales 
change alike: A multimethod, multisam￾ple study of age differences in the facets 
of conscientiousness. Journal of Person￾ality and Social Psychology, 96,
446–459.
Jackson, J. J., Wood, D., Bogg, T., Walton, 
K. E., Harms, P. D., and Roberts, B. W. 
(2010). What do conscientious people 
do? Development and validation of the 
Behavioral Indicators of Conscientious￾ness (BIC). Journal of Research in Person￾ality, 44, 501–511.
Jacoby, R., and Glauberman, N. (1995). The 
bell curve debate: History, documents, opin￾ions. New York: Random House.
James, W. (1884). What is an emotion? 
Mind, 9, 188–205.
Jang, K. L., Dick, D. M., Wolf, H., Livesley, 
W. J., and Paris, J. (2005). Psychosocial 
adversity and emotional instability: An 
application of gene–environment interac￾tion models. European Journal of Person￾ality, 19, 359–372.
Jang, K. L., Livesley, W. J., Angleitner, A., 
Riemann, R., and Vernon, P. A. (2002). 
Genetic and environmental influences on 
the covariance of facets defining the 
domains of the five-factor model of per￾sonality. Personality and Individual Differ￾ences, 33, 83–101.
Final PDF to printerREFERENCES
lar31869_ref_665-718 689 10/22/22 10:41 AM
689
Jarnecke, A. M., and South, S. C. (2017). 
Behavior and molecular genetics of the 
Five Factor Model. In T. A. Widiger 
(Ed.), The Oxford handbook of the Five 
Factor Model (pp. 301–317). New York: 
Oxford University Press.
Jauk, E., Breyer, D., Kanske, P., and 
Wakabayashi, A. (2021). Narcissism in 
independent and interdependent cultures. 
Personality and Individual Differences,
177, 110716.
Jenkins, C. D., Zyzanski, S. J., and 
Rosenman, R. H. (1976). Risk of new 
myocardial infarction in middle age men 
with manifest coronary heart disease. Cir￾culation, 53, 342–347.
Jenkins, S. R. (1994). Need for power and 
women’s careers over 14 years: Structural 
power, job satisfaction, and motive 
change. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 66, 155–165.
Jensen, A. R. (2011). The theory of intelli￾gence and its measurement. Intelligence, 
39, 171–177.
Jensen-Campbell, L. A., Adams, R., Perry, D. 
G., Workman, K. A., Furdella, J. Q., and 
Egan, S. K. (2002). Agreeableness, extra￾version, and peer relations in early ado￾lescence: Winning friends and deflecting 
aggression. Journal of Research in Person￾ality, 36, 224–251.
Jensen-Campbell, L. A., and Graziano, W. G. 
(2001). Agreeableness as a moderator of 
interpersonal conflict. Journal of Person￾ality, 69, 323–362.
Jensen-Campbell, L. A., Gleason, K. A., 
Adams, R., and Malcolm, K. T. (2003). 
Interpersonal conflict, agreeableness, and 
personality development. Journal of Per￾sonality, 71, 1059–1085.
Jeronimus, B. F., Riese, H., Sanderman, R., 
and Ormel, J. (2014). Mutual reinforce￾ment between neuroticism and life expe￾riences: A five-wave, 16-year study to test 
reciprocal causation. Journal of Personal￾ity and Social Psychology, 107, 751–764.
Jerskey, B. A., Panizzon, M. S., Jacobson, K. 
C., Neale, M. C., Grant, M. D., Schultz, 
M., Eisen, S., et al. (2010). Marriage and 
divorce: A genetic perspective. Personal￾ity and Individual Differences, 49,
473–478.
John, O. P. (1990). The “Big Five” factor tax￾onomy: Dimensions of personality in the 
natural language and questionnaires. In 
L. A. Pervin (Ed.), Handbook of personal￾ity (pp. 66–100). New York: Guilford 
Press.
John, O. P., and Naumann, L. P. (2010). 
Surviving two critiques by Block? The 
resilient big five have emerged as the par￾adigm for personality trait psychology. 
Psychological Inquiry, 21(1), 44–49. 
Chicago.
Johnson, D. P., and Whisman, M. A. (2013). 
Gender differences in rumination: A 
meta-analysis. Personality and Individual 
Differences, 55(4), 367–374.
Johnson, M. K., Rowatt, W. C., and Petrini, 
L. (2011). A new trait on the market: 
Honesty-humility as a unique predictor of 
job performance. Personality and Individ￾ual Differences, 50, 857–862.
Johnson, R. E. (1970). Some correlates of 
extramarital coitus. Journal of Marriage 
and the Family, 32, 449–456.
Johnson, W. (2007). Genetic and environ￾mental influences on behavior: Capturing 
all the interplay. Psychological Review, 
114, 423–440.
Johnson, W., and Deary, I. J. (2011). Placing 
inspection time, reaction time, and per￾ceptual speed in the broader context of 
cognitive ability: The VPR model in the 
Lothian Birth Cohort 1936, Intelligence, 
39, 405–417.
Johnson, W., Hicks, B. M., McGue, M., and 
Iacono, W. G. (2007). Most of the girls 
are alright, but some aren’t: Personality 
trajectory groups from ages 14–24 and 
some associations with outcomes. Jour￾nal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
93, 266–284.
Johnson, W., McGue, M., and Krueger, R. F. 
(2005). Personality stability in late adult￾hood: A behavior genetic analysis. Jour￾nal of Personality, 73, 523–551.
Johnson, W., McGue, M., Krueger, R. F., 
and Bouchard, T. J., Jr. (2004). Marriage 
and personality: A genetic analysis. Jour￾nal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
86, 285–294.
Johnson, W., Penke, L., and Spinath, F. M. 
(2011). Heritability in the era of molecu￾lar genetics: Some thoughts for under￾standing genetic influences on behavioural 
traits: Understanding heritability. Euro￾pean Journal of Personality, 25, 254–266.
Johnston, M. (1999). Spectral evidence: The 
Ramona case: Incest, memory, and truth 
on trial in Napa Valley. Boulder, CO: 
Westview Press.
Jokela, M. (2009). Personality predicts 
migration within and between U.S. states. 
Journal of Research in Personality, 43,
79–83.
Jokela, M., Airaksinen, J., Virtanen, M., 
Batty, G. D., Kivimäki, M., and 
Hakulinen, C. (2019). Personality, 
disability-free life years, and life expec￾tancy: Individual-participant meta￾analysis of 131,195 individuals from 10 
cohort studies. Journal of Personality.
Jonason, P. K. (2018). Bright lights, big city: 
The Dark Triad traits and geographical 
preferences. Personality and Individual 
Differences, 132, 66–73.
Jonason, P. K., and Webster, G. D. (2012). 
A protean approach to social influence: 
Dark Triad personalities and social influ￾ence tactics. Personality and Individual 
Differences, 52, 521–526.
Jonason, P. K., Garcia, J. R., Webster, G. D., 
Li, N. P., and Fisher, H. E. (2015). Rela￾tionship deal breakers traits people avoid 
in potential mates. Personality and Social 
Psychology Bulletin, 41(12), 1697–1711.
Jonason, P. K., Girgis, M., and Milne-Home, 
J. (2017). The exploitive mating strategy 
of the Dark Triad traits: Tests of rape￾enabling attitudes. Archives of Sexual 
Behavior, 46(3), 697–706.
Jones, A., and Crandall, R. (1986). Valida￾tion of a short index of self-actualization. 
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 
12, 63–73.
Jones, D. N., and Paulhus, D. L. (2010). Dif￾ferent provocations trigger aggression in 
narcissists and psychopaths. Social Psy￾chological and Personality Science, 1,
12–18.
Jones, D. N., and Weiser, D. A. (2014). Dif￾ferential infidelity patterns among the 
Dark Triad. Personality and Individual 
Differences, 57, 20–24.
Jordan, C. H., Spencer, S. J., Zanna, M. P., 
Hoshino-Browne, E., and Correll, J. 
(2003). Secure and defensive high self￾esteem. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 85, 969–978.
Judge, D. S., and Hrdy, S. B. (1992). Alloca￾tion of accumulated resources among 
close kin: Inheritance in Sacramento, 
California, 1890–1984. Ethology and 
Sociobiology, 13(5), 495–522.
Judge, T., and Larsen, R. J. (2001). Disposi￾tional sources of job satisfaction: A 
review and theoretical extension. Organi￾zational Behavior and Human Decision 
Processes, 86, 67–98.
Jung, I., Lee, H., and Cho, B. (2004). Persis￾tent psychotic disorder in an adolescent 
with a past history of butane gas depen￾dence. European Psychiatry, 19, 519–520.
Jusepeitis, A. and Rothermund, K. (2022). 
No elephant in the room: The incremen￾tal validity of implicit self-esteem mea￾sures. Journal of Personality, http://
dx.doi.org/10.1111/jopy.12705.
Jussim, L., Stevens, S. T., and Honeycutt, N. 
(2021). 16 The Accuracy of Stereotypes 
About Personality. The Oxford Handbook 
of Accurate Personality Judgment, 245.
Kagan, J. (1981). The Second Year: The 
Emergence of Self-Awareness. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press.
Kagan, J. (1994). Galen’s Prophecy: Tempera￾ment in Human Nature. New York: Basic 
Books.
Kagan, J. (1999). Born to be shy? In R. Con￾lan (Ed.), States of Mind (pp. 29–51). 
New York: Wiley.
Kagan, J., and Moss, H. (1962). Birth to 
maturity: A study in psychological develop￾ment. New York: Wiley.
Kagan, J., and Snidman, N. (1991). Infant 
predictors of inhibited and uninhibited 
profiles. Psychological Science, 2, 40–44.
Final PDF to printerREFERENCES
lar31869_ref_665-718 690 10/22/22 10:41 AM
690
Kaiser, T. (2019). Nature and evoked cul￾ture: Sex differences in personality are 
uniquely correlated with ecological stress. 
Personality and Individual Differences,
148, 67–72.
Kaiser, T., Del Giudice, M., and Booth, T. 
(2020). Global sex differences in person￾ality: Replication with an open online 
dataset. Journal of Personality, 88(3), 
415–429.
Kajonius, P. J., and Johnson, J. (2018). Sex 
differences in 30 facets of the five factor 
model of personality in the large public 
(N = 320,128). Personality and Individ￾ual Differences, 129, 126–130.
Kamakura, T., Ando, J., and Ono, Y. (2007). 
Genetic and environmental effects on the 
stability and change in self-esteem during 
adolescence. Personality and Individual 
Differences, 42, 181–190.
Kamble, S., Shackelford, T. K., Pham, M., 
and Buss, D. M. (2014). Indian mate 
preferences: Continuity, sex differences, 
and cultural change across a quarter of a 
century. Personality and Individual Differ￾ences, 70, 150–155.
Kammrath, L. K., and Scholer, A. A. (2011). 
The Pollyanna myth: How highly agree￾able people judge positive and negative 
relational acts. Personality and Social Psy￾chology Bulletin, 37, 1172–1184.
Kandler, C., Bleidorn, W., Spinath, F. M., 
and Riemann, R. (2010). Sources of 
cumulative continuity in personality: A 
longitudinal multiple-rater twin study. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychol￾ogy, 98, 995–1008.
Kaplan, H., and Hill, K. (1985). Food￾sharing among Ache foragers: Tests of 
evolutionary hypotheses. Current Anthro￾pology, 26, 223–246.
Kapogiannis, D., Sutin, A., Davatzikos, C., 
Costa, P. J., and Resnick, S. (2013). The 
five factors of personality and regional 
cortical variability in the Baltimore longi￾tudinal study of aging. Human Brain 
Mapping, 34(11), 2829–2840.
Karantzas, G. C., and Simpson, J. A. (2015). 
Attachment and aged care. In J. A. Simp￾son and W. S. Rholes (Eds.), Attachment 
theory and research: New directions and 
emerging themes (pp. 319–345). New 
York: Guilford Press.
Katigbak, M. S., Church, A. T., 
Guanzon-Lapena, M. A., Carlota, A. J., 
and del Pilar, G. H. (2002). Are indige￾nous personality dimensions culture￾specific? Philippine inventories and the 
five-factor model. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 82(1), 89–101.
Katz, I. M., and Campbell, J. D. (1994). 
Ambivalence over emotional expression 
and well-being: Nomothetic and idio￾graphic tests of the stress-buffering 
hypothesis. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 67, 513–524.
Kaufman, S. B., Quilty, L. C., Grazioplene, 
R. G., Hirsh, J. B., Gray, J. R., Peterson, 
J. B., and DeYoung, C. G. (2016). Open￾ness to experience and intellect differen￾tially predict creative achievement in the 
arts and sciences. Journal of Personality, 
82, 248–258.
Kavanagh, K., and Hops, H. (1994). Good 
girls? Bad boys? Gender and develop￾ment as contexts for diagnosis and treat￾ment. Advances in Clinical Child 
Psychology, 16, 45–79.
Kawamoto, T. (2016). Cross-sectional age 
differences in the HEXACO personality: 
Results from a Japanese sample. Journal 
of Research in Personality, 62, 1–5.
Keiser, H. N., Sackett, P. R., Kuncel, N. R., 
and Brothen, T. (2016). Why women per￾form better in college than admission 
scores would predict: Exploring the roles 
of conscientiousness and course-taking 
patterns. Journal of Applied Psychology, 
101, 569–581.
Kelley, H. H. (1992). Common-sense psy￾chology and scientific psychology. In 
M. R. Rosensweig and L. W. Porter 
(Eds.), Annual review of psychology
(Vol. 43, pp. 1–23). Palo Alto, CA: 
Annual Reviews.
Kelly, E. L., and Conley, J. J. (1987). Person￾ality and compatibility: A prospective 
analysis of marital stability and marital 
satisfaction. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 52, 27–40.
Kelly, G. A. (1955). The psychology of per￾sonal constructs (vols. 1 and 2). London: 
Routledge.
Keltikangas-Järvinen, L., Elovainio, M., 
Kivimäki, M., Lichtermann, D., Ekelund, 
J., and Leena Peltonen, L. (2003). Associa￾tion between the Type 4 dopamine receptor 
gene polymorphism and novelty seeking. 
Psychosomatic Medicine, 65, 471–476.
Kendler, K. S., McGuire, M., Gruenberg, A. 
M., O’Hare, A., Spellman, M., and 
Walsh, D. (1993). The Roscommon 
Family Study III: Schizophrenia-related 
personality disorders in relatives. Archives 
of General Psychiatry, 50, 781–788.
Kendler, R. S., Heath, A. C., Neale, M. C., 
Kessler, R. C., and Eaves, L. J. (1992). A 
population-based twin study of alcohol￾ism in women. Journal of the American 
Medical Association, 268, 1877–1882.
Kenrick, D. T., Griskevicius, V., Neuberg, S. 
L., and Schaller, M. (2010). Renovating 
the pyramid of needs: Contemporary 
extensions built upon ancient founda￾tions. Perspectives on Psychological Sci￾ence, 5, 292–314.
Kerkhof, G. A. (1985). Inter-individual differ￾ences in the human circadian system: A 
review. Biological Psychology, 20, 83–112.
Kernberg, O. (1975). Borderline conditions 
and pathological narcissism. New York: 
Jason Aronson.
Kernberg, O. F. (1984). Severe personality 
disorders. New Haven, CT: Yale Univer￾sity Press.
Kernis, M. H. (2006) Self-Esteem Issues and 
Answers: A Sourcebook of Current Perspec￾tives. New York: Psychology Press.
Kernis, M. H. (2006). Measuring self￾esteem in context: The importance of 
stability of self-esteem in psychological 
functioning. Journal of Personality, 73,
1569–1605.
Kernis, M. H. and Lakey, C. E. (2008). 
Secure versus fragile high self-esteem as a 
predictor of verbal defensiveness: Con￾verging findings across three different 
markers. Journal of Personality, 76,
477–512.
Kernis, M. H., Grannemann, B. D., and 
Barclay, L. C. (1992). Stability of self￾esteem: Assessment, correlates, and 
excuse making. Journal of Personality, 60,
621–643.
Kernis, M. H., Grannemann, B. D., and 
Mathis, L. C. (1991). Stability of self￾esteem as a moderator of the relation 
between level of self-esteem and depres￾sion. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 61, 80–84.
Kesebir, S., Graham, J., and Oishi, S. (2010). 
A theory of human needs should be 
human-centered, not animal-centered: 
Commentary on Kenrick et al. (2010). 
Perspectives on Psychological Science, 5,
315–319.
Ketelaar, T. (1995). Emotion as mental repre￾sentations of fitness affordances: I. Evi￾dence supporting the claim that the 
negative and positive emotions map onto 
fitness costs and benefits. Paper presented 
at the annual meeting of the Human 
Behavior and Evolution Society, Santa 
Barbara.
Khan, S. S., Nessim, S., Gray, R., Czer, L. S., 
Chaux, A., and Matloff, J. (1990). 
Increased mortality of women in coro￾nary artery bypass surgery: Evidence for 
referral bias. Annals of Internal Medicine, 
112, 561–567.
Kihlstrom, J. F. (1999). The psychological 
unconscious. In L. A. Pervin and O. P. 
John (Eds.), Handbook of personality: 
Theory and research (pp. 424–442). New 
York: Guilford Press.
Kihlstrom, J. F. (2003b). Hypnosis and 
memory. In J. F. Byrne (Ed.), Learning 
and memory (2nd ed., pp. 240–242). 
Farmington Hills, MI: Macmillan.
Kihlstrom, J. F. (2013). The person-situation 
interaction. In D. E. Carlston (Ed.), The 
Oxford Handbook of Social Cognition
(pp. 786–805). New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Kihlstrom, J. F., Barnhardt, T. M., and 
Tataryn, D. J. (1992). The psychological 
unconscious: Found, lost, and regained. 
American Psychologist, 47, 788–791.
Final PDF to printerREFERENCES
lar31869_ref_665-718 691 10/22/22 10:41 AM
691
Kim, E. (2002). Agitation, aggression, and 
disinhibition syndromes after traumatic 
brain injury. NeuroRehabilitation, 17,
297–310.
Kim, K., Smith, P. K., and Palermiti, A. 
(1997). Conflict in childhood and repro￾ductive development. Evolution and 
Human Behavior, 18, 109–142.
Kim, T. D., Luo, T. Z., Pillow, J. W., and 
Brody, C. D. (2021, July). Inferring 
latent dynamics underlying neural popu￾lation activity via neural differential equa￾tions. In International Conference on 
Machine Learning (pp. 5551–5561). 
PMLR.
Kim-Cohen, J., Caspi, A., Taylor, A., 
Williams, B., Newcombe, R., Craig, I. 
W., et al. (2006). MAOA, maltreatment, 
and gene–environment interaction pre￾dicting children’s mental health: New evi￾dence and a meta-analysis. Molecular 
Psychiatry, 11, 903–913.
Kimura, D. (2002). Sex hormones influence 
human cognitive pattern. Neuroendocri￾nology Letters, 23(Suppl. 4), 67–77.
King, L. A. (1995). Wishes, motives, goals, 
and personal memories: Relations and 
correlates of measures of human motiva￾tion. Journal of Personality, 63,
985–1007.
King, L. A., and Emmons, R. A. (1990). 
Conflict over emotional expression: Psy￾chological and physical correlates. Jour￾nal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
58, 864–877.
King, L. A., and Hicks, J. A. (2012). Positive 
affect and meaning in life: The intersec￾tion of hedonism and eudaimonia. In P. 
T. P. Wong (Ed.), The Human Quest for 
Meaning: Theories, Research and Applica￾tions (2nd ed., pp. 125–141). New York: 
Routledge/Taylor & Francis Group.
Kintz, B. L., Delprato, D. J., Mettee, D. R., 
Parsons, D. E., and Schappe, R. H. 
(1965). The experimenter effect. Psycho￾logical Bulletin, 63, 223–232.
Kipnis, D. (1971). Character structure and 
impulsiveness. New York: Academic 
Press.
Kirkpatrick, L. A. (2005). Attachment, evolu￾tion, and the psychology of religion. New 
York: Guilford Press.
Kjærgaard, A., Leon, G. R., and Venables, N. 
C. (2015). The ‘right stuff’ for a solo sail￾boat circumnavigation of the globe. Envi￾ronment and Behavior, 47(10), 1147–1171.
Kletenik, I., et al. (2022). Network localiza￾tion of unconscious visual perception in 
blindsight. Annals of Neurology, 91,
217–224.
Kling, K. C., Hyde, J. S., Showers, C. J., and 
Buswell, B. N. (1999). Gender differ￾ences in self-esteem: A meta-analysis. Psy￾chological Bulletin, 125, 470–500.
Kling, K. C., Noftle, E. E., and Robins, R. W. 
(2013). Why do standardized tests 
underpredict women’s academic perfor￾mance? The role of conscientiousness. 
Social Psychological and Personality Sci￾ence, 4, 600–606.
Klinger, E. (1977a). The nature of fantasy 
and its clinical uses. Psychotherapy: The￾ory, Research, and Practice, 14, 223–231.
Klinger, E. (1977b). Meaning and void: Inner 
experience and the incentives in people’s 
lives. Minneapolis: University of Minne￾sota Press.
Klucken, T., Kruse, O., Schweckendiek, J., 
and Stark, R. (2015). Increased skin con￾ductance responses and neural activity 
during fear conditioning are associated 
with a repressive coping style. Frontiers in 
Behavioral Neuroscience, 9.
Knafo, A., Iervolino, A. C., and Plomin, R. 
(2005). Masculine girls and feminine 
boys: Genetic and environmental contri￾butions to atypical gender development 
in early childhood. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 88, 400–412.
Knopik, V. S., Neiderhiser, J. M., DeFries, J. 
C., and Plomin, R. (2022). Behavioral 
Genetics, 7th ed. Worth Publishers, Mac￾millan Learning.
Knutson, B., and Bhanji, J. (2006). Neural 
substrates for emotional traits? In T. 
Canli (Ed.), Biology of personality and 
individual differences (pp. 116–132). New 
York: Guilford Press.
Knutson, B., Wolkowitz, O. M., Cole, S. W., 
Chan, T., Moore, E. A., Johnson, R. C., 
Terpestra, J., et al. (1998). Selective alter￾ation of personality and social behavior 
by serotonergic intervention. American 
Journal of Psychiatry, 155, 373–378.
Koenig, L. B., McGue, M., Krueger, R. F., 
and Bouchard, T. J., Jr. (2005). Genetic 
and environmental influences on reli￾giousness ratings. Journal of Personality, 
73, 471–488.
Koestner, R., and McClelland, D. C. (1990). 
Perspectives on competence motivation. 
In L. A. Pervin (Ed.), Handbook of 
Personality: Theory and Research
(pp. 527–548). New York: Guilford 
Press.
Kofman, S. (1985). The enigma of woman: 
Woman in Freud’s writings. Ithaca, NY: 
Cornell University Press.
Kohn, M. L., Naoi, A., Schoenbach, C., 
Schooler, C., and Slomczynski, K. M. 
(1990). Position in the class structure 
and psychological functioning in the 
United States, Japan, and Poland. 
American Journal of Sociology, 95,
964–1008.
Kohut, H. (1977). The restoration of the self.
Madison, CT: International Universities 
Press.
Koole, S. L., Jager, W., van den Berg, A. E., 
Vlek, C. A. J., and Hofstee, W. K. B. 
(2001). On the social nature of personal￾ity: Effects of extraversion, agreeableness, 
and feedback about collective resource 
use on cooperation in a resource 
dilemma. Personality and Social Psychol￾ogy Bulletin, 27(3), 289–301.
Koopmans, J. R., and Boomsma, D. I. 
(1993). Bivariate genetic analysis of the 
relation between alcohol and tobacco use 
in adolescent twins. Psychiatric Genetics, 
3, 172.
Kopp, C. B. (1989). Regulation of distress 
and negative emotions: A developmental 
view. Developmental Psychology, 25,
343–354.
Kosslyn, S. M., and Rosenberg, R. S. (2004). 
Psychology: The brain, the person, the 
world. Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
Kosslyn, S. M., Cacioppo, J. T., Davidson, R. 
J., Hugdahl, K., Lovallo, W. R., Spiegel, 
D., and Rose, R. (2002). Bridging psy￾chology and biology: The analysis of indi￾viduals in groups. American Psychologist, 
57, 341–351.
Kotov, R., Gamez, W., Schmidt, F., and Wat￾son, D. (2010). Linking “big” personality 
traits to anxiety, depressive, and sub￾stance use disorders: A meta-analysis. 
Psychological Bulletin, 136, 768–821.
Kotter-Gruhn, D., Wiest, M., Zurek, P. P., 
and Scheibe, S. (2009). What is it we are 
longing for? Psychological and demo￾graphic factors influencing the contents 
of Sehnsucht (life longings). Journal of 
Research in Personality, 43, 428–437.
Kowalski, R. M., and Brown, K. J. (1994). 
Psychosocial barriers to cervical cancer 
screening: Concerns with self–
presentation and social evaluation. 
Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 24,
941–958.
Kraeplin, E. (1913). Psychiatrie: Ein 
Lehrbuch (8th ed.). Leipzig: Barth.
Krampe, H., Danbolt, L. J., Haver, A., Stålsett, 
G., and Schnell, T. (2021). Locus of con￾trol moderates the association of COVID￾19 stress and general mental distress: 
Results of a Norwegian and a German￾speaking cross-sectional survey. BMC Psy￾chiatry, 21, Sep 6, 2021. ArtID: 437.
Krasno, J. (2015). William Jefferson Clinton: 
Promise, persistence, and the will to be 
adored. In J. Krasno, S. LaPides, J. 
Krasno, S. LaPides (Eds.), Personality, 
political leadership, and decision making: 
A global perspective (pp. 295–318). Santa 
Barbara, CA, US: Praeger/ABC-CLIO.
Kretschmer, E. (1925). Physique and charac￾ter. London: Kegan Paul.
Kreuzer, M., and Gollwitzer, M. (2021). 
Neuroticism and satisfaction in romantic 
relationships: A systematic investigation 
of intra-and interpersonal processes with 
a longitudinal approach. European Jour￾nal of Personality, 08902070211001258.
Kroencke, L., Geukes, K., Utesch, T., Kuper, 
N., and Back, M. D. (2020). Neuroticism 
and emotional risk during the COVID-19 
Final PDF to printerREFERENCES
lar31869_ref_665-718 692 10/22/22 10:41 AM
692
pandemic. Journal of Research in Person￾ality, 89. https://doi-org.libproxy.wustl.
edu/10.1016/j.jrp.2020.104038.
Krueger, J. I., Hasman, J. F., Acevedo, M., 
and Villano, P. (2003). Perceptions of 
trait typicality in gender stereotypes: 
Examining the role of attribution and cat￾egorization processes. Personality and 
Social Psychology Bulletin, 29(1), 
108–116.
Krueger, R. F., and Markon, K. E. (2006). 
Reinterpreting comorbidity: A model￾based approach to understanding and 
classifying psychopathology. Annual 
Review of Clinical Psychology, 2, 111–133.
Krueger, R. F., Markon, K. E., and 
Bouchard, T. J., Jr. (2003). The extended 
genotype: The heritability of personality 
accounts for the heritability of recalled 
family environments in twins reared 
apart. Journal of Personality, 71(5), 
809–834.
Krueger, R. F., South, S., Johnson, W., and 
Iacono, W. (2008). The heritability of 
personality is not always 50%: Gene–
environment interactions and correla￾tions between personality and parenting. 
Journal of Personality, 76, 1485–1522.
Krug, S. (1981). Interpreting 16 PF profile 
patterns. Institute of Personality and 
Ability Testing, Champaign, IL.
Krupnik, R., Yovel, Y., and Assaf, Y (2021). 
Inner hemispheric and interhemispheric 
connectivity balance in the human brain. 
The Journal of Neuroscience, 41,
8351–8361.
Kuhl, J., and Kazén, M. (2008). Motivation, 
affect, and hemispheric asymmetry: 
Power versus affiliation. Journal of Per￾sonality and Social Psychology, 95,
456–469.
Kuhle, B. X. (2011). Did you have sex with 
him? Do you love her? An in vivo test of 
sex differences in jealous interrogations. 
Personality and Individual Differences, 51,
1044–1047.
Kuhle, B. X., Smedley, K. D., and Schmitt, 
D. P. (2009). Sex differences in the moti￾vation and mitigation of jealousy-induced 
interrogations. Personality and Individual 
Differences, 46, 499–502.
Kurman, J. (2001). Self-enhancement: Is it 
restricted to individualistic cultures? Per￾sonality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 
27(12), 1705–1716.
Kushlev, K., Dunn, E. W., and Lucas, R. E. 
(2015). Higher income is associated with 
less daily sadness but not more daily hap￾piness. Social Psychological and Personal￾ity Science, 6, 483–489.
Kushlev, K., Radosic, N., and Diener, E. 
(2021). Subjective Well-Being and Proso￾ciality Around the Globe: Happy People 
Give More of Their Time and Money to 
Others. Social Psychological and Personal￾ity Science. https://doi.
org/10.1177/19485506211043379
Kvam, S., Kleppe, C. L., Nordhus, I. H., and 
Hovland, A. (2016). Exercise as a treat￾ment for depression: A meta-analysis. 
Journal of Affective Disorders, 202, 57–86.
Kwapil, T. R., Wrobel, M. J., and Pope, C. A. 
(2002). The five-factor personality struc￾ture of dissociative experiences. Personal￾ity and Individual Differences, 32,
431–443.
Kwon, P., Campbell, D. G., and Williams, 
M. G. (2001). Sociotropy and autonomy: 
Preliminary evidence for construct valid￾ity using TAT narratives. Journal of Per￾sonality Assessment Special Issue: More 
data on the current Rorschach controversy, 
77, 128–138.
Kyl-Heku, L., and Buss, D. M. (1996). Tac￾tics as units of analysis in and personality 
psychology: An illustration using tactics 
of hierarchy negotiation. Personality and 
Individual Differences, 21, 497–517.
Lajunen, T. (2001). Personality and accident 
liability: Are extraversion, neuroticism 
and psychoticism related to traffic and 
occupational fatalities? Personality and 
Individual Differences, 31, 1365–1373.
Lalumiere, M. L., Chalmers, L. J., Quinsey, 
V. L., and Seto, M. C. (1996). A test of 
the mate deprivation hypothesis of sexual 
coercion. Ethology and Sociobiology, 17,
299–318.
Lalumiere, M. L., Harris, G. T., and Rice, M. 
E. (2001). Psychopathy and developmen￾tal instability. Evolution and Human 
Behavior, 22, 75–92.
Lamarche, V. M., and Seery, M. D. (2019). 
Come on, give it to me baby: Self-esteem, 
narcissism, and endorsing sexual coer￾cion following social rejection. Personal￾ity and Individual Differences, 149,
315–325.
Langens, T. A. (2001). Predicting behavior 
change in Indian businessmen from a 
combination of need for achievement 
and self-discrepancy. Journal of Research 
in Personality, 35, 339–352.
Langevin, R., Bain, J., Wortzman, G., 
and Hucker, S. (1988). Sexual sadism: 
Brain, blood, and behavior. Annals of the 
New York Academy of Science, 528,
163–171.
Langford, P. H. (2003). A one-minute mea￾sure of the Big Five? Evaluating and 
abridging Shafer’s (1999) Big Five mark￾ers. Personality and Individual Differences, 
35, 1127–1140.
Langner, C. A., and Winter, D. G. (2001). 
The motivational basis of concessions 
and compromise: Archival and labora￾tory studies. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 81, 711–727.
Lanning, K. (1994). Dimensionality of 
observer ratings on the California Adult 
Q-set. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 67(1), 151.
Larrance, D., Pavelich, S., Storer, P., Polizzi, 
M., Baron, B., Sloan, S., Jordan, R., and 
Reis, H. T. (1979). Competence and 
incompetence: Asymmetric responses to 
women and men on a sex-linked task. 
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 
5, 363–366.
Larsen, R. J. (1985). Individual differences 
in circadian activity rhythm and personal￾ity. Personality and Individual Differences, 
6, 305–311.
Larsen, R. J. (1987). The stability of mood 
variability: A spectral analytic approach 
to daily mood assessments. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 52,
1195–1204.
Larsen, R. J. (1989). A process approach to 
personality: Utilizing time as a facet of 
data. In D. Buss and N. Cantor (Eds.), 
Personality psychology: Recent trends and 
emerging directions (pp. 177–193). New 
York: Springer-Verlag.
Larsen, R. J. (1992). Neuroticism and selec￾tive encoding and recall of symptoms: 
Evidence from a combined concurrent￾retrospective study. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 62, 480–488.
Larsen, R. J. (2000a). Toward a science of 
mood regulation. Psychological Inquiry, 
11, 129–141.
Larsen, R. J. (2000b). Maintaining hedonic 
balance. Psychological Inquiry, 11,
218–225.
Larsen, R. J. (2009). Affect intensity. In M. 
R. Leary and R. H. Hoyle (Eds.), Hand￾book of Individual Differences in Social 
Behaviors (pp. 241–254). New York: 
Guilford Press.
Larsen, R. J., and Cowan, G. S. (1988). 
Internal focus of attention and depres￾sion: A study of daily experience. Motiva￾tion and Emotion, 12, 237–249.
Larsen, R. J., and Diener, E. (1985). A multi￾trait-multimethod examination of affect 
structure: Hedonic level and emotional 
intensity. Personality and Individual Dif￾ferences, 6, 631–636.
Larsen, R. J., and Diener, E. (1987). Affect 
intensity as an individual difference char￾acteristic: A review. Journal of Research 
in Personality, 21, 1–39.
Larsen, R. J., and Diener, E. (1992). Prob￾lems and promises with the circumplex 
model of emotion. Review of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 13, 25–59.
Larsen, R. J., and Fredrickson, B. L. (1999). 
Measurement issues in emotion research. 
In D. Kahneman, E. Diener, and N. 
Schwarz (Eds.), Understanding Quality of 
Life: Scientific Perspectives on Enjoyment 
and Suffering (pp. 40–60). New York: 
Sage.
Larsen, R. J., and Kasimatis, M. (1990). 
Individual differences in entrainment of 
mood to the weekly calendar. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 58,
164–171.
Larsen, R. J., and Ketelaar, T. (1989). Extra￾Final PDF to printerREFERENCES
lar31869_ref_665-718 693 10/22/22 10:41 AM
693
positive and negative mood induction 
procedures. Personality and Individual 
Differences, 10, 1221–1228.
Larsen, R. J., and Ketelaar, T. (1991). Per￾sonality and susceptibility to positive and 
negative emotional states. Journal of Per￾sonality and Social Psychology, 61,
132–140.
Larsen, R. J., and Prizmic, Z. (2004). Affect 
regulation. In R. Baumeister and K. Vohs 
(Eds.), Handbook of Self-Regulation 
Research (pp. 40–60). New York: Guil￾ford Press.
Larsen, R. J., and Prizmic, Z. (2006). Multi￾method measurement of emotion. In M. 
Eid and E. Diener (Eds.), Handbook of 
Measurement: A Multimethod Perspective
(pp. 337–352). Washington, DC: 
American Psychological Association.
Larsen, R. J., and Prizmic-Larsen, Z. (1999). 
Marrying a culture when you marry a per￾son. Contemporary Psychology, 44,
538–540.
Larsen, R. J., and Zarate, M. A. (1991). 
Extending reducer/augmenter theory into 
the emotion domain: The role of affect in 
regulating stimulation level. Personality 
and Individual Differences, 12, 713–723.
Larsen, R. J., Billings, D., and Cutler, S. 
(1996). Affect intensity and individual 
differences in cognitive style. Journal of 
Personality, 64, 185–208.
Larsen, R. J., Chen, B., and Zelenski, J. 
(2003). Responses to punishment and 
reward in the emotion Stroop paradigm: 
Relations to BIS and BAS. Unpublished 
manuscript.
Larsen, R. J., Diener, E., and Cropanzano, 
R. S. (1987). Cognitive operations associ￾ated with individual differences in affect 
intensity. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 53, 767–774.
Larsen, R. J., Diener, E., and Emmons, R. A. 
(1986). Affect intensity and reactions to 
daily life events. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 51, 803–814.
Larsen, R. J., Mercer, K. A., and Balota, D. 
A. (2006). Lexical characteristics of 
words used in emotion Stroop tasks. 
Emotion, 6, 62–72.
Lassek, W. D., and Gaulin, S. J. C. (2009). 
Costs and benefits of fat-free muscle 
mass in men: Relationship to mating suc￾cess, dietary requirements, and native 
immunity. Evolution and Human Behav￾ior, 30, 322–328.
Lassiter, G. D., Lindberg, M. J., Gonzalez￾Vallejo, C., Bellezza, F. S., and Phillips, 
N. D. (2009). The deliberation-without￾attention effect: Evidence for an artifac￾tual interpretation. Psychological Science,
20, 671–675.
Laub, J. H., and Lauritsen, J. L. (1994). The 
precursors of criminal offending across the 
life course. Federal Probation, 58, 51–57.
Lawson, M. A., and Kakkar, H. (2021). Of 
pandemics, politics, and personality: The 
role of conscientiousness and political 
ideology in the sharing of fake news. 
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Gen￾eral. https://doi-org/10.1037/
xge0001120.
Lawton, M. P., Moss, M. S., Winter, L., and 
Hoffman, C. (2002). Motivation in later 
life: Personal projects and well-being. Psy￾chology and Aging, 17, 539–547.
Lazarus, R. S. (1991). Emotion and Adapta￾tion. Oxford, England: Oxford University 
Press.
Lazarus, R. S., and Folkman, S. (1984). 
Stress, appraisal and coping. New York: 
Springer.
Lazarus, R. S., Kanner, A. D., and Folkman, 
S. (1980). Emotions: A cognitive–
phenomenological analysis. In R. Plut￾chik and H. Kellerman (Eds.), Theories of 
emotion (pp. 189–217). New York: Aca￾demic Press.
Le Boeuf, B. J., and Reiter, J. (1988). Life￾time reproductive success in northern 
elephant seals. In T. H. Clutton-Brock 
(Ed.), Reproductive success
(pp. 344–362). Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press.
Leary, M. R., and Kowalski, R. M. (1995). 
Social Anxiety. New York: Guilford Press.
Lee, B. W., and Leeson, P. C. (2015). Online 
gaming in the context of social anxiety. 
Psychology of Addictive Behaviors, 29(2), 
473–482.
Lee, B., Kaya, C., Chen, X., Wu, J.-R., Iwan￾aga, K., Umucu, E., Bezyak, J., Tansey, 
T. N., and Chan, F. (2019). The buffer￾ing effect of character strengths on 
depression: The intermediary role of per￾ceived stress and negative attributional 
style. European Journal of Health Psychol￾ogy, 26, 101–109. https://doi-org.lib￾proxy.wustl.edu/10.1027/2512-8442/
a000036
Lee, C., Corte, C., Stein, K. F., Finnegan, L., 
McCreary, L. L., and Park, C. G. (2015). 
Expected problem drinker possible self: 
Predictor of alcohol problems and 
tobacco use in adolescents. Substance 
Abuse, 36(4), 434–439.
Lee, D., Kelley, K. R., and Edwards, J. K. 
(2006). A closer look at relationships 
among trait procrastination, neuroticism, 
and conscientiousness. Personality and 
Individual Differences, 40, 27–37.
Lee, K., and Ashton, M. C. (2008). The 
HEXACO personality factors in the 
indigenous personality lexicons of Eng￾lish and 11 other languages. Journal of 
Personality, 76, 1011–1054.
Lee, K., Ashton, M. C., Ogunfowora, B., 
Bourdage, J. S., and Shin, K. H. (2010). 
The personality bases of socio-political 
attitudes: The role of Honesty–Humility 
and Openness to Experience. Journal of 
Research in Personality, 44(1), 115–119.
Lee, K., Ogunfowora, B., and Ashton, M. C. 
(2005). Personality traits beyond the Big 
Five: Are they within the HEXACO 
space? Journal of Personality, 73,
1437–1463.
Lee-Ross, D. (2015). Personality characteris￾tics of the self-employed: A comparison 
using the world values survey data set. 
Journal of Management Development, 
34(9), 1094–1112.
Leeuwis, F. H., Koot, H. M., Creemers, D. 
M., and van Lier, P. C. (2015). Implicit 
and explicit self-esteem discrepancies, 
victimization and the development of late 
childhood internalizing problems. Jour￾nal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 43(5), 
909–919.
Lee-Won, R. J., Herzog, L., and Park, S. G. 
(2015). Hooked on Facebook: The role 
of social anxiety and need for social 
assurance in problematic use of Face￾book. Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and 
Social Networking, 18(10), 567–574.
Legare, C. H., and Souza, A. (2012). Evalu￾ating ritual efficacy: Evidence from the 
supernatural. Cognition, 124, 1–15.
Lehmann, R., Denissen, J. J., Allemand, M., 
and Penke, L. (2013). Age and gender 
differences in motivational manifesta￾tions of the Big Five from age 16 to 60. 
Developmental Psychology, 49, 365–383.
Lei, C., Wang, Y., Shackelford, T. K., and 
Buss, D. M. (2011). Chinese mate pref￾erences: Cultural evolution and conti￾nuity across a quarter century. 
Personality and Individual Differences, 
50, 678–683.
Leikas, S., Lonnqvist, J., and Verkasalo, M. 
(2012). Persons, situations, and behav￾iors: Consistency and variability of differ￾ent behaviors in four interpersonal 
situations. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 103, 1007–1022.
Leitner, J. B., Hehman, E., Deegan, M. P., 
and Jones, J. M. (2014). Adaptive disen￾gagement buffers self-esteem from nega￾tive social feedback. Personality and 
Social Psychology Bulletin, 40(11), 
1435–1450.
Lemay, E. P., and Dobush, S. (2015). When 
do personality and emotion predict 
destructive behavior during relationship 
conflict? The role of perceived commit￾ment asymmetry. Journal of Personality, 
83(5), 523–534.
León, F. R., Morales, O., Vértiz, H., and 
Burga-León, A. (2017). Universality of 
gender differences in 10 aspects of per￾sonality: A study of younger and older 
adult Peruvians. Personality and Individ￾ual Differences, 112, 124–127.
Leopold, D. A. (2012). Primary visual cor￾tex: Awareness and blindsight. Annual 
Review of Neuroscience, 35, 91–109.
LeVay, S. (1991). A difference in hypothalamic 
structure between heterosexual and homo￾sexual men. Science, 253. 1034–1037.
LeVay, S. (1993). The sexual brain.
Final PDF to printerREFERENCES
lar31869_ref_665-718 694 10/22/22 10:41 AM
694
LeVay, S. (1996). Queer science: The use and 
abuse of research into homosexuality.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Levenson, M. R. (1992). Rethinking Psy￾chopathy. Theory & Psychology, 2(1), 
51–71.
Levenson, M. R., Kiehl, K. A., and 
Fitzpatrick, C. M. (1995). Assessing psy￾chopathic attributes in a noninstitutional￾ized population. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 68, 151–158.
Levenson, R. W. (1983). Personality 
research and psychophysiology: General 
considerations. Journal of Research in 
Personality, 17, 1–21.
Levenson, R. W. (2003). Autonomic specific￾ity and emotion. In R. J. Davidson, 
K. R. Scherer, and H. H. Goldsmith 
(Eds.), Handbook of Affective Science
(pp. 212–224). New York: Oxford Uni￾versity Press.
Levesque, J., Fanny, E., and Joanette, Y. 
(2003). Neural circuitry underlying vol￾untary suppression of sadness. Biological 
Psychiatry, 53, 502–510.
Levy, B. R., Slade, M. D., and Ranasinghe, P. 
(2009). Causal thinking after a tsunami 
wave: Karma beliefs, pessimistic explana￾tory style and health among Sri Lankan 
survivors. Journal of Religion and Health, 
48(1), 38–45.
Levy, S. M. (1990). Psychosocial risk factors 
and cancer progression: Mediating path￾ways linking behavior and disease. In K. 
D. Craig and S. M. Weiss (Eds.), and 
Health enhancement, disease prevention, 
and early intervention: Biobehavioral per￾spectives (pp. 348–369). New York: 
Springer.
Levy, S. M., and Heiden. L. A. (1990). Per￾sonality and social factors in cancer out￾come. In H. S. Friedman (Ed.), 
Personality and disease (pp. 254–279). 
New York: Wiley.
Levy, S. M., Herberman, R., Maluish, A., 
Achlien, B., and Lippman, M. (1985). 
Prognostic risk assessment in primary 
breast cancer by behavioral and immuno￾logical parameters. Health Psychology, 4,
99–113.
Lewis, D. M. (2015). Evolved individual dif￾ferences: Advancing a condition￾dependent model of personality. 
Personality and Individual Differences, 
84, 63–72.
Lewis, D. M., Al-Shawaf, L., Conroy-Beam, 
D., Asao, K., and Buss, D. M. (2017). 
Evolutionary psychology: A how-to 
guide. American Psychologist, 72(4), 353.
Lewis, D. M., Conroy-Beam, D., Al-Shawaf, 
L., Raja, A., DeKay, T., and Buss, D. M. 
(2011). Friends with benefits: The 
evolved psychology of same-and oppo￾site-sex friendship. Evolutionary Psychol￾ogy, 9(4), 147470491100900407.
Lewis, G. J., Dickie, D. A., Cox, S. R., 
Karama, S., Evans, A. C., Starr, J. M., . . . 
Deary, I. J. (2018). Widespread associa￾tions between trait conscientiousness and 
thickness of brain cortical regions. Neuro￾image, 176, 22–28.
Lewis, M., and Ramsay, D. (2004). Develop￾ment of self-recognition, personal pro￾noun use, and pretend play during the 
second year. Child Development, 75,
1821–1831.
Li, H., Zhang, Y., Wu, C., and Mei, D. 
(2916). Effects of field dependence-inde￾pendence and frame of reference on navi￾gation performance using 
multi-dimensional electronic maps. Per￾sonality and Individual Differences, 97,
289–299
Li, N. P., Valentine, K. A., and Patel, L. 
(2011). Mate preferences in the U.S. and 
Singapore: A cross-cultural test of the 
mate preference priority model. Personal￾ity and Individual Differences, 50,
291–294.
Li, N. P., van Vugt, M., and Colarelli, S. M. 
(2018). The evolutionary mismatch 
hypothesis: Implications for psychologi￾cal science. Current Directions in Psycho￾logical Science, 27(1), 38–44.
Li, P. H., Chu, L. H., Yu, M. N. (2017). Joy 
shared with others is more joyful: Inter￾personal relationship as a mediator 
between optimistic explanatory style and 
well-being. Chinese Journal of Guidance 
and Counseling, 49, 53–77.
Lieberman, D., and Lobel, T. (2012). Kin￾ship on the Kibbutz: Coresidence dura￾tion predicts altruism, personal sexual 
aversions and moral attitudes among 
communally reared peers. Evolution and 
Human Behavior, 33(1), 26–34.
Lilienfeld, S. O., Watts, A. L., and Smith, S. 
F. (2015). Successful Psychopathy: A 
Scientific Status Report. Current Direc￾tions in Psychological Science, 24(4), 
298–303.
Linville, P. W. (1987). Self-complexity as a 
cognitive buffer against stress-related ill￾ness and depression. Journal of Personal￾ity and Social Psychology, 52, 663–676.
Lippa, R. (1998). Gender-related individual 
differences and the structure of voca￾tional interests: The importance of the 
people-things dimension. Journal of Per￾sonality and Social Psychology, 74,
996–1009.
Liquete, E., Dekoninck, E., and Wisker, G. 
(2021). Exploring how degree appren￾tices experience their engineering identity 
through Life Story Interviews and the 
Twenty Statement Test (TST). Design 
and Technology Education: an Interna￾tional Journal, 26(3), 313–324.
Lishman, W. A. (1972). Selective factors in 
memory. Part 1: Age, sex, and personal￾ity attributes. Psychological Medicine, 2,
121–138.
Little, B. R. (1972a). Person-thing orientation: 
A provisional manual for the T-P scale.
Oxford, England: Oxford University, 
Department of Experimental Psychology.
Little, B. R. (1972b). Psychological man as 
scientist, humanist, and specialist. Jour￾nal of Experimental Research in Personal￾ity, 6, 95–118.
Little, B. R. (1999). Personality and motiva￾tion: Personal action and the cognitive 
revolution. In L. A. Pervin and O. P. 
John (Eds.), Handbook of personality: 
Theory and research (pp. 501–524). New 
York: Guilford Press.
Little, B. R. (2007). Prompt and circum￾stance: The generative contexts of per￾sonal projects analysis. In B. Little, K. 
Salmela-Aro, and S. D. Phillips (Eds.), 
Personal project pursuit: Goals, action, and 
human flourishing (pp. 3–49). Mahwah, 
NJ: Erlbaum.
Little, B. R. (2011). Personal projects and 
motivational counseling: The quality of 
lives reconsidered. In W. M. Cox and E. 
Klinger (Eds.), Handbook of motivational 
counseling: Goal-based approaches to 
assessment and intervention with addiction 
and other problems (2nd ed.). New York: 
Wiley-Blackwell.
Little, B. R., and Gee, T. L. (2007). The 
methodology of personal projects analy￾sis: Four modules and a funnel. In 
B. Little, K. Salmela-Aro, and S. D. Phil￾lips (Eds.), Personal project pursuit: Goals, 
action, and human flourishing
(pp. 51–94). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Little, B. R., Lecci, L., and Watkinson, B. 
(1992). Personality and personal proj￾ects: Linking Big Five and PAC units of 
analysis. Journal of Personality, 60,
501–525.
Little, B. R., Salmela-Aro, K., and Phillips, S. 
D. (2007). Personal project pursuit: Goals, 
action, and human flourishing. Mahwah, 
NJ: Erlbaum.
Little, B. R. (2020). How are you doing, 
really? Personal project pursuit and 
human flourishing. Canadian Psychology/
Psychologie canadienne, 61, 140–150.
Little, B. R., and Balsari-Palsule, S. (2021). 
Fates beyond traits: The dynamics and 
impacts of personal project pursuit. In J. 
F. Raythmann (Ed.), The handbook of 
personality dynamics and processes, pp. 
323–344. San Diego, CA: Elsevier Aca￾demic Press.
Lloyd, M. E. (1990). Gender factors in 
reviewer recommendations for manu￾script publication. Journal of Applied 
Behavior Analysis, 23, 539–543.
Löckenhoff, C. E., Chan, W., McCrae, R. R., 
De Fruyt, F., Jussim, L., De Bolle, M., 
. . . and Nakazato, K. (2014). Gender ste￾reotypes of personality: Universal and 
accurate? Journal of Cross-Cultural Psy￾chology, 45(5), 675–694.
Löckenhoff, C. E., Chan, W., McCrae, R. R., 
De Fruyt, F., Jussim, L., De Bolle, M., 
.
Final PDF to printerREFERENCES
lar31869_ref_665-718 695 10/22/22 10:41 AM
695
stereotypes of personality: Universal and 
accurate? Journal of Cross-Cultural Psy￾chology, 45(5), 675–694.
Loehlin, J. C. (2010). Is there an active 
gene–environment correlation in adoles￾cent drinking behavior? Behavior Genet￾ics, 40, 447–451.
Loehlin, J. C. (2012). The differential herita￾bility of personality item clusters. Behav￾ior Genetics, 42, 500–507.
Loehlin, J. C., and Nichols, R. C. (1976). 
Heredity, environment, and personality.
Austin: University of Texas Press.
Loehlin, J. C., Neiderhiser, J. M., and Reiss, 
D. (2003). The behavior genetics of per￾sonality and the NEAD Study. Journal of 
Research in Personality, 37, 373–387.
Loftus, E. (2011). Intelligence gathering 
after post-9/11. American Psychologist, 66, 
532–541.
Loftus, E. F. (1992). When a lie becomes 
memory’s truth: Memory distortion after 
exposure to misinformation. Current Direc￾tions in Psychological Science, 1, 121–123.
Loftus, E. F. (1993). The reality of repressed 
memories. American Psychologist, 48,
518–537.
Loftus, E. F. (2000). Remembering what 
never happened. In E. Tulving (Ed.), 
Memory, consciousness, and the brain: The 
Tallinn Conference (pp. 106–118). 
Philadelphia: Psychology Press.
Loftus, E. F. (2003). Memory in Canadian 
Courts of Law. Canadian Psychology, 44,
207–212.
London, H., and Exner, J. E., Jr. (Eds.). 
(1978). Dimensions of personality. New 
York: Wiley.
Lönnqvist, J. E., Itkonen, J. V., Verkasalo, 
M., and Poutvaara, P. (2014). The five￾factor model of personality and degree 
and transitivity of Facebook social net￾works. Journal of Research in Personality, 
50, 98–101.
Lounsbury, J. W., Sundstrom, E., Loveland, 
James M., and Gibson, L. W. (2003). 
Intelligence, “Big Five” personality traits, 
and work drive as predictors of course 
grade. Personality and Individual Differ￾ences, 35, 1231–1239.
Low, B. (1989). Cross-cultural patterns in 
the training of children: An evolutionary 
perspective. Journal of Comparative Psy￾chology, 103, 311–319.
Lowenstein, L. F. (2002). Ability and per￾sonality changes after brain injuries. 
Criminal Lawyer, 120, 5–8.
Lowry, P. E. (1997). The assessment center 
process; New directions. Journal of Social 
Behavior and Personality, 12, 53–62.
Lucas, R. E. (2007). Personality and the pur￾suit of happiness. Social and Personality 
Psychology Compass, 1, 168–182.
Lucas, R. E., and Baird, B. M. (2004). Extra￾version and emotional reactivity. Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology, 86,
473–485.
Lucas, R. E., and Diener, E. (2021). Person￾ality and subjective well-being. In O. P. 
John and R. W. Robins (Eds.), Handbook 
of Personality: Theory and Research (4th 
ed., pp. 724–742). New York: Guilford 
Press.
Lucas, R. E., and Schimmack, U. (2009). 
Income and well-being: How big is the 
gap between the rich and the poor? Jour￾nal of Research in Personality, 43, 75–78.
Lucas, R. E., Le, K., and Dyrenforth, P. S. 
(2008). Explaining the extraversion/posi￾tive affect relation: Sociability cannot 
account for extraverts’ greater happiness. 
Journal of personality, 76(3), 385–414.
Ludeke, S. G., and Carey, B. (2015). Two 
mechanisms of biased responding 
account for the association between reli￾giousness and misrepresentation in Big 
Five self-reports. Journal of Research in 
Personality, 57, 43–47.
Ludtke, O., Trautwein, U., and Husemann, 
N. (2009). Goal and personality trait 
development in a transitional period: 
Assessing change and stability in person￾ality development. Personality and Social 
Psychology Bulletin, 35, 428–441.
Lukaszewski, A. W. (2013). Testing an adap￾tationist theory of trait covariation: Rela￾tive bargaining power as a common 
calibrator of an interpersonal syndrome. 
European Journal of Personality, 27(4), 
328–345.
Lukaszewski, A. W., and Roney, J. (2010). 
Kind toward whom? Mate preferences 
for personality traits are target-specific. 
Evolution and Human Behavior, 31,
28–38.
Lukaszewski, A. W., and Roney, J. (2011). 
The origins of extraversion: Joint effects 
of facultative calibration and genetic 
polymorphism. Personality and Social 
Psychology Bulletin, 37, 409–421.
Lukaszewski, A. W., Larson, C. M., 
Gildersleeve, K. A., Roney, J. R., and 
Haselton, M. G. (2014). Condition￾dependent calibration of men’s uncom￾mitted mating orientation: Evidence from 
multiple samples. Evolution and Human 
Behavior, 35(4), 319–326.
Lukaszewski, A. W., Lewis, D. M., Durkee, 
P. K., Sell, A. N., Sznycer, D., and Buss, 
D. M. (2020). An adaptationist frame￾work for personality science. European 
Journal of Personality, 34(6), 1151–1174.
Lund, O. C. H., Tamnes, C. K., Moestue, C., 
Buss, D. M., and Vollrath, M. (2006). 
Tactics of hierarchy negotiation. Journal 
of Research in Personality, 41, 25–44.
Luntz, B. K., and Widom, C. S. (1994). Anti￾social personality disorder in abused and 
neglected children grown up. American 
Journal of Psychiatry, 151, 670–674.
Luo, J., Derringer, J., Briley, D. A., and 
Roberts, B. W. (2017). Genetic and 
environmental pathways underlying per￾sonality traits and perceived stress: 
Concurrent and longitudinal twin stud￾ies. European Journal of Personality, 
31(6), 614–629.
Luo, S., Chen, H., Yue, G., Zhang, G., 
Zhaoyang, R., and Xu, D. (2008). Pre￾dicting marital satisfaction from self, 
partner, and couple characteristics: Is it 
me, you, or us? Journal of Personality, 76,
1231–1266.
Lykken, D. T. (1982, September). Fearless￾ness. Psychology Today, 6–10.
Lykken, D. T. (1995). The antisocial person￾alities. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Lynn, R. (2008). The global bell curve: Race, 
IQ and inequality worldwide. Augusta, 
GA: Washington Summit.
Lynn, R., and Harvey, J. (2008). The decline 
of the world’s IQ. Intelligence, 36,
112–120.
Lynn, S. J., Lock, T., Loftus, E. F., Krackow, 
E., and Lilienfeld, S. O. (2003). The 
remembrance of things past: Problematic 
memory recovery techniques in psycho￾therapy. In S. O. Lilienfeld and S. J. 
Lynn (Eds.), Science and pseudoscience in 
clinical psychology (pp. 205–239). New 
York: Guilford Press.
Lyons, M. T., and Hughes, S. (2015). Mali￾cious mouths? The Dark Triad and moti￾vations for gossip. Personality and 
Individual Differences, 78, 1–4.
Lyubomirsky, S. (2001). Why are some peo￾ple happier than others? The role of cog￾nitive and motivational processes in 
well-being. American Psychologist, 56,
239–249.
Lyubomirsky, S. (2007). The How of Happi￾ness: A Scientific Approach to Getting the 
Life You Want. New York: Penguin Press.
Lyubomirsky, S., King, L., and Diener, E. 
(2005). The benefits of frequent positive 
affect: Does happiness lead to success? 
Psychological Bulletin, 131, 803–855.
Ma, V., and Schoeneman, T. J. (1997). Indi￾vidualism versus collectivism: A compari￾son of Kenyan and American 
self-concepts. Basic and Applied Social 
Psychology, 19, 261–273.
Ma, Y., Peng, H., Liu, H., Gu, R., Peng, X., 
and Wu, J. (2021). Alpha frontal asym￾metry underlies individual differences in 
reactivity to acute psychosocial stress in 
males. Psychophysiology, 58, ArtID: 
e13893
Mac Giolla, E., and Kajonius, P. J. (2018). 
Sex differences in personality are larger 
in gender equal countries: Replicating 
and extending a surprising finding. Inter￾national Journal of Psychology. https://
doi.org/10.1002/ijop.12529.
MacDonald, G., and Leary, M. R. (2005). 
Why does social exclusion hurt? The rela￾tionship between social and physical 
pain. Psychological Bulletin, 131,
202–223.
MacLaren, V. V., Best, L. A., Dixon, M. J., 
Final PDF to printerREFERENCES
lar31869_ref_665-718 696 10/22/22 10:41 AM
696
gambling and the five factor model in 
university students. Personality and Indi￾vidual Differences, 50, 335–338.
Macmillan, M. B. (2000). Restoring Phineas 
Gage: A 150th retrospective. Journal of 
the History of the Neurosciences, 9, 42–62.
Madsen, E. A., Tunney, R. J., Fieldman, G., 
Plotkin, H. C., Dunbar, R. I., Richardson, 
J. M., and McFarland, D. (2007). Kin￾ship and altruism: A cross-cultural experi￾mental study. British Journal of 
Psychology, 98(2), 339–359.
Malcolm, J. (1981). Psychoanalysis: The 
Impossible Profession. New York: Knopf.
Maleva, V., Westcott, K., McKellop, M., 
McLaughlin, R., Widman, D., and 
College, J. (2014). Optimism and college 
grades: Predicting GPA from explanatory 
style. Psi Chi Journal of Psychological 
Research, 19(3), 129–135.
Malone, J. C., Weston, D., and Levendosky, 
A. (2011). Personalities of adults with 
traumatic childhood separations. Journal 
of Clinical Psychology, 67, 1259–1282.
Malouff, J. M., Thorsteinsson, E. B., 
Schutte, N. S., Bhullar, N., and Rooke, 
S. E. (2010). The five-factor model of 
person-ality and relationship satisfaction 
of intimate partners: A meta-analysis. 
Journal of Research in Personality, 44,
124–127.
Maltby, J., Wood, A. M., Day, L., Kon, T. W. 
H., Colley, A., and Linley, P. A., (2008). 
Personality predictors of levels of forgive￾ness two and a half years after the trans￾gression. Journal of Research in 
Personality, 42, 1088–1094.
Maner, J. K., and Shackelford, T. K. (2008). 
The basic cognition of jealousy: An evo￾lutionary perspective. European Journal 
of Personality, 22, 31–36.
Mann, F. D., Engelhardt, L., Briley, D. A., 
Grotzinger, A. D., Patterson, M. W., 
Tackett, J. L., . . . and Martin, N. G. 
(2017). Sensation seeking and impulsive 
traits as personality endophenotypes for 
antisocial behavior: Evidence from two 
independent samples. Personality and 
Individual Differences, 105, 30–39.
Maranges, H. M., and Strickhouser, J. E. 
(2021). Does ecology or character mat￾ter? The contributions of childhood 
unpredictability, harshness, and tempera￾ment to life history strategies in adoles￾cence. Evolutionary Behavioral Sciences.
Marangoni, C., Garcia, S., Ickes, W., and 
Teng, G. (1995). Empathic accuracy in a 
clinically relevant setting. Journal of Per￾sonality and Social Psychology, 68,
854–869.
Marcia, J. E. (1966). Development and vali￾dation of ego-identity status. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 3,
551–558.
Marcia, J. E. (2002). Identity and psychoso￾cial development in adulthood. Identity, 
2, 7–28.
Margolis, S., and Lyubomirsky, S. (2020). 
Experimental manipulation of extra￾verted and introverted behavior and its 
effects on well-being. Journal of Experi￾mental Psychology: General, 149,
719–731.
Markett, S., Montag, C., and Reuter, M. 
(2018). Network neuroscience and per￾sonality. Personality Neuroscience, 
1(E14), 1–14.
Markey, C. N., Markey, P. M., and Tinsley, 
B. J. (2003). Personality, puberty, and 
preadolescent girls’ risky behaviors: 
Examining the predictive value of the 
five-factor model of personality. Journal 
of Research in Personality, 37, 405–419.
Markey, P. M., and Markey, C. N. (2007). 
The interpersonal meaning of sexual pro￾miscuity. Journal of Research in Personal￾ity, 41, 1199–1212.
Markus, H. (1983). Self-knowledge: An 
expanded view. Journal of Personality, 51,
543–565.
Markus, H. R., and Kitayama, S. (1991). Cul￾ture and the self: Implications for cogni￾tion, emotion, and motivation. 
Psychological Review, 98, 224–253.
Markus, H. R., and Kitayama, S. (1994). A 
collective fear of the collective: Implica￾tions for selves and theories of selves. 
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 
20, 568–579.
Markus, H. R., and Kitayama, S. (1998). The 
cultural psychology of personality. Jour￾nal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 29,
63–87.
Markus, H., and Nurius, P. (1986). Possible 
selves. American Psychologist, 41,
954–969.
Markus, H., and Nurius, P. (1987). Possible 
selves: The interface between motivation 
and the self concept. In K. Yardley and 
T. Honness (Eds.), Self and Identity: Psy￾chosocial Perspectives (pp. 157–172). 
Chichester, England: Wiley.
Marschall-Lévesque, S., Castellanos-Ryan, 
N., Vitaro, F., and Séguin, J. R. (2014). 
Moderators of the association 
between peer and target adolescent sub￾stance use. Addictive Behaviors, 39(1), 
48–70.
Marshall, T. C., Lefringhausen, K., and 
Ferenczi, N. (2015). The Big Five, self￾esteem, and narcissism as predictors of 
the topics people write about in Face￾book status updates. Personality and Indi￾vidual Differences, 85, 35–40.
Marsland, A. L., Cohen, S., Rabin, B. S., and 
Manuck, S. B. (2001). Associations 
between stress, trait negative affect, acute 
immune reactivity, and antibody 
response in hepatitis B injection in 
healthy young adults. Health Psychology, 
20, 4–11.
Martin, M., Ward, J. C., and Clark, D. M. 
(1983). Neuroticism and the recall of 
positive and negative personality 
information. Behavior Research and Ther￾apy, 21, 495–503.
Martins, A., and Calheiros, M. M. (2012). 
Construction of a self-complexity scale 
for adolescents. Psychological Assessment, 
24, 973–982.
Maslow, A. H. (1968). Toward a psychology 
of being (2nd ed.). New York: Harper 
and Row. (Original work published 
1954.)
Maslow, A. H. (1970). Motivation and person￾ality. New York: Harper and Row. (Origi￾nal work published 1954.)
Maslow, A. H., and Hoffman, E. (1996). 
Future visions: The unpublished papers of 
Abraham Maslow. Thousand Oaks, CA: 
Sage.
Mason, A., and Blankenship, V. (1987). 
Power and affiliation motivation, stress, 
and abuse in intimate relationships. Jour￾nal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
52, 203–210.
Mason, J., Southwick, S., Yehuda, R., Wang, 
S., Riney, S., Bremner, D., Johnson, D., 
Lubin, H., Blake, D., and Zhou, G. 
(1994). Elevation of serum free triiodo￾thyronine, total triiodothyronine, 
thyroxine-binding globulin, and total thy￾roxine levels in combat-related posttrau￾matic stress disorder. Archives of General 
Psychiatry, 51, 629–641.
Mason, O., Claridge, G., and Jackson, M. 
(1995). New scales for the assessment of 
schizotypy. Personality and Individual Dif￾ferences, 18, 7–13.
Massar, K., Winters, C. L., Lenz, S., and 
Jonason, P. K. (2017). Green-eyed 
snakes: The associations between psy￾chopathy, jealousy, and jealousy induc￾tion. Personality and Individual 
Differences, 115, 164–168.
Masson, J. M. (1984). The assault on truth: 
Freud’s suppression of the seduction theory.
New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
Masuda, T., and Nisbett, R. E. (2001). 
Attending holistically versus analytically: 
Comparing the context sensitivity of 
Japanese and Americans. Journal of Per￾sonality and Social Psychology, 81(5), 
922–934.
Matsumoto, D. (1999). Culture and self: An 
empirical assessment of Markus and 
Kitayama’s theory of independent and 
interdependent self-construals. Asian 
Journal of Social Psychology, 2, 289–310.
Matsumoto, D. (2006). Are cultural differ￾ences in emotion regulation mediated by 
personality traits? Journal of Cross￾Cultural Psychology, 37(4), 421–437.
Matsumoto, D., and Hwang, H. S. (2012). 
Evidence for a nonverbal expression of 
triumph. Evolution and Human Behavior,
33(5), 520–529.
Matthes, J., Wirth, W., Schemer, C., and 
Kissling, A. K. (2011). I see what you 
don’t see: The role of individual differ￾Final PDF to printerREFERENCES
lar31869_ref_665-718 697 10/22/22 10:41 AM
697
as a predictor of product placement 
recall and brand liking. Journal of Adver￾tising, 40, 85–89.
Matthews, G. (2000). Attention, automatic￾ity, and affective disorder. Behavior Modi￾fication, 24, 69–93.
Matthews, G., and Gilliland, K. (1999). The 
personality theories of H. J. Eysenck and 
J. A. Gray: A comparative review. Person￾ality and Individual Differences, 26,
583–626.
Matthews, G., Derryberry, D., and Siegle, G. 
J. (2000). Personality and emotion: Cog￾nitive science perspectives. In S. E. 
Hampson (Ed.), Advances in personality 
psychology (Vol. 1, pp. 199–237). Phila￾delphia: Taylor and Francis.
Maynard Smith, J. (1982). Evolution and the 
theory of games. Cambridge, England: 
Cambridge University Press.
McAdams, D. P. (1990). Motives. In V. 
Derlega, B. Winstead, and W. Jones 
(Eds.), Contemporary research in person￾ality (pp. 175–204). Chicago: 
Nelson-Hall.
McAdams, D. P. (1992). The five-factor 
model in personality: A critical 
appraisal. Journal of personality, 60(2), 
329–361.
McAdams, D. P. (1999). Personal narratives 
and the life story. In L. A. Pervin and 
O. P. John (Eds.), Handbook of personal￾ity: Theory and research (2nd ed., 
pp. 478–500). New York: Guilford Press.
McAdams, D. P. (2008). Personal narratives 
and the life story. In O. John, R. Robins, 
and L. A. Pervin (Eds.), Handbook of per￾sonality: Theory and research (pp. 241–
261). New York: Guilford Press.
McAdams, D. P. (2011). Narrative identity. 
In S. J. Schwartz, K. Luyckx, and V. L. 
Vignoles (Eds.), Handbook of identity 
theory and research (vols. 1 & 2, 
pp. 99–115). New York: Springer Sci￾ence + Business Media.
McAdams, D. P. (2016). Life authorship in 
emerging adulthood. In J. J. Arnett, J. J. 
Arnett (Eds.), The Oxford handbook of 
emerging adulthood (pp. 438–446). New 
York: Oxford University Press.
McAdams, D. P. (2020). The strange case of 
Donald J. Trump: A psychological reckon￾ing. Oxford University Press.
McAdams, D. P., and Bryant, F. B. (1987). 
Intimacy motivation and subjective men￾tal health in a nationwide sample. Journal 
of Personality, 55, 395–413.
McAdams, D. P., and Manczak, E. (2015). 
Personality and the life story. In M. L. 
Cooper, & R. J. Larsen (Eds.), APA 
handbook of personality and social psy￾chology, Vol. 4. Personality processes 
and individual differences (pp. 425–446). 
Washington DC: American Psychologi￾cal Association.
McAdams, D. P., and Vaillant, G. E. (1982). 
Intimacy motivation and psychosocial 
adjustment: A longitudinal study. Journal 
of Personality Assessment, 46, 586–593.
McAdams, D. P., Hoffman, B. J., Mansfield, 
E. D., and Day, R. (1996). Themes of 
agency and communion in significant 
autobiographical scenes. Journal of Per￾sonality, 64(2), 339–377.
McCarley, N. G., and Clarskadon, T. G. 
(1983). Test–retest reliabilities of the 
scales and subscales of the Myers-Briggs 
Type Indicator and of criteria for clinical 
interpretive hypotheses involving them. 
Research in Psychological Type, 6, 24–36.
McClelland D. C. (1982). The need for 
power, sympathetic activation, and ill￾ness. Motivation and Emotion, 6, 31–41.
McClelland, D. C. (1958). Risk-taking in chil￾dren with high and low need for achieve￾ment. In J. W. Atkinson (Ed.), Motives in 
fantasy, action, and society (pp. 306–327). 
Princeton, NJ: Van Nostrand.
McClelland, D. C. (1965). N achievement 
and entrepreneurship: A longitudinal 
study. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 1, 389–392.
McClelland, D. C. (1979). Inhibited power 
motivation and high blood pressure in 
men. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 88,
182–190.
McClelland, D. C. (1985). How motives, 
skills, and values determine what people 
do. American Psychologist, 40, 812–825.
McClelland, D. C., Alexander, C., and 
Marks, E. (1982). The need for power, 
stress, immune function, and illness 
among male prisoners. Journal of Abnor￾mal Psychology, 91, 61–70.
McClelland, D. C., and Jemmott, J. B. 
(1980). Power motivation, stress, and 
physical illness. Journal of Human Stress, 
6, 6–15.
McClelland, D. C., and Pilon, D. A. (1983). 
Sources of adult motives in patterns of 
parent behavior in early childhood. Jour￾nal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
44, 564–574.
McClelland, D. C., Koestner, R., and Wein￾berger, J. (1989). How do self-attributed 
and implicit motives differ? Psychological 
Review, 96, 690–702.
McConnell, A. R., Strain, L. M., Brown, C. 
M., and Rydell, R. J. (2009). The simple 
life: On the benefits of low self￾complexity. Personality and Social Psy￾chology Bulletin, 35, 823–835.
McCoul, M. D., and Haslam, N. (2001). Pre￾dicting high risk sexual behaviour in het￾erosexual and homosexual men: The 
roles of impulsivity and sensation seek￾ing. Personality and Individual Differences, 
31, 1303–1310.
McCrae, R. R., and Costa, P. T. (1991). Add￾ing liebe und arbeit: The full five-factor 
model and well-being. Personality and 
Social Psychology Bulletin, 17, 227–232.
McCrae, R. R., and Costa, P. T., Jr. (1997). 
Personality trait structure as a human 
universal. American Psychologist, 52,
509–516.
McCrae, R. R., and Costa, P. T., Jr. (1999). 
A five-factor theory of personality. In L. 
A. Pervin and O. John (Eds.), Handbook 
of personality: Theory and research (2nd 
ed.). New York: Guilford Press.
McCrae, R. R., and Costa, P. T., Jr. (2008). 
The five factor theory of personality. 
In O. P. John, R. W. Robins, and L. A. 
Pervin (Eds.), Handbook of personality
(pp. 159–181). New York: Guilford 
Press.
McCrae, R. R., and John, O. P. (1992). An 
introduction to the five-factor model and 
its applications. Journal of Personality, 60,
175–215.
McCrae, R. R., Chan, W., Jussim, L., De 
Fruyt, F., Löckenhoff, C. E., De Bolle, 
M., . . . Allik, J. (2013). The inaccuracy 
of national character stereotypes. Journal 
of Research in Personality, 47(6), 
831–842.
McCrae, R. R., Costa, Jr, P. T., and Martin, 
T. A. (2005). The NEO–PI–3: A more 
readable revised NEO personality inven￾tory. Journal of Personality Assessment, 
84(3), 261–270.
McCrae, R. R., Costa, P. T., Jr., del Pilar, G. 
H., Rolland, J., and Parker, W. D. 
(1998). Cross-cultural assessment of the 
five-factor model: The Revised NEO Per￾sonality Inventory. Journal of Cross-Cul￾tural Psychology, 29, 171–188.
McCrae, R. R., Costa, P. T., Jr., Terracci￾ano, A., Parker, W. D., Mills, C. J., De 
Fruyt, F., and Mervielde, I. (2002). Per￾sonality trait development from age 12 
to age 18: Longitudinal, cross-sectional, 
and cross-cultural analyses. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 83,
1456–1468.
McCrae, R. R., Terracciano, A., and 78 
Members of the Personality Profiles of 
Cultures Project. (2005a). Personality 
profiles of cultures: Aggregate personality 
traits. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 89, 407–425.
McCrae, R. R., Terracciano, A., and 78 
Members of the Personality Profiles of 
Cultures Project. (2005b). Universal fea￾tures of personality traits from the 
observer’s perspective: Data from 50 cul￾tures. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 88, 547–561.
McCullough, M. E., Bellah, C. G., Kilpatrick, 
S. D., and Johnson, J. L. (2001). Venge￾fulness: Relationships with forgiveness, 
rumination, well-being, and the Big Five. 
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 
27, 5, 601–610.
McCullough, M. E., Emmons, R. A., 
Kilpatrick, S. D., and Mooney, C. N. 
(2003). Narcissists as “victims”: The role 
of narcissism in the perception of trans￾gressions. Personality and Social Psychol￾Final PDF to printerREFERENCES
lar31869_ref_665-718 698 10/22/22 10:41 AM
698
McDaniel, M. J., Beier, M. E., Perkins, A. 
W., Goggin, S., and Frankel, B. (2009). 
An assessment of fakeability of self￾report and implicit personality measures. 
Journal of Research in Personality, 43,
682–685.
McDaniel, S. R., and Zuckerman, M. (2003). 
The relationship of impulsive sensation 
seeking and gender to interest and partic￾ipation in gambling activities. Personality 
and Individual Differences, 35,
1385–1400.
McGrath, R. E., and Carroll, E. J. (2012). 
The current status of “projective” “tests.” 
In H. Cooper, P. M. Camic, D. L. Long, 
A. T. Panter, D. Rindskopf, and K. J. 
Sher (Eds.), APA handbook of research 
methods in psychology, Vol. 1: Founda￾tions, planning, measures, and psychomet￾rics (pp. 329–348). Washington, DC: 
American Psychological Association.
McHoskey, J. W. (2001). Machiavellianism 
and sexuality: On the moderating role of 
biological sex. Personality and Individual 
Differences, 31, 779–789.
McLoyd, V. S. (1998). Socioeconomic disad￾vantage and child development. American 
Psychologist, 53, 188–204.
McNaughton, N. (2020). Personality neuro￾science and psychopathology: Should we 
start with biology and look for neural￾level factors? Personality Neuroscience, 
3, ArtID: e4
McNaughton, N., and Smillie, L. (2018). 
Some metatheoretical principles for per￾sonality neuroscience. Personality Neuro￾science, 1(E11), 1–13.
Mead, M. (1928). Coming of age in Samoa.
New York: Morrow.
Mead, M. (1935). Sex and temperament in 
three primitive societies. New York: 
Morrow.
Mealey, L. (1995). The sociobiology of soci￾opathy: An integrated evolutionary 
model. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 18,
523–599.
Mecacci, L., Scaglione, M. R., and Vitrano, I. 
(1991). Diurnal and monthly variations 
of temperature and self-reported activa￾tion in relation to sex and circadian 
typology. Personality and Individual Dif￾ferences, 12, 819–824.
Megargee, E. I. (1969). Influence of sex roles 
on the manifestation of leadership. Jour￾nal of Applied Psychology, 53, 377–382.
Mehl, M. R., and Pennebaker, J. W. (2003). 
The social dynamics of a cultural 
upheaval: Social interactions surrounding 
September 11, 2001. Psychological Sci￾ence, 14, 579–585.
Mehl, M. R., and Wrzus, C. (2021). Ecologi￾cal sampling methods for studying per￾sonality in daily life. In O. P. John and R. 
W. Robins (Eds), Handbook of personal￾ity: Theory and research (pp. 806–823). 
New York: Guilford Press.
Meltzer, A. L., and McNulty, J. K. (2016). 
Who is having more and better sex? The 
Big Five as predictors of sex in marriage. 
Journal of Research in Personality, 63,
62–66.
Mendle, J., Moore, S. R., Briley, D. A., and 
Harden, K. P. (2016). Puberty, socioeco￾nomic status, and depression in girls evi￾dence for gene × environment 
interactions. Clinical Psychological Sci￾ence, 4(1), 3–16.
Menninger, K. (1963). The vital balance: The 
life process in mental health and illness.
New York: Viking Press.
Messick, S. (1994). The matter of style: Man￾ifestations of personality in cognition, 
learning, and teaching. Educational Psy￾chologist, 29, 121–136.
Meston, C. M., Kilimnik, C. D., Freihart, B. 
K., and Buss, D. M. (2020). Why 
humans have sex: development and psy￾chometric assessment of a short-form ver￾sion of the YSEX? Instrument. Journal of 
Sex & Marital Therapy, 46(2), 141–159.
Miao, C., Humphrey, R. H., and Qian, S. 
(2017). A meta-analysis of emotional 
intelligence effects on job satisfaction 
mediated by job resources, and a test of 
moderators. Personality and Individual 
Differences, 116, 281–288.
Michalos, A. C. (1991). Global Report on Stu￾dent Well-Being. Vol. 1: Life Satisfaction 
and Happiness. New York: 
Springer-Verlag.
Michel, M. and Lau, H. (2021). Is blindsight 
possible under signal detection theory? 
Comment on Phillips (2021). Psychologi￾cal Review, 128, 585–591.
Midgley, C., Thai, S., Lockwood, P., 
Kovacheff, C., and Page-Gould, E. 
(2021). When every day is a high school 
reunion: Social media comparisons and 
self-esteem. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 121, 285–307.
Mike, A., Jackson, J. J., and Oltmanns, T. F. 
(2014). The conscientious retiree: The 
relationship between conscientiousness, 
retirement, and volunteering. Journal of 
Research in Personality, 52, 68–77.
Mikulincer, M., and Florian, V. (1995). 
Appraisal and coping with a real-life 
stressful situation: The contribution of 
attachment styles. Personality and Social 
Psychology Bulletin, 69, 1203–1215.
Mikulincer, M., Florian, V., and Weller, A. 
(1993). Attachment styles, coping strate￾gies, and posttraumatic psychological dis￾tress: The impact of the Gulf War in 
Israel. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 64, 817–826.
Miljeteig, K., and von Soest, T. (2022, Febru￾ary 25). An Experience Sampling Study 
on the Association Between Social Media 
Use and Self-Esteem. Journal of Media 
Psychology: Theories, Methods, and Appli￾cations. Advance online publication. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1027/1864-1105/
a000333.
Miller, A. L. (2007). Creativity and cognitive 
style: The relationship between field￾dependence–independence, expected 
evaluation, and creative performance. 
Psychology of Aesthetics, Creativity, and 
the Arts, 1, 243–246.
Miller, G. E., and Cohen, S. (2001). Psycho￾logical interventions and the immune sys￾tem: A meta-analytic review and critique. 
Health Psychology, 20, 47–63.
Miller, J. D. (2012). Five-Factor Model per￾sonality disorder prototypes: A review of 
their development, validity, and compari￾son to alternative approaches. Journal of 
Personality, 80(6), 1565–1591.
Miller, J. D., and Lynam, D. R. (2015). 
Understanding psychopathy using the 
basic elements of personality. Social and 
Personality Psychology Compass, 9(5), 
223–237.
Miller, J. D., Lynam, D., Zimmerman, R. S., 
Logan, T. K., Leukefeld, C., and Clayton, 
R. (2004). The utility of the five factor 
model in understanding risky sexual 
behavior. Personality and Individual Dif￾ferences, 36, 1611–1626.
Miller, S. L., and Maner, J. K. (2009). Sex 
differences in response to sexual versus 
emotional infidelity: The moderating role 
of individual differences. Personality and 
Individual Differences, 46, 287–291.
Miller, T. W. K., Smith, T. W., Turner, C. 
W., Guajardo, M. L., and Hallet, A. J. 
(1996). A meta-analytic review of 
research on hostility and physical health. 
Psychological Bulletin, 119, 322–348.
Millon, T. (2000a). Reflections of the future 
of DSM Axis II. Journal of Personality 
Disorders, 14, 30–41.
Millon, T. (2000b). Sociocultural conceptions 
of the borderline personality. Psychiatric 
Clinics of North America Special Issue: Bor￾derline Personality Disorder, 23, 123–136.
Millon, T., Davis, R., Millon, C., Escovar, L., 
and Meagher, S. (2000). Personality disor￾ders: Current concepts and classical foun￾dations. New York: Wiley.
Minkov, M., van de Vijver, F. J., and 
Schachner, M. (2019). A test of a new 
short Big-Five tool in large probabilistic 
samples from 19 countries. Personality 
and Individual Differences, 151, 109519.
Mischel, W. (1968). Personality and assess￾ment. New York: Wiley.
Mischel, W. (1984). Convergences and chal￾lenges in the search for consistency. 
American Psychologist, 39, 351–364.
Mischel, W. (1990). Personality dispositions 
revisited and revised: A view after three 
decades. In L. Pervin (Ed.), Handbook of 
Personality: Theory and Research (pp. 
111–134). New York: Guilford Press.
Mischel, W. (2000). A cognitive-affective sys￾tem theory of personality: 
Final PDF to printerREFERENCES
lar31869_ref_665-718 699 10/22/22 10:41 AM
699
Reconceptualizing situations, disposi￾tions, dynamics, and invariance in person￾ality structure. In E. T. Higgins and A. W. 
Kruglanski (Eds.), Motivational science: 
Social and personality perspectives (pp. 
150–176). New York: Psychology Press.
Mischel, W. (2004). Toward an integrative 
science of the person. Annual Review of 
Psychology, 55, 1–22.
Mischel, W., and Peake, P. K. (1982). 
Beyond déjà vu in the search for cross-sit￾uational consistency. Psychological 
Review, 89, 730–755.
Mischel, W., and Shoda, Y. (2010). The situ￾ated person. In B. Mesquita, L. F. Bar￾rett, and E. R. Smith (Eds.), The Mind in 
Context (pp. 149–173). New York: 
Guilford.
Mischel, W., Shoda, Y., and Mendoza￾Denton, R. (2002). Situation-behavior 
profiles as a locus of consistency in per￾sonality. Current Directions in Psychologi￾cal Science, 11, 50–54.
Mittler, P. (1971). The study of twins.
Harmondsworth, England: Penguin 
Books.
Mlacic, B., and Ostendorf, F. (2005). Taxon￾omy and structure of Croatian personal￾ity-descriptive adjectives. European 
Journal of Personality, 19, 117–152.
Moffitt, T. E. (2005). The new look of behav￾ioral genetics in developmental psycho￾pathology: Gene–environment interplay 
in antisocial behaviors. Psychological Bul￾letin, 131, 533–554.
Monk, T. H., Leng, V. C., Folkard, S., and 
Weitzman, E. D. (1983). Circadian 
rhythms in subjective alertness and core 
body temperature. Chronobiologia, 10,
49–55.
Montemayor, R., and Eisen, M. (1977). The 
development of self-conceptions from 
childhood to adolescence. Developmental 
Psychology, 13, 314–319.
Moon, J. H., Lee, E., Lee, J. A., Choi, T. R., 
and Sung, Y. (2016). The role of narcis￾sism in self-promotion on Instagram. Per￾sonality and Individual Differences, 101,
22–25.
Moore, M. (1978). Discrimination or favorit￾ism? Sex bias in book reviews. American 
Psychologist, 33, 936–938.
Moore, M., Schermer, J. A., Paunonen, S.V., 
and Vernon, P. A. (2010). Genetic and 
environmental influences on verbal and 
nonverbal measures of the Big Five. Per￾sonality and Individual Differences, 48,
884–888.
Moretti, R. J., and Rossini, E. D. (2004). The 
Thematic Apperception Test (TAT). In 
M. J. Hilsenroth and E. L. Segal (Eds.), 
Comprehensive handbook of psychological 
assessment, Vol. 2: Personality assessment
(pp. 356–371). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Morey, L. C. (1997). Personality diagnosis 
and personality disorders. In R. Hogan, J. 
A. Johnson, and S. R. Briggs (Eds.), 
Handbook of personality psychology
(pp. 919–946). San Diego: Academic 
Press.
Morgan, C. A., Southwick, S., Steffian, G., 
Hazlett, G. A., and Loftus, E. F. (2012). 
Misinformation can influence memory 
for recently experienced, highly stressful 
events. International Journal of Law and 
Psychiatry, 36, 11–17.
Morgan, C. D., and Murray, H. A. (1935). A 
method of investigating fantasies. Archives 
of Neurological Psychiatry, 34, 289–306.
Morneau-Vaillancourt, G., Dionne, G., 
Brendgen, M., Vitaro, F., Feng, B., 
Henry, J., . . . and Boivin, M. (2019). The 
genetic and environmental etiology of 
shyness through childhood. Behavior 
Genetics, 49(4), 376–385.
Morosoli, J. J., Colodro‐Conde, L., Barlow, 
F. K., and Medland, S. E. (2021). Investi￾gating perceived heritability of mental 
health disorders and attitudes toward 
genetic testing in the United States, 
United Kingdom, and Australia. Ameri￾can Journal of Medical Genetics Part B: 
Neuropsychiatric Genetics, 186(6), 
341–352.
Morris, M. L. (2016). Vocational interests in 
the United States: Sex, age, ethnicity, and 
year effects. Journal of Counseling Psy￾chology, 63(5), 604–615.
Morrison, M., Epstude, K., and Roese, N. J. 
(2012). Life regrets and the need to 
belong. Social Psychological and Personal￾ity Science, 3(6), 675–681.
Moskowitz, D. S. (1993). Dominance and 
friendliness: On the interaction of gender 
and situation. Journal of Personality, 61,
387–409.
Moskowitz, D. S., Suh, E. J., and 
Desaulniers, J. (1994). Situational influ￾ences on gender differences in agency 
and communion. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 66, 753–761.
Moskowitz, J. T. (2011). Coping interven￾tions and the regulation of positive affect. 
In S. Folkman (Ed.), The Oxford hand￾book of stress, health, and coping
(pp. 407–427). New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Moskowitz, J. T., Folkman, S., Collette, L., 
and Vittinghoff, E. (1996). Coping and 
mood during AIDS-related caregiving 
and bereavement. Annals of Behavioral 
Medicine, 18, 49–57.
Moskowtiz, D. S., and Fournier, M. A. 
(2015). The interplay of persons and situ￾ations: Retrospect and prospect. In L. 
Cooper and R. J. Larsen (Eds.), Hand￾book of Personality and Social Psychology: 
Personality Processes and Individual Differ￾ences. Washington, DC: American Psy￾chological Association.
Mota, S., Humberg, S., Krause, S., Fatfouta, 
R., Geukes, K., Schröder-Abé, M., and 
Back, M. D. (2019). Unmasking narcis￾sus: A competitive test of existing hypoth￾eses on (agentic, antagonistic, neurotic, 
and communal) narcissism and (explicit 
and implicit) self-esteem across 18 sam￾ples. Self and Identity. doi: 
10.1080/15298868.2019.1620012.
Mower, O. H. (1960). Learning theory and 
behavior. New York: Wiley.
Moya Morales, M. C., and Moya Garófano, 
A. (2021). Evolution of gender stereo￾types in Spain: from 1985 to 2018. Psico￾thema, 33, No. 1, 53–59.
Mroczek, D. K., and Spiro, A., III. (2003). 
Modeling intraindividual change in per￾sonality traits: Findings from the Norma￾tive Aging Study. Journals of Gerontology 
Series B-Psychological Sciences & Social 
Sciences, 58B, P153–P165.
Mroczek, D. K., Spiro, A., III, and Turiano, 
N. A. (2009). Do health behaviors 
explain the effect of neuroticism on mor￾tality? Longitudinal findings from the VA 
Normative Aging Study. Journal of 
Research in Personality, 43, 653–659.
Mufson, D. W., and Mufson, M. A. (1998). 
Predicting police officer performance 
using the Inwald Personality Inventory: 
An illustration from Appalachia. Profes￾sional Psychology: Research and Practice, 
29, 59–62.
Mullins-Sweatt, S. N., and Lengel, G. J. 
(2012). Clinical utility of the Five-Factor 
Model of personality disorder. Journal of 
Personality, 80(6), 1615–1639.
Multon, K. D., Brown, S. D., and Lent, R. 
W. (1991). Relation of the self-efficacy 
beliefs to academic outcomes: A meta￾analytic investigation. Journal of Counsel￾ing Psychology, 38, 30–38.
Munafo, M. R., Yalcin, B., Willis-Owen, S. 
A., and Flint, J. (2008). Association of 
the dopamine D4 receptor (DRD4) gene 
and approach-related personality traits: 
Meta-analysis and new data. Biological 
Psychiatry, 63, 197–206.
Murdock, G. P. (1980). Theories of illness: A 
world survey. Pittsburgh: University of 
Pittsburgh Press.
Murphy, K. R. (1995). Integrity testing. In 
N. Brewer and C. Wilson (Eds.), Psychol￾ogy and Policing (pp. 205–229). Hills￾dale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Murphy, M. L. M., Janicki-Deverts, D., and 
Cohen, S. (2018). Receiving a hug is 
associated with the attenuation of nega￾tive mood that occurs on days with inter￾personal conflict. PLoS ONE 13(10): 
e0203522. https://doi.org/10.1371/jour￾nal.pone.0203522.
Murphy, S. M., Vallacher, R. R., Shackel￾ford, T. K., Bjorklund, D. F., and Yunger, 
J. L. (2006). Relationship experience as a 
predictor of romantic jealousy. Personal￾ity and Individual Differences, 40,
761–769.
Final PDF to printerREFERENCES
lar31869_ref_665-718 700 10/22/22 10:41 AM
700
Murray, D. R., Trudeau, R., and Schaller, M. 
(2011). On the origins of cultural differ￾ences in conformity: Four tests of the 
pathogen prevalence hypothesis. Person￾ality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 37,
318–329.
Murray, G., Allen, N. B., and Trinder, J. 
(2002). Longitudinal investigation of 
mood variability and neuroticism pre￾dicts variability in extended states of posi￾tive and negative affect. Personality and 
Individual Differences, 33, 1217–1228.
Murray, H. (1948). Assessment of men: Selec￾tion of personnel for the Office of Strategic 
Services. New York: Rinehart.
Murray, H. A. (1933). The effect of fear 
upon estimates of the maliciousness of 
other personalities. Journal of Social Psy￾chology, 4, 310–329.
Murray, H. A. (1938). Explorations in person￾ality. New York: Oxford University Press.
Murray, H. A. (1967). Autobiography (the 
case of Murr). In E. G. Boring and G. 
Lindzey (Eds.), History of psychology in 
autobiography (Vol. 5, pp. 285–310). 
New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Murstein, B. I. (1976). Who will marry 
whom? Theories and research in marital 
choice. New York: Springer.
Myers, D. G. (1993). The Pursuit of Happi￾ness. New York: Avon Books.
Myers, D. G. (2000). The funds, friends, and 
faith of happy people. American Psycholo￾gist, 55, 56–67.
Myers, D. G., and Diener, E. (1995). Who is 
happy? Psychological Science, 6, 10–19.
Myers, D. G., and Diener, E. (2018). The sci￾entific pursuit of happiness. Perspectives 
on Psychological Science, 13, 218–225.
Myers, I. B., McCaulley, M. H., Quenk, N. 
L., and Hammer, A. L. (1998). Manual: 
A guide to the development and use of the 
Myers-Briggs Type Indicator. Palo Alto: 
Consulting Psychologists Press.
Myers, L. B. (2010). The importance of the 
repressive coping style: Findings from 30 
years of research. Anxiety, Stress & Cop￾ing: An International Journal, 23(1), 
3–17.
Myers, L. B., and Derakshan, N. (2015). The 
relationship between two types of 
impaired emotion processing: Repressive 
coping and alexithymia. Frontiers in Psy￾chology, 6.
Myrseth, H., Pallesen, S., Molde, H., John￾sen, B. H., and Lorvik, I. M. (2009). Per￾sonality factors as predictors of 
pathological gambling. Personality and 
Individual Differences, 47, 933–937.
Na, J., and Choi, I. (2009). Culture and first￾person pronouns. Personality and Social 
Psychology Bulletin, 35, 1492–1499.
Nasby, W., and Read, N. W. (1997). The life 
voyage of a solo circumnavigator: Inte￾grating theoretical and methodological 
perspectives. Journal of Personality, 65,
785–1068.
Nash, M. R. (1987). What, if anything, is 
regressed about hypnotic age regression: 
A review of the empirical literature. Psy￾chological Bulletin, 102, 42–52.
Nash, M. R. (1988). Hypnosis as a window 
on regression. Bulletin of the Menninger 
Clinic, 52, 383–403.
Nash, M. R. (1999). The psychological 
unconscious. In V. J. Derlega, B. A. Win￾stead, and W. H. Jones (Eds.), Personal￾ity: Contemporary theory and research
(pp. 197–228). Chicago: Nelson-Hall.
Nash, M. R. (2001). The truth and the hype 
of hypnosis. Scientific American (July), 
47–55.
Nathania, E., Mahdiyyah, K., Chaidir, K., 
Phalapi, Y., and Wiguna, T. (2019). The 
relationship between empathy, prosocial 
behavior, peer relationships, and emo￾tional problems in elementary schoolchil￾dren in Indonesia. Journal of Natural 
Science, Biology and Medicine, 10(3), 
118–122.
Nathanson, C., Paulhus, D. L., and Williams, 
K. M. (2006). Personality and miscon￾duct correlates of body modification and 
other cultural deviance markers. Journal 
of Research in Personality, 40, 779–802.
Neisser, U. (1998). The rising curve: Long￾term gains in IQ and related measures.
Washington, DC: American Psychologi￾cal Association.
Nelson, E., Hoffman, C. L., Gerald, M. S., 
and Schultz, S. (2010). Digit ratio 
(2D:4D) and dominance rank in female 
rhesus macaques (Macaca mulatta). 
Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology, 64,
1001–1009.
Nesse, R., and Williams, G. C. (1994). Why 
we get sick. New York: New York Times 
Books.
Nettle, D. (2006). The evolution of personal￾ity variation in humans and other ani￾mals. American Psychologist, 61, 622–631.
Nettle, D., and Liddle, B. (2008). Agreeable￾ness is related to socio-cognitive, but not 
socio-perceptual, theory of mind. Euro￾pean Journal of Personality, 22, 323–335.
Newell, B. R., and Shanks, D. R. (2014). 
Unconscious influences on decision mak￾ing: A critical review. Behavioral and 
Brain Sciences, 37(1), 1–18.
Newman, J. P. (1987). Reaction to punish￾ment in extraverts and psychopaths: 
Implications for the impulsive behavior 
of disinhibited individuals. Journal of 
Research in Personality, 21, 464–480.
Newman, J. P., Widom, C. S., and Nathan, 
S. (1985). Passive avoidance and syn￾dromes of disinhibition: Psychopathy 
and extraversion. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 48, 1316–1327.
Newman, L. C., and Larsen, R. J. (2011). 
Taking sides: Clashing views in personality 
psychology. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Newman, P. R., and Newman, B. M. (1988). 
Differences between childhood and 
adulthood: The identity watershed. Ado￾lescence, 23, 551–557.
Newton, N. J., and Stewart, A. J. (2013). 
The road not taken: Women’s life paths 
and gender-linked personality traits. Jour￾nal of Research in Personality, 47,
306–316.
Neyer, F. J. (2006). Editorial: EJP special 
edition on personality change. European 
Journal of Personality, 20, 419–420.
Neyer, F. J., and Lehnart, J. (2007). Rela￾tionships matter in personality develop￾ment: Evidence from an 8-year 
longitudinal study across young adult￾hood. Journal of Personality, 75,
535–568.
Neyer, F. J., and Voigt, D. (2004). Personal￾ity and social network effects on roman￾tic relationships: A dyadic approach. 
European Journal of Personality, 18,
279–299.
Nicolaou, A., and Xistouri, X. (2011). Field 
dependence/independence cognitive style 
and problem posing: An investigation 
with sixth grade students. Educational 
Psychology, 31, 611–627.
Niederhoffer, K. G., and Pennebaker, J. W. 
(2002). Sharing one’s story: On the bene￾fits of writing or talking about emotional 
experience. In C. R. Snyder and S. J. 
Lopez (Eds.), Handbook of positive psy￾chology (pp. 573–583). London: Oxford 
University Press.
Niederle, M., and Vesterlund, L. (2005). Do 
women shy away from competition? Do 
men compete too much? Working paper # 
11474, National Bureau of Economic 
Research, Cambridge, MA.
Nietzsche, F. (1891/1969). Thus spoke Zara￾thustra: A book for everyone and no one.
Translated with an introduction by R. J. 
Hollingdale. New York: Penguin Books.
Nigg, J. T., and Goldsmith, H. H. (1994). 
Genetics of personality disorders: Per￾spectives from personality and psychopa￾thology research. Pathological Bulletin, 
115, 346–380.
Nikčević, A. V., Marino, C., Kolubinski, D. 
C., Leach, D., and Spada, M. M. (2021). 
Modelling the contribution of the Big 
Five personality traits, health anxiety, 
and COVID-19 psychological distress to 
generalised anxiety and depressive symp￾toms during the COVID-19 pandemic. 
Journal of affective disorders, 279,
578–584.
Nisbett, R. E. (1993). Violence and U.S. 
regional culture. American Psychologist, 
48, 441–449.
Nisbett, R. E., Peng, K., Choi, I., and Noren￾zayan, A. (2001). Culture and systems of 
thought: Holistic vs. analytic cognition. 
Psychological Review, 108, 291–310.
Nisbett, R., and Cohen, D. (1996). Culture of 
honor. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Nisiforou, E., and Laghos, A. (2016). Field 
Final PDF to printerREFERENCES
lar31869_ref_665-718 701 10/22/22 10:41 AM
701
movement patterns: Investigating user 
differences through an eye tracking study. 
Interacting with Computers, 28, 407–420.
Niv, S., Tuvbld, C., Raine, A., Want, P., and 
Baker, L. A. (2012). Heritability and lon￾gitudinal stability of impulsivity in adoles￾cence. Behavior Genetics, 42, 378–392.
Noftle, E. E., and Robins, R. W. (2007). Per￾sonality predictors of academic out￾comes: Big Five correlates of GPA and 
SAT scores. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 93, 116–130.
Nolen-Hoeksema, S., Larson, J., and 
Grayson, C. (1999). Explaining gender 
differences in depressive symptoms. Jour￾nal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
77, 1061–1072.
Noller, P. (1984). Nonverbal communication 
and marital interaction. Oxford, England: 
Pergamon Press.
Norbury, A., and Husain, M. (2015). Sensa￾tion-seeking: Dopaminergic modulation 
and risk for psychopathology. Behav￾ioural Brain Research, 288, 79–93.
Norem, J. K. (1995). The power of negative 
thinking: Interview with psychology pro￾fessor Julie Norem. Men’s Health, 
10 (June), 46.
Norem, J. K. (1998). Why should we lower 
our defenses about defense mechanisms? 
Journal of Personality Special Issue: 
Defense mechanisms in contemporary per￾sonality research, 66, 895–917.
Norem, J. K. (2001). Defensive pessimism, 
optimism, and pessimism. In E. Change 
(Ed.), Optimism and Pessimism: Implica￾tions for Theory, Research, and Practice
(pp. 77–100). Washington, DC: 
American Psychological Association.
Norman, W. T. (1963). Toward an adequate 
taxonomy of personality attributes: Repli￾cated factor structure in peer nomination 
personality ratings. Journal of Abnormal 
Psychology, 66, 574–583.
Norman, W. T. (1967). 2800 personality trait 
descriptors: Normative operating character￾istics in a university population. Ann 
Arbor: Department of Psychology, Uni￾versity of Michigan.
Norris, C. J., Larsen, J. T., and Cacioppo, J. 
T. (2007). Neuroticism is associated 
with larger and more prolonged electro￾dermal responses to emotionally evoca￾tive pictures. Psychophysiology, 44,
823–826.
Nudelman, A. E. (1973). Bias in the Twenty￾Statements Test: Administration time, 
incomplete protocols, and intelligence. 
Psychological Reports, 33, 524–526.
Nusbaum, E. C., and Silva, P. J. (2011). Are 
openness and intellect distinct aspects of 
Openness to Experience? A test of the 
O/I model. Personality and Individual Dif￾ferences, 51, 571–574.
O’Boyle, E. H., Jr., Humphrey, R. H. et al. 
(2011). The relation between emotional 
intelligence and job performance: A 
meta-analysis. Journal of Organizational 
Behavior, 32, 788–818.
O’Connell, D., and Marcus, D. K. (2016). 
Psychopathic personality traits predict 
positive attitudes toward sexually preda￾tory behaviors in college men and 
women. Personality and Individual Differ￾ences, 94, 372–376.
O’Connell, M., and Sheikh, H. (2011). “Big 
Five” personality dimensions and social 
attainment: Evidence from beyond the 
campus. Personality and Individual Differ￾ences, 50, 828–833.
O’Connor, S. L., Aston-Jones, G., and James, 
M. H. (2021). The sensation seeking trait 
confers a dormant susceptibility to addic￾tion that is revealed by intermittent 
cocaine self-administration in rats. Neuro￾pharmacology, 195, 108566.
O’Donnell, J. R., and Rutherford, J. (2016). 
Trumped!: The inside story of the real 
Donald Trump—His cunning rise and spec￾tacular fall. Crossroad Press.
Oaten, M., Stevenson, R. J., and Case, T. I. 
(2009). Disgust as a disease-avoidance 
mechanism. Psychological Bulletin, 
135(2), 303–321.
Oatley, K., and Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1987). 
Towards a cognitive theory of emotions. 
Cognition and Emotion, 1, 29–50.
Ode, S., Robinson, M. D., and Wilkowski, B. 
M. (2008). Can one’s temper be cooled? 
A role for agreeableness in moderating 
neuroticism’s influence on anger and 
aggression. Journal of Research in Person￾ality, 42, 295–311.
Oerlemans, W. G., and Bakker, A. B. (2014). 
Why extraverts are happier: A day recon￾struction study. Journal of Research in 
Personality, 50, 11–22.
Ofshe, R. J. (1992). Inadvertent hypnosis 
during interrogation: False confession 
due to dissociative states: Misidentified 
multiple personality and the satanic cult 
hypothesis. International Journal of 
Clinical and Experimental Hypnosis, 40,
125–156.
Oishi, S., Kushlev, K., and Benet-Martínez, 
V. (2021). Culture and personality: Cur￾rent directions. In O. P. John and R. W. 
Robins (Eds.), Handbook of personality: 
Theory and research (pp. 686–703). The 
Guilford Press.
Oishi, S., Talhelm, T., and Lee, M. (2015). 
Personality and geography: Introverts 
prefer mountains. Journal of Research in 
Personality, 58, 55–68.
Olino, T. M., Durbin, C. E., Klein, D. N., 
Hayden, E. P., and Dyson, M. W. 
(2013). Gender differences in young 
children’s temperament traits: Compari￾sons across observational and parent￾report methods. Journal of Personality, 
81(2), 119–129.
Oliver, M. B., and Hyde, J. S. (1993). Gen￾der differences in sexuality: A meta-analy￾sis. Psychological Bulletin, 114, 29–51.
Olson, J. (2002). “I”: The creation of a serial 
killer. New York: St. Martin’s 
Paperbacks.
Oltmanns, T. F., and Emery, R. E. (2004). 
Abnormal psychology (4th ed.). Upper 
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Olweus, D. (1978). Bullies and whipping boys.
Washington, DC: Hemisphere.
Olweus, D. (1979). Stability of aggressive 
reaction patterns in males: A review. Psy￾chological Bulletin, 86, 852–875.
Olweus, D. (2001). Olweus’ core program 
against bullying and antisocial behavior: A 
teacher handbook. Research Center for 
Health promotion (Hemil Center). Ber￾gen, Norway.
Ones, D. S., and Viswesvaran, C. (1998). 
Integrity testing in organizations. Mono￾graphs in Organizational Behavior and 
Industrial Relations, 23, 243–276.
Ones, D. S., Viswesvaran, C., and Schmidt, 
F. L. (2003). Personality and absentee￾ism: A meta-analysis of integrity tests. 
European Journal of Personality, 
17(Suppl1), S19–S38.
Ong, E. Y. L., Ang, R. P., Ho, J. C. M., Lim, 
J. C. Y., Goh, D. H., Lee, C. S., and 
Chua, A. Y. K. (2011). Narcissism, extra￾version and adolescents’ self-presentation 
on Facebook. Personality and Individual 
Differences, 50, 180–185.
Oniszczenko, W., Zawadzki, B., Strelau, J., 
Reimann, R., Angleitner, A., and Spi￾nath, F. M. (2003). Genetic and environ￾mental determinants of temperament: A 
comprehensive study based on Polish 
and German samples. European Journal 
of Personality, 17, 207–220.
Oravecz, Z., Dirsmith, J., Heshmati, S., 
Vandekerckhove, J., and Brick, T. R. 
(2020). Psychological well-being and per￾sonality traits are associated with experi￾encing love in everyday life. Personality 
and Individual Differences, 153, 109620.
Origlio, J., and Odar Stough, C. (2022). 
Locus of control and pre-pandemic 
depressive symptoms related to psycho￾logical adjustment of college students to 
the covid-19 pandemic. Journal of 
American College Health, Feb 28, DOI: 
10.1080/07448481.2022.2047699.
Osgood, C. E., Suci, G. J., and Tannenbaum, 
P. H. (1957). The measurement of mean￾ing. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
Oskis, A., Smyth, N., Flynn, M., and Clow, 
A. (2019). Repressors exhibit lower corti￾sol reactivity to group psychosocial 
stress. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 103,
33–40.
Osmon, D. C., and Jackson, R. (2002). 
Inspection time and IQ: Fluid or percep￾tual aspects of intelligence? Intelligence, 
30, 119–128.
Ostendorf, F. (1990). Language and personal￾ity structure: Towards the validity of the 
five-factor model of personality.
Final PDF to printerREFERENCES
lar31869_ref_665-718 702 10/22/22 10:41 AM
702
Ostrov, J. M., and Godleski, S. A. (2010). 
Toward an integrated gender-linked 
model of aggression subtypes in early and 
middle childhood. Psychological Review, 
117, 233–242.
Otero, M. C., Wells, J. L., Chen, K. H., 
Brown, C. L., Connelly, D. E., Levenson, 
R. W., and Fredrickson, B. L. (2020). 
Behavioral indices of positivity resonance 
associated with long-term marital satisfac￾tion. Emotion, 20(7), 1225.
Otgaar, H., Howe, M. L., Dodier, O., 
Lilienfeld, S. O., Loftus, E. F.. Lynn, S. 
J., Merckelbach, H., and Patihis, L. 
(2021). Belief in unconscious repressed 
memory persists. Perspectives on Psycho￾logical Science, 16, 454–460
Oughton, J. M., and Reed, W. M. (1999). 
The influence of learner differences on 
the construction of hypermedia concepts: 
A case study. Computers in Human 
Behavior, 15, 11–50.
Owens, M.M., Hyatt, C. S., Gray, J. C., 
Carter, N. T., MacKillop, J., Miller, J. D., 
and Sweet, L. H. (2019). Cortical mor￾phometry of the five-factor model of per￾sonality: Findings from the Human 
Connectome Project full sample. Social 
Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, 14, 
381–395.
Oyserman, D., and Markus, H. (1990). Possi￾ble selves in balance: Implications for 
delinquency. Journal of Social Issues, 46,
141–157.
Oyserman, D., and Saltz, E. (1993). Compe￾tence, delinquency, and attempts to 
attain possible selves. Journal of Personal￾ity and Social Psychology, 65, 360–374.
Oyserman, D., Coon, H. M., and Kemmel￾meier, M. (2002a). Rethinking individu￾alism and collectivism: Evaluation of 
theoretical assumptions and meta-analy￾ses. Psychological Bulletin, 128(1), 3–72.
Oyserman, D., Coon, H. M., and Kemmel￾meier, M. (2002b). Cultural psychology, 
a new look: Reply to Bond (2002), Fiske 
(2002), Kitayama (2002), and Miller 
(2002). Psychological Bulletin, 128(1), 
110–117.
Oyserman, D., Destin, M., and Novin, S. 
(2015). The context-sensitive future self: 
Possible selves motivate in context, not 
otherwise. In C. Tsekeris and C. Tsekeris 
(Eds.), Revisiting the Self: Social Science 
Perspectives (pp. 99–114). New York: 
Routledge/Taylor & Francis Group.
Ozer, D. J., and Benet-Martinez, V. (2006). 
Annual Review of Psychology, 57,
401–421.
Ozer, D. J., and Buss, D. M. (1991). Two 
views of behavior: Agreement and dis￾agreement in married couples. In A. 
Stewart, J. Healy, and D. Ozer (Eds.), 
Perspectives in personality psychology
(pp. 93–108). London: Jessica Kingsley.
Palys, T. S., and Little, B. R. (1983). Per￾ceived life satisfaction and the 
organization of personal project systems. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychol￾ogy, 44, 1221–1230.
Panksepp, J. (2005). Why does separation 
distress hurt? Comment on MacDonald 
and Leary (2005). Psychological Bulletin, 
131, 224–230.
Paquet, Y., Martin-Krumm, C., Junot, A., 
and Gilibert, D. (2021). Explanatory 
style and burnout at the workplace: A 
cluster analysis. L’Encéphale: Revue de 
psychiatrie clinique biologique et thérapeu￾tique, 47, 130–136 .
Paradis, C. M., Horn, L., Lazar, R. M., and 
Schwartz, D. W. (1994). Brain dysfunc￾tion and violent behavior in a man with a 
congenital subarachnoid cyst. Hospital 
and Community Psychiatry, 45, 714–716.
Paris, J. (2017). Is psychoanalysis still rele￾vant to psychiatry? Canadian Journal of 
Psychiatry, 62, 308–312.
Park, J. H., van Leeuwen, F., and Stephen, I. 
D. (2012). Homeliness is in the disgust 
sensitivity of the beholder: Relatively 
unattractive faces appear especially unat￾tractive to individuals higher in pathogen 
disgust. Evolution and Human Behavior, 
33(5), 569–577.
Park, S. W., and Colvin, C. R. (2015). Nar￾cissism and other-derogation in the 
absence of ego threat. Journal of Personal￾ity, 83(3), 334–345.
Patrick, C. J. (1994). Emotion and psychopa￾thy: Startling new insights. Psychophysiol￾ogy, 31, 319–330.
Patrick, C. J. (Ed.). (2005). The handbook of 
psychopathy. New York: Guilford Press.
Patrick, C. J., Bradley, M. M., and Lang, P. J. 
(1993). Emotion in the criminal psycho￾path: Startle reflex modulation. Journal of 
Abnormal Psychology, 102, 82–92.
Patrick, C. J., Cuthbert, B. N., and Lang, P. 
J. (1994). Emotion in the criminal psy￾chopath: Fear image processing. Journal 
of Abnormal Psychology, 103, 523–534.
Patrick, C., Drislane, L. E., and Strickland, 
C. (2012). Conceptualizing psychopathy 
in Triarchic terms: Implications for treat￾ment. The International Journal of Foren￾sic Mental Health, 11(4), 253–266.
Patterson, C. H. (2000). Understanding psy￾chotherapy: Fifty years of client-centred the￾ory and practice. Ross-on-Wye, England: 
PCCS Books Ltd.
Paulhus, D. L. (1984). Two component mod￾els of socially desirable responding. Jour￾nal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
46, 598–609.
Paulhus, D. L. (1990). Measurement and con￾trol of response bias. In J. P. Robinson, 
P. R. Shaver, and L. Wrightsman (Eds.), 
Measures of personality and social–
psychological attitudes (pp. 17–59). San 
Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Paulhus, D. L., and Vazire, S. (2007). The 
self-report method. In R. W. Robins, R. 
C. Fraley, and R. F. Krueger (Eds.), 
Handbook of research methods in person￾ality psychology (pp. 224–239). New 
York: Guilford.
Paulhus, D. L., and Williams, K. M. (2002). 
The Dark Triad of personality: Narcis￾sism, Machiavellianism, and psychopa￾thy. Journal of Research in Personality, 36,
556–563.
Paunesku, D., Walton, G. M., Romero, C., 
Smith, E. N., Yeager, D. S., and Dweck, 
C. S. (2015). Mind-set interventions are a 
scalable treatment for academic under￾achievement. Psychological Science, 
26(6), 784–793.
Paunonen, S. V. (2002). Design and construc￾tion of the Supernumerary Personality 
Inventory (Research Bulletin 763). 
London, Ontario: University of Western 
Ontario.
Paunonen, S. V. (2003). Big Five factors of 
personality and replicated predictions of 
behavior. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 84(2), 411–424.
Paunonen, S. V., and Ashton, M. C. (1998). 
The structured assessment of personality 
across cultures. Journal of Cross-Cultural 
Psychology, 29, 150–170.
Paunonen, S. V., and Hong, R. Y. (2015). In 
defense of personality traits. In L. 
Cooper and R. J. Larsen (Eds.), Hand￾book of Personality and Social Psychology: 
Personality Processes and Individual Differ￾ences (pp. 233–260). Washington, DC: 
American Psychological Association.
Paunonen, S. V., and O’Neil, T. A. (2010). 
Self-reports, peer ratings, and construct 
validity. European Journal of Personality, 
24, 189–206.
Pedersen, N. L. (1993). Genetic and environ￾mental change in personality. In T. J. 
Bouchard and P. Proping (Eds.), 
Twins as a tool of behavioral genetics
(pp. 147–162). West Sussex, England: 
Wiley.
Penke, L., and Asendorpf, J. B. (2008a). 
Beyond global sociosexual orientations: 
A more differentiated look at sociosexual￾ity and its effects on courtship and 
romantic relationships. Journal of Person￾ality and Social Psychology, 95,
1113–1135.
Penke, L., Denissen, J.J.A., and Miller, G. F. 
(2007). The evolutionary genetics of per￾sonality. European Journal of Personality, 
21, 549–587.
Pennebaker, J. W. (2003a). The social, lin￾guistic and health consequences of emo￾tional disclosure. In J. Suls and K. A. 
Wallston (Eds.), Social psychological 
foundations of health and illness (pp. 
288–313). Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Pennebaker, J. W. (2003b). Writing about 
emotional experiences as a therapeutic 
process. In P. Salovey and A. J. Rothman 
(Eds.), Social psychology of health
(pp. 362–368). New York: Psychology 
Final PDF to printerREFERENCES
lar31869_ref_665-718 703 10/22/22 10:41 AM
703
Pennebaker, J. W., and Chung, C. K. (2011). 
Expressive writing: Connections to physi￾cal and mental health. Oxford handbook 
of health psychology (417–437). New 
York: Oxford University Press.
Pennebaker, J. W., and O’Heeron, R. C. 
(1984). Confiding in others and illness 
rates among spouses of suicide and acci￾dental-death victims. Journal of Abnormal 
Psychology, 93, 473–476.
Pennebaker, J. W., Colder, M., and Sharp, L. 
K. (1990). Accelerating the coping pro￾cess. Journal of Personality and Social Psy￾chology, 58, 528–537.
Perilloux, C., Fleischman, D. S., and Buss, 
D. M. (2008). The daughter-guarding 
hypothesis: Parental influence on chil￾dren’s mating behavior. Evolutionary Psy￾chology, 6, 217–233.
Perilloux, C., Fleischman, D. S., and Buss, 
D. M. (2011). Meet the parents: Parent￾offspring convergence and divergence in 
mate preferences. Personality and Individ￾ual Differences, 50, 253–258.
Perry, V. G. (2008). Giving credit where 
credit is due: The psychology of credit 
ratings. Journal of Behavioral Finance, 9,
15–21.
Persson, B. (2020). Genotype– Environment 
Correlation and Its Relation to 
Personality—A Twin and Family Study. 
Twin Research and Human Genetics,
23(4), 228–234.$$$
Perugini, M., and Richetin, J. (2007). In the 
land of the blind, the one-eyed man is 
king. European Journal of Personality, 21,
977–981.
Perugini, M., Hagemeyer, B., Wrzus, C., and 
Back, M. D. (2021). Dual process mod￾els of personality. In J. F. Rauthmann 
(Ed), The Handbook of Personality 
Dynamics and Processes, pp. 551–577. 
New York: Elsevier Academic Press.
Petersen, J. L., and Hyde, J. S. (2010). A 
meta-analytic review of research on gen￾der differences in sexuality, 1993–2007. 
Psychological Bulletin, 136, 21–38.
Peterson, B. E., Winter, D. G., and Doty, R. 
M. (1994). Laboratory tests of a motiva￾tional-perceptual model of conflict escala￾tion. Journal of Conflict Resolution, 38,
719–748.
Peterson, C. (1991). The meaning and mea￾surement of explanatory style. Psychologi￾cal Inquiry, 2, 1–10.
Peterson, C. (1995). Explanatory style and 
health. In G. M. Buchanan and M. E. P. 
Seligman (Eds.), Explanatory style
(pp. 233–246). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Peterson, C. (2000). The future of optimism. 
American Psychologist, 55, 44–55.
Peterson, C., and Bossio, L. M. (1991). 
Health and optimism. New York: Free 
Press.
Peterson, C., and Bossio, L. M. (2001). Opti￾mism and physical well-being. In E. C. 
Chang (Ed.), Optimism and pessimism: 
Implications for theory, research, and prac￾tice (pp. 127–145). Washington, DC: 
American Psychological Association.
Peterson, C., and Chang, E. C. (2003). Opti￾mism and flourishing. In C. L. Keyes and 
J. Haidt (Eds.), Flourishing: Positive psy￾chology and the life well-lived (pp. 55–79). 
Washington, DC: American Psychologi￾cal Association.
Peterson, C., and Park, N. (2010). What hap￾pened to self-actualization? Commentary 
on Kenrick et al. (2010). Perspectives on 
Psychological Science, 5, 320–322.
Peterson, C., and Seligman, M. E. P. (1987). 
Explanatory style and illness. Special 
issue: Personality and physical health. 
Journal of Personality, 55, 237–265.
Peterson, C., and Seligman, M. E. P. (2003). 
Character strengths before and after 
September 11. Psychological Science, 14,
381–384.
Peterson, C., Maier, S. F., and Seligman, M. 
E. P. (1993). Learned helplessness: A the￾ory for the age of personal control. New 
York: Oxford University Press.
Peterson, C., Schulman, P., Castellon, C., 
and Seligman, M. E. P. (1992). CAVE: 
Content analysis of verbatim explana￾tions. In C. P. Smith (Ed.), Motivation 
and personality: Handbook of thematic 
content analysis (pp. 383–392). New 
York: Cambridge University Press.
Peterson, C., Seligman, M. E. P., and 
Vaillant, G. E. (1988). Pessimistic 
explanatory style is a risk factor for physi￾cal illness: A thirty-five-year longitudinal 
study. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 55, 23–27.
Peterson, C., Seligman, M. E. P., Yurko, K. 
H., Martin, L. R., and Friedman, H. S. 
(1998). Catastrophizing and untimely 
death. Psychological Science, 9, 49–52.
Peterson, J. B., Smith, K. W., and Carson, S. 
(2002). Openness and extraversion are 
associated with reduced latent inhibition: 
Replication and commentary. Personality 
and Individual Differences, 33,
1137–1147.
Petrie, A. (1967). Individuality in pain and 
suffering. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press.
Petrill, S. A. (2002). The case for general 
intelligence: A behavioral genetic per￾spective. In R. J. Sternberg and E. L. 
Grigorenko (Eds.), The general factor 
of intelligence: How general is it?
(pp. 281–298). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Phillips, I., (2021). Blindsight is qualitatively 
degraded conscious vision. Psychological 
Review, 28, 558–584.
Pickering, A. D., Corr, P. J., and Gray, J. A. 
(1999). Interactions and reinforcement 
sensitivity theory: A theoretical analysis 
of Rusting and Larsen (1997). Personality 
and Individual Differences, 26, 357–365.
Pickering, A., Farmer, A., Harris, T., Red￾man, K., Mahmood, A., Sadler, S., and 
McGuffin, P. (2003). A sib-pair study of 
psychoticism, life events and depression. 
Personality and Individual Differences, 34,
613–623.
Piedmont, R. L. (2001). Cracking the plaster 
cast: Big Five personality change during 
intensive outpatient counseling. Journal 
of Research in Personality, 35, 500–520.
Pietrzak, R., Laird, J. D., Stevens, D. A., and 
Thompson, N. S. (2002). Sex differences 
in human jealousy: A coordinated study 
of forced-choice, continuous rating-scale, 
and physiological responses on the same 
subjects. Evolution and Human Behavior, 
23, 83–94.
Piff, P. K., Kraus, M. W., Côté, S., Cheng, B. 
H., and Keltner, D. (2010). Having less, 
giving more: The influence of social class 
on prosocial behavior. Journal of Person￾ality and Social Psychology, 99(5), 
771–784.
Pincus, J. H. (1999). Aggression, criminality, 
and the frontal lobes. In B. L. Miller and 
J. L. Cummings (Eds.), The Human 
Frontal Lobes: Functions and Disorders.
(pp. 547–556). New York: Guilford 
Press.
Pincus, J. H. (2001). Base Instincts: What 
Makes Killers Kill? New York: Norton.
Pinker, S. (1997). How the mind works. New 
York: Norton.
Pinker, S. (2012). The better angels of our 
nature: The decline of violence in history 
and its causes. New York: Viking.
Pipher, M. (1994). Reviving Ophelia: Saving 
the selves of adolescent girls. New York: 
Ballantine Books.
Piquero, A. R., Carriaga, M. L., Diamond, 
B., Kazemian, L., and Farrington, D. P. 
(2012). Stability in aggression revisited. 
Aggression and Violent Behavior, 17(4), 
365–372.
Pittenger, D. J. (2005). Cautionary com￾ments regarding the Myers-Briggs Type 
Indicator. Consulting Psychology Journal: 
Practice and Research, 57, 210–221.
Plavcan, J. M. (2012). Sexual size dimor￾phism, canine dimorphism, and male–
male competition in primates. Human 
Nature, 23, 45–67.
Plomin, R. (2002). Individual differences 
research in a postgenomic era. Personal￾ity and Individual Differences, 33,
909–920.
Plomin, R. (2019). Blueprint: How DNA 
makes us who we are. Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press.
Plomin, R., and Crabbe, J. (2000). DNA. 
Psychological Bulletin Special Issue: Psy￾chology in the 21st Century, 126,
806–828.
Plomin, R., and Davis, O. S. P. (2009). The 
future of genetics in psychology and psy￾chiatry: Microarrays, genome-wide asso￾ciation, and non-coding RNA. Journal of 
Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 50,
Final PDF to printerREFERENCES
lar31869_ref_665-718 704 10/22/22 10:41 AM
704
Plomin, R., and DeFries, G. E. (1985). Ori￾gins of individual differences in infancy: 
The Colorado Adoption Project. New York: 
Academic Press.
Plomin, R., DeFries, J. C., and Fulker, D. W. 
(1988). Nature and nurture during infancy 
and early childhood. New York: 
Cambridge University Press.
Plomin, R., DeFries, J. C., and Loehlin, J. C. 
(1977). Genotype–environment interac￾tion and correlation in the analysis of 
human behavior. Psychological Bulletin, 
84, 309–322.
Plomin, R., DeFries, J. C., and McClearn, G. 
E. (1990). Behavioral Genetics: A Primer
(2nd ed.). New York: W. H. Freeman.
Plomin, R., DeFries, J. C., and McClearn, G. 
E. (2008). Behavioral genetics. New York: 
Macmillan.
Plomin, R., DeFries, J. C., Knopik, V. S., and 
Neiderheiser, J. (2013). Behavioral genet￾ics. Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave 
Macmillan.
Plomin, R., DeFries, J. C., McClern, G. E., 
and McGuffin, P. (2001). Behavioral 
genetics (4th ed.). New York: Worth.
Plutchik, R. (1980). A general psychoevolu￾tionary theory of emotion. In R. Plutchik 
and H. Kellerman (Eds.), Emotion: The￾ory, Research, and Experience: Vol. 1: The￾ories of Emotion (pp. 3–31). New York: 
Academic Press.
Pocuca, N., Hides, L., Quinn, C. A., White, 
M. J., Mewton, L., and Loxton, N. J. 
(2019). An exploratory study of the rela￾tionship between neuroticism and prob￾lematic drinking in emerging adulthood, 
and the moderating effect of social anxi￾ety. Personality and Individual Differences, 
145, 132–144.
Polderman, T. J., Kreukels, B. P., Irwig, M. 
S., Beach, L., Chan, Y. M., Derks, E. M., 
. . . and Raynor, L. (2018). The biologi￾cal contributions to gender identity and 
gender diversity: Bringing data to the 
table. Behavior Genetics, 48(2), 95–108.
Pollock, V. E., Briere, J., Schneider, L., 
Knop, J., Mednick, S., and Goodwin, D. 
W. (1990). Childhood antecedents of 
antisocial behavior: Parental alcoholism 
and physical abusiveness. American Jour￾nal of Psychiatry, 147, 1290–1293.
Poropat, A. E. (2009). A meta-analysis of the 
five-factor model of personality and aca￾demic performance. Psychological 
Bulletin, 135, 322–338.
Post, J. M. (Ed.). (2003). The psychological 
assessment of political leaders. Ann Arbor: 
University of Michigan Press.
Price, M. E., Cosmides, L., and Tooby, J. 
(2002). Punitive sentiment as an anti–
free rider psychological device. Evolution 
and Human Behavior, 23, 203–231.
Prior, H., Schwarz, A., and Güntürkün, O. 
(2008). Mirror-induced behavior in the 
magpie (Pica pica): Evidence of 
self-recognition. Public Library of Science: 
Biology, 6(8), 202. doi:10.1371/ journal.
pbio.0060202.
Privado, J., Román, F. J., Saénz-Urturi, C., 
Burgaleta, M., and Colom, R. (2017). 
Gray and white matter correlates of the 
Big Five personality traits. Neuroscience, 
349, 174–184.
Promislow, D. (2003). Mate choice, sexual 
conflict, and evolution of senescence. 
Behavior Genetics, 33, 191–201.
Prusik, M., Konopka, K., and Kocur, D. 
(2021). Too many shades of gray: The 
Dark Triad and its linkage to coercive 
and coaxing tactics to obtain sex and the 
quality of romantic relationships. Person￾ality and Individual Differences, 170,
110413.
Pullmann, H., Raudsepp, L., and Allik, J. 
(2006). Stability and change in adoles￾cents’ personality: A longitudinal study. 
European Journal of Personality, 20,
447–459.
Pulver, C. A., and Kelly, K. R. (2008). Incre￾mental validity of the Myers-Briggs Type 
Indicator in predicting academic major 
selection of undecided university stu￾dents. Journal of Career Assessment, 16,
441–455.
Putwain, D. W. (2019). An examination of 
the self-referent executive processing 
model of test anxiety: Control, emo￾tional regulation, self-handicapping, and 
examination performance. European 
Journal of Psychology of Education, 34,
341–358.
Quinn-Nilas, C., Kennett, D. J., and Maki, K. 
(2019). Examining explanatory style for 
failure of direct entry and transfer stu￾dents using structural equation modeling. 
Educational Psychology, Feb 23, 2019, 
DOI: 10.1080/01443410.2019.1574340
Rafaeli-Mor, E., and Steinberg, J. (2002). 
Self-complexity and well-being: A review 
and research synthesis. Personality and 
Social Psychology Review, 6, 31–58.
Raine, A. (2002). Biosocial studies of antiso￾cial and violent behavior in children and 
adults: A review. Journal of Abnormal 
Child Psychology, 30, 311–326.
Raine, A., Meloy, J. R., and Bihrle, S. 
(1998). Reduced prefrontal and 
increased subcortical brain functioning 
assessed using positron emission tomo￾graphy in predatory and affective murder￾ers. Behavioral Sciences and the Law 
Special Issue: Impulsive Aggression, 16,
319–332.
Ramírez-Maestre, C., Esteve, R., Serrano￾Ibáñez, E. R., López-Martínez, A. E., 
Ruiz-Párraga, G. T., and Rivas-Moya, T. 
(2020). Psychometric characteristics and 
factorial structures of the Defensive Pes￾simism Questionnaire—Spanish Version 
(DPQ-SV). PLoS ONE, 15. https://doi.
org/10.1371/journal.pone.0229695.
Rammsayer, T. H., and Brandler, S. (2002). 
On the relationship between general fluid 
intelligence and psychophysical indica￾tors of temporal resolution in the brain. 
Journal of Research in Personality, 36,
507–530.
Rammstedt, B., Goldberg, L. R., and Borg, I. 
(2010). The measurement equivalence of 
Big-Five factor markers for persons with 
different levels of education. Journal of 
Research in Personality, 44, 53–61.
Rammstedt, B., Spinath, F. M., Richter, D., 
and Schupp, J. (2013). Partnership lon￾gevity and personality congruence in cou￾ples. Personality and Individual 
Differences, 54(7), 832–835.
Ramos, A. M., Griffin, A. M., Neiderhiser, J. 
M., and Reiss, D. (2019). Did I inherit 
my moral compass? Examining socializa￾tion and evocative mechanisms for virtu￾ous character development. Behavior 
Genetics, 49(2), 175–186.
Randler, C., and Jankowski, K. S. (2014). 
Evidence for the validity of the Compos￾ite Scale of Morningness based on stu￾dents from Germany and 
Poland—Relationship with sleep–wake 
and social schedules. Biological Rhythm 
Research, 45(4), 653–659.
Randler, C., and Kretz, S. (2011). Assorta￾tive mating in morningness–eveningness. 
International Journal of Psychology, 46(2), 
91–96.
Raskin, J. D. (2001). The modern, the post￾modern, and George Kelly’s personal 
construct psychology. American Psycholo￾gist, 56, 368–369.
Raskin, R., and Hall, C. S. (1979). A narcis￾sistic personality inventory. Psychological 
Reports, 45, 590.
Raskin, R., and Shaw, R. (1987). Narcissism 
and the use of personal pronouns. Unpub￾lished manuscript.
Raskin, R., and Terry, H. (1988). A principle￾components analysis of the narcissistic 
personality inventory and further evidence 
of its construct validity. Journal of Person￾ality and Social Psychology, 54, 890–902.
Rattan, A., Good, C., and Dweck, C. S. 
(2012). “It’s OK—Not everyone can be 
good at math”: Instructors with an entity 
theory comfort (and demotivate) stu￾dents. Journal of Experimental Social Psy￾chology, 48, 731–737.
Rattan, A., Savani, K., Chugh, D., and 
Dweck, C. S. (2015). Leveraging mind￾sets to promote academic achievement: 
Policy recommendations. Perspectives on 
Psychological Science, 10(6), 721–726.
Rauthmann, J., and Denissen, J. J. A. 
(2011). I often do it vs. I like doing it: 
Comparing a frequency- and valency￾approach to extraversion. Personality and 
Individual Differences, 50, 1283–1288.
Rawlings, D. (2003). Personality correlates 
of liking for “unpleasant” paintings and 
Final PDF to printerREFERENCES
lar31869_ref_665-718 705 10/22/22 10:41 AM
705
photographs. Personality and Individual 
Differences, 34, 395–410.
Regan, P. C., and Atkins, L. (2006). Sex dif￾ferences and similarities in frequency and 
intensity of sexual desire. Social Behavior 
and Personality, 34, 95–102.
Reidy, D. E., Zeichner, A., Foster, J. D., and 
Martinez, M. A. (2008). Effects of narcis￾sistic entitlement and exploitativeness on 
human physical aggression. Personality 
and Individual Differences, 44, 685–875.
Renn, K. A., and Reason, R. D. (2021). Col￾lege students in the United States: Charac￾teristics, experiences, and outcomes. Stylus 
Publishing, LLC.
Renner, W., Kandler, C., Bleidorn, W., Rie￾mann, R., Angleitner, A., Spinath, F. M., 
and Menschik-Bendele, J. (2012). 
Human values: Genetic and environmen￾tal effects on five lexically derived 
domains and their facets. Personality and 
Individual Differences, 52, 89–93.
Renshon, S. A. (1998). Analyzing the psy￾chology and performances of presidential 
candidates at a distance: Bob Dole and 
the 1996 presidential campaign. Leader￾ship Quarterly, 9, 377–395.
Renshon, S. A. (2005). George W. Bush’s 
cowboy politics: An inquiry. Political Psy￾chology, 26, 585–614.
Rentzsch, K. and Schröder-Abé, M. (2022). 
Top down or bottom up? Evidence from 
the longitudinal development of global 
and domain-specific self-esteem in adult￾hood. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 122, 714–730.
Rhee, E., Uleman, J., Lee, H., and Roman, R. 
(1995). Spontaneous self-descriptions and 
ethnic identities in individualistic and col￾lectivist cultures. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 69, 142–152.
Rheingold, H. L., and Cook, K. V. (1975). 
The contents of boys’ and girls’ rooms as 
an index of parents’ behavior. Child 
Development, 46, 459–463.
Rhodenwalt, F., and Morf, C. (1998). On 
self-aggrandizement and anger: A tempo￾ral analysis of narcissism and affective 
reactions to success and failure. Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology, 74,
672–685.
Richardson, A. K., and Winter, D. G. 
(2021). U.S. Senators’ power motivation 
and their votes for war versus peace. 
Peace and Conflict: Journal of Peace Psy￾chology, 27, 524–533.
Richardson, J. A., and Turner, T. E. (2000). 
Field dependence revisited I: Intelligence. 
Educational Psychology, 20, 255–270.
Richardson, M., and Abraham, C. (2009). 
Conscientiousness and achievement 
motivation predict performance. Euro￾pean Journal of Personality, 23, 589–605.
Ridley, M. (1999). Genome: The autobiogra￾phy of a species in 23 chapters. New York: 
HarperCollins.
Rind, B., Tromovitch, P., and Bouserman, R. 
(1998). A meta-analytic examination of 
assumed properties of child sexual abuse 
(CSA) using college samples. Psychologi￾cal Bulletin, 124, 22–53.
Rindermann, H. (2008). Relevance of educa￾tion and intelligence at the national level 
for the economic welfare of people. Intel￾ligence, 36, 127–142.
Ristvedt, S. L., and Trinkaus, K. M. (2005). 
Psychological factors related to delay in 
consultation for cancer symptoms. Psy￾cho-oncology, 14, 339–350.
Ritts, V., and Patterson, M. L. (1996). 
Effects of social anxiety and action iden￾tification on impressions and thoughts in 
interaction. Journal of Social and Clinical 
Psychology, 15, 191–205.
Ritvo, L. B. (1990). Darwin’s influence on 
Freud: A tale of two sciences. New Haven, 
CT: Yale University Press.
Robbins, R. and John, O. P. (1997). Accu￾racy and Bias in Self-Perception: Individ￾ual Differences in Self-Enhancement and 
the Role of Narcissism. Journal of Person￾ality and Social Psychology, 66, 206–219.
Roberts, B. W., and DelVecchio, W. F. 
(2000). The rank-order consistency of per￾sonality traits from childhood to old age: 
A quantitative review of the longitudinal 
studies. Psychological Bulletin, 126, 3–25.
Roberts, B. W., Caspi, A., and Moffitt, T. E. 
(2001). The kids are alright: Growth and 
stability in personality development from 
adolescence to adulthood. Journal of Per￾sonality and Social Psychology, 81(4), 
670–683.
Roberts, B. W., Caspi, A., and Moffitt, T. E. 
(2003). Work experiences and personal￾ity development in young adulthood. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychol￾ogy, 84(5), 582–593.
Roberts, B. W., Walton, K. R., and 
Viechtbauer, W. (2006). Patterns of 
mean-level change in personality traits 
across the life course: A meta-analysis of 
longitudinal studies. Psychological Bulle￾tin, 132, 1–25.
Roberts, J. E., and Monroe, S. M. (1992). 
Vulnerable self-esteem and depressive 
symptoms: Prospective findings compar￾ing three alternative conceptualizations. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychol￾ogy, 62, 804–812.
Roberts, W. B., and Robins, R. W. (2004). Per￾son-environment fit and its implications for 
personality development: A longitudinal 
study. Journal of Personality, 72, 89–110.
Robertson, S. M. C., Short, S. D., Sawyer, L., 
and Sweazy, S. (2020). Randomized con￾trolled trial assessing the efficacy of 
expressive writing in reducing anxiety in 
first-year college students: The role of lin￾guistic features. Psychology and Health.
https://doi.org/10.1080/08870446.2020.
1827146.
Robins, R. W., and John, O. P. (1997). Self￾perception, visual perspective, and 
narcissism: Is seeing believing? Psycholog￾ical Science, 8, 37–42.
Robins, R. W., Caspi, A., and Moffitt, T. E. 
(2002). It’s not just who you’re with, it’s 
who you are: Personality and relationship 
experiences across multiple relationships. 
Journal of Personality, 70, 925–964.
Robins, R. W., Fraley, R. C., Roberts, B. W., 
and Trzesniewski, K. H. (2001). A longi￾tudinal study of personality change in 
young adulthood. Journal of Personality, 
69(4), 617–640.
Rodriguez, N. N., and Lukaszewski, A. W. 
(2020). Functional coordination of per￾sonality strategies with physical strength 
and attractiveness: A multi-sample inves￾tigation at the HEXACO facet-level. Jour￾nal of Research in Personality, 89, 104040.
Roediger, H. L., and McDermott K. B. 
(1995). Creating false memories: Remem￾bering words not presented in lists. Jour￾nal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, 
Memory, and Cognition, 21, 803–814.
Roediger, H. L., Balota, D. A., and Watson, 
J. M. (2001). Spreading activation and 
arousal of false memories. In Henry L. 
Roediger, III, and James S. Nairne 
(Eds.), The nature of remembering: Essays 
in honor of Robert G. Crowder (pp. 
95–115). Washington, DC: American 
Psychological Association.
Roediger, H. L., McDermott, K. B., and Rob￾inson, K. J. (1998). The role of associa￾tive processes in creating false memories. 
In M. A. Conway, S. E. Gathercole, and 
C. Cornoldi (Eds.), Theories of memory II
(pp. 187–246). Hove, Sussex, England: 
Psychological Press.
Rogers, C. R. (1957). The necessary and suf￾ficient conditions of therapeutic personal￾ity change. Journal of Consulting 
Psychology, 21, 95–103.
Rogers, C. R. (1975). Empathic: An unap￾preciated way of being. The Counseling 
Psychologist, 5, 2–10.
Rogers, C. R. (2002). Carl Rogers: The quiet 
revolutionary, an oral history. Roseville, 
CA: Penmarin Books.
Rogness, G. A., and McClure, E. B. (1996). 
Development and neurotransmitter￾environment interactions. Development 
and Psychopathology, 8, 183–199.
Romero, C., Master, A., Paunesku, D., 
Dweck, C. S., and Gross, J. J. (2014). 
Academic and emotional functioning in 
middle school: The role of implicit theo￾ries. Emotion, 14(2), 227–234.
Romero, E., Luengo, M. T., Carrillo-de-la￾Pena, T., and Otero-Lopez, J. M. (1994). 
The act frequency approach to the study 
of impulsivity. European Journal of Per￾sonality, 8, 119–134.
Rosch, E. (1975). Cognitive reference points. 
Cognitive Psychology, 7, 532–547.
Final PDF to printerREFERENCES
lar31869_ref_665-718 706 10/22/22 10:41 AM
706
Rose, R. J. (1995). Genes and behavior. 
Annual Review of Psychology, 46,
625–654.
Rosenzweig, S. (1986). Idiodynamics vis-à￾vis psychology. American Psychologist, 41,
241–245.
Rosenzweig, S. (1994). The historic expedi￾tion to America (1909): Freud, Jung, and 
Hall the king-maker. St. Louis, MO: Rana 
House.
Rosenzweig, S. (1997). “Idiographic” vis-à￾vis “idiodynamic” in the historical per￾spective of personality theory: 
Remembering Gordon Allport, 
1897–1997. Journal of the History of the 
Behavioral Sciences, 33, 405–419.
Ross, K. M., Liu, S., Tomfohr, L. M., and 
Miller, G. E. (2013). Self-esteem variabil￾ity predicts arterial stiffness trajectories 
in healthy adolescent females. Health Psy￾chology, 32(8), 869–876.
Ross, L., Greene, D., and House, P. (1977). 
The false consensus effect: An egocentric 
bias in social perception and attribution 
processes. Journal of Experimental Social 
Psychology, 13, 279–301.
Ross, S. R., Canada, K. E., and Rausch, M. 
K. (2002). Self-handicapping and the five 
factor model of personality: Mediation 
between neuroticism and conscientious￾ness. Personality and Individual Differ￾ences, 32, 1173–1184.
Rothbart, M. K. (1981). Measurement of 
temperament in infancy. Child Develop￾ment, 52, 569–578.
Rothbart, M. K. (1986). Longitudinal obser￾vation of infant temperament. Develop￾mental Psychology, 22, 356–365.
Rothbart, M. K., and Hwang, J. (2005). Tem￾perament. In A. J. Elliot and C. S. Dweck 
(Eds.), Handbook of competence & motiva￾tion (pp. 167–184). New York: Guilford.
Rotter, J. B. (1971). Generalized expectan￾cies for interpersonal trust. American Psy￾chologist, 26, 443–452.
Rotter, J. B. (1990). Internal versus external 
control of reinforcement: A case history 
of a variable. American Psychologist, 45,
489–493.
Rowe, D. C. (2001). Biology and crime. New 
York: Roxbury.
Rozin, P. (1996). Towards a psychology of 
food and eating: From motivation to 
module to model to marker, morality, 
meaning, and metaphor. Current Direc￾tions in Psychological Science, 5(1), 
18–24.
Rozin, P. (2003). Five potential principles 
for understanding cultural differences in 
relation to individual differences. Journal 
of Research in Personality, 37, 273–283.
Rozin, P., and Nemeroff, C. (1990). The 
laws of sympathetic magic: A psychologi￾cal analysis of similarity and contagion. 
In J. W. Stigler, R. A. Shweder, and G. 
Herdt (Eds.), Cultural psychology: 
Essays on comparative human 
development (pp. 205–232). Cambridge 
University Press.
Ruch, W., Heintz, S., Gander, F., Hofmann, 
J., Platt, T., and Proyer, R. T. (2021). 
The long and winding road: a compre￾hensive analysis of 50 years of Eysenck 
instruments for the assessment of person￾ality. Personality and Individual Differ￾ences, 169, 110070.
Ruchkin, V. V., Koposov, R. A., Eisemann, 
M., and Hagglof, B. (2002). Alcohol use 
in delinquent adolescents from Northern 
Russia: The role of personality, parental 
rearing and family history of alcohol 
abuse. Personality and Individual Differ￾ences, 32, 1139–1148.
Rule, A. (2000). The stranger beside me. New 
York: Norton.
Runge, J. M., Lang, J. W. B., Zettler, I., and 
Lievens, F. (2020). Predicting counter￾productive work behavior: Do implicit 
motives have incremental validity beyond 
explicit traits? Journal of Research in Per￾sonality, 89, ArtID: 104019
Runyon, W. M. (1983). Idiographic goals 
and methods in the study of lives. Journal 
of Personality, 51, 413–437.
Russell, V. M., and McNulty, J. K. (2011). 
Frequent sex protects intimates from the 
negative implications of their neuroti￾cism. Social Psychological and Personality 
Science, 2, 220–227.
Rusting, C. L., and Larsen, R. J. (1997). 
Extraversion, neuroticism, and suscepti￾bility to positive and negative affect: A 
test of two theoretical models. Personality 
and Individual Differences, 22, 607–612.
Rusting, C. L., and Larsen, R. J. (1998a). 
Diurnal patterns of unpleasant mood: 
Associations with neuroticism, depres￾sion, and anxiety. Journal of Personality, 
66, 85–103.
Rusting, C. L., and Larsen, R. J. (1998b). 
Personality and cognitive processing of 
affective information. Personality and 
Social Psychology Bulletin, 24, 200–213.
Rusting, C. L., and Larsen, R. J. (1999). 
Clarifying Gray’s theory of personality: A 
response to Pickering, Corr, and Gray. 
Personality and Individual Differences, 26,
367–372.
Ryan, R. M., and Deci, E. L. (2000). Self￾determination theory and the facilitation 
of intrinsic motivation, social develop￾ment, and well-being. American Psycholo￾gist, 55, 68–78.
Ryff, C., Lee, Y., and Na, K. (1995). Through 
the lens of culture: Psychological well-being 
at mid-life. Unpublished manuscript, Uni￾versity of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
Sagarin, B. J. (2005). Reconsidering evolved 
sex differences in jealousy: Comment on 
Harris (2003). Personality and Social Psy￾chology Review, 9, 62–75.
Sagarin, B. J., Becker, D. V., Guadagno, R. 
E., Nicastle, L. D., and Millevoi, A. 
(2003). Sex differences (and similarities) 
in jealousy: The moderating influence of 
infidelity experience and sexual orienta￾tion. Evolution and Human Behavior, 24,
17–23.
Sagarin, B. J., Martin, A. L., Clutinho, S. A., 
and Edlund, J. E. (2009). A meta-analysis 
of studies examining sex differences in jeal￾ousy using continuous measures. Paper 
presented to the Evolutionary Psychology 
Preconference, Annual Meeting of the 
Society of Personality and Social Psy￾chology, Tampa, Florida.
Sagarin, B. J., Martin, A. L., Coutinho, S. A., 
Edlund, J. E., Patel, L., Skowronski, J. J., 
and Zengel, B. (2012). Sex differences in 
jealousy: A meta-analytic examination. Evo￾lution and Human Behavior, 33, 595–613.
Sagie, A., and Elizur, D. (1999). Achieve￾ment motive and entrepreneurial orienta￾tion: A structural analysis. Journal of 
Organizational Behavior, 20, 375–387.
Sakuta, A., and Fukushima, A. (1998). A 
study on abnormal findings pertaining to 
the brain in criminals. International Medi￾cal Journal, 5, 283–292.
Salgado, J. F., Moscoso, S., and Lado, M. 
(2003). Evidence of cross-cultural invari￾ant of the Big Five personality dimen￾sions in work settings. European Journal 
of Personality, 17, S67–S76.
Salovey, P., and Mayer, J. D. (1990). Emo￾tional intelligence. Imagination, Cogni￾tion, and Personality, 9, 185–211.
Sam, D. L. (1994). The psychological adjust￾ment of young immigrants in Norway. 
Scandinavian Journal of Psychology, 35,
240–253.
Samuel, D. B., and Gore, W. L. (2012). Mal￾adaptive variants of conscientiousness 
and agreeableness. Journal of Personality, 
80(6), 1669–1696.
Sandvik, E., Diener, E., and Seidlitz, L. 
(1993). Subjective well-being: The con￾vergence and stability of self-report and 
non-self-report measures. Journal of Per￾sonality, 61, 317–342.
Santayana, G. (1905/1980). Reason in com￾mon sense: The life of reason (Vol. 1.) 
New York: Dover.
Sapienza, P., Zingales, L., and Maestripieri, 
D. (2009). Gender differences in finan￾cial risk aversion and career choices are 
affected by testosterone. Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Science, USA, 
106, 15268–15273.
Sapolsky, R. M. (1987). Stress, social status, 
and reproductive physiology in free-living 
baboons. In D. Crews (Ed.), Psychobiol￾ogy of reproductive behavior: An evolution￾ary perspective. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 
Prentice Hall.
Saroglou, V. (2002). Religion and the five 
factors of personality: A meta-analytic 
review. Personality and Individual Differ￾ences, 32, 15–25.
Saroglou, V., and Fiasse, L. (2003). Birth 
Final PDF to printerREFERENCES
lar31869_ref_665-718 707 10/22/22 10:41 AM
707
among young adults from a three-sibling 
family. Personality and Individual Differ￾ences, 35(1), 19–29.
Satterfield, J. H., and Schelle, A. M. (1984). 
Childhood brain function differences in 
delinquent and non-delinquent hyperac￾tive boys. Electroencephalography and 
Clinical Neurophysiology, 57, 199–207.
Saucier, G. (2003). Factor structure of Eng￾lish-Language personality Type-nouns. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychol￾ogy, 85(4), 695–708.
Saucier, G. (2009). Recurrent personality 
dimensions in inclusive lexical studies: 
Indications for a Big Six structure. Jour￾nal of Personality, 77, 1577–1614.
Saucier, G. (2010). The structure of social 
effects: Personality as impact on others. 
European Journal of Personality, 24,
222–240.
Saucier, G., and Goldberg, L. R. (1996). The 
language of personality: Lexical perspec￾tives on the five-factor model. In J. S. 
Wiggins (Ed.), The five-factor model of 
personality: Theoretical perspectives
(pp. 21–50). New York: Guilford Press.
Saucier, G., and Goldberg, L. R. (1998). 
What is beyond the Big Five? Journal of 
Personality, 66, 495–524.
Saucier, G., and Goldberg, L. R. (2001). Lex￾ical studies of indigenous personality fac￾tors: Premises, products, and prospects. 
Journal of Personality, 69(6), 847–879.
Saucier, G., Georgiades, S., Tsaousis, I., and 
Goldberg, L. R. (2005). The factor struc￾ture of Greek personality adjectives. Jour￾nal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
5, 856–875.
Sauter, D. A., Eisner, F., Ekman, P., and 
Scott, S. K. (2010). Cross-cultural recog￾nition of basic emotions through nonver￾bal emotional vocalizations. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences, 
107(6), 2408–2412.
Scarr, S. (1968). Environmental bias in twin 
studies. Eugenics Quarterly, 15, 34–40.
Scarr, S., and Carter-Saltzman, L. (1979). 
Twin method: Defense of a critical 
assumption. Behavior Genetics, 9,
527–542.
Scarr, S., and McCartney, K. (1983). How 
children make their own environments: 
A theory of genotype environment 
effects. Child Development, 54, 424–435.
Scealy, M., Phillips, J. G., and Stevenson, R. 
(2002). Shyness and anxiety as predic￾tors of patterns of Internet usage. Cyber 
Psychology and Behavior, 5, 507–515.
Scelza, B. A. (2014). Jealousy in a small￾scale, natural fertility population: The 
roles of paternity, investment and love in 
jealous response. Evolution and Human 
Behavior, 35(2), 103–108.
Scelza, B. A., Prall, S. P., Blumenfield, T., 
Crittenden, A. N., Gurven, M., Kline, M., 
. . . and McElreath, M. (2019). Patterns 
of paternal investment predict 
cross-cultural variation in jealous 
response. Nature Human Behaviour, 4, 
20–26.
Schacter, D. L. (1997). Searching for mem￾ory: The brain, the mind, and the past.
New York: Basic Books.
Schaffhuser, K., Allemand, M., and Martin, 
M. (2014). Personality traits and relation￾ship satisfaction in intimate couples: 
Three perspectives on personality. 
European Journal of Personality, 28(2), 
120–133.
Schaller, M. (2016). The behavioral immune 
system. In D. M. Buss (Ed.), The hand￾book of evolutionary psychology. Hoboken, 
NJ: Wiley.
Schaller, M., Kenrick, D., Neel, R., and 
Neuberg, S. (2017). Evolution and 
human motivation: A fundamental 
motives framework. Social and Personal￾ity Psychology Compass, 11(6), [e12319]. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/spc3.12319.
Schaller, M., Murray, D. R., and Hofer, M. 
K. (2021). The behavioural immune sys￾tem and pandemic psychology: the 
evolved psychology of disease-avoidance 
and its implications for attitudes, behav￾iour, and public health during epidemic 
outbreaks. European Review of Social Psy￾chology, 1–37.
Scheier, M. F, and Carver, C. S. (1985). 
Optimism, coping, and health: Assess￾ment and implications of generalized out￾come expectancies. Health Psychology, 4, 
219–247.
Scheier, M. F., and Carver, C. S. (2018). Dis￾positional optimism and physical health: 
A long look back, a quick look forward. 
American Psychologist, 73, 1082–1094.
Scheier, M. F., Matthews, K. A., Owens, J. 
F., Schulz, R., Bridges, M. W., Magovern, 
G. J., and Carver, C. S. (1999). Opti￾mism and rehospitalization after coro￾nary artery bypass graft surgery. Archives 
of Internal Medicine, 159(8), 829–835.
Scheier, M. F., Swanson, J. D., Barlow, M. 
A., Greenhouse, J. B., Wrosch, C., and 
Tindle, H. A. (2021). Optimism versus 
pessimism as predictors of physical 
health: A comprehensive reanalysis of 
dispositional optimism research. 
American Psychologist, 76, 529–548.
Schinka J. A., Letsch, E. A., and Crawford, 
F. C. (2002). DRD4 and novelty seeking: 
Results of meta-analyses. American Jour￾nal of Medical Genetics, 114, 643–648.
Schiraldi, G. (2007). 10 simple solutions for 
building self-esteem. Oakland, CA: New 
Harbinger.
Schmidt, L. A., and Fox, N. A. (1995). Indi￾vidual differences in young adults’ shy￾ness and sociability: Personality and 
health correlates. Personality and Individ￾ual Differences, 19, 455–462.
Schmidt, L. A., and Fox, N. A. (2002). Indi￾vidual differences in childhood shyness: 
Origins, malleability and developmental 
course. In D. Cervone and W. Mischel 
(Eds.), Advances in Personality Science
(pp. 83–105). New York: Guilford Press.
Schmitt, D. P. (2004). The Big Five related 
to risky sexual behavior across 10 world 
regions: Differential personality associa￾tions of sexual promiscuity and relation￾ship infidelity. European Journal of 
Personality, 18, 301–319.
Schmitt, D. P. (2015). The evolution of cul￾turally-variable sex differences: Men and 
women are not always different, but 
when they are . . . it appears not to 
result from patriarchy or sex role social￾ization. In The evolution of sexuality
(pp. 221–256). Basel, Switzerland: 
Springer.
Schmitt, D. P., and 118 Members of the Inter￾national Sexuality Description Project. 
(2003). Universal sex differences in the 
desire for sexual variety: Tests from 52 
nations, 6 continents, and 13 islands. Per￾sonality and Social Psychology, 85, 85–104.
Schmitt, D. P., and Buss, D. M. (2000). Sex￾ual dimensions of person description: 
Beyond or subsumed by the Big Five? 
Journal of Research in Personality, 34,
141–177.
Schmitt, D. P., and Buss, D. M. (2001). 
Human mate poaching: Tactics and 
temptations for infiltrating existing rela￾tionships. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 80, 894–917.
Schmitt, D. P., Jonason, P. K., Byerley, G. J., 
Flores, S. D., Illbeck, B. E., O’Leary, K. 
N., and Qudrat, A. (2012). A reexamina￾tion of sex differences in sexuality: New 
studies reveal old truths. Current Direc￾tions in Psychological Science, 21,
135–139.
Schmitt, D. P., Realo, A., Voracek, M., and 
Allik, J. (2008). Why can’t a man be 
more like a woman? Sex differences in 
Big Five personality traits across 55 cul￾tures. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 94, 168–182.
Schmitt, D. P., Youn, G., Bond, B., Brooks, 
S., Frye, H., Johnson, S., Klesman, J., 
et al. (2009). When will I feel love? The 
effects of culture, personality, and gender 
on the psychological tendency to love. 
Journal of Research in Personality, 43,
830–846.
Schmutte, P. S., Lee, Y. H., and Ryff, C. D. 
(1995). Reflections on parenthood: A cul￾tural perspective. Unpublished manu￾script, Madison: University of Wisconsin.
Schneider, K. (1958). Psychopathic personali￾ties. London: Cassell.
Schüler, J., Sheldon, K. M., and Fröhlich, 
S.M. (2010). Implicit need for achieve￾ment moderates the relationship between 
competence need satisfaction and subse￾quent motivation. Journal of Research in 
Personality, 44, 1–12.
Schultheiss, O. C., and Brunstein, J. C. 
Final PDF to printerREFERENCES
lar31869_ref_665-718 708 10/22/22 10:41 AM
708
with a research version of the TAT: Pic￾ture profiles, gender differences, and rela￾tions to other personality measures. 
Journal of Personality Assessment Special 
Issue: More Data on the Current 
Rorschach Controversy, 77, 71–86.
Schultheiss, O. C., and Köllner, M. G., 
(2021). Implicit motives. In O. P. John 
and R. W. Robins (Eds), Handbook of 
Personality: Theory and Research., 4th ed.,
pp. 385–410. New York: Guilford Press.
Schultheiss, O. C., and Pang, J. S. (2007). 
Measuring implicit motives. In R. W. 
Robins, R. C. Fraley, and R. Krueger 
(Eds.), Handbook of research methods in 
personality psychology (pp. 322–344). 
New York: Guilford Press.
Schultheiss, O. C., and Schultheiss, M. 
(2014). Implicit motive profile analysis: 
An if-then contingency approach to the 
picture-story exercise. Social & Personal￾ity Psychology Compass, 8(1), 1–16.
Schultheiss, O. C., Liening, S., and Schad, D. 
(2008). The reliability of a Picture Story 
Exercise measure of implicit motives: Esti￾mates of internal consistency, retest reli￾ability, and ipsative stability. Journal of 
Research in Personality, 42, 1560–1571.
Schultheiss, O. C., Wiemers, U. S., and Wolf, 
O. T. (2014). Implicit need for achieve￾ment predicts attenuated cortisol 
responses to difficult tasks. Journal of 
Research in Personality, 48, 84–92.
Schütz, A. and Baumeister, R. F. (2017). 
Positive illusions and the happy mind. In 
M. D. Robinson and M. Eid (Eds.). The 
Happy Mind: Cognitive Contributions to 
Well-Being (pp. 177–193). Cham, Swit￾zerland: Springer International 
Publishing.
Schutzwohl, A. (2008). Relief over the dis￾confirmation of the prospect of sexual 
and emotional infidelity. Personality and 
Individual Differences, 44, 668–678.
Schutzwohl, A., and Koch, S. (2004). Sex 
differences in jealousy: The recall of cues 
to sexual and emotional infidelity in 
adaptively relevant and irrelevant context 
conditions. Evolution and Human Behav￾ior, 25, 249–257.
Schutzwohl, A., Fuchs, A., McKibbin, W. F., 
and Shackelford, T. K. (2009). How will￾ing are you to accept sexual requests 
from slightly unattractive to exceptionally 
attractive imagined requestors? Human 
Nature, 20, 282–293.
Schuyler, B. S., Kral, T. A., Jacquart, J., 
Burghy, C. A., Weng, H. Y., Perlman, D. 
M., . . . Davidson, R. J. (2014). Temporal 
dynamics of emotional responding: 
Amygdala recovery predicts emotional 
traits. Social Cognitive and Affective Neu￾roscience, 9(2), 176–181.
Schwartz, C. E., Wright, C. I., Shin, L. M., 
Kagan, J., and Rauch, S. L. (2003). 
Inhibited and uninhibited infants “grown 
up”: Adult amygdalar response to nov￾elty. Science, 300, 1952–1953.
Schwartz, S. H., and Rubel, T. (2005). Sex 
differences in value priorities: Cross–
cultural and multimethod studies. Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology, 89,
1010–1028.
Schwarzer, R., and Luszczynska, A. (2013). 
Stressful life events. In A. M. Nezu, C. 
M. Nezu, P. A. Geller, and I. B. Weiner 
(Eds.), Handbook of psychology, Vol. 9: 
Health psychology (2nd ed., pp. 29–56). 
Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
Schwerdtfeger, A. (2007). Individual differ￾ences in auditory, pain, and motor 
stimulation: The case of augmenting/ 
reducing. Journal of Individual Differ￾ences, 28, 165–177.
Schwerdtfeger, A., and Baltissen, R. (1999). 
Augmenters vs. reducers: Cortical and 
autonomic reactivity in response to 
increasing stimulus intensity. Zeitschrift 
fuer Differentielle und Diagnostische Psy￾chologie, 20, 247–262.
Schwerdtfeger, A., and Baltissen, R. (2002). 
Augmenting-reducing paradox lost? A 
test of Davis et al.’s (1983) hypothesis. 
Personality and Individual Differences, 32,
257–271.
Schwerdtfeger, A., Getzmann, S. and Bal￾tissen, R. (2004). Fast reducers, slow 
augmenters: A psychophysiological anal￾ysis of temperament-related differences in 
reaction time. International Journal of 
Psychophysiology, 52, 225–237.
Schwerdtfeger, A., Heims, R., and Heer, J. 
(2010). Digit ratio (2D:4D) is associated 
with traffic violations for male frequent 
car drivers. Accident Analysis and Preven￾tion, 42, 269–274.
Schwinger, M., Trautner, M., Pütz, N., 
Fabianek, S., Lemmer, G., Lauermann, 
F., and Wirthwein, L. (2021). Why do 
students use strategies that hurt their 
chances of academic success? A meta￾analysis of antecedents of academic self￾handicapping. Journal of Educational 
Psychology. 114, 576–596. https://doi.
org/10.1037/edu0000706.
Scott, W. A., and Johnson, R. C. (1972). 
Comparative validities of direct and indi￾rect personality tests. Journal of Consult￾ing and Clinical Psychology, 38, 301–318.
Sear, R., and Mace, R. (2008). Who keeps 
children alive? A review of the effects of 
kin on child survival. Evolution and 
Human Behavior, 29, 1–18.
Seara-Cardoso, A., and Viding, E. (2015). 
Functional neuroscience of psychopathic 
personality in adults. Journal of Personal￾ity, 83(6), 723–737.
Sedikides, C., and Alicke, M. D. (2019). The 
five pillars of self-enhancement and self￾protection. In R. M. Ryan (Ed.), The 
Oxford handbook of human motivation
(pp. 307–319). Oxford University Press.
Segal, N. L. (1999). Entwined lives: Twins and 
what they tell us about human behavior.
New York: Plume.
Segerstrom, S. C., and Sephton, S. E. (2010). 
Optimistic expectancies and cell-medi￾ated immunity: the role of positive affect. 
Psychological Science, 21(3), 448–455.
Seidlitz, L., and Diener, E. (1993). Review of 
the satisfaction with Life Scale. Psycho￾logical Assessment, 5, 164–172.
Seidman, G., Roberts, A., and Zeigler-Hill, V. 
(2019). Narcissism and romantic rela￾tionship presentation on social media: 
The role of motivations and partner 
attractiveness. Personality and Individual 
Differences, 149, 21–30.
Selfhout, M., Burk, W., Branje, S., Denissen, 
J., van Aken, M., and Meeus, W. (2010). 
Emerging late adolescent friendship net￾works and Big Five personality traits: A 
social network approach. Journal of Per￾sonality, 78, 509–538.
Seligman, M. E. P. (1992). Helplessness: On 
depression, development, and death. New 
York: Freeman.
Seligman, M. E. P. (1994). What you can 
change and what you can’t. New York: 
Knopf.
Seligman, M. E. P., and Csikszentmihalyi, M. 
(2000). Positive psychology: An intro￾duction. American Psychologist, 55, 5–14.
Seligman, M. E. P., and Peterson, C. (2003). 
Positive clinical psychology. In L. G. 
Aspinwall and U. M. Staudinger (Eds.), 
A psychology of human strengths: Funda￾mental questions and future directions for 
a positive psychology (pp. 305–317). 
Washington, DC: American Psychologi￾cal Association.
Seligman, M., and Hager, J. (1972). Biologi￾cal boundaries of learning. New York: 
Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Seligman, M.E.P. (2002). Positive psychol￾ogy, positive prevention, and positive 
therapy. In C. R. Snyder and S. J. Lopez 
(Eds.), Handbook of positive psychology
(pp. 3–9). London: Oxford University 
Press.
Sell, A., Hone, L. S. E., and Pound, N. 
(2012). The importance of physical 
strength to human males. Human Nature, 
23, 30–44.
Sell, A., Tooby, J., and Cosmides, L. (2009). 
Formidability and the logic of human 
anger. Proceedings of the National Acad￾emy of Science, 106, 15073–15078.
Selye, H. (1976). The stress of life. New York: 
McGraw-Hill.
Semenova, E., and Winter, D. G. (2020). A 
motivational analysis of Russian presi￾dents, 1994–2018. Political Psychology, 
41, 813–834
Semerci, A. (2017). Investigating the effects 
of personality traits on cyberbullying. 
Journal of Education and Instruction, 7(2), 
211–230.
Final PDF to printerREFERENCES
lar31869_ref_665-718 709 10/22/22 10:41 AM
709
Servaas, M. N., van der Velde, J., Costafreda, 
S. G., Horton, P., Ormel, J., Riese, H., 
and Aleman, A. (2013). Neuroticism and 
the brain: A quantitative meta-analysis of 
neuroimaging studies investigating emo￾tion processing. Neuroscience and Biobe￾havioral Reviews, 37(8), 1518–1529.
Shackelford, T. K., Buss, D. M., and Bennett, 
K. (2002). Forgiveness or breakup: Sex 
differences in responses to a partner’s 
infidelity. Cognition and Emotion, 16,
299–307.
Shackelford, T. K., Goetz, A., Buss, D. M., 
Euler, H. A., and Hoier, S. (2005). When 
we hurt the ones we love: Predicting vio￾lence against women from men’s mate 
retention. Personal Relationships, 12,
447–463.
Shackelford, T. K., Voracek, M., Schmitt, D. 
P., Buss, D. M., Weekes-Shackelford, V. 
A., and Michalski, R. L. (2004). Roman￾tic jealousy in early adulthood and in 
later life. Human Nature, 15, 59–76.
Shafer, A. B. (2001). The Big Five and sexu￾ality trait terms as predictors of relation￾ships and sex. Journal of Research in 
Personality, 35, 313–338.
Shakeel, M. D., and Peterson, P. E.. (2022). 
A half century of progress in US student 
achievement: Agency and Flynn Effects, 
ethnic and SES differences. Educational 
Psychology Review, Mar 3, 2022, DOI: 
10.1007/s10648-021-09657-y.
Shakur, S. (1994). Monster: The autobiogra￾phy of an L.A. gang member. New York: 
Penguin.
Shatz, S. M. (2008). IQ and fertility: A 
cross-national study. Intelligence, 36,
109–111.
Shaver, P. R., and Mikulincer, M. (2010). 
New directions in attachment theory and 
research. Journal of Social and Personal 
Relationships, 27(2), 163–172.
Sheldon, K. M. and Lyubomirsky, S. (2021). 
Revisiting the sustainable happiness 
model and pie chart: Can happiness be 
successfully pursued? The Journal of Posi￾tive Psychology, 16, 145–154, DOI: 
10.1080/17439760.2019.1689421.
Sheldon, K. M., and Kasser, T. (2001). Get￾ting older, getting better? Personal striv￾ings and psychological maturity across 
the life span. Developmental Psychology, 
37, 491–501.
Shen, Y., Sun, H., Heng, C. S. and Chan, H. 
C. (2020). Facilitating complex product 
choices on e-commerce sites: An uncon￾scious thought and circadian preference 
perspective. Decision Support Systems, 
137, Oct, 2020. ArtID: 113365.
Sheppard, K. E., and Boon, S. D. (2012). 
Predicting appraisals of romantic 
revenge: The roles of honest-humility, 
agreeableness, and vengefulness. Person￾ality and Individual Differences, 52,
128–132.
Sheppard, L. D., and Vernon, P. A. (2008). 
Intelligence and speed of information￾processing. Personality and Individual Dif￾ferences, 44, 535–551.
Shimotsukasa, T., Oshio, A., Tani, M., and 
Yamaki, M. (2019). Big Five personality 
traits in inmates and normal adults in 
Japan. Personality and Individual Differ￾ences, 141, 81–85.
Shiner, R. L., Masten, A. S., and Roberts, J. 
M. (2003). Childhood personality fore￾shadows adult personality and life out￾comes two decades later. Journal of 
Personality, 71, 1145–1170.
Shiner, R. L., Masten, A. S., and Tellegen, A. 
(2002). A developmental perspective on 
personality in emerging adulthood: Child￾hood antecedents and concurrent adapta￾tion. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 83(5), 1165–1177.
Shneidman, E. S. (1981). Endeavors in psy￾chology: Selections from the personology of 
Henry A. Murray. New York: Harper and 
Row.
Shoben, E. J. (1957). Toward a concept of 
the normal personality. American Psychol￾ogist, 12, 183–189.
Shoda, Y., and Mischel, W. (1996). Toward 
a unified, intra-individual dynamic con￾ception of personality. Journal of 
Research in Personality, 30, 414–428.
Shoda, Y., Mischel, W., and Wright, J. C. 
(1994). Intra-individual stability in the 
organization and patterning of behavior: 
Incorporating psychological situations 
into the idiographic analysis of personal￾ity. Journal of Personality and Social Psy￾chology, 67, 674–687.
Shoda, Y., Wilson, N. L., Chen, J., Gilmore, 
A. K., and Smith, R. E. (2013). Cogni￾tive-affective processing system analysis 
of intra-individual dynamics in collabora￾tive therapeutic assessment: Translating 
basic theory and research into clinical 
applications. Journal of Personality, 
81(6), 554–568.
Shoda, Y., Wilson, N. L., Whitsett, D. D., 
Lee-Dussud, J., and Zayas, V. (2015). 
The person as a cognitive-affective pro￾cessing system: Quantitative ideography 
as an integral component of cumulative 
science. In M. Mikulincer, P. R. Shaver, 
M. L. Cooper, R. J. Larsen, M. 
Mikulincer, P. R. Shaver, . . . and R. J. 
Larsen (Eds.), APA handbook of person￾ality and social psychology, Vol. 4: Per￾sonality processes and individual 
differences (pp. 491–513). Washington, 
DC, US: American Psychological 
Association.
Shultz, J. S. (1993). Situational and disposi￾tional predictions of performance: A test 
of the hypothesized Machiavellianism X 
structure interaction among salespersons. 
Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 23,
478–498.
Shweder, R. A. (1991). Thinking through cul￾tures: Expeditions in cultural psychology.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press.
Shweder, R. A., Mahapatra, M., and Miller, 
J. G. (1990). Culture and moral develop￾ment. In J. W. Stigler, R. A. Shweder, 
and G. Herdt (Eds.), Cultural psychology: 
Essays on comparative human development
(pp. 130–204). Cambridge, MA: Cam￾bridge University Press.
Sibley, C. G., Osborne, D., and Duckitt, J. 
(2012). Personality and political orienta￾tion: Meta-analysis and test of a Threat￾Constraint Model. Journal of Research in 
Personality, 46(6), 664–677.
Siegel, J. (1997). Augmenting and reducing 
of visual evoked potentials in high- and 
low-sensation seeking humans, cats, and 
rats. Behavior Genetics, 27, 557–563.
Siegel, J. M. (1986). The Multidimensional 
Anger Inventory. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 51, 191–200.
Siegel, J., and Driscoll, P. (1996). Recent 
developments in an animal model of 
visual evoked potential augmenting/
reducing and sensation seeking behavior. 
Neuropsychobiology, 34, 130–135.
Sievertsen, H. H., Gino, F., and Piovesan, M. 
(2016). Cognitive fatigue influences stu￾dents’ performance on standardized tests. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, 113, 2621–2624.
Sigusch, V., and Schmidt, G. (1971). Lower￾class sexuality: Some emotional and 
social aspects in West German males and 
females. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 1,
29–44.
Sih, A., Mathot, K. J., Moirón, M., Monti￾glio, P. O., Wolf, M., and Dingemanse, 
N. J. (2015). Animal personality and 
state–behaviour feedbacks: A review and 
guide for empiricists. Trends in Ecology & 
Evolution, 30(1), 50–60.
Silverthorne, C. (2001). Leadership effective￾ness and personality: A cross-cultural 
evaluation. Personality and Individual Dif￾ferences, 30, 303–309.
Silvia, P. J., Nusbaum, E. C., and Beaty, R. 
E. (2014). Blessed are the meek? Hon￾esty–Humility, Agreeableness, and the 
HEXACO structure of religious beliefs, 
motives, and values. Personality and Indi￾vidual Differences, 66, 19–23.
Simonton, D. K. (1991). Emergence and real￾ization of genius: The lives and works of 
120 classical composers. Journal of Person￾ality and Social Psychology, 61, 829–840.
Simpson, J. A., and Gangestad, S. W. 
(1991). Individual differences in socio￾sexuality: Evidence for convergent and 
discriminant validity. Journal of Personal￾ity and Social Psychology, 60, 870–883.
Simpson, J. A., and Rholes, W. S. (1998). 
Attachment theory and close relationships.
New York: Guilford Press.
Final PDF to printerREFERENCES
lar31869_ref_665-718 710 10/22/22 10:41 AM
710
Simpson, J. A., Rholes, W. S., Orinea, M. 
M., and Grich, J. (2002). Working mod￾els of attachment, support giving, and 
support seeking in a stressful situation. 
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 
28, 598–608.
Singh, D., Vidaurri, M., Zambarano, R. J., 
and Dabbs, J. M., Jr. (1999). Behav￾ioral, morphological, and hormonal cor￾relates to erotic role identification 
among lesbian women. Journal of Per￾sonality and Social Psychology, 76,
1035–1049.
Singh, S. (1978). Achievement motivation 
and entrepreneurial success: A follow-up 
study. Journal of Research in Personality, 
12, 500–503.
Six, B., and Eckes, T. (1991). A closer look 
at the complex structure of gender stereo￾types. Sex Roles, 24, 64.
Skodol A. E. (2012). Personality disorders in 
DSM-5. Annual Review of Clinical Psychol￾ogy, 8, 317–344.
Skondras, M., Markianos, M., Botsis, A., 
Bistolaki, E., and Christodoulou, G. 
(2004). Platelet monoamine oxidase 
activity and psychometric correlates in 
male violent offenders imprisoned for 
homicide or other violent acts. European 
Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical Neuro￾science, 254, 380–386.
Slatcher, R. B., and Vazire, S. (2009). Effects 
of global and contextualized personality 
on relationship satisfaction. Journal of 
Research in Personality, 43, 624–633.
Smelser, N. J. (2004). Self-esteem and social 
problems. In A. M. Mecca, N. J. Smelser, 
and J. Vasconcellos (Eds). The Social 
Importance of Self-Esteem (pp. 1–23). 
Berkeley, CA: University of California 
Press.
Smillie, L. D., and Wacker, J. (2014). Dopa￾minergic foundations of personality and 
individual differences. Frontiers in 
Human Neuroscience, 8.
Smillie, L. D., Cooper, A. J., Wilt, J., and 
Revelle, W. (2012). Do extraverts get 
more bang for the buck? Refining the 
affective-reactivity hypothesis of extraver￾sion. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 103, 306–326.
Smith, C. P., and Atkinson, J. W. (1992). 
Motivation and personality: Handbook of 
thematic content analysis. New York: 
Cambridge University Press.
Smith, P., Caputi, P., and Crittenden, N. 
(2013). Measuring optimism in organiza￾tions: Development of a workplace 
explanatory style questionnaire. Journal 
of Happiness Studies, 14(2), 415–432.
Smith, R. E., and Shoda, Y. (2009). Person￾ality as a cognitive-affective processing 
system. In P. J. Corr and G. Matthews 
(Eds.), The Cambridge handbook of per￾sonality psychology (pp. 473–487). New 
York: Cambridge University Press.
Smith, R. E., Shoda, Y., Cumming, S .P., and 
Smoll, F. L. (2009). Behavioral signa￾tures at the ballpark: Intraindividual con￾sistency of adults’ situation-behavior 
patterns and their interpersonal conse￾quences. Journal of Research in Personal￾ity, 43, 187–195.
Smith, S. F., Watts, A. L., and Lilienfeld, S. 
O. (2014). On the trail of the elusive suc￾cessful psychopath. The Psychologist, 15, 
340–350.
Smith, T. W. (1979). Happiness: Time 
trends, seasonal variations, intersurvey 
differences, and other mysteries. Social 
Psychology Quarterly, 42, 18–30.
Smith, T. W. (2006). Personality as risk and 
resilience in physical health. Current Direc￾tions in Psychological Science, 15, 227–231.
Smith, T. W., and Spiro, A., III. (2002). Per￾sonality, health, and aging: Prolegome￾non for the next generation. Journal of 
Research in Personality, 36, 363–394.
Smith, T. W., Pope, M. K., Rhodewalt, F., 
and Poulton, J. L. (1989). Optimism, 
neuroticism, coping, and symptom 
reports: An alternative interpretation of 
the Life Orientation Test. Journal of Per￾sonality and Social Psychology, 56,
640–648.
Smith, T. W., Williams, P. G., and Seger￾strom, S. C. (2015). Personality and 
physical health. In L. Cooper and R. J. 
Larsen (Eds.), Handbook of personality 
and social psychology: Personality pro￾cesses and individual differences. Washing￾ton, DC: American Psychological 
Association.
Smits, I. A. M., Dolan, C. V., Vorst, H. C. 
M., Wicherts, J. M., and Timmerman, M. 
E. (2011). Cohort differences in Big Five 
personality factors over a period of 25 
years. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 100, 1124–1138.
Snyder, J. K., Fessler, D. M. T., Tiokhin, L., 
Frederick, D. A., Lee, S. W., and 
Navarrete, C. D. (2011). Trade-offs in a 
dangerous world: Women’s fear of crime 
predicts preferences for aggressive and 
formidable mates. Evolution and Human 
Behavior, 32, 127–137.
Snyder, M., and Cantor, N. (1998). Under￾standing personality and social behavior: 
A functionalist strategy. In D. T. Gilbert, 
S. T. Fiske, and G. Lindzey (Eds.), The 
handbook of social psychology (Vol. 1, 4th 
ed., pp. 635–679). Boston: McGraw-Hill.
Snyder, M., and Gangestad, S. (1982). 
Choosing social situations: Two investi￾gations of self-monitoring processes. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychol￾ogy, 43, 123–135.
Soloff, P. H., Lis, J. A., Kelly, T., and 
Cornelius, J. (1994). Risk factors for sui￾cidal behavior in borderline personality 
disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 
151, 1316–1323.
Solomon, B. C., and Jackson, J. J. (2014). 
Why do personality traits predict 
divorce? Multiple pathways through satis￾faction. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 106(6), 978–996.
Solomon, Z., Berger, R., and Ginzburg, K. 
(2007). Resilience of Israeli body han￾dlers: Implications of repressive coping 
style. Traumatology, 13(4), 64–74.
Somer, O., and Goldberg, L. R. (1999). The 
structure of Turkish trait-descriptive 
adjectives. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 76, 431–450.
Sorokowski, P., Sorokowska, A., Oleszkie￾wicz, A., Frackowiak, T., Huk, A., and 
Pisanski, K. (2015). Selfie posting behav￾iors are associated with narcissism 
among men. Personality and Individual 
Differences, 85, 123–127.
Source: Scarf, M. (1996). The Mind of the 
Unabomber. The New Republic, June 10, 
1996, p. 20.
South, S. C., and Krueger, R. F. (2008). An 
interactionist perspective on genetic and 
environmental contributions to personal￾ity. Social and Personality Psychology 
Compass, 2, 929–948.
South, S. C., Krueger, R. F., Elkins, I. J., 
Iacono, W. G., and McGue, M. (2016). 
Romantic relationship satisfaction mod￾erates the etiology of adult personality. 
Behavior Genetics, 46(1), 124–142.
South, S. C., Krueger, R. F., Johnson, W., 
and Iacono, W. G. (2008). Adolescent 
personality moderates genetic and envi￾ronmental influences on relationships 
with parents. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 94, 899–912.
South, S. C., Oltmanns, T. F., and Tur￾kheimer, E. (2003). Personality and the 
derogation of others: Descriptions based 
on self- and peer report. Journal of 
Research in Personality, 37, 16–33.
Souza, A. L., Conroy-Beam, D., and Buss, D. 
M. (2016). Mate preferences in Brazil: 
Evolved desires and cultural evolution 
over three decades. Personality and Indi￾vidual Differences, 95, 45–49.
Sowislo, J. F., and Orth, U. (2013). Does low 
self-esteem predict depression and anxi￾ety? A meta-analysis of longitudinal stud￾ies. Psychological Bulletin, 139, 213–240.
Spangler, W. D. (1992). Validity of question￾naire and TAT measures of need for 
achievement: Two meta-analyses. Psycho￾logical Bulletin, 112, 140–154.
Spanos, N. P., and McLean, J. (1986). Hyp￾notically created false reports do not 
demonstrate pseudomemories. British 
Journal of Experimental and Clinical Hyp￾nosis, 3, 167–171.
Specht, J., Bleidorn, W., Denissen, J. J., 
Hennecke, M., Hutteman, R., Kandler, 
C., . . . and Zimmermann, J. (2014). 
What drives adult personality develop￾ment? A comparison of theoretical 
Final PDF to printerREFERENCES
lar31869_ref_665-718 711 10/22/22 10:41 AM
711
perspectives and empirical evidence. 
European Journal of Personality, 28,
216–230.
Specht, J., Egloff, B., and Schmukle, S. C. 
(2011). Stability and change of personal￾ity across the life course: The impact of 
age and major life events on mean-level 
and rank-order stability of the Big Five. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychol￾ogy, 101, 862–882.
Spence, J. T., Helmreich, R., and Stapp, J. 
(1974). The Personal Attributes Ques￾tionnaire: A measure of sex-role stereo￾types and masculinity and femininity. 
Journal Supplement Abstract Service Cata￾log of Selected Documents in Psychology, 
4, 42 (No. 617).
Spengler, M., Lüdtke, O., Martin, R., and 
Brunner, M. (2013). Personality is 
related to educational outcomes in late 
adolescence: Evidence from two large￾scale achievement studies. Journal of 
Research in Personality, 47(5), 613–625.
Spies, R. A., and Plake, B. S. (2005). The six￾teenth mental measurements yearbook.
Lincoln, NE: Buros Institute of Mental 
Measurements.
Spikic, S., and Mortelmans, D. (2021). A 
Preliminary Meta-analysis of the Big Five 
Personality Traits’ Effect on Marital Sep￾aration. Journal of Divorce & Remarriage,
62(7), 551–571.
Spilker, B., and Callaway, E. (1969). Aug￾menting and reducing in averaged visual 
evoked responses to sine wave light. Psy￾chophysiology, 6, 49–57.
Spinath, F. M., and O’Connor, T. G. (2003). 
A behavioral genetic study of the overlap 
between personality and parenting. Jour￾nal of Personality, 71(5), 785–808.
Spinath, F. M., Wolf, H., Angleitner, A., 
Borkenau, P., and Riemann, R. (2002). 
Genetic and environmental influences on 
objectively assessed activity in adults. 
Personality and Individual Differences, 33,
633–645.
Spotts, E. L., Lichtenstein, P., Pedersen, N., 
Neiderhiser, J. M., Hansson, K., Ceder￾blad, M., and Reiss, D. (2005). Personal￾ity and marital satisfaction: A 
behavioural genetic analysis. European 
Journal of Personality, 19, 205–227.
Spotts, E. L., Neiderhiser, J. M., Towers, H., 
Hansson, K., Lichtenstein, P., Cederblad, 
M., and Pedersen, N. L. (2004). Genetic 
and environmental influences on marital 
relationships. Journal of Family Psychol￾ogy, 18, 107–119.
Srivastav, D. and Mathur, M. N. L. (2020). 
Helicopter parenting and adolescent 
development: The perspective of mental 
health. In L. Benedeto and M. Ingrassia 
(Eds.), Parenting. Open access, DOI: 
10.5772/intechopen.93155.
Srivastava, S., John, O. P., Gosling, S. D., 
and Potter, J. (2003). Development of 
personality in early and middle adult￾hood: Set like plaster or persistent 
change? Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 84(5), 1041–1053.
Stake, J. E., Huff, L., and Zand, D. (1995). 
Trait self-esteem, positive and negative 
events, and event specific shifts in self￾evaluation and affect. Journal of Research 
in Personality, 29, 223–241.
Standen, B., Firth, J., Sumich, A., and Heym, 
N. (2022). The neural correlates of rein￾forcement sensitivity theory: A system￾atic review of the fMRI literature. 
Psychology and Neuroscience, Feb 14, 
DOI: 10.137/pne0000284.
Stapleton, P., Luiz, G., and Chatwin, H. 
(2017). Generation validation: The role 
of social comparison in use of Instagram 
among emerging adults. Cyberpsychology, 
Behavior, and Social Networking, 20,
142–149.
Steel, P., and Ones, D. S. (2002). Personality 
and happiness: A national-level analysis. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychol￾ogy, 83(3), 767–781.
Steger, M. F., Hicks, B. M., Kashdan, T. B., 
Krueger, R. F., and Bouchard, T. J., Jr. 
(2007). Genetic and environmental influ￾ences on the positive traits of the values in 
action classification, and biometric covari￾ance with normal personality. Journal of 
Research in Personality, 41, 524–539.
Stein, A. A. (1976). Conflict and cohesion: 
A review of the literature. Journal of Con￾flict Resolution, 20, 143–172.
Stein, R., and Swan, A. B. (2019). Evaluating 
the validity of Myers-Briggs Type Indica￾tor theory: A teaching tool and window 
into intuitive psychology. Social and Per￾sonality Psychology Compass. E12434.
Steinberg, L., Albert, D., Cauffman, E., Ban￾ich, M., Graham, S., and Woolard, J. 
(2008). Age differences in sensation 
seeking and impulsivity as indexed by 
behavior and self-report: Evidence for a 
dual systems model. Developmental Psy￾chology, 44(6), 1764–1778.
Steiner, A. W., and Coan, J. A. (2011). Pre￾frontal asymmetry predicts affect, but not 
beliefs about affect. Biological Psychology, 
88(1), 65–71.
Steiner, M., Allemand, M., and McCullough, 
M. E. (2012). Do agreeableness and neu￾roticism explain age differences in the 
tendency to forgive others? Personality 
and Social Psychology Bulletin, 38,
441–453.
Stelmack, R. M. (1990). Biological basis of 
extraversion: Psychophysiological evi￾dence. Journal of Personality, 58,
293–311.
Stelmack, R. M., and Rammsayer, T. H. 
(2008). Psychophysiological and bio￾chemical correlates of personality. In 
G. J. Boyle, G. Matthews and D. H. 
Saklofske, (Eds), The SAGE Handbook 
of Personality Theory and Assessment, 
Vol 1: Personality theories and models
(33–55). Sage Publications, Thousand 
Oaks, CA
Stelmack, R. M., and Stalkas, A. (1991). 
Galen and the humour theory of temper￾ament. Personality and Individual Differ￾ences, 12, 255–263.
Stephan, Y., Sutin, A. R., Luchetti, M., and 
Terracciano, A. (2019). Facets of consci￾entiousness and longevity: Findings from 
the Health and Retirement Study. Journal 
of Psychosomatic Research, 116, 1–5.
Sternberg, R. J. (1985). Beyond IQ: A triar￾chic theory of human intelligence. New 
York: Cambridge University Press.
Stevenson, R. J., Hodgson, D., Oaten, M. J., 
Moussavi, M., Langberg, R., Case, T. I., 
and Barouei, J. (2012). Disgust elevates 
core body temperature and up-regulates 
certain oral immune markers. Brain, 
Behavior, and Immunity, 26(7), 
1160–1168.
Stewart, M. E., Donaghey, C., Deary, I. J., 
and Ebmeier, K. P. (2008). Suicidal 
thoughts in young people: Their fre￾quency and relationships with personality 
factors. Personality and Individual Differ￾ences, 44, 809–820.
Stewart, M. E., Ebmeier, K. P., and Deary, I. 
J. (2005). Personality correlates of happi￾ness and sadness: EPQ-R and TPQ com￾pared. Personality and Individual 
Differences, 38, 1085–1096.
Stieger, S., Lewetz, D., and Swami, V. 
(2021). Emotional well-being under con￾ditions of lockdown: An experience sam￾pling study in Austria during the 
COVID-19 pandemic. Journal of Happi￾ness Studies, 22(6), 2703–2720.
Stocker, S. (1997). Don’t be shy: Advice for 
becoming more outgoing. Prevention, 96.
Stoeber, J., Otto, K., and Dalbert, C. (2009). 
Perfectionism and the Big Five: Consci￾entiousness predicts longitudinal 
increases in self-oriented perfectionism. 
Personality and Individual Differences, 47,
363–368.
Stopfer, J. M., Egloff, B., Nestler, S., and 
Back, M. D. (2013). Being popular in 
online social networks: How agentic, 
communal, and creativity traits relate to 
judgments of status and liking. Journal of 
Research in Personality, 47(5), 592–598.
Strauss, K., Griffin, M. A., and Parker, S. K. 
(2012). Future work selves: How salient 
hoped-for identities motivate proactive 
career behaviors. Journal of Applied Psy￾chology, 97, 580–598.
Strelan, P. (2007). Who forgives others, 
themselves, and situations? The roles of 
narcissism, guilt, self-esteem, and agree￾ableness. Personality and Individual Differ￾ences, 42, 259–269.
Strickhouser, J. E., Zell, E., and Krizan, Z. 
(2017). Does personality predict health 
Final PDF to printerREFERENCES
lar31869_ref_665-718 712 10/22/22 10:41 AM
712
and well-being? A metasynthesis. Health 
Psychology, 36, 797–810.
Stroop, J. R. (1935). Studies of interference 
in serial verbal reactions. Journal of 
Experimental Psychology, 18, 643–661.
Strout, S. L., Laird, J. D., Shafer, A., and 
Thompson, N. S. (2005). The effect of 
vividness of experience on sex differences 
in jealousy. Evolutionary Psychology, 3,
263–274.
Strouts, P. H., Brase, G. L., and Dillon, H. 
M. (2017). Personality and evolutionary 
strategies: The relationships between 
HEXACO traits, mate value, life history 
strategy, and sociosexuality. Personality 
and Individual Differences, 115, 128–132.
Stucke, T. S., and Baumeister, R. F. (2006). 
Ego depletion and aggressive behavior: Is 
the inhibition of aggression a limited 
resource? European Journal of Social Psy￾chology, 36, 1–13.
Su, R., Rounds, J., and Armstrong, P. I. 
(2009). Men and things, women and peo￾ple: A meta-analysis of sex differences in 
interests. Psychological Bulletin, 135,
859–884.
Suls, J., and Wan, C. K. (1989). The relation 
between Type A behavior and chronic 
emotional distress: A meta-analysis. Jour￾nal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
57, 503–512.
Suls, J., Wan, C. K., and Costa, P. T., Jr. 
(1996). Relationship of trait anger to 
resting blood pressure: A meta-analysis. 
Health Psychology, 14, 444–456.
Sun, J., Harris, K., and Vazire, S. (2020). Is 
well-being associated with the quantity 
and quality of social interactions?. Jour￾nal of Personality and Social Psychology,
119(6), 1478.
Sun, T., Webster, K., Shah, A., Wang, W. Y., 
and Johnson, M. (2021). They, them, 
theirs: Rewriting with gender-neutral Eng￾lish. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.06788.
Surtees, P., Wainwright, N., Khaw, K. T., 
Luben, R., Brayne, C., and Day, N. 
(2003). Inflammatory dispositions: A 
population-based study of the association 
between hostility and peripheral leuko￾cyte counts. Personality and Individual 
Differences, 35, 1271–1284.
Sutin, A. R., Ferrucci, L., Zonderman, A. B., 
and Terracciano, A. (2011). Personality 
and obesity across the adult life span. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychol￾ogy, 101, 579–592.
Sutton, S. K. (2002). Incentive and threat 
reactivity: Relations with anterior cortical 
activity. In D. Cervone and W. Mischel 
(Eds.), Advances in Personality Science
(pp. 127–150). New York: Guilford 
Press.
Svartberg, K. (2021). The hierarchical struc￾ture of dog personality in a new behav￾ioural assessment: A validation approach. 
Applied Animal Behaviour Science, 238,
105302.
Sverko, B., and Fabulic, L. (1985). Stability 
of morningness-eveningness: Retest 
changes after seven years. Revija za Psi￾hologiju, 15, 71–78.
Swanbrow, D. (1989, August). The paradox 
of happiness. Psychology Today,
pp. 37–39.
Swann, W. B., Langlois, J. H., and Gilbert, 
L. A. (Eds.). (1999). Sexism and stereo￾types in modern society: The gender sci￾ence of Janet Taylor Spence. Washington, 
DC: American Psychological 
Association.
Swann, W. R., Jr., and Selye, C. (2005). Per￾sonality psychology’s comeback and its 
emerging symbiosis with social psychol￾ogy. Personality and Social Psychology 
Bulletin, 31, 155–165.
Symons, D. (1979). The evolution of human 
sexuality. New York: Oxford.
Symons, D. (1992). On the use and misuse 
of Darwinism in the study of human 
behavior. In J. Barkow, L. Cosmides, and 
J. Tooby (Eds.), The adapted mind (pp. 
137–159). New York: Oxford University 
Press.
Szepsenwol, O., Simpson, J. A., Griskevicius, 
V., and Raby, K. L. (2015). The effect of 
unpredictable early childhood environ￾ments on parenting in adulthood. Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology, 
109(6), 1045–1067.
Tackett, J. L., Krueger, R. F., Iacono, W. G., 
and McGue, M. (2008). Personality in 
middle childhood: A hierarchical struc￾ture and longitudinal connections with 
personality in late adolescence. Journal of 
Research in Personality, 42, 1456–1462.
Tamir, M., Robinson, M. D., and Solberg, E. 
C. (2006). You may worry, but can you 
recognize threats when you see them? 
Neuroticism, threat identifications, and 
negative affect. Journal of Personality, 74,
1481–1506.
Tamir, Y., and Nadler, A. (2007). The role of 
personality in social identity: Effects of 
field-dependence and context on reac￾tions to threat to group distinctiveness. 
Journal of Personality, 75, 927–954.
Tate, J. C., and Shelton, B. L. (2008). Per￾sonality correlates of tattooing and body 
piercing in a college sample: The kids are 
alright. Personality and Individual Differ￾ences, 45, 281–285.
Tay, L., Diener, E., Lucas, R. E., and Larsen, 
R. J. (2019). Measuring positive emo￾tions. In M. W. Gallagher and S. J. 
Lopez (Eds.), Positive Psychological 
Assessment: A Handbook of Models and 
Measures (2nd ed., pp. 179–202). Wash￾ington, DC: American Psychological 
Association.
Taylor, S. (1991). Health psychology (2nd 
ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Taylor, S. E. (1989). Positive Illusions: Self￾Deception and the Healthy Mind. New 
York: Basic Books.
Taylor, S. E., Kemeny, M. E., Reed, G. M., 
Bower, J. E., and Gruenewald, T. L. 
(2000). Psychological resources, positive 
illusions, and health. American Psycholo￾gist, 55, 99–109.
Teasdale, T. W., and Owen, D. R. (2008). 
Secular declines in cognitive test scores: 
A reversal of the Flynn effect. Intelli￾gence, 36, 121–126.
Tedeschi, R. G., Park, C. L., and Calhoun, L. 
(1998). Posttraumatic growth: Concep￾tual issues. In R. G. Tedeschi and P. L. 
Crystal (Eds.), Posttraumatic growth: 
Positive changes in the aftermath of crisis
(pp. 1–22). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Telama, R., Yang, X., Viikari, J., Välimäki, I., 
Wanne, O., and Raitakari, O. (2005). 
Physical activity from childhood to adult￾hood: A 21-year tracking study. American 
Journal of Preventive Medicine, 28(3), 
267–273.
Tellegen, A., Lykken, D. T., Bouchard, T. J., 
Wilcox, K., Segal, N., and Rich, S. 
(1988). Personality similarity in twins 
reared apart and together. Journal of Per￾sonality and Social Psychology, 54,
1031–1039.
Templer, D. I. (2008). Correlational and fac￾tor analytic support for Rushton’s differ￾ential K life history theory. Personality 
and Individual Differences, 45, 440–444.
ten Brummelhuis, L. L., Calderwood, C., 
Rosen, C. C., and Gabriel, A. S. (2021). 
Is physical activity before the end of the 
workday a drain or a gain? Daily implica￾tions on work focus in regular exercisers. 
Journal of Applied Psychology, Nov 04, 
2021.
Terman, L. M. (1938). Psychological factors 
in marital happiness. New York: 
McGraw-Hill.
Tester, N., and Campbell, A. (2007). Sport￾ing achievement: What is the contribu￾tion of digit ratio? Journal of Personality, 
75, 663–677.
Thalmayer, A. G., Saucier, G., Ole-Kotikash, 
L., and Payne, D. (2020). Personality 
structure in east and west Africa: Lexical 
studies of personality in Maa and Supy￾ire-Senufo. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 119(5), 1132.
Theakston, J. A., Stewart, S. H., Dawson, M. 
Y., Knowlden-Loewen, S. A. B., and 
Lehman, D. R. (2004). Big Five personal￾ity domains predict drinking motives. 
Personality and Individual Differences, 37,
971–984.
Thielmann, I., and Hilbig, B. E. (2014). Trust 
in me, trust in you: A social projection 
account of the link between personality, 
cooperativeness, and trustworthiness 
expectations. Journal of Research in Per￾sonality, 50, 61–65.
Thielmann, I., Morten M., Benjamin E. H., 
and Ingo Z. “On the comparability of 
basic personality models: Meta-analytic 
Final PDF to printerREFERENCES
lar31869_ref_665-718 713 10/22/22 10:41 AM
713
orthogonality of the Big Five and 
HEXACO dimensions.” European Jour￾nal of Personality (2021): 
08902070211026793.
Thomas, A. K., Bulevich, J. B., and Loftus, 
E. F. (2003). Exploring the role of repeti￾tion and sensory elaboration in the imagi￾nation inflation effect. Memory and 
Cognition, 31, 630–640.
Thompson, J. A., and Aukofer, C. (2011). 
Why we believe in god(s): A concise guide 
to the science of faith. Charlottesville, VA: 
Pitchstone Publishers.
Thompson, R. A. (1991). Emotional regula￾tion and emotional development. Educa￾tional Psychology Review, 3, 269–307.
Thompson, R. A., Simpson, J. A., and Berlin, 
L. J. (2022). Taking perspective on 
attachment theory and research: Nine 
fundamental questions. Attachment and 
Human Development, DOI: 
10.1080/14616734.2022.2030132.
Thorndike, E. L. (1911). Individuality.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Thornhill, R., and Gangestad, S. W. (2008). 
The evolutionary biology of human female 
sexuality. New York: Oxford University 
Press.
Thrash, T. M., and Elliot, A. J. (2002). 
Implicit and self-attributed achievement 
motives: Concordance and predictive 
validity. Journal of Personality, 70,
729–755.
Thrash, T. M., Wadsworth, L. M., Sim, Y. Y., 
Wan, X., and Everidge, C. E. (2019). 
Implicit–explicit motive congruence and 
moderating factors. In R. M. Ryan (Ed). 
The Oxford handbook of human motiva￾tion., 2nd ed., pp. 187–203, New York: 
Oxford University Press
Tice, D. M. (1991). Esteem protection or 
enhancement? Self-handicapping motives 
and attributions differ by trait self-esteem. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychol￾ogy, 60, 711–725.
Tice, D. M. (1993). The social motivations 
of people with low self-esteem. In R. F. 
Baumeister (Ed.), Self-Esteem: The Puzzle 
of Low Self-Regard (pp. 37–53). New 
York: Plenum Press.
Tice, D. M., and Baumeister, R. F. (1990). 
Self-esteem, self-handicapping, and self￾presentation: The strategy of inadequate 
practice. Journal of Personality, 58,
443–464.
Tice, D. M., and Bratslavsky, E. (2000). Giv￾ing in to feel good: The place of emotion 
regulation in the context of general self￾control. Psychological Inquiry, 11,
149–159.
Tindle, H. A., Chang, Y. F., Kuller, L. H., 
Manson, J. E., Robinson, J. G., Rosal, M. 
C., Siegle, G. J., and Matthews, K. A. 
(2009). Optimism, cynical hostility, and 
incident coronary heart disease and mor￾tality in the Women’s Health Initiative. 
Circulation, 120, 656–662.
Tolea, M. I., Terracciano, A., Simonsick, E. 
M., Metter, E. J., Costa, P. T., Jr., and 
Ferrucci, L. (2012). Associations 
between personality traits, physical activ￾ity level, and muscle strength. Journal of 
Research in Personality, 46, 264–270.
Tolnai, L. (2021). The Power of Personality 
Traits in Allocation Decision-Making: A 
Secondary Analysis of a Laboratory 
Experiment. Junior Management Science,
6(2), 299–323.
Tomarken, A. J., Davidson, R. J., and Hen￾riques, J. B. (1990). Resting frontal brain 
asymmetry predicts affective responses to 
films. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 59, 791–801.
Tomkins, S. S. (2008). Affect, Imagery, Con￾sciousness: The Complete Edition (Vols. 
1–4). New York: Springer.
Tooby, J., and Cosmides, L. (1990). On the 
universality of human nature and the 
uniqueness of the individual: The role of 
genetics and adaptation. Journal of Per￾sonality, 58, 17–68.
Tooby, J., and Cosmides, L. (1992). Psycho￾logical foundations of culture. In J. 
Barkow, L. Cosmides, and J. Tooby 
(Eds.), The Adapted Mind (pp. 19–136). 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Tooby, J., and Cosmides, L. (1996, 
January). Friendship and the banker’s 
paradox: Other pathways to the evolu￾tion of adaptations for altruism. In Pro￾ceedings-British Academy (Vol. 88, 
pp. 119–144). Oxford University Press 
Inc.
Tooke, J., and Camie, L. (1991). Patterns of 
deception in intersexual and intrasexual 
mating strategies. Ethology and Sociobiol￾ogy, 12, 345–364.
Tortoriello, G. K., Hart, W., Richardson, K., 
and Tullett, A. M. (2017). Do narcissists 
try to make romantic partners jealous on 
purpose? An examination of motives for 
deliberate jealousy-induction among sub￾types of narcissism. Personality and Indi￾vidual Differences, 114, 10–15.
Toschi, N., Riccelli, R., Indovina, I., 
Terracciano, A., and Passamonti, L. 
(2018). Functional connectome of the 
five-factor model of personality. Personal￾ity Neuroscience, 1, e2.
Toussaint, L. L., Shields, G. S., Green, E., 
Kennedy, K., Travers, S., and Slavich, G. 
M. (2018). Hostility, forgiveness, and 
cognitive impairment over 10 years in a 
national sample of American adults. 
Health Psychology, 37, 1102–1106.
Tracy, J. L., and Matsumoto, D. (2008). The 
spontaneous expression of pride and 
shame: Evidence for biologically innate 
nonverbal displays. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences, 105(33), 
11655–11660.
Tremblay, R. E., Pihl, R. O., Vitaro, F., and 
Dobkin, P. L. (1994). Predicting early 
onset of male antisocial behavior from 
preschool behavior. Archives of General 
Psychiatry, 51, 732–739.
Trinkaus, E., and Zimmerman, M. R. (1982). 
Trauma among the Shanidar Neander￾thals. American Journal of Physical 
Anthropology, 57, 61–76.
Trivers, R. (1985). Social evolution. Menlo 
Park, CA: Benjamin/Cummings.
Trivers, R. L. (1971). The evolution of recip￾rocal altruism. The Quarterly review of 
biology, 46(1), 35–57.
Trivers, R. L. (1972). Parental investment 
and sexual selection. In B. Campbell 
(Ed.), Sexual selection and the descent of 
man: 1871–1971 (pp. 136–179). 
Chicago: Aldine.
Trobst, K. K., Herbst, J. H., Masters, H. L., 
and Costa, P. T. (2002). Personality 
pathways to unsafe sex: Personality, con￾dom use, and HIV risk behaviors. Journal 
of Research in Personality, 36, 117–133.
Trull, J. J., and McCrae, R. M. (2002). A 
five-factor perspective on personality dis￾order research. In P. T. Costa, Jr., and T. 
A. Widiger (Eds.), Personality disorders 
and the five factor model of personality
(2nd ed., pp. 45–58). Washington, DC: 
American Psychological Association.
Trull, T. J. (2012). The Five-Factor Model of 
personality disorder and DSM-5. Journal 
of Personality, 80(6), 1697–1720.
Trull, T. J., and Widiger, T. A. (2013). 
Dimensional models of personality: The 
five-factor model and the DSM-5. 
Dialogues in Clinical Neuroscience, 15,
135–146.
Trzesniewski, K. H., Donnellan, M. B., and 
Robins, R. W. (2003). Stability of self￾esteem across the life span. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 84(1), 
205–220.
Tsai, A., Loftus, E., and Polage, D. (2000). 
Current directions in false-memory 
research. In D. F. Bjorklund (Ed.), False￾memory creation in children and adults: 
Theory, research, and implications
(pp. 31–44). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Tuerlinckz, F., De Boeck, P., and Lens, W. 
(2002). Measuring needs with the The￾matic Apperception Test: A psychomet￾ric study. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 82, 448–461.
Tupes, E. C., and Christal, R. C. (1961). 
Recurrent personality factors based on trait 
ratings. USAF ASD Technical Report, 
No. 61–97, U.S. Air Force, Lackland Air 
Force Base, TX.
Turiano, N. A., Chapman, B. P., Grue￾newald, T. L., and Mroczek, D. K. 
(2015). Personality and the leading 
behavioral contributors of mortality. 
Health Psychology, 34(1), 51–60.
Turiano, N. A., Whiteman, S. D., Hampson, 
S. E., Roberts, B. W., and Mroczek, D. 
K. (2012). Personality and substance use 
in midlife: Conscientiousness as a moder￾Final PDF to printerREFERENCES
lar31869_ref_665-718 714 10/22/22 10:41 AM
714
Journal of Research in Personality, 46,
295–305.
Turkheimer, E., Pettersson, E., and Horn, E. 
E. (2014). A phenotypic null hypothesis 
for the genetics of personality. Annual 
Review of Psychology, 65, 515–540.
Twenge, J. M. (2000). The age of anxiety? 
Birth cohort change in anxiety and neu￾roticism, 1952–1993. Journal of Personal￾ity and Social Psychology, 79, 1007–1021.
Twenge, J. M. (2001a). Changes in women’s 
assertiveness in response to status and 
roles: A cross-temporal meta-analysis, 
1931–1993. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 81, 133–145.
Twenge, J. M. (2001b). Birth cohort changes 
in extraversion: A cross-temporal meta￾analysis, 1966–1993. Personality and 
Individual Differences, 30, 735–748.
Twenge, J. M., Konrath, S., Foster, J. D., 
Campbell, W. K., and Bushman, B. J. 
(2008). Egos inflating over time: A cross￾temporal meta-analysis of the Narcissistic 
Personality Inventory. Journal of Person￾ality, 76, 875–902.
Tybur, J. M., and de Vries, R. E. (2013). Dis￾gust sensitivity and the HEXACO model 
of personality. Personality and Individual 
Differences, 55(6), 660–665.
Tybur, J. M., Lieberman, D., and 
Griskevicius, V. (2009). Microbes, mat￾ing, and morality: Individual differences 
in three functional domains of disgust. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychol￾ogy, 97(1), 103–122.
Tybur, J. M., Lieberman, D., Kurzban, R., 
and DeScioli, P. (2013). Disgust: 
Evolved function and structure. Psycho￾logical Review, 120, 65–84. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1037/a0030778
U.S. Department of Health and Human Ser￾vices, Administration on Children, 
Youth, and Families. (2019). Child Mal￾treatment 2019. Washington, DC: U.S. 
Government Printing Office.
Udry, J. R., and Chantala, K. (2004). Mascu￾linity–femininity guides sexual union for￾mation in adolescence. Personality and 
Social Psychology Bulletin, 30, 44–55.
Uher, R., Caspi, A., Houts, R., Sugden, K., 
Williams, B., Poulton, R., and Moffitt, T. 
E. (2011). Serotonin transporter gene 
moderates childhood maltreatment’s 
effects on persistent but not single￾episode depression: Replications and 
implications for resolving inconsistent 
results. Journal of Affective Disorders, 
135, 55–65.
UNODC, U. (2014). Global study on homi￾cide 2013. Vienna: United Nations 
Publication.
Vaidya, J. G., Gray, E. K., Gaig, J. R., 
Mroczek, D. K., and Watson, D. (2008). 
Differential stability and individual 
growth trajectories of Big Five and 
affective traits during young adulthood. 
Journal of Personality, 76, 267–304.
Vaidya, J. G., Gray, E. K., Haig, J., and Wat￾son, D. (2002). On the temporal stability 
of personality: Evidence for differential 
stability and the role of life experiences. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychol￾ogy, 83, 6, 1469–1484.
Vaillant, G. E. (1977). Adaptation to life.
Boston: Little Brown.
Vaillant, G. E. (1994). Ego mechanisms of 
defense and personality psychopathol￾ogy. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 103,
44–50.
Valentova, J. V., Štěrbová, Z., Bártová, K., 
and Varella, M. A. C. (2016). Personality 
of ideal and actual romantic partners 
among heterosexual and non￾heterosexual men and women: A cross￾cultural study. Personality and Individual 
Differences, 101, 160–166.
van Anders, S. M. (2012). Testosterone and 
sexual desire in healthy women and men. 
Archives of Sexual Behavior, 41,
1471–1484.
Van Beijsterveldt, C. E. M., Bartels, M., 
Hudziak, J. J., and Boomsma, D. I. 
(2003). Causes of stability of aggres￾sion from early childhood to adoles￾cence: A longitudinal genetic analysis 
of Dutch twins. Behavior Genetics, 33,
591–605.
Van de Velde, S., Bracke, P., and Levecque, 
K. (2010). Gender differences in depres￾sion in 23 European countries. Cross￾national variation in the gender gap in 
depression. Social Science & Medicine, 
71(2), 305–313.
van den Berg, S. M., de Moor, M. H., 
McGue, M., Pettersson, E., Terracciano, 
A., Verweij, K. J., . . . and Hansell, N. K. 
(2014). Harmonization of Neuroticism 
and Extraversion phenotypes across 
inventories and cohorts in the Genetics 
of Personality Consortium: An applica￾tion of Item Response Theory. Behavior 
Genetics, 44(4), 295–313.
van den Berg, S. M., de Moor, M. H., 
Verweij, K. J., Krueger, R. F., Luciano, 
M., Vasquez, A. A., . . . and Gordon, S. 
D. (2016). Meta-analysis of Genome￾Wide Association Studies for Extraver￾sion: Findings from the Genetics of 
Personality Consortium. Behavior Genet￾ics, 46(2), 170–182.
Van der Linden, D., Figueredo, A. J., de 
Leeuw, R. N. H., Scholte, R. J. J., and 
Engels, R. C. M. E. (2012). The general 
factor of personality (GFP) and parental 
support: Testing a prediction from Life 
History Theory. Evolution and Human 
Behavior, 33, 537–546.
Van Eck, R. N., Fu, H., Drechsel, P. V. J. 
(2015). Can simulator immersion change 
cognitive style? Results from a 
cross-sectional study of field￾dependence–independence in air traffic 
control students. Journal of Computing in 
Higher Education, 27, 196–214.
Van Iddekinge, C. H., Roth, P. L., Raymark, 
P. H., and Odle-Dusseau, H. N. (2012). 
The criterion-related validity of integrity 
tests: An updated meta-analysis. Journal 
of Applied Psychology, 97, 499–530.
van Scheppingen, M. A., Jackson, J. J., 
Specht, J., Hutteman, R., Denissen, J. J., 
and Bleidorn, W. (2016). Personality 
trait development during the transition to 
parenthood a test of social investment 
theory. Social Psychological and Personal￾ity Science, 7(5), 452–462.
Vando, A. (1974). The development of the 
R-A scale: A paper-and-pencil measure of 
pain tolerance. Personality and Social Psy￾chology Bulletin, 1, 28–29.
Vazire, S. (2010). Who knows what about a 
person? The self-other knowledge asym￾metry (SOKA) model. Journal of Person￾ality and Social Psychology, 98, 281–300.
Vazire, S., and Gosling, S. D. (2003). The 
role of animal research in bridging psy￾chology and biology. American Psycholo￾gist, 58, 407–408.
Vazire, S., and Mehl, M. R. (2008). Knowing 
me, knowing you: The accuracy and 
unique predictive validity of self and 
other ratings of daily behavior. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 95,
1207–1216.
Vazire, S., Naumann, L. P., Rentfrow, P. J., 
and Gosling, S. D. (2008). Portrait of a 
narcissist: Manifestations of narcissism 
in physical appearance. Journal of 
Research in Personality, 42, 1439–1447.
Veenhoven, R. (1988). The utility of happi￾ness. Social Indicators Research, 20,
333–354.
Veenhoven, R. (1991a). Questions on happi￾ness: Classical topics, modern answers, 
blind spots. In F. Strack and M. Argyle 
(Eds.), Subjective Well-Being: An Interdis￾ciplinary Perspective (pp. 7–26). Oxford, 
England: Pergamon Press.
Veenhoven, R. (1991b). Is happiness rela￾tive? Social Indicators Research, 24, 1–34.
Verdon, B., and Azoulay, C. (2020). Psycho￾analysis and projective methods in person￾ality assessment. New York: Hogrefe 
Publishing.
Verduyn, P., Lee, D. S., Park, J., Shablack, 
H., Orvell, A., Bayer, J., . . . Kross, E. 
(2015). Passive Facebook usage under￾mines affective well-being: Experimental 
and longitudinal evidence. Journal of 
Experimental Psychology: General, 144,
480–488.
Verduyn, P., Ybarra, O., Résibois, M., 
Jonides, J., and Kross, E. (2017). Do 
social network sites enhance or under￾mine subjective well-being? A critical 
Final PDF to printerREFERENCES
lar31869_ref_665-718 715 10/22/22 10:41 AM
715
review. Social Issues and Policy Review, 
11, 274–302.
Vernon, P., Villani, V. C., Vickers, L. C., and 
Harris, J. A. (2008). A behavioral genetic 
investigation of the Dark Triad and the 
Big 5. Personality and Individual Differ￾ences, 44, 445–452.
Veroff, J., Atkinson, J. W., Feld, S. C., and 
Gurin, G. (1960). The use of thematic 
apperception to assess motivation in a 
nationwide interview study. Psychological 
Monography, 74, 32.
Veselka, L., Schermer, J. A., and Vernon, P. 
A. (2012). The Dark Triad and an 
expanded framework of personality. Per￾sonality and Individual Differences, 53,
417–425.
Vidacek, S., Kaliterna, L., Radosevic￾Vidacek, B., and Folkard, S. (1988). Per￾sonality differences in the phase of 
circadian rhythms: A comparison of 
morningness and extraversion. Ergonom￾ics, 31, 873–888.
Vignoles, V. L., Regalia, C., Manzi, C., 
Golledtge, J., and Scabini, E. (2006). 
Beyond self-esteem: Influence of multiple 
motives on identity construction. Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology, 90,
308–333.
Vining, D. (1982). On the possibility of the 
reemergence of a dysgenic trend with 
respect to intelligence in American fertil￾ity differentials. Intelligence, 6, 241–264.
Viswesvaran, C., and Ones, D. S. (2016). 
Integrity tests: A review of alternate con￾ceptualizations and some measurement 
and practical issues. In U. Kumar (Ed.), 
The Wiley handbook of personality assess￾ment (pp. 59–73). Wiley Blackwell. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/9781119173489.
ch5.
Vohs, K. D., Schmeichel, B. J., Lohmann, S., 
Gronau, Q. F., Finley, Anna J., 
Ainsworth, S. E. et al. (2021). A multi￾site preregistered paradigmatic test of the 
ego-depletion effect. Psychological Sci￾ence, 32, 1566–1581.
Volkert, J., Gablonski, T., and Rabung, S. 
(2018). Prevalence of personality disor￾ders in the general adult population in 
Western countries: Systematic review and 
meta-analysis. British Journal of Psychia￾try, 213, 809–715.
von Rueden, C. R., Lukaszewski, A. W., and 
Gurven, M. (2015). Adaptive personality 
calibration in a human society: Effects of 
embodied capital on prosocial traits. 
Behavioral Ecology, 26(4), 1071–1082.
Vrij, A., van der Steen, J., and Koppelaar, L. 
(1995). The effects of street noise and 
field independence on police officers’ 
shooting behavior. Journal of Applied 
Social Psychology, 25, 1714–1725.
Vukasović, T., and Bratko, D. (2015). Herita￾bility of personality: A meta-analysis of 
behavior genetic studies. Psychological 
Bulletin, 141(4), 769–785.
Wachtel, P. L. (1973). Psychodynamics, 
behavior therapy, and the implacable 
experimenter: An inquiry into the consis￾tency of personality. Journal of Abnormal 
Psychology, 82, 324–334.
Wacker, J., and Smillie, L. D. (2015). Trait 
extraversion and dopamine function. 
Social and Personality Psychology Com￾pass, 9(6), 225–238.
Wacker, J., Mueller, E. M., and Stemmler, G. 
(2012). Prenatal testosterone and person￾ality: Increasing the specificity of trait 
assessment to detect consistent associa￾tions with digit ratio (2D:4D). Journal of 
Research in Personality, online first post￾ing, digital online identifier: 10.1016/
j.jrp.2012.10.007.
Wagels, L., Habel, U., Raine, A., and 
Clemens, B. (2022). Neuroimaging, hor￾monal and genetic biomarkers for patho￾logical aggression—Success or failure? 
Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences, 
43, 101–110.
Wagner, J., Ludtke, O., and Trautwein, U. 
(2015). Self-esteem is mostly stable 
across young adulthood: Evidence from 
latent STARTS models. Journal of Per￾sonality, published online, https://doi.
org/10.1111/jopy.12178.
Wagner, J., Lüdtke, O., Jonkmann, K., and 
Trautwein, U. (2013). Cherish yourself: 
Longitudinal patterns and conditions of 
self-esteem change in the transition to 
young adulthood. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 104, 148–163.
Wagstaff, G. F., Vella, M., and Perfect, T. 
(1992). The effect of hypnotically elicited 
testimony on jurors’ judgments of guilt 
and innocence. Journal of Social Psychol￾ogy, 132, 591–595.
Wahba, M. A., and Bridwell, L. (1973). 
Maslow’s need hierarchy theory: A 
review of research. Proceedings of the 
Annual Convention of the American Psy￾chological Association (1973), 571–572.
Wallace, H. M., and Baumeister, R. F. 
(2002). The performance of narcissists 
rises and falls with perceived opportunity 
for glory. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 82(5), 819–834.
Waller, N. (1994). The importance of nonge￾netic influences on romantic love styles. 
Psychological Science, 9, 268–274.
Walton, G. M., Paunesku, D., and Dweck, C. 
S. (2012). Expandable selves. In M. R. 
Leary and J. P. Tangney (Eds.), Hand￾book of Self and Identity (2nd ed., 
pp. 141–154). New York: Guilford Press.
Wang, J. L., Wang, H.-Z., Gaskin, J., and 
Hawk, S. (2017). The mediating roles of 
upward social comparison and self￾esteem and the moderating role of social 
comparison orientation in the 
association between social networking 
site usage and subjective well-being. 
Frontiers in Psychology, 8. doi:10.3389/
fpsyg.2017.00771.
Watson, D. (2000). Mood and Temperament.
New York: Guilford Press.
Watson, D. (2003). To dream, perchance to 
remember: Individual differences in 
dream recall. Personality and Individual 
Differences, 34, 1271–1286.
Watson, D. C. (2001). Procrastination and 
the five-factor model: A facet level analy￾sis. Personality and Individual Differences, 
30, 149–158.
Watson, D., and Clark, L. A. (1984). Nega￾tive affectivity: The disposition to experi￾ence aversive emotional states. 
Psychological Bulletin, 96, 465–490.
Watson, D., and Humrichouse, J. (2006). 
Personality development in emerging 
adulthood: Integrating evidence from 
self-ratings and spouse ratings. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 91,
959–974.
Watson, D., and Pennebaker, J. W. (1989). 
Health complaints, stress, and distress: 
Exploring the central role of negative 
affectivity. Psychological Review, 96,
234–254.
Watson-Jones, R. E., Whitehouse, H., and 
Legare, C. H. (2016). In-group ostracism 
increases high-fidelity imitation in early 
childhood. Psychological Science, 27(1), 
34–42.
Watts, B. L. (1982). Individual differences in 
circadian activity rhythms and their 
effects on roommate relationships. Jour￾nal of Personality, 50, 374–384.
Webster, G. D., and Crysel, L. C. (2012). 
“Hit Me, Maybe, One More Time”: Brief 
measures of impulsivity and sensation 
seeking and their prediction of blackjack 
bets and sexual promiscuity. Journal of 
Research in Personality, 46(5), 591–598.
Wechsler, D. (1949). The Wechsler Intelli￾gence Scale for Children. New York: Psy￾chological Corporation.
Wehr, T. A., and Goodwin, F. K. (1981). 
Biological rhythms and psychiatry. In S. 
Arieti and H. K. Brodie (Eds.), American 
Handbook of Psychiatry: Advances and 
New Directions (Vol. 7). New York: Basic 
Books.
Weinberger, D. S., Schwartz, G. E., and 
Davidson, R. J. (1979). Low-anxious, 
high-anxious, and repressive coping 
styles: Psychometric patterns and behav￾ioral and physiological responses to 
stress. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 
88, 369–380.
Weinberger, J. (2003). Freud’s influence on 
psychology is alive and vibrant. In E. E. 
Smith, S. Nolen-Hoeksema, B. L. Fred￾rickson, G. R. Loftus, D. J. Bem, and S. 
Maren, Introduction to psychology
Final PDF to printerREFERENCES
lar31869_ref_665-718 716 10/22/22 10:41 AM
716
(p. 486). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth/
Thomson Learning.
Weinberger, J., and McClelland, D. C. 
(1990). Cognitive versus traditional moti￾vational models: Irreconcilable or com￾plementary? In E. T. Higgins and R. M. 
Sorrentino (Eds.), Handbook of motiva￾tion and cognition (Vol. 2, pp. 562–597). 
New York: Guilford Press.
Weinberger, J., and Westen, D. (2007). 
RATS, we should have used Clinton: Sub￾liminal priming in political campaigns.
Paper presented at the annual meeting of 
the International Society of Political Psy￾chology, Portland, Oregon. USA Online.
Retrieved February 3, 2009, from www.
allacademic.com/meta/p204661_index.
html.
Weinstein, A., Dorani, D., Elhadif, R., 
Bukovza, Y., Yarmulnik, A., and 
Dannon, P. (2015). Internet addiction is 
associated with social anxiety in young 
adults. Annals of Clinical Psychiatry, 
27(1), 4–9.
Weinstock, L. M., and Whisman, M. A. 
(2006). Neuroticism as a common fea￾ture of the depressive and anxiety disor￾ders: A test of the revised integrative 
hierarchical model in a national sample. 
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 115,
68–74.
Weiser, E. B. (2015). # Me: Narcissism and 
its facets as predictors of selfie-posting 
frequency. Personality and Individual Dif￾ferences, 86, 477–481.
Weiss, A., King, J. E., and Enns, R. M. 
(2002). Subjective well-being is heritable 
and genetically correlated with domi￾nance in chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes). 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychol￾ogy, 83(5), 1141–1149.
Weissberg, R. P., Kumpfer, K. L., and Selig￾man, M. E. P. (2003). Prevention that 
works for children and youth: An intro￾duction. American Psychologist Special 
Issue: Prevention that works for children 
and youth, 58, 425–432.
Weller, H. G., Repman, J., Lan, W., and 
Rooze, G. (1995). Improving the effec￾tiveness of learning through hypermedia￾based instruction: The importance of 
learner characteristics. Special Issue: 
Hypermedia: Theory, research, and appli￾cation. Computers in Human Behavior, 11,
451–465.
Wertsch, J., and Kanner, B. (1992). A socio￾cultural approach to intellectual develop￾ment. In R. Sternberg and C. A. Berg 
(Eds.), Intellectual development
(pp. 328–349). New York: Cambridge 
University Press.
Wessman, A. E., and Ricks, D. F. (1966). 
Mood and Personality. New York: Holt, 
Rinehart, and Winston.
Westen, D. (1990). Psychoanalytic 
approaches to personality. In L. A. 
Pervin (Ed.), Handbook of personality: 
Theory and research (pp. 21–65). New 
York: Guilford Press.
Westen, D. (1992). The cognitive self and 
the psychoanalytic self: Can we put our 
selves together? Psychological Inquiry, 3,
1–13.
Westen, D. (1998). The scientific legacy of 
Sigmund Freud: Toward a psychodynam￾ically informed psychological science. 
Psychological Bulletin, 124, 333–371.
Westen, D., and Gabbard, G. O. (2002a). 
Developments in cognitive neuroscience: 
I. Conflict, compromise, and connection￾ism. Journal of the American Psychoana￾lytic Association, 50, 53–98.
Westen, D., and Gabbard, G. O. (2002b). 
Developments in cognitive neuroscience: 
II. Implications for theories of transfer￾ence. Journal of the American Psychoana￾lytic Association 50, 99–134.
Weston, S. J., and Jackson, J. J. (2016). How 
do people respond to health news? The 
role of personality traits. Psychology and 
Health, 31, 637–654.
Wever, R. A. (1979). The circadian system of 
man: Results of experiments under tempo￾ral isolation. New York: Springer.
Whalen, P. J., Bush, G., and McNally, R. J. 
(1998). The emotional counting Stroop 
paradigm: A functional magnetic reso￾nance imaging probe of the anterior cin￾gulate affective division. Biological 
Psychiatry, 44, 1219–1228.
Wheeler, J. G., George, W. H., and Dahl, B. 
J. (2002). Sexually aggressive college 
males: Empathy as a moderator in the 
“Confluence Model” of sexual aggres￾sion. Personality and Individual Differ￾ences, 33, 759–775.
Wheeler, R. W., Davidson, R. J., and 
Tomarken, A. J. (1993). Frontal brain 
asymmetry and emotional reactivity: A 
biological substrate of affective style. Psy￾chophysiology, 30, 82–89.
White, J. K., Hendrick, S. S., and Hendrick, 
C. (2004). Big Five personality variables 
and relationship constructs. Personality 
and Individual Differences, 37,
1519–1530.
White, S. J., Pascall, D. J., and Wilson, A. J. 
(2020). Towards a comparative approach 
to the structure of animal personality 
variation. Behavioral Ecology, 31(2), 
340–351.
Whiting, B., and Edwards, C. P. (1988). Chil￾dren of different worlds. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press.
Whorf, B. L. (1956). Language, thought, and 
reality. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Whyte, S., Brooks, R. C., Chan, H. F., and 
Torgler, B. (2019). Do certain personal￾ity traits provide a mating market com￾petitive advantage? Sex, offspring and the 
big 5. Personality and Individual Differ￾ences, 139, 158–169.
Wicker, F. W., Brown, G., Weihe, J. A., 
Hagen, A. S., and Reed, J. L. (1993). On 
reconsidering Maslow: An examination 
of the deprivation/domination proposi￾tion. Journal of Research in Personality, 
27, 118–133.
Wickman, S. A., and Campbell, C. (2003). 
An analysis of how Carl Rogers enacted 
client-centered conversation with Gloria. 
Journal of Counseling and Development, 
81, 178–184.
Widiger, T. A. (1997). Personality disorders 
as maladaptive variants of common per￾sonality traits: Implications for treatment. 
Journal of Contemporary Psychotherapy 
Special Issue: Personality Disorders, 27,
265–282.
Widiger, T. A. (2000). Personality disorders 
in the 21st century. Journal of Personality 
Disorders, 14, 3–16.
Widiger, T. A., and Costa, P. T. (2012). Inte￾grating normal and abnormal personality 
structure: The Five-Factor Model. Jour￾nal of Personality, 80(6), 1471–1506.
Widiger, T. A., Costa, P. T., Jr., and McCrae, 
R. M. (2002a). A proposal for Axis II: 
Diagnosing personality disorders using 
the five-factor model. In P. T. Costa Jr. 
and T. A. Widiger (Eds.), Personality dis￾orders and the five-factor model of person￾ality (2nd ed., pp. 431–456). 
Washington, DC: American Psychologi￾cal Association.
Widiger, T. A., Trull, T. J., Clarkin, J. F., 
Sanderson, C., and Costa, P. T., Jr. 
(2002b). A description of the DSM-IV
personality disorders with the five-factor 
model of personality. In P. T. Costa Jr. 
and T. A. Widiger (Eds.), Personality dis￾orders and the five-factor model of person￾ality (2nd ed., pp. 89–102). Washington, 
DC: American Psychological 
Association.
Wiebe, D. J., and Smith, T. (1997). Personal￾ity and health: Progress and problems in 
psychosomatics. In R. Hogan, J. John￾son, and S. Briggs (Eds.), Handbook of 
personality psychology (pp. 892–918). San 
Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Wiederman, M. W., and Kendall, E. (1999). 
Evolution, gender, and sexual jealousy: 
Investigation with a sample from 
Sweden. Evolution and Human Behavior, 
20, 121–128.
Wiggins, J. S. (1973). Personality and predic￾tion: Principles of personality assessment.
Menlo Park, CA: Addison-Wesley.
Wiggins, J. S. (1979). A psychological taxon￾omy of trait-descriptive terms: The inter￾personal domain. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 37, 395–412.
Wiggins, J. S. (1996). The five-factor model of 
personality: Theoretical perspectives. New 
York: Guilford Press.
Wiggins, J. S. (2003). Paradigms of personal￾ity assessment. New York: Guilford Press.
Final PDF to printerREFERENCES
lar31869_ref_665-718 717 10/22/22 10:41 AM
717
Wilgus, J. and Wilgus, B. (2009). Face to 
face with Phineus Gage. Journal of the 
History of the Neurosciences, 18,
340–345.
Willerman, L. (1979). Effects of families on 
intellectual development. American Psy￾chologist, 34, 923–929.
Willerman, L., Loehlin, J. C., and Horn, J. 
M. (1992). An adoption and a cross￾fostering study of the Minnesota Multi￾phasic Personality Inventory (MMPI) 
Psychopathic Deviate scale. Behavior 
Genetics, 22, 515–529.
Williams, D. E., and Page, M. M. (1989). A 
multi-dimensional measure of Maslow’s 
hierarchy of needs. Journal of Research in 
Personality, 23, 192–213.
Williams, J. E., and Best, D. L. (1982). 
Measuring sex stereotypes: A thirty-nation 
study. Beverly Hills: Sage.
Williams, J. E., and Best, D. L. (1990). 
Measuring sex stereotypes: A multi-nation 
study. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Williams, J. E., and Best, D. L. (1994). 
Cross-cultural views of women and men. 
In W. J. Lonner and R. Malpass (Eds.), 
Psychology and culture (pp. 191–196). 
Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
Williams, J. M. G., Mathews, A., and 
MacLeod, C. (1996). The emotional 
Stroop task and psychopathology. Psycho￾logical Bulletin, 120, 3–24.
Williams, L., Ashford-Smith, S., Cobban, L., 
Fitzsimmons, R., Sukhatme, V., and 
Hunter, S. C. (2019). Does your part￾ner’s personality affect your health? 
Actor and partner effects of the Big Five 
personality traits. Personality and Individ￾ual Differences, 149, 231–234.
Williams, P. G., O’Brien, C. D., and Colder, 
C. R. (2004). The effects of neuroticism 
and extraversion on self-assessed health 
and health-relevant cognition. Personality 
and Individual Differences, 37, 83–94.
Williams, W. M., and Ceci, S. J. (2015). 
National hiring experiments reveal 2: 1 
faculty preference for women on STEM 
tenure track. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, 112(17), 
5360–5365.
Wilmot, M. P., Haslam, N., Tian, J., and 
Ones, D. S. (2019). Direct and concep￾tual replications of the taxometric analy￾sis of type a behavior. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 116,
e12–e26. https://doi-org/10.1037/
pspp0000195
Wilson, D. S., Near, D., and Miller, R. R. 
(1996). Machiavellianism: A synthesis of 
the evolutionary and psychological litera￾tures. Psychological Bulletin, 119,
285–299.
Wilson, M. L., Boesch, C., Fruth, B., 
Furuichi, T., Gilby, I. C., Hashimoto, C., 
. . . and Lloyd, J. N. (2014). Lethal 
aggression in Pan is better explained by 
adaptive strategies than human impacts. 
Nature, 513(7518), 414.
Wilson, M., and Daly, M. (1985). Competi￾tiveness, risk-taking, and violence: The 
young male syndrome. Ethology and 
Sociobiology, 6, 59–73.
Wilson, M., and Daly, M. (2004). Do pretty 
women inspire men to discount the 
future? Proceedings of the Royal Society of 
London, B (Suppl.), 271, S177–S179.
Wilt, J., and Revelle, W. (2017). Extraver￾sion. In T. A. Widiger (Ed.), The Oxford 
handbook of the Five Factor Model (pp. 
57–81). New York: Oxford University 
Press.
Winch, R. F. (1954). The theory of comple￾mentary needs in mate selection: An ana￾lytic and descriptive study. American 
Sociological Review, 19, 241–249.
Winjgaards-de Meij, L., Stroebe, M., Schut, 
H., Stroebe, W., van den Bout, J., van der 
Heijden, P., and Dijkstra, I. (2007). Neu￾roticism and attachment insecurity as 
predictors of bereavement outcome. Jour￾nal of Research in Personality, 41,
498–505.
Wink, P., Ciciolla, L., Dillon, M., and Tracy, 
A. (2007). Religiousness, spiritual seek￾ing, and personality: Findings from a lon￾gitudinal study. Journal of Personality, 75,
1051–1070.
Winter, D. G. (1973). The power motive. New 
York: Free Press.
Winter, D. G. (1988). The power motive in 
women—and men. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 54, 510–519.
Winter, D. G. (1993). Power, affiliation, and 
war: Three tests of a motivational model. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychol￾ogy, 65, 532–545.
Winter, D. G. (1998). A motivational analy￾sis of the Clinton first term and the 1996 
presidential campaign. Leadership Quar￾terly, 9, 367–376.
Winter, D. G. (1999). Linking personality 
and “scientific” psychology: The develop￾ment of empirically derived Thematic 
Apperception Test measures. In Gieser 
and M. I. Stein (Eds.), Evocative images: 
The Thematic Apperception Test and the 
art of projection (pp. 107–124). Washing￾ton, DC: American Psychological 
Association.
Winter, D. G. (2002). The motivational 
dimensions of leadership: Power, 
achievement, and affiliation. In R. E. 
Riggio and S. E. Murphy (Eds.), Multiple 
intelligences and leadership (pp. 119–
138). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Winter, D. G., and Barenbaum, N. B. (1985). 
Responsibility and the power motive in 
women and men. Journal of Personality, 
53, 335–355.
Winter, D. G. (2018). What does Trump 
really want? Analyses of Social Issues and 
Public Policy, 18, 155–171.
Wirtz, D., Tucker, A., Briggs, C., and 
Schoemann, A. M. (2021). How and 
why social media affect subjective well￾being: Multi-site use and social compari￾son as predictors of change across time. 
Journal of Happiness Studies, 22,
1673–1691.
Witkin, H. A. (1973). A cognitive-style per￾spective on evaluation and guidance. Pro￾ceedings of the Invitational Conference on 
Testing Problems, 21–27.
Witkin, H. A. (1977). Role of the field￾dependent and field-independent cogni￾tive styles in academic evolution: A 
longitudinal study. Journal of Educational 
Psychology, 69, 197–211.
Witkin, H. A., and Goodenough, D. R. (1977). 
Field dependence and interpersonal behav￾ior. Psychological Bulletin, 84, 661–689.
Witkin, H. A., Dyk, R. B., Fattuson, H. F., 
Goodenough, D. R., and Karp, S. A. 
(1962). Psychological differentiation: Stud￾ies of development. New York: Wiley.
Witkin, H. A., Lewis, H. B., Hertzman, M., 
Machover, K., Meissner, P. B., and Wap￾ner, S. (1954). Personality through percep￾tion: An experimental and clinical study.
New York: Harper.
Witkin, H. A., Moore, C. A., Goodenough, 
D. R., and Cox, P. W. (1977). Field￾dependent and field-independent cogni￾tive styles and their educational 
implications. Review of Educational 
Research, 47, 1–64.
Woike, B. A. (1995). Most memorable expe￾riences: Evidence for a link between 
implicit and explicit motives and social 
cognitive processes in everyday life. Jour￾nal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
68, 1081–1091.
Wood, A. H., and Eagly, A. H. (2010). Gen￾der. In S. Fiske, D. Gilbert, and G. Lin￾dzey (Eds.), Handbook of social 
psychology (Vol. 1, 5th ed., pp. 629–667).
New York: Wiley.
Wood, D. (2015). Testing the lexical hypoth￾esis: Are socially important traits more 
densely reflected in the English lexicon? 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychol￾ogy, 108(2), 317–335.
Wood, D., Nye, C. D., and Saucier, G. 
(2010). Identification and measurement 
of a more comprehensive set of person￾descriptive trait markers from the Eng￾lish lexicon. Journal of Research in 
Personality, 44, 258–272.
Wood, J. J., McLeod, B. D., Sigman, M., 
Hwang, W. C., and Chu, B. C. (2003). 
Parenting and childhood anxiety: Theory, 
empirical findings, and future directions. 
Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 
and Allied Disciplines, 44, 134–151.
Wood, J. M., Nezworski, M. T., and Stejskal, 
J. W. (1996). The comprehensive system 
for the Rorschach: A critical examina￾tion. Psychological Science, 7, 3–10.
Final PDF to printerREFERENCES
lar31869_ref_665-718 718 10/22/22 10:41 AM
718
Wortman, J., and Wood, D. (2011). The per￾sonality traits of liked people. Journal of 
Research in Personality, 45, 519–528.
Wright, C. I., Williams, D., Feczko, E., 
Barrett, L. F., Dickerson, B. C., 
Schwartz, C. E., and Wedig, M. M. 
(2006). Neuroanatomical correlates of 
extraversion and neuroticism. Cerebral 
Cortex, 16(12), 1809–1819.
Wright, D. B., Eaton, A. A., and Skagerberg, 
E. (2015). Occupational segregation and 
psychological gender differences: How 
empathizing and systemizing help 
explain the distribution of men and 
women into (some) occupations. Journal 
of Research in Personality, 54, 30–39.
Wright, L. (1988). The Type A behavior pat￾tern and coronary artery disease. 
American Psychologist, 43, 2–14.
Wright, P. J., and Vangeel, L. (2019). Por￾nography, permissiveness, and sex differ￾ences: An evaluation of social learning 
and evolutionary explanations. Personal￾ity and Individual Differences, 143,
128–138.
Wrulich, M., Stadler, G., Brunner, M., 
Keller, U., and Martin, R. (2015). Child￾hood intelligence predicts premature 
mortality: Results from a 40-year popula￾tion-based longitudinal study. Journal of 
Research in Personality, 58, 6–10.
Wrzus, C., Wagner, G. G., and Riediger, M. 
(2016). Personality-situation transactions 
from adolescence to old age. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 110(5), 
782.
Wu, K. D., and Clark, L. A. (2003). Rela￾tions between personality traits and self￾reports of daily behavior. Journal of 
Research in Personality, 37, 231–256.
Yarkoni, T. (2015). Neurobiological sub￾strates of personality: A critical overview. 
In L. Cooper and R. J. Larsen (Eds.), 
Handbook of personality and social psy￾chology: personality processes and individ￾ual differences (pp. 61–84). Washington, 
DC: American Psychological 
Association.
Yeh, C. (1995). A cultural perspective on inter￾dependence in self and morality: A Japan￾U.S. comparison. Unpublished 
manuscript, Department of Psychology, 
Stanford University, Stanford, CA.
Yik, M. S. M., and Russell, J. A. (2001). Pre￾dicting the big two of affect from the Big 
Five of personality. Journal of Research in 
Personality, 35, 247–277.
Young, S. M., and Pinksky, D. (2006). Nar￾cissism and celebrity. Journal of Research 
in Personality, 40, 463–471.
Yu, D. L., and Seligman, M. E. P. (2002). 
Preventing depressive symptoms in 
Chinese children. Prevention and Treat￾ment, 5, np.
Zagorsky, J. L. (2007). Do you have to be 
smart to be rich? The impact of IQ on 
wealth, income, and financial distress. 
Intelligence, 35, 489–501.
Zakriski, A. L., Wright, J. C., and Under￾wood, M. K. (2005). Gender similarities 
and differences in children’s social 
behavior: Finding personality in contex￾tualized patterns of adaptation. Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology, 88,
844–855.
Zarevski, P., Bratko, D., Butkovic, A., and 
Lazic, A. (2002). Self-reports and peer￾ratings of shyness and assertiveness. 
Review of Psychology, 9, 13–16.
Zeidner, M., Matthews, G., Roberts, R. D., 
and MacCann, C. (2003). Development 
of emotional intelligence: Towards a 
multi-level investment model. Human 
Development, 46, 69–96.
Zeigler-Hill, V., Myers, E. M., and Clark, C. 
B. (2010). Narcissism and self-esteem 
reactivity: The role of negative achieve￾ment events. Journal of Research in Per￾sonality, 44, 285–292.
Zelenski, J. M., and Larsen, R. J. (1999). 
Susceptibility to affect: A comparison of 
three personality taxonomies. Journal of 
Personality, 67, 761–791.
Zelenski, J. M., and Larsen, R. J. (2000). 
The distribution of emotions in 
everyday life: A state and trait perspec￾tive from experience sampling data. Jour￾nal of Research in Personality, 34,
178–197.
Zengel, B., Edlund, J. E., and Sagarin, B. J., 
(2013). Sex differences in jealousy in 
response to infidelity: Evaluation of 
demographic moderators in a national 
random sample. Personality and Individ￾ual Differences, 54, 47–51.
Zettler, I., and Hilbig, B. E. (2010). Honesty￾humility and person-situation interaction 
at work. European Journal of Personality, 
24, 569–582.
Zhao, K., Ferguson, E., and Smillie, L. D. 
(2016). Prosocial personality traits differ￾entially predict egalitarianism, generosity, 
and reciprocity in economic games. Fron￾tiers in psychology, 7, 1137.
Zhou, Y., Zhang, Z., Wang, K., Chen, S., 
Zhou, M., and Zhang, J. (2021). Person￾ality and emerging adults’ friend selec￾tion on social networking sites: A social 
network analysis perspective. PsyCh Jour￾nal, 10(1), 62–75.
Zhu, B., Chen, C., Loftus, E .F., He, Q., 
Chen, C., Lei, X., Lin, C., and Dong, Q. 
(2012). Brief exposure to misinformation 
can lead to long-term false memories. 
Applied Cognitive Psychology, 26,
301–307.
Zilcha-Mano, S., Mikulincer, M., and Shaver, 
P. R. (2012). Pets as safe havens and 
secure bases: The moderating role of pet 
attachment orientations. Journal of 
Research in Personality, 46, 571–580.
Zimbardo, P. G. (1977). Shyness: What it is 
and what to do about it. New York: 
Symphony.
Zuckerman, M. (1974). The sensation seek￾ing motive. In B. Maher (Ed.), Progress 
in experimental personality research (Vol. 
7, pp. 79–148). New York: Academic 
Press.
Zuckerman, M. (1978). Sensation seeking. 
In H. London and J. E. Exner (Eds.), 
Dimensions of personality (pp. 487–559). 
New York: Wiley Interscience.
Zuckerman, M. (1984). Sensation seeking: A 
comparative approach to a human trait. 
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 7,
413–471.
Zuckerman, M. (1991a). Psychobiology of 
personality. New York: Cambridge Uni￾versity Press.
Zuckerman, M. (1991b). Sensation-seeking 
trait. Encyclopedia of Human Biology, 6,
809–817.
Zuckerman, M. (2005). The neurobiology of 
impulsive sensation seeking: Genetics, 
brain physiology, biochemistry, and neu￾rology. In C. Stough and C. Stough 
(Eds.), Neurobiology of exceptionality
(pp. 31–52). New York: Kluwer 
Academic/Plenum Publishers.
Zuckerman, M. (2006). Biosocial bases of 
sensation seeking. In T. Canli (Ed.), Biol￾ogy of personality and individual differ￾ences (pp. 37–59). New York: Guilford 
Press.
Zuckerman, M. and Glicksohn, J. (2016). 
Hans Eysenck’s personality model and 
the constructs of sensation seeking and 
impulsivity. Personality and Individual Dif￾ferences,103, 48–52.
Zuckerman, M., and Aluja, A. (2015). 
Measures of sensation seeking. In G. J. 
Boyle, D. H. Saklofske, G. Matthews, G. 
J. Boyle, D. H. Saklofske, and 
G. Matthews (Eds.), Measures of person￾ality and social psychological constructs
(pp. 352–380). San Diego, CA: Elsevier 
Academic Press.
Zuckerman, M., and Haber, M. M. (1965). 
Need for stimulation as a source of stress 
response to perceptual isolation. Journal 
of Abnormal Psychology, 70, 371–377.
Zuckerman, M., and Kuhlman, D. M. 
(2000). Personality and risk-taking: Com￾mon biosocial factors. Journal of Person￾ality, 68, 999–1029.
Final PDF to printerlar31869_nidx_719-730 719 11/07/22 04:17 PM
Name Index
A
Abbott, M., 471
Abdel-Khalek, A. M., 505
Abdellaoui, A., 180
Abe, J. A. A., 147
Abell, R., 480
Abell, S., 337
Abelson, R. P., 99
Abraham, C., 79
Abrahamson, A. C., 170
Abramson, L. Y., 510
Abregú-Crespo, R., 133
Abuhamdeh, S., 356
Acevedo, M., 514
Achille, N. M., 78, 97
Ackerman, J. M., 352
Aczel, B., 269
Adams, R., 78, 484
Adan, A., 214
Addison, T. L., 479
Adler, A., 232
Affleck, G., 579
Aguilar-Vafaie, M. E., 502–505
Agyei, Y., 171
Aigner, M., 428
Ainsworth, M., 321, 322, 327
Ainsworth, S. E., 273
Airaksinen, J., 148
Aitken, M. R. F., 269
Aknin, L. B., 414–415
Aksan, N., 420
Al-Shawaf, L., 234, 237
Alansari, B. M., 505
Albert, D., 140
Alberts, H., 272
Albino, A., 146
Aleman, A., 194, 421
Alexander, C., 346
Algom, D., 423
Allan, A., 35
Allem, M., 82, 90, 137
Alleman, M., 136
Allen, K. A., 232
Allen, N. B., 79
Allen, T. A., 191, 195, 204
Allik, J., 137, 503, 505, 518, 541
Allport, G., 4, 50, 63, 74, 190
Almagor, M., 82
Almond, L., 493
Alston, W. P., 58
Aluja, A., 146, 208
Amelang, M., 60, 62
Amell, J. W., 132, 180
Anastasi, A., 89
Andari, E., 199
Andersen, J. P., 370
Anderson, C., 61, 481
Anderson, K. B., 481
Ando, J., 168, 169
Andrews, J. A., 132
Andrews, J. D. W., 341
Ang, R. P., 440, 443, 493
Angelides, M., 146
Anggono, C. O., 272
Angier, N., 247
Angleitner, A., 60, 62, 167, 168, 
170, 175, 242, 471, 548
Ansell, E. B., 73
Antoniazzi, D., 209
Anusic, I., 136
Apostolou, M., 235
Arango, C., 133
Archer, J., 240, 241, 250, 521
Archontaki, D., 173
Ardila, A., 543
Areh, I., 35
Armstrong, P. I., 509
Arnocky, S., 84
Aron, A., 438
Aron, E. N., 438
Arsal, G., 619
Asai, M., 168
Aschoff, J., 213
Aschwanden, D., 563
Asendorpf, J., 66, 147, 253, 279
Asherian, A., 471
Ashford-Smith, S., 79
Ashmore, R. D., 500
Ashton, M. C., 64, 77, 83, 84, 235, 
541
Assaf, Y., 196
Assor, A., 345
Aston-Jones, G., 42
Atkins, L., 246
Atkinson, J. W., 338, 342
Audet, É. C., 563
Augustine, A. A., 423
Aunger, R., 237
Avdeyeva, T. V., 502–505
Averill, J. R., 403
Avinun, R., 177
Ayora, M., 133
Ayoub, M., 177
Azizoddin, D. R., 78
Azoulay, C., 338
B
Babiak, J., 456
Babyak, M. A., 79
Baccaro, L., 31
Back, M. D., 36, 485, 562
Bacon, A. M., 563
Bailey, J. M., 171, 250
Bailey, N. A., 304
Bailey, S. L., 214
Bain, J., 428
Baird, B. M., 418
Bajcar, B., 456
Baker, J. P., 493
Baker, L. A., 168, 170, 263
Bakker, A. B., 78
Balliet, D., 504
Balota, D. A., 302, 423
Baltissen, R., 378
Bandura, A., 391, 517
Banich, M., 140
Banks, A. P., 268
Bar-On, R., 359
Barbaranelli, C., 78
Barcan, S., 563
Barckley, M., 132
Barclay, L. C., 141
Barefoot, J. C., 79
Barelds, D. P. H., 77, 83, 476, 478, 
484
Barenbaum, N. B., 333, 345
Bargh, J. A., 306, 307, 352
Barker, E. D., 70
Barnes, M. L., 246
Barnhardt, T. M., 294
Baron, B., 516
Baron, M., 171
Baron, R. A., 427
Barouei, J., 237
Barrantes-Vidal, N., 27
Barren, R. V., 268, 269
Barrett, L. F., 421
Barrick, M. R., 113
Barron, J. W., 292
Barry, R. J., 70
Bartels, M., 168, 169, 173, 180
Barthorpe, A., 452
Bártová, K., 473
Baselmans, B. M. L., 180
Bass, E., 263, 300
Bastone, L. M., 376
Batailler, C., 272
Bates, T. C., 173
Batty, G. D., 148, 383
Bauer, J. J., 354
Baumard, N., 528
Baumeister, R., 232, 272, 273, 276, 
278, 281, 282, 291, 318, 
353, 438, 448, 451–456, 
458, 460, 493, 508
Baumeister, R. F., 232
Beach, L., 172
Beam, C. R., 173
Beaty, R. E., 84, 197
Beauducel, A., 379
Beauregard, M., 421
Beauvois, J. L., 81
Beck, A. T., 424–426
Becker, D. V., 244
Bedin, L. M., 483
Beekman, J. B., 234
Beer, J. S., 186
Bègue, L., 81
Beier, M. E., 41
Bell, S. M., 322
Bellah, C. G., 491
Belle, D., 413
Bellezza, F. S., 269
Bellingtier, J. A., 563
Belsky, J., 250, 529
Beltz, A. M., 519
Bem, D. J., 35, 90, 149, 171, 172
Bem, S. L., 511, 513
Bendixen, M., 244
Benedek, M., 197
Benet-Martinez, V., 92, 148
Benjamin, J., 178, 179
Bennett, K., 244
Bentler, P. M., 478
Berant, E., 337
Berenbaum, S. A., 519
Berg, A. I., 149
Berg, V., 249
Berger, R., 280
Berlin, L., 327
Berman, S., 179
Bernhardt, P. C., 520
Bernstein, D. M., 300
Berry, C. M., 108
Berry, D. R., 186
Berry, D. S., 78
Best, D. L., 514, 548–549
Best, L. A., 82
Bhanji, J., 204
Bhullar, N., 476
Biaggio, A., 471
Bian, M., 443
Bihrle, S., 428
Billari, F. C., 78
Billings, D., 430
Bilton, I., 143
Biran, A., 237
Birchall, P. M., 201
Birley, A. J., 167
Birt, A. R., 272
Biswas-Diener, R., 315, 411, 
413–414
Bjork, R. A., 117
Bjorklund, D. F., 244
Black, J., 113
Blades, C. A., 149
Blanch, A., 146
Blanco, E., 146
Blankenship, V., 345
Blankstein, K. R., 354
Bleidorn, W., 137, 169, 170
Bleske-Rechek, A., 493, 508
Block, J., 29, 31, 62, 74, 130, 139, 
499, 517
Blonigen, D. M., 132, 168, 169
Blumenfield, T., 244
Bochner, S., 25
Boesch, C., 240
Bogg, T., 60–62, 79, 137, 559
Bohart, A. C., 363
Boivin, M., 168
Boles, T. L., 483
Bolkan, C., 447
Bollich, K. L., 32
Bonacci, A. M., 508
Bonanno, G. A., 146, 279
Bond, B., 508
Bond, M. H., 338, 532, 534
Bonin, S. L., 170
Bono, J. E., 483
Bönte, W., 189
Bonus, K., 204
Boomsma, D. I., 167–169, 172
Boon, S. D., 84
Borg, I., 74, 77
Borkenau, P., 167, 168, 175
Bornovalova, M. A., 176
Bornstein, R. F., 35, 291
Bos, M. W., 268, 269
Bosner, I., 493
Final PDF to printer720 NAME INDEX
lar31869_nidx_719-730 720 11/07/22 04:17 PM
Bothwell, R. K., 79, 491
Botwin, M., 474–476
Botwin, M. D., 74
Bouchard, T. J., 168, 169, 249
Jr., 168, 170, 172, 177, 561
Bourgouin, P., 421
Bower, J. E., 408
Bowlby, J., 321, 322, 327
Boyce, C. J., 79
Boychuk, E. C., 370
Boyle, G. J., 117
Bradberry, T., 93
Bradley, M. M., 596
Brandler, S., 395, 397
Branje, S., 480
Branje, S. J. T., 137
Brase, G. L., 84, 244
Bratko, D., 169, 446, 491
Bratslavsky, E., 272, 456
Braun, K. A., 301
Bray, D., 139
Brayne, C., 581
Brebner, J., 203, 506–507
Breger, R., 532
Brend-gen, M., 168
Brennan, K. A., 323
Brennan, P. A., 428
Bresin, K., 471
Bretherton, I., 322
Breuer, J., 269, 270
Brick, T. R., 471
Brickman, P., 414
Bridwell, L., 354
Briere, J., 621
Briggs, C., 452
Briley, D. A., 169, 172, 176–178
Brocke, B., 379
Brody, J. E., 133
Brooks, R. C., 81
Brooks, S., 508
Brooks, S. J., 269
Brose, L. A., 82
Brothen, T., 110
Brown, C. M., 451
Brown, D. E., 543
Brown, G. D. A., 79
Brown, J. D., 451–452
Brown, K. J., 479
Brown, L. S., 262
Brown, M., 505
Brown, P. R., 319
Brown, S. D., 391
Bruce, J., 446
Bruch, M. A., 479
Bruggemann, J. M., 70
Brumbach, B. H., 253
Brummelhuis, L. L., 273
Brummelhuis, L. L., 273
Brummett, B. H., 79
Brunner, M., 147, 149
Brunstein, J. C., 337
Bryant, F. B., 348
Bucholz, K. K., 172
Buday, S. K., 447
Budziñska, A., 83
Buerkle, J. V., 25
Buffardi, L. E., 493
Bukovza, Y., 443
Bulevich, J. B., 301
Bullock, W. A., 202
Bunce, S. C., 280, 568
Bundy, T., 50, 51
Buratti, S., 149
Burgaleta, M., 195
Burgess, E. W., 478
Burghy, C. A., 421
Burk, W., 480
Burke, R. J., 78
Burns, J., 414
Burns, M. O., 389
Burns, W. J., 146
Burnstein, E., 234, 235
Burra, P. V., 268
Bursley, J. K., 269
Burt, S. A., 178
Burtaverde, V., 36
Burton, C. M., 577
Burton, M., 179
Bush, G., 421
Bush, G. H. W., 193
Bushman, B., 144, 318, 455, 
493, 508
Buss, A. H., 445
Buss, D. M., 16, 28, 31, 37, 60, 62, 
74, 79, 81, 82, 98, 130, 
145, 173, 177, 231, 232, 
234, 237, 239–246, 248, 
249, 253, 254, 256, 471–
478, 481–482, 486–488, 
515–518, 520–521
Buswell, B. N., 497, 506
Butcher, S. B., 84
Butkovic, A., 446, 491
Butler, A. C., 142
Button, T. M. M., 170
Buunk, B., 242
Buunk, B. P., 244
Byerley, G. J., 508, 521
Byrd, A. L., 429
Byrne, K. A., 80
Byrnes, J. P., 521
C
Cabrera, H. F., 60, 62
Cacioppo, J. T., 192, 204, 218
Cafferty, T. P., 323
Cai, H., 144
Caki, N., 563
Calderwood, C., 273
Calheiros, M. M., 453
Calhoun, L., 578
Calkins, S. D., 220
Callaway, E., 378
Calub, C. A., 32
Caluori, N., 540
Camie, L., 62
Campbell, A., 189, 505
Campbell, B., 179
Campbell, C., 361
Campbell, D. G., 337
Campbell, J. B., 203, 254
Campbell, J. D., 455, 575
Campbell, L., 254, 490
Campbell, W. K., 144, 455, 490, 
493
Canache, D., 82
Canada, K. E., 80
Canli, T., 420
Cann, A., 194, 244
Cantor, N., 332, 387, 485
Caplan, S. E., 446
Caprar, D. V., 244
Caprara, G. V., 77, 78
Caputi, P., 382, 389
Cardemil, E. V., 571
Carey, B., 39
Carli, V., 443
Carlo, G., 82
Carlota, A. J., 548
Carlson, M. D., 132
Carpenter, C. J., 493
Carr, D., 146
Carrasco, M., 70
Carriaga, M. L., 132
Carroll, E. J., 337
Carron, A. V., 389
Carson, S., 81
Carter, N. T., 195
Carter-Saltzman, L., 165
Cartiff, B. M., 273
Carver, C. S., 205, 572
Case, T. I., 237
Cashden, E., 528
Caspi, A., 35, 90, 132, 136, 137, 
147–150, 169, 170, 176, 
180, 484, 561
Cassidy, J., 327
Castellon, C., 570
Cattell, R. B., 74, 103, 177
Cauffman, E., 140
Cederblad, M., 173
Chagnon, N., 64, 525, 528
Chajut, E., 423
Chamorro-Premuzic, T., 81, 119, 
147
Chan, A., 237
Chan, H. C., 268
Chan, H. F., 81
Chan, W., 140
Chan, Y. M., 172
Chang, C. N., 61
Chang, C. Y., 61
Chantala, K., 514
Chapman, B. P., 59, 60, 148, 503, 
505, 559
Chappell, K. D., 323
Charles, S. T., 136, 137
Chatzisarantis, N. L. D., 272
Chaux, A., 516
Chavira, D. A., 445
Cheek, J. M., 444–445, 479
Cheit, R., 261, 262, 300
Cheit, R. E., 262
Chen, B., 206
Chen, C., 179, 301
Chen, F. F., 537
Chen, F. S., 180
Chen, H., 476
Chen, J., 375
Chen, S., 339, 452
Chen, S. Y., 375
Cheng, B. H., 541
Cheng, H., 79, 82, 134
Chia, R., 384
Chibnall, J. T., 114
Chida, Y., 581
Chiodo, L. M., 493
Chioqueta, A. P., 79
Chiu, C., 387, 391
Cho, B., 428–429
Choi, I., 535
Choi, J. K., 385
Choi, T. R., 27, 32, 493
Chong, W. H., 443
Christal, R. C., 74
Christensen, K., 170
Christie, R., 489
Chu, B. C., 289, 445
Chu, J. A., 262
Chua, A. Y. K., 493
Chua, K. J., 253
Chugh, D., 390
Chung, C. K., 32
Church, A. T., 60, 62, 526, 
537–538, 547
Chye, S., 443
Ciciolla, L., 147
Cimpian, A., 344
Clapper, R. L., 379
Claridge, G. S., 201
Clark, C. B., 493
Clark, D. M., 421
Clark, L. A., 78, 420
Clark, R. D., 247
Clarskadon, T. G., 116
Claxton, A., 476
Clayton, R., 81
Cleckley, H., 253, 595–597
Clemens, B., 428
Cleveland, H. H., 513
Clewley, N., 375
Clifford, C. A., 172
Clipp, E. C., 233
Cloninger, C. R., 211, 212, 561
Clow, A., 280
Clower, C. E., 79, 491
Coan, J. A., 29, 220
Coates, D., 414
Cobban, L., 79
Cochran, G., 179
Coehlo, D., 447
Cohen, D., 530
Cohen, J., 48, 499
Cohen, P., 48
Cohen, S., 199, 422, 565
Cohen-Bendahan, C. C., 519
Coie, J. D., 481
Colarelli, S. M., 228, 235
Colder, C. R., 79
Colder, M., 576
Colebaugh, C. A., 78
Coleman, R., 511
College, J., 389
Collette, L., 578
Colley, A., 68
Collins, J. N., 378
Collins, P. F., 212
Collins, P. I., 370
Colom, R., 195
Colon, S., 480
Confer, J. C., 231
Conger, R. D., 448, 484
Conley, J. J., 90, 145, 146, 420, 
474, 478
Connelly, B. S., 24, 28
Conrad, M. A., 79
Conroy-Beam, D., 234, 246, 473, 477
Consiglio, C., 78
Cook, C. L., 352
Cook, K. V., 517
Final PDF to printerNAME INDEX 721
lar31869_nidx_719-730 721 11/07/22 04:17 PM
Coombes, C., 505
Coon, H. M., 537
Cooper, A. J., 419
Cooper, B., 104
Cooper, C., 203
Cooper, M. L., 146, 244, 592
Cooper, S. H., 281
Copel, P., 171
Corcoran, D. W. J., 203
Corley, R. P., 170
Corr, P. J., 204, 205, 563
Cosmides, L., 20, 227, 235, 236, 
250, 253, 527–528, 531
Costa, A. R. L., 84
Costa, P. J., 421
Costa, P. T., Jr., 26, 74, 75, 78, 83, 
132, 135, 136, 411, 415–416, 
422, 427, 580, 586, 590
Costa, P. T., 64, 74, 75, 77, 79, 81, 
83, 88, 502–505
Costafreda, S. G., 194, 421
Côté, S., 541
Courbet, D., 81
Cousins, A. J., 521
Coutinho, S. A., 244
Coutts, L. M., 113
Cowan, G. S., 424
Cowen, A. S., 237
Cox, K., 310
Cox, P. W., 373
Cox, S. R., 231
Coyne, J., 422
Crabbe, J., 179
Craig, I. W., 176
Craik, K. H., 28, 60, 62, 101
Cramer, P., 277, 283, 291
Crandall, R., 354
Crandall, V., 342
Crawford, F. C., 212
Crawford, M. B., 212
Crede, M., 147
Creemers, D. M., 450
Creswell, J. D., 269
Crittenden, A. N., 244
Crittenden, N., 389
Crocker, D., 80, 484
Crocker, J., 411
Cronbach, L. J., 42, 43
Cropanzano, R. S., 370
Crosby, C., 237
Cross, S. E., 530
Crowne, D. P., 40
Cruz, M., 192
Crysel, L. C., 480
Csikszentmihalyi, M., 355, 386, 
413, 418
Cumming, S. P., 393
Cupp, P. S., 480
Curhan, J. R., 31
Curtis, V., 237
Cuthbert, B. N., 596
Cutler, S., 430
Cutler, S. S., 280
Czer, L. S., 516
D
da Rosa, C. E., 148
da Vinci, L., 12
Dabbs, J. M.
Jr., 199, 519
Dabbs, M. G., 199
Dahl, B. J., 508
Dahlke, J. A., 110
Dai, H., 273
Dalbert, C., 79
Dale, K., 276
Dalgleish, T., 423
Daly, M., 188, 504, 521
Damasio, A., 186
Danbolt, L. J., 384
Dang, H., 273
Danielsbacka, M., 78
Danner, D. D., 148
Dannon, P., 443
Darwin, C., 21, 224, 545
David, R., 505
Davidson, K., 291
Davidson, K. W., 581
Davidson, R. J., 204, 217–219, 
279, 403, 421
Davis, A. C., 84
Davis, E. P., 446
Davis, K. E., 323
Davis, L., 263, 300
Davis, M. H., 362, 480
Davis, O. S. P., 630
Davis, P., 279
Davis, P. J., 279, 300
Davis, R., 597, 601
Dawes, C. T., 170
Dawson, M. Y., 79
Day, L., 68
Day, N., 581
Day, R., 337
de Baca, T. C., 253
De Blas, L., 77
De Boeck, P., 337
De Bolle, M., 88, 140, 503–505
De Fruyt, F., 88, 136, 140, 
502–505, 548
De Giunta, L., 78
de Guzman, M. R. T., 82
de Moor, M. H., 167, 169, 180
De Raad, B., 77, 83, 548
De Raad, D., 77
de Souza Lima, N. R., 84
De Vries, J., 79
de Vries, R. E., 83, 84
Deaner, R. O., 250
DeAngelis, T., 107
Dearing, S., 491
Deary, I. J., 79, 82, 231, 383, 397
Deaux, K., 501, 513
Debener, S., 379
Deci, E. L., 142
Decuyper, M., 88
Deegan, M. P., 457
DeFries, G. E., 166
DeFries, J. C., 157, 160, 165, 166, 
174, 176
Deiner, C. I., 391
DeKay, T., 234
Dekkers, A. M., 32
Dekkers, T. J., 32
Dekoninck, E., 25
Del Giudice, M., 250
del Pilar, G. H., 548
del Prado, A. M., 60, 62, 538
Delatorre, M. Z., 483
DeLongis, A., 476, 567
DelVecchio, W. F., 135
Dembrowski, T. M., 427, 581
Demerath, P., 341
DeMeuse, K., 566
Demtroder, A. I., 60
Denissen, J., 233, 480
Denissen, J. J., 61, 137, 179, 248, 
253, 254
DePaulo, B., 315
DePaulo, B. M., 445
DePrince, A. P., 262
Depue, R. A., 211, 212
Derakshan, N., 280
Derks, E. M., 168, 172
Derringer, J., 178
Derryberry, D., 423
DeSoto, M. C., 244
DeSteno, D. A., 242
Destin, M., 446
Detrick, P., 114
Deuser, W. E., 481
DeWall, C. N., 273, 493
Dewey, R., 341
DeYoung, C. G., 81, 191, 195, 
199, 204, 211, 420–421
Di Blas, L., 73, 83
Di Nota, P. M., 370
Diacoyanni-Tarlatzis, I., 237
Diamond, B., 132
Diamond, J., 555
Díaz-Caneja, C. M., 133
Dick, D. M., 176
Dickerson, B. C., 421
Dickie, D. A., 231
Diener, C., 407
Diener, E., 413
Diener, E., 95, 96, 100, 315, 354, 
370, 404, 407–410, 
413–414, 429, 432
Diener, M., 410, 413
Dietz, P., 298
Digman, J. M., 74
Dijksterhuis, A. P., 268, 269
Dijkstra, I., 79
Dijkstra, P., 244, 476, 478
Dill, K. E., 481
Dillon, M., 147
Dingemanse, N. J., 16
Dinwiddie, S. H., 172
Dionne, G., 168
Dirsmith, J., 471
Dixon, M. J., 82
Dixon, W. A., 427
Dmitrieva, J., 179
Dobkin, P. L., 593
Dobush, S., 483
Dodge, K. A., 481
Dolan, C. V., 542
Donaghey, C., 79
Donald, J., 201
Dong, Q., 301
Donhauser, P. W., 344
Donnallan, M. B., 144
Donnellan, M. B., 92, 135, 136, 
148, 473, 484
Donohew, L., 480
Dorani, D., 443
Doris, J. M., 32
Dorros, S., 82
Doty, R. M., 346
Doucet, C., 203
Doucet, J., 413
Doyle, W. J., 567
Dragnić-Cindrić, D., 273
Draper, P., 250
Driscoll, P., 379
Drislane, L. E., 619
Druckman, D., 117
Dubanoski, J. P., 148
Dubbert, P. M., 427
Dubestein, P. R., 503, 505
Duckitt, J., 81
Duckworth, A. L., 79, 147
Duke, A. A., 81
Dull, W. R., 445
Dunbar, R. I., 228, 235, 255
Duncan, L. E., 333, 347
Dunlop, P. D., 84
Dunn, E. W., 414–415
Dunne, M. P., 171, 250
Duntley, J. D., 241
Durán-Cutilla, M., 133
Durkee, P., 237
Durkee, T., 443
Dutton, K. A., 451
Dweck, C. S., 60, 62, 344, 387, 
391, 453
Dwyer, S. M., 428
Dyk, R. B., 373
Dykstra, A., 84
Dyrenforth, P. S., 415
Dyson, M. W., 503
E
Eagle, M. N., 292
Eagly, A., 95, 498, 501, 504, 
515–516, 518
Easterlin, R. A., 411
Easton, J. E., 231
Eaton, A. A., 509
Eaves, L. J., 172
Eber, H. W., 103
Ebmeier, K. P., 79, 82
Eckes, T., 515
Eckrich, S. J., 32
Edlund, J. E., 244
Edmonds, G. W., 137
Edmundson, M., 186
Edwards, B., 80, 484
Edwards, C. P., 517
Edwards, D. A., 521
Edwards, J. K., 79
Egan, S., 78, 82, 484
Egan, V., 77
Egloff, B., 36, 136, 485
Eher, R., 428
Eid, M., 407
Eisemann, M., 146
Eisen, M., 441
Eisen, S., 173
Eisenberg, D. T. A., 179
Eisenberg, N., 78
Eisenkraft, N., 31
Eisner, F., 546
Ekman, P., 236, 237, 403, 405, 
545–546
Elder, G. H., 233
Jr., 35, 90, 149
Elfenbein, H. H., 31
Elhadif, R., 443
Final PDF to printer722 NAME INDEX
lar31869_nidx_719-730 722 11/07/22 04:17 PM
Elinder, L. S., 235
Elizur, D., 341
Elkins, I. J., 148, 176
Elliot, A. J., 327, 338–339, 344
Ellis, B. J., 254
Ellis, L., 170
Ellis, R., 301
Ellsworth, P., 405
Elovainio, M., 81, 82
Else-Quest, N. M., 501–502
Emery, R. E., 173, 615
Emmons, R. A., 95, 96, 319, 354, 
387, 409, 432, 493, 575
Emre, M., 114, 117
Ene, C., 36
Engelhard, I. M., 80
Engelhardt, L., 172, 177
Enns, R. M., 168
Entwisle, D. R., 338
Epley, C. H., 381
Epstein, S., 99, 100
Epstude, K., 234
Erdelyi, M. H., 299
Erdheim, J., 78
Erikson, E. H., 311, 312, 314
Erikson, F., 308
Escovar, L., 597, 601
Essex, M., 420
Esteve, R., 456
Euler, H. A., 62
Evans, A. C., 231
Evans, C., 379
Exley, C., 148
Exline, J. J., 493
Exline, R. V., 490
Exner, J. E.
Jr., 67
Eysenck, H. J., 40, 67–68, 70, 71, 
170, 201–203, 212, 420
Eysenck, M. W., 280, 420
Eysenck, S. B. G., 40, 68, 203
Ezquiaga-Bravo, I., 133
F
Fabianek, S., 456
Fabulic, L., 214
Fagot, B. I., 517
Fajkowska, M., 195
Fales, M. R., 245
Falk, C. F., 538
Fanny, E., 421
Farmer, A., 70
Farnham, S. D., 450
Farrington, D. P., 132
Fattuson, H. F., 373
Feczko, E., 421
Feingold, A., 507
Feld, S. C., 342
Feldman Barrett, L., 546
Feldman, S., 568
Feng, B., 168
Fenichel, O., 276
Fenigstein, A., 244
Ferenczi, N., 493
Fernandez, N., 389
Ferrucci, L., 78, 148
Fessler, D. M. T., 240
Fetchenhauer, D., 27
Fiddick, L., 84
Fielden, J., 519
Fieldman, G., 235
Figueredo, A. J., 253, 475
Fineman, S., 338
Finger, F. W., 213
Fink, B., 78
Finkel, E. J., 493
Finley, Anna J., 273
Finnegan, L., 447
Fireman, P., 565
Firth, J., 195
Fischer, C. S., 110, 414
Fisher, E. B., 423
Fisher, H. E., 473
Fisher, K. J., 146
Fiske, A. P., 538
Fiske, D. W., 74
Fitzgerald, C. J., 235
Fitzjohn, A., 195
Fitzpatrick, C. M., 597
Fitzsimmons, R., 79
Fleeson, W., 61, 78, 92, 97, 100
Fleischman, D. S., 231, 488, 517
Fletcher, G. J. O., 473
Flint, J., 212
Floderus-Myrhed, B., 167
Flores, S. D., 508, 521
Florian, V., 327
Flowers, K. M., 78
Flynn, F. J., 81
Flynn, H. A., 142
Flynn, J. R., 396
Flynn, M., 280
Foa, E. B., 71
Foa, U. G., 71
Fodor, E. M., 342, 346
Folkard, S., 214
Folkman, S., 567, 569
Fordyce, M. W., 407, 418
Forestier, E., 273
Forster, G., 273
Foster, C. A., 493
Foster, J. D., 144, 493
Fournier, M. A., 95
Fowles, D. C., 596
Fox, N. A., 217, 220, 379, 445, 479
Frackowiak, T., 493
Fraguas, D., 133
Fraley, C., 324, 327
Fraley, R. C., 92, 138, 322, 324, 
326, 327
Frankel, B., 41
Franks, X., 538
Fransella, F., 380–381
Frantzides, N., 491
Fraser, S., 397
Frederick, D. A., 240, 245
Fredrickson, B. L., 406, 578
Freed, R., 273
Freeman, D., 543
Freihart, B. K., 33
Freis, S. D., 481
Freshwater, S. M., 186
Freud, A., 277
Freud, S., 12, 15, 21, 232, 259, 
263–265, 267, 279, 280, 
282, 283, 286–288, 
291–294, 299
Freyd, J. J., 262
Frick, P. J., 593
Friedman, H. S., 148
Friedman, M., 579
Friesen, M., 473
Friesen, W. V., 148, 237, 405
Frijda, N. H., 405
Frisell, T., 168
Frodi, A., 499
Fröhlich, S. M., 338
Frottier, P., 428
Fruenhwald, S., 428
Fruth, B., 240
Frye, H., 508
Fuchs, A., 247
Fukushima, A., 428
Fulker, D. W., 166
Funder, D. C., 92, 93
Furdella, J. Q., 78, 484
Furnham, A., 70, 79, 81, 82, 134, 
147, 191, 480
Furr, R. M., 62
Furuichi, T., 240
G
Gabbard, G. O., 299
Gable, S. L., 457
Gabriel, A. S., 273
Gabriel, S., 234, 509
Gage, P., 186, 187
Gaig, J. R., 137
Gailliot, M. T., 273
Gale, A., 202
Gale, C. R., 383
Galic, Z., 103
Gallagher, P., 61
Gallup, A. C., 240
Gallup, G. G., 439
Gamez, W., 82
Gander, F., 71
Gangestad, S., 66, 96, 97, 241, 
252, 253, 518, 521
Gao, S., 144
Garbarino, E., 189
Garber, J., 386
Garcia, J., 473
Garcia, S., 96, 363
Gardner, H., 394, 395, 397
Gardner, W. I., 115, 117
Gardner, W. L., 509
Gates, B., 93
Gatz, M., 136, 137
Gauguin, P., 359
Gaulin, S. J. C., 240
Geary, D. C., 244
Gee, T. L., 387
Geen, R., 203
Geer, J. H., 33
Geis, F. L., 480, 489–490
Gelade, G. A., 396
George, C., 327
George, W. H., 508
Georgiades, S., 83, 548
Gerald, M. S., 189
Gere, J., 234
Gergen, K. J., 381
Geris, J. R. M., 137
Gerring, J. P., 186
Gerson, M. W., 389
Gervais, W. M., 540
Geukes, K., 562
Gewertz, D., 543
Gewirtz, V., 327
Gfeller, J. D., 79
Giammarco, E., 491
Gibbs, W., 156
Gibson, L. W., 394
Gidron, Y., 581
Gigy, L. L., 25
Gilbert, L. A., 513
Gilby, I. C., 240
Gildersleeve, K. A., 251
Gilibert, D., 389
Gillespie, N. A., 167
Gillil, K., 202
Gilmore, A. K., 397
Giluk, T. L., 81
Gino, F., 273
Ginzburg, K., 280
Giosan, C., 36
Gladden, P. R., 253
Gladwell, M., 93
Glauberman, N., 397
Gleason, K. A., 484
Glenn, A. L., 428–429
Gleser, G. C., 43
Gnambs, T., 81
Godleski, S. A., 505
Goetz, A., 62
Goetz, C., 231, 477
Goetz, S. M. M., 250
Goggin, S., 41
Goh, D. H., 493
Gold, S. N., 262
Goldberg, B., 299
Goldberg, L. R., 59, 60, 63, 67, 74, 
75, 77, 82, 83, 148, 547, 560
Golden, C. J., 186
Goldey, K. L., 519
Goldsmith, H. H., 403, 420, 
501–502, 619
Goleman, D., 394
Golledtge, J., 25
Gollwitzer, M., 68
Golsteyn, B. H. H., 174
Gomes, M., 98, 486
Gomez, V., 90
Gonzalez-Vallejo, C., 269
Good, C., 392
Goodenough, D. R., 373
Goodman, J., 516
Goodwin, D. W., 621
Goodwin, F. K., 213
Gorbaniuk, O., 83
Gordon, R. A., 396
Gordon, S. D., 180
Gosling, S. D., 16, 29, 62, 92, 137, 
162, 492–493
Gottman, J., 29, 484–485
Goudeau, S., 344
Gough, H. G., 24, 26, 140, 142
Graham, J., 352
Graham, S., 140
Grannemann, B. D., 141, 456
Grano, N., 81
Granqvist, P., 327
Grant, D. M., 253
Grant, H., 392
Grant, J., 113
Grant, J. D., 113
Grant, M. D., 173
Gray, D. L., 232
Gray, E. K., 136, 137
Final PDF to printerNAME INDEX 723
lar31869_nidx_719-730 723 11/07/22 04:17 PM
Gray, J., 204–205, 206, 212, 405, 596
Gray, J. R., 81, 195, 421
Gray, P. B., 179
Gray, R., 516
Grayson, C., 510
Grayson, D. K., 235
Grayson, L., 505
Graziano, W. G., 77, 78, 124, 147, 
483
Grazioplene, R. G., 81, 195
Greenberg, B. D., 178, 179
Greenberg, D. M., 81
Greenberg, J. M., 445
Greenberg, J. R., 299
Greenberger, E., 179
Greene, C., 273
Greene, D., 282
Greene, E., 516
Greene, J. A., 273
Greenwald, A. G., 450
Gregory, T., 397
Greiling, H., 242, 243, 253
Grich, J., 326
Griffin, M. A., 447
Griffin, S., 409
Griskevicius, V., 237, 241, 351
Gronau, Q. F., 273
Groothuis, T., 27
Gross, J. J., 60, 62, 418, 574
Grosskurth, P., 264
Grotzinger, A., 172, 177
Gruenberg, A. M., 621
Gruenewald, T. L., 408
Guadagno, R. E., 244
Guajardo, M. L., 148
Guanzon-Lapena, M. A., 548
Gul, P., 530
Gunnar, M. R., 446
Güntürkün, O., 439
Gurin, G., 342
Gurven, M., 244, 251
Gutierrez-Lobos, K., 428
Guzder, J., 619
Gwaltney, J. M.
Jr., 558
H
Habel, U., 428
Hacher, S. L., 363
Hagen, E., 505
Hager, J., 255
Hagerty, M. R., 354
Hagger, M. S., 272
Hagglof, B., 146
Hahn, E., 173
Haig, J., 136, 137
Hair, E. C., 147
Hakulinen, C., 148
Hald, G. M., 247
Hall, C., 384, 427
Hall, G. S., 264
Hall, J. A., 480, 504
Hallet, A. J., 148
Haltigan, J., 322
Hamann, S., 421
Hamer, D., 171, 178, 179, 211
Hamilton, L. D., 21, 226
Hammer, A. L., 114
Hampshire, S., 59
Hampson, S. E., 132, 146–148
Handy, A. B., 33
Hankin, B. L., 510
Hansell, N. K., 169
Hansen, C. H., 280
Hansen, R. D., 280
Hansen-Brown, A. A., 481
Hansson, I., 149
Hansson, K., 173
Hanzal, A., 82
Harden, K. P., 157, 176
Hardison, H. G., 382
Hare, R. D., 596–597
Harenski, C. L., 421
Hargrave, G. E., 113
Hargrove, M. F., 519
Haring, M., 146, 410
Harlow, H., 320, 321
Harms, P. D., 60–62, 137, 147
Harp, J. P., 186
Harpending, H., 179
Harpur, T. J., 596–597
Harrigan, K. A., 82
Harrington, A., 204
Harrington, H., 132, 180
Harris, G. T., 253
Harris, J., 168, 413
Harris, J. R., 105, 159, 174
Harris, K., 29
Harris, T., 70
Harrison, A., 15
Harrison, C., 15
Hart, S. D., 596
Harter, S., 507
Hartley, E. L., 149
Hartnagel, T., 490
Hartshorne, H., 90, 92, 99
Harvey, J., 396
Haselton, M. G., 244, 251, 518
Hashimoto, C., 240
Haslam, C., 493
Haslam, N., 480
Hasman, J. F., 515
Hatemi, P. K., 170
Haver, A., 384
Hawes, S. W., 429
Hawkins, H. C., 450
Hawley, C. W., 203
Hawley, P., 248, 626, 630
Hayden, E. P., 503
Hayes, M., 82
Hazan, C., 323, 325, 326
Hazlett, G. A., 301
He, Q., 145, 301
Head, S., 33
Heath, A. C., 167, 172
Heaven, P. C. L., 80, 484
Hebb, D. O., 202, 207
Heckhausen, H., 343
Heer, J., 189
Heffernan, M. E., 324
Hehman, E., 457
Heiden. L. A., 575
Heider, K., 237
Heims, R., 189
Heine, S. J., 538
Heintz, S., 71
Heitkemper, M. M., 214
Helfrecht, C., 504
Helliwell, J. F., 414
Helmer, Q., 167
Helmreich, R., 511–512
Helson, R., 139, 140, 142, 285
Henderson, L., 167, 444
Hendrick, C., 484
Hendrick, S. S., 484
Hendriks, A. A. J., 548
Heng, C. S., 268
Hennig, K. H., 73
Henning, G., 149
Henrich, J., 531
Henriques, J. B., 218
Henry, J., 168
Herbener, E. S., 149, 150
Herbert, T. B., 422
Herboth, G., 60, 62
Herbst, J. H., 79, 81
Herrnstein, R., 180, 395, 397
Hertzman, M., 373
Hertzon, C., 136
Herzog, A. R., 538
Herzog, L., 443
Heshmati, S., 471
Hess, N., 505
Heusel, C., 519
Hewitt, J. K., 170
Hewitt, P. L., 354
Hewlett, B., 504
Heydasch, T., 84
Heym, N., 195
Hiatt, D., 113
Hibbard, S., 337
Hickey, C. B., 490
Hicks, B. M., 132, 137, 168, 169
Hicks, J. A., 407
Hides, L., 80
Higgins, D. S., 98, 486
Higgins, E. T., 387, 392, 447
High, W. M., 186
Hilbig, B. E., 84, 481
Hill, C. T., 478
Hill, D. J., 172
Hill, K., 528
Hill, P. L., 560
Hill, R., 532
Hiraishi, K., 84
Hiroto, D. S., 386
Hirschfeld, L. A., 547
Hirsh, J. B., 78, 81, 195, 421
Ho, A. T., 84
Ho, J. C. M., 493
Hoard, M. K., 244
Hochman, N. A., 505
Hodgson, D., 237
Hofer, J., 338
Hoffman, B. J., 337
Hoffman, C., 189, 390
Hoffman, E., 350
Hoffmann, W., 273
Hofmann, D. A., 273
Hofmann, J., 71
Hofstee, W. K. B., 491
Hogan, J., 118, 119
Hogan, R., 67, 118, 119, 232
Hogh-Olesen, H., 247
Hoier, S., 62
Hokanson, J. E., 142
Holl, A. S., 326
Holl, B., 118
Hollmann, E., 359
Holmberg, X., 538
Holmes, D., 299
Holmes, T. H., 565, 566
Holroyd, K. A., 422
Holtzman, N. S., 493
Hone, L. S. E., 251
Honekopp, J., 189
Hong, R. Y., 89
Hong, Y., 387, 391
Honkalampi, K., 216
Honma, A., 84
Honomichl, R. D., 148
Hoodl, J. L., 240
Hooker, K., 447
Hooper, J. L., 172
Hooven, C., 519
Hoover, E., 395
Hopkins, A., 109, 111
Hops, H., 592
Hopwood, C. J., 73
Hormuth, S. E., 27
Horn, E. E., 179, 180
Horn, J. M., 253
Horn, L., 429
Horne, J. A., 212, 214
Horney, K., 294, 317–318
Horowitz, J., 354
Horton, P., 194, 421
Horton, R. S., 493
Hotard, S. R., 416
Hottenga, J. J., 167, 180
House, P., 282
Houts, R., 176, 180
Howard, A., 139
Howard, R. D., 240
Hoyenga, K. B., 498, 503, 
513–514, 517, 519, 521
Hoyenga, K. T., 498, 503, 
513–514, 517, 519, 521
Hrdy, S. B., 235
Hrebickova, M., 77, 548
Hruschak, V., 78
Hsu, F. K. K., 546
Hua, H., 381
Huan, V. S., 443
Hucker, S., 428
Hudson, N. W., 137, 138, 324
Hudziak, J. J., 168, 169
Huff, L., 451
Hugdahl, K., 204, 218
Hughes, S., 490
Huk, A., 493
Humbad, M. N., 474
Humrichouse, J., 476
Hunsley, J., 117
Hunt, E., 396
Hunter, S. C., 79
Huprich, S. K., 337
Huselid, R. F., 592
Husemann, N., 135
Hutteman, R., 137
Hutton, D. G., 451
Hwang, H. C., 238
Hwang, J., 130
Hwang, W. C., 289, 445
Hyafil, A., 528
Hyatt, C. S., 195
Hyde, J. S., 110, 247, 497–498, 
500–502, 504, 506, 508
Hyman, I. E., 301
Hynes, M. J., 479
Final PDF to printer724 NAME INDEX
lar31869_nidx_719-730 724 11/07/22 04:17 PM
I
Iacono, W. G., 132, 137, 148, 169, 
176, 177, 473
Ibáñez-Reyes, J., 536
Ickes, W., 96, 363
Iervolino, A. C., 514
Ihsan, Z., 191
Illbeck, B. E., 508, 521
Immelman, A., 23
Indovina, I., 197
Inouye, J., 74
Insel, P., 566
Ip, G. W. M., 534
Irurita, C., 32
Irwig, M. S., 172
Irwin, M., 423
Ishihara, K., 214, 216
Ishikawa, S. S., 250
Itkonen, J. V., 81
Izard, C. E., 404–405
Izuma, K., 195
J
Jackson, D. N., 90, 102, 338
Jackson, J. J., 32, 60–62, 79, 90, 
137, 478
Jackson, M., 609
Jackson, R., 397
Jacobs, W. J., 253
Jacobson, K. C., 173
Jacoby, R., 397
Jacquart, J., 421
Jager, W., 491
James, M. H., 42
James, W., 405
Jamison, R. N., 78
Jang, K. L., 168, 176
Jankowski, K. S., 216
Janoff-Bulman, R. J., 414
Jarnecke, A. M., 212
Järvelin-Pasanen, S., 216
Jauk, E., 197
Jemmott, J. B., 346
Jenkins, C. D., 580
Jenkins, S. R., 345
Jensen, A. R., 397
Jensen-Campbell, L. A., 77, 78, 
483–484
Jerneic, Z., 103
Jeronimus, B. F., 137
Jerskey, B. A., 173
Jesperson, K. H., 51
Jesuíno, A. D. S. A., 84
Ji, Y. G., 385
Joanette, Y., 421
Jobs, S., 93
Johansson, B., 149
John, O. P., 62, 74, 77, 83, 137, 
162, 319, 333, 347, 603
Johnsen, B. H., 82
Johnson, D. P., 510
Johnson, J. A., 548
Johnson, J. L., 491
Johnson, M. K., 84
Johnson, R. C., 338
Johnson, S., 180, 508
Johnson, W., 137, 160, 169, 172, 
173, 176, 177, 247, 397
Johnson-Laird, P. N., 405
Johnston, M., 297
Jokela, M., 82, 148, 249
Jonason, P. K., 36, 473, 491, 508, 
521
Jones, A., 354
Jones, D. N., 475, 490, 493
Jones, J. M., 457
Jonkmann, K., 448
Jordan, C. H., 450
Jordan, R., 516
Joy, B., 93
Judge, D. S., 235
Judge, T., 404, 483
Jung, I., 429
Jung, R. E., 197
Junot, A., 389
Juros, K., 83
Jusepeitis, A., 450
Jussim, L., 140, 541
K
Kabat-Zinn, J., 204
Kagan, J., 153, 155, 199, 342, 
444–445
Kaiser, T., 518
Kakkar, H., 563
Kaliterna, L., 214
Kamakura, T., 168, 169
Kamble, S., 246, 473
Kammrath, L. K., 78
Kamoo, R., 337
Kanagawa, C., 530
Kanba, S., 168
Kanner, A. D., 578
Kanner, B., 396
Kaplan, H., 528
Kapogiannis, D., 421
Kaprio, J., 249
Karama, S., 231
Karantzas, G. C., 327
Karp, S. A., 373
Kashdan, T. B., 168
Kasimatis, M., 27, 68
Kasser, T., 308
Katigbak, M. S., 60, 62, 548
Katkovsky, W., 341
Katz, I. M., 575
Kaufman, J. C., 384
Kaufman, S. B., 81, 197
Kavanagh, K., 592
Kawamoto, T., 137
Kayser, J., 379
Kazemian, L., 132
Kazén, M., 345
Keiser, H. N., 110
Keller, U., 149
Kelley, H. H., 64
Kelley, K. R., 79
Kelly, D. R., 79, 147
Kelly, E. L., 145, 146, 478
Kelly, G. A., 382
Keltikangas-Jarvinen, L., 82
Keltner, D., 237, 541
Kemeny, M. E., 408
Kemmel-meier, M., 535
Kendall, E., 244
Kendler, K. S., 619
Kendler, R. S., 172
Kenett, Y. N., 197
Kennair, L. E. O., 244
Kennedy, K., 195
Kenny, D. A., 448
Kenrick, D. T., 241, 351–352, 352
Kerkhof, G. A., 213
Kernberg, O., 318, 619
Kernis, M. H., 141, 456
Kesebir, S., 352
Kessler, R. C., 172
Ketelaar, R., 416
Ketelaar, T., 236
Khan, S. S., 516
Khaw, K. T., 581
Kiehl, K. A., 597
Kihlstrom, J. F., 96, 292–294, 301, 
307
Kilduff, G. J., 61
Kilpatrick, S. D., 491, 493
Kim, E., 186
Kim, S. H., 421
Kim-Cohen, J., 176
Kimura, D., 519
Kindt, M., 80
King, J. E., 168
King, L., 92, 332, 407, 409, 575
King, S. M., 148
Kipnis, D., 147
Kirk, K. M., 250
Kirsner, B. R., 253
Kitayama, S., 234, 235, 533–537, 
547
Kivi, M., 149
Kivimäki, M., 81, 82, 148
Kjaergaard, A., 384
Klein, D. N., 503
Klein, R., 209
Klemfuss, J. Z., 304
Klemmensen, R., 170
Kler, C., 169, 170
Klesman, J., 508
Kletenik, I., 268
Kline, M., 244
Kling, K. C., 110, 497, 507
Klinger, E., 387
Klohnen, E. C., 333, 347
Klucken, T., 280
Kluckhohn, C., 10
Knafo, A., 177, 514
Knight, G. P., 82
Knop, J., 621
Knopik, T., 163–165, 179, 180
Knopik, V. S., 157, 174
Knowlden-Loewen, S. A. B., 79
Knutson, B., 204
Ko, S. J., 492
Koch, S., 244
Kocur, D., 491
Koehl, L. M., 186
Koenig, L. B., 170
Koestner, R., 340, 342
Koestner, S., 563
Kofman, S., 294
Kohn, M. L., 541
Kohut, H., 318
Kolubinski, D. C., 148
Komlos, J., 269
Kon, T. W. H., 68
Konopka, K., 491
Konrath, S., 144
Koole, S. L., 491
Koopmans, J. R., 172
Koot, H. M., 450
Koposov, R. A., 146
Kopp, C. B., 574
Koppelaar, L., 375
Kosslyn, S. M., 34, 204, 218
Kotov, R., 82
Kotter-Gruhn, D., 509
Kovacheff, C., 451
Kovacic, M. P., 103
Kowalski, R. M., 445, 479
Krackow, E., 301
Kraeplin, E., 588
Krampe, H., 384
Krasno, J., 347
Krasnoperova, E. N., 445
Kraus, M. W., 541
Kraus, S. J., 362
Krause, R., 237, 545
Kreitler, S., 195
Krems, J. A., 352
Kretschmer, E., 588
Kretz, S., 216
Kreuger, R. F., 132
Kreukels, B. P., 172
Kroencke, L., 562
Krueger, J. I., 451, 454, 515
Krueger, R. F., 132, 168–170, 172, 
176, 177, 180, 608
Kruezer, M., 68
Krupić, D., 563
Krupnik, R., 196
Kruse, O., 280
Kuhl, J., 345
Kuhle, B. X., 244, 245
Kuhlman, D. M., 170, 179
Kuncel, N. R., 110
Kupari, S., 216
Kuper, N., 562
Kurman, J., 539
Kushlev, K., 413
Kwan, V. S., 144, 162
Kwapil, T. R., 27, 79
Kwon, P., 337
Kyl-Heku, L., 62
L
Lado, M., 547
Laird, J. D., 242, 244
Lajunen, T., 78
Lalumiere, M. L., 253
Lamb, M. E., 81
Lang, J. W. B., 339
Lang, P. J., 596
Langberg, R., 237
Langens, T. A., 341
Langevin, R., 428
Langford, K., 79
Langlois, J. H., 513
Langner, C. A., 347
Langstrom, N., 168
Lanning, K., 82, 83
Larrance, D., 516
Larsen, J., 192
Larsen, R. J., 27, 68, 95, 96, 100, 
192, 204–206, 215, 242, 
280, 283, 292, 404, 
406–408, 415–416, 418, 
422–424, 429–432, 568
Larsen-Rife, D., 484
Larson, C. M., 251
Larson, J., 510
Final PDF to printerNAME INDEX 725
lar31869_nidx_719-730 725 11/07/22 04:17 PM
Lassek, W. D., 240
Lassiter, G. D., 269
Lau, H., 268
Laub, J. H., 594
Lauermann, F., 456
Lauritsen, J. L., 594
Lauterbach, K., 98, 486
Lauver, K. J., 483
Law, M. K., 100
Lawson, M. A., 563
Lawton, M. P., 390
Lazar, R. M., 429
Lazic, A., 446
Le Boeuf, B. J., 240
Le, K., 415
Leach, D., 148
Leary, M. R., 232, 234, 353, 445
Lecci, L., 390
Lee, B. W., 443
Lee, C., 117, 443
Lee, C. S., 493
Lee, D., 79
Lee, E., 27, 32, 493
Lee, H., 428–429, 528
Lee, J. A., 27, 32, 493
Lee, J. H., 563
Lee, K., 64, 77, 83, 84
Lee, M., 78
Lee, S. W., 240
Lee, Y., 538
Lee, Y. H., 538
Lee-Dussud, J., 392
Lee-Ross, D., 341
Lee-Won, R. J., 443
Leeson, P. C., 443
Leeuwis, F. H., 450
Lefringhausen, K., 493
Legare, C. H., 234
Lehman, D. R., 79, 146, 538
Lehmann, R., 137
Lehnart, J., 494
Lei, C., 473
Lei, X., 301
Leikas, S., 91
Leinbach, M. D., 517
Leitner, J. B., 457
Lemay, E. P., 483
Lemmer, G., 456
Leng, V. C., 214
Lengel, G. J., 590
Lens, W., 337
Lent, R. W., 391
Leon, G. R., 384
Leopold, D. A., 268
Lepage, J., 81
Lesick, T. L., 450
Letsch, E. A., 212
Leukefeld, C., 81
Leung, L., 443
Lev, S., 423
LeVay, S., 171
Levendosky, A., 320
Levenson, M. R., 578, 597
Levenson, R., 29, 191, 403, 574
Levert, E., 77
Levesque, J., 421
Levine, S., 390, 431
Levine, S. L., 563
Levy, B. R., 389
Levy, S. M., 575
Lewetz, D., 27, 144
Lewis, D. M., 231, 234, 237
Lewis, G. J., 173, 231
Lewis, H. B., 373
Lewis, L. L., 513
Lewis, M., 439–440
Li, L., 178, 179
Li, M., 338
Li, N. P., 228, 246, 473, 504
Lichtenstein, P., 168, 173
Liddle, B., 78
Lieberman, D., 237, 533
Liening, S., 337
Lievens, F., 339
Lilienfeld, S. O., 301
Lim, J. C. Y., 493
Lin, C., 301
Lindberg, M. J., 269
Lindwall, M., 149
Linley, P. A., 68
Linville, P. W., 453
Lippa, R., 509
Liquete, E., 25
Lishman, W. A., 421
Listyg, B. S., 195
Little, B. R., 387–390, 509
Littvay, L., 170
Liu, S., 457
Liu, X., 375
Livesley, W. J., 168, 176
Lloyd, J. N., 240
Lloyd, M. E., 516
Lobel, T., 533
Lock, T., 301
Löckenhoff, C. E., 140, 502–505, 
537, 541
Lockwood, P., 451
Lodi-Smith, J., 137
Loeber, R., 429
Loehlin, J. C., 164, 167, 169, 170, 
174, 176, 178, 249, 253
Lofts, E. F., 516
Loftus, E., 301
Loftus, E., 298–301
Loftus, E. F., 304
Logan, T. K., 81
Lohmann, S., 273
Lombardo, M. V., 186
London, H., 67
Lönnqvist, J., 81, 91
López-Martínez, A. E., 456
Lorvik, I. M., 82
Lothert, J., 480
Lott, T., 282
Lounsbury, J. W., 394
Lovallo, W. R., 204, 218
Loveland, J. M., 394
Low, B., 517
Lowenstein, L. F., 186
Lowry, P. E., 113
Loxton, N. J., 80
Luben, R., 581
Lucas, I., 146
Lucas, R., 136, 407–409, 414–415, 
418
Luce, C., 362
Luchetti, M., 563
Luciano, M., 180
Ludeke, S. G., 39
Lüdtke, O., 135, 147, 457
Lukacs, B., 269
Lukaszewski, A. W., 29, 246, 251, 
253
Lukaszewski, W., 251
Lukowitsky, M. R., 73
Lummaa, V., 249
Lund, O. C. H., 62, 79
Luntz, B. K., 597
Luo, J., 178
Luo, S., 476
Luszczynska, A., 567
Lutter, C., 519
Lutz-Zois, C., 82
Lykken, D. T., 168, 558, 596, 619
Lynam, D., 81, 618
Lynam, D. R., 195
Lyness, J. M., 503, 505
Lynn, R., 395
Lynn, S. J., 301
Lyons, M., 490, 493
Lyubomirsky, S., 409, 418, 578
M
Ma, V., 25
Macaskill, G. T., 172
Macauley, J., 499
MacCann, C., 394
MacDonald, G., 234
Mace, R., 235
Macfarlan, S. J., 503
Machiavelli, N., 489
Machover, K., 373
MacLaren, V. V., 82
MacLeod, C., 423
Madden, P. A. F., 172
Madsen, E. A., 235
Maestripieri, D., 189
Mahapatra, M., 526, 531
Mahmood, A., 70
Maier, S. F., 387
Main, M., 322
Major, B., 411
Malanos, A. B., 78, 97
Malcarne, V. L., 445
Malcolm, J., 98
Malcolm, K. T., 484
Maleva, V., 389
Malone, J. C., 320
Malouff, J. M., 476
Maltby, J., 68
Malvo, L., 315
Manczak, E., 310
Maner, J. K., 244
Mangum, J. L., 194, 244
Mann, F. D., 172
Mannarelli, T., 492
Mansfield, E. D., 337
Manuck, S. B., 422, 565
Manzi, C., 25
Maranges, H. M., 529
Marangoni, C., 363
Marchessault, K., 618
Marcia, J. E., 314
Marcus, D. K., 70
Marcus, K., 173
Marcus, T., 234
Margolis, S., 418
Marino, C., 148
Markett, S., 197
Markey, C. N., 146, 478
Markey, P. M., 146, 478
Markon, K. E., 177, 608
Marks, E., 346
Markus, H., 443
Markus, H. R., 538
Marlowe, D., 40
Mars, B., 452
Marschall-Lévesque, S., 558
Marsh, H. W., 449
Marsland, A. L., 422, 567
Martin, A. L., 244
Martin, L. J., 389
Martin, L. R., 148
Martin, M., 421
Martin, N. G., 167, 171, 172, 250
Martin, R., 147, 149
Martin, T. A., 75
Martin-Krumm, C., 389
Martinez, M. A., 493
Martinko, M. J., 115, 117
Martins, A., 453
Maslow, A. H., 66, 350, 352
Mason, A., 345
Mason, J., 621
Mason, O., 609
Mason, W., 29
Masson, J. M., 269
Masten, A. S., 146, 147
Master, A., 60, 62, 391
Masters, H. L., 79, 81
Masuda, T., 536
Mathews, A., 423
Mathis, L. C., 141, 456
Mathot, K. J., 16
Mathur, M. N. L., 445
Matloff, J., 516
Matsumoto, D., 238, 536
Mattheiesen, S. B., 78
Matthews, G., 202, 394, 423
Matthews, M. D., 79, 147
Mauzey, E. D., 427
Maxwel, S. J., 32
May, M. A., 90, 92, 99
Mayer, J. D., 394
Mazuera Arias, R., 536
McAdams, D. P., 12, 74, 308, 310, 
337, 339, 347–348, 354
McBurnett, K., 593
McCarley, N. G., 116
McCartney, K., 177, 517
McCaulley, M. H., 114
McClearn, G. E., 165, 166
McClelland, D. C., 338–340, 
342–343, 345
McClern, G. E., 160
McConnell, A. R., 453
McCoul, M. D., 480
McCrae, R. R., 26, 64, 74, 75, 77, 
83, 88, 132, 135, 136, 140, 
411, 415–416, 422, 
503–505, 541, 547
McCreary, L. L., 447
McCullough, M. E., 82, 491, 493
McDaniel, M. J., 41
McDaniel, S. R., 42
McDermott, K. B., 302
McElreath, M., 244
McFarl, D., 235
McFatter, R. M., 415
McGrath, R. E., 337
Final PDF to printer726 NAME INDEX
lar31869_nidx_719-730 726 11/07/22 04:17 PM
McGue, M., 132, 137, 148, 
168–170, 172, 176, 473, 
558, 561
McGuffin, P., 70, 160
McGuire, M., 621
McHoskey, J. W., 70
McKellop, M., 389
McKibbin, W. F., 247
McLaughlin, R., 389
McLean, J., 301
McLeod, B. D., 289, 445
McLoyd, V. S., 413
McNally, R. J., 421
McNaughton, N., 194, 195
McNulty, J. K., 476, 483
McWhirter, R. M., 415
Mead, M., 543
Meagher, S., 597, 601
Mealey, L., 253
Mecacci, L., 214
Medl, S. E., 170
Medway, F. J., 323
Meehl, P. E., 42
Meeus, W., 480
Megarge, E., 30
Mehl, M. R., 27, 28, 32, 191
Meints, S. M., 78
Meissner, P. B., 373
Melchior, L. A., 445
Meloy, J. R., 428
Meltzer, A. L., 483
Mendle, J., 176
Mendoza-Denton, R., 392
Menninger, K., 578
Menschik-Bendele, J., 170
Mercer, K. A., 423
Mervielde, I., 136
Messick, S., 102, 375
Meston, C., 28, 33, 237
Metin, E., 563
Metter, E. J., 78
Mewton, L., 80
Meyer, M., 480
Micali, A., 505
Michalos, A. C., 410
Michalski, R. L., 244
Michel, M., 268
Midgley, C., 451
Mike, A., 79
Mikulincer, M., 323, 327
Miljeteig, K., 451
Milkman, K. L., 273
Miller, A. L., 378
Miller, D. C., 521
Miller, G. E., 199, 457, 567
Miller, G. F., 179, 248, 253, 254
Miller, J., 81, 413, 590, 618
Miller, J. D., 195
Miller, J. G., 526, 531–532
Miller, K. M., 78
Miller, M., 516
Miller, R. R., 489–490
Miller, S. L., 244
Miller, T. W. K., 148
Millevoi, A., 244
Millon, C., 600–601
Millon, T., 588–589, 600–601, 619
Mills, C. J., 136
Milne, B., 132, 180
Minkov, M., 75
Miramontes, L. G., 60, 62
Mischel, W., 8, 92, 94, 387, 392, 
627
Mitchell, K. V., 480
Mitchell, S., 299
Miyake, S., 216
Miyasita, A., 216
Miyata, Y., 214, 216
Mlacic, B., 77, 547
Moestue, C., 62, 79
Moffitt, T. E., 132, 136, 137, 147, 
148, 176, 180, 484
Moirón, M., 16
Molde, H., 82
Mondak, J. J., 82
Monk, T. H., 214
Monroe, S. M., 142, 457
Montag, C., 197
Montemayor, R., 441
Montiglio, P. O., 16
Montrose, V. T., 493
Moon, J. H., 27, 32, 493
Moon, T. H., 480, 490
Mooney, C. N., 493
Moore, C. A., 373, 375
Moore, M., 167, 168, 516
Moore, S. R., 176
Morag, J., 490
Moran, P., 452
Moretti, R. J., 337
Morey, L. C., 588
Morf, C., 319
Morgan, C. A., 301
Morgan, C. D., 336
Morgan, D., 49
Morneau-Vaillancourt, G., 168
Morosoli, S., 157
Morris, M. E., 492
Morrison, M., 234
Morsella, E., 307
Mortelmans, D., 145
Moscoso, S., 547
Moskowitz, D. S., 95, 518
Moskowitz, J. T., 578–579
Moskowtiz, D. S., 95
Moss, H., 342
Moss, M. S., 388
Mount, M. K., 113
Moussavi, M., 237
Mroczek, D. K., 137, 147, 148
Mueller, E. M., 137, 188
Mufson, D. W., 113
Mufson, M. A., 113
Muhammad, J., 315
Müllensiefen, D., 81
Muller, D., 204
Mullins-Sweatt, S. N., 590
Multon, K. D., 391
Munafo, M. R., 212
Muncer, S., 505
Mund, M., 563
Munz, D. C., 79
Muraven, M., 272, 458
Murdock, G. P., 531
Murphy, D. L., 178, 179
Murphy, K. R., 107
Murphy, S. M., 244
Murray, C., 180, 395
Murray, D. R., 530–531
Murray, G., 79
Murray, H., 4, 10, 29, 334, 336
Murstein, B. I., 473
Myers, D. G., 408, 411, 413, 415
Myers, I. B., 114
Myers, L. B., 280
Myrseth, H., 82
N
Na, J., 538
Na, K., 538
Nadeau, M. S., 363
Nadler, A., 378
Najle, M. B., 540
Nakamura, J., 356
Nakazato, K., 140, 541
Naoi, A., 541
Nasby, W., 49
Nash, M. R., 301, 307
Nathanson, C., 81
Naumann, L. P., 77, 493
Navarrete, C. D., 240
Neale, M. C., 171–173
Near, D., 489–490
Neiderheiser, J., 157, 173, 174
Neimeyer, R. A., 380–382
Nelson, E., 189
Nelson, G., 438
Nelson, L. J., 379
Nemeroff, C., 237
Nesse, R., 146, 510
Nessim, S., 516
Nestler, S., 485
Nettle, D., 78, 254
Neuberg, S. L., 351
Newcomb, M. D., 478
Newcombe, R., 176
Newell, B. R., 269
Newman, B. M., 314, 519
Newman, J. P., 596, 619
Newman, L. C., 292
Newman, P. R., 314, 519
Newsom, J. T., 565
Newton, N. J., 142
Neyer, F. J., 137, 484, 494
Nezlak, J. B., 457
Nezworski, M. T., 35, 445
Nicastle, L. D., 244
Nichols, R. C., 164, 170
Nicolaou, A., 375
Niederhoffer, K. G., 576
Niederle, M., 342
Nietzsche, F., 316
Nieuwboer, H. A., 167
Nigg, J. T., 619
Nikćević, A. V., 148
Nisbett, R., 529
Nisbett, R. E., 529, 530, 533, 536
Niv, S., 168
Noble, E. P., 179
Noftle, E. E., 79, 110
Nolen-Hoeksema, S., 510
Noller, P., 575
Noonan, K. M., 240
Nordgre, L. F., 268, 269
Norem, J. K., 456
Norenzayan, A., 536
Norman, A., 235
Norman, W. T., 63, 67, 74
Norris, C. J., 192
Norton, M. I., 414–415
Novin, S., 446
Nudelman, A. E., 25
Nurius, P., 443
Nusbaum, E. C., 81, 84
Nye, C. D., 503
O
O’Brien, B. S., 593
O’Brien, C. D., 79
O’Brien, D. T., 240
O’Connell, D., 70
O’Connell, M., 81
O’Connor, S. L., 42
O’Connor, T. G., 178
O’Donnell, J. R., 23
O’Hearn, R. E., 323
O’Heeron, R. C., 575
O’Leary, K. N., 508, 521
O’Loughlin, C., 473
O’Neil, T. A., 28
O’Rourke, N., 476
O’Sullivan, M., 237
Oaten, M., 237
Oatley, K., 405
Oberlé, D., 81
Odar Stough, C, 385
Odbert, H. S., 63, 74
Ode, S., 82
Oefner, I., 62
Oefner, L., 60
Oerlemans, W. G., 78
Ofshe, R. J., 301
Ogunfowora, B., 83
Oishi, S., 78, 352, 408
Oksanen, T., 216
Okun, M. A., 82, 410
Olaguez, A. P., 304
Ole-Kotikash, L., 548
Oleszkiewicz, A., 493
Olino, T. M., 503
Oliver, M. B., 247
Olson, J., 51
Oltmanns, T. F., 79, 493, 
613, 615
Olweus, D., 131–133
Ones, D. S., 24, 28, 82, 107, 108
Ong, E. Y. L., 493
Oniszczenko, W., 168
Ono, Y., 168, 169
Onoda, N., 168
Opre, A., 505
Oravecz, Z., 471
Orcutt, H. K., 146
Origlio, J., 385
Orinea, M. M., 326
Orlebeke, J. M., 172
Ormel, J., 137, 194, 421
Orth, U., 455
Ortony, A., 405
Osborne, D., 81
Osgood, C. E., 544
Oshio, A., 82
Oskarsson, S., 170
Oskis, A., 280
Osmon, D. C., 397
Ostberg, O., 212, 214
Ostendof, F., 77
Ostendorf, F., 77, 548
Ostrov, J. M., 505
Otero, I., 29
Final PDF to printerNAME INDEX 727
lar31869_nidx_719-730 727 11/07/22 04:17 PM
Otgaar, H., 304
Otto, K., 79
Oubaid, V., 242
Oughton, J. M., 375
Overall, N., 473
Owczarek, M., 83
Owen, D. R., 396
Owens, M. M., 195
Oyserman, D., 446, 447, 537
Ozer, D. J., 37, 148
Ozkaragoz, T., 179
P
Page, A. C., 149
Page, M. M., 66
Page-Gould, E., 451
Pallesen, S., 78, 82
Palys, T. S., 390
Panerai, L., 78
Pang, J. S., 337
Panizzon, M. S., 173
Panksepp, J., 234
Papageorgi, I., 235
Paquet, Y., 389
Paradis, C. M., 429
Pardini, D. A., 429
Parentich, K. T., 149
Paris, J., 176, 291, 618
Park, C. G., 445
Park, C. L., 578
Park, J. H., 237
Park, N., 352
Park, S. G., 443
Park, S. W., 443
Parker, S. K., 447
Parker, W. D., 136, 541
Pascalis, V., 203
Pascall, D. J., 16
Pashak, T. J., 79
Passamonti, L., 197
Patel, L., 244, 246
Patrick, C., 33
Patrick, C. J., 169, 596, 619
Patterson, C., 178, 179, 363
Patterson, M. L., 445
Patterson, M. W., 172, 177
Paulhus, D. L., 41, 70, 81, 84, 493
Paunesku, D., 60, 62, 344, 453
Paunonen, S. V., 28, 77, 81, 83, 89, 
167, 168, 235
Pausch, R., 316
Pavelich, S., 516
Pawitan, Y., 168
Payne, D., 548
Peake, P. K., 92
Pedersen, N., 167, 173
Peltz, R., 244
Peng, K., 536
Penke, L., 66, 68, 137, 160, 179, 
233, 248, 253, 254
Pennebaker, J. W., 27, 32, 422, 
575–576
Peplau, L. A., 478
Perea, E. F., 241
Perfect, T., 301
Perilloux, C., 231, 517
Perkins, A. W., 41
Perkiö-Mäkelä, M., 216
Perlman, D. M., 429
Perry, D. G., 78, 484
Perry, V. G., 384
Persson, B., 178
Perugini, M., 77, 541
Petersen, J. L., 508
Peterson, B. E., 346
Peterson, C., 79, 147, 352, 387–
388, 553, 568, 570
Peterson, J. B., 78, 81, 195
Peterson, M., 132
Peterson, P. E., 396
Peterson, Z. D., 447
Petrie, A., 378
Petrill, S. A., 395
Petrini, L., 84
Pettersson, E., 169, 179, 180
Pezdek, K., 262
Pham, M., 78, 246, 473
Phillips, J. G., 446
Phillips, N. D., 269
Phillips, S. D., 390
Picano, J., 142, 285
Picconi, L., 78
Pickering, A., 70
Pickering, A. D., 204, 205
Piedmont, R. L., 137
Pietrzak, R., 242, 244
Piff, P. K., 541
Pihl, R. O., 593
Pillard, R. C., 171
Pilon, D. A., 343
Pincus, A. L., 73
Pincus, J. H., 428
Pinker, S., 17, 543, 545
Pinksky, D., 493
Piovesan, M., 273
Pipher, M., 497
Piquero, A. R., 132
Pisanski, K., 493
Pittenger, D. J., 115–117
Plake, B. S., 118
Plant, E. A., 498
Platt, T., 71
Plavcan, J. M., 240
Plomin, R., 156, 157, 159, 160, 
165, 166, 174, 176, 179, 
510, 514, 630
Plotkin, H. C., 235
Plutchik, R., 405
Pocuca, N., 80
Polage, D., 301
Polak, C. P., 379
Polderman, T. J., 172
Polizzi, M., 516
Pollock, V. E., 619
Pope, C. A., 79
Pope, M. K., 422
Porcerelli, J., 337
Poropat, A. E., 79
Porter, C. L., 379
Posner, M. I., 421
Post, J. M., 23
Postlethwaite, B. E., 81
Potter, J., 137
Poulton, J. L., 422
Poulton, R., 176, 180
Pound, N., 251
Poutvaara, P., 81
Pradel, J., 27
Prall, S. P., 244
Preston, A., 341
Preston, N., 80, 484
Price, M. E., 253
Prior, H., 439
Privado, J., 195
Prizmic, Z., 283, 406, 408, 418, 
452, 453, 574
Prizmic-Larsen, Z., 532
Procher, V. D., 189
Promislow, D., 241
Proyer, R. T., 71
Prusik, M., 491
Przybeck, T. R., 211
Puca, R. M., 338
Pullmann, H., 137
Putin, V., 346
Pütz, N., 456
Q
Q Qudrat, A., 508, 521
Quenk, N. L., 114
Quilty, L. C., 81
Quina, K., 262
Quinn, C. A., 80
R
Rabie, T., 237
Rabin, B. S., 422, 567
Radosevic-Vidacek, B., 214
Radosic, N., 413
Rafaeli-Mor, E., 453
Rahe, R. H., 567
Raine, A., 168, 428, 428–429
Raison, C. L., 32
Raitakari, O., 131
Raja, A., 234
Rajeevan, N., 195, 421
Ramírez-Maestre, C., 456
Rammsayer, T. H., 202, 395, 397
Rammstedt, B., 74, 77, 145
Ramona, G., 297, 298
Ramsay, D., 439–440
Ranasinghe, P., 389
Rapport, M. D., 32
Rasanen, K., 216
Raskin, J. D., 381
Raskin, R., 493, 603
Rasmuson, I., 167
Rattan, A., 391
Rauch, S. L., 446
Raudsepp, L., 137
Rausch, M. K., 80
Rauthmann, J., 61
Rawlings, D., 70
Raynor, L., 172
Read, N. W., 49
Realo, A., 503, 505, 518, 526
Reason, R. D., 143
Redman, K., 70
Reed, G. M., 408, 452
Reed, W. M., 375
Regalia, C., 25
Regan, P. C., 246
Reidy, D. E., 493
Reimann, R., 168
Reis, H. T., 327, 516
Reiss, D., 173, 174
Reisse-Davis, Z., 262
Reiter, J., 240
Reivich, K. J., 571
Remiker, M. W., 493
Renn, K. A., 143
Renner, W., 170
Renshon, S. A., 23
Rentfrow, P. J., 81, 493
Repman, J., 375
Rettew, D. C., 168
Reuter, M., 197
Revelle, W., 204, 419
Reynolds, C. A., 136, 137
Reynolds, M., 363
Rhee, E., 534
Rhee, S. H., 170
Rheingold, H. L., 517
Rhodenwalt, F., 319
Rhodewalt, F., 422
Rholes, W. S., 326, 327
Riccelli, R., 197
Rice, M. E., 253
Rich, S., 168
Richards, S. C., 70
Richardson, A. K., 346
Richardson, J. A., 375
Richardson, J. M., 235
Richardson, M., 79
Richetin, J., 541
Richter, D., 145
Rickard, I. J., 249
Ricks, D. F., 415
Ridley, M., 179
Riediger, M., 470
Riemann, R., 167–170, 175
Riese, H., 137, 194, 421
Rietveld, J. J. J., 168
Rincon, B. C., 538
Rind, B., 310
Rindermann, H., 396
Ritts, V., 445
Ritvo, L. B., 265
Rivas-Moya, T., 456
Robbins, R. W., 130, 139
Roberts, B. W., 60–62, 135–137, 
147, 148, 169, 178, 
559–560
Roberts, J. E., 142, 457
Roberts, J. M., 147
Roberts, R. D., 393
Robertson, S. M. C., 461
Robins, R. W., 62, 79, 92, 110, 
135, 144, 319, 480, 484, 
603
Robinson, D. S., 576
Robinson, K. J., 302
Robinson, M. D., 68, 82, 254, 471
Roche, M. J., 73
Rodriguez, N. N., 251
Roediger, H. L., 302
Roese, N. J., 234
Rogers, C. R., 356, 361–362
Roisman, G. I., 322, 324, 326
Rolland, J., 547
Román, F. J., 195
Roman, R., 534
Romero, C., 60, 62, 343, 391
Roney, J., 29, 246, 251
Rooke, S. E., 476
Rooze, G., 375
Rorschach, H., 289
Rösch, A. G., 344
Rosch, E., 61
Rose, R., 172, 204, 218
Final PDF to printer728 NAME INDEX
lar31869_nidx_719-730 728 11/07/22 04:17 PM
Rosen, C. C., 273
Rosenberg, R. S., 34
Rosenkranz, M., 204
Rosenman, R. H., 578–579
Rosenzweig, S., 12, 264, 293
Ross, K. M., 457
Ross, L., 282
Ross, S. R., 80, 82
Roth, W., 566
Rothbart, M., 129, 130
Rothermund, K., 450
Rotter, J. B., 382
Rounds, J., 509
Rowatt, W. C., 84
Rowe, D. C., 253
Rozin, P., 237, 531
Rubel, T., 503
Rubin, Z., 478
Ruch, W., 71
Ruchkin, V. V., 146
Rudich, E. A., 493
Ruiz-Párraga, G. T., 456
Rule, A., 50
Runge, J. M., 339
Runyon, W. M., 12
Russell, J. A., 82
Russell, V. M., 476
Rusting, C. L., 204, 415–416, 424
Rutherford, J., 23
Ryan, R. M., 142
Rydell, R. J., 453
Rye, M. S., 82
Ryff, C., 538
Rymer, T., 32
S
Saaranen, T., 216
Sackett, P. R., 108, 110
Sadler, S., 70
Saénz-Urturi, C., 195
Sagarin, B. J., 244
Sagie, A., 341
Saitoh, T., 214
Sakuta, A., 428
Salgado, J. F., 547
Salmela-Aro, K., 390
Salovey, P., 242, 394
Saltz, E., 447
Sam, D. L., 592
Sandvik, E., 408, 411
Santayana, G., 27
Santorelli, S. F., 204
Sapienza, P., 189
Sapolsky, R. M., 520
Satpute, A. B., 269
Satterfield, J. H., 428
Saucier, G., 59, 63, 64, 67, 74, 
77, 82, 83, 485, 503, 
547–548, 548
Sauter, D. A., 546
Sawyer, L., 461
Scabini, E., 25
Scaglione, M. R., 214
Scarf, M., 608
Scarr, S., 165, 177, 517
Scealy, M., 446
Scelza, B. A., 244
Schachner, M., 75
Schacter, D. L., 262
Schad, D., 337
Schafer, W. D., 521
Schaller, M., 224, 351–352, 
530–531
Schantz, D. W., 280
Scheibe, S., 508
Scheier, M. F., 205, 572
Schelle, A. M., 428
Scherer, K. R., 279
Schermer, J. A., 84, 167, 168
Schimmack, U., 370, 414
Schinka J. A., 212
Schiraldi, G., 507
Schmeichel, B. J., 273
Schmidt, F., 82
Schmidt, G., 248
Schmidt, L. A., 107, 445, 479
Schmitt, D. P., 79, 82, 233, 244, 
478, 503, 505, 508, 518, 
520–521
Schmukle, S. C., 36, 136
Schmutte, P. S., 538
Schneider, K., 588
Schnell, T., 384
Schnotala, T., 250
Schoemann, A. M., 452
Schoenbach, C., 541
Schoeneman, T. J., 25
Scholer, A. A., 78
Schooler, C., 541
Schreiber, K. L., 78
Schüler, J., 338
Schultheiss, M., 337
Schultheiss, O. C., 337, 339, 344
Schultz, M., 173
Schultz, S., 189
Schumacher, J., 204
Schupp, J., 145
Schut, H., 79
Schutte, N. S., 476
Schutzwohl, A., 244, 247
Schuyler, B. S., 421
Schwab, J. R., 354
Schwartz, C. E., 421, 439, 442
Schwartz, D. W., 429
Schwartz, G., 279
Schwartz, J. E., 148
Schwartz, M., 337
Schwartz, S. H., 503
Schwarz, A., 439
Schwarzer, R., 567
Schweckendiek, J., 280
Schwerdtfeger, A., 189, 378
Schwinger, M., 456
Scott, S. K., 546
Scott, W. A., 338
Sear, R., 235
Seara-Cardoso, A., 621
Sedikides, C., 144, 195, 493
Sefcek, J. A., 253, 475
Segal, N., 163, 166, 168, 174, 324
Segerstrom, S. C., 556
Segrin, C., 82
Séguin, J. R., 558
Seidlitz, L., 408, 411
Selfhout, M., 480
Seligman, M., 255, 386–389, 407, 
571
Sell, A., 236, 251, 504
Selye, H., 565
Semenova, E., 346
Semerci, A., 29
Semmelroth, J., 242
Serman, R., 137
Serrano- Ibáñez, E. R., 456
Servaas, M. N., 194, 421
Sesker, A. A., 563
Severson, H. H., 146
Shackelford, T., 62, 78, 244, 246, 
247, 473–476
Shafer, A., 80, 244
Shakeel, M. D., 396
Shane, M. S., 195, 421
Shanks, D. R., 269
Shapcott, K. M., 389
Shapiro, J. R., 241
Sharp, L. K., 576
Sharpe, B. M., 195
Shattuck, K., 250
Shatz, S. M., 397
Shaver, P., 323, 325–327
Shavit, Y., 262
Shaw, R., 603
Sheikh, H., 81
Sheldon, K. M., 338
Shelton, B. L., 81
Shen, Y., 268
Sheppard, K. E., 84
Sheppard, L. D., 397
Shera-Ochsner, A. L., 186
Sheridan, J. F., 204
Sherman, P. W., 240
Shibata, K., 195
Shimotsukasa, T., 82
Shin, L. M., 446
Shiner, R. L., 137, 146, 147, 169
Shinohara, M., 168
Shirako, A., 31
Shneidman, E. S., 334
Shoben, E. J., 589
Shoda, Y., 92, 94, 627
Short, S. D., 461
Showers, C. J., 497, 507
Shu, F., 84
Shultz, J. S., 489
Shweder, R. A., 526, 531, 547
Sibley, C. G., 81
Siegel, J., 379, 427
Siegle, G. J., 423
Siegler, I. C., 79
Sievertsen, H. H., 273
Sigman, M., 289, 445
Sigusch, V., 248
Silasi-Mansat, C. D., 80
Silva, P. J., 81
Silventoinen, K., 249
Silver, N., 484–485
Silverthorne, C., 82
Silvia, P. J., 84, 197
Simonsick, E. M., 78
Simonton, D. K., 397
Simpson, J. A., 66, 252, 254, 326, 
327
Singh, D., 519
Singh, S., 341
Six, B., 515
Skaggs, S., 244
Skinner, B. F., 232
Skondras, M., 210
Skoner, D. P., 565
Skowronski, J. J., 244
Slade, M. D., 389
Slatcher, R. B., 476
Sloan, S., 516
Slomczynski, K. M., 541
Slonim, R., 189
Slovic, P., 146
Slutske, W. W., 172
Smart, S. A., 449
Smedley, K. D., 244
Smillie, L., 80, 195, 199, 418, 484
Smith, A., 84, 567
Smith, C. P., 338
Smith, E. N., 343
Smith, H. L., 409
Smith, J. Z., 476
Smith, K., 81, 384
Smith, M., 252
Smith, P., 389
Smith, R. E., 392
Smith, T. W., 148, 415, 422, 
556–557
Smits, I. A. M., 542
Smoll, F. L., 393
Smyth, N., 280
Snapp, T., 480
Snidman, N., 153, 155, 199
Snowdon, D. A., 148
Snyder, E., 519
Snyder, J. K., 240
Snyder, M., 96, 97, 485
Snydor, J., 189
Solberg, E. C., 68, 254
Soloff, P. H., 599
Solomon, B. C., 478
Solomon, J., 327
Solomon, Z., 280
Somer, O., 77
Sommer, K. L., 276
Sonnega, J., 146
Sorensen, S., 503, 505
Sorokowska, A., 493
Sorokowski, P., 493
Soronson, M. D., 179
South, S. C., 176, 177, 180, 212, 
493
Southwick, S., 301
Souza, A. L., 246, 473
Sowislo, J. F., 455
Spada, M. M., 148
Spangler, W. D., 339
Spanos, N. P., 301
Spearman, C., 99
Specht, J., 136, 137
Spence, J., 511, 513
Spencer, S. J., 450
Spengler, M., 147
Spiegel, D., 204, 218
Spies, R. A., 118
Spikic, S., 145
Spilker, B., 378
Spinath, F. M., 145, 160, 167–170, 
173, 175, 178
Spiro, A., 137, 148, 556
Spotts, E. L., 173
Srivastav, D., 445
Srivastava, S., 137
Staats, B. R., 273
Stadler, G., 149
Stake, J. E., 447, 451
Stalkas, A., 188
Final PDF to printerNAME INDEX 729
lar31869_nidx_719-730 729 11/07/22 04:17 PM
Stallings, M. C., 170
Stålsett, G., 384
Standen, B., 195
Stapp, J., 511
Stark, R., 280
Starr, J. M., 231
Stattin, N. S., 235
Stayton, D. J., 322
Steel, P., 82
Steffian, G., 301
Stegall, M. E., 415
Steger, M. F., 168
Steiger, S., 27, 144
Stein, D. J., 233, 269
Stein, K. F., 445
Stein, M. B., 441
Stein, R., 116
Steinberg, J., 453
Steinberg, L., 140, 250
Steiner, A. W., 220
Steiner, M., 82
Stejskal, J. W., 35
Stelmack, R. M., 82, 188, 202, 203
Stemmler, G., 137, 188
Stephan, Y., 563
Stephen, I. D., 237
Steptoe, A., 581
Sternberg, R. J., 397
Stevens, D. A., 242, 244
Stevenson, R., 237, 446
Stewart, A., 139, 142, 333, 347
Stewart, M. E., 79, 82
Stewart, S. H., 79
Stieger, S., 27
Stiles, T. C., 79
Stillman, T. F., 273
Stock, M. L., 234
Stock, W. A., 410
Stocker, S., 446
Stoeber, J., 79
Stoltz Harvey, T., 196
Stopfer, J. M., 485
Storer, P., 516
Strain, L. M., 453
Strauss, K., 447
Strelan, P., 78
Strelau, J., 168
Strickhouser, J. E., 529, 563
Stritzke, W. G., 149
Stroebe, M., 79
Stroebe, W., 79
Stroop, J. R., 423
Strout, S. L., 244
Strube, M. J., 493
Stucke, T. S., 273
Su, R., 509
Su, X., 339
Suci, G. J., 544
Sugden, K., 176, 180
Suh, E. M., 409
Sukhatme, V., 79
Sullivan, P. F., 167
Suls, J., 580
Sumich, A., 195
Sun, H., 268
Sun, J., 29
Sundstrom, E., 394
Sung, Y., 27, 32, 493
Suomi, S. J., 321
Surtees, P., 581
Sutin, A., 421
Sutin, A. R., 148, 563
Sutton, S. K., 204, 205, 416, 421
Svartberg, K., 162
Sverko, B., 214
Svrakic, D. M., 211
Swaim, G., 445
Swami, V., 27, 144
Swan, A. B., 116
Swanbrow, D., 418
Swann, W. B., 513
Swann, W. R.
Jr., 494
Sweazy, S., 461
Symons, D., 239, 521
Szarota, P., 77, 548
Szepsenwol, O., 327
T
Tackett, J. L., 132, 172, 177
Takemura, K., 538
Talhelm, T., 78
Tamir, M., 68, 254
Tamir, Y., 378
Tamnes, C. K., 62, 79
Tan, E., 413
Tancredy, C. M., 327
Tani, M., 82
Tannenbaum, P. H., 544
Tanskanen, A. O., 78
Tarvain, M. P., 216
Tataryn, D. J., 294
Tate, J. C., 81
Tatsouoka, M. M., 103
Taylor, A., 176
Taylor, S., 41, 556
Taylor, S. E., 408
Teasdale, T. W., 396
Tedeschi, R. G., 578
Telama, R., 131
Tellegen, A., 82, 146, 168
Templer, D. I., 253
Teng, G., 363
Tennen, H., 579
Terman, L. M., 247
Terracciano, A., 78, 136, 148, 169, 
197, 502–505, 547, 563
Terry, H., 493
Tester, N., 189
Thai, S., 451
Thalmayer, A. G., 548
Thanzami, V., 250
Theakston, J. A., 79
Theodore, R. F., 132, 180
Thiabaut, J., 490
Thielmann, I., 84, 481
Thomaes, S., 144
Thomas, A. K., 301
Thome, P. R., 499
Thompson, N. S., 242, 244
Thompson, R. A., 327, 574
Thorndike, E. L., 509
Thornhill, R., 252, 253, 521
Thorsteinsson, E. B., 476
Thrash, T. M., 338–339
Tice, D. M., 232, 272, 273, 291, 
451, 455–456
Timmerman, M. E., 542
Tinsley, B. J., 146
Tiokhin, L., 240
Tobin, R. M., 78
Tolea, M. I., 78
Tolnai, L., 31
Tomarken, A. J., 218
Tomfohr, L. M., 457
Tomkins, S. S., 405
Tomlinson-Keasey, C., 148
Tooby, J., 20, 227, 235, 236, 250, 
253, 531, 5227–528
Tooke, J., 62
Torgler, B., 81
Toschi, N., 197
Towers, H., 173
Tracy, A., 147
Tracy, J., 238
Trautner, M., 456
Trautwein, U., 135, 457
Tremblay, R. E., 70, 593
Trinder, J., 79
Trinkaus, E., 239
Trivers, R., 235, 240
Trobst, K. K., 79, 81
Trudeau, K. J., 581
Trudeau, R., 530–531
Trull, T. J., 586, 590
Trump, D., 12
Trzesniewski, K. H., 135, 144, 448
Tsai, A., 301
Tsaousis, I., 83, 548
Tucker, A., 452
Tucker, J. S., 148
Tucker-Drob, E. M., 169, 177
Tudor, M., 438
Tuerlinckz, F., 337
Tunney, R. J., 235
Tupes, E. C., 74
Turiano, N. A., 147, 148, 559
Turkheimer, E., 173, 179, 180, 493
Turner, C. W., 148
Turner, T. E., 375
Turner, T. J., 405
Tuvbld, C., 168
Tweed, R. G., 146
Twenge, J., 143
Twenge, J. M., 143, 144
Tybur, J. M., 237, 241
Tynan, M. C., 147
Tyrrell, D. A. J., 567
U
Udry, J. R., 514
Uher, R., 176, 180
Uleman, J., 534
Underwood, M. K., 502
Urbanowski, F., 204
Urbig, D., 189
Uskul, A. K., 530
Utesch, T., 562
V
Vahtera, J., 81
Vaidya, J. G., 136, 137
Vaillan-court, T., 84
Vaillant, G. E., 348, 395, 570, 614
Valentine, K. A., 246
Valentova, J. V., 473
Välimäki, I., 131
Vallacher, R. R., 244
van Aken, M., 147, 233, 480
van Anders, S. M., 519
van Beijhsterveldt, C. E. M., 168, 
169
van de Beek, C., 518–519
van de Vijver, F. J., 75
van de Weijer, M. P., 180
van den Berg, A. E., 491
van den Berg, S. M., 167, 169, 180
van den Bout, J., 79
van den Hout, M. A., 80
Van Den Noortgate, W., 144
van der Heijden, P., 79
van der Linden, D., 253
van der Steen, J., 375
van der Velde, J., 194, 421
van Dijk, M., 508
Van Doornen, L. J. P., 172
Van Heck, G. L., 79
Van Hulle, C. A., 501–502
van Leeuwen, F., 237
van Lier, P. C., 450
van Lieshout, C. F. M., 137
van Scheppingen, M. A., 137
Van Vugt, M., 228, 503
Vandekerckhove, J., 471
Vando, A., 379
Varella, M. A. C., 473
Vargas-Flores, J. D. J., 536
Vasa, R. A., 186
Vasquez, A. A., 180
Vasquez, G., 253
Vauhkonen, A., 216
Vazire, S., 16, 24, 28, 29, 32, 37, 
41, 476, 493
Veenhoven, R., 408, 411
Vella, M., 301
Venables, N. C., 384
Verdon, B., 338
Verkampt, F., 35
Verkasalo, M., 81, 91
Vernon, P., 84, 167, 168, 397, 491
Veroff, J., 342
Verweij, K. J., 169, 180
Veselka, L., 84
Vesterlund, L., 342
Vickers, L. C., 168
Vidacek, S., 214
Vidaurri, M., 519
Viding, E., 621
Viechtbauer, W., 137
Vignoles, V. L., 25
Viikari, J., 131
Villani, V. C., 168
Villano, P., 514
Vining, D., 397
Vink, J. M., 180
Virtanen, M., 81, 148
Visser, B., 84
Viswesvaran, C., 107, 108
Vitaro, F., 168, 593
Vitaro, J., 70
Vitrano, I., 214
Vittinghoff, E., 578
Vlek, C. A. J., 491
Vogt, T. M., 148
Vohs, K., 272, 273, 276, 291, 454
Vohs, K. D., 273
Vohs, K. E., 273
Voigt, D., 484
Volk, A. A., 84
Vollrath, M., 62, 79
Final PDF to printer730 NAME INDEX
lar31869_nidx_719-730 730 11/07/22 04:17 PM
von Rueden, C. R., 251
von Soest, T., 451
Voracek, M., 189, 244, 503, 505, 518
Vorst, H. C. M., 542
Vrij, A., 375
Vukasoviæ, T., 169
W
Wachtel, P. L., 98
Wacker, J., 137, 188, 199
Wagels, L., 428
Wagner, A., 483
Wagner, G. G., 470
Wagner, J., 457
Wagstaff, G. F., 301
Wahba, M. A., 354
Wainwright, N., 581
Walker, L. J., 73
Walker, M. S., 423
Wallace, H. M., 493
Waller, N., 82, 161
Wallin, P., 478
Wals, S. C., 82
Walsh, L. K., 363
Walton, G. M., 343, 453
Walton, K. E., 60–62, 137
Walton, K. R., 137
Wan, C. K., 580
Wang, K., 452
Wang, M., 78
Wang, S., 144
Wang, Y., 145, 473
Wanne, O., 131
Want, P., 168
Wapner, S., 373
Ward, J. C., 421
Ward, R., 80, 484
Waterhouse, P., 109
Watkinson, B., 390
Watson, D., 81, 82, 136, 137, 402, 
404, 418, 420, 422, 476
Watson, J., 302
Watson-Jones, R. E., 234
Watts, B. L., 216
Webster, G. D., 473, 480, 491
Wechsler, D., 394
Wedig, M. M., 421
Weege, B., 78
Weekes-Shackelford, V. A., 244
Wehr, T. A., 213
Weinberger, D. A., 568
Weinberger, D. S., 279
Weinberger, J., 280, 292, 338
Weinstein, A., 443
Weiser, D. A., 490
Weiser, E. B., 493
Weiss, A., 168
Weitzman, E. D., 214
Weller, A., 327
Weller, H. G., 375
Wells, M., 194, 244
Weng, H. Y., 421
Wertsch, J., 396
Wessman, A. E., 415
West, S. G., 537
Westcott, K., 389
Westen, D., 242, 292, 299, 619
Weston, D., 320
Wetzel, K., 521
Wever, R. A., 213
Whalen, P. J., 421
Wheeler, J. G., 508
Wheeler, R. W., 218
Whisman, M. A., 510
White, D. D., 240
White, J. K., 484
White, M. J., 80
White, S. J., 16
White, T. L., 205
White, V. M., 172
Whitehouse, H., 234
Whiteman, S. D., 147
Whiting, B., 517
Whitsett, D. D., 392
Whorf, B. L., 546
Whyte, S., 81
Wicherts, J. M., 542
Wickman, S. A., 361
Widiger, T. A., 586, 590, 618
Widman, D., 389
Widom, C. S., 597
Wiebe, D. J., 556
Wiederman, M. W., 244
Wiemann, S., 108
Wiemers, U. S., 339
Wiest, M., 508
Wiggins, J. S., 42, 43, 59, 71, 74
Wiklun, C. A., 235
Wilcox, K., 168
Wilkowski, B. M., 82
Willemsen, G., 167, 180
Willerman, L., 174, 253
Williams, B., 176, 180
Williams, D., 66, 421
Williams, G. C., 510
Williams, J. E., 514, 543–544
Williams, J. M. G., 423
Williams, K. M., 81, 84
Williams, L., 79
Williams, M. G., 337
Williams, P. G., 79, 556
Williams, R. B., 79
Willis-Owen, S. A., 212
Wilson, A. J., 16
Wilson, D. S., 240, 489–490
Wilson, M., 188, 240, 504, 521
Wilt, J., 204, 419
Winch, R. F., 473
Winjgaards-de Meij, L., 79
Wink, P., 140, 147
Winstone, L., 452
Winter, D. G., 333, 338, 344–346, 
346
Wirthwein, L., 456
Wirtz, D., 452
Wisker, G., 25
Witkin, H. A., 372–373, 375
Wittmann, W., 396
Woike, B. A., 339
Wolf, H., 167, 176
Wolf, M., 16
Wolf, O. T., 339
Wolitzky, D. L., 292
Wood, A. H., 515–516, 518
Wood, A. M., 68, 79
Wood, D., 60–63, 137, 485, 503
Wood, H. A., 376
Wood, J. J., 289, 445
Wood, J. M., 35, 117, 445
Wood, P. K., 146
Wood, W., 518
Woodbridge, N., 80, 484
Woodin, E., 29
Woodley, M. A., 253
Woolard, J., 140
Wootton, J. M., 593
Workman, K. A., 78, 484
Worthy, D. A., 80
Wortman, C. B., 146
Wortman, J., 485
Wortzman, G., 428
Wright, A. G. C., 73
Wright, C. I., 421, 446
Wright, D. B., 509
Wright, J. C., 94, 502
Wright, L., 581
Wrobel, M. J., 79
Wrulich, M., 149
Wrzus, C., 191, 470, 563
Wu, K. D., 78
Wu, S., 339
Wyner, D. R., 521
X
Xie, X., 144
Xing, Y., 145
Xistouri, X., 375
Xu, D., 476
Y
Yalcin, B., 212
Yamaki, M., 82
Yang, X., 131
Yarkoni, T., 191
Yarmulnik, A., 443
Yeager, D. S., 343
Yeh, C., 538
Yik, M. S. M., 82
Yoshimura, K., 168
Youn, G., 508
Yound, R. M., 179
Young, S. M., 493
Yovel, Y., 196
Yu, D. L., 571
Yu, Y., 145
Yue, G., 476
Yuki, M., 538
Yunger, J. L., 244
Z
Z Zacharia, M., 491
Zagorsky, J. L., 396
Zakriski, A. L., 502
Zanna, M. P., 450
Zarate, M. A., 379
Zarevski, P., 446
Zawadzki, B., 168
Zayas, V., 391
Zeichner, A., 493
Zeidner, M., 394
Zeigler-Hill, V., 319, 490, 493
Zelenski, J., 205, 206, 416, 433
Zelensky, V., 6
Zelkowitz, P., 618
Zell, E., 450
Zengel, B., 244
Zettler, I., 84, 339
Zhang, G., 476
Zhang, J., 452
Zhang, X., 144
Zhang, Z., 452
Zhao, K., 484
Zhaoyang, R., 476
Zhou, G., 621
Zhou, M., 452
Zhou, Y., 452
Zhu, B., 301
Zhu, G., 250
Zickar, M. J., 78
Zilcha-Mano, S., 327
Zimbardo, P., 78, 444, 479
Zimmerman, M. R., 239
Zimmerman, R., 321, 480
Zimmerman, R. S., 81
Zimprich, D., 136
Zingales, L., 189
Zonderman, A. B., 148, 411
Zuckerman, M., 42, 140, 170, 179, 
208–210, 212, 480, 593
Zurek, P. P., 508
Zwienenberg, M., 272
Zyzanski, S. J., 580
Final PDF to printerlar31869_sidx_731-738 731 11/07/22 04:18 PM
Subject Index
A
Abilities, 77
Abnormality, 588–589
Abnormal psychology, 588
Academic achievement, 147–148
Acculturation, 534
Achievement, 140
Achievement needs. See Need for 
achievement
Achievement view of intelligence, 
393
ACL, 24
Acquiescence, 39
ACT, 110
Act frequency research program, 
60–61
Action tendencies, 402
Active genotype–environment 
correlation, 177
Activity level
behavioral genetic research 
findings, 167–168
mechanical recording devices, 
31–32
stability during childhood, 
130–131
Activity measures, 131
Act nomination, 60
Actometer, 31–32, 130
Acute stress, 568
ADA, 112
Adaptation, 9, 227–228
Adaptive problem, 227, 520
Additive effects, 569
Adjacency, 72
Adjective Check List (ACL), 24
Adjustment domain, 14, 18, 
634–635
Adoption studies, 165–166
Adult relationships, 323–327
Affect intensity, 429–433
AIM Questionnaire, 432
assessment of, 430–432
high, 429
low, 429
research findings, 432–433
Affect Intensity Measure (AIM) 
Questionnaire, 432, 432
Age, 592
Aggregation, 93, 98–101
Aggression, 131–132, 132, 477, 
481
evoked, 529–530
Freud’s basic instincts, and, 
265
sex differences, and, 239–241, 
504, 504, 505
Agreeableness, 78, 503–505
academic achievement, 147
evocation of anger and upset 
in partners, 483
in five-factor model, 83
marital satisfaction, 476
marriage partner selection, 473
mate selection, 474, 475–476
mean level stability, 135, 136, 
137
rank order stability, 134
sex differences, 503–505
stability coefficients, 134
AIM Questionnaire, 432, 432
Alarm stage, 565
Alcoholism, 146–147
Alien, 353
Alpha press, 336
Alpha wave, 217
Altruism, 234–235
Ambition, 139
Ambivalently attached group, 322
Ambivalent relationship style, 323
American Beauty, 349, 458, 462
American Institute for 
Psychoanalysis, 318
Americans with Disabilities Act 
(ADA), 112
Amygdala, 446
Anal stage, 284
Analytic explanations, 536
Androgyny, 509–514, 511
Anger, 427, 477–480, 481–484
Anterior cingulate, 421
Antibodies, 199
Antisocial behavior, 175
Antisocial personality disorder, 
593–598, 619
Anxiety, 206, 275–276, 358
Anxious cluster of personality 
disorders, 610–615
Apperception, 336–338
Approach-approach conflicts, 461
Approval Motive, The (Crowne/ 
Marlowe), 40
Aptitude view of intelligence, 393
ARAS, 201
Arousability, 203
Arousal level, 201
Arteriosclerosis, 582
Ascending reticular activating 
system (ARAS), 201
Asian culture, 542, 550
ASQ, 570
Assertiveness, 143
Assessment. See Personality 
assessment
Assessment of Men, The (Murray), 
29
Association for Research in 
Personality, 626
Assortative mating, 473
Attachment, 320–323
Attend to information, 304
Attitudes, 169–170
Attitude traits, 72
Attraction similarity theory, 473
Attributional style, 570–571
Attributional Style Questionnaire 
(ASQ), 570
Autonomic nervous system, 191
Autonomous functioning, 175
Autonomy, 140
Autonomy vs. shame and doubt 
stage, 312
Average tendencies, 5
Avoidantly attached group, 322
Avoidant personality disorder, 
610–612
Avoidant relationship style, 323
B
Balanced Inventory of Desirable 
Responding, 41
Balancing selection, 254
Balkanization, 533
Barnum statements, 104–105
BAS, 204, 205
Beats-per-minute (BPM), 192
Beck’s cognitive theory, 424–426, 
425
Behavioral activation system 
(BAS), 204, 205
Behavioral genetics
adoption studies, 165–166
attitudes/preferences, 169–170
biological domain, 629
drinking/smoking, 170, 172
family studies, 163
goals of, 158–159
marriage, 172–173
methods used in, 161–166
molecular genetics, 178–180
personality traits, and, 
167–169
research findings, 167–173
selective breeding, 162
sexual orientation, 171–172
shared vs. nonshared 
environmental 
influences, 173–175
twin studies, 163–165
Behavioral inhibition system (BIS), 
204, 205, 596
Beliefs, 19
Bell Curve, The (Herrnstein/
Murray), 397
Belongingness needs, 350, 353
Beta press, 336
Big Five traits. See Five-factor 
model
Biological Basis of Personality, The
(Eysenck), 201
Biological domain, 14, 628–630
Bipolarity, 72
BIS, 204, 205, 596
Blame Externalization, 168
Blindsight, 268
Borderline personality disorder, 
599–601
BPM, 192
Brahman Indians, 531
Brain, 193–199
connections, 197
electrical activity, 199
function, 194–195
structure, 195
Brain asymmetry, 217–220
Bullying, 133
Byproducts of adaptations, 228
C
CAH, 519
California Adult Q-Sort, 82
California Psychological Inventory 
(CPI), 26
personnel selection, 113–114
Saroka v. Dayton Hudson, 112
workplace personality testing, 
112
California Psychological Inventory 
Dominance scale, 30
California Q-Sort, 31
CAPS, 392–393
Cardiac reactivity, 193
Cardiovascular activity, 192–193, 
199
Cardiovascular disease, 577–582
Carelessness, 102
Case studies, 49–51, 52
Case study method, 49
Castration anxiety, 285
Casual sex, 508
Categorical approach, 403
Categorical view, 589
Cattell’s 16 Personality Factor 
System. See 16 Personality 
Factor (16 PF) 
questionnaire
Causal attribution, 388
CAVE, 570
Character traits, 72
Chemistry.com, 88
Chesapeake Bay retriever, 162
Children
achievement motivation, and, 
343–344
attachment during childhood, 
320–323
temperament, and sex 
differences, 501–503
Child sexual abuse (CSA), 
309–310
Chronic stress, 568
Circadian rhythms, 212, 212
Circumplex taxonomies of 
personality, 71–73
Note: Boldface page numbers indicate key terms. Italic page numbers indicate figures or tables.
Final PDF to printer732 SUBJECT INDEX
lar31869_sidx_731-738 732 11/07/22 04:18 PM
Civil Rights Act of 1964, 108–111
Client-centered therapy, 361
Cognition, 371, 587
Cognitive-Affective Personality 
System (CAPS), 392–393
Cognitive approaches to 
personality, 370
Cognitive-experiential domain, 14, 
16–17, 631–632
Cognitive schema, 425
Cognitive social learning approach, 
390
Cognitive theories, 421–424
Cognitive triad, 425
Cognitive unconscious view, 307
Cohort effects, 143
Coldheartedness, 168
Collectivism, 537
Comorbidity, 607–608, 617
Compatibility and integration 
across domains and levels, 
20
Competitive achievement 
motivation, 579
Complementary needs theory, 473
Comprehensiveness, 19
Conditional positive regard, 357
Conditions of worth, 357–358
Confirmatory bias, 302
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia 
(CAH), 519
Conscientiousness, 79
academic achievement, 
147–148
in five-factor model, 82, 84
marital satisfaction, 477
marriage partner selection, 471
mate selection, 474–475
mean level stability, 135, 136, 
137
models of personality, 560
rank order stability, 134
sex differences, 505
social interaction, and, 491
stability coefficients, 134
Conscious goals, 372
Conscious mind, 266
Consensus, 306
Consistency, 91
Constructive memory, 302
Constructs, 381
Construct validity, 42
Content, 406
Content Analysis of Verbatim 
Explanations (CAVE), 570
Continuity, 457
Contrast, 458
Conventionality, 77
Convergent validity, 42
Coping with stress, 570–577
attributional style, 570–571
disclosure, 575–577
dispositional optimism, 
571–573
management of emotions, 
573–575
positive emotions, and, 
578–579
self-esteem, and, 452–453
Core conditions, 361
Coronary artery, 582
Correlational method, 46
Correlational studies, 46–49, 51
Correlation coefficient, 46
Cortisol, 199, 218
Counterbalancing, 44–45
Courage, 6
Courage to Heal, The (Bass/Davis), 
300
Covert integrity test, 107
COVID-19, 555–556, 562–564
CPI. See California Psychological 
Inventory (CPI)
CPI Independence scale, 142, 142
Creating positive events, 578
Criterion validity, 42
Criticism, 610
Cross-cultural marriages, 532–533
Cross-cultural universality, 63
CSA, 309–310
Cultural context of intelligence, 
396
Cultural personality psychology, 
527
Cultural universals, 542–550
Cultural variations, 528
Culture, 317, 524–551
cultural personality 
psychology, 527
cultural universals, 542–550
cultural violations, 526–527
evoked, 527–533. See also
Evoked culture
moral values, and, 531–533
personality disorders, and, 
590–591
self-concept, and, 533–536
self-enhancement, and, 
536–537
social and cultural domain, 
632–633
transmitted, 531–542. See also
Transmitted culture 
within-culture 
variations
Culture of honor, 530
D
Daily hassles, 567–568
Dark triad personality, 491
Deception, acts of, 62
Decision rules, 6
Deductive reasoning approach, 
231
Defense mechanisms, 277–283
denial, 277–278
displacement, 278–281
in everyday life, 283
projection, 281–282
rationalization, 281
reaction formation, 281
repression, 277
sublimation, 282–283
Defensive pessimism, 456
Deliberation-without-awareness, 
268
Denial, 277–278
Density of distributions of states, 
100
Dependability, 471
Dependent personality disorder, 
612–613, 613
Depression, 424–427
Beck’s cognitive theory, 
424–426
biology of, 426–427
diathesis-stress model, 424
signs of, 424
Depressive symptoms, 175
Desensitization process, 597
Developmental crisis, 312
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of 
Mental Disorders (DSM-5),
589–590, 622
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of 
Mental Disorders 
(DSM-IV), 589, 622
Diathesis-stress model, 424
Die Hard, 353
Differential diagnosis, 617
Differential gene reproduction, 226
Differential psychology, 89
Digit ratio, 188–189
Dimensional approach, 403–406, 
405
Dimensional model of personality 
disorders, 618–619
Dimensional view, 590
Directionality problem, 49
Disclosure, 575–577
Discriminant validity, 42
Disorder, 586. See also Personality 
disorders
Disparate impact, 111
Displacement, 278–281
Dispositional domain, 14, 15,
627–628
Dispositional optimism, 571–573
Distortion, 358
Divorce, 145–146
Dizygotic (DZ) twins, 164
DNA molecules, 156
Domains of knowledge, 14–18, 
627–634
adjustment domain, 18, 
634–635
biological domain, 15–16, 
628–630
cognitive-experiential domain, 
16–17, 631–632
defined, 14
domain, 15, 627–628
dispositional domain, 15, 
627–628
intrapsychic domain, 16, 631
social and cultural domain, 17, 
632–633
Domain specificity, 229
Dominance, 30, 60, 140
Dopamine, 211
Doubt, 312
DRD4 gene, 178–179, 212
Dream analysis, 288
Drinking, 170, 172, 174–175
Drug use, 146–147
DSM-5. See Diagnostic and 
Statistical Manual of 
Mental Disorders (DSM-5)
Dweck’s theory of mastery 
orientation, 391–392
Dynamic, 334
DZ twins, 164
E
Early childhood attachment, 
320–323
Eating, 265
Eccentric cluster of personality 
disorders, 604–610
Edge, The, 353
Education
female underprediction effect, 
and, 110
intelligence, and, 393–397
personality coherence, and, 
147–148
EEG. See Electroencephalograph 
(EEG)
Effective polygyny, 240, 241
Effect size, 499–500
Efficiency, 227
EFT, 373, 374
Egalitarianism, 528–529
Ego, 271–273, 274, 275
Ego depletion, 272–273
Ego psychology, 308–319
eHarmony.com, 88
Erikson’s eight stages of 
development, 311–316. 
See also Erikson’s 
eight stages of 
development
Horney’s views, 317–318
self/narcissism, 318–319
Electra complex, 285
Electrodermal activity, 191–192, 
199
Electrodes, 191
Electroencephalograph (EEG), 
198, 199, 202, 217, 218
Electronic recording devices, 32
Embedded Figures Test (EFT), 
373, 374
Emotional disturbance, 146–147
Emotional infidelity, 244
Emotional inhibition, 573
Emotional instability, 478
Emotional intelligence, 359, 394
Emotional Intelligence (Goleman), 
394
Emotional investment, 508–509
Emotional Stability, 79–80
academic achievement, 147
evocation of anger and upset 
in partners, 483
marital satisfaction, 474
mate selection, 475
sex differences, 505
Emotional states, 403
Emotional trait, 403
Emotions, 400–435, 402
affect intensity, 429–433
borderline personality 
disorder, 599
content of emotional life, 
406–407
cultural universals, 545–546
interaction of content and 
style, 433–434
Final PDF to printerSUBJECT INDEX 733
lar31869_sidx_731-738 733 11/07/22 04:18 PM
issues in research, 403–406
management of, 573–575
personality disorders, and, 587
pleasant, 407–419. See also
Pleasant emotions
sex differences, 506–507
unpleasant, 419–429. See also
Unpleasant emotions
Empathic listening, 361
Empathic understanding, 361
Empathizing, 509
Empathy, 361, 362, 363, 587
Employment screening, 108–109
Employment setting personality 
testing
Hogan Personality Inventory, 
118–120
legal issues, 108–112
Myers-Briggs Type Indicator, 
114–118
personnel selection, 113–114
Encode the information, 304
Enduring psychological traits/ 
mechanisms, 7–8
Enron, 594–595
Entitlement, 602
Environment, 9–10, 249
Environmentality, 160
Environmental view, 180
Envy, 603
Equal environments assumption, 
165
Erikson’s eight stages of 
development, 311,
311–316
autonomy vs. shame and 
doubt, 312
generativity vs. stagnation, 
315–316
identity vs. role confusion, 
312–313
industry vs. inferiority, 312
initiative vs. guilt, 312
integrity vs. despair, 316
intimacy vs. isolation, 
314–315
trust vs. mistrust, 312
Erratic cluster of personality 
disorders, 593–604
Esteem needs, 350, 353
Eugenics, 157
European Society of Personality 
Psychology, 626
Evocation, 8, 97–98, 480–484
aggression/hostility, 481
of anger and upset in partners, 
481–484
expectancy confirmation, 
485–486
of likability/pleasure/pain, 485
Evoked cooperation, 528–529
Evoked culture, 527–531
conformity, and cultural 
differences, 530–531
evoked cooperation, 528–529
honors/insults, 529–530
mating strategies, 525529
Evoked EEG, 199
Evolutionary byproducts, 228
Evolutionary noise, 228
Evolutionary perspectives on 
personality, 222–255
adaptations, 227–228
evolutionary psychology, 228–
231. See also
Evolutionary 
psychology
genes, 226
human nature, 232–238
inclusive fitness theory, 226
individual differences, 248–
253. See also
Individual differences
natural selection, 224–225
sex differences, 238–248. See 
also Sex differences
sexual selection, 225
Evolutionary-predicted sex 
differences, 238
Evolutionary psychology, 228–231
domain specificity, 229
empirical testing of 
hypotheses, 230–231
five-factor model, and, 254
functionality, 229–230
limitations of, 255–256
numerousness, 229
premises of, 228–230
Evolutionary psychology theory, 
520–521
Exhaustion stage, 565
Expectancy confirmation, 485–486
Experience sampling, 27
Experimental methods, 44–46, 52
Explanatory style, 388–389
Expressed behavior, 59
Expression of the Emotions in Man 
and Animals, The
(Darwin), 402, 545
Expressiveness, 513
External locus of control, 383
Extraversion, 68, 78, 135, 136
behavioral genetic research 
findings, 167
in five-factor model, 83
marital satisfaction, 476
mate selection, 474, 474–475
mean level stability, 136, 136
rank order stability, 134
sex differences, 503
stability coefficients, 134
Extraversion–introversion (E), 68, 
69
genotype–environment 
interaction, 175–176
physiological theories of, 
200–204
Extreme responding, 39
Eye-blink startle method, 596
Eyeblink startle reflex technique, 
33
Eysenck’s biological theory, 
420–421
Eysenck’s hierarchical model of 
personality, 67–71
F
Face validity, 42
Factor analysis, 64
Factor loadings, 65
Failure feedback, 451
Faithfulness, 83
Fake news, 304–306
Faking, 102–103
False consensus effect, 282
False memories, 300–302
False negative, 103
False positive, 103
Familiarity, 305
Family studies, 163
Fatal Attraction, 599, 600
Fearlessness, 168
Fear of success, 317
Feedback, 451
Female underprediction effect, 110
Femininity, 317–318, 511
Femininity/masculinity scale, 140
Field dependence/independence, 
372–378
current research, 375–378
Embedded Figures Test, 373, 
374
life choices, and, 373
Five-factor model, 73–83
agreeableness, 78
brain structure, 195
comprehensiveness of, 82–83
conscientiousness, 79
correlates of factors in, 77–82
cultural universals, 546–549
emotional stability, 79–80
empirical evidence for, 74–77
evolutionary perspectives on 
personality, 254–255
extraversion, 78
identity of fifth factor in, 77
mean level stability, 137
Norman’s markers, 74–75
openness, 80–81
sex differences, 503–506, 504
Fixation, 283
Flow, 356
Fluency, 305–306
Flynn effect, 396
fMRI, 33, 194
Forced-choice questionnaire, 40
Fraternal twins, 164
Free association, 287
Free running, 213
Frequency-dependent selection, 
248, 249, 252
Frontal brain asymmetry, 218
Frustration, 579
Fully functioning person, 357
Functional analysis, 402
Functionality, 229–230
Functional magnetic resonance 
imaging (fMRI), 33, 194
Fundamental attribution error, 278
Fundamental postulate, 381
G
GAS, 565
Geen study, 203
Gender, 498
Gender differences, 317. See also
Sex differences
Gendered toys, 517
Gender norming, 111
Gender schemata, 513
Gender stereotyping, 110, 498,
514–516
General adaptation syndrome 
(GAS), 565
General intelligence, 394
Generalizability, 43
Generalized expectancies, 383
Generalized locus of control, 383
Generativity vs. stagnation stage, 
315–316
Genes, 226
Genetic junk, 156
Genetics of personality. See also
Behavioral genetics
attitudes/preferences, 169–170
behavioral genetic methods, 
161–166
controversy, 157
drinking/smoking, 170–171
environmentalist view, 180
genotype–environment 
correlation, 176–178
genotype–environment 
interaction, 175–176
heritability, 159–161
human genome, 156
marriage, 173
molecular genetics, 178–180
personality disorders, 587
personality traits, 167–169
research findings, 167–173
sexual orientation, 171–172
shared/nonshared 
environmental 
influences, 173–175
Genital stage, 286
Genotype–environment correlation, 
176–178
Genotype–environment interaction, 
175–176
Genotypic variance, 159
Global self-esteem, 449, 507–508
Global self-esteem questionnaire, 
449, 449
Goals, 387–393
Bandura’s notion of self￾efficacy, 390–391
cognitive social learning 
theory, 390–393
Dweck’s theory of mastery 
orientation, 391–392
Higgins’ theory of regulatory 
focus, 392
interpretation, 380–387
Kelly’s personal construct 
theory, 380–382
learned helplessness, 
385–387
locus of control, 382–385
Mischel’s cognitive-affective 
personality system, 
392–393
personal projects analysis, 390
Good theory, 18
GPA, 110
Grade point average (GPA), 110
Grand unifying theory, 21
Griggs v. Duke Power, 108
Grit personality trait, 146
Group differences, 11–12
Final PDF to printer734 SUBJECT INDEX
lar31869_sidx_731-738 734 11/07/22 04:18 PM
Group differences level of 
personality analysis, 128
Guilt, 595
H
Happiness, 404, 407–408. See also
Positive emotions
Harm avoidance, 211
Health
disclosure, and, 575–577
hostility, and, 579–580
personality coherence, 
148–149
Type A personality, and, 
577–582
Health behavior model, 559, 563
Health psychology, 556
Healthy neuroticism, 562
Heart disease, 577–582
Heart rate, 192
Helping, 234–235
Heritability, 159–161
individual differences, and, 
249–250
reactive, 250
Heterosexuality, 171–172
Heuristic value, 19
HEXACO model, 83–84
Hierarchy of needs, 334, 350–354
Higgins’ theory of regulatory focus, 
392
High affect intensity individuals, 
429
High-variance conditions, 528
Historical era, 542
Histrionic personality disorder, 
601–602
Hogan Assessment Systems, 
118–120
Hogan Personality Inventory 
(HPI), 118–120
Holistic explanations, 536
Homosexuality, 171–172, 589
Honesty, 106
Honesty-Humility factor, 83
Honor, 529–530
Hormonal theories, 519–520
Hostile attributional bias, 481
Hostile forces of nature, 224
Hostility, 426–429, 579–580
HPI, 117-119
5-HTT gene, 176
Human Genome Project, 156, 629
Humanistic tradition, 349
Human nature, 11, 232–238
Hypnosis, 301
I
Id, 270, 274, 275
Ideal self, 447
Identical twins, 164
Identification, 285
Identity, 313–314, 457
crises, 460–463
development of, 458–460
social. See Social identity
Identity conflict, 461
Identity confusion, 314
Identity crisis, 308
identity conflict, 461
identity deficit, 460–461
resolution of, 461–463
Identity deficit, 460–461
Identity foreclosure, 314
Identity versus role confusion 
stage, 312–313
Idiographic research, 12
Id psychology, 308
“if. . .then. . .” propositions, 393
Illness. See Health
Illness behavior model, 560, 560,
561, 564
Imagination inflation effect, 301
Immune system, 422–423
Implicit motivation, 338
Impression Management subscale, 
41
Impulsivity, 204, 594
Inclusive fitness theory, 226
Income level, and happiness, 
413–414
Independence, 533, 536–537
Independence training, 343
Independent risk factor, 579
Independent variable, 44
Individual differences, 11,
248–253
environmental triggers, 
249–250
frequency-dependant selection, 
250–253
reactively heritable, 250
Individual differences level of 
personality analysis, 128
Individualism, 536–537
Individuality in Pain and Suffering
(Petrie), 378
Inductive reasoning approach, 231
Industry vs. inferiority stage, 312
Infancy, 129
Inferiority, 312
Infidelity, 242, 243
Inflexibility, 614
Influential forces of personality, 8
Information processing, 371
Infrequency scale, 102
Inhibitory control, 501
Initiative vs. guilt stage, 313
Inkblot, 34
Inputs, 6
Insight, 290
Inspection time, 397
Instincts, 265
Institute for Personality and Social 
Research (IPSR), 28
Instrumentality, 513
Insult, 529–530
Integrity testing, 106–108
Integrity tests, 108
Integrity vs. despair stage, 316
Intellect-Openness
marital satisfaction, 476
mate selection, 474–475
sex differences, 506
social interaction, and, 491
Intelligence, 77, 393–397
Intelligence quotient (IQ) scores, 
396
Interactional model, 556, 562
Interdependence, 533, 536–537
Internal consistency reliability, 38
Internalization, 320
Internal locus of control, 383
Internet dating service, 87–89
Internet recording devices, 32
Interpersonal traits, 72
Interpretation, 372
Interpretation of Dreams, The
(Freud), 263, 288
Interpretations, 290
Inter-rater reliability, 28, 38
Intersexual selection, 225
Intimacy, 587
Intimacy needs. See Need for 
intimacy
Intimacy vs. isolation stage, 
314–315
Intrapsychic domain, 14, 16,
631
Intrapsychic environment, 10
Intrasexual competition, 225
Introversion, 68, 444
IPSR, 28
IQ scores, 396
Irresponsibility, 594, 595
Irritability, 594
Isolation, 314–315
J
Japanese culture, 535
Jealousy, 241–245, 610
Jenkins Activity Survey, 580
Job analysis, 113
Journal of Positive Psychology, 407
Journal of Research in Personality,
626
K
Kelly’s personal construct theory, 
380–382
Kinesthetic intelligence, 394
Korean culture, 537
K-strategy, 253
L
Labrador retriever, 162
Latency stage, 285
Latent content, 288
L-data, 35–36
Leadership motivation, 140
Learned helplessness, 385–387
Legal issues
Americans with Disabilities 
Act, 112
Civil Rights Act of 1964, 
108–111
disparate impact, 111
employment setting personality 
testing, 108–112
Price Waterhouse v. Hopkins,
109
race/gender norming, 111
right to privacy, 111
Ward’s Cove Packing Co. v. 
Atonio, 109
Leukocytes, 581
Lexical approach, 63–64
Lexical hypothesis, 63
Libido, 265
Lie detector, 106
Life history data, 23
Life history strategy, 253
Life instinct, 265
Life-outcome data (L-data), 35–36
Life satisfaction, 407–408
Likability, 485
Likert rating scale, 25
Limbic system, 420
Locus of control, 382–385
Longevity, 148–149
Longitudinal studies, 130
Low affect intensity individuals, 432
Low conscientiousness, 478
Low impulse control, 478
Low self-esteem persons, 451
M
Machiavellianism, 168, 489–490
Major life events, 565–567
Manie sans delire, 588
Manifest content, 288
Manipulation, 9, 44, 98, 486–491
Machiavellianism, 489–490
personality predictors of 
tactics, 488–491
sex differences, and, 488
taxonomy of tactics of, 
486–488
MAO, 176, 199, 209
Marital satisfaction, 145–146
Marital stability, 145–146
Marriage, 172–173
cross-cultural, 532–533
partner selection, 471–473
Masculinity, 317, 511
Maslow’s hierarchy of needs, 
350–356
belongingness needs, 350, 353
characteristics of self￾actualizing persons, 
355
esteem needs, 350, 353
physiological needs, 350, 352
research findings, 354
safety needs, 350, 352
self-actualization needs, 350,
353
Mate deprivation hypothesis, 231
Mate guarding, 62
Mate preferences, 246–248
Materialism, 413
Material traits, 72
Mate selection, 473–475
Mate value, 476–477
Mating strategy, 252, 523, 529
Maturity principle, 137
Maximalist position, 501
MBTI. See Myers-Briggs Type 
Indicator (MBTI)
McKenna v. Fargo, 112
Mean, 45
Mean level change, 125
Mean level stability, 125, 135–138
Mechanical recording devices, 
31–32
Mediation, 559–560
Melancholia, 424–427
Memory
false, 300–302
repression, and, 299–304
Final PDF to printerSUBJECT INDEX 735
lar31869_sidx_731-738 735 11/07/22 04:18 PM
Men. See Sex differences
Mental traits, 72
MEQ, 216, 216
Metaverse, 377
Minimalist position, 501
Minnesota Multiphasic Personality 
Inventory (MMPI), 113
Americans with Disabilities 
Act, and, 112
personnel selection, 113
Saroka v. Dayton Hudson, 112
Minnesota Twin Study, 168
Mischel’s Cognitive-Affective 
Personality System 
(CAPS), 392–393
Mistrust, 312
MMPI. See Minnesota Multiphasic 
Personality Inventory 
(MMPI)
Modeling, 391
Moderator, 558
Modesty, 504
Molecular genetics, 178–180, 629
Monoamine oxidase (MAO), 176, 
199, 209
Monozygotic (MZ) twins, 163
Monster: The Autobiography of an 
L.A. Gang Member
(Shakur), 586
Mood induction, 416
Mood variability, 433
Moral anxiety, 276
Moral insanity, 588
Moral values, 531–533
Moratorium, 314
Morningness–eveningness, 
212–217
Morningness–Eveningness 
Questionnaire (MEQ), 
216, 216
Motivated unconscious view, 307
Motivation, 586–587
Motives, 330–364
achievement, 339–344. See 
also Need for 
achievement
apperception, and, 336–338
environmental press, and, 
335–336
needs, and, 334–335
power, 344–347. See also Need 
for power
self-actualization, 348–363. 
See also
Self-actualization
MPQ, 177
Multidimensional Personality 
Questionnaire (MPQ), 
177
Multiple intelligences theory, 394
Multiple social personalities, 28
Murray’s hierarchy of needs, 334, 
335
Myers-Briggs Type Indicator 
(MBTI), 114
business setting personality 
testing, 114–118
eight fundamental preferences, 
114
MZ twins, 163
N
nAch scores, 339–341
Narcissism, 318–319
personality change, 144
social interaction, and, 493
Narcissistic paradox, 318
Narcissistic personality disorder, 
603–604
Naturalistic observation, 29
Natural selection, 224–225
Nature–nurture debate, 161, 177
Need for achievement, 339–344
doing things better, 339–340
increasing the need for, 341
promoting motivation in 
children, 343–344
sex differences, 342–343
Need for achievement (nAch) 
scores, 339–341
Need for intimacy, 347–348
Need for power, 344–347
health status, and, 345–346
impact on others, 344–345
research findings, 345
sex differences, 345
war and peace, and, 346–347
Needs, 332, 334, 335
Need to belong, 232–234
Negative affectivity, 502
mean level stability, 136, 138
Negative evaluation, 82, 83
Negative identity, 314
Negligent hiring, 108
Neo-analytic movement, 299–308
childhood sexual abuse, 
309–310
false memory, 300–302
memory/repression, 299–304
views on the unconscious, 
306–308
NEO Personality Inventory, 26
Neuroimaging, 199
Neuroscience, 193
Neurotic anxiety, 276
Neuroticism, 420–424
behavioral genetic research 
findings, 167
in five-factor model, 85
marriage/divorce, 147
mean level stability, 136, 138
rank order stability, 135
stability coefficients, 134
Neuroticism-emotional stability 
(N), 68, 69, 70
Neurotic paradox, 610
Neurotransmitters, 209, 210–212
Neurotransmitter theory of 
depression, 426
Nicomachean Ethics, The
(Aristotle), 3
nInt. See Need for intimacy
Nomothetic research, 12
Noncontent responding, 39
Nonshared environmental 
influences, 173–175
Non-Western cultures, 547
Norepinephrine, 211
Novelty seeking, 211
nPow. See Need for power
Numerousness, 229
O
Objectifying cognition, 371
Objective anxiety, 276
Objective self-awareness, 442
Object relations theory, 319–327
adult relationships, 323–327
early childhood attachment, 
320–323
Observer report, 23
Observer-report data (O-data), 27–28
Obsessive–compulsive disorder 
(OCD), 614–615
Obsessive–compulsive personality 
disorder (OCPD), 614–615
Occupational preferences, 170
O-data, 27–28
Oedipal conflict, 285
okcupid.com, 88
Online dating service, 87–89
Openness, 80–81
academic achievement, 147
in five-factor model, 77, 85
mean level stability, 136
rank order stability, 135
stability coefficients, 134
Optimal level of arousal, 207–208
Optimism, 571
Optimistic explanatory style, 388
Oral stage, 284
Organized psychological traits/
mechanisms, 7
Orthogonality, 73
Ought self, 447
Outliers (Gladwell), 93
Outputs, 6
Overt integrity test, 107
P
Pain, 485
Pain tolerance, 378
Paranoid personality disorder, 
609–610
Parsimony, 20
Passive genotype–environment 
correlation, 176
Pathological jealousy, 610
Paxil, 211, 427
Penis envy, 285, 314
People-things dimension, 509
Percentage of variance, 159
Perception, 8, 371, 372–380
field dependence, 372–378
pain tolerance, 378
reducer/augmenter theory, 
378–379
Perceptual sensitivity, 502
Personal constructs, 381
Personality, 4
adaptation, and, 9
contemporary research in, 
13–14
defined, 4–10
dynamics of, psychoanalytic 
theory, 276–283
emotion and. See Emotions
environment, and, 9–10
genetics. See Behavioral 
genetics; Genetics of 
personality
goals and. See Goals
grand theories of, 12–13
health and. See Health
influential forces, 8
interpretation. See
Interpretation
perception, and, 372–380. See 
also Perception
person–environment 
interaction, 8–9
prediction, and, 105–120
psychological mechanisms, 
6–7
structure of, psychoanalytic 
theory, 270–275
traits, and, 5–6
Personality analysis, 10–12
differences among groups, 11
human nature, 10
individual differences, 11–12
individual uniqueness, 12
Personality and Assessment
(Mischel), 92, 392
Personality assessment
employment settings, 108–112. 
See also Employment
life-outcome data, 35–36
observer-report data, 27–29
self-report data, 24–27
setting personality testing 
issues in, 37–38, 
101–105
test data, 29–35. See also Test 
data (T-data)
Personality change, 127, 139–144
ambition, 140
cohort effects, 143–144
femininity, 140–142
independence and traditional 
roles, 142–143
intentionally change, 144–145
predicting, 149–150
self-esteem, 139, 141–142
sensation seeking, 140
Personality coherence, 125–127, 
144–149
academic achievement, and, 
147–148
alcoholism, and, 146–147
health, retirement/longevity, 
148–149
marriage/divorce, 145–146
predicting personality change, 
149–150
religiousness/spirituality, 147
substance abuse, and, 147
Personality-descriptive nouns, 83
Personality development, 124
Personality disorders, 584–623, 
591, 620–621
abnormality, defined, 588–589
antisocial personality disorder, 
593–595
anxious cluster of, 610–615
borderline personality 
disorder, 597–600
building blocks of, 586–588
causes of, 619–622
comorbidity of, 608–609
conceptualization of, 588–592
Final PDF to printer736 SUBJECT INDEX
lar31869_sidx_731-738 736 11/07/22 04:18 PM
Personality disorders,—Cont.
defined, 591–592
dependent personality 
disorder, 612–613
Diagnostic and Statistical 
Manual of Mental 
Disorders, 589–590
dimensional model of, 
618–619
eccentric cluster of, 604–610
erratic cluster of, 593–603
gender differences, and, 
617–618
histrionic personality disorder, 
601–602
narcissistic personality 
disorder, 602–603
obsessive–compulsive 
personality disorder, 
613–615
paranoid personality disorder, 
609–610
prevalence of, 616–617
schizoid personality disorder, 
604–605
schizotypal personality 
disorder, 604, 606, 
609
Personality-illness connection, 
562–564
Personality measurement issues, 
101–105
Barnum statements, 104–105
carelessness, 102
faking on questionnaires, 
102–103
fallibility, 37–38
integrity testing, 106–108
links among data sources, 36
Personality measures
evaluation of, 38–43
generalizability, 43
reliability, 38–39
response sets, 39–41
validity, 42–43
Personality research. See also
Domains of knowledge
act frequency research 
program, 60
on affect intensity, 432–433
on behavioral genetics, 
167–173
on emotions, 403–406
on field dependence/
independence, 375–
378, 376
on genetics of personality, 
167–173
idiographic, 12
on Maslow’s hierarchy of 
needs, 354
on need for power, 345
nomothetic, 12
on self-esteem, 449–457
Personality Research Form, 102
Personality scale, 25
Personality stability
adulthood, and, 132–135
childhood, and, 130–132
infancy, and, 129–130
mean level, 135–138
rank order, 132–135
Personality tests, 101
Personality theories
attraction similarity theory, 
473
Beck’s cognitive theory, 424–
426, 425
complementary needs theory, 
473
Dweck’s theory of mastery 
orientation, 391–392
evolutionary psychology 
theory, 520–521
Eysenck’s biological theory, 
420–421
good theory, 18
grand unifying theory, 21
Higgins’ theory of regulatory 
focus, 392
hormonal theories, 519–520
inclusive fitness theory, 226
Kelly’s personal construct 
theory, 380–382
neurotransmitter theory of 
depression, 425
object relations theory. See
Object relations theory
psychoanalytic theory. See
Psychoanalytic theory
psychosexual stage theory, 283
reducer/augmenter theory, 
378–379
reinforcement sensitivity 
theory, 204
role of, 18–19
scientific standards for 
evaluating, 19–20
sex differences, 516–521
socialization theory, 517–518
social role theory, 518
ultimate grand theory, 21
Personality Through Perception
(Witkin), 372
Personalizing cognition, 371
Personal project, 390
Personal Project Analysis method, 
390
Person–environment interaction, 8
Personnel selection, 106
Person–situation interaction, 93,
94–98
Perspective taking, 442
Pessimism, 571
Pessimistic explanatory style, 388
PET, 194
Phallic stage, 285
Phenotypic variance, 159
Physical aggressiveness. See
Aggression
Physical traits, 72
Physiological data, 33–34
Physiological measures, 191–200
brain activity, 193–199
cardiovascular activity, 
192–193
electrodermal activity, 
191–192
in personality research, 199
Physiological needs, 350, 352
Physiological systems, 186
Physiological theories of 
personality, 220–221
brain asymmetry and effective 
style, 217–220
extraversion–introversion, 
200–204
morningness–eveningness, 
212–217
neurotransmitters, and 
personality, 210–212
sensation seeking, 207–210
sensitivity to reward/
punishment, 204–207
Pleasant emotions, 407–419
benefits of happiness, 408–410
happiness, defined, 406
happy people, 410–412
money, and happiness, 
413–414
personality, and well-being, 
415–419
Pleasure, 485
Pleasure principle, 270
Polygraph, 106
Population level of personality 
analysis, 127
Positive emotions, 578–579
Positive evaluation, 82, 83
Positive illusions, 408
Positive Illusions (Taylor), 41
Positive reappraisal, 578
Positive regard, 357
Positive self-regard, 358
Positron emission tomography 
(PET), 194
Possible selves, 447
Postmodernism, 381
Posttraumatic stress disorder 
(PTSD), 568
Power needs. See Need for power
Power stress, 346
Precision, 227
Preconscious mind, 266
Predictive validity, 42
Predisposition model, 560, 561, 
563
Prefrontal cortex, 421
Prejudice, 516
Prenatal testosterone exposure, 
188
Press, 335–336
Prevalence, 616
Prevention focus, 392
Price Waterhouse v. Hopkins, 109
Primary appraisal, 569
Primary process thinking, 270
Priming, 307
Prince, The (Machiavelli), 489
Private self-concept, 441
Problem-focused coping, 578
Profligate impulsive behaviors, 345
Projection, 281–282
Projective hypothesis, 289
Projective techniques, 34–35, 288–
289, 290
Promotion focus, 392
Prototypicality judgment, 60–61
Prozac, 211, 427
Psychic energy, 264
Psychoanalysis, 286–291
dreams, 288
free association, 287
importance of, 291–292
personality, and, 286–291
process of, 289–291
projective techniques, 288–
289, 290
techniques for revealing the 
unconscious, 287–289
Psychoanalytic theory, 260–295
contemporary issues, 296–328
defense mechanisms, 277–283. 
See also Defense 
mechanisms
dynamics of personality in, 
276–283
ego psychology, 308–319. See 
also Ego psychology
Freud, Sigmund, 263–264, 
292–294
fundamental assumptions of, 
264–270
importance of psychoanalysis, 
291–292
neo-analytic movement, 299–
308. See also Neo￾analytic movement
object relations theory, 319–
323. See also Object 
relations theory
personality, and 
psychoanalysis, 
286–291
structure of personality in, 
270–275
Psychological mechanisms, 6–7
Psychological relief, 244
Psychological traits, 5
enduring, 7–8
organized, 7
Psychological types, 115
Psychology of Sex Differences, The
(Maccoby/Jacklyn), 
498–499
Psychopathic personality traits, 
168, 588
Psychopathology, 589
Psychopathology of Everyday Life, 
The (Freud), 267
Psychopathy, 252, 595, 596–597. 
See also Personality 
disorders
Psychopathy Checklist, 596, 598
Psychosexual stage theory, 283
Psychosocial conflicts, 312
Psychoticism (P), 68, 69, 70–71
PTSD, 568
Punishment, 204–207
P-value, 45
Q
Questionnaire, 40
R
Race norming, 111
Random assignment, 44
Random variations, 228
Rank order stability, 91, 124–125, 
132–135
Final PDF to printerSUBJECT INDEX 737
lar31869_sidx_731-738 737 11/07/22 04:18 PM
Rationalization, 281
Reaction formation, 281
Reactive genotype–environment 
correlation, 176–178
Reactive heritability, 252
“Reality of Repressed Memories, 
The” (Loftus), 300
Reality principle, 271
Recall the information, 304
Reciprocal causality, 410
Recklessness, 594
Recording of act performance, 61
Reducer/augmenter theory, 378,
378–379
Reinforcement sensitivity theory, 204
Reliability, 38–39
adaptations, 227
Myers-Briggs Type Indicator 
(MBTI), 116
Religiosity, 83, 147
Remorse, 595
Repeated lying, 594
Repeated measurement, 38
Repetition, 304–305
Repression, 277, 279–280
Research. See Personality research
Research designs, 43–52
case studies, 49–51
choosing between, 51–52
correlational studies, 46–49
experimental methods, 44–46
Resentment, 609
Resistance, 290
Resistance stage, 565
Response sets, 39–41
Responsibility training, 345
Restricted sexual strategy, 252
Return of Martin Guerre, The, 459
Reverse Flynn effect, 396
Revised Reducer Augmenter Scale 
(RRAS), 379
Reward, 204–207
Reward dependence, 211
RFT, 373
Right to privacy, 112
Rite of passage, 314
Rod and Frame Test (RFT), 373
RRAS, 379
Rumination, 510
S
Sadness, 404
Safety needs, 350, 352
Saroka v. Dayton Hudson, 112
SAT, 110, 147, 394
Satisfaction with Life Scale, 409
Schizoid personality disorder, 
604–605
Schizotypal personality disorder, 
604, 606, 609
Scholastic Aptitude Test (SAT), 
110, 147, 394
Science, 180–181
Scientific standards for evaluating 
personality theories, 19–20
S-data, 24–27
Secondary appraisal, 569
Secondary process thinking, 274
Securely attached group, 322
Secure relationship style, 323
SE-IAT, 450
Selective breeding, 162
Selective placement, 166
Self, 280
descriptive component of, 
439–448
evaluative component of, 
448–457
identity crises, 460–463. See 
also Identity crisis
identity development, 458–460
nature of identity, 458
protecting vs. enhancing, 
453–457
social component of, 
457–463
Self-actualization, 348–363
Self-actualization need, 350, 353
Self-attributed motivation, 338
Self-complexity, 453
Self-concept, 437
cultural differences, and, 
533–536
development of, 442–447
personality disorders, and, 587
private, 441
self-schemata, and, 443–447
Self-Deceptive Enhancement 
subscale, 41
Self-efficacy, 390
Self-enhancement, 538–539
Self-esteem, 139, 448–457
coping with negative events, 
452–453
global, 449
implicit measure of, 450
narcissistic personality 
disorder, 602–603
research on, 449–457
sex differences, 507–508
six myths of, 454–455
variability of, 456–457
Self-Esteem Implicit Association 
Test (SE-IAT), 450
Self-esteem variability, 141–142, 
456–457
Self-fulfilling prophecy, 426
Self-guides, 447
Self-handicapping, 80–81, 456
“Self-Portrait with Yellow Christ” 
(Gauguin), 360
Self-preservation instincts, 265
Self-recognition in the mirror test, 
439
Self-report, 23
Self-report data (S-data), 24–27
Self-schemata, 443–447
Self-serving biases, 318
Sensation reducing/augmenting, 
378–380
Sensation seeking, 140, 207–210
Sensation-Seeking Scale (SSS), 
140, 208
Sensory deprivation, 206
Separation anxiety, 321
Serotonin, 211
7-repeat (7R) allele, 179
Sex differences, 238–248, 497
aggression, and, 239–241
androgyny, 509–514
consenting to sex with 
stranger, 246–247
depression, and, 510
desire for sexual variety, and, 
245–246
effect size of, 499–500
emotions, and, 506–507
evolutionary-predicted, 238
evolutionary psychology 
theory, 520–521
five-factor model, and, 503–506
gender stereotypes, 514–516
history of the study of, 
498–499
hormonal theories, 519–520
integrated theoretical 
perspective, 521
jealousy, and, 241–245
manipulation tactics, and, 488
mate preferences, and, 246–248
maximalist position, 501
minimalist position, 501
need for achievement, 342–343
need for power, 345
people-things dimension, 509
personality disorders, 593, 
617–618
self-esteem, and, 507–508
sexuality/mating, and, 
508–509
socialization theory, 517
social learning theory, 517
social role theory, 518
temperament in children, 
501–503
theories of, 516–521
Sexiness, 83
Sexual abuse, 309–310
Sexual dimorphism, 239–241
Sexual infidelity, 244
Sexual instincts, 265
Sexuality
five-factor model, 508–509
Freud’s dream analysis, 288
Sexually provocative behavior, 601
Sexual orientation, 171–172
Sexual selection, 225
Sexual variety, 245–246
Shame, 312
Shared environmental influences, 
173–175
Shyness, 479–480
Silent treatment, 491
Situational selection, 8, 96–97, 
470–480
breakup of couples, and, 478–479
marital satisfaction, 477
marriage partner selection, 
471–473
mate selection, 473–477
shyness, and, 479–480
Situational specificity, 94
Situationism, 92, 93
16 Personality Factor (16PF) 
questionnaire, 113
Skin conductance, 191–192
Smiling, 504
SM-IV. See Diagnostic and 
Statistical Manual of 
Mental Disorders (DSM-IV)
Smoking, 170–172, 174–175
Social and cultural domain, 14, 17,
632–633
Social anxiety, 232, 444–447
Social attention, 78
Social categories, 514
Social class, 541
Social comparison, 441
Social desirability, 39
Social environment, 9
Social identity, 437, 457–463
development of, 458–460
identity conflict, 461
identity crises, 460–463
identity deficit, 460–461
nature of, 458
Social interaction, 468–495
evocation, 480–486. See also
Evocation
manipulation, 486–491. See 
also Manipulation
narcissism, and, 493. See also
Narcissism
overview, 492–494
selection. See also Situational 
selection
Socialization theory, 517–518
Social learning theory, 517
Social power, 317
Social rejection/exclusion, 234
Social role theory, 518
Society for Personality and Social 
Psychology, 626
Sociosexual orientation, 66
So Ordered: Making Partner the 
Hard Way (Hopkins), 111
Source expertise, 305
Special design, 227
Spirituality, 83, 147
Spreading activation model of 
memory, 302
SSS, 140, 208
Stability, 90–91
Stability coefficients, 131
Stability of personality. See
Personality stability
Stage model of development, 312
Stagnation, 315–316
Standard deviation, 45
Standards for evaluating 
personality theories, 19–20
State levels, 337
Statistical approach, 63, 64–65
Statistically significant difference, 45
Stereotypes. See Gender 
stereotyping
Strange situation procedure, 321
Stress, 556. See also Coping with 
stress
acute, 568
chronic, 568
concept of, 564–569
daily hassles, 567–568
major life events, 565–567
posttraumatic stress disorder 
(PTSD), 568
primary/secondary appraisal, 
569
traumatic, 568–569
varieties of, 568–569
Final PDF to printer738 SUBJECT INDEX
lar31869_sidx_731-738 738 11/07/22 04:18 PM
Stress Immunity, 168
Stressors, 565
Strong situation, 95
Structured personality tests, 24
Stubbornness, 614
Student Stress Test, 566, 566
Studying, 564
Style, 406
Sublimation, 282–283
Subliminal perception, 307
Substance abuse, 146–147
Superego, 275
Superiority, 602
Surgency, 502
Symbols, 288
Synapse, 209
Synonym frequency, 63
Systemizing, 509
T
Taking Sides: Clashing Views in 
Personality Psychology
(Newman/Larsen), 292
Talents, in five-factor model, 77
Target Stores, 112
TAT, 336–338
Taxonomy, 67–85, 486
T-data. See Test data (T-data)
Telemetry, 191
Temperament, 129–130
Temperament traits, 72
Temper tantrums, 149
Tender-mindedness, 4
10 Simple Solutions for Building 
Self-Esteem (Schiraldi), 
507
Testability, 19–20
Test data (T-data), 29–35
fMRI, 33
mechanical recording devices, 
31–32
physiological data, 33–34
projective techniques, 34–35
Testosterone, 188, 199, 515, 516, 
519, 520
Test–retest reliability, 38
Thanatos, 265
Thematic Apperception Test 
(TAT), 336–338
Theoretical approach, 66
Theoretical bridge, 191
Theoretical constructs, 42
Theories, 19. See also Personality 
theories
beliefs, contrasted, 19
good theory, 18
Third variable problem, 49
Thus Spoke Zarathustra
(Nietzsche), 316
Time urgency, 579
Title VII, Civil Rights Act of 1964, 
108-109
Tofranil, 427
Traditionalism, 168
Trait-descriptive adjectives, 4
Trait levels, 337
Traits, 56–85
act frequency formulation of, 
60–63
attitude, 72
behavioral genetic research 
findings, 167–169
character, 72
defined, 58
identifying, 63–67
as internal causal properties, 
58–59
interpersonal, 72
manifestations of, 125
mental, 72
physical, 72
as purely descriptive 
summaries, 59
taxonomies of personality, 
67–68
temperament, 72
Transactional model, 558, 559, 
561, 562–563
Transference, 98, 290
Transmitted culture, 531–533
collectivism/individualism, 
536–537
interdependence-independence 
concepts, 536–537
moral values, and cultural 
differences, 531–533
self-concept, and cultural 
differences, 533–536
self-enhancement, and cultural 
differences, 538–539
within-culture variations, 
541–542
Traumatic stress, 568–569
Triangulation, 38
Tridimensional personality model, 
211
Trust, 503
Trust vs. mistrust stage, 312
TST, 24, 25, 534, 550
Twenty Statements Test (TST), 24, 
25, 534, 550
Twin studies, 163–165
Type A personality, 193, 577–582
Type B personality, 577
U
Ultimate grand theory of 
personality psychology, 21
Unabomber, 607
Unconditional positive regard, 358
Unconscious decision making, 
268–269
Unconscious mind, 266
Unconscious motivation, 265–266
Uniform Guidelines on Employee 
Selection Procedures, 111
Universal emotions, 236–238
Unpleasant emotions, 419–429
anger proneness/hostility, 
427–429
Beck’s cognitive theory, 424–426
cognitive theories, 421–424
depression/melancholia, 
424–427
diathesis-stress model, 424
Eysenck’s biological theory, 
420–421
neuroticism, 420–424
Unrestricted mating strategy, 252
Unstructured personality tests, 24
V
Validity, 42–43
Validity coefficients, 131
Values, 181
Violation of desire, 478
Violence, 428
Violent crimes, and sex differences, 
504
W
Ward’s Cove Packing Co. v. Atonio,
109
Wechsler Intelligence Scale for 
Children Revised, 394
Western cultures, 547
Whipping boys, 133
Whorfian hypothesis of linguistic 
relativity, 546
Wish fulfillment, 271
Within-culture variations, 541–542
Within the individual, 7
Women. See Sex differences
Working models, 322
Workplace testing. See
Employment setting 
personality testing
X
Xenophobia, 228
Y
Yanomamö Indians, 63–64, 525, 
528
Yanomamö of Venezuela, 17
Z
Zoloft, 211, 427
Final PDF to printer
