Joaquín M. Campos Rosa
Drug Design and ActionAlso of interest
Pharmaceutical Chemistry.
Volume : Drugs and Their Biological Targets
Joaquín M. Campos Rosa, planned 
ISBN ----, e-ISBN ----
Organozinc Derivatives and Transition Metal Catalysts.
Formation of C-C Bonds by Cross-coupling
Janine Cossy (Ed.), 
ISBN ----, e-ISBN ----
Bioorganometallic Chemistry
Wolfgang Weigand, Ulf-Peter Apfel (Eds.), 
ISBN ----, e-ISBN ----
Chemical Drug Design
Girish Kumar Gupta, Vinod Kumar (Eds.), 
ISBN ----, e-ISBN ----Joaquín M. Campos Rosa
Pharmaceutical
Chemistry
Volume 1: Drug Design and Action
2nd EditionAuthor
Prof. Joaquín M. Campos Rosa
Department of Pharmaceutical and Organic Chemistry
University of Granada
Campus de Cartuja
18071 Granada
Spain
jmcampos@ugr.es
ISBN 978-3-11-131654-3
e-ISBN (PDF) 978-3-11-131690-1
e-ISBN (EPUB) 978-3-11-131721-2
Library of Congress Control Number: 2023946629
Bibliographic information published by the Deutsche Nationalbibliothek
The Deutsche Nationalbibliothek lists this publication in the Deutsche Nationalbibliografie;
detailed bibliographic data are available on the internet at http://dnb.dnb.de.
© 2024 Walter de Gruyter GmbH, Berlin/Boston
Cover image: alice-photo/iStock/Getty Images Plus
Typesetting: Integra Software Services Pvt. Ltd.
Printing and binding: CPI books GmbH, Leck
www.degruyter.com“The expert in anything was once a beginner”
Anonymous
“What we learn with pleasure we never forget”
Alfred Mercier (1816–1894)Preface to the first edition
Global objectives of pharmaceutical chemistry
1. To understand the interrelation between structure, physicochemical properties,
pharmacological activity, and therapeutic utility
2. To know the methods and strategies used in the generation of drugs
3. To know the interactions between drugs and their biological targets
4. To know and propose the structural modifications that affect the properties of
the drugs
5. To know the general methods and the synthetic strategies for the preparation of
drugs
6. To know the analytical and spectroscopic methods applicable to the structural
identification and elucidation of drugs, and related compounds
7. To be able to name and formulate a drug in accordance with the systematic
IUPAC nomenclature
8. To know and become able to predict the transformation of drugs in the body
9. To know and be able to estimate the risks associated with the use of reagents,
solvents and the development of processes in the chemical laboratory
10. To know how to acquire and use information related to drugs
The objective of pharmaceutical chemistry (hereinafter PC) is the chemical study of
drugs and the active ingredients of drugs in order to determine the relationship be￾tween chemical structure, physicochemical properties, reactivity, and biological re￾sponse, with the ultimate aim of providing the knowledge necessary for the creation
of new drugs. Since most of the drugs are organic in nature, PC is mainly based on the
knowledge of organic chemistry, although it requires a strong familiarity with and a
solid base in biochemistry. It is also nourished by other sciences such as (a) pharma￾cognosy, which studies natural products as a source of new active principles; (b) phar￾macology, which allows the establishment of experimental models for the evaluation
of new active principles; and (c) molecular pharmacology. The latter tries to explain
the biological effects at the molecular level, interpreting the phenomena related to
the association between a drug and the biomolecules that trigger its action, all from
the point of view of structural and physicochemical properties.
Although drug design in its origins focused primarily on the simple chemical
modifications of naturally occurring molecules, current design trends are based on
the study of drug interactions with their targets at the molecular level. The develop￾ment of molecular biology and genetic engineering over the last decade has allowed
the detailed study of many targets in the action of drugs, such as enzymes, membrane
receptors, and nucleic acids. Therefore, part of the design of new drugs is currently
based on drug–receptor interactions.
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783111316901-202The complete work consists of the following two volumes:
Pharmaceutical Chemistry
Volume 1: Drug Design and Action
Pharmaceutical Chemistry
Volume 2: Drugs and Their Biological Targets
After the first part, in which general principles are explained, in the second volume,
the knowledge acquired for the establishment of the therapeutic arsenal according to
the different molecular objectives is applied. There are excellent treatises of PC or me￾dicinal chemistry, but require the reader to have a solid foundation. Our book is
aimed at pharmacy and chemistry students who intend to enter the exciting world of
drug development. Therefore, we have not tried to cover this study in an exhaustive
way, but rather to establish the bases that in a first stage allow the fostering of inter￾est in this scientific field. This is our humble goal, and if we achieve it, we will feel
satisfied that we have fully achieved our objective. We have tried to achieve a balance
between chemical and biological aspects, highlighting the strong multidisciplinary
character of this science. As far as possible, the number of drugs of both volumes has
been reduced to a minimum, sufficient to understand the philosophy of PC and with￾out overburdening the beginner with more and more examples, and therefore we
hope to avoid a “can’t see the wood for the trees”.
Drug synthesis is approached from a double point of view in Chapter 8 of this
first volume:
(a) The retrosynthetic analysis that allows the bond breaking of the molecule to ar￾rive at a structurally simpler starting material and that will allow us to carry out
the direct and real process of synthesis in a rational way.
(b) The ability to propose the corresponding synthesis, based on the information ob￾tained in the retrosynthetic analysis, mechanism of reactions, and reactivity of
organic compounds. The basis of biology is chemistry, which permits the crea￾tion of drugs (chemists acting as molecular architects), as well as the analysis of
the interactions between the drug and its biological objective, which will permit
the design of more active structures after their optimization. This first volume
provides exercises and their solutions, allowing the reader to assess to what de￾gree he or she has understood
The work shown here is the result of extensive teaching experience at the Faculty of
Pharmacy of Granada University. We want to thank the role of the students in the
noble task of teaching. They give meaning to our work and stimulate us to keep both
knowledge and methodology up to date. We want to thank our parents, partners, and
children for the support we have received. They have demonstrated that constancy is
VIII Preface to the first editionfundamental to achieving our objectives, while we have neglected our families during
the time devoted to this work.
It is the explicit desire of the authors to receive any suggestions, additions and cor￾rections, which will surely make possible an expansion of the contents of the work.
Fundamental bibliography
Victoria F. Roche, S. William Zito, Thomas L. Lemke, David A. Williams. Foye’s Principles of Medicinal
Chemistry. Wolters Kluwer Heath, 8th Edition, 2019.
Thomas Nogrady, Donald F. Weaver. Medicinal Chemistry. A Biochemical Approach. Editorial Oxford
University Press, 3rd Edition, 2005.
Patrick, Graham L. An Introduction to Medicinal Chemistry. Editorial Oxford University Press, 5th
Edition, 2013.
Enrique Raviña. The Evolution of Drug Discovery: From Traditional Medicines to Modern Drugs. Wiley-VCH,
Verlag GmbH & Co., KGaA, 1st Edition, 2011.
Richard B. Silverman, Mark W. Holladay. The Organic Chemistry of Drug Design and Drug Action. Elsevier
Academic Press, 3rd Edition, 2015.
Camille Georges Wermuth, David Aldous, Pierre Raboisson, Didier Rognan. The Practice of Medicinal
Chemistry. Academic Press, 4th Edition, 2015.
Corwin Hansch, Albert Leo. Exploring QSAR: Fundamentals and Applications in Chemistry and Biology.
American Chemical Society, Washington, DC, 1995.
Hugo Kubinyi. QSAR: Hansch Analysis and Related Approaches, VCH Verlagesellschaft mbH, 1993.
Complementary bibliography
Daniel Lednicer. Organic Chemistry of Drug Synthesis. Vols. 1–6, Wiley-Interscience, 1977–1998.
Stuart Warren, Paul Wyatt. Organic Synthesis: The Disconnection Approach. Wiley, 2nd Edition, 2008.
Complementary bibliography IXPreface to the second edition
The objective of pharmaceutical chemistry (PC) is the chemical study of drugs, the ac￾tive ingredients of medicines, in order to determine the relationship between chemi￾cal structure, physicochemical properties, reactivity, and biological response, with the
ultimate aim of providing the necessary knowledge for the creation of new drugs.
Since most drugs are organic in nature, therapeutic chemistry or PC is mainly
based on the knowledge of organic chemistry, although it requires a strong biological
connection with a solid foundation in biochemistry. On the other hand, it also draws
on other subjects such as,
a) Pharmacognosy, which studies natural products as a source of new active
ingredients.
b) Pharmacology, which allows the establishment of experimental models for the
evaluation of new active ingredients.
c) Molecular pharmacology, which tries to explain biological effects at the molecu￾lar level, interpreting the phenomena related to the association between a drug
and the biomolecules that trigger its action, all from the point of view of struc￾tural and physicochemical properties.
Although drug design, the ultimate objective of PC, was originally focused on simple
chemical modifications of molecules of natural origin, current design trends are
based on the study of drug interactions with their target structures at the molecular
level. The development experienced in the last decade by molecular biology and ge￾netic engineering has allowed the detailed study of many target molecules in drug ac￾tion, such as enzymes, membrane receptors and nucleic acids. Therefore, part of the
design of new drugs is currently based on drug–receptor interactions.
The synthesis of the designed compounds is another aspect to be considered in
the study of PC.
Organic chemistry is approached from a mechanistic viewpoint. The ability to
write feasible reaction mechanisms in organic chemistry depends on the extent of the
individual’s preparation. These two volumes assume the knowledge obtained in a
two-semester undergraduate course of organic chemistry. I am going to review how
to draw Lewis structures and how to calculate formal charges. In order to write or
understand reaction mechanisms, it is essential to be able to construct Lewis struc￾tures for any organic compound. The electron flow pathway has become the building
blocks of the mechanistic processes. I am going to use the concept of electron flow
with the rigorous use of curved arrows as an electron bookkeeping device.
I have attempted to keep the use of IUPAC names of organic compounds to a bare
minimum to enhance the readability of the text. In the discussion of reactions, I drew
out the structures rather than the names of the compounds.
I will try to condense the essentials of PC in a student-friendly manageable way. I
will do this by concentrating purely on the basics of the subject without going into
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783111316901-203exhaustive detail or repetitive examples. Furthermore, keynotes at the end of a topic
summarize the essential facts covered and help to focus the mind on the essentials.
On the other hand, the most important aspects of some topics will be indicated at the
end of the corresponding chapter and will constitute the skeleton of the topic. They
are like the branches of a bare Christmas tree to which the leaves and ornaments will
have to be added.
After so many years dedicated to research and teaching, I have learned to question
everything!
Joaquín M. Campos Rosa
September 2023
XII Preface to the second editionHow to study pharmaceutical chemistry effectively
– Ask for help. Your professors have office hours that are specifically available for
students to ask questions and get help with the material. Take advantage of this
time, go and ask for assistance. They are there to help you learn and this is an
opportunity to ask questions you might have been afraid to ask in class.
Getting extra help from a one-to-one tutorship can also be beneficial if you
are really struggling.
– Study every day. Studying for an hour or two each day is a much better use of
your time than trying to study for 5 h all at once. With smaller, more frequent
study sessions, you can focus on individual concepts and not burn yourself
out trying to cram all of the information into your brain at once.
– Attend class. Class attendance is essential because it facilitates the first under￾standing of what is explained and makes learning more pleasant. Paying attention
in class is also necessary. Listen to what the professor is saying and then summa￾rize the information in your notes.
– Understanding the how and why of a biological, organic reaction or concept
will lead to a higher score. Many scores start high but can fall gradually through￾out the semester. These are students who failed to put in the effort after the mid￾term exam (overconfident) or who relied on memorizing the material rather than
understanding and building on a concept.
– Do not procrastinate (to put off or defer an action until a later time; delay).
Do something refreshing, because all studying without a break can make it diffi￾cult to concentrate.
– PC and organic chemistry are amazing subjects because of their hierarchical
nature. Learn a few simple concepts and you can explain and solve many
problems throughout the year.
– Getting behind early is hard to overcome but it is not a crime. If you get a bad
grade in your midterm exam, you must learn from your mistake and start again.
Many students have failed the first exam of the course and gone on to get an A as
a final grade.
Be strong and constant enough!
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783111316901-204How to achieve success in exams: some specific
hints for pharmaceutical chemistry
Chemistry forms the building blocks of life. It is a subject traditionally viewed as diffi￾cult because of the complex nature of chemical reactions and the unfamiliarity of the
new language.
– Tip 1: The secret to success is using formulae! A simple mistake like failing to
draw a formula, can affect your marks greatly!
– Tip 2: When it comes to answering theoretical questions, the explanation
must be based on chemical structures, mechanisms, or biological schemes.
However, all these previous forms must be verbalized and justified. Both extremes
are not valid: (a) representation of schemes, structures, and so on without provid￾ing a coherent explanation or (b) a lot of text but without the commitment of
structural representation of the corresponding cartoon. The professor has to ex￾tract from the exam the global content of your training and not imagine what
you mean.
– Tip 3: Be organized, structured, and clean (without crossing out) when solving an
exam. The more the teacher’s work is facilitated, the better the test grade will be.
Ultimately, you should walk away from chemistry and understand more about the
world around you.
Chemistry is interesting and fun, but it takes time, effort, and dedication.
Do not be afraid to ask for help, many people have been where you are right now
and pulled through!
Alongside the improvement in your academic results, the most outstanding and
important outcome would be the enhancement of your self-motivation, and even
more importantly, development of your self-confidence.
“For my part, I believe that medicines are one of the blessings of our age, perhaps the greatest of
them all”
Sir Ernst Boris Chain (1906–1979)
Co-recipient of the Nobel Prize in Physiology and Medicine for his work on penicillin.
“Success consists of going from failure to failure without loss of enthusiasm”
Sir Winston Churchill (1874–1965)
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783111316901-205Contents
Preface to the first edition VII
Preface to the second edition XI
How to study pharmaceutical chemistry effectively XIII
How to achieve success in exams: some specific hints for pharmaceutical
chemistry XV
About the author XXIII
1 Basic concepts in pharmaceutical chemistry 1
1.1 Goals 1
1.2 Basic concepts and purposes of pharmaceutical chemistry 1
1.3 Historical development of pharmaceutical chemistry 4
1.3.1 Pre-scientific period (~ 3000 years BC until the nineteenth
century) 4
1.3.2 Scientific period (nineteenth century to 1960) 4
1.3.3 Current period (from the 1960s to the present) 5
1.4 Multidisciplinary nature of this discipline 5
1.5 Patents 6
1.5.1 Cahn–Ingold–Prelog priority rules 7
1.5.2 Importance of homochiral drug development 8
1.5.2.1 The thalidomide tragedy 8
1.6 Origin of drugs 9
1.7 Other definitions 10
1.8 Classification of drugs 10
1.9 Process of discovery of a drug 11
1.10 Phases of clinical studies 12
1.11 Key notes: introduction 12
1.12 Key notes: clinical trials 13
2 Drug nomenclature 14
2.1 Goals 14
2.2 Introduction 14
2.3 Nomenclature of drugs 14
2.4 Systematic chemical names 15
2.5 Polyfunctional acyclic compounds 16
2.6 Monocyclic compounds 18
2.7 Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons 202.8 Partly or fully hydrogenated polycyclic hydrocarbons 22
2.9 Bicyclic hydrocarbons 23
2.9.1 Bridge systems 23
2.9.2 Bicyclic systems with heteroatoms 24
2.9.3 Spiro or spirane systems 26
2.10 Heterocycles 27
2.10.1 Condensed heterocycles 30
2.11 Numbering of condensed heterocycles 32
2.12 Criteria for choosing the base heterocycle 33
2.13 Heterocycles condensed with benzene 35
2.14 Exercises 37
3 Search for prototypes 42
3.1 Goals 42
3.2 Traditional and current discovery of new drugs 42
3.2.1 Screening of natural products 43
3.2.2 Existing drugs used as leaders 45
3.2.3 Isolation and identification of drug metabolites 46
3.2.4 Examples of serendipity 47
3.3 Planned syntheses of new chemical compounds on rational bases 49
3.4 Isolation and purification 50
3.5 Structural determination 50
3.6 Key notes 51
3.7 A pitfall 51
4 Optimization of prototypes 52
4.1 Goals 52
4.2 Molecular modification 52
4.2.1 Purpose 52
4.2.1.1 Development of substitutes and therapeutic copies 52
4.2.1.2 Development of drugs with different spectrum of action 54
4.2.1.3 Modification of pharmacokinetics 55
4.2.1.4 Modification of distribution 55
4.3 Strategies 56
4.3.1 Modulative structural variation 57
4.3.1.1 Vinylogy 57
4.3.1.2 Homology 59
4.3.1.3 Introduction of cyclic systems 59
4.3.1.4 Introduction or substitution of polar groups, by nonpolar bulky
ones 60
4.3.1.5 Isosterism and bioisosterism 60
4.3.1.5.1 Isosterism 60
XVIII Contents4.3.1.5.2 Bioisosterism 63
4.4 Disjunctive replication 69
4.5 Conjunctive replication 70
4.6 Peptidomimetics 71
4.7 Summary 71
4.8 Exercises 73
5 Biological targets and receptors for drugs 82
5.1 Goals 82
5.2 Membrane receptor 82
5.3 Affinity and intrinsic activity: agonists and antagonists 83
5.4 Types of receptors 83
5.4.1 Ionic channels 83
5.4.2 Receptors with an intrinsic catalytic activity 84
5.4.3 Receptors bound to G proteins: metabotropic receptors 85
5.4.3.1 Guanosine diphosphate 85
5.4.4 Intracellular receptors 88
5.5 Types of bonds: energy range (kcal/mol) per interaction 89
5.5.1 Intramolecular bonding interactions 89
5.5.2 Intermolecular interactions 90
5.6 Conformation and activity: use of rigid analogs 94
5.6.1 Nomenclature of conformations (Newman projections) 94
5.7 Absolute configuration and activity: difference between
enantiomers 99
5.8 Relative configuration and activity 100
5.9 Key notes: receptors 103
5.10 Key notes: binding interactions 103
5.11 Key notes: stereochemistry 103
5.12 Exercises 104
6 Quantitative drug design: parameters and quantitative structure–
activity relationships 110
6.1 Goals 110
6.2 Introduction 110
6.3 Electronic parameters 112
6.3.1 Interpretation of Hammett constants 113
6.3.1.1 Electronic effects 113
6.4 Substituents classified according to their directing power in
electrophilic aromatic reactions 116
6.5 Hyperconjugation 117
6.5.1 Electronegativity of an spn hybrid orbital 117
Contents XIX6.5.2 Activating effect of the toluene methyl group versus SEAr
reactions 118
6.5.3 Difference between hyperconjugation and resonance 119
6.6 Hydrophobic parameters: partition coefficient and hydrophobic
substituent constant 119
6.7 Steric parameters 122
6.8 Craig plot 122
6.9 Hansch equation 123
6.10 Concepts and QSAR philosophy 125
6.11 3D QSAR model 125
6.12 CoMFA advantages over traditional QSAR 126
6.13 Potential problems of CoMFA 127
6.14 Key notes: quantitative structure–activity relationships 128
6.15 The significance of QSAR in drug discovery 128
6.16 Exercises 129
7 Metabolic processes in drugs: other methodologies available for the
discovery of new drugs 135
7.1 Goals 135
7.2 Metabolism studies and their use in the discovery of new drugs 135
7.3 Absorption 135
7.4 Lipinski’s rules (rule of 5) 137
7.5 Metabolism 137
7.5.1 Phase I reactions 139
7.5.1.1 Oxidation reactions 139
7.5.1.2 Reduction reactions 142
7.5.1.3 Hydrolysis reactions 142
7.5.2 Phase II reactions 143
7.5.2.1 Conjugation reactions 143
7.5.2.1.1 The anomeric effect 143
7.5.2.2 Glucuronides 149
7.5.2.3 Conjugation with glycine 149
7.5.2.4 Acetylation 151
7.5.2.5 Conjugation reactions with glutathione 151
7.6 Prodrug concept 154
7.6.1 Improvements in the galenic formulations 154
7.6.2 Pharmacokinetic improvements 155
7.7 Modulation of drug metabolism 156
7.8 Suppression of the metabolic processes 157
7.9 Promotion of the nonoxidative metabolism 158
XX Contents7.10 Summary 159
7.11 Key notes: drug metabolism 160
7.12 Exercises 161
8 Synthetic drug strategies 165
8.1 Goals 165
8.2 Introduction 165
8.3 Definitions 166
8.4 Rules to make a good disconnection 167
8.5 endo selectivity 169
8.6 Synthesis of various barbiturates 170
8.6.1 Pentobarbital 170
8.6.2 Phenobarbital 170
8.6.3 Hexobarbital 172
8.7 Buprenorphine 172
8.8 Celecoxib 173
8.9 Rofecoxib 175
8.10 Fentanyl 176
8.11 Electrophilic substitution on pyrroles 177
8.12 Exercises 180
9 Solutions to the exercises 181
9.1 Exercises to Chapter 2 181
9.2 Exercises to Chapter 4 184
9.3 Exercises to Chapter 5 185
9.4 Exercises to Chapter 6 193
9.5 Exercises to Chapter 7 197
9.6 Exercises to Chapter 8 205
Index 213
Contents XXIAbout the author
Joaquín M. Campos received his B.Sc. and Ph.D. from the University of Granada (UGR). He is full
professor in medicinal and organic chemistry. He worked with Professor Ganellin, coinventor of
cimetidine (Tagamet®), at University College London, UK. He has published 180 papers in international
journals with a high impact index, mainly in the fields of organic chemistry, medical chemistry, and
cancer; 14 books; 14 book chapters; 13 national and 17 international patents; and supervised 15 doctoral
theses. He has been involved for the most part as a responsible researcher in 18 research projects and 3
research contracts with private companies. He advised the University of São Paulo (Brazil) on novel
anticancer and anti-Alzheimer’s drugs, during the years 2015–17 as special visiting professor. He was
awarded the 2010 Teaching Excellence Award from UGR. On March 17, 2016, he received the award from
the Social Council of UGR. He is regional editor in Europe for the journal Current Medicinal Chemistry
since August 13, 2016. Current Medicinal Chemistry is a leading journal in the field of medicinal chemistry.
As a consequence of his interest in raising the level of internationalization of the UGR and more
specifically that of the Faculty of Pharmacy of the UGR, he has been teaching pharmaceutical chemistry in
the Pharmacy Degree in English for many years, with excellent acceptance among students.
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783111316901-2071 Basic concepts in pharmaceutical chemistry
1.1 Goals
– To know the tasks of pharmaceutical chemistry
– To know and understand the concepts of drugs and medicines
– To understand the multidisciplinary nature of this discipline
– To introduce the concepts of patent and pharmaceutical industry
– To know the global process through which new drugs are discovered and the
methodologies used over time
– To know the main stages of development of a new drug and its cost
1.2 Basic concepts and purposes of pharmaceutical chemistry
According to the IUPAC specialized commission, pharmaceutical chemistry (PC) is re￾lated to the discovery, development, identification, and interpretation of the mecha￾nism of action of biologically active compounds. Drugs will be emphasized, but the
interest of pharmaceutical chemists will not be restricted only to drugs, but also in￾clude biologically active compounds, in general. PC will also address the study, identi￾fication, and synthesis of the metabolic products of drugs and related compounds. In
short, PC is responsible for the design, synthesis, and analysis of drugs. Scheme 1.1
shows the general method of work in PC.
After the application of Scheme 1.1, the ideal new drug has to fulfill the following
conditions:
1. New patentable chemical entity capable of being registered
2. Its synthetic process should not exceed four steps and should not include any
heavy metal catalysts or environmentally problematic wastes; purity >99%
3. Stable up to 70 °C, even in a humid environment, and stable against light
4. It has to possess solid-state properties (crystalline, nonexistence of polymorphic
and non-hygroscopic forms)
5. Solubility in water
6. 90% oral bioavailability
7. High activity with a pharmacokinetic profile that allows it to be given once daily
with a dose
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783111316901-001PC has three fundamental objectives:
1. Structural modification of compounds that have a well-known physiological action,
i.e. obtaining new drugs from other ones already known: molecular manipulation.
2. It provides the necessary knowledge for the development of new drugs: drug design.
3. In addition, the use of very sensitive analytical techniques is essential for the qual￾ity control that determines the efficacy and safety of the medicines: drug analysis.
On the other hand, metabolite analysis is a key aspect in the pharmacokinetic stud￾ies that determine the bioavailability and duration of the therapeutic response. Pu￾rity tests set the limit for acceptable impurities. If the tests have to determine the
amount of an active substance in a medicinal product, it must be separated from
other accompanying substances by applying separation techniques.
Scheme 1.1: The general method of work in PC.
2 1 Basic concepts in pharmaceutical chemistryThere are definitions that should be known:
Drug: any raw material of animal or vegetable origin that contains one or several ac￾tive principles which, introduced into the body by any route of administration, produ￾ces an alteration of the natural functioning of the central nervous system of the
individual and is also susceptible of creating dependence, whether psychological,
physical, or both. In English, a drug is also a biologically active substance (capable of
interacting with the biological environment), chemically pure, and with therapeutic
action, i.e. capable of curing, mitigating, or preventing disease in humans or animals
(e.g. acetylsalicylic acid).
Medicine: the drug in the proper dosage form, used in medicine (e.g. Aspirin®, Fig. 1.1).
It is synonymous with drug. Hence, the terms “medicinal chemistry”, “therapeutical
chemistry”, or “pharmaceutical chemistry” are used interchangeably.
The mere disposition of active drugs is not sufficient for their clinical application: it is
necessary to formulate medicines that can be introduced into the organism by the ap￾propriate route for each patient. For example, acetylsalicylic acid, widely used as an
analgesic, antipyretic, blood thinner, and an antirheumatic drug, could not be used
without a previous physicochemical transformation which would allow its absorption
and, if necessary, neutralize its ulcerogenic properties, contraindicated for certain pa￾tients. It has been demonstrated that the gastrointestinal dissolution of acetylsalicylic
acid is the slowest step, and is the determinant of its rate of absorption; therefore,
several forms of oral administration are required:
1. Micronization of its crystalline form to an ultrafine powder of high dissolution
rate, as in tablets known under the trade name of Aspirin®
2. Its galenic formulation with antacids or buffer substances, to form locally soluble
acetylsalicylates (effervescent Aspirin®)
3. The use of enteric-coated tablets that avoid direct contact of the drug with the
gastric mucosa, even if it is detrimental to absorption
We will study drugs (pure substances) and not medicines, in this collection.
Fig. 1.1: Acetylsalicylic acid (Aspirin®).
1.2 Basic concepts and purposes of pharmaceutical chemistry 31.3 Historical development of pharmaceutical chemistry
We can distinguish three great periods:
1.3.1 Pre-scientific period (~ 3000 years BC until the nineteenth century)
In ancient times, scientists were philosophers and erudite people so that the different
sciences were purely empirical. Some of the natural products, either as such or in the
form of derivatives, were often used for various purposes, such as arrow poisons,
complements for religious rituals, or even cosmetics:
1.3.2 Scientific period (nineteenth century to 1960)
From the nineteenth century and after the French Revolution (at the end of the eigh￾teenth century), the sciences went from being empirical to being sciences based on
experimentation. Organic chemistry was developed and, as a consequence, synthetic
products began to be used. The first occasion in which a synthetic organic product
was used to interfere with vital processes was probably during the first half of the
nineteenth century when ether and chloroform were introduced as anesthetics. Be￾cause of this, initial efforts to search for new synthetic drugs focused primarily on
anesthetics and hypnotics, and subsequently on analgesics. Physiology was also devel￾oped, and most diseases were listed and classified. A key figure in this period is the
German immunologist Paul Ehrlich (1854–1915), who thought that drugs were able to
distinguish human cells from those of parasites. This assumption was reinforced by
his previous experiences on the selective staining of different tissues of mammals
with dyes, as well as his studies on the selectivity of antibodies to the corresponding
antigens (substances that cause the formation of antibodies when introduced into the
body). He is the father of chemotherapy, which he defined as the use of drugs that
harm the invading organism without causing harm to the host. This greatest contribu￾tion to the advancement of PC is probably the original ideas that he proposed about
the mode of action of the drugs. Thus, he postulated the existence of receptors in
mammalian cells (a receptor is a macromolecule to which various ligands or com￾pounds selectively bind that cause a specific biological effect). He distinguished two
parts in antigens and chemotherapeutic agents:
Belladonna: Today → Antimuscarinic drug
Previously → Cosmetic or poison
Curare: Today → Muscle relaxant
Previously → Poison
4 1 Basic concepts in pharmaceutical chemistry1. Haptophore groups: responsible for the union
2. Toxoplastic groups: responsible for toxicity
1.3.3 Current period (from the 1960s to the present)
With the development of biochemistry and molecular pharmacology, the receptors
and the mechanism of action of the drugs began to be known, and so it is logical to
think of a structure–activity relationship (SAR). If it is accepted that the activity of a
drug is due to its chemical interaction with a hypothetical cellular receptor, it is logi￾cal to consider that its physicochemical properties, and therefore, its structure, must
be directly related to its activity. In 1964, the two most solid and general procedures
of the quantitative SAR appear:
– Hansch–Fujita method
– Free–Wilson method
Nowadays, with these and other theoretical studies, drugs can be rationally designed.
1.4 Multidisciplinary nature of this discipline
For the development of PC, a solid chemical knowledge, especially of organic chemis￾try, is not enough, but requires a strong biological base, concretized in a rational
foundation of biochemistry.
Molecules that show biological activity are called hits. The next step is to find
compounds that have attractive pharmaceutical properties, including low toxicity,
aqueous solubility suitable for being orally administered, among other pharmacoki￾netic properties. Such compounds are called “leaders or leads”. Leaders are hits but
more refined. Typically, hits are found by screening a vast number of molecules,
while “leader compounds” are developed from hits through chemical modifications.
Hit to lead, also known as lead generation, is a stage in early drug discovery
where small molecule hits from a high-throughput screening are evaluated and un￾dergo limited optimization to identify promising lead compounds. These lead com￾pounds undergo more extensive optimization in a subsequent step of drug discovery
called lead optimization. On the other hand, a lead is a compound or a series of com￾pounds with proven activity and selectivity that meets the criteria for drug develop￾ment such as originality, patentability, and accessibility (by extraction or synthesis).
PC relies on (a) pharmacognosy, which studies drugs as a source of active principles –
such active principles themselves constitute authentic drugs and serve as models for
obtaining new drugs by molecular manipulation; and (b) pharmacology and pharma￾codynamics, which study the action of drugs and their mechanism. Having checked
the pharmacological action of a drug, its pharmaceutical form allowing its administra￾1.4 Multidisciplinary nature of this discipline 5tion to the patient should be given. The adequate drug formulation requires biophar￾maceutical studies (i.e. those factors that influence the bioavailability of drugs) and
pharmacokinetics, which refer to the kinetics of absorption, distribution, metabolism,
and excretion of the drugs and their therapeutic response or toxicity in animals and
man. Biopharmacy and pharmacokinetics will therefore complete the cycle of the
drug when introduced into the galenic formulation (Fig. 1.2).
1.5 Patents
A patent is a title that grants the right to manufacture and market the object of the
patent during the period of validity (which is usually 20 years). That which is patented
must be novel, implying that it has not been disclosed, and must have an inventive
step, that is, it should not be obvious to a person skilled in the art. One of the hot
topics in the patent field is the “chiral switch”. During the period from 1983 to 1987,
30% of the approved drugs were pure enantiomers, 29% were racemic, and 41% were
Fig. 1.2: Relationships of the different disciplines that affect PC.
6 1 Basic concepts in pharmaceutical chemistryachiral. Nowadays, most of the drugs that reach the market are achiral or pure enan￾tiomers. The racemic problem is that each of the enantiomers normally has a differ￾ent level of activity. In addition, the enantiomers may differ in the way in which they
are metabolized and in their side effects. Therefore, it is better to market a pure enan￾tiomer rather than a racemic one. The issue of chiral change is mostly related to race￾mic drugs that have been on the market for several years and for which the 20-year
patent is on the point of expiring. Through the chiral switch toward a pure enantio￾mer, the pharmaceutical companies can argue that it is a new invention and that
therefore a new patent can be formalized. However, they have to prove that the pure
enantiomer represents an improvement over the original racemic, and such a fact
was not predictable when the racemic was originally patented. Examples of drugs for
which chiral change has been performed are salbutamol and omeprazole (Fig. 1.3).
1.5.1 Cahn–Ingold–Prelog priority rules
– Compare the atomic number (Z) of the atoms directly attached to the stereocen￾ter: the group having the atom of higher atomic number receives higher priority.
– If there is a tie, we must consider the atoms at distance 2 from the stereocenter:
the group containing the atom of higher atomic number receives higher priority.
– If there is still a tie, we must consider the atoms at distance 3 from the stereocen￾ter), and classified in decreasing order of atomic number, and so on.
– If an atom A is double bonded to an atom B, A is treated as being singly bonded to
two atoms.
– After the substituents of a stereocenter have been assigned their priorities, the tet￾rahedron is oriented in space so that the group with the lowest priority is pointed
away from the observer. You have to look at the tetrahedron through the lowest
priority group. If the substituents are numbered from 1 (highest priority) to 4 (low￾est priority), then the sense of rotation passing through 1, 2, and 3 distinguishes the
Fig. 1.3: The chiral switch has been carried out in some drugs.
1.5 Patents 7stereoisomers. A center with a clockwise sense of rotation is an R (rectus) center
and a center with a counterclockwise sense of rotation is an S (sinister) center.
1.5.2 Importance of homochiral drug development
– The introduction of racemic drugs is becoming less attractive due to the new poli￾cies followed by various regulatory agencies. Therefore, the preparation of pure
enantiomeric drugs (homochiral) is a critical issue of the pharmaceutical indus￾try. There are different reasons for producing optically pure materials:
– (a) Biological activity can be associated with a single enantiomer. In the most gen￾eral situation, the enantiomers can exhibit different types of activities, of which
both can be beneficial, or one can be and the other undesirable. The production
of a single enantiomer allows, therefore, the separation of the effects.
– (b) The unwanted isomer is an “isomeric ballast” exposed to the surrounding en￾vironment. The production of the active enantiomer is a matter of law in certain
countries, being considered the unwanted enantiomer as an impurity.
1.5.2.1 The thalidomide tragedy
Thalidomide (Fig. 1.4), a derivative of glutamic acid, was introduced as a racemic in
therapeutics in the 1960s as a sedative-hypnotic agent and was used to alleviate the
nausea of pregnant women.
It was withdrawn from the market as its use during pregnancy was associated with
malformations of the fetus (phocomelia or shortening of the members).
In 1984, it is published that this tragedy would not have occurred if, instead of
having used the racemic, the enantiomer (R) had been launched to the market, be￾cause in experimental conditions only the enantiomer (S)-(–) exerted toxic and terato￾genic effects on the embryo, after intraperitoneal administration.
This statement is wrong for two reasons:
(1) It is based on low-confidence biological data since experimental studies were per￾formed on mice, a species that is considered insensitive, and at very high doses;
however, later works in rabbits (species that is the most sensitive to thalidomide)
showed the same teratogenic potency of both enantiomers.
Fig. 1.4: (R)-(+)-Thalidomide of α-(N-phthalimido)glutarimide.
8 1 Basic concepts in pharmaceutical chemistry(2) The stereocenter of thalidomide is unstable in protonated media and suffers a
rapid reversal of its configuration, so both enantiomers are racemized quickly
and degraded by opening the ring of the glutarimide moiety, a process that takes
place faster in vivo than in vitro. Therefore, if there were differences of toxicity
between both enantiomers, their rapid racemizations in vivo would have pre￾vented the commercialization of the nonpoisonous enantiomer.
This case shows the importance of considering the data as a whole and of avoiding to
draw quick conclusions, as tempting as they are.
1.6 Origin of drugs
– Drugs of natural origin:
1. Vegetal (25%): there are many extractable drugs from phanerogams, and among
them, we highlight the alkaloids, such as quinine, reserpine, and morphine.
2. Animal (18%): e.g. insulin, a hypoglycemic substance obtained from ox fresh
pancreas, sex hormones, and corticosteroids.
3. Mineral (7%): this is the case of aluminum salts to alleviate acidity of the
stomach, or talc (silicates) to relieve pruritus and as a base for ointments.
– Drugs of semisynthetic origin: they are obtained by partial synthesis from a struc￾ture of natural origin, for example, semisynthetic penicillins.
– Drugs of synthetic origin: estradiol is a natural estrogen, ethinylestradiol is a
semisynthetic derivative, while diethylstilbestrol is a synthetic product (Fig. 1.5).
These last two groups constitute ≈ 50% and are those that are usually studied by PC.
Fig. 1.5: Examples of natural, semisynthetic, and synthetic drugs.
1.6 Origin of drugs 91.7 Other definitions
– The action of a drug refers to the modification that it produces in the functions of
the organism, in the sense of increasing or diminishing them. Drugs never create
new functions or alter the characteristics of the system on which they act: they
only modify them. The effect or response of a drug is the manifestation of phar￾macological action, which can be appreciated by the observer’s senses or by sim￾ple devices (Fig. 1.6).
– Molecules that show biological activity are called hits.
1.8 Classification of drugs
Pharmacological effect: Drugs are classified depending on the biological effect they
produce, e.g. analgesics. However, there are many biological goals and mechanisms
by which analgesics can have an analgesic effect. Therefore, it is not possible to iden￾tify a common characteristic shared by all analgesics. For example, Aspirin® and mor￾phine act on different goals and have no structural relationship.
Chemical structure: Many drugs have a common skeleton and are grouped according
to this criterion, e.g. penicillins, barbiturates, opiates, and catecholamine. For example,
penicillins contain the β-lactam ring and kill the bacteria by the same mechanism. How￾ever, it is not foolproof. Sulfonamides have a common structure and are fundamentally
antibacterial agents. However, some sulfonamides are used for the treatment of diabetes.
Biochemical process: Generally, a chemical messenger or neurotransmitter, e.g. anti￾histamines and cholinergics. It is more specific than that of the pharmacological ef￾fect, since it identifies the system on which the drugs act.
Molecular objective: There are compounds that are grouped according to the en￾zyme or receptor with which they interact; e.g. anticholinesterases are a group of
drugs that act by inhibiting the enzyme acetylcholinesterase. This is the most useful
classification with respect to PC.
Fig. 1.6: Action and effect of adrenaline (also called epinephrine).
10 1 Basic concepts in pharmaceutical chemistry1.9 Process of discovery of a drug
Successful research and development of a drug carries with it gigantic costs that can
fluctuate around 1.4 billion dollars (Fig. 1.7). These astronomical costs are due to the
fact that of 5,000 candidate molecules only 1,000 become objective compounds and a
dozen become “leaders”, that is to say, they are promising, and of those thousands
only one will arrive without problems up to the last phase of development. However,
if only one of these drugs complies with all basic and clinical evaluations and is pat￾ented, the initial multimillion-dollar investment will be virtually paid off.
A drug may take 12 years from the initial discovery state to reach the market, and
while estimates of costs vary, the Association of the British Pharmaceutical Industry
puts it at $1.4 billion per drug. Just 1 in 5,000 drug candidates make it all the way from
the drug discovery phase to licensing approval. If the pharmaceutical company pat￾ents compounds in the early stages, it has only 5–6 years to recoup the heavy invest￾ment and/or make a profit.
The number of biological targets is expected to increase tenfold for the treatment
of diseases with the increasing advancement of proteomics, genomics, and molecular
pharmacological techniques. Also being worked on is the development of other new
drugs, including gene therapy and nanotechnology. The goal of PC is to make the drug
development process more cost-effective, shortening the time between discovery, pre￾6 candidates
1 drug
12 “leads”
12 years
Discovery and
preclinical trials
Clinical trials:
Phases l, ll, lll, lV
$ 1.4 bn
> 1,000 “hits”
5,000 compounds are often
tested to fing a drug
Fig. 1.7: “Bottleneck” process outlining the difficulty of the drug discovery process.
1.9 Process of discovery of a drug 11clinical testing, and registration steps. This is why the rational design of drugs is at
present of such a large dimension.
1.10 Phases of clinical studies
Phase I: It is not yet useful to test the efficacy of the drug. Phase I studies attempts to
determine the potential toxic effect of the drug in humans by administering small
doses to a small number of healthy volunteers. In addition, pharmacokinetic and
pharmacodynamic parameters are measured.
Phase II: In Phase II studies, the drug is administered to a small number (greater
than in Phase I) of people suffering from a particular disease in order to clearly dem￾onstrate the potential therapeutic benefit of the drug. This is a first measure of effi￾cacy, but above all it is to determine the best doses and modes of distribution (oral,
intravenous, intramuscular, etc.) and to confirm the results of the Phase I tests.
Phase III: Phase III studies involve a larger number of patients with an established
dose range and final administration form in order to redefine the knowledge obtained
in Phase II studies. It aims to confirm the efficacy and safety of the drug on a large
scale. Once Phase III studies are completed, the pharmaceutical company can apply
for approval of the drug for marketing. This research process can last from 7 to
15 years and is the most expensive of the entire research process.
Phase IV: An even larger population or a specific subgroup, evaluation of the long￾term effects of the drug, or even its test in other indications.
1.11 Key notes: introduction
Pharmaceutical chemistry: PC deals with the design and synthesis of novel drugs,
based on an understanding of how they work at the molecular level. A useful drug
must interact with a molecular target in the body (pharmacodynamics) and also be
capable of reaching the target (pharmacokinetics).
Drugs: Drugs are normally low-molecular-weight chemicals that interact with macro￾molecular targets in the body to produce a pharmacological effect. This effect may be
beneficial or harmful depending on the drug used and the dose administered.
Classification of drugs: Drugs can be classified according to their pharmacological
effect, the particular biochemical process they affect, the type of structures they have,
or the molecular target with which they interact. The last classification is the most
useful one in PC.
12 1 Basic concepts in pharmaceutical chemistry1.12 Key notes: clinical trials
Definition: Clinical trials are carried out to test the therapeutic effects of new drugs
and to ensure that they have no unacceptable side effects. There are four phases:
Phase I: Phase I trials are normally carried out on healthy volunteers to establish dos￾ing levels and to carry out pharmacokinetic studies. The therapeutic effect is not
tested.
Phase II: Phase II studies are carried out on patients for a particular indication. One
group of patients receives the drug and another one receives a placebo or a conven￾tional drug. Neither patient nor doctor knows which patient receives placebo or drug.
Different dosage levels and regimes are used on different groups to establish the bet￾ter dosage regimen. These studies demonstrate whether the drug is therapeutically
useful and whether it has any side effects.
Phase III: Phase III studies are carried out in a similar fashion to Phase II studies, but
on a larger number of patients in order to get statistical proofs, both of the drug effi￾cacy and its safety.
Phase IV: Phase IV studies continue after the drug has gone onto the market. They
are designed to study the effects of long-term use and to identify any rare side effects
that may arise.
1.12 Key notes: clinical trials 132 Drug nomenclature
2.1 Goals
– Knowledge of drug nomenclature: types
– Knowledge of the International Nonproprietary Name
– Knowledge of the systematic nomenclature: the IUPAC rules for naming organic
molecules
– Knowledge of other nomenclatures
2.2 Introduction
Nowadays, knowledge of chemical nomenclature is indispensable; however, most
texts are limited to the handling of the nomenclature of isolated functional groups,
and no integration is achieved in the application of the rules of nomenclature for
complex structures. It is intended that by the end of this book, readers will be able to
establish the name of a compound from its structure and vice versa, regardless of its
complexity. Important changes in the recommendations affecting the nomenclature
of organic compounds appear in the book Nomenclature of Organic Chemistry: IUPAC
Recommendations and Preferred Names 2013.
2.3 Nomenclature of drugs
Drugs can be named in several ways:
Coded name: Usually with the initials of the laboratory, chemist, or research team who
prepared or tested the drug for the first time, followed by a number. This name does
not tell us anything about the structure or the pharmacological action.
Chemical name: Describes in an unambiguous way the structure of the drug. It is
produced in accordance with IUPAC standards. Since the chemical name can be very
complicated, it is not suitable for routine use.
Registered name: The name given by each manufacturer. Normally, a drug is pat￾ented by different industries, and therefore it can appear on the market with several
names. It is symbolized with the symbol ® to the right and top of the name. The first
letter of each word that is part of the name must be capitalized. It says nothing about
structure or action.
International nonproprietary name (INN): This is the name of the drug with which
it is identified as a specific substance and independent of its manufacturer. The first
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783111316901-002letter must be lowercase or all uppercase. Since 1976, the World Health Organization
is responsible for developing international standards. The name should be brief, con￾cise, and meaningful. The relationship between substances of the same group and
with the same pharmacological activity is evidenced by the use of some characteristic
particle. Table 2.1 shows some of these particles:
Acronyms: These are used in drugs of Anglo-Saxon countries (Fig. 2.1).
2.4 Systematic chemical names
Table 2.2 shows the order of various chemical-organic functions, from the major im￾portance (ammonium salts) to the minor one (ethers).
Tab. 2.1: Particles used in the construction of the
international common denominations (selection).
Particle Category Compound
-azepam Benzodiazepines Diazepam
-bamate Diol anxiolytics Meprobamate
-barb- Barbiturates Phenobarbital
-caine Local anesthetics Procaine
ceph- Cephalosporins Cefalotine
-cillin Penicillins Ampicillin
sulfa- Sulfonamides Sulfathiazole
Fig. 2.1: Acronyms used to name some drugs.
2.4 Systematic chemical names 152.5 Polyfunctional acyclic compounds
First, the main function has to be identified. Next, a structural fragment has to be cho￾sen, and it will be considered as main, applying the norms of the IUPAC.
The hypnoanalgesic methadone contains two functions (ketone and amine), of
which ketone is the priority one and therefore named as a suffix. This numbers the
end closest to the main function and chooses as the main chain, which is the longest
containing the main function. An example is shown in Fig. 2.2.
The drug primocarcin has a secondary ketone function (prefix) and two amide (prior￾ity) functions. In the ester and amide functions, the chain to be considered is that which
contains the carbonyl group. Since it is not possible to find a chain containing two amide
functions, the main chain will include a chain of six carbons and a double bond (Fig. 2.3).
In the hypnotic chlorhexadol, there is no carbon chain containing the two alcohol
functions, with priority over the ether function (halogen is not considered a functional
Tab. 2.2: Main functional groups in descending order of priority.
Generic name Functional group Prefix (substituent) Suffix (principal chain)
. Ammonium salts RN+
X− Ammonium halides
. Carboxylic acids R-COOH Carboxy- Carboxylic acid
-oic/-ic acid
. Anhydrides (R-CO)O -oic anhydride
. Esters R-COORʹ R-Oyloxy￾R-Carbonyloxy￾Rʹ-Oxycarbonyl￾Rʹ-Carboxylate
Rʹ-ate
. Acid halides R-CO-X Haloformyl- -oyl halide
. Amides R-CONH-Rʹ Rʹ-Carbamoyl￾R-Amido￾R-Carboxamido￾R-Amide
. Nitriles R-CN Cyano- -carbonitrile
-nitrile
. Aldehydes R-CHO Formyl-oxo- -carbaldehyde
-al
. Ketones -CO- Oxo- -one
. Alcohols, phenols R-OH, Ar-OH Hydroxy- -ol
. Thiols R-SH Mercapto- -thiol
. Amines R-NH Amino- -amine
. Ethers R-O-Rʹ Oxy- -ether
16 2 Drug nomenclaturegroup). The chain containing five carbons is selected as the principal one. It is num￾bered by giving the lowest number to the main function (Fig. 2.4).
Finally, let us look at the case of the acetylcholine cholinergic neurotransmitter (Fig. 2.5).
The main function is the ammonium group and hence the name is (2-acetoxyethyl)tri￾methylammonium chloride.
Fig. 2.2: Methadone (hypnoanalgesic).
Fig. 2.3: Primocarcin (antineoplastic and antimicrobial agent).
Fig. 2.4: Chlorhexadol (hypnotic agent).
Fig. 2.5: Acetylcholine (AcC).
2.5 Polyfunctional acyclic compounds 172.6 Monocyclic compounds
The same criteria are used in choosing the main chain or main cycle. Consider the
following difunctionalized molecule (Fig. 2.6).
The main function is the carboxylic acid, and the amide function is the secondary
one. The correct name is 3-(cyclohexanecarboxamido)propanoic acid.
Procaine is an anesthetic agent indicated for production of local anesthesia, par￾ticularly for oral surgery. It is named as a benzoic acid derivative, since the carbonyl
group of the ester function is attached directly to the benzene ring. There are three
different ways of naming procaine (Fig. 2.7).
In adrenaline (neurotransmitter), the main chain is the one containing the alcoholic hydroxyl
group (preferred over phenolic hydroxyls). In addition, a correct nomenclature must include
the configuration of the stereogenic centers when indicated in the structure (Fig. 2.8).
Another example is the antimicrobial chloramphenicol, for which two systematic
names are given (A and B). If the carbonyl group corresponding to the major function
(carboxamide) is chosen as the main chain, a complex systematic name (A) results.
Fig. 2.6: A difunctionalized molecule.
Fig. 2.7: Several ways of naming procaine.
Fig. 2.8: Adrenaline (neurotransmitter).
18 2 Drug nomenclatureFor the type of RCONHRʹ amides, where Rʹ is much more complex than R, the IUPAC
rules support alternative B, where Rʹ is considered prime (Fig. 2.9).
Fig. 2.9: Chloramphenicol (antibacterial agent).
Fig. 2.10: Sulfanilic acid and sulfanilamide.
2.6 Monocyclic compounds 19For the nomenclature of antibacterial agents, sulfonamides, the common name sulfanil￾amide for the 4-aminobenzenesulfonamide unit (from sulfanilic acid) is taken as the
basis. Prefixes N1 and N4 are used as locators of their two nitrogen atoms (Fig. 2.10).
Example: Sulfanitran (Fig. 2.11).
2.7 Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons
Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons are organic compounds formed by two or more
fused aromatic rings. The rings may be in a straight, angled, or clustered shape. The
simplest condensed structure formed by only two aromatic rings is naphthalene, and
the three-ring compounds are anthracene and phenanthrene.
The prefix for this hydrocarbon corresponds to the polycyclic system with the
maximum number of nonaccumulated double bonds. If this number is not reached,
the letter H with a number will indicate the state of hydrogenation. Most of the con￾densed polycyclic hydrocarbons have a common name (Fig. 2.12).
Compounds without a common name are denominated by combining the fundamen￾tal component (common name system with the highest number of rings) with the pre￾fixes representing the remaining cyclic components fused with it. The names of
hydrocarbons themselves are used as prefixes; some of them abbreviated benzo,
naphtho, phenanthro, and anthra.
Fig. 2.11: Sulfanitran (antibacterial agent).
Fig. 2.12: Some condensed polycyclic hydrocarbons and numbering.
20 2 Drug nomenclatureThe face by which the cyclic component is attached to the fundamental one is des￾ignated by a locator (a cursive letter a, b, c, . . .) which is ascribed in alphabetical
order on each side of the fundamental nucleus, beginning with the carbon atoms 1
and 2 (side a).
If the condensed system has two rings and does not have a common name, the
fundamental component will be the major ring named as cycloheptene, cyclooctene,
cyclononene, etc., which indicates the maximum number of unsaturations (Fig. 2.13).
A condensed polycyclic system must be numbered for the location of the substituents
or functional groups. First, the polycyclic system must be oriented, to finally proceed to
the numbering of each vertex. To orient the polycyclic system, it must be drawn so that
(a) a maximum number of rings are aligned in a horizontal row;
(b) a maximum number of rings is located in the first upper right quadrant; the verti￾cal line is drawn on the inner side of the leftmost cycle;
(c) when two orientations meet the above requirements, the one with the lowest
number of rings below the horizontal and to the left is chosen.
An example is the orientation of chrysene (Fig. 2.14).
Once the system has been oriented, number 1 is assigned to the position immediate
to the condensation in the ring that is (a) higher and (b) more to the right-hand
Fig. 2.13: Some condensed bicyclic hydrocarbons, in which one of the rings does not have a common
name.
Fig. 2.14: Orientation of chrysene.
2.7 Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons 21side. The numbering is continued clockwise. The carbon atoms common to two or
more rings are not numbered correlatively, but are designated by the addition of
the letters a, b, c, and so on, to the immediately preceding numeral. The inner
atoms of the polycyclic system follow the last exterior, also clockwise. An example
is fluorene (Fig. 2.15).
2.8 Partly or fully hydrogenated polycyclic hydrocarbons
If the condensed hydrocarbon leaves a hydrogen atom free in one position, it is
named as H. If several positions are left free, they are named dihydro-, tetrahydro-,
and hexahydro-, preceded by corresponding locators (even multipliers). If the mole￾cule does not contain any double bonds, the prefix perhydro- is used. If there is an
odd number of hydrogenated positions, a hydrogen with the lowest possible locator
and the other even-numbered positions are indicated as explained (Fig. 2.16).
Tetracyclines are an important group of antibiotics structurally derived from naph￾thacene, partially hydrogenated, and with a high degree of functionalization. In almost
Fig. 2.15: Numbering of fluorene.
Fig. 2.16: Partly or fully hydrogenated polycyclic hydrocarbons.
22 2 Drug nomenclatureall cases (all natural and many of the semisynthetic ones), the main function is a carbox￾amide, whose preference in numbering gives it position 2. Thus, the tetracyclines will be
naphthacene-2-carboxamides, although they are usually drawn oriented with position 1
in the lower right side. An example would be chlortetracycline (Aureomycin®, Fig. 2.17).
The hydrogenated positions are eight: 1, 4, 4a, 5, 5a, 6, 11, and 12a. The complete systematic
name would be as follows: 7-chloro-4-dimethylamino-3,6,10,12,12a-pentahydroxy-6-methyl
-1,11-dioxo-1,4,4a,5,5a,6,11,12a-octahydronaphthacene-2-carboxamide. Note that positions 1
and 11 are referred to as hydrogenated, in spite of having carbonyl groups, since these
ketone functions are prefixed “oxo” in the name and do not give rise to the suffix “one”.
2.9 Bicyclic hydrocarbons
2.9.1 Bridge systems
They are compounds that share two atoms called bridgeheads. They are named by
adding the prefix “bicyclo” followed by the number of atoms between the bridgeheads
(in squared brackets), separated by points and ordered from major to minor, ending
with the name of the alkane resulting from the sum of all the atoms of carbon of the
bicyclic base system (Fig. 2.18).
The numbering of these systems is started at the bridgehead, continued by the longest
chain to the other bridgehead, then the intermediate chain, and finally, the shortest
one (Fig. 2.19).
Fig. 2.17: Chlortetracycline (Aureomycin®).
Fig. 2.18: Bridge systems.
2.9 Bicyclic hydrocarbons 232.9.2 Bicyclic systems with heteroatoms
The type and position of heteroatoms (atoms other than carbon and hydrogen) are
indicated, respectively, by a prefix and a numbering. The three most frequent heter￾oatoms, O, N, and S, are indicated by the prefixes “oxa”, “aza”, and “thia”, respectively.
The order of priority between them is O > S > N. Consider two examples of pharmaceu￾tical significance, beginning with a tropane alkaloid:
(a) Atropine (antimuscarinic drug). The compounds of this family contain the fun￾damental nucleus of 8-methyl-8-azabicyclo[3.2.1]octane, commonly known as “tro￾pane” (Fig. 2.20).
(b) We have another related example in the local anesthetic cocaine (Fig. 2.21).
Fig. 2.19: Numbering of a bridge system.
Fig. 2.20: Atropine.
Fig. 2.21: Cocaine.
24 2 Drug nomenclature(c) Penicillins and cephalosporins are included within the general class of “β￾lactams” because they have a four-membered lactam as a common structural feature.
In all cases, this ring is condensed with another five- or six-membered heterocycle,
giving rise to penicillins and cephalosporins, respectively. We then establish the sys￾tematic names of penicillin G and cephalothin (Fig. 2.22).
For the nomenclature of these drugs, there are several possibilities, from a totally sys￾tematic name, through semisystematic names, to a common serial name.
Let us look at the different forms of nomenclature of the three nuclei (Fig. 2.23).
Consequently, the systematic names of penicillin G and cephalothin are as follows:
Penicillin G: 6-(Phenylacetamido)-3,3-dimethyl-7-oxo-4-thia-1-azabicyclo[3.2.0]-heptane
-2-carboxylic acid; alternative: 6-(phenylacetamido)penicillanic acid.
Cephalothin: 3-(Acetoxymethyl)-7-[2-(2-thienyl)acetamido]-8-oxo-5-thia-1-azabicyclo
[4.2.0]oct-2-ene-2-carboxylic acid; alternative: 7-(2-(2-thienyl)acetamido] cephalo￾Fig. 2.22: A penicillin and a cephalosporin.
Fig. 2.23: Several possibilities of naming penicillins and cephalosporins.
2.9 Bicyclic hydrocarbons 25sporanic acid. It is convenient to show the names of two radicals derived from thio￾phene (Fig. 2.24).
2.9.3 Spiro or spirane systems
It is said that two rings are united to form a spiro structure when they share a single
atom, and this is the unique union that exists between them. The common atom is
called the “spiro atom”. To name them, there are two valid options. In the first, spiro
is written first, followed by square brackets of the number of carbon atoms attached
to the spiro atom, ordered from smaller to larger rings, separated by a point and then
the linear hydrocarbon containing the same total number of carbon atoms is named.
Let us look at two examples (Fig. 2.25).
They are numbered beginning with the carbon atom of the smallest chain next to the
spiro carbon, continue through the spiro carbon, and finally continue to number the
major cycle. If there are substituents, try to give them the lowest possible locant (Fig. 2.26).
The second or alternative option to name these spiro compounds is to put the
name of the major cycle before the smaller one and insert the word “spiro”. Each
cycle maintains its own numbering, although the carbons of the mentioned cycle are
marked with primes at the end (Fig. 2.27).
Fig. 2.24: Two radicals derived from thiophene.
Fig. 2.25: Examples of spiro compounds.
26 2 Drug nomenclature2.10 Heterocycles
Heterocycle denominates any cyclic system in which one or more links are constituted
by heteroatoms, i.e. atoms other than carbon. Most heterocyclic systems have a com￾mon name: pyrrole, furan, thiophene, pyridine, indole, and quinoline. Those that do not
have a common name are named combining a series of prefixes and roots. The prefixes
indicate the heteroatom: oxa- (O), thia- (S), aza (N), in this order of priority, if there is
more than one heteroatom in a cycle. The roots indicate the size of the ring and its de￾gree of saturation. Hantzsch and Widman introduced a nomenclature system for five￾and six-membered nitrogen heterocycles which has spread to other heterocyclic rings.
The Hantzsch–Widman method is the most often used to name heterocycles that
do not have bridges. The roots corresponding to heterocycles of three to ten atoms are
indicated in Tab. 2.3. It consists of five sections: the first column shows the size of the
cycle; the following two contain the roots to be used when the heterocycle contains
nitrogen and the latter two the roots for heterocycles without nitrogen. In addition, the
particles are different if the cycle contains the maximum number of nonaccumulated
double bonds (unsaturated, columns 2 and 4) or fully saturated (columns 3 and 5). Nitro￾gen heterocycles of six to ten members are an exception, since their total saturation is
expressed in the usual way with the prefix “perhydro” preceding the name of the unsat￾urated compound.
Fig. 2.26: Fluspirilene (antipsychotic agent).
Fig. 2.27: Another form of naming and numbering spiro compounds.
2.10 Heterocycles 27In those heterocycles in which two or more identical heteroatoms exist, they will be
indicated by a multiplier di, tri, etc., before the corresponding prefix. The numbering of
cycles with a single heteroatom always begins in this one. If the heteroatoms are of a
different nature, they are numbered beginning with the higher priority O > S > N. Before
developing the nomenclature of some examples of heterocyclic drugs, we will proceed
to name the carbonic acid derivatives, which are important reagents in the synthesis of
drugs or form part of the structures of important groups of drugs (Fig. 2.28).
Tab. 2.3: Common name endings for heterocyclic compounds.
Size Nitrogen cycles Non-nitrogen cycles
Unsaturated Saturated Unsaturated Saturated
 -irine -iridine -irene -irane
 -ete -etidine -ete -etane
 -ole -olidine -ole -olane
 -ine ✶ -in -ane
 -epine ✶ -epin -epane
 -ocine ✶ -ocin -ocane
 -nonine ✶ -nonin -nonane
✶
Perhydro followed by the termination of the unsaturated heterocycles.
Fig. 2.28: Carbonic acid derivatives.
28 2 Drug nomenclatureConsider the antihypertensive agent, guanethidine; the prefix perhydro will be used
to indicate the saturation (Fig. 2.29).
Consider the antiulcer agent cimetidine (Fig. 2.30).
The antiulcer drug ranitidine contains three amino groups, two of which are linked to
the same carbon of a unit of ethylene. Accordingly, the fundamental structural unit is
a vinylidenediamine, or 1,1-ethylenediamine (Fig. 2.31).
Fig. 2.29: Guanethidine (antihypertensive agent).
Fig. 2.30: Cimetidine (antiulcer agent).
Fig. 2.31: Ranitidine (antiulcer agent).
2.10 Heterocycles 29A group of great importance within the heterocyclic nucleus drugs are the so-called
benzodiazepines, with multiple actions but mainly anxiolytic, anticonvulsive, seda￾tive, and hypnotic drugs. One of the simplest drug is diazepam (Fig. 2.32).
In Chemical Abstracts, diazepam receives a name almost equivalent, although with
the incorporation of hydrogen indicated by “2H”, which the nomenclature IUPAC con￾siders unnecessary.
Another example is chlordiazepoxide or Librium® (Fig. 2.33).
The frequency of heterocyclic systems in compounds of natural origin determines the
proliferation of common names, among which we refer to the most frequent ones in
Fig. 2.34 (five-membered heterocycles) and Fig. 2.35 (six-membered heterocycles):
2.10.1 Condensed heterocycles
Most important is to choose a fundamental component and name the secondary com￾ponents as prefixes, usually ending in “o”. Where the name of a (isolated) component
Fig. 2.32: Diazepam.
Fig. 2.33: Librium®.
30 2 Drug nomenclatureFig. 2.34: Selected five-membered heterocyclic skeletons.
Fig. 2.35: Selected six-membered heterocyclic skeletons.
2.10 Heterocycles 31requires localizers for hetero atoms (e.g. 1,3,4-triazole), and these numbers do not cor￾respond to those of the system after fusion, they should be indicated in square brack￾ets, apart from the localizers for fusion, which also go in a pair of square brackets.
When the secondary component to be named is furan, thiophene, pyridine, quin￾oline, isoquinoline, pyrimidine, or imidazole, the terms “furo”, “thieno”, “pyrido”,
“quino”, “isoquino”, “pyrimidino”, and “imidazo”, respectively, are used.
Finally, if a heteroatom is at the confluence of two rings, separation of the system
into components will be considered part of the two that result (Fig. 2.36).
2.11 Numbering of condensed heterocycles
The numbering of the condensed heterocycle follows the same orientation and start op￾erations in the upper right ring as described for nonheterocyclic systems. The heteroa￾toms common to two or more rings now have their own locator, a number that is not
followed by a letter, as in the carbocyclic systems. When more than one correct orienta￾tion is possible, the following criteria are applied until the ambiguity is eliminated:
(a) Lowest numbering to the heteroatoms together
(b) Lowest numbering for the most preferred heteroatom
(c) Lowest numbering for carbons common to rings
(d) Lowest numbering to hydrogenated positions
First, the common link is located, and then the simple heterocycles that compose it
are named (simple component is one that has a common name but with the most
complex structure possible).
The heterocycle, which gives the compound the name, is the heterocycle base,
which is preceded by a bracket with two numbers and a letter indicating the common
link, and before the bracket the non-base heterocycle is placed as a prefix. The lower￾case letter locates the common link of the base heterocycle, and the numbers locate
the non-base heterocycle common bond. The sense traversed by the base heterocycle
is then matched to the path of the non-base heterocycle. Finally, the complete con￾densed heterocycle is numbered.
Fig. 2.36: Separation of a bicyclic system into its components, when the heteroatom is at the confluence
of two rings.
32 2 Drug nomenclatureThe most commonly used prefixes are furan, imidazo (imidazole), isoquino (isoqui￾noline), pyrido (pyridine), pyrazine (pyrazine), pyran (pyran), pyrimido (pyrimidine),
quinoline (quinoline), thieno (thiophene), pyrrolo (pyrrole), and pyrazole (pyrazole).
We will number the following condensed heterocycle as an example (Fig. 2.37).
2.12 Criteria for choosing the base heterocycle
1. The one containing nitrogen (pyridine versus pyran)
2. If there is no nitrogen, the one containing the heteroatom other than N, in the
order of preference set (O > S) (Fig. 2.38)
3. The one with the highest number of cycles in the system (Fig. 2.39)
4. The one with the largest ring (Fig. 2.40)
Fig. 2.37: Naming and numbering a condensed bis-heterocycle, having a nitrogen atom.
Fig. 2.38: Naming and numbering a condensed bis-heterocycle, not having a nitrogen atom.
Fig. 2.39: The highest number of cycles is the main component for a condensed heterocycle.
2.12 Criteria for choosing the base heterocycle 335. A component containing a heteroatom with the higher priority (O>S>N) (Fig. 2.41)
6. Of the two components that have the same size, number, and type of heteroa￾tomic bases, the one that is considered to have the lower numbering for the het￾eroatoms is chosen as the prefix (Fig. 2.42)
Consider the following examples. In the case of doxepin, the central heterocycle is an
oxepin, partially hydrogenated and condensed with two benzenes (Fig. 2.43).
Thus, it is a dibenzo[b,e]oxepin. Their numbering must match the lowest possible
number (5) to the oxygen. Its systematic name is 11-[3-(dimethylamino)propylidene]-
6,11-dihydrodibenzo[b,e]oxepin or alternatively as (E)-3-(dibenzo)[b,e]oxepin-11(6H)-
ylidene)-N,N-dimethylpropan-1-amine, taking into account the amino function is the
main functional group (Fig. 2.43).
Clothiapine raises another problem (Fig. 2.44).
Fig. 2.40: The largest ring is the main component for a condensed bis-heterocycle with the same
heteroatom.
Fig. 2.41: The component containing a heteroatom with the higher priority (O>S>N) is the main
component for a condensed bis-heterocycle with the same size.
Fig. 2.42: The component with the lower numbers for the heteroatoms before fusion is the main
component for a condensed bis-heterocycle with the same heteroatom.
34 2 Drug nomenclatureThe second numbering is correct, since sulfur is preferential in relation to nitrogen.
Since the positions of S and N after condensation (5 and 10) do not coincide with their
locators in 1,4-thiazepine, these should be indicated in brackets: 2-chloro-11-(4-methyl
-1-piperazine-1-yl)dibenzo[b,f]-1,4-thiazepine.
2.13 Heterocycles condensed with benzene
They are named by placing the “benzo” prefix in the name of the heterocycle, losing
the final “o” if the heterocycle begins with a vowel. The position of the heteroatoms in
Fig. 2.43: Numbering and orientation of doxepin.
Fig. 2.44: Numbering and orientation of clothiapine.
2.13 Heterocycles condensed with benzene 35the condensed end system is indicated by locators, and with a letter the side by which
it binds to benzene. Examples are shown in Fig. 2.45.
After Fig. 2.46, where some of the most important heterocyclic systems are selected, a
couple of examples of drugs will be proposed, in which several aspects treated in this
chapter are consolidated.
Consider the case of a phenothiazine with a substituent at its 10-position, which con￾tains a spiro derivative (Fig. 2.47).
Finally, let us look at another example in the area of benzodiazepines. The first is
the hypnotic-sedative drug estazolam (Fig. 2.48).
Fig. 2.45: Heterocycles condensed with benzene.
Fig. 2.46: Names of some condensed heterocyclic systems selected, in many cases, with a specific
numbering system.
36 2 Drug nomenclature2.14 Exercises
A. Name the following drugs:
Fig. 2.47: A phenothiazine with a substituent that contains a spiro derivative.
Fig. 2.48: Name and numbering of estazolam.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
2.14 Exercises 37(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
38 2 Drug nomenclature(16)
(17)
(18)
(19)
(20)
(21)
(22)
(23)
(24)
(25)
2.14 Exercises 39(26)
(27)
(28)
(29)
(30)
(31)
(32)
(33)
(34)
(35)
(36)
40 2 Drug nomenclatureB. Formulate the following drugs:
(1) 2-(4-Phenyl-3-fluorophenyl)propionic acid
(2) 2-[2-(2,6-Dichlorophenylamino)phenyl]acetic acid
(3) Ethyl 7-chloro-4-ethoxy-6-fluoroquinoline-3-carboxylate
(4) 7-Chloro-10-(2-dimethylaminoethyl)-5,10-dihydrodibenzo[b,e]-1,4-diazepine-11-one
(5) 3-(4,5-Diphenyloxazol-2-yl)propionic acid
(6) 5-(3-Methylamino)propyl-5H-dibenzo[b,f]azepine; alternatively named as 3-
(5H-dibenzo[b,f]azepine-5-yl)-N-methylpropan-1-amine
(7) 10-(3-Dimethylaminopropyl)-9,9-dimethyl-9,10-dihydroacridine; alternatively
named as 3-(9,9-dimethylacridin-10(9H)-yl)-N,N-dimethylpropan-1-amine
(8) Ethyl-7-chloro-2,3-dihydro-2-oxo-5-phenyl-1H-benzo[e]-1,4-diazepine-3-carboxylate
(9) 5-(Dimethylamino)-9-methyl-2-propyl-1H-benzo[e]pyrazolo[1,2-a]-1,2,4-triazine￾1,3(2H)-dione
(10) 3-Acetoxy-5-(2-diethylaminoethyl)-2-(4-methoxyphenyl)-2,3-dihydro-1,5-benzothia￾zepine-4(5H)-one; alternatively named as 8-chloro-5-(2-(diethylamino)ethyl)-2-(4-
methoxyphenyl)-4-oxo-2,3,4,5-tetrahydrobenzo[b]-1,4-thiazepine-3-yl acetate
(11) 5-(2-Fluorophenyl)-1-methyl-7-nitro-1,3-dihydrobenzo[e]-1,4-diazepine-2-one
(12) 2-Methyl-3-(2-methylphenyl)quinazoline-4(3H)-one
(13) 7-[(2-Amino-2-phenyl)acetamido]-3-methyl-8-oxo-5-thia-1-azabicyclo [4.2.0]oct￾2-ene-2-carboxilic acid
(14) 11-Chloro-12b-phenyl-2,8-dimethyl-8,12b-dihydro-5H-[1,3]oxacino[3,2-d]-1,4-benzodi￾azepine-4,7-dione; alternatively named as 11-chloro-2,8-dimethyl-12b-phenyl-8,12b￾dihydro-4H-benzo[f]-1,3-oxazino[3,2-d]-1,4-diazepine-4,7(6H)-dione
(15) 6-(2-Phenoxybutanamido)-3,3-dimethyl-7-oxo-4-thia-1-azabicyclo[3.2.0]hep￾tane-2-carboxylic acid
(16) 2-Butyryl-10-{3-[4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazinyl]propyl}phenothiazine; alter￾natively named as 1-{10-[3-(4-(2-hydroxyethyl)piperazine-1-yl]propyl}-10H￾phenothiazine-2-yl)butan-1-one
(17) 4-[4-(4-Chlorophenyl)-4-hydroxypiperidine-1-yl]-1-(4-fluorophenyl)butan-1-one
(18) N-(4-Chlorobenzyl)-Nʹ,Nʹ-dimethyl-N-pyridine-2-yl-ethylene-1,2-diamine; alter￾natively named as N1
-(4-chlorobenzyl)-N2
,N2
-dimethyl-N1
-(pyridine-2-yl)eth￾ane-1,2-diamine
(19) 6-(2,6-Dimethoxybenzamido)-3,3-dimethyl-7-oxo-4-thia-1-azabicyclo[3.2.0]hep￾tane-2-carboxylic acid
(20) 1-[4-Hydroxy-3-(hydroxymethyl)phenyl]-2-tert-butylaminoethanol
2.14 Exercises 413 Search for prototypes
3.1 Goals
– To know the global process through which new prototypes are discovered and
the methodologies used over time
– To know the importance of isolation, purification, and structural determination
of drugs
3.2 Traditional and current discovery of new drugs
One of the greatest difficulties that the student finds when studying pharmaceutical
chemistry (PC) is both the high number and the great structural diversity of the drugs
to be memorized. Therefore, in order to facilitate the learning of this discipline, the
authors have decided to minimize the number of structures and, in addition, the
chemical structures detailed in these first general chapters will be later studied in the
corresponding descriptive themes in Volume 2 of this series.
The first thing required to begin a PC project is to have a leader, that is, a compound
that can be considered as therapeutically useful. The level of biological activity may not
be particularly noticeable, because this is not a fundamental issue. The lead compound is
not intended for use in clinical practice. It is only the starting derivative from which a
clinically useful compound can be developed. It does not matter whether or not this com￾pound is toxic or has side effects. One of the fundamental objectives of PC is the search
for drugs that are more potent, more selective, and less toxic in their therapeutic action.
Lead compounds can be obtained from a variety of natural sources, such as flora
and fauna, or synthetic compounds prepared in the laboratory. If a drug or poison
produces a biological effect, it is because there must be a molecular target in the
body. Many of the earliest known drugs, such as the analgesic morphine (Fig. 3.1), are
natural compounds derived from plants that coincidentally interacted with a molecu￾lar target of the human body. Subsequently, chemical messengers or neurotransmit￾ters began to be discovered. These have a short life span and are released by the
nerves to interact with specific cellular targets. For example, since the 1970s, a wide
variety of peptides and proteins that act as natural analgesics (enkephalins and en￾dorphins) of the body have been discovered. Quinine is a natural alkaloid with antipy￾retic, antimalarial, and analgesic properties.
However, few chemical messengers have been identified, either because they are
present in very small amounts or because they have such a short half-life that their
isolation is not possible. In fact, today many chemical messengers are unknown. This
implies that many of the potential biological targets of the human body remain hid￾den. However, advances in genomics and proteomics have changed the whole picture
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783111316901-003of new drug development. Several genome projects have elucidated the DNA of hu￾mans and other life forms and have discovered a large number of new proteins that
are biological targets for the future.
These biological targets have been hidden for so long that their natural chemical
messengers are also unknown, and for the first time, PC is facing new targets without
leading compounds that interact with them. Such targets have been defined as orphan
receptors, and the current challenge is to find chemical compounds that interact with
each of these targets to discover what their functions are and to see if they are appro￾priate as drug targets.
3.2.1 Screening of natural products
With this search procedure, a large number of chemical compounds, natural or syn￾thetic, are subjected to a battery of pharmacological tests, in search of an unknown or
hypothetical action. This mass trial is one of the most costly and least active procedures;
however, it has been successfully used in some fields, such as in the discovery of new
antibiotics like chloramphenicol (Fig. 3.2), isolated from Streptomyces venezuelae in the
general microorganism screening program at Parke-Davis Laboratories in the USA.
Natural products are an important source of biologically active compounds. Gener￾ally, the natural source has some form of biological activity, and the compound re￾sponsible for this activity is known as the active principle. This structure can act as a
leader compound. Most biologically active natural products are secondary metabolites
Fig. 3.1: Lead compounds such as morphine and quinine.
Fig. 3.2: Chloramphenicol.
3.2 Traditional and current discovery of new drugs 43with complex structures. Unfortunately, this complexity makes its synthesis difficult,
and the compound generally has to be extracted from its natural source, a slow, ex￾pensive, and inefficient process. Therefore, the design of simpler compounds is usu￾ally an effective approach for the development of new drugs.
Plants have always been a rich source of leading compounds (e.g. morphine, co￾caine, quinine, tubocurarine, nicotine, and muscarin). Many of them are useful drugs
in themselves (e.g. morphine and quinine), and others have been the basis for syn￾thetic drugs (e.g. local anesthetics developed from cocaine).
Microorganisms such as bacteria and fungi have also been the source of drugs
and leading compounds. The screening of microorganisms became very popular after
the discovery of penicillin. Land and water samples have been collected from all over
Fig. 3.3: Naturally existing or semisynthetic antibiotics.
44 3 Search for prototypesthe world to study new strains of fungi and bacteria and have resulted in a huge arse￾nal of antibacterial agents such as cephalosporins, tetracyclines, aminoglycosides, ri￾famycins (Fig. 3.3), and chloramphenicol.
Poisons and toxins have been used as lead compounds in the development of new
drugs. For example, the teprotide (nonapeptide isolated from the Brazilian viper Bo￾throps jararaca) was the leading compound for the development of the antihyperten￾sive agent captopril. Teprotide contains the strange pyroglutamic acid in its N-terminal
part and the proline in its C-terminal part (Fig. 3.4):
3.2.2 Existing drugs used as leaders
The molecular manipulation of known drugs consists of a progressive modification of
the chemical structure of chemical substances that possess a certain biological activ￾ity. Many companies use drugs established by their competitors as leading com￾pounds to design a drug that allows them to establish themselves in the same market
area. The aim is to modify the structure sufficiently to avoid, on the one hand, the
restrictions of the patent, and on the other hand to improve the therapeutic proper￾ties. For example, the antihypertensive captopril was used as a lead compound to pro￾duce their own antihypertensive agents (Fig. 3.5).
Although often neglected as “twin” drugs, they sometimes show improvements
over the original drug (better drugs: “me better”). For example, modern penicillins
are more selective, more potent, and more stable than the original penicillins.
An existing drug may have another minor property or an undesirable effect that
may be useful in another area of medicine. In this way, the drug could act as a leader
in line of its side effects. Consequently, the aim would be to increase the side effect
and eliminate the major biological activity. This has been described as the “selective
optimization of side activities” approach.
For example, most sulfonamides have been used as antibacterial agents. However,
some sulfonamides cannot be used clinically because they produce hypoglycemia and
accordingly cause seizures. Accordingly, structural modifications were performed to
eliminate the antibacterial activity and potentiate hypoglycemic activity. This led to the
Fig. 3.4: Teprotide.
3.2 Traditional and current discovery of new drugs 45antidiabetic agent tolbutamide (Fig. 3.6). Similarly, the development of sulfonamide￾type diuretics such as chlorothiazide arose from the observation that sulfanilamide has
a diuretic effect at high doses (due to its action on the carbonic anhydrase enzyme).
In some cases, the side effect may be strong enough for the drug to be used without
modification. For example, the drug sildenafil (Viagra®) that treats male impotence
(Fig. 3.6) was originally designed as a vasodilator to treat angina and hypertension.
Chlorpromazine is used as a neuroleptic (a neuroleptic or antipsychotic is a drug
that is commonly, but not exclusively, used for the treatment of psychosis) in psychia￾try, but developed from the antihistamine agent promethazine. It may seem strange,
but it was known that promethazine has sedative effects, so pharmaceutical chemists
modified the structure to increase the sedative effects at the expense of antihistamine
activity.
3.2.3 Isolation and identification of drug metabolites
Acetalinide and acetophenidine are converted in the body in paracetamol (Interna￾tional Nonproprietary Name), which is actually the active drug (analgesic–antipyretic)
in cases of intolerance to Aspirin® (Scheme 3.1).
Fig. 3.5: Captopril and “me too” drugs.
46 3 Search for prototypes3.2.4 Examples of serendipity
The term “serendipity” is used more and more in science to describe the way in
which many of the great discoveries have been made. Chance plays a very important
role in unforeseen valuable findings, when luck favors the prepared mind, in the
words of Pasteur (one of the beneficiaries of serendipity). This term can be defined as
“the ability to make discoveries by accident and sagacity, when one is looking for
Fig. 3.6: Drugs developed through potentiation of a side effect.
Scheme 3.1: Relationship between paracetamol and its two metabolic precursors.
3.2 Traditional and current discovery of new drugs 47something else”. It was 1754 when the English writer Horace Walpole encountered an
ancient story from Asia, which occurred in Serendip, a former name of the present
country of Sri Lanka, also previously known as the Kingdom of Ceylon. The monarch
of that country sent his three children to travel the world to get the essential items he
needed. The princes of Serendip visited the villages, had remarkable experiences, and
returned with far more valuable finds than their father had asked them. Serendipity
was decisive in the discovery of America, since we know that what Columbus was
looking for was a shorter way to reach the Indies.
Some notable examples are depicted in Scheme 3.2, and in Figs. 3.7 and 3.8.
(a) For example, prontosil rubrum, which is initially synthesized as an azo dye, is use￾ful for staining microorganisms, casually opening the field of chemotherapy
when tested in vivo and demonstrated its antibacterial therapeutic activity
(Scheme 3.2).
(b) Rubber industry workers were repelled by alcohol. This was caused by an antioxi￾dant agent, which was used in the rubber manufacturing process. Ethanol is me￾tabolized by sequential metabolic oxidation, first to acetaldehyde by alcohol
dehydrogenase and then to acetic acid by means of aldehyde dehydrogenase. Di￾sulfiram irreversibly inhibits the oxidation of acetaldehyde, causing a consider￾able increase in acetaldehyde concentrations after the ingestion of alcohol, which
was so unpleasant that workers preferred not to drink. The antioxidant agent be￾came the leading compound for the development of disulfiram (Antabuse®), used
for the treatment of chronic alcoholism. It is believed that the ability of disulfiram
to react with the sulfhydryl groups of essential proteins (generating diethyldithio￾carbamate) is important for its activity (Fig. 3.7).
(c) Clonidine was initially designed as a nasal vasoconstrictor. Clinical trials revealed
that this this effect is due to a marked decrease in blood pressure, which makes it
an important antihypertensive agent.
Scheme 3.2: Examples of metabolic reduction.
48 3 Search for prototypes(d) Imipramine was synthesized as an analog of chlorpromazine and was initially
used as an antipsychotic agent. It was found, however, to alleviate depression,
which led to the development of a number of compounds classified as tricyclic
antidepressants (Fig. 3.8).
3.3 Planned syntheses of new chemical compounds
on rational bases
It is the golden dream of pharmaceutical chemists and pharmacologists. The ultimate
aim in the synthesis of a drug is to prepare one for the “measurement” of the biologi￾cal function to be modified.
Fig. 3.8: Examples of drugs discovered by serendipity.
Fig. 3.7: Inhibition of aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) by disulfiram.
3.3 Planned syntheses of new chemical compounds on rational bases 493.4 Isolation and purification
If the compound (or active principle) is present in a mixture of other compounds, it
must then be isolated and purified. The ease with which the active ingredient can be
purified and isolated depends largely on its structure, stability, and the amount of the
compound. For example, Fleming recognized the antibiotic properties of penicillin and
its nontoxic characteristics for humans, but did not consider it for clinical use, because
he was not able to purify it. He could isolate it in an aqueous solution, but whenever he
tried to eliminate the water, the drug was decomposed. It was not until the development
of new experimental procedures such as lyophilization and chromatography that the iso￾lation and purification of both penicillin and other natural products became possible.
3.5 Structural determination
Nowadays, a structural determination can take a week of work but in the past, it
could be carried out for two to three decades. For example, the empirical formula of
cholesterol was known in 1888, but its chemical structure was not completely estab￾lished until 1932 by X-ray crystallography (Fig. 3.9).
In the past, structures were degraded to simpler compounds, which could be further
degraded to readily recognizable fragments. From these smaller fragments, a possible
structure was proposed, but the only way to test the proposed structure was to carry
out its total synthesis and compare its physical and chemical properties with those of
the natural compound.
Today, structural determination is a relatively simple process, and it is only nec￾essary to carry out its total synthesis to corroborate its structure when it has been
obtained in minimal quantities. The most useful analytical techniques for structural
determination are X-ray crystallography and NMR spectroscopy. The application of
the first technique allows obtaining a “snapshot” of the molecule, but a suitable crys￾tal of the molecule is required. The latter technique is used more routinely and can be
carried out on any sample, whether solid, oily, or liquid. There are different NMR ex￾Fig. 3.9: Cholesterol.
50 3 Search for prototypesperiments that can be used to establish the structure of complex molecules, such as
two-dimensional NMR techniques.
In cases where there is not enough sample for an NMR analysis, mass spectrome￾try can be very useful. The fragmentation model can provide important clues about
the structure, but it does not definitively prove the chemical structure. In this case,
complete synthesis would be required as the final test.
3.6 Key notes
1. A prototype is a structure that shows a useful pharmacological activity and can
act as the starting point for drug design.
2. Natural products are a rich source of hit compounds. The agent responsible for
the biological activity of a natural extract is known as the active principle.
3. Serendipity has played a role in the discovery of new compounds.
4. If a hit compound is present in a natural extract, it has to be isolated and purified
in order to determine its structure. X-ray crystallography and NMR spectroscopy
are particularly important in its structure determination.
5. A molecular target is chosen, based on the fact that is believed to influence a par￾ticular disease, when affected by a drug. The greater the selectivity that can be
achieved, the less chance of side effects.
3.7 A pitfall
It is possible to identify whether a particular enzyme or receptor plays a role in a par￾ticular ailment. However, the body is a highly complex system. For any given function,
there are usually several messengers, receptors, and enzymes involved in the process.
For example, there is no one simple cause for hypertension. This is illustrated by the
variety of receptors and enzymes, which can be targeted in its treatment. These include
β1-adrenoreceptors, calcium ion channels, angiotensin-converting enzyme, and the po￾tassium ion channel. As a result, more than one target may need to be addressed for a
particular ailment. For example, most of the current therapies for asthma involve a
combination of a bronchodilator (β2-agonist) and an anti-inflammatory agent such as a
corticosteroid. In the medical practice, a cocktail of drugs is typically used.
3.7 A pitfall 514 Optimization of prototypes
4.1 Goals
– To know the different tools of structural variation and their use in prototype opti￾mization in the discovery of new drugs
– To start with the concept of the cost of research: the idea that starting from active
compounds it is possible to produce other active compounds is an economic
concept
4.2 Molecular modification
Molecular manipulation consists of a progressive modification of the chemical struc￾ture of substances that possess a certain biological activity (prototypes or series
heads); it is the most frequent and, so far, the most cost-effective procedure for the
genesis of new drugs. About 80–90% of the current drugs have been obtained in
this way.
Since there is a high probability that a molecule obtained by modification of an
active prototype has useful properties, this drug-screening process is usually more
productive than the assay, without a sufficiently solid base, of novel compounds iso￾lated from nature or synthesized at the laboratory. In addition, it offers economic ad￾vantages, since both the synthetic methods and the pharmacological tests of the
analogs will be similar to those used for the reference compound.
4.2.1 Purpose
– Development of substitutes and therapeutic copies
– Development of drugs with a different action spectrum
– Transformation of agonists into antagonists
– Separation of one of the components of the action
– Modification of pharmacokinetics
– Modification of the distribution
– To increase chemical stability
4.2.1.1 Development of substitutes and therapeutic copies
(1) Development of existing drug substitutes, more powerful if possible. Examples:
– The passage of pronetalol (β-adrenergic blocker) to propranolol, with greater po￾tency than the previous one (Fig. 4.1).
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783111316901-004– Conversion of (S)-1-(3-mercaptopropionyl)-L-proline into captopril {(2S)-N-[3-
mercapto-2-methylpropionyl]-L-proline}, an antihypertensive agent, ten times
more potent than its demethylated analog (Fig. 4.2).
(2) The development of therapeutic copies is a quick option to find new patentable
formulas that can successfully compete in the market. They require less economic in￾vestment but must compete with existing drugs of proven efficacy in the same thera￾peutic group. Their commercial success is conditioned by the galenic or therapeutic
advantages that they provide with respect to existing drugs. From the antihyperten￾sive drug enalapril, compounds such as lisinopril and cilazapril were developed
(Fig. 4.3).
Fig. 4.1: Transition from pronetalol to propranolol.
Fig. 4.2: Transition from (S)-1-(3-mercaptopropionyl)-L-proline into captopril.
Fig. 4.3: Development of therapeutic copies.
4.2 Molecular modification 534.2.1.2 Development of drugs with different spectrum of action
(1) Transformation of agonists into antagonists. Thus, the β-adrenergic antagonist di￾chloroisoprenaline is obtained from the isoprenaline agonist by substituting the phe￾nolic hydroxyl groups for chlorine atoms (Fig. 4.4).
(2) Separation of any component to enhance or modify the action of the prototype.
Examples:
– The virilizing effect of testosterone is lost when it is transformed into a 19-
noresteroid, norethandolone, which is used as an anabolic drug (Fig. 4.5).
– The weak uricosuric character of phenylbutazone, attributed to the acidity of the
hydrogen at 4 position, can be enhanced by substituting its butyl group for an
electron-withdrawing phenylsulfinylethyl group, which reinforces the acidic
character, resulting in sulfinpyrazone (more potent uricosuric) (Fig. 4.6).
Fig. 4.4: Development of an antagonist (dichloroisoprenaline) from an agonist (isoprenaline).
Fig. 4.6: Sulfinpyrazone has a higher uricosuric activity than phenylbutazone.
Fig. 4.5: Norethandrolone that has not the virilizing action of testosterone.
54 4 Optimization of prototypes4.2.1.3 Modification of pharmacokinetics
The dose–effect relationship can be modified with structural changes that alter the
rate of metabolism and/or excretion. Example: passage of tolbutamide, oral antidia￾betic of short duration of action, to clorpropamide of a more lasting action (Fig. 4.7).
4.2.1.4 Modification of distribution
This allows the drug to reach the different organs and tissues in which it acts. This
purpose can be achieved through various procedures:
1. Introducing a fixed ionic charge to prevent the passage through the blood–brain
barrier (Fig. 4.8).
2. Using carrier groups to increase cell or tissue selectivity of the drug.
The active structure of nitrogen mustards, nonselective alkylating agents, can be trans￾formed into useful anticancer agents by increasing their selectivity by rapidly dividing
cells. To this end, fixed conveyor groups are introduced on the N, which facilitate the active
transport of the thus latent drug to the sites of action. Transporting groups such as L￾phenylalanine or uracil, present in melphalan and uramustine, can be used, because
tumor tissues synthesize proteins and DNA at a faster rate than healthy tissues so that their
demand for amino acids and bases is greater. Estramustine (estradiol + mustine) shows a
selective distribution to estrogen-dependent breast tumors (Fig. 4.9).
Fig. 4.7: From an oral short-acting antidiabetic to another one with a more acting effect.
Fig. 4.8: Introducing a fixed ionic charge to prevent the passage through the blood–brain barrier (BBB).
4.2 Molecular modification 553. Increased chemical stability, mainly against the acidic environment, to make it pos￾sible for the drug to be administered orally. Thus, by modifications in the side chain
of penicillins, active compounds are obtained orally, with greater resistance to the
acidic environment (Fig. 4.10).
4.3 Strategies
There are three possible strategies: modulative, disjunctive, and conjunctive struc￾tural variations.
Fig. 4.9: Carrier groups increase cell or tissue selectivity of the drug.
Fig. 4.10: Increased chemical stability.
56 4 Optimization of prototypes4.3.1 Modulative structural variation
This makes limited transformations in the structure of the model, which retains its
fundamental structure:
– Vinylogy
– Homology
– Introduction of cyclic systems
– Introduction or substitution of polar groups, by nonpolar bulky ones
– Isosterism and bioisosterism
4.3.1.1 Vinylogy
It has been shown that certain molecules differing in one or more vinyl groups (CH =
CH) located in the side chain or included in a cycle may have similarity in their phar￾macological properties. Procaine vinylogous A and B are also local anesthetics. The
hydrogenated compound C, homologous to A (a homolog of a given compound is the
analog to it resulting from the addition (or subtraction) of one or more CH2 to a chain
or ring), lacks activity (Fig. 4.11).
– The resonant effect is not lessened by distance. The inductive effect does.
– If the electron density of a given area of a molecule is important for its binding to
the receptor, the biological activity can be maintained in the reference vinylo￾Fig. 4.11: Active vinylogous (A and B) of procaine; C is an inactive homolog of procaine.
4.3 Strategies 57gous. Sometimes, some surprising properties can be found in vinylogous prod￾ucts. Thus, the acetylcholine (AcC) vinilogous has nicotinic and no muscarinic ac￾tivity, while AcC presents both (Fig. 4.12).
– Vinylogy serves to demonstrate if resonance effects are important in terms of ac￾tivity (Fig. 4.13).
This example demonstrates that the activity lies in the distance that exists between the
ring and the chain, which disappears when the activity increases, by introducing a
vinyl group.
Vinylogy has also been applied in the opposite sense. Thus, removal of benzene ring
from the sweetener dulcin gives rise to ethoxyurea, an equally sweet substance (Fig. 4.14).
In short, vinylogy is the transmission of electronic effects through a conjugated bond￾ing system.
Fig. 4.12: Acetylcholine and vinylogous.
Fig. 4.13: Vinylogy might give rise to an inactive drug.
Fig. 4.14: An example in which elimination of a benzene ring maintains the sweetener characteristic.
58 4 Optimization of prototypes4.3.1.2 Homology
Homologs are those molecules that differ from one another in a methylene group or
more. Example: the anti-nicotinic drug hexamethonium (ganglioplejic effect, which
blocks the sympathetic and parasympathetic glanglionic nerve transmission) and its
decamethylene homologue decamethonium (curarizant effect, with a non-depolarizing
skeletal muscle relaxant activity) (Fig. 4.15).
4.3.1.3 Introduction of cyclic systems
This approach is useful for the study of the active conformation in flexible molecules.
The formation of a ring restricts the conformational freedom of the original molecule.
This modification may also entail the creation of new stereocenters in the molecule.
Examples: chlorpromazine and thioridazine (both phenothiazine neuroleptics), on￾dansetron (antiemetic), and cilansetron (an even more potent antiemetic) (Fig. 4.16).
Fig. 4.15: An example of homologous derivatives.
Fig. 4.16: Introduction of cycles.
4.3 Strategies 594.3.1.4 Introduction or substitution of polar groups, by nonpolar bulky ones
This is a procedure of particular interest for converting agonists into antagonists. An an￾tagonist is a substance having an action opposite to another to which it refers (Fig. 4.17).
Propranolol is used to treat tremors, angina (chest pain), hypertension, heart rhythm
disorders, and other heart or circulatory conditions. It is also used to treat or prevent
heart attacks.
Diphenhydramine is used to relieve red, irritated, itchy, watery eyes; sneezing;
and runny nose caused by hay fever, allergies, or the common cold.
4.3.1.5 Isosterism and bioisosterism
4.3.1.5.1 Isosterism
One of the most frequent criteria for molecular variation is that of isosterism, which
essentially consists of substituting atoms or groups of atoms equivalent in size and
electronic distribution. It is a chemical concept:
Fig. 4.17: Examples for the conversion of agonist into antagonist drugs.
60 4 Optimization of prototypes– Langmuir concept (1919)
– Grimm’s hydride displacement law (1925)
– Peripheral isoelectricity (Erlenmeyer, 1932)
(1) Langmuir defined isosteres as molecules or groups of atoms with the same number
of atoms and valence electrons (Fig. 4.18).
(2) Grimm formulated the so-called hydride displacement law, according to which the
addition of a hydrogen atom to an atom of atomic number “n” provides a species with
the same properties of the atom of higher atomic number “n + 1” (Fig. 4.19). In this way,
families of “pseudo-atoms” with common electronic characteristics arose.
Fig. 4.18: Examples of isosteric molecules.
Fig. 4.19: Grimm’s hydride displacement law. In each vertical column, the atom is followed by its
pseudoatom.
4.3 Strategies 61(3) In 1932, Erlenmeyer extended the concept of isosterism by proposing a broader defini￾tion of isosteres as those elements, molecules, or ions with a similar electronic distribu￾tion in their valence layer. The concept of isosterism was thus extended to the elements
of a column of the periodic system (e.g. carbon would be isostere of silicon and oxygen of
sulfur). In this way, the so-called annular equivalents were defined (clusters that can be
interchanged in a ring without giving rise to a substantial change in the physical and
chemical properties of the latter): the following groups –CH = CH– and –S– are examples
of equivalent ring groups that permit the explanation of the analogies between benzene
and thiophene. The above criteria lead to a series of “ring equivalents”, widely used for
the design of analogs (Fig. 4.20).
Cyclo-equivalents are the atoms or groups of atoms that can be replaced in cycles
without having a marked variation in their properties. All of the above are classical
isosteres.
Friedman in 1951 introduced the term “bioisosterism” (a biological concept) to
designate those molecules or atomic groups responsible for the same biological (or
antagonistic) activity as a result of a similarity in their physical and chemical proper￾ties. Thus, the “nonclassical isostere” arises corresponding to those groups of atoms
that, when introduced into a given molecule, generate compounds whose shape, size,
or other properties make them bioequivalent, despite not being isoelectronic. The
term “bioisosterism” acquires a broader character than the strict chemical notion
mentioned before. It is important to keep in mind that the term “bioisostere” will be
meaningless if the property or properties that make it comparable to a pair of chemi￾cal species are not indicated. Thus, for example, two classical isosteres according to
Fig. 4.20: Isosteric equivalences between some aromatic rings.
62 4 Optimization of prototypesGrimm’s law such as –OH and –CH3 can be considered as bioisosteres in volume but
not in terms of their lipophilia or in their electronic distribution.
As an example, sulfur atom is approximately equivalent to the vinylene group:
Compare the boiling points of several benzene and thiophene derivatives (Fig. 4.21).
All the above are classical isosteres. In the concept of isosterism, there is an evolution:
the first concept (Langmuir) is very restrictive, and gradually, a broader vision is given.
4.3.1.5.2 Bioisosterism
It is possible to indicate the following properties:
(a) Size: H, F (see Chapter 13 of Volume 2 of this series)
Br, Pri
I, But
Fluorine atom is considerably smaller than the other halogens. The fluorine deriva￾tives differ from the rest of the halogen derivatives in which the fluorine atom forms
particularly stable carbon bonds and, unlike what happens to the other halogens, is
very rarely ionized or displaced. Therefore, due to both its chemical inertia and its
small size, fluorine is often compared to hydrogen.
Fig. 4.21: Similarity of boiling points among several benzene and thiophene derivatives.
4.3 Strategies 63(b) Electronic distribution and polarizability (Fig. 4.22)
Catechol is a bioisostere of benzimidazole in the sense that while in the first case
a second ring may be formed through an intramolecular bond, in the second case, the
imidazole ring mimics the “five-membered ring” of catechol through a cycle formed
with covalent bonds.
In the same way, the bioisosterism between thiourea, N-cyanoguanidine, and β￾nitroketene aminal groups (Fig. 4.23) has been demonstrated in histamine H2-receptor
antagonists, also known as H2-blockers (burimamide, cimetidine, and ranitidine). We
will go more deep into this aspect in Chapter 7 of Volume 2 of this series.
When the biological activity depends fundamentally on the distribution of charges
and polar effects of the molecule, the maintenance of these factors can lead to bioisos￾Fig. 4.22: Bioisosteres based on analogous electronic distribution and polarizability.
Fig. 4.23: Bioisosterism between the thiourea, N-cyanoguanidino, and β-nitroketene aminal groups.
64 4 Optimization of prototypesteric equivalences between very different molecules. Pyridine and nitrobenzene may
serve to illustrate this possibility. To understand this relationship, we compare the
structures of benzene with that of pyridine and those of pentagonal aromatic hetero￾cycles, such as furan, thiophene, and pyrrole (Scheme 4.1).
The dipole moment helps in explaining the distribution of charge of a molecule: Dipole
moment expresses the polar character or polarity of molecules. The product of charge
and distance of separation of atoms in a chemical bond defines the term “dipole moment
of molecules”. If +q is the amount of positive charge separated by –q amount of negative
charge by the bond distance l, then dipole moment (μ) of the molecule = q × l. The dipole
moment allows us to verify experimentally the distribution of charges (Fig. 4.24).
Scheme 4.1: A π-deficient aromatic heterocycle (pyridine) and π-excedent aromatic heterocycles (furan,
thiophene, and pyrrole).
4.3 Strategies 65The consequences are very evident: pyridine will react fundamentally according to an
SNAr (nucleophilic aromatic substitution), while the three aromatic pentagonal het￾erocycles will do so according to the SEAr (aromatic electrophilic substitution). Chichi￾babin reaction is a method for producing 2-aminopyridine derivatives by the reaction
of pyridine with sodium amide (Fig. 4.25). The mechanism of the formation of 2-
aminopyridine by the Chichibabin reaction will be explained in Chapter 7 of Volume 2
of this series.
Fig. 4.24: Several possibilities for the electronic distribution of pyridine, although only one is the real one.
66 4 Optimization of prototypesPyridine and nitrobenzene resist SEAr, and when they do so under these conditions,
they direct the entrance of the electrophilic groups (E+
) toward the meta position. This
suggests a certain polar similarity, and consequently, the possibility of bioequiva￾lence: N,N-diethyl-m-nitrobenzamide, for example, possesses analeptic properties (an
analeptic agent is a stimulating drug of the central nervous system) very similar to
those of its pyridine analog, nikethamide (Fig. 4.26).
(c) Solubility in lipids, as in the –CH2– and –S– groups, or in the trimethylene and p￾phenylene groups (Fig. 4.27).
Fig. 4.25: Reactivity of pyridine against SNAr.
Fig. 4.26: N,N-Diethyl-m-nitrobenzamide and nikethamide possess similar analeptic properties.
Fig. 4.27: Groups with the same solubility in lipids.
4.3 Strategies 67(d) pKa, as in the acidic groups in Fig. 4.28.
In principle, the acidic character of the 5-tetrazolyl moiety and consequently its bioisos￾teric relationship with the carboxylic acid group (Scheme 4.2) may be surprising.
While the acidity of the carboxylic acid (pKa ≈ 4.2–4.4) is related to the resonance sta￾bilization of the carboxylate anion, the acidity of tetrazole (pKa ≈ 4.9) is attributed to
the delocalization of the negative charge on each of the nitrogen atoms of the five￾membered ring. Although the greater number of resonant forms of tetrazole, which
contribute to the final hybrid, might suggest that the resonance energy of tetrazole
was more effective than that of the carboxylate anion, the higher electronegativity of
the oxygen atom relative to that of nitrogen is a decisive factor to justify the higher
acidity of the carboxylic acid group.
(e) Ability to establish hydrogen bonds, as in the –OH group of phenol, –NH of CH3SO2
NH–, and R-NH-CO-NH–.
Fig. 4.28: Groups with similar acidity.
Scheme 4.2: Acidic characters of the carboxyl and of the 5-tetrazolyl groups.
68 4 Optimization of prototypes4.4 Disjunctive replication
This means reducing the structure of the model until you keep nothing more than the
essential part. These analogs are partial replicates of the prototype drug. The tech￾nique of opening cycles is used. Disjunction: action and effect of separating.
(a) Procaine is the result of the simplification of cocaine (Fig. 4.29).
(b) Some hypnoanalgesics derived from the simplification of morphine (Fig. 4.30).
From the comparison of these structures, it can be deduced that the analgesic ac￾tivity of morphine is associated with the presence of a benzene ring attached to a
quaternary carbon and this to a tertiary amine through a two-carbon chain; this
fragment is the pharmacophore of hypnoanalgesic drugs (Fig. 4.30).
Fig. 4.29: Simplification of the prototype (disjunctive replication) cocaine.
4.4 Disjunctive replication 694.5 Conjunctive replication
Larger replicas than the model are made. It has two aspects:
– Molecular duplication (of interest in the development of antimetabolites, Fig. 4.31).
Antimetabolites have a structure very similar to that of the natural substrate, result￾ing in biologically unusable products through the incorporation of molecules other
than the natural ones.
– Hybrid or molecular combination. This involves the combination of two different
molecules (Fig. 4.32).
Fig. 4.30: Simplification of the prototype (disjunctive replication) morphine.
70 4 Optimization of prototypes4.6 Peptidomimetics
Biologically active molecules containing amide bonds normally suffer from pharmaco￾kinetic hazards. Bioisosteric transformations have been carried out in the carboxamide
group in order to increase its stability with great success in the area of peptidomimetics
(these can be defined as structures capable of replacing peptides in their interactions
with receptors and enzymes). The most established modifications are as follows: N￾methylation, change of configuration (configuration D), formation of a retroamide or
azapeptide, use of aminoisobutyric acid or dehydroamino acids, substitution of the
amide bond by an ester (depsipeptides), introduction of the ketomethylene group, intro￾duction of the thioamide group, reduction of the amide carbonyl group, and use of an
olefinic double bond (Fig. 4.33).
The best known peptidomimetic is morphine, which owes its analgesic action to
its binding capacity to opioid receptors such as the endogenous peptides, enkephalins
and endorphins (Fig. 4.34).
4.7 Summary
The design and development of a lead compound into a drug is a laborious and often
costly process, with most candidates failing due to metabolism and pharmacokinetic
issues rather than potency. Bioisosteric replacement is a strategy used by medicinal
chemists to address these limitations while retaining the potency/efficacy of the initial
Fig. 4.31: Molecular duplication of the prototype PABA (conjunctive replication).
Fig. 4.32: Molecular combination of the prototypes (disjunctive replication) acetylsalicylic acid
and paracetamol.
4.7 Summary 71lead compound. The use of bioisosteres and the introduction of structural changes to
the lead compound allows the chemist to alter the compound’s size, shape, electronic
distribution, polarizability, dipole, polarity, lipophilicity, and pKa, while retaining po￾tent target engagement. Therefore, the bioisosteric approach can be used for the ratio￾nal modification of a lead compound toward a more attractive therapeutic agent with
improved potency, selectivity, altered physical, metabolic, toxicological properties
with the bonus of generating novel intellectual property.
Fig. 4.33: Isosteric substitutions of the peptide bond.
72 4 Optimization of prototypes4.8 Exercises
1. Indicate the molecular modification criteria used in the design of the following
drugs, giving a reasoned explanation:
(a)
(b)
Fig. 4.34: Met-enkephalin and morphine.
4.8 Exercises 73(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
74 4 Optimization of prototypes(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
4.8 Exercises 75(k)
(l)
(m)
(n)
76 4 Optimization of prototypes2. Given the following pairs of structures, indicate if they are isosteres, homologues,
or vinylogues:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
4.8 Exercises 77(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
78 4 Optimization of prototypes(k)
3. Explain the purpose of the molecular modification achieved when switching from
one drug to the other:
(a)
(b)
(c)
4.8 Exercises 79(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
80 4 Optimization of prototypes(h)
4.8 Exercises 815 Biological targets and receptors for drugs
5.1 Goals
– To understand the concept of biological target and natural ligand
– To know the interactions that allow drug–receptor molecular recognition as a
cause of chemical affinity, efficacy, or intrinsic activity
– To know stereochemical requirements of the drugs
– To know the existence of drugs that do not bind at the receptor-binding site
5.2 Membrane receptor
A membrane receptor is a macromolecule embedded in the cell membrane, with one part
of its structure oriented toward the outside and the other toward the interior of the cell.
There are a variety of chemical messengers or neurotransmitters that interact
with receptors: some are simple molecules, such as a quaternary ammonium salt (ace￾tylcholine), monoamines (noradrenaline, dopamine, and serotonin), or amino acids
(e.g. γ-aminobutyric acid, glutamic acid, and glycine) (Fig. 5.1). Other chemical messen￾Fig. 5.1: Examples of neurotransmitters and the hormone adrenaline.
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783111316901-005gers are more complex, and include lipids such as prostaglandins, neuropeptides such
as endorphins and enkephalins, and peptide hormones such as angiotensin.
5.3 Affinity and intrinsic activity: agonists and antagonists
There are two parameters defining the behavior of the drug in its relationship with
receptors:
1. Its ability to bind to receptors or affinity.
2. The ability to activate them, intrinsic activity or effectiveness.
According to the presence and absence of the described properties, drugs are classi￾fied into:
– Agonists: substances that possess receptor affinity and intrinsic activity.
– Antagonists: drugs that possess affinity, but not intrinsic activity, so they occupy
the receptor but are unable to activate it. In addition, they will oppose its occupa￾tion by agonists and will prevent it from producing an effect:
D + R Ð
k1
k2
DR ! E ð Þ effect
E = α½  FR
Pure agonist: α = 1 Pure antagonist: α = 0
Partial agonist:0< α < 1
The receptor may be
– linked to an ion channel;
– have catalytic capacity;
– associated with a G protein;
– intracellular.
5.4 Types of receptors
5.4.1 Ionic channels
The membrane is formed by a bilayer of molecules, whereby the center of the cell
membrane is hydrophobic (represented by wavy lines in Fig. 5.2), whereas the ter￾mini, which are directed toward the outside and to the cytoplasm of the cell, are hy￾drophilic (represented by circles in Fig. 5.2). This characteristic makes it difficult for
polar molecules and ions to enter or leave the cell, and the movement of sodium and
potassium ions through the membrane is crucial for the functioning of the nerves.
5.4 Types of receptors 83Ionic channels are complexes formed by five protein subunits that cross the cell
membrane. The center of the complex is hollow and is furrowed by polar amino
acids, which translates into a hydrophilic tunnel. Ions can traverse the fat barrier of
the cell membrane, moving through these hydrophilic channels or tunnels. However,
there has to be some kind of control: in other words, there should be a lock that
opens or closes as required. In the idle state, the ion channel remains closed. How￾ever, when a chemical messenger binds to the outer binding site of the receptor pro￾tein (one part of which is the ion channel), an induced adjustment occurs which
causes the protein to change its shape, the channel to open, allowing the passage of
the ions through the channel.
Ionic channels are specific for certain ions. For example, there are different cat￾ionic channels for Na+
, K+
, and Ca2+ ions. There are also anionic channels for the Cl−
anion.
Example: Nicotinic receptor of neurotransmitter acetylcholine.
5.4.2 Receptors with an intrinsic catalytic activity
The binding of a ligand on the extracellular domain of the receptor triggers the activa￾tion of an enzymatic system located in the intracellular domain of such a receptor
(Fig. 5.3).
Fig. 5.2: Structure of an ionic channel.
84 5 Biological targets and receptors for drugsExample: Certain protein kinases.
5.4.3 Receptors bound to G proteins: metabotropic receptors
5.4.3.1 Guanosine diphosphate
Guanosine diphosphate (GDP) is a nucleotide diphosphate. It is an ester of pyrophos￾phoric acid with the nucleoside guanosine. GDP consists of a pyrophosphate group, a
pentose sugar (D-ribose), and the nucleobase guanine (Fig. 5.4).
Receptors bound to G proteins lead to the formation of secondary messengers that are
responsible for biochemical responses. They consist of the binding of the L-R complex with
a G protein (so called because it is associated with the guanine nucleotide, GDP). G proteins
are composed of three subunits, called α, β, and γ. Following the interaction of the G pro￾tein with the ligand–receptor complex, a series of conformational changes are derived,
leading to the exchange of GDP by GTP and to the dissociation of the γ-GTP complex.
Such a complex then interacts with an intracellular effector, such as adenylate cy￾clase, resulting in its activation with the consequent formation of the secondary messen￾ger cAMP (Fig. 5.5) or inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate (IP3), respectively. Myoinositol or inositol
Fig. 5.3: Mechanism of activation of an enzymatic system associated with a membrane receptor: (1) rest
state; (2) the enzyme acquires a productive conformation by interaction of the messenger with the
receptor; (3) and (4): enzymatic process and return to (2).
5.4 Types of receptors 85Fig. 5.4: Guanosine diphosphate (GDP).
Fig. 5.5: cAMP structure, degradation, and biosynthesis.
Fig. 5.6: Myoinositol or inositol.
86 5 Biological targets and receptors for drugsstructures are shown in Fig. 5.6. The cAMP is responsible for the activation of protein kin￾ases, which in turn activates certain enzymes by phosphorylation. IP3 results in the empty￾ing of the Ca2+ storage vesicles, whose increase in the intracellular level is responsible for
effects as diverse as smooth muscle contraction, glandular secretion, or the release of cer￾tain neurotransmitters (Fig. 5.7). Finally, the hydrolysis of a phosphate unit of the α-GTP
Fig. 5.7: System formed by phospholipids of inositol.
5.4 Types of receptors 87complex leads to the regeneration of the α-GDP subunit and its combination with the β￾and γ-subunits to give rise to the functional G protein again (Fig. 5.8).
Examples: muscarinic acetylcholine receptor, dopaminergic receptors, and opioid
receptors.
5.4.4 Intracellular receptors
These are characteristics of steroid hormones (Fig. 5.9):
Intracellular receptors are specific to steroid hormones (sex hormones, glucocor￾ticoids, vitamin D), and thyroid hormones. Steroid receptors are located at the level of
the cell nucleus in certain chromatin sequences leading to the initiation of transcrip￾tion and protein synthesis.
Fig. 5.8: Formation of a secondary messenger by activation of a G protein.
88 5 Biological targets and receptors for drugs5.5 Types of bonds: energy range (kcal/mol) per interaction
5.5.1 Intramolecular bonding interactions
– Ionic bond: Weak (−5 kcal/mol) reversible. It takes place between charged groups
of the drug and the receptor (e.g. ammonium groups, carboxylate, amino, and sulfona￾mido). In the reinforced ionic bond, hydrogen bonds can also be established between
the charged groups (Fig. 5.10). It may seem strange to consider the ionic bond as a
weak bond, when a prototype ionic salt is NaCl, which has a melting point of 801 °C.
The reason is based on the following reasons: The strong electrostatic force of attrac￾tion in ionic compounds reaches out in all directions, and each ion in a solid ionic,
crystalline substance is surrounded by other ions of opposite charge. For example, in
a sodium chloride crystal, each Na+ ion is surrounded by six Na+ ions. Any changes
that require disrupting the arrangement of ions in a crystalline ionic compound re￾quire a large amount of energy.
Fig. 5.9: From the messenger to the control of gene transcription.
Fig. 5.10: Ionic bonds.
5.5 Types of bonds: energy range (kcal/mol) per interaction 89– Covalent bond: Strong (−40 to −110 kcal/mol), irreversible). It takes place when the re￾ceptor is inactivated by an irreversible antagonist (Fig. 5.11). The covalent bond consti￾tutes the bond of greatest strength in the scale of energies of interaction between two
molecules. Due to its stability, this link can be considered practically irreversible.
5.5.2 Intermolecular interactions
– Hydrogen bond: Weak (−1 to −7 kcal/mol), reversible. It is established between a
weakly acidic hydrogen atom, bonded to an electronegative atom by a covalent bond,
and a base that acts as an electron donor (Fig. 5.12). It takes place between the hydro￾gen of –OH (alcohols and phenols), –NH (amines), –SH (thiols), and a group having
not shared pair of electrons (amine, alcohol, ether, and carbonyl).
– Dipole–dipole interaction: Weak (−1 to −7 kcal/mol), reversible. It is polarized by
the different electronegativity between the atoms involved (Fig. 5.13).
– Van der Waals bond: Weak (−1 to −5 kcal/mol). The set of forces that are established
between molecules or atoms, and which cannot be considered as covalent bonds or
purely ionic bonds are collectively referred to as “Van der Waals forces” (E prop. 1/r
6
).
It is a very weak bond, reversible.
Fig. 5.11: Formation of an irreversible covalent bond.
Fig. 5.12: Hydrogen bond.
Fig. 5.13: Dipole–dipole interactions.
90 5 Biological targets and receptors for drugs(a) London dispersion forces: The London dispersion force is a temporary attractive
force that results when the electrons in two adjacent atoms occupy positions that
make the atoms form temporary dipoles. In other words, even molecules with no
permanent dipole moment have, due to the movement of their electrons, local di￾pole moments which induce dipoles in the opposite molecule, leading to fluctuating
electrostatic attractions. This force is called sometimes a dipole-induced dipole at￾traction. London forces are the attractive forces that cause nonpolar substances to
condense to liquids and to freeze into solids when the temperature is lowered suffi￾ciently (Fig. 5.14). Consider, for example, the case of noble gas atoms, which have a
stable electronic configuration:
(b) Keesom orientation forces: They exist in molecules of type AB, where A and B do
not have the same electronegativity. They exist in molecules with a permanent dipole
(Fig. 5.15).
Fig. 5.14: London dispersion forces.
Fig. 5.15: Keesom orientation forces.
5.5 Types of bonds: energy range (kcal/mol) per interaction 91(c) Debye induction forces: They include the force between a permanent dipole and
a corresponding induced dipole: CO and Ne.
– Hydrophobic bond (−1 kcal/CH2 group). In the aqueous media, the Van der Waals
bond is reinforced by the entropic variation of the system resulting from the desolva￾tion that occurs when two organic molecules approach by their lipophilic part, with
the consequent increase of the entropy of the system (Fig. 5.16). Although the hydro￾carbon moieties are ordered, a considerably larger number of molecules become dis￾ordered, with the consequent increase of the positive value of ΔS and negative value
of ΔG. This reinforcement of the Van der Waals bond constitutes the so-called hydro￾phobic bond of great importance in biological media.
– Charge-transfer complex. A very weak bond (−1 to −7 kcal/mol). The charge￾transfer complexes are formed by the electrostatic attraction between an electron￾releasing molecule and an acceptor molecule; although the ionic form that can be rep￾resented as donor+
–acceptor− contributes only slightly to the resonance hybrid of
these complexes, it increases their stability (Fig. 5.17).
These complexes can be considered as an ionic pair, with the property of undergoing
an observable transition of charge between the donor that acquires positive charge
and the acceptor that acquires a negative one.
Fig. 5.16: Entropic increase derived from the desolvation required for binding of a drug to its biological
target.
92 5 Biological targets and receptors for drugsHydrogen bond is a particular case of charge transfer occurring through a weakly
acidic hydrogen atom, attached to the acceptor molecule in a covalent form, and a
base that acts as a donor of the electrons that will establish the hydrogen bond.
In the form of a summary and emphasizing the most important interactions that
we are going to find from this moment on, Fig. 5.18 represents the type of the most
frequent interactions of procaine with the biophase acceptor zones.
Fig. 5.18: Types of chemical interactions between procaine and the active site of its receptor.
Fig. 5.17: Examples of charge-transfer complexes.
5.5 Types of bonds: energy range (kcal/mol) per interaction 935.6 Conformation and activity: use of rigid analogs
5.6.1 Nomenclature of conformations (Newman projections)
Generally, n-butane has four conformers, which are represented in Fig. 5.19 in the
Newman projection. Those that rapidly interconvert at room temperature; they can￾not be separated. They result from rotation about C–C single bonds. Rotation around
a C−C sigma bond is not completely free. There is a possibility of weak repulsive inter￾actions between the bonds on adjacent carbon atoms. Such type of repulsive interac￾tion is known as torsional strain. There are two types of nomenclatures with respect
to the different conformations of n-butane: the first and older one, located below each
of them, and the second, more modern and increasingly used.
– The anti-prefix is used when the bonds of the most voluminous groups (in this
case, the two methyl groups) form angles higher than 90º.
– The syn-prefix is used when the bonds of the most voluminous groups (in this
case, the two methyl groups) form angles lower than 90º.
– The periplanar termination is applied when the two largest groups are in the
same plane.
– The clinal termination is when the two most voluminous groups are in different
planes.
Conformation is defined as the nonidentical spatial ordering of the atoms of a mole￾cule due to its rotation around one or more single bonds. Let us assume that situation
(a) represents the active conformation of an agonist that binds to the receptor through
its A and B groups, which causes the biological response through its C group, after
interacting with the corresponding complementary groups Aʹ, Bʹ, and Cʹ of the recep￾tor. Situation (b) represents an antagonist molecule, since it is capable of binding to
the receptor, but because it does not have the C group, it would be incapable of giving
any biological response. Finally, (c) would represent an isomer of the molecule of (a),
with antagonistic activity, for not having the group C in the proper arrangement to
interact with Cʹ of the receptor (Fig. 5.20).
Fig. 5.19: Four conformations of n-butane.
94 5 Biological targets and receptors for drugsThe pharmacophore conformation is not necessarily the preferred conformation in
crystalline or dissolution state and may be a thermodynamically unstable conforma￾tion. In some cases, the energy of binding to a receptor can compensate for the barrier
of forming an unstable conformation (Fig. 5.21).
One of the most commonly used methods for the determination of the active confor￾mation of flexible drugs consists in the study of rigid analogs, in which the conforma￾tional possibilities are partially restricted.
Decalin has 10 carbons in total. However, remember that any time we have two
substituents on a cyclohexane ring (as we do here), it is essential to draw in the ste￾reochemistry in order to avoid ambiguity. Two stereoisomers are possible here: one
where the hydrogens at both ring junctions are cis, and the other where they are
trans. The complexity comes when we examine their most stable three-dimensional
structures. Each six-membered ring will adopt a chair conformation. The cis- and
trans-stereoisomers of decalin have remarkably different shapes (Fig. 5.22).
Fig. 5.20: Active conformation of an agonist (a), and conformations of two antagonists (b) and (c)
interacting with a hypothetical receptor.
Fig. 5.21: Preferred “skewed” or synclinal conformation of acetylcholine, and the transoid or antiperiplanar
one that acetylcholine acquires upon acting on the muscarinic receptor.
5.6 Conformation and activity: use of rigid analogs 95The formation of cycles is one of the most frequently used methods for the study of
the active conformation of flexible molecules. A classic example of cycle formation is
the study carried out on various acetylcholine analogs, in which various conforma￾tions are mimicked (Fig. 5.23).
While analogs derived from decalin were devoid of cholinergic activity, cyclopro￾pane analogs support the theory that the antiperiplanar conformation is involved in
the interaction with the muscarinic receptor and in addition, it is more easily hydro￾lyzed by acetylcholinesterase.
The lack of activity of the decalin derivatives reveals one of the limitations of the
use of rigid analogs. Thus, additional atoms and bonds that are introduced to provide
rigidity to the structure can give rise to important changes in the physical and chemi￾cal properties with respect to the original molecule.
A thorough study of the antianxiety drug 4-(4-hydroxypiperidino)-4ʹ-fluorobutyro￾phenone has been carried out using conformers in order to determine the possible steric
requirements of the hydroxyl group (Fig. 5.24).
We will only represent the chair with the OH in equatorial or axial position (Fig. 5.25).
Boat and twist-boat conformations have been excluded because of their high
energy.
When subjected to muscle relaxation tests, they presented the following order of
activity or relative power b>c>a, which implies that the oxygenated function should
preferably be in the axial position: the probable pharmacophore conformation would
be b, i.e. the conformer with the axial hydroxyl group (Fig. 5.26).
The structure of a prototype can be manipulated by limiting its conformational
freedom around certain single bonds, as can be seen in the hypotensor clonidine. It is
a α2-adrenergic agonist. Its structure is characterized by having an imidazolidine sub￾unit attached to an aza-styrene moiety with two chlorine atoms at ortho-positions.
Clonidine has a restricted rotation by steric hindrance and is 30 times more active
Fig. 5.22: Cis- and trans-decalins.
96 5 Biological targets and receptors for drugsthan its isomer with free rotation around the nitrogen–phenyl bond (with the two
chlorine atoms at positions 3 and 4). These facts can be interpreted, taking into ac￾count that the conformational constraint fixes the optimal geometry and diminishes
the possible interactions with other targets. Clonidine is a very basic substance (pKa =
Fig. 5.24: 4-(4-Hydroxypiperidino)-4ʹ-fluorobutyrophenone.
Fig. 5.23: Acetylcholine cyclic analogs.
5.6 Conformation and activity: use of rigid analogs 9713); therefore, its protonated form is predominant in the biophase. X-ray studies con￾firm the exo-imine of the cyclic guanidine moiety of clonidine, in which the ortho￾dichloro aromatic ring lies on a plane different from that of the imidazoline system
with an angle of 75° (Fig. 5.27).
Molecular modeling studies indicate that there is a distance of 0.51 nm between
the two nitrogen atoms of the imidazolidine system and the center of the aromatic
ring, similar to the distance that occurs in adrenaline (a natural agonist of the α￾adrenergic receptors), between the NH3
+ group and the center of the catechol ring
(Fig. 5.28).
Fig. 5.25: Chair conformations of 4-(4-hydroxypiperidino)-4ʹ-fluorobutyrophenone.
Fig. 5.26: Use of conformers in order to determine the possible steric requirements of the hydroxyl
group.
98 5 Biological targets and receptors for drugs5.7 Absolute configuration and activity: difference between
enantiomers
It has been implicitly established in the previous section that the three-dimensional
orientation of the functional groups is fundamental for a correct adaptation to the
receptor. For example, the bronchodilator activity of (R)-isoprenaline is about 800
times greater than that of its (S)-enantiomer. Similar stereoselectivity is also observed
between the enantiomers of catecholamines noradrenaline and adrenaline (Tab. 5.1).
A simple explanation of the different activity of the enantiomers is provided by
the Easson–Stedman hypothesis according to which, if one considers that in the adap￾N
HN
H
N
Cl
Cl
Clonidine
N
HN
H Cl N
Cl
Isomer of clonidine
N
HN
H
N
Cl
Cl
75º
Predominant conformation
of clonidine
H
Fig. 5.27: Clonidine (predominant conformation according to X-ray studies) and its less active isomer.
N
HN
H
N
Cl
Cl
H
5.1 Å
(S) NH3
OH
H
5.1 Å
Clonidine Noradrenaline
(natural neurotransmitter)
Fig. 5.28: Similar distances occur between the nitrogen atoms of the five-membered guanidino moiety
and the center of the benzene ring in clonidine, and the ammonium group and the center of the catechol
moiety of noradrenaline.
5.7 Absolute configuration and activity: difference between enantiomers 99tation of the stereogenic center to the receptor requires at least the interaction
through three points, only one of the enantiomers may simultaneously establish such
interactions (Fig. 5.29).
The more active enantiomer is referred to as eutomer and the least as distomer; the
relation of activities between both is called eudysmic ratio.
5.8 Relative configuration and activity
Similarly, alterations in the relative configurations of the substituents of an aliphatic
cyclic derivative or an olefin may have repercussions for the recognition by the recep￾tor, as it could lead to a loss of complementarity and accordingly reduction of affinity
and intrinsic activity (Fig. 5.30).
Tab. 5.1: Differences in the bronchodilator activity among catecholamines.
OH
NHR
HO
HO
R = H Noradrenaline
R = Me Adrenaline
R = Pri
Isoprenaline
Relative bronchodilatation to the
(R)-(–)-noradrenaline
(R)-(–)-Noradrenaline
(S)-(+)-Noradrenaline
100
1.4
RIS = 71
(R)-(–)-Adrenaline
(S)-(+)-Adrenaline
5,800
130 }
RIS = 45
(R)-(–)-Isoprenaline
(S)-(+)-Isoprenaline
27,000
33 }
RIS = 818
A
B
D
C
D
B
A
C
B'
C'
D'
B'
C'
D'
Fig. 5.29: Three-point interaction model.
100 5 Biological targets and receptors for drugsAs an example, we have the case of cisplatin, which is an important anticancer agent,
while its trans-isomer (transplatin) does not present any useful pharmacological activ￾ity (Fig. 5.31).
Fig. 5.30: Relative configurations and ligand-receptor molecular recognition.
Cl
Pt
Cl
NH3
NH3
Cisplatin
H3N
Pt
Cl
Cl
NH3
Transplatin
Fig. 5.31: Cisplatin and transplatin.
5.8 Relative configuration and activity 101Sulindac is a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) of the arylacetic acid class that
evidences the importance of the configuration of the double bond in the biological activity.
The (Z)-isomer is the active drug, while the (E)-isomer or isosulindac is less active.
This difference in activity between the two geometric isomers led to the identification
of the bioactive conformation of indomethacin, another NSAID of the group of aryl acetic
acids with an indole nucleus. Indomethacin was the prototype for the development of
sulindac. However, in presenting an amide function involving a p-chlorobenzoyl residue
attached to the indole nitrogen, it is possible that it undergoes enzymatic hydrolysis,
which gives rise to certain Central Nervous System (CNS) side effects. Therefore, sulindac
was designed, and a new bioisosteric relationship was discovered between the indometh￾acin indole system and the indene ring of sulindac. When considering the structure of
the active diastereoisomer of sulindac [(Z)-isomer)], it was suggested that the A conforma￾tion is the bioactive conformation of indomethacin (Fig. 5.32).
Fig. 5.32: Sulindac, isosulindac, and bioactive conformation of indomethacin.
102 5 Biological targets and receptors for drugs5.9 Key notes: receptors
Receptors: Most receptors are proteins that traverse the cell membrane with a bind￾ing site on the extracellular region. Binding of a chemical messenger causes the recep￾tor to change shape, initiating a process that results in a message being received by
the cell. The messenger does not undergo any reaction and departs unchanged, allow￾ing the receptor to reform its original shape.
Chemical messengers: Chemical messengers are neurotransmitters or hormones.
Neurotransmitters are released by nerves to interact with specific target cells. Hor￾mones are released by glands and travel around the body to interact with all the re￾ceptors that recognize them.
Binding site: The binding site of a receptor is the equivalent of an enzyme’s active
site, but has no catalytic activity.
5.10 Key notes: binding interactions
Agonists and antagonists: Agonists mimic a receptor’s chemical messenger. Antago￾nists bind to a receptor but do not activate it. By binding to the receptor, they prevent
activation by the natural messenger.
Dipole–dipole interactions: Dipole–dipole moments may be important in orientating
a molecule when it enters a binding site. The dipole moment of the drug may align
itself with localized dipole moments present in the binding site. If the alignment is
such that the binding groups are correctly positioned, then the drug is more likely to
bind and will have a good activity.
Covalent bonds: Some drugs form covalent bonds to their targets. Alkylating agents
react with nucleophilic groups such as serine, cysteine, and guanine, leading to the
formation of a covalent bond and the irreversible inhibition of the target.
5.11 Key notes: stereochemistry
Introduction: Stereochemistry plays an important part in pharmaceutical chemistry.
Drugs must be the correct shape to fit binding sites. They must also have their binding
groups in the correct relative positions to interact with groups in the binding site.
Isomers: Constitutional isomers are different structures that have the same molecular
formula. Configurational (or geometrical) isomers have the same atoms and bonds, but
have different shapes, which cannot be interconverted through simple bond rotation.
Optical isomers are configurational isomers that can exist as two nonsuperimposable
5.11 Key notes: stereochemistry 103mirror images. Conformational isomers are different shapes of the same compound, in￾terconvertible by single bond rotation. The active conformation is the shape adopted by
a drug when it binds to its binding site.
Chirality and asymmetric centers: Chirality is defined as the asymmetry of a mole￾cule. In order to be chiral, a molecule must have no more than one axis of asymmetry.
Asymmetric centers are carbon atoms with four different substituents. The enantiom￾ers of a chiral drug can interact differently with chiral targets such as proteins.
5.12 Exercises
1. Indicate the possible binding forces that will bind the following drugs to their
receptor:
(a) Levodopa (d) α-Methylnoradrenaline
(b) Neostigmine (e) Sumatriptan
(c) Warfarin (f) Camazepam
104 5 Biological targets and receptors for drugs(g) Captopril (h) Dextromoramide
2. Indicate how a covalent bond will be formed between the following drugs and
their specific receptors:
(a) Melphalan
(b) Fluostigmine
(c) Ethacrynic acid
5.12 Exercises 105(d) Cefaclor
(e) Phenoxybenzamine
3. Propranolol is a β-adrenergic receptor antagonist that acts as a cardiovascular
agent. The S-enantiomer is the active isomer, although it is used clinically as the
racemate. Draw the structure of this enantiomer and compare it with that of the
neurotransmitter (R)-noradrenaline, explaining the antagonism. Represent the
binding forces that will bind each of these molecules to the β-adrenergic receptor:
4. Propantheline is an acetylcholine antagonist drug. (a) Show the drug–receptor (D￾R) interaction zones through the different binding forces and compare them with
those of acetylcholine. (b) Given the following interpretation for the D-R interac￾tion responsible for the pharmacological response, compare the values of the rate
constants for an agonist such as acetylcholine, an antagonist such as propanthe￾line, and for an inactive compound:
106 5 Biological targets and receptors for drugs5. Justify the possible difference in activity of the following pairs of structures in
their binding to the receptor, indicating whether they are conformational iso￾mers, enantiomers, or diastereoisomers:
(a)
(b)
5.12 Exercises 107(c)
(d)
(e)
108 5 Biological targets and receptors for drugs(f)
6. Tamoxifen acts as an estrogen receptor antagonist. Suggest how you can join the
receptor to manifest that effect. The tamoxifen metabolite, however, acts as an
agonist rather than as an antagonist. Why?
5.12 Exercises 1096 Quantitative drug design: parameters
and quantitative structure–activity relationships
6.1 Goals
– To know the quantitative structure–activity relationship tool as an instrument for
optimizing a prototype and reducing its cost
– To know the tool of molecular modeling as a research method for discovering
more selective and more economical new drugs
– To know superficially other current tools in the search for new drugs
6.2 Introduction
The discovery of new cancer drugs can happen in different ways:
– Serendipity
– Screening of natural products
– Chemical modification of existing drugs
– Rational drug design or simply rational design
By rational drug design, we mean to obtain the active molecules from a pharmacological
point of view, based on previous considerations that predict its activity. The aim of this
chapter is to give an introduction to QSAR (acronym for quantitative structure–activity
relationship) methodology for beginners. I will try to apply QSAR in a proper manner to
gain more insight into structure–activity relationships and biological mechanisms.
The historical birth of the QSAR idea was in the year 1870, when the biological
activity (BA) was postulated to be a function of the chemical structure (6.1):
BA = fð Þ chemical structure (6:1)
BA, measured in the form of log(1/C), where C is the molar concentration of the drug
capable of producing a certain activity, is a function of the physicochemical parame￾ters of the molecules:
log 1ð Þ =C = f ′
ð Þ electronic + hydrophobic + steric parameters (6:2)
The year 1964 may be considered as the year of birth of modern QSAR methodology.
A widely used method is the Hansch–Fujita method, which establishes a correlation
between BA and a linear combination of parameters representing the physicochemi￾cal changes within a number of molecules. The dependence of BA with the electronic,
hydrophobic, and steric parameters (6.2) is the simplest relation of a great variety of
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783111316901-006Hansch equations. Equations have been used in the last six decades relating the BA to
almost all possible conceivable combinations of lipophilic, polarizability, electronic,
steric parameters, with or without other additional indicators (among others, molecu￾lar orbital parameters). In this introductory course, we will study only the simplest
forms of Hansch equations. Herein, we will study only the simplest forms of Hansch
equations.
BA can be measured in isolated enzymes or receptors (in vitro), cells removed
from intact animals or humans (ex vivo), or in the whole animal (in vivo). The in vitro
assay provides information on the enzyme–drug or receptor–drug interaction and ul￾timately on the affinity of the drug. Such experiments are very useful in that provide
evidence about the biological target. The ex vivo assays provide evidence that the tar￾get under study is operational in the species studied, as well as demonstrating drug
absorption and penetration to the desired site of action. Research on isolated en￾zymes, isolated receptors, or isolated cells are the simplest to carry out and provide
the clearest insight as to mechanism. However, in the end, only whole animal data
can disclose the understanding required in drug design or toxicology research. Com￾pounds with suitable potency, efficacy, and selectivity at the primary target and that
have shown activity in disease relevant in in vitro and ex vivo systems also need to
have good pharmacokinetics if they are to deliver in vivo efficacy and duration of
action.
Most important condition in a QSAR study is that all compounds of a set should
have the same molecular frame, i.e. an identical parent compound, with structural
variation in only one or several positions.
Figure 6.1 represents linear and second-degree equations:
Fig. 6.1: Linear and second-degree equations.
6.2 Introduction 111Since Hammett studies obtained a quantitative expression of the reactivity of organic
substances, they represent the background as a function of their structures (Fig. 6.2).
6.3 Electronic parameters
The abscissa values are calculated from the dissociation constants of unsubstituted
and substituted benzoic acids (6.3). On the other hand, the ordinate values are ob￾tained from phenylacetic acids (6.4) with the same substitution patterns (Fig. 6.2). The
substitution refers to meta- and para-positions, and never to ortho-positions, because
of possible incidence of the steric effect:
XC6H4CH2COOH + H2O ! XC6H4 CH2COO− + H3O+ (6:3)
Y-axis values
XC6H4COOH + H2O ! XC6H4COO− + H3O+ (6:4)
X-axis values.
ρ is the slope of the line. The values of the abscissa axis are always those of ben￾zoic acid and are called σ (Hammett’s constant). Therefore, it is possible to write:
log K
K0
= ρ log K′
K′
0
(6:5)
K0 and K′0ʹ represent equilibrium constants of unsubstituted compounds and K or Kʹ
of the substituted derivatives (6.5).
Another form is (6.7), in which sigma is defined according (6.6):
Fig. 6.2: Correlation between the dissociation constants of unsubstituted and substituted benzoic acids
(abscissa axis) and those of phenylacetic acids (ordinate axis) with the same substitution patterns (meta
and para).
112 6 Quantitative drug design: parameters and quantitative structure–activity relationshipsσ = log K′
K′
0
(6:6)
log K
K0
= ρσ (6:7)
6.3.1 Interpretation of Hammett constants
There are two ways for the interpretation: (a) according to Fig. 6.3 and (b) according
to Fig. 6.4.
When a G group attracts electrons, it stabilizes the carboxylate group and strengthens
the acid, while when G releases electrons it exerts the opposite effect (Fig. 6.4).
Therefore, electron-withdrawing substituents have positive σ values, and electron
donors have negative values. The hydrogen has a value of σ = 0.
6.3.1.1 Electronic effects
Trichloroacetic acid is 15,000 times more acidic than acetic acid. The inductive effect
of the C–Cl bond is responsible for this difference (Fig. 6.5).
Fig. 6.3: Substituent effects on dissociation of benzoic acids.
6.3 Electronic parameters 113The inductive effect decreases rapidly with the distance as indicated by the compari￾son of α-, β-, and γ-chlorobutyric acids with butyric acid. Chlorine in position α in￾creases the acidity nine times. In position β, it reduces the effect of chlorine being the
acidity six times higher, and in the position γ, a chlorine is only able to double the
strength of the acid (Fig. 6.6).
The Hammett constant takes into account two electronic effects: the inductive and the
resonance or mesomeric effect. Hence, the value of σ of a particular substituent will
depend on whether the substituent is meta or para. This is indicated by the subscript m
or p after σ. For example, the nitro group has a value of σm = 0.71 and σp = 0.78. In the
meta-position, the attractive electron effect is due to the inductive influence of the sub￾stituent, while in the para-position, both inductive and resonance effects play a leading
role, so the σp value is greater (Fig. 6.7).
However, for the hydroxyl group, σm = 0.12 and σp = −0.37. In the meta-position it
has an electron-withdrawing influence, as a consequence of the inductive effect –I. In
the para-position, the electron-donating influence, due to the resonance of the elec￾tron pair of the hydroxyl group, is more important than the electron-withdrawing ef￾fect caused by the induction effect (–I) (Fig. 6.8).
Fig. 6.5: Trichloroacetic acid (TCA) is a strong acid: from a chemical ionization point of view, TCA is a much
stronger acid than acetic acid because electronegative chlorine atoms remove electron density from the
carboxyl end of the molecule, producing a partial positive charge on the carboxyl moiety.
Fig. 6.6: Relative forces of chlorobutyric acids.
Fig. 6.4: Stabilization or destabilization of the carboxylate anion depending on the electronic nature of G.
114 6 Quantitative drug design: parameters and quantitative structure–activity relationshipsIt is said that a group possesses an –I effect if it acquires negative charge by induction; the
effect is called +I if the charge acquired by induction is positive; similarly, it is said to have
a –R (or +R) effect if it acquires negative (or positive) charge by resonance. It is very impor￾tant not to confuse alkyl group (R) with the resonance effect, which is identified as R.
There are limitations as to the electronic constants described so far: for example,
the constants of the Hammett substituents cannot be measured for ortho-substituents
because the possible electronic effect is distorted by the steric effect.
Fig. 6.7: Effects of the nitro group at the meta- and para-positions.
Fig. 6.8: Effects of the phenol group at meta- and para-positions.
6.3 Electronic parameters 1156.4 Substituents classified according to their directing power
in electrophilic aromatic reactions
Recognizing substituents as electron-donating (or -releasing) or electron-withdrawing
is a useful skill for evaluating reaction mechanisms. For electrophilic aromatic reac￾tions, abbreviated as substitution electrophilic aromatic (SEAr), although some sour￾ces use the acronym EARs, the rate-determining step is the formation of a positively
charged sigma complex. Figure 6.9 shows the most common substituents according to
their directing power in EAR:
Overall, groups with a pair of unshared electrons in the atom attached to the benzene
ring are activating (in EARs) and ortho- and para-directing groups (–NH2, –OCH3, etc.).
ortho- and para-directing groups are electron-releasing groups.
If the atoms attached to the ring support a partial or total positive charge (all res￾onance structures must be checked), it will be a meta-directing group. meta-directing
groups are electron-withdrawing groups.
The halide ions, which are electron-withdrawing but ortho- and para-directing
groups, are the exception:
– All activators are ortho–para-directing groups.
– Deactivators (halogens) are ortho–para-directing groups.
– Deactivators (not halogens) are meta-directing groups (Fig. 6.10).
R
R I
I
R
R I
H
R I
Fig. 6.9: Effect of substituents on electrophilic aromatic reactions.
116 6 Quantitative drug design: parameters and quantitative structure–activity relationships6.5 Hyperconjugation
Propene is stabilized by the resonance structures in Fig. 6.11.
Such resonance is not very effective, since ionic forms have a covalent bond less than
the ordinary forms of Kekulé. These ionic forms will be analogous to forms such as
CH3
–
H+ for methane, and obviously, such forms are much less important than those
that only have covalent bonds.
Considering that the ionic forms of this type can only be written by “loss” of a cova￾lent bond, this type of resonance is called “hyperconjugation with a bond loss (Fig. 6.11)”.
However, for an alkyl-substituted carbonium ion, hyperconjugation resonance forms that
have the same number of covalent bonds as the main structures can be drawn.
This type of resonance is called “isovalent hyperconjugation (Fig. 6.12)” and is much
more important than “hyperconjugation with a bond loss”.
6.5.1 Electronegativity of an spn hybrid orbital
A p-orbital has the approximate shape of a pair of lobes on opposite sides of the nu￾cleus, or a somewhat dumbbell shape.
Fig. 6.10: meta-directing groups.
Fig. 6.11: Resonance structures of propene (hyperconjugation with a bond loss).
Fig. 6.12: Isovalent hyperconjugation.
6.5 Hyperconjugation 117A hybrid orbital spn has more s character the lower the value of n. Considering
that the s electrons are closer to the nucleus and more fastened than p electrons, the
lower the value of n, the more electronegative the orbital.
For instance, an sp3 orbital consists of 25% s character and 75% p character, and
an sp orbital consists of 50% s character and 50% p character. Thus, electronegativity
increases in the direction p < sp3 < sp2 < sp < s.
This influence creates a small dipole that has the negative end next to the double
link and the positive next to the alkyl group. In this way the alkyl groups have an in￾ductive effect giving rise to an electron-releasing effect when bound to an unsaturated
carbon.
6.5.2 Activating effect of the toluene methyl group versus SEAr reactions
Compared to benzene, toluene is more reactive by virtue of the inductive and hyper￾conjugative effects of the methyl group. Remember that when an sp3 orbital of a car￾bon atom is attached to an sp2 orbital (also of a carbon atom), there is an electronic
transfer in the direction of the sp2 carbon.
Hyperconjugation has little importance in the fundamental state of toluene as it is
a “hyperconjugation with a bond loss”; nevertheless, it is much more important in the
Wheland intermediate because it becomes an “isovalent hyperconjugation (Fig. 6.13)”.
Fig. 6.13: The methyl group releases electrons toward the benzene ring partly due to inductive effect
and mainly due to hyperconjugation.
118 6 Quantitative drug design: parameters and quantitative structure–activity relationshipsSo toluene and alkylbenzenes are ortho–para-directing groups and more reactive
than benzene versus SEAr. However, alkyl groups are weak activating groups.
6.5.3 Difference between hyperconjugation and resonance
Hyperconjugation: It is the stabilization effect on a molecule due to the interaction
between an s-bond and a π-bond.
Resonance: Resonance is the stabilizing effect of a molecule through delocalization
between free electron pairs and π-electrons, or between π-electrons.
Bond lengths:
– Hyperconjugation: It causes the σ-bond length to be shortened.
– Resonance: It has no effect on the σ-bonds.
To sum up, hyperconjugation is an extension of resonance since both methods cause
the stabilization of a molecule through delocalization of electrons. However, hypercon￾jugation involves delocalization of σ-bond electrons along with π-bond electrons,
whereas resonance causes the delocalization through interaction between free elec￾tron pairs and π-electrons, or between π-electrons.
6.6 Hydrophobic parameters: partition coefficient
and hydrophobic substituent constant
Lipophilicity or hydrophobicity of molecules measures the relative tendency they have to
prefer a nonaqueous environment against an aqueous one. In drugs, it is decisive for their
absorption, distribution, and elimination and also for their bonding with the therapeutic
target (hydrophobic bonds). P (6.8) is defined as the ratio of concentrations (C1/C2) of a sin￾gle species between two phases in equilibrium (phase 1 is n-octanol and phase 2 is water):
P = ½drug octanol=½  drug water (6:8)
However, log P is more useful.
Lipophilicity is an important factor affecting the distribution and fate of drug
molecules. Increased lipophilicity has been shown to correlate:
– with increased BA;
– poorer aqueous solubility;
– increased detergency/cell lysis;
– increased storage in tissues;
– more rapid metabolism and elimination: lipophilic compounds tend to have a
greater affinity for metabolic enzymes;
– increased rate of skin penetration;
6.6 Hydrophobic parameters: partition coefficient and hydrophobic substituent constant 119– increased plasma protein binding;
– faster rate of onset of action, and in some cases, shorter duration of action.
Drug transport characteristics, or how medications go from the place of application
(such as an injection site and the gastrointestinal system) to the site of action, are signif￾icantly influenced by log P. Drugs must enter and travel through numerous cells to
reach the site of action because they are often transported via the blood. The tissues
that a given chemical can reach will therefore depend on the log P. Drugs that are ex￾tremely water-soluble will not be able to penetrate lipid barriers and reach lipid-rich
organs like the brain and other neuronal tissues. Nevertheless, substances can pass
through the “blood–brain barrier” by diffusing from one aqueous phase (blood) to an￾other (cerebrospinal fluid). However, substances that are highly lipophilic will become
caught in the first “site of loss”, such as fat tissue, and be unable to move swiftly from
this site to reach their target. As a result, the graph of BA against log P has a parabolic
shape, with a maximum at which the best log P results in the highest level of activity.
The BA has usually two ways of behavior versus the lipophilicity of the com￾pounds (Fig. 6.14), which can be assimilated to a straight line (6.9) in the most hydro￾philic zone of the parabola or to a generic parabola that includes both the hydrophilic
and hydrophobic zones (6.10).
log 1ð Þ =C = k1 log P + k2 Linear equation (6:9)
Fig. 6.14: Parabolic dependence of the biological response against the logarithm of the partition
coefficient n-octanol/water.
120 6 Quantitative drug design: parameters and quantitative structure–activity relationshipslog 1ð Þ =C = k1 ð Þ log P 2 + k2log P + k3 Parabolic equation (6:10)
Hansch and Fujita asserted that the contribution of a given substituent to the log P is
a constant value. They defined the hydrophobic substituent constant by the following
equation (6.11):
πx = log PRX=PRH (6:11)
The more positive the πx-value, the more lipophilic the substituent, and vice versa.
As an example, consider the log P values of benzene (log P = 2.13), chlorobenzene (log
P = 2.84), and benzamide (log P = 0.64). Benzene is the reference compound, and the substit￾uent constants of the Cl and the CONH2 groups are 0.71 (πCl = log PClbenzene − log Pbenzene)
and −1.49 (πCONH2 = log Pbenzamide − log Pbenzene), respectively. Once these values are
obtained, the theoretical log P value of m-chlorobenzamide can be calculated:
log Pm−chlorobenzamide = log Pbenzene + πCl + πCONH2 = 2.13 + 0.71 + ð−1.49Þ = 1.35
The value observed of this compound is 1.35. It should be noted that the values of the
aromatic substituents are different from those of the aliphatic substituents.
Let us calculate the log Pparacetamol, considering the three possibilities of calcula￾tion: from phenol, acetanilide, and benzene (Fig. 6.15).
Fig. 6.15: Prediction of log P of paracetamol. See Tab. 6.1 for values of πNHCOCH3 and πOH.
6.6 Hydrophobic parameters: partition coefficient and hydrophobic substituent constant 121Hansch equations can be written as follows:
log 1ð Þ =C = −k1ð Þ logP 2 + k2 log P + k3 (6:12)
log 1ð Þ =C = −k4π2 + k5π + k6 (6:13)
where C is the concentration of the drug that produces a certain effect. The terms ki
are regression coefficients derived from the statistical treatment of the curves by the
method of least squares (or least squares fitting).
6.7 Steric parameters
The steric characteristics of a molecule are intimately related to the ability of a mole￾cule to bind to its receptor and, thus, to elicit its biological response (BR):
1. The steric parameter of Taft (Es) has been derived by studying the acid-catalyzed
hydrolysis of aliphatic esters:
Es = log kx=k0 (6:14)
where kx is the rate constant of the substituted compound and k0 is the rate constant
of the methyl ester.
2. Another measure of the steric factor is given by the molar refractivity (MR):
MR = n2 − 1  = n2 + 2   × MW=d (6:15)
where n is the refractive index, MW is the molecular weight, and d is the density. The
term MW/d defines a volume, whereas (n2 − 1)/(n2 + 2) is a corrective term.
Table 6.1 shows the electronic, hydrophobic, and steric descriptors of a number of
substituents.
6.8 Craig plot
Although there are tables with the values of σ and π for a large set of substituents, it
is often easier to visualize them using the Craig plot (Fig. 6.16).
It is possible to see at a glance which substituents have positive values of π- and σ￾parameters, which have negative values and which have one positive and the other neg￾ative values. It is easy to see which substituents have similar values of π; for example,
the ethyl, bromo, trifluoromethyl, and trifluoromethylsulfonyl groups are approximately
in the same vertical of the representation. Therefore, these groups could be interchanged
in drugs in which the main factor affecting BA is π. Similarly, groups in the same hori￾zontal are isoelectronic or have similar values of σ (e.g. CO2H, Cl, Br, and I).
122 6 Quantitative drug design: parameters and quantitative structure–activity relationships6.9 Hansch equation
The Hansch analysis correlates BA with physicochemical properties by linear regres￾sion analysis, multiple linear regression, or nonlinear regression. Since practically all
the parameters used in the Hansch analysis are linear values related to free energy
(e.g. derived from velocity or equilibrium constants), the terms “linear approach re￾lated to free energy” or “extra thermodynamic approach” are used, as synonyms of
Hansch’s analysis. In its simplest version, the general form of the Hansch equation is
given as follows:
log 1ð Þ =C = k1σ − k2ð Þ log P 2 + k3 logP + k4Es + k5 (6:16)
log 1ð Þ =C = k6σ − k7π2 + k8π + k9Es + k10 (6:17)
The more active the drug, the smaller the concentration required, and the larger the
value of 1/C.
Tab. 6.1: Electronic, hydrophobic, and steric descriptors.
Substituent Aromatic π Aliphatic π σm σp MRa Es
H . . . . . .
Br . . . . . −.
Cl . . . . . −.
F . −. . . . −.
I . . . . . −.
NO −. −. . . . −.
NMe . −. −. −. . +
NMe −. −. . . −.
NHMe −. −. −. −. .
NH −. −. −. −. . −.
NHCOCH −. . . .
O− −. −. −.
OH −. −. . −. . −.
OCH −. . −. . −.
OEt . . . −. .
CN −. −. . . . −.
CHO −. . . .
COH −. . . .
CF . . . . −.
CH . . −. −. . −.
CHOH −. . . . −.
COCH −. . . .
CH . . . −. . −.
SOCH −. . . ,
a
The value of MR is scaled by a factor of 0.1.
6.9 Hansch equation 123The accuracy of the adjustment of the equation to the experimental data can be esti￾mated through the correlation coefficient (r
2
). The fit is perfect when r
2 = 1. It is as￾sumed that the equation is correct when r = 0.9 (or the same, r
2 = 0.81). The parameters
selected for the “best equation” must be independent (i.e. the coefficient r should not be
greater than 0.6–0.7; exceptions to this rule are combinations of linear and quadratic
terms, such as log P and (log P)
2 that are normally highly correlated, with values of r >
0.9). Perhaps the most important consequence of Hansch’s equations is the subsequent
interpretation in physical–chemical terms of BA, which entails a better understanding
of what happens at the molecular level.
With the equation obtained, in addition to a better understanding of the interac￾tions, it will be possible to predict the structure of new compounds from the same
family for which an optimum activity would be expected.
The number of compounds required to define a Hansch equation is a function of
the number of variables that are to be introduced in the equation. As a rule of thumb, it
is accepted that for each independent variable, at least five compounds are necessary.
Fig. 6.16: Craig plot with the σ- and π-values of several substituents.
124 6 Quantitative drug design: parameters and quantitative structure–activity relationships6.10 Concepts and QSAR philosophy
– QSAR models are free-energy-related calculations:
ΔG = − 2.303 RT log K
– Additivity of substituent group contributions to BA follows from many applica￾tions of Hansch analysis.
– Activity is usually expressed in log[C] or log 1/C. Why?
– Biological data is often found to be skewed, and log transformation makes
the data to a normal distribution.
“The purpose of computing is insight, not numbers”
Richard Hamming (1915–1998)
6.11 3D QSAR model
In recent years, a method known as three-dimensional (3D) QSAR has been developed,
according to which the 3D properties of the molecules as a whole are considered
rather than considering individual substituents. The philosophy of the 3D QSAR
model lies around the assumption that the most important characteristics of mole￾cules are their overall size and shape, in addition to their electronic properties.
The best-known model is CoMFA (acronym of comparative molecular field analy￾sis) which assumes that drug–receptor interactions are noncovalent, and that changes
in BA correlate with changes in the steric and/or the electrostatic fields of drugs.
Networks or grids are increasingly used to measure the molecular properties.
There are a number of molecular properties that can be measured as fields. A field
can be defined as the influence that a given property exerts on the space surrounding
the molecule. Consider a magnet as an example: it creates a magnetic field around it,
which is stronger in the area of space closest to it. The most frequently measured mo￾lecular fields are steric and electrostatic. They can be measured by placing the mole￾cule in a 3D network. Next, a probe atom such as a proton or an sp3
-hybridized
carbocation is placed at each point in the network and a computer program calculates
the steric and electrostatic interactions between the probe atom and the molecule.
With respect to the steric field, it will increase as the probe approaches the molecule,
while in relation to the electrostatic field, there will be an attraction between the posi￾tively charged probe and the electronically rich zones of the molecule, and a repul￾sion interaction between the probe and electronically deficient zones of the molecule.
The points of the network having the same steric energy value are connected by con￾tour surfaces, which define a steric field. A similar process will be carried out to mea￾6.11 3D QSAR model 125sure electrostatic interactions. It is also possible to measure the hydrophobic field
using water molecules as a probe.
A frequent problem in drug design is to decide on what conformation the drug
molecule is when it links to the binding site of the biological target (active conforma￾tion). This is particularly true for flexible molecules that can adopt a large number of
conformations. One might think that the most stable conformation is the active one.
However, it may be that the less stable conformation is the active one: binding inter￾actions with the target can result in an energy gain that compensates for the energy
required to adopt that conformation. The simplest way to identify an active conforma￾tion is by studying the X-ray crystal structure of the complex between the protein and
the ligand (drug). The structure of the ligand itself can be obtained from the Cam￾bridge Structural Database, while that of the protein–ligand complexes can be ob￾tained from the Protein Data Bank. The protein–ligand complex can be downloaded
and studied through molecular modeling programs, whereby the ligand conformation
can be identified. However, not all proteins can easily crystalize, and so other meth￾ods that are beyond the scope of this text must be used.
It is essential in the 3D QSAR study that the molecules are all in their active con￾formation and that they are placed in the network in exactly the same way. In other
words, they have to be correctly aligned, thereby identifying the pharmacophore.
6.12 CoMFA advantages over traditional QSAR
Some of the problems associated with traditional QSAR are as follows:
(a) Only molecules of similar structure can be studied.
(b) The validity of numerical descriptors may be in question. These descriptors are
obtained by measuring reaction rates and equilibrium constants of model reac￾tions, and their values are tabulated in the specific scientific literature. However,
the separation of one property from another is not always possible during experi￾mental measurements. For example, the steric parameter of Taft cannot be con￾sidered purely to be a steric factor, because the reaction rates measured and used
to define it are also affected by electronic factors. On the other hand, the n￾octanol/water partition coefficients used for the calculation of log P are affected
by the donor and acceptor nature of the hydrogen bonds of the molecules.
(c) Descriptors of unusual substituents may not be known.
(d) It is necessary to synthesize a set of molecules in which the substituents are var￾ied to study a particular property (e.g. hydrophobicity), and these syntheses may
be difficult.
126 6 Quantitative drug design: parameters and quantitative structure–activity relationshipsThese problems can be avoided with CoMFA, which has the following advantages:
(a) Favorable and unfavorable interactions are represented graphically by 3D con￾tour surfaces around the representative molecule. A graphical representation like
this is easier to visualize than a mathematical equation.
(b) The properties of molecules are calculated by means of a computer program.
There is no dependence on experimental or tabulated values. There is no need to
restrict the study to molecules of similar structure. Molecules can be studied by
CoMFA as long as they share the same pharmacophore and interact in the same
way with the biological target.
(c) Graphical representations of favorable and unfavorable interactions allow phar￾maceutical chemists to design new structures. For example, if the boundary sur￾face exhibits a favorable steric effect at a particular site, this may imply that the
binding site of the biological target has an additional space that allows the drug to
be extended to improve the receptor–drug interaction.
(d) The 3D QSAR approach can be used without knowledge of the biological target.
6.13 Potential problems of CoMFA
Some of the problems associated with CoMFA are as follows:
(a) It is very important to know the active conformation of each of the studied mole￾cules. Identification of the active conformation is easy on rigid structures such as
steroids, but is more difficult on flexible molecules in which various rotations of
the single bonds are possible. Therefore, it would be advisable to have a confor￾mational biologically active restricted analog that can act as a guide for the active
conformation. The most flexible molecules could then be built on the computer,
with the conformation resembling that of the rigid analog. This may be very use￾ful in proposing the most likely active conformations of the ligands, if the struc￾ture of the binding site of the biological target is known.
(b) 3D QSAR provides a summary of how structural changes in drugs affect BA, but it
is very dangerous to attempt to go further. For example, a 3D QSAR model may
indicate that increasing the size of the molecule in a given location increases the
activity. It might be suggested that an accessible hydrophobic pocket exists that
allows extra bonding interactions. On the other hand, it is possible that the addi￾tional steric increase causes the molecule to bind with a different orientation
with respect to the other molecules included in the study, and that this can be the
cause of increased activity.
6.13 Potential problems of CoMFA 1276.14 Key notes: quantitative structure–activity relationships
Introduction: QSAR involves the derivation of a mathematical formula, which relates
the BAs of a group of compounds to their physicochemical properties. Traditional
QSAR is carried out on a range of analogs: A series of compounds could then be con￾structed in the computer, with a common skeleton but having different substituents.
Procedure: A QSAR equation is derived relating BA to several physical features.
Three physical features are of particular importance: hydrophobicity, electronic fac￾tors, and steric factors.
Hydrophobicity of the molecule: The hydrophobicity of a molecule is measured by
its log P value, where P is the partition coefficient. The partition coefficient is the rela￾tive solubility of the compound in octanol and water.
Substituent hydrophobicity constant: The electronic properties of aromatic sub￾stituents are measured as Hammett’s substituent constants (σ). Substituents with posi￾tive σ values are electron withdrawing, whereas substituents with negative values are
electron releasing.
The steric factor: MR is a measure of size calculated from a substituent´s molecular
weight, index of refraction, and density.
Hansch equation: The Hansch equation is the name given to the QSAR equation and
usually contains physical factors such as log P, π, σ, and MR. The substituents used to
derive a Hansch equation must represent a good spread of values for each physical
parameter.
Craig plot: Craig plot compares two physical properties for different substituents.
They are used to identify which substituents are valid for the derivation of a Hansch
equation including these properties.
Three-dimensional QSAR: 3D QSAR involves the calculation of steric and electronic
fields around molecules. It is not restricted to compounds having the same skeleton.
The effect of steric and electronic fields can be shown visually by means of con￾tour maps.
6.15 The significance of QSAR in drug discovery
Place 10 substituents of the four open positions of an asymmetrically disubstituted
benzene ring: The number of compounds required for synthesis is 10,000. Nowadays,
drug development is much too expensive to be guided by trial and error. QSAR, molec￾ular modeling, and protein crystallography are important and valuable tools in com￾puter-assisted drug design. The aim of this chapter is to give an introduction to the
128 6 Quantitative drug design: parameters and quantitative structure–activity relationshipsQSAR methodology for beginners. The classical QSAR methods still play an important
role in drug design. QSAR methods are cheap and efficient tools to derive and prove
hypotheses on structure–activity relationships in a quantitative manner, especially in
those cases where the 3D structure of the biological target is not known.
6.16 Exercises
1. Knowing that the log Pbenzene = 2.13, determine the log P values of the following
compounds (the experimentally observed values are indicated in parentheses):
(a) m-Xylene (3.20)
(b) Mesitylene (1,3,5-trimethylbenzene) (3.43)
(c) Hexamethylbenzene (2.33)
(d) 1,3-Dinitrobenzene (1.49)
(e) 2,4-Dihydroxybenzoic acid (1.44)
Notice the increasing difference between the calculated and observed values in
cases (a)–(c), and try to give an explanation. Do you find any justification for the
deviation between the experimental and the calculated values?
2. A correlation between the bacteriostatic activity of methicillin-related penicillins and
the π and σ values can be established for the X substituents on the aromatic nucleus:
The equation obtained for the bacteriostatic activity is
log ð1=CÞ = −0.245π + 1.720σ + 1.776; n = 10, r = 0.929
(a) Comment on these two equations.
(b) Propose different substituents to increase or decrease BA.
3. When studying the influence of substituent X on the activity of griseofulvin, the
following QSAR relation was obtained:
log ð1=MICÞ = 0.56 log P + 2.19 σX − 1.32; n = 22, r = 0.93
6.16 Exercises 129(a) What kind of substituents will give rise to maximum activity?
(b) Knowing that the antibiotic activity depends on an enone system that facili￾tates the nucleophilic attack to griseofulvin by the –SH groups, what relation￾ship does it find between this mechanism and the previous equation?
Propose the attack reaction of the nucleophile mentioned above.
4. The adrenergic blocking activity of β-halo-β-arylethylamines can be expressed by
the following equation:
log ð1=ED50Þ = 1.22 π − 1.59 σ + 7.0; n = 35, r = 0.92
The compounds exhibit hepatic toxicity through a DNA alkylation mechanism
represented by the equation
log ð1=ED50Þ = 1.15 π − 1.5 σ + + 7.89; n = 22, r = 0.93
(a) Comment on these equations.
(b) Propose a DNA alkylation mechanism for this type of compound.
(c) Depending on the alkylation mechanism, explain why the parameter σ+ is
used in the second equation.
5. The inhibitory activity of the monoamine oxidase produced by the benzylhydra￾zines R-C6H4-CH2-NH-NH2 in mice has been studied. For this, the necessary dose of
drug before extracting their brain has been measured to produce a maximum re￾sponse in the administration of L-DOPA to mice. The equation representing the
inhibitory activity in vivo is
log ð1=CÞ = 0.304 π − 0.183 π2 + 6.346; n = 11, r = 0.856
130 6 Quantitative drug design: parameters and quantitative structure–activity relationships(a) How and why does the in vivo inhibitory activity depend on the π-value of R?
(b) Of the following substituents, whose π-value is given in parentheses, what
seems to be more interesting to increase the in vivo response?
H (0.0); Cl (0.71); Br (0.86); Me (0.56); iso-Pr (1.53); phenyl (1.96)
6. The in vitro antibacterial activity of sulfonamides 6.3 can be described by the fol￾lowing two equations:
log ð1=CÞ = −0.693pKa + 6.405; n = 25, r = 0.962
log ð1=CÞ = 1.128σ + 0.398; n = 25, r = 0.975
(a) What is the relationship between the two equations?
(b) It has been suggested that the active species is ionized sulfonamide, according
to these equations. Why?
(c) What substituents are most suitable for the antibacterial activity?
(d) If antibacterial activity is studied in vivo, a parabolic dependence of the activ￾ity in relation to pKa is observed. How can this observation be explained?
7. Pyrazoles 6.4 show inhibition of rat alcohol dehydrogenase hepatic, and may be
utilized to prevent the conversion of methanol into formaldehyde and thus prevent
methanol intoxication. The model relates the inhibition constant to the physico￾chemical characteristics of substituents X. Analyze the characteristics of the model
and as an example, calculate the log 1/Ki for a derivative 6.4 in which R = Cl:
log ð1=KiÞ = 1.22 ð± 0.16Þlog P − 1.80 ð± 0.78Þ σm + 4.87 ð± 0.28Þ;
n = 14, r2 = 0.970, s = 0.316
clog Ppyrazole = 0.28
s is the standard deviation from the regression equation. Its definition is explained in
Exploring QSAR. Fundamentals and Applications in Chemistry and Biology, Hansch
and Leo, found in the Fundamental bibliography of the Prologue of this volume.
6.16 Exercises 1318. The following QSAR equation was obtained for the antidepressant activity in hu￾mans, from a family of amino acid oxidase (MAO) inhibitors that respond to the
chemical structure:
log ð1=CÞ = 0.398 π + 1.089 σ + 1.03 Es + 4.541; n = 9, r = 0.955
(a) Indicate on which parameters the inhibitory activity depends.
(b) Indicate the type of substituents that would be introduced in the aromatic
ring to improve such an activity.
(c) Show two examples of substituents that would improve the activity.
9. The following QSAR was obtained for activity of the pesticide indicated in the
structure. Explain the meanings of each term, and identify the type of substitute
that could improve the activity:
log ð1=CÞ = + 1.08 π + 2.41 σ + 5.25
n = 16, r = 0.84
10. The following reaction quantitatively relates the activity of an enzyme extracted
from a lamb kidney with the MAO activity, caused by phenylglycines with differ￾ent substituents in meta and para:
132 6 Quantitative drug design: parameters and quantitative structure–activity relationshipslog ð1=KmÞ = 0.3π + 0.6σ + 0.21Es + 2.3
n = 5, r = 0.860
(a) Which parameters affect the enzyme’s affinity of the substrate?
(b) How do these parameters have an influence, and what substituents should be
introduced into the ring to increase the enzyme activity?
11. The following QSAR equation is related to the mutagenic activity of a series of
nitrosamines. What kind of substituents will result in higher mutagenic activity?
R2N − NO
N − Nitrosamines
log ð1=CÞ = + 0.92 π + 2.08 σ − 3.26
n = 12, r = 0.794
12. The muscarinic effects of a series of m-substituted benzyltrimethylammonium de￾rivatives, expressed as BR, are indicated in the following equation:
BR = 1.30 π − 0.41 Es + 5.86
n = 10, r = 0.90
(a) What parameters depend on this response?
(b) What substituents should be introduced to increase the activity?
13. Given the following QSAR equation, indicate the factors that would increase BA in
the represented structure, and propose substituents that would improve such an
activity:
6.16 Exercises 133log ð1=IC50Þ = 0.481 Es + 0.606 π + 4.81
n = 20, r = 0.93
14. The antifungal activity against Cladosporium cucumerinum from a series of aryl
ethinyl sulfones is expressed by the following equation:
pIC50 = 1.10 σ + 0.84 π + 2.10 Es
n = 25, r = 0.89
(a) What parameters does it depend on?
(b) List some substituents to improve the activity.
15. The antimalarial activity of a series of aminoalcohols derived from phenanthrene
is reflected in the following QSAR equation. With examples indicate the substitu￾ents that will favor BA.
log ð1=CÞ = 0.27 π × + 0.40 πy + 0.65 σx + 0.88 σy + 2.34
n = 102, r = 0.913
134 6 Quantitative drug design: parameters and quantitative structure–activity relationships7 Metabolic processes in drugs: other
methodologies available for the discovery
of new drugs
7.1 Goals
– To introduce the student into the concept of pharmacokinetics applied to the dis￾covery of new drugs
– To introduce the student to the concept of prodrug as one of the solutions avail￾able to reduce the toxicity of the drug
7.2 Metabolism studies and their use in the discovery
of new drugs
The action of drugs does not only depend on their capacity to develop a pharmacolog￾ical response. It is also of great importance that they have pharmacokinetic properties
that allow them to reach the site required for their action, and that their toxicity is
minimal. Given the high degree of structural variability of drugs and the diversity of
known metabolic reactions, it is necessary to establish relationships between their
chemical structure and their pharmacokinetic properties: ADME (acronym for absorp￾tion, distribution, metabolization, and excretion).
The physicochemical properties of a drug will determine its ability to cross biolog￾ical membranes, to deposit in fatty tissues, to bind to serum proteins, or to bind to its
specific receptors to exert its action, and finally to undergo metabolic transformation
and elimination.
I will detail the two most important steps in the development of new drugs that
are absorption and metabolism.
7.3 Absorption
In any of the routes of administration, except intravenous, the drug has to cross bio￾logical membranes to reach its place of action. Since this is a critical step in the action
of a drug, it must be taken into account. For example, in the gastrointestinal system,
pH values vary from 1 to 3 in the stomach (due to the secretion of hydrochloric acid)
to a value of 8 in the small intestine (ileum) and in the ascending colon. Therefore,
the absorption of a drug is not equally effective in the different parts of the gastroin￾testinal system.
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783111316901-007Neutral and lipid-soluble compounds are assured of their systemic action when
administered orally, whereas the absorption of acids and bases depends on their dis￾sociation constant (pKa) and the pH of the medium, which are related according to
the Henderson–Hasselbach equation:
pH = pKa + log ½basic form=½  acid form
Example: Aspirin® (Fig. 7.1).
A weak acid such as Aspirin® with a pKa of 3.6 is practically in a nonionized form
under the acidic conditions of the stomach, and for this reason it is rapidly absorbed.
Once in the plasma (pH = 7.4), it ionizes almost completely and has no tendency to dif￾fuse back into the stomach (Fig. 7.2).
Fig. 7.1: Calculation of the percentage of ionization of Aspirin® as a function of the pH of the medium.
Fig. 7.2: Forms in which Aspirin® is present in the stomach and plasma.
136 7 Metabolic processes in drugs: other methodologiesOne of the objectives of pharmaceutical chemistry is to try to predict if a substance
can be active, and if it can become a good drug. Although, of course, this is only
known by synthesizing and testing it, Lipinski’s rules can help us in predicting oral
absorption.
7.4 Lipinski’s rules (rule of 5)
Lipinski’s rules emerged from a study of a wide-ranging oral drug group (WDI, Word
Drug Index, more than 50,000 compounds), where its physicochemical properties
were statistically correlated with its oral absorption profile, which in turn is related
to its ability to cross membranes. It was observed that the drugs with the best oral
absorption were those with a good balance between molecular weight (MW), lipid sol￾ubility and water solubility. These properties can be expressed quantitatively by
means of four descriptors:
1. Solubility in lipids expressed by log P
– Calculated log P (c log P) < 5 (Hansch)
– Moriguchi log P (m log P) < 4.15
2. MW <500
3. H-bond donor groups <5
4. H-bond acceptor groups <10
Lipinski’s rules are currently considered to be a good method to predict which struc￾tures with a pharmacological action will have good oral absorption. They are also
known as the “rule of 5”, because the parameter’s cutoff values all contained 5s. In gen￾eral, the more a compound is deviated from the Lipinski parameters, the lower the
probability of its overcoming the more advanced stages of drug development (because
it does not have a good oral absorption profile). Compounds that conform to these pa￾rameters are said to have drug properties. Despite the development of computational
methods, none of these overcomes these simple rules in the ease of handling, nor are
they used so widely.
Exercise: Apply Lipinski’s rules to the drugs shown in Fig. 7.3.
7.5 Metabolism
We are now going to dedicate a broader section to the metabolism process, in which
we will describe the metabolism of drugs from the chemical point of view, because
we can design drugs whose metabolism is accelerated or reduced, but we have to
know how they are metabolized. With the joint process of metabolism and elimina￾tion ends the action of drugs. Although metabolism is essentially a mechanism of de￾7.5 Metabolism 137toxification, in some cases, it produces the opposite, that is to say, toxicity of a drug,
since toxic metabolites can be formed.
On the other hand, many compounds called prodrugs are inactive and are acti￾vated as drugs by metabolic processes, or it may happen that the metabolism causes
changes in the pharmacological concentration of a compound. Therefore, the knowl￾edge and prediction of metabolism is essential in the development of drugs.
Biotransformation of drugs can be classified into two broad groups:
(a) Phase I reactions directed to the formation of more water-soluble metabolites by
unmasking or introduction of polar groups, such as COOH, OH, and NH2.
Phase I reactions are catabolic (oxidation, reduction, and hydrolysis) and are usu￾ally products with a higher chemical reactivity and paradoxically may be more
toxic or carcinogenic than before. Catabolic reactions are those where compounds
are degraded to smaller molecules, e.g. glycolysis is the catabolic pathway of the
carbohydrate degradation in the body. On the other hand, anabolic reactions are
those where new molecules are synthesized from precursors. For example, pro￾tein synthesis is an anabolic process, because proteins are generated from amino
acids (precursors).
(b) Phase II reactions complete the above with the formation of conjugates with sul￾furic acid, glucuronic acid, or amino acids with existing polar groups or created
in Phase I, thus forming more water-soluble species that are eliminated by the
renal route. Phase II reactions are anabolic and often give inactive products (with
some exceptions such as minoxidil sulfate). Reaction of Phases I and II occurs
mostly in the liver.
Fig. 7.3: Lipinski’s rules applied to Aspirin® and diazepam.
138 7 Metabolic processes in drugs: other methodologies7.5.1 Phase I reactions
7.5.1.1 Oxidation reactions
The main catalysts of the oxidation reactions are the cytochrome P450, which are he￾moproteins. The oxidation process of an RH drug is schematized in Fig. 7.4.
Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide in its reduced form (NADPH) provides the system
with one proton and two electrons, transforming it into the pyridinium derivative
NADP+ (Fig. 7.5).
These enzymes have the heme group as cofactor, a porphyrin containing Fe3+, which
in its reactive form of Fe5+ or Fe4+, performs essentially hydroxylation and epoxida￾tion reactions. The Fe3+ hydroperoxide is species 7.1, where N represents the four pyr￾role nitrogen atoms, and the fifth ligand is a cysteine residue of the enzyme. This
species is converted by protonation and dehydration into Fe5+ (7.2) species, which is
Fig. 7.4: Oxidation of an RH drug by P450.
Fig. 7.5: Coupled transformation of NADH and NADPH cofactors in the oxidation reactions catalyzed
by cytochrome P450.
7.5 Metabolism 139in resonance with Fe4+ (7.3). This active species breaks a C–H bond homolytically to
give an alkyl radical and species 7.4 which, by radical coupling, originate alcohols and
regenerate the heme group. On the other hand, the alkenes and arenes undergo the
addition of radical 7 and, later on, they become epoxides. Scheme 7.1 shows the pro￾cesses in a very simplified way; Silverman’s text, within the fundamental bibliogra￾phy in the Prologue of this volume, shows the complex real process.
The ease of oxidation is parallel to that which would be expected by the action of the
chemical reagents. Thus the aryl, benzyl, aromatic, alkyl, oxidation of amines, and O-,
S-, and N-dealkylation positions are oxidized:
(1) α-Positions of the carbonyl undergo oxidation.
(2) The aromatic oxidations take place in the activated position of the rings against
the electrophilic attack. The presence of electron donor groups favors it, while a
ring with electron-withdrawing groups is deactivated and its oxidation is difficult.
When there is more than one ring, oxidation takes place preferably over the
more activated one and in para-position (because it is the most activated locus
and with less steric hindrance).
Scheme 7.1: Mechanisms of oxidation reactions of alkanes, alkenes, and arenes catalyzed by cytochrome
P450.
140 7 Metabolic processes in drugs: other methodologiesExample: Diazepam (Fig. 7.6).
The O-, S-, and N-dealkylations are hydroxylation reactions occurring on the α-carbon
of the heteroatom and are followed by hydrolysis.
The proposed simplified mechanism is shown in Scheme 7.2.
Example: Phenacetin (Fig. 7.7).
There are other metabolic oxidation processes, such as the oxidative deamination of
dopamine, catalyzed by enzymatic systems other than cytochrome P450 (Scheme 7.3).
Fig. 7.6: Metabolism of diazepam.
Scheme 7.2: Metabolism of O-, S-, and N-dealkylations.
Fig. 7.7: Metabolism of phenacetin.
7.5 Metabolism 141The most frequent reaction of the primary amines is the oxidative deamination by
the action of monoaminoxidase in the unsubstituted amines in α.
7.5.1.2 Reduction reactions
Although the main metabolic pathway of drugs in mammals is oxidation, certain com￾pounds whose functional groups are the azo, nitro, and carbonyl groups tend to be
biotransformed by reduction to other functional groups such as amino and hydroxyl,
directly susceptible to conjugation.
Example: Methadone (Fig. 7.8).
7.5.1.3 Hydrolysis reactions
It is the immediate form of metabolism of esters and amides and takes place by the
action of esterases and amidases that are very widespread in the organism.
Example: Procaine (Scheme 7.4).
The amides hydrolyze more slowly than the esters; e.g. procainamide is more stable
than procaine against hydrolysis (longer half-life) (Scheme 7.5).
Fig. 7.8: Reductive metabolism of methadone.
Scheme 7.4: Metabolic hydrolysis of procaine.
Scheme 7.3: Oxidative deamination of dopamine.
142 7 Metabolic processes in drugs: other methodologies7.5.2 Phase II reactions
7.5.2.1 Conjugation reactions
They occur when the metabolites resulting from Phase I processes are not sufficiently
water-soluble to be eliminated by urine. The purpose is to form more hydrophilic and
rapid renal elimination metabolites. They take place with endogenous compounds
(glucuronic acid, sulfate, glutathione, and certain amino acids).
7.5.2.1.1 The anomeric effect
The reason to explain the anomeric effect is outlined in Scheme 7.6.
7.5.2.1.1.1 Acyclic and cyclic forms of glucose
Alcohols are added to the carbonyl group of aldehydes in a fast and reversible way
giving hemiacetals; this can be done intramolecularly when alcohols and carbonyl
groups are at appropriate distances. Therefore, monosaccharides in aqueous solution
are in equilibrium between the cyclic or hemiacetal form and the acyclic one, al￾though the equilibrium is usually shifted toward the cyclic form since this is more
stable.
Cyclic forms can be represented by the Haworth projection and the chair confor￾mation (Scheme 7.7).
The OH at C5 reacts with the carbonyl group to give rise to a six-membered ring
because it is more stable than the seven-membered one, and consequently the Ha￾worth projection is depicted in Scheme 7.8.
7.5.2.1.1.2 Acyclic and cyclic forms of D-glucose
Glucose is usually present in solid form as a closed pyran ring. In aqueous solution,
on the other hand, it is an open chain to a small extent and is present predominantly
as an α- or β-pyranose, which interconvert (Scheme 7.9).
7.5.2.1.1.3 Molecular orbitals
To construct molecular orbitals (MOs) we need to combine the atomic orbitals of
atoms that make up the molecule. This approach is known as the linear combination
of atomic orbitals. Atomic orbitals are wave functions (Scheme 7.10), and the different
Scheme 7.5: Hydrolysis of procainamide.
7.5 Metabolism 143wave functions can be combined together in the way waves combine: they can add
together constructively (in-phase) or destructively (out-of-phase).
Atomic orbitals can combine in the same way: in-phase or out-of-phase. Using
two 1s orbitals drawn as circles with dots to mark the nuclei and shading to represent
phase, we can combine them in-phase, that is, add them together, or out-of-phase
when they cancel each other in a nodal plane in the center between the two nuclei.
The resulting atoms are molecular rather than atomic orbitals (Scheme 7.11).
Scheme 7.6: The anomeric effect.
144 7 Metabolic processes in drugs: other methodologiesScheme 7.7: Representation of open and cyclic forms.
Scheme 7.8: Cyclic forms of D-glucose.
7.5 Metabolism 145Scheme 7.9: Cyclic and acyclic forms of D-glucose.
Scheme 7.10: Wave functions.
146 7 Metabolic processes in drugs: other methodologies7.5.2.1.1.3.1 The hydrogen molecule
In the bonding MO, the electrons can be shared between the two nuclei, and this low￾ers their energy relative to the 1s atomic orbital. Electrons in the σ✶ orbital do not
help bond; in fact, they hinder the bonding (Scheme 7.12).
Scheme 7.11: Molecular orbitals.
Scheme 7.12: The hydrogen molecule.
7.5 Metabolism 1477.5.2.1.1.3.2 The anomeric effect
The anomeric effect is a stereoelectronic effect that describes the tendency of heter￾oatomic substituents adjacent to a heteroatom within a cyclohexane ring to prefer the
axial orientation instead of the less hindered equatorial orientation that would be ex￾pected from steric considerations (Fig. 7.9).
In the above case, the methoxy group on the cyclohexane ring (top) prefers the equa￾torial position. However, in the tetrahydropyran ring (bottom), the methoxy group
prefers the axial position. This is because in the cyclohexane ring, the anomeric effect
is not observed, and steric effects dominate the observed substituent position. In the
tetrahydropyran ring, because of the endocyclic oxygen atom, the anomeric effect
contributes and stabilizes the observed substituent position.
A widely accepted explanation is that there is a stabilizing interaction (hypercon￾jugation) between the unshared electron pair on the heteroatom (the endocyclic one
in a sugar ring) and the σ✶ orbital for the axial (exocyclic) C–X bond. This causes the
molecule to align the donating lone pair of electrons to the σ✶ orbital lowering the
overall energy of the system and causing more stability. The fact that an antibonding
orbital contributes to the destabilization of a molecule does not mean that an anti￾bonding orbital is never occupied (Fig. 7.10).
Compounds exhibiting an anomeric effect have a longer (and therefore weakened)
bond outside the ring and a shorter, stronger C–O bond within the ring (Fig. 7.11).
Fig. 7.9: The anomeric effect.
Fig. 7.10: The anomeric effect.
148 7 Metabolic processes in drugs: other methodologiesAnother accepted explanation for the anomeric effect is the equatorial configuration
that has the dipoles involving both heteroatoms partially aligned, and therefore repel￾ling each other. By contrast, the axial configuration has these dipoles roughly oppos￾ing, thus representing a more stable and lower energy state (Fig. 7.12).
7.5.2.2 Glucuronides
Conjugation reactions take place by the reaction of existing polar groups in a drug,
and H2SO4, glucuronic acid, glutathione, sugars, or amino acids such as glycine, and
also acetylation and methylation giving directly excretable compounds. Conjugation
with glucuronic acid is probably the most important of all Phase II reactions. This is
probably because there is a good supply of glucuronic acid in the body. Numerous
alcohols, phenols, amines, thiols, and some carboxylic acids are metabolized by this
pathway. The xenobiotic reacts with the activated form of glucuronic acid, glucuronic
acid uridine diphosphate (UDPGA), to form a glucuronide conjugate very soluble in
water (Scheme 7.13). The reaction is catalyzed by uridine diphosphate glucuronyl
transferases (UDPG transferases).
The term “Walden inversion” is used to describe the stereochemical outcome of
aliphatic bimolecular nucleophilic substitution reactions. A bimolecular nucleophilic
substitution reaction at a chiral carbon atom produced a product that has the opposite
stereochemistry from that of the reactant. This requires the nucleophile to approach
the chiral atom from the side opposite to the leaving group (Scheme 7.13).
Example: Paracetamol conjugated with glucuronic acid (Scheme 7.14).
The reaction takes place on the anomeric carbon of the glucuronic acid giving
rise to acetals.
7.5.2.3 Conjugation with glycine
Certain amino acids participate in the reaction of Phase II metabolites from aromatic car￾boxylic acids. Glycine is the amino acid that is commonly involved in these conjugations.
O
OMe
O
OMe
(-)
(+)
Fig. 7.11: One interpretation of the anomeric effect.
O
H
O
H
OMe
OMe Fig. 7.12: A second interpretation of the anomeric
effect.
7.5 Metabolism 149Scheme 7.13: Mechanism of formation of glucuronide conjugates. UTP is uridine triphosphate and X is O
(alcohols and phenols), S (thiols), or NH (amines).
O HO
HO
COOH
OH
O NHCOCH
Paracetamol O-glucuronide
O HO
HO
COOH
HO O P
O
OH
O P
OH
O
O
O
HO OH
N
NH
O
O
UDP-glucuronic acid
NHCOCH
HO
+ UDP
(Uridine
diphosphate)
Scheme 7.14: Paracetamol conjugated with glucuronic acid.
150 7 Metabolic processes in drugs: other methodologiesExample: Scheme 7.15.
Benzoic acid is introduced into the body through diet, as it is widely used as a preser￾vative (both in its acid form and as a sodium, potassium, or calcium salt), although it
is not a drug. Hippuric acid (from Greek: Hyppos, horse; ouron, urine) is an organic
acid found in the urine of horses and other herbivores.
7.5.2.4 Acetylation
Acetylation is the main route of metabolization for amino groups and is mediated by
acetyl-CoA.
Example: Acetylation of procainamide (Scheme 7.16).
The half-life of N-acetylprocainamide is twice than that of procainamide and has no
undesirable side effects.
Example: Metabolism of Aspirin® (Scheme 7.17).
7.5.2.5 Conjugation reactions with glutathione
Glutathione is a tripeptide containing a thiol group of great importance in the detoxi￾fication of drugs and xenobiotics. (A xenobiotic is a chemical substance found within
an organism that is not naturally produced or expected to be present within the or￾ganism.) In the body, an equilibrium exists between the reduced form (GSH) and the
oxidized form (GS–GS). Conjugation reactions of GSH are catalyzed by glutathione
transferases. The conjugative reactivity of GSH is due to its thiol group (pKa 9.0),
which makes it a very effective nucleophile. The nucleophilic character is enhanced
by deprotonation to a thiolate form. It reacts with halides, epoxides, or double acti￾vated bonds (Fig. 7.13).
COOH
O
N
H
COOH
Benzoic acid Hippuric acid
N-Acyltransferase
Scheme 7.15: Metabolization of benzoic acid.
CONHCH2CH2NEt2
H2N
CONHCH2CH2NEt2
H3COCHN
N-Acetyltransferase
Procainamide
Scheme 7.16: Acetylation of procainamide.
7.5 Metabolism 151GSH is added to α,β-unsaturated carbonyl compounds, a typical case in which the xe￾nobiotic substrate is the toxic compound acrolein. The attack occurs on the activated
CH2 group. Quinones (ortho and para) and iminoquinones are strongly structurally
related to α,β-unsaturated carbonyl compounds (Scheme 7.18).
Many N-hydroxylated products can be chemically unstable and dehydrated, produc￾ing electrophilic species of the imine or iminoquinone type, which may be toxic. The imi￾noquinone may also be produced through epoxide-type intermediates. Scheme 7.18
shows the transformation of paracetamol into an iminoquinone through a previous N￾oxidation reaction. In Scheme 7.18, XH represents glutathione or a nucleophile present
in endogenous macromolecules.
Large doses of acetaminophen cause liver and kidney damage in humans (the
maximum recommended dose for an adult is 3–4 g/day at most). In therapeutic doses,
O
O
HOOC N
H
COOH
NH2
O
SH
O
Glutathione (Glu-Cys-Gly)
HSG
X
SG
SG
OH
O
Tautomerism
SG
OH
OH
1,4-Benzoquinone
or p-quinone
Fig. 7.13: Reaction of GSH with double activated bonds and benzyl halides.
O
OH
O
N
H
COOH
Aspirin®
OCOCH3
O
OH
OH
O
OH
OH
Salicylic acid Salicyluric acid
Gentisic acid Gentisuric acid
O
N
H
COOH
Esterase
N-Acyl
transferase
OH
OH
HO N-Acyl HO
transferase
Oxidation
Scheme 7.17: Metabolism of Aspirin®.
152 7 Metabolic processes in drugs: other methodologiesacetaminophen is not very toxic, but in high doses it causes hepatic necrosis and
renal lesions associated with a decrease in the glutathione reserves.
The treatment preferred for an overdose of paracetamol is the administration
(usually in atomized form) of N-acetyl-L-cysteine, which is processed by the cells to L￾cysteine, and used in de novo (de novo synthesis refers to the synthesis of complex
molecules from simple molecules) synthesis of glutathione.
Scheme 7.18: Formation of iminoquinones (possible cytotoxic agents) in the oxidative metabolism
of paracetamol.
7.5 Metabolism 1537.6 Prodrug concept
Prodrugs are inactive compounds, which give rise to a metabolite responsible for
pharmacological activity. The design of prodrugs is usually carried out, with the pur￾pose of modifying some pharmacokinetic or galenic characteristics of the drug in
order to improve its therapeutic application. Here are some of the most frequent
applications.
7.6.1 Improvements in the galenic formulations
Sometimes prodrugs are used due to issues of a galenic nature, such as increasing
water solubility to prepare dosage forms with water. Thus, for example, prednisolone
is a steroidal anti-inflammatory agent poorly soluble in water and therefore not ad￾ministrable parenterally; its conversion into the corresponding hemisuccinate (hemi
means “half”) results in a water-soluble derivative, which can revert to the active
drug by hydrolysis by the action of a plasma esterase (Fig. 7.14).
At other times, they are intended to improve the organoleptic characteristics in the
pharmaceutical formulations. For example, chloramphenicol is an antibiotic of an in￾tensely bitter taste that can be incorporated into syrups in the form of the correspond￾ing tasteless palmitate (Fig. 7.15).
O O
HO HO
O
OH
O
O
O
O
O- Na+
Prednisolone Prednisolone hemisuccinate
OH OH
HOOC-(CH2)n-COOH
Linear saturated
dicarboxylic acids
n = 0 Oxalic acid
n = 1 Malonic acid
n = 2 Succinic acid
n = 3 Glutaric acid
n = 4 Adipic acid
Fig. 7.14: Prednisolone hemisuccinate is a prodrug of prednisolone.
O2N
OH
NHCOCHCl2
OH
O2N
OH
NHCOCHCl2
O
O
(CH2)14CH3
Chloramphenicol Chloramphenicol palmitate
Fig. 7.15: Tasteless chloramphenicol palmitate.
154 7 Metabolic processes in drugs: other methodologies7.6.2 Pharmacokinetic improvements
These can affect the release of the drug. For example, in hormones such as testoster￾one (an androgenic and anabolic hormone), a slow and constant release can be
achieved through palmitate. In this way, the resulting prodrug is suitable for intra￾muscular administration at relatively high doses, accumulating in fatty tissues from
which it will be released slowly by hydrolysis. This is the basis of the so-called depot
action, which represents an important improvement both in the drug dosage regi￾mens and in the resulting plasma levels (Fig. 7.16). Thus, very wide administrations
that will allow the attainment of plasma levels of the hormone similar to their physio￾logical levels will be possible.
The molecules of all natural straight-chain fatty acids, saturated or unsaturated, con￾tain an even number of carbon atoms.
Absorption may also be favorably modified by the use of prodrugs. This is the
case of ampicillin, whose oral absorption is scarce due to its amphoteric character (it
has –NH+
2 and –COOH groups, which ionize to –NH3
+ and –COO− and is not well ab￾sorbed) (Fig. 7.17). Pivampicillin, a prodrug of ampicillin, is better absorbed than its
parent drug.
O O
OH O (CH ) CH
O
CH -(CH ) -COOH
n = 14 Palmitic acid
n = 16 Stearic acid
n = 18 18:1 cis-9 Oleic acid
n = 20 Arachidic acid
Saturated (n= 14, 16 , 20)
and unsaturated fatty acids
Fig. 7.16: Testosterone prodrug.
N
S
CH3
CH3
COOH
O
HN
NH2
O N
S
CH3
CH3
COOCH2OCOBut O
HN
NH2
O
Ampicillin Pivampicillin
H H
Fig. 7.17: Pivampicillin, prodrug of ampicillin.
7.6 Prodrug concept 155The use of prodrugs may also allow modification of the distribution. An example of
this is found in antibacterial sulfonamides. These compounds have a polar group,
which prevents their intestinal absorption. The metabolic elimination of this group by
the intestinal bacterial flora leads to the active sulfonamide. As the release takes
place in the final part of the gastrointestinal tract, its use is limited to the treatment of
localized infections in this area. Phthalylsulfathiazole and sulfasalazine are represen￾tative examples of two of the most common strategies used in the design of these com￾pounds. The former is a sulfathiazole pro-transporter in which the phthalyl group
behaves as a labile modulating group, since it requires a hydrolytic process to provide
the active species. On the other hand, sulfasalazine is an example of a bio-precursor
prodrug, since it requires a non-hydrolytic activation process such as the reduction of
the azo group (Scheme 7.19).
7.7 Modulation of drug metabolism
The metabolic processes causing toxicity are often related to the oxidative reactions
of Phase I, in which high reactivity intermediates such as epoxides or free radicals
are generated, which interact easily with biomolecules inactivating them. To avoid
this problem, different strategies can be adopted as follows:
(a) Completely suppress metabolic processes by administering drugs that are easily
eliminated or that are resistant to these processes
COOH
O
N
H
S
O O
N
H N
S
H2N
S
O O
N
H N
S
Bioactivation
Phthalylsulfathiazole Sulfathiazole
COOH
HO
N
N
S
O O
H
N N
Sulfasalazine
Bioactivation
H2N
S
O O
H
N N
Sulfapyridine
Scheme 7.19: Bioactivation of phthalylsulfathiazole and sulfasalazine.
156 7 Metabolic processes in drugs: other methodologies(b) Focus metabolic reactions on parts of the structure that do not give rise to toxic
compounds or facilitate other nonoxidative metabolic processes
7.8 Suppression of the metabolic processes
This strategy consists of the design of drugs that are stable against metabolic reac￾tions. These types of substances are called hard drugs. They are very lipophilic com￾pounds and tend to accumulate in the fatty tissues, producing long-term lesions. In
addition, complete suppression of a drug metabolism is impossible in practice, be￾cause even if only a small percentage of metabolic reactions occur, these could pro￾duce toxic compounds. However, the principles on which hard drugs are based have
served to prevent the first-pass effect of drug degradation in the liver before reaching
the general circulation, as well as to prolong the action of drugs whose degradation is
much faster than desirable.
One way to hinder the metabolism is to protect the group vulnerable to reaction
through electronic or steric effects. For example, the hydroxylation of carbon directly
attached to the nitrogen in the first N-dealkylation step of amines can be blocked by
the presence of a bulky nitrogen-bonded group, which hinders the access of the en￾zyme. Hydroxylation of aromatic rings can also be blocked by the introduction of ste￾ric hindrance as well as by the presence of electron-withdrawing groups on the
aromatic ring. A more robust group to this reaction may be substituted in order to
avoid the hydrolysis of an ester group, such as an amide or by the introduction of a
bulky group close to the position of the ester.
An example of such modifications is acetylcholine derivatives (Tab. 7.1) designed
to extend the half-life of this neurotransmitter, the ester linkage, which is rapidly hy￾drolyzed by plasma esterases.
Tab. 7.1: Design of acetylcholine analogs.
H3C
O
O
R R'
N+
(CH3)3
R Rʹ Hydrolysis velocity
H H  (acetylcholine)
CH H 
CH CH 
7.8 Suppression of the metabolic processes 1577.9 Promotion of the nonoxidative metabolism
Drugs that are metabolized through a route that does not contain oxidative reactions
are called soft drugs, designed to be inactivated in a controlled and predictable way.
A soft drug can be defined as a biologically active compound, which is characterized
by having a predictable and controllable in vivo destruction process (metabolism),
preferably by means of a single hydrolytic process, to produce nontoxic metabolites,
after having carried out its therapeutic role.
The easiest way to access this type of compounds is to incorporate groups vulnera￾ble to hydrolysis or other nonoxidative reactions. One example is the muscle-relaxant
decamethonium in which the substitution of two CH2–CH2 groups by two ester groups
facilitates the hydrolysis reactions and avoids the toxicity accumulation problems of
decamethonium (Fig. 7.18).
The concept of soft drug should not be confused with that of prodrug: while a prodrug
is an inactive derivative, which is activated in vivo in a predictable active drug man￾ner, a soft drug is an active species, but designed in such a way that it will undergo a
predictable transformation or metabolism to an inactive metabolite. Accordingly, the
common feature of prodrugs and soft drugs is that an in vivo transformation is in￾volved in either activation (prodrug) or inactivation (soft drug). According to both def￾initions, the two concepts are opposed to each other.
The concept of soft drug can be very useful in the design of drugs with a better
therapeutic index (TI). The fundamental goal of drug design is not only the search for
molecules with a maximum biological activity. It is important to bear in mind that
within a series of compounds, the optimum is not necessarily the one with the great￾est activity, but the one with the highest TI. This parameter is a quantitative measure
of the activity/toxicity ratio. For example, if the activity is quantified by means of the
effective dose 50 (ED50) and the toxicity as the lethal dose 50 (LD50), since the values of
ED50 and LD50 are in an inverse relationship with activity and toxicity, respectively,
the TI is expressed in accordance with the following equation (7.1):
TI = activity=toxicity = LD50=ED50 (7:1)
Fig. 7.18: Hard (decamethonium) and soft (suxamethonium) drugs.
158 7 Metabolic processes in drugs: other methodologiesThe optimization of a prototype or hit involves attempting to achieve the maximum
TI, which can be achieved by lowering the denominator of the LD50/ED50 fraction by
increasing the activity, or by increasing the numerator by decreasing the toxicity.
The soft drug 7.1 is an isosteric analog of the antibacterial agent cetylpyridinium
chloride 7.2. Both compounds have the same length of the hydrophobic chain and
have remarkable antimicrobial properties. This is because 7.1 can undergo an easy
hydrolytic deactivation, thereby destroying the positive charge of the pyridinium ring
(Scheme 7.20).
7.10 Summary
Drug interactions with various receptor systems and their biochemical and pharma￾cological effects were the focus of Chapter 5. The pharmacokinetic phase, which con￾sists of the physicochemical processes that enable the drug to reach its site of action,
comes before this pharmacodynamic phase in the timeline of pharmacological action.
Any medicine to be dissolved must first be absorbed at the administration site before
it can be distributed throughout the organism. However, because it depends on so
many variables, this technique is very inaccurate in terms of the drug’s ability to
reach its many targets. A drug will bind nonspecifically, get stuck in depot sites, and
travel to other systems in addition to the specific receptor binding that causes the de￾Cl Cl
N CH2 CH2 CH2 (CH2) N CH 12CH3 2 O C (CH2)12CH3
O
N CH2 OH
N CH2=O
7.1 7.2
+ CH3(CH2)12-COOH
fast
+
Enzymatic pathway
(Cetyl pyridinium chloride)
Scheme 7.20: Soft analog of cetylpyridinium chloride and its metabolic transformation.
7.10 Summary 159sired action. These nonspecific bindings result in toxicity and unwanted side effects.
The metabolism of the drug molecule must be taken into account along with the phar￾macokinetic and pharmacodynamic stages of pharmacological activity. Numerous en￾zyme systems involved in the regular upkeep of cells are vulnerable to drugs. These
systems are able to identify a “xenobiotic” molecule and expose it to biotransforma￾tion, frequently in unintended ways that aim to get rid of xenobiotic agents. Further￾more, the metabolites produced by such reactions might also have pharmacological
effect. An inactive prodrug can also be activated by metabolism to become the active
substance.
Drug’s activity is ended by its excretion, either prior to or following biotransfor￾mation, just as crucial to comprehending the whole pharmacological activity of a
medicine as molecular and biochemical pharmacodynamics are pharmacokinetics
and drug metabolism. Activity in these sectors has significantly expanded as a result
of methodology’s generally quick advancement and the expectations of drug regula￾tory bodies. The proper consideration of the drug distribution and metabolism, as
well as the manner in which their alteration might enhance the overall efficacy of
pharmacological action, has also been acknowledged as being necessary for rational
drug design.
7.11 Key notes: drug metabolism
Definition: Drug metabolism refers to the reactions undergone by a drug in the body.
Metabolic enzymes exist mainly in the liver and catalyze reactions that increase the
polarity of the drug.
Phase I metabolism: Phase I reactions usually involve the introduction of polar
groups to a drug so that the drug can be excreted more easily. Particular groups in a
molecule are more prone to metabolism than others. The cytochrome P450 enzymes
are important metabolic enzymes involved in oxidative reactions. Drugs that enhance
or inhibit the activity of these enzymes will affect the levels of drugs that are normally
metabolized by them.
Phase II metabolism: Phase II reactions involve the formation of polar conjugates.
Highly polar molecules such as glucose are linked to polar functional groups that may
have been placed there by Phase I metabolism.
Anomeric effect: The anomeric effect refers to the unexpected preference for an
electronegative substituent in the 2-position of a tetrahydropyran to be axial.
160 7 Metabolic processes in drugs: other methodologies7.12 Exercises
1. Propose reasonable Phase I metabolic reactions that may occur in the following
drugs:
(a) Apoatropine (e) Propoxyphene
N
H3C
O
O
CH2
H
O
O
Et
Me
NMe2
(b) Ampicillin (f) Reboxetine
O
H
N
N
S
O COOH
NH2
O
N
H
O
OEt
(c) Eseridine (g) Amitriptyline
N O
N
O
O
H
N
H3C
CH3
CH3
CH3
N
CH3
CH3
(d) Dibenzepine (h) Methylphenidate
N
N
O
Me2N
Me
7.12 Exercises 1612. Explain how the following metabolic transformations occur, detailing the steps:
(a) Methylphenobarbital [1-methyl-5-ethyl-5-phenylbarbituric acid] into 5-ethyl-5-
(4-hydroxyphenyl)barbituric acid
(b) 1-(p-Tolyl)-N-methyl-2-propanamine into [4-(2-aminopropyl)phenyl]methanol
(c) Adrenaline: [1-(3,4-dihydroxyphenyl)-2-methylaminoethanol] into 1-(3,4-di￾hydroxyphenyl)-2-aminoethanol, and this into 2-(3-methoxy-4-hydroxyphenyl)-2-
hydroxyacetic acid
(d) Indomethacin: [2-(2-methyl-5-methoxy-1-(p-chlorobenzoyl)-3-indolyl)acetic
acid] into 2-(2-methyl-5-hydroxy-3-indolyl)acetic acid 5-glucuronide
3. Tripeptide glutathione (γ-glutamyl-cysteinyl-glycine) is widely distributed in mam￾malian tissues. One of its physiological functions is to react with all kinds of electro￾philic species, thus avoiding the toxicity that would derive from the reaction of
these with biomolecules.
(a) Formulate the structure of glutathione.
(b) Propose the mechanism by which the following compounds are reacted with
glutathione:
(aʹ) N-(4-Chloromethyl thiazol-2-yl)acetamide
(bʹ) Busulfan
H3CO2SO
OSO2CH3
(cʹ) Arecoline
N
CO2CH3
CH3
(dʹ) Crotonaldehyde
H3C O
4. Classify the compounds on the right as “soft” or “hard” analogs of those on the left,
according to the structural modification performed (D = drug):
(a) D-N(CH3)2 D-N(CH3)C(CH3)3
(b) D-CH3 D-COOCH3
(c) D-COOC2H5 D-COOC(CH3)3
(d) D-C6H5 D-C6H4-pCF3
162 7 Metabolic processes in drugs: other methodologies(e) D-CH2COOR D-CH2CONHR
(f) D-COO(CH2)2N+
R3 D-COOCH2N+
R3
5. Explain the modification made in the following drugs when preparing them as
modified drugs:
7.12 Exercises 1636. Atracurium was designed as a soft muscle relaxant in which two ester groups are
introduced in the two β-positions with respect to the quaternary nitrogen atoms in
the linker chain. Their presence makes it possible for a spontaneous elimination
reaction to take place at physiological temperature and pH, aided by the acidity of
neighboring carbonyl protons. Specify the removal mechanism that takes place:
N+
H3CO
H3CO
CH3
O
O O
O
N+
OCH3
OCH3
H3C
OCH3
OCH3
OCH3
H3CO
Atracurium
164 7 Metabolic processes in drugs: other methodologies8 Synthetic drug strategies
8.1 Goals
– Knowledge of retrosynthetic analysis as a way to simplify the structure of the tar￾get molecule until reaching simple starting materials
– Ability to propose the synthesis phase, based on the information obtained in the
retrosynthetic analysis, based on mechanisms of reaction and reactivity of or￾ganic compounds
8.2 Introduction
Chemistry is a difficult discipline and presents a difficulty similar to learning a second
language. As with any foreign language, we must learn grammar rather than memorize
phrases. We are concerned with the processes by which reactions occur, the “how and
why” of the field. We get a command of organic chemistry based much more upon un￾derstanding the basics than upon memorization. We are going to use the concept of
electron flow together with the rigorous use of curved arrow as an electron bookkeep￾ing unit. The concept of flow is very important. Just as water flows under the influence
of gravity, electrons flow under the influence of charge: from electron-rich atoms to
electron-deficient atoms. Lewis dot structures are used to keep track of all electrons,
and curved arrows are used to symbolize electron movement. You must be able to
draw a proper Lewis structure complete with formal charges accurately and quickly.
Your command of curved arrows also must be automatic.
To carry out an analytical approach to the design of organic synthesis, a basic
knowledge of organic chemistry is required. The strategy followed is one of backward
analyses, i.e. from products to reagents, which is called retrosynthetic analysis. The
methodology consists of gradually “disarming” the product by breaking strategic
bonds to give simpler fragments that we call building blocks or synthons. Bond￾breaking is called a disconnection.
Suppose that we want to prepare barbital, the first barbiturate synthesized with a
hypnotic-sedative activity. Its synthesis is carried out starting from diethyl malonate
and ethyl bromide, in the presence of sodium ethoxide, by an SN2 process, due to the
acidity of the hydrogen atoms of the malonate C-2. It is then condensed with urea in a
basic medium to give barbital (Scheme 8.1).
Suppose, however, that this barbiturate has not been synthesized before and that we
must design its synthesis. In this case, the starting products are unknown, and all that is
known is the structure of the target molecule (TM). It is obviously necessary to start with
this structure and work backward. The key to the problem is the TM functional groups,
which in our case will be nitrogen atoms, carbonyl groups at positions 4 and 6, and C-5.
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783111316901-008There are one or several valid disconnections for most functional groups, i.e. imagina￾tive processes that reverse the actual chemical reactions by means of the rupture of a
bond in the TM, to lead to a new compound, from which the TM can be synthesized. In
this case, the first disconnection (a) will be that of a C–N bond, which leads to the pre￾cursors diethyl 2,2-diethylmalonate and urea (Scheme 8.2).
The second (b), that of a C–C bond of a 1,3-dicarbonyl compound, leads to diethyl mal￾onate and ethyl bromide. Alkylation of diethyl malonate proceeds well when primary
halides are used, since it is an SN2. When it is necessary to use secondary halides, it
will be necessary to look for another alternative, as we will see later.
8.3 Definitions
Disconnection: The analytical operation that consists of the rupture of a bond, which
converts the molecule into a starting product. It is the reverse operation of a chemical
reaction. It is represented by a double arrow and a crossed wavy line perpendicular
to the fragmenting bond.
FGI (functional group interconversion): It is the substitution of a functional group
for another, which allows the realization of the disconnection. This is again the in￾Scheme 8.1: Synthesis of barbital.
Scheme 8.2: Retrosynthesis of barbital.
166 8 Synthetic drug strategiesverse of a chemical reaction and is represented with the same symbol of the discon￾nection and the FGI acronym on the double arrow.
Reagent: The compound whose reaction leads to an intermediate in the proposed syn￾thesis, or leads to the TM. It is the synthetic equivalent of a synthon.
Synthetic equivalent: A reagent that plays the role of a synthon when it cannot be
used, usually due to its instability.
Synthon: A fragment (usually an ion), produced by a disconnection.
Target molecule: The molecule whose synthesis is intended. It is represented as TM,
followed by its corresponding number.
8.4 Rules to make a good disconnection
– A logical mechanism of reaction
– The greatest simplicity possible
– Leading to readily available starting materials
– Use FGI to make disconnections easier
As is well known, tert-butyl alcohol can be obtained by hydrolysis of tert-butyl chlo￾ride (Scheme 8.3).
The mechanism for the inverse imaginary reaction is shown in Scheme 8.4.
This would be the logical mechanism, whereas if any other TM bonds such as C–Me are
broken, the intermediate species Me+ and Me2C−
OH would probably not exist (Scheme 8.5).
Another example: Diethyl 2-benzylmalonate is shown in Fig. 8.1.
Of the two possible disconnections, breaking bonds by (a) or (b), the best discon￾nection is (b), since it leads to an anion and a cation, both stabilized. Therefore, the
correct disconnection would be as in Scheme 8.6.
Scheme 8.3: Synthesis of tert-butyl alcohol.
Scheme 8.4: Retrosynthesis of tert-butyl alcohol.
8.4 Rules to make a good disconnection 167The preparation of the molecule would therefore be through a malonic ester synthesis
(Scheme 8.7).
Another type of reaction in which it is very easy to deduce the disconnection are the
Diels–Alder reactions: for example, the reaction between 1,3-butadiene and acrolein
would be as shown in Scheme 8.8.
We now formulate the disconnection of the product (Scheme 8.9).
Scheme 8.5: Illogical disconnection of tert-butyl alcohol.
Fig. 8.1: Two possible disconnections of diethyl 2-benzylmalonate.
Scheme 8.6: Correct disconnection of diethyl 2-benzylmalonate.
Scheme 8.7: Synthesis of diethyl 2-benzylmalonate.
Scheme 8.8: Diels–Alder reaction.
Scheme 8.9: Disconnection of the Diels–Alder product.
168 8 Synthetic drug strategiesThe double bond in the six-membered ring tells us where to start the disconnection.
The Diels–Alder reaction is a syn addition, both with respect to diene and dienophile
(Scheme 8.10).
8.5 endo selectivity
When a diene reacts with a dienophile, two isomeric Diels–Alder products called endo
and exo adducts can be formed. When the electron-withdrawing group of the dieno￾phile is next to the new double bond formed, the compound is called endo. When the
electron-withdrawing group of the dienophile is far from the new double bond, the
compound is called exo (Scheme 8.11).
Scheme 8.10: syn addition of the Diels-Alder product.
Scheme 8.11: Endo and exo adducts of the Diels–Alder reaction.
8.5 endo selectivity 169We will use these concepts in the synthesis of buprenorphine.
8.6 Synthesis of various barbiturates
8.6.1 Pentobarbital
In the case where we have branched substituents, such as pentobarbital used as an
antiepileptic, hypnotic, and sedative drug (see Chapter 5 of Volume 2 of this series),
alkylation of the diethyl malonate in a basic medium with 2-bromopentane cannot be
carried out, because being a secondary halide the elimination reaction predominates.
In these cases, Knoevenagel reaction and subsequent reduction of the double bond
yield the desired product. The introduction of the ethyl substituent is carried out by
the classical method from ethyl 2-(2-pentyl)malonate (Scheme 8.12).
8.6.2 Phenobarbital
An interesting case is the preparation of phenobarbital, the first synthesized barbitu￾rate (see Chapter 5 of Volume 2 of this series). The preparation of the diethyl phenyl￾malonate is not made by direct alkylation with phenyl halide, since these derivatives
are very unreactive against SN2. 1,3-Dicarbonyl compounds can be disconnected
through the α,β-bond (Scheme 8.13), and the retrosynthetic analysis leads to the carb￾anion of ethyl phenylacetate and diethyl carbonate.
Scheme 8.12: Synthesis of pentobarbital.
170 8 Synthetic drug strategiesScheme 8.14 shows the synthesis of phenobarbital.
Scheme 8.13: Retrosynthesis of 1,3-dicarbonyl compounds.
Scheme 8.14: Synthesis of phenobarbital.
8.6 Synthesis of various barbiturates 1718.6.3 Hexobarbital
Hexobarbital is a barbiturate derivative having hypnotic and sedative effects (see
Chapter 5 of Volume 2 of this series). The introduction of the 1-cyclohexenyl substitu￾ent at the α-position of the malonic ester is affected by a Knoevenagel condensation
from cyclohexanone. However, the conjugated diester is isomerized in the basic me￾dium to the nonconjugated product, which in this case is more stable, because it is not
as destabilized by steric interactions as the conjugated tautomer (Scheme 8.15).
8.7 Buprenorphine
Buprenorphine (see Chapter 6 of Volume 2 of this series) may be used as an alterna￾tive to methadone in the treatment of withdrawal symptoms, and is the result of the
formation of an additional six-membered cycle between positions 6 and 14 of the opi￾ate skeleton. From a retrosynthetic point of view, this additional cycle with a double
bond and with the acetyl moiety can be prepared by means of the Diels–Alder reac￾tion of the opioid scaffold with the methyl vinyl ketone. Finally, the reaction of result￾ing ketone with Grignard reagents can lead to the so-called Bentley derivatives.
Scheme 8.16 shows the synthesis of buprenorphine from oripavine via its conver￾sion to the endo Diels–Alder adduct 8.1, the saturated derivative 8.2, the O-carbonate
8.3, and the tert-butyl carbinol 8.4. The palladium-catalyzed N-demethylation of 8.4 in
the presence of cyclopropylmethylcarboxylic acid anhydride gives rise to the acyl
amide 8.5, whose treatment with Vitride® furnish buprenorphine (8.6).
Scheme 8.15: Synthesis of hexobarbital.
172 8 Synthetic drug strategies8.8 Celecoxib
Celecoxib is a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) used to treat mild-to￾moderate pain and help relieve symptoms of arthritis, such as inflammation, swelling,
stiffness, and joint pain (see Chapter 9 of Volume 2 of this series). The C-heteroatom
bond, generally O, N, or S, in a hydrocarbon chain or cycle is usually the most suitable
point for dissociation into the heterocyclic compounds. We will raise the problem of
carrying out the retrosynthesis of a COX-2 inhibitor, such as celecoxib (Scheme 8.17).
Scheme 8.18 describes one of the syntheses of celecoxib. Dione 8.7 is prepared by
Claisen condensation between 4-methylacetophenone and ethyl trifluoroacetate in the
presence of NaOMe in methanol at reflux. The formation of the diarylpyrazole from the
condensation between β-diketone 8.7 and 4-sulfonamidophenylhydrazine hydrochloride
then leads to celecoxib. The corresponding chlorophenylpyrazolyl analog 8.8 is potent
(IC50 = 0.01 μM vs COX-2), selective (IC50 = 17.8 μM vs COX-1), and effective. However, its
Scheme 8.16: Synthesis of buprenorphine.
8.8 Celecoxib 173Scheme 8.17: Retrosynthesis of celecoxib.
Scheme 8.18: Synthesis of celecoxib.
174 8 Synthetic drug strategiesplasma half-life is too long. Substitution of the chlorine atom by the methyl group accel￾erates the metabolism to give benzoic acid via an in vivo oxidation process.
8.9 Rofecoxib
Rofecoxib (Vioxx®) is an NSAID prescribed to decrease pain and inflammation in rheu￾matoid arthritis (see Chapter 9 of Volume 2 of this series). In the original Merck patent
published in 1995, rofecoxib is synthesized in three steps from 4-methylthioacetophenone
8.9, prepared in turn from the Friedel–Crafts acylation of thioanisole. As shown in
Scheme 8.19, the use of an excess of magnesium monoperoxyphthalate hexahydrate (a
cheap, safe, and commercially available substitute for m-chloroperbenzoic acid) results
in sulfone 8.10, which is brominated to give compound 8.11. This phenacyl bromide is
cyclized with phenylacetic acid under the influence of 1,8-diazabicyclo[5.4.0]undec-7-ene
to yield rofecoxib. The ketoester, which is formed from esterification, undergoes an intra￾molecular Claisen condensation to yield the furanone ring of rofecoxib.
Scheme 8.19: Synthesis of rofecoxib.
8.9 Rofecoxib 1758.10 Fentanyl
Fentanyl is an opiate synthetic narcotic agonist used in medicine for its analgesic and
anesthetic actions (see Chapter 6 of Volume 2 of this series). Scheme 8.20 shows its
retrosynthetic process.
The fentanyl synthesis is performed in three steps, starting with 4-piperidone hydro￾chloride. It reacts with phenethyl bromide, giving rise to N-phenyl-4-piperidone,
which is subsequently subjected to a reductive amination to give 8.12. Finally, 8.12 re￾acts with propionic chloride to yield fentanyl (Scheme 8.21).
Scheme 8.20: Retrosynthesis of fentanyl.
Scheme 8.21: Synthesis of fentanyl.
176 8 Synthetic drug strategies8.11 Electrophilic substitution on pyrroles
Thiophene, pyrrole, and furan can be considered as aromatic, to a greater or lesser
degree, according to their resonance energies (Scheme 8.22). As it has been discussed
in Chapter 4, all of them present an excess of π-electrons, since they have six electrons
distributed in the five atoms of the ring. Thus, they are π-excessive heterocyclic com￾pounds. Therefore, due to this, their chemistry presents certain parallels to benzene
aromatic compounds, and nucleophilic compounds such as aniline or phenol.
The aromaticity of these heterocycles depends on the two electrons that the het￾eroatom contributes to the π-system.
Scheme 8.22: Structures of thiophene, pyrrole, and furan.
8.11 Electrophilic substitution on pyrroles 177Electrophilic aromatic substitution normally occurs at position C2, which is next to
the heteroatom, through the more stable intermediate (Scheme 8.23). When position 2
is occupied, the substitution takes place at position 5.
The three five-membered heteroaromatic compounds react all too easily with electro￾philes and are unstable in acid whether protic or Lewis. Therefore, we must find reac￾tions that can be used in neutral or weakly acidic solutions. The synthesis of the
NSAID tolmetin illustrates these two features. The disconnection of the ketone would
lead naturally to an AlCl3-catalyzed Friedel–Crafts reaction between the acid chloride
and the pyrrole derivative (Scheme 8.24).
But this mixture would decompose the pyrrole 8.13. The Vilsmeier acylation has to be
used, replacing the acid chloride by the tertiary amide and AlCl3 by POCl3. The amide
is very unreactive but combines with POCl3 to give a reactive species that does attack
pyrrole 8.15 at position 5 to give, after re-aromatization and hydrolysis, the ketone
8.16 (Scheme 8.25).
The pyrrole with the alkyl side chain must be prepared for this acylation reaction.
Friedel–Crafts alkylation is not an option, but instead, Mannich reaction can be car￾ried out on pyrroles: Formaldehyde and an amine combine to give another iminium
salt that reacts with N-methyl pyrrole to give, after re-aromatization, the substituted
pyrrole 8.17 (Scheme 8.26).
Scheme 8.23: Substitution position on five-membered aromatic compounds.
Scheme 8.24: Disconnection of tolmetin.
178 8 Synthetic drug strategiesThe tertiary amino group in Mannich products is often replaced by other functionali￾ties: Here methylation and substitution are used to make nitrile 8.18, and this com￾pound was used in the acylation sequence. Finally, hydrolysis of nitrile 8.18 gave
tolmetin (Scheme 8.27).
Scheme 8.27: Conversion between N,N-dimethyl-1-(1-methyl-1H-pyrrole-2-yl)methanamine and tolmetin.
Scheme 8.25: Application of the Vilsmeier acylation on N-methylpyrrole.
Scheme 8.26: Synthesis of N,N-dimethyl-1-(1-methyl-1H-pyrrole-2-yl)methanamine.
8.11 Electrophilic substitution on pyrroles 1798.12 Exercises
1. Propose the retrosynthesis and synthesis of the following drugs:
(a) (RS)-fluoxetine (Prozac®)
(b) Nifedipine
(c) Trimethoprim
(d) Methotrexate
(e) Sumatriptan
180 8 Synthetic drug strategies9 Solutions to the exercises
9.1 Exercises to Chapter 2
A. Name the following drugs:
(1) 4-Amino-N-[2-(diethylamino)ethyl]benzamide
(2) 4-Amino-5-chloro-N-(2-diethylaminoethyl)-2-methoxybenzamide
(3) 2-Amino-3,5-dibromo-N-cyclohexyl-N-methylbenzylamine
(4) 7-(Cyclohexylcarbonyl)-2-naphthoic acid
(5) N-(5-Nitro-2-propoxyphenyl)acetamide
(6) Ethyl 2-phenoxy-2-methylpropanoate
(7) 6-(Dimethylamino)-5-methyl-4,4-diphenylhexane-3-one
(8) 2-(4-Chlorophenoxy)-2-methylpropanoic acid
(9) (2-Amino-3-benzoylphenyl)acetic acid
(10) 1-(2,6-Dimethylphenoxy)propan-2-amine
(11) 6-(Phenoxypropanamido)-3,3-dimethyl-7-oxo-4-thia-1-azabicyclo[3.2.0]hep￾tane-2-carboxylic acid
(12) 4,7-Dimethyl-7-azabicyclo[2.2.1]heptan-2-yl propionate
(13) 7-[2-(Thiophene-2-yl)acetamido]-3-[(carbamoyl)methyl]-8-oxo-5-thia-1-
azabicyclo[4.2.0]oct-2-ene-2-carboxylic acid
(14) 3-[(2-Aminoethyl)thio]-6-(1-hydroxyethyl)-7-oxo-1-azabicyclo[3.2.0]hept-2-en-2-
carboxylic acid
(15) 2-Methoxycarbonyl-8-methyl-8-azabicyclo[3.2.1]octane-3-yl benzoate
(16) Propyl 8-methyl-8-azabicyclo[3.2.1]octane-3-yl-pentanoate
(17) 8-[4-(4-Fluorophenyl)-4-oxobutyl]-1-phenyl-1,3,8-triazaspiro[4.5]decan-4-one
(18) 5-[(2-Methoxyphenoxy)methyl]oxazolidine-2-one
(19) 1-(p-Chlorobenzyl)-2-[(1-pyrrolidinyl)methyl]-1H-benzimidazole
(20) 8-Chloro-11-(4-methylpiperazin-1-yl)-10,11-dihydro-5H-dibenzo[b,e]-1,4-diazepine
(21) 5-(4-Chlorophenyl)-3,5-dihydro-2H-imidazo[2,1-a]isoindole-5-ol
(22) 11-[3-(Dimethylamino)propylidene]-6,11-dihydrodibenzo[b,e]thiepine
(23) 2-Bromo-4-(2-chlorophenyl)-9-methyl-6H-thieno[3,2f][1,2,4]triazolo[4,3-a]-1,4-
diazepine
(24) 7-(α-Amino-α-(3-hydroxyphenyl)acetamido)-8-oxo-3-(1-propene-1-yl)-5-thia-1-
azabicyclo[4.2.0]oct-2-ene-2-carboxylic acid
(25) 2-(6-Chloro-9H-carbazol-2-yl)propionic acid
(26) 8-Chloro-10-(2-dimethylaminoethoxy)dibenzo[b,f]thiepine
(27) 10-(2-Dimethylaminopropyl)-10H-pyrido[3,2-b][1,4]benzothiazine or 1-(10H-benzo
[b]pyrido[2,3-e]-1,4-thiazine-10-yl)-N,N-dimethylpropan-2-amine
(28) 4-Amino-2-[4-(furan-2-carbonyl)-1-piperazinyl]-6,7-dimethoxyquinazoline or {4-
[4-amino-6,6-dimethoxyquinazoline-2-yl]piperazine-1-yl}(furan-2-yl)methanone
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783111316901-009(29) 6-Benzoyl-3-hydrazino-5,6,7,8-tetrahydropyrido[4,3-c]pyridazine or (3-hydrazine
-yl-7,7-dihydropyrido[4,3-c]pyridazine-6(5H)-yl)phenylmethanone
(30) 2-[3-(4-Chlorophenyl)-1-phenyl-1H-pyrazole-4-yl]acetic acid
(31) N1
-(6-Methoxy-2-methylpyrimidine-1-methyl)sulfanilamide
(32) N1
-(5-Methyl-1,3,4-thiadiazole-2-yl)sulfanilamide
(33) Ethyl methyl 4-(2,3-dichlorophenyl)-2,6-dimethyl-1,4-dihydropyridine-3,5-
dicarboxylate
(34) 7-Chloro-N-(5-diethylamino)pentan-2-yl)quinazoline-4-amine
(35) 10-Chloro-11b-(2-chlorophenyl)-7-methyl-3,5,7,11b-tetrahydro-2H-oxazolo[3,2-
d]-1,4-benzodiazepine-6-one
(36) 3-(Acetoxymethyl)-7-[2-(2-thienyl)acetamido]-8-oxo-5-thia-1-azabicyclo[4.2.0]
oct-2-ene-2-carboxylic acid
B. Formulate the following drugs:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
182 9 Solutions to the exercises(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
9.1 Exercises to Chapter 2 183(18) (20)
(19)
9.2 Exercises to Chapter 4
1. (a) Modulative structural modification due to a ring size variation
(b) Modulative variation due to reorganization and dissociation of the rings
(c) Modulative structural variation by isomerization
(d) Modulative structural variation by formation of a rigid analog
(e) Conjunctive replication by formation of a hybrid or a molecular combination
(f) Structural modulative variation by bioisosterism
(g) Disjunctive replication
(h) Disjunctive replication
(i) Modulative structural variation by formation of a cycle
(j) Conjunctive replication: molecular duplication
(k) Modulative structural variation by bioisosterism
(l) Conjunctive replication by association of two molecules (antihypertensive +
diuretic drug)
(m) Disjunctive replication (simplification of the structure)
(n) Modulative structural variation due to the formation of a cycle
(o) Modulative variation by a bioisosteric change (suprophen: a drug with anal￾gesic and an anti-inflammatory property)
2. (a) Vinylogous: procaine and its active vinylogue
(b) Isosteres: change of the carbonyl and sulfone groups (meperidine and its iso￾stere that is also a hypnoanalgesic drug)
(c) Isosteres: indomethacin and oxametacin (an isosteric anti-inflammatory agent)
(d) Homologs: procaine and its inactive counterpart
(e) Isosteres: catechol and benzimidazole
184 9 Solutions to the exercises(f) Isosteres: 4-dimethylaminoantipyrine and 4-isopropylantipyrine, both analge￾sic and antipyretic agents
(g) Homologs
(h) Isosteres: hypoxanthine and 6-mercaptopurine
(i) Isosteres: methaphenilene and methapyrilene
(j) Vinylogues: pethidine (meperidine) and its vinylogue
(k) Vinylogues: phenylbutazone and styrylbutazone
3. (a) Modification of pharmacokinetics by blocking the metabolism by the intro￾duction of fluorine atoms into the aromatic rings: longer duration of action.
The compound on the left is CGP52411, an enzymatic inhibitor that acts on the
active site of the epidermal growth factor receptor, useful as an antitumor
agent. This compound undergoes oxidative metabolism at the para-position
of the aromatic ring. The introduction of F resulted in CGP53353. This same
procedure was successfully applied in the synthesis of gefitinib, which is a
drug used for certain breast, lung, and other cancers.
(b) Transformation of an agonist into antagonist (hypoxanthine, a metabolite,
and 6-mercaptopurine, an antitumor agent by antagonism)
(c) Development of therapeutic copies: enalapril and its therapeutic copy, quinapril
(d) Activity change (homology allowed by chance the interaction with another bi￾ological target): dietazine, an H1 antihistaminic drug, and chlorpromazine, a
neuroleptic change
(e) Reduction of toxicity: the change of chlorine atoms of the compound UK47265
by F atoms led to the antifungal fluconazole, lacking toxicity
(f) Improvement of distribution so that it reaches the organs where it has to ex￾ercise its action: mechlorethamine and melphalan
(g) Change of the spectrum of action: transformation of an agonist into an antag￾onist, by introduction of bulky groups (acetylcholine and propantheline)
(h) Improvement of distribution: the compound does not cross the blood–brain
barrier with the quaternization of nitrogen and acts only at the peripheral
level (scopolamine and scopolamine butylbromide)
9.3 Exercises to Chapter 5
1. (a)
9.3 Exercises to Chapter 5 185(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
186 9 Solutions to the exercises(f)
(g)
(h)
2. (a)
9.3 Exercises to Chapter 5 187(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
188 9 Solutions to the exercises3.
4. (a)
Hydrophobic interactions cause it to act as an antagonist.
(b)
D + R Ð
K1
K2
½ ! DR
K3 Biological response
Agonist: big K1 ≥ K2, K3
Antagonist: K1 ≥ K2, K3 = 0
9.3 Exercises to Chapter 5 189Partial agonist: small K1 ≥ K2, K3
Inactive compound: K1 ≤ K2
5. (a)
(b)
(c)
190 9 Solutions to the exercises(d)
(e)
9.3 Exercises to Chapter 5 191Only the cis-isomer has potency similar to that of the flexible drug. It follows that the
antineoplastic activity is related to the ability to form a pyrrolidine derivative by bis￾1,4-alkylation of some amino groups suitably disposed in the biological target.
(f)
6.
The hydrophobic pocket is quite spacious, except in the area where the phenol binds:
this is a narrow zone, which only accepts a flat ring, and due to this the phenolic ring
determines the orientation of the rest of the molecule.
192 9 Solutions to the exercisesTamoxifen metabolite would bind to the estrogen receptor in the same way as es￾tradiol, while tamoxifen, with its dimethylaminoethyl group, would not fit into the re￾ceptor hole. In addition, it could not form all the hydrogen bonds needed for the bond.
9.4 Exercises to Chapter 6
1. (a) m-Xylene (3.20)
πMe ðaromaticÞ = 0.56
log Pmesitylene = log Pbenzene + 2πMe = 2.13 + ð Þ 2 × 0.56 = 3.25
(b) Mesitylene (1,3,5-trimethylbenzene) (3.43)
log Pmesitylene = log Pbenzene + 3πMe = 2.13 + 1.68 = 3.81
(c) Hexamethylbenzene (2.33)
log Phexamethylbenzene = log Pbenzene + 6πMe = 2.13 + 3.36 = 5.49
The fact that the experimental value is lower than the calculated one may be
due to the large number of substituents in the benzene ring and to its elec￾tron-donating effect that causes this partition coefficient to fall.
(d) 1,3-Dinitrobenzene (1.49)
πNO2 ð Þ aromatic = − 0.28
log Pnitrobenzene = log Pbenzene + 2πNO2 = 2.13 − 0.56 = 1.57
(e) 2,4-Dihydroxybenzoic acid (1.44)
πCOOH aromatic ð Þ = − 0.32; πOH aromatic ð Þ = − 0.67
log P2,4 − dihydroxybenzoic acid = log Pbenzene + πCOOH + 2πOH
= 2.13 − 0.32 − 1.34 = 0.47
In this case, the difference in values is due to the presence of an intramolecu￾lar bond that increases the lipophilicity of the molecule with respect to the
calculated value:
9.4 Exercises to Chapter 6 1932. The negative value of the coefficient of π indicates that the activity is favored by
hydrophilic substituents (π < 0); since σ has a positive coefficient, the electron￾withdrawing substituents favor potency. Thus, both s polar and an electron￾withdrawing group will yield a compound of optimal activity, whereas an elec￾tron-releasing group will yield a weak methicillin derivative; for example:
The foregoing values allow the prediction that the activity of p-methylsulfonyl￾methicillin would be some 700 times higher than expected for p-dimethylamino￾methicillin. However, these predictions must be verified by synthesis and assay of
the compounds.
3. (a) Those substituents that have a high partition coefficient (log P) and that are
electron-withdrawing groups.
(b) An electron-withdrawing substituent X will be needed to facilitate the nucleo￾philic attack of a thiol group (–SH):
Mechanism of nucleophilic attack reaction:
4. (a) The first equation indicates that adrenergic blocking activity depends on lip￾ophilicity (π) and on electronic effects (σ). The second equation shows that he￾patic toxicity (as well as activity) increases with the presence of substituents
in the aromatic ring that increase lipophilicity (π positive) and that are elec￾tron-releasing groups (σ negative), such as –NMe2.
(b) Mechanism of alkylation:
194 9 Solutions to the exercises(c) Many reactions create positive charges that can be stabilized by delocalization
via resonance with the substituent. Therefore, a new substituent effect scale was
produced for groups that stabilized positive charges via resonance (σ+
), such as
in the intermediate that gives rise to the alkylated DNA compounds A and B. The
σ+ scale is based upon the heterolysis (SN1) reaction of para-substituted cumyl
chlorides (phenyldimethyl chloromethanes). The rationale for using parameters
σ–
, σ+
, and σ0 is discussed in Chapter 1 of the Hansch and Leo’s book, which is
referenced in the fundamental bibliography in the Prologue of this volume:
5. (a) The inhibitory activity depends on the distribution coefficient as this is impor￾tant in the transportation of the drug at the physiological level.
(b) To calculate the best value of π, the derivative of the equation with respect to
π has to be calculated:
d log 1
C
 
dπ = 0.34 − 2 0ð Þ .183 π = 0
π = 0.304
0.366 = 0.831
Of the proposed substituents, the closest to this value is Br (0.86). The Br substitu￾ent would be therefore the best group to improve the in vivo inhibitory activity.
6. (a) The second equation indicates that the activity is favored by electron￾withdrawing substituents (σ positive values).
According to the first equation, the lower the absolute value of pKa, the
higher the activity, i.e. the activity will be favored by substituents that in￾crease the acidity of the substituents.
9.4 Exercises to Chapter 6 195An electron-withdrawing R substituent in the structure of the sulfonamide
moiety will stabilize the anion that would be formed by the abstraction of a
proton in structure 6.3. Thus, both equations are related to the same parame￾ter: the acidity of the sulfonamide.
(b) The fact that the activity increments on increasing the acidity is indicative
that the compound will act in its ionized form.
(c) Electron-withdrawing substituents, such as halogens (–Br, –Cl), –NO2, –CF3,
would improve the activity.
(d) The parabolic dependence of the activity on pKa is explained by the influence
of the ionization on the penetration through the bacterial membranes. Thus,
a fully ionized substituent would be very hydrophilic and would not go
through the membrane. A balance between hydrophilicity and lipophilicity is
required so that part of the drug will have to be in the nonionized form to
cross the biological membrane.
7. It depends on hydrophobic and electronic parameters, and substituents lipophilic
and electron-releasing will increase log(1/Ki):
– for the –Cl-substituted pyrazole:
log P = 0.28 pyrazole ð Þ + 0.71 for aromatic ð Þ − Cl = 0.99
– for the –Cl-substituted pyrazole:
log 1ð Þ =Ki = 1.22 × 0.99 + 1.80 × 0.37 + 4.87 = 6.75
8. (a) It depends on hydrophobic, electronic, and steric parameters.
(b) The activity will be favored by lipophilic substituents (π > 0), electron￾withdrawing (σ > 0), and not bulky substituents (Es < 0).
(c) Examples: –F and –CF3.
9. Biological activity correlates with hydrophobic and electronic parameters. It is fa￾vored by the presence of substituents that are both lipophilic (apolar, π > 0) and
electron-withdrawing groups (σ > 0), such as –Br and –SEt2.
10. (a) It depends on hydrophobic, electronic, and steric parameters.
(b) The activity will be favored by the presence of lipophilic substituents (π > 0),
electron-withdrawing groups (σ > 0) and not bulky surrogates (Es < 0). Exam￾ples: –CH2F and –SCH3.
11. Lipophilic (π > 0) and electron-withdrawing substituents (σ > 0), such as halogens
(–Br, –Cl, and –I), must be introduced.
12. (a) It depends on lipophilic and steric parameters.
196 9 Solutions to the exercises(b) Hydrophobic (π > 0) and quite voluminous (Es > 0) substituents would be in￾troduced. Examples: –Prn
, –Bun
, –But
, and –Ph.
13. The activity would be improved with lipophilic substituents (π > 0) and small sub￾stituents (Es < 0), such as –CH2Cl, –CH2F, –CH3, and –SH.
14. (a) It depends on electronic, hydrophobic, and steric parameters. The biological
activity will be favored with electron-withdrawing (σ > 0), lipophilic (π > 0),
and small substituents (Es < 0).
(b) Examples: –SCH3, –F, –Cl, and –CH2F.
15. The QSAR equation resulting from the multiple linear regression analysis for the
antimalarial activity indicates that the two substituents X and Y of the substituted
aromatic rings will be affected by the same type of parameters (hydrophobic and
electron), and in the same order of magnitude (π > 0 and σ > 0). Therefore, the ac￾tivity will be favored by lipophilic and electron-withdrawing substituents, such
as –Cl, –Br, –I, –CH2Br, and –CCl3.
9.5 Exercises to Chapter 7
1. (a)
9.5 Exercises to Chapter 7 197(b)
(c)
198 9 Solutions to the exercises(d)
(e)
9.5 Exercises to Chapter 7 199(f)
(g)
200 9 Solutions to the exercises(h)
2. (a)
(b)
9.5 Exercises to Chapter 7 201(c)
(d)
3. (a)
(a′)
202 9 Solutions to the exercises(b′)
(c′)
(d′)
4. (a) D-N(CH3)C(CH3)3 is a hard analog of D-N(CH3)2.
(b) D-COOCH3 is a soft analog of D-CH3.
(c) D-COOC(CH3)3 is a soft analog of D-COOC2H5.
t-Bu+ cation is stable, and degradation of the ester occurs at physiological pH.
(d) D-C6H4-pCF3 is a hard analog of D-C6H5.
(e) D-CH2CONHR is a hard analog of D-CH2COOR because the former is more dif￾ficult to hydrolyze.
(f) D-COOCH2N+
R3 is a soft analog of D-COO(CH2)2N+
R3 because the former is an
unstable acyloxymethyltrimethylammonium derivative
9.5 Exercises to Chapter 7 2035. (a)
It has been transformed into a soft analog because its hydrolytic metabolism
is facilitated in the modified drug.
(b)
The second drug is a soft analog of aryloxypropanolamine (with an ester
group easy to hydrolyze).
(c)
The second drug is a soft analog: it is an active metabolite of phenylbutazone.
(d)
Hard analog: the first drug is transformed into a carbamate more resistant to
hydrolysis.
204 9 Solutions to the exercises(e)
Hard analog: by introduction of a steric hindrance in the proximity of the
ester group that hinders its hydrolysis.
6.
9.6 Exercises to Chapter 8
(a) (RS)-Fluoxetine
Fluoxetine (Prozac®, see Chapter 4 of Volume 2 of this series) was marketed for
the first time in 1986. Although it has been on the market for 37 years, it remains
one of the most prescribed antidepressant drugs.
9.6 Exercises to Chapter 8 205The disconnection process begins with the cleavage of the C–O bond. The cleavage
of the C–O bond leads to p-trifluoromethylphenol 9.1 and the functionalized amine
9.2, the precursor of which is the amino alcohol 9.3. The increase in the oxidation
state of the hydroxyl function generates β-aminoketone 9.4, whose disconnection
process, based on a Mannich reaction, leads to acetophenone, formaldehyde, and
methylamine (Scheme 9.1). Fluoxetine prepared according to the synthesis de￾scribed in Scheme 9.2 is obtained in racemic form.
Scheme 9.1: Retrosynthetic analysis of fluoxetine.
Scheme 9.2: Synthesis of racemic fluoxetine.
206 9 Solutions to the exercises(b) Nifedipine
Nifedipine is a calcium channel blocker of the 1,4-dihydropyridine type, used in med￾icine for the relief of angina pectoris, as well as for arterial hypertension (see Chap￾ter 10 of Volume 2 of this series). Scheme 9.3 outlines the retrosynthesis of nifedipine.
1,4-Dihydropyridines are obtained from Hantzsch synthesis, i.e. they should be
formed from 1 mol of aldehyde, 2 mol of 1,3-diCO compound, and 1 mol of ammo￾nia. The necessary β-ketoester to react with o-nitrobenzaldehyde (Scheme 9.4) is
prepared previously by the Claisen condensation of ethyl acetate.
Scheme 9.3: Retrosynthesis of nifedipine.
Scheme 9.4: Synthesis of nifedipine.
9.6 Exercises to Chapter 8 207(i) Trimethoprim
Trimethoprim is a bacteriostatic antibiotic derived from a trimethoxybenzylpyrimi￾dine and almost exclusively used in the treatment of urinary tract infections (see
Chapter 12 of Volume 2 of this series). Its retrosynthesis is shown in Scheme 9.5:
Synthesis begins with an aldol condensation of the benzaldehyde derivative with 3-
ethoxypropionitrile. The ethoxy group in an allylic position can be displaced by a
nucleophile. An amino group of guanidine is the nucleophile in this displacement
process, while the second amino group is added to the cyano group. Proton 1,3-
rearrangement gives rise to the drug shown in Scheme 9.6.
(ii) Methotrexate (MTX)
MTX (see Chapter 13 of Volume 2 of this series) is an antimetabolite that has anti￾proliferative and immunosuppressive activity by competitively inhibiting the en￾zyme dihydrofolate reductase. This is a key enzyme in the metabolism of folic
acid that regulates the amount of intracellular folate available for the synthesis of
proteins and nucleic acids. It prevents the formation of tetrahydrofolate neces￾sary for the synthesis of nucleic acids. Its retrosynthesis is shown in Scheme 9.7.
Scheme 9.5: Retrosynthesis of trimethoprim.
Scheme 9.6: Synthesis of trimethoprim.
208 9 Solutions to the exercisesThe route begins with formation of the pyrimidine base by condensation between
guanidine and malononitrile, followed by the introduction of the new amino
Scheme 9.7: Retrosynthesis of methotrexate.
Scheme 9.8: Synthesis of methotrexate.
9.6 Exercises to Chapter 8 209group by diazo coupling and subsequent reduction. The next step builds up the
molecule in a single-step one-pot synthesis (Scheme 9.8).
(iii) Sumatriptan
Sumatriptan (see Chapter 4 of Volume 2 of this series) is a medicine that belongs
to the group of triptans and is used for the treatment of migraine. Its retrosynthe￾sis is shown in Scheme 9.9.
Synthesis of sumatriptan is shown in Scheme 9.10. Sumatriptan was the first seroto￾nergic agonist introduced in therapeutics in 1991 by Glaxo. For its synthesis, the 4-
substituted aniline by an N-methylsulfamoylmethyl group is the starting material. An￾iline nitrogen is converted into diazonium salt with nitrous acid. Its reduction with
tin(II) chloride yields the corresponding arylhydrazine, which is condensed with 3-
cyanopropionaldehyde diethyl acetal to give the hydrazine, which undergoes a Fisher
rearrangement to give indole 9.5. Finally, the reduction of the nitrile to primary
amine and its treatment with an excess of formaldehyde and sodium borohydride
leads to N,N-dimethyl derivative (sumatriptan).
Scheme 9.9: Retrosynthesis of sumatriptan.
210 9 Solutions to the exercisesScheme 9.10: Synthesis of sumatriptan.
9.6 Exercises to Chapter 8 211Index
acetylcholine 17, 58, 82, 84, 88, 95–96, 106,
157, 185
acetylsalicylic acid 3, 71
acrolein 152, 168
adenine 139
adrenaline 18, 100, 162
affinity 82–83, 100, 111, 119, 133
agonist 189
alcohol dehydrogenase 48
aldehyde dehydrogenase 48
aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) 49
ampicillin 155
anomeric effect 143–144, 148–149, 160
Antabuse 48
antagonist 54, 60, 83, 90, 94, 106, 109,
185, 189
Aspirin 3, 10, 46, 136, 138, 151–152
atropine 24–25
Aureomycin 23
benzodiazepine 182
bioisostere 62, 64
bioisosterism 57, 60, 62, 64, 184
buprenorphine 170, 172–173
butadiene 168
captopril 45, 53
carbamate 204
carbonic acid 32
catecholamine 10
celecoxib 173
cephalosporin 25
cetylpyridinium 159
chloramphenicol 18, 43, 45, 154
chlordiazepoxide 32
chlorhexadol 16
cholesterol 50
chrysene 21
cilansetron 59
cimetidine 32, 64
cisplatin 101
clonidine 48, 96, 99
clothiapine 37
cocaine 25, 44, 69
conformational 59, 85, 95–96, 107
Craig plot 122, 124, 128
Curare 4
cysteine 103, 139, 153
cytochrome P450 139–140
decamethonium 59, 158
diazepam 15, 30, 141
Diels-Alder 169
disconnection 165–169, 178, 206
distomer 100
disulfiram 48–49
dopamine 82, 141–142
drug–receptor interactions VII, XI, 125
dulcin 58
effective dose 50 (ED50) 158
enantiomer 7–9, 99–100, 106
endo 169, 172
endorphins 42, 71, 83
enkephalins 42, 71, 83
enzymatic 84–85, 102, 141, 185
enzyme 10, 46, 51, 85, 103, 111, 132–133, 139, 157,
160, 208
epinephrine 10
estradiol 9, 55, 193
ethinylestradiol 9
ethoxyurea 58
eutomer 100
exo 98, 169
fentanyl 176
FGI (functional group interconversion) 166
fluorene 22
fluoxetine 180, 205–206
fluspirilene 27
Free–Wilson method 5
furan 28, 32, 35, 65, 177, 181
gefitinib 185
glucuronide 149–150, 162
glutathione 151
glycine 82, 149, 162
Grimm’s hydride displacement law 61
guanethidine 32
guanine 85, 103
Hammett 112–115, 128
Hansch equations 111, 122
Hansch–Fujita method 5
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783111316901-010Hantzsch–Widman method 30
hard drugs 157
hexobarbital 172
homology 185
hyperconjugation 117–119, 148
iminoquinone 152
imipramine 49
ionic channels 83–84
isoprenaline 54, 99
lethal dose 50 (LD50) 158
levodopa 104
Librium 30, 32
Lipinski’s rules 137–138
lipophilicity 72, 119–120, 193–194, 196
Mannich 178–179, 206
MAO 132, 142
mass spectrometry 51
metabolism 6, 55, 71, 119, 135, 137–138, 142, 153,
156–158, 160, 175, 185, 204, 208
methadone 17, 142
methotrexate 180, 208
morphine 9–10, 42–44, 69–71, 73
NADP+ 139
NADPH 139
nifedipine 180, 207
nikethamide 67
noradrenaline 82, 99–100, 106
noresteroid 54
omeprazole 7
ondansetron 59
oripavine 172
paracetamol 46–47, 71, 121, 152–153
penicillin XV, 25–26, 44, 50
pentobarbital 170
peptidomimetics 71
phenacetin 141
phenobarbital 170–171
phenylbutazone 185
prednisolone 154
primocarcin 16
procainamide 142–143, 151
procaine 18, 57, 93, 142, 184
prodrug 154
propranolol 52–53
Prozac 180, 205
pyridine 28, 32, 35, 65–67
pyridinium 139, 159
pyrrole 28, 35, 65, 139, 177–179
QSAR IX, 5, 110–111, 125–129, 131–134, 197
quinine 9, 43–44
quinones 152
racemic 6, 8, 206
ranitidine 32, 64
receptor VII, XI, 4–5, 10, 51, 57, 64, 82–85, 88–90,
93–96, 99–101, 103–104, 106–107, 109, 111, 122,
125, 127, 159, 185, 193
rofecoxib 175
salbutamol 7
soft drugs 158
SOSA 45
spiro 26–27, 37–38
stereocenter 7, 9
sulfanitran 20
sulfathiazole 156
sumatriptan 104, 180, 210
suxamethonium 158
synthetic equivalent 167
synthon 167
teprotide 45
testosterone 54, 155
tetracyclines 23
tetrazolyl groups 68
thiophene 177, 181
tolmetin 178–179
transplatin 101
trimethoprim 180, 208
Vilsmeier acylation 178
vinylogy 57–58
214 Index
