Philosophical Mechanics 
in the Age of ReasonPhilosophical Mechanics 
in the 
Age of Reason
KATHERINE BRADING AND MARIUS STANOxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford. It furthers
the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship, and education
by publishing worldwide. Oxford is a registered trade mark of Oxford University
Press in the UK and certain other countries.
Published in the United States of America by Oxford University Press
198 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016, United States of America.
© Oxford University Press 2023
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in
a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the
prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press, or as expressly permitted
by law, by license, or under terms agreed with the appropriate reproduction
rights organization. Inquiries concerning reproduction outside the scope of the
above should be sent to the Rights Department, Oxford University Press, at the
address above.
You must not circulate this work in any other form
and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2023952439
ISBN 978–0–19–767895–4
DOI: 10.1093/oso/9780197678954.001.0001
Printed by Integrated Books International, United States of AmericaFor Cherie & Lomey & Momo
For Mark & Thomas & Matthew & Toby & Max
Your love sustains us, and makes it all possibleContents
Preface xi
1. A golden era 1
 1.1 Introduction 1
 1.2 Te problem of bodies 2
 1.3 Philosophical mechanics 3
 1.4 Constructive and principle approaches 8
 1.5 Te unity of physical theory 12
 1.6 Collisions and constraints: PCOL and PCON 13
 1.7 Methods 17
 1.8 Audience 19
 1.9 Overview 22
 1.10 Conclusions 25
2. Malebranche and the Cartesian foundations of natural 
philosophy 27
 2.1 Introduction 27
 2.2 Correcting Descartes: Malebranche’s early theory of collisions 29
 2.3 Leibniz’s objections to Malebranche’s early collision theory 34
 2.4 Malebranche’s mature theory of collisions 37
 2.5 Afer Malebranche: hard bodies in the Paris Academy prize 
competition of 1724 and beyond 48
 2.6 Afer Malebranche: elastic rebound and the Paris Academy prize 
competition of 1726 52
 2.7 Open questions, hidden problems 57
 2.8 Conclusions 61
3. Beyond Newton and Leibniz: Bodies in collision 63
 3.1 Introduction 63
 3.2 Newtonian collisions 64
 3.3 Leibniz on collisions 74
 3.4 Leibnizian collisions in Hermann and Wolf 82
 3.5 Te problem of collisions 95
4. The Problem of Bodies 97
 4.1 Introduction 97
 4.2 Te scope and remit of physics 99viii Contents
 4.3 Te problem of bodies: nature and action 103
 4.4 Te problem of bodies: evidence and principle 105
 4.5 Te methods of Newtonian physics 106
 4.6 Substance and causation 124
 4.7 Te goal: a philosophical mechanics 129
5. Body and force in the physics of collisions: Du Châtelet 
and Euler 132
 5.1 Introduction 132
 5.2 Nature: extension as a property of bodies 133
 5.3 Action 143
 5.4 Du Châtelet and Action 149
 5.5 Euler and Action 154
 5.6 Conclusions 167
6. Searching for a new physics: Kant and Boscovich 169
 6.1 Introduction 169
 6.2 Te physics of bodies in Kant and Boscovich 170
 6.3 Kant’s philosophical mechanics 180
 6.4 Boscovich’s philosophical mechanics 184
 6.5 Conclusions 198
7. Shifting sands in philosophical mechanics 201
 7.1 Introduction 201
 7.2 Methodology 202
 7.3 Elusive mass 204
 7.4 Contact action 210
 7.5 A general theory of bodies in motion 213
 7.6 Shifing sands 217
 7.7 From rational to philosophical mechanics 223
 7.8 Rational mechanics ascendant 227
 7.9 Conclusions 228
8. Early work in the rational mechanics of constrained motion 231
 8.1 Introduction 231
 8.2 Personnel and work sites 232
 8.3 New territory: oscillating systems 234
 8.4 Te compound pendulum 238
 8.5 From special problems to general principles 245
 8.6 Implications for philosophical mechanics 249
 8.7 Conclusions 261
9. Constructive and principle approaches in d’Almbert’s Treatise 263
 9.1 Introduction 263
 9.2 Constructive and principle approaches 265
 9.3 D’Almbert’s Treatise on Dynamics: its structure and contents 268Contents ix
 9.4 D’Alembert’s Treatise as a contribution to rational mechanics 285
 9.5 D’Alembert’s Treatise as a contribution to philosophical 
mechanics: a constructive approach 287
 9.6 D’Alembert’s Treatise as a contribution to philosophical 
mechanics: a principle approach 289
 9.7 Ontic and nomic unity 295
 9.8 Nature, Action, Evidence, and Principle 296
 9.9 Conclusions 297
10. Building bodies: Euler and impressed force mechanics 299
 10.1 Introduction 299
 10.2 Solving MCON 300
 10.3 Newton’s Lex Secunda, Euler’s principles, Cauchy’s laws 
of motion 303
 10.4 Solving MCON1 307
 10.5 Assessment 324
 10.6 Conclusions 331
11. External obstacles: Lagrange and the mechanics of constraints 333
 11.1 Introduction 333
 11.2 Te Principle of Virtual Velocities and “Lagrange’s Principle” 334
 11.3 Constraints: equations of condition 341
 11.4 Lagrange’s Relaxation Postulate: the kinematics and dynamics of 
constraints 345
 11.5 Philosophical mechanics and Lagrange’s Mechanique 349
 11.6 Action 356
 11.7 Evidence 358
 11.8 Assessment 362
 11.9 Conclusions 364
12. Philosophical mechanics in the Late Enlightenment 366
 12.1 Introduction 366
 12.2 Makers and spaces 367
 12.3 Lagrangian nomic unifcation 369
 12.4 Molecular ontic unifcation 377
 12.5 Te Cauchy package 385
 12.6 Conclusions 394
Conclusions 396
Bibliography 401
Index 415Preface
Te enormous project in this book resulted from two strands of interest 
that converged, in a meeting of the minds, at a 2014 workshop that Michela 
Massimi and Angela Breitenbach organized in Cambridge, UK. Katherine 
Brading is a philosopher of science, and of physics in particular, who had 
recently begun work on foundational problems lef unsolved in the wake of 
Newton’s Principia. She had long been curious about the question of how 
and when philosophy and physics came apart—because it was clear they 
had not separated in the decades afer the Principia frst appeared. Marius 
Stan is a philosopher and historian of science whose work on mechanics 
has taken him deep into the 18th century. He relies on linguistic, technical, 
and philosophical tools to cast light on the deep structure of classical me￾chanics, investigating its enormous growth, and explicating its philosoph￾ical foundations. Tis book lies at the happy crossroads of their inclinations, 
interests, and expertise.
It has been many years in the making; during them all sorts of upheavals 
have taken place, from family illness to a global pandemic. Our work to￾gether has been a rock in troubled times, and speaks to the power of collabo￾rative scholarship. But even with each other, we could not have done it alone. 
We owe a great debt of gratitude to many colleagues, friends, mentors, and 
students; it is our great pleasure to acknowledge them here.
We humbly thank those who have shaped and inspired us as scholars. KB’s 
interest in the entwined history of physics and philosophy developed slowly 
from seeds sown and nurtured by John Roche, Dan Garber, Bill Harper, and 
John Henry. She is forever grateful to Dana Jalobeanu and Hasok Chang for 
the many hours spent pondering the relationships between Descartes’ and 
Newton’s physics and between history, philosophy, and science, respec￾tively. Her appreciation for the philosophical importance of the details in the 
physics owes most to Julian Barbour, Harvey Brown, Tom Ryckman, and the 
philosophy of physics group at Oxford. She thanks the students and faculty 
of the Notre Dame History and Philosophy of Science Graduate Program for 
creating an environment in which integrated history and philosophy of sci￾ence is the norm.xii Preface
MS learned the history of classical physics from Jed Buchwald, a gif for 
which he is forever grateful. For the way he looks at early modern matter 
theories, he is greatly indebted to Sheldon Smith. Dan Garber and Vincenzo 
De Risi inspired him to wonder about the relation of early modern philos￾ophy to science. His broader grasp of classical mechanics has been shaped by 
Mark Wilson, Iain Stewart at MIT, and the late Cliford Truesdell. For their 
generous mentoring in the history and philosophy of science, MS is grateful 
to Moti Feingold, Gideon Manning, and Chris Hitchcock.
Tis book is not about Newton, but his legacy and impact on the 
Enlightenment is our backdrop. In grappling with that legacy, we have 
benefted enormously from long and illuminating conversations with Zvi 
Biener, Mary Domski, Geof Gorham, Dana Jalobeanu, Andrew Janiak, 
Oliver Pooley, Eric Schliesser, Ed Slowik, Chris Smeenk, and Monica 
Solomon. For us both, the infuence of George E. Smith as scholar, mentor, 
and friend is beyond measure.
MS’s path to Enlightenment mechanics went through Kant. For guidance 
in that difcult area, we wish to thank Eric Watkins and Michael Friedman. 
We thank warmly Marij van Strien, Josh Eisenthal, Sandro Caparrini, and 
Andreas Verdun for many enlightening discussions about the history of 
classical mechanics and its foundational subtleties. And we thank Alison 
Peterman, Jef McDonough, and David Marshall Miller, who have been our 
thoughtful, generous interlocutors about early modern natural philosophy 
for many years.
Our students, past and present, have kindly given us feedback on the var￾ious parts of this book as it grew. For their comments, we thank especially 
Qiu Lin, Michael Veldman, and the students in KB’s research seminars at 
Duke University.
For penetrating questions, comments, and advice, we thank audiences at 
the Oxford Philosophy of Physics Seminar, the Division of Humanities at 
Caltech, the philosophy departments at Princeton and Toronto, the Logic 
and Philosophy of Science Department at the University of California Irvine, 
the HOPOS 2022 Conference, and the participants at the 2018 workshop 
Mechanics and Matter Teory in the Enlightenment at Duke.
We thank the American Council of Learned Societies, whose gen￾erous support allowed us to take time of from teaching in 2017–18 and do 
a great deal of primary research and sustained refection on the problems 
treated here.Preface xiii
We are grateful to Oxford University Press; to Peter Ohlin for support and 
encouragement; and to his two anonymous reviewers who gave us invaluable 
feedback earlier in the project.
Last, and most importantly, we thank our families and our close personal 
friends, who have endured our dedication to this project with good humor 
and unfailing support. Tank you.Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason. Katherine Brading and Marius Stan, Oxford University Press. 
© Oxford University Press 2023. DOI: 10.1093/oso/9780197678954.003.0001
1
A golden era
1.1 Introduction
Tis is a book about philosophy, physics, and mechanics in the 18th cen￾tury, and the struggle for a theory of bodies. Bodies are everywhere, or so it 
seems: from pebbles to planets, tigers to tables, pine trees to people; animate 
and inanimate, natural and artifcial, they populate the world, acting and 
interacting with one another. And they are the subject-matter of Newton’s 
laws of motion. At the beginning of the 18th century, physics was that 
branch of philosophy tasked with the study of body in general. With such an 
account in hand, the special areas of philosophy (whether natural, moral, or 
political) that presuppose special kinds of bodies (such as plants, animals, 
and human beings) could proceed assured of the viability of their objects 
and the unity of their shared enquiries. For all had “bodies” in common. 
So: What is a body? And how can we know? Tis is the Problem of Bodies, 
and the quest for a solution animated natural philosophy throughout the 
Age of Reason.
How so? Because, inherited from the 17th century as a foundational 
concern, the Problem of Bodies proved surprisingly resistant to solu￾tion. Consequently, it ensnared a wide range of 18th century fgures who 
brought to bear a diverse assortment of resources. At the forefront we fnd 
familiar characters from the received philosophical canon, such as Leibniz, 
Malebranche, Wolf, Hume, and Kant, wrestling with Body alongside 
others of equal or greater import, such as Maupertuis, Musschenbroek, Du 
Châtelet, Euler, and d’Alembert. Teir attempted solutions drew on matter 
theory, metaphysics, physics, and mechanics; they appealed to a variety of 
principles metaphysical, epistemological, and methodological; and they si￾multaneously disputed the appropriate criteria for success. At stake were two 
central issues of philosophy from the period: material substance and cau￾sation. Upshot: the contours and depths of the problem are a philosophical 
treasure trove.2 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
In this chapter, we introduce the Problem of Bodies, along with the main 
analytical tools we use for its investigation (sections 1.2–1.6). We outline our 
methods (section 1.7) and our intended audiences (section 1.8). Finally, we 
provide a chapter-by-chapter guide for what is to come in the remainder of 
this book (section 1.9), and a preview of our main conclusions (section 1.10). 
Inevitably, some of what we say in this chapter is compressed and may seem 
somewhat cryptic at frst sight, but when read in conjunction with the later 
chapters it is, we hope, sufcient to anchor the main points of each chapter 
within the argument of the whole.
1.2 Te problem of bodies
Te Problem of Bodies (hereafer Body) is large and unwieldy, as we will see. 
Nevertheless, we argue that it has a structure that makes it amenable to anal￾ysis, in the form of a goal and four criteria for success.1
Goal: a single, well-defned concept of body that is simultaneously 
(i) consistent with an intelligible theory of matter, (ii) adequate for a 
causal-explanatory account of the behaviors of bodies, and (iii) suf￾cient for the purposes of mechanics.
Any satisfactory solution to Body was expected to meet this goal. To do so, it 
needed to satisfy the following criteria for success: Nature, Action, Evidence, 
and Principle (NAEP).
Nature: Determine the nature of bodies. Ascertain their essential 
properties, causal powers, and generic behaviors.
Action: Explain how bodies act on one another. Give an explanation 
of how, if at all, one body changes another’s state (where specifying the 
“state” of a body is addressed by Nature).
Tese frst two are metaphysical. Te next two are epistemological: they seek 
to uncover the justifcatory reasoning behind Nature and Action.
1 We arrived at this structure for Body by examining the arguments of the participants in the de￾bate. We then made the elements explicit and used them to assess purported solutions.A golden era 3
Evidence: Elucidate the evidential reasoning behind Nature and Action. 
Spell out what counts as evidence for these claims, and what patterns of 
inference take us to them as conclusions.
Principle: Elucidate the constraining principles appealed to in attempting 
a solution to Body, and check that proposed solutions conform.
Such principles include the Principle of Sufcient Reason, the Law of 
Continuity, the restriction to contact action, and the criterion of clear and 
distinct ideas. Our protagonists understood their principles in diferent 
ways—as a priori philosophical requirements, defeasible heuristics, and 
so forth—but such principles were always in play, whether implicitly or 
explicitly.
Te four criteria (NAEP) may be variously interpreted and implemented. 
Teir more precise specifcation difers from one philosopher to another, 
and this comprises one element of the debate over Body. Excavating and 
investigating them is a part of what we do in this book. Te diversity of views 
on ofer is proof that Body was neither easy to state nor straightforward 
to solve.
1.3 Philosophical mechanics
“Philosophical mechanics” is a term of art.2 We use it to label the framework 
within which we use the resources described above (“Goal” and “NAEP”) to 
analyze Body in the 18th century. Such a framework is justifed by its utility: it 
stands or falls by the work that it does for us in this book, and that assessment 
can be made only when we reach the end. However, there are some remarks 
we can make here, at the beginning, that we hope will be helpful.
Simply put, a philosophical mechanics is any project that integrates matter 
theory with rational mechanics. To motivate the idea, we ofer some 17th 
century background in Descartes’ Principles of Philosophy and in Newton’s 
Principia.
3 In Descartes, we see the connection of Body to collision theory, 
and from there to philosophical mechanics. In Newton, we fnd an explicit 
2 While the term was frst used (to our knowledge) in 1800, in Gaspard Riche de Prony’s Mécanique 
philosophique, ou, Analyse raisonnée des diverses parties de la science de l’équilibre et du mouvement, 
we adopt it for our own purposes.
3 Descartes 1991; Newton 1999.4 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
example of a philosophical mechanics. Refected in each is an important dis￾ciplinary distinction between physics—as a sub-discipline of philosophy; 
and rational mechanics—as a sub-discipline of mathematics. Philosophical 
mechanics draws on both, as we will see.
(i) Cartesian origins
In his 1644 Principles, Descartes set out to explain all the rich variety of the nat￾ural world around us: he sought to provide a complete physics that included eve￾rything from planetary motions to the creation of comets, from the formation 
of mountains to the behavior of the tides, and from earthquakes to magnetism 
and beyond. Descartes’ physics begins with his theory of matter; the principal 
attribute of Cartesian matter is extension, and the parts of matter have shape, 
size and motion. All change comes about through matter moving in accordance 
with the laws of nature.
Body, as it occurs in Principles, concerns the parts of matter, for these are 
Descartes’ bodies. His laws of nature take parts of matter—or bodies—as 
their subject-matter. Te frst issue is whether (and if so, how) he succeeds 
in giving a viable account of bodies prior to his introduction of the laws of 
nature. For, he suggests that matter is divided into parts by means of mo￾tion, but he also defnes motion by appeal to the parts of matter, generating 
an undesirable circle. Tis issue was widely appreciated at the time, and has 
been much discussed since.4 If we set it aside, and presume that Descartes 
has “parts of matter” available, a second issue then comes to the fore. While 
the laws of nature supposedly take these bodies as their subject-matter, 
Descartes’ bodies seem not to have the properties and qualities demanded 
by the laws. Te only properties that his matter theory secures for bodies are 
shape, size, and motion. However, as we move through the exposition of his 
laws, we fnd Descartes appealing to “stronger” and “weaker” bodies; “hard￾ness”; “yielding” and “unyielding” bodies; the “tendency” of bodies to move 
in a straight line; and the “force” of a body, which is nothing other than the 
4 See Garber 1992, 181; Brading 2012; and references therein. One upshot is a tendency among 
Cartesian philosophers toward mind-dependent bodies, as seen in both Desgabets and Régis, for ex￾ample. Lennon (1993, 25) writes of Régis: “Individual things result from our projection of sensations 
on otherwise homogeneous and undiferentiated extension. On this view individual things are what 
Malebranche and Arnauld took to be the representations of things.”A golden era 5
“power” of a body to remain in the same state. But it is far from clear that 
these are reducible to shape, size, and motion.5
Te issue is pressing because of the role of bodies in Descartes’ physics. It 
is by means of bodies moving in accordance with the laws of nature that he 
aims to explain all of the material world. If his philosophy lacks the resources 
for his matter theory to yield bodies, his physics cannot get of the ground.
A necessary condition on a viable solution to Body, within Descartes’ 
system, is that the resulting bodies are capable of undergoing collision. Tis 
is because all change takes place through impact among the parts of matter. 
Collisions therefore lie at the heart of his physics, and Descartes supplements 
his laws of nature with seven rules of collision. Te rules, like the laws, appeal 
to his prior theory of matter: to the essential attribute of matter (extension), 
and its modes (shape, size, and motion). To sum up: collision theory is foun￾dational for Descartes’ physics, and it combines two elements: matter theory 
and rules of impact.
Te centrality of collisions is not confned to Descartes’ philosophy. 
For anyone pursuing “mechanical philosophy” in the 17th century, im￾pact was the only kind of causal process by which change comes about in 
the material world. Moreover, even for philosophers who, in the wake of 
Newton, sought to move beyond “mechanical philosophy” by endowing 
bodies with additional “forces,” collisions remained an important means 
of action and interaction among bodies. As a result, collision theory was 
foundational for natural philosophy in the late 17th century. Moreover, 
following Descartes, any adequate collision theory was required to com￾bine a theory of matter with rules of collision: we call this a philosophical 
mechanics of collisions.
(ii) Te integration of philosophical physics 
with rational mechanics
Projects in philosophical mechanics seek to meet the demands of both 
physics and rational mechanics. What do we mean by this?
5 Impenetrability, solidity, and hardness are among the properties of body that some philosophers 
thought Descartes was not entitled to (as in Locke’s discussion of body, for example). Te question of 
whether a notion of force must be added (cf. Leibniz) persists long into the 18th century, as we shall 
see in later chapters of this book.6 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
Early modern physics retained the Aristotelian aim of seeking the most 
general principles and causes of natural things, and of their changes. Te pri￾mary subject-matter of physics was bodies: the role of physics was to provide 
a causal account of the nature, properties, and behaviors of bodies in general. 
Frequently, the term “physics” was used interchangeably with “natural phi￾losophy.” Tis refects the fact that early modern physics was a sub-discipline 
of philosophy, practiced by self-professed philosophers who retained re￾sponsibility for and authority over the account of body in general. When 
other areas of philosophy (such as those treating specifc kinds of bodies) and 
other disciplines (such as mechanics) presupposed bodies, they did so with 
the presumption that physics succeeds in providing an account of bodies in 
general.
Te term “mechanics,” on the other hand, had several senses, ranging 
from the science of machines to the various strands of “mechanical phi￾losophy,” but here we use it with one particular connotation, current at 
the time and broadly familiar from present-day usage. Specifcally, we 
are interested in rational mechanics, namely, the mathematical study of 
patterns of local motion and mutual rest. It was a descriptive approach that 
represented mechanical attributes (mass, speed, force, and the like) as meas￾urable quantities. Its inferences were subject to laws of motion and equi￾librium conditions, functioning as constraints on admissible conclusions. 
Put modernly, rational mechanics pursued deductive schemas for moving 
from values of relevant parameters to integrals of motion or to diferential 
equations relating these parameters. At frst, its representational framework 
was heavily geometric, but through the 1700s algebraic methods increas￾ingly supplanted the earlier reliance on synthetic geometry. Our use of the 
term “rational mechanics” is one that came to dominate by the end of the 
18th century, and it can be found explicitly one hundred years earlier, in the 
Preface to Newton’s Principia.
By “mechanics” we mean, from here on (unless stated otherwise), ra￾tional mechanics. In his Preface, Newton ofered a taxonomy of mechanics 
in which he divided “universal mechanics” into three: practical mechanics, 
rational mechanics, and geometry. For our purposes, the key points are as 
follows. Like geometry, rational mechanics is mathematical and exact: it 
sufers from none of the imperfections of practical mechanics. Unlike geom￾etry, however, rational mechanics goes beyond the treatment of magnitudes 
to include motions and forces. Rational mechanics, Newton says, is the “sci￾ence, expressed in exact propositions and demonstrations, of the motions A golden era 7
that result from any forces whatever and of the forces that are required for 
any motions whatever.”6
Te term “mechanics” today typically denotes some branch of physics 
(e.g., classical mechanics, quantum mechanics, statistical mechanics, and so 
forth). At the beginning of the 18th century, this was not the case: physics and 
mechanics were distinct felds.7 Unlike mechanics, physics was largely qual￾itative and, as we have said, practiced by philosophers. Mechanics, on the 
other hand, fell under the authority of mathematicians. While some people 
at the time, including some of the most infuential fgures of the period, were 
both philosophers and mathematicians, the two disciplines were distinct. 
Tey had distinct methods, distinct goals, and distinct domains of authority.
With this in mind, we see that physics in the early 18th century is impor￾tantly diferent from physics today, in its goal (of providing a causal account of 
the nature, properties, and behaviors of bodies in general), methods (which 
were qualitative), and disciplinary relations (within philosophy, and distinct 
from mechanics). Physics thus understood is central to the arguments of our 
book, and it is this 18th century conception that the term “physics” denotes. 
Sometimes, we will use the term “philosophical physics” as a reminder that 
in the 1700s physics was a non-mathematical branch of philosophy.
Descartes’ account of bodies falls within his philosophical physics. His 
rules of collision, insofar as they are mathematical and exact, fall under 
the remit of rational mechanics. According to the analysis that we ofer, 
Descartes’ theory of collisions integrates resources from physics and rational 
mechanics in order to provide a philosophical mechanics of impact. By itself, 
this makes overly hard work of Descartes on collisions, with a superfuity of 
terminology for little philosophical gain. Te payof comes from the appli￾cation of the same analytical tools over the next 150 years of developments.
(iii) Newton’s Principia as a project 
in philosophical mechanics
Newton’s Principia contains a rational mechanics, but it is not merely a 
text in rational mechanics. His choice of title, Mathematical Principles of 
Natural Philosophy, is revealing. Newton declares that the forces to be treated 
6 Newton 1999, 382. 7 Guicciardini 2009.8 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
mathematically include natural forces, such as gravity. In this way, rational 
mechanics becomes a tool for the pursuit of natural philosophy. In Book III, 
Newton applies the results of his rational mechanics from Books I and II to 
the particular case of gravity, and thereby provides a causal account of the 
motions of material bodies under the force of gravity: he ofers a contribu￾tion to philosophical physics.
Te Principia therefore contains both rational mechanics and physics. 
Newton explicitly set out the relationship between the two, as he understood 
it. Together, the overall project forms a framework for pursuing the science 
of bodies in motion, in which a rational mechanics (an exact mathematical 
treatment of bodies and the forces that act upon them) is to be integrated 
with a physics (a treatment of the causes of the motions of bodies). Newton’s 
physics is incomplete, but his intention to contribute to both rational me￾chanics and physics is clear. Indeed, Newton’s “Axioms, or Laws of Motion” 
belong to both. Te 17th century, prior to Newton, had seen discussions over 
whether the laws of nature (such as those found in Descartes’ Principles) 
might also serve as axioms of mechanics. Up until Newton, books of physics 
and books of mechanics were distinct, and the principles of each difered. 
Te Principia, in attempting to combine rational mechanics with physics, is 
an important example of a philosophical mechanics.8
1.4 Constructive and principle approaches
We have seen the centrality of collisions within Descartes’ natural philos￾ophy. Yet, as is well known, his rules of collision were rejected for their inad￾equacy with respect to observation.9 Te ensuing 17th century discussions 
are an important background for our book. First, they reveal hints of two 
distinct heuristics for tackling Body—constructive and principle—and we 
discuss these here. Second, they preview the problems with collision theory 
that 18th century natural philosophy was to inherit.
In October 1668, Henry Oldenburg, the secretary of the Royal Society, 
wrote to Huygens and Wren asking for their theories of motion and collision. 
8 For a detailed discussion of Newton’s philosophical mechanics see Brading, forthcoming. 9 Descartes himself maintained that his rules applied only to microscopic (and therefore unob￾servable) collisions, not to the bodies of our experience. Te rejection of this defense of his rules 
speaks to the question of epistemology: of the means by which we are to determine whether or not 
the proposed rules are to be accepted.A golden era 9
Soon, Huygens, Wren, and Wallis submitted their proposals. Tose of 
Huygens and Wren cover the case of perfectly elastic bodies while Wallis’ per￾tain to perfectly inelastic collisions.10 One might think that this is where the 
story should end: we have the correct rules of collision, so what else is there?
As Jalobeanu describes, the issues were far from resolved by the arrival 
of the rules from Huygens, Wren, and Wallis.11 On December 1, 1668, 
Oldenburg wrote to Wallis (and others) asking about the physical causes 
of rebound; whether resting matter resists motion; whether motion is 
conserved; whether motion is transferred from one body to another when 
they collide; and so forth. Te questions concerned the material nature of 
bodies and the physical causes of their behaviors during impact.
In their submissions, Huygens, Wren, and Wallis had not discussed the 
material constitution of bodies, let alone used such considerations as perti￾nent to the problem. Wallis responded by claiming that the rules themselves 
provide an account of the physical causes:
 I have this to adde . . . you tell mee yt ye Society in their present disquisitions 
have rather an Eye to the Physical causes of Motion, & the Principles thereof, 
than ye Mathematical Rules of it. It is this, Tat ye Hypothesis I sent, is in￾deed of ye Physical Laws of Motion, but Mathematically demonstrated. 
(Oldenburg 1968, 220–2)
Huygens explicitly set aside causes:12
Whatever may be the cause of hard bodies rebounding from mutual contact 
when they collide with one another, let us suppose that when two bodies, 
equal to each other and having equal speed, directly collide with one an￾other, each rebounds with the same speed which it had before the collision. 
(Huygens 1977, 574)
10 For simplicity of exposition, we use today’s terminology here. Te problem of how to catego￾rize bodies—as hard, sof, elastic, inelastic, rigid, malleable, unbreakable, infnitely divisible, etc.—
and how to correlate these terms with the various behaviors of bodies (when pressed upon, during 
impacts, etc.) persisted into the 18th century, as we shall see. For discussion of the 17th century 
struggles with “hardness” in the context of collisions, and in relation to the Royal Society debates, see 
Scott (1970, 12f.).
11 See Jalobeanu 2011. 12 Tis excerpt is from a paper published posthumously in 1703. See also Murray, Harper, & 
Wilson (2011, 189, footnote 8) who note that this phrase does not appear in the original letter sent to 
Oldenburg but was added prior to publication.10 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
But, their quietism about material properties and causes met with resist￾ance at the Royal Society. Another member, William Neile, argued that the 
collision rules should be supplemented by an underlying matter theory so 
as to account for the “physical causes” of the observed phenomena, such as 
rebound.13
Te problem to be solved arises in the following way. If the properties of 
bodies (such as hardness and “springyness”) and the principles concerning 
the behavior of bodies (such as conservation of quantity of motion) appealed 
to in the rules of collision arise from the nature of matter (as they do in 
Cartesian physics), then a problem in mechanics—fnding the correct rules 
of collision—is inevitably entangled with matter theory. More generally, 
Neile’s objection signals a theme that persists late into the 18th century: the 
search for a causal-explanatory account of the properties of bodies, and of the 
collision process, that integrates the rules of impact into a theory of matter: a 
philosophical mechanics of collisions.
Te Royal Society dispute can be analyzed as ofering two general 
approaches for tackling problems within philosophical mechanics. Following 
Neile, we may decide to begin with a theory of matter, and develop our col￾lision theory from there. We call this the constructive approach. Following 
Wallis, we may decide to begin with the rules, and seek to build our matter 
theory from them. We call this the principle approach. By “approach” we here 
mean a general strategy consisting of a broad heuristic along with a reservoir 
of initial evidence and explanatory premises. We will argue that 18th cen￾tury attempts to solve Body are best understood as pursuing a philosophical 
mechanics of bodies by means of these two general approaches. We further 
specify them as follows.
Constructive approach (bodies): Te qualities and properties of 
matter are the primary resource for solving Body.
From the properties and powers of matter, we construct concepts of body 
(Nature) and bodily action (Action) consistent with Principle and Evidence 
(see section 1.2) to arrive at a philosophical mechanics in which the resulting 
account of bodies yields, or is at least consistent with, the notion of body that 
rational mechanics presupposes.
13 For context and discussion, see Jalobeanu 2011 and Stan 2009.A golden era 11
Tis approach comes in two varieties, a stronger and a weaker. Te stronger 
begins from an explicit theory of matter, and from there constructs bodies. 
Te weaker eschews a foundation in matter theory, working directly with 
bodies instead; it presumes that the methods and resources of philosophical 
physics itself are sufcient for determining their qualities and properties.
Principle approach (bodies): Teoretical principles, such as the laws of 
motion, are the primary resource for solving Body.
In the case of laws of motion, the principle approach means drawing the 
concept of body, and of bodily action, from the laws themselves, without 
appeal to any prior theory of the material constitution of bodies. From 
there, we arrive at a philosophical mechanics by showing that the resulting 
account coheres with a philosophically viable theory of matter in meeting 
the demands of NAEP. By “coheres with,” we likewise include two diferent 
possibilities, a stronger and a weaker once again. Te weaker is that the laws 
are deemed necessary in constructing a body concept, but that extra-legal 
ingredients are also needed, drawn perhaps from an independent matter 
theory. Te second, stronger, position is that the laws are both necessary and
sufcient for the construction of an adequate body concept.
Insofar as matter theory and physics fall under the authority of philosophy, 
and laws of motion under rational mechanics, the constructive and principle 
approaches align with two distinct routes to a philosophical mechanics: one 
which prioritizes philosophy—including matter theory and physics—and 
the other which prioritizes rational mechanics. To see this play out requires 
the rest of our book.
Te constructive and principle approaches generalize beyond bodies. At 
the beginning of the 18th century, bodies were presumed to be the objects 
of study in both physics and rational mechanics. As the century wore on, 
this presumption came under increasing pressure. From the perspective of 
mechanics, candidates for the objects of study in the 1700s included point 
particles, fexible and elastic solids, inviscid fuids, and mass volumes in 
equilibrium confgurations.14 If we relax the assumption that the objects of 
physical theorizing are bodies, then it becomes an open question what those 
objects might be, and Body becomes a more general problem, the Problem of 
14 If we move beyond the 18th century we soon add classical felds, quantum particles, quantum 
felds, and so forth, as objects of theorizing. Te problem persists of how best to specify these objects.12 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
Objects: What are the objects of physical theorizing? And how can we know? 
As our analysis of the 18th century unfolds in later chapters, we see the con￾structive and principle approaches tracking this generalization.
Constructive approach (objects): Matter theory is the primary re￾source for constituting the objects of physical theorizing.
Principle approach (objects): Teoretical principles, such as laws, are 
the primary resource for constituting the objects of physical theorizing.
As in the case of bodies, these approaches come in weaker and stronger forms.
1.5 Te unity of physical theory
At the beginning of the 18th century, the role of physics was to provide the 
general account of bodies. Other areas of enquiry, both within philosophy 
and beyond, took such bodies for granted, as a given in theorizing. Special 
areas of natural philosophy (e.g., botany) took the general account of body 
and then studied the additional specifcs (e.g., as appropriate to plants). Te 
general concept of body provided by physics thus played a unifying role as 
the common object of philosophy, mechanics, and so forth. Tis is an ex￾ample of ontic unity in physical theory.
Ontic unity: a single type of object unifes physical theory.
In order for bodies to play such a unifying role, solutions to Body must 
yield a single body concept adequate for all areas of theorizing. To achieve 
this, one may adopt either a constructive or a principle approach.
Tere is an alternative to ontic unity, one that arises from the principle ap￾proach alone. Rather than unifying our theorizing through a shared object
(such as a shared account of body), we locate unity directly in the principles
(such as the laws). We call this “nomic unity”.
Nomic unity: a single set of principles, such as a set of dynamical laws, 
unifes physical theory.
Unity comes from a (small) set of principles that entail the properties and 
behaviors of all physical systems (such as when the laws entail equations of A golden era 13
motion)—or at least all those regarded as tractable at the time. Such an ap￾proach makes no explicit commitments about the ontology associated with 
the principles: it allows for a diverse ontology, for diverse objects, and for 
cases where there is no explicit specifcation of objects at all. Rather than 
unifying our theorizing through a shared object (such as a shared account of 
body), we locate unity directly in the principles (such as the laws).
As we will see in the second half of our book, this latter conception of unity 
emerged in the context of rational mechanics as a consequence of the per￾sistent failure to solve Body. But it too faced a challenge, viz. to ensure that 
mechanics is one theory, not a patchwork of local accounts joined arbitrarily 
by blunt juxtaposition in a textbook. Facing up to this challenge is crucial, for 
if mechanics lacks even this unity then it is unclear whether it has a subject￾matter at all. We see examples of this approach to unity, and challenges to it, 
in the second half of this book.
1.6 Collisions and constraints: PCOL and PCON
We cannot hope to cover all the many aspects of Body in one book. However, 
when viewing the 18th century through the lens of philosophical me￾chanics, we see that two somewhat better defned problems provide the main 
loci of investigation: the problem of collisions (PCOL) and the problem of 
constrained motion (PCON). We explain these at length in our book, for 
they are the focus of the frst and second halves, respectively. Here, we state 
them for future reference, and attempt to give the gist of their signifcance.
We have already noted that collisions became central to natural philos￾ophy in the wake of Descartes’ Principles. As a result, the following question 
became pressing:
PCOL: What is the nature of bodies such that they can undergo collisions?
We argue that solving PCOL became a necessary—but not sufcient—
condition on solving Body. Te task was to provide a causal-explanatory ac￾count of collisions by integrating rules of impact into a theory of matter. In 
other words, to provide a philosophical mechanics of collisions.
Tere are two routes to this: one prioritizing philosophical physics and 
the other rational mechanics. Within the former, we fnd two versions of 
a constructive approach, consistent with the stronger and weaker versions 14 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
described above. Te stronger is matter-theoretic: it starts with an overt, 
philosophical theory of matter. From its resources, this approach articulates 
a physics of the bodies that undergo impact, including their properties rel￾evant to the collision process, and their behaviors during and afer. Te 
weaker presumes that physics itself has methods and resources sufcient for 
determining and justifying the qualities and properties of material bodies, 
without the need to appeal to any explicit theory of matter. Te constructive 
approach to PCOL is the subject of the frst half of our book.
Ten, we take a new direction. For, despite concerted eforts by a wide 
range of philosophers, success eluded them as of the mid-1700s. Meanwhile, 
developments in rational mechanics had begun to change the philosoph￾ical space in important ways, so that a new problem supplanted PCOL as the 
most important locus of research relevant to Body. Tis is the focus of the 
second half of our book, and it is here that the principle approach comes to 
the fore.
A key assumption in any attempt to address PCOL is that bodies are ex￾tended and mobile. Such are the bodies of rational mechanics, and Euler’s 
Mechanica of 1736 positioned collisions within a projected general theory 
of the motions of extended bodies. Te 17th century had tackled the motion 
of an extended body by tracking a representative point.15 Tis approach has 
two serious limitations that yielded two corresponding challenges for 18th 
century rational mechanics, both of which proved highly consequential for 
attempts to solve Body.
First, treating a representative point yields the overall trajectory of a body 
(e.g., the path of an asteroid), but it does not determine the motions of the 
parts of the body as it executes that trajectory (e.g., the tumbling of the as￾teroid as it careens toward the earth). Te challenge was to construct a ra￾tional mechanics that goes beyond the representative point when treating 
the motion of the whole. Within mechanics, it falls within the theory of 
constrained motions, and we call it MCON1.
MCON1: Given an extended body subject to internal constraints, how 
does it move? More specifcally, given an extended body whose parts 
are mutually constrained among themselves (i.e., held together to form 
one body), what is the motion of each of the parts?
15 Tis proved hard enough for many systems. See Chapters 7 and 8, as well as Stan 2022.A golden era 15
A solution to MCON1 would enable us to determine the motion of every part 
of an extended body, as the whole moves. Te simplest case is the hard (or 
perfectly rigid) body, in which there are no relative motions among the parts 
of the body. To achieve rigidity, the presumptions are that (i) forces acting on 
the body produce no change in shape (no compression forces, no torsion); 
(ii) forces acting on the body through a point other than the centroid (rep￾resentative point) produce only rotational motion, no torsion; and (iii) any 
rotational motion has no efect on the shape of the whole. As soon as these 
assumptions are relaxed, relative motions among the parts of the body, and 
their consequences for the motion of the whole, must be addressed. As you 
might imagine, MCON1 is horribly difcult.
Te second limitation concerns the motions of bodies that are impeded 
by other bodies, such as when a ball is prevented from falling by the pres￾ence of an inclined plane. One might hope to treat such obstructions in terms 
of Newton’s laws of motions, via the forces at work as one body acts on an￾other. However, such hopes are ofen ill-founded, especially when the forces 
are many or when they change at every moment of the motion. As a classic 
example, consider a bead constrained to move along an arbitrarily curved 
wire. As the bead moves, the direction and magnitude of the impressed force 
change at every instant. To overcome this complexity, and the resulting in￾tractability of the problem,16 we consider the bead as subject to kinematic 
constraints: we treat the wire as restricting the motion of the bead to a par￾ticular spatial region, without concern for the forces that bring this about. 
More generally, we theorize the obstructed motion of the target body as 
encountering obstacles that render certain regions of space inaccessible. By 
this means, we can seek to determine the motions of bodies when subject to a 
variety of external obstacles. We call this MCON2.
MCON2: Given an extended body subject to external constraints, 
how  does it move? More specifcally, when the motion of a body is 
impeded by an obstacle, what is its resulting motion?
16 It can be tempting to think that intractability concerns the limits of what is practical for us and 
is therefore unimportant for the claim that “in principle” everything moves in accordance with 
Newton’s second laws. Tis would be a mistake because of the relationship between Evidence and 
Nature: our evidence for our claims about Nature depends on showing that bodies do indeed move 
in accordance with theories of motion that are at least consistent with Nature, so if we cannot solve 
problems of motion using those theories, then we break the link between Evidence and Nature, and 
our claims about Nature lose their justifcation.16 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
A solution to MCON2 would enable us to determine the motion of a body 
when subject to any kinematic constraints whatsoever.
Both MCON1 and MCON2 belong to the theory of constrained motions 
within rational mechanics. As this theory developed in the 18th century it 
provided a new locus of investigation into Body that we call “the problem of 
constrained motion,” PCON:
PCON: What is the nature of bodies such that they can be the object of 
a general mechanics?
Te parallels with PCOL will be helpful. In tackling PCOL, the rules of col￾lision place important demands on the nature of bodies undergoing impact 
and thereby play a signifcant role in determining conditions of adequacy 
for any solution to Body. In moving beyond collisions to consider a more 
general mechanics, we turn our attention to the more general rules for the 
motions of bodies, as formulated in equations of motion and so forth. In par￾ticular, we seek a rational mechanics that provides solutions to MCON1 and 
MCON2. Te resulting theory in relation to PCON is analogous to the rules 
of collision in relation to PCOL. Te crucial diference is that, unlike in the 
case of PCOL where the rules of collision had been widely agreed since the 
mid-1660s, as of the early 18th century mechanics did not yet have the “rules 
of motion” for a general mechanics. Rather, it wasn’t until the 18th century 
itself that a general theory became an explicit goal for rational mechanics 
(MCON1 and MCON2), and that PCON came to the fore as a critical locus 
of investigation for Body. Tis is the subject of the second half of our book.
We argue that addressing PCON became a necessary condition on any ad￾equate solution to Body. Te nature of bodies must be such that they are ca￾pable of cohering so as to move in accordance with the demands of MCON1, 
and of undergoing constrained motion in accordance with the demands 
of MCON2. As the century progressed, the relationship of Body—and the 
vulnerability of proposed solutions thereof—to developments in rational 
mechanics became increasingly fraught with philosophical and concep￾tual difculties. For philosophers, the lesson is this: any attempted solution 
to Body must keep up with developments in rational mechanics, especially 
MCON1 and MCON2.
Historically, we can map the relationships between Body, PCOL, and 
PCON in the 18th century as follows. From the 17th century, philosophers 
inherited collisions as fundamental for natural philosophy, along with an A golden era 17
unsolved problem, PCOL. Te failure of philosophical physics to solve this 
during the early decades of the 18th century (see Chapters 2–6) coincided 
with the independent rise of rational mechanics (see Chapter 7). Following 
this, PCON emerged as critical for solving Body, and impact now lay 
downstream, far from the foundational problems of the newly developing 
generalized theories of rational mechanics (see Chapters 8–11). What then 
of Body come the end of the 18th century (see Chapter 12)?
1.7 Methods
Body belongs to philosophy, and remains a problem in contemporary phi￾losophy today.17 Yet, in this book, we approach it from a historical vantage 
point, and limit our attention to the 18th century. Why?
Tree reasons lead us to take a historical approach. First, Body is more than 
three hundred years old, as are attempts to solve it. If we study just its cur￾rent version, we risk working in an impoverished problem-space, bound by a 
thin, narrow slice of a philosophical picture that is both bigger and richer. In 
consequence, even those with strictly contemporary interests stand to beneft 
from taking a longer temporal view. We are familiar with this from work by 
philosophers of physics on space, time, and motion, where not just early 20th 
century, but also 17th, 18th, and 19th century considerations deepen our un￾derstanding of the philosophical issues at stake. Te same is true for Body.
Second, the contours of Body are historically sensitive: how Body is 
formulated, its place in the system of knowledge, the preferred heuristics 
for solving it, and—most importantly—the criteria for an acceptable so￾lution, vary with time as the philosophical context for addressing it shifs 
and changes. Terefore, Body raises diferent philosophical challenges and 
questions at diferent moments in the history of philosophy. Tese are of 
philosophical interest in their own right.
Finally, this diachronic dimension is developmental and interactive. 
Philosophers’ understanding of Body changed and developed over time not 
17 Tere are two main strands of Body in contemporary philosophy. Te frst concerns macro￾scopic bodies, their metaphysical status, and their relationship to “fundamental” objects. Te second 
is the generalization of Body to the Problem of Object: that is, the problem of specifying the object of 
a given theory, whether that be a body, particle, feld, gene, or whatever it may be. See van Inwagen 
1990, and the subsequent literature in metaphysics; the vast literature on reductionism in philosophy 
of science; discussions of the appropriate ontology for quantum mechanics (see, e.g., Ney 2020) and 
quantum feld theory (see, e.g., Fraser 2008); and so forth.18 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
only in response to, but also—and crucially—contributing to the evolving 
philosophical context. To study the unfolding of Body in the history of phi￾losophy is, in our view, the best path to understanding both Body itself and 
its signifcance for philosophy.
A contrastive characterization of our project may be helpful, for our book 
is situated between two alternative historical approaches. On the one hand, 
it is not a work in intellectual history: we do not set out to track the “emer￾gence” of a concept or idea, or the semantic shifs undergone by a word or 
concept. On the other hand, neither is this a work in history of material cul￾ture. We do not seek to map chains of belief transmission through networks 
of patronage, mentorship, correspondence, and the like, or to study the 
means by which such transmission takes place. Rather, our book studies a 
philosophical problem as a historically situated object whose characteristics 
are: determined by the historical fgures who formulated it and struggled with 
it; revealed by the argumentative and evidential resources those fgures em￾ployed; and presented in the material books, papers, letters, manuscripts, and 
notes those fgures lef behind. As a result, conceptual developments and ma￾terial circumstances have an important role to play, but only when and where 
they make a philosophical diference to the argumentative, explanatory, or 
evidential elements of Body.
To pursue our goal, we employ three methodological heuristics. First, we 
seek to recover meaning from use, where by “use” we mean: in philosoph￾ical argumentation and in theoretical problem-solving. We do not confne 
ourselves to prefaces, manifestos, and programmatic declarations; while 
these are important, we give greater evidential weight to the details that come 
later: the places in the texts where the opening declarations are tamed and 
re-shaped by the argumentative and evidential constraints of the problems at 
hand. It is here that most of the philosophical action takes place, in our view.
Second, we use anachronism judiciously. Situated as we are in the 21st 
century, later developments (in both philosophy and classical mechanics) 
provide us with resources unavailable to our protagonists. We use the 
resulting insights only where they can be translated without remainder into 
the concepts of the historical period at issue. We aim to state and shape our 
explanations or objections just as a leading authority, fully au courant with 
the state of the art then, could have done, with the proviso that some of the 
words we use have changed their meaning since that time (and where this 
is of philosophical import for our project, we say so). We neither state nor 
assess any historically given answers to Body in terms or by standards that A golden era 19
greatly post-date the context of the answer at issue. In this way, we seek to 
preserve the diachronic dimensions of Body described above.
Finally, we explicitly recognize our own authorship. Body is both our
problem and their problem, and this book is the product of an engagement 
between the two, of course. We chose Body as our central theme because 
it interests us. As philosophers living in the 21st century, our philosophical 
backgrounds, sensibilities, and motivations for embarking on this project 
frame and guide the work that we do in this book. We do not ofer a history 
that pretends to wash out our own presence: rather, we ofer a philosophy of 
a problem that has a long history, and we seek to explain what interests us 
about it and why.
1.8 Audience
We ofer three strands of argument, of interest to the three groups of people 
for whom we wrote this book: philosophers of physics; historians of modern 
philosophy; and philosophers of science and metaphysicians interested in 
the epistemology and metaphysics of science.
(i) Philosophy of physics
From Aristotle to Newton, physics was the study of bodies. If we turn our 
attention to modern physics, however, we fnd that bodies are no longer its 
principal object, and indeed “body” is not even among its central concepts. 
Tis observation, mundane though it may seem, turns out to hide an abun￾dance of interesting philosophical problems. When we ask: “Why did bodies 
get displaced from their privileged position, how did that come to be, and 
with what consequences?,” the answers that we demand—and that we ofer in 
this book—are metaphysical, epistemological, and conceptual. One upshot 
is this: the 18th century becomes a period of focal interest for philosophers 
of physics, equal to the 17th and early 20th centuries in its import. Tis is 
because it was then that physics proved unable to articulate a satisfactory ac￾count of body, and rational mechanics (then a separate discipline) attempted 
to fll the void—also unsuccessfully, as it will turn out. In the process, the con￾ceptual foundations of physics and mechanics received profound scrutiny 20 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
and reformation. Te consequences shape contemporary physics today, as 
we shall see.
Most philosophers of physics will be familiar with 18th century debates 
over space, time, motion, and gravity. Tese will not be our focus. Instead, 
our goal is to open up a new area of enquiry for philosophers of physics, one 
that has yet to receive detailed scrutiny. If we consider Newton’s Principia as 
a text in philosophical mechanics, we see that the scope of his rational me￾chanics contrasts sharply with that of his physics: while Books I and II are 
intended to be general, Book III concerns one force only, gravitation. Against 
this foil, we restrict our attention to philosophical mechanics where the 
gravitational behavior of bodies is not the target of investigation: namely, to 
non-gravitational mechanics, and to terrestrial physics. It is here that many 
foundational issues in classical mechanics were worked out, for it is here 
that the pressing need to treat constrained systems, and the limitations of 
Newton’s laws of motion for this purpose, come to the fore.
Te comparison with gravitation is useful in one further respect. Recent 
work has done much to elucidate the evidential support for Newton’s theory 
of universal gravitation, as it was developed and accrued during the 18th cen￾tury (Smith 2014). Unlike celestial mechanics, non-gravitational mechanics 
in the 18th century did not have centuries of observational data and math￾ematical theorizing to work with. Te only potential analogue of positional 
astronomy for terrestrial mechanics is the set of terrestrial machines studied 
in ancient mechanics, but the new mechanics of the 18th century explicitly 
sought to move beyond this limited set. Te contrast with gravitation brings 
the following question into focus: what counts as evidence in those parts of 
philosophical mechanics not primarily concerned with gravitation?
(ii) History of modern philosophy
Philosophers have long read the 18th century as grappling with problems 
inherited from Descartes: Cartesian skepticism, Cartesian dualism, and the 
Cartesian circle, to name but a few. Most ofen, these are cast in an episte￾mological vein. However, there is a further problem, also originating with 
Descartes and equally evident in the collective philosophical struggles of the 
18th century: Body.
Body directly confronts core topics of the period: the metaphysics of 
substance and causation, and the associated epistemological issue of how, A golden era 21
if at all, we can arrive at knowledge of either. All created substances were 
presumed (by almost everyone at the time) to depend on God, the primary 
substance and primary cause of all things. As a result, discussions of sub￾stance and causation divide into two: primary and secondary. Our concern 
is exclusively with secondary substances (bodies) and secondary causation 
(agency among bodies). When approached with primary substance and cau￾sation as the entry point, we fnd the familiar range of opinions on secondary 
substance and causation—from Leibniz’s monads and pre-established har￾mony through Malebranche’s occasionalism and physical infux—and re￾hashing these debates is not our goal. If we focus our attention exclusively on 
secondary substances and causation instead, a diferent picture emerges, one 
in which there is—perhaps surprisingly—widely shared broad-brush agree￾ment on what would count as an adequate theory of secondary substance 
and causation. Te disagreements are over how and whether any such theory 
can be developed. Detailing this debate, and its philosophical consequences, 
is our concern.
Taming the problems that 18th century natural philosophers engaged 
with, so as to render them soluble, required developments in not just the 
appropriate technologies (experimental, mathematical, conceptual) but 
also the appropriate epistemologies and accompanying methodologies. 
Canonical fgures such as Locke, Berkeley, Hume, and Kant, like Descartes 
before them, presumed a starting point for epistemology in our ideas. An 
individual is assumed to have ideas whose contents they may inspect, with 
at least some of those contents being sufciently determinate and accessible 
that they may serve as the basis of a viable epistemology. We are familiar with 
reading Hume’s views as the terminus of this line of enquiry into causation, 
and conceding the point lies at the heart of Kant’s Critical turn.18 However, 
not all who contributed to Body take ideas as their epistemological fountain￾head, and Body therefore requires us to widen our epistemological purview. 
For example, many of the fgures we discuss approached questions of justif￾cation, certainty, and truth by way of criteria of success (theoretical and em￾pirical) in solving problems.
Whereas Enlightenment natural philosophy has predominantly been cast 
as grappling with the world according to Newton, a diferent picture emerges 
when Body provides our lens. Tough he engaged with Body, Newton was 
neither the frst nor the last to do so. For the most part, philosophers of the 
18 See Clatterbaugh 1999.22 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
18th century attacked Body within parameters set largely by Descartes, 
or they recast it in new terms that had no precedent in Newton. As a re￾sult, our book provides a new perspective on the relationship between 
philosophy and the exact science of nature then. More generally, it is an 
invitation to historians of philosophy to revisit the epistemological and met￾aphysical commitments, arguments, and methodologies of Enlightenment 
philosophers engaged with understanding the material world, and the philo￾sophical consequences of these that we inherit today.
(iii) Philosophy of science and metaphysics of science
Body lies at the intersection of metaphysics, physics, and mechanics during 
the 18th century. Attempts to address it involve inferences from one domain 
to another, disputes over the authority of one domain with respect to another, 
and indeed problematize where the boundaries between domains might be 
drawn and on what basis. Moreover, these attempts lead directly to questions 
of appropriate epistemology and methodology for solving Body, including 
questions of what principles might be used to guide, constrain, or evaluate 
a solution. Enlightenment attempts to grapple with these issues are inter￾esting in themselves, as well as for the light they shed on their contemporary 
counterparts. We ofer our book as an invitation to philosophers of science, 
metaphysicians of science, and anyone interested in “scientifc metaphysics,” 
to engage with either or both.
1.9 Overview
In this introductory chapter we have presented several technical terms (in￾cluding Body; philosophical mechanics; Goal; Nature, Action, Evidence, and 
Principle; PCOL and PCON). In the chapters that follow, these terms will be 
re-introduced slowly as the need for each arises naturally in the argument 
of the book. We have collected them together here as a guide to the overall 
structure of our analysis, and for ease of reference going forward. Whether 
all are necessary will be clear only by examining the work that they do in the 
remainder of this book. We proceed as follows.
In the frst half of our book, our primary focus is collisions. Accordingly, 
Chapter 2 is a genetic account of collision theory in France afer Descartes. A golden era 23
It documents and explains protracted eforts, by Malebranche and his pos￾terity, to integrate coherently a broadly Cartesian matter theory and the rules 
of impact.
Chapter 3 is a sequel that uncovers analogous eforts to build a philo￾sophical mechanics of collision from resources bequeathed by Leibniz and 
Newton. Te joint upshot of these two chapters is that, by 1730, European 
natural philosophy regarded collision theory as the main locus for solving 
Body, and no satisfactory solution was available.
In Chapter 4, we broaden our scope to Body. We introduce physics as a 
sub-discipline of philosophy, and show that Body was its central problem 
We articulate NAEP within this context, and illustrate some of the difculties 
facing philosophers at that time in their attempts to fnd appropriate 
resources—metaphysical and epistemological—by which to tackle Body. We 
show the relationship of Body to familiar debates over substance and cau￾sation in the period. Finally, we show that PCOL arises naturally within the 
context of Body, and that its philosophical signifcance is best understood 
against this backdrop. We conclude that Body is a problem to be solved not 
just within philosophy, but within philosophical mechanics.
Tis sets the scene for Chapter 5, which examines mid-century attempts 
to address Body. We argue that the two most promising proposals, defended 
by Du Châtelet and Euler, respectively, face insurmountable obstacles. 
Both proposals begin with physics, and seek to integrate relevant resources 
from the mechanics of collision. We claim that success demands meeting 
Goal: providing a single, well-defned concept of body that is simultaneously 
(i) consistent with an intelligible theory of matter, (ii) adequate for a causal￾explanatory account of the behaviors of bodies, and (iii) sufcient for the 
purposes of mechanics. And we argue that neither succeeds.
Chapter 6 studies two radically new ways of constructing spatially ex￾tended, impenetrable, mobile, and causally interacting bodies, found in 
Kant and Boscovich. We explain how their theories transform the goals of 
physics while simultaneously falling short when it comes to philosophical 
mechanics.
In Chapter 7, we argue that, around 1750, the locus for grappling with 
Body moved from philosophy to rational mechanics. We explain the reasons 
for this watershed transition. First, we identify conceptual difculties with 
three notions that philosophers had relied on—mass, contact action, and 
extended-body motion. Ten, we argue that professional philosophers at 
the time failed to incorporate pertinent advances in mechanics into their 24 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
accounts of Body, opening a rif between philosophical physics and rational 
mechanics. Finally, we uncover the key challenge within mechanics going 
forward; namely, PCON. Tis problem is our lens, throughout the subse￾quent chapters, for analyzing developments in rational mechanics most rel￾evant to Body.
In Chapter 8 we return to the early 1700s to review developments in the 
theory of constrained motion at that time, as they pertain to the goals of 
this book. We survey a wealth of work on the vibrating string and the com￾pound pendulum. Teorists at this time sought general principles and uni￾form methods for treating constraints. But, they generally fell short of these 
desiderata. Tat insufcient outcome would shape the agenda for rational 
mechanics through the latter half of the century.
Building on this, in Chapter 9 we turn to d’Alembert’s Treatise on 
Dynamics. D’Alembert ofered the frst systematic attempt at a general treat￾ment of the mechanics of constrained motions. We show that his Treatise
exemplifes the enormous difculties involved in PCON, and argue that it is 
pivotal for the development of philosophical mechanics in the latter half of 
the 18th century.
Chapters 10 and 11 assess two diferent strategies for solving MCON. In 
Chapter 10, we examine how the 18th century dealt with MCON1. Afer 
1730, rational mechanics learned how to tackle the motion of extended 
bodies with internal constraints (e.g., rigidity and incompressibility). Te 
greatest advances were due to the Bernoullis, d’Alembert, and especially 
Euler. Accordingly, we focus on their key breakthroughs in pursuit of a ra￾tional mechanics of extended bodies.
In Chapter 11 our focus is Lagrange. Te problem of external constraints 
found a wholesale solution in his analytic mechanics of 1788. Two 
ingredients were key to his solution: a dynamical law, viz. the Principle of 
Virtual Velocities; and the method of Lagrange multipliers. Tis combina￾tion allowed him to unify all rational mechanics then available. We assess 
Lagrange’s achievement, via a constructive and then principle reading of his 
theory.
By now, we have reached the end of the 18th century. What, then, is the 
state of philosophical mechanics? To see this, we follow two strands of de￾velopment, one seeking nomic unity (following Lagrange), and the other 
ontic unity (in the physics of the Laplacian School). Work by Cauchy 
spawned alternatives to both: a new approach to nomic unity, by means of 
balance laws of force and torque; and a new approach to ontic unity, based A golden era 25
in deformable-continuous matter. Te upshot is pluralism in philosophical 
mechanics, with consequences for Body and for the relationships among 
philosophy, physics, and mechanics. We end with a brief review of the main 
conclusions of our book.
1.10 Conclusions
To sum up. Te 18th century was a golden era for philosophical mechanics. 
As the century began, physics was a subdiscipline of philosophy, and its 
primary task was Body. By 1800, this was no longer the case. Physics had 
become an independent discipline, and Body was not its driving concern 
anymore. In this book, we argue that the philosophical reasons for this 
transformation—and thus its consequences—come into view if we analyze 
the century as an era of philosophical mechanics. Tat is, as an age of wide￾spread, long-lasting, and concerted eforts to address Body by integrating 
rational mechanics with philosophical physics.
Tis is an entirely new way of thinking about philosophy, physics, and 
mechanics in the 18th century, diverging sharply from prior accounts. 
According to Mach, with Newton’s Principia classical mechanics is complete 
as regards its principles; all that remains is the technical challenge of using
these principles to treat ever more complex and difcult phenomena. Tis 
view of post-Newtonian mechanics is perpetuated in Kuhn. For him, the 
Principia is the culmination of a scientifc revolution, afer which all “clas￾sical mechanics” becomes normal science within the Newtonian paradigm. 
Te principles, methods, and basic ontological commitments are secure; all 
we need to do now is solve puzzles.19
But it is simply not true that 18th century physics is “normal science,” nor 
that 18th century mechanics has settled foundations and is philosophically 
uninteresting. Tis is not a new point to make, yet for its signifcance to shine 
through, for it to be something we can use in our research and teach in our 
classrooms, we need an alternative way of framing the history, one that is dif￾ferent from Mach’s or Kuhn’s.
Our proposal, philosophical mechanics, is built on evidence from the 
books and papers of the time, and it enables us to do a wide variety of new 
and interesting work. Books whose philosophical importance is largely 
19 See, respectively, Mach (1883, 239) and Kuhn (1962, 10–14).26 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
invisible under old framings (such as Du Châtelet’s Foundations of Physics
and d’Alembert’s Treatise on Dynamics) come to the fore. New questions arise 
about more familiar works (such as Boscovich’s Teory of Natural Philosophy
and its relation to constrained mechanics). A broad range of frst-rank 
physicists are seen to be doing work with philosophical import. Tis latter 
is in stark contrast with the Mach–Kuhn picture, where the work of some 
physicists (such as Newton and Einstein) is philosophically important, while 
the work of others (such as Euler and Lagrange) is philosophically inert—
because all they did was use Newton’s principles to solve problems within 
the already-existing Newtonian paradigm. Te work on Body that we dis￾cuss makes little sense from a Mach–Kuhn perspective. Yet, it was impor￾tant. From our vantage point it appears as a widely shared and long-lasting 
project—of integrating philosophical physics with rational mechanics.
We intend our book to be an example of the importance of telling and re￾telling our history, keeping it alive over and again with every new generation 
of students and scholars. We hope you will fnd it worthwhile.Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason. Katherine Brading and Marius Stan, Oxford University Press. 
© Oxford University Press 2023. DOI: 10.1093/oso/9780197678954.003.0002
2
Malebranche and the Cartesian 
foundations of natural philosophy
2.1 Introduction
In 1668, Huygens, Wren, and Wallis sent rules of collision to the Royal 
Society of London. We recognize these today as the rules of elastic and ine￾lastic collisions (Huygens and Wren for the former, Wallis the latter).1 Yet al￾most sixty years later, in 1724 and 1726, the Paris Academy of Sciences set up 
prize competitions concerning the rules of collision. Why? What was lef un￾solved by Huygens, Wren, and Wallis, and why was it so important as to de￾mand not one but two prize competitions? Tese are the questions addressed 
in this chapter.
If we focus our attention on early 18th century France, it is not hard to 
see why collisions were foundational to natural philosophy. Te towering 
fgure in French philosophy was Malebranche, and in natural philosophy 
Malebranche was broadly Cartesian (modulo his explicit occasionalism, 
and with further diferences that, when important, we highlight below). 
For Cartesian philosophers, the material world is a plenum, and all change 
comes about through collisions. Te explanation for all that we see around us 
in the material world is to be given in terms of the parts of matter in motion, 
colliding with one another so as to change direction and speed in accordance 
with the rules of collision. Without collisions, no change in the natural world; 
without the rules of collision, no theory of such change: no natural philos￾ophy. So we begin our discussion of collisions in France, before widening our 
purview in later chapters.
Te 18th century opens with the ffh edition of Malebranche’s Search afer 
Truth (published in 1700), which contains his mature theory of collisions.2
1 For several discussions of this episode, see papers in Jalobeanu & Anstey 2011 as well as Chapter 1. 2 During his lifetime, Malebranche reissued Search afer Truth six times, every time with some 
corrections and additions. For convenience, we shall denote them by means of Roman capitals, as 
follows: edition A (1674–5), B (1676), C (1678), D (1688), E (1700), and F (1712). Hereafer, we cite 28 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
Tis theory sets the agenda for collision theory in France and is (or so we 
will argue) the impetus for the 1724 Paris Academy prize competition. 
Malebranche’s theory evolved through multiple versions, not least due to 
Leibniz’s repeated pressing and prodding. If we are to appreciate the goals of 
Malebranche’s mature theory, and the problems that it faced, we must go back 
to his earlier discussions of collisions, beginning with the frst edition of the 
Search afer Truth, published in 1674–5. Tere, Malebranche set out to cor￾rect the collision theory inherited from Descartes’ Principles of Philosophy.
3
Leibniz then pounced on what he claimed to be Malebranche’s perpetuation 
of Cartesian mistakes, and this led the Frenchman to revise his account twice. 
We describe these developments below. But to jump ahead: Malebranche’s 
mature theory of collisions created more problems than it solved. Some of 
these soon became apparent and turned into a research agenda for his disci￾ples into the late 1730s, while others were less immediately visible; all spelled 
trouble for the project of founding natural philosophy on collisions.
In what follows, we argue that the goal for an adequate theory of collisions, 
as bequeathed to natural philosophers in France by Malebranche, was as 
follows: to provide a causal-explanatory account of impact within a single 
theory that unifes the matter-theoretic account of body with rules of colli￾sion. We argue that the Paris Academy prize competitions of the 1720s, on 
the topic of collisions, were among the eforts directed at fnding such an ac￾count. Finally, we argue that between 1700 (when Malebranche published his 
mature collision theory) and the 1730s no satisfactory account was found. 
On the contrary, the depth of the difculties involved in developing such an 
account began to make itself visible.
To that aim, we begin with a synopsis of Malebranche’s frst collision 
theory (section 2.2). Ten we explain Leibniz’s protracted objections to it 
(section 2.3) and Malebranche’s ensuing responses and improvements (sec￾tion 2.4). We will argue that, despite his later eforts, Malebranche’s theory 
had failed to solve two key problems, which the French Academy took up 
in search of solutions (sections 2.5 and 2.6). We end with a forward-looking 
account of some open questions and hidden problems in the natural philos￾ophy of collisions (section 2.7).
Malebranche from the canonical edition Malebranche 1958–70, which we abbreviate as OM followed 
by volume number (e.g., OM xvii.2, which is in two parts).
3 See Descartes 1991.Malebranche and natural philosophy 29
2.2 Correcting Descartes: Malebranche’s early theory 
of collisions
We begin, then, with Malebranche’s early theory of collisions. Its origin 
lies in Descartes’ philosophy. In 1664, the young Malebranche came across 
a copy of Descartes’ L’homme, and its mechanistic program for physiology 
quickly seduced him with its seeming power to explain so much from so 
little. Destined to an exclusive career in the priesthood at the time, he re￾trained himself in mathematics and mechanics—a “Cartesian novitiate,” 
so to speak—such that within a decade Malebranche became a leading au￾thority in the new French physics.4 In the 1690s, to this knowledge he added 
a solid initiation in the emerging diferential calculus, taught to his friend, 
the marquis de l’Hôpital, by Johann Bernoulli (who, afer a long visit to Paris 
in 1691, was hired by l’Hôpital as private coach in mathematics).
Malebranche took Descartes’ chief legacy to be his doctrine of method, 
which he adopted. So taken was he with the requirement of “clear ideas” 
that he advertised his forays into collision theory as applications of that 
Cartesian method. Tis explains their place in Search afer Truth as a quan￾titative coda to the last section of his treatise. In addition, Malebranche took 
from Descartes the notion that matter has just one essential attribute, viz. 
extension.
What is novel in Malebranche’s theory of collisions, and in his matter 
theory more generally? Malebranche’s greatest departure—heavy with 
implications, it turns out—was his decision to discard Descartes’ “force 
of rest.” While Descartes had claimed to remove any notion of force from 
bodies, his words belied his aim, especially in his statements and explanations 
of his rules of collision. Already in the frst edition of his book (Search A), 
Malebranche sought to improve the situation, claiming that “rest is a pure 
privation that does not suppose any positive will on God’s part.”5
Purging the “force of rest” from the metaphysics of body creates two 
problems. One is in matter theory: what causes cohesion? Specifcally, what 
prevents the parts of certain matter-volumes (namely, solids) from dispersing 
away from each other? More importantly for the project, what is the reason 
4 Gouhier 1926, 68. 5 Malebranche’s early argument seems to be that corporeal rest obtains by the very same (divine) 
act of willing that brings that body into being, or, alternately, by God ceasing to will that the body 
move (cf. Mouy 1927, 35). Because a force (in some body) requires a distinct, or “positive,” act of 
willing, he concludes that rest is not associated with any sui generis force.30 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
that, from before to afer collision, the parts of a solid body move together, as 
a whole?
Te second problem arises directly in the rules of collision. In the 
Principles, Descartes had supposed one body to exert a “force to remain at 
rest” and had used this in deriving his rules. Malebranche needed to repair 
the rules somehow, a problem whose depth is disguised by the humble place 
he gave it in the presentation structure of the Search, yet whose attempted 
resolution soon led to trouble.
Descartes’ paradigm object is his “hard body,” which is rigid: the parts 
of the body remain at rest with respect to one another, throughout the in￾teraction with any other body. But Cartesian rigidity arises from the body 
parts having a “force to remain at rest” relative to each other. Malebranche, 
by discarding the force of rest, leaves himself without the resources in his 
matter theory to provide the “hard” bodies that are the subject-matter of the 
Cartesian rules of collision. Nevertheless, he retained “hard” bodies within 
his theoretical treatment of bodies, and added to them two additional kinds 
of body: “sof” and “elastic.”6 As we will see, “sof” bodies come to play a foun￾dational role in his matter theory, and his account of “elastic” bodies leads 
to a research program taken up by others. But that is to get ahead. Te im￾portant point for now is that Malebranche’s collision theory begins from his 
matter-theoretic account of bodies, and incorporates this three-way tax￾onomy of bodies into that theory.
Te main elements of Malebranche’s approach to collision theory are as 
follows. For Malebranche, extension is an essential property of bodies, on 
which the further essential properties of divisibility, impenetrability, and 
fgure (size and shape) depend. From these matter-theoretic resources, 
Malebranche seeks to provide an account of “hard,” “sof,” and “elastic” 
bodies (more on this below). To this three-way taxonomy of kinds of body, 
Malebranche added a threefold collision theory, with rules for each kind of 
6 Te terminology of “hard,” “sof,” and “elastic” varied in meaning in the 18th century, from au￾thor to author, and so must be read with care, and most especially not through the lens of modern￾day physics. Our age has entrenched “hard” and “elastic” in diferent regimes, viz. analytic and 
continuum mechanics, respectively. In these felds hard, elastic, and plastic (a lateral descendant of 
“sof body,” now extinct) are defned in terms of stress and strain, by specifying the local (infnites￾imal) deformation in response to applied contact forces. Each class of possible response is governed 
by a so-called constitutive relation, expressed by a (partial) diferential equation. For example, 
simple elastic materials are ruled by the Generalized Hooke’s Law. For Malebranche (and for many 
of his contemporaries), the term “sof” is broadly coextensive with our notion of a fexible body 
today: a mesoscopic matter-volume that undergoes only irreversible isochoric deformations. Here, 
and throughout, the term “rigid” denotes that no two points in the body change distance relative to 
each other; hence, the body remains self-congruent at all times (including throughout impact).Malebranche and natural philosophy 31
body and a causal account of the collision process for each. Tis fact is signif￾icant. While Malebranche revised his collision mechanics several times, he 
always ran it along three tracks, one for each basic body kind. His project—to 
have the matter theory and the rules of collision cooperate toward a unifed 
picture of body–body action—remained a constant heuristic, visible under 
his opaque account of “communication of motion,” or speed exchanges in im￾pact. Moreover, this threefold division and this project turn out to run deep 
and wide in 18th century Europe. (Just why, and with what consequences, is 
something we seek to excavate in this book.) For Malebranche, motion is a 
universal but inessential property of bodies: it “always accompanies” matter.7
Te overarching principle applying to collision processes is conservation of 
total quantity of “force of motion,” defned as the product of size and speed 
(more on this term below). Tis completes the foundation for his collision 
theory, a foundation that persists throughout the later versions of his theory.
We can locate Malebranche’s approach to collisions within the taxonomy 
set out in Chapter 1, where we distinguished between the constructive and 
principle approaches. Te principle approach begins with privileged laws or 
rules and seeks to develop an adequate theory of collisions from there. Te 
constructive approach, by contrast, sets out from a theory of matter. We can 
further specify these two approaches to collision theory as follows.
Principle approach to collisions: Start with a privileged principle, such 
as a law or rule, that involves system-specifc speeds. Introduce a purely 
kinematic condition on the outcome (i.e., one that constrains post￾collision speeds). From these two premises derive the two exit speeds as 
a function of known pre-collision quantities.
Crucially, this heuristic bypasses matter theory entirely: it leaves out of the 
account any causal processes (either within the interacting bodies or at their 
common contact surface) and thus any reference to bodily attributes beyond 
those mentioned in the dynamical law.
Tis principle approach, which can be found in Newton, Huygens, and 
Leibniz (among others), is in contrast with the constructive approach:
7 He claims that we can conceive of extension qua always at rest, so motion does not depend on 
it. On the other hand, it is universal because matter without motion “would be wholly useless, and 
incapable of the variety of forms for which it was made; and it is impossible that an intelligent being 
would have made it so deprived.” See OM i.382f. and Robinet 1970, 72f.32 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
Constructive approach to collisions: Give a taxonomy of basic spe￾cies of body, with a causal-powers mechanism proper to each. Ten, for 
each species, describe a causal mechanism of contact action during im￾pact. Next, use the specifc description to infer the kinematic outcome, 
and hence the post-collision speeds. Finally, derive the system-wide 
quantities, if any, conserved throughout the interaction.
Malebranche took this second approach and ofered a causal-explanatory 
account of the collision process for each of his three kinds of body, as we 
shall see in detail below. But why did he take this approach? In later years, his 
justifcation—though always rather understated—was the need to fnd the 
“Physical reason for the laws of motion,” echoing the language of William 
Neile during the Royal Society discussion of collisions (see Chapter 1), and 
by which both he and Neile meant a causal explanation for the rules of colli￾sion in terms of an underlying matter theory.
8 Tis is something the principle 
approach eschews. Still, why did he choose the material approach in 1675? 
Tere is not enough direct evidence to answer it, and our conjecture is that, 
having discarded the “force of rest” from Cartesian matter, Malebranche saw 
that this had consequences for Descartes’ rules of collision and for the “hard” 
bodies to which they apply; and he sought a means of modifying the rules 
consistent with the changes he made to the theory of matter. Tis makes the 
constructive approach to collisions the natural one to pursue. “Hard” bodies 
are retained by Malebranche—perhaps out of deference to Descartes—as 
the theoretical starting point from which to reason about “sof” and “elastic” 
bodies, these latter being the bodies of our experience.
We can divide the evolution of Malebranche’s collision theory into three 
stages: the early theory (described in this section), a second stage prompted 
by criticisms from Leibniz, and the mature theory published in 1700.9 Te 
frst stage, the early theory of collisions presented in Search A and B, begins 
with hard-body collisions and uses “force of motion” along with the speeds 
of approach to describe the collision process and resulting outcome for three 
possible collision scenarios: catch-up collision (when the bodies move in 
the same direction and the one following behind moves faster), head-on 
8 Search E, § 16, OM xvii.1, 81. In early editions of Search afer Truth, Malebranche adhered fairly 
closely to Descartes’ linguistic separation of “laws” and “rules of motion.” In the 1692 treatise and 
later, he is less careful to keep these terms distinct; see Robinet 1970, 137. So, at times it is up to the 
surrounding context to make clear if by “laws” Malebranche means dynamical principles or just kin￾ematic rules of collision.
9 For Leibniz’s criticisms, see section 2.3, and for his revisions in response to them, section 2.4.Malebranche and natural philosophy 33
collision (when the bodies approach one another from opposite directions) 
with equal forces, and head-on collision with unequal forces. In this account, 
as in Descartes’, stronger bodies (defned in terms of their force of motion) 
defeat weaker ones. Malebranche uses hard-body impact as the basis from 
which to arrive at his accounts of sof and elastic collision. Sof bodies, he 
claims, behave exactly like hard ones, with one exception: unlike hard bodies, 
sof bodies deform on impact, expending “force” to compress as well as to 
arrest each other. For elastic-body collisions, Malebranche ofers a two-stage 
process. In the frst, the two bodies behave like “sof” ones, expending “force” 
to compress and arrest each other. But then shape restoration begins, and 
in this second stage the bodies press back on each other, driving them apart 
from one another, and resulting in rebound.10
We summarize Malebranche’s threefold taxonomy of bodies in Table 2.1. 
Te kinds of body are distinguished by means of two criteria, one geometric 
(concerning the shape of the body) and the other kinematic (concerning the 
motion of the body). Both criteria refer to the body type’s behavior during the 
collision.
Tis taxonomy remained stable throughout the evolution of Malebranche’s 
collision theory and was widespread in the early 18th century. It is immedi￾ately obvious from this table that the geometric criterion yields three kinds 
of body, whereas the kinematic criterion yields only two. Te kinematic divi￾sion, arising from the rules of collision, is that which the principle approach 
invites: the rules of Huygens, Wren, and Wallis divide collisions (and thereby 
kinds of body) into elastic and inelastic (to use today’s terminology); and it 
is these rules to which Malebranche appeals. Whether this discrepancy be￾tween the geometric and kinematic criteria leaves us with an unsolved puzzle 
is an issue to which we will return.
10 For a brief overview, see also Beeson 1992, 19f. and Pyle 2003, 131–47.
Table 2.1 Taxonomies for Kinds of Body
Kind of body Geometric behavior Kinematic behavior
Hard No shape deformation No rebound
Sof Irreversible shape deformation No rebound
Elastic (or “hard with 
rebound”)
Reversible shape deformation Rebound34 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
2.3 Leibniz’s objections to Malebranche’s early 
collision theory
In January 1686, Leibniz published A Brief Demonstration of a Notable Error 
of Descartes and Others Concerning a Natural Law, According to which God Is 
Said Always to Conserve the Same Quantity of Motion; a Law which Tey also 
Misuse in Mechanics, frst in Latin in the Acta Eruditorum and then in French 
translation, already in September 1686, in the Nouvelles de la République 
des Lettres. Te provocation was the mechanics of Malebranche’s Search B 
(of 1676), and though by title the paper reproached “Descartes and others,” 
no one in France would have missed that Malebranche was the true target. 
Leibniz’s criticisms led Malebranche to revise his account, eventually yielding 
his mature theory of 1700, which set the agenda for research on collisions in 
18th century France.
Leibniz excoriated Malebranche for following Descartes in taking the 
conserved quantity in collisions to be the “absolute [quantity of] motion,” or 
size times speed.11 Tat quantity is not conserved, he argued, and so a colli￾sion theory built on it cannot be correct. Instead, he claimed, the conserved 
quantity is the product of size and speed squared. In other words, it is Leibniz’s 
own vis viva that he holds to be conserved. His hope, in pointing out the 
Cartesian “error,” was to convert Malebranche to a reformed notion of body, 
in which “force” (newly defned as vis viva) is, afer all, to be admitted:12
I add a remark important for metaphysics. I have shown that the force 
ought not to be estimated by the product of speed and size, but by its fu￾ture efect. . . . Hence it follows that we should admit in bodies something 
else beside size and speed, unless we wish to deny to them all power to act. 
(Leibniz 1687, 131–5)
Brief and efective in the reasoning, Leibniz’s objection and his alternative 
proposal were well known in France.13
In a second line of attack, Leibniz objected that Malebranche’s collision 
rules violate a “general Principle of order, useful in explaining the laws of 
11 Speed is, of course, a scalar quantity, unlike velocity, which combines speed and direction. 12 From Leibniz, “Réplique de M[onsieur] L[eibniz] a Monsieur l’Abbé D[e] C[atelan] . . ., touchant 
ce qu’on a dit Monsieur Descartes que Dieu conserve toujours dans la nature la même quantité de 
mouvement.” Nouvelles de la République des Lettres, February 1687. 13 Catelan in 1687 had it translated into French and printed in Nouvelles de la Republique des 
Lettres, then edited by Pierre Bayle. See Robinet 1955.Malebranche and natural philosophy 35
nature by considering divine wisdom.” Soon aferward, he and his followers 
would call this the Law of Continuity. Leibniz’s alleged law is multifarious; 
even in his polemic use against the French, he stated it broadly enough to 
apply across disciplines. Te Law of Continuity—as a guide to (and con￾straint on) reasoning about the natural world—went on to play a powerful 
role in the 18th century and beyond. Its initial public statement deserves 
quotation in full:
[In responding to my objections] Father de Malebranche gives 
reasons . . . that contravene a general Principle of order I have noted. I hope 
he will kindly allow me here to explain this principle, greatly useful in rea￾soning, and which I see neither applied ofen enough nor sufciently known 
in all its scope. It has its origins in the infnite, it is absolutely necessary in 
geometry, but it holds in Physics too, because the sovereign wisdom—the 
source of all things—works as a perfect geometer, and follows a harmony to 
which nothing can be added. For that reason, this principle ofen serves me 
as a test, or touchstone, for detecting prima facie and from the outside the 
defect in an inadequate view, even before I come to examine it internally.
I could state it thus: When the diference between two cases can be dimin￾ished below any quantity given in the data (or in what has been assumed), 
the diference must be found to likewise diminish in the sought-afer (or in 
the consequences). Or, in more familiar terms: When the cases (or what is 
given) approach continually, the consequences (or what is sought afer) must 
do so too. All this depends on a principle even more general, to wit, If the 
given is ordered, the required too is ordered. (Leibniz 1687, 744–5; original 
emphasis)
With regard to collisions, the law translates as: correct rules of collision 
must not entail that an infnitesimal change in some initial condition will 
cause a fnite change in the outcome. But with his rules of hard-body im￾pact, Malebranche violates this principle. Specifcally, for head-on collisions, 
his theory makes separate predictions: (1) if the bodies, say C and D, meet 
with equal force, then they rebound at the same relative speed (to each other) 
as before impact; but (2) if their forces are unequal, post-impact they move 
together in the direction of the “stronger” (i.e., in the direction of the one 
which had more “force”). Leibniz’s objection amounts to this: there can be 
two cases, one falling under (1) and the other under (2), that difer “in the 
given” by an infnitesimal amount and difer in the “sought afer” by a fnite 36 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
amount. For example, in (1) the mass of D is m, and in (2) it is (m + dm), 
where dm is an infnitesimal increment. Malebranche’s rules predict that sit￾uation (2) results in a mutual speed of 0 units (as C and D move together afer 
impact), whereas (1) produces a fnite mutual speed, say v units; the difer￾ence in outcomes is thus (v – 0) = v, a fnite amount.
Leibniz’s objections awoke Malebranche rudely; had it not been for them, 
“I would have never in my life” thought about impact again, he confessed.14
To appease his critic, Malebranche in 1692 issued a self-standing work, the 
Lois de la communication des mouvements. Tis treatise of some sixty pages 
represents the second stage in the evolution of Malebranche’s collision 
theory. Tough containing an allegedly revised account, closer inspection 
reveals that Malebranche’s revisions were both superfcial and confned to the 
sub-theory of “hard” bodies, the primary target of Leibniz’s attack. Te force 
of Leibniz’s critique seems to have eluded Malebranche: a mere tweaking of 
the rules of collision for hard bodies will not solve the problem that such 
bodies pose.
Despite this, Malebranche’s general approach remains unchanged, and 
Lois reprises his early, constructive approach to collision. Again, he partitions 
bodies into three kinematic species, he views collision as an asymmetric 
clash between unequal agents, and he tries to infer the outcome speeds from 
the “quantity of impact” spent by the “stronger” body so as to displace the 
“weaker.”15 Te Law of Continuity is violated in the same way as before—
namely, collision with a body at rest yields a diferent outcome from when 
both are in motion. And, Lois shows Malebranche a reluctant author; colli￾sion theory was not his pressing interest in those years: theological matters 
had been keeping him busy.16 His exposition in the treatise is cumbersome 
and far from transparent.
Unsurprisingly, the 1692 treatise, with its revised Cartesian account, did 
not satisfy Leibniz much more than Malebranche’s frst theory. In November 
1692, he sent Malebranche an annotated copy of the Oratorian’s little trea￾tise. He followed up with more objections in 1693, then again in 1698, when 
he had disclosed to the public some of his own foundations for dynamics. In 
all of these missives Leibniz harried Malebranche, accusing him of a lack of 
neatness and uniformity in his derivation of rules of collision, arguing that 
the Cartesian “absolute quantity of motion” is not conserved in real-world 
14 Cf. [Malebranche] 1692, verso of title page. 15 [Malebranche] 1692. 16 Robinet 1970, 129.Malebranche and natural philosophy 37
collisions and pointing out that Malebranche’s revised rules violate the Law 
of Continuity. Leibniz impressed upon Malebranche the need (as Leibniz 
saw it) to accept vis viva, and moreover to accept this force as an attribute of 
body, distinct from Cartesian extension.
Father Catelan, then Malebranche’s personal secretary, presumed to an￾swer on his behalf and countered that Leibniz’s critiques were erroneous, 
to which the Hanoverian courtier responded, in turn. In December 1698, 
Malebranche himself stepped in to respond:
During a leisurely stay in the countryside, I re-read my naughty little 
Treatise on the communication of motions, and—wishing to reassure my￾self of the third set of laws—I came to see that it is impossible to reconcile 
experience with Descartes’ principle that the absolute [quantity of] motion 
remains always the same. I have changed this treatise entirely; for now I am 
convinced that the absolute motion is lost and increased all the time—and 
that, in collision, only the motion in the same direction is kept always the 
same. So, I have corrected my treatise entirely, but I don’t know when it will 
appear. (Leibniz 1875, 355f.)
He did not have long to wait. Search E, the ffh edition of his opus, came out 
in 1700, with its collision theory amended as promised. In the fnal version, 
Search F of 1712, it remained virtually unchanged.
So much for a preamble. Malebranche’s treatment of collisions in the ffh 
edition of Search is his mature theory, and it sets the stage for the develop￾ment of collision theory in 18th century France. It is the details of this that we 
need to understand.17
2.4 Malebranche’s mature theory of collisions
Te third and fnal stage in the evolution of Malebranche’s collision theory is 
his mature account, which rests on three pillars: a classifcation of bodies into 
three kinds; a conception of the collision process as a clash between bodies of 
diferent “strengths;” and an appeal to two quantities: “force of motion” and 
“quantity of impact.” Malebranche ofers a general heuristic for how to think 
17 For details of that theory, see also Schmit 2020, chapters 2–3, which discusses in rich detail the 
evolution and context of Malebranche’s foundations for his impact mechanics.38 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
about the collision process, and then an account of that process plus a set of 
collision rules specifc to each kind of body. His goal, as it was in his original 
theory, is to provide a causal-explanatory account of the collision process 
that integrates the rules of collision into a theory of matter.
As we have seen, Malebranche labels his three kinds of body “hard,” 
“sof,” and “elastic.” His taxonomic criterion is shape behavior during im￾pact: Malebranchean hard bodies do not change their shape (they remain 
rigid throughout); sof ones deform irreversibly; and elastic bodies deform 
and then recover their original shape. Te collision process Malebranche 
envisages as an asymmetric clash of mechanical agencies, with a “stronger” 
body seeking to displace a “weaker” one that happens to be in its path. 
Malebranche views all post-collision speeds as kinematic outcomes of such 
clashes between unequals. Te “force of motion” quantifes the inequality in 
the “strength” of the clashing bodies, whereas the “quantity of impact” is the 
key by which Malebranche seeks to derive the exit speed of the “weaker” body.
Against this backdrop, Malebranche’s general heuristic for the rules of col￾lision is the following. On contact, the “stronger” seeks to defeat the “weaker” 
so as to free up its own obstructed path. To do so, the “stronger” must 
spend some force, equal to the “quantity of impact.” Te “weaker” receives 
it (modulo occasionalism) and is thereby displaced, hence set in motion. 
Tis general heuristic is then worked out in its specifcs for each of the three 
body kinds.
(i) Hard-body collisions
Malebranche’s frst treatment is of “bodies hard by themselves” (i.e., rigid 
under applied forces). Moreover, Malebranche supposes them to collide “in 
the void,” such that no subtle matter may interfere with them. He starts from 
defned notions, viz. “speed,” “quantity of motion,” and “quantity of impact;” 
and with some theoretical assumptions:18
1. Rest has no force to resist motion.
2. As the bodies are supposed infnitely hard, the force of the impacting 
acts immediately and in an instant on the impacted body. Hence, it 
pushes it with all the speed [of the impacting body].
18 OM xvii.1, 67.Malebranche and natural philosophy 39
3. Tis force once received, it must distribute itself throughout the 
mass19 [of the impacted body], on account of the hardness supposed. 
So, dividing this force by the mass [of the impacted], we get the out￾come speed of that body.
4. Te impacting body keeps for itself the motion that it does not give 
to the impacted. And so, by dividing the remainder motion (that it 
keeps) by its mass, we get its lefover speed.
With these posits in place, Malebranche fnds the rules of direct rigid colli￾sion by applying the heuristic above; that is, by viewing impact as a clash of 
unequals. First, he partitions the possible outcomes in two classes: collisions 
in which the Cartesian “absolute quantity of motion” must be conserved 
throughout; and those in which the quantity is allowed to vary. In each case, 
he obtains a “general rule”: an algorithm for computing exit velocities from 
arbitrary initial masses and speeds.20 For clarity, we give an algebraic expres￾sion of his rule (for the latter case) as derived by Louis Carré, his disciple.21
Let a body M of mass m and speed v collide head-on with a body N of mass n
and speed r, moving against it. Ten their exit speeds will be:
Of M : / v n −{[2 × + ( ) v r ] (m n + ) } (1)
Of N : / r − × {[2m v( ) + + r m ] ( n) } (2)
In line with his commitment to explain from causes, Malebranche ac￾counts for his rule as follows. In all (but one) possible impacts, one body, 
W, counts as the weaker. Step 1 is to regard this weaker body as stationary 
so that the stronger, S, will always count as running into it. Malebranche’s 
justifcation for this is as follows: either W is already at rest, or it moves 
against S (head-on), or they both move in the same direction and S is be￾hind W but faster (catch-up). In head-on collisions, contrary motions “de￾stroy each other,” hence (at the mid-way stage of collision) W comes to rest, 
19 Although Malebranche here uses the term “mass,” he is not entitled to help himself to the 
Newtonian concept of mass; and it is not clear what the term means for him; see below.
20 Malebranche’s rules thus rely on both mass and “speed,” but there are difculties with both; 
see below.
21 In a paper for the Paris Academy’s proceedings, printed with a motivating account, or histoire, by 
Fontenelle; see Carré 1706, “Proposition générale.”40 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
even though just for an instant. Tat is because, by that stage, all of its motion 
(speed, that is) has been destroyed by the stronger body.
Step 2 is to notice that, qua bodies, S and W are both impenetrable. Tis 
means they cannot pass through each other, and so one of them must be dis￾placed. In line with the general heuristic, it is always the weaker that gets dis￾placed. For that, S must spend some force, equal to the quantity of impact q, 
which gets transferred to W. Tus, S is lef with a remainder amount of force, 
r. So, post-impact, the weaker will have received a speed equal to q divided by 
its mass; and the stronger will have a speed equal to the remainder r divided 
by its mass.
Where does “hardness” belong in this explanation? Malebranche is silent 
on this point, but we can see a place for it, afer all. Consider S spending a 
quantity of impact, q. In principle, q could be spent on three (mutually ex￾clusive) outcomes: to deform W; to deform and move it; or just to move it. 
Malebranche chooses the third possibility, explaining that “the bodies being 
supposed perfectly hard, all of their parts proceed or rebound to the same ex￾tent; whereas, in an elastic body, the struck part rebounds while the one far￾thest from the impact surface just continues to move” with the speed it had.22
Still, we would like to know, what is the kinematic behavior of “infnitely 
hard” bodies relative to each other? Although no experiment can yield evi￾dence about such objects, Malebranche feels he ought to say something about 
them, even obliquely. In essence, he thinks that “infnitely hard” bodies must 
rebound completely afer collision.23 His justifcation is evasive. He convinces 
himself that, even though we lack empirical access to them, when a “perfectly 
hard” body A collides with a body B at rest, A “pushes it with all its force [of 
motion], hence B must receive all the motion” that A had. “To me, that seems 
an incontestable principle,” he decrees.24 Hence, in the taxonomy above, his 
“infnitely hard” bodies count as kinematically elastic (or k-elastic, see sec￾tion 2.5). And yet, right away Malebranche recalls his voluntarism about laws 
of nature and grants that God “could possibly” have willed that hard bodies 
do not rebound afer collision, in a vacuum—hence they may be k-inelastic
afer all.
22 See OM xvii.1, 61–2. Tat is, the elastic body gets deformed as the collision makes its struck part 
c get closer to the extremal, not-yet-afected-by-collision part f. 23 Tis emerges from his tables of predicted exit speeds for particular cases of hard-body impact. 
For example, when one body strikes an equal one at rest, it comes to a halt, and the resting acquires its 
entry speed; cf. OM xvii.1, 67. 24 OM xvii.1, 63.Malebranche and natural philosophy 41
Recall that, for Descartes, hard-body impact was the paradigm of physical 
action at basic scales. With his explanation in place, Malebranche concludes 
about that view:
In Descartes’ thesis, that God always conserves an equal quantity of motion 
in the Universe, there is an ambiguity that makes it true in one sense and 
false in another; in agreement with or contrary to experience. It is true in 
this sense: the gravity center of two or more bodies, colliding in any pos￾sible way, always moves at the same velocity before and afer impact. Tus 
it is true that God conserves an equal quantity of motion in the same direc￾tion, or an equal transport of matter. . . . But, his thesis is false and contrary 
to experience if taken to mean that, afer collision, the sum of each body’s 
motion (any way they may collide) is the same as before, viz. that the abso￾lute quantity of motion remains always the same. (OM xvii.1, 73)
Tat is, in Malebranche’s mature account, the “quantity of motion” has scalar 
and vector aspects, but impact conserves just its vector sum while its scalar 
aggregate varies.
And so, in one respect, Leibniz’s critique (in Brevis demonstratio) did little 
to move Malebranche. Even afer 1692, he continued to think that hard-body 
impact is a legitimate thought. Tus, apparently the Law of Continuity did 
not persuade him, and neither did Leibniz’s new force-concept, vis viva.
(ii) Sof-body collisions
“Sof” bodies for Malebranche are those that deform irreversibly during 
impact. Malebranche dispatches the collision theory for these objects 
briefy: afer collision they move together just like hard bodies do, and with a 
common speed inferable from the heuristic above. Teir specifc diference 
is the behavior during collision: sof bodies compress each other, and remain 
deformed, because they lack pores (that communicate with their exterior). 
Tis last feature distinguishes them from Malebranche-elastic bodies, which 
likewise deform, but regain their shape entirely with help from outside, as it 
were (see below). As regards the kinematics, the outcome of their encounter 
is as follows:42 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
General Rule for the Impact of Sof Bodies
When two sof bodies run into each other, their contrary motions (if they 
have any) destroy each other. Te bodies then will move together, with 
whatever motion is lef over in them. Hence, their speed post impact equals 
the diference of their motions pre-impact, divided by the sum of their 
masses.
But if they have no contrary motions, afer the collision they will move 
together, with the sum of their [prior] motions. Hence, their exit speed 
equals the sum of their [initial] motions divided by the sum of their masses. 
(Search F [1712]; OM xvii.1, 113)
In his late natural philosophy, this type of encounter stands out through the 
brief and evasive treatment that Malebranche gives it. He gives no quantita￾tive examples, unlike his profuse accounts of hard and elastic bodies, which 
he sprinkled generously with particular instances.
Neither does he discuss the geometric behavior of such bodies in 
collision—the changes of shape that result from it. Tat is unfortunate be￾cause Malebranche faces a dilemma here. On the one hand, he fails to rule 
out that impact at any speed would fatten two sof spheres into thin flms, 
adjacent to each other.25 On the other hand, experiment speaks against that 
possibility: sof spheres deform just partially, to various degrees. By his own 
admission, Malebranche wants his collision theory to give the “physical 
reasons” for the outcome of impact, and yet this eludes him entirely for the 
shape changes in bodies of inelastic, poreless matter.
Tat is no small problem. At explanatorily fundamental levels, all
Malebranchean matter is “sof.” Stifness and elasticity are downstream 
behaviors that arise from interactions between porous “sof” matter and the 
subtle ether that soaks it. If Malebranche’s account of sof-body behavior is 
incomplete, then a fortiori so is his explanation of elasticity and “hardness 
with rebound,” or stifness.
25 In plastic bodies, what keeps them from deforming like an incompressible fuid is certain in￾ternal forces, between adjacent parts—in particular, shear stresses. Malebranche’s blanket denial that 
bodies have any “force of rest” entails inter alia that his bodies neither exert nor undergo any internal 
stresses. So, his matter theory gives us no reason to suppose that his “sof bodies” are plastic.Malebranche and natural philosophy 43
(iii) Elastic-body collisions
“Elastic” bodies—which Malebranche confusingly called “hard bodies that 
rebound”—deform during the collision process (like sof bodies) but recover 
their shape. For these bodies, Malebranche derives the post-collision speed 
of each body by means of two “general rules,” one for each body. In Search
F he adopts Carré’s 1706 algebraic presentation. Let M and N be two elastic 
bodies, of masses m and n, respectively. Ten their post-impact motions are:
Exit speed of M: v − { [2n × (v + r)] / (m + n) }
Exit speed of N: r − { [2m × (v + r)] / (m + n) }
Tese recipes closely match the pair of formulas (1) and (2) above. Tat is 
because Malebranche argued that “perfectly hard” bodies behave as k-elastic 
bodies, in collision: they rebound. Moreover, this quantitative result was long 
known. Truly novel was just his picture of the “physical reasons” for it; this 
picture is also the key to understanding his immediate posterity.
Malebranche ofers a two-stage account of the sub-visible mechanism be￾hind the rebound of elastic bodies. Framing the picture is the assumption 
that such bodies are porous, permeated by microscopic holes, or vesicles, 
flled with “subtle matter.” Moreover, unlike in the analysis of hard-body im￾pact, in this case the bodies collide not in the void but in a plenum: the colli￾sion takes place in a medium of subtle matter, the ether.
Te impact is a two-stage process. Stage 1 begins when the bodies make 
kinematic contact, and it amounts to mutual compression. Specifcally, as 
the bodies press on one another, subtle matter is expelled from the pores of 
each, and each body thereby deforms as its pores are fattened. Te expelled 
subtle matter mixes with the subtle matter surrounding the bodies, adja￾cent to the compressed body’s surface. As a result, that vicinity becomes a 
region of increased ether pressure.26 Tese outcomes mark the mid-point 
of impact: the colliding bodies’ respective “force of contrary movement 
compresses the subtle matter, and communicates their motion to it.”
Stage 2 now begins, with the compressed matter exerting a “reaction,” 
which “makes the rebound.”27 Te proximate cause for the reaction is the 
26 Put exactly, this compression process results in each body’s apparent size coinciding with its true
size (which is never the case, in normal circumstances) and in a net pressure gradient arising on the 
bounding surface of each body.
27 OM xviii.1, 129.44 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
increased ether pressure on the compressed body’s outer surface. Tis pres￾sure diferential endeavors to decrease, Malebranche thinks, so the ether 
re-enters the pores it had vacated through compression. Its re-entry causes 
two concurrent efects: the bodies resume their initial shape; and by re￾expanding they press on each other, which leads to their mutual rebound. 
Malebranche now makes a crucial claim: this ether “reaction” induces in the 
rebounding bodies speeds inversely as their respective masses. Tese speed 
increments (call them s and t) must be added to the speeds r and v the bodies 
had at the end of Stage 1 (where r and v are the post-collision speeds that the 
bodies would have had were they “hard”). Tis reasoning leads Malebranche 
to a fnal pair of formulas, giving the exit speed of the “elastic” bodies M and 
N, respectively. He keeps his earlier dichotomic notion of impact being an 
encounter between a “weaker” and a “stronger” body. Let their masses be m
and n and their entry speeds v and r, respectively. Against that background 
assumption, his rule of collision predicts:28
Speed of the stronger body: (mv − nr) / (m + n) (3)
Speed of the weaker body: (−mv + nr) / (m + n) (4)
Before moving on from Malebranche’s collision theory, three further aspects 
of this theory deserve mentioning, for they became relevant soon afer his 
death. First, Malebranche’s matter theory gives sof bodies a privileged status. 
We have seen that Malebranche rested his mechanics on a tripartite division 
of bodies. Nevertheless, these three kinds of body are not on an equal footing. 
Tere are no actual hard bodies for Malebranche: sof and elastic bodies 
alone are real. Of the two kinds of real body, it is sof bodies that are basic:
To me it seems clear that, by itself, body is infnitely sof—for rest has no 
force to resist motion, and so a part (of some body) pushed harder than its 
neighbor must separate from it. (OM xvii.1, 127)
Te degrees of sofness (and hardness) of bodies as we experience them arise 
from the pressure of the subtle matter surrounding them. Moreover, elastic 
rebound is an epiphenomenon, supervening on a certain interaction be￾tween “sof” and “subtle” matters, viz. the extrusion and re-entry of ether in 
body pores. Tus, while hard bodies form the starting point of Malebranche’s 
28 Again, for the sake of synoptic understanding, we use Louis Carré’s algebraic presentation (of 
1706), instead of Malebranche’s cumbersome verbal account. See OM xvii.1, 183.Malebranche and natural philosophy 45
argument for his rules of collision, it is sof bodies that lie at the basis of his 
matter theory.
Second, Malebranche’s assertion that there are no hard bodies gives rise to 
a raf of related difculties. For example, if there are no hard bodies, then his 
theory of hard-body collision applies to no actual bodies—not even counter￾factual ones, for the reality of hard bodies is ruled out in principle, not just in 
practice.29 Such objects count as metaphysically impossible in his system,30
so his account seemingly applies to nothing. Moreover, it is a mystery how 
he could infer anything at all about hard bodies, for his very natural phi￾losophy rules out there being any evidence for them, even in principle. On 
the one hand, his Augustinian tenets led him to voluntarism about God’s 
choice of fundamental laws for the actual world. For him, divine legislation 
is unconstrained by rationality requirements on God’s will, so purely ra￾tional methods and knowledge sources yield no insight into the basic laws 
of our world—only empirical investigation can reveal them, if anything. On 
the other hand, he admits that no hard body exists in fact, so we can have 
no empirical evidence from which to infer abductively to claims about the 
kinematic behavior of hard bodies. Malebranche put all hope in his intu￾ition that, when two hard bodies collide, either loses as much motion as the 
“weaker” had.31 Tat is all he has to go on, and he knows it is not quite solid 
enough: “In the end, it all depends on the Creator’s arbitrary volitions, and he 
may very well have wished that hard bodies without recoil lose their motions 
in impact.”32 So his theory of hard-body impact succumbs to an epistemic di￾lemma of his own making: we must discover principles of hard-body action 
from experience alone, and yet no such experience is ever at hand.
Add to this that Malebranche admits the “inutility for Physics” of hard 
bodies, and we might wonder about their role in his system: why exactly does 
he need them, or even bother to theorize about them at all? To his readers, he 
always insisted that his project in natural philosophy was to correct Cartesian 
29 Perhaps we ought to describe hard-body collision (in Search) as a “counter-legal” scenario, bor￾rowing a term from Marc Lange.
30 Again, the reason is that he rejected the Cartesian “force of rest,” which secured rigidity in 
Descartes’ system. Without it, Malebranche can at most ofer a practical analogue, viz. “relative” 
rigidity (really, high stifness relative to a spectrum of applied force). But recall that stifness, in 
Malebranche, is an efect induced by ether pressure. In a vacuum, then, all matter is fundamentally 
“sof.” Tere can be no “hard” bodies in a Malebranche void.
31 Tereby, any such collision is reduced to impact with a stationary body, and that setup he thinks 
he can handle unproblematically: through impact, they become one body, as it were, and so the lef￾over motion permeates the whole “new body” uniformly, etc.
32 OM xvii.1, 65.46 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
physics while changing as little of it as necessary. Tat minimal change, 
he thought, was to discard the “force of rest” operative in the Principles of 
Philosophy. “I have given the bodies’ laws of collision as Mr. Descartes ought 
to have given them . . . had he admitted that rest has no force to resist mo￾tion,” he explained to the end.33 If it was simply out of deference to Descartes 
that he kept them in his taxonomy, then the philosophical justifcation for 
them remains moot. Hard bodies are treated only in the abstract, as a tool by 
which to reason about sof and elastic bodies. Could we not arrive at an ac￾count of sof and elastic bodies, and the rules of their collision, without going 
via hard bodies? And indeed, seeing that he is not entitled to the account of 
hard-body impact that he ofers, aren’t we required to do just this? Since the 
rules for sof and elastic bodies are derived as deviations from the rule for 
hard-body collisions, our epistemic access to and justifcation of the former 
are endangered by these problems facing the latter. Malebranche’s retention 
of hard bodies in his theory of collisions, despite his denial that any such 
bodies exist, seems not to be benign.
Tird, Malebranche’s views of subtle matter evolved, and in the end they 
led to a split of sorts. In 1699 he wrote a paper in optics, for admission to 
the Royal Academy. To solve the problem in it, he postulated the ether to be 
vortex-full. Namely, subtle matter everywhere moves in spherical patterns 
around stable but moveable centers; interstices between such touching 
spheres are flled with smaller vortices; their interstices with other, yet smaller 
ones; and so on, down to some basic scale. By 1712, this picture had become 
his preferred foundation for explaining almost everything, as he confessed in 
Explication XVI:34
Te subtle, or ethereal, matter is necessarily composed of small vortices 
[tourbillons]; they are the natural causes of everything that happens to 
matter. I confrm this Supposition by explaining the most general efects in 
Physics, such as the hardness, fuidity, weight and lightness of bodies; the 
light, the refraction and refection of its rays. Te Supposition . . . is not arbi￾trary, I say. For I am convinced it is the true general principle of Physics, on 
which particular efects depend. (OM iii, 270)
33 OM xvii.1, 79, 75. 34 Schmit 2020, chapters 4–5, covers exhaustively Malebranche’s program of vortex-based 
explanations coming out of his Explication XVI and its posterity in France afer him.Malebranche and natural philosophy 47
Note what is missing from his explanatory agenda: collision theory, and 
elastic rebound in particular. Tat splits his foundation uncomfortably. 
Specifcally, his mechanics of impact assumes a vortex-free ether (that 
envelops bodies and flls pores), and yet his ofcial doctrine claims that the 
ether is vortex-full.35 In particular, the centrifugal forces that obtain in his 
ether do nothing in his mechanics of contact action. Some disciples strove to 
address that disconnect, as we will see below.
Tis concludes our account of Malebranche’s mature theory of collisions, 
which we can summarize as follows. What is sought, it seems to us, is a 
causal-explanatory account of the collision process that integrates the 
rules of collision into a theory of matter. Te approach that Malebranche 
ofers is constructive: it begins with matter theory, and builds from there. 
Metaphysically, sof bodies are primary: body in itself is infnitely sof, as 
we have seen. Malebranche ofers a matter-theory account of hard and sof 
bodies in terms of the pressure of the subtle matter surrounding them, and 
hard bodies (of which there are no such things, in reality) are the primary 
bodies from which Malebranche develops his account of collisions. He ofers 
a causal-explanatory account of the rule for hard-body collisions (no de￾formation, no rebound) in terms of “quantity of force” and “stronger” and 
“weaker” bodies. And, he accounts for sof-body collisions (irreversible de￾formation and no rebound) as deviations from hard-body collision due to 
some “quantity of force” being used up in the deformation process. He also 
ofers a matter-theoretic account of elastic bodies, this time in terms of pores 
in sof bodies and pressure diferences arising in the subtle matter, along with 
a causal-explanatory account of the rule for elastic-body collisions (revers￾ible deformation and rebound) as deviations from sof-body collision due to 
the pores and pressure diferences.
Tis, then, is the situation as it stood in France around 1700. Philosophers 
inherited from Descartes the project of explaining all natural phenomena 
in terms of matter in motion, with all change occurring via collisions. Tis 
placed collisions at the foundation of natural philosophy. Tey inherited 
from Malebranche a recognition that Descartes’ own rules of collision 
were in need of revision, and requirements on what any such revisions 
should achieve. Specifcally, the revisions should integrate matter theory 
with the new rules of collision, so as to yield a causal-explanatory account 
35 A modern analogue is the contrast between a static central-acceleration feld and a dynamic 
(time-dependent) normal pressure feld.48 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
of the process and outcomes of collisions: there were to be no remaining 
inconsistencies between the account of bodies as posited in the rules of im￾pact, and the underlying matter theory from which those bodies and their 
properties arise. Te stakes were clear: no such causal-explanatory account, 
no foundation for natural philosophy.
In addition to the project just described, French philosophers inherited 
Malebranche’s own attempt to carry out this project, and with it a number of 
loose ends. Tese might have turned out to be insignifcant, tidied up within 
a few years and thereby laying the problem of collisions to rest. Natural phi￾losophy would have been free to go its way without further ado. But this 
was not to be. Te loose ends were anchored in deep problems. And tug￾ging on the threads led to an unraveling of the entire project, with disastrous 
consequences.
2.5 Afer Malebranche: hard bodies in the Paris Academy 
prize competition of 1724 and beyond
An area of great disagreement reaching well beyond Malebranche’s circle 
of disciples was his account of “hard” bodies. In hindsight, there were two 
problems: one regarded their behavior, the other concerned their very 
existence.
Te frst is a conceptual problem that transcends Malebranche’s specifc 
commitments in metaphysics and theology, as we shall see. Trough early 
modernity, the corporeal attribute “hard” was deeply equivocal (as were its 
cognates, “sof” and “elastic”). Recall the taxonomy of body kinds set out 
in Table 2.1. As the table makes vivid, there were two descriptive uses for 
these terms. Each term was used in a geometric regime, to describe the be￾havior of shape in impact; and in a kinematic regime, to denote the bodies’ 
post-collision speed relative to each other. From this vantage point, the three 
attributes above translate thus:36
g-elastic: reversibly deformable: shape returns to its initial confguration
g-sof: fexible, viz. irreversibly deformed; impact literally bends the 
body out of shape
g-hard: rigid, viz. body shape remains self-congruent throughout
36 Evidently, the prefx “g-” stands for “geometric” and “k-” for “kinematic.”Malebranche and natural philosophy 49
k-elastic: the relative exit speed equals their pre-collision mutual speed; 
the outcome is perfect rebound
k-sof: their relative exit speed is zero (i.e., they proceed together)
k-hard: ???
In Table 2.1, representing Malebranche’s taxonomy, k-hard bodies do not 
rebound. But, as we noted above, Malebranche had little justifcation for 
this claim, and it was controversial (not least because, for Descartes, g-hard
bodies do rebound, they are k-elastic). Te frst problem of hard bodies was 
to determine the content of the attribute k-hard; and to do so from premises 
about g-hard bodies. In essence, a theoretical explanation was needed to take 
us from facts about g-hardness (shape behavior) to empirical claims about 
k-hardness (motion behavior). Of course, the argument must be sound; in 
particular, the evidence for it must be as strong as the (specifc author’s) epis￾temology of mechanics allows for the rest of their fundamental principles. 
Malebranche faltered on this count, as we have seen (section 2.4).
Tis perceived failure in Malebranche’s account of collisions is, we 
submit, the main driving force behind the Paris Academy’s 1724 decision to 
admit that hard-body impact was an open problem, and to invite proposed 
solutions to it: “Which are the laws whereby a perfectly hard body in mo￾tion will move another body of the same nature through collision, be it in 
a vacuum or in a plenum?”37 Te prize went to a Newtonian of sorts, Colin 
MacLaurin, who was then in France; Johann Bernoulli’s submission received 
special mention.
In the winning paper, MacLaurin divides his ofcial foundation into two 
parts; one is a set of seven “Axioms and Principles.” Tree of these evoke 
Newton’s laws, though they really difer from them; one is a problematic 
relativity principle for collisions.38 Te other part is three “defnitions” of 
body kinds. Te reader will recognize them as the three species of geometric 
attributes above, viz. g-hard, g-sof, and g-elastic; for example, “we call per￾fectly hard the Bodies whose parts yield not at all in impact,” he explains.39
37 Bernoulli 1727, 8. Scott (1970, 17–8) emphasizes the relationship between hardness and at￾omism and a line of arguments concerning this issue. He claims that the arguments between Leibniz 
and Hartsoecker precipitated the 1724 competition. We locate these discussions within the broader 
context of the nature of bodies and how one body acts on another, rather than in the specifc—though 
important—debate over atomism. 38 “Axiom VII” claims that impact “takes place the same way” in two Galilean frames—which is 
true; and also “whether the Earth turns on its axis or is immobile, as in the Ptolemaic” system—which 
is egregiously false, and shows a defcient grasp of Newton’s theory.
39 MacLaurin 1724, 15.50 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
Tis shows him perfectly aware of what the real problem is: to infer the k￾behavior of g-hard solids. What is his solution? He answers:
As these Bodies have no recoil [ressort], they will not rebound afer the 
collision. Instead, they will keep moving in the same direction at the same 
speed, as if they made up a single mass. (MacLaurin 1724, 16)
In our terms, he claims that g-hards are k-sof, just as Malebranche had 
decreed; that is all he deemed necessary for a justifcation. Tere is a 
way to unfold MacLaurin’s reasoning, but no new insight emerges. Like 
Malebranche, MacLaurin faces a clash between his assertion that there are no 
genuine hard bodies, and his epistemology. MacLaurin was broadly an em￾piricist in regard to foundations, but since hard bodies do not exist, empiri￾cism about their k-behavior is not an option; and yet he thinks that, like ideal 
frictionless fuids, true rigids are a legitimate object for physical theory.40 So 
MacLaurin’s reasoning about them becomes strongly aprioristic, beftting a 
rationalist of sorts. In essence his argument for his predicted exit speeds in 
hard-body impact is:
1. Bodies are either g-hard or g-sof or g-elastic.
2. Only g-elastics rebound (i.e., are k-elastic).
3. Hard bodies are not g-elastic, per defnitionem.
4. g-hards are not k-elastic. So, they must be k-sof. Tertium non datur.
His premise (3) is analytic, entailed by the very way that he defned body￾species above. But (2) requires evidence to be true, and it is a mystery what 
his evidence is. What could count as evidence for the behavior of non￾existent objects? MacLaurin’s solution remained glib, and the difculties of 
rigid impact eluded him.41
In contrast, MacLaurin’s closest competitor, Johann Bernoulli, claimed 
“hard” bodies rebound perfectly; that is, they behave as k-elastic solids. 
To establish his result, however, he took a peculiar route: he replaced the 
Academy’s imposed setup (of two rigids colliding head-on) with one of his 
own: “I will apply artifcial recoils, from outside.” Specifcally, Bernoulli 
proved that, if we place a spring between two arbitrary bodies about to 
40 MacLaurin 1724, 16. 41 For a detailed exposition of Maclaurin’s argument, emphasizing diferent elements than those we 
highlight here, see Scott 1970, 24–9.Malebranche and natural philosophy 51
collide, they will rebound with the same relative speed. Incoherently, he then 
claims the same efect obtains even if “we suppose the spring to be so small 
that the two bodies . . . would count as being in contact.”42 His maneuvering 
displeased the jury, which disqualifed his paper.43 Years afer the fact he 
explained why he replaced their physical setup with his:
I thought I was free to attach to the term “hardness” the idea that seemed 
to me (and it still seems) the most appropriate to the nature of things. . . . In 
doing that, my aim was to reconcile perfect hardness with the Laws of na￾ture. For I had shown, in my paper, that the common opinion—which takes 
perfectly hard bodies to lack all fexibility, even an infnitely small one—
cannot coexist with these very laws of nature. (Bernoulli 1742, 81f.)
In other words, he set out from the thought that certain fundamental 
laws rule out the very obtaining of rigidity in nature. Tis brings us to the 
other problem in Malebranche’s theory of hard-body impact: do any hard 
bodies exist?
We have already seen that Malebranche denied the existence of hard 
bodies. He had admitted it by 1687, when Leibniz pointed out incoherent 
results in the Frenchman’s theory:
Te cause of the Paradoxes ensuing from the rules [of impact] I gave . . . is 
that I had reasoned from a false assumption, which I made willingly. It is 
the premise that, in a vacuum, perfectly hard bodies would exist. But the 
premise conficts with the fact—which I take to have demonstrated—that 
bodies cannot be hard except when compressed by the subtle matter sur￾rounding them. Tey can never be hard in virtue of their parts being at 
[mutual] rest, for rest has no force to resist motion. (Robinet 1955, 264)
Leibniz agreed (though from diferent premises): Malebranche “blames the 
errors” in his collision rules “on the false Hypothesis of there being perfectly 
hard bodies, which I grant do not exist in nature.” And so did Bernoulli: “Tus 
42 Bernoulli 1727, 14, 24, 26. For details of Bernoulli’s argument, and the principles that he 
appealed to in deriving his results, see Scott 1970, 30–9. Particularly important for our purposes is 
the relationship between Bernoulli’s discussion of collisions and his treatment of the compound pen￾dulum (on 35f.), which we discuss in Chapter 8.
43 For a description and critique of Bernoulli’s account of how hard bodies arise, and why they 
rebound perfectly, see Scott 1970, 24. D’Alembert takes up the use of a spring for analyzing elastic 
collisions (see Chapter 9).52 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
we conclude that hardness taken in the vulgar sense [of rigidity] is absolutely 
impossible.” MacLaurin too: “Tere are no perfectly hard Bodies . . . but that 
does not prevent us from considering them in Physics.”44 So: no rigidity in 
nature, just high stifness.
Tis rejection of hard bodies should give us pause for the following 
reason: hard bodies came to play a foundational role in the mechanics of 
constrained systems begun by Clairaut and d’Alembert in the 1740s. Tat 
alone would have been sufcient to keep Malebranche’s theory relevant for 
decades, independently of the issue of hard-body collisions. Indeed, we 
cannot overstate how important the appeal to hard bodies turned out to be 
for 18th century science. In short, the rejection of hard bodies by Leibniz, 
Malebranche, MacLaurin, Johann Bernoulli, and others leaves us in the 
1730s not only with unsolved puzzles in collision theory at the foundations of 
natural philosophy, but also with the seeds of difculties for the foundations 
of mechanics.
2.6 Afer Malebranche: elastic rebound and the Paris 
Academy prize competition of 1726
In 1704, Louis Carré, one-time secretary to Malebranche, read a paper at the 
French Academy “on the laws of motion” seeking to “demonstrate a general 
Rule” for all outcomes of direct impact. Tis paper did little to go beyond 
Malebranche’s own account. Carré’s proof takes the same constructive ap￾proach that his mentor had pursued above, reasoning from matter theory, 
viz. premises about the causal behavior of bodies during impact. One no￾table diference is the absence of any hard-body collisions: only “sof” and 
“rebounding” bodies are considered. To “demonstrate the [general] 
Proposition,” he proposes that colliding bodies “fatten each other a little” 
at the point of contact. Tis mutual compression requires the “stronger” 
body to spend some “force.” Ten “whatever force or motion is lef over” in 
the system distributes itself across the bodies in proportion to their masses. 
Tis yields post-impact velocities. In explaining the causal mechanism be￾hind elastic rebound, Malebranche had given just a qualitative picture with 
no exact details, let alone a quantitative treatment. Carré did no better: he 
44 See, respectively, Leibniz, “Lettre de M. L[eibniz] sur un Principe,” in Robinet 1955, 257; 
Bernoulli 1742, 10; and MacLaurin 1724, 16.Malebranche and natural philosophy 53
restated his mentor’s vague claim that, midway through impact, when mu￾tual compression has ended, the “reaction of subtle matter” (which the im￾pact had ejected from the pores) “restores to their natural state the bodies’ 
parts compressed and fattened, hence it pushes them in the direction con￾trary to that from which they collided.”45
Following Malebranche’s death in 1715, the vagueness in the account of 
elastic collisions was felt as a painful lacuna. Te community of research 
perceived the need for a causal account of the mechanics of elastic impact. 
“We have not yet given an account of the cause of Rebound,” judged in 1721 
the Academy’s then secrétaire perpétuel, Fontenelle. Tat situation motivated 
two papers on the topic by Nicolas Saulmon, who proposed an alternative ex￾planation to that of Malebranche. His speculative explanation has two parts. 
One is a phenomenological picture of a fuid pressing equally on a cylindrical 
fexible pipe (un tuyau mou et sans ressort) as it fows through it. At any loca￾tion, pushing the pipe in allegedly causes the fuid to “act against” the pressing 
agency, by pushing back until the pipe is restored to its initial, undeformed 
confguration.46 Te other part is a picture of axis-symmetric “arcs” that, if 
bent, “make an efort against” the bending cause until they restore them￾selves to the initial shape. Saulmon combines the two parts as follows. He 
posits that atmospheric air is made of “small treelike parts” whose stems and 
twigs “recoil and can bend,” just like his arcs above. And he proposes that 
rebounding solids are all permeated by pipe-like pores flled with “ordinary 
air.” When such bodies collide, their mutual compression eventually bends 
the twig-like tiny arcs of air trapped in their pores; and as they “reprise their 
frst fgure,” the arcs cause the two bodies to press against each other. Elastic 
rebound ensues.47
Notice, however, that this account is circular: Saulmon explains elasticity 
in mesoscopic solids by assuming it to obtain at sub-visible scales, in his arcs 
and “balloons,” or solids of revolution, a fact not lost on some.48 And it was 
not the only account on ofer: Crousaz, an unreconstructed Cartesian from 
Lausanne, had yet another view of the “physical reason” of rebound, which 
45 Carré 1706, 446. 46 Saulmon 1723, 105–7. Tis was Saulmon’s second work on impact; see also Saulmon 1721. 47 See Saulmon 1723, 130–2, and Nakata 1994. 48 Johann Bernoulli caught it: “I wonder if those who posit air to consist in an infnite heap (of 
tiny branched, pliable particles in perpetual agitation . . . tending naturally to resume shape when an 
external cause compresses them) realize that they commit the fallacy of petitio principii” (Bernoulli 
1742, 89).54 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
won him plaudits from a provincial academy.49 It relied on an analogy with 
a phenomenological scenario. Picture a fexible cylindrical pipe with an in￾viscid fuid in laminar fow parallel to the pipe walls. Crousaz assumes: if the 
pipe’s cross section gets smaller, the fuid there presses on it “with a greater 
force of motion . . . on the walls as it moves through,” and if the cross section 
increases, the fuid “force” on the wall (in the section’s plane) decreases.50
Tis loose relation is his key dynamical premise. Te rest of his causal ex￾planation he pictures thus: suppose that cylindrical pores permeate bodies 
throughout, and ether fows through them rapidly. Now imagine bending a 
fat straight blade from both ends, so that, of two opposite sides, one curves 
in concavely and the other becomes convex. Let there be pores crossing the 
blade, with orifces opening on either side mentioned above. Bending it 
causes pore orifces to get smaller on the now-concave side, and to get wider 
on the convex one. Per his assumption above, ether pressure increases on the 
pore walls at the narrow orifce, and decreases at the wide one. Te higher 
pressure “forces” the orifces back to their initial, unbent confguration; and 
the lower pressure favors those walls coming closer together, thus back to 
their unbent confguration. When the entire pore has been restored to a cy￾lindrical shape, the ether pressure inside it equalizes, so the pore—and so 
its walls, which are part of the body itself—remains in equilibrium. Crousaz 
submits that impact always produces a deformation (at the collision point) 
just like the bending of the blade above. Mutatis mutandis then, the same 
mechanism causes elastic impact. In turn, shape restoration causes the two 
bodies to rebound from each other. Tat concludes his explanation of perfect 
elasticity.
We suggest that this situation—the presence by 1725 of at least three ac￾counts, most of them avowedly conjectural—was the impetus behind the 
Paris Academy’s 1726 decision to end the collective uncertainty about the 
“physical reasons” of elastic rebound in collision. Indeed, the topic had ap￾propriate international reach: accounts of elastic collision were on ofer by 
leading natural philosophers outside France, from England to the German￾speaking world to St. Petersburg, and nowhere was a consensus to be found 
(see Chapters 3 and 4 for more details). And so, the advertised topic was to 
49 In “Dissertation sur les causes du ressort,” a paper that won him the prize for 1721 from the 
Bordeaux Academy of Sciences.
50 See Crousaz 1721, 9f. To justify his key assumption, Crousaz fumbles dimly at proto-versions of 
the Continuity Equation and Bernoulli’s Law.Malebranche and natural philosophy 55
give “the laws of impact between bodies with recoil, perfect or imperfect, 
deduced from a probable explanation of the physical cause of recoil.”51
To its call for papers, the Academy received some ten submissions, of 
which two are memorable. One, by Father Mazière, an Oratorian cleric, took 
the frst prize; another, by Johann Bernoulli, was a resubmission from 1724, 
and now it received special mention. Remarkably, both proposed causal 
explanations that are structurally the same, and relied on the same dynam￾ical assumption: “I adopt as my principle the centrifugal force, but taken in 
an intelligible sense.”52 In essence, they speculated that rebounding bodies 
have pores whose cross section (in the equilibrium confguration) is circular. 
Crucially, the pores are closed: they are spherical, and the ethers inside are 
unable to escape; no pore has open orifces that communicate with the out￾side, cosmic ether (as they had for Saulmon and Crousaz). Inside each pore 
a tiny ether vortex is trapped, turning at constant speed. Now all spinning 
matter, even the “subtle” one, exerts a “centrifugal force,” an outward pressure 
normal to the container surface, or body whose pore it is. By compressing 
the body in one direction, the impact makes the pores shrink, and thereby 
the vortices’ radii get shorter, and that—both authors assert, separately—
entails that the trapped ether’s “centrifugal force” increases. Ergo, the ether 
pressure on the walls goes up, causing the pores—and thus the body itself—
to revert to its pre-collision shape. Te rest is familiar: shape restoration 
makes the bodies (now mid-stage through the collision) press on each other, 
which drives them to rebound. Quod erat ostendendum.
53 Later, Bernoulli 
explained to the reader the progress his paper meant to have made over his 
predecessors, Malebranche included:
Generally speaking, these Gentlemen are right to admit a subtle matter 
that, through its motion, is the ultimate cause of bodies’ rebound. But, it is 
not enough to just suppose a perpetually-agitated fuid; we must in addi￾tion explain the circumstances of that fuid, and exhibit the nature of an ag￾itation capable of producing the rebound, for not all motion is appropriate 
to that end. (Bernoulli 1727, 84)
51 Mazière 1727, 1–2. 52 Bernoulli 1727, 89; his emphasis. 53 See the details in Mazière 1727 and Bernoulli 1727, 90–9. Other contributions to these French 
debates on collision are also discussed in Schmit 2015.56 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
Tat he had achieved such an explanation was a prematurely optimistic 
assessment.
Te accounts of elastic rebound published before 1726 saw themselves as 
speculative and conjectural. Teir dominant mood is the subjunctive, and 
markers of epistemic hesitancy pervade them: “could be regarded as,” “could 
be the cause,” “we may conceive it to be,” “the hypothesis I am about to pro￾pose,” “I posit that,” “the conjecture I have just alleged.” Bernoulli thought his 
account fared much better than the speculative “physical reasons” on ofer 
before his 1726 Discours. And yet, his own paper rests on three premises la￾beled “Hypotheses.”54 Why did he think it evidentially superior?
Bernoulli seems to have defended his model of elastic recoil by an 
apagogic argument in which the options are: any account based on an action￾at-a-distance repulsive force (di
); a contact action account along the lines of 
Crousaz and Saulmon (ci
); or Bernoulli’s own contact action model (cB). His 
argument then has this structure:
1. Either di
 or ci
 or cB
.
2. Not di
.
3. Not ci
.
4. Terefore, cB
.
First, Bernoulli refutes approaches along the lines of Crousaz and Saulmon 
(ci
) by showing that they violate accepted principles of hydrostatics.55 Ten, 
he rejects all species of di
 accounts as false in principle because they rest on 
action-at-a-distance, allegedly an unintelligible, insightless notion:
I doubt that those who, in elastic bodies, admit some elementary corpuscles 
endowed by nature with an expansive virtue—without explaining whence 
this property—deserve to be refuted. Tese Philosophers clearly assume 
the very thing at issue. And if this virtue (which they think innate and 
primitive) is independent of the arrangement of particles composing the 
elastic body, then it is just as easy to attribute it, in one stroke, to the largest 
body as easily as to their corpuscles. Everyone sees, I trust, how that would 
be to give renewed shelter to ignorance and new life to the occult qualities 
that we decry with so much reason. (Bernoulli 1727, 84)
54 One is the Law of Inertia, another is Galilean relativity for collisions, and the last is a version of 
Newton’s Tird Law.
55 Bernoulli 1727, 85–9.Malebranche and natural philosophy 57
Bernoulli thus seems to think that his recoil model was the only one lef 
standing, consilient with his commitments in mechanics and ontology. Still, 
he was quite mistaken. His model requires two physical impossibilities in 
order to avoid self-contradiction. For one, Bernoulli claims that, as the in￾itially spherical pore gets shrunk in impact, the speed of ether-bits in the 
outer layers remains constant through shrinking: this violates the conserva￾tion of angular momentum. For another, he claims that spheres get shrunk 
into spheres (pores, that is), which requires a radially symmetric inbound 
pressure. But collision results in a “sideways,” asymmetric pressure wave—
from the struck side, horizontally across the body—which turns a spherical 
pore into an ellipsoid, and thereby the centrifugal force of the outer layers 
gets smaller, not greater, as Bernoulli needs and claims.
Te problem of elastic collisions remained unsolved, then, notwith￾standing the 1726 prize competition.
2.7 Open questions, hidden problems
We have seen that Leibniz’s challenges forced Malebranche to revisit his 
account of impact. Tis raised the visibility of the problem of collisions 
in France, and led to the Paris Academy prize competitions discussed 
above. Nevertheless, notwithstanding our discussion, the extent to which 
Malebranche’s revisions, or those of his followers, successfully engaged with 
and addressed the challenges posed by Leibniz remains something of an 
open question requiring further work.
Moreover, in addition to the problems and loose ends that Malebranche 
and his immediate successors explicitly recognized and addressed, there were 
other problems in the foundations of his theory of collisions that remained 
unrecognized, but which pose a signifcant threat. Two are the most serious. 
Te frst is Malebranche’s appeal to mass, despite not being entitled to any 
such concept. Te second is Malebranche’s dependence on “true speed,” and 
the resulting confict between his qualitative account of the collision process 
and (what the 20th century would come to call) the Galilean relativity al￾ready present in the quantitative treatment of collisions. Both “elusive mass” 
and “Galilean relativity” persist as difculties for natural philosophy well be￾yond Malebranche’s own theorizing, and they resurface in later chapters of 
this book.58 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
(i) Elusive mass
Malebranche’s account of collisions appeals to the mass of a body (section 
2.4). Te quantity of motion is the product of a body’s speed and its mass. 
Likewise, this product expresses the quantity of moving force actually ap￾plied so as to produce the motion, because efects are in proportion to the 
forces that produce them.56 And yet, he has no defnition of mass itself; not 
even a nominal one, let alone a real defnition. On this count no charitable 
interpretation can save him. To see this, consider three promising ways to 
credit him with a mass concept (call it Malebranchean mass, or M-mass) and 
how none really succeeds.
An operational defnition, (i): let M-mass denote the other factor that 
makes a diference to collision outcomes (next to speed, his preferred quan￾tity). Specifcally, let a test body S, moving at some constant speed s, collide 
consecutively with some set of bodies M, N, P, Q, etc. initially at rest in each 
case. And, let ΔqM, ΔqN, etc. denote the Malebranchean “quantity of mo￾tion” that each body acquires afer collision. Ten we may defne M-mass 
as follows: it is the quantity µk
 such that, for any k, µk
 equals Δqk
/ΔqB
, and k
ranges over bodies. Regrettably, this proposal is not feasible. Like most in 
his time, Malebranche restricts the scope of his collision theory—and so 
the range of empirical applicability—to direct impact, viz. that in which the 
bodies’ contact point lies on the line between their M-mass centers. Absent 
that initial condition, his theory is silent—its empirical consequences are not 
well defned. Now the fatal problem is in plain view: to set up Malebranchean 
test collisions (needed to defne M-mass operationally) we must already 
have a contentful, empirically applicable concept of M-mass, so as to locate 
the bodies’ M-mass centers and ensure the collisions are treatable from his 
theory. Tis proposal is logically defective, then.
Another route is (ii) to let his M-mass be the quantity that tracks body size 
by co-varying: it increases and decreases in proportion as size does. To make 
this work, however, Malebranche would need two ingredients. First, a dis￾tinction between true- and merely apparent size; plus the claim that M-mass 
correlates with true size, not with apparent volume. Without the distinction, 
the proposed solution is trivial to defeat. Second, he would need an argu￾ment that, at true sizes, all matter has the same density (i.e., that two equal 
true volumes of matter contain the same amount of M-mass). He needs this 
56 OM xvii.1, 59.Malebranche and natural philosophy 59
clause sine qua non, or else the proposal is doomed, because true size does 
not track the right notion of M-mass unless we guarantee that its density is 
everywhere the same. But, it is far from clear how to extract the two premises 
above from Malebranche’s system.
Lastly, he could have chosen (iii) Descartes’ proto-concept of mass qua 
measure of corporeal rest’s power to resist motion and of motion to resist 
rest. Supposing Cartesian momentum to be conserved—as his Rule IV 
indicates—this notion is close enough to Newton’s understanding of inertia, 
which mass measures. Frustratingly, Malebranche foreclosed this option for 
himself early and without a second thought. As we have seen, his frst and 
most visible departure from Descartes was to give up on his predecessor’s 
“force to remain at rest,” and he never looked back. In Search F, he sounds 
as resolute as ever on this count: “rest has no force to resist motion, for it is 
just pure privation.”57 He thus unwittingly forbade himself his best chance 
to let into his system the dynamical quantity needed for any sound theory of 
collision.
Newton’s introduction of inertial mass into his theorizing was hard won 
and highly fruitful. Any successful theory of collisions will have to contend 
with the problems that led to its introduction, and either adopt Newtonian 
mass or ofer an alternative that solves these difculties (or at least those that 
are relevant to collisions). But Newtonian inertial mass is problematic from 
a Cartesian perspective, so there is work to be done either way. No one in 
France of the 1720s had seen the problem, let alone taken it on.
(ii) Galilean relativity
Malebranche’s explanation of impact sufers from a weakness that subverts it 
from two sides. Seen from outside, the problem is that his account privileges 
individual speeds: it is a body’s “true” speed, as it were, that determines 
whether that body is the stronger or weaker, in impact; whether it acts or 
resists; and how much force, if any, it has available as it sets out to collide with 
the other. Te appeal to “true” speed immediately entangles Malebranche in 
the debates over absolute and relative motion that came to the fore in the 
Leibniz–Clarke Correspondence and persisted throughout the 18th century 
and beyond. Tere is ample literature on this, and we will not foreground it in 
57 OM xvii.1, 75.60 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
this book, with the exception of one element. Impact is Galilean-relative: no 
fact about the observable mechanical behavior of colliding bodies can dis￾tinguish between true and merely apparent quantity of speed (relative to the 
observer’s frame) or between true net speed and true rest. Tus, whenever 
two bodies C and D collide, no observer is able to determine non-arbitrarily 
if C or D was the “stronger,” agent body. Tis fact causes a problem of evi￾dence for Malebranche’s theory—and for any account of impact that appeals 
to “true” speed in its explanations of collision outcomes.
Te same problem arises from within Malebranche’s theory. As he admits, 
the sole kinematic factor that determines the outcome (ceteris paribus) is the 
bodies’ speed relative to each other. It alone (next to their mass ratio) makes 
a diference to the “quantity of impact” exerted by the acting “stronger” onto 
the acted-on “weaker.” And yet, two bodies C and D could have the same rel￾ative speed—ergo, their collision will amount to the same interaction—no 
matter whether C happens to be “stronger” and D “weaker” or vice versa or 
both are equally “strong.” Ten Malebranche’s causal terms above, and the 
diferent-in-kind agencies they convey, are explanatorily inert. Te real pre￾dictive work is done by the two-body relation “relative speed.” Not by single￾body speeds; hence, not by one body being “stronger” either.
Malebranche does not seem aware of this serious problem, but he had 
ample chances to see it.58 Inexplicably, these worries lef him unfazed. Nor 
was it just his problem then; many natural philosophers embraced some var￾iant of explaining collision as a contest between unequal agents exerting dis￾tinct species of powers. Behind their confdent expounding—about agents 
overcoming patients—lies the same inability to connect univocally their 
metaphysics of asymmetric powers with the rules of collision. Because they 
think of these powers as velocity functions, the Galilean relativity of collision 
underdetermines their causal account. If there is to be evidence for one body 
being “stronger” or “weaker” than another, its source will not be the rules of 
collision or any of the empirical support those enjoy.
58 A version of the Law of Continuity (as Leibniz had urged on him) states that rest and motion 
are “continuous” states. Leibniz explained it as follows. Suppose one and the same body K to be in 
two successive collisions, at rest in the frst and in motion in the second, but in both cases at the same
speed relative to the other mass. Te Law of Continuity requires that K’s speeds post-impact (again rel￾ative to the other mass) cannot difer by a fnite amount. Leibniz saw, correctly, that Descartes’ orig￾inal collision rules, in Principles of Philosophy, violate this demand, and that Malebranche’s picture of 
hard-body impact does too.Malebranche and natural philosophy 61
In sum, these two problems—of elusive mass and Galilean relativity—
together subvert Malebranche’s best eforts to have his metaphysics of 
body reach explanatorily into the natural world. To be precise, his chosen 
explanatory-evidential bridge is collision theory, in which he singles out two 
quantities as privileged: mass and true speed. And yet, his system lacks the 
concept of mass needed for a successful theory of impact, and true speed is 
inert with respect to his rules of collision.
2.8 Conclusions
Te problem of collisions, as bequeathed to 18th century French philosophers 
by Malebranche, was this: to provide a causal-explanatory account of 
collisions within a single theory that unifes the matter-theoretic account 
of body with rules of impact. Between 1700, when Malebranche published 
his mature collision theory, and the 1730s, this problem resisted solution. 
Te situation was so troubling to those involved that the Paris Academy held 
two prize competitions on the topic in the 1720s. Tese failed to yield a so￾lution. Malebranche’s taxonomy of bodies divided the kinds of bodies into 
three (hard, sof, and elastic) using geometric considerations (the behavior 
of the body’s shape during collision), while his kinematic considerations (the 
speeds of bodies afer collision) divided them into only two (rebounding 
or not rebounding). Hard bodies were problematic—Malebranche was not 
alone in denying their existence—and this problematic status threatened 
to infect the rules of collision for all three kinds of body, as well as the 
foundations of the mechanics of constrained systems. Moreover, an account 
of the process by which an elastic body rebounds eluded the best minds of 
the time. Tese are the most obvious problems, but there were others. Two 
are especially difcult, and they escaped most philosophers of the time, dis￾ciples and opponents of Malebranche alike. Tese are the need for a mass 
concept, and the Galilean relativity of collisions.
In Chapter 1 we highlighted the foundational role of collisions in Cartesian 
natural philosophy. In this chapter, we have argued that the problems facing 
philosophers in early 18th century France, as they attempted to develop a sat￾isfactory theory of collisions, ran deep, and that by the 1730s no such account 
had yet emerged. In the next chapter, we argue that difculties with hand￾ling collisions were not confned to French natural philosophers of a broadly 62 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
Cartesian bent. Rather, they were endemic in natural philosophy throughout 
Europe and the British Isles. As a result, the failure to solve the problem of 
collisions is a powerful lens through which to view developments in natural 
philosophy and in the relationships between matter theory, mechanics, met￾aphysics, and physics throughout the period.Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason. Katherine Brading and Marius Stan, Oxford University Press. 
© Oxford University Press 2023. DOI: 10.1093/oso/9780197678954.003.0003
3
Beyond Newton and Leibniz: Bodies 
in collision
3.1 Introduction
In Chapter 2 we saw that providing a causal-explanatory account of 
collisions was a foundational problem for French Cartesians. Here, we in￾vestigate the place of collisions in early 18th century natural philosophy 
more generally. Tis enables us to demonstrate three things. First, collisions 
were seen to be an important problem across Europe and the British Isles 
at this time, not just by “Cartesian” philosophers but also by “Leibnizians” 
and “Newtonians.”1 Second, there is a common approach to the treatment 
of collisions throughout natural philosophy that requires integrating rules 
of impact with an account of the material constitution of bodies. We call this 
a “philosophical mechanics of collisions.” Tird, as of the 1730s, a successful 
philosophical mechanics of collisions had yet to be provided—all the ac￾counts on ofer had serious shortcomings. Te signifcance of this last con￾clusion will be made clear in the chapters that follow.
Te early 18th century inherited not only Cartesian natural philosophy 
(developed most notably for our purposes by Huygens and Malebranche) 
but also the alternatives ofered by its most infuential critics: Newton and 
Leibniz. Te turn of the century is spanned by the frst and second editions 
of Newton’s Principia (1687 and 1713, respectively) and by multiple works 
of Leibniz, from A Brief Demonstration (1686) to Te Leibniz–Clarke 
Correspondence of 1715–6 (brought to a close by Leibniz’s death). We show 
that collisions played a central role in natural philosophy for Cartesians, 
Newtonians, and Leibnizians alike.
1 As we note below, there is no straightforward division of philosophers of the period into 
“Cartesians,” “Newtonians,” and “Leibnizians” in terms of their philosophical commitments. 
Nevertheless, here (as in Chapter 2) we divide the fgures we treat into these broad camps, for the spe￾cifc purposes of the issues we are considering. We do so by following the fgures themselves, either 
via their own self-labeling or via specifcally identifable doctrines that they endorsed, and we note 
the origin of our choice of label explicitly in each case.64 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
In one sense, this is not surprising: there is no neat division of philosophers 
from this period into “Cartesians,” “Newtonians,” and “Leibnizians”; dif￾ferent fgures incorporate, reject, and transform diferent elements of each, 
making new additions of their own as well. Nevertheless, it is striking the ex￾tent to which the treatment of collisions is the same throughout Europe and 
the British Isles, from the framing of the problem, to the particulars of the 
accounts, to the conception of what would count as a satisfactory resolution. 
We demonstrate these deep similarities, and argue that there is a common 
project: a philosophical mechanics of collisions.
We begin with John Keill as our starting point for a broadly Newtonian ap￾proach to collisions (section 3.2). We show the similarities to and diferences 
from Malebranche, and argue that he (and self-professed Newtonians more 
generally) faced a number of difculties in attempting to provide an account 
of collisions. We then turn our attention to Leibniz (section 3.3). We have 
already seen in Chapter 2 that Leibniz criticized Malebranche’s Cartesian 
account. In this chapter, we outline the resources Leibniz himself sought 
to use in theorizing the motions of bodies. We then use Te Leibniz–Clarke 
Correspondence to demonstrate the importance of collisions for both Leibniz 
and Samuel Clarke, through the role that the theory of bodily impact plays 
in their wide-ranging disagreements. Finally, we turn to Jakob Hermann’s 
Phoronomia of 1716 and Christian Wolf ’s 1720s discussions to examine 
two explicit accounts of collision within the Leibnizian framework (section 
3.4). We show the similarities to and diferences from Malebranche and the 
problems that Hermann’s and Wolf ’s Leibnizian accounts face. We end by 
concluding that, despite these widespread and concerted eforts, as of the late 
1730s no successful philosophical mechanics of collisions had been devel￾oped. Te problem of collisions (or “PCOL” as we shall call it at the end, see 
section 3.5) turns out to be deep and lasting, with widespread ramifcations 
for philosophy.
3.2 Newtonian collisions
Like the French Cartesians, the English, Scottish, and Dutch Newtonians 
sought a causal account of impact that provided an explanatory basis for 
the rules of collision; also like the Cartesians, they found themselves in 
difculties. To show this, we begin with John Keill’s treatment of collisions in 
his 1700 Oxford lectures, published as An Introduction to Natural PhilosophyBeyond Newton and Leibniz 65
in 1702 (in Latin). Keill’s Oxford lectures were highly successful, going 
through three further editions as well as an English translation. Remembered 
today for his polemical pro-Newton intervention over the invention of the 
calculus, Keill was a strong and leading voice in early 18th century English 
natural philosophy, and his lectures can be taken as representative of the 
forefront of natural philosophy in England at the time.
As we will see, Keill’s account of collisions looks remarkably familiar to 
anyone who has read the discussions surrounding Malebranche’s attempts 
to revise Descartes’ rules of collision (see Chapter 2). We demonstrate 
the similarities, and thereby establish the problematic shared amongst 
Cartesians and Newtonians. We also argue that, despite these commonalities, 
diferences in epistemology lead to some distinct problems.
(i) Keill on collisions
Keill classifes bodies into three kinds according to how the shape of the body 
changes during the process of collision:
VII. I call that a perfectly hard Body, which does not yield in the least to a 
Stroke; that is, which does not lose its Figure for a moment.
VIII. Tat is a sof Body, which so yields to a Stroke as to lose its frst Figure, 
and never to endeavour to recover it again.
IX. Tat is an elastick Body, which yields indeed for a little while to a Stroke, 
yet of its own accord does recover its frst Figure. (Keill 1726, 163)
Moreover:
X. An elastick Force is that Force, whereby a Body obliged to quit its Figure, 
recovers it again. (Keill 1726, 163)
And:
XI. A perfectly elastick Body is such a one, as recovers its frst Figure with 
the same Forces whereby it was obliged to quit it. (Keill 1726, 163)
Just as with Malebranche, this is a geometric classifcation of bodies into 
hard, sof, and elastic (see Chapter 2).66 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
With this geometric taxonomy in place, Keill turns next to developing 
rules of collision. He ofers only two sets of rules, the frst covering both 
sof and hard bodies and the second covering elastic bodies. For the former, 
Keill asserts that afer impact the bodies will move together with the same 
speed. Considering frst the case where the impacted body B is either at rest 
or moving with less speed than body A (in either direction), his argument is 
as follows:
it cannot move slower, by reason the Body A follows immediately behind 
it; and it cannot move faster, because by Hypothesis there is given no other 
impelling Cause of its Motion besides Body A; since we suppose all others, 
as an elastick Force, and an ambient Fluid, to here have no Infuence. (Keill 
1726, 173)
In other words, in the absence of either an internal (elastic force) or external 
(ambient fuid) cause for Body B to move faster than Body A, impenetrability 
is the only quality in play, and Body B will simply move at the same speed as 
Body A. Notice that Keill appeals to a causal account of the collision process 
to argue for a particular outcome: the bodies will move together. Te upshot 
is a kinematic classifcation, in which both hard and sof bodies fall into the 
same group: non-rebounding.
Tis is not yet sufcient to determine at what speed the two bodies will 
move following collision, and the remainder of Keill’s chapter is taken up 
with addressing this issue. However, at this point Keill switches tack, and 
turns to the laws or rules as the primary resource for developing an adequate 
theory of collisions. He makes no further appeal to arguments concerning the 
causal processes involved in shape deformation or rebound, and instead uses 
Newton’s laws of motion to determine the quantitative outcome of collisions, 
via the notions of relative velocity and center of gravity.
In Lecture XIV, Keill turns his attention to elastic collisions. He says that 
were there no such thing as elasticity, then all bodies would obey the rules 
given in the previous chapter, but “since there are indeed very few Bodies, 
wherein there is not some degree of elasticity,” bodies do not move together 
but “fy from one another.” He feels he needs to ofer some kind of causal 
explanation for how this comes about. However, unlike Malebranche, Keill 
proceeds not by a reductive account of elasticity in terms of an underlying 
matter theory, but instead by beginning from a simple case of elastic behavior 
(see below), and building from there to an account of the elastic rebound of Beyond Newton and Leibniz 67
bodies. For Keill, observation of rebound compels us to introduce elasticity 
as a quality of bodies, and the task is to explain this corporeal behavior ac￾cordingly. He does so as follows.
His starting point is the behavior of a string fxed at two ends, stretched 
out to one side, and then released. He takes the shape changes that the string 
undergoes as an empirical given. Next, he considers a case where the initial 
stretching of the string out to one side is caused by an impinging body. Due 
to the behavior of the string previously described, this body is repelled back 
in the other direction, Keill claims. Notice that in this step, Keill transitions 
from geometric considerations (the change in shape of the string) to kin￾ematic considerations (the motion of the body following impact with the 
string), and his claim is that the body is repelled away from the string. Te 
connection between the two behaviors—the geometric shape change of the 
string and the kinematic rebound—is stipulated to occur as a consequence 
of the string being “elastic.”2 With this account of refection in place, Keill 
replaces the string with an elastic body supposed fxed at the ends (just as was 
our elastic string), and then fnally he allows that the elastic body is not fxed, 
so that it too is free to move, and thus the bodies rebound from one another. 
He concludes:
And so we have demonstrated afer what manner it happens, that 
Bodies afer Impulse do not either rest, or move conjointly together, but 
rebounding from one another, they move with diferent Velocities, some￾times towards the contrary Parts, and sometimes towards the same. (Keill 
1726, 184–5)
And yet, as with Malebranche and his followers, the association of the ge￾ometric conception of elasticity with the kinematic remains stipulative—
just a posit.3 In the course of discussing elastic bodies, Keill criticized the 
Cartesians, who he says were “ignorant of the Force of Elasticity to refect 
Bodies.”4 As Keill knew, Descartes had argued that perfectly hard bodies 
would rebound by saying that there is no cause present by which they could 
lose their speed, and impenetrability prevents them from continuing in the 
2 Tat is, the g-elastic behavior is stipulated to yield a k-elastic outcome, without further justifca￾tion. See Chapter 2, Table 2.1.
3 With his account of the elasticity of bodies in place, Keill turns his attention to the rules of elastic 
collision (1726, 188–95). 4 Keill 1726, 185.68 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
same direction, so they must rebound.5 Keill rejected this association of hard 
bodies with rebound, criticizing the Cartesian rules of collision for hard 
bodies, and more specifcally conservation of motion. He pointed out that 
non-elastic collisions are problematic in relation to the claim that quantity of 
motion in the universe is conserved, writing:
Hence the Law of the Cartesians is demonstrated to be false, whereby they 
contend that there is always preserved the same Quantity of Motion in the 
Universe: for Bodies which are not elastick, meeting each other from con￾trary Parts with the same Motions, mutually destroy each other’s Motions. 
(Keill 1726, 176; theorem XXIV, corollary 2)
Te issue of whether or not the total quantity of motion in the universe is 
conserved, and of how to defne the quantities of motion and force associated 
with a body, became a central topic of dispute: originating with Leibniz’s Brief 
Demonstration (directed at Malebranche’s collision theory, see Chapter 2), 
this dispute is known today as the vis viva controversy (about which more in 
section 3.3).
Where does this leave us? Keill was a staunch, self-identifed Newtonian. 
We see in his work the same taxonomy of body as we found in Malebranche 
(Chapter 2, Table 2.1): bodies are labeled as either hard, sof, or elastic. And 
he classifed them as such based on the geometric criterion of their shape 
behavior during collision: no deformation, irreversible deformation, and 
reversible deformation. Tis is placed alongside a second, kinematic classi￾fcation into just two kinds: non-rebounding (encompassing both hard and 
sof bodies) and rebounding (elastic bodies). Keill sought to use the frst clas￾sifcation to give a causal account of how the second classifcation arises. He 
then moved on to state the quantitative rules of collision, and these are not 
derivable from the qualitative causal account of the collision process previ￾ously given. We see in Keill an example of the constructive approach (see 
Chapter 1), in which the properties of bodies relevant to the collision process 
are identifed independently of, and prior to, specifcation of the rules of col￾lision. Tese properties of bodies are used to give a causal explanation of the 
collision process, including the outcomes of collisions among diferent kinds 
5 Descartes 1991, II.46. Tis reasoning is repeated in Rohault’s System of Natural Philosophy
(1723) in his chapter on collisions (chapter XV, §2). Tis is the English translation of Rohault (1671), 
made by Samuel Clarke, and to which Clarke added extensive notes. Keill makes no mention of the 
Malebranchean approach in his discussion of elasticity.Beyond Newton and Leibniz 69
of bodies, and the rules of collision are then introduced to complete the ac￾count of collisions.
However, Keill is lef in the same uncomfortable position as Malebranche. 
He has a three-way geometric taxonomy of hard, sof, and elastic bodies, 
based on how their shape changes during impact, and using this classifca￾tion he sought to give a causal account of the post-collision behavior. Yet this 
post-collision behavior comprises a two-way kinematic taxonomy of bodies 
based on whether they rebound or not, and the relationship of bodies in one 
taxonomy to those in the other is set by stipulation: elastic bodies just are
those that undergo reversible shape deformation, but why this should result 
in rebound is lef unexplained. Te kinematic dual taxonomy is refected in 
the dual collision rules for rebounding and non-rebounding bodies, respec￾tively, but the relation between the qualitative kinematic taxonomy and the 
quantitative dynamical rules remains stipulative: Keill says that the former 
grounds the latter, but he is unable to derive the quantitative outcomes from 
the resources of either the geometric or the kinematic taxonomies of bodies. 
In all these respects, the approach to collisions ofered by Keill is the same as 
that of Malebranche.6
Nevertheless, there is an important diference between Keill’s and 
Malebranche’s approaches. Despite ofering the same three-way taxonomy of 
kinds of material body, Keill—unlike Malebranche—did not seek to explain 
the diferences between sof, hard, and elastic bodies by appeal to a common 
underlying theory of matter: he said nothing about what makes a sof or 
hard body sof or hard, respectively, and his account of elastic rebound is 
non-reductive, relying on a simpler case of an elastic body: an elastic string, 
endowed with an elastic force. Instead, he presupposes these properties of 
material bodies, and starts from there. Tis is a weak version of the con￾structive approach, in contrast to Malebranche’s strong one (see Chapter 1).7
Moreover, Keill’s “quantity of matter” is Newtonian mass,8 and his impact 
theory is built on relative velocities, so unlike the Malebrancheans he avoids 
6 Tis situation, found not just in Keill but also in other self-professed “Newtonians” (see below, 
and see the discussion of MacLaurin in Chapter 2), is all the more surprising in light of Newton’s 
own treatment of collisions. For Newton there is only one kind of body, and only one rule for 
collisions: hardness, sofness, and elasticity are treated simply in terms of rebound character￾istics by means of what today we term the “coefcient of restitution.” See also the discussion of 
Pemberton, below.
7 Te diference in whether or not to accept elasticity as primitive refects diferences in method￾ology and epistemology between Keill and Malebranche; this is an important issue, much broader 
than our current concerns, and for now we keep our focus on the topic of collisions.
8 For that fact, see especially Keill 1726, 114.70 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
the issues of “elusive mass” and “Galilean relativity” highlighted at the end of 
Chapter 2.
We saw in Chapter 2 that Malebranche and his disciples faced serious 
problems arising from the epistemic status of hard bodies. Te Newtonians 
encountered analogous problems, as we will now see. In setting out his rules, 
Keill himself provided no evidence for there being any non-elastic bodies, 
whether hard or sof, either by appeal to principles (such as those invoked by 
the Cartesians, see Chapter 2) or by appeal to empirical evidence. In order to 
pursue the epistemic status of the kinds of material body further, we need to 
turn our attention to other “Newtonians” of the period.
(ii) Epistemic access to hard bodies
Te Dutch philosopher ’s Gravesande discusses collisions in his Mathematical 
elements of physics prov’d by experiments: being an introduction to Sir Isaac 
Newton’s philosophy (1720).9 Here, he divides bodies according to the familiar 
three-way taxonomy of sof, hard, and elastic. Following this, he ofers exper￾imental evidence for two kinds of collision process, inelastic and elastic, in 
line with two sets of collision rules. He writes that for making experiments 
on “Bodies which are not elastick, we use Globes or Balls of sof Clay,” and 
that “Experiments concerning elastick Bodies, are made with Ivory Globes 
or Balls.”10 Te former are clearly sof bodies, the latter he labels as elastic, 
and there is no example of hard bodies given. Tis highlights the problem 
facing empirically inclined philosophers wishing to include hard bodies in 
their taxonomy of material kinds of body: what empirical access do we have 
to them?
’s Gravesande’s compatriot Musschenbroek, in his Elements of Natural 
Philosophy,
11 is explicit about the empirical status of hard bodies and the ep￾istemic consequences of this. In his chapter on collisions (chapter XVI) he 
divides bodies into the usual three cases (sof, hard, and elastic) and then says:
9 ’s Gravesande was professor of mathematics and astronomy in Leiden and a Fellow of the Royal 
Society of London. His experimental approach to “Newtonian philosophy” was highly infuential in 
Europe.
10 ’s Gravesande 1720, 97 and 98. 11 Published in 1726, translated into English in 1744. Pieter van Musschenbroek was a leading 
Dutch natural philosopher and professor of mathematics, philosophy, medicine, and astronomy. He 
was a fellow of the Royal Society of London, and his work helped to spread “Newtonian” ideas in 
Europe. For ’s Gravesande’s broader foundations of mechanics, see Ducheyne & van Besouw 2022; 
and for Musschenbroek, see Ducheyne & Present 2020.Beyond Newton and Leibniz 71
Because there are no perfectly hard bodies, which are large enough for 
making experiments upon, (for these bodies perfectly hard are merely ele￾mentary, and by their subtilty do not fall under the cognizance of our senses) 
I shall examine the percussion of sof and elastick bodies. (Musschenbroek 
1744, 176)
Perfectly hard bodies are unobservable, and so we cannot do experiments on 
them; therefore, we cannot fnd out by these means what the rules of collision 
are for them, and consequently Musschenbroek does not ofer any rules for 
hard-body impact. Te epistemic challenge is that the “elementary” or “ulti￾mate” particles of matter are assumed to be hard, and Musschenbroek’s po￾sition means that, despite their assumed existence, their rules of motion are 
epistemically inaccessible.12
Musschenbroek and the weak constructive approach
Musschenbroek’s three-way taxonomy of bodies into hard, sof, and elastic is 
an example of the weak constructive approach.13 Unlike the strong version 
of Malebranche, Musschenbroek does not construct his account of bodies 
and their properties from an underlying theory of matter. Rather, he begins 
with bodies, and his taxonomy is made in terms of a rich set of primitive 
qualities of bodies: hardness, sofness, fragility, fexibility, and elasticity.14
A perfectly hard body is one whose fgure is immutable under all and any 
conditions. A sof body is one whose parts may be separated by a small force. 
While the world contains many large, sof bodies, there are no perfectly sof 
bodies: where there is a body, there is a force of cohesion uniting its parts 
into a body. A fexible body, Musschenbroek says, is one whose fgure may 
be changed “without dissolving the union and coherence of the parts,” and 
12 Musschenbroek 1744, 171; see also his chapter XV, §420. Te status of the mentioned elementary 
hard bodies is also uncertain, as Musschenbroek discussed earlier in his text, in chapter II. Tere, he 
ofered empirical evidence concerning the divisibility of bodies, noting that “divisibility is not yet 
received as an attribute of body, since it cannot be demonstrated [by experiment], that the smallest 
sensible particles can be further divided by any natural force,” and suggested that there may be atoms 
or “elements” that are indivisible, without pores, and perfectly solid, hard, frm, etc. However, he 
maintained that the case for or against atoms was not yet decisively empirically determined.
13 In Chapter 1, we distinguished between the constructive and principle approaches to collisions, 
and between weaker and stronger versions of the former. Stronger versions appeal to an underlying 
matter theory in constructing their account of bodies, whereas weaker versions begin directly with 
bodies and their physical qualities.
14 His account of primitive qualities is in chapter XV, and in XVI he gives his taxonomy of bodies.72 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
when a fexible body restores its own fgure by its own force, it is said to be 
elastic. Tus, perfect elasticity is “when the force of the compressed or dis￾tended body, by which it restores itself, is equal to the force by which its fgure 
was changed, so that the body returns exactly to the same fgure it had before 
the change.”15
According to Musschenbroek, the shape of a sof body changes during 
collisions, with its parts being squeezed inward. In this process, the force by 
which the parts of the sof body cohere must be overcome by the force of the 
striking body, this latter consequently being used up in changing the fgure 
of the sof body. Tis is what accounts for the changes in speeds of the bodies 
as a result of the collision. However, this constructive approach yields only a 
geometric account of the shape behavior of sof bodies, along with a qualita￾tive story about its dynamical underpinnings. Just as for the Malebrancheans, 
the challenge is to connect the geometric collision behavior with the kine￾matics: what will the motions of the bodies be afer impact?
Te assumption Musschenbroek makes is that the absence of elasticity as￾sociated with lack of shape recovery is the same as that associated with failure 
to rebound. With this assumption in place, two conclusions follow. First, sof 
bodies can be assumed to undergo no rebound and therefore move together 
afer collision. Second, the force associated with the shape change can be 
equated to that associated with changes in motion, so that from the post￾collision speed we will be able to determine how much force was used up in 
changing the shape of the bodies, given that the initial relative velocity (and 
mass ratio, though it seems Musschenbroek deals only with “equal” bodies) 
is known. Alternatively, if we know how much force is lost in a particular col￾lision process, we will be able to calculate the post-collision speeds, provided 
we add a second condition. For Musschenbroek, this latter is a relationship 
between the force of a moving body and its speed: the force is related to the 
square of the speed.16
In the case of two elastic bodies striking one another, the parallel assump￾tion needs to be made: geometric elasticity (shape recovery) is equated to 
15 Musschenbroek 1744, 172–3. 16 See Musschenbroek 1744, chapter VI, “Of the Force of Bodies in Motion,” §190: “Te forces in a 
moved body are in a duplicate ratio of the velocity with which it moves.” He uses this in his example 
in chapter XVI, §440: body A strikes body B with 10 degrees of velocity and with a force of 100. 
Afer collision, A and B move together with a velocity of 5. Terefore, the force for each mass afer 
collision is 25, and the sum of both is 50. Here we see the “Newtonian” Musschenbroek embracing 
the “Leibnizian” measure of force. Tis is just one example of how these labels, though sometimes 
helpful, do not do justice to the independence of the fgures to whom we apply these labels.Beyond Newton and Leibniz 73
kinematic elasticity (rebound) such that, afer the change of shape, the elastic 
force of the body will restore its fgure and “the parts will press themselves 
outwards with the same violence as they were pressed inwards.” Hence, 
“the elasticity reproduces the same force, which was extinguished by the 
intropression, so that no force is lost in the percussion of elastick bodies.”17
In both elastic and sof bodies, the impact force is consumed in changing 
the shape of the bodies, but in elastic bodies there is a further elastic force 
that is responsible for shape recovery and rebound. For Musschenbroek, this 
explains why bodies behave according to the rules of collision.
Like the Malebrancheans, Musschenbroek attempted to unify the geo￾metric criteria for the shape behavior of sof and elastic bodies with the kin￾ematic criteria associated with their behavior in collisions. In both cases, the 
desired outcome seems to be this: an account of the collision process which 
uses the properties and qualities of material bodies to explain how the out￾come of impact is in accordance with the rules of collision.
Musschenbroek did not, though, go so far as Malebranche, in two impor￾tant ways. First, he did not attempt to reduce the behaviors of sof and elastic 
bodies to an underlying account in terms of hard bodies. Since hard bodies 
are empirically inaccessible, Musschenbroek refused to ofer any account of 
their collisions. Second, and relatedly, he did not attempt to explain the cause 
of elasticity. Rather, he took the force of elasticity as a primitive, provision￾ally. His chapter XV ends with arguments against those philosophers who 
have sought to fnd the cause of elasticity, and in particular those who have 
sought to do so using pores and subtle matter. Te target here was clearly the 
Malebrancheans discussed in Chapter 2. Instead, Musschenbroek aligned 
himself with the Newtonian approach of suspending judgment as to the cause
of elasticity until more experiments had been done.18 In our terminology, 
Musschenbroek rejected the strong constructive approach to collisions in 
favor of the weak.
Interestingly, Henry Pemberton, who was the editor of the third edi￾tion of Newton’s Principia, abandoned the three-way division of bodies 
into hard, sof, and elastic found in Malebranche, Keill, ’s Gravesande, and 
Musschenbroek. In 1728, two years afer the third edition of the Principia, 
Pemberton published his notes on Newton’s philosophy under the title A 
17 Musschenbroek 1744, 181. 18 Musschenbroek 1744, §§432–3; cf. also Newton’s approach to gravity in the General Scholium 
(1999, 943).74 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
View of Sir Isaac Newton’s Philosophy. Tere he divided bodies simply into 
inelastic and elastic, identifying geometrically sof bodies with kinematically 
inelastic ones, and geometrically elastic with kinematically elastic, thereby 
implicitly rejecting geometrically hard bodies. As with Musschenbroek, this 
identifcation goes via a force of elasticity, by which a body both recovers 
its shape and causes the other body to rebound. However, in the absence of 
a detailed dynamical theory of the elasticity of shape recovery, it is a stipu￾lation that shape recovery leads to rebound (and that shape non-recovery 
does not). So, despite having apparently done away with the problem of a 
three-way geometric taxonomy of bodies and a two-way kinematic tax￾onomy (via the implicit rejection of hard bodies), the underlying problem of 
unifying shape behavior with collision behavior remains. In Pemberton, as in 
Musschenbroek and others, the unifcation is by stipulation.
Together, Keill, ’s Gravesande, Musschenbroek, and Pemberton repre￾sent the leading “Newtonians” of the early 18th century. Teir work made 
clear that there was interest in providing a causal-explanatory account of 
collisions, one that integrated the rules of impact into a material account of 
bodies. We call any such attempted integration a “philosophical mechanics” 
of collisions. Despite their diferences, the similarities among the French 
Cartesians (see Chapter 2) and Newtonians in their treatments of impact 
show that such a philosophical mechanics was a task they held in common. 
Moreover, we see that they are in the same predicament: from matter theory 
and natural philosophy they inherited a tripartite division of bodies into 
hard, sof, and elastic; from mechanics they inherited a bipartite division 
of bodies based on the rules of collision; and any unifcation was via stipu￾lation. No-one had succeeded in using qualitative accounts of the material 
constitution of bodies to provide a causal account of impact that explained 
the specifcs of the rules of collision. As a result, a philosophical mechanics of 
collisions remained elusive.
3.3 Leibniz on collisions
In the same year that Keill gave his lectures in Oxford (1700), Malebranche 
published his mature collision theory. As we saw in Chapter 2, it was Leibniz’s 
criticisms of the earlier versions that prompted Malebranche to revisit and 
revise his account of collisions. Te opening salvo from Leibniz was his 1686 
Brief Demonstration, in which he argued against Descartes’ claim that the Beyond Newton and Leibniz 75
conserved quantity in collisions is the quantity of motion, or size times speed. 
According to Leibniz, the conserved quantity is vis viva, or quantity of living 
force, measured by the product of size and speed squared. Tis marks the 
beginning of a long-running dispute, now known as the vis viva controversy. 
Te entanglement of vis viva with a wide range of philosophical issues—from 
the nature of matter to God’s presence in the world to human freedom—is ev￾ident in the correspondence between Leibniz and Clarke which took place in 
1715–16 (see below). For our purposes here, Leibniz’s account is important 
for two reasons. First, it shows that impact was of pressing importance for 
Leibniz, and that a motivating goal was the search for a causal explanation of 
the collision process. In making this case, we complete our argument for the 
foundational status of the problem of collisions within all three major strands 
of natural philosophy in the early 18th century: Cartesian, Newtonian, and 
Leibnizian. Second, the resources ofered in Leibniz’s approach for tackling 
the problem of collisions difer from those of Descartes and Newton, and this 
will be important as the century progresses (see especially Chapter 5).
(i) Leibniz and the forces of bodies in collision
Leibniz’s arguments for vis viva take place in the context of his account of 
body and force. A Brief Demonstration provoked responses both in corre￾spondence and in publications, and not just from Malebranche. During 
the course of these exchanges, and in the years that followed right through 
to the end of his life, Leibniz developed his theory of force in a series of 
publications.19
In 1695 he published the supplement to his Brief Demonstration as well as 
Specimen Dynamicum; in these he set out in detail his position on the force of 
bodies. We begin with the opening claim of Specimen, and build from there to 
the main elements of Leibniz’s account that are important for our purposes.
Te paper opens with the anti-Cartesian claim that there is something be￾sides and prior to extension in corporeal things: natural force. Natural force 
is present everywhere in matter, even where it does not appear to the senses, 
19 Including 1688, when Leibniz read and took extensive notes on Newton’s Principia (see Bertoloni 
Meli, 1993). For the reaction to Leibniz’s Brief demonstration, see Iltis (1967, chapter IV). Around 
1691, Leibniz followed up his controversy with Denis Papin (on the true measure of force) with Essay 
de dynamique sur les loix du mouvement, an unpublished piece in which he frst made use of the terms 
forces mortes and forces vives. Te essay remained unknown to the public until Gerhardt printed it as 
piece no. XII in volume VI of Leibniz’s Mathematische Schrifen (1860, 215–31).76 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
and it consists in a striving. Tis striving constitutes “the innermost nature 
of a body, since it is the character of a substance to act, and extension means 
only the continuation or the difusion of a striving and counter-striving al￾ready presupposed by it.”20 Terefore, by its very nature, a body has associ￾ated with it a force that is a continuous striving (it constitutes the nature of 
the body, so it is always there, always acting).
Later in the paper he provides support for this claim, as part of a broader 
explanation for why a notion of force must be added to the geometrica con￾ception of body (i.e., to matter theory) in order for a theory of collisions to 
get of the ground. With a geometric conception alone:
the largest body at rest will be carried away by a colliding body, no matter 
how small, without any retardation of its motion, since such a notion of 
matter involves no resistance to motion but rather indiference to it. Tus it 
would be no more difcult to move a large body than a small one, and hence 
there would be action without reaction, and no estimation of power would 
be possible, since anything could be accomplished by anything. (Leibniz 
1956, 720)
Moreover, a conservation law must be added in order for the resulting ac￾count to satisfy the principle of sufcient reason (PSR). Lacking a conserva￾tion law:
it was obvious that no reason could be given why the colliding body should 
not attain the efect to which it strives, or why the opposing body should 
not receive the full conatus of the colliding one, so that the motion of the 
opposing body would be compounded of its own original motion and of 
that newly received external conatus. (Leibniz 1956, 720)
Te upshot is that in order to have an account of corporeal bodies we need 
more than geometry. We need further principles of:
cause and efect, action and passion, in order to give a reasonable account of 
the order of things. Whether we call this principle form, entelechy, or force 
does not matter provided that we remember that it can be explained intelli￾gibly only through the concept of forces. (Leibniz 1956, 721)
20 Leibniz 1956, 712.Beyond Newton and Leibniz 77
However, the forces by which bodies act on one another are not always 
manifesting, according to Leibniz.21 Terefore, we need a distinction be￾tween the force that is always acting (primitive force) and the force that is 
manifest when bodies act upon one another (derivative force). Te latter is 
the means by which bodies act upon one another, and it is this that is the sub￾ject of the laws of motion. Derivative force is “that force which is connected 
with motion (local motion, that is).”22
We have yet to arrive at vis viva (i.e., force vive or “living force”). Prior 
to that, we need one more distinction, between active and passive force. 
Primitive active force is “in all corporeal substance as such,” and corresponds 
to the soul or substantial form. Derivative active force is exercised when 
primitive active force is limited by the confict of bodies with each other, 
and is the means by which one body acts on another. Primitive passive force 
corresponds to prime matter, and is the basis of why bodies are impenetrable 
and possess inertia. Derivative passive force is the manifestation of impene￾trability and inertia by a body when another body acts on it; it is the means by 
which a body resists the action of another body.23
And so, we come at last to the distinction between dead and living force. It 
seems to us that the problem that Leibniz is trying to solve by means of this 
is (a) how a body goes from not moving to moving without a discontinuity, 
and (b) why that motion is in the particular direction that it is. Tough he 
does not say so explicitly in Specimen Dynamicum, part (a) of this problem 
arises due to the requirement that our theory satisfy the law of continuity, 
and part (b) arises from the requirement that our theory satisfy PSR. Leibniz 
solves both parts of this problem in one go by introducing the notion of so￾licitation, which is a momentaneous tendency toward motion in a particular 
direction. When all that exists is this momentaneous tendency (without any 
resulting motion), what we have is dead force; once motion results, we have 
living force. Leibniz writes:
21 In the Principia, Newton had written that the inherent force of matter is exerted by a body “only 
during a change of its state, caused by another force impressed upon it” (1999, 404, defnition 3). 
Leibniz does not refer to Newton in his Specimen Dynamicum, but we take Newton’s discussion of 
force to be a key source for the puzzle that Leibniz is seeking to resolve in this portion of his argument.
22 Leibniz 1956, 715. 23 It is not clear from Specimen itself what problem Leibniz was trying to solve with this distinction. 
Given his other writings, we take it that the driving concern is the problem of unity. For bodies, this 
is the problem of how an extended body is possible at all, given the divisibility of matter. With admi￾rable conceptual economy, though not with obvious success, Leibniz sought to solve this problem, 
and the problem of how it is that bodies are able to act on and be acted upon by one another, with one 
tool: the a notion of force playing a role akin to substantial form.78 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
Hence force is also of two kinds: the one elementary, which I also call dead 
force, because motion does not yet exist in it but only a solicitation to mo￾tion . . . the other is ordinary force combined with actual motion, which 
I call living force [vis viva]. An example of dead force is centrifugal force, 
and likewise the force of gravity or centripetal force; also the force with 
which a stretched elastic body begins to restore itself. But in impact . . . the 
force is living and arises from an infnite number of continuous impressions 
of dead force. . . . But even though impetus is always associated with living 
force [cum vi viva semper sit conjunctus], the two are nonetheless diferent, 
as we shall see below. (Leibniz 1695, 148f.; 1956, 717; translation slightly 
amended)
Distinguishing between dead and living force allows Leibniz to solve the 
above problem, via the notion of solicitation. Te upshot of this solution is 
that when the motion is tiny (i.e., in problems of statics) only frst-order ve￾locity efects show up (dead force problems), but once motion is fully un￾derway the second-order efects become apparent (such as in Galileo’s 
treatment of free fall). Tis is why, once we move beyond statics to consider 
the force of bodies in motion, we can no longer use the quantity “bulk times 
velocity” as the measure of force, but must use the quantity “bulk times 
velocity-squared.” Tis is the place of vis viva in Leibniz’s new theory, which 
he calls “dynamics.”
Why go to all this trouble? Leibniz makes explicit what he takes his con￾tribution in Specimen to be. We have the correct rules of collision, thanks 
to Huygens, Wren, and others, he says, but there is a remaining problem as 
yet unsolved, concerning the causes of collisions: “But there is no unity of 
opinion about the causes. . . . It would seem, indeed, that the true foundations 
of this science have not yet been revealed.” Specifcally, he says, no-one “be￾fore me” has “explained the concept of force itself.”24
In Chapter 1 we noted that the question of causes was eschewed, explicitly 
by Huygens, in the 1660s papers on the rules of collision, and that this was 
raised as an issue at the time, most forcefully by William Neile. Leibniz too 
complained at the time that the rules of collision failed to make clear why mo￾tion changes in the way that it does in impact. Henry Oldenburg relayed that 
24 Leibniz 1956, 719. Ten he continues: “a matter which has always disturbed the Cartesians and 
others who could not understand that the sum of motion or of impetuses, which they take for the 
quantity of forces, can be diferent afer collision than it was before [i.e., not conserved], because they 
believed that such a change would change the quantity of forces as well.”Beyond Newton and Leibniz 79
dissatisfaction to Huygens: “[Leibniz] seems to think that neither you nor Mr 
Wren have assigned the causes of the Phenomena that you considered while 
establishing your rules of motion.”25
In sum, the problem of collisions lies behind Leibniz’s complex theory of 
forces that we have outlined above, and in developing this theory Leibniz 
sought a causal account of the actions and passions of bodies such that colli￾sion processes are rendered intelligible.
It is well known that the developments in Leibniz’s philosophy yield a pic￾ture in which collisions between material bodies are not foundational in the 
way that they are in Cartesian philosophy. Nevertheless, they remain crit￾ical to his project in two important respects. First, collisions remain the only 
means by which change in the material world is intelligible. While bodies 
themselves may not lie at the basis of Leibniz’s philosophy, insofar as we are 
to have a physics then collisions are central. Second, the vis viva controversy 
was so controversial precisely because it was not simply about collisions: the 
issue of conservation of motion and of force is tied to much bigger questions 
such as God’s action in the world and human agency. Tat this is so becomes 
vividly evident in Te Leibniz–Clarke Correspondence.
(ii) Te Leibniz–Clarke Correspondence
In their letters, Leibniz and Clarke began from such problems as the na￾ture and extent of God’s presence and action in the world, but in discussing 
these issues they soon found themselves moving into the issues surrounding 
vis viva, and drawing on empirical work in mechanics. Te correspond￾ence makes vivid the connections between vis viva as a measure of force 
and a wide range of philosophical issues. As we will see, Te Leibniz–Clarke 
Correspondence shows explicitly that the preferred solution to the problem of 
collisions—or, worse, a failure to fnd any solution—would have ramifcations 
for Leibniz’s philosophy far beyond mechanics. Tis conclusion serves to 
emphasize the importance of collisions for Leibnizian philosophy.
In his very frst letter, Leibniz contrasted his view that the total quantity 
of force in the world is conserved with the Newtonian position according to 
which God intervenes from time to time to add new motion into the world, 
25 Oldenburg to Huygens, April 7, 1671, in Huygens 1889–1950, vol. VII, 56. Tis concern—to “as￾sign the causes” for the rules of impact—persists into Kant; see Chapter 6.80 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
stating that the latter is “a very odd opinion concerning the work of God.” 
Clarke responded that God “is himself the author and continual preserver 
of their [i.e., material things’] original forces or moving powers,” and the 
view that the world continues without God’s intervention in this way leads to 
atheism.26 Leibniz responded in turn by distinguishing between God’s power 
(shown by the existence and continuation of his creation) and his wisdom 
(shown by the perfection of his creation), and by grounding the global con￾servation of force in his wisdom: if God needed to inject more force into 
the world at some point, this would show want of foresight on his part. He 
rejected Clarke’s charge of atheism aficting his own view by appealing to 
God’s power: “God preserves every thing continually, and nothing can sub￾sist without him.” In his third letter, Leibniz summarized what he took to 
be the issues at stake in the dispute with Clarke, including the question of 
whether or not God acts in the most perfect manner, or whether “his ma￾chine is liable to disorders.”27
Tis issue of God’s action in the world is explicitly connected to vis viva
in Leibniz’s third letter: there, he introduced the term “active force” without 
saying what he meant by it, and argued that if active force should naturally 
diminish in the universe such that God was required to replenish it, this 
would be an imperfection in God. Clarke responded with his own interpre￾tation of the term “active force,” and by quoting Newton’s Opticks, query 31, 
in support of his claim that active force diminishes in the world. For Clarke, 
“active force signifes nothing but motion, and the impetus or relative impul￾sive force of bodies, arising from and being proportional to their motion.”28
In other words, Clarke claimed the term “active force” for a quantity propor￾tional to velocity rather than velocity-squared. As with other topics in Te 
Leibniz–Clarke Correspondence, Leibniz and Clarke seem to misunderstand 
each other, whether deliberately or not.
Leibniz’s response is unhelpful in clarifying the underlying issue con￾cerning the appropriate measure of force. He wrote: “Tey who fancy that 
active force lessens of itself in the world, do not well understand the prin￾cipal laws of nature, and the beauty of the world of God.” Clarke was un￾impressed: “Tis is a bare assertion, without proof.”29 And then collisions 
are explicitly introduced: “Two bodies, void of elasticity, meeting each other 
26 See, respectively, letters L 1 §4 and C 1 §4 in Alexander 1970. 27 See, consecutively, L 2 §7, L 2 §11, and L 3 §16. 28 See C 3 §§13–14, footnote b. 29 See L 4 §38 and C 4 §38.Beyond Newton and Leibniz 81
with equal contrary forces, both lose their motion.” Notice the steps: Leibniz 
and Clarke began from the issue of God’s action in the world and, more spe￾cifcally, whether there is a quantity of force or motion that is conserved in 
the world; they move from this to the appropriate measure of that force; and 
from there to the problem of collisions. In this way, a problem that might 
seem to modern-day readers to belong squarely within mechanics is shown 
to be directly relevant to the issue of God’s action in the world.
Leibniz responded by engaging with Clarke on the problem of collisions, 
and by appealing to his old distinction (from Brief Demonstration) between 
quantity of motion and quantity of force:
I don’t here undertake to establish my dynamics, or my doctrine of forces; 
this would not be a proper place for it. However, I can very well answer 
the objection here brought against me. I have afrmed that active forces 
are preserved in the world. Te author objects that two sof or un-elastic 
bodies meeting together, lose some of their force. I answer no. ’Tis true, 
their wholes lose it with respect to their total motion, but their parts re￾ceive it, being shaken by the force of the concourse. And therefore that loss 
of force, is only in appearance. Te forces are not destroyed, but scattered 
among the small parts.30 . . . However, I agree that the quantity of motion 
does not remain the same; and herein I approve what Sir Isaac Newton says, 
page 341 of his Opticks, which the author quotes. But I have shown else￾where that there is a diference between the quantity of motion, and the 
quantity of force. (Alexander 1970, L 5, §99)
Clarke was once again unimpressed. He responded in two ways.31 First, he is￾sued Leibniz with a challenge: what about a case “when two perfectly HARD 
un-elastic bodies lose their whole motion by meeting together”? Te motion 
cannot be dispersed among the parts of the bodies in this case, so where does 
it go? Second, he rejected without argument Leibniz’s distinction between 
quantity of motion and quantity of force, simply asserting that force is “al￾ways proportional to the quantity of relative motion: as is constantly evident 
in experience.” He then went on to assert that, thus understood, active force 
30 Interestingly, the appeal to motion being dispersed among insensible bodies was used earlier 
against Leibniz by Papin, and Leibniz responded by accusing Papin of making an ad hoc maneuver 
(see Freudenthal 2002, 574, and Rey 2010, 83). Nevertheless, others such as Wolf and Du Châtelet 
followed Leibniz in making this move.
31 C 5, §99.82 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
“does naturally diminish continually in the material universe,” and that this 
is as it should be for inert matter. And he re-asserted that this is no imperfec￾tion in God’s creation. Here the discussion ended, due to Leibniz’s death.
Our purpose is not to adjudicate between Leibniz and Clarke. Rather, the 
point is this: in Leibniz’s philosophy, the argument over whether vis viva is 
conserved during collisions has consequences far beyond the problem of 
collisions itself, making impact a topic of central importance for his system. 
As Te Leibniz–Clarke Correspondence shows, the problem of collisions 
remained a crucial and pressing issue for Leibniz right until the end of his life.
Yet despite its importance, and for all the resources that Leibniz 
introduced—and for all his stated aims in Specimen Dynamicum—he failed 
to provide a causal account of the collision process. Moreover, his followers 
failed too.
3.4 Leibnizian collisions in Hermann and Wolf
In pursuing the fate of a broadly Leibnizian foundational program, two fg￾ures stand out; each owed their position to his patronage, and each adopted 
some of his central ideas in natural philosophy. Specifcally, they shared his 
commitment to PSR and the Law of Continuity as constraints on admissible 
dynamical foundations and to his claim that the nature of body includes 
force—active and passive, living and dead. Tey also agreed that the basic 
laws of mechanics must be laws of these corporeal powers, and that all action 
is by contact. Hence the central importance of impact.
(i) Hermann’s Phoronomia
In the Germanic community of research, the frst collision theory infuenced 
by Leibniz is in chapter VI of Phoronomia, a 1716 treatise by Jacob Hermann. 
At Leibniz’s recommendation, Hermann had been hired at Padua into 
Galileo’s former chair; Phoronomia was intended as a textbook in mechanics 
for advanced students. Two things are particularly relevant for our argu￾ment: the book ofers a Leibnizian approach to collisions, and the treatment 
is broadly familiar from the accounts we have already seen in the Cartesians, 
the Malebrancheans, and the Newtonians—complete with corresponding 
difculties. Moreover, while we do not yet have a critical and comprehensive Beyond Newton and Leibniz 83
study of this very infuential work, a synoptic survey reveals that for the most 
part it is a collation of extant results in mechanics ca. 1715, when it went to 
press. As such, it represents the state of the art at the time.
Hermann sets out by defning his basic notions for that theory. First is a 
division of bodies into “inert” and “actant” [inertia et actuosa]. Te latter spe￾cies are bodies that “have the actant force of repelling [other bodies] with the 
same force that they had been themselves impelled,” he explains. Hermann 
adds that this dichotomy between “inert” and “actant” corresponds to a then￾current division of bodies into “non-elastic and elastic,” but the distinction 
remains unclear.32 Tis is because, as we saw in Chapter 2, the terms “elastic” 
and “inelastic” were ambiguous at the time, between geometric shape be￾havior (during collision) and kinematic rebound behavior (afer impact), 
and Hermann does not tell us which he means. Rather, he seems agnostic 
about the actual existence of the two kinds; to justify his reliance on them 
he is content to simply mention the pragmatic consensus. So, while he goes 
beyond his predecessors in choosing a dynamical, force-based criterion to 
divide body into two basic kinds (not three), corresponding to two sets of 
collision rules, his criterion fails to specify those kinds unambiguously. Still, 
he must connect force terms with space and time parameters, and yet he fails 
to do so unambiguously. Tat is, he fails to specify whether his “actant” and 
“inert” dichotomy just overlaps with “elastic” and “inelastic” qua descriptors 
of shape behavior (during collision) or of kinematic-rebound behavior 
(post-impact).
His next ingredients are “proper velocity,” a signed quantity of individual 
bodies, and “relative velocity,” which is the vector sum of the proper ones. 
Another notion is “absolute force of bodies,” which is a key efective param￾eter, it will turn out. He defnes it, much like Huygens and Leibniz, in terms 
of Galilean heights. Namely, the heights from which the center of gravity has 
descended (before impact) or would ascend (afer impact), supposing all ver￾tical motions to be “naturally accelerated,” viz. in accordance with Galilean 
gravity, constant and parallel.33 Lastly, there is an undefned notion, namely 
mass [massa], which emerges unannounced halfway through Hermann’s ac￾count of collision. Tis tacit notion shows in retrospect that, by absolute force 
of bodies, Hermann means the vis viva of the collision system’s mass center.
32 Hermann 1716, 112. 33 Hermann 1716, 111.84 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
Having presented his conceptual tools, Hermann went on to treat impact, 
by giving a causal explanation of the collision process, and a derivation of the 
rules for exit velocities.
Inelastic collision
Hermann treats inelastic collision frst, as he thinks he can dispatch it easily 
with “just one brief ” theorem: “When inert bodies collide frontally, their 
[proper] velocities afer impact equal the velocity that their common gravity 
center had before impact.”34 Ten he expresses that (common) exit velocity 
as a function of their masses and relative speed as defned above. Because 
he calls it a theorem, Hermann then adds a proof of sorts—as opaque as it is 
interesting, for he evidently aims there to rely on the dynamical notions (of 
body types) that he began his entire account with.
Demonstration. In collision, the motion of bodies does not change except 
on account of, and in proportion to, the inertia of matter. Hence, when 
[inert] bodies collide, the outcome is that they move together—as if they 
were glued to each other—with the same quantity of motion. Tis quantity 
equals the amount whereby the greater body’s [quantity of motion] exceeds 
the lesser’s, if they collide head-on. In catch-up collision, it equals the sum 
of their individual quantities of motion. (Hermann 1716, 114)
Tis seems disappointingly brief, and raises the not unreasonable suspi￾cion that Hermann had no clear and compelling way to connect his matter￾theoretical notions with the kinematics of collision. And yet, we can develop 
his verbal proof into quantitative reasoning. Te clue is Hermann’s use above 
of a telling phrase, namely, “on account of, and in proportion to, the inertia 
of matter” (pro ratione inertiae materiae). Elsewhere in Phoronomia, he sheds 
some more light on this confounding phrase and its role in collision theory. 
Specifcally, early in the book Hermann gives a picture of force, or rather of 
forces plural, that all bodies exert in interactions; for undeclared reasons, his 
paradigm interaction is inelastic collision. In it, he explains, one body counts 
as “passive,” and so, he infers hastily, that body must exert a passive force:
In addition to active force, there is in bodies also a certain passive Force, 
from which neither motion nor tendency to move results, but consists in 
34 Hermann 1716, 114.Beyond Newton and Leibniz 85
that Resistance whereby it opposes any external force striving to change 
the bodies’ state of rest or motion. . . . Tis force of inertia is plain enough 
in resting bodies. Indeed, when a [moving] body A strikes another one B 
at rest, A loses something of its force, whereas B, drawing out some of A’s 
force and motion, acquires it. Whence it is clear that the resting body really 
has some passive force, which the incoming’s force must break and over￾come. . . . Tis force of resistance the great Astronomer Kepler called Force 
of inertia.
In this force of inertia of matter is grounded the law of Nature whereby to 
every action there is an equal and opposite reaction. For in every action there 
is a struggle [luctatio] between an agent body and a patient one, and without 
such struggle no action, properly so called, of the agent upon the patient 
can be conceived; for otherwise there would be no stable foundations for 
Mechanics, but any efect would follow from any cause. (Hermann 1716, 3)
And then later:
Hence in all corporeal action there is a clash between an agent force and the 
resistance of the patient body, an application of the agent’s force onto the 
body receiving the action; that is, action itself is equal and contrary to the 
resistance of the patient, which is its reaction, because this resistance—or 
this force of inertia—by the patient body must be removed, so that the pa￾tient might be set in motion by the agent. . . . Terefore, when we say that 
any action is equal and contrary to the reaction of the patient body, all we 
mean is: in all corporeal action, as much of the agent’s forces is lost as it is 
gained by the body receiving the action. (Hermann 1716, 378–9)
Here is how we construe his words. In almost any direct collision, the two 
bodies play diferent dynamical roles, viz. they exert distinct causal powers.35
One body counts as the agent, and the other as the patient. Te agent acts 
on the latter by exerting active force; and the patient resists by exerting vis 
inertiae, a passive force of resistance. Moreover, the agent acts exactly to the 
extent that the patient is able to resist it—neither more, nor less (because, 
Hermann believes, there is no sufcient reason why the agent should act 
more than needed to defeat the resistance encountered). Ergo, the agent’s 
35 Te one exception is collision in the mass-center frame, where the two bodies meet with equal 
momentum, and neither counts as passive.86 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
action equals the reaction of the resisting patient body. And, the common 
measure of these two parameters is the net linear momentum—not vis viva—
lost by the agent and gained by the patient, respectively. Once the patient’s 
resistance has been overcome, the agent then pushes it along, unresisted—
which for Hermann explains the kinematic appearance of the two bodies 
moving together afer the inelastic collision.
Finally, a word of caution: Hermann’s distinction, active versus passive, 
appears unstable: it relies on empirically inaccessible quantities; and it ap￾peals to an equivocal criterion.36 Still, that did not keep it from becoming 
very popular and infuential in post-Leibnizian Germany, thanks to Christian 
Wolf and his school.
Hermann then quickly dispatches oblique impact, in which the bodies’ 
lines of motion are at an angle. For two bodies A and B, he resolves their 
velocities into “motions they contain virtually,” viz. into a central compo￾nent (aD and bD, along the line between the two bodies’ mass centers) and 
a normal component Aa and Bb, respectively. Now, he reasons, “because the 
(normal-component) motions Aa and Bb are parallel, the two bodies cannot 
act on each other by means of them.” So, he infers, they interact “only through 
their (central-component) motions.”37 Tereby, oblique impact reduces to 
head-on collision, whose outcome Hermann has just taught above how to 
compute. Finally, these central motions must be added to the (unchanged) 
normal components Aa, Bb. Tus, we get individual exit velocities.
Tis algorithm yields for Hermann a complete solution to the problem of 
oblique inelastic collision—but with a severe limitation: it predicts the post￾impact motion for just one point within either body, namely, the velocity of 
its individual mass-center. Te motion of the body as an extended whole is 
beyond the power of his algorithm.
36 When both bodies move (before impact), the one with less linear momentum counts as the 
patient—because it has less active force, presumably. When one body is at rest, it counts as the pa￾tient, but now because it is endowed with nothing but passive force (of inertia). Tat makes the crite￾rion of passivity equivocal. Moreover, the quantity of active force—which determines the respective 
ascription of activity and passivity—is linear momentum, hence it is a function of velocity. And so, 
Hermann’s picture of collision (as a clash between agent and patient) in the end relies on the premise 
that a colliding body has a distinguished, or true, velocity. But impact is Galilean-relative, as Huygens 
and Newton had made clear; thus, true velocity is not detectable by any observation or experiment 
that appeals to impact. So, Hermann’s picture of collision lacks determinate empirical content. For the 
post-Leibnizian fortunes of his account, see Stan 2017. 37 Hermann 1716, 115.Beyond Newton and Leibniz 87
Elastic collision
To handle elastic impact, Hermann sets out with a “Hypothesis: when actant 
bodies collide, their absolute force post impact remains the same as it was before 
the collision.”38 From this hypothesis alone, Hermann seeks to derive sev￾eral important results. Namely, that in collision with rebound, the system’s 
net quantity mi
vi
2 remains constant; that its center of gravity’s velocity is not 
changed by the collision; and that the relative speed (of the colliding bodies) 
is the same, before and afer impact. All these results serve as his premises 
from which he infers without efort an algorithm for computing the exit 
velocities of “actant” bodies.
We shall not try to assess here the validity of his reasoning; in particular, 
his above corollary on relative-speed conservation seems paralogistic. More 
important for our theme in this book is Hermann’s heuristic. It really is aston￾ishingly similar to Huygens’ earlier treatment of elastic collision. Specifcally, 
they both set out with a hypothesis—in efect, a disguised energy principle—
about a privileged parameter which they construed purely kinematically, de￾spite the overt dynamical connotations of Hermann’s term “absolute force.”39
Beyond that, both Huygens and Hermann rely on diagrammatic reasoning 
alone to infer their corollaries; see also Fig. 3.1.
At the same time, however, Hermann’s heavy reliance on kinematics and 
geometry qua driving engines for his elastic-collision theory raises some 
questions that deserve mentioning.
First, Hermann’s account is disconcertingly sinuous. It has all the early 
signs of a constructive approach—in that it sets out with defnitions of body 
types and their forces—and then it turns abruptly into a minimalistic, very 
austere principle approach: in efect, a conservation law and diagram-based 
reasoning is enough to secure his sought outcome. But then his notions of 
inert and actant body play no role in his collision mechanics—whether ex￾planatory or evidential—and so they sit in the book idly, as mere decorations.
Second, this being so raises a puzzling question: why does he break from 
tradition so as to defne body types in dynamical, causal-property terms, in￾stead of hewing to precedent, viz. defning their specifc diference in terms 
of shape change or kinematic behavior in collision?
38 Hermann 1716, 112; his emphasis. 39 In truth, his assumption is stronger than Huygens’ (a statement now called the “Torricelli￾Huygens Principle”), which claims merely that a system’s gravity center does not rise throughout the 
collision—though it can descend, clearly. Hermann’s hypothesis entails that it rises to the same height 
as that from which it must have descended. See Fig. 3.1.88 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
Tird, his force concepts are explanatorily unmoored from his account 
of the collision’s outcomes: they do not help understand why, post-impact, 
the bodies move together or rebound. By all appearances, Hermann’s pic￾ture of body-force is just initial evidence for the truth of the dynamical laws 
from which he infers values for exit speeds. However, channeling truth (from 
premises to conclusion, which inferences do) is not the same as causing us 
to understand—and so Hermann’s appeal to force notions, in his impact me￾chanics, is explanatorily inert.
Fourth, Phoronomia is home to two notions of force, not one, and they 
have diferent measures. “Inert” bodies spend “active force” in non-elastic 
collision; its measure is the scalar momentum, Δmv, lost by each in the 
process. In contrast, Hermann’s “absolute force” is the same as vis viva, and so 
its measure is diferent, viz. mv2. Tis split foundation forces on us the con￾clusion that, in regard to collision theory, Hermann did not make any prog￾ress beyond Huygens and Leibniz. To sum up, then, in the terms of Chapter 1, 
Hermann’s approach is weakly material. He starts in medias res with body 
species as given, with no further grounding needed. From there, he seeks 
to give a causal-explanatory account of the collision process and to thereby 
arrive at the rules of collision. Had he been successful, the result would have 
been what we call a “philosophical mechanics” of collisions. But his account 
has problems, as we have seen.
A B G
E
F
C
a b g
e
f
c
Fig. 3.1. Hermann’s geometric solution to the direct-impact problem. EA, eA, 
FB, and fB are heights of free fall. Te heights are proxy measures for v2, based 
on Galileo’s kinematics of free fall. Tey represent the two bodies’ speeds, before 
and post impact, respectively. CG and cg are the respective heights of ascent and 
descent for the mass center of the two-body system. To prove his collision rules, 
Hermann assumes that the mass center falls from, and rises to, the same height 
through the collision.Beyond Newton and Leibniz 89
(ii) Wolf on collisions
Another fgure whom Leibniz greatly infuenced took the strongly material 
path to collision theory, by design. Tat was Christian Wolf, an academic 
don whose philosophical mechanics was part of a comprehensive system 
of rationalism that runs the gamut from substance metaphysics to civil 
law. A substantive part of that system was his philosophical mechanics of 
collisions. As to why he needs one, he would give three rationales. For one, he 
subscribes to the mechanists’ reducibility program: “Tere can be no change 
in bodies except by means of motion.”40 Tat is, all corporeal properties 
and changes of state must reduce by explanation to kinematic and dynam￾ical terms. For another, he denies any action at a distance. All momentum 
transfer—indeed, all physical action—is by contact only: “A body does not 
act on another unless it presses against it.”41 Tat makes collision the funda￾mental process in his physics. Lastly, the rules of collision are explanatorily 
unsaturated:
We call rules of motion those whereby motive force is changed by the col￾lision of bodies. . . . In the rules of motion there are general principles, 
from which these rules can be derived. Tese principles once established, 
the rules of motion, i.e. of impact, were proved from them in several ways. 
Mathematicians assume these laws without proof; but it behooves the 
Metaphysician to demonstrate them. (Wolf 1731, §§302–3)
Tose principles are his two laws of motion below, which he derived from an 
ontology of body. And so, his project in efect requires him to reconcile rules 
of impact with a theory of matter: a philosophical mechanics of collisions.
Te basis of his matter theory is a list of privileged concepts that pick out 
the “internal principle of [a body’s] actions and passions.”42 Tis principle 
is threefold: the nature of bodies is to be extended, inert, and endowed with 
active force:
All bodies are extended. Every determinate body is endowed with a shape 
[fgura] and a defnite size [magnitudo]. Each body flls a determinate space.
40 See Wolf 1731, §129. 41 Wolf 1731, §320. 42 Wolf 1731, §145. To legitimize his notion, Wolf appeals to Aristotle and latter-day followers 
(such as Daniel Sennert), whose term “nature” allegedly matches his.90 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
Every body resists motion. Te corporeal principle of resistance to mo￾tion is called Force of inertia, or also passive Force.
Any body in motion is endowed with a force of acting [vis 
agendi]. . . . Hence, active force is the principle of changes [in bodies]. 
Mathematicians try to measure this active force of bodies; in so doing, they 
assume something [to exist] that it behooves the philosopher to prove.
Te active force of bodies is called motive force, as it is associated with 
local motion. And so, all the changes in bodies can be explained through 
[per] extension, force of inertia, and active force. (Wolf 1731, §§122–
30, 135–8)
In sum, Wolf argues that to be a body is to be extended (or fll a defnite 
volume), resist by a (passive) force of inertia, and act by exerting motive 
force. Tese three body attributes are distinct in the sense that “neither can 
be determined from the other.”43 Two of them count as powers, while exten￾sion is causally inert.
Te two powers (inertia and active force) ground—explanatorily, via 
the PSR—two dynamical principles: a law of inertia, and a law of action–
reaction. As he declared above, to discover and confrm these laws is a task 
for metaphysics of matter, not rational mechanics. His two laws are one ex￾planatory bridge from matter theory to the kinematics of collision. Te other 
bridge is a taxonomy of body types; it too straddles the physics of body and 
the mechanics of impact. We say that it straddles these two domains because 
Wolf uses two distinct sets of criteria to classify bodies, and hence to explain 
collision. Let’s call the resulting classes Group A and B, respectively. In his 
doctrine, “hard” and “sof” bodies share a commonality about power: when 
sof bodies collide, the sole cause of their motion-changes is their “mutual ac￾tion and reaction.” And so do hard bodies; hence they belong together in one 
group (say, A). In contrast, elastics are dynamically diferent: when they col￾lide, an additional power gets exerted, viz. “elastic force.” So, the philosoph￾ical mechanics of their collision would require a diferent account, hence 
they belong in a group by themselves. Besides this dynamics-frst grouping 
of body types, Wolf ’s collision theory makes clear that he also relies on a kin￾ematic criterion to classify bodies, viz. those that move together post-impact 
versus those that rebound.
43 See Wolf 1731, §§129 and 130, in the notes.Beyond Newton and Leibniz 91
Between these two criteria Wolf wedged yet another one, geometric (i.e., 
based on shape behavior during impact). Tis particular criterion yields for 
him three classes of objects: hard bodies are non-deformable, sof bodies 
change shape irreversibly, and elastics “revert to their state” (i.e., self-restore 
the shape they had before impact). He uses this geometric classifcation to 
defend a claim about impact dynamics, namely, that in the collision of “non￾elastic bodies” (viz. hard and sof) the “only changes of motion” come from 
these bodies’ action and reaction.44 When elastics collide, a third agency 
(elastic force) is at work, in addition to the action and reaction they exert 
simply qua bodies.
Te above claim is absolutely crucial in his philosophical mechanics, be￾cause it aimed to connect explanatorily his theory of matter with the rules of 
impact, via his laws of motion:
You ought to take into account this [force of] resistance if you wish to un￾derstand distinctly the communication of motion. Now as all change occurs 
by means of motion, we must classify this resisting force among the princi￾ples of change. Accordingly, we must not leave it out of the concept of body 
[notio corporis], especially as we have just shown that this force is not at all 
entailed by bodies being extended. And, we allow this resistance into the 
concept of body merely because the communication of motion must have a 
sufcient reason, and thereby every change be explicable from a completely 
distinct reason. (Wolf 1731, §129, note; cf. also §134; emphasis added)
Examined in more detail, his two accounts work as follows.
Inelastic collision
Like many predecessors, Wolf partitions the class of possible initial 
conditions—head-on, catch-up, and resting collision (with a stationary 
body)—and accounts for them separately. For head-on impact, his profered 
causal-explanatory mechanism is “destruction of equal forces.” Namely, 
when inelastics collide, equal and opposite amounts of “force” get destroyed 
in the “agent” and the “patient” body, respectively. At that point, with the 
lefover motive force, the agent then pushes along the patient, whose ability 
44 Wolf 1731, §145. His warrant is: “if a body is not elastic, then in collision its shape either does 
not change or if it changes it is not restored. Hence, there is no reason for the motion that results from 
bodies’ action and reaction to change any further. Because nothing can be without a sufcient reason, 
the resulting motion is not further changed.”92 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
to resist (by further slowing down the agent) has been neutralized. Call the 
agent’s lefover force Q, as Wolf does. Afer contact,
it is entirely as if body A is urged to move by the force Q. Now because there 
is nothing that impedes force Q from producing motion, then motion will be 
produced. . . . As nothing is without a reason why it is rather than not, so 
there must be a reason why a body acts on another. And, since a body does 
not act on another unless it touches it, the only reason is if the one resists 
the other’s actual motion or endeavor to move. Terefore, when there is no 
longer a resistance, the [agent body’s] reason to act has been removed, and 
so its action must cease too. (Wolf 1731, §§342–3)
Tat sums up his destruction-of-force mechanism, which he might have 
borrowed from Jakob Hermann’s earlier opus, Phoronomia.
For catch-up and resting collisions, Wolf gives a diferent explana￾tion, based in a common mechanism; we call it “mental gluing.” Te gist is 
this: when (the moving body) A catches up with (the slower or resting body) 
B, they “seem to cohere, as it were,” hence can be regarded as a single body, AB. 
Wolf then claims that if something is a single body, all its parts must move 
with the same velocity, celeritas. From these two premises, he concludes that, 
post-collision, the two “parts” A and B (of the as-if single body AB) must 
“move as one body, in the same direction. Terefore, the speed must be dis￾tributed throughout [A and B], such that either acquires the same speed.”45
Elastic collision
Again, like many predecessors, Wolf too regards it as a two-stage process. 
Stage I is mutual compression: upon contact, bodies press on each other (at 
their common surface) and thereby use motive force to squeeze together the 
other body’s parts. Te result of that is that “each body acquires,” or builds up, 
“the same elastic force.”46 Stage II is acceleration away from each other, which 
causes rebound. Wolf is quite evasive about the mechanism behind this ac￾tion. In passing, he suggests that, as vis elastica restores one body’s shape, it 
pushes against the adjacent body, thereby accelerating it away: “Now as body 
A’s compressed parts get restored, body B (which resists that restitution) is 
45 Wolf, 1731, 381. See below for analysis. 46 Wolf 1731, 415.Beyond Newton and Leibniz 93
urged in the direction in which it was already moving. Hence, the motion of 
B is accelerated.”47 And vice versa.
Assessment
In turning bodies into substance-likes, Wolf aimed to spell out a notion of 
body ft for dynamics. It is doubtful that he succeeds—which serves again 
to emphasize just how difcult was the task of articulating an internally co￾herent philosophical mechanics centered on collisions.
In particular, his theory of sof-body impact falters at several important 
junctures. Te critical weakness is that it falls short explanatorily. Recall, the 
generic project is to integrate successfully matter theory with rules of colli￾sion. Wolf ’s particular strategy is to argue that the nature of body comprises 
two corporeal powers (motive force and the passive force of resistance) that 
yield sufcient reasons for the rules of impact: “you ought to take account of 
this [force of] resistance if you wish to understand distinctly the communi￾cation of motion.”48 But he does not live up to that promise. His two powers 
above—their action and reaction—account just for the colliding bodies’ loss 
or gain of momentum. Tey do not explain why those particular, determi￾nate momentum exchanges obtain, or why the bodies have the particular 
(common) exit velocity post-collision. To account for that, Wolf introduces, 
out of the blue, a very diferent picture of how bodies act on one another, 
namely, “mental gluing” as we explained it above. In plastic collisions, once 
the moving body A runs into the slower (or resting) body B, they “detain each 
other in the same place,” and thus “appear to cohere” into a “single body,” he 
says.49 Tey can be regarded as just one compound body AB that we men￾tally glue out of them.50 From that act being conceivable, he concludes, fal￾laciously, that there is a “difusion of speed.” Namely, that the stronger body’s 
lefover speed difuses throughout the entire compound, AB.51 It follows that 
A and B regarded individually will move at the same speed in the same direc￾tion afer contact. Note, however, that mental gluing makes no appeal to the 
bodies’ natural powers of action and resistance. It is completely unconnected 
47 Wolf 1731, 418 48 Wolf 1731, §129. 49 Wolf 1731, §347. 50 Tis conclusion is false by his own criteria. To count as one body, two matter bits must “press 
against each other” (Wolf 1731, §285). But he has not established that they do press so. In catch-up 
collision, all they can exert (based on his ontology) are “motive forces.” But those point in the same
direction—not in contrary ones, as they should do (if they are to press mutually). So, A and B do not 
count as pressing on each other, hence we may not regard them as one body, AB. 51 Wolf 1731, §366.94 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
to the nature Wolf ascribes to bodies. Tat makes his philosophical me￾chanics inadequate.
Incidentally, Malebranche had the same problem. He too furtively reached 
for mental gluing at the critical juncture: “we can reduce all the laws of the 
communication of motion to just one, namely, that—because we may con￾sider the colliding bodies to make up just one body at the instant of their 
impact—the moving force divides itself among them, in proportion to their 
respective sizes.”52
Serious problems lurk in Wolf ’s theory of elastic collision as well. For 
one, he never explains how shape-restoration relates to the nature of body—
whether it is an essential property of the species of matter he counts as 
elastic or whether it is an efect (at phenomenological scales) induced by 
some micro-mechanism of plastic matter. For another, it is very hard to see 
how vis elastica accounts for perfect rebound in collision—for the conser￾vation of relative speed. Tat is because Wolf gives at least three diferent 
clues about the measure of this force. He thinks of it as a Hooke’s Law type 
of force, proportional to distance, viz. the depth of compression at the end of 
Stage I of impact. But he also thinks that this force generates vis viva in the 
colliding bodies, hence it must be proportional to the quantity Δv2 gained by 
each from rebounding. Finally, he wishes to argue as well that the vis elastica
generated in compression equals the “impetus,” or scalar momentum, lost 
by the “stronger” body as it strikes the “weaker.”53 Tere is no clarity on how 
these various measures connect inferentially, if at all, with the exit velocities 
of bodies in elastic impact. Which makes it doubtful that he lives up to the 
main goal of philosophical mechanics, namely, to integrate matter theory 
with the collision rules coherently.
Our remarks here give a favor of Wolf ’s approach to collisions, showing 
that he, too, sought a causal-explanatory account of the collision process, 
based in matter theory, and which would yield the rules of collision. He took 
the strong constructive approach (see Chapter 1). A similar, but much clearer 
and—for our purposes—much more informative attempt is found in the 
work of Émilie Du Châtelet (see Chapter 5). So we leave it as an exercise for 
the interested reader to pursue Wolf ’s account of collisions in more detail, 
and move on.
52 Malebranche, in OM iii, 215; emphasis added. 53 Tese various measures of the elastic force are scattered throughout his discussion in Wolf 1731, 
§§409–19.Beyond Newton and Leibniz 95
3.5 Te problem of collisions
We saw in Chapter 2 that in France the problem of collisions persisted into 
the 1730s unsolved. For the Cartesians, it is clear why collisions are foun￾dational: all change comes about through impact, and so collisions lie at 
the foundation of Cartesian natural philosophy, both ontologically and 
explanatorily. In this chapter, we have seen that collisions also posed a se￾rious problem for fgures working within a broadly Newtonian or Leibnizian 
framework. Troughout natural philosophy, impact remained a basic mode 
of material activity and change. Tis was so even for those who, following 
Newton, added action-at-a-distance forces to their explanatory resources, 
and even (though not always) to their ontologically basic categories. And it 
was so for those who, following Leibniz, made a fundamental realm of non￾extended simples metaphysically prior to the physical realm of bodies, for 
change in the physical realm was rendered intelligible via collisions.
Tis is not the only way in which collision theory was a foundational con￾cern in natural philosophy. As we have seen throughout Chapters 2 and 3, the 
requirements of the theory played a role in determining the basic properties 
of bodies. For example, simple extension (measured by volume) turns out 
to be inadequate for a successful theory of collisions, and Newtonian mass 
must be attributed to bodies instead. Similarly, Leibniz argued that “quan￾tity of motion” is inadequate and that quantity of force (his vis viva) must 
be attributed to bodies as the quantity that is conserved during collisions. In 
short, collision theory had a vital role to play in investigating the nature and 
properties of bodies, including their activity and causal powers. Moreover, 
acceptable laws of nature or of motion, whether in natural philosophy or me￾chanics, needed to incorporate a successful impact theory, and so collisions 
provide privileged evidence for the truth of postulated laws.
We pursue these lines of argument in later chapters, and it will prove 
helpful to highlight the problem of collisions with a label, PCOL.
PCOL: What is the nature of bodies such that they can undergo collisions?
For all parties, a successful solution to PCOL required the integration of 
a material account of bodies with the rules of collision into a single treat￾ment of impact. Almost everyone divided bodies into three kinds (hard, sof, 
elastic) in terms of their geometric behavior during impact (e.g., irrevers￾ible change of shape), whereas the rules of collision ofered a distinct dual 96 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
taxonomy in terms of the kinematic behavior of bodies afer impact (rebound 
and non-rebound). Te challenge was to unify these systematically—by ar￾gument and causal explanation, rather than by stipulation. In Chapter 2, we 
saw the eforts of French Cartesians to bridge the gap. In this chapter, we have 
seen Newtonians and Leibnizians attempting the same. Why, afer all, should 
irreversible shape change result in non-rebound afer impact? A successful 
account of collisions was expected to use the material nature and properties 
of bodies to provide a causal explanation of the impact outcomes expressed 
in the rules of collision. We call such an account a “philosophical mechanics” 
of collisions, and we have argued that by the 1730s, almost 100 years afer 
Descartes’ Principles, no such account was to be had: no-one had been able to 
integrate matter theory and collision rules coherently.
Te remaining question is, so what? To understand the ramifcations of 
this predicament, we need to widen our purview to the broader philosoph￾ical context in which PCOL fnds its home. We do that next.Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason. Katherine Brading and Marius Stan, Oxford University Press. 
© Oxford University Press 2023. DOI: 10.1093/oso/9780197678954.003.0004
4
Te Problem of Bodies
4.1 Introduction
What is a body? And how can we know? Tis is the Problem of Bodies 
(Body), and this entire book is ultimately about it. Why is it so important? 
Because in the early 18th century physics was a sub-discipline of philos￾ophy, and Body was its central concern and engine of innovation. Entangled 
therein were two quintessentially problematic issues of early modern philos￾ophy: substance and causation.
In the two previous chapters, we uncovered protracted eforts to address 
the problem of collisions (PCOL).1 Now, we broaden our scope: we argue 
that the philosophical signifcance of PCOL is best understood within the 
context of Body. Tis, in turn, has consequences for Body itself for, as we 
saw in Chapters 2 and 3, PCOL requires a philosophical mechanics for its 
solution. We indicate the signifcance of this at the end of the chapter; the re￾mainder of our book wrestles with its implications.
Our approach to PCOL in the preceding chapters was diachronic and 
genetic. In widening our scope to Body, we change tack. We analyze Body
into its conceptual parts, and claim that its solution required philosophers 
to discharge four distinct tasks: we call these Nature, Action, Evidence, and 
Principle (NAEP); we spell out their content, and indicate how these tasks 
had to cooperate toward a single answer to Body.
Our claim is that NAEP is a powerful tool of analysis for widespread 
debates falling under the umbrella of Body in the 18th century. We give some 
indications in support of this with our remarks on gravitation, and in our 
analysis of Newtonian debates over method at that time. Te main source of 
evidence is the remainder of this book, where we deploy NAEP to analyze 
developments in Body from Du Châtelet and Euler to Kant and Lagrange. 
Articulating it is one of the major achievements of this book.
1 PCOL: What is the nature of bodies such that they can undergo collisions? See Chapter 1.98 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
One more piece of the puzzle is needed before we can begin. At the begin￾ning of the 18th century, Body was a problem in physics, and physics was a 
sub-discipline of philosophy: it was importantly diferent from physics as 
we conceive it today. So, a pre-emptive warning: wherever we use the term 
“physics,” it denotes the 18th century sub-discipline of philosophy (unless 
otherwise noted). And, because the term “physics” carries signifcant risk for 
anachronistic misunderstanding, we will sometimes use the label “philosoph￾ical physics” as a reminder. Philosophical physics is the context in which to un￾derstand Body.
We proceed as follows. We begin this chapter by documenting the scope and 
remit of philosophical physics (section 4.2). Ten, we move to break down Body
analytically, starting with its ontological elements, Nature and Action (section 
4.3), before continuing to the epistemic, Evidence and Principle (section 4.4).
Had Body been easy to solve, there would have been no reason for us 
to write this book. But the expected cooperation among Nature, Action, 
Evidence, and Principle proved elusive. In particular, the epistemological 
aspects of Body—its logic of evidence and principles of adequacy—did not 
ft smoothly with its metaphysical dimensions: the material pictures ofered 
exceeded the epistemic allowances. We illustrate this by turning our atten￾tion to discussions of method for philosophical physics. In particular, to the 
struggles of self-proclaimed Newtonians as they sought to address Nature 
and Action while meeting the demands of Evidence and Principle (sec￾tion 4.5).
Next, we re-frame our results within the context of debates over substance 
and causation (section 4.6). Our goal is simply this: to make vivid the impor￾tance of Body for philosophy in the 18th century by explicitly demonstrating 
its place in this familiar landscape. We make clear which questions about 
substance and causation are at stake in addressing Body, and which are not.
Finally (section 4.7), we return to PCOL, to show why it deserves the at￾tention we are giving it in this book. Te reason is that PCOL is a necessary 
condition for solving Body. Te consequences of this are threefold. First, 
every philosopher who sought to ofer a solution to Body needed to address 
PCOL. Second, PCOL was a powerful tool for investigating Body. And third, 
since PCOL requires not just physics for its solution, but a philosophical me￾chanics of collision, Body also becomes a problem to be solved within philo￾sophical mechanics.2 And that is the topic of Chapter 5.
2 For the term “philosophical mechanics,” see Chapter 1.The Problem of Bodies 99
4.2 Te scope and remit of physics
In the early 18th century, “physics” was a sub-discipline of philosophy. Te 
terms “natural philosophy” and “physics” were used broadly interchange￾ably. To see what was meant by this term, we look at several leading fgures 
from the period, beginning with Rohault.
Rohault’s System of Natural Philosophy (1671) was the standard French 
Cartesian textbook into the early 18th century, and it became popular also 
in England following Samuel Clarke’s Latin translation (to which he added 
extensive notes) and the later English translation of this version by John 
Clarke.3 Chapter 1 is entitled “Te Meaning of the Word Physicks, and the 
Manner of treating such a Subject,” and here Rohault says that in his book he 
will use the word “Physicks” to signify the “Knowledge of natural Tings, that 
is, that Knowledge which leads us to the Reasons and Causes of every Efect 
which Nature produces.”4 Tree years afer the Latin edition of Rohault, the 
self-proclaimed Newtonian John Keill likewise stated that the goal of nat￾ural philosophy is to investigate “the Causes of Natural Tings.” Similarly, ’s 
Gravesande opens his introduction to Newton’s philosophy by writing:
Whoever shall compare the Works of several Philosophers who have 
treated of Physicks, must readily own quite diferent Sciences are meant by 
that Title, tho’ they all pretend to give us the true Cause of the Phenomena
of Nature. (’s Gravesande 1720, in the Preface5)
We see here a key feature of 18th century physics: the search for causal knowl￾edge of the natural world.
In his Elementa Physicae, Musschenbroek felt the need for a careful articu￾lation of the remit of physics as a branch of philosophy. Te opening chapter 
is highly important for its clarity in articulating the place of physics within 
philosophy. He begins with a characterization of philosophy in general:6
3 Rohault 1697 and 1723, respectively. 4 Rohault 1723, 1. 5 Quotations here are from the Keill translation; there was another one, by Desaguliers. We fnd 
Keill’s version much clearer than the latter. For ’s Gravesande’s broader natural philosophy, see van 
Besouw 2020.
6 Quotations are from the English translation of 1744, with indications of substantial diferences 
from the Latin version of 1726. For a deeper look into Musschenbroek’s Newtonian commitments in 
regard to method, see Ducheyne 2015.100 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
Philosophy is the knowledge of all things both divine and human, and of 
their properties, operations, causes, and efects; which may be known by 
the understanding, the senses, reason, or by any other way whatever. Its end 
is to promote the real happiness of mankind, as far as may be attained in 
this life. (Musschenbroek 1744, 1)
He then divides all of philosophy into six diferent areas:
Te frst is Pneumaticks, which comprehends whatever belongs to spir￾itual existences, their attributes and operations. Te second is Physicks, 
which considers the space of the whole universe, and all bodies contained 
in it; enquires into their nature, attributes, properties, actions, passions, 
situation, order, powers, causes, efects, modes, magnitudes, origins; 
proving these mathematically as far as may be done. Te third is Teleology, 
which investigates the ends, for the sake of which all things in the uni￾verse have their existence, and all their actions, changes and motions are 
performed . . . . Te fourth is Metaphysics, which explains such general 
things as are in common to all created beings. As what is being, substance, 
mode, relation, possible, impossible, necessary, contingent, etc. . . . Fifhly, 
Moral Philosophy . . . Sixthly and lastly, Logick. (Musschenbroek 1744, 2–3)
Two things are most important for our purposes. First, as in the above 
texts, physics includes causes: “actions, passions, . . . powers, causes, 
efects.”7 Second, physics is the study of bodies: their nature, attributes, 
properties, actions, passions, situation, order, powers, causes, efects, modes, 
magnitudes, and origins.
Physics as the study of bodies is a widespread commitment—from 
“Cartesians” (such as Rohault and Crousaz), to “Newtonians” (such as Keill 
and Musschenbroek), to “Leibnizians” (such as Wolf).8 Here is Wolf ’s de￾scription of physics as that sub-discipline of philosophy concerned with 
bodies, from his “Preliminary discourse on philosophy in general”:
7 Ducheyne and van Besouw (2017, 10) state that Musschenbroek rejected exploration of causes in 
his physics, but we disagree with this assessment. For more on this point, see below.
8 Tere is no simple and clean division of philosophers of the period into “Cartesians,” 
“Newtonians,” and “Leibnizians” in terms of their philosophical commitments. Nevertheless, it is 
sometimes helpful to divide fgures into these broad camps, for the specifc purposes of the issues at 
hand. When we do so, we follow the fgures themselves, primarily via their own self-labeling.The Problem of Bodies 101
Te part of philosophy that studies Bodies is hailed by the name of Physics. 
For that reason, I defne Physics as the science of those things that are pos￾sible through bodies [per corpora]. I do so based on the same argument 
as above. For philosophy is the science of possibles insofar as they can be; 
and physics studies bodies; therefore, physics shall be the science of those 
things that are possible through bodies. (Wolf 1740, 30)
For some, such as Rohault, physics begins with matter (“matter” being a mass 
noun) and from there constructs bodies (“bodies” being a count noun). For 
others, such as Musschenbroek and Wolf, physics begins with bodies as its 
primary object of study. All agreed that physics studies bodies. Tis is the 
second key feature of 18th century physics.
Musschenbroek’s discussion of physics has two further characteristics im￾portant for our purposes. First, notice that the placement of the division be￾tween physics and metaphysics is such that physics includes a great deal of 
what today we might think of as metaphysics. While physics studies bodies, 
including their natures, properties, causes, and efects, metaphysics studies 
only what bodies and created spiritual beings have in common. For example, 
if both bodies and angels are substances, then metaphysics studies substances 
as such, but it is physics that studies the nature of bodies in every respect in 
which they difer from angels. Similarly, if bodies and angels are both caus￾ally efcacious, then it is metaphysics that studies this causal efcacy, but it 
is physics that studies causation among bodies, insofar as this difers in any 
way from causation among angels. We must not assume that the resulting 
relationship between metaphysics and physics is that the former supplies a 
foundation for the latter. In particular, we must not presuppose a Leibnizian 
(let alone a Kantian) view of this relationship.
Second, Musschenbroek explicitly places teleology outside of both physics 
and metaphysics. Tis move, familiar from the 17th century rejection of tel￾eology by mechanical philosophers,9 will be disputed as the 18th century 
progresses.10
Returning to the two key features of 18th century physics noted above, we 
arrive at the following general claim: physics is a sub-discipline of philosophy 
that aims to give a causal account of the nature, properties, and behaviors of 
bodies in general. Tis is what was meant by the term “physics” in the 1700s, 
9 For an introductory summary of this issue, see Shapin 1998, chapter 2. 10 See the end of section 4.5.102 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
not only in the early decades but throughout the century. It is what we may 
call “philosophical physics.”
Examples abound. Here are just a few, to illustrate. In Germany, Fr. 
Baumeister describes physics thus:
Chapter II: On the Parts and Division of Philosophy.
In theoretical philosophy, one part is natural philosophy, or Physics, which 
deals in explaining natural bodies and their forces. . . . Te other part is 
Metaphysics, which deals in common notions and the most general truths. 
(Baumeister 1747, 10)
Tis is philosophical physics. Moving on through the century, we fnd 
M. Chr. Hanov, a compendious disciple of Wolf:
Physics is the science of bodies (viz. of their essence and nature). We may 
also defne it as the science of those that are or can be by means of bodies. 
From Latin we have another name for it, viz. natural Philosophy, for it is the 
science that studies the things and forces of nature. (Hanov 1762, 13)
Examples continue throughout the century. Across the country, at Göttingen, 
Erxleben explained to his students, in a bestselling textbook that ran through 
seven editions:
Bodies around us have manifold efects on us. . . . A proper knowledge of 
bodies must indisputably have an efect on our wellbeing, and so the doc￾trine of nature, or Physics (philosophia naturalis, physica), qua science 
of the properties and forces of bodies, is one of the most useful sciences. 
(Erxleben 1772, 2)
For one fnal example, we turn to Fr. Jacquier. He is particularly relevant for 
this chapter because he, along with Tomas Le Seur, published an edition 
of Newton’s Principia with extensive commentary in 1739–42, and it was he 
who encouraged Du Châtelet to embark upon her own French translation, 
rather than translating a commentary by John Keill.11
11 See Du Châtelet 2009, 9.The Problem of Bodies 103
We have arrived now at the part of Philosophy that we call Physics, or the 
Science of nature . . . . In general Physics I explain the universal properties of 
bodies, and then I move on to particular Physics, in which we observe and 
study individually the various species of body. . . .
We call Physics the part of philosophy that studies the properties of natural 
bodies. . . . Hence physics may also be called natural philosophy, or the science 
of nature. (Jacquier 1785, 3, 6, 13)
Tis is philosophical physics, and it is the home of Body.
4.3 Te problem of bodies: nature and action
Te preceding description of physics places Body at the heart of physics, for the 
central goal of such a physics will be to address the question “What is a body?”
Tis question divides immediately into two, concerning frst the nature of 
bodies, and second their actions. Crousaz, in a prize essay of 1720 that won 
over the Royal Academy of Paris, expresses the pair eloquently:
I take a physicist [un Physicien] to be a man who tries his best to see if he 
can come to understand how the bodies around him are constituted; and to 
form the right idea of the manner in which these bodies act on him, and the 
several ways they act on each other. (Crousaz 1752, 3)
Hence the frst two of our four criteria for any satisfactory solution to Body.
Nature: Determine the nature of bodies. Ascertain their essential 
properties, causal powers, and generic behaviors.
Action: Explain how bodies act on one another. Give an explanation 
of how, if at all, one body changes another’s state (where specifying the 
“state” of a body is addressed by Nature).
We maintain that these criteria are shared among natural philosophers 
at the time, as evidenced explicitly in such writers as Musschenbroek and 
Crousaz, as well as implicitly in the attempts to solve Body (as we will see 
going forward).12
12 Further examples are easy to fnd, throughout the 18th century. Here is an example from later 
in the century. “To the nature of body belong two aspects. First, its essence, i.e. the way and manner 104 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
For many philosophers in the early 1700s, addressing Nature and Action 
required giving an account of the matter out of which bodies are made: a 
matter theory. But the theory of matter was the locus of pressing metaphys￾ical and conceptual difculties:
A complex of interrelated problems plagued the theory of matter during 
the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries: problems concerning matter’s 
divisibility, composition, and internal architecture. Is any material body 
divisible ad infnitum? Must we posit atoms or elemental minima from 
which bodies are ultimately constructed? Are the parts of material bodies 
themselves concreta? Or are they merely potentialities or possible existents? 
Questions such as these—and the press of subtler questions hidden in their 
ambiguities—deeply unsettled natural philosophers of the early modern 
period. Tey seemed to expose serious conficts in the most basic meta￾physical commitments of the new science. (Holden 2004, 1)
Many Newtonians, for example, took atomism as their underlying matter 
theory, with the view that these ultimate parts of matter are indivisible and 
perfectly hard. Yet atomism was subject to metaphysical and conceptual 
challenges, such as the apparent confict between the concept of extension as 
infnitely divisible and the concept of an extended atom as indivisible. A cen￾tral question falling under the umbrella of Nature was simply this: How can 
bodies be extended?
A second question is: What other essential properties do bodies have? 
While Descartes had rested with extension as the sole essential attribute 
of matter, others found that additional properties, such as impenetrability, 
hardness, mass, and so forth, were necessary in order to arrive at an adequate 
account of bodies. Which of these, if any, should be admitted as essential? 
What is their metaphysical status? All of these questions fall under the scope 
of Nature.
A successful solution to Body will address not just Nature, but also Action. 
For Leibniz, active and passive force are included in Nature precisely because 
they are required for meeting the demands of Action. In Chapter 5, we see an 
example of how this plays out in detail. For now, the general point is this: at 
of its composition. Te other is corporeal powers, forces, and capacities. Now all bodies have a force 
of inertia and a moving force; hence both the body’s inertia and its moving force belong to its na￾ture. . . . Sometimes, by the term ‘nature’ we mean just the nature of body. Hence, the science of na￾ture, or Physics, denotes simply the doctrine that studies the nature of body” (Meier 1765, 201–2).The Problem of Bodies 105
the heart of philosophical physics lies the quest for causal knowledge of the 
natural world, a world populated by bodies; and so we seek an account of 
how it is that one body is capable of acting on another, if indeed such bodily 
action is possible at all. We return to this issue below. First, we introduce two 
more criteria for successfully addressing Body.
4.4 Te problem of bodies: evidence and principle
Cartesians, Newtonians, and Leibnizians alike divided bodies into hard, 
sof, and elastic. Hardness, as we saw in Chapter 3, posed an especial dif￾culty for those favoring an empiricist epistemology, as hard bodies are em￾pirically inaccessible. Moreover, if the ultimate parts of matter are perfectly 
hard, then the observed elasticity and sofness of composite bodies requires 
explanation. Some appealed to specifc arrangements of hard bodies; others 
postulated an elastic force in bodies (see Chapter 3). But if the latter, why 
not postulate elasticity all the way down? For some, following Leibniz, the 
ultimate parts of matter were indeed perfectly elastic, but then the problem 
is reversed: why isn’t every collision perfectly elastic—why is there impact 
without rebound? Furthermore, for the Cartesian-inclined, this leaves an 
unanswered question at the very basis of matter theory: how can a part of ex￾tension be elastic? Voluntarists might allow that God simply made the parts 
of matter that way (e.g., he endowed them with a force of elasticity, just as he 
endowed them with a force of inertia, and with the force of gravity, etc.), but 
those with a more rationalist epistemology owe us an explanation of how it is 
that elasticity can be an inherent, perhaps even essential, property of matter. 
Tese brief remarks are intended to highlight one thing: any purported so￾lution to Body will be judged within the context of epistemological (and al￾lied methodological) commitments; and these varied a great deal from one 
philosopher to another. We therefore introduce two further criteria on suc￾cessful solutions to Body, both of which are epistemological:
Evidence: Elucidate the evidential reasoning behind Nature and Action. 
Spell out what counts as evidence for these claims, and what patterns of 
inference take us to them as conclusions.
Principle: Elucidate the constraining principles appealed to in attempting 
a solution to Body, and check that proposed solutions conform.106 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
Such principles include the Principle of Sufcient Reason (PSR), the Law of 
Continuity, the restriction to contact action, the criterion of clear and distinct 
ideas, and so forth. Diferent protagonists understood such principles dis￾parately as a priori philosophical requirements, defeasible heuristics, and so 
forth, but such principles are always in play, whether implicitly or explicitly.
Together, these criteria require that we make explicit the justifcatory rea￾soning behind Nature and Action.
4.5 Te methods of Newtonian physics
How should we go about solving Body? How can we address NAEP? 
Te most famous 18th century locus for this question is the debate over 
Newtonian gravitation. Te issues at stake included: whether gravity is an es￾sential property of bodies (Nature); whether bodies can act on one another at 
a distance (Action); whether Newton’s methods of gathering evidence from 
the phenomena are sufcient to decide these issues (Evidence); and what, if 
any, constraining principles—such as mechanical philosophy’s commitment 
to contact action and Leibniz’s Principles of Sufcient Reason (PSR)—should 
be brought to bear (Principle).13 Te latter two issues concern epistemology 
and, more specifcally, the appropriate methods for doing physics. Tis ques￾tion animates natural philosophy from Descartes’ Discourse on Method
through Te Leibniz–Clarke Correspondence to Du Châtelet’s chapter on 
hypotheses in her Foundations of Physics, and beyond.
Examination of the debates over the methods of physics reveals just how 
difcult it is to address Nature and Action while adhering to the demands 
of Evidence and Principle. We can see this by analyzing the response of 
self-identifed Newtonians to the weaknesses they perceived in Cartesian 
methods of pursuing physics, and their proposals for arriving at knowl￾edge of bodies and causes. As we will see, these fgures encountered serious 
difculties in their attempts to reconcile self-imposed epistemic strictures 
with ambitions for a causal account of bodies. Moreover, the obstacles to a 
satisfactory solution of Body, via a coherent package addressing NAEP, per￾tain not only to the debates over gravitation, but to collisions, and to physics 
quite generally.
13 See Janiak 2008, Smith 2002 and 2014, Harper 2012, Biener 2018, and references therein.The Problem of Bodies 107
(i) Evidence and principle
A famous commonality among self-proclaimed “Newtonian” philosophers 
such as Keill, ’s Gravesande, Musschenbroek, and Pemberton is their rejec￾tion of the Cartesian method of theorizing in natural philosophy. Pemberton 
describes the Cartesian method thus:
Te custom was to frame conjectures, and if upon comparing them with 
things, there appeared some kind of agreement, though very imperfect, it 
was held sufcient. Yet at the same time nothing less was undertaken than 
entire systems. (Pemberton 1728, 3)
In this brief description, Pemberton highlights two issues. First, the method 
requires only very weak agreement between theory and observation. Second, 
it licenses theory construction far beyond observational evidence. Te up￾shot, according to the Newtonians, is a high risk of error. Te method invites 
us to make extravagant use of our imaginations without sufcient constraints 
on those imaginings.14 ’s Gravesande admonishes:
We must be careful not to admit Fiction for Truth: By such a false Step we 
shut up the Door against all future Examination. No true Explication of the 
Appearances of Nature can be deduced from a false Principle. How vast 
a Diference is there between learning the Fiction of a humane Wit, and 
considering the Work of the most wise Mind . . . it is needless to ofer fur￾ther Arguments, that we ought not to reason from imagined Hypotheses. (’s 
Gravesande 1720, iii)
Tere are two kinds of constraints that we might appeal to. Te frst is evi￾dence, and this may be either empirical or theoretical. Empirical evidence 
might include loose qualitative agreement with the phenomena, and theo￾retical evidence might include fertility for solving further problems; whether 
either of these proposals is adequate as an evidential constraint on physics 
14 Tis problem was already highlighted by Keill in his 1700 Oxford lectures (Keill 1726, 10). In 
the English edition of his Elements, Musschenbroek extends his earlier (1726) remarks prohibiting 
hypotheses as follows: “Terefore hypotheses are to be utterly banished from Physicks; for whatever 
is deduced from them must be uncertain, nor can be esteemed as demonstrated. And besides science 
will rather be oppressed than advanced by feigning hypotheses. Useless controversies will be raised, 
and the phenomena will be distorted, nay perhaps feigned, that the hypotheses may be defended and 
confrmed” (Musschenbroek 1744, 8).108 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
is precisely what is in dispute. Te second kind of constraint is the princi￾ples appealed to in doing physics, such as the restriction to clear and distinct 
ideas in Cartesian physics, Leibniz’s use of PSR and conservation of vis viva, 
Newton’s frst rule of reasoning, and so forth.
In addition to the room for error, there is a problem of underdetermina￾tion: too many conjectures are compatible with the Cartesian constraints on 
theorizing. In the late 17th century, Huygens had sought to remove, or at least 
reduce, the underdetermination problem by means of a method he explic￾itly set out in his Treatise on Light. He required a much tighter quantitative ft 
between theory and observation, emphasized the need for a large number of 
observations, and placed special importance on novel predictions. With all 
these conditions met, he thought “it must be ill” were the proposed causal expla￾nation of the phenomena not, in fact, true.15 Huygens’ articulation of these ad￾ditional requirements on theorizing in physics was an attempt to reduce the risk 
of error in the Cartesian method of conjecture and, more specifcally, to address 
the problem of underdetermination arising from lack of adequate constraints.
Some responded to these problems by advocating that hypotheses be 
banished from philosophy entirely.16 More generally, early 18th century 
Newtonians argued that a new method was needed. At stake was the eviden￾tial basis (Evidence) and constraining principles (Principle) appropriate for 
pursuing physics.
Newton’s own explicit remarks in the Principia on method are exceedingly 
sparse. Te work of elucidating the method and associated epistemology re￾sponsible for the achievements of the Principia fell to later philosophers (and 
continues to the present day).17 Tough discussed already by Cotes in his 
15 Huygens 1912, vi–vii. 16 Pemberton describes the risks in terms of Bacon’s idols, writing: “for in this spacious feld of na￾ture, if once we forsake the true path, we shall immediately lose our selves, and must for ever wander 
with uncertainty.” He goes on: “all men are in some degree prone to a fondness for any notions, which 
they have once imbibed, whereby they ofen wrest things to reconcile them to those notions, and 
neglect the consideration of whatever will not be brought into an agreement with them” (Pemberton 
1728, 5–6). Both of these motifs are later picked up by Du Châtelet 1740. 17 For Newton’s method, we have to look at his practice, rather than solely his explicit statements. 
We have had to wait until recent years, and especially the work of Harper 2012, and Smith 2002 
and 2014 for a philosophical analysis of the depth, sophistication, and sheer epistemic power of the 
method developed and employed by Newton in his Principia. Even those working closely with this 
book have struggled to see what’s going on, and have then been bowled over once the realization 
dawns (e.g., Maupertuis; see Beeson 1992). Te relationship between Newton’s Rules of Reasoning 
and the method deployed in the Principia is a matter of dispute (see Biener 2018 and Ducheyne 
2012). An alternative view is that Keill had it right: the rules do not so much ofer a method as provide 
constraints on theorizing; Keill was right to place them among his Philosophical Axioms, whereas ’s 
Gravesande, Musschenbroek, and Pemberton were wrong to ofer them as providing a method in and 
of themselves.The Problem of Bodies 109
preface to the second edition of the Principia, it was John Keill who placed 
method center stage. In his lectures of 1700, Keill opens with “Of the Method 
of Philosophizing,” and there reviews the previously available methods from 
diferent schools of philosophy, along with their successes and especially 
their failures. He sets out an alternative method, drawing elements from each 
but adhering to none. Te method he proposes is explicitly tied to an epis￾temological goal: “But that we may proceed in this Afair with the greater 
safety, and, as much as possible, avoid all Errors: we shall endeavour to ob￾serve the following Rules.”18
Te lesson from the failures of the past cataloged by Keill is that we need 
a method that, as far as possible, allows us to proceed in a “safe” manner, 
keeping us from making errors.19
Keill’s frst rule states that we are to begin with defnitions that are based on 
experience, and are sufcient for us to recognize (without ambiguity among 
them) the things that are our subject-matter, via their properties. Tat is, we 
are to begin with nominal defnitions, rather than with real defnitions. Te 
rule combines methodology—asserting that defnitions provide a means for 
us to distinguish one thing from another—with epistemology—asserting that 
insofar as we know things, we know them through their sensory properties. 
Te second rule suggests using abstraction to simplify the case (e.g., by frst 
treating bodies in motion as points rather than as extended bodies). And 
the third rule stipulates that we begin with the most simple cases and ad￾vance from there to compound cases (e.g., by treating bodies moving frst in 
a vacuum and then in resisting media).
Keill’s explicit target with these rules is Cartesian philosophers who have 
rushed ahead to give accounts of complex systems—“a World, a Planet, or an 
Animal”—before mastering simple systems frst.20 Tis leads to error:
18 Keill 1726, 7. 19 Keill’s frst major publication (Examination of Dr. Burnet’s Teory of the Earth, 1698) begins 
with a fery and provocative attack on philosophers ancient and modern, with especial vitriol re￾served for Malebranche and Descartes. Keill asks how we are to proceed in light of these appalling 
and insuferable failures of both the ancients and the moderns. His response: by means of appropriate 
method. At this point in time, Keill had little positive to ofer by way of method, other than that we 
need a philosophy “which is founded upon observations and calculations, both which are undoubt￾edly the most certain principles that a Philosopher can build upon. It is in vain to think that a system 
of Natural Philosophy can be framed without the assistance of both, for without observations we can 
never know the appearances and force of nature, and without Geometry and Arithmetick we can 
never discover, whether the causes we assign are proportional to the efects we pretend to explain” 
(Keill 1698, 18). Tese initial thoughts are given some elaboration in his lectures of 1700, as we will 
see next.
20 Keill 1726, 10.110 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
[O]ur Teorists, not having laid a good Foundation, raise up but a weak 
Superstructure; whence it is not to be wondered, if their great Building im￾mediately sinks, not without the disgrace of the Architects. (Keill 1726, 10)
Tese problems are to be avoided by adopting the proper method:
But those who philosophize aright, ought to take another course, and pro￾ceed in quite a diferent Method; and tho’ they do not pretend to form a 
World, an Earth, or a Planet, yet they may be able to lay down a sure 
Foundation. (Keill 1726, 10–11)
His rules concern the methods for gathering evidence in doing philos￾ophy. He is clear that the epistemological goal is to proceed with physics 
while avoiding error, which requires a new method distinct from that of the 
Cartesians, with their tendency to rush toward system-building. What is less 
clear is whether his rules are enough methodological guidance for his goal to 
be met.
In Lecture VIII, Keill adds more advice: he ofers some philosophical ax￾ioms with accompanying remarks. He asserts that the objects of physics—
bodies and their actions—are to be distinguished from the objects of 
geometry in being not so “easily and distinctly conceived.” Tis distinguishes 
his position from that of the Cartesians, with respect to the epistemological 
status of the axioms or principles of physics, and the demonstrations that are 
drawn from them:
I would not have any one in physical Matters, insist so much on a rigid 
Method of Demonstration, that is, Axioms so clear and evident in them￾selves, as those that are delivered in the Elements of Geometry: for the 
Nature of the thing will not admit of such. But we think it sufcient, if we 
deliver such as we apprehend are congruous to Reason and Experience, 
whose Truth shines out, as it were, at frst view, which procure the Belief of 
such as are not obstinate, and to which nobody can deny his Assent, unless 
he professes himself to be altogether a Sceptick. (Keill 1726, 88)
In other words, the requirement on the principles is that reasonable people 
will fnd themselves persuaded to accept them, on pain of falling into skepti￾cism otherwise. Tis is clearly a rather under-developed account of the epi￾stemic status of the principles, but it is all that he has.The Problem of Bodies 111
Next, Keill deals with the epistemic criteria for satisfactory demonstrations, 
noting that “also in demonstrating, it is necessary to make use of a more lax 
sort of Reasoning, and to exhibit Propositions that are not absolutely true, but 
nearly approaching to Truth.”21 Tere are two issues at stake here concerning 
evidence. First, how rigorous does a demonstration in physics need to be for 
it to count as supporting the conclusion? Second, given a demonstrated con￾clusion, what is its truth status? Tese issues arise also in Newton’s fourth rule 
of reasoning: “In experimental philosophy, propositions gathered from the 
phenomena by induction should be considered either exactly or very nearly 
true, notwithstanding any contrary hypotheses.”22 But Keill does not ofer 
anything new. He dismisses any remaining concerns about the epistemic 
status of such axioms and demonstrations:
But if there are any who harden their Minds against such Principles and 
Demonstrations, and will not sufer themselves to be convinced by 
Propositions sufciently manifest; we leave such to enjoy their supine 
Ignorance, nor do we think them worthy to be admitted to the Knowledge 
of the true Philosophy. (Keill 1726, 89)
Fighting words indeed, but rather inadequate as a guide to the epistemic 
and evidential standards appropriate for the principles and conclusions of 
physics.
Keill’s philosophical axioms are themselves also of interest. He follows 
Rohault’s lead.23 Rohault’s frst axiom is that “Nothing, or that which has no 
Existence, has no Properties,” and Keill’s states that “Tere are no Properties 
or Afections of a Non-entity or Nothing.” For his second axiom, Keill skips to 
Rohault’s third, with an additional restriction to the case of bodies (“No Body 
can be naturally annihilated”). Ten, like Rohault, Keill turns his attention to 
causes and efects (Axioms IV–VII; see discussion of Action). Axioms VIII–
XII concern the composition of motion, momenta, and forces. And then the 
three fnal axioms (XIV–XVI) state that all matter is everywhere of the same 
kind; that diferent forms of bodies arise from the diferent arrangements of 
the particles composing bodies, and from the properties of those particles; 
and that the “Qualities, or Actions or Powers” by which bodies act on one 
21 Keill 1726, 88. 22 Newton 1999, 796. Newton did not state this rule until the 1726 edition of the Principia. 23 Chapter V of Rohault is entitled “Te principal Axioms of Natural Philosophy.” Quotations are 
from Clarke’s 1723 translation of Rohault 1671.112 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
another “arise only from the former Afections and Motions conjointly.”24
Together, these axioms form a set of principles that are to be adhered to when 
practicing physics.
Later Newtonian textbooks followed Keill’s lead, beginning their 
discussions with a treatment of method, and of associated epistemology, 
working through the issues in more detail. Moreover, the 1713 edition of 
Newton’s Principia saw the highlighting of his rules of reasoning (through 
their re-labeling as such), and the replacement of the original hypothesis 
3 with the new third rule of reasoning.25 In their textbooks, ’s Gravesande 
(1720), Musschenbroek (1726), and Pemberton (1728) all use method 
as a means to distinguish themselves from the Cartesians, and each ofers 
Newton’s rules of reasoning in an opening chapter on method. All three 
philosophers treat several of the themes touched on by Keill and, despite the 
important diferences among them, jointly they ofer a further articulation of 
the methodological and epistemological commitments associated with this 
self-professed alternative to Cartesianism.
Our point is twofold. First, at stake was the articulation of the principles 
that are to guide theorizing in physics, and the kinds of evidence by which its 
conclusions are to be supported. Second, this articulation was in its infancy.
(ii) Nature
When it comes to our knowledge of the nature and properties of bodies, a 
central commonality among Newtonian philosophers is their rejection of a 
priori reasoning in favor of observation.26 Musschenbroek argues specif￾cally against a Cartesian a priori approach to the nature of body as extension, 
using four claims. First, he states that mental abstraction does not uniquely 
24 Keill 1726, 92. 25 Te fourth rule was added in the third (1726) edition. For the development and interpretation of 
Newton’s rules of reasoning, see Biener 2018, and the references therein.
26 For example, see ’s Gravesande: “Te Properties of Body cannot be discovered a priori. Body 
itself is therefore to be examined, and its Properties exactly consider’d, that we may be able to de￾termine what must follow from these Properties in the Phaenomena of Tings. Upon a further 
Examination of Body we fnd there are some general Laws, according to which Bodies are moved . . . 
which can in no wise be deduced from the Properties, which are said to constitute Body itself ” (1720, 
Preface). To be sure, this is not to deny all a priori knowledge, nor to rule out any role for reasoning in 
physics. See, for example: “As to what regards Spiritual Beings, this can be known only by reason and 
the understanding. What is corporeal can only be known by the means of our senses. Te knowledge 
of each of those, being frst acquired by our understanding and senses, may be much promoted and 
extended by reasoning and refection” (Musschenbroek 1744, 2).The Problem of Bodies 113
yield extension, since if we started with the sensation of the weight of a body, 
we could compress its extension to a point and we would not thereby remove 
its weight. Second, we cannot know how many attributes, and which ones to￾gether, constitute a body—and so having knowledge of some does not mean 
we have ascertained them all. Tird, we cannot derive solidity, inactivity, 
mobility, gravity, and attraction from extension alone, so extension alone 
cannot exhaust the nature of body.27 And fnally, he claims he will prove in 
later chapters that space is distinct from body. According to Musschenbroek’s 
critique, the Cartesian a priori method fails to deliver either the essential 
properties of bodies by showing them necessary, or the further properties 
of bodies by showing how they follow from extension. In short, he disputes 
their approach to Evidence.
More generally, the reason we cannot begin with a priori knowledge of the 
properties of bodies lies in a voluntarist conception of God, widely shared 
among Newtonian philosophers (and by Newton himself), and according to 
which he can associate any properties he so chooses with matter:
Who dares assert whether or how many other Properties may not be given 
to Body, of which we have no Idea? Or who has been able to discover, 
whether besides those Properties of Body, which fow from the Essence of 
Matter, others may not be given it, depending on the free Power of GOD? 
And that Substance extended, and solid, (for this we call Body) may be 
dignifed with some Properties not necessary to its meer Existence. (’s 
Gravesande 1720, viii)
Tis position amounts to a denial of Leibniz’s PSR, and therefore takes a stand 
on Principle. Te epistemic consequence of this voluntarism is that reason 
alone gives no means for us to ascertain the properties of bodies, let alone 
the essence of matter. It therefore has consequences for Evidence. We can 
have epistemic access to some of the properties of matter through our senses, 
but we have no access to the nature of the substance in which they inhere. 
Terefore, we must begin with observations, and from phenomena (i.e., from 
that which we are able to observe using our senses).28 Te observations are to 
27 Musschenbroek 1726, §18. 28 Musschenbroek writes: “All the situations, motions, mutations, and actions of bodies, which we 
may observe by our senses, whether by one or more of them, are called Phenomena or Appearances.” 
He gives examples of each kind of phenomenon (i.e., of situation, of motion, of mutation, and—
interestingly—of action). For this last he ofers “bodies impinging upon one another, or by powers 
mutually drawing each other” (1726, 4; original emphasis).114 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
be detailed and to proceed slowly, and by this means we may arrive at knowl￾edge of some properties of bodies.29 We should not expect to attain complete 
knowledge of the nature of bodies: our epistemic situation in the world does 
not allow this.30
Such a view does not require a voluntarist justifcation. Maupertuis, in 
defending Newtonian attraction, adopted the same empiricist epistemology 
with respect to the nature and properties of bodies as Musschenbroek, 
writing:
If we had perfect Ideas of Bodies; if we well knew what they are in them￾selves, and what their Properties; how, and in what number resident 
in them; we should be able to pronounce whether or no Attraction is a 
Property in Matter: But we, so far from being sufciently informed; know 
Bodies but by some Properties only, without the least knowledge of the 
Subject in which these Properties are reunited. (Maupertuis 1734, 12)
He suggests that the only rational grounds we have for ruling out a candi￾date property as a property of bodies is contradiction with other properties 
already known to pertain to bodies. Beyond this, our knowledge of the 
properties of bodies must come from experience.31 At stake was what counts 
as evidence when addressing Nature.
29 ’s Gravesande, Musschenbroek, and Pemberton all claim epistemic caution and modesty for 
their proposed method. For example: “Whereas the only method, that can aford us any prospect 
of success in this difcult work, is to make our enquiries with the utmost caution, and by very slow 
degrees. And afer our most diligent labour, the greatest part of nature will, no doubt, for ever remain 
beyond our reach” (Pemberton 1728, 4).
30 Pemberton distinguishes between essential and non-essential properties of matter in terms of 
those that always belong to bodies, and those that depend on the particular composition of the body. 
In seeking the properties of bodies we should be looking for those that pertain to all the bodies that we 
examine. However, he cautions against concluding that such properties are essential to matter, noting 
Newton’s distinction between universal and essential properties (1728, 17–8). Musschenbroek makes 
no attempt to provide epistemic access to essential qualities, distinguishing only between those that 
we fnd in all bodies (his attributes) and those that we fnd only in some (his properties or qualities). 
Maupertuis 1732 follows suit, urging that, even though we do not fnd any bodies without extension 
and impenetrability, from this we cannot infer a necessary connection between them, or what other 
properties a body may or may not have.
31 Maupertuis 1734, 14. For more on his defense of Newtonian attraction, see Beeson 1992, Terrall 
2002, and Downing 2012.The Problem of Bodies 115
(iii) Action
Developing a philosophical physics requires more than making observations 
and cataloging observable properties of bodies. We need a means of reasoning 
from these observations to causes. What kinds of causal claims about bodies are 
within reach for natural philosophy, and how are they justifed?
How we proceed will depend on how we approach Evidence and Principle. 
One consequence of beginning from observations is, according to Pemberton, 
that we need to proceed step by step, starting with the most immediate cause of 
each appearance before pursuing more remote causes. Pemberton contrasts this 
way of proceeding with that of making conjectures about causes:
Causes assumed upon conjecture, must be so loose and undefned, that 
nothing particular can be collected from them. But those causes, which 
are brought to light by a strict examination of things, will be more distinct. 
(Pemberton 1728, 12)
Te frst edition of the Principia had been immediately criticized for failing 
to provide a physics—that is, for failing to provide a causal account of grav￾itational phenomena.32 Newtonians such as Pemberton responded that the 
Newtonian method allows for the discovery of true causes of phenomena, 
even without the discovery of their ultimate causes.
Pemberton interprets Newton’s rules as guides to inductive reasoning, 
through which we arrive at knowledge of causes. He views the frst rule as 
an elaboration of the claim that “nature does nothing in vain,” as applied to 
causes and efects. He justifes it by saying that, if we deny it, natural phi￾losophy would be impossible: it would “reduce all philosophy to mere un￾certainty, for the only proof, which we can have, of the existence of a cause, 
is the necessity of it for producing known Efects.”33 Since we are seeking a 
method that neither requires (per impossibile) the same standards of proof as 
in mathematics, nor leaves us with skepticism, we are well advised to accept 
this rule.34
32 See the review in Anonymous 1688: 238. 33 Pemberton 1728, 28, 20. 34 Pemberton writes that reasoning in mathematics difers from that in natural philosophy because 
the objects difer. In mathematics, the objects are free creations of our minds and can be completely 
known by us. In natural philosophy, by contrast, the objects are outside our minds, known to us 
through observations, and therefore not so well known. As a result, we cannot demand the level 
of certainty in physics that we expect in mathematics. “But in natural knowledge the subject of our 116 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
Musschenbroek also ofers Newton’s rules of philosophizing as a guide to 
inductive reasoning from efects to causes. His comments on Newton’s frst 
rule, in the 1744 English edition of his Elements, are especially interesting. As 
Newton stated the rule, the causes are required to be true, but the epistemic 
problem of identifying true causes is not addressed, making the rule prob￾lematic as a methodological requirement. Musschenbroek addresses this ep￾istemic issue explicitly: causes are to be derived from the phenomena, and 
will be true if three conditions are met: (1) “it appears that they really obtain”; 
(2) “the phenomena are manifestly proved to fow from them; and (3) “the 
bodies under examination being tried in various ways, always exhibit the 
same causes of the same phenomena.”35 Condition (1) concerns observation, 
condition (2) concerns embedding of cause and efect in theory such that 
the latter can be deduced from the former, and (3) concerns a requirement of 
varying the observations (to test for robustness under counterfactuals, as we 
might say today). Negatively, the frst rule also requires restraint in assigning 
causes:
But if the causes cannot be assigned, nor certainly proved to exist, it will be 
better ingenuously to acknowledge it, than to invent imaginary causes, from 
whence we may endeavour to explain the phenomena. (Musschenbroek 
1744, 8)
Tis is a prohibition on hypotheses, on which Musschenbroek elaborates vig￾orously, as did other Newtonians. Following his presentation of rules 2 and 3, 
Pemberton writes:
In these precepts is founded that method of arguing by induction, without 
which no progress could be made in natural philosophy. For as the qualities 
of bodies become known to us by experiments only, we have no other way 
of fnding the properties of such bodies, as are out of reach to experiment 
contemplations is without us, and not so compleatly to be known, therefore our method of arguing 
must fall a little short of absolute perfection.” He adds: “It is only here required to steer a just course 
between the conjectural [Cartesian] method of proceeding, against which I have so largely spoke, 
and demanding so rigorous a proof [adopting standards of demonstration appropriate in mathe￾matics], as will reduce all philosophy to meer scepticism, and exclude all prospect of making any 
progress in the knowledge of nature” (Pemberton 1728, 19–20).
35 In the frst edition (1726) he ofers a short prohibition on hypothesizing, but in the later English 
edition there is an extended discussion of the frst rule as a guide for reasoning about causes. See 
Musschenbroek 1744, 8.The Problem of Bodies 117
upon, but by drawing conclusions from those which fall under our exam￾ination. Te only caution here required by us, that the observations and 
experiments, we argue upon, be numerous enough, and that due regard be 
paid to all objections that occur. (Pemberton 1728, 21)
Notice that he is not trying to justify induction as itself securing knowl￾edge. Rather, he ofers inductive reasoning, cautiously pursued and guided 
by Newton’s rules, as a means of escaping the dilemma between requiring a 
higher standard of certainty than the objects of physics allow, and giving up 
on the possibility of physics altogether.
For ’s Gravesande and Musschenbroek, why we must reason from 
observations to the laws of nature inductively, and why these laws of na￾ture are not to be discovered by reason, is that they depend on the arbi￾trary will of God and knowledge of his will is beyond our epistemic reach. 
Musschenbroek ofers an explicit account of our epistemic access to laws. He 
writes:
All bodies are observed to move according to stated laws or rules, whatever 
may be the cause of their motions. By the name of Laws we call those con￾stant appearances, which are always the same, whenever bodies are placed 
in like circumstances. (Musschenbroek 1744, 5)
Te epistemic status of these laws is that they are discovered by the senses 
and “constant appearances,” such that “we may expect” the same efect as we 
have previously observed to follow on future occasions “if the circumstances 
are the same.” Te justifcation for the inductive practice based on “constant 
appearances” is the wisdom of God:
§8. Tese laws are discoverable only by the use of our senses; for the wisest 
of mortals could not have discovered any of them by reason and medita￾tion, nor can pretend to have any innate ideas of them in his mind. For they 
all result from the arbitrary appointment of the Creator, by which he has 
ordered, that the same constant motions shall always obtain on the same 
occasions. (Musschenbroek 1744, 5)
He ofers some examples of constant appearances, and then goes on:118 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
All these things might have been otherwise constituted, if God had so 
pleased. And why he thought ft to constitute them in this manner, we can 
by no means apprehend. It is sufcient for us to know, that they are thus 
constituted, and to adore the infnite wisdom of the Creator, in this most 
admirable order and constitution of the universe. Terefore the cause and 
reason of these laws are entirely unknown to us, but we know they will per￾petually be observed, because the divine will act always in the most con￾stant and uniform manner. (Musschenbroek 1744, 6)
Te mode of reasoning whereby we must arrive at the laws of nature is induc￾tive. We have no independent means of checking whether the regularities we 
identify are in fact laws, and the only basis we have for believing that the laws 
will continue to hold lies in our belief in the constancy of God’s actions.
Moreover, both Musschenbroek and ’s Gravesande hold that the laws of 
nature are the epistemic terminus of our enquiries in physics. For the latter, 
this is because we cannot know whether the laws we infer follow from (i) the 
essence of matter; (ii) properties that God happened to give the bodies in 
this world but which are “by no means essential to Body”; or (iii) some other 
cause that we cannot even comprehend. Once we have reached the laws of 
nature, depending as they do on the will of God, we “cannot proceed any 
farther into our Inquiries into Causes.”36 Musschenbroek explains why not:
In the investigation of corporeal causes we meet with insuperable 
difculties, because when we arrive at the ultimate cause, which depends 
only on the will and power of God, we shall not perceive any clear connec￾tion between the cause and the efect. For it will never be conceived by us, 
how God, as a spirit, operates on matter. Again, we have no rule or criterion 
certainly to know, when we have arrived at the ultimate corporeal or nat￾ural cause of things. (Musschenbroek 1744, 8)
We face a dilemma: our inquiries in physics will ultimately lead to causes for 
which we can give no other explanation than appealing to the will of God, 
yet we can never know whether or not we have arrived at that point of our 
enquiries where such an appeal is appropriate.37
36 ’s Gravesande 1720, xii, xv. 37 Ducheyne & van Besouw suggest that both ’s Gravesande and Musschenbroek exclude the search 
for causes from the remit of physics, writing that they “omitted causal talk entirely in their physics” 
(2017, 10f). We think it more accurate to say that they include the search for causes, but are attentive 
to the limitations on enquiry that arise from their epistemic commitments. Tis is perhaps what they The Problem of Bodies 119
In short, we are to begin with careful and detailed observations of the 
phenomena—that is, the observable behavior of bodies—and move from 
there, by means of slow and cautious inductive reasoning (including detailed 
quantitative investigations of the ft between theory and observations), to 
laws of nature. Te laws of nature are the ultimate causes to which we have 
epistemic access; beyond that, we are not to enquire. Te laws are the way 
they are because God willed them to be that way. To justify our use of induc￾tive reasoning, we are ofered two choices: accept it because without it we 
cannot proceed at all in physics (Pemberton), or ground it in the nature of 
God (Musschenbroek).
Te empirical, inductive practices of the Newtonians discussed here are 
advocated as an antidote to the speculative excesses of the rationalist, deduc￾tive method, whose risk of error had epistemic consequences the Newtonians 
would not tolerate.38 However, this alternative inductive method has epi￾stemic problems of its own. We have the epistemic risks associated frst with 
inductive reasoning, and second with the unknowable will of God. Tis 
seems to be our predicament in attempting to articulate what is required in 
Evidence and Principle such that we can successfully pursue Action.
Tere is a further problem with Action highlighted by Musschenbroek. 
To see this, we frst return to Keill, who in 1700 used observable constant 
conjunction as a means of reasoning from efects to causes. Keill ofered four 
axioms (IV–VII) that concern causation. Tey are worth going through in 
full.39
Axiom IV. Efects are proportional to their adequate Causes.
Statements of this kind were widespread among natural philosophers at 
the time, whether “Cartesian,” “Newtonian,” or “Leibnizian” in inclination. 
have in mind when they indicate that the exclusion applies to “metaphysical” causes and “underlying 
causes.” In our view, ’s Gravesande’s and Musschenbroek’s positions refect Newton’s dividing physics 
into a two-step enquiry into causes (see Brading, forthcoming). So, when Ducheyne & van Besouw 
write that “the aim of physics was to uncover the rules according to which efects occur,” we should 
recognize that these rules themselves provide us with causal knowledge.
38 Te central division here is between a rationalist epistemology, in which truth is deduced from 
a priori principles, and an empiricist epistemology, in which truth is induced from observational ev￾idence. Te rationalist may use observation and experiment as a tool to assist in developing theory, 
and the empiricist may use reasoning as a tool to develop theorizing; but the epistemological basis of 
the two approaches to science difer, and their methods must also difer correspondingly.
39 Keill 1726, 89–92.120 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
Indeed, some such principle is needed in order to reason from efects to 
causes. Axioms V–VII provide additional constraints on such reasoning.
Axiom V. Te Causes of Natural Tings are such, as are the most simple, 
and are sufcient to explain the Phenomena: for Nature always proceeds in 
the simplest and most expeditious Method; because by this Manner of op￾erating the Divine Wisdom displays itself the more.
Te source of most of this rule is clearly Newton’s frst rule of reasoning.40
However, the fnal clause is not in Newton, and we don’t know what the 
source is. Interestingly, the middle and fnal clauses, without the frst clause 
about causes, is the reasoning that Maupertuis uses when arguing for his 
least action principle. Reasoning about efcient causes concerns the power 
of God; reasoning about teleology (not part of physics for Musschenbroek, 
recall) concerns the wisdom of God.
Axiom VI. Natural Efects of the same kind have the same causes.
Tis is very close to Newton’s statement of his second rule of reasoning, and 
the examples that Keill gives are those that Newton gives in illustrating his 
rule. Tis rule plays a crucial role in the argument for universal gravita￾tion, identifying the cause of the planetary orbits (a celestial phenomenon) 
with the cause of trajectories of falling bodies (a terrestrial phenomenon). 
While Axioms IV–VI are (at least) parsimony constraints on the attribu￾tion of causes, Axiom VII concerns the epistemic warrant for the inference 
from efect to cause, analyzed in terms of causal constant conjunction and 
covariation:
Axiom VII. If two things are so connected together, that they perpetu￾ally accompany each other, that is, if one of them is changed or removed, 
the other likewise will be in the same manner changed or removed; either 
one of these is the Cause of the other, or they both proceed from the same 
common Cause. (Keill 1726, 90)
40 First published as “Hypothesis 1” in the 1687 Principia. See also the second edition of 1713. 
Te wording is unchanged in the later editions. It reads: “No more causes of natural things should 
be admitted than are both true and sufcient to explain their phenomena. As the philosophers 
say: Nature does nothing in vain, and more causes are in vain when fewer sufce, for nature is simple 
and does not indulge in the luxury of superfuous causes” (Newton 1999, 794).The Problem of Bodies 121
Keill ofers examples, including the covariation of movements of a lodestone 
and a needle, as well as the tides and the moon. Te evidence for a causal re￾lation in terms of constant conjunction therefore includes cases where the 
covarying phenomena are spatially separated. Tis is crucial to Keill’s goal of 
maintaining that Newton’s theory of universal gravitation provides a causal 
account of gravitational phenomena, and is therefore a physics (and not 
merely beautiful mathematics awaiting an accompanying physics).
Tere are two distinct problems facing Keill’s strategy of using constant 
conjunction and covariation as an epistemic warrant for causal knowledge. 
Te frst is in the inference from constant conjunction to the presence of 
causation—something with which Hume famously took issue. Te second 
concerns the causal process. Musschenbroek makes explicit this latter epi￾stemic difculty, and his example is collisions:41
we do not understand the manner of operating of any one thing; and all 
we can do is to observe the efects that constantly fow thence. When two 
bodies impinge against one another, how do they operate upon each other? 
What is the force, and how is it transferred from one to the other? . . . All 
these mysteries are concealed from us mortals. Tose that think they very 
well understand the impulse of bodies, because manifest efects of it contin￾ually present themselves before their eyes, seem not at all to consider what 
produces those efects, nor to distinguish between the cause and the efect. 
(Musschenbroek 1726, ix)
Constant conjunction may allow us to infer the existence of a causal rela￾tion, but this does not tell us how the efect comes about: we do not arrive at a 
causal-explanatory theory of collisions.
For all the fuss about Newtonian gravitation and action-at-a-distance, the 
real problem was both broader and deeper: how, if at all, does one body act 
upon another? Despite their pronouncements that physics is the investiga￾tion of causes, there are limitations to how far Newtonian philosophers are 
able to proceed by means of their method. It seems there may be a mismatch 
between Action, on the one hand, and the epistemic resources available in 
their specifcations of Evidence and Principle, on the other.42
41 Maupertuis (1732) makes the same point in France in his defense of Newtonian attraction. See 
Chapter 5.
42 Newton himself had split physics into two steps: in the frst he inferred the existence of gravity as 
the cause of a wide range of observed motions of bodies; but for the second—ascertaining the cause 
of gravity—he never reached a conclusion. We see here the beginnings of this same issue unfolding 122 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
(iv) Alternatives
Early champions of Newtonian natural philosophy in France were Émilie Du 
Châtelet and Pierre Maupertuis. Du Châtelet is most remembered for her 
translation of Newton’s Principia (1756) with its extensive commentary, and 
Maupertuis for his contributions to least-action approaches in mechanics. 
Du Châtelet’s early advocacy of Newtonianism came through her work with 
Voltaire, but by the time of her Foundations of Physics (1740), Du Châtelet 
had come to the conclusion that neither the Cartesian nor the Newtonian 
method was adequate for the demands of physics. In other words, she sought 
a new approach to Evidence and Principle in order to achieve Nature and 
Action.
Revising her text just as it was going to press, she replaced a discussion of 
Newton’s rules of reasoning with a new approach to method in physics.43 Te 
rules of reasoning, viewed as guides for theorizing about causes, had turned 
out to be inadequate. In her Foundations, she appeals instead to Leibniz’s PSR, 
ofering a two-pronged methodology that also uses empirical resources to 
test hypotheses.44 By these means, Du Châtelet attempts to deliver on Nature 
and Action while meeting the epistemological challenge facing Newtonian 
philosophical physics in the early 18th century (see Chapter 5).
Du Châtelet’s contemporary Maupertuis, with whom she was in fre￾quent correspondence, also sought an additional principle by which to con￾strain theorizing in physics, and his proposal also has a Leibnizian favor. 
For Maupertuis, however, the objective is not to strengthen our resources 
for reasoning to efcient causes. Rather, in his assessment, efcient causa￾tion is insufcient for developing a full causal-explanatory account of the 
phenomena, for it takes into account only the power of God, and not his 
wisdom.45 Rejecting Musschenbroek’s placement of teleological reasoning 
outside of physics, Maupertuis took “nature does nothing in vain,” which 
Pemberton had interpreted as the basis of Newton’s frst rule of reasoning 
in the case of contact action, with the consequent pressure to revisit what kinds of causal knowl￾edge, if any, are epistemically accessible. See section 4.6 for further discussion of causation, as well as 
Chapter 5 for continuation of this theme.
43 See Brading 2019, chapter 2. 44 See Du Châtelet 1740, chapter 4. See also the essays in Hagengruber 2012, as well as Detlefsen 
2019, Brading 2019, and references therein.
45 See Terrall (2002, 179) for this interpretation of Maupertuis 1744.The Problem of Bodies 123
concerning efcient causes, and used it instead to re-introduce fnal causa￾tion into physics with his principle of least action (PLA).46
Importantly for our purposes, among the processes Maupertuis treats via 
his PLA is collision.47 It is only familiarity that makes impact seem intelli￾gible, he says; once we refect, we realize it is utterly mysterious how motion 
could pass from one body to another.48 He elaborates on his point with a vivid 
example, of someone who had never touched a body or seen them collide, 
but who had experience of the mixing of colors. Presented with a blue body 
moving toward a yellow one, and asked about the outcome, such a person 
might say that the blue body would turn green when the two bodies meet, 
Maupertuis suggests.49 But could such a person guess that the two bodies 
would join together and move with a common speed, or that they would re￾fect of one another in opposite directions? Maupertuis thinks it would not 
be possible for the person to guess these things in the absence of experience. 
Moreover, even once we know from experience that bodies are impenetrable 
and that they refect and displace one another, we still do not know how these 
changes come about: we lack a causal explanation of the collision process in 
terms of the nature of bodies.
And so, Maupertuis seeks to shif the debate away from causal explanations 
in terms of the nature of bodies, and toward a search for the principles and 
laws by which motion is distributed, conserved, and destroyed. Maupertuis 
explicitly rejects the Leibnizian “law of continuity” as a suitable principle 
because, he says, we do not have good reasons for excluding hard bodies. 
Similarly, conservation of vis viva does not hold for all bodies and so cannot 
be accepted. What we need, according to Maupertuis, is a single, universal 
principle. Such a principle would reveal what all physical processes have 
in common, and in this way render them intelligible. Tis is what his PLA 
provides, he claims.50
46 Tis is not to say that the principle of least action must, or even should, be interpreted in terms of 
fnal causes, but this is how Maupertuis understood it. See McDonough 2020 and Veldman (n.d.).
47 Maupertuis 1746. 48 See also Maupertuis 1740. 49 Maupertuis 1746, 280. 50 Maupertuis claims to show that PLA encompasses (i) equilibrium in statics (1740); (ii) the 
propagation, refection, and refraction of light (1744); and (iii) both hard and elastic body collisions 
(1746). Note that the 1740 paper contains no mention of fnal causation. Te search for unifcation 
through a single principle (nomic unity) emerges as an important theme in rational mechanics in the 
mid to late 18th century, see Chapters 9–12. For Maupertuis, the epistemic status of such principles is 
inductive (see especially Maupertuis 1740). For details of Maupertuis’ PLA, and its subsequent devel￾opment by Euler, see Veldman (n.d.).124 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
For our purposes here, the important point is this: both Du Châtelet and 
Maupertuis, despite their expertise in Newtonian physics, came to believe 
that the methods of the Newtonians were insufcient for us to arrive at 
knowledge of causes. Tis led them to revisit the demands of Nature, Action, 
Evidence and Principle.
To sum up: In the Newtonian response to Cartesian physics, we see the im￾portance of Evidence and Principle for articulating conditions on acceptable 
accounts of Nature and Action. And we see the preliminary nature of these 
discussions: a great deal more work was needed to provide a satisfactory ar￾ticulation of Evidence and Principle, and to evaluate the alignment of these 
criteria with the proposed accounts of Nature and Action.
4.6 Substance and causation
Body can be situated within the early modern debates over the metaphysics 
of substance and causation. All created substances were presumed (by almost 
everyone at the time) to depend on God, the primary substance and primary 
cause of all things. Body is exclusively concerned with secondary substances 
(bodies) and secondary causation (agency among bodies). For our purposes, 
this is really all that matters.
Tat said, such a brief statement risks underplaying the signifcance of 
Body for the metaphysics of substance and causation, because standard 
narratives would have us believe we know where this leads. By the mid-18th 
century Hume had shown us that we lack epistemic warrant for endorsing 
any metaphysics of secondary substance or causation for bodies, and mean￾while science progresses just fne, striding boldly on without either. And so 
we know what to expect: any metaphysical elements of NAEP will, in the end, 
fade away as Hume’s epistemic lessons take hold and science establishes itself 
as autonomous from metaphysics. Were this right, then when it comes to 
the debates over substance and causation our book would fll in details but it 
would not change the narrative. Our investigations suggest a diferent phil￾osophical trajectory within which to locate the signifcance and relevance of 
Body for the debates over substance and causation.51
51 Te following discussion draws from and engages with Clatterbaugh’s 1999 study of causation in 
early modern philosophy.The Problem of Bodies 125
Suppose we begin from a familiar theme of early modern philosophy: the 
increasing attention to epistemology—in particular, the use of epistemology 
in constraining acceptable metaphysics. Metaphysical claims should not out￾strip our epistemic resources, as the kinds of creatures that we are. A widely 
shared view was that our knowledge of secondary substances is limited to 
knowledge of their properties. Tus bodies were presumed to be (sec￾ondary) substances, and the contribution of Nature to addressing Body, in 
identifying the essential properties of bodies and so forth, is to uncover all 
there is that we can know about such substances. At frst sight, this approach 
presupposes that bodies are substances, thereby implicitly committing us to 
claims about what makes bodies substances in the frst place. Such claims may 
include: secondary substances have independent existence (they depend on 
nothing other than God for their existence); they are unities (in some sense 
to be specifed); and/or they are active (either with respect to the unfolding 
of their own states, solely, or also in relation to other substances). Te rela￾tionship between these metaphysical criteria for substancehood and Body
seems to be that the latter presumes the former: metaphysical commitments 
underpin Body, even when they do not receive explicit attention. However, 
things are not so straightforward, as we will see. First, however, we need to 
add causation into our discussion.
It is broadly uncontroversial that protagonists in the late 17th century cau￾sation debate worked with four desiderata for a metaphysics of causation:
1. Te account should be consistent with God being the primary cause of 
all things, and with creatures being, at most, secondary causes.
2. It should make the mind–body interaction intelligible. Tis was an es￾pecially pressing problem in light of Cartesian dualism.
3. It should ensure that body–body interaction is intelligible. Seventeenth 
century philosophers claimed this intelligibility as the primary advan￾tage of the new “mechanical philosophy” over its rivals.
4. Te preceding desiderata should all be achieved by a single, unifed 
metaphysics of causation.
At frst, the debate focused on (1), and by the early 1700s it had yielded oc￾casionalism, concurrentism, pre-established harmony, and physical infux 
as contenders for secondary causation among bodies. Ironically, this makes 
(3)—viewed as unproblematic as of the mid-17th century—highly problem￾atic. Given occasionalism or pre-established harmony, secondary causation 126 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
among bodies fails to be “true causation” because in both cases God is the 
only true cause. Alternatively, it becomes unintelligible: for physical infux, 
this is the conclusion of Leibniz’s critique; for concurrentism, it follows be￾cause the position is unstable (or at least seemed to many to be so).52
As the 18th century progressed, debates attempting (4), viz. a single, uni￾fed metaphysics of causation, faded. Te question is why, and what philo￾sophical lessons we should take away. One view, expressed by Clatterbaugh, 
is that “science” successfully redirected attention away from the search for 
a metaphysics of causation to the task of identifying regularities as a means 
of discovering secondary causes. Hume’s epistemic critique showed that 
constant conjunction is all that we have access to epistemically; this was in 
line with the needs of science, and so Hume laid to rest the quest for a meta￾physics of causation.53 We think there is an alternative narrative that brings 
rather diferent philosophical lessons to light.
In our view, the fading away of (4) is not the demise of the quest for a met￾aphysics of causation. Rather, it is a fragmentation of the debate: discussions 
of God’s action in the world, of mind–body interaction, and of bodily causa￾tion continue, but as increasingly independent lines of enquiry. Moreover, 
the emphasis on epistemology engenders a shif in method, so that an inves￾tigation of particular causes becomes a prerequisite for pursuing a general
metaphysics of causation. And so, it’s not that attention to the “scientifc” task 
of discovering secondary causes replaces the search for a metaphysics of cau￾sation; rather, this task becomes a frst step toward pursuing the latter.
Within this fragmented debate, the metaphysics of causation becomes a 
localized enquiry, one venue of which is the metaphysics of body–body (sec￾ondary) causation. Tere is an ongoing line of philosophical development 
that, without presupposing a general metaphysics of cause, seeks an account 
of bodily causation. In our view, these attempts to make bodily causation in￾telligible can be understood as exploring and developing a metaphysics of 
causation, albeit one that may be limited in scope (viz. to bodies).
Such a localization in turn has an unexpected outcome arising directly 
from Body, as we shall see in later chapters. Shortly put, difculties with Body
lead to a disconnect between the bodies of physics and those of ordinary life, 
52 See Clatterbaugh 1999. See also Watkins 2005, chapter 1, for attempts to save physical infux 
from Leibniz’s critique.
53 Tough, as Clatterbaugh notes, there is a further irony that Hume’s analysis does not serve the 
purposes of science, but that is an additional story.The Problem of Bodies 127
which in turn severs the metaphysics of causation developed within the par￾ticular contexts of the former from that appropriate for the latter.
We can ofer some support for this narrative of localization in the meta￾physics of causation. First, notice that even those who opted for occasion￾alism (e.g., Malebranche) or for pre-established harmony (e.g., Leibniz 
himself)—according to which bodies do not “truly” act on one another—
sought a physics that would make body–body action intelligible. Of 
course, the criteria for intelligibility were themselves up for dispute, but the 
commonalities across all discussions of bodily interaction are striking, as we 
have seen (Chapters 2 and 3). Philosophers attempted to render collisions 
intelligible by means of a “causal” explanation of the process whereby one 
body acts on another, such that outcomes are in accordance with the rules of 
collision. Te point is that those who responded to (1) by adopting occasion￾alism, for example, did not then desist from pursuing (3). On the contrary, 
aside from the caveat about secondary causation not being “true and proper” 
causation, their accounts of secondary bodily causation are indistinguishable 
from those who take such causation to be genuine.
Second, and as a consequence, discussions of causation that focus on (1), 
and thereby on occasionalism, pre-established harmony, and so forth, be￾come disconnected from discussions intended to address (3). To the extent 
that discussion of (1) fades, so too do debates over the metaphysics of causa￾tion incorporating (1). But notice: this does not entail that discussions con￾cerning secondary causation among bodies also cease to be a locus of debate 
over the metaphysics of causation. Rather, debates over (1) come to seem ir￾relevant to the task associated with (3). In a revision to the “standard” narra￾tive, we suggest that the disconnection of (1) from (3) allowed philosophers 
to set aside the former and focus attention on the latter; that is, on developing 
an adequate metaphysics for (secondary) causation among bodies. Tat task 
explicitly required the intelligibility of body–body action. And so, insofar as 
intelligibility was achieved, we should expect the account to bring with it an 
appropriate metaphysics of causation, albeit one that is localized to bodies. 
What fzzles out is not the search for a metaphysics of causation, but rather 
(1) and (4), leaving (3)—and separately (2)—to be pursued.
If this is right, then our enquiries into Body open the way to a narrative 
in which bodily action (Action) becomes an important locus of enquiry for 
the metaphysics of causation in the mid to late 18th century, one that brings 
no metaphysical preconceptions to the table, not even Aristotle’s taxonomy 
of four causes. Te criterion of success is that it renders bodily action, as 128 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
identifed and explored in Body, intelligible (where the criteria for intelligi￾bility are themselves controversial). What looks like “science” from our 21st 
century vantage point, is simultaneously a richly loaded vein of metaphysical 
enquiry, as yet underexplored.54
Tird, having frst localized our inquiries into the metaphysics of causa￾tion to the particular case of bodies as secondary causes, one might hope to 
build outward to a general metaphysics of causation. In fact, this is not what 
happened. On the contrary, further localization and fragmentation followed. 
As we will see in later chapters, by the late 18th century the “bodies” of 
physics had proliferated into a variety of objects of theorizing (mass points, 
mass elements, ideal fuids, etc.) and these had become disconnected from 
the bodies of our everyday lives (human bodies, animals, rocks, trees, chairs) 
in the sense that there was no explicit route by which to recover the latter 
from the former. Tis is one of the lessons of this book, and of our study of 
Body. And one consequence is this: for any metaphysics of causality devel￾oped for the objects of physics, we will lack the means to transfer it to the 
bodies of everyday experience. Where the standard narrative asserts that the 
search for a metaphysics of causation was rightly abandoned, we instead ofer 
an alternative perspective: our epistemic situation is such that our enquiries 
into the metaphysics of causation will have to be piecemeal, at least in the frst 
instance.
So much for causation. What about substance? Body inquires into causa￾tion via Action, and Action in turn draws on Nature. Nature, as we know, is 
above all a search for the generic properties of bodies—those that pertain to 
all bodies universally, those that are essential to bodies and without which 
a thing would not be a body, and so forth. Tis seems to leave metaphys￾ical questions about the nature of substance untouched, for it presumes that 
bodies are (secondary) substances. We suggest that there is an alternative 
perspective here too. In parallel with the causation debate, we suggest that 
the 18th century began with a unifed approach to substance, both primary 
and secondary, and then became localized. Te criteria for substancehood 
were a matter of dispute, and Body provides one context in which they can be 
probed. Suppose we are interested in independence, unity, and/or activity as 
54 Tere is a further wrinkle. For some, such as Descartes and Musschenbroek, it is laws rather 
than bodies that are secondary causes. Sorting out the metaphysics of the relationships between laws, 
bodies, and the properties of bodies (or between laws and the entities they “govern”) was then and 
remains now a topic of much discussion. See Ott & Patton 2018 and references therein, as well as Ott 
2009, Brading 2012, and Biener & Schliesser 2017.The Problem of Bodies 129
conditions. We can use our study of Body to investigate what these amount 
to for bodies, and the extent to which they satisfy them. Our methods will 
be the familiar feedback between empirical inquiry and conceptual clarif￾cation.55 Again, the local becomes prior to the general in the order of inves￾tigation, and detailed empirical research is the frst step, prior to a general 
metaphysics of substance and causation. Metaphysical inquiry becomes 
localized, but it is no less a metaphysical inquiry for that.
Rather than seeing in the 18th century an abandonment of the meta￾physics of secondary substance and causation (as epistemically inaccessible, 
at best), we see the emergence of an alternative route forward: (a) presume 
that secondary causation exists, (b) identify cases of secondary causation, 
and (c) render them intelligible, including by providing a sufcient meta￾physics; and (a) presume that secondary substances exist, (b) identify these 
secondary substances, and (c) render their status as substances intelligible by, 
for example, showing that they can serve as the objects of laws.56
We do not pursue the metaphysics of substance and causation explicitly 
in the remainder of this book (though it will appear again when we dis￾cuss Kant and Boscovich), and our remarks here cannot be more than sug￾gestive. Nevertheless, the route lies open for this work to be done. In our 
opinion, there is a strand of philosophical development that remained live 
and productive, though transformed into localized debates that were highly 
entangled with detailed empirical enquiries. Tis is the place where Body
engages with the metaphysical debates over substance and causation, and it 
does so concerning secondary substance and secondary causation.
4.7 Te goal: a philosophical mechanics
A successful solution to Body will address both Nature and Action. In 
Chapters 2 and 3, we saw the importance of collision theory for addressing 
PCOL. In accounts of the natural world where collisions are a means of 
55 For example, we might try out the claim that to be a secondary substance (e.g., a body) is to be 
something of which the laws can be predicated, and then explore what independence, unity, and ac￾tivity amount to in that case. We begin from an initial conception of these three conditions, and then 
refne them in response to what we learn through our study of bodies. Tis makes metaphysics em￾pirically responsive (as Aristotle’s was, for example, but now in ways that refect the epistemological 
lessons of the 17th and 18th centuries), but it is metaphysics nonetheless.
56 Insofar as such an approach requires a rejection of Humean epistemology, alternatives were 
available at the time from those who rejected the widespread commitment to “ideas” as being the 
starting point of epistemology.130 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
action among bodies (and especially where they are the only means of ac￾tion, as in most “mechanical” philosophies eschewing action-at-a-distance), 
addressing Action will therefore require solving PCOL. In Chapters 2 and 
3 we argued that PCOL was a foundational problem in natural philosophy. 
We now see the breadth and depth of its signifcance. Te overarching goal 
of physics was to solve Body, and solving PCOL is a necessary condition for 
completing that task.57
Tis result has three consequences. Te frst two concern the importance 
of PCOL. First, any philosopher who sought to ofer a solution to Body
needed to address it. PCOL was important not just in its own right, therefore, 
but had even greater signifcance due to its role in relation to Body. Second, 
it becomes a powerful tool for investigating Body. As noted above, Leibniz 
includes active and passive force in addressing Nature precisely because they 
are required for addressing Action: for providing an explanation of how it is 
that one body acts upon another. Collisions are the exemplar of bodily action, 
and solving PCOL places demands upon the resources we make available in 
Nature. Turning this around, by investigating PCOL we have a route toward 
addressing Body by means of a problem that is more clearly articulated—
both conceptually and with respect to empirical evidence. It was recognized 
and pursued as such, as we will see in later chapters. We begin this project in 
Chapter 5, where we look in detail at several attempts to address Body that 
use PCOL as an investigative tool and test case for adequate solutions. Tere, 
we complete the case for our claim that PCOL was the most important, far￾reaching, and pressing challenge at the foundation of early 18th century 
philosophical physics. Te consequences of this persist throughout the re￾mainder of our book.
Te third consequence concerns Body. We have seen in Chapters 2 and 
3 that PCOL requires not just philosophical physics for its solution, but a 
philosophical mechanics of collision. Tat is to say, an adequate solution will 
integrate resources from both philosophical physics and rational mechanics 
so as to provide a causal-explanatory account of the collision process (see 
also Chapter 1). PCOL is a necessary condition for solving Body, and thus 
Body too becomes a problem in philosophical mechanics. Any solution 
to Body must provide bodies that are adequate not only for the purposes 
57 From a metaphysical perspective, at stake is secondary substance and causation, pursued inde￾pendently of—or even prior to—a general metaphysics of substance and causation. More specifcally, 
with our metaphysical enquiry localized to Body, we seek accounts of Nature (bodily substance) and 
Action (bodily causation). Te primary tool for this pursuit is PCOL.The Problem of Bodies 131
of philosophical physics, but also as the objects of rational mechanics. We 
show how this plays out—and with what ramifcations—in the remainder of 
our book.
To sum up and conclude. We began this chapter with Body—what is a 
body, and how can we know?—plus four criteria for success: Nature, Action, 
Evidence, and Principle. We have explored these within the context of 18th 
century natural philosophy, and have shown the relationship of Body both 
to PCOL and to debates over the metaphysics of substance and causation. 
Together, the results of these inquiries enable us to formulate the principal 
goal to be met by purported solutions to Body.
Goal: to provide a single, well-defned concept of body that is simul￾taneously (i) consistent with an intelligible theory of matter, (ii) ade￾quate for a causal-explanatory account of the behaviors of bodies, and 
(iii) sufcient for the purposes of mechanics.
Tis is a project in philosophical mechanics, and it was central to natural phi￾losophy in the early 18th century. It also persisted throughout the century, as 
later chapters will show.Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason. Katherine Brading and Marius Stan, Oxford University Press. 
© Oxford University Press 2023. DOI: 10.1093/oso/9780197678954.003.0005
5
Body and force in the physics 
of collisions: Du Châtelet and Euler
5.1 Introduction
At the beginning of the 18th century, the problem of bodies (Body) lay at 
the heart of natural philosophy: What is a body? And how can we know? 
Solutions to Body were expected to ascertain the properties, causal powers, 
and generic behaviors of bodies (Nature); explain how, if at all, bodies act 
on one another (Action); and provide justifcation for their results (Evidence 
and Principle).1 By the middle of the century, prospects for a solution looked 
bleak, and the result is an intriguing philosophical predicament, or so we 
will argue.
In the preceding chapters, we have seen the central role of collision theory 
in addressing Body: we have made vivid the foundational role of collisions 
in philosophical physics,2 and have claimed that solving the problem of 
collisions (PCOL) is a necessary condition for solving Body. Any satisfac￾tory treatment of impact was expected to give a causal-explanatory account 
integrating philosophical physics with rational mechanics: a philosophical 
mechanics of collisions. In this chapter, we show just how difcult this task 
proved to be. We argue that the two main lines of approach available in the 
middle of the 18th century, defended by Émilie Du Châtelet and Leonhard 
Euler, respectively, arrived at insurmountable obstacles. Te consequence 
is that the branch of philosophy charged with the study of body in general 
fails: if it cannot address PCOL, then it cannot answer Body.
1 See Chapter 4 for Body. For explication of all the shorthand terminology that we use in this 
chapter, including Body, PCOL, Nature, Action, Evidence, Principle, and “philosophical mechanics,” 
see Chapter 1.
2 Today the term “physics” means something very diferent from what it meant then. Troughout 
this book, we use the term “physics” as it was used at that time, to indicate the subdiscipline of phi￾losophy charged with the study of body in general (for more details, see Chapter 4). To remind the 
reader of this unfamiliar usage, now and then we use the label “philosophical physics.” Physics in that 
sense was also called “natural philosophy.” Te two terms were ofen used interchangeably (again, see 
Chapter 4).Body and force in the physics of collisions 133
We begin (section 5.2) with Nature: with the properties of body presumed 
in any physics of collisions. We argue that the three most important ones—
extension, quantity of matter, and impenetrability—all involve long-standing 
conceptual difculties that neither Du Châtelet nor Euler fully resolved.
Next, we turn our attention to Action: to the philosophical physics 
of bodily action, and to the specifc case of how one body acts on another 
through collision (section 5.3). Beginning from primarily Leibnizian and 
Newtonian resources, respectively, Du Châtelet (section 5.4) and Euler (sec￾tion 5.5) each ofered an account of how it is that one body acts on another. 
Teir proposals involve radically diferent conceptualizations of body and 
force, and we argue that both face serious difculties.
In our view, this represents the end of the road for a philosophical me￾chanics of collisions based on a philosophical physics of extended, impene￾trable, material bodies acting on one another by means of contact forces. Or 
so we conclude (section 5.6). No such project is viable.
Tis result takes some digesting, both in itself, and for its wider signif￾cance. We elaborate on some of the ramifcations in later chapters, where the 
dramatic consequences for philosophy, and for its relationship to physics and 
mechanics, begin to emerge.
5.2 Nature: extension as a property of bodies
Philosophers in the early 1700s agreed that extension is a property of 
bodies: the fundamental objects of physics were bodies, and they were taken 
to be extended. Such bodies are important not just for physics, but also for 
rational mechanics, and so the topic of extension as a property of bodies 
pertains to philosophical mechanics quite generally. Moreover, for some 
of its purposes (e.g., constraints) rational mechanics takes extended rigid
bodies as primitive (see later chapters). Tus, insofar as physics at that time 
was expected to supply mechanics with its objects (viz. the material bodies 
that mechanics then treats mathematically), it was expected to provide ex￾tended bodies, including rigid ones (or at least bodies that could be treated as 
ideally rigid in specifc contexts).
From the 17th century, philosophers had inherited two basic types of 
matter theory from which to construct spatially extended bodies: Descartes’ 
infnitely (or indefnitely) divisible matter, and the indivisible particles of 
the atomists. Both faced difculties arising from the concept of extension. 134 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
Insofar as extension is a geometric concept, all parties agreed on the fol￾lowing premise: that which is extended is divisible. Cartesian matter theorists 
embraced geometric divisibility as a property of matter; atomists rejected it. 
Either way, problems ensued. By the end of the century, attempts to over￾come these difculties posed a direct threat to physics as the science of ex￾tended bodies.
For the Cartesian matter theorist, the divisibility of extension presents 
the following problem for constructing a viable notion of body. If bodies are 
the subject-matter of physics, then they should persist through time, and 
through interactions with one another (such as impact); but if matter is in￾fnitely divisible, then what holds a region of such matter (a body) together 
over time and through collisions? Descartes claimed that mutual rest of the 
parts is sufcient for those parts to jointly constitute a body, but extension 
itself lacks the resources to keep the parts of a body at mutual rest when a col￾lision occurs, and so cannot be what holds a body together. Cartesian bodies 
are doomed to be ephemeral, dividing at the slightest collision.3 Te upshot 
is that such “bodies,” having only the property of being extended, in fact lack 
what is needed to make them bodies at all.
Te atomist overcomes this problem by insisting that matter is not di￾visible all the way down; rather, there are ultimate parts of matter that are 
extended yet indivisible. Tis avoids the ephemerality of the smallest 
bodies, and provides stable units of matter out of which larger bodies can 
be constructed. However, atomism faces its own conceptual difculty, for it 
must escape the contradiction present in the following set of claims: (1) that 
which is extended is divisible; (2) atoms are extended; (3) atoms are indivis￾ible. Claim (1) was widely held to be true on the basis of geometry. Claims 
(2) and (3) are needed to avoid ephemerality and arrive at bodies. Yet (1), (2), 
and (3) are mutually contradictory, and to begin with a logically incoherent 
concept of extended body is a risky place to start when doing natural philos￾ophy. It seems, then, that neither Cartesian matter theory nor atomism has 
the resources for a coherent concept of extended body. Tis was the situation 
facing natural philosophers in the early 18th century.
3 Tis issue worried Leibniz already in his youth: if extension is the sole essential attribute of 
matter, then any region of matter lacks the unity required to prevent “division to dust” (see Garber 
2009, 62, where he discusses Leibniz’s papers of 1675–6 collectively known as De summa rerum). 
Moreover, such a region lacks the cohesion a body must have in order to survive collisions, and this 
worried Newton (see Brading 2018, 8–9). Both concluded: something more must be added to exten￾sion in order for us to have an extended body.Body and force in the physics of collisions 135
One response to the difculty facing atomism is to distinguish mathe￾matical from physical extension. Musschenbroek, for example, adopted this 
approach. While conceptual arguments show mathematical extension to 
be infnitely divisible, for physical extension the issue is an empirical one, 
he claimed. It may be the case, he suggested, that God created least parts of 
matter that are indivisible “by any power of nature,” and whether or not he 
has done so is something that can be determined only by experiment.4 Tis 
position is in line with those “Newtonians” who accepted that explanations 
in science come to an end in the will of God (see Chapter 4). Once we have 
extended atoms, made by God, we can build extended bodies. In the 1730s, 
Du Châtelet took a similar approach, though she later changed her mind, as 
we will see.5
Leibniz ofered a diferent solution. He sought to arrive at extended bodies 
(at least phenomenologically) from non-extended simples, or monads. His 
proposal involved the desperate move of adding immaterial souls to the ma￾terial world; “desperate” because immaterial souls lie outside the domain of 
physics (see, e.g., Musschenbroek’s characterization of physics and meta￾physics).6 And, in making this move, Leibniz thereby conceded that physics 
is unable to provide its own objects. If we follow Leibniz, then we give up on 
the primary goal of philosophical physics, for we admit that physics lacks the 
resources for delivering a well-defned concept of body that is both consistent 
with an intelligible theory of matter and adequate for a causal-explanatory 
account of the behaviors of bodies.
Tis was the state of the debate as of the 1730s, at the time when Du 
Châtelet and Euler got involved.
4 See Musschenbroek 1744, 19. In this, he follows Newton; see Brading 2018, 15, footnote 17. 5 To Maupertuis she wrote (September 29, 1738): “Your idea that God has not made (for could not 
make is a big word) bodies without elasticity, gave me another one; it is that the frst parts of matter 
could be indivisible not by the complete privation of elasticity but by the will of God, for one is ofen 
obliged to have recourse there, and I think this indivisibility of the frst bodies of matter to be one of 
the indispensable necessities in physics” (Besterman 1959, letter 146).
6 Musschenbroek 1744, 1.136 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
(i) Du Châtelet on non-extended simples and 
extended bodies
In her Foundations of Physics of 1740,7 Du Châtelet tackles the extension 
and divisibility of bodies head on. She rejects the Newtonian appeal to the 
inscrutable will of God as justifcation for the existence of extended atoms, 
believing that they cannot be postulated as primitive. She maintains that 
the best (and perhaps only) available alternative is the postulation of non￾extended simples. Unlike Leibniz, however, she makes no appeal to minds 
or souls. In Du Châtelet’s account, simples stand in causal (though not spa￾tial) relations to one another, and extended bodies arise from our perception 
of multiplicities of causally related simples. Extended bodies, and the causal 
relations both among their parts and between distinct bodies, supervene on 
the simples and their causal relations.
More specifcally, Du Châtelet’s bodies are phenomenal: they arise from 
the way in which we perceive simples. Tat is to say, bodies arise from 
multiplicities of non-extended simples through how we represent those 
multiplicities to ourselves, in perceiving them. If we could perceive each 
of the simples separately, disconnected from the others, the phenomena of 
extended bodies would disappear. But we cannot perceive those simples, 
and moreover we cannot even perceive them distinctly in their relations to 
one another. Te upshot of our confused perception is a blurring over, and 
the emergence of bodies in the phenomena. Tis brief introduction to Du 
Châtelet’s account of bodies will have to sufce here.8 For our purposes, the 
important question is how this enables Du Châtelet to tackle the infnite di￾visibility of extended bodies.
Du Châtelet addresses the issue by distinguishing between geometric 
and physical extension. She accepts the divisibility argument as applied to 
the former only, as a concept that we abstract from our experience of phys￾ical bodies. In our minds, we can divide geometric extension however we 
please: this concept contains no resources for denying infnite divisibility. 
However, physical extension is diferent. A fnitely extended physical body 
arises from a fnite and determinate number of causally interacting simples. 
Terefore, this body can be divided only a fnite number of times. Moreover, 
at some point prior to division into individual simples, too few simples 
7 Du Châtelet 1740. Translated as Du Châtelet 2009, 2014, and 2018b. References use original 
chapter and paragraph number.
8 For more details, see Brading 2019, chapter 3.Body and force in the physics of collisions 137
remain for the phenomenology of extension to arise. Either way, the physical 
extension of bodies is not infnitely divisible. In this way, Du Châtelet is able 
to ofer an explanation for a claim that Musschenbroek had lef as a brute, 
inexplicable (and perhaps self-contradictory) assertion: geometric extension 
is infnitely divisible, whereas physical extension is not. Tere is a price to be 
paid: the extended bodies that are the subject-matter of both physics and me￾chanics are not primitive, but are instead a derivative ontology, arising from 
an underlying primitive ontology of non-extended simples, or monads.
Du Châtelet was not alone in appealing to non-extended simples in her 
attempt to provide an account of extended bodies. She drew on Christian 
Wolf, and both she and Wolf were responding to, and building on, Leibniz. 
Notwithstanding the important diferences between their accounts, all 
addressed the problem of the infnite divisibility of extension by means 
of non-extended simples, and so all were committed to some version of 
monads. In 1745, the Berlin Academy of Science set a prize competition on 
the topic of monads. Te submissions were required to frst either refute or 
support the doctrine of monads, and then deduce “an intelligible explanation 
of the principal phenomena of the universe, and in particular of the origin 
and motion of bodies.”9
(ii) Euler’s objection to non-extended simples
Te 1745 monad prize competition led to a dispute in which far-reaching 
philosophical, social, and political issues were at stake.10 Notwithstanding 
these wider issues, the heart of the dispute was the relevance of monads for 
natural philosophy, and the philosophical questions were of two kinds. On 
the one hand, we have the frst-order philosophical problems themselves, 
such as the divisibility of extension. On the other, we have the second-order 
philosophical problem of the appropriate method for resolving frst-order 
questions. Tis latter issue reveals itself in conficts concerning domains 
of authority, such as that between the “mathematician” Euler—the central 
fgure in the controversy—and followers of the “philosopher” Wolf.11
9 Broman 2012, 2. 10 See Broman 2012 and Calinger 1969. 11 See Brading & Stan 2021.138 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
Te dispute over monads involved several properties of bodies, but for 
now we concentrate on extension. Euler explicitly rejected two features of 
monadic theory that we drew attention to above. First, he rejected the claim 
that geometric but not physical extension is infnitely divisible. Second, he 
rejected any “solution” to the problem of extended bodies that makes their 
extension phenomenal, so that it is “only an appearance of extension which is 
perceived in bodies, but that real extension by no means belongs to them.”12
For Euler, extension is a property of bodies in themselves, and geometry 
is a legitimate means of knowledge about the properties of bodies; so bodies 
are infnitely divisible because they are extended.13 Te atomist approach to 
accounting for the extension of bodies is therefore precluded. Nevertheless, 
Euler also rejected the monadic approach. His positive account of bodies 
is discussed below. Here, we focus on his rejection of monads. In this, he 
remained consistent from the days of the “monad dispute” in the 1740s 
through to his Letters to a German Princess in the 1760s. Letters 125–132 
ofer an extended, colorful, and probing series of arguments and objections 
against non-extended monads.14 Among the themes of these arguments is 
the question of composition. Euler ofers a series of arguments against the 
view that monads, or non-extended simples of any kind, compose bodies.15
One version of this argument, found in his Natural Philosophy, is particularly 
striking for our present purposes:
Te proponents of simple things argue that the simple things, that consti￾tute a body, are at a distance from each other, and because of this distance 
have extent. However, if all these simple things were at a distance from each 
other, with nothing in between them, there would be nothing to prevent 
12 Euler 1802, letter 124 [IX]. See also the preceding letters. 13 More on this later. 14 Regrettably, we must pass over Euler’s Letters without engaging with them in detail. In the 18th 
century, Euler was an intellectual giant, and his Letters a widely read bestseller (see Breidert 1983, 
Calinger 1976, Hult 1985, and Grigorian & Kirsanov 2007). Te subsequent division of disciplines 
has placed him outside philosophy, and so recovering him as an important fgure for philosophy in 
the 18th century requires us to read his contributions across these later divisions. Tis is work that 
largely remains to be done. Calinger’s 2016 biography provides philosophers with help in navigating 
Euler’s vast corpus, and it has been invaluable for us in the work we have done here.
15 For Du Châtelet, the phenomenal experience of bodies arises from the existence of monads and 
our experience of those monads, and in this way she evades the composition question. However, 
the cost is that, as for Leibniz, the monads themselves are out of reach of physics and bodies become 
phenomenal. Euler rejects this approach, takes the monads as physical, and poses the composition 
question.Body and force in the physics of collisions 139
them from being driven together so closely that no distance between them 
remained. (Euler 1862, chapter 2, §13)
Tus, he concludes, since the simples themselves are non-extended, no exten￾sion would remain.16 Te challenge is explicit: what prevents non-extended 
simples from coming together so closely that no extension results from their 
composition?17 It is here that Boscovich and Kant entered the conversation, 
as we will see in Chapter 6.
(iii) Euler on the extension of bodies
Where Du Châtelet saw a problem in the divisibility of extension, Euler did 
not. He embraced the divisibility of bodies, writing “all parts of bodies, how￾ever small they might be, still are composite things as the whole body itself.”18
For Euler, every part of a body, no matter how small, is extended. Tat it is 
further divisible poses no problem, he thinks. Yet, given infnite divisibility, 
there are no fnite-sized ultimate parts that we can glue together to form 
stable wholes, so how can we have extended bodies?
Euler elaborates on this issue in Introduction to Natural Philosophy, a 
manuscript written in the late 1750s or so but not published in his lifetime 
(see section 5.4), and in his Letters of 1760–2. In Natural Philosophy, Euler 
asserts that extension is a general property of bodies—nothing is a body that 
is not extended—so that bodies are species of the genus “extended things.” 
Moreover, Euler accepts that all the properties of extension also pertain to 
bodies, since they have the property of extension. Terefore, bodies are inf￾nitely divisible.
Nevertheless, Euler argues, “the statement that every body consists of inf￾nitely many parts is simply wrong, and is even in contradiction with infnite 
divisibility,” for while a body is infnitely divisible, there are no “last parts” 
into which it is divisible. On the one hand, due to infnite divisibility, bodies 
16 Tis passage does not seem to be in Euler’s Letters, and since the Natural Philosophy was not 
published at the time, it is possible that this particular criticism of the monadic account of extension 
was not in the public domain. Nevertheless, the issue of how it is that non-extended monads could 
compose an extended body was a topic for Euler (see, e.g., Euler 1802, letter 126 [XI]).
17 Te analogous issue of whether points can compose a line was a familiar topic at the time. See 
Chapter 6 for further explanation.
18 Euler 1746b, §74. Euler’s main concern in this paper is with the force of bodies, to which we re￾turn below.140 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
must be viewed as composite, in the sense that they can always be divided. 
On the other hand, any given body has only a determinate number of actual 
parts, notwithstanding that those parts are themselves infnitely divisible.19
Or so he claims.
From this, one might conclude that a body has an infnite number of po￾tential parts, and that Euler has therefore failed to evade the problem of how 
such parts are unifed into a fnite extended body. However, we interpret 
Euler as rejecting this way of conceiving of infnite divisibility in relation to 
extended bodies. For Euler, the concept of body (at which we arrive from 
experience) allows us to conclude that extension is a property of all bodies 
universally, and that bodies are extended in three dimensions and have a 
determinate shape. However, unlike Du Châtelet, Euler does not require a 
further account of how it is that extended bodies are possible in order to pro￾ceed with physics. In particular, we should not commit ourselves to the view 
that there are “ultimate” or “fundamental” wholes out of which “composite” 
wholes are made. Rather, it is metaphysically legitimate to treat any body as a 
unifed whole, or as having actual parts, depending on the problem at hand.
Euler writes that the concept of continuity applies to extension (as well as 
to motion), and this allows us to think of the division of extension however 
we please; but this does not in turn allow us to make any inferences con￾cerning the parts of extension.20 Applying this idea explicitly to bodies, we 
can think of a body as being divided however we please, but there is no in￾ference from here to the body having those parts. Tere is no inference from 
the infnite divisibility of an extended body to an infnite number of “ultimate 
parts” out of which the “derivative whole” is composed.
One implication of this view is a rejection of the distinction between 
“ultimate” or “fundamental” indivisible wholes and the composites out of 
which they are made. Tis is implicit in Euler’s work just as it is in Newton’s 
Principia.21 With hindsight, it becomes visible as an example of a non￾foundationalist approach to physics, emerging already in the 18th century. 
But this was missed by their contemporaries and takes us beyond our topic 
here.22 It is also suggestive with respect to Euler’s overall epistemology, but 
his philosophy awaits a comprehensive treatment beyond our scope here.
19 Euler 1862, §§12, 14. 20 Euler 1862, §19. 21 For Newton, see Brading 2013 and 2018. 22 Moreover, the metaphysical import of rejecting a distinction between ultimate parts and com￾posite wholes is something that Newton’s and Euler’s contemporaries missed, and it continues to be 
neglected today.Body and force in the physics of collisions 141
And so, the situation as of the mid-1700s was that there were only three 
explicit alternatives available for constructing an account of the extension of 
bodies: continuous matter, atomism, and some form of monad theory.
(iv) Extension and quantity of matter
Extension as a property of bodies was an issue not just because of the 
problems arising from divisibility. In the context of mechanics, the extension 
of a body interests us in two further ways. First, extension was used (following 
Descartes) as a measure of the “quantity of matter.” Newton transformed this 
idea with the introduction of his concept of mass, but the radical nature of 
this innovation escaped most at the time (see our discussion of “elusive mass” 
in Chapter 7). Second, the shape of a body afects its motion, and in ways 
that are related to the distribution of its mass throughout its volume. Te 
latter issue we return to in later chapters.23 With respect to the former, it was 
obvious to all that extension simpliciter was inadequate for the purposes of 
mechanics: two balls of equal volume, one lead and one wood, do not be￾have in the same ways, so their “quantity of matter” must difer despite their 
apparent equal volumes. For Du Châtelet, as a plenist, the solution is that 
all bodies contain two types of matter, proper and foreign, and it is only the 
proper matter that rests, moves, and—crucially—is weighed and acts with it. 
She claims: “Te reality of the existence of two matters is easily demonstrated 
by experience; for experience teaches us that bodies have diferent densities 
and weights.”24 Tis conclusion follows only if we assume that proper matter 
is in itself of uniform density. Such an assumption—that fundamental matter 
(whether atoms or a plenum) is uniformly dense—was widespread at the 
time, and Du Châtelet never made it explicit.25
With her commitment to the plenum, her proper/foreign matter distinc￾tion, and the uniform density assumption implicitly in place, Du Châtelet 
then concludes:
23 Te importance of the issue for mechanics became increasingly evident as the century 
progressed.
24 Du Châtelet 2014, 9.177–8. 25 For more on this assumption, and on proper and foreign matter, see the discussion of “elusive 
mass” in Chapter 7.142 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
it is necessary that these pores be flled with foreign matter that is not 
weighed with these bodies, and which does not enter into collisions with 
them if they encounter other bodies in their path. (Du Châtelet 2014, 9.178)
Her appeal to weight and to collisions is important because it connects quan￾tity of proper matter to the dynamical roles of mass in Newtonian physics.26
In chapter 11, Du Châtelet tells us that a body’s resistance to changes in its 
state of motion or rest arises as a necessary consequence of its inertial force 
(which in turn arises from the forces associated with simples, about which 
more below), and that the inertial force of a body is proportional to the quan￾tity of its “own matter”; the greater the quantity, the more it resists. Clearly, 
the relevant quantity here is quantity of proper matter, and this is where Du 
Châtelet introduces the term “mass,” without any fanfare whatsoever: “Tat 
is to say, that the more mass, the more it resists.”27 Notice that while the mass 
of a body is its quantity of proper matter, its additional dynamical role is ac￾quired through the stipulation that a body’s mass is proportional to its iner￾tial force; the discussion in the Foundations then moves on without pause. 
Deeper conceptual difculties associated with reconciling this dynamical 
role for mass with extension as the measure of “quantity of matter” remain 
hidden from view, and we discuss this issue in Chapter 7.
(v) Extension and impenetrability
In the frst half of the 1700s impenetrability, like extension, was widely 
adopted and uncontroversial as a property of bodies. Tere is some ambi￾guity in use among the terms “impenetrability,” “solidity,” “hardness,” and so 
forth in diferent authors, but the idea that bodies exclude one another from 
spatial overlap was widespread.
Whether or not impenetrability must be postulated as an additional prop￾erty beyond extension was debated, and the positions divide roughly into 
two camps, depending on whether the broader picture accepts or rejects a 
plenum of continuous matter. Tose who accepted the plenum seem to im￾plicitly infer impenetrability directly from extension (on pain of incoher￾ence, for if the parts of extension were not impenetrable, then they could all 
26 See the discussion of “elusive mass” in Chapter 7. 27 Du Châtelet 2009, 11.257.Body and force in the physics of collisions 143
overlap with one another, and extension would collapse upon itself in such 
a way that there would be no such thing). Terefore, in granting that bodies 
are extended we also grant that they are impenetrable. Tose who accepted 
the vacuum postulate impenetrability as an additional property of bodies 
(or rather, of atoms) as a means of distinguishing space, which is penetrable, 
from body. Beyond this, impenetrability remained untheorized.
From the extension and impenetrability of bodies, it is a short step to con￾sideration of collisions. Whether plenists or atomists, those who accepted 
impenetrability also accepted the argument that impenetrability implies 
contact action. Two bodies on a collision course must (given Newton’s frst 
law of motion) either remain in the same state, which would require them 
to pass through one another, or change state. Given impenetrability, they 
cannot pass through one another, so they must, on coming into contact, 
change state. Terefore, the postulate of bodies whose sole attributes are ex￾tension, impenetrability, and mobility implies contact action. Te project 
of physics (as it was understood at the time) required a causal account of 
contact action in terms of the properties of bodies, and this was pursued via 
the postulation of various forces associated with bodies, as we will now see.28
5.3 Action
While it was agreed that bodies are extended and impenetrable, it was also 
widely accepted that they cannot be merely so. Te reason for this is concern 
that extension and impenetrability fail to provide sufcient resources for a 
causal explanation of how one body is capable of acting on another. Where 
Descartes sought to eschew all notions of force in his physics, Leibniz and 
Newton found this to be not viable given the problems that they were inter￾ested in; in consequence, they each introduced notions of force (about which 
more below). Debates ensued. A goal widely shared was a causal-explanatory 
account of bodily action; the test case was collisions.
Newton and Leibniz appealed to “force” for a variety of diferent reasons, 
and their notions of force play several diferent roles. For our purposes, the 
most important features of their views are as follows.29 Newton associated 
28 For what becomes of impenetrability, and relatedly of contact action, in Boscovich and Kant, see 
Chapter 6.
29 For Newton on force see, for instance, Westfall 1971, McMullin 1978, Janiak 2008. For Leibniz 
on force, see Garber 2009 and references therein.144 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
an “inherent force” with each body, and introduced a concept of “impressed 
force” as the source of all changes of states of motion in bodies. Te two are 
connected via changes in the quantity of motion: the “inherent force” is pro￾portional to the inertial mass; the inertial mass is proportional to the quan￾tity of motion; and changes in motion of a body come about via an impressed 
force.30 In the wake of the Principia, Newtonian philosophers used quantity 
of motion, or momentum, as the measure of the force of motion of a body. 
Leibniz, on the other hand, constructed a complex theory of forces, active and 
passive, living and dead. According to Leibniz, living and dead force are the 
means by which one body acts upon another, and he and his followers argued 
for living force as the correct measure of the force of motion of a body (about 
which more below).31 Te vis viva debate was over the correct measure of this 
motive force: does it depend on speed (the measure that Leibniz associated 
with “dead force”) or on the square of the speed (the measure that Leibniz 
associated with “living force”)?32 Broadly speaking, Newtonians favored the 
former; Leibnizians the latter. Either way, both sides accepted the appeal to 
a motive force in the explanation of contact action, and maintained that by 
means of motive force contact action among bodies is rendered intelligible.33
In the 1730s, Maupertuis questioned this intelligibility, and Du Châtelet 
responded to the challenge with an account of collisions that uses the 
Principle of Sufcient Reason (PSR) as a criterion of intelligibility, as we shall 
see in the remainder of this section.
(i) Te intelligibility of contact action
In the early decades of the 18th century, contact action was widely held to 
be intelligible (in accordance with “mechanical philosophy”), and it was 
Newtonian gravitation—as an unintelligible action-at-a-distance—that was 
challenged. However, as the century progressed, the former assumption 
came under increasing scrutiny. In 1732, Maupertuis attacked the claim that 
30 See Newton 1999, defnitions 3 and 4, and the laws of motion. 31 See also Chapter 3 for Leibniz, Hermann, and Wolf on active and passive forces. 32 See Chapter 3, and below, for more on the “vis viva dispute.” We use “force of motion of a body” as 
an umbrella term, recognizing that the dispute at the time involved a range of terminology designed 
to mark a variety of distinctions, including “quantity of motion,” “quantity of force,” and so forth.
33 A good point of entry into early 18th-century discussions of this issue is Te Leibniz–Clarke 
Correspondence. Criteria of intelligibility difered from one philosopher to another, of course, falling 
broadly into three camps: Cartesian (clarity and distinctness), Leibnizian (PSR), and Newtonian 
(empirically accessible lawlike behavior and the will of God).Body and force in the physics of collisions 145
contact action via a motive or “impulsive” force is intelligible. His argument 
was addressed primarily to his fellow French philosophers, for his point was 
that collisions are no more intelligible as a form of action between bodies 
than is Newtonian action-at-a-distance.34 He writes:
Ordinary folk are not astonished when they see a moving body communi￾cate its motion to other bodies. Accustomed as they are to this occurrence, 
they can no longer see it as wondrous. But some Philosophers—having 
resolved they can decide a priori which properties bodies can have, and 
which must be denied to them—believe recklessly that the impulsive force 
is more conceivable than the attractive. But what is this impulsive force? 
How does it reside in bodies? Who could have guessed that it does reside in 
them, before he ever saw bodies collide? (Maupertuis 1732, 16f.)
Contact action seems intelligible only because we have seen collisions among 
bodies so ofen, and so we are accustomed to it.35
Du Châtelet, in her 1740 Foundations, ofered an account of the forces 
of bodies explicitly intended to meet the requirements of PSR, and thereby 
make contact action intelligible. Kant, too, was troubled by the issue of in￾telligibility, and ofered his own response (see Chapter 6). Maupertuis took a 
diferent route, via what became the Principle of Least Action (see Chapter 4).
Du Châtelet’s engagement with this issue begins with the vis viva de￾bate, and with a query that she posed to Maupertuis in 1738 concerning the 
contrasting positions of Bernoulli (pro vis viva) and Mairan (against).36 At 
this time, Du Châtelet had yet to develop her theory of forces (see section 
5.4), but her discussion with Maupertuis reveals some of the motivations be￾hind her eventual position.
34 In the Cartesian picture, the essential attribute of bodies is extension, and from this it follows 
a priori that bodies are impenetrable and therefore that they act on one another via collisions (see 
above). Maupertuis accepts the view that bodies are extended, but denies that impenetrability is de￾rivable from extension. Moreover, he denies that, from these resources of extension and impenetra￾bility, the manner in which bodies act on one another in collisions is intelligible. Maupertuis also 
points out that a retreat to Malebranchean occasionalism does not help those who favor contact ac￾tion and reject Newtonian gravitation. For, Maupertuis asks, if it is God who moves bodies according 
to the rules of collision, why should God not also move bodies according to the law of gravitation?
35 Tis theme is developed most famously in Hume. 36 Du Châtelet’s Foundations of Physics went through two French editions (1740, 1742) and was 
translated into German (1743) and Italian (1743). Te Foundations is bookended by her interest in 
vis viva: from her 1738 correspondence with Maupertuis to her clash with Mairan (consisting of her 
criticism of him in the 1740 edition, his response in 1741, and her further reply, all of which were 
published in the 1742 edition). See also Reichenberger 2012, 165.146 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
(ii) How body acts on body: wider issues
On February 2, 1738, Du Châtelet wrote to Maupertuis as follows:
Permit me to ask you a question. I have read many things recently on living 
force, and I want to know if you are for Mr. Mairan or for Mr. Bernoulli. I do 
not have the indiscretion to ask you on this all that I would like to know, 
but only which of the two opinions is yours. (Du Châtelet 2018a, 329–30, 
letter 134)
Maupertuis must have replied immediately, because by around February 
10th she wrote to him again, responding to the opinion he had sent her. Du 
Châtelet presents the two reasons on the basis of which she had previously ac￾cepted the product of mass and velocity as the measure of the force of bodies 
(Leibnizian “dead force”). She then indicates her change of opinion, declaring 
that in her view Bernoulli’s essay (1727) proves the case for living force.37
Maupertuis’ letter, however, has lef her with a remaining puzzle. He must 
have asserted that vis viva is conserved in the universe, and this troubled her. 
In the Newtonian picture, the quantity of force (measured by the product of 
mass and speed) need not be conserved.38 Du Châtelet fnds the conserva￾tion claim hard to reconcile with empirical evidence (our translation):
I tell you that it gives me great grief when you tell me that, if we take living 
force for the force of bodies, the same quantity of it will be conserved al￾ways in the universe. Tat would be more worthy of the eternal geometer, 
I admit, but how would this way of measuring the force of bodies prevent 
motion from getting lost by friction, prevent free creatures from begin￾ning motion, prevent the motion produced by two diferent motions from 
being greater when these two motions conspire together than when they 
are along lines perpendicular to one another, etc. It is perhaps daring of me 
to ask you to tell me how it is that it follows that the same quantity of force 
would exist in the universe, if the force of a body in motion is the product of 
its mass and its speed squared. I suppose that we ought to distinguish per￾haps between force and motion, but this distinction weighs on me greatly, 
37 She also endorses Maupertuis’ view that “the rest” (whatever exactly that may be) is nothing but 
a dispute of words, and writes that with respect to vis viva (but in this respect only) Leibniz uncovered 
a secret of the creator.
38 See Chapter 3 for discussion of this point in Te Leibniz–Clarke Correspondence.Body and force in the physics of collisions 147
and because you are the one who threw this doubt in my mind I hope that 
you will clarify it. (Du Châtelet 1958, letter 118)
Te phenomena of friction, free will, and collisions seem to Du Châtelet 
to confict with the claim that the total quantity of the force of bodies is 
conserved. She presses Maupertuis on the issue of free will:
But the only thing that puzzles me at present is liberty, for in the end I be￾lieve myself free and I do not know if this quantity of force, which is always 
the same in the universe, does not destroy liberty. Initiating motion, is that 
not to produce in nature a force that did not exist? Now if we have not the 
power to begin motion, we are not free. I beg you to enlighten me on this 
point. (Du Châtelet 2009, 109)
Her concern is as follows. Suppose that I am sitting in my chair, not moving, 
and then choose to get up and walk around. In so doing, my body goes from 
rest to motion and acquires a force of motion where before it had none. 
Importantly, it does so without any other body acting upon it to put it into 
motion. Free action seems to require the spontaneous injection of new 
quantities of force into the world, but how can this be in a universe where the 
quantity of force is conserved?39
Shortly aferward in her letters, Du Châtelet pursues the issue of 
collisions: what happens to the force of bodies in a head-on collision between 
two perfectly hard bodies in a vacuum? As we have seen in Chapters 2 and 3, 
those who treated hard bodies stipulated that they do not deform on collision, 
and most agreed that they do not rebound. In specifying that the collision 
takes place in a vacuum, Du Châtelet also rules out the force being dispersed 
into the bodies of a surrounding medium. She asks Maupertuis: “What then 
would become of their force?”40
Te standard Leibnizian response is to deny that there are hard bodies (see 
Chapters 2 and 3). Du Châtelet does not endorse this solution. While she 
admits that at that time there was no observational confrmation of the exist￾ence of perfectly hard bodies, she does not accept this as proof that they are 
39 One response might be to assert that since the conservation law is global, so long as an equal 
quantity of force disappears elsewhere, the total quantity of force will remain constant. Tis requires 
an account of how it is that exactly the right quantity of force spontaneously disappears somewhere in 
the universe whenever I act freely. Without this, the response posits a spectacular (not to say miracu￾lous) global conspiracy.
40 Du Châtelet 1958, letter 124.148 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
impossible. Moreover, she asserts that “it is even very likely that the primary 
bodies of matter are such.”41 And so, we should theorize about what would 
happen were hard bodies to collide in a vacuum.
Te next move she makes is telling, since it seems to concede that there 
is no answer to be had from within physics. She writes approvingly of 
Maupertuis’ suggestion that we should appeal to metaphysics. She suggests 
that the force produced in hard-body collision is measured by its efect (i.e., 
the bodies coming to rest): it is the loss of vis viva that measures the force 
used up in the collision. Tis is a clear indication that, despite accepting vis 
viva as the true measure of the force of bodies, she continued to reject its con￾servation. One motivation was free will, as is evident later in the same letter. 
She suggests that conservation may hold for inanimate bodies yet be violated 
by animate beings, even if the latter were to lie beyond our comprehension:
God could have established laws of motion [governing] the collisions of in￾animate bodies, according to which they conserve, or communicate, or ab￾sorb the efects of the force impressed upon them; but this does not preclude 
the existence of a self-moving power in animate beings, which is a gif of the 
creator like intelligence, life, etc. For if I am free, it is absolutely necessary 
that I be able to begin movement, and if my freedom were demonstrated, it 
would be necessary to concede that my will produces force, even if the how￾really is unknown to me. Isn’t the case of creation, which must be assumed 
if one assumes that a God exists, the same? Are there not a thousand things 
that will always be as impossible to deny, and to understand? (Besterman 
1959, letter 124)
All of this makes vivid Du Châtelet’s concerns over how bodies act on one an￾other, the true measure of the force of bodies, and whether the total force of 
bodies in the universe is conserved.
In the manuscript version of the Foundations, Du Châtelet appealed to 
God, albeit reluctantly, at least for the case of perfectly hard bodies acting on 
one another:42
In the end it seems to me that it is no easier to conceive the simple com￾munication of movement between bodies supposed to be completely hard, 
41 Du Châtelet 1958, letter 124. 42 Both the following quotations from the manuscript are found in Janik 1982, 101. Our transla￾tion, with thanks to Lauren LaMore.Body and force in the physics of collisions 149
than to know what their forces will be afer the collision; one must, I think, 
leave both questions to God.
She went on:
Te simplest case of them all is that of one body that hits an immovable ob￾stacle, and this case is subject to the greatest difculties. I am quite afraid 
that we must resort to God for the collisions of bodies.
In this, she was not alone.43 Ultimately, however, Du Châtelet found the ap￾peal to God as the solution to the problem unsatisfactory: she came to believe 
that God has no place in scientifc theorizing.44
Tese exchanges with Maupertuis concern Body, and the primary issue is 
the appropriate measure of the “force” of bodies in motion: Nature. In their 
discussion, the focus is on how best to resolve the issue, by means of Evidence 
and Principle: Du Châtelet appeals to empirical evidence associated with 
collisions, free will, and friction, and she asks whether this evidence can be 
made consistent with the principle of conservation of vis viva. She thereby 
shifs our attention from Nature to Action, for Du Châtelet wants to know 
how it is that the action of one body upon another can be made consistent 
with the principle of conservation of vis viva. By 1740, and the published ver￾sion of her Foundations, she had worked out her answers to these questions.
5.4 Du Châtelet and Action
Te depth and signifcance of the issues surrounding Action, as they stood 
in the 1730s, were recognized vividly by Du Châtelet. She places them at 
the heart of her Foundations. Writing for a French audience, she begins her 
treatment of bodies by rejecting Cartesian matter theory as leading to occa￾sionalism, which she maintains undermines the possibility of genuine action 
among bodies. In this, she sympathizes with Keill, for whom the upshot of 
Malebranchean occasionalism is that when one man is attacked by another 
43 For a discussion of the epistemic limits of inquiry into the nature and actions of bodies, see 
Chapter 3.
44 See Brading 2019, chapter 2. For an indication of the ways in which appeal to God permeated the 
debates over collisions, see Scott 1970, 29.150 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
with a stone, it is God Almighty himself who will “dash out his brains.”45
Crousaz, as we have seen, made similar objections to occasionalism in his 
prize-winning 1721 article on the nature and communication of motion (see 
Chapter 3). If it is God who does everything, then there can be no genuine 
bodily action, and no human action either, or so goes this criticism of occa￾sionalism. Du Châtelet ofers her fellow philosophers an alternative account 
of Nature, one that enables her to address Action such that bodies genuinely 
act upon one another.46
(i) Du Châtelet on the forces of bodies
In the opening chapters of the Foundations, Du Châtelet argues for PSR as 
an important methodological principle for theorizing in physics.47 Ten, 
in Leibnizian vein, she argues that any account admitting only extension 
to the essence of matter violates PSR, via the principle of the identity of 
indiscernibles, since such matter would be entirely homogeneous and so all 
parts of matter would be similar.48 On the basis of PSR, we are to conclude 
that there must be something more to the essence of matter, such that the 
parts are discernible. Du Châtelet moves immediately to assert that by the 
addition of “force” to the essence of matter we ensure that PSR is satisfed.
Te argument for this conclusion is extremely compressed, but seems to 
go something like this.49 Suppose that matter were purely extension. Suppose 
that the parts of a portion of this matter, no matter how small, were all at 
rest. Ten they would be entirely similar. But by PSR, this cannot be the 
case. Terefore all the parts of matter, no matter how small, must be in dif￾ferent states of motion. Moreover, and crucially, in order to satisfy PSR the 
properties that diferentiate one part of matter from all the others must be 
“in” that part of matter: there must be “a real diference between all the parts 
of Matter.” Te source of this real diference is an “internal force, or force 
tending toward motion” that is in all parts of matter. Te introduction of a 
45 Keill’s colorful diatribe against Malebranche’s occasionalism includes such rhetorical gems as 
this: “At this rate one need not fear his headpiece tho’ a Bomb were falling upon it with all the force 
that Powder can give it, for it could not so much as break his Skull, or singe his hair, if God did not 
take that occasion to do it” (1698, 8–9). 46 Te following material is based on Brading 2019; a more detailed discussion can be found there. 47 See Brading 2019, chapters 1 and 2. 48 Du Châtelet 2018b, 8.139. 49 Du Châtelet 2018b, 8.139.Body and force in the physics of collisions 151
force in all parts of matter seems to be a bit of a leap, but we can interpret it 
modestly as being whatever is needed in order for a part of matter to be al￾ways in its own distinct (though perhaps changing) state of motion. Neatly, 
this is also going to be what provides a body with the power to act. If we ac￾cept that all changes in bodies are re-arrangements of parts of matter, then 
the power of one body to act on others is its power to rearrange them (or 
their parts). Du Châtelet identifes the force of a body tending toward mo￾tion, introduced in order to satisfy PSR, with the force by which it is able to 
act on others. We will not pause here to analyze whether this argument is 
any good, for our goal is to outline the main contours of her position. Her 
purpose is to provide an account of the nature of bodies such that they are 
capable of acting on one another. She argues that PSR requires enhancing 
the essence of body with something beyond extension, and so adds force of 
acting, which she calls “motive force.”50
Te addition of motive force as an essential property of matter does not 
complete the account of bodies, and of how they act on one another. Du 
Châtelet argues, on the basis of both reason and experiment, that matter 
has also a passive force.51 For, how can one body act on a second unless the 
second resists?
Du Châtelet maintains that all changes happening in bodies can be 
explained by appeal to extension, active (or motive) force, and passive (or 
resisting) force, and that these three principles are mutually independent 
and jointly necessary and sufcient for an account of the nature of body.52
Moreover, just as the extension of bodies is a phenomenon, arising from how 
we experience the simples (see section 5.2), so too are the active and pas￾sive forces of bodies: they are phenomena arising from the active and pas￾sive force of simples, through how we experience those simples. Referencing 
Leibniz, Du Châtelet distinguishes between primitive force, associated with 
simples, and derivative force, associated with bodies.53 In arriving at this ac￾count of Nature, Du Châtelet adopted PSR (Principle) as a powerful tool, 
while also appealing to general empirical considerations (Evidence). And 
she is now in a position to address Action, thereby completing her solution 
to Body. For this, we turn our attention to PCOL, and to her philosophical 
mechanics of collisions.
50 Du Châtelet 2018b, 8.141. 51 Du Châtelet 2018b, 8.142. 52 Du Châtelet 2018b, 8.145–149. 53 Du Châtelet 2018b, 8.155–158.152 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
(ii) Du Châtelet on collisions
Du Châtelet asserts: “Te active force and the passive force of Bodies is mod￾ifed in their collision, according to certain laws that can be reduced to three 
principles.”54 And she then states her version of Newton’s laws of motion.55
Important diferences in wording from Newton’s formulations notwith￾standing, once Du Châtelet has Newton’s laws, she can solve all the problems 
that fall under Newton’s laws of motion, including the set of collision 
problems soluble using those laws.
What remains is to use these resources to provide a causal-explanatory ac￾count of the changes in motions of the bodies, consistent with the laws of 
motion. Tis is to be done using the theory of active and passive forces. Du 
Châtelet’s account of the collision process proceeds as follows. At the end of 
chapter 11, she writes:
When a moving body encounters an obstacle, it strives to displace this ob￾stacle; if this efort is destroyed by an invincible resistance, the force of this 
body is a force morte, that is to say, it does not produce any efect, but it only 
tends to produce one. If the resistance is not invincible, the force then is 
force vive, for it produces a real efect, and this efect is called the efect of the 
force of this body. (Du Châtelet 2009, 11.268)
We have seen that all bodies have associated with them an active force, by 
which they move (or strive to move), and a passive force, by which they re￾sist motion (or changes in motion). Du Châtelet here explains that the active 
force of a body manifests itself in two ways: as dead force (force morte), when 
the body strives to move but fails (due to an obstacle), and as living force 
(force vive), when the body is in motion. Du Châtelet further develops her 
account of the forces of bodies in chapters 20 and 21, and we arrive at the 
following account. When two bodies collide, during the time when they are 
in contact, they press upon one another by means of dead force, and in so 
doing they impress potential speed, or a tendency to motion, into one an￾other. Eventually, all the active force of one body is used up, and it can no 
longer counteract the pressure of the other through its own dead force. Te 
other body continues to impress active force, and the frst body begins to 
54 Du Châtelet 2009, 11.229. 55 See again Du Châtelet 2009, 11.229.Body and force in the physics of collisions 153
move—with living force—back in the direction of the impressed force. If it 
happens that the active forces are equal, then they destroy each other and the 
bodies remain at rest. If it happens that the two bodies are moving initially in 
the same direction, the dead force impressed by the faster body on the slower 
becomes a living force, and the slower body increases its speed. If it happens 
that the line of impact is oblique, the outcome of the collision is calculated by 
the components of force acting along the line of impact.
Our primary focus here is Du Châtelet’s attempt to render the collision 
process intelligible by appeal to a complex theory of active and passive, dead 
and living, forces. Qualitatively, her account may seem promising. However, 
from the perspective of philosophical mechanics, this causal explanation 
succeeds only if it can be integrated with the rules of collision from me￾chanics. Again, her account looks promising because of her attempt to unify 
her theory of forces with a version of Newton’s laws of motion. Ultimately, 
however, Du Châtelet’s attempt fails.56 Tis is partly, though not funda￾mentally, because it is incomplete: like her predecessors, she distinguished 
bodies into hard, sof, and elastic, but she did not explicitly develop her ac￾count for all three.57 More importantly, however, her defense of vis viva in 
the concluding chapter of the Foundations leads her to disconnect her qual￾itative story from her quantitative account, so that the former is no longer 
explanatory with respect to the latter. Tis is what undermines her attempted 
unifcation.
By the middle of the 18th century, hers was the most developed attempt 
to provide a philosophical mechanics of bodily action, and yet it failed. With 
the beneft of over 250 years of hindsight, we can hope to pinpoint the philo￾sophical reasons as to why, but in the 1740s the debate remained live.58
56 For analysis, see Brading 2019, 95–7. 57 See Du Châtelet 2009, 11.267: “Bodies receiving or communicating motion can be either com￾pletely hard, that is to say, incapable of compression, or completely sof, that is to say, incapable 
of reconstitution afer the compression of their particles, or again elastic, that is to say, capable of 
regaining their original shape afer the compression.”
58 Te two most important open questions, for our purposes, were these: (1) Is an account of bodies 
in terms of active and passive forces necessary and/or sufcient for explaining bodily action? (2) Is 
an account of the forces of bodies as derivative, deriving from an underlying theory of non-extended 
simples, necessary and/or sufcient for explaining bodily action?154 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
5.5 Euler and Action
Euler is an important fgure in our story for his work explicitly spans all of 
philosophical mechanics. While the majority of his work lies primarily in 
rational mechanics (about which more in later chapters), he had a long￾standing interest in philosophical physics: in the nature and properties 
of bodies, and the search for causes.59 In 1741, Euler read Du Châtelet’s 
Foundations. He wrote to her from Berlin, saying that he greatly admired her 
chapter on hypotheses, for hypotheses are the means by which we can ar￾rive at certain knowledge of physical causes.
60 Te letter continues with Euler 
announcing that he will ofer his thoughts on the topic of bodies and their 
motions. All indications are that he wrote an extensive discussion of this 
topic, directly engaging with Du Châtelet’s account of bodies, but this por￾tion of the letter is, sadly, lost.61
Central to the Berlin Academy monad dispute62 is Euler’s rejection of the 
Leibnizian theory of simples with their active and passive forces, as advocated 
both by Wolf and his followers, and by Du Châtelet.63 Beginning with his 
paper “Toughts on the elements of bodies, in which the theory of simple 
things and monads is examined and the true essence of bodies is discovered,” 
Euler argued for an alternative account of the “true essence of bodies.”64
He used collisions as a test of adequacy for his account, and claimed that 
we do not need the Leibnizian theory of active and passive forces in order 
to explain them. In the decade or so that followed, Euler developed and re￾fned his account, and in the process he recast physics and its relationship to 
mechanics.65
59 See especially his Letters to a German Princess and his Natural Philosophy. Te literature on 
Euler’s natural philosophy is small. Of particular relevance to our topic are Gaukroger 1982 and 
Watkins 1997, who discuss Euler’s treatment of bodies, force, and impenetrability, especially in rela￾tion to Descartes, Newton, and Wolf. A general systematic treatment of Euler’s natural philosophy 
has yet to appear.
60 Du Châtelet 2018a, letter 380. 61 He writes: “I begin with the frst principle of mechanics, that all bodies by themselves remain in 
their state of rest or of motion. To this property one can well give the name force, when one does not 
say that all force is a tendency to change state, as does Mr. Wolf. All body is thus for you . . . ” (Du 
Châtelet 2018a, 93). Frustratingly, the extant manuscript of the letter ends here, just as it was getting 
interesting for our present purposes.
62 See section 5.2 and references therein. 63 For Euler’s involvement in the ongoing “monad dispute”, see Calinger 2016, chapter 8. 64 See Euler 1746b. 65 See below and Chapter 6. We thank those present in KB’s graduate seminar, fall 2018, in which 
the group worked on and discussed the natural philosophy of Euler.Body and force in the physics of collisions 155
(i) Euler on the force of bodies
In 1746, Euler argued that empirical investigations of the phenomena of 
bodily motions show that bodies remain in the same state unless acted upon 
externally. In the spirit of Newton’s Principia, he recognized “vis inertiae” as 
an essential property of bodies:
Te force of all bodies to remain in their state is called in the theory of mo￾tion vis inertiae, and it is as general a property of bodies as extension, such 
that a body without this force would cease to be a body. (Euler 1746b, part 
II, §16)
Euler then argues for the identity of this force of continuing in the same state 
with the force of resistance to change of state:66
17. It is not possible to imagine this force that enables bodies to remain in 
their state, without at the same time ascribing to them a force to resist all 
changes. For were a body to undergo all changes without resisting them in 
the slightest, one could not say that it is endowed with a force to remain in 
its state.
18. Since these two forces are of necessity connected with each other, and 
cannot be separated, it is the same force through which a body remains in 
its state, and through which it resists all change.
19. From this is clear that if the bodies were deprived of this force, they 
would have to undergo all changes without any resistance and there would 
be no impact and quite generally no resistance in the world; in consequence 
it would be as if the bodies could freely interpenetrate each other, and the 
concept of impenetrability, which is as important a property of bodies as 
extension, would cease to apply. (Euler 1746b, part II)
For Euler, bodies are extended, have a force of inertia, and are impene￾trable: these three properties of bodies are needed for collisions between 
bodies to be possible. Tis is his answer to Nature.
Euler argues that these three are sufcient for the explanation of 
collisions: given impenetrability, the force of inertia is sufcient to yield 
66 In his 1746b, Euler refers to inertia as a force, but he soon modifes this language (see below). Cf. 
also McMullin 1978, 36.156 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
changes in the state of bodies on impact, and no further active force need be 
postulated. His argument is as follows.67 Consider two bodies, one at rest and 
the other moving toward the frst along a line of impact. In such a situation, 
it is impossible for both bodies to remain in their same state: in order for the 
former to remain in its state of rest, the latter would also have to come to rest; 
in order for the latter to remain in the same state of motion, the former would 
have to be moved out of the way by the impact. Te reason why these changes 
of state occur, the very cause of these changes, Euler writes, is nothing other 
than vis inertiae. Te same argument holds for any number of bodies in any 
states of motion where the lines of motion intersect. Having postulated vis 
inertiae, we have given the reason and the cause for the changes in the states 
of motion undergone by colliding bodies.
Contrary to those pursuing a Leibnizian approach to bodies, such as 
Wolf and Du Châtelet, Euler maintains that no further active force need 
be postulated in order to explain collisions. Indeed, he argues that postula￾tion of an active force in bodies contradicts the principle of inertia, by which 
bodies are essentially passive. Euler retained this rejection of active force 
throughout the later developments in his account of bodies.68
Euler revisits and revises his 1746 treatment of bodies in his 1752 paper 
“Recherches sur l’origine des forces.” Tere are three important diferences 
concerning: (1) the status and conceptualization of inertia; (2) the role of im￾penetrability in the account of body and collisions; and (3) the desiderata 
for an adequate account of impact, and the role of physics and mechanics 
therein.
Te frst change that Euler makes concerns inertia. Euler makes the impor￾tant move of denying that inertia is a force and reserving the term “force” for 
any cause that is capable of changing the state of a body.69 Inertia, in contrast 
to force, is that property of a body by which it remains in the same state.70
67 See Euler 1746b, §§23–28. 68 See, for example, chapter 4 of Euler 1862. He used this general style of argument to reject not 
just Leibnizian active force but also gravity as an active principle in matter, and thought as a property 
of matter (Euler 1746b). Te latter shows the importance of this general argument for Euler, beyond 
mechanics and physics. In his 1746d Euler argues that, to show that matter cannot think, it is suf￾cient to show the incompatibility of the property of thought with another accepted property of body. 
Since inertia is a force that preserves the state of a body (and is accepted to be so by all parties in the 
thinking matter dispute), and thought is a force contrary to inertia, bodies cannot possess both in￾ertia and thought, or so Euler argues. (In this paper, Euler refers not only to Wolf, but also to Martin 
Knutzen, who is most famous today for having been Kant’s teacher. Euler and Knutzen maintained an 
extensive correspondence, but the latter never mentioned Kant.)
69 Euler 1752b, §8. 70 In his Principia, Newton equated “vis inertiae” with “vis insita” in defnition 3. He also 
introduced “vis impressa” in defnition 4, and “vis centripeta” in defnition 5. Euler’s clarifcation Body and force in the physics of collisions 157
Calling inertia a force misleadingly implies some kind of action or activity 
in the body, whereas inertia is a property that opposes all changes of state. 
Forces that change the state of a body are to be sought outside the body that 
undergoes the change. Research in mechanics should seek the changes that 
are produced in the motions of bodies by a given force, on the one hand, and 
the forces that are responsible for given changes in the motions of bodies, on 
the other.71
Te importance of this for natural philosophy, and for the conceptual 
foundations of physics, is perhaps not evident in the 1752 paper, but Euler’s 
unpublished Natural Philosophy, written around a decade later, makes it 
clear. In chapter 1, entitled “On Natural Philosophy in General,” he sets out 
the aim and scope of natural philosophy, placing himself squarely within the 
conception of physics dominant in the early 18th century (see Chapter 4). He 
writes:
1. Natural philosophy is a science [Wissenschaf] that aims to explain the 
causes [Ursachen] of changes that occur in bodies.
2. All changes occurring in bodies must have their reason [Grund] in the 
very essence and properties of bodies.
3. Hence, before all else, we must strive to investigate the essence and 
properties of bodies. (Euler 1862, 449f.)
Te subject-matter of natural philosophy is therefore bodies and their 
properties, with a particular emphasis on causes. Tis much is familiar 
(again, see Chapter 4).
Like Du Châtelet, Euler selects the PSR as a methodological tool for the 
adequacy of meeting the aim expressed in 1, but he uses it diferently.72
Immediately following his statement of the aim of natural philosophy, he 
writes:
Wherever there is a change, there must be a cause that brings it about, for 
it is certain that nothing can happen without a sufcient reason. Whoever 
can point to the reason [Grund] why a change has occurred, has found its 
gives us the separation of inertia from external or impressed forces, as is now familiar in our current 
versions of classical mechanics.
71 Compare Newton 1999, 382. 72 See Euler 1960, letter 128, for his criticism of the use of PSR by the advocates of monads.158 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
cause [Ursache], and thus fulflls the ultimate aim of natural philosophy. 
(Euler 1862, 449)
However, he next emphasizes a very interesting diference between his con￾ception of natural philosophy and the dominant one from the early 18th cen￾tury. He insists that the aim is to provide reasons for changes only:
Tus natural science aims to study changes only. For, while an object re￾mains in the same state, we cannot point to any other reason for that but 
the absence of causes that could bring about any changes. But as soon as a 
change occurs, we are entitled to ask for its cause. (Euler 1862, 449)
Tis has two consequences. First, it means that the search for the properties 
of bodies is subservient to the search for the causes of changes in bodies: what 
is required of natural philosophy is to determine all and only those properties 
of bodies relevant to the changes that bodies undergo. Second, it means that 
we are not required to explain those properties themselves: we do not need to 
say how it is that a body is extended, impenetrable, and mobile. Tus, Euler 
envisages a rather diferent application of PSR in natural philosophy than 
Du Châtelet. Where Du Châtelet sought an explanation of the extension of 
bodies (see section 5.2), for Euler a list of the properties of bodies is suf￾cient so long as those properties can be used to explain the changes that such 
bodies undergo. Tough it may seem innocuous, in fact this is a very dif￾ferent conception of the goals and scope of physics. From the perspective of 
our analytical framework, it is a transformation of Evidence: with the change 
in goals and scope of physics, the justifcatory task with respect to Nature 
and Action is recast. Te consequences are far-reaching, as later chapters 
will show.
Tis account of force and inertia is the frst of three important changes in 
his position that Euler makes in his 1752 paper. With this one in place, Euler 
turns to his main topic: the origin of the force by which a body is compelled 
to change its state when it collides with another body. Here, the two further 
important diferences between the 1746 and 1752 papers emerge.Body and force in the physics of collisions 159
(ii) Euler’s physics of collisions
Euler begins his 1752 discussion of collisions with the general case discussed 
in his 1746 paper, in which one body is on a collision course with a second 
body, and from which we can already conclude that a change in state of at 
least one body must occur.73 He notes that this qualitative conclusion is 
completely general, following regardless of whether the bodies are elastic 
or completely inelastic, and argues that the crucial property of bodies that 
makes collisions possible is impenetrability.74 Without this, bodies would 
pass through one another: it is impenetrability that prevents them from 
doing so. Moreover, this is what prevents bodies from remaining in the 
same state of motion, and therefore what requires them to change their state. 
Impenetrability, Euler claims, is an essential property of bodies, in the same 
sense as extension and inertia: without these properties, bodies would not 
be bodies.75 If there were perfectly penetrable bodies, Euler goes on, these 
would be just like bits of empty space: for a body to occupy a place is for 
it to exclude other bodies from that place. Moreover, the impenetrability of 
bodies does not admit of degrees, for if it is not completely impenetrable, 
then it is penetrable. Terefore, the impenetrability of bodies is absolute.76
Te conclusion of this frst part of Euler’s argument is that impenetrability 
is the reason why bodies change their state when their trajectories intersect. 
Euler then asks: what is the origin of the force that brings about these changes 
in state?77 First, Euler asks whether this force is necessarily found with im￾penetrability, or whether the two are separable. His answer is that this force 
is necessarily coextensive with impenetrability and that they are absolutely 
inseparable. For, without this identifcation one could have impenetrability 
without any changes in motion, but that is not possible; and one could have 
changes in motion without impenetrability, but that is not possible either. 
We must therefore conclude that impenetrability is the origin of the force by 
which bodies undergo changes in their states of rest or motion, he avers.
Tis is the second important development from the 1746 paper. In that 
early piece, Euler had appealed to inertia in giving his causal account of the 
collision process. In 1752, Euler denies that inertia is a force and turns to 
73 Euler 1752b, §11. 74 Euler 1752b, §12. 75 Euler 1752b, §15. Euler there points out that without impenetrability, bodies would not be sen￾sible. Cf. Newton’s remarks in his manuscript “De Gravitatione” (Newton 2014, 42).
76 Euler 1752b, §§16–17. 77 Euler 1752b, §18.160 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
impenetrability for the origin of the force of collisions. Moreover, he argues 
that impenetrability is sufcient for a physics of impact, as we will now see.78
To proceed, Euler notes that the force associated with impenetrability acts 
only when there is a threat of penetration and does not otherwise manifest 
itself. Hence, this force does not act continually (contrary to those—such as 
Wolf and Du Châtelet—who say that a force is a continual efort to change 
state).79 Te change of state that it produces in the second body is an indirect 
efect, arising as a consequence of the frst body maintaining its impenetra￾bility. However, it is a mistake to think of one body acting on the other, rather 
than of a mutual action. Te force that arises from impenetrability when two 
bodies collide arises not from one body, but from the two bodies jointly. For, 
if one body was penetrable, then there would be no need for a change of state 
of either body, and no need for a force to operate. So it is the impenetrability 
of both bodies jointly that results in the appearance of a force. Moreover, the 
force will be of exactly the magnitude and direction needed to prevent pene￾tration: no more and no less.80 Euler concludes that when two bodies A and 
B run into each other, penetration is prevented by A and B acting on one 
another with equal and opposite force. In other words, Newton’s third law 
of motion (equal and opposite action and reaction) for the case of collisions 
follows necessarily from the nature of impenetrability. Tis result enables 
Euler to conclude that impenetrability alone is the source of the force that 
acts to change the states of bodies in collisions.81 Moreover, it follows from 
this that there is no need for the active and motive forces of bodies used by 
Wolf and Du Châtelet in their accounts of the collision process, and Euler 
rejects them. Te appeal to impenetrability remains a constant in his account 
of bodies going forward.82
Tese results do not enable a quantitative treatment of impact, nor the re￾covery of collision rules. In the 1746 paper discussed above,83 Euler did not 
investigate the collision process and its relationship to rules of collision in 
any detail. He turned his attention to this in a second paper of that year,84 but 
78 Nothing in the above commits Euler to any specifc notion of contact action as an account of 
collisions. Rather, whatever is the process whereby penetration is avoided, this is the notion of colli￾sion at work. For Euler on impenetrability and force, see also Gaukroger 1982 and Watkins 1997, 329f.
79 Euler 1752b, §§20–21. 80 Euler 1752b, §§25–27. 81 Euler 1752b, §§30–2. 82 See Gaukroger 1982, 134–7. 83 Euler 1746b. 84 Euler 1746c ofers an intervention in the so-called vis viva dispute. First, he challenged the idea 
that there are two competing measures of the force of bodies in motion. Contrary to the Leibnizians, 
Euler argued that these are not utterly diferent in kind, but instead both pressure and percussion Body and force in the physics of collisions 161
it is the 1752 paper that is of greater interest for our purposes. Here, Euler 
takes a new approach, and thereby makes a critical move for the philosoph￾ical mechanics of collisions. Tis is the third important diference between 
the 1746 and 1752 treatments. In 1752, according to Euler, the qualitative 
causal account of collisions—in terms of impenetrability—ofers a complete 
physics. Tat is: we do not need a quantitative account of the causal process of 
collisions, or any micro-level causal story of this process, in order to complete 
our physics of collisions. In what follows, we unpack and examine this claim.
(iii) Euler’s philosophical mechanics of collisions
For Euler, the quality of bodies relevant to the physics of collisions is im￾penetrability: it is the origin of the force by which bodies act on one another 
during impact. Impenetrability is absolute; it is all or nothing: it is not a quan￾tity. Nevertheless, impenetrability is sufcient for our causal story of bodily 
collision, as described above, and that story is qualitative. Tis is all we need 
for physics.
Mechanics, however, is quantitative, and the quality of bodies relevant to 
the quantitative treatment of collisions is hardness. Hardness, Euler writes, 
concerns the extent to which a body can be compressed, and therefore how 
much it deforms when acted upon by another body.85 It is a property that 
comes in quantitative degrees. If determining the change of state that comes 
about as a result of collisions required perfect knowledge of the deformation, 
such knowledge would perhaps be impossible, since the outcome would be 
diferent for every degree of hardness. But happily, Euler argues, regardless 
of how much a body deforms during collision, we need pay attention only 
to whether or not this deformation remains afer the collision is complete. 
Tis is enough to provide a quantitative treatment of collision outcomes. 
forces are species of the same kind. Tis follows Newton. Second, Euler challenged the view that the 
dispute can be resolved empirically by looking at the efects of the force of bodies in motion, showing 
the complexity involved in quantitative treatments of the collision process and the deformations 
undergone by bodies during collision. He endorsed inertia as adequate for an account of all the 
changes in the motions of bodies that we see around us, and rejected the existence of hard bodies 
as “repugnant to the order of nature” via an appeal to continuity. He also comments (in line with 
d’Alembert 1743) that the vis viva dispute is largely a dispute about words; see Euler 1746c, 31–7. We 
will not pursue these interesting remarks here. For more on the vis viva dispute, see Chapter 3 and 
references therein.
85 Euler 1752b, §§33–34.162 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
As a result, we need to distinguish between only two principal kinds of 
bodies: those that keep their deformation afer impact (inelastic), and those 
that return to their original shape exactly (elastic).
Euler’s quantitative treatment of collisions is as follows. For both elastic 
and inelastic impact, the frst stage of the analysis is the same. We begin 
by considering the period during which the bodies are acting on one an￾other, and in particular an element of this time dt during which the speed 
increments of the two bodies are dv (for body A) and du (for body B) along 
the line of collision. Requiring that the force acting during any interval of the 
collision is equal and opposite, Euler concludes from
m dv P dt m du P dt A B = − and = (1)
that
m dv m du A B + = 0 (2)
where m is the mass of the relevant body,86 and the force P is defned as rate of 
change of momentum m dv/dt. From whence he concludes:
m v m u A B + = constant. (3)
Tis result, Euler says, shows that momentum is conserved throughout the 
collision process, and therefore
m v m u m a m b A B A B + = + (4)
where a and b are the initial pre-impact speeds of A and B, respectively, along 
the line of collision.
Next, Euler turns to the value of the force P, by which bodies are deformed 
through impact.87 Tis is measured by the change in the distance between 
86 For the problems with “elusive mass,” and Euler on mass, see Chapter 7. 87 Euler 1752b, §§41f.Body and force in the physics of collisions 163
the mass-centers of the two bodies, dz, which is in turn composed of the dis￾tance traveled by the center-of-mass of body A (let this be dx) during dt, and 
that traveled by the center-of-mass of body B (say dy) in dt. Ten, since dx = v 
dt and dy = u dt, we have, from (1):
m v dv P dx m u du P dy A B = = − and (5)
Terefore,88
m v dv m udu P dz A B + = − . (6)
Integrating, we have:
½ ½ m v m u K P dz A B
2 2 + = − ∫ (7)
where K is a constant of integration. Now consider the special case of the frst 
instant of collision, in order to determine K in (7). At this moment, v = a and 
u = b. Moreover, at this instant, the deformation is zero, and hence ∫P dz = 0.
From this we conclude that89
m v m u m a m b P dz A B A B
2 2 2 2 + = + − ½ 2 ∫ (8)
Having established (4) and (8), which hold for all types of bodies, Euler next 
diferentiates between elastic and inelastic bodies.
Bodies that are entirely without elasticity, he writes, cease to act on one an￾other the moment that they acquire the same speed along the line of impact, 
regardless of whether they deform one another; v = u. Terefore we can solve 
for v and u in terms of the masses and initial speeds (along the line of impact) 
of the bodies.90 He concludes:
88 Euler 1752b, §42. 89 Euler 1752b, §42. 90 Euler 1752b, §44.164 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
As a result it is clear that the change of state that inelastic bodies undergo 
in collision is solely caused by the force of impenetrability of these bodies, 
and that we do not need to look elsewhere for the cause. In addition, notice 
that this rule does not depend in any way on the degree of hardness of the 
bodies, or on the quantity of forces with which these bodies act on one an￾other during the collision; and as these forces depend principally on the de￾gree of hardness, it is all the more remarkable that they always produce the 
same efect, however large or small they may be. (Euler, 1752b, §44)
Of course, this conclusion is somewhat circular. Te justifcation for the 
claims that (i) the force of collision is equal and opposite (used in the deri￾vation of (4)), and (ii) it ceases to act the moment that the threat of penetra￾tion ceases (i.e., when the bodies acquire the same speed, in the second part 
of the derivation), lies in Euler’s treatment of impenetrability given above. 
Nevertheless, given this account of impenetrability, we are able to justify 
those claims and arrive at the accepted rules of collision for inelastic bodies. 
In this way, his physics of collisions plays a crucial role in his account of the 
rules of collision, en route to a philosophical mechanics of impact.
Notice also that Euler is able to remove a puzzle lef unsolved by the ac￾counts of collision considered in Chapters 2 and 3. Recall from Chapter 2 
that a geometrically inelastic body, whether hard or sof, is one that may or 
may not deform on impact, but if it does, then it does not regain its shape 
aferward. A kinematically inelastic body is one that does not rebound. Te 
difculty was to explain why g-inelastic bodies are also k-inelastic (and simi￾larly for elastic bodies, see below). Euler ofers an explanation in terms of im￾penetrability. Te impenetrability of bodies gives rise to only as much force 
as is necessary to prevent mutual penetration and no more, and that is why 
g-inelastic bodies move together afer impact.
Elastic-body collision difers from inelastic because the bodies do not 
cease to act on one another once they acquire a common speed, but con￾tinue to do so until they have returned to their original shapes. Once again, 
impenetrability is the origin of this continued action: with the two bodies in 
contact, during the time that each body is recovering its original shape the 
threat of penetration (due to the changing shape) remains, and so the bodies 
continue to act on one another. As a result of this ongoing mutual action, 
the state of motion of each body continues to change, and so the fnal speeds 
of the two bodies may not be equal. Tis is the reason for rebound. Tus, Body and force in the physics of collisions 165
g-elasticity leads to k-elasticity, via impenetrability as the origin of mutual 
forces between colliding bodies.
Since the fnal speeds may not be equal, an additional equation is needed 
for a quantitative solution to the collision of elastic bodies. For this, Euler 
turns to his result (8), above, from which he arrives at conservation of energy 
by a further appeal to impenetrability, as follows. Since impenetrability is the 
source of the force of collision, the additional force arising in elastic collision 
is just that required to remove the threat of penetration as the bodies regain 
their original shapes: it ceases to act once the bodies have regained their orig￾inal shapes. Tus, Euler writes, the additional force is exactly that required to 
restore the distance between the centers-of-mass of the two bodies to that at 
the moment of impact (and prior to any compression). Tat is to say, the total 
deformation z is zero, and since there is no change in z, it follows that ∫P dz 
= 0. Tus, from (8) we arrive at conservation of energy for elastic collisions:
m v m u m a m b A B A B
2 2 2 2 + = + (9)
and this provides us with our second equation, using which we can solve 
for our two unknowns (the fnal speeds) in terms of the initial speeds and 
masses.
Euler concludes his discussion of collisions as follows: “Tere remains 
no doubt that, in all the collisions of bodies generally, the change of state is 
caused solely by the forces that result necessarily from impenetrability.”91
At frst sight, this seems a disingenuous conclusion. In elastic bodies, their 
elasticity plays a role in the change of state: where impenetrability yields 
bodies moving with a common speed afer collision, elasticity leads to fnal 
speeds that may be unequal. An additional “force of elasticity” seems to be 
at work. But this is to misunderstand a division that Euler is making be￾tween impenetrability and elasticity. Impenetrability is a property of bodies 
as such: it is absolute (it does not come in degrees); it is the causal basis of 
the mutual action of bodies in collision; and it therefore lies in the domain 
of physics. Elasticity, by contrast, is an empirical property observed in the 
behavior of composite bodies: it comes in degrees, and is to be studied em￾pirically. Hardness, too, is observed to come in degrees, and is subject to 
91 Euler 1752b, §46.166 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
empirical study. Tus, hardness and elasticity have a very diferent status in 
Euler’s natural philosophy than impenetrability.
Tis brings us back to the third important feature of Euler’s 1752 paper. We 
saw above that impenetrability is sufcient to yield a physics of collisions: it 
provides us with a causal explanation of the collision process (see section 
5.4). We have now seen that it is also sufcient for a philosophical mechanics 
of collisions, for it enables us to derive collision rules (his two equations by 
which we can treat collisions quantitatively). From there, we proceed on a 
secure foundation to elaborate our mechanics (by providing equations for 
special cases, deriving corollaries, and so forth) and to pursue our empirical 
investigations of particular kinds of bodies (in which we explore hardness 
and elasticity, and the behavior of bodies with varying degrees of each).92
Euler’s rules of collision, as derived above, are not as general as they might 
appear from our presentation. Tey depend on two crucial assumptions: that 
the bodies in collision are spherical (so that the initial area of contact can be 
assumed to be a point), and that the density distribution within each sphere 
is spherically symmetric. Euler does not discuss this in the 1752 paper, but 
in a later piece, “Research on the knowledge of bodies from mechanics,” 
he is clear that consideration of the efects of diferent shapes and mass 
distributions on the outcomes of collisions belongs to the domain of me￾chanics (Euler 1765a). So despite the appearance of a quantitative treatment 
arising from the physics of impenetrability, what we have is the quantitative 
treatment of a highly idealized case. Tis is the bridge, constructed by the 
provision of a philosophical mechanics, over which we pass from the quali￾tative causal treatment of physics to the specifc quantitative cases treated in 
mechanics.
In our opinion, Euler’s views ofer a macro-causal account of collisions 
without a micro-causal account of the process. Specifcally, impenetrability 
is a property of the whole simpliciter (in contrast to hardness and elasticity, 
which are properties arising from the composition of the parts), and it is 
impenetrability that we appeal to in giving a causal account of collisions in 
general. Tis sufces for our physics. Te particular outcome of a given col￾lision, depending on the hardness/elasticity of the bodies involved (as well 
as other properties, such as fragility), is an empirical matter (as it was for 
Newton in his Principia), a matter for empirical science, but knowledge of 
92 Euler’s matter theory has proper and subtle matter, so he might have an account of elasticity in 
terms of these, along the lines of Malebranche (see Chapter 2). Tis is an open question about Euler’s 
philosophy that requires further investigation.Body and force in the physics of collisions 167
these particular cases does not afect our knowledge of the general physics of 
collisions.
Unlike with the approach based on active and passive forces (as seen 
in Du Châtelet, for example), we do not need to attempt to say how the 
forces are used up during the process of collision. And, unlike those who 
appealed to subtle matter, we do not attempt to explain the causal process of 
collisions in terms of a micro-causal story. All of these attempts failed, as we 
have seen, and Euler does not adopt them. However, we also do better than 
those Newtonians who pulled the principles or rules needed to solve colli￾sion problems out of the air, or attempted to justify them empirically (but 
failed, see Chapter 3). Instead, we justify the needed principles by appeal to 
impenetrability. In our assessment, in the context of the approaches available 
at the time, Euler’s approach to collisions appears to be a promising proposal. 
Nevertheless, it comes at a signifcant cost, for it defers a causal account of 
collisions at the microscale to some later date and removes responsibility for 
it from the domain of philosophical physics. We discuss the implications of 
Euler’s reconceptualization of physics, and his reconfguring of the domain 
of physics in relation to mechanics, in Chapter 7.
5.6 Conclusions
Body persisted as a research problem in natural philosophy from the begin￾ning of the 18th century to its end. By the 1730s, it would have been clear 
that the issue demanded urgent attention (as we saw in Chapters 2–4), and 
so it is not surprising that leading fgures of the mid- to late 18th century en￾gaged with it. For all their disagreements over the nature and properties of 
bodies, these philosophers agreed that: (1) bodies are spatially extended, im￾penetrable, and have a quantity of matter, and (2) an adequate philosophical 
physics would provide a causal account of how bodies act on one another.
In this chapter, we have examined Body in the 1730s–50s, focusing on Du 
Châtelet and Euler. We paid close attention to their accounts of collision be￾cause, as we argued in Chapter 4, addressing PCOL is a necessary condition 
for solving Body. In their work, we fnd attempts to begin from a philosoph￾ical physics of impact, and to work from there to an account that integrates 
the rules of collision, yielding a philosophical mechanics. In our view, their 
proposals are the best available options in the mid-18th century. Both face 
serious difculties. Indeed, we think they take us to the end of the road for 168 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
a philosophical mechanics of collisions based on a physics of extended, im￾penetrable, material bodies acting on one another by means of contact forces.
In the early 18th century it was Newtonian gravity, conceived of as action￾at-a-distance, that was controversial as a means of body–body action. As the 
century progressed, it became increasingly clear that collisions were equally, 
if not more, problematic. New alternatives emerged in the work of Boscovich 
and Kant, each of whom ofered a radical departure from physics as it was 
then understood. We investigate these in the next chapter.Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason. Katherine Brading and Marius Stan, Oxford University Press. 
© Oxford University Press 2023. DOI: 10.1093/oso/9780197678954.003.0006
6
Searching for a new physics: 
Kant and Boscovich
6.1 Introduction
In the 18th century, solutions to the Problem of Bodies (Body) were expected 
to ascertain the properties, causal powers, and generic behaviors of bodies 
(Nature); explain how, if at all, bodies act on one another (Action); and 
provide justifcation for their results (Evidence and Principle).1 In earlier 
chapters, we have seen the central role of collision theory in addressing Body, 
and the widespread search for a causal-explanatory account integrating phil￾osophical physics2 with rational mechanics: a philosophical mechanics of 
collisions. In Chapter 5, we showed just how difcult this task proved to be, 
and we argued that the two main lines of approach available in the middle of 
the 18th century, defended by Du Châtelet and Euler, respectively, arrived at 
insurmountable obstacles. We argued that this was the end of the road for a 
philosophical mechanics of collisions based on a physics of extended, impen￾etrable, material bodies acting on one another by means of contact forces. No 
such project is viable.
It is here that Boscovich and Kant enter the story. What was needed was 
a new way to construct the spatially extended, impenetrable, mobile, and 
causally interacting bodies of a satisfactory philosophical physics. Kant and 
Boscovich each attempted just this. More than that, on the basis of their new 
accounts of body they sought to construct a philosophical mechanics that in￾cluded a treatment of collisions. Tis chapter assesses those eforts.
Our main conclusions are two. First, the approaches of Kant and Boscovich 
are transformative as to the goals of physics in two respects: (i) they limit the 
1 See Chapter 4 for Body. For explication of all the shorthand terminology that we use in this 
chapter, including Body, PCOL, Nature, Action, Evidence, and Principle, as well as the terms “philo￾sophical physics” and “philosophical mechanics,” see Chapter 1.
2 Recall that physics then was the sub-discipline of philosophy charged with the study of body in 
general (see Chapter 4). We use the label “philosophical physics” now and then to remind the reader 
of this.170 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
causal account that we can expect from physics; and (ii) they problematize 
the objects of physics. We explain precisely what we mean by these claims.
Second, their treatments of collisions are at once both radical and disap￾pointing. On the one hand, there is a dramatic reconceptualization of what 
contact action might amount to. On the other, we show that many of the same 
problems in handling collisions persist in these new accounts. Te promise 
of a new physics opening a path to a successful philosophical mechanics of 
collisions is unrealized, or so we argue.
Despite these shortcomings, all is not lost. Boscovich’s theory is forward￾looking in a way that Kant’s is not, for Boscovich attempts to incorporate not 
just collision theory but the latest developments in rational mechanics more 
generally. Tese developments are our focus in later chapters of this book; we 
return briefy to Boscovich in Chapter 9.
We begin with the accounts of bodies ofered by Kant and Boscovich (sec￾tion 6.2). We next turn our attention to philosophical mechanics, in frst 
Kant (section 6.3) and then Boscovich (section 6.4). We summarize our 
conclusions in section 6.5.
6.2 Te physics of bodies in Kant and Boscovich
In Chapter 5, we saw Euler pose a challenge to those who, following Leibniz, 
attempted to construct bodies from monads or non-extended simples of 
any kind:
Te proponents of simple things argue that the simple things, that consti￾tute a body, are at a distance from each other, and because of this distance 
have extent. However, if all these simple things were at a distance from each 
other, with nothing in between them, there would be nothing to prevent 
them from being driven together so closely that no distance between them 
remained. (Euler 1862, §13)
Te challenge is explicit: what prevents non-extended simples from coming 
together so closely that no extension results from their composition?3
3 Tough the above statement comes from the Natural Philosophy, published only posthumously, 
Euler’s concerns over how non-extended monads could compose an extended body were well￾known: see Chapter 5. Te analogous issue of whether points can compose a line was also a familiar 
topic at the time. We can distinguish two questions: (1) What keeps simples from coming so close 
together that they all collapse into a point? (2) What keeps them from being so tightly packed that Searching for a new physics 171
Boscovich and Kant share a common strategy: they combine non-extended 
simples with action-at-a-distance forces to arrive at extended bodies.4
Boscovich introduced his proposal in 1745 in the context of the ongoing 
debates over collision, and developed it in A Teory of Natural Philosophy
of 1758.5 Kant ofered his 1756 Physical Monadology explicitly as a solution 
to the problem of identifying the ultimate parts of bodies, and the means 
whereby these parts yield corporeal extension.6 Te diferences between 
their accounts of bodies are important, but so too are the commonalities 
in their solutions to the problem of the extension and divisibility of bodies. 
Teir theories have been studied in depth by philosophers. Our purpose here 
is to assess their proposals as contributions to Body.
(i) Kant on bodies
His earliest account is in his Physical Monadology, a paper of 1756 whose full 
title reads, “Te employment in natural philosophy of metaphysics combined 
with geometry, of which sample I contains the physical monadology.” Kant 
there aligns himself with those who, following Newton, advocated the use 
of experience and geometry together as a means of avoiding error in nat￾ural philosophy. But he then moves to distance himself from some, such as 
Musschenbroek and ’s Gravesande, for whom this method places the laws of 
nature at the epistemic limit of our inquiries (see Chapter 4). In a highly re￾vealing passage, he writes:
if we follow this sound path, we can exhibit the laws of nature though 
not the origin and causes of these laws. For those who only hunt out the 
phenomena of nature are always that far removed from the deeper un￾derstanding of the frst causes. Nor will they ever attain knowledge of the 
nature itself of bodies. (Kant 1992, 51)
they occupy no fnite interval (though they may take up an infnitesimal stretch ds). To (1), both 
Baumgarten and young Kant gave solutions. For Baumgarten, see Watkins 2006; for the young Kant, 
see Stan forthcoming. To (2), only Kant did, but he required action-at-a-distance forces to do so, as 
we shall see.
4 If the former are considered “Leibnizian” in origin, and the latter “Newtonian,” then each drew 
on both traditions to ofer a novel way forward. Boscovich 1922 is explicit about this: see part I, §2. 
Whether Boscovich’s “force” is best understood as such is discussed below (section 6.4).
5 See Boscovich 1745 and 1922, respectively. 6 See Kant 1910 and 1992, respectively.172 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
Kant’s concern is that we will lack a complete knowledge of causes, and of the 
nature of bodies. We return to this below when we discuss the consequences 
of his view for physics. Kant assigns the search for “frst causes” and the na￾ture of bodies to metaphysics: “Metaphysics, therefore, which many say may 
be properly absent from physics is, in fact, its only support.” More specif￾cally, we require metaphysics to address the following problem:
For bodies consist of parts; it is certainly of no little importance that it be 
clearly established of which parts; and in what way they are combined to￾gether, and whether they fll space merely by the co-presence of their primi￾tive parts or by the reciprocal confict of their forces. (Kant 1992, 51)
According to Kant, tackling this will require the union of metaphysics with 
geometry, or (equivalently, it seems) of transcendental philosophy with 
geometry.7
Difculties arise immediately, Kant says: (1) geometry asserts that space 
is infnitely divisible, while metaphysics denies this; (2) geometry asserts 
that “empty space is necessary for free motion,” while metaphysics rejects 
empty space; (3) geometry endorses universal attraction by means of forces 
inherent in bodies acting at a distance, whereas metaphysics rejects this in 
favor of mechanical causes. Te frst of these difculties, more specifcally 
stated, is how to reconcile the geometrical infnite divisibility of space with 
the physical extension of bodies. Te bodies of physics are presumed to be 
extended, but how is this extension possible?8
Toward addressing this question, Kant opens Section I of his Physical 
Monadology by arguing as follows:
1. Bodies consist of parts, each of which separately has an enduring 
existence.
2. Te composition of parts is nothing but a relation that can cease to exist 
without the parts ceasing to exist.
3. When all composition relations are abolished, the parts that are lef are 
non-composite.
4. Terefore, all bodies consist of non-composite parts.
7 See this famous statement: “But how, in this business, can metaphysics be married to geometry, 
when it seems easier to mate grifns with horses than to unite transcendental philosophy with geom￾etry?” (Kant 1992, 51).
8 Kant 1992, 53. See Chapter 5 for earlier attempts to address this issue.Searching for a new physics 173
Tereby Kant introduces his non-extended physical monad, located in space 
at a (non-extended) point. He refers to this point as the “place” taken up by 
the “mere positing of a substance,” viz. by simply asserting it to exist, without 
regard to its causal activities.9 Kant’s monads are capable of motion in space, 
over time.
Next, he introduces additional properties. For now, the relevant ones are 
two forces, attractive and repulsive, each with its origin at the location of the 
monad. Tis enables him to associate an extended spatial region with each 
monad: its sphere of activity. Specifcally, each monad has associated with it 
a fnite-sized spherical volume whose bounding surface (call it S) lies where 
the monad’s repulsive and attractive forces balance each other. At any point 
below this surface, there is net repulsion. Tat is, any other monad must ex￾pend momentum to reach below S, and when it comes to rest there it will be 
scattered back. At the center of S, the repulsive force becomes infnite.
Tis innovation—distinguishing between the place occupied by the sub￾stance and the space occupied by its activity—ingeniously allows Kant to 
evade the threat of contradiction arising from the divisibility of extension. 
To see this, we must distinguish two ways to claim divisibility. Both are 
conceptual, but it turns out that they difer importantly. In the frst, we im￾agine slicing through our volume with a blade that has no width. Call this 
“slicing.” In the second, we not only slice through our volume, but separate 
the resulting parts from one another spatially. Call this “breaking.” More pre￾cisely, the two types of divisibility are these:
s-divisibility; slicing: to conceive a mental plane intersecting a material 
volume. Mutatis mutandis for material surfaces or lines.10
b-divisibility; breaking: to conceive of a separation of parts divided by 
slicing, either by spatial separation or by annihilation of one part.
9 See Kant 1910, 483. As it happens, Newton’s Principia makes possible the denial of premise 1 and, 
as we saw in Chapter 5, Euler explicitly denies it. However, Kant adopts it as a premise, and it would 
have been similarly accepted by many of his contemporaries. Kant notes explicitly that he is not using 
the Principle of Sufcient Reason in his derivation of simples, contra Wolf (and Du Châtelet). 10 Imagine a loaf of bread and you driving a wide, thin blade through it. Leave the blade in, then 
do two mental operations: imagine the blade’s thickness shrunk to zero (suppose it to be as thick as 
a line in Euclidean geometry); and abstract completely from its specifc material, mass, temperature, 
etc. If the material is a plane, let the blade’s analogue be a mental line; and for a material line, let it be 
a (mental) point. Soon afer Kant, this approach became the canonical way for research in the me￾chanics of continuous media: we posit a mental plane—nowadays named an “Euler Cut”—to run 
through a control volume of material, and we study the stresses and torques crossing that plane in any 
given direction.174 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
Here is what the distinction entails. Te substance of the physical monad is 
itself indivisible in both senses: it can be neither sliced nor broken.11 And, 
while the space it flls (its sphere of activity) is divisible, it is so in a safe 
sense: it can be sliced but it cannot be broken.
Te extended bodies of our experience are composed of physical 
monads: they are aggregates of physical monads in an equilibrium confgura￾tion. For any two monads J and K, there is a number r such that, if K is placed 
at r units of distance away from J, the attraction and repulsion from J (on K) 
cancel out; thus, K will remain at rest there. (Evidently, there are many such 
locations; placing K anywhere on the bounding surface of J’s sphere of ac￾tivity will do it.) Vice versa for J in respect to K. So, having the monads J and 
K be at relative rest and mutual distance r is to have a composite body JK. And 
so on, for any fnite number of physical monads; except that the equilibrium 
distance rn
 (that separates a component monad from its nearest neighbors) 
will vary with the number n of monads in that particular composite body. In 
modern terms, a composite body is a lattice of mass points on which the net 
force is individually zero.
Te material substances of Kant’s physical monadology are both simple 
(i.e., part-less) and extended (albeit in a peculiar sense, as we have seen). 
Kant calls these substances physical monads, to signal that, unlike Leibniz’s 
monads, they are not mind-like. Moreover, unlike the simples of either Wolf 
or Du Châtelet, there is no lack of clarity about their metaphysical status: they 
are physical and they are located in space and time. Kant’s physical monads 
are assumed to be mobile, endowed with momentum, and able to respond 
to—as well as exert—impressed force. Any individual monad, with its sphere 
of activity, is a body. From here, it is a short step to the bodies of our experi￾ence: perceptible bodies are simply a subset of all composite bodies. Tey are 
composed of physical monads.
(ii) Boscovich on bodies
In A Teory of Natural Philosophy, frst published in 1758, Boscovich ofered 
a similar account of the extension of bodies.12 He accepts extension as a 
11 Bear in mind that “slicing” requires mentally producing a lesser-dimensional object inside the 
thing to be “sliced” (i.e., a plane slices a volume, a line slices a plane, etc.). But a point is a zero￾dimensional object. So, “slicing” it is not conceptually possible. Neither is “breaking” it, since a point 
has no proper parts to separate or annihilate. For further explanation, see Stan (forthcoming, part II).
12 See Boscovich 1922.Searching for a new physics 175
corporeal property, and accounts for it by appeal to non-extended physical, 
or material, points that stand in distance relations to one another as a result of 
the second primitive of Boscovich’s matter theory, force. For him, each such 
point has an associated single force that alternates with distance—between 
being repulsive and attractive—and when the forces between a collection 
of points are in equilibrium, the upshot is an extended body (see below for 
details).
In Book III, Boscovich raises the issue of the divisibility of extension, 
and tackles it with ease. For, while geometrical space is infnitely divisible, 
extended matter is not: “as soon as we reach intervals that are less than the 
distance between two points, further sections will cut these empty intervals 
and not matter.”13 Te upshot is physical extension that can be sliced, but 
not broken into spatially extended parts. In other words, we can continue 
to slice the space occupied by the physical points and their felds of force, 
but such conceptual slicing does not divide the matter present in that re￾gion into parts of matter. Like Kant, Boscovich begins with non-extended 
simples that cannot be divided, and then the extended bodies of our experi￾ence arise from composites of simples standing in force relations to one an￾other. A Boscovichian body arises from a fnite number of simples, and thus 
allows for a fnite number of divisions before further attempts at division no 
longer yield bodies as the resulting parts.14 Te diferences between Kant’s 
and Boscovich’s accounts of bodies are important, but so too are the above 
commonalities in their solutions to the difculties associated with the exten￾sion and divisibility of bodies.
Besides being extended, the bodies of physics were presumed to be mo￾bile and impenetrable. Te issues associated with mobility divide into two 
groups. First, there is the metaphysical question about the nature of motion, 
most famously expressed in the debate over absolute versus relative motion. 
What is it for a body to move? Change of place in absolute space? Change 
of distance relations with respect to other bodies? Tis question remained 
a matter of dispute in the late 18th century and beyond, and we touch on 
Kant’s involvement briefy, later.15 Te second is the ability of bodies to act on 
one another through motion, including resisting the actions of other bodies 
13 Boscovich 1922, §§391–3. 14 Tis was also Du Châtelet’s (1740) solution, but she does not posit forces between her simples. 15 Boscovich’s discussion of space and time can be found in Boscovich 1922, supplements I and 
II. See also Guzzardi 2020 and references therein. Kant’s contributions to the absolute versus rela￾tive space, time, and motion debate have been widely discussed in the literature. See, for example, 
Friedman 2013 and references therein.176 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
when their mutual motions are impeded. For this, collisions are of course 
the primary testing ground, and so we turn to the problem of collisions 
(PCOL) below.
For all of the fgures studied in the preceding chapters, impenetrability 
was accepted as a primitive property of bodies. In the theories of Boscovich 
and Kant this is no longer the case. Scott writes that “Boscovich used his own 
conception of ‘impenetrability’ as the theme” whereby to achieve a middle 
way “between the theories of the Newtonians and the Leibnizians.”16 Having 
constructed bodies from physical points endowed with a force, Boscovich 
states:
Te Impenetrability of bodies comes naturally from my Teory. For, if re￾pulsive forces act at very small distances, and these forces increase indef￾nitely as the distances decrease, so that they are capable of destroying any 
velocity however large; then there never can be any fnite force, or velocity, 
that can make the distance between two points vanish, as is required for 
compenetration. (Boscovich 1922, §360)
In other words, the force associated with the monad becomes repulsive 
at short distances, exponentially so with decreasing distance. One body 
excludes another from the space that it occupies in virtue of this repulsive 
force. Tis is a dynamical, rather than geometric, conception of impenetra￾bility.17 Tough Kant does not dwell on it, a similar view of impenetrability 
follows naturally from his physical monadology.
Tis revision to impenetrability will be important for Boscovich’s and 
Kant’s theories of collisions. Scott says that for Boscovich impenetrability is 
accounted for in terms of forces rather than matter, but this seems to un￾derplay how radical the proposal is.18 For both Boscovich and Kant, the im￾penetrability of extended bodies is derivative, an appearance manifest in the 
motions of bodies that arises due to the forces acting between non-extended 
material points. Every particle interacts with every other particle by means of 
action at a distance; contact action—the corollary of impenetrability—never 
takes place. Jammer puts the point well:
16 Scott 1970, 65. 17 Cf. discussion of “quantity of matter,” section 6.4. 18 Scott 1970, 65.Searching for a new physics 177
it is the same to assert that contact never takes place or to say that it al￾ways takes place, since two bodies have always a dynamic connection that 
depends on their relative distance alone. . . . Boscovich’s theory thus reduces 
contact phenomena to actions at a distance and consequently eliminates 
impact as a fundamental concept of mechanics. (Jammer 1957, 157)
Tat is, impact—which a century earlier counted as a primitive, and as 
the only intelligible means whereby one body might act on another—now 
requires detailed theorizing in terms of action-at-a-distance forces.19 We 
turn to Kant’s and Boscovich’s attempts to address PCOL shortly (see sections 
6.3 and 6.4).
(iii) Assessment
First, however, it is appropriate to assess their attempts at a constructive ac￾count of bodies from the perspective of philosophical physics. Recall from 
Chapters 1–5, physics was expected to provide a causal account of bodies—
of their natures, properties, and actions. To what extent do they achieve 
this goal?
We have seen that, for Boscovich and Kant, Nature (specifcally, extension 
and impenetrability) is intimately tied to Action: contact action is replaced 
by forces emanating from physical points; the points act on one another at 
a distance, and the interaction of bodies derives from this point–point in￾teraction. Tis picture seems comfortingly familiar in light of 20th century 
particle physics (at least as presented in books of popular science), thought of 
in terms of point particles and forces. Tat familiarity should not be allowed 
to obscure our view of what has happened: ostensibly, for both Boscovich 
and Kant, extended bodies remain the primary objects of physics, yet their 
solution to the problem of divisibility undermines that enterprise. Extended 
bodies are now composites, arising from extensionless physical points and 
spheres of activity or forces. Tis transforms not just the account of Nature, 
but the conception of physics itself. Teir transformation in physics is 
twofold.
First, such physical monadologies leave natural philosophers with a di￾lemma. On the one hand, we might retain bodies as the subject-matter of 
19 For more on the complexities of contact action, see Chapter 7.178 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
physics, but concede that these objects are derivative, constituted from a 
diferent kind of object whose study lies outside the domain of physics. 
A complete account of bodies would then require resources from beyond 
physics. Earlier in the 18th century, physics was the area of philosophy 
tasked with a complete account of bodies (their nature, properties, causes, 
efects, behaviors, etc.). Moreover, where such bodies were constituted from 
an underlying theory of matter, they were regions or parts of that matter, 
with matter and bodies sharing the same properties and investigable by the 
same methods. But now it turns out that we need to appeal to resources from 
metaphysics—such as simples—that lie forever beyond the reach of physics 
(i.e., beyond the means of inquiry available to physics). Tis approach, fa￾miliar from Leibniz, is clear in Kant. Physics cannot stand on its own: it 
requires a “metaphysical foundation.” On the other hand, we might adopt 
physical monads and the forces between them as the proper subject-matter of 
physics. Bodies, constructed out of these monads and forces, can be studied 
by physics, but they are no longer physics’ primary objects. Tis approach can 
be reached by considering Boscovich’s position for, unlike Leibniz and Kant, 
his simples are in principle empirically accessible by means of investigating 
the force law.20 Tis ofers a route to the physical simples as objects of physics. 
Such simples (and their forces) are then the primary objects of physics, with 
bodies being a derivative ontology. Either way, the enterprise of physics is 
transformed: in the latter case, bodies are no longer its primary subject￾matter; in the former, they remain so, but a complete account of bodies is 
now beyond its scope. Tis is one of the ways in which physics as the study of 
extended bodies disappears from existence as a viable philosophical enter￾prise by 1800. Insofar as bodies are extended, mobile, and impenetrable, they 
are no longer viable as the basic object of physics.
Tere is a second respect in which the general approach to Body found in 
Boscovich and Kant transforms physics. We saw above Kant’s concern that 
the Newtonians’ methods are limited when it comes to causal knowledge:
if we follow this sound path, we can exhibit the laws of nature though 
not the origin and causes of these laws. For those who only hunt out the 
20 A crucial intermediate position is occupied by Du Châtelet (1740). Like Leibniz, she put her 
simples in metaphysics, outside the reach of physics, and for her the bodies of physics arise from 
collections of these simples. However, unlike Leibniz her simples are causally connected with one an￾other (see Brading 2019, 59f.), and this makes Kant’s and Boscovich’s simples more like Du Châtelet’s 
than like Leibniz’s.Searching for a new physics 179
phenomena of nature are always that far removed from the deeper un￾derstanding of the frst causes. Nor will they ever attain knowledge of the 
nature itself of bodies. (Kant 1992, 51)
Tis means that we will lack a philosophical physics (see Chapter 4). Yet this 
is not how Kant expresses the issue, for instead he assigns the search for “frst 
causes” to metaphysics.
21 So, Kant is placing limits on the causal account that 
we can expect from physics. To complete our causal account of the natural 
world we must appeal to resources outside those accessible by the methods 
of physics. What this means, and how we go about it, is something Kant seeks 
to explicate.
For Boscovich, by contrast, forces are causes, and our knowledge of causes 
is limited to that of forces.22 As a result, since forces are physical, a meta￾physics of causation is beyond our epistemic reach. Boscovich is explicit that 
his ontology is compatible with all metaphysical views of causation then on 
ofer, such as occasionalism and so forth.23 He says that deciding between 
these accounts of causation is something that he does not seek to do, and 
that it cannot be done “from the phenomena, which are the same in all these 
theories.” In this he is representative of the late 18th century trend in which 
discussions of the metaphysics of causation are widely judged to be irrelevant 
to discussions of causation in physics. Where this leaves the status of physics’ 
claims to causal knowledge is an open question.24
And so, whereas in the early 18th century physics was the discipline re￾sponsible for obtaining causal knowledge of the natural world, and this was 
largely seen to be unproblematic and continuous with general metaphys￾ical accounts of causation, in Kant and Boscovich we see attempts to either 
completely reconfgure this relationship (Kant) or walk away from it entirely 
21 See also Chapter 4 for a discussion of causation in early modern philosophy. 22 Tat the forces are to be understood as causes is clear from Boscovich (1922, §519), where he 
discusses the possibility of other points, related by diferent force laws, present in the same space, 
and how they would be “perfectly independent” of one another and “could never acquire any indi￾cation of the existence of the other”: they would be causally unconnected, despite living in the same 
space. It is in this same paragraph that Boscovich introduces the idea of another space, bearing no 
relations (including no spatial relations) to our own. Tis is a natural consequence of his position 
that (1) space is relational, (2) relations arise from the force law, (3) there may be diferent force laws 
relating non-overlapping sets of things. See Guzzardi (2020, 49) for a distinction between powers 
(the ontological seat of forces) and the forces themselves, which Guzzardi regards as mathematical. 
See the surrounding pages for Guzzardi’s discussion of Boscovich on causation.
23 Boscovich 1922, §§516–518. 24 Te emerging disconnect between the metaphysics of causation and causation within physics 
was discussed in Chapter 4.180 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
(Boscovich). Tus, in diferent ways, both Boscovich and Kant limit the 
causal aspirations of physics.
And so, Boscovich’s and Kant’s proposals ofer a radical approach to Nature, 
one that is intimately tied to their accounts of Action. Te question is whether 
the general ideas that we have gestured to above can be turned into a successful 
solution to Body when spelled out in detail. For example, can either Kant or 
Boscovich provide bodies that survive interaction with one another? Can they 
meet the demands of PCOL? To address this, we turn our attention to their phil￾osophical mechanics.
6.3 Kant’s philosophical mechanics
Both Boscovich and Kant are fruitfully read as ofering a philosophical me￾chanics. Te term is ours, and we use it to label the many attempts at addressing 
Body that sought to integrate philosophical physics with rational mechanics, 
where the physics is responsible for a constructive account of the nature and 
properties of bodies, yielding a causal explanation of their behaviors, while the 
mechanics is responsible for a mathematical treatment of their motions.
As earlier chapters have shown, PCOL was central to attempts to address 
Body, by providing a test case for the viability of any purported solution.
PCOL: What is the Nature of bodies such that they can undergo collisions?
Te account of Nature and Action should be such as to allow a causal explana￾tion of the collision process between bodies. Moreover, the explanation should 
yield (or at least be consistent with) the rules of collision: we should obtain a 
philosophical mechanics of collisions. How do Kant’s and Boscovich’s accounts 
of bodies cope with PCOL? As we will see, both addressed this issue explicitly.
Within the mid-century discussion of Body and PCOL, the debate over 
vis viva was given new impetus by Du Châtelet in 1740. In 1745, Boscovich 
published his dissertation On Living Forces in which he reviewed the issues 
as they then stood, especially the confict between hard-body collisions and 
the principle of conservation of vis viva.
25 Kant’s frst publication was also on 
this topic,26 and his interest in it is part of the wider enthusiasm for natural 
25 Boscovich was a close contemporary of Du Châtelet and Euler. Like them, he wrestled with the 
inheritance from Leibniz and Newton, and with the search for an adequate account of bodies and of 
their collisions.
26 His 1749 Toughts on the True Estimation of Living Forces (Kant 2012, 1–155).Searching for a new physics 181
philosophy that he exhibited throughout his pre-Critical years. We begin 
with Kant, and then turn to Boscovich’s contemporaneous proposal (section 
6.4). Each ofers an attempt to address PCOL via a constructive account of 
bodies, and each faces similar difculties, familiar from the frst half of the 
century.
In 1758, not long afer Physical Monadology, Kant published a treatment of 
collisions.27 Tis paper has received very little attention, but its signifcance 
stands out if we read it against the backdrop of our discussion so far. First, Kant 
aimed to contribute to the Leibniz–Malebranche agenda we have described 
in earlier chapters. He does not say so explicitly, but his exposition unmistak￾ably reveals his problem as their conundrum: to explain the rules of collision 
by deriving them from a notion of body equipped with causal agency codifed 
in dynamical laws. Tat derivation is his crowning result in the paper. We de￾scribe the derivation below, and assess its merits. Second, Kant confronted the 
question of whether collision processes are as intelligible as many 17th and early 
18th century natural philosophers had insisted (see Chapter 5). More specif￾cally, the process of collisions was commonly described as a “communication 
of motion.” Kant wondered, as some before him had done, what this phrase re￾ally denoted. For it cannot be meant literally: everyone agreed that motion is 
a property (of individual moving bodies), and properties do not travel across 
substances. All attributes—thus motion too—always inhere in their respective 
substance, at all times. So, it is metaphysically absurd to suppose that motion 
(qua property) could be literally communicated, in collision. Ten what does
impact amount to, if it is not a case of substances transferring attributes?28
To achieve his frst aim, Kant resorts to a three-step strategy. First, he crafs 
a new account of true motion; hence the title for his paper. Second, from this 
he claims to derive dynamical laws (of contact action) by a priori argument. 
And fnally, with his laws in place, he explains briefy how to derive the rules 
of impact.
In the frst step, Kant ofers his key to a sound collision mechanics: a theory 
of true motion, wahrhafe Bewegung, which he construes as a peculiar version 
of relationism.29 He begins with some very terse reasoning that leads him to 
27 Kant 1905. Translated as “New doctrine of motion and rest” in Kant 2012, 396–408. For context 
and analysis, see Stan 2009.
28 See Chapter 4. See Watkins 2005 for the physical infux approach in Kant’s immediate 
predecessors. On the early modern causality debate more generally, see Clatterbaugh 1999. For Du 
Châtelet’s novel solution to this problem, see Chapter 5, and discussion in Brading 2019, chapter 4. 29 True motion was that which bodies have in re vera (as Descartes put it), that is, independent of 
their apparent motion or rest as manifested to terrestrial observers. For instance, the motion and rest 182 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
infer that, in impact, the two bodies have a privileged quantity of motion, 
namely their velocity relative to the mass center of their collision. Quietly, he 
assumes that any moving body has a “moving force” equal to its “true” quan￾tity of motion, mv, relative to their common center of mass.30 It follows triv￾ially that, in his mechanics, any two bodies always collide with equal force, 
and so neither counts as “weaker,” “passive,” “stronger” and the like.
From his analysis, Kant immediately infers two theses that function as his 
dynamical laws. Te frst says that, in any direct collision (even when one 
body is apparently at rest) both bodies are truly in motion: “it is impossible 
for a body to approach another one absolutely at rest.” Te second says that, 
“in impact, action and reaction are always equal.” Kant claims that with these 
resources in hand he can “explain the laws of impact according to the new 
doctrine of [true] motion” he had defended above.31
Now we arrive at the third step, and here is how Kant’s explanation of im￾pact goes. Suppose that body A is taken to be at rest with body B moving 
toward it, in a straight line at some constant speed u. For Kant, these are just 
apparent states. Teir true inertial states fall out of his theory of true motion 
above, as follows. Take their relative speed—in this case, u—and divide it into 
two individual body speeds, a and b, such that a/b = B/A, where A and B are 
the masses of the two bodies.32 Obviously, Ba = Ab, and since mass times 
speed measures “force of motion,” it follows that the bodies collide with equal 
and opposite forces: “both are in motion toward each other, . . . the one with 
the same force as the other. . . . and it is really with these forces [Kräfe] that 
the two bodies will act on each other in impact.”33
At this key point Kant declares, casually and without any argument, that 
equal-force bodies always come to mutual rest afer impact: “because of the 
at issue in the Copernican controversy; or the (true) states of motion and rest asserted by the Law of 
Inertia. A theory of motion is a metaphysical account of the nature of true motion; an answer to the 
question, What does true motion consist in? From Descartes to our times, the two leading contenders 
have been absolutism—the view that true motion is change of place in absolute space, an immaterial, 
rigid, unbounded container-like entity metaphysically distinct from body; and relationism—that 
true motion consists in a (kinematic) relation to some distinguished body or material setup. Kant was 
a relationist, both early (in the 1750s) and late, afer the so-called Critical Turn.
30 Tis puts him close to the later Wolf, but quite far away from Du Châtelet. Te center-of-mass 
frame is sometimes called the “zero-momentum frame,” because relative to it colliding bodies have 
equal and opposite momenta. If that quantity measures their “force,” then evidently they meet with 
equal and opposite “forces of motion.”
31 Kant 1905, 19f. 32 It is clear then that a and b, the bodies’ “true” speeds, are with respect to the mass-center frame of 
their collision.
33 Kant 1905, 18–9.Searching for a new physics 183
equality of their contrary forces, the bodies come to relative rest.” Evidently, 
this description—and the causal-dynamical story it allows—holds only for 
the center-of-mass frame; only there are their “forces” equal, so that mutual 
rest ensues. His conclusion: this account yields “the rules of the relation that 
colliding bodies enter into, with respect to each other.”34
To predict the apparent motions that the observer will see, we need only re￾describe the impact’s outcome relative to that observer (taken to be at rest).35
Kant illustrates his point with a particular case, and then reminds the reader 
that such descriptions are not really explanatory: they are “just the outer phe￾nomenon of what occurred immediately between the [colliding bodies]; and 
it is the latter that one needs to know,” he insists.36 Namely, the causal-process 
story he has given and defended above.
Tus Kant accounts for the quantitative patterns of apparent motion that 
an observer would see as they watch any two bodies collide head-on. In sum, 
the young Kant’s natural-philosophical basis for collision mechanics is: a 
relationist account of true motion; two dynamical laws; and the presumption 
that moving bodies have “force of motion” equal to mass times true speed, 
not the Leibnizians’ vis viva. Tereby, his paper is a late installment in the 
Leibniz–Malebranche agenda to explain why those patterns obtain, viz. to 
“give the reason” for the “rules of motion.”
Recall that Leibniz and William Neile had frst demanded a causal￾explanatory basis for collision theory in the 1660s and ’70s. Tus, the 
struggle to make sense of contact action had by now entangled sharp phil￾osophical minds for well over a century. And yet, little progress has been 
made. First, Kant helps himself to a notion of mass, without justifcation.37
Second, he asserts that bodies of equal “force” will come to rest as a result 
of head-on collision. Tis is to simply presume perfectly inelastic collisions, 
and Kant did not justify why the “force of motion” in each body should be 
annihilated in a head-on collision. Tese puzzles, present at the beginning of 
34 Kant 1905, 23. 35 Kant (1905) helps himself to some key assumptions, though without discussion. Namely, that 
the bodies are in uniform motion, are non-rotating, and collide head-on; hence that their interaction 
is described from a proper inertial frame.
36 Kant 1905, 24; our emphasis. 37 Newton’s second law of motion quantifes the relationship between force, mass, and accelera￾tion. In Physical Monadology, Kant recognizes that this dynamical conception of mass involves both 
resistance and impulse. His physical monad is a point-sized entity endowed with just such a dual 
property, and the property is additive: physical monads aggregate into extended bodies, and their
aggregate inertia is the sum of the component monads’ mass. And, it equals the body’s quantity of 
matter. See Kant 1910, 485–6. See also Chapter 7 for a discussion of “elusive mass.”184 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
the century, remained unaddressed in Kant’s 1758 paper. As a result, the ac￾count of Nature, Action, Evidence, and Principle ofered in his philosophical 
mechanics fails to meet the challenge posed by PCOL, and thereby to provide 
an adequate solution to Body.
In the “Critical” years, Kant ofered a new attempt in his Metaphysical 
Foundations of Natural Science (MFNS), a pithy tract of 1786 where he 
expounds a “metaphysics of material nature” for the sake of obtaining a “con￾cept of matter ready for application” to natural science.38 Tough diferent 
in detail, the approach is again constructive; and again impact lies at the 
heart of MFNS. Kant frst goes to enormous lengths to construct a notion 
of body. He then places collision center stage, in his chapter “Metaphysical 
foundations of mechanics,” leaving the reader keen to see how he solves 
PCOL. In the end, however, nothing new emerges, and familiar problems 
resurface.39 Moreover, MFNS is a late 18th century work; by the time Kant 
wrote it rational mechanics had moved on, displacing impact from its central 
role in philosophical mechanics.40 Tus, while this book serves to emphasize 
the continuing importance of Body through the end of the century, it is oth￾erwise of little interest for our purposes: from the perspective of philosoph￾ical mechanics, MFNS was out of date before it was even written.
6.4 Boscovich’s philosophical mechanics
We have already seen in general terms the constructive account of body 
ofered by Boscovich in his physics. But in his Teory he was afer a bigger 
prize, attempting exactly the type of project we call a philosophical me￾chanics. He says so explicitly in the opening paragraph of his Preface.41
Teory consists of three parts: Part I outlines the theory as a whole (the 
38 Kant 1911. English translation Kant 2004. 39 See Stan (forthcoming) for details. Te gist is this. Kant’s mature theory of collisions treats 
bodies as having real states of motion relative to their center of mass (or rather, relative to an in￾ertial frame in which their mass center is at rest), and then any two colliding bodies run into each 
other with equal amounts of “moving force” which “cancel each other out” on impact, bringing the 
bodies to rest. Already one can suspect numerous assumptions in here, and closer inspection bears 
this out. Kant’s account leaves several important questions unresolved. For extensive discussion of 
Kant’s laws and their relevance to impact mechanics, see also Friedman 2013 (chapter 3) and Watkins 
2019 (chapters 4–6). 40 Tese developments in rational mechanics and their signifcance for philosophical mechanics 
are the subject of the remaining chapters of this book.
41 Boscovich 1922, 13.Searching for a new physics 185
unifed philosophical mechanics, in our terminology); Part II sets out his 
mechanics; and Part III develops his physics.
By physics, Boscovich means the study of bodies, their properties, and 
the changes they undergo. He opens Part III saying that he will address 
“the general properties of bodies,” the “diferent species of bodies,” and the 
“changes, alterations & transformations that happen to them.”42 By me￾chanics, Boscovich means rational mechanics along the lines conceived by 
Newton: the mathematical treatment of motions under forces. Specifcally, 
in Part II Boscovich asserts that mechanics boils down to two problems: to 
fnd the motions given the force, and to fnd the force given the motions. 
And so, he sets out to investigate the “general laws of equilibrium and mo￾tion.”43 On his own terms, his physics is to be understood in the context of 
the goals of the overall project. And so, our question is this: To what extent 
does Boscovich succeed in his goal of producing an integrated theory of me￾chanics and physics—a philosophical mechanics—capable of solving Body? 
To answer this, we begin with his mechanics, and then explore his attempted 
integration, adding more details from his physics as needed.
(i) Boscovich’s mechanics
Te core of Boscovich’s mechanics concerns the motions of “points” under 
“forces.” Each point has associated with it a “force of inertia”: an “inherent 
propensity to remain in the same state of rest or of uniform motion in a 
straight line.”44 Te points act on each other via an action-at-a-distance given 
by a single force law that varies with distance. Famously, Boscovich’s theory 
begins from two fundamental assumptions, impenetrability and continuity. 
Impenetrability is the requirement that no two of the points can be spatially 
co-located. Continuity, the principle enunciated by Leibniz, is satisfed by the 
Boscovich force.45
Over various fnite intervals, the force either repels or attracts other points 
within that interval (see Fig. 6.1). Te frst interval, from A to E, is one of re￾pulsion; in the next interval, from E to G, the force is attractive. Tere follows 
another interval, G to I, of repulsion; and so on, alternately, up to distance 
42 Boscovich 1922, §358. 43 Boscovich 1922, §204. 44 Boscovich 1922, §8. 45 Child 1922, xi.186 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
R from the point, where the force turns attractive and trails of to zero at in￾fnity. Moreover, within each interval but two, the force increases gradually 
from zero to a maximum strength, and then decreases to zero, at the same 
rate as it increased (e.g., from L to M, and then to N, respectively). Boscovich 
represented all these conjectures about his force in a famous graph.
“Limit points” are those where the force transitions from attractive to re￾pulsive, or vice versa. Given a system of two points (say a and b), one situated 
at the origin and the other at one of these limit points, there will be no mutual 
force between them. So, if they are at mutual rest, they will remain at mutual 
rest: they will be in equilibrium. Following a disturbance to this equilibrium 
that momentarily increases the distance between the points, there are two 
possible outcomes. In the frst case, the force on b may be attractive and the 
points will return to their original equilibrium confguration. In the second, 
the force on b is repulsive and the points will continue to move apart. Te 
former kind of equilibrium is cohesive, and the latter non-cohesive.46 In fact, 
a Boscovich central force originates from each of the points, so the net force is 
the critical dynamical player. Te forces add as vectors to produce a single net 
force in which the pairwise motions of the points are mutual.47 Tese are the 
C' G'
D'
F' F K O S
T
V
R C
Q M
E' E G I L N P
A a b m
d i
h l y
x
u
t
H
D
B
n
r
g
c e f q o v
s p
z
Fig. 6.1. Boscovich force. Te curve represents the strength of the force. A is 
the location of the physical point, and so AC is an ordinate axis. Te AB axis is 
oriented. Above A, the force is repulsive; below A, it is attractive. To infer the 
strength of the force at any location, project that location (for instance, n, l, or t) 
onto the AB axis, and you get the local strength.
46 See Boscovich 1922, §§179–180. In modern terms, these confgurations correspond to stable 
and unstable equilibrium, respectively.
47 Tis is important when interpreting his force-distance diagrams; see Boscovich 1922, §177.Searching for a new physics 187
crucial features of Boscovich’s forces on which his mechanics depends: “force 
of inertia”; central forces; mutual pairwise motions; vector addition of forces; 
and equilibrium.
From these assumptions, Boscovich derives the main principles of his me￾chanics. First, he shows that every collection of points has a unique “center￾of-gravity”. Tis follows from the assumption of central forces, mutual 
pairwise motions, and the vector addition of forces.48
Second, he argues that the center-of-gravity of any isolated collection of 
points is at rest or moves uniformly. He begins by showing this holds for 
the simple case of points moving by “the force of inertia” alone, and then 
considers interacting points. In the latter scenario, since we have already 
postulated central forces and mutual pairwise motions, the result follows 
straightforwardly. It is, as he notes, “a most elegant theorem of Newton.”49
From this principle, Boscovich draws an immediate corollary of his own:
Te quantity of motion in the Universe is maintained always the same, so long 
as it is computed in some given direction in such a way that motion in the 
opposite direction is considered negative, & the sum of the contrary motions is 
subtracted from the sum of the direct motions. (Boscovich 1922, §264; italics 
in original)
Tis is a conservation principle for the total quantity of motion in the uni￾verse, though “quantity of motion” remains an undefned term thus far.
Next, Boscovich turns his attention from points to bodies. Since his bodies 
are sets of points in cohesive equilibrium, we can apply the above results 
to them. Such bodies act on one another when they (as two equilibrium 
confgurations) are not in mutual equilibrium jointly, for then there will be a 
net force between them. His frst conclusion is that there is equality of action 
and reaction between all bodies. Tus, Boscovich takes Newton’s third law 
of motion to be a consequence of the assumptions he makes in setting up his 
mechanics.
To assess his mechanics fully, we would need to take stock of terms we 
have so far passed over, including “points,” “forces,” “center-of-gravity,” “force 
48 Te alert reader will be suspicious that an implicit assumption about mass has been made. We 
come back to this, and to the meaning of the term “center-of-gravity,” in our discussion of “elusive 
mass,” below.
49 Boscovich 1922, §260. He means Corollary IV to the laws of motion in Newton’s Principia (see 
Newton 1999, 421).188 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
of inertia,” “quantity of motion,” and “mass.” However, we can defer much 
of this until later. Our interest for now is in his account of bodies in relation 
to his treatment of collisions. Boscovich’s approach consists of two general 
steps: frst, the construction of the necessary extended bodies; and second, a 
demonstration that impact can be treated within his theory. We tackle each 
in turn.
(ii) Te construction of extended bodies 
in rational mechanics
Boscovich constructs solid bodies by means of cohesive equilibrium 
occurring in regular tetrahedra. First, he discusses the motion of a point 
around an ellipse that has an additional point at each focus. He argues that 
cohesive limit points occur at the intercepts of the major and minor axes, 
and from there that cohesive equilibrium among three non-collinear points 
occurs only when the three points form an equilateral triangle (in the ab￾sence of an external force).50 From collections of these triangles he builds 
tetrahedra, which he calls “particles.”51 From four of these particles we form 
a larger pyramid (a “particle of the second kind”), and so on until we arrive 
at large collections of points forming masses: the familiar solid bodies of 
physics, including practically rigid rods, as well as fexible rods, including 
those that oscillate appreciably (and thereby exhibit elasticity).52
As we have seen in earlier chapters, there was a standard three-way tax￾onomy of bodies in terms of their shape behaviors into sof, hard, and elastic. 
Boscovich explains how to think of this taxonomy within the context of his 
theory. Of sof bodies, he writes:
50 See Boscovich 1922, §§225–239. He frst considers equilibrium for three collinear points where 
the cohesion is extremely strong, so that it is very difcult to disturb the points from the line along 
which they lie, and once disturbed they return to that line in a very short time. Ten he turns to 
non-collinear points, and argues for equilateral triangles exhibiting strong cohesion, and for these 
as providing us with “an idea of a certain solidity.” He also considers four coplanar points, giving us 
“a more precise idea than hitherto has been possible of a solid rod,” before arriving at tetrahedra. His 
discussion reinforces the interpretation that each point is equal in mass with the same force function 
being associated with every point. Te diferences in behaviors of bodies arise from the diferent 
arrangements of the points making up the body, and the consequent net force associated with that 
body. At large distances, these diferences become negligible; this is why gravitational behavior then 
dominates.
51 Boscovich 1922, §239. 52 Boscovich 1922, §226.Searching for a new physics 189
By sof bodies are to be understood those, which resist deformation of 
their shapes, or compression; but which, when compressed, exert no force 
tending to restore shape; such as wax or tallow. (Boscovich 1922, §266)
Of elastic bodies:
Elastic bodies are those that endeavor to recover the shape they have lost; 
& if the force tending to restore shape is equal to that tending to prevent 
loss of shape, the bodies are termed perfectly elastic; and just as there are 
no perfectly sof bodies, there are none that are perfectly elastic, according 
to my thinking, in Nature. Lastly, they are imperfectly elastic, if the force 
exerted against losing shape bears to the force exerted to restore it some 
given ratio. (Boscovich 1922, §266)
And fnally of hard bodies:
It is usual to add a third class of bodies, namely, such as we call hard; and 
these never alter their shape at all; but these also, even according to general 
opinion, never occur in Nature; still less can they exist in my Teory. Yet, 
if anyone wishes to take account of such bodies, they could consider them 
as sof bodies which are compressed less and less, until the compression 
fnally becomes evanescent; that is, take the compressible sof body and re￾duce the compressibility towards zero to arrive at an idealization that we 
call a hard body. (Boscovich 1922, §266)
Tis is how we are to think of such bodies for the purposes of mechanics. 
As for “what are the causes of sof or elastic bodies, I do not investigate at 
present; this relates to the third part” (i.e., to his physics).53
For the purposes of mechanics, when we appeal to “rigid bodies,” “inex￾tensible threads,” “rigid planes,” and so on, we are working with idealizations 
never realized in nature, not even at its smallest parts; there are no tiny, rigid 
atoms in Boscovich’s natural philosophy. Nor are there any perfectly elastic 
parts of matter, out of which the macroscopic bodies of our experience are 
53 Te causes lie in the diferent arrangements that lead to diferent forces among the parts, 
yielding diferent locations for the limit points as well as diferent locations and strengths for cohesive 
equilibrium.190 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
constructed, and of which the theorems of mechanics are exactly true. And 
so, Boscovich writes,
Since, to my idea, there are no such things as continuous spheres or contin￾uous planes, many of the things that have been said are only true as far as 
we can observe, & only very approximately and not accurately. (Boscovich 
1922, §296)
Tis raises questions concerning the evidential status of mechanics, and of 
Boscovich’s theory of points and forces out of which the bodies of mechanics 
are made.
(iii) Boscovich and PCOL
Boscovich treats collisions explicitly, appealing to both his mechanics and his 
physics, and so PCOL ofers the opportunity for an exemplary window into 
his philosophical mechanics. Te results, as we shall see, are disappointing.
Boscovich begins by saying that “to make the matter easier, I consider 
spheres, and these too homogeneous round about the center.”54 Tis allows 
him to treat the trajectories via centroids (that is, by a representative point 
at the center of the sphere). Te principle on which he rests his collision me￾chanics is equality of action and reaction (cf. Newton’s third law of motion) 
as a consequence of which “quantity of motion” is conserved. As already 
noted, Boscovich is explicit that “quantity of motion” is the product of mass 
and velocity.55
One equation is insufcient to determine the two unknowns (that is, the 
exit speeds of the two spheres post-collision). A second equation is needed, 
and for that Boscovich reaches outside his mechanics to his physics, begin￾ning with sof bodies. His canonical situation is catch-up impact, and he says 
that when the faster approaches the slower closely enough,
the parts at the back of the slower body, and the ones at the front of the 
faster, get compressed by a mutual repulsive force. And this compression 
54 Boscovich 1922, §266. 55 Boscovich 1922, §268: “the velocity multiplied by the number of points represents the sum of the 
motions of all the points, i.e., the quantity of motion.” Recall from earlier that the notion of mass is an 
open interpretive question.Searching for a new physics 191
increases until the bodies reach the same speed. At that point, the catch￾up body stops approaching the other one any further, and so they stop 
compressing each other as well. As the bodies are sof, they exert on each 
other no other force beyond the above compression. Rather, they just keep 
moving at the same speed. (Boscovich 1763, §268)
Tis descriptive physics allows Boscovich to infer the second condition 
needed for solving the sof-body collisions: following impact, the bodies 
move together. Inferring the relevant “general formula” for their outcome is 
then routine: the fnal speed is v = (ma
ua
 + mb
ub
)/(ma
 + ma
), for masses a and 
b, with initial and fnal velocities u and v.
56
Notice that this conclusion is “routine” only so long as Boscovich has the 
Newtonian concept of mass. For, while one body acts on another in pro￾portion to the number of points, how each body responds to the action of 
the other requires specifcation—such as via Newton’s second law of mo￾tion. However, Boscovich, like many before him, faces a problem of “elu￾sive mass”: it is not at all clear that he has the requisite notion available (see 
below). His treatment of collisions seems to demand that he make use of it, 
dishearteningly committing Boscovich to principles and concepts not ex￾plicitly stated in setting out his theory.
Moving on to his treatment of elastic impact, the process takes place as 
above until the stage of maximum mutual compression. At this point, elastic 
bodies do not cease to act on each other, but instead each one’s “force of 
recovering shape” leads it to return to its initial shape. As a result, the bodies 
“keep acting on each other, until they come back to their initial shapes; and 
their action will double the above efect.”57 By this pithy phrase, Boscovich 
leaps to conclude that the “double” action will result in the bodies rebounding 
at the same relative speed they had before impact. Tis provides him with the 
second condition he needs for deriving the outcome of elastic collision.58
Boscovich’s treatment of collisions is disappointing. Tough gesturing 
qualitatively at his new theory, in fact he simply repeats the results from 
decades before, his new theory playing no substantive role in determining 
56 Tis is Boscovich’s algebraic expression in our notation. 57 Boscovich 1922, §270. 58 Boscovich also treats oblique impact, again from a centroid perspective, and he introduces two 
further conditions in order to derive his results. One of these is that in oblique collision, the force of 
impact is central, viz. acting along the line between the bodies’ centers of gravity, a result that remains 
to be demonstrated within his mechanics and that allows him to transform oblique impact into cases 
that can be handled via the equations for direct collision.192 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
collision outcomes. Boscovich makes no attempt to mathematize dynamics 
at the point of contact, nor even to connect his physical story of collision with 
his diagram of Boscovichian force. He treats the colliding bodies via their 
centroids, ignoring their extension in the quantitative treatment. Moreover, 
his treatment relies on Newtonian dynamical mass without explicit ac￾knowledgment. A coherent mechanics of collision—one that successfully 
combines a notion of body, the forces at work in collision, and their kinematic 
outcomes—eluded Boscovich just as it had escaped all his predecessors.
Moreover, if we were to attempt a treatment that explicitly uses his force 
function, we would fnd that his account does even worse. Te combina￾tion of Boscovich’s collision theory with his doctrine of body entails that 
bodies are fundamentally and incurably unstable: Boscovich bodies oscillate 
without end, and nothing is available to restore and keep them in equilib￾rium confgurations. Te root cause of this problem is the absence of any 
dissipative forces—or any physical basis that can dampen oscillations and 
end vibrations.59 Tis problem reverberates negatively into his very notion
of body: if a body is a collection of points remaining at mutual rest in a stable 
equilibrium confguration, but any collision results in endless vibrations, 
then it follows that there are no Boscovich bodies in the actual world that are 
capable of undergoing signifcant interactions with other bodies. No body 
survives a collision.
If we are looking to Boscovich for progress and innovation in philosoph￾ical mechanics, we will not fnd it in his treatment of collisions. However, by 
the late 18th century collisions had been moved downstream, away from the 
foundations of mechanics, as a complex problem too difcult to solve at that 
time.60
59 Consider the two “physical points” colliding head on. Te outcome is elastic rebound (their mu￾tual repulsive forces will drive them back from each other, to the same extent). As they recede, they 
reach a band of relative distance in which their mutual attractive forces dominate. So, under mutual 
attraction, their elastic rebound will slow down to an end, and turn into mutual approach. Tat will 
bring them close enough for their mutual repulsive forces—more exactly, for some repulsive regime 
within their force law—to take over, thus inducing mutual rebound, again; which will remove them 
far enough from each other that again some mutual-attractive regime of force becomes dominant, 
leading to relative approach; and so on, to no end. But, Boscovich bodies are just sets of interacting 
physical points; as bodies, they have no sui-generis forces over and above the single, alternative force 
of Boscovich’s matter points. And so, head-on impact between bodies is bound to result in endless 
vibrations within each body, as the collision makes its constituent points oscillate relative to each 
other. Incidentally, Kant’s physical monadology has the same problem; Smith 2013 frst noticed that.
60 Indeed, to best understand the ambitious goals of Boscovich’s Teory, as a philosophical me￾chanics, we think it should be read in light of d’Alembert’s Treatise; see Chapter 9.Searching for a new physics 193
(iv) Boscovich and “elusive mass”
Boscovich is of particular interest when it comes to “elusive mass.” Tis is 
because he makes no explicit appeal to mass when setting up his mechanics. 
Two interpretative options present themselves.
Interpretation 1
In the frst, we assume that this was an oversight: we interpret Boscovich’s 
mechanics as closely to Newtonian point particle mechanics as possible, 
associating an equal quantity of Newtonian mass with each Boscovichian 
point and treating the mass of a body as the additive sum of the masses of 
the constitutive points. At frst sight, this interpretation seems to align with 
what Boscovich says later, when he turns his attention to physics in Part 
III. Here, he writes that the “mass of a body is the total quantity of matter 
pertaining to that body; & in my Teory this is precisely the same thing as the 
number of points that go to form the body.”61 Moreover, this reading has sev￾eral advantages. First, it makes sense of Boscovich’s term “center-of-gravity,” 
which he says in reality “does not depend on gravity, but rather is related 
to masses.” “Center-of-mass” indeed seems to be a more appropriate term 
for the quantity that he calculates. Second, his proof that every collection 
of points has a unique “center-of-gravity” goes through straightforwardly 
if (a) he means center-of-mass and (b) every point is implicitly assumed to 
have an equal mass. Tird, if his points are point masses, and if (crucially) he 
is willing to appeal to the necessary principles, he will be able to derive all the 
results then available for point-mass mechanics.
Doubts about Interpretation 1
Tat things are not so straightforward is clear from Boscovich’s very next re￾mark: “Here now we have a certain indefniteness, or at least the greatest dif￾fculty, in forming a defnite idea of mass; & that, not only in my theory, but in 
the usual theory as well.”62 Whereas the frst quotation may look like an en￾dorsement of Newtonian mass, this second remark gives us pause: Boscovich 
holds “mass” to be indefnite, and an unhelpful notion as a result.
In the ensuing discussion, it becomes clear what he is worried about. As we 
saw in Chapters 2–5, in the early 18th century many relied on a distinction 
61 Boscovich 1922, §378. 62 Boscovich 1922, §378.194 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
between proper and foreign matter. Boscovich’s concern is that this distinc￾tion cannot be made in a principled way, leaving the mass of a body indef￾nite. Specifcally, the quantity of matter associated with a body—understood 
as the volume of its proper matter—is indefnite. Now, measuring mass by 
its geometric volume (viz. the “geometric” notion of mass) is to be distin￾guished from the dynamical notion expressed in Newton’s second law of mo￾tion (see Chapter 7 for details), where the relevant aspect is a body’s response 
to impressed force. It seems to be the geometric conception that Boscovich 
fnds problematic, but it is the dynamical conception that is crucial for me￾chanics. So, we can take his criticism of “mass” to target geometric mass, and 
continue to maintain our interpretation that each Boscovichian point has a 
well-defned quantity of dynamical mass.
Tinking of Boscovich’s “mass” as picking out geometric rather than 
dynamical mass is consistent with Boscovich’s use of the term to denote 
collections of multiple points (and never in connection with a single point). 
Moreover, though Boscovich never uses the term “mass” in setting up his 
mechanics, he does assert that his points have a “force of inertia” associated 
with them, and that as a consequence of this bodies do too.63 It is striking 
that Boscovich separates “mass” (for which he ofers a geometric concep￾tion, as we have just seen) from “force of inertia,” and that he never uses the 
term “mass” for the latter at all. In his use of these labels, he perhaps makes 
the distinction we have made between geometric and dynamical mass. If 
Boscovich’s “force of inertia” is correctly interpreted as dynamical mass, then 
Interpretation 1 stands.
According to him, “the force of inertia consists in a propensity for staying 
in the same state of rest or of maintaining a uniform state of motion in a 
straight line, unless some external force compels a change of this state.”64
Statements along these lines are familiar from Newton’s frst law of motion, 
and it is tempting to think of this as expressing dynamical mass. However, 
Newton’s frst law tells us nothing about what changes in motion a body 
undergoes when a force is impressed: it gives us only “kinematic” mass 
(see Chapter 7). Lacking Newton’s second law (or some analogue thereof), 
we have no information about the relationship between the mass of a body 
and its response to impressed force. And so, despite the initial plausibility 
of attributing Newtonian dynamical mass to Boscovichian points, pursuing 
63 Boscovich 1922, §8. 64 Boscovich 1922, §382.Searching for a new physics 195
this line of interpretation leads to trouble: it requires attributing to Boscovich 
a concept he never explicitly endorses, and for which he lacks the requisite 
resources.
Interpretation 2
Tere is a second interpretative line that we might take instead. Having 
noticed that Boscovich makes no reference to mass in setting up his account 
of the motions of points, we might wonder what he means by “force.” If his 
“forces” determine the motions of points without any appeal to mass, then 
they are perhaps better thought of as acceleration felds. Te word “force” 
was still an ambiguous term with many senses then, as we have seen. Hence, 
while “acceleration feld” may sound anachronistic, we think it is a helpful 
use of later terminological clarifcations: Boscovich lacked a term for an ac￾celeration feld at the time, so though we are applying this terminology with 
hindsight, it is not unreasonable to test out the concept against the uses 
Boscovich makes of his term “force.”65
Te “acceleration feld” interpretation of “force” has four advantages. First, 
Boscovich explicitly presents the area under his “force” curve as representing 
the change in the square of the velocity of the point. Tis is the case when ac￾celeration is plotted as a function of distance, so the “force” curve is naturally 
thought of as an acceleration feld in one spatial dimension.66
Second, in an acceleration feld all bodies placed at the same location un￾dergo the same acceleration, independent of their mass. So if Boscovich’s 
“force” is an acceleration feld, then all points would accelerate the same way, 
and he would not need to appeal to mass. As a result, our interpretation is not 
only consistent with his seeming failure to mention mass, it does better: it 
explains and justifes it. If his forces are acceleration felds, then mass indeed 
plays no role in the motion of his points.
Te third advantage is that it ensures consistency with Boscovich’s asser￾tion that he is introducing a single force. Tis requires a slightly longer expla￾nation. Recall frst that in Boscovich’s theory there is only one force, given by 
the function graphed above (Fig. 6.1). He opens his “Preface to the Reader” 
65 Whyte (1961, 284) follows Child (1922) in noting that “Boscovich’s vis and massa did not mean 
what “force” and “mass” meant for Newton and all mechanical theories . . . Boscovich’s theory is still 
the only example of a pure kinematic theory.” See also Guzzardi (2020), who respects Boscovich’s ter￾minology in arguing for a mutual “determination” interpretation of Boscovich’s force.
66 Boscovich 1922, §176. Te area under an acceleration–displacement graph is (v2 – u2)/2, where 
v is the fnal and u the initial velocity. See also Child (1922, xiii), who long ago pointed out that 
Boscovich’s force has the dimensions of acceleration.196 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
thus: “Dear Reader, you have before you a Teory of Natural Philosophy 
deduced from a single law of Force.”67 It is from this force that gravitational 
phenomena arise (at appropriately large scales). Next, notice that Boscovich’s 
only explicit example of this force is gravity. Now, in a gravitational feld all 
bodies fall at the same rate, whether a piece of gold or a feather, as he explicitly 
points out.68 Putting all this together, we may infer: it is not just gravity that 
satisfes the equivalence principle (i.e., that all bodies fall at the same rate), 
but rather throughout nature Boscovich’s force produces mass-independent 
accelerations, just like gravity. Tere is only one force in Boscovich’s theory 
and, since gravity has this property, so does Boscovich’s force quite gener￾ally. Boscovich’s “force” is an acceleration feld in which all points (and there￾fore all bodies) “fall freely” (to use terminology from general relativity). So 
our third advantage is this: it allows for a unifed treatment of Boscovich’s 
“force,” whereas appeal to “dynamical mass” would require a fragmentation, 
diferentiating the domain of gravity (for which the equivalence principle 
holds) from other regimes of his “force” (where the equivalence principle 
fails). Boscovich is explicit that he is introducing a single force and he never 
discusses any such diferentiation of it.69
Tis interpretation of his force directly yields the fourth advantage. It 
makes sense of our earlier observations about Boscovich’s use of the term 
“mass,” including: his use of it to denote only a geometrical (and not a dy￾namical) conception of mass; his separation of “force of inertia” from his use 
of “mass”; and his lack of a dynamical concept of mass. According to our new 
approach, Boscovich lacks an analogue of Newton’s second law and a notion 
of dynamical mass, not because he makes an unfortunate omission, but be￾cause he believes he can do without them. Te place where he introduces 
“force of inertia” supports this reading, for he writes that a point existing by 
itself will be at rest or move uniformly, but:
if there are also other points anywhere, there is an inherent propensity to 
compound . . . the preceding motion with the motion which is determined 
67 Boscovich 1922, 13; translation amended. 68 See Boscovich (1922, §213) for his discussion of how, at appropriate distances, behavior in 
accordance with Newtonian universal gravitation arises. Te inverse-square dependence on dis￾tance comes from the shape of the force law. Te acceleration feld’s dependence on the mass of the 
attracting body arises from the number of points combining to form the source of the acceleration 
feld. Te acceleration of the attracted body depends only on these, so that the “mass” of the attracted 
body drops out of consideration, as discussed. Nowhere is a dynamical conception of mass needed.
69 Guzzardi (2020, 56f.) suggests that multiple powers may underlie the single force law, but we do 
not think this contradicts the claim that the result is a single force.Searching for a new physics 197
by the mutual forces that I admit to act between any two of them, depending 
on the distances & changing, as the distances change, according to a certain 
law common to them all. (Boscovich 1922, §8)
At this juncture, were there any mass-dependence of the changes in mo￾tion resulting from the mutual forces (as Newton’s second law dictates), 
Boscovich would have told us. He does not. And the most natural conclusion 
is that this is because he didn’t think he needed it.
Doubts about Interpretation 2
Tere are some disadvantages, however. First, whereas our frst interpreta￾tion opened the road to Boscovich incorporating all of Newtonian point￾mass mechanics into his system, the second ofers no such easy path. His 
results will have to be re-examined to see whether they go through.
Second, and relatedly, his key concept “center-of-gravity” loses its ready 
understanding as our familiar notion of center-of-mass. Specifcally, if 
Boscovichian points do not have mass, then center-of-gravity seems to be￾come a merely geometric notion concerning the spatial distribution of these 
points, lacking any of the dynamical import we are used to associating with it 
via Newtonian inertial mass. Moreover, if Boscovich arrives at his results on 
the motion of the center-of-gravity via the “force of inertia” (viz. kinematic 
mass) associated with each point, his proofs of these results will need to be 
reworked using only acceleration felds, to prove that they go through.
Tird, when it comes to developing his mechanics there are remarks that 
are most naturally read as invoking dynamical mass. For example, he writes 
that “the common center of two masses lies in the straight line joining the 
centers of each of the masses, & that the distances of the masses from this 
point will be reciprocally proportional to the masses themselves.”70 If we 
deny ourselves Newtonian mass, then we will need to do some heavy lifing 
to see whether this can be made sense of. Moreover, recall that Boscovich 
introduces the term “quantity of motion” without explaining what he means 
by it. Later, he claims: “the velocity multiplied by the number of points 
represents the sum of the motions of all the points, i.e., the quantity of mo￾tion.”71 Tis quantity is conserved, he says, due to equality of action and reac￾tion, so it plays a crucial role in his mechanics. If each point has Newtonian 
70 Boscovich 1922, §253. 71 Boscovich 1922, §268.198 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
mass associated with it, then “quantity of motion” is straightforwardly un￾derstood as linear momentum. If not, then we are faced with some hard work 
to understand whether and how our second interpretation can incorporate 
an adequate concept of “quantity of motion.”
Finally, even if Boscovich works only with “force of inertia,” the measure
of kinematic mass in Newtonian mechanics is its acceleration under an 
impressed force: dynamical mass. So, if “force of inertia” plays a quantita￾tive role in his mechanics, he will need some measure of it, and this may 
require Newton’s second law (or some analogue thereof). As we will see in 
the coming chapters, 18th century theorists sought alternative dynamical 
principles to Newton’s second law, many through attempting to generalize 
from equilibrium (a notion in statics) to a principle adequate for dynamics. 
Boscovich places equilibrium at the heart of his mechanics. On the one hand, 
this looks promising because weight is a property that is empirically acces￾sible and tracks mass. On the other hand, in Boscovich’s theory this weight 
behavior must arise from the points moving in the acceleration feld and his 
theory—interpreted as positing a single force in which all points are in free 
fall—lacks the resources for adequately theorizing the balance.
To resolve these challenges to the second interpretation, and to determine 
the extent to which either of the interpretations is viable, we would need to 
look at the details of Boscovich’s mechanics. We defer this for another occa￾sion, for either way there is an important conclusion already available: there 
is no straightforward interpretation of Boscovich’s theory that avoids the 
challenges associated with Newtonian mass. Tis adds yet another difculty 
for his account of collisions, because in our discussion of impact we granted 
him a notion of mass. Terefore, despite Boscovich’s fne attempt to produce 
a physics adequate to the needs of mechanics, obstacles on this road to a phil￾osophical mechanics of collisions remain.
6.5 Conclusions
Tus far in this book we have argued for the centrality of PCOL to 18th cen￾tury philosophy, and for its pressing importance. If philosophical physics 
cannot address PCOL, then it cannot solve Body, and if there is no solution 
to Body, then no area of philosophy that includes bodies (human or other￾wise) among its objects escapes. Knowing this, it is not surprising to fnd that 
Body persisted as a research problem in natural philosophy throughout the Searching for a new physics 199
century, and that a great deal was learned about the possibilities (and other￾wise) for a solution.
We have focused our attention so far on constructive solutions: those 
that begin from the qualities and properties of matter and seek to build an 
account of bodies from there.72 Te 18th century opened with two options 
for matter theory: the continuously divisible matter of Descartes, and any 
theory in which there are smallest parts of indivisible matter, such as atomism. 
Mathematically, rational mechanics at that time made use of a third option, 
namely, point particles endowed with mass and force. By the end of the cen￾tury there were, thanks to Boscovich and Kant, candidate matter theories to 
go with it. Philosophical mechanics provides a tool by which to analyze the 
extent to which the resources ofered by Boscovich and Kant are adequate for 
addressing Body. Tis matters because each of them explicitly set out to do so.
Boscovich and Kant both begin with non-extended physical “points” 
endowed with forces and attempt a constructive account of bodies; one 
which recovers the Nature of bodies as extended, impenetrable, and mobile, 
and which explains the Action of one body on another.73 Te consequences 
for physics are twofold. First, the move to points and forces puts pressure 
on the conception of physics as the study of bodies; it seems that the fun￾damental ontology of the natural world is something very diferent in￾deed, and it is unclear whether this ontology is going to be investigable by 
the methods of physics. Second, both Boscovich and Kant in their diferent 
ways limit the scope of physics in delivering knowledge of causes. At the be￾ginning of the century, knowledge of bodies and causes lay at the heart of 
physics; in Boscovich and Kant that ambition is transformed, and in some 
ways curtailed. Tis might have been a price worth paying if a solution to 
PCOL, and thereby to Body, had been forthcoming. But it was not. As we 
saw, many of the old problems in handling collisions reappear in the accounts 
of Boscovich and Kant. Almost a century afer the Royal Society discussions 
of impact, a satisfactory solution to PCOL remained elusive.
Notwithstanding all the difculties we have encountered, in the late 18th 
century extended bodies persisted as important objects of study, not just 
in physics but also in rational mechanics. It is easy to see why: they are the 
72 See Chapter 1 for the constructive and principle approaches to Body. 73 Again, we have interpreted Kant above as endorsing a mass-point picture of matter. But, it is not 
the only reading compatible with his Physical Monadology, which is ofen opaque and ambiguous. 
Te excellent Smith 2013 argues for a diferent picture that is closer to our modern view of a deform￾able continuum.200 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
objects of our sensory experience, with the human body among them. One 
way or another, philosophy requires that we recover an account of extended 
bodies in order to proceed. Qualitatively, the attempt to construct bodies 
from matter points endowed with forces seems promising. But philosoph￾ical mechanics demands that this promise be made good quantitatively, via 
integration with rational mechanics. Te constructive accounts of Kant and 
Boscovich make the difculties vivid, and serve to demonstrate that eforts to 
achieve a philosophical mechanics continued throughout the 18th century. 
Moreover, as we will see in the coming chapters, concurrent developments 
in rational mechanics changed the landscape for philosophical mechanics, 
presenting philosophers with new challenges as well as new opportunities.Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason. Katherine Brading and Marius Stan, Oxford University Press. 
© Oxford University Press 2023. DOI: 10.1093/oso/9780197678954.003.0007
7
Shifing sands in philosophical mechanics
7.1 Introduction
Troughout the 18th century, the dominant strategy whereby philosophers 
sought to tackle the Problem of Bodies (Body) involved two steps. First, de￾velop a material account of bodies. Ten, integrate the rules of collision, 
augmenting the account of bodies as necessary (the problem of collisions, 
or PCOL).1 Despite widespread and extensive eforts to bring this strategy 
to fruition, none succeeded (see Chapters 2–6). And yet, a coherent account 
of bodies remained crucial and indispensable for philosophers and rational 
mechanicians alike. Te need for a solution to Body did not go away.
With hindsight, we can see that an important shif occurred mid-century. 
Rational mechanics, the province of mathematicians, became the research 
feld most relevant to Body. Tis chapter explains why, and with what 
consequences. Most importantly, a divide emerged between philosophical 
physics and pertinent advances in rational mechanics. Afer 1750 most pro￾fessional philosophers failed to absorb the new insights of mechanics into 
their doctrines of body. Consequently, we cannot turn to philosophers of 
the period to unpack the signifcance of contemporaneous developments 
in mechanics for Body. Instead, we must examine rational mechanics for 
ourselves.
Doing so reveals two things. First, the relevant area of rational mechanics 
is the theory of constraints. As a result, PCOL is displaced as the problem 
to be solved by philosophical mechanics, replaced by what we call “the 
problem of constrained motions,” or PCON. Second, with the shif in locus 
to rational mechanics, Body is no longer the primary problem engaging our 
protagonists. From Descartes onward, Body had been an explicit problem 
among philosophers, self-consciously acknowledged and grappled with 
(see Chapters 1–6). Tis allowed us to study it with the tools of contextualist 
1 For a longer explanation of Body, and of the requirements on any satisfactory solution, including 
PCOL, see Chapter 1.202 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
historiography. Te move to rational mechanics as our domain of study 
means that new methodological tools will be required.
We begin by addressing this methodological challenge explicitly (sec￾tion 7.2). We then turn to the shif, behind which were two factors. First, 
conceptual difculties with three notions that philosophers had relied on—
mass, contact action, and extended-body motion. Rational mechanics, it 
turned out, was best equipped to clarify these (sections 7.3–7.5). Second, 
developments in rational mechanics itself that were largely undigested by 
philosophers. Te chief causes were a lack of relevant training, along with 
some institutional barriers (section 7.6). As a result: the rif, and our new 
task. In section 7.7, we explain the relevant problem to be solved in me￾chanics (namely, the mechanics of constrained motion, MCON) along 
with its correlate in philosophical mechanics (PCON). We ofer a brief in￾troduction to 18th century rational mechanics (section 7.8), by way of an 
on-ramp to Chapters 8–11, where we take up the story in detail. Section 7.9 
summarizes our conclusions for this chapter.
7.2 Methodology
In the earlier chapters of this book, our actors were themselves explicitly en￾gaged with the problems and questions we call Body. In contrast, for those 
who worked in rational mechanics, this was seldom the case. Yet, bodies con￾tinued to be presupposed across philosophy and rational mechanics. Indeed, 
the claims of rational mechanics at the time to be ofering a science of bodies 
in motion means its protagonists were obliged to say something about what 
those bodies are, especially since philosophy had so far failed to provide a 
notion of body adequate for their purposes. Euler explicitly asserted that me￾chanics has authority over the account of body in general, and not philosophy 
(section 7.6). So, rational mechanics is not completely silent; one thing we 
can do is examine the explicit claims found in the texts of the period, and see 
how they fare with respect to Body.
A second thing we can do is uncover and analyze the philosophical sig￾nifcance of the moves made by those rational mechanicians, independent of 
the motivations and purposes of the protagonists at the time. Tat is, we can 
look into the problems solved, the presuppositions and assumptions made, 
and the means whereby solutions were achieved (or not), to see how these 
developments impact Body.Shifting sands in philosophical mechanics 203
In what follows, we do both, by means of the three methodological 
heuristics articulated in Chapter 1 and employed in this book. First, we seek 
to recover meaning from use, where by “use” we mean: in philosophical ar￾gumentation and in theoretical problem-solving. Second, we strive to use 
anachronism judiciously, developing our arguments just as a premier au￾thority, fully au courant with the state of the art then, could have done (with 
the proviso that some of the words we use have changed their meaning since 
that time). Finally, we explicitly recognize our own authorship: Body is our
problem, and we chose it because it interests us. It was also, as we have seen 
in the preceding chapters, ofen their problem too, a live problem of the day. 
A little more articulation of this last heuristic will be helpful here. Whenever 
we discuss Body, it is always someone’s problem; ours, theirs, or both. Our 
methodology prohibits treating Body as foating free, as having a disem￾bodied life of its own (excuse the pun). Tis point is especially important in 
the chapters that follow where, very ofen, we will be addressing Body using 
work in rational mechanics that was carried out by people whose primary 
motivation lay elsewhere. In these instances, it is not that our protagonists 
were somehow mistaken about their own projects, engaged in working on 
Body without knowing it; they are not sleepwalkers. Rather, it is we who 
bring Body to their work, and we who use their work to examine the specifc 
form, contours, and development that this problem takes in the context of 
the projects that they were engaged with at the time. Moreover, as we have 
emphasized throughout, an adequate solution to Body requires a philosoph￾ical mechanics: it demands resources beyond those of either philosophical 
physics or rational mechanics alone. So, in our investigations into rational 
mechanics we are on the lookout for two things: developments that pertain 
to rational mechanics itself (actors’ category), and those that pertain to philo￾sophical mechanics (our category of philosophical analysis).
So now we see our task. Looking back from our present-day vantage point, 
we seek to (1) identify what developments were taking place in rational me￾chanics relevant to Body, and (2) spell out the philosophical signifcance of 
these developments for Body. Tis is the work of philosophers of physics. 
Te task is demanding, and it will take the remaining chapters of this book to 
see it through.204 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
7.3 Elusive mass
We begin our argument by identifying three strands in the standard strategy 
for tackling Body that became increasingly problematic as the 18th century 
unfolded. Te frst of these is “quantity of matter,” or mass, and the second is 
contact action. Both hide complex conceptual issues that, as of the 18th cen￾tury, remained unresolved. Te third is the theory of motion for extended 
bodies, and this is where enormous progress was made. We treat them 
in turn.
In the preceding chapters we have encountered multiple philosophers who 
introduced a notion of mass, either explicitly or implicitly, and we have seen 
that it was frequently unsatisfactory, lacking justifcation within the meta￾physics of the system being developed and/or failing to meet the demands 
of collision theory. In Chapter 2, we labeled this issue “elusive mass.” We are 
now in a position to articulate it in more detail, and to show its consequences. 
It shifs attention concerning the general properties of bodies from philo￾sophical physics to rational mechanics—at least for mass, the single most im￾portant general property of all.
In Descartes’ physics, the “quantity of matter” associated with a body is 
simply its volume. Tis is what makes his notion intelligible according to his 
epistemology. Newton in his Principia introduced the term “mass” to des￾ignate a body’s “quantity of matter,” and he included the volume of a body 
in its defnition. Yet this similarity between Cartesian “quantity of matter” 
and Newtonian mass is deceptive, for the two concepts are radically diferent. 
Unlike Descartes, Newton associates an “inherent force” with matter—a 
“power of resisting,” a “force of inertia”—and uses his second law of mo￾tion to relate this quantitatively to changes in motion in response to external 
forces. Developed through considerable conceptual labor, the result is a com￾plex innovation whose importance was under-appreciated by many, and 
ofen not recognized at all.2 Indeed, while all the rules of collision we have 
considered thus far invoke some notion of mass, this apparent ubiquity hides 
a surprising proliferation of ideas and lack of conceptual clarity. If we claim 
that mass is among the general properties of bodies, then what exactly do we 
mean by this?
2 To see just how much efort it took Newton to obtain his mass concept, see Fox 2016 and 
Smith 2019.Shifting sands in philosophical mechanics 205
(i) Geometric mass
Consider frst the idea that “quantity of matter” is measured by the volume of 
a body. An immediate problem is that two bodies of equal size may behave 
diferently in important test cases. In particular, both collisions and the bal￾ance scale may seem to indicate a diference in mass among equal volumes. 
Take, for example, one ball made of balsa wood and another, equal in size, 
made of lead: an impact from the latter feels rather diferent, and they do not 
balance one another when placed on a scale. A solution is readily to hand. 
Introducing a distinction between the apparent volume of a body (given by 
its bounding surface, such as the spherical size of our wooden ball) and its 
true volume (the apparent volume minus the volume of any “pores” inside 
the body) addresses this while preserving the volumetric—or geometric—
conception of mass. Tere is very little discussion of mass in 18th century 
natural philosophy, and one explanation for this is that both atomism and 
plenism could treat mass geometrically by means of this distinction. Atomists 
could choose to assume that all atoms are of uniform density, and account 
for the varying masses of equal-sized objects by variation in the number of 
atoms present in a given volume: a piece of lead of a given volume is heavier 
than a piece of wood (of equal volume) because it contains a greater quan￾tity of matter; it contains more atoms per unit volume. Tose who adopted 
continuous matter theory were typically plenists, and their response was to 
distinguish between proper and foreign matter. Only the former contributes 
to the quantity of matter associated with a body, and constitutes the “true 
volume” of the body. All true volumes of equal size are equally dense. Foreign 
matter, though present in the overall volume occupied by the body and 
thereby contributing to its apparent volume, does not belong to the body 
proper: it is simply passing through “pores” in the proper matter. It does not 
contribute to its true volume, nor therefore to its mass: the equal-sized pieces 
of lead and wood, though having the same apparent volume, difer in true 
volume, and so difer in mass. Tis latter approach is found in Du Châtelet, as 
we saw in Chapter 5.
(ii) Kinematic and dynamical mass
In addition to volume (and the geometric conception of mass), there is the 
persistence of a body in its state of motion as described in Newton’s frst law 206 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
of motion (call this “kinematic mass”), and there is the weight of a body. 
Together, these are the three most common ideas associated with the term 
“mass” in the fgures we have considered so far.
Yet none of these captures the dynamical conception of mass expressed in 
Newton’s second law of motion. Tis law quantifes the change in motion that 
a body undergoes as a result of an impressed force, and that change in motion 
depends upon the mass of the body: F = ma, in its most familiar formula￾tion, where F is the force acting on the body, m is the mass of the body, and 
a is the resulting acceleration.3 Given a known impressed force and a meas￾ured acceleration, we can calculate the mass of the body. Notice that this is 
independent of any consideration of its volume. In contrast to the geometric 
conception, Newton’s second law concerns dynamical mass.4 And notice that 
Newton’s frst law by itself is insufcient for this dynamical mass concept, 
because that law tells us nothing about how a body responds to an impressed 
force; it gives us kinematic mass only.
It is not obvious that the above threads in the mass concept will come to￾gether into a coherent package. To see this, consider that a body has parts, 
and ascribing to it a quantity requires a sum of the magnitudes of those parts. 
But what is being added, and what is the mathematical form of that addition? 
Here, indeterminacy intrudes for, by 1750, three diferent matter theories 
had emerged, and each gave a diferent answer. As a consequence, quantity 
of matter, and hence mass, is indeterminate unless coupled to a preferred 
theory of matter. To see this more clearly, consider what it means for a per￾ceptible body K to have a “quantity of matter.” Tree exact formulations are 
available:
m m K i i = ∑ (1)
and also
m d K V = ∫ ρK V (2)
3 Tis formulation is not found in Newton’s work. It is due to Euler 1752a. 4 Te distinction between “geometrical” and “dynamical” mass is due to Biener & Smeenk 2012. 
See McMullin, 1978, chapter 2, for a taxonomy of the diferent roles that mass plays in Newton’s 
Principia.Shifting sands in philosophical mechanics 207
and, fnally
m V K i i i = ∑ ρ (3)
Te frst formulation is entailed by matter theories in which the mass point 
counts as the unit body. In words, it says that the material mass of a (macro￾scopic) body is the sum of the masses associated with its component points, 
or “physical monads.” Te second formula falls out of the theory that matter 
is a physical continuum. It says that a body’s quantity of matter is the integral 
(over the body’s volume) of its density ϱ.
5 Te third concept goes with the 
picture of matter as made up of discrete atoms, that is, of fnite rigid volumes 
flled with mass density, and situated at fnite distances from each other. In 
words, the quantity of matter for a body of this kind is the sum of its indi￾vidual masses, for each constituent atom. Importantly for our purposes, de￾ciding among these will depend on detailed work on the motions of extended 
bodies, and this falls within the domain of rational mechanics.6
(iii) Mass in rational mechanics
When it comes to the motions of bodies, dynamical mass proves to be the 
most important mass concept. It provides a measure of quantity of matter 
that has multiple virtues: it is empirically accessible via the body’s kinematic 
response to impressed force; it is intimately tied (via gravitation theory) to 
weight, itself empirically accessible; and it is fruitful for problem-solving in 
rational mechanics generally. And, it is those prioritizing mechanics who 
have most need of the dynamical concept, and most at stake in clarifying the 
concept of mass.
Tis clarifcation took time. Newton himself was not always clear about the 
diferent aspects of his mass concept that he wrapped together into a single 
notion. Euler was the frst, so far as we know, to attempt a purely dynamical 
5 In turn, the notion of (mass) density requires that density be describable by a continuous, dif￾ferentiable function ϱ non-negative everywhere in space, endowed with the structure of a Lebesgue 
measure (so that mass density at a point can be additive over the extended volume taken up by 
the body).
6 Crucially, even the kinematics—the exact description of motion—for an extended body depends 
on the choice of its basic-level constituents (from among the three candidates above). For a trenchant 
statement of that important lesson, see Wilson 2009.208 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
theorization of mass, freed from an associated geometric conception.7 We 
see this explicitly in Mechanica, where he set out a research program for a 
complete mechanics.8 Te frst step of Euler’s program considers those ex￾tended bodies that can be treated as point particles; that is, the extended mass 
distribution of the body plays no role in the trajectory of that body, and so 
its motion can be treated by means of a representative point. Tis is impor￾tant, for these point particles may difer in their quantity of matter (or mass). 
Euler introduces his concept of mass in the middle of chapter 2. Consider 
two point particles a and b, acted upon by two external forces p and q, respec￾tively. Te two points will “acquire the same acceleration” just in case q/p = b/
a. Tis equality, he explains, is “the foundation of measuring the force of in￾ertia . . . whereby matter or mass in mechanics must be considered.” In virtue 
of it, a point particle counts as having greater or lesser mass than another, by 
a quantifed amount.
Euler’s demonstration proceeds as follows. Let q = np. Ten, from q/p = b/
a, we have that b = na. Question: In this case, will the force q on the point 
particle b have the same efect as the force p on the particle a? Te na parts of 
b are acted upon by force q = np, so each part a is acted upon by each force p
(i.e., we can treat them separately as acted upon by separate “elements” of the 
force); therefore b = na is acted upon by force q = np as a is acted upon by the 
force p. So, the point particles are related in magnitude to one another not 
by the summation of geometrical parts, but dynamically. Te equal division 
of b into n parts is made not in the sense that the elements are equally small 
(the geometric notion of mass), but in the sense that a given force yields an 
equal efect on each element (dynamical notion). Moreover, these parts are 
not prior to the whole: we can divide b into however many parts we need.9
Euler follows Newton in asserting that the force of resisting changes in the 
state of motion or rest is the same as the force of continuing in the same state. 
Tis latter is inertia which, for Euler, is an essential property of bodies rather 
than a force: it is the property that bodies have for conserving their state.10
Nevertheless, he continues to talk of the “inertial force” of a body, and the 
“matter, or mass” of a body equals the sum of the inertial force of its compo￾nent point particles:
7 Nevertheless, he was committed to bodies as extended (as we have seen). More work is needed to 
spell out the relationship between mass dynamically conceived and bodies geometrically conceived 
in Euler’s philosophy. 8 Euler 1736. 9 See Chapter 5 for Euler on extension in relation to the divisibility of bodies. 10 Euler, 1736, Preface.Shifting sands in philosophical mechanics 209
For every body, its force of inertia is proportional to the quantity of matter 
of which the body consists. . . . Te body’s force of inertia must be estimated 
from the force, or power, required to put the body out of its state of rest 
or uniform rectilinear motion. Now two diferent bodies will be equally 
changed out of their state by two powers that are respectively as the 
quantities of matter contained in those bodies. Tus, their forces of inertia 
are proportional to those powers; hence also to their quantities of matter. 
(Euler 1736, 57)
So, as Euler says explicitly, the mass of a body is measured by the change in 
the state of motion arising due to a disturbing force, or the acceleration due 
to an impressed force, and the upshot is that the inertia of a body is measured 
by its acceleration in response to a given impressed force. Quantity of matter, 
or mass, is measured dynamically.
We have said that dynamical mass measures inertia of linear motion. Tat 
qualifcation is critical for understanding mass correctly. As became clear by 
the mid-1700s, bodies also have rotational inertia, not just inertia of trans￾lation; that is, they likewise resist changes to their circular motion. But, the 
measure of that species of resistance is more complex. To infer how much 
a body will resist torques (attempts to make it turn around an axis) it is not 
enough to know how much dynamical mass it has; we must also know ex￾actly how that mass is arranged (the shape of the body and the mass distri￾bution within that shape). Tat joint information—of the quantity of mass 
and its spatial distribution—is encoded in a parameter now called moment of 
inertia. In rational mechanics, Huygens frst broached that notion, but it was 
Euler in the 1750s who formulated an exact theory of the bodies’ moment of 
inertia, the rotational analogue of linear mass.
For our purposes, this is important because rotational inertia emerged 
as a concept in—and is critical for—the theory of the motions of extended 
bodies. Tis makes it important for Body. Yet, it is a highly technical concept, 
forged and refned in rational mechanics. As a result, it is yet another factor 
pushing research pertinent to Body out of philosophical physics and into the 
domain of rational mechanics.
Alongside those who worked with a notion of mass as central to their 
projects, there were those who attempted to construct mechanics without 
mass, eliminating it as a fundamental concept. We see this in d’Alembert’s me￾chanics, and also in Boscovich’s Teory (see Chapters 9 and 6, respectively). 
Te examination of any such eliminative project requires us to identify which210 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
elements of the mass concept are the targets of elimination and which, if any, 
are being retained. Te distinctions made above are useful for this purpose.
In sum, the concept of mass, and even the need for such a notion, con￾tinued to trouble 18th century philosophers and mathematicians alike. To 
some modern eyes, the schism in Enlightenment conceptions of mass may 
seem shocking, but it was not entirely unexpected. As we noted above mass 
was, from the beginning, a hard-won concept. Newton, its inventor, struggled 
to see it clearly, and when he turned to writing, he was not always clear and 
univocal about the exact meaning of his novel concept. Te difculties with 
mass persisted throughout the 18th century, and they afected everyone. Te 
important point for our purposes is this: “mass” remained an elusive concept 
mid-century, and if attempts at clarifcation were to succeed then rational 
mechanics would have to play a central role.
7.4 Contact action
Mechanical philosophers of the 17th and early 18th centuries had this in 
common: they deemed contact to be the only intelligible means whereby 
one body acts on another. In the wake of the Principia, they—especially in 
continental Europe—challenged Newton’s claim to have produced a physics 
of gravitation on the grounds that action-at-a-distance is unintelligible. Te 
contrast, they alleged, was with contact action as the standard. Yet as we 
saw in Chapter 5, Maupertuis in 1732 threw down a challenge to his French 
compatriots: he argued that contact action is no more intelligible than 
Newtonian action at a distance. With the spotlight on the intelligibility of 
contact action, a new problem comes to the fore: what exactly is contact ac￾tion; what does it amount to, and in what terms should it be described?
Two views emerged. Te frst is the “traditional” view, inherited from the 
17th century claim that bodies are extended parts of matter, and maintained 
into the 18th century among Cartesian-, Newtonian-, and Leibnizian￾inclined philosophers alike. On this view, each body occupies a space—it 
has a geometric shape—and bodies are in contact if these shapes “touch.” We 
call this geometric contact, or g-contact for short. Tis notion was ofcially a 
part of Wolf ’s doctrine, and he in fact restricted all corporeal action to it.11
11 “Tere can be no change in a body except from another body in contact with it” (Wolf, 1731, 
112, §128).Shifting sands in philosophical mechanics 211
However, the notion of “touching” behind this picture of contact remained 
problematically unclear, as we will see.
Te second view was new in the 18th century. On this dynamical view, 
two bodies count as being in contact if their mutual repulsive forces go above 
zero. Call this d-contact. Tis view can be found in both Boscovich and 
Kant, as we have seen in Chapter 6. It remained a constant in Kant’s thought, 
retained even afer his drastic conversion to a continuum theory of matter. 
For him, “contact in the physical sense is the immediate action and reaction 
of impenetrability,” which relies on a repulsive force for its obtaining.12 In 
other words, geometric touching—the fact of two bodies’ bounding surfaces 
merely overlapping at a common area—is not enough to count as contact ac￾tion between bodies.13
Kant saw clearly the ambiguity in his century’s understanding of contact￾action. In 1786, he explained it, and expressed his preference for the d￾contact picture:
Contact in the mathematical sense is the common boundary of two spaces, 
which therefore [on account of being their boundary] is neither inside 
the one space nor inside the other. . . . Now a circle and a line, a circle and 
another circle—they make contact at a point; surfaces make contact over 
lines; and bodies over surfaces. Mathematical contact underpins physical 
contact, but there is more to the latter notion. For physical contact to ob￾tain, we must also think a dynamical relation, namely, . . . a relation of re￾pulsive forces, i.e. of impenetrability. Physical contact is the mutual action 
of the repulsive forces [built up] on the common boundary of two matters. 
(Kant 1911, 512)
Tese two notions are really distinct; they do not count as just two explications 
of the same phenomenon. In fact, they are not even coextensive—they do not 
pick out the same physical situations entirely. Two bodies can be in g-contact 
but not in d-contact, and vice versa (see Figs. 7.1 and 7.2).
Moreover, these notions are separately incompatible with certain theories 
of matter. Suppose that matter is really made of mass points: then g-contact 
cannot obtain, and so it counts as an empty concept; only d-contact is possible 
12 Kant 1911, 511. 13 Boscovich similarly theorized the mutual action of bodies dynamically rather than geometri￾cally; see Chapter 6.212 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
A B
d
c
A B
d
c
Fig. 7.2. Two deformable continua in contact. Top: Bodies A and B are in 
geometric contact: they overlap at the surface cd, which counts as common 
to both. However, neither of them is exerting any repulsive force on the other. 
Bottom: Te same bodies, A and B, in dynamical contact. Upon their mutual 
compression, repulsion stresses build up below their common surface cd, 
forcing them away from each other.
A B A B
d
c
Fig. 7.1. Two point masses in contact. Lef: A and B are in a type of geometric 
contact: two of their associated spaces (viz. the volumes over which they exert 
repulsive force) overlap. And yet, A and B are not in dynamical contact: the 
repulsion force on each (by the other) is zero. Right: Two mass points, A and 
B, in dynamical contact. Specifcally, B is within A’s feld of repulsive force (i.e., 
below the bounding surface c at which its repulsion drops to zero).Shifting sands in philosophical mechanics 213
in that theory.14 Or, suppose that it is made of spatially extended, rigid atoms, 
lacking any action-at-a-distance forces: then at fundamental scales only g￾contact is possible, and d-contact counts as an empty concept (see Fig. 7.3).
Really, of the three canonical theories of matter available in that century, 
just one—namely, the physical continuum—can accommodate both notions 
of contact. Unsurprisingly then, Kant, who had just converted to that matter 
theory by 1786, made the distinction ofcial.
In any case, that contact action admitted of two distinct explanations must 
count as a further source of difculty in philosophical mechanics afer 1750. 
What had seemed an unproblematic notion less than a century before was 
now revealed to require extensive theorizing, with diferent options available 
for investigation. Any satisfactory resolution would, perforce, require de￾tailed work in rational mechanics.
7.5 A general theory of bodies in motion
We turn now to the area of conceptual difculty that mattered the most in the 
latter half of the 18th century. Te strategy for tackling Body we have focused 
on in earlier chapters takes the rules of collision as the principal resource 
M
N
k
j
Fig. 7.3. Rigid bodies in contact. M and N are non-deformable under 
interactions. Tey overlap at the common surface jk, and so they count as being 
in geometric contact. However, there are no internal stresses in a rigid body, and 
so M and N cannot exert repulsive forces (built up by compression, on either 
side of jk) on each other.
14 No two point masses can overlap, nor can they share a common boundary—some point, line, or 
surface common to both. For a lucid and very helpful account of the various notions of contact and 
pictures of matter, we recommend Smith 2007 and 2013.214 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
from rational mechanics needed for a philosophical mechanics.15 Te for￾mulation of these rules had been settled in the mid-17th century, and so from 
this perspective there was nothing new for 18th century rational mechanics 
to contribute to Body. However, these rules capture the motions of extended 
bodies only under some highly restrictive assumptions; a general theory of 
extended-body motions proved more troublesome.
For some two decades afer the 1687 Principia, rational mechanics made 
no advances beyond Newton’s results.16 Most Europeans were busy quibbling 
with Newton’s conceptual foundations or trying to reverse-engineer some 
of his key results from diferent assumptions.17 It was the 1730s before sig￾nifcant new ground was broken. Two desiderata emerged that would 
shape rational mechanics going forward. Te frst is a quest for generality. 
Protagonists sought principles that were demonstrably general, covering all 
problems previously solved along with new classes of problems too. We ex￾plain this in more detail momentarily. Looming large as a stimulant in the 
quest for general principles was an obstacle. Mathematicians ran up against 
limitations in the scope of problems treatable by the techniques currently 
available, whether in Newton or elsewhere. Of particular importance for 
our purposes is the lack of adequate resources for treating the motions of 
extended bodies. Tis problem falls within a wider project constituting the 
second desideratum: a mechanics of constraints.
Upshot: a great deal more rational mechanics will be needed for a phil￾osophical mechanics of bodies in motion; or, more simply, for an adequate 
solution to Body. Since much of the work was incomplete as of mid-century, 
this engendered a shif from philosophical physics to rational mechanics as 
the primary locus of research pertaining to Body.
15 Te laws of motion had a dual status, as laws of nature as well as axioms of rational mechanics 
(see Brading forthcoming), and their formulation was a matter of continued debate during the 18th 
century.
16 Newton, in Book I of his Principia, had pursued with great success an approach to motion that 
he called “rational mechanics” (see Chapter 1). In his time, “mechanics” normally denoted a science 
of equilibrium (viz. the statics of some select rigid bodies) or also the engineering dynamics of the 
fve ancient-Greek “simple machines” plus the inclined plane. Newton’s rational mechanics is dif￾ferent: he assumed some dynamical parameters as initial conditions, and inferred their kinematic 
consequences, viz. predicted the ensuing motions; or he assumed certain trajectories as given, and 
inferred the forces necessary or sufcient for producing them. Newton put it as the “Science of the 
Motions that ensue from any forces whatsoever; and of the forces required for any motion what￾ever, precisely [accurate] stated and demonstrated.” A conceptual innovation that Christoph Pfautz 
signaled for attention in his account of the book for the Germans; cf. Newton (1687, Preface) and 
[Pfautz] (1688, 304). Euler in 1736 repurposed the old term “mechanics” to denote the science of mo￾tion, not equilibrium. 17 Lucid accounts of how the Leibnizians did that are Bertoloni Meli 1993 and Aiton 1972, 123–51.Shifting sands in philosophical mechanics 215
Te calls for generality from leading natural philosophers began barely a 
decade afer Newton died. Tis bafes us moderns because—by a prejudice 
that Ernst Mach instilled in us—we expect everyone then to have seen right 
away that Newton’s three laws were truly general principles of mechanics.18
And yet, no one then building up mechanical theory thought that. Consider 
these pronouncements. One is by Daniel Bernoulli, who had just solved 
Leibniz’s old problem—a case of motion under rheonomic constraints—of 
a bead moving outward in a tube that rotates in a plane around a fxed point:
One would be wrong to regard this sort of problem as just an isolated re￾search whose sole fruit is the pleasure to have solved it. . . . Such mechan￾ical problems never fail to enlighten us: ofen they yield new principles, 
and teach us new general laws that nature follows in all her operations. . . 
. Te wonderful System of the world, whose important discovery was re￾served for the great Newton, is simply a consequence of Mechanics. And, 
what is lef to discover in this System depends solely on achieving a greater 
perfection—in my opinion, not so much by improving the calculus as by 
getting closer to the general laws of motion, which are still hidden to us. (D. 
Bernoulli 1746, 55; our emphasis)
Euler expressed the same sentiment as he struggled with the motion of an ex￾tended body around a fxed axis:
Tese principles are of no use in the study of motion, unless the bodies are 
infnitely small, hence the size of a point—or at least we can regard them 
as such without much error: which happens when the direction of the 
soliciting power passes through the center of gravity. . . . But if it does not 
pass through that center, we cannot determine the entire efect of these 
powers. Tat is all the more so if the body to be moved is not free, viz. is 
constrained by some obstacle, depending on its structure. (1745, §17; our 
emphasis)
And again, years later, still struggling with the motion of extended bodies:
18 Mach claimed that “Newton’s principles sufce for solving every mechanical problem we en￾counter in practice, be it in statics or dynamics. We need not appeal to any new principle for that. If we 
run into obstacles, they are always just mathematical, i.e. formal. Not difculties with the principles” 
(Mach 1883, 239; our emphasis).216 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
I must note that the principles of Mechanics so far established sufce only 
for the case when the rotation is around a steady axis. . . . But if the axis of 
rotation changes, the principles of Mechanics we know so far are insuf￾cient to determine the motion. Tus we must fnd and prove new principles, 
suited for solving the problem above. (Euler 1752a, 188–9; our emphasis)
Implicit in their lament above was the denial that Newton’s laws had the gen￾erality they required. So much for Mach’s prejudice.19
Examined more closely, the calls for generality faced in two directions. 
One was forward-looking, so to say, and essentially open-ended. Namely, it 
called for the discovery of laws general in the sense of being applicable to 
mechanical systems as yet untamed. At the time, the epitome of these un￾tamed systems was the rigid body moving around a fxed point, under the 
action of an external force.20 But there were others, too; for instance, the mo￾tion of elastic membranes and of thick plates. Te other was retrospective, 
as it were, because it called for the unifcation of known solutions (under a 
single law or a small set of connected laws). To be precise, by 1740 many me￾chanical setups had been solved from “local” theories. For these systems, 
equilibrium conditions or equations of motion had been derived from laws 
known to hold for some, but far from all, mechanical processes.21 Te retro￾spective calls for generality demanded these known solutions be re-derived
from a single, unifying law. Tereby, that law would be shown to be a general 
19 Notice the epistemic importance of this lack of generality, in relation to Evidence. Suppose one 
believed that Newton’s laws are complete in principle (that is, they cover all physical phenomena). 
How would one gather evidence for this? One would do so by using those laws to construct theories 
of motion for physical systems. But the lack of generality means that we have systems for which 
Newton’s laws are no help. So, the epistemic barrier to treating these systems by Newton’s laws 
becomes a problem of evidence for the claim that Newton’s laws are complete. Absent demonstrable 
generality, we are not justifed in making that claim.
20 Tis setup needed treating because it was the key to modeling mathematically a long-known, 
but as yet intractable, celestial phenomenon, viz. the earth’s precession of the equinoxes. As a re￾minder, Newton’s treatment (of that precession) was entirely qualitative: he gave no equations of 
motion—let alone one derived from his laws—that would account for the known precession of the 
earth’s axis. Te need to solve rigid-body motion became even more pressing in 1748, when a new 
celestial phenomenon—terrestrial nutation—was discovered; it too must be modeled as an addi￾tional, second-order precession of a rigid body rotating around a fxed point in space. In fact, it was 
the discovery of nutation that spurred d’Alembert and Euler separately into treating, from diferent 
dynamical laws, the kinematics of forced rigid-body motion, in 1749–50; see Chapters 9 and 10, 
respectively.
21 Among such local laws were familiar ideas such as Conservation of Vis Viva, the Parallelogram 
Rule, the Law of the Lever, Conservation of the Gravity Center, the so-called Pendulum Condition, 
and similar statements of limited explanatory scope. For some examples of how these limited-scope 
laws worked in practice, see Maltese 1992a, and Clairaut’s aptly titled booklet of 1742, “On a few prin￾ciples of dynamics that yield solutions to a great many problems” (Clairaut 1745).Shifting sands in philosophical mechanics 217
principle of mechanics, superior to the 17th century laws known to hold only 
for some specifc, limited conditions or confgurations.
To sum up: in the early 18th century, philosophers debated the correct for￾mulation of the laws of motion (revising and tweaking Newton’s laws, for 
example) and suggested alternative principles (such as Leibniz’s conserva￾tion of vis viva), but the presumption then was that such principles would be 
sufcient for all cases. Te debates in rational mechanics show that, at that 
time, there was not sufcient epistemic warrant to support this presumption. 
Rather, it was an open question which principles are truly general, because 
it was an open question which principles would allow the treatment of the 
kinds of systems listed above. Resolving this required detailed work in me￾chanics. Moreover, the unsolved problems of interest frequently concerned 
bodies moving subject to constraints, such as when a rigid sphere moves 
around a fxed point. In fact, treating constrained motion lies at the heart of 
developing a general theory of the motions of extended bodies. And so, in￾sofar as solving Body demands that we have bodies capable of motion, and 
of undergoing changes in motion, the rational mechanics of constrained mo￾tion is moved center stage philosophically.
7.6 Shifing sands
Troughout the frst half of the 18th century, the dominant strategy for 
tackling Body took philosophical physics as its starting point and sought a 
constructive solution. Despite decades of widespread and concerted efort, 
by the middle of the century this strategy had yet to deliver (see Chapters 2–
6). So far in this chapter we have argued for the importance of rational me￾chanics for further progress in addressing Body, and this suggests a diferent 
strategy, one that takes rational mechanics as its point of departure: develop 
a rational mechanics of the motions of extended bodies, and show that this is 
consistent with a philosophically viable theory of matter.
Euler’s physics represents a transition between the two strategies (see 
Chapter 5). For Euler, the search for the properties of bodies is subservient to 
the search for the causes of changes in bodies: what is required of natural phi￾losophy is to determine all and only those properties of bodies relevant to the 
changes that bodies undergo. Moreover, we are not required to explain those 
properties themselves: so long as they can be used to explain the changes, 
this is all we need in order to admit them. Now, since it is mechanics that 218 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
identifes which properties are necessary and sufcient for this task, it is to 
mechanics rather than matter theory that we must turn for identifcation of 
the properties of bodies in general.
Notice the shif in domains of authority that this transition engenders. By 
1758, Euler had a clear tripartite division for the study of bodies, making ex￾plicit where the new boundaries lie. In the opening paragraph of “Te knowl￾edge of bodies from mechanics,” he states that there are three domains of 
knowledge of bodies: geometry, mechanics, and physics.22 Geometry treats 
bodies only insofar as they are extended. Mechanics treats bodies as material, 
without regard for any other properties with which they are endowed, while 
physics treats all remaining properties and qualities of bodies. In order to 
treat bodies as material, mechanics requires the quantity of matter (or 
“mass”) associated with any body, and how that quantity of matter is dis￾tributed within the volume of the body.23 Euler emphasizes that this knowl￾edge is “absolutely necessary” when the motion of bodies is at stake; hence 
knowledge of quantity of matter and its distribution falls within the remit of 
mechanics.
Traditionally, it had been the role of philosophy (and specifcally physics) 
to provide the bodies that are the subject-matter of rational mechanics, 
specifying bodies’ nature, properties, and causal powers (see Chapter 5). In 
Euler’s reconceptualization, rational mechanics has authority to determine 
those properties of body relevant to its materiality: it is mechanics that will 
tell us, for example, that mass is the relevant quantity and what is meant by 
the concept.24
And so we have two strategies for tackling Body, distinguished by taking 
either philosophical physics or rational mechanics as the starting point. In 
principle, philosophers might adopt either of these two approaches, pursuing 
philosophical mechanics in parallel with the rational mechanics of the 
mathematicians. In practice, by the late 1750s the two groups of practitioners 
had begun to drif apart. Developments in rational mechanics outstripped 
the mathematical training of most philosophers at the time, and meanwhile 
institutional factors exacerbated the rif.
22 Euler 1765a, 131. 23 See discussion of “elusive mass” in section 7.2. 24 Again, see section 7.2.Shifting sands in philosophical mechanics 219
(i) An emerging rif
It comes as no surprise today to fnd laws of physics expressed mathemati￾cally as diferential expressions. But consider the situation in the early 18th 
century. Not only Descartes’ laws of nature, from 1644, but also Newton’s 
laws of motion in his Principia, were expressed in words alone.
In sharp contrast, afer 1710 mathematicians began to beneft from a 
breakthrough that let them expand the scope of rational mechanics to an 
unprecedented width: they invented the diferential equation. Applied to 
matter, that invention yields a new way of describing its behavior, viz. the 
equation of motion, which quantifes infnitesimal changes at every point in 
an extended body.25
Tis application had three consequences. It turned collective attention 
away from causal processes between whole bodies—toward the kinematics 
of change at a point. It transformed rational mechanics in a way that favored 
nomic unity—by generating the collective task of inferring new equations 
of motion (for as yet untreated systems) from dynamical laws. And, it put 
rational mechanics—its chief results and methods—even further beyond 
the reach of professional philosophers. Next, we explain how these aspects 
deepened the rif between mathematicians and philosophers.
Equations of motion
Te task of quantifying kinematic change over infnitesimal neighborhoods—
by deriving equations of motion for that particular type of body—set 
mathematicians apart from those who pursued a traditional approach to 
Body. Te latter persisted afer 1750 in the German-speaking lands, where 
its supporters advocated for three closely-knit priorities. One, that Nature—
the essential properties and powers of body—be given prominence by 
placing it explanatorily upstream from the more local, specifc pictures and 
processes described in mechanics. Two, that the basic laws of philosophical 
mechanics be tightly connected to matter theory—preferably by having the 
laws inferred from Nature. And three, that properly discharging Action must 
result in causal explanations of a privileged kind, namely, ones that incorpo￾rate broad descriptions of whole-body changes over fnite intervals of time, 
from premises about the causal powers of body in general (or at least of its 
25 For the historical stages that led to this breakthrough, and some of its philosophical implications, 
see Stan 2022.220 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
broadest species, e.g., elastic, solid, or fuid bodies). With its new objective, 
rational mechanics now diverged from this in all three respects: it prioritized 
mechanics; it prioritized generality of the principles over commitment to a 
particular theory of matter; and it endorsed equations of motion (expressing 
the kinematics of infnitesimal change) over qualitative explanation of 
whole-body processes from a causal dynamics embedded in matter theory 
via loose reliance on fnite quantities.
Ontic and nomic unity
A second, and related, task becomes the pursuit of nomic unity: mathe￾maticians aimed to integrate the various parts of the theory of rational me￾chanics into a whole, by showing that they are connected to one another 
deductively. Specifcally: show that all equations of motion can be inferred 
from a single dynamical law, itself stated as a diferential expression. Tey 
meant inferability in a strong sense that mixed purely deductive reasoning 
with explicit analytic rules (for the manipulation of variables and operators). 
Epitomes of this integrative endeavor are Lagrange’s two theories of me￾chanics, which we discuss at length in Chapter 11. However, this endeavor 
likewise set them at variance with those who thought that philosophical me￾chanics must fall out of the metaphysics of body, via verbal deductions ofen 
couched in qualitative language. Whereas rational mechanicians favored 
deductive nomic unity, the traditional approach of the philosophers sought 
explanatory ontic unity: begin from ontological commitments to a theory of 
matter or of body, obtained from outside rational mechanics; and integrate 
therein the results of rational mechanics via explanatory rather than deduc￾tive relations. Viewed from one side of the chasm, the other likely looked 
irrelevant to the task at hand. Euler, the intellectual colossus of 18th century 
mathematics and mechanics, attempted both approaches; he stood alone in 
straddling the abyss.
Institutional changes
Te fragmentation above correlated with an institutional develop￾ment: the rise of the royal academies of Paris, St. Petersburg, and Berlin. 
Tese academies in efect were research institutes avant la lettre, providing 
secure employment for a meritocratic elite of mathematicians.26 Te leading 
26 Tis is in contrast with Britain, where the Royal Society remained a voluntary association, de￾void of the royal funding dispensed at Paris or Berlin. Instead, the British had to rely on funding from Shifting sands in philosophical mechanics 221
fgures of rational mechanics found such institutions to aford the most ap￾pealing career prospects; which in turn tended to keep them from univer￾sity campuses, where exposure to metaphysics of matter might have been 
more likely, as would engagement with it.27 At the same time, employment 
on campuses—in the provinces, as professors of metaphysics at traditional 
universities—kept the supporters of matter-theoretic, ontic unity programs 
away from the royal academies, where they could have engaged with rational 
mechanics in the 18th century.
In addition, some contingent but very efective obstacles kept philosophers 
from immersing themselves more deeply into the advances of rational me￾chanics. One obstacle was linguistic. French was the ofcial language of busi￾ness at the Berlin Academy, but many local metaphysicians (with Kant as the 
most lamentable instance) had little French, and so they could not follow the 
mathematicians’ new results and methods.
Another obstacle was really formidable. Afer 1740, the mathemat￾ical framework and techniques of rational mechanics became a good deal 
more complex than the geometric approaches of Huygens, Newton, and 
Hermann. In consequence, grasping the newer research required special 
training. However, such advanced training was not available at university, 
and self-study was an option only for the most mathematically-gifed minds 
of the century.28 As a result, before the 1810s most professional philosophers 
simply could not follow the state of research in advanced rational mechanics.
Continental Europe had two chances to make philosophical mechanics 
into a central area of work in the Republic of Letters. Regrettably, it missed 
both, which sharpened the emerging split we have uncovered in this chapter. 
One chance was at the beginning of the Berlin Academy. Frederick II wished 
it to be a place where science and letters coexisted and collaborated—
unlike at the Academy in Paris, which he otherwise sought to emulate. To 
that end, he would have the Berlin Academy led jointly by a mathematician 
members’ contributions. Inter alia, this disadvantage kept them from recruiting foreign talent away 
from France, Germany, or even Russia (which Euler chose in the last decades of his career).
27 Johann Bernoulli and Jakob Hermann in the 1720s were virtually the century’s last rational 
mechanicians employed in academia—at Groningen and at Padua, respectively. Afer that, only 
Lagrange would work in a teaching capacity, but at very atypical venues (viz. military engineering 
schools), which kept him from philosophical faculties at liberal arts universities.
28 Prior to 1740, all of the century’s premier mathematicians—Hermann, Daniel Bernoulli, Euler, 
Maupertuis, and Clairaut—had learned the “higher analysis” by private coaching from Johann 
Bernoulli, a prominent father of the integral calculus. D’Alembert and Lagrange were self-taught; on 
the latter’s mathematical education, see Pepe 2008.222 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
(Maupertuis) and a philosopher (Wolf). However, Maupertuis took six years 
to arrive, and Wolf refused outright. Te latter had misgivings about the 
heavy French presence at Berlin, and little regard for Euler, whom he some￾times belittled, in private letters. And, he had reasons to mistrust the vagaries 
of royal power.29 And so, Frederick’s planned duumvirate came to nothing. 
Instead, Maupertuis would run the institution by himself, starting in 1746. 
Ten Euler in 1747 challenged German metaphysicians to a debate, but they 
perceived it as a great slight, resolving to keep their collective distance from 
Berlin.30 To these years we owe some of Euler’s most important contributions 
to philosophical mechanics: a fresh defense of absolute space and time; his 
mature theory of matter; and an ontology of body and impressed force. But, 
none of the local philosophical talent took it up to engage with it at the time. 
So, overall, the Berlin institution missed a great opportunity for philosoph￾ical mechanics.
As a result, in Prussia by the late 1750s metaphysics and rational me￾chanics had grown into mutual indiference. Teir estrangement deepened 
afer 1765, with Lagrange doing solitary work on the frontiers of rational 
mechanics while his colleagues in the Academy’s Division of Speculative 
Philosophy had turned to traditional metaphysics.31 Philosophical me￾chanics thereby goes dormant in Germany, at least until Kant’s solitary eforts 
in the 1780s, and then Gauss’ renewal of rational mechanics in the 1820s.
Te other chance was at the end of life for the Paris Academy of Sciences. 
From its inception in 1666, this institution had been walled of from philo￾sophical inquiries. Its given mission was to advise the government on sci￾entifc matters, review intellectual-property claims, and do pure research in 
the sciences and mathematics broadly conceived.32 Philosophy was lef to 
universities and the Academy of Letters, a diferent institution. Afer 1789, 
the Academy of Sciences became a target of revolutionary hostility. Some had 
29 On these facts about Wolf, see Winter 1956, 22f., and Wolf ’s correspondence with Manteufel, 
in Ostertag 1910. Academic intrigue that spilled into politics at the royal court caused Wolf in 1723 
to be banished from Halle, and to lose his job at the university there. He went to Marburg (outside 
Prussia), where he taught until 1740, when he was fnally able to return to his old school.
30 Euler there became embroiled, sometimes against his will, in various academic disputes—
about monads; space and time; and physical action—that turned heated, and had some political 
undertones. A good account is Leduc 2015.
31 Recent work on philosophy at the Berlin Academy in the 1700s is Leduc & Dumouchel 2015. 
Calinger 2016 recounts Euler’s prolifc activity there. Te classic synopsis of research output at the 
Academy during the Euler years is Winter 1956; von Harnack 1900, volume 1A, is an older but useful 
narrative of the Academy in the 18th century during Frederick II’s reign.
32 In 18th century France, “mathematics” covered arithmetic and number theory, several species of 
geometry, analysis, theoretical astronomy, kinematic optics, and rational mechanics.Shifting sands in philosophical mechanics 223
come to see it as an arm of the ancien régime, so they called for its termina￾tion. Academicians who had joined revolutionary legislative bodies sought 
to save it in some form. Among them was Condorcet, who drafed a proposal 
for reform; he called for the academy to be supplanted by a National Society 
of Sciences and Letters. It would employ mathematicians and philosophers 
alike—an institutional frst, for France. If created, his Society would have 
given two previously separated groups the chance, place, and resources to col￾laborate on common problems in the foundations of science. Unfortunately, 
political headwinds kept Condorcet’s proposal from becoming a reality. In 
1793, the Royal Academy of Sciences was dismantled, with no successor in￾stitution to give philosophical mechanics a home to take hold and fourish.33
And so: the Age of Reason ended with two groups—philosophers and 
mathematicians—who were, for the most part, separated from one another 
by intellectual dispositions, disciplinary premises, and institutional barriers. 
To a regrettable extent, they were kept from working together on problems 
for whose adequate solution both groups were needed.
7.7 From rational to philosophical mechanics
Te above rif means we cannot turn to philosophers then to understand the 
philosophical signifcance of contemporaneous developments in rational 
mechanics for Body. Instead, we need to turn to mechanical theory itself. 
Here, we specify the central problem to be addressed by rational mechanics 
(MCON) as a prerequisite to solving Body, and the corresponding necessary 
condition on any satisfactory solution (PCON).
(i) MCON
A general theory of the motions of extended bodies requires a treatment of 
constraints, for reasons we explain in a moment. Newton himself handled 
almost no constrained systems in his Principia. Canonically, he studied 
scenarios in which bodies can be treated as point masses, free to move 
33 Chapter IX of Hahn 1971 recounts the Academy’s last years, and the eforts to save it. A more so￾phisticated account is in Gillispie 2004.224 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
everywhere in empty space.34 Mathematicians in the early 18th century had 
only just begun to struggle with constrained motion. We call this challenge 
MCON. For our purposes, we divide MCON into two. Tis will help us ex￾plain the importance of constrained motion for Body.
In the frst, the task is to build a mechanics of extended bodies that, 
throughout interactions, continue to move as one body, or single-shaped 
volume. We call it MCON1:
MCON1: Given an extended body subject to internal constraints, how 
does it move?
More specifcally, given an extended body whose parts are mutually 
constrained among themselves (i.e., held together to form one body), what 
is the motion of each of its parts? A solution to MCON1 would enable us to 
determine the motion of every part of an extended body, as the whole moves. 
We give an example below.
Te second is the difcult case in which the bodies’ possible motions are 
not free, on account of constraints that limit their mechanical behaviors. We 
call it MCON2:
MCON2: Given an extended body subject to external constraints, how 
does it move?
Specifcally, when a body’s path is impeded by an obstacle, what is its resulting 
motion? A solution to MCON2 would enable us to determine the motion of 
a body when subject to external constraints, as we explain a little more below.
34 More precisely: he did not handle any such systems from his own dynamical laws, by means 
of mathematized models of motion. Admittedly, Newton in Book I does discuss some extended 
bodies—the attraction of ellipsoids—but he does so in a static context or with the aim of eliminating
their extension. Tat is, Newton takes those spheroids to be at rest; and he seeks to replace them with 
point-sized sources of gravity (on other particles passing nearby). In sum, Newton’s theorizing there 
is not about extended bodies in motion. Another seeming exception is Newton’s treatment of the 
compound pendulum (in Book I, §10). But, note what he does there. He accepts as valid Huygens’ 
solution to the compound pendulum (from his 1673 Horologium oscillatorium, see Huygens 1986), 
and merely adapts it to the case of central gravity—viz. directed to the center of the earth, decreasing 
as the inverse-square distance from it, instead of the parallel constant gravity (which was Huygens’ 
assumption in 1673). Plainly put, Newton just recalibrated numerically Huygens’ result, which was 
proven from non-Newtonian principles (namely, from a vis viva assumption), and which consisted 
in replacing the extended body (i.e., the pendulum bob) with an equivalent mass-point. In efect, he 
used an eliminative strategy born out of the inability to treat extended-body constrained motion 
mathematically and from frst principles. See also Chapter 8, as well as Stan 2022.Shifting sands in philosophical mechanics 225
An illustrative example of early work on MCON1 is rigid-body motion. 
A rigid, extended body is one whose parts move together not just as one 
connected body, but in a fxed confguration: if I move one end of a rigid rod, 
the rest of the rod moves accordingly. Te parts of the rod are constrained
to move together. Another much-studied type of constraint was the mo￾tion of an incompressible fuid.35 Tis alone should sufce for a glimpse of 
two things: frst, the central place that rational mechanics comes to have in 
tackling Body; and second, how hard that problem became in the 1700s, and 
how much efort it cost to tackle it.
However, extended bodies are just one species of constrained system. 
Articulating their mechanics qua extended is merely MCON1; the problem 
is broader than that. Its other half was the need to mathematize the motion 
of bodies when external constraints are present (MCON2). French theorists 
sometimes called them “invincible obstacles.”36 Put more exactly, external 
constraints are kinematic impossibilities, or restrictions on free motion. Tey 
are conditions (on the system) which entail that certain directions of mo￾tion, trajectories, confgurations, or shapes are disallowed—so, they never 
obtain—because they are incompatible with the given conditions.
Kinematic constraints were a placeholder: they stipulated that a rod re￾mains rigid; they did not give an account of the forces by which this is so. 
Tat the constraints they treated were just kinematic was a mixed blessing for 
18th century theorists. Te constraints being studied ultimately amounted 
to restrictions on the overall shape of a system or of its location in space; 
shape and spatial location were the common topic of various geometries; 
and the constraints were holonomic: so the makers of rational mechanics 
ofen resorted to exploiting the geometry of a system in order to gauge the 
efect of constraints on its motion.37 Namely, they stated constraints as 
35 For this object, the constraint is that the motion be isochoric, that is, the fuid takes up an equal 
volume throughout the time it moves, even though it changes shape. For the other, the constraint 
requires self-congruence, that is, the body must keep the same shape and size throughout its motion. 36 Two easy examples are the inclined plane and the mass-point pendulum. In the former, gravity 
urges bodies to move vertically downward, but the inclined plane prevents any body on it from so 
moving. As a result, that body is constrained to move in the direction that remains kinematically free, 
or unconstrained: namely, parallel to the inclined plane. Mutatis mutandis for the pendulum bob, 
which is prevented by the string (from which it hangs) from moving vertically down as gravity impels 
it to do.
37 Constraints are holonomic (a 19th century term) when they can be stated as functional de￾pendencies between just the positions of the constituent bodies in a mechanical system. If some 
constituents’ motion depends on the velocities of some other part in the system, the constraints are 
anholonomic. Further, holonomic constraints come in two species. Tey can be scleronomic, when 
their expression is only a function of space-coordinates, not of time. (A famous 18th century example 
was the downward motion of a bead on a curved wire, under gravity.) Or, they can be rheonomic, 
when the constraints are a function of coordinates and also of time. (A famous rheonomic system 226 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
restrictions on the geometry of a system. Tat was a blessing, as it enabled ra￾tional mechanicians to draw on the immense trove of geometric knowledge 
accumulated by 1740, or even add to it, with a view to mechanical applica￾tion.38 At the same time, this implication required theorists to explain how 
these conditions on the system’s geometry link up explanatorily with the dy￾namical laws and the forces—which are generally unknown—responsible 
for maintaining the constraints. However, these fgures never explained 
this aspect. It is quite hard to explain constraints from mass- and force￾distribution, and so they never broached this problem. Tat had an unfore￾seen efect: rational mechanics in the Enlightenment becomes unmoored 
from matter theory, and from physics more broadly. In modern terms, the 
mathematicians actively pursued physics avoidance, and so their mechanics 
sufers from the mystery of missing physics.39 We see how this plays out in 
later chapters.
(ii) Te problem of constrained motions: PCON
Te role of rational mechanics is to provide solutions to MCON1 and 
MCON2. With this in place, we can hope to move to a philosophical me￾chanics, and to a solution to Body.
From the perspective of Body, the challenge is clear. Te mechanics of 
constrained motions provides us with a theory of the motions of extended 
bodies. And so, just as the mechanics of collisions makes demands on our 
accounts of Nature and Action (hence the importance of PCOL, as we saw in 
earlier chapters), so too does the mechanics of constrained motions. Tat is 
to say, any purported solution to Body must address this question:
PCON: What is the nature of bodies such that they can be the object of a 
general mechanics (that is, a general theory of the motions of such bodies)?
then was Leibniz’s example of a bead moving outward in a tube that rotates in a horizontal plane. 
Daniel Bernoulli and Euler in the 1740s worked out its equation of motion.)
38 Tis was especially the case in diferential geometry. For instance, important results on geodesics 
(of curved surfaces) came out of Euler’s researches of inertial particle motion on a rigid curved sur￾face; and early notions of Gaussian curvature came out of eforts (from Daniel Bernoulli to Poisson 
and Sophie Germain) to quantify the strain energy of a point in a bent elastic plate, which thus curves 
in two dimensions, not just one.
39 “Physics avoidance” and the “mystery of the missing physics” are apt phrases that come from 
Mark Wilson; see his 2009, and the recent collection of case studies, Wilson 2018.Shifting sands in philosophical mechanics 227
Whereas PCOL required the integration of the rules of collision into a solution 
of Body, PCON requires the integration of the results of MCON1 and MCON2. 
Hence the importance of developments in rational mechanics in the latter half 
of the 18th century for Body.
7.8 Rational mechanics ascendant
A little-noticed paper by Jakob Bernoulli in 1703 made a contribution to rational 
mechanics that proved epoch-making in retrospect (we analyze it in Chapter 8). 
But it was not until the 1730s that rational mechanics began to emerge as a pow￾erhouse of innovation and development. From 1740 on, it settled into a pattern 
of massive and steady growth, well past the terminus years of the period at issue 
in this book.
Very importantly, this new brand of rational mechanics stands apart from 
Newton’s version in three respects. First, it incorporates entirely new principles, 
with no precedent in the 17th century. Even when, rarely and superfcially, some 
of these principles look like one of Newton’s laws, they difer from it quite signif￾icantly in real content, mathematical form, and manner of application. Tat is 
the case for Euler’s laws of motion, which resemble Newton’s principles super￾fcially. Other post-Newtonian innovations were Maupertuis’ “principle of least 
action,” “d’Alembert’s Principle,” and a plethora of further basic laws that we ex￾plain in later chapters.
Second, the new, post-1738 approaches treated constrained-motion sys￾tems, whereas Newton had tackled exclusively kinematically free bodies and 
particles, as noted above. Indeed, the early Enlightenment had inherited 
next to nothing of help in tackling systems with constraints, but in 1703 
Jakob Bernoulli found a heuristic that would prove immensely fruitful. 
With confdence increasing that constrained motion was tractable, afer 
all, Clairaut found ways to mobilize known mechanical principles into 
new heuristics that allowed him to handle a broad spectrum of constrained 
motions. Tese advances spurred d’Alembert into prolifc action, 
culminating in his great treatises on constrained particles, fuid motion, and 
rigid-body dynamics (1743–52). At the end of the century, Lagrange took up 
an insight he attributed to d’Alembert, in his ground-breaking Mechanique 228 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
analytique.
40 For details on these breakthroughs in MCON1 and MCON2, 
see Chapters 8–12.
Finally, soon afer 1742, rational mechanics moved to tackle MCON1, 
namely, the motion of whole bodies regarded as extended volumes of 
matter.41 Johann Bernoulli had the initial breakthrough, as he sought a way 
to quantify the motion of inviscid fuids under gravity. His insight was to 
single out an arbitrary, very small volume (in the fuid), identify all the forces 
acting on it, and infer the net acceleration that they would induce; then repeat 
the procedure for every similar volume there. Te fuid’s overall motion will 
then be the time-integral of the accelerated volume elements in the extended 
fuid mass.42 However, it was Euler who saw the real merit of Bernoulli’s dis￾covery. Armed with his old teacher’s insight, Euler in the late 1740s began 
to develop it into a general recipe for building up the rational mechanics of 
extended bodies. Te gist of his breakthrough was a recipe that we call the 
Euler Heuristic. Tis recipe allowed Euler to make immense strides toward 
a theory of rational mechanics truly broad in scope. In Chapter 10, we dis￾cuss it in greater depth; for now, sufce it to say that it came out of Johann 
Bernoulli’s insight above, which he claimed to have had late in the 1730s.
7.9 Conclusions
In this chapter we have argued that, during the mid-part of the 18th cen￾tury, rational mechanics emerged as the primary locus of research relevant to 
Body. Tis has three broad consequences, whose implications we address in 
the chapters that follow. Te frst concerns the role of collisions in relation to 
Body; the second concerns the importance of the mechanics of constrained 
motions for Body; and the third concerns the very conception of physics 
itself—its goals, methods, and place within philosophy.
We have seen that impact was the explanatory gateway to everything else 
in philosophical physics. Yet in mechanics, collisions occupy no such priv￾ileged place. In Hermann’s widely-read Phoronomia, collisions are treated 
in chapter 6, well behind other mechanical processes. Euler in Mechanica
does not even include an account of collisions; his introduction there hints 
40 Lagrange 1788. 41 In contrast, Huygens and Newton had treated them as particles, or point-sized bits of inert 
matter, devoid of extension; as had Leibniz’s disciple, Jakob Hermann.
42 For details, see Chapter 10.Shifting sands in philosophical mechanics 229
at a reason why (see Chapter 10). As the 1700s wear on, canonical textbooks 
relegate impact to an even more peripheral place. By 1788, when Lagrange 
wrote his Mechanique, he did not even think it worth having a treatment of 
collisions at all.
Two circumstances precipitated this demotion of impact. First, the enor￾mous growth in rational mechanics that took place from the mid-century on￾ward put two new priorities at the forefront of research: the quest for general 
laws of motion, valid across mechanics broadly, not just for impact action; 
and the imperative to model mathematically new mechanical setups and sys￾tems, instead of retreading old knowledge (which the rules of collision were 
then). Te other circumstance is the realization that impact is a complex 
problem in mechanics, and a good deal more work was needed before col￾lision theory could be secured within the newly developing foundations of 
mechanics. Hence, PCOL loses its importance for Body and, some thought, 
should be shifed downstream until the needed resources from mechanics 
were at hand.
Instead, we see PCON rise to prominence as a necessary condition on any 
satisfactory solution of Body. By the mid-18th century, a general mechanics 
of extended bodies, whether free or constrained, was an explicit target of 
theorizing. Te task was to build a rational mechanics that is general, and also 
consistent with a single matter theory; that is, to provide a generalized philo￾sophical mechanics. Constraints emerged as the most pressing foundational 
problem facing mechanics in the early decades of the 18th century. Moreover, 
as the century progressed, the relationship of Body—and the vulnerability 
of proposed solutions—to developments in mechanics became increasingly 
fraught with philosophical and conceptual difculties. In the remainder of 
our book, we examine PCON and the associated attempts to solve Body.
Our third major conclusion concerns the place of physics in relation to 
philosophy. At the beginning of the 18th century, matter theory and physics 
were under the umbrella of philosophy. Matter theory fed into philosophical 
physics, the study of material bodies. Te bodies of philosophical physics, in 
turn, were fed into rational mechanics, as its material subject-matter. By the 
end of the century, rational mechanics had laid claim to authority over the 
general properties and principles of bodies and their motions. But, as we will 
see in the coming chapters, physics did not yield to this attempted take-over, 
and instead took steps toward independence, drawing resources from me￾chanics, but refusing to fall entirely under the dominion of either philosophy 
or mechanics.230 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
So here is where we fnd ourselves: one hundred years afer Descartes’ 
Principles of Philosophy, Body remained unsolved. Physics, the area of phi￾losophy charged with its solution, had yet to deliver. Mechanics, equipped 
with new tools and new energy, was asserting itself as a source of knowledge 
of the nature and properties of bodies, but any claim to be ofering a solu￾tion to Body was, mid-century, little more than a promissory note. Yet the 
philosophical exigencies requiring a solution remained. Te unfolding of 
this story, and its consequences for philosophy, are the subject of the coming 
chapters.Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason. Katherine Brading and Marius Stan, Oxford University Press. 
© Oxford University Press 2023. DOI: 10.1093/oso/9780197678954.003.0008
8
Early work in the rational mechanics 
of constrained motion
8.1 Introduction
Te frst half of this book ended in disappointment: the fgures involved failed 
to solve the problem of bodies (Body). Tey thought the solution would 
come out of making coherent sense of the problem of collision (PCOL). In 
turn, that struggle with impact slowly taught them the need for an account 
of whole-body motion, and led them to a broader realization: before any￾thing else, a sound philosophical mechanics ought to solve the problem of 
constrained motion (PCON). And, as we saw in Chapter 7, tackling PCON 
shifs our attention away from philosophical physics and into rational me￾chanics. With the above backdrop in place, we now backtrack to revisit the 
frst half of the 18th century with rational mechanics center stage.
From Chapter 7 recall that PCON demands two contributions from ra￾tional mechanics. First, a mathematical account of extended bodies subject 
to internal constraints—bodies that, throughout their motions, continue to 
move as one thing, viz. as an extended and connected whole of adjoining parts 
constrained to stay together as one throughout the motion. Second, a me￾chanics of bodies impeded by external constraints, viz. obstacles, trajectories, 
or regions of space that are inaccessible—kinematic prohibitions. Tese are 
MCON1 and MCON2, respectively (see Chapter 7).
Below, we present the frst eforts to discharge both tasks, and we draw out 
the implications for PCON. To elucidate those eforts, we focus on two key 
episodes: the early treatments of the vibrating string, and of the compound 
pendulum. Historically, these eforts went from 1690 to the mid-1730s. In 
line with our philosophical, analytic interests in this book, we concentrate 
on the inferential structure, warrant, and matter-theoretical assumptions be￾hind the eforts at issue.
Our aim is threefold, and forward-looking. First, we seek to impress on the 
reader just how difcult it was to mathematize the motion of extended matter. 232 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
At these early stages, breakthroughs were modest. With them as a backdrop, 
it will come as no surprise that much of the 18th century was given to solving 
PCON; specifcally, to creating a rational mechanics of extended bodies with 
constraints. Second, we aim to open a new vista. Tese early eforts uncov￾ered some heuristics that proved enormously fruitful for the later theory of 
constrained systems. In retrospect, the Lagrangian synthesis of Chapter 11 
will appear as the apogee of an insight discovered around 1700. Tird, we 
seek to uncover some serious philosophical complications. Specifcally, 
success in these new areas of rational mechanics ofen came at the expense 
of empirical warrant and clear links to a picture of body. In our terms, in 
these mathematizations it becomes unclear what roles Nature, Action, and 
Evidence play, and whether they are compatible with each other. As it turns 
out, these worries will have long-term implications for the chances of an in￾ternally coherent philosophical mechanics.
As backdrop, we begin with an outline of the theorists and centers driving 
the research in the half-century at issue here (section 8.2). Next, we study 
competing attempts to tackle one half of PCON: the motion of extended 
bodies. To illustrate their eforts, we choose the vibrating string (section 
8.3). Next, we examine a major attempt to solve the other half of PCON, 
namely, external constraints. As illustration, we use their work on the com￾pound pendulum (section 8.4). And, we complement it with French work 
on constrained particles (section 8.5). From these fve decades of collective 
eforts, we draw some lessons for philosophical mechanics in that period 
(section 8.6).
8.2 Personnel and work sites
Much work in the frst two research areas surveyed below came from a 
small group united by family ties and adherence to Leibniz’s version of the 
calculus. Jakob Bernoulli had encountered it in the 1680s, taught it to his 
brother, Johann, and they went on to apply it to new problems in statics and 
dynamics. Jakob’s research career unfolded in academia, at Basel, whereas 
Johann had to journey in search of stable employment—frst to Paris, where 
he taught calculus to the marquis de l’Hôpital; then to the University of 
Groningen; and fnally to Basel, where he outlived his brother by decades.
In various senses, the elder Bernoullis fathered the Basel School, by far 
the most important research group in mechanics during the century afer Rational mechanics of constrained motion 233
Newton. Its second generation counted their distant cousin, Jakob Hermann. 
Recommended by Leibniz, he took up Galileo’s former chair at Padua, where 
he wrote Phoronomia. Daniel Bernoulli was Johann’s son and unwilling an￾tagonist; much of Daniel’s later research took place at Basel, the family’s 
hometown. Te youngest and by their joint assent the brightest member of 
the Basel School, was Johann’s student, Leonhard Euler, whose long career 
spanned half of Europe and most of the Enlightenment.
Johann Bernoulli mattered in another respect. At the time, training in 
“higher analysis” (viz. the new calculus and its physical applications) was in￾formal and hard to come by. Many important fgures—Euler, Clairaut, and 
Maupertuis—learned it from Johann Bernoulli, who coached them.
Tere were two institutional centers of gravity for advanced research in ra￾tional mechanics in the early 18th century. Te frst site was at St. Petersburg, 
where the ambitious Peter the Great had set up the Imperial Academy, a 
research institute designed to compete with France and Britain. And it 
did, largely thanks to its hiring the entire second-generation Basel School. 
Hermann went there frst, then Daniel Bernoulli, and fnally Euler, who 
stayed until 1740, when Frederick II enticed him to Berlin, to work at his
academy.1
Te second center was the Paris Academy, then in the process of becoming 
the world’s powerhouse of research in mechanics for a good century. Tere 
Alexis Clairaut began his rapid, meteoric rise aided by an early training in 
analysis. Of interest for our topic here is a long paper he presented in 1742, 
“Sur quelques principes qui donnent la Solution d’un grand nombre de 
Problèmes de Dynamique.”2
Finally, nearly all the fgures we study did work in Newton’s wake too 
(on celestial phenomena, that is), not just in the rational mechanics of sub￾cosmic processes. However, we set aside their astronomical research. For 
one, the meager advances in celestial mechanics (during the fve decades at 
issue here) did not make a diference to Body. For another, it was the me￾chanics of terrestrial, sub-lunar motions that drove theorists to understand 
that new foundations were needed to solve Body: new laws and concepts that 
go beyond Newton’s resources.
1 For the Bernoulli family, see Fleckenstein 1949; for Jakob Hermann, see Nagel 2005; Euler’s defn￾itive biography is Calinger 2016; good accounts of the Basel School’s activity at St. Petersburg are Boss 
1972, and Nagel & Verdun 2005.
2 Clairaut 1745. On the rise of the Paris Academy of Sciences in the 18th century, see Hahn 1971, 
58–251. A scientifc biography of Clairaut is Brunet 1952.234 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
8.3 New territory: oscillating systems
In this section and the next we survey and discuss some early attempts to 
create a rational mechanics of two oscillating systems: the vibrating string 
and the compound pendulum. Te attempts to tackle the former were 
modest, cautiously aimed at inferring just one characteristic quantity of 
the motion of a thin string fxed at both ends. Many pursued it, and we will 
focus on just two attempts, by Brook Taylor and by Johann Bernoulli. Others 
have studied these pieces before, but our perspective is novel. We read them 
as episodes in philosophical mechanics: as further attempts to integrate 
mathematized models (of motion patterns) with a philosophical physics of 
body and its generic laws.3
From that vantage point, early work on the vibrating string appears 
broadly instructive about rational mechanics in the early 1700s. Relative to 
the theorizing that preceded them, Taylor’s and Bernoulli’s results epitomize 
four tendencies. First, they show a felt need to extend rational mechanics to 
motion patterns and mechanical processes not covered by the theories of 
the late 1600s. Second, they help us diagnose a certain heuristic silence, as 
it were: the principles bequeathed by Newton, Leibniz, and Huygens gave 
no clear, univocal guidance for how—or even whether—they apply to cases 
and setups not solved by these pioneers. Tird, they sufer from descriptive 
incompleteness. Specifcally, the several attempts to quantify the vibrating 
string have a shortcoming in common: they are unable to predict the mo￾tion of every point in the string. In modern terms, they merely infer an efec￾tive parameter of the string, not its equation of motion. Finally, they obscure 
connections: while they refer to material bodies, the papers above end up 
severing links to an underlying theory of matter; at the very least, they ob￾scure those links considerably.
Moreover, the papers above matter to a foundational agenda that gained 
momentum as the century advanced. For one, they show, contrastively, 
what later fgures meant by their calls for generality in mechanics. Namely, 
discovering principles that were general in the sense of provably entailing 
solutions to many diferent mechanical setups. Te treatments of the vibrating 
string that we will present lacked this virtue. Second, these treatments attest 
3 Tese papers, and related work at the time, have been surveyed and discussed in Truesdell 1960, 
Maltese 1992b, Cannon & Dostrovsky 1981, Villaggio 2008, and Feigenbaum 1985. Except for 
Feigenbaum’s work, the others share an anachronistic reliance on modern mathematics, to the detri￾ment of physical and conceptual insight, and of understanding in context.Rational mechanics of constrained motion 235
to a centrifugal tendency that accelerated throughout the century. It is the 
tendency of rational mechanics to pull away from matter theory, and to settle 
into outward trajectories that break free from linkages to any picture of the 
bodies whose motions these rational-mechanical models aim to represent. 
Now we move to present their content.
Taylor treated vibration in a 1713 paper entitled “On the motion of a taut 
string,” and reprised his solution in 1717 so as to illustrate Newton’s calculus 
of fuxions; we refer to these pieces as Motus nervi and Methodus, respectively. 
Johann Bernoulli followed up in 1728 with a paper that re-derived Taylor’s 
results from diferent material assumptions, mathematical notions, and heu￾ristic principles.4
Both men start from the same givens, or initial conditions. Let AB be the axis 
on which the string lies when at rest. Pinch it at the middle point C, and stretch 
it into the tensed triangular shape ACB, then release it. Tey assume that, post￾release, the middle point will travel from C to C′ (on the other side of the rest 
axis) and back, periodically; and that the tensed string starts out as a triangle 
ACB but afer release it rearranges itself into a curve of some sort (see also sec￾tion 8.6, especially Fig. 8.6). Separately, Taylor and Bernoulli pursue the same 
question: what is the frequency of the moving string? Namely, what is the pe￾riod of the point C of maximum elongation? Implicit in their reasoning are two 
restrictions: the string vibrates in the fundamental mode; and its vibrations are 
infnitesimal.5
 From the frst restriction, they draw an easy corollary, nowadays 
called the “harmonic condition”: as the string self-relaxes from the tensed posi￾tion, all the particles in it cross the axis AB at the same time.
Against this backdrop, Taylor’s study is a two-stage argument. First, he 
assumes the harmonic condition, and asks what type of force (acting on the 
string particles, driving them toward AB) would secure that condition, viz. 
cause the particles to cross AB simultaneously. He proves two results about 
it: the strength of the restoring force must be directly as the distance from 
the axis; and it must be as the local curvature.6 Next, Taylor proves the re￾verse conditional. He assumes that the restoring force on any particle is as 
4 Bernoulli 1742b. 5 Tey say that the vibrations must be very small, but for their reasoning to go through, the vi￾bration must be infnitesimal. Large vibrations remained intractable until the late 20th century; cf. 
Antman 1980. 6 Tat is, at any instant the restoring force on a particle C must be as its distance to the rest axis 
AB, and proportional to the radius of the osculating circle (tangent to the string curve) at the point 
C. See also section 8.6, especially Fig. 8.6. Tis shows why he must restrict the string to infnitesimal 
vibrations; if they were fnite, the curvature CG and the distance CD would difer by a fnite amount, 
and Taylor’s proof would be fallacious. So, he must impose that both CG and CD are frst-order 236 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
the distance to the axis AB; and infers that the force will cause “all the string 
points to arrive at the axis [AB] at the same time.”7 Tat is, the string is a 
simple harmonic oscillator.
Taylor then obtains a novel result. From the restoring force being as the 
distance (to the rest axis) he infers: there exists a simple pendulum that 
oscillates isochronously with the string AMB.8 Finding the length of that 
pendulum gives him the frequency. And this equals the result he sought, viz. 
the frequency of the vibrating string itself: because the string and its equiva￾lent pendulum oscillate isochronously ex suppositione, thus at the same rate.
In his treatment Taylor relied on two premises with dynamical import: that 
the restoring force is proportional to the local curvature; and that it is the re￾sultant (as given by the Parallelogram Rule)9 of the local tensions that pull 
away from each other; see also Fig. 8.6. Tis fact deserves notice, because 
soon we will see d’Alembert take up that dual assumption, and use it to infer 
the wave equation (Chapter 10).
Eforts to produce a rational mechanics of vibration continued throughout 
the period. Te most visible was a 1728 piece by Johann Bernoulli, “Toughts 
on vibrating strings.”10 Te title is apt, for his paper is really a set of terse 
notes, not limpid argument. Still, the piece is remarkable for its striking sim￾ilarity with Taylor’s treatment above, which it aims to emulate. In particular, 
Bernoulli re-derives Taylor’s key result—the frequency of the fundamental 
mode—but from diferent dynamics. Taylor’s key assumption had been 
the Parallelogram of Forces (cf. section 8.6). In contrast, Johann Bernoulli 
relies on a diferent, and obscure, dynamical principle: “I too have obtained 
[Taylor’s formula], but from the principle of live forces.”11 In efect, he seems 
to reason as follows.
We explain the case of one mass—see Fig. 8.1; for strings loaded with mul￾tiple masses, Bernoulli generalizes inductively. He aims to derive the time t
infnitesimals, and hence they difer by a second-order infnitesimal amount, which may be safely 
neglected.
7 Taylor 1713, 28. 8 Namely, the pendulum bob P and the string’s middle point M would take the same time to reach 
their respective rest axes, if released at the same instant. 9 We gloss here over the technical and conceptual difculties involved in extending the addition 
rule for powers from simple cases (of time-independent forces acting on point particles) to complex 
cases involving extended matter.
10 Reprinted as Bernoulli (1742b, 198–210). Te full title is “Toughts on strings that vibrate with 
little weights placed at equal intervals on them; in which, from the principle of live forces, it is sought 
the number of vibrations the string does during one oscillation of a pendulum of known length.”
11 Bernoulli 1742b, 208.Rational mechanics of constrained motion 237
for the load L to arrive at C on the string’s rest axis AB, its line of equilibrium. 
Let z be the height from which, if L fell freely, it would arrive at C with the 
same speed as it actually does when the vibrating string carries it to C afer 
release.
Bernoulli starts from the key assumption that “the vis viva Lz of the little 
mass L [as it moves to C under the action of tension in the string] equals the 
vis viva of P,” a weight supposed to be equal to the tension.12 Tis quick move 
allows him to infer:13
Lz = Ph. (1)
Tree of the four quantities above are known; or are inferable from known 
quantities. Tat yields an expression for the height z, which then yields the 
L
Z
A B
C
h
P
Fig. 8.1. Bernoulli’s derivation of the string frequency from a vis viva
principle. L is a discrete mass that a tensed fexible string AB carries to C, where 
it arrives with a velocity v. z is the height from which L would have to fall freely 
so as to acquire v at C. Te tension force in the string is equal to the weight Ph.
12 Bernoulli 1742b, 200. Why those two live forces are equal remains unclear, and Bernoulli leaves 
it at that, without further light. Commentators are just as cryptic as he, on this point. One calls it the 
“energy theorem” and the “balance of kinetic energy” (Villaggio 2008, 229, 230). Another glosses 
it as “the potential energies of P and L are identical” (Maltese 1992b, 725). Tese are anachronistic 
impositions, not explanations in context.
13 Bernoulli’s assumption is laminar gravity, hence the string particles obey Galileo’s law of free 
fall: if a body drops from a height z, its time of fall t and its speed s of arrival are equal to √z. Hence z
equals the speed squared, and so Lz equals its vis viva at the end of fall, just as Bernoulli has it in ex￾pression (1).238 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
sought time t, from Galileo’s formula. Tat is how long it takes the string to 
reach the rest axis AB post-release.14
8.4 Te compound pendulum
Troughout the half-century at issue here, another object proved fruitful 
for rational mechanics: the compound pendulum. Research on it was fairly 
circumscribed: it aimed to locate a special point (the “center of oscillation”) 
in a compound pendulum.15 Nevertheless, its study in those decades matters 
greatly for philosophical mechanics.
First, their attempts to mathematize the compound pendulum illustrate 
the struggles to make rational-mechanical sense of objects that Newton 
was unable to handle. While work on the compound pendulum preceded 
Newton’s Principia, his book just took it for granted, because that object is 
intractable from his Second Law.16 Second, the treatments of this setup viv￾idly illustrate the proliferation of principles in the period we survey here. 
Teorists then relied on many, distinct dynamical laws: virtual-work prin￾ciples, energy principles, equilibrium conditions, and novel force laws. As a 
result, the landscape of rational mechanics turns rich and diverse to an extent 
that we miss if we focus on the Principia. Tird, and most signifcantly, in 
some of these treatments were the seeds of later theories that, in terms of gen￾erality of treatment and explanatory power, surpassed Newton’s approach, 
and birthed modern analytic mechanics as we know it.
Te compound pendulum is a body with dual constraints, internal and ex￾ternal. Te internal constraint is that the bob’s component particles keep the 
same distance to each other as the bob oscillates. And, the bob is presumed 
14 His reasoning is far from clear, but see a summary in Villaggio 2008, 227f. 15 A compound, or “physical,” pendulum is a theoretical model in which the bob is extended, and 
attached to a rigid massless rod swinging vertically from a suspension point. In contrast, a simple, or 
“mathematical,” pendulum models the bob as an unextended mass point attached to a massless rod. 
Te center-of-oscillation problem is to locate in a physical bob the point H that swings isochronously
with an equivalent mathematical pendulum. Specifcally, let P and M be two equal-mass pendulums, 
compound and simple, respectively; and let M oscillate with frequency w. Te center-of-oscillation 
problem is to locate in P the point H that oscillates with frequency w. (All other points in it oscillate 
with diferent frequencies; see below.) 16 Newton in his Principia treated the compound pendulum in Book I, section 10. Tere he took for 
granted Huygens’ Formula above—he did not seek to rederive it from his own laws. Instead, Newton 
just proved that Huygens’ results (about the beat of a compound pendulum) also hold in a feld of cen￾tral gravity (not just in Galilean-laminar gravity, as Huygens had assumed in his treatment of 1673).Rational mechanics of constrained motion 239
rigidly attached to the swinging rod.17 Together, these constraints make a 
great diference to the motion of component particles in the bob. Consider 
their behavior if they were free, that is, allowed to move without kinematic 
restrictions (see Fig. 8.2, where the particles C and D fall freely to g and h). 
Starting from rest, all free particles would fall at the same rate: so a and b
would cover equal distances in equal times. Hence at every subsequent in￾stant, we would fnd the particles at the same height above ground, falling in 
straight lines.18
But constraints alter these motions radically. Te requirement that the bob 
stay attached to the rod entails that its particles must move in circles, not in 
straight lines. And, the rigidity conditions entail that the particles must fall at 
unequal rates, thereby crossing unequal distances in equal times (so that the 
pendulum’s shape remains self-congruent through its fall and rise). Together, 
these constraints entail that, in a pendulum bob, some particles must ac￾celerate and others decelerate—relative to their speed of free fall—so as to 
keep their mutual positions in the bob unchanged. But, no one then knew 
how much the individual particles’ motion changes thereby; the dynamical 
17 Note that the rod itself is taken to be massless: it kinematically constrains the motion of the bob, 
but does not contribute to the dynamics of the scenario. 18 Tese facts, and the particles’ individual speeds at every second of their fall, had been known 
since Galileo’s 1638 tract, Two New Sciences (Galilei 1974). Te kinematics of free fall from rest is in 
the Tird Day of that book. Huygens rederived Galileo’s theory in Part I of his treatise, Horologium 
oscillatorium (Huygens 1986).
A
θ
β
D
C
g
T
V
h
Fig. 8.2. Constrained motion. Where the weights would be (relative to each 
other) afer an instant, if they were free. Tat is, if the constraint CAD was not 
rigid. Cg, Dh are the (equal) accelerations of gravity. NB: If they were free as 
above, their mutual angle β at the next instant would be greater than θ, their 
mutual angle at the previous instant.240 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
principles they had at hand were impotent for this setup. Nor could they 
rely on Newton’s theory (of impressed force): to suppose that kinematic 
constraints are induced by underlying impressed forces is no help, because 
these forces—their physical sources and specifc laws—are unknown, hence 
so are the trajectory-altering accelerations they cause in the bob. In conse￾quence, the net efective acceleration at every instant is unknown, and so the 
Newtonian approach was prima facie helpless in regard to the compound 
pendulum.19
Admittedly, all the eforts in this period yielded somewhat limited 
results: no one was able to advance theory beyond the representative-point 
approach to this object. Just like the vibrating string above, the compound 
pendulum daunted all eforts to tackle it as an extended body (MCON1). 
Nevertheless, this work concentrated theorists’ attention and energies 
on the motions of bodies subject to external constraints (MCON2), and it 
stimulated them to think about it more generally, beyond the specifcities of 
pendulum motion.
At the time, the compound pendulum received attention from the 
Bernoullis, Brook Taylor, Jakob Hermann, and the young Euler. Space being 
at a premium, we explain in detail just one solution, by Jakob Bernoulli. It 
was the most signifcant: Bernoulli there originated a heuristic—for inferring 
actual motions from unknown forces—that later d’Alembert and Lagrange 
would put to very powerful uses (see Chapters 9 and 11). To understand his 
intervention, we need some background.
Huygens in 1673 had frst treated the compound pendulum, by deriving a 
formula for a special point in the extended bob, viz. its center of oscillation. 
Specifcally, he calculated its distance l from the suspension point (around 
which the physical bob swings in a vertical plane):20
l m r
m r
i i
i i
= ∑
∑
( )2
(2)
We call it the Huygens Formula. He had inferred it from a key premise that 
some rejected then. Tey did not think that Huygens had enough evidence
19 Te “most widespread mistake about Newton’s three laws of motion is that they alone sufced 
for all problems in classical mechanics” (Smith 2008, §5).
20 In the formula, mi
 is the mass of the i-th particle in the compound bob, and ri
 its distance from 
the point of suspension. For the reception of Huygens’ pendulum work, see Howard 2003, chapter 3.Rational mechanics of constrained motion 241
for it. Teir objection led other theorists to show the formula was correct 
afer all, by rederiving it from some principle they thought incontestable.21
Among them was Jakob Bernoulli. At frst he studied the case of a com￾pound pendulum made of two or more discrete particles on a rigid rod that 
swings around a fxed point. Tough he succeeded, Bernoulli knew that his 
approach was too narrow: it worked only for the special case of collinear 
weights (all on a single straight rod, that is). So, a more general approach 
was needed. Afer much efort, Bernoulli found it in a brief but seminal 
paper of 1703. Tere, Bernoulli states a general principle, and then applies 
it to the compound-pendulum problem. In efect, these two moves amount 
to proposing a new dynamical law and a new heuristic for handling systems 
with rigid constraints.
Bernoulli claims to derive his solution from the “Lever Principle.” His 
phrase is misleading, because it denotes a radically new insight. As an entry 
point into his novel idea, consider a bent lever—specifcally, a massless rigid 
rod CAD, with A between C and D, and the angle CAD less than 180°. Let 
gravity be equal and parallel everywhere, and A be a fulcrum fxed in space. 
And, let two weights be placed on the lever at points C and D. Now ask 
yourself:
Under what conditions is the bent lever in static equilibrium?
Jakob Bernoulli frst answered this question, two millennia afer 
Archimedes. Bernoulli reasoned as follows. For each weight, “conceive” 
the acceleration of gravity “as being composed of two other ones,” that 
is, resolve it into two components: one normal to the arm, viz. tangential
to the weight’s circular trajectory; and one radial, viz. along the arm (see 
Fig. 8.3). He continues: none of the radial components produce any efect, 
because they “disperse themselves entirely” along their arms, and so “they 
become completely lost.” Hence, “only the [tangential] motions have their 
efect.”22
21 Te premise was: “Let a pendulum made of several weights be released from rest, then cross 
some part of a whole oscillation. Let the constraint (holding the weights together) be dissolved. 
Suppose each weight converts the speed it has (when the constraint is removed) into motion upward, 
and rises as high as it can from that motion. Tereby, the compound bob’s center of gravity will rise to 
the same height where it was before release.” See Huygens 1673, 98. Among the frst follow-up pieces 
to Huygens’ derivation was Bernoulli 1691; for discussion, see Vilain 2000.
22 Bernoulli 1703, 82.242 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
Put in exact terms, his Lever Principle becomes:23
∑ + ( ) AC· · c CB ∑ = ( ) AD· · d 0 DE . (3)
Namely: a bent lever is in equilibrium if the net sum of the arm times the 
mass times the tangential velocity increment is null.24
Now here is how Bernoulli applies his Lever Principle. Let CD be the 
simplest compound pendulum—two weights C and D rigidly connected to 
a suspension point A and to each other. Suppose that C and D were not mu￾tually constrained, but in fact are free to move relative to each other. If they 
were so free, afer an instant of fall they would have changed their mutual sit￾uation: in particular, they would arrive at T and V, respectively. In that case, 
their mutual angle would be greater (see Fig. 8.2). But a change of angular 
distance would violate the rigidity condition, viz. that the bob CD must re￾tain its shape throughout the oscillations: the “weights C and D cannot then 
be at T and V, respectively.” Hence, instead of arriving at T and V (as they 
A
D
D
E
E
B
B
C
C
Fig. 8.3. Bernoulli’s lever principle. He represented each weight at C, D twice. 
CB and DE are the tangential components of the acceleration of gravity on each 
weight.
23 c and d are the masses attached to the lever arms at the points C and D, respectively. CB and DE
are tangential components of the acceleration of gravity.
24 In modern terms, that is the net virtual work done by the (gravity-induced) torque on the 
system. Note that the individual products are signed quantities: plus if the velocity increments go one 
way (say, clockwise), and minus if they go the other way (counterclockwise).Rational mechanics of constrained motion 243
would, were they free, not constrained), the weights must arrive respectively 
at R and S; see Fig. 8.4.25
Still, that leaves the exact location of R and S undetermined. How might 
one infer it? Without any notice, Bernoulli’s reasoning now reaches a critical 
juncture, of great subtlety and immense theoretical value.
To arrive at R and S instead of T and V, the weights must act on each other 
via the constraint internal to the bob, whatever its physical underpinnings 
may be. Specifcally, each weight must induce in the other an angular dis￾placement RT and VS, respectively. Bernoulli’s breakthrough was to see that 
the displacements are really the angular diferences between the locations 
where C and D would have been, were they mutually free; and the locations 
where they actually are, due to the constraint. Nowadays, we call them virtual
displacements induced by the constraints. He explains the dynamics associ￾ated with these virtual displacements:
because of the isochronism [condition], the weights C and D cannot be at 
the locations T and V: in fact, they must be at R and S. . . . Consequently, the 
efort of gravity, which acts on the weight C, is not exhausted at R. Hence 
its lefover efort RT must be used to push the body D across VS. However, 
because body D must resist as much as it is pushed, it is as if D were in S
25 Which trivially ensures that the angle CAD remains self-congruent throughout the displace￾ment, hence the bob CD stays rigid.
R
T V
S
A
Fig. 8.4. Internal constraints and their action. Te diference between where 
the weights C and D would be, versus where they actually are, afer an instant 
(i.e., the diference between their falling free vs. falling mutually constrained). 
If the bob was not rigid, in an instant the two weights would fall to T and V, 
respectively. But the rigidity condition constrains them to move in fact to R and 
S, respectively.244 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
and as if there was a force there that would try to push it from S back to V. 
(Bernoulli 1703, 82; our emphasis)
Tat is, in a rigid body the parts must act on each other, so that the self￾congruence condition is maintained. But how much do they act? He answers:
And so, we have a lever CAD, on which a weight equal to C (pushing 
or pulling one way with forces or speeds as RT) and a weight equal to D 
(pushing or pulling the other way, with forces or speeds as DV) balance 
each other. (Bernoulli 1703, 82)
Tat is: to obey the constraint, the parts do virtual work—they exert torques 
on each other, which cause virtual displacements. Over the whole body, their 
net virtual work vanishes, hence rigid constraints are workless. Tat follows 
from applying his Lever Principle to the pendulum’s bob:26
C D · · m RT n + = · ·SV 0.
With this crucial insight in place, locating M, the center of oscillation—
and thus obtaining Huygens’ Formula—becomes a mere exercise in plane 
trigonometry.
In any case, his paper is not important for that formula, which had long 
been accepted as a fact. It really matters for the deep insight it contains: his 
Lever Principle for a bent lever. For the 18th century, the principle mattered in 
three ways. First, it broadened the notion of equilibrium beyond the narrow 
sense it had in Archimedean statics.27 In Chapter 9 we will see d’Alembert 
extend that notion ever further. Second, it extended the nomic basis of statics 
well beyond the meager fundament it had inherited from Ancient Greece. So 
signifcant was his extension that in the 1700s some thought the laws of static 
equilibrium were enough to support all of mechanics (see section 8.6). Tird, 
it led them to focus on virtual displacements and the work associated with 
26 Specifcally, let the length of the arms AC and AD be n and m; and recall that the displacements 
RT and SV are directed magnitudes. Ten Bernoulli’s Lever Principle entails that, in the compound￾pendulum bob, the quantities C · m · RT and D · n · (−SV) are equal. 27 In statics before Bernoulli, the notion of equilibrium was based on the Archimedean (straight) 
lever: two bodies are in equilibrium if their respective distances to the fulcrum are inversely as their 
masses or weights.Rational mechanics of constrained motion 245
them. Tat change of focus—on the virtual work of forces and torques on a 
body—would lead to a crucial breakthrough. It taught theorists that internal 
constraints are workless: their net virtual work vanishes; see Chapter 11.
8.5 From special problems to general principles
In the early 18th century, work on constrained motion had two features rele￾vant to our analyses in Chapters 9–11. It was piecemeal—it amounted to in￾dividual solutions to local, specifc problems. And, it was unsystematic: there 
was no unity of treatment, and no common heuristic; the dominant spirit 
was epistemic opportunism.
Te mechanical setups most studied were the motions of several particles 
connected by fexible strings; the orbit of a particle moving outward in a 
rotating tube; and the motion of a particle falling down a curved incline that 
slips horizontally under the particle’s weight.28
Tis kind of setup is a Class of physico-mathematical Problems, so to say, 
whose common requirement is to fnd the motion of several bodies placed 
inside certain grooves . . . when these bodies are connected by strings, and 
so they infuence each other’s motions. (Clairaut 1739, 3)
In just a few years, those eforts lead to a deep change of mindset; a new 
awareness arises about the true import of these problems. Many begin to 
call for generality of treatment—for principles or approaches that apply to 
all these constraints uniformly, and neither depend on, nor assume, any 
particular facts about a limited class of bodies. “Te fourth principle I use 
here . . . leads to solutions for all the problems” of determining the motion of 
bodies under mutual constraints, ventured Clairaut.29 D’Alembert saw the 
chief merit of his own book as answering precisely their call for generality, 
with which he was familiar: “I will teach here how to solve all problems of 
Dynamics by a single Method, very simple and direct.”30
28 Many then grappled with the motion of a particle in a rotating tube (frst mentioned by Leibniz, 
who had lef it unsolved); Nakata 2002 explains the various approaches they used. Te frst treatment 
of fall on a mobile incline is Bernoulli 1742c. Te calls for generality of treatment began at the Paris 
Academy around 1740; Schmit 2017 gives the context for them, and some of the frst attempts to an￾swer that call.
29 Clairaut 1745, 3; added emphasis. 30 D’Alembert 1743, xxiv. See Chapter 9 for explanation.246 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
In those years, the chief landmark in the mechanics of constraints was 
a paper by Clairaut that matters here in two respects. First, it illustrates a 
nascent impulse of Enlightenment science that 17th century theories 
lacked: the drive for generality as we explained it above. Second, it shows the 
heuristic predicament of rational mechanics at this time. As they look into 
mechanical systems beyond the Principia, theorists realize that none of the 
laws they had inherited from the 1600s was truly general in the sense they 
required; nor did those laws come with clear instructions for how to apply 
them to novel setups. We elaborate these points in section 8.6. Now we move 
to give an overview of Clairaut’s results and approaches in his “Quelques 
principes.”31
Te mathematics of his solution is a mixture of algebraic and geometric 
methods. He represents particle trajectories as polygons (with infnitesimal 
sides dx), and seeks to infer displacements dx or velocities dx/dt by diagram￾matic reasoning, viz. by inferring ratios between infnitesimals based on the 
geometry of the constrained system at issue.32 Once an expression for dx has 
been found, integrating it gives Clairaut an equation for the curve, or trajec￾tory, represented analytically.
Now here is how Clairaut’s mathematical methods matter to our topic. 
To infer the strength and direction of the constraints’ action (on the moving 
bodies they constrain) he always needs to rely on the particular makeup of 
the system at issue. Te diagrammatic representation of that specifc setup 
discloses how the constraint changes the motion in that case. Tus, Clairaut’s 
approach to constraints is not general. He does not have a recipe (for hand￾ling constraints) that is non-specifc (i.e., applies uniformly) despite his 
talk of general principles. Tis fact—the indispensable reliance on graphic 
methods—is methodologically signifcant. It will be lef to Lagrange to over￾come this heuristic limitation, by devising an approach to constraints that is 
truly general, viz. does not require ad hoc reasoning from the specifcs of the 
target system.
31 Clairaut 1745. Tis is not Clairaut’s sole major work in mechanics. In the 1740s, he also made 
very major contributions to gravitation theory from Newtonian, impressed-force foundations. But, 
his paper above was an important contribution to the rational mechanics of constrained motion, 
MCON2. Moreover, “Quelques principes” had an ancestor that began in 1735—a shorter piece in 
which he treated a smaller number of problems, by a single method (Clairaut 1739).
32 Example: “To extract an equation from these conditions, I drop a segment no perpendicular 
to Ck, and I note that nko and CPH are similar triangles. Which gives me no = gdt2 √(1 – z2).” See 
Clairaut 1745, 28 and passim.Rational mechanics of constrained motion 247
Te setups Clairaut treated are as follows. A body falling down a curved 
incline that slides horizontally under an arbitrary impulse. A particle sliding 
outward in a tube that rotates around an endpoint C fxed in a horizontal 
plane. Two particles M, N connected by a fexible string as they fall individu￾ally down two distinct curved inclines. Two particles M, N, each constrained 
to move in a given rigid groove, and connected to each other by a rigid rod. 
A particle K falling on a curved incline that moves under K’s weight, and 
thereby pushes another particle, C. A rigid body with a component point 
constrained to move in a curved groove MN. An extended body moving 
under gravity while connected by strings to an arbitrary number of particles. 
Two particles attached to a rod—one rigidly, the other mobile alongside 
it—while the rod is impelled in a horizontal plane; or it falls vertically under 
gravity. Te same setup, but now both particles can slide freely along the rod 
above. A tube loaded with an arbitrary number of mobile particles, moving 
horizontally from an initial impulse. Two particles rigidly attached to a rod 
constrained to pivot around a fxed point afer an initial impulse. A particle 
M that falls down a mobile, curved incline; as it falls, M drags an extended 
body sliding horizontally at the top of the incline, which likewise moves side￾ways under M’s weight.33
To solve the problems above, Clairaut relies on certain propositions that 
he denotes by the umbrella term “principle.” Tey difer in role and func￾tion, as we explain in section 8.6. Two of his principles are really heuristics. 
Tey state recipes for solving a class of related problems—hence they count 
as stepwise instructions, not frst-order knowledge claims.
Other principles are knowledge claims: premises that he invokes when he 
needs to reduce some unknown quantities in a master equation.34 Some of 
these auxiliary principles are explicit (e.g., Conservation of Vis Viva). Others 
are tacit—he relies on their content without drawing attention to them (e.g., 
the two laws of the lever, Archimedean-straight and Bernoullian, or bent). 
Yet another principle is a knowledge claim, but it is equivocal. Clairaut calls 
it the “general principle of accelerative forces.”35 Sometimes, he means the 
33 Schmit (2017, §2) has a synopsis of Clairaut’s various problems and their immediate antecedents 
and successors in rational mechanics on the Continent.
34 Tat is, when he has more unknown quantities than equations involving them. In each case, 
Clairaut iterates the same approach to solutions: (i) set up a master diferential equation between the 
sought quantity and other variables, known or unknown; (ii) use some auxiliary principle—some 
accepted general statement—to obtain an extra equation for an unknown in the master formula; (iii) 
repeat, until one has as many equations as unknowns in (i).
35 Clairaut 1745, 6 and 38, for his use of lever laws.248 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
Second Law: on a unit-mass particle, the net force equals its acceleration d2x/
dt2. Some other times, he means the Parallelogram Rule for the composition 
of forces; see Fig. 8.5. With the beneft of retrospective, behind his account of 
this principle—and latent in the way he uses it—we recognize a deep insight:
From one instant to the next, the path of a constrained particle is the 
Parallelogram-Rule resultant of two motions: the velocity it would have, if it 
were free; and a velocity increment caused by the constraint.
Tis insight lurks behind his instructions on how to apply his principle of 
accelerative forces—on how to think about the action of constraints at every 
point, and how they interfere with the exogenous, applied forces. As he 
explains (see Fig. 8.5):
I begin by imagining the system in some position, and I draw each of the 
little straight lines that the bodies cross in an instant. Next, at the end of 
every such little line I draw the little lines that the bodies would describe in 
the second instant if they were free. Ten, I draw the directions along which 
the strings, levers or other instruments act. On these directions, I mark the 
M m n
h t
r p
g
P
Fig. 8.5. Clairaut’s “principle of accelerative forces” applied to constrained 
motion. M and P are mass points moving for two instants while constrained by 
a rigid rod. Te task is to fnd the position of M at the end of the second instant, 
afer it leaves place m. Suppose M was free, not constrained: then it would travel 
to n. And, suppose the action of the constraint would change its motion by a 
velocity increment mh. Ten the actual path of the particle is the resultant of 
these two tendencies. Tat is the real meaning of Clairaut’s principle. By the 
Parallelogram Rule, the actual path is the diagonal mt of the parallelogram hmnt
that the two tendencies form, if represented geometrically.Rational mechanics of constrained motion 249
little segments that denote the forces of these instruments. I determine the 
length of those segments as follows. For each body, these segments and the 
extension of the lines crossed in the frst instant [the imaginary lines of 
counterfactual free motion] form a parallelogram. Te endpoint of its diag￾onal is where the body will be at the end of the second instant—assuming 
the string or lever has neither stretched nor bent. By this method, we obtain 
any two consecutive sides of the respective curves that the bodies (in the 
given system) will cross. Ten fnding the equations of these determinate 
curves becomes a matter of mere calculus. (Clairaut 1745, 21; our emphasis)
Tis principle is worth our attention here, because it turned out to be a 
key step toward a general solution to MCON2. Clairaut did not have that 
solution—Lagrange frst did, later—but it required the insight behind 
Clairaut’s principle.
Still, the only type of constraints Clairaut tackled are rigid, whether di￾rectly or ultimately. In “Quelques principes,” most constraints are rigid 
surfaces (parois, lamelles, rainures, plans), fxed or mobile. A few are strings 
(fls), but they are fexible, not elastic. Tis fact is key: as fexible, these strings 
bend isometrically—they can curve at any point, but their overall length is 
constant—whereas true elastics can change both shape and size, or length. 
Being merely fexible, Clairaut’s strings can be analyzed away, as it were, into 
aggregates of microscopic rigid, infexible rods connected by pins and joints.
8.6 Implications for philosophical mechanics
Now let us evaluate how the results above bear on the long-term project of 
a philosophical mechanics of extended matter in motion—in particular, on 
the problem of constraints, PCON.
(i) Faltering progress in rational mechanics
When it came to MCON1, progress was very difcult. Te true aim was to 
mathematize the motion of every particle in an extended body—not just 
of a “representative point,” or centroid. For vibration theory, however, that 
aim remained out of reach until d’Alembert’s papers of 1747 and later. Te 
work we surveyed above inferred just a modest result, viz. the frequency of 
one point in the string: the point of its maximum elongation from the rest 250 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
axis. Taylor and Bernoulli express it as the “equivalent pendulum” (i.e., as 
the length of the mass-point pendulum that would beat at the same fre￾quency as the vibrating string). In essence, then, both were forced to take the 
representative-point approach, and so their struggles with MCON1 fell short 
of real success. In the early 18th century many strove to “solve problems con￾cerning systems with many degrees of freedom through the determination of 
mass-points considered ‘equivalent’ to the system.”36
Clairaut too takes the centroid approach to solutions. Tat is, he does not
treat the constrained body as an extended whole. Instead, he replaces the 
body with a point (which he endows with “mass,” a notion lef unexplained) 
attached to a weightless rigid rod whose other end always moves along the 
constraint.
In efect, this substitutive approach skirts around MCON1. Namely, it 
avoids giving an equation that tracks the motion of every single point in an 
extended body. Tat task remains too difcult for mechanics in 1742, and 
so the best Clairaut can do is solve for the motion of just one point—a cen￾troid. An understandable heuristic, to be sure, given the expressive and 
computational limits of Clairaut’s kinematics and dynamics. In taking the 
centroid approach, however, he does away with extension as a theoretically 
relevant, efective parameter in his mechanics. Eo ipso he does away with 
bodies; his mechanics is unable to account for the motion of a body as an ex￾tended whole.
(ii) Unstable explanations
Another aspect of the above studies on vibration illustrates our point that 
17th century mechanical principles lacked heuristics for further application. 
Tat aspect is their profered explanation for the string’s shape as it vibrates. 
Consider Taylor’s account of how shape evolves post-release from the tensed 
state (see also Fig. 8.6):
Let a string stretch from A to B. Pinch it at z, and pull it to distance Cz
from the axis AB. Because the string is bent only at C, upon release that 
point moves frst. Ten right away the string becomes bent at the locations 
D and d nearby, so these points begin to move as well; then E and e, and 
so on. Now at the beginning, point C moves very fast, because of the great 
36 Maltese 1993, 54.Rational mechanics of constrained motion 251
bending [fexura] at place C. But then, as the curvature [curvatura] at the 
nearby places D, E, etc. goes up, these points also move ever more swifly. By 
the same action [eadem opera], as the curvature of C goes down, that string 
point is accelerated less. And likewise everywhere, as the slower points get 
more accelerated and the faster ones less—eventually it comes to be that, 
the forces having regulated one another suitably [inter se rite temperatis], 
the motions of all the string points conspire, and they approach the axis to￾gether, then recede from it together, and so on to infnity. (Taylor 1713, 28)
Some have called it a “qualitative” account of the “redistribution of the cur￾vature” as it propagates outward from the string’s plucked center point.37
Tat seems too charitable. Te tensed string starts out as a triangle, isos￾celes with C as a vertex. Tere is no curvature at C. To say that the string 
curves as it travels away from C is to presume that curvature arises ex nihilo, 
then propagates outward. Even that miraculous birth appears ruled out—by 
Taylor’s matter-theoretical premises (see below). Truesdell was right to call 
Taylor’s account “obscure if not faulty.”38
Bernoulli’s explanation is hardly better. Recall, he concludes that the 
string’s shape as it vibrates is sinusoidal. But, he cannot explain that from 
his matter-theoretic premises. He starts with a discrete loading: then the 
string’s shape post-release must be a polygon (with a weight at every vertex). 
Bernoulli ought to explain how a polygon turns into a smooth curve—by 
what causal process, treated rational-mechanically. Much like Taylor, he is 
unable to explain that. In efect, both Taylor and Bernoulli exploit the ge￾ometry of their models so as to extract results in rational mechanics alone. 
But, in doing so, they sever the explanatory link to the material properties
of the body they quantify: to the matter theory that underpins it. In short, 
these technical difculties in MCON1 spell trouble for the general problem 
of constrained motion: they are barriers to using the results in rational me￾chanics as resources for a philosophical mechanics.
(iii) Elusive physics
Philosophical mechanics aimed to integrate smoothly a physics of body with 
a mathematized mechanics of its motions. Te early-Enlightenment authors 
37 Maltese 1992b, 717. 38 Truesdell 1960, 130.252 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
we surveyed above ran into very serious difculties on this front: they were 
unable to combine matter theory and rational mechanics coherently. Tey 
start from certain physical premises (about the makeup of their target body) 
and infer to mathematized conclusions (about its motion) that contradict 
their premises. Or, they start from physical assumptions that contradict each 
other. To illustrate our point, we turn the spotlight on Taylor’s early account.
In Motus nervi, he starts from matter theory: he regards the string as made 
up of equal “rigid particles, infnitely small.”39 From that premise he seeks to 
derive a result in rational mechanics, viz. the strength of the restoring force 
at a point on the string. He reaches that result by two routes. One is to regard 
the restoring force as the resultant of two other forces, namely, the tension 
forces Bt and bt that pull the two rigid particles (fexibly joined at t) away 
from each other. For that conclusion he relies on the Composition of Forces, 
or Parallelogram Rule, whereby he infers that segment tr gives the size and 
direction of the sought resultant.
Te other approach is to regard the restoring force as proportional to the 
curvature of the string at B and b. In turn, curvature varies as the radius of 
the osculating circle at those points. Geometrical reasoning (plus the small￾vibrations assumption) then leads him to conclude that the curvature (and 
so the sought force) is as the distance to the rest axis (see Fig. 8.6).
But these two approaches contradict each other, because they rely on in￾compatible matter theories. Te ofcial one takes a string to be a fexible 
composite of rigid bits of mass—infnitesimal parallelepipeds, really. When 
deformed, the string is always a polygon, with actual vertices: because rigid 
bodies do not curve, if they are straight. But—because he needs curvature 
as well, qua measure of the local restoring force—Taylor quietly assumes an￾other matter theory, viz. the physical continuum. In this picture, a string is 
a deformable continuous line, and when it vibrates its shape is a true curve, 
not a polygon. It has no vertex, but it does have a well-defned degree of cur￾vature at every point between the fxed ends A and B. In contrast, polygons 
have no curvature: it is a meaningless concept when applied to them, and 
so it is nonsensical to estimate force at a polygon vertex from the curvature 
at that point. In efect, Taylor’s rational mechanics of the string used two 
39 Ex particulis rigidis (Taylor 1713, 27). Tat they are “equal” is ambiguous. Taylor likely means 
them to be of equal mass, but he draws them equal in length. Te two equalities are not coextensive 
unless he tacitly assumes that his rigid particles are of equal mass density.Rational mechanics of constrained motion 253
distinct matter theories—the rigid body and the deformable continuum—
but he never paused to ask, which is the true one?
Tings get little better in Methodus. Tere he rehearses his earlier der￾ivation (of the restoring force) but now all talk of rigid particles has been 
expunged. Instead, Taylor says just that his string consists of “very narrow 
matter, uniformly dense,” and that forces act on its “points.”40 A note up￾stream from his treatment gives more details, in a lemma to Prop. 18:
Te next four propositions will treat the shape of cords, of cloth fabrics 
flled with water, and of vaults supporting some given weight. Insofar as 
they are made of physical matter, these shapes have some true density 
[crassities], are little ft to bending, and give some way to forces that stretch 
or compress them. Tus, he who wishes to describe these shapes precisely 
ought to take these facts into account. However, these factors are difcult to 
handle mathematically, and greatly complicate our calculations, which are 
already too long. For that reason, I disregard entirely these factors’ efect, 
40 Taylor 1717, 89.
t
G
D
g
d
c
C b
r
A
B
Fig. 8.6. Taylor’s two theories of matter. Lef: Bt and bt are rigid particles; 
tension forces at t pull them away from each other, toward B and b, respectively; 
tr is their resultant, and also the restoring force on the spring at that location. 
Right: Mass distribution in the string is along ABbC, which is a true curve. 
CG and cg are the radii of curvature at C and c, respectively; they’re also the 
direction and strength of the restoring force at those locations. CD and cd are 
the respective distances from the rest axis. Because they difer from CG and cg
by a second-order infnitesimal amount, Taylor takes them to be proportional 
to the restoring force. Adapted from Taylor 1713, where he assumes a rigid￾particle picture of matter (lef); and from Taylor 1717, where the ofcial picture 
is a true continuum (right).254 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
and instead I assume as follows: the shapes are made of perfectly fexible 
matter, wholly unable to contract or dilate, and so thin that their density 
practically vanishes in respect to length. (Taylor 1717, 74)
Hence, his ofcial matter theory has changed—from rigids to deformable 
continua. And yet, Taylor still chooses to rely on premises about the string 
regarded as a set of rigid segments. Namely, he still inferred the restoring 
force by the Parallelogram Rule, as if the string were a polygonal set of tiny 
rigid masses, not a true continuum.
Just as with Taylor, Johann Bernoulli’s underlying theory of matter is like￾wise opaque and equivocal. He sets out to treat a discretely loaded string, by 
induction. Ten he switches to a string modeled as a physical continuum, 
“uniformly dense” and deformable into a true curve, with an osculating circle 
at every point.41 But, he gives no thought to which of these two pictures may 
be true, and on what grounds.
Clairaut’s substitutive maneuver above—his replacing an extended 
body with a representative point—has a companion in his strategy for 
theory building. In this respect, his most signifcant choice was to curtail 
the explanatory ambitions of his theory. In efect, Clairaut inaugurated the 
explanation-bracketing approach at home in modern analytic mechanics. 
Namely, he bypassed—or rather, refused to answer—all matter-theoretic 
questions about the physical constitution and specifc causal powers of the 
materials that might instantiate the constraints.
Plainly put, he tackled MCON2 by removing it entirely from the physics
of body. Tereby, in efect he closed of his work from solving constrained 
motion qua problem in philosophical mechanics. What properties of body 
do external constraints instantiate? What corporeal powers underpin their 
action as they impede the free motions of other bodies? Tat is, how do 
Nature and Action link up explanatorily with his rational mechanics of un￾free motions? Clairaut would not even raise these questions—and with good 
reason, because they were intractable then. We will soon see his bracketing 
maneuver turn rampant in much 18th century mechanics. However, we must 
not lose sight of these questions just because Clairaut and others did not ask 
41 Bernoulli 1742b, 207, 209. He proceeds by induction, as follows. He supposes the string loaded 
with one weight, and derives its frequency. Next, he considers the same string, loaded with two 
weights, and infers its frequency. Ten he reiterates for three, four, and then seven equally spaced 
weights. He seeks to extrapolate to a general formula for the frequency N of a string with n discrete 
equal weights.Rational mechanics of constrained motion 255
them. Tey go to the very heart of philosophical mechanics as a project that 
straddled philosophy, physics, and the mathematical science of motion.
(iv) Epistemology: sources of evidence
Tere is a bafing aspect to Taylor’s and Bernoulli’s treatments of the vibrating 
string: they derive their key results twice, by two diferent routes. Why? We 
think they did it for evidential reasons. Bear in mind, there was no empirical 
evidence about the shape and frequency of a taut vibrating string. So, Taylor 
and Bernoulli could not justify their conclusions by induction from data. 
Not even more weakly, by showing the conclusions to be at least compatible 
with data. Tere were no empirical facts to verify their rational-mechanical 
models. Absent that, they decided that multiple derivation could supply the 
evidence otherwise unavailable.
More precisely, they each infer their key results from dynamical princi￾ples: Taylor in Motus nervi starts “from the principles of mechanics,” viz. the 
Parallelogram of Forces; and Bernoulli in Meditationes starts from “the prin￾ciple of live forces.” Ten Taylor in Methodus says the harmonic condition 
likewise follows “from the principles of Statics.” His antagonist re-obtains 
them as well “from statical principles,” in the second part of Meditationes.
42
Recall that at the time statics was the much older science, born in the work 
of Archimedes. Its principles thus counted as fully secure, not up for debate, 
and immune to skeptical doubts. And so, the ability to derive a novel result 
from the ancient and accepted laws of statics counted as evidence for it; and 
it served as a cross-check on its derivability from properly dynamical prin￾ciples. Te latter were much more recent, far from universally accepted, and 
their scope unclear to the community of research.
Tis epistemological verdict gains support from our study above of Jakob 
Bernoulli’s paper on the compound pendulum. He frst had devised this novel 
source of evidential support, specifcally for the Huygens Formula. Recall, 
Huygens before him had obtained it from a dynamical law—an energy prin￾ciple in disguise. But then some doubted that the principle was legitimately 
applied; they could not see that dissolving the constraints in a system leaves 
the motion of its mass center unchanged. To assuage their doubts, Jakob 
Bernoulli started from a principle of statics: the law of equilibrium for a bent 
42 See, respectively, Taylor 1717, 89, and Bernoulli 1742b (“Meditationes”), 203; our emphasis.256 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
lever. He thought his starting point was epistemologically impeccable, and 
so the Huygens Formula, if validly derived from it, must be true. Te same 
logic of evidence is at work in the Taylor-Bernoulli papers on the vibrating 
string: to preempt doubts about the legitimacy of their dynamical premises, 
they show that the intended results follow from laws of statics too, and those
are beyond dispute. Tat must count as evidence for the result, in the absence 
of empirical facts to confrm it.
However, their evidential appeal to statics is not without problems. For 
one, it is cognitively obscure: they rarely declare overtly on which principles 
of statics they rely for confrmation. Taylor and Johann Bernoulli tend to in￾voke it as a shibboleth. Constat ex Staticis—it is plain from the principles of 
statics, they say, without further detail. But their evasive language does not 
inspire confdence.43 For another, it is explanatorily opaque: these authors 
do not explain how a law from statics (the theory of masses at mutual rest) is 
supposed to confrm a result about masses in motion, or points in a vibrating 
string. Lastly, some of these appeals are not quite legitimate, because they 
credit statics with principles it did not have before then. Tat is the case of 
Jakob Bernoulli’s principle above. It is a statical claim, to be sure; qua state￾ment about the equilibrium of a bent lever, it does belong in statics. However, 
before 1703 no theory of statics had contained it as a principle. He frst stated 
it, but gave no evidence for it: no account of what justifes his law of the bent 
lever. So it seems illicit to treat it as an ancient and accepted truth of statics, 
able to transfer truth to conclusions inferred from it.44
His own brother rejected it, and set out to re-derive the Huygens Formula 
from yet another, supposedly safer, premise. As he did so, Johann felt the 
need to justify his move: Huygens had “assumed a principle . . . that some 
found too rash and not ft to be accepted without demonstration.”45 Later he 
tried another method, again driven by evidential concerns about previous 
solutions to the center-of-oscillation problem:
I leave it to expert readers to see that I established the Formula [giving the 
center of oscillation] from a foundation much safer than it has been done so 
far. For, not only did I not need to use Mr Huygens’ gratuitous hypothesis 
[on the descent and ascent of the gravity center]; but also, I did not need to 
43 See Bernoulli 1746. Commentators do no better. None of them has tried to elucidate the statical 
principles at work in the treatments above; cf. Truesdell 1960, Feigenbaum 1985, and Villaggio 2008.
44 Recall, the canonical Law of the Lever—which stems from Archimedes’ treatise, Equilibrium of
Planes—is about two weights (not more) on a straight lever, not bent. 45 Bernoulli 1715, 242.Rational mechanics of constrained motion 257
suppose—which my Brother did—that the center of oscillation lies on the 
line of center. (Bernoulli 1717, §29; our emphasis)
Tese complications further illustrate the evidential predicament that beset 
mechanics afer 1700. For their chosen setups, Taylor, the Bernoullis, and 
their posterity had neither the clean experimental results that collision 
theorists had received from Huygens and Mariotte; nor the rich body of ob￾servational data that Newton had drawn on for his gravitation theory. As a 
task in philosophical mechanics, Evidence would dog them throughout the 
century.
(v) Epistemology: principles
Examined through PCON as our analytic lens, the half-century of researches 
above reveals commonalities that have eluded all historiography of me￾chanics so far. In particular, a great amount of cutting-edge theory struggled 
with the overarching question, How does an extended body with constraints 
move over time? Most fgures then believed that success on this front required 
the discovery of a new principle; the term “principle” becomes a leitmotif in 
the rational mechanics of constrained motion. Two aspects of it are philo￾sophically signifcant.
Ambivalence
Regarded as an agent’s category, the term “principle” denoted two distinct 
ideas. For some, a principle was a common premise. Namely, a proposition 
used as a premise in many derivations of efective parameters, orbits, or equa￾tions of motion for a broad spectrum of mechanical systems. In this role, the 
premise had an evidential role: its truth served as evidence for the truth of 
the conclusions of the derivations. Two favorite principles in this sense were 
the Parallelogram Rule and Conservation of Vis Viva.
For others, a principle was a fruitful heuristic. Namely, a generic recipe, 
policy, or guideline for solving a great number of diferent mechanical 
problems, viz. for treating systems importantly diferent (e.g., a sphere 
rolling down curved inclines; many particles strung together and given ar￾bitrary impulses; etc.). Some ofered their heuristic principle as a discursive 
recipe stated in a general, non-specifc way; an example is d’Alembert and 
his General Principle (see Chapter 9). Others stated it as epitomes, or illus￾trative examples, applying the heuristic to a few systems while hoping that 258 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
the reader would extract a general lesson from their epitome. Tat is the case 
of Clairaut: “I give here a good number of problems, and try to explain them 
so that readers can infer the general Method for solving any other similar 
topic.”46
To sharpen the insight, we give distinct names to these two senses, as follows. 
E-principle: a premise common to many deductive derivations of spe￾cifc equations of motion. 
H-principle: a heuristic that works across a broad range of setups in ra￾tional mechanics. 
Tese are diferent things, so we ought to keep them distinct. One is a 
knowledge claim; it is truth-apt, and it requires evidence if we are to accept it. 
Te other is a pragmatic injunction, and we judge it from success in action, or 
instrumental adequacy for its declared purpose. More to our point, the dis￾tinction will prove an efcient analytic tool for the next four chapters, where 
talk of principles proliferates.
Generality
Another aspect of principles in these years is a rising push for generality. 
Specifcally, some wish that rational mechanics had truly general principles:
One would be wrong to regard this sort of problem [on constrained 
motions] as just an isolated research whose sole fruit is the pleasure to have 
solved it. . . . Such problems never fail to enlighten us: ofen they yield new 
principles, and teach us new general laws that nature follows in all her oper￾ations. . . . Te wonderful System of the world, whose important discovery 
was reserved for the great Newton, is simply a consequence of Mechanics. 
And, what is lef to discover in this System depends solely on achieving a 
greater perfection—in my opinion, not so much by improving the calculus 
as by getting closer to the general laws of motion, which are still hidden to 
us. (D. Bernoulli 1746, 55; our emphasis)
Others claim to have them already: “A Principle General and Direct for 
solving all Problems of determining the Motion of several Bodies acting on 
each other, whether by means of strings, levers or any other way.”47 As the 
46 Clairaut 1739, 3. 47 Clairaut 1745, 21.Rational mechanics of constrained motion 259
century progresses, these claims will only get louder and bolder, as we will 
see in Chapters 9–11.
Since their notion of principle was ambiguous, it turns out that calls for 
generality were just as equivocal. Some asked to see a premise that entails all 
the equations of motion—for every mechanical system, treated or in need of 
treatment. Others claimed to have a recipe (or at least the proof-of-concept 
for one) that will guide successful research into mechanical systems not yet 
treated (e.g., the motion of air currents). A modern way to put this duality 
is: some sought a dynamical law for a comprehensive theory, others proposed 
a uniform heuristic for a forward-looking research program. Examples of 
the former are the Euler–Cauchy laws of continuum mechanics; or the 
Principle of Virtual Work, in analytic dynamics. For the latter, an example is 
the method of Lagrange multipliers.48 Any heuristic that works analogously 
counts as uniform. Tat is what some 18th century principles of rational me￾chanics aimed to be.
(vi) Epistemology: fumbling for insight
Tough Jakob Bernoulli’s Lever Principle was evidentially opaque, in the 
century afer him it played a major role as a guideline to solving further 
problems. In particular, path-breaking fgures in rational mechanics learned 
two things from his terse paper.
First, they learned that if a system has internal constraints, they are 
workless. Tat is, the net virtual work they do on the system is null. Jakob 
Bernoulli put it as the idea that, in the compound pendulum, the internal 
actions form a generalized bent lever in equilibrium. Two later fgures 
reworked his insight into two related heuristics. D’Alembert transformed it 
into the idea that, if motion-changes due to internal constraints were caused 
by applied forces, these fctitious extra forces would be jointly balanced. In 
the next chapter, we explain his idea and the innovative uses to which he put 
it. Lagrange took from Jakob Bernoulli the insight that, if a system of rigid 
48 Other examples are the Euler-Cut approach, in continuum mechanics, where we let an arbitrary 
plane cut through the body, then we identify the balance of forces and torques on either side of that 
plane; or the approach where we treat a system by identifying the relevant potentials (monogenic or 
dissipative), subtract the kinetic energies, and thereby obtain a function L that we can plug into the 
Euler–Lagrange equation, which then—once we have described the system in terms of its generalized 
coordinates—yields the equation of motion for it.260 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
masses is in equilibrium, the net virtual work of the applied forces is zero. He 
too generalized this idea in his own, equally novel way; see Chapter 11 for 
explanation.
Second, they learned that, if the constraints are external to the moving 
system and rigid, their action is normal to the constraint. From Bernoulli’s 
analysis above, recall that in the compound pendulum the only motions com￾patible with the constraints (viz. the rod swinging rigidly) are circular, around 
the suspension point. Hence, he infers, the constraint’s action destroys (so 
to say) the component of the external force normal to the circular path that 
every mass in the bob is allowed to have; see the discussion around Fig. 8.3. 
Te lesson that Clairaut and d’Alembert took from Bernoulli’s insight was 
that, if the external constraints can be modeled as rigid surfaces, their efect 
on the system is perpendicular to the constraint surface at that point.
Important as Clairaut’s paper was, however, it did not quite do enough. It 
fell short of teaching a principle that applies to all the problems then studied. 
Tat kind of general law still eluded mechanics; hence the hope that con￾tinued work on constrained systems might just yield that general principle 
one day. Tough valuable, their principles and associated insights were just 
partial, thus ultimately insufcient. Jakob Bernoulli saw, correctly, that in￾ternal constraints do zero net work—provided they are rigid, however, not in 
general. Clairaut saw, correctly, that the constraint combines vectorially with 
the external force, thereby determining the body’s efective, actual accelera￾tion. However, his insight is inert without help from diagrams: applying his 
principle requires indispensably that we read the direction and strength of 
constraint actions from a geometric picture—the diagrammatic representa￾tion of the body and the obstacles to its freedom.49
It will be lef to d’Alembert and Lagrange to overcome these limitations. 
Te former would fnd an ingenious way to combine Bernoulli’s and Clairaut’s 
respective insights into a novel heuristic, or H-principle; see Chapter 9. Te 
latter, building on his three predecessors, would at last devise a general way 
to solve MCON: by combining the Principle of Virtual Work, d’Alembert’s 
insight, and his radically new recipe, viz. the method of Lagrange multipliers; 
see Chapter 11.
49 In his paper, every solved problem comes with at least one diagram, for a total of thirty-two fg￾ures; see Clairaut 1745, 52f.Rational mechanics of constrained motion 261
8.7 Conclusions
We have examined fve decades of work in rational mechanics relevant to 
the problem of constraints, PCON, in its two variants: the motion of a body 
constrained to move as one extended volume of matter (MCON1); and the 
motion of bodies under external constraints, or impediments to their kine￾matic freedom (MCON2). As exemplary setups for this duality, we chose the 
vibrating string and the compound pendulum, respectively.
Despite strenuous eforts, the tangible results were modest: for each setup 
above, they were able to fnd just one efective parameter, or pragmatic quan￾tity. Specifcally, the frequency of the principal mode in a vibrating string, and 
the location of the center of oscillation in a pendulum bob. Tese results fall 
short of the whole-body descriptions of motion they pursued in studying the 
two objects above. And so, in the late 1730s rational mechanics remained far 
from any promising solution to PCON—hence a philosophical mechanics of 
extended matter still eluded natural philosophers. Again, that illustrates how 
difcult Body was, and how little help Newton’s laws of motion had been for 
its solution.
Still, those eforts were not wasted; slowly, they bore fruit. For one, they 
focused everyone’s attention on vibrating systems—the need to mathematize 
the string’s motion at every point, not just one; and then to extend the ap￾proach to higher-dimensional objects, such as elastic membranes. Another 
was a lasting beneft: Jakob Bernoulli’s insight of 1703 (his principle of the 
bent lever) taught the 18th century an invaluable lesson, namely, to regard 
internal constraints as workless, or jointly balanced. Yet another beneft was 
a growing awareness of the multitude of principles in rational mechanics—
and a new sense of urgency about their anarchic proliferation.
Research on the compound pendulum in these decades matters greatly for 
philosophical mechanics, not least because it yielded a seminal heuristic: the 
virtual-work approach, a novel way of studying constrained systems that 
proved greatly successful, in retrospect. Tis breakthrough was Janus￾faced: while useful, the heuristic gave fgures in rational mechanics permis￾sion to postpone the hard task of asking what material forces and actions 
underpin the work of constraints in a system.50 Te reason is that Jakob 
50 At this juncture we use the phrase “virtual work,” which is slightly anachronistic; the term is 
coined and becomes entrenched about a century afer the fact. Figures in the early 1700s did not 
have a stable vocabulary for it; some (such as Johann Bernoulli) called it “energy,” others (including 
Lagrange later) called it “virtual velocity.”262 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
Bernoulli’s heuristic insight lets us disregard the physics of constraints: it says 
that their combined virtual work vanishes, and so their underlying makeup 
and causal import may be circumvented as we seek to infer the motion of the 
body, or system, that they constrain. We elaborate on this fact in Chapters 9 
and 11. Put in our terms, the heuristic came at the price of disregarding Nature 
and Action entirely. Moreover, their struggles required them to pay renewed 
attention to Principle and Evidence: to seek out new principles beyond those 
ofered by Newton and the 17th century, and to examine sources of confr￾mation for them.
Te person who made the most of these chances was d’Alembert. Soon 
afer 1740, he would make great strides on the three counts above. He frst 
produced a proper rational mechanics of the vibrating string. He made real 
progress with both MCON1 and MCON2, thanks to a powerful heuristic 
that came to bear d’Alembert’s name. And, he did much to unify rational me￾chanics, to broaden its descriptive scope, and to breathe new life into philo￾sophical mechanics. Accordingly, we turn to him next.51
51 For developments in 18th century rational mechanics outside the scope of problems treated in 
this book, see Hepburn and Biener 2022.Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason. Katherine Brading and Marius Stan, Oxford University Press. 
© Oxford University Press 2023. DOI: 10.1093/oso/9780197678954.003.0009
9
Constructive and principle approaches 
in d’Almbert’s Treatise
9.1 Introduction
During the frst half of the 18th century, constructive approaches to the 
problem of bodies (Body) were dominant. Beginning from material 
commitments such as the qualities and powers of matter, philosophers 
sought to construct a body concept, one demonstrably consistent with the 
demands of mechanics, specifcally the rules of collision (see Chapters 2–5). 
Tis approach persisted into the second half of the century (see Chapter 6), 
but by mid-century developments in rational mechanics had changed the 
philosophical problem space in important ways (see Chapter 7). Enter Jean 
Le Rond d’Alembert who, in 1743, sought to set rational mechanics on a new 
foundation in his Traité de dynamique (or Treatise on Dynamics, henceforth 
his Treatise), with lasting consequences.1
For two reasons, we think the Treatise is pivotal for the development of 
philosophical mechanics in the latter half of the 18th century. First, the struc￾ture of his book suggests taking a “principle approach,” in which the theory’s 
principles—such as the laws of motion—are the primary resource for solving 
Body. We explain what we mean in detail below. Tough contrasting with 
the constructive approach, the principle and constructive approaches are 
complementary: the interplay between the two is productive for theorizing 
in physics, as later chapters will show. However, the principle approach 
comes with a risk: there may be no single body concept, or indeed any single 
ontology, uniquely consistent with the principles. Tus the second conse￾quence for philosophical mechanics: a shif from ontology to principles as 
the source of theoretical unity. Whereas the frst half of the century is replete 
1 In what follows, page references are to the 1743 French edition; and translations are our own. 
D’Alembert’s Traité de l’équilibre et du mouvement des fuides (1744) is also important for our story, 
but in this chapter we restrict our attention primarily to the Traité de dynamique.264 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
with theories exhibiting ontic unity, in the second half of the century we see 
theories unifed axiomatically, by shared principles. We call this “nomic 
unity,” and it is an explicit goal of d’Alembert’s Treatise.
2 Nomic unity is con￾sistent with a proliferation in ontologies associated with a single theory—or 
no articulated ontology at all. An alarming outcome for philosophers con￾cerned with Body.
In this chapter, we argue for an interpretation of d’Alembert’s Treatise that 
foregrounds: the challenges facing a constructive approach; the availability of 
a principle approach; and the search for nomic unity. In later chapters, these 
features of his Treatise will be important for understanding developments in 
philosophical mechanics through the turn of the century.3
We proceed as follows. We begin by explaining the constructive/prin￾ciple distinction (section 9.2). We then outline the structure and content 
of d’Alembert’s Treatise, by way of background (section 9.3). We evaluate 
the theory frst for its contribution to rational mechanics (section 9.4), and 
then as a work in philosophical mechanics. For the latter, we argue that the 
Treatise can be evaluated from the perspective of either a constructive (sec￾tion 9.5) or a principle (section 9.6) approach. We then explain how this is 
connected to diverging conceptions of theoretical unity, ontic and nomic 
(section 9.7), before returning to Body to draw out the implications for 
Nature, Action, Evidence, and Principle in the context of d’Alembert’s theory 
(section 9.8). We summarize our conclusions at the end (section 9.9). One 
important lesson is that philosophers interested in Body have no choice but 
to engage with the complexities of constrained-motion mechanics. Tis is 
true quite generally from mid-century onward; and is especially the case 
with d’Alembert where, in order to address Body, we cannot rely on his defn￾ition of body, but must investigate the details of his rational mechanics.
Philosophers have given d’Alembert’s Treatise very little attention.4 Yet, as 
we hope to show, it is enormously important—both in and of itself, and for its 
role in the transition from early 18th century conceptions of physics to a new 
notion of physics as an independent discipline with its own goals, methods, 
and norms.
2 See Chapters 1 and 7 for our explication of ontic versus nomic unity. 3 See especially Chapter 12. 4 Tis is changing. See the special issue of Centaurus (2017, 59:4) commemorating the tercen￾tenary of d’Alembert’s birth for the articles and references therein, including Gilbaud & Schmit 2017, 
and Schmit 2017. See also Le Ru 2015 and 2021.Constructive and principle approaches 265
9.2 Constructive and principle approaches
We take the “constructive” and “principle” terminology from Einstein.5
We use it to label two approaches to the development and interpretation of 
theories, and—in line with the narrower task of this book—to tackling Body.
Te constructive approach to theorizing begins from the material consti￾tution of the objects or systems of interest, and from there develops an ac￾count of the laws that such objects or systems satisfy. In the case where our 
objects are bodies, we frst develop a material account of bodies, including 
their properties and powers. Ten we move on to the rules describing the 
behaviors of those bodies (such as rules of collision). We may seek to de￾velop, derive, or explain the rules from the account of body, and must at least 
demonstrate consistency.
Te constructive approach to Body may be stated as follows:
Constructive approach (bodies): Te qualities and properties of 
matter are the primary resource for solving Body.
We begin with material commitments and from them we construct concepts 
of body (Nature) and bodily action (Action) consistent with Principle and 
Evidence (see Chapter 1) to arrive at a theory of the behaviors and motions 
of such bodies. We have seen examples of this throughout Chapters 2–
6 and, though the label is ours, we have seen that the associated approach 
dominated physics during the early 18th century.
Te constructive approach to Body comes in two varieties, a stronger and 
a weaker. Te stronger begins from an explicit theory of matter, and from 
there constructs bodies. Only with this in hand do we develop a theory of 
the behavior of such bodies. For example, Du Châtelet frst provides her ac￾count of the nature of matter, then using this ofers her account of the nature 
of bodies, and fnally derives the laws from the nature of bodies thus under￾stood.6 Te weaker eschews a foundation in matter theory, and works directly 
5 In 1919 Einstein distinguished between constructive and principle theories (see Einstein 1982). 
Te distinction has been much discussed in the philosophy of physics literature. See especially 
Brown & Pooley 2006 and Janssen 2009. For applications in quantum theory, see Bub 2000. See also 
Flores 1999. Tis discussion has been carried out in terms of constructive versus principle theories. 
However, we prefer the categories of constructive and principle approaches to the development and 
interpretation of a theory. Hence, from our vantage point, a given theory is not a constructive or prin￾ciple theory in itself. Rather, we may interpret it constructively or principledly, and each approach 
yields diferent insights.
6 See Du Châtelet 1740, chapter 7 for matter; 8 for body; and 11 for laws.266 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
with bodies. Te qualities and properties of bodies are frst enumerated, then 
invoked to justify the behavior of these bodies (e.g., the Newtonians’ eforts 
to demonstrate the collision rules for diferent kinds of body; see Chapter 3). 
All the attempts to address Body discussed in Chapters 2–6 are most natu￾rally interpreted and assessed constructively.
More generally, the constructive approach fnds a natural home in philo￾sophical physics: the subdiscipline of philosophy charged with the account of 
body in general, and the dominant conception of physics in the early 18th 
century. Philosophical physics ofered a qualitative approach to the theory 
of bodies, frequently rooted in matter theory,7 and the task was to integrate 
the quantitative rules of collision—taken from rational mechanics—into this 
physics to arrive at a philosophical mechanics.
With this in mind, we can see how the constructive approach provides us 
with a useful tool of analysis. A theory will be amenable to constructive in￾terpretation if it ofers an account of its objects (such as bodies) prior to the 
statement of principles that pertain to the behavior of those objects. To assess 
a theory constructively requires us to determine whether, and to what extent, 
that theory ofers a material account of its objects compatible with and ade￾quate for its needs.
In contrast, when adopting a principle approach, we begin our theorizing 
from some principles that we hold to be very general, perhaps universal. 
Importantly, these principles are independent of the particular material con￾stitution of the target systems. For instance, in special relativity (SR), Einstein 
adopted the light postulate and the relativity principle, on the grounds that 
these principles were consistent with all known empirical evidence. We then 
derive the consequences. Tese are conditions that any material system, no 
matter its constitution, must satisfy. In the case of SR, Einstein used the light 
postulate and the relativity principle to derive the Lorentz transformations. 
SR tells us that all material systems, regardless of their individual material 
constitution, must satisfy the Lorentz transformations: for example, a rod put 
into motion must contract.8
7 By “matter theory” we here mean the philosophical enterprise familiar from the 17th and early 
18th centuries of seeking the nature of matter through largely a priori reasoning. Te term undergoes 
a subtle but important change of meaning later, around the turn of the 18th century, as seen most es￾pecially in French matter theory and Laplacian physics (see Chapter 12).
8 Here is another example: Einstein contrasts thermodynamics (principle) with the kinetic theory 
of gases (constructive). In the latter case, we build up to the principles of thermodynamics from the 
behaviors of the particles constituting the gases; in the former, we specify the principles of thermody￾namics to which all gases, whatever their material constitution might be, must conform.Constructive and principle approaches 267
Te principle approach to theorizing is powerful because it allows us to set 
aside some aspects of the dynamics of material systems: we do not need to 
know the details of the dynamical behavior of a material rod in order to know 
that it must contract. In this sense the Lorentz transformations are a kine￾matic condition: no information about the forces acting on or within a par￾ticular body is required in order to know that it will satisfy them. However, 
the Lorentz transformations encode dynamical commitments about the 
forces pertaining to bodies (e.g., the forces that yield the stability of meas￾uring rods). Tese commitments are placed into the kinematic condition, 
bracketed out of explicit consideration by the assumption that all systems sat￾isfy the principles of the theory, and therefore the Lorentz transformations.
Tese are the three most important features of the principle approach: the 
adoption of principles that are independent of the particular material consti￾tution of the target systems as the starting point for theorizing; the generality 
of the principles; and the bracketing of dynamical considerations by means 
of a kinematic condition.
Assessing a theory through the lens of the principle approach sets three 
tasks for the philosopher. First, to clarify the principles, including their scope. 
In the case of SR, the scope of the principles is maximal—it is universal—and 
we think of the resulting kinematic condition (the Lorentz transformations) 
as expressing the structure of space and time themselves. But the technique 
of bracketing dynamics into kinematics does not require this maximal gen￾erality, as we will learn from a principle reading of d’Alembert’s Treatise. 
Second, to investigate the epistemic status of the principles. Einstein’s justif￾cation for adopting the light postulate and the relativity principle was induc￾tive: they were two principles consistent with all known empirical evidence. 
However, justifcation need not be inductive, and with d’Alembert it seems 
that it is not (more on this below). Finally, the third task is to make explicit 
the dynamics that has been bracketed into the kinematics. As noted above, 
to adopt the relativity principle is to make dynamical commitments con￾cerning the behavior of material systems, and we can seek to illuminate what 
these are.9
If we take a principle approach to theorizing, the question remains: what 
are the objects or systems to which this theory applies? To what extent does the 
theory itself specify its own objects? On this approach, rather than specifying 
the objects prior to theorizing, we rely on the principles themselves. For 
9 See Brown 2005 for extensive philosophical discussion of this aspect.268 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
example, in the case of bodies and the laws of motion, adopting the principle 
approach means drawing our concept of body, and of bodily action, from the 
laws themselves, without appeal to any prior theory of the material constitu￾tion of bodies.
Principle approach (bodies): Teoretical principles, such as the laws of 
motion, are the primary resource for solving Body.
Te question is then whether, and to what extent, the principles contain ad￾equate resources for this task. If the principles prove insufcient for deter￾mining a unique ontology, we will be lef with ontic pluralism, or even with 
ontic under determination. More on this below (see especially section 9.7).
Tough anachronistic, our use of the constructive/principle terminology 
in an 18th century context is well-motivated. Einstein did not create his 
distinction from nowhere. We suggest that it originates in philosophical 
mechanics: in the amalgam of physics (as it was once understood, with its 
constructive approach) and rational mechanics (with its search for princi￾ples that may serve as axioms) that went on to become the physics of the 19th 
century.10 If this is right, then using the distinction to analyze d’Alembert’s 
Treatise may be productive of new insights. We argue that it is.
9.3 D’Almbert’s Treatise on Dynamics: its structure 
and contents
Te Treatise consists of a Preface; Defnitions and Preliminary Notions; Part 
I containing his three principles or axioms; and Part II containing his General 
Principle,
11 fourteen problems demonstrating the utility of the General 
Principle, and a discussion of vis viva.
12 In what follows, we outline the con￾tent of each of these elements, focusing on the aspects most relevant to Body. 
10 See Chapter 12. For the 19th century background to Einstein’s distinction, see Howard 2005. 11 Te General Principle of his Treatise on Dynamics is ofen referred to as “d’Alembert’s Principle.” 
However, this term is thrice ambiguous. First, there is the 1743 General Principle, discussed here. 
Ten, there is d’Alembert’s attempt to generalize it in his 1744 Treatise on the Equilibrium and Motion 
of Fluids. Tis latter was the primary inspiration for Lagrange, who in 1788 coined the term “the prin￾ciple of Mr d’Alembert” when he attributed his own version of the principle to him. It is important 
we keep the three versions distinct, since they each contain new insights. For this reason, we restrict 
the term “d’Alembert’s Principle” to d’Alembert 1744. We use “Lagrange’s Principle” for Lagrange’s 
Mechanique (1788), discussed in Chapter 11. 12 We will not discuss vis viva here. See Iltis 1970.Constructive and principle approaches 269
Tis provides us with the background necessary for evaluating d’Alembert’s 
Treatise from the perspective of philosophical mechanics.
(i) Preface
D’Alembert opens his Preface with the issue he plans to tackle. Recent decades 
had seen an expansion in the range of mechanical problems treated, with a 
proliferation of solutions to particular problems, derived from a variety of 
diferent principles.13 Many of them, he claims, are obscure. His stated goal 
is to provide mechanics with a minimum number of clear principles that are 
maximally general in terms of the problems they can solve. Specifcally, he 
claims that all the various principles of mechanics hitherto relied upon can 
be reduced to just three: force of inertia, composition of motion, and equilib￾rium. We discuss each in turn below.
D’Alembert’s aim in the Treatise is to show that his three principles suf￾fce for a mechanics of the motions of bodies acting on one another in any 
way through contact (such as collision, being tied together by threads, 
and so forth).14 His strategy consists of four steps. First, he introduces his 
“Defnitions and Preliminary Notions.” Second, he presents his three princi￾ples. Te justifcation for their truth is clarity: each principle should be suf￾fciently clear so as to command assent as certain.15 Tird, he uses his three 
principles to formulate his General Principle, which he takes to be the general 
solution of all problems in mechanics. Te value of his General Principle lies 
precisely in this generality. For, insofar as it is successfully formulated using 
only the resources of the three principles, and insofar as it is indeed a general 
solution for all problems in mechanics, this justifes the claim that not only 
are the three principles true, but they are sufcient to serve as the axioms 
of mechanics: they are the foundation from which all of mechanics can be 
developed.16 Hence the fourth and fnal step: d’Alembert ofers solutions to 
fourteen problems as evidence for his claim of generality.
Te Preface is important for setting out d’Alembert’s epistemology, and for 
his summary of the contents of the Treatise that is to follow. It also contains 
13 See Chapter 8. 14 Tis is what we mean by “mechanics” for the remainder of this chapter. 15 For the relationship between truth, clarity, and certainty, see d’Alembert 1743, i. 16 In this Treatise, he is concerned with solid bodies. He seeks to extend his principle to fuids in his 
1744 work.270 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
his arguments against incorporating any notion of force into mechanics 
(1743, xxv), and we return to this topic below. For our present purposes, 
however, we leave our exposition of the Preface here.17
(ii) Defnitions and Preliminary Notions
Tis section is divided into four: body and space; rest and motion in space; 
motion in time; and a collection of issues including the infnite divisibility of 
space and time, uniform motion, and accelerated and retarded motion in a 
straight line. Te section deserves a full treatment, but for our purposes we 
focus our attention on body and motion.
D’Alembert introduces his notion of body by appeal to extension and im￾penetrability: if two portions of extension, equal in size and shape to one an￾other, cannot be imagined unifed and combined so as to make one portion 
of extension whose total size is less than that of the sum of the original two, 
then these two portions of extension are impenetrable to one another, and 
each is what we call a body.18
In these remarks, he presupposes that bodies are extended, taking this to 
be unproblematic, at least for the purposes of mechanics. Like Descartes, he 
takes the idea of extension to be clear. However, unlike Descartes, he states 
that what distinguishes bodies from space is their mutual impenetrability. 
He gives a geometric conception of impenetrability for which the criterion 
is imagination: bodies are entities for which we cannot imagine their being 
combined in such a way as to result in a decrease in the total volume.
Tat bodies are mobile requires that bodies be distinguished (at least con￾ceptually) from the space in which they move. Te impenetrability of bodies 
plays this role: it is that by which we distinguish, in our minds at least (i.e., 
conceptually), body from space.19
Following Newton, d’Alembert says that the place of a body “is the part of 
space that a body occupies, that is to say, the part of space with which the ex￾tension of the body coincides.” Tis defnition of place enables d’Alembert to 
defne the rest and motion of a body: “A body is at rest when it remains in the 
same place; it is in motion when it passes from one place to another.” For the 
17 For further discussions of d’Alembert’s Treatise, including his epistemology, see Grimsley 1963; 
Hankins 1970; Firode 2001; Schmit 2017; and references therein.
18 d’Alembert 1743, 1. 19 See d’Alembert 1743, v. See also d’Alembert 1754 and 1759.Constructive and principle approaches 271
case of motion, he further elaborates that in going from one place to another, 
the body must pass through all the parts of space immediately contiguous to 
one another, successively and without interruption. Next, d’Alembert explic￾itly introduces time, writing that since a body cannot occupy several places 
at once, it cannot go from one place to another instantaneously, but must 
take time to do so: motion requires a duration of time.20 Finally, d’Alembert 
claims that the space traversed by a body and the time in which it does so are 
each divisible to infnity. Tis is d’Alembert’s concept of motion, and his epis￾temology requires that we have a clear idea of it.
Two questions arise. First, is d’Alembert right that we have a clear idea 
of body and motion, thus conceived? Second, even if so, can his mechanics 
be developed on these ideas of body and motion? For example, no force 
concepts have been introduced, in striking contrast to the defnitions found 
in Newton’s Principia; we return to this issue below.
(iii) Part I. General laws of motion and equilibrium of bodies
Part I of d’Alembert’s Treatise sets out the three principles from which he 
develops his mechanics. From the perspective of rational mechanics, we may 
think of these as his axioms (see section 9.6, below).
1. Force of inertia
D’Alembert asserts that he follows Newton in using “force of inertia” for “the 
property that bodies have for remaining in the same state.”21 By itself, this 
would be uninformative without details about what properties or attributes 
of a body are part of its “state,” and d’Alembert writes that “a body is neces￾sarily in a state of rest or of motion.”22 Given this, two laws follow, he claims:23
20 But see Le Ru 2015. 21 d’Alembert 1743, 1. 22 d’Alembert 1743, 3–4. Te strength of the necessity here is as follows. “Body” was defned with 
mechanics, as the science of motion, in mind: we required a defnition of body such that bodies are 
mobile (see his section “Defnitions and preliminary notions”). Given this defnition, it follows nec￾essarily that such a body is determinately at rest or in motion. See his later Essais sur les éléments de 
philosophie (1759) for more on this topic of necessity, as well as Hankins 1970. 23 Tese two laws together correspond to Newton’s frst law of motion. Notice that d’Alembert splits 
the law into two, rests both on his principle of the “force of inertia,” and seeks to argue for them from 
this principle. For more on his principle in relation to Newton’s laws, see Hankins 1970, chapter 8. 
Hankins points out (176) that whereas Newton ofered three laws of motion, many of those who were 
primarily responsible for the development of rational mechanics in the 18th century, including the 
Bernoullis, Clairaut, Euler, and Lagrange, did not formulate their mechanics in terms of laws.272 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
Law 1. A body at rest remains at rest, unless a foreign cause removes it. For 
a body cannot set itself in motion. (d’Alembert 1743, 3)
Law 2. A body once put into motion by some cause, must remain in uni￾form, straight-line motion, so long as a new cause, diferent from that which 
put it in motion, does not act on it. Tat is to say, unless a foreign cause that 
difers from the motive cause acts on the body, it will move perpetually in a 
straight line, and traverse equal spaces in equal times. (d’Alembert 1743, 4)
Law 1 seems to follow unproblematically from “force of inertia.” D’Alembert 
draws an important corollary: regardless of the cause whereby a body receives 
motion, it cannot then further accelerate itself; a cause that sets a body in mo￾tion cannot also give the body the power of self-acceleration. As we will see 
presently, he means that a body cannot change its own speed.24
Law 2 is a little more complicated. Why should a body put into motion re￾main at a constant speed and move in a straight line? D’Alembert discusses 
this issue at length.25 For our purposes, two points are most important. 
First, for d’Alembert constant speed follows from the frst corollary to Law 
1, whereas straight-line motion requires a further argument. He writes that, 
afer the frst instant, there is no reason for a body to turn right rather than 
lef, so it will move in a straight line. Tus, it seems that he supplements force 
of inertia with a principle of sufcient reason so as to infer that a body, when 
not acted upon by an external cause, continues to move not just at a constant 
speed but also in a straight line.
Second, d’Alembert believes that Law 2 can be demonstrated whether or 
not bodies are assumed to have either resisting force or force of motion. Te 
result is independent of one’s views on force, he claims. Still, he faces the same 
difculties as Descartes when trying to remove any notion of force from his 
discussion, for d’Alembert ends his argument for Law 2 with an apparently 
throw-away comment that bodies have a tendency to move in a straight 
line: nothing in his arguments has said anything explicit about any such ten￾dency, or about how we should think of it. In short, though his arguments 
demand further attention, we are already in a position to conclude that his 
frst principle, “force of inertia,” introduces additional conceptual resources 
beyond those in his “Defnitions and Preliminary Notions.”
24 d’Alembert 1743, §4. 25 d’Alembert 1743, §§6–7. Tis deserves more treatment than we can give it here. See Hankins 
1970, 179–85.Constructive and principle approaches 273
2. Composition of motions
By this phrase, d’Alembert means the Parallelogram Rule for the addition of 
velocities, which he states as follows:
If any two powers act at the same time on a body or point A (fg. 6 [Fig. 9.1]) 
to move it, one from A to B uniformly in a certain time, and the other from 
A to C uniformly during the same time, and we complete the parallelogram 
ABCD, I say that the body A will traverse the diagonal AD uniformly, in 
the same time that it would have traversed AB or AC. (d’Alembert 1743, 22)
He is very deliberate in this formulation of the Parallelogram Rule and in 
his ensuing demonstration, as he explains in the remark that follows. He 
wants his demonstration to be neutral between whether the two powers on 
the body act only at the initial instant, or whether they both act continu￾ously throughout. Puzzlingly, he also thinks the addition of motions along 
the same line is a corollary of the Parallelogram Rule.26
His demonstration of the Parallelogram Rule is as follows (see Fig. 9.1).27
Suppose that body M, moving freely, traverses some unknown straight line 
K L
L M
A B
C D
a c
o g
Fig. 9.1. D’Alembert’s proof of the Parallelogram Rule. Troughout the 
Treatise, d’Alembert uses a combination of geometric and algebraic reasoning. 
In his statement of the composition of motions, ABCD is the parallelogram and 
AD the actual motion. Te term “power” is used neutrally; what matters is the 
consequent motion. For example, two “powers” give rise to the quantities of 
motion AB and AC, and all theorizing is then done in using these quantities of 
motion, with no further reference to “powers.” Cf. d’Alembert 1743, fg. 6.
26 d’Alembert 1743, §§22–23. 27 d’Alembert 1743, §21–22.274 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
Ag, resulting from powers AC and AB. Once M arrives at point g, suppose 
that two powers act on it, powers that tend to move M along gc and go with 
speeds equal and opposite to those along AC and AB, respectively. It is clear, 
d’Alembert says, that M would then remain at rest at point g, for it is animated 
by equal and opposite powers along each of the two directions.
Now keep M fxed at point g, but consider its path relative to a moving 
reference plane. Let this reference plane move freely in two directions: frst, 
in the direction AC so that M would describe the line gc parallel and equal 
in length to AC, in the same time that M traversed AC; and second, in the 
direction AB so that M would describe the line go parallel and equal in 
length to AB.
It is evident, d’Alembert asserts, that the path of M relative to the moving 
plane is the line ga, equal and parallel to the diagonal AD of the parallelo￾gram ABDC. But this simply reverses the original motions, and M can only 
arrive back at A if AD = Ag. Terefore, the unknown path Ag must be the di￾agonal of the parallelogram formed by AC and AB.
Tere are many puzzling things about this attempted demonstration, both 
implicit and explicit. For one, the demonstration presumes the intended re￾sult: in considering the motion of the reference plane d’Alembert treats the 
two motions independently and assumes that they add as vectors. Tis is ex￾plicit, but hidden from view, because the body M is supposed stationary in 
this case, and the motions belong to the reference plane—not to the body 
with whose motions we are concerned. But the addition rule is in use none￾theless. Moreover, in treating the trajectory of M frst from a resting reference 
plane and then from a moving one, d’Alembert implicitly assumes a transfor￾mation rule between the two. And, as we know with the beneft of hindsight 
following SR, such transformations hide assumptions about the behaviors of 
physical systems. Lurking in the background, and never explicitly addressed 
by d’Alembert, is the lack of a relativity principle in his mechanics.
3. Equilibrium
D’Alembert’s axiom of equilibrium states: “bodies that have equal and oppo￾site quantities of motion are in equilibrium,” where “quantity of motion” is 
“the product of the mass and the speed.”28
28 See d’Alembert 1743, §39, for the statement of equilibrium, and §49 for the quantity of motion. 
Notice that no notion of mass has been explicitly introduced by d’Alembert prior to this, raising 
questions about the place of mass in his mechanics. We will have more to say about this in section 9.6.Constructive and principle approaches 275
In earlier chapters we saw proposals for arriving at new principles ade￾quate for mechanics by generalizing accepted principles of statics. Here, 
d’Alembert is attempting to take the familiar notion of equilibrium from 
statics (of bodies at mutual rest) and to re-theorize it so that it can be used 
for systems of bodies in motion. He explains the relationship between 
“quantities of motion” and “equilibrium” thus: given a system of bodies in 
equilibrium, we assume each body has a certain quantity of motion, and then 
by our axiom we conclude that the total quantity of motion in any given di￾rection must be zero.29
D’Alembert’s version of the Lever Principle illustrates his axiom of equi￾librium as follows.30 Take a bent lever, ACB, fxed at point C (see Fig. 9.2). 
Let the lever be acted upon at A and B by two “powers,” and let it be in equi￾librium. We represent the direction and magnitude of these “powers” by the 
lines AH and BE. D’Alembert decomposes the “powers” in two directions, 
29 See the frst two corollaries that follow §39. 30 See Chapter 8 for the importance of Bernoulli’s Lever Principle in early 18th century attempts to 
treat new problems in mechanics.
FE
k A
G H
K L P
B p
M C V
Fig. 9.2. D’Alembert’s equilibrium condition for the bent lever. Te proof 
proceeds as follows. Let AM be the extension of the line AH through A, all the 
way to point M, such that CM is perpendicular to AM. Te length of the line 
CM then varies with the angle that AH makes with AB; that is, with the angle at 
which the power acts through A when the system is in equilibrium. Let CV be 
the analogous line constructed for the power acting at B. Now decompose AH
and BE (i) parallel to the respective arms of the lever (AG and BF, respectively), 
and (ii) along the line joining A to B (AK and PB, respectively). Ten our 
equilibrium condition is that AK = PB. By similar triangles, AK/AH = CM/CL
and BP/BE = CV/CL. Terefore, AH:BE is as CV:CM; that is, the ratio of the 
“powers” yielding equilibrium of the bent lever is equal to that of the lengths 
CV to CM. Te standard lever (one with a straight arm) is then recovered as a 
special case (1743, §47). Cf. d’Alembert 1743, fg. 16.276 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
along the lever arms and along the line joining A and B. Te equilibrium 
condition is that the “powers” along AB are equal. He develops a geometric 
construction that displays this equilibrium as the ratio of two lengths sensi￾tive to two factors: the direction of the “power” relative to the balance arm, 
and its magnitude.
So far, so good. Now comes the crucial conceptual step: according to 
d’Alembert the “powers” in the above scenario are to be understood as 
nothing but “quantities of motion”; this is how statics is to be incorporated 
into a general theory of mechanics.31 Lines AH and BE in the geometric con￾struction represent the magnitudes and directions of quantities of motion, 
and when two such quantities are equal, equilibrium obtains.
Prima facie, this analysis of the lever in terms of quantities of motion is 
puzzling because when a system is in equilibrium there are no actual motions. 
But this is exactly d’Alembert’s new theorization of “equilibrium”: bodies that 
have equal and opposite quantities of motion are in equilibrium. To make 
this work, he will need a concept of counterfactual (or virtual) motions, and 
we return to this later when we discuss his General Principle.
D’Alembert’s goal is more general than statics: he aims to treat bodies 
in motion. He arrives at his principle in three steps. First, he considers the 
motions of bodies that encounter obstacles. Next, he introduces his notion 
of equilibrium. And then fnally, moving through a series of four cases, he 
arrives at his generalized principle of equilibrium. Tere is much in these 
discussions that demands closer scrutiny. However, we will focus our atten￾tion on those elements most relevant for our own purposes here.
In the frst step, where d’Alembert is considering obstructed motions, 
there is one argument that stands out as especially important. Tis is his ar￾gument for the claim that when a body without elasticity collides perpendic￾ularly with an immobile and impenetrable plane, it must come to a stop afer 
the collision and remain at rest.32 What could justify this claim?
In Chapters 2–4, we examined several attempts to justify the kinematic be￾havior of elastic and inelastic bodies on the basis of their geometric behavior, 
and of their material composition. D’Alembert ofers no such argument. 
Instead, he states simply, “it is obvious that if the body moves afer the en￾counter with the plane, this can only be backwards and in the perpendicular 
31 See d’Alembert 1743, §43, where he argues that his framework is sufciently general to contain 
the theorems of statics, and that his proofs are more precise due to his identifcation of power (an un￾clear notion) with quantity of motion.
32 d’Alembert 1743, §29.Constructive and principle approaches 277
direction.” And since “there is no more reason why m should be one number 
rather than another”—where m is a coefcient such that if u is the speed be￾fore impact then mu is the exit speed—m must be zero. Tat is, the speed 
afer impact will be zero.33 But an equally good argument would set m equal 
to 1 (viz. no speed is lost). Indeed, nothing in d’Alembert’s arguments keeps 
m from being greater than 1, such that motion is created in the impact. To 
rule this out, d’Alembert would need to appeal to both the principle of inertia 
and the claim that interactions do not generate new quantities of motion, 
both of which are substantive claims about the behavior of bodies and forces. 
Finally, notice that m being less than 0 is ruled out by the stipulation that the 
obstacle is immobile, rigid, and impenetrable; this is posited without regard 
for whether any physical body could satisfy it. So, d’Alembert’s claim—that 
a body without elasticity colliding perpendicularly with an immobile and 
impenetrable plane must come to a stop and remain at rest—is both a the￾oretical stipulation and a substantive physical claim about bodies and their 
motions. It is one for which he ofers no sound justifcation.
So much for the speed afer impact. As for direction, d’Alembert claims 
that, were there any motion afer impact, it would have to be perpendicular to 
the impenetrable plane, and this is taken to be “obvious,” as we saw. Perhaps 
he relies on Descartes’ proof that angle of incidence equals angle of refec￾tion, but this proof itself relies on the assumption we are interested in: that 
the perpendicular component of speed in a collision with a rigid, fat surface 
is not defected into a new direction.34 Tis is a substantive claim about the 
interaction that occurs when one physical body collides with another, and 
about the conservation laws that hold for such interactions. In sum, there is 
a great deal of physics in just this frst step of d’Alembert’s argument for his 
principle of equilibrium.
In the second step of his argument, d’Alembert introduces his notion of 
equilibrium:
If the obstacles that the body encounters in its motion have precisely the 
resistance necessary to prevent the body from moving, we say that there is 
equilibrium between the body and these obstacles. (d’Alembert 1743, §38)
33 d’Alembert 1743, §29. 34 See the essay on dioptrics in Descartes 1637.278 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
However we seek to understand this claim, one thing to notice is that he 
introduces the idea of a body’s “resistance” to another, but without any dis￾cussion of the justifcation for introducing it as a concept of rational me￾chanics (let alone its physical basis). Indeed, recall that in arguing for Law 
II, he maintained that this law holds regardless of whether one believes that 
bodies have a force of resisting associated with them. So his principle of in￾ertia cannot give him the “resistance” of bodies that he appeals to here.
In the fnal step of his argument, d’Alembert moves to demonstrate the 
principle of equilibrium itself. Up to this point, he has considered a body 
encountering an obstacle. Now, he replaces the obstacle with a second body, 
so that we have a pair of bodies, each of which is an obstacle for the other. 
Ten he states his principle of equilibrium as follows:
If two bodies whose speeds are in inverse ratio to their masses have oppo￾site directions, in such a manner that neither can move without displacing 
the other, there will be equilibrium between these two bodies. (d’Alembert 
1743, §39)
He demonstrates this via a series of four cases, beginning with two equal 
bodies of equal and opposite speeds. Of this case he says: “it is evident” that 
such bodies will remain at mutual rest.35 He uses his earlier argument to sup￾port this conclusion, and in light of our discussion we know it is far from 
obvious that “equal” bodies with equal and opposite speeds will be at mu￾tual rest.36 Nevertheless, d’Alembert takes this to be the only scenario “where 
equilibrium manifests itself clearly and distinctly.”37 It seems that underlying 
his claim must be the thought that, when two bodies act on one another in 
an equal and opposite way, they are in equilibrium. Te head-on collision of 
“equal” bodies with equal and opposite speeds realizes this idea, and the con￾cept can be made precise by introducing “quantity of motion”: such bodies 
35 See d’Alembert 1743, §39. Te four cases raise interesting questions concerning the concept of 
mass in d’Alembert’s rational mechanics. It might be thought that he is illegitimately helping himself 
to a dynamical notion of mass as primitive, but thus far in the Treatise mass seems to be a derivative 
concept. Tat is, speeds and equilibrium are empirically accessible, but “mass” and “quantity of mo￾tion” are theoretical constructs accessible via the behaviors of bodies. We will have more to say about 
this in section 9.6.
36 See our discussion of d’Alembert 1743, §29. Tis situation is problematic because of d’Alembert’s 
epistemology: he requires that his mechanics rests on clear ideas. Te mutual rest of such “equal” 
bodies might be something on which widespread agreement could be reached (as, for example, with 
Newton’s frst law of motion), but that is not the same as its being a principle that is sufciently clear 
that it is thereby certain.
37 d’Alembert 1743, xiv.Constructive and principle approaches 279
have equal quantities of motion that are oppositely directed, and so when the 
two bodies come into contact they fnd themselves in equilibrium.
For the purposes of exposition, let us grant this. D’Alembert then varies 
the masses and speeds, and arrives at his general conclusion, restating his 
principle of equilibrium thus: bodies having equal and opposite quantities of 
motion are in equilibrium.
38
We have indicated some of the difculties with d’Alembert’s attempt to jus￾tify his principle of equilibrium, without dwelling on too many details. He 
hoped that his principles would be mutually independent, yet his demon￾stration implicitly relies on his principle of inertia. He appeals to a priori rea￾soning in arguing that a body without elasticity will come to rest on impact 
with an immovable obstacle, but either this argument fails (for the reasons 
given above), or the claim should be taken as stipulative (viz. defnitional of 
what it is for a body to be without elasticity)—in which case it would not re￾quire the kind of extended argument that d’Alembert provides. And, his con￾ception of quantity of motion applies to bodies not actually moving, which 
seems puzzlingly disconnected from the concept of motion introduced in 
the “Defnitions and Preliminary Notions,” where he states that a body is in 
motion “when it passes from one place to another.”39 Finally, his principle of 
equilibrium invokes some notion of mass (via “quantity of motion”), yet he 
nowhere introduces an explicit mass concept.
Inertia, composition of motion, and equilibrium are the three principles 
at the foundation of d’Alembert’s mechanics. His stated goal was to rest me￾chanics on clear principles. In this section, we ofered an initial exposition of 
the principles, raising some questions about their content and clarity. Tese 
will be important when we turn to the interpretation of d’Alembert’s Treatise
as a book in both rational and philosophical mechanics (sections 9.4–9.6).
(iv) Part II. General principle for determining the motions 
of several bodies acting on one another in any manner, 
with several applications of this principle
D’Alembert claims that his three principles of inertia, composition of motion, 
and equilibrium are sufcient for a rational mechanics of bodies in motion. 
38 d’Alembert 1743, §39. He refers to this principle as an “axiom” (§39, 39–40). 39 d’Alembert 1743, II.280 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
His evidence is: from them he obtains a result—his General Principle—that is 
a general form for solutions to all such problems. Or so he believed. He hoped 
that his General Principle would enable the solution of “the most difcult 
problems” of mechanics.40 Tis is the sense in which he calls it a “method”: it 
is a generic solution, a general schema for solving problems in mechanics. To 
support his claim, he works through fourteen problems. We begin with the 
General Principle and then turn our attention to the problems.
General Principle
Te General Principle concerns a system of any number of bodies arranged 
in any relations to one another whatsoever. Given the initial motions a, b, 
c . . . of bodies A, B, C . . . we are charged with fnding the subsequent motions 
of each of the bodies. He states his principle thus:
Decompose the motions a, b, c etc. impressed on each body, each into two 
others: a', α; b', β; c', γ; etc., and let these be such that, had we impressed 
on the bodies only the motions a', b', c' etc., the bodies would have been 
able to conserve these motions without mutual impediment; and such that, 
had we impressed on them the motions α, β, γ etc., the system would have 
remained at rest. It is clear that a', b', c' will be the motions that these bodies 
take in virtue of their action. (d’Alembert 1743, §50)
In other words, we separate out the components of the motions a, b, c . . . that 
yield a system in equilibrium (α, β, γ . . .), and then the remaining motions are 
those that the bodies in the system in fact undergo (a', b', c' . . .).41
Note that the General Principle appeals to motions that, had they been 
impressed, the bodies would have conserved them, or (for other motions) 
would have remained at rest. D’Alembert is comfortable with non-actual 
motions—motions that bodies would have had, had they not been impeded. 
Tese “virtual” motions are at the heart of his General Principle, and they are 
the technique by which statics falls under his general approach: the “powers” 
holding the lever in static equilibrium are to be understood as equal and op￾posite virtual quantities of motion (see earlier).
40 d’Alembert 1743, 49–50. 41 To better understand the principle, see d’Alembert’s fourteen problems where he shows the prin￾ciple in action (section 9.5). For detailed discussion of the General Principle and several of these 
problems, see Fraser 1985.Constructive and principle approaches 281
What is the scope of the General Principle? How general is it? Te frst step 
toward addressing this is to get a sense of how the General Principle functions 
as a general method for solving problems in mechanics. Ten, we can con￾sider the scope of this generality, as well as its limitations.
Fourteen problems
D’Alembert breaks his fourteen problems into four groups. Section 
I (Problems I–VI) contains problems of constrained motion in which mass 
points are variously connected (by rods and threads) and constrained by 
rigid surfaces (such as horizontal or curved planes). Te rods and threads are 
massless, mobile, and perfectly inextensible, but difer in the rod being rigid 
while the thread is fexible. Te rigid surfaces may be either fxed or mobile. 
D’Alembert’s goal is generality: he aims to bring prior solutions to particular 
problems, including center-of-oscillation problems and the compound pen￾dulum, under one set of principles, as well as solving new problems.42 We can 
get a sense of how the General Principle works in these cases by looking at the 
simplest, Problem I (see below).
Te remainder of Section I concerns several complex cases involving mul￾tiple point masses connected either rigidly via massless infexible rods or by 
means of massless non-stretching threads that can bend around obstacles 
(such as fxed points, pulleys, and so forth), including compound pendulums 
constructed with threads rather than rigid rods.43
Section II, Problem VII concerns an oval shape touching a horizontal 
plane such that the vertical through the shape’s gravity center does not pass 
through the contact point. Te problem is to determine how the shape will 
move. Tis is a constrained-motion problem for an extended body, in which 
both the shape of the body, and the position of its center of gravity within that 
shape, afect its motion along a constraining surface. Te body is assumed to 
be rigid, and so is the constraining surface. Section III, Problem 8 concerns 
two mass points connected to a thread, one at a fxed point and the other free 
to move along the thread. Once again, we have a constrained motion, but this 
time the constraining surface (the thread) is not fxed in place—it changes 
position as the constrained bodies move.44
42 He refers to previous solutions of particular problems by J. Bernoulli, Clairaut, Hermann, 
D. Bernoulli, and Euler.
43 For detailed treatment of Problems II, V, and X, see Fraser 1985. 44 See also Chapter 7, where we see Clairaut treating the same class of problems. For a comparison 
of d’Alembert’s Treatise with contemporaneous work by Clairaut, see Schmit 2017.282 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
Finally, Section IV (Problems IX–XIV) is entitled “Of bodies that push or 
collide.” D’Alembert begins with the familiar case of head-on impact of two 
spherical bodies, in which the motions of the bodies are treated by means of 
representative points located at the center of each, while the extended shapes 
of the bodies provide the constraints. He then goes on to treat collisions of 
bodies constrained in various additional ways: by rods, threads, and surfaces, 
where the impact is oblique, and where more than two bodies collide at 
once. In this way, d’Alembert locates the problem of collision (PCOL) under 
the general umbrella of the problem of constrained motion (PCON), to be 
treated by the same principles and techniques.
We can get a sense of how the General Principle works in these cases 
by considering the most straightforward (see below). What matters for 
our purposes is not the complexity of the scenarios but the simplifying 
assumptions, present in even the simplest case. D’Alembert supposes spher￾ical bodies with uniform mass distribution. Tey hang from inextensible 
strings, so that they swing into one another rather than roll, removing the 
need to consider the complexities of any rotation of the sphere as it impacts 
another sphere, and the role of friction for a body rolling on a surface. Jointly, 
these simplifcations ensure that dynamically each body can be treated as a 
point, with the mass located at the center of the sphere, while the size and 
shape of the body play a role as purely geometrical constraints, restricting 
the spatial paths available to the bodies and thereby impeding their motions.
In both the cases we analyze (Problems I and IX), we will see d’Alembert’s 
general strategy at work. He shows how a simple case (such as the linear com￾pound pendulum or head-on collisions of equal bodies) can be treated by 
his General Principle, and then shows how progressively more complex cases 
can be treated by means of the same method. D’Alembert claims to have in￾corporated and extended a disparate variety of problems previously treated 
by others, all by means of the General Principle.
45 He is explicit that his goal 
is generality. For example, in the scholium following Problem III d’Alembert 
emphasizes his aim of showing that all these problems can be treated by his 
Principle, even if in some cases such a treatment is longer than one available 
by means of another principle (see §90).
45 D’Alembert’s treatment of many of these problems is challenging to follow: the notation is ofen 
awkward; the methods are unfamiliar; and the problems are ofen extremely difcult (becoming 
more readily tractable only in light of later developments due primarily to Lagrange). Problem II has 
been analyzed in detail by Fraser 1985. See also Schmit 2017 (and references therein) for his analysis 
of the problems.Constructive and principle approaches 283
Te problems he discusses incorporate all known results and, impor￾tantly, show a way forward for a unifed treatment of more complex results 
of the same kind. An open question is whether this exhausts all the kinds of 
problems we might hope to treat within mechanics. We take this up in sec￾tion 9.4.
Section I, Problem I: the linear compound pendulum
Tis problem concerns a rigid, compound pendulum: multiple weights are 
attached to a straight rigid rod at diferent points along its length; the rod it￾self is assumed to be massless and suspended from one end, and it is assumed 
to swing freely about its fxed point of suspension. Te problem is to fnd how 
the motion of the rod is afected by having various weights placed along its 
length. Te technique works for any number of weights, m1
, m2
, . . . mN, and 
for simplicity we will work with three: mA, mB
, and mR located at positions A, 
B, and R as the rod hangs vertically from point C (see Fig. 9.3). Troughout, 
displacement from the vertical is small.
Te method is as follows. We consider a given unit of time, so that our task 
is to fnd the displacement of the rod in that unit time, and for this it is suf￾cient to fnd the displacement of mR from R in that time, say from R to S (see 
Fig. 9.3). Tat is, we are to determine the distance RS.
First, consider a simple pendulum associated with each weight. Let the 
impressed speeds be such that, in the given time interval, mA would displace 
C
A
B
P
R S
T
Q
G
O
M
Fig. 9.3. D’Alembert’s treatment of the compound pendulum. C is the point of 
suspension, with weights located at A, B, and R along the rod CR. Te problem is 
to fnd the displacement RS, diferent from the displacement RT that the weight 
R would have had, were it not constrained by the rod CR to which the weights A
and B are also attached. Cf. d’Alembert 1743, fg. 22.284 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
from A to O; mB from B to Q; and mR from R to T. Tat is, since we are con￾sidering a unit time interval, the impressed speeds are represented by the 
distances RT, BQ, and AO.
Now build the compound pendulum: mA, mB
, and mR are constrained 
by the rod to move together so that, in the same given interval of time, mA
displaces from A to M; mB from B to G; and mR from R to S. Te positions M, 
G, and T are, of course, collinear: they are the positions of the weights along 
the rod, as they swing together about the fulcrum C. Now we can write the 
impressed speeds as consisting of two contributions:
RT RS = + ST
BQ BG = −GQ
AO AM = − MO
Tis decomposes each of the impressed motions RT, BQ, and AO into 
two: those that the bodies would have been able to conserve without imped￾iment, despite their being attached to the rod (RS, BG, and AM), and the re￾mainder (ST, −GQ, and −MO).
Next, we apply the General Principle. Tis states that impressed motions 
can be decomposed into two contributions: those that balance one another 
out and those under which the bodies move freely. Hence, the former in this 
case are ST, −GQ, and −MO. Te “lever,” as d’Alembert calls it—in this case 
just a single rigid rod swinging from C as a pendulum—would remain at rest 
if the bodies mA, mB
, and mR were in equilibrium. Tus, our equilibrium con￾dition is given by the masses multiplied by the speeds:
m MA B · · O AC m + = · · GQ BC m S R · · T CR
and from here we solve algebraically for RS.
Te givens of our problem are: the masses mA, mB
, and mR; the lengths CA, 
CB, and CR; and the displacements RT, BQ, and AO. Te displacement RS
(which d’Alembert re-labels x) is straightforwardly obtained in terms of these 
givens. In other words, from our knowledge of the behavior of the simple Constructive and principle approaches 285
pendulums associated with the masses, the General Principle allows us to de￾termine the behavior of the compound linear pendulum.
Section IV, Problem IX: two bodies in head-on collision
We consider a body of mass m and initial speed u, moving along the same 
line as another body of mass M and initial speed –U. Te problem is to fnd 
the speeds of the bodies afer the collision.
Applying the General Principle, we decompose each of the initial motions 
mu and MU into two parts: the part that produces equilibrium (say mc and 
MC) and the part that the bodies are able to preserve notwithstanding the 
impediment (the fnal motions mv and MV, say). Since mc and MC produce 
equilibrium, mc + MC = 0; that is, m(u − v) + M(U − V) = 0, as he says.46
To proceed from here to knowledge of the fnal speeds v and V, more in￾formation is required. D’Alembert states that, by his principle, it must be 
the case that the bodies move together with the same speed afer collision.47
Given this, v = V, and the fnal speed v (or V) is given by (mu + MU)/(M + m).
However, as we noted above, the claim that the bodies move together with 
the same speed afer collision is a substantive, dynamical claim, and not one 
that follows from the General Principle. It is a stipulation about the behavior 
of bodies that requires justifcation.
9.4 D’Alembert’s Treatise as a contribution 
to rational mechanics
From the perspective of rational mechanics as it stood at the time, the Treatise
ofers a remarkable unifcation under a single set of principles.48 Tat said, 
there are important limitations in the scope of the problems covered.
First, insofar as d’Alembert considers extended bodies, all the target 
bodies treated in his fourteen problems are “perfectly hard”: they are im￾penetrable and rigid. Moreover, so are many of his constraining bodies, in￾cluding his surfaces and rods. Te only exceptions are the threads that he 
46 d’Alembert 1743, 138. 47 d’Alembert 1743, 138. 48 For comparison of the principles adopted by d’Alembert with those of his contemporaries, and 
of the problems covered with those by Clairaut and others, see Schmit 2017.286 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
uses to constrain the motions of bodies: these are extended and impenetrable 
but they are fexible (they bend but do not change length).
Second, d’Alembert’s bodies are non-rebounding. As we know from pre￾vious chapters, this kinematic assumption is independent of the geometric 
assumption about rigidity (lack of shape change).49
Tird, the primary means for treating extended bodies is to treat them 
as composite: constructed from point masses connected to one another 
by massless rods or threads. D’Alembert succeeds in giving highly general 
treatments for arbitrary numbers of such masses. But this generality is rather 
deceptive, for it is a generality in principle only: the initial motions of the 
point masses are presumed known, and while this might allow for a quantita￾tive solution of particular cases when the numbers of point masses are small, 
it seems less illuminating once the numbers increase. Indeed, when it comes 
to his treatise on fuids published the following year, d’Alembert is quick to 
point out that additional principles are needed due to our lack of access to the 
mutual actions of the particles composing the fuid.50
Fourth, even in the case of collisions, the extension of bodies appears 
primarily as a kinematic constraint, limiting the trajectories available to 
bodies. In most cases, the trajectories of the target bodies are determined 
within these constraints via representative points. For example, in Problem 
VI d’Alembert claims to treat a compound pendulum with an extended bob 
of arbitrary shape, but it seems that by restricting consideration to infnites￾imally small oscillations he is able to determine the motion of the whole via 
a known center-of-gravity, that is, via a representative point. Tere is only 
one case where the target body is non-composite and extended, and where 
the shape of the body plays a dynamical role: Problem VII. In this case, the 
shape is placed in a non-equilibrium position on a surface, and the challenge 
is to determine how it will move. Tis is a particularly interesting problem, 
combining rotational and linear motion on a constraining surface. However, 
note that even in this case he again assumes the target body to be rigid, and, 
importantly, that mass is uniformly distributed across the shape.
49 While hard, non-rebounding bodies are the central case for d’Alembert, he does ofer some 
remarks at the end of the fourteen problems on how to extend his analysis to treat elastic and sof 
bodies. However, this involves stipulation as to how the rebound behavior difers from the hard body 
case, using the analysis of hard-body collision as the basis from which to arrive at results for elastic 
and sof bodies (see Fraser 1985, 151–5). Hence, he added more dynamical information, beyond the 
content of the axioms and General Principle, and it is unclear what justifcation d’Alembert takes this 
additional content to have.
50 d’Alembert 1744, viii–ix.Constructive and principle approaches 287
Fifh, all of d’Alembert’s fourteen problems treat time-independent (i.e., 
scleronomic) constraints. Extension to constraints with an explicit time 
dependence lies in the future. More generally, though d’Alembert ofers 
generalized treatments of existing problems, it seems to us that no new kinds
of problems fall within the fourteen problems of his Treatise.
Alongside these limitations in scope, there are conceptual limitations. It 
is far from clear that the concepts articulated at the outset are adequate for 
expressing the General Principle and solving the fourteen problems, let alone 
that they meet d’Alembert’s epistemological requirement of being so clear as 
to be certain (section 9.2). All of these considerations pertain to the assess￾ment of d’Alembert’s rational mechanics.
Notwithstanding these considerations, the overall structure of d’Alembert’s 
Treatise is important for our purposes, for he is attempting to unify ra￾tional mechanics by means of a single set of principles, and to derive all of 
rational mechanics from these principles. We might call this d’Alembert’s 
axiomatization project in the foundations of rational mechanics.51 Tis will 
be important in what follows.
9.5 D’Alembert’s Treatise as a contribution 
to philosophical mechanics: a constructive approach
According to d’Alembert, mechanics is “the science of the motions of bodies 
that act on one another in any manner whatsoever.”52 What, then, are the 
bodies of d’Alembert’s mechanics, and how do they act on one another?
To answer this question would be to give a philosophical mechanics, one 
that integrates d’Alembert’s rational mechanics with an account of the nature 
and properties of the bodies that his theory is about. Tough d’Alembert’s 
51 Te unifcation of mechanics through axiomatization is an early element of a broader interest in 
unifcation that d’Alembert later develops in his Preliminary Discourse of 1751 (d’Alembert 1995) and 
Essai (1759). In the Preliminary Discourse d’Alembert says (1995, 29): “Te universe, if we may be 
permitted to say so, would only be one fact and one great truth for whoever knew how to embrace 
it from a single point of view.” Tis can be seen in the context of discussions over systems and sys￾tematization in philosophy (see, for example, Condillac 1749). One of us (KB) is indebted to Matias 
Navarro Crespo for extended discussions of d’Alembert’s views on the unity of the sciences.
52 See d’Alembert 1743, xxiii. He adds that dynamics properly signifes the science of powers or 
motive causes, whereas he conceives of mechanics as primarily a science of efects rather than of 
causes. But he chooses the word “dynamics,” since he intends mechanics to include the actions of 
bodies on one another. From our perspective, he intends to treat such actions from the perspective 
of rational mechanics (as in Book I of Newton’s Principia) in preference to physics, understood as a 
branch of philosophy concerned with causes (see Chapters 1–5).288 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
Treatise primarily addresses rational mechanics, we may also attempt to 
read it as contributing to philosophical mechanics. Tat is, we may examine 
whether the Treatise itself ofers an account of its own objects. We may ask: to 
what extent does d’Alembert’s Treatise provide us with a solution to Body?
Viewed from this perspective, it is natural to read the Treatise construc￾tively, as beginning with a material account of body—its qualities and 
properties—and moving from there to a theory of the motions of such 
bodies. For, the very frst defnition that d’Alembert ofers is of “body.” And 
by the end of the defnitions we know that bodies are extended, impenetrable, 
and mobile. Perhaps these are the properties of body, and this is d’Alembert’s 
account of Nature.53
Such a reading leads to problems, however. For example, when introducing 
his frst principle, “force of inertia,” d’Alembert writes that this is the property
bodies have for remaining in the same state of rest or of motion in a straight 
line. Tat is, he seems to introduce a further property of bodies not included 
in his defnition, and one by which he attributes a “tendency” to bodies (see 
the discussion above). When discussing his third principle, “equilibrium,” 
d’Alembert invokes a notion of mass, and speaks of bodies having “resistance.” 
Moreover, in arriving at this principle, d’Alembert makes commitments con￾cerning the kinematic behavior of bodies when encountering obstacles, 
behaviors that do not follow from the properties already attributed to bodies, 
as we saw above. So his principles seem to attribute additional properties to 
bodies beyond those given in the defnitions.
Terefore, to pursue a constructive approach would require us to work 
through his principles, his General Principle, and his fourteen problems, to 
enumerate the properties that he in fact attributes to bodies in the course of 
his Treatise. Tis is a task that remains to be completed.
For our purposes, the important points are these. On the one hand, 
attempting a constructive approach to the bodies of d’Alembert’s Treatise is 
not unreasonable. It is consistent with the book’s structure, and is encouraged 
by the conception of physics at the time. Indeed, we suggest that Boscovich 
undertook just this in his Teoria (see Chapter 6). On the other hand, even 
the preliminary examination we have ofered here is sufcient to show that it 
faces signifcant obstacles.
53 See Chapter 1 for the four elements of Body: Nature, Action, Evidence, and Principle.Constructive and principle approaches 289
9.6 D’Alembert’s Treatise as a contribution 
to philosophical mechanics: a principle approach
Sometimes, there are moments in theorizing when a principle approach is 
more appropriate than a constructive one. In the latter, we build up to the 
objects of our theory (such as bodies) from prior material commitments; and 
then we show that these objects satisfy relevant principles (such as laws of 
motion). In contrast, the former begins with the adoption of general prin￾ciples and develops the theory from there. Pursuing this, we can then ask 
whether the objects of the theory are to be presumed from outside (such as 
when philosophical physics provides bodies as the objects of mechanics), or 
whether the theory itself, in its principles, has sufcient resources to specify 
its own objects. In the second option, the objects of the theory are whatever 
satisfy the principles.54 In what follows, we suggest that adopting such a 
reading of the Treatise is philosophically fruitful.
To be clear: our question is not “Is d’Alembert’s theory a constructive 
or a principle theory?” Te categories of “constructive” and “principle” 
approaches are ours, drawn from Einstein’s distinction explained in section 
9.2. D’Alembert did not have these categories, and his theory is not best un￾derstood as being of one kind or the other. Rather, we believe that bringing 
these categories to bear on d’Alembert’s theory yields philosophical insights 
into the structure and content of that theory. Some we obtain from reading 
the theory constructively (see section 9.5); some we obtain from reading the 
theory as taking a principle approach; some we obtain from seeing the inter￾play between the two in the context of the one theory.
So now let us turn to reading d’Alembert’s Treatise through the lens of a 
principle approach. Recall that when adopting a principle approach we seek 
principles that are independent of the material constitution of the target sys￾tems; are general in scope; and enable bracketing of (hitherto) dynamical 
considerations by means of a “kinematic condition” (see section 9.2 for more 
details). Consider frst d’Alembert’s General Principle. It has the three central 
features associated with a principle approach. First, the formulation of the 
General Principle is independent of the particular material constitution of 
the systems that it encompasses. Second, it is intended to be general, covering 
any system of bodies interacting in any way whatsoever. Tird, it reduces dy￾namics to kinematics by restricting the space of available trajectories for the 
54 See Brading 2012 for her “law-constitutive” approach to the bodies of Newton’s Principia.290 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
system: no matter the dynamical details of any particular system, its trajec￾tory must satisfy the General Principle. In other words, the General Principle
is appropriately understood as a kinematic condition.55 Adopting the prin￾ciple approach allows us to see these features of the General Principle, and 
encourages further exploration of d’Alembert’s theory from that perspective. 
We begin this here.
(i) Assessment
Assessing a theory through the lens of the principle approach involves 
three tasks.
Task 1
Clarifcation of the principles. Tis includes assessing whether the princi￾ples satisfy the axiomatization conditions of being mutually independent 
as well as jointly necessary and sufcient for deriving the kinematic con￾dition.56 When introducing d’Alembert’s three principles in section 9.3 we 
raised some queries about their content, mutual independence, and scope. 
Adopting the principle approach requires us to pursue these issues with 
vigor (a task beyond our scope here). Moreover, since the kinematic con￾dition is the General Principle, we are required to analyze its relationship to 
his three principles. D’Alembert claims to have derived the former from the 
latter, but are the three axioms necessary and sufcient? It seems there are no 
concepts being used to state the General Principle that have not already been 
introduced in the three principles. But this is not the same as its being strictly 
derivable. More work is needed.57
Task 2
Investigate the epistemic status of the principles. In the case of Einstein’s 
SR, the principles are justifed inductively, as we noted earlier. Tis is not 
55 For d’Alembert, rational mechanics picks out the allowed spatiotemporal trajectories from 
among all the curves that may be treated by means of geometry (1743, vii).
56 For example, recall from section 9.2 that the “kinematic condition” in the case of Einstein’s SR 
is the Lorentz transformations. Much work has been done on the relationship between Einstein’s 
postulates and the Lorentz transformations (see Brown 2005 and references therein). We are grateful 
to Oliver Pooley for a discussion of the analogy between Einstein’s special theory of relativity and 
d’Alembert’s theory.
57 For example, although Hankins (1970, 190) states that d’Alembert derived his principle from the 
last two of his laws, he does not show that this derivation can be carried through.Constructive and principle approaches 291
the case for d’Alembert’s Treatise. His claimed justifcation for the truth 
of each of his principles is its clarity: each principle should be sufciently 
clear as to command our assent as certain (see our discussion of the Preface, 
above). Interestingly, the clarity of the principles of a given science arises 
from the simplicity of the object of that science, he avers; algebra and ge￾ometry have the simplest objects, and from there we move to the object of 
mechanics: bodies. So, the justifcation demanded by d’Alembert for his 
principles takes us back to the objects of his theorizing, and to the construc￾tive approach. As we noted at the outset, d’Alembert’s Treatise is not best 
interpreted along either constructive or principle lines; rather, there are 
insights to be gained from each.58
What about the General Principle? If it is not derivable from the three 
axioms, what are its status and justifcation? Insight into that comes from 
d’Alembert’s remark that the General Principle provides a “general method” 
for the solution of problems in rational mechanics (indeed all such problems, 
he claims).59 From this perspective, what we have called a kinematic 
condition—a condition that the trajectories of all systems must satisfy—may 
be viewed as a heuristic by which to analyze systems and arrive at solutions. 
Te justifcation for the General Principle (and thereby for the claim that the 
three principles “axiomatize” all of mechanics) lies not in its strict deriva￾tion from the axioms, but in the extent to which the generality claim is true. 
Te role of his fourteen problems is to support the claim of generality, and 
thereby justify the General Principle. In this way, the question of justifcation 
is intimately tied to that of scope: the greater the scope of the problems falling 
under the General Principle, the stronger its justifcation.
Task 3
Make explicit the dynamics encoded into the kinematic condition. Newton’s 
theoretical architecture of masses subject to impressed forces is utterly ab￾sent. We have already noted that d’Alembert uses the term “mass” without 
explicitly introducing his intended concept. And, famously, he sought to 
58 Not all sciences can proceed in the same way as mechanics, according to d’Alembert, for not all 
have a simplicity of object sufcient for us to formulate clear principles without appeal to the details 
of experience or experiments. He is explicit about this in his treatise on fuids, where he argues that, 
unlike for the mechanics of solid bodies, “the theory of fuids, on the contrary, must necessarily be 
based on experience/experiments.” Our goal is then to arrive at principles that maximize the combi￾nation of “simplicity and certitude.” Te reason for this is that we don’t have access to the shapes and 
motions of the particles of a fuid, and so in order to have a successful theory of fuids we need new 
principles beyond those presented in the Treatise. See d’Alembert 1744, vi–vii. 59 d’Alembert 1743, 50.292 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
eliminate any notion of force from mechanics. He is explicit that when￾ever he uses the term “force” this is merely for convenience: the term has no 
meaning beyond that which results from the three principles.60 So our frst 
research question must be: exactly what dynamical information is present in 
the three axioms?
In our earlier discussion of these axioms we made some observations about 
the dynamical commitments they bring. In light of the principle approach, 
these issues become pressing. To pursue them, the most important point to 
note about d’Alembert’s mechanics is that “quantity of motion” is his central 
notion. He argues that we can treat the efects of force (i.e., motions) without 
treating the forces themselves (the causes of the motions).61 His equilibrium 
principle requires that each body, at any given time, has a quantity of motion 
associated with it, where this quantity incorporates speed, direction, and also 
mass. Two conceptual limitations are apparent. First, d’Alembert presumes 
that quantities of motion obey his principle for the composition of motion. 
But this principle was developed for velocities only, and quantity of motion 
involves not just speed and direction but also mass. Te claim that quantities 
of motion compose in accordance with the vector addition of their associated 
velocities is a further assumption that d’Alembert does not justify. We may 
obtain it either by direct stipulation or by assuming that mass is a velocity￾independent scalar, but the important point is that it does not follow from 
d’Alembert’s rule for the composition of motions. In the Treatise, d’Alembert 
never ofers an explicit account of what he means by the term “mass.”
Elusive mass
Te place of mass in d’Alembert’s mechanics is a subtle issue. He frst appeals 
to mass when he argues for his equilibrium principle, and there it looks as 
though he needs such a concept, but this conclusion would be too hasty. We 
can think of his appeal to mass at that point in his argument as being tem￾porary: d’Alembert allows his readers to help themselves to a notion of mass 
because it aids our intuitions about equilibrium, but once we arrive at the 
principle of equilibrium a notion of mass no longer plays any role. Rather, it 
60 d’Alembert 1743, xxv. 61 He argues that the language of “force” is entirely a matter of convenience by which increments 
of speed and time are set in relation to one another, and it can be eliminated in the following 
manner: “motive force” is the product of the mass of a moving body with the element of its speed, or 
(what is the same thing) by the small space that it traverses in a given instant in virtue of the cause that 
accelerates or retards its movement; “accelerative force” is simply the element of speed (d’Alembert 
1743, 18–9).Constructive and principle approaches 293
is the product of mass and speed (“quantity of motion”) that he is interested 
in, not the apportioning of that quantity between mass and speed. Tus, un￾like for Newton, for whom mass is an invariant quantity associated with a 
body, measuring the quantity of matter, for d’Alembert mass by itself would 
then have no meaning or signifcation. Te crucial quantity—“quantity of 
motion”—can be determined from the speeds of bodies and their equilib￾rium states, for both of which we have a clear idea (unlike mass) and (not 
unrelatedly) empirical access, at least in principle.
However, two passages challenge this interpretation of mass signifcantly. 
Te frst lies in d’Alembert’s treatment in chapter II of center-of-gravity, where 
his defnition seems to rely on mass as a separable parameter. Te second 
is more important for our purposes, for it is in the treatment of collisions. 
Tere, the desired outcome is to fnd the post-collision speeds of the bodies, 
and the masses of these bodies are among the givens of the problem. As we 
saw above, the very frst collision problem asks us to consider a body of mass 
m and speed u, moving along the same line as another body of mass M and 
speed U, and to fnd the speed of these bodies afer the collision.62 Tis is 
solved using the General Principle plus the assumption that the bodies move 
of together at the same speed afer impact. Te solution explicitly includes 
the masses.
Tese “masses” could be understood as theoretical constructs, derived via 
the consideration of other equilibrium problems. However, this is not the 
justifcation d’Alembert gives, nor is it what he says about mass. Moreover, 
the fact that mass seems to be a constant associated with a body, independent 
of any particular scenario or circumstance, whereas “quantity of motion” 
varies, might seem to indicate that mass is a primary property of bodies, with 
quantity of motion being derivative. Tat said, we see no evidence d’Alembert 
took mass to be primary: he was explicit in allowing only clear concepts into 
the basis of his mechanics, and he would surely have commented on mass 
had he believed it to be a primitive notion. So we fnd ourselves with an inter￾pretative puzzle.
Where does this leave Body? Once we have worked through the above 
tasks, we will have the conditions that d’Alembert’s principles place on ad￾equate objects for his theory. Are these sufcient to specify a body concept? 
If so, this will be d’Alembert’s solution to Body, arrived at via a principle 
approach.
62 d’Alembert 1743, Problem IX, §125.294 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
Boscovich and d’Alembert
A comparison with Boscovich’s Teory is informative. Like d’Alembert, 
Boscovich begins from a force of inertia, composition of motion, and 
considerations of equilibrium, and as for d’Alembert the place of a mass con￾cept in his theory is a tricky issue (see Chapter 6). Unlike d’Alembert, how￾ever, Boscovich ofers a theory that is explicitly and thoroughly constructive. 
Tis has the advantage of making visible just how difcult such a construc￾tive theory is going to be, given the state of mechanics at the time.63
However, it also has disadvantages, and the most telling is that we lose 
sight of the power enjoyed by the newly emerging rational mechanics of 
constrained motions. For, in Boscovich’s theory, all elements of a system 
are treated dynamically by means of Boscovichian points and forces. By 
contrast, in d’Alembert’s theory the General Principle allows constraints 
to be treated kinematically. From the perspective of 18th century physics, 
this leaves d’Alembert’s theory incomplete, pending a full causal account of 
the system in question, which is what Boscovich’s theory seeks to provide. 
Looking back from our present-day perspective, with the constructive/prin￾ciple distinction in hand, the issue is not so one-sided. First, the fact that 
the constraints can be treated kinematically provides important dynamical 
information about our system. Te principle approach encourages us to elu￾cidate that information in ways that do not require a constructive account 
of our system. Second, that we can successfully treat a wide range of motion 
behaviors without having a constructive account in hand turns out to be a 
powerful achievement. Te signifcance of this last point becomes increas￾ingly apparent as the century progresses, and is seen most especially in the 
work of Lagrange (see Chapter 11).
In the end, as we will see in Chapter 12, it is the interplay between con￾structive and principle approaches to theorizing that turns out to be most 
fruitful.
63 Indeed, we think Boscovich’s Teory is helpfully read in light of d’Alembert’s Treatise, re￾vealing his philosophical mechanics to be engaged with recent developments in rational mechanics. 
Nevertheless, as of the early 19th century, it remained the case that no single constructive theory was 
adequate for the needs of mechanics. See Chapter 12, and our discussion of ontic unity below.Constructive and principle approaches 295
9.7 Ontic and nomic unity
D’Alembert’s explicit goal in his Treatise is to identify a minimum number 
of clear principles from which all problems in mechanics can be solved. It is 
an axiomatization project in rational mechanics, one that seeks to unify me￾chanics through a set of principles.
Read as a philosophical mechanics, the result is a theory that exhibits nomic
unity. Notice that this theory may or may not be consistent with a unique 
ontology. In attempting to specify the objects to which the theory applies, 
we may adopt either a constructive or a principle approach, and if we take a 
principle approach there is no guarantee that the theory successfully specifes 
a unique object. Given the expectations of early 18th century physics, this is a 
weakness, perhaps even a catastrophe.
However, we argue that it must also be viewed as a strength, for it respects 
the state of enquiry as of mid-century. At that time, it was utterly unclear 
what the appropriate underlying ontology should be—point particles, f￾nite rigid masses, deformable continua, etc.—or how to relate the candidate 
ontologies to one another. Tere was not sufcient evidence to decide the 
issue. Nomic unity is consistent with a proliferation in ontologies associ￾ated with a single theory—or with no articulated ontology at all—and allows 
theorizing to progress in the face of this epistemic challenge. D’Alembert ex￾plicitly criticized Daniel Bernoulli for justifying his choice of axiom (con￾servation of vis viva) by appeal to a specifc matter theory (an underlying 
ontology of elastic bodies).64 He argued instead that axioms must be justifed 
either by their clarity or inductively, as we have seen. Te epistemic situation 
was that we did not know what ontology to posit. In those circumstances, 
pursuing nomic unity and a principle approach to the associated ontology of 
a theory is, we maintain, exactly the appropriate philosophical move.
Te interplay between constructive and principle approaches to a given 
theory, and the desire for ontic unity alongside the search for nomic unity, 
are engines of theoretical development during the remainder of the century, 
as we will see (Chapters 10–12). Te resulting changes bring us closer to a 
conception of theoretical physics recognizable from the perspective of the 
21st century, in which physics is no longer a sub-discipline of philosophy but 
an enterprise with its own goals, methods, and standards of acceptance.
64 d’Alembert 1744, xvi.296 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
9.8 Nature, Action, Evidence, and Principle
What, then, of Body? We have ofered two diferent ways of addressing 
Nature using the resources of d’Alembert’s Treatise—the constructive and the 
principle approaches—and both leave questions unanswered. Viewed from 
a constructive perspective, d’Alembert’s defnition of body (the very frst 
defnition he ofers) takes on particular importance. But the properties he 
attributes there to bodies are inadequate for his mechanics, and it is only by 
working through his axioms, General Principle, and his problems, that we 
learn the additional properties he includes, and the restrictions in scope on 
the kinds of bodies he explicitly treats. Tis moves us toward the principle ap￾proach (see section 9.6). Either way, a philosopher seeking to develop a phil￾osophical mechanics from, or at least consistent with, d’Alembert’s theory 
cannot work simply with his defnition of body: they must work through the 
details of his rational mechanics.
Te two approaches difer in the role ascribed to the principles (Principle) 
and in their response to Evidence. Constructively, the evidence for the 
properties of body lies in the clarity of our ideas of body qua object of me￾chanics. From a principle perspective, the evidence rests entirely on that 
accruing to the principles themselves. Tis is of two kinds. First, d’Alembert 
takes his principles themselves to exhibit clarity, and thereby command as￾sent. But there is a further justifcation: the generality of the principles, dis￾played in the General Principle and demonstrated by our ability to solve a 
wide variety of problems by their means. Notice that neither of these is con￾cerned with empirical support for the principles or for the attendant body 
concept.
In addition to addressing Nature, a response to Body also requires a treat￾ment of Action: of how bodies act on one another, if at all. D’Alembert in￾tended his General Principle to cover bodies acting on one another in any 
manner whatsoever, but in his Treatise he restricts his attention to non￾gravitational contact action.65 Unfortunately, he did not explicate his notion 
of “contact,” and we have already seen the emerging recognition that it is a 
problematic notion in need of explication (Chapter 7). What about “action”? 
Here, one can turn to d’Alembert’s discussion of causes.66 In the end, how￾ever, his methodological goal seems to be to treat motions (efects) without 
65 d’Alembert 1743, 49. 66 d’Alembert 1743, x. For him, impenetrability is an epistemically privileged kind of cause, with 
contact action having a correspondingly privileged epistemic status.Constructive and principle approaches 297
appeal to forces, causes, or any analysis of the means by which one body acts 
on another.67 He stipulates a category of bodies (hard), and ofers an unsatis￾factory attempt to justify their behavior on contact (their rebound behavior), 
but ultimately these dynamical considerations are swept up into the kine￾matic condition that is his General Principle. D’Alembert would rather not 
address Action at all.
9.9 Conclusions
We have argued that d’Alembert’s Treatise on Dynamics is a pivotal work for 
the development of philosophical mechanics in the 1700s. By mid-century, 
the primary locus of research in rational mechanics pertinent to Body had 
shifed from PCOL to PCON, and d’Alembert ofered the frst systematic 
attempt at a general treatment of the mechanics of constrained motions. 
His book exemplifes the enormous difculties involved in PCON, and the 
ensuing consequences for philosophical mechanics.
Te frst difculty is that a general theory of the motions of extended 
bodies is extremely hard. We outlined d’Alembert’s strategy of axiomatizing 
rational mechanics under a set of three principles, justifed by their clarity 
and by the generality of the problems whose solution they enable (via his 
General Principle). Tough he successfully captured a wide array of problems 
this way, their scope remained somewhat limited. Tese limitations transfer 
to any associated philosophical mechanics.
Te second difculty is that of making explicit the properties of bodies 
treated in such a theory. We suggest that it is helpful to analyze this through 
the lens of two distinct approaches, constructive and principle, each ofering 
diferent insights (though see section 9.8, above). Te principle approach 
requires us to clarify the principles as axioms, determine the scope of the 
systems falling under these principles, and make explicit the dynamics being 
bracketed into a general kinematic condition by means of the principles. 
Tis last point, about the relationship between dynamics and kinematics as 
probed by a principle approach, is particularly important for understanding 
the insights into physical systems coming out of the study of constrained 
motions. It is an issue to which we will return in the chapters that follow. 
However, here our goal has been more modest. We hope to have done enough 
67 d’Alembert 1743, especially 18–9.298 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
to indicate the benefts of reading d’Alembert’s Treatise through the lens of 
a principle approach, regarding both the structure and the content of his 
theory. We highlighted one consequence. Whereas a constructive approach 
seeks to build a single ontology as the object of theorizing, the principle ap￾proach allows for a proliferation of ontologies, and indeed leaves open the 
possibility that the theory fails to specify a coherent object at all. Tis latter 
outcome would clearly be disastrous for those committed to solving Body. 
In the place of the ontic unity that is explicit in constructive approaches, the 
principle approach to d’Alembert’s axiomatization project ofers us nomic 
unity: a theory unifed by its principles, but uncommitted as to the unity or 
otherwise of its material objects.
Whether one adopts a constructive or a principle approach when 
interpreting d’Alembert’s theory (and we suggest that both are needed to 
adequately explore the theory), the contribution the theory makes to Body
is both necessary (due to PCON) and demanding: it requires us to work 
through the details of the theory so as to uncover its object. Te philosopher 
interested in Body has no choice but to pursue the complexities of the me￾chanics of constrained motions. We continue this task in Chapters 10 and 11.Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason. Katherine Brading and Marius Stan, Oxford University Press. 
© Oxford University Press 2023. DOI: 10.1093/oso/9780197678954.003.0010
10
Building bodies: Euler and impressed 
force mechanics
10.1 Introduction
Te main reason for the problem of constrained motions (PCON) pressing 
on philosophy to look beyond impact for a solution to the Problem of Bodies
(Body) came from rational mechanics. Mathematicians in those years moved 
into a new domain untrodden by their 17th century predecessors, viz. the 
study of bodies that are constrained: certain regions of space and certain pos￾sible motions are forbidden to them.1 Tis new domain—constraints—was 
vast and not yet mathematized. Teorists had the enormous task of building 
a rational mechanics of constrained motions. We call that task MCON, for 
brevity. Note that it is a problem in rational mechanics, not philosophical 
mechanics. It requires that constrained extended bodies be mathematized as 
efectively as Newton and Huygens had done with free particles.
Insightful theorists soon came to understand that constraints come in two 
broad classes, internal and external. Te former are types of conditions on 
the motion of body parts relative to each other; for instance, rigidity, incom￾pressibility, and fexibility. Te latter are limits on the parts of space (regions) 
that a body is allowed to be in; for instance, motion outward in a rotating 
massless tube. And so, the rational mechanics of constrained motion came to 
unfold along two tracks of theory-building. MCON splits into two problems, 
and so we have given them custom names, as follows:
MCON1: Given an extended body subject to internal constraints, how 
does it move? Namely, given an extended body whose parts are mutually 
1 A good example is a ball rolling down an inclined plane. Gravity pulls it vertically downward, 
but it cannot move that way—because the rigid plane obstructs its downward motion. So, the ball is 
constrained to roll along the plane.300 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
constrained among themselves (i.e., held together to form one body), 
what is the motion of each of the parts?
MCON2: Given an extended body subject to external constraints, how 
does it move? Namely, when the motion of a body is impeded by an ob￾stacle, what is its resulting motion?
In this chapter, we reconstruct the milestones for work on MCON1 in the 
1700s, and their implications for philosophical mechanics. We begin by 
explaining clearly what a solution to MCON requires (section 10.2), and 
why theorists lacked the resources for it (section 10.3). Next, we survey the 
milestones on their way to solving MCON1 (section 10.4). Ten we sub￾ject their results to a critical evaluation, and we take stock of the state of the 
problem as the century turned (sections 10.5 and 10.6).
Before we proceed, a word on method. Tis chapter is not a history of 
mechanics afer 1735. In line with our declared interest, we focus only on 
results and developments conceptually relevant to the philosophical problem 
of constrained motion. Accordingly, it is a narrative of the key results on the 
way to a generic object, viz. the equation of motion for a material point in 
an extended body. From history, we take just what made a diference to the 
problem we study. But, of course, mechanics in those decades made fateful 
progress on many fronts, not all related to our topic.
10.2 Solving MCON
We mentioned above the need to mathematize the motion of extended 
bodies, but that idea is vague. Spelled out exactly, it amounts to three distinct 
steps—a full solution requires three distinct formulas:
Step I a local expression for the instantaneous kinematic change at any 
material point in the body. Tat is, an equation of motion.
Step II a global expression that quantifes how the whole body changes in 
an instant dt. Tat is either a volume integral or a fnite sum over 
discrete particles.
Step III an evolution formula describing the body’s motion over time: afer 
some fnite interval, not just an instant.Building bodies 301
Tese steps difer signifcantly in representational content and in regard 
to what they require for success. Step I demands physical insight: a grasp of 
the agencies at that point, viz. internal and external forces, body forces and 
stresses, tractions and shear, etc.; and of the kind of actions that internal 
constraints can do. It also requires a grasp of the various response factors 
present there: mass, moment of inertia, and mass fow; translation, spin, 
and strain; efective acceleration and motion lost to constraints, etc. Step 
II requires an architecture of matter: a picture of mass distribution at basic 
scales, and its kinematic behaviors, or possible ways to move. Without that 
picture, the task of representing a whole-body motion is indeterminate 
(see section 10.5). Lastly, Step III requires mathematical power: that certain 
branches of pure mathematics have developed enough to yield exact answers 
to that task; for example, closed-form solutions to the relevant diferential 
equations (or at least some approximation techniques to supplant them, such 
as methods of numeric approximation, fnite-element approaches, and the 
like).2
Te fgures at issue in this chapter were keenly aware of these distinct needs 
for solving MCON, and also of how much they lacked as they set out to solve 
it. Facing up to rigid rotation around a variable axis, Euler commented: “if 
the axis of spin changes orientation, the principles of Mechanics we have so 
far do not sufce to determine the motion. So, we must fnd and prove new 
principles ft for the task.”3 Likewise, on the shortcomings of mathematics for 
many Step III tasks, required afer the equation of motion has been found:
if we are unable to reach a complete knowledge of fuid motion, it is not the 
fault of Mechanics and its known principles of motion. Rather, it is Analysis 
itself that lets us down in this matter. . . . Seeing as a general solution must 
appear impossible, on account of shortcomings in Analysis, we must content 
ourselves with knowledge of a few particular cases. (Euler 1757, 298; our 
emphasis)
However, the integration of these equations [of perfect-fuid motion] 
exceeds the powers of the calculus as we know it. (Lagrange 1788, 456)
2 In the cases we study below, the salient branches of mathematics were integral calculus, the 
theory of diferential equations, and (afer 1800) the theory of analytic functions.
3 Euler 1752a, 189; our emphasis.302 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
Plainly put, as they set out to quantify extended bodies moving under a net 
force, they lacked both the physical insight and the mathematical strength 
needed for it.
In Chapters 10–12 our focus is on Step I. One reason: that sort of task 
(deriving the equation for a specifc body type or mechanical system) has long 
been regarded as the key problem in rational mechanics. Here is Max Planck, 
in 1919:
Te motion of a material body is fully determined just in case we know the 
motions of every single material point we may suppose to make up that body, 
i.e., when we have given the position of every such point as a function of time.
To describe a defnite point in it, we must represent the body’s position at 
some time t = 0. Ten to every body-point we assign its three coordinates a, 
b, c at that instant. . . . Tese three quantities should be used to describe that 
material point also at any later time t, from position a, b, c to x, y, z. . . . Te 
whole motion of the body is determined in every last detail if, for every ma￾terial point a, b, c that the body consists in, its coordinates x, y, z are given 
as functions of t. . . . We take these functions to be continuous, because we 
presuppose that, as the body moves, it does not disintegrate into disjointed 
parts. (Planck 1919, 3f.; our emphasis)
Another reason: a focus on Step I tasks is the most powerful interpretive lens 
for rational mechanics in the Long Enlightenment. Before 1740, theorists did 
not have any equations of motion. All they had or hoped to obtain were spe￾cifc instances of Step III results. Only with Johann Bernoulli and d’Alembert 
did equations of motion take center stage in rational mechanics. By 1742 
they had enough resources for that task to no longer seem hopeless.4 Once 
they succeeded, the quest for further Step I results became the central agenda 
for mechanics through the 1840s, as Chapter 12 makes clear.
Troughout this book we forgo any discussion of Step III. It received scant 
attention in the Enlightenment; only the 19th century began to give it sus￾tained study. And, as the collective focus switched to it, the aspect migrated 
into pure mathematics, with just a few, faint connections to then-ongoing 
work in philosophical mechanics.5 Next, we explain how rational mechanics 
4 For an account of those new resources and their impact on mechanics, see Stan 2022. 5 On the mathematics side, Step III becomes a key focus of the theory of elliptic integrals, in the 
1830s and beyond; and then of the theory of diferential equations, as part of the general problem of 
the existence, uniqueness, and stability of exact, analytic solutions. On the rational-mechanics side, Building bodies 303
afer 1735 made the frst signifcant progress toward solving MCON1 in 
terms of Planck’s explanation above.
10.3 Newton’s Lex Secunda, Euler’s principles, Cauchy’s 
laws of motion
Te struggles we survey in this chapter yielded a physical insight that was 
hard won and deep. It is the principle that the balance of force equals the 
net kinematic change. Later in the chapter we call it “Euler’s First Law,” fol￾lowing Truesdell.6 From today’s vantage point, it is easy to miss or trivialize 
how novel and deep it was, because it looks like an older idea coming from 
Newton, which he called Lex Secunda: “A change in motion is proportional 
to the motive force impressed,” and is along the force’s line of action.7
Te insight was the threefold realization that (i) “the net force equals the 
total kinematic change” is necessary for mathematizing a very broad class of 
motions; (ii) it sufces to represent mechanical change at every point in an 
extended body; and (iii) it comes with a heuristic, or recipe for applying it. 
Te mistake is to think that, to gain that insight, Enlightenment theorists just 
took Newton’s idea and applied it to new cases; or at least that his idea can 
yield the insight above—no new physics being required, just mathematical 
prowess:
Newton’s principles sufce for solving every mechanical problem we en￾counter in practice, whether in statics or dynamics. We need not appeal 
to any new principle for that. If we run into obstacles, they are always just 
mathematical. Not difculties with the principles. (Mach 1883, 239; our 
emphasis)
Step III mattered just to the question of systems with anholonomic constraints (which are generally 
not integrable) and, later in the 19th century, to the long-term evolution of many-body gravitational 
systems.
6 Truesdell 1991, 64f. Here and in every allied context below, we follow 20th century commentators 
in their somewhat unfortunate use of the term “balance.” Note that, in these contexts, the term 
denotes the net amount, or sum, rather than a case of mutual rest, or static equilibrium: it is a concept 
from accounting, not statics.
7 Newton 1999, 416. For discussion of the meaning of Newton’s phrase, see Pourciau 2006. We em￾ploy the term Lex Secunda to distinguish it from the ambiguous phrase “Newton’s Second Law.” Te 
latter covers a variety of inequivalent expressions and formulations; see below.304 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
Te mistake is as old as it is pernicious (see also Chapter 7). Our case for that 
is the remainder of this book; for now, we give the reader a capsule account. 
Te thought that Euler’s and Cauchy’s respective laws and rational mechanics 
merely extend Newton’s Lex Secunda to further systems rests on distorted 
history and conceptual confusion.
(i) Illusions of hindsight
Te thought above supposes that afer Newton it was clear to everyone that 
any further theorizing ought to start with his Lex Secunda. Specifcally, that 
it was the preferred law, and that it clearly applies to objects other than a kin￾ematically free particle (which the Principia had treated admirably). Tese 
assumptions are false; they are illusions of hindsight—looking back at his￾tory with weak eyes, from the wrong angle.
It was not clear that Lex Secunda was the natural candidate law. When 
Euler and his age set out to solve MCON1, they had many other laws avail￾able, and used them: the Torricelli-Huygens principle; Conservation of Vis 
Viva (really, one name for two distinct laws); the principle of least action; and 
d’Alembert’s General Principle. Nothing about Newton’s law singled it out for 
primacy.8 And, it was not clear at all that his law applies to the motion of an 
extended body. If anything, they knew early on that it does not:
In a vacuum, a material point in projectile motion describes a parabola. 
From that, we can understand why a body too will cross a parabola if 
we throw it. But, that point motion alone will not teach us the laws gov￾erning the motion of individual parts in a fnite body. . . . What Newton has 
demonstrated about motion under centripetal forces applies just to a single 
point. (Euler 1736, v–vi; our emphasis)
Accordingly, they set out to fnd new, better laws that do sufce for MCON. If 
some of these laws ended up looking like Newton’s Lex Secunda, this was not 
a preordained, expectable outcome.
8 In the 18th century, conservation of vis viva denoted two ideas: (i) when several particles interact, 
a quantity K (viz. twice their total kinetic energy) remains constant through the interaction; (ii) when 
an extended body moves, its “actual descent” equals its “potential descent” (i.e., the change in ki￾netic energy equals the negative of its change in potential energy); see section 10.4; and Calero 2008, 
chapter 7. For d’Alembert’s General Principle, see Chapter 9; for the principle of least action and its 
application to mechanics, see Veldman (n.d.), Pulte 1989, and Fraser 1983.Building bodies 305
(ii) Conceptual confusions
We misunderstand Newton’s Lex Secunda if we think that Euler’s and 
Cauchy’s respective principles are equivalent to it. Tese principles assert 
content that Lex Secunda cannot even express, and they apply to cases where 
his law is impotent.
First, if we express Lex Secunda as F = ma, here is what it says: On a free
(unconstrained) point endowed with constant mass m, the net force F has a 
fxed ratio (viz. m) to the point’s linear acceleration a. But that is not enough 
content to support a mechanics of extended bodies. It leaves out, or even 
disallows, concepts and distinctions absolutely crucial for a mathematical 
theory of deformable extendeds in motion. Here are some. In fuids and 
elastics, the relevant factor is mass density, not just mass; but a point has no 
density (it’s a meaningless notion for it). In solids and fuids, there are body 
forces and contact forces (stresses), but they are dimensionally diferent; only 
the former kind count as an instance of F as in Lex Secunda. For extended 
bodies, rational mechanics must distinguish between internal and external 
forces; but for a mass point, that distinction is meaningless: all forces on it 
count as external, because it has no interior.
Second, Euler’s and Cauchy’s principles are dynamical laws in the modern 
sense: they entail equations of motion for every point in an extended body. 
Lex Secunda does not do that; that fact has long been known, but its lesson 
remains unlearned.9
Tird, Euler-Cauchy principles come with an associated recipe: an iterative 
scheme that yields the particular equation of motion for the target system. 
We call it the Euler Heuristic (see section 10.5). Newton’s Lex Secunda has 
no such scheme. It does not require it, for it applies directly to its intended 
objects.
Fourth, it is a mistake to think the phrase “the Second Law” denotes a 
single, univocal expression. When we state the vague ideas behind that 
phrase exactly, we obtain three expressions mathematically and physically 
distinct, not one; see section 10.5. Newton gets credit for just one expres￾sion, the easiest; the other two are due to Euler and Cauchy. But Euler’s and 
Cauchy’s respective laws were hard won, with no help from Newton. To 
discover them, it took radically new physical insights—about the ways that 
9 Truesdell frst drew attention to that fact (1968b, 92f.). For the modern concept of dynamical law, 
see Stan 2022.306 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
internal constraints work—plus a picture of matter and a program to tackle 
extended bodies; not merely more mathematics, as Mach wrongly believed. 
Here and in Chapter 12 we will show precisely what it took for Euler and 
Cauchy to establish their much broader expressions.
To sum up, some are tempted to think that Lex Secunda was the ob￾vious and sufcient frontrunner for solving MCON. Tat temptation is 
wrong twice. Historically, Bernoulli, Euler, and Cauchy did not set out as￾suming it is the preferred law and was sure to apply beyond Newton’s 
chosen objects. Conceptually, it gets things backward. It is a mistake to 
see Euler’s and Cauchy’s mechanics of extended bodies as a further appli￾cation of Lex Secunda. Rather, once Cauchy created the concepts of stress 
and strain, Newton’s and Euler’s respective theories turn out to be just in￾choate precursors, valid for a few degenerate cases, or types of object (see 
Chapter 12). Tat realization is old, by the way. Lamé had it not long afer 
Cauchy’s breakthrough:
In the past, geometers thought that, before we can study elastic bodies, we 
ought to tackle thin strings and membranes frst, viz. lines and surfaces 
before solids. Tis approach seemed natural and reasonable—but it failed 
completely, because the true theory of elasticity has borrowed nothing from 
those frst attempts. In fact, it was born wholly outside them.
. . . the theory of elasticity applies in full generality to solid bodies of 
comparable dimensions. In exceptional cases, it applies to thin membranes, 
and to strings even more rarely. Which is the exact opposite of the order 
suggested by the abstractions of Geometry. A failure to heed this anomaly 
(which was hard to foresee), combined with an abuse of the laws and 
methods of celestial mechanics, ended up hampering real progress in elas￾ticity. (Lamé 1852, 93, 107; our emphasis)
By the laws and methods of celestial mechanics, Lamé meant reliance on 
mass points and Lex Secunda (the joint basis for Laplace’s vast work in celes￾tial mechanics). Tus Mach’s verdict above starts at the wrong end. Newton’s 
principles are not a true basis for a realistic account of extended bodies; they 
are an easy corollary of that basis, once Cauchy’s laws of motion are in place.Building bodies 307
10.4 Solving MCON1
Most of the breakthroughs below come from Euler, who worked on them for 
many decades. He frst grasped the problem of constraints in its enormity at 
St. Petersburg in the mid-1730s, when he also drafed a research program for 
solving it. Ten he moved to Berlin, where from 1740 to 1764 he obtained his 
most signifcant results, on the motion of rigid bodies, inviscid fuids, and 
harmonic oscillators. In the twilight of his career, back in St. Petersburg, he 
worked on extending his approaches to the motion of elastic bodies, a dif￾cult terrain for anyone.
Te other fgures that matter here are d’Alembert, along with Johann 
Bernoulli and his son, Daniel. Teir work served mostly to inspire Euler, by 
giving him a glimpse into the way to a solution (e.g., with fuid motion, where 
the Bernoullis had made crucial breakthroughs earlier). Or, it challenged 
him, by solving a key problem before he could—which spurred Euler to fnd 
his own solution, from frst principles he trusted (e.g., with rigid bodies, fuid 
motion, and vibration, where d’Alembert at frst bested him). Still, Euler tow￾ered over them all. In scope, generality of treatment, and internal unity, his 
rational mechanics of extended bodies far exceeds whatever these fgures 
had obtained in that area.
For two reasons, in the 1730s the path forward (to mathematizing whole 
bodies) was neither easy nor clear. First, they had inherited many laws from 
the 1600s. Recall, those laws apply merely to the motion of a point in the 
body (a representative centroid). No one then knew a priori which laws can 
handle the motion of extended bodies; whether they can handle it at all; and 
how one might apply those laws to a volume of moving matter. Second, while 
the matter volume moves as one body, its parts act on each other. Tey must 
act, so that the thing remains a connected whole; their workings secure the 
one-body constraint that drove the very rational mechanics at issue in this 
chapter. And, the body parts act in particular ways. Te strength and con￾tent of their actions depend as well on material specifcs: properties that 
distinguish one class of bodies from another. However, these facts—which 
properties are relevant, and what efects they induce—is not known a priori, 
at the outset of a rational mechanics that must quantify them.10 Hence, to 
10 Put modernly, no one then knew whether those properties were forces, energies, charges, felds, 
temperature gradients, enthalpies, or their higher derivatives. In fact, this question remains an open 
problem in our time. It is the main topic in the theory of constitutive relations, within the modern 
science of materials.308 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
18th century fgures the task of mathematizing extended bodies seemed an 
intractable riddle. With characteristic insight, Euler described their conun￾drum sharply:
Tese principles [inherited from the 17th century] are of no use in the 
study of motion, unless the bodies are infnitely small, hence the size of a 
point. Or at least we can regard them as such without much error: which 
happens when the direction of the net force passes through the center of 
gravity. . . . But if it does not pass through that center, we cannot determine 
the entire efect of the force. Tat is all the more true if the body to be moved 
is not free, viz. is constrained by some obstacle, depending on its structure. 
(Euler 1745, §17; our emphasis)
In one breath, Euler expresses why mathematizing bodies in motion had 
eluded his age: the available laws were too weak; and constraints were a 
problem in general—both as external obstacles restricting the whole body’s 
motion, and also as internal actions of the body parts among themselves, 
mutually afecting their motions.
Euler had glimpsed their predicament well before he voiced it in print. 
Around 1734, he began work on a comprehensive study of mechanics 
“treated analytically” by a uniform method. He aimed to treat extended 
bodies too, not just free particles. At work on this task, however, he soon 
realized that it was not yet solvable; in particular, the motion of rigid bodies 
seemed an opaque mystery (see below). In response, Euler greatly restricted 
his ambitions, and reconceived the work as a treatise on the dynamics of a 
particle; this became his Mechanica. Still, in the preface he took care to mo￾tivate and outline a long-term research program well beyond the book’s 
narrow scope:
Te parts of my work come from the very division of bodies whose motion 
I treat; and of their state into free and constrained. My criterion for dividing 
them is their makeup [indoles]. And so, in the present book I investigate the 
motion of infnitely small bodies, or point-sized, so to say. In later works, 
I will move on to fnite-sized bodies: which I divide into rigid, fexible, and 
bodies whose parts are completely loose [viz. fuids]. (Euler 1736, v)
Trough the analytic lens of PCON, we can see that Euler charted the way 
to a very broad rational mechanics of internal constraints. Accordingly, our Building bodies 309
synopsis will follow his roadmap. We begin with his work on rigid dynamics, 
then we move to vibration theory, and we end with a survey of results on fuid 
motion.
(i) Rigid bodies
Impulse for work in this area came from two external factors, viz. the French 
state’s interest in engineering applications; and theoretical challenges in ce￾lestial mechanics. Common to these factors was a single task: to give the 
equation of motion for an infexible body of arbitrary shape when a force acts 
on it.11 Euler confdently set out in 1734 to tackle it, but the question defeated 
him quickly. All he gained was the shocked realization that mechanics was 
not yet strong enough to answer that question (see above). His early struggles 
with rigid bodies did pay of in a key respect, however. Tey helped him grasp 
a lack in the foundations: For the general task of mathematizing an extended 
body in motion, the laws of 17th century mechanics are insufcient. Tey do 
not have the expressive power to fully describe its motion as extended. And, 
they do not have enough physical content to predict its full motion over time.
Much of Euler’s subsequent work in this area amounts to overcoming 
these two shortcomings. In efect, he set rational mechanics on a new basis, 
representational and explanatory.
Sobered by the difculty of the problem, Euler resolved to conquer the 
rigid body stepwise. For many years, he was able to grasp only what happens 
when a force turns the body around an axis fxed in space. In that case, he dis￾covered, the result is as follows:12
Px Mk d
dt = 2 2
2
2
ω . (1)
11 A complete study of Euler’s work in rigid-body dynamics is Verdun (forthcoming), on which we 
rely in this section. In a historiographic frst, his study draws on much unpublished work by Euler. 
However, we must forgo those sources; our case relies just on results publicly available in the 18th cen￾tury. Relatedly, Verdun 2015 is an extended study of Euler’s work on rigid-body motion in the context 
of celestial mechanics.
12 See Euler 1746a, 66 (§48). P is the x-component of the force (expressed by a weight), M the mass, 
x the arm of that force, ω the angular speed, and k the particle’s distance to the axis of rotation.310 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
Te insight behind this formula is: the balance of torque on a particle equals 
its change of angular momentum.13 A step forward, to be sure, but far from 
enough. Euler later made more progress by learning that an exact account of 
rigid motion requires novel concepts: angular velocity and acceleration; in￾stantaneous axis of rotation; and moment of inertia.
Still, he could not see how these concepts must combine to yield the for￾mula for the arbitrary motion of a rigid body. His result (1) holds when the 
body must turn around an axis fxed in space. But suppose the axis of rotation 
is not stationary. Ten external forces will change the speed of every body￾point, and also the direction of that axis. To infer those changes, one might 
think it would be sufcient to reapply the insight above (about the balance of 
torque). However, that is insufcient.14 If the applied force tilts that axis, the 
efect seems intractable—no one at that time had any principles describing 
how a force moves a line passing through a fxed point. Euler struggled with 
this question for some ten years; then he spent ten more making it mathe￾matically tractable. He struggled to fnd the equation of motion (Step I), and 
then to fnd workable ways to integrate it over time (Step III).
D’Alembert was able to fnd an answer to the former question before Euler. 
Spurred to action by a newly-discovered astronomical phenomenon, by 
1749 d’Alembert had discovered the equation of motion for a rigid sphere 
rotating under gravity as its axis of spin changes direction.15 However, his 
derivation was meandering, obscured by unhelpful notation, and short on 
elucidations at critical junctures; he was notorious for his opaque style. Euler 
grappled with it at some length, frustrated by its proof structure. Eventually, 
he glimpsed in d’Alembert’s paper some things that showed him a way to 
his own proof, from diferent premises. Tose things were two kinematic 
insights: (i) when a rigid body moves, there exists an instantaneous axis of 
13 A word on notation: 18th century mechanics was born before the coordinate-free language of 
modern vector algebra and analysis. Te results we examine in this book were all written in com￾ponent form. Generally, for illustration or discussion we choose the component (of the equation or 
principle) in the x-direction. 14 Te missing knowledge is of two kinds. Kinematic: the body’s points are in circular motion, and 
the rotation axis moves in space. It was not clear what quantities are relevant to mathematize these 
motions. Dynamical: the axis of rotation moves on account of the force (external to the body) and of 
the body parts’ mutual actions. It was unclear how—and to what extent—a force moves a line; and 
how much the parts act on each other.
15 Te phenomenon was a new type of terrestrial motion, viz. nutation, a wobbling of the earth’s 
axis of spin as it precesses across the northern sky. James Bradley, Astronomer Royal, had discovered 
nutation in the 1740s, and announced it around 1748.Building bodies 311
rotation; (ii) the linear velocity of a body-point can be described as the cross￾product of two quantities.16
Euler’s way to the equation of motion goes through a few key stages. He 
begins with a terse expression that connects the balance of forces and the 
linear accelerations; in the x-direction, it reads:17
2
2
2 P M d x
dt = (2)
It is a Step II formula, or integral expression for the balance of force over 
an extended body. Euler says two important things about it. He calls it the 
“general and fundamental principle of mechanics.” Tat is his way of saying 
that (2) counts as what we called an E-principle (see Chapter 8) and modern 
science calls a dynamical law.18 And, he explains that the balance P above 
comprises
both the external forces (whereby a body is urged from outside) and also 
the internal forces whereby its parts are mutually connected, such that they 
cannot change their relative distances. (Euler 1752a, §42; emphasis added)
Tis latter thought carries an immensely valuable insight. Euler at this point 
has grasped that, when an extended body moves, the change in motion at 
every point comes from two sources: external and internal forces. To fnd the 
equation of motion, both kinds must be taken into account. Crucially, the 
16 Te two quantities are the radius vector r (to the origin of a reference frame) and an angular 
speed ⍵ around the axis of rotation. Of course, the term “cross product” is anachronistic; Euler 
expressed it geometrically, as a diference of two segment products, or areas. And, (i) above says that 
at any time t there exists a line around which every point in a rigid body sweeps the same infnites￾imal angle θ. Tere is some debate about what insights Euler got from d’Alembert. Wilson said it was 
the knowledge of how to apply his General Principle to a rigid body (1987). Verdun argues, more 
persuasively, that it was the two insights above (cf. Verdun forthcoming, chapter 2). We follow him 
on this.
17 P is the external force, M the mass, and x the coordinate function in the x-direction. Te factor 
2 is because Euler represents mass by an equivalent weight, with the value of g (the acceleration of 
gravity) set by convention at 1/2. For details and context, see Ravetz 1961. 18 Euler calls it the general and fundamental principle in his 1752a, §§26, 11. A dynamical law 
is a diferential expression that has been proven to entail a broad range of equations of motion for 
specifc mechanical systems. By the time Euler wrote, the formula (2) had been used to solve the 
vibrating string (by d’Alembert), systems of interacting mass points (by Euler in Mechanica), and 
one-dimensional fuid motion in a tube of variable width (by Johann Bernoulli in 1742). For a discus￾sion in the context of 18th century work, see Stan 2022.312 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
latter depend—for their strength and manner of action—on the internal con￾straint specifc to the body type at issue.19
Now let us return to the rigid body. To obtain the equation of motion, Euler 
applies the “general principle” (2) above to Z, which is an “arbitrary element” 
in the rigid body, and “let dM be its mass.”20 Tat requires him to do two 
things. First, to express the linear velocity of Z, which in fact rotates. Second, 
to take the time derivative of that velocity, so as to get the linear acceleration 
that (2) governs. For the frst task, Euler found a clue in d’Alembert’s paper on 
precession. Tat clue amounted to a geometric way to infer the result of r ⨯
⍵, the cross-product that gives the linear velocity of rotation. He found the 
x-component of that velocity to be21
dx = − ( ) λ µ y z dt (3a)
For the second task, he took the derivative ddx of this linear velocity, which 
gives the linear acceleration relative to an external frame. Ten he let that 
acceleration equal the “elementary force” Zᶣ, viz. the balance of force on the 
mass element at Z:
22
Z dM
dt γ λ = − 2 2 yd zdµ λ + + dM ν µ z yν λ + + µ x 2 2 ( ) [ ( ) ] (3b)
Behind this complicated expression lies a deceptively simple insight: the 
total force on a body-point (the dynamical term on the lef) equals its total 
change of motion (the kinematic terms on the right). Te latter depend on 
two factors. First, the internal constraint specifc to that body type—in par￾ticular, the condition that a rigid body remains self-congruent as it moves. 
Second, the way the instantaneous axis of spin changes orientation over time; 
the terms λ, μ, and ᶭ above encode that knowledge.
19 For example, in rigid bodies internal forces “mutually destroy each other” such that no internal 
displacements occur (Euler 1752a, §42), whereas in fexible bodies they are tensions analogous with 
the structure of Hooke’s Law actions, and in fuids they are internal pressures.
20 Euler 1752a, 190. Te term “element” is ambiguous; we discuss it in section 10.5. 21 See the next footnote for an explanation of the variables he employed. 22 Euler 1752a, 207. Zᶣ is the net force, but represented by a length, viz. the length of the force’s 
projection on the ᶣ-axis of a frame Zαβᶣ. Further, x, y, and z are coordinates of the element Z, and ᶫ, 
μ, and ᶭ the components of its angular velocity vector (relative to the instantaneous axis of rotation, 
which passes through the body and changes orientation over time).Building bodies 313
Lastly, Euler then derived an analogous expression for the net torque and 
its efect, viz. the rate of change in the body’s angular momentum.23 He im￾plied that his two diferential expressions (for the balance of force and torque, 
respectively) jointly sufce to describe the motion of a rigid body.
Euler’s equation (3b) was an enormous advance, but just a partial success. 
In the form above, the equation was true, but useless for the aim of predicting 
how the body moves over time (i.e., for Step III as we defned it).24 By 1758, 
Euler had found an ingenious way around this difculty—a way to turn the 
intractable quantities from variables into constants, so as to make a rigid 
body’s behavior over time epistemically determinate. Specifcally, his worka￾round was to obtain two expressions for the instantaneous motion of a rigid 
body. One expression describes how a body-point (acted on by external and 
internal forces) moves in an instant relative to a frame fxed to the body. Tat 
expression is Euler’s dynamical equation. Te other describes how the co￾moving, body frame changes place relative to another, stationary frame fxed 
in space. Tat is Euler’s kinematic equation. Together, his two formulas make 
the motion both determinate and tractable. Tey solve MCON1 for the class 
of rigid bodies; Euler had them in place by 1758.25
By the end of his career Euler had come to grasp all the ingredients that a 
complete rational mechanics of rigids demands. Synoptically stated, they are 
as follows. Any fnite motion of a rigid body consists in two displacements, 
viz. a pure translation in space and a rigid rotation around an axis through 
the body’s mass center. Tese two are distinct: they are dynamically inde￾pendent (the quantity of one has no infuence on the other), and can be 
studied separately, on their own:
An infexible body can engage in two motions independent of each other. 
One is progressive, whereby the body’s center of gravity moves uniformly 
ahead. Te other is a rotating motion whereby the body turns uniformly 
around an axis passing through its gravity center. . . .
23 For details, see Verdun (forthcoming, chapter 2.1). 24 Te reason is that, in the expression (3b), the quantities ᶫ, μ, and ᶭ are variable: they are 
functions of time, so they change from one instant to the next—because they are referred to a spin 
axis that changes position over time. For the equation of motion to be integrable, they ought to be 
constant quantities.
25 Admittedly, he kept on doing research in this area of rational mechanics. Tat work, how￾ever, falls outside the purview of PCON as a philosophical problem; it bears just on the mathemat￾ical aspects of rigid motion and its applications. For complete details, see Verdun (forthcoming, 
chapter 4).314 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
Now let some forces act on the body, whether it be at rest or in motion. 
Likewise, those forces will produce two efects in the body. One regards the 
progressive motion, which they will increase or change. Te other regards 
its rotation around the said axis, which they will increase or change. Tese 
two efects are such that there is no connection between them; neither 
infuences the other. (Euler 1745, 43)
In general, however, a full representation of the latter motion (rotation) 
requires two descriptions: the kinematic change at every material point rel￾ative to a frame fxed in the body, co-moving with it; and that frame’s change 
of orientation relative to a second, stationary frame (or to absolute space).
(ii) Flexible bodies
Tis term meant things that vibrate (i.e., oscillate about an equilibrium po￾sition); and things that revert to a reference shape, following deformation. 
A comprehensive theory of the latter type of object (elastic solids) was too 
difcult; theorists had been able to ofer only a few special solutions for 
lower-dimensional bodies.
Here too, d’Alembert frst broke new ground, by solving MCON1 for a 
vibrating string.26 He supposed it to be continuous, uniformly dense, and 
fxed at both ends, but not necessarily at rest. And, he made a few restric￾tive assumptions: all oscillations are small, all forces on it are coplanar, the 
tension in the string is nearly equal everywhere, and the accelerations are 
parallel.
Against this backdrop, d’Alembert approached the problem as follows (see 
Fig. 10.1). For each point in the string, he supposes: “Let t be the time elapsed 
afer the string has begun to vibrate. Ten it is clear that the ordinate PM [of a 
point P can only be expressed as a function of time t and of its abscissa.”27 In 
our terms: the string’s motion is a transverse wave. To represent any particle 
P in the string, he uses a function y(x, t), with y the ordinate, x the abscissa, 
and t a continuous variable ranging over instants. Some cryptic reasoning 
follows. Buried under it are two key premises that d’Alembert imported 
without argument from Brook Taylor, which we express as follows:
26 See Chapter 8 for earlier attempts to tackle the vibrating string. 27 d’Alembert 1747, 215.Building bodies 315
a = F/m: for any string particle, its efective acceleration equals the restoring 
force on it divided by its mass;
F ∝ T ∂2y/∂x2: the restoring force at every point is proportional to the ten￾sion T (in the string at that point) and the local curvature.28
To describe the string’s motion, d’Alembert aims to solve this problem: at any 
given time t, fnd the value of y for every material point in the string (just 
as Planck above required in general, for any possible body).29 At this junc￾ture, the solution is in sight; a few more algebraic manipulations are all it 
takes. D’Alembert expresses the particle’s acceleration above as the second 
derivative of y with respect to time. Substituting into the two premises above 
yields30
∂
∂ = 

 


∂
∂
2
2
2
2
y
t
y
x
T
m
(4)
Tat is the Step I formula for a string vibrating in a plane. “Tus, afer so 
many near misses, the wave equation fnally appears.”31
A
P
M m
p
B
Fig. 10.1. D’Alembert’s derivation of the wave equation for a vibrating 
string. As the string moves, the location of any point P in it depends just on 
the time t and the point’s location on the string, viz. its x-coordinate. Based on 
d’Alembert 1747.
28 Taylor, following Newton, had used curvature as a measure of the restoring force (cf. Chapter 7). 
Equipped with a concept of function as he is, d’Alembert expresses that Newtonian idea as the second 
partial derivative of the ordinate y with respect to the abscissa, x. 29 d’Alembert 1747, 216f. He thinks no string particle moves sideways, just up and down from the 
rest axis AB. So, its x-coordinate never changes. In modern terms, he assumes the string’s motion is 
a transversal wave. Taylor (1713) had tried to justify that assumption: he granted that each point (as 
it moves up and down) also shifs sideways, so its x-location changes as well. But, he explained, those 
changes count as second-order infnitesimals, so they can be ignored. (By assumption, the string’s 
vibration was frst-order infnitesimally small, not fnite.) So, he inferred, a point’s x-coordinate re￾mains practically unchanged; see Chapter 8.
30 See d’Alembert 1747, 216. 31 Truesdell 1960, 238.316 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
Euler then followed up with a paper on the same topic; he obtained no 
new result beyond d’Alembert’s wave equation—just a cleaner derivation, 
and some thoughts on admissible solutions. Te latter topic belongs in pure 
mathematics, so we bypass it here.32 As so ofen, Euler’s great merit was to see 
how a predecessor’s breakthrough can be generalized. In this case, he subse￾quently broadened d’Alembert’s result to two new types of whole-body mo￾tion. Neither was remotely easy.
First, Euler derived the equation for a string vibrating in space, viz. under 
forces that drive it to oscillate out of a fxed plane (the only motion that 
theorists from Brook Taylor to d’Alembert had treated). Euler called this 
novel behavior “whirling motion,” motus turbinatorius.
33 Here too he takes 
the direct method, or balance-of-force approach. He regards the string as a 
continuum of uniform density q, and picks an arbitrary line element Zz of 
length ds. Te element has a tiny mass (massula) equal to qds. Euler next 
expresses its acceleration (in component form), and infers the strength of the 
“elementary force,” viz. the net impressed force on the element Zz. Ten he 
reasons that the elementary force equals the tiny mass times the “accelerative 
force” of Zz. Tat is one principle of mechanics he relies on. However (be￾cause the string vibrates in three dimensions, not one) Euler realizes that he 
needs another, second principle for his solution. Namely: the moment of the 
elementary force equals the moment of the “motive force.”34 Together—and 
only together—these two principles yield his desired equations of motion. 
“And thereby the entire theory of the equilibrium and motion of strings, both 
fexible and elastic, has been brought to the greatest degree of perfection we 
desire for it.”35
Second, Euler derived the equation for a body of two dimensions. 
Specifcally, for a very thin membrane uniformly dense.
32 See Euler 1748. In terms of sections 10.2 and 10.3, it concerns the type of formulas that emerge 
at Step III. Te exchanges between Euler and d’Alembert on this matter turned polemic, and dragged 
on for some two decades, with little beneft for mechanics. Cf. the critical verdict by Truesdell 1960, 
237–44. 33 Suppose a string at rest between two points A, B fxed in space. Pinch it at several locations, and 
stretch it from rest in diferent directions, then release all pinched locations simultaneously. Euler 
seeks to fnd how every point of that string will then move.
34 In modern terms: the torque on ds (about the three axes of an inertial frame) equals the rate 
of change in angular momentum. Even at that late stage, Euler still used the rapidly obsolescent 
terminology of “accelerative force” and “motive force” to denote the acceleration and momentum, 
respectively.
35 Euler 1771, 347–8.Building bodies 317
All that Geometers have studied so far about vibrating motion applied just to 
bodies of one dimension, or which we can regard as such: a stretched string 
and an elastic lamina. . . . But, if I am not mistaken, no one has determined how 
a surface made to vibrate will move, e.g. a tight canvas or a stretched mem￾brane. . . . I have resolved to set down here the frst foundations of this doc￾trine. (Euler 1766, 243)
He starts with a rectangular membrane supposed continuous, uniformly dense, 
of very small thickness k, and held fxed at the edges. Suppose that a perpen￾dicular force depresses the membrane downward by a small amount, and the 
resulting tension force is nearly equal everywhere. He mentally decomposes the 
membrane into extremely thin threads criss-crossing at right angles. Te result 
is a grid with each cell being a squarelet (quartulum) of side w and thickness k. 
He lets w become arbitrarily small, and picks the centerpoint Y of any such cell, 
with the justifcation: “we can conceive each element, viz. the matter that flls a 
squarelet, to be concentrated in this point.” His aim is to fnd an “equation that 
expresses the membrane’s vibrating motion.”36
To that end, he represents every material point Y in the membrane by a 
function z of three variables: two space coordinates x, y orthogonal in the 
equilibrium plane; and time t.
37 He reasons that Y is subject to the tension 
force acting in the x- and y-directions, respectively. Te restoring force, which 
“presses the element Y downward” to its rest position, is the resultant of the 
tensions on Y. Euler expresses it accordingly, then claims that the sought mo￾tion of Y “arises from the principles of mechanics.”38 One principle, in par￾ticular, is important—unstated but visible just below the linguistic surface:
mass of Y Y • acceleration of = restoring force onY
Two of these three quantities are given or already inferred above, and the ac￾celeration is the second derivative of the z function. Tat yields for Euler the 
equation of motion he required:39
36 Euler 1766, 244–5. 37 z is the height of that point above or below the plane. Te sought equation gives that height for 
any point at any instant.
38 Euler 1766, 245. 39 h and f are coefcients proportional to the tension force (in the x- and y-directions, respectively), 
and g is the acceleration of gravity, which Euler took to be proportional to the membrane’s weight. 
Tere was a mass term on either side of the equation, but it canceled out.318 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
∂
∂ = ∂
∂





 +
∂
∂






2
2
2
2
2
2
z
t
h z
x
f z
y
g g
In essence, that solves Stage I of the one-body problem of constraints for a 
thin membrane. Euler then proceeds to Steps II and III: he infers the integral 
form of the equation above (over the whole membrane), then eliminates time 
from it to make clear that, at any instant, the shape of any infnitesimal thread 
in the membrane is a sinusoidal curve.40 With these results, the 18th century 
rational mechanics of fexible bodies reaches its zenith.
(iii) Fluid bodies
Progress in this area was slow and uncertain; from Torricelli to Newton and 
Varignon, researchers managed to obtain just two meager results—two efec￾tive parameters of whole-body motion. One was the efux speed of a “per￾fect” fuid, the other was the resistance force on the head of a solid submerged 
in a moving fuid.41
Two decades of separate eforts by the Bernoullis and d’Alembert then 
yielded a few key results that Euler soon combined into the basis for a rational 
mechanics of frictionless fuids. In modern terms, they were the concepts of 
internal pressure and “convective” acceleration; the use of partial derivatives 
to represent motion changes; and the balance-of-force approach to the equa￾tion of motion. Next, we survey the birth of these results; then we explain 
what Euler made of them.
In a 1738 treatise, Hydrodynamica, Daniel Bernoulli inferred inter alia the 
speed of water fowing out of a small hole in a large tank. A trained phy￾sician, he had an eye for practical consequences of his research. One im￾plication is knowledge of the pressure that a fuid moving in a tube exerts 
on its walls.42 He reasoned that it must be proportional to a certain change 
in speed: “Clearly, the water’s pressure on the container sides will be pro￾portional to the acceleration,” or the velocity increment it would acquire 
if the obstacle to its motion (the tube wall with the hole in it) disappeared 
at that instant, and the water could gush free. He found a way to compute 
40 Euler 1766, 247. 41 For work on the efux problem then, see Calero 2008, chapter 6. 42 Tis gives a tool for studying blood pressure (on arteries and veins) quantitatively. For Bernoulli’s 
experimental work on “dynamic” fuid pressure, see Calero 2008, 318–20.Building bodies 319
that increment, and thus infer the “dynamic” pressure, or fuid force on the 
walls.
43 To get some of his main results, Daniel Bernoulli used an approach 
then called methodus indirecta: to obtain a parameter value at a point, he 
would start by imposing a condition on an extended mass of fuid (usually 
a thin slice) and then infer to local values (at a point) from that supposition.
An odd impulse to compete then led his father, Johann, to publish his 
own tract, Hydraulica. Tough it had no new major results, it came with new 
insights into how fuids move; three, in particular. First, he realized that con￾tiguous parts in a fuid also press—and so exert a force—on each other, not 
just on container walls. Second, that in a tube of variable width a fuid par￾ticle undergoes a certain change of motion he obscurely called gurges.
44 And 
third, Johann Bernoulli found a way to handle instantaneous change at every 
point in a fuid by an approach then called methodus directa. Specifcally, he 
inferred the resulting acceleration (of a fuid particle) from the net balance of 
all the forces acting on it.
D’Alembert studied fuids at length, but two of his works are especially im￾portant here. In 1744, a year afer his infuential treatise on solid mechanics 
(see Chapter 9), he published a sequel on fuid motion. In it, he reobtained the 
Bernoullis’ key results above but from a new premise that he frst devised: a 
powerful version of “d’Alembert’s Principle.” Among those key results was 
the integral form (our Step II expression) of the equation of motion for one￾dimensional fow in a variable tube.
Ten he made a real breakthrough in a 1747 paper on the supposed cause 
of winds. Euler studied that paper closely, and drew much inspiration from 
it, in two regards. D’Alembert showed that the Bernoullis’ results on one￾dimensional fow can be extended to the much more difcult case of fuid 
motion in two dimensions. And, he showed how the calculus of partial 
43 See Bernoulli 1738, 259. Prior to Hydrodynamica, the notion of pressure then current was hydro￾static, viz. as the force on the container walls by a fuid at rest. Daniel Bernoulli frst investigated the 
“dynamical” pressure, viz. by a fuid in motion, and showed that it is less (than hydrostatic pressure). 
His father’s subsequent researches led to Euler’s discovery of the modern concept of pressure qua 
internal force, exerted on a fuid particle—not on container walls, as they had thought until then—by 
the surrounding fuid. For the hydrostatic notion of pressure, see Chalmers 2017.
44 “And so, for that infnitesimal width [of the fuid at a point] . . . a sort of throat [gurges] gets 
formed . . . that goes from wide to narrow . . . through which the fuid must pass while it accelerates, 
by continuous degrees” (Bernoulli 1742a, 398). A gurges is literally a throat (cf. “to regurgitate,” ety￾mologically “to go backward through the throat”). Truesdell translated gurges as “eddy” (1954, 32f.). 
However, that seems excessive; Bernoulli’s notion does not denote a gain in vorticity (as Darrigol 
2005, 10, correctly notes). Rather, it indicates the rate of change of position at that point (experienced 
by a fuid particle that happens to be there). Te nearest idea is our modern notion of “convective” ac￾celeration, which (combined with the “local” acceleration ∂v/∂t) gives the particle’s total acceleration 
at that instant. See the perceptive Darrigol & Frisch 2008.320 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
derivatives (then a nascent branch of pure mathematics) fruitfully applies to 
fuids, especially to their acceleration at a point.45
Maturation
Euler read Hydraulica in installments, before it came out in 1742. Afer the 
frst, he wrote back in excitement: “You have given me great light on this 
topic, which until now had seemed covered in thick fog.”46 Te great light he 
got from Bernoulli was really three lights. One, that methodus directa, or the 
balance-of-force approach, is the path to the equation of motion for that ele￾ment. Instead of taking Daniel Bernoulli’s integral approach, one must start 
with an infnitesimal volume element dV, and identify the causes that change 
its motion at an instant. Two, that pressure is an action—on a volume element 
dV, caused by the surrounding fuid—and so it contributes to the net force 
on it. Namely, internal pressure is a force-like cause of changes in fuid mo￾tion at every point: “for the frst time, the local and internal dynamics enters 
the scene.”47 Tree, that gurges is part of the kinematic change induced in that 
element, in addition to the change in speed that forces cause. Finally, here too 
d’Alembert’s mathematics taught Euler to represent Johann Bernoulli’s vague 
notion of gurges exactly: as a sum of the partial derivatives that we now call 
convective acceleration; see below.48
With these lessons absorbed, Euler in 1755 presented the rational me￾chanics of inviscid fuids in a lucid, strikingly modern paper on the “general 
principles of the motion of fuids.” Tere he obtained the equation of motion 
for a volume element—the key result of his century, really.49
He sets out with a clear statement of the “general problem” of fuid dy￾namics: to discover the “principle whereby we can determine the motion of a 
fuid, in whatever state it may be, acted on by arbitrary forces.” For that task, 
45 D’Alembert there showed how a fuid particle moves ahead while getting defected sideways 
(specifcally, how an air particle gets defected by centrifugal force as it moves around the earth). For 
quantitative details, see Darrigol & Frisch 2008, 1862f. For background, context, and reception, see 
Grimberg 1998.
46 Euler to Bernoulli, May 5, 1739, in Eneström 1905, 25. 47 Truesdell 1954, 36; his emphasis. 48 Tese results hold for the “Eulerian” description of fuid motion, which describes changes in the 
motion of any fuid particle that happens to pass through a location X fxed in space (the equation of 
motion is about changes in velocity and pressure at that location). In that description, the change of 
motion can be written as a sum of four partial derivatives: one with respect to time (∂u/∂t), and the 
others with respect to each of the three directions in space. Te latter type of change is sometimes 
called the “convective” acceleration, and the former is the “local” acceleration. In the alternative, 
“Lagrangian” description of fuid motion, we track an individual particle as it moves through space. 
In that description, the split above (between convective and local acceleration) does not obtain.
49 Euler 1757.Building bodies 321
certain quantities are given, or known: the positions and velocities of every 
particle in the fuid at some instant; that is the fuid’s “primitive state.” Also 
given, or known, are the “external forces” that act on the fuid: “I call them 
external to distinguish them from the internal forces (whereby the fuid’s 
particles act on each other). Tese latter forces are the topic of my researches 
below.” Other quantities are unknown, and must be inferred: “to know the 
fuid’s motion, we must determine, at every instant and every point, the ve￾locity and pressure” on the fuid there.50 An equation of motion does just 
that, and so his primary task is to discover it.
To that end, frst Euler derived two kinematic results: an expression (A) for 
the size-change in an infnitesimal volume element (see Fig. 10.2); and an ex￾pression (B) for the components of the acceleration vector du/dt at a point in 
a deformable continuum—the four partial derivatives that sum up to it:
du
dt
u
x
u
y
u
z
u
t = ∂
∂
+
∂
∂
+
∂
∂
+
∂
∂ (6a)
Here is why he needs expression (A). Density q is proportional to volume, 
V.
51 And, in a fuid the total mass is constant. Ten knowing a volume’s rate 
50 Euler 1757, 276. 51 In fact, Euler assumes the density q (in the fuid’s reference state) to be 1 by convention.
z Z z' Z'
Fig. 10.2. Change of volume. Lef: A volume element dV in the reference 
confguration. Right: Te same element, but in the stressed confguration. Euler 
showed how to express the change in volume using the partial derivatives ᶺxi
/
ᶺxj
 of the changes in length (of the sides) in the three directions.322 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
of change ipso facto tells us how mass density behaves in that volume. He 
describes that behavior as follows:
dq
dt
qu
x
qv
y
qw
z = ∂
∂
+
∂
∂
+
∂
∂ = 0 (6b)
In words: in a control volume, the change in density comes only from mass 
fow across the volume’s bounding surface.52 Following his cue, nowadays we 
call it the Continuity Equation, because it comes from “taking into account 
the continuity of the fuid.”53
Tis result meets a critical need for him. Recall the main topic of this 
chapter: motion under internal constraints. In Euler’s framework, a fuid 
in motion experiences internal actions that cause accelerations at every 
point: density changes, and internal pressure. His key to taming the latter 
was to treat it as a force—that was Johann Bernoulli’s clue—and to infer its 
action from the internal constraint, viz. the condition that the fuid is incom￾pressible. To grapple with the former, however, he needed the Continuity 
Equation above.
At this juncture, the sought result is in sight. To fnd out how a fuid moves, 
Euler chooses an arbitrary infnitesimal volume, and applies to it his “general 
and fundamental principle of mechanics,” namely:
the balance of force = the increment of linear momentum
In the particular case of a fuid, on the right side go the changes in speed and 
in relative position.54 On the lef side go external forces (such as gravity) and 
internal forces (viz. pressure).
52 Recall, his symbol q stands for mass density, hence ∂qu/∂x is the rate of mass fow in the x￾direction, and so on.
53 Euler 1757, 284. 54 Tere are two ways to track the motion of deformable bodies, “Eulerian” and “Lagrangian.” In 
the former, the equation of motion refers to a fxed point of space, and it quantifes the fow of matter 
there: the change of density, velocity, temperature, etc. at that location. Te Lagrangian approach 
picks out matter points—constituents of the body—and tracks their motion through space, over an 
instant of time. Choosing between these approaches is based on pragmatic criteria (e.g., ease of ex￾perimental access). In fuid dynamics, the Eulerian approach is more convenient (in lab settings, 
we place pressure gauges at fxed locations, and we monitor their readings over time). In elasticity 
theory, the Lagrangian approach works better (we use strain gauges to measure the relative-distance 
changes between neighboring particles).Building bodies 323
Te other factors [that determine the acceleration] come from taking 
account of the forces that afect each fuid particle. Now, beside the 
components P, Q, R of the [external] force acting on the fuid at location z, 
there is also the [internal] pressure acting from all sides on the volume ele￾ment situated at z. (Euler 1757, 284)
Tat yields the equation of motion for a perfect (inviscid) incompressible 
fuid. In the x-direction it reads:55
P + −
∂
∂





 = ∂
∂
+
∂
∂
+
∂
∂
+
∂
∂






1
q
p
x
u
t
u
u
x
v
u
y
w
u
z
(7)
In words: the net force (on the lef) equals the net kinematic change (on the 
right). Specifcally, because the fuid is a deformable continuum, the total 
force (from outside the fuid) plus the internal pressure—at a point, caused 
by the surrounding fuid—equals its speed change plus its rate of position 
change.56
In efect, by 1755 Euler had obtained a key result—his formula (7), known 
as Euler’s Equation for a perfect fuid—by a route that has become canon￾ical: the balance-of-force approach. Tat solved MCON1 for inviscid fuids, 
at least in the key respect: “at this stage, the entire theory of fuid motion 
reduces to solving analytic formulae,” namely, to fnding Step III, closed￾form solutions to the equations of motion.57
And so, fve decades of collective work slowly produced a vast rational me￾chanics of extended bodies. Afer much hesitant fumbling, Euler succeeded 
in developing a rational mechanics of impressive scope, including rigid, fex￾ible, and fuid bodies. We turn now to assess its strengths and weaknesses, 
with an eye to the demands of philosophical mechanics.
55 Euler 1757, 286. P is the net force external to the fuid, q is the mass density, p is the internal pres￾sure, and u, v, and w are the components of the velocity vector at that point in the fuid. 56 In our terms: the body force plus the pressure gradient equals the “local” acceleration plus the 
“convective” acceleration. Tat is, Σf + (–∇p) = mDv/dt. Here, D is the so-called material derivative, 
taken with respect to a moving frame, that is, Dv/dt = ∂v/∂t + (v·∇v). 57 Euler 1757, 298. Good accounts of Euler’s derivation are Truesdell 1954, 84–90, and Darrigol 
2005, 23f.324 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
10.5 Assessment
In 1700, mathematicians knew just enough to treat two interacting particles, 
and one mass point under elementary constraints. By 1780, they had 
quantifed the motion of broad classes of extended bodies. Several fgures 
drove these enormous advances, and Euler built on their work by giving 
wide-ranging solutions to MCON1. Te keys to his success were two: “Euler’s 
First Law,” and the “Euler Heuristic.” Still, his treatment had lacunae, as we 
will see.
(i) Euler’s First Law and the Euler Heuristic
Overall, the basis of Euler’s success was his decision to rely on balance laws—
of mass, force, and torque. One law in particular proved indispensable for any
solution to the problem of internal constraints. Tat makes it an E-principle, 
in the language of Chapter 8. Following a recent tradition, we call it “Euler’s 
First Law”:58
the balance of force, internal and external
= the local increment of linear momentum
To be sure, he stated it in quantitative terms—but that statement varies with 
the context of application. A signifcant fact; see below.
Tough their theory fell short of full generality—as of 1780 there were 
important types of extended body that rational mechanics could not treat—
Euler put in place an approach that, based on his track record, seemed the 
most promising approach to solving MCON1. To credit him, we call it the 
“Euler Heuristic,” and summarize it as a series of seven steps:
1. For every “element” in an extended body, refer its position to a frame 
external to the body, via three coordinate functions x, y, z.
2. Identify all the forces, internal and external, on that element at an in￾stant t
0
. Resolve each force into components relative to the three axes.
58 Truesdell (1991, 64f.) frst called it so, with good reason.Building bodies 325
3. Apply Euler’s First Law to the element; write it for each of three orthog￾onal components (e.g., ∑ P + ∑ N = md2x/dt2, etc.).
4. Te external forces P are known, or given by experiment.59
5. Te internal forces N are generally unknown, viz. not given as above. 
Infer their efects on the element from the internal constraint specifc to 
that particular type of extended body.
6. Plug the found formulas for P and N into the force law above. Te result 
is the equation of motion for that species of body. In essence, that solves 
MCON1 for that kind of object.
7. Mutatis mutandis for the torques on the body, if there are any; use 
Euler’s Second Law.
For this chapter, step 5 is especially noteworthy. Euler frst grasped it, and even 
he took decades to do so. To determine the motion of a fuid, he explained, 
we must “know the motion of every element” in it. But that seems a daunting 
task: for a rigid body, “if we know the motion of three non-collinear points in 
it, we have thereby determined how every other point” of that body moves; 
whereas in a fuid its elements “can move independently of each other,” and 
so its overall motion would “remain undetermined even if we knew the mo￾tion of a thousand particles” in that fuid. He goes on:
Still, we should not think that the individual elements’ motions do not 
depend at all on one another. For, if the fuid’s density cannot vary, then 
plainly its individual particles cannot fow such that they may disperse into 
a greater volume or squeeze into a smaller one. Hence there follows a cer￾tain condition on the motion of every individual particle. And, even if the 
fuid is allowed to condense or rarefy, that change cannot happen without 
regard to pressure [in the fuid]. Hence, that pressure imposes a certain law 
on the motions of every particle. (Euler 1761, 276; our emphasis)
We must assume the state of the fuid at an instant to be known; I call it the 
primitive state. It is nearly arbitrary, so we must be given the position of the 
particles making up the fuid, and their impressed motion. . . . However, 
this initial motion is not wholly arbitrary: both the continuity and the 
59 For instance: “among the givens [of the problem] we must count the external forces; the fuid is 
subject to their solicitation. Here, I call these forces external to distinguish them from internal ones 
[forces intestines] whereby the fuid’s particles act on each other. Tese latter forces are the topic of my 
study below. In consequence, we may suppose the fuid to be solicited by no external force at all; or 
just by natural gravity, which we regard as equal and parallel everywhere” (Euler 1757, 275).326 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
impenetrability of the fuid limit that motion in certain ways that I will study 
in the following. (Euler 1757, 275; our emphasis)
In other words, the internal constraints specifc to that body type—for in￾stance, rigidity in solids or incompressibility in fuids—allow us to infer the 
actions of its parts on each other; see also below.
With the above synopsis as a lens for historiography, we may regard the 
subsequent discovery of the Navier-Stokes equation as a further and for￾midable vindication of the Euler Heuristic. Tat equation difers from his 
formulas for fuid motion because it quantifes an internal force (viscosity) 
that his age could not tame. Te same is true of the equation for elastic bodies 
in three dimensions, another victory of French mechanics afer 1820.60
And so we see the extraordinary power of the Euler Heuristic: it yielded 
solutions to MCON1 for a wide range of bodies, and promised a solution for 
all. Te path to reliable success turned out to be the “direct method”: start 
with a mass element in the extended body, and infer its motion from the sum 
of the forces on it, external and internal. Te latter had to be derived from the 
internal constraint, viz. the restriction (on the relative motion of parts) spe￾cifc to that body type: rigid, fexible, incompressible, elastic, etc.
And herein lies a crucial point for the purposes of philosophical me￾chanics. Te unity of Euler’s rational mechanics lies in its principles—laws 
of force and torque—that were shown to apply to a broad variety of kinds 
of bodies: rigid, fuid, fexible, and elastic. Tis allowed Euler and his 
predecessors to build a rational mechanics of broad descriptive scope from 
a small set of “frst principles,” as we say nowadays. But this nomic unity 
belies an ontic disunity. Te body kinds are independently specifed—
independently of the principles, that is—and irreducible to one another. Tis 
latter fact points to a telling lacuna.
(ii) Lacunae
Two limitations are most important for our purposes. Te frst is an insta￾bility in the classifcation of body types, whose root cause leads to a failure 
to treat the most important kind of body of all: deformable bodies (such 
60 A complete account of the discovery of the Navier-Stokes equation is Darrigol 2002; for Cauchy’s 
equation for elastics, see Chapter 12.Building bodies 327
as the human body). Te second stems from a lack of micro theory for the 
matter out of which the body kinds are constructed. We call them “Kind” and 
“Architecture,” respectively.
Kind
In some key respects, the forced motion of extended bodies—its full geom￾etry and causal structure—defeated even Euler and his emulators. In partic￾ular, the kinematics and dynamics of deformable bodies remained beyond 
their grasp. Importantly for our purposes, this includes not only our bodies 
(in particular), but all the bodies of common, terrestrial experience: wind 
blowing sand, seas lapping at the shoreline, blood coursing through veins, 
trees bending in the breeze, and so on.
With hindsight, 18th century mechanics fell short of discovering two 
concepts that are fundamental and indispensable for the motion of three￾dimensional bodies that deform. Te two concepts are strain and stress: one 
to describe mathematically any change of body shape, and the other to quan￾tify the mechanical agency causing those changes. Put diferently, six decades 
of work by d’Alembert, Euler, and Lagrange did not yield enough concepts to 
answer the broad question: how does a continuous deformable body move 
if forces act on it? Not until Navier, Cauchy, and their posterity was rational 
mechanics able to answer it at last. And so, in efect, around 1800 the problem 
MCON1 remained unsolved, Euler’s great advances notwithstanding.
Teir lack of insight into the true basis for representing extended matter 
(the concepts of stress and strain) kept them from seeing another founda￾tional distinction, namely, between “mechanical” and “material” properties. 
Te former are features that all bodies have simply qua objects of mechanics 
in general (e.g., inertial mass and space flling, or resistance to deformation). 
Te latter denotes properties that only a class of bodies has, and serves to 
distinguish it mechanically from other classes. Examples: fuidity, linear elas￾ticity, plasticity, and hysteresis (or mechanical memory). In modern, post￾1900 formulations of classical theory, mechanical properties are encoded in 
the dynamical laws (such as Euler’s First Law, or the principle of linear mo￾mentum) valid for all extended bodies whatsoever. Material properties, on 
the other hand, are encoded in constitutive relations, or equations that govern 
the kinematic response (to forces) specifc to that body type. Examples are the 
general form of Hooke’s Law, which contains the stifness tensor k qua ma￾terial property common to linearly-elastic bodies; the drag equation, which 
contains the dynamic viscosity (�) as the property specifc to “Newtonian” 328 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
fuids; the Kelvin-Voigt equation, which contains the dynamical modulus 
(�), a property of viscoelastic materials; and so on.
Te crucial aspect of the above distinction is: a constitutive relation (de￾fning a body type) is an equation that relates stress and strain. Absent that 
pair of concepts, the very notion of constitutive relations—the gateway to 
our modern taxonomy of bodies—is meaningless. And, without that no￾tion, classifying bodies into general kinds is not principled, or theory￾driven: it is not based on frst principles of rational mechanics, but on 
extraneous considerations, such as engineering practice, rules of thumb, or 
empirical regularities found in laboratory settings.
Tese lacunae matter for MCON1. Only the two insights above allow us 
to give a well-grounded account of body and its main species: fuid, elastic, 
plastic, solid, etc. Tat account was a desideratum of philosophical me￾chanics from the earliest days of the problem of collision (PCOL). Recall, a 
central part of that problem was to explain why elastic, sof, and hard bodies 
behave as they do in impact. To speak of elastic, sof, and solid in general, we 
need four concepts: stress, strain, material property, and constitutive rela￾tion. Te 18th century did not see that. And so, in an important sense their 
answers remain incomplete.61
Architecture
Tere is a recalcitrant dark corner in Euler’s philosophical mechanics: the 
architecture of matter at microscales. For decades, he took extended bodies 
to be composed of “elements” of matter—his equations of motion apply 
to single elements; and for internal forces (between body parts) he coined 
the term “elementary forces,” because they are the mutual actions of intra￾body elements. However, the makeup of an Euler element has three obscure 
aspects: the geometry of its mass distribution; its kinematic possibilities; and 
the kinetic actions it can exert.
Te frst aspect amounts to whether an element is a mass point, a very 
small but fnite rigid volume flled with mass, or a deformable, continuous 
infnitesimal volume dV. Te second regards the range of motions it can 
perform. A mass point’s trajectory is always a (curved) line. A rigid particle 
both moves in curves and spins around its gravity center—whereas no mass 
point can spin. Finally, a volume element dV can translate, spin, and also 
61 From our vantage point, we can readily see that they collectively lef out certain broad species 
(e.g., brittle solids and plastic bodies) that were not yet tractable. So, their partition of extended 
bodyhood into classes is certainly incomplete.Building bodies 329
deform (change shape), which the other two entities cannot do. Te third as￾pect concerns the types of force an element can apply. Mass points exert only 
actions at a distance. Rigid particles do too, but they also apply contact forces 
on each other’s surfaces—which cause translations and rigid rotations in the 
element as a whole. Volume elements can apply contact forces of a diferent 
kind (namely, stresses), which deform such volumes.62 In sum, an Euler ele￾ment can be one of three possible, but conceptually distinct, types of object.
Unsurprisingly, Euler saw deeper than most into how diferent these ulti￾mate objects are. And yet, he never squarely faced up to the question, What is 
the geometry, kinematics, and dynamics of the element common to all bodies? 
Te difculty of describing an “element” exactly contaminates philosophical 
mechanics downstream. Any attempt to state his balance laws exactly—in 
sharp, univocal mathematical terms—results in three distinct expressions for 
any single law, and none is general, or sufcient by itself to describe the mo￾tion of all extended bodies.
Take conservation of mass. If the Euler element is a mass point (hence an 
extended body K is a lattice of i equal elements of individual mass mi
), the 
principle becomes:
dM
dt
d m
dt
K i = ∑ = ( ) 0
But if the body is a physical continuum, then conservation of mass is given by 
the Continuity Equation:
∂
∂ + ∇ = ρ ρ t
[ ] v 0
Namely, for any volume element in a continuous body, the change in mass 
density at any instant equals the rate of mass fow into or out of the element.
Now take his second principle, viz. Euler’s First Law. If a body is a lattice of 
mass points, the principle must be stated as:
∑ = F a i i ∑m i
62 Mass points and rigid particles do not deform, so they cannot possibly exert stresses—nor can 
they respond by undergoing strain.330 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
Tat is, the total force on the body equals the net mass times acceleration of 
its individual elements. But if we regard the body as continuous, we must 
state the principle as:63
∑ + b T −∇ = v ( ) d
dt
ρ
2
Our initial point now stands out sharply: none of Euler’s principles admits of 
a single, univocal expression in quantitative terms.
Tis outcome points again to an ontic disunity, this time at the level of 
underlying matter theory. Tere is no single theory of matter from which to 
construct the distinct body kinds to which Euler’s principles apply.
In Chapter 9 we distinguished between principle and constructive 
approaches to theories. Euler’s successful quest to base rational mechanics on 
exact principles yields a tension with attempts to produce a constructive ac￾count of the bodies to which his principles apply. Tis tension—between gen￾eral principles and the three competing notions of matter element described 
above—persists into the early 19th century. We return to it in Chapter 12, 
when we examine how the Laplacians sought to anchor their rational me￾chanics in a single, specifc theory of matter.
Solving for internal constraints
Tough he built on real breakthroughs by his predecessors, in his century 
Euler went the farthest in the direction of general treatments, viz. mathemat￾ical descriptions that hold for very broad classes of extended body. In one 
respect, however, even Euler fell short: a truly general solution to MCON1 
eluded him. Tat is, he could not fnd a way to state exactly a uniform recipe 
for tackling internal constraints. Granted, this charge is somewhat difcult 
to grasp clearly at this point. But it will become more transparent by the end 
of the next chapter, afer we survey the method of Lagrange multipliers. Tat
method yields, as a very valuable corollary, a genuinely uniform treatment of 
internal constraints. But, it must be paired with a diferent dynamical basis—
a principle signifcantly unlike Euler’s balance laws of force.
63 b is the body force, T the net stress (the surface tractions and the internal stresses), and � the 
mass density. Cauchy established this result; see Chapter 12.Building bodies 331
10.6 Conclusions
While philosophical mechanics pondered its way out of the morass of PCOL, 
rational mechanics around 1730 turned to the task of mathematizing ex￾tended bodies. Tese objects—the bodies around us on earth, not the 
free particles in the sky that Newton had treated—generally come with 
constraints, internal or external.
Te constraints’ geometry and physics afect the motion of extended 
bodies, and so constraints have to be taken into account. In this chapter, we 
have reconstructed the 18th century struggle to tame internal constraints: the 
restrictions that make a body count as rigid, fexible, elastic, fuid, etc. For this 
particular struggle, we coined the term “MCON1.” Euler made the greatest 
advances on this front, ofen by building on breakthroughs and insights by 
d’Alembert and the Bernoullis. His genius for generalizing led him to an it￾erative recipe that we have called the Euler Heuristic. It is a powerful mix of 
three ingredients: the balance-of-force approach to the equations of motion; 
a broad dynamical principle, viz. Euler’s First Law of Motion; and the deep 
insight that internal constraints induce efects (on the moving body) on a par 
with the external forces acting on it—and so they can be treated by generic 
laws of force.
Te central problem we have surveyed in this chapter may now be stated 
more precisely: what is the mathematical description of a body moving 
(under exogenous forces) as a connected whole while its parts constrain 
each other?
Euler gave the most comprehensive answer, but his approach to a solution 
was piecemeal. Namely, frst he identifed the broadest species of extended 
body that he could tackle. For that task, his speciation criteria were geo￾metric, viz. based on shape behavior: he classifed bodies as either rigid or 
elastic or fuid-compressible or incompressible. Ten from their kinematic
possibilities—the changes of shape admissible for that species of body—he 
sought to infer the type of internal forces that would yield those kinematic 
behaviors. For instance, the forces required to maintain rigidity, or sameness 
of shape over time; tension qua the internal force responsible for shape resto￾ration in elastic solids; or pressure as the internal force that drives the shape 
behavior of compressible fuids.
Euler’s recipe for handling internal constraints deserves a further note. 
In the next chapter we will witness eforts to tame external constraints, and 
they culminate in another recipe, which we call the Lagrange Heuristic, built 332 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
around a diferent set of ingredients. Tat fact will be momentous. In efect, 
thanks to Euler and Lagrange, two powerful heuristics—two recipes for 
expanding the descriptive scope of rational mechanics—arose by 1800, but 
they difered, and they pulled mechanics in diferent directions. Teir diver￾gence threatened to break it apart, or at least seriously subvert all attempts 
at a unifed rational mechanics. Tat ominous prospect (its growth and real 
force) will be a focus of enquiry in Chapter 12.Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason. Katherine Brading and Marius Stan, Oxford University Press. 
© Oxford University Press 2023. DOI: 10.1093/oso/9780197678954.003.0011
11
External obstacles: Lagrange and 
the mechanics of constraints
11.1 Introduction
Te zenith of theory-building in the century afer the Principia was Lagrange’s 
treatise on “analytic” mechanics. In this chapter, we address two themes: his 
results in the rational mechanics of constrained motions (MCON), and their 
relevance for philosophical mechanics. We focus on edition A (1788) of his 
work, which we abbreviate as Mechanique, in line with its peculiar spelling. 
Edition B (1811–5) has signifcant changes, some of them philosophically 
important, which we defer to Chapter 12.1
Philosophically, our route into constrained motion has been from the 
Problem of Bodies (Body). As we have seen in earlier chapters, the early to 
mid-18th century quest for an account of whole-body motion led to a shif 
in the locus of research pertinent to Body, from the philosophical physics
of the early 18th century to rational mechanics. Te challenge facing ra￾tional mechanics can be broken into two: extended bodies subject to 
internal constraints (MCON1) and bodies impeded by external constraints 
(MCON2).2 In Chapter 10, we saw one approach to MCON1, led by Euler. 
Here, we turn our attention MCON2, and to Lagrange.
MCON2: Given an extended body subject to external constraints, how 
does it move?
Formulated in this way, MCON2 concerns bodies. And yet, as the rational 
mechanics of external constraints developed, its connection to Body
1 Mechanique was Lagrange’s second theory of rational mechanics. Previously he had devised and 
used a diferent, narrower theory based on a principle of least action. For lucid accounts of the earlier 
theory, see Fraser 1983. Chapters 11 and 12 are based on wider, ongoing research by MS.
2 See Chapter 7 for the transition from philosophical physics to rational mechanics, and for the 
specifcation of MCON and its division into MCON1 and MCON2.334 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
became ever more tenuous, with momentous consequences for philosoph￾ical mechanics.
In this chapter, we analyze Mechanique as a contribution to rational me￾chanics, and then evaluate it from the perspective of philosophical mechanics. 
To that end, frst we lay out the logical structure of Lagrange’s theory (sec￾tion 11.1). Ten we explain how he tackled MCON—how he treated both 
MCON1 and MCON2 within a single, unifed theory, efacing the distinction 
(sections 11.2 and 11.3). For the purposes of this book, we focus our attention 
on MCON2. We show that Lagrange’s mechanics yields a general solution to 
it, though with some limitations important for our purposes. Te solution 
rests on his most important principle—the Principle of Virtual Velocities 
(PVV)—along with two further principles whose content we make explicit 
(section 11.4). His solution has implications for philosophical mechanics; the 
most important is that it does not contain a solution to Body. We show this by 
taking frst a constructive and then a principle approach to his rational me￾chanics (section 11.5). Adopting the latter allows us to develop the insight fur￾ther: his theory is importantly neutral and open-ended about the ontology to 
which it applies (sections 11.6 and 11.7). We conclude with an evaluation of 
his overall theory (section 11.8), including its descriptive limits.
11.2 Te Principle of Virtual Velocities and “Lagrange’s 
Principle”
Lagrange’s Mechanique was a long time in gestation, and its origin is three￾fold. He created its mathematical framework (an algebraic version of the cal￾culus of variations) in his youth, and published it as a brief paper in 1760. Its 
fundamental principle, or basic dynamical law, he created soon afer that, 
and applied it to rigid-body dynamics in a 1764 prize essay on lunar motion. 
Te chief applications of that principle—mainly to dynamics, and gravitation 
theory in particular—Lagrange developed over two decades at Berlin, during 
his tenure at the Royal Academy, where he succeeded Euler. By the time he 
lef for Paris, in 1787, he seems to have had a frst draf of Mechanique.
3
3 Lagrange’s variational calculus, its application to dynamics, and his transition to the PVV are 
lucidly explained in Fraser 1983, which remains unsurpassed. Another study of Lagrange’s early 
mechanics is Pulte 1989. Cf. also Panza 2003, and the older Galletto 1991. Caparrini 2014 surveys 
Lagrange’s work leading up to Mechanique; his (forthcoming) describes the major changes from the 
frst to the second edition. Various overviews of Mechanique are in Capecchi 2012, Barroso Filho 
1994, and Pulte 2005.External obstacles 335
Outwardly, the book is a diptych with two unequal parts, a statics and a dy￾namics. Te two theories are not merely juxtaposed, however; they are held 
together by a fundamental premise, the Principle of Virtual Velocities. His 
statics and dynamics are both axiomatic-deductive in structure. Te former 
rests on a single principle, and the latter requires a second, which we call 
“Lagrange’s Principle.”4
Ostensibly, each theory treats three types of object: particles, solids, and 
fuids. Importantly for our purposes, Lagrange leaves most of these terms 
undefned or equivocal (see section 11.5). For particles and solids, he studies 
their motions while free, and then in setups with external constraints—these 
latter make up the bulk of Mechanique, and are a signifcant and substantial 
contribution to MCON2.5
We explicate his rational mechanics in three steps. We begin with 
statics, and PVV as formulated in that context. We then move to the dy￾namics of unconstrained systems, expanding the scope of PVV by means 
of Lagrange’s Principle. Finally, we extend PVV to incorporate constrained 
motion by introducing “equations of condition” and their associated heu￾ristic, the method of Lagrange multipliers. Tis fnal step enabled Lagrange 
to treat a wide range of constrained systems, as we shall see. But frst, some 
prerequisites on notation and basic concepts.
Lagrange’s notation is nonstandard and confusing. In Part I (his statics) he 
uses a single operator, d, in three diferent regimes: timeless variation (corre￾sponding to our ᶤ), partial diferentiation (viz. ∂), and regular diferentiation 
d, mostly with respect to time. Context alone disambiguates how he means 
his operator d. In addition, he has D, for elements of integration in contin￾uous bodies.6 In Part II (dynamics), he introduces ᶤ for “virtual velocities.” 
Lastly, he has a single operator, S, for two uses: fnite summation over discrete 
elements (as in our ∑), and integration over continuous regions (equivalent 
to our ∫). Again, context alone indicates how he means it.7 For the sake of 
clarity, we have disambiguated his notation wherever we could.
4 We follow Papastavridis 2002 in using this label. Lagrange himself attributed the principle to 
d’Alembert, but his own version is importantly diferent.
5 Most of the setups Lagrange treated—and for which he had developed his general heuristic—are 
masses with external constraints. To showcase the broad reach of his method, however, he used it to 
treat internal constraints as well: rigidity (in solids) and incompressibility (in perfect fuids). 6 For instance, he writes the incompressibility condition as d(DxDyDz) = 0, with Dx etc. denoting 
line elements; Lagrange 1788, 442.
7 Two lucid expositions of Lagrange’s mathematical framework are Fraser 1983 (a classic study) 
and Dahan Dalmedico 1990.336 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
To grasp the logic of his mechanics, it helps to start with his fundamental 
concepts. Te key notion is force:
In general, by “force” or “power” we understand the cause (whatever it may 
be) that impresses—or tends to impress—motion in the body to which we 
suppose that force applied. Hence, we must measure [estimer] that force 
by the quantity of motion impressed, or able to be impressed. (Lagrange 
1788, 1)
Another fundamental notion is “coordinate,” whereby he means a generalized
coordinate function, not just Cartesian distance.8 A third is “virtual velocity,” 
a key notion that he defnes twice. It is the velocity “that a balanced body is 
disposed to receive if the equilibrium is broken, i.e. the velocity it would ac￾tually acquire in the frst instant of its motion.” Equivalently, he thinks, it is 
the “variation, or diference” insofar as it “can result from an infnitesimally 
small change” induced by a force in the position of a material point.9 Put 
modernly, a virtual velocity is the result of applying his variational operator 
ᶤ to a coordinate x, y, r, etc. while letting time t be constant; hence the term 
really picks out a virtual displacement. Fourth, there is the “moment of a 
power,” his term for the virtual work done by a force. He writes it as a product 
of the general form mPᶤp, where m is a mass variable, P an acceleration, and 
ᶤp the “virtual velocity” of the force mP.
Lastly, there is “equation of condition,” whereby he means an expression 
that states the constraint “given by the nature of the system.”10 Lagrange has 
two ways of expressing such; sometimes he writes them as equations, and 
sometimes he treats the expression as an analytic function (of the generalized 
coordinates) to which he then applies diferential operators.11 All these 
notions matter below, and will become clearer in context.
8 “Above, we have used [Cartesian] rectangular coordinates because it simplifes calculations; but 
of course we can employ others just as well. Clearly, nothing in our approach requires that we use 
Cartesian coordinates rather than any lines or quantities that can express the positions of bodies” 
(Lagrange 1788, 23–4). Ten he gives transformation formulas between coordinate species (e.g., 
Cartesian to polar and vice versa). 9 Lagrange 1788, 11 and 13. 10 Lagrange 1788, 45. 11 Other synonyms he has: “fnite equation” and “algebraic function.” Lagrange restricts the class of 
admissible functions to those that can be locally approximated by a Taylor-series expansion.External obstacles 337
(i) Principle of Virtual Velocities
In his statics, Lagrange begins with an expression he called the Principle of 
Virtual Velocities:
Let a system of points or bodies drawn by arbitrary forces be in equilib￾rium; and give this system an arbitrary small motion whereby each point 
would cross an infnitely small distance (which stands for its virtual ve￾locity). Ten the sum of the forces respectively multiplied by the distance 
that the point (on which the force is applied) would cross (in the direction 
of the force) is zero. (Lagrange 1788, 10f.)
Ten he gives it exact, quantitative expression:
P pδ δ + + Q q R rδ + = etc. 0 (1)
where again P is the force and δp the corresponding virtual velocity. In our 
terms: if the net virtual work of the applied forces on a system vanishes, the 
system is balanced.
From it, he derives the equilibrium condition for the following setups. A set 
of free mass points under arbitrarily directed forces. A system of mass points 
subject to scleronomic constraints. A continuous, solid body acted on by 
action-at-a-distance forces. A mass point at rest on a rigid surface. An elastic 
string under an arbitrary distribution of external forces. A fexible string 
loaded with discrete masses. Tree particles under rheonomic constraints. 
A string confned to a rigid surface while forces act on it—a “problem that is 
perhaps quite difcult to treat by the common principles of Mechanics, but 
very easy to solve by my method.”12 A rigid body under forces acting at every 
point. A volume of incompressible fuid, enclosed in a container or free on 
every side. A volume of compressible, elastic fuid.
So much for statics. Te larger prize is dynamics, especially constrained 
motion. Lagrange’s signal achievement in Mechanique is the incorporation 
of all dynamics under a single principle devised for statics. Next, we explain 
how he managed that.
12 Lagrange 1788, 97.338 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
(ii) “Lagrange’s Principle”
His PVV was a principle for equilibrium—if the virtual work of the applied 
forces is null, the masses in that system remain at mutual rest—whereas dy￾namics treats systems in motion. Prima facie, then, his principle seems inap￾plicable beyond statics. Lagrange circumvented this obstacle by a brilliant 
invention: he devised a principle that “reduces” moving systems to rest, and 
thus makes them treatable by PVV. Te basic idea is this.
Let there be a body m prevented from moving freely, be it by external 
obstacles fxed in space or by constraints to other bodies. Let an actual force 
be applied to it, in some direction D. If the body were free, it would accel￾erate along D by a known amount, inferable from the Second Law: a = F/m. 
However, the constraints prevent it from moving that way. Hence, the body’s 
actual acceleration will be diferent from what the known forces and their 
laws entitle us to infer. It will move the body by some amount e in some direc￾tion E. Generally, a ≠ e; that is why external constraints count as obstacles (to 
free motion). Now imagine that a fctive force acted on the body along E, but 
in the opposite direction, and equal to me. Te two forces, actual and fctive, 
would balance each other—and the moving body would freeze in place and 
stay at rest. Speaking more precisely, let F be an actual force on a constrained 
mass m. Imagine we were able to induce on it another, non-actual force E
such that:
E e = −m (2)
In modern theory, we ofen call it a “reverse efective force,” or REF. It follows 
trivially that
F E + = 0 (3)
Tat is, the mass would be in static equilibrium. Lastly, suppose that each 
force gives the mass a virtual displacement. Ten
F E δ δ f e + = 0 (4)External obstacles 339
Tis is just PVV governing the moving mass m, which is actually in motion, 
but has been counterfactually reduced to rest. Tus Lagrange’s frst great heu￾ristic breakthrough was to allow the introduction of fctive forces that, when 
suitably calibrated, mentally turn a moving system into a static one. Ten the 
moving masses become treatable by PVV, the general law of his statics: for 
that system in motion, the sum of each force (whether actual or fctive) times 
its “virtual velocity” is zero.
When he re-published his treatise, Lagrange took the opportunity to 
clarify his innovation—the mental device of fctive forces introduced to bal￾ance the applied forces that actually move the system:
If we imagine impressing in each body the motion it is to have, but in the 
opposite direction, clearly the system will be reduced to rest. . . . Tereby we 
can reduce the entire Dynamics to a single general formula. For, to apply 
the formula of equilibrium to the motion of a system, it is enough to intro￾duce forces that come from the [actual] change in the motion of each body, 
which motions must be destroyed. (Lagrange 1811–5, volume II, 240; our 
emphasis)
Very rarely, modern theorists take care to remind the reader that REFs are fc￾tive, not actual. Tey state Lagrange’s idea as follows: “To the impressed forces 
add the negative accelerations of masses, as fctitious forces [Scheinkräfe]. 
Ten treat the system as one in equilibrium.”13 See also Fig. 11.1.
Out of great modesty, Lagrange credited his radical innovation to his 
former protector, calling it “the principle of Mr. d’Alembert.” Many modern 
writers followed him uncritically, and so “d’Alembert’s Principle” has become 
an equivocal phrase that covers three distinct ideas.14 To avoid confusion, we 
call the thought explained above “Lagrange’s Principle,” and state it thus:
Lagrange’s Principle. If reverse efective forces acted on a system of masses 
in motion, the masses would come to rest.
13 Hamel 1949, 218. 14 Te frst is from d’Alembert 1743, namely his General Principle (see Chapter 9). Te second is 
from d’Alembert 1744, which d’Alembert took to be a generalization of his 1743 insight. Tis is most 
appropriately labeled “d’Alembert’s Principle,” and it was the inspiration for “Lagrange’s Principle.”340 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
In sum, Lagrange built his dynamics of constrained systems from two 
postulates, viz. PVV and “Lagrange’s Principle.” In Mechanique, this dual 
basis is combined into the expression15
∑ + + ∑ + = 







 

m P p m  d
dt ( ) δ δ etc. x etc.
2
2 0
x (5)
From this equality, he derived the equations of motion for all the free systems 
solved in the book. We explain below his general approach to solutions. Te 
setups he treated are these. A set of free mass points under central forces. Te 
small oscillations of fexible strings. A free mass attracted by two or more 
forces directed to fxed centers. A system of particles interacting by action￾at-a-distance forces.
Tese systems are all free in the sense that they are not subject to ex￾ternal constraints. In each scenario, Lagrange’s chief concern is to derive 
E λ
m
p
G
Fig. 11.1. An illustration of “Lagrange’s principle” and his PVV. Here, m is 
a pendulum bob on a rigid rod; G is the real-impressed force on it, viz. gravity; 
ᶫ is the action of the constraint induced by the rod; p is the actual momentum 
increment that m acquires in an instant, viz. the mass times the efective 
acceleration e as defned in formula (2); and E denotes a fctive, non-actual force 
supposed equal to p but contrary to it. “Lagrange’s principle” says that E would 
balance the force G and the action ᶫ. Namely, if E were actual, m would remain 
at rest. His PVV says that these three actions times the virtual velocities they 
respectively induce add up to zero.
15 See, for instance, Lagrange 1788, 200.External obstacles 341
the equation of motion for that particular system. Yet, in addition, he seems 
interested in drawing broad conclusions too. For instance, he derives cer￾tain “general properties” of equilibrium and motion. Tey are what modern 
theory calls “frst integrals of motion,” viz. proof that if the net external force 
vanishes, then four quantities (the mass center’s velocity; the system’s linear 
momentum, angular momentum, and mechanical energy) are conserved in 
every closed system.16
11.3 Constraints: equations of condition
We have reached our chief object of interest: systems subject to external 
constraints. Mechanique exceeds all its predecessors in a key respect: it found 
a way to treat constraints that is general and uniform. We illustrate his insight 
by an example with generic import. (Te notation is slightly adapted from his 
treatise.)
Suppose two constrained equal masses are acted on by a force each; 
the motion efects they undergo are as follows. Te external forces induce 
accelerations P and R, respectively. Tese are the accelerations the masses 
would have acquired, were they unconstrained. Next, by “Lagrange’s 
Principle,” we must imagine that fctive REFs likewise act on the system, and 
induce −d2x/dt2 and −d2y/dt2, respectively: they are equal to the efective 
accelerations, but in the opposite direction.
Now we consider the constraints. Tese prevent the masses from 
undergoing the accelerations P and R, and so they change their motions 
at every instant. But these changes are not known in advance; they are not 
among the givens of the problem (unlike the external, applied forces, which 
are supposed known, or given). Tey would be so knowable, if only we 
knew the type and strength of the constraint forces—and the microphysical 
underpinnings of the constraints more broadly. However, that knowledge is 
generally not available, and it defnitely was not at hand during this period. 
In the 18th century, the only thing known about constraints was their geom￾etry, or “equation of condition.” How to proceed?
Lagrange broke through this epistemic obstacle—our ignorance of the 
physics and dynamics of constraints—by reasoning as follows. Whatever 
their underlying physics, let the constraints produce in each mass some 
16 Tat is, he obtains the familiar conservation laws for such systems.342 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
unknown accelerations l and m, respectively. Like any cause of motion, the 
constraints are associated with some “virtual velocities,” say ᶤL and ᶤM, one 
for each mass. In modern terms: ᶤL and ᶤM are virtual displacements com￾patible with the constraints. Tese too are unknown.
But then we are no closer to really knowing how the constraints will alter 
the motion. What will yield that knowledge? Lagrange’s triumph was to take 
two things we do know about the target system, and use them as stepping 
stones to a solution.
First, Lagrange points out that we do have some knowledge about the 
virtual displacements ᶤL and ᶤM. In particular, L and M designate the 
“equations of condition,” or algebraic expressions that spell out how the co￾ordinates depend on each other because of the constraints.17 He takes these 
geometric conditions (on admissible motions) to be given by expressions of 
the form:18
L = 0; M = 0, etc.
Tis knowledge is what we meant above in saying that the geometry of 
constraints was given, or known. Te condition equations state facts about 
the spatial-geometric confguration of the system throughout its motion.
Second, Lagrange declares that PVV applies to the actions of constraints 
as well. More precisely: each constraint can be associated with a “virtual ve￾locity”; their combined “moments” can be added to the “moments” of the 
real and the imaginary forces; and still the net “moment” across the system is 
zero—just as PVV had it for free, unconstrained bodies.
We have reached a crucial juncture. Lagrange has defned “moment” as 
the product of a virtual velocity and a force. However, generally the forces 
due to the constraints are unknown. As we noted above, they are not given. 
We lack the empirical facts from which to infer them before we derive the 
equation of motion for a system. Tis broad ignorance (of constraint forces) 
was the main stumbling block for Newton–Euler mechanics based on the 
Second Law. So, is the Lagrangian approach in a position to avoid Newton’s 
and Euler’s predicament?
As it happens, Lagrange was able to take this apparent weakness and 
turn it into a strength, as follows. (i) If the strength of a constraint force is 
17 Te idea is that external constraints take away independence, as it were: the freedom of a coordi￾nate to change without regard to how other coordinates change, if at all. A constraint “forces” certain 
coordinates to depend on others. It “conditions” their behavior.
18 Tereby, Lagrange in efect restricts his rational mechanics to what we nowadays call bilateral
constraints. Not all constraints are like that; see section 11.8.External obstacles 343
unknown, then we are free to represent it by an arbitrary function ᶫ, ᶬ, ᶭ, 
etc. Any function will do, provided it is analytic. Te functions ᶫ, ᶬ, ᶭ are the 
so-called Lagrange multipliers: scalar quantities that we may choose at will, 
and multiply each of them with a virtual velocity. Tat product has the di￾mension of a “moment,” or work done by a force; and, being arbitrary, can 
stand in for unknown quantities, as constraint actions are. (ii) Te direction 
of the unknown force is inferable from the “equation of condition” for that 
constraint, via its derivative dL, dM, etc. And so, the individual actions of the 
constraints are expressible as the “moments” (i.e., the quantities of virtual 
work) ᶫdL, ᶬdM, etc.
With this dual thought in hand, Lagrange is able to regiment the 
constraints under PVV, so that the full version of the principle reads:19
S S m m ( ) X Y etc e . . tc
x y δ δ x y δ δ d
dt
x
d
dt
+ + + + y +















2
2
2
2



+ { } λδL dµ M + = etc. 0
(6)
To help the reader grasp his radical innovation, Lagrange abbreviates 
the lef-side summands above as ᶊ, ᶉ, and �, respectively. Ten he rewrites 
PVV as:
∆ Γ+ + Λ = 0 (7)
Tis is a clearer expression of the insight behind that principle: in any 
moving system of bodies, the virtual work of the (real) impressed forces ᶊ, 
the (imaginary) reverse efective forces ᶉ, and the constraint forces �, to￾gether vanish. Tis is the statement of PVV in its most general form. See also 
Fig. 11.1.
We can think of it like this. In the most general sense, constraints are any 
quantitative relations of dependence between the coordinates in a mechan￾ical system. Te coordinates expressing the motion of a constrained system 
are not free to vary independently of one another—that is what it means for 
a system to be constrained. We have taken the known information about the 
dependencies among the coordinates (expressed as equations of condition) 
and incorporated it into PVV. Lagrange explains it himself:
19 See Lagrange 1788, 231 and 439.344 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
To apply this method, . . . we will suppose that L = 0, M = 0, etc. are the con￾dition equations that must obtain by the nature of the given problem; and 
that they refer to every point of the [system’s] mass. We shall call them “un￾determined equations of condition.”
When we diferentiate these equations in respect to ᶤ, we get ᶤL = 0, 
ᶤM = 0, etc. Ten we multiply the quantities ᶤL, ᶤM, etc. by the undeter￾mined quantities ᶫ, ᶬ, etc. respectively. And then we integrate over them, 
which yields the formula S (ᶫᶤL + ᶬᶤM = etc.). By adding it to the integral 
formula above [viz. Equation (1)], we obtain the general equation of equi￾librium. (Lagrange 1788, 53)
By working with the equations of condition, we bypass any appeal to 
the forces responsible for the constraints on our system. Remarkably, 
incorporating constraints into PVV in this way allows him to derive equa￾tions of motion for a wide range of constrained systems. Presented synopti￾cally, those systems are as follows. Mass points connected by massless rods 
or strings, but otherwise free to move in space under central forces. A system 
of particles moving under an initial impulse while connected by strings or 
rods. Te small oscillations of a coupled pendulum. Te small vibrations of 
an elastic, extended string loaded with discrete masses; and of a heavy chain 
swinging as it hangs from one end. Rigid-body rotation, free and forced. Te 
motion of a rigid body in terrestrial gravity. Te motion of a volume of in￾compressible fuid—specifcally: the fow of a homogeneous fuid in a pipe of 
variable profle; efux from a vertical tank; surface waves in a fuid. Te “very 
small motions” of an elastic-compressible fuid (such as sound waves in air).
Tere are limitations in the types of constraints that Lagrange considered, 
to be sure (section 11.8). Nevertheless, Mechanique is a landmark work: it 
covers a very wide range of problems in statics and dynamics from a single 
principle, PVV. And, by means of a radical innovation—the method of 
Lagrange multipliers—it incorporates classes of constrained systems that 
d’Alembert and Clairaut had been unable to treat. “Tough these mechanical 
setups are diferent, the steps to a solution [la marche du calcul] are the same. 
Which must count as a chief advantage of my method.”20
Tis gives us the basis of Lagrange’s mechanics, and a sense of the scope 
of systems covered. In the remainder of this chapter, we seek to better 
20 Lagrange 1788, 121.External obstacles 345
understand how Lagrange’s surprising strategy works, and the implications 
of this for philosophical mechanics.
11.4 Lagrange’s Relaxation Postulate: the kinematics and 
dynamics of constraints
In addition to PVV and Lagrange’s Principle, there is a third “principle” at 
work, of great importance for philosophical mechanics. It is an implicit but 
very broad assumption that covers all constrained motions. Lagrange does 
not name it; he gives it very little discussion, and just alludes to it as being 
“the spirit behind the method” of Lagrange multipliers. It took well over a 
century for mechanics to even begin to recognize it. Nowadays, we know it 
as the Relaxation Postulate, or Befreiungsprinzip. Te pernicious dearth of 
axiomatized accounts of analytic mechanics makes it hard to even state it 
clearly. Here is an attempt:21
Lagrange’s Relaxation Postulate
In a constrained system, the action of constraints is kinematically indis￾tinguishable from the efect of impressed forces: if the constraints were 
dissolved (relaxed), the result would be additional accelerations on the 
now-free bodies.
Te statement may seem vacuous or tautological, but is robustly informative. 
To see that, consider two ideas. (i) Constraints are just geometric or kinematic 
dependencies: algebraic relations between coordinates. (ii) Constraints have 
the same efect as dynamical agencies, viz. forces, on the bodies they con￾strain: they induce accelerations, and they do virtual work.
In building the rational mechanics of constrained systems, we start with 
(i) and along the way we quietly reach for (ii). But, they are distinct ideas. 
Te Relaxation Postulate is the precise, honest acknowledgment of the 
need to bridge (i) and (ii). Modern mechanics regards it as a broad (non￾local) postulate—an indispensable premise logically independent from the 
21 We rely on Hamel 1949 and Papastavridis 2002. Acknowledging the Befreiungsprinzip is rare, 
and mostly restricted to German-language treatises. In Anglophone literature, Papastavridis alone 
gives it the prominence it deserves. See also Neimark & Fufaev 1972.346 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
dynamical laws. Lagrange stated it without fanfare, and with no efort to 
signal its foundational status:
I must note that, in the general equation of equilibrium, we may regard the 
terms ᶫdL, ᶬdM, etc. as designating the moments of various forces applied 
to the system.
It follows that every condition equation is equivalent to one or more 
forces applied to the system, in the given directions.22 Ergo, the system’s 
state of equilibrium will be the same, whether we consider it as induced by 
these forces [equal to the Lagrange multipliers] or we suppose it to ensue 
from the equation of constraint. (Lagrange 1788, 47, 49; our emphasis)
We mentioned above that, by working with “equations of condition,” we by￾pass any appeal to the forces responsible for the constraints on the system. 
Te constraints make regions of confguration space inaccessible: they 
are kinematic conditions. Yet, once we think of these constraints as being 
realized physically, we are to treat them as part of the dynamics of that system.
Te use of Lagrange multipliers (and their equations of condition) gives 
just partial information about the constraints’ action. In regard to cor￾poreal action at a point, consider two types of knowledge we could have. 
(i) Knowing the quantity of a vector F that, when fed into the generic formula 
F = ma, yields a determinate value for the local acceleration, a. (ii) Knowing 
the constitutive relation, or particular law, specifc to the force behind that ac￾tion: these are what one uses to replace the generic, placeholder term on the 
lef-hand side of F = ma. Examples of constitutive relations are Hooke’s Law 
for tensile stress; Newton’s Law for gravitational actions; and Stokes’ Law for 
fuid resistance on a sphere.
Te method of Lagrange multipliers yields just the frst kind of knowledge 
above. It does not tell us the particular force law giving rise to the action of 
the constraint. Te method is powerful in part just because it allows us to set 
aside the need for such detailed knowledge of the forces: we use the condi￾tion equations to bracket the relevant dynamics into the kinematics, as we 
might say, and then solve for the motion of the system.
We saw this bracketing strategy at work in d’Alembert’s Treatise (Chapter 9). 
Lagrange’s Mechanique makes an important advance by indicating how to 
move beyond treating our system merely through kinematic constraints. 
22 Namely, in the direction of the partial derivative ∂L/∂qi
.External obstacles 347
Tis is a subtle, deep strand of theory-building in his book. It is a heuristic 
insight that allowed Lagrange to extend his theory while keeping it unifed. 
Specifcally, he took a dynamical law that applies to constrained systems, 
and applied it to unconstrained ones that are otherwise similar. Te key to 
extending it (to free, no longer constrained systems) is Lagrange’s Relaxation 
Postulate above. Recall, in this context “relaxation” denotes the removal of a 
constraint; in modern talk, the opening up of a previously closed degree of 
freedom.
We begin with a generic description of his approach, then we illustrate it 
with some examples. An apt name for his approach would be23
Lagrange’s Relaxation Heuristic
Let Z be an arbitrary mechanical system, L = 0 be one of its constraint equa￾tions, and λ be its corresponding Lagrange multiplier. Now consider an￾other system Z′ exactly like Z in every respect, but with an extra degree 
of freedom. Namely, the degree that results by removing the constraint L
above. Ten the system Z′ so freed will move according to the same equa￾tions as Z, except that now λ designates an impressed force. Te kinematic 
and dynamical properties of Z′ determine λ uniquely.
Some examples cast light on this idea. In statics, Lagrange derives the equi￾librium condition for a rigid rod, with the Lagrange multiplier λ (and the 
accompanying equation of constraint L = 0) expressing the rigidity condi￾tion. Relaxing that constraint allows the body to behave as an elastic rod, 
which is now free to bend. However, bending (formerly prohibited, in the 
rigid body) must now be supposed to be resisted by a force: a “force of elas￾ticity” that resists bending, and tends to restore the rod to its equilibrium 
shape.24 In dynamics, Lagrange frst derives the equation of motion for an 
incompressible fuid; in that setup, L = 0 expresses the sameness-of-volume 
constraint, and ᶫ∂L is the resulting Lagrange multiplier. Ten he relaxes that 
constraint, viz. he allows the fuid to contract or dilate—types of motion for￾bidden in incompressibles. But, in the fuid freed to contract, a force arises 
to resist that motion now permitted. Tat is internal pressure, a function of 
volume-change at a point.
23 We base this presentation on Hamel 1917. An updated, stepwise exposition of the approach is 
in Papastavridis (2002, 470f.), who illustrates it with new examples, and shows its kinship with the 
kinetostatic, or “rubber band” approach in modern analytic mechanics.
24 See the details in Lagrange 1788, 87.348 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
Unfortunately, Lagrange did not make this demarche as clear as he could 
have. Mostly, he suggested it:
It follows that every condition equation is equivalent to one or more forces 
applied to the system, in the given directions.25 . . .
Conversely, these forces can replace the constraint equations that result 
from the nature of the given system. And so, by employing these forces, we 
can regard the bodies as entirely free and devoid of constraints. . . . Tat is the 
spirit of what the method [of Lagrange multipliers] consists in.
Properly speaking, the forces above stand in [tiennent lieu] for the 
resistances that the bodies must experience in virtue of their mutual 
constraints; or are induced by the obstacles that, depending on the system’s 
makeup, resist the [free] motion of bodies.
Better put, those forces are nothing but the very force of these resistances 
[of the constraints], which must be equal and opposite to the pressures 
exerted on them by the bodies. As we have seen, my method gives a means 
to determine these forces and resistances. Which is not among its least 
advantages. (Lagrange 1788, 49f.; our emphasis)
He lef it to readers to infer from his use how the Relaxation Heuristic really 
works. It took over a century for his posterity to grasp it.
For our purposes, it is of enormous import. In a constrained system, 
knowledge of the impressed forces responsible for the constraints lies out￾side the reach of rational mechanics, for the reasons we have just explained. 
Lagrange’s heuristic shows how to move stepwise from a tractable constrained 
system to a full dynamical treatment.
In practice, this is easier said than done. For example, a conspicuous gap 
in his theory is the motion of deformable continua in three dimensions—
even of simple, highly symmetric objects such as elastic bars or shells. Te 
only three-dimensional bodies he managed to treat were rigids, even though 
his heuristic suggests how to move from them to deformables. It was lef to 
Navier and Cauchy in the 1820s to take that fnal step. Tis is not to fault 
Lagrange, of course. Rather, it is a lesson in how difcult it is to quantify the 
mechanical behavior of extended bodies.
Te most important take-aways for our purposes are these. Mechanique is a 
tract in rational mechanics—a long, connected exercise in applied diferential 
25 Namely, in the direction of the partial derivative ∂L/∂qi
.External obstacles 349
equations. It is an analytic mechanics: where d’Alembert’s solutions work 
with a mix of diagrammatic and algebraic reasoning, Lagrange’s methods 
make no use of diagrams: “there are no fgures in this book. Te methods 
I present herein require neither construction nor geometric reasoning, just 
algebraic operations.”26 It is highly general, and equipped with a general heu￾ristic for treating constrained systems—including a systematic treatment of 
MCON2, though with some important limits of scope—and then relaxing 
the constraints toward a full dynamical treatment. With this analysis of his 
book in hand, we turn to our next task: the signifcance of all this for philo￾sophical mechanics.
11.5 Philosophical mechanics and Lagrange’s Mechanique
Much of Lagrange’s treatise is concerned with ofering a theory of bodies—in 
equilibrium or in motion—but he says very little about what a body is. Body
was not his concern. But it is ours. And, as we have emphasized throughout 
this book, an adequate solution to Body requires a philosophical mechanics: it 
demands resources beyond those of either philosophical physics or rational 
mechanics alone. Our task is to identify the elements of Mechanique relevant 
to Body and to spell out their philosophical signifcance. To this end, we do 
two things. We examine Lagrange’s explicit statements, and we also seek to 
uncover commitments implicit in the problems that he solves—we aim to re￾cover meaning from use.27
Together, his overt declarations and implicit premises imply that he took a 
body to be any object with four properties: mobility, extension, mass, and the 
ability to apply forces of interaction: “Since every body is essentially heavy 
[pesant] and extended, we cannot strip them of either property without 
changing their nature [les dénaturer].”28
He further thinks that bodies come in two genera. But, he makes this di￾vision twice, and along diferent lines. One division yields solid and fuid 
bodies, and the distinction is broadly dynamical, viz. based on their specifc 
response to applied force. His fuids come in two classes: incompressible and 
“elastic,” or compressible:
26 Lagrange 1788, vi. 27 For more on our methodology, see Chapters 1 and 7. 28 Lagrange 1788, 389. Caution: by “heavy” he means responsive to exogenous actions in general, 
not just to gravity.350 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
In efect, the main property of fuids—the only one that distinguishes them 
from solids—is that all of their parts yield to the least force, and can move 
(relative to each other) most easily, no matter what the connections and 
mutual actions of these parts. . . .
As we know, fuids in general are divided into two species: incompress￾ible, whose parts can change shape but not volume; and compressible￾elastic, whose parts can change both shape and volume, and which always 
tend to dilate with a known force, commonly supposed to be some function 
of density. (Lagrange 1788, 122, 130; our emphasis)
Under “solids,” he ofers three species: rigid volumes, fexible lines (they bend 
but do not stretch or compress), and elastic strings. We cannot make these 
categories any clearer on his behalf—it will take later developments to arrive 
at the specifcity of our modern concepts.29 Te second division is purely geo￾metric, and it entails bodies that are either rigid or deformable:
In regard to mass and fgure, we must regard each body as a congeries of 
an infnity of particles that keep the same relative situation, if it is solid; or 
can change their situation according to certain laws, if the body is fexible 
or fuid.
Te solidity condition [for a body] consists in all of its points constantly 
keeping the same positions and distances relative to each other. (Lagrange 
1788, 122, 130; our emphasis)
However, his two ways of carving up bodyhood are not coextensive: the frst 
divides (i) rigids, fexibles, and elastics from (ii) fuids, both compressible 
and incompressible; the second divides (i) rigids from (ii) deformables, solid 
or fuid.
Two things to notice. First, most of this is tacit. Tere are no defnitions 
of body, and no ofcial account of body and its properties. Second, what 
we can extract is ambiguous. If “body” is a genus, Lagrange was unable to 
decide which diferentiae specifcae matter most for his mechanics. Tis 
suggests something important about Lagrange’s mechanics: though overtly 
his tract concerns a theory of bodies in equilibrium and in motion, “body” is 
29 In modern theory, a fuid is a physical continuum that exerts very low shear stresses when it is 
deformed. “Solid body” is no longer a true genus.External obstacles 351
not a robust concept therein, neither as a presupposition nor as target of his 
theorizing.
From the perspective of philosophical mechanics, this poses an interesting 
challenge. A successful philosophical mechanics goes beyond rational me￾chanics by specifying its objects: by telling us what the theory is about. As we 
move to assess how well a particular theory meets this requirement, we have 
two options: constructive and principle (see Chapter 9). Te former approach 
to theorizing begins from the material constitution of the objects or systems 
of interest (such as bodies), and from that picture develops an account of 
the rules and laws that such objects or systems satisfy. Te latter begins from 
some principles held to be very general (perhaps universal) and independent
of the particular material constitution of the target systems. Ten from those 
principles it draws out an account of the nature of the objects or systems 
(such as bodies) to which these principles apply. With these tools we can cast 
light on the signifcance of Lagrange’s book for philosophical mechanics.
(i) Te constructive reading of Mechanique
If we take a body and zoom in to the ultimate level of ontological resolution, 
what does Lagrange think we will see? Mass points separated by small but 
fnite distances; tiny rigid volumes; or continuous matter of varying density?
Lagrange did not answer. Instead, he tried to formulate a rational me￾chanics that can be retroftted to any of the three pictures of matter above. 
Specifcally, he treats systems of discrete mass points interacting by action-at￾a-distance forces or fexible strings; then rigid bodies, and fnally fuids. He 
regards fuids as being a species of continuous matter; it is unclear whether 
he thinks rigid bodies are continuous, made of mass points, or a sui gen￾esis type of body.30 In every case, he derives the relevant equation of motion 
from the same one principle, PVV. So, in a robust sense, he created a rational 
mechanics that can be moored to any of the three, distinct architectures 
of matter. He is keenly perceptive of the diferences between these matter 
30 Te assumption that the system’s component masses are tiny rigids is tacit in his treatment of a 
discretely-loaded string that vibrates (Mechanique, Part II, section V, §1); and also his later treatment 
of fuid resistance (edition B, Part II, section XI, §§36–7). Like Newton before him, Lagrange thinks 
of fuid resistance as induced by the impact of tiny rigid spheres on the head of a solid body moving 
through the fuid. Tat was really the default assumption until Prandtl’s creation of boundary-layer 
theory in 1904.352 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
theories, and he is seeking a theory that allows for them all.31 (Admittedly, 
his insight has limits; see below.)
He admits that extended bodies are composites, but that clears up little. 
Lagrange refers to the ultimate components of body—casually and without 
discussion—as “points,” “particles,” “molecules,” and “elements.”32 Only the 
last is clear: a Lagrange element is an infnitesimal volume dV in a physical 
continuum: an element of integration over continuous manifolds. He lef 
“molecule” undefned; a pity, and a reason to be wary, because his French 
disciples will give “molecules” the starring role in their theory of matter (see 
Chapter 12). Lastly, his notions “particle” and “material point” are equiv￾ocal. Te interpreter has two options. One: they are mass points. However, 
in an extended body, the number of mass points is fnite, whereas Lagrange 
says, “Generally, when we must take into account the mass and fgure of 
mobile bodies, we need only regard each body as a congeries [assemblage] 
of an infnity of particles.”33 It is unlikely that he could be confused about 
this simple fact. Two: they are points in a pre-theoretical notion of a con￾tinuous body.34 More work is needed to decide which of these options was his 
considered view.
“Architecture of matter” is our umbrella term for any account that builds 
on the answer to a key question: what is the size of the mass units that make 
up a body? Are they zero-sized (mass points)? Finite-sized (atoms, rigid or 
elastic)? Infnitesimally small (volume elements)? Lagrange gave no clear an￾swer to this question, even though his book is a mechanics of bodies and 
it supposes that whole-body motion emerges from the motions of its mass￾bearing components. And so, his triumphant phrase—that “those who love 
mathematical Analysis will be delighted to see that I have turned Mechanics 
31 For instance, he knows to denote the mass of discrete particles by M, a fnite number; and that of 
elements in continua by dM, an infnitesimal quantity. He knows to use diferent operators for whole￾body quantities, depending on whether he regards a body as a discrete set or a true continuum. For 
the idea that his operator S has diferent meanings (viz. summation vs. integration), depending on 
whether masses in the target system are discrete or continuous, see Lagrange 1788, 244.
32 For “particle” see, inter alia, 1788, 122, 330, 334, 378, 438f., 449f.); for “point” see 1788, 333, 340–
50, 357–9, etc. 33 Lagrange 1788, 330; our emphasis. 34 Continuum mechanics begins with a notion of body placement, understood as a mapping from 
the body’s points to the points of Euclidean space. A fnite-time motion in this theory is defned 
as transplacement, viz. a mapping from one placement into another. However, when it moves to 
dynamics—to the study of stresses in continuous bodies—the theory leaves behind the picture of 
continuous bodies as sets of points. Instead, it takes the “Euler-Cut” approach: it regards them as 
fnite volumes, and chooses arbitrary subparts in them (control volumes), which it then shrinks men￾tally to an infnitesimal volume element dV, so as to study its response to force and stress. For ex￾ample, Lagrange seems to regard a rigid body as made up of “elements” (1788, 372, 374).External obstacles 353
into a branch of it”—comes at great cost. From the perspective of a construc￾tive approach, analytic mechanics clouds in obscurity its most important 
object.
Ten let us try interpreting his theory using a principle reading instead.
(ii) Te principle reading of Mechanique
In the landscape of Enlightenment theorizing, Lagrange’s book stands out 
through the explicit importance it gives to principles. Like d’Alembert be￾fore him, he refects on the principles that support his mechanics, places 
them in historical context, and reviews their qualities self-consciously.35 So, 
approaching Mechanique from a principle perspective is consonant with 
Lagrange’s own thinking. In that regard, we pursue three tasks. First, we 
clarify the principles and their scope. Second, we investigate their epistemic 
status. Tird, we elucidate the relation between the kinematics and dynamics 
of his theory. Tis will enable us to clarify the extent to which the principles of 
the theory are sufcient to specify the objects of that theory.
As he sees it—and says explicitly—the genuine and single foundation 
of his theory is PVV. We know, from Chapters 7–9, that “principle” was an 
equivocal notion in philosophical mechanics. In Lagrange’s, PVV is a prin￾ciple in the strongest, most genuine sense: it is an E-principle, or common 
premise for all the equations of motion (every one of them requires it indis￾pensably for its derivation). And, it is the privileged source of confrmation
for all the results downstream from it. Tis is because of the epistemic status 
he ascribes to PVV, and the axiomatic-deductive structure of his theory.36
As it happens, that status was somewhat fuid: Lagrange was of two minds 
about the warrant for his PVV. In edition A, he claimed the principle is cer￾tain because it has four virtues. In edition B, he argued that it is true because 
it follows deductively from a necessary truth of statics. We discuss his frst 
account now, and his second in Chapter 12.
At the outset of Mechanique, Lagrange declared that PVV may “be 
regarded as a species of axiom for Mechanics.” It deserves that status, he 
35 Lagrange prefaces his statics and dynamics with long surveys of the various principles histori￾cally used before him. In edition B, these surveys become even more extensive. He appears keen to 
argue that PVV has a distinguished track record that long precedes Mechanique, and so his choice of 
principle is all the more legitimate.
36 In efect, Lagrange’s work established that any optimal solution to MCON must rest on the PVV 
(because it alone is compatible with the method of Lagrange multipliers).354 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
explained, because it has a number of theoretical virtues. It is entrenched, or 
“long recognized as the fundamental principle” of equilibrium.37 It is simple, 
in some undefned respect; presumably he means easy to grasp, because all 
it says is: the net virtual work is always null. It is general, in that it applies to 
every mechanical system, at rest or in motion. And, it is heuristically fruitful, 
because when we state it exactly, it becomes clear how we can apply it to other 
types of systems:
We must admit that it [the PVV] has all the simplicity we could require of a 
truly fundamental principle; and we will see below how much its generality
speaks in its favor. . . .
Moreover, the Principle is not just very simple in itself and very general. 
It has another advantage, unique and invaluable: we can translate it into a 
general formula that contains [the solutions to] all the problems [of equi￾librium or of motion] that can be thought up. (Lagrange 1788, 10, 12; our 
emphasis)
In sum, at this stage of his career Lagrange sought certainty for his principle, 
not proof of truth. In singling out generality and simplicity qua distinctive 
marks of genuinely fundamental principles, he sides with his later mentor, 
d’Alembert. Tis changed dramatically in edition B of 1811. Tere he made 
a volte face and argued that PVV is a theorem, because it follows from a priv￾ileged species of true proposition; see Chapter 12 for discussion. In short, 
PVV is intended to be completely general in scope (task 1), and is taken to be 
certain (task 2).
Generality plays an important role for Lagrange in the evidential sup￾port for his theory, as we discuss below. But the desired generality has 
some lacunae. For the purposes of philosophical mechanics, the most se￾rious lacuna is that his book treats only ideal constraints, so called. Tat is, 
constraints assumed to be workless: PVV requires that the combined action of 
constraints does not change the target system’s overall momentum or energy. 
In reality, however, this condition does not obtain; real-world constraints do 
drain energy and momentum away from the bodies they constrain. Te most 
common avenues (whereby constraints do net work) are friction, thermal 
efects of vibration, impact, viscosity, and similar dissipative mechanisms; 
37 To make his case for this, he surveys briefy how Galileo, Descartes, Wallis, and Johann Bernoulli 
made use of the principle in their theories; cf. Lagrange 1788, 8–12.External obstacles 355
and these are everywhere. Tat stark reality poses a challenge for Lagrange. 
His theory does not come with an account of its own limits of representa￾tion. So, it is difcult to know which real-world systems of bodies it applies 
to, and how well it can represent their behavior. Tis has consequences for 
evidence: if the theory is to obtain empirical support, then we must know 
how to relax the workless-constraint restriction such that we can represent 
real-world systems. As we explained above, Lagrange had a heuristic for how 
to do this, but it requires us to undo exactly what made the system tractable 
in the frst place (i.e., the bracketing of dynamics into kinematics); when this 
is too difcult, the evidential question remains unaddressed.
In his book PVV is stated overtly, but it is not the only principle on which 
his theory rests. Tere is also “Lagrange’s Principle,” although he does not 
state it explicitly as a principle. It takes analytic work to give it a precise 
formulation—by drawing on what Lagrange says and also what he does with 
the principle. In addition, there is the Relaxation Postulate. It too must be 
extracted by the reader—less from Lagrange’s meager explicit statements, 
and more from his problem-solving practice. Having identifed these three 
foundational pillars, the principle approach requires that we examine them 
for their mutual independence and consistency, and their joint sufciency 
for solving the problems of mechanics. Only an axiomatic reconstruction of 
mechanics can discharge this task, and so we defer it here.38
For our purposes, we may draw two conclusions. First, Lagrange’s theory 
has the three most important features of the principle approach: adoption—
as the starting point for theorizing—of principles that are independent of the 
particular material constitution of the target systems; generality of the prin￾ciples; and bracketing of dynamical considerations by means of a kinematic 
condition. In consequence, the principle approach yields a natural interpre￾tation of Mechanique.
Second, we see the reason why the constructive approach fails to yield a 
unique ontology of objecthood for Lagrange’s theory. Te method he deploys 
is deliberately open-ended, in two important ways. For one, Lagrange 
presumed his PVV to be independent of—hence silent about—any partic￾ular choice of material constitution for the systems to which it is applied. For 
another, the Relaxation Heuristic tells us nothing about the species of forces 
responsible for the constraints: it asserts that, in removing the constraint, the 
38 Two informal axiomatic approaches are Hamel 1949 and Papastavridis 2002. We do not yet have 
a rigorous axiomatization of virtual-work mechanics, but Noll 1974 took the frst steps toward it.356 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
corresponding Lagrange multiplier will then designate an impressed force, 
but not what species that force is (whether gravitational, electric, and so on), 
nor what specifc law it obeys. Since the properties of bodies, the forces they 
experience, and their material constitution are directly related to one another 
(gravitational mass, electromagnetic charge; gravitational force, electromag￾netic force; point masses, line elements, etc.), we cannot know the properties 
of body until we know how to relax the constraints. And this is an open￾ended project in Lagrange’s mechanics.
11.6 Action
In Lagrange’s mechanics, inter-body action comes in two species: between 
bodies that are free, or able to move anywhere in space; and those that are 
constrained, or limited in their kinematic freedoms. Both free bodies and 
mechanical constraints act in the same generic way: by applying forces on 
other bodies. Teir efect is likewise the same: they induce virtual velocities 
and efective motions, viz. actual changes in generalized coordinates.
Tese two action species are more alike than they seem. For one, the same 
law governs them: the PVV, which—by allowing Lagrange multipliers—does 
not distinguish between these two species. For another, Lagrange frst made 
clear, and defended, the idea that the actions of constraints are forces; or at 
least are kinematically indistinguishable from them (see section 11.4).
Te true diference between these action species comes from the forces 
they exert. Lagrange restricts inter-body action to forces given by mono￾genic potentials: corporeal forces are the negative gradients of some “alge￾braic function of the relative distances” between them.39 But he put no such 
restriction on constraint forces; in particular, rheonomic constraints clearly 
exceed that limitation: “nothing prevents the condition equations L = 0, 
M = 0, etc. from including a variable t for time as well; we just need to regard 
it as a constant when we vary [other variables] by means of ᶤ,” he allowed.40
Moreover, his treatment of Action is very general. In this respect, it 
exceeds all predecessors on two counts. It treats a broader spectrum of setups 
than any rational mechanics had done before him. And, it solves them from 
one common premise—PVV. Lagrange knows well the unifying power of his 
39 Lagrange 1788, 381. 40 Lagrange 1788, 228.External obstacles 357
approach, and draws attention to it at crucial junctures. For instance, as he 
sets out to treat incompressible fuids, he reviews his predecessors, praises 
d’Alembert, but then remarks, “because he based it on laws of equilibrium 
specifc to fuids alone, his method makes Hydrodynamics into a separate 
science from the Dynamics of solid bodies.”41 In contrast, Lagrange derives 
the equations of fuid motion from the same one principle (of virtual work) 
that governs the rest of his statics and dynamics. Tey become “results of a 
single, general formula,” namely, equation (6): the virtual work of the applied 
forces, the reverse efective forces, and the constraint forces is null.
His mechanics being based on forces is at odds with the modern but 
anachronistic expectation that it must have been a theory of the Lagrangian 
L = T − V and its associated dynamical law, the Euler–Lagrange equation, 
ELQ. Te historical Lagrange did not really think that the physical agencies 
T, V, and their diference were genuine and sole foundations. True, he did ac￾knowledge ELQ as a partially alternative approach, but he did not think that 
it had the theoretical primacy that our modern notion of “Lagrangian” me￾chanics assigns it. In line with its predecessors, Mechanique makes good on 
the early modern program that mechanics is the science of forces.
Importantly, however, this is a treatment of forces within rational me￾chanics; it is a mathematical treatment. We can see the import of this by 
comparing Lagrange with his predecessor, d’Alembert, for whom:
We know just three ways for bodies to act on each other: either by direct 
impulse, as in regular collisions; or by means of some body interposed be￾tween them, and to which they are attached; or, lastly, by a mutual power of 
attraction, such as the Sun and the planets exert in the Newtonian system. 
(d’Alembert 1743, 72)
In Lagrange, there is no such appeal to physics in elaborating a taxonomy of 
forces. On the contrary, we fnd a clean separation of the physics by which 
one body acts on another from its mathematical treatment in rational me￾chanics. Specifcally, to apply the mathematical machinery of Lagrange’s me￾chanics, one need not know the physical species of force responsible for the 
constraints or for the motions being analyzed.
41 Lagrange 1788, 437. D’Alembert’s grounding assumption for his hydrodynamics was that, in any 
fuid at rest, internal pressure (at a point) is spherical, or equal in all directions.358 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
11.7 Evidence
Given the vast scope and imperial ambitions of Lagrange’s mechanics, a 
pressing question is: what evidence does he have for his novel theory? Te 
matter is difcult, and it rewards closer study; here we can give just a synopsis 
of its main parts. Briefy put, he seeks to marshal evidence in two ways: empir￾ically via the solutions to particular systems that he treats, and mathematic￾ally through the generality of the principles on which the theory is based.
(i) Evidence from empirical instances
Lagrange selects a few local consequences of PVV—one equilibrium con￾dition and two equations of motion—that can be solved (by numeric inte￾gration) and thereby yield predictions of determinate parameter values: the 
shape of the earth (from the equatorial bulging ratio); the speed of sound in 
air; and the orbital period of the moon and sun around the earth. He regards 
the agreement (between his predicted values and the empirically found ones) 
as evidence for his equations. For instance, he derives three diferential equa￾tions for a mass m attracted by two others, m′ and m″, then makes two special 
assumptions: he lets their mutual forces be inverse-square, and continues:
If we take m to be the mass of the earth, m′ of the moon and m″ of the 
sun, the three equations above become those of the so-called Tree-Body 
Problem, on which Geometers have worked a great deal recently. Tat the 
lunar and the solar orbits [around the earth] are nearly circular makes them 
amenable to solving by approximation. And, if you look up the papers that 
treat the Problem, you will see the contrivances they have devised to make 
that approximation as exact as possible. (Lagrange 1788, 259)
In efect, he takes that to be empirical confrmation for his equation of mo￾tion, via the special case of a “reduced” three-body problem.42
Two aspects deserve a note here. Prima facie, Lagrange’s approach to 
empirical evidence resembles that of Newton and his followers, who like￾wise had inferred to specifc parameter values for certain whole-motion 
42 Tat is the special case when one mass is much larger than the other two, and thus can be 
regarded as stationary.External obstacles 359
integrals: the bulging ratio (and the associated value of g at select latitudes); 
the time of arrival at perihelion (for the 1759 return of Halley’s Comet); and 
the speed of aerial sound. Very unlike Newton, however, Lagrange does not 
seem interested in the stronger kind of evidence to be had from system￾atic discrepancies. Namely, from the diferences between predicted values 
(from his theory) and parameter values measured empirically. Being able 
to account for such discrepancies—from the very resources of the theory at 
issue—had yielded strong evidence for Newton; certainly stronger than mere 
loose agreement between theory and observation. Lagrange looks away from 
this stronger kind of empirical confrmation; when data diverges from his 
predicted values, he tends to speak dismissively of data:
Hence the speed of sound [from my theory] will be 915 Paris feet per 
second. Experiment gives about 1,088 f/sec, which is almost one sixth 
higher. But this diference [between theory and data] can only be attributed 
to the uncertainty of our current experimental results. (Lagrange 1788, 511)
Contrast his attitude with that of Newton, who always sought to ascertain 
if the discrepancies (between prediction and data) were systematic, and—
when they were—to account for them by identifying their physical causes in 
exact, measurable terms, then by predicting (from theory) the expected size 
of those discrepancies.43
Lagrange’s epistemology of mechanics has an important obscurity. Recall 
his statement (7) above of PVV in the source-specifc form: ᶊ + ᶉ + � = 0. 
If we state his principle for free bodies only, it reads: ᶊ + ᶉ = 0. Tis implies 
trivially that � = 0: the net virtual work of the constraints vanishes.44 But 
what might be his warrant for this assertion? What evidence does he have? 
Regrettably, he does not say; but a charitable interpreter can answer it on his 
behalf. Lagrange’s theory is designed to treat just ideal constraints (i.e., the 
kind of constraints whose overall action across the system is workless): the 
43 Te sources of confrmation (including the 1759 return of Halley’s Comet) and the patterns 
of evidential reasoning associated with Newton’s gravitation theory in the 18th century are lucidly 
explained by George Smith (2014). Smith frst uncovered, and stressed the evidential import of, sys￾tematic discrepancies (between Newton’s frst-order predictions and observed orbits), and the ability 
of Newton’s theory to trace them to physical sources (viz. further centers of gravitational attraction in 
the solar system).
44 ᶊ is the net virtual work of the forces actually applied on the system; ᶉ is that of the (imaginary) 
reverse efective forces; and � that of the constraints in the system.360 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
net virtual work due to them is zero by defnition. To be sure, this evidential 
aspect of Lagrange’s mechanics deserves a second look.
Interestingly for our purposes, the appeal to empirical evidence pertains 
to theorizing in physics; it takes us beyond rational mechanics and into phil￾osophical mechanics. Te second type of evidence is proper to mathematics; 
we turn to that now.
(ii) Evidence from mathematical generality
Lagrange puts great stock in the heuristic power of his principles: to unify 
theory and to solve new problems. Tat power drives his theory construc￾tion along two tracks. One is a recipe for instantiating the same principle for 
diferent confgurations. Te other is a heuristic for extending the theory to 
novel setups. Each is a form of generalization, and by these means Lagrange 
seeks to establish the generality of his principles.
Te former may be called the canonical recipe. Synoptically presented, it is 
a series of four moves. For simplicity, we confne it to the statics of constrained 
systems in a plane; it is then easy to see how it works for dynamics.45
Step 1 Write down the Principle of Virtual Work for all the masses in the 
system: P ᶤp + etc. + ᶫ ᶤL + etc. = 0.
Step 2 Te virtual velocities δp, δq, etc. are in the direction of the respec￾tive forces that induce them. Express p, q, etc. in terms of some 
useful set of generalized coordinates; for example, polar (R and φ). 
Substitute each resulting expression into δp, δq, etc. of Step 1, and 
work out the algebra (based on Lagrange’s rules for the variational 
operator δ).
Step 3 Each constraint L, M is given as a dependence formula between 
generalized coordinates. Substitute the relevant formula into δL, 
δM, etc., and work out the algebra.
Step 4 For n masses in a plane, Step 1 yields 2n equations.46 For k
constraints, Step 3 yields k equations. Use them to eliminate 
45 Specifcally, at Step 1 just add new terms corresponding to the reverse efective forces, and make 
the necessary adjustments at the subsequent steps that need them.
46 Because two generalized coordinates are enough to describe the position of a single material 
point in a plane.External obstacles 361
dependent variables from the result of Step 1. Te outcome will be 
a set Z of (2n−k) equations between (2n−k) variables.
Te set Z gives the sufcient conditions for the system to be in equilibrium. 
At this point, the mechanics problem is solved—any further steps are just 
problems in mathematics (e.g., integrating Z over time).
In addition, Lagrange found another heuristic—but in dynamics alone—
which he ofered as the “simplest method for obtaining the equations that 
determine the motion of an arbitrary system of bodies” driven by accelera￾tive forces.47 It too is a recipe that he stated in generic terms; we reconstruct 
it here. Let m be the mass of a component particle or body, q its generalized 
coordinates, and d denote diferentiation in respect to time only.
Step 1 For that particular system, construct two functions, T and V, as 
follows. T is half of vis viva, that is, the sum over mdq2/2. V is the 
sum of mΠ, where Π is the “work function” for that system.48
Step 2 Now build the formula: � = d·∂T/∂dq − ∂T/∂q + ∂V/∂q
Step 3 If the masses are free, set Φ equal to zero. If they are constrained, 
let Φ equal the sum λ∂L/∂dq + μ∂M/∂dq + etc., where L, M, and the 
like are the equations of constraint.
Step 4 Use the dependencies expressed by L = 0, M = 0, etc. to eliminate 
all dependent variables in the equations obtained at Step 3. “By 
eliminating the unknown [quantities] λ, μ, etc., there remain as 
many equations as we need for the solution” of the problem.49
In retrospect, at Step 2 we recognize an early form of the Euler-Lagrange 
Equation, ELQ. His second heuristic, in efect, is a proto-version of the 
ELQ-based approach that nowadays we take to be the method of analytic 
mechanics. But we must caution against a misconception, or illusion of hind￾sight. Lagrange himself did not take it to be the sole recipe of his theory—not 
the preferred approach either. In his picture, the royal avenue to solutions 
was the frst heuristic above, based on PVV. He saw the ELQ as a benefcial 
shortcut allowable when the dynamics of the target system permits it: namely, 
47 Lagrange 1788, 216. 48 He defnes Π as “an algebraic function of the distances” between the masses. Earlier, he had built 
it from the work done on a particle by external forces P, Q, R, etc. that are functions of the distance 
to it (Lagrange 1788, 375, 381). Namely, Π = ∫ (Pdp + Qdq + Rdr + etc.). Hence, in modern terms Π
counts as a monogenic (conservative) potential.
49 Lagrange 1788, 228.362 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
when the interaction forces are gravity-like, namely, conservative, or given 
by V-type potentials; and when the forces act on point-sized particles. But, 
of course, not all systems are so tractable, and in that case Lagrange does 
not avail himself of the shortcut. For instance, his treatment of fuid motion 
makes no mention of ELQ.
Now that we know Lagrange’s recipes for theory buildup and expansion, 
it is easier to grasp and appreciate his words about their value. Te approach 
in Mechanique, he explained, showcases the “steady and regular workings” of 
his method.50 Against this backdrop, his treatise strongly suggests an overall 
conclusion about its epistemic credentials. Tey come from the virtues of 
two supporting pillars, namely, its principle and the accompanying recipe. 
Te PVV is “simple” in expression and very general in scope; the heuristic is 
uniform and transparent: it can be explained discursively and iterated indef￾nitely. It is these virtues, he implies—rather than strong support from empir￾ical evidence—that legitimize his rational mechanics.
11.8 Assessment
Like d’Alembert before him, Lagrange touted his mechanics’ vast descrip￾tive reach as a virtue, or reason to prefer it to its competitors. He had de￾monstrably covered all the species of kinematic behavior that Enlightenment 
theory had been able to solve.
(i) Unity and scope
From our vantage point, however, his rational mechanics has yet another 
virtue—subtler, buried deep, but all the more valuable. Lagrange’s approach 
yields a complete solution to the problem of constraints in general. It entails 
equations of motion for a system with any constraints, whether external or 
internal. More precisely, if the target object of his principles is free particles, 
then all Lagrange multipliers are trivially zero. If the object is free extended 
bodies, the multipliers denote the internal constraints specifc to that body 
kind. And if the target is extended bodies with obstacles to their motion, the 
50 Lagrange 1788, vi.External obstacles 363
multipliers pick out both classes of constraint, internal and external, that 
control those motions. In efect, Lagrange’s approach eliminates the need for 
any principled distinction between internal and external constraints.
Admittedly, he did not stop to acknowledge his theory’s unity of treat￾ment and generality of scope. Tat dual merit comes to light only when we 
survey the long history of that theory, especially in Germany. Some fgures 
there learned to exploit his two germinal ideas—the method of Lagrange 
multipliers and the relaxation of constraints—so as to cover further descrip￾tive territory from the same coherent set of three principles. Tat approach 
culminated in Georg Hamel’s comprehensive synthesis, subtitled A unifed 
introduction to the entire mechanics.
51
(ii) Lacunae
Its enormous range notwithstanding, Lagrange’s rational mechanics had 
some real descriptive limits. It was able to treat just constraints that are 
holonomic, bilateral, and workless (or ideal). From a purely mathematical 
standpoint, constraints come in two classes: bilateral and unilateral. In turn, 
bilateral constraints come in two species, holonomic and anholonomic.52
Lagrange’s mechanics is ft to handle just holonomic constraints: it admits 
just constraints that are given by equations between coordinates (and per￾haps time), which means they count as holonomic. Further, he restricted his 
account to constraints given by equations (of condition). Tat makes them 
bilateral. Tis reduces its scope not insignifcantly. For instance, it is unable 
to derive the equation of motion for this simple case: a ball, at rest on a hemi￾sphere a small distance from the pole, which starts to roll down under gravity 
without slipping; fnd its location at any time before it hits the ground. We 
51 See Hamel 1949, which covers—from the same three principles as Mechanique above—broad 
domains that Lagrange had been unable to treat. In particular, waves in continuous media, elasticity 
theory, and the dynamics of viscous fuids.
52 Bilateral constraints are expressible as equations. Unilateral constraints are expressible as 
inequalities. Example: a particle with position vector x falls down along a hemisphere of radius r; 
the constraint is | x | – r = 0. Holonomic constraints are functions of the generalized coordinates 
(and perhaps time) but not of derivatives (velocity or higher order). If the equation expressing a bi￾lateral constraint includes any generalized velocities (or higher-order derivatives), the constraint is 
anholonomic. Example: a sphere that rolls on a plane of length x. Te constraint is the “no slip” con￾dition for rolling, viz. x = rᶹ, where r is the radius, and ᶹ is the angular velocity of the sphere point in 
contact with the plane at that instant.364 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
might try to expand the scope, but then Lagrange faces a dilemma. Either 
all constraint forces are monogenic, just like the applied-impressed forces. 
Consequence: anholonomic constraints are then not explainable as the re￾sult of forces acting, because Lagrange’s admissible forces are not functions 
of generalized velocities, whereas anholonomic constraints are. Or we admit 
any constraint force provided it is expressible as ᶫ∂f/∂q, so that anholonomic 
constraints are included. Consequence: Lagrange was wrong to insist that all 
the forces allowed in Mechanique are monogenic.53
Lastly, Lagrange treated just ideal constraints. We have already remarked 
that his formula (7) entails � = 0, viz. the net virtual work of the constraints 
vanishes across the system. Tat is a not insignifcant limitation. In the 
real world, constraints are not workless; they drain energy away from the 
system, and increase its entropy. Which poses a challenge to his rational me￾chanics: its descriptive scope is not broad enough.
11.9 Conclusions
By mid-century, it was clear that a successful philosophical mechanics re￾quired a solution to MCON2: “Given an extended body subject to external 
constraints, how does it move?” In Mechanique, Lagrange ofered an answer. 
Despite the limitations just discussed, he had created a single, unifed theory 
of impressive scope, encompassing the motions of extended bodies impeded 
by external obstacles. In fact, it is a remarkable solution to MCON, quite gen￾erally. In order to apply the theory to physical systems, all one need do is de￾termine the appropriate Lagrange multipliers. And herein lies the interesting 
challenge of moving from rational mechanics to physics. Or, in our terms, of 
arriving at a philosophical mechanics.
More specifcally, an open question is the extent to which Lagrange’s ra￾tional mechanics can be incorporated into a philosophical mechanics that 
yields a solution to Body by giving a single, well-defned concept of body 
that is simultaneously (i) consistent with an intelligible theory of matter, 
53 Recall, any scleronomic constraint can be expressed as a function f(q1
, . . . qn
), viz. a dependence 
between coordinates alone. But, that is exactly the same condition that a potential must meet to count 
as monogenic. We may think of λ∂f/∂q as a potential-induced force that keeps the body “glued” to 
the constraint surface, by requiring it to do mechanical work if it is to move free of that particular 
constraint.External obstacles 365
(ii) adequate for a causal-explanatory account of the kinematic behaviors of 
bodies, and (iii) sufcient for the purposes of mechanics. Te obstacles are 
signifcant, as we saw when we assessed his theory from a constructive and 
then from a principle approach. To make more progress we need to look be￾yond Lagrange; see Chapter 12.Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason. Katherine Brading and Marius Stan, Oxford University Press. 
© Oxford University Press 2023. DOI: 10.1093/oso/9780197678954.003.0012
12
Philosophical mechanics in the 
Late Enlightenment
12.1 Introduction
In the previous four chapters, our leading thread was the rational mechanics 
of constrained motion. In that collective project, the center of gravity was 
the arduous task of mathematizing the motion change at every point of an 
extended body with constraints. Lagrange’s treatise, Mechanique, was the ap￾ogee of success on that count.
Troughout, Lagrange emphasized a pressing priority: the task of turning 
rational mechanics into a single theory, one that is general—it entails all the 
equations of motion then known; and unifed—it derives them from one and 
the same basis. Te basis was his Principle of Virtual Velocities (PVV) or, in 
modern terms, of virtual work.1
In the early 19th century, rational mechanics succeeded in quantifying 
the behavior of two new species of deformable body, which broadened its 
scope enormously. At the same time, alternatives emerged to Lagrange’s 
principle approach to unifcation. Together, these developments had 
signifcant consequences for philosophical mechanics. More specif￾cally, afer 1800 rational mechanics managed to treat novel classes of 
motion phenomena: capillary efects, and the behavior of elastic solids 
and viscous fuids. Many of these successes came from approaches and 
foundations not given in Mechanique. For this and other reasons, a group 
of mathematicians objected to Lagrangian nomic unity as a goal, setting 
out instead to establish ontic unity, via a preferred object that they called a 
“molecule.” However, both programs were challenged by Cauchy’s work in 
1 In the years we survey in this chapter, the concept of mechanical work becomes explicit and grad￾ually entrenched (see Grattan Guinness 1984), and so we abandon the 18th century language of vir￾tual velocities in favor of the phrase “virtual work.”Late Enlightenment 367
the 1820s. His results showed that, for some very important classes of mo￾tion, the Eulerian balance-of-force approach does better than Lagrange’s 
virtual-work principle; and that picturing matter as a deformable con￾tinuum works better than the Laplacians’ discrete molecules. Ultimately, 
these advances and watershed changes bear on the main topic of our 
book—the fate of philosophical mechanics, and the chances of solving the 
Problem of Bodies (Body).
Below, we spell out these developments and ensuing problems in sharper 
detail, and then draw some lessons for our main theme. We begin with a 
synopsis of the relevant fgures and sites of research (section 12.2). We then 
survey the main successes of the Lagrangian nomic program in new areas 
of mechanics afer 1800, and the problems it faced (section 12.3); and we do 
the same for the molecular ontic program (section 12.4). Next, we turn to 
Cauchy’s early work in rational mechanics, where his balance-of-force ap￾proach yields an alternative basis for nomic unity, and his use of the deform￾able continuum challenges the molecularist approach to ontic unity (section 
12.5).2 We close by assessing the impact of these developments on philo￾sophical mechanics afer 1840 (section 12.6).3
12.2 Makers and spaces
Te two unifying projects, ontic and nomic, were both French afairs, 
as was the challenger that arose to defy them subsequently. In the Late 
Enlightenment, the country was the world’s powerhouse for mechanics.
Te constructive approach relied on two leaders, Laplace and his out￾standing student, Poisson, who succeeded him afer 1820. Tey had associates 
in related felds—Navier in elasticity and fuid dynamics, Berthollet and Gay 
Lussac in chemistry, and Biot in optics. Occasionally, they received help from 
Haüy in crystallography and Cauchy in continuum mechanics. At the same 
time, this program ran into signifcant dissent, which blunted its appeal and 
curtailed its chances of success.
Te principle approach originated with Lagrange. His later career in aca￾demia acquired him some very capable disciples, and also sharp but friendly 
2 For convenience’s sake, henceforth we ofen use the phrase “true solid” for non-fuid bodies of 
three dimensions comparable in size.
3 Tis chapter is based on research by MS that is ongoing, extending beyond the scope of this book.368 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
critics (all of them young graduates from Lagrange’s courses) aiming to 
strengthen the foundations of his program. Among these critics were 
Poinsot, Fourier, and Ampère.
Tese two programs relied on some novel logistics, thanks to happy 
changes in the status of exact science in France afer the ancien régime. 
Te most drastic innovation was to put rational mechanics in the class￾room, and make it the cornerstone of elite education in science. Te locus 
for that was the École Polytechnique, a highly competitive preparatory 
school for advanced education in engineering. Its founding in 1794 had 
two outcomes relevant here. It caused the Principle of Virtual Work to 
become the law of the land, as it were: the ofcial basis for rational me￾chanics as taught to three generations, and codifed in major textbooks. 
And, it resulted in the Journal de l’École polytechnique, a new venue for 
research in mechanics.
Another novel site was a private laboratory for experimental research in 
physics. Funded and managed by Laplace and Berthollet at Arcueil, outside 
Paris, it was a venue for testing empirically the theoretical work that they 
and some young disciples had carried out in capillary theory, physical optics, 
heat science, and chemistry. Tis mattered for the ontic program, which ex￾pected knowledge of their privileged object—the molecule, its key properties 
and characteristic behaviors—to come from strongly established empirical
research in physics and chemistry.
Finally, one resource was traditional but more innovatively managed: the 
system of prize essay competitions at the Academy of Sciences. Te inno￾vation was that Laplace exerted more initiative over the choice of topics, all 
for the sake of advancing the constructive program. His overt advocacy for 
it, coupled with his towering prestige and political clout, led to historians 
calling the program “Laplacian physics.”4
4 Many other new journals for research in physics and applied mathematics were established then. 
Te institutional landscape and publication venues at issue in this chapter have been thoroughly 
studied. Grattan Guinness 1990 is a comprehensive guide to them, and Gillispie 2004 is an invaluable 
account of the broader context for science at the time. Crosland 1967 is an older classic on research at 
Arcueil. Excellent surveys of the École Polytechnique in its early years are Belhoste 2003 and Gillispie 
2004. Fox 1974 and 2013 are canonical presentations of “molecular” physics at the time, with an em￾phasis on Laplace; for Poisson and his time, the account must be supplemented with the comprehen￾sive Arnold 1983–4.Late Enlightenment 369
12.3 Lagrangian nomic unifcation
Lagrange had pursued with great success a project to unify mechanics on 
d’Alembert’s old terms: a formulation maximal in scope and based on very 
few principles. Tus the resulting unity of his mechanics was nomic, based 
in a privileged principle, PVV. His success lent that principle a distinguished 
place in French mechanics at the time:
To give mechanics all the perfection it is capable of, the last remaining task 
was to combine [Lagrange’s] principle (which we have just explained) with 
the principle of virtual velocities.5 Tat is what Lagrange did. Tereby, he 
reduced the study of the motion of an arbitrary system of bodies to the inte￾gration of diferential equations. (Laplace 1795, 307)
Tus, now we have [Lagrange’s] principle, which applies to arbitrary 
changes, fnite or infnitesimal, that can occur in the motion of a system. 
By this principle, we can always reduce a case of motion to equilibrium. If 
we combine this principle with that of virtual velocities, there is no dynam￾ical problem we cannot turn into an equation. From this vantage point, the 
science of motion and that of equilibrium lacks nothing. (Prony 1815, 284)
Afer 1800, eforts began to extend PVV to new areas not yet mathematized.
(i) Progress
All unifcation projects in the 1700s had been reactive, as it were: they would 
wait until theorists discovered further equations of motion—by whatever 
methods and approaches they could—and only then show that these newer 
results could be subsumed under the preferred unifying principle.6 As the 
19th century began, that reactive stance gave way to a diferent attitude. 
Teorists now turned to active unifcation: they used Lagrange’s principles 
for discovery too, not just incorporation afer the fact. Specifcally, they 
relied on virtual-work approaches so as to mathematize domains not treated 
5 Note: what we call “Lagrange’s Principle” is the statement that Lagrange himself called “the prin￾ciple of Mr d’Alembert”; viz. the thesis that in a moving system the reverse efective forces exactly 
balance the actual-impressed forces. See Chapter 11. 6 Recall, in Mechanique Lagrange derived from PVV the equations of rigid-body motion, the 
vibrating string, and perfect-fuid dynamics. But those equations came from d’Alembert and Euler, 
who had discovered them from premises and methods diferent from Lagrange’s. See Chapter 11.370 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
in Mechanique: elastostatics, capillary theory, and systems with unilateral 
constraints. We survey them in turn.
Elasticity
A frst new area they conquered was elastostatics; in particular, the equilib￾rium of an elastic membrane. In the 1810s, Sophie Germain and Lagrange 
tackled this problem, but somewhat inconclusively.7 It was Navier who made 
the real breakthrough, by deriving the equilibrium formula for a special case 
frst, then generally.8 He reasoned as follows. Any point in that plane is sub￾ject to two forces caused by the plane being deformed.9 One is “due to ten￾sion,” viz. local stretching, and the other force is “produced by the fexion,” or 
bending of the plane. Both of these force-kinds induce virtual displacements, 
corresponding to “moments” (i.e., virtual work). For that point to stay at rest, 
Navier concludes, “the sum of these moments” must vanish:10
T E dxdy · · δ δ k h + = ε dxdy E 3 0 (1)
By “integrating this expression over the whole elastic plane,” we obtain “the 
equation that expresses the equilibrium of the system.” Tat expression then 
must be “treated by the methods of [Lagrange’s] Mécanique analytique,” 
which gives two sets of equations, one for points inside the plane, and an￾other for points at the edges, viz. the boundary conditions.11
7 An 1809 prize essay competition at the French Academy asked for the equilibrium condition 
of an elastic membrane. Sophie Germain submitted a paper in 1811, then again in 1814 with some 
improvements. Because she claimed to derive her formula from the “principle of moments,” some 
scholars have thought it was Lagrange’s PVV. But, it seems she meant it in Euler’s older sense (of 
torque, or moment of a force). Tat is, Germain assumed equilibrium follows if the torque of the ex￾ternal forces balances the net torque of the membrane’s “elastic force” of restoration. Spurred by her 
eforts, Lagrange in 1814 gave his own formula for the equilibrium, but it is unclear from what me￾chanical assumptions he derived it. For further discussion, see Bucciarelli & Dworsky 1980. 8 Tat was the case of an elastic plate held fxed at the edges as forces press on it at arbitrary 
locations (e.g., as in a foor slab when people stand on it). Navier was a civil engineer. 9 Tis claim is signifcant. Cauchy’s early work in elasticity (see below) started as an efort to re￾duce Navier’s two forces above to just one, viz. stress.
10 See Navier 1823a, 95. T is the tension force (it stretches the plane evenly around that point), ᶤk
a virtual displacement in its direction, � a material-specifc constant (analogous to the parameter K
in Hooke’s Law for elastic springs), h the thickness of the plane, E the restoring force induced by the 
bending, and ᶤE its corresponding virtual displacement. Navier takes the force E to be equal to the 
sum of the plane’s curvatures in the two directions x and y; compare his result to Euler’s analysis of the 
vibrating membrane, see Chapter 10.
11 Navier 1823b, 178, 180. Te methods he mentions are known to the reader from Chapter 11. 
One is a step in the Lagrange Heuristic, viz. to express the virtual displacements ᶤk and ᶤE in terms 
of Cartesian or polar coordinates. Te others are purely mathematical, designed to eliminate the 
operator ᶤ from the equations: by letting it commute with the operator d, then via integration by Late Enlightenment 371
Ten he broadened his treatment for the more general case of an elastic 
solid (a body of comparable dimensions, not just a thin plane). To tame that 
type of object, again he resolved to take the “method of calculation employed 
in Mécanique analytique” (i.e., the virtual-work approach). Informally 
speaking, Navier’s derivation went as follows. On every molecule in an elastic 
solid there are internal forces: exerted on it by all the particles nearby, hence 
inside the body. When the body is in the “natural state” (viz. undeformed), 
the internal forces vanish. When external forces act on the body and deform 
it, the internal net force on every particle becomes non-zero.12 Moreover, 
every one of these forces induces a “moment,” or quantity of virtual work. 
Following Lagrange’s approach, Navier concludes: the body is in equilibrium 
if the “moments” of the internal forces and the external forces jointly vanish.
In exact terms, when an elastic body gets deformed, on every particle M 
the particles around it exert a restoring force associated with a virtual work. 
Tese count as internal forces. In addition, there are two more species: forces 
external to the body, acting on material particles inside it; and exogenous 
forces acting on its surface only.13 Tese forces do virtual work on their target 
particle. Te “general equation that expresses the equilibrium of the system” 
will be:14
ε ∫ + dV f F ( ) r ⋅ ⋅ δ δ ∫ + dV X X x d∫ ′ A x ⋅ δ ′ = 0 (2)
If the net virtual work of the three kinds of forces above, taken over the whole 
body, adds up to zero, then the elastic body will be in equilibrium.
Tis was a very great advance—it showcased the power of Lagrange’s prin￾ciple approach in a very difcult area, much harder to quantify than anything 
parts proceed until a purely diferential equation (in d alone) ensues. See the explanation in Lagrange 
(1788, 213).
12 Because deformation changes inter-particle distances, and so it displaces every particle from 
the location where the net force on it was zero. In other words, Navier takes internal forces to be 
functions of the deformation (i.e., the change of relative distance), not of the mere distance. 13 In modern continuum mechanics, Navier’s taxonomy broadly corresponds to the threefold dis￾tinction between internal stresses, body forces, and surface tractions. Not long afer him, Cauchy 
would make these distinctions rigorous; see section 12.5.
14 See Navier 1823b, 180. In his expression, �f is the net intermolecular force, X the net applied 
force (external to the body, acting at that point), and X′ the external force on points on the body’s 
surface.372 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
we have seen so far. Navier’s breakthrough had an added beneft: it let him 
derive the equation of motion. In the x-direction, it reads:15
ε
Π f
g
d x
dt ( )r − = X
2
2 (3)
Namely, the internal force plus the (exogenous) body force equals the rate 
of change in linear momentum. Tus the motion of an extended elastic 
body—its motion at every point, not just its mass center—at last yielded to 
Lagrange’s methods.
Capillary surfaces
Another major advance for the nomic unifcation program was due to Gauss. 
In rational mechanics afer 1800 there were many attempts to derive the an￾alytic formula for the shape of the meniscus surface of a fuid in a capillary 
tube; see below. Gauss in 1829 decided that Laplace’s theory of capillarity 
was inadequate, and sought to replace it “from the ground up,” by a “wholly 
diferent method” that proceeds “from the frst principles of dynamics.” Just 
one, in fact, namely, the “principle of virtual motions.” In an incompressible 
fuid, he begins, at every point let there be a quantity mΣP · ᶤp.
16 Te fuid is 
in equilibrium if
m PΣ Σ · · δ δ p m + ′ P p ′ ′ + ″ m PΣ ″ ″ ·δp + = etc. 0 (4)
for all the “physical points” in it. Tat is, equilibrium obtains if the virtual 
work of all the forces on a fuid particle vanishes.
Tis part is not new, of course. Already in 1788, Lagrange had rested 
his entire hydrostatics on it. Gauss’ innovation was to extend it by a new 
account of the forces acting on a fuid particle in a capillary tube. Tose 
actions, he claimed, are “gravity” pulling downward, “attractive forces” that 
fuid particles exert on each other, and forces whereby those particles are 
15 �, f, and X have been explained above; �/g is Navier’s representation of mass density (� is weight 
per unit volume, and g the acceleration of gravity). 16 Gauss 1833, 42f. Here, m is the particle’s mass, P the net efective acceleration, and ᶤp an “inf￾nitely small motion compatible with the conditions” on the system (Gauss 1833, 43). Just as Lagrange 
had explained in Mechanique.Late Enlightenment 373
“attracted to some fxed points” (i.e., to the capillary tube walls). He expresses 
these three force kinds accordingly, and adds their respective contributions 
to the efective acceleration P above. Te rest is just mathematical prowess. It 
yielded for Gauss a general solution that superseded Laplace’s “incomplete 
theory,” and did not need to start from his “principle of molecular forces.”17
Unilateral constraints
From Chapter 11 recall that Lagrange’s theory handled just bilateral 
constraints, viz. given by equations between dependent coordinates. Around 
1827 Cournot tried to move rational mechanics beyond this limitation by a 
small, cautious step forward. He sought to extend Lagrange’s statics to cases 
in which mass points are subject to constraints given by inequalities (e.g., I ≥
0 and J ≤ 0). For that family of cases, he argued, the masses are in equilibrium 
when two conditions obtain (not just one, as in Mechanique). First, the vir￾tual displacements compatible with the constraints are themselves given by 
inequalities:
δ δ I J ≥ ≥ 0 0 ; (5a)
Second, the virtual work of the applied forces F, G, H, etc. is at most null:
F f δ δ + + G g H hδ + ≥ etc. 0 (5b)
Tese two formulas jointly give conditions for the masses to remain at rest.18
Granted, this extension of PVV was rather modest. (Te mechanics of uni￾lateral constraints is difcult, and remains an area of active research.) But, it 
further illustrates the eforts to expand Lagrange’s principle approach to the 
unity of mechanics.
17 Gauss 1833, 42, 81. 18 See Cournot 1827, 167f. He then illustrates his point with two examples, including the case of 
a mass point constrained to remain on or above a rigid plane z = a parallel to the plane xy of the 
coordinates.374 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
(ii) Problems of unifcation
A half-century afer Mechanique, the nomic unity program had added enor￾mous new territory. But the Lagrangian project then ran into some problems. 
One was internal, and it concerned the epistemology of its principle. Te 
other was an external objection that accused the project of being explanato￾rily and referentially opaque. Let us inspect them more closely.
Evidential concerns
Recall from Chapter 11 a certain ambivalence about the epistemic status of 
PVV in Mechanique. Tere was empirical evidence for its truth, but it was 
scant, disparate, and comparatively weak. And, there were strong reasons to 
accept the principle as certain.
Lagrange’s immediate posterity was unsatisfed with either. Afer 1796 a 
group of young theorists, former students of his at the École Polytechnique, 
made a forceful push to show that PVV is true and based on the strongest 
evidence available in rational mechanics. Tese critics then go on to seek 
that missing evidence themselves—they try to infer the principle from some 
supposedly primitive mechanical truth. Some tried to show that PVV can 
be inferred from the Composition of Forces (i.e., the Parallelogram Rule for 
statics); others argued that it follows from the Law of the Lever.19
Lagrange reacted to his critics rather strangely. Instead of pointing out that 
his principle was certain, he chose to agree to their terms, viz. that PVV re￾quired proof of truth. “I must confess that the idea [behind the principle], 
though in itself correct, is not clear enough for it to serve as the principle 
of a science whose certainty must rest on self-evidence,” especially when we 
teach it to beginners, he fretted.20 He just disagreed with their choices of key 
premise for that proof; he believed none of the candidates above really counts 
as a primitive truth. Te proofs given so far, Lagrange objected, infer the 
principle from either the Parallelogram Rule or the Law of the Lever. “But, 
as is well known, these two are not evident enough that they do not require 
their own proof,” he demurred.21 Accordingly, in edition B he gave a proof 
of his own—an intended demonstration of PVV. But the proof is drawn out, 
19 For derivations from the Composition of Forces, see Fossombroni 1796, the frst critical exam￾ination of Lagrange’s warrant; and Poinsot 1806. For the Law of the Lever, see Fourier 1797. Tese 
claims help shed light on Lagrange’s own attempted proof.
20 Lagrange 1797a, 3. 21 Lagrange 1797b, 115.Late Enlightenment 375
its logic opaque, and the evidence for its key premise far from transparent.22
Whatever Lagrange thought of its strength, it did not end the debate. Years 
afer the fact Poinsot, one of his early and astute critics, commented on the 
need to shore up evidentially his mechanics:
Since Lagrange’s book ofered nothing clearer than the march of 
calculations, soon we realized that he had dispersed the obscurity hanging 
over the structure of Mechanics at the price of shifing that obscurity back 
onto the very origins of this science. (Bailhache 1975, 111)
Attempts to dispel that obscurity, by way of yet another “proof ” of PVV, con￾tinued up into the 1830s. Teir logical merits aside, they all assumed the 
target system—the thing that the Principle is about—to be a set of discrete
mass points, free or constrained. Not continuous bodies. Which led Cournot 
to remark grimly:
Consequently, in the case of continuous mass elements, the principle of vir￾tual velocities holds just by induction, i.e. from particular confrmations. 
Hence, the foundations of the general theory that Mécanique analytique has 
so admirably developed are not yet sufciently established a priori. We do 
not yet have a direct demonstration that would allow us to derive, from a 
single principle and by a uniform method, the laws of equilibrium for all
systems, whether solid, fuid, etc. (Cournot 1827, 166; our emphasis)
In sum, the two editions of Lagrange’s treatise are importantly diferent. 
Beneath their sameness of structure (nomic unifcation from PVV) lies a 
drastic shif in the evidential status of that principle. And yet, the epistemic 
credentials of his approach seemed defcient even to its followers.
22 His key premise is a proposition he calls the “principle of pulleys.” It is a claim about the behavior 
of a weight at rest hanging from a system of connected pulleys rigidly attached to pedestals fxed in 
space. To avoid evidential regress, the premise ought to be self-evident. It would need non-discursive 
a priori evidence; for instance, ostension to a diagram. But Lagrange undermines that prospect. His 
opposition to synthetic geometry (and its representational resources) rules out that option; recall his 
injunction that “analytic mechanics” has no fgures to rely on. So, it is mysterious why he thinks his 
own proof is sound. For some discussion, mostly inconclusive, see Jacobi 1996[1847–8], Mach 1883 
and Bailhache 1975.376 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
Referential opacity
Another problem was external: a blunt reproach by fgures associated with 
Laplace. Expressed in their terms, the objection went as follows. Recall the 
original rationale for the Lagrange multipliers: the forces of constraint—their 
physical sources and mechanisms of action—are generally unknown in ad￾vance. Only the geometry (and not the physics) of the ensuing constraints is 
available knowledge. Te method of Lagrange multipliers exploits that geo￾metric fact so as to infer the efect of constraints while bypassing the need for 
microphysical knowledge. For that reason, the Laplacians called it “abstract 
mechanics.” To them, it seemed radically inadequate—precisely because it 
bypassed physics. So, they advocated its demise and replacement by a “phys￾ical mechanics” that incorporates the missing knowledge:
Geometers should reprise the main questions of mechanics from this phys￾ical point of view, which corresponds to nature. So far those questions have 
had to be treated in a wholly abstract manner, so as to discover the gen￾eral laws of equilibrium and motion. With this sort of generality and ab￾straction, Lagrange went as far as it is conceivable, by replacing the physical 
bonds of bodies with equations between the coordinates of their points. 
Tat is what analytic mechanics consists in. But, alongside this admirable 
approach, we can now advance physical mechanics, whose sole principle 
is to reduce everything to molecular actions, which transfer from point to 
point the action of forces, and mediate their equilibrium. . . .
Generally, in applying mechanics we must take into account all the phys￾ical circumstances pertaining to the innermost nature of bodies. Tat need 
has long been felt, so as to overcome the indeterminacy behind certain 
questions of abstract mechanics. Such indeterminacy could in no way ob￾tain in nature, where everything must be determinate, and admit of unique 
solutions. (Poisson 1828, 341f., 344)
Put in our terms, they objected that Lagrange’s bracketing of dynamics into 
geometry lef his mechanics referentially opaque: its physical content was 
in part occulted, and that was reason to move beyond his approach.23 Tey 
thought they had a better way forward.
23 Poisson thought that only constructive approaches could turn mechanics into a source of deter￾minate knowledge. In his view, Lagrange multipliers do not give that knowledge: computing them 
yields a quantity (namely, ∂ᶫ/∂qi
) with the dimension of a force, but no insight into (as 17th century 
fgures put it) the “seat” and “manner of operation” of constraint forces. In modern terms: Lagrange Late Enlightenment 377
12.4 Molecular ontic unifcation
Te program we are about to explain could, and was, a plausible alternative 
to the Lagrangian nomic approach. But it did not begin as such—not overtly, 
anyway. Rather, it began as a confdent project to mathematize all of physics. 
Namely, to use reliable results of empirical research as inputs for quantifca￾tion, that is, for using the calculus of partial derivatives so as to derive those 
results from a physical theory of forces between certain entities they called 
“molecules”:
In general, all the attractive forces and repulsive forces of nature ul￾timately reduce to like forces [of attraction or repulsion] acting from 
molecule to molecule. From this supposition I had shown . . . that all cap￾illary phenomena reduce to intermolecular attractions over imperceptible 
distances. . . . We have also attempted to reduce electric and magnetic phe￾nomena to actions from molecule to molecule. . . . Lastly, the supposition 
of actions ad distans from one molecule to the next, when applied to heat, 
leads clearly and precisely to the true diferential equations for the motion 
of heat in solid bodies. Tereby, this very important branch of Physics like￾wise enters the domain of mathematical Analysis. (Laplace 1898, 288, 290)
Tough Laplace’s chief aim was to reform physics, his program had a critical 
component that pertained to mechanics as well. Te Laplacians expected all 
rational mechanics—all equilibrium conditions and equations of motion—
to be derived from the physics of molecules. In efect, their program assumed 
that the unity of mechanics is really ontic. Tat is, mechanics is a single 
theory because it quantifes the possible motion-behaviors of a preferred ob￾ject, namely, the molecule:
Teorists have sought to reduce elastic phenomena as well to actions from 
molecule to molecule. To determine the equilibrium and motion of an 
elastic lamina that has been bent, we suppose that its restoring tendency at 
every point is inversely as the radius of curvature. But this law is a deriva￾tive fact, and follows from the attractive and repulsive actions of molecules, 
which are functions of distance. To show how the above law follows, we 
multipliers are not as informative (about the microphysics of constraints) as a force law or a constitu￾tive relation is. For related, helpful discussion, see chapters 7 and 8 in Duhem 1903.378 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
must assume that, in an undeformed elastic body, each molecule is at rest 
in equilibrium under forces (attractive and repulsive) exerted on it by 
neighboring molecules. And, we must suppose that molecules tend to re￾gain their equilibrium position if they become displaced by an infnitesimal 
amount. (Laplace 1898, 288–9)
Broadly speaking, their molecules had two features. Tey were discrete, 
not continuous—imperceptible masses separated by very small but fnite 
distances. And, they interacted in just two generic ways (with many species), 
namely, by means of repulsive or attractive forces directed along the straight 
line between molecules.24
Hence, the Laplacians’ commitment to ontic unity entailed that mechanics 
must be recast as a constructive theory: one must begin with the ontology—
with an account of the preferred object, its powers and behaviors—and derive 
rational mechanics from it. To that end, they imposed two hard constraints 
on theorizing. First, appeal to molecules had to be exact. One was expected to 
start from some postulated law, or constitutive relation, for a species of mo￾lecular force. From it, one had to derive privileged quantities of some target 
phenomenon: the shape or height of a meniscal surface; the analytic expres￾sion for an elastic membrane in equilibrium; or the equation of motion for 
a vibrating string. Second, they expected the properties of molecules—the 
full list of their force laws and relevant parameters—to be given by empirical
physics.
Here we must note a crucial fact. If successful, the Laplacians’ ontic pro￾gram would mark a watershed change in the overall project we have studied 
in this book: it would relocate Body. Te outcome of their constructive ap￾proach to theory-building would be a physical mechanics: a combination 
of rational mechanics and empirical physics. Tat novel project would no 
longer rest on philosophical physics as the notion had been understood from 
Descartes to Kant. It would no longer complement rational mechanics with 
resources supplied by a metaphysical theory of matter—an account of Nature 
and Action—articulated with the methods of philosophy. Instead, it would 
rely on the empirical methods of post-1800 mathematical physics for a pic￾ture of the micro-bodies expected to unify mechanics. Tus, Poisson’s choice 
of words above, while polemically directed at Lagrange’s theory, was much 
24 Tey were the actual parts of sensible bodies, ofering the philosopher hope for recovering the 
bodies of our experience from this single, unifed, underlying ontology.Late Enlightenment 379
farther reaching than that. We discuss this radical change in the Conclusions 
chapter of this book.
(i) Progress
Te leaders of the ontic program believed, rightly or wrongly, that all results 
in rational mechanics obtained by 1800 could be recovered from facts about 
“molecules” and their force laws; even the mechanics of external constraints. 
So, they thought, in the new century their task was to extend mechanics to 
types of body and motion that 18th century work had not covered. In partic￾ular, to elastic true solids and viscous fuids.
Its initial success, and impetus for research afer 1800, was in celestial 
mechanics. Starting from mass points interacting by direct, inverse-square 
gravity, Laplace had derived some impressive results in potential theory; spe￾cifcally, on the local strength of attraction by spheroids. Tat gave him the 
confdence to try and use his unifying premise (of molecules interacting by 
central forces) at lower, sub-planetary scales. As they saw it, there were three 
areas then ripe for mathematics: capillary action, the motion of elastic true 
solids, and of viscous fuids. Accordingly, the Laplacians moved to extend 
their dominion over these untamed areas.
Capillary surfaces
From about 1805 onward, Laplace and others sought to infer the shape and 
height of the free surface that a liquid takes in a thin tube of arbitrary shape. 
Te experimental impetus for this question was old, and other fgures had 
been working on it (e.g., Tomas Young across the Channel). To treat it, 
Laplace set out to derive a formula for the total action at an arbitrary point on 
the bounding surface of a confned mass of fuid. Efort and skill led him to 
an expression for the action on a “molecule” in the fuid.25 When that action 
is null, the point remains at rest. To fnd the meniscus shape, he just needs to 
integrate the formula for the action at a point.
Laplace’s commitment to intermolecular forces enters this piece of 
theorizing at two junctures. He thinks the liquid in the tube is a mass in hy￾drostatic equilibrium under two forces: terrestrial gravity, which weighs 
25 Te argument structure of Laplace’s proofs is far from transparent, and secondary literature is 
unfortunately not much better; for an attempt at a synopsis, see Dhombres 1989, 65f.380 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
the fuid down; and the fuid’s self-force, a two-way attraction between its 
molecules.26
Elasticity
Navier’s two breakthroughs in elasticity above (see section 12.3) must count 
as progress for the ontic unity program as well. Tat is because he relied on 
the Laplacians’ key idea about the constitution of extended bodies and their 
internal forces: “We regard an elastic solid body as an assemblage of matter 
molecules placed at extremely small distances.”27 Moreover, he explained, if 
one starts with molecules and their forces, the Lagrangian, virtual-work ap￾proach to the equations of motion is just one option. Another route to it is the 
balance-of-force approach.28 It was this broadly Eulerian, non-Lagrangian 
approach that led him to his important advance below.
Fluid motion
Perhaps the greatest step forward for the ontic program in mechanics was 
Navier’s derivation of the equation for a viscous fuid. All fuids treated in 
18th century mechanics had been supposed frictionless. Tat assumption 
was known to be empirically false, but no one knew how to do better, until at 
last Navier broke through:
When a fuid moves such that its molecules continually change relative 
distances, actions are being exerted—between these molecules, and also 
between them and the stationary molecules of the solid container. We must 
take these actions into account, if we are to know the fuid’s true laws of mo￾tion. . . . My aim is to study the values of the forces due to intermolecular 
actions, which we must then put into the equations of fuid motion. (Navier 
1821, 245f.)
26 Admittedly, he does not know the law of these actions. However, Laplace bypasses that obstacle 
with a sleight of hand: he assumes that those forces are “sensible only at insensible distances”; they are 
given by a power-law function that decreases very rapidly (e.g., 1/r4 or higher). His characterization 
of those forces is a refrain that reliably identifed his disciples at the time; they subscribed to it. See 
also Navier’s reasoning below.
27 Navier 1823b, 177. 28 “Alternatively, we may consider the forces arising between a molecule M and all other molecules 
M′ that surround it. Ten we will assert that their resultant is equal to the accelerative [external] force 
applied at point M. Tereby, we obtain the equation that must hold at every point in the body [for 
equilibrium to ensue]” (Navier 1823b, 178).Late Enlightenment 381
His derivation relied not on PVV, but on a balance-of-force approach, in 
three stages. First, he focused on the state of a single “fuid molecule.” As part 
of that, he supposed all other actions on it—the net external force and the 
internal pressure—to be known, or given. Second, he sought to quantify the 
action of viscosity in the fuid, which he called “force of adherence.” Tird 
and last, he added that action to the overall balance of force on the molecule. 
Te resulting motion will be proportional to this net balance. As he explains, 
once found, the expression for viscosity “must be added, in the general equa￾tion of fuid motion, to the quantities of the forces supposed to act on the 
molecule.”29
His breakthrough was at stage two above. It had two aspects. Navier took 
viscosity efects to be caused by an intermolecular force:
I adopt the following principle: when two fuid molecules approach or re￾cede from each other, there exists a mutual repulsion or attraction, whose 
strength depends on their relative speed of approach or recess. . . . by na￾ture, this attraction or repulsion is a molecular force. (Navier 1821, 248)
Ten he found a way to infer the net “force of adherence” on an arbitrary 
molecule M. Navier assumes the force is proportional to the interacting 
molecules’ masses, their change of relative speed, and some distance func￾tion such that the force decreases very rapidly above “sensible distances.”30
Next, he “composes” the intermolecular forces on M so as to fnd their re￾sultant. Obscurely, he claims that the resultant comes out by integration over 
the region around M where viscosity is “sensible.”31 So, he concludes, afer 
integration “there remain just the partial derivatives of the [molecule’s] ve￾locity, and a constant factor that is specifc to the strength of intermolecular 
adherence in that particular fuid.” In the x-direction,32
σ 3 2 2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2 2 ∂
∂
+
∂
∂
+
∂
∂
+
∂
∂ ∂
+
∂
∂ ∂






u u u v w
x y z xy xz
(6)
29 Navier 1821, 251. By the “general equation” he means the formula (7) of Chapter 10, also known 
as Euler’s Equation for an inviscid fuid.
30 More precisely put, the force V = m·m′ · Δv · f(r), where f is a power-law distance function like 
f = 1/rn, and n≫2; v the relative speed; and r the distance. 31 Tis claim is very signifcant, and we discuss its crucial importance below. 32 See Navier 1821, 250f.; � is a fuid-specifc viscosity factor; u, v, and w are components of the 
molecule’s velocity; and x, y, and z are its coordinates in the Eulerian description.382 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
Call this quantity V. Navier’s contribution to the problem of fuid motion was 
fnding a way to quantify V; the rest came from Euler. Tat is, Navier added V
to the equation of motion for an inviscid fuid—recall Euler’s formula (7) in 
Chapter 10—and obtained:33
X V u u
u
u
v
u
+ − w
∂
∂ = ∂
∂
+
∂
∂
+
∂
∂
+
∂
∂






1
ρ
p
x t x y x
(7)
Te insight behind it is: in an incompressible fuid, the net external force, the 
viscosity, and the local pressure gradient equal the total change in linear mo￾mentum, local and convective. It is the x-component of the Navier–Stokes 
equation, so called.34
Among the Laplacians, Poisson subsequently took up the results above, 
and re-derived them from somewhat diferent yet still broadly “molecularist” 
premises.35 Notwithstanding diferences in the starting premises for their in￾dividual derivations, the proponents of the molecular ontic unifcation pro￾gram are responsible for the greatest advances in rational mechanics afer 
1800, as far as descriptive scope goes.
(ii) Problems of unifcation
Te ontic agenda came to face its own problems, internal to its framework 
and approaches. Two in particular appear quite serious: their notion of mole￾cule was equivocal; and at key junctures it became descriptively otiose.
Architecture
Laplacians took their molecules to be discrete: “disjoint masses” separated 
by very small regions of empty space, as Fourier explained. Now let us ask, 
what is the geometry of mass distribution in a molecule? It turns out that they 
33 Navier 1821, 252. X is the net external force in the x-direction, � the density, and p the internal 
pressure. Te rest is as above, and also as in Chapter 10.
34 To determine the fuid’s motion completely, to Navier’s formula “we must add the equation of 
continuity,” that is, Euler’s formula (6b) from Chapter 10 (Navier 1821, 252).
35 Te details are important per se, but not essential to the progress of the ontic unifcation pro￾gram, so we forgo them here. A survey of Poisson’s competition with his fellow Laplacians is Dahan 
Dalmedico 1992, chapter 10. Tere is a rich context to Navier’s discovery—empirical, having to do 
with known departures from the inviscid-fow regime; and physical, pertaining to the Laplacian pic￾ture of molecules. For that context we again refer the reader to the admirable Darrigol 2002.Late Enlightenment 383
had no consensus answer. Some thought a molecule is zero-sized (i.e., a mass 
point). Others thought it is a deformable volume flled with mass, though 
very small. Yet others took it to be a rigid volume with a fxed shape, viz. an 
ellipsoid. Tey almost never stopped to ponder these diferences in their in￾dividual pictures; but to the trained eye they are diferent. Cauchy and Saint￾Venant endorsed the mass point:
As to the dimensions of the atoms in which the centers of molecular force 
reside, we must regard them not as very small (relative to the distances 
between atoms), but as strictly zero. Put diferently, these atoms—which 
are the true simples that compose matter—have no extension. (Cauchy 
1868, 36)
I think we must regard the ultimate particles of matter as being non￾contiguous points without extension, viz. centers of action by way of repul￾sive and attractive forces. (Saint-Venant 1844, 8; his emphasis)
Te rigid ellipsoid was Poisson’s late picture of matter, caused by his need to 
account for the deformation of elastic solids:
When two molecules, m and m′, are not far enough from each other that 
their shape has no efect on their mutual action, m’s action on m′ is not nec￾essarily along the line MM′ [between their mass centers]. Tat action may 
not even amount to a single force. Its components will be functions of [their 
relative distance] r, to be sure. . . . But, they will also depend, in addition, 
on the angles that MM′ makes with certain fxed sections inside m and m′. 
(Poisson 1831, 7)
Navier at times implied a molecule is fnite and deformable, equipped with 
pores that can fll with “caloric,” the fuid of heat:
We take a solid body to be an assemblage of matter molecules at extremely 
small distances. Tese molecules exert on one another two contrary actions. 
One is an attractive force, proper to the molecules themselves. Te other is a 
repulsive force due to the principle of heat. (Navier 1827, 375)
At the very least, the ontic unity group appeared split between a small frac￾tion that argued for mass points, and a majority party that took them to be 
fnite volumes. “Like Leucippus, Democritus and Epicurus, the majority of 384 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
physicists nowadays regard atoms as small heaps of continuous, compact 
matter.” Tey are “extended atoms,” Saint-Venant noted.36 Te upshot is im￾portant: their agenda for unifcation had no determinate, univocal matter 
theory. Te only tenet they shared was that molecules were discrete.
Descriptive import
Even that idea would get discarded at critical junctures. Cauchy’s early suc￾cess in elasticity and fuid dynamics (see below) led some Laplacians to re￾tool their approach. To obtain the equations of equilibrium and motion in 
those two areas, they would start by assuming a discrete distribution of mass 
and velocity, which their commitment that matter is molecular required. But 
then right away they would average those discrete values (as contained in 
a small volume, say), and extrapolate the resulting averages to there being 
mass- and velocity quantities at every point inside that volume; see Fig. 12.1.
In efect, that replaces the initial assumption—discrete matter, or disjoint 
masses—with a continuum picture, in which mass flls that volume every￾where. In other words, to get their results, even the Laplacians had to reach 
for the methods of continuum modeling. Tat is, they ended up representing 
quantities at a point as elements of continuous extension: infnitesimal 
lines ds, areas dA, or volumes dV; and for whole-body quantities, they used 
integrals over a continuous area (its bounding surface) and over volumes in￾side those surfaces. For an example of that practice, look again at expression 
(2) above—Navier’s equilibrium condition for an extended elastic solid body. 
He was a molecularist, and yet the condition he wrote is for a body supposed 
to be continuous.
In the Laplacians’ mind, their replacement maneuver was just a mathe￾matical workaround, not an abjuration of the faith. Still, it makes their theory 
of matter practically irrelevant. Teir real tool for extending mechanics to 
new domains—by way of new concepts such as stress, strain, viscosity, 
bending moments, or elastic moduli—is a feld theory: a mathematical pic￾ture of matter as flling space at every point in an extended body. In content, 
that picture is entirely equivalent to the one that continuum-matter theorists 
(such as Sophie Germain and Stokes) started with by design, not by acci￾dent. Ultimately then, the ontic program’s overt appeal to discrete matter bits 
was just a ritual invocation—an empty credo belied by their mathematical 
36 Saint-Venant 1844, 7; his emphasis.Late Enlightenment 385
practice of treating matter as continuous when it mattered. And so, a coherent
ontic unifcation in efect eluded their grasp.
12.5 Te Cauchy package
From the early 1820s onward, both approaches to unity saw themselves 
defed. Initially, the challenge arose from the same quarter, driven by the 
same rationale, namely, the need to mathematize true solids. As it gathered 
steam and successes, however, the challenge came to threaten the two unif￾cation approaches separately, on their own terms. Te single origin of these 
challenges was Cauchy’s work in elasticity during the 1820s.37 To make 
E E
Fig. 12.1. Continuum values from discrete molecules. An intuitive indication 
of how Laplacians passed from molecules to mass density and internal force 
at a point in an extended body. Let E be a cross-section plane through a body. 
Lef: Molecules as supposed by the Laplacian program: spatially discrete masses, 
exerting two-way forces on each other. At select points in E, the total force is 
non-zero, and would move a mass point (counterfactually placed there) in the 
direction of the resultant vector. Right: Continuous-feld values—force density 
per unit area—at every point in the plane E, obtained by averaging the discrete 
values on the lef (over some small area or volume). At any point in E, a mass 
placed there would be accelerated (in the direction of the average force-density 
vector at that point).
37 More exactly, between 1822 and 1827. Te results below presuppose that matter is a deformable 
continuum, hence that bodies are extended volumes flled with mass everywhere. However, in terms 
of foundational commitments, this was a transient stage in Cauchy’s work. He did not really think 386 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
progress there, he chose a new matter theory, at odds with the molecular 
ontic-unity program; and a new set of principles, at odds with the Lagrangian 
nomic-unity program. We begin with the former.
(i) Continuous matter
Soon afer Navier’s breakthrough paper on elastic solids,38 Cauchy outlined 
an alternative treatment of that topic. Inter alia, his innovation was to assume 
that matter is continuous, not molecular-discrete (as Navier had supposed):
In seeking the equations that express equilibrium conditions or laws of in￾ternal motion for solids and fuids, we may regard these bodies either as con￾tinuous masses whose density varies by insensible degrees from one point 
to the next; or as distinct material points, separated by very small distances. 
In a previous paper on fuids, I have treated them as continuous—as do the 
several mechanics treatises published so far. Now I take the same approach 
to solid bodies. (Cauchy 1890 [1828], 195)
Tat diference in pictures of matter is more drastic and momentous than it 
seems. It required Cauchy to rethink radically how matter acts by contact, 
and how it responds to such actions; we go over his innovations next.
Dynamics
In regard to material action, he took the Eulerian idea of internal pressure 
in a fuid, and generalized it so as to describe and quantify the action of in￾ternal forces in an elastic body. Tat is, Cauchy broadened the concept as 
follows. 1. In fuids, internal pressure is always normal.39 But, in true solids it 
can be oblique. 2. In fuids, internal pressure at a point has the same value in 
every direction. However, in elastic solids it can have diferent values in dif￾ferent directions. 3. Tough pressure in a solid can be oblique, its quantity is 
that continuous matter was the true picture. “Cauchy’s subsequent rallying to the paradigm of mo￾lecular mechanics was not a transient occurrence. Te scientist persisted in that paradigm ever afer 
that” (Dahan Dalmedico 1992, 295). Te continuity of matter—in particular, of the luminiferous 
ether—was then a key assumption in related felds, e.g., wave optics; see Buchwald 1980.
38 Tat paper was Navier 1827, which he really wrote in 1821, and presented at the Academy of 
Sciences in the same year.
39 Tat is, perpendicular to any arbitrary surface passing through that point.Late Enlightenment 387
always a linear function of the normal vector at that point. See also Fig. 12.1. 
For his generalized idea above, later generations coined the term “stress” (Fr. 
contrainte, Ger. Spannung). Not yet having a word for it, Cauchy called it 
“pressure or tension”:
If, in a solid body (elastic or not) we let a small volume element become rigid 
and invariable, then on every side—and at every point on those sides—the 
element will experience a determinate pressure or tension. It is similar to 
the one that a fuid applies on an element in the solid body that holds it. But, 
there is a diference. Te pressure that a stationary fuid exerts on a solid 
surface is perpendicular to it, and is everywhere independent of the solid 
surface’s inclination [angle] relative to the planes of a coordinate system. 
However, the pressure or tension exerted at a point in a solid body—on a 
small area passing through the point—can be perpendicular or oblique to 
this surface. In the case of solid compression, it points inward from outside; 
in expansion, it points outward from inside. And, this pressure or tension 
depends on the inclination that the surface [on which it acts] has relative to 
the coordinate planes. (Cauchy 1889 [1822], 61; our emphasis)
Put modernly: in a deformable continuum, the stress at a point is a linear 
function of the normal unit vector to an arbitrary surface imagined to pass 
through that point; see also Fig. 12.2. In recognition of its enormous value, 
we call it Cauchy’s Stress Principle.40
In the process he found that, to describe the local action of “pressure or 
tension,” a new representational tool was needed. Specifcally, to quantify 
the local action—on an infnitesimal part in the body, caused by the forces 
originating in that body—we must take into account the way those forces 
tend to stretch and shear that minimal part. In the x-direction,41
p A cos c λ α = + os F E cos c β γ + os (8a)
40 Te phrase “Cauchy’s Stress Principle” seems to come from Truesdell and Toupin 1960, 536f. 
Te Stress Principle is the gateway to modern continuum mechanics, and that is why we gave its gen￾esis a close look. Dahan Dalmedico (1992, 244–9) explains the reasoning that led Cauchy to infer that 
stress is a function of the normal to the surface at that point.
41 See Cauchy 1889, 68. p is the net stress vector on that point, and cosᶫ is its direction cosine, 
which thus projects it onto the x-axis. Cauchy’s point is that p results from three actions: a pressure￾like force A that presses or pulls on any material surface S passing through that point, and two forces 
F and E that tend to shear the surface in the direction of two planes perpendicular to S.388 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
Mutatis mutandis for the other two components. In synoptic hindsight we 
can grasp that, to fully represent how Cauchy’s “pressure or tension” acts at a 
single point in a continuous body, we must write:
A F E
F B D
A D C
x x x
y y y
z z z
(8b)
While he lacked the term, Cauchy however grasped the relevant 
idea: the stress is a tensor quantity. In mathematical structure, it difers from 
“Newtonian” forces, that is, the vector quantities (like gravity) that tend to 
displace a free particle along some curve. Rather, Cauchy stress—the action 
of contact forces at a point inside an extended body regarded as continuous, 
or flled with mass everywhere—needs nine diferent “Newtonian” actions to 
specify completely: three perpendicular forces, and six shearing forces .
To make his new idea intuitive, Cauchy gave it a geometric interpreta￾tion as well. He represented “pressure or tension” at a point M by means of 
an ellipsoid of revolution centered on it. Any radius vector in the ellipsoid 
S S
E L
Fig. 12.2. Stress according to Cauchy. An intuitive picture of how Cauchy 
stress difers from hydrostatic pressure. Lef: S is a plane section in an isotropic, 
homogeneous fuid at rest. Suppose the fuid mass on the right side of S was 
annihilated. Ten all fuid particles on the lef would be accelerated equally, 
in the same direction, toward L. Right: S is a plane section in an elastic body 
deformed by forces applied on its surface. Suppose the body mass on the 
right side of S was annihilated. Ten the solid particles on the lef would be 
accelerated in diferent directions and at diferent speeds, depending on how the 
body had been deformed.Late Enlightenment 389
measures the stress in that direction; the longest semiaxis corresponds to the 
maximum stress at M, and the shortest to the minimum.42
Kinematics
Mathematizing solid continua faced a head-on challenge: how is motion 
inside a continuous body to be described, really? Te language of “material 
points” is vague and misleading; it seduces the reader into thinking, wrongly, 
that early modern kinematics was sufcient. It was not—a novel, sharper ap￾proach was needed.43 Cauchy took the main steps toward the right answer. 
He considered two points X and Y in the body, very close to each other; and 
quantifed the deformation that the material fber XY can undergo.44 He 
inferred that, for an infnitesimal fber, its kinematic change (over an instant, 
in response to stresses) equals ∂s/∂xi
, the partial derivatives of its strained 
length and direction s relative to its unstrained, “natural” confguration xi
.
Furthermore, just as he did with stress, Cauchy also gave a geometric in￾terpretation of “dilation or condensation” (i.e., strain). “As I will prove, the 
condensations or dilations around a point, plus or minus 1, become equal 
(up to a sign) to the vector radii of an ellipsoid.”45
Tese results turned out to matter enormously in two respects. For one, 
their heuristic power (to treat solids and fuids) was so great that it forced 
the Laplacians to reverse-engineer it from discrete matter foundations. 
Namely, they had to start with molecules and then fnd ways to represent 
their properties as continuously-distributed values, both at a point and 
over the whole body; again, see Fig. 12.1. For another, Cauchy’s conceptual 
42 Tat geometric device is known as the Cauchy Stress Ellipsoid; for some details, see Dahan 
Dalmedico (1992, 245f.).
43 Here is why. Single points have just three degrees of freedom. “Points” in a continuum have an 
infnity of them, because they are really infnitesimal volumes dV that stresses can deform in endless 
diferent ways. Tis is something that a single segment—the only way to represent a displacement, 
before Cauchy’s work—cannot adequately represent. At this juncture, our account is perforce frag￾mentary. Te history of continuum kinematics remains mostly uncharted territory. Notes on its early 
stages are scattered here and there, in pieces on dynamics for continua chiefy concerned with the 
birth of stress concepts.
44 In continuum mechanics, a fber (also called a material line) of length l is a one-dimensional 
segment with mass values at every point in it. Hence, a fber has a density �, and so its net mass is �l. 
Clearly, a continuous fber is diferent from two molecules at a distance l from each other. Teir net 
mass is m1
 + m2
, and between them there is just empty space. 45 Cauchy 1823, 11. Let M be a point in an elastic solid, and consider all the infnitesimal fbers 
that “sprout” from it, or have M in common. Te action of stress on these fbers, he proved, can be 
represented by an ellipsoid centered at M. Tat ellipsoid has three semiaxes; one is the longest, and 
one the shortest. Tose semiaxes measure the principal strains (i.e., the maximum and minimum 
changes of length in the fbers at M). A radius vector in that ellipsoid measures the changed length 
and orientation of some fber at that location. For additional discussion, see Dahan Dalmedico 
1992, 251–4.390 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
innovation (stress and strain) fts very well with a dynamical law quite dif￾ferent from PVV, as we explain below. Together, his new matter theory and 
dynamical principle yielded a framework that challenged forcefully both 
approaches to unity we have examined so far.
(ii) Balance laws
Cauchy innovated in yet another respect. While his premises above chal￾lenged the molecular ontic program, his approach below threatened the 
virtual-work program for nomic unifcation. In particular, he took up and 
broadened Euler’s old path to the dynamics of extended bodies, namely, 
the balance-of-force approach. Recall the generic idea behind that ap￾proach: the kinematic response of matter equals the net balance of the forces 
on it. Various subfelds of mechanics simply adapt this genus idea to the 
specifcs of the object type at issue. Newton had taken the frst step, for the 
case of a free particle. Euler had applied it to a rigid body and to a volume of 
ideal fuid, respectively. Cauchy extended it to an elastic solid and a viscous 
fuid. We may distinguish two prongs to his demarche: the conceptual insight 
and the heuristic.
Te heuristic amounts to this. To fnd out when an interior point re￾mains at rest—or how it moves, if equilibrium is broken—Cauchy carved 
up mentally a small volume (in an elastic body) and studied two kinds of 
forces: those acting on its boundary surface (i.e., the “pressures or tensions” 
explained above); and the “external” forces, viz. those originating in sources 
outside the body, such as gravity. Tese latter forces reach deep inside the 
volume, and act on its mass center; they are actions at a distance. Once he had 
quantifed the strength and direction of all these forces, he mentally shrank 
the volume into an infnitesimal element of integration, dV. At this juncture, 
Cauchy summed the two kinds of force acting on the element. Tat gave him 
the balance of forces at a point.46
46 Many call this heuristic the “Euler-Cut” approach. However, Euler never knew to apply it in 
elasticity, where it matters most (for evidence, see Fraser 1991). Tere are some traces of him using it 
in fuid dynamics, but the matter is inconclusive. Cauchy made the best, clearest use of this method, 
thus showing its true heuristic value; see Dahan Dalmedico 1992 and Casey 1992.Late Enlightenment 391
Te conceptual breakthrough builds on this approach. In essence, a 
volume element in an elastic body remains in equilibrium if the balance of 
forces on it vanishes:47
t B+ = 0 (9a)
In component form, the element stays at rest in the x-direction if:48
∂
∂
+
∂
∂
+
∂
∂


 

 +
A F E
X =
x y z
ρ 0 (9b)
But if the net force on it is not zero, the volume element moves—in the 
manner specifc to deformable continua. Te balance-of-force approach 
dictates that two aspects of this process (the net action and the motion re￾sponse) are equal:49
Total force = Rate of linear momentum (10)
Inspired by Navier’s success above, Cauchy’s insight was that “pressure 
or tension” (i.e., stress) belongs on the lef side above, next to gravity. Tis 
extends Euler’s idea to the difcult case of deformable continuous matter. 
Ten Cauchy produced an analogue of his law above, but for the bal￾ance of torques.50 Because his generalization required him to devise a new 
47 In the terminology of modern continuum mechanics, t is the traction, or internal contact force, 
and B is the (external) body force, exerted by exogenous sources at every point inside a continuous 
body (e.g., gravity or magnetic force).
48 X is the acceleration of the net external force on the material point. In square brackets is the total 
stress at that point relative to the Ox axis (i.e., the x-component of t above). Tat stress component 
has a “tensile” part ∂A/∂x, which tends to shrink or stretch the fber on which it acts; and two shearing 
components (∂F/∂y and ∂E/∂z) which turn the fber toward the Oy and Oz axes, respectively. Te 
other term is the x-component of the net force B external to the body. Expressed in modern form, 
Cauchy’s result writes as ∇ · t + �B = 0. See also Dahan Dalmedico 1992, 257f. 49 See Cauchy 1891, 343. 50 More precisely, afer 1841 Cauchy understood that, in addition to deformation, stresses also 
induce a rigid rotation (of the volume element, around its mass center). In consequence, Cauchy 
supplemented his law (10) above with an analogue for torques, or causes of change in angular mo￾mentum. Tat part of his mechanics has not been studied much yet, but see the quick overview in 
Dahan Dalmedico 1992, 254–6, and Belhoste 1991, chapter 12.392 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
representational framework (for kinematics and dynamics), some historians 
think they deserve to be called Cauchy’s Laws of Motion.51
In structure, content, and scope, balance laws are very diferent from 
virtual-work principles. Te latter assert that a certain action (the virtual 
work of the generalized forces) vanishes across the target system. Te former 
say that the net dynamical action (of forces and torques) equals the net kin￾ematic change. Crucially, balance laws have the old blind spot of Newton–
Euler dynamics—they have no associated recipe for solving external
constraints.
(iii) Impact on philosophical mechanics
Te alternative we presented above complicated the chances that a unifed 
philosophical mechanics would emerge afer 1840. Te Cauchy package—
continuous matter and his two balance laws—counts as a formidable chal￾lenge to the two unifcation programs that came before it.
On the one hand, it ofered an alternative to Laplace’s ontic approach. 
Cauchy did not himself believe in continuous matter; for various reasons, 
his loyalty was to discrete molecules.52 And yet, his continuum-based work 
in mechanics escaped his orbital pull, as it were, and acquired a life of its 
own. In the long run, the deformable continuum became the standard basis 
for elasticity, fuid dynamics, and their later ofshoots: plasticity; fracture, 
damage, and creep; mixtures and the mechanics of porous media; and the 
theory of Cosserat continua. In these areas, molecular foundations eventu￾ally gave way.53
Returning to Cauchy’s historical context, to conquer elastic solids and vis￾cous fuids, the Laplacians had to make two critical moves. One was mathe￾matical: they started from discrete molecules, and inferred to claims about 
51 Te term was introduced by Truesdell (1991, 182f.). Our formula (10) expresses Cauchy’s First 
Law in qualitative terms. Cf. Chapter 10; we might call it the Euler–Cauchy First Law. His Second 
Law conveys the same insight, but concerning torques and the change in angular momentum they 
induce.
52 See his accessible account of them in Cauchy 1868. 53 Nowadays they seek to regain some access through a side entrance, as it were. Since the mid￾1950s there have been attempts to get concepts of stress and strain from “atomistic foundations” (i.e., 
from mass points). Te idea is to make modern continuum mechanics explanatorily consilient with 
the kinetic theory of matter, which regards matter as discrete. See Murdoch 2010 for a latter-day 
expression of that project; incidentally, it shows how simplistic the Laplacians’ workarounds at the 
time were.Late Enlightenment 393
continuous bodies. Another was conceptual: they started from a notion of 
mass (qua property of molecules) and along the way they quietly switched to 
density qua efective parameter in the equation of motion.54
Tese moves were indispensable to their work—without them, the rele￾vant equations of motion do not follow. Or, if they follow, the Laplacians did 
not take the trouble to prove it. And yet, they had no clear, compelling jus￾tifcation for those moves. Absent that justifcation, the moves appear as a 
sleight of hand, not natural steps in a proof. Cauchy’s approach requires no 
such costly prestidigitation. In it, all whole-body quantities are integrals, be￾cause a Cauchy body is a continuous volume. And, it starts from density ab 
initio, because the parts of his bodies (the volume elements dV) have den￾sity as a primitive feature; mass in their case is a derivative property. Tus, 
Cauchy’s mechanics is conceptually coherent and logically impeccable to an 
extent that the Laplacians’ ontic program could not match. As an alternative 
to molecular ontic unity, it presented the Laplacians with a major challenge.
On the other hand, the Cauchy package also ofers an alternative 
to Lagrangian nomic unity: by means of balance laws. Cauchy-type 
breakthroughs in hydrodynamics and elasticity served to make the balance￾of-force approach into an ever more credible competitor for the coveted 
prize—unifying mechanics from a single principle. Te insight behind his 
formula (10) is the core of Newton–Euler–Cauchy dynamics, which unifes 
vast swathes of classical theory from a balance law of impressed force, rather 
than from a virtual-work principle. In addition to Cauchy’s own results 
above, his two laws of motion entail all the equations of motion that 18th 
century fgures had obtained from balance-of-force approaches: d’Alembert’s 
wave equation (plus its extension to membranes); Euler’s rigid-body dy￾namics; and the hydrodynamics of ideal fuids. In that respect, it can unify 
nearly as much mechanics as Lagrange was able to, but from diferent 
foundations. And, where it succeeds, Cauchy unifcation does not need to 
bracket the dynamics into geometry. It represents internal constraints di￾rectly and explicitly as efects of forces: internal forces such as elastic stresses, 
fuid pressure, and viscosity. It just requires a stronger mathematical frame￾work for describing their actions. Indeed, as it turns out, the resurgence of 
impressed-force approaches slowly exiled virtual-work principles to areas 
54 For edifcation, consider contrastively Navier’s starting assumption about the strength of vis￾cosity V as an intermolecular force dependent on discrete masses, with his use of continuous density
in the Navier–Stokes equation he inferred above.394 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
where they have remained impregnable: the statics of structures, engineering 
dynamics, and the mechanics of constrained rigid bodies.55 And so, as an 
alternative to Lagrangian nomic unity, achieving nomic unity via Newton–
Euler–Cauchy dynamics ofers strong competition.
12.6 Conclusions
In the years from Lagrange to Poisson, rational mechanics continued to 
make enormous advances in descriptive scope. It really was the period when 
mechanics came close to mathematizing the behavior of bodies as we know 
them—extended and deformable. Driving that leap in breadth of coverage 
were two competing projects that aimed to unify all of mechanics. Tey 
difered starkly in what the sought unity amounted to. For the Lagrangians, 
unity was nomic: mechanics is one if all the local accounts are strictly 
deduced from one basic principle, of virtual work. For the Laplacians, unity 
was ontic: mechanics counts as one theory if all local accounts—all equa￾tions of motion and equilibrium conditions—are inferable from facts about a 
micro-body they called a molecule.
Afer a period of initial élan, however, both approaches to unity came to 
face signifcant conceptual obstacles. Te nomic program lacked a clear link 
to a picture of matter. Te ontic approach began to show logical cracks in 
the foundations. As if to compound their respective predicaments, these 
approaches came to face competition from a robust outsider. Cauchy showed 
how to make crucial progress in expanding mechanics by means of a dual 
foundation—continuous matter and balance laws of force—at odds with the 
two unifcation programs above.
Teir three-way competition had no clear winner. Tat entails a sobering 
fact, namely, disunity. By the mid-19th century, there was no single approach, 
whether ontic or nomic, that could unify all rational mechanics demon￾strably, viz. by entailing its full gamut of diferential equations. In efect, de￾spite best eforts to achieve unity, rational mechanics had become disunifed, 
in both its principles and its ontology.
55 Again, we must restate that Newton–Euler–Cauchy approaches do not work for systems with 
external constraints. Te virtual-work approach remains uncontested there. For historically in￾formed glimpses into the unifying virtues of PVV in those areas, see Heyman 1996 (for statics) and 
Papastavridis 2002 (for analytic dynamics).Late Enlightenment 395
Tis fact leaves philosophical mechanics in a predicament when it comes 
to Body. Tat is because, absent a single, unifed mechanics (whether rational 
or physical, whether unifed nomically or ontically), it seems there is little 
prospect of elaborating a single, unifed concept of body, as Goal requires.56
56 See Chapter 1.Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason. Katherine Brading and Marius Stan, Oxford University Press. 
© Oxford University Press 2023. DOI: 10.1093/oso/9780197678954.003.0013
Conclusions
At the beginning of the 18th century, physics was a subdiscipline of philos￾ophy and its primary task was to solve the problem of bodies (Body). By the 
early 1800s, this was no longer the case. Physics had become an independent 
discipline, and Body was no longer its driving concern. In this book, we have 
argued that the philosophical reasons for this transformation—and its chief 
consequences—come into view if the 18th century is analyzed as an era of 
philosophical mechanics. Tat is, as an age of widespread, long-lasting, and 
concerted eforts to address Body through the integration of rational me￾chanics into philosophical physics.
We built our case slowly, chapter by chapter, displaying the rich evolution 
of philosophical mechanics in the Age of Reason. We have already previewed 
our conclusions from each of these chapters (see Chapter 1), and so we will 
not reprise them here. Instead, looking back over the whole, we draw out 
some conclusions for philosophical mechanics in the Age of Reason.
1. Te 18th century closed without a philosophical mechanics capable 
of addressing Body. One reason for this was the enormous difculty of 
achieving a rational mechanics for extended bodies in motion. At the start 
of the century, it seemed that incorporating the rules of collision should be 
sufcient for the purposes of philosophical mechanics (the problem of col￾lision, or PCOL). By mid-century it was clear that much more was needed; 
specifcally, the incorporation of a rational mechanics of constrained motion 
(the problem of constrained motions, or PCON). Te theory of constraints 
developed rapidly during the later decades of that century, and the mathe￾matical demands of this theory placed it out of reach of most philosophers at 
the time.
Tis brings us to the second reason: the methods of the philosophers 
proved inadequate by themselves for determining the nature and properties 
of body—or of matter in general—consistent with the demands of rational 
mechanics. Kant explicitly attempted the task, but with PCOL only, not 
PCON, in mind; and so he failed. Even Boscovich, who explicitly attempted Conclusions 397
to provide mid-century d’Alembertian rational mechanics with a physics, fell 
short. By the early 19th century, empirical rather than philosophical resources 
had become the most important source and justifcation for the physical 
commitments being integrated into rational mechanics. No longer a philo￾sophical mechanics, this is the physical mechanics of Laplace and Poisson (see 
Chapter 12).
Te result was a disconnect between the philosophers who continued to 
pursue Body (such as Boscovich and Kant) and those such as Lagrange, Laplace, 
Navier, and Cauchy, whom we regard today as physicists.
2. Physics emerged at the end of the century as an independent discipline, 
with its own resources, methods, criteria for success, and also its own commu￾nity of researchers. In resources, it no longer deferred to philosophy for either its 
ontology or its principles. For its methods, it combined those of the mathemati￾cian (in rational mechanics) with empirical methods—for the articulation and 
justifcation of both principles and ontology, and for criteria of success.
Contrary to narratives in which Newton’s Principia is the culmination of the 
scientifc revolution, ushering in a stable period of classical physics, in reality 
“physics” as we know it took another century or more to emerge. Tough with 
hindsight the Principia fts the description of the new, independent physics 
given here, that hindsight is misleading. Te Principia is consistent with phil￾osophical physics succeeding in addressing Body, and thereby providing (from 
outside Newton’s book) an account of the bodies to which Newton’s laws apply. 
Te Principia sits at the beginning of a golden era of philosophical mechanics, 
when it seemed that things might go very diferently, and philosophers might 
succeed in their task of solving Body. It was only afer a further century of 
struggle with Body that physics separated itself from philosophy, and this for all 
the reasons we have detailed in this book.
3. Tough our story ends without a solution to Body, the problem does 
not go away. Bodies are all around us: from pebbles to planets, tigers to tables, 
and pine trees to—most importantly for many areas of philosophy—people. 
Philosophers relied on philosophical physics to provide a general account 
of the nature of bodies, one that could be presupposed in any other area of 
philosophy in which human bodies and bodily action play a role. But the 
task has now fragmented into two. First, as the latter chapters of our book 
have made clear, by the early 1800s “bodies” were no longer the presump￾tive objects of physics. Te Problem of Bodies has become the more general 398 Philosophical Mechanics in the Age of Reason
Problem of Objects (Object), and the ontic disunity described in Chapter 12 
shows that no solution was then in sight.1 Second, even given a solution to 
Object, the task remained to construct from this ontology the bodies of our 
experience.
Te philosopher interested in Body will have to tend to both of these tasks. 
As we have seen, their methods—the approaches and sources of evidence 
domestic to philosophy—by themselves had proven inadequate. Terein 
lie deep and lasting epistemological lessons: about our epistemic situation 
in the world, the methods whereby we may obtain knowledge of the phys￾ical world, and the kinds and limits of that knowledge. Te philosopher will 
need to revise the Goal set out in Chapter 1 to refect the dual task that they 
face. Tey will need the methods and results of both rational mechanics and 
the new physics if they are to make progress. And they will need interpre￾tive tools: Body is their problem, and no longer that of the physicist; they 
will need to master the details of the physics so as to unpack the philosoph￾ical moves and content as they pertain to Body. For this, we have suggested, 
examining the interplay between principle and constructive approaches to 
theorizing provides an important means of extracting philosophical insight.
Nature and Action also require revision. Te task of determining the “[1]
essential properties, [2] causal powers, and [3] generic behaviors” of bodies 
has been transformed into the task of ascertaining [1] a set of parameters 
by which to specify the state of an object (or system) and [2] the depend￾ence relations among those parameters sufcient to determine [3] changes 
in the state of that system, as for example in its spatiotemporal evolution. 
Tis discharges the demands of Nature, and the lesson of the 18th century 
is that we cannot hope to do more.2 What we can know about the physical 
world depends on the physical details of us as epistemic agents, and of that 
world itself in which we are embedded. Tere is no way to go beyond these 
limitations, to “know more” or to somehow know other than this humanly￾accessible knowledge. And so, for the purposes of Object, Action is fully 
encompassed by the articulation of the dependence relations among the 
parameters; what remains is to relate this to an account of causation among 
the bodies of our experience.
1 See Chapter 1 for the explanation of Object. 2 Notice that in addition to the constructive route for addressing Nature we now have the principle 
route, and this opens the way to domain-specifc, efective theories for which there is no underlying 
constructive theory (but which nevertheless should not be thought of as “instrumental” just because 
they are domain-specifc).Conclusions 399
Clearly, in the wake of the extraordinary developments of the 18th century, 
there is much for the philosopher to do as they try to develop a philosoph￾ical mechanics. But these challenges lie ahead, in the 19th, 20th, and 21st 
centuries. As for the 18th century, the Age of Reason, it was remarkable for 
the evolving relationships between philosophy, physics, and mechanics. And 
for the project we have called philosophical mechanics, it was a golden era.Bibliography
Aiton, E. 1972. Te Vortex Teory of Planetary Motions. New York: Elsevier.
Alexander, H. G., ed. 1970. Te Leibniz–Clarke Correspondence. Manchester 
University Press.
Anonymous. 1688. Review of I. Newton, Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica. 
Journal des Sçavans 16: 237–8.
Antman, S. 1980. Te equations for large vibrations of strings. American Mathematical 
Monthly 87: 359–70.
Arnold, D. 1983–4. Te Mécanique Physique of Siméon Denis Poisson. Archive for History 
of Exact Sciences 28: 243–87, 343–67; 29: 37–94.
Bailhache, P. 1975. Introduction. L. Poinsot: La théorie générale de l’équilibre et du 
mouvement des systèmes. Paris: Vrin.
Barroso Filho, W. 1994. La mécanique de Lagrange: principes et méthodes. Paris: Karthala.
Baumeister, Chr. 1747. Elementa philosophiae recentioris. Leipzig.
Beeson, D. 1992. Maupertuis: An Intellectual Biography. Oxford: Voltaire Foundation.
Belhoste, B. 1991. Augustin-Louis Cauchy. Springer.
Belhoste, B. 2003. La formation d’une technocratie: L’École Polytechnique et ses élèves de la 
Révolution au Second Empire. Paris: Belin.
Bernoulli, D. 1738. Hydrodynamica. Strasbourg.
Bernoulli, D. 1746. Nouveau problème de mécanique. Mémoires de l’académie des sciences
1: 54–70.
Bernoulli, Jakob. 1691. Demonstratio centri oscillationis, ex natura Vectis. Acta 
Eruditorum July: 317–21.
Bernoulli, Jakob. 1703. Démonstration générale du centre de balancement ou d’oscillation, 
tirée de la nature du Levier. Histoire de l’Académie des sciences de Paris, 78–83.
Bernoulli, Johann. 1715. De centro turbinationis inventa nova. Acta Eruditorum
June: 242–57.
Bernoulli, Johann. 1717. Nouvelle théorie du centre d’oscillation. Histoire de l’Académie 
Royale des Sciences, 208–30.
Bernoulli, Johann. 1727. Discours sur les loix de la communication du mouvement. Paris.
Bernoulli, Johann. 1742a. Hydraulica. Opera omnia 4: 387–493. Lausanne.
Bernoulli, Johann. 1742b. Meditationes de chordis vibrantibus. Opera omnia 3: 198–210. 
Lausanne.
Bernoulli, Johann. 1742c. Problema statico-dynamicum. Opera omnia 4: 332–41. 
Lausanne.
Bernoulli, Johann. 1746. Meditatio de natura centri oscillationis. Opera omnia 2: 168–86. 
Lausanne.
Bertoloni Meli, D. 1993. Equivalence and Priority: Newton vs Leibniz. Oxford: Clarendon.
Besterman, T. 1959. Les lettres de la Marquise du Châtelet, 2 vols. Geneva: Institut et 
Musée Voltaire.402 Bibliography
Biener, Z. 2018. Newton’s ‘Regulae philosophandi.’ Te Oxford Handbook of Newton, 
edited by Chr. Smeenk and E. Schliesser. Oxford University Press. https://doi.org/
10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199930418.013.4
Biener, Z., and E. Schliesser. 2017. Te certainty, modality, and grounding of Newton’s 
laws. Te Monist 100: 311–25.
Biener, Z., and C. Smeenk. 2012. Cotes’s queries: Newton’s empiricism and conceptions 
of matter. Interpreting Newton: Critical Essays, edited by A. Janiak and E. Schliesser, 
105–37. Cambridge University Press.
Boscovich, R. 1745. De viribus vivis. Rome.
Boscovich, R. 1922. A Teory of Natural Philosophy. Translated by J. M. Child. 
Chicago: Open Court.
Boss, V. 1972. Newton and Russia. Harvard University Press.
Brading, K. 2012. Newton’s law-constitutive approach to bodies: a response to Descartes. 
Interpreting Newton: Critical Essays, edited by A. Janiak and E. Schliesser, 13–32. 
Cambridge University Press.
Brading, K. 2013. Tree principles of unity in Newton. Studies in History and Philosophy 
of Science 44: 408–15.
Brading, K. 2018. Newton on body. Te Oxford Handbook of Newton, edited by C. Smeenk 
and E. Schliesser. Oxford University Press. https://academic.oup.com/edited-volume/
34749/chapter-abstract/296599802?redirectedFrom=fulltext&login=false
Brading, K. 2019. Emilie Du Châtelet and the Foundations of Physical Science. 
New York: Routledge.
Brading, K. forthcoming. Newton’s Principia and philosophical mechanics. Teory, 
Evidence, Data: Temes from George E. Smith, edited by M. Stan and Chr. Smeenk. 
Springer.
Brading, K., and M. Stan. 2021. How physics few the philosophers’ nest. Studies in History 
and Philosophy of Science 88: 312–20.
Breidert, W. 1983. Leonhard Euler und die Philosophie. Leonhard Euler, 1707–
1783: Beiträge zu Leben und Werk, edited by J. Burckhardt, E. Fellmann, and W. 
Habicht, 447–58. Basel: Birkhäuser.
Broman, T. 2012. Metaphysics for an enlightened public: the controversy over monads in 
Germany, 1746–1748. Isis 103: 1–23.
Brown, H. 2005. Physical Relativity: Space–Time Structure from a Dynamical Perspective. 
Oxford University Press.
Brown, H., and P. Pooley. 2006. Minkowski space–time: a glorious non-entity. Te 
Ontology of Spacetime, edited by D. Dieks, 1: 67–89. Elsevier.
Brunet, P. 1952. La vie et l’œuvre de Clairaut. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France.
Bub, J. 2000. Quantum mechanics as a principle theory. Studies in History and Philosophy 
of Modern Physics 31: 75–94.
Bucciarelli, L., and N. Dworsky. 1980. Sophie Germain: An Essay in the History of the 
Teory of Elasticity. Dordrecht: D. Reidel.
Buchwald, J. Z. 1980. Optics and the theory of the punctiform ether. Archive for History of 
Exact Sciences 21: 245–78.
Calero, J. S. 2008. Te Genesis of Fluid Mechanics 1640–1780. Translated by J. H. Watson. 
Springer.
Calinger, R. 1969. Te Newtonian–Wolfan controversy: 1740–1759. Journal of the 
History of Ideas 30: 319–30.Bibliography 403
Calinger, R. 1976. Euler’s ‘Letters to a Princess of Germany.’ Archive for History of Exact 
Sciences 15: 211–33.
Calinger, R. 2016. Leonhard Euler: Mathematical Genius in the Enlightenment. Princeton 
University Press.
Cannon, J., and S. Dostrovsky. 1981. Te Evolution of Dynamics. Springer.
Caparrini, S. 2014. Te history of the Méchanique analitique. Lettera Matematica 2: 47–54.
Caparrini, S. forthcoming. Remarks on Mecanique Analytique. Teory, Evidence, 
Data: Temes from George E. Smith, edited by M. Stan and Chr. Smeenk. Springer.
Capecchi, D. 2012. History of Virtual Work Laws. Basel: Birkhäuser.
Carré, L. 1706. Des loix du mouvement. Histoire de l’Académie Royale des Sciences, 442–61.
Casey, J. 1992. Te principle of rigidifcation. Archive for History of Exact Sciences
43: 329–83.
Cauchy, A. L. 1823. Recherches sur l’équilibre et le mouvement intérieur des corps solides 
ou fuides, élastique ou non élastique. Bulletin de la Société Philomatique, 9–13.
Cauchy, A. L. 1868. Sept leçons de physique générale. Edited by F. N. Moigno. Paris.
Cauchy, A. L. 1889. De la pression ou tension dans un corps solide. [1822] Oeuvres 
complètes d’Augustin Cauchy, 2:7: 60–78. Paris.
Cauchy, A. L. 1890. Sur les équations qui expriment les conditions d’équilibre ou les lois 
du mouvement intérieur d’un corps solide élastique ou non élastique. [1828] Oeuvres 
complètes d’Augustin Cauchy, 2:2: 195–226. Paris.
Cauchy, A. L. 1891. Sur l’équilibre et le mouvement intérieur des corps considérés comme 
des masses continues. [1829] Oeuvres complètes d’Augustin Cauchy, 2:9: 342–72. Paris.
Chalmers, A. 2017. One Hundred Years of Pressure: Hydrostatics from Stevin to Newton. 
Springer.
Child, J. M. 1922. Introduction to A Teory of Natural Philosophy by R. Boscovich, xi–
xviii. Chicago: Open Court.
Clairaut, A. 1739. Solution de quelques problèmes de dynamique. Histoire de l’Académie 
royale des sciences, 1–22. Paris.
Clairaut, A. 1745. Sur quelques principes qui donnent la solution d’un grand nombre de 
problèmes de dynamique. Histoire de l’Académie royale des sciences, 1–52. Paris.
Clatterbaugh, K. 1999. Te Causation Debate in Modern Philosophy, 1637–1739. 
New York: Routledge.
Condillac, E. 1749. Traité des sistêmes. Te Hague.
Cournot, A. 1827. Extension du principe des vitesses virtuelles au cas où les conditions 
des liaisons sont exprimées par inégalités. Bulletin des sciences mathématiques, 
astronomiques, physiques et chimiques 8: 165–70.
Crosland, M. 1967. Te Society of Arcueil. Harvard University Press.
Crousaz, J. P. 1721. Dissertation sur les causes du ressort. Bordeaux.
Crousaz, J. P. 1752. Discours sur le principe, la nature, et la communication du mouvement. 
Recueil des pièces qui ont remporté les prix de l’Académie royale des sciences. Paris.
Dahan Dalmedico, A. 1990. Le formalisme variationnel dans les travaux de Lagrange. La
Mécanique analytique de Lagrange et son héritage, edited by A. Lichnerowicz, 81–106. 
Turin: Accademia delle Scienze di Torino.
Dahan Dalmedico, A. 1992. Mathématisations: Augustin-Louis Cauchy et l’École Française. 
Paris: Editions du Choix.
d’Alembert, J. 1743. Traité de dynamique. Paris.
d’Alembert, J. 1744. Traité de l’équilibre et du mouvement des fuides. Paris.404 Bibliography
d’Alembert, J. 1747. Recherches sur la courbe que forme une corde tenduë mise en vi￾bration. Histoire de l’Académie royale des sciences et des belles-lettres de Berlin, 214–19. 
Berlin.
d’Alembert, J. 1749. Recherches sur la précession des équinoxes, et sur la nutation de l’axe de 
la terre, dans le systême Newtonien. Paris.
d’Alembert, J. 1754. Corps. Encyclopédie ou Dictionnaire raisonné des sciences, des arts et 
des métiers 4: 261–63. Paris.
d’Alembert, J. 1759. Essai sur les éléments de philosophie. Paris.
d’Alembert, J. 1995. Preliminary Discourse to the Encyclopedia of Diderot. Translated by R. 
N. Schwab. University of Chicago Press.
Darrigol, O. 2002. Between hydrodynamics and elasticity theory: the frst fve births of the 
Navier-Stokes Equation. Archive for History of Exact Science 56: 95–150.
Darrigol, O. 2005. Worlds of Flow. Oxford University Press.
Darrigol, O., and U. Frisch. 2008. From Newton’s mechanics to Euler’s equations. Physica 
D: Nonlinear Phenomena 237: 1855–69.
Descartes, R. 1637. Discours de la methode pour bien conduire sa raison, & chercher la 
verité dans les sciences. Leiden.
Descartes, R. 1991. Principles of Philosophy. Translated by V. R. Miller and R. P. Miller. 
Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Detlefsen, K. 2019. Du Châtelet and Descartes on the role of hypothesis and metaphysics 
in science. Feminist History of Philosophy: Te Recovery and Evaluation of Women’s 
Philosophical Tought, edited by E. O’Neill and M. Lascano, 97–128. Springer.
Dhombres, J. 1989. La théorie de la capillarité selon Laplace. Revue d’histoire des sciences
42: 43–77.
Downing, L. 2012. Maupertuis on attraction as an inherent property of matter. Interpreting 
Newton: Critical Essays, edited by A. Janiak and E. Schliesser, 280–98. Cambridge 
University Press.
Du Châtelet, E. 1740. Institutions de physique. Paris. Translated into English as Foundations 
of Physics (in her 2009, 2014, 2018b).
Du Châtelet, E. 1958. Les lettres de la Marquise Du Châtelet. Edited and translated by T. 
Besterman, 2 vols. Geneva: Institut et Musée Voltaire.
Du Châtelet, E. 2009. Selected Philosophical and Scientifc Writings. Edited and translated 
by I. Bour and J. Zinsser. University of Chicago Press.
Du Châtelet, E. 2014. On the divisibility and subtlety of matter. Philosophy, Science, 
and History: A Guide and Reader. Edited and translated by L. Patton, 332–42. 
New York: Routledge.
Du Châtelet, E. 2018a. La correspondance, edited by U. Kölving and A. Brown, vol. 1. 
Ferney-Voltaire, France: Centre international d’étude du XVIIIe siècle.
Du Châtelet, E. 2018b. Foundations of Physics. Translated by K. Brading et al. Available at 
www.kbrading.org.
Ducheyne, S. 2012. ‘Te Main Business of Natural Philosophy’: Isaac Newton’s Natural￾Philosophical Methodology. Springer.
Ducheyne, S. 2015. Petrus van Musschenbroek and Newton’s vera stabilisque 
Philosophandi methodus. Berichte zur Wissenschafsgeschichte 38: 279–304.
Ducheyne, S., and P. Present. 2020. Pieter van Musschenbroek on laws of nature. British 
Journal for the History of Science 50: 637–56.
Ducheyne, S., and J. van Besouw. 2017. Newton and the Dutch ‘Newtonians’: 1713–
1750. Te Oxford Handbook of Newton, edited by Chr. Smeenk and E. Schliesser. Bibliography 405
Oxford University Press. https://academic.oup.com/edited-volume/34749/chap
ter-abstract/296601089?redirectedFrom=fulltext&login=false#:~:text=Newton%20
and%20the%20Dutch%20%E2%80%9CNewtoni ans%E2%80%9D%3A%201
713%E2%80%931750%20%7C%20The,particular%20on%20three%20strands%20
in%20the%20reception%20of
Ducheyne, S., and J. van Besouw. 2022. ’s Gravesande’s foundations for mechanics. 
Encyclopedia of Early Modern Philosophy and the Sciences, edited by Ch. Wolfe and D. 
Jalobeanu, 1–8. Springer.
Duhem, P. 1903. L’évolution de la mécanique. Paris: Joanin.
Einstein, A. 1982. What is the theory of relativity? [1919] Ideas and Opinions, 2nd ed., 
227–31. New York: Crown Publishers.
Eneström, G. 1905. Der Briefwechsel zwischen Leonhard Euler und Johann I Bernoulli. 
Bibliotheca Mathematica 6: 16–83.
Erxleben, J. P. 1772. Anfangsgründe der Naturlehre. Göttingen.
Euler, L. 1736. Mechanica, sive scientia motus. St. Petersburg.
Euler, L. 1745. Dissertation sur la meilleure construction du cabestan. Pièces qui ont 
remporté le prix de l’Académie royale des sciences en 1741, 29–87. Paris.
Euler, L. 1746a. De motu corporum in superfciebus mobilibus. Opuscula varii argumenti, 
1:1–136. Berlin.
Euler, L. 1746b. Recherches physiques sur la nature des moindres parties de la matière. 
Opuscula varii argumenti, 1:287–300. Berlin.
Euler, L. 1746c. De la force de percussion et de sa véritable mesure. Mémoires de l’académie 
des sciences de Berlin 1: 21–53.
Euler, L. 1746d. Enodatio quaestionis utrum materiae facultas cogitandi tribui possit 
necne. Opuscula varii argumenti, 1:277–86. Berlin.
Euler, L. 1748. Sur la vibration des cordes. Histoire de l’Académie royale des sciences et des 
belles-lettres de Berlin: 69–85.
Euler, L. 1752a. Découverte d’un nouveau principe de mécanique. Mémoires de l’académie 
des sciences de Berlin 6: 185–217.
Euler, L. 1752b. Recherches sur l’origine des forces. Mémoires de l’académie des sciences de 
Berlin 6: 419–47.
Euler, L. 1757. Principes généraux du mouvement des fuides. Mémoires de l’académie des 
sciences de Berlin 11: 274–315.
Euler, L. 1761. Principia motus fuidorum. Novi commentarii academiae scientiarum 
Petropolitanae 6: 271–311.
Euler, L. 1765a. Recherches sur la connoissance mécanique des corps. Mémoires de 
l’académie des sciences de Berlin 14: 131–53.
Euler, L. 1765b. Du mouvement de rotation des corps solides autour d’un axe variable. 
Mémoires de l’académie des sciences de Berlin 14: 154–93.
Euler, L. 1766. De motu vibratorio tympanarum. Novi commentarii academiae scientiarum 
Petropolitanae 10: 243–60.
Euler, L. 1771. Genuina principia doctrinae de statu aequilibrii et motu corporum tam 
perfecte fexibilium quam elasticorum. Novi commentarii academiae scientiarum 
imperialis Petropolitanae 15: 381–413.
Euler, L. 1802. Letters of Euler on Diferent Subjects in Physics and Philosophy. Addressed to 
a German Princess, vols. 1 and 2, 2nd ed. Translated by H. Hunter. London.
Euler, L. 1862. Anleitung zur Naturlehre. Opera postuma, edited by P. H. Fuss and N. Fuss, 
2:449–560. St. Petersburg. Also in Euleri Opera Omnia, 3:1:16–180.406 Bibliography
Euler, L. 1960. Lettres à une princesse d’Allemagne sur divers sujets de physique et de 
philosophie. [1760] Euleri Opera Omnia, series 3, vols. 11 and 12. Basel: Birkhäuser.
Feigenbaum, L. 1985. Brook Taylor and the method of increments. Archive for History of 
Exact Sciences 34: 1–140.
Firode, A. 2001. La dynamique de d’Alembert. Paris: Fides.
Fleckenstein, J. O. 1949. Johann und Jakob Bernoulli. Basel: Birkhäuser.
Flores, F. 1999. Einstein’s theory of theories and types of theoretical explanation. 
International Studies in the Philosophy of Science 13: 123–34.
Fossombroni, V. 1796. Memoria sul principio delle velocità virtuali. Florence.
Fourier, J. 1797. Mémoire sur la statique. Journal de l’École Polytechnique 5: 20–61.
Fox, R. 1974. Te rise and fall of Laplacian physics. Historical Studies in the Physical 
Sciences 4: 89–136.
Fox, R. 2013. Laplace and the physics of short-range forces. Oxford Handbook of the 
History of Physics, edited by J. Z. Buchwald and R. Fox, 406–31. Oxford University Press.
Fox, C. 2016. Te Newtonian Equivalence Principle: how the relativity of acceleration 
led Newton to the equivalence of inertial and gravitational mass. Philosophy of Science
83: 1027–38.
Fraser, C. 1983. Lagrange’s early contributions to the principles and methods of me￾chanics. Archive for History of Exact Sciences 28: 197–241.
Fraser, C. 1985. D’Alembert’s Principle: the original formulation and application in Jean 
d’Alembert’s Traité de dynamique. Centaurus 28: 31–61, 145–59.
Fraser, C. 1991. Mathematical technique and physical conception in Euler’s investigation 
of the elastica. Centaurus 34: 211–46.
Fraser, D. 2008. Te fate of ‘particles’ in quantum feld theories with interactions. Studies 
in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 39: 841–59.
Freudenthal, G. 2002. Perpetuum mobile: the Leibniz–Papin controversy. Studies in 
History and Philosophy of Science 33: 573–637.
Friedman, M. 2013. Kant’s Construction of Nature. Cambridge University Press.
Galilei, G. 1974. Two New Sciences. Translated by S. Drake. University of Wisconsin Press.
Galletto, D. 1991. Lagrange e la Mécanique Analytique. Memorie dell’Istituto Lombardo, 
29: 77–179. Milan: Istituto Lombardo di Scienze e Lettere.
Garber, D. 1992. Descartes’ Metaphysical Physics. University of Chicago Press.
Garber, D. 2009. Leibniz: Body, Substance, Monad. Oxford University Press.
Gaukroger, S. 1982. Te metaphysics of impenetrability: Euler’s conception of force. 
British Journal for the History of Science 15: 132–54.
Gauss, C. 1833. Principia generalia theoriae fgurae fuidorum in statu æquilibrii. 
Commentationes Societatis Regiae Gottingensis 7: 39–88.
Gilbaud, A. and C. Schmit. 2017. A historiographical overview of the current state of re￾search into Jean Le Rond D’Alembert. Centaurus 59: 251–62.
Gillispie, C. 2004. Science and Polity in France: Te Revolutionary and Napoleonic Years. 
Princeton University Press.
Gouhier, H. 1926. La vocation de Malebranche. Paris: Vrin.
Grattan Guinness, I. 1984. Work for the workers: advances in engineering mechanics and 
instruction in France, 1800–1830. Annals of Science 41: 1–33.
Grattan Guinness, I. 1990. Convolutions in French Mathematics, 1800–1840, vols. I-II. 
Springer.Bibliography 407
Grigorian, A. T., and V. Kirsanov. 2007. Letters to a German Princess and Euler’s physics. 
Euler and Modern Science, edited by N. Bogolyubov, G. Mikhailov, and A. Yushkevich, 
307–16. Providence: Mathematical Society of America.
Grimberg, G. 1998. D’Alembert et les équations aux dérivées partielles en 
hydrodynamique. PhD diss., Université Paris 7.
Grimsley, R. 1963. Jean d’Alembert. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Guicciardini, N. 2009. Isaac Newton on Mathematical Method and Certainty. MIT Press.
Guzzardi, L. 2020. Ruggiero Boscovich’s Teory of Natural Philosophy. Springer.
Hagengruber, R., ed. 2012. Emilie du Châtelet between Newton and Leibniz. Springer.
Hahn, R. 1971. Te Anatomy of a Scientifc Institution: Te Paris Academy of Sciences, 
1666–1803. University of California Press.
Hamel, G. 1917. Über ein Prinzip der Befreiung bei Lagrange. Jahresberichte der 
Deutschen Mathematiker-Vereinigung 25: 60–7.
Hamel, G. 1949. Teoretische Mechanik. Springer.
Hankins, T. 1970. Jean d’Alembert: Science and the Enlightenment. Oxford: 
Clarendon Press.
Hanov, M. Ch. 1762. Philosophia naturalis, sive physica dogmatica, vol. 1. Halle.
Harper, W. 2012. Isaac Newton’s Scientifc Method. Oxford University Press.
Hepburn, B., and Z. Biener. 2022. Mechanics in Newton’s wake. Cambridge History of 
Philosophy of the Scientifc Revolution, edited by D. M. Miller and D. Jalobeanu, 293–
311. Cambridge University Press.
Hermann, J. 1716. Phoronomia. Amsterdam.
Heyman, J. 1996. Elements of the Teory of Structures. Cambridge University Press.
Holden, T. 2004. Te Architecture of Matter. Oxford University Press.
Howard, D. 2005. ‘And I shall not mingle conjectures with certainties’: Einstein on the 
principle theories–constructive theories distinction. Invited lecture delivered at the 
conference 2005: Te Centenary of Einstein’s Annus Mirabilis. London: British Academy.
Howard, N. C. 2003. Christiaan Huygens: the construction of texts and audiences. Phd. 
diss., Indiana University, Bloomington.
Hult, J. 1985. Eulers Briefe an eine deutsche Prinzessin. Festakt und Wissenschafliche 
Konferenz aus Anlass des 200. Todestages von Leonhard Euler, edited by W. Engel, 83–
90. Berlin: Akademie-Verlag.
Huygens, Chr. 1673. Horologium oscillatorium. Paris: F. Muguet.
Huygens, Chr. 1889–1950. Oeuvres complètes de Christiaan Huygens, 22 vols. Te 
Hague: Société Hollandaise des Sciences.
Huygens, Chr. 1912. Treatise on Light. Translated by S. P. Tompson. London: Macmillan.
Huygens, Chr. 1977. Te motion of colliding bodies. Translated by R. Blackwell. Isis
68: 574–97.
Huygens, Chr. 1986. Te Pendulum Clock, or Geometrical Demonstrations Concerning 
the Motion of Pendula as Applied to Clocks. Translated by R. Blackwell. Iowa State 
University Press.
Iltis, C. 1967. Te controversy over living force, Leibniz to d’Alembert. PhD diss., 
University of Wisconsin-Madison.
Iltis, C. 1970. D’Alembert and the vis viva controversy. Studies in History and Philosophy 
of Science 1: 135–44.
Jacobi, C. G. J. 1996. Vorlesungen über analytische Mechanik [1847-8]. Edited by H. Pulte. 
Braunschweig: Vieweg.
Jacquier, Fr. 1785. Institutiones philosophicae, vol. 4. Venice.408 Bibliography
Jalobeanu, D. 2011. Te Cartesians of the Royal Society: the debate over the nature of 
collisions (1668–1671). Vanishing Matter and the Laws of Motion, edited by D. 
Jalobeanu and P. Anstey, 103–29. New York: Routledge.
Jalobeanu, D., and P. Anstey, eds. 2011. Vanishing Matter and the Laws of Motion. 
New York: Routledge.
Jammer, M. 1957. Concepts of Force. Harvard University Press.
Janiak, A. 2008. Newton as Philosopher. Cambridge University Press.
Janik, L. G. 1982. Searching for the metaphysics of science: the structure and composition 
of Madame Du Châtelet’s Institutions de physique, 1737-1740. Studies on Voltaire and 
the Eighteenth Century 201: 85–113.
Janssen, M. 2009. Drawing the line between kinematics and dynamics in Special Relativity. 
Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 40: 26–52.
Kant, I. 1905. Neuer Lehrbegrif der Bewegung und Ruhe. [1758] Kant’s Gesammelte 
Schrifen, edited by the Prussian Academy of Sciences, 2:13–26. Berlin: G. Reimer.
Kant, I. 1910. Monadologia physica. [1756] Kant’s Gesammelte Schrifen, edited by the 
Prussian Academy of Sciences, 1:473–88. Berlin: G. Reimer.
Kant, I. 1911. Metaphysische Anfangsgründe der Naturwissenschaf. [1786] Kant’s 
Gesammelte Schrifen, edited by the Prussian Academy of Sciences, 4:465–566. 
Berlin: G. Reimer.
Kant, I. 1992. Teoretical Philosophy 1755–1770. Edited and translated by D. Walford and 
R. Meerbote. Te Cambridge Edition of the Works of Immanuel Kant. Cambridge 
University Press.
Kant, I. 2004. Metaphysical Foundations of Natural Science. Edited and translated by M. 
Friedman. Cambridge Texts in the History of Philosophy. Cambridge University Press.
Kant, I. 2012. Natural Philosophy. Edited by E. Watkins. Te Cambridge Edition of the 
Works of Immanuel Kant. Cambridge University Press.
Keill, J. 1698. An Examination of Dr. Burnet’s Teory of the Earth. Oxford.
Keill, J. 1702. Introductio ad veram physicam seu lectiones physicae. London: Tomas 
Bennett.
Keill, J. 1726. An Introduction to Natural Philosophy. 2nd ed. London.
Lagrange, J. L. 1788. Mechanique analytique. Paris: Veuve Desaint.
Lagrange, J. L. 1797a. Téorie des fonctions analytiques. Paris.
Lagrange, J. L. 1797b. Sur le principe des vitesses virtuelles. Journal de l’École Polytechnique
5: 115–8.
Lagrange, J. L. 1811–5. Mécanique analytique, 2 vols. Paris.
Lamé, G. 1852. Leçons sur la théorie mathématique de l’élasticité des corps solides. 
Paris: Bachelier.
Laplace, P. S. 1795. Exposition du systême du monde, vol. 1. Paris.
Laplace, P. S. 1898. Mémoire sur les mouvements de la lumière dans les milieux diaphanes. 
[1810] Oeuvres complètes de Laplace, 12:267–300. Paris: Gauthier-Villars.
Leduc, C. 2015. La métaphysique de la nature à l’Académie de Berlin. Philosophiques
42: 11–30.
Leduc, C., and D. Dumouchel, eds. 2015. Philosophiques, vol. 42, issue 1.
Leibniz, G. W. 1686. Brevis demonstratio erroris memorabilis Cartesii et aliorum circa 
legem naturae. Acta Eruditorum August: 161–3. French translation in Nouvelles de la 
République des Lettres: 996–9.Bibliography 409
Leibniz, G. W. 1687. Réplique de M[onsieur] L[eibniz] a Monsieur l’Abbé D[e] 
C[atelan] . . ., touchant ce qu’on a dit Monsieur Descartes que Dieu conserve toujours 
dans la nature la même quantité de mouvement. Nouvelles de la République des Lettres
February: 131–45.
Leibniz, G. W. 1695. Specimen dynamicum. Acta Eruditorum April: 145–57. English 
translation in Philosophical Papers and Letters, edited by L. Loemker, 435–51. Kluwer.
Leibniz, G. W. 1860. Mathematische Schrifen, vol. 6. Edited by C. I. Gerhardt. Halle.
Leibniz, G. W. 1875. Philosophische Schrifen, vol. 1. Edited by C. I. Gerhardt. Berlin.
Leibniz, G. W. 1956. Philosophical Papers and Letters. Edited and translated by L. Loemker. 
University of Chicago Press.
Lennon, T. M. 1993. Te Battle of the Gods and Giants: Te Legacies of Descartes and 
Gassendi, 1655–1715. Princeton University Press.
Le Ru, V. 2015. La notion de temps chez d’Alembert: une notion mathématique? 
Les mathématiques et l’expérience, edited by E. Barbin and J. P. Cléro, 131–47. 
Paris: Hermann.
Le Ru, V. 2021. D’Alembert ou comment penser les grandes questions métaphysiques à
partir de son principe de dynamique. Les chemins du scepticisme en mathématiques, 
edited by J. P. Cléro, 253–66. Paris: Hermann.
Mach, E. 1883. Mechanik in ihrer Entwickelung. Wien.
MacLaurin, C. 1724. Démonstration des loix du choc des corps. Pièce qui a remporté le 
prix de l’Académie royale des sciences proposé pour l’année 1724. Paris: Jombert.
Malebranche, N. 1958–70. Oeuvres complètes. Edited by A. Robinet, 21 vols. Paris: Vrin.
[Malebranche, N.] 1692. Des loix de la communication du mouvement, par l’auteur de la
Recherche de la Verité. Paris: Pralard.
Maltese, G. 1992a. La storia di F=MA. Firenze: Olschki.
Maltese, G. 1992b. Brook Taylor and Johann Bernoulli on the vibrating string. Physis
29: 703–44.
Maltese, G. 1993. Toward the rise of the modern science of motion: the transition from 
synthetic to analytic mechanics. History of Physics in the 19th and 20th Centuries, ed￾ited by F. Bevilacqua, 51–67. Bologna: SIF.
Maupertuis, P. L. M. 1732. Discours sur les diférentes fgures des astres. Paris.
Maupertuis, P. L. M. 1734. Dissertation on the diferent fgures of the celestial bodies. 
Translated by J. Keill in An Examination of Dr. Burnet’s Teory of the Earth, 1–67. 
Oxford and London.
Maupertuis, P. L. M. 1740. Loix de repos des corps. Histoire de l’Académie royale des sci￾ences, 170–7. Paris.
Maupertuis, P. L. M. 1744. Accord des diférentes loix de la nature qui avoient jusqu’ici 
paru incompatibles. Histoire de l’Académie royale des sciences, 417–26. Paris.
Maupertuis, P. L. M. 1746. Les loix de mouvement et du repos, déduites d’un principe 
de métaphysique. Histoire de l’Académie des sciences et belles lettres de Berlin, 267–94. 
Berlin.
Mazière, P. 1727. Les loix du choc des corps à ressort parfait ou imparfait. Pièce qui 
a remporté le prix de l’Académie royale des sciences proposé pour l’année 1726. 
Paris: Jombert.
McDonough, J. 2020. Not dead yet: teleology and the ‘Scientifc Revolution.’ Teleology: A 
History, edited by Jefrey K. McDonough, 150–79. Oxford University Press.
McMullin, E. 1978. Newton on Matter and Activity. University of Notre Dame Press.
Meier, G. 1765. Metaphysik. 2nd ed., vol. 2. Halle.410 Bibliography
Mouy, P. 1927. Les lois du choc des corps d’après Malebranche. Paris: Vrin.
Murdoch, A. I. 2010. On molecular modeling and continuum concepts. Journal of 
Elasticity 100: 33–61.
Murray, G., W. Harper, and C. Wilson. 2011. Huygens, Wren, Wallis, and Newton on 
rules of impact and refection. Vanishing Matter and the Laws of Motion, edited by D. 
Jalobeanu and P. Anstey, 153–92. New York: Routledge.
Musschenbroek, P. 1726. Elementa physicae. Leiden.
Musschenbroek, P. 1744. Te Elements of Natural Philosophy: Chiefy Intended for the Use 
of Students in Universities, vol. 1. Translated by J. Colson. London.
Nagel, F. 2005. Jacob Hermann—Skizze einer Biographie. Gelehrte aus Basel an der St. 
Petersburger Akademie der Wissenschafen des 18. Jahrhunderts, edited by F. Nagel and 
A. Verdun, 55–76. Aachen: Shaker.
Nagel, F., and A. Verdun, eds. 2005. ‘Geschickte Leute, die was praestiren können.’ Gelehrte 
aus Basel an der St. Petersburger Akademie der Wissenschafen des 18. Jahrhunderts. 
Aachen: Shaker.
Nakata, R. 1994. Joseph Privat de Molières: reconciler between Cartesianism and 
Newtonianism in collision theory. Historia Scientiarum 3: 201–13.
Nakata, R. 2002. Te general principles for resolving mechanical problems in d’Alembert, 
Clairaut and Euler. Historia Scientiarum 12: 18–42.
Navier, H. 1821. Sur les lois des mouvements des fuides, en ayant régard à l’adhésion des 
molécules. Annales de Chimie et de Physique 19: 244–60.
Navier, H. 1823a. Extrait des recherches sur la fexion des plans élastiques. Bulletin de la 
Société Philomathique de Paris, 92–102.
Navier, H. 1823b. Sur les lois de l’équilibre et du mouvement des corps solides élastiques. 
Bulletin de la Société Philomathique de Paris, 177–81.
Navier, H. 1827. Sur les lois de l’équilibre et du mouvement des corps solides élastiques. 
Mémoires de l’Académie Royale des Sciences 7: 375–93.
Neimark, J., and N. Fufaev. 1972. Dynamics of Nonholonomic Systems. 
Providence: American Mathematical Society.
Newton, I. 1687. Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica. London.
Newton, I. 1713. Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica. Edited by R. Cotes, 2nd 
ed. London.
Newton, I. Principes mathématiques de la philosophie naturelle. Translated by E. Du 
Châtelet. Paris.
Newton, I. 1999. Te Principia. Edited and translated by I. B. Cohen, with A. Whitman. 
University of California Press.
Newton, I. 2014. Philosophical Writings. Edited by A. Janiak, 2nd ed. Cambridge 
University Press.
Ney, A. 2020. Te World in the Wave Function. Oxford University Press.
Noll, W. 1974. La mécanique classique, basée sur un axiome d’objectivité. Te Foundations 
of Mechanics and Termodynamics, 135–44. Springer.
Oldenburg, H. 1968. Te Correspondence of Henry Oldenburg. Vol. V: 1668–1669. Edited 
and translated by A. R. Hall and M. Boas Hall. University of Wisconsin Press.
Ostertag, H. 1910. Der philosophische Gehalt des Wolf-Manteufelschen Briefwechsels. 
Leipzig: Quelle & Mayer.
Ott, W. 2009. Causation and Laws of Nature in Early Modern Philosophy. Oxford 
University Press.
Ott, W., and L. Patton, eds. 2018. Laws of Nature. Oxford University Press.Bibliography 411
Panza, M. 2003. Te origins of analytic mechanics in the 18th century. A History of 
Analysis, edited by H. N. Jahnke, 137–53. Providence: American Mathematical Society.
Papastavridis, J. 2002. Analytical Mechanics. Oxford University Press.
Pemberton, H. 1728. A View of Isaac Newton’s Philosophy. London.
Pepe, L. 2008. Il giovane Lagrange e i fondamenti dell’analisi. Sfogliando la Méchanique 
Analitique, edited by G. A. Sacchi Landriani and A. Giorgilli, 37–49. Milan: LED.
[Pfautz, C.] 1688. Review of Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica by Isaac 
Newton. Acta Eruditorum June: 304–12.
Planck, M. 1919. Einführung in die Mechanik deformierbarer Körper. Leipzig: S. Hirzel.
Poinsot, L. 1806. Téorie générale de l’équilibre et du mouvement des systèmes. Journal de 
l’École Polytechnique 13: 182–241.
Poisson, S. D. 1811. Traité de mécanique. 1st ed. Paris.
Poisson, S. D. 1828. Mémoire sur l’équilibre et le mouvement des corps élastiques. Annales 
de Chimie et de Physique 37: 337–54.
Poisson, S. D. 1831. Nouvelle théorie de l’action capillaire. Paris.
Pourciau, B. 2006. Newton’s interpretation of Newton’s Second Law. Archive for History of 
Exact Sciences 60: 157–207.
Prony, R. 1800. Mécanique philosophique. Paris.
Prony, R. 1815. Leçons de mécanique analytique. Paris.
Pulte, H. 1989. Das Prinzip der kleinsten Wirkung und die Krafkonzeptionen der rationalen 
Mechanik. Stuttgart: Franz Steiner.
Pulte, H. 2005. Lagrange, Méchanique analitique, frst edition. Landmark Writings in 
Western Mathematics 1640–1940, edited by I. Grattan-Guinness, 208–24. Elsevier.
Pyle, A. 2003. Malebranche. New York: Routledge.
Ravetz, J. 1961. Te representation of physical quantities in eighteenth-century mathe￾matical physics. Isis 52: 7–20.
Reichenberger, A. 2012. Emilie du Châtelet’s Institutions in the context of the vis viva con￾troversy. Emilie du Châtelet between Newton and Leibniz, edited by R. Hagengruber, 
157–71. Springer.
Robinet, A. 1955. Malebranche et Leibniz: Relations personnelles. Paris: Vrin.
Robinet, A. 1970. Malebranche de l’Académie des sciences. L’œuvre scientifque, 1674–1715. 
Paris: Vrin.
Rohault, J. 1671. Traité de physique. Paris.
Rohault, J. 1697. Physica. Edited and translated by S. Clarke. London.
Rohault, J. 1723. System of Natural Philosophy. Edited and translated by J. Clarke. London.
Saint-Venant, A. B. de. 1844. Mémoire sur la question de savoir s’il existe des masses con￾tinues, et sur la nature probable des dernières particules des corps. Paris.
Saulmon, M. 1721. Du choc des corps dont le ressort est parfait. Histoire de l’Académie 
royale des sciences, 126–45.
Saulmon, M. 1723. Sur le choc des corps à ressort. Histoire de l’Académie royale des sci￾ences, 101–7.
Schmit, C. 2015. Les dynamiques de Jean-Jacques Dortous de Mairan. Revue d’Histoire 
des Sciences 68: 281–309.
Schmit, C. 2017. Beginnings of a new science. D’Alembert’s Traité de dynamique and the 
French Royal Academy of Sciences around 1740. Centaurus 59: 285–99.
Schmit, C. 2020. La philosophie naturelle de Malebranche au XVIIIe siècle. Paris: Classiques 
Garnier.412 Bibliography
Scott, W. 1970. Te Confict between Atomism and Conservation Teory, 1644 to 1860. 
New York: American Elsevier.
’s Gravesande, W. J. 1720. Mathematical Elements of Physics Prov’d by Experiments: Being 
an Introduction to Sir Isaac Newton’s Philosophy. Translated by J. Keill. London.
Shapin, S. 1998. Te Scientifc Revolution. University of Chicago Press.
Smith, G. E. 2002. Te methodology of the Principia. Cambridge Companion to Newton, 
edited by I. B. Cohen and G. E. Smith, 138–73. Cambridge University Press.
Smith, G. E. 2008. Newton’s Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica. Stanford 
Encyclopedia of Philosophy, edited by E. Zalta. Winter ed. 2008. https://plato.stanford.
edu/archives/win2008/entries/newton-principia/.
Smith, G. E. 2014. Closing the loop: testing Newtonian gravity, then and now. Newton and 
Empiricism, edited by Z. Biener and E. Schliesser, 262–352. Oxford University Press.
Smith, G. E. 2019. Newton’s numerator in 1685: a year of gestation. Studies in History and 
Philosophy of Modern Physics 68: 163–77.
Smith, S. 2007. Continuous bodies, impenetrability, and contact interactions. British 
Journal for the Philosophy of Science 58: 503–38.
Smith, S. 2013. Kant’s picture of monads in the Physical Monadology. Studies in the History 
and Philosophy of Science 44: 102–11.
Stan, M. 2009. Kant’s early theory of motion. Te Leibniz Review 19: 29–61.
Stan, M. 2017. Newton’s concepts of force among the Leibnizians. Reading Newton in 
Early Modern Europe, edited by M. Feingold and E. Boran, 244–89. Brill.
Stan, M. 2022. From metaphysical principles to dynamical laws. Cambridge History of 
Philosophy of the Scientifc Revolution, edited by D. M. Miller and D. Jalobeanu, 387–
405. Cambridge University Press.
Stan, M. forthcoming. Kant’s Natural Philosophy. Cambridge University Press.
Taylor, B. 1713. De motu nervi tensi. Philosophical Transactions, 26–32.
Taylor, B. 1717. Methodus incrementorum. London.
Terrall, M. 2002. Te Man Who Flattened the Earth. University of Chicago Press.
Truesdell, C. 1954. Rational Fluid Mechanics, 1687–1765. Zurich: Orell Füssli.
Truesdell, C. 1960. Te Rational Mechanics of Flexible or Elastic Bodies, 1638–1788. 
Zurich: Orell Füssli.
Truesdell, C. 1968. Te creation and unfolding of the concept of stress. Essays in the 
History of Mechanics, 184–238. Springer.
Truesdell, C. 1968b. Essays in the History of Mechanics. Springer.
Truesdell, C. 1991. A First Course in Rational Continuum Mechanics. 2nd ed. 
Boston: Academic Press.
Truesdell, C., and R. Toupin. 1960. Te classical feld theories. Principles of Classical 
Mechanics and Field Teory, edited by S. Flügge, 226–858. Springer.
van Besouw, J. 2020. ’s Gravesande’s philosophical trajectory: ‘between’ Leibniz and 
Newton. Intellectual History Review 30: 615–40.
van Inwagen, P. 1990. Material Beings. Cornell University Press.
Veldman, M. n.d. Mathematizing metaphysics: the case of the Principle of Least Action. 
Unpublished manuscript.
Verdun, A. 2015. Leonhard Eulers Arbeiten zur Himmelsmechanik. Springer.
Verdun, A. forthcoming. Leonhard Euler’s Principle of Angular Momentum. Springer.
Vilain, C. 2000. La question du centre d’oscillation de 1660 à 1690; de 1703 à 1743. Physis
37: 21–51, 439–66.Bibliography 413
Villaggio, P. 2008. Introduction. Die Werke von Johann I und Nikolaus II Bernoulli, 6:27–
241. Basel: Birkhäuser.
von Harnack, A. 1900. Geschichte der königlich Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschafen 
zu Berlin, vol. 1A. Berlin.
Watkins, E. 1997. Te laws of motion from Newton to Kant. Perspectives on Science
5: 311–48.
Watkins, E. 2005. Kant and the Metaphysics of Causality. Cambridge University Press.
Watkins, E. 2006. On the necessity and nature of simples: Leibniz, Wolf, Baumgarten, and 
the pre-Critical Kant. Oxford Studies in Early Modern Philosophy 3: 261–314.
Watkins, E. 2019. Kant on Laws. Cambridge University Press.
Westfall, R. S. 1971. Force in Newton’s Physics. Elsevier.
Whyte, L. L. 1961. Boscovich’s atomism. Roger Joseph Boscovich. Studies of His Life and 
Work, edited by L. L. Whyte, 102–26. London: Allen & Unwin.
Wilson, C. 1987. D’Alembert versus Euler on the precession of the equinoxes and the me￾chanics of rigid bodies. Archive for History of Exact Sciences 37: 233–73.
Wilson, M. 2009. Determinism and the mystery of the missing physics. British Journal for 
the Philosophy of Science 60: 173–93.
Wilson, M. 2018. Physics Avoidance. Oxford University Press.
Winter, E. 1956. Die Registres der Berliner Akademie der Wissenschafen 1746–1766. 
Berlin: Akademie Verlag.
Wolf, Chr. 1731. Cosmologia generalis. Frankfurt.
Wolf, Chr. 1740. Philosophia rationalis, sive logica. 3rd ed. Frankfurt, 1740.Action, 2, 98, 103, 119, 132, 169, 180, 219–
20, 226, 231–32, 254–55, 356–57
bodily action, 10, 11, 104–5, 127–28, 
130, 133, 143, 149–50, 153, 265, 267–
68, 397–98
capillary action, 379
contact action, 3, 23–24, 32, 47, 56, 106, 
143–45, 170, 176, 177, 181, 183–84, 
202, 204, 210, 211, 213, 296–97
continued action, 164–65
corporeal action, 85, 210–11, 346
God’s action, 79, 80–81, 126
mutual action, 90, 160, 164–66, 211, 383
Nature, 2–3, 10, 98, 104–5, 106, 122, 
124, 128–30, 149–50, 151, 158, 177, 
180, 199, 254–55, 261–62, 265, 378–
79, 398
philosophical action, 18
physical action, 41, 89
action-at-a-distance, 56, 95, 121, 129–30, 
171, 177, 185, 211–13, 337
Newtonian, 144–45, 210
as unintelligible, 144–45, 210
Age of Reason, 1, 223, 396, 399
Ampère, André-Marie, 335
analytic mechanics, 24, 238, 254, 333, 345, 
348–49, 352–53, 361–62, 376
ancien régime, 222–23, 368
Ancient Greece, 244–45
Archimedes, 241, 255
Aristotle, 19–20, 89n.41
atomism, 104, 134–35, 141, 199, 205
Basel School, 232–33
Baumeister, Fr., 102
Berkeley, George, 21
Berlin (Germany), 220–22
Berlin Academy of Science, 137, 221–22
French, as ofcial language, 221
monad dispute, 154
Bernoulli, Daniel, 232–33, 295
Leibniz problem, solving of, 215
methodus indirecta, 318–19
Bernoulli, Jakob, 227–28, 232, 240, 241, 
243–44, 256
compound pendulum, 241, 255–
56, 259–60
internal constraints, as workless, 260
Lever Principle, 241, 242–43
new dynamical law, 241
statics, principle of, 255–56
Bernoulli, Johann, 29, 51–52, 55, 56, 57, 
145, 146, 228, 232, 233, 234, 235, 
302, 307
center-of-oscillation problems, 256–57
elastic recoil, model of, 56
gurges, notion of, 320
hard bodies, 50–51
methodus directa, 319, 320
pressure, as action, 320
statics, 256
vibrating strings, 236–37
Berthollet, Claude Louis, 367, 368
bodies in motion, 8, 78, 109, 149, 202, 214, 
275, 276
mathematizing of, 308
rational mechanics of, 279–80, 396
bodily action, 10, 11, 104–5, 127–28, 
130, 133, 149–50, 153, 265, 267–
68, 397–98
body kinds, 38, 48, 49–50, 326–27, 330
body types, 84, 87, 90, 326–27
Index
For the beneft of digital users, indexed terms that span two pages (e.g., 52–53) may, on 
occasion, appear on only one of those pages.
Figures are indicated by f following the page number416 Index
Boscovich, Roger Joseph, 23, 129, 139, 
168, 169–70, 179–81, 184–85, 187, 
188, 189–90, 192, 197, 199–200, 211, 
288, 397
acceleration feld, 195
Boscovich force, 185–87, 186f, 195–
96, 197
collisions, treatment of, 190, 191–92
d’Alembert, comparison with, 
294, 396–97
divisibility of extension, 175
elastic bodies, 189
elastic collision, 191
elusive mass, 191, 193
extended bodies, 171, 174–75, 176, 177
force of inertia, 194–95, 196, 197, 198
forces, as causes, 179
hard bodies, 189
impenetrability of bodies, 176
points under forces, 185
quantity of motion, 187, 190, 197–98
sof bodies, 188–89, 190–91
botany, 12
Bradley, James, 310n.14
Brief Demonstration, A… (Leibniz), 34, 
63, 68, 74–75, 81
Britain, 220
British Isles, 61–62, 63, 64
calculus, 232, 248–49, 258, 301
diferential, 29
improving of, 215
invention of, 64–65
new, 233
Newton, 235
partial derivatives, 319–20, 377
variations, 334
Carré, Louis, 39, 52–53
Cartesian method, 29, 107, 108
Cartesian physics, 10, 107–8, 124
Cartesians, 63–65, 70, 74, 82–83, 95–96, 
100, 105, 110, 112
criticism of, 67–68
system-building, tendency toward, 110
Catelan, Father, 37
Cauchy, Augustin-Louis, 24–25, 305–6, 
327, 348, 367, 386, 397
action of internal forces, 386–87
balance-of-force approach, 390, 393–94
balance of torques, 391–92
Cauchy package, 392, 393–94
Cauchy’s Laws of Motion, 306, 391–92
continuous matter, 392, 394
continuous volume, 393
discrete molecules, 392
Euler-Cauchy laws of continuum 
mechanics, 259, 305
mass point, 382–83
strain, 389
stress, 388f, 389
stress, tensor quality of, 388
tension, 386–87, 388–89
causation, 21, 101, 119, 121, 122–23, 
125, 398
debate over, 124–26, 127, 128–29
metaphysics of, 126–28, 129, 179–80
primary, 20–21
secondary, 20–21, 124, 125–26, 127, 129
substance, 1, 20–21, 23, 97, 98, 124, 127, 
128–29, 131
celestial mechanics, 20, 233, 306, 309, 379
centrifugal force, 55, 57, 78
Clairaut, Alexis, 52, 227–28, 233, 245–46, 
247, 254–55, 257–58, 260, 344
centroid approach, 250
general principle of accelerative forces, 
247–49, 248f
rigid constraints, 249, 260
theory building, 254
Clarke, John, 99
Clarke, Samuel, 64
Clatterbaugh, K., 126
collision theory, 3–4, 8, 10, 22–23, 170, 204
BODY, addressing of, 132, 169
Boscovich, 192
causal-explanatory basis, 183–84
Descartes’ physics, foundational for, 5
Hermann, 84, 87, 88
Leibniz, 82–83
Malebranche, 27–28, 29, 30–31, 32–33, 
34, 36, 37–38, 41, 42, 44, 47, 58, 61, 
68, 74–75
natural philosophy, foundational for, 
5, 52, 95
philosophical mechanics of collision, 5
principle approach, 31Index 417
problem of collisions (PCOL), 
addressing of, 129–30, 229
Wolf, 89, 90
composition of motion, 111–12, 269, 279–
80, 292, 294
compound pendulum, 24, 231, 232, 234, 
238, 239–40, 259–60, 261–62, 281, 
282, 286
Bernoulli’s Lever Principle, 241, 242–
45, 242f
dual constraints of, 238–39, 261
Huygens Formula, 240–41, 244, 255–56
linear, 282, 283, 284
concurrentism, 125–26
Condorcet, Marquis de, 222–23
conservation of vis viva, 107–8, 123, 149, 
180–81, 217, 247–48, 257, 295, 304
See also vis viva
constraints
external, 15, 24, 224, 225, 231, 232, 
240, 254–55, 260, 261, 300, 331–32, 
333, 335, 338, 340–41, 362–63, 364, 
379, 392
internal, 14, 24, 224, 231, 244–45, 259–
60, 261, 299–300, 301, 305–6, 308–9, 
322, 324, 326, 330, 331–32, 333, 362–
63, 393–94
contact action, 3, 23–24, 32, 47, 56, 106, 
143–44, 170, 181, 183–84, 202, 204, 
211, 213, 296–97
action at a distance, 176, 177
intelligibility of, 144–45, 210
Continuity Equation, 322, 329
continuous matter, 141, 142–43, 205, 351–
52, 392, 394
deformable, 24–25, 391–92
continuum mechanics, 352n.34, 367, 
389n.44, 392n.53
Euler-Cut approach, 259
Cosserat continua, 392
Cotes, R., 108–9
Crousaz, Jean-Pierre de, 53–54, 55, 56, 
100, 103, 149–50
d’Alembert, Jean Le Rond, 52, 227–28, 
236, 240, 244–45, 259–60, 264, 267, 
270–71, 272, 273–74, 275, 276–77, 
284–87, 288, 289, 290–91, 295, 
297–98, 310–11, 312, 320, 346–47, 
348–49, 369
composition of motion, 279–80, 
292, 294
d’Alembert’s Principle, 227, 319, 339
equilibrium, 277–80, 288
force of inertia, 271, 272, 288
fourteen problems, 269, 281
General Principle, 257–58, 277, 280, 281, 
282, 284, 290, 291, 294, 296–97, 304
inertia, 269, 279–80, 294
Lever Principle, version of, 275–76
mass, notion of, 288, 291–93
Parallelogram Rule, 273
principle approach, 293
problem of collisions (PCOL), 282
problem of constrained motion 
(PCON), 282
Teory (Boscovich), comparison to, 294
Treatise on Dynamics, 24, 25–26, 
263, 297
virtual motions, 276, 280
wave equation, 315f, 316, 393–94
d-contact, 211–13
deductive nomic unity, 220
Democritus, 383–84
Descartes, René, 3–5, 8, 21–23, 29, 32–33, 
34, 37, 41, 47–48, 74–75, 104, 134, 
143, 201–2, 204, 270, 272, 378–79
angle of incidence, 277
Cartesian circle, 20
Cartesian dualism, 20, 125
Cartesian skepticism, 20
divisible matter, 133–34, 199
doctrine of method, 29
force of rest, 29
hard bodies, 30, 32, 41, 49, 67–68
laws of nature, 219
mass qua measure, 59
Principles of Philosophy, 13, 27–28, 30, 
45–46, 95–96, 230
quantity of matter, 141, 204
rules of collision, 65
theory of collisions, 7
theory of matter, 4
de l’Hôpital, marquis de, 29, 232
Discours (J. Bernoulli), 56
Discourse on Method (Descartes), 106418 Index
Du Châtelet, Émilie, 122–23, 148–49
bodies, account of, 154
bodies, as phenomenal, 136
collision process, account of, 152, 153
Foundations of Physics, 25–26, 106, 122, 
136, 148, 153, 154
free will, 147, 148, 149
Newtonianism, early advocacy of, 122
as plenist, 141
primitive force and derivative force, 
distinction between, 151
PSR, adoption of, 151
vis viva debate, 145
dynamical laws, 12, 88, 181, 182, 183, 
218n.22, 219, 225–26, 225n.36, 238, 
305–6, 345–46
See also Euler’s First Law
dynamical mass, 193–94, 195–96, 197–98, 
207, 209
Newtonian, 191–92, 194–95, 206
École Polytechnique, 368, 374
Einstein, Albert, 25–26, 265
constructive and principle approaches, 
distinction between, 265n.5, 268
Lorentz transformations, 266
special relativity (SR), 266
elastic collision, 32–33, 54–55, 87, 88, 94, 
165, 191
elastic rebound, 44–45, 47, 52–53, 54–55, 
56, 66–67, 69–70
elasticity, 42, 53–54, 66–68, 72, 73–74, 80–
81, 105, 163, 164–67, 188, 276–77, 
306, 327–28, 347, 367, 370, 380, 384, 
385–86, 392, 393–94
geometric, 72–73
kinematic, 72–73
perfect, 71–72
without, 276–77, 279
Elements of Natural Philosophy
(Musschenbroek), 70, 99
elusive mass, 57, 61, 69–70, 141, 191, 
193, 204
empirical evidence, 45, 70, 107–8, 130, 146, 
149, 255, 266, 267, 358–59, 360, 362, 374
empirical physics, 378–79
England, 54–55, 64–65, 99
See also Britain
Enlightenment, 21–22, 210, 225–26, 
227–28, 232–33, 246, 251–52, 302–3, 
353, 362
Late, 367
Long, 302
Epicurus, 383–84
Euler, Leonhard, 1, 23, 24, 25–26, 97, 132, 
133, 135, 137, 139–40, 154, 156, 169, 
170, 202, 221–22, 228–29, 232–33, 
240, 301, 304, 306, 316, 319–20, 323, 
328–29, 330, 331–32, 333, 334, 382
architecture of matter, 328
causes of changes in bodies, 217–18
collisions, 155–56, 159, 160–63, 164, 
165, 166, 167–68
continuity, 140
Continuity Equation, 322, 329
deformable bodies, 165, 327
dynamical equation, 313
dynamical mass, 207–8
elastic and inelastic bodies, diference 
between, 163–64, 165–66
E-principle, 311, 324
Euler-Cauchy laws, 259, 305–6
Euler Cut, 174n.11, 259n.48, 352n.34, 
390n.46
Euler Heuristic, 228, 305, 324, 325–
26, 331
Euler’s First Law, 303, 324, 325, 327–28, 
329, 331
Euler-Lagrange equation (ELQ), 
259n.48, 357, 361–62
Euler Heuristic, 228, 305, 324, 326, 331
Euler’s Equation, 313, 323
extended bodies, 139, 140, 215, 216, 
309, 311–12
extension, 138, 139, 140, 155
frst principles, 326
fexible bodies, 318
fuid motion, 319–20, 321–22, 323
force, origin of, 158, 159
frictionless bodies, 318
gurges, 320
impenetrability, 159, 160, 164, 165–66
inertia, 156–57, 159–60, 208–9
inertia and force, 158
inertial force, 208
as intellectual giant, 138n.14, 220Index 419
kinematic equation, 313
moment of inertia, 209, 310
monadic theory, rejection of, 138–39
motus turbinatorius, 316
Newton-Euler-Cauchy 
dynamics, 393–94
Newton-Euler dynamics, 392
Newton-Euler mechanics, 342
piecemeal approach of, 331
principle of sufcient reason 
(PSR), 157–58
problem of constraints, 307–9
property of bodies, 155, 157, 158
quantity of matter, 218
rigid bodies, 309, 310–11, 312, 313, 
314, 390
true essence of bodies, 154
vibrating string, 316–17
Europe, 3, 61–62, 63, 64, 210, 221–
22, 232–33
Evidence, 3, 10, 98, 105, 106, 108, 112–14, 
115, 119, 121, 122, 124, 131, 132, 
149, 151, 158, 169, 231–32, 261–62, 
265, 296
empirical evidence, 45, 70, 107–8, 130, 
146, 149, 255, 266, 267, 358–59, 360, 
362, 374
observational evidence, 107, 119
Principle, 10, 98, 106, 108, 113–14, 115, 
119, 121, 122, 124, 131, 132, 149, 151, 
169, 261–62, 265, 296
explanatory ontic unity, 220
extended bodies, 14, 109, 133–34, 135, 
138, 171, 177–78, 187–88, 199–200, 
302, 305–6
balance-of-force approach, 390
as composites, 352
constitution of, 380
with constraints, 223–24, 231–32, 
299, 331
d’Alembert, 285–86
as derivative, 176
divisibility of, 136–37, 139, 140, 177
dynamical laws, 327–28
elements of matter, 328
evolution formula, 300
as free particles, 308
global expression, 300
internal constraints, 24, 231, 
333, 362–63
Lex Secunda (Newton), as application 
of, 306
local expression, 300
mathematizing of, 299, 300, 307–8, 331
MCONI, 224, 225
MCON2, 224, 225
mechanical behavior of, 348
motions of, 207, 213–14, 215, 217, 226, 
232, 297, 300, 307–8, 324, 327, 329, 
331, 362–63, 364, 396
physical monads, 174
as point particles, 207–8
rational mechanics of, 228, 229, 305, 
307, 323, 396
rotational inertia, 209
simples, 136, 137, 175
theory of motion, 204, 209
extended body with constraints, 
257, 366
extended matter, 175, 231–32, 249, 
261, 327
extension, 4, 5, 29, 30–31, 75–76, 90, 
112–13, 133–34, 139, 170, 244–45, 
248–49, 250, 349, 383, 393–94
atomist approach, 138
of bodies, 136–37, 138, 141, 151, 158, 
174–75, 286
Boscovich, 174–75, 191–92
Cartesian, 37, 134
as causally inert, 90
constraints, 287
continuity, 140
continuous, 384
corporeal, 171
d’Alembert, 270–71, 287
divisibility of, 136, 137, 139, 171, 
173, 175
Du Châtelet, 150–51, 158
elastic, 105
Euler, 138, 139, 140, 155–56
geometric, 133–34, 136–37
impenetrability, 142–43, 177, 270–140
inertia, 159
as infnitely divisible, 104, 136–37, 
138, 139
mathematical, 135420 Index
matter, as sole essential attribute of, 104
motive force, 150–51
notion of body, 134
physical, 135, 136–37, 138, 172, 175
Principles of Sufcient Reason 
(PSR), 150
Principle of Virtual Velocities 
(PVV), 373
as property of bodies, 133, 138, 139, 
140, 141, 155
quantity of matter, 141, 142
resisting force, 151
simple, 95
external constraints, 15, 24, 224, 231, 
232, 240, 254–55, 260, 300, 331–32, 
333, 335, 338, 340–41, 362–63, 364, 
379, 392
as kinematic possibilities, 225, 261
fuid dynamics, 320–21, 367, 384, 392
Fontenelle, Bernard Le Bovier de, 53
force of inertia, 84–85, 90, 105, 155–56, 
185, 186–87, 194–95, 196, 197, 
198, 204, 207–8, 209, 269, 271, 272, 
288, 294
Foundations of Physics, 25–26, 106, 122, 
136, 148, 153, 154
Fourier, Jean-Baptiste Joseph, 367–
68, 382–83
France, 22–23, 27–28, 34, 37, 47–48, 49, 
54–55, 57, 59, 61–62, 95, 122, 222–23, 
233, 368
Frederick II, 221–22, 233
French Academy of Sciences, 27, 222–
23, 368
Galileo, 82–83, 232–33, 237–38
Galilean relativity, 57, 60–61–, 69–70
law of free fall, 76, 78, 237n.13
Gauss, Carl Friedrich, 222, 372–73
Gay-Lussac, Joseph Louis, 367
geometric contact (g-contact), 210–13
geometry, 6–7, 35, 76, 87, 110, 134, 138, 
171, 172, 218, 246, 251, 290–91, 306, 
327, 328, 329, 331, 341, 376, 393–94
of constraints, 342, 376
diferential, 228n.40
of mass distribution, 382–83
synthetic, 6, 375n.22
of a system, 225–26
Germain, Sophie, 370, 384–85
Germany, 86, 102, 222, 363
Goal, 2, 3, 22, 23, 131, 395, 398
gravity, 7–8, 20, 66, 78, 83, 105, 106, 112–
13, 195–96, 228, 241, 243–44, 247, 
256–57, 310–11, 322, 361–62, 363–
64, 372–73, 390, 391–92
center of, 41, 84, 187–88, 193, 197, 215, 
233, 281, 286, 293, 308, 313, 328–
29, 366
inverse-square, 379
Newtonian, 168, 388
terrestrial, 344, 379–80
gurges, 319, 320
Halley’s Comet, 358–59, 359n.43
Haüy, René Just, 367
Hermann, Jakob, 82–83, 84, 85–86, 87, 
221, 232–33
actant bodies, 83
active versus passive, 86
elastic collision, 87
force of inertia, 84–85
inelastic collision, 84
inert bodies, 83
material approach of, 88
oblique impact, 86
vis visa, 83, 85–86
Hooke’s Law, 94, 327–28, 346
H-principle, 258, 260
Hume, David, 1, 21
causation, 121, 124, 126
epistemic lessons, 124
Huygens, Christiaan, 8–9, 27, 31, 33, 63, 
78–79, 83, 87, 88, 108, 209, 221, 234, 
257, 299
compound pendulum, 240
Huygens Formula, 240–41, 244, 255–57
Torricelli-Huygens principle, 304
Hydraulica (Johann Bernoulli), 319
Hydrodynamica (D. Bernoulli), 320
hydrostatics, 56, 372–73
impenetrability, 30–31, 66, 67–68, 77, 104, 
133, 156, 165, 166, 211
of bodies, 159, 160, 164–66, 176, 
211, 270
extension (cont.)Index 421
collisions, 159–61, 164, 165–67, 176
contact action, 143, 176
continuity, 185
dynamical conception of, 176
elasticity, division between, 165–66
as essential property of bodies, 159
extension, 142–43, 155, 177, 270
of fuid, 325–26
force of inertia, 155–56
geometric conception of, 270
Imperial Academy, 233
inertia, 77, 156, 159, 208
acceleration, measured by, 209
D’Almbert, 271, 272, 276–77, 279–80
division of bodies, as inert and 
actant, 83
force of, 84–85, 90, 105, 155–57, 158, 
159–60, 185, 186–88, 194–95, 196, 
197, 198, 204, 207–8, 209, 269, 271, 
272, 288, 294
law of, 90
linear motion, 209
of matter, 84, 85
moment of inertia, 209, 301, 310
Newton, 59, 271
principle of, 276–77, 278, 279
rotational, 209
Introduction to Natural Philosophy
(Euler), 139
Introduction to Natural Philosophy, An
(Keill), 64–65
Jacquier, Fr., 102–3
Jalobeanu, Dana, 9
Jammer, M., 176–77
Journal de École polytechnique
(journal), 368
Kant, Immanuel, 1, 23, 97, 129, 139, 145, 
168, 169–70, 171, 172, 175, 176, 180–
81, 199–200, 221, 378–79, 396–97
apparent motion, 183
on bodies, 172, 199
body, notion of, 184
causal knowledge, 178, 179–80, 183
collisions, treatment of, 181
contact action, 211
Critical Turn, 21, 182n.30
d-contact, 211
divisibility, 173
dynamical laws, 182
equal-force bodies, 182–83
extended bodies, 171, 176, 177–78
frst causes, 172, 178–79
force of motion, 183–84
geometry, 136–72
impact, explanation of, 182
matter theory, 213
monads, 173
notion of mass, 183–84
physical monads, 174, 176, 177–78
true motion, 181–82
Keill, John, 64–65, 70, 73–74, 99, 100, 102, 
107, 109, 110, 111, 112, 121, 149–50
axioms, 111–12, 119–20
causal account, of collision process, 66
collisions, 65, 66
constructive approach, 68–70
elastic collisions, 66–67
hard bodies, with rebound, rejection 
of, 67–68
as Newtonian, 68–69
Oxford lectures, 74–75, 108–9, 110
post-collision behavior, 69
Kelvin-Voigt equation, 327–28
Kepler, Johannes, 84–85
kinematic behavior, 40, 45, 87, 95–96, 
276–77, 288, 362
kinematic constraints, 15, 16, 225–26, 
239–40, 346–47
kinematics, 41, 72, 87, 219–20, 250, 267, 
289–90, 297–98, 327, 329, 346, 353, 
354–55, 389, 391–92
of collision, 84, 90
of free fall, 88f
knowledge claim, 247–48, 258
Kuhn, Tomas, 25–26
Lagrange, Joseph-Louis, 24–25, 97, 222, 
227–28, 240, 246, 249, 259–60, 294, 
301, 327, 333, 336, 341–42, 351, 353, 
358, 362, 364–65, 372–73, 375, 376, 
393–94, 397
architecture of matter, 352–53
bilateral and unilateral 
constraints, 363–64
bodies, approach to, 349, 350–51
critics, reaction to, 374–75422 Index
d’Alembert, comparison to, 357
deformable continua, 348
dynamics, 361–62
elasticity, 370
empirical evidence, 358–59
equations of condition, 336, 342, 346
Euler-Lagrange Equation (ELQ), 
259n.48, 357, 361–62
extended bodies, as composites, 352
fctive forces, 339
fuids, as incompressible and 
compressible, 349–50
generality of principles, 354–55, 360
ideal constraints, 364
inter-body action, 356
Lagrange Heuristic, 331–32, 
370–71n.11
Lagrange multipliers, 24, 259, 260, 330, 
335, 342–43, 344, 345, 346, 348, 356, 
362–63, 364, 376
Lagrange’s Principle, 335, 339–40, 340f, 
341, 345, 355, 366–67, 371–72, 373
Mechanique analytique, 190, 228–29, 
333, 334, 335, 337, 340, 341, 344, 
346–47, 348–49, 353–54, 355, 357, 
362, 364, 366–67, 369–70, 373, 374
principle approach, 355, 367–68
Principle of Virtual Velocities (PVV), 
337, 338, 339, 342–44, 345, 351–52, 
353–54, 355–57, 358, 359–60, 361–
62, 366, 369, 374–75
Principle of Virtual Work, 260, 360
proof of truth, 374–75
Relaxation Heuristic, 347–48, 355–56
Relaxation Postulate, 15, 345–46, 355
reverse efective force (REF), 338
solids, 350
three-body problem, 358
Lamé, Gabriel, 306
Lange, Marc, 45n.29
Laplace, Pierre-Simon, 367, 369, 376, 377–
78, 379, 396–97
capillarity theory, 372
celestial mechanics, 306
incomplete theory, 372–73
intermolecular forces, commitment 
to, 379–80
Laplacian physics, 368
ontic approach, 392
Laplacian School, 377, 379, 382, 384
abstract mechanics, 376
continuously-distributed 
values, 389–90
continuum modeling, 384
discrete molecules, 382–83, 392–93
equation of motion, 392–93
extended bodies, 380
feld theory, 384–85
nomic unity, 393–94
ontic unity, 378–79, 393, 394
Law of Continuity, 3, 34–35, 36–37, 41, 77, 
82, 106, 123
laws of motion, 6, 9, 32, 77, 89, 91, 148, 
152, 263–64, 267–68, 289, 380
Cauchy, 306, 391–92, 393–94
constructive approach, 11
Euler, 227
general rule, 52–53, 215, 229, 258
Newton, 1, 8, 20, 66, 152, 153, 217, 
219, 261
principle approach, 11, 268
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm, 1, 23, 27–28, 
31, 32–33, 34, 57, 75, 83, 88–89, 95, 
105, 127, 136, 137, 143, 151, 170, 
177–78, 181, 183, 232–33, 234
active force, 104–5, 130, 143–44
calculus, version of, 232
Clarke, correspondence between, 59–
60, 63, 64, 74–75, 79–82, 106
collisions, 78–79, 81, 82–83, 130
collision theory, causal-explanatory 
basis for, 183–84
continuity, 185
dead and living force, distinction 
between, 77–78, 143–44
derivative force, 77
dynamics, 78
extended bodies, 135
force, notion of, 76–77
God’s action, 79–81
hard bodies, denial of, 52
Law of Continuity, 34–35, 36–37
Malebranche, criticism of, 34–35, 36–
37, 51–52, 64, 74–75
passive force, 104–5, 130, 143–44
Lagrange, Joseph-Louis (cont.)Index 423
primitive force, 77
Principles of Sufcient Reason 
(PSR), 76, 77
quantity of motion and quantity of 
force, distinction between, 81–82, 95
solicitation, notion of, 77–78
theory of force, 75
vis viva controversy, 77, 78, 80, 82
Leibnizians, 63–64, 95–96, 100, 105, 143–
44, 176, 183
Leibniz-Malebranche agenda, 181, 183
Leibniz-Clarke Correspondence, 59–60, 
63–64, 79, 82, 106
God’s action, 79, 80
Le Seur, Tomas, 102
Letters to a German Princess (Euler), 138
Leucippus, 383–84
Locke, John, 21
Lois de la communication des mouvements
(Malebranche), 36
Lorentz transformations
dynamical commitments, 267
as kinematic condition, 267
special relativity (SR), 266
Mach, Ernst, 25, 215, 303, 305–6
Mach-Kuhn perspective, 25–26
MacLaurin, Colin, 49, 50, 51–52
“Axioms and Principles,” 49–50
Mairan, Jean-Jacques Dortous de, 145, 146
Malebranche, Nicolas, 1–28, 29, 30, 35, 
48, 52–53, 55, 57, 63–64, 65, 66–70, 
71–72, 73–74, 75
as Cartesian, 27
Cartesian mistakes, perpetuation 
of, 27–28
causal-explanatory account, of 
collisions, 32, 47–48
collision theory, 30–31, 32–33, 35–36,
37, 38, 47–48, 51–52, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61
Descartes’ doctrine of method, 
adoption of, 29
elastic body collisions, 43–47
extension, as essential property of 
bodies, 30–31
Galilean relativity, 57, 60–61, 69–70
hard body collision theory, 38–41, 48, 
49, 50, 51, 52, 61
kinematic behavior, 40, 45
Leibniz-Malebranche agenda, 181, 183
Leibniz’s criticism of, 34, 36–37, 41
M-mass, 58–59
mature collision theory, 28, 37–38, 41, 
47, 61, 74–75
mental gluing, 94
new French physics, leading 
authority in, 29
occasionalism of, 20–21, 27, 38, 
127, 149–50
sof body collision theory, 41, 42
true speed, 59–60
voluntarism, 40, 45
Mariotte, Edme, 257
mass
of a body, 58, 142, 162, 165, 193–95, 
208, 209
concept of, 210
conservation of mass, 329
as derivative property, 393
dynamical, 193–96, 197–98, 206, 207, 209
as elusive concept, 210
elusive, 57, 61, 69–70, 141, 193, 204
fuid, 228
geometric, 193–94, 205–6, 208
gravitational, 355–56
as hard-won concept, 210
inertial, 59, 143–44, 197, 327–28
kinematic, 194–95, 197, 198, 205–6
linear, 209
mass center, 83, 86, 162–63, 181–82, 
255–56, 313, 340–41, 372, 383, 390
mass density, 305, 321–22, 329
mass distribution, 301, 328, 382–83
mass fow, 301, 329
M-mass, 58–59
mass points, 207, 211–13, 249–50, 281, 
305, 306, 324, 328–29, 337, 340, 344, 
351–53, 373, 375, 379, 382–84
mass variable, 336
moment of inertia, 209, 301, 310
Newtonian, 69–70, 95, 191–92, 193, 
197–98, 204, 207–8, 388
Newton’s second law of motion, 206
as primary, 293
quantity of matter, 69–70, 206, 207–8, 
209, 218, 279, 292–93424 Index
quantity of motion, 292, 293
qua measure, 59
rigid bits of, 252–53
speed, 146–47, 274, 285, 292–93
as term, 204, 205–6, 291–92
as theoretical constructs, 293
true speed, 61, 183
velocity, 146, 190, 292, 384
virtual displacements, 341–42
volumetric, 205
material properties, 10, 251, 327–28
Mathematical elements of physics… (‘s 
Gravesande), 70
matter theory, 1, 3–5, 10, 11, 12, 29–31, 32, 
47–48, 52–53, 61–62, 66–67, 74, 76, 
90, 104, 105, 199, 213, 217–18, 219–
20, 225–26, 229, 234–35, 251–53, 
295, 330, 385–86, 389–90
Boscovich, 174–75
Cartesian, 22–23, 134, 149–50
Châtelet, 265–66
continuous, 205
Malebranche, 30, 44–45, 47
material properties, 251
rules of collision, 93–94, 95–96
single, 229
Taylor, 254
theory of bodies, 266
types of, 133–34
univocal, 383–84
Wolf, 89–90
Maupertuis, Pierre Louis, 1, 114, 120, 
122–24, 144–46, 147, 148, 149, 210, 
221–22, 233
principle of least action (PLA), 123, 
145, 227
Mazière, Father, 55
mechanics of constrained motion 
(MCON), 202, 223–24, 299, 300, 304, 
333–34, 364
solving, 24, 260, 301, 306
See also MCON1; MCON2; theory of 
constrained motions
mechanics of constrained motion 
(MCON1), 14, 16, 224, 225, 226, 
227–28, 240, 249–50, 251, 254, 261, 
262, 299–300, 302–3, 327, 328, 
331, 334
internal constraints, 14, 24, 224, 299–
300, 333
inviscid fuids, 323
rigid-bodies, 225, 313
solutions to, 15, 16, 224, 226, 304, 313, 
314, 323, 324, 325, 326, 330
as term, 331
vibrating strings, 314
mechanics of constrained motion (MCON2), 
15, 16, 224, 225, 226, 227–28, 231, 254–
55, 261, 262, 333–34, 348–49
external constraints, 15, 224, 240, 
300, 333
solutions to, 16, 224, 249, 364
Mechanica (Euler), 14, 207–8, 228–29, 308
Mechanique analytique (Lagrange), 228–
29, 333, 340, 357, 364, 366–67, 369–
70, 373, 374
constraints, general and uniform, 341
explicit statements, 349
as ground-breaking, 227–28
implicit commitments, 349
kinematic constraints, 346–47
as landmark work, 344
MCON2, contribution to, 335
origin of, 334
principle reading of, 353, 355
Principle of Virtual Velocities (PVV), 
353–54, 362, 374
rational mechanics, contribution to, 334
statics, 337
as tract in rational mechanics, 348–49
unifed theory of, 364
mechanical philosophy, 5, 6, 125, 144–45
mechanics. See analytic mechanics; 
celestial mechanics; continuum 
mechanics; mechanics of constrained 
motion (MCON, MCON1, 
MCON2); philosophical mechanics; 
physical mechanics; practical 
mechanics; rational mechanics; 
universal mechanics
Meditationes (Johann Bernoulli), 255
Metaphysical Foundations of Natural 
Science (Kant), 184
metaphysics, 1, 34, 48, 60, 61–62, 89, 100, 
101, 102, 125, 135, 148, 171, 172, 
177–78, 204, 220–21, 222
of body, 29–30, 37, 220
mass (cont.)Index 425
BODY, at intersection of, 22
of causation, 125, 126–28, 129, 179
frst causes, 179
geometry, union with, 172
of material nature, 184
of matter, 90, 220–21
physics, division between, 101
of science, 19
scientifc, 22
of substance and causation, 20–21, 101, 
124, 128–29, 131
Methodus (Taylor), 235, 253, 255
molecules, 352, 377, 378, 379–80, 
381, 383
attractive and repulsive forces, 377–
78, 383
as continuously distributed 
values, 389–90
discrete, 366–67, 378, 382–84, 392–93
fuid motion, 380, 381
as otiose, 382
monads
dispute over, 137–38
Du Châtelet, 136–37
Euler, 154, 170
Kant, 173
Leibniz, 20–21, 135
monad theory, 141
physical, 174, 177–78, 207
prize competitions, 137
rejection of, 138
Motus nervi (Taylor), 235, 252, 255
Musschenbroek, Pieter van, 1, 70–71, 
72–73, 74, 99–100, 101, 103, 107, 
112–13, 114, 116, 117, 118, 119, 120, 
136–37, 171
atomism, 135
elasticity, 72, 73–74
epistemic access, 117, 118, 121
hard bodies, 71–72, 73
hypotheses, 116
inductive reasoning, 116, 119
sof bodies, 72, 73
natural philosophy, 1, 7–8, 12, 42, 45–46, 
48, 57, 63, 64–65, 74–75, 82, 99, 115, 
116–17, 131, 134, 157, 171
BODY problem, at heart of, 132, 
167, 198–99
Boscovich, 189–90
Cartesian, 61–62, 63, 95
collision theory, foundations of, 5, 8, 
13, 16–17, 23, 27, 28, 47–48, 52, 61–
62, 95
Enlightenment, 21–22
Euler, 157–58, 165–66, 217–18
geometric mass, 205
monads, relevance of, 137
Newtonian, 122
problem of collisions (PCOL), as 
foundational problem, 129–30
physics, as used interchangeably, 6, 99, 
102, 103
Natural Philosophy (Euler), 138–39, 157
Nature, 2, 10, 85, 99, 103, 104, 107, 110, 
114, 120, 125, 128–29, 130, 133, 149–
50, 151, 155, 169, 177, 180, 189, 199, 
219–20, 231–32, 288, 296
Action, 2–3, 98, 103, 104–5, 106, 122, 
124, 129–30, 132, 149, 158, 180, 226–
55, 261–62, 296–97, 378–79, 398
bodily action, 10, 265
Nature, Action, Evidence, and Principle 
(NAEP), 2, 3, 11, 23, 97, 106, 124
Navier, Claude-Louis, 327, 348, 367, 370, 
371, 381, 383, 397
continuous matter, 386
equation of motion, 382
Navier-Stokes equation, 326, 382
viscosity efects, 381
viscous fuid, 380
Neile, William, 10, 32, 78–79, 183–84
Newton-Euler-Cauchy dynamics, 393–94
Newton-Euler dynamics, 392
Newton, Isaac, 3–4, 5, 8, 19–20, 21–22, 23, 
25–26, 31, 63, 64–65, 74–75, 81, 113, 
116, 143, 166–67, 171, 185, 187, 208, 
214, 215, 221, 223–24, 227–28, 232–
33, 234, 238, 258, 261–62, 270–71, 
292–93, 299, 304, 318, 331, 358–59
action-at-a-distance, 95
calculus of fuxions, 235
frst law of motion, 143, 194–95
frst rule of reasoning, 107–8, 
120, 122–23
force of inertia, 204, 271
free particle, 304, 388, 390
gravitation theory, 257426 Index
gravity, 7–8
impressed force, 143–44
inductive reasoning, 115–16, 117
inherent force, 143–44, 204
Lex Secunda, 303, 304
mass, concept of, 141, 207–8, 210
mass, as term, 204
Newton-Euler-Cauchy dynamics, 393–94
Newton-Euler dynamics, 392
Newton-Euler mechanics, 342
point particle mechanics, 193
Rules of Reasoning, 112, 122
second law of motion, 305–6
second rule of reasoning, 120
theory of universal gravitation, 20, 121
third law of motion, 160, 187, 190
three laws, 215
universal mechanics, 6–7
Newtonians, 63–65, 70, 74, 82–83, 95–96, 
98, 100, 104, 105, 106, 107, 108, 115, 
116, 119, 124, 135, 143–44, 167, 176, 
178, 265–66
Newtonian physics, 124, 142
nomic unity, 12, 24–25, 219, 220, 263–64, 
295, 297–98, 367, 374
deductive nomic unity, 220
Lagrangian nomic unity, 366–67, 385–
86, 393–94
ontic disunity, based on, 326
nutation
terrestrial, 218n.22, 310n.14
observational evidence, 107, 119n.39
occasionalism, 125–26, 127, 179
criticism of, 149–50, 150n.45
Malebranchean, 20–21, 145n.34, 149–
50, 150n.45
modulo, 27, 38
Oldenburg, Henry, 8–9, 78–79
On Living Forces (Boscovich), 180–81
ontic disunity, 326, 330, 397–98
ontic unity, 12, 24–25, 220–21, 263–64, 
295, 297–98, 366–67, 378, 380, 383–
84, 385–86
explanatory, 220
molecular, 393
in physical theory, 12
Opticks (Newton), 80, 81
Papin, Denis
Leibniz, controversy with, 
73n.18, 80n.29
Parallelogram Rule, 218n.23, 236, 247–
48, 248f, 252, 254, 257, 273–74, 
273f, 374–75
Paris Academy of Sciences, 222–23, 233
prize competitions concerning rules of 
collision, 27–28, 57, 61
particle physics, 177
Pemberton, Henry, 73–74, 107, 112, 115, 
116–17, 119, 122–23
Peter the Great, 233
Pfautz, Christoph, 215n.18
phenomena, 25, 78–79, 113–14, 116, 179
capillary, 377
causal-explanatory account, 122–23
celestial, 233
elastic, 377–78
of extended bodies, 136
gravitational, 115, 121, 195–96
by induction, 111
motion, 366–67
natural, 47–48
of nature, 171, 178–79
observed, 10, 119
true causes of, 115
ultimate causes, 115
philosophical mechanics, 3–4, 5, 8, 10, 11, 
13, 20, 23, 24–26, 54–55, 89, 97, 98, 
130–31, 133, 153, 154, 166, 170, 180, 
201–2, 213–14, 218, 220, 222–23, 
231–32, 238, 249, 251, 254–55, 257, 
262, 263–64, 266, 268–69, 279, 287–
88, 295, 296, 297, 299, 300, 302–3, 
323, 331, 333, 334, 344–45, 348–49, 
360, 367, 395, 396
of bodies, 10
of bodily action, 153
BODY, 203, 214, 226, 333, 349, 364–65, 
366–67, 396
Boscovich, 180, 184–85, 190, 192, 198, 
199–200
of collisions, 5, 10, 13, 63, 64, 74, 88–89, 
95–96, 132, 133, 151, 160–61, 166, 
167–68, 169, 170, 180, 198
Newton, Isaac (cont.)Index 427
conclusions for, 396–99
Euler, 221–22, 326, 328, 329
of extended matter, as elusive, 261
golden age, 397
of impact, 7, 74, 91, 164
Kant, 180, 183–84, 199–200
Lagrange, 351, 353, 354–55, 364–65
matter theory, 94, 219–20, 229
MCON2, 364
nomic unity, 295, 326
Principal of Virtual Velocities (PVV), 
353, 354–55
as term of art, 3
virtual-work approach, 261–62
philosophical physics, 7–8, 11, 13–14, 
16–17, 98, 101–2, 104–5, 115, 122, 
130, 135, 154, 167, 169, 177, 179, 203, 
204, 214, 218, 231, 289, 349, 378–
79, 397–98
of bodily action, 133
BODY, addressing of, 103, 130–31, 198–
99, 209, 217, 333, 397
collisions, foundational role of, 132
constructive approach, 266
of impact, 167–68, 228–29
matter theory, 229
rational mechanics, divide between, 
23–24, 201, 333
rational mechanics, integration of, 25–
26, 130–31, 132, 180, 266, 396
philosophical theory of matter, 13–14
philosophy, 1, 3–4, 5, 7, 11, 12, 17–19, 
21–22, 23–25, 64, 98, 100, 108–9, 110, 
115, 132, 133, 177–78, 198–200, 202, 
218, 222–23, 228, 254–55, 299, 378–
79, 397–98, 399
Cartesian, 79
Descartes, 29
experimental, 111
French, 27
Leibniz, 79, 82
modern, 19, 97, 125
moral philosophy, 1, 100
Newton, 73–74, 99
physics, as sub–discipline of, 6, 23, 25, 
97, 98, 99, 100–2, 103, 229, 230, 266, 
295, 396
political philosophy, 1
theoretical, 102
transcendental, 172
See also mechanical philosophy; natural 
philosophy
Phoronomia (Hermann), 64, 82–83, 84, 88, 
92, 228–29, 232–33
physical infux, 20–21, 125–26
physical mechanics, 376, 378–79, 396–97
physical monadology, 171, 174, 176
Physical Monadology (Kant), 171, 181
physical monads, 174, 177–78, 207
physical theory, 12, 50, 377
nomic unity, 12
ontic unity, 12
physics, 1, 11, 12, 13–14, 17, 19, 20, 22, 23, 
25, 45–46, 61–62, 79, 90, 98, 101, 102, 
103, 106, 108, 111–12, 117, 118–19, 
120, 121, 122–23, 126–27, 128, 135, 
140, 143, 148, 158, 165–66, 167, 168, 
177, 180, 203, 218, 219, 228, 229–30, 
254–55, 263–64, 265, 288, 376, 399
avoidance, 225–26
bodies, 397–98
BODY, 129–30
Boscovich, 169–70, 177–78, 179, 180, 
184–85, 188, 190–91, 193, 198, 199
Cartesian, 10, 107–8, 110, 122, 124, 134
classical, 397
of collisions, 133, 160–61, 164, 166–
67, 170
complete, 160–61
of constraints, 261–62
constructive approach, 268
D’Alembert, 277, 294, 396–97
Descartes, 4, 5, 143, 201
eighteenth century, 99, 101–2, 157, 179–
80, 266, 294, 295
eighteenth century v. modern, 7, 98
empirical, 378–79
Euler, 157, 160–61, 167, 217–18
experimental research, 368
extended, 169
extended bodies, 133–34, 172, 177, 331
French, 29
of impact, 159–60, 167–68
impenetrability, 161, 166, 175–76
as independent discipline, 25, 264, 
396, 397428 Index
Kant, 169–70, 172, 177–79, 180, 199
Lagrange, 341–42, 357
of Laplacian, 24–25, 368, 377
Leibniz, 127, 143–44
mathematical, 378–79
mathematical treatment, 357, 377
Maypertuis, 122–23
mechanics, , 7, 19–20, 133, 137, 154, 
156, 166–43, 185
metaphysics, 101
modern, 6, 19–20
of molecules, 377–78
natural philosophy, interchanged with, 
6, 99, 103, 132n.2
new physics, 170, 303, 398
Newtonian, 115, 121–22, 124, 142, 
143–44, 210
non-foundationalist approach to, 140
as “normal science,” 25
particle physics, 177
philosophy, as sub–discipline of, 23, 25, 
97, 98, 99, 100, 101–2, 103, 169n.2, 
177–78, 295, 396
principle of least action (PLA), 122–23
Principles of Sufcient Reason (PSR), 150
as qualitative, 7
rational mechanics, 7, 8, 11–12, 133, 
199–200, 203, 204, 225–26, 360, 364
as study of bodies, 19–20, 100–1, 102, 
133, 199
as term, 6, 7, 98, 132n.2
terrestrial, 20
theoretical, 295
transformation of, 177–78, 199
underlying, 341–42
Wolf, 89
Planck, Max, 302, 315
plenism, 205
plenum, 27, 43, 49, 141, 142–43
Poinsot, Louis, 367–68, 374–75
Poisson, Siméon Denis, 228n.40, 367, 376, 
376–77n.23, 382, 383, 394, 396–97
practical mechanics, 6–7
pre-established harmony, 20–21, 125–
26, 127
Principia (Newton), 3–4, 6, 7–8, 20, 25, 
63, 73–74, 102, 108–9, 112, 115, 122, 
140, 143–44, 155, 166–67, 204, 210, 
214, 219, 223–24, 238, 246, 271, 304, 
333, 397
Principle, 3, 11, 105, 106, 113–14
auxiliary principle, 247n.34
conservation principle, 187
dynamical principle, 236, 331, 389–90
equilibrium principle, 292–93
equivalence principle, 195–96
Evidence, 10, 98, 106, 108, 115, 119, 
121–22, 124, 132, 149, 169, 261–62, 
265, 296
general Principle of order, 34–35
heuristic principle, 257–58
Principle approach (bodies), 11, 268
Principle approach to collisions, 31
Principle approach (objects), 12
relativity principle, 49–50, 266, 267, 274
Principle of Least Action (PLA), 122–23, 
145, 227, 304
Principles of Philosophy (Descartes), 3–4, 
27–28, 45–46, 230
Principles of Sufcient Reason (PSR), 76, 
77, 82, 90, 106, 107–8, 113–14, 122, 
144, 145, 150–51, 157, 158
Principle of Virtual Velocities (PVV), 344, 
351–52, 355–57, 358, 359–60, 361–
62, 366, 369, 373, 374
Composition of Forces, 374
constraints, 342, 344, 354–55
as E-principle, 353
equations of condition, 335
fctive forces, 339
Lagrange multipliers, 356
Lagrange’s Principle, 335, 338, 339, 340, 
342, 343–44, 345, 353–54, 355, 375, 
381, 389–90
as neutral and open-ended, 334
proof of truth, 374–75
as theorem, 354
unconstrained bodies, 342
virtual velocity, 339
Principle of Virtual Work, 259, 260, 340f, 
360, 368
Problem of Bodies (BODY), 1–2, 97, 132, 
231, 263, 396
problem of collisions (PCOL), 13–14, 16, 
22, 23, 64, 95, 96, 97, 151, 177, 180–
81, 183–84, 198–99, 201–2, 226, 227, 
229, 231, 328, 331, 396–97
physics (cont.)Index 429
BODY, as necessary for solving, 97, 98, 
130–31, 132, 167–68, 175–76
BODY, solutions to, 131, 180
Boscovich, 190, 199
d’Alembert, 282, 297
importance of, 130
as investigative tool, 130
natural philosophy, as foundational 
problem in, 129–30
problem of constrained motion 
(PCON), relationships 
between, 16–17
solution to, 95–96
solving of, 129–30
solving of, as necessary, 13, 129–30
problem of constrained motion (PCON), 
13, 16, 22, 23–24, 201–2, 223, 226, 
231, 249, 251, 257, 281, 300, 396–97
BODY, as solution to, 16–17, 229, 261, 299
compound pendulum, 231, 232, 261
d’Alembert, 282, 297, 298
Euler, 308–9
extended bodies, 232, 245
external constraints, 232
implications for, 231
MCON1 and MCON2, integration of, 
227, 261
problem of collisions (PCOL), 
relationships between, 16–17
rational mechanics, contributions 
from, 231–32
vibrating string, 231, 261
See also rational mechanics of 
constrained motion
properties of bodies, 10, 68–69, 95–96, 
103, 112–14, 138, 143, 154, 155, 
157, 167, 180, 230, 265–66, 297–
98, 355–56
causes of change in bodies, 158, 217–18
essential, 125
general, 185, 204
generic, 128–29
observable, 115
Prussia, 222
quantity of matter, 69–70, 133, 141, 142, 
167, 193–94, 204, 206, 207–8, 209, 
218, 292–93
volume of body, 205
rational mechanics, 3–4, 5, 7–8, 10, 11–12, 
13–14, 16, 19–20, 24, 90, 133, 170, 
184, 185, 199, 202, 204, 207, 213, 214, 
220–21, 222, 227, 228, 229, 231, 233, 
238, 251–52, 259, 261–62, 263, 266, 
268, 278, 302–3, 304, 307–8, 318, 328, 
331–32, 345–46, 351, 360, 373, 374, 
378, 379, 382, 394, 397, 398
advanced research in, 233
BODY, relevant to, 201, 202, 203, 209, 
213–14, 218, 219–20, 223, 225, 
226, 227, 233, 261, 297, 299, 333, 
349, 364–65
capillary efects, 372
Cauchy, 367
compound pendulum, 234, 238
of constrained motion, 217, 225–26, 
254–55, 257, 294, 299, 333, 366, 396
d’Alembert, contribution to, 279–80, 285,
287–88, 291, 294, 296, 297, 357, 396–97
deformable body, 366–67
disunifed, 394
elite education, cornerstone of, 368
equations of motion, center stage of, 302
Euler, 154, 209, 218, 307, 308–9, 313, 
320, 323, 324, 326, 327, 330
of extended bodies, 24, 217, 219, 228, 
231–32, 305, 323, 324, 396
of external constraints, 333
of frictionless fuids, 318
generality, 258
growth in, 229
heuristic predicament of, 246
H-principle, 258
innovation and development, as 
powerhouse of, 227
of internal constraints, 308–9
of inviscid fuids, 320
Lagrange, 335, 348, 351–52, 356–57, 
362–65, 366–67
Laplacians, 377, 378–79
Lever Principle, 259
in Long Enlightenment, 302
mass in, 207, 209, 210
as mathematical and exact, 6–7
mathematical treatment, 357
MCON1, solving of, 228
Mechanique (Lagrange), contribution 
to, 334, 348–49, 364, 366–67430 Index
nomic unity, favoring of, 219, 220
philosophical physics, divide between, 
23–24, 201
philosophical physics, integration with, 
25–26, 130–31, 132, 169, 180, 199–
200, 396
problem of constrained motion 
(PCON), 261
problem of constraints, 261
rise of, 16–17
single matter theory, 229
single theory of matter, 330, 366–
67, 394
Taylor and Bernoulli, 234–35, 251
as term, 6
theory of constraints, 201–2
Treatise (d’Alembert), 264, 271, 287–88, 
295, 297
of vibrating string, 234, 236, 252–
53, 262
See also mechanics; PCON
rebound, 9, 10, 32–33, 35–36, 40, 43–44, 
47, 50, 55, 66, 73–74, 88, 90, 105, 147, 
164, 296–97
afer collision, 40
elastic, 44–45, 47, 52–55, 56, 66–67, 69–
70, 87, 92–93, 193n.61
failure to, 72
as k-elastic bodies, 43, 49, 50–51
k-hard bodies, 49, 67–68
kinematic, 67, 69, 72–73, 83, 95–96
perfect, 49, 94
physical reason of, 53–54
reason for, 164–65
stifness, 42
relationism, 181–82
Relaxation Heuristic, 347, 348, 355–56
Relaxation Postulate, 345–47, 355
Rohault, Jacques, 99, 100, 101, 111–12
Royal Academy of Paris, 103
Royal Academy of Sciences, 222–23
Royal Society of London, 32–33
Saint-Venant, Jean Claude, 382–84
Saulmon, Nicolas, 53–54, 55, 56
Scott, W., 176
Search afer Truth (Malebranche), 
27–28, 29
secondary causation, 20–21, 124, 125–26, 
127, 129
’s Gravesande, W. J., 70, 73–74, 99, 107, 
112, 113, 117, 118, 171
special relativity (SR), 266
Specimen Dynamicum (Leibniz), 75, 77, 82
Stokes, George G., 384–85
Stokes’ Law, 346
St. Petersburg (Russia), 54–55, 220–21, 
233, 307
System of Natural Philosophy (Rohault)
Taylor, Brook, 234, 235, 236, 240, 251, 
252–54, 255, 256, 257, 314, 316
equivalent pendulum, 249–50
multiple derivation, 255
reverse conditional, 235–36
shape, 250–51
theories of matter, 253f, 254
Taylor and Bernoulli papers, 255–56
descriptive incompleteness, 234
equivalent pendulum, 249–50
frequency of moving string, 235
harmonic condition, 235
heuristic silence, 234
multiple derivation, 255
vibrating string, 255
theoretical physics, 295
Teory of Natural Philosophy, A (Bosovich)
Treatise (d’Alembert), comparison to, 294
theory of constrained motions 
(MCONI), 14, 16
See also MCON; MCON1; MCON2
theory of matter, 2, 10, 11, 31, 37–38, 91, 
104, 206, 217, 219–20, 221–22, 330, 
352, 384–85
continuum, 211
Descartes, 4, 5
explicit, 11, 13–14, 265–66
intelligible, 23, 131, 135, 364–65
kinetic, 392n.53
Malebranche, 32, 47
metaphysical, 378–79
philosophical mechanics of collision, 5, 
10, 13, 89
underlying, 69–70, 71–72, 177–78, 
234, 254
underlying matter theory, 10, 32, 47–48, 
66–67, 104, 330
rational mechanics (cont.)Index 431
Torricelli, Evangelista, 318
Torricelli-Huygens principle, 87n.38, 304
Toupin, R., 387n.40
Treatise on Dynamics (d’Alembert), 24, 
25–26, 263, 297
Treatise on Light (Huygens), 108
true motion, 181–82, 183
Truesdell, Cliford, 251, 303, 304n.8, 
387n.40, 392n.51
gurges, 319n.43
underdetermination problem, 108
universal mechanics, 6–7
Varignon, Pierre, 318
vibrating string, 232, 234–35, 236–37, 
255–56, 261, 262, 314, 378
compound pendulum, 24, 231, 234, 
240, 261
mass-point pendulum, 249–50
vibration theory, 249–50, 308–9
virtual displacement, 336, 338, 370n.10
virtual-work approach, 261–62, 371, 380
vis viva, 34, 36–37, 41, 75, 77, 78, 79, 82, 
83, 85–86, 88, 94, 95, 107–8, 123, 146, 
148, 153, 183, 217, 237, 268–69, 361
as controversy, 68, 74–75, 79
debate over, 143–44, 145, 180–81
God’s action, issue of, 80
principle of conservation of, 149, 
180–81, 247–48, 257, 295, 304
See also conservation of vis viva
Voltaire, 122
voluntarism, 40, 45, 113–14
Wallis, John, 8–9, 10, 27, 33
Wolf, Christian, 1, 64, 86, 89, 90–94, 
100–1, 102, 137, 154, 156, 160, 
174, 221–22
elastic collision, 94
g-contact, 210–11
Wren, Christopher, 8–9, 27, 33, 78–79
Young, Tomas, 379
