Photography, Photographic Arts, and the Visual Research Process in Qualitative Inquiry
is a book that introduces doctoral students and early career researchers to photography as a 
significant dimension of visual qualitative methods.
It examines the potential of photographic arts in qualitative research by highlighting theory 
and practice. Theories of photographic research and the types of photography within the genre 
are presented along with tips and exercises on how to conduct visual research through the use of 
photography. The central features of this book include learning to incorporate photography and 
photographic thinking through the arc of the research process. Question posing, data gathering, 
data analysis, and presentation and dissemination of photographic research are discussed. Ethics 
for photographic qualitative research is discussed. Learning to consider all senses for visual 
analysis and to consider issues of power and equity in photographic research is explained. 
Readers of this book can practice different ways to think about photographic research through 
the exercises and tips offered at the end of each chapter.
Graduate students and early career researchers who are interested in qualitative research will 
find this book valuable to learn and experiment with photography and photographic arts in 
visual qualitative research.
Raji Swaminathan, Ph.D., is a professor in the Department of Educational Policy and 
Community Studies in the School of Education at the University of Wisconsin‑Milwaukee. She 
has served as Director of Doctoral Studies and Chair of the department and is a recipient of 
the university’s Faculty Teaching and Faculty Research Awards. She is interested and works 
in the areas of qualitative research, youth resilience, urban and alternative schools, creative 
pedagogies, and school leadership.
Thalia M. Mulvihill, Ph.D., is Professor of Higher Education and Social Foundations and 
Provost Faculty Fellow at Ball State University. She serves as the Director of the Higher 
Education Doctoral Program as well as the Certificate Program in Qualitative Research and 
Education, and the Certificate Program in College and University Teaching. A recipient of 
numerous outstanding teaching, research, and mentoring awards, she is engaged in the study of 
historical and sociological issues in the fields of higher education, qualitative inquiry, innovative 
pedagogies, and educational leadership.
Photography, Photographic Arts, and the 
Visual Research Process in Qualitative 
InquiryPhotography, Photographic Arts, 
and the Visual Research Process in 
Qualitative Inquiry
Raji Swaminathan and Thalia M. MulvihillCover image: RossHelen via Getty Images
First published 2025
by Routledge
4 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
and by Routledge
605 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10158
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 2025 Raji Swaminathan and Thalia M. Mulvihill
The right of Raji Swaminathan and Thalia M. Mulvihill to be identified as authors of this 
work has been asserted in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright, Designs and 
Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilised in any 
form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, 
including photocopying and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, 
without permission in writing from the publishers.
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, 
and are used only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe.
British Library Cataloguing‑in‑Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
ISBN: 9780367473051 (hbk)
ISBN: 9780367473075 (pbk)
ISBN: 9781003034773 (ebk)
DOI: 10.4324/9781003034773
Typeset in Times New Roman
by codeMantraContents
Acknowledgments vi
1 Introduction to photographic research 1
2 Ethics and photographic visual research 7
3 Ways of seeing and research photography 22
4 Participatory action research (PAR) and photography 42
5 Researcher photography and videography 62
6 Protest photography and democratic witnessing 78
7 Land, place, context, and photographic arts 91
8 Interviews and photography 109
9 Photographic data analysis and display 129
10 Writing, exhibitions, narratives, and photography 158
Index 177Acknowledgments
As always when we write, we are reminded of the community that supports us and stimulates 
our intellectual curiosity. We are grateful for the community of scholars we meet at AERA 
(American Educational Research Association), ICQI (International Congress of Qualitative 
Inquiry), AESA (American Educational Studies Association), TQR (The Qualitative Research), 
and ASHE (Association for the Study of Higher Education) where we have had the opportunity 
to present our ideas while they were still forming. The informal peer feedback and discussions 
we have engaged in at these venues have helped to sharpen our thinking. We are also grateful to 
our graduate students who continually challenge us to think in new ways and inspire our teach‑
ing and writing. Finally, we thank all those who generously shared their photographs for this 
book, enriching what we could showcase as a result.
We would like to thank the reviewers of this book proposal who helped refine our early 
thoughts about this book. We would like to say a special thank you to Hannah Shakespeare, 
Portfolio Manager, Public Administration, Advertising, and Marketing Journals at Taylor & 
Francis, who worked with us during the early part of the journey of this book. A big thank 
you to Matt Bickerton, Senior Editorial Assistant, who has patiently answered all the questions 
regarding production. We also thank Eleanor Taylor and Lucy Kennedy for making it a smooth 
transition for us as they took over the book production. We thank the members of the production 
team at Routledge Press as well.DOI: 10.4324/9781003034773-1
Introduction
In the last decade or more, qualitative research methods have expanded to include a variety 
of ways in which to engage a wider range of participants. These strategies and methods have 
included arts‑based methods, visual methods, and performance‑based methods, including the‑
atrical and drama‑based approaches, in addition to the more commonly used methods such as 
interviews and/or observations. The use of the visual in portraying the social and political con‑
ditions of globalization, inequality, increasing violence, and acts of documentation and protests 
against rising inequalities is the result of increased access and relative ease of visual production 
and dissemination of photographs and moving images on social media and other electronic 
platforms. Blogs, vlogs, and apps, as well as a variety of other outlets, create venues for photo 
sharing and communication. Traditional media outlets are now increasingly reaching out to the 
casual observer in cities asking for newsworthy items that they can submit with photographs 
or video clips attached to be posted on news sites. The use of photography in everyday life has 
opened a portal of opportunities for qualitative researchers to explore, understand, and docu‑
ment via photography the experiences of groups of people.
The increased use of photography in everyday life has marked the reemergence of the visual 
in the social sciences and has been documented in areas such as qualitative research methods 
(Smith et al., 2016) and the sensory turn (Calvey, 2021; Pink, 2013), placing emphasis on the 
use of all senses in the construction and representation of experience (Guillemin & Harris, 
2014; Harris & Guillemin, 2012; Low & Abdullah, 2019). In addition, an increased emphasis 
on imagination and memory work, along with engaging participants (Edgar, 2004; Kuhn, 2007), 
has allowed researchers to think differently about scholarly production and has invited new and 
innovative methodologies for the purpose of knowledge creation. For example, case studies, 
biographies, autobiographies, interviews, and historical research all can be carried out using 
photography as a research method. In addition, photography can be combined with interviews, 
participant observations, or other forms of dialog. Photography as a research method can be 
used in different ways during all stages of the research process, from project planning to data 
gathering and data analysis, as well as data display and dissemination. It is an important time for 
qualitative researchers to think anew about the possibilities of the photograph.
Why we wrote this book
Our work in qualitative methodologies continues to center on holistic pedagogies (Swaminathan & 
Mulvihill, 2018), within which we have explored arts‑based research methods (Mulvihill & 
Swaminathan, 2020), oral history methods (Mulvihill & Swaminathan, 2022), and collaborative 
1 Introduction to photographic research2 Introduction to photographic research
research approaches (Mulvihill & Swaminathan, 2023). We have emphasized critical qualitative 
approaches that take into account omissions, or blind spots, and further problematize areas that 
are taken for granted. By delving into feminist methods and postmodernism ideas as well as 
critical interpretivism we have aimed to find new ways to employ theory in qualitative inquiry 
projects for ourselves and for the students we teach. In our continued exploration into innova‑
tions in qualitative methods that are participatory, equitable, democratic, and anticolonialist, we 
found photography to be an exciting and important area to further contemplate.
The early colonial roots of photography have given way to a series of important questions 
that researchers must engage with and develop a more sensitized way of using photography 
in research. From contemplating how photographs have been used to “other” participants, 
researchers have challenged one another to insist upon more democratic inclusion of partici‑
pants by a variety of methods that value collaboration, for example, by inviting participants to 
take photographs themselves – author their own experiences – and be equally engaged in the 
interpretation of whatever data is amassed. In the field of healthcare and education, for example, 
participation in photography has long been situated within a method referred to as photovoice, 
initiated most prominently by Wang and Burris (1997) and then taken up by many others such 
as Jarldorn (2018) and Zurba et al. (2017). Yet, there are many more and varied ways to think 
about the use of photographs and engaging a process of photography within qualitative research 
projects that are useful for all social sciences.
The widespread use of photography in everyday life has expanded the possibilities that pho‑
tography as a research method offers, and we explore those possibilities for qualitative research 
in this book. Photography has been underutilized in qualitative research, while the argument for 
including visual qualitative methods has grown and strengthened. Our book takes up photogra‑
phy as a significant dimension of visual qualitative research methods and examines the potential 
of photographic arts in qualitative research. It highlights both theory and practice by discussing 
the theories of visual research along with practical tips and exercises on how to conduct visual 
research through the use of photography.
Photographic research over time
Harper’s (1988) explanation of the history of photography in the social sciences is a useful ori‑
entation. Between 1896 and 1916, photographs were used as evidence and 31 articles appeared 
in the American Journal of Sociology on the use of photographs or used, as several scholars 
have commented, as mechanisms that would reveal what was real (Harper, 1988). However, by 
1920, photographs were scarce in sociological publications and were considered as just another 
device in the fieldworkers’ toolkit. Documentary photography also contributed to the field of 
photographic research although they were not framed within sociological theories. They had in 
common with sociologists, however, a deep, insider knowledge of their subjects and their sur‑
roundings much as a fieldworker would have had. Further, they photographed poverty, social 
and class issues, and social interactions, all of which resonated with researchers in the fields of 
sociology and anthropology. Researchers later drew inspiration from the early works of Jacob 
Riis (1890) and the Farm Security Administration’s photographic documentation of poverty 
during the 1930s (Agee & Evans, 1941; Stryker & Wood, 1973). In anthropology, Margaret 
Mead and Gregory Bateson did some pioneering work in photography when studying Balinese 
culture (1942). They had been studying Balinese culture for almost a decade before turning to 
photography because they found words inadequate to describe and analyze what they perceived. 
In their words, “... by the use of photographs, the wholeness of each piece of behavior can be 
preserved…” (Bateson & Mead, 1942, p. xiii). In the tradition of Bateson and Mead, other Introduction to photographic research 3
ethnographers applied their methods to study death rituals in ancient Greece (Danforth & Tsi‑
aras, 1982), the Dani people of New Guinea (Heider, 1967), and the peasants of Mexico (Can‑
cian, 1974). All these ethnographers used photography as a way to reflect or as evidence of their 
interpretations. At this time, photographs were seen as confirmation of a selective reality. Collier 
(1967) argued for a more inductive use of photography for research and further suggested that 
visual research and photography might be a way to map social interactions.
In the 1960s, the political climate and issues of war and peace, race, and gender all led to 
several research programs that adopted photography as part of documentation. Issues that were 
considered overlooked at that time are now ripe for research. Qualitative researchers in the 
disciplines of sociology and anthropology began conducting photographic studies on drugs and 
drug culture (Clark, 1971), small‑town poverty and racism (Adelman, 1972), and institutionali‑
zation (Lyon, 1971).
Visual anthropology and the use of photography in research have grown since then and, in 
the last two decades, have become widespread, both due to the ease of sharing images as well as 
the turn to the visual. Visual sociology is a well‑established discipline as is visual anthropology. 
However, in other fields, it is still not used as much as it could be.
While the use of photographs is not new, the ways in which they are used have changed over 
time. Photographs were used as illustrations by researchers and as an objective record, while 
now they are seen as much more of a collaborative enterprise. Moreover, photographs are not 
merely accurate mirrors of what the eye sees, but they are the result of selective, active visual 
perception on the part of the researcher. Just as we take for granted different speech sounds from 
different languages, we need to investigate what the eye sees across differences. The same pho‑
tograph can be interpreted, for example, by different people differently depending on the context 
they employ for interpretation.
The role of photography was initially limited to representation and identification because of 
its use as evidence or illustration of a particular concept, habit, or way of life. However, scholars 
have over time regarded the camera not as an innocent or passive device but as much enmeshed 
in the power relations as the photographer might be. Questions regarding who is behind the 
camera and who is in front of it, how this interaction surfaces in the photographs, how to under‑
stand photography from the point of view of those being photographed, and how to understand 
photography from an insider point of view, all of these questions remain. Further, since pho‑
tography has grown exponentially in use over the last two decades, it has changed how people 
view the world and themselves in it. The act of taking a photograph has an impact on the pho‑
tographer and the viewer who can also be a participant in commenting on the photograph. Such 
continued conversations open up new vistas for communication and for further research inquiry.
Photography itself has different subgenres that include family photography, tourist photog‑
raphy, or protest photography, to name only three. The reasons or motivations for photography 
and photographic arts are many. Some photographs are taken to defy stereotypes since photo‑
graphs allow for a microvision of places and people that might shatter the ideological images 
one has built up of them. Photographs can evoke memories, be used in interviews and fieldwork, 
survey conceptions of place within fieldwork, create an inventory, and study behavior and rela‑
tionships. Photography as records can serve as documentary photography. Photography can 
also be combined with collage or other arts to create new photographic arts that are useful for 
qualitative research.
In the analysis of photographic arts, qualitative research approaches can contribute new 
insights. As Barthes (1964) pointed out, photographs are polysemic and therefore offer the 
potential for several interpretations or meaning‑making possibilities. In analyzing photographs, 
it is possible to use all the senses, making a multimodal analysis of images and context viable. 4 Introduction to photographic research
Further, in writing qualitative research, the use of photography as a form of visual data yields 
multiple creative pathways for students and emerging researchers to explore. Some relatively 
recent books on qualitative methods have focused on arts‑based research and have mentioned 
photography, such as Leavy (2015) Method Meets Art: Arts‑Based Research Practice, and 
Prosser and Loxley (2008) Introducing Visual Methods, as well as our own previous work, 
Mulvihill and Swaminathan (2020), Arts‑Based Educational Research and Qualitative Inquiry: 
Walking the Path. Our interest in the growing ways researchers are incorporating photography 
into projects led us to new questions that helped guide the structure of this new book. The 
upcoming chapters of this book interrogate possibilities for using various photographic concepts 
and practices within qualitative inquiry studies that explore the entire arc of the research pro‑
cess. We are interested in how researchers theorize the power of the photograph and how visual 
research can be combined with participatory action research (PAR) as well as the impact these 
combinations may have on self‑efficacy and collective efficacy. Research where photographs 
help document conditions that require change is often conducted under difficult conditions. Pro‑
test photography, for example, can be used as a research method for examining the relationships 
between the photographer‑researchers and the photographed. Other central questions are raised 
throughout the book such as what are the ethical implications of photographic arts‑based pro‑
jects? And, what are the pedagogical implications of expanding the ways we use photographs 
within qualitative research projects?
Features of the book
Central features of the book include:
• Learning to incorporate photography, and photographic thinking, through the whole arc of 
the qualitative research process (question posing, data gathering, data analysis, presentation, 
and dissemination) to enrich meaning‑making.
• Considering how emotions, identity, and memory can be expressed through photography to 
produce a deeper understanding of the human experience.
• Learning to consider all the senses for visual analysis and integration of theory into practice.
• Useful tips and exercises for early career researchers experimenting with integrating photog‑
raphy into qualitative research.
• An awareness of a broad audience of researchers in education, social sciences, social work, 
and humanities.
This book introduces early career researchers in the social sciences to photography as a signifi‑
cant dimension of visual qualitative research methods. It examines the potential of photographic 
arts in qualitative research by highlighting both theory and practice, discussing the theories of 
visual research and types of photography within the genre, and offering practical tips on how to 
conduct visual research through the use of photography. We aim to make the methodological, 
analytical, data gathering, and ethical issues pertinent to photographic arts in qualitative research 
more visible so that a conversation can begin about the different ways to use photography for 
research. This book introduces ways to create and use photographs throughout the research pro‑
cess, including determining research questions for visual research, integrating different research 
methods with photography, data gathering and analysis of visual, multimodal data, ethics sur‑
rounding the use of image‑based data, writing as representation, critique, and creativity through 
the use of photographs as data exemplars, communicative medium, and creative art. This is a 
book that doctoral students and early career researchers we hope will find valuable as they seek Introduction to photographic research 5
to experiment and learn to use photography as visual research within the qualitative genre. The 
book will offer theoretical discussions and current debates that showcase the dimensions of the 
use of photography as well as examples from published research to exemplify the possibilities 
of visual qualitative research.
Summary
This chapter introduces the readers to photographic research, the ways in which it can contribute 
to qualitative research. It presents an argument for using photography. The chapter lays out the 
benefits of using photography for research for early career researchers. It also foreshadows what 
will occur in the chapters to follow.
References
Adelman, B. (1972). Down home. McGraw Hill.
Agee, J., & Evans, W. (1941). Let us now praise famous men. Riverside Press.
Barthes, R. (1964). Rhetoric of the image. In R. Barthes (Ed.), The responsibility of forms: Critical essays 
on music, art, and representation (pp. 21-40). Richard Howard (trans., New York, 1985).
Bateson, G., & Mead, M. (1942). Balinese character: A photographic analysis. New York Academy of 
Sciences.
Calvey, D. (2021). Sensory ethnography: A creative turn. Journal of Organizational Ethnography, 10(3), 
346–357.
Cancian, F. (1974). Another place. Scrimshaw Press.
Clark, L. (1971). Tulsa. Lunstrom Press.
Collier, J. J. (1967). Visual anthropology: Photography as a research method. New York: Holt, Rinehart 
and Winston.
Danforth, L., & Tsiaras, A. (1982). Death rituals of rural Greece. Princeton University Press.
Edgar, I. (2004). A guide to imagework: Imagination‑based research methods. Routledge.
Guillemin, M., & Harris, A. (2014). Using the senses in qualitative interview research: Practical strate‑
gies. Sage Publications.
Harper, D. (1988). Visual sociology: Expanding sociological vision. The American Sociologist, 19, 54–70.
Harris, A., & Guillemin, M. (2012). Developing sensory awareness in qualitative interviewing: A portal 
into the otherwise unexplored. Qualitative Health Research, 22(5), 689–699.
Heider, K. G. (1967). Speculative functionalism: Archaic elements in New Guinea Dani culture. Anthropos
(H. 5./6), 833–840.
Jarldorn, M. (2018). Photovoice handbook for social workers: Method, practicalities and possibilities for 
social change. Springer.
Kuhn, A. (2007). Photography and cultural memory: A methodological exploration. Visual Studies, 22(3), 
283–292.
Leavy, P. (2015). Method meets art: Arts‑based research practice. Guilford Publications.
Low, K. E., & Abdullah, N. (2019). Sensory experience as method. In N. Boero, & K. Mason (Eds.), The 
Oxford Handbook of the sociology of body and embodiment (pp. 53–68). Oxford University Press.
Lyon, D. (1971). Conversations with the dead. Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Mulvihill, T. M., & Swaminathan, R. (2020). Arts‑based educational research and qualitative inquiry: 
Walking the path. Routledge.
Mulvihill, T. M., & Swaminathan, R. (Eds.). (2022). Oral history and qualitative methodologies: Educa‑
tional research for social justice. Routledge.
Mulvihill, T. M., & Swaminathan, R. (2023). Collaborative qualitative research. Guilford Publications.
Pink, S. (2013). Doing visual ethnography. London: Sage.
Prosser, J., & Loxley, A. (2008). Introducing visual methods. National Centre for Research Methods 
Review Paper, UK.6 Introduction to photographic research
Riis, J. (1890) How the other half lives. Dover.
Rose, G. (2016). Visual methodologies: An introduction to research with visual materials. Sage Publications.
Smith, S. K., Mountain, G. A., & Hawkins, R. J. (2016). A scoping review to identify the techniques 
frequently used when analysing qualitative visual data. International Journal of Social Research Meth‑
odology, 19(6), 693–715.
Stryker, R., & Wood, N. (1973). In this proud land. New York Graphic Society.
Swaminathan, R., & Mulvihill, T. M. (2018). Teaching qualitative research: Strategies for engaging 
emerging scholars. Guilford Publications.
Wang, C., & Burris, M. A. (1997). Photovoice: Concept, methodology, and use for participatory needs 
assessment. Health Education & Behavior, 24(3), 369–387.
Zurba, M., Tennent, P., & Woodgate, R. L. (2017). Worth a thousand words?: Advantages, challenges and 
opportunities in working with photovoice as a qualitative research method with youth and their families. 
Forum Qualitative Sozialforschung/Forum: Qualitative Social Research, 18(1), 22.DOI: 10.4324/9781003034773-2
This chapter outlines the ethical debates around the use and presentation of photographic data. 
Examples of qualitative studies using photographs will be described along with an analysis of 
the research methodology issues. These include status and ownership of images, found images, 
and created images, as well as the participants’ anonymity, issues of consent, vulnerable popula‑
tions, dignity and voice in using photographic images, and relationships of power and equity. 
Technical manipulation of photographs (memes, boomerangs, and gifs) on Snapchat and Insta‑
gram, permanence of photographs, and misuse of photographs will be discussed. The questions 
of Institutional Review Boards (IRB), managing ethical review processes, and examples from 
researchers on how to navigate the increasing scrutiny by boards, permissions needed for visual 
data, and the effect on research and researchers will be discussed. Strategies with examples 
from research studies for managing ethical review approval processes for visual research will be 
offered. Tips and exercises for practice will be offered at the end of the chapter.
A variety of ethical issues ought to be fully considered when incorporating photographs 
as data and/or photographs as elicitation devices for creating data. These are related yet not 
synonymous ways for considering the role photographs can play within a study. Researchers 
have reported some benefits to incorporating photographs such as increasing the likelihood of 
participants agreeing to be part of the study because of the appeal of being able to use photos to 
tell their story and moving the locus of control for data collection more toward the participants 
and less toward the researchers (Fairey, 2018; Miller, 2015; Pauwels, 2015; Simmons, 2020).
The popular appeal and ease of using photography can lead researchers into inadvertently 
overlooking some ethical issues that may not be immediately apparent. Participatory research, 
for example, can be taken for granted by researchers as an empowering or liberatory method. 
However, Smith et al. (2022) sound a cautionary note regarding participatory research by point‑
ing out that “Photovoice, in particular, is often problematic if the researchers mistakenly view 
the camera as inherently an ‘emancipatory tool’ that automatically advances ‘empowerment’” 
(p. 6). The authors suggest that it is
necessary for researchers to justify the necessity of Photovoice and to describe why this 
method is essential to answer the proposed research questions. Researchers contemplating 
this method should consider how the photographs can be used to reveal issues that could 
not have been revealed through spoken word alone.
(Smith et al., 2022, p. 6)
Researchers, therefore, would need to give careful scrutiny to their methods when using photog‑
raphy and think through the reasons for using it as a tool for data gathering. Researchers ought 
to guard against reductionist thinking, whereby they mistakenly believe that taking photos and 
2 Ethics and photographic visual 
research8 Ethics and photographic visual research
talking about them are the whole of the methodological approach. Like all qualitative inquiry 
projects, a carefully crafted purpose and actionable research questions ought to be the basis of 
the inquiry.
Approaches to ethics in photographic research
The National Centre for Research Methods produced a review paper on the topic of Visual 
Ethics: Ethical Issues in Visual Research (2008), outlining ways to think about these issues 
that still have currency today. Within this document, the creators summarized four categories 
of approaches to research ethics: consequentialist, nonconsequentialist, principalist, and ethics 
of care. Consequentialist approaches “argue that ethical decisions should be based on the con‑
sequences of specific actions so that an action” (and therefore researchers using this approach 
ought to) “assess what the outcome of a specific decision might be and decide on an action 
that they believe would result in the most beneficial outcome” (Wiles et al., 2008, p. 6). Non‑
consequentialist approaches argue that “ethical decisions should be based on notions of what 
it is morally right to do regardless of the consequences” (Wiles et al., 2008, p. 7). Principal‑
ist approaches “draw on the principles of respect for people’s autonomy, beneficence, non‑
malificence [sic] and justice in making and guiding ethical decisions in research. Respect for 
autonomy relates to issues of voluntariness, informed consent, confidentiality and anonymity” 
(Wiles et al., 2008, p. 7). An ethics of care approach focuses on ethical decisions “made on the 
basis of care, compassion and a desire to act in ways that benefit the individual or group [being 
researched often at the heart of] feminist and participatory research” (Wiles et al., 2008, p. 8). 
Ethical considerations in visual research can be of various types and can be “situated” (Pink, 
2012). Two categories would be ethical issues concerning the safety of the participants and the 
safety of the researcher. With regard to participant safety, researchers may need to alleviate the 
anxiety of participants who are new to research.
Anxiety among participants
Anxiety can occur both in terms of technical know‑how and regarding content. If participants 
are not used to having or owning smart phones or cameras, they may not be open to sharing 
their lack of expertise with researchers. This may lead to photographs that cannot be used even 
if the technology is supplied. One way to alleviate this anxiety is to require a training session 
with all participants, regardless of their existing levels of expertise. Informing participants that 
technology often changes or holding some practice sessions with other participants might be a 
way to ease some into using photographs for research.
Participants may wonder or ask for reassurance that they are taking the right photographs. 
Guidelines can be provided to alleviate such anxiety while making it clear to participants that 
it is their choices and decisions that are key to the photographic documentation. Reassuring 
participants that their photographs would not be singled out in focus groups for discussion 
and instead volunteering photographs would also help participants to feel comfortable making 
choices and decisions about which photographs to take and share.
This can be especially anxiety provoking for participants whose participation might place 
them in a vulnerable position within communities where photography is viewed with suspicion 
and mistrust and seen as a tool for surveillance. Facial recognition software has been used to 
monitor and apprehend those who are suspected of breaking laws. Photography that catches 
cars who break rules of the road, cameras at different junctures of urban areas all contribute to 
a feeling of being constantly watched. When photography is used for surveillance, the power Ethics and photographic visual research 9
rests firmly in the hands of those who photograph rather than the subjects of the photographs. In 
communities with negative experiences with photography, researchers might need to take time 
to build trust while also reassuring the participants of the power of their choices to photograph 
and share as well as withhold from sharing particular photographs. Ethical issues specific to 
particular populations are also important to consider, for example, when projects involve youth.
Youth as active researchers
The idea of youth as active researchers is not new and has been prevalent since the United Nations 
Convention on the Rights of the Child (1989) (see https://www.ohchr.org/sites/default/files/crc.
pdf). The articles of the convention noted that children needed to be informed and consulted 
on all aspects that concern their lives. This means research on children would need to move 
to researching with children where they are informed, consulted, or additionally brought in as 
coresearchers. And, the United Nations International Children’s (Emergency) Fund (UNICEF) 
created specific guidelines and questions to help journalists, researchers, and others minimize 
the impact of photographing and filming vulnerable youth (see https://www.unicef.org/romania/
media/7441/file/Photographing%20and%20filming%20children%20ethically.pdf).
Scholars have sought to acknowledge children and youth as experts on their own lives and 
have attempted in different ways to bring them in as coconstructors of knowledge and as col‑
laborators in research. Innovative approaches to research have been found to be particularly 
effective, as scholars have used art (Ångström‑Brännström & Norberg, 2014), mapping, act‑
ing, or theater (Wright, 2020). Video and photography are also popular ways to involve youth 
in research. The pervasive use of video and photography in the lives of young people through 
YouTube, smartphones, and social media speaks to a visual culture already present in the lives 
of youth, making it easier for them to use photography to document their everyday lives or to 
pinpoint aspects that they would like to highlight.
While participant photography among youth is generally regarded as positive and has been 
successful (Smith et al., 2022), youth participant photography research might pose additional 
specific challenges in addition to those faced by photography researchers among adult groups. 
O’Hara and Higgins (2019) reported on a study in Northern Ireland using participatory pho‑
tography with youth and discussed the ethical challenges they faced. The participants were 70 
youths between the ages of 13 and 17. They used a variety of data‑gathering methods, including 
participant photography, focus groups, and individual interviews. In the case of youth, not only 
are parental permissions important but also youth assent. Further, in photographic research, 
youth participants need to understand and agree with the different norms of protecting people 
in their images. Asking them to ensure that they take permission before photographing, getting 
consent in their turn from the participants after discussing the research purposes with them, as 
well as ensuring that there is an agreement that the photographs would be taken only by the 
youth participants. Further, an agreement that inappropriate photographs should not be taken 
needs to be part of this discussion. O’Hara and Higgins (2019) offer some tips for researchers 
going into the field and conducting sensitive research based on their experiences. They suggest 
that researchers need to familiarize themselves with the community and participants in some 
way. For example, volunteering in the setting will help the researchers to understand the context 
and may create the ground for participant recruitment into the study. They also suggest that 
researchers communicate with the community members who might have a different perspec‑
tive or response to the research topics or research questions than the participants. This would 
ensure that different viewpoints are listened to prior to the commencement of the research. 
Sensitivity regarding any potential disruption to the community from the research processes 10 Ethics and photographic visual research
needs to be thought through before embarking on research. This could include considering the 
obligations of participants toward the needs of the community and their possible absence from 
such duties during the time of research. Further, learning the language and slang or terms used 
by youth is important for researchers. In addition, having a relationship with the gatekeepers in 
the community might be critical to conducting the research and gaining trust around issues of 
confidentiality.
Researchers Farello et al. (2019) examined female youth from refugee backgrounds who 
were forced to migrate and resettle, yet benefitted from participating in physical activity as a 
pathway to healthy resettlement. Nine Burmese females from refugee backgrounds participated 
in semistructured interviews and discussed their experiences in sport and physical education 
and how those experiences relate to their sense of belonging, autonomy, and relationships, as 
well as their ability to adapt. Participants then completed a photovoice task where they photo‑
graphed highlights and challenges they have faced. Photographs were analyzed and discussed in 
a follow‑up interview. This study is an example of the extra steps taken and the increased levels 
of sensitivity the researchers must engage to maintain ethical standards appropriate for studies 
involving vulnerable youth. It also highlights the role gatekeepers can play when gaining access 
to youth populations and shows the complexities that are often involved. For example, consent 
from parents and assent from youth were obtained with the help of the English as a nonnative 
language (ENL) coordinator at the urban school district.
Consent and confidentiality
Researchers need to address how the concepts of anonymity and confidentiality apply to Pho‑
tographic Data. Consent is complex in visual research. Confidentiality, which is a hallmark of 
qualitative research, is usually maintained in interviews and observations through a change in 
the names of people and places, with the use of pseudonyms and the removal of any identify‑
ing landmarks. However, in visual research in photography, such confidentiality is not possible 
unless one takes photographs without faces being recognizable or places that are shot in a way 
that brings out their generic features rather than specific landscape points. A study conducted 
by Helen Close (2007) with children who used photography can give researchers several points 
for consideration regarding how confidentiality works in the arc of the research process. Close 
(2007) conducted research using photography with children in healthcare, where 12 chroni‑
cally ill children between 2 and 19 years old were asked to take photographs of their everyday 
lives. She tried to distinguish between consent and ethics during data gathering, data generation, 
and dissemination. In her study, consent was obtained from parents and assent from children. 
Parental consent was not seen as superseding the interests and wishes of the children, who had 
a say in whether or not they chose to be in the study. Further, in keeping with research ethics 
protocols, the children could decide to withdraw their assent at any time during the study. They 
were interviewed twice: once in the beginning where photography was explained and the second 
time after the photographs were taken and shared. However, as Close points out, the children 
did not have a say on whether or not the photographs could be disseminated. Close explains that 
while the decision to not disseminate the photographs was made by researchers, it nevertheless 
empowered the children to share photographs with the researchers that they might have other‑
wise withheld. For example, they were less anxious about showing and sharing photographs that 
were not sharp or were out of focus.
Close (2007) used photographs taken by the children as a way of gathering data and eliciting 
meaning. She considered different choices regarding disseminating or sharing the photographs 
that the children had taken when writing up the research. In the end, she chose to withhold Ethics and photographic visual research 11
sharing of the photographs rather than alter or blur the recognizable portions of the photographs. 
Arguing that there was not much benefit to showing a photograph if it was altered, she decided 
to centralize and privilege the meanings or meaning‑making of the children and describe the 
photographs rather than showcasing the accompanying photographs.
Although using technology to blur images of people’s faces is a common and an accepted 
way to include photographs in dissemination, researchers might want to reflect on the per‑
spective of Banks (2001) who has suggested that the blurred or fuzzy face is associated with 
criminality in Western societies. It is also possible that audiences may view and interpret 
photographs differently than the way in which participants or those generating the data 
might interpret and view the same photograph. Again, while this last is considered one of the 
empowering aspects of photography and photographs as being the medium that can generate 
multiple meanings, the view that a photograph might communicate meanings contrary to the 
intent of the photographer needs to be thought through by researchers during the dissemina‑
tion process.
While blurring of images is one possibility for anonymity, it can also be read as erasure of 
the person’s identity, raising a different set of ethical concerns. Further, since different cultures’ 
sense of dignity can arise from different contexts, individually or collectively, it is crucial to be 
aware of how and where photographic images are taken and whether or not these images rep‑
resent participants in their contexts in authentic and dignified ways. Dignity involves aligning 
the goals of the research with the direct benefit to those being researched. In research with com‑
munities, regardless of the topic of research, the goal is to create new knowledge that will speak 
to policymakers and those with power to improve the lives of the communities by sharing the 
details of their lived experiences. This involves researchers making decisions regarding whom 
and when to photograph. This means thinking about the time and place and how the image will 
be received in different arenas once it is disseminated.
The heart of these types of ethical dilemmas implores researchers to not rush to use pho‑
tographs without full contemplation of the dynamics involved because failure to consider 
deeply the reasons for their use and the frameworks used to guide the procedures risks rein‑
forcing damaging conceptions about the power relations among those involved in the project. 
Wang and Redwood‑Jones (2001) draw on the work of Gross et al. (1992) to discuss some
principles that researchers can adhere to while conducting research with photographs. The 
first would be to recognize that while laws may permit photography in public places, such acts 
may not be ethically neutral. Even if laws allow one to do so, the principle of not intruding 
on participants’ and community life worlds is an ethical practice for researchers. Some photo‑
graphs may invade and disrespect the privacy of participants. Researchers should think about 
inadvertently disclosing embarrassing facts by taking a photograph at the wrong moment. 
Being reflective about and taking steps to prevent participants from being seen in a false light 
is also important. Portraying photographs that might be truthful and yet not representative 
is another ethical boundary for researchers to reflect upon. And finally, it is a researcher’s 
responsibility to protect participants from their likenesses being used for commercial gain. 
These safeguards draw on the earlier mentioned consequentialist, nonconsequentialist, prin‑
cipalist, and ethics of care.
Participant consent and vulnerability issues
Langmann and Pick (2018) offer a useful chart for researchers identifying some of the major 
organizations who have developed a code of ethics for researchers using photography as a 
research method (see Table 2.1).12 Ethics and photographic visual research
The limits of confidentiality
The legal extent of confidentiality needs to be explained to any participant who is taking 
photographs. If participants take photographs of abuse, neglect, or any type of concern where 
action might be necessary, appropriate authorities would need to be notified. In such cases, 
conditional confidentiality would apply. Ethical issues can go beyond legal concerns about 
confidentiality. Gold (2019), a researcher who used photography in field settings, suggested 
that the relationship between the researcher and the participants needs to be one of a covenan‑
tal nature rather than that of a contractual relationship. By this, he meant that the researcher 
goes beyond the rights and duties specified in a contract and instead accepts the obligations 
that develop between people in the course of research as they would in any interdependent 
relationship. He went on to caution that since the ethical requirements and nature of each 
project might vary, it was crucial for researchers to keep their participants’ interests front and 
center when conducting research with photography. This would be especially true for research 
on sensitive topics or with vulnerable populations or with cross‑cultural research involving 
vulnerable populations.
Sensitive topics of research and participant vulnerability
In cross‑cultural research, as with vulnerable populations, the benefit to participants and to the 
community where the research is being conducted needs to be clear to the researchers and to 
community partners. Without a clear benefit to communities, photography can devolve into a 
Table 2.1 Summary of Major RECs and Codes of Ethics
Research ethics council 
(REC)
Code of ethics Country of 
origin
URL
American sociological 
association (ASA)
ASA code of ethics United States http://www.asanet.org/about/ethics.
cfm
British Sociological 
Association (BAS)
Statement of ethical 
practice for the 
BAS
United 
Kingdom
https://www.britsoc.co.uk/
media/24310/bsa_statement_of_
ethical_practice.pdf
European Science 
Foundation – All 
European Academics 
(ALLEA)
The European code 
of conduct for 
research integrity
European 
Union
https://allea.org/code‑of‑conduct/
International Sociological 
Association (ISA)
ISA code of ethics International http://www.isa‑sociology.org/about/
isa_code_of_ethics.htm
International Visual 
Sociology Association 
(IVSA)
IVSA code of 
research ethics and 
guidelines
International http://visualsociology.org/about/
ethics‑and‑guidelines.html
National Health and 
Medical Research 
Council (NHMC)
Australian code for 
the responsible 
conduct of 
research
Australia https://www.nhmrc.gov.au/sites/
default/files/documents/
attachments/grant%20documents/
The‑australian‑
code‑for‑the‑responsible‑conduct‑
of‑research‑2018.pdf
The Australian 
Sociological Association 
(TASA)
TASA ethical 
guidelines
Australia https://www.tasa.org.au/content.
aspx?page_id=22&club_
id=671860&module_id=357739
The European Charter for 
Researchers
Charter for 
researchers
European 
Union
https://euraxess.ec.europa.eu/jobs/
charter/european‑charterEthics and photographic visual research 13
type of voyeurism, despite the best intentions of the researchers. Further, it may endanger the 
population if they are unaware of where their photographs will be disseminated and in what 
contexts. If research is on topics that are sensitive, it is possible that, despite consent and assent, 
disclosures might put people in vulnerable positions. This is again an issue for a researcher to 
think through and make decisions regarding confidentiality, legality, and ethical responsibility.
In an age where surveillance is the norm rather than the exception and self‑photography is 
widely accepted, there is nevertheless a mistrust and unease generated when people living in a 
community see cameras or people taking photographs of their neighborhood. Such discomfort 
might translate into community members being reluctant to take photographs of some activities 
or physical areas of the community. Along with participant vulnerability, researchers also need 
to consider their own vulnerability in situations where they are perceived as strangers.
Researcher vulnerability
In hard‑to‑reach populations, researchers can be vulnerable and seen as outsiders unless they 
take the time to build relationships in the community where they are conducting research. They 
may face hostility from the community. In order to mitigate this and find ways to commu‑
nicate with the local population, researchers need to be prepared and strategize so that they 
can build rapport. Ways to do this might include volunteering in community agencies in the 
area, requesting introductions to prominent people or key people of the community through the 
agency personnel, and being seen with volunteer agency personnel who are familiar and trusted 
in the community on walks in the neighborhood. Gaining access to research populations can 
be challenging if one does not have inroads into the group. In such cases, one needs to locate 
the key people who might facilitate access. Another strategy for researchers might be to pre‑
pare and learn specific vocabulary used by groups that can signal credibility or knowledge to 
the participants.
Early career researchers and IRB committees
Early‑career researchers and doctoral students often face challenges when getting their studies 
approved by an Institutional Review Board (IRB) charged with the responsibility for the ethical 
conduct of research studies involving human subjects. Researchers have to submit a proposal 
that provides the details regarding the potential risk involved for human subjects (i.e., par‑
ticipants) who consent to take part in the study. Research involving photography has presented 
additional challenges for many researchers who have described the obstacles they faced and the 
steps they have taken to alleviate and “manage” the study. One of the questions often raised by 
both IRB committees and by peers or community members where the research is conducted 
is the degree to which the participant is protected in the photograph. Even in auto‑driven or 
participant‑driven approaches where the participants make decisions regarding what and whom 
they wish to photograph and choose what photographs to share, they might inadvertently pho‑
tograph people who did not ask to be in the study or put themselves in vulnerable situations 
without meaning to do so. It is important for researchers to be aware of the types of questions 
they might be faced with and be prepared to answer them. In all cases, the level of risk for the 
participants needs to be examined so that if it is indeed minimal, in other words, if the degree 
of risk or discomfort is not any different from what they would encounter in everyday life, then 
the researcher might present the case to the committee, describing the study as minimal risk.
And, in some cases, methodological modifications may be needed to acquire the approval 
of the IRB. For example, Miller (2015) described the objections raised by the IRB for his study 14 Ethics and photographic visual research
of parental memories of school and the activities they used to socialize their children for kin‑
dergarten. Although his initial intent was not to use photographs, it was the parents themselves 
who shared them spontaneously while describing their schooling and their children’s activities. 
When Miller (2015) tried to get the IRB to permit the use of photographs for interview elicita‑
tion, he ran into obstacles. One question that was raised was the necessity of using photographs 
since it was deemed by the IRB to be an invasive process. As several scholars (Pitt, 2014; Wiles 
et al., 2012; Miller, 2015) explain, the objections from IRB committees can be a result of a lack 
of familiarity on the part of such boards to fully understand the power and potential of photog‑
raphy in qualitative research.
One way to mitigate concerns or to answer such questions raised by IRBs is to present an 
argument in favor of the benefits of photography for the research project and to justify the 
choice of method. This would counter the idea that photography was being suggested as a 
method because it is superfluous rather than necessary for knowledge production. The argument 
that photographs and images can open up different ways of knowing and that verbal and visual 
communications use different parts of the brain has been well documented (Banks, 2001; Pain, 
2012; Prosser & Loxley, 2007). Photographic data can enhance the quality and scope in terms 
of depth of the data gathered and analyzed. Additionally, it is a forum for representing gestures 
and emotions as well as contexts, consequently producing data that draw on the complexity of 
human interactions and representations.
For early career researchers, the questions regarding ethics they ask themselves when using 
photography as data will benefit their thinking throughout the process. Some of the following 
constructs can be used to guide such reflection.
Dignity of process, context, and outcome
Dignity in the research process has been discussed by several scholars (Boxall & Ralph, 2009; 
Berle, 2008; Langmann & Pick, 2014). It is important to think about the political aspect of all 
forms of representation. In using photography, scholars (Boxall & Ralph, 2009; Berle, 2008; 
Langmann & Pick, 2014) contend that it is the researchers’ responsibility to maintain the dignity 
of the participants and how they are represented in context as central to their decision‑making. 
Langmann and Pick (2014) suggest that the construct of dignity can alleviate ethical issues that 
might arise with image‑based data. They explore dignity in context, dignity in process, and 
dignity in outcome. Dignity would encompass authenticity, beneficence, breaking stereotypes, 
and avoiding distortions of social situations. To protect the dignity of participants being photo‑
graphed, it is especially important to remember the critique of Susan Sontag (1977), who argued 
that the camera is invasive, that the photographer can either be compassionate or not, and that 
the images captured can either maintain the dignity of the participant or not.
Dignity has emerged as an important consideration when researching or understanding social 
relations, poverty, or empowerment. How images are interpreted or used is an important ques‑
tion to ensure that participant dignity is maintained throughout the process, that there is a lack 
of distortion, and that the outcome is one that does not promote stereotypes.
Reflexive photography is another way to facilitate participants’ empowerment and dignity 
since, in this process, they take their own photographs and decide how they want to be portrayed. 
In terms of ethics, the questions that researchers need to ask themselves include how well they 
are communicating the purpose of the photographs to those whom they are photographing and 
how they ensure that there is informed consent. Further, beyond obtaining consent, researchers 
need to think about the intent to preserve dignity, which means accepting responsibility as a 
researcher for the images being produced and disseminated.Ethics and photographic visual research 15
Depending on the context, obtaining consent might be more complicated than getting forms 
signed. For example, in groups where signing forms might be viewed with suspicion or where 
literacy is limited, obtaining oral consent might be the better option. Further, participants need 
to understand what they are consenting to, for example, if permission is sought to take candid 
photographs or photographs as they proceed in their daily routines. Another issue that might 
present itself is taking photographs of people as part of the frame, although they might not be 
the focus. In photographic research, consent may be an ongoing negotiation, and the signing of 
forms might not indicate continued consent. Participant‑friendly consent forms can be created 
through videos or cartoons to explain what the participant is assenting or consenting to.
Questions to assist researchers
The concepts of anonymity and confidentiality have separate and distinct meanings yet are often 
confused or conflated by novice researchers learning to navigate IRB protocols. Research activi‑
ties cannot be both anonymous and confidential when following the operationalized definitions 
of these terms as provided by IRBs. Maintaining anonymity in research may or may not be 
desirable, but if it is desired then researchers often give careful consideration to various factors. 
Here are some aspects qualitative researchers should be aware of when designing and carrying 
out their studies to adhere to ethical standards:
What steps will be taken related to data security? Implement robust data security measures to 
protect collected data from unauthorized access or breaches. This includes secure storage and 
transmission protocols.
Will access to the data be limited? Restricting access to the collected data only to essential 
research team members who need it for analysis minimizes the risk of accidental or inten‑
tional identification.
Will the data be aggregated, deidentified, or otherwise disguised? Aggregating data to present 
summaries or general trends rather than individual responses is an approach some research‑
ers use to assist with deidentifying data, as it may reduce the potential for unintended identi‑
fication through unique or specific details.
Will the researchers use forms of confidential reporting and/or coding systems? Utilizing confi‑
dential coding systems for participants, such as pseudonyms for people and places or replac‑
ing personal identifiers with unique codes, can help. Employ deidentification techniques such 
as removing or altering specific details in qualitative data that could potentially lead to par‑
ticipant identification, such as the names of individuals, places, or other unique identifying 
factors.
Will researchers have a need for secure communication? Using secure communication chan‑
nels when sharing information within the research team may be necessary and can be one 
approach to safeguarding against unintentional leaks of sensitive data.
What types of Informed Consent processes will be used? Clearly communicating, during the 
informed consent process, the level of confidentiality (or at times anonymity) incorporated 
into the design of the study will be important. Participants should also be informed about 
how their data will be handled at all stages of the study (including after the study has con‑
cluded) to make informed decisions about participation. Establishing protocols for secure 
and timely data destruction once the research project is complete and the raw data is no 
longer needed or properly archiving the data for future use by the initial researchers and/or 
other researchers for secondary data analysis purposes. If outsourcing data‑related tasks to 
third parties (e.g., data analysis or storage services), ensure they have robust confidentiality 16 Ethics and photographic visual research
measures in place and clear practices to protect participant data in the short‑term as well as 
the long‑term. And, that these measures are clearly communicated to the participants during 
the consenting process and during the course of the research.
Will researchers conduct regular audits and compliance checks? Conducting regular audits of 
research practices to ensure ongoing compliance with agreed‑upon protocols is a good prac‑
tice. Researchers ought to have mechanisms in place to be able to stay informed about evolv‑
ing ethical standards and update their research practices accordingly. At times, researchers 
decide to provide ongoing training for research team members regarding the importance of 
confidentiality and the specific protocols in place. This ensures everyone remains vigilant 
and follows established procedures.
Maintaining confidentiality is crucial to safeguarding the personally identifiable data of partici‑
pants. It entails a commitment to preventing the disclosure of the participants’ identity, personal 
information, and responses to anyone beyond the research team, unless expressly agreed upon 
otherwise. The use of pseudonyms for all names of participants, other people they may name 
or refer to as part of an interview (or other data collection process – such as written responses 
to online prompts), as well as names of places or locations. Furthermore, participants should 
be made aware of all of the ways researchers are attending to confidentiality issues. Clear com‑
munication should outline the specific steps researchers will take to ensure the security and 
protection of participants’ records. This includes detailed information on the measures in place 
to uphold the privacy and integrity of their data throughout the research process. These are all 
common practices among qualitative researchers as they strive to maintain the highest ethical 
standards in their practice. Stay informed about relevant legal and ethical guidelines regarding 
data confidentiality and adhere to IRB requirements and any applicable data protection regula‑
tions in place at the time of your study. By addressing these considerations, researchers can 
enhance their ability to maintain confidentiality and protect the sensitive information entrusted 
to them by participants.
Ethics and challenges of ownership of photographs
Van House (2011) pointed out that in the research they were conducting, the question of owner‑
ship of photographs in shared spaces garnered different responses from the participants. Many 
participants saw the public platform where photographs could be shared as open‑source mate‑
rial or as a public resource, and this included photographs that were both their own as well 
as photographs posted by others to which they had access. Many people tagged photographs 
almost as a service in order to make it easier for others to find their own photographs. However, 
unlike the concern exhibited by those who shared their everyday photographs with an audience 
they might not know well, artists and those who regarded photography as their profession were 
seriously concerned about copyright and ownership of their images. The ability to change and 
alter photographs creates another ethical question with regard to how to prevent freely shared 
photographs from being altered by others.
Ongoing implications of technology tools
Using or misusing photographs for exploitative purposes is on the rise and the ease with which 
photographs and videos can be manipulated via technologies associated with photo‑driven 
social media sites such as Snapchat and Instagram and the creation of memes, gifs, and spe‑
cial effects such as boomerangs, stickers, blurring, and erasing portions of an image floods the Ethics and photographic visual research 17
internet with visual images that cannot always be easily evaluated. And, as artificial intelligence 
(AI) is advanced and popularized, the next wave of image creation will no doubt pose a new set 
of ethical dilemmas for researchers incorporating visual images into their studies. The uptick 
in the literature even in the last few years surrounding the overall implications of AI on the 
research community is necessary reading (see e.g., Christou, 2023a, 2023b; Longo, 2020; Lv 
et al., 2021; Ryan, 2022).
The most important issues surrounding ethics ultimately translate to an awareness on the part 
of researchers to maintain a vigilance in terms of the responsibility of the researcher toward 
participants. While the IRB covers the institutional and legal content to guide a researcher, 
achieving ethics in practice can be more complicated. For this reason, we draw from feminist 
epistemologies to suggest that for research with photography, an ethic of care needs to be cen‑
tral to questions of ethical practice. The concept of “care” has evolved over time when care and 
justice were presented as contrasting perspectives (Gilligan, 1982; Noddings, 1986) to a more 
contemporary conception of care that is informed by intersectionality and postcolonial con‑
cerns (Collins, 1990; Craddock, 2015; Noddings, 2005). Redefining care, scholars took up four 
aspects of care that included “caring about,” “taking care of,” “caregiving,” and “care receiv‑
ing” (Fisher & Tronto, 1990, p. 40). Taking these into account and drawing from Miller (2005) 
who discusses care as beneficence, applying it to photographic research, we consider the ethic of 
care to be fundamental to qualitative research using photography. Care in this sense is a political 
and compassionate caring so that we look to satisfy both justice and caring equally when we 
approach participants for the purposes of research. This entails reflecting on the intersectionality 
of privilege as well as the cultural, racial, gendered, and colonial histories of research relations 
when we consider the ethics of photographic research.
Photograph 2.1 A metal box of photos. Photo credit: Raji Swaminathan18 Ethics and photographic visual research
Exercise 2.1: Anticipating ethical challenges (Corresponding 
with Photograph 2.1)
Guidelines:
1 Look at your research question and the population you are planning to involve in photo‑
graphic research.
2 What are some possible ethical dilemmas you might encounter in your study?
3 Make a list of these dilemmas that you anticipate.
4 What are some preparations you can make to meet these challenges?
5 How is power related to the ethical dilemmas or issues that you anticipate?
6 What are some feelings you have around these ethical issues?
Reflection:
Examine Photograph 2.1 and write responses to the following prompts:
1 What would you do if a participant chose not to share a photograph with you?
2 Would there be photographs you might choose to withhold from the public that might be 
impactful for your research?
3 What photographs would you choose to refrain from disseminating or sharing and in what 
contexts?
4 In what way would the audience have an influence on what you might or might not share?
Photograph 2.2  Photograph of two hands holding a teapot pouring tea into cups. Photo credit: Geetha 
RamsundarEthics and photographic visual research 19
Exercise 2.2: Positionality of the researcher (Corresponding 
with Photograph 2.2)
Guidelines:
1 Think of your own positionality in terms of race, class, gender, and ability. How will your 
positionality influence your research?
2 How will your positionality limit the photographs or visual research that you undertake?
3 What advantages can you think of that you will have given your positionality?
4 Report the above to a peer and have them do the same in turn.
5 Give feedback to each other on the above.
6 What changes or additions did you make to your ideas after the feedback?
Reflection:
Examine Photograph 2.2 and write responses to the following prompts:
1 What are the ethics involved in erasing the images of people in the photograph?
2 What reasons might there be to draw attention to a single element in a photograph?
3 Why would this be problematic and under what circumstances would it be acceptable to do this?
4 What ethical imperatives should you consider when thinking about how to interpret a 
photograph?
Summary
This chapter addressed the question, what are the ethics of using and creating photographs 
in qualitative research? This chapter highlighted examples of studies using photography, pro‑
viding ways for researchers to think about the ethical implications involved in studies using 
photographs. In addition, the chapter reviewed navigating the IRB process including strategies 
for meeting potential challenges. This includes examining participant consent and vulnerability 
issues; the concepts of anonymity, visibility, dignity, and voice; the ownership of images; found 
and created images; the impacts of a surveillance society; security concerns; using or misusing 
photographs for exploitative purposes; manipulation of photographs via technologies associated 
with photo‑driven social media sites such as Snapchat and Instagram; the creation of memes and 
gifs; and special effects such as boomerangs and stickers; blurring and erasing portions of an 
image; and the rapidly developing AI landscape. The chapter ends by suggesting that research‑
ers consider the ethics of photographic research through the lens of beneficence and the politics 
of caring that include an attention to justice.
References
Ångström‑Brännström, C., & Norberg, A. (2014). Children undergoing cancer treatment describe their 
experiences of comfort in interviews and drawings. Journal of Pediatric Oncology Nursing, 31(3), 
135–146. https://doi.org/10.1177/1043454214521693
Banks, M. (2001). Visual methods in social research. London: Sage Publications.
Berle, I. (2008). Clinical photography and patient rights: The need for orthopraxy. Journal of Medical 
Ethics, 34(2), 89–92.
Boxall, K., & Ralph, S. (2009). Research ethics and the use of visual images in research with people with 
intellectual disability. Journal of Intellectual and Developmental Disability, 34(1), 45–54.20 Ethics and photographic visual research
Becker, K. (2011). Looking back: Ethics and aesthetics of non‑professional photography. In K. Andén‑
Papadopoulos & M. Pantti (Eds.), Amateur images and global news (pp. 23–39). Bristol: Intellect Books.
Christou, P. A. (2023a). The use of artificial intelligence (AI) in qualitative research for theory develop‑
ment. The Qualitative Report, 28(9), 2739–2755. https://doi.org/10.46743/2160‑3715/2023.6536
Christou, P. (2023b). Ηow to use artificial intelligence (AI) as a resource, methodological and analy‑
sis tool in qualitative research?. The Qualitative Report, 28(7), 1968–1980. https://doi.org/10.46743/
2160–3715/2023.6406
Close, H. (2007). The use of photography as a qualitative research tool. Nurse Researcher, 15(1), 27–36.
Collins, P. (1990). Black feminist thought. New York: Routledge Press.
Craddock, K. (2015). Black motherhoods: Contours, contexts and considerations. Toronto, ON: Demeter 
Press.
Fairey, T. (2018). Whose photo? Whose voice? Who listens? “Giving,” silencing and listening to voice 
in participatory visual projects. Visual Studies, 33(2), 111–126. https://doi.org/10.1080/1472586X.
2017.1389301
Farello, A., Blom, L. C., Mulvihill, T., & Erikson, J. (2019). Female youth refugees’ experiences in sport and 
physical education through the self‑determination theory. Journal of Sport for Development, 7(13), 55–72. 
https://jsfd.files.wordpress.com/2019/11/farello‑et‑al‑2019‑female.youth_.refugee.experiences.pdf
Fisher, B., & Tronto, J. (1991). Toward a feminist theory of care. In E. Abel & M. Nelson (Eds.), Circles 
of care: Work and identity in women’s lives (pp. 35–62). Albany, NY: SUNY Press.
Gilligan, C. (1982). In a different voice. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Gold, S. J. (2019). Ethical issues in visual field work. In G. Blank, J. L. McCartney, & E. Brent (Eds.), New 
technology in sociology (pp. 99–109). Routledge.
Gross, L., Katz, J. S., & Ruby, J. (Ed.). (1992). Image ethics: The moral rights of subjects in photographs, 
film, and television. Oxford University Press.
Langmann, S., & Pick, D. (2014). Dignity and ethics in research photography. International Journal of 
Social Research Methodology, 17(6), 709–721.
Langmann, S., & Pick, D. (2018). Ethical considerations in photography as a research method. In Photog‑
raphy as a social research method. Singapore: Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978‑981‑10‑7279‑6_3
Longo, L. (2020). Empowering qualitative research methods in education with artificial intelligence. In 
A. P. Costa, L. P. Reis, & A. Moreira (Eds.), Computer supported qualitative research: New trends on 
qualitative research (WCQR2019) 4 (pp. 1–21). Springer International.
Lv, K., Sun, Z., & Xu, M. (2021). Artificial intelligent based video analysis on the teaching interaction 
patterns in classroom environment. International Journal of Information and Education Technology, 
11(3), 126–130.
Miller, K. (2015). Dear critics: Addressing concerns and justifying the benefits of photography as a research 
method. Forum Qualitative Sozialforschung, 16(3). https://doi.org/10.17169/fqs‑16.3.2434
Miller, S. C. (2005). A Kantian ethic of care?. In B. Andrew, J. Keller, & L. H. Schwartzman (Eds.), Femi‑
nist interventions in ethics and politics (pp. 111-130). New York: Rowman & Littlefield.
Noddings, N. (1986). Caring: A feminine approach to ethics. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Noddings, N. (2005). The challenge to care in schools. New York: Teacher’s College, Columbia University.
O’Hara, L., & Higgins, K. (2019). Participant photography as a research tool: Ethical issues and practical 
implementation. Sociological Methods & Research, 48(2), 369–399.
Pain, H. (2012). A literature review to evaluate the choice and use of visual methods. International Journal 
of Qualitative Methods, 11(4), 303–319.
Pauwels, L. (2015). “Participatory” visual research revisited: A critical‑constructive assessment of 
epistemological, methodological and social activist tenets. Ethnography, 16(1), 95–117. https://doi.
org/10.1177/1466138113505023
Pink, S. (2012). A multisensory approach to visual methods. In E. Margolis & L. Pauwels (Eds.), The 
SAGE handbook of visual research methods. London: SAGE Publications. https://doi.org/10.4135/
9781446268278
Pitt, P. (2014). “The project cannot be approved in its current form”: Feminist visual research meets the 
human research ethics committee. Australian Educational Researcher, 41, 311–325.Ethics and photographic visual research 21
Prosser, J., & Loxley, A. (2007). Enhancing the contribution of visual methods to inclusive education. 
Journal of Research in Special Educational Needs, 7(1), 55–68.
Ryan, M. (2020). In AI we trust: Ethics, artificial intelligence, and reliability. Science and Engineering 
Ethics, 26(5), 2749–2767.
Simmons, N. (2020). Participatory action research: Navigating nuances. In N. E. Fenton & W. Ross (Eds.), 
Critical reflection on research in teaching and learning (pp. 133–153). Brill.
Smith, E., Carter, M., Walklet, E., & Hazell, P. (2022). What are photovoice studies? Evidence‑Based 
Nursing, 25(1), 6–7.
Sontag, S. (1977). In Plato’s Cave. In On photography. New York: Delta Books (pp. 3–24).
United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child. (1989). https://www.ohchr.org/sites/default/files/
crc.pdf
Nations International Children’s (Emergency) Fund (UNICEF). https://www.unicef.org/romania/
media/7441/file/Photographing%20and%20filming%20children%20ethically.pdf)
Van House, N. A. (2011). Personal photography, digital technologies and the uses of the visual. Visual 
studies, 26(2), 125–134.
Vujović, M., & Prelevic, I. S. (2015). Ethics of newspaper photography. Facta Universitatis, Series: Phi‑
losophy, Sociology, Psychology and History, 13(3), 123–135.
Wang, C. C., & Redwood‑Jones, Y. A. (2001). Photovoice ethics: Perspectives from flint photovoice. 
Health Education & Behavior, 28(5), 560–572.
Wiles, R., Prosser, J., Bagnoli, A., Clark, A., Davies, K., Holland, S., & Renold, E. (2008). Visual ethics: 
Ethical issues in visual research. The National Centre for Research Methods.
Wright, D. E. (2020). Imagining a more just world: Critical arts pedagogy and youth participatory action 
research. International Journal of Qualitative Studies in Education, 33(1), 32–49.DOI: 10.4324/9781003034773-3
This chapter discusses “ways of seeing” as a foundation for visual research, including the chal‑
lenges and opportunities presented by visual research through photography. Theories of visual 
research are explored, along with the contributions photography makes within the larger scheme 
of visual qualitative research. Every photograph is incomplete because it reflects the way we 
see. And what we see is filtered through our own preconditioned habitus (Bourdieu, 1985) or 
lenses or theories that we apply consciously or unconsciously. We also examine the types of 
research questions that are conducive to visual qualitative research, how researchers can deter‑
mine how and when to use visual research methods and photography in particular. Types of 
photographs and their differences will also be examined: for example, posed or arranged pho‑
tographs versus spontaneous or candid photography, timing and time, studio photography, and 
creative photography integrating art. In relation to social media photography, this chapter raises 
pertinent issues of confidentiality and authenticity in general and on social media platforms in 
particular that include a discussion on fake photography, the shifting boundaries of privacy, and 
what researchers need to keep in mind as they use photographs for research. The chapter will 
also examine the preliminary ways in which researchers can reflect on the “eye” needed for 
engaging in photography as a research method.
Chalfen (2011) problematizes ways of seeing and urges researchers to examine alternative 
ways of looking and seeing. Looking and seeing can be interpreted in different ways. Looks 
can be both what one sees actively, as in “we are looking,” or they can mean being seen, as in 
“good looks” (Chalfen, 2011). There are two aspects to looking and seeing. One is the active 
element of looking, and the second is the element of being seen, which can include being aware 
of how one is seen. Elliot Eisner (1991, 1998) similarly urged educators to broaden their views 
of knowledge so that they moved from merely looking to seeing through an “enlightened eye.” 
By this, he encouraged educators to examine their own surroundings, their schools, classrooms, 
and neighborhoods with fresh eyes. Eisner argued against the dichotomy of art as a work of the 
hands and education as a work of the head. His ideas can be applied to qualitative research and 
the integration of photographic arts in research methods as a way to infuse emotion, expression, 
and complex nonlinear ways of knowing and understanding phenomena and lived experiences. 
The “enlightened eye” of Eisner combined connoisseurship with critical appraisal, explaining 
that they were the “two wings to looking at the world” (as cited in Amrein‑Beardsley, 2012, 
video interview.), or the ability to appreciate art and then transform it into a form that com‑
municates to an audience what one has seen. As qualitative researchers using photography as a 
research method, this would mean learning to see photographs in different ways.
Photographs are regarded by some as documentary evidence of reality, while others argue 
that photographs are expressions of art. The inherent difference between the two views is 
that the former considers the camera as a neutral recording device, while the latter takes into 
3 Ways of seeing and research 
photographyWays of seeing and research photography 23
consideration the subjective gaze of the photographer. A third way to think about photography 
is to regard it as a performative act. As a performative act, photography takes into consideration 
what goes on prior to the actual moment when the picture is taken. The actions of the photogra‑
pher and the participant – the candid or posed moment – are thought through, as is the aesthetic 
component of photography. How do these different ways of thinking about photography impact 
qualitative researchers? How can qualitative researchers make use of the diversity in ways of 
seeing to enhance and expand research methods to be more inclusive and dynamic? Below, we 
first consider the discussion around photographs as reality and as expressions of art.
Seeing photographs as reality and as expressions of art
One way to look at photographs, keeping in mind what Chalfen (2011) recommended as well 
as Eisner (1991, 1998), would be to understand photographs both as art and as an expression of 
reality. There is debate around seeing photographs as one or the other; however, photographs 
have been used in qualitative research both as a methodological tool and as a way to present 
research. As a tool to generate data, researchers would need to think about how participants and 
viewers understand and view the images. Context and social awareness are necessary qualities 
to situate photographs. Further, researchers using photographs need to remind themselves that 
images are constructed and interpreted actively by the photographer, the participants, and the 
viewer.
Questions of whether the photographs are understood as art or as documentation of a moment 
in time determine how researchers may view the photographs and what story can be generated 
from them. As works of art, photographs are often seen as an expression of what the artist intended 
or the artist’s thoughts; however, if they are seen as a recording of a moment in time, they are 
viewed as being more objective or unbiased. Seeing photographs, as either an expression of the 
photographer or as a recording of a single moment, may limit the meaning of the image and con‑
tain it within preconceived ideas of the image itself. The role of the viewer is absent from the story 
or analysis. However, as Barthes (1964) and Hall (2019/1973) argue, photographs do not merely 
communicate messages for passive consumption; instead, they are dynamic images where mean‑
ing is actively constructed by the viewer. Often, the viewer interprets images with reference to 
their own experiences, contributing new meaning to the images. Barthes (1964) discussed the con‑
cepts of the “studium” and the “punctum,” where studium denotes the interest that the individual 
shows toward the photographs in attempting to understand the underlying meaning and punctum 
is the recognition of the meaning contained in the photograph.
Photography as performance or performative art
Photography can be viewed through the lens of performance (Holm, 2008; Levin, 2009; Shus‑
terman, 2012) or as a form of performative art (Taylor, 2017), emphasizing the dynamic and 
interactive nature of the medium and highlighting the roles of both the photographer and those 
being photographed in the creation and interpretation of images. The researcher may or may not 
also be serving as the photographer, and the same is true for the participants in the study. Yet, in 
other cases, the roles are separately delineated. Here are some ideas to consider when designing 
and carrying out studies related to the intersection of photography and performance and decid‑
ing how to situate specific roles and related activities:
Photographer as Performer: When a photographer sets out to capture images, they often go 
through a performative process. They select subjects, compose shots, manipulate lighting, 24 Ways of seeing and research photography
and direct their subjects – all of which can be seen as performative acts. The photographer’s 
decisions, movements, and interactions during the shoot can be considered performances in 
themselves.
Those being photographed as Performers: In many cases, the subjects of a photograph are 
performers themselves. Whether it’s a model posing for a fashion shoot, actors in a staged 
scene, or everyday people engaging in an activity – if the people are aware they are being 
photographed, they often play a performative role in the creation of the image.
Narrative and Storytelling: Photography often involves storytelling, and this storytelling aspect 
can be seen as a performance. Through composition, framing, and the selection of subjects, 
photographers construct narratives that engage viewers emotionally and intellectually, much 
like a performer on stage.
Interactive Photography: Some forms of photography involve direct interaction between the 
photographer and the subject or audience. For example, in street photography, photographers 
often engage with people on the streets, sometimes eliciting specific reactions or perfor‑
mances that become part of the final image.
Conceptual Photography: In conceptual photography, artists often use their bodies or other ele‑
ments as part of a broader artistic concept. These performances, whether staged or spontane‑
ous, become integral to the meaning and interpretation of the photograph.
Exhibition and Presentation: The display of photographs in galleries or online platforms can 
also be seen as a form of performance. Curators and artists make deliberate choices about 
how images are presented, affecting the viewer’s experience and interpretation.
Temporal Dimension: Photography captures a moment in time, freezing it for eternity. This tem‑
poral aspect can be seen as a performance in itself. The photographer must decide when to 
click the shutter, capturing a specific moment that may never occur again. This act of timing 
and capturing fleeting moments can be considered a performance.
Emotional Expression: Photography often conveys emotions, whether through the expressions 
of subjects, the mood created by lighting and composition, or the overall atmosphere of the 
image. In this sense, photography can be seen as a form of emotional performance, as it 
evokes feelings and responses from viewers.
Identity and Representation: Photography has the power to shape and challenge perceptions of 
identity and representation. Photographers may use their work to perform identity, explor‑
ing issues of race, gender, sexuality, and other aspects of personal and collective identity. 
Similarly, subjects may perform their identities for the camera, challenging or conforming to 
societal norms and expectations.
Documentary and Photojournalism: In documentary photography and photojournalism, pho‑
tographers often perform the role of witnesses or storytellers, capturing real‑life events and 
experiences. Their images serve as visual narratives that inform, provoke, or inspire action, 
highlighting the performative nature of documentary practice.
Collaborative Processes: Photography frequently involves collaboration between photogra‑
phers, subjects, stylists, makeup artists, and other creative professionals. This collaborative 
aspect can be seen as a form of collective performance, with each participant contributing to 
the final outcome.
Experimental Approaches: Some photographers explore experimental and avant‑garde approaches 
to the medium, pushing the boundaries of what constitutes a photograph. These experimental 
practices often involve performative elements, such as the use of the photographer’s body as a 
canvas or the incorporation of live performances into photographic installations.
Overall, photography as performance or as performative art encompasses a broad range of 
practices and perspectives, highlighting the dynamic interplay between the photographer, the Ways of seeing and research photography 25
subject, and the viewer in the creation and interpretation of images. The research potentials are 
equally broad and may offer some inventive ways to design and conduct studies. The next sec‑
tion further addresses ways of seeing and photography as a research method.
Photography as a research method
When considering photography as a research method, Holm (2014) makes a point of remind‑
ing researchers that the trend has been to move away from using photographs as illustrative 
material and toward using photography as a way to empower the participant so that they can 
collaborate and become a coresearcher or collaborative data gatherer in the process of qualita‑
tive research. Typically, photographs have been used as photo elicitation for interviews and 
conversations prompted by photographs. Hurworth (2003) has explained that photo elicitation 
can be of different types. The first is referred to as auto‑driving. In auto‑driving, the researcher 
photographs participants and then asks them to explain and reflect on their behavior. This type 
of photo elicitation has come out of the marketing arena and used to be a market research tool. 
The second type of photographic research is reflexive photography, in which photographs are 
taken by the participant. The researcher then asks the participants questions about why they 
took the photograph and the meaning behind the photograph. The third type of photography is 
a photo novella, where the participants construct a story with the photographs. Such stories are 
intended to prompt or encourage social change. Photovoice was developed as an extension of 
the photo novella in that the photographs are used to create change at a community level. Van 
House (2011) pointed out that personal photography could be categorized into several social 
uses, one of them being memory, the second being maintaining relationships, and the third being 
expression and self‑representation. Typologies such as this provide opportunities for researchers 
to consider the social uses of photography for the populations they are interested in studying.
Photography in the field
Terence Heng (2016) defined field presence as the degree to which a camera either causes distur‑
bance or is unobtrusive as one does field research. As he explains, the field presence of a researcher 
is not merely dependent on the size of the camera that he or she carries but also on the social roles 
that one associates with the type of camera that a person is carrying. For example, a very large 
camera with a telephoto lens is often associated with journalists or with professional photogra‑
phers who might be on assignment. A smartphone is commonplace enough today to not cause any 
discomfort or associated feelings of being watched or observed in the field. Qualitative researchers 
can be full participants, partial participants, participant observers, or complete observers. With an 
unobtrusive camera such as a smartphone, it is possible to participate while observing and cause 
less disturbance or intrusiveness in the research process while doing field research. However, as 
qualitative researchers, despite the unobtrusive nature of the smaller camera, issues of consent and 
assent are central to when and how researchers can take photographs in the field. In qualitative 
research, photographs have also emerged as central to some autobiographical and biographical 
studies. In these cases, photographs can be used to elicit memories, discuss events past and pre‑
sent, and even discuss future aspirations. The frequent posts of people’s everyday activities on 
social media can be seen as slices of autobiography and, at times, a curation of identity creation.
Biographical and autobiographical research
In biographical and autobiographical research, photos can be an important data source. People’s 
memories of life events, including childhood memories as well as key moments in their lives, 26 Ways of seeing and research photography
photographs can be used to create a conversation to jog memories and even allow reexamination 
of certain times and places that change in meaningfulness over time. Qualitative researchers can 
formulate research questions pertaining to biographical research and oral histories that can take 
the form of experiences that a person lived through or that connect sociological questions to 
their own lives to make the personal sociological or the political.
Biographical research with a particular focus on questions of identity formation has become 
an example of how everyday photography serves as a multimodal form of diary keeping or 
journaling. While the use of older‑styled cameras had once restricted people to photographing 
only special occasions, the move to more universally used mobile phones and smartphones for 
photography has shifted the content of photographs to the everyday and the casual, revealing the 
mundane as well as the extraordinary moments of people’s lives as they view them. The making 
of a photograph as well as the instantaneous sharing of it is an invitation to create a relationship 
between the photographer and the audience. The audience itself has shifted to include a broader 
range of people whom the participant may or may not know personally. Both the photographer 
and the audience may be part of a larger group of acquaintances or friends on social media sites 
such as Facebook or Instagram. The lack of a time lag or the almost instantaneous sharing has 
also made a difference between the kinds of photographs that are being shared online. Photo‑
graphs have become a much greater part of the lives of many people, and therefore, they open 
up expanded ways to conceive of research studies. Photographs have also become a form of 
communication with a caption added to them, and at other times, the photographs themselves 
speak in place of verbal conversation. The large number of photographs and images displayed 
publicly has created a storehouse of material for researchers to examine. The ability to make 
changes and alter photographs creates challenges and opportunities in the use of photography 
for researchers. For example, arranging photographs into albums for easy retrieval online may 
introduce particular challenges for researchers. Questions related to repositories or other storage 
locations, including cost factors as well as the long‑term preservation of photographs, are areas 
of consideration for researchers. Also, asking new questions about the creation of photographs 
and the reasons for manipulating them, as well as who has access and power to do so, are all 
areas for researchers to consider. The use of photography in research studies is growing. For 
example, the photo‑story method, discussed in the next section, offers many opportunities.
Photo‑story method
The photo‑story method has been used in different ways by researchers for phenomenological 
research. Keremane and McKay (2011) adapted and expanded the techniques of photovoice 
and used them in the context of community development and action research with a view to 
changing policy. They were recording stories alongside the pictures they were making. In the 
photo‑story method as used by Varvantakis et al. (2019), the researchers used elements of pho‑
tovoice as well as photo elicitation. They drew on ideas based on visual anthropology that 
discussed the different types of knowledge that might be available through the visual. They 
asked children between six and eight years old to make pictures of what mattered to them. They 
intentionally did not narrow it down further and instead left it up to the children to decide what 
mattered to them. Every child was given a digital camera, and they explained to the children 
that the camera was a research tool through which the researchers would have an opportunity to 
discuss with the children what the children cared about. Although the researchers attempted to 
explain to the children that there was a difference between personal photographs and research 
photographs, this distinction was blurred, and the children were given the camera to keep at the 
end of the study. It was a study that spanned 18 months. The children chose ten pictures of the 
many that they had made and discussed their selections with their peers and with the researchers. Ways of seeing and research photography 27
The researchers held a workshop where the children shared their photographs. They were also 
given art materials to adapt their photographs in any way that they wanted. Children discussed 
their photographs as well as had other conversations about the photos. They were then asked to 
choose one photo that they valued highly and to write a story about it. These photo stories were 
then exhibited for parents and later published. The exhibition allowed the issues that mattered 
to children to be shared publicly. Children’s views were embedded in the wider discourse of 
society and politics. Political policies impacting adults also had their effect on children. Asking 
children about what mattered to them, the researchers argued, also enhances and expands the 
political imagination of researchers. The eye of the researcher and what is seen are embedded in 
a political imagination. As we have mentioned earlier, photographs are incomplete; they encap‑
sulate a moment in time and can represent a fragment of a story or a small story that represents 
part of a bigger story.
Theories and concepts of photography in research
Baudrillard and postmodernism
Theory has often been defined as a set of interrelated constructs that explain or predict a phe‑
nomenon (Kerlinger, 1986). They offer a window through which to perceive the world (Silver, 
1983) or a map to explain a phenomenon (Le Compte & Preissle, 1993). Saldaña and Omasta 
(2016) refer to theory as a distilled statement that accounts for variation and is applicable to 
different settings, populations, and contexts. The use of multiple theories helps researchers see 
the world through different frames and can open up multiple visual literacies through which to 
interpret and analyze photographic data. In this section, we offer a few theories and concepts 
that researchers using photography might find useful for further exploration.
Theoretical frameworks in photography‑based research are drawn from several scholars. 
John Baudrillard (2012) has said that in the late 20th century, images have become more real 
than real. Jean Baudrillard is one of the prominent theorists of the image in the late 20th cen‑
tury. He points out that we moved from images being sites of reproduction and representation 
to a paradigm of simulation. He explains that while representation makes a reference to the 
real, simulacra can stand on their own, and in this sense, we have moved from the real to the 
hyperreal. Jean Baudrillard is a postmodern theorist, and in postmodernism, the surface is taken 
seriously. The idea that there is something underneath or beneath the surface that has depth and 
true meaning is not part of postmodern theory since the surface image is seen to transcend the 
idea of the real. According to this postmodern theorist, photographic images are seen as having 
no significance beyond the surface, and there is nothing left to ponder.
Deleuze’s theory of folding and unfolding for photographic research
Deleuze’s theory of becoming presents possibilities that can be applied to photography. One of the 
ways in which Deleuze (1990) discusses becoming is by pointing out that there is a continuous 
state of folding or unfolding and refolding that takes place. By arguing that everything in the world 
is in a constant state of becoming, he also discusses the idea of a continuous multiplicity or con‑
tinuous possibilities taking place. In this sense, he discusses doing and becoming as an unfolding 
within the infinite possibility that is life. To unfold means to “increase, to grow” (Deleuze, 1993, 
p. 8). This can be understood as amplification, intensification, or deepening. Applied to photogra‑
phy, photographers pay close attention to all that a photograph unfolds before them. A photograph 
contains continuous multiplicities or the idea that a photograph is not simply a photograph but is 
always implicating the world around it in some way. Therefore, it involves both the person who 28 Ways of seeing and research photography
took the photograph and the person who is going to look at the photograph. Dados (2010) uses 
the concept of threshold to explain the unfolding and folding within a photograph. According to 
Dados (2010), the photograph is a threshold between the image and the narrative. Marks (2011) 
has said that an image has three elements: the image, the information, and the experience, and 
viewers selectively unfold the photograph and examine the three elements. They examine the 
image and view it both through their own experience as well as information contained within it. 
This is also dependent on the viewer’s interests and selectivity in terms of what they find interest‑
ing or useful. Specific details might be interesting to people, depending on their own interests. 
According to Marks (2011), “every medium unfolds events in its own way and ignores other 
aspects of it that remain enfolded” (p. 10). Photography is a medium that allows for particular 
types of unfolding and can serve as the connection between the person seeing and what and who is 
being seen. Nordstrom (2013) has used the concept of fold to explain the ways in which subjects 
and objects are folding entities in qualitative interviews, in which the fold allows for both inward 
and outward perception. The boundary between participants and objects is permeable, and the con‑
nection contains a past, present, and future, all of which can be narrated, dialoged, and imagined. 
Narratives can be perceived as unfolding. Applied to photography, this means that in photo elicita‑
tion interviews, researchers need to be aware that folding and unfolding are selective processes 
and can be influenced by the interests of the researcher. Particular contexts might facilitate unfold‑
ing, while other contexts might facilitate folding or withdrawing.
Brecht and distanciation
Brecht (1974), the Marxist playwright, discussed the concept of distanciation as a technique in 
order to get viewers to distance themselves from the story being told and pay attention instead 
to the process by which they were being pulled into the story or how they buy into the ideology 
or get influenced by the ideology. Spectators should not allow themselves to get fully empathetic 
and should instead hold themselves at a distance. Barthes (2000) similarly said that the power of 
the photograph was in its ability to appear natural while reproducing an ideology. Barthes used 
the example of the way, a series of photographs are collated or put together for selling a particu‑
lar product. In advertising, the photograph often depicts an idea or communicates what a person 
might lack or might get if they bought the product. The purpose of distanciation (Brecht, 1974) 
is to encourage reflexivity through a critical eye, which in turn develops a critical conscious‑
ness. The critical eye presents a critique and resists the media or image which weaves the story 
and tries to influence the viewer. The techniques of fragmentation or interruption were used in 
modernism to generate a critical consciousness that would critique surface photographic images 
and instead try to find the meaning behind the surface photograph and present a critique of the 
actual conditions that produce some of these photographs and other types of images. For quali‑
tative researchers, Brecht’s concepts offer a way of interrupting what they see on the surface 
of a photograph as they analyze it. The concept of distantiation offers an opening into a visual 
literacy. It allows one to see multiple dimensions or layers of meaning in a single photograph. 
The first layer of meaning could be that which was intended by the photographer, with multi‑
ple layers being revealed after the viewer looks at the different ways in which the photograph 
communicates a particular message and questions the purpose of the message, the partial truth 
revealed by the photograph and what it conceals. Distanciation would allow one to disrupt the 
ideological beliefs that might appear normal in a photograph. Questions asked about the photo‑
graph can reveal history or contexts that are just outside of the photograph. These analyses are 
possible with Brecht’s distanciation that reminds us that a critical perspective can interrupt and 
disrupt the dominant narrative that one might perceive at first viewing.Ways of seeing and research photography 29
Communication theories for engaging with photography in qualitative research
Communication theory has contributed to understanding photography (Chalfen, 1987). Chalfen 
pointed out that the “central concern of the study of communication is the production, organiza‑
tion, composition, structure, distribution and functions in message systems in society” (1987, 
p. 131). Chalfen (1987), for instance, asked what are people doing when they are making photo‑
graphs, when they appear in photographs, or when they look at their own collections of personal 
photography? By looking at what participants or viewers did with photographs and the reasons 
or what photographs did for them, Chalfen provided a way by which communication theories 
could inform day‑to‑day home photography. Referring to photography as “pictorial commu‑
nication,” Chalfen (1987) found that participants often said they wanted to keep in touch with 
friends and family by showing photographs and viewing images shared by others. While some 
participants discussed the ways in which they arranged the photographs, others discussed the 
selection process. As a visual diary, some saw it as a record of the past, how things and people 
were at a particular point in time. Gleason (2008) drew on Carey’s (1992) ritual model of com‑
munication that emphasizes how communication is shaped and used by members of a culture. 
Gleason pointed out that “like other forms of communication, photography is an interaction 
among people, whether the people are face to face or distant” (p. 2). From a communications 
theory standpoint, photography is seen as a series of communicative rituals or stories that are 
captured by individuals to share with others. Joinson (2008) additionally pointed out that through 
photography, people are making and keeping connections without having to closely interact, 
maintaining a relationship that Van House (2007) referred to as “distant closeness” (p. 2717). 
For qualitative researchers using photography, communication theories are a reminder to see 
photographs as communicative points and as stories that are intended to be shared either with 
a small or larger group of people. What one does with the tool or medium of photography is 
significant, and researchers need to keep in mind for whom the messages are intended and what 
the purpose of such communication might be. Further, since communication is not a one‑way 
street, the messages might be interpreted and reanalyzed in ways that the photographer did not 
anticipate. Memes in contemporary times allow for photographs to be shared with widely differ‑
ing commentary that can showcase a voice that is ironic, advocating, or humorous.
Framing theory
Framing theory has been used by Gregory Bateson (1972/1955) in anthropology and Erving 
Goffman (1974) in sociology. Goffman (1974) explained that the context and organization of 
messages can affect the subsequent ways in which people think about the messages. Audience 
frames are those mental images that people create to make sense of the information that they 
receive. According to Goffman, people categorize and organize their life experiences to make 
sense of them. These frames allow people to make sense of the world around them. Photographs 
are powerful framing tools that carry excess information.
Framing means identifying patterns that highlight an aspect of reality or a message or sets of 
messages that reveal an aspect of reality. This kind of framing is called emphasis framing. For 
example, how do images contribute to messages on the news? The selection of one photograph, 
one view, or one angle represents a kind of framing. Framing theory allows researchers to exam‑
ine the relationship between what is seen in the photograph as a result of a selection process 
and which elements are included or excluded from it. The frame of the photograph is a process 
of selection. A particular detail, for example, may be highlighted that draws attention to a frag‑
ment of reality. Qualitative researchers using photography need to be mindful of what story 30 Ways of seeing and research photography
they want to emphasize when taking photographs and carefully examine photographs taken by 
participants. The dialogs that follow can elicit why or what the participant wished to share, how 
they framed the photograph in terms of what details they chose to keep versus the details that 
were weeded out or cut off in the framing. The themes that can be drawn from the photographs 
or the frames through which one views and analyzes photographs can help to organize the story 
the researcher wants to emphasize. Qualitative researchers need to examine the visual framing 
of photographs in addition to the textual framing of other forms of data, for example, interviews 
or documents.
Theories of dialog: using Bohm and Freire for dialog with photographs
Two theories of dialog and their proponents are David Bohm (2004) and Paolo Freire (1970). 
For Bohm, dialog unfolded organically, and all ideas were welcome. The purpose of dialog was 
to learn and understand different ways of thinking, and each conversation or participant contrib‑
uted to a greater understanding of the issue. Freire’s concept of dialog was a way of developing 
critical consciousness and political agency. Bohm (2004) sees dialog as a way of exploring 
experiences, concepts, and ideas. Although he sees the possibility of tensions inherent in the 
different views put forward, by not having a goal for the dialog but allowing the conversation 
to emerge in a free‑flowing manner, his form of dialog was akin to flowing water; it was not 
controlled and had the potential to deepen understanding.
Fairey and Orton (2019) present an interesting view of photography as dialog. They started 
a visual conversation that began by sending pictures and images to each other, each one in 
response to the other’s image or photograph. According to them, “photography as dialogue 
focuses on photography as a social, networked, communicative and political activity enmeshed 
in webs of power, resistance and agency through which we assert and explore a sense of self 
and relation to others” (Fairey & Orton, 2019, p. 299). Photography as dialog means paying 
attention to voice and to power that goes beyond representation to question who has the power 
to communicate and who is silenced? Between which parties do these negotiations take place?
Fairey and Orton (2019) point out that despite an assumption that images are universal, there 
are multiple registers of meaning inherent in images. Exactly how photographs are interpreted and 
understood might involve more than assuming that the photograph can speak for itself. In Bohm 
and Freire’s theories of dialog, a precondition of humility, trust, and respect among the group is 
necessary. If we applied Bohm’s theory of dialog, we would see that different members of a group 
might put forward their thoughts about what they see in the photograph so that multiple registers 
and nuances are contributed. In Freire’s dialog, the purpose of the multiple registers would be to 
create a critical consciousness in examining images. In both types of dialogs, questions about who 
is represented and/or misrepresented in photographs can be an essential part of the conversation.
Dialog around photographs can take place at multiple points during the research process. For 
example, in photo elicitation interviews, dialog can present the possibility for participants to talk 
back to any misrepresentations that they see. It may even serve as a form of member‑checking 
(Candela, 2019). Dialog and conversation can examine the reasons for which people collect 
photographs. What photographs they collect and keep, what memories they choose to remem‑
ber, what events actually get photographed, and what might be some crucial events that are 
missing. Examining photographs that people have collected is like examining some points in 
a person’s life; it is an unfinished process since not every moment has been photographed and 
perhaps large gaps exist between events and times when photographs have been taken.
Some researchers have pointed out that photographs are comprised of layers in which not 
only interactions but also time, hopes, and silences, in addition to people’s vulnerabilities and Ways of seeing and research photography 31
resistance, are layered in an image. In order to understand the multiple layers within a photo‑
graph, a conversation with those who have been part of the photograph or have participated 
in the event can craft a more coherent picture. Photography presents the opportunity to have 
extended dialogs and interviews through workshops, exhibitions, and collaborations with other 
researchers. Images also allow for intergenerational dialog and the exchange of experiences 
through photographs that can be used as catalysts for further conversation and dialog.
Examining concepts of habitus and field through photographs: Bourdieu
One of the key concepts illustrated by Pierre Bourdieu, French philosopher and sociologist, 
was that of habitus (Bourdieu, 1985). Habitus is one’s orientation or predisposition toward the 
world that is reflected in the ways in which one moves, acts, talks, and interacts in the world. 
According to Bourdieu, small gestures, responses as well as large actions, are informed by 
habitus. Habitus, according to Bourdieu, is an unconscious set of practices, ideas, and decisions 
that people engage in that reflect their long habits of how they live. Habitus gets reproduced in 
the structure and sets of practices that people engage in over time. What people might refer to 
as “taking it for granted” is a reference to habitus, as is a predisposition to exclude that which 
seems to not fit one’s way of being or living. Bourdieu et al. (2004) took photographs in Algeria 
while conducting fieldwork. Some of these, he took to reexamine at leisure since he was not in 
a position to spend extended time at the sites or during interviews. For example, he took pho‑
tographs of objects like a marriage lamp to study carefully later. In this sense, his photography 
worked like shorthand field notes that he could later expand. He also took photographs where 
he saw or felt dissonance. If something seemed out of place or context, he photographed it to 
study and understand the underlying reasons why it seemed out of place. In terms of habitus 
and field, this meant where a person’s way of being clashed metaphorically with the context, 
so that there was a clash or dissonance between habitus and field. The dissonance also reminds 
researchers of the assumptions that they carry over into the field. Taking Bourdieu’s concept 
of habitus, other researchers have also conducted photographic research that leads to illustrat‑
ing habitus in addition to socioanalysis as advocated by Bourdieu, which is a reflexive critical 
awareness of habitus. Magda Segal (2002), in her book Southampton Women, allowed audi‑
ences to glimpse the everyday health‑related practices of the women not only by photographing 
their everyday activities but also by including the photographs of the inside of their refrigera‑
tors. Heath and Cleaver’s (2004) study of shared households, where participants were provided 
with cameras and then interviewed about their photographs, revealed the ways in which people 
lived together and further cleared up misunderstandings of the researchers who had misread 
some everyday aspects of their shared living. For example, on seeing a large number of cereal 
boxes, researchers had assumed that it meant everyone in the unit had their own individual liv‑
ing pattern, but it was subsequently revealed that the number of boxes meant that participants 
in the shared household were taking advantage of discount and bonus offers on cereals while 
shopping. Sweetman (2009) suggests that one can go beyond the way in which Bourdieu took 
photographs so that photographic methods can be used to illuminate habitus in a variety of 
ways as illustrated by Segal (2002) and Heath and Cleaver (2004). Photographs can be used to 
understand and document shared knowledge within a group through a series of photographs in 
sequence. Sweetman (2009) argues that photography can be used to illustrate difficult‑to‑grasp 
concepts like Bourdieu’s habitus or, with participant photography, to illustrate the concept of 
critical self‑awareness or socioanalysis.
Researchers can study the display of photographs in homes to understand the meaning that 
people make around photographs. What is displayed, chosen, and the centrality or otherwise of 32 Ways of seeing and research photography
the display itself and the stories told around the photographs are all part of how researchers can 
make sense of the lived experiences of participants (Durrant et al., 2009; Rose, 2004; Shove, 
2007), and if viewed through the lens of Bourdieu’s habitus or field, can help us look deeper 
into those everyday taken for granted ways of being. Displays can also reveal the relationships 
among the people portrayed. Another set of research questions that qualitative researchers have 
started to examine is how people use new technologies and share their lives online (Van House, 
2009; Whittaker et al., 2010).
Social media photography as a form of visual communication
The rise of social media cannot be understood without looking at the impulse to document life 
in all its forms. A century ago, Emile Zola said in 1900, “in my view, you cannot claim to have 
really seen something until you have photographed it” (Newhall, 1964, p. 94).
The everyday use of photography is evident in sharing a photograph of a meal or a selfie in a 
new place or posting a photograph of an event. Despite the rise of everyday photography, there 
has been little research with regard to how people take photographs (Ruby, 2005). Scholars have 
also pointed to the lack of theory around personal photography (Cobley & Haeffner, 2009). The 
research on personal photography comes from the areas of social science as well as cultural 
studies and has mostly been concerned with the place of photography in culture and society. 
The second area of research comes from the human‑computer interaction, where the research 
examines technology design and how people relate to technology.
Although the rise of social photography has seen some discussion regarding the differentia‑
tion between professional photographers and everyday photography, the real questions around 
social photography center around relations between power, identity, and reality. How do people 
communicate today with images? Larsen and Sandbye (2020) have pointed out that academic 
research on social photography is “underexposed.” Jose Van Dijck (2013) says that images are 
like a visual language. In this sense, photographs may be regarded as an expression of a view‑
point and an “interface for visual communication” (Gómez Cruz, 2016, p. 229).
Mobile camera photography: selfies
The Oxford English Dictionary in 2013 defined selfie as a photograph that one has taken of 
oneself and shared via social media. Selfies can be regarded as a type of self‑portraiture. The 
project Selfiecity (2014) was initiated by a team of researchers who included media theorists, art 
historians, data scientists, and visual designers. The online project presentation includes demo‑
graphics of people, media visualizations, or image plots that reveal interesting patterns, as well 
as an interactive application called selfie exploratory where visitors can explore selfie photos 
and sort and filter them in order to find new patterns. These selfies are now part of an open online 
database (https://selfiecity.net/).
Between December 5 and 11 2013, they collected images shared on Instagram in five cities: 
New York City, Bangkok, Moscow, São Paulo, and Berlin. They randomly selected 120,000 
photos and selected the top 1,000 photos for each city. Some of the findings from this study 
include that people took fewer selfies than was assumed, there were significantly more female 
selfies than male selfies, and most of the selfies revealed that the people taking selfies were 
young. They conducted analysis with face analysis software. They argued that “selfies” are a 
photographic type of self‑portraiture that is constructed and performed. For example, people 
taking selfies are often positioning themselves within particular settings and contexts to convey 
a message. McGill (2020) conducted a study with 12 participants, exploring the selfie images Ways of seeing and research photography 33
drawn from Instagram and textually analyzing them. She followed a feminist qualitative meth‑
odology and was guided by the principle of the personal is the political. This allowed her to 
make connections between individual photographs, or selfies, and the larger sociological con‑
structs that connect individuals to patterns in society. All the participants had publicly accessible 
Instagram profiles and were very active on social media. In her dialogs with her participants, 
she found that the public is also personal. By this, she meant that several of her participants 
were unaware of how public their profiles were on Instagram. She argues that the principle of 
the public is also personal and can help researchers mitigate against ethical violations regarding 
digital media.
One of the questions that comes up with open online databases like selfie city is one of pri‑
vacy and consent. It’s complicated because such data from Instagram are regarded as already 
public. Besides this, the public‑private distinction is blurred on social media platforms, espe‑
cially since visibility is the intent of such platforms. The taking of selfies through camera phones 
has become commonplace enough as well as deserving close examination, with over 349 mil‑
lion Instagram posts with the #selfie. According to Samsung, a person will take about 25,000 
selfies during their lifetime (Wang et al., 2017). In the popular media, several accounts of selfie 
takers as self‑absorbed or narcissistic have been described, or the danger that taking selfies can 
pose as an inattention to one’s immediate surroundings, resulting in accidents. In the academic 
literature, selfie analysis has been largely conducted via content analysis (Veum & Undrum, 
2018), with some surveys (Fox & Rooney, 2015) and few interviews with users (Katz & 
Crocker, 2015). While the above studies have examined selfies as performances, Weilenmann 
and Hilman (2020) discuss selfies in the contexts in which they are produced, focusing on loca‑
tion. Other scholars, for example, Hjorth and Pink (2014), have similarly called for more studies 
of selfies to center on the contexts of selfies, while still others (Wargo, 2017) have looked at 
selfies as a practice connected to place. While it is possible to photograph oneself on a com‑
puter, a tablet, or the phone and post it online, selfies are typically photographs that are taken 
on a mobile phone with a front‑facing camera and shared easily and widely. Selfies using selfie 
sticks have been criticized in popular media as a self‑centered and vain practice and as causing 
disturbances and accidents in public spaces, to the extent that several museums have banned 
them. Researchers have examined the ways in which people use phones in everyday contexts 
for taking photographs (Kirk et al., 2006), while others have looked at the ways in which photo 
sharing occurs. Rettberg (2014) has argued that the motivation behind taking selfies is a form of 
self‑expression that is driven by a desire for self‑improvement and self‑knowledge. As Murray 
(2015) points out, selfies taken together represent a type of social movement that can serve as 
a function of the practice of freedom as well as a reclaiming of the physical body. Selfies have 
entertainment value and also contain a conversational feature that is central to the ways in which 
they are exchanged, a type of visual “chit‑chat” (Villi, 2012, p. 42). Chalfen (1987) has warned 
researchers to look carefully beneath the surface when examining what appears to be a surface 
or shallow practice. Chalfen’s (1987) argument and approach toward snapshot culture can be 
applied to the selfie phenomenon, where he has suggested that we seek to understand the prac‑
tice deeply before asking the why question, which might give us a simplistic answer reinforcing 
stereotypes around the practice.
How to study selfies
Qualitative researchers who wish to study selfies need to adapt existing approaches to the study 
of social media. Weilenman and Hilman (2020) approached studying selfies as an ethnographic 
study. This meant that they had to examine selfies where they were naturally occurring. They 34 Ways of seeing and research photography
looked for public spaces where they could observe and document selfie photography. They chose 
the city center for their observations, where there were landmarks and festivals that drew people 
and crowds. Their research questions included thinking about what was going on in the context 
where people took selfies, what technology was used, and how do selfie photographers interact 
with the environment and people around them. They found that people not only took selfies but 
also took a group of other photographs of their friends and of the environment around them. There‑
fore, selfies were part of a group or sequence of photographs that they were taking. Some also 
combined their camera phones with other digital cameras that they were carrying to take a group 
of photographs. While the camera phone appeared to be used when taking selfies or with friends 
for the environment, at times people took photographs with their digital cameras. When people 
were taking selfies, it seemed like they were immediately going to share them with others. Katz 
and Crocker (2015) referred to the practice of taking and sharing selfies as conversation. This took 
place when a selfie was immediately shared on a platform, and there was an almost immediate 
response with regard to likes or comments and selfies leading to visual conversations. Snapchat as 
a platform is conducive to a more lighthearted conversation, as the self‑destructing images allow 
for a type of storytelling that restricts the scope while allowing for instant stories to be told. Selfies 
are taken either solo or in the presence of others who are part of the photographs, or group self‑
ies. Participant observations of the type done by the researchers (Weilenman and Hilman, 2020) 
can point the way for qualitative researchers to try similar ethnographic fieldwork methods in 
studying the use of camera phones and the ways in which selfies are part of conversations or 
around which socializing is organized. In this sense, researchers can approach the study of selfies 
as a situated phenomenon. The use of camera phones, uploading of selfies, and sharing occurred 
both locally and remotely. Users were interacting with peers locally and showing them and shar‑
ing with them texts, selfies, and photographs received from others remotely and what they were 
sending, so that they were interacting simultaneously with local and remote peer groups. In order 
to understand the use of camera phones at these two levels, we need to think about how best to 
gather data and observe how selfie users work and interact in their immediate surroundings, even 
while they visually communicate remotely. This can lead researchers to consider how socializing 
occurs around selfies as well as how selfies are more than portraits; they present context‑specific 
or location‑specific activities and communicate them to remote users. In this sense, selfie photog‑
raphers move in and out of virtual and material worlds and navigate online and offline simultane‑
ously. The dichotomy of online and offline worlds is more blurred as well as more collaborative 
in the practice of selfie photography. Camera photography in this sense presents opportunities for 
research that can go beyond content analysis of photographs to understanding how photography 
operates and functions in the world of the selfie photographer.
Mobile devices such as smartphones combined with apps like Instagram have allowed people 
to use photography to communicate experiences at a rapid pace. Social photography is usually 
part of a stream and conveys who a person is, what they’re experiencing, and provides more 
context about the person. It is less about the individual photograph or the object being photo‑
graphed, for example, a meal. A meal might appear banal as a single photograph but as a stream 
collectively with other photographs represents how a person experiences life in all its moments. 
It represents their everyday experience and their point of view. Instagram allows users to cre‑
ate a personal profile as well as a relationship by following each other. Most social networking 
services allow people to have affiliate relationships with other users who are often referred to as 
friends or followers. Friends can comment on the photographs and can “like” them.
Serafinelli and Cox (2019) researched photo sharing on Instagram and Blipfoto and com‑
bined netnography with interviewing. They examined the privacy concerns of users. Users of 
Instagram often struggled with the tension between the desire to share and simultaneously the Ways of seeing and research photography 35
desire to protect their privacy. Social media blurs the lines between the public and the private. 
On the one hand, most platforms ask users to create an account in which their personal details 
are sought. In addition, they also invite users to interact with other online users using the same 
platform. Participants say that, with regard to privacy, they often just signed the agreement in 
order to be able to use the platform. They rarely read the terms and conditions and felt that 
unless they agreed to the terms, they would not be able to use the platform. The public and the 
private therefore get blurred and are no longer in separate spheres. Multimedia content is often 
shared by users both as a presentation of themselves as well as looking at others photos and 
posts. Using what is referred to as social surveillance, users attempt to both protect their own 
privacy even while attempting to share what they want. The boundaries get blurred because 
social media invites the blurring of social interactions between the private and the public.
Social media: research potential using photographs on Instagram and Snapchat
Researchers are increasingly interested in visual images on social media and in ways to research 
and analyze such images. Social media offers a rich platform for understanding how people cre‑
ate and curate their own self‑portraits and which groups they would like to belong to and what 
that community means on online platforms. Marshall et al. (2020) examined visual research on 
Instagram. Instagram happens to be one of the most popular platforms for social media. Accord‑
ing to Balakrishnan and Boorstin (2017), more than 95 million photographs a day were being 
posted on Instagram even as early as 2016. On Instagram, a post is centered around either a pho‑
tograph, a video, or any other image and is explained and contextualized through captions and 
hashtags. It is further contextualized by comments from other Instagram users (Marwick, 2015).
In research with Instagram, big data and quantitative approaches have taken precedence over 
qualitative approaches, which typically center around small batch data or where the sample 
size is purposeful and small. Marshall et al. (2020) discuss the methodological challenges that 
they faced when conducting research on Instagram into bodybuilders. They were conducting 
visual research, and we’re interested in how cultural expectations of femininity and masculin‑
ity were reinforced, reproduced, or in some ways contested through the self‑representation of 
bodybuilders on Instagram. They explained how they conducted the research and offered good 
guidance in terms of methodological considerations that can be applied equally to other social 
media platforms. However, there are some unique features of Instagram that are also important 
to consider. The first question that researchers need to confront is how to gather the data on Ins‑
tagram. Marshall et al. (2020) suggest that extracting data manually from Instagram is probably 
the best way for researchers to gather data. Hashtags represent the best way to conduct a search 
for communities or groups. Hashtags on Instagram are likely to indicate a community because 
Instagram users use hashtags to not only give meaning to their post or to create a caption that 
contextualizes their post but, they also try to ensure that the posts are found by the community 
to which they wish to belong. Hash tags in this sense also represent participants’ wishes and 
interests in a particular community where they can share interests and space. Further, posts on 
Instagram with hashtags can be located in chronological order, with the most recent on top they 
can also be differentiated according to geographical locations. Photographs on Instagram are 
intentionally curated and self‑mediated by the participants, who are very selective about what 
they post. There is a communicative purpose to Instagram images. People use Instagram in order 
to connect with each other via images. How many times an image is recirculated and the number 
of comments, likes, and followers on Instagram can be indicative of the power and influence of 
the user. As some scholars like Marshall et al. (2020) as well as Marwick (2015) have pointed 
out, popular photographs often reproduce the cultural processes of power. Instagram users post 36 Ways of seeing and research photography
images in the hope that they get more followers, likes, and comments, and in some ways, those 
that attract such a following tend to be conventionally attractive and rich, and they tend to also 
post images of status like cars and travel to exotic places and bodies that are conventionally 
accepted as attractive. Researchers can also look for hashtags that are contesting some of these 
conventional narratives by looking for hashtags that might do the opposite. For example, the 
positive body movement on Instagram tries to actively negotiate what it means to have a posi‑
tive body and challenges a narrower definition of what is considered attractive.
Instagram offers a rich site for the examination of cultural notions of what is popular or not, 
feminine or masculine, and the ways in which people create and want to belong to certain com‑
munities. It is also a site that has potential for examination in terms of resistance to cultural and 
dominant narratives of how identity constructions and dominant cultural ideas either clash or 
intersect in a variety of different ways.
Snapchat, another popular social media site organized around photographs, was designed to 
be self‑destructive and showcase the importance of communication rather than the object itself, 
which is ephemeral. Snapchat is organized so that a photograph can be sent to friends or added 
to one’s story, which is a record of the day and can be viewed for 24 hours. If the snap is sent 
to friends as a message, it disappears within ten seconds of the recipient viewing it. The mes‑
sage gets deleted from the Snapchat server as well. In this sense, social photography is a type of 
visual communication that focuses more on sharing experiences than information. Storytelling 
is part of such social photography, with stories being one of the types of communication that 
can be shared through Instagram posts. Photography is a way of communicating with its own 
increasingly unique vocabulary and tools for visual discourse, such as embedding photos with 
emojis, art, comics, memes, or other ways of personalizing and manipulating the original photo‑
graph, thereby expanding the ways in which images speak to the world. In the rapid sharing of 
such images, visual literacy is taken for granted. As more and more social photography evolves, 
people learn to interpret these images almost by cultural cues. Understanding what social pho‑
tography means to the person who is sharing and to the viewing audience, along with analyzing 
relationships of power or collaboration in photography, is part of what a qualitative researcher 
has opportunities to address when using photography in qualitative research.
How can qualitative researchers make decisions about research questions in 
visual qualitative research?
Qualitative researchers have a rich field to pursue various questions of interest and relevance to them 
using photography. Researchers, as with any qualitative project, can begin with a topic that leads 
to a question or a complex issue that needs examining or reinvestigating. To do this with photogra‑
phy, early career researchers can begin in several ways. They can lead with theory and think about 
the ways in which their own positionality or world view informs their research. They would apply 
that thinking to questioning how and in what ways photography can best help them to realize their 
goals of constructivism, critical theory, or equity‑centered research. Besides leading with theory, 
they can also begin by leading with a tradition in research, that is, biography, autobiography, case 
study, ethnography, autoethnography, or participatory action research. They can think about which 
of these they would center their research design around, and then they can think about the ways 
in which photography can enhance or play a central role in their research. A third way to come up 
with research questions would be to lead with affect, emotion, or advocacy. They could ask – what 
makes me angry, curious, or want to advocate? To this question, they would then add – in what 
way would using photography help gather data or learn more? Remembering that photography is a 
performative process and not merely a static image can help researchers think of a variety of ways Ways of seeing and research photography 37
to further their research projects. They would need to reflect on the roles of the researcher, the par‑
ticipant, the subjects of photography, and the audience for dissemination or sharing. A fourth way 
to move the research process forward and think about questions would be to lead with a process or 
lead with a phenomenon one wants to get close to. They could ask – what is going on here that needs 
investigating or explaining? What is commonly misunderstood? A fifth way would be to lead with 
a place or site in mind to research. Here too, photography can lend itself to research questions that 
investigate belonging or community mapping of assets. In all these, one needs to keep in mind the 
role of the researcher. Is the researcher going to be the sole photographer? or Is the research going 
to be coconstructed with participants? Keeping in mind photography as a central part of the research 
process, the questions of who will conduct research or be the photographer, what types of data will 
be gathered, where does photography fit into the larger research design, and when and where and 
how will the process of data gathering take place, all these prompts will lead researchers toward 
the why of a research project or the contribution to the community as well as to the field of study.
Photograph 3.1  A desk with a green tea cup, a red notebook, a paper clip, and highlighter. Photo credit: 
Raji Swaminathan.38 Ways of seeing and research photography
Exercise 3.1: Photographs as a way of visual communication
1 Look at Photograph 3.1, which is a photograph of a desk. This was part of a study on aca‑
demic work spaces. The academics who were asked to be part of the study agreed readily but 
immediately cleaned out their workspace before it could be photographed.
2 What can one learn about the process of research with photography when such interactions 
take place?
3 What are the different ways in which researchers can respond to participants and create rap‑
port in such circumstances?
Photograph 3.2  A shadow of a person and a fence against a background of grass and gravel. Photo credit: 
Raji Swaminathan.Ways of seeing and research photography 39
Exercise 3.2: Everyday photography and communicating the 
world and self
1 Look at Photograph 3.2. It is an example of the ways in which a researcher can insert them‑
selves into their photographs, albeit in a small way. It may be regarded as a type of selfie.
2 Why do you think the researcher decided to do this? What purpose can it serve?
3 What can we reflect about the absence of the photographer in photographs and the presence 
of the photographer in others?
Summary
In this chapter, different theories of visual research have been presented, ranging from the modern 
to the postmodern and the critical framework. The different types of research designs that can ben‑
efit from using photography have been explained. Biographical and phenomenological research are 
potential spaces where visual methods can be significant. The ways in which different theories can 
be used for photographic research have been described. The increasing use of mobile phone tech‑
nology for photography opens doors for researchers to examine newer sites for qualitative research 
that are online and offline. Exercises and tips have been discussed at the end of the chapter.
References
Amrein‑Beardsley, A. (Host). (2012, April 22). Inside the academy video interviews with Dr. Elliot Eisner 
[video]. United States of America: Arizona State University. Retrieved from https://ita.education.asu.
edu/honoree/elliot‑eisner#videos/
Balakrishnan, A., & Boorstin, J. (2017). Instagram says it now has 800 million users, up 100 million since 
April. Consumer News and Business Channel. Retrieved on April 28, 2024, from https://www.cnbc.
com/2017/09/25/how‑manyusers‑does‑instagram‑have‑now‑800‑million.html
Barthes, R. (1964). Rhetoric of the image. In R. Barthes (Ed.), The responsibility of forms: Critical essays 
on music, art, and representation (R. Howard, trans., New York, 1985) (pp. 21–40). University of Cali‑
fornia Press.
Barthes, R. (2000). The photographic message. In R. Craig & H. L. Muller (Eds.), Theorizing communica‑
tion: Readings across traditions (pp. 191–199). Sage.
Bateson, G. (1972/1955). Steps to an ecology of mind. Ballantine Books.
Bohm, D. (2004). On dialogue. Routledge.
Baudrillard, J. (2012). Impossible exchange. Verso Books.
Bourdieu, P. (1985). The genesis of the concepts of habitus and field. Sociocriticism, 2(2), 11–24.
Bourdieu, P., Bourdieu, M. C., Wacquant, L., & Nice, R. (2004). The peasant and photography. Ethnogra‑
phy, 5(4), 601–616.
Brecht, B. (1974). Brecht on theatre (J. Willett, Ed. & Trans.). London: Eyre Methuen.
Candela, A. G. (2019). Exploring the function of member checking. The Qualitative Report, 24(3), 
619–628.
Carey, J. (1992). Communication as culture: Essays on media and society. New York: Routledge.
Chalfen, R. (1987). Snapshot versions of life. Bowling Green State University Popular Press.
Chalfen, R. (2011). Differentiating practices of participatory visual media production. In E. Margolis & L. 
Pauwels (Eds.), The SAGE handbook of visual research methods (pp. 186–200). Sage.
Chalfen, R. (2011). Looking two ways: Mapping the social scientific study of visual culture. In E. Margolis & 
L. Pauwels (Eds.), The SAGE handbook of visual research methods (pp. 37–56). Sage.
Cobley, P., & Haeffner, N. (2009). Digital cameras and domestic photography: Communication, agency 
and structure. Visual Communication, 8(2), 123–146.40 Ways of seeing and research photography
Dados, N. (2010). Liminal transformations: Folding the surface of the photograph. Memorial Canneries. 
Transdisciplinary Journal, 7, 1–14.
Deleuze, G. (1990). The logic of sense. (M. Lester with C. Stivale, Ed. C. V. Boundas, trans.) New York: 
Columbia University Press.
Deleuze, G. (1993). The fold: Leibniz and the Baroque. University of Minnesota Press.
Durrant, A., Frohlich, D., Sellen, A., & Lyons, E. (2009). Home curation versus teenage photography: Photo 
displays in the family home. International Journal of Human‑Computer Studies, 67(12), 1005–1023.
Eisner, E. W. (1991). What the arts taught me about education. Art Education, 44(5), 10–19.
Eisner, E. (1998). What do the arts teach?. Improving Schools, 1(3), 32–36.
Fairey, T., & Orton, L. (2019). Photography as dialogue. Photography and Culture, 12(3), 299–305.
Freire, P. (1970). Pedagogy of the oppressed (M. B. Ramos, trans.). Continuum Press.
Fox, J., & Rooney, M. C. (2015). The Dark Triad and trait self‑objectification as predictors of men’s use and 
self‑presentation behaviors on social networking sites. Personality and Individual Differences, 76, 161–165.
Gleason, T. R. (2008). The communicative roles of street and social landscape photography. SIMILE: 
Studio Media Information Literacy Education, 8(4), 1–13.
Goffman, E. (1974). Frame analysis: An essay on the organization of experience. Boston: Northeastern 
University Press.
Gómez Cruz, E. (2016). Photo‑genic assemblages: Photography as a connective interface. In E. Gómez 
Cruz & A. Lehmuskallio (Eds.), Digital photography in everyday life. Empirical studies on visual mate‑
rial practices (pp. 228–242). London: Routledge.
Hall, S. (2019). The determinations of news photographs (1973). In Greer, C. (Ed.), Crime and media
(pp. 123–134). Routledge.
Heath, S., & Cleaver, E. (2004). Mapping the spatial in shared household life: A missed opportunity. In 
Knowles, C. and Sweetman, P. (Ed.), Picturing the Social Landscape: Visual Methods and the Socio‑
logical Imagination, 65–78.
Heng, T. (2016). Visual methods in the field: Photography for the social sciences. Routledge.
Hjorth, L., & Pink, S. (2014). New visualities and the digital wayfarer: Reconceptualizing camera phone 
photography and locative media. Mobile Media & Communication, 2(1), 40–57.
Holm, G. (2008, May). Photography as a performance. Forum Qualitative Sozialforschung/Forum: Quali‑
tative Social Research, 9(2).
Holm, G. (2014). Photography as a research method. In Leavy, P. (Ed.), The Oxford handbook of qualita‑
tive research (pp. 380–402). Oxford University Press.
Hurworth, R. (2003). Photo‑interviewing for research. Social Research Update, 40, Retrieved from http://
sru.soc.surrey.ac.uk/SRU40.html
Joinson, A. N. (2008, April). Looking at, looking up or keeping up with people? Motives and use of Face‑
book. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 1027–
1036). https://doi.org/10.1145/1357054.1357213
Katz, J., & Thomas Crocker, E. (2015). Selfies and photo messaging as visual conversation: Reports 
from the United States, United Kingdom and China. International Journal of Communication, 9(1), 
1861–1872.
Keremane, G., & McKay, J. (2011). Using photostory to capture irrigators emotions about water policy and 
sustainable development objectives: A case study in rural Australia. Action Research, 9(4), 405–425.
https://doi.org/:10.1177/1476750311409598.
Kerlinger, F. N. (1986). Foundations of behavioral research. New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston.
Kirk, D., Sellen, A., Rother, C., & Wood, K. (2006, April). Understanding photowork. In Proceedings of 
the SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in computing systems (pp. 761–770). Montreal, Canada.
Larsen, J., & Sandbye, M. (Eds.). (2020). Digital snaps: The new face of photography. Routledge.
Le Compte, M. D., & Preissle, J. (1993). Educational ethnography and qualitative design research (2nd 
ed.). New York: Academic Press.
Levin, L. (2009). The performative force of photography. Photography and Culture, 2(3), 327–336.
Marks, L. U. (2011). Unfolding from the real: Mediation as connective tissue. Passagens, 10, 6–18.
Marshall, K., Chamberlain, K., & Hodgetts, D. (2020). Methodological considerations for visual research 
on Instagram. In Reavey, P. (Ed). A handbook of visual methods in psychology (pp. 221–238). Routledge.Ways of seeing and research photography 41
Marwick, A. E. (2015). Instafame: Luxury selfies in the attention economy. Public Culture, 27(1 (75)), 
137–160.
McGill, M. (2020, September). The public is personal: Reflections on the ethical dimensions of selfie 
research. Visual Studies, 35(2/3), 193–200.
Murray, D. C. (2015). Notes to self: The visual culture of selfies in the age of social media. Consumption 
Markets & Culture, 18(6), 490–516.
Newhall, B. (1964). The history of photography. New York: The Museum of Modern Art.
Nordstrom, S. N. (2013). Object‑interviews: Folding, unfolding, and refolding perceptions of objects. 
International Journal of Qualitative Methods, 12(1), 237–257.
Rettberg, J. W. (2014). Blogging. Polity.
Rose, G. (2004). ‘Everyone’s cuddled up and it just looks really nice’: An emotional geography of some 
mums and their family photos. Social & Cultural Geography, 5(4), 549–564.
Ruby, J. (2005). The image mirrored: Reflexivity and the documentary film. New Challenges for Docu‑
mentary, 2, 34–47.
Saldaña, J., & Omasta, M. (2016). Qualitative research: Analyzing life. Sage Publications.
Segal, M. (2002). Southampton’s Women: by Magda Segal. International Journal of Epidemiology, 31(2), 
333–335.
Selfiecity. (2014). https://selfiecity.net
Shove, E. (2007). The design of everyday life. Berg.
Shusterman, R. (2012). Photography as performative process. The Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism, 
70(1), 67–77.
Serafinelli, E., & Cox, A. (2019). Privacy does not interest me. A comparative analysis of photo sharing on 
Instagram and Blipfoto. Visual Studies, 34(1), 67–78.
Sweetman, P. (2009). Revealing habitus, illuminating practice: Bourdieu, photography and visual meth‑
ods. The Sociological Review, 57(3), 491–511.
Taylor, A. S. (2017). Performance, Photography, Performativity: What Performance ‘does’ in the still 
image Doctoral thesis, University of the Arts London and Falmouth University.
Van Dijck, J. (2013). The culture of connectivity: A critical history of social media. Oxford University 
Press.
Van House, N. A. (2007, April). Flickr and public image‑sharing: Distant closeness and photo exhibition. 
In CHI’07 extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems (pp. 2717–2722). New York: 
Association for Computing Machinery.
Van House, N. A. (2009). Collocated photo sharing, story‑telling, and the performance of self. Interna‑
tional Journal of Human‑Computer Studies, 67(12), 1073–1086.
Van House, N. A. (2011). Personal photography, digital technologies and the uses of the visual. Visual 
studies, 26(2), 125–134.
Varvantakis, C., Nolas, S.‑M., & Aruldoss, V. (2019). Photography, politics and childhood: Exploring 
children’s multimodal relations with the public sphere. Visual Studies, 34(3), 266–280.
Veum, A., & Undrum, L. V. M. (2018). The selfie as a global discourse. Discourse & Society, 29(1), 
86–103.
Villi, M. (2012). Social curation in audience communities: UDC (user‑distributed content) in the net‑
worked media ecosystem. Participations: The International Journal of Audience and Reception Studies, 
9(2), 614–632.
Wang, R., Yang, F., & Haigh, M. M. (2017). Let me take a selfie: Exploring the psychological effects of 
posting and viewing selfies and groupies on social media. Telematics and Informatics, 34(4), 274–283.
Wargo, J. M. (2017). “Every selfie tells a story…”: LGBTQ youth lifestreams and new media narratives as 
connective identity texts. New Media & Society, 19(4), 560–578.
Weilenmann, A., & Hillman, T. (2020). Selfies in the wild: Studying selfie photography as a local practice. 
Mobile Media & Communication, 8(1), 42–61.
Whittaker, S., Bergman, O., & Clough, P. (2010). Easy on that trigger dad: A study of long term family 
photo retrieval. Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, 14, 31–43.
Zola, E. (1900). Photo‑Miniature no. 21 (December 1900). In B. Newhall (Ed.), The History of Photogra‑
phy (p. 94). New York: The Museum of Modern Art.DOI: 10.4324/9781003034773-4
Photography can be a powerful and engaging tool in participatory action research (PAR) to 
document, stimulate discussion, and promote change within a community. PAR is a research 
methodology that involves collaboration between researchers and the community being studied, 
with the goal of addressing social issues and promoting social change (Powers & Allaman, 
2012; Vaughn & Jacquez, 2020). One of the most popular forms of PAR using photography is 
photovoice. In this chapter, we briefly discuss the advantages and disadvantages of using photo‑
voice. However, there are a plethora of ways researchers can use photographs within a PAR pro‑
ject. Besides photovoice, there are uses of photography for eliciting interview data, stimulating 
reflection, and addressing emotional issues through photography, in addition to discussing com‑
munity problems and possible solutions. Photovoice has a well‑established place in the method‑
ological literature (Anderson et al., 2023; Mooney & Bhui, 2023; Muller, 2023; Sutton‑Brown, 
2014; Wang & Burris, 1997), including a delineation of the advantages and disadvantages of 
using this approach. This chapter moves beyond photovoice to explore other forms of PAR with 
photographs. Further, the chapter includes discussions on the preparation of photographs for use 
at different stages of the research process, with a focus on entering the field and establishing rap‑
port, along with the risks involved. Debates regarding the ethical use of photographs placed in 
the public domain on social media sites will be discussed, as well as the impact of social media 
trends on how researchers and participants are socialized to respond to certain images (or lack of 
images). This includes the emotional and cultural influencing components of single‑frame still 
photographs, memes, GIFs, and video snippets, as well as other images shared on social media 
platforms. Exercises and tips for practice are presented at the end of the chapter.
PAR projects are often affiliated with meaningful community partnerships between research‑
ers and members of the community at the center of the study (Nygreen et al., 2012; Taylor 
et al., 2004). These types of projects are ripe for photographic documentaries and the process 
of engaging in photography. In addition, the photographs themselves can serve as catalysts for 
creating meaningful narratives. At the same time, researchers need to be ever‑mindful of the 
ethical considerations inherent in participatory community action research projects. For exam‑
ple, Wilson et al. (2018) have produced an instructive scoping review to help deepen researchers’ 
abilities to proactively identify some of the ethical questions that need to be asked throughout 
the research process. Overall, photography in participatory action research (PAR) not only pro‑
vides new opportunities for shaping narratives about communities but also empowers individu‑
als to raise the questions important to them and to sharpen the focus on aspects of their lived 
experiences that others may miss. PAR projects using photography provide people with ways 
to take ownership of their narratives and engage in an arts‑based approach to documenting their 
experiences, often leading to more inclusive and collaborative research outcomes. At times, 
PAR projects using photography can be combined with other data sources and methods, such 
4 Participatory action research (PAR) 
and photographyParticipatory action research (PAR) and photography 43
as interviews, surveys, and community mapping. Combining multiple data sources can offer a 
rich and comprehensive understanding of the issues being studied. Issues related to social media 
photography used for research purposes are also of considerable interest.
Frameworks for PAR
The origins of PAR are found in the work of Kurt Lewin (1946), who laid out the cyclical pro‑
cess of planning, action, research, or fact‑finding leading to more action or change, evaluation, 
or review, which in turn would lead to more questions or concerns leading to change. The group 
dynamics promoted by Lewin were that of democracy and interdependence. Over time, several 
disciplines and areas of research have adapted and contributed to the growth of PAR. The termi‑
nology that indicates PAR has also broadened to include action inquiry, community‑based PAR, 
citizen action research, appreciative inquiry, and decolonizing methodologies. The degree to 
which participation and involvement from the community occur and the ways in which demo‑
cratic and power sharing or collaboration take place can vary in each project. The critical frame‑
work, which is outlined below, puts questions of power at the center while also bringing to the 
forefront issues of social justice.
Critical frameworks
When used as a critical framework, PAR is often focused on the actions that a qualitative inquiry 
can help produce, and because it is rooted in the belief that a coconstruction of knowledge 
requires working together with those most affected by research, PAR assumes that all people 
have meaningful knowledge about their own lives. Further, people have the ability, or can learn 
to develop the ability, to read the world around them and critically analyze their life experiences. 
PAR also assumes that people’s connections to communities are rooted in the social and political 
systems of those communities – and that each community has a history. In PAR projects, change 
is understood as an ongoing process. In this sense, PAR is a cyclical process that perpetually 
generates new questions for effecting change in communities.
PAR’s connections to critical frameworks often combine theories such as feminist stand‑
point theories (Crasnow, 2014; Harding, 2004) with Freire’s (1970) critical consciousness, 
Marxist theories of how economies are established and maintained, as well as anticolonialism 
approaches to generating new knowledge (Carlson, 2020). The concept of praxis is an impor‑
tant ingredient in PAR, with the aim to connect epistemology with larger theories of knowledge 
creation and how the conditions of the use of knowledge must be understood and challenged 
in order to bring about social change and related policy changes that can benefit communities.
For example, Freire’s consciousness‑raising method involved using photographs or line 
drawings to promote dialog and to inspire thinking critically about political and social forces 
that influence communities and situations. Before Freire, in the early 20th century, photogra‑
phers including Lewis Hine (Seixas, 1987) and Jacob Riis (Quirke, 2008), by documenting the 
living conditions of the poor, raised an awareness that led to changes in policy. For example, 
Hine’s photographs of children were keys to the enactment of Child Labor Laws. Photography, 
in this sense, has been instrumental in bringing social issues to the forefront. Images served as 
a catalyst in Freire’s process of consciousness‑raising to help participants see the world around 
them in ways that interrupted habitual ways of looking. Feminist theorists argued that Freire’s 
work, which was meant to empower communities, ignored the ways in which power operated 
within gender hierarchies and at times rendered women invisible. Standpoint theories helped to 
highlight the contribution of nondominant perspectives and emphasized the intersectionality of 44 Participatory action research (PAR) and photography
people’s identities. In the process of fieldwork in PAR, qualitative researchers have to be espe‑
cially sensitive to multiple identities and standpoints in communities. They need to think about 
the project’s relevance to the community and the local struggles for social justice. Paulo Freire’s 
(1970) use of the concept of praxis linked critical theory to political action. Freire saw the role 
of the researcher as assisting the oppressed to understand and recognize their circumstances, 
become aware of their limited situations, and imagine themselves beyond these to overcome 
their own oppressions. That cycle of reflection and action, when it is collaborative rather than 
imposed on one, can lead to action that results in freedom and emancipation. Scholars like Patti 
Lather (2017) and Ellsworth (1989) have critiqued the idea of praxis as being simplistic, where 
the researcher’s power is not always articulated and is at times imposed on the participants’ 
voices. And bell hooks (1994) and Kathleen Weiler (1991) both strongly critiqued Friere’s lack 
of feminist consciousness. The lens and theories researchers come with into the field are some‑
times superimposed on the voices and lived experiences of participants, which is antithetical to 
constructivist epistemologies aimed at positive social change. This simplistic notion of voice
being a tool for emancipation becomes complex when one realizes that researchers cannot “give 
voice” – a phrase that has since gone out of vogue, nor can researchers ever really get rid of their 
own preconceptions – often referred to with another overused but faulty phrase, “bracketing” –
and as a result, researchers need to turn the critical eye onto themselves using formal and infor‑
mal reflexivity processes to stay attuned to the ways their assumptions and the assumptions help 
by their participants operate in the meaning‑making process.
Lather (2017) offers a different view of how to look at praxis. She suggests that praxis needs 
to be revisioned into praxis 2.0, in which the researchers are able to see how terms such as 
oppressor and oppressed, as well as empowerment and disempowerment, are not simple bina‑
ries but are indeed complex concepts that can coexist. At times, empowerment may be disem‑
powering as much as the oppressed might also be part of oppression. Ellsworth (1989) called 
attention to this reality in her frequently cited article, Why doesn’t this feel empowering? Work‑
ing through the repressive myths of critical pedagogy and later Lather (2007) pointed out that 
research is always an act of power, and to that extent, researchers are participating in a certain 
type of disempowerment and need to be mindful. Further, researchers need to be aware of the 
differential power and privilege that can exist among different members of the community.
Researchers are implicated in being part of the problem as agents of power as well as being 
part of the solution as they try to create change. This role is one that can be problematic if the 
researchers see themselves as offering solutions or saving the community. Pink (2007) and Pil‑
low (2003) discuss reflexivity as a tool that can turn the eye onto oneself for researchers and the 
purpose of which is not merely to illuminate honesty or authenticity but to practice a reflexivity 
that is uncomfortable. The research questions in PAR are usually drawn from the community 
or jointly constructed with members of the community. The benefits to the community need to 
be clarified, and the participatory roles of the community members and researchers need to be 
defined with the goal of an agreement between all parties. Within a critical framework, the out‑
come of PAR needs to benefit the community as it works toward confronting social inequalities. 
In PAR, the use of photography can highlight the lived experiences, unique experiences, and 
stories of nondominant sections of the population that can act as catalysts for change.
Photovoice as participatory action research
Photovoice, as one example of how researchers use photographs as part of a PAR project, has 
been useful for health care and community health projects as well as some educational research 
projects. Photovoice (Wang & Burris, 1997) was developed in order to go one step further than Participatory action research (PAR) and photography 45
analyzing photographs or images presented by researchers to having the community partici‑
pants themselves choose and photograph what they found relevant to showcase or discuss. The 
goal of photovoice was to reach the ears of policymakers who have the power to effect change 
that would impact the community. The original goals included documenting the community’s 
strengths and concerns, promoting critical dialog, and reaching policymakers. However, as sev‑
eral scholars have argued (Lykes, 2010; Lykes & Crosby, 2014), while photovoice has expanded 
to several fields, it has, at the same time, also moved away from its original ideal with regard to 
the generation of a collective voice and advocacy that can effect changes in policy. They found 
that those who embraced photovoice often neglected the tenets of PAR. Some photovoice pro‑
jects encourage the expression of individuals’ experiences through photography. At times, the 
researchers and participants are committed more to the act of photography and less to the social 
justice or collective emancipatory ideals of photovoice. Such photovoice‑inspired projects can 
lean toward presenting a singular view of reality rather than a collective story based on inter‑
active dialog and negotiated meaning. Catalani and Minkler (2010) reviewed 37 articles that 
reported photovoice projects and found differences in all aspects of the research process, includ‑
ing outcomes and the research methodology used. They claimed that this was further evidence 
that the drift away from the critical aspect of photovoice resulted in a collection of photographs 
accompanied by short descriptive comments yet lacking in analysis. And, at times, photovoice 
serves as a way to generate important discussion – yet fails to rise to the level of research where 
the data generated is rich enough to be effectively analyzed. For example, Higgins (2016) calls 
into question the assumption of empowerment in photovoice research, emphasizing that the col‑
laboration or democratic power of photovoice cannot be taken for granted and indeed needs to 
be practiced with deliberation. In many photovoice projects, he points out that decision‑making 
power is imbalanced and tilted in favor of the research team.
Photovoice highlights the advantages of using visual images. For example, by community 
participants taking the photographs themselves, they have the opportunity to focus on what 
they consider important. A camera is accessible where literacy in the form of the written word 
might not be. Vulnerable populations can learn to use a camera more easily and can therefore 
participate in the research. Community needs and assets can be photographed by the partici‑
pants, giving a more well‑rounded picture of the community. Photovoice can stimulate action 
and advocacy. However, photovoice is not without disadvantages. Some disadvantages include 
the vulnerability of community members. At times, their participation in the project could be 
seen as a political act. Further, participants might choose to remain silent about some issues 
leading to a status quo in some areas where change might be needed. What is photographed 
and what is left out are questions that the researchers might remain unaware of. Finally, the 
power differential between researchers and participants can be mitigated, yet not eliminated, in 
photovoice projects. Contemporary research and scholarship on voice acknowledges that the 
power of research relationships can be responsible for privileging some voices over others and 
eliciting some and not others. Researchers accept that they do not always elicit or get the range 
of multiple voices within social categories. To better understand the voices of participants, one 
needs to know how the voices were generated and how photographs were used to elicit or create 
possibilities for participation among the participants.
Wendy Ewald’s (2019) work is an example of documentary photography and can be under‑
stood as a companion to photovoice methodologies. It is an example of how companion meth‑
ods can both help inform photovoice methods and yet go beyond. Ewald, as an artist, wanted 
to document rather than analyze images and leave open in the images; multiple possible inter‑
pretations, much like rich qualitative data, can open up multiple ways of examining meaning. 
Bourdieu’s (2003) concept of sociological self‑reflection might also be a theoretical partner to 46 Participatory action research (PAR) and photography
photovoice, as it provides a useful way to incorporate the political, economic, and social con‑
texts in which the researchers are embedded. This type of structural reflection would be utilized 
in addition to personal reflection and group reflection. Reflexivity, for Bourdieu, is when the 
habitus meets the field. Buckley (2000), however, offers a distinction between participatory 
methodologies in general by emphasizing the question about empowerment. Buckley (2000) 
reminds researchers that there is nothing inherently empowering about participatory method‑
ologies. For PAR to be empowering, first empowerment needs to be defined. Questions such 
as empowerment for whom and whose benefit is served by the particular research project need 
to be clarified. Further, telling one’s story is not necessarily inherently empowering. For photo‑
voice to assume such empowerment automatically exists in PAR is to be working from a deficit 
mindset – an approach that assumes that communities and participants are inherently without 
voice and without opportunities to express themselves until the magical researcher arrives on 
the scene. And further it portrays photovoice as a type of savior methodology which runs coun‑
ter to the very tenets of critical approaches to research.
One of the problems that photovoice might face is the inherent and implied promise of com‑
munity change brought about by drawing attention to politically powerful figures. Unfortunately, 
researchers have pointed out that this does not always occur and that photovoice often fails to 
deliver on this particular promise (Evans‑Agnew et al., 2022; Johnston, 2016; Shankar, 2016). 
This can pose problems ethically for researchers. Johnston (2016) suggests that researchers and 
scholars emphasize or stress policy‑informing rather than policy‑changing as one of the goals 
of photovoice. In a study by Close (2007), 12 chronically ill children were given disposable 
cameras in order to take photographs of their lives and what mattered to them. The data analysis 
process included a holistic analysis of the content of the photographs and then a microanalysis. 
By using microanalysis strategies, the photographs were grouped into different cultural groups. 
Children took photographs of places, not of people. The first category of places was trips or 
special events and brought up questions of interactions with caregivers and peers. Themes of 
friendship and loneliness were part of the first theme. A second team was that of independence 
and dependence, as they took photographs of ordinary places that they frequented, like their 
garden or just outside of the house. They also took photographs of people who were special and 
their own photographs. Scholars such as Close (2007) and Moran and Tegano (2005) suggested 
that when photography is used as a visual language or is interpreted as an actual language, it 
needs to take into account the various levels of meaning and the act of interpretation ought to 
consider things such as context(s) as well as a sense of order or arrangements of the visual com‑
munication being enacted. This follows the verbal communication process of analysis based 
on semantics, pragmatics, and syntax, or word order. In Closer’s (2007) study, children also 
placed their photographs in narrative order, some chronologically and some thematically, to be 
able to express their meaning‑making and showcase how they saw their experiences of living 
with chronic illness. The children also had taken some close‑up photographs and some at a far 
angle, and in their discussions, they revealed how they felt about each of these photographs. The 
close‑ups were about friends, family, and caregivers, while the ones far away also represented 
how far they felt from some of the events that they could not participate in; for example, there 
was one child who showed the researcher a photograph of a playground taken at a distance in 
which she was not allowed to play because of her illness.
Higgins (2016) discusses the complexity of empowerment in photovoice research. Higgins 
pointed out that the assumption of the collaborative and democratic power of photovoice cannot 
be left to chance. In many photovoice projects, it is still the research team that makes decisions 
on what to research and determines the focus of the research. The focus can often be from a 
deficit perspective, rather than choosing to centralize narratives of resilience when members Participatory action research (PAR) and photography 47
of the group under study face issues and problems. According to Higgins, one needs to have 
a “critical and complicit engagement with photovoice” (p. 670) in order to trouble methodo‑
logical concepts and recognize that they contain both possibilities and problematics at the same 
time. Higgins (2016) suggested that one needs to put photovoice methodology “under erasure” 
(p. 670), which means acknowledging the problematic nature of the research methodology even 
while engaging with it and paying attention to complicated meanings.
As a response to the critique of photovoice methodology, researchers (Lykes & Scheib, 2015) 
have begun exploring the emancipatory potential of photovoice by introducing PhotoPAR as 
a critical praxis that is situated at the interface of feminist participatory action, creative tech‑
niques, antiracist, and postcolonial methodologies. Through this process, they hope to regener‑
ate the original intent of photovoice as a participatory research endeavor predicated on a critical 
engagement with systemic problems as identified via a partnership between researcher and par‑
ticipants. The critical edge of photovoice is hopeful and opens up possibilities for continued 
methodological innovations. The use of photography in PAR, however, goes beyond photovoice 
to embrace a multitude of ways in which photographs can be used in the process of research. 
Some of these are explained in the next section.
PAR and photography beyond photovoice
Photography, known for its realism on the one hand and for its ambiguity on the other, 
offers opportunities for qualitative researchers to explore multiple perceptions and interpre‑
tations. The camera can be understood as an extension of the researcher and the participant. 
Researchers can use photography to enter a scene and community, establish rapport, and 
position photographs as a medium for the interpretation of a subculture. Photographs can be 
understood as communicative keys that can unlock narratives not uncovered through tradi‑
tional interviews or participant observations. There are, however, also risks researchers need 
to be mindful of, such as the sensitivities surrounding rapport‑building and what additional 
precautions need to be considered when visual artifacts are involved as data, data‑elicitors, 
and/or as part of the data‑generated displays showcased by the researchers to represent the 
knowledge construction process in a PAR project. Below are some additional ways photog‑
raphy may be used in PAR:
Visual Documentation: Participants can use photography to document their daily lives, experi‑
ences, and the issues they face. These images provide a visual record that can be used to 
analyze and understand the community’s problems and strengths. These can serve as vis‑
ual journals or visual diaries. Researchers can also take their own photographs and com‑
pare the visual documentation of the participants with that of the researcher’s photographs. 
An example of visual documentation is the work of artist Wendy Ewald (1985), who gave 
Appalachian children cameras to take photographs of their lives, and the resulting photo‑
graphs revealed family life through the eyes of children. Her book, Portraits and Dreams
(1975), was reissued as a revised edition in 2020 with stories from some of the children from 
the original publication. In a project called American Alphabets, Ewald (2005) addressed 
questions of identity and language. She asked children to think of a word for each letter of the 
alphabet in their own language and to pick a scene, object, or sign that they thought depicted 
the word. She then photographed what they presented, after which the children wrote with 
a magic marker the letter and the word that it represented. Visual diaries can serve as field 
notes for qualitative researchers as they examine the community through their own eyes as 
well as through the eyes of participants.48 Participatory action research (PAR) and photography
Stimulating Dialog: Photographs can serve as a catalyst for discussion and reflection. Partici‑
pants can share their photos and discuss what they reveal about their community, challenges, 
and aspirations. This visual dialog can help build a shared understanding of the issues and pri‑
orities. Such photographs can be either existing photographs that are shared or those that are 
taken by the participants currently. Dialog stimulation among the participants can be treated 
like a focus group where participants discuss what they see in the different photographs. 
Such dialog can serve as another source of data that is combined with the photographs to 
tell a deeper story. Photographs can be selected by the researchers to serve as starting points 
or prompts for focus group discussions. Photographs can also prompt memories of shared 
experiences and shed light on the changes in the community over time.
Strategies for Empowerment: Photography allows community members to become active par‑
ticipants in the research process. By giving them the tools to capture and share their own 
perspectives, it empowers them to have a say in the research agenda and outcomes. For 
example, Prins (2010) asks a provocative question: Is participatory photography a tool for 
empowerment or surveillance? And doing so helps researchers consider the important ethical 
questions.
Raising Awareness: The visual impact of photographs can be a powerful tool for raising aware‑
ness about social issues. Photos can be shared with a broader audience, including policy‑
makers and the public, to advocate for change and garner support for community initiatives. 
Researchers such as Husain and Rizal (2023), for example, connected the use of photographs 
as a tool to raise awareness about environmental issues.
Community Collaboration: Photography can help bridge the gap between researchers and the 
community. It fosters collaboration, as both researchers and community members work 
together to decide what to photograph, how to interpret the images, and what actions to take 
based on the findings.
Reflexivity: Photography can encourage reflexivity among participants, researchers, and view‑
ers. It can challenge preconceived notions, biases, and stereotypes and promote a more 
nuanced understanding of the community’s issues.
Advocacy and Social Change: Through photography, participants can engage in advocacy efforts, 
such as exhibitions, community presentations, or publications. These actions can help mobilize 
support and resources to address the identified problems and promote social change.
Data Collection: Photographs can be used as a data source in the research process. Research‑
ers can analyze the images alongside other qualitative and quantitative data to gain a more 
comprehensive understanding of the community’s context.
Visual Storytelling: Photography is a form of visual storytelling that can capture the lived expe‑
riences and narratives of community members. This can be particularly important in PAR, as 
it helps convey the complexity of issues and the personal stories behind them.
Assessment, Evaluation, and General Feedback: Community members can use photography to 
assess the impact of their actions and projects. It allows them to track progress and provide 
feedback on the effectiveness of the interventions.
Training and Capacity Building: Providing participants with training in photography techniques 
and storytelling can be valuable. It equips them with the skills needed to effectively capture 
their experiences and convey their messages.
Visual Literacy: Developing visual literacy within the community is important to ensure that 
participants can critically analyze and interpret the images they create and encounter. This 
enhances the quality of the dialog and analysis.
Research Projects that Require Long‑Term Engagement: Some PAR projects require longer 
time frames in order to reach the intended goals and, at times, can encompass multiple Participatory action research (PAR) and photography 49
phases. In these instances, it is not just a one‑time data collection effort but an ongoing and 
sustained collaborative process. When research projects have no expressed end date, addi‑
tional considerations may be needed. For example, when considering the sustainability of the 
photographic component of PAR, are there mechanisms in place for community members to 
continue using photography as a tool for change even after the research project concludes? 
Who owns or can have continued use of project‑related equipment such as cameras, printers, 
repositories for storing and arranging photographs, etc. Depending on the context, research‑
ers may need to consider issues related to the availability of cameras or smartphones and the 
digital knowledge of participants and work to ensure that technology is accessible, afford‑
able, and readily available for everyone involved in the project.
The roles played by the researcher and the community members also need to be negotiated in 
PAR. For example, how will participants be selected, who will use the cameras, and what say 
will participants have in what they photograph? And finally, what degree of power over dissemi‑
nation will participants have in research projects? In PAR research, where photography is cen‑
tral to the research project, researchers may need to negotiate separately whom to photograph, 
who will participate in the project, what types of photographs will be used, and what types of 
prompts will be shared for the photography. Issues of power and voice are integral to all of the 
ways in which photography can be used in PAR projects. Recent scholars (Lykes, 2010; Prins, 
2010) have raised questions around the extent to which the act of giving a camera to a partici‑
pant also confers voice and power.
PAR and voice in photographic projects
Participation in participatory photography projects can range from visual ethnographies in 
which participants have minimal roles to different types of visual research in which participants 
have control over the research question, the methods, and the political or ideological framing of 
the project. According to Lykes (2010), PhotoPAR or photographic PAR allows for a continual 
negotiation between researchers and participants, so that both groups become researchers. Com‑
munity members can be coresearchers while taking on the roles of insider coresearchers while 
researchers can be outsider coresearchers.
Researchers in photographic projects using PAR might assume that the act of giving cameras 
to people to document their daily lives, they are conferring a voice on participants while engag‑
ing in wider inclusivity in research. The use of voice in PAR and participatory visual research 
(PVR) is wide‑ranging. Different ways of characterizing voice include testimonio (Lykes, 2010) 
or speaking truth to power (Collins, 1991). Testimonio is a reflexive form of narrative that draws 
on concepts of agency and can include speeches, newsletters, and spoken word. It is an account 
told in the first person by a narrator who is a witness or protagonist. A testimonio includes an 
intention of empowerment and is political in its production of awareness. Testimonio, when it 
is translated from oral to written form, is an acknowledgement of the revolutionary aspect of 
literacy. Voices can be collective, group, or individual voices. Counter‑narratives constitute yet 
another type of voice in storytelling. Photo‑elicitation methods are usually used for individual 
interviews to encourage the narration of experiences through photographs as cues. Lykes (2010) 
described her research with Mayan women in Chajul, Guatemala, in the aftermath of war and 
human rights violations. It was an effort to find ways to encourage and empower local voices 
and to find ways to correct the “voiceover” of nonlocals like herself that glossed over the voices 
of the participants as they narrated their own experiences. The purpose of the project was to find 
ways to recover indigenous knowledge or traditions, create a space for listening and talking, 50 Participatory action research (PAR) and photography
facilitate the development of critical skills, as well as find ways that women who had suf‑
fered human rights violations could share their stories and feelings, express their understanding 
of events, and find action‑based responses to problems identified by them. The research team 
employed a wide variety of methods and steps for analysis using photography. These included 
individual picture‑taking and storytelling, making decisions about choosing photographs from 
the individual photovoice projects, and conferring and discussing in groups to analyze the same.
In describing the photonarratives, Lykes (2010) recounts the ways in which photographic 
PAR can silence or privilege voices. For example, in her project, she discovered that ethnic 
diversity had been erased or glossed over in the narratives, even though in the photographs it 
was apparent. Similarly, ethnic tensions that had arisen during the conversations and dialogs 
were absent from the photonarratives. She emphasized that while funding agencies required 
the researchers to report on ethnic diversity, such questions from the agencies were seldom 
answered. For example, the challenges and benefits garnered by different groups due to gender 
or ethnicity were not articulated. Participants and local insider coresearchers resisted discuss‑
ing the dynamics of ethnic tensions or historical diversities. Lykes (2010) suggests that one 
reason for this could be a resistance to outsiders that includes both the researcher and the fund‑
ing agency. In a second example narrated by Lykes (2010), the photograph of a child carrying 
wood was analyzed by the group, and discussions of child labor, poverty, and family conditions 
prevailed. The story told by the child in the photograph of wanting to sell wood to buy her 
favorite sweet was not discussed, and in the process, her voice was silenced. If the discus‑
sions had included the voice of the child, it would have affirmed the rights of children along 
with highlighting the group’s discussion on advocating against child labor. Similarly, Chal‑
fen et al. (2010) caution researchers regarding celebrating voice uncritically in photographic 
and image‑based projects and call our attention to taking a closer look at voice as depicted in 
participant‑generated images or videos. When researchers are collaborating closely with com‑
munity partners, the photographs that are taken by the community participants are likely in 
some degree to be influenced by researchers. The voices that are represented in photographic 
research therefore are that of both the participants as well as the silent voice of the researcher, 
much like the person taking a picture might be absent from a photograph. This means that the 
voices of researchers and participants together produce the collective critique within which the 
differential power spaces of researchers and participants exist alongside the power relations 
among participants. The voices in the photographs or through the photographs are the result of 
the relationships among participants and participant‑community relations.
Scholars like hooks (1989) and Thomson (2008, 2013) have offered additional ways of thinking 
about voice that can be applied to examining photography in PAR. The concept of coming‑to‑voice, 
as pointed out by hooks (1989), recognizes that the move from silence to speech involves indi‑
vidual learning to articulate one’s views within particular contexts, both political and social. The 
critical questions to think about are who is being heard, who is listening to voices, and how they 
are interpreting what they hear. When thinking about photographs and the voices they represent, 
these ways of thinking and related questions are useful. Researchers can also draw on Thomson 
(2008), who has created a typology of five kinds of voice. They are authoritative, critical, con‑
sumer, pedagogic, and therapeutic. This categorization of voice might help researchers facilitate 
the analysis of photographs, although these categories are not exhaustive and, at times, can over‑
lap. An authoritative voice could also be pedagogic, and a critical voice could also be authoritative. 
In the search for and affirmation of collective voices in PAR, photographic data can also represent 
individual voices that can inadvertently be erased unless researchers pay careful attention and not 
assume a less common type of voice is necessarily less significant in relation to the purpose of the 
study. Further, looking to see and understand what type of voice we see represented in photographs Participatory action research (PAR) and photography 51
along with the stories told by the participants can help researchers see what is absent and what is 
highlighted. An example of how collective voices can be effectively used to protect individuals 
without giving up their individual stories can be seen in the work of Lykes (2010), who described 
an international research project in Chajul, Guatemala. After participants took photographs, they 
selected a few that they were drawn to and then recounted stories based on the photographs. Some 
stories were those told by the person depicted in the photograph, while others were narratives by 
the photographer about the picture taken and the participant photographer’s own memories evoked 
by the photograph. Another way to expand the data gathering and collect some initial analytical 
impressions was by choosing some of the individual projects to present to a group of three to five 
participants and elicit ideas from them.
Photographs in PAR can be used in multiple rounds of data gathering with different groups 
of people to gain a deeper understanding of shared experiences in addition to individual nuances 
and differences in lived experiences. Scholars such as Close (2007) and Moran and Tegano 
(2005) suggest that when photography is used as a visual language or is interpreted as a lan‑
guage, it needs to take into account the meanings and interpretations that are based on contexts 
as well as a sense of order. In a study by Close (2007), 12 chronically ill children were given 
disposable cameras in order to take photographs of their lives and what mattered to them. The 
themes of the photographs included friendship, loneliness, special places, trips, independence, 
and dependence. The children placed their photographs in a narrative order that was at times 
thematic and at other times chronological. The angles at which they took the photographs, at a 
distance, and the close‑ups also had meaning for them, as they explained how far away they felt 
from some events, like a playground in which they could not play or the close‑up of a caregiver 
with whom they had a special relationship. Qualitative researchers, therefore, need to be espe‑
cially attentive to what the photographs reveal and what voices they represent by learning to 
employ visual listening with photographs. In the next section, we offer some tools to facilitate 
seeing voices or listening to the voices and representations in images.
Voice and visual voice: listening to images
Wang and Burris (1997) referred to VOICE as an acronym that meant – Voicing Our Individual 
and Collective Experience. In this chapter, in taking photography beyond photovoice and build‑
ing on the work of Wang and Burris (1997), we use the acronym VOICE differently to facilitate 
qualitative researchers in thinking about the collection and examination of photographic images 
and data. To this extent, we refer to voice in photography as Visual Voice, in which each letter 
stands for a particular way to think about photographic research in PAR. We offer questions and 
reflection prompts to facilitate qualitative researchers as they consider how voice is expressed 
or manifested in their research using photography.
V – Visual listening: Images can be understood as well as speech. To facilitate understanding, 
researchers can ask themselves – What does it mean to listen visually? What is seen in the 
photograph? What can we hear from the viewing of the photograph? What issues are pre‑
dominant? What takes center stage in the photograph?
O – Omissions: What is omitted in the photograph or lies just beyond the frame of the photo‑
graph? What is absent, and whose voices are absent in the taking of the photograph? What 
issues are minimized but related to the activity or place in the photograph?
I – Interpretations: What interpretations are possible when looking at the images? Which groups 
or what intersections can one draw on to figure out the relationships and networks that pho‑
tographs can depict?52 Participatory action research (PAR) and photography
C – Communication: What types of communication are taking place through the photograph? 
For whom is the photograph intended? What unintended communication or message is also 
conveyed? What lessons will people take away from the image that are in line with their own 
experiences?
E – Extending: How do we extend the range of voices we see in photographs by eliciting stories, 
interviews, and dramatic enactments? Voices in photographs and stories are encapsulated in 
momentary images that encompass several backstories that can be unearthed through forms 
of storytelling and performance.
By examining photographs through the prompts of Visual Voice, qualitative researchers can 
extend listening to the examination of the visual.
Related considerations
Qualitative researchers must work to increase awareness of cultural norms and practices related 
to photography in the community. Some cultures may have specific customs or taboos associ‑
ated with photography that should be respected. Considerations related to cultural sensitivity 
must be ever‑present. In some cultures, photography is forbidden during some rituals, especially 
those surrounding death or mourning. To remain sensitive to these issues, some ethnographers 
(see, e.g., Bateson & Mead, 2012) tried a redramatization of some rituals in order to take photo‑
graphs, making it a photo‑drama that they recorded rather than the actual ritual, which remained 
unphotographed. Bateson and Mead (2012) shared that in order to minimize the intrusion of 
the camera, they at first focused on taking photographs of children, even though adults featured 
frequently in them, either holding the children or playing with them. By appearing continu‑
ously with a camera, eventually, the camera ceased to be regarded as a novelty and was soon a 
taken‑for‑granted device. However, a long‑term presence in the field may not always alleviate 
the discomfort that can be caused by a camera, especially in a surveillance society. PAR projects 
involving photography, in such contexts, may require specific conversations and agreements 
about data security. Taking, sharing, and storing photographs may pose risks to participants. 
It’s essential to consider safety and security measures and protect the identity of individuals if 
necessary. For qualitative researchers to continue to expand the potential of photovoice, they 
need to turn the reflexive gaze onto themselves in ways that disrupt taken‑for‑granted ideas or 
understandings and move out of their comfort zones.
What is participation in PAR?
The collaborative potential of PAR is in the relationship between researchers and the community 
members, who are also usually participants in the research process. Call‑Cummings and Ross 
(2022) discuss the idea that participation in PAR is a spectrum and that in different contexts it is 
constrained or facilitated in different ways. They also make a distinction between the terms col‑
laborative and participatory, suggesting that participatory refers to the extent of involvement a 
particular person or group undertakes. Further, they define participation in terms of commitment 
of time, skills, and involvement in the project. One of the key issues in participation is the ques‑
tion of how power is allocated and how it functions within a participatory action project. For 
PAR that uses photography, the additional question would be who gets cameras and who makes 
decisions about what to photograph. In research projects, despite a commitment to collaborative 
participation, circumstances can change and create situations where the collaborative segment 
of the participation can get either enhanced or minimized. For example, Call‑Cummings and Participatory action research (PAR) and photography 53
Ross (2022) explain that in their research project, their collaborative proposal for a joint evalu‑
ation was interrupted and thrown off course by COVID‑19. As a result, the researchers ended 
up collecting most of the data with little collaboration. Instead, they delegated some of the 
data gathering, and despite their wanting various perspectives to be represented, they did not 
always manage that. The lack of various perspectives can be true for photographic PAR, where 
the researchers might find that their questions dominate the project and that researcher‑based 
photographs take up more room than the participants or the community representatives’ photo‑
graphs. Alam et al. (2018) describe a type of participatory photography method that is referred 
to as a “more‑than‑human” research method. Using the term “photo‑response,” they researched 
homemaking in a city in Bangladesh. Using participatory photography, an appropriate method 
for vulnerable populations, they explored the human–nature interactions. There were three 
response moments that they were attentive to: the response to the camera, the response to the 
photographs, and the response to the setting of the images. These moments were the points that 
they took into account in their data‑gathering efforts. PAR using photography opens up many 
possibilities and, at times, can be rooted in projects that begin as arts projects. The next section 
illustrates an example of a community photography project rooted in art that nevertheless could 
be viewed as a critique. PAR and the use of photography nevertheless require careful planning 
and training. Challenges can arise that need to be considered and thought through.
Community photography projects as PAR
McAllister (2015) describes a multistory, community‑based art project started by the artist Tim‑
mermans involving photography by refugee seekers in Glasgow after the year 2000. Refugee 
seekers were housed in areas with the most difficult living conditions, which segregated the asy‑
lum seekers from the rest of Glasgow. The areas were variously described as asocial or dysto‑
pian spaces where several estates were due to be demolished. Multistory is an online archive of 
photo‑based projects started by Iseult Timmermans, who used photography to work with asylum 
seekers to visualize how they viewed the surrounding spaces that they inhabited, typically spaces 
of exclusion (https://timmermans.co.uk/). The project was housed at multi‑story.org. However, 
that site has since been removed, and some of the work can be seen at https://www.redroadflats.
org.uk/p_3201/. Like PAR projects, this project used photography to function as a critique of and 
resistance to the spatial practices that name groups of people as illegal aliens, squatters, or refugee 
seekers. Since people were living in areas earmarked for demolition, the structure for a stable 
community was not possible. Yet it was in these areas that, through photography, the presence of 
the asylum seekers was documented. Their individual day‑to‑day life in the multistory flats was 
documented through individual photography. McAllister’s (2015) goal was to understand the spa‑
tial practices of people who are struggling under unstable conditions and how they were connected 
to the global flows of forced migration as they fled to seek safer ground. The videos do not feature 
the faces of the participants to protect their identities. Multistory is a record of documents and 
photographs of people who have passed through the spaces as refugee and asylum seekers; their 
temporary abode can be seen as both exclusionary spaces as well as spaces filled with imagination 
and inclusion in their attempt to build community with each other. Online archives like these also 
function as historical records and as memorial sites, allowing audiences to glimpse traces of those 
who traveled through these spaces. While the community project described by McAllister (2015) 
focuses on spatial practices, PAR can encompass a wide variety of projects that need community 
input and participation. The use of photography in PAR projects can be challenging. Some of the 
general challenges of PAR are outlined in the next section, along with some specific challenges to 
incorporating photography within PAR.54 Participatory action research (PAR) and photography
Challenges of PAR
When qualitative researchers contemplate a PAR project, they may meet some anticipated and 
unanticipated challenges. The first challenge would be to identify and engage in preliminary 
conversations with community partners. At times, preexisting fears and distrust of academia 
can cause delays in the process of finding community partners who have the authority in their 
communities to move the project forward. The next step would be to invite community members 
or leaders to the table to discuss the research project and seek input from them to draw up an 
outline of what the project would look like. Challenges during this phase could include mak‑
ing decisions among competing interests to decide on research questions that are agreeable to 
all. The planning stage of the project would require input alongside any training of community 
members in skills needed for the project. Participation in PAR calls for specific knowledge, 
skills, and competencies that different groups might need to acquire over time. Capacity build‑
ing is an important part of PAR, and training and reciprocal learning need to be incorporated 
into the process of building a collaborative team. Team building can at times be conflictual, 
and processes for conflict resolution need to be agreed upon by all stakeholders in PAR. The 
importance of a safe space where people can talk requires building a space that is supportive 
for all. In PAR research using photography, despite the widespread awareness and use of taking 
photographs on phones, a practice session might be useful where the researchers discuss some 
possible pros and cons of taking photographs. Further, not everyone might have a cell phone 
to take photographs, and this would mean getting cameras for participants and deciding how 
they might share cameras or which participants would receive cameras to take photographs. 
Discussions around what photographs should not be taken and issues of privacy and consent are 
integral to PAR research using photography. Reciprocal learning requires researchers to learn 
skills and knowledge from the community participants. This would entail recognizing and learn‑
ing from different forms of implicit and tacit knowledge, or what might be referred to by the 
community as “common knowledge” that researchers will likely not possess as outsiders to the 
community. Trust building is a crucial aspect of PAR. It builds on long‑term relationships that 
are honest and characterized by empathy. Different types of reflection are also needed in order 
to make sure that PAR groups can function well. These challenges are heightened with the use 
of social media for PAR, where the medium of dissemination does not always make it possible 
to have longer discussions or contextual dialog with the recipients of photographs. In the next 
section, we discuss how PAR using photography works within social media platforms and the 
particular challenges that can arise in the process.
PAR, photography, and social media
Qualitative researchers with access to social media platforms to gather data and disseminate find‑
ings have experimented with these tools. This is a potential opportunity for wider communication 
while also presenting new ethical dilemmas for researchers. Social media can refer to any applica‑
tion via cell phones or websites that enable users to create and share content. Visual data, compris‑
ing photographs and videos, are the usual form of communication where a photograph or visual 
is shared with a short comment or caption and a hashtag to capture the interest of targeted groups 
while remaining available for larger groups to view and comment on in turn through emoticons or 
messages. Social media accounts can be set to private or public, and the dissemination of photo‑
graphs can therefore be shared with a wider audience or with a more select audience. Social media 
is beginning to be used as a dissemination tool by participants in PAR projects because of its ease 
of use and efficiency, as well as its quick sharing ability (Perrin, 2015). Anderson et al. (2023) 
issued a Pew Research Center report on the use of social media by teenagers in the United States Participatory action research (PAR) and photography 55
that stated that more than 90% of teenagers use some form of social media. Since youth are often 
eager to share the photographs that they take and to display their names with their photographs, 
the confidentiality clauses in qualitative research can be difficult to sustain and may at times put 
participants and groups in danger by identifying participants. However, it is also true that the value 
of empowerment in PAR is highlighted when youth participants or adults take the initiative to 
share and disseminate photographs and results of PAR on social media platforms. Shifting ideas 
around privacy add to the complexity of the ethical responsibility of researchers in the protection 
of participants. Qualitative researchers may need to sharpen their awareness of the ways in which 
an electronic medium can give a sense of anonymity allowing people to be more open or, at times, 
express their beliefs strongly. Taken to an extreme, anonymity can be dangerous by allowing 
the creation of false or hidden identities for harassment and bullying of participants by different 
groups opposing the policy changes for which participants might be advocating. At the same time, 
insisting on anonymity on the part of participants could also lead to restricting their empowerment 
and freedom to choose in what form and whether or not to disseminate their work. Further, ques‑
tions regarding the authenticity of the research, the photographic data, and participant narratives 
arise when trying to protect confidentiality through anonymous posts online. In PAR, the interests 
and purposes of PAR and social activism do not always align with anonymity and confidentiality 
as operationally defined by IRBs. In this sense, there is an inherent conflict between qualitative 
research and the protection of individuals’ identities and PAR, in which social activism and com‑
munity change cannot be effectively anonymized. This is a challenge that researchers might face 
when conducting research through social media using photographs and PAR. Therefore, careful 
and sustained conversations and agreements about the ethical values that will be adhered to must 
remain a high priority.
Researchers have been experimenting with ways to resolve the conundrum of online sharing 
while protecting participant identities. An example of protecting the identities and stories of 
the participants was in a research project conducted by Kia‑Keating et al. (2017). They paired 
different photographs with different participants’ narratives to prevent a direct link to a par‑
ticipant’s story with a particular photograph. This was made possible because the photographs 
chosen were metaphorical or symbolic. This was also done as a way to prevent any negative 
comments made online that might retrigger traumatic memories of any disclosures that might 
have been made by the participants through their photography. Developing a collective voice in 
such cases might be an answer to such dilemmas. Collective voices can be a way to disguise and 
protect individual voices while at the same time not suppressing the narratives and stories asso‑
ciated with each individual. Participant and researcher photography can be showcased together 
to create a collective voice. However, in such cases, qualitative researchers need to be mindful 
of preserving the voices of participants and not creating a voice‑over with their own voices 
becoming dominant.
Collaborative video and filmmaking
Baumann et al. (2019), interested in visual public health research, produced a scoping review 
that identified a variety of different research methods related to the use of film, such as autovide‑
ography (Linz et al., 2016; Petros et al., 2016), video diaries (Bates, 2013; Danielsson & Berge, 
2020), and videovoice (Catalani et al., 2012). Baumann et al. (2020) operationally defined col‑
laborative filmmaking as
an embodied, participatory, and visual research method in which participants are trained 
to create, analyze, and screen films to answer a research question . . .Building upon the 56 Participatory action research (PAR) and photography
trajectory of other visual and community‑based research methods, [it] is valuable for gather‑
ing granular details and sensory data, co‑analyzing data in partnership with participants, and 
producing participant‑generated films that serve as powerful and authentic advocacy tools.
(Baumann et al., 2020, pp. 2248–2249)
And they offered a six‑step Collaborative Filmmaking method outlined within their open‑access 
Handbook (http://www.collaborativefilmmaking.com/wp‑content/uploads/2020/05/Collab‑Film‑
Handbook_May_1_2020‑1.pdf). This method recommends the following steps:
1 Training
2 Film making
3 Film assembly and preparation for coanalysis
4 Coanalysis: individual and group
5 An optional community screening
6 Synthesize data
Using photographs at different stages of the PAR research process
Qualitative researchers, when viewing photographs, can think about different ways to use them 
in the process of research. Entering the field for a qualitative researcher means finding the 
setting where research takes place or where the phenomenon that is being researched is occur‑
ring naturally. To use photographs when entering the field, the researcher can look for existing 
images and photographs on the internet or published in books. For example, if a researcher is 
examining a school district to understand how students and teachers view and use urban spaces, 
before entering the field, a researcher can look for existing photographs of the spaces along with 
any descriptions that might be available. These photographs can be useful in terms of prepara‑
tion for the researcher and further can be one way to start conversations with participants. Pre‑
paring photographs would require researchers to make the selections, group photographs into 
categories that are pertinent to the research question, ensure that as clear an image as possible is 
available for presentation, and determine which photographs to share as ice‑breakers.
Using photographs to build rapport
Photographs can at times serve as a mediating tool for establishing or deepening the rapport 
needed to enhance a research collaboration. This can include asking participants to caption 
photographs of places and events that they might be familiar with as a way to provide early 
opportunities for reinforcing that the participants have a special expertise only they possess. 
Another approach might be to set up a focus group where the researcher can present the purpose 
of the study and potential research questions and encourage the participants to add, modify, or, 
at times, reject the early direction of the research project. Researchers can help facilitate the 
conversation on what type of data to gather and what would have the most impact in terms of 
affecting mindset, changes in practices, and/or policy change. Relationships and trust building 
are keys to developing meaningful participation from different groups or stakeholders. This may 
also include explicit discussions about the types and levels of commitment needed, as well as 
forms of participation, and a detailed communication plan among various parts of the research 
team.
Researchers need to be aware that while one can build rapport with photographs, one can 
also run the risk of destroying rapport by using them without care. In some communities, for 
example, ceremonies considered sacred cannot be photographed, and if a researcher does take Participatory action research (PAR) and photography 57
photographs during such times and places, even inadvertently, it can be interpreted as disrespect 
and can run the risk of destroying rapport. Researchers can follow a few protocols that can pre‑
vent such occurrences. For example, photographs taken in the public domain can be shown to 
most people; however, photographs taken in private homes or settings or within families should 
only be shown to those who are within that group. The researcher cannot take the initiative to 
show even friends of the family without the express consent of the family. Since researchers 
may not be aware of the dynamic between one family and another, it is better to exercise caution 
in order to prevent gossip and conflict. If researchers remember that it is the generosity of those 
who allow them into their lives that results in good research, the protocols and ethics that need 
to be exercised should allow researchers to create goodwill among the community members so 
that they can be welcomed back to the field.
Exercise 4.1: Reading the world through a cross‑cultural lens
The photograph (Photograph 4.1) is floor art in front of a person’s house.
1 In a simulated study of how people of different cultures celebrate, the researcher examined 
specific activities that communities are aware of and that need little explanation for insiders.
2 Look at the Photograph 4.1 submitted by the researcher. What are the ways in which celebra‑
tion is indicated by the photograph?
Photograph 4.1 The photograph is floor art in an entryway. Photo credit: Geetha Ramsundar58 Participatory action research (PAR) and photography
3 Now read the short excerpt from the field notes of the researcher.
[Fieldnotes dated August 1, 2019: I took photographs of the entryways into apartments 
and houses all of which were decorated in different designs and colors. Although everyone is 
aware of the Festival of Lights and the candles and lamps that are part of that festival, few 
know that floor designs are made everyday albeit on a smaller scale to celebrate the new day, 
to welcome good spirits and to keep away bad luck. It is wiped clean every day and a new 
design is made fresh. These are usually made by women in the house, often in collaboration 
and at times by turn taking. The women choose how to draw, what to draw and use tradi‑
tional designs to create a cheerful exterior. This also led me to understand that women often 
carry the cultural traditions and pass them on to their children. Even though men do not 
participate in this event, and as children it is usually the girls who learn this art first, some 
boys are beginning to take an interest in this as an art form].
4 Reading the fieldnotes, would you guess whether the researcher is an outsider or an insider 
to the culture?
5 What does this resemble in your own experience? Is there anything about the field notes and 
description that creates new questions in your mind?
6 What are some ideas that you can learn about the particular community or culture from these 
field notes that you would not have guessed from the photograph?
Photograph 4.2 Five bowls with whisks for a tea ceremony. Photo credit: Raji SwaminathanParticipatory action research (PAR) and photography 59
Exercise 4.2: Understanding and recording activities in a 
community
1 Look at Photograph 4.2. This photograph was submitted by a participant in a simulated pho‑
tovoice study where the participant wanted to examine the world around her, her social life, 
and the meaning of community. Understanding the complexities of social relations was the 
main objective.
2 What can you understand from the photograph about community relations? How would this 
photograph add to one’s understanding of community in a study?
Summary
In this chapter, we discussed the different ways in which photography can be used in PAR. A dis‑
cussion of photovoice and the advantages and disadvantages of the same was followed by other 
ways in which researchers can use photography for participatory research. Exploring emotions 
and working with community‑based groups, as well as the promises and challenges of working 
with social media photography for PAR projects, were discussed. Further, the ways in which 
photographs can be used at different stages of the research process were also outlined with some 
suggested tips for preparation for fieldwork.
References
Alam, A., McGregor, A., & Houston, D. (2018). Photo-response: Approaching participatory photography 
as a more-than-human research method. Area, 50(2), 256–265.
Anderson, K., Elder‑Robinson, E., Howard, K., & Garvey, G. (2023). A systematic methods review of 
Photovoice research with indigenous young people. International Journal of Qualitative Methods, 22. 
http://doi.org/10.117716094069231172076.
Bates, C. (2013). Video diaries: Audio‑visual research methods and the elusive body. Visual Studies, 28,
29–37. https://doi.org/10.1177/16094069231172076
Bateson, G., & Mead, M. 1942). Balinese character: A photographic analysis. New York Academy of Sciences.
Baumann, S. E., Merante, M. M., Folb, B., & Burke, J. G. (2019). Is film as a research tool the future of 
public health?: A review of study designs, opportunities and challenges. Qualitative Health Research. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/1049732319871251
Baumann, S. E., Lhaki, P., & Burke, J. G. (2020). Collaborative filmmaking: A participatory, visual 
research method. Qualitative Health Research, 30(14), 2248–2264.
Bourdieu, P. (2003). Reflexivity, relationism, & research. Space & Culture, 6(1), 52–65.
Buckley, M. E. (2000). Beyond the rhetoric of empowerment: A critical analysis of gender, participation 
and empowerment. Thesis, Master of Arts, Dalhousie University, Canada.
Call‑Cummings, M., & Ross, K. (2022, September). Spectrums of participation: A framework of pos‑
sibility for participatory inquiry and inquirers. Forum Qualitative Sozialforschung/Forum: Qualitative 
Social Research 23(3).
Carlson, E. (2020). Anti‑colonial methodologies and practices for settler colonial studies. In L. Davis, J. 
Denis, & R. Sinclair (Eds.), Pathways of settler decolonization (pp. 102–122). Routledge.
Catalani, C., & Minkler, M. (2010). Photovoice: A review of the literature in health and public health. 
Health Education & Behavior, 37(3), 424–451.
Catalani, C., Veneziale, A., Campbell, L., Herbst, S., Butler, B., Springgate, B., & Minkler, M. (2012). Vid‑
eovoice: Community assessment in post‑Katrina New Orleans. Health Promotion Practice, 13, 18–28. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/1524 839910369070
Close, H. (2007). The use of photography as a qualitative research tool. Nurse Researcher, 15(1), 27–36.60 Participatory action research (PAR) and photography
Collins, P. H. (1991). Black feminist thought: Knowledge, consciousness, and the politics of empowerment.
New York, NY: Routledge.
Crasnow, S. (2014). Feminist standpoint theory. Philosophy of Social Science: A New Introduction, 1, 145–161.
Danielsson, A. T., & Berge, M. (2020). Using video‑diaries in educational research exploring iden‑
tity: Affordances and constraints. International Journal of Qualitative Methods, 19. https://doi.org/
10.1177/1609406920973541
Ellsworth, E. (1989). Why doesn’t this feel empowering? Working through the repressive myths of critical 
pedagogy. Harvard Educational Review, 59(3), 297–325.
Evans‑Agnew, R. A., Rosemberg, M. A. S., & Boutain, D. M. (2022). Emancipatory photovoice research: 
A primer. Health Promotion Practice, 23(2), 211–220.
Ewald, W. (1985). Portraits and dreams. Writers and Readers Publishers.
Ewald, W. (2005). American alphabets. Scalo Verlag Ac Publishers.
Ewald, W. (2019). An immigrant alphabet. Studies in Social Justice, 13(1), 10–19.
Freire, P. (1970). Pedagogy of the oppressed (M. B. Ramos, trans.). Continuum Press.
Harding, S. G. (Ed.). (2004). The feminist standpoint theory reader: Intellectual and political controver‑
sies. Psychology Press.
Higgins, M. (2016). Placing photovoice under erasure: A critical and complicit engagement with what it 
theoretically is (not). International Journal of Qualitative Studies in Education, 29(5), 670–685.
hooks, b. (1994). Teaching to transgress: Education as the practice of freedom. New York: Routledge.
Husain, M. P. M., Ali, M. N. S., & Rizal, A. R. A. (2023). Identifying effectiveness of photography as a 
visual communication tool for enhancing public awareness of environmental issues. Asian Social Sci‑
ence and Humanities Research Journal (ASHREJ), 5(1), 1–10.
Johnston, G. (2016). Champions for social change: Photovoice ethics in practice and “false hopes” for 
policy and social change. Global Public Health, 11(5–6), 799–811
Kia-Keating, M., Santacrose, D., & Liu, S. (2017). Photography and social media use in community-based 
participatory research with youth: Ethical considerations. American Journal of Community Psychology, 
60(3–4), 375–384.
Lather, P. (2017). From research as praxis to praxis in the ruins. future directions of educational change: 
Social justice, professional capital, and systems change. Abingdon: Routledge.
Lewin, K. (1946). Action research and minority problems. In G. W. Lewin (Ed.), Resolving social conflicts
(pp. 143–152). New York: Harper & Row.
Linz, S., Hanrahan, N. P., Decesaris, M., Petros, R., & Solomon, P. (2016). Clinical use of an autovideog‑
raphy intervention. Journal of Psychosocial Nursing & Mental Health Services, 54(5), 33–40. https://
doi.org/10.3928/02793695‑20160420‑04
Lykes, M. B. (2010). Silence (ing), voice (s) and gross violations of human rights: Constituting and per‑
forming subjectivities through PhotoPAR. Visual Studies, 25(3), 238–254.
Lykes, M. B., & Crosby, A. (2014). Feminist practice of action and community research. In S. Hesse‑Biber 
(Ed.), Feminist Research Practice: A Primer, 145–181.
Lykes, M. B., & Scheib, H. (2015). The artistry of emancipatory practice: Photovoice, creative techniques, 
and feminist anti‑racist participatory action research. In H. Bradbury‑Huang (Ed.), The SAGE Hand‑
book of Action Research (pp. 131–142), Sage.
McAllister, K. (2015). Transnational spaces of exclusion in Glasgow: Multi‑story, photography and spatial 
practices. Visual Studies, 30(3), 244–263.
Mooney, R., & Bhui, K. (2023). Analysing multimodal data that have been collected using photovoice as 
a research method. BMJ Open, 13(4), e068289.
Moran, M. J., & Tegano, D. W. (2005). Moving toward visual literacy: Photography as a language of 
teacher inquiry. Early Childhood Research & Practice, 7(1), n1.
Muller, I. (2023). Photovoice methodology to promote education for sustainable development. South Afri‑
can Journal of Higher Education, 37(2), 167–184.
Nygreen, K., Kwon, S. A., & Sánchez, P. (2012). Urban youth building community: Social change and 
participatory research in schools, homes, and community‑based organizations. In B. N. Checkoway, & 
L. M. Gutierrez (Eds.), Youth participation and community change (pp. 107–123). Routledge.Participatory action research (PAR) and photography 61
Perrin, A. (2015). Social media usage. Pew Research Center, 125, 52–68.
Petros, R., Solomon, P., Linz, S., DeCesaris, M., & Hanrahan, N. P. (2016). Autovideography: The lived 
experience of recovery for adults with serious mental illness. Psychiatric Quarterly, 87(3), 417–426. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11126‑015‑9397‑8
Pillow, W. (2003). Confession, catharsis, or cure? Rethinking the uses of reflexivity as methodological 
power in qualitative research. International Journal of Qualitative Studies in Education, 16(2), 175–196.
Powers, C., & Allaman, E. (2012). How participatory action research can promote social change and help 
youth development. SSRN Electronic Journal, https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2199500.
Prins, E. (2010). Participatory photography: A tool for empowerment or surveillance?. Action Research, 
8(4), 426–443.
Quirke, C. (2008). Picturing the poor: Jacob Riis’s reform photography. Reviews in American History, 
36(4), 557–565.
Seixas, P. (1987). Lewis Hine: From” social” to” interpretive” photographer. American Quarterly, 39(3), 
381–409.
Shankar, A. (2016). Auteurship and image-making: A (gentle) critique of the photovoice method. Visual 
Anthropology Review, 32(2), 157–166.
Sutton‑Brown, C. A. (2014). Photovoice: A methodological guide. Photography and Culture, 7(2), 
169–185.
Taylor, R. R., Braveman, B., & Hammel, J. (2004). Developing and evaluating community‑based ser‑
vices through participatory action research: Two case examples. The American Journal of Occupational 
Therapy, 58(1), 73–82.
Thomson, P. (2008). Children and young people: Voices in visual research. In P. Thomson (Ed.), Doing 
visual research with children and young people (pp. 23–42). Routledge.
Thomson, P. (2013). Coming to terms with ‘voice.’ In C. Wise, M. Cartwright, & P. Bradshaw (Eds.), 
Leading professional practice in education (pp. 78–89). London: Sage.
Vaughn, L. M., & Jacquez, F. (2020). Participatory research methods–choice points in the research pro‑
cess. Journal of Participatory Research Methods, 1(1).
Wang, C., & Burris, M. A. (1997). Photovoice: Concept, methodology, and use for participatory needs 
assessment. Health Education & Behavior, 24(3), 369–387.
Weiler, K. (1991). Freire and a feminist pedagogy of difference. Harvard Educational Review, 61(4), 
449–475. https://doi.org/10.17763/haer.61.4.a102265jl68rju84
Wilson, E., Kenny, A., & Dickson‑Swift, V. (2018). Ethical challenges in community‑based par‑
ticipatory research: A scoping review. Qualitative Health Research, 28(2), 189–199. https://doi.
org/10.1177/1049732317690721DOI: 10.4324/9781003034773-5
This chapter looks at photojournalism, photodocumentaries, and videodocumentaries, includ‑
ing examining the art of photography, videography, and documentary research. In this context, 
archival photographs, photographic collections, and found photographs will be explored as well 
as questions regarding the source of photographs. We will discuss the contemporary debates 
about secondary data analysis with regard to archival photographs and photojournalism. Film 
elicitation within visual qualitative research is rare but much needed, despite the challenges that 
come with the medium (Banks, 2001). In Banks’ words, “even more so than still photography, 
the moving image – film, video, or television broadcast – is a wayward medium, difficult to 
control” (2001, p. 99). Qualitative researchers need to understand the challenges of photography 
as both a still and moving medium. In this chapter, we also explain what videography entails, 
the promises of video, how researchers can use video to enhance their data gathering, and the 
limitations and challenges of videography in qualitative research practices. Tips and practice 
exercises are offered at the end of the chapter.
Brennen (2010) provided an important summary of the history of photography from the 
perspective of photojournalism that has direct implications for the ways social scientists have 
thought about research photography. She wrote
the history of photography has presented photographs as news items, documentary evi‑
dence, objective renderings of reality, and individual works of art. The word photography 
has Greek origins and literally means “writing with light.” Initially, photographic images 
were thought to be devoid of human agency and formed solely through a chemical pro‑
cess…Soon after the development of the daguerreotype in the late 1830s, photographs 
began to shape not only the way individuals saw themselves but also the way they envi‑
sioned the world. Photographs were thought to verify the existence of a subject and were 
presumed to provide objective proof that something actually happened and individuals 
began to believe that photographs could provide [an accurate reality more] than other 
artistic renderings of society
(Brennen, 2010, pp. 71–72).
The existence of the manipulation of images and staged photos also has a long history. Brennen 
(2010) reminds us that
Researchers began to demonstrate that the choice of a subject and the framing of that 
subject, as well as lighting decisions and camera angles, printing strategies, retouching, 
cropping, and labeling, all influenced the way an image would be interpreted; yet, in 
their daily usage photographs continued to be seen as truthful depictions of an objective 
5 Researcher photography and 
videographyResearcher photography and videography 63
reality…Although the camera continued to hold the promise of capturing realistic ren‑
derings of society, it was also a technology that could deceive, blurring the line between 
representation and reality. For example, Mathew Brady’s collection of Civil War images 
represents the first time in the history of photography that a war was covered in its entirety. 
Brady and his team of photographers including Alexander Gardner, Timothy O’Sullivan, 
and George Barnard compiled approximately 7,000 images of Civil War battlefields and 
encampments. [The photographic images] were initially thought to illustrate the reality 
of an extremely gruesome war. And yet, contemporary historians now maintain that the 
single most famous image in the Brady collection, “Home of a Rebel Sharpshooter,” taken 
by Gardner with the assistance of O’Sullivan, was actually staged
(Brennen, 2010, p. 73).
Archival photos
Archival photos can be a rich source of data for secondary analysis in qualitative research. 
Secondary data analysis involves using existing data, such as archival photos or other forms of 
archived information, to address new research questions or to explore new aspects of a research 
topic. Archival photos can provide rich and diverse data for secondary analysis and can be used 
in conjunction with other forms of archived data to provide a more complete understanding of a 
research topic. Here are some ways that researchers can use archival photos as part of secondary 
data analysis:
Memory and nostalgia: Archival photos can evoke feelings of nostalgia and prompt memories 
of past experiences. Researchers can use archival photos to explore how memories of past 
experiences shape present‑day attitudes and behaviors and to examine the role that nostalgia 
plays in shaping cultural narratives.
Environmental analysis: Archival photos can be used to analyze changes in the built environ‑
ment and natural landscapes over time. Researchers can use archival photos to examine how 
urban and natural landscapes have changed over time and to identify the social, cultural, and 
environmental factors that have contributed to these changes.
Artistic analysis: Archival photos can be used to analyze the artistic and aesthetic aspects of 
visual culture. Researchers can use archival photos to examine the techniques and styles used 
by photographers and other visual artists and to explore how these techniques and styles have 
changed or evolved over time.
Policy analysis: Archival photos can be used to inform policy decisions by providing historical 
context and evidence of past practices and policies. Researchers can use archival photos to 
examine the impact of past policies on communities and to identify lessons that can inform 
current policy decisions.
The use of archival photos can provide researchers with a unique perspective on historical 
events, social practices, and cultural trends and can contribute to a more nuanced understanding 
of a wide range of research topics. It can also help researchers raise questions about those who 
engaged in the process of archiving and preserving certain images. One point to continuously 
consider is the ethical implications of using archival photos in research. When using archival 
photos, it is important to consider issues of privacy, informed consent, and cultural sensitivity. 
Researchers should be aware that archival photos may depict individuals or communities who 
may not have given their consent for their image to be used in research, and that the use of these 
images may be considered intrusive or disrespectful by some groups. To address these ethical 64 Researcher photography and videography
concerns, researchers should take steps to ensure that their use of archival photos is respectful, 
sensitive, and transparent. This may involve seeking the consent of the individuals or communi‑
ties depicted in the photos or using anonymized or deidentified photos to protect the privacy of 
individuals. Researchers should also be aware of the cultural context in which the photos were 
taken and should be sensitive to the potential cultural and historical meanings and implications 
of the images. It is important to acknowledge and credit the sources of archival photos used 
in research and to be transparent about the methods and techniques used to gain access to the 
photos used for analysis of the photos as well as any precautions taken to preserve the original 
image.
Qualitative researchers can use archival photographs, photographic collections, and found 
photographs in a variety of ways to enrich their research. Here are some examples (Table 5.1):
How can archivists assist qualitative researchers with photographic data?
Qualitative researchers can use archival photos and film footage as valuable sources of data to 
enhance their research. Here are several ways in which these materials can be utilized:
Historical Context and Cultural Analysis: Archival photos and film footage can provide a visual 
representation of historical events, places, and people. Researchers can use these materials to 
gain insights into the historical context relevant to their study by way of background and/or 
use select portions of the visual data for direct analysis, depending on the goals of the study. 
It can also help researchers understand cultural nuances, traditions, and social dynamics. 
This is particularly useful when studying cultural phenomena or changes over time. This type 
of analysis can complement traditional ethnographic research methods.
Narrative Analysis: Photos and film footage often capture personal and collective memories. 
Researchers can analyze these visuals to explore how individuals or communities construct 
narratives and make sense of their past.
Identity and Representation: Visual materials offer insights into how certain identities or groups 
are represented in society. Researchers can analyze the portrayal of individuals or communi‑
ties in archival photos and films to understand issues related to identity and representation.
Comparative Studies: Archival visuals can be compared with contemporary images to iden‑
tify changes or continuities in social, cultural, or environmental aspects. This comparative 
approach can contribute to a deeper understanding of societal transformations.
Documenting Change in Natural and Built Environments: Researchers can use archival photos 
and film footage to document changes in landscapes, urban development, or natural environ‑
ments. This can be valuable for studies focused on environmental changes or urbanization.
Complementing Interviews and Text‑based Data: Archival visuals can complement traditional 
qualitative data sources like interviews and text‑based documents, providing a multidimen‑
sional understanding of the research topic.
Public Memory and Discourse: Researchers can explore how archival visuals contribute to 
public memory and discourse. This is particularly relevant when studying events that have 
shaped collective memory.
Archivists can play a crucial role in assisting qualitative researchers with photographic data. By 
embracing a collaborative and interdisciplinary approach, archivists can enhance the qualitative 
research process, ensuring that researchers effectively leverage photographic data for mean‑
ingful insights. Open communication and a shared understanding of the goals of the research 
project contribute to a successful partnership between archivists and qualitative researchers. Researcher photography and videography 65
Table 5.1 Ways to Use Archival Photographs, Photographic Collections, and Found Photographs
Historical analysis Archival photographs and photographic collections can be used to analyze 
historical events and social changes. Researchers can examine how 
visual representations of past events have influenced cultural beliefs and 
perceptions.
Visual storytelling Newly generated and/or found photographs can be used to tell stories about 
people, communities, or events. Researchers can use photographs to create 
narratives that convey the experiences of individuals or groups.
Comparative analysis Researchers can compare different photographs to explore how images 
are constructed and how meaning is created through multiple visual 
representations of the same or similar people or events. Researchers can 
use photographs as a means of creative analysis, using them to generate 
new insights and understandings. For example, photographs can be 
used to inspire creative writing, art, or other forms of data generation 
and data analysis allowing for a fuller range of expression that may 
help to illuminate the meaning and significance of the photographic 
data. Chronological comparisons can use a small sample of archival 
photographs to augment a larger data set or engage an entire photographic 
collection as the main data source to explore the intersection of the 
past and present. Comparing photographs from different time periods, 
locations, or contexts to explore how social norms and cultural practices 
differ across different groups and contexts. 
Reflexive analysis Photographs can be used by researchers as a tool for reflexivity, examining 
how their own positionality, such as cultural, educational, geographic 
location, gender identity, and socio‑economic background, may influence 
their interpretation of visual data.
Focus group studies Qualitative researchers can use photographs as prompts for interviews or for 
focus group discussions. 
Participatory research Participatory Action Research (PAR), for example, can involve archival 
or found photographs as well as newly generated photographs, where 
participants are invited to tell stories based on how they interpret the 
visuals.
Ethnographic analysis Qualitative researchers can use photographs as a means of ethnographic 
documentation, using them to capture and analyze the material culture of 
a particular community or group. Photographs can be used to record the 
physical environment, objects, and artifacts, as well as to document social 
practices and interactions.
Intersectional analysis Qualitative researchers can use photographs to explore the intersectionality 
of identity and experience. For example, photographs can be used to 
examine how race, gender, sexuality, and class intersect to shape social 
identities and experiences.
Collaborative analysis A collaborative team of qualitative researchers can involve participants in the 
analysis of photographic data, inviting them to interpret and analyze the 
images themselves alongside the research team. This can be done through 
focus groups, collaborative workshops, or other participatory methods.
Digital analysis With the increasing availability of digital archives and online collections, 
researchers can use digital tools and software to analyze large collections 
of photographs. For example, researchers can use image recognition 
algorithms to identify patterns and themes across large collections of 
photographs.
Creative analysis Finally, researchers can use photographs as a means of creative analysis, 
using them to generate new insights and understandings. For example, 
photographs can be used to inspire creative writing, art, or other forms 
of data generation and data analysis allowing for a fuller range of 
expression that may help to illuminate the meaning and significance of the 
photographic data.
(Continued)66 Researcher photography and videography
By working closely with archivists, qualitative researchers can benefit from the expertise and 
resources available within archival institutions, ensuring effective and responsible use of photo‑
graphic data in their research endeavors.
Here are specific ways in which archivists can provide support in working with photographic 
materials:
Collection Management and Reference Assistance: Archivists organize and manage archival 
collections, ensuring that materials are properly cataloged, preserved, and accessible. They 
can assist researchers in navigating and locating relevant materials within the archive. Archi‑
vists are knowledgeable about the contents of their collections. They can help researchers 
identify potential sources, recommend relevant materials, and provide guidance on navigat‑
ing the archive’s resources.
Access and Permissions: Archivists can facilitate access to archival materials, guiding research‑
ers through any necessary permissions or usage policies. They can provide information on 
copyright restrictions and help researchers obtain the necessary permissions for use.
Preservation Guidance: Archivists ensure the preservation of archival materials. They can 
advise researchers on handling and care procedures to prevent damage to delicate items. This 
guidance is crucial when researchers want to view or handle physical materials.
Digitization Services: Archivists may offer digitization services, making it possible for research‑
ers to access materials remotely. This is especially helpful for researchers who cannot physi‑
cally visit the archive.
Metadata Creation: Archivists often create detailed metadata for archival materials, describing 
their content, context, and significance. This metadata assists researchers in understanding 
the relevance of materials and helps in efficient searches.
Narrative analysis Researchers can use photographs as a means of analyzing the visual story or 
narrative that the photographs spark. This can also involve analyzing the 
composition, lighting, and other visual elements to identify themes and 
patterns in the material effects of the photographs.
Autoethnography Researchers can use photographs as a means of augmenting 
autoethnographies, using them to reflect on their own experiences and 
identities and/or represent various life experiences. 
Critical analysis Qualitative researchers can use photographs as a means of critical analysis, 
exploring how visual representations are used to reinforce or challenge 
dominant cultural narratives and power structures. This can involve 
analyzing the ways in which photographs are used in advertising, media, 
and other forms of visual culture to construct and reinforce social norms 
and power relations.
Phenomenological 
analysis
Researchers can use photographs to explore the lived experiences of 
individuals or groups. This involves analyzing the ways in which 
photographs capture and convey elements of people’s multivocal 
experiences and the ways in which individuals and groups experience 
and make sense of the world around them. This can involve analyzing 
the visual elements of the photograph as well as considering the context 
in which the photograph was taken, examining who the photographer 
was, the cultural background of the photographer, and the individuals 
depicted in the photograph. Phenomenological analysis can be 
particularly useful in exploring issues such as identity, embodiment, and 
emotion.
Table 5.1 (Continued)Researcher photography and videography 67
Assistance with Visual Citation: Archivists can provide guidance on proper citation practices 
for visual materials. Researchers may need assistance in citing photographs accurately and 
ethically in their academic work.
Training and Orientation: Archivists can provide training sessions or orientations to researchers 
on how to use the archive’s resources effectively. This includes guidance on navigating find‑
ing aids, databases, and other tools.
Collaboration on Research Projects: Archivists can collaborate with researchers on specific 
projects. They may provide insights into the archival holdings, suggest relevant materials, 
and offer expertise on the historical context of the materials. Archivists can also facilitate 
interdisciplinary collaboration by connecting researchers with materials from different col‑
lections that may be relevant to multiple fields of study as well as facilitate introductions 
among researchers from different fields with connected interests. Archivists are often aware 
of ethical considerations related to the use of archival materials. They can guide researchers 
on ethical practices, ensuring that materials are used responsibly and in compliance with 
archival policies.
Community Engagement: In cases where archival materials involve specific communities, archi‑
vists can help researchers engage with those communities respectfully and collaboratively. 
This may include obtaining community input or permissions.
Customized Research Support: Archivists can offer personalized research support based on the 
specific needs of individual researchers. This may involve tailored assistance in navigating 
complex archival collections.
Assistance with Primary Source Analysis and Developing Visual Narratives: Archivists can 
provide guidance on the analysis of primary sources, helping researchers interpret and con‑
textualize archival materials within the broader framework of their research. And they can 
assist researchers in developing visual narratives based on available photographic data. This 
involves helping researchers craft stories or interpretations that arise from the images in a 
coherent and meaningful way. Including helping researchers construct timelines using photo‑
graphic evidence. This can be especially valuable when exploring changes over time, histori‑
cal events, or the evolution of certain subjects captured in the photographs.
Technology Integration: Archivists can assist researchers in leveraging digital tools and tech‑
nologies to enhance their research. This may include using digital archives, databases, or 
other technological solutions to access and analyze materials.
Assisting in Image Clustering and Analysis: Archivists can assist researchers in clustering and 
analyzing large sets of images. This may involve grouping photographs based on common 
themes, visual elements, or temporal patterns to facilitate in‑depth analysis.
Exhibition and Outreach Support: For researchers interested in public engagement, archivists 
can provide support in curating exhibitions, creating educational materials, or participat‑
ing in outreach activities to share research findings with a broader audience. Archivists and 
researchers can collaborate on outreach initiatives to promote the importance of archival 
research and engage the wider community in understanding and appreciating historical 
materials.
Grant and Funding Opportunities: Archivists may be aware of grant and funding opportunities 
available for researchers in the field. They can provide information on potential sources of 
financial support for research projects.
Assessment of Collection Relevance: Archivists can assist researchers in assessing the relevance 
of archival collections to their research questions. This may involve consultations to better 
understand the scope of available materials and their potential contributions.68 Researcher photography and videography
Providing Insights into Photographic Techniques: Archivists may offer insights into the histori‑
cal context of photographic techniques used during a specific time period. This knowledge 
can aid researchers in understanding the technical aspects of the images.
Supporting Oral History Projects: Archivists can assist researchers in integrating oral history 
with photographic data. This may involve identifying individuals in photographs, conducting 
interviews, and creating a more comprehensive understanding of the visual narrative.
Assisting with Multimodal Analysis: Archivists can support researchers in incorporating multi‑
modal analysis, combining photographic data with other forms of qualitative data (interviews 
and textual documents) for a holistic understanding of the research topic.
Advisory Role in Methodology: Archivists can serve in an advisory role, offering insights into 
effective research methodologies when working with archival materials. This guidance can 
be valuable in shaping the overall approach to a research project.
Feedback on Research Proposals: Archivists may provide feedback on research proposals, 
helping researchers refine their plans and ensuring that the proposed use of archival materi‑
als aligns with the capabilities and policies of the archive.
Found photographs
Found photographs are photographs that are discovered or obtained from sources other than 
one’s own camera, such as within attic storage boxes, at garage sales or flea markets, thrift stores, 
or within physical or online archives. The use of found photographs in qualitative research is 
often driven by the researcher’s theoretical or conceptual framework, as well as their research 
questions and goals. Many qualitative researchers have used found photographs as research 
data, often using them to explore cultural or historical phenomena, but qualitative researchers 
have used found photographs in a whole plethora of ways. Here are a few examples:
As prompts for interviews or focus groups: Found photographs can serve as prompts for quali‑
tative interviews or focus groups. Participants can be asked to reflect on the images, which 
can prompt discussion and help researchers to explore participants’ experiences, perceptions, 
and attitudes.
To create visual narratives: Found photographs can be used to create visual narratives that 
reflect particular themes or issues. For example, a series of found photographs depicting 
homelessness could be used to create a visual narrative that explores the various ways the 
lives of the homeless are depicted and interpreted.
To challenge dominant narratives: Found photographs can be used to challenge dominant nar‑
ratives or representations. For example, a researcher might use found photographs to chal‑
lenge common stereotypes or misconceptions about a particular group or issue as well as to 
highlight the gaps in public knowledge or understanding about particular issues.
To examine the production and circulation of images: Found photographs can be used to explore 
the social, political, and economic factors that shape the production and circulation of images. 
For example, a researcher might use found photographs to explore the ways in which images 
of poverty are produced and circulated, to whom and why, and to use as the basis to examine 
the social and political implications of these images.
To construct photographic collages pieced together to produce a story of congruence or 
juxtaposition.
To explore the relationship between images and memory. Found photographs can serve as 
“memory triggers,” prompting individuals to recall and reflect on their own experiences and 
memories. Researchers can use found photographs in interviews or focus groups to explore Researcher photography and videography 69
the ways in which individuals interpret and assign meaning to images and to examine the role 
of images in shaping personal and collective memories.
As a way to engage with communities and involve them in the research process, researchers 
can use found photographs to initiate conversations and build relationships with individuals 
or groups and to involve them in the interpretation and analysis of images. This participatory 
approach to research can help to promote a sense of ownership and empowerment among partic‑
ipants and can lead to more nuanced and complex understandings of social phenomena. The use 
of found photographs in qualitative research can also involve collaboration with other research‑
ers or artists. For example, a qualitative researcher might collaborate with a photographer or 
visual artist to create a visual representation of their research findings, using found photographs 
as source material. This can be a way to translate complex ideas or concepts into a more acces‑
sible and engaging form.
As a multisensory research approach that incorporates other forms of media, such as audio 
recordings or video. For example, a researcher might use found photographs in conjunction with 
audio interviews or field recordings to create a multisensory representation of a particular social 
or cultural phenomenon.
Overall, the use of found photographs in qualitative research is a versatile and powerful 
tool for exploring a wide range of social, cultural, and historical phenomena. Researchers often 
categorize found photographs in a variety of ways. They can be categorized by topic or theme, 
by the people in them, by types of social interactions, as well as by determining whether the 
photographs were candid or posed. Both candid and posed photographs reveal something about 
the performance, the content, and the messages conveyed both collectively as in a group of 
photographs and individually in each photograph. The use of found photographs in qualitative 
research can involve ethical considerations, particularly with regard to the privacy and consent 
of the individuals depicted in the photographs. Researchers must be mindful of the potential 
harm that could result from the use of certain images and must take steps to protect the privacy 
and dignity of individuals depicted in the photographs. This may involve seeking consent from 
individuals or their families or using anonymized images to protect identities.
Photodocumentary
Photodocumentary is a type of photography that aims to document and depict a particular sub‑
ject, event, or social phenomenon. It typically involves the use of photographs to tell a story, pro‑
vide information, or raise awareness about an issue or topic. Photodocumentary often involves 
the work of photojournalists or documentary photographers, who use their images to commu‑
nicate a message or make a statement about a particular subject. It can be used to document a 
wide range of topics, from social and political issues to environmental concerns and cultural 
traditions. Photodocumentary can be used in a variety of contexts, including journalism, art, and 
research. For example, a photojournalist might use photodocumentary techniques to document 
a social issue or event, such as a protest or natural disaster, and publish the resulting images in 
a newspaper or magazine. An artist might use photodocumentary techniques to create a series 
of photographs that explore a particular theme or idea. And a researcher might use photodocu‑
mentary techniques as part of a larger study, using photographs to help document and analyze a 
particular phenomenon or social issue. Increasingly, it is being used by qualitative researchers, 
and the term photodocumentary can refer to a broad range of research approaches designed for 
storytelling purposes that involve the use of photographs as a means of documenting, convey‑
ing, and analyzing social phenomena. This approach often involves combining photographs 70 Researcher photography and videography
with other types of data, such as interviews, surveys, and archival materials, in order to provide 
a more comprehensive understanding of the subject being studied. In recent years, there has 
been a growing interest in the use of photodocumentary techniques in educational research, 
particularly in fields such as anthropology, sociology, and education. This approach to research 
involves using photographs as a means of capturing and analyzing data, often in conjunction 
with other qualitative research methods such as interviews, observations, and focus groups.
Photodocumentary, as used by researchers, can be thought of as a form of visual storytelling 
that uses photographs to convey information and create a provocative narrative. In some cases, 
photodocumentary may involve capturing images in a candid, unobtrusive way, while in other 
cases, it may involve more staged or posed photographs. Photodocumentary techniques can pro‑
vide a rich source of data, as they can capture not only visual information but also the emotions, 
experiences, and perspectives of the individuals being photographed.
Video data gathering
Chalfen et al. (2010) used Video Intervention and Prevention Assessment (VIA), a research pro‑
gram that was developed to create better communication between physicians and patients. The 
goal was to give patients a greater role in their healthcare management. The researchers assumed 
that the stories told by the patients would be different in terms of revealing more about their 
living conditions and how they managed their illnesses compared with the biomedical informa‑
tion and knowledge that physicians would provide. The researchers gave a list of assignments 
to participants to facilitate telling their stories. For 8–12 weeks, participants carried camcorders 
to record anything in their everyday lives that they thought would be useful for their storytell‑
ing. In addition, they also asked participants to talk to the camcorder once a day and record a 
monolog. They provided prompts that would help the participants to get started. Prompts were 
generic and included what annoyed you, or tell us about your day. The researchers then drew 
on the work of Thompson (2008) who outlined a typology of different types of voices that can 
emerge in research. She outlined six types of voices, namely authoritative, critical, therapeutic, 
confidential, consumer, and pedagogic voices. Chalfen et al. (2010) applied this framework to 
their analysis of voice and found examples of the different registers of voices among the narra‑
tives of the participants to whom they gave camcorders to record their experiences and explain 
to physicians and other healthcare professionals how they were feeling and managing their ill‑
ness on a day‑to‑day basis.
They categorized those that spoke of experiences that were common or voices that were advo‑
cating for a greater awareness of some aspect of an illness as using an authoritative voice. The 
authoritative voice was often used in order to illuminate aspects of illness and the conditions of 
living with that illness. The critical voice challenged the status quo, and patients talked about poli‑
cies or discussed stereotypical attitudes. The therapeutic voice was often used to discuss private 
feelings that also had to do with both identity and coping. This could also be regarded as a con‑
fessional voice or a confidential voice, which was more like a private message to the healthcare 
professional. The consumer voice would be that which describes what preferences people have 
and what they need in order to live the life that they want to live. Participants might talk about 
what they did with cosmetics or what they needed to disguise or cover up any visual effects of 
their medications. Consumer voices often had to do with what they needed in order to present 
themselves in the way they wanted to the world. Since these participants were asked to teach their 
physicians or doctors about what it is like to live with an illness, they used a pedagogic voice as 
well where they were explaining to the doctors how they coped on an everyday basis. Thompson 
(2008) cautions that we should not treat voice as either authentic, fixed, or stable.Researcher photography and videography 71
In discussing voice, it would be remiss not to think about who is being addressed or who is 
listening. What is being said is often mediated, changed, or altered depending on the audience, 
and therefore, in discussing, thinking about, and analyzing voice, even in video or imagery, one 
needs to think about who is the audience or the intended audience toward whom the images or 
films are being directed. The same applies to still photography, where who is viewing the images 
is as important as the photographer sharing the images. This includes choosing not to share as 
well as sharing particular images. It may also involve participants choosing to leave their pho‑
tographs and images anonymous or without captions, while the narratives and text might tell 
the stories that they wish to tell. Confidentiality can conflict with advocacy or voice, and yet the 
choice to not voice or not put one’s name to images is as much an aspect of empowerment as is 
the choice to advocate for oneself.
Video diaries
Pini and Walkerdine (2012), in their study of girls on film, had their participants produce video 
diaries. The purpose behind using video dairies was both due to the increased familiarity with 
video production on the part of the participants and the intent to reduce the presence of the 
researchers and provide them with a role that was not central to the research data gathering. 
Pini and Walkerdine (2012) intended that the video diaries would allow their participants to be 
more free in their expressions as they spoke to the video and treated the camera as a confidante. 
Although the presence of a camera might indicate another person or a type of surveillance, that 
was not the way in which they hoped participants perceived the camera. Video diaries were also 
chosen because of a certain lack of confidence among the participants in their literary abilities 
to write or journal their experiences. The video diaries produced by the women were somewhat 
like literary diaries and very often juxtaposed the mundane and the everyday with brief flashes 
of narration on a confidential note. Although diaries and video diaries might be regarded as more 
authentic because of the absence of a researcher in the frame, it is important to remind research‑
ers that video diaries are also produced, edited, and at times staged in a particular setting before 
they are recorded. To this extent, the authenticity claim of video diaries as being untouched 
or natural can be called into question. However, at the same time, the presentation of self by 
participants as they desire in the diaries can also be seen as an authentic attempt to fashion the 
self they wish to portray. Goffman’s (1959) impression management and the presentation of self 
in everyday life come into play as the participants simultaneously discuss issues openly while 
also monitoring how they appear on camera. The idea that the camera is a confidante is made 
complex in that the participants were aware that the diaries would be viewed by an audience. 
Some participants referred to the research questions on camera as they pointed out that they 
were being asked to keep these diaries so that people could study how they lived to understand 
social class and femininity. Some of the participants produced a satirical diary in which they 
adopted the tone of a documentary presenter or changed their accent in order to mimic a differ‑
ent social class, making it clear that they were very aware of the intended audience or the gaze 
of the camera as being, to some degree, the gaze of the researcher. At the end of the project, 
when the girls handed in their video diaries, some of them had wiped or had edited a lot of the 
diaries out before handing them back to the researchers. They also shared that sometimes they 
just felt obligated to do the diaries and that it did not feel particularly empowering to talk about 
the topics to a camera. They also confessed that their own social class accents were distasteful 
to them, and they had tried to talk in ways that did not make them appear from a lower social 
class. At times, it was difficult for them to film at home or show what was going on because of 
objections from others who were living with them. At times, they recorded over and erased what 72 Researcher photography and videography
they had earlier recorded to prevent conflicts. From this study, it was clear to the researchers that 
ideas of empowerment and access or authenticity were all complex concepts. Further, the par‑
ticipants saw themselves as both observers through the camera and the observed. They at times 
commented on what they had filmed earlier and contradicted what might appear as one interpre‑
tation by offering a different one. What video diaries reveal is the possibility of multiplicity and 
different framings of particular scenes. The researchers would need to take into consideration 
that what they see is a presentation, is at times spontaneous and at other times staged, and that 
what is revealed might conceal layers beneath the surface‑level performances. In analyzing 
such visual data, it is difficult to categorize and neatly place into boxes the different diaries or 
components of the different diaries. Instead, one needs to seek context both in voice as well as 
in the visual to see what it is that the participants choose to share, where the contradictions exist, 
and what their setting might reveal along with their verbal explanations. Their nonverbal com‑
munication is equally important, including whether or not they choose to video themselves or 
video different objects and spaces as part of their video diary.
Videography
Knoblauch and Schnettler (2012) have discussed videography in the context of social interac‑
tions to mean gathering data that reflects social interactions and analyzing the same through 
qualitative methods. Vlogging or video blogs have become popular with YouTube channels 
on a variety of topics, from cooking to travel or housekeeping, allowing a wide variety of 
interests to be represented by equally varied cross‑sections of society. Researchers can study 
vlogs and analyze them. They can also use vlogs to record their fieldnotes by taking videos of 
the setting and talking about it. They can use vlogs for the dissemination of research results as 
well. Researchers need to be mindful of confidentiality if they decide to use a vlog for record‑
ing their field notes or for dissemination. They have the choice of vlogging without sharing 
it publicly or restricting the sharing to participants and the community who are partners in 
the research. Narratives can be added to the vlogs, as can discussions and dialog with the 
community. Vlogs of field diaries could also be useful for teaching and sharing within small 
groups. With the requisite permissions, records of places at particular moments in history are 
also a valuable resource if it can be accessible to the public or for research purposes. While 
videos can be made using sophisticated cameras, one can also use a mobile phone to take 
videos and create short films. Cellphilms are one type of videography that can be taken with 
a mobile phone.
Cellphilms
Mobile technologies have made it easy to take not only photographs but also videos. The term 
cellphilm was first used by Dockney, Tomaselli, and Hart in 2010. Cellphilms are a participatory 
visual research methodology in the tradition of photovoice digital storytelling and participatory 
video. Cellphilms are made by people who use their smartphones in order to create videos for a 
particular purpose, in response to a prompt, and usually toward activist ends (MacEntee et al., 
2016). They are about two minutes long and filmed on smartphones. A number of international 
film festivals have incorporated and celebrated cellphilm productions in Spain, France, and 
Canada. Traditional video recording can be expensive and technically demanding, while cell 
filming is a tool that counters the hierarchy of the researcher/researched by putting the means 
of producing the films in the hands of participants. This makes cellphilm production a more 
democratic process. It is similar to digital storytelling but with a much stronger emphasis on Researcher photography and videography 73
advocacy. In order to understand or look at examples of cell films, the Cellphilm Festival web‑
site, https://internationalcellphilmfestivalblog.wordpress.com/, is a space where viewers, espe‑
cially qualitative researchers, can look at a range of films.
Noreiga (2022) discusses how she created and facilitated the creation of cellphilms in order 
to understand Black student experiences. She used cellphilms to create a platform so that Black 
university students in Canada could voice their experiences. In her first workshop, with students 
whom she was unfamiliar, she created a sense of trust and rapport by having a willingness to 
appreciate the perspectives of others in order to have an ethical facilitation. She also had a 
friendly approach and tried to make the space informal in order to make it comfortable for the 
students. After an initial discussion around mutually shared experiences that were both similar 
and dissimilar, she introduced the tool of cellphilms. Her participants, with whom she was col‑
laborating around this workshop, were students like herself. Some participants were Black stu‑
dents who had grown up in Canada, and others were international students from countries where 
Blacks were the majority population, and they had therefore not experienced being categorized 
as a person of color. However, after coming to Canada, they experienced being part of a minor‑
ity community. She introduced cellphilms as a tool with which people could express themselves 
and create counter‑narratives. Cell phones can be used as a medium for social justice activism, 
and participants can have the autonomy to determine what they want to film and how they want 
to narrate their stories. Creating the films is the first step. A crucial second step is the dialog 
that can be facilitated with the viewing of these films. Dissemination is a third step in order to 
initiate action that can positively transform structural inequalities. In the workshop that Noreiga 
created, some of the participants chose to disseminate their films through social media outlets. 
They disseminated the film during Black History Month by screening it. The films and report 
were also distributed to a committee on equity and inclusion, along with participant‑generated 
suggestions on how the university and academia could find ways to be more inclusive and wel‑
coming to black students. In the dissemination of cellphilms, potential conflicts might arise if 
participant‑produced films are discussed at conferences that are academic and without the pres‑
ence of the participants.
Burkholder et al. (2023) used cellphilm making in their research on how school structures 
and policies can perpetuate gendered violence. In their research, a student participant ques‑
tioned the violence of practices in schools in a film called S/S/S (school, safe, space). They used 
a password‑protected YouTube channel to share their cellphilms and to use as an archive, with 
the understanding that creators could at any time remove their content. Some participants were 
comfortable sharing their films with a larger audience through social media, while others chose 
where and how to share them. Some chose to edit their philms for certain audiences and not for 
others.
Researchers can use blogs, vlogs, cellphilms, still photographs, or a cluster of photographs to 
study various phenomena and social interactions. Additionally, they can showcase their ongo‑
ing research and share the often challenging and messy process via these platforms. They can 
share field diaries and memos that they write, the challenges they face, and how the research 
process itself unfolds. Researchers can choose to make these accessible to participants and to 
select peers to invite dialog and open up communication. Researcher‑generated photography 
and videography can be used for pedagogic purposes as well, to introduce participants to the 
process or to engage with early‑career researchers. In doing so, the ethical dimensions of shar‑
ing need to be kept in mind so that the trust and confidentiality of participants are not trans‑
gressed in any way. Researcher‑generated photography and videography opens up opportunities 
for early‑career researchers to engage with participants and to reflect on their ongoing field 
experiences, as well as make the process of research more transparent.74 Researcher photography and videography
Photograph 5.1a  Lee, R. (photographer). (1941). Children and their teacher at the FSA Farm Security 
Administration farm family migratory labor camp. Yakima, Washington. United States 
Yakima Washington Yakima County, 1941. September [Photograph] Retrieved from the 
Library of Congress, https://www.loc.gov/item/2017815729/
Photograph 5.1b  Leffler, W. K. (photographer). (1969). St. Peters School, 3rd & “E” St, SE D.C., 1969. 
[6/5/69 5 June] [Photograph]. Retrieved from the Library of Congress, https://www.loc.
gov/item/2019636730/ Photograph from https://www.loc.gov/resource/ppmsca.56731/Researcher photography and videography 75
Exercise 5.1: Archival photographs and secondary data
Look at the images and Photographs 5.1a–5.1c separately at first. Describe each.
1 What words first come to mind to classify them? What other types of material would you be 
looking for in the archives that would help you to understand and analyze these images?
2 How do these artifacts help you to understand something about the history of education?
3 What other histories can you learn from these photographs and the captions accompanying 
them?
4 Imagine that you were one of the people in any of the photographs. What would you say?
5 Reflect: Think about the challenges of looking at archival photographs. What types of 
research questions would archival photographs help you answer?
Photograph 5.1c  Hine, L. W. (photographer). (1913). Group of children in the kindergarten school 
composed of the cotton mill people. Even during the play the mill is ever in the back‑
ground. Dallas Cotton Mill. Location: Dallas, Texas. United States Texas Dallas, 1913. 
October. [Photograph] Retrieved from the Library of Congress, https://www.loc.gov/
item/2018677607/76 Researcher photography and videography
Photograph 5.2a A wall poster saying Happy Halloween. Photo credit: Sadhana Athreya
Photograph 5.2b  Photograph of a skeleton reclining on a black sofa with a large black spider hovering 
above it. Photo credit: Sadhana AthreyaResearcher photography and videography 77
Exercise 5.2: Researcher photography and narratives
Look at Photographs 5.2a and 5.2b.
1 Examine the photographs of a well‑known event celebrated in much of the world today. 
What do you see in the photographs?
2 What emotions do you experience when you see the photographs, singly and together? Why 
do you think that is the case?
3 What was instantly recognizable about the photographs? Why do you think that is the case?
4 How would you explain the photographs to a person from another culture? What story would 
you tell?
5 How would the narrative enhance the photograph or vice versa?
Summary
This chapter provided an overview of photography and videography, including a discussion 
of photojournalism, photodocumentaries, videodocumentaries, archival photographs, photo‑
graphic collections, and found photographs. In addition, the chapter addressed some of the chal‑
lenges and potentials of researcher‑generated or selected photography as a still and moving 
medium.
References
Banks, M. (2001). Visual methods in social research. Sage.
Brennen, B. (2010). Photojournalism: Historical dimensions to contemporary debates. In The Routledge 
companion to news and journalism (pp. 71–81). Routledge. https://epublications.marquette.edu/cgi/
viewcontent.cgi?article=1177&context=comm_fac
Burkholder, C., Hamill, K., & Thorpe, A. (2023). Speaking back to gender‑based violence in New Brun‑
swick schools through queer maker literacies with 2SLGBTQ+ youth. Journal of Youth Studies, 1–15.
Chalfen, R., Sherman, L., & Rich, M. (2010). VIA’s visual voices: The awareness of a dedicated audience 
for voices in patient video narratives. Visual Studies, 25(3), 201–209.
Dockney, J., Tomaselli, K., & Hart, T. B. (2010). Cellphilms, mobile platforms and prodsumers: Hyper‑
individuality and film. In Hyde‑Clarke, N. (Ed.), The citizen in communication: Revisiting traditional, 
new and community media practices in South Africa (pp. 91–116). Juta Publishers.
Goffman, E. (1959). The presentation of self in everyday life. London: Penguin Books.
Knoblauch, H., & Schnettler, B. (2012). Videography: Analysing video data as a ‘focused’ ethnographic 
and hermeneutical exercise. Qualitative Research, 12(3), 334–356.
MacEntee, K., Burkholder, C., & Schwab‑Cartas, J. (2016). What’s a cellphilm? An introduction. In MacEntee, 
K., Burkholder, C., & Schwab‑Cartas, J. (Eds.), What’s a Cellphilm? (pp. 1–18). Brill.
Noreiga, A. (2022). Facilitating Black identity and advocacy: creating cellphilms for reflecting on 
issues affecting Black students. Visual Studies, 37(1–2), 11–21. https://doi.org/10.1080/1472586X.
2022.2042371
Pini, M., & Walkerdine, V. (2012). Girls on film: Video diaries as ‘autoethnographies’. In Reavey, P. (Ed.), 
Visual methods in psychology (pp. 175–188). Routledge.
Thompson, P. (2008). Doing visual research with children and young people. London: Routledge.DOI: 10.4324/9781003034773-6
Protest photography and democratic witnessing are growing genres of photography that have 
been examined by qualitative educational researchers. Protest photography takes several forms, 
two of which are predominant. One functions as a witness for social justice advocacy through 
photographing instances of police brutality, bullying by one person or another, or instances 
where the camera serves as the eye witnessing events that require the intervention of social 
justice advocates. The second functions as documenting the practice of democracy through 
photographing protests that demand justice or rights for marginalized populations or those suf‑
fering under injustice. This includes, for example, protest marches and walkouts. Photography 
as a politics of resistance will be discussed, as well as social media photography as a form of 
witnessing. Contexts and shifting cultural boundaries regarding privacy, as well as issues and 
questions related to the dissemination of photographs, are introduced for researchers to be able 
to make informed decisions. In addition, this chapter will examine the relationship between pho‑
tographs and the writing of field notes and respond to the question of how writing field notes can 
enhance the place of photographs in the data gathering process. Tips and exercises for practice 
are offered at the end of the chapter.
Protest photography, as a tool for qualitative research studies, can be created and/or exam‑
ined to shed light on the injustices and inequalities of society. Protest photography can be used 
as a qualitative research method to capture and analyze the experiences of protestors and to 
understand the social and political issues that motivate them. Protest photography has a long 
and storied history, dating back to the early days of photojournalism. Famous documentary pho‑
tographers in the United States like Dorothea Lange (1895–1965) and Lewis Hine (1874–1940) 
used their cameras to document the struggles of migrant workers (Lange, 2021) and child labor‑
ers (Hine, 1977), respectively, and their images helped to raise public awareness and spur social 
and political change. In the decades since, protest photography has continued to be a powerful 
tool for social activism, with photographers capturing iconic images of protests against war, 
racism, and environmental degradation.
Qualitative researchers seek to understand social phenomena from the perspective of those 
who experience them. Qualitative inquiry is particularly useful in contexts where the researcher 
seeks to understand complex social and cultural phenomena that cannot be easily measured or 
quantified. Protest photography seeks to capture and convey the experiences of protestors and 
to provide insight into the social and political contexts that give rise to protest movements. By 
documenting situations that give rise to protest, the protests themselves, and the people who par‑
ticipate in them, photographers can create a visual record of the issues that motivate protestors 
and the strategies they use to effect change. This record can then be analyzed using qualitative 
research methods to identify common themes, patterns, and trends.
6 Protest photography and democratic 
witnessingProtest photography and democratic witnessing 79
One example of the use of protest photography as a qualitative research method is the work 
of photographer Susan Meiselas, best known for her documentation of human rights issues 
in Latin America, who documented the Sandinista revolution in Nicaragua in the 1970s and 
1980s. Meiselas’s photographs captured the experiences of Nicaraguan revolutionaries and 
provided insight into the social and political contexts that gave rise to the revolution. Meise‑
las’s work was later analyzed by anthropologist Richard Chalfen, who used her photographs 
to understand the ways in which revolutionary consciousness was constructed and expressed 
in Nicaragua.
Another example is the work of photographer Zanele Muholi, who has documented the expe‑
riences of Black queer and trans people in South Africa. Muholi’s photographs provide a pow‑
erful visual record of the experiences of marginalized communities and highlight the ways in 
which systems of power and privilege intersect to create multiple forms of oppression. Muholi’s 
work has been used by researchers to understand the ways in which race, gender, and sexuality 
intersect in South Africa and to identify strategies for social and political change (Van der Vlies, 
2012).
Picking up a camera to record Kashmir from the perspective of those who are living through 
the conflict, the female photographers Masrat Zahra and Durdana Bhat (Kanjawal et al., 2018) 
served as photojournalists for local as well as international media. Listening to the photojour‑
nalists themselves discuss their work and seeing a short video of them in the field bears out 
the argument that being present in itself is an act of protest for the female photojournalists, a 
point made by Bhatia (2018) in a report on the two women. The female photographers also 
discuss the threat to their own safety in the context of a patriarchal society that rarely saw 
female photojournalists in areas of conflict. Protests according to the photographers are more 
than people resisting; they are lodged in the memories of people and can be documented 
through photography. Photographs of everyday life juxtaposed with photographs of everyday 
struggle make up the complete narrative of living through these troubled times for people in 
Kashmir. Photography allows for a narrative that combines pain and resilience. Both Zahra 
and Bhat (Kanjwal et al., 2018) have discussed what it means to be a female photographer 
and journalist in conflict‑ridden areas. They argue that it is important to obtain the perspective 
of a woman journalist on the conflict. Despite facing several barriers and challenges regard‑
ing their presence in mostly male groups of civilians and soldiers, they nevertheless persist. 
They also offer tips for new photo journalists who are women, suggesting that a balance of 
being ethical and sensitive would help them be successful in what they did. Hafsa Kanjwal 
et al. (2018) analyze photographs taken by Zahra and Bhat. The photographs represent two 
forms of protest, one is the protest of the Kashmiri female photographer and the second is the 
act of resistance or form of protest that is showcased in the photograph. Referring to these as 
interrelated forms of protest, Kanjwal et al. (2018) argue that conditions in Kashmir render 
photography as not merely bearing witness but as an act of protest. Nath (2019), in discussing 
photographs of Kashmiris who were wounded in 2016, similarly argues that the camera was 
both a witness to the mass blinding by pellets as well as a witness to the protests in the after‑
math of the incident. Doctors in Kashmir joined the protest wearing eye patches and holding 
signs asking for the violence to stop.
Scholar Haran (2019) analyzes photographs of New York taken between 1931 and 1936 
and from 1936 to 1951 by two groups. The first was the Workers Film and Photo League and 
the second was called the Photo League. Haran (2019) argues that street photography is a ver‑
sion of protest photography that documented urban protests or witnessed protests against fas‑
cism, while street photography eventually evolved to include community‑based photography to 80 Protest photography and democratic witnessing
document the wants and needs of communities as another form of protest. Books compiled of 
street photography over time that can serve as exemplars are:
Bystander: A History of Street Photography by Joel Meryerowitz and Colin Westerbeck (1995). 
The book comprises photographs of everyday life by several different photographers who 
captured moments as people went about their activities in public spaces. Often, the photog‑
raphers tried to be unobtrusive in their approach and strove not to be seen. The point was to 
take candid pictures that were not manipulated by the photographer.
The Americans (1959) is a compilation of photographs taken by Robert Frank on his journey 
across the country. His photographs were examples of street photography, as he was the quin‑
tessential qualitative researcher with his careful observations as he documented and showed 
slices of life through his candid photography. Street photography of the type that Bystander
and The Americans exemplified a silent witness alongside the art of the photographer, whose 
photographs, like an artist’s with a brush, bear a signature and perspective unique to the 
photographer.
This is an aspect of photographic research that qualitative researchers can learn and apply as 
they examine their own photography to find traces of the way they see or observe and what they 
choose to record. Qualitative research using photography can be metaphorically a window to the 
world as well as a mirror to the world, showing audiences both what the photographer sees and 
means to convey as well as that which the photographer might not intend to show the viewer.
Witnessing
Protest photography has grown exponentially in part due to the availability and easy access to 
take photographs and videos of acts of outrage and conditions of oppression that can then be 
circulated via social media to reach a vast audience who in turn can participate in the protests 
and witnessing of the acts of violence. There is evidence to argue that the participation of ordi‑
nary people in photodocumentation has resulted in multiple perspectives being available to the 
world. For example, while state media showed pro‑Gaddafi protests, videos and photographs 
from mobile phones showed a different perspective (Allan, 2013). The significance of and dif‑
ferences between reporters who document from the outside versus those with cameras reporting 
on events as they unfold or as they are caught up in the events offer an inside‑out perspective. 
An example of such glimpses was evident in the aftermath of the London underground train 
bombings in 2005, where citizens captured the events and news outlets used the clips submitted 
by citizens to piece together narratives despite official denials. Citizen journalists became news 
gatherers and not merely consumers of official news outlets. The newsgathering processes were 
becoming democratized rapidly, even as news agencies tried to figure out how to evaluate the 
incoming data for accuracy or to eliminate hoaxes.
The role of witnesses and those who document as events unfold is different from that of 
photojournalists, whose career and job are intertwined with the news they follow, the stories 
they connect with, and the evidence they seek to support their narratives. Similarly, the role of 
researchers using photography to understand, analyze, and disseminate the results of examin‑
ing protest photography is different from that of the participants who witness and document 
events and oppression as they experience them. The researcher has opportunities to examine 
all the crowdsourced photography to be able to build a narrative that is coherent and compre‑
hensive, even while giving credence to the authenticity of individual perspectives submitted by 
different people.Protest photography and democratic witnessing 81
Democratic witnessing
Democratic witnessing is a concept that emerged in the fields of political theory and social activ‑
ism, which refers to the process of creating and sharing testimonies and narratives about politi‑
cal events and social injustices. It is sometimes also referred to in journalism studies as citizen 
witnessing (Allan, 2013; Nilsson, 2020). This process involves individuals coming together to 
document and share their experiences, creating a collective understanding of a given situation 
and the conditions that gave rise to it. Democratic witnessing is based on the idea that every 
individual has the right to be heard and that their testimonies and narratives can serve as pow‑
erful tools for creating social and political change. By sharing their stories and experiences, 
individuals can build solidarity with others who share similar experiences and create a sense of 
community around shared goals and values. One of the key features of democratic witnessing 
is its emphasis on the power of storytelling. Through the act of sharing stories, individuals can 
create a shared understanding of a given situation and build empathy and compassion for others. 
This can help to create a sense of solidarity and collective action, as individuals come together 
to address social and political issues.
Democratic witnessing is often used in the context of social movements, where individuals 
come together to document and share their experiences of oppression and discrimination. By 
doing so, they create a collective understanding of the systems of power and privilege that 
give rise to these conditions and identify strategies for challenging and transforming these 
systems.
Photography can play an important role in democratic witnessing, as it can capture and con‑
vey the experiences of individuals and communities in a powerful and accessible way. Through 
photography, individuals can create visual narratives that document their experiences and provide 
a window into the social and political contexts that give rise to them. And, given the increase in 
access to personal devices such as smartphones with built‑in high‑quality cameras for still and 
video images, many novice researchers will have the ability to gather data in this way.
For example, photography can be used in democratic witnessing projects in several ways. 
First, it can be used to document social and political events, such as protests, rallies, and 
marches. By capturing these events, photographers can create a visual record of the actions 
taken by individuals and communities to challenge oppressive systems and effect change. This 
visual record can then be used to create a collective understanding of these events and to identify 
strategies for future action.
Second, photography can be used to document the experiences of individuals and commu‑
nities affected by social and political issues. By photographing the lives and experiences of 
those who are marginalized and oppressed, researchers using photographs can create a powerful 
visual testimony to the realities of social injustice and inequality. These images can provide a 
window into the conditions that give rise to oppression and can help to build empathy and com‑
passion for those who are affected by it.
Third, photography can be used to challenge dominant narratives and representations of 
social issues. By creating images that challenge stereotypical representations of marginalized 
communities, researchers can use photographs to disrupt dominant narratives and provide alter‑
native visions of social reality. Photographic evidence can play an important role in democratic 
witnessing, as it can capture and convey the experiences of individuals and communities in a 
powerful and accessible way.
Fourth, images trigger strong emotional reactions and can be utilized for mobilizing social 
action. Protest participation can depend on the emotions provoked by images ranging from fear 
and anger to enthusiasm or sadness. Anger, for example, can encourage people to join protest 82 Protest photography and democratic witnessing
movements against inequality or discrimination. For example, it is possible that an image of a 
group of students protesting a tuition hike can generate enthusiasm from other students who 
might participate to show their solidarity. Fear can also be a response to some images, which can 
motivate people to join protest movements and to be mobilized to action. Some images might 
also give a misleading impression; for example, photographs of protesting crowds can create a 
perception that a movement has widespread support.
Photographs can spur debates and reactions from the public on different platforms, including 
social media. They can affect social and political actions like protests and social movements. 
However, as Kharroub and Bas (2015) point out, there is little research that examines the effect 
of images on social movements or social protest mobilization. However, related political activi‑
ties and how they are affected by images have been examined. For example, Rohlinger (2012) 
looked at different news sources coverage of protests and found that the images were similar 
across news outlets. Images can generate empathy or alienation. For example, Wright and Citrin 
(2011) found that people held a more positive view of immigrants when they held an American 
rather than a Mexican flag. That images create a strong response has been well documented 
(Grabe & Bucy, 2009; Papacharissi, 2014; Valentino et al., 2011).
In 2015, two photographs of refugees taken in Denmark spurred a series of polarized reac‑
tions from the public. The first photograph showed a middle‑aged man spitting at refugees, 
while the second photograph was that of a cop playing with a refugee child. The two photo‑
graphs represented the starkly different reactions to the influx of refugees into Denmark as into 
much of Europe at that time. There was little doubt that these polarities already existed; how‑
ever, the photographs crystallized the issues and raised questions regarding how refugees are 
perceived by different people. What was particularly different about these photographs was that, 
unlike some typical protest photography that depicts police violence against innocent people, 
the two photographs depicted a different type of scenario. They showed a police figure being 
kind and playing with a child while a civilian perpetrates the hostile act of spitting. By focus‑
ing on the actual meeting, reaction, and response during the scene, these photographs are visual 
representations not of refugees, authorities, or civilians in isolation but in interaction with each 
other. Olesen (2020) argues that photographs can be “significant visual sites for the enactment of 
notions of solidarity, identity and belonging” (p. 967). These photographs, taken by professional 
photographers, developed into points for debates and interpretations on social media, where 
several issues were taken up vigorously.
This incident and its accompanying debates are a case in point of how photographs of par‑
ticular people and events can transcend their particularity to become politicized and acquire 
meanings that are shared by a larger group of people, particularly about injustice. As several 
scholars have pointed out, photographs along with conversations about the photographs create 
meanings that can make the photographs into political statements. Such debates and statements 
not only cast the people in the photographs as heroes or villains; meaning‑making also involves 
how people see themselves or how collective identity is represented in their minds. A case in 
point is the photograph from Abu Ghraib, which raised questions about American values (But‑
ler, 2010).
Olesen (2020) points out that with Web 2.0, the interpretations of photographs have exceeded 
the purview of newspapers, television, and other such authorized agencies and have instead 
taken up space on social media platforms where interpretations are made by a larger group of 
people who can also participate in democratic debates and conversations that are in part emo‑
tional as well. Since photographs have the power to evoke emotions, these emotions can be 
expressed by larger groups of people who might participate in and offer multiple interpretations 
through the dialogs and discussions around photographs.Protest photography and democratic witnessing 83
In the photograph described of the civilian spitting at refugees, the civilian denied that he 
spat at refugees. The photograph itself does not show the refugees, and it is the photographer’s 
description that contextualizes the photograph for the viewer. Despite the photograph’s lack of 
visual cues for context and the man’s denial of spitting, the photograph nevertheless was widely 
accepted as that of an angry middle‑aged man protesting the presence of refugees by spitting at 
them.
Researchers interested in protest photography and examining photographs that appear on TV 
or online news outlets can use Olesen’s (2020) methodology for understanding and analysis by 
examining both the interpretation given by the photographers or the accompanying text in the 
journalism outlets as well as social media outlets that allow for multiple interpretations and mul‑
timodal forms of expression. Olesen (2020) decided to focus on Facebook and Twitter as well as 
newspaper commentaries. This allowed for an examination of memes, graffiti, photoshops, and 
paintings that emerged in the wake of these photographs along with discussion forums.
Using social media platforms to gather data on photography includes looking at memes or 
recontextualization by people to create a reversal of meanings. In the case of the photograph of 
the spitting man, for example, people recreated the scene with him blowing kisses or singing a 
welcome tune. Such depictions allow for photography to be manipulated in different ways by 
people who are contributing to the creation of an image that resonates with their feelings and 
voices. Protest photography can therefore be a rearrangement of photographs, and the dialogs 
that emerge can shed light on the ways in which people participate in public debates.
The second photograph described by Olesen (2020) of a cop playing with a six‑year‑old 
refugee girl offered a contrast in terms of the way in which police are depicted in encounters 
with refugees in protest and injustice photography. While comments on the photographs varied 
from those protesting what they saw as preferential treatment afforded to refugees by the police, 
others saw the photograph as depicting sympathy and empathy. In a similar twist with regard to 
how photographs can be manipulated to depict different scenes, in a painting of the photograph 
of the child, an artist replaced the child with a depiction of a terrorist, thus depicting the cop as 
naive rather than sympathetic. Such interpretations are provocative and garnered further debate 
on social media.
Fuchs (2018) has offered some suggestions for gathering data on social media platforms that 
are also mindful of ethics. For example, researchers need to be aware of whether or not comments 
being made are in the public or private sphere. Further, will quoting anyone bring potential harm 
to the speaker or writer? On platforms such as Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram, there are spaces 
where comments are usually made in public. However, despite this, to protect the identities of peo‑
ple, pseudonyms or composites can be created that will prevent comments that can be easily traced 
back to the people concerned. Examining the most up‑to‑date information about how and why 
people create fake accounts, or alias accounts, and what these social media platforms say in their 
rules about what is allowable and not is an important practice for researchers contemplating using 
what is posted as data and/or contemplating using these platforms to post/display data they have 
created or gathered. A few guiding questions include: do the rules created by these social media 
platforms conform to research ethics or do they subscribe to another ethical framework? Are their 
rules simply legalistic and laden with capitalist values while potentially neglecting other values? 
The use of replies or comments on these platforms themselves can also be scrutinized before being 
used for research purposes in order to protect the participants.
Protest photography presents a range of ethical dilemmas that require careful consideration 
by both researchers and participants. It is important to strike a balance between capturing impor‑
tant images and protecting the dignity, autonomy, and safety of protesters. It is also important to 
clarify any distinctions that may or may not be present among or between the roles of researcher 84 Protest photography and democratic witnessing
and participant. Because protest photography involves capturing images of social and political 
protests, demonstrations, and movements, there are often risks involved for both researchers 
and participants. In such scenarios, both researchers and participants can play important roles. 
The researcher’s role in protest photography may involve capturing images of the protests for 
journalistic, academic, or advocacy purposes. The researcher may document the protests as part 
of a larger research project, study the social and political dynamics of the protest, or provide 
historical records of the event. On the other hand, participants in the protest may also play a 
role in protest photography. Protest participants may take photographs or videos of their own to 
document their involvement or the involvement of others in the movement that may be designed 
to share with others or document conditions to aid in their own safety or the safety of others as 
acts of witnessing. Participants may also use photography as a form of advocacy, sharing their 
images on social media platforms to raise awareness and promote their cause.
Both researchers and participants may face on‑going ethical considerations while engaging 
in protest photography. For example, researchers may need to obtain informed consent from 
participants before taking and storing photographs or videos and confront questions about 
proper ways to consider the anonymity and confidentiality of the participants, at times related 
to safety issues. It is important for both researchers and participants to follow ethical guidelines 
and standards when documenting protests to ensure the dignity, respect, and safety of everyone 
involved.
There are several ethical dilemmas that may arise when researchers decide to engage with 
protest photography. Here is a starter list of the kinds of considerations important to examine:
1 Safety and anonymity: Protesters may be at risk of harm or retaliation if their identities are 
revealed. Photographers must be sensitive to this risk and take steps to protect protesters’ 
anonymity and safety. They should also consider the potential consequences of sharing 
images on social media platforms, where they may be exposed to a wider audience.
2 Exploitation: Protest photography can be a lucrative business for some photographers, and 
there is a risk of exploiting protesters for personal gain. Photographers should avoid using 
images for commercial purposes without obtaining the participants’ consent and without 
compensating them appropriately.
3 Informed consent: Obtaining informed consent from protest participants can be challenging 
in the midst of a protest. Some participants may not want their images captured or shared, 
while others may not understand the implications of sharing their images. It can be difficult to 
strike a balance between respecting participants’ autonomy and capturing important images. 
Researchers may need to decide which code of ethics may guide their work – codes adopted 
by journalists? more traditional ethical guidelines for conducting qualitative research? or a 
new amalgamation?
4 Representation: Photographers must be mindful of how they represent the protest and the 
protesters. They should avoid framing images in a way that misrepresents the protesters’ 
message or that reinforces negative stereotypes. Photographers should also avoid sensation‑
alizing images or using them for personal gain.
5 Manipulation: Photographers may manipulate images to fit their own agendas or to convey 
a particular message. This can lead to misrepresentation and distortion of the protest and the 
protesters. Photographers must be transparent about any image manipulation and avoid using 
it to mislead or deceive their audience.
The photographs from Abu Ghraib (Leung, 2004) created both shock and outrage around the 
world, with one photograph in particular generating increasing dialogue and eventually gaining Protest photography and democratic witnessing 85
status as representative or emblematic of the violence. It was the photograph of the “hooded 
man,” a photograph that found its way into different media outlets, that was recreated in a vari‑
ety of visual genres. The “hooded man” is one among many photographs that have generated a 
sense of outrage and a condensed snapshot of war and torture. The United States Civil Rights 
movement as well as the Arab Spring are two examples where images were powerful catalysts 
for generating participation.
The video clip and related still photos of the 2022 Academy Awards violent response by 
Will Smith when he approached the performance stage and open‑hand slapped the face of Chris 
Rock in reaction to an insensitive (some would say cruel and misogynistic) joke he told about 
Jada Pinkett‑Smith are another example of how photographic images are central to how humans 
make sense of events, even when they are experienced as traumatic. The repetition of view‑
ing the photos as a part of incremental deciphering and trying to make sense of a shocking 
moment – a moment that was shared by millions of people worldwide – reinforces the role 
photographic images play for so many in modern society.
In many ways, the video clip and the resulting photographs were interpreted and reinterpreted 
as much as the actions of the two men on stage and off stage. Often, people viewing these photo‑
graphs and videos were looking for ways to think about and comment on the actions beyond the 
violence that took center stage. As with most events, people were looking for a deeper meaning, a 
reason for the action and reaction, leading to speculations about a history of conflict and violence 
by all parties, even the seemingly silent Jada Pinkett‑Smith. The photographic images generated 
as part of other atrocities, such as the October 7, 2023 Hamas attack and the aftermath resulting 
in the Israeli‑declared war, were widely distributed, and journalists and social scientists examined 
still photos as well as video images for meaning. The range of images being generated represented 
essential elements in how people narrated and understood such a complex set of realities. And 
gave rise to evidence of horrific cruelty via photographic images and snippets of film.
These are some examples of the power of photography to influence how people think, feel, 
speculate, and wonder, therefore providing researchers with expanded opportunities to inter‑
rogate meaning. Photography can generate wide participation in terms of discussion and debate 
as well as generate emotional responses. Witnessing injustice or protests against injustice today, 
with the ease of cameras on phones, reduces the time to spread a message as people can share 
pictures and images in real time. Besides witnessing, images online are often used to gener‑
ate the mobilization of protests. Images can affect such social movement mobilizations partly 
because they generate emotions of enthusiasm, anger, or fear, all of which can affect the rate 
of participation in protests. Sharing photographs or images via social media or other accessible 
technologies can generate movement and can help drive attention and public discussion.
Photo selections can have an effect on how an event is portrayed. A framework can either 
highlight differences between groups of people and encourage conflict or encourage peace. In 
discussing these frameworks in the context of journalism, Galtung (1986) discussed the con‑
cepts of war and peace journalism as two frameworks for covering conflict. Framing works as 
a way to convey a particular interpretation of a news event (Entman, 1993). It functions as a 
storyline that involves the selection, exclusion, inclusion, or emphasis of a particular idea. The 
framing process in text is different from the framing process in photographs and visual images. 
Scholars have pointed out that the news media have used photographs to either garner sympathy 
or evoke a strong reaction. Selections of photographs can drive the narrative as Ali et al. (2013) 
or Wells (2007) found in their study of photographs of children in news reports, with one nar‑
rative of liberation and the other of suffering. Galtung’s (1986) frameworks applied to selecting 
photographs of war could focus on protests of war, the victims of war, civilian casualties, or 
peace negotiations. Storylines can be determined by portraying different roles in photographs, 86 Protest photography and democratic witnessing
with victim, negotiator, or demonstrator being some possibilities that can generate correspond‑
ing textual narratives. With regard to photographs, the availability of a pool of images is a cru‑
cial factor in determining what photographs get selected. Since not every newspaper or media 
outlet has photographers or journalists at every given event, they rely on select news agencies, 
like AP, Reuters, and AFP/Getty, especially for international news coverage. Therefore, selec‑
tion decisions of images are often done by a few news agencies (Fahmy, 2010; Paterson, 2001).
Photo contests
Photo contests connected to democratic actions are also sites for considering the research impli‑
cations of democratic witnessing activities that involve generating and publicly sharing data. For 
example, the World Meteorological Organization (https://www.linkedin.com/company/world‑
meteorological‑organization/) organized a photo competition calling for photos depicting people and 
communities working on climate action – and the organization established a social media hashtag, 
#ClimateAction. The winners of the competition have their photos placed in the 2024 Calendar 
the organization uses to bring further attention to important climate concerns. This calendar photo 
competition has been ongoing since 2014 and the archived photos represent one type of photobank 
where various research projects might be launched such as those using secondary data analysis, or 
others using the examination of the photos as prompts for individual interviews or focus groups.
Can photographs replace writing field notes?
While photographs can be a valuable supplement to field notes, they cannot entirely replace the 
need for written notes. Here are the 12 most compelling reasons why:
1 Context: Photographs capture a moment in time, but they may not provide the context and 
detail that written field notes can. Field notes can capture the nuances of the situation, the 
environment, the people involved, and the researcher’s own observations and feelings. These 
details provide a more comprehensive understanding of the situation and its significance.
2 Interpretation: Photographs are open to interpretation, and different people may see differ‑
ent things in the same image. Written field notes allow the researcher to clarify their own 
interpretations and provide context for how they are interpreting what they observe.
3 Flexibility: Written field notes allow for flexibility in the research process. Researchers can 
revise their notes as they gain new insights or observations, while photographs capture a 
single moment in time.
4 Ethics: There are also ethical considerations when using photographs in research, includ‑
ing the need to obtain informed consent and to protect the privacy and safety of the people 
involved. Written field notes allow researchers to capture information without necessarily 
exposing people to potential harm or discomfort.
5 Detail: Written field notes allow the researcher to capture details that may not be immedi‑
ately apparent in a photograph. For example, a researcher may note the body language, tone 
of voice, or other nonverbal cues of the people they are observing. These details can provide 
important insights into the research topic.
6 Data analysis: While photographs can be analyzed, it can be time‑consuming and challeng‑
ing to extract meaningful data from them. Written field notes help track the evolution of 
thinking a researcher has about the data analysis process.
7 Memory aid: Written field notes serve as a memory aid for the researcher, allowing them 
to recall important details and observations that they may have otherwise forgotten. 
They can also be date, time, and location stamped in order to show researchers’ thought Protest photography and democratic witnessing 87
processes over time about a single photo or collection of photos. This can be especially 
important when conducting fieldwork in dynamic or fast‑paced environments where 
there is a lot of information to process.
8 Transparency: Written field notes provide a transparent record of the research process, 
allowing other researchers to understand how the researcher arrived at their findings. This 
can help to increase the trustworthiness and credibility of the research in alignment with the 
evaluative criteria or framework adopted by the researcher.
9 Reflection and reflexivity: Written field notes can serve as a space for the researcher to reflect 
on their own positionality, assumptions, and perspectives. This ongoing reflexivity work is 
important to track in qualitative research, as it allows the researcher to recognize and address 
their own influence on the design, analysis, and writing phases of any research process.
10 Access: At times, written field notes can be more easily shared and accessed by other research‑
ers, while photographs may require more specialized equipment or software, or permissions, 
to view or analyze. This makes written notes, at times, the more accessible artifact when need‑
ing to share with a group of collaborators on a research project, and may increase the potential 
impact of the research.
11 Consistency: Written field notes can provide consistency across research participants, allow‑
ing the researcher to compare and contrast different observations and experiences. In contrast, 
photographs may capture different moments or angles that are difficult to compare directly.
12 Privacy: Written field notes can protect the privacy of research participants, as they do not 
require the same level of personal identification as photographs. This is especially important 
in research that involves sensitive topics or vulnerable populations.
Photograph 6.1  A group of people marching on a street carrying a banner and flags. Photo credit: Raji 
Swaminathan88 Protest photography and democratic witnessing
Exercise 6.1: Writing field notes via photographs
1 In a simulated study, a participant took Photograph 6.1 in order to illustrate a protest march. 
By looking at the photograph, what types of notes can one take that can serve as field notes 
on the topic?
2 Try writing up some field notes using the photograph as a visual guide.
3 What is the message that this photograph is trying to convey? What is the action it is trying 
to bring about, if any?
4 Reflect on the nature of the photograph and see what type of emotion it evokes.
Photograph 6.2  A photograph of graffiti with two silhouettes in the profile of youth holding guns. Photo 
credit: Sadhana AthreyaProtest photography and democratic witnessing 89
Exercise 6.2: Can you present an argument in a photograph?
1 Look at Photograph 6.2, which a participant in a simulated study about teachers’ views on 
gun control took. It is about gun violence and its impact on children. Compare Photographs 
6.1 and 6.2 and see which one evokes a greater reaction and why.
2 Think about what types of photographs would evoke strong reactions and why researchers 
might choose to use such photographs or not.
3 If a participant or researcher in a study submitted only a single photograph in the study and 
it was 6.2, what can you learn about their views?
4 What can you learn about protest photography through the two photographs in this chapter?
5 What did you learn about presenting a single photograph to present an argument?
Summary
In this chapter, we examined the ways in which protest photography and democratic witness‑
ing have been taken up by qualitative researchers who study resistance to injustice and ways, 
in which collective action takes place. Recent public protests and their aftermath, the different 
documentations of acts of injustice, and the large amount of data that are crowdsourced and 
shared on social media platforms offer a rich array of data for qualitative researchers. They 
provide both video and still images alongside the comments from the public who interpret and 
reinterpret what they and others have witnessed. The complexity of democratic witnessing has 
also been discussed, as the images can be seen in a variety of ways. The chapter also discussed 
the writing of field notes along with photographs and whether one can replace the other. Finally, 
exercises and tips for researchers have been offered.
References
Ali, S. R., James, D., & Vultee, F. (2013). Strike a pose: Comparing associated press and UNICEF visual 
representations of the children of Darfur. African Conflict and Peacebuilding Review, 3(1), 1–26.
Allan, S. (2013). Citizen witnessing: Revisioning journalism in times of crisis. John Wiley & Sons.
Bhatia, P. (2018). Watch: The Badass Women Photojournalists of Kashmir. The Quint. Retrieved on 24 
May, from https://www.thequint.com/videos/kashmirconflict‑the‑badass‑women‑photojournalists
Butler, J. (2010). Frames of war: When is life grievable? Verso.
Entman, R. M. (1993). Framing: Toward clarification of a fractured paradigm. Journal of communication, 
43(4), 51–58.
Fahmy, S. (2010). Contrasting visual frames of our times: A framing analysis of English‑and Arabic‑language 
press coverage of war and terrorism. International Communication Gazette, 72(8), 695–717.
Frank, R. (1959). The Americans. Pantheon Books.
Fuchs, C. (2018). Dear Mr. Neo‑Nazi, can you please give me your informed consent so that I can quote 
your fascist tweet?’: Questions of social media research ethics in online ideology critique. In G. Meikle 
(Ed.), The Routledge Companion to Media and Activism (pp. 385–394). Routledge.
Galtung, J. (1986). On the role of the media in worldwide security and peace. In T. Varis (Ed.) Peace and 
communication (pp. 249–266). San Jose, Costa Rica: Universidad para La Paz.
Grabe, M. E., & Bucy, E. P. (2009). Image bite politics: News and the visual framing of elections. Oxford 
University Press.
Haran, B. (2019, May). ‘We cover New York’: Protest, neighborhood, and street photography in the (work‑
ers film and) photo league. In Arts, 8(2), 61. MDPI.
Hine, L. W. (1977). Men at work: Photographic studies of modern men and machines. Courier Corporation.90 Protest photography and democratic witnessing
Kanjwal, H., Bhat, D., & Zahra, M. (2018). “Protest” photography in Kashmir: Between resistance and 
resilience. WSQ: Women’s Studies Quarterly, 46(3), 85–99.
Kharroub, T., & Bas, B. (2015). Social media and protests: An examination of Twitter images of the 2011 
Egyptian revolution. New Media & Society, 18(9), 1973–1992.
Lange, D. (2021). The assignment I’ll never forget. In L. Heron & V. Williams (Eds.), Illuminations: 
Women writing on photography from the 1850’s to the present (pp. 151-153). Routledge.
Leung, R. (2004, April 27). Abuse of Iraqi POWs by GIs probed. CBS News.
Nath, A. (2019). Camera as weapon: Ways of seeing in Kashmir. Studies in Documentary Film, 13(3), 268–282.
Nilsson, M. (2020). An ethics of (not) showing: Citizen witnessing, journalism and visualizations of a ter‑
ror attack. Journalism Practice, 14(3), 259–276.
Olesen, T. (2020). The role of photography in the production and problematization of online affective 
debates: Struggles over solidarity and identity during the 2015 refugee crisis in Denmark. The Socio‑
logical Review, 68(5), 965–981.
Papacharissi, Z. (2014). Uses and gratifications. In D. W. Stacks, M. B. Salwen, K. C. Eichhorn (Eds.), An 
integrated approach to communication theory and research (pp. 151–166). Routledge.
Paterson, C. A. (2001). The transference of frames in global television. In S. D. Reese, O. Gandy Jr., & A. 
E. Grant (Eds.), Framing public life: Perspectives on media and our understanding of the social world
(pp. 337–353). Lawrence Erlbaum.
Rohlinger, D. A (2012). How social movements are using the Internet to change politics. Scholars Strategy 
Network. https://scholars.org/contribution/how‑social‑movements‑are‑using‑internet‑change
Valentino, N. A., Brader, T., Groenendyk, E. W., Gregorowicz, K., & Hutchings, V. L. (2011). Election 
night’s alright for fighting: The role of emotions in political participation. The Journal of Politics, 73(1), 
156–170.
Van der Vlies, A. (2012). Queer knowledge and the politics of the gaze in contemporary South African 
photography: Zanele Muholi and others. Journal of African Cultural Studies, 24(2), 140–156.
Wells, K. (2007). Narratives of liberation and narratives of innocent suffering: The rhetorical uses of 
images of Iraqi children in the British press. Visual Communication, 6(1), 55–71.
Westerbeck, C., & Meyerowitz, J. (1995). Bystander: A history of street photography. The Art Book, 2(1), 
24a-24a.
Wright, M., & Citrin, J. (2011). Saved by the stars and stripes? Images of protest, salience of threat, and 
immigration attitudes. American Politics Research, 39(2), 323–343.DOI: 10.4324/9781003034773-7
This chapter examines and discusses how to photograph place, site, and photographic mapping 
of spaces and contexts. Urban and rural contexts, school environments, and work spaces, for 
example, all have distinct contexts that are often taken for granted in photography; however, 
interpretations of the same are likely to be different depending on who is looking at the photo‑
graph. Mapping physical spaces from different angles can help both researchers and participants 
“see” differently and reflect on a variety of narratives. Tips and exercises are offered at the end 
of the chapter.
Photographic place and site
As a continuation of our work examining “place‑reflexivity” as a methodological tool for engag‑
ing in qualitative research (Swaminathan & Mulvihill, 2019), here we expand our prior work 
by providing a specific application to issues and questions related to using the photographic arts 
as data. Qualitative research often involves a site or field. Descriptions of sites or places where 
research is conducted are often taken for granted and have often been overlooked in methodo‑
logical discussions. Place is often depicted as static, where people are depicted as actors drawing 
the primary or sole attention of the observer, and within qualitative studies, sites are described 
as “where people do things” (Pellow, 2001). We refer to such taken‑for‑granted descriptions of 
sites as an approach similar to how tourists stereotypically engage in sightseeing. Sites cannot 
be regarded as simply a container for action but need to be considered as a medium for activ‑
ity, open for analysis. Shifting the focus from the action and interaction of participants among 
themselves and/or participants and researchers to a focus on sites and participants, and/or sites 
and researchers, leads to additional findings that can bring us a fresh awareness of the possibili‑
ties mined from data analyses.
To facilitate this level of data analysis related to place, we developed a tool that can move 
qualitative researchers toward a site‑seeing perspective that is informed by place‑reflexivity 
through the acronym VISION (Swaminathan & Mulvihill, 2019):
V – Versus: Versus as a way to reflect on sites and their similarity or dissimilarity to other sites 
by asking the questions: How is this site different or similar to other sites? What is typical of 
this site that we take for granted? What is atypical of this site or what would we not expect 
to see here? What is the space of this site – is it a physical place or a virtual or imaginative 
space?
I – Interactions: Interactions are networks or social relations that can be interrogated for the 
power relations between participants and place, as well as between participants in a particular 
place. The following questions can serve as a way to examine interactions: How are social 
7 Land, place, context, and photographic 
arts92 Land, place, context, and photographic arts
relations produced at this site? What types of power are exercised in or on this site by differ‑
ent groups?
S – Similarity: Similarity is a way of thinking about resemblances to problematize places and 
to create a push away from conventional ways of thinking about sites. What does this place 
resemble? What about this site reminds me of another site? What metaphor or discourse of 
imagination would I use to understand this site better?
I – Interruptions: Interruptions are prompts for the examination of counter‑narratives of people 
at sites and/or about the ways that prior narratives about a site can be revised. It facilitates 
qualitative researchers foregrounding and problematizing places in a deliberate way, leading 
to emergent themes. Interruption means examining sites so that we go beyond the tradition 
of the site to see the ways in which traditional narratives are interrupted. Whose voices are 
not often heard? What are the dominant voices and their narratives? What are the marginal 
voices or hushed voices and their narratives? Where do these voices occur and what is the 
relation of people to places?
O – Orientation: Involves an action on the part of the researcher who then tries out different 
self‑reflective strategies and ideas to become more consciously aware of place, with a focus 
on sensations that researchers feel at particular sites. What makes this place interesting? 
What senses do we engage when we are at this site? What memories are invoked by thinking 
about a site and/or experiencing a site?
N – Narrative: Finding the story of the site and, in addition, it also means looking for the 
threads of the story that are situated in liminal spaces, as referred to by Soja (2010), Bhabha 
(2004), and Turner (1969). Liminality here implies interactions that create new combina‑
tions, new insights, and new analytics possibilities.
In conjunction with the many well‑established and immensely rich contributions to the quali‑
tative research methodological literature about reflexivity, such as the offerings of Tuck and 
McKenzie (2014), Alvesson and Skoldburg (2009), Cunliffe (2004), and Luttrell (2009), the 
benefits of further troubling the concept as it applies to studies involving photographs are prom‑
ising. The above‑described prompts contained in the acronym VISION can be used as a tool 
for foregrounding sites as part of the analysis process and can serve as a means for enhancing 
place‑reflexivity (Swaminathan & Mulvihill, 2019).
Storyscapes as a way to document connections to land and place
Storyscapes are transmedia storytelling, or stories told across multiple media platforms (Shin & 
Woo, 2023). The use of photography for storytelling can be integrated with blogs, X (formerly 
Twitter), or other disseminating platforms and utilize photographs, audios, and videos to create 
an innovative story. Home and school are two spaces and places where youth spend significant 
amounts of time. At times, the separation between these spaces is artificial, as we notice in residen‑
tial schools or homeschooling. However, most youth who are day scholars spend time in school 
and at home. For youth, over time, the lack of spaces to congregate has led to an increased amount 
of time in virtual spaces where they meet, interact with each other, and hang out. That place is 
important to youth, as documented in the literature on the often‑difficult transitions experienced 
by students as they transition from elementary to middle school or from middle to high school.
Photography can offer a way to make sense of the meaning these spaces hold for youth and 
can make their transitions easier as they hold on to that which is meaningful to them while let‑
ting go of places and memories that might have been painful.
Research on belonging emphasizes a sense of connectedness to place and people as cen‑
tral to youth staying in school. Place and physical connectedness are considered crucial for Land, place, context, and photographic arts 93
identity development and wellness as they provide a link to the land, traditions, and ancestry. 
Photographic storyscapes provide a medium through which people can tell stories of their con‑
nection to land and place. Photography can be viewed as a visual language within which the 
participants’ cultural lives are embedded. People, values, and places important to youth can 
be depicted in a storyscape project. For researchers intent on using photography as a research 
medium, storyscapes offer a qualitative perspective that connects people to places, traditions, 
and relationships.
Photomapping as a way to understand neighborhoods and community 
connections
Different from storyscapes that often discuss connectedness to places and land, in urban land‑
scapes, abandoned buildings and vacant lots characterize a sense of neglect. Teixeira and Gardner 
(2014) conducted a study using photomapping with youth who participated in an assessment of 
their neighborhood through photomapping and youth‑led tours. The study contributed to how 
youth navigated their neighborhood and perceived their environment. The study found that vacant 
properties and conditions of dilapidation contributed to a sense of unease, a lack of safety, and a 
feeling of neglect. Participatory community photomapping had the advantage of bringing together 
several data sources, including survey maps and narratives of the residents and the youth. Teixeira 
and Gardner’s (2014) study proposed solutions to the problems that they outlined. Participatory 
photomapping is a way to integrate photography with contextual data through walk‑along tours 
and discussions. PPM is derived from critical and participatory geographic information systems 
(GIS). While GIS was critiqued for its positivist leanings, feminist and “bottom‑up” GIS (Dennis, 
2006; Talen, 2000) bring a critical, participatory framework to community mapping and geovisu‑
alization (Dennis, 2006). Counter‑mapping has been used as a form of spatial justice. Emerging 
out of the theories of third space, counter‑mapping tries to find space and make place beyond two 
opposing binaries (Lefebvre, 1991; Soja, 2010). For example, a third space would go beyond the 
categories of rural and urban, or informal and formal. It presents ways to see places that are dif‑
ferent from formal maps and what cartographers might see, create, and photograph. For example, 
residents living in an area might know a place or can map a place because of their familiarity with 
it and by actually moving from one place to another versus seeing it from an aerial photograph. 
Counter‑mapping uses storytelling in order to talk about place in ways that take into consideration 
lived experience to disrupt a disembodied map or even a photograph devoid of context. To do this, 
photographs can help to build sensescapes (Grasseni, 2009). Counter‑mapping allows residents 
of the community to use their experiences to forecast how a neighborhood should look and what 
kind of planning needs to take place; they superimpose their experiences onto existing landscapes 
to show urban planners what could or needed to happen. For example, residents of a particular 
community can draw bicycle paths where none existed onto a map or onto photographs and share 
with urban planners the need for such bicycle paths or the need for a grocery store to counter urban 
deserts as well as create new avenues for transport. The lived experience of residents and their 
epistemic knowledge is sharply contrasted here with the knowledge systems like GIS mapping or 
aerial photography scans and radar. The GIS mapping is mapping from above whereas the lived 
experiences create a map from within.
What can we learn from photographs of land?
Scholars have regarded space and place as related, but with one more specific than the other. 
Relph (1976), for example, has described space as being three‑dimensional and expansive in all 
directions, while place is specific and delimited. In his characterization, place is part of space. 94 Land, place, context, and photographic arts
Similarly, Tuan (1977) considers space as more abstract than a place where lived experiences 
can gradually imbue a space with meaning, making it a place. Some scholars argue that the act 
of naming contributes to changing space into place.
Land is important and is an essential part of today’s geopolitical landscape. Researchers 
using photography need to grapple with multiple meanings of land, which bring into question 
the ways in which land is described, named, and categorized. How can qualitative researchers 
using photography engage with issues about land, the representation of land, and how it can be 
idealized? Questions of how we see need to be combined with reflections on the implications of 
thinking through the visual. Land representation as a landscape is influenced by political, social, 
and environmental perceptions and intersects with multiple and various identities. The discus‑
sion of landscape implies land as a social product since particular landscapes result from human 
intervention to shape natural environments. Therefore, land matters are issues that involve both 
natural and human interventions on land as well as the extent to which human agency has oper‑
ated in the shaping of the landscape.
In research contexts, environmental issues have become increasingly difficult to ignore as the 
influence of physical surroundings on participants and their way of life is becoming more appar‑
ent every day. Urban environments, the weather, and climate change all influence and impact 
the way of life of participants, making it crucial for researchers today to take into consideration 
the concept of place as data that can inform their studies. Landscape change models need to 
consider community participants’ views of what would benefit them. At times, for example, the 
proposed location of a park, a grocery store, or buildings can cut into existing areas that hold 
special memories for local communities, thereby depriving them of a sense of place. Although 
a sense of place has been defined variously by different scholars, most researchers agree that 
place is not neutral (Allen et al., 1988; Eisenhauer, 2000; Massey, 1995; Rose, 1999). A sense of 
place can emerge from memories of interactions in certain places. Related to sense of place as a 
construct is the theory of place attachment (Low & Altman, 1992), where people exhibit a sense 
of attachment to sites. Similarly, place identity can also occur when people feel that a place is 
connected to their heritage or history (Huff, 2006).
Researchers can use photography in a variety of ways to examine sense of place, place attach‑
ment, or place identity, which we will discuss in the next sections.
Researching sense of place
A sense of place would also mean considering the cultural aspects and power relations in rela‑
tion to place. This in turn would mean examining the unequal relations between the place and 
the people residing there. A sense of place could be inclusive, connoting people’s sense of 
belonging to a place, or exclusionary, if it includes only some people as “belonging” while 
others do not (Rose, 1993). Yet another way that scholars have thought of a sense of place is 
related to the natural scenery or climate, or the wildlife or environmental setting. In this sense, 
it focuses on the interaction between the physical or environmental factors and human beings. 
People confer meaning on places that derive from their own social and cultural experiences.
Tuck and Mackenzie’s (2015) landmark work on decolonizing place brings the global chal‑
lenges of climate change and economics together with place. Asking researchers to take place 
seriously in research, they draw attention to the ways in which globalization and neo‑liberalism 
have restructured space and recreated colonialism, albeit in new forms. Decolonizing place 
involves a critical inquiry that is centered on indigenous methods of storywork and place map‑
ping. It involves noticing place as inextricably linked to social and political relations, power, 
and marginalization. They challenge the simplistic notion of space as a static context where Land, place, context, and photographic arts 95
a study takes place and instead argue that space is produced and reproduced as a result of the 
dynamic interactions between people and place and between nonhuman material contexts like 
energy, economy, oil, or land. In doing so, they bring to the center an awareness of how a place 
is shaped by other places. By paying such critical attention to places, they bring placemaking to 
the forefront as a research process and argue for an ethical critical place inquiry. Their work pro‑
vides lessons in decolonizing methodologies for the different disciplines and professions con‑
cerned with place. Different frameworks can influence how a place is conceptualized. Economic 
and political factors, for example, often influence land‑use planning decisions. Land‑use plan‑
ners may frame decisions from a deficit framework as they view their efforts to make changes 
as improving the community. A participatory action framework would view planning decisions 
as requiring collaborative dialogs between the community and the planners. An example of a 
participatory action research that sought community perspectives was conducted by Glover 
et al. (2008) with photo elicitation, interviews, and a civic discovery forum where photographs 
and stories were presented by the participants to their peers.
Photographs taken by the community along with narratives serve to present a different view‑
point from those that planners might take. These are imbued with a sense of connection to place 
as opposed to what are often the efficiency and economic priorities of planners. In connection 
with land use and urban or rural planning, photographs can serve as a way to facilitate dialogs 
between stakeholders and as a way to see through the eyes of the community that lives close to 
the land, changes to which are being debated.
Researching place attachment
Like sense of place, place attachment is a theoretical construct that gives place a personal mean‑
ing and focuses on the bonds that people make with places (Lewicka, 2011; Low & Altman, 
1992). In anthropology or geography, the concept of place attachment has been extensively 
used to refer to place as a specific site as well as to making memories through experiences. 
Place attachment is complex and multidimensional. Research on place attachment ranges across 
examining leisure spots and tourists’ connections to such places to people’s attachment to the 
land that they might be working on for a living. Indigenous populations have a distinct relation‑
ship with land and have historically been excluded from having a say in the development and 
changes to the land. Researchers have begun to explore place attachment in relation to indig‑
enous peoples through interviews and observations. Some researchers have used photography 
to elicit interviews with participants. Place attachment is also related to place identity, where 
individuals feel like a place or site is part of their heritage.
Peroff et al. (2020) used a mixed‑methods approach to gain a deeper understanding of 
indigenous participants’ attachment to places. They used photographs to elicit interviews and 
then asked for a ranking of photographs to get at the variations and extent to which specific 
sites had particular meanings for the participants. Several studies have used photography to 
get insight into place‑based meanings (Cheng & Kuo, 2015; Stedman et al., 2014; Walker & 
Ryan, 2008; Zhang & Lei, 2010). Both qualitative and quantitative approaches have been used 
with photographs to elicit how participants relate to places. In qualitative approaches, 
researchers have sought to understand what places mean to participants, and in quantitative 
approaches, they have been concerned with how much a place means to participants. Cappello 
(2005) conducted photo interviews by selecting some photographs to use during interviews. 
Photo interviews have been seen as a way to reduce social and cultural gaps between the 
researcher and the researched and thereby aiding in democratizing the process of the inter‑
views. Huff (2006), for example, started her interviews by showing photographs of familiar 96 Land, place, context, and photographic arts
places. Peroff et al. (2020) started by identifying and choosing ten photographs from Google 
Images for a study based on literature on landscapes relevant to rural Guatemala, where the 
study took place. They then asked the participants to choose five photographs that they could 
identify with or the photographs that they found held meaning or were most important to 
them. Participants were asked to arrange the photographs in order of importance. Next, the 
participants were interviewed about the photograph ranking so that their narratives explained 
why they chose the photographs and the reasoning behind the ranking. Their findings helped 
to explain the ways in which changes in tourism and landscape use influenced participants’ 
identification and place attachment. Photography in this research project helped to elicit par‑
ticipants’ views of the changing landscape around them. Further, the ranking of photographs 
allowed the researchers to gather narratives that shed light on the extent to which participants’ 
depended on the land for economy and sustenance.
Other ways to research place attachment or sense of place are illustrated by scholars studying 
how children relate to places. As scholars Rasmussen (2004) and Zeiher (2003) have pointed 
out, children are usually in spaces designed by adults for children, whether they be schools or 
playgrounds. Studies that seek to understand place attachment or place identity need to examine 
how children see those places and how they connect to them. To this end, Rasmussen (2004) 
conducted two studies of Danish children’s everyday lives, one of which focused on the institu‑
tions to which children were connected and the other on neighborhoods to examine how physical 
environments influenced the everyday lives of children. In the first study, children were given 
disposable cameras to take photographs of places they liked indoors or in buildings. Rasmussen 
(2004) argued that a child’s life is primarily organized around an “institutionalized triangle,” 
with one corner being the school, another where an after‑school or recreational activity takes 
place, and the third corner being the home. These places are designed for children by adults and 
regarded as places for children. Rasmussen (2004) sought to understand what children’s places 
might be rather than places for children by inviting their participation and input into what places 
they might consider as having meaning for them. In the second study, researchers conducted 
walking interviews with children around their neighborhood as the children pointed to places 
they were familiar with and talked about spaces to which they were particularly attached. When 
children presented their everyday lives in photographs and stories, they not only mentioned 
areas within institutionalized places like school and home but also pointed to key areas between 
those routes that were outdoors, to which they also connected. Children described and attributed 
qualities to some areas that were animated with their imagination so that the space and ground 
became a special place that was given a name by the children. Children saw in the space and in 
their imagination a place that might exist in the future as they described imaginary places and 
discussed what they were in the process of building on that site. While researchers saw in the 
photograph an abandoned square, children saw different areas of the square that they had created 
in their imaginations. Similarly, in a photograph of a playground, children pointed to a tree on 
the grounds rather than a swing or slide as one of the places to which they were most attached.
As we see in these examples, photography allowed the researchers a greater understanding 
of place attachment that can in turn inform adults of how to create spaces for children that they 
can make their own.
Researching travel photography, volunteer tourism, or voluntourism
Travel photography has become increasingly popular as a site for research and can be regarded 
as more than a form of gazing. Because it involves representational engagement, research‑
ers have much to learn when analyzing photographs related to travel. Photographs of places Land, place, context, and photographic arts 97
that people visit and then share or post to social media websites have become the norm. Such 
photographs feed particular images of places and people, and there is an intersection of gazes 
(Crang, 1997) as a narrative is woven by the creator of the photographs and those who view 
them. Purposes behind creating photographs by travelers frame photographs in distinct ways; 
for example, humanitarian aid is often sought through photographs of children in need or in 
vulnerable conditions. Photographs can depict the innocence of children and their dependence 
and appeal to the protective instincts of those looking at the photographs. Critiques of such pho‑
tographs as commodifying suffering (Cohen, 2001) can be extended to the contexts and places 
in the photographs that depict the conditions of suffering, the lack of amenities, or safety and 
shelter.
Qualitative researchers interested in how land and place play a role in the experiences of 
people can also examine voluntourism, or volunteer tourism, where people spend some time 
volunteering in a foreign country while also learning about the culture of the place and people. 
Voluntourism is regarded as similar to the “gap year” experience, where youth spend a year in 
countries other than their own to experience the world differently, broaden one’s mind, or under‑
stand different cultures and contexts (Raymond & Hall, 2008; Snee, 2013).
Voluntourism has its supporters who claim that the experiences of voluntourists attest to an 
increased self‑confidence and has broadened their perspectives. Scholars who take a critical 
approach have used neo‑liberal discourses or postcolonial theories (Conran, 2011; Lyons et al., 
2012; Snee, 2013) to point out that the motivations of voluntourists are not always in line 
with the ideals of the program. Despite intentions to help those in poverty, other factors like 
a focus on self‑development, an opportunity to travel to otherwise remote locations or places 
where they might have little support, or an opportunity to interact with people from different 
cultures all play a part in the impetus to volunteer (Perold et al., 2013; Sin, 2009). Places in the 
non‑western regions appear to the voluntourist as needy and position the voluntourist as the 
savior, creating a paternalistic relationship and further creates a situation where “lotto” logic 
is applied by the voluntourist so that conditions in the third world are seen as randomized bad 
luck.
Qualitative researchers who want to study photographs taken by voluntourists can therefore 
apply a critical lens to understanding how such photographs impact both the volunteer and the 
audience of the first world, as well as the depictions of the places and people they encounter.
Photography of places and tourism cuts across disciplines of anthropology, sociology, and 
education, as well as the healthcare industry. Clifford (1997) points out that anthropologists 
have typically gone to unfamiliar cultures to photograph, interview, and live in culturally differ‑
ent contexts only to leave and write from their own lands. He points out the blurred boundary 
between tourists and anthropologists, as they are both tourists and researchers in these places. 
The link between photography and early colonial researchers has also been discussed by other 
scholars (see, for example, Dehejia & Allen, 2000).
Van de Ven (2011) describes her own journey as a tourist with a camera in the city of Cal‑
cutta in India. At first disdainful of tourism, she took on an antitourist stance that would talk 
back to the imperialist gaze of the tourist photographer. However, the reality that met her was 
different from what she had expected. With people on the streets clamoring for portraits, she 
realized that the camera creates a stage around itself. It becomes part of a performance. She 
too was assigned a role by the people who wanted to be photographed, and this often led to a 
coconstruction of the photograph or a making together of the photograph. Van de Ven (2011) 
argues against the argument of the “gaze” of the camera that positions the recipients of the 
gaze as powerless or as captured. Instead, she found that recipients looked back both at her 
and at the camera and what she might snap. She further points out that merely removing the 98 Land, place, context, and photographic arts
camera from one’s hands does not remove the colonial or imperialist thinking of the tourist 
or the researcher, a point made by several scholars (Cheshire et al., 2013; de la Barre, 2013; 
Huff, 2006).
Land can be photographed in several ways, at eye level or using different angles and dis‑
tances, or can be photographed from a plane or a drone. As a researcher, one can use aerial 
photography and surveys of the land where available. Harper (1997) tried aerial photography 
to supplement his interview and observation data and found that the aerial photographs added to 
his data and, in addition, confirmed his data categories. Repeat photography is another way to 
understand land use and the way it changes over time.
Harper’s (1997) study of dairy farms in upstate New York was one of several around the 
United States at the time that attempted to shed some light on the future of family‑based agri‑
culture through understanding the social and community structure of dairy farms. After com‑
pleting interviews and observations with 48 family farms, Harper documented farmers’ farming 
strategies and collected farmers’ perspectives on what they thought of the economic viability of 
their farms. He categorized the farms as “craft” and “industrial” as a way to distinguish between 
farm social structures. The “craft” farm often had a single individual who performed most of the 
tasks and whose knowledge of the production system was comprehensive. In the “industrial” 
farm, production was divided among several people, with more reliance on machines. Using 
photographs, Harper (1997) wanted to document the differences between the two types of farms. 
The interiors of the barns in the craft and industrial farms, for example, showed differences, as 
did the ways in which farmers interacted with the animals on both types of farms. Both could 
be photographed and would supplement the data that he gathered through observations and 
interviews. However, Harper (1997) attempted to examine whether or not the differences that 
he observed on the ground could be seen through aerial photographs. He used photographs to 
represent categories and confirm or disconfirm the categories he had arrived at through inter‑
view data.
Harper (1997) first took photographs at the ground level or eye level of both types of farms 
and compared them. He found that, at first glance, most farms appeared more similar than dis‑
similar. What was most apparent was that the buildings were made of wood or metal. One could 
not see the number of buildings, the relationship between them, or what each building com‑
prised from the outside. He was curious to see if the aerial photographs might reveal any differ‑
ences between the farms he had categorized as industry or factory and those that he had grouped 
under a craft label. The aerial photographs did indeed confirm his categories and showed distinct 
differences in the way they were laid out. Details of buildings and the spaces between them, the 
size and layout of buildings, all helped him to see that the types of farms appeared visually dif‑
ferent in the photographs.
In terms of method, after hiring a pilot who was known for his inexpensive rates, Harper 
went on several rides during different seasons and took the aerial photographs himself through 
the window. The aerial data provided him with a bird’s‑eye view of what these differences 
looked like. While more expensive methods of aerial photography exist, the photographs he 
took on his low‑budget rides produced enough data for him to visually see the differences that 
he documented through his observations and further interrogated via interviews.
Repeat photography
Repeat photography is a method by which the same landscape is photographed over a period 
of time to see and monitor landscape change (Kull, 2005). Usually used to monitor ecologi‑
cal changes and often used in geographical fieldwork, repeat photography is fairly new as a Land, place, context, and photographic arts 99
qualitative research tool. Repeat photography can be conducted in different ways. One way 
might be to look at historical photographs of locations and rephotograph them to see differences. 
Bromberg’s (2001) work, an exemplar of this category, documented the cities, villages, land‑
scapes, and people of Wisconsin on the state’s 150th anniversary. Another example is the work 
of Garrard et al. (2012), in which the authors used repeat photography to create a diachronic 
photo diary and combined presenting the diary to local populations with participatory action 
research. They interviewed a purposeful sample of the local population in Nepal to understand 
their perceptions of environmental services over time. The authors concluded that repeat pho‑
tography combined with interviews allowed them to gain insights into the relationship between 
ecosystems and people’s livelihoods.
Another way might be to pick a location and photograph it at different times during the day or 
at different times of the month to see how it is being used. This last might be particularly useful 
when we see how the landscape of places is used, for example, to see how school or neighbor‑
hood playgrounds look different during different parts of the day.
Pauwels (2010) and Metcalfe (2016), pushing at the boundaries of visual sociology, have 
provided qualitative researchers with new frameworks and tools to contemplate the use of pho‑
tographs, such as with repeat photography, as well as calling attention to the challenges of these 
methods. Pauwels introduced the Integrated Framework for Visual Social Research, compris‑
ing three dimensions: origin and nature of visuals, research focus and design, and format and 
purpose. Pauwels emphasizes the point that an
important focus of visual research is also the representational practices as cultural expres‑
sions in relation to what the visuals depict. The visual form is then problematized and 
the image no longer seen as an unproblematic window to the depicted world, but (also) 
as mirroring the social and cultural world of the image producer. This focus of analysis 
requires sufficient knowledge of the medium and its culture (e.g., the evolution of ana‑
logue/ digital camera techniques, the cultural codes of picture making, and the depicted 
culture in a broad sense).
(Pauwels, 2010, p. 558)
Metcalfe (2016), building on Pauwels (2010) framework, conducted a five‑year repeat photog‑
raphy study called Images of Academic Science. Metcalfe recounts that the
initial aim of the Images of Academic Science project was to understand how academic 
science was visually represented in the photographs housed in the university archive, from 
the foundation of the campus in the early 1900s to the present. The project was designed 
as an interdisciplinary project, drawing upon theories of visual representation from (a 
variety of disciplines). As the study progressed, it became apparent that critical theories 
of space and place were also useful, as the physical environment of the campus yielded 
rich analytic opportunities.
(Metcalfe, 2016, pp. 162–163)
Metcalfe then decided to employ ideas related to Gruenewald’s (2003) critical pedagogy of 
place to better articulate the methodological challenges and opportunities that arose from the 
study. Gruenewald’s incantation to researchers offers opportunities for deeper contemplation: 
“The question is whether we will embrace place at all – What happened here? What will happen 
here? – as a critical construct in educational theory, research, and practice” (Gruenewald, 2003, 
p. 11).100 Land, place, context, and photographic arts
Challenges with repeat photography include figuring out how to document or describe 
through narratives the changes seen in the photographs. Analyzing repeat photographic data 
would require the researcher to look for and create categories that they are particularly inter‑
ested in and document the changes in those categories. These categories would emerge from 
their research questions. A researcher might seek to understand what people find most interest‑
ing and why or where people tend to congregate. This could be a particular bench in a park or 
on a playground. It could be the swing or the slide in an elementary school.
In terms of photographing land, there is another practice that researchers and artists also 
employ, referred to as the “aftermath aesthetic”; it focuses on taking photographs of sites after 
historical events. Neath (2012) examines the artwork and photography of two artists, Anne Fer‑
ran and Ricky Maynard, who photographed the traumatic histories of Tasmania through land‑
scapes as they represent the present moment. These landscape photographs are mostly empty 
and devoid of people. In these photographs, researchers attempt to document that the land has 
witnessed events, specifically traumatic events. Sites are empty because buildings have been 
removed or recycled. Photographers, researchers, and artists using this type of aesthetic prefer 
to let the emptiness speak for itself. In this way, they look for new ways to access historical 
experiences. Similarly, Gilman (2001) discusses another example of accessing historical expe‑
riences through emptiness in the photography by Alan Cohen, who, in a series called Now, has 
photographed the remains of the Nazi death camp in Auschwitz, Germany, through the stream 
of visitors as they make their way toward the site of the crematorium or by the photographs of 
empty paths or gravel.
Researchers who might want to examine histories in the city might be able to use this tech‑
nique, in which they visually represent what is current even though the stories they tell are of 
the past. Memorials are one such example of past events or tragedies where current photos 
or images might evoke the stories of what took place in the past. Photography has been long 
associated with mourning practices. Traditional places of mourning, like the cemetery, are using 
new digital technology to create headstones with photographs of the dead. Other places in cities 
where memorials spontaneously appear to mark the sudden or violent death of a person often 
have photographs displayed so that people passing by can remember and mourn the dead. The 
memory of the person who has passed is kept alive with photographs and other memorabilia. 
Passersby leave flowers to commemorate the life of the person. Digital photography and social 
media together have created virtual spaces for virtual memorials where the community can 
come together to mourn. Everyday photographs of the dead are distributed widely on social 
media and commented upon. Blogs and Facebook pages are also set up for people to write notes 
about the dead. Biographical studies, life histories, or life writing, as well as exploring how 
people negotiate grief over time, are all topics within memorial studies that can be conducted 
using photography.
Guided tour as methodology for understanding place
Bendiner‑Viani (2016) advocated for the use of photographs in order to generate a more 
mindful discussion of places by way of guided tours. This involves asking the participants to 
take the researcher on a tour of their everyday places, and the researcher then photographing 
or making creative images of these places and bringing them back to the participant for them 
to talk about how these photographs might be different or similar, or in what way they rep‑
resent or not their lived experiences. Using examples from Brooklyn, NY, and Oakland, CA, 
the author explored the process by taking photographs and showing them to the participants Land, place, context, and photographic arts 101
who took them on the guided tour. Bendiner‑Viani (2016) explained that participants who 
saw their worlds through the eyes of the researcher felt at times like they were seeing them 
for the first time. This method of using photography for discussion and sharing is distinct 
from other photo elicitation methods. This model brings people’s worlds back to them and 
creates an opportunity for them to consider what they do every day in more depth. Partici‑
pants explored how the place felt and their own emotional responses. All this allowed for 
new ways of seeing that led them to discuss the urban everyday environment in different 
ways. The goal of the research was to understand how meaning is made in what are often 
regarded as banal or everyday spaces. The researcher walked around in the same spaces 
that participants who took her on these guided tours lived and moved around every day, and 
she took several sets of photographs from different angles and distances to finally create an 
album that was shared with the participants for their reflections. There was a different per‑
spective that the viewing of the photographs allowed participants who could point out what 
was missed in the photographic representations or the feelings that were excluded so that 
it was possible to look anew at places that they had been used to going through every day. 
At times, the participants shared that they wished they had shown the researcher a different 
place or had pointed out other landmarks that later appeared to be important for them. At 
times, the photographs revealed how they saw their place. And what made it home or gave 
it a sense of belonging. For example, a single building did not feel like a neighborhood, 
but the addition of a tree or a swingset might create a comprehensive picture of what felt 
like belonging. Context, in this sense, filled in what people regarded as familiar places. The 
second interview, with photographs, revealed a different way of seeing compared to the first 
interview or guided walking tours, where the participants showed their neighborhoods and 
where they walked every day to the researcher.
Expressive photography and performing urban places
Kroon (2016) shares the way in which she uses expressive photography through several prac‑
tices in Managua, Nicaragua. She frames her work in the concepts of city as archive and urban 
visual archive. By city as archive, she means the ways in which cities can be read as archives 
built over time where the past continues to resonate and moves into the present, where the city 
can be read in layers. Images of the city, comprising historical postcards, art, or other snapshots, 
as well as family and personal photographs, are all part of the urban visual archive. Through 
expressive photography, as a researcher who explores the city as archive, she can then use 
photography to contribute to the urban visual archive. She moved away from documentary 
photography to expressive photography to take visual field notes, using techniques of abstract 
art or at times detailed images that could convey the multilayered traces of the different times 
and uses of buildings. She used expressive photography in conjunction with historic images, in 
visualization of the presence and absence of what was, and through interpretations of designs 
and graphic forms.
Majumdar (2021), in a study of South Asian women’s experiences of close relationships 
and marriage, used photographs of spaces, places, and objects. The researcher conducted two 
studies using photography. In the first, she used photo elicitation with life history interviews. 
The second study asked the participants to take photographs to make meaning of their close 
relationships and in this sense was a photo production study. Photographs in both studies were 
used in different ways, and each contributed to the ways in which the participants understood 
and experienced what they meant by closeness. Photographic research has been used as a 102 Land, place, context, and photographic arts
way to study people’s relationships with their homes and to draw attention to those aspects of 
their home that they valued and found difficult to put into words. Such studies have included 
a study of gender and home life (Hunt, 1989), mantelpiece displays (Hurdley, 2006, 2007), 
and sensory perceptions in relation to memory (Pink, 2013). The idea is that visual images 
can generate narratives that are not necessarily sequential or linear but can be reflective of the 
complexities and ambiguities of relationships and again serve as an opening for understanding 
the deeper meaning of lived experiences. In the first study, people were asked to bring pho‑
tographs of places where they had lived in the homes they had lived in, and these were used 
to conduct a live history interview. However, in this study, people were less engaged with the 
photographs and were more intent on telling their story. Photographs in this study surprisingly 
disrupted the flow of their narrative, and several of them chose to ignore the photographs 
themselves. Part of the reason for this was that people did not always bring photographs of 
homes and places where they had lived, and instead the photographs were mostly of people 
with whom they had lived in several different places, so they chose to focus on the relation‑
ships with the people rather than with the places. In the second study, the participants were 
asked to take photographs of where they were living and focus on objects, spaces, and places 
that were important to them in their experience of married life. They were asked to take about 
10 or 12 photographs without thinking too much about it. They were given the cameras for 
about a period of three weeks although some participants kept them for a much longer time. 
They were told that they would have a conversational, informal chat once they had finished 
taking the photographs. During the chat, the participants were given a chance to rearrange and 
to decide what was the sequence of the photographs that they wanted to present as well as to 
filter out any that they now regretted or did not wish to share. Most participants focused on 
the big events of their lives, like moving houses or moving from one place to another, or on 
personal celebratory events like engagements or marriages. The participants spoke about how 
they took the photographs at times collaboratively with their partners or with their families. 
The choice of what to take and how to stage it was at times decided upon together. There were 
some photographs that they would have liked to take, but since they were asked to take only 
objects and places, they had decided not to take some. The difficulty of what to photograph 
was also described by some. The objects that participants decided to photograph were every‑
day objects like cars, cookers, beds, computers, televisions, etc. But what they meant for each 
participant was different. Some photographs symbolized feelings that were hard to describe 
for the participants, for example, how to negotiate housework among the couple, arguments, 
or conflicts. The variety and range of stories in which they discussed their experiences of 
closeness showed that visual narratives, like all verbal stories, are created for an audience. 
Riessman (2008) pointed out that visual portraits are not unmediated. Portraits are complex, 
and visual narratives are equally layered and arranged for audiences. They represented the 
way in which people saw their world at that particular time.
Qualitative researchers using photography can centralize place and engage with a critical 
place inquiry. Land, place, and context are all areas that are multifaceted and allow for an 
engagement with how attachment, belonging, and community can be researched using photog‑
raphy. Researchers need to be mindful of an ethical place inquiry as they navigate places where 
they conduct research. Like Tuck and McKenzie (2015), we believe that place is embedded in the 
research we do, and paying attention to it is crucial. Early‑career researchers need to think through 
the place(s) where they conduct research, acknowledge that the researcher and the participants 
are already present and interacting with the surroundings, environment, political, and social 
climate of the times. In this sense, a critical place research is a place‑making activity where both 
participants and researchers are located. The orientation helps to expand our view of the role 
photographs can play in helping to interrogate places.Land, place, context, and photographic arts 103
Exercise 7.1: Photographic storyscapes: Narrating across 
multiple media platforms
1 Look at Photograph 7.1 and think about what it conveys to you. What type of story could this 
photograph depict?
2 Using parts of the VISION acronym explained in this chapter, think of the following:
a What does this photograph remind you of? What does this resemble? How is this similar 
or dissimilar to other photographs you have seen?
3 After you have seen the photograph, now read the narrative shared by participants in a simu‑
lated study via a blog.
4 How does the narrative help you to see or understand social relations and interaction at the site?
5 What questions of power and community can be asked in this context?
The following narrative was posted on a community blog during COVID‑19.
Hi everyone, We are all stuck at home in the pandemic. But we need not be alone. There are 
things we can do in our apartment buildings where there are terraces. In our building we are 
using the top floor terrace to create herb gardens. These are medicinal herbs for increasing 
immunity during this difficult time. The herbs can be boiled and made into a drink. Some of 
the elder women (grandmothers) in the building suggested this great idea. The herbs are for 
everyone in the building. If you want to grow them yourself, we will post a “how to” shortly. 
Soon we will post recipes as well.
Photograph 7.1  Terracotta pots with seedlings and a net covering all the pots. Photo credit: Raji 
Swaminathan104 Land, place, context, and photographic arts
Exercise 7.2 Photographs, guided tour methodologies, and 
understanding sense of place
1 Look at the Photograph 7.2 of a street. What do you see? How similar is it to other streets you 
are familiar with?
2 How do these connections remind you of similar ways in which you might connect with 
places in your own experience?
[The study that this was based on was a simulated study to understand and experience 
‘sense of place’ by a group of participants. In order to do this, they looked at archival maps, 
compared it to places they were familiar with to layer a sense of the present over history.]
The following exercises are for you to try your hand at taking photographs and analyzing 
them.
Exercise i. (Use a photograph you take)
Take a map of your neighborhood and visualize the places. Look at some photographs of the 
places or landmarks. What experiences do those places bring to mind? What sense of attachment 
do you have toward particular streets or landmarks? How does a photograph or a map allow for 
a guided tour of the sites?
Photograph 7.2  Street corner traffic with cars and a van with a building with a large screen streaming ads. 
Photo credit: Sadhana AthreyaLand, place, context, and photographic arts 105
Exercise ii. (Use your own photographs)
1 Take some photographs of spaces in your home that you especially connect to.
2 Take some photographs of spaces outside your home that you connect to.
3 Take some photographs of nature that you connect to.
4 Take some photographs of your favorite space(s).
Share the photographs with your peers
1 Explain what each photograph means to you.
2 What themes or terms come to mind when you are sharing these photographs?
3 What story can you tell about yourself through these photographs?
4 What story can you tell about a tradition you are familiar with from these photographs?
5 Reflect on how your story links your past and present and how the photographs are repre‑
sentative, illustrative, or symbolic.
Exercise iii: Repeat photography (take your own photos)
Photographing the same place at different times of the day or week might reveal differences or 
similarities, a sense of continuity or change. Further, they can lend an increased understanding 
of contexts in research. You could try photographing your work space or living space every day 
at a particular time for a week for comparison.
Examine the photographs and consider the following questions for reflection:
1 What does this photograph convey about you?
2 What do the photos reveal about changing aesthetics, use, or your own habits?
3 What might be some mistaken assumptions made when viewing this photograph without 
additional data?
4 What might be some ways that this photograph might add or supplement a life history of the 
person concerned?
5 What do the comparative repeat photographs convey?
Summary
This chapter examined photography research in relation to place and site, including photo‑
graphic mapping of spaces, and discussed the context‑rich data produced by the use of pho‑
tographs. Urban and rural contexts, school environments, and work spaces all have a distinct 
context that is often taken for granted in photography; however, interpretations of the same are 
likely to be different depending on who is looking at the photograph. Mapping physical spaces 
from different angles can help both researchers and participants “see” differently and reflect on 
a variety of narratives.
References
Allen, J., Massey, D., & Cochrane, A.(1998). Rethinking the region. London: Routledge.
Alvesson, M., & Skoldberg, K. (2009). Reflexive methodology: New vistas for qualitative research. Thou‑
sand Oaks, CA: Sage.106 Land, place, context, and photographic arts
Bhabha, H. (2004). The location of culture. London: Routledge.
Bendiner‑Viani, G. (2016, March). Bringing their worlds back: Using photographs to spur conversations 
on everyday place. Visual Studies, 31(1), 8–17.
Bromberg, N. (2001). Wisconsin then and now: The Wisconsin Sesquicentennial Rephotography Project.
University of Wisconsin Press.
Cappello, M. (2005). Photo interviews: Eliciting data through conversations with children. Field Methods, 
17(2), 170–182.
Cheng, C. K., & Kuo, H. Y. (2015). Bonding to a new place never visited: Exploring the relationship 
between landscape elements and place bonding. Tourism Management, 46, 546–560.
Cheshire, L., Meurk, C., & Woods, M. (2013). Decoupling farm, farming and place: Recombinant attach‑
ments of globally engaged family farmers. Journal of Rural Studies, 30, 64–74.
Clifford, J. (1997). Spatial practices: Fieldwork, travel, and the disciplining of anthropology. In A. Gupta, 
A. & J. Ferguson (Eds.), Anthropological locations: Boundaries and grounds of a field science, 185–222.
Cohen, S. (2001). States of denial: Knowing about atrocities and suffering. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Conran, M. (2011). They really love me!: Intimacy in volunteer tourism. Annals of Tourism Research, 
38(4), 1454–1473.
Crang, M. (1997). Picturing practices: Research through the tourist gaze. Progress in Human Geography, 
21(3), 359–373.
Cunliffe, A. (2004). On becoming a critically reflexive practitioner. Journal of Management Education, 28,
407–426. https://doi.org/10.1177/1052562904264440
Dehejia, V., & Allen, C. (2000). India through the lens: Photography 1840–1911. Munich: Prestel.
de la Barre, S. (2013). Wilderness and cultural tour guides, place identity and sustainable tourism in remote 
areas. Journal of Sustainable Tourism, 21(6), 825–844.
Dennis Jr., S. F. (2006). Prospects for qualitative GIS at the intersection of youth development and partici‑
patory urban planning. Environment and Planning A, 38(11), 2039–2054.
Eisenhauer, B., Kannich, R., & Blahna, D. (2000). Attachments to special places on public lands: An analy‑
sis of activities, reason for attachments, and community connections. Society & Natural Resources, 13, 
421–440.
Garrard, R., Kohler, T., Wiesmann, U., Price, M. F., Byers, A., & Sherpa, A. R. (2012). Depicting com‑
munity perspectives: Repeat photography and participatory research as tools for assessing environ‑
mental services in Sagarmatha National Park, Nepal. eco.mont, 4(2), 9–19. https://doi.org/10.1553/eco.
mont‑4‑2s21
Gilman, S. L. (2001). Alan Cohen’s surfaces of history. In A. Cohen (Ed.), On European ground (pp. 3–4). 
University of Chicago Press.
Glover, T. D., Stewart, W. P., & Gladdys, K. (2008). Social ethics of landscape change: Toward community‑
based land‑use planning. Qualitative Inquiry, 14(3), 384–401. https://doi.org/10.1177/10778004073
09409
Grasseni, C. (2009). Developing skill, developing vision: Practices of locality at the foot of the Alps (Vol. 
3). Berghahn Books.
Gruenewald, D. A. (2003). The best of both worlds: A critical pedagogy of place. Educational Researcher, 
32(4), 3–12.
Harper, D. (1997). Visualizing structure: Reading surfaces of social life. Qualitative Sociology, 20(1), 57–77.
Huff, L. A. (2006). Sacred sustenance: Maize, storytelling, and a Maya sense of place. Journal of Latin 
American Geography, 79–96.
Hunt, P. (1989). Gender and the construction of home life. In G. Allan & G. Crow (Eds.), Home and family: 
Creating the domestic sphere (pp. 66–81). Basingstoke: Palgrave.
Hurdley, R. (2006). Dismantling mantelpieces: Narrating identities and materializing culture in the home. 
Sociology, 40(4), 717–733.
Hurdley, R. (2007). Focal points: Framing material culture and visual data. Qualitative Research, 7(3), 
355–374.
Kroon, A. (2016, September). The ruins of Managua vieja: The use of expressive photography in urban 
ethnography. Visual Studies, 31(3), 191–205.Land, place, context, and photographic arts 107
Kull, C. A. (2005). Historical landscape photography as a tool for land use change research. Norsk Geo‑
grafisk Tidsskrift-Norwegian Journal of Geography, 59, 253–268.
Lefebvre, H. (1991/2014). The production of space. In J. J. Gieseking, W. Mangold, C. Katz, S. Low, & S. 
Saegert (Eds.), The people, place, and space reader (pp. 289–293). Routledge.
Lewicka, M. (2011). Place attachment: How far have we come in the last 40 years?. Journal of environ‑
mental psychology, 31(3), 207–230.
Low, S. M., & Altman, I. (1992). Place attachment: A conceptual inquiry. In I. Altman, & S. M. Low (Eds.). 
Place attachment (pp. 1–12). Boston, MA: Springer US.
Luttrell, W. (2009). Qualitative educational research: Readings in reflexive methodology and transforma‑
tive practice. London: Routledge.
Lyons, K., Hanley, J., Wearing, S., & Neil, J. (2012). Gap year volunteer tourism: Myths of global citizen‑
ship?. Annals of Tourism Research, 39(1), 361–378.
Majumdar, A. (2021). Using photographs of places, spaces and objects to explore South Asian women’s 
experience of close relationships and marriage. In P. Reavey (Ed.). A Handbook of Visual Methods in 
Psychology (pp. 97–112). Routledge.
Massey, D. (1995, April). Places and their pasts. In History workshop journal (No. 39, pp. 182–192). 
Oxford University Press.
Metcalfe, A. S. (2016). Repeat photography and educational research. In J. Moss, & B. Pini (Eds.). Visual 
research methods in educational research (pp. 153–171). London: Palgrave Macmillan UK.
Neath, J. (2012). Empty lands: Contemporary art approaches to photographing historical trauma in Tas‑
mania. Journal of Australian Studies, 36(3), 309–325. https://doi.org/10.1080/14443058.2012.703220
Rasmussen, K. (2004). Places for children–children’s places. Childhood, 11(2), 155–173. https://doi.
org/10.1177/0907568204043053
Pauwels, L. (2010). Visual sociology reframed: An analytical synthesis and discussion of visual methods 
in social and cultural research. Sociological Methods & Research, 38(4), 545–581.
Pellow, D. (2001). Cultural differences and urban spatial forms: Elements of boundedness in an Accra 
community. American Anthropologist, 103(1), 59–75. https://doi.org/10.1525/aa.2001.103.1.59
Peroff, D. M., Morais, D. B., Seekamp, E., Sills, E., & Wallace, T. (2020). Assessing residents’ place 
attachment to the Guatemalan Maya landscape through mixed methods photo elicitation. Journal of 
Mixed Methods Research, 14(3), 379–402.
Perold, H., Graham, L. A., Mavungu, E. M., Cronin, K., Muchemwa, L., & Lough, B. J. (2013). The 
colonial legacy of international voluntary service. Community Development Journal, 48(2), 179–196.
Pink, S. (2013). Engaging the senses in ethnographic practice: Implications and advances. The Senses and 
Society, 8(3), 261–267.
Rasmussen, K. (2004). Places for children–children’s places. Childhood, 11(2), 155–173.
Raymond, E. M., & Hall, C. M. (2008). The development of cross‑cultural (mis) understanding through 
volunteer tourism. Journal of Sustainable Tourism, 16(5), 530–543.
Riessman, C. K. (2008). Narrative methods for the human sciences. Sage Publications.
Relph, E. (1976). Place and placelessness. London: Pion.
Rose, G. (1995). Place and identity: A sense of place. In D. Massey & P. Jess (Eds.), A place in the world? 
Places, cultures and globalization (pp. 87–132). Oxford: The Open University.
Rose, G. (1993). Feminism and geography: The limits of geographical knowledge. Cambridge, UK: Polity 
Press.
Shin, J. E., & Woo, W. (2023, April). How space is told: Linking trajectory, narrative, and intent in aug‑
mented reality storytelling for cultural heritage sites. In A. Schmidt A., & K. Vaananen (Eds.). Pro‑
ceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 1–14), Hamburg, 
Germany. Association for Computing Machinery Publishers.
Sin, H. L. (2009). Volunteer tourism—“involve me and I will learn?.” Annals of Tourism Research, 36(3), 
480–501.
Snee, H. (2013). Framing the other: Cosmopolitanism and the representation of difference in overseas gap 
year narratives. The British Journal of Sociology, 64(1), 142–162.
Soja, E. W. (2010). Seeking spatial justice. University of Minnesota Press.108 Land, place, context, and photographic arts
Stedman, R. C., Amsden, B. L., Beckley, T. M., & Tidball, K. G. (2014). Photo‑based methods for under‑
standing place meanings as foundations of attachment. In L. Manzo, & P. Devine‑Wright (Eds.). Place 
attachment: Advances in theory, methods and applications, 112–124. Routledge.
Swaminathan, R., & Mulvihill, T. M. (2019). Learning to ‘site‑see’: Place‑reflexivity as a methodological 
tool for qualitative researchers. International Journal of Qualitative Studies in Education, 32(8), 982–997.
Talen, E. (2000). Bottom‑up GIS: A new tool for individual and group expression in participatory plan‑
ning. Journal of the American Planning Association, 66(3), 279–294.
Teixeira, S., & Gardner, R. (2017). Youth‑led participatory photo mapping to understand urban environ‑
ments. Children and Youth Services Review, 82, 246–253.
Tuan, Y.‑F. (1977). Space and place: The perspective of experience. London: Edward Arnold.
Tuck, E., & McKenzie, M. (2014). Place in research: Theory, methodology, and methods. New York, NY: 
Routledge.
Turner, V. (1969). The ritual processes: Structure and anti‑structure. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Van de Ven, A. (2011). The eyes of the street look back: In Kolkata with a camera around my neck. Pho‑
tographies, 4(2), 139–155.
Walker, A. J., & Ryan, R. L. (2008). Place attachment and landscape preservation in rural New England: 
A Maine case study. Landscape and Urban Planning, 86(2), 141–152.
Zhang, H., & Lei, S. L. (2010). Effects of place attachment on participation intentions for local tourism 
development. WIT Transactions on Ecology and the Environment, 139, 501–509.
Zeiher, H. (2003). Shaping daily life in urban environments. In P. Christensen, & M. O’Brien (Eds.). Chil‑
dren in the city (pp. 84–99). Routledge.DOI: 10.4324/9781003034773-8
In this chapter, we discuss how photographs may be used for data elicitation, interviewing, and 
preliminary analysis. Photographs do not automatically elicit good interviews. The types of 
photographs to present in order to elicit reflective data rather than taken‑for‑granted data will 
be explored. The roles of the participant and researcher as viewers and as data generators will 
also be discussed. Distinctions between found photographs and researcher and/or participant 
photography, as well as ways in which interviewing can be adapted to suit the particular context, 
are explored in this chapter. Interviewing, as a form of data gathering, occurs through a variety 
of modes, including open inquiry, dialog, or group discussions. The use of photographs as a 
way to create connections with participants as well as a means of gathering stories of compara‑
tive living conditions (such as the way things were vs. how they are now) are common ways to 
incorporate photographs into interview studies. The use of photographs as a means to learn from 
participants as they teach researchers about the conditions of their lives and the types of stories 
that are generated by family photography, photo self‑elicitation, photo feedback, or photo essays 
are all exciting and accessible ways for researchers to engage with photographic data.
Visual data and photographic data
There is a wide range of data that can be collected from participants in order to increase and 
deepen the information gathered. While visual data is a broad umbrella term that comprises 
drawings, paintings, collages as well as photographs, films, and videos, the purpose of gather‑
ing photographic data is to further the meaning of the data gathered, improve the quality of the 
conversations, or add layers to data analysis, allowing for “thick description” (Geertz, 1973).
Using photographs as a research tool should align with your research objectives and the 
nature of your study. Careful planning, ethical considerations, and a thoughtful integration of 
photographs with other research methods can lead to a deeper understanding of the research 
topic and enhance the substantiation of the findings. Furthermore, photographs can be combined 
with other qualitative or quantitative research methods to enhance the overall data collection 
and analysis processes. For instance, photographs can be used alongside interviews, surveys, 
or observational data to provide a more comprehensive understanding of a research topic or 
serve as the centerpiece of the meaning‑making. As always, it is important to remain vigilant 
regarding ethical considerations when using photographs for data elicitation within qualitative 
research. Researchers must obtain appropriate consent not only from participants but also from 
those who are generating the photographs. In addition, researchers need to be especially mindful 
about the human subjects that may be appearing in the photographs, establish protocols for the 
necessary measures to be taken to ensure appropriate privacy and confidentiality of the individu‑
als involved, and handle the images in accordance with ethical guidelines and data protection 
8 Interviews and photography110 Interviews and photography
regulations. And, as always, researchers must guard against the use of any images of minors 
and/or other vulnerable populations without adhering to proper ethical protocols.
Photography for interviewing in qualitative research presents an opportunity for researchers 
to go beyond the one‑on‑one talk method. Photographs can be used as a powerful tool for data 
elicitation, including interviewing and preliminary analysis, in various fields of research. Here 
are some ways in which photographs can be effectively utilized:
Data elicitation: Under the banner of photo elicitation, there are various methodological varia‑
tions and distinctions in terminology as well as political ideologies. Examples include photo 
interviewing, photo novella, photo voice, and photo production (Elliot & Gillen, 2013; Hur‑
worth, 2003; Karm & Remmik, 2013; Radley, 2011). Researchers can also be mindful of 
nonverbal as well as verbal cues for interviews. Such cues can generate narratives that bring 
an additional perspective. The photographs can supplement verbal data and at times be illus‑
trative of experiences that have not been verbalized.
Photographs can serve as a visual stimulus to elicit information from participants. By showing 
them specific photographs related to a topic of interest, researchers can prompt participants 
to recall relevant experiences, emotions, or details that may not have been easily expressed 
through verbal or written responses alone. For example, in qualitative research, researchers may 
use photographs to trigger memories, gather perceptions about a particular event or situation, 
or encourage deep and rich storytelling about the focus of the study. Photographs can enhance 
the interviewing process by providing concrete visual references for participants to discuss. 
Researchers can present photographs as prompts during interviews to encourage participants 
to provide more detailed and accurate descriptions. This technique can be particularly useful in 
sensitive or emotional topics where participants may struggle to express themselves verbally. 
Conversational interviews or other types of interview approaches that remain permeable, such 
as semistructured interviews, create opportunities between researchers and participants where 
a shared understanding or coconstructed meaning can be developed. Discussing photographs 
as part of the interview process can promote another layer of engagement at times leading to a 
deeper conversation. Photographs can also aid in the preliminary data analysis phase of the 
research project. Researchers can examine photographs to identify visual patterns, themes, or 
notable features. This can be especially valuable in fields such as anthropology, architecture, or 
urban planning, where visual data provides rich insights into a given context’s cultural, social, 
or spatial aspects. Researchers can use image analysis techniques, such as content analysis or 
visual coding, to identify and categorize visual elements in the photographs (Table 8.1).
The use of photographs in qualitative research, particularly in interviews, is a powerful tool 
and can be used for stimulating research discussions, providing context, aiding memory, facili‑
tating the expression of emotions, empowering participants to more fully shape their narra‑
tions, cross‑validating information, facilitating complex communications, and enabling a robust 
visual narrative analysis to be accomplished. A description for each is in Table 8.2.
Researchers should be sensitive to cultural differences as well as power dynamics when 
using visual materials. Symbols, meanings, and interpretations of photographs can vary across 
cultures, so it’s essential to consider cultural contexts. The choice and presentation of visual 
materials can influence power dynamics between the researcher and participants. Photographs 
are dynamic, and their meaning can evolve over time. Researchers should acknowledge the 
temporal aspect of visual data and consider how meanings may change throughout the research 
process. Interdisciplinary collaboration can be immensely beneficial when bringing together 
experts in various fields to enrich the analytic possibilities.Interviews and photography 111
Table 8.1 Designing Interviews by Using Photographs
Photovoice Photovoice is a participatory research method that provides participants 
with cameras to capture images that reflect their experiences, 
perspectives, or challenges related to a specific research topic. 
Participants can then discuss the photographs in individual and/
or group settings, enabling them to share their stories, contribute 
to deeper understandings, and, at times, contribute to social change 
or policy development. Photovoice has been particularly effective 
in community‑based research, empowering marginalized groups to 
have a voice matched to a visual depiction, leading to more nuanced 
decision‑making processes.
Compare and contrast forms 
of evidence
Photographs can be used to triangulate data collected through other 
methods, such as interviews or observations. Qualitative researchers 
can extend the meaningfulness of their findings by comparing 
and contrasting verbal or written accounts with visual evidence. 
Triangulation, given its uses in positivist research, can be a contested 
practice unless described and substantiated as a methodological tool 
in line with the goals of a particular study; but in some cases, it is 
a practice that allows for a more comprehensive understanding of a 
phenomenon by integrating multiple perspectives and data sources. 
Photographs, when serving as one of a few data sources, can prompt 
the data analysis to move in new directions.
Visual ethnography Visual ethnography combines photography and ethnographic research 
techniques to explore cultural practices, behaviors, and identities (Pink, 
2007), whereby researchers immerse themselves in the research context, 
generating photographs that document everyday life, rituals, artifacts, 
or social interactions. These visual artifacts can provide rich insights 
into the cultural nuances and complexities of a community or group, a 
geographic location, or meaningful events, complementing traditional 
ethnographic methods like interviews and participant observation.
Visual narratives Photographs can be used to create visual narratives or storytelling methods. 
Designing an interview protocol as a storyboard or narrative retelling 
exercise can be an insightful data collection approach. Researchers 
can ask participants to select a series of photographs and use them to 
construct a cohesive narrative representing their experiences, emotions, 
or perspectives. Visual narratives offer a creative and engaging way 
for participants to express themselves, and they can provide valuable 
insights into personal meaning‑making processes.
Historical research In historical research, photographs can be valuable primary sources. 
Researchers can analyze historical photographs to gain insights 
into past events, social dynamics, cultural practices, or architectural 
changes. Photographs can be compared with other historical 
documents and narratives to corroborate information or uncover new 
perspectives on a particular time period. Using archived photographs 
as the central prompt for a qualitative interview can help shape the 
specific questions a researcher may generate. For example, studies 
using photographs as a way to explore everyday life and cultural 
practices of a particular geographic location or region may include the 
analysis of street scenes, social gatherings, and work environments to 
understand social dynamics, technological changes, and the material 
culture of that era. The photographs could be compared with additional 
archival records and paired with oral history interviews to provide 
a more nuanced historical narrative. Whenever researchers engage 
with archived photographs, a series of questions are attended to by 
researchers in order to account for the narrations often set in motion by 
the sheer act of collecting and organizing the photos (Conway, 2010).
(Continued)112 Interviews and photography
Health research In healthcare settings, photographs can be used to document deidentified 
patients’ physical conditions, wounds, or symptoms over time. By 
capturing visual evidence, researchers and healthcare professionals 
can track progress, identify patterns, or evaluate the effectiveness of 
interventions. Photographs of this nature can also be used to enhance 
patient interviews, enabling individuals to express their symptoms 
or experiences visually. Or interviews of healthcare professionals 
as they convey their meaning‑making and related decision‑making 
processes for determining a care plan. For example, Shaw et al. (2023) 
wrote about a photovoice study exploring perceptions older African 
Americans held about Alzheimer’s disease and neurovascular clinical 
trials. The use of photographs as part of the interview process, in 
this case, helped “inform the development of culturally appropriate 
research protocols and effective recruitment strategies to enhance 
participation among older AAs in neurovascular clinical trials” (Shaw 
et al., 2023, p. 213). And Switzer and Flicker (2021) provided specific 
recommendations for designing participatory visual analysis processes 
from a critical narrative intervention perspective, ultimately aimed at 
social change.
Environmental studies In environmental studies, photographs can serve as a powerful tool to 
document ecological changes, land use patterns, or natural resource 
management. Researchers can use aerial photographs, satellite 
imagery, or ground‑level photographs to analyze the impact of 
human activities, monitor biodiversity, or assess the effectiveness of 
conservation efforts. Developing an interview protocol around these 
types of images may lead to a more descriptive version of the tacit 
knowledge of the interviewees.
Market research Photographs can be used in market research to understand consumer 
preferences, behaviors, and reactions to products or advertising 
campaigns. Participants can be shown product images or 
advertisements and asked to provide feedback or impressions. This 
visual stimulus can elicit more detailed and accurate responses, 
helping companies refine their marketing strategies. Photographs of 
this sort may also lead to more nuanced responses to questions within 
the interview.
Educational Research Photographs can be utilized in educational research to explore teaching 
and learning processes, including projects under the umbrella of 
the Scholarship of Teaching and Learning (SOTL). Researchers 
can use photographs to document classroom interactions, student 
engagement, or the physical learning environment. By analyzing these 
visual records, researchers can identify patterns, assess instructional 
strategies, or investigate the impact of the learning environment 
on student outcomes. There is a long history within the field of 
educational research of using photographs and video images to assist 
with performance improvement by teachers in the classroom. For 
example, studies can be designed to better understand how classroom 
design and human use of learning spaces can influence how students 
engage and how it impacts overall student learning. Designing studies 
of this type may involve researchers and/or participants generating 
photographic images of different classroom layouts, lighting sources 
(natural and/or artificial), color combinations, seating arrangements, 
learning resources, etc., and how teachers and students are using them. 
Analyzing the photographs within the context of an interview may help 
to identify design features that positively influenced teacher behavior, 
student behavior, and interaction patterns that were produced.
Table 8.1 (Continued)
(Continued)Interviews and photography 113
Cultural studies Photographs can be used to explore cultural identities, social movements, 
or subcultures. Researchers can analyze photographs from different 
time periods or cultural contexts to understand changes in fashion, 
visual symbols, or societal norms. By incorporating photographs 
of this sort into the interview protocols, researchers can engage 
participants in the process of interpreting visual representations and 
ultimately gain deeper insights into the ways culture is constructed, 
negotiated, and expressed by members of the subculture themselves.
Architectural photography As a research method, architectural photography involves generating 
and analyzing photographs of urban landscapes, buildings, and public 
spaces to understand the impact of urban planning policies on the built 
environment. The photographs combined with interviews and other 
archival research data sources can be used to gain a comprehensive 
understanding of urban development patterns. For example, studies 
designed to include photographic portrayals of cultural identity as 
expressed by urban youth researchers may use collected photographs 
that represent visual symbols, fashion choices, and artistic expressions 
associated with various youth subcultures. Through visual analysis and 
interviews, researchers may gain insights into how cultural identities 
were in part shaped by the built environment people navigated.
Table 8.1 (Continued)
Researchers should also consider the accessibility of visual materials. Ensure that partici‑
pants can easily view and discuss the photographs, especially if conducting interviews with 
individuals with visual impairments or other accessibility needs. Ethical considerations extend 
to the creation, use, and dissemination of visual materials. Being transparent about the purpose 
of using visuals, seeking informed consent, and handling visual data with care are all important 
for researchers to consider. At times, researchers may need to assess participants’ digital literacy 
levels and provide the necessary support to ensure effective engagement with visual materials. 
Before implementing visual methods on a larger scale, researchers may conduct pilot tests to 
refine their approach, assess participant reactions, and ensure the effectiveness of using photo‑
graphs in interviews. Seeking feedback from participants on their experience with the visual 
aspects of the interview process can inform future research practices.
Absent photographs
Photographic data sometimes include absent photographs. Missing photographs in this sense can 
be those photographs that were planned but were never taken, those that were taken and then lost, 
or still others that were deliberately planned to not be taken. Asking people to visually represent 
their lives might at times put people in a position to have to remember those memories that they 
would rather forget. Hannah Frith (2020) cautions us to remember that at times participants may 
deliberately refuse to take photographs of events or aspects of their lives that they wish to keep 
private, confidential, or wish to forget. Therefore, when considering photographic data, qualita‑
tive researchers need to keep in mind that they may be missing photographs and that the existing 
photographs might tell an incomplete story. Further, photographic interviews rarely tell the story of 
how the photographs were created or organized. Qualitative researchers need to keep in mind that 
the photographs might limit the story told and in listening, the participant might reveal some absent 
spaces. The question for researchers is: What does one do about missing photographs and how can 
we explore the role of absent images in the creation and narration of self in biographical work? 
However, along with absent photographs, the missing information in photographic interviewing is 114 Interviews and photography
Table 8.2 Photographs as Tools
Stimulating research discussion Photographs can serve as stimuli to prompt participants to share 
more in‑depth and nuanced information. Participants may be 
asked to describe or reflect on the content of the photograph, 
which can lead to richer and more detailed responses.
Providing context Photographs help provide context for the interview. They can be 
used to explore participants’ experiences, perspectives, and 
emotions related to specific events or situations captured in the 
images. As well as add temporal nuances.
Memory aids Photographs can act as memory aids, assisting participants in 
recalling specific details about events or experiences. This can 
contribute to more accurate and detailed responses during the 
interview.
Expression of emotions Images can evoke emotions, allowing participants to express 
their feelings and experiences in a visual and nonverbal way. 
This adds a layer of depth to other forms of qualitative data.
Empowerment In some cases, participants might be encouraged to bring their 
own photographs to the interview. This empowers them to 
share personal visual representations of their experiences, 
providing a unique perspective.
Cross‑validation The use of photographs can also serve as a form of 
cross‑validation, helping researchers triangulate information 
gathered through interviews with visual evidence.
Enhanced communication For participants who might find it challenging to articulate 
their thoughts verbally, photographs offer an alternative 
mode of communication. This is especially beneficial when 
working with diverse groups or individuals with varying 
communication preferences.
Visual narrative analysis Researchers may conduct visual narrative analysis, examining 
the visual elements of photographs along with participants’ 
narratives to gain a deeper understanding of the stories being 
told.
Participant‑created visuals Beyond photographs, researchers might encourage participants 
to create visual representations such as drawings, collages, or 
diagrams incorporating the photos or created alongside the 
photos, allowing participants to express themselves creatively 
using different mediums.
Technology and digital media With advancements in technology, researchers may experiment 
with digital photographs, videos, or multimedia presentations 
not only as ways to display and convey findings within a study 
but also as ways to engage participants during interviews.
Longitudinal studies Photographs can be especially valuable in longitudinal studies, 
where researchers can capture changes over time. Participants 
may be asked to take photographs at multiple points, providing 
a visual narrative of their evolving experiences and help to 
create interactive visual timelines.
Visual sociology and anthropology The use of visuals in qualitative research aligns with fields like 
visual sociology and anthropology, where researchers explore 
the visual aspects of culture, society, and human experiences.
Integration with other methods Visual methods can be integrated with other qualitative research 
methods, such as focus groups, observations, or content 
analysis. This multimethod approach can offer a more 
comprehensive understanding of the research topic. Combining 
visual data with other sources of data (such as interviews, field 
notes, or documents) enhances triangulation, strengthening the 
overall validity and reliability of the research findings.Interviews and photography 115
the story behind how photographs get produced, which ones get left out or not taken at all. Photo 
production comprising the work that goes into choosing a photograph is obscured when one thinks 
of photo elicitation as interviews based on photographs that already exist. Hodgetts et al. (2007) 
refer to the task and labor involved when people work through the stories and narratives of them‑
selves and how they negotiate memory when presenting the photographs during an interview. Photo 
production in this sense shifts the emphasis from photographs triggering certain memories to photo‑
graphs creating a story or a memory through a particular staging. This can be especially true when 
participants are asked to document parts of their lives that they would rather forget.
Recollection is a social act in itself through which the past is invoked in meaningful ways. 
While reflecting on their experiences of the process of taking photography, homeless women in 
a study (Hodgetts et al., 2007) described the times when they forgot to take the camera that they 
were given for the duration of the study with them and missed taking crucial photos. At other 
times, they recalled having missed the moment when something was happening and felt bad that 
they did not take the photograph. Hodgetts et al. (2007) discuss how the homeless women in 
their study vividly described those photographs that they would have liked to have taken but did 
not. It also brings into question what missing photographs might tell us about the nature of the 
experience that one is trying to describe. Experiences that might be too painful to document and 
are therefore missing in terms of photography are as revealing as the photographs themselves. 
A photo production approach allows researchers to examine, consider, and think about absent 
photographs and missing photographs so that a narrative picturing can fill the gap or help us 
to understand this story better; the nonmaking of images can inform the understanding of the 
experience itself.
Reflexive photography
In reflexive photography, participants take the photographs and are then guided through a reflec‑
tive interview in which they interpret the meanings of the photographs they took. Schulze (2007) 
explored how male academics constructed their world during a time when there was transfor‑
mation at a university in South Africa. White male faculty were given cameras and asked to 
take photographs of what was most meaningful about their work setting and environment, fol‑
lowed by interviews based on the photographs that they shared. In this research, photographs 
were seen as conduits through which the photographers or the participants explained how they 
viewed their environment. The photographs were symbolic rather than literal and required inter‑
pretation by the participants. Greater equity measures were being taken at the university, which 
involved addressing issues of racial imbalance. One of the ways in which the university man‑
agement worked to achieve equity was by appointing racially diverse faculty to management or 
other positions of authority. A Black management team tried to bring about a change by giving 
some new names to buildings and creating new logos to reflect a more African‑centered culture. 
At the same time, the university in question was also going through some mergers. In Schulze’s 
(2007) research, eight White males were purposefully chosen to document what they felt were 
the most significant parts of their work life. They were given cameras with 12 exposure films 
so that they could take photographs, including symbolic images of what they wanted to convey. 
This was followed up by an interview where they were asked to separate the photographs into 
positive and negative categories and a third category that may contain both positive and nega‑
tive elements. Data analysis in this research was first conducted on the interview data, after 
which the themes from the interview data were used in order to categorize the photographs. 
The participants in this research experienced the taking of photographs to be therapeutic. They 
also found the technique of using photography as a way to help them reflect, and they reported 116 Interviews and photography
gaining some insight into what was significant for them in their working lives. Some of the chal‑
lenges that the participants found with photography were trying to get permission for some of 
the photographs that they wanted to take that would best capture what they wanted to commu‑
nicate. In such cases, the participants decided to use photographs of symbols in order to depict 
what they wished. The method itself was experienced as time‑consuming by both the researcher 
and the participants. The photographs themselves did not always depict positive or negative 
interpretations or experiences. It required a follow‑up interview to clarify what meaning each 
participant attributed to each photograph.
Reflexive photography has its origins in Paulo Freire (1970) and his use of photographs or 
sketches to read the world, understand their contexts, and analyze their own situations. Photo‑
graphs allowed people to see things in a new way or pay attention to that which they took for 
granted or forgot to see. In reflexive photography, participants use photographs as symbols to 
indicate the meanings that they make of these images. Reflexive photography in qualitative 
research has been used by the researcher or the participants, either one or both of whom have 
produced images or photographs.
Researcher‑generated photographs that are then shared with participants to elicit their com‑
mentary are seen as a way to encourage participants to share and teach the researchers about 
what is happening in the photograph; it also allows the researchers to elicit the opinions of the 
participants through the photographs. However, such a method can be seen as more positivist in 
that a set of images is being imposed on the participants. It is less empowering for participants 
than allowing them to set their own agenda regarding which photographs to take, what they 
consider as issues, or what thoughts they might want to share via the photographs that they 
themselves generate. In critical paradigms, researchers and participants are seen as collaborators 
and partners.
Amerson and Livingston (2014) documented or explored reflexive photography by examin‑
ing the ways in which students learned cultural competence on the international service learning 
trip in Guatemala. Ten nursing students traveled to Guatemala, where they provided health edu‑
cation by interacting with families and by paying home visits. They completed several reflexive 
photography assignments that required them to take photographs. Photographs represented their 
participation in some form of cognitive learning and practical learning. In addition, they also 
documented learning about cultural issues during their trip. Their photo documentation included 
the process of learning, any barriers they faced, and their moments of success.
Reflexive photography can be used to facilitate a deeper reflective process. Amerson and 
Livingston (2014) found that reflective photography was a way to facilitate deeper reflection, 
and for visual learners, it specifically provided prompts that allowed them to think more deeply 
about what they were trying to portray. How to exemplify cognitive learning, practical learning, 
or affective learning were questions that they had to think about even when they were trying to 
choose photographs or take photographs to serve as examples.
Exploring photo albums, posed photographs, and narrative strategies
Photo albums are often seen as a way to elicit photographic memories for interviewing in quali‑
tative research. Photo albums offer different stories. Family photographs are an example of the 
ways in which posed photographs tell us the story of the idealized family structure. Narratives 
accompanying the photographs might, on the other hand, tell us contradictory stories, allowing 
the complexity of relationships to emerge in the storytelling. Examining family albums or relook‑
ing at childhood photographs to bring back memories, which signal where a person was located 
when the photograph was taken or whom the participant was with, are all part of the process of Interviews and photography 117
examining stories of the past. However, Oksman (2009) suggests that one’s childhood and youth 
represent times when we were less conscious of ourselves. Therefore, photographs can stimulate 
past memories while also presenting opportunities to examine oneself anew. For researchers, it is 
important to keep in mind that photographs can represent, as Oksman says, the “past idyllic image 
of a self, the image that is forever being held up against the present self” (Oksman, 2009, p. 235). 
Such images or photographs of one’s childhood can frame the past and identities in ways that can 
be restrictive or can offer ways that can liberate the trapped identities of the past (Martin & Spence, 
1985; Spence, 1988). Spence’s (1988) point regarding the power of images such as photographs 
is a cautionary tale for researchers. By asking participants to look at a photograph again and again 
might cause them to relive a particular moment that may be associated with either a positive emo‑
tion or a negative emotion. It is important for researchers to be mindful of how participants use 
photographs to tell stories and to be sensitive to stories they might not want to narrate.
Visual metaphors
Lorenz (2010) discusses visual metaphors as a type of voice. Nelson Goodman (1976) describes 
how metaphors work. According to him, a family of labels or a network of labels is transported 
from one realm to another when a metaphor is used or employed. Other scholars, like Black 
(1979), suggest that a metaphor is a lens through which something new is viewed. Elliot et al. 
(2017) conducted a study with international doctoral students and their experiences of adjust‑
ing and acculturating to a new environment. The study also examined the use of visual meta‑
phors in photo elicitation. After international students had taken a series of photographs that 
represented their experiences, they were then asked to choose photographs based on questions 
and prompts. Questions allowed participants to choose photographs that represented states of 
mind. For example, questions included what they found most amusing or most confusing. Photo 
elicitation techniques allowed the researchers to first determine whether or not a photograph 
taken by a participant was an informational photograph or whether it was symbolic in nature 
and required an explanation that was hidden from view in the photographs. Metaphors allow 
people to express feelings that might be otherwise difficult to articulate verbally (Charon, 2006). 
Creating visual metaphors of experience requires critical thinking and distilling the meaning 
of experience into a visual form or a photograph. It also requires participants to engage with 
other peers, an audience, or a group and collaborate with them and share the meanings of the 
photographs that they are using in order to convey, through visual metaphors, their experiences. 
Opportunities to create visual metaphors can lead to better understanding and communication 
with an audience or to immediate interactions with people around the participant. Visual meta‑
phors therefore exemplify action as well as opportunity or voice.
These considerations highlight the versatility and depth that the integration of photographs 
and visual methods can bring to qualitative studies using interviews for data gathering. Below 
are some practical tips aimed to guide researchers effectively integrate photographs into qualita‑
tive research interviews.
Tips and practical considerations for researchers using photographs in 
qualitative research interviews
Participant Feedback: Researchers may seek feedback from participants on how they felt about 
the use of photographs in the interview process. This feedback can provide insights into the 
effectiveness of visual methods from the participants’ perspective.118 Interviews and photography
Narrative Integration: Integrate participants’ narratives with the visual elements. Explore how 
participants construct stories around the images and how the visual and verbal components 
complement each other to create a holistic understanding.
Flexibility: Be flexible in your approach. Participants may have different comfort levels with 
visual materials, and some may be more visually oriented than others. Adapt your use of 
photographs based on individual participant preferences and needs.
Training for Participants: Provide clear instructions and training for participants on how 
to engage with visual materials during interviews. This includes explaining the purpose, 
addressing any concerns, and ensuring participants feel comfortable discussing images.
Visual Journaling: In longitudinal studies, participants may keep visual journals, documenting 
their experiences through photographs, or drawings over an extended period. This can pro‑
vide a rich source of data for understanding changes and developments.
Collaborative Analysis: Consider involving participants in the analysis process. Collabora‑
tive analysis sessions, where researchers and participants jointly interpret visual data, can 
enhance the validity and authenticity of findings.
Embracing Ambiguity: Visual data can be inherently ambiguous, allowing for multiple interpre‑
tations. Researchers should embrace this ambiguity and explore diverse perspectives rather 
than seeking a singular “correct” interpretation.
Logistical Aspects: What time and task management planning tools might be needed? Such as 
ensuring the quality of images, the choice of cameras or smartphones, lighting conditions, and 
any potential technical issues involving the location where interviews will take place, etc.
Reflexivity: Researchers can use photographs to help them engage in their own reflexivity exer‑
cises, reflecting on their own biases, assumptions, and interpretations when analyzing visual 
data. Keeping detailed documentation of your decisions on the use of photographs, combined 
with well‑documented reflexivity exercises, helps to contribute to the overall trustworthiness 
and credibility of the research methods being employed.
Visual Literacy Workshops: Conduct visual literacy workshops for both researchers and par‑
ticipants. These workshops can help enhance the ability to interpret visual materials and 
contribute to a more meaningful engagement with photographs.
Cross‑Cultural Relevancy and Sensitivity: When working in cross‑cultural settings, researchers 
should be attentive to cultural nuances and ensure that visual materials are culturally relevant 
and sensitive to the context in which they are used.
Visual Analysis Software: Consider using specialized software for visual analysis. These tools can 
assist in organizing, coding, and analyzing visual data, adding a layer to the analysis process.
Visual Storytelling: Look for opportunities where the participants can engage in various types 
of visual storytelling, where they narrate stories or experiences based on a sequence of pho‑
tographs or a video montage.
Visual Diaries: Participants may keep visual diaries, documenting their daily experiences 
through photographs. This longitudinal approach allows researchers to capture evolving nar‑
ratives over an extended period.
Visual Rhetoric Analysis: Researchers may employ visual rhetoric analysis techniques to exam‑
ine how visual elements in photographs contribute to persuasive or communicative aspects 
of participants’ narratives.
Selecting Appropriate Photographs: Choose photographs that align with the research objectives 
and are relevant to participants’ experiences. Ensure the images are clear, unambiguous, and 
have the potential to stimulate discussion.
Informed Consent and Transparency: Clearly explain the purpose of using photographs in the 
research. Obtain informed consent from participants, outlining how the visual materials will 
be used and ensuring confidentiality.Interviews and photography 119
Preparing Participants and Establishing Trust: Brief participants before the interview about the 
inclusion of visual materials. Provide any necessary instructions on how to engage with the 
photographs during the interview. Build a trusting relationship with participants to create a 
comfortable environment for discussing potentially sensitive visual content. And be mind‑
ful of time commitments. Allocate sufficient time within the interview for discussing visual 
materials without rushing the conversation, and plan accordingly.
Organizing Visual Data: Develop a systematic approach for organizing and storing visual data. 
Create a well‑organized file or database to facilitate efficient retrieval and analysis.
Transcribing Interviews Involving Photographs: Recognize that transcribing discussions involv‑
ing visual materials may present unique challenges. Develop a clear system for transcribing 
both verbal and visual components of the interview.
These additional tips address specific aspects of the practical implementation of visual methods 
in qualitative research interviews. Researchers can tailor these recommendations to their unique 
research contexts and participant populations.
Using photography with interviews as a decolonizing method
In this section, we address three ways photography can be used as a decolonizing method in 
the interview process by early‑career researchers. These are: (a) photo‑elicitation for collabora‑
tive interviewing; (b) using storyboards for reflexive storytelling; and (c) using comparative 
photo‑mapping for interviewing.
Photography for interviewing in qualitative research presents an opportunity for researchers 
to go beyond the traditional one‑on‑one talk method. Patton (2002) pointed out that one of the 
reasons for interviews is to gather information that cannot be observed. In other words, what 
do participants think, recall about their past, how do they describe their emotions, or how do 
they reflect on their own experiences? While historically photographs were used as illustrations 
or as evidence or a record of an activity that operated from a deficit framework of how “other 
people” lived, photographs have the potential to be widely used today to gather information that 
can lend depth to the data. Linda Tuhiwai Smith (1999) called for decolonizing methodologies 
so that research is a liberatory venture. Decolonizing would mean subverting a top‑down model 
of research that denies participation and power to participants and working with the complex 
and expert knowledge of participants in contributing to knowledge generation collaboratively. 
Photovoice emerged as a viable way to foreground participants’ voices in the research process 
(Wang & Burris, 1997; Wilson et al., 2007). Even with the shift toward participatory methodolo‑
gies, photography has remained a relatively under‑used resource in educational research (Tin‑
kler, 2008, 2013). The method opened up the arena for researchers to creatively use photography 
in a variety of ways across the arc of the research process.
The use of still and moving photography in qualitative research is likely to increase in postpan‑
demic times with the use of virtual platforms for interviews. Early career researchers will need tools 
to make full use of the new opportunities for photographic data in qualitative research. Expanded 
opportunities for qualitative researchers using photography as a data gathering and analysis tool for 
research are under development. Discussing the ways in which researchers can design interviews 
using photography to create democratic knowledge production by mitigating the power hierarchies 
of researcher and participant will be of continued importance (Luttrell, 2010; Pink, 2012).
Decolonization methodologies (Smith, 1999) alongside theories of participatory action research 
(Chevalier & Buckles, 2013; Kemmis, 2008) and feminist standpoint theories (Coffey, 2023; Song, 
2023; Huirem et al., 2020; Sweet, 2020) can all serve as frameworks for the use of photographs 
as part of interview processes. By bringing together elements of participation, action research, and 120 Interviews and photography
social change, these frameworks encourage researchers to take up an epistemology of democratic 
knowledge creation through participation, collaboration, and advocacy (Smith, 1987; Wang & Bur‑
ris, 1997). Further, the use of photographic images to inform interview methods can serve to inter‑
rupt the taken‑for‑granted binary of photographer/photographed (Azoulay, 2015; Campt, 2017). 
Interviewing with photographs can go beyond the producing and reading of photographs. Processes 
of curating, organizing, and writing with and on images, as well as storytelling and comparing 
images with one another in dialog, are all processes that serve to create more equitable power rela‑
tions between researchers and participants and among participants. Here are some examples:
Photo‑elicitation: Photographs can be a decolonizing method for qualitative interviewing. Pho‑
tographs can offer ways to expand the conversation and honor the participant–researcher 
relational collaboration. Photo‑elicitation relies on photographs generated by the researcher 
or the participant that are then interpreted by the participant. The art of interviewing requires 
the researcher to be mindful of context, reflect on power relations, and build rapport to 
encourage conversation. Researchers can present photographs as prompts during interviews 
to encourage participants to provide more detailed and accurate descriptions. This technique 
can be particularly useful in sensitive or emotional topics where participants may struggle 
to express themselves verbally. By discussing photographs together, researchers and partici‑
pants can establish a shared understanding and engage in deeper conversations. Photographs 
can function as a third party in the conversation, which allows both the researcher and the 
participant to explore the photographs together.
Visual Narratives: Photographs can be used to create visual narratives or used for storytell‑
ing. Designing an interview protocol as a storyboard or narrative retelling exercise can be 
an insightful data collection approach. Researchers can ask participants to select a series 
of photographs and use them to construct a cohesive narrative that represents their experi‑
ences, emotions, or perspectives. Visual narratives offer a creative and engaging way for 
participants to express themselves, and they can provide valuable insights into personal 
meaning‑making processes.
Photo Maps Comparisons or Field Photo Comparisons: Another way in which photography can 
be used to stimulate conversations is to take photographs of context and the environment. 
Here, both the researcher and the participants can take photographs and compare them. For 
example, a researcher can take photographs in an educational context of two different schools 
or classrooms. The teachers, as participants, can take photographs of their own school. The 
three sets can be compared to elicit a discussion. Participants can also write captions or 
poems to accompany their photographs. Researchers often take photographs that are puz‑
zling or interesting to them, while participants take photographs to showcase an issue or that 
which they wish to share. The motivation for participants might range from advocacy for 
an issue to highlighting a success. The comparisons with other classrooms or schools can 
generate a robust discussion on how structures can influence pedagogy in a variety of ways.
The use of photography in qualitative research can serve as a tool for decolonizing methodolo‑
gies and lead to more equitable power relations as both the participants and researchers jointly 
discuss photographs. Thoughtful integration of photographs with other research methods can 
lead to a deeper understanding of the research topic and enhance the substantiation of the find‑
ings. Furthermore, photographs can be combined with other qualitative or quantitative research 
methods to enhance the overall data collection and analysis process. Alongside the benefits 
of photography, it is important to consider ethical considerations when using photographs in 
qualitative research.Interviews and photography 121
Below are summaries of additional tools to aid researchers contemplating the use of photo‑
graphs as part of interview protocols. Consider whether or not they may be useful for the project 
you are designing.
Using virtual reality (VR) technology
Virtual reality (VR) technology can be a powerful tool for conducting visual qualitative studies, 
including providing unique opportunities to explore and understand human experiences using 
images intertwined with interviews. Here are some examples:
Immersive interviews: VR allows researchers to conduct interviews in immersive virtual envi‑
ronments, providing participants with a more engaging and realistic experience. This can be 
particularly useful when studying topics that involve spatial or contextual elements, such as 
architecture, urban planning, or cultural experiences.
Virtual simulations: Researchers can create virtual simulations that replicate real‑world scenar‑
ios, enabling participants to engage in realistic situations. This can be beneficial for studying 
decision‑making processes, social interactions, educational settings, or training scenarios. 
For example, VR can be used to simulate job interviews, medical consultations, classroom 
environments, or emergency response situations.
Ethnographic research: VR might also be used for immersive ethnographic studies, or micro‑
ethnographies, enabling researchers to use photographs and other visual images to explore 
and document different cultural or social settings without physically being present. This can 
help overcome geographical, logistical, and cost barriers, making it easier to study at‑a‑
distance communities and observe behaviors and practices in a naturalistic manner.
Visualization and data analysis: VR may also serve to enhance data visualization and analysis 
in qualitative studies. Researchers can represent qualitative data, such as photographs used 
and/or generated along with the interview transcripts and/or observational notes, in virtual 
environments. This allows for interactive exploration and more processes for collaborative 
interpretation of the data, potentially revealing new patterns, relationships, or insights.
Collaboration and cocreation: VR may facilitate collaboration between researchers and partici‑
pants in new ways, enabling them to cocreate virtual environments or experiences together as 
part of the interview exchange in a more reciprocal way. This participatory approach can be 
valuable for understanding participants’ perspectives, engaging them actively in the research 
process, and fostering a sense of coownership of the generated data.
Phobia and exposure therapy: VR can be utilized to study and treat phobias and anxiety disor‑
ders through exposure therapy. By creating virtual environments with photographic artifacts 
that simulate the feared stimuli or situations, researchers can safely expose participants to 
their fears and observe their reactions through a carefully designed, semistructured interview 
protocol. This can provide valuable insights into the mechanisms of fear and anxiety and how 
they operate inside the experiences of participants, as well as, perhaps, the effectiveness of 
therapeutic interventions.
Memory and recall studies: VR can be employed to investigate memory and recall processes. 
Researchers can create virtual environments replete with photographic images that replicate 
real‑world contexts, allowing participants to navigate and interact with the environment, then 
conduct a postexperience interview to ascertain how the participants’ descriptions of their 
experiences in the VR context might offer new understandings. By manipulating different 
aspects of the environment, researchers can explore how photographic and experiential cues 
about a particular context may influence memory retrieval and reconstructive processes.122 Interviews and photography
Spatial cognition and wayfinding: VR can be used to study spatial awareness or cognition, 
navigation, and wayfinding. Researchers can design virtual environments that require partici‑
pants to navigate and orient themselves within complex spaces and simultaneously be inter‑
viewed about their thought processes, decision‑making, and affective dimensions of their 
experiences. This may help deepen the understanding of human spatial abilities, cognitive 
maps, and the strategies people use to navigate unfamiliar environments.
Empirical aesthetics: VR has the potential to offer an immersive and interactive medium for 
studying esthetic experiences using photographic images. Researchers can create virtual 
environments that vary in visual, auditory, or haptic qualities to explore participants’ subjec‑
tive responses to different stimuli. Designing an interview protocol to provide an avenue for 
participants to narrate these aspects of their experiences may contribute to a fuller under‑
standing of aesthetic preferences, emotional responses to art, and the impact of environmen‑
tal factors on perception and mood.
Body image and embodiment: VR can be utilized to investigate body image perception and 
embodiment. Researchers can create virtual avatars that represent different body shapes, 
sizes, or characteristics and design interview questions to bring forward the complex ways 
participants may think and feel about embodiment issues. By allowing participants to embody 
these avatars, researchers can examine how body image perceptions are influenced by virtual 
experiences, potentially shedding light on body image‑related issues and interventions.
Social psychology and group dynamics: VR may also provide a platform for studying social 
psychology and group dynamics. For example, researchers could create virtual social envi‑
ronments where participants interact with virtual agents or other participants and design 
interview questions related to how the photographic images impacted them. This allows 
for the observation of social behaviors, communication patterns, and group processes while 
simultaneously generating interview data about them.
Rehabilitation and therapy: VR technology may hold promise in rehabilitation and therapy set‑
tings. Researchers could use VR to create immersive and interactive experiences that facilitate 
motor rehabilitation, cognitive training, or psychological interventions. These interventions 
could involve photographic images in a VR environment where participants can practice and 
improve specific skills or overcome psychological challenges. A carefully designed interview 
protocol would accompany these interventions to ascertain how participants experience them.
Empathy and perspective‑taking: VR can help create conditions that stimulate participants’ think‑
ing and lead to posing interview questions embedded within the experiential conditions being 
generated by VR. The created conditions may serve to enhance opportunities for participants 
to discuss forms of and experiences with empathy. By allowing researchers to create virtual 
experiences that photographically provide a unique perspective, VR holds new possibilities 
for designing interviews. For instance, researchers can develop simulations to help partici‑
pants understand the experiences of individuals with different abilities, cultural backgrounds, 
or social contexts. This may contribute to promoting a deeper understanding of the stages of 
developing deeper empathy. However, VR technology may also lead to improper manipula‑
tions that ought to be guarded against. While researchers may have tools to increase ways to 
influence the environment and the context of the interview, compassionate ethical questions 
must be present. Properly designed and implemented VR may contribute to the tools available 
to researchers as they examine insights into human cognition, perception, and social dynamics.
It is important to emphasize that, while VR technology may offer exciting opportunities for qual‑
itative research to further integrate photographic images into the interview process, it also poses 
new and enduring ethical considerations. Researchers should continue to ensure the well‑being, 
informed consent, and privacy of participants and take into account the potential physical and Interviews and photography 123
psychological effects of VR experiences. McLaughlan (2019) poses important questions about 
the future possibilities of VR as a research method, and it may be identified as the newest form 
of photo‑elicitation studies.
Photographic analysis software
Photographic analysis software can be a valuable tool in qualitative interview studies, especially 
when visual data is involved. Various software tools are available to support the analysis of pho‑
tographs. These tools enable researchers to organize and manage large collections of images, 
annotate and code visual elements, and extract quantitative data from photographs, such as color 
analysis or facial expression recognition. Software, like NVivo, ATLAS.ti, or Adobe Lightroom, 
can be utilized depending on the specific research needs. Here are some ways in which photo‑
graphic analysis software can be used in conjunction with qualitative interviews:
Image categorization and organization: Photographic analysis software can help researchers 
organize and categorize visual data collected and/or used as prompts during interviews. This 
software typically offers features such as tagging, labeling, and sorting images based on specific 
criteria. Researchers can use these features to manage and structure visual data for analysis.
Visual data coding: Just like qualitative data analysis software helps researchers code and ana‑
lyze textual data, photographic analysis software enables coding and analysis of visual data. 
Researchers can identify and code specific elements within images, such as objects, people, 
or environmental factors, to gain insights and identify patterns or themes.
Enhancing data interpretation: Photographic analysis software can assist researchers in inter‑
preting visual data by providing tools for zooming, cropping, and annotating images. These 
tools allow researchers to focus on specific areas of interest within an image and add notes or 
comments for further analysis. These annotations can be valuable not only when preparing 
for or conducting an interview but also for discussing and presenting findings.
Cross‑referencing with interview transcripts: By linking visual data to interview transcripts, 
researchers can develop a richer understanding of the relationship between data sources. 
Photographic analysis software often allows researchers to integrate images with associated 
text, enabling them to analyze the visual data alongside the interview content.
Collaborative analysis: Many photographic analysis software tools offer collaboration features, 
allowing multiple researchers to work together on the analysis. This feature can facilitate a 
team‑based approach, where researchers can collectively analyze and discuss visual data, 
share insights, and raise questions with one another while simultaneously interpreting the 
images.
Data visualization: Photographic analysis software often provides visualization capabilities that 
allow researchers to create charts, graphs, or diagrams based on the coded visual data. These 
visual representations can help communicate the findings in a clear and compelling manner, 
making it easier for others to understand the results of the qualitative interview study.
It’s important to note that the choice of photographic analysis software is constantly evolving, 
and researchers will need time and access to experiment with the range of capabilities this tech‑
nology may offer. The selection of which technology (or combinations of technologies) may be 
deemed best for a given study will depend on the specific goals of your study, the types of visual 
data involved, and the analytical approaches you plan to use. Before using photographic analy‑
sis software, researchers should undergo training to understand its features and functionalities. 
Familiarize yourself with the software’s user interface, coding options, and data management 
capabilities to optimize your analysis process and ensure accurate and consistent coding.124 Interviews and photography
Integration with other analysis methods: Photographic analysis software can complement 
other qualitative analysis methods. Consider integrating visual data analysis with other data 
analysis methods, such as thematic coding, content analysis, or grounded theory, to gain a com‑
prehensive understanding of the interview data. Use the software as a complementary tool rather 
than relying solely on versions of visual data analysis it cues up.
As with all types of data analysis, researchers should be mindful of their own starting 
assumptions when working with visual data. Reflexivity is crucial in qualitative research, and 
it becomes especially important when analyzing visual material. Reflect on your own perspec‑
tives, preconceptions, and values that may influence the interpretation of visual data. As with 
any research method, establishing overall trustworthiness and credibility in the analysis process 
is essential. Document your analysis procedures, ensure transparency, and consider the various 
ways you can engage in quality checks to help enhance the credibility of your findings.
Combining qualitative and quantitative approaches
Depending on your research questions, you may find it beneficial to integrate quantitative anal‑
ysis techniques with qualitative approaches. Some photographic analysis software also offer 
quantitative features, such as image recognition algorithms or statistical analysis tools, which 
can provide additional insights when used alongside qualitative methods.
Ongoing ethical considerations: When working with visual data, it’s important to consider 
ethical guidelines regarding informed consent, confidentiality, and privacy. Ensure that partici‑
pants have provided consent for the use of visual data and take steps to anonymize or deidentify 
images to protect participants’ identities and maintain confidentiality.
Photograph 8.1a  Photograph of a beach with rocks in the foreground and some people and waves in the 
background. Photo credit: S. KrishnanInterviews and photography 125
Photograph 8.1b  Photograph of a beach with two people sitting on a bench in the foreground. Photo 
credit: S. Krishnan
Photograph 8.1c  Photograph of a beach with rocks in the foreground and waves in the background. Photo 
Credit: S. Krishnan126 Interviews and photography
By considering these points, you can maximize the potential of photographic analysis soft‑
ware in qualitative interview studies and derive meaningful insights from your visual data 
alongside interview transcript data.
Exercise 8.1: Interviewing and interpretating photographs
1 Look at the cluster of Photographs 8.1a–8.1c provided. What comes to mind as you view the 
photographs?
2 What other thoughts and ideas that you can gather from the photographs?
3 Have a conversation with a peer about the photographs.
4 What ideas can you share with each other about the photographs?
5 What emotions do the photographs evoke? What memories do they evoke?
6 What questions can you think of asking a participant who might have given you this cluster 
of photographs?
7 How would you interpret each photograph individually and then as a cluster?
Reflect on the conversation
1 How differently or similarly did you interpret the photographs?
2 What experiences did you bring to the photographs that were similar or different?
3 What did you learn about using photographs to generate a conversation with a participant or 
participants?
4 How did clustering the photographs change the way you looked at the photographs?
5 In what situations or at what stage of the research interview do you think using photographs to 
generate conversation will work well, and in what situations do you think they will not work well?
Photograph 8.2  Outsized pumpkins displayed in a row with people standing on the sidelines. Photo credit: 
Raji SwaminathanInterviews and photography 127
Exercise 8.2: Photo‑elicitation interviews with photographs
1 Create a set of four questions based on Photograph 8.2 from a simulated study based on what 
meaning seasonal or annual festivals and events can hold for people. Think of the different 
ways in which you can conduct an interview, and pick one way to converse with or interview 
a peer based on them.
2 Reflect: After the interview, discuss with your peer how they felt about the process of the 
interview. Ask your peer interviewee for feedback on the interview and conversation.
3 Reflect: What challenges did you face in creating the interview questions? What did you 
learn about how to ask questions about events that most people experience and attend?
Summary
This chapter addressed how photographs may be used for data elicitation, interviewing, and 
what opportunities they provide for analysis. As well as the roles participants and research‑
ers enact as viewers and as data generators. Photographs do not automatically elicit good 
interviews. The types of photographs used to elicit reflective data were explored. Distinc‑
tions between found photographs and researcher‑ and participant‑generated photographs were 
explored, as well as ways in which interviewing can be adapted to suit the particular context. 
Interviewing and data gathering through a variety of modes, including open inquiry, dialog, or 
group discussions, were highlighted, as was the use of photographs as a way to create connec‑
tions with participants.
References
Amerson, R., & Livingston, W. G. (2014). Reflexive photography: An alternative method for documenting 
the learning process of cultural competence. Journal of Transcultural Nursing, 25(2), 202–210.
Azoulay, A. A. (2015). Civil imagination: A political ontology of photography. Verso Books.
Black, M. (1979). More about metaphor. Metaphor and Thought, 2, 19–41.
Campt, T. M. (2017). Listening to images. Duke University Press.
Charon, R. (2006). The self‑telling body. Narrative Inquiry, 16(1), 191–200.
Chevalier, J. M., & Buckles, D. J. (2013). Handbook for participatory action research, planning and evalu‑
ation. Ottawa: SAS2 Dialogue, 155.
Coffey, J. (2023). Images as ‘potentials’: Feminist new materialist orientations to photovoice. Qualitative 
Research, 23(4), 847–865.
Conway, P. (2010). Modes of seeing: Digitized photographic archives and the experienced user. The Amer‑
ican Archivist, 73(2), 425–462.
Elliot, D. L., & Gillen, A. (2013). Images and stories: Through the eyes of at‑risk college learners. Inter‑
national Journal of Qualitative Studies in Education, 26(7), 912–931.
Elliot, D. L., Reid, K., & Baumfield, V. (2017). Capturing visual metaphors and tales: innovative or elu‑
sive?. International Journal of Research & Method in Education, 40(5), 480–496.
Freire, P. (1970). Pedagogy of the oppressed (M. B. Ramos, Trans.). Continuum Press.
Frith, H. (2020). Narrating biographical disruption and repair: Exploring the place of absent images in 
women’s experiences of cancer and chemotherapy. In P. Reavey (Ed.), A Handbook of visual methods in 
psychology (pp. 83–96). Routledge.
Geertz, C. (1973). The interpretation of cultures (Vol. 5019). Basic Books.
Goodman, N. (1976). Languages of art: An approach to a theory of symbols. Hackett Publishing.
Hodgetts, D., Chamberlain, K., & Radley, A. (2007). Considering photographs never taken during 
photo‑production projects. Qualitative Research in Psychology, 4(4), 263–280.
Huirem, R., Loganathan, K., & Patowari, P. (2020). Feminist standpoint theory and its importance in femi‑
nist research. Journal of Social Work Education and Practice, 5(2), 46–55.128 Interviews and photography
Hurworth, R. (2003). Photo‑interviewing for research. Social Research Update, 40(1), 1–4.
Karm, M., & Remmik, M. (2013). Novice university teachers’ teaching conceptions based on photo inter‑
views. Eesti Haridusteaduste Ajakiri. Estonian Journal of Education, 1, 124–155.
Kemmis, S. (2008). Critical theory and participatory action research. The SAGE handbook of action 
research: Participative inquiry and practice, 2(2008), 121–138.
Lorenz, C. (2010). Photography‑aided gravity modeling of solid bodies. Universität Stuttgart. https://doi.
org/10.18419/OPUS‑3850
Lorenz, L. S. (2010). Visual metaphors of living with brain injury: Exploring and communicating lived 
experience with an invisible injury. Visual Studies, 25(3), 210–223.
Luttrell, W. (2010). ‘A camera is a big responsibility’: A lens for analysing children’s visual voices. Visual 
Studies, 25(3), 224–237.
Martin, R., & Spence, J. (1985). New portraits for old: The use of the camera in therapy. Feminist Review, 
19(1), 66–92.
McLaughlan, R. (2019). Virtual reality as a research method: is this the future of photo‑elicitation? Visual 
Studies, 34(3), 252–265.
Oksman, T. (2009). Mourning the family album. a/b: Auto/Biography Studies, 24(2), 235–248.
Patton, M. Q. (2002). Two decades of developments in qualitative inquiry: A personal, experiential per‑
spective. Qualitative Social Work, 1(3), 261–283.
Pink, S. (2007). Doing visual ethnography. Sage.
Pink, S. (2012). Situating everyday life: Practices and places. Sage.
Radley, A. (2011). Image and imagination. In P. Reavey (Ed.), Visual methods in psychology: Using and 
interpreting images in qualitative research (pp. 17–28). New York, NY: Psychology Press.
Schulze, S. (2007). The usefulness of reflexive photography for qualitative research: A case study in higher 
education. South African Journal of Higher Education, 21(5), 536–553.
Shaw, A. R., Lofton, S., & Vidoni, E. D. (2023). A virtual photovoice study of older African Americans per‑
ceptions of neurovascular clinical trials. Alzheimer Disease and Associated Disorders, 37(2), 113–119.
Smith, D. E. (1987). The everyday world as problematic: A feminist sociology. University of Toronto Press.
Smith, L. T. (1999). Decolonizing methodologies. London: Zed Books.
Song, N. (2023). Reimagining identity through photography: The experience of intersectionality for 
Asian‑American Women. https://orcid.org/0009‑0001‑6289‑6928
Spence, J. (1988). Putting myself in the picture: A political, personal and photographic autobiography. 
Seattle, WA: The Real Comet Press.
Sweet, P. L. (2020). Who knows? Reflexivity in feminist standpoint theory and Bourdieu. Gender & Soci‑
ety, 34(6), 922–950.
Switzer, S., & Flicker, S. (2021). Visualizing DEPICT: A multistep model for participatory analysis in 
photovoice research for social change. Health Promotion Practice, 22(2_suppl), 50S‑65S.
Tinkler, P. (2008). A fragmented picture: reflections on the photographic practices of young people. Visual 
Studies, 23(3), 255–266.
Tinkler, P. (2013). Using photographs in social and historical research. Sage.
Wang, C., & Burris, M. A. (1997). Photovoice: Concept, methodology, and use for participatory needs 
assessment. Health Education & Behavior, 24(3), 369–387.
Wilson, N., Dasho, S., Martin, A. C., Wallerstein, N., Wang, C. C., & Minkler, M. (2007). Engaging young 
adolescents in social action through photovoice: The youth empowerment strategies (YES!) project. The 
Journal of Early Adolescence, 27(2), 241–261.DOI: 10.4324/9781003034773-9
In this chapter, we will examine the different ways in which visual data can be analyzed, dis‑
played, and disseminated. Content analysis, the most used form of analysis of visual data, will 
be explored as one of several types of analytical strategies possible with visual data. Visual 
analyses grounded in cultural studies and art history allow researchers to match data with theo‑
retical frameworks and enable meaning‑making. Visual analyses allow researchers to examine 
layered meanings both symbolic and representative. In this chapter, we will present different 
ways in which visual analyses can be carried out, leading with theory or the image itself to allow 
for a synergistic approach to visual data analysis where reflection follows action and vice versa. 
Tips and exercises will be offered at the end of the chapter.
Incorporating visual data, such as the use of photographs as data, involves the realization 
that technologies that produce, edit, and display photographs are more and more inscribed into 
the everyday experiences of many people. In this sense, photographic data can operate parallel 
to text data and need to be treated similarly. The relationship with the analysis of photographs 
and texts need not be hierarchical but parallel or intersecting. Photographs can be seen as both 
stand‑alone data and as intersecting with other types of data. Pink (2008) uses an approach for 
analysis that looks for meanings generated from the relationship of photographs to each other as 
well as the relationship of the photographs with other data that include, for example, text‑based 
materials, audio files, documents, and diaries. This allows different types of knowledge that are 
generated to be understood in relation to each other. The potential for ambiguity in photographic 
data can be lost if the data analysis methods are too prescriptive or even rely too heavily on 
objectivity (Pink, 2008).
Photographs can not only be analyzed at the moment they are taken, but they can also serve 
as historical data and can be reanalyzed at a different time, leading to different interpretations. 
Cameras are not just recorders but are tools, and consequently, photographs can be analyzed 
across time and space. Analyzing photographs as historical data presents opportunities like com‑
paring different time periods for similar activities. For example, games that children played at 
different decades might reveal adaptations or even gender segregation or the presence of play‑
grounds or supervision. For researchers, photographic data, like textual data, can be useful for 
making meaning by asking different questions at different time periods of the photographs and 
by categorizing them in different ways.
Holm (2008) discussed the analysis of photographs in a study where doctoral students were 
asked to take photographs of their own lives and analyze the photographs both individually 
and as a collective. When the students took photographs that documented their everyday lives 
as doctoral students, they were both documenting and sharing them. In this sense, they were 
creating an identity of themselves as doctoral students that they also wanted to share. In order 
to understand the scope of the photographic data, they focused their analysis solely on the 
9 Photographic data analysis and display130 Photographic data analysis and display
photographs and did not include other data. Further, they did not analyze or arrange the photo‑
graphs sequentially. Instead, they looked for themes that cut across the photographs shared by 
all the students. However, being immersed in the method helped them to realize that although 
they were well versed in the point‑and‑shoot system of cell phone photography, they had not 
thought through the ways in which they might document absences or moods. They found them‑
selves misinterpreting photographs if they did not ask the participants what they were seeing. 
For example, a photograph of a family shared by one doctoral student did not help them under‑
stand whether the student was with the family or was trying to portray loneliness because of the 
absence of family or being far away from them. They found the analysis to be challenging since 
they had to make assumptions about the photographs, leading them to conclude that understand‑
ing photographs without accompanying text or interview data could be difficult. Further, they 
analyzed the photographs individually at first and then collectively to arrive at categories and 
themes.
Differences between researcher‑generated photographs and 
participant‑generated photographs
While it might be safe to assume that researchers might take photographs of different objects 
and everyday life moments than participants might, the differences manifest in part due to the 
questions asked by the researcher and the participants. While researchers might take photo‑
graphs of what puzzles them, what might interest them, or what they might consider significant, 
participants may choose to represent a particular moment of their lives in specific ways with the 
goal of sharing with a purpose. The performance of showing and sharing might be influenced by 
a number of factors, including showcasing their lives in positive ways, pointing out problems 
that need to be fixed, and at times they might be generated in response to researcher questions 
or directives. Holm’s (1997) study with teen mothers revealed that the participants who were 
also interviewed showcased a complex and distinct identity in the photographs and texts. For 
example, they expressed themselves as troubled verbally, but in the photographs that they took 
of each other, they appeared cheerful. These contradictions allowed the researchers an opportu‑
nity to understand the lives of participants more deeply.
Interpreting photographic data in conjunction with visual data
What possibilities might emerge when qualitative researchers explore combining photographic 
data with other forms of visual data? Interpreting visual data involves making meaning of informa‑
tion presented in a visual format, not only using photographic images and videos but also increas‑
ingly using interactive charts or graphs displayed within digital environments. While interactive 
charts and graphs are more commonly associated with quantitative data analysis and data visu‑
alization, some qualitative researchers have started to incorporate interactive elements into their 
visual data analysis processes. These researchers are exploring innovative ways to engage with 
qualitative data using interactive tools. Here are a few notable qualitative researchers who have 
experimented with interactive charts and graphs as part of their visual data analysis:
Sarah Pink: A leading expert in visual ethnography (Pink, 2007) has explored the use of various 
visual methods in social science (Pink, 2008, 2012), including digital technologies and inter‑
active visualizations (Pink, 2011), to engage with and analyze visual data. Her work often 
focuses on the sensory aspects of human experience (Pink, 2006) and the use of digital tools 
for qualitative data analysis (Pink, 2023).Photographic data analysis and display 131
Alison Bravington and Nigel King: Healthcare researchers who use graphic elicitation and 
participant‑led diagrams in qualitative research interviews (Bravington & King, 2019). Brav‑
ington and King were part of a group of researchers who experimented with using the Pictor 
technique – “a visual technique in which participants construct a representation of roles and 
relationships in a particular case using arrow‑shaped adhesive notes or cards” (King et al., 
2013, p. 1). This resulting chart, meant to help describe and represent working collaborations 
in the lives of the participants, can be supplemented with other types of visual images to 
help further contextualize the narrative being produced. For example, these researchers used 
“Images in the form of photographs, drawings, collages, and video footage . . . to facilitate 
participants’ reflections and/or illustrate how particular phenomena are experienced” (King 
et al., 2013, p. 17).
Nicole Krämer: A researcher in media psychology has investigated the use of interactive visu‑
alizations and multimedia to analyze online communication and user‑generated content, par‑
ticularly in the context of social media research. One of her studies with Lea Frentzel‑Beyme, 
a doctoral student at the University of Duisburg‑Essen in Germany, focused on historical 
virtual reality (VR) applications that provide immersion experiences whereby the visual 
experience combined with the sensory reactions is designed to provide the participants with 
a simulation of time, place, and events (Frentzel‑Beyme & Krämer, 2023). The use of pho‑
tographic data to fuel VR applications provides new opportunities for qualitative research 
questions to be crafted as well as new forms of displaying the results of studies that hinge 
on interactive spaces for continuing the process of generating new knowledge immersively.
Cathrine Hasse, a professor of cultural anthropology and learning at the University of Aarhus, 
Denmark, has explored the use of interactive visualizations and digital tools in educational 
research. Her work often focuses on technology‑mediated learning and the analysis of digital 
data. For example, she published an article using postphenomenology and cultural‑historical 
activity theory to interrogate how technology – in this case, assistive robots – can bring 
into focus the visual learning processes triggered when technologies are engaged by humans 
(Hasse, 2013).
Theo Hug: A qualitative researcher in the social sciences has explored the use of interactive data 
visualizations in qualitative data analysis. Hug’s research often addresses issues of social 
inequality, visual literacy, and the use of interactive tools to communicate findings effec‑
tively (Hug, 2012). Hug has also worked with a team of researchers to provide innovative 
insights into discourse and argumentation mapping methods to accompany photographic 
data arrangements and analysis (Oberbichler et al., 2021).
David Geelan: An Australian educator known for his work in science education has experi‑
mented with interactive data visualizations and simulations to engage students in the analysis 
of qualitative data, particularly in the context of science education research. In a recent col‑
laboration, Geelan coauthored an important chapter about academic well‑being in the midst 
of pandemic experiences and the role of visual methodologies (Pendergast et al., 2023).
It’s important to note that the use of interactive charts and graphs in addition to photographic 
artifacts in qualitative research is still evolving, and these researchers represent only a subset 
of those exploring various approaches. As technology and methodologies continue to advance, 
more qualitative researchers may incorporate interactive elements into their visual data analysis 
processes to enhance engagement, exploration, and understanding of qualitative data.
What further can we learn about how qualitative researchers might use interactive charts 
and graphs as valuable tools for data exploration, analysis, and communication to accom‑
pany photographic data? These tools can empower users to actively engage with data, ask 132 Photographic data analysis and display
questions, and make discoveries, making them a powerful asset in combination with photo‑
graphic images and/or videos. Interactive charts or graphs function as visual data by allowing 
qualitative researchers to engage with and explore data visually in a dynamic and user‑
controlled manner. Unlike static charts and graphs, interactive visualizations enable users to 
manipulate and interact with the data, uncover patterns, and gain deeper insights. Here are 
some examples of how interactive charts and graphs might function as ways to arrange visual 
data for analysis and display:
User Interaction: Interactive charts and graphs are designed to respond to user input. Users 
can click, hover, scroll, or perform other actions to trigger specific interactions within the 
visualization.
Filtering and Highlighting: Users can filter data points or highlight specific data subsets by 
interacting with elements of the visualization. For example, they may click on a data point to 
see additional information or isolate a particular category.
Zooming and Panning: Interactive visualizations often allow users to zoom in on specific areas 
of the chart or pan across a larger dataset, providing a closer look at details or trends.
Data Exploration: Users can explore data by toggling between different views, dimensions, or 
variables. They can switch between various chart types or explore different time periods or 
categories.
Tooltips and Pop‑ups: Interactive visualizations often include tooltips or pop‑up windows that 
display additional information when users hover over or click on data points. This feature 
provides context and details about each data element.
Dynamic Updates: Visualizations can dynamically update in response to changes in the underly‑
ing data or user selections. This ensures that the visualization always reflects the most current 
information.
Animations: Animations can be used to illustrate transitions or changes in data over time. For 
example, a line chart may animate the progression of data points over a specified time period.
Data Drilling: Users can “drill down” into the data to explore granular details. This might 
involve clicking on a data point to reveal more specific data or clicking on a category to 
explore its subcategories.
Comparative Analysis: Interactive charts allow users to compare multiple datasets or varia‑
bles side by side. Users can overlay or juxtapose different data sets for simple or complex 
analyses.
Data Export: Many interactive visualizations allow users to export or download data in various 
formats (e.g., CSV, Excel) for further analysis or reporting.
Customization: Users often have the option to customize the appearance and behavior of the vis‑
ualization to suit their preferences. This might include changing colors, labels, or axis scales.
Interactivity Feedback: Interactive charts can provide feedback to users about their interactions, 
such as displaying the number of data points selected or showing changes in data values in 
real time.
Responsive Design: Interactive visualizations are typically designed to be responsive, adapting 
to different screen sizes and devices to ensure a consistent user experience.
Cross‑Filtering: In dashboards with multiple interactive visualizations, selections made in one 
chart can filter or affect data displayed in other charts, allowing for cross‑filtering and coor‑
dinated views.
Here are a few more reasons qualitative researchers may be drawn to using interactive charts 
and graphs as they analyze and display photographic and/or other forms of visual data, as well Photographic data analysis and display 133
as some reminders about how to ensure data security and accessibility when working with visual 
data:
Real‑time Data Integration: In applications where real‑time data is critical, interactive visu‑
alizations can integrate with data sources that update in real‑time. This ensures that users 
always have access to the most current information.
User‑driven Insights: Interactive charts encourage users to take an active role in exploring data. 
They can formulate their own hypotheses, test them, and gain insights, fostering a sense of 
data‑driven discovery.
Storytelling: Interactive visualizations can be used to tell data‑driven stories. By guiding users 
through a series of interactive elements and transitions, you can create a narrative that leads 
to key insights or conclusions.
Audience Engagement: When presenting data to an audience, interactive charts can keep view‑
ers engaged and encourage participation. Users can interact with the data during presenta‑
tions or workshops, promoting deeper understanding.
Predictive Modeling: Some interactive visualizations incorporate predictive modeling or 
machine learning algorithms, allowing users to explore potential future scenarios based on 
their input.
Collaboration: Interactive visualizations can facilitate collaboration among teams or stakehold‑
ers. Multiple users can interact with the same visualization simultaneously and at a distance, 
fostering discussion and collective decision‑making.
Mobile Accessibility: Ensure, when possible, that interactive visualizations are mobile‑friendly, 
as users may access them on smartphones or tablets. Responsive design and touch‑friendly 
interactions are crucial for a seamless mobile experience.
Usability Testing: Conduct usability testing to gather feedback from users. This can help iden‑
tify usability issues, such as confusing interactions or navigation challenges, and improve 
the user experience.
Data Security: If your interactive visualization involves sensitive or confidential data, prioritize 
data security measures to protect the integrity and privacy of the information and evaluate the 
level of security provided by repositories housing the data.
Accessibility Compliance: To ensure that your interactive charts are usable by individuals with 
disabilities, make sure they adhere to accessibility standards (e.g., Web Content Accessibility 
Guidelines [WCAG]). This includes providing alternative text for visual elements and ensur‑
ing keyboard navigation.
User Training: If your audience or users are unfamiliar with interactive charts or the specific 
tools you are using, providing training or guidance to help them get the most out of the visu‑
alization can be beneficial.
Iterative Design: Approach the development of interactive visualizations as an iterative pro‑
cess. Gather user feedback and continuously refine the visualization based on user needs and 
preferences.
In summary, interactive charts and graphs can be powerful tools for data exploration, analysis, 
and communication, as they accompany photographic data analysis. However, their effective‑
ness largely depends on their usability, accessibility, and alignment with user objectives. Taking 
a user‑centered approach and continuously improving the interactive experience will enhance 
their impact and utility for qualitative inquiry projects. Throughout the process of analyzing 
photographic data (or any form of visual data), close attention ought to be paid to data integrity 
issues.134 Photographic data analysis and display
Visual data integrity issues
What do researchers mean when they use the term data integrity?
In the context of qualitative research, “data integrity” refers to the quality and reliability of 
data. It encompasses the accuracy, consistency, and trustworthiness of data throughout its life‑
cycle of the study, from collection and storage to analysis and reporting. Researchers use the 
term “data integrity” to emphasize the importance of maintaining data in a state that is free from 
errors, inconsistencies, or unauthorized alterations. Here are some key aspects of what research‑
ers mean when they use the term data integrity:
Accuracy: Data should accurately represent the real‑world phenomena it is intended to measure 
or describe. Inaccurate data can lead to incorrect conclusions and undermine the validity of 
research findings.
Consistency: Data should be consistent both within itself and with other related data. Inconsist‑
ent data can result from errors, duplications, or discrepancies and can make analysis difficult 
or unreliable.
Reliability: Reliable data can be depended upon to produce consistent results when collected or 
analyzed under the same conditions. Researchers seek data that is consistently reliable over 
time.
Completeness: Data should be complete, meaning that it includes all relevant information 
needed for the research objectives. Missing or incomplete data can hinder analysis and lead 
to biased results.
Security: Data integrity includes safeguards to protect data from unauthorized access, tamper‑
ing, or corruption. Security measures help ensure that data remains intact and confidential.
Traceability: Data should be traceable, meaning that its origins, transformations, and any 
changes made to it are documented and can be retraced. This helps ensure transparency and 
accountability.
Ethical Considerations: Data integrity also encompasses ethical considerations, such as obtain‑
ing proper consent for data collection, respecting privacy, and adhering to ethical guidelines 
throughout the research process.
Data Management: Data integrity requires effective data management practices, including data 
storage, backup, version control, and retention policies, to prevent data loss or corruption.
Transparency: Researchers should be transparent about their data collection, processing, and 
analysis methods. Transparent reporting of methods and findings promotes trust in research 
outcomes.
In essence, data integrity is the foundation of credible and trustworthy research. Researchers strive 
to maintain data integrity to ensure that their findings are robust, accurate, and reliable, which 
ultimately contributes to the advancement of knowledge in their respective fields. Violations of 
data integrity, such as data manipulation, fabrication, or inadequate data management, can have 
serious consequences, including the loss of research credibility and ethical breaches. Qualitative 
researchers who work with visual data must be mindful of several data integrity issues to ensure 
the accuracy, reliability, and ethical handling of their data. Here are some common data integrity 
issues that qualitative researchers may encounter when dealing with visual data:
Data Authenticity: Ensure that the visual data you are working with is authentic and has not 
been manipulated or altered in a way that could misrepresent the original context or content. 
This includes confirming the source and origin of visual materials.Photographic data analysis and display 135
Data Privacy and Consent: Obtain proper informed consent from individuals whose visual data 
is being used. Respect privacy and confidentiality, especially when working with photo‑
graphs or videos that include identifiable individuals or sensitive information.
Copyright and Permissions: Address copyright and intellectual property rights when using vis‑
ual materials that are not in the public domain. Obtain necessary permissions and provide 
proper attribution to avoid legal issues.
Data Quality: Assess the quality and resolution of visual data to ensure it is suitable for analysis. 
Poor‑quality images or videos may hinder accurate interpretation.
Data Bias: Be aware of potential biases in the visual data, including selection bias in the process 
of collecting or curating visual materials. Consider how biases may impact the interpretation 
of data. Another word for “bias” is “prejudice.” Bias and prejudice share similar meanings, 
and both refer to a tendency to favor one perspective, group, or outcome over others, often 
without objective or rational justification. Here’s a more detailed explanation of the term 
“prejudice”:
Prejudice is a preconceived opinion or judgment about a person, group, or thing, often based 
on stereotypes, personal beliefs, or irrational attitudes. It involves forming an opinion or mak‑
ing a decision without considering all relevant facts or being influenced by personal feelings or 
biases. Prejudice can manifest in various forms, such as racial prejudice, gender prejudice, or 
social prejudice, and it can lead to unfair treatment, discrimination, or unjust outcomes.
In the context of research and visual data analysis, “bias” and “prejudice” both refer to the 
introduction of systematic errors or favoritism that can skew results or interpretations away 
from reasonableness and fairness. Researchers strive to minimize bias or prejudice to ensure 
their findings are accurate and reflect the nature of the phenomena being studied.
Data Annotation and Documentation: Thoroughly document the context of visual data, includ‑
ing when and where it was collected, who created it, and any relevant details about the setting 
or subjects. Accurate metadata is crucial for data integrity.
Data Security: Safeguarding visual data against unauthorized access or data breaches. Ensuring 
that data storage and sharing practices are secure and comply with relevant data protection 
regulations.
Data Transparency: Maintain transparency in your data collection and analysis processes. 
Clearly describe how visual data were collected, curated, and analyzed to allow for replica‑
tion and verification by others.
Data Storage and Backup: Implement secure data storage practices and backup procedures to 
prevent data loss or corruption. Visual data can be valuable and irreplaceable, so robust data 
management is essential.
Data Validation: Consider methods for validating the interpretations of visual data. This might 
involve member checking, peer debriefing, or other validation techniques to ensure the accu‑
racy of interpretations.
Data Retention and Disposal: Develop clear policies for data retention and disposal, particu‑
larly in cases where visual data contains sensitive or personal information.
Data Ownership: Clearly establish and communicate ownership and rights related to visual 
data, especially in collaborative research projects or when visual data is sourced from exter‑
nal parties.
Data Capture and Preservation: Ensure that the process of capturing visual data, such as photo‑
graphs or videos, is done carefully and without alteration. Original data should be preserved 
in its raw form to maintain data integrity.136 Photographic data analysis and display
Data Context: Visual data often lacks context when presented in isolation. Document the con‑
text in which visual data was captured, including the time, location, and any relevant events 
or circumstances that may affect interpretation.
Data Verification: Consider methods for verifying the authenticity of visual data, especially 
when there are concerns about potential manipulation or tampering. Digital forensics tools 
and techniques can be employed for this purpose.
Data Annotation Tools: Use reliable and reputable annotation tools when adding annotations 
or metadata to visual data. Ensure that these tools do not compromise the integrity of the 
original data.
Version Control: If working with multiple versions or iterations of visual data (e.g., edited 
images or video clips), implement version control mechanisms to track changes and ensure 
the accuracy of the final visual data used for analysis.
Data Migration: If transferring visual data between systems or formats, take precautions to 
avoid data corruption or loss during the migration process. Maintain backups and verify the 
integrity of migrated data.
Data Analysis Consistency: When working with visual data, ensure consistency in data analysis 
processes. Clearly document how coding, interpretation, and analysis of visual materials 
were conducted to facilitate transparency and reproducibility.
Data Presentation: When presenting visual data in research outputs (such as reports, publica‑
tions, or presentations), provide clear and accurate contextual information to assist readers or 
viewers in understanding the data and its implications.
Data Storage Duration: Comply with relevant institutional or ethical guidelines (e.g., as required 
by IRBs) regarding the duration for which visual data should be retained. Be prepared to 
justify the retention or disposal of data based on research needs and ethical considerations.
Data Transfer and Sharing: When sharing visual data with collaborators or within research 
teams, use secure data transfer methods to prevent unauthorized access or data breaches. 
Implement access controls and encryption where appropriate.
Data Ownership and Attribution: Clearly define data ownership and establish protocols for 
attributing visual data to creators, contributors, or sources in a transparent and ethical manner.
Data Handling Training: Ensure that all members of the research team involved in handling 
visual data are trained in ethical data handling practices and understand their responsibilities 
for maintaining data integrity.
Additional Ethical Considerations: Adhering to ethical guidelines and principles when conduct‑
ing research with visual data takes an ongoing effort. Ensuring that research respects the 
rights and dignity of individuals depicted in visual materials, as well as the lands and places 
depicted, ought to be of paramount concern. By addressing these data integrity issues in a 
continuous manner, qualitative researchers can maintain the trustworthiness and credibility 
of their research findings and contribute to ethical and responsible research practices when 
working with visual data. Qualitative researchers must build thoughtful plans about how to 
uphold the integrity of visual data throughout the entire research process, from data collec‑
tion and curation to analysis and dissemination of findings. These practices contribute to the 
credibility and ethical conduct of research involving visual materials.
Analyzing photographic data
Chapman et al. (2017) discuss the ways in which photographic data can be analyzed so that the 
image remains central to the analysis rather than text. Despite the increasing popularity of pho‑
tovoice in research, photographs taken by the participants are often used as elicitation devices Photographic data analysis and display 137
to generate dialog about the photographs and their meanings for participants. They suggest that 
photographs be regarded as data on their own as well as linked with the voice of participants so 
that the photograph can be seen fully, perhaps including those sections of the photograph not 
pointed out or discussed by participants. Looking at the whole photograph independently as 
if it were a document as well as examining it in relation to the narrative of the participant can 
bring additional clarity to image‑based data. Chapman et al. (2017) offer a five‑step process as 
a way of analyzing photographic images using the data analysis program Atlas.ti. However, the 
method that they propose can be used by researchers in any program or even to code by hand. 
The steps are: “data organization, code creation, coding, finding relationships or patterns and 
interpretation” (p. 815). These steps have often been used by qualitative researchers to analyze 
text. In analyzing dialog and text, researchers often add the step of finding quotes as evidence 
to cite in their findings as well as memo writing to create claims and themes that cut across 
several data sets. With regard to photographic analysis, Chapman et al. (2017) suggest treating 
every photograph as an independent source or a primary source separate from the text that might 
accompany the photograph. This text includes any captions, explanations, or stories that the par‑
ticipant might reveal during interviews. With regard to coding, they suggest using some a priori 
codes as well as emergent codes. A priori codes can be generated from the research questions 
or intent of the research and the scholarly literature. They suggest creating groups of codes or 
finding the relationships between codes in much the same way as one would in text. However, 
in photographs, the background and the people in the photograph can all be coded separately 
and then grouped together in relation to each other. To apply their coding system, researchers 
would need to look at each photograph separately and code everything in the photograph. For 
example, in a photograph of children surrounding a teacher, each child could represent a code 
and the teacher another code; any activity in the photograph would represent yet another code. 
These codes and the relationship between codes would need to be part of a coding scheme. 
A photograph in this sense can be seen as a complex text. If, for example, in the photograph, two 
children are seen with their arms linked, one can code that part of the photograph as “friends” 
or, depending on the context, could be “siblings.” Multiple photographs can serve as linked data 
to be analyzed both individually and collectively. Codes can be people, places, relationships of 
people with places, activities going on in the photograph, as well as indicators of time. Analyz‑
ing photographs in this way would mean examining not only the context with regard to place 
but also time and frequency. Researchers would need to think about how often the activity can 
be seen in different photographs as well as how consistently it happens.
Analyzing video‑based data
McNaughton (2009) found that it was difficult to access literature that outlined the steps needed 
for the analysis of video in mainstream research methods books. She points out the limitations 
of the camera for data gathering since the camera cannot capture all the action everywhere, even 
in a small space where multiple interactions occur at the same time. Classroom interactions are 
a case in point. At times like these, more than one camera might be required if one wants both 
the long or the wide angle range as well as a focus range so that the researcher can later look at 
what is going on in the classroom as a whole and examine the particular interaction within that 
context. However, for most researchers, unless they are working as a team, using more than one 
camera is not only difficult in terms of equipment but also in terms of having to make decisions 
regarding which of the two would be set up to focus on one spot or where the camera would 
be placed to best capture the needed interactions or the setting. Typically, researchers often 
switch between focusing on an interaction in a particular group and capturing the classroom as 138 Photographic data analysis and display
a whole. If several volunteer researchers or participants who might volunteer to use the camera 
are involved, there is a possibility that since they are also participants in the classroom, the qual‑
ity of film, or the audio might not always be clear.
McNaughton (2009) suggests a five‑step analysis method for videos. The first is to playback 
the videos, make notes on the different activities, and create logs of types of activities, interac‑
tions, who is involved, the date, and the timestamp for each. An index with the activity and 
when it starts and ends on the video is useful for coding and analysis. The next step is to identify 
episodes of significance and to document them so that they are categorized and labeled. The 
third stage would be to select certain events or videographic episodes that are representative of 
the interactions pertaining to the research question. Transcribing the episodes would follow. The 
fourth stage in the analysis would be a description and interpretation of these transcriptions, and 
the fifth would be to look for themes and to make some links to the research question and what 
the research attempted to answer.
Another analysis procedure suggested by Strauss and Corbin (1998) is microanalysis, in 
which the video is examined to look for interesting and relevant interactions. Categories as well 
as themes are reflected on and reorganized. Nonverbal communications would also be important 
in video analysis, through which unanticipated themes and categories might emerge.
Photography as a dialog for reinterpretation and history‑making
Photographic analysis and interpretation often focus on the composition of the photograph in 
context. Where it was published, when it was published, why it was taken, and what is the his‑
tory behind this photograph are all questions for qualitative researchers to ask when examining 
photographs in archives. To these questions, researchers can add how the photograph is being 
viewed or exhibited and the ways in which people interpret and reinterpret them over time.
Vium (2018) suggests using photographs through reenactment for qualitative analysis. He 
suggests combining collaborative photographic reenactments with data collected during field 
work. Looking at archives and finding photographs of field work done in central Australia by 
Gillen and Baldwin Spencer between 1875 and 1912, Vium (2018) repatriated photographs that 
had been taken during that period to the descendants of the communities where the original 
photographs had been taken. He also assembled the photographs in new ways so as to make it 
a collage or a montage to facilitate a technique for dialog. He showed the photographs to the 
descendants of the people in the older photographs as a way to initiate dialog and uncover hid‑
den histories or perspectives that were silenced.
Cultural studies approach to photographic analysis
Grounded in interdisciplinary cultural studies, perhaps one of the most popular ways to analyze 
photographic data is the approach that Stuart Hall (1973, 1980, 1997) and John Fiske (1989, 
1994) discussed the encoding and decoding method. While this approach does not offer specific 
steps for analysis, it is nevertheless one of the most comprehensive since it encompasses the 
picture, the context as well as the way in which photographs are perceived by an audience and 
then reinterpreted. According to Hall (1997), researchers should not make assumptions and 
instead need to carefully examine the political and social context, in which media or photo‑
graphs are produced or encoded and further examine how such messages are consumed by the 
audience. Audience members have the agency to interpret messages differently from what the 
encoders might have intended. Hall (1997) described three ways in which audiences could read 
media messages that can be applied to photographic images. Hall (1997) explained that images 
contained a dominant message or a preferred message that the encoders wanted to convey to the Photographic data analysis and display 139
audience. In the case of photographs, that would be what the photographer wanted to convey 
through a particular photograph. The audience could read the image in the dominant way, which 
was congruent with the intent of the photographer, and thereby reinforce the status quo or could 
provide an alternative reading of the photograph. A third way that the audience could interpret 
photographic images would be in direct opposition to the ways in which they were intended. 
Such a reading would be regarded as oppositional decoding. According to Hall’s ways of read‑
ing photographs, qualitative researchers can draw on new ways of seeing endorsed by feminists 
by looking for unintended messages that a photograph can convey through unnoticed details that 
exist in the images or by looking for absences.
Iconologic image analysis – Panofsky’s method
Erwin Panofsky (1892–1968) outlined an approach to analyze art. He made a distinction between 
iconography and iconology. The former was the study of the subject matter in visual arts, while 
the latter is the study of the significance of art within the context in which it is produced. This 
approach outlines three steps that qualitative researchers can adapt for photographic analysis. 
The first is to describe the photograph as completely as possible. The second step would be to 
add knowledge to the photograph, which includes the context, comparative photographs, and 
knowledge of how the image was produced, whether or not it was posed or candid, altered in 
some way, or reproduced. The third step would be to look at both the image itself and the sur‑
rounding images, or to take into consideration other knowledge and create an interpretation that 
gets at the deeper meaning of the photograph. Scholars have used Panofsky’s method for analy‑
sis in some studies. Christmann (2008) used the method to study photographs of old Dresden 
and worked toward a visual discourse analysis.
Hermeneutic analysis
Hermeneutic analysis is based on Gadamer’s philosophy (Alsaigh & Coyne, 2021; Hekman, 
1984). In this method, researchers focus on the photographer and the people, places, or objects 
depicted in the photograph. Analysis can be aided by captions in photographs that may include 
a description or a date. Questions that can guide a hermeneutic analysis of photographs include 
examining the intentions, the motivations, and the contexts of the photographs. Since these can 
be complex and subtle, approaching analysis with empathy and openness to diverse interpreta‑
tions can allow polysemic readings of photographs.
The following questions can serve as a guide for hermeneutic analysis:
What was the intention of the photographer in taking this particular photograph?
What are the characteristics of a photo context?
Can the photograph or image be classified as an advertisement, a pamphlet, or a portrait?
What are some emotions that appear in the photograph?
What are some emotions that are evoked in viewing the photograph?
What interactions are visible in the photograph?
What is not visible in the photograph?
Pierre Bourdieu and analyzing photographic data
Bourdieu took photographs in Algeria between 1958 and 1961. He conducted fieldwork in the 
midst of a colonial war and took about 2,500 photographs. During this time, Bourdieu reflected 
that fieldwork relations and the relationships between the interviewer and interviewee, and/or 140 Photographic data analysis and display
the observer and the informant, all had to be carefully scrutinized and reflected on during the 
analysis process (Bourdieu, 2004, 2007). For Bourdieu, photography reveals two aspects of 
social life. First, it reveals the world as seen in the photograph. Second, it reveals the choices 
made by the photographer, thereby letting audiences get a glimpse of the thoughts, feelings, and 
a sense of the biography of the photographer. In other words, photographs need to be examined 
for what they proclaim as well as for what they inadvertently reveal (Bourdieu et al., 1990).
Data analysis: when is the right time to start analyzing photographs?
The question of when photographic analysis actually starts can have multiple answers depend‑
ing on the project. Most scholars agree that it is never too early to start thinking and jotting down 
first impressions in research. This does not involve coding or categorizing but rather describes 
impressions and ideas. At the point of the researcher‑participant contact, if there is the possibil‑
ity of using photographs for data collection, the analysis needs to begin at that point. Research‑
ers can start making journal notes on their interactions, how photography is being discussed, 
what is the focus of the photographs to be taken, and to what extent does the participant pho‑
tographer have compositional agency when selecting what, where, and whom to photograph.
Coding photographs as part of data analysis
How do qualitative researchers design data analysis processes for photographic data? For exam‑
ple, a group of health researchers (Jih et al., 2023) developed an analytic approach for coding 
visual data that involved the development of two codebooks: a foreground codebook and a 
background codebook. These codebooks were created by the researchers separately, coding 
what they determined were the foreground and background messages contained in the photo‑
graphs. They used tools embedded within Dedoose (https://www.dedoose.com/), a commercial 
qualitative data analysis platform, to frame what they determined were foreground elements 
versus background elements; this visual overlay onto the original photographic images trained 
the researchers’ eyes to consider independently what was within the frame and how it did or did 
not relate to the prompts participants were given to help guide the photos they created.
The researchers were interested in how all of the
visual elements that both relate to participants’ intended response to the photo‑taking prompt 
[and any] additional aspects of socio‑contextual and lived experiences. This method was, in 
part, informed and inspired by traditional approaches to analyzing textual data, in which anal‑
ysis focuses on all aspects of the data presented to prioritize and understand both the implicit 
and explicit thoughts and understandings of participants on topics and ideas relevant to them. 
Thus, similar to inductive approaches to analyzing textual data, critical examination of pho‑
tographic data beyond the intended focus can more fully capture participants’ experiences
(Jih et al., 2023, p. 1052).
The researchers further leveraged the Dedoose function of cooccurrence frequencies, which 
allowed them to examine the relationships between foreground and background codes. This part 
of the data analysis process helped the researchers discover the unique analytical possibilities 
when using background codes. They revealed aspects of the physical home environment and 
social networks that differed from what was observable in the foreground. These findings were 
crucial for gaining insights into the social determinants of health and health behaviors among 
their participants. Notably, the researchers observed details such as food logs, confined living Photographic data analysis and display 141
spaces that were limiting mobility, and the presence of social connections. Failing to code the 
background of the photographs might have resulted in missing this additional visual data, hin‑
dering further investigation or exploration and leading to important findings. And they offered 
an insightful discussion about the additional analytical possibilities that might emerge if partici‑
pants had been involved in the photo coding process, including defining foreground/background 
or developing the codebook (Jih et al., 2023).
Another example of how researchers engage with analyzing photographic data is contained 
within the work of Drew and Guillemin (2014), who developed a framework of interpretive 
engagement comprised of
three stages of meaning‑making; these are meaning‑making through participant engagement 
(Stage 1), through researcher‑driven engagement (Stage 2), and through re‑contextualising 
(Stage 3). These three stages on their own are limited, but in combination provide rich and 
comprehensive visual analysis. The “interpretive engagement” framework involves five key 
elements, namely, the researcher, the participant, the image and the context of its production 
and the audience/s. Each plays a significant role, contributing to the overall analysis . . . It 
involves systematically and deliberately interpreting the material followed by articulation 
of an analytic story which accommodates participant intentions, researcher interpretations, 
theoretical underpinnings and emerging knowledge claims
(Drew & Guillemin, 2014, p. 54).
Visual analysis, when using photographs as data in a qualitative study, can be similar to and differ‑
ent from other forms of data analysis. While there are commonalities in the qualitative data analysis 
process, visual analysis introduces unique challenges and considerations related to the nature of vis‑
ual data, multimodality, and the need for enhanced visual literacy. Researchers need to adapt their 
approach and methods to effectively analyze and interpret visual materials in a meaningful way.
Below are some visual analysis strategies commonly employed.
Visual analysis strategies for photographic data
Visual analysis strategies for photographic data involve systematic approaches to interpret and 
derive meaning from images. Here are some common strategies:
Descriptive Analysis: Begin by describing the content of the photograph in detail. Note the peo‑
ple, objects, settings, actions, and any other observable elements. This step helps establish a 
baseline understanding of the visual data.
Formal Analysis: Analyze the formal elements of the photograph, such as composition, framing, 
lighting, color, perspective, and visual symbols. Consider how these elements contribute to 
the overall message or mood conveyed by the image.
Semiotic Analysis: Apply semiotic theory to interpret the signs, symbols, and visual codes pre‑
sent in the photograph. Explore how meaning is constructed through the relationship between 
signifiers (visual elements) and signifieds (conceptual meanings).
Content Analysis: Conduct a systematic analysis of the content within the photograph, identify‑
ing recurring themes, patterns, or motifs. Look for narrative structures, cultural references, 
and sociopolitical implications embedded in the visual data.
Contextual Analysis: Consider the broader context surrounding the photograph, including the 
historical, cultural, and social factors that may influence its interpretation. Explore how the 
photograph relates to its cultural moment or socio‑historical context.142 Photographic data analysis and display
Comparative Analysis: Compare and contrast the photograph with other images or visual repre‑
sentations related to the same topic or theme. This comparative approach can reveal similari‑
ties, differences, and nuances in meaning across different visual sources.
Narrative Analysis: Analyze the narrative or storytelling aspects of the photograph, including 
the sequence of events, characters, plotlines, and symbolic imagery. Consider how the visual 
narrative constructs meaning and elicits emotional or cognitive responses from viewers.
Audience Reception Analysis: Explore how different audiences interpret and respond to the 
photograph. Consider factors such as viewer demographics, cultural backgrounds, and indi‑
vidual perspectives that may influence the reception and interpretation of the visual data.
Critical Visual Analysis: Engage in critical analysis by questioning the underlying assumptions, 
power dynamics, and ideologies present in the photograph. Consider whose perspectives are 
represented or marginalized and how the visual representation may reinforce or challenge 
dominant narratives.
Reflexive Analysis: Reflect on your own positionality and biases as a researcher, as well as the 
ethical implications of your analysis. Consider how your interpretation of the photograph 
may be influenced by your own background, experiences, and cultural standpoint.
Temporal Analysis: Consider the temporal aspects of the photograph, including the moment 
captured in time and any temporal sequences or changes depicted within the image. Explore 
how time influences the meaning and interpretation of the visual data.
Spatial Analysis: Analyze the spatial dimensions of the photograph, including the physical loca‑
tions, settings, and spatial relationships depicted within the image. Consider how space is 
represented and utilized to convey meaning or evoke specific responses.
Genre Analysis: Situate the photograph within its genre or visual tradition, considering common 
conventions, styles, and motifs associated with similar types of images. Explore how the 
photograph both conforms to and deviates from genre expectations.
Affective Analysis: Investigate the emotional impact of the photograph on viewers, consider‑
ing how visual elements such as composition, color, and facial expressions evoke emotional 
responses. Explore the role of affect in shaping interpretations of the visual data.
Materiality Analysis: Consider the material aspects of the photograph, including the physical 
characteristics of the image (e.g., print quality, surface texture) and the materiality of the 
photographic medium itself (e.g., film, digital). Reflect on how materiality influences the 
perception and meaning of the visual data.
Intermedial Analysis: Explore how the photograph interacts with other media forms or cultural 
artifacts, such as paintings, films, advertisements, or social media posts. Consider how inter‑
medial references or influences shape the interpretation of the visual data.
Visual Ethnography: Adopt an ethnographic approach to visual analysis, considering the photo‑
graph as a cultural artifact embedded within specific social contexts and practices. Explore 
how the photograph reflects broader cultural norms, values, and power dynamics.
Participatory Analysis: Engage participants or community members in the analysis process, 
soliciting their interpretations and insights into the meaning of the photographs. This par‑
ticipatory approach can enrich the analysis and foster collaborative knowledge production.
Multimodal Analysis: Analyze the photograph alongside other modes of communication or 
expression, such as text, audio, or video. Explore how the combination of different modali‑
ties contributes to the overall meaning and impact of the visual data.
Future‑Oriented Analysis: Consider the potential future uses or implications of the photograph, 
exploring how it might be circulated, repurposed, or interpreted in different contexts over 
time. Anticipate how the meaning of the visual data may evolve or change in the future.Photographic data analysis and display 143
The choice of visual analysis strategy depends on the research question, the objectives of the 
study, and the nature of the visual data being examined. Combining multiple strategies can pro‑
vide a richer and more nuanced understanding of the qualitative data derived from photographs 
as well as the process of engaging in photography.
Photographic data analysis innovations
In addition to the more familiar approaches, here are a few innovative and emerging approaches 
to visual analysis in qualitative studies using photographs. These approaches are usually only 
taken up by researchers with a good amount of prior experience with studies using photographs 
as data (Table 9.1).
These specialized approaches highlight the diversity and evolving nature of visual analysis 
methods in qualitative research. Depending on the specific objectives and context of your study, 
you may find inspiration in combining multiple approaches or adapting these techniques to suit 
your research needs.
Table 9.1 Photographic Data Analysis Innovations
Innovation Description
• Neuroscientific analysis • Investigate how visual elements in photographs may impact 
the brain and emotional responses.
• Aesthetic preferences • Explore individual and cultural variations in aesthetic 
preferences based on neuroscientific principles.
• Virtual reality (VR) and augmented 
reality (AR)
• Employ VR or AR to create immersive environments for 
in‑depth exploration of visual data.
• Spatial interaction • Analyze how users interact with and navigate through 
virtual visual landscapes.
• Social media and network analysis • Investigate how photographs circulate and are interpreted 
within social media networks. Explore social relationships 
and interactions within photographs through network 
analysis.
• Networked visual analysis • Explore connections and relationships between visual 
elements across online platforms.
• Machine learning and computer 
vision
• Use machine learning algorithms to automatically identify 
and analyze objects in photographs. Employ computer 
vision techniques to uncover patterns and trends within 
large datasets of visual information.
• Photogrammetry • Apply photogrammetric methods to reconstruct 
three‑dimensional representations from two‑dimensional 
photographs. Explore spatial relationships and dimensions 
in a more dynamic way.
• Sensor‑based analysis • Integrate physiological sensors to measure participants’ 
emotional responses while viewing photographs. Capture 
contextual information, such as lighting conditions or ambient 
noise, for a more comprehensive analysis.
• Mobile ethnography • Encourage participants to use their mobile devices for 
ethnographic photography, capturing moments in their daily 
lives. Leverage metadata, such as geotagging and timestamps, 
for contextual and temporal analysis.
(Continued)144 Photographic data analysis and display
Photographic data analysis challenges
While visual analysis in qualitative studies using photographs can offer valuable insights, there 
are several challenges that researchers may encounter. Some of the biggest challenges are 
included in Table 9.2.
Innovation Description
• Data visualization techniques • Create visualizations that represent patterns, trends, or 
thematic clusters within the visual data. Use heatmaps 
to visualize temporal patterns and the intensity of visual 
elements over time.
• Mixed‑methods approaches • Combine qualitative visual analysis with quantitative data 
to provide a more comprehensive understanding. Further 
interrogate visual findings by comparing them with findings 
from other data sources.
• Eye‑tracking analysis • Use eye‑tracking technology to analyze where viewers focus 
their attention within the photographs. Understand the visual 
hierarchy and saliency of different elements.
• Biometric analysis • Use facial recognition technology to analyze emotions 
expressed in faces within photographs. Investigate cognitive 
load or emotional arousal through pupil dilation patterns.
• Automated image annotation • Employ NLP techniques to automatically generate 
textual descriptions or annotations for visual elements 
in photographs. Utilize deep learning models for image 
captioning to describe visual content.
• Emotional mapping • Create heat maps indicating the intensity and distribution of 
emotions across a photograph. Trace emotional trajectories 
within a series of photographs to understand emotional 
dynamics over time.
• Augmented reality ethnography • Overlay additional information or contextual details 
onto photographs using augmented reality for deeper 
ethnographic insights. Create interactive AR environments 
to engage participants in immersive visual experiences.
• Neurophenomenology • Integrate neuroscience techniques with phenomenological 
approaches to explore the lived experience of viewing 
photographs. Investigate the embodied nature of visual 
experiences through a neurophenomenological lens.
• Serendipity analysis • Encourage a focus on unexpected and serendipitous findings 
within photographs. Explore how unexpected elements 
contribute to the overall narrative or meaning.
• Cinemetrics and visual storytelling • Apply cinematic principles to analyze visual storytelling 
techniques within photographs. Break down visual narratives 
into storyboard‑like components for in‑depth exploration.
• Virtual heritage analysis • Use virtual heritage techniques to digitally reconstruct 
historical or cultural contexts depicted in photographs. 
Create virtual tours to explore historical or cultural 
landscapes represented in visual data.
• Haptic analysis • Explore the integration of haptic interfaces to allow 
researchers or participants to physically interact with visual 
data. Investigate the role of tactile feedback in enhancing 
the understanding of visual content.
Table 9.1 (Continued)Photographic data analysis and display 145
Table 9.2 Photographic Data Analysis Challenges
Challenges Description
• Subjectivity and 
interpretation
• Diverse perspectives: Different individuals may interpret visual data 
differently based on their experiences, cultural background, and personal 
biases.
Researcher bias: Researchers’ own biases and preconceptions may influence 
the interpretation of visual elements.
• Ethical considerations • Informed consent: Ensuring that participants fully understand how their 
photographs will be used and interpreted.
Privacy concerns: Safeguarding the privacy of individuals depicted in the 
photographs, especially in sensitive or stigmatized contexts.
• Complexity of visual 
data
• Multifaceted nature: Visual data often contains multiple layers of 
information, making it challenging to analyze comprehensively.
Ambiguity: Some visual elements may be ambiguous or open to multiple 
interpretations.
• Integration with textual 
data
• Methodological integration: Effectively integrating visual analysis with 
other qualitative data sources.
Triangulation Challenges: The need to triangulate findings with textual data 
while maintaining the unique contributions of visual analysis.
• Technological 
limitations
• Data storage and management: Handling large volumes of visual data 
and ensuring proper storage and organization.
Technical Expertise: Some advanced visual analysis techniques may 
require specialized technical skills and resources.
• Validity and reliability • Ensuring validity: Establishing the validity of interpretations and 
findings derived from visual analysis.
Reliability issues: The potential for variability in interpretations, even 
among different researchers using the same visual data.
• Cultural sensitivity • Cultural context: Recognizing and addressing cultural nuances in the 
interpretation of visual elements.
Ethnocentrism: Avoiding ethnocentric interpretations that may not resonate 
with the cultural context of the participants.
• Participant engagement • Limited participant involvement: Balancing the depth of participant 
involvement in the analysis while maintaining ethical standards.
Participant empowerment: Ensuring that participants feel empowered in the 
research process, particularly in participatory approaches.
• Rapid technological 
changes
• Keeping up with technology: The fast‑paced evolution of visual analysis 
tools and technologies may pose challenges in staying current with best 
practices.
• Resource constraints • Time and budget: Visual analysis, especially with advanced techniques, 
can be time‑consuming and resource‑intensive.
Access to technology: Limited access to specialized software or equipment 
may hinder certain visual analysis methods.
• Cross‑cultural 
challenges
• Diverse interpretations: Visual elements may be interpreted differently 
across cultures, leading to challenges in achieving cross‑cultural validity.
Cultural appropriateness: Ensuring that visual analysis methods and 
interpretations are culturally appropriate and sensitive.
• Dynamic and evolving 
nature
• Temporal dynamics: Visual data, especially in longitudinal studies, may 
evolve over time, requiring researchers to adapt their analysis methods.
Technological advancements: Rapid advancements in technology may 
introduce new challenges or opportunities for visual analysis.
• Negotiating complexity • Complex visual narratives: Dealing with intricate visual narratives that 
may require sophisticated analytical frameworks.
Interconnected visual elements: Understanding how various visual 
elements interact and contribute to the overall meaning.
(Continued)146 Photographic data analysis and display
Challenges Description
• Interdisciplinary 
collaboration
• Collaboration challenges: Interdisciplinary collaboration may be 
necessary for advanced analyses, requiring effective communication 
between researchers with different expertise.
Data integration: Challenges in integrating visual analysis findings with 
insights from other disciplines.
• Accessibility and 
inclusivity
• Accessibility of visual data: Ensuring that visual data is accessible to 
all researchers, and readers of the research, including those with visual 
impairments.
Inclusivity: Addressing potential inclusivity and equity issues related to the 
analysis process.
• Teaching and learning • Methodological training: Providing adequate training for researchers 
in visual analysis methods, especially when incorporating novel 
technologies.
Pedagogical approaches: Developing effective pedagogical approaches for 
teaching visual analysis techniques to students and novice researchers.
• Legal and copyright 
issues
• Intellectual property rights: Navigating legal considerations, especially 
when using photographs taken by participants or sourced from external 
archives.
Permission and consent: Ensuring that appropriate permissions are 
obtained for the use of visual data, particularly when publishing findings.
• Dynamic nature of 
participant experience
• Changing perspectives: Acknowledging that participants’ perspectives 
and interpretations of their own visual data may evolve over time.
Participant withdrawal: Dealing with challenges if participants wish to 
withdraw their visual data from the study.
• Postmodern and critical 
perspectives
• Deconstruction challenges: Applying postmodern or critical perspectives 
may introduce challenges in deconstructing visual narratives and 
meanings.
Power dynamics: Recognizing and addressing power dynamics inherent in 
visual representation and analysis.
• Environmental 
considerations
• Ecological validity: Considering the ecological validity of visual data, 
especially when studying environments or ecosystems.
Environmental impact: Being mindful of the environmental impact of 
technologies used in visual analysis.
Table 9.2 (Continued)
Researchers should approach visual analysis with a clear awareness of these challenges 
and be prepared to address them throughout the research process. Rigorous methodological 
approaches, reflexivity, and transparency in reporting findings can help mitigate some of these 
challenges and enhance the credibility of visual data analysis in qualitative research. Addressing 
these considerations requires a thoughtful and reflexive approach to visual analysis, ensuring 
that researchers are attuned to the complexities of the data and the broader ethical and cul‑
tural context in which the research is situated. Additionally, ongoing reflection and adaptation 
of methodologies may be necessary to navigate the evolving landscape of visual analysis in 
qualitative research. Addressing these challenges associated with visual analysis in qualitative 
studies using photographs requires a combination of thoughtful methodological choices, ethical 
considerations, and practical strategies. Table 9.3 shows some approaches to help researchers 
navigate these challenges.Photographic data analysis and display 147
Table 9.3 Ways to Approach Photographic Data Analysis Challenges
Challenges Approaches
• Methodological rigor • Develop clear and transparent protocols for visual data 
collection, coding, and analysis.
• Ensure intercoder reliability by having multiple researchers 
independently code and analyze visual data.
• Participant engagement and 
empowerment
• Prioritize informed consent, ensuring that participants 
understand how their visual data will be used and interpreted.
• Encourage participants to provide feedback on the analysis 
process to enhance reflexivity.
• Cultural Sensitivity • Cultivate cultural competence among researchers, seeking 
input from individuals with diverse cultural backgrounds.
• Pilot visual analysis methods with participants to identify 
and address potential cultural nuances.
• Ethical guidelines • Ensure that research involving visual data adheres to ethical 
guidelines and undergoes thorough ethics review.
• Implement strategies to protect the privacy of individuals 
depicted in photographs, such as anonymization or face blurring.
• Training, capacity building, cross‑, 
inter‑, and trans‑disciplinary 
collaboration
• Form interdisciplinary teams to combine expertise in visual 
analysis, technology, and relevant subject matter.
• Maintain open and regular communication between team 
members from different disciplines.
• Provide training sessions that bridge disciplines, ensuring 
researchers understand both the subject matter and visual 
analysis methodologies.
• Invite experts from relevant disciplines to provide insights 
and perspectives on visual analysis.
• Provide comprehensive training for researchers in visual 
analysis methods, including the use of relevant technologies.
• Conduct workshops and seminars to facilitate ongoing 
learning and skill development.
• Embrace transdisciplinary approaches that go beyond 
traditional disciplinary boundaries, encouraging 
collaboration across diverse fields.
• Develop boundary objects that facilitate communication and 
understanding between researchers from different disciplines.
• Accessibility and inclusivity • Adhere to accessibility standards when presenting visual data, 
making it accessible to researchers with different abilities.
• Ask questions about issues of representation in visual data.
• Technology adoption and adaptation • Stay abreast of technological advancements and continuously 
update skills to adapt to new tools and methods.
• Evaluate the suitability and ethical implications of 
technologies used in visual analysis.
• Reflexivity and transparency • Engage in reflexivity throughout the research process, 
acknowledging and addressing the researchers’ own biases.
• Clearly document and report the methods and decisions made 
during visual analysis to enhance transparency.
• Community involvement • Involve the community or participants in decisions related to 
data interpretation and representation.
• Conduct workshops or forums to engage the community in 
the research process.
(Continued)148 Photographic data analysis and display
Challenges Approaches
• Longitudinal considerations • Conduct periodic check‑ins with participants in longitudinal 
studies to understand changes in perspectives.
•	 Be flexible in adapting analysis strategies to accommodate
the dynamic nature of visual data over time.
•	 Legal compliance •	 Seek legal expertise to ensure compliance with intellectual
property rights, copyright laws, and permissions.
•	 Clearly communicate legal considerations to participants
during the consent process.
•	 Environmental responsibility •	 Consider the environmental impact of research technologies
and opt for sustainable practices.
•	 Explore environmentally friendly options for the storage and
archiving of visual data.
• Open dialogs •	 Foster a community of practice where researchers can share
experiences, challenges, and best practices.
•	 Encourage open dialogs about challenges and ethical
considerations within the research community.
•	 Pre‑analysis protocols •	 Develop preanalysis coding frameworks or guidelines to
maintain consistency in coding visual elements.
•	 Pilot the coding framework with a small subset of visual
data to identify and address potential issues before full‑scale
analysis.
•	 Researcher reflexivity workshops •	 Conduct workshops specifically focused on researcher
reflexivity, encouraging researchers to critically reflect on
their assumptions and biases.
•	 Establish peer‑review processes where researchers can
provide constructive feedback on each other’s interpretations.
• Data visualization ethics •	 Adhere to ethical principles in data visualization, ensuring
that visual representations accurately reflect the data and
avoid misinterpretation.
•	 Clearly articulate the narrative constructed through visual
analysis, including potential limitations and alternative
interpretations.
•	 Longitudinal ethnography •	 Combine longitudinal ethnography with visual analysis to
capture changes in both visual data and participants’ lived
experiences.
Collaborate with participants in the analysis process over time
to enrich interpretations.
•	 Art‑based research methodologies •	 Explore art‑based research methodologies, incorporating
creative and visual arts methods in the research process.
• Facilitate visual dialogs where participants and researchers 
engage in collaborative visual expression and interpretation.
•	 Critical digital literacy •	 Encourage critical digital literacy among both researchers
and participants to navigate the ethical implications of using
digital technologies.
Organize digital storytelling workshops to empower participants
in visually expressing their narratives.
•	 Spatial and temporal coding •	 Develop coding schemes that explicitly consider spatial and
temporal dimensions in the visual data.
Utilize visualization tools to analyze spatial and temporal
patterns in the visual content.
•	 Metaanalysis and reflexive
documentation
•	 Conduct a metaanalysis of visual analysis methods, comparing
and contrasting different approaches used in the literature.
(Continued)
Table 9.3 (Continued)Photographic data analysis and display 149
Challenges Approaches
• Document the reflexive process itself, providing insights into 
the evolution of interpretations and decisions made during 
visual analysis.
• Community cocreation platforms • Use digital platforms that allow community members to 
cocreate visual content and contribute to the ongoing analysis.
• Establish virtual spaces for collaborative analysis, enabling 
participants and researchers to engage in discussions and 
interpretation.
• Ephemeral data considerations • If working with ephemeral visual data (e.g., disappearing 
images), consider the unique challenges and opportunities 
associated with analyzing such data.
• Adapt analysis methods to account for the temporary nature 
of visual content.
Table 9.3 (Continued)
By proactively considering these approaches, researchers can enhance the trustworthiness 
and ethical integrity of their visual analysis in qualitative studies using photographs. Each 
approach should be adapted to the specific context of the research, ensuring that the unique chal‑
lenges of the study are adequately addressed. Researchers should continuously reflect on their 
practices, engage with the broader research community, and be open to evolving methodologies 
to meet emerging challenges.
Key pieces of advice for novice researchers entering this field
Engaging in visual analysis in qualitative research, especially for novice researchers, can be a 
rewarding but challenging endeavor. Here are some key pieces of advice for novice researchers 
entering this field:
Understand the Basics of Qualitative Research:
• Before delving into visual analysis, ensure a solid understanding of qualitative research 
principles, including research design, data collection, and data analysis.
Read Relevant Literature:
• Familiarize yourself with the existing literature on visual analysis in qualitative research. 
This will help you understand different approaches, methodologies, and best practices.
Training and Skill Development:
• Seek training in visual analysis methods, including both traditional and emerging tech‑
niques. Attend workshops, webinars, or courses offered by experts in the field.
Collaborate and Seek Mentorship:
• Collaborate with experienced researchers and seek mentorship from those who have exper‑
tise in visual analysis. Learning from others’ experiences can be invaluable for your own 
development.
Pilot Studies:
• Consider conducting small pilot studies to practice visual analysis methods on a limited 
scale. This can help you refine your approach and identify potential challenges.150 Photographic data analysis and display
Ethical Considerations:
• Prioritize ethical considerations in visual research. Understand the ethical implications of 
working with visual data, obtain informed consent, and ensure participant confidentiality.
Reflexivity:
• Develop a reflexive practice. Reflect on your own biases, assumptions, and preconceptions 
throughout the research process. Keep a research journal to document your reflections.
Start with Clear Research Questions:
• Begin with clear and focused research questions that guide your visual analysis. Having 
well‑defined objectives will help structure your approach to data interpretation.
Build a Coding Framework:
• Develop a coding framework or set of guidelines before starting your analysis. This provides 
a structured approach to coding visual elements and ensures consistency in interpretation.
Triangulation:
• Consider using triangulation by combining visual data with other qualitative data sources. 
This can enhance the credibility and validity of your findings.
Use Software Judiciously:
• If employing software for visual analysis, choose tools that align with your research goals and 
are user‑friendly. Familiarize yourself with the software’s features to maximize efficiency.
Engage Participants:
• Foster positive relationships with participants. If possible, involve them in the analysis 
process to ensure their perspectives are considered and accurately represented.
Embrace Flexibility:
• Be flexible in your approach. Visual analysis often involves unexpected discoveries, and 
flexibility allows you to adapt your methods to emerging patterns and themes.
Continuous Learning:
• Stay curious and embrace a mindset of continuous learning. Visual analysis methods and 
technologies evolve, so staying informed about new developments is crucial.
Present and Discuss Findings:
• Share your findings with peers and experts in the field. Engaging in discussions allows 
you to receive feedback and refine your interpretations.
Celebrate Small Achievements:
• Visual analysis can be time‑consuming and complex. Celebrate small achievements and 
milestones throughout the research process to stay motivated.
Take Breaks and Manage Stress:
• Balancing the demands of visual analysis can be challenging. Remember to take breaks, 
manage stress, and prioritize self‑care to maintain well‑being.Photographic data analysis and display 151
Network and Attend Conferences:
• Engage with the research community by networking and attending conferences. Confer‑
ences provide opportunities to learn from others, share your work, and receive construc‑
tive feedback.
Build a Support System:
• Surround yourself with a supportive network of colleagues, mentors, and peers who can 
provide guidance, encouragement, and constructive feedback.
Be Patient and Persevere:
• Visual analysis can be intricate, and results may take time. Be patient, persevere through 
challenges, and view each obstacle as a learning opportunity.
Stay Curious and Open‑Minded:
• Cultivate a curious and open‑minded approach to visual data. Be open to unexpected find‑
ings and alternative interpretations that may emerge during the analysis process.
Document Methodological Choices:
• Keep detailed records of your methodological choices, including coding decisions, ana‑
lytical strategies, and any adjustments made during the analysis. This documentation aids 
transparency and supports the reproducibility of your work.
Seek Feedback Early and Often:
• Share your initial interpretations and coding decisions with mentors, colleagues, or peers. 
Seeking feedback early in the process can help identify potential pitfalls and refine your 
analytical approach.
Iterative Analysis:
• Embrace an iterative approach to analysis. It is common to revisit and refine your coding 
and interpretations as you gain a deeper understanding of the visual data.
Practice Reflexive Writing:
• Integrate reflexive writing into your analysis process. Regularly write about your reflec‑
tions, insights, and challenges. This practice can enhance self‑awareness and contribute to 
the rigor of your analysis.
Balance Detail and Holistic Understanding:
• Strive for a balance between detailed analysis of specific visual elements and a holistic 
understanding of the overall narrative or context depicted in the photographs.
Explore Multiple Perspectives:
• Consider exploring multiple perspectives within your analysis. Acknowledge the potential 
for diverse interpretations and engage with different viewpoints to enrich your understanding.
Collaborative Analysis:
• If possible, engage in collaborative analysis with other researchers. Collaborative discus‑
sions can provide diverse insights and enhance the robustness of your interpretations.152 Photographic data analysis and display
Engage in Methodological Workshops:
• Attend workshops or training sessions focused on specific visual analysis methodologies. 
These practical sessions can deepen your understanding of techniques and tools.
Be Mindful of Time Management:
• Visual analysis can be time‑consuming, so practice effective time management. Set real‑
istic goals, prioritize tasks, and allocate time strategically to ensure progress.
Consider Visual Literacy:
• Develop your visual literacy skills. Familiarize yourself with the language of visual elements, 
such as composition, color, and symbolism, to enhance your ability to interpret visual data.
Emphasize Trustworthiness:
• Prioritize the trustworthiness of your findings. Clearly articulate the steps taken to ensure 
rigor, credibility, and dependability in your visual analysis.
Network with Experienced Researchers:
• Attend conferences, webinars, or events where you can connect with experienced research‑
ers in visual analysis. Building a network can provide valuable insights and potential col‑
laboration opportunities.
Stay Informed About Ethical Guidelines:
• Regularly update yourself on ethical guidelines related to visual research. Understand the 
evolving ethical considerations associated with the use of visual data.
Be Transparent in Reporting:
• When reporting your findings, be transparent about your methodology, including any 
challenges faced and decisions made during the analysis. Transparency enhances the cred‑
ibility of your work.
Build a Resource Library:
• Curate a resource library that includes key literature, methodological guides, and relevant 
software tools. Having a go‑to resource library can assist you in navigating challenges.
Attend Methodology Peer Discussions:
• Participate in methodology‑focused peer discussions or journal clubs where researchers 
share insights and experiences related to visual analysis. Engaging in these discussions 
can broaden your perspective.
Celebrate Successes and Learn from Challenges:
• Acknowledge and celebrate your successes, whether they are small milestones or significant 
achievements. Additionally, view challenges as opportunities for growth and learning.
Experiment with Visualization Techniques:
• Explore various visualization techniques to communicate your findings effectively. 
Experiment with visual formats that align with your research goals and resonate with 
your intended audience.Photographic data analysis and display 153
Enjoy the Process:
• Lastly, enjoy the process of exploring, interpreting, and making sense of visual data. 
Embrace the creativity and intellectual curiosity that comes with engaging in visual analy‑
sis within qualitative research.
Visual data analysis is both a skill and an art, and it evolves with experience and continuous 
learning. As you navigate your journey in visual research, stay enthusiastic, seek support when 
needed, and relish the insights that visual data can bring to your qualitative studies. Becom‑
ing proficient in visual analysis is a gradual process. Embrace the learning journey, be open to 
feedback, and continually refine your skills over time. As you gain experience, your ability to 
navigate the complexities of visual research will grow, contributing to the richness and depth of 
your qualitative studies.
Photograph 9.1 Photograph of graffiti on a rock on a beach. Photo credit: Chris Megrue154 Photographic data analysis and display
Exercise 9.1: Coding photographs from a hermeneutic 
framework
Guidelines:
1 Look at Photograph 9.1. Ask a peer to also do the same.
2 What are the different ways in which you would code the photograph?
3 What do you think of the intention of the person who took the photograph?
4 What emotions does it evoke?
5 Look at the foreground and the background of the photograph. What does it reveal or pro‑
claim and what if anything is inadvertently revealed?
6 Imagine that a participant is sharing the above with you. What questions would you ask?
7 Reflect on your peer’s responses to the same questions. How was it different or similar? What 
can you learn about coding photographs and the possibilities and limitations of coding a single 
photograph? What was missing that might have helped you to code the Photograph 9.1 better.
Photograph 9.2  This is a photograph of a stadium with a tennis court with scattered people. Photo credit: 
Sadhana AthreyaPhotographic data analysis and display 155
Exercise 9.2: Coding photographs from an interpretive 
framework
1 Look at the Photograph 9.2. Describe what you see.
2 Wearing the hat of a researcher, think about why you would take this photograph.
3 Wearing the hat of a participant, why would you take this photograph?
4 What would be the context of this photograph?
5 What research questions might it help to answer if the participant was examining privilege, 
sports, and participation?
6 What other data would you want to gather to examine inclusion, privilege, and exclusion in 
sport participation?
In the following exercise, we ask you to take some photographs or use photographs you already 
have to try out further analysis.
Exercise i. (Use any photograph or take a photograph) 
Interpreting identity
Goal: To prepare for photographic analysis through brainstorming questions
Activity: Brainstorming and Discussion
Prepare: Choose photos of yourself with a view to creating an internet identity that you would 
share with your friends. Choose 6–8 photographs.
Reflect: What did you decide to include or exclude about yourself?
What does the inclusion or exclusion criteria you used tell you about examining photographic 
data?
In a small group, share these photographs and ask your peers how they would interpret the 
photographs. Share with them your reasons for the choices and your interpretations.
Discuss: How did interpretations differ among the group and you? What was similar? What 
shared understanding does this reveal about the activities or the types of photos you chose?
How did this help you to think nonverbally?
Summary
In this chapter, we examined the different ways in which qualitative researchers can analyze 
photographic data, both individually and in conjunction with other visual data, including charts 
and graphs. Different approaches to the analysis of photographs and images have also been 
presented, allowing researchers to gain a variety of ways to interpret data. Ways of analysis that 
lead with theory and others where the analysis begins with the photograph are showcased. Fur‑
ther, innovative data analysis methods in photographic research and challenges to data analysis 
have been discussed. Finally, we end with some tips and exercises for researchers.
References
Alsaigh, R., & Coyne, I. (2021). Doing a hermeneutic phenomenology research underpinned by Gadam‑
er’s philosophy: A framework to facilitate data analysis. International Journal of Qualitative Methods, 
20. https://doi.org/10.1177/16094069211047820.
Bravington, A., & King, N. (2019). Putting graphic elicitation into practice: Tools and typologies for the 
use of participant‑led diagrams in qualitative research interviews. Qualitative Research, 19(5), 506–523.156 Photographic data analysis and display
Bourdieu, P., Boltanski, L., Castel, R., Chamboredon, J.‑C., & Schnapper, D. (1990). Photography. A 
middle‑brow art. Stanford University Press.
Bourdieu, P. (2004). Algerian landing. Ethnography, 5(4), 415–443.
Bourdieu, P. (2007). Sketch for a self‑analysis. Polity.
Chapman, M. V., Wu, S., & Zhu, M. (2017). What is a picture worth? A primer for coding and interpreting 
photographic data. Qualitative Social Work, 16(6), 810–824.
Christmann, G. B. (2008, September). The power of photographs of buildings in the Dresden urban dis‑
course. Towards a visual discourse analysis. Forum Qualitative Sozialforschung/Forum: Qualitative 
Social Research, 9(3). https://doi.org/10.17169/fqs‑9.3.1163
Drew, S., & Guillemin, M. (2014). From photographs to findings: Visual meaning‑making and interpretive 
engagement in the analysis of participant‑generated images. Visual Studies, 29(1), 54–67.
Fiske, J. (1989). Reading the popular. Boston: Unwin Hyman.
Fiske, J. (1994). Media matters. Everyday culture and political change. University of Minnesota Press.
Frentzel‑Beyme, L., & Krämer, N. C. (2023). Historical time machines: Experimentally investigating 
potentials and impacts of immersion in historical VR on history education and morality. Technology, 
Mind, and Behavior, 4(1). https://assets.pubpub.org/hd9uusb1/11675885314159.pdf
Hall, S. (1973). The determinations of news photographs. In S. Cohen & J. Young (Eds.), The manufacture 
of news. Deviance, social problems and the mass media (pp. 176–190). London: Constable.
Hall, S. (1980). Encoding/decoding. In Center for Contemporary Cultural Studies (Ed.), Media language. 
Working papers in cultural studies (pp. 128–138). London: Hutchinson.
Hall, S. (1997). Representation: Cultural representations and signifying practices. London: Sage.
Hasse, C. (2013). Artefacts that talk: Mediating technologies as multistable signs and tools. Subjectivity, 
6(1), 79–100.
Hekman, S. (1984). Action as a text: Gadamer’s hermeneutics and the social scientific analysis of action. 
Journal for the Theory of Social Behaviour, 14(3), 333–354.
Holm, G. (1997). Teenage motherhood: Public posing and private thoughts. In Janice Jipson & Nicholas 
Paley (Eds.), Daredevil research. Re‑creating analytic practice (pp. 61–81). New York: Peter Lang.
Holm, G. (2008, May). Photography as a performance. Forum Qualitative Sozialforschung/Forum: Quali‑
tative Social Research, 9(2).
Hug, T. (2012). Media competence and visual literacy‑towards considerations beyond literacies. Periodica 
Polytechnica Social and Management Sciences, 20(2), 115–125.
Jih, J., Nguyen, A., Woo, J., Ly, A., & Shim, J. K. (2023). Using photographs to understand the context of 
health: A novel two‑step systematic process for coding visual data. Qualitative Health Research, 33(12), 
1049–1058.
King, N., Bravington, A., Brooks, J., Hardy, B., Melvin, J., & Wilde, D. (2013). The Pictor technique: 
a method for exploring the experience of collaborative working. Qualitative Health Research, 23(8), 
1138–1152. https://doi.org/10.1177/1049732313495326.
McNaughton, M. J. (2009). Closing in on the picture: Analyzing interactions in video recordings. Interna‑
tional Journal of Qualitative Methods, 8(4), 27–48.
Oberbichler, S., Gallner‑Holzmann, K., & Hug, T. (2021). Generous and inviting interfaces revisited: 
Examples of designing visual structures for digital archives. Information Design Journal, 26(2), 
157–174.
Pendergast, D., Sammel, A., Rowan, L., O’Brien, M., McCann, T., Kanasa, H., Geelan, D., Exley, B., Den‑
nett, C., & Alhadad, S. (2023). Spaces to care and places to share. In N. Lemon, H. Harju‑Luukkainen, 
S. Garvis (Eds.). Practicing compassion in higher education: Caring for self and others through chal‑
lenging times. Routledge.
Pink, S. (2006). The future of visual anthropology: Engaging the senses. Taylor & Francis.
Pink, S. (2007). Doing visual ethnography. Sage.
Pink, S. (2008). Analysing visual experience. Research Methods for Cultural Studies, 1(1), 124–149.
Pink, S. (2011). Digital visual anthropology: Potentials and challenges. In M. Banks, & J. Ruby (Eds.), 
Made to be seen: Perspectives on the history of visual anthropology, 209–233. University of Chicago 
Press.Photographic data analysis and display 157
Pink, S. (2012). Advances in visual methodology. Sage.
Pink, S. (2023). Doing anthropology forward: Emerging technologies and possible futures. In A. J. Willow 
(Ed.), Anthropological Optimism, 177–191. Routledge.
Strauss, A., & Corbin, J. (1998). Basics of qualitative research techniques. Sage.
Vium, C. (2018). Temporal dialogues: Collaborative photographic re‑enactments as a form of cultural 
critique. Visual Anthropology, 31(4–5), 355–375.DOI: 10.4324/9781003034773-10
This chapter addresses the question: What should writing up research look like in visual qualita‑
tive research? Different examples of writing with photographs by qualitative researchers that 
centralize photography or other image‑based data to enhance, illuminate, or otherwise produce 
a depth to the writing process will be shared. The different forms of writing with text and image 
are discussed. Narrative photography as a genre is explored, including the use of photo essays. 
The ways in which researchers can combine photographs to tell a story, along with words and 
text, are central to this chapter. Finally, publication of articles with photographs and other outlets 
for visual research will be suggested. Tips and exercises are offered at the end of the chapter.
Gillian Rose paved the way for a “critical visual methodology” that she operationally defined as
an approach that thinks about the visual in terms of the cultural significance, social prac‑
tices and power relations in which it is embedded; and that means thinking about the 
power relations that produce, are articulated through, and can be challenged by, ways of 
seeing and imaging.
(Rose, 2001, p. 3)
The use of photographs for and with writing, making decisions related to exhibitions displaying 
research findings, and constructing narratives all have implications for how qualitative inquiry 
can impact people and derive significance. As Pink (2011) describes, for a qualitative researcher, 
writing is a type of knowledge construction that assimilates and synthesizes the data collected 
by the researcher based on the researchers’ eye or way of seeing and experiencing. It is through 
writing and arranging photographs in particular ways that one can differentiate between illus‑
trative uses of photography and contextual narrative, argumentative, or demonstrative uses. In 
writing with photography, one combines the identity of a scholar with that of an artist or creative 
persona.
Writing and displaying photographic research
Writing with images presents challenges since communicating research findings that are cen‑
tered on images or supported by images is not easy. Displaying research findings via photo‑
graphs can at times be illustrative and clear, or they can also be confusing. Pictures in place of a 
thousand words allow the viewer the freedom to explore but can also present too many choices 
and information that can prevent sustained engagement. Some scholars believe in letting the 
photographs drive the narrative. Other scholars prefer to use photographs to make specific argu‑
ments or use them as part of a larger data collection process. Storytelling is integral to qualitative 
research and emerges from oral traditions. Research using photography allows for storytelling 
10 Writing, exhibitions, narratives, and 
photographyWriting, exhibitions, narratives, and photography 159
using several formats for the recording and dissemination of research findings. Stories can be 
told using photography alongside other forms of arts‑based research and visual research.
One example of storytelling through the use of photographs is Leslie Marmon Silko’s (1981) 
Storyteller. It comprises 26 photographs and 67 pieces of writing that include short stories 
and poetry as well as narrative prose. The photographs have been taken by four generations 
of family and friends. Silko’s use of photographs in her writing is a response to the history of 
invasive surveillance or commercial photography that objectified Native Americans. Her work 
instead showcases photographs taken by Native Americans, a counter‑narrative to the imagery 
produced by Euro‑Americans that built up and magnified the stereotypes of Native Americans 
in the Euro‑American minds. The photographs were taken by Silko’s father, Lee H. Marmon, 
and retell the Laguna stories from the perspective of communal and relational interwoven sto‑
ries. The short stories provide a counter‑narrative and the photographs are a historical record of 
the stories that are passed down from one generation to the next via oral traditions. For qualita‑
tive researchers, Silko’s work can be seen as an exemplar of an autoethnography that uses fic‑
tive writing and photographs to tell a visually compelling story of the experiences of the Native 
American peoples by revisiting and renarrating dominant historical viewpoints and replacing it 
with indigenous perspectives.
Disseminating with evocative writing styles
Although writing in qualitative research is the most commonly used form of dissemination, 
presentations notwithstanding, visual qualitative research, particularly photography, allows for 
a variety of platforms where such dissemination can take place. Digital platforms can structure 
the types of writing for sharing research findings. YouTube, X (formerly Twitter), Snapchat, 
blogs, Pinterest, and Vimeo are all venues for disseminating research findings and creating a 
space for advocacy and change that can reach a greater number of people. Photography can raise 
questions about the depiction of reality or the concrete façade behind which lie many layers of 
meaning. While a vast array of images are shared and reshared every day, the casual image is 
often edited, changed, and made‑over to resemble and represent a particular reality or image 
that the participants want to convey. Visualization software becomes part of the photographic 
process of both taking and disseminating.
Research with photography opens up new writing modes, and early‑career researchers can be 
encouraged to experiment with new formats and structures. One way of writing with photogra‑
phy would be to combine different writing styles, including poetry and short stories or dialogs 
that are drawn from the data to tell the stories interwoven with photography. The findings can 
be arranged by themes, and the narrative can showcase photographs and different images or 
art within photography to layer the narrative in ways that allow the audience to interact with 
the text and visual narrative. Further, it also opens up the possibility of moving away from a 
single shared meaning in the writing to invite readers to approach the texts from their own lived 
experiences so that the research narrative is not a static truth but remains partial, deconstructed, 
and problematized. Writing can be used to complicate the knowledge that appears to be overtly 
presented in photographs. Using photographs in the dissemination of research results requires 
researchers to be aware of the ethical dimensions of data display. Participants should be able 
to retain the power to remove any photographs before they are publicly shared or displayed. 
However, despite all attempts by researchers to safeguard the people and processes, it is also 
true that once in the public domain, the sharing, interpreting, reinterpreting, and resharing of 
such photographs can become extremely difficult to control by the participants or the research‑
ers. When displaying data, people familiar with the sites can recognize them and might interpret 160 Writing, exhibitions, narratives, and photography
images beyond the intention of the researcher. One response has been to blur photographs or 
pixilate them. In such cases, the loss of the image needs to be taken into consideration. However, 
it is during interviews that such photographic data can be used for eliciting thick descriptions 
that can to some degree enrich the findings by allowing the audience to visualize the experi‑
ences of the participants in the study. Altering and pixilating photographs have been regarded as 
problematic since they can diminish the affective power of the findings. However, one way to 
mitigate the loss has been to use different evocative writing styles, like poetry or short stories, 
to retain the creativity and art of the photographic data.
Ziegner (2023), for example, has used different forms of writing along with photographs 
to create a deeper understanding of phenomena. He wrote an experimental research report. 
Referring to it as a polynomial composition, Ziegner has used screenplays, music, and dance 
to showcase different photographs and explain them. Ziegner’s research is an examination of 
the personal experiences of violence in the GDR between 1986 and 2016. He examined photo‑
graphs related to 21 specific events. His methodology cuts across several areas of study, includ‑
ing archival research, conceptual photography, and documentary photography. In writing and 
recording research, he used experimental writing. He traveled to the 21 sites that he wished to 
examine, took multiple photographs in color and black and white, and reviewed them in detail. 
He wrote in different formats, including short stories, fictive dialogs, and reflexive journaling. In 
presenting his research, he has also used performative lectures in which the audience is actively 
involved.
Ulmer (2018) placed photography alongside poetry and argued that everyday art, photog‑
raphy, and poetry are similar. Inspired by Eric Manning’s (2016) concept of the minor gesture 
(Manning, 2016), which are subtle movements that unfold around us every day, Ulmer (2018) 
advocated a slowing down in research to take notice of what is unfolding around us. Photo‑
graphs can help slow us down if we start to take them in as visual experiences. She points 
out that people communicate every day through photographic interventions when they write 
a caption and share a photograph with each other. Hashtags #SlowWriting and #minorgesture 
on social media point to the popularity of the movement to slow down, listen, and respond to 
everyday environments.
Disseminating research through visual abstracts and exhibitions
Ramos and Concepcion (2020) described disseminating research through visual abstracts. Vis‑
ual methods of writing can include a visual summary of the findings or the abstract. A second 
approach could involve an interactive visual method that can take research findings to different 
audiences beyond the academic community.
Scholars are looking beyond conferences and article publications in journals to disseminate 
their research to wider audiences. X (formerly Twitter), Instagram, and other similar platforms 
are being used for social media dissemination. However, social media users tend to look for 
brevity, while scholarly articles tend to be lengthy and detailed arguments. To mitigate this 
issue, scholars have argued that article abstracts need to be presented in ways that can allow 
users and readers to determine more immediately whether or not it is in their interest to pursue 
the entire publication by using a visual abstract to help attract readers and perhaps persuade 
them to invest in reading the full piece (Brownlee & Ibrahim, 2020).
The X platform (formerly Twitter) uses a model by which the dissemination of research is 
shifted from the user who seeks out articles of interest to them to the researcher who transmits 
it to those interested directly. Yet, the simple act of posting a tweet about a journal article is not 
enough; it needs the right use of hashtags and the text of the tweet to influence and create a wider Writing, exhibitions, narratives, and photography 161
readership. The visual abstract takes advantage of an audience that can process visuals faster 
than text. Tweets on X (formerly Twitter) containing the hashtag #visualabstract can be viewed 
for examples of visual abstracts. Medical journals have adopted the strategy for dissemination 
of research through visual abstracts. In order to use visual images as a dissemination strategy, 
photographs that violate privacy or copyright laws or that are problematic for ethical reasons 
should be avoided. Further, scholars need to become cognizant of how to design the visual 
abstract so that it is pleasing to the audience. Finally, the researcher needs to use the correct 
image file for uploading on social media platforms.
A second type of visual abstract is the Translational Visual Abstract (Rodrigues, 2021). Trans‑
lational visual abstracts are meant to translate or disseminate research for nonacademic audi‑
ences. Academic conferences award scholars for outstanding public communication of research. 
While such research dissemination is often textual, using photography to communicate with the 
general public can be another way to increase the visibility of the research as well as communi‑
cate in ways that can create change and advocacy. This practice can help to focus on the findings 
of research as applicable to different groups of audiences. For example, the same educational 
research findings can be extracted and shared with parents, administrators, and teachers differ‑
ently, and the application for each group also made clear. While translational research practices 
have advocated visual artifacts, photographs as visual data or representation of findings that are 
pertinent can supplement or evoke a curiosity to learn more about the research.
One popular and well‑used method for disseminating findings using photography has been 
the use of exhibitions. Exhibitions have been especially used in photovoice research in order to 
facilitate action and change.
Different ways to write with photography
Latham (2003) discussed photodiaries and argued that photographs allow for a fluidity and feel 
or the depicting of emotions and sensory experiences of the participant or research photogra‑
pher. He suggested that photo‑diaries were a type of performance that enhanced the interviews 
that could follow if participants were asked to generate them.
Hayles (2012) suggests that reading and interpreting where the move from individual pho‑
tographs to a stream of photographs online has already taken place, the way to engage the 
photographs needs to shift from a close reading to a fast, casual scan or skimming to take note 
of more than serious meaning in images. Instead, as researchers, we should be looking for play, 
humor, silliness, and creativity.
Pink (2007) discusses the possibilities of photo essays and hyperlinking photographs within 
scholarly writing in journals. Hypermedia has potential but also the drawback of being vulner‑
able to manipulation of data, leading to a change in the importance or meaning of the photo‑
graphs. Some researchers publish the text version in journals and post the photographs on their 
own websites. Others try publishing in open‑source, peer‑reviewed publications.
Tay (2016) regards himself as a “bricoleur,” using different practices to write with photogra‑
phy. He brings together street photography, writing with poetry, and autoethnography in order to 
create a new type of scholarship in which different art forms can be combined.
McLean and Rowsell (2015) discuss their research, where they experimented with multiple 
literacies and registered with high school students. They examined how high school students 
in two different schools who struggled with literacy could be supported and challenged. Youth 
have an affinity for photography and visual expressions, which can be termed new literacies 
alongside traditional academic literacies that schools teach and encourage. McLean and Rowsell 
(2015) argue that multimodal instruction that combines traditional with digital modes can help 162 Writing, exhibitions, narratives, and photography
students’ diverse literacies. They found that photography allowed students to think about nar‑
rative differently. They expanded the ways in which they thought about narrative by moving 
beyond point of view, character, setting, and story boards to visual metaphors, lighting, and 
angles. They were challenged to think of ways in which photography can convey a particular 
message or story. McLean and Rowsell (2015) argued that it is important to situate traditional 
literacies alongside visual literacies that are arts‑based and broaden the landscape of writing. 
This is relevant for qualitative researchers who are attempting to experiment with ways to write 
up research that uses photography as a method. It reminds qualitative researchers of the multiple 
registers and literacies that need to be amalgamated and storied for meaning‑making. Further, it 
makes qualitative researchers aware of the ways in which photographs, like textual narratives, 
can be used or displayed purposefully to convey a particular message or meaning.
McLean and Rowsell (2015) further suggested using and applying Rosenblatt’s theory of 
transaction and transformation to different registers and genres, like visual data. Rosenblatt’s 
(2005) theory of transaction frames the process of meaning‑making and refers to the new 
text that is created when a person responds to another text. According to Rosenblatt (2005), 
readers of texts usually adopt one of two stances in reading. An efferent stance is one where 
the reader looks for and gleans information from the text. A second is the aesthetic stance, 
where the reader focuses on the experience they have with the text. Readers typically move 
back and forth from each stance, gathering information even while experiencing the emo‑
tional aspects of texts. A third stance in reading is suggested by Smith (2012), who discusses 
a deferent stance in which readers typically defer to the interpretations of others becoming 
consumers rather than producers of knowledge. Smith (2012) suggests that it is important 
for students to acquire the confidence in their own interpretive skills to move from defer‑
ent stances to efferent and aesthetic stances. Smith (2012) warns that the deferent stance is 
one that promotes a narrowing of the focus in ways that are counterproductive. For qualita‑
tive researchers, meaning‑making and meaning generation are crucial skills that involve both 
informational and emotional content. In examining the different ways in which qualitative 
texts can be approached, the three stances described above can be reminders of the importance 
of integrating the efferent and aesthetic while being aware of the times when one adopts a 
deferent stance.
If we apply Rosenblatt’s theory to visual research, specifically photography, the text or inter‑
pretation of photographs can represent the transaction. The interaction between the viewer and 
the photograph allows for new meanings to be created. Further, such texts are also transforma‑
tive for Rosenblatt, as such texts contain not only the meaning intended by the original pho‑
tographer but now embody some of the thoughts and identity of the interpreter. In other words, 
people bring “funds of knowledge” (Moll et al., 2006) with them or the sum of their own past 
experiences and contexts to interpret a photograph and create meaning that is integrated with 
the meaning that the photographer wished to convey to create a new text. The stances adopted 
by the readers of visual images can help early career researchers examine their own reading and 
interpreting of photographs for research. Qualitative researchers can become more aware of 
when they adopt different stances in viewing and interpreting photography and when they adopt 
the efferent or aesthetic stance. Visuals allow for a greater freedom of expression and a greater 
ease of both production and interpretation because of the popularity and prevalence of everyday 
visual culture. In writing up qualitative research, multimodal practices can generate a range of 
writing, including visual narratives, textual narratives accompanied by photographs, as well as 
photographic collages accompanied by texts. The moving image can also be included in such 
dissemination, as links to videos using audiovisuals and text can be included in the writing up 
of research.Writing, exhibitions, narratives, and photography 163
Narrative photography
Narrative photography is a genre of photography that tells a story or conveys a message through 
a series of images. Unlike individual photographs that capture a single moment or scene, nar‑
rative photography uses a sequence of pictures to create a cohesive and meaningful story. 
This storytelling approach allows photographers to explore themes, emotions, and concepts 
in a more extended and nuanced manner. Narrative photography can be found in various con‑
texts, including documentary photography, photojournalism, conceptual art, and social science 
research projects. It allows researchers using photographs to explore social issues, personal 
experiences, or abstract concepts in a visually compelling way. The viewer is encouraged to 
engage with the images and interpret the story. Ultimately, narrative photography is a versatile 
and dynamic genre that encourages researchers to use their creativity to communicate stories, 
messages, and experiences in a visually compelling way. It provides a platform for storytelling 
that goes beyond the confines of a single image, allowing for a more comprehensive exploration 
of themes and ideas.
Key elements of narrative photography that have direct relevance for qualitative inquiry 
include:
Storytelling: The primary goal is to convey a narrative or message through a sequence of images. 
The story may be linear or more abstract, relying on the viewer’s interpretation.
Sequence and Flow: Narrative photographs are usually presented in a specific order, creating 
a flow that guides the viewer through the story. The arrangement of images is crucial for 
maintaining coherence.
Characters and Settings: Narrative photography often includes identifiable characters and set‑
tings, much like characters and scenes in a story. These elements help viewers connect with 
the narrative on a more personal level.
Emotion and Atmosphere: Photographers use composition, lighting, and other visual elements 
to evoke emotions and create a particular atmosphere that enhances the narrative.
Context and Details: The inclusion of relevant details and context is essential for a complete 
and immersive storytelling experience. Photographers may use close‑ups, wide shots, and 
various angles to provide a comprehensive view of the narrative.
Captioning and Text: Some narrative photography projects incorporate captions, text, or accom‑
panying written stories to provide additional context or guide the viewer’s understanding. 
This can add depth to the narrative and offer insights that may not be immediately apparent 
in the images alone.
Single Image versus Series: While narrative photography often involves a series of images, a 
powerful story can also be told through a single photograph. The challenge lies in capturing 
a moment that encapsulates a significant part of the narrative.
Temporal Element: Narrative photography can explore the passage of time, showing changes 
or developments within the story. This may involve capturing moments at different points in 
time to create a dynamic and evolving narrative.
Symbolism and Metaphor: Photographers often use symbolism and metaphorical elements 
within their images to convey deeper meanings and messages. This adds layers to the narra‑
tive and invites viewers to interpret the photographs on a symbolic level.
Personal versus Collective Narratives: Narrative photography can focus on individual experi‑
ences or tell broader, collective stories. It can document personal journeys, cultural shifts, or 
societal changes, depending on the photographer’s intention.
Experimental Approaches: Some narrative photographers experiment with unconventional 
storytelling techniques, such as nonlinear narratives, fragmented sequences, or abstract 164 Writing, exhibitions, narratives, and photography
representations. This allows for creative expression and challenges traditional storytelling 
norms.
Narrative Collaborations: In some cases, photographers collaborate with other artists, writers, 
or individuals involved in the narrative to create a more multidimensional and collaborative 
storytelling experience.
Environmental and Conceptual Narratives: Narrative photography is not limited to document‑
ing physical events. It can also explore conceptual narratives, emotions, or abstract ideas 
through carefully composed images that provoke thought and reflection.
Qualitative researchers have embraced narrative photography as a valuable method for gather‑
ing and analyzing data, particularly in fields such as sociology, anthropology, education, and 
psychology. Here are some common approaches and considerations within qualitative research 
when utilizing narrative photography:
Photovoice: Photovoice is a participatory research method that involves giving cameras to 
participants to document their lives, experiences, and perspectives. Participants take photo‑
graphs based on specific themes or prompts and then discuss the images in group settings. 
This method empowers participants to share their stories through visual representation.
Visual Ethnography: Visual ethnography combines traditional ethnographic methods with vis‑
ual elements, including photography. Researchers may use photographs to supplement writ‑
ten field notes, providing a more comprehensive understanding of the cultural context being 
studied.
Narrative Inquiry: Narrative inquiry is an approach that focuses on the stories people tell about 
their experiences. Narrative photography can be integrated into this method by having par‑
ticipants create visual narratives through images. Researchers may then analyze the visual 
narratives alongside written or verbal interviews conveying narratives in relation to the pur‑
pose of the study to gain a deeper understanding of the participants’ experiences.
Photo Elicitation Interviews: Researchers use photographs as prompts during interviews to 
encourage participants to discuss their experiences more openly. This method can help 
uncover deeper meanings and emotions associated with the images. Participants may be 
asked to explain the context of the photos or elaborate on their feelings and reactions.
Digital Storytelling: Digital storytelling involves using multimedia elements, including nar‑
rative photography, to create a digital narrative. Participants, often with the guidance of 
researchers, compile a series of images with voiceovers, music, or text to convey a story. 
This approach can be a powerful way to explore and share personal narratives.
Autoethnography: Autoethnography involves researchers reflecting on their own experiences 
within a cultural context. Narrative photography can be used by researchers to visually docu‑
ment and analyze their own experiences, adding a personal dimension to the research process.
Thematic Analysis of Photographs: Researchers may conduct thematic analysis on the content 
of a series of photographs. This involves identifying recurring themes, patterns, or symbols 
within the images to extract meaningful insights about the research topic.
Contextual Understanding: Qualitative researchers using narrative photography often emphasize 
the importance of understanding the context surrounding the images. This includes considering 
the cultural, social, and historical factors that may influence the interpretation of the photographs.
Intersectionality: Researchers increasingly recognize the importance of considering intersec‑
tionality in narrative photography. This involves acknowledging and exploring the intercon‑
nected nature of various social identities (such as race, gender, class, and sexuality) within 
the narratives captured through images.Writing, exhibitions, narratives, and photography 165
Community‑Based Research: Many qualitative researchers opt for community‑based partici‑
patory research (CBPR) approaches when incorporating narrative photography. In these 
projects, researchers collaborate closely with community members, involving them in the 
design, data collection, and interpretation of the visual narratives.
Digital Platforms and Social Media: The rise of digital platforms and social media has influ‑
enced how narrative photography is shared and disseminated. Researchers may leverage 
online platforms for photo‑sharing, engaging a broader audience, and allowing participants 
to contribute to ongoing discussions.
Reflexivity and Positionality: Qualitative researchers often emphasize reflexivity and position‑
ality when using narrative photography. Acknowledging the researcher’s influence on the 
research process and considering how their background and perspective may impact the 
interpretation of visual data is crucial.
Multimodal Approaches: Researchers may adopt multimodal approaches that combine vari‑
ous forms of data, including narrative photography, interviews, and written narratives. This 
approach allows for a more comprehensive understanding of the research topic.
Collaborative Analysis: Collaborative analysis involves working with participants or other 
stakeholders in the analysis phase. This can enhance the validity and richness of interpreta‑
tions by incorporating diverse perspectives.
Cultural Sensitivity: Researchers must be culturally sensitive when working with narrative pho‑
tography in diverse contexts. Understanding the cultural meanings embedded in visual rep‑
resentations is essential for accurate interpretation.
Longitudinal Studies: Some qualitative researchers opt for longitudinal studies using narrative 
photography, capturing changes and developments over an extended period. This approach 
provides a dynamic perspective on experiences and narratives.
Digital Ethnography: With the increasing prevalence of digital technologies, researchers may 
conduct digital ethnography using narrative photography in online spaces. This involves 
studying online communities, social media platforms, or virtual environments to explore 
digital narratives.
These approaches highlight the ways in which qualitative researchers integrate narrative pho‑
tography into their methodologies, allowing for a richer and more nuanced exploration of indi‑
viduals’ experiences and perspectives. The combination of visual and verbal data can provide 
a holistic understanding of complex social phenomena. As the field of qualitative research con‑
tinues to evolve, the integration of narrative photography offers researchers innovative ways 
to explore, represent, and understand complex human experiences and social phenomena. 
Researchers often adapt their approaches based on the specific research questions, context, and 
ethical considerations associated with their projects.
Photo essays as a form of narrative photography
Photo essays are a visual storytelling technique that involves combining a series of photographs 
to convey a narrative, explore a theme, or communicate a message. Researchers use photo 
essays, a form of narrative photography, in various ways to document, analyze, and present 
qualitative data. “Photo essays serve primarily to explain an argument because they exploit the 
rhetorical and narrative potential of images, not just their figurative or representational func‑
tions” (Marin & Roldan, 2010, p. 13). Marin and Roldan (2010) raised essential methodological 
questions for researchers to consider when designing a research project using photos – “How 
should we differentiate illustrative uses of photographs in educational research from contextual, 166 Writing, exhibitions, narratives, and photography
narrative, argumentative or demonstrative uses?” (Marin & Roldan, 2010, p. 8). Marin and 
Roldan (2010) also contributed important clarifications, including a lexicon and operationalized 
definitions for researchers engaging in photo essays projects, assisting with distinctions between 
photo series, photo essay, photographic discourse, photo abstract, photo conclusion, and photo‑
graphic quotation. In addition, they addressed the terminology associated with the various uses 
of photographs within qualitative research, such as “photo elicitation, photojournalism, photo 
montage and photo story [which] have existed for some time; others like photo activism, photo 
dialogue, photo interview, photo inventory, photo poem, photo questionnaire, photo voice or 
photo writing are newer” (Marin & Roldan, 2010, p. 9).
Below are some examples of how qualitative researchers use photo essays in their work:
Researchers start by planning the structure and design of the research project and the role 
photo essays will play – will the photos be generated as part of data collection or will found 
photographs be arranged and examined as part of an analysis process? Photo essays often begin 
with the collection of narrative photography. Researchers may provide participants with cam‑
eras or encourage them to use their smartphones to capture images related to the research topic. 
The goal is to gather a series of photographs that collectively tell a story or represent a particular 
aspect of the participants’ experiences. Alternatively, the photographs as data sources might not 
be newly generated photos but rather found photos located in established archives, in online 
repositories, or may reside in personal collections.
After collecting a pool of photographs, researchers carefully select images that align with the 
narrative they aim to convey. The selected images are then sequenced in a specific order to cre‑
ate a cohesive and compelling visual story. The sequencing is crucial for maintaining the flow 
of the narrative and guiding the viewer through the intended message. Researchers analyze the 
visual elements within each photograph and across the entire photo essay. This involves examin‑
ing composition, lighting, colors, symbols, and other visual cues to uncover nuanced meanings 
and messages embedded in the images.
Thematic analysis can be applied to identify recurring themes, patterns, or motifs within 
the photo essay. Researchers look for commonalities across images to derive insights into the 
research topic. This analysis may involve coding and categorizing visual elements to understand 
the underlying narratives. This process may also involve determining the central theme, defin‑
ing the narrative arc, and outlining the key messages or insights researchers want to convey 
through the visual story. Researchers work on developing a narrative that connects the selected 
photographs. This narrative may follow a linear structure or employ more creative and abstract 
storytelling techniques, depending on the research objectives and the nature of the visual data. 
In some cases, researchers involve participants in the process of developing the photo essay. 
Participants may reflect on the selected images, share their interpretations, and contribute to 
shaping the narrative. This collaborative approach adds depth and authenticity to the visual 
story.
Researchers ensure that the contextual factors surrounding the images are considered. This 
includes understanding the cultural, social, and personal contexts in which the photographs 
were taken, providing a more comprehensive interpretation of the visual data. Once the photo 
essay is finalized, researchers use various platforms for presentation and dissemination. This 
could include academic publications, presentations at conferences, online platforms, or com‑
munity events. The goal is to share the research findings in a visually engaging and accessible 
format.
Using photo essays with narrative photography allows researchers to leverage the power of 
visual storytelling, providing a unique and impactful way to communicate research findings Writing, exhibitions, narratives, and photography 167
and engage audiences in a more immersive and emotionally resonant manner. Below are some 
examples of how researchers have integrated photo essays into particular types of research 
projects.
Researchers may integrate photo essays as part of a mixed‑methods approach, combining 
visual data with other qualitative or quantitative methods to gain a more comprehensive under‑
standing of the research topic. The combination of visuals and textual data can enhance the 
richness of the overall analysis. Photo essays can also be used to document changes and devel‑
opments over time. Researchers may capture a series of photographs at different points in the 
research process or over an extended period, allowing for a longitudinal exploration of the 
narrative.
Photo essays can also serve as a tool for community engagement. Researchers may collabo‑
rate with communities, encouraging participants to share their stories through visual narratives. 
This approach fosters a sense of empowerment and shared representation. Researchers often 
use photo essays for educational and advocacy purposes. The visual impact of a well‑crafted 
photo essay can effectively convey complex social issues, making research findings accessible 
to a broader audience and encouraging action based on the findings. With advancements in 
technology, researchers may leverage digital storytelling platforms to create interactive and 
multimedia‑rich photo essays. These platforms allow for a dynamic and engaging presentation 
of the visual narrative.
In some cases, researchers use photo essays as part of autoethnographic approaches, docu‑
menting their own experiences or reflections visually. This adds a personal dimension to the 
research and can enhance the authenticity of the narrative. Researchers may employ visual 
rhetoric analysis to examine how the visual elements within the photo essay contribute to its 
persuasive or communicative power. This approach explores how images are used to convey 
specific messages and influence viewers. When working across different cultures or communi‑
ties, researchers need to be sensitive to cultural interpretations of visual elements. The use of 
symbols, colors, and other visual cues may vary across cultures, influencing the overall meaning 
of the photo essay. Researchers may explore the impact of photo essays by assessing how the 
visual narratives resonate with different audiences. This can involve collecting feedback, con‑
ducting audience surveys, or tracking the dissemination and engagement metrics. Using photo 
essays offers researchers a dynamic and expressive method for qualitative exploration and com‑
munication. The flexibility of this approach allows for creativity and adaptability, making it a 
valuable tool across various research contexts.
Novice researchers often ask the question, what are some potential topics and approaches 
researchers have focused on when using photo essays? Here are a few areas for exploration:
Photovoice Projects:
• Participants capture images that represent their experiences, perspectives, or community 
issues. Examples include a photo essay on the daily lives of individuals in a specific 
neighborhood or a project documenting challenges faced by a marginalized group.
Visual Ethnography:
• Researchers may use photo essays to visually document and analyze cultural practices, 
rituals, or everyday life in a particular community. For instance, a visual ethnography 
could explore the cultural significance of a festival or the impact of globalization on local 
traditions.168 Writing, exhibitions, narratives, and photography
Digital Storytelling in Education:
• Photo essays are used to document educational journeys or experiences. For example, a 
researcher might work with students to create a digital storytelling project capturing their 
learning experiences over a school year.
Health and Well‑being:
• Researchers might employ photo essays to investigate health‑related issues. A project 
could focus on the experiences of individuals managing chronic illnesses or the impact of 
public health interventions within a community.
Environmental and Social Justice:
• Photo essays can be powerful tools for exploring environmental issues or social justice 
concerns. This might involve documenting the effects of climate change on a specific 
region or capturing moments from social justice movements.
Migration and Displacement:
• Researchers may use photo essays to shed light on the experiences of migrants or dis‑
placed populations. This could include documenting the journey of refugees, exploring 
their living conditions, or portraying the resilience of displaced communities.
Urbanization and Architecture:
• Photo essays can visually explore urban development, architectural changes, or the gen‑
trification of neighborhoods. Researchers might use images to depict the evolution of a 
cityscape over time.
Crisis and Conflict:
• Photo essays can provide a visual narrative of crises or conflicts, offering a unique per‑
spective on the impact on individuals and communities. This might include documenting 
the aftermath of natural disasters or the experiences of people living in conflict zones.
Cultural Identity and Heritage:
• Researchers could use photo essays to explore questions of cultural identity and heritage. 
This might involve documenting cultural practices, traditions, or the preservation of cul‑
tural heritage in the face of globalization.
Gender and Social Issues:
• Photo essays can be used to address gender‑related topics and social issues. For instance, 
researchers might document the experiences of women in various professions or explore 
issues related to gender equality and empowerment.
Aging and Life Transitions:
• Researchers might explore the aging process and life transitions through a photo essay. 
This could include documenting the daily lives of older adults, capturing moments of 
reflection, or portraying the challenges and joys of aging.
Family Dynamics:
• Photo essays can be employed to study family dynamics and relationships. For example, 
researchers might work with families to document significant life events, rituals, or the 
evolving dynamics between family members.Writing, exhibitions, narratives, and photography 169
Identity and Intersectionality:
• Photo essays can be a powerful tool for examining aspects of identity, especially in rela‑
tion to intersecting social categories. Researchers might explore how individuals navigate 
and express their identities in diverse social contexts.
Education and Learning Environments:
• Researchers in education might use photo essays to document learning environments, 
student experiences, or educational interventions. This could involve capturing the impact 
of innovative teaching methods or exploring the challenges faced by students.
Workplace Culture and Employment:
• Photo essays can provide insights into workplace culture, employee experiences, or the 
impact of work on individuals. Researchers might visually document the daily routines, 
challenges, and triumphs of workers in different industries.
Community Development and Activism:
• Photo essays can be instrumental in community‑based research and activism. Researchers 
might collaborate with community members to visually document local initiatives, grass‑
roots movements, or the effects of community development projects.
Technology and Social Connectivity:
• Exploring the intersection of technology and society, researchers might use photo essays 
to depict how individuals engage with digital technologies. This could include document‑
ing the use of social media, online communities, or the impact of technology on social 
interactions.
Culinary and Food Culture:
• Photo essays can be employed to explore culinary traditions, food culture, and the role of 
food in different communities. Researchers might visually document the process of food 
production, consumption patterns, or the cultural significance of meals.
Artistic Expression and Creativity:
• Researchers interested in the intersection of art and society might use photo essays to explore 
artistic expression, creativity, and the impact of the arts on individuals and communities. 
This could include documenting art installations, performances, or the work of local artists.
Community Resilience:
• Photo essays can highlight community resilience in the face of challenges. Research‑
ers might visually document how communities come together during times of adversity, 
showcasing the strength, adaptability, and support systems that contribute to resilience.
It’s important to note that the effectiveness of a photo essay lies not only in the images them‑
selves but also in the thoughtful curation, sequencing, and interpretation of those images. Addi‑
tionally, ethical considerations, participant consent, and privacy protection are crucial aspects 
of any research project involving visual data. These examples illustrate the versatility of photo 
essays in capturing and conveying a wide range of human experiences and societal phenomena. 
The choice of topics will depend on the research goals, questions, and the context in which the 
study takes place. Researchers can use photo essays to engage with participants and audiences 
in a visually compelling and emotionally resonant way.170 Writing, exhibitions, narratives, and photography
Exercise 10.1: Combining visual data with qualitative text
Guidelines: In this exercise, first look at Photograph 10.1. Use the following prompts to 
examine the photograph.
1 What do you first think of when you see the photograph? How would you describe the pho‑
tograph in your own words? What story could you tell with the photograph?
2 Read the following text that goes with Photograph 10.1, in the words of a participant in a 
simulated study with older men and women who live independently.
Miriam: I usually get up in the morning and if there is light snow, then I clear it so that 
I can get out of the garage and drive to get my groceries. Light snow is okay, I have my 
boots on, my coat and gloves. I use a shovel that we have had for, I don’t know, probably 
centuries. But last winter, I fell on an icy patch and left the shovel out there for days. The 
snow melted and I just couldn’t bring it back in and I was too embarrassed to ask anyone 
else to do so.
3 How does reading this text above along with the photograph change any meaning that you 
had made with seeing the photograph on its own the first time?
4 How does the textual data add to the photograph?
5 To what extent does the photograph depict the participant’s story or convey her emotions?
6 What is absent from the photograph that is supplemented in the text? What is absent in the 
text that you can see from the photograph?
7 Think of a story or text from a research participant that can accompany the photograph that 
might change the meaning of what you see in the photograph.
Photograph 10.1 Photograph with a shovel, boulder, and light snow. Photo credit: Raji SwaminathanWriting, exhibitions, narratives, and photography 171
Photograph 10.2a A pathway of large flat stones. Photo credit: Raji Swaminathan
Photograph 10.2b A group of people fishing in a river. Photo credit: Raji Swaminathan172 Writing, exhibitions, narratives, and photography
Exercise 10.2: Making Research Findings Accessible
Guidelines: In this exercise, there are two Photographs 10.2a and 10.2b. The first is a photo‑
graph of a walking pathway. And the second is one of a group of people fishing. Both these pho‑
tographs were submitted by doctoral students in a simulated study to depict their experiences.
1 What research questions can you infer from the photographs?
2 If these were to symbolize findings from a study, what would the findings tell us?
3 What are some key takeaways from the photographs?
4 Reflect on what other photographs could have depicted the findings or research question better.
In the following exercises, you are asked to try to use your own photographs or take photo‑
graphs that may be symbolic to depict findings or convey meaning.
Exercise 10.3 (Use your own photograph)
Exercise: Writing with Photography/Using photographs to convey meaning
Guidelines: Read your research data and generate findings. Think of two or three findings 
that you wish to communicate to an audience. In a small group, use existing photographs or take 
photographs that will convey the meaning that you intend. Display it on a board and arrange it 
to showcase a story or claim from your research findings. Share your interpretations with your 
peers. Ask them to describe and interpret what they see in the photographs. How does it compare 
with what you intended to convey? Share what you intended to convey.
Reflection: Use the following questions as prompts for discussion or for journaling.
1 How does the narrative or storytelling method change when you use photographs to tell the 
story?
2 What connections did you make within the photographs?
3 How well do findings get conveyed with photographs?
4 What alternative photographs could you have used to convey findings from research?
Exercise 10.4 (Take or use your own photographs)
Exercise: Writing with photography/conveying meaning through words and photographs
Guidelines: Use photographs that represent or narrate your findings in some ways. Add some 
captions or words along with the photographs. Display your photographs differently to convey 
a finding that you want your audience to understand. Share the same with your peers. How do 
your peers interpret what they see? Share what you wanted to convey with your photographs.
Reflection: Use the following questions as prompts to discuss the display and to journal.
1 How did the addition of captions change how the photographs were received?
2 How does narration change the way in which you select photographs for display?
3 How does dissemination of research results change when done with photographs and the 
writing of captions?
Exercise: Writing with photography: Interpreting findings through photographsWriting, exhibitions, narratives, and photography 173
Guidelines: In a small group, share photographs associated with your research. Ask your 
peers to look at each photograph to see if either as single photographs or as a group, they tell a 
story. After an initial discussion of no more than five minutes, share your research question with 
the group. See if they can associate any story relating to the question from the photographs that 
you have shared. Next, share your research findings in brief. Let your peers now choose photo‑
graphs that they think represent the findings you shared.
Prompts for discussion
1 What prompted you to pick the photographs to share with your peers?
2 What prompted each peer to pick the photograph they thought most representing a particular 
finding?
3 To what extent do the photographs tell a story on their own?
Reflection: As a group, write up the following on an index card or journal to share with your peers.
1 How different is writing up findings compared with sharing findings visually through photo‑
graphic data? What thinking and decision‑making processes are involved in visually narrat‑
ing data versus using photographs with captions or writing alone.
2 To what extent did visual metaphors play a role in your choice of photographs or in 
interpretation?
3 How did this exercise help you to think visually about disseminating research visually?
Exercise 10.5: (take your own photographs) Reading 
photographic images in research
Guidelines: Take a series of six photographs on your research topic. Examine the photo‑
graphs carefully adopting the efferent stance first and then the aesthetic stance. Share your 
thoughts in a research journal or with your peers.
Reflection: What insights did the different stances yield?
How helpful was it to become aware of the different stances that one can adopt in reading and 
interpreting photographs?
Did you at any time take on the deferent stance? If so, in what context?
What obstacles do or could a deferent stance pose? What are some strategies that you can 
think of to counter deferent stances?
Exercise10.6: |(use your own photographs) Reading and 
interrogating a photograph
Guidelines: Take a photograph and generate ten questions that you can ask of it. Generate 
more questions if possible.
Journal Reflection: How did the questions you generated help you?
What types of questions did you generate? Did they include questions that can generate emo‑
tional, interpretive, and informational responses?
Did interrogating the photograph help to counter any deferent stances you might have taken 
in interpreting the photograph?174 Writing, exhibitions, narratives, and photography
Conclusion or a pause in the conversation
We have enjoyed putting this book together and we are reminded yet again about how these 
conversations go on beyond the end of a book. Rather than consider the conclusion as an ending, 
we take it as a pause in the conversation that will be carried on by all interested in the inter‑
sections of qualitative inquiry and photographs. In the different chapters of the book, we have 
discussed how qualitative researchers can use photographic methods for their research projects, 
the theories, and frameworks they could explore, how to conduct different types of research 
with photography, and the enhancement of new knowledge that this might lead researchers to 
create. We have discussed the varieties of photography and the possibilities that they open up, 
whether it be protest photography or interviewing with photography, or participatory action 
research, or place‑based research. We have also discussed different ways to analyze photog‑
raphy and write up photographic research. We have gone into how researchers can use photo 
diaries or photo narratives to present a narrative with photos or enrich the findings and also to 
disseminate research through visual abstracts. We have discussed the issue of ethics with photo‑
graphic research, and some of the challenges with confidentiality given the easy dissemination 
and manipulation of photographs that is possible with software and social media platforms. 
Some ideas that we would like to continue to think about that have been lingering in our minds 
as we wrote this book include the further pedagogical possibilities of photographic research.
In closing, we offer a few provocative quotes about photography that distill some of the ways 
the research community might continue to think about photographic research.
“A Photograph is a secret about a secret, the more it tells you the less you know,” 
Diane Arbus (Politanoff, 2011, Huffington Post, https://www.huffpost.com/entry/diane‑arbus‑
photography_b_996233)
Photographer Diane Arbus’s quote can help qualitative researchers to keep in mind that a 
photograph is a starting place or a spark for curiosity. Looking at photographs as beginnings and 
not the finished product can lead researchers to questions and to uncovering the layers behind 
what went into the production of the photograph. They can serve as tools for interviews, and 
can serve as a way to understand the richness and vitality that is encapsulated in the photograph 
but spills over into life.
“All Photographs are accurate, none of them is the truth” Richard Avedon (1991) 
in Chronicle of Higher Education, https://www.chronicle.com/article/all‑photographs‑are‑
accurate‑none‑of‑them‑is‑the‑truth/
Richard Avedon’s quote resonates with us as qualitative researchers and helps to remind 
us that all truth is partial and that with photography as with any other form of data, we 
see only a portion of it. However, we have also questioned the accuracy of photographs, 
since it has become increasingly easy to alter and make changes to photographs so that 
accuracy can be called into question. And yet, the lesson for qualitative researchers might be to 
look for the whole story, and accept that any photograph will be part of the story, altered or not.
“Seeing is more than a physiological phenomenon… We see not only with our eyes but 
with all that we are and all that our culture is. The artist is a professional see‑er.” – Dorothea 
Lange (PBS Public Broadcasting Service, 2014) https://www.pbs.org/wnet/americanmasters/
dorothea‑lange‑quotes‑by‑dorothea‑lange/3159/
One of the points we have tried to make in this book is that researchers carry more than a 
camera or more than an eye to see when conducting research, the ways of seeing are often a 
result of what we bring to the act of looking or seeing. We have discussed ways to interrupt 
the habitual ways of seeing and thinking. As participant observers and as interviewers in the 
researcher process, the practice of reflexivity or reflecting on our own positionality or how we Writing, exhibitions, narratives, and photography 175
see our own identity in relation to the participants or the activity or the people in a photograph, 
can help move us away from our habits and into an awareness of how we see what we see.
In teaching us a new visual code, photographs alter and enlarge our notions of what is 
worth looking at and what we have a right to observe. They are a grammar and, even more 
importantly, an ethics of seeing.
(Susan Sontag, 1977, p. 3)
Susan Sontag reminds us of the ethics involved in photography, the vulnerability of the 
participants who might be photographed and the rich possibilities that open up with a new 
way of looking and seeing through the eye of the camera. Researchers can use photographic 
methods to draw our attention to what we might have otherwise not have observed, to see what 
is around us.
Summary and An Invitation to Continue the Conversation
In this chapter, various ways of dissemination of photographic research through exhibitions, 
narratives, visual abstracts were discussed. The ways in which researchers can combine pho‑
tographs to tell a story, along with words and text, are central to this chapter. Some tips and 
exercises for the practice of writing with photography were also presented.
Overall, in this book, we have pointed out the ways in which photography can draw attention 
to issues of rights, the voices of people who are usually not heard and to question any easy solu‑
tions to equity issues in research processes. As qualitative researchers, we are constantly finding 
new ways to look, listen, see, and hear that can lead to actions toward a more equitable society. 
We invite early‑career researchers and all qualitative researchers to continue raising questions 
about possibilities and to participate in the on‑going sharpening of the ability to remain curious. 
As researchers the incorporation of the visual, such as photographs, provides endless opportuni‑
ties to enhance meaningful narratives.
References
Avedon, R. (1991, July 10). All photographs are accurate, none of them is the truth. The Chroni‑
cle of Higher Education. Retrieved on April 27, 2024, from https://www.chronicle.com/article/
all‑photographs‑are‑accurate‑none‑of‑them‑is‑the‑truth/
Brownlee, S. A., & Ibrahim, A. M. (2020). Disseminating research and# visual abstracts. In Dimick, J.B., & 
Lubitz, C.C. (Eds.), Health services research, 271–281. Springer.
Hayles, N. K. (2012). How we think: Transforming power and digital technologies. In Berry, D.M. (Eds.), 
Understanding digital humanities (pp. 42–66). London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Latham, A. (2003). Research, performance, and doing human geography: Some reflections on the 
diary‑photograph, diary‑interview method. Environment and Planning A, 35(11), 1993–2017.
Manning, E. (2016). The minor gesture. Duke University Press.
Marin, R., & Roldan, J. (2010). Photo essays and photographs in visual arts‑based educational research. 
International Journal of Education through Art, 6(1), 7–23.
McLean, C. A., & Rowsell, J. (2015). Imagining writing futures: Photography, writing, and technology. 
Reading & Writing Quarterly, 31(2), 102–118.
Moll, L., Amanti, C., Neff, D., & Gonzalez, N. (2006). Funds of knowledge for teaching: Using a quali‑
tative approach to connect homes and classrooms. In Gonzalez, N., Moll, L.C., & Amanti, C. (Eds.), 
Funds of knowledge (pp. 71–87). Routledge.
Pink, S. (Ed.). (2007). Visual interventions: Applied visual anthropology (Vol. 4). Berghahn Books.176 Writing, exhibitions, narratives, and photography
Pink, S. (2011). Sensory digital photography: Re‑thinking ‘moving’ and the image. Visual Studies, 26(1), 
4–13.
Politanoff, E. (2011, October 6). The photograph is a secret about a secret. Huffington Post. Retrieved on 
April 28, 2024, from https://www.huffpost.com/entry/diane‑arbus‑photography_b_996233.
Public Broadcasting Service. (2014, August 25). American Masters, Quotes by Dorothea Lange. 
Retrieved on April 28, 2024, from https://www.pbs.org/wnet/americanmasters/dorothea‑lange‑quotes‑
by‑dorothea‑lange/3159/.
Ramos, E., & Concepcion, B. P. (2020, May). Visual abstracts: Redesigning the landscape of research dis‑
semination. Seminars in nephrology, 40, (3), 291–297.
Rodrigues, J. (2021). Get more eyes on your work: Visual approaches for dissemination and translation of 
education research. Educational Researcher, 50(9), 657–663.
Rose, G. (2001). Visual methodologies: An introduction to the interpretation of visual materials. Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Sage.
Rosenblatt, L. M. (2005). Making meaning with texts: Selected essays. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.
Silko, L. M. (1981). Storyteller. Little, Brown and Company.
Smith, C. H. (2012). Interrogating texts: From deferent to efferent and aesthetic reading practices. Journal 
of Basic Writing, 31(1), 59–79.
Sontag, S. (1977). On photography. Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
Tay, E. (2016). Writing photography, seeing poetry and creative writing scholarship. New Writing, 13(3), 
387–401.
Ulmer, J. B. (2018). Minor gestures: Slow writing and everyday photography. Qualitative Research in 
Psychology, 15(2–3), 317–322.
Ziegner, K. (2023). A history of violence: Photography and writing as an experience, experiment and 
insight. In De Brabandere, N. (Ed.), Media, Practice and Theory: Tracking emergent thresholds of 
experience, pp.115‑ 130. Vernon Press. Index
Note: Bold page numbers refer to tables and italic page numbers refer to figures.
absent photographs 113, 115
Abu Ghraib 82–84
Alam, A. 53
Ali, S. R. 85
The Americans (Frank) 80
Amerson, R. 116
Anderson, K. 54–55
anticolonialism approach 43
Arbus, Diane 174
archival photos 62–64, 65–66, 74–75, 75, 77
artistic analysis, archival photos 63
arts‑based approach 1, 42
audience frames 29
authoritative voice 50, 70
auto‑driven approach 13
autoethnography 164, 167
Avedon, R. 174
Balakrishnan, A. 35
Balinese culture 2
Banks, M. 11
Barnard, George 63
Barthes, R. 3, 23, 28
Bas, B. 82
Bateson, G. 2, 29, 52
Baudrillard, J. 27
Baumann, S. E. 55
Bendiner‑Viani, G. 100–101
Bhat, D. 79
Bhatia, P. 79
biographical and autobiographical research 25–26
Black, M. 117
Bohm, D. 30
Boorstin, J. 35
Bourdieu, P. 31–32, 45–46, 139–140; concept of 
habitus 31
Brady, Mathew 63
Bravington, A. 131
Brecht, B. 28
Brennen, B. 62
Bromberg, N. 99
Buckley, M. E. 46
Burkholder, C. 73
Burris, M. A. 2, 51
Bystander: A History of Street Photography
(Meryerowitz and Westerbeck) 80
Call‑Cummings, M. 52
Cappello, M. 95
Carey, J. 29
Catalani, C. 45
cellphilms 72–73
cell phone photography 130
Chalfen, R. 22, 23, 29, 33, 50, 70, 79
Chapman, M. V. 136–137
Christmann, G. B. 139
Citrin, J. 82
Cleaver, E. 31
Clifford, J. 97
Close, H. 10–11, 46, 51
Codes of Ethics 12
coding photographs 140–141, 153, 154, 154, 
154–155; as part of data analysis 140–141
Cohen, A. 100
collaborative processes 24
collaborative video and filmmaking 55–56
collective voice 51, 55
Collier, J. J. 3
community‑based participatory research (CBPR) 
approach 165
community‑based photography 79–80
community resilience 169
Concepcion, B. P. 160
conceptual photography 24
consciousness‑raising method 43
consent and confidentiality 8–11, 124, 145
consumer voice 50, 70
Corbin, J. 138
Cox, A. 34–35
critical frameworks 39, 43–44
critical voice 50, 70
crowdsourced photography 80178 Index
Dados, N. 28
data analysis 140
data elicitation 110
decolonizing method 119–121
Deleuze, G. 27–28; theory of folding and 
unfolding for photographic research 27–28
democratic witnessing 78–89; anger 81–82; ethical 
dilemmas 83–84; news agencies 86; social 
media platforms 83; social movements 81, 
82; solidarity and collective action 81; United 
States Civil Rights movement 85
digital photography 100
dignity 7, 11, 14–15, 19, 69, 83, 84, 136
Dockney, J. 72
documentary and photojournalism 24; 
documentary photography 2, 3, 101
Drew, S. 141
Eisner, E. 22, 23
Elliot, D. L. 117
Ellsworth, E. 44
emotional expression 24
emphasis framing 29
empowerment 7
environmental analysis, archival photos 63
ethics 4, 86, 174, 175; anxiety 8–9; and 
challenges, photographs ownership 16, 17,
18; confidentiality limits 12–13; consent 
and confidentiality 10–11; consequentialist 
approaches 8; data visualization 149; dignity 
11, 14; early career researchers 13–14; ethics 
of care approach 8; IRB committees 13–14; 
parental consent 10; participant consent 11; 
participant vulnerability 12–13; photographic 
documentation 8; principalist approaches 8; 
and protocols 57; reflexive photography 14; 
researcher positionality 18, 19; researcher 
vulnerability 13; social media 19, 83; standards 
of 15–16; technical manipulation 7; technology 
tools, implications 16–17; vulnerability issues 
11; youth 9–10
ethics and photographic visual research see ethics
Ewald, W. 45, 47
exhibitions: disseminating research through visual 
abstracts and 160–161; and presentation, 
galleries 24
exhibitions and photography 175; visual abstracts 
160–161
experimental approaches 24
expressive photography and performing urban 
places 101–102
Fairey, T. 30
family photography 3
Farello, A. 10
Ferran, Anne 100
Fiske, J. 138
found photographs 68–69
framing theory 29–30
Frank, R.: The Americans 80
Freire, P. 30, 43–44, 116
Frith, H. 113
Fuchs, C. 83
Galtung, J. 85
Gardner, Alexander 63
Garrard, R. 99
Geelan, D. 131
Gilman, S. L. 100
Gleason, T. R. 29
Glover, T. D. 95
Goffman, E. 29, 71
Gold, S. J. 12
Goodman, N. 117
Gross, L. 11
Gruenewald, D. A. 99
guided tour, as methodology for understanding 
place 100–101
Guillemin, M. 141
Hall, S. 23, 138–139
Haran, B. 79
Harper, D. 2, 98
Hart, T. B. 72
Hasse, C. 131
Hayles, N. K. 161
Heath, S. 31
Heng, T. 25
Higgins, K. 9
Higgins, M. 45–47
Hilman, T. 33–34
Hine, L. W. 43, 75, 78
Hjorth, L. 33
Hodgetts, D. 115
Holm, G. 25, 129, 130
hooks, b. 44, 50
Huff, L. A. 95–96
Hug, T. 131
Hurworth, R. 25
Husain, M. P. M. 48
hypermedia 161
identity and representation, photography 24
Images of Academic Science project (Metcalfe) 99
informed consent 15–16, 118
Instagram and Snapchat, social media 35–36
Institutional Review Board (IRB) committees 
13–14
interactive photography 24
interviews and photography 1, 3, 9, 10, 25, 30, 31, 
47, 49, 65, 68–69, 95, 98, 111–114, 124–126,
126, 160, 164, 174; absent photographs 113, 
115; data elicitation 110; decolonizing method 
119–121; ethical considerations 124; field 
photo comparisons 120; interdisciplinary 
collaboration 110; narrative strategies 116–117; Index 179
photo albums 116–117; photo‑elicitation 
117, 119, 120, 127; photographic analysis 
software 123–124; photographic data 109–110, 
113; photo maps comparisons 120; posed 
photographs 116–117; qualitative research 
interviews 117–119; reflexive photography 
115–116; visual data 109–110, 113; visual 
metaphors 117; visual narratives 120; VR 
technology 121–123
IRB committees see Institutional Review Board 
(IRB) committees
Jarldorn, M. 2
Johnston, G. 46
Joinson, A. N. 29
Kanjwal, H. 79
Katz, J. 34
Keremane, G. 26
Kharroub, T. 82
Kia‑Keating, M. 55
King, N. 131
Knoblauch, H. 72
Krämer, N. C. 131
Kroon, A. 101
land, place, context and photographic arts: 
decolonizing methodologies 95; digital 
photography 100; environmental issues 94; 
expressive photography 101–102; photo 
elicitation method 101; photographic place and 
site 91–92; photomapping 93; place attachment 
95–96; repeat photography 98–100, 105; sense 
of place 94, 104, 104; storyscapes 92–93, 
103, 103; travel photography 96–97; urban 
environments 94; voluntourism 97
Lange, D. 78, 174
Langmann, S. 11, 14
Larsen, J. 32
Latham, A. 161
Lather, P. 44
Leavy, P. 4
Lee, R. 74
Leffler, W. K. 74
Lewin, K. 43
Livingston, W. G. 116
Lorenz, C. 117
Loxley, A. 4
Lykes, M. B. 49–51
Mackenzie, M. 94
Majumdar, A. 101
Manning, E. 160
Marin, R. 165–166
Marks, L. U. 28
Marmon, Lee H. 159
Marshall, K. 35
Marwick, A. E. 35–36
Maynard, Ricky 100
McAllister, K. 53
McGill, M. 32–33
McKay, J. 26
McKenzie, M. 102
McLaughlan, R. 123
McLean, C. A. 161–162
McNaughton, M. J. 137–138
Mead, M. 2, 52
Meiselas, Susan 79
Meryerowitz, Joel: Bystander: A History of Street 
Photography 80
Metcalfe, A. S. 99
Miller, K. 13–14
Miller, S. C. 17
Minkler, M. 45
Moran, M. J. 46, 51
Muholi, Zanele 79
multisensory research approach 69
Murray, D. C. 33
narrative photography 158, 163–169; elements of 
163–164; photo essays 165–169; qualitative 
research 164–165
narratives and photography see narrative 
photography; and storytelling 24; strategies 
116–117
Nath, A. 79
Neath, J. 100
Nordstrom, S. N. 28
Noreiga, A. 73
O’Hara, L. 9
Oksman, T. 117
Olesen, T. 82, 83
Orton, L. 30
O’Sullivan, Timothy 63
Panofsky, Erwin 139
parental consent 10
participant‑driven approach 13
participant‑generated photographs 130
participatory action research (PAR) 4, 36, 65, 
95, 99, 119, 174; advocacy and social change 
48; anticolonialism approach 43; arts‑based 
approach 42; assessment, evaluation, and 
general feedback 48; awareness, environmental 
issues 48; challenges 54; collaborative 
video and filmmaking 55–56; community 
collaboration 48; community photography 
projects 53; critical frameworks 43–44; 
cross‑cultural lens 57–58; data collection 48; 
dialog stimulation 48; empowerment 46, 48; 
microanalysis strategies 46; origins of 43; 
participation in 52–53; PhotoPAR 49–51; 
photovoice 42, 44–49, 52, 59; process stages 
56; rapport building 56–57, 57; recording 
activities, community 58, 59; reflexivity 48; 180 Index
research projects, long‑term engagement 
48–49; social inequalities 44; social media 
54–55; training and capacity building 48; visual 
documentation 47; visual literacy 48; visual 
storytelling 48; voice and visual voice 51–52
participatory visual research (PVR) 49
Patton, M. Q. 119
Pauwels, L. 99
pedagogic voice 50, 70
performance‑based methods 1
Peroff, D. M. 95–96
phobia and exposure therapy 121
photo albums 116–117
photo‑diaries 161
photodocumentary 62, 69–70
photo elicitation 25, 26, 30, 49, 95, 101, 110, 115, 
117, 119, 120, 123, 127, 164, 166
photo essays, as form of narrative photography 
158, 165–169
photographic analysis software 123–124
photographic arts 2–4, 22, 91
photographic data analysis 133, 136–137, 
139–141; challenges 143, 146–150; innovations 
143, 144–145
photographic data analysis and display: cell phone 
photography 130; challenges 143, 146–150; 
coding photographs 140–141, 153, 154, 154–155; 
content analysis 129; cultural studies approach 
138–139; data integrity 134–136; hermeneutic 
analysis 139; innovations 143, 144–145; 
Panofsky’s method 139; in qualitative research 
143, 145, 146, 149, 150–153; reinterpretation 
and history‑making 138; researcher‑generated 
photographs vs. participant‑generated 
photographs 130; researcher‑participant contact 
140; social life 139–140; video‑based data 
137–138; visual analysis strategies 141–143; 
visual data 130–133, 153
photographic research 1–5, 15, 17, 19, 25, 50, 
80, 101–102, 174, 175; Bourdieu’s concept 
of habitus 31; Deleuze’s theory 27–28; ethics 
8–10; PAR 51; writing and displaying 158–159
photographing place and site 37, 91–93, 105
photographs: absent 113, 115; to build rapport 
56–57, 120; coding 140–141, 153, 154, 
154–155; at different stages of PAR research 
process 56; found photographs 68–69; with 
interviews 119–124; posed photographs 
116–117; researcher‑generated 116, 130
photography: different ways to write with 
photography 161–165; in the field 25; as 
performance/performative art 23–25; as a 
research method 1, 2, 11, 22, 25, 113; see also
participatory action research (PAR); individual 
entries
photojournalism 62
photomapping 93
photo maps comparisons/field photo comparisons 
120
photo production approach 115
photo‑story method 26–27
photovoice, as participatory action research 42, 
44–49, 52, 59, 164
Pick, D. 11, 14
pictorial communication 29
Pillow, W. 44
Pini, M. 71
Pink, S. 33, 44, 129, 130, 158, 161
Pinkett‑Smith, Jada 85
policy analysis, archival photos 63
posed photographs 116–117
Prins, E. 48
Prosser, J. 4
protest photography 3, 174; argument presentation 
88, 89; community‑based photography 79–80; 
democratic witnessing 78–89; field notes 
86–88, 87; photo contests 86; qualitative 
research method 78; witnessing 80–86
qualitative research approaches 1, 3
questions to assist researchers 15, 64, 66–68
Ramos, E. 160
Rasmussen, K. 96
Redwood‑Jones, Y. A. 11
reflexive photography 14, 25, 115–116
rehabilitation and therapy 122
repeat photography 98–100, 105
researcher‑generated photographs 116; vs.
participant‑generated photographs 130
researcher photography 9, 25, 55, 64, 66–68, 
76, 77
research ethics council (REC) 12
researching place attachment 95–96
researching sense of place 94–95, 104, 104
researching travel photography 96–98
research photography: act expressions 23; 
biographical and autobiographical research 
25–26; communication theories 29; context 
and social awareness 23; Deleuze’s theory 
27–28; distanciation 28; documentary 
evidence 22–23; enlightened eye 22; everyday 
photography 38, 39; framing theory 29–30; 
habitus 31–32; Instagram and Snapchat, social 
media 35–36; narratives 76, 77; performative 
act 23–25; photo elicitation 25, 30; photo‑story 
method 26–27; postmodernism 27; qualitative 
researchers 36–37; selfies 32–35; social media 
photography 22, 32; theories and concepts of 
27–32; visual communication 32, 37, 38; visual 
research 22; ways of seeing 22–39
Rettberg, J. W. 33
Riessman, C. K. 102
Riis, J. 2Index 181
Riis, Jacob 43
Rizal, A. R. A. 48
Rock, Chris 85
Rohlinger, D. A. 82
Roldan, J. 165–166
Rose, G. 158
Rosenblatt, L. M. 162
Ross, K. 52
Rowsell, J. 161–162
Sandbye, M. 32
Schnettler, B. 72
Schulze, S. 115
Segal, M. 31
Selfiecity project 32
selfies 32–35
Serafinelli, E. 34–35
Silko, L. M. 159
Smith, C. H. 162
Smith, E. 7
Smith, Linda Tuhiwai 119
Smith, Will 85
Snapchat 36
social: inequalities 44; media photography 22, 32, 
43, 59, 78; photography 34, 36; surveillance 35
Sontag, S. 14, 175
Spence, J. 117
storyscapes 92–93, 103
Strauss, A. 138
Sweetman, P. 31
Tay, E. 161
technology tools, implications 16–17
Tegano, D. W. 46, 51
temporal dimension 24
thematic analysis 166
therapeutic voice 50, 70
Thomas Crocker, E. 34
Thompson, P. 50, 70
Timmermans, Iseult 53
Tomaselli, K. 72
tourist photography 3
travel photography 96–97
Tuck, E. 94, 102
Ulmer, J. B. 160
United States Civil Rights movement 85
Van de Ven, A. 97
Van Dijck, J. 32
Van House, N. A. 16, 25, 29
Varvantakis, C. 26
video‑based data 137–138
video data gathering 70–71
video diaries 55, 71–72
videodocumentaries 62
videography 62, 72, 73, 77
Video Intervention and Prevention Assessment 
(VIA) 70
virtual reality (VR) 121–123, 131, 144
visual analysis strategies for photographic data 
141–143
visual anthropology 3, 26
visual data and photographic data 109–110, 
111–113, 113
visual metaphors 117, 162, 173
visual narratives 24, 67, 81, 102, 110, 111, 114,
120, 145–147, 159, 162, 164–165, 167, 168
visual qualitative research methods 2, 4, 5
visual sociology 3
Vium, C. 138
voice 10, 29, 30, 92, 117, 119, 137; authoritative 
50, 70; categorization of 50, 70; collective 
51, 55; consumer 50, 70; critical 50, 70; 
pedagogic 50, 70; photo 2, 7, 10, 25, 26, 42, 
44–49, 52, 59, 72, 111, 112, 161, 164, 166, 167; 
storytelling 49; therapeutic 50, 70; visual 51–52
volunteer tourism/voluntourism 96–98
Walkerdine, V. 71
Wang, C. C. 2, 11, 51
ways of seeing 22, 101, 139, 174; research 
photography 22–39
Weilenmann, A. 33–34
Weiler, K. 44
Wells, K. 85
Westerbeck, C.: Bystander: A History of Street 
Photography 80
Wilson, E. 42
witnessing: crowdsourced photography 80; 
democratic 81–86; newsgathering process 80
Wright, M. 82
writing: and displaying photographic research 
158–159; fieldnotes via photographs 88; and 
photography 4, 10–11, 88, 120, 158–162, 166; 
disseminating with evocative writing styles 
159–160
writing, exhibitions, narratives, and photography 
171, 172–173; aesthetic stance 162; critical visual 
methodology 158; displaying research findings
158; efferent stance 162; ethical dimensions 159; 
hypermedia 161; narrative photography 163–169;
photo‑diaries 161; photo essays 158; photovoice 
research 161; protest photography 174; social 
media dissemination 160; storytelling 158–159; 
Translational Visual Abstract 161; visual data 
with qualitative text 170, 170; writing styles 
159–160; writing with images 158–159
Zahra, M. 79
Zeiher, H. 96
Ziegner, K. 160
Zola, E. 32
Zurba, M. 2
