Physics of Wave Turbulence
A century ago, Lewis Fry Richardson introduced the concept of energy cascades
in turbulence. Since this conceptual breakthrough, turbulence has been studied in
diverse systems and our knowledge has increased considerably through theoret￾ical, numerical, experimental, and observational advances. Eddy turbulence and
wave turbulence are the two regimes we can find in nature. So far, most attention
has been devoted to the former regime, eddy turbulence, which is often observed
in water. However, physicists are often interested in systems for which wave turbu￾lence is relevant. This textbook deals with wave turbulence and systems composed
of a sea of weak waves interacting nonlinearly. After a general introduction which
includes a brief history of the field, the theory of wave turbulence is introduced
rigorously for surface waves. The theory is then applied to examples in hydrody￾namics, plasma physics, astrophysics, and cosmology, giving the reader a modern
and interdisciplinary view of the subject.
Sébastien Galtier is a professor at the University of Paris-Saclay. His research
focuses on fundamental aspects of turbulence with applications to space plasmas
and cosmology. He has published over 100 refereed papers and a graduate text,
Introduction to Modern Magnetohydrodynamics (Cambridge University Press,
2016). He is a senior fellow of the prestigious Institut Universitaire de France.Physics of Wave
Turbulence
Sébastien Galtier
University of Paris-SaclayShaftesbury Road, Cambridge CB2 8EA, United Kingdom
One Liberty Plaza, 20th Floor, New York, NY 10006, USA
477 Williamstown Road, Port Melbourne, VIC 3207, Australia
314–321, 3rd Floor, Plot 3, Splendor Forum, Jasola District Centre, New Delhi – 110025, India
103 Penang Road, #05–06/07, Visioncrest Commercial, Singapore 238467
Cambridge University Press is part of Cambridge University Press & Assessment, a department of the
University of Cambridge.
We share the University’s mission to contribute to society through the pursuit of
education, learning and research at the highest international levels of excellence.
www.cambridge.org
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9781009275897
DOI: 10.1017/9781009275880
c Sébastien Galtier 2023
This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception
and to the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements,
no reproduction of any part may take place without the written
permission of Cambridge University Press & Assessment.
First published 2023
This is an adapted translation of Physique de la turbulence published in 2021 by CNRS Editions. ´
A catalogue record for this publication is available from the British Library.
A Cataloging-in-Publication data record for this book is available from the Library of Congress.
ISBN 978-1-009-27589-7 Hardback
Cambridge University Press & Assessment has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy of
URLs for external or third-party internet websites referred to in this publication
and does not guarantee that any content on such websites is, or will remain,
accurate or appropriate.To CécileContents
Preface page xi
1 General Introduction 1
1.1 Brief History 2
1.2 Chaos and Unpredictability 12
1.3 Transition to Turbulence 14
1.4 Statistical Tools and Symmetries 17
References 20
Part I Fundamentals of Turbulence 25
2 Eddy Turbulence in Hydrodynamics 27
2.1 Navier–Stokes Equations 27
2.2 Turbulence and Heating 27
2.3 Kármán–Howarth Equation 33
2.4 Locality and Cascade 35
2.5 Kolmogorov’s Exact Law 37
2.6 Phenomenology of Eddy Turbulence 39
2.7 Inertial Dissipation and Singularities 40
2.8 Intermittency 46
2.9 Compressible Turbulence 57
References 65
3 Spectral Theory in Hydrodynamics 69
3.1 Kinematics 69
3.2 Detailed Energy Conservation 71
3.3 Statistical Theory 74
viiviii Contents
3.4 Two-Dimensional Eddy Turbulence 82
3.5 Dual Cascade 93
3.6 Nonlinear Diffusion Model 93
References 96
Exercises I 99
I.1 1D HD Turbulence: Burgers’ Equation 99
I.2 Structure Function and Spectrum 99
I.3 2D HD Turbulence: Detailed Conservation 100
References 100
Part II Wave Turbulence 101
4 Introduction 103
4.1 Brief History 104
4.2 Multiple Scale Method 111
4.3 Weakly Nonlinear Model 115
References 122
5 Theory for Capillary Wave Turbulence 127
5.1 Introduction 127
5.2 Phenomenology 130
5.3 Analytical Theory: Fundamental Equation 132
5.4 Analytical Theory: Statistical Approach 136
5.5 Detailed Energy Conservation 140
5.6 Exact Solutions and Zakharov’s Transformation 141
5.7 Nature of the Exact Solutions 145
5.8 Comparison with Experiments 147
5.9 Direct Numerical Simulation 149
References 152
6 Inertial Wave Turbulence 155
6.1 Introduction 155
6.2 What Do We Know About Rotating Turbulence? 157
6.3 Helical Inertial Waves 161
6.4 Phenomenological Predictions 162
6.5 Inertial Wave Turbulence Theory 164
6.6 Local Triadic Interactions 167Contents ix
6.7 Perspectives 174
References 175
7 Alfvén Wave Turbulence 179
7.1 Incompressible MHD 180
7.2 Strong Alfvén Wave Turbulence 181
7.3 Phenomenology of Wave Turbulence 185
7.4 Theory of Alfvén Wave Turbulence 189
7.5 Direct Numerical Simulation 196
7.6 Application: The Solar Corona 197
7.7 Perspectives 200
References 201
8 Wave Turbulence in a Compressible Plasma 205
8.1 Multiscale Solar Wind 206
8.2 Exact Law in Compressible Hall MHD 209
8.3 Weakly Compressible Electron MHD 212
8.4 Kinetic Alfvén Waves (KAW) 216
8.5 Spectral Phenomenology 216
8.6 Theory of Weak KAW Turbulence 219
8.7 Inertial/Kinetic-Alfvén Wave Turbulence: A Twin Problem 223
8.8 Perspectives 226
References 227
9 Gravitational Wave Turbulence 231
9.1 Primordial Universe 231
9.2 Weak Gravitational Wave Turbulence 234
9.3 Strong Turbulence and Inflation 241
9.4 Perspectives 242
References 242
Exercises II 245
II.1 MHD Model of Nonlinear Diffusion 245
II.2 Four-Wave Interactions 246
II.3 Gravitational Wave Turbulence: Exact Solutions 246
II.4 Inertial Wave Turbulence: Domain of Locality 247
References 247
Appendix A Solutions to the Exercises 249x Contents
I.1 1D HD Turbulence: Burgers’ Equation 249
I.2 Structure Function and Spectrum 253
I.3 2D HD Turbulence: Detailed Conservation 255
II.1 MHD Model of Nonlinear Diffusion 259
II.2 Four-Wave Interactions 261
II.3 Gravitational Wave Turbulence: Exact Solutions 262
II.4 Inertial Wave Turbulence: Domain of Locality 265
References 269
Appendix B Formulary 271
Index 275Preface
Ink, this darkness from which a light comes out
Victor Hugo, Dernière gerbe
Anyone who has ever flown in an aircraft knows how to define a turbulence zone: it
is characterized by unpredictable, sometimes violent, often unpleasant jolts, which
can even cause some anxiety in the passenger. For the physicist, on the other hand,
turbulence is a pleasant, fascinating, and mysterious subject. This book proposes
a journey into the world of turbulence in which we will gradually unveil the main
fundamental laws governing the physics of turbulence where waves are omnipres￾ent. We will see that since Reynolds’ first historical experiment on liquids in 1883,
turbulence has been studied in a wide variety of systems: from surface waves on
the sea to gravitational waves, turbulence is now ubiquitous in physics.
Eddy turbulence and wave turbulence are the two regimes that we may
encounter in nature. The attention of fluid mechanics being mainly focused on
incompressible hydrodynamics, it is usually the first regime that is treated in books
on turbulence. However, physicists are interested in much more diverse systems
where waves are often present and for which the second regime (the subject of this
book) is relevant. Wave turbulence offers the possibility of developing an analyt￾ical theory. Beyond its mathematical beauty, this spectral theory allows a deep
understanding of weakly nonlinear systems and to develop a physical intuition on
strong wave turbulence. Weak and strong wave turbulence are not independent
of each other. On the contrary, one can emerge from the other during the cascade
process; the two regimes can also coexist and be in permanent interaction. Without
being exhaustive, this book offers a relatively broad overview on wave turbulence
which should enable beginning researchers to acquire fundamental knowledge on
subjects which are sometimes under development.
The theoretical framework chosen in this book will be that of statistically homo￾geneous turbulence for which a universal behavior is expected. In Chapter 1, a
xixii Preface
general introduction to turbulence is given where we find a brief history of the evo￾lution of ideas, and the emergence of the main concepts and results. This history
is of particular importance today, a century after Richardson (1922) introduced
the concept of energy cascade. The fundamentals of turbulence are outlined in
the physical (Chapter 2) and spectral (Chapter 3) spaces, which constitutes Part I.
This first part focuses on incompressible hydrodynamics and thus on eddy tur￾bulence. With Part II, we enter into the core of the book. Wave turbulence is
introduced in Chapter 4, with a brief history and a presentation of the multiple
scale method for weakly nonlinear systems. In Chapter 5, the theory of weak
wave turbulence is presented in great detail for capillary waves, which is one of
the simplest systems (three-wave interactions, two-dimensional, Navier–Stokes
equations). Various examples dealing with three-wave interactions are discussed
in Chapters 6, 7, and 8. In Chapter 9, we conclude with a new topic – gravitational
wave turbulence – which is far more complex and involves four-wave interactions.
This book is based on a course on turbulence that I have been giving for sev￾eral years at École polytechnique to students of the Master’s degree in plasma
physics (from the University of Paris-Saclay, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, and
Sorbonne University). It is thus, in part, the result of fruitful interactions with my
students, whom I would like to thank. I would also like to thank all my colleagues
with whom I share my passion on this subject and who have contributed, in their
own way, to the writing of this book; I would like to thank in particular Nahuel
Andrés, Supratik Banerjee, Amitava Battacharjee, Éric Buchlin, Pierre-Philippe
Cortet, Vincent David, Éric Falcon, Stephan Fauve, Özgür Gürcan, Lina Hadid,
Romain Meyrand, Frédéric Moisy, Sergey Nazarenko, Alan Newell, Hélène
Politano, Fouad Sahraoui, and, of course, Annick Pouquet, who introduced me
to turbulence.1
General Introduction
Turbulence is often defined as the chaotic state of a fluid. The example that imme￾diately comes to mind is that of water: turbulence in water takes the form of eddies
whose size, location, and orientation are constantly changing. Such a flow is char￾acterized by a very disordered behavior difficult to predict and by the existence
of multiple spatial and temporal scales. There are many experiments of everyday
life where the presence of turbulence can be verified: the agitated motions of a
river downstream of an obstacle, those of smoke escaping from a chimney, or the
turbulence zones that one sometimes crosses in an airplane.
Experiencing turbulence at our scale seems easy since it is not necessary to use
powerful microscopes or telescopes. A detailed analytical understanding of tur￾bulence remains, however, limited because of the intrinsic difficulty of nonlinear
physics. As a result, we often read that turbulence is one of the last great unre￾solved problems of classical physics. This long-held message, found, for example,
in Feynman et al. (1964), no longer corresponds to the modern vision. Indeed, even
if turbulence remains a very active research topic, we have to date many theoreti￾cal, numerical, experimental, and observational results that allow us to understand
in detail a part of the physics of turbulence.
This book deals mainly with wave turbulence. However, wave turbulence is not
totally disconnected from eddy turbulence, from which the main concepts have
been borrowed (e.g. inertial range, cascade, two-point correlation function, spec￾tral approach). Moreover, very often, wave turbulence and eddy turbulence can
coexist as in rotating hydrodynamics. This is why a broad introduction to eddy tur￾bulence is given (Part I) before moving on to wave turbulence (Part II), giving this
book, for the first time, a unified view on turbulence. We will see that many results
have been obtained since the first steps taken by Richardson (1922), a century ago.
The many examples discussed in this book reveal that the classical presentation of
turbulence, based on the Navier–Stokes equations (Frisch, 1995; Pope, 2000), is
somewhat too simplistic because turbulence is found in various environments, in
various forms. If we restrict ourselves to the standard example of incompressible
12 1 General Introduction
hydrodynamics, the simple introduction of a uniform rotation for describing geo￾physical fluids drastically changes the physics of turbulence by adding anisotropy.
In astrophysics, 99 percent of the visible matter of the Universe is in the form of
plasma, which is generally very turbulent, but plasma turbulence mixes waves and
eddies. The regime of wave turbulence, described in Part II, can emerge from a
vibrating steel plate; here, we are far from the classical image of eddies in water.
Finally, recent studies reveal that the cosmological inflation that followed the Big
Bang could have its origin in strong gravitational wave turbulence.
The objective of Part I, which follows this first chapter, is to present the funda￾mentals of turbulence. We will start with eddy turbulence, where the first concepts
and laws have emerged. We will limit ourselves to the most important physical
laws. The theoretical framework will be that of a statistically homogeneous turbu￾lence for which a universal behavior is expected. The problems of inhomogeneity
inherent to laboratory experiments will therefore not be dealt with. Through the
examples discussed, we will gradually reveal the state of knowledge in turbulence.
To help us in this task, we begin with a brief historical presentation.
1.1 Brief History
1.1.1 First Cognitive Advances
Leonardo da Vinci was probably the first to introduce the word turbulence (tur￾bulenza) at the beginning of the sixteenth century to describe the tumultuous
movements of water. However, the word was not commonly used by scientists
until much later.1
The first notable scientific breakthrough in the field of turbulence can be
attributed to Reynolds (1883): he showed experimentally that the transition
between the laminar and turbulent regimes was linked to a dimensionless num￾ber – the Reynolds number.2 The experiment, which can be easily reproduced in
a laboratory, consists of introducing a colored stream of the same liquid as cir￾culating in a straight transparent tube (see Figure 1.1). It can be shown that the
transition to turbulence occurs when the Reynolds number becomes greater than
a critical value. An important step in this discovery is the observation that the ten￾dency to form eddies increases with the temperature of the water, and Reynolds
knew that in this case the viscosity decreases. He also showed the important role
played by the development of instabilities in this transition to turbulence.
World War I was a time of further important advances. The war efforts in
Germany and, in particular, under the influence of Prandt in Göttingen, directed
1 For example, the book of Boussinesq (1897) still bears the evocative title: “Theory of the Swirling and
Tumultuous Flow of Liquids in Straight Beds with a Large Section.”
2 The Reynolds number measures the ratio between the inertial force and the viscous force. We will come back
to this definition in Section 1.3.1.1 Brief History 3
Figure 1.1 Historical experiment of Reynolds (1883) (top) and his observations (bottom).
The original device is kept at the University of Manchester.
the research in the field of aerodynamics to the study of the fall of bombs in
air or water. It is a question here of studying, for example, the drag of a sphere;4 1 General Introduction
this work was then used for the design of airplanes. After the war, research in
turbulence increased: for example, we can mention the results on the inhomoge￾neous effects due to walls in wind tunnel experiments (Burgers, 1925). But it is
with Richardson (1922) that a second major breakthrough in turbulence arrives:
in his book on weather predictions and numerical calculation.3 Richardson intro￾duced the fundamental concept of energy cascade. Inspired by the Irish writer J.
Swift, Richardson wrote “Big whirls have little whirls that feed on their velocity.
Little whirls have lesser whirls and so on to viscosity – in the molecular sense”
(page 66). We find here the idea of a cascade of eddies from large to small spatial
scales.
It is probably with this idea in mind that Richardson (1926) formulated the
empirical 4/3 law4
to describe the turbulent diffusion process. This law differs
from the one proposed by Einstein in 1905 on the diffusion of small particles
in a liquid (Brownian motion), which was in clear disagreement with turbulence
experiments where a much higher diffusion was found.5 The proposed new law
is characterized by a nonconstant diffusion coefficient D`, which depends on the
scale being considered, such that:
D` ∼ `
4/3
. (1.1)
This relationship reflects the fact that in a turbulent liquid the diffusivity increases
with the mean separation between pairs of particles. This scaling law is fundamen￾tal because we find there the premises of the exact four-fifths law of Kolmogorov
(1941a), with which it is in agreement dimensionally.
It was during this interwar period that the first works based on two-point
correlations emerged (Taylor, 1935),6
as well as works on the spectral anal￾ysis of fluctuations by Fourier transform, which have become the basis of
modern research in turbulence (Motzfeld, 1938; Taylor, 1938). The correlation
approach leads, in particular, to the Kármán–Howarth equation (von Kármán and
Howarth,1938) for an incompressible, statistically homogeneous, and isotropic7
hydrodynamic turbulence. This equation describes the fluid dynamics through
correlators – two-point measurements in physical space. As we will see in Chap￾ter 2, this result is central for the establishment of the exact four-fifths law of
Kolmogorov (1941a), which is not a dynamic equation but a statistical solution of
Navier–Stokes equations.
3
“Numerical calculation” here means calculation carried out by hand with a method essentially based on finite
differences.
4 This empirical law should not be confused with the exact four-thirds law which deals with structure functions
(see Chapter 2).
5
It is known that a cloud of milk dilutes more rapidly in tea if stirred with a spoon.
6
It is the British Francis Galton (1822–1911) who seems to have been the first to correctly introduce the
concept of correlation for statistical studies in biology.
7 This is the strong isotropy that is considered here, which we will return to in Section 1.4.1.1 Brief History 5
1.1.2 Kolmogorov’s Law and Intermittency
In the 1930s and under the leadership of the mathematician Kolmogorov, the
Soviet school became very active in turbulence. At that time, Kolmogorov was
working on stochastic processes and random functions. It was therefore natural
that he turned his attention to turbulence, where a pool of data was available.
Based on some of the work described in the Section 1.1.1, Kolmogorov and his
student Obukhov set out to develop a theory for the standard case of incompressi￾ble, statistically homogeneous, and isotropic hydrodynamic turbulence. Based, in
particular, on the Kármán–Howarth equation, Kolmogorov (1941a,b) established
the first exact statistical law of turbulence – known as the four-fifths law – which
relates a third-order structure function involving the difference of the component
in direction ` of the velocity between two points separated by the vector `, the
distance `, and the mean rate of dissipation of kinetic energy ε (hi means the
ensemble average):8
−
4
5
ε` = h[u`(x + `) − u`(x)]3
i. (1.2)
To establish this universal law, Kolmogorov assumes that fully developed turbu￾lence becomes isotropic on a sufficiently small scale, regardless of the nature of
the mean flow. He also assumes that ε becomes independent of viscosity within
the limits of large Reynolds numbers (i.e. low viscosity); this is what is often
referred to today as the zeroth law of turbulence. After several years of research, a
first exact law was established for which it was possible to get rid of the nonlinear
closure problem. The trick used to achieve this was to relate the cubic nonlin￾ear term to the mean energy dissipation in the inertial range, that is, in a limited
range of scales between the larger scales where inhomogeneous effects can be felt,
and the smaller scales where viscosity efficiently damps the fluctuations. We will
return at length to the law (1.2) in Chapter 2. Kolmogorov’s law remained unno￾ticed for several years (outside the USSR). It was Batchelor (1946) who was the
first to discover the existence of Kolmogorov’s articles:9 he immediately realized
the importance of this work, which he shared with the scientific community at
the Sixth International Congress of Applied Mathematics held in Paris in 1946
(Davidson et al., 2011).
For his part, independently of Kolmogorov but inspired by the ideas of Richard￾son (1922), Taylor (1938), and the work by Millionschikov (1939, 1941), who was
another student of Kolmogorov, Obukhov (1941b) proposed a nonexact spectral
theory of turbulence based on the relationship:
8 Kolmogorov was probably the first to be interested in structure functions that are constructed from the differ￾ences and not from the products of a field (here the velocity field), as was the case with the Kármán–Howarth
equation.
9 The English version of the Russian papers had been received in the library of the Cambridge Philosophical
Society.6 1 General Introduction
∂E
∂t
+ D = T , (1.3)
with E the energy spectrum, D the viscous dissipation, and T the energy transfer
(in Fourier space). The artificial closure proposed is based on an average over
small scales. He obtained as a solution the energy spectrum:10
E(k) ∼ k
−5/3
, (1.4)
which is dimensionally compatible with Kolmogorov’s exact law. In extend￾ing this study, Obukhov was then able to provide a theoretical justification for
Richardson’s (1926) empirical 4/3 law of diffusion. Later, Yaglom (1949) obtained
a new exact law, applied this time to the passive scalar: this model describes how
a scalar evolves, for example the temperature or the concentration of a product, in
a turbulent fluid for which the velocity fluctuations are given.
For a short period of time Kolmogorov thought that the mean rate of energy
dissipation was the key to establishing a more general exact law describing the sta￾tistics at any order in terms of a velocity structure function. This general law would
have provided a complete statistical solution to the problem of hydrodynamic tur￾bulence. But in 1944, Landau11 pointed out the weakness of the demonstration
(proposed by Kolmogorov during a seminar), which we will come back to in
Chapter 2: it does not take into account the possible local fluctuations of ε, a
property called intermittency. It took about 20 years for Kolmogorov (1962) and
Oboukhov (1962) to propose, in response to Landau, a model (and not an exact
law) of intermittency based on a log-normal statistics which incorporates the exact
four-fifths law as a special case. Kolmogorov’s answer was given (in French) at a
conference held in Marseilles in 1961 to celebrate the opening of the Institut de
Mécanique Statistique de la Turbulence. This conference became famous because
it brought together for the first time all the major specialists (American, European,
and Soviet) on the subject. It was also during this conference that the first energy
spectrum in k
−5/3 measured at sea was announced (Grant et al., 1962).
Basically, the notion of intermittency is related to the concentration of dissi￾pation in localized structures of vorticity. As mentioned by Kolmogorov, inter￾mittency may slightly modify the −5/3 exponent of the energy spectrum, but its
most important contribution is expected for statistical quantities of higher orders
(the exact law is of course not affected). This new formulation is at the origin of
work, in particular, on the concept of fractal dimension as a model of intermittency
(Mandelbrot, 1974; Frisch et al., 1978) – see Chapter 2. It is interesting to note
that we already find the concept of fractional dimension in Richardson’s (1922)
book, where the study of geographical boundaries is discussed.
10 In general, this solution is called the Kolmogorov spectrum, but it would be more accurate to call it the
Kolmogorov–Obukhov spectrum. This spectrum was also obtained independently by other researchers, such
as Onsager (1945) and Heisenberg (1948).
11 Landau’s remark (Landau and Lifshitz, 1987) can be found in the original 1944 book (Davidson et al., 2011).1.1 Brief History 7
1.1.3 Spectral Theory and Closure
In this postwar period, the theoretical foundations of turbulence began to be estab￾lished. The first book exclusively dedicated to this subject is that of Batchelor
(1953), which still remains a standard reference on the subject: it deals with sta￾tistically homogeneous turbulence. From the 1950s, a major objective seemed to
be within the reach of theorists: developing a theory for homogeneous and iso￾tropic turbulence in order to rigorously obtain the energy spectrum. The work
of Millionschikov (1941) (see also Chandrasekhar, 1955) based on the quasi￾normal approximation (QN) had opened the way: this approximation – a closure –
assumes that moments of order four and two are related as in the case of a normal
(Gaussian) law without making this approximation for moments of order three
(which would then be zero, making the problem trivial). Kraichnan (1957) was
the first to point out that this closure was inconsistent because it violated some
statistical inequalities (realizability conditions), and Ogura (1963) demonstrated
numerically that this closure could lead to a negative energy spectrum for some
wavenumbers.
In this quest, Kraichnan (1958, 1959) proposed a sophisticated theory which
does not have the defects we have just mentioned: it is the direct interac￾tion approximation (DIA), which is based on field theory methods, a domain
in which Kraichnan was originally trained.12 The fundamental idea of this
approach is that a fluid perturbed over a wavenumber interval will have its
perturbation spread over a large number of modes. Within the limit L→ +∞,
with L being the side of the cube in which the fluid is confined, this inter￾val becomes infinite in size, which suggests that the mode coupling becomes
infinitely weak. The response to the perturbation can then be treated in a sys￾tematic way. Under certain assumptions, two integro-differential equations are
obtained for the correlation functions in two points of space and two of time,
and the response function. The inferred prediction for the energy spectrum, in
k
−3/2
, is, however, not in dimensional agreement with Kolmogorov’s theory, nor
with the main spectral measurements. Improvements were then made (Lagrangian
approach) to solve some problems (noninvariance by random Galilean transfor￾mation, Kolmogorov spectrum) (Kraichnan, 1966): this new theory can be seen
as the most sophisticated closure model.13 This work has led, in particular, to
the development of the EDQNM (eddy-damped quasi-normal Markovian) clo￾sure model (Orszag, 1970), still widely used today, to which we will return in
Chapter 3.
12 Kraichnan became interested in turbulence in the early 1950s while he was Einstein’s postdoctoral fellow.
Together, they searched for nonlinear solutions to the unified field equations.
13 In (strong) eddy turbulence, no exact spectral theory with an analytical closure has been found to date.
This contrasts with the (weak) wave turbulence regime, for which an asymptotic closure is possible (see
Chapter 4).8 1 General Introduction
1.1.4 Inverse Cascade
Two-dimensional hydrodynamic (eddy) turbulence is the first example where an
inverse cascade was suspected. The motivation for the study of such a system may
seem on the face of it surprising, but several works showed that a two-dimensional
approach could account for the atmospheric dynamics quite satisfactorily (Rossby
and collaborators, 1939). We now know that the rotation, or stratification, of the
Earth’s atmosphere tends to confine its nonlinear dynamics to horizontal planes.14
The first work on two-dimensional hydrodynamic turbulence dates back to the
1950s with, for example, Lee (1951), who demonstrated that a direct energy
cascade would violate the conservation of enstrophy (proportional to vorticity
squared), which is the second inviscid invariant (i.e. at zero viscosity) of the
equations. Batchelor (1953) had also noted at the end of his book that the exist￾ence of this second invariant should contribute to the emergence, by aggregation,
of larger and larger eddies. He concluded by asserting the very great differ￾ence between two- and three-dimensional turbulence. By using the two inviscid
invariants, energy and enstrophy, Fjørtoft (1953) was able on his part to demon￾strate, in particular with dimensional arguments, that the energy should cascade
preferentially towards large scales.
It is in this context, clearly in favor of an inverse energy cascade, that Kraichnan
became interested in two-dimensional turbulence. Using an analytical devel￾opment of Navier–Stokes equations in Fourier space, the use of symmetries,
and under certain hypotheses such as the scale invariance of triple moments,
Kraichnan (1967) rigorously demonstrated the existence of a dual cascade – that
is, in two different directions – of energy and enstrophy (see Chapter 3). This
prediction is in agreement with previous analyses and the existence of a direct
cascade of enstrophy and an inverse cascade of energy for which the proposed
(nonexact) spectrum is in k
−5/3
.
The existence in the same system of two different cascades was quite new in
eddy turbulence. This prediction has since been accurately verified both experi￾mentally and numerically (Leith, 1968; Pouquet et al., 1975; Paret and Tabeling,
1997; Chertkov et al., 2007). The second-best-known system where an inverse
cascade exists is that of magnetohydrodynamics (MHD): using some arguments
from Kraichnan (1967), Frisch et al. (1975) deduced in the three-dimensional case
the possible existence of an inverse cascade of magnetic helicity, a quantity which
plays a major role in the dynamo process in astrophysics (Galtier, 2016). To date,
we know several examples of turbulent systems producing an inverse cascade (see,
e.g., the review of Pouquet et al., 2019).
14 Chapter 6 is devoted to inertial wave turbulence (i.e. incompressible hydrodynamic turbulence under a uni￾form and rapid rotation), for which it can be rigorously demonstrated that the cascade is essentially reduced
to the direction transverse to the axis of rotation. However, it can be shown in this case that the energy cascade
is direct.1.1 Brief History 9
Kraichnan’s (1967) discovery was made at a period when the theory of wave
turbulence, the regime that is the main subject of this book, was beginning to
produce important results. The brief history presented in Chapter 4 allows us to
appreciate the evolution of ideas on this subject, which finds a large part of its
foundations in eddy turbulence (spectral approach, inertial range, cascade, clo￾sure problem). In this context, a problem that attracted a lot of attention was that
of gravity wave turbulence (which is an example of surface waves). This prob￾lem deals with four-wave resonant interactions: in this case, there are two inviscid
invariants, energy and wave action. The first is characterized by a direct cascade
and the second by an inverse cascade. The study carried out15 by Zakharov and
Filonenko (1966) (see also Zakharov and Filonenko, 1967) focused only on the
energy spectrum. The authors obtained the exact solution as a power law asso￾ciated with energy, but curiously they did not focus on the second solution and
therefore did not immediately realize that it corresponded to a new type of cas￾cade. Starting from a similar study (involving four-wave resonant interactions)
on Langmuir wave turbulence by Zakharov (1967), in which the energy spectrum
had also been obtained, Kaner and Yakovenko (1970) found the second exact solu￾tion corresponding to an inverse cascade of wave action. It is thus in the field of
plasmas that the existence of a dual cascade was finally demonstrated in wave
turbulence.16
A major difference between the two turbulence regimes is that, unlike (strong)
eddy turbulence, (weak) wave turbulence theory is analytical (see Chapter 4). In
this case, one can develop a uniform asymptotic theory and obtain the dynamic
equations of the system and then, if they exist, its exact spectral solutions. It is
then possible to provide analytical proof of the type of cascade (direct or inverse).
It is also possible to prove the local character of turbulence (by a study of the
convergence of integrals) and thus be in agreement with one of Kolmogorov’s
fundamental hypotheses. For this reason, exact nontrivial solutions of wave tur￾bulence are called Kolmogorov–Zakharov spectra. There are several examples in
wave turbulence where there is an inverse cascade of wave action; in Chapter 9 we
present the case of gravitational wave turbulence (Galtier and Nazarenko, 2017).
It is less common to obtain an inverse cascade in the case of three-wave resonant
interactions. An example is given by rotating magnetohydrodynamic turbulence:
the energy cascades directly and the hybrid helicity (a modified magnetic helicity)
cascades inversely (Galtier, 2014).
To conclude this section, let us note that Robert Kraichnan and Vladimir
Zakharov received the Dirac medal in 2003 for their contributions to the the￾ory of turbulence, particularly the exact results and the predictions of inverse
15 Many other studies have been devoted to gravity wave turbulence. Chapter 4 discusses some of them.
16 The second exact solution corresponding to an inverse cascade of wave action for gravity waves was published
by Zaslavskii and Zakharov (1982).10 1 General Introduction
cascade, and for identifying classes of turbulence problems for which in-depth
understanding has been achieved.
1.1.5 Emergence of Direct Numerical Simulation
From the 1970s, a new method for analyzing turbulence emerged: direct numer￾ical simulation (Patterson and Orszag, 1971; Fox and Lilly, 1972). By direct, we
mean the simulation of the fluid equations themselves and not a model of these
equations. We have already cited as a model the EDQNM approximation used in
hydrodynamics (Orszag, 1970); there is also the case of magnetohydrodynamics
with the study of the inverse cascade of magnetic helicity (Pouquet et al., 1976).
There are other models such as nonlinear diffusion models (Leith, 1967) or shell
models (Biferale, 2003) – which we will briefly discuss in Chapter 3.
Since its beginnings, direct numerical simulation has made steady progress. It
currently represents a means of studying turbulence in great detail; it is also an
indispensable complement to experimental studies. It is impossible to summarize
in a few lines the numerous results obtained in the field of numerical simulation.
Let us simply point out that the regular increase in spatial resolution makes it pos￾sible to increase the Reynolds number and to describe increasingly fine structures
(see Figure 1.2). It is interesting to compare the current situation with the first
direct numerical simulations of incompressible three-dimensional hydrodynamic
turbulence. For example, Orszag and Patterson (1972) used a spatial resolution of
643
and, as explained by the authors, each time step then required a computation
time of 30 seconds! It is also interesting to note that the diffusion of knowledge
takes some time: for example, the first direct numerical simulation of incompress￾ible three-dimensional magnetohydrodynamic turbulence was realized by Pouquet
and Patterson (1978) with a spatial resolution of 323
. Nowadays, a standard direct
numerical simulation of turbulence is generally performed with a pseudospectral
code, in a periodic box and with a spatial resolution of about 20483 – the high￾est to date being 16 3843
(Iyer et al., 2019). For more information on the subject,
the reader can consult the review article of Alexakis and Biferale (2018), where
numerous examples of direct numerical simulation are presented in the context of
various turbulence studies.
1.1.6 Turbulence Today
In the history of sciences on turbulence, the early 1970s were a turning point.
Very schematically, we can consider that the theory of turbulence was built
during the years 1922–1972, a period during which the main concepts were intro￾duced, allowing the first exact results to be obtained.17 The books of Monin and
17 The year 1922 can be used as a reference since it is this year that Richardson introduced the fundamental
concept of energy cascade.1.1 Brief History 11
Figure 1.2 Two-dimensional direct numerical simulation of incompressible magneto￾hydrodynamic turbulence (see Chapter 7). The image, with a spatial resolution of
2048 × 2048, shows the norm of the out-of-plane component of the electric current. The
white regions correspond to the sites of energy dissipation.
Yaglom (1971, 1975) summarize the situation well. After this period, which can
be described as exploration, the years 1972–2022 are rather a period of exploita￾tion during which the results of incompressible hydrodynamics were generalized
to other systems, often much more complex. However, it would be simplistic to
limit this second period to a simple exploitation, because new concepts have also
emerged and our knowledge has been considerably refined thanks, in particular,
to numerous experiments and direct numerical simulations.
Today, the physics of turbulence appears in many fields (physics, geophysics,
astrophysics, cosmology, aeronautics, biology) and it is impossible to draw up
an exhaustive list of its applications. Given the difficulty of the subject, the use of
simple – even simplistic – models of turbulence is quite common. The best-known
result is probably the Kolmogorov energy spectrum. While there is no reason to
think that this form of spectrum appears in other turbulence problems, it is often
mentioned or even used. On the other hand, the exact laws based on two-point12 1 General Introduction
measurements in physical space are less known, as well as the regime of wave
turbulence.
Part I of this book is a short introduction to eddy turbulence, where histori￾cally the main concepts and results of turbulence have been developed. This part
is therefore very important to appreciate Part II, the second and main part of the
book, devoted to wave turbulence. In Chapter 2, special attention will be given
to anomalous dissipation and the zeroth law of turbulence, which are fundamen￾tal for both eddy and wave turbulence. It is then used to derive a modern form
of the Kolmogorov exact law. We note in passing that the exact laws of turbu￾lence are also valid for wave turbulence: for example, the Kolmogorov exact law
(without the assumption of statistical isotropy) is also valid for inertial wave tur￾bulence (see Chapter 6). In Chapter 2 we also introduce the Kolmogorov eddy
phenomenology (which we will compare to the wave turbulence phenomenology
in the second part) and intermittency models. The treatment of turbulence in Fou￾rier space will be presented in Chapter 3. In particular, the discussion of statistical
closures developed in the 1960s is relevant to the comparison with the wave turbu￾lence closure presented in Chapter 4. The case of two-dimensional turbulence will
also be discussed in great detail; we will show that the Zakharov transformation,
used so far only for wave turbulence, can also be a powerful tool in this case.
Part II of the book is devoted to wave turbulence: after a general introduction
to the subject and a nonexhaustive list of applications of this regime (Chapter
4), various examples will be treated in Chapters 5 to 9. Capillary wave turbu￾lence is probably the simplest example to present the theory of wave turbulence.
Therefore, in Chapter 5, we present this theory in great detail. This is an essential
technical chapter to master the asymptotic development.
This book is an introduction to the physics of wave turbulence. The bias is to
present fundamental results limited to the case of statistically homogeneous tur￾bulence. Therefore, the problems of inhomogeneity that we encounter, especially
in laboratory experiments, will not be discussed. Nevertheless, the results of lab￾oratory experiments will be regularly presented, as well as those obtained from
observations or numerical simulations.
1.2 Chaos and Unpredictability
Defining turbulence precisely requires the introduction of a number of notions
that we will define in part in this chapter. Without going into detail, we can notice
that the disordered – or chaotic – aspect seems to be the primary characteristic of
turbulent flows. The chaotic nature of a system is of course related to nonlineari￾ties. It is often said that a system is chaotic when two points initially very close to
each other in phase space separate exponentially over time. This definition can be
extended to the case of fluids.1.2 Chaos and Unpredictability 13
The origin of the media success of chaos theory goes back to the early 1960s. It
is indeed at this period that the meteorologist Lorenz from the Massachusetts Insti￾tute of Technology (MIT) decided to use his computer (a Royal McBee LGP-300,
without screen, capable of performing 60 operations per second) to numerically
integrate a system of nonlinear differential equations – the Lorenz system – which
is a simplified version of the fluid equations of thermal convection and whose form
is:
dX
dt
= σ(Y − X) , (1.5a)
dY
dt
= ρX − Y − XZ , (1.5b)
dZ
dt
= XY − βZ , (1.5c)
Figure 1.3 Numerical simulation of the Lorenz system (1.5) with σ = 10, ρ = 28 and
β = 8/3. The three variables X(t), Y(t), and Z(t) show a randomness, or unpredictability,
in terms of variations or sign changes.14 1 General Introduction
where σ, ρ, and β are real parameters. In Figure 1.3 we show the evolution over
time of the three variables X(t), Y(t), and Z(t).
By pure chance, Lorenz (1963) observed that two initial conditions very close
to each other diverge quite rapidly.18 Since linear functions imply results propor￾tional to the initial uncertainties, the observed divergence could only be explained
by the presence of nonlinear terms in the model equations. Lorenz then under￾stood that even if some nonlinear phenomena are governed by rigorous and
perfectly deterministic laws, precise predictions are impossible because of the
sensitivity to initial conditions, which is, as we know, a major problem in mete￾orology. To make this result clear, Lorenz used an image that contributed to the
media success of chaos theory: the famous butterfly effect. He explained that the
laws of meteorology are so sensitive to initial conditions that the simple flap￾ping of a butterfly’s wings in Brazil can trigger a tornado in Texas. Lorenz had
thus just demonstrated that the future is unpredictable. But what is unpredicta￾ble is not necessarily chaotic (i.e. disordered), as demonstrated, for example, by
the existence of strange attractors (Hénon, 1976): we then speak of determin￾istic chaos. In phase space, this translates into trajectories irresistibly attracted
by complex geometric figures. These systems wander randomly around these
figures, without passing twice through the same point. In Figure 1.4, we show
Lorenz’s strange attractor: it appears when we plot the function f (X, Y, Z) over
time.
Turbulent flows are also unpredictable. Two initial conditions that are very close
to each other diverge quite rapidly over time. Although the equations – such as
those of Navier–Stokes – governing fluid motion are deterministic, it is not pos￾sible to predict exactly the state of the turbulent fluid at some distant future time.
However, a distinction exists between turbulence and chaos: the word chaos is
nowadays mainly used in mechanics to describe a deterministic dynamic system
with a small number of degrees of freedom. In turbulence, flows have a very large
number of degrees of freedom, which results, for example, in the nonlinear exci￾tation of a wide range of spatial scales. As we will see in this book, turbulence
is, on the other hand, predictable in the statistical sense, hence the importance of
studying turbulence with statistical tools.
1.3 Transition to Turbulence
The observation of turbulence in fluid mechanics is often part of everyday life
experiences. In fact, it is under this regime that most of the natural flows of
the usual terrestrial fluids such as air and water occur. There is a very large
variety of turbulent flows: for example, geophysical flows (atmospheric wind,
18 Lorenz was not the first to wonder about unpredictability. Henri Poincare addressed the question at the end ´
of the nineteenth century in his study on the stability of the solar system (Poincaré, 1890). Later, Richardson
(1922) also wondered about the effect of initial conditions on the predictability of atmospheric flows.1.3 Transition to Turbulence 15
Figure 1.4 The Lorenz attractor appears when we plot the function f (X, Y, Z) over time,
with X(t), Y(t), and Z(t) given by solving the Lorenz system.
river currents), astrophysical flows (sun, solar wind, interstellar cloud), biolog￾ical (blood), quantum (superfluid), or industrial flows (aeronautical, hydraulic,
chemical). Despite this diversity, these turbulent flows have a number of common
properties.
Probably the most familiar example of turbulent flow is that of a river encoun￾tering an obstacle, such as a rock. Downstream, there is a random movement of
water characterized by the presence of eddies of different sizes. As we will see
in Chapter 2, the eddy is the central concept in the analysis of strong turbulence
and, in particular, in the phenomenological description of the cascade of energy to
spatial scales that are generally smaller. In Figure 1.5, one can see schematically
how such a flow moves from the laminar regime with a low Reynolds number Re,
to the fully developed turbulence regime with a Reynolds number that exceeds
1000. In particular, during this transition a Kármán vortex street is formed for
Re ∼ 100. Historically, it was Reynolds who was the first to study the transition
between these two regimes in 1883 and who gave his name to the dimensionless
parameter – the Reynolds number – measuring the degree of turbulence of a flow.16 1 General Introduction
Figure 1.5 Transition between laminar (top) and turbulent (bottom) regimes as a function
of the Reynolds number Re for a flow coming from the left and encountering an obstacle
(symbolized by a disc). Figure adapted from Feynman et al. (1964).
This number reflects the relative importance of nonlinear versus dissipative effects
in the Navier–Stokes equations and is written as follows:
Re =
UL
ν
, (1.6)
with U and L a velocity and a characteristic length of the flow respectively, while
ν is the kinematic viscosity.1.4 Statistical Tools and Symmetries 17
1.4 Statistical Tools and Symmetries
We have mentioned the importance of approaching the physics of turbulence with
statistical tools in order to better understand its random nature. In this section, we
recall some of these tools that are generally introduced in the course of statistical
physics.
1.4.1 Ensemble Average
The ensemble average hXi of a quantity X is a statistical average performed on N
independent realizations (with N → +∞) where we measure this quantity:
hXi = lim
N→+∞
1
N
X
N
n=1
Xn . (1.7)
If the averaged quantity is, for example, the velocity field, one has:
hu(x, t)i = lim
N→+∞
1
N
X
N
n=1
un(x, t) . (1.8)
The average operation commutes with derivatives of different kinds, for example:

∂u(x, t)
∂x

=
∂hu(x, t)i
∂x
. (1.9)
The ensemble average operator is analogous to the one used in statistical thermo￾dynamics. Generally, this is not equivalent to a spatial or temporal average, except
under special conditions. For example, when turbulence is statistically homoge￾neous, the ergotic hypothesis can be used to calculate an ensemble average as a
spatial average (Galanti and Tsinober, 2004). Note that, to date, no proof of the
ergodic theorem is known for the Navier–Stokes equations.
1.4.2 Autocorrelation
To characterize the disorder in a signal u(x, t), one uses the concept of correlation.
The simplest correlation function is the autocorrelation:
R(x, t, T) = hu(x, t)u(x, t + T)i, (1.10)
which measures the resemblance of the function to itself, here at two different
instants. The quantity u(x, t) (for example, a velocity component) is a random
function. To get statistical independence between u(x, t) and u(x, t + T), T cannot
be too small, because the fundamental laws of turbulence lead us to expect a cer￾tain memory of the signal: T must therefore be larger than a value Tc, which is
called the correlation time. A similar analysis can be done for two measurement
points not in time, but in space. In this case, we arrive at the notion of correlation18 1 General Introduction
R(T)/R(0)
0 Tc
1
T
Figure 1.6 Illustration of the meaning of the correlation scale Tc from a given auto￾correlation function: the surface + is by definition equal to the surface − (see relation
(1.11)).
length Lc (also called the integral scale). Thus, a random flow is characterized by
a spatiotemporal memory whose horizon is measured by Tc and Lc. The turbu￾lence study consists in extracting information on the spatiotemporal memory of
the flow which can thus be revealed only if we place ourselves on relatively small
spatiotemporal correlation scales. Figure 1.6 illustrates the notion of correlation
time; by definition we have:
Tc ≡
1
R(0) Z +∞
0
R(T)dT , (1.11)
where the dependence in t has been forgotten under the assumption of statistical
homogeneity.
1.4.3 Probability Distribution and PDF
Let us define Fy(x) as the probability of finding a fluctuation of the random var￾iable y in the interval ] − ∞, x]: the function Fy is by definition a probability
distribution. From this definition one has:
• Fy(x) is an increasing function,
• Fy(x) is a continuous function,
• Fy(−∞) = 0 and Fy(+∞) = 1.
If this function is differentiable then F
0
y
(x) defines a probability density function
(PDF), that is, F
0
y
(x) is the probability of finding y in the interval ]x, x + dx]. In the
framework of intermittency (Chapter 2) we will see that the normal (or Gaussian)
and Poisson PDFs play a central role.1.4 Statistical Tools and Symmetries 19
1.4.4 Moments and Cumulants
The moments of a probability density function are the means of the powers:
Mn = hy
n
i = Z +∞
−∞
x
nF
0
y
(x)dx . (1.12)
We may note that the moment of order one is the mean or expected value. The
moments of y − hyi are said to be centered. The variance is the centered moment
of order two:
h(y − hyi)
2
i, (1.13)
while the mean quadratic deviation is the root of the variance.
Given any non-Gaussian random function of zero mean whose second-order
moments are known, it is then possible to calculate the fictitious moments of
order n that this function would have if it were a Gaussian function. The differ￾ence between the actual nth-order moment of the function and the corresponding
Gaussian value is called the nth-order cumulant. Then, the odd cumulants are
equal to the moments (since the odd moments of a Gaussian are zero) and by def￾inition all the cumulants are zero for a Gaussian function. We will come back to
moments, and cumulants in particular, in Chapter 4, when the asymptotic closure
of wave turbulence is introduced.
1.4.5 Structure Functions
A structure function of order n of a quantity f (x) is by definition:
Sn = h(f (x1) − f (x2))n
i = h(δf )
n
i, (1.14)
where x1 and x2 are two points of the space. We will see in Chapter 2 that the
first rigorous law established in turbulence by Kolmogorov (1941a) involves the
velocity structure function of order three.
1.4.6 Symmetries
In order to simplify the analytical study of turbulence, we often impose certain
symmetries on the flow. Unless explicitly stated, the symmetries below are taken
in the statistical sense.
• Homogeneity: This is the space translation invariance. It is the most classical
assumption that is satisfied at the heart of turbulence, that is, far from the walls
of an experiment. This assumption is essential in the theoretical treatment of
turbulence insofar as it brings important simplifications both in physical space
and in Fourier space. For a homogeneous turbulence the ergotic hypothesis
allows one to calculate an ensemble average as a spatial average.20 1 General Introduction
• Stationarity: This is the time translation invariance. It is a very classical
hypothesis insofar as a system generally finds its balance between the external
forces and the dissipation which occurs at a small scales by viscous friction.
For stationarity turbulence the ergotic hypothesis allows one to calculate an
ensemble average as a time average.
• Isotropy: This is an invariance under any arbitrary rotation. It is a classical
assumption in hydrodynamics, which is less justified in presence of an external
agent like, for example, rotation or stratification.
• Mirror symmetry: This is the invariance under any plane symmetry. It corre￾sponds to an invariance when the sign of all vectors (x → −x, u → −u, etc.)
is changed. It allows the removal of quantities such as the kinetic helicity. One
speaks of strong isotropy when turbulence is both isotropic and mirror sym￾metric. Throughout the book we shall use the word isotropy in the weak sense
to indicate invariance under rotations, but not necessarily under reflexions of
the frame of reference.
• Scale invariance: This is the (nonstatistical) invariance by a transformation of
the type u(x, t) → λ
hu(λx, λ
1−h
t). The solutions of the Navier–Stokes equa￾tions satisfy this symmetry if h = −1. If the viscosity is zero then h can be
anything. In practice, this symmetry can be found in the turbulent regime if the
scales considered are much greater than those at which the viscosity acts.
The statistical symmetries we have just defined can emerge in a fluid when the
Reynolds number is large enough. A return to Figure 1.5 is instructive: com￾parison of the five images actually shows that the initial symmetries of the fluid
disappear at an intermediate Reynolds number to reveal other symmetries at large
Reynolds number.
References
Alexakis, A., and Biferale, L. 2018. Cascades and transitions in turbulent flows. Phys.
Rep., 767, 1–101.
Batchelor, G. K. 1946. Double velocity correlation function in turbulent motion. Nature,
158(4024), 883–884.
Batchelor, G. K. 1953. The Theory of Homogeneous Turbulence. Cambridge University
Press.
Biferale, L. 2003. Shell models of energy cascade in turbulence. Ann. Rev. Fluid Mech.,
35(35), 441–468.
Boussinesq, M. J. 1897. Théorie de l’écoulement tourbillonnant et tumultueux des liquides
dans les lits rectilignes à grande section, vol. 1. Gauthier-Villars.
Burgers, J. M. 1925. The motion of a fluid in the boundary layer along a plane smooth sur￾face. In C. B Biezeno and J. M. Burgers (eds.) Proceedings of the First International
Congress for Applied Mechanics, Delft 1924 (pages 113–128). J. Waltman, Jr.
Chandrasekhar, S. 1955. A theory of turbulence. Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. Series A,
229(1176), 1–19.References 21
Chertkov, M., Connaughton, C., Kolokolov, I., and Lebedev, V. 2007. Dynamics of energy
condensation in two-dimensional turbulence. Phys. Rev. Lett., 99(8), 084501.
Davidson, P. A., Kaneda, Y., Moffatt, K., and Sreenivasan, K. R. 2011. A Voyage through
Turbulence. Cambridge University Press.
Feynman, R. P., Leighton, R. B., and Sands, M. 1964. The Feynman Lectures on Physics,
vol. 2: Mainly Electromagnetism and Matter. Addison-Wesley.
Fjørtoft, R. 1953. On the changes in the spectral distribution of kinetic energy for two￾dimensional, non-divergent flow. Tellus, 5, 225–230.
Fox, D. G., and Lilly, D. K. 1972. Numerical simulation of turbulent flows. Rev. Geophys.
Space Phys., 10, 51–72.
Frisch, U. 1995. Turbulence. Cambridge University Press.
Frisch, U., Pouquet, A., Leorat, J., and Mazure, A. 1975. Possibility of an inverse cascade
of magnetic helicity in magnetohydrodynamic turbulence. J. Fluid Mech., 68, 769–
778.
Frisch, U., Sulem, P. L., and Nelkin, M. 1978. A simple dynamical model of intermittent
fully developed turbulence. J. Fluid Mech., 87, 719–736.
Galanti, B., and Tsinober, A. 2004. Is turbulence ergodic? Phys. Lett. A, 330, 173–180.
Galtier, S. 2014. Weak turbulence theory for rotating magnetohydrodynamics and plane￾tary flows. J. Fluid Mech., 757, 114–154.
Galtier, S. 2016. Introduction to Modern Magnetohydrodynamics. Cambridge University
Press.
Galtier, S., and Nazarenko, S. V. 2017. Turbulence of weak gravitational waves in the
early universe. Phys. Rev. Lett., 119(22), 221101.
Grant, H. L., Stewart, R. W., and Moilliet, A. 1962. Turbulence spectra from a tidal
channel. J. Fluid Mech., 12(2), 241–268.
Heisenberg, W. 1948. Zur statistischen Theorie der Turbulenz. Zeit. Physik, 124(7–12),
628–657.
Hénon, M. 1976. A two-dimensional mapping with a strange attractor. Comm. Math.
Physics, 50(1), 69–77.
Iyer, K. P., Sreenivasan, K. R., and Yeung, P. K. 2019. Circulation in high Reynolds
number isotropic turbulence is a bifractal. Phys. Rev. X, 9(4), 041006.
Kaner, É. A., and Yakovenko, V. M. 1970. Weak turbulence spectrum and second sound
in a plasma. J. Exp. Theor. Phys., 31, 316–330.
Kolmogorov, A. N. 1941a. Dissipation of energy in locally isotropic turbulence. Dokl.
Akad. Nauk SSSR, 32, 16–18.
Kolmogorov, A. N. 1941b. The local structure of turbulence in incompressible viscous
fluid for very large Reynolds number. C. R. Acad. Sci. URSS, 30, 301–305.
Kolmogorov, A. N. 1962. A refinement of previous hypotheses concerning the local struc￾ture of turbulence in a viscous incompressible fluid at high Reynolds number. J. Fluid
Mech., 13, 82–85.
Kraichnan, R. H. 1957. Relation of fourth-order to second-order moments in stationary
isotropic turbulence. Phys. Rev., 109(5), 1407–1422.
Kraichnan, R. H. 1958. Irreversible statistical mechanics of incompressible hydromag￾netic turbulence. Phys. Rev., 111(6), 1747 (1 page).
Kraichnan, R. H. 1959. The structure of isotropic turbulence at very high Reynolds
numbers. J. Fluid Mech., 5, 497–543.
Kraichnan, R. H. 1966. Isotropic turbulence and inertial-range structure. Phys. Fluids,
9(9), 1728–1752.
Kraichnan, R. H. 1967. Inertial ranges in two-dimensional turbulence. Phys. Fluids, 10(7),
1417–1423.
Landau, L. D., and Lifshitz, E. M. 1987. Fluid Mechanics. Pergamon Press.
Lee, T. D. 1951. Difference between turbulence in a two-dimensional fluid and in a three￾dimensional fluid. J. Appl. Phys., 22(4), 524 (1 page).22 1 General Introduction
Leith, C. E. 1967. Diffusion approximation to inertial energy transfer in isotropic
turbulence. Phys. Fluids, 10(7), 1409–1416.
Leith, C. E. 1968. Diffusion approximation for two-dimensional turbulence. Phys. Fluids,
11(3), 671–672.
Lorenz, E. N. 1963. Deterministic nonperiodic flow. J. Atmos. Sciences, 20, 130–141.
Mandelbrot, B.B. 1974. Intermittent turbulence in self-similar cascades: Divergence of
high moments and dimension of the carrier. J. Fluid Mech., 62, 331–358.
Millionschikov, M. D. 1939. Decay of homogeneous isotropic turbulence in a viscous
incompressible fluid. Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR, 22, 236–240.
Millionschikov, M. D. 1941. Theory of homogeneous isotropic turbulence. Dokl. Akad.
Nauk SSSR, 22, 241–242.
Monin, A. S., and Yaglom, A. M. 1971. Statistical Fluid Mechanics, Vol. I. MIT Press.
Monin, A. S., and Yaglom, A. M. 1975. Statistical Fluid Mechanics, Vol. 2. MIT Press.
Motzfeld, H. 1938. Frequenzanalyse turbulenter Schwankungen. Z. Angew. Math. Mech.,
18(6), 362–365.
Obukhov, A. M. 1941. Spectral energy distribution in a turbulent flow. Izv. Akad. Nauk
SSSR Ser. Geogr. Geofiz., 5, 453–466.
Obukhov, A. M. 1962. Some specific features of atmospheric turbulence. J. Fluid Mech.,
13, 77–81.
Ogura, Y. 1963. A consequence of the zero-fourth-cumulant approximation in the decay
of isotropic turbulence. J. Fluid Mech., 16, 33–40.
Onsager, L. 1945. The distribution of energy in turbulence. Phys. Rev., 68(11–12), 286 (1
page).
Orszag, S. A. 1970. Analytical theories of turbulence. J. Fluid Mech., 41, 363–386.
Orszag, S. A., and Patterson, G. S. 1972. Numerical simulation of three-dimensional
homogeneous isotropic turbulence. Phys. Rev. Lett., 28(2), 76–79.
Paret, J., and Tabeling, P. 1997. Experimental observation of the two-dimensional inverse
energy cascade. Phys. Rev. Lett., 79(21), 4162–4165.
Patterson, G. S., Jr., and Orszag, S. A. 1971. Spectral calculations of isotropic turbulence:
Efficient removal of aliasing interactions. Phys. Fluids, 14(11), 2538–2541.
Poincaré, H. 1890. Sur le problème des trois corps et les équations de la dynamique Acta
Mathematica, 13, 1–270.
Pope, S. B. 2000. Turbulent Flows. Cambridge University Press.
Pouquet, A., and Patterson, G. S. 1978. Numerical simulation of helical magnetohydro￾dynamic turbulence. J. Fluid Mech., 85, 305–323.
Pouquet, A., Lesieur, M., Andre, J. C., and Basdevant, C. 1975. Evolution of high
Reynolds number two-dimensional turbulence. J. Fluid Mech., 72, 305–319.
Pouquet, A., Frisch, U., and Leorat, J. 1976. Strong MHD helical turbulence and the
nonlinear dynamo effect. J. Fluid Mech., 77, 321–354.
Pouquet, A., Rosenberg, D., Stawarz, J. E., and Marino, R. 2019. Helicity dynamics,
inverse, and bidirectional cascades in fluid and magnetohydrodynamic turbulence:
A brief review. Earth Space Science, 6(3), 351–369.
Reynolds, O. 1883. An experimental investigation of the circumstances which determine
whether the motion of water shall be direct or sinuous and the law of resistance in
parallel channels. Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc., 174, 935–982.
Richardson, L. F. 1922. Weather Predictions by Numerical Process. Cambridge University
Press.
Richardson, L. F. 1926. Atmospheric diffusion shown on a distance-neighbour graph.
Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. Series A, 110(756), 709–737.
Rossby, C. G., and collaborators. 1939. Relation between variations in the intensity of the
zonal circulation of the atmosphere and the displacements of the semi-permanent
centers of action. J. Marine Res., 2, 38–55.References 23
Taylor, G. I. 1935. Statistical theory of turbulence. Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. Series A,
151(873), 421–444.
Taylor, G. I. 1938. The spectrum of turbulence. Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. Series A, 164(919),
476–490.
von Kármán, T., and Howarth, L. 1938. On the statistical theory of isotropic turbulence.
Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. Series A, 164(917), 192–215.
Yaglom, A. M. 1949. Local structure of the temperature field in a turbulent flow. Dokl.
Akad. Nauk SSSR, 69, 743–746.
Zakharov, V. E. 1967. Weak-Turbulence spectrum in a plasma without a magnetic field. J.
Exp. Theor. Phys., 24, 455–459.
Zakharov, V. E., and Filonenko, N. N. 1966. The energy spectrum for stochastic
oscillations of a fluid surface. Doclady Akad. Nauk. SSSR, 170, 1292–1295.
Zakharov, V. E., and Filonenko, N. N. 1967. Energy spectrum for stochastic oscillations
of the surface of a liquid. Soviet Phys. Dokl., 11, 881–884.
Zaslavskii, M. M., and Zakharov, V. E. 1982. The kinetic equation and Kolmogorov
spectra in the weak turbulence theory of wind waves. Izv. Atmos. Ocean Phys., 18,
747–753.Part I
Fundamentals of Turbulence2
Eddy Turbulence in Hydrodynamics
2.1 Navier–Stokes Equations
In this chapter, we shall focus on incompressible hydrodynamics and eddy turbu￾lence. The associated equations are the Navier–Stokes equations, established by
Claude Louis Marie Henri Navier and George Gabriel Stokes (see Figure 2.2):
∂u
∂t
+ u · ∇u = −∇P/ρ0 + ν1u , (2.1a)
∇ · u = 0 , (2.1b)
where u is the flow velocity, P the pressure, ρ0 the mass density which is supposed
to be constant, and ν the kinematic viscosity. The second equation ensures the
incompressibility of the fluid. We will assume that the reader knows the basics of
fluid mechanics. Although this system is relatively simple, it already concentrates
all the difficulties inherent to the treatment of turbulence with the presence of a
nonlinear term. The relative importance of this term is usually measured by the
Reynolds number (see Chapter 1):
Re ≡
|u · ∇u|
|ν1u|
∼
UL
ν
, (2.2)
where U and L are the characteristic velocity and length of the flow, respectively.
Subsequently, we will assume that the Reynolds number is very large: in practice,
this means that the limit Re → +∞ will be taken.
2.2 Turbulence and Heating
2.2.1 Joule’s Experiment
Joule was a physicist known for his studies on energy conversion in the form of
heating. We all know the Joule effect, which is the thermal manifestation of elec￾trical resistance that occurs when an electric current passes through a conductive
material. But he was also interested in mechanics. In a famous experiment, Joule
2728 2 Eddy Turbulence in Hydrodynamics
Figure 2.1 Eddy turbulence: vorticity produced by a direct numerical simulation of two￾dimensional Navier–Stokes equations (see Chapter 3).
Figure 2.2 Claude Louis Marie Henri Navier (left) and George Gabriel Stokes (right)
established the eponymous equations that describe viscous fluids (Navier, 1823; Stokes,
1845).
(1850) measured precisely the mechanical equivalent of heat. This experiment,
which he did at home in his cellar, is relatively simple in its design (Young, 2015).
A paddle wheel placed in a tank containing water is driven by a rope attached at
the other end to a mass (see Figure 2.3). The fall of the mass from a given height
is used to evaluate the mechanical work. The heating of the water set in motion by
the blades can be deduced from the increase in temperature, measured with a ther￾mometer placed in the tank. To obtain a measurable temperature increase (from
0.5 oF to 2 oF), the experiment, that is, the fall of the mass, would be repeated about2.2 Turbulence and Heating 29
Figure 2.3 The Joule (1850) experiment to measure the conversion of mechanical energy
into heat. The fall of the mass on the right causes the blades to move in a tank containing
water (left). The water temperature is measured using a thermometer (vertical rod to the
left of the tank). This experiment made it possible to demonstrate the equivalence between
work and heat. From the point of view of turbulence, we can interpret this experiment as
a manifestation of energy transfer from large scales (movement of the blades) to small
viscous scales from which energy is dissipated and the fluid heated.
20 times in a row. Joule was thus able to demonstrate the mechanical equivalent
of heat.
What is the link between Joule’s experiment and turbulence? If we look at this
experiment from a different angle, we can see here a proof of the transfer of the
kinetic energy of the fluid from the large scales to the small viscous scales from
which the energy is dissipated and the fluid heated.1 The interpretation is then as
follows: the setting in motion of the fluid by the blades is characterized by eddies
whose size is comparable to that of the blades; then, by a process of direct cascade,
the energy associated with these large eddies is finally found at the smallest scales
in the form of small fluctuations in velocity, or, in the language of turbulence, in
the form of small eddies, which disintegrate as a result of viscous friction. Without
1 Of course, it is possible that part of the heating of the water is of a diffusive nature with a direct transmission
between the heated objects (by friction with the rope for example) and water.30 2 Eddy Turbulence in Hydrodynamics
knowing it, Joule was probably the first to highlight a fundamental property of
turbulence.
2.2.2 Mean Rate of Energy Dissipation
The Joule experiment highlights the heating process by viscous friction. What
happens when the viscosity of the fluid is lower? In other words, in a fully devel￾oped turbulent regime, when the Reynolds number is increasing, and for identical
experiment conditions, one can ask if the dissipation (or heating) through viscous
friction decreases so that it becomes zero within the limit Re → +∞ (since at
ν = 0 kinetic energy is a priori conserved). If this is the case, the smallest eddies,
generated after a cascade, should accumulate since they are less dissipated. This
thought experiment leads us to a surprising conclusion: within the limit of large
Reynolds numbers, a fully developed turbulence excited at a large scale should be
characterized by essentially small vortices and by the impossibility of reaching a
statistically stationary regime, because the equilibrium between a large-scale forc￾ing and the viscous dissipation at small scales would become impossible. This
behavior is contrary to experimental measurements where the stationarity of the
turbulence is observed.
It is difficult to know if Kolmogorov (1941b) followed the same reasoning;
however, we can see that one of his hypotheses is that the mean rate of dissipation
of kinetic energy ε becomes independent of viscosity within the large Re. Note
in passing that Taylor (1935) also reached this conclusion by proposing a semi￾phenomenological demonstration to interpret some experimental data.
Let us see what this means in terms of energy conservation. From the Navier–
Stokes equations, we get:
ρ0
2
∂u
2
∂t
= ρ0u ·
∂u
∂t
= ρ0u · (−u · ∇u − ∇P/ρ0 + ν1u) . (2.3)
The use of a vector identity (see Appendix B) allows us to write in the
incompressible case:
u · 1u = −u · (∇ × w) = ∇ · (u × w) − w
2
, (2.4)
with by definition w ≡ ∇ × u the vorticity; then, one obtains:
ρ0
2
∂u
2
∂t
= −ρ0u · ∇ 
u
2
2

− ∇ · (Pu − ρ0ν u × w) − ρ0ν w
2
. (2.5)
After some manipulation, we finally come to the local form of the kinetic energy
conservation (E ≡ ρ0u
2
/2):
∂E
∂t
= −∇ · ρ0u
2
2
+ P

u − ρ0ν u × w

− ρ0ν w
2
. (2.6)2.2 Turbulence and Heating 31
The kinetic energy variation is therefore due to two types of term: a flux F and
a source S. The source (last term on the right) is negative and depends on the
viscosity. In other words, it is an irreversible source of energy dissipation for
the turbulent system which is always zero in the inviscid case (ν = 0). In the
divergence operator, we find an energy flux and a nonlinear viscous contribution
depending on the velocity. The integral form of the kinetic energy conservation is
written:
d
dt ZZZ E dV = − Z

Z
F · n dS − ρ0ν
ZZZ w
2
dV . (2.7)
In the particular case of an integration on a volume large enough to contain all
the fluid (so that on the surface of this volume u = 0; one can also consider peri￾odic boundary conditions), the flux is canceled out so that only a purely viscous
dissipation contribution remains.
Subsequently, we will consider the ensemble average, which can be calculated
via a spatial average when turbulence is statistically homogeneous (see Chapter
1). If we think of a direct numerical simulation carried out in a periodic box, this
is equivalent to taking the spatial average of this box. In this case, and with the
notations introduced previously, we obtain the exact relation:
dhEi
dt
= −ρ0νhw
2
i ≡ −ε(ν) . (2.8)
With this calculation, the mean rate of energy dissipation ε is now well defined.2
Expression (2.8) allows the introduction of a quantity often used: the enstrophy,3
 ≡ w
2
/2.
2.2.3 Spontaneous Symmetry Breaking
In the previous expression, it is not obvious that ε becomes independent of viscos￾ity within the limit of a large Reynolds number. This assertion assumes that there
is, at the same time, an increase in vorticity such that hw
2
i ∝ 1/ν. Physically,
this behavior is not in contradiction with the idea of a direct cascade since small
eddies are associated with small and rapid fluctuations in velocity. Since vorticity
involves a spatial derivative, we can be convinced that its modulus increases when
moving towards small scales. This property of ε cannot be rigorously demon￾strated; however, it can be highlighted numerically. In Figure 2.4, we report the
results of four freely decaying numerical simulations, that is to say, without exter￾nal forcing. The initial condition consists in exciting the flow on a large scale by
depositing energy only on a few (small) Fourier modes. The parameters of the
2 Usually this is the mean rate of energy dissipation per unit of mass, ε/ρ0, which is used. The comparison
with the compressible case (see Section 2.9) shows that our definition is actually more universal.
3 The word “enstrophy” comes from the Greek σ τρωϕη´, which means rotation.32 2 Eddy Turbulence in Hydrodynamics
Figure 2.4 Temporal variation of the mean rate of energy dissipation ε for different Reyn￾olds numbers: Re = 102
(dot), 103
(dash-dot), 104
(dash), and 105
(solid). Freely decaying
numerical simulations.
calculation are the same, only the viscosity changes, and thus the Reynolds num￾ber, which varies by a power of 10 between Re = 102
and Re = 105
. We see that
the curves tend to overlap when Re increases, which shows that indeed ε(t) tends
to become independent of viscosity. The asymptotic shape of this curve reflects
the fact that turbulence first passes through a phase of development characterized
by essentially a zero dissipation rate. This is the period during which turbulence
develops: the direct cascade generates smaller and smaller eddies; when the small￾est modes are reached, viscous dissipation becomes significant and ε increases
sharply. The last phase of decay is related to the fact that the system is not forced:
consequently, the dissipated energy is not renewed and the dissipation rate can
only decrease and tend towards zero after an infinite time. In the presence of a sta￾tionary external force, the behavior is different: the turbulent system adjusts itself
so that the energy injection and dissipation rate compensate each other on aver￾age; in this case ε also becomes independent of time. The fact that the mean rate of
energy dissipation tends towards a finite value at large Re is observed numerically
(Kaneda et al., 2003) and also experimentally with a Reynolds number that can
approach 108 using superfluids (Sreenivasan, 1984; Pearson et al., 2002; Ravelet
et al., 2008; Saint-Michel et al., 2014).
Suppose that ε becomes asymptotically independent of viscosity at high Re.
Moreover, we know that the Euler equations, that is, the Navier–Stokes equations
at zero viscosity, conserve energy. Therefore, with expression (2.8) we obtain the
property:
lim
ν→0
dhEi
dt
= −ε 6= 0 . (2.9)2.3 Kármán–Howarth Equation 33
This property is a fundamental law of turbulence – often called the zeroth law.
Behind this result hides a remarkable physical property. Viscosity is the parame￾ter that breaks the symmetry of the system by evacuating energy irreversibly by
heating or, in other words, by producing entropy. Viscosity thus induces a sym￾metry breaking of the time reversal in the Navier–Stokes equations. Now, relation
(2.9) tells us that when the parameter ν, at the source of this symmetry breaking,
tends towards zero, its effect (the symmetry breaking) remains nonzero: we have
here an example of spontaneous symmetry breaking.4
In turbulence, we call this
anomalous dissipation.
2.3 Kármán–Howarth Equation
The first exact law in turbulence was obtained by Kolmogorov (1941a): it is the
four-fifths law whose name is simply due to the value of the constant that appears
in the expression. The path taken by Kolmogorov requires a delicate tensor anal￾ysis which – although elegant and historical – tends to make the formalism more
cumbersome. We choose to follow, here, a more modern path which allows us to
obtain, with less computation, an exact law with a slightly different form;5
it is the
four-thirds law obtained by Antonia et al. (1997). These Kolmogorov laws express
how third-order structure functions in velocity are related to the distance between
the two measurement points in the case of statistically homogeneous and isotropic
turbulence. To achieve this, we have to go through the Kármán–Howarth equation
(von Kármá and Howarth 1938).
Let us write the Navier–Stokes equations at points x and x
0
for the components
i and j, respectively. Using Einstein’s notations, we get:
∂tui + ∂k (ukui) = −∂iP/ρ0 + ν∂2
kkui
, (2.10a)
∂tu
0
j + ∂
0
k
(u
0
k
u
0
j
) = −∂
0
jP
0
/ρ0 + ν∂02
kku
0
j
, (2.10b)
where the incompressibility condition writes ∂kuk = 0. To simplify the writing,
we define u(x) ≡ u, u(x
0
) ≡ u
0
, ∂/∂x
0 ≡ ∂
0
and we will consider that the velocity
fluctuations are of zero mean, that is to say, hui = 0. We multiply the first equation
by u
0
j
and the second by ui
. The addition of the two equations gives us, taking the
ensemble average, a dynamic equation for the second-order correlation tensor:
∂thuiu
0
j
i + h∂k (ukuiu
0
j
) + ∂
0
k
(u
0
k
u
0
j
ui)i = (2.11)
−h∂i(Pu0
j
/ρ0) + ∂
0
j
(P
0ui/ρ0)i + νh∂
2
kk (uiu
0
j
) + ∂
02
kk (u
0
j
ui)i.
To get this expression, we used the relation: ∂ku
0
j = ∂
0
k
ui = 0. Subsequently, we
will make extensive use of properties that are valid in statistically homogeneous
4 Turbulence was the first example in physics where such a breaking was reported. The second would come
later in quantum electrodynamics (Schwinger, 1951; Davidson et al., 2011).
5 This is also the approach used in MHD for electrically conducting fluids (see Chapter 8).34 2 Eddy Turbulence in Hydrodynamics
turbulence (see Batchelor, 1953). Since turbulence is statistically homogeneous,
the two-point correlation tensors depend only on the relative distance `, with x
0 =
x + `, and not on the absolute positions x and x
0
(see Figure 2.5). In particular, we
have:
h∂k (ukuiu
0
j
)i = −∂`k
hukuiu
0
j
i, (2.12a)
h∂
0
k
(u
0
k
u
0
j
ui)i = ∂`k
hu
0
k
u
0
j
uii, (2.12b)
hence the expression:
∂thuiu
0
j
i + ∂`k
hu
0
k
u
0
j
ui − ukuiu
0
j
i = (2.13)
+∂`i
hPu0
j
/ρ0i − ∂`j
hP
0ui/ρ0i + 2ν∂2
`k`k
huiu
0
j
i.
We will now restrict ourselves to the trace of the second-order correlation ten￾sor. In this case, the equation simplifies for two reasons: on the one hand, the
contribution of the pressure disappears by incompressibility:
∂`i
hPu0
i
/ρ0i = h∂
0
i
(Pu0
i
/ρ0)i = h(P/ρ0)∂
0
i
u
0
i
i = 0 , (2.14)
and on the other hand, we have by homogeneity:
∂`k
hukuiu
0
i
i(`) ≡ ∂`k
huk (x)ui(x)ui(x + `)i
= ∂`k
huk (x − `)ui(x − `)ui(x)i ≡ ∂`k
hu
0
k
u
0
i
uii(−`)
= −∂`k
hu
0
k
u
0
i
uii(`) . (2.15)
Figure 2.5 In statistically homogeneous turbulence, only the relative position of the two
points M and M0
is relevant.2.4 Locality and Cascade 35
Hence the expression:
∂thuiu
0
i
i = −2∂`k
hu
0
k
u
0
i
uii + 2ν∂2
`k`k
huiu
0
i
i
= −2∇` · huiu
0
iu
0
i + 2ν∂2
`k`k
huiu
0
i
i. (2.16)
The introduction of the third-order structure function gives (with the assumption
of homogeneity):
h(δu · δu)δui ≡ h(u
0
i − ui)
2
(u
0 − u)i
= −2huiu
0
iu
0
i + 2huiu
0
iui + hui
2u
0
i − hu
0
i
2
ui. (2.17)
By incompressibility, then homogeneity, we find:
∇` · h(δu · δu)δui = −2∇` · huiu
0
iu
0
i + 2∇` · huiu
0
iui
= −4∇` · huiu
0
iu
0
i. (2.18)
Finally, we obtain the dynamic equation for a homogeneous turbulence:
∂t

uiu
0
i
2

=
1
4
∇` · h(δu · δu)δui + 2ν∂2
`k`k

uiu
0
i
2

. (2.19)
This is the Kármán–Howarth equation obtained by the authors6
in 1938, which
reflects the dynamic evolution of the velocity correlation at two points.
2.4 Locality and Cascade
To go further in the analysis and obtain the exact Kolmogorov law, it is necessary
to introduce a locality hypothesis. This hypothesis asserts that there is an interval
of scales – called the inertial range – where the physics of turbulence is insensitive
(i) to large-scale flow motions, whose dynamics are correlated in particular to
the action of a nonuniversal external force, and (ii) to small-scale motions whose
dynamics are governed by viscous dissipation. In practice, this means that the
inertial range7
lies on the interval:
`diss  `  `0 , (2.20)
with `0 the typical scale where an external force applies and `diss the typical scale
where the viscous dissipation becomes important. Therefore, the inertial range is
the domain where nonlinear physics dominates; it is here that we can hope to find
some universality in the flow behavior.
A fundamental hypothesis proposed by Kolmogorov (1941b) is that, within this
scale interval, turbulence can be considered statistically homogeneous and iso￾tropic. Note that the assumption of statistical homogeneity has already been used
6
In fact, its original form was slightly different because it involved the longitudinal and transverse correlations
(von Kármán and Howarth, 1938).
7 The name inertial comes of course from the inertial term, u · ∇u, from the Navier–Stokes equations.36 2 Eddy Turbulence in Hydrodynamics
to obtain the Kármán–Howarth equation: the correlation scale ` in this equation is
therefore assumed to be sufficiently small. In Figure 2.6, we schematically repre￾sent the physics of turbulence in the inertial range: it is characterized by a cascade
of eddies from large to small scales. This classical image of the cascade process
has, above all, a pedagogical dimension, because the reality is a bit different. An
illustration of the vortex structures actually present in hydrodynamic turbulence
is visible in Figure 2.7: direct numerical simulations show instead that we have
nested vorticity tubes (like Russian dolls) which are thinning over time.
A more realistic phenomenological interpretation of the cascade was proposed
by Taylor (1937). His reasoning is based on the topological conservation of a
vorticity tube in the inviscid case. We know that in turbulence two points tend
statistically to move away from each other by turbulent diffusion. From this prop￾erty, we can be convinced that a vorticity tube will tend to stretch over time. Since
the volume of the tube is preserved by incompressibility, a stretching of this tube
implies at the same time a thinning. On the other hand, we know that the vortic￾ity flow in the tube is conserved (Kelvin’s theorem), therefore, a thinning of the
tube implies an increase in the vorticity norm. (It can be shown that this norm
increases in proportion to the elongation of the tube.) This process stops when
the radius of the tube reaches the viscous dissipation scale. The vorticity tube is
then destroyed. It is interesting to relate the increase of vorticity at small scales to
relation (2.8): when ν → 0, the system will produce thinner and thinner vorticity
tubes as w
2 → +∞. We find here a beginning of explanation of the anomalous
dissipation. We will come back to this in Section 2.7.1.
Figure 2.6 Three-dimensional hydrodynamic turbulence is characterized by a cascade of
eddies from large to small scales. This energy transfer process is carried out from scale
to scale from the energy injection scale `0 via an external forcing, up to its dissipation
by viscous friction from a typical scale `diss. The inertial range is located on the interval
`diss  `  `0.2.5 Kolmogorov’s Exact Law 37
Figure 2.7 Direct numerical simulation of Navier–Stokes equations with a spatial res￾olution 1024 × 1024 × 1024. Two iso-surfaces of vorticity are drawn in a localized
region of the simulation box. Results from the database JHU Turbulence Database Cluster;
http://turbulence.pha.jhu.edu. Reprinted with permission (Galtier, 2016).
2.5 Kolmogorov’s Exact Law
The Kármán–Howarth equation was obtained without introducing an external
force; this is also the situation considered by Kolmogorov (1941a). However,
the calculation assumes in its final resolution the stationarity of the turbulence;
it is therefore more consistent to introduce an external force to maintain a fully
developed turbulence. In practice, this corresponds to adding to the Navier–Stokes
equations (2.1a) a term f in the right-hand side. This force is assumed to be ran￾dom, homogeneous, and stationary in nature. The Kármán–Howarth equation is
then modified as follows:
∂t

uiu
0
i
2

=
1
4
∇` · h(δui)
2
δui + 2ν∂2
`k`k

uiu
0
i
2

+ F(`) , (2.21)
with the correlator F(`) = hfiu
0
i + f
0
i
uii/2. To appreciate its shape, we have to
come back to the energy conservation equation. In the presence of f, we get:
dhEi
dt
= ρ0hf · ui − ε = ρ0F(0) − ε . (2.22)
Therefore, the stationary regime corresponds to a statistical equilibrium between
forcing and dissipation.
We will place ourselves in the inertial range in order to highlight the universal
behavior of turbulence. We will assume that the external force acts only at the
largest scales of the system. In this case, we can evaluate its contribution by a
simple Taylor development:38 2 Eddy Turbulence in Hydrodynamics
F(`) ' F(0) + ` · ∇`F(`) , (2.23)
with ρ0F(0) = +ε. Consequently, under the stationarity hypothesis we obtain:
0 =
1
4
∇` · h(δui)
2
δui + 2ν∂`k`k

uiu
0
i
2

+ ε/ρ0 . (2.24)
The relation (2.24) is valid for homogeneous, stationary turbulence such that
`  `0 (which is not equivalent to the limit ` → 0). It becomes simpler if we
assume `diss  ` to be at the heart of the inertial range (which means that we
consider the limit ν → 0). In this case, the dissipation term of equation (2.24)
is negligible and the zeroth law of turbulence can be used. A primitive form of
Kolmogorov’s law is obtained:8
−4ε¯ = ∇` · h(δui)
2
δui , (2.25)
with ε¯ ≡ ε/ρ0 the mean rate of energy dissipation per unit of mass. This
expression is valid for both isotropic and nonisotropic turbulence.9
Kolmogorov’s exact law, in its classical form, can be obtained by finally assum￾ing that turbulence is statistically isotropic. In this case, all that remains to be
done is to integrate equation (2.25) on a full sphere of radius `; one obtains the
four-thirds law valid when `diss  `  `0:
−
4
3
ε`¯ = h(δui)
2
δu`i , (2.26)
where u` is the longitudinal component of the velocity, that is, that along the direc￾tion of separation ` between the two measuring points. As already mentioned, the
law originally obtained by Kolmogorov is a bit different: it is the exact four-fifths
law, which is written:
−
4
5
ε`¯ = h(δu`)
3
i , (2.27)
with the same notations. Note that this law is experimentally easier to use because
it only requires knowing one component of velocity. Contrary to appearances, the
mathematical link between the four-thirds law and the four-fifths law is not trivial
(e.g. one must be careful to project the components of velocity before calculating
their statistical value).
Kolmogorov’s law (2.27) is the first exact result in turbulence. It is a universal
law invariant by Galilean transformation, which describes (in the inertial range)
the statistically homogeneous, stationary, and isotropic hydrodynamic turbulence.
8 Note that this primitive form is not unique: for example, it is possible to obtain a law that involves the vorticity
but not the divergence operator (Banerjee and Galtier, 2017).
9 For its derivation we did not make any assumption of the type of regime, so this law is also valid for wave tur￾bulence such as inertial wave turbulence, that is, fast-rotating hydrodynamic turbulence which is anisotropic
with a cascade mainly in the direction transverse to the axis of rotation (see Chapter 6).2.6 Phenomenology of Eddy Turbulence 39
Re = 106
Re = 104
Re = 102
0.8
/0 0
1 10 102 103 104 105
Figure 2.8 Schematic reproduction of experimental measurements in a wind tunnel
(see, e.g., Antonia and Burattini, 2006): the higher the Reynolds number, the better the
Kolmogorov four-fifths law holds.
By exact, we mean a law obtained rigorously after an analytical calculation. Of
course, hypotheses have been made, but they are all mathematically well defined.
Kolmogorov’s laws are well verified10 numerically and experimentally (Moisy
et al., 1999; Antonia and Burattini, 2006): in Figure 2.8, we report schematically
a series of experimental measurements of the four-fifths law. Since then, other
exact laws have been obtained: this is essentially an extension of the four-thirds
law to other incompressible fluids. Note that the first compressible exact law was
obtained only 70 years after Kolmogorov: it describes the compressible hydrody￾namic turbulence in the isothermal case (Galtier and Banerjee, 2011). The most
interesting applications of this law concern turbulence in interstellar clouds where
stars are formed. Indeed, observations reveal that the turbulent Mach number in
these clouds approaches 100 (see Section 2.9).
2.6 Phenomenology of Eddy Turbulence
To obtain the exact four-thirds law, we have done a rigorous analysis which is,
therefore, quite long. This law can in fact be found more quickly by a phenom￾enological approach – therefore less rigorous. However, this approach is very
useful because it highlights the main quantities required to describe the physics of
turbulence.
We will rely on Figure 2.6, focusing on the energy transfer in the inertial range
at a ` scale such that `diss  `  `0. We can associate with this scale an eddy
of size `. The velocity of this eddy is noted u`: we sometimes speak of the eddy
turnover velocity. We can also define this velocity by the relation p
h(δu`)
2
i. From
these two quantities, we can construct a (nonlinear) eddy turnover time τNL ∼ `/u`.
Note that this is also the time that emerges dimensionally from the Navier–Stokes
10 Note that it is easier to highlight the dimensional (nonexact) law h(δu`
)
2
i ∝ `
2/3
for the second-order
structure function because it is a positive definite quantity (Antonia and Burattini, 2006; Ishihara et al., 2020).40 2 Eddy Turbulence in Hydrodynamics
equations. In this phenomenological approach, we will associate τNL to the char￾acteristic time of the energy cascade at the scale `. Therefore, the mean rate of
energy transfer from the scale ` to a smaller scale can be written (ρ0 = 1):
ε¯` ∼
dE`
dt
∼
u
2
`
τNL
∼
u
3
`
`
, (2.28)
with E` the energy of the associated eddy. As in the inertial range, energy is neither
injected nor dissipated; the mean rate of energy transfer ε` must be equal to the
mean rate of energy injection or dissipation ε. This ultimately brings us to the
phenomenological relation:
ε`¯ ∼ u
3
`
, (2.29)
which is the dimensional analogue of Kolmogorov’s (four-thirds or four-fifths)
law. To obtain expression (2.29), we used the locality of the cascade, as well as
the isotropy hypothesis. We will see later how this last hypothesis can be relaxed
to allow us to predict the right energy spectrum in anisotropic turbulence (see
Chapter 6).
2.7 Inertial Dissipation and Singularities
2.7.1 Onsager’s Conjecture
In this section, we will discuss the consequences of the anomalous dissipation
(2.9), which asserts that the mean rate of energy dissipation tends to a positive
nonzero value when ν → 0
+. We always place ourselves in the three-dimensional
case. We will introduce the inertial dissipation, which is linked to the existence
of singularities, a concept that belongs more to mathematics than to physics.
However, it is interesting to see what we can learn from mathematics to better
understand physics.
Since we have by definition ε = ρ0νhw
2
i, the anomalous dissipation necessar￾ily implies that the vorticity (or enstrophy) tends to become infinite in a region
of the flow within the ν → 0
+ limit. Let us note first of all that with the phe￾nomenology of Taylor (1937) presented in Section 2.4, we obtain a vorticity that
tends towards infinity in the inviscid limit. This behavior is also supported by
a phenomenological analysis of the vorticity equation, which can be written as
follows:
Dw
Dt
≡
∂ω
∂t
+ u · ∇w = w · ∇u , (2.30)
with D/Dt the Lagrangian derivative. Since dimensionally ∇u ∼ w, we get:
Dw
Dt
∼ w
2
, (2.31)2.7 Inertial Dissipation and Singularities 41
whose solution is of the form |w| ∼ 1/(t∗ − t). This solution implies an explosion
of vorticity in a finite time t∗.
11 The works dedicated to the appearance of singu￾larities in fluid mechanics are of diverse nature. For example, there are those based
on a spectral technique that allows us to follow a complex singularity over time,
and to measure its proximity to the real axis. If it touches the real axis, it becomes
a true singularity. In practice, only a trend can be identified because, in the invis￾cid case, direct numerical simulations become unstable in a finite time, whereas
in the presence of viscosity the motion of the singularity is modified by the latter
in a finite time (Brachet et al., 1983; Sulem et al., 1983; Fournier and Galtier,
2001). Let us note that a new physical scenario has recently been proposed: the
appearance of singularities in Euler’s equations could be linked to the collision of
vorticity tubes and their transformation into layers (Brenner et al., 2016). But to
date, the proof of the appearance of singularity in a finite time has not yet been
obtained. This is also a major research topic for mathematicians.12
A singular behavior of vorticity may seem difficult to accept physically: it
means in particular that the velocity becomes an irregular field within the ν → 0
+
limit (see Figure 2.9 for an illustration). Derivative operations are then no longer
applicable, and expression (2.25) becomes inappropriate. This situation was con￾sidered by the mathematician Leray (1934), who introduced the notion of weak
solution for Navier–Stokes equations (behind this lies the concept of distribution
Figure 2.9 Velocity fluctuations for three Reynolds numbers Re. With the increase of Re,
the irregularity of the field emerges as discontinuities.
11 For two-dimensional turbulence, the situation is different since the vorticity equation (which is then a sca￾lar function) becomes a simple transport equation. In this particular case, theorems on the existence and
uniqueness of the solutions can be established (Bardos, 1972).
12 The question of the underlying regularity of the velocity field, at any instant, is one of the seven Millennium
mathematical problems proposed by the Clay Institute. A million-dollar reward is promised for a significant
breakthrough on this question.42 2 Eddy Turbulence in Hydrodynamics
Figure 2.10 The convolution operation (2.32) applied to the image on the left gives new
images that are increasingly blurry as ` becomes larger (images on the right). Images
made by V. David.
later formalized by Laurent Schwartz). The underlying idea of this approach is to
introduce a local average of the field values in an increasingly tightened volume
around the point of study. In practice, a field mean weighted by a ϕ
`
function is
computed on a full sphere of radius ` such that:
u
`
(x, t) ≡
Z
R3
ϕ
`
(ξ )u(x + ξ , t)dξ , (2.32)
with:
ϕ
`
(ξ ) ≡
ϕ(ξ/`)
`
3
. (2.33)
By definition, ϕ ∈ C
∞, and is compactly supported on R
3
, even, positive, and
such that R
R3 ϕ(ξ )dξ = 1 . These properties assure that ϕ
`
tends towards the
distribution δ(ξ ) within the limit ` → 0 and that therefore:
u
`
(x, t) −−→
`→0
u(x, t) . (2.34)
With this mathematical tool, it is possible to obtain a small-scale smoothed version
of the Navier–Stokes equations while keeping intact information coming from the
largest scales: in mathematical language, we speak of a weak (or regularized) for￾mulation of the equations. Figure 2.10 shows the consequences of the smoothing
operation on an image.
As we will see in the Section 2.7.2, it is possible to demonstrate with this
tool that an irregular velocity field can potentially lead to local energy dissipa￾tion. This result has been proven by French mathematicians Duchon and Robert
(2000), but it was actually Onsager (1949) (see also Eyink and Sreenivasan, 2006)
who was the first to speculate that energy could be dissipated without the assis￾tance of viscosity, by the simple fact of irregularities in the velocity field. This
potential dissipation of energy is called inertial dissipation, as opposed to viscous
dissipation. The importance of this conjecture lies in the fact that the anomalous2.7 Inertial Dissipation and Singularities 43
dissipation in turbulence could have its origin in the velocity field irregularities of
the Euler equations.13
2.7.2 Weak Formulation
In this section, we will establish the expression for the inertial dissipation DI
. To
do this, let us apply the smoothing operator to the Navier–Stokes equations:
∂tu
` + ∂j(uju)
` = −∇P
`
/ρ0 + ν1u
`
. (2.35)
After multiplying by u (a weak solution) and some manipulations, we get:
∂t(u · u
`
) + u · ∂j(uju)
` + u
`
· ∂j(uju) =
−u · ∇P
`
/ρ0 − u
`
· ∇P/ρ0 + νu · 1u
` + νu
`
· 1u . (2.36)
With the relation:
∇ · 
(u
`
· u)u

= uiuj∂ju
`
i + u
`
i
∂j(uiuj) , (2.37)
and the condition of zero divergence on the velocity, we can rewrite the previous
expression in the form:
∂t(u · u
`
) + ∇ · 
(u · u
`
)u + (P
`
/ρ0)u + (P/ρ0)u
`

=
−ui∂j(uiuj)
` + uiuj∂ju
`
i + νu · 1u
` + νu
`
· 1u . (2.38)
We define the inertial dissipation (per unit mass) from the third-order structure
function:
D
`
I ≡
1
4
Z
R3
∇ϕ
`
(ξ ) ·

(δu)
2
δu

dξ . (2.39)
After an integration by part and the development of the structure function, we
obtain:
4D
`
I = −∂j(u
2
uj)
` + 2ui∂j(uiuj)
` + uj∂j(u
2
)
` − 2uiuj∂ju
`
i
. (2.40)
Introducing this expression into relation (2.38) gives:
∂t

u · u
`
2

+ ∇ · u · u
`
2

u +
P
`u + Pu
`
2ρ0

=
1
4
∂j

uj(u
2
)
` − (u
2
uj)
`

− D
`
I +
ν
2
ui1u
`
i +
ν
2
u
`
i 1ui
. (2.41)
13 The physicist may, however, wonder whether this mathematical origin of the anomalous dissipation is physi￾cally relevant, because the irregularities in question involve a physical description on an infinitely small scale,
for which the Euler equations are in theory no longer valid.44 2 Eddy Turbulence in Hydrodynamics
After using vector identities (see Appendix B), we find the exact equation for
energy conservation (per unit mass):
∂t

u · u
`
2

+ ∇ · J
` = −D
`
I − D
`
ν
, (2.42)
where by definition the energy flux (per unit mass) is:
J
` ≡
u · u
`
2
u +
P
`u + Pu
`
2ρ0
−
νu
` × w + νu × w
`
2
+
(u
2u)
` − u(u
2
)
`
4
, (2.43)
and the viscous dissipation (per unit mass):
D
`
ν ≡ ν w · w
`
. (2.44)
Expression (2.42) can be seen as a weak formulation of the Kármán–Howarth
equation (2.19). Unlike that famous equation, the weak formulation does not use
the ensemble average: it is therefore a local form of energy conservation. The
correlation is made between a field at position x and another field averaged over a
full sphere of radius ` centered at the point x; this correlation can be rewritten in
the form:
u · u
` =
Z
R3
ϕ
`
(ξ )u(x)u(x + ξ )dξ . (2.45)
With this new expression, we see that it is a correlation similar to the Kármán–
Howarth equation, but locally averaged. The two right-hand terms of expression
(2.42) also have an equivalent: they can be associated with the inertial (after inte￾gration by part) and dissipative (after some vectorial manipulations) terms. On the
other hand, the energy flux on the left has no equivalent in the Kármán–Howarth
equation: it is a purely local contribution that disappears on average (Dubrulle,
2019).
We can now take the limit ` → 0 (in the sense of distribution) of expression
(2.42). In this case, the last two terms of the energy flux compensate each other
and we obtain the equation (which is a theorem) of Duchon and Robert (2000):
∂t

u
2
2

+ ∇ · 
u
2
2
u +
P
ρ0
u − νu × w

= −DI − Dν , (2.46)
with by definition:
DI ≡ lim
`→0
D
`
I
and Dν ≡ lim
`→0
D
`
ν = νw
2
. (2.47)
Equation (2.46) takes all its importance when ν = 0: in the case of Euler’s equa￾tions, the inertial dissipation is the only term on the right. The evaluation of this
dissipation does not pose a problem, since the derivative is applied (before taking
the limit) on the function ϕ
`
and the possible discontinuities of the velocity field2.7 Inertial Dissipation and Singularities 45
are absorbed when calculating the integral. This leads to a surprising conclusion
for the physicist: an irregular field can potentially contribute to dissipating energy.
The anomalous dissipation could therefore have its origin in the nonregularity of
the velocity field. Laboratory experiments are compatible with this idea: indeed,
measurements show that the mean rate of energy dissipation tends towards a finite
value within the limit of a large Reynolds number (Re ∼ 108
) (Ravelet et al., 2008;
Saint-Michel et al., 2014). Note that extreme events potentially related to inertial
dissipation have been identified experimentally (Saw et al., 2016; Debue et al.,
2021).
From a mathematical point of view, the absence of anomalous dissipation
requires checking the so-called Hölder’s condition.14 Let us introduce δu` ≡
supξ<`|u(x + ξ ) − u(x)| and assume that this increment satisfies the following
relation for small enough `:
δu` < C`
h
, (2.48)
with C a constant and h the Hölder exponents. From expression (2.39), we can
show that:15
D
`
I = O(`
3h−1
) . (2.49)
Therefore, for h > 1/3, D`
I →0 when `→0 and energy is conserved in the invis￾cid case. On the other hand, for h ≤ 1/3, we are in presence of an anomalous
dissipation. We can see that Kolmogorov’s law is dimensionally compatible with
h = 1/3, and thus with the existence of an anomalous dissipation. Under cer￾tain mathematical conditions concerning the velocity field, we can also show that
DI ≥ 0 (Duchon and Robert, 2000; Eyink, 2008). The Euler and Navier–Stokes
three-dimensional equations have been the subject of many mathematical stud￾ies. For example, in the first case, it has been shown that if a nonregular solution
exists then the vorticity is not bounded (Beale et al., 1984); in the second case, it
has been shown that the regularity of the velocity is ensured if it remains bounded,
and that the singularity associated with the nonregularity is necessarily punctual
in time and space (Caffarelli et al., 1982; Constantin, 2008). For the physicist, the
result on Euler is intuitive; on the other hand, the result on Navier–Stokes with the
appearance of furtive singularities seems not very physical, because the speed of
light is an impassable limit.
2.7.3 1D Shocks
To conclude this section, we first note that the anomalous dissipation can be
calculated exactly in the particular case of Burgers’ equation, which is a one￾dimensional hydrodynamic model of shocks (see Exercise I.1). In this case, we
can show analytically that hDIi = ε. This result gives us an indication – but not a
14 See also the work of mathematicians Constantin et al. (1994) carried out in the Besov space.
15 For a regular velocity field, using a Taylor expansion gives us h = 1. In that case, D`
I → 0 when ` → 0.46 2 Eddy Turbulence in Hydrodynamics
proof – that for three-dimensional hydrodynamics the situation could be the same.
However, the task required to conduct such an analysis, for example with data,
seems impractical because it requires to study locally all the events in order to
sum up all the contributions to inertial dissipation.
We also note that the weak formulation introduced in this section can be used in
other systems. For example, the theorem of Duchon and Robert (2000) has been
generalized to incompressible magnetohydrodynamics (Galtier, 2018) and, as sug￾gested by the author, the inertial dissipation can be a relevant proxy to measure
the local heating in space plasmas (David et al., 2022). Using the one-dimensional
Burgers–MHD model for shocks, it is also possible to generalize the proof of the
zeroth law of turbulence (i.e. hDIi = ε) and to use it to evaluate, for example, the
heating produced by collisionless shocks near Jupiter (David and Galtier, 2021).
2.8 Intermittency
Intermittency is a still poorly understood property of turbulence. This is often the
reason why it is claimed that turbulence is an unresolved problem. This assertion
is, however, contradicted by the immense knowledge acquired on the subject over
more than 50 years. For example, we have at our disposal intermittency models
that can correctly reproduce experimental data for structure functions of the order
p ≤ 15. Even if our knowledge is still limited, we are able to understand an impor￾tant part of the physics of intermittency. The objective of this section is to present,
first of all, a simple and pedagogical model based on the notion of fractals. Then,
we will present the two best-known models of intermittency: the log-normal and
log-Poisson models.
More information on intermittency is available in the eponymous chapter of
Frisch’s (1995) book.
2.8.1 What Is Intermittency?
From the exact Kolmogorov four-fifths law (2.27), one may wonder whether it
would be possible to extend the analytical development to higher-order struc￾ture functions.16 Until now all attempts have failed, and the closure problem
seems insurmountable (see Chapter 1). We can, however, introduce a simple
self-similarity hypothesis to extend the Kolmogorov law dimensionally to higher
orders. In this case, we get:
Sp(`) ≡ h(δu`)
p
i = Cp(ε`)
ζp
, (2.50)
16 In general, a random variable follows a probability law whose form is all the better known, as one can
calculate its moments of high order. In our case, it is the longitudinal velocity increment δu`
that serves as
basic random variable.2.8 Intermittency 47
Figure 2.11 Reproduction of experimental measurements (black octagons) of the velocity
structure function exponents ζp (after Anselmet et al., 1984). The self-similar Kolmogorov
law (K41) is plotted for comparison. The deviation from the self-similar law is called
intermittency.
with:
ζp = p/3 , (2.51)
to satisfy the third-order structure function law. It is now widely recognized that
the self-similar model of Kolmogorov is not satisfactory, because the structure
functions of higher order (p > 3) show unambiguously a large deviation of the
scaling exponents. Figure 2.11 illustrates schematically this property: the higher
the order p, the greater the discrepancy between the measures and the Kolmogorov
self-similar law. It is this discrepancy that is called intermittency. In addition, we
speak of anomalous exponents for ζp, because the latter cannot be predicted by
simple dimensional arguments. Note that intermittency is also detected in natural
environments such as stratocumulus clouds (Siebert et al., 2010).
A relatively simple way to visualize intermittency is to plot the spatial varia￾tion of the velocity as well as its derivative. In Figure 2.12, we see schematically
that the intermittent character is amplified on the derivative with the presence of
intermittent bursts, that is, the sudden appearance of large-amplitude fluctuations.
A Gaussian random function has, however, the same behavior as its derivative.
If we now plot the probability density function of the velocity increment δu`, we
see that non-Gaussian wings appear. The smaller the separation between the two
points, the larger the wings. In other words, turbulent events of large amplitude
are more likely than they would be if the velocity at a point are the result of the
sum of independent random events (which follow a Gaussian law). Physically, this
means that in a turbulent flow the velocity fluctuations at a point are the result of48 2 Eddy Turbulence in Hydrodynamics
Figure 2.12 Schematic representation of the spatial variation of a turbulent velocity u(x)
(top), its derivative (middle), and its probability density function F
0
δu
(bottom) for dif￾ferent separations ` (see, e.g., Anselmet et al., 1984). The greatest non-Gaussian wings
correspond to the smallest separations. Reprinted with permission (Galtier, 2016).
the superposition of the influence of a large number of eddies that operate at dif￾ferent scales. These eddies are not completely independent of each other but have
a spatiotemporal memory whose origin lies mainly in the cascade process.2.8 Intermittency 49
2.8.2 Fractal Model
Among the existing intermittency models, one of the simplest is undoubtedly the
fractal model, known as the β–model, introduced by Frisch et al. (1978) (see also
Mandelbrot, 1974). As we will see, this model is based on the idea of a fractal cas￾cade; it is therefore by nature a self-similar model. However, since the exponents
of the structure functions are not those predicted by the self-similar Kolmogorov
law (2.50), we speak of intermittency and anomalous exponents.
The idea underlying the β–fractal model is Richardson’s cascade (see Figure
2.6): at each stage of the cascade, the number of eddies is chosen so that the
volume (or the surface in the two-dimensional case) occupied by these eddies
decreases by a factor β (with 0 < β < 1) compared with the volume (or surface)
of the parent eddy. The β factor is a parameter of the model less than one to reflect
the fact that the filling factor varies according to the scale considered: the smallest
eddies occupy less space than the largest.
We define by `n the discrete scales of our system: the fractal cascade is char￾acterized by jumps from the scale `n to the scale `n+1. We show an example of a
fractal cascade in Figure 2.13: at each stage of the cascade, the elementary scale
is divided by two.17 So we have:
`n =
`0
2
n
, (2.52)
with `0 the integral scale, that is, the largest scale of the inertial range. Let pn be
the probability of finding an “active” region after n steps (this is our filling factor),
hence:
pn = β
n
. (2.53)
We suppose that initially p0 = 1; in other words, that in the initial state (at the
integral scale) we have a single eddy of the size of the system. We can show that:
pn = β
ln(`n/`0
)
ln(1/2)
. (2.54)
Now we seek an expression of the form:
pn =

`n
`0
d−D
, (2.55)
where d is the dimension of the system and D its fractal dimension. In our
case, another way to introduce the fractal dimension is to define the following
relationship between the number of children N that each parent produces and D:
N = 2
dβ ≡ 2
D
. (2.56)
17 Since an inverse cascade occurs in two-dimensional hydrodynamic turbulence, Figure 2.13 should be seen as
a simple illustration of the concept of fractal cascades. In Figure 2.15, it is a three-dimensional fractal model
that is considered.50 2 Eddy Turbulence in Hydrodynamics
Figure 2.13 A fractal cascade in two dimensions for β = 1/2. At each stage of the cascade
the elementary scale is divided by two and the children eddies occupy only a fraction β
of the surface of the parent eddy. At the integral scale (not shown) a single eddy occupies
the entire available surface. The fractal dimension of this cascade is D = 1.
This finally gives us the general relationship:
D = d +
ln β
ln 2
. (2.57)
The example in Figure 2.13 therefore corresponds to a fractal dimension D = 1,
whereas that of Figure 2.14 corresponds to D = ln 3/ ln 2 ' 1.585.
From this fractal model, it is possible to predict the scaling laws for the energy
spectrum and more generally for the structure functions of order p. Eddies of
size `n fill only a fraction pn of the considered volume (we only study the three￾dimensional case and take d = 3). Therefore, one can assume that the energy per
unit mass associated with motions at the scale `n is such that:
En = u
2
`n
pn = u
2
`n

`n
`0
3−D
. (2.58)2.8 Intermittency 51
Figure 2.14 A fractal cascade in two dimensions for β = 3/4 (see the comments in the
caption of Figure 2.13). The fractal dimension of this cascade is D ' 1.585.
Following the usual Kolmogorov phenomenology, one gets:
ε ∼
u
3
`n
`n
pn . (2.59)
We have in particular:
ε ∼
u
3
`0
`0
, (2.60)
hence:
u`n ∼ u`0

`n
`0
(D−2)/3
. (2.61)
Finally, we arrive at the following spectral prediction:
En ∼ E(k)k ∼ u
2
`0

`n
`0
(5−D)/3
, (2.62)52 2 Eddy Turbulence in Hydrodynamics
Figure 2.15 Reproduction of experimental measurements (black octagons) of the velocity
structure function exponents ζp (after Anselmet et al., 1984). Four theoretical models of
reference are plotted for comparison: the self-similar Kolmogorov model (K41), the three￾dimensional β fractal model with D = 2.8 (dashes), the log-Poisson model with β = 2/3
(dash-dotted line), and the log-normal model with µ = 0.2 (dots).
or, in other words:
E(k) ∼ k
−5/3−(3−D)/3
. (2.63)
The energy spectrum associated with the fractal cascade is therefore steeper (since
D < 3) than that of Kolmogorov.
We can generalize this result to the case of structure functions of order p; it
yields:
Sp(`n) = h￾
δu`n
p
i ∼ pnu
p
`n ∼ u
p
`0

`n
`0
ζp
, (2.64)
with the fractal law:
ζp = p/3 + (3 − D)(1 − p/3) . (2.65)
As expected, this fractal – self-similar – model gives us a linear relationship
between the scaling exponents. This correction is zero for p = 3 so that we recover
the Kolmogorov exact four-fifths law. For p = 2, we find a result compatible with
the energy spectrum that we have calculated just before. Furthermore, we note that
the Kolmogorov law is obtained for D = 3: a fractal dimension identical to the
space dimension simply means that all space is filled with eddies. Otherwise (for
D < 3), the correction is negative and corresponds quantitatively to the measure￾ments made where, for example, D ' 2.8 has been found for p < 8 (see Figur2.8 Intermittency 53
2.15). This model has subsequently been generalized to bifractal, then multifrac￾tal, cases to better describe the curvature of the ζp function. In the most trivial
case, the bifractal model corresponds to the combination of the Kolmogorov law
for p ≤ 3 and the fractal model for p > 3, a situation that we encounter in Burgers’
turbulence (see Exercise I.2).
2.8.3 The Log-Normal Model
We have just seen that the β fractal model gives a different law from that of Kol￾mogorov in introducing the fundamental idea that intermittency is rooted in the
nonuniform spatial distribution of turbulent structures. This property is observed
very well in direct numerical simulations, with the appearance of clusters of vor￾ticity filaments (Kaneda and Ishihara, 2006). As we see in Figure 2.15, however,
the β fractal model becomes less relevant for high values of p, where the data
show clearly a curvature of the ζp(p) function. The log-normal model that we
present in this section brings this improvement by predicting a nonlinear law in
p. In fact, it was historically the first intermittency model: it was introduced by
Kolmogorov (1962) and Oboukhov (1962) in order to respond to a criticism made
by Landau regarding the potential problems of the self-similar Kolmogorov theory
(see Chapter 1).
The new idea introduced in the log-normal model is to rewrite the relationship
(2.50) in the form:
Sp(`) ≡ h(δu`)
p
i = Cphε
p/3
`
i`
p/3
, (2.66)
with, by definition:
ε` ≡
1
4/3π`3
Z
|ξ |≤`
ε(x + ξ )dξ , (2.67)
which is the (local) dissipation of energy averaged in a full sphere of radius `
centered at x. Note in passing that we have the trivial relation hε`i = ε. In this way,
we will take into consideration Landau’s remark about the possible fluctuations
of the dissipation: for example, hε`i
p will be even more different from hε
p
`
i the
stronger the fluctuations of ε`, but these fluctuations tend to increase as the volume
decreases, since it is at small scales that dissipative structures are concentrated.
In this model, it is assumed that the probability density function of ε` fol￾lows a log-normal behavior, that is, the probability density function of ln(ε`) is
a Gaussian of variance σ` centered on m`:
F
0
ln(ε`) ≡
1
q
2πσ2
`
exp 
−
(ln(ε`/ε) − m`)
2
2σ
2
`

. (2.68)
The log-normal hypothesis originated in a study by Oboukhov on the pulverization
of ore (Davidson et al., 2011). In this process, the pieces of ore get smaller and54 2 Eddy Turbulence in Hydrodynamics
smaller. After n steps, the size of the ore is εn, a product of the initial size ε
and the n random fragmentation factors fi
: εn = εf1f2 . . . fn, with fi < 1 . If these
factors are assumed to be independent, then log εn is a sum of independent random
numbers. When n increases, the statistics of this sum tends to a Gaussian (or
normal) law with a variance proportional to n. The analogy between the size of the
fragments and that of the eddies justifies this hypothesis because the dissipation
rate is fundamentally related to filamentary vorticity structures (see Figure 2.7).
By a change of variables,18 we obtain:
F
0
ε` ≡
1
ε`
1
q
2πσ2
`
exp 
−
(ln(ε`/ε) + σ
2
`
/2)2
2σ
2
`

, (2.69)
where we have used the relation m` = −σ
2
`
/2, which allows us to verify hε`i = ε.
We deduce:19
hε
n
`
i = 
n
exp
nσ
2
`
2
(n − 1)
. (2.70)
Insofar as we are looking for power-law solutions, it is convenient to introduce the
following form for the variance:
σ
2
` ≡ µln
`0
`

, (2.71)
where µ is a constant assumed to be universal. We introduce (2.70) into (2.66),
which finally gives:
Sp(`) = Cp(ε`0)
p/3

`
`0
ζp
, (2.72)
with the log-normal law:
ζp =
p
3
−
µ
18
p(p − 3) . (2.73)
The first intermittency measurements gave, with a relatively good accuracy,
the anomalous exponents ζp for p < 10, and allow us to conclude that µ ' 0.2.
More recent measurements have, however, shown that for p > 10 a clear diver￾gence appears (see Figure 2.15), invalidating the log-normal model. Despite
these limitations, it is interesting to see what happens for p = 2; we obtain
S2(`) = C2ε
2/3
`
2/3
(`/`0)
µ/9
, and hence the spectrum:
E(k) ∼ ε
2/3
k
−5/3
(k`0)
−µ/9
. (2.74)
18 We recall the following mathematical property: the probability of a differential surface remains invariant
under a change of variables, that is, |F
0
ln(ε`
)
d ln(ε`
)| = |F
0
ε`
dε`
|.
19 We recall that: R +∞
−∞ exp(−αx
2 − βx)dx =
√
π/α exp(β
2
/4α), with α > 0.2.8 Intermittency 55
We see that the Kolmogorov energy spectrum undergoes a slight correction of
approximately −0.02 (with µ ' 0.2) and thus becomes steeper. This is actually a
trend observed in the experiments and direct numerical simulations.
In conclusion, we can say that as a first approximation the log-normal law is
relatively clearly observed (Anselmet et al., 2001). However, the model shows
signs of weakness for p > 10: this finding motivated new work which culminated
in the log-Poisson model.
2.8.4 The Log-Poisson Model
The log-Poisson model of intermittency was proposed by She and Leveque (1994).
It is currently a very used model insofar as it reproduces very well the data up to
values of p ' 16. It is based on the following three assumptions:
• Existence of a scaling law for structure functions:
Sp(`) ≡ h(δu`)
p
i = Cphε
p/3
`
i`
p/3
. (2.75)
• Existence of a recurrence relation between the moments of the distribution of
the local energy dissipation ε`:
hε
p+1
`
i
ε∞
`
hε
p
`
i
= Ap
 
hε
p
`
i
ε∞
`
hε
p−1
`
i
!β
, 0 < β < 1 , (2.76)
where Ap are some constants and ε∞
` ≡ limp→∞hε
p+1
`
i/hε
p
`
i is a quantity that is
mainly sensitive to the tail of the distribution of ε`. (We always have hε`i = ε.)
• Existence of divergence scale dependence associated with the most intermittent
dissipative structures:
lim
`→0
ε
∞
` ∼ `
−2/3
. (2.77)
Upon introducing the scaling relation hε
p
`
i ∼ `
τp
, expression (2.76) leads to the
following recurrence relation:
τp+1 − (1 + β)τp + βτp−1 +
2
3
(1 − β) = 0 . (2.78)
By defining τp = −2p/3 + 2 + fp, we get a simple form of linear recursive
progression of order two:
fp+1 − (1 + β)fp + βfp−1 = 0 , (2.79)
which we can solve easily; we find fp = λ + µβp
. The coefficients λ and µ are
determined from the initial conditions τ0 = τ1 = 0, hence:
τp =
2
3

1 − β
p
1 − β
− p

. (2.80)56 2 Eddy Turbulence in Hydrodynamics
Finally, we obtain the following log-Poisson law (with by definition, Sp(`) ∼ `
ζp
):
ζp =
p
3
+
2
3

1 − β
p/3
1 − β
−
p
3

. (2.81)
We see that limβ→1 ζp = p/3: the parameter β measures the degree of inter￾mittency in the sense that the smaller the value, the stronger the intermittency.
The best agreement with the data is obtained for β = 2/3 (see Figure 2.15).
The log-Poisson law correctly predicts the anomalous exponents up to approxi￾mately p = 16. The latest measurements seem to show that beyond 16 a divergence
appears, perhaps revealing the limits of the model. Note, however, that precautions
have to be taken in the statistical analysis because the uncertainties increase with
the order p since the statistical sample is finite. Probably 16 is already too high for
a serious comparison with a model.
The log-Poisson model owes its name to the fact that the recurrence (2.76) can
be interpreted as an underlying statistical property of the distribution ε` (Dubrulle,
1994). Let us rewrite this recurrence for the variable, π` = ε`/ε∞
`
; we get by a
simple substitution:
hπ
p+1
`
i = Ap
hπ
p
`
i
β+1
hπ
p−1
`
i
β
. (2.82)
We show easily that:
hπ
p
`
i = Ap−1
 
Ap−2
hπ
p−2
`
i
β+1
hπ
p−3
`
i
β
!β+1
1
hπ
p−2
`
i
β
= Ap−1A
β+1
p−2
hπ
p−2
`
i
β
2+β+1
hπ
p−3
`
i
β(β+1)
= . . . = Ap−1A
β+1
p−2A
β
2+β+1
p−3
. . . A
β
p−1+...+1
0
hπ`i
β
p−1+...+1
= Bphπ`i
1−β
p
1−β , (2.83)
where the coefficients Bp depend on Aq (with 0 ≤ q < p). The distribution F
0
π`
corresponding to the moments (2.83) is a generalized Poisson distribution for the
variable Y = ln π`/ ln β, namely:
F
0
Y =
e
−λλ
Y
Y!
, (2.84)
where λ is the variance. With the change of variables, we get:
hπ
p
`
i = Z
π
p
`
e
−λλ
Y
Y!
e
−Y ln β
dπ` =
Z
e
pY ln β
e
−λλ
Y
Y!
dY = e
−λ
Z
(λβp
)
Y
Y!
dY
= e
−λ(1−β
p
)
. (2.85)
The condition p = 0 fixes the variance:
λ =
1
β − 1
lnhπ`i. (2.86)2.9 Compressible Turbulence 57
Hence, finally:
hπ
p
`
i = e
1−β
p
1−β
lnhπ`i = hπ`i
1−β
p
1−β . (2.87)
We can even show that the relationship (2.83) is still satisfied if the distribution
F
0
Y
is the convolution of a Poisson distribution with any other distribution. In this
case, a coefficient appears in the calculation and Bp 6= 1.
2.8.5 Exact Constraints
To conclude on this subject of intermittency, let us point out that there are exact
constraints that must be satisfied by the exponents ζp (Constantin and Fefferman,
1994; Frisch, 1995). The first is obviously ζ3 = 1. A second is the convexity
constraint:
(p3 − p1)ζ2p2 ≥ (p3 − p2)ζ2p1 + (p2 − p1)ζ2p3
, (2.88)
for exponent orders such as p1 ≤ p2 ≤ p3. A third states that if:
ζ2p > ζ2p+2 , (2.89)
then the velocity fluctuations become unbounded. It is therefore necessary to con￾sider exponents which do not decrease strictly to ensure that these fluctuations
remain subsonic. We note, in particular, that the log-normal model does not satisfy
this third constraint, while it is actually the case for the log-Poisson model.
2.9 Compressible Turbulence
Most of the fundamental results in strong turbulence are limited to incompressible
fluids. We can find at least three reasons for this: (i) the study of turbulence is more
difficult in the compressible case and the basic concepts are still under debate, (ii)
in laboratory experiments where the compressibility is strong, turbulence is gener￾ally statistically inhomogeneous, which limits the universality of the behavior, (iii)
the supersonic homogeneous turbulence regime mainly concerns astrophysics, a
field where important advances in turbulence have been made only recently. In
Section 2.9.1 present in a few lines the main properties of interstellar turbulence,
where the turbulent Mach numbers are often approaching 100. In this medium, it
is believed that turbulence plays a key role by regulating the rate of star forma￾tion. Then, we will show how Kolmogorov’s exact law in hydrodynamics can be
generalized to compressible fluids.
2.9.1 Supersonic Turbulence in Astrophysics
Understanding star formation is one of the major challenges of modern astro￾physics (Mac Low and Klessen, 2004; McKee and Ostriker, 2007). Although it58 2 Eddy Turbulence in Hydrodynamics
is well established that stars form in molecular clouds by collapse, many funda￾mental questions remain controversial, because the star formation is governed by
the interstellar cycle, which involves a wide range of spatial and temporal scales,
and a great diversity of coupled physical phenomena such as turbulence, mag￾netic field, gravity, radiation, and cosmic rays. A major problem is the low rate of
star formation observed. To understand this problem, we can evaluate the free-fall
time τff, that is, the time it takes for a spherical cloud without pressure to collapse
to a point due to its own gravity. For our galaxy, we get (Spitzer, 1978):
τff =
s
3π
32Gρ
' 4 × 106
years . (2.90)
The Milky Way contains a mass of molecular clouds of about Mc ' 2 × 109M
(with M the mass of the sun) (Solomon et al., 1987), which gives us a rate of
formation:
χ∗ ∼
Mc
τff
' 500 M/year . (2.91)
The problem is that the rate χ∗ measured in our galaxy is about 2 M/year
(Chomiuk and Povich, 2011), which is more than two orders of magnitude lower
than the previous estimate. Although relatively simple, this evaluation highlights a
major problem whose origin could well be turbulence: turbulent fluctuations may
act as an additional pressure which slows down the collapse of clouds.
The first observational signatures of interstellar turbulence date back to the
1950s, when spectral line widening, such as that of the ionized oxygen atom
OIII, was detected (Münch, 1958). The widening of spectral lines coming from
cold clouds proves to be much larger than one would expect for low-temperature
gases. This anomaly is attributed to turbulence whose velocity exceeds by far that
of sound (cs ∼ 0.5 km/s), which means that the turbulence is supersonic. Molecu￾lar clouds were discovered in the 1970s with the detection of an intense radiation
line emitted by the Orion nebula. This line was attributed to a transition of car￾bon monoxide (CO) molecules (Wilson et al., 1970; Penzias et al., 1972). Since
then, there has been a lot of discussion about molecular clouds. CO molecules
are considered to be one of the best tracers for measuring interstellar dynamics:
for example, we know by spectroscopic analysis that molecular clouds are cold
(T < 10 K) and dense (n > 109 m−3
). Nowadays, their observations in the galaxy
cover a wide range of length scales, from a few 100 pc to around a milliparsec (1pc
' 3×1016 m). New instruments are now available to probe interstellar matter. Per￾haps the most important is the ALMA (Atacama Large Millimeter Array) antenna
array in Chile, which considerably increases the available spatial resolution with
the best submillimeter and millimeter interferometers. In this way it is possible
to map cold and dark regions that cannot be observed in optics, where new stars
and their associated planetary systems form. In particular, the observations give2.9 Compressible Turbulence 59
Figure 2.16 Interstellar filaments at a distance of 500 pc from the Earth observed
in the infrared domain (70, 250, and 500µm), using the European space telescope
Herschel. Stars are born along these filaments. Credits: ESA/Herschel/SPIRE/PACS/D.
Arzoumanian (CEA Saclay) for the “Gould Belt survey” Key Programme Consortium.
access to fine structures at scales close to the dissipative scale of turbulence in
molecular clouds (Baudry et al., 2016).
The systematic observation of molecular clouds in the Milky Way has made it
possible to highlight the scaling law (Heyer and Brunt, 2004):
hδvi ∼ `
+0.56
, (2.92)
with δv the velocity increment between two points separated by the distance `.
This law is observed on more than three orders of magnitude, between 0.04 pc and
40 pc. Dimensionally, the law (2.92) is compatible with the spectrum of velocity
fluctuations:
E
u
(k) ∼ k
−2.1
, (2.93)
which is significantly steeper than the Kolmogorov spectrum. It is interesting
to note that this scaling law is close to the Burgers’ spectrum in k
−2 where the
dynamics are governed by shocks (see Exercise 1).
The imaging allows us to characterize the interstellar medium and to show that
this medium is in the form of gigantic networks of filaments in which stars are
born (see Figure 2.16). Recent measurements with the Herschel/ESA space tel￾escope (Arzoumanian et al., 2011) or ALMA (Fukui et al., 2019) suggest that
these filaments, which extend over tens of parsecs, have approximately the same
thickness (∼ 1pc) regardless of the density or length of these filaments (see, how￾ever, Panopoulou et al., 2022). This characteristic scale may correspond to the
sonic scale, that is, the scale under which interstellar turbulence passes from a60 2 Eddy Turbulence in Hydrodynamics
supersonic to a subsonic regime. This property has been observed in numerical
simulations where, furthermore, it is found that the velocity dispersion inside the
filaments is subsonic and supersonic outside (Federrath, 2016). Compressible tur￾bulence thus appears as a key ingredient to understand the dynamics of interstellar
clouds and in particular the rate of star formation (Elmegreen and Scalo, 2004;
Chabrier and Hennebelle, 2011).
2.9.2 Generalized Exact Law
As mentioned at the start of Section 2.9, the study of compressible turbulence is
more difficult than in the incompressible case, and the number of results is more
limited. Note that compressible turbulence can be strong or weak. In the latter
case, the regime – called acoustic wave turbulence – is characterized by relatively
small mass density fluctuations with a turbulent Mach number Mt much smaller
than one (subsonic turbulence); this regime will be discussed in Chapter 4. Inter￾mediate turbulent Mach numbers (0 < Mt < 1) is a domain widely studied both
experimentally and theoretically whose description would require much more than
a chapter (Sagaut and Cambon, 2008). In this domain, we note that recent prog￾ress has been made in finding a universal behavior (Donzis and John, 2020). In
the present section, the density variation is, however, not limited and the turbu￾lence can possibly be supersonic (Mt > 1) and even hypersonic (Mt  1), with
no possibility to find a small parameter.
For the derivation of the Kolmogorov exact law, we shall consider the
simplest case: that of isothermal compressible hydrodynamics for which the
equations are:
∂ρ
∂t
+ ∇ · (ρu) = 0 , (2.94a)
∂ρu
∂t
+ ∇ · (ρuu) = −∇P + µ1u +
µ
3
∇θ , (2.94b)
with ρ the mass density, µ the dynamic viscosity, and θ ≡ ∇ · u the dilatation.
The isothermal closure leads to the pressure-density relationship:
P = c
2
sρ , (2.95)
with cs
the sound speed, which is constant in this approximation. This system
of equations is often used to study interstellar supersonic turbulence (Kritsuk
et al., 2007; Federrath et al., 2008). The implicit assumption made with this
model is that the thermal processes (which include necessarily a cooling func￾tion like radiation), are much faster than the turbulence dynamics, so that on the
turbulence timescale the environment appears isothermal. We will see that the fila￾mentary structures produced in supersonic isothermal turbulence are very similar2.9 Compressible Turbulence 61
to observations of molecular clouds (see Figure 2.16). Equations (2.94) verify the
conservation of free energy E (also called total energy), namely:20
∂hEi
∂t
= −µhw
2
i −
4
3
µhθ
2
i, (2.96)
with E = ρu
2
/2 + ρU and the internal energy U = c
2
s
ln(ρ/ρ0) (ρ0 is the mean
mass density). Among the questions currently being debated there is that con￾cerning the anomalous dissipation. While it seems likely that the first term in the
right-hand side of equation (2.96) will lead to a nonzero contribution in the small
viscosity µ limit (as observed in incompressible turbulence), it is not clear whether
the second term will also lead to an anomalous contribution. Numerical studies in
this direction exist but are limited to relatively small Reynolds numbers and, more
importantly, to mainly subsonic turbulence (Jagannathan and Donzis, 2016).
The formalism presented previously in this chapter will be applied to equations
(2.94) in order to obtain an exact law for homogeneous isothermal compressible
turbulence. This law, which was obtained for the first time by Galtier and Banerjee
(2011), brings up a new type of term – a source S – in addition to the classical flux
vector F. Within the stationary limit and a large Reynolds number, the exact law
is written (no proof is given here since the technique of derivation is similar to
incompressible turbulence):
−4ε = ∇` · F + S , (2.97)
with ε the mean rate of free energy dissipation; the expressions for the flux and
source are respectively:
F ≡


δρ¯ (δu)
2
δu

, (2.98a)
S ≡ −
1
2


(ρθ0 + ρ
0
θ)(δu)
2

, (2.98b)
where by definition δρ¯ ≡ (ρ + ρ
0
)/2. Note that we show here the modern form
of the law (Ferrand et al., 2020). The isothermal compressible hydrodynamic
law is reminiscent of the classical Kolmogorov law, which is found when the
density is constant: in the incompressible limit θ →0 the flux is identified with
the expression obtained previously in Section 2.5 (it is necessary to introduce
δρ¯ = ρ0 and use ε¯ = ε/ρ0). We note in passing that expressions (2.98) are Galilean
invariant.
The relative simplicity of expression (2.98b) allows us to understand easily its
role in compressible turbulence (see Figure 2.17). We can see that in a compres￾sion phase, θ < 0 and thus S > 0, whereas in a dilatation phase θ > 0 and S < 0.
20 By free energy we mean the kinetic energy plus the work part of the internal energy. As usual in turbulence
(compressible or not), the heat term related to entropy is not included (the isothermal closure used can be
seen as isentropic).62 2 Eddy Turbulence in Hydrodynamics
εeff < ε εeff > ε
Figure 2.17 Dilatation (left) and compression (right) phases in space correlation for
isotropic turbulence. In a direct cascade scenario, the flux vectors (dashed arrows) are
oriented towards the center of the sphere. Dilatation and compression (solid arrows) are
additional effects which act, respectively, in the opposite or in the same direction as the
flux vectors.
Therefore, in a compression phase S will modify the rate ε so that the effective rate
εeff ≡ ε + S/4 will be bigger than ε, while εeff will be smaller than ε in a dilata￾tion phase. The source can therefore be interpreted as a term whose overall effect
is to modify the apparent cascade rate, increasing or decreasing it as follows if
the turbulence compresses or expands the fluid. Note that the primary form of the
exact compressible law has been studied in great detail using three-dimensional
supersonic numerical simulations (Kritsuk et al., 2013): an extended inertial range
was found where the theoretical predictions have been verified.
The derivation of the isothermal law (2.97) relies on the existence of a range
of scales where the physics is immune from direct effects of viscosity and large￾scale forcing. Such a property has been studied by Aluie (2011, 2013) under a
rigorous framework based on coarse-graining. The technique used is similar to
that introduced previously in this chapter in the context of the inertial dissipa￾tion. The same author also shows that under mild assumptions on the structure
functions (for velocity and density), the mean kinetic and internal energy budgets
decouple statistically beyond a transitional conversion range and behave therefore
like two invariants, and that the cascade is dominated by local interactions. Several
comments can be made. First, the decoupling in question is found numerically at
subsonic scales (Aluie et al., 2012), which means that supersonic turbulence is
probably more complex to describe. Second, the locality of the interactions pre￾vents the direct transfer of kinetic energy from a large scale to small (dissipative)
scales, such as into shocks, as is commonly believed.21 Third, the fact that the
kinetic energy behaves as an invariant, while it is not, does not mean that subsonic
turbulence is incompressible (Ferrand et al., 2020). Overall, one can say that these
results found with a coarse-graining approach provide strong arguments in favor
of the universal law (2.97).
21 This belief is partially based on our knowledge of Burgers’ equation (see Exercise 1).2.9 Compressible Turbulence 63
2.9.3 Phenomenology
Compressible turbulence is physically expected to be subsonic at small scales,
that is, where density fluctuations and the source term are relatively small.
The question is then to know from which scale the source becomes compara￾ble, or even superior, to the first/flux term in the right-hand side of expression
(2.97). This transition scale, `s
, can be roughly evaluated from the following
ratio:
∇` · F
S
∼


δρ¯ (δu)
3

`


ρθ(δu)
2
 . (2.99)
When this ratio is of the order of unity, one obtains: `s ∼ hδui / hθi. Com￾parison with numerical simulations shows that `s coincides well with the sonic
scale.
Based on the exact law (2.97), we can propose a phenomenology for compress￾ible turbulence. The law suggests a (isotropic) spectrum of the velocity having the
shape:
E(k) ∼ εeff
2/3
k
−5/3
, (2.100)
with an effective energy flux εeff which depends on the scale considered. At super￾sonic scales (k < ks), this flux varies according to a scaling law deduced from the
source: a possible estimate deduced from numerical simulation (Ferrand et al.,
2020) suggests a variation of the source in k
−1/2
, which leads us to a velocity
spectrum in k
−2
. At subsonic scales (k > ks) this effective flux is approximately
constant because the source is negligible. The associated spectrum could therefore
be that of Kolmogorov in k
−5/3
. A schematic illustration of this compressible tur￾bulence regime is given in Figure 2.18. Note that we can also expect to observe the
acoustic wave turbulence regime at subsonic scales if the conditions are satisfied
(see Chapter 4). In this case, we may find a spectrum in k
−3/2
for the dilatation
(i.e. compressible) component of the velocity (Zakharov and Sagdeev, 1970).
We show in Figure 2.19 the result of a numerical simulation of the isother￾mal compressible hydrodynamic equations at very high spatial resolution (10 0483
points). A mixed compressible–solenoidal external force is applied at a large scale
and the turbulent Mach number is around 4. A visualization of θ in a slice of the
simulation cube reveals a structured environment with large regions where θ is
mainly positive and others in the form of filaments where θ is negative. These
compression filaments resemble the interstellar filaments (see Figure 2.16) in
which stars are formed. As mentioned in Section 2.9.1, interstellar filaments might
be characterized by a thickness of the order of the sonic scale (Arzoumanian et al.,
2011), a property also found in some numerical simulations (Federrath, 2016). In
the light of numerical simulations, it appears that supersonic turbulence produces
planar shocks whose collisions lead to the formation of filaments. Their thickness64 2 Eddy Turbulence in Hydrodynamics
Figure 2.18 A compressible phenomenology based on the exact law suggests a velocity
spectrum E
u
(k) characterized by an effective flux of energy nonconstant at supersonic
scales (k < ks) and approximately constant at subsonic scales (k > ks). These spectra cor￾respond to a physics dominated by shocks (E
u
(k) ∼ k
−2
) and vortices (E
u
(k) ∼ k
−5/3
),
respectively. We can also envisage a physics dominated by waves at subsonic scales
(E
u
(k) ∼ k
−3/2
).
Figure 2.19 Dilatation θ in a x-z plane of a cube of simulation of supersonic isothermal
compressible hydrodynamic turbulence with spatial resolution 10 0483
and a turbulent
Mach number of 4 (Ferrand et al., 2020; Federrath et al., 2021). We can distinguish large
white regions where θ is mainly positive (dilatation zone) and narrow dark filamentary
regions where θ is negative (compression zone). Image produced by R. Ferrand.
is limited at the sonic scale because the physics underneath is governed by eddies.
If gravity is also present, numerical simulations show that at even smaller scales
it can override the turbulent dynamics to lead to a gravitational fragmentation and
star formation (Federrath, 2016).References 65
References
Aluie, H. 2011. Compressible turbulence: The cascade and its locality. Phys. Rev. Lett.,
106(17), 174502.
Aluie, H. 2013. Scale decomposition in compressible turbulence. Physica D Nonlinear
Phenomena, 247(1), 54–65.
Aluie, H., Li, S., and Li, H. 2012. Conservative cascade of kinetic energy in compressible
turbulence. Astrophys. J. Lett., 751(2), L29 (6 pages).
Anselmet, F., Gagne, Y., Hopfinger, E. J., and Antonia, R. A. 1984. High-order velocity
structure functions in turbulent shear flows. J. Fluid Mech., 140, 63–89.
Anselmet, F., Antonia, R. A., and Danaila, L. 2001. Turbulent flows and intermittency in
laboratory experiments. Plan. Space Sci., 49(12), 1177–1191.
Antonia, R. A., and Burattini, P. 2006. Approach to the 4/5 law in homogeneous isotropic
turbulence. J. Fluid Mech., 550, 175–184.
Antonia, R. A., Ould-Rouis, M., Anselmet, F., and Zhu, Y. 1997. Analogy between
predictions of Kolmogorov and Yaglom. J. Fluid Mech., 332, 395–409.
Arzoumanian, D., André, P., Didelon, P. et al. 2011. Characterizing interstellar filaments
with Herschel in IC 5146. Astron. Astrophys., 529, L6.
Banerjee, S., and Galtier, S. 2017. An alternative formulation for exact scaling relations
in hydrodynamic and magnetohydrodynamic turbulence. J. Phys. A: Math. Theor.,
50(1), 015501.
Bardos, C. 1972. Existence et unicité de la solution de l’équation d’Euler en dimension
deux. J. Math. Anal. Appl., 40(3), 769–790.
Batchelor, G. K. 1953. The Theory of Homogeneous Turbulence. Cambridge University
Press.
Baudry, A., Brouillet, N., and Despois, D. 2016. Star formation and chemical complex￾ity in the Orion nebula: A new view with the IRAM and ALMA interferometers.
Comptes Rendus Physique, 17, 976–984.
Beale, J. T., Kato, T., and Majda, A. 1984. Remarks on the breakdown of smooth solutions
for the 3-D Euler equations. Comm. Math. Physics, 94(1), 61–66.
Brachet, M. E., Meiron, D. I., Orszag, S. A. et al. 1983. Small-scale structure of the
Taylor–Green vortex. J. Fluid Mech., 130, 411–452.
Brenner, M. P., Hormoz, S., and Pumir, A. 2016. Potential singularity mechanism for the
Euler equations. Phys. Rev. Fluids, 1(8), 084503.
Caffarelli, L., Kohn, R., and Nirenberg, L. 1982. Partial regularity of suitable weak
solutions of the Navier–Stokes equations. Comm. Pure Appl. Math., 35(6), 771–831.
Chabrier, G., and Hennebelle, P. 2011. Dimensional argument for the impact of turbulent
support on the stellar initial mass function. Astron. Astrophys., 534, A106 (4 pages).
Chomiuk, L., and Povich, M. S. 2011. Toward a unification of star formation rate
determinations in the Milky Way and other galaxies. Astronom. J., 142, 197 (16
pages).
Constantin, P. 2008. Euler and Navier–Stokes equations. Pub. Math., 52(2), 235–265.
Constantin, P., and Fefferman, C. 1994. Scaling exponents in fluid turbulence: Some
analytical results. Nonlinearity, 7, 41–57.
Constantin, P., Weinan, E., and Titi, S. 1994. Onsager’s conjecture on the energy
conservation for solutions of Euler’s equation. Commun. Math. Phys., 165, 207–209.
David, V., and Galtier, S. 2021. Proof of the zeroth law of turbulence in one-dimensional
compressible MHD and shock heating. Phys. Rev. E, 103(6), 063217.
David, V., Galtier, S., Sahraoui, F., and Hadid, L. Z. 2022. Energy transfer, discontinuities
and heating in the inner solar wind measured with a weak and local formulation of
the Politano-Pouquet law. Astrophys. J., arXiv:2201.02377.66 2 Eddy Turbulence in Hydrodynamics
Davidson, P. A., Kaneda, Y., Moffatt, K., and Sreenivasan, K. R. 2011. A Voyage Through
Turbulence. Cambridge University Press.
Debue, P., Valori, V., Cuvier, C. et al. 2021. Three-dimensional analysis of precursors to
non-viscous dissipation in an experimental turbulent flow. J. Fluid Mech., 914, A9
(20 pages).
Donzis, D. A., and John, J. P. 2020. Universality and scaling in homogeneous compressible
turbulence. Phys. Rev. Fluids, 5(8), 084609.
Dubrulle, B. 1994. Intermittency in fully developed turbulence: Log-Poisson statistics and
generalized scale covariance. Phys. Rev. Lett., 73, 959–962.
Dubrulle, B. 2019. Beyond Kolmogorov cascades. J. Fluid Mech., 867, P1 (63 pages).
Duchon, J., and Robert, R. 2000. Inertial energy dissipation for weak solutions of
incompressible Euler and Navier–Stokes equations. Nonlinearity, 13, 249–255.
Elmegreen, B. G., and Scalo, J. 2004. Interstellar turbulence I: Observations and
processes. Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys., 42, 211–273.
Eyink, G. L. 2008. Dissipative anomalies in singular Euler flows. Physica D, 237(14–17),
1956–1968.
Eyink, G. L., and Sreenivasan, K. R. 2006. Onsager and the theory of hydrodynamic
turbulence. Rev. Mod. Phys., 78(1), 87–135.
Federrath, C. 2016. On the universality of interstellar filaments: Theory meets simulations
and observations. MNRAS, 457(1), 375–388.
Federrath, C., Klessen, R. S., and Schmidt, W. 2008. The density probability distribu￾tion in compressible isothermal turbulence: Solenoidal versus compressive forcing.
Astrophys. J. Lett., 688, L79–L82.
Federrath, C., Klessen, R. S., Iapichino, L., and Beattie, J. R. 2021. The sonic scale of
interstellar turbulence. Nat. Astron., 5, 365–371.
Ferrand, R., Galtier, S., Saharoui, F., and Federrath, C. 2020. Compressible turbulence in
the interstellar medium: New insights from a high-resolution supersonic turbulence
simulation. Astrophys. J., 904, 160 (7 pages).
Fournier, J.-D., and Galtier, S. 2001. Meromorphy and topology of localized solutions in
the Thomas–MHD model. J. Plasma Phys., 65(5), 365–406.
Frisch, U. 1995. Turbulence. Cambridge University Press.
Frisch, U., Sulem, P.-L., and Nelkin, M. 1978. A simple dynamical model of intermittent
fully developed turbulence. J. Fluid Mech., 87, 719–736.
Fukui, Y., Tokuda, K., Saigo, K. et al. 2019. An ALMA view of molecular filaments in
the Large Magellanic Cloud. I. The formation of high-mass stars and pillars in the
N159E-Papillon Nebula triggered by a cloud-cloud collision. Astrophys. J., 886(1),
14.
Galtier, S. 2016. Introduction to Modern Magnetohydrodynamics. Cambridge University
Press.
Galtier, S. 2018. On the origin of the energy dissipation anomaly in (Hall) magnetohydro￾dynamics. J. Physics A: Math. Theo., 51(20), 205501.
Galtier, S., and Banerjee, S. 2011. Exact relation for correlation functions in compressible
isothermal turbulence. Phys. Rev. Lett., 107(13), 134501.
Heyer, M. H., and Brunt, C. M. 2004. The universality of turbulence in galactic molecular
clouds. Astrophys. J., 615, L45–L48.
Ishihara, T., Kaneda, Y., Morishita, K., Yokokawa, M., and Uno, A. 2020. Second-order
velocity structure functions in direct numerical simulations of turbulence with Rλ up
to 2250. Phys. Rev. Fluids, 5(10), 104608.
Jagannathan, S., and Donzis, D. A. 2016. Reynolds and Mach number scaling in
solenoidally-forced compressible turbulence using high-resolution direct numerical
simulations. J. Fluid Mech., 789, 669–707.
Joule, J. P. 1850. On the mechanical equivalent of heat. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond., 140,
61–82.References 67
Kaneda, Y., and Ishihara, T. 2006. High-resolution direct numerical simulation of
turbulence. J. Turbulence, 7(20), N20.
Kaneda, Y., Ishihara, T., Yokokawa, M., Itakura, K., and Uno, A. 2003. Energy dissi￾pation rate and energy spectrum in high resolution direct numerical simulations of
turbulence in a periodic box. Phys. Fluids, 15(2), L21–L24.
Kolmogorov, A. N. 1941a. Dissipation of energy in locally isotropic turbulence. Dokl.
Akad. Nauk SSSR, 32, 16–18.
Kolmogorov, A. N. 1941b. The local structure of turbulence in incompressible viscous
fluid for very large Reynolds number. C. R. Acad. Sci. URSS, 30, 301–305.
Kolmogorov, A. N. 1962. A refinement of previous hypotheses concerning the local struc￾ture of turbulence in a viscous incompressible fluid at high Reynolds number. J. Fluid
Mech., 13, 82–85.
Kritsuk, A. G., Norman, M. L., Padoan, P., and Wagner, R. 2007. The statistics of
supersonic isothermal turbulence. Astrophys. J., 665, 416–431.
Kritsuk, A. G., Wagner, R., and Norman, M. L. 2013. Energy cascade and scaling in
supersonic isothermal turbulence. J. Fluid Mech., 729(127), 140–142.
Leray, J. 1934. Sur le mouvement d’un liquide visqueux emplissant l’espace. Acta Math.,
63, 192–248.
Mac Low, M.-M., and Klessen, R. S. 2004. Control of star formation by supersonic
turbulence. Rev. Modern Phys., 76, 125–194.
Mandelbrot, B. B. 1974. Intermittent turbulence in self-similar cascades: Divergence of
high moments and dimension of the carrier. J. Fluid Mech., 62, 331–358.
McKee, C. F., and Ostriker, E. C. 2007. Theory of star formation. Annu. Rev. Astron.
Astrophys., 45, 565–687.
Moisy, F., Tabeling, P., and Willaime, H. 1999. Kolmogorov equation in a fully developed
turbulence experiment. Phys. Rev. Lett., 82(20), 3994–3997.
Münch, G. 1958. Internal motions in the Orion Nebula. Rev. Mod. Phys., 30,
1035–1041.
Navier, C. L. M. H. 1823. Mémoire sur les lois du mouvement des fluides. Mém. Acad.
Roy. Sci., 6, 389–416.
Oboukhov, A. M. 1962. Some specific features of atmospheric turbulence. J. Fluid Mech.,
13, 77–81.
Onsager, L. 1949. Statistical hydrodynamics. Il Nuovo Cimento, 6, 279–287.
Panopoulou, G. V., Clark, S. E., Hacar, A. et al. 2022. The width of Herschel filaments
varies with distance. Astron. Astrophys., 657, L13.
Pearson, B. R., Krogstad, P.-A., and van de Water, W. 2002. Measurements of the turbulent
energy dissipation rate. Phys. Fluids, 14(3), 1288–1290.
Penzias, A. A., Solomon, P. M., Jefferts, K. B., and Wilson, R. W. 1972. Carbon monoxide
observations of dense interstellar clouds. Astrophys. J. Lett., 174, L43–L48.
Ravelet, F., Chiffaudel, A., and Daviaud, F. 2008. Supercritical transition to turbulence in
an inertially driven von Karman closed flow. J. Fluid Mech., 601, 339–364.
Sagaut, P., and Cambon, C. 2008. Homogeneous Turbulence Dynamics. Cambridge
University Press.
Saint-Michel, B., Herbert, E., Salort, J. et al. 2014. Probing quantum and classical turbu￾lence analogy in von Karman liquid helium, nitrogen, and water experiments. Phys.
Fluids, 26(12), 125109.
Saw, E.-W., Kuzzay, D., Faranda, D. et al. 2016. Experimental characterization of
extreme events of inertial dissipation in a turbulent swirling flow. Nature Comm., 7,
12466.
Schwinger, J. 1951. On gauge invariance and vacuum polarization. Phys. Review, 82(5),
664–679.
She, Z.-S., and Leveque, E. 1994. Universal scaling laws in fully developed turbulence.
Phys. Rev. Lett., 72, 336–339.68 2 Eddy Turbulence in Hydrodynamics
Siebert, H., Shaw, R. A., and Warhaft, Z. 2010. Statistics of small-scale velocity fluctu￾ations and internal intermittency in marine stratocumulus clouds. J. Atm. Sciences,
67(1), 262–273.
Solomon, P. M., Rivolo, A. R., Barrett, J., and Yahil, A. 1987. Mass, luminosity, and line
width relations of galactic molecular clouds. Astrophys. J., 319, 730–741.
Spitzer, L. 1978. Physical Processes in the Interstellar Medium. Wiley-Interscience.
Sreenivasan, K. R. 1984. On the scaling of the turbulence energy dissipation rate. Phys.
Fluids, 27(5), 1048–1051.
Stokes, G. G. 1845. On the theory of the internal friction of fluids in motion and the
equilibrium and motion of elastic solids. Trans. Cam. Phil. Soc, 8, 287–319.
Sulem, C., Sulem, P. L., and Frisch, H. 1983. Tracing complex singularities with spectral
methods. J. Comp. Physics, 50(1), 138–161.
Taylor, G. I. 1935. Statistical theory of turbulence. Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. Series A,
151(873), 421–444.
Taylor, G. I. 1937. The statistical theory of isotropic turbulence. J. Aero. Sci., 4(8), 311–
315.
von Kármán, T., and Howarth, L. 1938. On the statistical theory of isotropic turbulence.
Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. Series A, 164(917), 192–215.
Wilson, R. W., Jefferts, K. B., and Penzias, A. A. 1970. Carbon monoxide in the Orion
Nebula. Astrophys. J. Lett., 161, L43–L44.
Young, J. 2015. Heat, work and subtle fluids: A commentary on Joule (1850) “On the
mechanical equivalent of heat.” Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. A, 373(2039), 20140348.
Zakharov, V. E., and Sagdeev, R. Z. 1970. Spectrum of acoustic turbulence. Sov. Phys.
Dok., 15, 439–440.3
Spectral Theory in Hydrodynamics
The spectral approach in eddy turbulence offers an indispensable complemen￾tary way of study to the one based on correlations in physical space (see Chapter
2). The use of spectral space can be justified in particular from (i) a theoretical
point of view with the possibility of analyzing the mechanisms of interaction and
energy exchange (to mention only this invariant) between wavenumbers, (ii) mod￾eling with the introduction of statistical closure hypotheses (e.g. EDQNM, DIA),
and (iii) direct numerical simulation using spectral type codes. As we will see in
Part II, wave turbulence is mainly studied in spectral space, therefore the three
points mentioned are also relevant for this regime.
We will first define some indispensable statistical tools, and then discuss the
most used spectral quantity: the energy spectrum. We will derive several exact
results of the spectral theory in incompressible hydrodynamics, and we will con￾sider in particular the two-dimensional case, for which we can prove the presence
of a dual cascade. For this, we will show that the Zakharov transformation, usu￾ally used only in wave turbulence, can be an elegant tool for the demonstration.
Finally, the best-known closure models will be presented as well as the nonlinear
diffusion model.
3.1 Kinematics
3.1.1 Spectral Tensor
The three-dimensional Fourier transformation of an integrable function f (x) is by
definition:
ˆf (k) ≡ ˆfk ≡
1
(2π)
3
Z
R3
f (x) e
−ik·x
dx , (3.1)
with k a wavevector (its norm will be written k); then the inverse Fourier
transformation is:
6970 3 Spectral Theory in Hydrodynamics
f (x) ≡
Z
R3
ˆfk e
ik·x
dk . (3.2)
From these definitions, we define the correlator:
h
ˆf (k)
ˆf ( k
0
)i =
1
(2π)
6
Z
R6
hf (x) f (x
0
)i e
−i(k·x+k
0
·x
0
)
dxdx
0
, (3.3)
with hi the ensemble average (see Chapter 1).
In the statistical homogeneous case, we can define:
Q(`) ≡ hf (x) f (x
0
)i = hf (x) f (x + `)i, (3.4)
which leads to:
h
ˆf (k)
ˆf (k
0
)i =
1
(2π)
6
Z
R6
Q(`) e
−i(k+k
0
)·x
e
−ik
0
·`
dxd`
=
1
(2π)
3
Z
R3
Q(`) e
−ik
0
·`
δ(k + k
0
)d`
= δ(k + k
0
)Qˆ (k
0
) , (3.5)
with Qˆ (k
0
) a two-point spectral correlator.
In hydrodynamic turbulence, we are mainly interested in the velocity field. The
three-dimensional spectral tensor of the velocity for a homogeneous turbulence is
defined as
8ij(k) ≡
1
(2π)
3
Z
R3
Rij(`) e
−ik·`
d` , (3.6)
with Rij(`) ≡ hui(x)uj(x + `)i the second-order velocity correlator tensor. This
quantity is well defined mathematically (it is an integrable function) to the extent
that the correlation between two points tends to zero when the distance between
these points increases to infinity. We have the Hermitian property:
8ji(k) = 8ij(−k) = 8
∗
ij(k) , (3.7)
where the symbol ∗ means the complex conjugate (we will use c.c. for bigger
terms). This property is the result of the homogeneity relationship in the physical
space Rij(`) = Rji(−`). Since turbulence is assumed incompressible, we also have
the relation:
ki8ij(k) = 0 . (3.8)
3.1.2 Energy Spectrum
We will now define one of the best-studied turbulence quantities, namely the
kinetic energy spectrum per unit mass (we assume ρ0 = 1). We have:
hEi ≡
1
2
hu
2
i =
1
2
Rii(0) =
1
2
Z
R3
8ii(k)dk . (3.9)3.2 Detailed Energy Conservation 71
This relation allows us to define the energy spectrum:
E(k) ≡
1
2
8ii(k) , (3.10)
which reflects the distribution of energy by spectral band [k, k + dk].
In the particular case of isotropic turbulence, the spectral tensor depends only
on the modulus of k; also the definition of the spectrum is reduced to:
E(k) ≡ Ek =
Z

Z
E(k)dS(k) = 2πk
28ii(k) , (3.11)
where S(k) is a sphere of radius k in the Fourier space. The mean kinetic energy
of the system is found by a simple integration over k:
hEi = Z +∞
0
Ekdk . (3.12)
3.2 Detailed Energy Conservation
In this section, we will study a fundamental property of turbulence: the detailed
conservation of invariants. To illustrate our point, we will consider the three￾dimensional hydrodynamic Navier–Stokes equations (2.1) and show that the
kinetic energy is conserved by triadic interaction. For that, let us apply a Fou￾rier transform to these equations (we use Einstein’s notations and we do not write
explicitly the time variable):1
∂tuˆi(k) + u\m∂mui(k) = −ikiPˆ(k)/ρ0 − νk
2
uˆi(k) , (3.13a)
kiuˆi(k) = 0 . (3.13b)
We can rewrite the nonlinear term by showing a convolution product of Fourier
transforms:
u\m∂mui(k) = ˆum ? ∂dmui(k) (3.14)
= i
Z
R6
uˆm(p)qmuˆi(q)δ(k − p − q)dpdq .
In applying the divergence operator to equation (3.13a), one obtains:
ikiu\m∂mui(k) = k
2Pˆ(k)/ρ0 , (3.15)
hence, the expression for the pressure:
Pˆ(k)/ρ0 = −
kn
k
2
Z
R6
uˆm(p)qmuˆn(q)δ(k − p − q)dpdq . (3.16)
1 The application of a Fourier transform to the Navier–Stokes equations supposes that it is mathematically
possible to define the Fourier transform of the velocity field, that is, that this field decreases sufficiently
quickly to infinity.72 3 Spectral Theory in Hydrodynamics
Figure 3.1 Examples of local (middle) and nonlocal (left and right) triadic interactions.
The incompressibility condition allows us to affirm that for a triadic interaction
qmuˆm(p) = kmuˆm(p). Then, one obtains:
∂tuˆi(k) = −ikmPin Z
R6
uˆm(p)uˆn(q)δ(k − p − q)dpdq − νk
2
uˆi(k) , (3.17)
with Pin = δin −kikn/k
2
the projection operator which ensures the incompressibil￾ity of the fluid. Expression (3.17) is often the starting point of the spectral analysis:
it is the spectral equations of Navier–Stokes. They involve triadic interactions and
therefore a geometric aspect of the equations (see Figure 3.1).
To show the detailed energy conservation, we will write an evolution equation
for the modulus of velocity, which is nothing other than the kinetic energy (per
unit mass and) per mode:2
∂t
|uˆ(k)|
2 + 2νk
2
|uˆ(k)|
2 =
− ikmPin R
uˆ
∗
i
(k)uˆm(p)uˆn(q)δ(k − p − q)dpdq
+ ikmPin R
uˆi(k)uˆ
∗
m
(p)uˆ
∗
n
(q)δ(k − p − q)dpdq . (3.18)
After development, we have in vector writing:
∂t
|uˆ(k)|
2 + 2νk
2
|uˆ(k)|
2 = −i
Z
[(k · uˆ(p))(uˆ
∗
(k) · uˆ(q)) (3.19)
− (k · uˆ
∗
(p))(uˆ(k) · uˆ
∗
(q))]δ(k − p − q)dpdq .
This equation simplifies by using the relation uˆ(−k) = uˆ
∗
(k) and by playing with
the mute variables p and q; one obtains:
∂t
|uˆ(k)|
2 + 2νk
2
|uˆ(k)|
2 = −i
Z

(k · uˆ
∗
(p))(uˆ
∗
(k) · uˆ
∗
(q)) (3.20)
− (k · uˆ(p))(uˆ(k) · uˆ(q))
δ(k + p + q)dpdq
= i
Z
(k · uˆ(p))(uˆ(k) · uˆ(q))δ(k + p + q)dpdq + c.c. ,
2 From now, the multiple integral will be denoted simply R
.3.2 Detailed Energy Conservation 73
with c.c. the complex conjugate. By symmetrizing the equation with respect to the
variables p and q, we can finally write:
∂t
|uˆ(k)|
2 + 2νk
2
|uˆ(k)|
2 =
Z
S(k, p, q)δ(k + p + q)dpdq , (3.21)
with by definition:
S(k, p, q) ≡ −=[(k · uˆ(p))(uˆ(k) · uˆ(q)) + (k · uˆ(q))(uˆ(k) · uˆ(p))] , (3.22)
and = the imaginary part. The detailed conservation of energy is obtained by using
the symmetry properties of the operator S(k, p, q). After some manipulations and
use of the incompressibility condition, we arrive at the exact relation by triad of
interaction:
S(k, p, q) + S(p, q, k) + S(q, k, p) = 0 . (3.23)
The conservation of kinetic energy (per unit mass) can be written:
∂t
Z
1
2
|uˆ(k)|
2
dk + νk
2
Z
|uˆ(k)|
2
dk =
1
6
Z
[S(k, p, q) + S(p, q, k) (3.24)
+ S(q, k, p)]δ(k + p + q)dkdpdq = 0 .
When ν = 0, there is, as expected, conservation of kinetic energy because the
integral on the right (second line) is zero, but in fact this conservation is carried
out locally (before integration) by triadic interaction: energy is exchanged by tri￾adic interaction without loss or gain. This remarkable property was discovered by
Kraichnan (1959) in his work on the direct interaction approximation (DIA).3 This
exact result is important because it informs us about the way in which energy is
redistributed between modes.
The detailed conservation is a property that is verified for all invariants of a
system (without dissipation), regardless of the regime under consideration. For
example, in wave turbulence (see Chapter 4) this detailed conservation is per￾formed for resonant interactions (triadic, quartic, etc.). This property has its roots
outside of statistical physics since the ensemble average is not applied to obtain
expression (3.24); it must therefore also be verified as a statistical average. In Fig￾ure 3.1 we show examples of triadic interactions: we can distinguish the (two)
nonlocal interactions from the local one. Energy is exchanged within each triad:
the direct cascade suggests that, on average, the smallest modes yield energy to
the largest modes.
3 Kraichnan was an original researcher whose work profoundly influenced our understanding of turbulence. Its
originality is due in part to the fact that he obtained his PhD thesis at the age of 21, then left the academic
world in 1962 to become an independent researcher, regularly funded by American agencies.74 3 Spectral Theory in Hydrodynamics
3.3 Statistical Theory
3.3.1 Flux and Transfer
Let us apply the ensemble average to equation (3.21); one gets:
∂th|uˆ(k)|
2
i + 2νk
2
h|uˆ(k)|
2
i = Z
hS(k, p, q)iδ(k + p + q)dpdq . (3.25)
It is easy to demonstrate that this equation conserves energy in detail. By intro￾ducing the energy spectrum, we get an equation whose form was suggested by
Batchelor (1953) (see also Obukhov, 1941b):
∂tE(k) + 2νk
2E(k) = T(k) , (3.26)
with by definition the transfer function:
T(k) ≡
Z
1
2
hS(k, p, q)iδ(k + p + q)dpdq . (3.27)
Equation (3.26) is exact: it expresses the evolution over time of the three￾dimensional energy spectrum. This equation should not make people believe that
we have solved the difficult problem of closure: in fact, the whole problem now is
to find an analytical form for the transfer function T(k).
Let us simplify the problem and assume that turbulence is statistically iso￾tropic. We then arrive at the equation of temporal evolution of the one-dimensional
energy spectrum:
∂tE(k) + 2νk
2E(k) = T(k) , (3.28)
with by definition:
T(k) ≡
Z

Z
4πk
2T(k)dS(k) , (3.29)
where the integral is performed on a sphere S of radius k. The transfer function can
be expressed as an energy flux term 5(k) with the following definition (Kraichnan,
1959):
T(k) ≡ −
∂5(k)
∂k
. (3.30)
The detailed conservation of energy (3.23) allows us to affirm that:
Z +∞
0
T(k)dk = 0 , (3.31)
therefore, we have the flux-transfer relations:
5(k) =
Z +∞
k
T(k
0
)dk0 = − Z k
0
T(k
0
)dk0
, (3.32)3.3 Statistical Theory 75
Figure 3.2 Temporal evolution of the energy spectrum in linear scales. In general, we
prefer to show this spectrum in logarithmic scales (insert), where it is easier to distinguish
the inertial range.
with the condition 5(0) = 5(+∞) = 0. This condition is satisfied insofar
as the energy tends towards zero within the limit of small and large wavenum￾bers. In Figure 3.2 we show schematically the evolution of the energy spectrum
between the instants t = 0 and t = 1. The energy, localized initially over a narrow
band of small wavenumbers, spreads mainly towards large wavenumbers. This
development is explained by a flux of energy 5(k) on average positive.
The problem of anomalous dissipation is also found in Fourier space (see the
discussion in Chapter 2). After integration over k from equation (3.28), we get
(ρ0 = 1):
1
2
∂hu
2
i
∂t
= −2ν
Z +∞
0
k
2E(k)dk ≡ −ε(ν) −−→ν→0
−ε . (3.33)
Let us now introduce an external force F, which is homogeneous, stationary, and
localized at small wavenumbers around k0. We can write:
∂E(k)
∂t
+
∂5(k)
∂k
= Fδ(k0) − 2νk
2E(k) , (3.34)
which gives us after integration on k and within the limit ν → 0:
1
2
∂hu
2
i
∂t
= F − ε . (3.35)
The study of solutions in turbulence is generally carried out in the stationary case.
We see that this necessarily implies that the mean rate of dissipation is adjusted to
the mean rate of energy injection F.76 3 Spectral Theory in Hydrodynamics
Let us now return to equation (3.34) and place ourselves in the inertial range,
that is, on a scale k such that: k0  k. We see that within the limit of a small
viscosity, the dissipation term can be neglected, and consequently:
∂E(k)
∂t
+
∂5(k)
∂k
= 0 . (3.36)
A stationary turbulence therefore corresponds to a constant energy flux 5. To find
this value, we have to integrate equation (3.34):
Z k
0
∂E(k
0
)
∂t
dk0 +
Z k
0
∂5(k
0
)
∂k
0
dk0 =
Z k
0
Fδ(k0)dk0 − 2ν
Z k
0
k
02E(k
0
)dk0
, (3.37)
with k  k0. For large-scale stationary turbulence, the relationship is simplified:
5 = F − 2ν
Z k
0
k
02E(k
0
)dk0
. (3.38)
Within the limit of a small viscosity, we finally obtain:
5 = F = ε . (3.39)
The energy flux in spectral space is therefore precisely the mean rate of energy
dissipation, which we discussed at length in Chapter 2. The flux associated with
a direct cascade is therefore positive. Note that in the case of an inverse cascade
with a force acting at a small scale, we can easily show from expression (3.37)
that this flux is negative. From the flux-transfer relations (3.32), we see that for a
fixed wavenumber k, the transfer function T is positive for wavenumbers greater
than k and negative for wavenumbers smaller than k.
3.3.2 Kolmogorov’s Spectrum
The Kolmogorov phenomenology developed in Chapter 2 allowed us to obtain the
scaling relation (ρ0 = 1):
ε` ∼ u
3
`
, (3.40)
valid for statistically homogeneous and isotropic turbulence. From this relation￾ship and a simple dimensional analysis, we can deduce:
u
2
` ∼ (ε`)
2/3 ∼ ε
2/3
k
−2/3 ∼ kEk , (3.41)
hence, the spectral prediction (one introduces the equal sign and therefore a
constant of proportionality):
Ek = CKε
2/3
k
−5/3
, (3.42)
with CK the Kolmogorov constant; the measurements give CK ' 0.5 (Sreenivasan,
1995; Welter et al., 2009). The energy flux involved here is the one that will be3.3 Statistical Theory 77
Figure 3.3 Energy spectrum found in experimental measurements: a universal law
in k
−5/3
is identified over approximately four orders of magnitude. Reprinted with
permission (Saddoughi and Veeravalli, 1994).
measured in the spectral space. Note that with a pure dimensional analysis involv￾ing only Ek , ε, and k, we arrive at the same scaling prediction. Although proposed
for the first time by Obukhov (1941a), this spectrum is known as Kolmogorov’s
spectrum. It is quite remarkable to note that despite its phenomenological origin,
this prediction is very clearly observed at sea (Grant et al., 1962) and in many lab￾oratory experiments (Saddoughi and Veeravalli, 1994), with a power law in k
−5/3
over several orders of magnitude, as shown in Figure 3.3.
Using our analysis in physical space and Kolmogorov’s phenomenology, we
can interpret Figure 3.3 as follows. The spectrum in k
−5/3
results from a bal￾ance between the injection of energy at small wavenumbers and its dissipation at
large wavenumbers. Between the two, we have an inertial range where turbulence
behaves universally. This inertial range is crossed by a flux of energy that con￾nects large to small scales: this is the region where energy cascades. The cascade
process means that the energy flows continuously from one scale to another. The
Kolmogorov spectrum is therefore not a set of lines, but a continuous distribution
of energy. Note that the dissipative part of the spectrum has been the subject of
many studies to find its shape. A simple model is the one proposed by Pao (1965)
in which the spectrum is simply the −5/3 law weighted by an exponential func￾tion whose coefficient depends on the dissipation scale, called the Kolmogorov
scale.78 3 Spectral Theory in Hydrodynamics
One of the objectives for theoreticians is to find a rigorous justification for
the Kolmogorov spectrum (in the inertial range), which requires a self-consistent
spectral equation. Despite numerous attempts by physicists and mathematicians,
to date no solution to this problem has been found in eddy turbulence. The prob￾lem is fundamentally related to nonlinearities and the lack of closure of the
hierarchy of equations. We will see in Chapter 4 that it is possible to find an
analytical solution to this problem in the wave turbulence regime.
3.3.3 Infinite Hierarchy of Equations
Let us take a closer look at the closure problem. This one being fundamentally
related to the nonlinearities, to simplify we will forget the viscous linear term
which can be reintroduced trivially at the end of the calculation.
From the Navier–Stokes spectral equations (3.17), we obtain the equation for
the second-order moment:
∂thˆui(k)uˆj(k
0
)i = −ikmPin Z
hˆuj(k
0
)uˆm(p)uˆn(q)iδ(k − p − q)dpdq (3.43)
− ik0
mP
0
jn Z
hˆui(k)uˆm(p)uˆn(q)iδ(k
0 − p − q)dpdq .
This equation involves a third-order moment whose evolution equation is:
∂thˆui(k)uˆj(k
0
)uˆl(k
00)i = −ikmPin Z
h ˆuj(k
0
)uˆl(k
00)uˆm (3.44)
× (p)uˆn(q)iδ(k − p − q)dpdq
− ik0
mP
0
jn Z
h ˆui(k)uˆl(k
00)uˆm(p)uˆn(q)iδ(k
0 − p − q)dpdq
− ik00
mP
00
jn Z
h ˆui(k)uˆj(k
0
)uˆm(p)uˆn(q)iδ(k
00 − p − q)dpdq .
We now need to write the moment equation for the third-order, fourth-order, and
so on: we end up with an infinite hierarchy of equations. It is generally at this
level that spectral closures are introduced. We will present in Sections 3.3.4–3.3.6
the main closure methods, that is, the QN, EDQN, EDQNM, then DIA approx￾imations. There are others, like the Lagrangian DIA approximation (LHDIA;
Kraichnan, 1965), or the one based on stochastic models (Kraichnan, 1961).
3.3.4 QN Closure
The first closure model was proposed by Millionschikov (1941): it is based
on the quasi-normal approximation (QN), which consists in simply neglect￾ing the contribution of the fourth-order cumulant, and therefore act as if the
fourth-order moment was that of a Gaussian distribution. We recall that the fourth￾order cumulant appears when rewriting the fourth-order moment as second-order3.3 Statistical Theory 79
moment products (see Chapter 1). With simpler notations, we have the statistical
relationship:
hˆu1uˆ2uˆ3uˆ4i = hˆu1uˆ2ihˆu3uˆ4i + h ˆu1uˆ3ihˆu2uˆ4i + h ˆu1uˆ4ihˆu2uˆ3i (3.45)
+ { ˆu1uˆ2uˆ3uˆ4},
where the term in the second line is the fourth-order cumulant. In the case of a
Gaussian statistical distribution, this term is by definition zero; it is the same for
all odd moments (which are also cumulants). The hypothesis made by Million￾schikov (1941) is therefore not the Gaussianity hypothesis, which would trivialize
the problem (with vanishing third-order moments), but a close hypothesis, hence
the name of quasi-normal closure (or approximation). Schematically, we then
obtain:
∂th ˆui(k)uˆj(k
0
)uˆl(k
00)i = Xhˆuuˆih ˆuuˆi. (3.46)
With this hypothesis, we see that it is possible after a time integration to obtain a
self-consistent equation for the second-order moment, and therefore in particular
for the energy spectrum.
Kraichnan (1957) showed, however, that this closure was inconsistent because
it violated certain statistical inequalities (the feasibility conditions); then Ogura
(1963) numerically demonstrated that this closure could lead to a negative energy
spectrum for some wavenumbers. The energy spectrum being a definite posi￾tive quantity, this behavior constitutes a major defect of the model, which was
consequently abandoned. The origin of the problem was understood later by
Orszag (1970): in the absence of fourth-order cumulant, the impact of products
of second-order moment on third-order moment is overestimated. In reality, as
the experimental measurements show, they saturate. The fourth-order cumulant
therefore has the role of damping for third-order moments.
3.3.5 EDQN and EDQNM Closure
In order to correct the defect of the QN approximation, a more sophisticated
closure was proposed by Orszag (1970): it is the EDQNM (eddy-damped quasi￾normal Markovian) approximation, itself based on the EDQN approximation. In
this approach, the fourth-order cumulant is modeled by a linear damping term.
Thus, the schematic equation (3.46) is replaced by:
(∂t + µkk0k
00)hˆui(k)uˆj(k
0
)uˆl(k
00)i = Xh ˆuuˆihˆuuˆi. (3.47)
The coefficient µkk0k
00 has the dimension of the inverse of a time and is called
the damping rate of the third-order moment. The definition of this rate is
phenomenological: we have
µkk0k
00 = µk + µk
0 + µk
00 (3.48)80 3 Spectral Theory in Hydrodynamics
and
µk ∼
p
k
3Ek . (3.49)
In the isotropic case and after reintroduction of the viscosity, we schematically
obtain the EDQN equation:
￾
∂t + 2νk
2

E(k, t) = (3.50)
R t
0
R
1
Phˆuuˆihˆuuˆi(τ )e
−[µkpq+ν(k
2+p
2+q
2
)](t−τ )dpdqdτ ,
where 1 is the domain of integration corresponding to the triadic relation k =
p + q. However, the equations obtained with this closure conserve the weakness
of the QN model: they do not guarantee the statistical feasibility condition in all
situations. The spectrum can therefore become negative.
The last refinement brought to this spectral closure is called Markovianization
(M): here, we take into account the fact that the characteristic linear damping
time is shorter than the characteristic nonlinear time of variation of second-order
moment products. This timescale difference is used to justify a separate average
over short time of the contribution of µk at the level of the expression of third￾order moments. Concretely, equation (3.50) becomes:
￾
∂t + 2νk
2

E(k, t) =
Z
1
θkpqXhˆuuˆihˆuuˆi(t)dpdq , (3.51)
with
θkpq =
Z t
0
e
−[µkpq+ν(k
2+p
2+q
2
)](t−τ )
dτ . (3.52)
The final expression of the EDQNM spectral equation, in the case of nonhelical
turbulence, is written (Lesieur, 1997):
￾
∂t + 2νk
2

Ek =
Z
1
bkpqEq(k
2Ep − p
2Ek )θkpqdpdq , (3.53)
with the geometric coefficient (we consider the angles inside the triangle kpq):
bkpq =
1
q
[cos([p, q) cos([k, q) + cos3
([k, p)] . (3.54)
A last simplifying assumption is made to evaluate θkpq: it is assumed that the
damping rate does not vary over time integration, hence the expression:
θkpq =
1 − e
−[µkpq+ν(k
2+p
2+q
2
)]t
µkpq + ν(k
2 + p
2 + q
2
)
. (3.55)
As we will see in Chapter 4, the asymptotic closure of wave turbulence is based on
a timescale separation between the wave period and the nonlinear time of variation
of moments. There is therefore a certain proximity between the two approaches.
Note that the EDQNM closure, which is subsequent to that of wave turbule3.3 Statistical Theory 81
whose development dates from the mid-1960s, emanates from the thoughts of
Kraichnan in the late 1950s on another closure method, called DIA.
3.3.6 DIA Closure
The direct interaction approximation (DIA) was proposed by Kraichnan (1958,
1959) in order to remedy certain shortcomings of the QN closure (Millionschikov,
1941) as the nonconservation of energy (Kraichnan, 1957).4 This approach, which
has no adjustable parameter, is based on a field theory method. The fundamental
idea is that a disturbed flow over an interval of wavenumbers will see its distur￾bance spread over a large number of modes. Within the limit L → +∞, with L the
side of the cube in which the fluid is confined, this interval becomes of infinite size,
which suggests that the mode coupling becomes infinitely weak. The response to
the perturbation can then be treated systematically. Under certain assumptions,
two integro-differential equations are obtained for the two-point (in space and
time) correlation functions and the response function (see the review by Zhou,
2021).
In practice, we are interested in the evolution of two velocity fields. The first uˆi
is generated by an external force ˆfi which is introduced to keep the turbulence
stationary. The second is a small perturbation (of the speed uˆi) δuˆi generated
by a small perturbation (of the force ˆfi) δ
ˆfi
. The equation associated with the
perturbation is written:
(∂t + νk
2
)δuˆi(k, t) − Mijm(uˆj(p, t), δˆum(q, t)) = δ
ˆfi(t) . (3.56)
If we assume that the two velocity fields are independent, thenMis a linear opera￾tor whose form can be deduced from the Navier–Stokes spectral equations (3.17).
The linearity of equation (3.56) is justified as long as the perturbations remain
relatively small. The solution to this equation is the response to an infinitesimal
perturbation:
δuˆi(k, t) =
Z t
−∞
Gˆ
ij(k, t, t
0
)δ
ˆfj(k, t
0
)dt0
, (3.57)
with, for t ≥ t
0
:
(∂t + νk
2
)Gˆ
ij(k, t, t
0
) − M(uˆi(p, t), Gˆ
ij(q, t, t
0
)) = Pij(k)δ(t − t
0
) . (3.58)
Gˆ
ij is the infinitesimal response tensor. We see that these spectral equations intro￾duce two different times, t and t
0
, therefore there is a temporal memory, which is
not the case with the EDQNM approach.
4 For a moment Kraichnan believed that his theory was exact, which is not the case as demonstrated by the non
invariance of its equations by random Galilean transformation. The origin of the problem comes from the
truncated series used (Kraichnan, 1975).82 3 Spectral Theory in Hydrodynamics
Although more sophisticated than the EDQNM approach, the DIA method
remains an approximation. Briefly, we can say that this technique consists in devel￾oping the velocity field and the infinitesimal response tensor in power series of 
(hence of the Reynolds number). The zero-order term in velocity is assumed to
be a random variable with a Gaussian statistics. DIA closure consists of stop￾ping the expansion to the lowest possible nontrivial order, then taking  = 1,
which involves subtle issues about divergence of series (Leslie, 1973; Kraich￾nan, 1975). We speak of direct interaction in the sense that all the equations are
truncated to a given order and that we assume that there is no indirect interac￾tion between the order of the truncation and a higher order. We finally obtain two
coupled integro-differential equations (whose appearance resembles the EDQNM
equations) which preserve the detailed energy conservation. The prediction for
the energy spectrum, in k
−3/2
, is, however, not in dimensional agreement with the
theory of Kolmogorov, nor with the main spectral measurements.
Improvements were then made with a Lagrangian approach – called Lagran￾gian history direct interaction approximation (LHDIA) – to solve some problems
like the noninvariance by random Galilean transformation (Kraichnan, 1966): this
new theory can be seen as the most sophisticated model of closure. However, its
degree of complexity is such that its use remains rare (Nakayama, 1999, 2001).
Nowadays, the most used spectral closure method remains the EDQNM, because
it is a spectral theory of reasonable complexity with which it is relatively easy to
perform numerical simulation (Lesieur, 1997).
3.4 Two-Dimensional Eddy Turbulence
The motivation for the study of two-dimensional hydrodynamic turbulence stems
from work showing that a two-dimensional approach could account relatively well
for atmospheric dynamics (Rossby and collaborators, 1939). It is now known that
the rotation (or stratification) of the Earth’s atmosphere tends to confine its nonlin￾ear dynamics to horizontal planes (see Chapter 6). Numerous works are dedicated
to this subject; for fundamental aspects, we refer the reader to the reviews of
Boffetta and Ecke (2012) and Alexakis and Biferale (2018).
Very early on, two-dimensional hydrodynamic turbulence was suspected to
behave differently from the three-dimensional case. For example, Lee (1951)
demonstrated that the existence of a direct cascade of energy would violate the
conservation of enstrophy which is an invariant of the two-dimensional equations.
At the end of his book, Batchelor (1953) notes that the existence of this sec￾ond invariant should contribute to the emergence, by aggregation, of larger and
larger eddies and concludes by asserting the very large difference between two￾and three-dimensional turbulence. Using energy and enstrophy, Fjørtoft (1953),
for his part, was able to demonstrate, in particular with dimensional arguments,
that energy should tend to cascade preferentially towards large scales.3.4 Two-Dimensional Eddy Turbulence 83
Figure 3.4 Temporal evolution of the (normalized) vorticity produced by a direct numer￾ical simulation of the two-dimensional Navier–Stokes equations. Vortices form rapidly
with a variable direction of rotation (direct in black and retrograde in white), then agglom￾erate to leave finally only a few structures. This merging mechanism can be seen as a
signature of the inverse cascade. The numeric box used of spatial resolution 1024 × 1024
is periodic in both directions.
It is in this context, clearly in favor of an inverse energy cascade, that Kraichnan
became interested in two-dimensional turbulence (Kraichnan and Montgomery,
1980). With the help of an analytical development of Navier–Stokes equations in
Fourier space, the use of symmetries and under certain hypotheses such as the
scale invariance of double and triple moments, Kraichnan (1967) brought major
quantitative arguments in favor of a direct cascade of enstrophy and an inverse
cascade of energy, for which the proposed spectrum is in k
−5/3
. The existence
in the same system of two different cascades – called dual cascade – was quite
new in strong turbulence. This prediction has since been accurately verified both
at the experimental (Couder, 1984; Kellay and Goldburg, 2002) and numerical
levels (Leith, 1968; Pouquet et al., 1975; Chertkov et al., 2007). An illustration of
what happens in physical space is given in Figure 3.4: this is a result of a direct
numerical simulation of the two-dimensional Navier–Stokes equations. We see84 3 Spectral Theory in Hydrodynamics
the temporal evolution of the (normalized) vorticity, which allows us to follow
the formation of eddies. The latter tend to agglomerate and finally leave room for
only a few structures. This merging mechanism can be seen as a signature of the
inverse cascade.
3.4.1 Fjørtoft’s Phenomenology
It is possible to demonstrate the existence of a dual cascade by dimensional
arguments. We recall that enstrophy is defined as:
 ≡
1
2
Z
R2
w
2
dx ≡
1
2
Z
R2
(∇ × u)
2
dx . (3.59)
In this two-dimensional case, the definition can be reduced to the transverse com￾ponent:  ≡
1
2
R
w
2
z
(x, y)dxdy. This quantity is dimensionally related to the energy
by the spectral relation: k
2Ek ∼ k . Suppose that an energy flux εi and an enstro￾phy flux ηi are injected into the system at a scale ki
. For our proof, we will assume
the existence of dissipation at large and small scales, denoted respectively by k0
and k∞ and such that 0 < k0 < ki < k∞ < +∞. Large-scale dissipation can be seen,
for example, as the consequence of the friction between the eddies and the walls of
an experiment. We assume that the system is dynamically balanced (assumption
of statistical stationarity) and that the injection compensates on average the dis￾sipation of the invariants. In this case, by conservation of the invariants we have:
εi = ε0 + ε∞ , (3.60a)
ηi = η0 + η∞ , (3.60b)
with ε0, η0, ε∞, and η∞ the values of the energy and entrophy fluxes at the scales
mentioned above. Furthermore, we have the dimensional relation:
k
2
ε ∼ η , (3.61)
which is valid at the three scales introduced above. The combination of the
different relationships gives us:
ε0
ε∞
∼
k
2
∞/k
2
i − 1
1 − k
2
0
/k
2
i
, (3.62a)
η0
η∞
∼
k
2
i
/k
2
∞ − 1
1 − k
2
i
/k
2
0
. (3.62b)
In the limit of an extended inertial range, 0 < k0  ki  k∞ < +∞, we obtain:
ε0
ε∞
∼
k
2
∞
k
2
i
→ +∞, (3.63a)
η0
η∞
∼
k
2
0
k
2
i
→ 0 , (3.63b)3.4 Two-Dimensional Eddy Turbulence 85
which means that the energy and entrophy fluxes have an opposite direction. In
other words, we have a direct cascade of entrophy and an inverse cascade of
energy.
The spectral law can be obtained by the Kolmogorov phenomenology presented
in Section 3.3.2, which does not take into account the direction of the cascade. In
the case of energy, the prediction remains the same and we obtain a large-scale
spectrum in Ek ∼ ε
2/3
k
−5/3
for the inverse cascade. We then have to adapt the
phenomenology to the enstrophy. We have in the inertial range:
η ∼

τ
∼

`/u
∼ 
3/2 ∼ (kk )
3/2
, (3.64)
hence the small-scale entrophy spectrum for the direct cascade:
k ∼ η
2/3
k
−1
. (3.65)
Using the dimensional relationship between the two spectra, we get the energy
spectrum at small scales:
Ek ∼ η
2/3
k
−3
. (3.66)
The dependence in η is there to remind us that this spectral law is the con￾sequence of the entrophy cascade and not of energy. In Figure 3.5 we show the
energy spectrum of two-dimensional turbulence, which is therefore character￾ized by two different spectral slopes: while the power law at large scales is the
Figure 3.5 Schematic evolution (in two-dimensional turbulence) of the one-dimensional
energy spectrum between the initial time t = 0 and t = 1. An external force applied at an
intermediate scale injects energy flux ε and entrophy flux η. A dual cascade emerges and
the energy spectrum is characterized by two different spectral slopes.86 3 Spectral Theory in Hydrodynamics
consequence of the inverse cascade of energy, that at small scales must be inter￾preted as a signature of a direct entrophy cascade. Note, to conclude, that the
formation of the energy spectrum in −5/3 is slower for an inverse cascade than
for a direct cascade. The origin of this difference is the infinite capacity of the
system to accumulate energy at small wavenumbers k, while it is finite at large
wavenumbers.
3.4.2 Detailed Conservation
The analytical theory proposed by Kraichnan (1967) makes it possible to go fur￾ther in the description. For this we need to use the detailed energy and enstrophy
conservation. Note that the demonstration that we are going to do differs slightly
from that of Kraichnan because we will use the stream function ψ such that:
u ≡ ez × ∇ψ , (3.67)
with ez a unit vector in the transverse direction to the two-dimensional plan. In
Fourier space, this relation is written:
uˆ(k) = iψˆ
kez × k . (3.68)
With the use of the stream function the condition of zero divergence on the veloc￾ity is automatically satisfied and the equations become simpler. We have also:
k · uˆ(p) = iψˆ
p ez · (p × k) , (3.69a)
k · uˆ(q) = iψˆ
q ez · (q × k) , (3.69b)
uˆ(k) · uˆ(p) = −ψˆ
kψˆ
p k · p , (3.69c)
uˆ(k) · uˆ(q) = −ψˆ
kψˆ
q k · q . (3.69d)
Therefore, expression (3.22) can be written as:
S(k, p, q) = [(k · p)(ez · (p × q)) + (k · q)(ez · (q × p))] <[ψˆ
kψˆ
pψˆ
q] , (3.70)
with < the real part. By using the triadic relation, the relation simplifies:
S(k, p, q) = [(q
2 − p
2
)(ez · (p × q))] <[ψˆ
kψˆ
pψˆ
q] , (3.71)
with the energy conservation equation per mode:
∂t
|uˆ(k)|
2 + 2νk
2
|uˆ(k)|
2 =
Z
R4
S(k, p, q)δ(k + p + q)dpdq . (3.72)
Furthermore, we can demonstrate (see Exercise I.3) that the conservation of
entrophy per mode is written:
∂t
| ˆwz(k)|
2 + 2νk
2
| ˆwz(k)|
2 =
Z
R4
k
2
S(k, p, q)δ(k + p + q)dpdq . (3.73)3.4 Two-Dimensional Eddy Turbulence 87
For that we have to use the relation:
wˆ z(k) = −k
2ψˆ
kez . (3.74)
From these expressions, it is possible to demonstrate the detailed conservation of
energy and enstrophy (see Exercise I.3) per triad of interaction; these conservation
laws are written respectively:
S(k, p, q) + S(p, q, k) + S(q, k, p) = 0 , (3.75a)
k
2
S(k, p, q) + p
2
S(p, q, k) + q
2
S(q, k, p) = 0 . (3.75b)
These two relations are generalized in the case of statistically isotropic turbulence
(see Exercise I.3). In this case we have:
T(k, p, q) + T(p, q, k) + T(q, k, p) = 0 (3.76)
and
k
2T(k, p, q) + p
2T(p, q, k) + q
2T(q, k, p) = 0 , (3.77)
with the evolution equations of the one-dimensional energy E(k) and entrophy
(k) spectra:
∂tE(k) + 2νk
2E(k) = T(k) =
Z
1
T(k, p, q)dpdq , (3.78a)
∂t(k) + 2νk
2(k) = k
2T(k) =
Z
1
k
2T(k, p, q)dpdq , (3.78b)
where 1 means an integral verifying the triadic relation k + p + q = 0 and:
T(k, p, q) = 2πk(q
2 − p
2
)
pq
sin θk
ez · (ep × eq)<hψˆ
kψˆ
pψˆ
qi , (3.79)
with ep and eq two unit vectors oriented according to p and q, respectively, and θk
the opposite angle to k in the triangle k + p + q = 0.
3.4.3 Zakharov Transformation and Power-Law Solutions
We will follow a method different from Kraichnan (1967) and make use of the
Zakharov transformation. Usually, this transformation is only used in wave turbu￾lence to obtain the exact solutions of the kinetic equations (see Chapter 5). We
will assume the scale invariance:
T(ak, ap, aq) = a
xT(k, p, q) (3.80)
and introduce the dimensionless variables: ξp = p/k and ξq = q/k. We are first of
all interested in energy; we have in the inertial range:
∂tE(k) =
1
3
Z
1
k
2+x
[T(1, ξp, ξq) + T(1, ξp, ξq) + T(1, ξp, ξq)]dξpdξq . (3.81)88 3 Spectral Theory in Hydrodynamics
We then apply the following transformations respectively to the last two
integrands (see Figure 3.6):
ξp →
1
ξp
and ξq →
ξq
ξp
, (3.82a)
ξp →
ξp
ξq
and ξq →
1
ξq
, (3.82b)
which gives:
∂tE(k) =
k
2+x
3
Z
1
[T(1, ξp, ξq) (3.83)
+ ξ
−3−x
p T(ξp, 1, ξq) + ξ
−3−x
q T(ξq, ξp, 1)]dξpdξq
=
k
2+x
3
Z
1
[T(1, ξp, ξq) + ξ
−3−x
q T(ξq, 1, ξp) + ξ
−3−x
p T(ξp, ξq, 1)]dξpdξq .
The detailed conservation laws of energy and enstrophy give us the relationships:
T(ξq, 1, ξp)
T(1, ξp, ξq)
=
1 − ξ
2
p
ξ
2
p − ξ
2
q
, (3.84a)
T(ξp, ξq, 1)
T(1, ξp, ξq)
=
ξ
2
q − 1
ξ
2
p − ξ
2
q
. (3.84b)
ξq
ξp
ξq
ξp
ξp
ξq
ξq = ξp + 1
ξq = ξp + 1
ξq = ξp – 1
ξq = ξp – 1
ξq = 1 – ξp
ξq = 1 – ξp
ξq ξq
and ξp ξp ξp
ξq
ξq and
ξp
1
1
0 1 1
1
0
1 → — → — → — → —
Figure 3.6 Zakharov conformal transformation for three-wave interactions. The infinitely
extended gray band corresponds to the solutions of the triangular relation k + p + q =
0 (the boundaries correspond to flattened triangles). The transformation consists of the
exchange of four regions separated by dashes. The transformations (3.82a) and (3.82b)
are shown on the right and on the left, respectively.3.4 Two-Dimensional Eddy Turbulence 89
With the introduction of these relationships, we get:
∂tE(k) =
k
2+x
3
Z
1
T(1, ξp, ξq) (3.85)
×
"
1 + ξ
−3−x
q
1 − ξ
2
p
ξ
2
p − ξ
2
q
+ ξ
−3−x
p
ξ
2
q − 1
ξ
2
p − ξ
2
q
#
dξpdξq =
k
2+x
3
Z
1
T(1, ξp, ξq)
×
"
(ξpξq)
3+x
(ξ
2
p − ξ
2
q
) + ξ
3+x
p − ξ
5+x
p + ξ
5+x
q − ξ
3+x
q
(ξpξq)
3+x
(ξ
2
p − ξ
2
q
)
#
dξpdξq .
Therefore, the exact stationary constant flux solution corresponds to x = −3.
What is the associated energy spectrum E(k)? To answer this question, it is
necessary to introduce a similarity hypothesis. Dimensionally, we have:
[E(k)]3/2
k
3/2 = [T(k)] = k
x+2
. (3.86)
If we assume that E(k) ∼ k
y we get the scaling relation: 3y = 2x + 1. Therefore,
the stationary solution corresponds to y = −5/3: it is the Kolmogorov spectrum.
This solution is not exact because we made an assumption of similarity which is
not true in turbulence, as proven by the presence of intermittency (see Chapter 2).
However, the intermittency correction at this statistical level is relatively small.
Let us now turn to enstrophy; we have in the inertial range:
∂t(k) =
1
3
Z
1
k
4+x
[T(1, ξp, ξq) + T(1, ξp, ξq) + T(1, ξp, ξq)]dξpdξq . (3.87)
We apply the Zakharov transformation:
∂t(k) =
k
4+x
3
Z
1
[T(1, ξp, ξq) (3.88)
+ ξ
−3−x
q T(ξq, 1, ξp) + ξ
−3−x
p T(ξp, ξq, 1)]dξpdξq .
Using detailed conservation laws gives:
∂t(k) =
k
4+x
3
Z
1
T(1, ξp, ξq) (3.89)
×
"
(ξpξq)
3+x
(ξ
2
p − ξ
2
q
) + ξ
3+x
p − ξ
5+x
p + ξ
5+x
q − ξ
3+x
q
(ξpξq)
3+x
(ξ
2
p − ξ
2
q
)
#
dξpdξq .
The exact stationary solution at constant flux therefore corresponds to x = −5,
that is, an entrophy spectrum in (k) ∼ k
−1
. We recover the phenomenological
prediction. Here again this result is not exact, because we have used a similarity
hypothesis – not valid in the presence of intermittency.
3.4.4 Energy and Enstrophy Fluxes
Then, we can study the sign of the energy flux. We have:
5(k) =
Z +∞
k
k
02+x
3
dk0
I(x) = −
k
3+x
3(3 + x)
I(x) , (3.90)90 3 Spectral Theory in Hydrodynamics
with:
I(x) ≡
Z
1
T(1, ξp, ξq) (3.91)
×
(ξpξq)
3+x
(ξ
2
p − ξ
2
q
) + ξ
3+x
p − ξ
5+x
p + ξ
5+x
q − ξ
3+x
q
(ξpξq)
3+x
(ξ
2
p − ξ
2
q
)
dξpdξq .
We implicitly assumed that the contributions of the triadic interaction for k →
+∞ tend towards 0 (and therefore that 5(+∞) = 0): this is a locality hypothesis
whose validity must be verified a posteriori. The constant flux is obtained in the
stationary case, that is, when x = −3. To take this limit, it is necessary to use
L’Hôspital’s rule since I(−3) = 0. With z = x + 3, we have:
lim
z→0
5(k) = ε = −
1
3
dI(z)
dz
|z=0 , (3.92)
with:
dI(z)
dz |z=0 = (3.93)
R
1
T(1, ξp, ξq)
−ξ
−z
q
ln(ξq)+ξ
2
p
ξ
−z
q
ln(ξq)−ξ
2
q
ξ
−z
p
ln(ξp)+ξ
−z
p
ln(ξp)
ξ
2
p −ξ
2
q
dξpdξq|z=0
=
R
1
T(1, ξp, ξq)
(ξ
2
p −1) ln(ξq)−(ξ
2
q −1) ln(ξp)
ξ
2
p −ξ
2
q
dξpdξq .
We get the exact expression for the energy flux:
ε =
Z
1
T(1, ξp, ξq)A(ξp, ξq)dξpdξq , (3.94)
with:
A(ξp, ξq) =
1
3
(ξ
2
p − 1) ln(ξq) − (ξ
2
q − 1) ln(ξp)
ξ
2
q − ξ
2
p
. (3.95)
To go further, we can introduce the normalized expression (3.79):
T(1, ξp, ξq) = (ξ
2
q − ξ
2
p
)ξpξq
ez · (ep × eq)
sin θk
<[2πhψˆ
1ψˆ
ξpψˆ
ξq
i] . (3.96)
A Taylor expansion in the neighborhood of the point ξp = ξq = 1 gives
A(ξp, ξq) ' − 1
3
ξpξq, therefore A(1, 1) = 0. Furthermore, we see that A(ξp, ξq) is
zero for ξp = 1 or ξq = 1. Thus, the gray band in Figure 3.6 on which we are can
be divided into four regions with an axial symmetry along the diagonal ξp = ξq
on which A = 0. The sign of A in each region is in fact given by an estimate in the
neighborhood of the point (1, 1) (see Figure 3.7).
The enstrophy flux writes:
η(k) =
Z +∞
k
k
04+x
3
dk0
J(x) = −
k
5+x
3(5 + x)
J(x) , (3.97)3.4 Two-Dimensional Eddy Turbulence 91
Figure 3.7 Functions A(x, y) (top) and B(x, y) (bottom). Only the values on the shaded
band in Figure 3.6 are relevant. We can distinguish four regions on which A and B have
opposite signs.92 3 Spectral Theory in Hydrodynamics
with:
J(x) ≡
Z
1
T(1, ξp, ξq) (3.98)
×
(ξpξq)
3+x
(ξ
2
p − ξ
2
q
) + ξ
3+x
p − ξ
5+x
p + ξ
5+x
q − ξ
3+x
q
(ξpξq)
3+x
(ξ
2
p − ξ
2
q
)
dξpdξq .
A study similar to the previous case gives us the exact expression:
η =
Z
1
T(1, ξp, ξq)B(ξp, ξq)dξpdξq , (3.99)
with:
B(ξp, ξq) =
1
3
ξ
2
q
(ξ
2
p − 1) ln(ξq) − ξ
2
p
(ξ
2
q − 1) ln(ξp)
ξ
2
q − ξ
2
p
. (3.100)
A Taylor expansion in the neighborhood of the point ξp = ξq = 1 gives B(ξp, ξq) '
1
3
ξpξq, so B(1, 1) = 0. As for A, we see that B(ξp, ξq) is zero for ξp = 1 or ξq = 1.
Thus the gray band in Figure 3.6 can also be split into four regions with an axial
symmetry along the diagonal ξp = ξq on which B is zero. The sign of B in each
region is in fact given by an estimate in the neighborhood of the point (1, 1). As
shown in Figure 3.7, A and B are always of opposite sign. Note that Kraichnan
(1967) arrived at this conclusion without using the Zakharov transformation but
by manipulating the integral (3.90): he showed that the flux can be reduced to the
contribution of the triangular region at the top left of the gray band in Figure 3.6
(right). Note in passing that the comparison of the two approaches highlights a
nontrivial relation at the level of the contributions of the flux.5 With these results
we arrive at a major result: the flows ε and η are necessarily of opposite sign. In
other words, two-dimensional hydrodynamic turbulence is characterized by a dual
cascade of energy and entrophy. Two-dimensional turbulence is historically the
first example of a system where this phenomenon is observed. We now know that
there are others, such as in magnetohydrodynamics, where the magnetic helicity
cascades inversely (Pouquet et al., 1976).
The use of numerical simulation confirms the phenomenology: we have a direct
cascade of entrophy and an inverse cascade of energy (Leith, 1968; Pouquet et al.,
1975; Chertkov et al., 2007). To finish, note that we have made an assumption
about the convergence of integral (locality assumption). It turns out that a logarith￾mic correction must be made to the small-scale spectrum to verify this hypothesis
(Kraichnan, 1971). This type of correction is not uncommon: it is also found in
the wave turbulence regime (see, e.g., Düring et al., 2017).
5 The approach developed here from the Zakharov transformation is original and has never been published.3.6 Nonlinear Diffusion Model 93
3.5 Dual Cascade
We have just seen that two-dimensional hydrodynamic turbulence is characterized
by an inverse cascade of energy, whereas it is direct in three dimensions. From
a theoretical point of view, one can wonder if the transition between a direct and
an inverse cascade of energy happens suddenly when the thickness of the fluid
decreases, or if it is done gradually. Numerical studies on the subject show that
the second scenario is the right one: there is a thickness interval on which the
transition happens gradually (Benavides and Alexakis, 2017).
In the three-dimensional case, the decomposition of the velocity field on a com￾plex helicity basis (Craya, 1954) makes it possible to separate triadic interactions
by class and highlight those that contribute to positive and negative energy flux
(Sahoo et al., 2017; Alexakis and Biferale, 2018). We can show that this behavior
is linked to the amount of kinetic helicity injected into the system (Plunian et al.,
2020). Note that the introduction of an external force, such as the Coriolis force,
can fundamentally change the three-dimensional physics with the emergence of
an inverse cascade (Smith and Waleffe, 1999) (see Chapter 6).
The duality – direct cascade / inverse cascade – remains a subject very much
studied in hydrodynamic turbulence but also in many others systems. A review on
this theme is proposed by Pouquet et al. (2017), 50 years after the discovery made
by Kraichnan (1967).
3.6 Nonlinear Diffusion Model
In this section, we will present a phenomenological model of turbulence based
on the idea of a turbulent diffusion in the spectral space. The approach is differ￾ent from the closure methods as EDQNM in that we seek to express the cascade
mechanism directly without going through a hierarchy of equations. This type of
model was first proposed by Leith (1967). It has since been generalized to other
systems in strong/eddy turbulence (Leith, 1968; Zhou and Matthaeus, 1990; Con￾naughton and Nazarenko, 2004; Matthaeus et al., 2009; Thalabard et al., 2015)
and in weak/wave turbulence (Hasselmann et al., 1985; Dyachenko et al., 1992;
Zakharov and Pushkarev, 1999; Boffetta et al., 2009; Galtier and Buchlin, 2010;
Galtier et al., 2019). Note that in the latter case, the nonlinear diffusion equa￾tion can be obtained by a rigorous calculation from the weak wave turbulence
equations in the approximation of local interactions. In Chapter 6, such a limit is
discussed in detail in the context of rotating hydrodynamic turbulence.
In this approach, the cascade is modeled by a diffusion process in the spectral
space. We will consider the diffusion equation of energy valid in the inertial range:
∂tE(k) = −∇ · 5(k) , (3.101)94 3 Spectral Theory in Hydrodynamics
with 5(k) the energy flux. We assume a statistically isotropic turbulence, therefore
we can write:
∂tE(k) = −
1
k
2
∂(k
25k (k))
∂k
, (3.102)
with 5k the radial component of the flux in spherical coordinates. This component
is modeled as follows:
5k = −D
∂E(k)
∂k
, (3.103)
where D is a diffusion coefficient. Dimensionally, we find:
D =
k
2
τNL
, (3.104)
with τNL the characteristic transfer time of energy. Its phenomenological expres￾sion is given by the relation (see Chapter 2):
τNL ∼
`
u`
. (3.105)
We introduce the one-dimensional energy spectrum, E(k) = 4πk
2E(k). The
diffusion coefficient can then be written:
D ∼ k
3
p
kE(k) . (3.106)
After a few manipulations, we finally obtain the following nonlinear diffusion
equation, in which we have introduced a term of dissipation to include the
dissipative scales:
∂tE(k) =
∂
∂k

k
11/2
p
E(k)
∂(E(k)/k
2
)
∂k

− 2νk
2E(k) . (3.107)
This equation models three-dimensional, homogeneous, and isotropic hydrody￾namic turbulence. We could have introduced a constant of proportionality in front
of the right term, however, we can always renormalize time to make this constant
disappear. In other words, the characteristic timescale of this diffusion equation is
normalized by the characteristic time of the cascade.
We can verify that this equation has as its solution the Kolmogorov spectrum.
For that we introduce the spectrum:
E(k) = Akx
, (3.108)
with A > 0 because the energy spectrum is a definite positive quantity. The
expression for the flux then takes the form:
5k (k) = −√
Ak(11+x)/2
∂(Akx−2
)
∂k
= A
3/2
(2 − x)k
(5+3x)/2
. (3.109)3.6 Nonlinear Diffusion Model 95
Figure 3.8 Schematic evolution of the energy spectrum with a nonlinear diffusion model.
The non-zero constant flux solution therefore corresponds to x = −5/3: it is
indeed the Kolmogorov spectrum. We see that for this value of x, we have:
5k = ε =
11
3
A
3/2
, (3.110)
which is positive, as expected for a direct cascade. It is not difficult to numerically
simulate the nonlinear diffusion equation and obtain the Kolmogorov spectrum
over several decades, as shown in Figure 3.8.
This access to an extended inertial range makes it possible to numerically
address the problem of the nonstationary regime, during which the spectrum
formed may not be that of the stationary regime. In the hydrodynamic case, a
slightly steeper spectrum around −1.85 was measured. This spectrum is currently
understood as a self-similar solution of the second kind, that is, a solution that
we cannot predict exactly (Connaughton and Nazarenko, 2004; Thalabard et al.,
2015). This solution is characterized by an explosive propagation of the spectrum
towards large wavenumbers: we can show that the self-similar solution reaches in
principle k = +∞ in a finite time. We will come back to this question in Chapter
6 in the context of rotating hydrodynamics and in Chapter 8 in plasma physics.
To conclude, let us note that there is another type of turbulence model that
has been often used in the past: the shell model. As for the diffusion equation,
in this model the nonlinear interactions are assumed to be local. The velocity is
modeled in the Fourier space by a complex scalar depending on the wavenumber
and whose temporal evolution is governed by an ordinary differential equation
built in an ad hoc manner. Despite its simplicity, this hydrodynamic model has
nontrivial intermittency properties. In the case of magnetohydrodynamics, chaotic96 3 Spectral Theory in Hydrodynamics
reversals of magnetic polarity have been observed. For more information, we refer
the reader to the review articles of Biferale (2003) and Plunian et al. (2013) for
hydrodynamics and magnetohydrodynamics, respectively.
References
Alexakis, A., and Biferale, L. 2018. Cascades and transitions in turbulent flows. Phys.
Rep., 767, 1–101.
Batchelor, G. K. 1953. The Theory of Homogeneous Turbulence. Cambridge University
Press.
Benavides, S. J., and Alexakis, A. 2017. Critical transitions in thin layer turbulence. J.
Fluid Mech., 822, 364–385.
Biferale, L. 2003. Shell models of energy cascade in turbulence. Ann. Rev. Fluid Mech.,
35(35), 441–468.
Boffetta, G., and Ecke, R. E. 2012. Two-dimensional turbulence. Ann. Rev. Fluid Mech.,
44(1), 427–451.
Boffetta, G., Celani, A., Dezzani, D., Laurie, J., and Nazarenko, S. 2009. Modeling Kelvin
wave cascades in superfluid helium. J. Low Temp. Phys., 156, 193–214.
Chertkov, M., Connaughton, C., Kolokolov, I., and Lebedev, V. 2007. Dynamics of energy
condensation in two-dimensional turbulence. Phys. Rev. Lett., 99(8), 084501.
Connaughton, C., and Nazarenko, S. 2004. Warm cascades and anomalous scaling in a
diffusion model of turbulence. Phys. Rev. Lett., 92, 044501.
Couder, Y. 1984. Two-dimensional grid turbulence in a thin liquid layer. J. Phys. Lett., 45,
353–360.
Craya, A. 1954. Contribution à l’analyse de la turbulence associée à des vitesses
moyennes. PST Ministère de l’Air, 345.
Düring, G., Josserand, C., and Rica, S. 2017. Wave turbulence theory of elastic plates.
Physica D, 347, 42–73.
Dyachenko, S., Newell, A. C., Pushkarev, A., and Zakharov, V. E. 1992. Optical tur￾bulence: Weak turbulence, condensates and collapsing filaments in the nonlinear
Schrödinger equation. Physica D, 57, 96–160.
Fjørtoft, R. 1953. On the changes in the spectral distribution of kinetic energy for two￾dimensional, non-divergent flow. Tellus, 5, 225–230.
Galtier, S., and Buchlin, E. 2010. Nonlinear diffusion equations for anisotropic magneto￾hydrodynamic turbulence with cross-helicity. Astrophys. J., 722(2), 1977–1983.
Galtier, S., Nazarenko, S. V., Buchlin, E., and Thalabard, S. 2019. Nonlin￾ear diffusion models for gravitational wave turbulence. Physica D, 390,
84–88.
Grant, H. L., Stewart, R. W., and Moilliet, A. 1962. Turbulence spectra from a tidal
channel. J. Fluid Mech., 12(2), 241–268.
Hasselmann, S., Hasselmann, K., Allender, J. H., and Barnett, T. P. 1985. Computations
and parameterizations of the nonlinear energy transfer in a gravity-wave spectrum.
Part II. J. Phys. Oceano., 15, 1378–1391.
Kellay, H., and Goldburg, W. I. 2002. Two-dimensional turbulence: A review of some
recent experiments. Rep. Prog. Phys., 65(5), 845–894.
Kraichnan, R. H. 1957. Relation of fourth-order to second-order moments in stationary
isotropic turbulence. Phys. Rev., 107(6), 1485–1490.
Kraichnan, R. H. 1958. Irreversible statistical mechanics of incompressible hydromag￾netic turbulence. Phys. Rev., 109(5), 1407–1422.
Kraichnan, R. H. 1959. The structure of isotropic turbulence at very high Reynolds
numbers. J. Fluid Mech., 5, 497–543.References 97
Kraichnan, R. H. 1961. Dynamics of nonlinear stochastic systems. J. Math. Phys., 2(1),
124–148.
Kraichnan, R. H. 1965. Lagrangian-history closure approximation for turbulence. Phys.
Fluids, 8(4), 575–598.
Kraichnan, R. H. 1966. Isotropic turbulence and inertial-range structure. Phys. Fluids,
9(9), 1728–1752.
Kraichnan, R. H. 1967. Inertial ranges in two-dimensional turbulence. Phys. Fluids, 10(7),
1417–1423.
Kraichnan, R. H. 1971. Inertial-range transfer in two- and three-dimensional turbulence.
J. Fluid Mech., 47, 525–535.
Kraichnan, R. H. 1975. Remarks on turbulence theory. Adv. Math., 16, 305–331.
Kraichnan, R. H., and Montgomery, D. 1980. Two-dimensional turbulence. Rep. Prog.
Phys., 43(5), 547–619.
Lee, T. D. 1951. Difference between turbulence in a two-dimensional fluid and in a three￾dimensional fluid. J. Appl. Phys., 22(4), 524 (1 page).
Leith, C. E. 1967. Diffusion approximation to inertial energy transfer in isotropic
turbulence. Phys. Fluids, 10(7), 1409–1416.
Leith, C. E. 1968. Diffusion approximation for two-dimensional turbulence. Phys. Fluids,
11(3), 671–672.
Lesieur, M. 1997. Turbulence in Fluids. Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Leslie, D. C. 1973. Review of developments in turbulence theory. Rep. Prog. Phys.,
36(11), 1365–1424.
Matthaeus, W. H., Oughton, S., and Zhou, Y. 2009. Anisotropic magnetohydrodynamic
spectral transfer in the diffusion approximation. Phys. Rev. E, 79(3), 035401.
Millionschikov, M. D. 1941. Theory of homogeneous isotropic turbulence. Dokl. Akad.
Nauk SSSR, 22, 241–242.
Nakayama, K. 1999. Statistical theory of anisotropic MHD turbulence: An approach to
strong shear Alfvén turbulence by DIA. Astrophys. J., 523(1), 315–327.
Nakayama, K. 2001. Statistical theory of anisotropic MHD turbulence. II. Lagrangian
theory of strong shear Alfvén turbulence. Astrophys. J., 556(2), 1027–1037.
Obukhov, A. M. 1941a. On the distribution of energy in the spectrum of turbulent flow.
Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR, 32, 22–24.
Obukhov, A. M. 1941b. Spectral energy distribution in a turbulent flow. Izv. Akad. Nauk
SSSR Ser. Geogr. Geofiz., 5, 453–466.
Ogura, Y. 1963. A consequence of the zero-fourth-cumulant approximation in the decay
of isotropic turbulence. J. Fluid Mech., 16, 33–40.
Orszag, S. A. 1970. Analytical theories of turbulence. J. Fluid Mech., 41, 363–386.
Pao, Y.-H. 1965. Structure of turbulent velocity and scalar fields at large wavenumbers.
Phys. Fluids, 8(6), 1063–1075.
Plunian, F., Stepanov, R., and Frick, P. 2013. Shell models of magnetohydrodynamic
turbulence. Phys. Rep., 523(1), 1–60.
Plunian, F., Teimurazov, A., Stepanov, R., and Verma, M. K. 2020. Inverse cascade of
energy in helical turbulence. J. Fluid Mech., 895, A13.
Pouquet, A., Lesieur, M., Andre, J. C., and Basdevant, C. 1975. Evolution of high
Reynolds number two-dimensional turbulence. J. Fluid Mech., 72, 305–319.
Pouquet, A., Frisch, U., and Leorat, J. 1976. Strong MHD helical turbulence and the
nonlinear dynamo effect. J. Fluid Mech., 77, 321–354.
Pouquet, A., Marino, R., Mininni, P. D., and Rosenberg, D. 2017. Dual constant-flux
energy cascades to both large scales and small scales. Phys. Fluids, 29(11), 111108.
Rossby, C. G., and collaborators. 1939. Relation between variations in the intensity of the
zonal circulation of the atmosphere and the displacements of the semi-permanent
centers of action. J. Marine Res., 2, 38–55.98 3 Spectral Theory in Hydrodynamics
Saddoughi, S. G., and Veeravalli, S. V. 1994. Local isotropy in turbulent boundary layers
at high Reynolds number. J. Fluid Mech., 268, 333–372.
Sahoo, G., Alexakis, A., and Biferale, L. 2017. Discontinuous transition from direct to
inverse cascade in three-dimensional turbulence. Phys. Rev. Lett., 118(16), 164501.
Smith, L. M., and Waleffe, F. 1999. Transfer of energy to two-dimensional large scales in
forced, rotating three-dimensional turbulence. Phys. Fluids, 11(6), 1608–1622.
Sreenivasan, K. R. 1995. On the universality of the Kolmogorov constant. Phys. Fluids,
7(11), 2778–2784.
Thalabard, S., Nazarenko, S., Galtier, S., and Medvedev, S. 2015. Anomalous spectral
laws in differential models of turbulence. J. Phys. A: Math. & Theo., 48, 285501.
Welter, G. S., Wittwer, A. R., Degrazia, G. A. et al. 2009. Measurements of the
Kolmogorov constant from laboratory and geophysical wind data. Phys. A: Stat.
Mech. Appl., 388(18), 3745–3751.
Zakharov, V. E., and Pushkarev, A. N. 1999. Diffusion model of interacting gravity waves
on the surface of deep fluid. Nonlin. Proc. Geophys., 6, 1–10.
Zhou, Y. 2021. Turbulence theories and statistical closure approaches. Phys. Rep., 935,
1–117.
Zhou, Y., and Matthaeus, W. H. 1990. Models of inertial range spectra of interplanetary
magnetohydrodynamic turbulence. J. Geophys. Res., 95(A9), 14881–14892.I.1 1D HD Turbulence: Burgers’ Equation 99
Exercises I
I.1 1D HD Turbulence: Burgers’ Equation
Burgers’ equation (Burgers, 1948) is often regarded as a one-dimensional model
of compressible hydrodynamic turbulence. This equation is written:
∂u
∂t
+ u
∂u
∂x
= ν
∂
2u
∂x
2
,
with u a scalar velocity and ν a viscosity. Burgers’ equation is a simple model
often used to test new ideas in turbulence. Here we will study the properties of dis￾sipation and then intermittency using the tools introduced for the Navier–Stokes
equations.
(1) Demonstrate that:
u(x, t) =
1
t

x − L tanh
xL
2νt

is an exact solution.
(2) Find the limit of this solution when ν → 0.
(3) Calculate the mean rate of energy dissipation ε.
(4) Calculate the mean rate of viscous dissipation εν . Conclude.
(5) Find the expression of the smoothed Burgers equation by introducing an
anomalous dissipation D`
I
.
(6) Calculate the expression of the inertial dissipation DI with the exact
solution. Conclude.
(7) By using the exact solution in the limit ν → 0, find the exponents ζp by
distinguishing the case where p < 1 from the case where p ≥ 1.
I.2 Structure Function and Spectrum
We are interested in the relationship between the one-dimensional energy
spectrum E1d(k) and the second-order structure function S2(r) in the case of
three-dimensional homogeneous isotropic hydrodynamic turbulence.
(1) Let R(r) be the two-point correlation function of the velocity, that is,
R(r) = hu · u
0
i. Write down the general relation between this function and the
three-dimensional energy spectrum E3d(k).
(2) Focusing on the isotropic case, demonstrate the relationship:
S2(r) = 4
Z +∞
0

1 −
sin kr
kr 
E1d(k)dk , (3.111)
where S2(r) = h(δu)
2
i.
(3) It is assumed that the one-dimensional energy spectrum is given by the
relation E1d(k) = CKε
2/3
k
−5/3
, where CK is the Kolmogorov constant. Find the
relation:100 Exercises I
S2(r) = C2ε
2/3
r
2/3
, (3.112)
where C2 is a constant that will be given. Compare your results with the experi￾mental measurements CK ' 0.5 and C2 ' 2.5 (Sreenivasan, 1995; Welter et al.,
2009).
I.3 2D HD Turbulence: Detailed Conservation
In the two-dimensional case, the Navier–Stokes equations become simpler and it
is possible to demonstrate analytically the existence of a dual cascade of energy
and enstrophy (see Chapter 3). For this, we must use the detailed conservation
laws for these invariants. The aim of this exercise is to obtain these two laws. We
will introduce the stream function ψ such that u ≡ ez∇ψ. With the use of this
function the zero velocity divergence condition is automatically satisfied and the
calculations are simplified.
(1) Write the spectral expression of enstrophy conservation.
(2) Demonstrate the detailed conservation of enstrophy using the relationships
in the triangle formed by k, p, and q.
(3) Same question for energy.
(4) Generalize the result in the case of statistically isotropic turbulence.
References
Burgers, J. M. 1948. A mathematical model illustrating the theory of turbulence. Adv.
Appl. Mech., 1, 171–199.
Sreenivasan, K. R. 1995. On the universality of the Kolmogorov constant. Phys. Fluids,
7(11), 2778–2784.
Welter, G. S., Wittwer, A. R., Degrazia, G. A. et al. 2009. Measurements of the
Kolmogorov constant from laboratory and geophysical wind data. Phys. A: Stat.
Mech. Appl., 388(18), 3745–3751.Part II
Wave Turbulence4
Introduction
Waves and turbulence are the two pillars of this second part. As we shall see,
the wave turbulence regime offers the possibility to develop an analytical theory.
Beyond its mathematical beauty, the spectral theory obtained makes it possible
to understand in depth a weakly nonlinear system and to develop an intuition on
the physics of strong wave turbulence. In essence, the wave turbulence regime
only concerns systems in which waves can be excited, which excludes the Navier–
Stokes equations of incompressible hydrodynamics.1 We have seen in Part I that
these equations are fundamental in turbulence: indeed, it is from them and from
laboratory experiments based on water or air that the first theoretical advances
(concepts, exact laws) have been made. This is one of the reasons why the
literature on turbulence focuses mainly – if not entirely – on incompressible hydro￾dynamics, thus excluding a whole range of applications where waves make a
major contribution to the dynamics.2 The present book is an exception, as it is the
first to devote significant attention to (strong) eddy turbulence and (weak) wave
turbulence. As we shall see in this part, turbulent systems that have waves within
them are very numerous. In contrast, incompressible hydrodynamics (pure eddy
turbulence) appear quite singular.
We can distinguish two regimes in wave turbulence: one where the waves are of
weak amplitude and one where they are not. The regime that concerns us here is
mainly that of weak turbulence (first case). When there will be no ambiguity, we
will follow the usages on the subject and speak of wave turbulence in the sense
of weak turbulence. The existence of a small parameter – the amplitude of the
waves – allows a systematic approach to the problem. The general idea is that
the weak amplitude of the waves makes it possible to distinguish between the
temporal evolution of the amplitude and that of the phase, the former evolving
1 We mean here the unmodified Navier–Stokes equations. If, for example, the Coriolis force is added, inertial
waves appear. In the limit of a small Rossby number, we obtain the inertial wave turbulence regime, which is
the subject of Chapter 6.
2 Another reason is that books on turbulence are often written by fluid mechanists and not by physicists.
103104 4 Introduction
Figure 4.1 Wave turbulence: Spatial deformation of the free surface of a liquid produced
by direct numerical simulation (see Chapter 5).
more slowly than the latter. This separation of scales in time makes it possible to
obtain a uniform asymptotic closure of the hierarchy of equations.
A brief history will allow us to understand how the theory of wave turbulence
was constructed. We will apply, in a simple example and then in a nonlinear
equation model, the method of multiple scales, which allows us to justify the
uniformity of the asymptotic development. The systematic method of wave turbu￾lence will then be presented exhaustively in what is probably the simplest example,
that of capillary waves (Chapter 5). Chapter 5 is a technical chapter, but neces￾sary for those who wish to make the method their own. Chapters 6 and 7 will
be devoted to hydrodynamics in rapid rotation, then to magnetohydrodynamics
(MHD) in a strong magnetic field. A synthetic presentation of the main properties
will be given. Chapter 8 will look at wave turbulence in a compressible plasma
at sub-MHD scales. The final Chapter 9 deals with a subject at the limits of our
knowledge: gravitational wave turbulence, which could play a fundamental role in
the mechanism at the origin of the cosmological inflation that appeared in the first
second of the universe, just after the Big Bang.
4.1 Brief History
4.1.1 Prehistory
It is essentially in the field of oceanography and the study of surface waves on
the sea that we find the beginnings of the theory of wave turbulence (Phillips,
1981). This work began in the late 1950s, at a time when surface waves were
treated essentially in a linear manner, the spectra as a superposition of linear4.1 Brief History 105
waves, and nonlinear effects restricted, for example, to periodic wave distortion
phenomena described a long time previously by Stokes (Stokes, 1847). Gravity
waves are by definition on the surface of the ocean; inside the ocean they are
called “internal gravity waves.” A second type of surface wave exists: capillary
waves, which are discussed in detail in the Chapter 5. The Navier–Stokes equa￾tions, modified by the force of gravity, are the theoretical framework from which
the first results emerged. To simplify the problem, the movements are generally
assumed to be irrotational: this corresponds to an air–water interface disturbed by
a unidirectional blowing wind – a typical condition encountered in the open sea.
The problem is then reduced to Bernoulli’s equation applied to the free surface
of the fluid, to which is added a Lagrangian equation to describe the deformation
of the fluid surface and another to take into account an additional hypothesis: the
deep-water hypothesis (see Chapter 5).
4.1.2 Resonant Wave Interactions
Work in the late 1950s and early 1960s led to a major theoretical breakthrough
with the discovery of the existence of resonant interactions between nonlinear
waves of weak amplitude.3 The waves in question are, of course, gravity waves.
The idea has its origin in the work of Phillips (1960), Longuet-Higgins (1962),
and Hasselmann (1962). who tried to understand how the nonlinear interactions
between gravity waves could redistribute the energy initially present in these
modes.4 The underlying idea is that in the initial phase of the development of
turbulence it is the resonant interactions that provide the dominant mechanism for
transferring energy from one wave to another. The ultimate phase of development
had already been studied previously by Phillips (1958) who, using dimensional
analysis, was able to make a spectral prediction of strong (wave) turbulence which
is still in use today (see Chapter 7 on critical balance).
After long calculations based on a classical perturbative development, it was
possible to demonstrate that the energy redistribution was generally negligible for
interactions involving less than four waves, but that it became important for four
waves if the following resonance relationship was satisfied:

k1 + k2 = k3 + k ,
ω1 + ω2 = ω3 + ω ,
(4.1)
with the dispersion relation ω
2 = g|k| (g being the acceleration of gravity). The
experimental demonstration of the existence of resonant interactions was then
published by Longuet-Higgins and Smith (1966) and McGoldrick et al. (1966).
3 Note that earlier studies on three- and four-wave resonance had already been carried out, for example, in the
field of thermal conduction in crystals (Peierls, 1929). See also Nordheim (1928), who wrote the first kinetic
equation: it was for four-wave interactions in the context of the electron theory of conductivity.
4 K. Hasselmann was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics in 2021 “for the physical modelling of Earth’s climate,
quantifying variability and reliably predicting global warming.”106 4 Introduction
Although the existence of resonant wave interactions appeared to be real, their
interpretation was then subject to debate because the energy exchange between
resonant waves also led to a linear growth (in time) of the amplitude of the
waves, ultimately breaking the hypothesis underlying the existence of resonant
interactions, that is, the presence of waves of weak amplitude; in this case, the
perturbation is said to be nonuniform.5
It was therefore not clear whether this
energy transfer could be really effective. An answer to this question was first pro￾posed statistically by Hasselmann (1962), who considered a random set of gravity
waves. The hypothesis of weak nonlinearities was then used to justify another
hypothesis, that of a Gaussian statistics which greatly simplifies the calculations
by eliminating in particular moments of odd order (see also Drummond and Pines,
1962).
4.1.3 Multiple Scale Method
A second major theoretical breakthrough came with Benney’s work, which showed
that the problem of wave turbulence is similar to that of weakly coupled oscillators
in mechanics (Akylas, 2020). With a new mathematical technique for the analy￾sis of dispersive wave packets involving two timescale, Benney (1962) obtained
a relatively simple form for the (discrete and nonstatistical) equations that govern
the temporal evolution of resonant modes. In this approach, the secular terms dis￾appear: they are somehow absorbed by the slow variation of the wave amplitude.
This work shows, in a simple way, how the exchange of energy between four grav￾ity waves is carried out: this exchange takes place while conserving energy. Here
we find a property of strong turbulence, that of detailed conservation (see Chapter
3).
This approach paved the way for the use of a new mathematical technique called
the multiple scale method (Sturrock, 1957; Nayfeh, 2004), which made it possi￾ble to demonstrate that the (continuous) statistical equations of wave turbulence
have a natural closure due to the separation of scales in time. As shown by Ben￾ney and Saffman (1966) for quadratic nonlinearities and Benney (1967) for cubic
nonlinearities, the equations of wave turbulence are asymptotically valid over long
periods of time and do not require the statistical assumption of Gaussianity made
by Hasselmann (1962). The method of multiple timescale offers a systematic and
consistent theoretical framework in which the procedure expansion allows one
in principle to determine the slow rate of change of the amplitude of the waves at
any order in  (Benney and Newell, 1967, 1969). The so-called kinetic equation of
gravity wave turbulence then takes the following (schematic) integro-differential
form in d-dimension:
5 We are talking about secular terms, an illustration of which is given in Section 4.2 from the Duffing equation.
This growth can also be nonlinear in t
α (α > 0) for higher-order corrective terms.4.1 Brief History 107
∂N(k)
∂t
= 
4
Z
R3d
S(k, k1, k2, k3)[N1N2(N + N3) − N3N(N1 + N2)]
δ(ω1 + ω2 − ω3 − ω)δ(k1 + k2 − k3 − k)dk1dk2dk3 , (4.2)
with N ≡ N(k) = E(k)/ω the wave action spectrum and E(k) the energy spec￾trum.6 The Dirac functions translate the resonance condition (4.1) discussed in
Section 4.1.2. The presence of the 
4
factor means that the timescale (normalized
to the wave period ∼ 1/ω) on which the spectra are modified by the nonlinear
dynamics is of the order of O(1/4
). Therefore, it is a relatively slow process.
4.1.4 Kolmogorov–Zakharov Spectrum
Parallel to the work carried out in the Western world, major theoretical advances
were also made in the East. From the beginning of the 1960s, the Soviet school
became interested in wave turbulence, mainly through plasma physics (Sagdeev
and Galeev, 1966; Vedenov, 1967), from which certain notations and vocabulary
were borrowed (one speaks, for example, of the kinetic equation or collision inte￾gral). In passing, it is curious to note that this work was carried out simultaneously
by the two parts of the world without much communication between them. In par￾ticular, by the method known as random phase approximation, kinetic equations of
wave turbulence were proposed in a primitive form by Kadomtsev and Petviashvili
(1963) for a problem of plasma physics, then in a modern form by Zakharov and
his collaborators (Zakharov, 1965, 1967; Zakharov and Filonenko, 1966, 1967).
This work is generally based on a Hamiltonian approach to the problem, whereas
it is the Eulerian approach that was mainly used in the West.
The random phase approximation leads, in practice, to the same kinetic
equations as by the (more rigorous) method of multiple scales. From these integro￾differential equations, a major breakthrough was achieved with the discovery
of a conformal transformation to extract from the nonlinear kinetic equations
the exact power-law solutions. This transformation – now called the Zakharov
transformation – was first proposed for capillary wave turbulence involving tri￾adic interactions (Zakharov, 1967), then for Langmuir wave turbulence, where
the interactions are quartic (Zakharov, 1967; Kaner and Yakovenko, 1970).7 For
more details on the Zakharov transformation, we refer the reader to the Chapter
5, on capillary wave turbulence, in which this transformation is used. However,
6 By analogy with plasma physics, wave action is often associated with particles. This is a quantity that is
sometimes conserved in four-wave processes. This is the case, for example, in gravitational wave turbulence
(see Chapter 9).
7 Zakharov was a student of Sagdeev. He defended his PhD thesis on surface waves in 1966 with sev￾eral fundamental results in wave turbulence to his credit, such as the discovery of exact solutions to the
kinetic equations. This discovery is reported in the article by Zakharov (1965) in which the author first
verified that the collision integral (obtained from a relatively simple ad hoc model of three-wave interac￾tions) tended towards ±∞ for two power-law exponents. He then demonstrated that the solution (the energy
spectrum) associated with the index exactly in the middle of this interval cancels nontrivially the collision
integral: Zakharov had just discovered an exact stationary solution. The discovery of the so-called Zakharov
transformation came shortly after (Zakharov and Filonenko, 1966).108 4 Introduction
we can already note that there are two types of solution: the zero flux solution
(which was the regime studied by Nordheim, 1928) and the nonzero constant
flux solution. The first case corresponds to the thermodynamic solution (constant
entropy) and the second to the Kolmogorov–Zakharov spectrum, which is the most
interesting solution because it is nontrivial. Note that we have already made use
of the Zakharov transformation in the study of two-dimensional hydrodynamic
turbulence (see Chapter 3).
4.1.5 Applications of Wave Turbulence
There are many examples of the application of wave turbulence. Below is a
nonexhaustive list of applications with some references.
• Surface waves: These are the first applications of wave turbulence. They
include capillary waves and gravity waves. The former involve three-wave
interactions, the theory of which was published in English by Zakharov (1967)
in the deep water limit. This is the subject of Chapter 5, in which many refer￾ences are given. Note that the shallow water limit is also the subject of studies
(see, e.g., Clark di Leoni et al., 2014). Gravity wave turbulence is a problem
that needs to be addressed at the level of four waves (Hasselmann, 1962). This
regime has been well reproduced in the laboratory or by direct numerical sim￾ulations (see, e.g., Deike et al., 2011; Zhang and Pan, 2022). Its detection at
sea is more difficult, but not impossible (see, e.g., Hwang et al., 2000). The two
subjects being linked, several experiments deal with the interaction between
gravity and capillary waves (see Chapter 5). All in all, it is a subject that is still
very much under study (see the review by Falcon and Mordant, 2022).
• Internal gravity waves: These waves are a variant of the previous ones in
the sense that we are interested here in gravity waves under the surface of the
ocean. These waves contribute dynamically to the turbulent transport of heat,
which is important to understand in order to properly evaluate the impact of
oceans on the climate (MacKinnon, 2017). Internal gravity wave turbulence
is an anisotropic three-wave problem for which an Eulerian theory has been
developed by Caillol and Zeitlin (2000), as well as several experiments (see,
e.g., Savaro et al., 2020).
• Inertial waves: This is the closest example to the standard case of eddy tur￾bulence, in the sense that the equations are those of Navier–Stokes which are
modified simply by adding the Coriolis force. Inertial wave turbulence is a
three-wave anisotropic problem, whose theory has been published by Galtier
(2003). Chapter 6 is devoted to this subject: the main properties of this regime
are described, and a review of the numerous numerical and experimental works
is given (see, e.g., Monsalve et al., 2020).4.1 Brief History 109
• Rossby waves: These waves appear in a situation of differential rotation.
They are used in the modeling of planetary atmospheres, the interiors of
gaseous planets, and stars; these are often referred to as planetary waves
(Longuet-Higgins and Gill, 1967). In wave turbulence, the dynamics is driven
by three-wave processes with a dominance of nonlocal interactions (Balk et al.,
1990a,b).
• Plasma waves: As mentioned in Section 4.1.4, we find the beginnings of wave
turbulence in the field of plasma physics (Sagdeev and Galeev, 1966; Vedenov,
1967). In this very vast domain, waves are legion. In Chapter 7 we present the
special case of Alfvén wave turbulence, which is based on the simplest model of
plasma physics. The three-wave theory was published by Galtier et al. (2000):
it is a case where the anisotropy is so strong that the cascade is completely
inhibited in the direction of the strong applied magnetic field. Further examples
of plasma physics are mentioned and accompanied by references in Chapter 8,
which is devoted to compressible plasmas.
• Geodynamo waves: Geodynamo waves are defined as waves present in the
earth’s outer liquid core. These waves take part in the dynamo effect, that is, the
physical mechanism that maintains the earth’s magnetic field (Finlay, 2008).
These are magnetostrophic waves and inertial waves. The three-wave theory
models a homogeneous medium with a small Rossby number (Galtier, 2014):
in this framework, an anisotropic inverse cascade of hybrid helicity is predicted,
which could be at the origin of the regeneration of the magnetic field on a large
scale (Menu et al., 2019).
• Acoustic waves: Acoustic wave turbulence is driven by three-wave interac￾tions, but these waves are not dispersive. This is a critical situation for the
application of wave turbulence, because the uniformity of the development is
not guaranteed (it depends on the dimension of the problem). The first works on
the subject date back to the early 1970s (Zakharov and Sagdeev, 1970). The way
in which the asymptotic is subtly modified is discussed by Newell and Aucoin
(1971), and later by L’vov et al. (1997). It can be shown for this regime that
energy is at best redistributed according to rays (in three-dimensional Fourier
space).
• Elastic waves: This is a turbulence produced by a thin elastic plate or by the
introduction of long polymer molecules into a liquid (Steinberg, 2021). In the
former case, we are in a very different situation from the traditional turbulence
produced by a fluid. The vibrations of a plate can in theory produce weak or
strong wave turbulence, depending on the forces acting on it. The theory of
wave turbulence has been published by Düring et al. (2006): it is a four-wave
problem characterized by a direct energy cascade. Although the wave action is
not conserved in this problem, direct numerical simulations show an inverse
cascade which seems to be established in an explosive way (Düring et al.,
2015). Laboratory experiments using steel plates have been carried out in order110 4 Introduction
to reproduce, with varied success, the theoretical predictions (Boudaoud et al.,
2008; Mordant, 2008; Cobelli et al., 2009; Mordant, 2010).
• Optical waves: Wave turbulence is also found in the field of nonlinear optics.
The multidimensional nonlinear Schrödinger equation can be used to describe
the evolution of quasi-monochromatic plane wave envelopes (Sulem and
Sulem, 1999). The theory is explained by Dyachenko et al. (1992): this wave
turbulence is governed by four-wave interactions, and an intermittency mech￾anism characterized by a collapse phenomenon in physical space can occur.
In the case of a reduction of the problem to one dimension, it can be shown
that the dominant resonant interactions are six-wave interactions, involving a
much slower nonlinear dynamics (Laurie et al., 2012). All this work is part of
the study of nonlinear effects on the propagation of incoherent optical beams
(Mitchell et al., 1996; Picozzi et al., 2014).
• Quantum turbulence: This subject is very close to the previous one, in the
sense that the model used is a variant of the nonlinear Schrödinger equation:
by changing the sign of the nonlinear term, the interaction becomes repulsive
and the physics of turbulence is modified. The associated equation – also called
the Gross–Pitaevskii equation – describes a Bose gas at very low temperatures.
Note that the emergence of quantum turbulence in an oscillating Bose–Enstein
condensate has been experimentally demonstrated (Henn et al., 2009). The
wave turbulence regime is described by Dyachenko et al. (1992): it is shown
that four-wave interactions conserve energy and wave action. The inverse cas￾cade associated with the latter leads to the formation of a stable condensate,
that is, the accumulation of wave action in the k = 0 mode. Direct numerical
simulations in two (Nazarenko and Onorato, 2006; Nazarenko, 2007) and three
(Proment et al., 2009, 2012) dimensions illustrate this regime.
• Kelvin waves: Kelvin waves are studied in the context of superfluids whose
temperature is close the absolute zero. These waves can propagate along fil￾aments of vorticity and modify the dynamics of turbulence (Vinen, 2000;
Kivotides et al., 2001). Kelvin’s theory of wave turbulence has been proposed
by Kozik and Svistunov (2004): it involves six-wave processes that conserve
both energy and wave action. As these cascade processes are extremely slow,
it is particularly interesting to consider a local model of nonlinear diffusion
(Nazarenko, 2006).
• Gravitational waves: This example illustrates the wide range of possible appli￾cations of wave turbulence. It relates to cosmology, and more precisely the
birth of the universe: primordial gravitational waves could be at the origin of
the inflation phase of the universe, a question that is still open to this day and
that touches the limits of our knowledge (Galtier et al., 2020). The theory has
been published by Galtier and Nazarenko (2017): the dynamics is governed by
four-wave processes sufficiently symmetric to conserve wave action. The latter
is characterized by an explosive inverse cascade. It is interesting to note that4.2 Multiple Scale Method 111
this regime is close to that of elastic waves in the strong tension limit, as shown
by the theoretical, numerical, and experimental work of Hassaini et al. (2019).
Chapter 9 is devoted to this cosmological subject.
To go further, the reader is invited to consult the books of Zakharov et al. (1992)
and Nazarenko (2011), in which other examples are presented.
4.2 Multiple Scale Method
4.2.1 Duffing’s Equation
Classical Perturbation Development
The aim of this section is not to provide a rigorous and comprehensive demonstra￾tion of the theoretical validity of wave turbulence, but rather to show the reader
the main steps in a schematic manner. To illustrate our point, we will first consider
the Duffing equation:
d
2
f
dt2
+ f = −f
3
, (4.3)
with  a small parameter (0 <   1) which measures the intensity of the non￾linearity and f a function of time only. The main solution to this equation is a
harmonic oscillator. This solution will, however, be slightly modified over time
by the presence of the small nonlinear perturbation (right-hand-side term). Let us
first use the standard perturbation theory and introduce the following power series
development:
f =
X
+∞
i=0

i
fi
. (4.4)
We then obtain an infinite system of equations which, for the first three orders,
can be written:
O(
0
) :
d
2
f0
dt2
+ f0 = 0 , (4.5a)
O(
1
) :
d
2
f1
dt2
+ f1 = −f
3
0
, (4.5b)
O(
2
) :
d
2
f2
dt2
+ f2 = −3f
2
0
f1 . (4.5c)
We can see that the solution to a given order will affect the solution to the higher
order. The first solution is trivially f0 = A cos(t + φ). By introducing this one in
the second equation, we can deduce the exact solution for f1. If we stop at this
order, the solution reads:112 4 Introduction
f (t) = A cos(t + φ) + A
3

−
3
8
tsin(t + φ) +
1
32
cos(3t + 3φ)

+ O(
2
) . (4.6)
As a first approximation, this system behaves well as a harmonic oscillator. The
condition to be checked is that the nonlinear perturbation remains of weak ampli￾tude and the time considered relatively short. On the other hand, over long periods
of the order of O(1/), this solution is modified in a nonnegligible way. The term
that is at the origin of it, in t, is said to be secular. For even longer periods of
time the development diverges; this divergence is all the more so as certain secu￾lar terms of a higher order reinforce it. Then, the uniformity of the development
is broken.
We can pursue the analysis to evaluate the period of oscillations. To do this, the
Duffing equation, which has been previously multiplied by the derivative of f , is
integrated:
1
2

df
dt 2
+
1
2
f
2 +
1
4
f
4 = E , (4.7)
where E is a constant. One obtains:
dt =
df
q
2E − f
2 −
1
2
f
4
. (4.8)
This equation can be integrated over a period T. By posing f = a sin θ, we obtain
the following expression, which is exact in its integral form:
T = 4
Z π/2
0
dθ
q
1 + a
2
(1 −
1
2
cos2 θ)
= 2π

1 −
3
8
a
2 + O(
2
a
4
)

. (4.9)
A Taylor expansion is used to evaluate the integral. It is found that the 2π period
of the harmonic oscillator is corrected by the nonlinear perturbation. The smaller
the nonlinearity, the smaller the correction.
What information is useful for our problem? This very simple system illustrates
schematically the problems that we can encounter in a classical perturbation devel￾opment. Such a development should allow us, in principle, to follow the evolution
of the dynamics of wave turbulence at various orders in . The main problem is
to ensure that the development remains neat (or uniform). In other words, this
means making sure that no secular term of the order n comes to interfere in the
dynamics at an order m, such as m < n, in order not to find oneself in the same sit￾uation as Hasselmann (1962), that is, in the presence of a secular term. This type
of term constitutes an obstacle to the closure of the hierarchy of equations. The
more sophisticated method of multiple scales will allow us to solve this problem.4.2 Multiple Scale Method 113
Multiple Scale Method
Let us take the Duffing equation again and introduce the following independent
time variables:
Tn ≡ 
n
t with n = 0, 1, 2, . . . . (4.10)
The power series development of the variable f is then written:
f =
X
+∞
i=0

i
fi(t, T1, T2, . . .) , (4.11)
and the time derivative becomes a sum of partial derivatives:
d
dt
=
X
+∞
n=0

n
∂
∂Tn
. (4.12)
The introduction of relations (4.10)–(4.12) into the Duffing equation gives:

∂
∂t
+ 
∂
∂T1
+ 
2
∂
∂T2
+ . . .2
(f0 + f1 + 
2
f2 + . . .) (4.13)
+ ( f0 + f1 + 
2
f2 + . . .) = −(f0 + f1 + 
2
f2 + . . .)
3
.
We obtain an infinite system of equations which, for the first two orders, can be
written:
O(
0
) :
∂
2
f0
∂t
2
+ f0 = 0 , (4.14a)
O(
1
) :
∂
2
f1
∂t
2
+ f1 + 2
∂
2
f0
∂t∂T1
= −f
3
0
. (4.14b)
We can see the presence of a new term in the time evolution equation of f1, whose
importance emerges over long times. We will look for a solution of the form:
f0 = A(T1, T2, . . .) cos(t + φ(T1, T2, . . .)) , (4.15)
with an amplitude A and a phase φ which can vary slowly over time. The
introduction of the previous expression in (4.14b) gives the equation:
∂
2
f1
∂t
2
+ f1 = 2
∂A
∂T1
sin(t + φ) +

2A
∂φ
∂T1
−
3
4
A
3

cos(t + φ)
−
A
3
4
cos(3(t + φ)) . (4.16)
To ensure that the f1 solution does not include a secular term, the following
conditions must be imposed:
∂A
∂T1
= 0 and
∂φ
∂T1
=
3
8
A
2
, (4.17)114 4 Introduction
Figure 4.2 Variation of f (t) (solid line) obtained by a numerical simulation of the Duffing
equation with  = 0.01. The solutions (4.6) and (4.18) are plotted in dotted and dashed
lines, respectively.
which gives φ = (3/8)A
2
t + θ. The solution is then written:
f (t) = A cos
t +
3
8
A
2
t + θ

+
A
3
32
cos
3t +
9
8
A
2
t + 3θ

+ O(
2
) , (4.18)
with A(T2, T3, . . .) and θ(T2, T3, . . .). In the order of the truncation, we can there￾fore consider that A and θ are constant. Note that this development is compatible
with the previous one (4.6) for t ≤ O(). This example illustrates the fact that we
can achieve a uniform development in a systematic way using the multiple scale
method.4.3 Weakly Nonlinear Model 115
We show in Figure 4.2 the result of a numerical simulation of the Duffing equa￾tion with  = 0.01. The function f (t) is plotted in solid line. At the top, we see the
evolution for t ∈ [0.200] and at the bottom, we show an enlargement of the end of
the simulation. The mathematical solutions (4.6) and (4.18) are plotted in dotted
and dashed lines, respectively. The divergence with t of the solution (4.6) whose
origin is the secular term can be seen. As expected, this divergence occurs over a
time t of the order of O(1/) (the reference time is the wave period). On the other
hand, the solution (4.18) remains close to the real solution until the final time.
4.3 Weakly Nonlinear Model
4.3.1 Fundamental Equation
To go further, let us now consider the following inviscid model:
∂u(x, t)
∂t
= L(u) +  N (u, u) , (4.19)
where u is a null mean random function, L is a linear operator which ensures
that waves are linear solutions to the problem, and N is a nonlinear quadratic
operator thus implying triadic interactions. The coefficient  is a small parameter
(0 <   1) which measures the amplitude of the nonlinearities. Direct and inverse
Fourier transforms in d-dimension (see Chapter 3) are introduced:
u(x, t) ≡
Z
Rd
A(k, t)e
ik·x
dk , (4.20a)
A(k, t) ≡
1
(2π)
d
Z
Rd
u(x, t)e
−ik·x
dx . (4.20b)
The Fourier transform of equation (4.19) takes the following schematic form:

∂
∂t
+ iω

A(k, t) = 
Z
R2d
HkpqA(p, t)A(q, t)δ(k − p − q)dpdq . (4.21)
On the left we find ω, which is fixed by the dispersion relation, whereas on the
right Hkpq is an operator which depends on the shape of the nonlinearities and is
symmetrical in p and q. We recall that the presence of the Dirac function finds its
origin in the convolution product, and the quadratic nature of the nonlinearities
leads to triadic interactions. The equation is simplified by making the following
change of variables (writing is simplified in passing):
A(k, t) =
X
s
a
s
(k, t)e
−isωk t =
X
s
a
s
k
e
−isωk t
, (4.22)
with s = ±. One obtains the fundamental equation:
∂a
s
k
∂t
= 
X
spsq
Z
R2d
Hkpqa
sp
p a
sq
q e
ik,pqt
δk,pqdpdq , (4.23)116 4 Introduction
with δk,pq ≡ δ(k−p−q) and k,pq ≡ sωk −spωp −sqωq. This equation highlights
the temporal evolution of the amplitude of the wave: this evolution is relatively
slow since it induces a nonlinear term proportional to . We will find this prop￾erty by the multiple scale method. The presence of the complex exponential is
fundamental for the asymptotic closure: since we are interested in the dynamics
over a long time compared to the period of the waves, the contribution of this
exponential is essentially zero. Only certain terms will survive: those for which
k,pq = 0. With the condition imposed by the Dirac, we obtain the resonance
condition:

k = p + q ,
sωk = spωp + sqωq .
(4.24)
4.3.2 Dispersion Relation and Resonance
The triadic resonance condition (4.24) does not always have a solution. To realize
this, we can represent this condition geometrically in the two-dimensional and
isotropic case: Figure 4.3 shows a (axisymmetric) dispersion relation of the type
ωk ∼ k
x
, with x > 1 at the top and 0 < x < 1 at the bottom. The solutions of
the resonance condition (4.24) correspond to the intersection between the surface
ω(p) (which is identified with that of ω(k)) and the surface ω(q). We find that this
intersection exists only for a convex dispersion relation (x > 1). The concave case
corresponding to 0 < x < 1 is the one encountered with gravity waves.
The special case x = 1 is that of nondispersive waves. We can easily see that the
only possible solution is that where all three wavevectors are aligned. Although a
solution to the triadic resonance condition exists, we are not sure that there is
a an asymptotic closure of the hierarchy of equations. Physically, we can easily
understand this problem: two nondispersive waves propagate at the same speed,
therefore, if they initially overlap their interactions will be strong, otherwise they
will never interact. Using the multiscale method presented in the Section 4.3.3,
it can be shown in 1D that a contribution from nonlinear terms is possible on
a timescale of the order of T1, while the closure is made on a longer timescale
in T2 (Benney and Saffman, 1966). This problem is found in the case of acous￾tic wave turbulence, discussed briefly in Section 4.1.5. It should be noted that in
the case of four-wave interactions, the situation is less constraining because new
possibilities exist. Thus, gravity waves can be analyzed at this order. In the case
of a four-wave problem of a nondispersive nature, it is also possible to develop
a theory of wave turbulence, because the associated four wavevectors are not
necessarily collinear. An example will be discussed in Chapter 9: these are grav￾itational waves for which the dispersion relation is ωk = ck, with c the speed of
light.4.3 Weakly Nonlinear Model 117
Figure 4.3 Resonance condition for a dispersion relation of the type ωk ∼ k
x with x > 1
(top) and 0 < x < 1 (bottom).
4.3.3 Uniform Asymptotic Development
Following our analysis of the Duffing equation, we wish to make a power series
development of equation (4.23) following the method of multiple timescales.
A series of timescales are introduced, T0, T1, T2, . . . , which will be treated as
independent variables, with:
T0 ≡ t, T1 ≡ t, T2 ≡ 
2
t, . . . . (4.25)
We obtain:

∂
∂t
+ 
∂
∂T1
+ 
2
∂
∂T2
+ . . .
a
s
k =

X
spsq
Z
R2d
Hkpqa
sp
p a
sq
q e
ik,pqt
δk,pqdpdq . (4.26)118 4 Introduction
The variable a
s
k must also be expanded to the power of  to make the various scales
appear in time:
a
s
k =
X
+∞
n=0

n
a
s
k,n
(t, T1, T2, . . .) = a
s
k,0 + a
s
k,1 + 
2
a
s
k,2 + . . . . (4.27)
This expression must then be introduced into the fundamental equation (4.26). We
obtain for the first three terms:
∂a
s
k,0
∂t
= 0 , (4.28a)
∂a
s
k,1
∂t
= −
∂a
s
k,0
∂T1
+
X
spsq
Z
R2d
Hkpqa
sp
p,0a
sq
q,0e
ik,pqt
δk,pqdpdq , (4.28b)
∂a
s
k,2
∂t
= −
∂a
s
k,1
∂T1
−
∂a
s
k,0
∂T2
+ 2
X
spsq
Z
R2d
Hkpqa
sp
p,0a
sq
q,1e
ik,pqt
δk,pqdpdq . (4.28c)
To lighten the writing, the time dependency of the variables has been omitted. Let
us look at the solutions; we get after integration on t:
a
s
k,0 = a
s
k,0(k, T1, T2, . . .) , (4.29a)
a
s
k,1 = −t
∂a
s
k,0
∂T1
+ b
s
k,1 , (4.29b)
a
s
k,2 = −t
∂a
s
k,1
∂T1
− t
∂a
s
k,0
∂T2
−
t
2
2
∂
2a
s
k,0
∂T
2
1
+ b
s
k,2 , (4.29c)
with
b
s
k,1 ≡
X
spsq
Z
R2d
Hkpqa
sp
p,0a
sq
q,01(k,pq)δk,pqdpdq , (4.30)
and b
s
k,2, a term whose integral form will not be shown because it is not very useful
for our purpose. One can rewrite expression (4.30) within the long time limit by
using the Riemann–Lebesgue lemma for the distributions (which corresponds to
a phase mixing):
1(X) =
Z t
0
e
iXtdt
=
e
iXt − 1
iX
t → +∞
−−−−→ πδ(X) + iP

1
X

. (4.31)
This long time limit means that we are considering a much longer timescale than
the period of linear waves (∼ 1/ω); however, this timescale remains shorter than
any interaction time. We notice that the first solution (4.29a) is compatible with
the hypothesis that amplitude and phase do not evolve on the same timescale: the
phase evolves on a timescale t shorter than the amplitude timescale (which is on4.3 Weakly Nonlinear Model 119
T1 or longer). In relation (4.22), amplitude and phase are therefore two variables
separated in time.
We now need to define the conditions that will enable us to ensure the uni￾formity of the development. Here, the development we are interested in concerns
statistical objects, that is, cumulants and moments. In practice, we wish to have a
uniform development at long times for the cumulants. We obtain from expression
(4.29b):
ha
s
k,1a
s
0
k
0
,0i + ha
s
k,0a
s
0
k
0
,1i = −t
∂ha
s
k,0a
s
0
k
0
,0i
∂T1
+ ha
s
0
k
0
,0b
s
k,1 + a
s
k,0b
s
0
k
0
,1i, (4.32)
with hi the ensemble average. We will assume statistically homogeneous turbu￾lence. The terms on the left are moments (or cumulants) at two points. They are
quantities which are physically bounded (we can see these terms as energy spec￾tra). The second term on the right is also bounded in the long time limit. Therefore,
to ensure the uniformity of the development we must eliminate the potentially
secular term and impose the condition:
∂ha
s
k,0a
s
0
k
0
,0i
∂T1
= 0 . (4.33)
In other words, this means that the cumulants (in two points) of zero order evolve
on a timescale longer than T1.
The analysis must continue at the higher order with the solution (4.29c). We
can obtain:
ha
s
k,2a
s
0
k
0
,0i + ha
s
k,0a
s
0
k
0
,2i = −t
*
a
s
k,0
∂a
s
0
k
0
,1
∂T1
+ a
s
0
k
0
,0
∂a
s
k,1
∂T1
+
− t
∂ha
s
k,0a
s
0
k
0
,0i
∂T2
−
t
2
2
*
a
s
k,0
∂
2a
s
0
k
0
,0
∂T
2
1
+ a
s
0
k
0
,0
∂
2a
s
k,0
∂T
2
1
+
+ ha
s
0
k
0
,0b
s
k,2 + a
s
k,0b
s
0
k
0
,2i.
(4.34)
A condition on the uniformity of the development emerges after a few additional –
sometimes subtle – manipulations, and reuse of expression (4.29b) (see Benney
and Saffman, 1966).8 We can then show that the previous expression is simplified
(for example, the first term in the second line is null). The terms on the left (cumu￾lants) are considered to be physically bounded at long time, which finally leads us
to a nontrivial uniformity condition:
∂ha
s
k,0a
s
0
k
0
,0i
∂T2
= Cthb
s
k,1b
s
0
k
0
,1i + Ctha
s
0
k
0
,0b
s
k,2 + a
s
k,0b
s
0
k
0
,2i, (4.35)
8 Several relationships that mix, for example, products (within the long time limit) of 1 introduced above must
be used. For example, there is the Poincaré–Bertrand formula, or the relation 1(X)1(−X) ∼ 2πtδ(X) +
2P

1
X

∂
∂X
, in which we have a secular contribution. For more formulas, see Benney and Newell (1967).120 4 Introduction
where Ct
f means the coefficient of f proportional to t. This relation implies, in
particular, that the energy spectrum (two-point cumulant at zero order) evolves on
the timescale T2: it is on this timescale that the modes can thus exchange energy.
The next part of the study consists of evaluating the right-hand-side term of
equation (4.35). To understand the principle, we will only focus on the contribu￾tion of the first term on the right of this expression. This term shows four-point
moments of zero order. These moments are decomposed into sums of products
of two-point cumulants (of zero order) and four-point cumulants (of zero order).
Therefore, we have:
Cthb
s
k,1b
s
0
k
0
,1i = Ct
X
si
Z
R4d
HkpqHk
0rsha
sp
p,0a
sq
q,0a
sr
r,0a
ss
s,0i1(k,pq)1(k
0
,rs)
δk,pqδk
0
,rsdpdqdrds, (4.36)
with:
ha
sp
p,0a
sq
q,0a
sr
r,0a
ss
s,0i = q
spsqsrss
0
(p, q, r,s)δ(p + q + r + s) (4.37)
+ q
spsq
0
(p, q)q
srss
0
(r,s)δ(p + q)δ(r + s)
+ q
spsr
0
(p, r)q
sqss
0
(q,s)δ(p + r)δ(q + s)
+ q
spss
0
(p,s)q
sqsr
0
(q, r)δ(p + s)δ(q + r) .
In this writing q
ss0
0
is a two-point cumulant of order 0 such that q
ss0
0
(k, k
0
)δ(k+k
0
) =
ha
s
k,0a
s
0
k
0
,0i. We can then show by manipulating Dirac products that the contribution
of the cumulant q
spsqsrss
0
to the dynamics is null, that is, it is not possible to generate
from this term a linear contribution in t. Indeed, both 1 functions are independ￾ent, so the relationship (4.31) must be used as a product. On the other hand, a
nonzero contribution can come from products of two-point cumulants: more pre￾cisely, these are products of the type 1(X)1(−X), which give a linear contribution
in t. An analysis of the second right-hand-side term of equation (4.35) comes to the
same conclusion. Therefore, the contribution proportional to t that we are look￾ing for does not involve the fourth-order cumulant. It should be noted that for
a Gaussian distribution the fourth-order cumulant is zero. The situation we have
here is thus similar in appearance to the one of a Gaussian distribution, however,
we have not made the assumption of Gaussianity. This result does not preclude a
contribution to the dynamics of the non-Gaussian part of the statistic: in princi￾ple, it can intervene in the dynamics by slowly changing the spectrum, but at a
higher order in . The demonstration presented here is only sketched. For more
information, one can refer to the work of Benney and collaborators (Benney and
Saffman, 1966; Benney, 1967; Benney and Newell, 1967, 1969), where the case
of four-wave interactions is also studied. In particular, it is shown for three-wave
interactions that the development is uniformly valid for times ωt  O(1/4
), with
the wave period as the reference time.4.3 Weakly Nonlinear Model 121
In summary, we can say that wave turbulence is characterized by a dynamics
on two timescale. Over short times, of the order of the wave period, we have a
phase mixing which leads, because of the dispersive nature of the waves, to the
decoupling of the correlations initially present and to a statistics that is close to
Gaussianity, as expected from the central limit theorem.9
(It is assumed, however,
that initially there are no coherent structures leading to too strong correlation as
can be the case in strong turbulence.) On a longer timescale, the nonlinear cou￾pling – weak over short times – becomes nonnegligible because of the resonance
mechanism. This coupling leads to a regeneration of the cumulants via the prod￾uct of lower-order cumulants. It is these terms that are at the origin of the energy
transfer mechanism. Their contribution is such that an asymptotic closure uni￾form in time is achievable. As we will see in the Chapter 5, on capillary wave
turbulence – for which the interactions are three-wave – the analytical develop￾ment can be done in practice directly from the fundamental equation (4.23) by
assuming a scale separation in time, between phase and amplitude. However, it
should be borne in mind that this is a demonstration by the multiscale method of
the uniformity of the asymptotic development, which allows the theory of wave
turbulence to be rigorously justified.
In this book, we implicitly assume that the systems studied are of infinite
size and that they can therefore be treated as continuous. Note that numeri￾cal simulation with its grid of points escapes this description. Effects (freezing
of the cascade) related to the discretization of the Fourier space may emerge
because the resonance conditions are necessarily more difficult to satisfy (see,
e.g., Connaughton et al. (2001) for capillary waves). In theory, the weaker the
nonlinearities, the stronger these effects. For example, in inertial wave turbulence
Bourouiba (2008) has shown that discretization effects become preponderant
when the Rossby number, Ro, is smaller than 10−3
. Above this value, but still
for a small Ro, these effects are negligible because of the quasi-resonances which,
together with the resonances, contribute to the transfer of energy.
Finally, we give the schematic form of the kinetic equation of (dispersive) wave
turbulence for three-wave interactions:
∂N(k)
∂t
= (4.38)

2
Z
R2d
S(k, p, q)(NpNq − NNp − NNq)δ(ω − ωp − ωq)δ(k − p − q)dpdq ,
with N ≡ N(k) = E(k)/ω the wave action spectrum and E(k) the energy
spectrum. This schematic equation describes the dynamics on a timescale ωt ∼
O(1/2
). This timescale is therefore shorter than in the case of four-wave interac￾tions. New contributions of higher orders can emerge over longer timescales (from
9 Note that in a multidimensional problem, the dispersive nature of the waves is required for three-wave
interactions but not for four-wave interactions, as shown in Chapter 9 on gravitational waves.122 4 Introduction
O(1/4
)), whereas over shorter times the dynamics of wave turbulence does not
have time to develop. Note that the wave action is not conserved for three-wave
interactions: it can be conserved only if the interactions are even (four waves, six
waves, etc.).
In nature we often encounter three-wave problems. Chapters 5, 6, 7, and 8 cor￾respond to this type of situation, while Chapter 9 presents a four-wave problem.
As mentioned in Section 4.1.5, sometimes higher-level problems (up to six waves)
can occur. Despite the diversity of situations, the kinetic equation takes a universal
form in the sense that it is written (at the main order):
∂N(k)
∂t
= 
2n−4T(k) , (4.39)
for n-wave interactions, with T the transfer function (or collision integral). The
higher the degree of interaction, the longer the transfer time τtr. This time is
characterized by the relation:
ωτtr ∼ O(1/2n−4
) . (4.40)
Since the characteristic time of the waves is τω ∼ 1/ω and the small parameter is
none other than the ratio between this time and the nonlinear time τNL, we arrive
at the following phenomenological expression for the transfer time:
τtr ∼
τω

2n−4
∼
τ
2n−4
NL
τ
2n−5
ω
. (4.41)
For three-wave interactions, we will use the expression: τtr ∼ ωτ 2
NL. In Chapter
7, we will show how this characteristic time can be found with a phenomenology
based on collisions of wave packets.
References
Akylas, T. R. 2020. David J. Benney: Nonlinear wave and instability processes in fluid
flows. Ann. Rev. Fluid Mech., 52(1), 010518–040240.
Balk, A. M., Zakharov, V. E., and Nazarenko, S. V. 1990a. Nonlocal turbulence of drift
waves. J. Exp. Theor. Phys., 98, 446–467.
Balk, A. M., Nazarenko, S. V., and Zakharov, V. E. 1990b. On the nonlocal turbulence of
drift type waves. Phys. Lett. A, 146(4), 217–221.
Benney, D. J. 1962. Non-linear gravity wave interactions. J. Fluid Mech., 14, 577–584.
Benney, D. J. 1967. Asymptotic behavior of nonlinear dispersive waves. J. Math. Phys.,
46(2), 115–132.
Benney, D. J., and Newell, A. C. 1967. Sequential time closures for interacting random
waves. J. Math. Phys., 46(4), 363–392.
Benney, D. J., and Newell, A. C. 1969. Random wave closures. Stud. App. Maths., 48(1),
29–53.
Benney, D. J., and Saffman, P. G. 1966. Nonlinear interactions of random waves in a
dispersive medium. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A, 289(1418), 301–320.References 123
Boudaoud, A., Cadot, O., Odille, B., and Touzé, C. 2008. Observation of wave turbulence
in vibrating plates. Phys. Rev. Lett., 100(23), 234504.
Bourouiba, L. 2008. Discreteness and resolution effects in rapidly rotating turbulence.
Phys. Rev. E, 78, 056309.
Caillol, P., and Zeitlin, V. 2000. Kinetic equations and stationary energy spectra of weakly
nonlinear internal gravity waves. Dyn. Atmos. Oceans, 32(2), 81–112.
Clark di Leoni, P., Cobelli, P. J., and Mininni, P. D. 2014. Wave turbulence in shallow
water models. Phys. Rev. E, 89(6), 063025.
Cobelli, P., Petitjeans, P., Maurel, A., Pagneux, V., and Mordant, N. 2009. Space-time
resolved wave turbulence in a vibrating plate. Phys. Rev. Lett., 103(20), 204301.
Connaughton, C., Nazarenko, S., and Pushkarev, A. 2001. Discreteness and quasireso￾nances in weak turbulence of capillary waves. Phys. Rev. E, 63, 046306.
Deike, L., Laroche, C., and Falcon, E. 2011. Experimental study of the inverse cascade in
gravity wave turbulence. EPL (Europhys. Lett.), 96(3), 34004.
Drummond, W. E., and Pines, D. 1962. Non-linear stability of plasma oscillations. Nuclear
Fusion Supp., 3, 1049–1057.
Düring, G., Josserand, C., and Rica, S. 2006. Weak turbulence for a vibrating plate: Can
one hear a Kolmogorov spectrum? Phys. Rev. Lett., 97(2), 025503.
Düring, G., Josserand, C., and Rica, S. 2015. Self-similar formation of an inverse cascade
in vibrating elastic plates. Phys. Rev. E, 91(5), 052916.
Dyachenko, S., Newell, A. C., Pushkarev, A., and Zakharov, V. E. 1992. Optical tur￾bulence: Weak turbulence, condensates and collapsing filaments in the nonlinear
Schrödinger equation. Physica D, 57, 96–160.
Falcon, E., and Mordant, N. 2022. Experiments in surface gravity-capillary wave turbu￾lence. Ann. Rev. Fluid Mech., 54(1), 1–25.
Finlay, C. C. 2008. Waves in the presence of magnetic fields, rotation and convection. In
P. Cardin and L. F. Cugliandolo (eds.) Dynamos: Lecture Notes of the Les Houches
Summer School 2007 (pages 403–450). Elsevier.
Galtier, S. 2003. Weak inertial-wave turbulence theory. Phys. Rev. E, 68(1), 015301.
Galtier, S. 2014. Weak turbulence theory for rotating magnetohydrodynamics and plane￾tary flows. J. Fluid Mech., 757, 114–154.
Galtier, S., and Nazarenko, S. V. 2017. Turbulence of weak gravitational waves in the
early universe. Phys. Rev. Lett., 119(22), 221101.
Galtier, S., Nazarenko, S. V., Newell, A. C., and Pouquet, A. 2000. A weak turbulence
theory for incompressible magnetohydrodynamics. J. Plasma Phys., 63, 447–488.
Galtier, S., Laurie, J., and Nazarenko, S. V. 2020. A plausible model of inflation driven by
strong gravitational wave turbulence. Universe, 6(7), 98 (16 pages).
Hassaini, R., Mordant, N., Miquel, B., Krstulovic, G., and Düring, G. 2019. Elastic weak
turbulence: From the vibrating plate to the drum. Phys. Rev. E, 99(3), 033002.
Hasselmann, K. 1962. On the non-linear energy transfer in a gravity-wave spectrum. Part
1. General theory. J. Fluid Mech., 12, 481–500.
Henn, E. A. L., Seman, J. A., Roati, G., Magalhaes, K. M. F., and Bagnato, V. S. 2009.
Emergence of turbulence in an oscillating Bose–Einstein condensate. Phys. Rev.
Lett., 103(4), 045301.
Hwang, P. A., Wang, D. W., Walsh, E. J., Krabill, W. B., and Swift, R. N. 2000. Airborne
measurements of the wavenumber spectra of ocean surface waves. Part I: Spectral
slope and dimensionless spectral coefficient. J. Phys. Ocean., 30(11), 2753.
Kadomtsev, B. B., and Petviashvili, V. I. 1963. Weakly turbulent plasma in a magnetic
field. J. Exp. Theor. Phys., 16, 1578–1585.
Kaner, É. A., and Yakovenko, V. M. 1970. Weak turbulence spectrum and second sound
in a plasma. J. Exp. Theor. Phys., 31, 316–330.
Kivotides, D., Vassilicos, J. C., Samuels, D. C., and Barenghi, C. F. 2001. Kelvin waves
cascade in superfluid turbulence. Phys. Rev. Lett., 86(14), 3080–3083.124 4 Introduction
Kozik, E., and Svistunov, B. 2004. Kelvin-wave cascade and decay of superfluid turbu￾lence. Phys. Rev. Lett., 92(3), 035301.
Laurie, J., Bortolozzo, U., Nazarenko, S., and Residori, S. 2012. One-dimensional
optical wave turbulence: Experiment and theory. Phys. Rep., 514(4),
121–175.
Longuet-Higgins, M. S. 1962. Resonant interactions between two trains of gravity waves.
J. Fluid Mech., 12, 321–332.
Longuet-Higgins, M. S., and Gill, A. E. 1967. Resonant interactions between planetary
waves. Proc. Royal Soc. Lond. A, 299(1456), 120–140.
Longuet-Higgins, M. S., and Smith, N. D. 1966. An experiment on third-order resonant
wave interactions. J. Fluid Mech., 25, 417–435.
L’vov, V. S., L’vov, Yu., Newell, A. C., and Zakharov, V. E. 1997. Statistical description of
acoustic turbulence. Phys. Rev. E, 56(1), 390–405.
MacKinnon, J. A., Zhao, Z., Whalen, C. B. et al. 2017. Climate process team on internal
wave-driven ocean mixing. Bull. Am. Meteo. Soc., 98(11), 2429– 2454.
McGoldrick, L. F., Phillips, O. M., Huang, N. E., and Hodgson, T. H. 1966. Measurements
of third-order resonant wave interactions. J. Fluid Mech., 25, 437–456.
Menu, M. D., Galtier, S., and Petitdemange, L. 2019. Inverse cascade of hybrid helicity in
B0 −  MHD turbulence. Phys. Rev. Fluids, 4(7), 073701.
Mitchell, M., Chen, Z., Shih, M.-F., and Segev, M. 1996. Self-trapping of partially
spatially incoherent light. Phys. Rev. Lett., 77(3), 490–493.
Monsalve, E., Brunet, M., Gallet, B., and Cortet, P.-P. 2020. Quantitative experimental
observation of weak inertial-wave turbulence. Phys. Rev. Lett., 125, 254502.
Mordant, N. 2008. Are there waves in elastic wave turbulence? Phys. Rev. Lett., 100(23),
234505.
Mordant, N. 2010. Fourier analysis of wave turbulence in a thin elastic plate. Europ. Phys.
J. B, 76(4), 537–545.
Nayfeh, A. H. 2004. Perturbation Methods. Weinheim, Germany: Wiley-VCH Verlag
GmbH & Co. KGaA.
Nazarenko, S. 2006. Differential approximation for Kelvin wave turbulence. JETP Lett.,
83(5), 198–200.
Nazarenko, S. 2011. Wave Turbulence. Lecture Notes in Physics, vol. 825. Springer
Verlag.
Nazarenko, S., and Onorato, M. 2006. Wave turbulence and vortices in Bose–Einstein
condensation. Physica D, 219(1), 1–12.
Nazarenko, S., and Onorato, M. 2007. Freely decaying turbulence and Bose–Einstein
condensation in Gross–Pitaevski model. J. Low Temp. Phys., 146(1–2), 31–46.
Newell, A. C., and Aucoin, P. J. 1971. Semi-dispersive wave systems. J. Fluid Mech., 49,
593–609.
Nordheim, L. W. 1928. On the kinetic method in the new statistics and its application
in the electron theory of conductivity. Proc. Royal Soc. London Series A, 119(783),
689–698.
Peierls, R. 1929. Zur kinetischen Theorie der Wärmeleitung in Kristallen. Annalen der
Physik, 395(8), 1055–1101.
Phillips, O. M. 1958. The equilibrium range in the spectrum of wind-generated waves. J.
Fluid Mech., 4, 426–434.
Phillips, O. M. 1960. On the dynamics of unsteady gravity waves of finite amplitude. Part
1. The elementary interactions. J. Fluid Mech., 9, 193–217.
Phillips, O. M. 1981. Wave interactions – The evolution of an idea. J. Fluid Mech., 106,
215–227.
Picozzi, A., Garnier, J., Hansson, T. et al. 2014. Optical wave turbulence: Towards a uni￾fied nonequilibrium thermodynamic formulation of statistical nonlinear optics. Phys.
Rep., 542(1), 1–132.References 125
Proment, D., Nazarenko, S., and Onorato, M. 2009. Quantum turbulence cascades in the
Gross–Pitaevskii model. Phys. Rev. A, 80(5), 051603.
Proment, D., Nazarenko, S., and Onorato, M. 2012. Sustained turbulence in the three￾dimensional Gross–Pitaevskii model. Physica D, 241(3), 304–314.
Sagdeev, R. Z., and Galeev, A. A. 1966. Lectures on the Non-linear Theory of Plasma.
Trieste: International Center for Theoretical Physics.
Savaro, C., Campagne, A., Linares, M. C. et al. 2020. Generation of weakly nonlinear
turbulence of internal gravity waves in the Coriolis facility. Phys. Rev. Fluids, 5(7),
073801.
Steinberg, V. 2021. Elastic turbulence: An experimental view on inertialess random flow.
Ann. Rev. Fluid Mech., 53(1), 010719–060129.
Stokes, G. G. 1847. On the theory of oscillatory waves. Trans. Camb. Philos. Soc., 8,
441–455.
Sturrock, P. A. 1957. Non-linear effects in electron plasmas. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A,
242(1230), 277–299.
Sulem, C., and Sulem, P.-L. 1999. The Nonlinear Schrödinger equation: Self-focusing and
wave collapse. Applied Mathematical Sciences, vol. 139. Springer-Verlag.
Vedenov, A. A. 1967. Theory of a weakly turbulent plasma. Rev. Plasma Physics, 3, 229–
276.
Vinen, W. F. 2000. Classical character of turbulence in a quantum liquid. Phys. Rev. B,
61(2), 1410–1420.
Zakharov, V. E. 1965. Weak turbulence in media with a decay spectrum. J. Appl. Mech.
Tech. Phys., 6, 22–24.
Zakharov, V. E. 1967. Weak-turbulence spectrum in a plasma without a magnetic field. J.
Exp. Theor. Phys., 24, 455–459.
Zakharov, V. E., and Filonenko, N. N. 1966. The energy spectrum for stochastic
oscillations of a fluid surface. Doclady Akad. Nauk. SSSR, 170, 1292–1295.
Zakharov, V. E., and Filonenko, N. N. 1967. Weak turbulence of capillary waves. J. Appl.
Mech. Tech. Phys., 8(5), 37–40.
Zakharov, V. E., and Sagdeev, R. Z. 1970. Spectrum of acoustic turbulence. Sov. Phys.
Dok., 15, 439–440.
Zakharov, V. E., L’Vov, V. S., and Falkovich, G. 1992. Kolmogorov Spectra of Turbulence,
vol. 1: Wave Turbulence. Springer Series in Nonlinear Dynamics. Springer.
Zhang, Z., and Pan, Y. 2022. Numerical investigation of turbulence of surface gravity
waves. J. Fluid Mech., 933, A58.5
Theory for Capillary Wave
Turbulence
5.1 Introduction
Together with gravity waves, capillary waves are the main surface waves encoun￾tered in nature. The latter have an advantage over the former in that they are easier
to treat analytically in the nonlinear regime. This is the choice we make in this
chapter: we present capillary wave turbulence in detail (see Figure 5.1). It is a
technical chapter which is, however, necessary for those who wish to master the
theory of wave turbulence. For others, the calculation steps can be ignored.
We will consider an incompressible fluid (∇ · u = 0) (such as water) subject to
irrotational movements (u = ∇φ with φ the potential). This condition is well jus￾tified when the air–water interface is perturbed by a unidirectional wind (a typical
condition encountered in the open sea). The nonlinear equations that describe the
dynamics of capillary waves are obtained by firstly noting that the deformation of
the fluid at the air–water interface verifies the exact Lagrangian relationship:
dη
dt
= uz =
∂φ
∂z
|η , (5.1)
where η(x, y, t) is the deformation and φ(x, y,z, t) the potential (see Figure 5.2 for
an illustration). Bernoulli’s equation applied to the free surface of the fluid (at
z = η) is written:
∂φ
∂t
|η = −
1
2
(∇φ)
2
|η + σ1η , (5.2)
where σ = γ /ρwater with γ the surface tension coefficient (for the air–water inter￾face γ ' 0.07 N/m) and ρwater the mass density of the water. Note that the mass
density of air is negligible compared to that of water. The surface tension term
is obtained by assuming that the deformation is relatively small: |∇η|  1. This
tension is responsible for a discontinuity between the pressure of the fluid at its
free surface Pf and the pressure of the atmosphere Pa; it is modeled by the rela￾tion Pf − Pa = σ/R, with R the radius of curvature of the free surface. The
127128 5 Theory for Capillary Wave Turbulence
Figure 5.1 Superposition of capillary waves (ripples) on gravity waves. Photo taken near
Cargèse (Corsica).
Figure 5.2 Schematic section of a capillary wave in deep water. It is assumed that the
deformation η of the air–water interface is on average at altitude z = 0 and is such
that |∇η|  1, that is, of weak amplitude. In addition, we will assume that the fluid
is incompressible (∇ · u = 0) and irrotational (u = ∇φ): in this case 1φ = 0. The deep￾water hypothesis means that the potential φ is nul at altitude z = −∞. A more realistic
illustration produced by a direct numerical simulation can be seen in Figure 5.3.
assumption of weak deformation (or weak curvature) simplifies the modeling.
After developing the first equation, we obtain the following system:
∂η
∂t
= −∇⊥φ|η · ∇⊥η +
∂φ
∂z
|η , (5.3a)
∂φ
∂t
|η = −
1
2
(∇φ)
2
|η + σ1η , (5.3b)
where the symbol ⊥ means that we only take derivatives in the x and y directions.
This system of equations is the one used by Zakharov (1967) to develop the theory
that interests us in this chapter. Basically, it involves the use of the potential φ in
z = η, which can be tricky to handle. One way to get around this problem is to use
a Taylor development in quadratic order to express φ in z = η from its (Eulerian)
value in z = 0. We obtain (Benney, 1962; Case and Chiu, 1977):5.1 Introduction 129
∂η
∂t
= −∇⊥φ|0 · ∇⊥η +
∂φ
∂z
|0 + η
∂
2φ
∂z
2
|0 , (5.4a)
∂φ
∂t
|0 + η
∂
2φ
∂z∂t
|0 = −
1
2
(∇φ)
2
|0 + σ1η . (5.4b)
We have limited ourselves to quadratic nonlinearities because the problem of
capillary wave turbulence can be solved at this level, that is, for three-wave inter￾actions (McGoldrick, 1965). This situation differs from that of gravity waves,
which must be treated at the cubic level (four-wave interactions). Equations (5.4a)
and (5.4b) are the ones we will consider to develop the theory of capillary wave
turbulence. They are completed by the incompressible and irrotational conditions
of the fluid:
1φ = 0 . (5.5)
Under the deep-water hypothesis, that is, φ = 0 in z = −∞, we obtain a function
of form:
φ(x, y,z, t) = ψ(x, y, t)e
kz
, (5.6)
with k the wavevector norm, k ≡ (kx, ky).
The linearization of the system (5.4a)–(5.4b) will give us the dispersion
relation. We obtain after Fourier transform:
−iωkηˆk = kφˆ
k , (5.7a)
−iωkφˆ
k = −σk
2
ηˆk , (5.7b)
with by definition:
ηˆk ≡ ˆη(kx, ky) =
1
(2π)
2
Z
R2
η(x) exp−ik·x
dx , (5.8a)
φˆ
k ≡ φˆ(kx, ky) =
1
(2π)
2
Z
R2
φ(x) exp−ik·x
dx . (5.8b)
Finally, the dispersion relationship is obtained:
ω
2
k = σk
3
. (5.9)
Note that the presence of gravity at the linear level corrects this relation in ω
2
k =
σk
3 + gk. Therefore, our study is valid in the case where k  k∗ with k∗ ≡ √
gρwater/γ (we have explicitly written the surface tension coefficient to obtain a
numerical value). This corresponds to a critical wavelength λ∗ ' 1.7 cm for the
air–water interface. As a result, capillary waves appear at small scales. They are
dispersive with a phase velocity vφ that increases with the wavenumber (vφ ∝
√
k). This property can be observed by slightly disturbing the water surface: short
wavelength waves are the fastest to escape from the disturbed area. Let us note130 5 Theory for Capillary Wave Turbulence
in passing that in the case of gravity waves we have the inverse situation (easily
verifiable by experiment): long wavelength gravity waves are the fastest to escape
from the disturbed region (but they are preceded by capillary waves).
5.2 Phenomenology
Phenomenological analysis plays a fundamental role in turbulence because in the
regime of strong turbulence it is the method used to arrive at a spectral prediction,
for example, for energy. In the case of wave turbulence, it is possible to obtain
this solution analytically; however, phenomenological analysis remains indispen￾sable in order to, on the one hand, rapidly arrive at a first prediction and, on the
other hand, be able to explain simply how the solution sought emerges. If we
consider the nonlinear contribution of equation (5.4b), we arrive at the following
phenomenological expression:
φ
τNL
∼ k
2φ
2
, (5.10)
where τNL is the nonlinear time with ∂φ/∂t ∼ φ/τNL and (∇φ)
2 ∼ k
2φ
2
. We then
obtain:
τNL ∼
1
k
2φ
. (5.11)
A similar analysis using equation (5.4a) leads to the same expression. We can
note, however, that the nonlinear term η∂2φ/(∂t∂z)|0 of equation (5.4b) gives
us an additional expression when this is balanced with the time derivative term
(expression (5.11) should also be used), that is:
kφ
2 ∼ k
2
η
2
. (5.12)
This can be interpreted as an equipartition relation between the kinetic kφ
2
and
surface potential k
2η
2
energies.
To arrive at a prediction for the total energy spectrum, we need to introduce the
mean rate of energy transfer ε in the inertial range:
ε ∼
kEk
τtr
∼
kEk
ωτ 2
NL
∼
kEk k
4φ
2
k
3/2
∼ k
7/2E
2
k
, (5.13)
with τtr the transfer (or cascade) time of capillary wave turbulence and Ek the one￾dimensional spectrum of total energy (we assume that turbulence is statistically
isotropic). We use here the expression τtr for triadic interactions (see Chapter 4 or
7 for a justification). One gets the relationship:
Ek ∼
√
εk
−7/4
. (5.14)5.2 Phenomenology 131
Figure 5.3 Spatial variations of the surface deformation η(x, y) (top) and velocity poten￾tial φ(x, y) (bottom) in the wave turbulence regime. This direct numerical simulation is
presented in Section 5.9.132 5 Theory for Capillary Wave Turbulence
From this prediction and information on the equipartition between kinetic and
potential surface energies, we obtain the spectra:
E
φ
k ≡ |φˆ
k |
2 ∼
√
εk
−11/4
and E
η
k ≡ | ˆηk|
2 ∼
√
εk
−15/4
. (5.15)
These spectra can also be written as a function of frequency using the dispersion
relation ω ∼ k
3/2
. With the dimensional relation kEk ∼ ωEω, one obtains for the
total energy:
Eω ∼
√
εω−3/2
, (5.16)
and then:
E
φ
ω ≡ |φˆ
ω|
2 ∼
√
εω−13/6
and E
η
ω ≡ | ˆηω|
2 ∼
√
εω−17/6
. (5.17)
It is often the latter prediction that is used for comparison with experiment (or
direct numerical simulation) because it is easily accessible. We will see in Sec￾tion 5.6 that the energy spectrum (5.14) can be obtained analytically as an exact
solution of the equations of capillary wave turbulence. The analytical approach
also makes it possible to demonstrate that the energy cascade is direct (with a
flux of energy strictly positive) and to estimate the so-called Kolmogorov constant
of proportionality, allowing the sign “∼” to be substituted for “=” in expression
(5.14).
A last comment can be made on the capillary wave turbulence regime if we
express the ratio χ between the wave period and the nonlinear time. With the
prediction (5.15), we get:
χ =
1/ω
τNL
∼
k
2φ
ω
∼ k
−3/8
, (5.18)
which means that turbulence is weaker at small scales (i.e. large k). In other words,
if at a given wavenumber k the turbulence is weak, it will remain so with a direct
cascade of energy. However, this property is not generic: for example, in magne￾tohydrodynamics (Chapter 7) the ratio χ increases with the wavenumbers so that
an initially weak turbulence inevitably becomes strong at small scales (of course,
assuming that small-scale dissipation effects remain negligible). This is also the
case for gravity waves that can produce wave breaking and whitecaps (Nazarenko,
2011).
5.3 Analytical Theory: Fundamental Equation
For the nonlinear treatment of capillary wave turbulence, we will pass through
Fourier space and make extensive use of the properties of the (spatial) Fourier
transform. We will follow the Eulerian method proposed by Galtier (2021), which
is the only complete demonstration published to date; the article of Zakharov
(1967) only gives an overview of the demonstration, and it is the same for the
later Pushkarev and Zakharov (1996, 2000), in which, however, there are some5.3 Analytical Theory: Fundamental Equation 133
additional steps; note that these articles follow a Hamiltonian approach. The
system (5.4a)–(5.4b) can be rewritten:
∂ηˆk
∂t
− kφˆ
k =
Z
R4
[(p · q)φˆ
pηˆq + p
2φˆ
pηˆq]δ(k − p − q)dpdq , (5.19a)
∂φˆ
k
∂t
+ σk
2
ηˆk =
1
2
Z
R4
[(p · q − pq)φˆ
pφˆ
q + 2σp
3
ηˆpηˆq]δ(k − p − q)dpdq .
(5.19b)
The convolution product is expressed through the presence of the Dirac δ(k −
p − q). One can notice at this level of analysis a difference with the equations of
Zakharov (1967) whose attribution can be given to our initial choice to use a Tay￾lor development around the equilibrium position. We now introduce the canonical
variables A
s
k
of this system:
ηˆk ≡

4
σk
1/4
X
s
A
s
k
, (5.20a)
φˆ
k ≡ −i(4σk)
1/4X
s
sAs
k
, (5.20b)
with s = ±. As the functions η and φ are real, we have:
ηˆ
∗
−k = ˆηk , φˆ
∗
−k = φˆ
k , (5.21)
which gives us the remarkable relationship: A
s
k
∗ = A
−s
−k
(with ∗
the complex conju￾gate). The introduction of relations (5.20a)–(5.20b) in (5.19a)–(5.19b) gives (we
also use the triadic relation q = k−p to simplify partly the nonlinear expression):
∂A
s
k
∂t
+ isωkA
s
k =
1
2

σk
4
1/4 Z
R4
(k · p)φˆ
pηˆqδ(k − p − q)dpdq (5.22)
+
is
4

1
4σk
1/4 Z
R4
[(p · q − pq)φˆ
pφˆ
q
+ 2σp
3
ηˆpηˆq]δ(k − p − q)dpdq ,
with ωk =
√
σk
3
. The relevance of the choice of definitions of the canonical
variables is immediately visible at the linear level: the term on the left makes the
dispersion relationship explicitly apparent. The introduction of these variables at
the nonlinear level gives:
∂A
s
k
∂t
+ isωkA
s
k =
−iσ
1/4
√
2
Z
R4
X
spsq
sp(k · p)

pk
q
1/4
(5.23)
× A
sp
p A
sq
q δ(k − p − q)dpdq −
isσ
1/4
2
√
2
Z
R4
X
spsq

spsq(p · q − pq)
×
pq
k
1/4
−
2p
3
(kpq)
1/4

A
sp
p A
sq
q δ(k − p − q)dpdq .134 5 Theory for Capillary Wave Turbulence
This expression cannot be used as such for a statistical development: it needs
to be simplified and above all to make it as symmetrical as possible in order to
facilitate subsequent work. This is a fundamental work on which one can spend
more time than the statistical development – which is merely the application of
sophisticated but systematic techniques. The objective here is, moreover, to find
the expression proposed by Zakharov (1967). This guide will help us to simplify
the expression. The first remark concerns the first and last nonlinear terms, which
can become symmetric by exchanging the wavevectors p and q, and the associated
polarizations sp and sq; this gives us
∂A
s
k
∂t
+ isωkA
s
k = −
iσ
1/4
2
√
2
Z
R4
X
spsq
spsqA
sp
p A
sq
q δ(k − p − q) (5.24)
×
h
s(p · q − pq)
pq
k
1/4
+ sq(k · p)

pk
q
1/4
+ sp(k · q)

qk
p
1/4
−
sspsq(p
3 + q
3
)
(kpq)
1/4
i
dpdq .
Then we introduce and subtract several terms and get:
∂A
s
k
∂t
+ isωkA
s
k = −
iσ
1/4
2
√
2
Z
R4
X
spsq
spsqA
sp
p A
sq
q δ(k − p − q) (5.25)
×

s(p · q + pq)
pq
k
1/4
+ sq(k · p − kp)

pk
q
1/4
+ sp(k · q − kq)

qk
p
1/4
− 2spq pq
k
1/4
+ sqkp
pk
q
1/4
+ spkq
qk
p
1/4
−
sspsq(p
3 + q
3
)
(kpq)
1/4

dpdq .
We will see that the terms of the last line do not ultimately contribute to the
nonlinear dynamics over long periods of time. For this, we introduce the angular
frequency ωk =
√
σk
3
; we can then show that:
spsq
"
−2spq pq
k
1/4
+ sqkp
pk
q
1/4
+ spkq
qk
p
1/4
−
sspsq(p
3 + q
3
)
(kpq)
1/4
#
=
s(spωp + sqωq)(sωk − spωp − sqωq)
σ(kpq)
1/4
. (5.26)
Finally, we get:
∂A
s
k
∂t
+ isωkA
s
k = −
iσ
1/4
2
√
2
Z
R4
X
spsq
spsqA
sp
p A
sq
q δ(k − p − q) (5.27)
×
"
s(p · q + pq)
pq
k
1/4
+ sq(k · p − kp)

pk
q
1/45.3 Analytical Theory: Fundamental Equation 135
+ sp(k · q − kq)

qk
p
1/4
#
dpdq −
isσ
1/4
2
√
2
Z
R4
×
X
spsq
(spωp + sqωq)(sωk − spωp − sqωq)
σ(kpq)
1/4
A
sp
p A
sq
q
× δ(k − p − q)dpdq .
Since the amplitude of the waves is assumed to be weak, the linear term will first
dominate the dynamics, and the phase of the waves will evolve while maintaining
the amplitude. Over longer periods of time, nonlinear terms will no longer be
negligible and will modify the amplitude of the waves. Under these conditions, it
is useful for canonical variables to separate the amplitude from the phase (which
we have already done to find the dispersion relationship). We recall that the theory
of wave turbulence consists of an asymptotic development whose uniformity was
discussed in Chapter 4. A small parameter 0 <   1 is introduced, and we write:
A
s
k ≡ a
s
k
e
−isωk t
, (5.28)
hence the expression:
∂a
s
k
∂t
= −
iσ1/4
2
√
2
Z
R4
X
spsq
spsqa
sp
p a
sq
q δ(k − p − q)e
i(sωk−spωp−sqωq)t
(5.29)
×

s(p · q + pq)
pq
k
1/4
+ sq(k · p − kp)

pk
q
1/4
+ sp(k · q − kq)

qk
p
1/4 
dpdq −
isσ
1/4
2
√
2
Z
R4
X
spsq
×
(spωp + sqωq)(sωk − spωp − sqωq)
σ(kpq)
1/4
a
sp
p a
sq
q e
i(sωk−spωp−sqωq)t
× δ(k − p − q)dpdq .
We are going to look at the nonlinear dynamics that emerges over a long time. By
long time we mean a time τ much longer than the period of the waves, that is, τ 
1/ωk . It is clear that the relevant contributions are those that cancel the coefficient
in the exponential. Therefore, the secular contributions will not be provided by the
second integral of equation (5.29), which precisely cancels for this condition. We
will therefore neglect this term later on. Finally, we obtain the following nonlinear
equation for the evolution of the amplitude of capillary waves:
∂a
s
k
∂t
= i
Z
R4
X
spsq
L
−sspsq
−kpq a
sp
p a
sq
q e
ik,pqt
δk,pqdpdq , (5.30)136 5 Theory for Capillary Wave Turbulence
with by definition k,pq ≡ sωk − spωp − sqωq, δk,pq ≡ δ(k − p − q) and
L
sspsq
kpq ≡
spsqσ
1/4
2
√
2
"
s(p · q + pq)
pq
k
1/4
+ sp(k · q + kq)

qk
p
1/4
+sq(k · p + kp)

pk
q
1/4
#
. (5.31)
Equation (5.30) governs the slow temporal evolution of capillary waves of weak
amplitude. It is a quadratic nonlinear equation: these nonlinearities correspond to
the interactions between waves propagating in the directions p and q, and in the
positive (sp,sq > 0) or negative direction (sp,sq < 0). Equation (5.30) is fundamen￾tal for our problem since it is from it that we will make a statistical development
over asymptotically long times. This development is based on the symmetries of
the fundamental equation: a lack of symmetry is a source of additional algebraic
complexity (in particular for its statistical processing). Moreover, simplifications
generally appear more easily on symmetrical equations. In our case, the interaction
coefficient verifies the following symmetries (of which the number is sufficient,
as we will see in practice):
L
sspsq
kpq = L
ssqsp
kqp , (5.32a)
L
sspsq
0pq = 0 , (5.32b)
L
sspsq
−k−p−q = L
sspsq
kpq , (5.32c)
L
−s−sp−sq
kpq = −L
sspsq
kpq , (5.32d)
ssqL
sqsps
qpk = L
sspsq
kpq , (5.32e)
sspL
spssq
pkq = L
sspsq
kpq . (5.32f)
5.4 Analytical Theory: Statistical Approach
We now move on to a statistical description. We use the ensemble average hi and
define the following spectral correlators (cumulants) for homogeneous turbulence
(we will also assume ha
s
k
i = 0):
ha
s
k
a
s
0
k
0i = q
ss0
kk0(k, k
0
)δ(k + k
0
) , (5.33a)
ha
s
k
a
s
0
k
0a
s
00
k
00i = q
ss0
s
00
kk0k
00(k, k
0
, k
00)δ(k + k
0 + k
00) , (5.33b)
ha
s
k
a
s
0
k
0a
s
00
k
00a
s
000
k
000i = q
ss0
s
00s
000
kk0k
00k
000(k, k
0
, k
00
, k
000)δ(k + k
0 + k
00 + k
000) (5.33c)
+ q
ss0
kk0(k, k
0
)q
s
00s
000
k
00k
000(k
00
, k
000)δ(k + k
0
)δ(k
00 + k
000)
+ q
ss00
kk00(k, k
00)q
s
0
s
000
k
0k
000(k
0
, k
000)δ(k + k
00)δ(k
0 + k
000)
+ q
ss000
kk000(k, k
000)q
s
0
s
00
k
0k
00(k
0
, k
00)δ(k + k
000)δ(k
0 + k
00) .5.4 Analytical Theory: Statistical Approach 137
From the fundamental equation (5.30), we get:
∂ha
s
k
a
s
0
k
0i
∂t
=

∂a
s
k
∂t
a
s
0
k
0

+
*
a
s
k
∂a
s
0
k
0
∂t
+
(5.34)
= i
Z
R4
X
spsq
L
−sspsq
−kpq ha
s
0
k
0a
sp
p a
sq
q ie
ik,pqt
δk,pqdpdq
+ i
Z
R4
X
spsq
L
−s
0
spsq
−k
0pq
ha
s
k
a
sp
p a
sq
q ie
ik
0
,pqt
δk
0
,pqdpdq .
At the next order we have:
∂ha
s
k
a
s
0
k
0a
s
00
k
00i
∂t
=

∂a
s
k
∂t
a
s
0
k
0a
s
00
k
00
+
*
a
s
k
∂a
s
0
k
0
∂t
a
s
00
k
00+
+
*
a
s
k
a
s
0
k
0
∂a
s
00
k
00
∂t
+
(5.35)
= i
Z
R4
X
spsq
L
−sspsq
−kpq ha
s
0
k
0a
s
00
k
00a
sp
p a
sq
q ie
ik,pqt
δk,pqdpdq
+ i
Z
R4
X
spsq
L
−s
0
spsq
−k
0pq
ha
s
k
a
s
00
k
00a
sp
p a
sq
q ie
ik
0
,pqt
δk
0
,pqdpdq
+ i
Z
R4
X
spsq
L
−s
00spsq
−k
00pq
ha
s
k
a
s
0
k
0a
sp
p a
sq
q ie
ik
00
,pqt
δk
00
,pqdpdq .
Here we face the classic problem of closure: a hierarchy of statistical equa￾tions of increasingly higher order emerges. In contrast to the strong turbulence
regime, in the weak wave turbulence regime we can use the scale separation in
time to achieve a natural closure of the system. Expressions (5.33a)–(5.33c) are
introduced into equation (5.35):
∂q
ss0
s
00
kk0k
00(k, k
0
, k
00)
∂t
δ(k + k
0 + k
00) = i
Z
R4
X
spsq
L
−sspsq
−kpq (5.36)
× [q
s
0
s
00ssp
ssq
k
0k
00pq
(k
0
, k
00
, p, q)δ(k
0 + k
00 + p + q)
+ q
s
0
s
00
k
0k
00(k
0
, k
00)q
spsq
pq (p, q)δ(k
0 + k
00)δ(p + q)
+ q
s
0
sp
k
0p
(k
0
, p)q
s
00sq
k
00q
(k
00
, q)δ(k
0 + p)δ(k
00 + q)
+ q
s
0
sq
k
0q
(k
0
, q)q
s
00sp
k
00p
(k
00
, p)δ(k
0 + q)
× δ(k
00 + p)]e
ik,pqt
δk,pqdpdq
+ i
Z
R4
n
(k,s) ↔ (k
0
,s
0
)
o
dpdq
+ i
Z
R4
n
(k,s) ↔ (k
00
,s
00)
o
dpdq ,
where the last two lines correspond to the exchange at the notation level between
k, s in the expanded expression and k
0
, s
0
(penultimate line), then k
00
, s
00 (last line).138 5 Theory for Capillary Wave Turbulence
We are now going to integrate expression (5.36) both on p and q, and on time,
by considering a long integrated time compared to the reference time (i.e. the
period of the capillary wave). The presence of several Dirac functions leads to
the conclusion that the second term on the right (in the main expression) gives no
contribution, since it corresponds to k = 0, for which the interaction coefficient
is null. It is a property of statistical homogeneity. The last two terms on the right
(always in the main expression) lead to a strong constraint on wavevectors p and q
which must be equal to −k
0 or −k
00. For the fourth-order cumulant, the constraint
is much less strong since only the sum of p and q is imposed. The consequence
is that for long times this term will not contribute to the nonlinear dynamics (see
the discussion on uniformity of the development in Chapter 4). Finally, for long
times the second-order cumulants are only relevant when the associated polarities
have different signs. In order to understand this, it is necessary to go back to
the definition of the moment, hA
s
kA
s
0
k
0i = 
2
ha
s
k
a
s
0
k
0i exp(−i(sωk + s
0ωk
0)t), from
which we see that a nonzero contribution is possible for homogeneous turbulence
(k = −k
0
) only if s = −s
0
(then the coefficient of the exponential is cancelled).
We finally get:
q
ss0
s
00
kk0k
00(k, k
0
, k
00)δ(k + k
0 + k
00) = i1(kk0k
00)δ(k + k
0 + k
00) (5.37)
×
nhL
−s−s
0−s
00
−k−k
0−k
00 + L
−s−s
00−s
0
−k−k
00−k
0
i
q
s
00−s
00
k
00−k
00
× (k
00
, −k
00)q
s
0−s
0
k
0−k
0(k
0
, −k
0
)
+
h
L
−s
0−s−s
00
−k
0−k−k
00 + L
−s
0−s
00−s
−k
0−k
00−k
i
q
s
00−s
00
k
00−k
00
× (k
00
, −k
00)q
s−s
k−k
(k, −k)
+
h
L
−s
00−s
0−s
−k
00−k
0−k + L
−s
00−s−s
0
−k
00−k−k
0
i
q
s−s
k−k
× (k, −k)q
s
0−s
0
k
0−k
0(k
0
, −k
0
)
o
,
with:
1(kk0k
00) =
Z t1/ω
0
e
ikk0k
00t
0
dt0 =
e
ikk0k
00t − 1
ikk0k
00
. (5.38)
We can now write without ambiguity: q
s−s
k−k
(k, −k) = q
s
k
(k). Using the symmetry
relations of the interaction coefficient, we obtain
q
ss0
s
00
kk0k
00(k, k
0
, k
00)δ(k + k
0 + k
00) = −2i1(kk0k
00)δ(k + k
0 + k
00) (5.39)
h
L
ss0
s
00
kk0k
00q
s
00
k
00(k
00)q
s
0
k
0(k
0
) + L
s
0
ss00
k
0kk00q
s
00
k
00(k
00)q
s
k
(k) + L
s
00s
0
s
k
00k
0k
q
s
k
(k)q
s
0
k
0(k
0
)
i
,
and then:
q
ss0
s
00
kk0k
00(k, k
0
, k
00)δ(k + k
0 + k
00) = −2i1(kk0k
00)δ(k + k
0 + k
00) (5.40)
L
ss0
s
00
kk0k
00 h
q
s
00
k
00(k
00)q
s
0
k
0(k
0
) + ss0
q
s
00
k
00(k
00)q
s
k
(k) + ss00q
s
k
(k)q
s
0
k
0(k
0
)
i
.5.4 Analytical Theory: Statistical Approach 139
The effective long time limit (which introduces irreversibility) gives us (Riemann–
Lebesgue lemma):
1(x) → πδ(x) + iP(1/x) , (5.41)
with P the principal value integral.
The so-called kinetic equation is obtained by injecting expression (5.40) into
equation (5.34) and integrating on k
0
(with the relation q
−s
−k
(−k) = q
s
k
(k)):
∂q
s
k
(k)
∂t
= 2
2
Z
R4
X
spsq
|L
−sspsq
−kpq |
2
(πδ(−kpq) + iP(1/−kpq))e
ik,pqt
δk,pq
× spsq

spsqq
sq
q (q)q
sp
p (p) − ssqq
sq
q (q)q
s
k
(k) − sspq
s
k
(k)q
sp
p (p)

dpdq
+ 2
2
Z
R4
X
spsq
|L
sspsq
kpq |
2
(πδ(kpq) + iP(1/kpq))e
ikpqt
δkpq (5.42)
× spsq

spsqq
sq
q (q)q
sp
p (p) + ssqq
sq
q (q)q
s
k
(k) + sspq
s
k
(k)q
sp
p (p)

dpdq .
By changing the sign of the (dummy) variables p and q of integration, and the
associated polarities, the principal values are eliminated. Using the symmetries
of the interaction coefficient, we finally arrive at the following expression after
simplification:
∂q
s
k
(k)
∂t
= 4π2
Z
R4
X
spsq
|L
sspsq
kpq |
2
δ(sωk + spωp + sqωq)δ(k + p + q) (5.43)
spsq

spsqq
sq
q (q)q
sp
p (p) + ssqq
sq
q (q)q
s
k
(k) + sspq
s
k
(k)q
sp
p (p)

dpdq ,
with:
|L
sspsq
kpq |
2 ≡
√
σ
8
"
s(p · q + pq)
pq
k
1/4
+ sp(k · q + kq)

qk
p
1/4
+sq(k · p + kp)

pk
q
1/4
#2
. (5.44)
Expression (5.43) is the kinetic equation of capillary wave turbulence first
obtained by Zakharov & Filonenko in 1967.1 The presence of the small param￾eter   1 means that the amplitude of the quadratic nonlinearities is weak and
that, consequently, the characteristic time over which we place ourselves to meas￾ure these effects is of the order of 1/2
. As we have seen in practice, the obtaining
of this expression was only possible thanks to the numerous symmetries of the
interaction coefficient which we have used several times.
It is from the invariants of the system that we can bring out the main proper￾ties of wave turbulence. Energy has, therefore, a privileged role since it is always
1 To be totally convinced of the equivalence of the two expressions, it remains to develop the integrand accord￾ing to the values of sp and sq by eliminating the special case sp = sq = s, which has no solution at the
resonance.140 5 Theory for Capillary Wave Turbulence
conserved. Other (inviscid) invariants can appear as the kinetic helicity in incom￾pressible hydrodynamics subject to rapid rotation (limit of low Rossby numbers),
a condition for being in the wave turbulence regime (see Chapter 6). In the capil￾lary wave turbulence regime, we will consider the only relevant invariant, energy,
for which the detailed conservation property will be demonstrated.
5.5 Detailed Energy Conservation
The kinetic equation (5.43) describes the temporal evolution of capillary wave
turbulence over asymptotically long times compared to the reference time, which
is the period of the waves. It is an equation involving three-wave interactions
that give a nonzero contribution only when the following resonance condition is
verified:

sωk + spωp + sqωq = 0 ,
k + p + q = 0 . (5.45)
In the case of capillary waves, the resonance condition has solutions, but this is
not always the case. For example, for gravity waves the dispersion relation ωk ∝
√
k does not allow us to get a solution (see Chapter 4). In this case, it is necessary
to consider nonlinear contributions to the next order in the development, that is,
four-wave interactions; the analytical approach then becomes more cumbersome.
A remarkable property verified by the kinetic equation is the detailed conser￾vation of energy (see also Chapter 3 on two-dimensional eddy turbulence). To
demonstrate this result, the kinetic equation must be rewritten for the polarized
energy spectrum:
e
s
(k) ≡ ωkq
s
k
(k) . (5.46)
One notices in particular that: e
s
(k) = e
−s
(−k). After a few manipulations, we
get:
∂e
s
(k)
∂t
=
π2
2σ
Z
R4
X
spsq
|L˜
sspsq
kpq |
2
δ(sωk + spωp + sqωq)δ(k + p + q) (5.47)
sωk

sωk
e
s
(k)
+
spωp
e
sp (p)
+
sqωq
e
sq (q)

e
s
(k)e
sp
(p)e
sq
(q)dpdq ,
with:
|L˜
sspsq
kpq |
2 ≡

p · q + pq
sk√pq
+
k · q + kq
spp
√
kq
+
k · p + kp
sqq
√
kp 2
. (5.48)
By considering the integral in k of the total energy spectrum, e
+(k) + e
−(k),
and then playing on the permutation of the wavevectors (first we decompose the
expression into three identical integrals), we can show that:5.6 Exact Solutions and Zakharov’s Transformation 141
∂
R
R2
P
s
e
s
(k)dk
∂t
(5.49)
=
π2
6σ
Z
R6
X
sspsq
|L˜
sspsq
kpq |
2
δ(sωk + spωp + sqωq)δ(k + p + q)(sωk + spωp + sqωq)
×

sωk
e
s
(k)
+
spωp
e
sp (p)
+
sqωq
e
sq (q)

e
s
(k)e
sp
(p)e
sq
(q)dkdpdq = 0 .
This means that energy is conserved by triadic interaction: the redistribution of
energy takes place within a triad satisfying the resonance condition (5.45). This
is a general property of wave turbulence that can be used to verify (in part) the
accuracy of the kinetic equation obtained after a long computation.
5.6 Exact Solutions and Zakharov’s Transformation
In this section, we look for the exact solutions of the nonlinear kinetic equation
(5.47). These solutions can be obtained by applying the Zakharov transformation,
which we have already introduced in Chapter 3, which is a conformal trans￾formation applied to the integral (see Figure 5.5). Note that Balk (2000) has
proposed another method to obtain these solutions without using a conformal
transformation.
We will make the simplifying hypothesis that capillary wave turbulence is sta￾tistically isotropic. This assumption is reasonable, since we do not have a source of
anisotropy as may be the case in other problems (e.g. in plasma physics, the strong
uniform magnetic field supporting the plasma waves induces a strong anisotropy
– see Chapters 7 and 8). The isotropic spectrum is therefore introduced:
E(k) ≡ Ek = 2πk
X
s
e
s
(|k|) . (5.50)
We will rewrite the kinetic equation using the triangular relation (see Figure 5.4):
q
2 = k
2 + p
2 − 2kp cos θ , (5.51)
from which we deduce (at fixed k and p): qdq = kp sin θdθ. This relation will then
be used to rewrite the kinetic equation. We use Al Kashi’s formulas on the triangle
to finally obtain the following expanded expression:
∂Ek
∂t
=

2
2σ
Z
1
X
sspsq
sωk |L˜
sspsq
kpq |
2
δ(sωk + spωp + sqωq) (5.52)
skωkEpEq + sppωpEkEq + sqqωqEkEp
p
4k
2p
2 − (k
2 + p
2 − q
2
)
2
dpdq ,142 5 Theory for Capillary Wave Turbulence
with 1 the integration domain (the shaded band in Figure 5.5) and:
|L˜
sspsq
kpq |
2 =

k
2 − p
2 − q
2 + 2pq
2sk√pq
(5.53)
+
p
2 − k
2 − q
2 + 2kq
2spp
√
kq
+
q
2 − k
2 − p
2 + 2kp
2sqq
√
kp 2
.
We notice that the new expression no longer uses wavevectors but only wavenum￾bers. A further simplification is made by introducing the adimensional wavenum￾bers ξp ≡ p/k and ξq ≡ q/k; we get the expression:
∂Ek
∂t
=

2
k
5/2
2
√
σ
Z
1
X
sspsq
s|L˜
sspsq
1ξpξq
|
2
δ(s + spξ
3/2
p + sqξ
3/2
q
) (5.54)
sEkξpEkξq + spξ
5/2
p EkEkξq + sqξ
5/2
q EkEkξp q
4ξ
2
p − (1 + ξ
2
p − ξ
2
q
)
2
dξpdξq ,
with:
|L˜
sspsq
1ξpξq
|
2 =
"
1 − ξ
2
p − ξ
2
q + 2ξpξq
2s
p
ξpξq
(5.55)
+
ξ
2
p − 1 − ξ
2
q + 2ξq
2spξp
p
ξq
+
ξ
2
q − 1 − ξ
2
p + 2ξp
2sqξq
p
ξp
#2
.
We will apply the Zakharov transformation on this last expression by assuming
a power-law form for the energy spectrum, Ek = Ckx
. In practice, we divide the
integral into three equal parts and apply on two of the three integrals a different
transformation, keeping the third integral intact. The Zakharov transformations
are:
ξp →
1
ξp
, ξq →
ξq
ξp
, (TZ1) (5.56)
and
ξp →
ξp
ξq
, ξq →
1
ξq
. (TZ2) (5.57)
Figure 5.4 Triadic interaction.5.6 Exact Solutions and Zakharov’s Transformation 143
ξq
ξp
ξq
ξp
ξp
ξq
ξq = ξp + 1
ξq = ξp + 1
ξq = ξp – 1
ξq = ξp – 1
ξq = 1 – ξp
ξq = 1 – ξp
ξq ξq
and ξp ξp ξp
ξq
ξq and
ξp
1
1
0 1 1
1
0
1
→ — → — → — → —
Figure 5.5 Zakharov conformal transformation for three-wave interactions. The infinitely
long gray band corresponds to the solutions of the triangular relation k+p+q = 0 (bound￾aries correspond to flattened triangles). The transformation consists in the exchange of the
four regions separated by dashes. The transformations (5.56) and (5.57) are shown to the
right and left, respectively.
They correspond to a conformal transformation of the region of integration
in (ξp,ξq) space. In the case of triadic interactions, this region is an infinitely
long band, as shown in Figure 5.5. The reader will be able to verify that these
transformations give:
|L˜
sspsq
1ξpξq
|
2 TZ1 −→ |L˜
spssq
1ξpξq
|
2
, (5.58a)
|L˜
sspsq
1ξpξq
|
2 TZ2 −→ |L˜
sqsps
1ξpξq
|
2
, (5.58b)
δ(s + spξ
3/2
p + spξ
3/2
q
)
TZ1
−→ ξ
3/2
p
δ(sp + sξ
3/2
p + sqξ
3/2
q
) , (5.58c)
δ(s + spξ
3/2
p + spξ
3/2
q
)
TZ2
−→ ξ
3/2
q
δ(sq + spξ
3/2
p + sξ
3/2
q
) , (5.58d)
1/
q
4ξ
2
p − (1 + ξ
2
p − ξ
2
q
)
2
TZ1
−→ ξ
2
p
/
q
4ξ
2
p − (1 + ξ
2
p − ξ
2
q
)
2
, (5.58e)
1/
q
4ξ
2
p − (1 + ξ
2
p − ξ
2
q
)
2
TZ2
−→ ξ
2
q
/
q
4ξ
2
p − (1 + ξ
2
p − ξ
2
q
)
2
, (5.58f)
dξpdξq
TZ1
−→ ξ
−3
p
dξpdξq , (5.58g)
dξpdξq
TZ2
−→ ξ
−3
q
dξpdξq . (5.58h)
This transforms the energy spectrum equation:
∂Ek
∂t
=

2C
2
k
2x+5/2
6
√
σ
Z
1
X
sspsq
|L˜
sspsq
1ξpξq
|
2
δ(s + spξ
3/2
p + sqξ
3/2
q
)
q
4ξ
2
p − (1 + ξ
2
p − ξ
2
q
)
2
(5.59)144 5 Theory for Capillary Wave Turbulence
[ξ
x
p
ξ
x
q
(s + spξ
−x+5/2
p + sqξ
−x+5/2
q
)s
+ ξ
x
p
ξ
x
q
(s + spξ
−x+5/2
p + sqξ
−x+5/2
q
)spξ
−2x−2
p
+ ξ
x
p
ξ
x
q
(s + spξ
−x+5/2
p + sqξ
−x+5/2
q
)sqξ
−2x−2
q
]dξpdξq .
Note that to obtain the previous expression, we exchanged s and sp in the second
integrand term, and s and sq in the third integrand term. This manipulation is
allowed because of the sum on the three indices s, sp, and sq. The symmetry of the
equations is a great help in this case. After a final manipulation, we arrive at the
following expression:
∂Ek
∂t
=

2C
2
k
2x+5/2
6
√
σ
Z
1
X
sspsq
|L˜
sspsq
1ξpξq
|
2
δ(s + spξ
3/2
p + sqξ
3/2
q
)
q
4ξ
2
p − (1 + ξ
2
p − ξ
2
q
)
2
(5.60)
ξ
x
p
ξ
x
q
[s + spξ
−x+5/2
p + sqξ
−x+5/2
q
][s + spξ
−2x−2
p + sqξ
−2x−2
q
]dξpdξq .
The stationary solutions for which the right-hand term cancels out correspond to:
x = 1 and x = −7/4 . (5.61)
Indeed, for these two values one can make appear the expression s+spξ
3/2
p +sqξ
3/2
q
(in the second line of (5.60)), which cancels exactly at resonance (a condition
imposed by the Dirac).
The solution x = 1 corresponds to the thermodynamic equilibrium for which
the energy flux is zero: in this case each of the three right-hand terms of expression
(5.59) is null and therefore no energy transfer is possible. The solution x = −7/4
is more interesting, because the cancellation of the right-hand term of (5.59) is
obtained by a subtle balance of its three contributions: it is the finite energy flux
solution called the Kolmogorov–Zakharov spectrum. In this case, a final calcula￾tion must be performed to justify the relevance of this spectrum: this is a question
of verifying the convergence of integrals in the case of strongly nonlocal inter￾actions (this must be done before the application of the Zakharov transformation
– see Figure 5.6). This corresponds to the regions close to the two right angles
of the bands in Figure 5.5 as well as to the infinitely distant region of the origin.
In the case of a divergence, the solution found is simply not relevant (however,
sometimes a logarithmic correction is required for the convergence) and only
the numerical simulation of the wave turbulence equation can be used to esti￾mate the shape of the spectrum. In capillary wave turbulence, the locality of the
Kolmogorov–Zakharov spectrum has been verified by Zakharov (1967). Contrary
to their study, our solution was obtained from an equation written in wavenum￾ber; it is therefore necessary to properly establish the area of convergence. An
elementary calculation (for example, we can write the variables ξp and ξq in polar
coordinates) brings us to the condition:
− 7/2 < x < +5/4 , (5.62)5.7 Nature of the Exact Solutions 145
Figure 5.6 Numerical estimation of the collision integral I(x) before the application of
the Zakharov transform (solid line) and after (dashed line). We use expression (5.54)
multiplied by a factor of 40 in the first case, while it is expression (5.60) or (5.63) in
the second case. The vertical lines x = −5, x = −7/2, and x = 5/4 define the limits
of the domains of convergence. Insert: enlargement to show the stationary Kolmogorov–
Zakharov solution at x = −7/4. Note that the broader domain of convergence corresponds
to the result published by Pushkarev and Zakharov (2000) with ] − 5, −5/6[, but in fact it
should be reduced to ] − 4, −5/6[. Figure made by V. David.
where the upper bound is given by the convergence condition for a point located at
infinity on the bands of Figure 5.5. This result thus demonstrates the relevance of
the Kolmogorov–Zakharov spectrum. The convergence condition actually corre￾sponds to a criterion of locality of interactions. In this sense, we find a hypothesis
made by Kolmogorov to obtain the exact four-thirds (or four-fifths) law presented
in Chapter 2, namely that the inertial range describes a universal physics inde￾pendent of mechanisms (e.g. of forcing and dissipation) operating at the largest
and smallest scales. This is the reason why the Kolmogorov–Zakharov spectrum
is relevant here.
5.7 Nature of the Exact Solutions
Zakharov’s transformation allowed us to obtain the exact stationary solutions in
power law and to highlight two types of spectrum: the thermodynamic solution,
and the dynamic solution corresponding to a cascade of energy. However, the
nature of this cascade remains unknown: is it a direct or an inverse cascade? The
answer to this question requires further analysis.
We will use the relation linking the energy flux 5k to the energy spectrum:
∂Ek
∂t
= −
∂5k
∂k
=

2C
2
√
σ
k
2x+5/2
I(x) , (5.63)146 5 Theory for Capillary Wave Turbulence
where I(x) is the integral deduced from expression (5.60). We get:
5k = −

2C
2
√
σ
k
2x+7/2
I(x)
2x + 7/2
. (5.64)
The direction of the cascade will be given by the sign of the energy flux in the spe￾cial case where x = −7/4. But in this case, we see that the denominator cancels.
Fortunately, so does the numerator, since it is precisely for this value that I(x) =0.
L’Hôspital’s rule allows us to write (we use the notations introduced in Chapter 3
on energy flux):
lim
x→−7/4
5k = ε = −

2C
2
√
σ
lim
x→−7/4
I(x)
2x + 7/2
= −

2C
2
√
σ
lim
y→3/2
I(y)
3/2 − y
,
=

2C
2
√
σ
lim
y→3/2
∂I(y)
∂y
, (5.65)
with y = −2x − 2 and:
∂I(y)
∂y
|3/2 =
1
6
Z
1
X
sspsq
|L˜
sspsq
1ξpξq
|
2
q
4ξ
2
p − (1 + ξ
2
p − ξ
2
q
)
2
δ(s + spξ
3/2
p + sqξ
3/2
q
)
ξ
x
p
ξ
x
q
[s + spξ
−x+5/2
p + sqξ
−x+5/2
q
]
∂[s + spξ
y
p + sqξ
y
q
]
∂y
dξpdξq|3/2
=
1
6
Z
1
X
sspsq
|L˜
sspsq
1ξpξq
|
2
q
4ξ
2
p − (1 + ξ
2
p − ξ
2
q
)
2
δ(s + spξ
3/2
p + sqξ
3/2
q
) (5.66)
ξ
−7/4
p
ξ
−7/4
q
[s + spξ
17/4
p + sqξ
17/4
q
][spξ
3/2
p
ln(ξp) + sqξ
3/2
q
ln(ξq)]dξpdξq .
The sign of the previous expression can be found numerically. A positive sign was
obtained (Pushkarev and Zakharov, 2000), demonstrating that the energy cascade
of capillary wave turbulence is direct. It is also possible to find the numerical value
of the Kolmogorov constant CK, whose expression is deduced from C in (5.65);
finally, we obtain:2
Ek =
σ
1/4

CK
√
εk
−7/4
, (5.67)
with:
CK =
1
p
∂I(y)/∂y|3/2
. (5.68)
The value reported by Pushkarev and Zakharov (2000) with their approach is
CK ' 9.85 but this value has been corrected by Pan and Yue (2017), who found
6.97. In the present case, the value obtained numerically for the (total) energy
spectrum is CK ' 3.48. We see that the analytical study allowed us to find the
main properties of capillary wave turbulence. The strength of these results is that
they are analytical.
2 See also Chapter 7, where the Kolmogorov constant is obtained analytically and numerically.5.8 Comparison with Experiments 147
5.8 Comparison with Experiments
Capillary waves have been studied for a long time as, demonstrated by the work of
Longuet-Higgins (1963) and McGoldrick (1970): in these examples, the aim was
to understand the role of resonant wave interactions and the mechanism of cap￾illary wave generation from gravity waves. On the other hand, the experimental
study of capillary wave turbulence is more recent and is still the subject of much
work today. For example, Holt and Trinh (1996) have been able to produce a sea of
capillary waves at the surface of a drop (of about 5.0 mm in diameter) in levitation
and consisting mainly of water. The experiment shows the rapid formation (in less
than one second) by a direct cascade of a spectrum in f
−3.58 (with f the frequency)
for the fluctuations of the surface deformation η. The difference with the theoret￾ical prediction (5.17) could have its origin in nonnegligible visco-elastic effects.
In the article by Wright et al. (1996), a new measurement technique based on the
scattering of visible light on spheres in polystyrene (with a diameter of the order
of µm) is used to obtain the height variations of the water surface. From these
data the authors were able to calculate the wavenumber spectrum: a narrow power
law with an exponent around −4 was measured. Subsequent measurements with
the same technique (but with semi-skimmed milk) gave results consistent with the
prediction of −17/6 for the frequency spectrum (see Section 5.2) (Henry et al.,
2000).
Capillary wave turbulence has also been studied using liquid hydrogen (main￾tained at 15–16 K). The interest of this kind of study is that the liquid has a
lower kinematic viscosity than water, allowing the size of the inertial zone to be
increased (Brazhnikov et al., 2001, 2002). Note, however, that in this problem the
inertial range is also limited by the surface tension coefficient. The experiment
shows that the theoretically predicted frequency spectra can be reproduced fairly
well over more than an order of magnitude, despite high noise. Since the imagina￾tion of physicists is vast, the problem has also been addressed using the properties
of fluorescence (essentially localized on the surface of the liquid) of a solution
added to water. Using a blue laser projected on to the surface of the liquid, the
authors (Lommer and Levinsen, 2002) measured the power law with precision,
and this time the Zakharov–Filonenko solution was very well reproduced over
two decades of frequencies.
The low-gravity capillary wave turbulence regime (∼ 0.05 g) was achieved dur￾ing parabolic (Airbus A320) flights with a duration of 22 seconds (Falcón et al.,
2009). The motivation to develop such an experiment is to limit the effects of
gravity waves and thus extend the purely capillary inertial range (see Figure 5.7).
Two decades of frequency power law have been measured, with an exponent close148 5 Theory for Capillary Wave Turbulence
Figure 5.7 Capillary wave turbulence on the surface of a spherical container (of 15 cm
diameter) filled with 20 cl of water. This result is obtained during a parabolic flight in free
fall (Falcón et al., 2009). The fluid wets the inner surface of the sphere and forms a layer
of spherical fluid. Purely capillary waves are then generated by vibrating the container.
Credit: E. Falcon.
to the expected value.3 Note that gravito-capillary waves have been the subject
of several experimental studies in which, in particular, the transition between the
regime dominated by large-scale gravity waves and small-scale capillary waves
has been well highlighted, as well as the possible (nonlocal) interactions between
these two types of waves (with collinear wavevectors) (see, e.g., Falcon et al.,
2007; Deike et al., 2012; Berhanu and Falcon, 2013; Aubourg and Mordant, 2015,
2016; Berhanu et al., 2018; Hassaini and Mordant, 2018; Cazaubiel et al., 2019).
Direct numerical simulation is an essential complement to experimental studies
because it allows a more detailed analysis of capillary wave turbulence: in princi￾ple it gives access to all fields and therefore allows precise signal processing. Little
work has been done on this compared to the numerous experimental studies. These
simulations were first made by Pushkarev and Zakharov (1996, 2000), then more
recently by, for example, Deike et al. (2014) and Pan and Yue (2014) (see also
Kochurin et al., 2020 for collinear capillary wave turbulence). However, surface
waves are subject to numerical instabilities that make it difficult to obtain a large
inertial range (less than a decade has been obtained). Moreover, these simulations
with an external force take particularly long to reach a steady state for which tur￾bulence is fully developed. Finally, the discretization of the Fourier space induced
3 A similar experiment has been done on board the International Space Station (ISS), but the regime obtained
is that of strong capillary wave turbulence (Berhanu et al., 2019).5.9 Direct Numerical Simulation 149
by the numerical box also has potential consequences for turbulence, whose ana￾lytical properties are obtained in a continuous medium (Nazarenko, 2011; Pan and
Yue, 2017). Paradoxically, the simulation of surface wave turbulence, by nature
two-dimensional, seems to be more difficult to do than that in three dimensions,
for which nonlinear interactions are more numerous and numerical instabilities
better controlled.
These direct numerical simulations complement the numerical simulations of
Falkovich et al. (1995) made directly from the wave turbulence equations: the aim
was to study the nonstationary phase in a freely decaying regime in order to high￾light, in particular, the explosive properties of the spectrum. We will come back
to this property in inertial wave turbulence (Chapter 6). Note that capillary wave
turbulence has also been numerically simulated at the surface of a ferrofluid in the
presence of a strong horizontal magnetic field that reduces the wave interactions
in the direction of the magnetic field (Kochurin, 2020).
5.9 Direct Numerical Simulation
In order to illustrate the capillary wave turbulence regime, we present in this sec￾tion the results of a direct numerical simulation. For numerical stability reasons,
dissipation terms have been added to the primitive equations (5.4a)–(5.4b). The
simulated equations are therefore:
∂η
∂t
= −∇⊥φ|0 · ∇⊥η +
∂φ
∂z
|0 + η
∂
2φ
∂z
2
|0 − ν12
η , (5.69a)
∂φ
∂t
|0 + η
∂
2φ
∂t∂z
|0 = −
1
2
(∇φ)
2
|0 + σ1η − ν12φ + f , (5.69b)
1φ = 0 , (5.69c)
with ν = 3 × 10−8
a hyperviscosity. The use of a hyperviscosity allows us to
confine the effect of dissipation to the smallest scales and thus widen the iner￾tial range. An external force f is applied only to the velocity potential, assuming
initially the absence of deformation (i.e. η(x, y, t = 0) = 0). The force f is charac￾terized by a large-scale spectrum (excitation at wavenumbers k = 1, 2, 3 at each
time step) with a random fluctuation of the amplitudes around a mean value and a
random phase. Classically, a pseudospectral numerical code is used with periodic
boundary conditions in (x,y). The spatial resolution used is 512 points in each
direction.
In Figure 5.3, we see the spatial variation of the deformation η(x, y) of the fluid
surface and the velocity potential φ(x, y) in fully developed turbulence. These
fields are characterized by random fluctuations. This first figure is interesting, but
it does not allow us to fully appreciate the excited scale range. In particular, the
smallest scales are impossible to see. In Figure 5.8, we see how these fields evolve150 5 Theory for Capillary Wave Turbulence
Figure 5.8 Temporal variations of the root mean square (in space) of the potential
hφ(x, y)i (top) and of the deformation hη(x, y)i (bottom) during the initial phase of devel￾opment of capillary wave turbulence. The time is normalized with the angular frequency
associated with the forcing.
over time from the initial instant for which hη(x, y, t = 0)i = 0. More precisely, it
is the temporal variations of the quadratic means that are shown. We find that the
response of the deformation to the force applied to the velocity potential is rela￾tively smooth. For both fields, the amplitude increases over time; in this window of
time the stationary state has not yet been reached. This figure shows a qualitative
behavior of the two fields: we can see that an increase in one field corresponds to
a decrease in the other field.
The isotropic spectra of the surface potential energy E
η
(k, t) are shown in Figure
5.9 when the turbulence is fully developed. An inertial range clearly emerges, with
a power law compatible with the prediction in k
−15/4
, as we can see in the insert
figure, when these spectra are compensated by the expected solution: a plateau
over nearly a decade is indeed obtained.
The wave character of capillary wave turbulence can be revealed by tracing the
spectrum E
η
(k, ω). This spectrum is constructed from the field ηˆ(kx, ky, t). The
values of the real part and the imaginary part are recorded in the course of time
for kx = 1 and ky ∈ [0, 45]. A Fourier transform in time is then applied to these
signals, weighted with a Hamming function in order to make them periodic (and
thus reduce the noise produced by the nonperiodicity). The result is shown in5.9 Direct Numerical Simulation 151
Figure 5.9 Spectra at different times of the surface potential energy E
η
(k, t) and (insert)
compensated by the expected solution in k
−15/4
.
Figure 5.10 Surface potential energy spectrum E
η
(kx, ky, ω) constructed from ηˆk (t) with
kx = 1 and ky ∈ [0, 45]. Each signal in the vertical direction is normalized by its maximum.
The black dots correspond to the dispersion relation ω = k
3/2
.
Figure 5.10: we plot the sum of the squared modulus of the Fourier coefficients.
We see that the information is essentially concentrated along the curve ω = k
3/2
,
which reveals the wave nature of this turbulence. The nonlinearities have the
effect of widening the dispersion relationship. The ω–k spectrum is often used152 5 Theory for Capillary Wave Turbulence
as a diagnostic tool to determine the type of turbulence. Often wave turbulence
becomes strong at smaller scales. This is the situation encountered in magne￾tohydrodynamics (see Chapter 7): in this case, the ω–k spectrum shows a clear
transition between the two regimes, with a signal that fills a large region of ω–k
space in the strong wave turbulence regime (Meyrand et al., 2016).
References
Aubourg, Q., and Mordant, N. 2015. Nonlocal resonances in weak turbulence of gravity￾capillary waves. Phys. Rev. Lett., 114(14), 144501.
Aubourg, Q., and Mordant, N. 2016. Investigation of resonances in gravity-capillary wave
turbulence. Phys. Rev. Fluids, 1(2), 023701.
Balk, A. M. 2000. On the Kolmogorov–Zakharov spectra of weak turbulence. Physica D:
Nonlinear Phenomena, 139(1–2), 137–157.
Benney, D. J. 1962. Non-linear gravity wave interactions. J. Fluid Mech., 14, 577–584.
Berhanu, M., and Falcon, E. 2013. Space-time-resolved capillary wave turbulence. Phys.
Rev. E, 87(3), 033003.
Berhanu, M., Falcon, E., and Deike, L. 2018. Turbulence of capillary waves forced by
steep gravity waves. J. Fluid Mech., 850, 803–843.
Berhanu, M., Falcon, E., Michel, G., Gissinger, C., and Fauve, S. 2019. Capillary wave
turbulence experiments in microgravity. EPL (Europhysics Letters), 128(3), 34001.
Brazhnikov, M. Yu., Kolmakov, G. V., Levchenko, A. A., and Mezhov-Deglin, L. P. 2001.
Capillary turbulence at the surface of liquid hydrogen. Sov. J. Exp. Theo. Phys. Lett.,
73(8), 398–400.
Brazhnikov, M. Yu., Kolmakov, G. V., and Levchenko, A. A. 2002. The turbulence of
capillary waves on the surface of liquid hydrogen. Sov. J. Exp. Theo. Phys., 95(3),
447–454.
Case, K. M., and Chiu, S. C. 1977. Three-wave resonant interactions of gravity-capillary
waves. Phys. Fluids, 20(5), 742–745.
Cazaubiel, A., Haudin, F., Falcon, E., and Berhanu, M. 2019. Forced three-wave interac￾tions of capillary-gravity surface waves. Phys. Rev. Fluids, 4(7), 074803.
Deike, L., Berhanu, M., and Falcon, E. 2012. Decay of capillary wave turbulence. Phys.
Rev. Fluids, 85(6), 066311.
Deike, L., Fuster, D., Berhanu, M., and Falcon, E. 2014. Direct numerical simulations of
capillary wave turbulence. Phys. Rev. Lett., 112(23), 234501.
Falcón, C., Falcon, E., Bortolozzo, U., and Fauve, S. 2009. Capillary wave turbulence on
a spherical fluid surface in low gravity. Europhys. Lett., 86(1), 14002.
Falcon, É., Laroche, C., and Fauve, S. 2007. Observation of gravity-capillary wave
turbulence. Phys. Rev. Lett., 98(9), 094503.
Falkovich, G. E., Shapiro, I. Ya, and Shtilman, L. 1995. Decay turbulence of capillary
waves. Europhys. Lett., 29(1), 1–6.
Galtier, S. 2021. Wave turbulence: the case of capillary waves (a review). Geophys. Astro.
Fluid. Dyn. 115(3), 234–257.
Hassaini, R., and Mordant, N. 2018. Confinement effects on gravity-capillary wave
turbulence. Phys. Rev. Fluids, 3(9), 094805.
Henry, E., Alstrøm, P., and Levinsen, M. T. 2000. Prevalence of weak turbulence in
strongly driven surface ripples. Europhys. Lett., 52(1), 27–32.
Holt, R. G., and Trinh, E. H. 1996. Faraday wave turbulence on a spherical liquid shell.
Phys. Rev. Lett., 77(7), 1274–1277.References 153
Kochurin, E., Ricard, G., Zubarev, N., and Falcon, E. 2020. Numerical simulation of
collinear capillary-wave turbulence. JETP Lett., 112(12), 757–763.
Kochurin, E. A. 2020. Numerical simulation of the wave turbulence on the surface of a
ferrofluid in a horizontal magnetic field. J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 503, 166607.
Lommer, M., and Levinsen, M. T. 2002. Using laser-induced fluorescence in the study of
surface wave turbulence. J. Floresc., 12(1), 45–50.
Longuet-Higgins, M. S. 1963. The generation of capillary waves by steep gravity waves.
J. Fluid Mech., 16, 138–159.
McGoldrick, L. F. 1965. Resonant interactions among capillary-gravity waves. J. Fluid
Mech., 21, 305–331.
McGoldrick, L. F. 1970. An experiment on second-order capillary-gravity resonant wave
interactions. J. Fluid Mech., 40, 251–271.
Meyrand, R., Galtier, S., and Kiyani, K. H. 2016. Direct evidence of the transition from
weak to strong magnetohydrodynamic turbulence. Phys. Rev. Lett., 116(10), 105002.
Nazarenko, S. 2011. Wave Turbulence. Lecture Notes in Physics, vol. 825. Springer
Verlag.
Pan, Y., and Yue, D. K. P. 2014. Direct numerical investigation of turbulence of capillary
waves. Phys. Rev. Lett., 113(9), 094501.
Pan, Y., and Yue, D. K. P. 2017. Understanding discrete capillary-wave turbulence using
a quasi-resonant kinetic equation. J. Fluid Mech., 816, R1 (11 pages).
Pushkarev, A. N., and Zakharov, V. E. 1996. Turbulence of capillary waves. Phys. Rev.
Lett., 76(18), 3320–3323.
Pushkarev, A. N., and Zakharov, V. E. 2000. Turbulence of capillary waves – theory and
numerical simulation. Physica D Nonlinear Phenomena, 135(1), 98–116.
Wright, W. B., Budakian, R., and Putterman, S. J. 1996. Diffusing light photography of
fully developed isotropic ripple turbulence. Phys. Rev. Lett., 76(24), 4528–4531.
Zakharov, V. E., and Filonenko, N. N. 1967. Weak turbulence of capillary waves. J. Appl.
Mech. Tech. Phys., 8(5), 37–40.6
Inertial Wave Turbulence
Inertial wave turbulence is the regime reached by an incompressible fluid sub￾jected to a rapid and uniform rotation within the limit of a large Reynolds number.
At first glance this situation seems to be close to the one discussed in Part I to
introduce the main concepts of turbulence – eddy turbulence – since it is simply
a matter of adding a well-known force to the Navier–Stokes equations, that is,
the Coriolis force. However, there are two major differences to the standard case:
inertial waves exist because of the rotation, and the spherical symmetry is broken
by the presence of a privileged axis, that of rotation. This anisotropy makes the
analytical development of wave turbulence more complex than in the case of cap￾illary waves. As we will see here, it is nevertheless possible to derive the kinetic
equations and find the main properties of such a system.
6.1 Introduction
Rotating turbulent flows are of interest to a wide variety of fields, such as industry,
meteorology, and geophysics (oceans, atmosphere). In the latter case the effect of
the earth’s rotation is felt, for example, in large-scale atmospheric motions. The
comparison between the earth and Venus illustrates this point well. The two plan￾ets, of similar size, rotate on themselves at very different speeds: by definition, it
takes one day for an earth revolution to occur while Venus needs about 243 (Earth)
days.1 The effects of this difference are noticeable in the atmospheric motions of
the two planets. The earth’s atmosphere has a complex dynamics whose signature
is revealed, in part, by the shape of the cloud structures (see Figure 6.1), while the
Venusian atmosphere presents a more uniform appearance. Note that rotation also
plays an important role in the geodynamo (we restrict ourselves here to the case
of the earth): the earth’s magnetic field owes its existence to a dynamo process
operating in the earth’s outer liquid core, where the Rossby number is about 10−6
,
1 The very slow rotation of Venus on itself makes the Venusian year (225 days) shorter than its day.
155156 6 Inertial Wave Turbulence
Figure 6.1 An example of a low Rossby number flow: large-scale terrestrial atmospheric
motions. Image of the earth taken on September 4, 2019. Credits: NASA Earth Obser￾vatory/Joshua Stevens; NOAA National Environmental Satellite, Data, and Information
Service.
and where inertial wave signatures emanating from this core have been detected
(Aldridge and Lumb, 1987).
A precise description of geophysical flows requires the consideration of many
parameters (rotation, stratification, geometry, etc.). The methodology often fol￾lowed in research consists in isolating one parameter to study its effects in detail.
Much work has been done on the effect of rotation on geophysical turbulent
flows, for which Navier–Stokes equations are the simplest representation. These
are written in the incompressible case (it is assumed that the mass density ρ0 = 1):
∂w
∂t
− 2 ( · ∇) u = (w · ∇) u − (u · ∇) w + ν ∇
2 w , (6.1)
with w ≡ ∇ × u the vorticity,  the rotation rate associated with the Coriolis
force, and ν the kinematic viscosity. Note that with this writing, the pressure term
(including the effects of rotation) disappears. The intensity of the Coriolis force
can be measured by the ratio between the advection term and the Coriolis force.
This dimensionless quantity,6.2 What Do We Know About Rotating Turbulence? 157
Ro =
U
L
, (6.2)
is the Rossby number. A low Rossby number tells us that the effects of rotation
are dominant. To fix these ideas, let us take the example of a wind flowing at
U = 0.1 ms−1
and a length scale L = 10 km (the size of a large cloud struc￾ture). With the angular velocity of the earth, T ' 7.3 × 10−5
rad s−1
, we get
the Rossby number Ro ' 0.1, which is the typical value of large-scale geophys￾ical flows. With a kinematic viscosity ν ≈ 0.1 cm2
s
−1
, we arrive for this flow at
the Reynolds number Re = UL/ν ' 108
. The modeling of large-scale atmos￾pheric flows therefore requires us to consider, among other things, the properties
of rotating turbulence. The limit of interest in this chapter is the small Rossby
number (Ro  1). This number offers us a small parameter on which the theory
of inertial wave turbulence can be built.
6.2 What Do We Know About Rotating Turbulence?
Laboratory Experiment
Numerous laboratory experiments have been dedicated to the study of rotating
turbulent flows (see Figure 6.2). From an experimental point of view, it is not dif￾ficult to obtain a small Rossby number (Ro < 1) in a fast rotating tank; on the other
hand, it is more difficult to reach a Reynolds number higher than 105
. However,
this number is high enough for the flow to be in a fully developed turbulent regime.
These experiments (e.g. in a wind tunnel with a rotating section) have shown that
rotation has the effect, when Ro < 1, of bi-dimensionalizing an initially isotropic
turbulence (Jacquin et al., 1990; Lamriben et al., 2011). This results in the pres￾ence of vorticity filaments having their axes approximately parallel to the rotation
axis () and a strong correlation of velocity along  (Hopfinger et al., 1982). An
asymmetry is also measured in the distribution of cyclones and anticyclones (the
former dominating the latter) as well as a slowing down (compared to the nonro￾tating case) of the temporal energy decay when the turbulence is free, that is, in
absence of external forcing (Moisy et al., 2011).
Thanks to the PIV (particle image velocimetry) technique, which consists in
illuminating a fluid in which small spherical particles of a few µm in diameter are
introduced, it is possible to accurately measure the velocity of these particles and
thus that of the fluid, whose dynamics is supposed not to be influenced by the pres￾ence of these intruders. A restriction exists, however: until now, the measurement
has been made in a plane. It is often the plane perpendicular to the axis of rotation
that is chosen. The energy spectra measured as a function of the perpendicular
wavenumber k⊥ show a stiffening of the power law passing from an index close to
−5/3 (case without rotation at Ro = +∞) to a value close to −2.2 for the fastest
rotation (Morize et al., 2005).158 6 Inertial Wave Turbulence
Figure 6.2 Rotating platform dedicated to the experimental study of rotating turbulence
and inertial waves. This mechanical platform of 2 m in diameter, rotating at up to 30
revolutions per minute, allows for the loading of one tonne of material, including the
weight of the tank and the water (700 liters here) where flows are generated. The platform
allows experimenters to remotely control an embedded PIV system composed of a pulsed
laser and several high-sensitivity cameras. In the experiment presented here, an assembly
of inertial wave beams is forced by 32 oscillating cylinders organized regularly around a
virtual sphere of 80 cm diameter. This rotating platform and the experiments (Monsalve
et al., 2020) have been developed by P.-P. Cortet & F. Moisy at the Fluids, Automatic and
Thermal Systems (FAST) Laboratory (CNRS & University of Paris-Saclay) in Orsay.
The experiments also reveal that the p-order structure functions follow a self￾similar law with ξp = p/2 (Baroud et al., 2002) or ξp = 3p/4 (van Bokhoven et al.,
2009). Thus, rapidly rotating turbulence seems to be characterized by an absence
of intermittency, in the sense that the curvature of ξp(p) measured in hydrodynam￾ics at Ro = +∞ is absent (see Chapter 3).2 Even if the origin of this self-similar
behavior can be attributed to inhomogeneities, measurements, or forcing effects,
it is interesting to mention that the ξp = 3p/4 law is dimensionally compati￾ble with the exact solution (p = 2) of inertial wave turbulence (Galtier, 2003) as
well as some direct numerical simulations (Pouquet and Mininni, 2010). These
experiments also show that the probability distribution functions of (increments
of) velocity have non-Gaussian wings (Baroud et al., 2002; van Bokhoven et al.,
2009).
The PIV technique has also made it possible to highlight the inertial wave
turbulence regime by measuring the frequency spectrum. Like capillary waves,
2 Sometimes, the simple deviation from Kolmogorov’s law ξp = p/3 is considered as a signature of intermit￾tency. However, this definition is restrictive because it includes any deviation – even self-similar – from the
spectrum in −5/3.6.2 What Do We Know About Rotating Turbulence? 159
this spectrum is characterized by a signal essentially concentrated along the iner￾tial wave dispersion relation (Yarom and Sharon, 2014). This property is the one
expected when nonlinearities are weak (Nazarenko, 2011). The experiments have
shown the presence, in the perpendicular direction only, of a large-scale inverse
cascade (Campagne et al., 2014) whose properties seem, however, to be different
from those of a purely two-dimensional turbulence (Kraichnan, 1967).
To conclude, note that a quantitative experimental observation of weak iner￾tial wave turbulence has been reported recently by Monsalve et al. (2020). In this
experiment where inertial waves are directly excited and the geostrophic mode
strongly damped, the spectra display the expected power-law behavior both in
scaling and amplitude.
Numerical Simulations
The effects of rotation on hydrodynamic turbulence are also studied via numer￾ical simulation. A reduction of the nonlinear transfer in the direction of  has
been observed, as well as a slowing down of the temporal decay of energy (Bar￾dina et al., 1985; Cambon et al., 1997). A stiffening of the power law followed
by the energy spectrum was measured, as well as signatures of an inverse cas￾cade (Hossain, 1994; Smith et al., 1996). In particular, Smith and Waleffe (1999)
have shown with direct numerical simulations that when the flow is forced three￾dimensionally at an intermediate wavenumber kf
, one observes a direct cascade of
energy for k > kf
, with a one-dimensional isotropic spectrum close to k
−2
, and an
apparently inverse cascade for k < kf
, with a one-dimensional isotropic spectrum
close to k
−3
. Their analysis shows that large-scale energy is mainly contained in
the two-dimensional state which is defined as the fluctuations in the mode kk = 0
(with k ·  = kk ; we also speak about slow mode), whereas at small scales
the energy is mainly contained in the three-dimensional modes (fluctuations at
modes |kk| > 0). The spectrum of the slow mode could be the result of nonlocal
interactions between the two- and three-dimensional modes, rather than the con￾sequence of a two-dimensional inverse cascade (Bourouiba et al., 2012). We will
come back to this problem at the end of the chapter. These simulations also show
that the behavior at small and large scales is strongly influenced by the aspect ratio
between the vertical resolution, along , and the horizontal resolution: a small
aspect ratio, with a low resolution in the vertical direction, leads to a reduction in
the number of resonant triads and a significant alteration of the energy spectrum.
Their simulations reveal a global energy spectrum in k
−5/3
for a sufficiently small
aspect ratio. This result suggests that the resonant triads have a fundamental role
to play in turbulence with rotation.
The domination of cyclones (rotating in the same direction as the global rota￾tion) over anticyclones (rotating in the opposite direction; see Figure 6.3) was
also highlighted by numerical simulation in the case of a fast rotation (Buzzicotti160 6 Inertial Wave Turbulence
et al., 2018). One can show that this asymmetry is linked to the nonstability of
the anticyclones. The formation of larger and larger structures is studied through
the notion of condensate, that is, the ability of a turbulent system to excite the
smallest wavenumbers (Seshasayanan and Alexakis, 2018). Within the limit of a
fast rotation, the use of frequency and wavenumber spectra has made it possible
to highlight the wave character of turbulence (Clark di Leoni et al., 2014). Note
finally that the most recent three-dimensional direct numerical simulations by Le
Reun et al. (2020) show that the anisotropic Kolmogorov–Zakharov spectrum pre￾dicted by the theory is well reproduced (see also Sharma et al., 2018; Yokoyama
and Takaoka, 2021) and that the energy transfer is mainly local. More details on
this topic, and many other issues, are discussed in the reviews of Godeferd and
Moisy (2015) and Alexakis and Biferale (2018).
Figure 6.3 Schematic view of vorticity tubes in the case of hydrodynamic turbulence
without rotation (top) and with rotation (bottom). The rotation polarizes the tubes along
the axis of rotation, here in the vertical direction, and the direction of rotation of the tubes
is mostly that of the rotation of the fluid (domination of cyclones over anticyclones).6.3 Helical Inertial Waves 161
Theories
Rotating turbulence can be analyzed phenomenologically. Early works on the sub￾ject (Zeman, 1994; Zhou, 1995) show that a steep spectrum in k
−2
is expected
at large scales, a region where the Coriolis force is nonnegligible, that is, for
wavenumbers smaller than a critical wavenumber k. We can notice, however,
that this phenomenological prediction does not introduce anisotropy, which is a
fundamental property of this turbulence.
In spectral theory, the most striking results were obtained using the EDQNM
closure model (Orszag, 1970) that was introduced in Chapter 3. Cambon and
Jacquin (1989) have developed a formalism based on an eigenmode decomposi￾tion. The ad hoc closure used leads to dynamic equations for the invariants of the
system. The simulation of these equations allows us to understand more precisely
certain observed properties such as the anisotropic transfer mechanism (see also
Cambon et al., 1997). Inhomogeneity effects have been introduced to take into
account the existence of infinitely large boundaries in the direction perpendicular
to the axis of rotation (Scott, 2014). It has been shown that the rapidly rotating
confined fluid behaves differently from the free one, with essentially a dissipation
effect, due to the walls, which dynamically emerges before the classical volume
dissipation.
One can adapt Kolmogorov’s exact law to this axisymmetric problem (Galtier,
2009). This law can be used in its nonintegrated form (Lamriben et al., 2011),
whose expression is, at the origin, identical to that of hydrodynamics without
rotation (exact law (2.25)) because the Coriolis force does not work. It can also
be integrated by means of a critical balance hypothesis (see Chapter 7). The non￾integrated Kolmogorov law is also valid in wave turbulence, since we do not need
for its derivation to make assumptions about the type of turbulence; the univer￾sality of Kolmogorov’s law is thus reinforced. To conclude, we note that a recent
theoretical study shows an unexpected proximity between rotating turbulence and
solar wind turbulence at subionic scales (Galtier and David, 2020). This proximity
opens interesting perspectives that will be discussed in final section of this chapter
also Chapter 8).
6.3 Helical Inertial Waves
To obtain the inertial wave dispersion relation, we start from the incompressible
equation (6.1), with by definition  ≡ eˆ|| and eˆ|| a unit vector such that |eˆ||| = 1.
Anticipating the helical character of these waves, we will introduce a complex
helical decomposition (Craya, 1954):
h
s
k ≡ h
s
(k) = (eˆk × eˆ||) × eˆk + is(eˆk × eˆ||) , (6.3)162 6 Inertial Wave Turbulence
with k = keˆk = k⊥ + kke ( ˆ k = |k|, k⊥ = |k⊥|, |eˆk | = 1) and s = ± the directional
polarity. This basis satisfies the following properties:
h
−s
k = h
s
−k
, (6.4a)
is(eˆk × h
s
k
) = h
s
k
, (6.4b)
k · h
s
k = 0 , (6.4c)
h
s
k
· h
s
0
k =
2k
2
⊥
k
2
δ(s + s
0
) . (6.4d)
In particular, the relation (6.4c) means that the incompressibility condition will be
implicitly verified by the helical fields. This property will allow us to lighten the
wave turbulence formalism that we will briefly present later. The projection of the
velocity on the helical basis leads us to the following definition for A
s
k
:
uˆ k ≡ uˆ(k) =
X
s
A
s
(k) h
s
k ≡
X
s
A
s
k h
s
k
, (6.5)
with uˆ k the Fourier transform of the velocity u. One deduces from this:
wˆ k ≡ wˆ (k) = ik × uˆ k = k
X
s
s As
k h
s
k
. (6.6)
In the inviscid case (ν = 0), the Fourier transform of equation (6.1) gives us:
∂wˆ k
∂t
− 2ikkuˆ k = [(w · ∇)u − (u · ∇)w]k
, (6.7)
where the index k in the right-hand term means the Fourier transform. If we for￾get the nonlinear contribution and introduce the helical fields (6.5) and (6.6), we
obtain, after projection and use of relation (6.4d):
sk
∂A
s
k
∂t
= −2ikkA
s
k
, (6.8)
which leads to the following dispersion relationship:
ωk =
2kk
k
. (6.9)
Inertial waves are transverse, dispersive, and helical with a left polarization.
6.4 Phenomenological Predictions
Following the classical phenomenology presented in the previous chapter on cap￾illary waves, we will define the nonlinear time from the Navier–Stokes equations;
we obtain trivially:
τNL ∼
1
ku`
. (6.10)6.4 Phenomenological Predictions 163
The transfer (or cascade) time for three-wave interactions (nonlinearity is quad￾ratic) is written in the case of fast rotation (see Chapter 4):
τtr ∼ ωτ 2
NL ∼
kk
k
3u
2
`
. (6.11)
The difficulty here is to take into account the statistical anisotropy induced by
rotation, whose theoretical justification will be given in Section 6.5 the reso￾nance condition. To distinguish between perpendicular and parallel directions, we
introduce the following two-dimensional axisymmetric energy spectrum:
u
2
` ∼ E(k⊥, kk)k⊥kk . (6.12)
However, numerous experiments and numerical simulations show that the cascade
is preferentially done in the direction perpendicular to the axis of rotation: this
means that the energy is preferentially transferred in a region of Fourier space
where k⊥  kk. We will place ourselves in this region and thus substitute k⊥
for k. We then introduce the mean rate of kinetic energy transfer ε in the inertial
range:
ε ∼
E(k⊥, kk)k⊥kk
τtr
∼
E
2
(k⊥, kk)k
5
⊥
kk

. (6.13)
We finally get the following spectral prediction:
E(k⊥, kk) ∼
√
ε k
−5/2
⊥
k
−1/2
k
. (6.14)
The effect of rotation is therefore to stiffen the energy spectrum compared to the
standard case (at Ro = +∞) while orienting the cascade in the transverse direc￾tion. The dependency in kk that appears here is therefore not very relevant from
the dynamic point of view. We will see in Section 6.5 that the spectrum (6.14) is
the exact solution of the kinetic equations of inertial wave turbulence.
The ratio χ of linear to nonlinear times gives us an additional indication of the
range of validity of the wave turbulence regime. We get, always with k⊥  kk:
χ =
1/ω
τNL
∼
k
2
⊥
u`
kk
∼
k
2
⊥
p
E(k⊥, kk)k⊥kk
kk
∼
k
5/4
⊥
k
3/4
k
. (6.15)
As the energy is essentially transfered to larger and larger k⊥, if the wave tur￾bulence condition (χ  1) is met at a given k⊥ scale, it will be less and less as
the cascade develops in the perpendicular direction, and beyond a critical scale,
k⊥c
, turbulence becomes strong. We see here a difference to the case of capillary
wave turbulence, which becomes weaker and weaker as the cascade develops.
Another limit of validity of wave turbulence exists at small wavenumbers. Indeed,
the inequality χ  1 also means that the wavenumber kk cannot be too small: in
particular, it is necessary that kk > 0. This condition means that the slow mode
kk = 0 cannot be described by weak wave turbulence.164 6 Inertial Wave Turbulence
6.5 Inertial Wave Turbulence Theory
Let us now take again the nonlinear expression (6.7) and introduce the helical
fields (6.5) and (6.6); after projection and exchange of the dummy variables p and
q, sp and sq, we obtain:
∂A
s
k
∂t
+ isωkA
s
k = i
X
spsq
Z
R6
L
sspsq
−k p q A
sp
p A
sq
q δ(k − p − q) dpdq , (6.16)
with the interaction coefficient:
L
sspsq
k p q =
sk
4k
2
⊥
(spp − sqq)[(q · h
sp
p )(h
sq
q · h
s
k
) − (p · h
sq
q )(h
sp
p · h
s
k
)] . (6.17)
Since the amplitude of the waves is assumed to be weak, the dynamics over short
times – of the order of the wave period 1/ω – will be dictated by linear terms. At
longer times, such that τ  1/ω, nonlinear terms will come into play by changing
the amplitude of the waves. Therefore, the amplitude is separated from the phase
(see Chapter 5 for a justification):
A
s
k ≡ a
s
k
e
−isωk t
, (6.18)
with  a small parameter (0 <   1); hence the equation for the amplitude of
inertial waves:
∂a
s
k
∂t
= i
X
spsq
Z
R6
L
sspsq
−k p q a
sp
p a
sq
q e
i(sωk−spωp−sqωq)t
δ(k − p − q)dpdq . (6.19)
We find a classical form for three-wave interactions with a term in the right-hand
side of weak amplitude (proportional to ), a quadratic nonlinearity, and an expo￾nential which, over long times, will give a nonzero contribution only when its
coefficient cancels out.
After a few manipulations, we can write the resonance condition as follows:
sqq − spp
sωk
=
sk − sqq
spωp
=
spp − sk
sqωq
. (6.20)
It is interesting to discuss the particular case of strongly local interactions that
generally give a dominant contribution to turbulent dynamics. In this case, we
have k ' p ' q and the previous expression simplifies, at leading order, to:
sq − sp
skk
'
s − sq
sppk
'
sp − s
sqqk
. (6.21)
If kk is nonzero, the term on the left will give a nonnegligible contribution only
when sp = −sq. We do not consider the case sp = sq, which is not relevant to the
leading order in the case of local interactions, as we can see from the expression of
the interaction coefficient (6.17), which then becomes negligible.The immediate6.5 Inertial Wave Turbulence Theory 165
consequence is that either the middle term or the right-hand term has a numerator
which cancels itself out (at main order), which implies that the associated denom￾inator must also cancel (at main order) to satisfy the equality: for example, if
s = sp then qk ' 0. This condition means that the transfer in the parallel direction
is negligible: indeed, the integration of equation (6.19) in the parallel direction is
then reduced to a few modes (since pk ' kk), which strongly limits the transfer
between parallel modes. The cascade in the parallel direction is thus possible, but
relatively weak compared to that in the perpendicular direction. This situation is
to be compared to that of incompressible MHD, which will be presented in the
chapter 7: in this case, the uniform magnetic field b0 plays the role of the (uni￾form) rotation by introducing a privileged axis that breaks the spherical symmetry
of the turbulence. In the MHD wave turbulence regime, it can be shown that no
transfer in the b0 direction is possible; therefore, the direct cascade of the total
(kinetic + magnetic) energy is exclusively in the perpendicular direction.
The kinetic equations of inertial wave turbulence are obtained in a classical way
after a (long) systematic development.3 They are partially simplified when the
k⊥  kk limit is taken: this limit is fully justified by the arguments developed pre￾viously about the weak cascade in the parallel direction. Under these conditions,
we finally get:
∂t

Ek
Hk

=

22
4
X
sspsq
Z
1⊥
skksppk
k
2
⊥
p
2
⊥
q
2
⊥
(6.22)
×

sqq⊥ − spp⊥
ωk
2
(sk⊥ + spp⊥ + sqq⊥)
2
sin θ
×

Eq(p⊥Ek − k⊥Ep) + (p⊥sHk/k⊥ − k⊥spHp/p⊥)sqHq/q⊥
sk⊥

Eq(p⊥sHk/k⊥ − k⊥spHp/p⊥) + (p⊥Ek − k⊥Ep)sqHq/q⊥


× δ(sωk + spωp + sqωq) δ(kk + pk + qk)dp⊥dq⊥dpkdqk ,
with Ek ≡ E(k⊥, kk) = 2πk⊥E(k⊥, kk) and Hk ≡ H(k⊥, kk) = 2πk⊥H(k⊥, kk) the
axisymmetric energy and kinetic helicity spectra, respectively. In this expression,
θ is the angle between the wavevectors k⊥ and p⊥ in the triangle k⊥ + p⊥ +
q⊥ = 0 and 1⊥ is the integration domain (infinitely extended band) corresponding
to this triangle (see Figure 5.5). The anisotropic kinetic equations of inertial wave
turbulence (6.22) have been obtained and analyzed for the first time by Galtier
(2003). They were then studied numerically by Bellet et al. (2006), and then found
analytically with a Hamiltonian method by Gelash et al. (2017).
3 However, an additional step must be considered: it consists in introducing a local orthonormal vectorial
basis for each triad (Galtier, 2014) in order to make all symmetries appear. It is only after that the statistical
development can take place.166 6 Inertial Wave Turbulence
After applying the generalized Zakharov transformation to the axisymmetric
case (Kuznetsov, 1972), one obtains the exact solutions with a non-zero constant
energy flux (Kolmogorov–Zakharov spectrum):4
E(k⊥, kk) ∼ k
−5/2
⊥
k
−1/2
k
, (6.23)
and H(k⊥, kk) ∼ k
−3/2
⊥
k
−1/2
k
. These solutions correspond to a direct cascade of
energy. In particular, this means that the spectrum of kinetic helicity is not the con￾sequence of a dynamics specific to helicity, but the trace of a dynamics induced
by energy. These solutions are in the domain of convergence of integrals, for
which a subtle calculation is necessary (which mixes the perpendicular and par￾allel modes). With the following definition E ∼ k
x
⊥
k
y
k
, we find the conditions of
locality (see Exercise II.4):
−4 < x + 2y < −3 , (6.24)
−4 < x + y < −2 . (6.25)
This property demonstrates that the Kolmogorov–Zakharov spectrum (6.23) is rel￾evant in describing this regime. As can be seen, it is placed exactly in the middle
of the two intervals. Numerical simulations of the kinetic equations of wave tur￾bulence performed by Bellet et al. (2006) show a spectral behavior compatible
with, in particular, the prediction (6.23). Note that an anisotropic spectrum com￾patible with the Kolmogorov–Zakharov solution has been obtained recently with
three-dimensional direct numerical simulations (Le Reun et al., 2020; Yokoyama
and Takaoka, 2021).
Several other properties of inertial wave turbulence can be deduced from
expression (6.22). First, we see that a state with zero kinetic helicity will not
produce helicity at any scale. Energy is therefore the main driver of turbulence.
Second, we observe that there is no nonlinear coupling when the wavevectors p⊥
and q⊥ are collinear (because then sin θ = 0). Third, there is no nonlinear coupling
when p⊥ and q⊥ are equal, if at the same time their polarity sp and sq are equal.
This is a property that seems to be quite general, since it is common to other types
of helical waves (Kraichnan, 1973; Waleffe, 1992; Turner, 2000; Galtier and Bhat￾tacharjee, 2003). Finally, we recall that these kinetic equations cannot describe the
slow mode (kk = 0) and cannot describe too large three-dimensional modes (espe￾cially in k⊥) for which the wave turbulence becomes strong. Kinetic equations are
thus limited to a finite size domain in Fourier space. Moreover, the exact solutions
obtained are restricted to a part of this authorized domain for which k⊥  kk.
4 The expressions of the energy flux components can be deduced under the assumption of statistical axisym￾metry. For this, we use the relation ∂tE(k⊥, kk) = −∇ · 5(k⊥, kk) in cylindrical coordinates from which
we can show that 5k/5⊥ ∝ kk/k⊥. Therefore, the parallel energy flux is expected to be smaller than the
perpendicular flux since the kinetic equation used is valid in the limit kk/k⊥  1.6.6 Local Triadic Interactions 167
6.6 Local Triadic Interactions
6.6.1 Nonlinear Diffusion Equation
The kinetic equations of inertial wave turbulence can be simulated numerically to
study more precisely this regime. However, the work on the subject (Bellet et al.,
2006) shows that the problem remains difficult because it requires, in particular,
solving properly the resonance condition, which strongly limits the number of
triads to be considered. One way to get around this difficulty is to take into account
only local interactions, which leads to a significant simplification of the equations.
In our case, this limit concerns above all perpendicular wavenumbers. We will see
later that in fact it is not possible to consider this limit for parallel wavenumbers.
In this study, we will limit ourselves to the particular case of energy, and we
assume that the kinetic helicity is null. We have seen that within the highly aniso￾tropic limit (k⊥  kk), the kinetic equation of inertial wave turbulence takes the
following form:
∂Ek
∂t
=
X
sspsq
Z
T
sspsq
kpq dp⊥dq⊥dpkdqk , (6.26)
with by definition T
sspsq
kpq the transfer function per mode.
T
sspsq
kpq =
2
4
skksppk
k
2
⊥
p
2
⊥
q
2
⊥

sqq⊥ − spp⊥
ωk
2
(sk⊥ + spp⊥ + sqq⊥)
2
sin θ
Eq(p⊥Ek − k⊥Ep)δ(sωk + spωp + sqωq) δ(kk + pk + qk) . (6.27)
It can be noted that the small parameter  has been absorbed in the time derivative
and therefore no longer appears explicitly: this means that we are focusing on
the long times of wave turbulence. The transfer function verifies the following
symmetry property, which will be used later:
T
spssq
pkq = −T
sspsq
kpq . (6.28)
Within the limit of strongly local interactions, we can write:
p⊥ = k⊥(1 + p) and q⊥ = k⊥(1 + q) , (6.29)
with 0 < p  1 and 0 < q  1. We can then introduce an arbitrary function
f (k⊥, kk) and integrate the kinetic equation; we get:
∂
∂t
Z
f (k⊥, kk)Ekdk⊥dkk

=
X
sspsq
Z
f (k⊥, kk)T
sspsq
kpq dk⊥dkkdp⊥dq⊥dpkdqk
=
1
2
X
sspsq
Z
[f (k⊥, kk) − f (p⊥, pk)]
× T
sspsq
kpq dk⊥dkkdp⊥dq⊥dpkdqk . (6.30)168 6 Inertial Wave Turbulence
For local interactions, we have at the main order (we neglect the contribution of
the parallel wavenumber):
f (p⊥, pk) = f (k⊥, kk) + (p⊥ − k⊥)
∂f (k⊥, kk)
∂k⊥
= f (k⊥, kk) + pk⊥
∂f (k⊥, kk)
∂k⊥
. (6.31)
One obtains:
∂
∂t
Z
f (k⊥, kk)Ekdk⊥dkk

= −
1
2
X
sspsq
Z
pk⊥
∂f (k⊥, kk)
∂k⊥
(6.32)
× T
sspsq
kpq dk⊥dkkdp⊥dq⊥dpkdqk .
An integration by part of the right-hand term allows us to write (after simplifica￾tion):
∂Ek
∂t
=
1
2
∂
∂k⊥


X
sspsq
Z
pk⊥T
sspsq
kpq dp⊥dq⊥dpkdqk

 . (6.33)
The local form of the transfer function T
sspsq
kpq can be deduced by using the locality
in the perpendicular direction. In particular, we have:
k
2
⊥p
2
⊥q
2
⊥ = k
6
⊥, (6.34)

sqq⊥ − spp⊥
ωk
2
=

sq − sp + sqq − spp
2kk
2
k
4
⊥, (6.35)
(sk⊥ + spp⊥ + sqq⊥)
2 = (s + sp + sq)
2
k
2
⊥, (6.36)
Eq(p⊥Ek − k⊥Ep) = −pk
3
⊥Ek
∂(Ek/k⊥)
∂k⊥
, (6.37)
sin θ = sin(π/3) =
√
3
2
, (6.38)
δ(gkpq) =
k⊥
2
δ(skk + sppk + sqqk). (6.39)
After simplification, we arrive at:
T
sspsq
kpq = −
√
3
64
ssppk
kk
(sq − sp + sqq − spp)
2
(s + sp + sq)
2
pk
4
⊥
Ek
∂(Ek/k⊥)
∂k⊥
δ(skk + sppk + sqqk)δ(kk + pk + qk) . (6.40)
The previous expression shows us that the transfer will be dominant when
spsq = −1. Therefore, we will only consider this type of interaction. The expres￾sion is then reduced to:
T
sspsq
kpq = −
√
3
16
ssppk
kk
pk
4
⊥Ek
∂(Ek/k⊥)
∂k⊥
δ(skk+sppk−spqk)δ(kk+pk+qk) . (6.41)6.6 Local Triadic Interactions 169
The resonance condition leads us to two possible combinations for parallel
wavenumbers:
kk + pk − qk = 0 and kk + pk + qk = 0 , (6.42)
or
kk − pk + qk = 0 and kk + pk + qk = 0 . (6.43)
The solution is either qk = 0 or pk = 0, which means that the strong locality
assumption does not apply for the parallel direction. The second solution cancels
the transfer function, so we will consider only the first solution, for which we
obtain:
∂Ek
∂t
=
√
3
16
∂
∂k⊥

k
7
⊥Ek
∂(Ek/k⊥)
∂k⊥
Z +
−

2
p
dp
Z +
−
dq . (6.44)
After integration, we finally arrive at the following nonlinear diffusion equation
for energy:
∂Ek
∂t
= C
∂
∂k⊥

k
7
⊥Ek
∂(Ek/k⊥)
∂k⊥

, (6.45)
with C = 
4
/(4√
3). This nonlinear diffusion equation describes inertial wave
turbulence in the limit of strongly local interactions in the perpendicular direction
(Galtier and David, 2020). It is an equation that has been rigorously deduced from
the kinetic equation. Note that it is also possible to obtain this diffusion equation
by phenomenological arguments. The calculation is then simpler, but it does not
allow us to obtain the exact expression of the constant C. Consequently, we will
renormalize the time and take C = 1.
6.6.2 Stationary and Self-Similar Solutions
We will verify that the nonlinear energy diffusion equation (6.45) has the same
exact solutions as the kinetic equation (6.22). To do this, we introduce into
equation (6.45) the energy flux 5(k⊥), which is defined by the relation:
∂E(k⊥)
∂t
= −
∂5(k⊥)
∂k⊥
, (6.46)
as well as the kinetic energy spectrum E(k⊥) = Akx
⊥
. By definition, A is a positive
constant because the energy spectrum is a positive definite quantity. We obtain:
5(k⊥) = A
2
(1 − x)k
5+2x
⊥
. (6.47)
Constant energy flux solutions are therefore x = 1 and x = −5/2. The first value
cancels the flux and corresponds to the thermodynamic solution. The second value
corresponds to the spectrum discussed in Section 6.5: it is the non-zero constant170 6 Inertial Wave Turbulence
flux solution (Kolmogorov–Zakharov spectrum). In this case, we can also show
that:
lim
x→−5/2
5(k⊥) = ε =
7
2
A
2
, (6.48)
which is positive, as expected for a direct cascade.
The stationary solution – known as the Kolmogorov–Zakharov spectrum – is
sometimes preceded by a nonstationary transient solution of a different nature.
We will see, in the numerical study in the Section 6.6.3, that this is the case for
inertial wave turbulence. It is a self-similar solution whose form is:
Ek =
1
τ
a
E0

k⊥
τ
b

, (6.49)
with τ = t∗ − t and t∗ the time it takes for the spectrum to reach the largest
available wavenumber. This time is finite, which means that in principle the front
of the energy spectrum can reach infinity in a finite amount of time. This property
reminds us of the discussion in Chapter 2 on the emergence of a singularity in
finite time. By introducing the top expression into equation (6.45), one obtains
the condition:
a = 4b + 1 . (6.50)
A second condition can appear, assuming that E0(ξ ) ∼ ξ
m behind the front. The
stationarity condition then gives us the relation:
a + mb = 0 . (6.51)
The combination of the two relationships finally gives us:
m = −
a
b
= −4 −
1
b
. (6.52)
This last expression means that we have a direct relation between the exponent m
of the power-law spectrum and the propagation law of the front kf ∼ τ
b
. For exam￾ple, if we assume that the stationary solution is established immediately when the
front propagates, then m = −5/2 and thus b = −2/3 (and a = −5/3). In this
case, the prediction for the front propagation is:
kf ∼ (t∗ − t)
−2/3
. (6.53)
In practice, we will see that the nonstationary solution is different: it verifies well
the conditions (6.51)–(6.52), but the values of a, b, m are not predictable. We then
speak of a self-similar solution of the second kind (only solutions of the first kind
are predictable).6.6 Local Triadic Interactions 171
6.6.3 Numerical Study
The numerical study of equation (6.45) does not pose any particular problem in
terms of implementation; however, it is necessary to consider a viscous term to
dissipate energy at small scales in order to avoid the emergence of numerical
instability. We make the choice of a hyperviscosity to extend the inertial range.
Therefore, the normalized equation with C = 1 that we are going to simulate is:
∂Ek
∂t
=
∂
∂k⊥

k
7
⊥Ek
∂(Ek/k⊥)
∂k⊥

− νk
6
⊥Ek . (6.54)
One can use a logarithmic discretization for the k⊥ axis, with k⊥i = 2
i/8
and i an
integer between 0 and 160. The Crank–Nicolson and Adams–Bashforth numeri￾cal schemes are used for the linear and nonlinear terms, respectively. The initial
condition (t = 0) corresponds to a spectrum localized at large-scale such that:
Ek ∼ k
3
⊥ exp(−(k⊥/k0)
2
) , (6.55)
with k0 = 5. No forcing is introduced in this simulation and the time step is
1T = 2 × 10−13
.
Figure 6.4 shows (top) the evolution of the energy spectrum from t = 0 to t∗.
During this nonstationary phase a power law in k
−8/3
⊥
appears progressively over
about three decades. This nonstationary phase is characterized by a nonconstant
energy flux (bottom of Figure 6.4). Therefore, the spectrum does not correspond to
the constant flux solution obtained analytically. On the other hand, it is compatible
with the solution ∼ k
−1/3
⊥ when we take x = −8/3 in equation (6.47).
In order to check if these results correspond to the self-similar solution intro￾duced previously, we show on Figure 6.5 the temporal evolution of the front kf (t).
This spectral front is defined by taking as a reference E(k⊥) = 10−15 in Figure
6.4. We then follow the point of intersection between this threshold and the spec￾tral tail. From this figure, we can define the singular time t∗ that the front takes to
reach the maximum wavenumber (in principle k⊥ = +∞). We get approximately
t∗ = 6.7537 × 10−7
. In Figure 6.5 (insert) we see kf as a function of t∗ − t: a very
clear power law appears over three decades, with an exponent close to −0.750.
The negative exponent value illustrates the explosive nature of the direct energy
cascade. These values are well compatible with:
a = −2 , b = −3/4, and m = −8/3 , (6.56)
which demonstrates the self-similar nature of the nonstationary solution. Note that
the power law in −8/3 was apparently obtained with a numerical simulation of the
kinetic equations of inertial wave turbulence when the spectrum is in a phase of
development and before it is affected by inhomogeneities (Eremin, 2019).172 6 Inertial Wave Turbulence
Figure 6.4 Top: Temporal evolution (every 4 × 1031T) of the energy spectrum between
t = 0 (large-scale localized spectrum) and t∗; a spectrum in k
−8/3
⊥
emerges over about
three decades. Bottom: The spectrum of the energy flux (at the same time) is compatible
with k
−1/3
⊥
. Simulation made by V. David.
In Figure 6.6 we show the temporal evolutions of the energy and flux (insertion)
spectra for t > t∗, with t close to t∗ (top) and t  t∗ (bottom). The stationary solu￾tion is finally obtained with a spectrum in k
−5/2
⊥
and a constant flux. We can notice
that the stationary solution is established following a bounce of the spectrum when
it reaches the smallest scales. We then have a relatively slow self-similar decay of
the stationary solutions.
6.6.4 Universality of the Anomalous Scaling
The behavior that we have just described in detail for inertial wave turbulence is
qualitatively universal for the solutions with finite capacity. We recall that these
solutions correspond to spectra in power law whose integral (from the initial exci￾tation mode ki
, to infinity for a direct cascade, or zero for an inverse cascade)
is convergent. In the case of a direct cascade of energy, this means that the sys￾tem can redistribute the initial energy in the neighborhood of ki
, over the interval
ki < k < +∞ in a finite time (we assume that there is no external force).6.6 Local Triadic Interactions 173
Figure 6.5 Temporal evolution of the front kf of the spectrum for t ≤ t∗ (semilogarithmic
scale). A sudden increase of kf
is observed from which one can precisely define the time
t∗ = 6.7537 × 10−7
. Insert: temporal evolution of kf as a function of t∗ − t (logarithmic
scale). The dashed line corresponds to (t∗ − t)
−0.750. For comparison two other values of
t∗ − t are taken. Simulation made by V. David.
The discovery of this anomalous scaling is relatively recent in the history of
turbulence. The first detection was carried out within the framework of the study
of a Bose condensate process (here an inverse cascade) with an exponent around
−1.24 instead of −7/6 for the stationary solution (Semikoz and Tkachev, 1995).
A second detection was performed in magnetohydrodynamics (see Chapter 7)
with an exponent for the energy spectrum in −7/3 instead of −2 (Galtier et al.,
2000). In the case of gravitational waves (see Chapter 9), the difference between
these exponents for the wave action is tiny: −0.6517 instead of −2/3. Spectral
anomalous scalings are also detected in strong turbulence. For example, using a
nonlinear diffusion model to describe three-dimensional incompressible hydro￾dynamic turbulence (Leith, 1967), it is possible to show numerically that the
Kolmogorov spectrum in −5/3 is preceded by a nonstationary spectrum around
−1.856 (Connaughton and Nazarenko, 2004).
To date, an exact prediction for the anomalous exponent seems out of reach
(Grebenev et al., 2014). Only the numerical simulation can help us to estimate it,
for example, by framing the value (Thalabard et al., 2015). As we have seen, this
nonstationary solution is followed by a bounce of the spectrum to finally form the
stationary solution. We can show that this bounce is described by a self-similar
solution of the third kind (Nazarenko and Grebenev, 2017). We can ask whether174 6 Inertial Wave Turbulence
Figure 6.6 Top: Temporal evolution (every 4×1031T) for t > t∗ of the energy spectrum
compensated by k
5/2
⊥
, and (insert) the temporal evolution of the energy flux at the same
time (semilogarithmic scale). Bottom: Final temporal evolution of these quantities for
t  t∗. Simulation made by V. David.
there is a quantitative relationship between these anomalous exponents and the
possible appearance of singularities in a finite time (see Chapter 2). The answer to
this question offers an interesting perspective.
6.7 Perspectives
Recently, several experimental studies have been devoted to rotating turbulence
(see, e.g., Le Reun et al., 2017). An interesting perspective is the experimentalReferences 175
reproduction of the inertial wave turbulence regime (Yarom and Sharon, 2014;
Monsalve et al., 2020) and an understanding of, in particular, the role of the slow
mode. Experiments show a first difficulty: that of avoiding the too fast excitation
of the slow mode which corresponds to geostrophic structures. In many laboratory
experiments dedicated to rotating turbulence, the slow mode is often excited by
the forcing. Now we know that this mode can become dominant and prevent the
detection of three-dimensional modes. One possible approach is to use an inertia
wave attractor device from which the desired regime could develop by instability
(Brunet et al., 2020). The underlying fundamental question is to understand by
which mechanism the slow mode can be excited and how this can, in turn, modify
the dynamics of wave turbulence. From a theoretical point of view, the study of
quasi-resonant interactions as an efficient source of slow mode excitation is an
interesting perspective (Clark di Leoni and Mininni, 2016).
A new question concerns the proximity between inertial wave turbulence
and a seemingly very different problem, that of kinetic Alfvén wave turbu￾lence, a relevant regime in understanding the solar wind at subionic scales (see
Chapter 8). Indeed, in the approximation of local interactions we can show
analytically that the two problems are described by the same nonlinear diffu￾sion equation (Galtier and David, 2020). It is then perhaps not so surprising
to note that experimental measurements of intermittency in the case of rota￾tion (van Bokhoven et al., 2009) and in the solar wind (Kiyani et al., 2009)
give very close self-similar exponents. Is this a pure coincidence or is there
really a common physics? We have here, potentially, an example of close
interdisciplinarity.
Another interesting project would be to highlight the transition between the
weak and strong wave turbulence regimes that is expected to occur at small scales.
As predicted by relation (6.15), the time ratio increases with the mode k⊥. Accord￾ing to the phenomenology of Nazarenko and Schekochihin (2011), one can expect
to fall into the regime of strong wave turbulence (described by the critical balance
– see Chapter 7), then, on an even smaller scale, to no longer feel the rotation
effect and find the fluid in the classic regime of strong eddy isotropic turbulence
(Chapter 2). As shown by the numerical study of Mininni et al. (2012) (see also
the work of Meyrand et al., 2016 in magnetohydrodynamics), the measurement
of a such a transition requires very high spatial resolution, at the limits of current
computing facilities. It also requires measuring precisely the energy flux vector in
anisotropic turbulence (Yokoyama and Takaoka, 2021).
References
Aldridge, K. D., and Lumb, L. I. 1987. Inertial waves identified in the earth’s fluid outer
core. Nature, 325(6103), 421–423.
Alexakis, A., and Biferale, L. 2018. Cascades and transitions in turbulent flows. Phys.
Rep., 767, 1–101.176 6 Inertial Wave Turbulence
Bardina, J., Ferziger, J. H., and Rogallo, R. S. 1985. Effect of rotation on isotropic
turbulence: Computation and modelling. J. Fluid Mech., 154, 321–336.
Baroud, C. N., Plapp, B. B., She, Z. S., and Swinney, H. L. 2002. Anomalous self￾similarity in a turbulent rapidly rotating fluid. Phys. Rev. Lett., 88(11), 114501.
Bellet, F., Godeferd, F. S., Scott, J. F., and Cambon, C. 2006. Wave turbulence in rapidly
rotating flows. J. Fluid Mech., 562, 83–121.
Bourouiba, L., Straub, D. N., and Waite, M. L. 2012. Non-local energy transfers in rotating
turbulence at intermediate Rossby number. J. Fluid Mech., 690, 129–147.
Brunet, M., Gallet, B., and Cortet, P.-P. 2020. Shortcut to geostrophy in wave-driven
rotating turbulence: The quartetic instability. Phys. Rev. Lett., 124(12), 124501.
Buzzicotti, M., Aluie, H., Biferale, L., and Linkmann, M. 2018. Energy transfer in
turbulence under rotation. Phys. Rev. Fluids, 3(3), 034802.
Cambon, C., and Jacquin, L. 1989. Spectral approach to non-isotropic turbulence
subjected to rotation. J. Fluid Mech., 202, 295–317.
Cambon, C., Mansour, N. N., and Godeferd, F. S. 1997. Energy transfer in rotating
turbulence. J. Fluid Mech., 337(1), 303–332.
Campagne, A., Gallet, B., Moisy, F., and Cortet, P.-P. 2014. Direct and inverse energy
cascades in a forced rotating turbulence experiment. Phys. Fluids, 26(12), 125112.
Clark di Leoni, P., Cobelli, P. J., Mininni, P. D., Dmitruk, P., and Matthaeus, W. H. 2014.
Quantification of the strength of inertial waves in a rotating turbulent flow. Phys.
Fluids, 26(3), 035106.
Clark di Leoni, P., and Mininni, P. D. 2016. Quantifying resonant and near-resonant
interactions in rotating turbulence. J. Fluid Mech., 809, 821–842.
Connaughton, C., and Nazarenko, S. 2004. Warm cascades and anomalous scaling in a
diffusion model of turbulence. Phys. Rev. Lett., 92(4), 044501.
Craya, A. 1954. Contribution à l’analyse de la turbulence associée à des vitesses
moyennes. PST Ministère de l’Air, 345.
Eremin, A. 2019. Implémentation numérique de la fermeture de turbulence d’ondes dans
un canal rotatif. Thesis, University of Lyon.
Galtier, S. 2003. Weak inertial-wave turbulence theory. Phys. Rev. E, 68(1), 015301.
Galtier, S. 2009. Exact vectorial law for homogeneous rotating turbulence. Phys. Rev. E,
80(4), 046301.
Galtier, S. 2014. Weak turbulence theory for rotating magnetohydrodynamics and plane￾tary flows. J. Fluid Mech., 757, 114–154.
Galtier, S., and Bhattacharjee, A. 2003. Anisotropic weak whistler wave turbulence in
electron magnetohydrodynamics. Phys. Plasmas, 10(8), 3065–3076.
Galtier, S., and David, V. 2020. Inertial/kinetic-Alfvén wave turbulence: A twin problem
in the limit of local interactions. Phys. Rev. Fluids, 5(4), 044603.
Galtier, S., Nazarenko, S. V., Newell, A. C., and Pouquet, A. 2000. A weak turbulence
theory for incompressible magnetohydrodynamics. J. Plasma Phys., 63, 447–488.
Gelash, A. A., L’vov, V. S., and Zakharov, V. E. 2017. Complete Hamiltonian formalism
for inertial waves in rotating fluids. J. Fluid Mech., 831, 128–150.
Godeferd, F. S., and Moisy, F. 2015. Structure and dynamics of rotating turbulence:
A review of recent experimental and numerical Results. Appl. Mech. Rev., 67(3),
030802.
Grebenev, V. N., Nazarenko, S. V., Medvedev, S. B., Schwab, I. V., and Chirkunov, Y. A.
2014. Self-similar solution in the Leith model of turbulence: Anomalous power law
and asymptotic analysis. J. Physics A Math. General, 47(2), 025501.
Hopfinger, E. J., Gagne, Y., and Browand, F. K. 1982. Turbulence and waves in a rotating
tank. J. Fluid Mech., 125, 505–534.
Hossain, M. 1994. Reduction in the dimensionality of turbulence due to a strong rotation.
Phys. Fluids, 6(3), 1077–1080.References 177
Jacquin, L., Leuchter, O., Cambon, C., and Mathieu, J. 1990. Homogeneous turbulence in
the presence of rotation. J. Fluid Mech., 220, 1–52.
Kiyani, K. H., Chapman, S. C., Khotyaintsev, Y. V., Dunlop, M. W., and Sahraoui, F. 2009.
Global scale-invariant dissipation in collisionless plasma turbulence. Phys. Rev. Lett.,
103, 075006.
Kraichnan, R. H. 1967. Inertial ranges in two-dimensional turbulence. Phys. Fluids, 10(7),
1417–1423.
Kraichnan, R. H. 1973. Helical turbulence and absolute equilibrium. J. Fluid Mech., 59,
745–752.
Kuznetsov, E. A. 1972. Turbulence of ion sound in a plasma located in a magnetic field.
J. Exp. Theor. Phys., 35, 310–314.
Lamriben, C., Cortet, P.-P., and Moisy, F. 2011. Direct measurements of anisotropic
energy transfers in a rotating turbulence experiment. Phys. Rev. Lett., 107(2),
024503.
Le Reun, T., Favier, B., Barker, A. J., and Le Bars, M. 2017. Inertial wave turbulence
driven by elliptical instability. Phys. Rev. Lett., 119(3), 034502.
Le Reun, T., Favier, B., and Le Bars, M. 2020. Evidence of the Zakharov–Kolmogorov
spectrum in numerical simulations of inertial wave turbulence. EPL (Europhysics
Letters), 132(6), 64002.
Leith, C. E. 1967. Diffusion approximation to inertial energy transfer in isotropic
turbulence. Phys. Fluids, 10(7), 1409–1416.
Meyrand, R., Galtier, S., and Kiyani, K. H. 2016. Direct evidence of the transition from
weak to strong magnetohydrodynamic turbulence. Phys. Rev. Lett., 116(10), 105002.
Mininni, P. D., Rosenberg, D., and Pouquet, A. 2012. Isotropization at small scales of
rotating helically driven turbulence. J. Fluid Mech., 699, 263–279.
Moisy, F., Morize, C., Rabaud, M., and Sommeria, J. 2011. Decay laws, anisotropy and
cyclone–anticyclone asymmetry in decaying rotating turbulence. J. Fluid Mechanics,
666, 5–35.
Monsalve, E., Brunet, M., Gallet, B., and Cortet, P.-P. 2020. Quantitative experimental
observation of weak inertial-wave turbulence. Phys. Rev. Lett., 125, 254502.
Morize, C., Moisy, F., and Rabaud, M. 2005. Decaying grid-generated turbulence in a
rotating tank. Phys. Fluids, 17(9), 095105–095105–11.
Nazarenko, S. 2011. Wave Turbulence. Lecture Notes in Physics, vol. 825. Springer
Verlag.
Nazarenko, S. V., and Grebenev, V. N. 2017. Self-similar formation of the Kolmogorov
spectrum in the Leith model of turbulence. J. Physics A Math. General, 50(3),
035501.
Nazarenko, S. V., and Schekochihin, A. A. 2011. Critical balance in magnetohydrody￾namic, rotating and stratified turbulence: Towards a universal scaling conjecture. J.
Fluid Mech., 677, 134–153.
Orszag, S. A. 1970. Analytical theories of turbulence. J. Fluid Mech., 41, 363–386.
Pouquet, A., and Mininni, P. D. 2010. The interplay between helicity and rotation in tur￾bulence: Implications for scaling laws and small-scale dynamics. Phil. Trans. Royal
Soc. London Series A, 368(1916), 1635–1662.
Scott, J. F. 2014. Wave turbulence in a rotating channel. J. Fluid Mech., 741, 316–349.
Semikoz, D. V., and Tkachev, I. I. 1995. Kinetics of Bose condensation. Phys. Rev. Lett.,
74(16), 3093–3097.
Seshasayanan, K., and Alexakis, A. 2018. Condensates in rotating turbulent flows. J. Fluid
Mech., 841, 434–462.
Sharma, M. K., Verma, M. K., and Chakraborty, S. 2018. On the energy spectrum of
rapidly rotating forced turbulence. Phys. Fluids, 30(11), 115102.
Smith, L. M., and Waleffe, F. 1999. Transfer of energy to two-dimensional large scales in
forced, rotating three-dimensional turbulence. Phys. Fluids, 11(6), 1608–1622.178 6 Inertial Wave Turbulence
Smith, L. M., Chasnov, J. R., and Waleffe, F. 1996. Crossover from two- to three￾dimensional turbulence. Phys. Rev. Lett., 77(12), 2467–2470.
Thalabard, S., Nazarenko, S., Galtier, S., and Medvedev, S. 2015. Anomalous spec￾tral laws in differential models of turbulence. J. Physics A Math. General, 48(28),
285501.
Turner, L. 2000. Using helicity to characterize homogeneous and inhomogeneous turbu￾lent dynamics. J. Fluid Mech., 408(1), 205–238.
van Bokhoven, L. J. A., Clercx, H. J. H., van Heijst, G. J. F., and Trieling, R. R. 2009.
Experiments on rapidly rotating turbulent flows. Phys. Fluids, 21(9), 096601.
Waleffe, F. 1992. The nature of triad interactions in homogeneous turbulence. Phys. Fluids
A, 4(2), 350–363.
Yarom, E., and Sharon, E. 2014. Experimental observation of steady inertial wave
turbulence in deep rotating flows. Nature Physics, 10(7), 510–514.
Yokoyama, N., and Takaoka, M. 2021. Energy-flux vector in anisotropic turbulence:
Application to rotating turbulence. J. Fluid Mech., 908, A17.
Zeman, O. 1994. A note on the spectra and decay of rotating homogeneous turbulence.
Phys. Fluids, 6(10), 3221–3223.
Zhou, Ye. 1995. A phenomenological treatment of rotating turbulence. Phys. Fluids, 7(8),
2092–2094.7
Alfvén Wave Turbulence
Magnetohydrodynamics (MHD) is the study of the magnetic properties and
behavior of electrically conducting fluids. It is an extension of hydrodynamics
that couples the Navier–Stokes equations and Maxwell electrodynamics. MHD
fluids are essentially of two kinds: on the one hand, there are liquid metals such
as sodium, used, for example, in laboratory experiments to study the mechanism
of generation of the magnetic field – the dynamo effect – which occurs naturally
in the heart of our planet via the turbulent movements of liquid iron; on the other
hand, there are partially ionized gases – called plasmas – whose properties differ
deeply from those of neutral gases.
MHD is primarily used in astrophysics because about 99 percent of the visible
matter in the Universe consists of plasma. There are many examples of applica￾tions: planetary magnetospheres, the Sun, stars, solar and stellar winds, interstellar
clouds, accretion disks, and galaxies. Most of these media are very turbulent, with,
in the case of the interstellar medium, a turbulent Mach number often of several
dozen (see Chapter 2). Controlled thermonuclear fusion is the second-best-known
field of application of MHD, with the famous ITER (International Thermonuclear
Experimental Reactor) reactor in Cadarache. Indeed, the control of a magnetically
confined plasma requires an understanding of large-scale equilibria and the solu￾tion of stability problems whose theoretical framework is basically MHD. Here,
turbulence is also detected, but by nature it is inhomogeneous and non-MHD.
Tokamak turbulence is, however, considered harmful because it is an obstacle to
plasma confinement (Fujisawa, 2021).
Incompressible MHD waves – called Alfvén waves – play an important role
in many processes because they are carried by the large-scale magnetic field that
structures the medium. Figure 7.1 displays solar coronal loops: these structures
are interpreted as magnetic loops along which Alfvén waves propagate and where
the regime of Alfvén wave turbulence is expected. The objective of this chapter
is to give the main properties of Alfvén wave turbulence, which bears a certain
resemblance to inertial wave turbulence (Chapter 6) with a strongly anisotropic
179180 7 Alfvén Wave Turbulence
Figure 7.1 Coronal loops along which Alfvén waves propagate. Observation made on
June 6, 1999 at the wavelength 17.1 nm by the TRACE/NASA space telescope. Credits:
M. Aschwanden et al. (LMSAL), TRACE, NASA.
dynamics. Some properties of incompressible MHD will be exposed, including the
critical balance phenomenology that describes the strong wave turbulence regime.
We will assume the reader is familiar with the MHD equations; otherwise, we
recommend reading Galtier (2016), where the same notations are used.
7.1 Incompressible MHD
We will consider the incompressible MHD equations. In this case, the mass den￾sity ρ0 is constant and the magnetic field B can be expressed dimensionally as a
velocity field b with the normalization b = B/
√µ0ρ0 (µ0 is the magnetic per￾meability of vacuum). The MHD equations are then written as (Alfvén, 1942):1
∇ · u = 0 , (7.1a)
∂u
∂t
+ u · ∇u = −∇P∗ + b · ∇b + ν1u , (7.1b)
∂b
∂t
+ u · ∇b = b · ∇u + η1b , (7.1c)
1 The MHD theory was proposed by the Swedish astrophysicist H. Alfvén, who received the Nobel Prize in
Physics in 1970 “for fundamental works and discoveries in magnetohydrodynamics with fruitful applications
in different parts of plasma physics.”7.2 Strong Alfvén Wave Turbulence 181
∇ · b = 0 , (7.1d)
with u the velocity, P∗ = P/ρ0 + b
2
/2 the total pressure, ν the kinematic vis￾cosity, and η the magnetic diffusivity. The induction equation (7.1c) is obtained
from Maxwell’s equations and Ohm’s law; it reflects the dynamics of the magnetic
field when the plasma behaves like a monofluid within a nonrelativistic limit. This
MHD approximation implies, in particular, plasma electroneutrality. We can refine
the description by adding, for example, the Hall term in expression (7.1c) in order
to take into account the decoupling between the ions and the electrons: we then
obtain Hall MHD (see Chapter 8).
MHD turbulence is characterized by two dimensionless numbers, the classical
(kinetic) Reynolds number, Re, and the magnetic Reynolds number, Rm, such that:
Re =
UL
ν
, Rm =
UL
η
, (7.2)
where U and L are characteristic velocity and macroscopic lengths of the fluid.
These numbers are naturally very high in astrophysical media, as we can see in
Figure 7.2.
7.2 Strong Alfvén Wave Turbulence
7.2.1 Alfvén Wave Packets
Most astrophysical plasmas evolve in media structured on a large scale by a
magnetic field. The solar wind plasma illustrates this situation well, since on
Figure 7.2 Kinetic (Re) and magnetic (Rm) Reynolds numbers for different media.
Diagonals correspond to constant magnetic Prandtl numbers Pm = ν/η.182 7 Alfvén Wave Turbulence
average the interplanetary magnetic field forms a spiral (called Parker’s spiral)
with an amplitude of the order of fluctuations (see Chapter 8). The Sun with its
numerous coronal loops (see Figure 7.1), is another example: in this case, the
large-scale magnetic field along the loops is significantly more intense than the
fluctuations.
It is legitimate to ask whether MHD turbulence behaves in the same way paral￾lel and perpendicular to a uniform magnetic field b0. Theoretical, numerical, and
observational analyses show that this is not the case: MHD turbulence becomes
anisotropic with a reduction of the cascade along the direction of b0 (see Section
7.4.2). It is therefore fundamental – even phenomenological – to make this dis￾tinction in our analysis of MHD turbulence. In this section, we present a model
that accounts for this dynamics when b0 is moderate: it is the critical balance phe￾nomenology proposed by Goldreich and Sridhar (1995) on the basis of a previous
study by Higdon (1984) (see Oughton and Matthaeus, 2020, for a critical review
on the subject). Basically, it is a phenomenology of strong MHD wave turbulence.
Let us note that Phillips (1958) had already proposed a similar conjecture (the
author speaks of “equilibrium interval”) in the framework of strong gravity wave
turbulence.
To introduce this phenomenology, we will write the incompressible MHD
equations using Elsässer’s variables z
± ≡ u ± b (Elsässer, 1950) and introduce a
uniform magnetic field b0. One obtains (with ν = η = 0):
∇ · z
± = 0 , (7.3a)
∂z
±
∂t
∓ b0 · ∇z
± = −∇P∗ − z
∓
· ∇z
±
. (7.3b)
In this form, MHD equations appear compact and symmetrical. We can immedi￾ately see that the linear resolution of these incompressible MHD equations leads
to the dispersion relationship for Alfvén waves:
ω
2
k = (k · b0)
2
. (7.4)
We notice that if the field z
+ = 0, the field z
− is an exact nonlinear solution of
the MHD equations (at ν = η = 0), since in this case:
∂z
−
∂t
+ b0 · ∇z
− = 0 . (7.5)
Note that the total pressure is absent because the application of the null divergence
condition on the MHD equations shows that P∗ is proportional to the nonlinear
term. Equation (7.5) is interpreted as an Alfvén wave packet z
− propagating along
the uniform magnetic field b0, at a speed b0, without deformation. This reasoning
is also valid for z
− = 0 with, in this case, an Alfvén wave packet z
+ propagat￾ing in the opposite direction. Therefore, the z
± fields can be interpreted as Alfvén
wave packets propagating in opposite directions (see Figure 7.3) and which are7.2 Strong Alfvén Wave Turbulence 183
Figure 7.3 Propagation of two Alfvén wave packets along a quasi-uniform magnetic field
that defines the parallel direction.
deformed nonlinearly when they collide. Here we touch a fundamental physical
property of MHD turbulence: it is the collisions between Alfvén wave packets
z
+ and z
− and their successive deformations that produce a cascade. This colli￾sion property is intrinsically linked to the nondispersive nature of Alfvén waves:
two waves that follow each other will never catch up and will therefore not suf￾fer any nonlinear deformation. Note that the nonlinear interaction between two
counter-propagating Alfvén waves has been measured experimentally by Drake
et al. (2013), while the first clear experimental detection of an Alfvén wave was
realized in 1959 (Allen et al., 1959). We will come back in Section 7.3.1 to this
aspect in Alfvén wave turbulence where successive collisions play a fundamental
role in the cascade process.
7.2.2 Critical Balance Phenomenology
With the linear term in the left-hand side of equation (7.3b), a new characteristic
time appears; it is the Alfvén time:
τA ∼
`k
b0
, (7.6)
which can be interpreted as the collision time of two wave packets z
+ and z
− of
length `k (see Figure 7.3). Hereafter, we will assume, to simplify, that MHD turbu￾lence is balanced and that z
+ ∼ z
− ∼ z. The original idea of critical balance is that
in the inertial range a natural equilibrium is established between the linear term
that carries the Alfvén wave packet and the nonlinear term which corresponds to
its deformation by collision, whatever the scale ` considered. In other words, it
means that the Alfvén time τA balances with the nonlinear time τNL:
τA ∼ τNL , (7.7)
and that a significant transfer is achieved after a single collision. With the
introduction of anisotropy, the nonlinear time becomes:
τNL ∼
`⊥
z`
. (7.8)
This means that we consider that the cascade is preferentially in the perpendicular
direction. From this new definition and relation (7.7), we get:184 7 Alfvén Wave Turbulence
log E
log k
E(k )
E(k )
log k
log k
log k
k
Figure 7.4 The critical balance relationship (7.12) can be obtained from the perpen￾dicular and parallel energy spectra (top). There are two wavenumbers that correspond
to each value of energy. Relation (7.12) emerges when these pairs of points are plotted
(bottom) – see Bigot et al. (2008b). Reprinted with permission (Galtier, 2016).
z` ∼ b0
`⊥
`k
. (7.9)
Insofar as there is a balance between the only two times available, the phenome￾nology is reduced to that of Kolmogorov, and one obtains classically:
ε ∼
E`
τNL
∼
z
3
`
`⊥
. (7.10)
The spectrum of critical balance can be deduced directly; it can be written:
E(k⊥) ∼ k
−5/3
⊥
. (7.11)
The combination of relations (7.9) and (7.10) finally gives the scaling relation for
the critical balance (Goldreich and Sridhar, 1995):
`k ∼

b0
ε
1/3

`
2/3
⊥ ∼ `
1/3
0
`
2/3
⊥
, (7.12)
with `0 the (isotropic) injection scale of energy.
Relation (7.12) expresses the fact that the MHD cascade develops preferen￾tially – but not exclusively – in the transverse direction to the magnetic field b07.3 Phenomenology of Wave Turbulence 185
and that this turbulence is more anisotropic at small scales, as shown schematically
in Figure 7.4. In practice, the difficulty lies in determining the parallel direction,
which may vary slightly depending on the scale on which one is standing. How￾ever, we can show by direct numerical simulations that when b0 is at least three
times greater than the fluctuations, this variation is negligible (Bigot et al., 2008c).
The conjecture of critical balance was verified by direct numerical simulations
(Cho and Vishniac, 2000; Bigot et al., 2008c; Beresnyak, 2011). From the obser￾vational point of view, its verification is more difficult for technical reasons: it
requires measurement of the plasma in several directions at the same time, which
is only possible if we have several satellites at our disposal (Osman et al., 2011;
see, however, Luo and Wu, 2010). The critical balance spectrum is in principle
easier to check since one can concentrate on a single transverse direction. In
practice, the measurements of the solar wind magnetic field at 1 AU show good
agreement with this prediction (see Figure 8.2); however, the velocity fluctuations
follow a −3/2 exponent power law (Podesta et al., 2007).
To conclude, one can note that the critical balance conjecture has been extended
to sub-MHD scales within the electron MHD approximation. It leads to the rela￾tion `k ∼ `
1/3
⊥
(see Chapter 8). Note that the critical balance is also mentioned in
rotating turbulence (Chapter 6) and for gravitational wave turbulence (Chapter 9).
In the first case, the critical balance regime is supposed to appear at the smallest
scales of the system after a weak turbulence direct cascade of energy, while in the
second case it is expected to appear at the largest scales of the system after a weak
turbulence inverse cascade of wave action.
7.3 Phenomenology of Wave Turbulence
7.3.1 Iroshnikov–Kraichnan Isotropic Spectrum
The discussion on Alfvén wave packets leads us to introduce one of the major
ideas of MHD turbulence: the (IK) phenomenology proposed independently by
Iroshnikov (1964) and Kraichnan (1965). This approach is interesting for this part
of the book, since the ideas that emerged from this phenomenology date from
the incubation period of the wave turbulence theory (see Chapter 4). They have
contributed to a better understanding of the physics of wave turbulence in the case
of triadic interactions.
The major difference between hydrodynamics and incompressible MHD is the
presence of waves in the latter. To these waves, we can associate an Alfvén time,
τA, which characterizes the interaction time – that is, the collision time – between
two wave packets. If these two packets have a typical length ` (isotropic turbulence
is assumed), then:
τA ∼
`
b0
∼
1
ωk
, (7.13)186 7 Alfvén Wave Turbulence
where b0 is the Alfvén (group) velocity. Even if this hypothesis of isotropy is not
physically justified, it will allow us in a first step to simplify the analysis. The main
idea of IK’s phenomenology is that at each scale of the inertial range the structures
see locally a uniform magnetic field, even if there is no uniform magnetic field at
large scales. In other words, even if the medium is isotropic, at the turbulent scales
of the inertial range we will consider that the physics is governed by the process
described in Figure 7.3. Using this approach, the collision between Alfvén wave
packets becomes the central element in the analysis of MHD turbulence: it is the
multiplicity of collisions that deforms the wave packets and finally transfers the
energy from the large scales to smaller ones.
We will place ourselves in the balanced situation where z
+ ∼ z
− ∼ z, that is,
when the waves propagating in opposite directions are approximately balanced.
Therefore:
ε ∼
z
2
`
τtr
, (7.14)
where ε is the mean rate of energy transfer in the inertial range (at scale `) and
τtr is the associated transfer time. In the process we describe, turbulence is sup￾posed to develop as the result of a large number of stochastic collisions between
wave packets. Moreover, at a scale ` in the inertial range, the locally uniform mag￾netic field is assumed to be significantly larger than the magnetic fluctuations. The
more intense the field, the shorter the duration of the collision, and the weaker the
associated deformation will be. Therefore, the number of collisions required to
produce a cascade must increase with the intensity of the field b0. So in strong
field, we have τtr  τA. To estimate the transfer time, let us first evaluate the defor￾mation of a wave packet at scale ` produced by a single collision. By placing
ourselves on the wave packet, we have:
z`(t + τA) ∼ z`(t) + τA
∂z`
∂t
∼ z`(t) + τA
z
2
`
`
. (7.15)
The deformation of the wave packet for one collision is therefore estimated at:
11z` ∼ τA
z
2
`
`
. (7.16)
This deformation will increase with time and for N stochastic collisions the
cumulative effect can be evaluated in the same way as a random walk:
X
N
i=1
1iz` ∼ τA
z
2
`
`
r
t
τA
. (7.17)
The transfer time we are looking for is the one from which the cumulative
deformation is of order one, that is, of the wave packet itself:
z` ∼
X
N
1
1iz` ∼ τA
z
2
`
`
r
τtr
τA
. (7.18)7.3 Phenomenology of Wave Turbulence 187
Then, we obtain:
τtr ∼
1
τA
`
2
z
2
`
∼
τ
2
NL
τA
∼ ωτ 2
NL , (7.19)
where τNL is the nonlinear time that emerges from the MHD equations (which is
similar to that of hydrodynamics). We see here for the first time a phenomenologi￾cal justification of the cascade time expression used for turbulence of capillary and
inertial waves: it is the angular frequency of the wave weighted by the square of
nonlinear time. Note that if we take as reference the collision time τA and introduce
the small parameter  ∼ τA/τNL, we come to the expression:
τtr ∼ 
−2
τA . (7.20)
This characteristic time now shows the small parameter on which the development
of the wave turbulence is realized. By adapting the writing, this expression is
generalized to all triadic problems (see Chapter 4).
All that remains is to complete the calculation using expression (7.14);
assuming E(k) ∼ E
±(k), we get:
ε ∼
z
2
`
ωτ 2
NL
∼
z
4
`
`b0
∼
E
2
(k)k
3
b0
, (7.21)
hence the one-dimensional isotropic Iroshnikov–Kraichnan (IK) spectrum of wave
turbulence:
E(k) = CIKp
εb0 k
−3/2
, (7.22)
with CIK a constant of the order of unity. The isotropic IK prediction thus differs
from that of Kolmogorov, with a slightly less steep spectrum. It is interesting to
note that in this approach the transfer time is longer than in hydrodynamics (we
assume τA  τNL). Physically, it is the fact of having sporadic collisions between
wave packets – and not continuous interactions between eddies – that explains
phenomenologically the slowdown of energy transfer to small scales. This slowing
down is observed, for example, in direct numerical simulations where the free
decay of energy is clearly slower in MHD than in hydrodynamics (Biskamp and
Welter, 1989; Kinney et al., 1995; Galtier et al., 1997; Bigot et al., 2008c). This
decay is of course related to the dissipation, whose efficiency weakens when the
cascade process slows down.
Today, the IK spectrum is still under discussion. For example, in situ measure￾ments made in the solar wind (see Figure 8.2) at one astronomical unit show a
power-law spectrum in −5/3 for the magnetic field fluctuations while it is in −3/2
for the velocity.2 However, these properties may depend, on the one hand, on the
heliocentric distance because of the expansion of the wind (Verdini and Grappin,
2 Note that turbulence in liquid metals is characterized by kinetic energy spectra close to k
−5/3 over more than
three decades (Crémer and Alemany, 1981).188 7 Alfvén Wave Turbulence
2015) and, on the other hand, on the wave character of the turbulence, which is
probably more pronounced near the Sun where the magnetic field is stronger. In
general, it is the critical balance of strong wave turbulence that is used to describe
the solar wind at MHD scales for which a k
−5/3
⊥
is predicted. As far as direct
numerical simulation is concerned, the question of the spectral exponent is not
yet decided, because the small difference between the IK and Kolmogorov predic￾tions requires a wide inertial range (at least two decades) to conclude (Beresnyak,
2011). Note that the situation is different at subionic scales where the prediction
of wave turbulence is in relatively good agreement with the solar wind data (see
Chapter 8).
7.3.2 Anisotropic Spectrum
We have just seen that IK’s phenomenology leads to an isotropic spectrum in k
−3/2
.
In this approach, we have assumed the existence, locally, of a uniform magnetic
field to justify the notion of Alfvén wave packet. As shown, for example, in direct
numerical simulations (Oughton et al., 1994; Müller et al., 2003; Bigot et al.,
2008b; Teaca et al., 2009), the presence of a uniform magnetic field is a source
of anisotropy with a cascade limited to the perpendicular direction, which con￾tradicts the hypothesis of isotropy.3 We are here in a situation similar to that of
hydrodynamics under rotation (Chapter 6). Let us take up again this IK phenom￾enology by incorporating anisotropy through the wavenumbers k⊥ and kk. In the
simple case where the Alfvén wave packets are balanced (z
+ ∼ z
− ∼ z), we obtain
for the transfer time:
τtr ∼ ωτ 2
NL ∼
(`⊥/z`)
2
`k/b0
∼
kkb0
k
2
⊥
z
2
`
. (7.23)
We deduce from this:
ε ∼
z
2
`
τtr
∼
k
2
⊥
z
4
`
kkb0
∼
k
2
⊥
(E(k⊥, kk)k⊥kk)
2
kkb0
∼
k
4
⊥
kkE
2
(k⊥, kk)
b0
, (7.24)
hence the two-dimensional anisotropic (axisymmetric) spectrum:
E(k⊥, kk) ∼
p
εb0 k
−2
⊥
k
−1/2
k
. (7.25)
This anisotropic MHD spectrum is therefore the result of the cumulative effect
of collisions of Alfvén wave packets propagating in opposite directions. It was
first proposed by Ng and Bhattacharjee (1997). Phenomenology finds here its lim￾its insofar as the dependence in kk is only apparent: indeed, we can demonstrate
analytically that the nonlinear transfer (the cascade) is totally frozen along the b0
magnetic field. We will see in Section 7.4.3 that the spectral prediction on k
−2
⊥
is
3 MHD equations are invariant by Galilean transformation on a uniform velocity field, but not on a uniform
magnetic field b0 = b0ek (with |ek| = 1). The observed anisotropy can be seen as a consequence of this
property.7.4 Theory of Alfvén Wave Turbulence 189
in fact an exact solution of Alfvén wave turbulence. These two results are part of
the theory published by Galtier et al. (2000).
7.4 Theory of Alfvén Wave Turbulence
7.4.1 Canonical Variables
Let us go back to the MHD equations (with ν = η = 0), and use the directional
polarization s = ±; we get:
∂z
s
∂t
− sb0 · ∇z
s = −z
−s
· ∇z
s − ∇P∗ , (7.26a)
∇ · z
s = 0 . (7.26b)
The direction of the uniform magnetic field b0 defines the parallel direction. The
Fourier transform (by component) of the Elsässer field is introduced:
z
s
j
(x, t) ≡
Z
R3
A
s
j
(k, t) e
ik·x
dk , (7.27)
as well as the decomposition:
A
s
j
(k, t) ≡ a
s
j
(k, t)e
−isωk t
, (7.28)
with ωk ≡ kkb0 and 0 <   1. The introduction of the variable a
s
j
allows us to
place ourselves directly on an Alfvén wave packet and to follow its slow evolution
over time whose origin is purely nonlinear. By applying the Fourier transform on
expression (7.26a), we obtain the exact relation, whatever the value of :
∂a
s
j
(k)
∂t
= −ikmPjn Z
R6
a
−s
m
(q) a
s
n
(p) e
is(ωk−ωp+ωq)t
δ(k − p − q) dpdq , (7.29)
where Pjn(k) ≡ δjn − kjkn/k
2
is the projection operator which ensures that the
incompressibility condition (7.26b) is satisfied. Note that obtaining expression
(7.29) requires writing the total pressure as a function of Elsässer’s variables
beforehand. This is possible by applying the divergence operator to equation
(7.26a); one obtains the relation:
1P∗ = −∇ · (z
−s
· ∇z
s
) . (7.30)
Expression (7.29) represents the MHD equations in Fourier space in the pres￾ence of a uniform magnetic field. It is the starting point for the analytical
development of wave turbulence. We see that the Elsässer variables are the canon￾ical variables of the problem, since they directly lead to the classical form with
a relatively simple interaction coefficient which is, here, essentially made up of
the projection operator. Since only the counter-propagating Alfvén wave packets190 7 Alfvén Wave Turbulence
give a nonlinear contribution, the sum on the directional polarities is reduced to a
unique combination involving only the s polarity.
7.4.2 Resonance Condition
Equation (7.29) shows the resonance condition:

ωk = ωp − ωq ,
k = p + q ,
(7.31)
which can be rewritten for its parallel part:
kk = pk ± qk . (7.32)
Therefore, the only possible solution is:
qk = 0 and kk = pk . (7.33)
This condition implies the absence of coupling between wavenumbers in the par￾allel direction when equation (7.29) is solved (a mode coupling is only possible
if the sum implies several modes). Therefore, no transfer along the b0 field is
expected in this problem and the cascade is only in the perpendicular direction.
Alfvén wave turbulence is thus even more anisotropic than that of inertial waves,
a problem in which the transfer parallel to the axis of rotation is weak, but not
totally inhibited.
The anisotropic character of MHD turbulence in a strong magnetic field was
discussed in detail for the first time by Montgomery and Turner (1981). This
theoretical study was based, in particular, on measurements made in magnetic con￾finement experiments (z-pinch or tokamak type) (Robinson and Rusbridge, 1971;
Zweben et al., 1979), where it was possible to highlight an important difference
between the correlation length along the mean field and those in the transverse
directions, the former being greater than the latter two, fluctuations of the mag￾netic field in the transverse direction being always dominant. In the theoretical
work of Montgomery and Turner (1981) the resonance condition is, evoked but
it is really with Shebalin et al. (1983) that the analysis presented above, based on
wave turbulence, was proposed for the first time to explain the results of direct
numerical simulation of two-dimensional MHD turbulence in a strong magnetic
field.
It is interesting to mention that at the end of the 1980s there was some confusion
about the nature of MHD turbulence, because the Alfvén-based IK phenomenol￾ogy had a fault: it did not take anisotropy into account. Wave turbulence theory
could provide a rigorous answer, but the first attempt by Sridhar and Goldreich
(1994) proved to be erroneous. The error comes from the fact that the authors
considered that the fluctuations associated with the (slow) mode qk = 0 solu￾tion of the resonance condition had no energy, since they were not wavelike in7.4 Theory of Alfvén Wave Turbulence 191
nature. The authors therefore proposed a four-wave theory; at the same time they
questioned the IK phenomenology based on triadic interactions. After strong crit￾icisms (Montgomery and Matthaeus, 1995; Ng and Bhattacharjee, 1996; Chen
and Kraichnan, 1997) explaining why, in particular, the slow mode could contain
energy (such as in rotating hydrodynamics; see Chapter 6), the analytical theory of
Alfvén wave turbulence was finally published by Galtier et al. (2000). The impor￾tance of this paper goes far beyond the resolution of a classical wave turbulence
problem: the theory is demonstrated for three-wave interactions, which conse￾quently validates IK’s triadic approach and clarifies the nature of MHD turbulence
(see also Lithwick and Goldreich, 2003).
7.4.3 Kinetic Equations
The formalism of wave turbulence applies in a classical way to equation (7.29).
Note that the simplified derivation of Galtier et al. (2002) allows us to arrive at the
result more quickly. The kinetic equations take the following form:
∂e
s
(k)
∂t
=
π2
b0
Z
R6
(k⊥ · p⊥)
2
(k × q)
2
k
k
2
⊥
p
2
⊥
q
2
⊥
e
−s
(q) (7.34)
× [e
s
(p) − e
s
(k)] δ(qk) δ(k − p − q) dpdq ,
where e
s
(k) is the energy spectrum associated with shear-Alfvén waves. These
waves correspond to the transverse part of the Elsässer fields. The waves asso￾ciated with the parallel part are called pseudo-Alfvén waves: their dynamics is
enslaved to shear-Alfvén waves, and they can therefore be forgotten, to lighten
the calculations.4
We introduce the reduced axisymmetric spectrum E
s
(k⊥) defined by the
relation:
2πk⊥e
s
(k) ≡ E
s
(k⊥)f (kk) , (7.35)
with f (kk) a function that arbitrarily depends on the parallel wavenumbers. The
introduction of such a dependency in kk is justified by the absence of transfer in
the b0 direction which is mathematically translated by the presence of δ(qk) in the
kinetic equations. In the same way as for capillary wave turbulence, we can then
return to an expression involving only wavenumbers. After simplification, we get:
∂E
s
(k⊥)
∂t
=

2
f (0)
2b0
Z
1⊥
k⊥
q⊥
(cos θq)
2
sin θp E
−s
(q⊥) (7.36)
× [k⊥E
s
(p⊥) − p⊥E
s
(k⊥)] dp⊥dq⊥ ,
4 Pseudo-Alfvén waves are the incompressible limit of the slow magneto-acoustic waves, whereas shear-Alfvén
waves remain unchanged in the compressible case: these are the “true” Alfvén waves.192 7 Alfvén Wave Turbulence
with by definition θp ≡ (k\⊥, q⊥) and θq ≡ (k\⊥, p⊥) the angles in the triangle
k⊥ = p⊥ + q⊥, and 1⊥ the integration band corresponding to this triangle (see
Figure 5.5). The presence of f (0) corresponds to the contribution qk = 0. For the
development of wave turbulence to remain valid, the contribution of f (0) must
remain finite: in other words, in the case of a strong condensation the theory
becomes invalid because the term on the right is no longer in O(
2
) (see discussion
in Section 7.4.4).
The simplest exact solution of the kinetic equations is the one correspond￾ing to zero energy flux. This is the thermodynamic solution (see Chapter 5) for
which:
E
s
(k⊥) ∼ k⊥ . (7.37)
Numerical simulations show that over long times compared to the timescale of
the direct cascade, this solution can appear at the largest scales when the system
is forced at an intermediate scale (Galtier and Nazarenko, 2008). In this case, the
thermodynamic solution can contribute to the slow regeneration of a very large￾scale magnetic field (dynamo effect). One application envisaged by the authors is
the regeneration of the galactic magnetic field.
Figure 7.5 Numerical simulation of the kinetic equations (7.36) in which a dissipative
term corresponding to a Laplacian is introduced. Balanced Alfvén wave turbulence is con￾sidered, with an energy spectrum E(k⊥) initially excited at large scales. The compensation
by the nonstationary solution ∝ k
−7/3
⊥
reveals the transition to the Kolmogorov–Zakharov
spectrum ∝ k
−2
⊥
after a spectral bounce (which is less localized at small scales than for
rotating turbulence (see Chapter 6) where a hyperviscosity is used).7.4 Theory of Alfvén Wave Turbulence 193
The exact constant-flux solution of equation (7.36), with nonzero ε, is:
n+ + n− = −4 , (7.38)
with by definition E
±(k⊥) ∼ k
n±
⊥
. In this case, the convergence condition implies
that:5
− 3 < n± < −1 . (7.39)
For the particular case of a balanced Alfvén wave turbulence, the exact solution is
written (see Figure 7.5):
E
+
(k⊥) = E
−
(k⊥) ≡ E(k⊥) ∼ k
−2
⊥
. (7.40)
We can see that the phenomenology (7.25) predicts well the right spectrum for its
transverse part. However, the theory allows us to go further than the phenomenol￾ogy and to demonstrate that the flux is positive – the cascade is therefore direct.
One can also find the analytical form of the Kolmogorov constant which, in the
balanced case, is:6
CK ' 1.467 . (7.41)
This constant can also be evaluated directly (see Figure 7.6) from the simulation
of the kinetic equation (7.36) and the form of the energy spectrum
E(k⊥) = CK
p
b0εk
−2
⊥
. (7.42)
In this last expression, the small parameter 
2
is absorbed by the time variable
as well as the contribution f (0). The formation of this spectrum from the kinetic
equations is shown in Figure 7.5: a spectrum in k
−2
⊥
appears over approximately
seven decades. Note that the first observational evidence of weak MHD turbu￾lence, which includes this spectrum, was detected in the middle magnetosphere of
Jupiter (Saur et al., 2002).
A last remark is to be made on the condition of validity of this Alfvén wave
turbulence regime. Indeed, this regime is not uniformly valid in Fourier space
because it is conditioned by the inequality:
χ ≡
τA
τNL
 1 , (7.43)
underlying to the asymptotic development. Using the spectrum of balanced
turbulence, this condition can be rewritten:
χ ∼
k⊥z`
kkb0
∼
s
k⊥
kk
 1 . (7.44)
In the absence of a parallel cascade, energy will populate the k⊥ modes more
and more. If the condition on χ is verified initially in a spectral domain, it will
5 Unlike the three-dimensional case discussed here, two-dimensional Alfvén wave turbulence is nonlocal
because the solutions obtained are out of the convergence domain (Tronko et al., 2013).
6 There is a difference (actually a correction) of √
2π with the prediction published by Galtier et al. (2000).194 7 Alfvén Wave Turbulence
Figure 7.6 Numerical estimation of the Kolmogorov constant CK from a simulation of the
kinetic equation (7.36). The analytical prediction is obtained with a good approximation.
Insert: time evolution of the mean rate of energy dissipation ε. Its value used to estimate
CK is taken at time t = 2.5.
no longer be in a finite time, since this ratio will grow ∝ k
1/2
⊥ with the cascade.
The turbulence will become strong at small scales when the two characteristic
times become of the same order of magnitude. Then, the regime can be described
by the critical balance phenomenology (Goldreich and Sridhar, 1995), in which
it is assumed that the relation τA ∼ τNL remains true in the inertial range under
consideration. This transition was highlighted clearly for the first time by Meyrand
et al. (2016).
7.4.4 Treatment of the 2D Mode (kk = 0)
The kinetic equations (7.34) show a term e
−s
(q) whose contribution is reduced to
qk = 0 because of the resonance condition. Since this is the slow mode, these fluc￾tuations are not associated with an Alfvén wave and the inequality (7.43) cannot
be verified. How then can this different term be treated?
First of all, there is no reason to think that e
−s
(q⊥, qk = 0) = 0, because low￾frequency fluctuations usually have energy (this is also the case in rotating
hydrodynamics). This means that the dominant interactions in this problem are
indeed triadic. Can we have a strong condensation in kk = 0 that would inval￾idate the analytical approach? This situation cannot be totally excluded, but in
practice it requires very specific conditions. For example, forcing around the slow7.4 Theory of Alfvén Wave Turbulence 195
Figure 7.7 The asymptotic theory of Alfvén wave turbulence is valid in a domain of
k-space where the inequality (7.43) is satisfied; it corresponds to the region kk > α
(with
α > 0). However, the three-wave interactions induce the energy spectrum (schematically
represented by the function f ) of the slow mode (kk = 0). The implicit assumption in
the theory of Alfvén wave turbulence is the smooth behavior of f in the narrow shaded
domain such that f (kk = 
α
) ∼ f (kk = 0). The opposite situation corresponds to a singular
behavior, which leads to a much higher value of f (kk = 0) (strong condensation) that
could break the asymptotic (at time 
2
t) and make the theory irrelevant.
mode could perhaps cause such condensation. According to the direct numer￾ical simulations of Bigot and Galtier (2011), in which a forcing of the type
E
s
(k⊥, kk) = F(kk)k
3
⊥ was used for the perpendicular and parallel modes 1 and 2,
an increase in energy at kk = 0 was clearly observed. This increase was stronger
for larger b0, however, no strong condensation, that is, a singular tendency to trans￾fer energy to the slow mode, has been observed. Indeed, after a phase of rapid
increase, a saturation was measured. Considering a continuous variation of e
−s
(q)
around the slow mode – without condensation – therefore seems a good hypoth￾esis. From a theoretical point of view, this means that we consider fields whose
correlation decreases with distance in any direction: in this case, e
−s
(q⊥, 0) can
be seen as the limit of e
−s
(q⊥, kk) when qk → 0 and the solutions described given
in Section 7.4.3 (see Figure 7.7). If the fluctuations of the slow mode have their
own dynamics – a possible situation if the associated energy is higher than that of
the waves – kinetic equations can still inform us about solutions. Indeed, equation
(7.38) can always be used with n− the exponent of the slow mode energy spec￾trum. For example, if we assume a Kolmogorovian two-dimensional dynamics
with n− = −5/3, then for the wave energy spectrum we get n+ = −7/3.7 These
questions around condensation have also been discussed in phenomenological and
numerical studies (Boldyrev and Perez, 2009; Wang et al., 2011; Schekochihin
et al., 2012).
7
In two-dimensional MHD, strong turbulence behaves as in the three-dimensional case, with a direct energy
cascade for which a spectrum in −5/3 is a realistic solution.196 7 Alfvén Wave Turbulence
7.4.5 Other Results
We conclude with several remarks. First, like inertial waves, the kinetic equations
(7.36) can be studied in the limited case of local triadic interactions (see Exercise
II.1). We can then show that the nonlinear diffusion equations that emerge are
structurally simpler and have the same solutions as the kinetic equations (Galtier
and Buchlin, 2010). Second, a nonstationary solution was highlighted by a numer￾ical simulation of the kinetic equation in the balanced case (see Figure 7.5). It is
a self-similar solution of the second kind compatible with E(k⊥) ∼ k
−7/3
⊥
(Galtier
et al., 2000). The nature of this solution is identical to that discussed in Chap￾ter 6 on inertial wave turbulence. Third, when the magnetic field b0 is too strong,
Alfvén wave turbulence becomes too weak and a problem of discretization appears
which can modify the dynamics (Nazarenko, 2007).
7.5 Direct Numerical Simulation
Direct numerical simulation has recently made it possible to reproduce the main
properties of Alfvén wave turbulence, including its transition to a small-scale
regime of strong turbulence (Meyrand et al., 2016). A result of such a simulation
is shown in Figure 7.8: the modulus of the magnetic field fluctuations is presented
on a slice perpendicular to b0. Contrary to the case of strong turbulence, we do
not see a hierarchy of coherent structures. This is explained by the phase mixing
induced by b0, which tends to oppose the emergence of structures.
From such a simulation, it is possible to construct the ω–kk spectrum to high￾light the wave character of such a turbulence. The result is shown in Figure 7.9:
we see the two branches of the dispersion relation corresponding to Alfvén waves.
These have a certain thickness, whose origin is attributed to nonlinear effects.
We can observe also the presence of a thick band at low ω: we find there the
contribution of the slow mode.
These numerical studies have highlighted the intermittency nature of Alfvén
wave turbulence (Meyrand et al., 2015). The structure functions used to take into
account the coupling between Alfvénic fluctuations of different polarities are:
Sp = h(δz
+
)
p/2
ih(δz
−
)
p/2
i = Cp`
ζp
⊥
, (7.45)
with Cp a constant. Due to the absence of cascade in the parallel direction, only the
transverse increments (`⊥) are considered. The data verify with a great accuracy
the following law:
ζp =
p
8
+ 1 −

1
4
p/2
. (7.46)
This law has been constructed by adapting the approach of She and Leveque
(1994) to this problem (see Chapter 2) where structures oriented along the external7.6 Application: The Solar Corona 197
Figure 7.8 Three-dimensional direct numerical simulation of Alfvén wave turbulence.
We see here the modulus of magnetic field fluctuations on a slice of spatial resolu￾tion 3072 × 3072 perpendicular to b0. Simulation made by R. Meyrand. Reprinted with
permission (Galtier, 2016).
magnetic field in the form of sheets are present. Figure 7.10 shows these mea￾surements and the correspondence with the theoretical model. The origin of the
intermittency is partly attributed to the slow mode: indeed, the artificial reduction
of the interactions of this mode with Alfvén’s modes reveals a significant reduc￾tion of intermittency (at the PDF level). At the same time, a modification of the
Elsässer spectrum is observed with a power law going from k
−2
⊥
(interaction with
the slow mode) to k
−3/2
⊥
(no interaction) (Meyrand et al., 2015).
7.6 Application: The Solar Corona
The Sun has a strong magnetic activity that can be detected through the appear￾ance of sunspots in the photosphere or flares in the corona. These active regions
are made up of a network of magnetic loops in perpetual reorganization and whose
activity can be measured by emissions in the ultraviolet or X-ray range (Reale,198 7 Alfvén Wave Turbulence
Figure 7.9 Normalized ω–kk spectrum built from magnetic energy fluctuations at k⊥ = 4.
Simulation made by R. Meyrand.
Figure 7.10 Measurements of the ζp coefficients of the structure functions (7.45) realized
from a direct numerical simulation show a good agreement with the law (7.46) in solid
line. Adapted from Meyrand et al. (2015).
2014). Space telescopes or imagers such as SDO/NASA allow us to follow this
activity, but the current instruments are not yet able to resolve coronal loops at
more than one million degrees and whose thickness is probably less than one kilo￾meter (see Figure 7.1). The coronal temperature is very inhomogeneous: between
the quiet and active regions there is nearly a factor of ten. A major problem in solar
physics is to understand why such a high temperature is measured in the corona7.6 Application: The Solar Corona 199
even though the photosphere, at a lower altitude, is at ' 6400 K. The energy avail￾able at the surface of the Sun seems to be largely sufficient to compensate for the
loss of coronal energy, estimated at about 104
Jm−2
s
−1
in active regions, and about
one or even two orders of magnitude lower for the quiet corona or coronal holes,
which are located essentially at the poles. The main problem is to understand how
this energy available on the surface of the Sun is deposited at the corona and then
finally released to heat the plasma (Priest, 2014).
Spectrometric analyses of coronal loops in active regions reveal plasma move￾ments at several tens of km/s (Brekke et al., 1997), with nonthermal velocities up
to 30 km/s (Chae et al., 1998). These observations, made with the SOHO/ESA sat￾ellite, show, moreover, that the widening of the spectral lines is due to motions at
very small spatial and temporal scales that are not resolved by the instruments (of
the order of a second for the temporal resolution). The ubiquity of Alfvén waves
was also highlighted by measurements made from the Hinode/JAXA satellite (De
Pontieu et al., 2007). These various observations constitute a bundle of clues that
pleads in favor of a turbulent description of the coronal plasma in which Alf￾vén waves play an important role (Matthaeus and Velli, 2011; Pontin and Hornig,
2020).
At lower altitudes, at the level of the photosphere, it is possible to accurately
measure (Zeeman effect) the magnetic field component transverse to the surface
of the Sun. Based on two-dimensional magnetic maps of active regions, structure
functions and spectra can be calculated. In this case, it is the correlation in the
perpendicular direction (k⊥ for the spectrum) that is available. Studies show spec￾tra compatible with wave turbulence predictions, especially during a flare, that is,
in a phase of high light emission caused by an increase in heating. The spectrum,
which is close to −5/3 in a quiet phase, becomes much steeper during a flare
with exponents generally between −2 and −2.3 (Abramenko, 2005; Hewett et al.,
2008; Mandage and McAteer, 2016).
In the scenario of a coronal heating by MHD turbulence, the energy transport
to the corona is done via Alfvén waves excited at the photospheric level.8 This
forcing is in fact produced by the convective movements of the plasma that can be
observed at the surface of the Sun in the form of granulation. As shown in Figure
7.11, the energy transported by Alfvén wave packets cascades to small scales due
to the numerous collisions between contra-propagating wave packets. In the end,
an intermittent heating is produced. Thermodynamics then allows us to make the
link between heating and cooling, by conduction and radiation.
Many models have been published on the subject. The first ones hypothesized
an isotropic turbulence (Heyvaerts and Priest, 1992), then anisotropy was intro￾duced with a numerical modeling in different dimensions (Einaudi et al., 1996;
Hendrix and van Hoven, 1996; Galtier and Pouquet, 1998; Walsh and Galtier,
8 The problem of solar coronal heating is sufficiently complex to make room for several other scenarios, such
as the phase mixing mechanism proposed by Heyvaerts and Priest (1983).200 7 Alfvén Wave Turbulence
Figure 7.11 Heating of a magnetic loop by Alfvén wave turbulence. The coronal loop
can act as a resonant cavity for the Alfvén wave packets generated in the photosphere.
The direct cascade produced by the numerous collisions between contra-propagating wave
packets eventually leads to a plasma heating. Reprinted with permission (Galtier, 2016).
2000; Buchlin et al., 2003; Gudiksen and Nordlund, 2005; Buchlin and Velli,
2007; Cranmer et al., 2007). The Alfvén wave turbulence regime was then studied
by Rappazzo et al. (2007), and on the basis of the isotropic analytical model of
Heyvaerts and Priest (1992), an anisotropic version has been proposed by Bigot
et al. (2008a) in which the coronal heating is estimated from the turbulent vis￾cosities deduced from the Alfvén wave turbulence kinetic equations (7.36). In this
case, the heating rate obtained proves to be high enough to explain the coronal
observations. This heating rate (integrated along the loop) is written (in IS units):
ε⊥ ∼ 103

L
106
2/3
 u
103
4/3

B0
10−2
5/3
 ρ0
10−12 1/6
Jm−2
s
−1
, (7.47)
where L is the diameter of the coronal loop, u the photospheric velocity of the foot￾points of the loop (forcing velocity), B0 the coronal magnetic field and ρ0 the mass
density in the corona. This prediction is comparable to the one made by Heyvaerts
and Priest (1992) for the strong turbulence regime. Therefore, the reduction of the
cascade to two directions does not fundamentally change the heating produced.
7.7 Perspectives
An important question concerns the physics of the solar wind near the Sun. The
two new probes Parker Solar Probe (NASA) and Solar Orbiter (ESA), launched
in 2018 and 2020 respectively, aim, among other things, to measure the turbulent
properties of the solar wind at the intersection with the low solar corona (as close
as 10 solar radii). We can expect that the wave aspect of the wind will be more pro￾nounced near the Sun since the magnetic field is more intense there, and that the
properties differ from those measured essentially at one astronomical unit (BaleReferences 201
et al., 2019). Interesting new questions will have to be tackled, such as, for exam￾ple, on physics at electron scales (so beyond the MHD approximation but still in
the incompressible limit), taking into account electron inertia (Roytershteyn et al.,
2019). Wave turbulence is a solid approach to address this issue (see Chapter 8).
A second interesting perspective concerns MHD turbulence subject to uniform
rotation. This regime is relevant in the context of the geodynamo, where the Corio￾lis force plays a central role: the Rossby number is indeed of the order of 10−6
(see
Chapter 6). The liquid metal of the Earth’s outer core must therefore be described
by incompressible MHD under rapid rotation. This turbulence has been little stud￾ied so far (Favier et al., 2012), because in general the emphasis is on convection.
Rotating MHD in the presence of a uniform magnetic field generally has only one
invariant, the total energy: indeed, cross-helicity and magnetic helicity, the two
other invariants of standard MHD, lose their invariant status because of the rota￾tion and the uniform magnetic field, respectively. However, in the particular case
where the axis of rotation is parallel to the uniform magnetic field, a second invari￾ant appears: hybrid helicity, a combination of cross-helicity and magnetic helicity.
The strong wave turbulence regime has been recently studied using direct numeri￾cal simulation (Menu et al., 2019). It is interesting to note that the inverse cascade
of the magnetic field is relatively large precisely when the axis of rotation is par￾allel (or almost) to the uniform field. This is the situation observed for the Earth:
the angle between the two axes is nonzero but small – about 10o
. Understanding
this regime requires further studies according to the available parameters (e.g. the
magnetic Prandtl number). Note that this theory of wave turbulence has been pub￾lished by Galtier (2014) and numerically simulated by Bell and Nazarenko (2019).
As is very often the case, these results can be used as a guide to better understand
the regime of strong wave turbulence.
References
Abramenko, V. I. 2005. Relationship between magnetic power spectrum and flare
productivity in solar active regions. Astrophys. J., 629(2), 1141–1149.
Alfvén, H. 1942. Existence of electromagnetic-hydrodynamic waves. Nature, 150, 405–
406.
Allen, T. K., Baker, W. R., Pyle, R. V., and Wilcox, J. M. 1959. Experimental generation
of plasma Alfvén waves. Phys. Rev. Lett., 2, 383–384.
Bale, S. D., Badman, S. T., Bonnell, J. W. et al. 2019. Highly structured slow solar wind
emerging from an equatorial coronal hole. Nature, 576(7786), 237–242.
Bell, N. K., and Nazarenko, S. V. 2019. Rotating magnetohydrodynamic turbulence. J.
Phys. A: Math. Theo., 52(44), 445501.
Beresnyak, A. 2011. Spectral slope and Kolmogorov constant of MHD turbulence. Phys.
Rev. Lett., 106, 075001.
Bigot, B., and Galtier, S. 2011. Two-dimensional state in driven magnetohydrodynamic
turbulence. Phys. Rev. E, 83(2), 026405.
Bigot, B., Galtier, S., and Politano, H. 2008a. An anisotropic turbulent model for solar
coronal heating. Astron. Astrophys., 490, 325–337.202 7 Alfvén Wave Turbulence
Bigot, B., Galtier, S., and Politano, H. 2008b. Development of anisotropy in incompressi￾ble magnetohydrodynamic turbulence. Phys. Rev. E, 78(6), 066301.
Bigot, B., Galtier, S., and Politano, H. 2008c. Energy decay laws in strongly anisotropic
magnetohydrodynamic turbulence. Phys. Rev. Lett., 100(7), 074502.
Biskamp, D., and Welter, H. 1989. Dynamics of decaying two-dimensional magnetohy￾drodynamic turbulence. Phys. of Fluids B, 1(10), 1964–1979.
Boldyrev, S., and Perez, J. C. 2009. Spectrum of weak magnetohydrodynamic turbulence.
Phys. Rev. Lett., 103(22), 225001.
Brekke, P., Kjeldseth-Moe, O., and Harrison, R. A. 1997. High-velocity flows in an active
region loop system observed with the coronal diagnostic spectrometer on SOHO.
Sol. Phys., 175, 511–521.
Buchlin, E., and Velli, M. 2007. Shell models of RMHD turbulence and the heating of
solar coronal loops. Astrophys. J., 662, 701–714.
Buchlin, E., Aletti, V., Galtier, S. et al. 2003. A simplified numerical model of coronal
energy dissipation based on reduced MHD. Astron. Astrophys., 406, 1061–1070.
Chae, J., Schühle, U., and Lemaire, P. 1998. SUMER measurements of nonthermal
motions: Constraints on coronal heating mechanisms. Astrophys. J., 505, 957–973.
Chen, S., and Kraichnan, R. H. 1997. Inhibition of turbulent cascade by sweep. J. Plasma
Phys., 57(1), 187–193.
Cho, J., and Vishniac, E. T. 2000. The anisotropy of magnetohydrodynamic Alfvénic
turbulence. Astrophys. J., 539, 273–282.
Cranmer, S. R., van Ballegooijen, A. A., and Edgar, R. J. 2007. Self-consistent cor￾onal heating and solar wind acceleration from anisotropic magnetohydrodynamic
turbulence. Astrophys. J. Supp. Series, 171, 520–551.
Crémer, P., and Alemany, A. 1981. Aspects expérimentaux du brassage électromagnétique
en creuset. J. Mécanique Appl., 5, 37–50.
De Pontieu, B., McIntosh, S. W., Carlsson, M. et al. 2007. Chromospheric Alfvénic waves
strong enough to power the solar wind. Science, 318, 1574–1577.
Drake, D. J., Schroeder, J. W. R., Howes, G. G. et al. 2013. Alfvén wave collisions, the
fundamental building block of plasma turbulence. IV. Laboratory experiment. Phys.
Plasmas, 20(7), 072901.
Einaudi, G., Velli, M., Politano, H., and Pouquet, A. 1996. Energy release in a turbulent
corona. Astrophys. J. Lett., 457, L113–L116.
Elsässer, W. M. 1950. The hydromagnetic equations. Phys. Rev., 79, 183–183.
Favier, B. F. N., Godeferd, F. S., and Cambon, C. 2012. On the effect of rotation on magne￾tohydrodynamic turbulence at high magnetic Reynolds number. Geophys. Astrophys.
Fluid Dynamics, 106, 89–111.
Fujisawa, A. 2021. Review of plasma turbulence experiments. Proc. Japan Acad., Series
B, 97(3), 103–119.
Galtier, S. 2014. Weak turbulence theory for rotating magnetohydrodynamics and plane￾tary flows. J. Fluid Mech., 757, 114–154.
Galtier, S. 2016. Introduction to Modern Magnetohydrodynamics. Cambridge University
Press.
Galtier, S., and Buchlin, E. 2010. Nonlinear diffusion equations for anisotropic magneto￾hydrodynamic turbulence with cross-helicity. Astrophys. J., 722(2), 1977–1983.
Galtier, S., and Nazarenko, S. V. 2008. Large-scale magnetic field sustainment by forced
MHD wave turbulence. J. Turbulence, 9(40), 1–10.
Galtier, S., and Pouquet, A. 1998. Solar flare statistics with a one-dimensional MHD
model. Sol. Phys., 179, 141–165.
Galtier, S., Politano, H., and Pouquet, A. 1997. Self-similar energy decay in magnetohy￾drodynamic turbulence. Phys. Rev. Lett., 79(15), 2807–2810.
Galtier, S., Nazarenko, S. V., Newell, A. C., and Pouquet, A. 2000. A weak turbulence
theory for incompressible magnetohydrodynamics. J. Plasma Phys., 63, 447–488.References 203
Galtier, S., Nazarenko, S. V., Newell, A. C., and Pouquet, A. 2002. Anisotropic turbulence
of shear-Alfvén waves. Astrophys. J., 564(1), L49–L52.
Goldreich, P., and Sridhar, S. 1995. Toward a theory of interstellar turbulence. 2: Strong
alfvenic turbulence. Astrophys. J., 438, 763–775.
Gudiksen, B. V., and Nordlund, A. A. 2005. An ab initio approach to the solar coronal
heating problem. Astrophys. J., 618, 1020–1030.
Hendrix, D. L., and van Hoven, G. 1996. Magnetohydrodynamic turbulence and implica￾tions for solar coronal heating. Astrophys. J., 467, 887–893.
Hewett, R. J., Gallagher, P. T., McAteer, R. T. J. et al. 2008. Multiscale analysis of active
region evolution. Solar Phys., 248(2), 311–322.
Heyvaerts, J., and Priest, E. R. 1983. Coronal heating by phase-mixed shear Alfven waves.
Astron. Astrophys., 117, 220–234.
Heyvaerts, J., and Priest, E. R. 1992. A self-consistent turbulent model for solar coronal
heating. Astrophys. J., 390, 297–308.
Higdon, J. C. 1984. Density fluctuations in the interstellar medium: Evidence for aniso￾tropic magnetogasdynamic turbulence. I – Model and astrophysical sites. Astrophys.
J., 285, 109–123.
Iroshnikov, P. S. 1964. Turbulence of a conducting fluid in a strong magnetic field. Soviet
Astron., 7, 566–571.
Kinney, R., McWilliams, J. C., and Tajima, T. 1995. Coherent structures and turbulent cas￾cades in two-dimensional incompressible magnetohydrodynamic turbulence. Phys.
Plasmas, 2(10), 3623–3639.
Kraichnan, R. H. 1965. Inertial-range spectrum of hydromagnetic turbulence. Phys.
Fluids, 8, 1385–1387.
Lithwick, Y., and Goldreich, P. 2003. Imbalanced weak magnetohydrodynamic turbu￾lence. Astrophys. J., 582(2), 1220–1240.
Luo, Q. Y., and Wu, D. J. 2010. Observations of anisotropic scaling of solar wind
turbulence. Astrophys. J. Lett., 714, L138–L141.
Mandage, R. S., and McAteer, R. T. J. 2016. On the non-Kolmogorov nature of flare￾productive solar active regions. Astrophys. J., 833(2), 237 (7 pages).
Matthaeus, W. H., and Velli, M. 2011. Who needs turbulence? A review of turbulence
effects in the heliosphere and on the fundamental process of reconnection. Space
Sci. Rev., 160(1–4), 145–168.
Menu, M. D., Galtier, S., and Petitdemange, L. 2019. Inverse cascade of hybrid helicity in
B– MHD turbulence. Phys. Rev. Fluids, 4(7), 073701.
Meyrand, R., Kiyani, K. H., and Galtier, S. 2015. Weak magnetohydrodynamic turbulence
and intermittency. J. Fluid Mech., 770, R1.
Meyrand, R., Galtier, S., and Kiyani, K. H. 2016. Direct evidence of the transition from
weak to strong magnetohydrodynamic turbulence. Phys. Rev. Lett., 116(10), 105002.
Montgomery, D., and Matthaeus, W. H. 1995. Anisotropic modal energy transfer in
interstellar turbulence. Astrophys. J., 447, 706.
Montgomery, D., and Turner, L. 1981. Anisotropic magnetohydrodynamic turbulence in
a strong external magnetic field. Phys. Fluids, 24(5), 825–831.
Müller, W.-C., Biskamp, D., and Grappin, R. 2003. Statistical anisotropy of magnetohy￾drodynamic turbulence. Phys. Rev. E, 67(6), 066302.
Nazarenko, S. 2007. 2D enslaving of MHD turbulence. New J. Physics, 9(8), 307.
Ng, C. S., and Bhattacharjee, A. 1996. Interaction of shear-Alfven wave packets: Implica￾tion for weak magnetohydrodynamic turbulence in astrophysical plasmas. Astrophys.
J., 465, 845–854.
Ng, C. S., and Bhattacharjee, A. 1997. Scaling of anisotropic spectra due to the weak
interaction of shear-Alfvén wave packets. Phys. Plasmas, 4(3), 605–610.204 7 Alfvén Wave Turbulence
Osman, K. T., Wan, M., Matthaeus, W. H., Weygand, J. M., and Dasso, S. 2011. Aniso￾tropic third-moment estimates of the energy cascade in solar wind turbulence using
multispacecraft data. Phys. Rev. Lett., 107(16), 165001.
Oughton, S., and Matthaeus, W. H. 2020. Critical balance and the physics of magnetohy￾drodynamic turbulence. Astrophys. J., 897(1), 37 (24 pages).
Oughton, S., Priest, E. R., and Matthaeus, W. H. 1994. The influence of a mean magnetic
field on three-dimensional magnetohydrodynamic turbulence. J. Fluid Mech., 280,
95–117.
Phillips, O. M. 1958. The equilibrium range in the spectrum of wind-generated waves. J.
Fluid Mech., 4, 426–434.
Podesta, J. J., Roberts, D. A., and Goldstein, M. L. 2007. Spectral exponents of kinetic
and magnetic energy spectra in solar wind turbulence. Astrophys. J., 664, 543–548.
Pontin, D. I., and Hornig, G. 2020. The Parker problem: Existence of smooth force-free
fields and coronal heating. Living Rev. Solar Phys., 17(1), 5.
Priest, E. 2014. Magnetohydrodynamics of the Sun. Cambridge University Press.
Rappazzo, A. F., Velli, M., Einaudi, G., and Dahlburg, R. B. 2007. Coronal heating, weak
MHD turbulence, and scaling laws. Astrophys. J. Lett., 657, L47–L51.
Reale, F. 2014. Coronal loops: Observations and modeling of confined plasma. Living
Rev. Sol. Phys., 11, 4.
Robinson, D. C., and Rusbridge, M. G. 1971. Structure of turbulence in the ZETA plasma.
Phys. Fluids, 14(11), 2499–2511.
Roytershteyn, V., Boldyrev, S., Delzanno, G.-L. et al. 2019. Numerical study of inertial
kinetic-Alfvén turbulence. Astrophys. J., 870(2), 103.
Saur, J., Politano, H., Pouquet, A., and Matthaeus, W. H. 2002. Evidence for weak MHD
turbulence in the middle magnetosphere of Jupiter. Astrophys. Astron., 386, 699–
708.
Schekochihin, A. A., Nazarenko, S. V., and Yousef, T. A. 2012. Weak Alfvén-wave
turbulence revisited. Phys. Rev. E, 85(3), 036406.
She, Z.-S., and Leveque, E. 1994. Universal scaling laws in fully developed turbulence.
Phys. Rev. Lett., 72(3), 336–339.
Shebalin, J. V., Matthaeus, W. H., and Montgomery, D. 1983. Anisotropy in MHD
turbulence due to a mean magnetic field. J. Plasma Phys., 29, 525–547.
Sridhar, S., and Goldreich, P. 1994. Toward a theory of interstellar turbulence. I. Weak
Alfvenic turbulence. Astrophys. J., 432, 612–621.
Teaca, B., Verma, M. K., Knaepen, B., and Carati, D. 2009. Energy transfer in anisotropic
magnetohydrodynamic turbulence. Phys. Rev. E, 79(4), 046312.
Tronko, N., Nazarenko, S. V., and Galtier, S. 2013. Weak turbulence in two-dimensional
magnetohydrodynamics. Phys. Rev. E, 87(3), 033103.
Verdini, A., and Grappin, R. 2015. Imprints of expansion on the local anisotropy of solar
wind turbulence. Astrophys. J., 808(2), L34.
Walsh, R. W., and Galtier, S. 2000. Intermittent heating in a model of solar coronal loops.
Solar Phys., 197(1), 57–73.
Wang, Y., Boldyrev, S., and Perez, J. C. 2011. Residual energy in magnetohydrodynamic
turbulence. Astrophys. J., 740(2), L36 (4 pages).
Zweben, S. J., Menyuk, C. R., and Taylor, R. J. 1979. Small-scale magnetic fluctuations
inside the Macrotor tokamak. Phys. Rev. Lett., 42(19), 1270–1274.8
Wave Turbulence in a
Compressible Plasma
Plasmas are naturally compressible. In astrophysics, most visible matter is in a
state of plasma and a wide variety of turbulence is encountered: for example,
in the interstellar medium, turbulence can be supersonic, with turbulent Mach
numbers greater than 10 (see Chapter 2), while in the solar wind, it is subsonic and
weakly compressible with a relative mass density variation of about 5 percent.1
The Earth’s magnetosphere is another example where the mass density variations
can be strong, often with the presence of a bow shock at the interface with the
solar wind (see Figure 8.1).
A major difference between incompressible hydrodynamics and plasmas is the
plethora of waves supported by the latter. Therefore, the theory of wave turbulence
applies well beyond the approximation of incompressible magnetohydrodynam￾ics (MHD) introduced in the previous chapter. The most immediate extension is
the weak compressible MHD case, for which the Hamiltonian (Kuznetsov, 2001)
and Eulerian (Chandran, 2008) approaches have been used. In both cases, the
thermodynamic pressure is neglected compared to the magnetic pressure. As for
incompressible hydrodynamics, the turbulent dynamics is dominated by triadic
interactions. However, the uniformity of the development has not been checked.
It is also necessary to go beyond the MHD approximation when we deal with
sub-MHD scales. A simple model that can be used is incompressible Hall MHD
which, within the limit of the small scales, becomes electron MHD. The associated
theories (always for triadic interactions) use a complex helical basis, as for iner￾tial waves (Galtier and Bhattacharjee, 2003; Galtier, 2006). The direct numerical
simulations of Meyrand et al. (2018) show that this system is nontrivial, with the
possibility of having at the same time a wave turbulence regime for right-polarized
waves (carried by electrons) and a strong turbulence regime for left-polarized
waves (carried by ions). Weakly compressible Hall MHD is a much more diffi￾cult case to treat and, to date, no complete theory has been developed (Sahraoui
et al., 2003). Only one attempt has been made for the case of kinetic Alfvén waves:
1 The solar wind has a velocity (400–800 km/s) higher than the speed of sound (∼ 50 km/s); however, with
velocity fluctuations ∼ 10 km/s, the turbulent Mach number Mt
is less than one.
205206 8 Wave Turbulence in a Compressible Plasma
Figure 8.1 Earth’s magnetoshere (image created by P. Robert, LPP/CNRS). Compressible
turbulence is clearly observed in the magnetosheath. Reprinted with permission (Galtier,
2016).
in the Hall MHD approach, this corresponds to very oblique wavevectors, that is
close to the direction perpendicular to the uniform magnetic field (Voitenko, 1998;
Galtier and Meyrand, 2015).
At much smaller spatial and temporal scales, we encounter Langmuir wave tur￾bulence, studied by Zakharov (1967) (see also Zakharov, 1972; Musher et al.,
1995). The purpose here is to describe the behavior of a plasma when the elec￾troneutrality is momentarily broken. It this case, the electron population oscillates
and produces waves characterized by a wavenumber smaller than the Debye
length (which is the characteristic distance over which electrostatic potentials are
screened out by a redistribution of the charged particles). Contrary to the situations
mentioned above, this turbulence involves four-wave interactions.
We will start this chapter by presenting some turbulent properties of the solar
wind, which is at the heart of many questions related to strong and weak wave
turbulence. Then we will derive a weakly compressible model that describes the
dynamics of electrons on a quasi-static ocean of ions. The kinetic equations will
be derived for this compressible system and their properties and exact solutions
will be discussed. We will finally show the strong similarity between this problem
and inertial wave turbulence.
8.1 Multiscale Solar Wind
The Sun is a wonderful gift for people working on turbulence, because it acts like
a giant natural wind tunnel (Goldstein and Roberts, 1999; Bruno and Carbone,8.1 Multiscale Solar Wind 207
Figure 8.2 Magnetic spectrum measured in the solar wind by the ACE/NASA and Clus￾ter/ESA spacecraft at one astronomical unit. The scales ρi and ρe are the ion and electron
Larmor radius, respectively. There are several power laws, including that of MHD around
f
−5/3 over nearly four decades. Figure created by L. Hadid and based on Sahraoui et al.
(2020).
2013). The generated solar wind propagates in the interplanetary medium at sev￾eral hundred km/s. There exists two solar winds: a slow equatorial wind with a
velocity of the order of 400 km/s, and a fast polar wind at about 800 km/s. Now￾adays, the properties of the interplanetary plasma are well known, thanks to the
numerous in situ measurements carried out by the ESA and NASA probes, which
can be seen as nonintrusive instruments. In Figure 8.2 we show a synthetic spec￾trum of the interplanetary magnetic field fluctuations carried by the solar wind.
It is a frequency f spectrum as the in situ measurements are based on a time sig￾nal. Since the solar wind propagates relatively quickly, we can assume that the
recorded time signal gives a fairly accurate picture of the plasma at a given time,
because the plasma remains relatively fixed during the duration of the measure￾ments (this is the Taylor hypothesis commonly used in wind tunnels). In other
words, the frequency spectrum can be interpreted in a first approximation as a
wavenumber spectrum (f ∼ k). This spectrum shows several power laws over a
total of eight decades, making it the widest spectrum ever measured in turbulence.
At very low frequencies (f < 10−4Hz), we have a law close to f
−1 whose
origin is generally attributed to physical processes of the lower solar corona:
this frequency range can therefore be interpreted as the domain of injection (the
reservoir) of energy. At higher frequencies (up to 0.5Hz), a second power law208 8 Wave Turbulence in a Compressible Plasma
is observed around f
−5/3
. This frequency range, where Alfvén waves are also
detected, is interpreted as an MHD inertial range; the critical balance phenom￾enology is often used to describe this regime of strong Alfvén wave turbulence
(see Chapter 7). After a very steep transition spectrum, a second inertial zone
appears over about a decade (between ∼ 2 Hz and 40 Hz), with a magnetic spec￾trum often around f
−8/3
. It is obvious that an additional physical ingredient has to
be brought to the standard MHD model to reproduce such a law at spatial scales
smaller than the ion Larmor radius (which is here approximatively equal to the ion
inertial length). This ingredient can be simply modeled by the Hall term (Franci
et al., 2015), a dispersive term, which takes into account the decoupling between
ions and electrons, without, however, including kinetic effects. From 40 Hz, the
spectrum becomes even steeper: electron scales are reached beyond which current
instruments saturate.
As in hydrodynamics, intermittency is also a clearly identified property of the
solar wind. Figure 8.3 shows a reproduction of the measurements made in the
slow solar wind at MHD scales (main plot): the normalized exponents of the
structure functions of the velocity and (parallel and perpendicular components
Figure 8.3 Main plot: Normalized (with respect to ζ3) exponents of structure functions
h(δX)
p
i ∼ `
ζp of fluctuations in velocity (X = u) and magnetic field (components parallel
X = bk and perpendicular X = b⊥ to the wind direction) measured in the slow solar
wind (data from the German probe Helios); after Carbone et al. (2004). Kolmogorov’s
self-similar law in p/3 is indicated in solid line (K41). Inset: the plot of ζp for the y￾component of the magnetic field at sub-MHD scales (data from Cluster/ESA) reveals a
monoscaling behavior (with ζp ∼ 0.85p). After Kiyani et al. (2009).8.2 Exact Law in Compressible Hall MHD 209
to the wind direction) magnetic field reveal a stronger intermittency for the lat￾ter, with a stronger curvature. At sub-MHD scales (inset) a completely different
behavior is observed for the three components of the magnetic field fluctuations
(only the results for the y-component are reproduced here; note that the veloc￾ity fluctuations are currently not accessible for this high-frequency domain): a
monoscaling behavior is observed. This result is similar to the experimental mea￾surements made in fast-rotating hydrodynamics (van Bokhoven et al., 2009). This
comparison is more than anecdotal, as will be explained in Section 8.7, and may
be interpreted as a signature of the regime of weak wave turbulence.
The evolution of the solar wind with the heliocentric distance r offers an inter￾esting question for turbulence. Indeed, the measurements (made by Voyager 1 and
2) of the ion temperature as a function of r reveal a decrease in r
−α with α < 1
(and r ∈ [0.3, 50AU]), which is significantly slower than an adiabatic cooling in
r
−4/3
(Marsch et al., 1982; Matthaeus et al., 1999). Therefore, a local source of
heating seems required. Currently, many studies are looking at this problem by
considering a heating of turbulent origin (see the discussion in Section 8.2). The
idea is that the turbulent cascade is an efficient process for transporting the energy
supplied by the Sun at large scales towards sub-MHD scales, where it is dissipated
by kinetic effects (Matthaeus, 2021). Without knowing the details of the kinetic
processes that lead to the heating of the plasma, it is possible to estimate the heat￾ing rate by using the mean rate of energy transfer in the MHD inertial range. It
can be shown that the measured values are close to that required to heat the solar
wind (Sorriso-Valvo et al., 2007; Hadid et al., 2017).
8.2 Exact Law in Compressible Hall MHD
Kolmogorov’s exact laws are valid for both eddy turbulence and wave turbulence.
In plasma physics, exact laws were derived initially in the incompressible case,
first for MHD (Politano and Pouquet, 1998) and later for Hall MHD (Galtier,
2008). Exact laws were then obtained for compressible plasmas (Banerjee and
Galtier, 2013; Andrés et al., 2018; Ferrand et al., 2021a). As explained in Sec￾tion 8.1, these different laws can be used to measure the mean rate of energy
transfer ε in the solar wind (see Figure 8.4), which is a proxy for evaluating the
mean rate of energy dissipation (Sorriso-Valvo et al., 2007; Vasquez et al., 2007;
Osman et al., 2011; Banerjee et al., 2016; Hadid et al., 2017; Bandyopadhyay
et al., 2020). The main conclusion of these observational studies is that weak
compressibility has a stronger impact at sub-MHD scales than at MHD scales in
the evaluation of ε.
In this section, we shall present such a law for compressible Hall MHD, a
system described by the following set of equations (Galtier, 2016):210 8 Wave Turbulence in a Compressible Plasma
Figure 8.4 Variation of the magnetic field components (in nT) of the solar wind (Novem￾ber 2009; data from THEMIS/NASA spacecraft). A statistical study based on this interval
shows that the heating rate ε is close to 10−16Jm−3
s
−1
(Hadid et al., 2017).
∂ρ
∂t
+ ∇ · (ρu) = 0 , (8.1a)
ρ

∂u
∂t
+ u · ∇u

= −∇P +
1
µ0
(∇ × B) × B + µ1u +
µ
3
∇(∇ · u) , (8.1b)
∂B
∂t
= ∇ × (u × B) − ∇ × 
(∇ × B) × B
µ0ne 
+ η1B, (8.1c)
∇ · B = 0 , (8.1d)
where B is the magnetic field, µ0 the magnetic permeability of free space, n the
plasma density (due to the electroneutrality, the electron and ion mass densities
are equal), and e the absolute value of the electron charge (other variables are
defined in Sections 2.9.2 and 7.1). From this system, using an isothermal closure,
one can obtain the following compact exact law (Ferrand et al., 2021a):2
− 4ε¯ = ∇` ·

δρ¯
ρ0
|δu|
2
δu + |δb|
2
δu − 2(δu · δb)δb

−

(ρθ0 + ρ
0
θ)
2ρ0
|δu|
2

− 2

δρ
ρ0
δu · δ¯
￾
jc × b


+ di∇` ·


2(δb · δjc
)δb − |δb|
2
δjc

− 2di


δ(j × b) · δjc

, (8.2)
where by definition ε¯ ≡ ε/ρ0, δ¯X ≡ (X + X
0
)/2, b ≡ B/
√µ0ρ0 is the mag￾netic field normalized to a velocity, ρ0 ≡ hρi, (ρ/ρ0)jc ≡ j = ∇ × b, and
di ≡ mi/
p
µ0ρ0e
2
is the ion inertial length which defines the characteristic scale
2 Note that for a given system, there is no single expression for the exact law. The law given here is the most
compact ever found8.2 Exact Law in Compressible Hall MHD 211
below which the dynamics of ions and electrons decouples. In the first line of
expression (8.2), we find the structure of the incompressible MHD law (Politano
and Pouquet, 1998). The second line is purely compressible, with an HD term on
the left and an MHD term on the right. In the third line, we finally find the con￾tribution of the Hall effect, which is proportional to di
; its expression can only be
written as a flux in the incompressible limit. Overall, we see that the exact law for
isothermal compressible Hall MHD has a similar expression to that of compress￾ible hydrodynamics (which is a particular limit; see expression (2.97)) in that we
have a flux F and a source S.
The exact law (8.2) is valid for eddy turbulence and wave turbulence; however,
in the latter case, a relatively strong uniform magnetic field (b0  b) must be
introduced. The weak turbulence regime has been studied in detail in the incom￾pressible limit by Galtier (2006). This requires a tedious calculation, because one
has to deal with two types of waves: left and right circularly polarized waves.
Weakly compressible Hall MHD is a much more difficult case to treat and, to
date, no complete theory has been proposed. In Section 8.6 we will present a the￾ory of weak wave turbulence in a particular case where the dynamics is given
by small-scale electrons evolving in a weakly compressible medium, and we will
use from the beginning the anisotropy induced by the uniform magnetic field to
simplify the problem. Under this limit, one can simplify expression (8.2). First,
if we neglect ion velocity then u → 0. Second, we can write ρ ≡ ρ0 + ρ1 with
ρ1/ρ0  1; then, jc ' j − jc1 with by definition jc1 ≡ (ρ1/ρ0)j is the (normal￾ized) compressible electric current. With these assumptions, we obtain after some
manipulation:
−4ε/¯ di = ∇` ·

(δb · δj)δb −
1
2
|δb|
2
δj

+ 2


δ(j × b0) · δjc1

(8.3)
− ∇` ·


(2δb · δjc1
)δb − |δb|
2
δjc1

+ 2


δ(j × b) · δjc1

.
This exact law valid for wave turbulence reduces to the incompressible case when
jc1 = 0. The contribution to the leading order comes from the first line: it includes
the last term on the right because it is proportional to the strong uniform magnetic
field b0. The second line corresponds to a correction in O (ρ1/ρ0) due to the small
fluctuations in mass density; smaller corrections in O
￾
(ρ1/ρ0)
2

are neglected. As
in the case of compressible hydrodynamics, the introduction of compressibility
leads to a source which here consists of second-order mixed structure functions.
Note that in the presence of b0, turbulence becomes anisotropic and the law cannot
be integrated on a full sphere as it is usually done in isotropic hydrodynamics (see
Chapter 2)212 8 Wave Turbulence in a Compressible Plasma
8.3 Weakly Compressible Electron MHD
When the Cluster/ESA spacecraft initially dedicated to the Earth’s magnetosphere
(see Figure 8.1) moved to the solar wind, a new physics became accessible in
detail: the physics of turbulence at sub-MHD scales (Bale et al., 2005). This has
contributed to the development of several new theoretical studies where plasma
waves are the main ingredients. This includes the critical balance phenomenology
for strong wave turbulence (see Chapter 7) in the context of electron MHD (Cho
and Lazarian, 2004, 2009) or a gyrokinetic model (Howes et al., 2008, 2011),
and the regime of weak wave turbulence in Hall MHD (Galtier and Bhattacharjee,
2003; Galtier, 2006). On the other hand, the exact laws, which are valid for both
strong and weak wave turbulence, have also been widely used (see the Section
8.2).
The purpose of this section is to see how the weak compressibility assump￾tion can be used in plasma physics to derive a new set of fluid equations, valid
at sub-MHD scales, that can model in a simple way a part of the collisionless
solar wind plasma, and from which wave turbulence may be used to obtain spec￾tral predictions. The main assumption of the model called compressible electron
MHD is that ions (mostly protons in the solar wind) are mainly at rest. It is not
strictly speaking a kinetic model, which requires the use of velocity distribution
functions to describe the particles in phase space and include kinetic effects, but
a fluid model. However, the word kinetic is very often employed: for example,
the weakly compressible waves associated with this system are generally called
kinetic Alfvén waves.
8.3.1 From Bi-fluid to Compressible Electron MHD
We shall start with a bi-fluid system that describes separately the ions (for
simplicity, we only consider protons) and the electrons. We have:
∂ρi
∂t
+ ∇ · (ρiui) = 0 , (8.4a)
ρi

∂ui
∂t
+ ui
· ∇ui

= −∇Pi + nieE + nieui × B, (8.4b)
∂ρe
∂t
+ ∇ · (ρeue) = 0 , (8.4c)
ρe

∂ue
∂t
+ ue · ∇ue

= −∇Pe − neeE − neeue × B, (8.4d)
∂B
∂t
= −∇ × E, (8.4e)
∇ × B = µ0J = µ0ene(ui − ue) , (8.4f)8.3 Weakly Compressible Electron MHD 213
where the subscript s denotes the species (i for ion and e for electron), ρs
is the
mass density, ms
the mass, ns
the particle density (due to the electroneutrality
ne = ni), us
the velocity, Ps
the pressure, and E the electric field (other notations
are introduced in Section 8.2). Note that the electroneutrality relation imposes a
constant adjustment of the ion density to the variation of the electron density. This
is possible if ∇ · ui ∼ ∇ · ue, which means that the ion velocity is negligible
compared to the electron velocity, but not its divergence (note that if ui/ue  1,
electrons must be more incompressible than ions to satisfy the ordering).
We limit ourselves to scales smaller than the typical scale at which ions and
electrons decouple, which is the ion inertial length di (or the ion Larmor radius;
note that they are roughly the same in the solar wind at 1 AU where βi ∼ 1; its
definition will be given later in this section). We seek to model the solar wind
where a strong large-scale magnetic field B0 = B0ek (with |ek| = 1) is present.
This leads to an anisotropic dynamics (see Chapter 7) for which we have the ine￾quality ∂k  ∂⊥ or, equivalently, kk  k⊥. (Note that at the leading order of the
present derivation, no distinction will be made between the k direction along the
total magnetic field line and the z direction; this approximation is correct as long
as b0  b.) At these scales, the dynamics is relatively fast and we can assume that
ui/ue ∼ O(), with   1. From the momentum equation (8.4b), we obtain at
main order the relation valid for a perfect gas (with kB a the Boltzmann constant
and Ts
the temperature):
ni0eE = ∇Pi = ∇(ni1kBTi) , (8.5)
where ni0
is a uniform particle density. For a weakly compressible plasma, we
have ns = ns0 +ns1 with ns1/ns0 ∼ O(). Later, we will assume that both ions and
electrons are isothermal.
We further simplify the problem by neglecting the inertia of the electrons and
thus keeping only the right-hand-side terms of equation (8.4d). By introducing
these terms into the Maxwell–Faraday equation (8.4e), we obtain:
∂B
∂t
=
me
e
∇ ×

∇Pe
ρe

+ ∇ × (ue × B) . (8.6)
After introducing the relation ∇ · ue = −∂tρe/ρe − (ue · ∇ρe)/ρe and the use of
some vector identities, we find:
∂B
∂t
−
B
ρe
∂ρe
∂t
=
me
eρ
2
e
∇Pe × ∇ρe + B · ∇ue − ue · ∇B +
B
ρe
(ue · ∇)ρe . (8.7)
We introduce the normalized magnetic field b ≡ B/
√µ0ρe0 = ∇ × a and the
normalized vector potential a ≡ A/
√µ0ρe0
, with ρe0
a uniform mass density
(ρe = ρe0 + ρe1 with ρe1/ρe0 ∼ O()).3 Furthermore, the use of the Maxwell–
Ampère equation (8.4f) leads to the relation ue = de1a, with de ≡ me/
p
µ0ρe0
e
2
the electron inertial length. With these new variables, one obtains (at main order):
3 Note that the normalization is made with the electron mass density and not with the ion mass density, which
leads to the introduction of the ion inertial length di
.214 8 Wave Turbulence in a Compressible Plasma
∂b
∂t
−
b0
ρe0
∂ρe1
∂t
=
de
ρe
2
0
∇Pe × ∇ρe1
+ de

(b · ∇)1a − (1a · ∇)b +
de
ρe0
b0(1a · ∇)ρe1

. (8.8)
The implicit assumption is that in terms of velocity, we have ue/b0 ∼ O().
We introduce the following decomposition for the normalized magnetic field:
b = b0ek − ∇ × (ψek + gex) =


−∂yψ
∂xψ − ∂kg
b0 + bk

 , (8.9)
where ψ is the stream function and bk = ∂yg. Then, we find at main order:
1a =


−∂ybk
∂xbk
−1⊥ψ

 , (8.10)
which leads to the relation (at main order), ue ×B0 = deB0∇⊥bk. Coming back to
the momentum equation for electrons (8.4d) and neglecting the electron inertia,
we find (at main order) the following relation:
∇Pe + ne0eE + ne0eue × B0 = 0 . (8.11)
The combination of the latter expression with relations (8.5) gives:
∇⊥(ne1kB(Te + Ti)) = −ene0deB0∇⊥bk . (8.12)
In the isothermal case, the latter expression leads to the closure relationship:
−
2
βi(1 + 1/τ )
bk
b0
=
ne1
ne0
=
ρe1
ρe0
, (8.13)
with by definition the plasma parameters βi ≡ 2µ0nikBTi/B
2
0
and τ ≡ Ti/Te. The
latter relation means that in a weakly compressible plasma, the density and the
parallel magnetic field are anti-correlated. With the closure relation (8.13), the
isothermal assumption, and the use of vector identities, equation (8.8) reduces to:
∂b
∂t
+
2ek
βi(1 + 1/τ )
∂bk
∂t
= (8.14)
de

b0∂k1⊥a + (b⊥ · ∇⊥)1⊥a − (1⊥a · ∇⊥)b

.
Note that the only difference with incompressible electron MHD is the presence
of the second term in the left-hand side. The last step consists in introducing
the stream function and again using some vector identities; we finally get, after
simplification:4
4
In particular, the operator ek × ∇⊥ must appear in front of each term of the first equation.8.3 Weakly Compressible Electron MHD 215
∂ψ
∂t
= deb0∂kbk + de(ek × ∇⊥ψ) · ∇⊥bk , (8.15)
K
∂bk
∂t
= −deb0∂k1⊥ψ − de(ek × ∇⊥ψ) · ∇⊥(1⊥ψ) , (8.16)
with K ≡ 1 +
2
βi(1+1/τ )
. We obtain a set of self-consistent equations that describe
the nonlinear evolution of magnetic field fluctuations in a weakly compressible
isothermal plasma embedded in a strong uniform magnetic field (with ∂k  ∇⊥).
This system is called reduced compressible electron MHD. Compressibility only
affects the equation for bk, leaving the equation for ψ intact. The incompress￾ible limit is obtained when βi → +∞ (i.e. K → 1): this is the well-known
electron MHD system introduced by Kingsep et al. (1990). Actually, through a
simple change of variables (ψ → ψ/√
K and b0 → b0/
√
K; see also Galtier
and Meyrand, 2015), one can recover the reduced incompressible electron MHD
equations. The consequence is remarkable: the regime of (weak or strong) wave
turbulence is the same for both systems, weakly compressible and incompressible
electron MHD. Therefore, the nature of the waves (kinetic Alfvén or whistler;
see Section 8.4 for the wave derivation) becomes a secondary point for the
understanding of the turbulence regime.
8.3.2 Fluid versus Kinetic Models
Weakly compressible electron MHD has been derived from the bi-fluid sys￾tem (8.4a)–(8.4f). A derivation from the gyrokinetic equations is also possible
(Schekochihin et al., 2009); it is a more rigorous way of deriving equations (8.15)–
(8.16). A basic assumption is, however, necessary concerning the distribution
functions, which must be close to Maxwellian. We note that this situation is rela￾tively far from the conditions encountered in the collisionless solar wind, where it
has long been known that the velocity distribution functions are more complex, for
example bi-Maxwellian or anisotropic (Montgomery et al., 1968; Marsch et al.,
1982; Pilipp et al., 1987). We arrive here to an interesting debate in the plasma
community. Fluid models are often criticized for their simplicity by plasma physi￾cists, who sometimes consider that a fluid model is not relevant to describe reality.
It is obvious that kinetic effects (e.g. Landau damping, finite Larmor radius effect)
cannot be captured with a fluid model such as Hall MHD; however, it must be
admitted that limiting oneself to a kinetic description that only considers a plasma
with a velocity distribution function close to Maxwellian does not lead to the cor￾rect description of space plasmas either. When we work on turbulence in plasma
physics, the goal for a theoretician is to find a prediction (very often for the energy
spectrum), and in practice we generally come back to basic concepts that are fun￾damentally rooted in incompressible fluid turbulence. But we must remain modest
in our quest for fundamental laws and accept fluid prediction that frequently gives216 8 Wave Turbulence in a Compressible Plasma
a qualitatively correct answer. This comment does not mean that kinetic effects are
unimportant. In the case of solar wind turbulence, their role in energy dissipation
is of crucial importance: they can potentially modify the power-law predictions
and lead to a nonconstant value (a decrease) of the mean rate of energy transfer
(see, e.g., Ferrand et al., 2021b).
8.4 Kinetic Alfvén Waves (KAW)
The linearization of the Fourier transform of equations (8.15)–(8.16) leads to the
system (hereafter, for simplicity the k index for the parallel component of the
magnetic field is not written in Fourier space and we use the index k for the k￾dependence of the variables):
− ωemhdψˆ
k = deb0kkbˆ
k , (8.17)
−Kωemhdbˆ
k = deb0kkk
2
⊥ψˆ
k , (8.18)
and eventually to the dispersion relation:
ωemhd = deb0kkk⊥/
√
K . (8.19)
The waves associated with a finite βi are called kinetic Alfvén waves, while in the
βi → +∞ limit (i.e. K → 1) they are called (oblique) whistler waves. The latter
are incompressible and the former weakly compressible. Note that whistler waves
were first detected during World War I. They are audio frequency waves, often
produced by lightning. Once produced in the magnetosphere, these waves travel
along closed magnetic field lines from one hemisphere to the other. Their phase
and group velocities are both proportional to k, implying that higher-frequency
waves have higher group and phase velocities. Thus, the high-frequency part of
the whistler wave packet will reach a detector earlier than its low-frequency part,
and it will appear as a falling tone in a frequency–time sonogram (see Figure 8.5).
8.5 Spectral Phenomenology
8.5.1 Strong KAW Turbulence
The spectral prediction for the magnetic energy is straightforward. In strong
kinetic Alfvén wave turbulence we have:
ε ∼
E
b
`
τNL
, (8.20)
with
τNL ∼
1
dek
2
⊥
bk
∼
Kbk
dek
4
⊥ψ2
. (8.21)8.5 Spectral Phenomenology 217
Figure 8.5 Spectrogram showing several whistler signals recorded by the Palmer Station
(Antarctica) on August 24, 2005. These waves occur at audio frequencies. Credit: D. I.
Golden, Stanford University. CC BY-SA 3.0.
By introducing the axisymmetric spectrum E
b
` ∼ E
b
(k⊥, kk)k⊥kk and the balance
relation √
Kbk ∼ k⊥ψ, we find:
E
b
(k⊥, kk) ∼ K
1/3

ε
de
2/3
k
−7/3
⊥
k
−1
k
, (8.22)
which is the anisotropic generalization of the prediction made by Biskamp et al.
(1996) for isotropic incompressible electron MHD. Note that this spectral pre￾diction is compatible dimensionally with the small-scale limit of the exact law
(8.3). Assuming a perpendicular dynamics, the exact law is written dimensionally
as:
ε¯ ∼ dib
2
j/`⊥ ∼ dib
3
/`2
⊥ ∼ dik
2
⊥(E
b
(k⊥, kk)k⊥kk)
3/2
, (8.23)
hence the spectral prediction (8.22). Clearly, it is the exact law that gives solid
support to the phenomenology, not the other way around.
On the other hand, we can use the critical balance conjecture:
τemhd ∼ τNL , (8.24)218 8 Wave Turbulence in a Compressible Plasma
with τemhd ∼ 1/ωemhd. This leads to the relation:
kk ∼ K
1/6

ε
deb
3
0
1/3
k
1/3
⊥ ∼ k
2/3
0
k
1/3
⊥
, (8.25)
with k0 the characteristic wavenumber of magnetic energy injection. The latter
expression shows that kinetic Alfvén wave turbulence is more anisotropic than
(incompressible) MHD turbulence, for which the critical balance conjecture leads
to the relation kk ∼ k
1/3
0
k
2/3
⊥
, which was verified numerically by Cho and Lazarian
(2009).
Strong kinetic Alfvén wave turbulence is often cited as a model for the solar
wind at sub-MHD scales, however, the comparison with the data reveals a dis￾crepancy, with a frequency spectrum characterized by a power-law index close to
−8/3 instead of −7/3 (see Figure 8.2). Furthermore, a monoscaling behavior is
measured for the magnetic field (see Figure 8.3) and the mass density fluctuations
(Kiyani et al., 2009; Roberts et al., 2020), which are in strong contrast to the clas￾sical intermittency found at MHD scales and more generally in strong turbulence
(see Chapter 2). Although no firm conclusion has been reached for the interpre￾tation, these anomalous properties can find a natural explanation in the regime of
weak wave turbulence.
8.5.2 Weak KAW Turbulence
The phenomenology of weak wave turbulence is based on three-wave interactions.
Therefore, we have:
ε ∼
E
b
`
τtr
, (8.26)
with the cascade time:
τtr ∼ ωemhdτ
2
NL ∼
√
Kb0kk
dek
5
⊥ψ2
. (8.27)
As before, we introduce the axisymmetric spectrum E
b
` ∼ E
b
(k⊥, kk)k⊥kk and get
in this case:
E
b
(k⊥, kk) ∼ K
1/4
s
b0ε
de
k
−5/2
⊥
k
−1/2
k
, (8.28)
which is also the exact solution found by Galtier and Bhattacharjee (2003) in the
framework of incompressible electron MHD (K = 1). In Section 8.6.2, we will
show that it is also an exact solution for kinetic Alfvén wave turbulence.8.6 Theory of Weak KAW Turbulence 219
8.6 Theory of Weak KAW Turbulence
8.6.1 Canonical Variables
We start from the reduced compressible electron MHD equations (8.15)–(8.16).
Their Fourier transforms give:
∂ψˆ
k
∂t
= ideb0kkbˆ
k − de
Z
R6
(ek × p⊥) · q⊥ψˆ
pbˆ
qδ(k − p − q)dpdq , (8.29)
K
∂bˆ
k
∂t
= ideb0kkk
2
⊥ψˆ
k −
Z
R6
de(ek × p⊥) · q⊥q
2
⊥ψˆ
pψˆ
qδ(k − p − q)dpdq . (8.30)
We introduce the canonical variables:
A
s
k = k⊥ψˆ
k − s
√
Kbˆ
k , (8.31)
where the directional polarity s = ±. This choice leads to a simple writing for the
energy E. Indeed, for a compressible plasma we have:
E =
1
2
ρe(b
2
⊥ + b
2
k
) + ρeU , (8.32)
with U the internal energy. For an isothermal closure, we have U = c
2
s
ln(ρe1/ρe0
);
this leads to:
ρeU ' c
2
sρe0ρe1 +
1
2
c
2
s
ρe
2
1
ρe0
. (8.33)
Since by definition hρe1
i = 0 (where hi can be seen as the space average), we
need to consider the second-order term for the internal energy. At main order we
obtain:
hEi =
1
2
ρe0
hb
2
⊥i +
1
2
ρe0
hb
2
k
i +
1
2
c
2
s
ρe0
hρe
2
1
i. (8.34)
Using the closure (8.13), the definition of the sound speed c
2
s ≡ (βi +βe)b
2
0
/2, and
some manipulation, we find eventually:
hEi =
1
2
ρe0
hb
2
⊥i +
1
2
Kρe0
hb
2
k
i. (8.35)
From the canonical variables, it is easy to prove that in Fourier space:
E(k) =
1
2
ρe0
X
s
|A
s
k
|
2 =
1
2
ρe0
k
2
⊥|ψˆ
k |
2 +
1
2
Kρe0
|bˆ
k |
2
, (8.36)
which is the energy per wavevector.220 8 Wave Turbulence in a Compressible Plasma
Introducing the canonical variables, we find after some manipulation:
∂A
s
k
∂t
+ isωemhdA
s
k =
dek⊥
4
√
K
Z
R6
X
spsq
ek (8.37)
× (p⊥ × q⊥)
sq
p⊥
A
sp
p A
sq
q δ(k − p − q)dpdq
+
sde
4
√
K
Z
R6
X
spsq
ek · (p⊥ × q⊥)
q⊥
p⊥
A
sp
p A
sq
q δ(k − p − q)dpdq .
We can put the two integrals together and use the symmetry in p⊥ and q⊥; we find:
∂A
s
k
∂t
+ isωemhdA
s
k =
sde
8
√
K
Z
R6
X
spsq
ek · (p⊥ × q⊥)
p⊥q⊥
(sqq⊥ − spp⊥)
(sk⊥ + spp⊥ + sqq⊥)A
sp
p A
sq
q δ(k − p − q)dpdq . (8.38)
We introduce a small parameter   1 such that:
A
s
k ≡ a
s
k
e
−isωk t
, (8.39)
where, hereafter, ωk identifies to ωemhd. Then, we obtain:
∂a
s
k
∂t
=
de
8
√
K
Z
R6
X
spsq
L
sspsq
−kpqa
sp
p a
sq
q e
i(sωk−spωp−sqωq)t
δ(k − p − q)dpdq, (8.40)
with:
L
sspsq
kpq = s
ek · (p⊥ × q⊥)
p⊥q⊥
(sqq⊥ − spp⊥)(sk⊥ + spp⊥ + sqq⊥) . (8.41)
Equation (8.40) describes the slow evolution in time of the kinetic Alfvén wave
amplitude. This is a classical form for three-wave interactions, with a term in
the right-hand side of weak amplitude (proportional to ), a quadratic nonlinear￾ity, and an exponential which, over long times, will give a nonzero contribution
only when its coefficient cancels out. In the framework of incompressible electron
MHD (K = 1), Galtier and Bhattacharjee (2003) derived a similar equation where
the only notable difference is the presence of a phase term whose origin lies in the
use of a complex helicity basis (and whose dependence eventually disappears in
the derivation of the kinetic equations).
At this level, two properties can already be deduced. First, we observe that
there is no nonlinear coupling when the wavevectors p⊥ and q⊥ are collinear.
This means in particular that two wave packets travelling in the same direction
at the same speed cannot lead to strong nonlinear effects. Second, there is no
nonlinear coupling when p⊥ and q⊥ are equal, if at the same time their polarities
sp and sq are equal. We have already met this property for inertial wave turbulence
(see Chapter 6) and, as mentioned, it seems to be quite general for helical waves
(Kraichnan, 1973; Waleffe, 1992; Turner, 2000; Galtier, 2003).8.6 Theory of Weak KAW Turbulence 221
8.6.2 Kinetic Equations and Exact Solutions
To derive the kinetic equations we need to use the following properties:
L
sspsq
kpq = L
ssqsp
kqp , (8.42a)
L
sspsq
0pq = 0 , (8.42b)
L
sspsq
−k−p−q = L
ssqsp
kqp , (8.42c)
L
−s−s−psq
kpq = −L
ssqsp
kqp , (8.42d)
L
spssq
pkq =
spp⊥pk
sk⊥kk
L
sspsq
kpq , (8.42e)
L
sqssp
qkp =
sqq⊥qk
sk⊥kk
L
sspsq
kpq . (8.42f)
We will also use the resonance condition, which can be written after some
manipulation as:
sqq⊥ − spp⊥
kk
=
sk⊥ − sqq⊥
pk
=
spp⊥ − sk⊥
qk
. (8.43)
Note that this expression is similar to the case of inertial wave turbulence (see
Chapter 6). It is interesting to discuss the particular case of strongly local interac￾tions in the perpendicular direction that generally make a dominant contribution
to the turbulent dynamics. In this case, we have k⊥ ' p⊥ ' q⊥, and the previous
expression simplifies to:
sq − sp
kk
'
s − sq
pk
'
sp − s
qk
. (8.44)
If kk is nonzero, the term on the left will give a nonnegligible contribution only
when sp = −sq. We do not consider the case sp = sq, which is not relevant to
the main order in the case of local interactions, as we can see from the expression
of the interaction coefficient (8.41). The immediate consequence is that either the
middle term or the right-hand term has a numerator that cancels itself out (at
main order), which implies that the associated denominator must also cancel (at
main order) to satisfy the equality: for example, if s = sp then qk ' 0. This
condition means that the transfer in the parallel direction is negligible: indeed, the
integration of equation (8.40) in the parallel direction is then reduced to a few
modes (since pk ' kk), which strongly limits the transfer between parallel modes.
The cascade in the parallel direction is thus possible, but relatively weak compared
to that in the perpendicular direction, which justifies a posteriori the assumption
made initially, that is, k⊥  kk. Therefore, this situation is comparable to inertial
wave turbulence (see Chapter 6).222 8 Wave Turbulence in a Compressible Plasma
After a long but standard development, we eventually find:
∂e
s
(k)
∂t
=

2πd
2
e
16K
Z
R6
X
spsq
|L
sspsq
kpq |
2
δ(sωk + spωp + sqωq)δ(k + p + q)
e
s
(k)e
sp
(p)e
sq
(q)
sk⊥kk

sk⊥kk
e
s
(k)
+
spp⊥pk
e
sp (p)
+
sqq⊥qk
e
sq (q)

dpdq , (8.45)
with by definition the energy density tensor e
s
(k) for homogeneous turbulence:
ha
s
k
a
s
0
k
0i = e
s
(k)δ(k + k
0
)δss0 , (8.46)
where δss0 means s = s
0
. Equation (8.45) is the kinetic equation for kinetic Alf￾vén wave turbulence. The incompressible electron MHD limit can be recovered
when the compressibility K = 1. Note that with the current approach, we directly
find the anisotropic limit (k⊥  kk) of the incompressible case. From expression
(8.45) it is straightforward to show (using the resonance condition) the detailed
conservation of the two invariants, the energy and the magnetic helicity.
We can introduce the axisymmetric spectra for the magnetic energy Ek ≡
E(k⊥, kk) = 2πk⊥(e
+(k) + e
−(k)) and the magnetic helicity Hk ≡ H(k⊥, kk) = 2
π(e
+(k) − e
−(k)). After some calculation where, in particular, the resonance con￾dition in frequency and the symmetry in directional polarity are used, we obtain
the following kinetic equations:
∂t

Ek
Hk

=

2d
2
e
64K
X
sspsq
Z
1⊥
skksppkp⊥ sin θk (8.47)
×

sqq⊥ − spp⊥
kk
2
(sk⊥ + spp⊥ + sqq⊥)
2
×

Eq
q⊥
(Ek/k⊥ − Ep/p⊥) + sqHq(sHk − spHp)
s
h
Eq
q⊥
(sHk − spHp) + sqHq(Ek/k⊥ − Ep/p⊥)
i

× δ(sωk + spωp + sqωq) δ(kk + pk + qk)dp⊥dq⊥dpkdqk ,
where θk is the angle between the wavevectors p⊥ and q⊥ in the triangle k⊥ +
p⊥ + q⊥ = 0, and 1⊥ is the integration domain (infinitely extended band) corre￾sponding to this triangle (see Figure 5.5). These kinetic equations were obtained
for the first time by Galtier and Bhattacharjee (2003) in the incompressible limit,
then discussed by Galtier and Meyrand (2015) and Passot and Sulem (2019) in the
context of kinetic Alfvén waves.
The exact power-law solutions are found by applying the generalized Zakharov
transformation to the axisymmetric case (Kuznetsov, 1972): for the nonzero
constant energy flux (Kolmogorov–Zakharov spectrum), we have:
E(k⊥, kk) ∼ k
−5/2
⊥
k
−1/2
k
, (8.48)8.7 Inertial/Kinetic-Alfvén Wave Turbulence 223
and H(k⊥, kk) ∼ k
−7/2
⊥
k
−1/2
k
. These solutions correspond to a direct cascade of
energy. In particular, this means that the spectrum of magnetic helicity is not the
consequence of a dynamics specific to helicity, but the trace of a dynamics induced
by energy.
8.7 Inertial/Kinetic-Alfvén Wave Turbulence: A Twin Problem
The exact solutions found for the energy (8.48) are similar to the one obtained for
inertial wave turbulence (6.23), while the kinetic equations are different. In fact,
despite their apparent difference, we can show that these two kinetic equations
obey the same nonlinear diffusion equation when only local interactions (in the
perpendicular direction) are retained. To prove this claim, we will follow the same
method as in Section 6.6.
The kinetic equation takes the following form:
∂Ek
∂t
=
X
sspsq
Z
T
sspsq
kpq dp⊥dq⊥dpkdqk , (8.49)
with the transfer function per mode:
T
sspsq
kpq =
d
2
e
64√
K
skksppkp⊥
k⊥p⊥q⊥
sin θ

sqq⊥ − spp⊥
kk
2
(sk⊥ + spp⊥ + sqq⊥)
2
Eq(p⊥Ek − k⊥Ep)δ(sωk + spωp + sqωq) δ(kk + pk + qk) . (8.50)
It can be noted that the small parameter  has been absorbed in the time derivative
and therefore no longer appears explicitly: this means that we are focusing on
the long times of wave turbulence. The transfer function verifies the following
symmetry property, which we will be used later:
T
spssq
pkq = −T
sspsq
kpq . (8.51)
Within the limit of strongly local interactions, we can write:
p⊥ = k⊥(1 + p) and q⊥ = k⊥(1 + q) , (8.52)
with 0 < p  1 and 0 < q  1. We can then introduce an arbitrary function
f (k⊥, kk) and integrate the kinetic equation; we get:
∂
∂t
Z
f (k⊥, kk)Ekdk⊥dkk

=
X
sspsq
Z
f (k⊥, kk)T
sspsq
kpq dk⊥dkkdp⊥dq⊥dpkdqk
=
1
2
X
sspsq
Z
[ f (k⊥, kk) − f (p⊥, pk)]T
sspsq
kpq dk⊥dkkdp⊥dq⊥dpkdqk . (8.53)224 8 Wave Turbulence in a Compressible Plasma
For local interactions, we have at the main order (we neglect the contribution of
the parallel wavenumber):
f ( p⊥, pk) = f (k⊥, kk) + (p⊥ − k⊥)
∂f (k⊥, kk)
∂k⊥
= f (k⊥, kk) + pk⊥
∂f (k⊥, kk)
∂k⊥
. (8.54)
One obtains (as for inertial wave turbulence):
∂
∂t
Z
f (k⊥, kk)Ekdk⊥dkk

= (8.55)
−
1
2
X
sspsq
Z
pk⊥
∂f (k⊥, kk)
∂k⊥
T
sspsq
kpq dk⊥dkkdp⊥dq⊥dpkdqk .
An integration by part of the right-hand term allows us to write:
∂Ek
∂t
=
1
2
∂
∂k⊥


X
sspsq
Z
pk⊥T
sspsq
kpq dp⊥dq⊥dpkdqk

 . (8.56)
The local form of the transfer function T
sspsq
kpq can be deduced by using the locality
in the perpendicular direction. In particular, we have:
k
2
⊥p
2
⊥q
2
⊥ = k
6
⊥, (8.57)

sqq⊥ − spp⊥
kk
2
=

sq − sp + sqq − spp
kk
2
k
2
⊥, (8.58)
(sk⊥ + spp⊥ + sqq⊥)
2 = (s + sp + sq)
2
k
2
⊥, (8.59)
Eq(p⊥Ek − k⊥Ep) = −pk
3
⊥Ek
∂(Ek/k⊥)
∂k⊥
, (8.60)
sin θ = sin(π/3) =
√
3
2
, (8.61)
δ(sωk + spωp + sqωq) =
√
K
k⊥deb0
δ(skk + sppk + sqqk). (8.62)
After simplification, we arrive at:
T
sspsq
kpq = −
√
3
32
de √
Kb0
ssppk
kk
pk
4
⊥Ek
∂(Ek/k⊥)
∂k⊥
δ(skk + sppk + sqqk)δ(kk + pk + qk) , (8.63)
where we have considered the dominant transfer for which spsq = −1. The reso￾nance condition leads us to two possible combinations for parallel wavenumbers:
kk + pk − qk = 0 and kk + pk + qk = 0 , (8.64)8.7 Inertial/Kinetic-Alfvén Wave Turbulence 225
or
kk − pk + qk = 0 and kk + pk + qk = 0 . (8.65)
The solution is either qk = 0 or pk = 0, which means that the strong locality
assumption does not apply for the parallel direction. The second solution cancels
the transfer function, so we will consider only the first solution, for which we
obtain:
∂Ek
∂t
=
√
3
64
de √
Kb0
∂
∂k⊥

k
7
⊥Ek
∂(Ek/k⊥)
∂k⊥
Z +
−

2
p
dp
Z +
−
dq . (8.66)
After integration, we finally arrive at the following nonlinear diffusion equation
for energy (Passot and Sulem, 2019):
∂Ek
∂t
= C
∂
∂k⊥

k
7
⊥Ek
∂(Ek/k⊥)
∂k⊥

, (8.67)
with the constant C = 
4de/(16√
3
√
Kb0). This nonlinear diffusion equation
has been rigorously deduced from the kinetic equation. It describes weak kinetic
Alfvén wave turbulence in the limit of strongly local interactions in the perpendic￾ular direction. Note that it is also possible to obtain this diffusion equation using
phenomenological arguments (David and Galtier, 2019): the calculation is then
simpler but it does not allow us to obtain the exact expression of the constant C.
Surprisingly, the diffusion equation (8.67) is the same as for inertial wave tur￾bulence (6.45); only the expression for C differs. This means that the physics of
turbulence is essentially the same for both problems. As explained in Chapter 6,
the exact solution found previously can be obtained here for a constant flux, and
we can prove that this flux is positive, and thus the cascade direct. In Chapter 6,
we made an additional comment about this nonlinear diffusion equation, which
becomes very important for kinetic Alfvén wave turbulence: the numerical sim￾ulation reveals the existence of a steep solution in k
−8/3
⊥
during the nonstationary
phase (see Figure 8.6). This anomalous spectrum is understood as a self-similar
solution of the second kind (David and Galtier, 2019), which disappears when vis￾cous scales are reached, with a bounce of the spectrum at small scales and finally
the formation of the expected stationary solution in k
−5/2
⊥
. However, unlike water,
the solar wind is a collisionless plasma where dissipation involves physical pro￾cesses completely different from a simple viscous term.5 Also, the fact that the
solar wind spectrum exhibits a scaling often close to f
−8/3
(see Figure 8.2) can
in fact be interpreted as the signature of weak wave turbulence. It is perhaps not
5
In numerical simulations, a viscous term is added to avoid numerical instabilities.226 8 Wave Turbulence in a Compressible Plasma
Figure 8.6 Temporal evolution (from bright to dark dashed lines) of the (compensated)
magnetic spectrum Ek in KAW turbulence produced with a nonlinear diffusion model. An
anomalous k
−8/3
⊥
spectrum is obtained (solid line) before its bounce at small scales (David
and Galtier, 2019). Note that the extension of the inertial range is not physically realistic;
however, it is necessary to unambiguously reveal the power-law index. Simulation made
by V. David.
so surprising, then, that experimental measurements of intermittency in the fast￾rotating case (van Bokhoven et al., 2009) and in the solar wind (Kiyani et al.,
2009) give very close self-similar exponents.
8.8 Perspectives
An interesting perspective on compressible plasmas concerns the physics at sub￾MHD scales in space plasmas, where kinetic Alfven and whistler waves are often ´
observed. As shown in Figures 8.2 and 8.3, the turbulent properties of the solar
wind vary significantly as we cross the ion Larmor radius that separates MHD
scales from sub-MHD scales. In general, the phenomenology of (incompressible)
wave turbulence is used to obtain spectral predictions. However, the power-law
exponents proposed for the magnetic energy spectrum, namely −7/3 and −2.5 for
strong and weak wave turbulence respectively, do not match observations, where
−8/3 is often measured (Alexandrova et al., 2012; Sahraoui et al., 2013; Bale
et al., 2019). Additionally, self-similar exponents are found for the structure func￾tions constructed from the magnetic field (Kiyani et al., 2009) or the mass density
(Chen et al., 2014; Roberts et al., 2020), giving intermittency a very specific char￾acter. Understanding the origin of this spectral difference is a difficult subject
because the solar wind plasma is collisionless and, therefore, the dissipation can￾not be modeled as a simple viscosity localized at small scales. In particular, this
means that the phenomenology of turbulence based implicitly on the equilibriumReferences 227
between a large-scale force and a small-scale dissipation can be questioned. As
we have shown numerically in inertial wave turbulence (Chapter 6), the stationary
solution is obtained after a bounce of the spectrum at small scales, which is only
possible if a viscous term is present. The same behavior is observed for KAW
turbulence (David and Galtier, 2019): during the nonstationary phase, a spectrum
in k
−8/3
⊥
is formed, which transforms into k
−2.5
⊥
only after the rebound of the spec￾trum at small scales. What would happen without the effect of viscosity? One
possible answer is that the initial spectrum in k
−8/3
⊥ would be maintained, which
would explain why standard theories have so far failed to explain the data. This
topic is at the heart of current issues related to solar wind turbulence, where the
kinetic effects of plasma physics have, undoubtedly, also a role to play (Passot
and Sulem, 2015, 2019). In this context, an interesting perspective concerns the
direct numerical simulation of the compressible electron MHD equations derived
in this chapter to study the differences between the strong and weak KAW turbu￾lence regimes. The reproduction of solar wind intermittency measurements in the
weak regime would provide an additional and perhaps definitive argument for a
weak wave turbulence interpretation of solar wind turbulence at sub-MHD scales.
If we take the comparison further, could we learn more about space plasmas from
laboratory experiments using rotating water? In the context of a (compressible)
bi-fluid description where there are several types of waves that are related to the
ion and electron populations, their nonlinear interactions are not well understood.
Theoretical and numerical studies are needed to make progress in this area.
References
Alexandrova, O., Lacombe, C., Mangeney, A., Grappin, R., and Maksimovic, M. 2012.
Solar wind turbulent spectrum at plasma kinetic scales. Astrophys. J., 760(2), 121–
127.
Andrés, N., Galtier, S., and Sahraoui, F. 2018. Exact law for homogeneous compressible
Hall magnetohydrodynamics turbulence. Phys. Rev. E, 97(1), 013204.
Bale, S. D., Kellogg, P. J., Mozer, F. S., Horbury, T. S., and Reme, H. 2005. Measurement
of the electric fluctuation spectrum of magnetohydrodynamic turbulence. Phys. Rev.
Lett., 94(21), 215002.
Bale, S. D., Badman, S. T., Bonnell, J. W. et al. 2019. Highly structured slow solar wind
emerging from an equatorial coronal hole. Nature, 576(7786), 237–242.
Bandyopadhyay, R., Sorriso-Valvo, L., Chasapis, A. et al. 2020. In situ observation of Hall
magnetohydrodynamic cascade in space plasma. Phys. Rev. Lett., 124(22), 225101.
Banerjee, S., and Galtier, S. 2013. Exact relation with two-point correlation functions and
phenomenological approach for compressible MHD turbulence. Phys. Rev. E, 87(1),
013019.
Banerjee, S., Hadid, L., Sahraoui, F., and Galtier, S. 2016. Scaling of compressible mag￾netohydrodynamic turbulence in the fast solar wind. Astrophys. J. Lett., 829(2), L27
(5 pages).
Biskamp, D., Schwarz, E., and Drake, J. F. 1996. Two-dimensional electron magnetohy￾drodynamic turbulence. Phys. Rev. Lett., 76(8), 1264–1267.228 8 Wave Turbulence in a Compressible Plasma
Bruno, R., and Carbone, V. 2013. The solar wind as a turbulence laboratory. Living Rev.
Solar Physics, 10(1), 2.
Carbone, V., Bruno, R., Sorriso-Valvo, L., and Lepreti, F. 2004. Intermittency of magnetic
turbulence in slow solar wind. Plan. Space Sci., 52(10), 953–956.
Chandran, B. D. G. 2008. Weakly turbulent magnetohydrodynamic waves in compressible
low-beta plasmas. Phys. Rev. Lett., 101, 235004.
Chen, C. H. K., Sorriso-Valvo, L., Šafránková, J., and Neme ˇ cek, Z. 2014. Intermittency of ˇ
solar wind density fluctuations from ion to electron scales. Astrophys. J. Lett., 789(1),
L8 (5 pages).
Cho, J., and Lazarian, A. 2004. The anisotropy of electron magnetohydrodynamic
turbulence. Astrophys. J. Lett., 615(1), L41–L44.
Cho, J., and Lazarian, A. 2009. Simulations of electron magnetohydrodynamic turbulence.
Astrophys. J., 701(1), 236–252.
David, V., and Galtier, S. 2019. k
−8/3
⊥
spectrum in kinetic Alfvén wave turbulence:
Implications for the solar wind. Astrophys. J. Lett., 880(1), L10 (5 pages).
Ferrand, R., Galtier, S., and Sahraoui, F. 2021a. A compact exact law for compress￾ible isothermal Hall magnetohydrodynamic turbulence. J. Plasma Phys., 87(2),
905870220.
Ferrand, R., Sahraoui, F., Laveder, D. et al. 2021b. Fluid energy cascade rate and kinetic
damping: New insight from 3D Landau-fluid simulations. Astrophys. J., 923(1), 122
(8 pages).
Franci, L., Verdini, A., Matteini, L., Landi, S., and Hellinger, P. 2015. Solar wind turbu￾lence from MHD to sub-ion scales: High-resolution hybrid simulations. Astrophys.
J., 804(2), L39 (5 pages).
Galtier, S. 2003. Weak inertial-wave turbulence theory. Phys. Rev. E, 68(1), 015301.
Galtier, S. 2006. Wave turbulence in incompressible Hall magnetohydrodynamics. J.
Plasma Phys., 72, 721–769.
Galtier, S. 2008. Von Kármán–Howarth equations for Hall magnetohydrodynamic flows.
Phys. Rev. E, 77(1), 015302.
Galtier, S. 2016. Introduction to Modern Magnetohydrodynamics. Cambridge University
Press.
Galtier, S., and Bhattacharjee, A. 2003. Anisotropic weak whistler wave turbulence in
electron magnetohydrodynamics. Phys. Plasmas, 10, 3065–3076.
Galtier, S., and Meyrand, R. 2015. Entanglement of helicity and energy in kinetic Alfvén
wave/whistler turbulence. J. Plasma Phys., 81(1), 325810106.
Goldstein, M. L., and Roberts, D. A. 1999. Magnetohydrodynamic turbulence in the solar
wind. Phys. Plasmas, 6(11), 4154–4160.
Hadid, L. Z., Sahraoui, F., and Galtier, S. 2017. Energy cascade rate in compressible fast
and slow solar wind turbulence. Astrophys. J., 838(1), 9 (11 pages).
Howes, G. G., Dorland, W., Cowley, S. C. et al. 2008. Kinetic simulations of magnetized
turbulence in astrophysical plasmas. Phys. Rev. Lett., 100(6), 065004.
Howes, G. G., Tenbarge, J. M., Dorland, W. et al. 2011. Gyrokinetic simulations of solar
wind turbulence from ion to electron scales. Phys. Rev. Lett., 107(3), 035004.
Kingsep, A. S., Chukbar, K. V., and Yankov, V. V. 1990. Electron magnetohydrodynamics.
Rev. Plasma Phys., 16, 243–291.
Kiyani, K. H., Chapman, S. C., Khotyaintsev, Y. V., Dunlop, M. W., and Sahraoui, F. 2009.
Global scale-invariant dissipation in collisionless plasma turbulence. Phys. Rev. Lett.,
103, 075006.
Kraichnan, R. H. 1973. Helical turbulence and absolute equilibrium. J. Fluid Mech., 59,
745–752.
Kuznetsov, E. A. 1972. Turbulence of ion sound in a plasma located in a magnetic field.
J. Exp. Theor. Phys., 35, 310–314.References 229
Kuznetsov, E. A. 2001. Weak magnetohydrodynamic turbulence of a magnetized plasma.
Sov. J. Exp. Theo. Physics, 93(5), 1052–1064.
Marsch, E., Schwenn, R., Rosenbauer, H. et al. 1982. Solar wind protons: Three￾dimensional velocity distributions and derived plasma parameters measured between
0.3 and 1 AU. J. Geophys. Res., 87(A1), 52–72.
Matthaeus, W. H. 2021. Turbulence in space plasmas: Who needs it? Phys. Plasmas,
28(3), 032306.
Matthaeus, W. H., Zank, G. P., Smith, C. W., and Oughton, S. 1999. Turbulence, spatial
transport, and heating of the solar wind. Phys. Rev. Lett., 82, 3444–3447.
Meyrand, R., Kiyani, K. H., Gürcan, O. D., and Galtier, S. 2018. Coexistence of weak and
strong wave turbulence in incompressible Hall magnetohydrodynamics. Phys. Rev.
X, 8(3), 031066.
Montgomery, M. D., Bame, S. J., and Hundhausen, A. J. 1968. Solar wind electrons: Vela
4 measurements. J. Geophys. Res., 73(15), 49995003.
Musher, S. L., Rubenchik, A. M., and Zakharov, V. E. 1995. Weak Langmuir turbulence.
Phys. Rep., 252(4), 177–274.
Osman, K. T., Wan, M., Matthaeus, W. H., Weygand, J. M., and Dasso, S. 2011. Aniso￾tropic third-moment estimates of the energy cascade in solar wind turbulence using
multispacecraft data. Phys. Rev. Lett., 107(16), 165001.
Passot, T., and Sulem, P. L. 2015. A model for the non-universal power law of the solar
wind sub-ion-scale magnetic spectrum. Astrophys. J. Lett., 812(2), L37 (5 pages).
Passot, T., and Sulem, P. L. 2019. Imbalanced kinetic Alfvén wave turbulence: From weak
turbulence theory to nonlinear diffusion models for the strong regime. J. Plasma
Phys., 85(3), 905850301.
Pilipp, W. G., Miggenrieder, H., Montgomery, M. D. et al. 1987. Characteristics of elec￾tron velocity distribution functions in the solar wind derived from the helios plasma
experiment. J. Geophys. Res., 92(A2), 1075–1092.
Politano, H., and Pouquet, A. 1998. Von Kármán–Howarth equation for magnetohydro￾dynamics and its consequences on third-order longitudinal structure and correlation
functions. Phys. Rev. E, 57, R21R24.
Roberts, O. W., Thwaites, J., Sorriso-Valvo, L., Nakamura, R., and Vörös, Z. 2020.
Higher-order statistics in compressive solar wind plasma turbulence: High-resolution
density observations from the Magnetospheric MultiScale Mission. Frontiers in
Physics, 8, 584063.
Sahraoui, F., Belmont, G., and Rezeau, L. 2003. Hamiltonian canonical formulation
of Hall-magnetohydrodynamics: Toward an application to weak turbulence theory.
Phys. Plasmas, 10(5), 1325–1337.
Sahraoui, F., Huang, S. Y., Belmont, G. et al. 2013. Scaling of the electron dissipation
range of solar wind turbulence. Astrophys. J., 777(1), 15 (11 pages).
Sahraoui, F., Hadid, L., and Huang, S. 2020. Magnetohydrodynamic and kinetic scale tur￾bulence in the near-Earth space plasmas: A (short) biased review. Rev. Mod. Plasma
Phys., 4(1), 4 (33 pages).
Schekochihin, A. A., Cowley, S. C., Dorland, W. et al. 2009. Astrophysical gyrokinet￾ics: Kinetic and fluid turbulent cascades in magnetized weakly collisional plasmas.
Astrophys. J. Supp., 182(1), 310–377.
Sorriso-Valvo, L., Marino, R., Carbone, V. et al. 2007. Observation of inertial energy
cascade in interplanetary space plasma. Phys. Rev. Let., 99(11), 115001.
Turner, L. 2000. Using helicity to characterize homogeneous and inhomogeneous turbu￾lent dynamics. J. Fluid Mech., 408(1), 205–238.
van Bokhoven, L. J. A., Clercx, H. J. H., van Heijst, G. J. F., and Trieling, R. R. 2009.
Experiments on rapidly rotating turbulent flows. Phys. Fluids, 21(9), 096601.
Vasquez, B. J., Smith, C. W., Hamilton, K., MacBride, B. T., and Leamon, R. J. 2007.
Evaluation of the turbulent energy cascade rates from the upper inertial range in the
solar wind at 1 AU. J. Geophys. Res., 112, A07101.230 8 Wave Turbulence in a Compressible Plasma
Voitenko, Y. M. 1998. Three-wave coupling and weak turbulence of kinetic Alfvén waves.
J. Plasma Phys., 60(3), 515–527.
Waleffe, F. 1992. The nature of triad interactions in homogeneous turbulence. Phys. Fluids
A, 4(2), 350–363.
Zakharov, V. E. 1967. Weak-turbulence spectrum in a plasma without a magnetic field.
Sov. J. Exp. Theor. Physics, 24, 455459.
Zakharov, V. E. 1972. Collapse of Langmuir waves. Sov. J. Exp. Theor. Physics, 35, 908–
914.9
Gravitational Wave Turbulence
The first direct detection of gravitational waves (GW) by the LIGO–Virgo collab￾oration (Abbott et al., 2016), a century after their prediction by Albert Einstein
(1916), is certainly one of the most important events in astronomy in recent
decades. Thanks to this new gravitational astronomy and the fact that GW interact
only weakly with matter, the primordial Universe that preceded the first electro￾magnetic radiation of the Universe, commonly known as the cosmic microwave
background (CMB), becomes now potentially accessible. Hence, many efforts are
currently made to detect primordial GW. But do we know how the Universe would
have behaved if it was made of a sea of GW?
In this final chapter, we shall answer this question and present the regime of
weak GW turbulence in the context of primordial cosmology. First, we will give
a brief review of cosmology – useful for nonspecialists – with the main steps
in the evolution of the Universe, starting from its “birth.” Then, we will report
the main theoretical properties of weak GW turbulence, which involves four-wave
interactions and a dual cascade, with a slow direct energy cascade and an explosive
inverse cascade of wave action. This part will be illustrated by direct numerical
simulations of Einstein’s equations. Finally, we will present an extension to strong
GW turbulence with a plausible application: the cosmological inflation produced
a fraction of second after the Big Bang.
9.1 Primordial Universe
9.1.1 History of the Universe
Since the observations of Hubble (1929), we have known that the Universe is
expanding. This expansion is not uniform, in the sense that the farther away the
galaxies are, the faster they move away. Reversing the arrow of time suggests that
there was a time (around 13.8 billion years) when the Universe was concentrated
in one point. The Big Bang is associated with this theoretical point from which the
231232 9 Gravitational Wave Turbulence
Figure 9.1 A brief history of the observable Universe. Starting from the bottom, the dif￾ferent phases of expansion are symbolized by the widening of the sample of the Universe.
Today (top), the observable Universe has a diameter of about 13.8 × 109
light-years,
which is only a small fraction of the Universe (whose size could be infinite). By defini￾tion, we are at the center of the observable Universe. The timescale on the right starts
at the Planck epoch (t ∼ 10−43 s) to reach the present moment (top). On the left is indi￾cated the temperature of the Universe: the actual temperature corresponds to that of the
cosmic microwave background radiation, emitted when the Universe was about 380 000
years old. The primordial Universe, which preceded this moment, can be directly probed
only by considering (primordial) GW. These were produced, in particular, during the GUT
(t ∼ 10−36 s) and electroweak (t ∼ 10−10 s) phase transitions. The inflation phase would
have increased the size of the Universe by a factor of at least 1028. A regime of strong
GW turbulence is expected close to the birth of the Universe (hatched area), around time
t ∼ 10−36s  tPlanck .
Universe was created. It is difficult to conceive what the Universe was at the initial
instant, especially since the notion of time as we know it today had no meaning. In
general, the earliest instant to which we can refer was the first 10−43s, equivalent to
Planck time, tPlanck , and referred to as the Planck epoch. As proposed by Wheeler
(1955), the Universe may have been then in a state of turbulent quantum foam
that only quantum gravity could describe, but to date this theory has not yet been
established (Weinberg, 2008).9.1 Primordial Universe 233
In Figure 9.1 we show schematically what happened next. Globally, the Uni￾verse underwent an expansion cooling with several phases. The first phase is
usually located around t ∼ 10−36 s: at this time, the Universe would have under￾gone a very violent accelerated expansion called inflation – with a speed of
expansion faster than the speed of light. This expansion would have occurred at
the moment of the GUT (grand unified theory) phase transition, that is, the instant
when the strong interaction separated from the electroweak interaction. It is fol￾lowing this phase of inflation that matter would have been created. Let us note that
turbulence is a possible mechanism for understanding the post-inflationary transi￾tion to thermal equilibrium (Micha and Tkachev, 2003, 2004). Later, around t ∼
10−10 s, there was a second phase transition which corresponded to the moment
when the weak interaction separated from the electromagnetic interaction. We
arrive here at an energy level that CERN instruments can reach, and thus exper￾imentally test the theories. From t ∼ 380 000 years, the Universe was no longer
opaque and the first electromagnetic radiation could escape: this was the CMB. We
enter from this moment into the domain of the observable Universe. Then came
the last phase, discovered in 1998 (Perlmutter et al., 1998; Riess et al., 1998): it
was a new phase of accelerated expansion, which was due to dark energy. This
mysterious denomination mainly reflects our ignorance about the origin of this
acceleration.
To explain all these expansion phases, we need to use the equations of general
relativity (Einstein, 1915). The decelerated expansion, between the end of inflation
and the dark energy era, is well explained by the standard model (Friedmann,
1922). Explaining the accelerated expansion phases it is still an open problem: in
general, a nonzero cosmological constant is introduced (or equivalently a negative
pressure of quantum origin), but the detailed physical mechanism is unknown.
On the other hand, the equations of relativity are not valid near Planck’s epoch,
where quantum effects are so important that they require a theory of quantum
gravity.
9.1.2 Cosmological Inflation
The CMB was measured with unprecedented accuracy by ESA’s Planck mission
(Planck Collaboration, 2014). These new measurements confirm those made with
NASA’s COBE and WMAP satellites, that is, that the first electromagnetic in the
Universe was of a very high homogeneity, with a temperature around 2.7 K. This
property can be explained if a phase of inflation existed in the primordial Universe.
To understand this, we must return to Figure 9.1. At the top, the two small black
disks symbolize two regions of the sky sufficiently distant from each other to
be causally disconnected. If we go back in time, we see that before the inflation
phase these two regions were in fact causally connected. This change of state is
explained by a supraluminal expansion of the Universe. This expansion at a speed234 9 Gravitational Wave Turbulence
greater than that of light is not in contradiction with the laws of physics, because
it is not the propagation of information but the expansion of space-time itself. If
a physical process existed (such as turbulence) to homogenize the preinflationary
primordial Universe, then inflation would have had the effect of extending the
homogenized region over the entire current sky. Note that the role of inflation
is not limited to this: for example, it is also a way to explain the flatness of the
Universe.
Cosmological inflation was proposed in particular by Guth (1981). This sce￾nario is based on particle physics and the existence of a scalar field called inflaton.
However, to date no direct or indirect evidence of its existence has been found.
Furthermore, Planck’s measures point out the weaknesses of the model, which
have led to several criticisms (see, e.g., Ijjas et al., 2013, 2014 and Hollands and
Wald, 2002). One of the difficulties is that the classical inflation model requires a
very fine tuning of the initial conditions, which is difficult to explain physically.
One solution is to evoke the anthropic principle and, for example, the existence of
∼ 10100 parallel universes. Our universe would therefore have by pure chance the
parameters in question.
In Section 9.3 we will see that strong GW turbulence may offer an original
mechanism at the origin of the cosmological inflation. To understand the essence
of this mechanism, we need to present the main properties of the weak turbulence
regime.
9.2 Weak Gravitational Wave Turbulence
9.2.1 Einstein’s Equations
The theory of GW turbulence is based on the equations of general relativity, which
dynamically describe how space-time is distorted by energy and matter (Einstein,
1915). These equations of relativistic gravitation are written in a general way:
Rµν −
1
2
gµνR − 3gµν =
8πG
c
4
Tµν , (9.1)
with Rµν the Ricci tensor, R the Ricci scalar, gµν the metric tensor, 3 the cos￾mological constant, Tµν the stress-energy tensor, G the gravitational constant, and
c the speed of light. For our study, we will neglect the cosmological constant
(3 = 0). Equations (9.1) relate the energy-matter (right term) to space-time cur￾vature (left term). The fundamental variable to describe the space-time curvature
is the metric tensor gµν : it is a 4 × 4 tensor symmetrical in µ and ν.
1
It is interesting to make a comparison between Einstein’s equations (9.1) and
those of Navier–Stokes (2.1). As in hydrodynamics, general relativity is described
1 The metric is what makes it possible to measure the distance between two close points. In classical physics,
this distance can be written: ds2 = dx2 + dy2 + dz2 = gµνdxµdxν
. With x
1 = x, x
2 = y and x
3 = z, we
obtain: gµν = δµν .9.2 Weak Gravitational Wave Turbulence 235
by nonlinear partial differential equations. The tensors being symmetrical in µ
and ν, we have a total of 10 equations. The left-hand terms of (9.1) are for us
the core of nonlinearities (time derivatives are also present there), while the right￾hand term can be seen as an external force that excites the space-time over a
given range of scale (or frequency). For our study, we will place ourselves in the
vacuum, which is the same as eliminating the right-hand term of equation (9.1).
Under these circumstances, the equations are simplified (for an empty Universe,
R = 0), and we obtain the equation of general relativity in a vacuum:
Rµν = 0 . (9.2)
By definition:
Rµν ≡ ∂α0
α
µν − ∂µ0
α
αν + 0
β
µν0
α
αβ − 0
α
µβ0
β
αν , (9.3a)
0
i
jk ≡
1
2
g
il(∂jglk + ∂kgjl − ∂lgjk ) , (9.3b)
where 0
i
jk is the Christoffel symbols; Einstein’s convention on indices should be
used. These expressions are sufficient (we will not give details on the origin of
the different Ricci tensor terms) to give us an idea of the type of nonlinearity we
are dealing with: they are at least quadratic. Note that the comparison with the
Navier–Stokes equations is not complete, since in general relativity there are no
pure dissipative terms. However, dissipation of GW by matter is expected through,
for example, Landau damping (Baym et al., 2017).
9.2.2 Gravitational Waves
The linear solutions of equation (9.2) are well known: they are gravitational
waves (Einstein, 1916, 1918). These solutions are obtained by adding a small
perturbation hµν to the undisturbed (flat) space-time ηµν , which is simply the
Poincaré–Minkowski metric:
ηµν =




−1 0 0 0
0 1 0 0
0 0 1 0
0 0 0 1



 . (9.4)
The introduction of the metric:
gµν = ηµν + hµν (9.5)
in the linearized equation (9.2) gives the dispersion relation (Maggiore, 2008):
ω = kc . (9.6)
Gravitational waves are therefore nondispersive. This could be a problem for the
nonlinear treatment because the uniformity of the wave turbulence development236 9 Gravitational Wave Turbulence
is not guaranteed (see Chapter 4). But this potential problem occurs for triadic
interactions (as for acoustic waves; see L’vov et al., 1997) while GW turbulence is
in fact a problem that is treated at the next order, that is, for quartic interactions
(four-wave interactions).
9.2.3 Theory of Weak GW Turbulence
The theory of GW turbulence consists in introducing expression (9.5) into the
nonlinear equation (9.2), assuming:
|hµν |  1 . (9.7)
The objective of this final chapter is not to present the analytical development
of the theory but rather to give an idea of the method for arriving at the kinetic
equation, whose form is quite classical. In the approximation of waves with weak
amplitude (9.7), we see on expressions (9.3) that the dominant nonlinear terms are
quadratic. Consequently, the nonlinear treatment will bring out a triadic resonance
condition similar to that of acoustic waves, for which the solutions correspond to
rays in Fourier space (Newell and Aucoin, 1971; L’vov et al., 1997). From this
property concerning the resonant manifold, one can demonstrate that Einstein’s
equations (for an empty Universe and neglecting the cosmological constant) do
not make any contribution to wave turbulence (Galtier and Nazarenko, 2017).
Therefore, the theory must be treated at the next order – for quartic interactions –
and take into account the cubic nonlinear contributions.
The development of a four-wave theory is more difficult. The equations of gen￾eral relativity being themselves much more complex than the equations we usually
deal with, we must try to simplify the approach. It is known that the search for
solutions in general relativity is facilitated by the choice of coordinates. For exam￾ple, the search for simple solutions associated with spherical objects (black hole
type) requires the use of spherical coordinates. We will do the same here and use
a metric introduced by Hadad and Zakharov (2014): it is a diagonal metric in
Cartesian coordinates, which is written:
gµν =




−(H0)
2 0 0 0
0 (H1)
2 0 0
0 0 (H2)
2 0
0 0 0 (H3)
2



 , (9.8)
with H0, H1, H2, and H3 the Lamé coefficients.2 These coefficients depend on
x
0 = t, x
1 = x, and x
2 = y, but are independent of x
3 = z, with by definition the
space-time interval: ds2 = gµνdxµdxν
. The Lamé coefficients are defined by the
2 One can verify with this metric that the fourth-order Riemann curvature tensor, as well as the Kretschmann
curvature invariant, is nontrivial. This means that the metric used can describe a nontrivial physics that exists
independently of the choice of coordinates (Weber and Wheeler, 1957).9.2 Weak Gravitational Wave Turbulence 237
following relations:
H0 ≡ e
−λ
(1 + γ ) , H1 ≡ e
−λ
(1 + β) , H2 ≡ e
−λ
(1 + α) , H3 ≡ e
λ
, (9.9)
with α, β, γ , λ  1. The introduction of these variables into equation (9.2) gives
the following system at the main order:
∂xα˙ = −2λ˙(∂xλ) , (9.10a)
∂yβ˙ = −2λ˙(∂yλ) , (9.10b)
∂xyγ = −2(∂xλ)(∂yλ) , (9.10c)
with:
∂t[(1+α +β −γ )λ˙] = ∂x[(1+α −β +γ )∂xλ]+∂y[(1−α +β +γ )∂yλ] , (9.11)
where ˙means the time derivative. As we can see from equation (9.11), GW are
indeed linear solutions. We also note that λ is the fundamental variable to describe
these waves. The linear solution obtained involves only one wave polarization (the
diagonal components whose polarization is noted +), whereas in the general case,
there are two polarizations (the + and × polarizations associated with the diago￾nal and nondiagonal components, respectively (Maggiore, 2008)). This reduction
allows a simplification of the problem, while keeping the indispensable element
for the theory, the wave.3
The analytical development here is based on a relatively classical Hamilto￾nian approach. The kinetic equation obtained for GW turbulence is finally written
(Galtier and Nazarenko, 2017):
∂tNk = 
4
Z
R6
|T
kk3
k1k2
|
2 NkNk1Nk2Nk3
(9.12)
×

1
Nk
+
1
Nk3
−
1
Nk1
−
1
Nk2

δ
k
03,12 δ
ω
03,12 dk1dk2dk3,
with by definition δ
k
03,12 ≡ δ(k + k3 − k1 − k2) and δ
ω
03,12 ≡ δ(ωk + ωk3 − ω k1 −
ωk2
). Nk is the wave action and T
k3
k1k2
a geometric coefficient verifying certain
symmetries that it is not useful to give here. Equation (9.12) has two invariants:
energy and wave action. The presence of a second invariant – the wave action – is
not automatic for four-wave interactions because it requires the kinetic equation to
satisfy additional symmetries (Nazarenko, 2011). In practice, interactions 1 ↔ 3
must be absent, leaving only interactions 2 ↔ 2. Note that the wave action is
an invariant that appears in other systems described by quartic interactions, such
as nonlinear optics (Dyachenko et al., 1992) or for elastic wave turbulence on
3 The use of a diagonal metric immediately raises the problem of compatibility: the metric has ten elements, and
generally four of which can be eliminated by using gauge transformations. This makes the vacuum Einstein
equations an overdetermined system of ten equations for six unknowns. This compatibility has been properly
checked (without introducing a gauge) by Hadad and Zakharov (2014). In particular, we can see that there
are as many equations (9.10)–(9.11) as there are unknowns (9.9).238 9 Gravitational Wave Turbulence
Figure 9.2 Temporal evolution of the (isotropic) wave action spectrum N(k) with an
initial spectrum located around k = 1022 (decaying simulation of a nonlinear diffusion
model). The inverse cascade produces a spectrum close to k
−2/3 over more than 20
decades (this huge inertial range is probably nonphysical, but necessary here to measure
the power-law index unambiguously). Simulation created by É. Buchlin.
a membrane (Hassaini et al., 2019). It is also an invariant that can be found in
six-wave problems (Laurie et al., 2012).
Equation (9.12) admits of three exact (isotropic) solutions. First, there is the
thermodynamic solution Nk ∼ k
0
. The two others are the Kolmogorov–Zakharov
spectra for the wave action:
Nk ∼ k
−2/3
, (9.13)
and energy (by definition Ek ≡ ωkNk ):
Ek ∼ k
0
. (9.14)
These solutions correspond respectively to an inverse and a direct cascade (see
Exercise II.3 and its solutions).4 The form of the solution for the wave action
allows us to affirm that the inverse cascade is explosive (this property is related
to the convergence of the integral R ki
0
Nkdk, with ki
the initial wavenumber
excitation).
An analysis of the explosiveness of the inverse cascade is made easier if a
nonlinear diffusion model is used. As in the case of rotation (see Chapter 6), a
nonstationary solution different from the Kolmogorov–Zakharov spectrum can be
found. However, the difference in power-law exponent followed by Nk is tiny here
(' −0.6517 for the nonstationary solution instead of −2/3 for the stationary
solution). In Figure 9.2, we show the result of a numerical simulation with the for￾mation of a N(k) spectrum over more than 20 decades (Galtier et al., 2019). The
expected scenario in weak wave turbulence is therefore the rapid formation of a
4 These spectra are the first exact statistical solutions of Einstein’s equations ever found.9.2 Weak Gravitational Wave Turbulence 239
Figure 9.3 Result of a direct numerical simulation of equations (9.10)–(9.11) with a
spatial resolution of 512 × 512. Components g11 (bottom) and g22 + 0.2 (top) of the
space-time metric produced in weak GW turbulence. There are characterized by small
erratic fluctuations around the reference value, the Poincaré–Minkowski flat metric (+1).
large-scale inertial range by an inverse cascade of wave action, and the relatively
slow formation of a small-scale inertial range by a direct energy cascade.
9.2.4 Direct Numerical Simulations
The direct numerical simulation of weak GW turbulence is an emerging subject in
cosmology: the first simulation in the decaying case was realized by Galtier and
Nazarenko (2021) with a pseudospectral code (using FFTW3 and de-aliasing).
The main conclusion reached by the authors is that it is possible to produce tur￾bulence in general relativity. Unlike classical hydrodynamic turbulence, it does
not consist of randomly interacting vortices but, rather, it takes a form of random
interacting waves – the space-time turbulence (see Figure 9.3). Furthermore, the
dual cascade was confirmed (see Figure 9.4) with a timescale (transfer time) com￾patible with four-wave processes, that is, such that τtr ∼ τGW /4
(see Chapter 4).
In this case, the gravitational time is defined with the initial excitation, that is,
τGW = 1/ki
.
The domain of validity of GW turbulence is limited to a certain range of scales.
We have seen that for MHD plasmas (see Chapter 7) the transition between the
weak and strong regimes is at a small scale (i.e. at a scale smaller than the initial
excitation), whereas in the case of capillary waves the turbulence becomes weaker
and weaker at small scales (see Chapter 5). However, in both cases, the cascade
of the invariant is direct. In GW turbulence, a transition to strong turbulence is
expected at large scales (scales larger than the initial excitation). In other words,
the inverse cascade of wave action will necessarily end up (quickly) in the strong
regime. In the direct numerical simulation shown in Figure 9.3, the computation240 9 Gravitational Wave Turbulence
Figure 9.4 Direct evidence of a dual cascade in GW turbulence (same direct numerical
simulation as in Figure 9.3). The time evolution of the 1D isotropic compensated wave
action spectrum k
2/3Nk is shown, with the initial spectrum (located at ki = 89) given in
dashed line. The direct cascade is stopped (around k = 140) by the additional dissipative
term added to the Einstein equations.
Figure 9.5 Spectrum Hˆ
k of the space-time metric fluctuations. In these units, the scaling
law of the weak inverse cascade is in k
−5/3
and that of critical balance (from the ks scale)
in k
−1
. A condensation phenomenon appears at k = 0, which leads to an expansion of
the Universe (see text). Planck’s scale is given for information: close to this scale, the
equations of general relativity are no longer valid. Sources of forcing at the ki scale are
assumed sufficiently intense to generate a regime close to that of strong wave turbulence.
stopped when the GW amplitude exceeded 10 percent and the weak turbulence
condition (weak wave amplitude) started not to be fulfilled.9.3 Strong Turbulence and Inflation 241
9.3 Strong Turbulence and Inflation
Weak GW turbulence is dominated by the inverse cascade of wave action as it
is explosive (solution of finite capacity), whereas the direct energy cascade is
slow (solution of infinite capacity). This means in principle that modes k smaller
than the initial excited mode (ki) of the space-time can all be excited in a finite
time. However, during this process wave turbulence quickly becomes strong, and
a phenomenological model is required to pursue the description. As explained in
Chapter 7, the critical balance conjecture is a widely used model in turbulence.
In the case of GW, the prediction for the large-scale wave action spectrum is
N(k) ∼ k
0
, a situation always favorable to an explosive inverse cascade.
What happens next? Although the scenario becomes hypothetical, we can envis￾age that the inverse cascade finally excites significantly the slow mode k = 0 (see
Figure 9.5). We have already seen the importance of the slow mode in rotating
hydrodynamic turbulence (Chapter 6) and in MHD (Chapter 7). In particular, we
know that the slow mode excitation does not violate the principle of causality,
because it does not correspond to the propagation of information in the physical
space from a given scale to infinity. Note, in passing, that for our analysis we do
not need to specify the size of the Universe sample (finite or infinite). In cos￾mology, the slow mode corresponds to the background level of the metric, which
means that if we feed (amplify) this mode, we increase the size of the Universe
(phase of expansion). This is where the link is made between turbulence and infla￾tion: due to the explosive nature of the inverse cascade we can expect an equally
explosive expansion, that is, a phase of inflation (Galtier et al., 2020).
Is GW turbulence the cause of cosmological inflation? The answer to this ques￾tion is far from trivial and requires much more work, based, in particular, on direct
numerical simulations of strong GW turbulence. However, based on the previous
discussion, we can now sketch out a complete scenario. The basic assumption
is that the nonlinearities of the equations of general relativity were nonnegligi￾ble around t ∼ 10−36s  tPlanck (see Figure 9.1). The sharp increase of the
condensate described here is necessarily limited in time, because the expansion
of the Universe induces a dilution, that is, a decrease in the space-time metric
fluctuations, and thus a reduction of nonlinearities, which means the end of the
cascade mechanism. Consequently, turbulence offers a natural physical mechan￾ism to stop inflation. Then, we enter a standard expansion phase of the Universe,
with a self-similar decay of GW turbulence with a 1/k metric spectrum, which cor￾responds to the critical balance phenomenology. By using a simple dimensional
argument, we can deduce the spectrum for the mass density of the primordial Uni￾verse following inflation (which is the Harrison–Zeldovich spectrum Harrison,
1970; Zeldovich, 1972). It turns out that this fossil spectrum is in good agree￾ment with Planck/ESA measurements of the CMB (Planck Collaboration, 2016);
indeed, the measurements are in correspondence with a k
−1.033 metric spectrum.242 9 Gravitational Wave Turbulence
A turbulence-based scenario also has the advantage of offering a natural physi￾cal mechanism to homogenize the initial metric fluctuations without fine-tuning
(a weakness of current models; Ijjas et al., 2013, 2014). This scenario, which is
radically different in nature from the inflation model of particle physics based on
a hypothetical scalar field called inflaton, suggests that under extreme conditions
(strong nonlinearities) Einstein’s gravitation can be a repulsive force.5
9.4 Perspectives
Since the equations of general relativity have never failed so far, this cosmological
scenario is arguably interesting in helping us to better understand the primordial
Universe from first principles. One advantage is that it can be tested directly (a lux￾ury in this field) by direct numerical simulation.6 This is a promising and exciting
prospect in turbulence. In particular, it would be interesting to verify if an anom￾alous exponent (found in weak GW turbulence and in several other systems – see
Chapters 6, 7, and 8) also exists for the inverse cascade in the regime of strong
GW turbulence that could lead to a small deviation from the 1/k metric spec￾trum. According to the cosmological observation, a scaling in k
−1.033 is expected.
In this case, that would mean the anomalous exponent of GW turbulence could
be at the origin of the formation of the structures in the Universe. The formation
of a spectral condensate is not new in turbulence. For example, it is predicted
and observed with the nonlinear Schrödinger model (Gross–Pitaevskii equation),
which forms a Bose–Einstein condensate (Dyachenko et al., 1992; Zakharov and
Nazarenko, 2005; Miller et al., 2013). The numerical study of the formation of
such condensate in GW turbulence is an important perspective.
On the other hand, as shown by the theoretical, numerical, and experimental
work of Hassaini et al. (2019), there is a strong proximity (type of interactions,
symmetry of kinetic equations) between GW turbulence and that of elastic waves
in the high tension limit. We can see here another interesting perspective: the
development of new laboratory experiments could help us to better understand
the primordial Universe.
References
Abbott, B. P., Abbot, R., Abbott, T. D. et al. 2016. Observation of gravitational waves
from a binary black hole merger. Phys. Rev. Lett., 116, 061102.
Baym, G., Patil, S. P., and Pethick, C. J. 2017. Damping of gravitational waves by matter.
Phys. Rev. D, 96(8), 084033.
Dyachenko, S., Newell, A. C., Pushkarev, A., and Zakharov, V. E. 1992. Optical tur￾bulence: Weak turbulence, condensates and collapsing filaments in the nonlinear
Schrödinger equation. Physica D, 57, 96–160.
5
In the standard model of cosmology (Friedmann, 1922), if we neglect the cosmological constant (3 = 0) and
if the Universe is empty, the solution is a static Universe.
6 Other applications of strong GW turbulence, such as the environment of black holes, can also be considered
(Green et al., 2014; Yang et al., 2015).References 243
Einstein, A. 1915. Erklarung der Perihelionbewegung der Merkur aus der allgemeinen
Relativitatstheorie. Sitzungsber. preuss. Akad. Wiss, 47, 831–839.
Einstein, A. 1916. Näherungsweise Integration der Feldgleichungen der Gravitation.
Sitzungsberichte der Königlich Preusischen Akademie der Wissenschaften (Berlin),
688–696.
Einstein, A. 1918. Über Gravitationswellen. Sitzungsberichte der Königlich Preusischen
Akademie der Wissenschaften (Berlin), 154–167.
Friedmann, A. 1922. Über die Krümmung des Raumes. Zeitschrift fur Physik, 10, 377–
386.
Galtier, S., and Nazarenko, S. V. 2017. Turbulence of weak gravitational waves in the
early Universe. Phys. Rev. Lett., 119, 221101.
Galtier, S., and Nazarenko, S. V. 2021. Direct evidence of a dual cascade in gravitational
wave turbulence. Phys. Rev. Lett., 127, 131101.
Galtier, S., Nazarenko, S. V., Buchlin, É., and Thalabard, S. 2019. Nonlinear diffusion
models for gravitational wave turbulence. Physica D, 390, 84–88.
Galtier, S., Laurie, J., and Nazarenko, S. V. 2020. A plausible model of inflation driven by
strong gravitational wave turbulence. Universe, 6(7), 98 (16 pages).
Green, S. R., Carrasco, F., and Lehner, L. 2014. Holographic path to the turbulent side of
gravity. Phys. Rev. X, 4(1), 011001.
Guth, A. H. 1981. Inflationary universe: A possible solution to the horizon and flatness
problems. Phys. Rev. D, 23, 347–356.
Hadad, Y., and Zakharov, V. 2014. Transparency of strong gravitational waves. J. Geom.
Phys., 80, 37–48.
Harrison, E. R. 1970. Fluctuations at the threshold of classical cosmology. Phys. Rev. D,
1(10), 2726–2730.
Hassaini, R., Mordant, N., Miquel, B., Krstulovic, G., and Düring, G. 2019. Elastic weak
turbulence: From the vibrating plate to the drum. Phys. Rev. E, 99(3), 033002.
Hollands, S., and Wald, R. M. 2002. Essay: An alternative to inflation. General Relat. &
Grav., 34(12), 2043–2055.
Hubble, E. 1929. A relation between distance and radial velocity among extra-galactic
nebulae. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., 15(3), 168–173.
Ijjas, A., Steinhardt, P. J., and Loeb, A. 2013. Inflationary paradigm in trouble after
Planck2013. Phys. Lett. B, 723, 261–266.
Ijjas, A., Steinhardt, P. J., and Loeb, A. 2014. Inflationary schism. Phys. Lett. B, 736,
142–146.
Laurie, J., Bortolozzo, U., Nazarenko, S., and Residori, S. 2012. One-dimensional optical
wave turbulence: Experiment and theory. Phys. Rep., 514(4), 121–175.
L’vov, V. S., L’vov, Y., Newell, A. C., and Zakharov, V. E. 1997. Statistical description of
acoustic turbulence. Phys. Rev. E, 56(1), 390–405.
Maggiore, M. 2008. Gravitational Waves, vol. 1: Theory and Experiments. Oxford
University Press.
Micha, R., and Tkachev, I. I. 2003. Relativistic turbulence: A long way from preheating
to equilibrium. Phys. Rev. Lett., 90(12), 121301.
Micha, R., and Tkachev, I. I. 2004. Turbulent thermalization. Phys. Rev. D, 70(4), 043538.
Miller, P., Vladimirova, N., and Falkovich, G. 2013. Oscillations in a turbulence￾condensate system. Phys. Rev. E, 87(6), 065202.
Nazarenko, S. 2011. Wave Turbulence. Lecture Notes in Physics, vol. 825. Springer
Verlag.
Newell, A. C., and Aucoin, P. J. 1971. Semi-dispersive wave systems. J. Fluid Mech., 49,
593–609.
Perlmutter, S., Aldering, G., della Valle, M. et al. 1998. Discovery of a supernova
explosion at half the age of the universe. Nature, 391(6662), 51–54.244 9 Gravitational Wave Turbulence
Planck Collaboration. 2014. Planck 2013 results. I. Overview of products and scientific
results. Astron. Astrophys., 571, A1 (48 pages).
Planck Collaboration. 2016. Planck 2015 results. XX. Constraints on inflation. Astron.
Astrophys., 594, A20 (65 pages).
Riess, A. G., Filippenko, A. V., Challis, P. et al. 1998. Observational evidence from super￾novae for an accelerating universe and a cosmological constant. Astron. J., 116(3),
1009–1038.
Weber, J., and Wheeler, J. A. 1957. Reality of the cylindrical gravitational waves of
Einstein and Rosen. Rev. Modern Phys., 29(3), 509–515.
Weinberg, S. 2008. Cosmology. Oxford University Press.
Wheeler, J. A. 1955. Geons. Phys. Rev., 97, 511–536.
Yang, H., Zimmerman, A., and Lehner, L. 2015. Turbulent black holes. Phys. Rev. Lett.,
114(8), 081101.
Zakharov, V. E., and Nazarenko, S. V. 2005. Dynamics of the Bose–Einstein condensation.
Physica D, 201(3–4), 203–211.
Zeldovich, Y. B. 1972. A hypothesis, unifying the structure and the entropy of the
Universe. MNRAS, 160, 1P–3P.Exercises II
II.1 MHD Model of Nonlinear Diffusion
Nonlinear diffusion models are often used in turbulence because their numeri￾cal simulations are relatively easy. We have already encountered these models in
Chapters 3, 6, and 8. We propose here to develop such a phenomenological model
for Alfvén wave turbulence in the balanced case. The particularity of the approach
is that it must take into account the anisotropy. In practice, the following equation
is considered:
∂E(k)
∂t
= −∇ · 5(k) ,
where E(k) is the energy spectrum and 5(k) the associated flux.
(1) What are the conditions of validity of this equation?
(2) Alfvén wave turbulence is strongly anisotropic. Using a coordinate system
adapted to this situation, rewrite the diffusion equation.
(3) The transverse component of the energy flux is modeled as follows:
5⊥(k) = −D(k)
∂E(k)
∂k⊥
,
where D is a nonlinear diffusion coefficient which remains to be determined. What
is the dimension of D?
(4) We call τtr the characteristic time of energy transfer. Express τtr as a function
of E(k) and k⊥.
(5) By using the relation R
E(k⊥)f (kk)dk⊥dkk =
RRR E(k)dk, show that the
nonlinear diffusion equation can be written as:
∂E(k⊥)
∂t
= C
∂
∂k⊥

k
6
⊥E(k⊥)
∂(E(k⊥)/k⊥)
∂k⊥

,
where C is a constant.
(6) What is the Kolmogorov–Zakharov spectrum exact solution of the equation?
What is the direction of the cascade?
245246 Exercises II
II.2 Four-Wave Interactions
Let us consider the isotropic dispersion relation ω = Akα
, with A a positive con￾stant and α ∈ R
∗
+. In the two-dimensional case, show graphically that we can
always find solutions for four-wave resonant interactions.
II.3 Gravitational Wave Turbulence: Exact Solutions
The objective of this exercise is to obtain analytically the exact solutions of grav￾itational wave turbulence. We have seen that the kinetic equation is written as
follows:
∂tNk = 
6
Z
R6
|T
kk3
k1k2
|
2 NkNk1Nk2Nk3
×

1
Nk
+
1
Nk3
−
1
Nk1
−
1
Nk2

δ
k
03,12 δ
ω
03,12 dk1dk2dk3 ,
with δ
k
03,12 ≡ δ(k + k3 − k1 − k2) and δ
ω
03,12 ≡ δ(ωk + ωk3 − ω k1 − ωk2
).
We must specify the symmetries verified by the geometric coefficient. We have:
T
kk3
k1k2
=
1
4
(W
kk3
k1k2
+ W
k3k
k1k2
+ W
kk3
k2k1
+ W
k3k
k2k1
) ,
as well as:
W
kk3
k1k2
= Q
kk3
k1k2
+ Q
k1k2
k k3
.
The exact form of Q
kk3
k1k2
is not useful (see Galtier and Nazarenko, 2017); only
information on its degree of homogeneity is important. We have:
T
ak ak3
ak1 ak2
= T
k k3
k1 k2
,
which means that this coefficient is dimensionless.
For four-wave interactions, the Zakharov conformal transformation is written:
ξ1 →
1
ξ1
, ξ2 →
ξ3
ξ1
, ξ3 →
ξ2
ξ1
, (TZa)
ξ1 →
ξ3
ξ2
, ξ2 →
1
ξ2
, ξ3 →
ξ1
ξ2
, (TZb)
ξ1 →
ξ1
ξ3
, ξ2 →
ξ2
ξ3
, ξ3 →
1
ξ3
. (TZc)
(1) By applying these transformations to the kinetic equation, find the isotropic
exact solutions proposed in Chapter 9.
(2) Deduce the direction of the cascade for each solution.
(3) Give the expression for the Kolmogorov constants.II.2 Four-Wave Interactions 247
II.4 Inertial Wave Turbulence: Domain of Locality
Find the domain of locality for inertial wave turbulence.
References
Galtier, S., and Nazarenko, S. V. 2017. Turbulence of weak gravitational waves in the
early Universe. Phys. Rev. Lett., 119, 221101.Appendix A
Solutions to the Exercises
I.1 1D HD Turbulence: Burgers’ Equation
Burgers’ equation (Burgers, 1948) is often regarded as a one-dimensional model
of compressible hydrodynamic turbulence. This equation is written:
∂u
∂t
+ u
∂u
∂x
= ν
∂
2u
∂x
2
,
with u a scalar velocity and ν a viscosity. Burgers’ equation is a simple model
often used to test new ideas in turbulence. Here we will study the properties of dis￾sipation and then intermittency using the tools introduced for the Navier–Stokes
equations.
(1) Demonstrate that:
u(x, t) =
1
t

x − L tanh
xL
2νt

is an exact solution.
(2) Find the limit of this solution when ν → 0.
(3) Calculate the mean rate of energy dissipation ε.
(4) Calculate the mean rate of viscous dissipation εν . Conclude.
(5) Find the expression of the smoothed Burgers equation by introducing an
anomalous dissipation D`
I
.
(6) Calculate the expression of the inertial dissipation DI with the exact
solution. Conclude.
(7) By using the exact solution in the limit ν → 0, find the exponents ζp by
distinguishing the case where p < 1 from the case where p ≥ 1.
Solutions:
(1) To demonstrate that:
u(x, t) =
1
t

x − L tanh
xL
2νt

249250 Appendix A Solutions to the Exercises
Figure A.1 Temporal evolution of the velocity starting from the initial condition u(x, 0) =
sin(x). The formation of the shock is followed by a dissipation phase. Direct numerical
simulation of Burgers’ equation with a spatial resolution of 32 768 points.
is an exact solution, the following expressions are calculated:
∂u
∂t
= −
x
t
2
+
L
t
2
tanh
xL
2νt

+
xL2
2νt
3
sech2

xL
2νt

,
∂u
∂x
=
1
t
−
L
2
2νt
2
sech2

xL
2νt

,
∂
2u
∂x
2
=
L
3
2ν
2
t
3
sinh
xL
2νt

sech3

xL
2νt

.
The weighted sum of these three terms cancels each other out, which proves the
result. Note that this solution is unique (Kruzkhov’s theorem).
(2) The exact solution is simplified within the limit ν → 0 with x 6= 0. We use
the asymptotic expression of the tanh function and obtain:
u(x, t)
x>0
−−−→ν→0+
1
t
(x − L) ,
u(x, t)
x<0
−−−→ν→0+
1
t
(x + L) . (I.1.2)
This (weak) solution is valid on the [−L, +L] interval around the discontinuity
in x = 0. This discontinuity is a shock of amplitude 1 = 2L/t. An illustration
is given in Figure A.1: these are the results of a direct numerical simulation of
Burgers’ equation with initially u(x, 0) = sin(x). The numerical grid between 0
and 2π is solved with 32 768 points.Solutions to the Exercises 251
(3) The mean rate of energy dissipation ε within the limit ν → 0 can be
obtained from ∂hu
2
/2i/∂t, averaged over the interval [−L, +L]. We have:

u
2
2

=
1
2L
Z +L
−L
u
2
2
dx
=
1
4L
Z 0
−L

x + L
t
2
dx +
1
4L
Z L
0

x − L
t
2
dx
=
L
2
6t
2
.
Hence, the mean rate of energy dissipation:
ε = −
∂
∂t

u
2
2

=
L
2
3t
3
=
12
12t
.
This rate varies over time as the shock dissipates.
(4) The mean rate of viscous dissipation εν is written with an integration by
part:
εν = −ν

u
∂
2u
∂x
2

= ν
*
∂u
∂x
2
+
= ν
*
1
t
−
L
2
2νt
2
sech2

xL
2νt
2
+
.
Within the limit ν → 0, one obtains at the main order:
εν =

L
4
4νt
4
sech4

xL
2νt
 =
L
3
8νt
4
Z +L
−L
sech4

xL
2νt

dx
=
L
2
4t
3
Z +L
2
/2νt
−L
2/2νt
sech4
(y)dy .
By using the relationship:
sech4
(y) = 1 − 2 tanh2
(y) + tanh4
(y) ,
one can show that R
R
sech4
y dy = 4/3. Hence, the value:
εν =
L
2
3t
3
=
12
12t
.
Within the limit ν → 0, we have therefore εν = ε which is independent of viscos￾ity and positive. Burgers’ equation is therefore a model that behaves similarly to
hydrodynamics.
(5) We can apply the smoothing function to Burgers’ equation. We obtain in the
inviscid case (ν = 0):
∂u
`
∂t
+
1
2
∂(u
2
)
`
∂x
= 0 ,252 Appendix A Solutions to the Exercises
hence:
∂
∂t

uu`
2

+
u
4
∂(u
2
)
`
∂x
+
u
`
4
∂u
2
∂x
= 0 .
The anomalous dissipation, also called inertial dissipation, is defined as:
D
`
I ≡
1
12 Z
∂ϕ`
∂ξ
(δu)
3
dξ
=
1
4
u∂x(u
2
)
` −
1
4
u
2
∂xu
` −
1
12
∂x(u
3
)
`
.
After rearrangement, we get:
∂
∂t

uu`
2

+
∂
∂x

u
2u
`
4
+
(u
3
)
`
12 
= −D
`
I
.
Within the limit ` → 0, we arrive at the expression:
∂
∂t

u
2
2

+
∂
∂x

u
3
3

= −DI
,
with the distribution (generalized function) DI ≡ lim`→0 D`
I
.
(6) The expression of the anomalous dissipation can be obtained with the exact
solution within the limit ν → 0 and for ` small enough. In the integral calculation,
care must be taken to separate the contributions of the points to the right and to
the left of the reference point x which itself is placed in the vicinity of the shock.
We finally get:
D
`
I =
1
12 Z
∂ξϕ
`
(δu)
3
dξ =
1
12 Z
∂ξϕ
`1
3
dξ =
13
12
ϕ
`
(0)
−−→
`→0
DI =
13
12
δ(x) = 2L
12
12t
δ(x) = 2Lεν δ(x) .
In order to make a proper comparison with the mean rate of dissipation, we still
have to make an average calculation:
hDIi =
1
2L
Z +L
−L
2Lεν δ(x)dx = εν .
We can therefore see that the averaged anomalous dissipation is identical to εν
in the case of Burgers’ equation. This one-dimensional compressible model of
turbulence is interesting because it allows us to carry out the analytical calcula￾tions to the end. Understanding this can help us to interpret (without constituting
a proof) the much more difficult case of three-dimensional turbulence. Thus, it
would seem that in order to have equality between εν and hDIi, it is necessary to
be in an extreme situation in which discontinuities are omnipresent.
(7) We are looking for the expression of the structure function of order p:
Sp = h|δu|
p
i,I.2 Structure Function and Spectrum 253
using the relationships (I.1.2). One gets:
δu ≡ u(x + `) − u(x) =

(` − 2L)/t if 0 ∈ [x, x + `] ,
`/t otherwise .
One obtains:
Sp =
1
2L
Z −`
−L




`
t




p
dx +
Z 0
−`




` − 2L
t




p
dx +
Z L
0




`
t




p
dx
= 1
p
 `
2L
p 
1 −
`
2L

+
`
2L

1 −
`
2L
p
' 1
p
 `
2L
p
+
`
2L

with `  L .
It remains for us to distinguish the case p < 1 from the case p ≥ 1. We finally
arrive at the expressions:
Sp = 1
p



(`/2L)
p
if 0 < p < 1 ,
`/2L if p ≥ 1 .
Therefore:
ζp =



p if 0 < p < 1 ,
1 if p ≥ 1 .
This result differs significantly from three-dimensional turbulence: here, ζp expo￾nents quickly saturate (because of the shock) and the energy spectrum is in k
−2
(compatible with ζ2 = 1).
I.2 Structure Function and Spectrum
We are interested in the relationship between the one-dimensional energy
spectrum E1d(k) and the second-order structure function S2(r) in the case of
three-dimensional homogeneous isotropic hydrodynamic turbulence.
(1) Let R(r) be the two-point correlation function of the velocity, that is,
R(r) = hu · u
0
i. Write down the general relation between this function and the
three-dimensional energy spectrum E3d(k).
(2) Focusing on the isotropic case, demonstrate the relationship:
S2(r) = 4
Z +∞
0

1 −
sin kr
kr 
E1d(k)dk ,
where S2(r) = h(δu)
2
i.254 Appendix A Solutions to the Exercises
(3) It is assumed that the one-dimensional energy spectrum is given by the
relation E1d(k) = CKε
2/3
k
−5/3
, where CK is the Kolmogorov constant. Find the
relation:
S2(r) = C2ε
2/3
r
2/3
,
where C2 is a constant that will be given. Compare your results with the experi￾mental measurements CK ' 0.5 and C2 ' 2.5 (Sreenivasan, 1995; Welter et al.,
2009).
Solutions:
(1) By definition, we have the relations:
E3d(k) =
1
(2π)
3
Z
R3
1
2
R(r)e
ik·r
dr
and
R(r) = 2
Z
R3
E3d(k)e
−ik·r
dk.
Then, we also have:
R(0) = 2
Z
R3
E3d(k)dk.
(2) For isotropic turbulence:
R(r) = R(r) = 2
Z +∞
0
Z π
0
Z 2π
0
E3d(k, θ✁,✓φ✓)e
−ik·r
k
2
sin θdkdθdφ
= 4π
Z +∞
0
Z π
0
k
2E3d(k, θ✁,✓φ✓)e
−ik·r
sin θdkdθ.
We choose a vector r along the z-axis; this gives:
R(r) = 4π
Z +∞
0
Z π
0
k
2E3d(k, θ✁,✓φ✓)e
−ikr cos θ
sin θdkdθ
= 4π
Z +∞
0
Z 1
−1
k
2E3d(k, θ✁,✓φ✓)e
−ikrX dkdX
= 2
Z +∞
0
4πk
2E3d(k, θ✁,✓φ✓)
sin kr
kr
dk = 2
Z +∞
0
E1d(k)
sin kr
kr
dk.
In particular:
R(0) = 2
Z +∞
0
E1d(k)dk.
We also have:
S2(r) ≡ h(δu)
2
i ≡ h(u
0 − u)
2
i = h(u
0 − 2u · u
0 + u
2
)i
= 2hu
2
i − 2hu · u
0
i = 2R(0) − 2R(r).I.3 2D HD Turbulence: Detailed Conservation 255
In the isotropic case:
S2(r) = 2R(0) − 2R(r).
Hence, this is the relationship we are looking for.
(3) We substitute the proposed spectrum into the relation previously found:
S2(r) = 4CKε
2/3
Z +∞
0

1 −
sin kr
kr 
k
−5/3
dk
= 4CKε
2/3
r
2/3
Z +∞
0

1 −
sin Y
Y

Y
−5/3
dY
' 4CKε
2/3
r
2/3 × 1.21.
Then, we find the relation C2 ' 4.84CK which is compatible with the experimental
measurements C2 ' 2.5 and CK ' 0.5.
I.3 2D HD Turbulence: Detailed Conservation
In the two-dimensional case, the Navier–Stokes equations become simpler and it
is possible to demonstrate analytically the existence of a dual cascade of energy
and enstrophy (see Chapter 3). For this, we must use the detailed conservation
laws for these invariants. The aim of this exercise is to obtain these two laws. We
will introduce the stream function ψ such that u ≡ ez∇ψ. With the use of this
function the zero velocity divergence condition is automatically satisfied and the
calculations are simplified.
(1) Write the spectral expression of enstrophy conservation.
(2) Demonstrate the detailed conservation of enstrophy using the relationships
in the triangle formed by k, p, and q.
(3) Same question for energy.
(4) Generalize the result in the case of statistically isotropic turbulence.
Solutions:
(1) In the two-dimensional case, the vorticity equation is written:
∂twz + u · ∇wz = ν1wz
,
which gives in Fourier space:
∂twˆ z(k) + νk
2wˆ z(k) = − Z
R4
uˆ(p) · iqwˆ z(q)δ(k − p − q)dpdq .
With the introduction of the stream function, we have wˆ z(k) = −k
2ψˆ
k, and thus:
∂t(k
2ψˆ
k) + νk
4ψˆ
k = − Z
R4
ψˆ
pq · (ez × p)q
2ψˆ
qδ(k − p − q)dpdq .256 Appendix A Solutions to the Exercises
Then, the enstrophy equation is:
∂t(k
4
|ψˆ
k|
2
) + 2νk
6
|ψˆ
k|
2 = − Z
R4
k
2
q
2
[ψˆ
∗
kψˆ
pψˆ
q
+ ψˆ
kψˆ
∗
pψˆ
∗
q
]q · (ez × p)δ(k − p − q)dpdq .
By using the relation ψˆ ∗
k = ψˆ−k and by manipulating the dummy variables p and
q, we arrive at the expression:
∂t(k
4
|ψˆ
k|
2
) + 2νk
6
|ψˆ
k|
2 = − Z
R4
k
2
q
2
[ψˆ
∗
kψˆ
∗
pψˆ
∗
q
+ ψˆ
kψˆ
pψˆ
q]q · (ez × p)δ(k + p + q)dpdq
=
Z
R4
k
2
q
2ψˆ
kψˆ
pψˆ
qq · (ez ×p)δ(k + p + q)dpdq+ c.c. ,
where c.c. means the complex conjugate. We can make the equation symmetrical
in p and q:
∂t(k
4
|ψˆ
k|
2
) + 2νk
6
|ψˆ
k|
2 =
1
2
Z
R4
k
2ψˆ
kψˆ
pψˆ
q[q
2
ez · (p × q)
+ p
2
ez · (q × p)]δ(k + p + q)dpdq + c.c.
=
Z
R4
k
2
S(k, p, q)δ(k + p + q)dpdq ,
with by definition:
S(k, p, q) ≡ [(q
2 − p
2
) (ez · (p × q))] <[ψˆ
kψˆ
pψˆ
q] .
This gives us expression S from Chapter 3.
(2) The detailed conservation of enstrophy requires the previous expression to
be written in the form:
∂t
Z
R2
k
4
|ψˆ
k|
2
dk + 2ν
Z
R2
k
6
|ψˆ
k|
2
dk =
1
3
Z
R6
[k
2
S(k, p, q) + p
2
S(p, q, k)
+ q
2
S(q, k, p)]δ(k + p + q)dkdpdq .
We are going to show that the integrand is null. With the definition of S, we have:
k
2S(k, p, q) + p
2S(p, q, k) + q
2S(q, k, p) = <[ψˆ
kψˆ
pψˆ
q]
ez · [k
2
(q
2 − p
2
)(p × q) + p
2
(k
2 − q
2
)(q × k) + q
2
(p
2 − k
2
)(k × p)] .
Let us introduce the interior angles θk , θp, and θq associated with the triangle
k + p + q = 0 (see Figure A.2); by using identities in the triangle, we get:
k
2S(k, p, q) + p
2S(p, q, k) + q
2S(q, k, p) = <[ψˆ
kψˆ
pψˆ
q]
pq sin θk [(q
2 − p
2
)k
2 + (k
2 − q
2
)p
2 + (p
2 − k
2
)q
2
] = 0 ,
hence the detailed conservation of enstrophy.I.3 2D HD Turbulence: Detailed Conservation 257
p q
k
θq
θk
θp
Figure A.2 Angles associated with a triad of interaction k + p + q = 0.
(3) To demonstrate the detailed energy conservation, we will use the stream
function. We have (see Chapter 3):
∂t
|uˆ(k)|
2 + 2νk
2
|uˆ(k)|
2 =
Z
R4
S(k, p, q)δ(k + p + q)dpdq .
One obtains:
∂t
Z
R2
|uˆ(k)|
2
dk + 2ν
Z
R2
k
2
|uˆ(k)|
2
dk =
1
3
Z
R6
[S(k, p, q) + S(p, q, k)
+ S(q, k, p)]δ(k + p + q)dkdpdq ,
with:
S(k, p, q) + S(p, q, k) + S(q, k, p) = <[ψˆ
kψˆ
pψˆ
q]
ez · [(q
2 − p
2
)(p × q) + (k
2 − q
2
)(q × k) + (p
2 − k
2
)(k × p)] .
With the relationships in the triangle, we finally get:
S(k, p, q) + S(p, q, k) + S(q, k, p)
= <[ψˆ
kψˆ
pψˆ
q]pq sin θk [(q
2 − p
2
)
+ (k
2 − q
2
) + (p
2 − k
2
)] = 0 ,
hence the detailed energy conservation.
(4) With the ensemble average, we find:
∂tE(k) + 2νk
2E(k) =
Z
R4
hS(k, p, q)iδ(k + p + q)dpdq
=
Z
1
(q
2 − p
2
)pq ez · (ep × eq)<hψˆ
kψˆ
pψˆ
qipdθqdp ,
where the symbol 1 means that the integral is calculated by satisfying the trian￾gular relationship, and ep and eq are unit vectors oriented according to p and q,
respectively. Al Kashi’s relation in the triangle:
q
2 = k
2 + p
2 − 2kp cos θq ,
gives us, at k and p fixed, qdq = kp sin θqdθq, hence the expression:
∂tE(k) + 2νk
2E(k) =
Z
1
(q
2 − p
2
)
pq
sin θk
ez · (ep × eq)<hψˆ
kψˆ
pψˆ
qidpdq .258 Appendix A Solutions to the Exercises
If the turbulence is statistically isotropic, one can introduce the one-dimensional
energy spectrum, E(k) = 2πkE(k), hence:
∂tE(k) + 2νk
2E(k) = T(k) ,
with by definition:
T(k) ≡
Z
1
2πk(q
2 − p
2
)
pq
sin θk
ez · (ep × eq) <hψˆ
kψˆ
pψˆ
qidpdq
≡
Z
1
T(k, p, q)dpdq .
Detailed energy conservation is easily demonstrated from the relationship:
Z
R
T(k)dk =
1
3
Z
R3
[T(k, p, q) + T(p, q, k) + T(q, k, p)]dkdpdq .
We have for a given triad:
T(k, p, q) + T(p, q, k) + T(q, k, p) = 2πkpq[(q
2 − p
2
) + (k
2 − q
2
)
+ (p
2 − k
2
)]<hψˆ
kψˆ
pψˆ
qi = 0 ,
hence the detailed statistical energy conservation.
For enstrophy, we introduce the spectrum (k) ≡ k
4
h|ψˆ
k|
2
i and we obtain in a
similar way:
∂t(k) + 2νk
2(k) =
Z
R4
k
2
hS(k, p, q)iδ(k + p + q)dpdq
=
Z
1
k
2
(q
2 − p
2
)
pq
sin θk
ez · (ep × eq) <hψˆ
kψˆ
pψˆ
qidpdq .
For the one-dimensional enstrophy spectrum this gives:
∂t(k) + 2νk
2(k) = k
2T(k) =
Z
1
k
2T(k, p, q)dpdq .
We have then:
Z
R
k
2T(k)dk =
1
3
Z
R3
[k
2T(k, p, q) + p
2T(p, q, k) + q
2T(q, k, p)]dkdpdq ,
with per triad:
k
2T(k, p, q) + p
2T(p, q, k) + q
2T(q, k, p) = 2πkpq[k
2
(q
2 − p
2
) + p
2
(k
2 − q
2
)
+ q
2
(p
2 − k
2
)]<hψˆ
kψˆ
pψˆ
qi = 0 ,
which demonstrates the detailed statistical conservation of enstrophy.II.1 MHD Model of Nonlinear Diffusion 259
II.1 MHD Model of Nonlinear Diffusion
Non-linear diffusion models are often used in turbulence because their numeri￾cal simulations are relatively easy. We have already encountered these models in
Chapters 3 and 6. We propose here to develop such a phenomenological model for
Alfvén wave turbulence in the balanced case. The particularity of the approach is
that it must take into account the anisotropy. In practice, the following equation is
considered:
∂E(k)
∂t
= −∇ · 5(k) ,
where E(k) is the energy spectrum and 5(k) the associated flux.
(1) What are the conditions of validity of this equation?
(2) Alfvén wave turbulence is strongly anisotropic. Using a coordinate system
adapted to this situation, rewrite the diffusion equation.
(3) The transverse component of the energy flux is modeled as follows:
5⊥(k) = −D(k)
∂E(k)
∂k⊥
,
where D is a non-linear diffusion coefficient which remains to be determined.
What is the dimension of D?
(4) We call τtr the characteristic time of energy transfer. Express τtr as a function
of E(k) and k⊥.
(5) By using the relation R
E(k⊥)f (kk)dk⊥dkk =
RRR E(k)dk, show that the non￾linear diffusion equation can be written as:
∂E(k⊥)
∂t
= C
∂
∂k⊥

k
6
⊥E(k⊥)
∂(E(k⊥)/k⊥)
∂k⊥

,
where C is a constant.
(6) What is the Kolmogorov–Zakharov spectrum exact solution of the equation?
What is the direction of the cascade?
Solutions:
(1) The equation describes the physics of the inertial range in wave turbulence.
This means that the external force acts on a larger scale than the scales of the
inertial range and that dissipation acts on a smaller scale. At the same time, we
need to check the wave turbulence conditions. We know that a transition to strong
turbulence is possible at small scales. Therefore, an additional condition exists;
this one is written τA  τNL, that is:
k⊥z  kkb0 ,
with b0 the uniform magnetic field and z the Elsässer field.260 Appendix A Solutions to the Exercises
(2) Cylindrical coordinates are used, which are particularly well adapted to this
problem. We obtain in the case of axisymmetric turbulence:
∂E(k)
∂t
= −
1
k⊥
∂(k⊥5⊥(k))
∂k⊥
.
(3) Dimensionaly we find:
D ∼
k
2
⊥
τtr
,
with τtr the characteristic transfer time in Alfvén wave turbulence.
(4) The transfer time is:
τtr ∼ ωτ 2
NL ∼
kkb0
k
2
⊥
z
2
∼
b0
k
4
⊥E(k)
.
(5) Using the previous results, we can write:
∂E(k)
∂t
∼
1
k⊥
∂
∂k⊥

k
3
⊥τ
−1
tr
∂E(k)
∂k⊥

∼
1
b0k⊥
∂
∂k⊥

k
7
⊥E(k)
∂E(k)
∂k⊥

.
The axisymmetric spectrum is then introduced:
∂(k⊥kkE(k))
∂t
∼
∂(kk f (kk)E(k⊥))
∂t
∼
kk f
2
(kk)
b0
∂
∂k⊥

k
6
⊥E(k⊥)
∂(E(k⊥)/k⊥)
∂k⊥

.
After simplification, we obtain the following non-linear diffusion equation:
∂E(k⊥)
∂t
= C
∂
∂k⊥

k
6
⊥E(k⊥)
∂(E(k⊥)/k⊥)
∂k⊥

,
with C a constant depending, among others, on b0 and f (kk). Note that this
diffusion equation was deduced directly from the MHD kinetic equations by
considering the approximation of local interactions (Galtier and Buchlin, 2010).
(6) To find the exact solutions, we introduce the spectrum E(k⊥) = Akx
⊥
(with
A > 0) and the flux 5⊥(k⊥). For this analysis, we take C = 1, which means
that we place ourselves on the characteristic time of the Alfvén wave turbulence
cascade. We get:
5⊥ = A
2
(1 − x)k
2x+4
⊥
.
The first solution x = 1 is a spectrum with zero energy flux: this is the thermo￾dynamics solution. The second solution x = −2 corresponds to the Kolmogorov–
Zakharov spectrum; in this case,
5⊥ = 3A
2 > 0 .
The flux is positive and therefore the cascade direct.II.2 Four-Wave Interactions 261
Figure A.3 Solutions to the resonance conditions (left: α > 1; right: α < 1; top: 2 → 2
interactions; bottom: 3 → 1 interactions) are always possible except for the last case
(bottom right).
II.2 Four-Wave Interactions
Let us consider the isotropic dispersion relation ω = Akα
, with A a positive con￾stant and α ∈ R
∗
+. In the two-dimensional case, show graphically that we can
always find solutions for four-wave resonant interactions.
Solutions:
We shall consider three cases: α > 1, α = 1, and α < 1. As shown graphically
in Figures A.3 and A.4, solutions are always possible for interactions of the type
2 → 2:
ωk + ωk1 = ωk2 + ωk3
,
k + k1 = k2 + k3 ,
while for 3 → 1 one cannot find solutions when α < 1.262 Appendix A Solutions to the Exercises
Figure A.4 Solutions to the resonance conditions for α = 1 (left: 2 → 2 interactions;
right: 3 → 1 interactions). For 3 → 1 interactions, solutions correspond to collinear
wavevector.
II.3 Gravitational Wave Turbulence: Exact Solutions
The objective of this exercise is to obtain analytically the exact solutions of grav￾itational wave turbulence. We have seen that the kinetic equation is written as
follows:
∂tNk = 
6
Z
R6
|T
kk3
k1k2
|
2 NkNk1Nk2Nk3
×

1
Nk
+
1
Nk3
−
1
Nk1
−
1
Nk2

δ
k
03,12 δ
ω
03,12 dk1dk2dk3 ,
with δ
k
03,12 ≡ δ(k + k3 − k1 − k2) and δ
ω
03,12 ≡ δ(ωk + ωk3 − ω k1 − ωk2
) .
We must specify the symmetries verified by the geometric coefficient. We have:
T
kk3
k1k2
=
1
4
(W
kk3
k1k2
+ W
k3k
k1k2
+ W
kk3
k2k1
+ W
k3k
k2k1
) ,
as well as:
W
kk3
k1k2
= Q
kk3
k1k2
+ Q
k1k2
k k3
.
The exact form of Q
kk3
k1k2
is not useful (see Galtier and Nazarenko, 2017); only
information on its degree of homogeneity is important. We have:
T
ak ak3
ak1 ak2
= T
k k3
k1 k2
,
which means that this coefficient is dimensionless.II.3 Gravitational Wave Turbulence: Exact Solutions 263
For four-wave interactions, the Zakharov conformal transformation is written:
ξ1 →
1
ξ1
, ξ2 →
ξ3
ξ1
, ξ3 →
ξ2
ξ1
, (TZa)
ξ1 →
ξ3
ξ2
, ξ2 →
1
ξ2
, ξ3 →
ξ1
ξ2
, (TZb)
ξ1 →
ξ1
ξ3
, ξ2 →
ξ2
ξ3
, ξ3 →
1
ξ3
. (TZc)
(1) By applying these transformations to the kinetic equation, find the isotropic
exact solutions proposed in Chapter 9.
(2) Deduce the direction of the cascade for each solution.
(3) Give the expression for the Kolmogorov constants.
Solutions:
(1) We introduce the isotropic wave action spectrum:
Ni ≡ 2πkiNki
,
with in particular k0 ≡ k. We obtain the kinetic equation:
∂tN0 =
Z
C
kk3
k1k2
N0N1N2N3

k
N0
+
k3
N3
−
k1
N1
−
k2
N2

δ
ω
03,12 dk1dk2dk3 ,
with:
C
kk3
k1k2
≡

4
4π2
Z
|T
kk3
k1k2
|
2
δ
k
03,12 dC0dC1dC2dC3 ,
where Ci are circles of radius ki
. We will look for nontrivial solutions in power
law. We introduce Ni = Akx
i
(with A > 0), and the dimensionless wavenumber
ξi ≡ ki/k; we get:
∂tN0 = A
3
k
3x+1
Z
C
1ξ3
ξ1 ξ2
(ξ1ξ2ξ3)
x
(1 + ξ
1−x
3 − ξ
1−x
1 − ξ
1−x
2
)δ
ξ
03,12 dξ1dξ2dξ3 .
Two trivial solutions appear:
x = 0 and x = 1 .
These are zero-flux (thermodynamic) solutions associated with wave action and
energy, respectively.
To find the nontrivial solutions, we decompose the integral into four iden￾tical parts and apply the three Zakharov transformations on three integrals. In
particular, we use the following properties:264 Appendix A Solutions to the Exercises
C
1ξ3
ξ1 ξ2
TZa
−→ ξ
2
1C
ξ1 ξ2
1ξ3
= ξ
2
1C
1ξ3
ξ1 ξ2
,
C
1ξ3
ξ1 ξ2
TZb
−→ ξ
2
2C
ξ2 ξ1
ξ31 = ξ
2
2C
1ξ3
ξ1 ξ2
,
C
1ξ3
ξ1 ξ2
TZc
−→ ξ
2
3C
ξ31
ξ1 ξ2
= ξ
2
3C
1ξ3
ξ1 ξ2
,
obtained using the symmetries of the geometric coefficient. We obtain the
expression:
∂tN0 =
1
4
A
3
k
3x+1
Z
C
1ξ3
ξ1 ξ2
(ξ1ξ2ξ3)
x
(1 + ξ
1−x
3 − ξ
1−x
1 − ξ
1−x
2
)δ
ξ
03,12 dξ1dξ2dξ3
+
Z
ξ
2
1C
1ξ3
ξ1 ξ2
(ξ2ξ3)
x
ξ
3x
1
(ξ
1−x
1 + ξ
1−x
2 − 1 − ξ
1−x
3
)
ξ
1−x
1
ξ1δ
ξ
12,03
dξ1dξ2dξ3
ξ
4
1
+
Z
ξ
2
2C
1ξ3
ξ1 ξ2
(ξ1ξ3)
x
ξ
3x
2
(ξ
1−x
2 + ξ
1−x
1 − ξ
1−x
3 − 1)
ξ
1−x
2
ξ2δ
ξ
21,30
dξ1dξ2dξ3
ξ
4
2
+
Z
ξ
2
3C
1ξ3
ξ1 ξ2
(ξ1ξ2)
x
ξ
3x
3
(ξ
1−x
3 + 1 − ξ
1−x
1 − ξ
1−x
2
)
ξ
1−x
3
ξ3δ
ξ
30,12
dξ1dξ2dξ3
ξ
4
3
)
.
By rearranging the terms, we find:
∂tN0 =
1
4
A
3
k
3x+1
Z
C
1ξ3
ξ1 ξ2
(ξ1ξ2ξ3)
x
(1 + ξ
1−x
3 − ξ
1−x
1 − ξ
1−x
2
)
(1 − ξ
−3x−2
1 − ξ
−3x−2
2 + ξ
−3x−2
3
)δ
ξ
03,12dξ1dξ2dξ3
= k
3x+1
I(x) .
Therefore, the non-zero constant flux solutions (Kolmogorov–Zakharov spectrum)
are:
x = −
2
3
and x = −1 .
(2) The first exact solution corresponds to an inverse cascade of wave action
and the second to a direct cascade of energy. To demonstrate this association, we
must introduce the wave action and energy fluxes, 4 and 5, respectively.
In the first case, we have:
∂tN0 = k
3x+1
I(x) = −
∂4
∂k
,
hence:
4(k) = −
k
3x+2
3x + 2
I(x) .
The constant (nonzero) wave action flux solution is obtained for x = −2/3, a
value that cancels the integral I, hence (with L’Hôspital’s rule):
lim
x→−2/3
4(k) ≡ ζ = − lim
x→−2/3
I(x)
3x + 2
= −
∂I(z)
∂z
|z=0 ,II.4 Inertial Wave Turbulence: Domain of Locality 265
with z = 3x + 2. We finally obtain:
ζ = −
A
3
4
Z
C
1ξ3
ξ1 ξ2
(ξ1ξ2ξ3)
−2/3
(1 + ξ
5/3
3 − ξ
5/3
1 − ξ
5/3
2
) ln
ξ1ξ2
ξ3

δ
ξ
03,12dξ1dξ2dξ3
= −A
3
J1 .
An evaluation of the sign of the integrand shows that ζ < 0 : the cascade is thus
inward.
In the second case, we have E0 = kN0 and:
∂tE0 = k
3x+2
I(x) = −
∂5
∂k
.
Hence the relation:
5(k) = −
k
3x+3
3x + 3
I(x) .
The solution with constant (nonzero) energy flux is obtained for x = −1, a value
that cancels the integral I, hence:
lim
x→−1
5(k) ≡ ε = − lim
x→−1
I(x)
3x + 3
= −
∂I(z˜)
∂z˜
|z˜=0 ,
with z˜ = 3x + 3. We finally get the expression:
ε = −
A
3
4
Z
C
1ξ3
ξ1 ξ2
(ξ1ξ2ξ3)
−1
(1 + ξ
2
3 − ξ
2
1 − ξ
2
2
)
(ξ1 ln ξ1 + ξ2 ln ξ2 − ξ3 ln ξ3)δ
ξ
03,12dξ1dξ2dξ3
= A
3
J2 .
An evaluation of the sign of the integrand shows that ε > 0 : the cascade is
therefore foreward.
(3) To find the expressions of the Kolmogorov constants, we just need to express
A according to the flux. In the case of the wave action, we have:
N0 = CN(−ζ )
1/3
k
−2/3
,
with the Kolmogorov constant, CN = J
−1/3
1
.
For energy, we obtain:
N0 = CEε
1/3
k
−1
,
with the Kolmogorov constant, CE = J
−1/3
2
.
II.4 Inertial Wave Turbulence: Domain of Locality
Find the domain of locality for inertial wave turbulence.266 Appendix A Solutions to the Exercises
Solutions:
We start with the kinetic equation describing the evolution of the kinetic energy
(see Chapter 6):
∂tEk ∝
X
sspsq
Z
1⊥
skksppk
k
2
⊥
p
2
⊥
q
2
⊥

sqq⊥ − spp⊥
ωk
2
(sk⊥ + spp⊥ + sqq⊥)
2
sin θ
Eq(p⊥Ek − k⊥Ep)δ(sωk + spωp + sqωq) δ(kk + pk + qk)dp⊥dq⊥dpkdqk ,
where Ek ≡ E(k⊥, kk) ∼ k
x
⊥
|kk|
y
is the axisymmetric spectrum. By introducing
the dimensionless wavenumbers p˜⊥ ≡ p⊥/k⊥, q˜⊥ ≡ ˜q⊥/k⊥, p˜k ≡ pk/kk and
q˜k ≡ qk/kk, we find the expression:
∂tEk ∝
X
sspsq
Z
1⊥
sspp˜k
p˜
2
⊥
q˜
2
⊥
(sqq˜⊥ − spp˜⊥)
2
(s + spp˜⊥ + sqq˜⊥)
2
s
1 −

1 + ˜p
2
⊥
− ˜q
2
⊥
2p˜⊥
2
q˜
x
⊥q˜
y
k
(p˜⊥ − ˜p
x
⊥p˜
y
k
)
δ(s + sp
p˜k
p˜⊥
+ sq
q˜k
q˜⊥
) δ(1 + ˜pk + ˜qk)dp˜⊥dq˜⊥dp˜kdq˜k ,
for which we will evaluate the convergence in three regions of nonlocality.
Region A: p˜⊥ = 1 + r cos β, q˜⊥ = rsin β, with r  1 and β ∈ [π/4, 3π/4].
At leading order, we have (we use the other delta function):
δ(s + sp
p˜k
p˜⊥
+ sq
q˜k
q˜⊥
) = δ(sr cos β + sqq˜k/(rsin β)) when s = sp,
δ(s + sp
p˜k
p˜⊥
+ sq
q˜k
q˜⊥
) = δ(2 + sqq˜k/(rsin β)) when s = −sp,
(sqq˜⊥ − spp˜⊥)
2 = 1,
(s + spp˜⊥ + sqq˜⊥)
2 = 4 when s = sp,
(s + spp˜⊥ + sqq˜⊥)
2 = r
2
(sq sin β − s cos β)
2 when s = −sp, r
1 −

1+ ˜p
2
⊥−˜q
2
⊥
2p˜⊥
2
= r
p
sin2 β − cos2 β.
These estimates lead to q˜k = −ssqr
2
cos β sin β, p˜k = −1 when s = sp, and to
q˜k = −2sqrsin β, p˜k = −1 when s = −sp. Note that the use of the integrations
over p˜k and q˜k leads to the emergence of the factor r|sin β| in both cases.
For s = sp, we find the following contribution to the kinetic equation:
Z R
0
Z 3π/4
π/4
1
r
2 sin2 β
r
q
sin2 β − cos2 β r|sin β|(rsin β)
x
(r
2
|sin β cos β|)
y
(1 + r cos β − (1 + r cos β)
x
)rdrdβ ,
which gives:
Z R
0
Z 3π/4
π/4
r
x+2y+2
q
sin2 β − cos2 β(sin β)
x−2
| cos β|
y
|sin β|
y+1
cos βdrdβ .II.4 Inertial Wave Turbulence: Domain of Locality 267
The condition for convergence is x + 2y > −3, however, because of the sym￾metry in β the integral is zero. The next order correction leads to the condition
x + 2y > −4.
For s = −sp, we find the following contribution:
Z R
0
Z 3π/4
π/4
1
r
2 sin2 β
r
2
(sq sin β − s cos β)
2
r
q
sin2 β − cos2 β r|sin β|
(rsin β)
x
(r|sin β|)
y
(1 + r cos β − (1 + r cos β)
x
)rdrdβ ,
which gives (no cancellation from β is expected):
Z R
0
r
x+y+4
dr.
We find the condition for convergence x + y > −5.
Region B: p˜⊥ = r cos β, q˜⊥ = 1 + rsin β, with r  1 and β ∈ [−π/4, +π/4].
At leading order, we have (we use the other delta function):
δ(s + sp
p˜k
p˜⊥
+ sq
q˜k
q˜⊥
) = δ(sqrsin β + spp˜k/(r cos β)) when s = sq,
δ(s + sp
p˜k
p˜⊥
+ sq
q˜k
q˜⊥
) = δ(2 + spp˜k/(r cos β)) when s = −sq,
(sqq˜⊥ − spp˜⊥)
2 = 1,
(s + spp˜⊥ + sqq˜⊥)
2 = 4 when s = sq,
(s + spp˜⊥ + sqq˜⊥)
2 = r
2
(sp cos β − ssin β)
2 when s = −sq, r
1 −

1+ ˜p
2
⊥−˜q
2
⊥
2p˜⊥
2
=
p
1 − sin2 β/ cos2 β.
These estimates lead to p˜k = −sspr
2
cos β sin β, q˜k = −1 when s = sq, and to
p˜k = −2spr cos β, q˜k = −1 when s = −sq. Note that the use of the integrations
over p˜k and q˜k leads to the emergence of the factor r| cos β| in both cases.
For s = sq, we find the following contribution to the kinetic equation:
Z R
0
Z +π/4
−π/4
r
2
cos β sin β
r
2 cos2 β
q
1 − sin2 β/ cos2 β r| cos β|
(r cos β − (r cos β)
x
)(r
2
| cos β sin β|)
y
)rdrdβ ,
which gives for the problematic integral:
Z R
0
Z +π/4
−π/4
r
x+2y+2
sin β(cos β)
x+y
q
1 − sin2 β/ cos2 β|sin β|
y
drdβ .
The condition for convergence is x + 2y > −3, however, because of the sym￾metry in β the integral is zero. The next order correction leads to the condition
x + 2y > −4.
For s = −sq, we find the following contribution:
Z R
0
Z +π/4
−π/4
r cos β
r
2 cos2 β
q
1 − sin2 β/ cos2 β r| cos β|268 Appendix A Solutions to the Exercises
r
2
(sp cos β − ssin β)
2
(r cos β − (r cos β)
x
)(r| cos β|)
y
)rdrdβ ,
which gives for the problematic integral (no cancellation from β is expected):
Z R
0
r
x+y+3
dr.
We find the condition for convergence x + y > −4 which is stronger than for
region A.
Region C: p˜⊥ = (τ1 + τ2)/2, q˜⊥ = (τ1 − τ2)/2, with τ1  1 and τ2 ∈ [−1, +1].
At leading order, we have (we use the other delta function):
δ(s + sp
p˜k
p˜⊥
+ sq
q˜k
q˜⊥
) = δ(s − 4p˜kτ2/τ 2
1
) when sp = sq,
δ(s + sp
p˜k
p˜⊥
+ sq
q˜k
q˜⊥
) = δ(s + 4p˜k/τ1) when sp = −sq,
(sqq˜⊥ − spp˜⊥)
2 = τ
2
2 when sp = sq,
(sqq˜⊥ − spp˜⊥)
2 = τ
2
1 when sp = −sq,
(s + spp˜⊥ + sqq˜⊥)
2 = τ
2
1 when sp = sq,
(s + spp˜⊥ + sqq˜⊥)
2 = τ
2
2 when sp = −sq, r
1 −

1+ ˜p
2
⊥−˜q
2
⊥
2p˜⊥
2
=
q
1 − τ
2
2 − 2τ2/τ1 + 2τ
3
2
/τ1 =
q
1 − τ
2
2
.
These estimates lead to p˜k = sτ
2
1
/(4τ2), q˜k = − ˜pk when sp = sq, and to p˜k =
−sτ1/4, q˜k = ˜pk when sp = −sq. Note that the use of the integrations over p˜k and
q˜k leads to the emergence of a factor |τ
2
1
/τ2| and |τ1| for sp = sq and sp = −sq,
respectively.
For sp = sq, we find the following contribution to the kinetic equation:
Z +∞
τ
Z +1
−1
τ
2
1
τ2
1
τ
4
1
τ
2
2
τ
2
1
q
1 − τ
2
2
τ
x
1
|
τ
2
1
τ2
|
y
(τ1 − τ
x
1
|
τ
2
1
τ2
|
y
)
τ
2
1
|τ2|
dτ1dτ2 ,
which gives for the problematic integral:
Z +∞
τ
Z +1
−1
τ
x+2y+3
1
q
1 − τ
2
2
τ2
|τ2|
y+1
dτ1dτ2 .
The condition for convergence is x + 2y < −4, however, because of the sym￾metry in τ2 the integral is zero. The next order correction leads to the condition
x + 2y < −3.
For sp = −sq, we find the following contribution:
Z +∞
τ
Z +1
−1
τ1
1
τ
4
1
τ
2
1
τ
2
2
q
1 − τ
2
2
τ
x
1
|τ1|
y
(τ1 − τ
x
1
|τ1|
y
)|τ1|dτ1dτ2 ,
which gives for the problematic integral (no cancellation from τ2 is expected):
Z +∞
τ
Z +1
−1
τ
x+y+1
1
τ
2
2
q
1 − τ
2
2
dτ1dτ2 .II.4 Inertial Wave Turbulence: Domain of Locality 269
We find the condition for convergence x + y < −2.
In conclusion, the conditions of locality (convergence of integrals) are:
−4 < x + 2y < −3 ,
−4 < x + y < −2 .
The Kolmogorov–Zakharov spectrum corresponds to x = −5/2 and y = −1/2
which places this solution exactly in the middle of the intervals of convergence.
References
Burgers, J. M. 1948. A mathematical model illustrating the theory of turbulence. Adv.
Appl. Mech., 1, 171–199.
Galtier, S., and Buchlin, E. 2010. Nonlinear diffusion equations for anisotropic magneto￾hydrodynamic turbulence with cross-helicity. Astrophys. J., 722(2), 1977–1983.
Galtier, S., and Nazarenko, S. V. 2017. Turbulence of weak gravitational waves in the
early universe. Phys. Rev. Lett., 119, 221101.
Sreenivasan, K. R. 1995. On the universality of the Kolmogorov constant. Phys. Fluids,
7(11), 2778–2784.
Welter, G. S., Wittwer, A. R., Degrazia, G. A. et al. 2009. Measurements of the
Kolmogorov constant from laboratory and geophysical wind data. Phys. A: Stat.
Mech. Appl., 388(18), 3745–3751.Appendix B
Formulary
Vector Identities
• Multiple products:
(A × B) · (C × D) = (A · C)(B · D) − (A · D)(B · C)
A · (B × C) = B · (C × A) = C · (A × B)
A × (B × C) = B(A · C) − C(A · B)
• Rules for products with derivatives:
∇(fg) = f (∇g) + g(∇f )
∇(A · B) = A × (∇ × B) + B × (∇ × A) + (A · ∇)B + (B · ∇)A
∇ · ( f A) = f (∇ · A) + A · (∇f )
∇ · (A × B) = B · (∇ × A) − A · (∇ × B)
∇ × ( f A) = f (∇ × A) − A × (∇f )
∇ × (A × B) = (B · ∇)A − (A · ∇)B + A(∇ · B) − B(∇ · A)
• Rules for second-order derivatives:
∇ · (∇ × A) = 0
∇ × (∇f ) = 0
∇ × (∇ × A) = ∇(∇ · A) − 1A
Vectorial Derivatives
We list here the vectorial derivatives in the three usual coordinate systems (see
Figure B.1).
271272 Appendix B Formulary
Figure B.1 Systems of cylindrical polar and spherical coordinates.
• Cartesian coordinates:
d` = dx ex + dy ey + dz ez
dV = dx dy dz
Gradient: ∇9 =
∂9
∂x
ex +
∂9
∂y
ey +
∂9
∂z
ez
Divergence: ∇ · u =
∂ux
∂x +
∂uy
∂y +
∂uz
∂z
Rotational: ∇ × u =

∂uz
∂y −
∂uy
∂z

ex +

∂ux
∂z −
∂uz
∂x

ey +

∂uy
∂x −
∂ux
∂y

ez
Scalar Laplacian: 19 =
∂
29
∂x
2 +
∂
29
∂y
2 +
∂
29
∂z
2
Vectorial case: 1u = 1uxex + 1uyey + 1uzez
• Cylindrical coordinates:
d` = dr er + rdθ eθ + dz ez
dV = r dr dθ dz
Gradient: ∇9 =
∂9
∂r
er +
1
r
∂9
∂θ eθ +
∂9
∂z
ez
Divergence: ∇ · u =
1
r
∂
∂r
(rur) +
1
r
∂uθ
∂θ +
∂uz
∂z
Rotational: ∇ ×u =

1
r
∂uz
∂θ −
∂uθ
∂z

er +

∂ur
∂z −
∂uz
∂r

eθ +
1
r

∂
∂r
(ruθ ) −
∂ur
∂θ 
ez
Scalar Laplacian: 19 =
1
r
∂
∂r
￾
r
∂9
∂r

+
1
r
2
∂
29
∂θ 2 +
∂
29
∂z
2
Vectorial case: 1u =

1ur −
ur
r
2 −
2
r
2
∂uθ
∂θ 
er +

1uθ −
uθ
r
2 +
2
r
2
∂ur
∂θ 
eθ +
1uzez
u · ∇ b =

u · ∇br −
uθ bθ
r

er +

u · ∇bθ +
uθ br
r

eθ + (u · ∇bz)ez
• Spherical coordinates:
d` = dr er + rdθ eθ + rsin θdφ eφ
dV = r
2
sin θ dr dθ dFundamental Theorems 273
Gradient: ∇9 =
∂9
∂r
er +
1
r
∂9
∂θ eθ +
1
rsin θ
∂9
∂φ eφ
Divergence: ∇ · u =
1
r
2
∂(r
2ur)
∂r +
1
rsin θ
∂(sin θ uθ )
∂θ +
1
rsin θ
∂uφ
∂φ
Rotational: ∇ × u =
1
rsin θ

∂(sin θ uφ)
∂θ −
∂uθ
∂φ 
er +
1
r

1
sin θ
∂ur
∂φ −
∂(ruφ)
∂r

eθ +
1
r

∂(ruθ )
∂r −
∂ur
∂θ 
eφ
Scalar Laplacian: 19 =
1
r
2
∂
∂r
￾
r
2 ∂9
∂r

+
1
r
2 sin θ
∂
∂θ
￾
sin θ
∂9
∂θ

+
1
r
2 sin2
θ
∂
29
∂φ2
Vectorial case: 1u =

1ur −
2
r
2

1
sin θ
∂(sin θuθ )
∂θ +
1
sin θ
∂uφ
∂φ + ur
 er+

1uθ +
1
r
2

∂2ur
∂θ −
uθ
sin2
θ
−
2 cos θ
sin2
θ
∂uφ
∂φ  eθ+

1uφ +
1
r
2

2
sin θ
∂ur
∂φ +
2 cos θ
sin2
θ
∂uθ
∂φ −
uφ
sin2
θ

eφu · ∇ b =

u · ∇br −
uθ bθ+uφbφ
r

er +

u · ∇bθ +
uθ br−uφbφ cot θ
r

eθ +

u · ∇bφ +
uφbr+uφbθ cot θ
r

eφ
Fundamental Theorems
• Gradient theorem:
Z b
a
(∇f ) · d` = f (b) − f (a)
• Divergence (or Ostrogradsky) theorem:
ZZZ (∇ · A)dV =
Z

Z
A · dS
• Rotational (or Stokes) theorem:
ZZ (∇ × A) · dS =
I
A · Index
β–model, 49
2D turbulence, 82
acoustic wave, 109
acoustic wave turbulence, 60, 63, 116, 237
Alfvén wave, 179, 182, 209
anisotropy, 157, 165, 182, 188, 212, 217, 246
anomalous dissipation, 33, 36, 40, 75
anomalous exponent, 47, 253
anomalous spectrum, 226
anticyclone, 159
astrophysics, 57, 179
asymptotic closure, 81, 121
autocorrelation, 17
Batchelor, 7, 74
Benney, 106
Bernoulli equation, 127
Big Bang, 232
Burgers’ equation, 45, 99, 249
Burgers’ spectrum, 59
Burgers’ turbulence, 53
butterfly effect, 14
canonical variable, 132, 190, 220
capillary wave, 104, 107, 108, 127, 129
capillary wave turbulence, 130, 139
cascade, 4, 77
chaos, 12
closure, 74, 78
complex helicity decomposition, 161
compressible phenomenology, 63
compressible turbulence, 57, 58, 60, 206
compression, 62
Coriolis force, 155
correlation, 4
cosmological inflation, 232, 242
critical balance phenomenology, 182, 183, 195,
209, 218, 242
cumulant, 19, 78, 119, 138
cyclone, 159
damping rate, 79
detailed conservation, 73, 82, 86, 100, 106,
140, 223, 255
deterministic, 14
DIA, 7, 73, 81
dilatation, 62
direct cascade, 30, 36, 49, 147, 260, 265
direct numerical simulation, 10, 149, 197
discretization effect, 121
dual cascade, 8, 84, 92, 93, 240
Duchon & Robert’s law, 44
Duffing equation, 111
eddy, 15
eddy turbulence, 12, 69, 78
eddy turnover time, 39
EDQNM, 7, 79, 161
Einstein equations, 232
elastic wave, 110, 243
electron MHD, 213
Elsässer variable, 190
energy cascade, 4
energy conservation, 31
energy flux, 74, 89, 145, 169
energy spectrum, 5, 70, 74
energy transfer, 30, 121
ensemble average, 17, 31, 70, 119, 136
enstrophy, 8, 31, 84, 89
enstrophy flux, 90
275276 Index
ergotic, 17
Euler equation, 32
exact law, 61, 212
Fjørtoft phenomenology, 84
four-fifths law, 5, 38, 46
four-thirds law, 38
four-wave interaction, 105, 207, 232, 240, 247,
261
fractal, 6, 46, 49
fractal law, 52
general relativity, 234
gravitational wave, 111, 116, 232, 237
gravitational wave turbulence, 247, 262
gravito-capillary wave, 147
gravity wave, 104, 108, 127, 129
Hölder’s condition, 45
Hall effect, 207
Harrison–Zeldovich spectrum, 242
Hasselmann, 105
heating, 27
homogeneity, 19
homogeneous turbulence, 7, 33, 34, 70, 119,
138, 223
inertial dissipation, 43, 99, 249, 252
inertial range, 35, 62, 75, 77, 186
inertial wave, 108, 156, 162
inertial wave turbulence, 121, 155, 248, 265
intermittency, 6, 18, 46, 96, 157, 175, 197, 209,
227
internal energy, 60
internal gravity wave, 108
interstellar turbulence, 57, 58
inverse cascade, 8, 10, 84, 85, 239, 265
ion inertial length, 214
Iroshnikov–Kraichnan spectrum, 187
irreversibility, 139
isothermal, 60
isotropic turbulence, 38, 71, 74
isotropy, 20
Joule, 27
Kármán–Howarth (weak formulation), 44
Kármán–Howarth equation, 35
Kelvin wave, 110
kinetic Alfvén wave, 207, 217
kinetic equation, 107, 121, 139, 165, 191, 223,
238
Kolmogorov, 5, 9, 53
Kolmogorov constant, 76, 132, 147, 194, 254
Kolmogorov phenomenology, 39, 76
Kolmogorov spectrum, 76, 94
Kolmogorov–Zakharov spectrum, 9, 144, 166,
170, 223, 239, 246
Kraichnan, 7, 73
Leray, 41
local interaction, 73, 145, 167, 226
locality, 35
log-normal model, 53, 54
log-Poisson model, 55, 56
Lorenz, 12
magnetic Reynolds number, 181
magnetohydrodynamics, 8, 179, 209
magnetostrophic wave, 109
mean rate of energy dissipation, 31, 45, 76, 99,
249
mean rate of energy transfer, 39, 130, 163, 186,
210
mirror symmetry, 20
moment, 19, 78, 119
multifractal law, 53
multiple scale method, 106, 113, 117
natural closure, 106, 137
Navier–Stokes equations, 27, 104, 156
non-Gaussian wings, 48
nonlinear diffusion, 93, 169, 197, 224, 240,
246, 259
nonlinear time, 39
nonlocal interaction, 73
nonstationary solution, 95, 170
Obukhov, 5, 53
Onsager’s conjecture, 42
optical wave, 110
phenomenology, 39, 40, 63, 130, 162, 185, 217
plasma physics, 206
plasma wave, 109
primordial Universe, 232
probability density function, 18, 157
projection operator, 72
QN, 78
quantum turbulence, 110
quasi-resonance, 121
quasi-resonant interaction, 175Index 277
random phase approximation, 107
resonance condition, 105, 107, 116, 140, 164,
169, 190, 222
resonant interaction, 105
Reynolds, 2
Reynolds number, 2, 16, 27, 45, 181
Richardson, 4
Riemann–Lebesgue lemma, 119, 139
Rossby number, 156, 157, 202
Rossby wave, 109
rotation, 155
scale invariance, 20
sea, 127
secular term, 106, 112, 135
self-similar hypothesis, 46
self-similar solution, 170
self-similarity, 175
shell model, 96
shock, 59
singularity, 40
six-wave interaction, 110
slow mode, 159, 163, 175, 190, 195, 242
solar wind, 185, 188, 207, 213, 217
sonic scale, 63
space-time, 235
spatiotemporal memory, 18, 48
spectral analysis, 4
spectral bounce, 228
spectral correlator, 136
spectral theory, 7
spontaneous symmetry breaking, 33
stationarity, 20
stationary turbulence, 37, 75
stream function, 86
structure function, 19, 46, 61, 99, 157, 197,
209, 253, 254
Sun, 180, 198
supersonic, 57, 63
surface wave, 104, 105, 108
symmetry, 19
Taylor, 30, 36
Taylor hypothesis, 208
temporal memory, 81
thermodynamic spectrum, 144, 170, 193, 239
three-wave interaction, 140, 219
tokamak, 190
transfer function, 74, 167
transfer time, 122, 188, 240
triadic interaction, 72, 87, 107, 116, 185
turbulence, 2
turbulent diffusion, 4
turbulent Mach number, 60
uniform expansion, 112, 114, 119
universality, 35
unpredictability, 14
viscous dissipation, 44
vorticity filament, 157
vorticity tube, 36
wave action, 9, 107, 239
wave breaking, 132
wave packet, 122
wave turbulence, 12
weak solution, 41
whistler wave, 217, 218
whitecaps, 132
wind tunnel, 4, 207
Zakharov, 9, 107
Zakharov transformation, 12, 87, 107, 141,
166, 223, 247, 263
zeroth law, 32
