PLANTS AND THEIR INTERACTION 
TO ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTIONThis page intentionally left blankPLANTS 
AND THEIR 
INTERACTION TO 
ENVIRONMENTAL 
POLLUTION
Damage Detection, Adaptation, 
Tolerance, Physiological 
and Molecular Responses
Edited by
Azamal Husen
Wolaita Sodo University, Wolaita, EthiopiaElsevier
Radarweg 29, PO Box 211, 1000 AE Amsterdam, Netherlands
The Boulevard, Langford Lane, Kidlington, Oxford OX5 1GB, United Kingdom
50 Hampshire Street, 5th Floor, Cambridge, MA 02139, United States
Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, 
including photocopying, recording, or any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from 
the publisher. Details on how to seek permission, further information about the Publisher’s permissions policies and our 
arrangements with organizations such as the Copyright Clearance Center and the Copyright Licensing Agency, can be found 
at our website: www.elsevier.com/permissions.
This book and the individual contributions contained in it are protected under copyright by the Publisher (other than as may 
be noted herein).
Notices
Knowledge and best practice in this field are constantly changing. As new research and experience broaden our 
understanding, changes in research methods, professional practices, or medical treatment may become necessary.
Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own experience and knowledge in evaluating and using any 
information, methods, compounds, or experiments described herein. In using such information or methods they should be 
mindful of their own safety and the safety of others, including parties for whom they have a professional responsibility.
To the fullest extent of the law, neither the Publisher nor the authors, contributors, or editors, assume any liability for any 
injury and/or damage to persons or property as a matter of products liability, negligence or otherwise, or from any use or 
operation of any methods, products, instructions, or ideas contained in the material herein.
ISBN: 978-0-323-99978-6
For information on all Elsevier publications
visit our website at https://www.elsevier.com/books-and-journals
Publisher: Candice G. Janco
Acquisitions Editor: Gabriela D. Capille
Editorial Project Manager: Rupinder K. Heron
Production Project Manager: Rashmi Manoharan
Cover Designer: Christian Bilbow
Typeset by STRAIVE, India 
To my Nana, Mohammad Habib
(July 12, 1899–August 03, 1991)
A philanthropist, untold freedom fighter and retired as Treasury Officer from Azamgarh, in 
1954. A Founder Member and Treasurer of Sukhpura Inter College, Ballia, India
DedicationThis page intentionally left blankContributors xi
About the editor xv
Preface xvii
1. Plants and their unexpected response 
to environmental pollution: 
An overview
Shakeelur Rahman, Sahil Mehta, and Azamal Husen
1. Introduction 1
2. Plant response to air pollution 4
3. Plant response to photochemical 
oxidants 6
4. Plant response to light pollution 8
5. Plant response to soil pollution 10
6. Plant response to water pollution 11
7. Plant response to noise pollution 12
8 Plant response to nanoparticles 14
9. Conclusion 15
References 16
2. Effect of UV-B radiation on plants 
growth, active constituents, and 
productivity
Irina F. Golovatskaya and Nikolay I. Laptev
1. Introduction 26
2. Physiological reactions of plants in response to 
UV-B-radiation 28
3. UV-B signaling in the plant 35
4. Plants protection mechanisms from the negative 
effects of UV-B 45
5. Applications of UV-B radiation in practice 52
6. Conclusion 54
References 54
Further reading 60
3. Effect of elevated CO2 on plant growth, 
active constituents, and production
Harmanjot Kaur, Antul Kumar, Anuj Choudhary, Shivam Sharma, 
D.R. Choudhary, and Sahil Mehta
1. Introduction 61
2. Current status of CO2 and historical 
perspectives 62
3. Effect of high CO2 on plant growth 64
4. Effect on the production of active 
constituents 69
5. Deleterious effect of alleviated CO2 on the plant 
architecture 71
6. Conclusion 73
References 73
4. Effect of elevated O3 on plants 
growth, active constituents, 
and production
Priti Chauhan and Neeti Sharma
1. Introduction 79
2. Chemistry of tropospheric O3 formation 80
3. Mechanisms by which O3 damages plant 
tissue 81
4. Volatile organic compounds (VOCs) 82
5. Toxicology of plants 83
6. The effects of ozone on plants 83
7. Measurements of ozone-induced changes 85
8. Visible injury and physiological effects 85
9. Effects on plant growth 86
10. Biochemical effects of O3 87
11. Productivity measurements 88
12. The impact on crops and trees 89
13. Ozone and reactive oxygen species 89
14. Ozone as a disinfectant for the surface 89
15. ROS and plant cell metabolism 90
16. Conclusion 90
References 91
Contents
viiviii Contents
5. Plants response to SO2 or acid deposition
Suchisree Jha and Ashok Yadav
1. Introduction 99
2. Plant and SO2 or acid rain 100
3. Plants response to SO2 or acid deposition 100
4. Plants develops their defense system 105
5. Conclusion 106
References 106
6. Fly ash toxicity, concerned issues and 
possible impacts on plant health and 
production
Saurabh Sonwani, Anshu Gupta, Pallavi Saxena, and Anita Rani
1. Introduction 109
2. Fly ash composition 111
3. Causes of fly ash toxicity 112
4. Impact of fly ash on crop health and 
productivity 113
5. Effects of heavy metals on plant metabolism and 
physiology 117
6. Conclusion 119
References 120
7. Effect of coal-smoke pollution on plants 
growth, metabolism and production
Saumya Srivastava, Rajlaxmi Singh, and Prahlad Arya (Kumar)
1. Introduction 125
2. Principal phytotoxic gases of coal burning and 
their impact on flora 126
3. Other gases/release of coal burning and their 
impact on vegetation of the world 129
4. Conclusion 134
References 134
8. Effect of heavy metals on growth, 
physiological and biochemical 
responses of plants
Arslan Hafeez, Rizwan Rasheed, Muhammad Arslan Ashraf, 
Freeha Fatima Qureshi, Iqbal Hussain, and Muhammad Iqbal
1. Introduction 139
2. Effect of heavy metal pollution on plants 140
3. Cadmium (Cd) 142
4. Lead (Pb) 145
5. Arsenic (As) 147
6. Mercury (Hg) 149
7. Metal stress tolerance mechanisms 
in plants 150
8. Conclusion 151
References 151
9. Interaction of nanoparticles 
and nanocomposite with plant 
and environment
Chandrabose Selvaraj, Chandrabose Yogeswari, 
and Sanjeev Kumar Singh
1. Introduction 162
2. Sources of nanomaterials 162
3. Classification of nanoparticles 163
4. Organization of nanomaterials based on their 
sizes 165
5. Types of nanomaterials based on their 
source 165
6. Types of nanoparticles related to plants 166
7. Cerium NPs (CeO NPs) 168
8. Silicon NPs (SiNPs) 168
9. Titanium dioxide NPs (TiO2 NPs) 169
10. Nano pesticides 170
11. Nanoemulsion 173
12. Interaction of NMs with soil and 
rhizosphere 173
13. Interaction of NMs with overall 
environment 174
14. Factors influencing the uptake 
and translocation of NPs 175
15. NPs for plant pathogen detection 178
16. Transport and interaction 179
17. Nanoparticle-plant interaction pathways 180
18. Effects of ion-releasing NP 181
19. Impact of natural organic material on 
NP-induced effects 182
20. Concluding remarks 183
Acknowledgment 183
References 183
10. Toxic effects of essential metals 
on plants: From damage to adaptation 
responses
Shivam Sharma, D.R. Choudhary, Viveka Katoch, Antul Kumar, 
Anuj Choudhary, B.M. Harish, Harmanjot Kaur, and Sahil Mehta
1. Introduction 195
2. Metal toxicity in plants 197Contents ix
3. Metal toxicity and its damage detection 200
4. Repair strategies and plant response 202
5. Adaptation responses 203
6. Conclusion 205
References 205
11. Phytoremediation strategies of plants: 
Challenges and opportunities
Poonam Sharma, Smita Rai, Krishna Gautam, and Swati Sharma
1. Introduction 211
2. Mechanism of heavy metal remediation 214
3. Phytoremediation of contaminated soil to grow 
food 218
4. Phytoremediation for bioenergy production 220
5. Valorization of phytoremediation 
by-products 221
6. Challenges associated with 
phytoremediation 223
7. Conclusion and future perspective 224
References 225
12. Pesticide toxicity and their impact on 
plant growth, active constituents 
and productivity
Himani Gautam, Shubhra Singh, Hema Prashad, Antul Kumar, 
Anuj Choudhary, Harmanjot Kaur, Om Prakash Narayan, Shambhu 
Krishan Lal, and Sahil Mehta
1. Introduction 232
2. Phytotoxicity effects on plants 233
3. Pesticides phytotoxicity symptoms on plants 236
4. Impact of pesticide toxicity on soil health and 
plant 237
5. Other measures for the prevention of pesticides 
phytotoxicity 246
6. Conclusion 246
References 247
13. Plant responses to water pollution
Nirmal Singh, Sourabh, Pramod Kumar, Preeti, and Sahil Mehta
1. Introduction 253
2. Water pollution: Definition, types, and extent of 
the problem 254
3. Plant and water pollution 257
4. Concluding remarks 261
References 261
Further reading 263
14. Plant response to industrial waste
Sana Ashraf, Ayesha Anwar, Qasim Ali, Azna Safdar, and Kehkashan
1. Introduction 265
2. Types of plants 268
3. Response of plant to industrial waste 270
4. Conclusion 276
References 277
15. Radioisotopes and their impact on plants
K.F. Abdelmotelb, Shri Hari Prasad, Shivaji Ajinath Lavale, 
Akash Ravindra Chichaghare, and Sahil Mehta
1. Introduction to radioisotopes 283
2. Radioisotopes as pollutants 285
3. Effects of radiation on plant diversity 286
4. Effects of radiation in plant morphology 287
5. Effects of radiation in plant physiology and 
molecular biology 288
6. Radio-adaptation by plants 292
7. Use of radioisotopes in crop improvement: 
A positive side 294
8. Conclusion 294
References 295
16. Effects of cell phone radiation on 
plants growth, active constituents and 
production
Ashok Yadav and Suchisree Jha
1. Introduction 299
2. Plants and cell phone radiation or GSM 
radiation 300
3. Effects of cell phone radiation on plant system 300
4. Conclusion 304
References 305
17. Effects of major munitions compounds 
on plant health and function
Stephen M. Via and Paul V. Manley
1. Warfare and the environment 309
2. Global munitions issue 311
3. Chemical relics of war 312
4. Environmental behavior 313
5. Explosives and vegetation 316
6. Monitoring going forward 320
References 325
Further reading 331x Contents
18. Aquatic macrophytes and trace 
elements: Deleterious effects, biomarkers, 
adaptation mechanisms, and potential 
new wave of phytoremediation 
processes
Maha Krayem, Sami El Khatib, and Pascal Labrousse
1. Introduction 334
2. Trace elements and aquatic plants or 
macrophytes 335
3. Biomarkers and adaptation mechanisms of 
macrophytes 338
4. Macrophytes: A potential new wave of 
phytoremediation processes 353
5. Conclusion 365
References 366
19. Production and role of plants secondary 
metabolites under various environmental 
pollution
Phaniendra Alugoju and Tewin Tencomnao
1. Introduction 380
2. Effect of elevated CO2 (EC) levels on PSMs 380
3. Effect of ozone (O3) on PSMs 390
4. Effect of toxic gases on the production of 
PSMs 393
5. Effect of heavy metals on PSMs 395
6. Effect of particulate matter (PM) on PSMs 399
7. Conclusion 401
References 401
20. Plant proteomics and environmental 
pollution
B.M. Harish, Shivam Sharma, D.R. Choudhary, Antul Kumar, 
Anuj Choudhary, Harmanjot Kaur, Manisha Lakhanpal, 
Wajahat Ali Khan, and Sahil Mehta
1. Introduction 411
2. Approaches and challenges in crop plant 
proteomics 413
3. Plant proteomic technologies—Recent 
innovations and their applications 413
4. Cellular proteome to subcellular protein 
catalogues 415
5. Organ-specific proteome analysis of plants in 
concern to environmental pollutants 420
6. Conclusion 423
References 423
21. Genetic modification and genome 
engineering of plants for adverse 
environmental pollution
Khushboo Singh, Geeta Boken, and Sahil Mehta
1. Introduction 429
2. Current scenario of globe and human towards 
pollution 430
3. Pollution: Effects on plants 431
4. Engineering plants 433
5. Conclusion and future prospects 436
References 436
Index 441xi
K.F. Abdelmotelb Department of Genetics, 
Faculty of Agriculture, Zagazig University, 
Zagazig, Egypt
Qasim Ali Department of Soil Sciences, Faculty 
of Agriculture and Environment, The Islamia 
University of Bahawalpur, Bahawalpur, 
Pakistan
Phaniendra Alugoju Natural Products for Neu￾roprotection and Anti-Ageing Research Unit; 
Department of Clinical Chemistry, Faculty of 
Allied Health Sciences, Chulalongkorn Univer￾sity, Bangkok, Thailand
Ayesha Anwar Institute of Soil and Environ￾mental Sciences, University of Agriculture, 
Faisalabad, Pakistan
Prahlad Arya (Kumar) Department of Geology, 
Patna Science College, Patna University, Patna, 
Bihar, India
Muhammad Arslan Ashraf Department of 
Botany, Government College University Fais￾alabad, Faisalabad, Pakistan
Sana Ashraf College of Earth and Environmen￾tal Sciences, Quaid-e-Azam Campus, Univer￾sity of the Punjab, Lahore, Pakistan
Geeta Boken Department of Genetics and Plant 
Breeding, CCS Haryana Agricultural Univer￾sity, Hisar, Haryana, India
D.R. Choudhary Department of Vegetable 
Science and Floriculture, CSK HPKV, Palam￾pur, Himachal Pradesh, India
Priti Chauhan Department of Biosciences and 
Biotechnology, Banasthali Vidyapith, Jaipur, 
Rajasthan, India
Akash Ravindra Chichaghare Department of 
Silviculture and Agroforestry, Kerala Agricul￾tural University, Thrissur, Kerala, India
Anuj Choudhary Department of Botany, Punjab 
Agricultural University, Ludhiana, Punjab, 
India
Sami El Khatib LIU, Lebanese International 
University, Al Khyara-West Bekaa, Lebanon
Himani Gautam Department of Entomology, 
Dr. YS Parmar University of Horticulture and 
Forestry, Nauni Solan, Himachal Pradesh, 
India
Krishna Gautam Centre for Energy and Envi￾ronmental Sustainability, Lucknow, Uttar 
Pradesh, India
Irina F. Golovatskaya Department of Plant 
Physiology, Biotechnology and Bioinformat￾ics, National Research Tomsk State University, 
Tomsk, Russia
Anshu Gupta Department of Environmental 
Science, Government Degree College, Jammu, 
India
Arslan Hafeez Department of Botany, Govern￾ment College University Faisalabad, Faisala￾bad, Pakistan
B.M. Harish Department of Vegetable Science 
and Floriculture, CSK HPKV, Palampur, Him￾achal Pradesh, India
Azamal Husen Wolaita Sodo University, 
Wolaita, Ethiopia
Iqbal Hussain Department of Botany, Govern￾ment College University Faisalabad, Faisala￾bad, Pakistan
Muhammad Iqbal Department of Botany, Gov￾ernment College University Faisalabad, Faisal￾abad, Pakistan
Suchisree Jha Plant Nutrition Department, 
Indofil Industries Limited, Thane, Maharashtra, 
India
Contributorsxii Contributors
Viveka Katoch Department of Seed Science and 
Technology, CSK HPKV Palampur, Himachal 
Pradesh, India
Harmanjot Kaur Department of Botany, Punjab 
Agricultural University, Ludhiana, Punjab, India
Kehkashan Institute of Soil and Environmental 
Sciences, University of Agriculture, Faisalabad, 
Pakistan
Wajahat Ali Khan International Centre for 
Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, New 
Delhi, Delhi, India
Maha Krayem LIU, Lebanese International Uni￾versity, Al Khyara-West Bekaa, Lebanon
Antul Kumar Department of Botany, Punjab 
Agricultural University, Ludhiana, Punjab, India
Pramod Kumar Department of Agronomy, 
CCS Haryana Agricultural University, Hisar, 
Haryana, India
Pascal Labrousse Université de Limoges, 
PEIRENE EA 7500, Limoges, France
Manisha Lakhanpal Department of Forest 
Products (Medicinal and Aromatic Plants), Dr 
YS Parmar university of Horticulture and For￾estry, Nauni, Himachal Pradesh, India
Shambhu Krishan Lal School of Genetic Engi￾neering, ICAR–Indian Institute of Agricultural 
Biotechnology, Ranchi, Jharkhand; Interna￾tional Centre for Genetic Engineering and Bio￾technology, New Delhi, India
Nikolay I. Laptev Department of Ecology, 
Nature Management and Environmental Engi￾neering, National Research Tomsk State Uni￾versity, Tomsk, Russia
Shivaji Ajinath Lavale Centre for Plant Bio￾technology and Molecular Biology, Kerala 
Agricultural University, Thrissur, Kerala, India
Paul V. Manley Department of Civil, Architec￾tural and Environmental Engineering, College 
of Engineering and Computing, Missouri Uni￾versity of Science and Technology, Rolla, MO, 
United States
Sahil Mehta Department of Botany, Hansraj 
College, University of Delhi, New Delhi, India
Om Prakash Narayan BME Department, Tufts 
University, Medford, MA, United States
Shri Hari Prasad Centre for Plant Biotechnol￾ogy and Molecular Biology, Kerala Agricultural 
University, Thrissur, Kerala, India
Hema Prashad Department of Entomology, 
Dr. YS Parmar University of Horticulture and 
Forestry, Nauni Solan, Himachal Pradesh, 
India
Preeti ICAR-National Bureau of Plant Genetic 
Resources, New Delhi, India
Freeha Fatima Qureshi Department of Botany, 
Government College University Faisalabad, 
Faisalabad, Pakistan
Shakeelur Rahman Prakriti Bachao Founda￾tion, Ranchi, Jharkhand, India
Smita Rai Department of Biosciences, Integral 
University, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India
Anita Rani Department of Botany, Dyal Singh 
College, University of Delhi, Delhi, India
Rizwan Rasheed Department of Botany, Gov￾ernment College University Faisalabad, Faisal￾abad, Pakistan
Azna Safdar Institute of Soil and Environmen￾tal Sciences, University of Agriculture, Faisala￾bad, Pakistan
Pallavi Saxena Department of Environmental 
Sciences, Hindu College, University of Delhi, 
Delhi, India
Chandrabose Selvaraj Computer-Aided Drug 
Design and Molecular Modeling Lab, Depart￾ment of Bioinformatics, Science Block, Alagappa 
University, Karaikudi, Tamil Nadu, India
Neeti Sharma Department of Biosciences and 
Biotechnology, Banasthali Vidyapith, Jaipur, 
Rajasthan, India
Poonam Sharma Department of Bioengi￾neering, Integral University, Lucknow, Uttar 
Pradesh, India
Shivam Sharma Department of Vegetable 
Science and Floriculture, CSK HPKV, Palam￾pur, Himachal Pradesh, India
Swati Sharma Department of Biosciences, Inte￾gral University, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India
Khushboo Singh School of Agricultural Sci￾ences, K.R. Mangalam University, Gurugram, 
Haryana, IndiaContributors xiii
Nirmal Singh Department of Seed Science and 
Technology, CCS Haryana Agricultural Univer￾sity, Hisar, Haryana, India
Rajlaxmi Singh Department of Botany, Patna 
University, Patna, Bihar, India
Sanjeev Kumar Singh Computer-Aided Drug 
Design and Molecular Modeling Lab, Depart￾ment of Bioinformatics, Science Block, Alagappa 
University, Karaikudi, Tamil Nadu, India
Shubhra Singh Department of Entomology, 
Dr. YS Parmar University of Horticulture and 
Forestry, Nauni Solan, Himachal Pradesh, 
India
Saurabh Sonwani Department of Environmen￾tal Studies, Zakir Husain Delhi College, Uni￾versity of Delhi, Delhi, India
Sourabh ICAR – Central Arid Zone Research 
Institute, Jodhpur, Rajasthan, India
Saumya Srivastava Department of Botany, Patna 
University, Patna, Bihar, India
Tewin Tencomnao Natural Products for Neu￾roprotection and Anti-Ageing Research Unit; 
Department of Clinical Chemistry, Faculty of 
Allied Health Sciences, Chulalongkorn Univer￾sity, Bangkok, Thailand; Department of Physi￾ology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY, 
United States
Stephen M. Via Department of Biology, College 
of Science, Engineering, and Technology, Norfolk 
State University, Norfolk, VA, United States
Ashok Yadav ICAR-Central Agroforestry 
Research Institute, Jhansi, Uttar Pradesh, India
Chandrabose Yogeswari Ezhilnala Siddha 
Varma Hospital and Research Centre, Madurai, 
Tamil Nadu, IndiaThis page intentionally left blankProfessor Azamal Husen holds a BSc 
from Shri Murli Manohar Town Post 
Graduate College, Ballia, UP; an MSc from 
Hamdard University, New Delhi; and a PhD 
from Forest Research Institute, Dehra Dun, 
India.. He is Foreign Delegate at Wolaita 
Sodo University, Wolaita, Ethiopia. He has 
served the University of Gondar, Ethiopia, 
as Full Professor of Biology, and worked 
there as the coordinator of MSc Program 
and as the Head of the Department of 
Biology. He was Visiting Faculty of the 
Forest Research Institute, and the Doon 
College of Agriculture and Forest at Dehra 
Dun, India. Dr. Husen’s research and teach￾ing experience of 20 years includes biogenic 
nanomaterial fabrication and application, 
plant responses to nanomaterials, plant ad￾aptation to harsh environments at the phys￾iological, biochemical and molecular levels, 
herbal medicine, and clonal propagation for 
improvement of tree species.
Dr. Husen has conducted several research 
projects sponsored by various funding agen￾cies, including the World Bank (FREEP), the 
National Agricultural Technology Project 
(NATP), the Indian Council of Agriculture 
Research (ICAR), the Indian Council of 
Forest Research Education (ICFRE), and the 
Japan Bank for International Cooperation 
(JBIC). He received four fellowships from 
India and a recognition award from the 
University of Gondar, Ethiopia, for his ex￾cellent teaching, research, and community 
service. An efficient evaluator of research 
projects, book proposals, etc., Dr. Husen 
has been on the editorial board and the 
panel of reviewers of several reputed jour￾nals published by Elsevier, Frontiers Media 
SA, Taylor & Francis, Springer Nature, RSC, 
Oxford University Press, Sciendo, The Royal 
Society, CSIRO, PLOS, MDPI, and John 
Wiley & Sons. He is on the advisory board 
of Cambridge Scholars Publishing, UK. He is 
Fellow of the Plantae group of the American 
Society of Plant Biologists, and Member of 
the International Society of Root Research, 
Asian Council of Science Editors, and 
INPST. He has more than 200 publications 
to this credit; he is also Editor-in-Chief of the 
American Journal of Plant Physiology.
He is also working as Series Editor of 
Exploring Medicinal Plants, published by 
Taylor & Francis Group, USA; Plant Biology, 
Sustainability, and Climate Change, published 
by Elsevier, USA; and Smart Nanomaterials 
Technology, published by Springer Nature 
Singapore Pte Ltd. Singapore.
About the editor
xvThis page intentionally left blankEnvironmental pollution as a conse￾quence of diverse human activities has 
become a global concern. Urbanization, 
mining, industrial revolution, burning of 
fossil fuels/firewood, and poor agricultural 
practices as well as improper dumping of 
waste products are largely responsible for 
the undesirable change in the environment 
composition. The sources of pollution may 
be the point sources, which are easily iden￾tified; and/or nonpoint sources, where the 
pollution comes from diffuse sources that 
are not easy to pinpoint. In our society, the 
environmental pollution is mainly classified 
as air pollution, water pollution, land pollu￾tion, noise pollution, thermal pollution, light 
pollution, and plastic pollution. Nowadays, 
it has been realized that with the increasing 
environmental pollution, impurities may 
accumulate in plants, which are required 
for basic human uses such as food, cloth￾ing, and medicine. Environmental pollution 
has tremendous impacts on phenological 
events, structural patterns, physiological 
phenomena, biochemical status, and the 
cellular and molecular features of plants. 
Exposure to environmental pollution in￾duces acute or chronic injury depending on 
the pollutant concentration, exposure dura￾tion, season, and plant species. Moreover, 
the global rise of greenhouse gases such as 
carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, nitrous 
oxides, methane, chlorofluorocarbons, and 
ozone in the atmosphere is among the ma￾jor threats to the biodiversity. They have 
also shown visible impacts on life cycles 
and distribution of various plant species. 
Anthropogenic activities, including the 
fossil-fuel combustion in particular, are re￾sponsible for steady increases in the atmo￾spheric greenhouse gas concentrations. This 
phenomenon accelerates the global warm￾ing. Studies have suggested that the changes 
in carbon dioxide concentrations, rainfall, 
and temperature have greatly influenced 
the plant physiological and metabolic activ￾ities including the formation of biologically 
active ingredients. Taken together, plants in￾teract negatively with pollutants and cause 
adverse ecological and economic outcomes. 
Therefore, plant response to pollutants re￾quires more investigation in terms of dam￾age detection, adaptation, tolerance, and 
the physiological and molecular responses. 
The complex interplay among other emerg￾ing pollutants, namely, radioisotopes, cell 
phone radiation, nanoparticles, nanocom￾posites, heavy metals, etc. and their impact 
on plant adaptation strategies, and possi￾bility to recover, mitigation, phytoremedia￾tion, etc., also needs to be explored. Further, 
it is necessary to elucidate better the process 
of the pollutant’s uptake by plant and accu￾mulation in the food chain, and the plant re￾sistance capability against the various kinds 
of environmental pollutants. In this context, 
the identification of tolerance mechanisms 
in plants against pollutants can help in de￾veloping eco-friendly technologies, which 
requires molecular approaches to increase 
plant tolerance to pollutants, such as plant 
transformation and genetic modifications. 
Pollutant-induced overproduction of reac￾tive oxygen species that cause DNA damage 
and apoptosis-related alterations has also 
been examined. They also trigger changes at 
Preface
xviixviii Preface
the levels of transcriptome, proteome, and 
metabolome, which has been discussed in 
this book.
The book in hand covers awide range of 
topics as mentioned above. It incorporates 
chapters that the authors have skillfully 
crafted with clarity and precision, reviewing 
up-to-date literature with lucid illustrations. 
The book caters to the need of graduate stu￾dents and is also useful for both novices and 
experienced scientists/researchers. It should 
also inspire industrialists and policy mak￾ers associated with plant products and the 
environmental health and planning. I extend 
my sincere thanks to all the contributors 
for their timely response and excellent con￾tributions. Finally, my special thanks go to 
Shagufta, Zaara, Mehwish, and Huzaifa for 
providing their time, encouragement, and 
extended support to put everything together. 
I would be happy to receive comments and 
criticism, if any, from subject experts and 
general readers of this book.
Azamal HusenPlants and their Interaction to Environmental Pollution 1 Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-99978-6.00004-2
CHAPTER
1
Plants and their unexpected response 
to environmental pollution: 
An overview
Shakeelur Rahmana
, Sahil Mehtab
, and Azamal Husenc
a
Prakriti Bachao Foundation, Ranchi, Jharkhand, India, b
Department of Botany, Hansraj 
College, University of Delhi, New Delhi, India, c
Wolaita Sodo University, Wolaita, Ethiopia
Abbreviations
ATP adenosine tri-phosphate
CFCs chloro fluoro carbons
dB decibel
FR far-red
H2S hydrogen sulfide
HCl hydrogen chloride
HF hydrogen fluoride
NO2 nitrogen dioxide
NPs nanoparticles
NMs nanomaterials
PAN peroxy acetyl nitrate
PAR photosynthetically active radiation
R red
ROS reactive oxygen species
SPL sound pressure level
SOD superoxide dismutases
UV ultraviolet radiation
1. Introduction
Environmental pollution is one of the most complex problems in the modern world. 
Combustion of fossil fuels, urbanization, chemicals used in agriculture, traffic load, war 
weapons, airplanes, and industrialization results in increased emission of toxic gases. These 2 1. Plants and their unexpected response to environmental pollution
are the major sources of pollution responsible for numerous impacts on the flora and fauna 
(Husen, 2021a,b,c, 2022). As a result, the chemical composition of the atmosphere has been 
distorted. In the present scenario, the increase in the concentration of greenhouse gases such 
as carbon monoxide (CO), carbon dioxide (CO2), nitrous oxides (NOx), methane (CH4), chlo￾rofluorocarbons (CFCs), and ozone (O3) in the atmosphere is among the most major threats to 
the biodiversity. Overall, environmental pollution has tremendous impacts on plant growth, 
development, and physiological performance at the cellular and molecular levels (Husen, 
2022; Deepti et al., 2022a,b; Rahman and Husen, 2022) (Fig. 1). The global rise of environ￾mental pollution also leads to climate change causing visible impacts on life cycles and dis￾tribution of various plant species. The raised level of CO2 and sulfur dioxide (SO2) in the 
atmosphere is also affecting the productivity and quality of plants species, showing major 
changes in their chemical composition (Husen, 1997, 2022; Husen et al., 1999; Idso et al., 2000; 
Iqbal et al., 2018).
Plants absorb pollutants on the surface of leaves, and onto the plant root-soil system to 
mitigate global warming and minimize the pollution load in a particular area. Moreover, 
forests act as a purification system of the planet earth by absorbing airborne chemicals and 
releasing oxygen. However, another aspect is that water pollution gives sufficient space for 
other plants to grow well because the nutrients they need for existence are collected in the 
polluted water. Water pollution also modifies the growing environment of plants, such as the 
removal of essential nutrients and bringing in new and hazardous ones. Acid rain (mainly 
NO2 and SO2 deposition), also harm by burning or killing plants in a specific location. Soils 
and freshwaters are naturally acidic (pH < 7) owing to the oxidation and respiration reac￾tions in biotic and abiotic systems. During the twentieth century, the acidity of many re￾gions of the world continuously increased as a consequence of energy and food production. 
FIG. 1 Plant response to various types of environmental pollution.1. Introduction 3
The phenomena and impacts of acid rain on vegetation create a complex situation for plants 
which ends up with the plants being unable to flourish. Acidic conditions accumulate a lot of 
aluminum ions in the soil, which destroys roots systems and prevents the uptake of import￾ant nutrients and ions (Lal, 2016).
Some plants, such as species of cactus bloom only in the dark at night. They are pollinated 
by bats and moths and other nocturnal animals or insects. Increasing the duration of light 
in such areas will disrupt the pollination and this affects plant's ability to flower and repro￾duce and this will ultimately disrupt our food sources. It is amazing to know that plants, 
like animals, are sensitive to light, intensity, color, and duration of exposure. Photosynthesis, 
therefore, requires blue and red lights of high intensity. Low-intensity red and infrared lights 
are good for regulating biological rhythms and controlling processes like seed germination, 
flower development, leaf expansion, stem elongation, etc. thus, light pollution perhaps, there￾fore affects all these biological phenomena.
Air pollution can affect plants directly through the leaves, as well as indirectly by the 
acidification of the soil environment (Iqbal et al., 1987, 2010a,b, 2011; Husen and Iqbal, 2004; 
Kumar and Nandini, 2013). The impacts of atmospheric pollution are generally observed on 
leaves because they are the first receptors (Randhi and Reddy, 2012). It has also been observed 
in different studies that the majority of plants exposed to a polluted atmosphere start many 
physiological changes before visible injuries to the leaves (Abida and Harikrishna, 2010). The 
study on environmental pollution in relation to anatomical, morphological, physiological, 
and biochemical parameters of plants has been conducted by several researchers (Husen, 
2021a,b,c). Some of the biochemical mechanisms assist to acclimatize plants to atmospheric 
pollutants. It can be assessed by several parameters or air pollution tolerance indexes such 
as total chlorophyll, relative water content, ascorbic acid, and pH. Similarly, the tolerance 
of plants to heavy metal toxicity has to be established to judge their possible application 
in soil phyto stabilization and plantation in mining areas contaminated with heavy metals 
(Nadgorska-Socha et al., 2013a,b; Iqbal et al., 2015). A plant in stress delays flowering as it 
uses all its resources to face the threat. For example, most of the plants exposed to vehicular 
pollution, delay in flowering as they are fighting the emissions.
Another important concern is the depletion in the stratospheric O3 layer causes ultravio￾let radiation (UV-B) radiation which is harmful not only to human health but also to plants 
and sea biota. It physically injures the plant leaves, causing abnormal yellowing of leaves 
or chlorosis. These results in a deficiency in chlorophyll, meaning the plant will not be able 
to make its own food or energy. With a higher concentration of O3, plant leaves will sim￾ply die due to too much exposure. Destruction by the O3 in the lower atmosphere restricts 
respiration, obstructs stomata, prevents photosynthesis, and stunts plant growth (Deepti 
et al., 2022a).
Plants have shown immediate (acute) and long (chronic) impacts of environmental pol￾lution on plant growth and developmental processes (Husen, 1997, 2021c, 2022), which may 
depend on the types of plant species, exposure duration, concentration, and types of pollut￾ants. It has been suggested that the anthropogenic or naturally produced pollutants interact 
with various plant species, and alter plant growth, development, biochemical physiologi￾cal, and molecular performance. Moreover, their impact may vary according to the pollution 
source, pollutant types, season, exposure duration, plant species, leaf types, leaf thickness, 
presence of leaf hair or trichomes, epicuticular wax, etc. (Husen, 2021c, 2022). Taken together, 4 1. Plants and their unexpected response to environmental pollution
this chapter reports the effect of various environmental pollution on plant growth and devel￾opment, cytological, biochemical, physiological, and molecular responses.
2. Plant response to air pollution
The most significant anthropogenic phytotoxic gaseous air pollutants include nitrogen di￾oxide (NO2), O3, CO2, SO2, hydrogen sulfide (H2S), hydrogen chloride (HCl), hydrogen flu￾oride (HF), chlorine (Cl2), ethylene (C2H4), peroxyacetyl nitrate (PAN), and ammonia (NH3). 
These gases can be categorized according to their biochemical and physiological activity in 
plant cells as given in Table 1 (De Kok and Stulen, 1998).
The air pollutants that cause plant injury are most common near large cities, refineries, 
smelters, electric power plants, incinerators, refuse dumps, pulp and paper mills, and coal, 
gas, petroleum burning furnaces, other industries, airports, and highways. Several factors 
administer the level of injury and the area where air pollution is a problem, these are type 
and concentration of pollutants, length of exposure, distance from the source, meteorological 
conditions, and maturity of plant tissues, species, and variety of plants (Husen, 2021c, 2022). 
The extreme temperature, light, soil moisture deficit, and humidity recurrently modify the 
response of the plant to air pollutants. The impacts of pollutants on plants include burning 
at leaf tips or margins, blotchy foliage, twig dieback, premature leaf drop, delayed maturity, 
early drop of blossoms, stunted growth, and reduced yield. Generally, the visible injury to 
plants is of three types collapse of leaf tissue with the development of necrotic patterns, alter￾ations in growth or premature loss of foliage, and yellowing or other color changes.
Air pollution injuries can create confusion with the symptoms caused by bacteria, fungi, 
nematodes, insects, viruses, toxicities, nutritional deficiencies as well as the adverse effects of 
water, temperature, and wind. SO2 is one of the key air pollutants which can get enter in the 
plant parts through roots as well as stomatal opening during photosynthesis and respiration. 
Young plants and matured leaves are most susceptible to SO2. SO2 injury can be severe 30 
miles or more from its source. Injury, however, is generally highest in the surrounding area 
of the source. The degree of injury increases as both the concentration of sulfur dioxide and 
the length of exposure increase. Different responses of the plants against SO2 exposure have 
been reported (Rahman and Husen, 2022). It also depends on the plant species and different 
environmental factors (Rahman and Husen, 2022).
TABLE 1 The main metabolic activities of phytotoxic air pollutants in plants.
Air pollutant Metabolic activity
O3, PAN Oxidizing
SO2, NO2, HF, HCl Acidifying
SO2 Mutagenic
SO2, NO2, H2S Reducing
NH3, NH4 +, NO2, NO N-eutrophying
O3, PAN, SO2, HF, C2H4 Disturbing hormonal balance2. Plant response to air pollution 5
Plants are most sensitive to SO2 during periods of high relative humidity, bright sun, and 
adequate plant moisture during the late spring and early summer. Some of the responses are 
damaging photosystem, changes in the stomatal density, and deviations in the efficiency of 
carbon fixation (Swanepoel et al., 2007; Haworth et al., 2012; Husen, 2022). The exposure of 
succulent, broad-leaved plants to SO2 and its by-product sulfuric acid generally results in dry, 
white, or straw papery spots. Chronic injury causes brown to reddish-brown or black blotches 
on both surfaces of the leaf of some plant species. A tan to reddish-brown banding or dieback 
occurs on conifer leaves with adjoining areas. SO2 from the atmosphere along with H2S works 
as a sulfur source that can be up-taken through stomata of the plants other than the sulfate 
uptake from the roots. This stomatal uptake affects the metabolic profile of the plant.
Glucosinolates are sulfur-containing secondary metabolites that play an important function 
in sulfur storage which helps in the redistribution of sulfur during the sulfur-deprived con￾dition (Falk et al., 2007). Two members from the genus Brassica were exposed to the 0.25μL− 1
of SO2 for seven days to examine the deviations in the glucosinolate content (Aghajanzadeh 
et al., 2015). The glucosinolate content was observed negligible change in the shoot under 
sulfur deprived as well as sufficient conditions. It has been reported that the high concen￾tration of hydrogen sulfide (H2S) is responsible for leaf lesions, defoliation, tissue death and 
decreased growth rate in some plant species. H2S is also a signaling molecule that is proven 
to endorse the antioxidant activities in many plants against abiotic stresses. The application 
of H2S increased the antioxidant potential and quality in plants. Brassica oleracea was applied 
with the incrementing levels of sodium hydrosulfide (as an H2S donor) to check the physio￾logical and antioxidative changes. It was observed that the lower levels of treatment showed 
increased contents of anthocyanins, flavonols, total phenolics, sinigrin, and carotenoids 
(Montesinos-Pereira et al., 2016). H2S has been also noted to mediate nicotine biosynthesis 
in Nicotiana tabacum when the growth of plants is induced under high temperatures. The 
element fluorine is found in fluorides compounds. Injury by particulate or gaseous fluorides 
is either a reddish brown or tan or yellowish mottle blistering at the tips and margin of broad￾leaved plants. A narrow, chlorotic to the dark brown band is mostly found between living and 
dead tissues (Chen et al., 2016). Many explanations related to plant response to SO2 pollution 
have been discussed in detail in the chapters to follow.
Further, greenhouse gases are major environmental challenge for a range of plant species 
(Husen, 2022; Choudhary et al., 2022). In this connection, CO2 is one of the key causes of 
a terrific rise since industrialization took place. Overall, the performance of plants to ele￾vated CO2have shown both positive and negative responses. In terms of positive response, 
elevated CO2increased photosynthesis and subsequently higher growth, biomass, and plant 
yield (Ainsworth and Long, 2005; De Souza et al., 2008; van der Kooi et al., 2016). Though, 
in terms of negative response, elevated CO2has decreased a variety of nutrients including 
protein concentrations, vitamins, and macro- and microelements in plants (Myers et al., 2014; 
Fernando et al., 2015; Broberg et al., 2017; Thompson et al., 2019). Therefore, it is essential to 
understand the effect of elevated CO2 on plant growth and production. The elevated CO2 sig￾nificantly affects photosynthetic features, metabolism, and plant development (Nowak et al., 
2004; Ainsworth and Long, 2005).
It is assumed that C4 photosynthesis was saturated at ambient CO2 and that C4 plants 
might be less and/or not at all affected by the increased level of CO2 in comparison to C3 
plant species (Pearcy and Ehleringer, 1984; Bowes, 1993). Possibly, this assumption appeared 6 1. Plants and their unexpected response to environmental pollution
in the anatomical and functional variation of C3 and C4 plant species and higher CO2 levels 
in bundle sheath cells of C4 leaves. However, it has been also observed that the variation 
between C3 and C4 is not as important as anticipated and that C4 plants can also acceler￾ate photosynthesis under elevated CO2. For example, Ziska and Bunce (1997) reported an 
increase in growth (3%–25%) and photosynthesis (4%–30%) in six different weed species 
namely, Amaranthus retrofexus, Echinochloa crus-galli, Panicum dichotomiforum, Setariafaberi, 
Setariaviridis, and Sorghum halapense; and also, inf our crop species namely, Amaranthus hypo￾chondriacus, Saccharum offcinarum, Sorghum bicolor, and Zea mays under elevated CO2.
In some investigations, under abiotic stress (high temperature and drought) conditions 
it has been noticed that the elevated CO2 reduces the negative effects of stress by mitigating 
oxidative stress and improving water status in Arabidopsis thaliana (Abo Gamar et al., 2019). 
Balasooriya et al. (2020) has demonstrated that elevated CO2 (950ppm) and higher tempera￾ture (30°C) increased the amounts of accessible bioactive compounds in strawberries plants. 
It has been also reported that the rice seed priming with salicylic acid (25mgL− 1
) and ascorbic 
acid (100mgL− 1
) increased germination rate, other seed quality features, α-amylase activ￾ity, and antioxidant enzyme activities under stress due to elevated CO2 and temperatures 
(Nedunchezhiyan et al., 2020).
Medicinal plants are good sources for plant secondary metabolites; they hold significant 
plasticity to acclimatize to the changing environments (Husen, 2021a,b, 2022). Digitalis lanata
is known for its use in heart failures (Rahimtoola, 2004), when treated with elevated CO2, 
there was a 3.5-folds increase in digoxin, a cardenolide glycoside. The digoxin also enhances 
other three glycosides viz. digoxin-mono-digitoxoside, digitoxin, and digitoxigenin showing 
a decline in their concentration (Stuhlfauth et al., 1987). It was observed in an experiment 
on Hymenocallis littoralis whose bulbs are known for their antineoplastic and antiviral prop￾erties, the elevated CO2 resulted in an increase in three types of alkaloids (Pancratistatin, 
7-deoxynarciclasine, and 7-deoxy-trans dihydronarciclasin) in the first year and decrease in 
their concentration for the subsequent year (Idso et  al., 2000). Similarly, in Ginkgo biloba a 
traditional Chinese medicinal plant used in Alzheimer’s disease, vascular or mixed demen￾tia (Weinmann et al., 2010) elevated CO2 and O3 together resulted in altered terpenoid con￾tent, increase in quercetin aglycon, and decrease in keampferol aglycon (Huang et al., 2010). 
In Zingiber officinale, elevated CO2 increased flavonoid and phenolic content (Ghasemzadeh 
et al., 2010). Many explanations and findings related to the aforementioned subject are dis￾cussed in Chapter 3.
3. Plant response to photochemical oxidants
The most important photochemical oxidants in the atmosphere include NO2, O3, and PAN. 
These oxidants are secondary pollutants that develop as a result of sunlight reacting with 
the products of fuel combustion. O3 is come down from the stratosphere by vertical winds or 
formed during electrical storms; more importantly, it is produced when sunlight reacts with 
nitrogen oxides and hydrocarbons formed by refuse burning and combustion of coal or petro￾leum fuels, especially the exhaust gases from internal-combustion engines. O3 is well known 
for its life-protective layer against ultra violet radiations. However, the ground level of O3 is 
increasing because of the rise in O3 precursor emissions in polluted areas. Plant performance 3. Plant response to photochemical oxidants 7
under elevated O3 has been reported by many investigators (Rai and Agrawal, 2012; Fuhrer 
et al., 2016; Jolivet et al., 2016; Li et al., 2017; Yendrek et al., 2017; Mills et al., 2018; Shang et al., 
2019; Peng et al., 2019; Ghosh et al., 2020; Mohamed et al., 2021; Deepti et al., 2022a; Yin et al., 
2022). They have shown that the young plants are generally the most sensitive to O3 whereas 
mature plants are relatively resistant.
O3 is most likely an important plant-toxic air pollutant and a very active form of oxygen 
that causes different types of symptoms on broad-leaved plants such as interveinal chlorosis, 
necrosis, scar on the upper surface of leaves, tissue collapse, flecking, bleaching, and mot￾tling. O3 reduced the plant growth and slow down bud formation and flowering. Affected 
leaves of certain plants, such as tobacco, citrus, and grape shrink and drop early. Conifers 
recurrently express a yellow to brown mottling and tip burn, or flecking and banding of the 
needles (Stolte, 1996). The flecks may later combine to form larger, bleached white to yellow￾ish dead areas. O3 usually attacks nearly mature leaves first, moving to younger and older 
leaves. The leaves tissues damaged by O3 are infected by certain fungi like Botrytis. O3 has 
several biochemical and physiological effects on plants.
At the biochemical level, O3 oxidizes sulfhydryl and fatty acid double bonds, increases 
membrane permeability, disrupts membrane-bound photosynthetic systems, and reduces fo￾liar sugar and polysaccharide levels. At the physiological level, stomatal conductance, net 
photosynthesis, and water use efficiency are reduced, dark respiration is affected, carbon 
allocation is changed, leaf senescence is accelerated, foliar visible injuries and leaching are 
increased, floral yield is decreased, and fruit set is delayed. O3-induced reduction in growth 
rates and yield happens through impaired net photosynthesis and regeneration (Rai and 
Agrawal, 2012; Deepti et al., 2022a). O3 impacts changes in wood quality reduced wood den￾sity and tracheid length, resulting in reductions in wood strength, pulp yield, and quality. The 
oxidation products of atmospheric nitrogen (NOx) are chemically reactive gaseous pollutants 
with harmful effects on biological systems. NO2 is a precursor molecule for other NOx com￾ponents and O3 (Chappelka and Samuelson, 1998). A reduction in the level of RNA transcript 
for the small subunit of RuBisCO, photosynthetic gene expression under ozone stress has 
been reported in rice plants (Agrawal et al., 2002).
In another report, Sarkar and Agrawal (2010) also reported reduced levels of mRNA (both 
small and large subunits of RuBisCO) in the same plant under ozone exposure. In an exper￾iment, Ghosh et al. (2020) used two sowing dates (timely sown and late sown) to explore 
the effect of elevated O3 on Triticum aestivum cv. HD 2967 growth including biomass, leaf 
gas exchange rate and other yield features such as the length of the ear plant, weight of ears 
plant, number of grains plant, weight of grains plant, husk weight plant, straw weight plant, 
harvest index, test weight of the grains, and straw grain ratio. Ghosh et al. (2020) concluded 
that O3 stress affected growth and productivity and late sowing practice is not worthwhile for 
wheat cultivation. Many other investigations have exhibited that O3 stress adversely influ￾ences photosynthesis and other related physiological performance in wheat (Feng et al., 2008; 
Ghosh et al., 2020), soybean (Morgan et al., 2003), rice (Ainsworth, 2008), radish, and brinjal 
(Tiwari and Agrawal, 2011). The reduced rate of assimilation was attributed to decreased car￾boxylation efficiency and was associated with reduced RuBisCO activity (Leitao et al., 2007). 
Sarkar and Agrawal (2010) reported that the degree of O3-induced foliar injury depends on 
the exposure duration and concentration. Reduced photosynthesis may also be noticed be￾cause of damage to thylakoids, which influenced photosynthetic transport of electrons and is 8 1. Plants and their unexpected response to environmental pollution
shown by a decrease in the Fv/Fm ratio. Quite often, the Fv/Fm ratio is associated with plant 
stress condition evaluation (Husen, 2009, 2010, 2013; Husen et al., 2017, 2019).
Next to O3, the most plant-toxic oxidant is PAN. Similar to O3, PAN is produced when 
sunlight reacts with different exhaust gases. PAN is formed by oxides of nitrogen reacting 
with unsaturated hydrocarbons in presence of light. PAN causes a collapse of tissue on the 
lower leaf surface of many plant species. The distinctive leaf marking is a bronzing, glazing, 
or silvering that commonly develops in blotches. On some plants, such as tobacco, petunia, 
bean, and tomato the wrinkle may be through the entire thickness of the leaf blade. In grasses, 
the collapsed tissue has a bleached appearance, with tan to yellow, transverse bands. Conifer 
needles change into yellow. Senescence, chlorosis, moderate to severe stunting, and prema￾ture leaf drop can occur. PAN is most toxic to lower plants and young leaves.
Damage caused by ethylene (H2C-CH2) is often associated with PAN and O3 in urban ar￾eas. Ethylene modifies the activities of plant hormones and growth regulators, which affect 
developing tissues and normal organ development, without causing leaf-tissue collapse and 
necrosis. Broad-leaved plants injury occurs as downward curling of the leaves and shoots, 
followed by a stunting of growth. O3 and PAN-compounds are the main photochemical ox￾idants, having severe adverse effects on plants. A large number of experiments have been 
carried out to explain the physiological and biochemical mechanisms of toxicity of O3 in crop 
plants, medicinal plants, and various forest trees species (Stolte, 1996; Deepti et al., 2022a). 
In several herbaceous crop plants, there was a positive correlation between O3 exposure and 
the induction of arginine decarboxylase activity, resulting in increased spermidine content in 
barley and increased putrescine content in O3-resistant tobacco and potato. These depositions 
in polyamine compounds were correlated with improved protection against O3 damage in 
leaves (Grunhage et al., 2001). It was observed in a study on Melissa officinalis, an important 
medicinal plant used for the treatment of the central nervous system (CNS) related disorders, 
dementia, and anxiety with elevated O3 concentrations showed that the total anthocyanins 
increased to a significant extent along with phenolics and tannins (Pellegrini et al., 2011). It 
was found that pericarp of Capsicum baccatum when exposed to O3 shows a decrease in cap￾saicin and dihydrocapsaicin (Bortolin and Caregnato, 2016). The effect of O3 as an indicator 
of secondary metabolites alterations under in vitro conditions has also been studied. An ex￾periment on Pueraria thomsnii suspension cultures showed an increase in puerarin production 
by cells treated with O3 (Sun et al., 2012). Many explanations related to plant response to O3
exposure have been discussed in detail in the chapters to follow.
4. Plant response to light pollution
Light pollution refers to the large amount of light produced by most urban and other heav￾ily populated areas. Light pollution has been shown to hinder the migration patterns of birds 
and the activities of nocturnal animals which are helpful in pollination. Photosynthetically 
active radiation (PAR, 400–700nm) is part of the visible light (380–760nm). The major wave￾lengths sensed by plant photoreceptors and pigments correspond to blue (400–500nm) and 
red (R, 600–700nm), and, to a lesser extent, green (500–600nm) light. Plants perceive a small 
fraction of near-infrared radiation or far-red (FR) light due to phytochromes with a sensitivity 
peak at 730nm, which is important for plant development (Huche-Thelier et al., 2016).4. Plant response to light pollution 9
Generally, plants developed two opposite strategies in response to competition for light, 
i.e., shade avoidance and shade tolerance (Ruberti et al., 2012). Plants shaded within a canopy 
will have reduced R/FR and blue/green ratios, sensed by phytochromes and cryptochromes, 
respectively. FR photons are not effective to induce photosynthesis, so a low R/FR ratio may 
quickly provoke changes in gene expression and physiological responses, controlling pheno￾typic plasticity and allowing plants to compete better with surrounding plants (Keuskamp 
et al., 2010). Flowering plants respond to the reduction in R/FR ratio due to phytochrome 
photoreceptors which is an early signal of neighbor proximity and activate complex develop￾mental responses like elongated stems, petioles, hypocotyls and internodes, smaller leaves/
reduction in leaf development, apical dominance, suppression of branching and early flower￾ing (Keuskamp et al., 2010; Ruberti et al., 2012). Stimulation of height growth is a remarkable 
shade avoidance response. The response is fast and reversible when returning plants to light 
with a high R/FR ratio. In contrast to shade avoidance, shade-tolerance response inhibits 
shade avoidance characteristics and increases leaf expansion causing interception of more 
radiation and simultaneous chlorophyll reorganization to improve photosynthetic efficiency 
(Gommers et al., 2013; Park and Runkle, 2017).
Light is also used as elicitor treatment to improve the biosynthesis of bioactive compounds 
in plants. In addition, UV and PAR depending on their quality and intensity may induce ROS 
and oxidative stress, affecting the biosynthesis of primary and secondary metabolites, plant 
growth and biomass as well as phytohormones (Wani et al., 2016; Deepti et al., 2022b). Further, 
the effect of UV-B radiation on plants growth, active constituents, and production has been 
discussed in detail in the chapters to follow. Other types of light or shade also stimulate very 
complex metabolic acclimation responses, including the synthesis of new secondary metab￾olites, which were not found under control conditions. Biosynthesis of both plant secondary 
metabolites and phytohormones depends on environmental factors, genotype, and genetic 
regulation. Different plant species have their own optimal light set, i.e., quality and quantity 
which administer to elicit maximal yield of secondary metabolites (Zhou et al., 2016). Specific 
light irradiation with narrow-bandwidth light could influence important herbal traits like 
aroma in sweet basil. It was reported that the quick adjustment of plants to the new light 
environment to obtain healthier food products reduces the toxic compounds such as methyl 
eugenol in basil.
The effect of light quality including white, yellow, blue, and red onquinoline alkaloid pro￾duction was observed in Camptotheca acuminate seedlings. It was found that compared with 
white light, redlight provoked the highest leaf biomass and camptothecin yield, whereas blue 
light led to the highest camptothecin content, higher activities of camptothecin biosynthesis￾related enzymes (TSB, b-subunit of tryptophan synthase and TDC, tryptophan decarboxy￾lase) and parallel transcript levels of TSB, TDC1, and TDC2 genes, but lowest leaf biomass. It 
was concluded that red light had the best effect on increasing the production of camptothecin 
in leaves of C. acuminata seedlings and suggested that light quality manipulation could be 
an effective approach to getting high camptothecin yield (Liu et al., 2015). Concentrations of 
calycosin 7-O-b-glucoside, hesperidin, and pseudobaptigenin were significantly increased by 
blue light when compared with white light but growth was not affected by different wave￾bands, i.e., white, red, blue, yellow, complete darkness treatment observed in Cyclopia subter￾nata callus (Kokotkiewicz et al., 2014). It was studied that blue light increased total phenolic 
and total flavonoid contents for callus cultures of Stevia rebaudiana (Ahmad et al., 2016).10 1. Plants and their unexpected response to environmental pollution
Blue LED spectrum or cool fluorescent lamp with 27Lmolm− 2 s
− 1
 was the best for the most 
favorable in vitro growth of Achillea millefolium but there was variation in amount, number, 
and profile of volatile compounds under the influence of quality and light intensity (Alvarenga 
et al., 2015). The effects of shade were observed in Paeonia lactiflora, which is a high-light de￾manding plant containing many bioactive compounds with pharmaceutical importance as 
paeoniflorin, oleanolic acid, and ursolic acid (Zhao et al., 2012). The report indicated that dif￾ferent morphological parameters were higher in sun-exposed compared to shade-grown pe￾ony. Shade reduced soluble protein, soluble sugar, and malondialdehyde contents that caused 
delayed initial flowering date, lengthened flowering time, faded flower color, and reduced 
flower fresh weight. It was observed that reduced anthocyanin content was the reason for 
fading flower color under shade. In comparison with shaded leaves, sun-exposed leaves had 
better-developed photoprotection mechanisms, including augmentation of zeaxanthin pools 
and de-epoxidation state of the xanthophylls cycle. Enhancement in spermine concentration 
was found in turmeric rhizome grown under-screen shading (Ferreira et al., 2016).
5. Plant response to soil pollution
Soil is a key factor as it manages the biological, geochemical, and hydrological cycles 
(Berendse et al., 2015). Toxic heavy metals such as cadmium (Cd), chromium (Cr), nickel (Ni), 
arsenic (Ar), etc. have been harshly included in the environment through variable sources 
including industrial effluent, fertilizers, pesticides, and metal smelters. Heavy metals are pres￾ent in the soil as free metal ions, metal complexes in soluble form, exchangeable metal ions, 
and insoluble or precipitated oxides, carbonates, hydroxides or they may also form a part of 
structural silicates (Rai et al., 2004). Soil pollution is now considered a challenge of a global 
dimension and is incorporated into environmental policy frameworks. Soils have been used to 
detect the accumulation, deposition, and distribution of heavy metals (Alirzayeva et al., 2006).
Plants exposed to a heavy metal contaminated environment tend to change the secondary 
metabolite profile. This interaction may lead to either inhibition or stimulation of the second￾ary bioactive compounds. Heavy metal exposure is a cause of induction of oxidative stress 
triggering the formation of highly active signaling molecules which further helps in the pro￾duction of secondary metabolites that affects the medicinal potency of the plant (Nasim and 
Dhir, 2010; Ditta et al., 2022). For instance, Ocimum tenuiflorum was cultivated in Hoagland 
solution (5%) containing variable concentrations of Cr to examine the eugenol content, a key 
component of Ocimum oil. A significant increment in eugenol content up to 100μM in com￾parison to control was found. Similarly, the effect of chromium on two therapeutically im￾portant secondary metabolites phyllanthin and hypophyllanthin of Phyllanthus amarus was 
reported (Rai and Mehrotra, 2008). The Robinia pseudoacacia is an indicator of soil pollution 
including Zn and Cd and is determined as a sensitive biomarker species for contaminated 
areas (Nadgorska-Socha et al., 2013a,b; Nadgorska-Socha et al., 2016).
The plants have bioaccumulation and metal-tolerant properties, heavy metals do obstruct 
their metabolism and consequently induce morphological and ecophysiological changes (Maleci 
et al., 2014). Reynoutria japonica and Solidago Canadensis are the two different species that are highly 
tolerant to environmental pollution (Vanderhoeven et al., 2005). It was reported that Achillea 
millefolium can be used to monitor Pb and Cu accumulation (Pilegaard and Johnsen, 1984). Many 6. Plant response to water pollution 11
other explanations of the effect of heavy metal pollution on plants in terms of damage detec￾tion, repair, acclimation, and adaptation response have been given in the Chapter 8. Crude pe￾troleum oil hydrocarbons are one of the most common groups of persistent organic pollutants 
(Abdollahzadeh et al., 2019; Odukoya et al., 2019; Gamage et al., 2020). Petroleum hydrocarbons 
are recognized as toxic to many living organisms due to their mutagenic and carcinogenic prop￾erties (Ma et al., 2018; Rusin et al., 2018). The low rate of decomposition of oil and oil products in 
the environment triggers their accumulation and a gradual increase in their concentration in the 
soil. After getting into the soil, crude oil products destroy its structure, upset the air-water bal￾ance (Abdollahzadeh et al., 2019), alter the soil's physicochemical properties (Peretiemo-Clarke 
and Achuba, 2007; Achuba, 2014), hinder the microbial propagation (Abdollahzadeh et al., 2019), 
interrupt the soil enzymatic activity (Otitoju et al., 2017), and have a negative impact on terres￾trial and soil mesofauna, as well as on plant growth and development.
The growth and development disorder of plants, growing on oil-contaminated soils, is 
caused by several reasons. The absorption of toxic petroleum molecules by plants can change 
the permeability and structure of the plasma membrane (Peretiemo-Clarke and Achuba, 
2007), modify the shape and size of the parenchyma tissue, reduce the intercellular space in 
the cortex of the stem and roots, and inhibit the mitotic activity of the root meristem (Bellout 
et al., 2016). The insufficient aeration caused by air displacement from the pore spaces be￾tween the soil particles by crude oil leads to low water availability and root stress to the plant 
(Athar et al., 2016). Furthermore, oil pollution minimizes the percentage of organic matter 
accessible to plants and reduces the amount of mineral nutrients such as phosphates, so￾dium, potassium, sulfates, and nitrates (Otitoju et al., 2017; Achuba and Ja-anni, 2018). The 
response of plants to oil pollution can manifest itself at various levels such as physiological, 
biochemical, and molecular levels. It has been studied that crude oil pollution reduces overall 
chlorophyll contents and photosynthetic activity in plants. Distinguished symptoms noted in 
plants growing on oil-polluted soil also include a decrease in the activity of starch metaboliz￾ing enzymes (Achuba and Ja-anni, 2018) and a decrease in the content of total carbohydrates, 
and total proteins/amino acids (Al-Hawas et al., 2012).
The most hazardous disorder, resulting from the impact of petroleum hydrocarbons on 
plants, is oxidative stress which leads to the formation of many reactive oxygen species 
with high oxidizing capacity in cells. In one respect, the ROS destroys intracellular reac￾tions, cell-membrane complexes and disrupts transport processes and by this means inhibits 
growth activity (Zaid and Wani, 2019). Contrastingly, plants use ROS as a second messen￾ger in many signal transduction cascades, and therefore ROS accumulation is essential to 
plant development and defense. Various studies have shown a change in the contents of 
proline, non-protein thiols (Rusin et  al., 2020), ascorbic acid, riboflavin, and anthocyanins 
(Chupakhina and Maslennikov, 2004), phenolic compounds, and flavonoids, in plants grow￾ing on oil-contaminated soils.
6. Plant response to water pollution
The main sources of water pollution are industrial effluent, runoff from agricultural fields, 
and raw sewage. Agricultural runoff includes toxic chemicals from fertilizers and pesti￾cides. Fertilizers can cause an explosive growth of algae, damaging plants and decreasing 12 1. Plants and their unexpected response to environmental pollution
the amount of available oxygen necessary for the survival of aquatic plant species. Another 
source of water pollution is improperly disposed of plastic bags, fishing lines, and other ma￾terials that may accumulate in the water creating problems in plant biodiversity. The problem 
of environmental pollution due to the dispersion of nitrate in surface water or groundwater 
is very topical. In this context, many plant species are capable to tolerate even high nitrate 
quantities for environmental remediation. Bravo and Hill (2012) found that high nitrate con￾centration in the groundwater did not affect Thuja occidentalis growth. Nitrate increases can 
improve transpiration without adverse effects on the species leading to increases in biomass 
(Chen et al., 2016). Accumulation of toxic heavy metals in living plant cells results in various 
deficiencies, reduction of cell activities, and inhibition of plant growth (Farooqi et al., 2009; 
Ditta et al., 2022).
The soluble salts and other contaminants in ground water, such as toxic metals, can accu￾mulate in the root zone, and other plant parts, thus affecting overall vegetation growth (Teng 
et al., 2018; Jha and Porwal, 2022; Kumar et al., 2022a,b). Sarma et al. (2011) have reported that 
sewage water and sludge contain different inorganic and organic metal ions which create 
adverse situations in plants. The impact of abiotic stress as well as pollutants on secondary 
metabolites production has been described and exhibits plasticity to maintain balance under 
adverse environmental situations (Husen, 2022; Bachheti et al., 2021). The upregulation of 
plant secondary metabolites depends upon the amount and time interval of pollutants ex￾posure. Several topics related to water pollution and plant tolerance mechanisms have been 
discussed in Chapter 13.
7. Plant response to noise pollution
Sound is acoustic energy in the form of an oscillatory concussive pressure wave transmit￾ted through gases, liquids, and solids. The physiological effect of environmental factors such 
as light, wind, moisture, and temperature on plant stimulus and growth has been well under￾stood. However, little information is available on the effects of noise on plants. Audible sound 
wave technology has recently been applied to plants at various physiological growth stages 
such as seed germination, callus growth, endogenous hormones, and mechanism of photo￾synthesis and transcription of certain genes. The noise stimulation could enhance disease 
resistance and decrease requirements for chemical fertilizers and biocides for plants (Zhang, 
2012). Plants also can absorb and vibrate to specific external sound frequencies (Hou et al., 
1994). Sound waves can alter the cell cycle (Wang et al., 1998). Sound waves shake the plant 
leaves and speed up the protoplasmic movement in the cells (Godbole, 2013).
Some stress-induced genes might be switched on under noise wave stimulation and the 
level of transcription increased (Wang et al., 2003a). Sound frequency technology stimulates 
leaf stomata to open, and thereby the plant will be able to increase its uptake of spray fer￾tilizer and dew. Sound waves were found to be efficient at getting the herbicide into the 
plant. Mature weeds can be sprayed with 50% less herbicide and biocide if also treated with 
sound waves. Therefore, sound waves can decrease the requirements for chemical fertilizers 
and pesticides (Carlson, 2013). Both sound energy and light energy could convert and store 
as chemical energy, which enhances the photosynthesis system (Meng et al., 2012). Sound 
waves have been applied to okra and zucchini seeds by using the natural sounds of birds and 7. Plant response to noise pollution 13
echoes. It was observed that natural sounds had a higher statistically significant effect on the 
number of sprouted okra and zucchini seeds for the main condition and over exposure time 
(Creath and Schwartz, 2004). Rideau wheat seeds and seedlings were exposed to various sig￾nal frequencies. The treatment at a sound frequency of 5kHz and sound pressure level (SPL) 
of 92dB stimulated tiller growth coupled with an increase in plant dry weight and number of 
roots (Weinberger and Measures, 1979).
In contrast, Wang et al. (2003a,b) reported the biological impact of sound waves on paddy 
rice seeds. It was found that the germination index, stem height, relative increase rate of fresh 
weight, activity of root system, and the penetrability of cell membrane were significantly 
increased at the sound frequency of 0.4kHz and SPL of 106dB. When the sound wave stimu￾lation exceeded 4kHz or 111dB, it inhibits the growth of paddy rice seeds. Therefore, sound 
waves could greatly change the cell cycle of paddy rice cells and speed up their reproduction 
rate. Sound wave also transfers energy into the cell and drives cytoplasmic streaming. Sound 
waves may affect the membrane materials to change the biological function of the membrane 
and enhance cell metabolism.
The cell membrane is very sensitive to environmental stimulation and its penetrability in￾fluences the plant's resistance to harmful materials in poor environments. Recent evidence il￾lustrated that the young root tips of Zea mays clearly bend toward a continuous sound source 
(Gagliano et al., 2012). Sound wave stimulation was applied to Actinidia chinensis in tissue 
culture, especially on callus growth. The sound waves have dual effects on the root devel￾opment of A. chinensis plantlets with a significant difference (Arts et al., 2000). Sound waves 
stimulation increased the root activity, total length, and number of roots whereas, the perme￾ability of cell membranes decreased (Yang et al., 2004).
Furthermore, it was found that adenosine triphosphate (ATP) significantly increased at 
SPL of 100dB and sound frequency of 1kHz. ATP is a high-energy molecule used for energy 
storage by organisms. The increase in ATP content indicates that the anabolism was strength￾ened in cells. The content of soluble proteins and the activity of Superoxide dismutases 
(SOD) increased at 1kHz and 100dB. However, those indexes decreased when sound waves 
stimulation exceed 1kHz and 100dB (Yang et al., 2002; Yang et al., 2003). Effects of sound 
stimulation on the metabolism of Chrysanthemum roots illustrated that the growth of roots 
accelerated under certain sound stimulation. The soluble sugar content, protein, and am￾ylase activity increased significantly by sound stimulation, but it had no obvious effect on 
the permeability of membranes (Jia et al., 2003b). The increase in soluble sugar and protein 
illustrated that sound simulation accelerated the anabolism of Chrysanthemum. In addition, 
the increase in amylase activity showed an advancement of sugar decomposition, hence the 
catabolism changed highly after the sound stimulation. The influence of sound waves on the 
microstructure of plasmalemma for Chrysanthemum roots illustrated that the sound stimula￾tion enhanced the fluidity of lipids and sound could also influence the secondary structure 
of protein not only in cell wall but also in plasmalemma. Soundwaves decreased the phase 
transition temperature. Thus, the decrease in thermodynamic phase transition illustrates the 
enhancement of the fluidity of the cell wall and membrane, which also enhances the cells to 
grow and divide faster and easily.
The enhancement of cell wall fluidity is one of the mechanisms of the promotion of plant 
growth by sound waves. Moreover, the electric potential of cell membranes could be changed 
by the sound field stimulation. Plasmalemma exists in the outermost part of cells, consisting 14 1. Plants and their unexpected response to environmental pollution
of membrane lipid and protein. It is the most sensitive and important part of sensing the envi￾ronmental factors and many substances related to signal transduction exist in plasmalemma 
(Sun and Xi, 1999; Jia et al., 2003a).
8. Plant response to nanoparticles
Because of the enormous production and unintentional use of nanoparticles (NPs) or 
nanomaterials (NMs), the whole environment is affected. Though many of them are benefi￾cial, some are toxic to plants, algae, and microorganisms. They may, therefore, pose a poten￾tial risk to the environment. NPs/NMs creation has expanded big interest due to their huge 
applications (Husen and Siddiqi, 2014b; Husen and Iqbal, 2019a; Husen and Jawaid, 2020; 
Sharma et al., 2021; Siddiqi and Husen, 2021; Kumar et al., 2021a,b, 2022a,b; Alle et al., 2022; 
Sharma et al., 2022; Adnan et al., 2022). Accelerated production, and release of these materials 
into the environment, perhaps emerged as another kind of environmental pollution (Boykov 
and Zhang, 2021). As they are very minute entities ranging from the size 1 to 100nm. The 
ravage materials from agriculture, industries, and medical products are the main sources of 
escalating the nanowaste in the environment. The plants are stationary living beings with two 
primary sinks of the environment, i.e., water and soil; they cannot get away from the harsh 
effects and consecutive metabolism changes due to nanopollution. However, nanoparticles 
are also used as nanopesticides, nanofertilizers, and herbicides which are helpful to enhance 
the productivity of crops, control unnecessary uses of chemicals fertilizers, and also boost 
survivability against biotic stress (Husen and Pandey, 2020; Kumar et  al., 2021b, 2022a,b). 
They control plant development and augment metabolic activity (Husen and Siddiqi, 2014a; 
Siddiqi and Husen, 2016, 2017, 2021).
NPs may have a negative or positive impact on the plant growth species depending on 
their nature and concentration (Husen, 2020a,b). Some reports have also shown both promo￾tive and inhibitory impacts of carbon-based NMs on the rhizosphere microorganisms (Wagay 
et al., 2019). However, thus far, the impact of these materials on the food chain and ultimately 
on the health of consumers (animals and humans) are unknown. NPs enter the plant cells 
and disrupt the electron transport system cycle of chloroplast and mitochondria and trig￾ger oxidative burst due to increased reactive oxygen species (ROS) concentration. ROS have 
both hydroxyl radical and superoxide free radical and nonradical singlet-like oxygen and 
hydrogen peroxidase (Hossain et al., 2015; Dimkpa et al., 2013). It functions as a transporter 
molecule, excess levels of ROS cause adverse impacts in the cell known as oxidative stress 
(Faisal et al., 2013). When cells are exposed to surplus levels of ROS induces oxidation of 
protein, destruction of DNA, lipid peroxidation, and membrane damage finally causing pro￾grammed cell death (Van Breusegem and Dat, 2006). In an experiment, Rui et al. (2017) used 
Arachis hypogaea seedlings and examined their yield, quality, physiological, and biochemical 
response in the amended sandy soil with various concentrations of silver NPs (50, 500, and 
2000mgkg− 1
) for 98 days. All growth-associated parameters, namely plant height, biomass, 
grain weight, and yield were remarkedly reduced in a dose-dependent manner. Du et  al. 
(2011) have reported that zinc oxide and titanium dioxide NPs decreased the biomass pro￾duction in Triticum aestivum. It has also been found that the titanium dioxide NPs adhere to 
the root tip cell wall of periderm cells, while zinc oxide NPs dissolved in the soil, therefore 9. Conclusion 15
increasing the uptake of toxic zinc by T. aestivum. It has been found that the chemically syn￾thesized silver NPs decreased shoot/root growth and increased oxidative stress and damage 
in Oryza sativa (Mazumdar and Ahmed, 2011; Mirzajani et al., 2013, 2014).
However, Jahani et  al. (2019) have reported that in Calendula officinalis, the growth pa￾rameters (shoot length and biomass) and chlorophyll contents were increased at the lower 
concentrations of cerium dioxide NPs (50 and 100mgL− 1
) and decreased at higher doses. 
Further, copper oxide NPs have shown no response to seed germination of Zea mays (Wang 
et al., 2012). Further, it decreased growth traits and increased chlorosis of Z. mays seedlings at 
the dose of 100mgL− 1
 copper oxide NPs. In Hordeum vulgare, Shaw et al. (2014) have demon￾strated that copper oxide NPs decreased shoot and root growth of seedlings over time in 
a concentration-dependent manner. It has been noticed that the exact mechanism of plant 
defense against NPs/NMs toxicity has not been fully explored. The absorption and translo￾cation of NPs/NMs in plant systems depend on their bioavailability, concentration, solubil￾ity, and exposure time. It has been Further, these nanoparticles may reach other organisms, 
animals, and humans through the food chain which may alter the entire biodiversity (Siddiqi 
and Husen, 2017; Husen and Iqbal, 2019b). Further discussion on plant response to NPs/
NMs toxicity can be seen in Chapter 9.
9. Conclusion
Chemical compositions of the atmosphere and environment are changing rapidly because 
of increased world population, emission of gases from agriculture, combustion of fossil fu￾els, traffic, and industries. Apart from the rise in greenhouse gases such as CO2 and O3, the 
predicted ecological changes include an increase in the temperature of the earth, changes 
in hydrological cycles, and an increase in UV radiation. In addition, acidification is one of 
the important threats to plant diversity, while increasing O3 and nitrogen deposition cause 
severe environmental problems. O3 is a widespread phytotoxic pollutant that affects several 
plant species such as loss of membrane integrity, reduction of photosynthesis, accelerated leaf 
senescence, and reduced yield. Forest trees have also been chronically exposed to increased 
O3 levels, and thereby tropospheric O3 is estimated to be one of the major environmental 
challenges to forest ecosystems. Similarly increasing CO2 and nitrogen deposition on plants 
are changing their physiological, chemical, and genetic properties. However, some species 
will be favored while others adversely affected by the changing environment. Acid rain is 
also creating harmful effects on trees and other plants. Acid rain deposits aluminum into the 
soil and destroys important soil nutrients. As a result, trees and plants are less able to absorb 
the ground water they need for growth. Acidic water affects aquatic plant life as well and 
destroys important food sources.
Furthermore, Heavy metals, NPs/NMs, water, noise, and light pollution are adversely 
putting impact the physiology, biochemical and cellular properties of plants. If the stress is 
prolonged, plant growth and productivity are severely diminished. However, at the same 
time, plants have evolved morphological, and complex physiological and biochemical adap￾tations to adjust and adapt to a variety of environmental stresses. Molecular mechanisms that 
plant used to increase stress tolerance, and maintain appropriate hormone homeostasis. An 
understanding of how these systems is regulated and ameliorate the impact of environmental 16 1. Plants and their unexpected response to environmental pollution
pollution in plants at cellular and molecular levels would provide the information to cope 
with such kinds of challenges. Taken together, the systems that regulate plant response to 
different environmental pollution are the subject of the current review in the present chapter.
References
Abdollahzadeh, T., Niazi, A., Moghadam, A., Heydarian, Z., Ghasemi-Fasaei, R., Kaviani, E., Pourdad, N., 2019. 
Phytoremediation of petroleum-contaminated soil by Salicornia: from PSY activity to physiological and morpho￾logical communications. Environ. Technol. 40, 2789–2801.
Abida, B., Harikrishna, S., 2010. Evaluation of some tree species to absorb air pollutants in three industrial locations 
of South Bengaluru, India. E-J. Chem. 7 (S1), 151–156.
Abo Gamar, M.I., Kisiala, A., Emery, R.J.N., Yeung, E., Stone, S.L., Qaderi, M.M., 2019. Elevated carbon dioxide de￾creases the adverse effects of higher temperature and drought stress by mitigating oxidative stress and improving 
water status in Arabidopsis thaliana. Planta 250, 1191–1214.
Achuba, F.I., 2014. Petroleum products in soil mediated oxidative stress in cowpea (Vigna unguiculata) and maize (Zea 
mays) seedlings. Open J. Soil Sci. 4, 417–435.
Achuba, F.I., Ja-anni, M.O., 2018. Effect of abattoir waste water on metabolic and antioxidant profiles of cowpea 
seedlings grown in crude oil contaminated soil. Int. J. Recycl. Org. Waste Agric. 7, 59–66.
Adnan, A., Oh, K.K., Husen, A., Wang, M.H., Alle, M., Cho, D.H., 2022. Microwave-assisted synchronous nanogold 
synthesis reinforced by kenaf seed and decoding their biocompatibility and anticancer activity. Pharmaceuticals 
15, 111. https://doi.org/10.3390/ph15020111.
Aghajanzadeh, T., Kopriva, S., Hawkesford, M.J., Koprivova, A., De Kok, L.J., 2015. Atmospheric H2S and SO2 as 
sulfur source for Brassica juncea and Brassica rapa: impact on the glucosinolate composition. Front. Plant Sci. 6, 924.
Agrawal, G.K., Rakwal, R., Yonekura, M., Akihiro, K., Saji, H., 2002. Proteome analysis of differentially displayed 
proteins as a tool for investigating ozone stress in rice (Oryza sativa L.) seedlings. Proteomics 2, 947–959.
Ahmad, N., Rab, A., Ahmad, N., 2016. Light-induced biochemical variations in secondary metabolite production and 
antioxidant activity in callus cultures of Stevia rebaudiana (Bert). J. Photochem. Photobiol. B 154, 51–56.
Ainsworth, E.A., 2008. Rice production in a changing climate: a meta-analysis of responses to elevated carbon diox￾ide and elevated ozone concentration. Glob. Change Biol. 14, 1642–1650.
Ainsworth, E.A., Long, S.P., 2005. What have we learned from 15  years of free air-CO2 enrichment (FACE)? A 
meta-analytic review of the responses of photosynthesis, canopy properties and plant production to rising CO2. 
New Phytol. 165, 351–372.
Al-Hawas, G.H.S., Shukry, W.M., Azzoz, M.M., Al-Moaik, R.M.S., 2012. The effect of sublethal concentrations of 
crude oil on the metabolism of Jojoba (Simmodsia chinensis) seedlings. Int. Res. J. Plant Sci. 3, 54–62.
Alirzayeva, E.G., Shirvani, T.S., Yazici, M.A., Alverdiyeva, S.M., Shukurov, E.S., Ozturk, L., Ali-Zade, V.M., Cakmak, 
I., 2006. Heavy metal accumulation in Artemisia and Foliaceous Lichen species from the Azerbaijan flora. Forest 
Snow Landscape Res. 80, 339–348.
Alle, M., Bandi, R., Sharma, G., Dadigala, R., Husen, A., Kim, J.C., 2022. Current trends in engineered gold nanopar￾ticles for cancer therapy. In: Kim, J.C., Alle, M., Husen, A. (Eds.), Smart Nanomaterials in Biomedical Applications. 
Nanotechnology in the Life Sciences, Springer, Cham, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-84262-8_1.
Alvarenga, I.C.A., Pacheco, F.V., Silva, S.T., Bertolucci, S.K.V., Pinto, J.E.B.P., 2015. In vitro culture of Achillea millefolium
L.: quality and intensity of light on growth and production of volatiles. Plant Cell Tissue Organ Cult. 122, 299–308.
Arts, I.C., van de Putte, B., Hollman, P.C., 2000. Contents of foods commonly consumed in the Netherlands. Fruits, 
vegetables, staple foods, and processed foods. J. Agric. Food Chem. 48, 1746–1751.
Athar, H.R., Ambreen, S., Javed, M., Hina, M., Rasul, S., Zafar, Z.U., Manzoor, H., Ogbaga, C.C., Afzal, M., Al￾Qurainy, F., 2016. Influence of sub-lethal crude oil concentration on growth, water relations and photosynthetic 
capacity of maize (Zea mays L.) plants. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 23, 18320–18331.
Bachheti, A., Deepti, Bachheti, R.K., Husen, A., 2021. Medicinal plants and their pharmaceutical properties un￾der adverse environmental conditions. In: Husen, A. (Ed.), Harsh Environment and Plant Resilience. Springer 
International Publishing AG, Cham, pp. 457–502, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-65912-7_19.
Balasooriya, H., Dasanayake, K., Ajlouni, S., 2020. Bioaccessibility of micronutrients in fresh and frozen strawberry 
fruits grown under elevated carbon dioxide and temperature. Food Chem. 309, 125662.References 17
Bellout, Y., Khelif, L., Guivarch, A., Haouche, L., Djebbar, R., Carol, P., AbrousBelbachir, O., 2016. Impact of edaphic 
hydrocarbon pollution on the morphology and physiology of pea roots (Pisum sativum L.). Appl. Ecol. Environ. 
Res. 14, 511–525.
Berendse, F., van Ruijven, J., Jongejans, E., Keesstra, S., 2015. Loss of plant species diversity reduces soil erosion 
resistance. Ecosystems 18, 881–888.
Bortolin, R., Caregnato, F., 2016. Chronic ozone exposure alters the secondary metabolite profile, antioxidant poten￾tial, anti-inflammatory property, and quality of red pepper fruit from Capsicum baccatum. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 
129, 16–24.
Bowes, G., 1993. Facing the inevitable: plants and increasing atmospheric CO2. Annu. Rev. Plant Physiol. Plant Mol. 
Biol. 44, 309–332.
Boykov, I.N., Zhang, B., 2021. Impact of nanoparticles on plant growth, development, and biomass. In: Pan, X., Zhang, 
B. (Eds.), Environmental Toxicology and Toxicogenomics. Methods in Molecular Biology, vol. 2326. Humana, New 
York, NY, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-0716-1514-0_15.
Bravo, D., Hill, A.R., 2012. The effect of chronic high groundwater nitrate loading on riparian forest growth and 
plant-soil processes. Water Air Soil Pollut. 223, 73–84.
Broberg, M., Hogy, P., Pleijel, H., 2017. CO2-induced changes in wheat grain composition: meta-analysis and response 
functions. Agronomy 7, 32.
Carlson, D., 2013. Sonic Bloom Organic Farming Made Easy! The Best Organic Fertilizer in the World. pp. 3–6. 
http://www.relfe.com/sonic_bloom.html.
Chappelka, A.H., Samuelson, L.J., 1998. Ambient ozone effects on forest trees of the eastern United States: a review. 
New Phytol. 139, 91–108.
Chen, X., Chen, Q., Zhang, X., Li, R., Jia, Y., Ef, A.A., Jia, A., Hu, L., Hu, X., 2016. Hydrogen sulfide mediates nico￾tine biosynthesis in tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum) under high temperature conditions. Plant Physiol. Biochem. 104, 
174–179.
Choudhary, A., Kumar, A., Kaur, H., Singh, M., Suri, G.S., Kaur, G., Mehta, S., 2022. Effect of elevated CO2 conditions 
on medicinal plants: a relatively unexplored aspect. In: Husen, A. (Ed.), Environmental Pollution and Medicinal 
Plants. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, pp. 95–115, https://doi.org/10.1201/9781003178866-5.
Chupakhina, G.N., Maslennikov, P.V., 2004. Plant adaptation to oil stress. Russ. J. Ecol. 35, 290–295.
Creath, K., Schwartz, G.E., 2004. Measuring effects of music, noise, and healing energy using a seed germination 
bioassay. J. Altern. Complement. Med. 10, 113–122.
De Kok, L.J., Stulen, I., 1998. Responses of Plant Metabolism to Air Pollution and Global Change. Backhuys Publishers, 
Leiden, The Netherlands, p. 519.
De Souza, A.P., Gaspar, M., Da Silva, E.A., Ulian, E.C., Waclawovsky, A.J., Nishiyama Jr., M.Y., Dos Santos, R.V., 
Teixeira, M.M., Souza, G.M., Buckeridge, M.S., 2008. Elevated CO2 increases photosynthesis, biomass and produc￾tivity, and modifies gene expression in sugarcane. Plant Cell Environ. 31, 1116–1127.
Deepti, Bachheti, A.J., Bhalla, P., Bachheti, R.K., Husen, A., 2022b. Growth and development of medicinal plants, and 
production of secondary metabolites under ozone pollution. In: Husen, A. (Ed.), Environmental Pollution and 
Medicinal Plants. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, pp. 25–45, https://doi.org/10.1201/9781003178866-2.
Deepti, Bachheti, A.J., Chauhan, K., Bachheti, R.K., Husen, H., 2022a. Impact of UV radiation on the growth and 
pharmaceutical properties of medicinal plants. In: Husen, A. (Ed.), Environmental Pollution and Medicinal Plants. 
CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, pp. 47–64, https://doi.org/10.1201/9781003178866-3.
Dimkpa, C.O., McLean, J.E., Martineau, N., Britt, D.W., Haverkamp, R., Anderson, A.J., 2013. Silver nanoparticles 
disrupt wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) growth in a sand matrix. Environ. Sci. Technol. 47 (2), 1082–1090.
Ditta, A., Ullah, N., Li, X., Soomro, G.S., Imtiaz, M., Mehmood, S., Jan, A.U., Rizwan, M.S., Rizwan, M., Ahmad, I., 
2022. Heavy metal pollution and medicinal plants: an overview. In: Husen, A. (Ed.), Environmental Pollution and 
Medicinal Plants. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, pp. 145–163, https://doi.org/10.1201/9781003178866-8.
Du, W.C., Sun, Y.Y., Ji, R., Zhu, J.G., Wu, J.C., Guo, H.Y., 2011. TiO2 and ZnO nanoparticles negatively affect wheat 
growth and soil enzyme activities in agricultural soil. J. Environ. Monit. 13, 822–828.
Faisal, M., Saquib, Q., Alatar, A.A., Al-Khedhairy, A.A., Hegazy, A.K., Musarrat, J., 2013. Phytotoxic hazards of NiO￾nanoparticles in tomato: a study on mechanism of cell death. J. Hazard. Mater. 15 (250), 318–332.
Falk, K.L., Tokuhisa, J.G., Gershenzon, J., 2007. The effect of sulfur nutrition on plant glucosinolate content: physiol￾ogy and molecular mechanisms. Plant Biol. 9, 573–581.
Farooqi, Z.R., Iqbal, M.Z., Kabir, M., Shafiq, M., 2009. Toxic effects of lead and cadmium on germination and seedling 
growth of Albezialebbeck (L.) Benth. Pak. J. Bot. 41, 27–33.18 1. Plants and their unexpected response to environmental pollution
Feng, Z.Z., Kobayashi, K., Ainsworth, E.A., 2008. Impact of elevated ozone concentration on growth, physiology and 
yield of wheat (Triticum aestivum L.): a meta-analysis. Glob. Chang. Biol. 142, 2696–2708.
Fernando, N., Panozzo, J., Tausz, M., Norton, R., Fitzgerald, G., Khan, A., Seneweera, S., 2015. Rising CO2 concentra￾tion altered wheat grain proteome and flour rheological characteristics. Food Chem. 170, 448–454.
Ferreira, M.I., Uliana, M.R., Costa, S.M., Magro, M., Vianello, F., Ming, L.C., Lima, G.P.P., 2016. Exclusion of solar UV 
radiation increases the yield of curcuminoid in Curcuma longa L. Ind. Crop. Prod. 89, 188–194.
Fuhrer, J., Val Martin, M., Mills, G., Heald, C.L., Harmens, H., Hayes, F., Sharps, K., Bender, J., Ashmore, M.R., 
2016. Current and future ozone risks to global terrestrial biodiversity and ecosystem processes. Ecol. Evol. 6, 
8785–8799.
Gagliano, M., Stefano, M., Daniel, R., 2012. Towards understanding plant bioacoustics. Trends Plant Sci. 17, 
323–325.
Gamage, S.S.W., Masakorala, K., Brown, M.T., Gamage, S.M.K.W., 2020. Tolerance of Impatiens balsamina L., and 
Crotalaria retusa L. to grow on soil contaminated by used lubricating oil: a comparative study. Ecotoxicol. Environ. 
Saf. 188.
Ghasemzadeh, A., Jaafar, H., Rahmat, A., 2010. Elevated carbon dioxide increases contents of flavonoids and phe￾nolic compounds, and antioxidant activities in Malaysian young ginger (Zingiber officinale Roscoe.) varieties. 
Molecules 15 (7907), 7922.
Ghosh, A., Pandey, A.K., Agrawal, M., Agrawal, S.B., 2020. Assessment of growth, physiological, and yield attri￾butes of wheat cultivar HD 2967 under elevated ozone exposure adopting timely and delayed sowing conditions. 
Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. Int. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-020-08325-y.
Godbole, M., 2013. Does Music Affect Plant Growth?, pp. 3–6. http://www.buzzle.com/articles/does-music-affect￾plant-growth.html.
Gommers, C.M.M., Visser, E.J.W., St Onge, K.R., Voesenek, L.A.C.J., Pierik, R., 2013. Shade tolerance: when growing 
tall is not an option. Trends Plant Sci. 18, 65–70.
Grunhage, L., Krause, G.H.M., Köllner, B., Bender, J., Weigel, H.-J., Jäger, H.-J., Guderian, R., 2001. A new flux-oriented 
concept to derive critical levels for ozone to protect vegetation. Environ. Pollut. 111, 355–362.
Haworth, M., Elliott-Kingston, C., Gallagher, A., Fitzgerald, A., McElwain, J.C., 2012. Sulphur dioxide fumigation 
effects on stomatal density and index of non-resistant plants: implications for the stomatal palaeo-[CO2] proxy 
method. Rev. Palaeobot. Palynol. 182, 44–54.
Hossain, Z., Mustafa, G., Komatsu, S., 2015. Plant responses to nanoparticle stress. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 16 (11), 26644–26653.
Hou, T.Z., Re, Z.W., Li, M.D., 1994. Experimental evidence of a plant meridian system: II. The effects of needle acu￾puncture on the; temperature changes of soybean (Glycine max). Am. J. Chin. Med. 22, 103–110.
Huang, W., He, X., Liu, C., 2010. Effects of elevated carbon dioxide and ozone on foliar flavonoids of Ginkgo biloba. 
Adv. Mater. Res. 113, 165–169.
Huche-Thelier, L., Crespel, L., Le Gourrierec, J., Morel, P., Sakr, S., Leduc, N., 2016. Light signaling and plant re￾sponses to blue and UV radiations—perspectives for applications in horticulture. Environ. Exp. Bot. 121, 22–38.
Husen, A., 1997. Impact of Air Pollution on the Growth and Development of Datura innoxia Mill. M.Sc. Dissertation, 
Jamia Hamdard, New Delhi, India.
Husen, A., 2009. Growth, chlorophyll fluorescence and biochemical markers in clonal ramets of shisham (Dalbergia 
sissoo Roxb.) at nursery stage. New For. 38, 117–129.
Husen, A., 2010. Growth characteristics, physiological and metabolic responses of teak (Tectona grandis Linn. f.) 
clones differing in rejuvenation capacity subjected to drought stress. Silvae Genet. 59, 124–136.
Husen, A., 2013. Growth characteristics, biomass and chlorophyll fluorescence variation of Garhwal Himalaya’s fod￾der and fuel wood tree species at the nursery stage. Open J. Forest. 3, 12–16. http://www.scirp.org/journal/ojf/.
Husen, A., 2020a. Interactions of metal and metal-oxide nanomaterials with agricultural crops: an overview. In: 
Husen, A., Jawaid, M. (Eds.), Nanomaterials for Agriculture and Forestry Applications. Elsevier Inc, Cambridge, 
MA, USA, pp. 167–197, https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-817852-2.00007-X.
Husen, A., 2020b. In: Husen, A., Jawaid, M. (Eds.), Carbon-Based Nanomaterials and Their Interactions 
With Agricultural Crops. Elsevier Inc, Cambridge, MA, USA, pp. 199–218, https://doi.org/10.1016/
B978-0-12-817852-2.00008-1.
Husen, A., 2021a. Harsh Environment and Plant Resilience (Molecular and Functional Aspects). Springer Nature, 
Cham, Switzerland, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-65912-7.
Husen, A., 2021b. Plant Performance Under Environmental Stress (Hormones, Biostimulants and Sustainable Plant 
Growth Management). Springer Nature, Cham, Switzerland, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-78521-5.References 19
Husen, A., 2021c. Morpho-anatomical, physiological, biochemical and molecular responses of plants to air pollution. 
In: Husen, A. (Ed.), Harsh Environment and Plant Resilience. Springer International Publishing AG, Cham, 
pp. 203–234, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-65912-7_9.
Husen, A., 2022. Environmental Pollution and Medicinal Plants. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL.
Husen, A., Ali, S.T., Mahmooduzzafar, I.M., 1999. Structural, functional and biochemical responses of Datura innoxia
Mill. to coal-smoke pollution. Proc. Acad. Environ. Biol. 8, 61–72.
Husen, A., Iqbal, M., 2004. Growth performance of Datura innoxia Mill. under the stress of coal-smoke pollution. Ann. 
For. 12, 182–190.
Husen, A., Iqbal, M., 2019a. Nanomaterials and Plant Potential. Springer International Publishing AG, Cham, 
Switzerland, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-05569-1.
Husen, A., Iqbal, M., 2019b. Nanomaterials and plant potential: an overview. In: Husen, A., Iqbal, M. (Eds.), 
Nanomaterials and Plant Potential. Springer International Publishing AG, Cham, pp. 3–29, https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-030-05569-1_1.
Husen, A., Iqbal, M., Aref, I.M., 2017. Plant growth and foliar characteristics of faba bean (Vicia faba L.) as affected by 
indole-acetic acid under water-sufficient and water-deficient conditions. J. Environ. Biol. 38 (2), 179–186.
Husen, A., Iqbal, M., Khanam, N., Aref, I.M., Sohrab, S.S., Masresha, G., 2019. Modulation of salt-stress tolerance of 
Niger (Guizotia abyssinica), an oilseed plant, by application of salicylic acid. J. Environ. Biol. 40 (1), 96–104.
Husen, A., Jawaid, M., 2020. Nanomaterials for Agriculture and Forestry Applications. Elsevier Inc, Cambridge, MA, 
USA, https://doi.org/10.1016/C2018-0-02349-X.
Husen, A., Pandey, S.B.S., 2020. Nanofertilizers for smart agricultural practices. In: National Seminar (Under ICAR, 
New Delhi, India) on Smart-Horticulture, 30-31 January, 2020, Agricultural University, Jhalawar, Kota, Rajasthan, 
India, pp. 203–215.
Husen, A., Siddiqi, K.S., 2014a. Carbon and fullerene nanomaterials in plant system. J. Nanobiotechnol. 12 (1), 16.
Husen, A., Siddiqi, K.S., 2014b. Phytosynthesis of nanoparticles: concept, controversy and application. Nano Res Lett 
9, 229. https://doi.org/10.1186/1556-276X-9-229.
Idso, S., Kimball, B., Pettit, G., 2000. Effects of atmospheric CO2 enrichment on the growth and development of 
Hymenocallis littoralis (Amaryllidaceae) and the concentrations of several antineoplastic and antiviral constituents 
of its bulbs. Am. J. Bot. 87 (6), 769–773.
Iqbal, M., Ahmad, A., Ansari, M.K.A., Qureshi, M.I., Aref, I.M., Khan, P.R., Hegazy, S.S., El-Atta, H., Husen, A., 
Hakeem, K.R., 2015. Improving the phytoextraction capacity of plants to scavenge metal(loid)-contaminated sites. 
Environ. Rev. 23, 44–65.
Iqbal, M., Mahmooduzzafar, Aref, I.M., Khan, P.R., 2010b. Behavioural responses of leaves and vascular cambium of 
Prosopis cineraria (L.) Druce to different regimes of coal-smoke pollution. J. Plant Interact. 5 (2), 117–133.
Iqbal, M., Mahmooduzzafar, Kabeer, I., Kaleemullah, A.Z., 1987. The effect of air pollution on the stem anatomy of 
Lantana camara L. J. Sci. Res. 9, 121–122.
Iqbal, M., Mahmooduzzafar, Nighat, F., Aref, I.M., 2011. Composition of seed oils of Peristrophebicalyculata and Ruellia 
tuberosa as affected by coal-smoke stress. J. Food Agric. Environ. 9 (3&4), 1101–1104.
Iqbal, M., Mahmooduzzafar, Nighat, F., Khan, P.R., 2010a. Photosynthetic, metabolic and growth responses of 
Triumfetta rhomboidea to coal-smoke pollution at different stages of plant ontogeny. J. Plant Interact. 5 (1), 11–19.
Iqbal, M., Parveen, R., Parveen, A., Parveen, B., Aref, I.M., 2018. Establishing the botanical identity of plant drugs 
based on their active ingredients under diverse growth conditions. J. Environ. Biol. 39 (1), 123–136.
Jahani, S., Saadatmand, S., Mahmoodzadeh, H., Ali Khavari-Nejad, R., 2019. Effect of foliar application of cerium ox￾ide nanoparticles on growth, photosynthetic pigments, electrolyte leakage, compatible osmolytes and antioxidant 
enzymes activities of Calendula officinalis L. Biologia 74, 1063–1075.
Jha, S., Porwal, P., 2022. Impact of industrial wastewater on medicinal plant growth. In: Husen, A. (Ed.), 
Environmental Pollution and Medicinal Plants. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, pp. 133–143, https://doi.
org/10.1201/9781003178866-7.
Jia, Y., Wang, B.C., Wang, X.J., Duan, C.R., Toyama, Y., Sakanishi, A., 2003a. Influence of sound wave on the micro￾structure of plasmalemma of Chrysanthemum roots. Colloids Surf. B: Biointerfaces 29, 109–113.
Jia, Y., Wang, B.C., Wang, X.J., Wang, D.H., Duan, C.R., Toyama, Y., Sakanishi, A., 2003b. Effect of sound wave on the 
metabolism of Chrysanthemum roots. Colloids Surf. B: Biointerfaces 29, 115–118.
Jolivet, Y., Bagard, M., Cabane, M., Vaultier, M.N., Gandin, A., Afif, D., Dizengremel, P., Le Thiec, D., 2016. Deciphering 
the ozone-induced changes in cellular processes: a prerequisite for ozone risk assessment at the tree and forest 
levels. Ann. For. Sci. 73, 923–943.20 1. Plants and their unexpected response to environmental pollution
Keuskamp, D.H., Sasidharan, R., Pierik, R., 2010. Physiological regulation and functional significance of shade avoid￾ance responses to neighbors. Plant Signal. Behav. 5, 655–662.
Kokotkiewicz, A., Bucinski, A., Luczkiewicz, M., 2014. Light and temperature conditions affect bioflavonoid accu￾mulation in callus cultures of Cyclopia subternata Vogel (honeybush). Plant Cell Tissue Organ Cult. 118, 589–593.
van der Kooi, C.J., Reich, M., Low, M., De Kok, L.J., Tausz, M., 2016. Growth and yield stimulation under elevated 
CO2 and drought: a meta-analysis on crops. Environ. Exp. Bot. 122, 150–157.
Kumar, A., Choudhary, A., Kaur, H., Guha, S., Mehta, S., Husen, A., 2022b. Potential applications of engineered 
nanoparticles in plant disease management: a critical update. Chemosphere 295, 133798. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
chemosphere.2022.133798.
Kumar, A., Choudhary, A., Kaur, H., Kumar, R., Sharma, R., Gautam, H., Mehta, S., 2022a. Water pollution and me￾dicinal plants insights into the impact and adaptation responses. In: Husen, A. (Ed.), Environmental Pollution and 
Medicinal Plants. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, pp. 117–132, https://doi.org/10.1201/9781003178866-6.
Kumar, A., Choudhary, A., Kaur, H., Mehta, S., Husen, A., 2021a. Metal-based nanoparticles, sensors and their mul￾tifaceted application in food packaging. J. Nanobiotechnol. 19, 256. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12951-021-00996-0.
Kumar, A., Choudhary, A., Kaur, H., Mehta, S., Husen, A., 2021b. Smart nanomaterial and nanocomposite with ad￾vanced agrochemical activities. Nano Res. Lett. 16, 156. https://doi.org/10.1186/s11671-021-03612-0.
Kumar, M., Nandini, N., 2013. Identification and evaluation of air pollution tolerance index of selected avenue tree 
species of urban Bangalore, India. Int. J. Emerg. Technol. Comput. Appl. Sci. 13, 388–390.
Lal, N., 2016. Effects of acid rain on plant growth and development. e-J. Sci. Technol. 11 (5), 85–108.
Leitao, L., Delacote, E., Dizengremel, P., Thiec, D.L., Biolley, J.P., 2007. Assessment of the impact of increasing con￾centrations of ozone on photosynthetic components of maize (Zea mays L.), a C4 plant. Environ. Pollut. 146, 5–8.
Li, P., Feng, Z., Calatayud, V., Yuan, X., Xu, Y., Paoletti, E., 2017. A meta analysis on growth, physiological, and bio￾chemical responses of woody species to ground-level ozone highlights the role of plant functional types. Plant 
Cell Environ. 40, 2369–2380.
Liu, Y., Song, L., Yu, W., Hu, Y., Ma, X., Wu, J., Ying, Y., 2015. Light quality modifies camptothecin production and 
gene expression of biosynthesis in Camptotheca acuminata Decne seedlings. Ind. Crop. Prod. 66, 137–143.
Ma, H., Wang, A., Zhang, M., Li, H., Du, S., Bai, L., Zhong, M., Chen, S., 2018. Compared the physiological response 
of two petroleum tolerant-contrasting plants to petroleum stress. Int. J. Phytoremed. 20, 1043–1048.
Maleci, L., Buffa, G., Mohammad Wahsha, M., Bini, C., 2014. Morphological changes induced by heavy metals in 
dandelion (Taraxacum officinale Web.) growing on mine soils. J. Soils Sediments 14, 731–743.
Mazumdar, H., Ahmed, G.U., 2011. Phytotoxicity effect of silver nanoparticles on Oryza sativa. Int. J. Chem. Tech. 
Res. 3, 1494–1500.
Meng, Q.W., Zhou, Q., Zheng, S.J., Gao, Y., 2012. Responses on photosynthesis and variable chlorophyll fluorescence 
of Fragaria ananassa under sound wave. Energy Proc. 16, 346–352.
Mills, G., Sharps, K., Simpson, D., Pleijel, H., Broberg, M., Uddling, J., Jaramillo, F., Davies, W.J., Dentener, F., Van 
den Berg, M., Agrawal, M., Agrawal, S.B., Ainsworth, E.A., Buker, P., Emberson, L., Feng, Z., Harmens, H., Hayes, 
F., Kobayashi, K., Paoletti, E., Van Dingenen, R., 2018. Ozone pollution will compromise efforts to increase global 
wheat production. Glob. Chang. Biol. 24, 3560–3574.
Mirzajani, F., Askari, H., Hamzelou, S., Farzaneh, M., Ghassempour, A., 2013. Effect of silver nanoparticles on Oryza 
sativa L. and its rhizosphere bacteria. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 88, 48–54.
Mirzajani, F., Askari, H., Hamzelou, S., Schober, Y., Römpp, A., Ghassempour, A., et al., 2014. Proteomics study of 
silver nanoparticles toxicity on Oryza sativa L. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 108, 335–339.
Mohamed, E., Ansari, N., Yadav, D.S., Agrawal, M., Agrawal, S.B., 2021. Salinity alleviates the toxicity level of ozone 
in a halophyte Mesembryanthemum crystallinum L. Ecotoxicology 30, 689–704.
Montesinos-Pereira, D., Barrameda-Medina, Y., Baenas, N., Moreno, D.A., Sanchez-Rodriguez, E., Blasco, B., Ruiz, 
J.M., 2016. Evaluation of hydrogen sulfide supply to biostimulate the nutritive and phytochemical quality and the 
antioxidant capacity of Cabbage (Brassica oleracea L. ‘Bronco’). J. Appl. Bot. Food Qual. 89.
Morgan, P.B., Ainsworth, E.A., Long, S.P., 2003. How does elevated ozone impact soybean? A meta-analysis of pho￾tosynthesis, growth and yield. Plant Cell Environ. 26, 1317–1328.
Myers, S.S., Zanobetti, A., Kloog, I., Huybers, P., Leakey, A.D.B., Bloom, A.J., Carlisle, E., Dietterich, L.H., Fitzgerald, 
G., Hasegawa, T., Holbrook, N.M., Nelson, R.L., Ottman, M.J., Raboy, V., Sakai, H., Sartor, K.A., Schwartz, J., 
Seneweera, S., Tausz, M., Usui, Y., 2014. Increasing CO2 threatens human nutrition. Nature 510, 139–142.
Nadgorska-Socha, A., Kandziora-Ciupa, M., Ciepal, R., Barczyk, G., 2016. Robiniapseudoacacia and Melandrium album
in trace elements biomonitoring and air pollution tolerance index study. Int. J. Environ. Sci. Technol. 13, 1741–1752.References 21
Nadgorska-Socha, A., Kandziora-Ciupa, M., Ciepał, R., Musialik, D., Barczyk, G., 2013a. The activity of selected soil 
enzymes and soil contamination with zinc, cadmium and lead in the vicinity of zinc smelter “MiasteczkoSlaskie”. 
Ecol. Chem. Eng. 20 (1), 123–131.
Nadgorska-Socha, A., Ptasinski, B., Kita, A., 2013b. Heavy metal bioaccumulation and antioxidant responses in 
Cardaminopsis arenosa and Plantago lanceolata leaves from metalliferous and non-metalliferoussites. Ecotoxicology 
22, 1422–1434.
Nasim, S.A., Dhir, B., 2010. Heavy Metals alter the potency of medicinal plants. In: Whitacre, D.M. (Ed.), Reviews of 
Environmental Contamination and Toxicology, p. 203.
Nedunchezhiyan, V., Velusamy, M., Subburamu, K., 2020. Seed priming to mitigate the impact of elevated carbon 
dioxide associated temperature stress on germination in rice (Oryza sativa L.). Arch. Agron. Soil Sci. 66, 83–95.
Nowak, R.S., Ellsworth, D.S., Smith, S.D., 2004. Functional responses of plants to elevated atmospheric CO2—do 
photosynthetic and productivity data from FACE experiments support early predictions? New Phytol. 162, 
253–280.
Odukoya, J., Lambert, R., Sakrabani, R., 2019. Impact of crude oil on yield and phytochemical composition of selected 
green leafy vegetables. Int. J. Veg. Sci. 25, 554–570.
Otitoju, O., Udebuani, A.C., Ebulue, M.M., Onwurah, I.N., 2017. Enzyme-based assay for toxicological evaluation of 
soil ecosystem polluted with spent engine oil. Agric. Ecol. Res. Int. J. 11, 1–13.
Park, Y., Runkle, E.S., 2017. Far-red radiation promotes growth of seedlings by increasing leaf expansion and whole￾plant net assimilation. Environ. Exp. Bot. 136, 41–49.
Pearcy, R.W., Ehleringer, J., 1984. Comparative ecophysiology of C3 and C4 plants. Plant Cell Environ. 7, 1–13.
Pellegrini, E., Carucci, G., Campanella, A., 2011. Ozone stress in Melissa officinalis plants assessed by photosynthetic 
function. Environ. Exp. Bot. 73, 94–101.
Peng, J., Shang, B., Xu, Y., Feng, Z., Pleijel, H., Calatayud, V., 2019. Ozone exposure- and flux-yield response relation￾ships for maize. Environ. Pollut. 252 (Pt A), 1–7.
Peretiemo-Clarke, B.O., Achuba, F.I., 2007. Phytochemical effect of petroleum on peanut (Arachis hypogea) seedlings. 
Plant Pathol. J. 6, 179–182.
Pilegaard, K., Johnsen, I., 1984. Heavy metal uptake from air and soil by transplanted plants of Achillea millefolium
and Hordeum vulgares. In: Ecological Bulletins No. 36 Ecotoxicology: Proceedings of the Third Oikos Conference 
Held 30 November: 2 December, 1982, in Copenhagen, Denmark, pp. 97–102.
Rahman, S., Husen, A., 2022. Impact of sulphur dioxide deposition on medicinal plants’ growth and production of 
active constituents. In: Husen, A. (Ed.), Environmental Pollution and Medicinal Plants. CRC Press, Boca Raton, 
FL, pp. 65–93, https://doi.org/10.1201/9781003178866-4.
Rahimtoola, S., 2004. Digitalis therapy for patients in clinical heart failure. Circulation 109, 2942–2946.
Rai, V., Mehrotra, S., 2008. Chromium-induced changes in ultramorphology and secondary metabolites of Phyllanthus 
amarus Schum &Thonn.—an hepatoprotective plant. Environ. Monit. Assess. 147, 307–315.
Rai, V., Vaypayee, P., Singh, S.N., Mehrotra, S., 2004. Effect of chromium accumulation on photosynthetic pigments, 
oxidative stress defense system, nitrate reduction, proline level and eugenol content of Ocimumtenuiflorum L. 
Plant Sci. 167, 1159–1169.
Rai, R., Agrawal, M., 2012. Impact of tropospheric ozone on crop plants. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. India Sect. B. Biol. Sci. 
82, 241–257.
Randhi, U., Reddy, A., 2012. Evaluation of tolerant plant species in urban environment: a case study from Hyderabad, 
India. Univers. J. Environ. Res. Tech. 2, 300–304.
Ruberti, I., Sessa, G., Ciolfi, A., Possenti, M., Carabelli, M., Morelli, G., 2012. Plant adaptation to dynamically chang￾ing environment: the shade avoidance response. Biotechnol. Adv. 30, 1047–1058.
Rui, M., Ma, C., Tang, X., Yang, J., Jiang, F., Pan, Y., et al., 2017. Phytotoxicity of silver nanoparticles to peanut (Arachis 
hypogaea L.): physiological responses and food safety. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 5, 6557–6567.
Rusin, M., Gospodarek, J., Nadgorska-Socha, A., 2020. Soil pollution by petroleum-derived substances and its biore￾mediation: the effect on Aphis fabae Scop. infestation and antioxidant response in Vicia faba L. Agronomy 10, 147.
Rusin, M., Gospodarek, J., Barczyk, G., Nadgórska-Socha, A., 2018. Antioxidant responses of Triticum aestivum plants 
to petroleum derived substances. Ecotoxicology 27, 1353–1367.
Sarkar, A., Agrawal, S.B., 2010. Identification of ozone stress in Indian rice through foliar injury and differential pro￾tein profile. Environ. Monit. Assess. 161, 283–302.
Sarma, H., Deka, S., Deka, H., Saikia, R.R., 2011. Accumulation of heavy metals in selected medicinal plants. Rev. 
Environ. Contam. Toxicol. 214, 63–86.22 1. Plants and their unexpected response to environmental pollution
Shang, B., Xu, Y., Dai, L., Yuan, X., Feng, Z., 2019. Elevated ozone reduced leaf nitrogen allocation to photosynthesis 
in poplar. Sci. Total Environ. 657, 169–178.
Sharma, G., Nim, S., Alle, M., Husen, A., Kim, J.C., 2022. Nanoparticle-mediated delivery of flavonoids for cancer 
therapy: prevention and treatment. In: Kim, J.C., Alle, M., Husen, A. (Eds.), Smart Nanomaterials in Biomedical 
Applications. Nanotechnology in the Life Sciences, Springer, Cham, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-84262-8_3.
Sharma, P., Pandey, V., Sharma, M.M.M., Patra, A., Singh, B., Mehta, S., Husen, A., 2021. A review on biosensors and 
nanosensors application in agroecosystems. Nano Res Lett 16, 136. https://doi.org/10.1186/s11671-021-03593-0.
Shaw, A.K., Ghosh, S., Kalaji, H.M., Bosa, K., Brestic, M., Zivcak, M., et al., 2014. Nano CuO stress induced modu￾lation of antioxidative defense and photosynthetic performance of Syrian barley (Hordeum vulgare L.). Environ. 
Exp. Bot. 102, 37.
Siddiqi, K.S., Husen, A., 2016. Engineered gold nanoparticles and plant adaptation potential. Nano Res Lett 11, 400. 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s11671-016-1607-2.
Siddiqi, K.S., Husen, A., 2017. Plant response to engineered metal oxide nanoparticles. Nano Res Lett 12, 92. https://
doi.org/10.1186/s11671-017-1861-y.
Siddiqi, K.S., Husen, A., 2021. Plant response to silver nanoparticles: a critical review. Crit. Rev. Biotechnol. https://
doi.org/10.1080/07388551.2021.1975091.
Stolte, K., 1996. Symptomology of Ozone Injury to Pine Foliage. USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. PSW￾GTR-155 https://www.fs.fed.us/psw/publications/documents/psw_gtr155/psw_gtr155_stolte.pdf. (Accessed 
3 September 2022).
Stuhlfauth, T., Klug, K., Fock, H., 1987. The production of secondary metabolites by Digitalis lanata during CO2 en￾richment and water stress. Phytochemistry 26 (10), 2735–2739.
Sun, L., Su, H., Zhu, Y., 2012. Involvement of abscisic acid in ozone-induced puerarin production of Pueraria thomsnii
Benth. suspension cell cultures. Plant Cell Rep. 31, 179–185.
Sun, K.L., Xi, B.S., 1999. The effects of alternative stress on the thermodynamic properties of cultured tobacco cells. 
Acta Biochim. Biophys. Sin. 15, 579–584.
Swanepoel, J.W., Kruger, G.H.J., Van Heerden, P.D.R., 2007. Effects of sulphur dioxide on photosynthesis in the suc￾culent Augea capensis Thunb. J. Arid Environ. 70, 208–221.
Teng, Y., Hu, B., Zheng, J., Zhai, Y., Zhu, C., 2018. Water quality responses to the interaction between surface water 
and groundwater along the Songhua River, NE China. Hydrogeol. J. 26, 1591–1607.
Thompson, M., Gamage, D., Ratnasekera, D., Perera, A., Martin, A., Seneweera, S., 2019. Effect of elevated carbon 
dioxide on plant biomass and grain protein concentration differs across bread, durum and synthetic hexaploid 
wheat genotypes. J. Cereal Sci. 87, 103–110.
Tiwari, S., Agrawal, M., 2011. Assessment of the variability in response of radish and brinjal at biochemical and phys￾iological levels under similar ozone exposure conditions. Environ. Monit. Assess. 175, 443–454.
Vanderhoeven, S., Dassonville, N., Meerts, P., 2005. Increased topsoil mineral nutrient concentrations under exotic 
invasive plants in Belgium. Plant Soil 275, 169–179.
Van Breusegem, F., Dat, J.F., 2006. Reactive oxygen species in plant cell death. Plant Physiol. 141 (2), 384–390.
Wagay, J.A., Singh, S., Raffi, M.M., Rahman, Q.I., Husen, A., 2019. Impact of carbon-based nanomaterials on plant 
functioning and rhizosphere. In: Husen, A., Iqbal, M. (Eds.), Nanomaterials and Plant Potential. Springer Nature 
Publication, Cham, Switzerland, pp. 553–575.
Wang, B.C., Chen, X., Wang, Z., Fu, Q.Z., Zhou, H., Ran, L., 2003a. Biological effect of sound field stimulation on 
paddy rice seeds. Colloids Surf. B: Biointerfaces 32, 29–34.
Wang, X.J., Wang, B.C., Jia, Y., Duan, C.R., Sakanishi, A., 2003b. Effect of sound wave on the synthesis of nucleic acid 
and protein in Chrysanthemum. Colloids Surf. B: Biointerfaces 29, 99–102.
Wang, B.C., Yoshikoshi, A., Sakanishi, A., 1998. Carrot cell growth response in a stimulated ultrasonic environment. 
Colloids Surf. B: Biointerfaces 12, 89–95.
Wang, Z., Xie, X., Zhao, J., Liu, X., Feng, W., White, J.C., et al., 2012. Xylem-and phloem-based transport of CuO 
nanoparticles in maize (Zea mays L.). Environ. Sci. Technol. 46, 4434–4441.
Wani, S.H., Kumar, V., Shriram, V., Sah, S.K., 2016. Phytohormones and their metabolic engineering for abiotic stress 
tolerance in crop plants. Crop J. 4, 162–176.
Weinberger, P., Measures, M., 1979. Effects of the intensity of audible sound on the growth and development of 
Rideau winter wheat. Can. J. Bot. 57, 1036–1039.
Weinmann, S., Roll, S., Schwarzbach, C., 2010. Effects of Ginkgo biloba in dementia: systematic review and 
meta-analysis. BMC Geriatr. 10, 14. www.aces.edu.References 23
Yang, X.C., Wang, B.C., Ye, M., 2004. Effects of different sound intensities on root development of Actinidia Chinese
plantlet. Chin. J. Appl. Environ. Biol. 10, 274–276.
Yang, X.C., Wang, B.C., Duan, C.R., 2003. Effects of sound stimulation on energy metabolism of Actinidia chinensis
callus. Colloids Surf. B: Biointerfaces 30, 67–72.
Yang, X.C., Wang, B.C., Duan, C.R., Dai, C.Y., Jia, Y., Wang, X.J., 2002. Brief study on physiological effects of sound 
field on Actinidia chinese callus. J. Chongqing Univ. 25, 79–84.
Yendrek, C.R., Erice, G., Montes, C.M., Tomaz, T., Sorgini, C.A., Brown, P.J., McIntyre, L.M., Leakey, A.D.B., 
Ainsworth, E.A., 2017. Elevated ozone reduces photosynthetic carbon gain by accelerating leaf senescence of 
inbred and hybrid maize in a genotype-specific manner. Plant Cell Environ. 40, 3088–3100.
Yin, R., Hao, Z., Zhou, X., et al., 2022. Ozone does not diminish the beneficial effects of arbuscular mycorrhizas on 
Medicago sativa L. in a low phosphorus soil. Mycorrhiza 32, 33–43. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00572-021-01059-w.
Zaid, A., Wani, S.H., 2019. Reactive oxygen species generation, scavenging and signaling in plant defense responses. 
In: Jogaiah, S., Abdelrahman, M. (Eds.), Bioactive Molecules in Plant Defense. Springer, Cham, Switzerland, pp. 
111–132.
Zhang, J., 2012. Application progress of plant audio control technology in modern agriculture. Ningxia J. Agric. 
Forest. Sci. Technol. 53, 80–81.
Zhao, D., Hao, Z., Tao, J., 2012. Effects of shade on plant growth and flower quality in the herbaceous peony (Paeonia 
lactiflora Pall.). Plant Physiol. Biochem. 61, 187–196.
Zhou, R., Su, W.H., Zhang, G.F., Zhang, Y.N., Guo, X.R., 2016. Relationship between flavonoids and photoprotection 
in shade-developed Erigeron breviscapus transferred to sunlight. Photosynthetica 54, 201–209.
Ziska, L.H., Bunce, J.A., 1997. Influence of increasing carbon dioxide concentration on the photosynthetic and growth 
stimulation of selected C4 crops and weeds. Photosynth. Res. 54, 199–208.This page intentionally left blankPlants and their Interaction to Environmental Pollution 25 Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-99978-6.00024-8
CHAPTER
2
Effect of UV-B radiation on plants 
growth, active constituents, and 
productivity
Irina F. Golovatskayaa
 and Nikolay I. Laptevb
a
Department of Plant Physiology, Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, National Research 
Tomsk State University, Tomsk, Russia, b
Department of Ecology, Nature Management and 
Environmental Engineering, National Research Tomsk State University, Tomsk, Russia
Abbreviations
ANAC13 arabidopsis NAC domain containing protein 13
AtPDCD5 programmed cell death protein5
BES1 BRI1-EMS-suppressor 1
CLF curly leaf
COP1 constitutively photomorphogenic1
COP1-SPA constitutively photomorphogenic1-suppressor of PHYA
CRY1-3 cryptochrome 1-3
CUL4-DDB1 Cullin 4-damageD DNA binding protein 1
FLC flowering locus C
FT flowering time
HAM1-2 histone acetyltransferase of the MYST family 1 и 2
HY5 elongated hypocotyl 5
HYH HY5 homolog
MKP1 phosphatase 1 MAP kinase
MSI1-5 multicopy suppressor of IRA 1-5
PHOT1-2 phototropin 1 и 2
PHYA-E phytochrome A-E
PSI-II photosystem I-II
RCD1 radical-induced cell death1
ROS reactive oxygen species
RUP1-2 repressor of UV-B photomorphogenesis1-2
SAG12-13 senescence-associated gene 12-13
SEN1 SENESCENCE1
CPD cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers26 2. Effect of UV-B radiation on plants growth, active constituents, and productivity
GLK2 GOLDEN2-LIKE2
STO/BBX24 SALTOLERANCE/BBX24
UV-B UV-B radiation
UVR8 UV resistance locus 8
ZTL/FKF1/LKP2 zeitlupe/flavin-binding
1. Introduction
1.1 UV-B as an external environmental factor
Plants lead a lifestyle attached to the substrate. As a result, they are faced with a more 
volatile environment than animals. Plants have the ability to change their development in re￾sponse to dynamic environmental conditions. Such flexibility of plant development is essen￾tial for the implementation of their reproduction. Plants require highly efficient mechanisms 
of adaptation to stress conditions to survive (Wang et al., 2021; Husen, 2021a,b). The most im￾portant environmental factor is sunlight, which serves as an energy source for photosynthesis 
and a signal about the state of the environment that regulates plant growth and development 
(Golovatskaya and Karnachuk, 2015). Light is the factor of the external environment that al￾lows the plant to adapt to the place of growth. Light characterizes the time of day through the 
values of illumination and spectrum, depending on the solstice; as well as seasonal changes 
in the environment through the magnitude of the duration of the photoperiod and the quality 
of light; the density of the phytocenosis—through the magnitude of shading and the quality 
of light when radiation passes through the crown of neighboring plants. Light is character￾ized by intensity, duration, and quality—wavelength.
The signaling function of light is implemented due to the presence in plants of specific 
and sensitive systems for its perception. These systems include several classes of regulatory 
photoreceptors capable of assessing the intensity, duration, and spectral characteristics of 
light. Among them, there are blue light/UV-A photoreceptors cryptochromes CRY1, CRY2 
and CRY3 or CRY-DASH (CRYPTOCHROME 1-3, At4g08920, At1g04400, and At5g24850) 
(Liscum et al., 2003), phototropins PHOT1 and PHOT2 (PHOTOTROPIN 1 и 2, At3g45780, 
and At5g58140), photoreceptors of the ZTL/FKF1/LKP2 family (ZEITLUPE/FLAVIN￾BINDING, KELCH, F-BOX1/LOV KELCH PROTEIN2, At5g57360/At1g68050/At2g18915) 
(Kagawa et al., 2001; Chen et al., 2004; Moglich and Moffat, 2010; Ito et al., 2012), and red/
far red light photoreceptors—phytochromes PHYA-E (PHYTOCHROME A-E, At1g09570, 
At2g18790, At5g35840, At4g16250, At4g18130) (Galvão et al., 2012). Ultraviolet B radiation 
(UV-B; 280–315nm) is an integral part of sunlight reaching the Earth's surface and induces a 
wide range of physiological responses in plants. Photomorphic responses, induced by UV-B, 
are considered to be in contrast to responses to damage, are mediated by a UV-B-specific pho￾toreceptor, UVR8 (UV RESISTANCE LOCUS 8; At5g63860) (Wu et al., 2012).
The action of UV-B radiation causes a variety of positive and negative responses in plants 
(Deepti et al., 2022). In particular, plants perceive low fluxes of UV-B radiation as signals of 
growth and development or signals of adaptation, while high fluxes of UV-B radiation as a 
stress factor.
Plant responses to UV-B exposure depend on external and internal factors (Yadav et al., 
2020). At the same time, there is a complex integration of UV-B interactions both with 1. Introduction 27
environmental factors (electromagnetic radiation of other ranges, temperature, water deficit, 
and others) and with endogenous factors, primarily phytohormones (brassinosteroids, jas￾monates, salicylates, ethylene, and others).
1.2 Characteristics of UV radiation
The sun emits ultraviolet radiation in a wide range (100–400nm). Four regions are distin￾guished in the UV spectrum: vacuum-UV (100–200nm, 6.20–12.40 eV), UV-C (200–280nm, 
6.20–4.43 eV), UV-B (280–315nm, 3.94–4.43 eV), and UV-A (315–400nm, 3.94–3.10 eV). UV-B 
and UV-C are outside the range considered to be ionizing; the lower limit is 10eV (Tilbrook 
et al., 2013; Gasperini et al., 2017). UV-C is completely attenuated by the atmospheric gases 
of the earth. The ozone layer absorbs 50% UV-A, 90% UV-B, and 100% vacuum UV and UV￾C. The surface of the earth receives UV radiation with wavelengths from 286 to 400nm. The 
ozone layer is the main natural obstacle to the passage of solar ultraviolet light through the 
Earth's atmosphere (Mironov et al., 2020). As the ozone layer decreases, the level of short￾wave UV radiation will increase. In this case, short-wave UV radiation will become the most 
active and strong stress factor (Kryvokhyzha et al., 2019).
Despite the low level of UV-B, it is a potential factor of abiotic stress for any organism. It 
causes DNA photodamage and an increase in malignant formations of the human skin. It is 
especially important for photosynthetic organisms—plants (Tilbrook et al., 2013).
Depletion of the ozone layer raises concern among scientists about the environmental im￾pact on agricultural production and natural plant ecosystems. As a result, the proportion of 
UV-B radiation will increase, and the negative effects can be significantly changed by many 
interacting stress factors in the natural habitat, including anthropogenic ones (Kataria and 
Guruprasad, 2018; Jardine et al., 2020).
The amount of UV rays reaching the earth's surface depends on both the permeability of 
the ozone layer and the height of the Sun above the horizon. During the daytime, the amount 
of UV rays reaching the earth's surface is reduced by 20 times. For every 100 m above sea 
level, the UV intensity increases by 3%–4%. The scattered UV in the summer noon accounts 
for 45%–70% of the radiation, and that reaching the earth's surface: 30%–55%. On cloudy 
days, scattered radiation mainly reaches the Earth's surface. When the Sun is at its zenith, 
rays with a length of 289–290nm reach the equatorial region of the earth's surface. In the 
middle latitudes, the short-wavelength boundary, in the summer months, is approximately 
297nm. Beams with a wavelength of 350–380nm reach the earth's surface beyond the polar 
circle.
A NASA-sponsored satellite mission played an important role in studying the dynamics of 
the intensity and spectrum of the electromagnetic radiation from the sun. The SORCE satellite 
probed cosmic rays for 17 years (2003–2020) and estimated total solar radiation and spectral 
solar radiation in the range from 1 to 2400nm (SORCE, 2020).
The amount of UV radiation on the Earth's surface can be determined by the response 
of plants to solar radiation. In particular, Mironov et al. (2020) analyzed the growth re￾sponses of Sphagnum riparium to solar UV radiation recorded in outer space. They found 
that sphagnum begins to show its first growth response in response to a wavelength of 
286 nm, the shortest wavelength of solar UV radiation that travels through the Earth's 
ozone layer.28 2. Effect of UV-B radiation on plants growth, active constituents, and productivity
2. Physiological reactions of plants in response to UV-B-radiation
2.1 Negative effects of UV-B on molecular and cellular processes in plants
UV-B is one of the dramatic environmental stressors affecting plant life in any corner of 
the planet (Yao et al., 2015). According to the magnitude of the effect of UV-B radiation on 
plants, several levels are distinguished: moderate at a dose of 7kJm− 2
, high—14kJm− 2
, and 
lethal—21kJm− 2
 (Prudnikova et al., 2019).
High UV-B levels induce reactive oxygen species (ROS) production and activate general 
stress signaling pathways. Cell death may depend on ROS signaling. The UV-B range is ab￾sorbed by many constituents of the cell with negative effects. UV-B is cytotoxic because it 
damages cellular structural elements, including nucleic acids, lipids, photosynthetic pig￾ments, and proteins (Sztatelman et al., 2015).
Unlike ionizing radiation, UV radiation predominantly does not destroy molecules, but 
very effectively triggers photochemical reactions due to the excitation of valence electrons. 
Conjugated bonds in organic molecules absorb radiation with wavelengths of about 200nm 
and below, and in linear repeats or in ring structures, the absorption bands of these bonds are 
shifted towards higher solar UV wavelengths. After absorbing UV radiation, the molecule can 
change and/or affect other molecules, for example, through the production of ROS. UV radi￾ation in the high-energy shortwave range poses a direct threat to the stability of vital organic 
molecules. In particular, DNA with aromatic rings in the bases is an active absorber of UV-B 
radiation (315nm) in cells. Although UV DNA uptake decreases at longer UV-A wavelengths, 
DNA can be damaged by UV absorption by endogenous photosensitizers, among which por￾phyrins, Fe-S mitochondrial proteins, flavins, and pterins are distinguished (Solovchenko 
and Merzlyak, 2008). These molecules induce the formation of radicals, including ROS, that 
react with DNA (De Gruijl, 2002).
UV-C and UV-B radiation damage DNA through photochemical reactions that promote 
the formation of dimers between adjacent pyrimidines in DNA chains—CPDs (cyclobutane￾pyrimidine dimers) (Jiang et al., 2009). These molecular changes interfere with transcription 
and replication.
UV radiation damages DNA and can cause genomic changes. In particular, UV-B (302nm) 
and UV-A (365nm) radiation can cause point mutations associated with ROS (e.g., from G to 
T) and gross genomic changes (e.g. deletions) (De Gruijl, 2002). UV-B radiation (wavelength 
range 280–315nm) is more carcinogenic than UV-A radiation (315–400nm) in experimental 
induction of squamous cell carcinomas.
The effect of UV radiation on the structure of the film formed by DNA is shown. Gasperini 
et al. (2017) reported an increase in UV optical density of thin and optically transparent crys￾talline DNA films formed by self-assembly caused by UV light. DNA films with a surface 
density of up to 0.031mg/mm2
 can reduce the transmittance of incident light UV-C and UV-B 
by up to 90%, and the transmittance of UV-A by up to 20%.
UV-B radiation affects many cellular processes. UV-B reduces plant growth Glycine max
(Kataria et al., 2021), overall growth and biomass accumulation of Pisum sativum L. (Martel 
and Qaderi, 2016). UV-B radiation causes changes in plant morphology (short stems, inhi￾bition of hypocotyl growth) and leaves (short petioles, thick, and small leaves) (Yoon et al., 
2021). Zuk-Golaszewska et al. (2003) showed that different doses of UV-B radiation caused 2. Physiological reactions of plants in response to UV-B-radiation 29
a decrease in plant height of two species Avena fatua and Setaria viridis, fresh mass of leaves, 
shoots and roots, and leaf area. UV-B radiation also caused leaf curling in both species. On the 
example of two varieties of Gossypium hirsutum L. (Romanos and Allegria), the influence of 
UV-B radiation on numerous growth parameters is shown. UV radiation significantly reduces 
the height of plants, as well as the size of other components of the structure: the length of the 
bracts and petals, the number of anthers, the mass of cotton seeds, the strength and length of 
the fiber, and the maturity index of the fiber. Increased UV-B radiation also significantly re￾duces pollen germination, fiber yellowness and fiber uniformity index, but increases stomatal 
density and fiber reflectance (Zouzoulas et al., 2020). Typically, plants grown in areas with 
low UV radiation accumulate more biomass and form a larger leaf area. In contrast, plants 
grown in areas exposed to intense sunlight show greater root development to compensate for 
water loss caused by transpiration (Alves and Deschamps, 2019).
The ambiguous influence of UV-B radiation on the growth of various plant organs and the 
participation of cytoskeleton elements in these processes was shown. In particular, Du et al. 
(2020) established the effect of actin filaments on the morphogenesis of the root and hypo￾cotyl of A. thaliana under the influence of UV-B. UV-B inhibits the elongation of Arabidopsis
hypocotyls due to the reorganization of actin filaments from bundles into a loose structure 
not associated with H2O2, while UV-B disrupts the dynamics of actin filaments in A. thaliana
roots, changing the level of H2O2.
One of the most noticeable symptoms of high-dose UV-B exposure is yellowing of the 
leaves resulting from the degradation of chlorophyll. UV-B treatment of mature leaves sup￾presses gene expression and synthesis of key photosynthetic proteins—Lhcb (chlorophyll 
a/b-binding proteins) and psbA (PSII D1 polypeptide) (Khan et al., 2015; Kataria et al., 2021), 
causing subsequent inhibition of photosynthesis (John et al., 2001; Kusano et al., 2011).
UV-B affects Photosystem II (PSII) to a significantly greater extent than PSI. Integral com￾ponents of PSII reaction centers, including proteins D1 and D2, undergo degradation. The 
reaction center, quinone acceptors and redox tyrosines are also targets of UV-B effects on 
photosynthesis. UV-B is absorbed by the oxygen-releasing Mn cluster and can damage it 
(Sarvikas et al., 2006).
UV-B reduces photosynthetic parameters (PSII efficiency, Fv/Fm, φEo, ΔV (IP), PIABS, 
PItotal, and photosynthesis rate) of Glycine max leaves (Kataria et al., 2021). It was also found 
that UV radiation significantly reduces the content of chlorophyll in the leaves of two vari￾eties of Gossypium hirsutum L. (Romanos and Allegria), the net rate of photosynthesis, and 
stomatal conductance (Zouzoulas et al., 2020).
UV-B increases the synthesis of UV-B absorbing substances as well as ROS such as super￾oxide radical and hydrogen peroxide. This is followed by an increase in antioxidants such 
as ascorbic acid and α-tocopherol, and a decrease in nitrate reductase (NR) activity. All met￾abolic changes result in a decrease in the rate of photosynthesis, biomass, and plant produc￾tivity (Kataria et al., 2021).
Elevated UV-B decreases rice leaf photosynthetic rate (PN), quantum yield, electron trans￾fer rate, total chlorophyll concentration, plant height, leaf number, pollen viability, concentra￾tion phenol and yield (Mohammed and Tarpley, 2013).
Increased UV-B levels can significantly reduce crop yields by inhibiting PSII, electron 
transport systems, photosynthesis rates, photosynthetic pigments, nucleic acids, and biomass 
accumulation (Khan et al., 2015). UV-B radiation also reduced net CO2 assimilation and water 30 2. Effect of UV-B radiation on plants growth, active constituents, and productivity
efficiency in WUE Pisum sativum L. (Martel and Qaderi, 2016). The effect of UV-B radiation 
caused not only the loss of chlorophyll, but also an increase in lipid damage, which was sim￾ilar to natural aging. At the same time, exposure to UV-B caused the induction of a number 
of genes associated with aging (SAG12, 13, 14, and 17). The result of UV-B exposure was cell 
destruction through regulated processes involving many genes also associated with natural 
aging (John et al., 2001; Kusano et al., 2011).
Increasing the dose to 8.93kJm− 2
 led to an increase in respiration, electrolyte leakage, total 
soluble solids, and biomass loss in Capia pepper varieties (Kasim and Kasim, 2018).
UV-B, causing a number of changes in plant growth and development, alters the flow￾ering time. UV-B radiation causes changes in Brassica oleracea L. plant morphology (short 
stems) and leaves (short petioles, thick, and small leaves) (Yoon et al., 2021). Kryvokhyzha 
et al. (2019) showed that shortwave UV radiation strongly influences the regeneration and 
flowering processes. Dotto et  al. (2018) demonstrate that Arabidopsis plants grown under 
UV-B enriched white light delay flowering and this developmental reprogramming is medi￾ated by the UVR8 photoreceptor. Flowering delay pathways have been established based on 
specific gene expression in UV-B-irradiated mutants at the flowering stage. UV-B radiation 
suppresses the expression of MSI1 and CLF, two components of the polycomb 2 repressive 
complex, which, as a consequence, leads to a decrease in histone H3K27me3 methylation in 
the miR156 and FLC genes. The effect of UV-B on flowering mutants confirms the partici￾pation of polycomb complex 2 in the observed delay in flowering time, mainly through the 
age path, that is, through the modification of the expression of several flowering time genes 
(Dotto et al., 2018).
Influence of UV-B on the processes in the biosphere. Solar UV-B radiation, being an im￾portant stressor factor, affects entire ecosystems through individual organisms. In addition 
to direct DNA damage, increased UV-B levels can lead to morphological and phenological 
changes in plants and, possibly, to changes in the competitive relationship between species 
(Caldwell et al., 1998; Rozema et al., 1997; Jardine et al., 2020). In ecosystems, in particular, cy￾anolichens (e.g., Lobaria oregana) are important sources of nitrogen. They grow in old-growth 
fir forests, providing food for other forest organisms. In forests, as a result of clearcutting, 
cyanolichens become exposed to UV-B radiation and drought when trees are isolated, which 
reduces their productivity and competitiveness (Trest et al., 2015).
On the other hand, UV-B stimulates the production of secondary metabolites that can 
affect herbivorousness levels, plant decomposition and carbon cycle (Rozema et al., 1997). 
Studies have shown that lichens generally respond to UV radiation by increasing the syn￾thesis and accumulation of secondary metabolites that reduce UV penetration. Lichens differ 
in their UV-protective metabolites. The variety of metabolites arises from differences in the 
chemical substances of fungi, as well as due to differences in the production of photosynthetic 
symbionts (Nguyen et al., 2013). For example, some cyanolichens have photosynthetic symbi￾onts that produce polyaromatic scytonemin (Soule et al., 2007) and mycosporins that protect 
against UV-A but not UV-B radiation. In the lichen population Cladonia arbuscula ssp. more 
UV-absorbing phenolic compounds accumulate (Hall et al., 2002). Sun-resistant Xanthoria pa￾rietina and light-adapted Lobaria pulmonaria accumulate more sunscreen pigments after UV-B 
exposure (Solhaug et  al., 2003). In this regard, it is assumed that UV-B irradiation affects 
lichen diversity and community structure. The largest differences can be found in regions 
affected by the depletion of the polar ozone layer.2. Physiological reactions of plants in response to UV-B-radiation 31
Increased UV-B can also directly enhance the decomposition of leaf litter through photo￾degradation and affect the activity of organisms such as animals, fungi and bacteria, which 
play a role in the degradation and cycling of nutrients (Gehrke et al., 1995; Rozema et al., 1997; 
Jardine et al., 2020).
2.2 Sensitivity to UV-B radiation
2.2.1 Plant sensitivity to UV-B flux
In connection with the increase in the UV-B proportion in the flow of electromagnetic radi￾ation, it becomes necessary to determine the resistance of plants to UV-B. The same effect of 
UV-B was shown in the range from 3 to 9kJm− 2day− 1
 for the morphogenesis of Beta vulgaris
L. UV-B causes a decrease in wet and dry weight. At the same time, growth inhibition is asso￾ciated with a decrease in the intensity of photosynthesis, the relative content and fluorescence 
of chlorophyll (Rahimzadeh Karvansara and Razavi, 2019).
2.2.2 Plant sensitivity to UV-B irradiation pattern
The plant response to UV-B depends on the exposure pattern. Acute treatment has a more 
severe effect than chronic exposure, which activates acclimatization reactions (Boyko et al., 
2006; Lake et al., 2009). These responses minimize the effect of UV-B on plant cells through 
leaf thickening, alteration of the waxy layers of the cuticle and biosynthesis of UV-B absorb￾ing flavonoids (Frohnmeyer and Staiger, 2003).
2.2.3 UV-B resistance of different photosynthetic organisms
UV-B radiation is known to harm most photosynthetic organisms. The exception is photo￾synthetic prokaryotes, in which UV-B has shown a positive effect (Chen et al., 2020). Exposure 
to low UV-B radiation of 0.08Wm− 2
 against a background of low intensity of visible light for 
14 days significantly increased the growth rate and biomass production of the cyanobacte￾rium Nostoc sphaeroides, compared with those in visible light alone. This indicates the acclima￾tization of the cells. Cells adapted to UV-B exhibit an increase in photosynthetic efficiency (α) 
and photosynthetic capacity (Pmax), a higher PSI/PSII fluorescence ratio, an increase in PSI 
content and, as a consequence, an increase in cyclic electron flux compared with nonacclima￾tized cells. Both the primary quinone-type acceptor and reoxidation of the plastoquinone pool 
were activated in cells acclimated to UV-B. Colonies adapted to UV-B maintained a higher 
rate of D1 protein synthesis after exposure to increased UV-B or visible light intensity, thus 
functionally mitigating photoinhibition. These data show the adaptation of photosynthesis 
to low-intensity UV-B radiation and suggest that UV-B may act as a positive environmental 
factor for the productivity of some photosynthetic prokaryotes, especially during periods of 
twilight or in shaded environments.
When studying resistance to UV-B radiation of plants, the specificity of the PSII response 
was shown in different varieties and genotypes of strawberries and actinidia, which are char￾acterized by increased resistance to this stress factor. The fact of increased functional activity 
of photosynthetic tissues of variegated leaves of Actinidia polygama Maxim was established. 
under UV-B irradiation conditions. Chlorophyll-containing tissues of varieties Gladkaya, 
Izyshchnaya and Sakhalinskaya 35 are distinguished by the most stable fluorescence values, 
which suggests that these genotypes have increased field resistance to excess UV-B radiation. 32 2. Effect of UV-B radiation on plants growth, active constituents, and productivity
However, after 2h, the green leaves of the control and experimental plants did not differ 
much in Fv/Fm, while the efficiency of PSII functioning in the experimental samples after 
exposure to UV-B decreased by 6.3%–9.3% compared with the level of fluorescence before the 
start experiment (Shornikov and Abyzov, 2011).
The effect of increased UV-B radiation has the same growth retardation rates for summer 
C3 and C4 annuals (Suchar and Robberecht, 2018). In comparison, biennial and winter C3 
annuals were more sensitive to UV-B. The suppression of the growth of perennial plants oc￾curred only in the case of an increase in their metabolic rate.
2.2.4 Organ-specific resistance of plants to UV-B
Maulión et  al. (2019) showed that plant organs with a deficiency of CAF-1 (Chromatin 
assembly factor-1—histone H3/H4 chaperone) react differently to UV-B radiation. In partic￾ular, leaves with a CAF-1 deficiency, which is involved in supporting DNA packaging into 
chromatin, tolerate UV-B radiation better than roots. Leaves have less CPD accumulation and 
less inhibition of cell proliferation, but increase in cell wall thickness, ploidy levels and UV-B 
absorbing compounds. At the same time, CAF-1 deficient roots have increased inhibition 
of primary root elongation, with a reduced meristem size due to stronger inhibition of cell 
proliferation after UV-B exposure. The decrease in the size of the root meristem in CAF-1 mu￾tants is a consequence of the impairment of programmed cell death after exposure to UV-B. 
Maulión et al. (2019) suggest that meristematic cells of roots and shoots may have different 
defense mechanisms against UV-B-dependent CPD accumulation, associated with different 
functions of the CAF-1 complex in these organs.
2.2.5 The effect of UV radiation on plants depends on their age
DNA damage was more significant in young Arabidopsis and Nicotiana plants than in older 
plants (Boyko et al., 2006). However, the decrease in the content of chlorophyll, carotenoids, 
and anthocyanin, as well as the productivity of photosynthesis, is higher in old plants (Kakani 
et al., 2004; Pradhan et al., 2008).
An analysis of the qualitative composition of flavonoids showed that, under the influence 
of UV-B, the content of quercetin increased more in young leaves compared with older leaves 
of Nasturtium officinale, Sinapis alba, and two Brassicaceae species. Younger ginkgo leaves had 
a marked increase in quercetin and kaempferol and were more sensitive to UV-B radiation 
than older leaves (Sztatelman et al., 2015). Young leaves of vines under the influence of UV-B 
showed an increase in UV-B absorbing pigments, phenolic compounds and antioxidant ca￾pacity compared with old leaves (Hunt and Mcneil, 1998).
2.2.6 UV-B and 3D plant structure
UV-B radiation causes changes in plant morphology (short stems) and leaves (short pet￾ioles, thick, and small leaves), which can affect the interception of radiation in the canopy 
structure and alter the spatial relationship of the plant's three-dimensional structure and 
physiological parameters. It was found that UV-B induces a dose-dependent biosynthesis of 
antioxidant phenolic compounds (flavonoids) in leaves. The heterogeneity of the activation 
of biosyntheses within the whole plant is associated with the magnitude of the interception 
of UV-B radiation by various structural elements of plants. Yoon et al. (2021) analyzed the 
spatial interception of UV-B radiation in Brassica oleracea L. var. Acephala inside the crown of 2. Physiological reactions of plants in response to UV-B-radiation 33
the plant. Under UV-B radiation, phenolic compounds and flavonoids accumulated more in 
organs with higher UV-B uptake and in younger leaves.
2.3 Combined action of UV-B radiation and environmental conditions
Often, under the action of several factors, cross-resistance to stresses caused by various 
factors arises. The effect of UV-B on plant function is also dependent on environmental 
conditions.
2.3.1 Combined action of UV-B radiation with the visible range of solar radiation
UV-B radiation never acts in isolation under natural conditions. Therefore, it is of interest 
how plants respond to UV-B in the presence of light of varying quality. Palma et al. (2021) inves￾tigated the effects of low dose UV-B (0.91 ± 0.07kJm− 2day− 1
) in combination with four light 
treatments (blue—BL, green—GL, red—RL and broadband white—WL, 210μmolm− 2 s
− 1
) 
to the morphological and physiological reactions of Cucumis sativus “Lausanna RZ F1”. 
Additional UV-B radiation has been shown to significantly reduce biomass accumulation in 
the presence of broadband WL, BL and GL, but not RL. UV-B also reduces the photosynthetic 
efficiency of CO2 fixation when combined with BL. These plants, despite the high accumula￾tion of anthocyanins, do not cope with the conditions of WL. UV-B in combination with GL 
has no significant effect on gas exchange and chlorophyll fluorescence parameters, however, 
additional UV-B significantly increases the content of chlorophyll and flavonoids in the leaf 
epidermis. Plants grown under RL and UV-B significantly increase the maximum rate of pho￾tosynthesis and dark respiration compared with pure RL. In addition, the addition of saturat￾ing light to these plants led to an increase in the quantum yield of PSII, the proportion of open 
PSII centers, and the electron transfer rate.
Other authors have shown a synergistic effect of UV radiation and blue light in the reg￾ulation of the content of carotenoids (including the active antioxidant astaxanthin) in the 
microalga Haematococcus pluvialis, which increased 8 times compared with the control. At 
the same time, the combination of UV radiation and red light increased the biomass of the 
microalga by about 2 times (Suyono et al., 2015).
Short-term irradiation with a high dose of UV-B (8Wm− 2
) has the opposite effect on iso￾lated A. thaliana leaves, depending on their light status after UV treatment (Sztatelman et al., 
2015). In darkened leaves, the appearance of aging symptoms is delayed after a short UV-B 
treatment. UV-B inhibits darkness-induced degradation of chlorophyll in Arabidopsis leaves in 
a dose-dependent manner. Expression of genes associated with photosynthesis, chlorophyll 
content and photosynthetic efficiency are increased in UV-B-treated leaves left in the dark. 
Illumination of leaves after UV-B treatment leads to degradation of chlorophyll, i.e., yellow￾ing of the leaves, and induction of expression of aging-related genes. Regardless of the light 
treatment, a high dose of UV-B results in clearly visible cell death 3 days after irradiation.
Kimura et al. (2003) found that 110 genes responded positively to 3h of high light intensity 
treatment. Among them are genes encoding enzymes that absorb ROS and are involved in 
the biosynthesis of lignins and flavonoids (PAL1—PHE AMMONIA LYASE 1, At2g37040 and 
CHS—CHALCONE SYNTHASE, TT4, At5g13930).
Recovery of photosynthesis after UV-B damage also occurs faster when illuminated with 
photosynthetically active light (Bergo et al., 2003). UV-B causes the D1 protein to be cleaved to 34 2. Effect of UV-B radiation on plants growth, active constituents, and productivity
a 20-kDa fragment that is completely degraded by proteases. In addition, de novo D1 protein 
synthesis and photosynthetic efficiency were analyzed. Anthocyanin production was inves￾tigated both at the level of gene expression and at the level of anthocyanin accumulation. In 
addition, the expression of genes associated with aging, SAG12 and SAG13, (SENESCENCE￾ASSOCIATED GENE 12 and 13; At5g45890 and At2g29350), SEN1 (SENESCENCE1; 
At4g35770) and WRKY53 (At4g23810) was tested. The results clearly showed that high dose 
UV-B exposure can cause two different pathways. The key controlling factor is the presence 
or absence of visible light after UV-B exposure (Sztatelman et al., 2015).
Irradiation with short-wave UV caused differences in the expression profiles of genes for 
the photoperiodic mechanism of flowering regulation in plants grown under different light￾ing conditions (Kryvokhyzha et al., 2019).
2.3.2 UV-B and mineral nutrition
With an increase in nitrogen fertilization, the negative effect of UV radiation on the growth 
parameters of the cucumber increases (Hunt and Mcneil, 1998).
2.3.3 UV-B and temperature factor
Arabidopsis plants grown at elevated temperatures are more sensitive to UV-B radiation. 
At the same time, the cold resistance of plants is increased by UV-B (Sztatelman et al., 2015).
2.3.4 UV-B and salinization
The combination of UV-B and NaCl (150mmol/L) treatment produced an additive effect 
on most of the parameters of barley seedlings studied (Fedina et al., 2003). UV-B radiation 
reduced the chlorophyll/carotenoids ratio and photochemical efficiency of PSII. NaCl pre￾exposure decreased H2O2 generation and lipid peroxidation and alleviated the inhibitory ef￾fect of UV-B on PSII activity. Proline accumulated under salt stress conditions might be one of 
the reasons for the observed tolerance of barley seedlings to UV-B radiation.
2.3.5 UV-B and drought
Drought is less dangerous for plants pretreated with UV-B (Sztatelman et  al., 2015). 
Influence of water deficit (WD, PEG 6000, water potential 0.5MPa) and UV-B radiation 
(24kJm− 2day− 1
) change the accumulation of salicylic acid (SA) in the roots and barley leaves, 
as well as the activity of PAL and benzoic acid hydroxylase (BAH), which control the path￾way of SA biosynthesis from phenylalanine. Both factors, administered separately and to￾gether, caused, depending on the time, an increase in the SA content in the roots and leaves. 
An increase in the SA level in plants subjected to WD stress was accompanied by an increase 
in the activity of both enzymes. However, in plants, exposure to UV-B was accompanied only 
by an increase in BAH activity. Under WD conditions, an earlier increase in the SA content 
was observed in the roots than in the leaves, which may indicate the involvement of SA in 
signal transduction between roots and leaves (Bandurska and Cieślak, 2013). Sequential use 
of WD and UV-B increased the influence of each individual factor on the accumulation of SA 
in leaves. WD has a greater effect on water loss and membrane damage than UV-B radiation. 
Plants exposed to WD after pretreatment with UV-B radiation exhibited a cross-resistance 3. UV-B signaling in the plant 35
mechanism. In the leaves of these plants, there was no increased lipid peroxidation and a de￾crease in water content, which is associated with an increase in SA level in the leaves of plants 
treated with UV-B before WD application.
2.3.6 UV-B and static magnetic field
Pre-treatment of seeds with a static magnetic field increases the resistance of Glycine max
seedlings to UV-B radiation by increasing a number of physiological parameters. The con￾tent of NO and the activity of NR, the efficiency of PSII, the parameters φEo, ΔV (IP), PIABS 
and PItotal increase. However, the intercellular concentrations of CO2 and ROS decrease. It 
follows that pretreatment with a static magnetic field mitigates the adverse effects of UV-B 
stress by improving photosynthetic performance along with a higher NO content, which may 
protect plants from the harmful effects of oxidative stress caused by UV-B radiation (Kataria 
et al., 2021).
2.3.7 UV-B and plant pathogenesis
UV-B irradiation can increase plant resistance to attack by pathogens by changing plant 
morphology, production of secondary metabolites, and expression of genes that control the 
viability of pathogens. On the other hand, rice plants overexpressing the WRKY89 gene in￾duced by the attack of the pathogen are more resistant to UV-B (Sztatelman et al., 2015).
2.3.8 UV-B and Injury to Plants
UV-B radiation and injury synergistically induce the biosynthesis of phenolic compounds 
and ascorbic acid in the peel and pulp of Opuntia ficus-indica cv. Rojo Vigor. The greatest ac￾cumulation of phenols after 24h occurred in tissue treated with UV-B radiation (6.4Wm− 2
for 15min), where the main phenolic compounds accumulated in the peel and pulp were 
quercetin, sinapic acid, kaempferol, rosmarinic acid and sinapoyl malate. PAL activity in￾creased after storage of all and wounded tissue treated with UV-B light, and this increase was 
associated with phenol accumulation. The activity of l-galactone-γ-lactone dehydrogenase 
(GalLDH) and biosynthesis of ascorbic acid were enhanced by treatment with UV-B radia￾tion, and the effect was enhanced when UV-B was applied to wounded tissue. The respiratory 
rate of prickly pears increased due to wound stress, while ethylene production increased due 
to two factors: injury facilitated UV-B access to underlying tissue and enhanced the apparent 
synergistic response (Ortega-Hernández et al., 2019).
3. UV-B signaling in the plant
The perception of light of different spectral composition is carried out by the sensory pho￾toreceptors of plants. Protein UVR8 (UV RESISTANCE LOCUS 8) has been identified in plants 
as a photoreceptor absorbing UV-B radiation (Cloix et al., 2012; O’Hara et al., 2019). UV-B sig￾naling is specifically mediated by UVR8 via a transducer system and results in physiological 
reactions, including plant photomorphogenesis reactions. Depending on the amount of UV-B 
radiation flux, other signal transmission paths take place.36 2. Effect of UV-B radiation on plants growth, active constituents, and productivity
3.1 UVR8 structure and UV-B sensing mechanism
UVR8 was first identified by screening Arabidopsis mutants hypersensitive to UV-B 
(Kliebenstein et al., 2002). Deficiency of UVR8 leads to hypersensitivity of uvr8-null mutants 
to UV-B stress, while overexpression of UVR8 leads to increased UV-B-induced photomor￾phogenesis and resistance to UV-B stress (Favory et al., 2009).
UVR8 is a seven-lobed β-propeller protein of 440 amino acids (see Fig. 1). The amino acid 
sequence UVR8 contains a large amount of tryptophans (Trp) that absorb UV-B rays in the 
wavelength range from 280 to 300nm. Of the 14 aromatic amino acids Trp (s) in UVR8, six 
are located within the protein core, supporting the β-propeller structure, one is located at the 
C-terminus of the protein, and seven are found at the homodimer interface (Christie et al., 
2012; O’Hara and Jenkins, 2012; Wu et al., 2012). Four Trp (s) (Trp-233, Trp-285, Trp-337 and 
Trp-94) out of seven form a cross-dimeric "tryptophan pyramid" in each of the proteins in￾volved in UV-B perception (Rizzini et al., 2011; Christie et al., 2012). However, only Trp-233 
and Trp-285 are considered to be the true UV-B chromophore UVR8. Arginine (Arg) residues 
Arg-146, Arg-286, and Arg-338 surrounding the four “pyramidal” Trp (s) form salt bridges 
with them (Christie et al., 2012; Wu et al., 2012). These bonds maintain the UVR8 homodimer, 
and their disruption underlies UV-B perception (Wu et al., 2012).
As a result of the perception of UV-B radiation, the destruction of salt bridges occurs, the 
UVR8 homodimer undergoes a change in conformation and monomerization occurs (Huang 
et al., 2014). The monomeric form of UVR8 moves rapidly into the nucleus. For the activation 
of UVR8 in the nucleus and the expression of target genes, the need for prolonged exposure 
to UV-B remains (Kaiserli and Jenkins, 2007). The N-terminus of the UVR8 protein contains a 
region with 23 amino acids (N23), crucial for the translocation of the UV-B photoreceptor into 
the nucleus (see Fig. 1). Removing this area prevents UV-B from accumulating protein in the 
nucleus (Kaiserli and Jenkins, 2007).
In addition to two light-absorbing Trp (s) (Trp-233 and Trp-285), two dimer-stabilizing 
Arg (s) (Arg-286 and Arg-338) play a decisive role in UV-B-induced photomorphogenesis 
(see Fig. 2). Mutation of each residue of these amino acids leads to changes in UV-B light per￾ception, UVR8 monomerization, and UVR8-COP1 bond in response to photomorphic UV-B 
(Huang et al., 2014).
Seven-lobed β-propeller UVR8 protein
440 amino acids
N C
N23
(a) (d) (b, c)
C17 C27
FIG. 1 UVR8 photoreceptor structure. Functions of the UVR8 protein domains: (A) translocation of the UVR8 into 
the nucleus; (B) direct interaction of UVR8 with the WD40 domain COP1 protein; (C) interaction with the RUP1 and 
RUP2 proteins; and (D) weakening of bonds between 27C domain of UVR8 and COP1 (Kaiserli and Jenkins, 2007; 
Wu et al., 2011; Christie et al., 2012; O’Hara and Jenkins, 2012; Cloix et al., 2012; Camacho et al., 2019; Lin et al., 2020).3. UV-B signaling in the plant 37
The ability of UVR8 to use a wider spectrum of radiation than UV-B has been shown. For 
this, it is supposed to interact with other photoreceptors under conditions of a mixed light 
flux containing UV-B, UV-A and PAR. In particular, UVR8 may play an important role in 
the perception of both longwave UV-B and shortwave UV-A radiation (315 ∼ 350nm). It fol￾lows that UVR8 and cryptochromes (CRYs) co-regulate gene expression through interactions 
that alter the relative sensitivity to UV-B, UV-A, and the blue region of the solar spectrum. 
Negative feedback loops of the action of these photoreceptors can arise from gene cross-signal 
expression and UV absorption by phenolic metabolites. These interactions explain why blue 
light modulates photomorphic responses to UV-B and UV-A radiation (Rai et al., 2021).
Tissot and Ulm (2020) show that CRY photoreceptors induce RUP1 and RUP2 in re￾sponse to blue light. Elevated levels of RUP1 and RUP2 under blue light enhance UVR8 red￾imerization, thereby negatively regulating UVR8 signaling and allowing cross-regulation of 
FIG. 2 UV-B signaling mechanism mediated by the UVR8 photoreceptor and its regulation of RUP1-2 and photo￾receptors: (A) model of UVR8/COP1 mediated UV-B signaling cascade and (B) established interactions of proteins 
associated with the UV-B receptor. (A) Description in the text of Section 3; (B) The interaction of signaling pathways 
of photomorphogenesis associated with photoreceptors UVR8, CRY1-2, PHYA-B, PHOT1 has been shown (STRING, 
2022 Version: 11.5).38 2. Effect of UV-B radiation on plants growth, active constituents, and productivity
photoreceptor pathways in a polychromatic light environment. Both CRY1 and the red light 
photoreceptor PHYB have been found to contribute to UV-B resistance at the same time as 
UVR8. Thus, visible light and UV-B photoreceptors regulate UV-B resistance through a com￾plex interaction that allows for the integration of different sunlight signals.
After pretreatment with UV-B, plant survival increased under biotic and abiotic stress.
3.2 Transmission of UV-B signals via UVR8
3.2.1 UV-B signal transduction mechanism
UVR8 in the absence of UV-B exists as a homodimer held together by intermolecular hy￾drogen bonds that break down after UV-B absorption by Trp-285 and Trp-233, resulting in 
monomerization of UVR8 (see Fig. 2A) (Cloix et al., 2012; Heijde and Ulm, 2013).
When exposed to UV-B, some of the activated UVR8 accumulates in the nucleus, while 
the other part of UVR8 may remain in the cytoplasm (Kaiserli and Jenkins, 2007). Found in 
the nucleus, UVR8 is thought to play a central role in UV-B signaling. For this, the nuclear 
pool UVR8 binds to the component of the ubiquitin ligase E3 COP1 (CONSTITUTIVELY 
PHOTOMORPHOGENIC1, At2g32950), controlling photomorphic UV-B responses (Favory 
et al., 2009; Cloix et al., 2012). However, the functional role of the cytoplasmic photoreceptor 
cannot be ruled out (Tilbrook et al., 2013).
For UVR8 to interact with the COP1 protein, a certain photoreceptor conformation is re￾quired, which is created by the structural components of the C-terminus of the protein. The 
C-terminus of the protein consists of 44 amino acids (C44), including the C27 and C17 do￾mains, which determine changes in structural conformation and, accordingly, photorecep￾tor activity (see Fig. 1) (Camacho et al., 2019; Lin et al., 2020). Cloix et al. (2012) report that 
C27 mediates the interaction of UVR8 with the WD40 COP1 domain and their activity. It 
is required for the regulation of gene expression and suppression of hypocotyl growth in 
Arabidopsis (Yin et al., 2015). At the same time, the C17 domain plays an inhibitory role in 
UV-B signaling, probably by fine tuning the interaction between UVR8 and COP1 (Lin et al., 
2020). C17 is thought to inhibit UV-B signaling by weakening the binding between C27 and 
COP1. In addition, C27 interacts with repressor proteins RUP1 and RUP2 (REPRESSOR OF 
UV-B PHOTOMORPHOGENESIS1 and 2; At5g52250 and At5g23730), which are negative 
regulators of UVR8 function (Cloix et al., 2012).
One of the early stages of UV-B signaling in the nucleus is the direct interaction of UVR8 
with the COP1 protein, which is responsible for the plant's response to UV-B, providing accli￾matization and protection of UV-B (Brown et al., 2005; Favory et al., 2009). The importance of 
the association between UVR8 and COP1 is confirmed by their regulation of the same set of 
genes (Oravecz et al., 2006). Under the action of UV-B, COP1 acts as a positive regulator, while 
during photomorphogenesis of etiolated seedlings under the action of PAR, COP1 acts as a 
negative regulator (Yi and Deng, 2005). In UV-B-dependent responses, COP1 is required to 
stimulate the expression of the HY5 gene (ELONGATED HYPOCOTYL 5), which encodes the 
bZIP HY5 transcription factor (Oravecz et al., 2006). Whereas, in seedlings grown in the dark, 
COP1 acts as an E3 ubiquitin ligase, promoting the destruction of HY5 (Osterlund et al., 2000).
Binkert et al. (2014) identified a T/G box in the HY5 promoter, which is required for its UV-B 
sensitivity. HY5 and its homologue HYH bind to the cis-acting element of the T/G (HY5) box 
of the HY5 promoter, mediating the activation of HY5 transcription in response to UV-B.3. UV-B signaling in the plant 39
UVR8 then binds to COP1-SPA (CONSTITUTIVELY PHOTOMORPHOGENIC1—
SUPPRESSOR OF PHYA) by the nucleus complex, which is released from the E3 complex 
CUL4-DDB1 (CULLIN 4-DAMAGED DNA BINDING PROTEIN 1). This complex is believed 
to be responsible for the conversion of COP1 from a repressor to a photomorphogenesis pro￾moter (Podolec and Ulm, 2018).
The result of the UV-B signaling pathway is the activation of specific genes that carry 
out protective reactions. UV-B-sensitive genes include genes for proteins involved in UV-B￾induced photomorphogenesis and acclimatization. These include protective proteins: pro￾teins of UV-B absorbing phenylpropanoids biosynthesis; antioxidant enzymes that remove 
ROS; enzymes for repairing damaged DNA (e.g., photolyase) and others (Li et  al., 2009; 
Tilbrook et al., 2013).
By analogy with other photoreceptors, its inactivation and reversal of its main homodi￾meric state due to redimerization are of great importance for the functioning of the UVR8 
receptor. Redimerization simultaneously stops UV-B signaling and restores UV-B sensitivity. 
Redimerization is associated with the activity of repressor proteins RUP1 and RUP2, which 
serve as negative regulators of UV-B signaling, facilitating UVR8 re-merization after UV-B 
exposure, which, as a result, disrupts the key interaction between UVR8 and COP1 (Heijde 
and Ulm, 2013). Repressor proteins RUP1 and RUP2 with WD40 repeats interact only with 
the C27 domain of UVR8, causing UVR8 to return to the ground state due to redimerization 
(Yin et al., 2015). Redimerization of UVR8 is essential for the optimal balance of the UV-B￾induced photomorphic response associated with plant growth and development (Heijde and 
Ulm, 2013; Tilbrook et al., 2013).
Another negative regulator of the molecular UV-B signaling pathway is STO/BBX24 
(SALTOLERANCE/BBX24; At1g06040). STO/BBX24 interacts with HY5 and COP1 to form 
a complex. The STO/BBX24—HY5 interaction reduces the accumulation of HY5 and sup￾presses its role as an activator of transcription under the action of UV-B. The consequences 
of the STO/BBX24—COP1 interaction differ depending on the presence or absence of UV-B. 
In the dark, COP1 represses STO/BBX24 transcription and leads to proteasome-mediated 
degradation of STO/BBX24 in the nucleus. However, under UV-B, STO/BBX24 accumulates 
despite the increased COP1 content in the core. It was also found that STO/BBX24 interacts 
with RCD1 (RADICAL-INDUCED CELL DEATH1; At1g32230), which together are involved 
in the negative regulation of UV-B signaling (Jiang et al., 2009).
At night, UVR8 is in the cytoplasm in the form of a homodimer. When exposed to sun￾light, UV-B signals are transmitted to the nucleus. In response to the action of UV-B, UVR8 is 
monomerized, individual monomers bind to COP1 and are transferred as a heterodimer into 
the nucleus. The interaction of UVR8 with COP1 prevents the degradation of HY5, allowing 
HY5 to activate target genes. HY5 activates UV-B sensitive genes such as the FLS and CHS 
enzymes involved in the phenylpropanoid biosynthetic pathway. MYB10 appears to regulate 
MYB22 without the involvement of HY5. Whereas HY5 is not regulated by itself. Negative 
feedback of regulation of the UV-B signaling pathway is provided by proteins RUP1 and 
RUP2 with WD40 repeats, which promote UVR8 redimerization, disrupting the UVR8-COP1 
interaction (Tilbrook et al., 2013).
The ability of plants to respond and survive under stressful conditions, including under 
the influence of high UV flux density, includes the perception and signaling of events, the ac￾tivation of the action of the hormonal system mediated by nitric oxide (NO), which interacts 40 2. Effect of UV-B radiation on plants growth, active constituents, and productivity
with ROS and modulates gene expression, and protein activity (Simontacchi et al., 2015). The 
level of gaseous NO in plant tissues is constantly changing depending on the ontogeny of a 
given plant and environmental fluctuations. Such dynamics is associated with the participa￾tion of NO in the transduction of the hormonal signal. The integration of the hormonal and 
antioxidant systems of plant cells is responsible for maintaining a narrow range of NO and 
ROS concentrations. Stress hormones include jasmonates, salicylates, abscisic acid (ABA), 
and ethylene (Bandurska and Cieślak, 2013; Martel and Qaderi, 2016; Prudnikova et al., 2019; 
Raza et al., 2020).
In addition to the hormonal system, metabolites can be involved in the regulation of plant 
resistance. Liu et al. (2020) identified a metabolic strategy of a more resistant species Astragalus 
mongholicus in relation to UV-B radiation. UV-B radiation causes the plant to move from car￾bon assimilation to carbon storage more quickly. The level of sugars, which serve as energy 
sources for growth, decreases in aboveground tissues, but increases in underground tissues. 
This explains the decrease in plant height and leaf area, as well as an increase in the specific 
gravity of the roots. The mobilization of carbon stocks influences the increase in the flow of 
the phenylpropanoid pathway. Treatment with UV-B radiation has shown tissue-specific met￾abolic reactions. Among the phenolic compounds, carbon compounds C6C1 (phenolic acids: 
4-hydroxybenzoic acid, vanillic acid and salicylic acid) and C6C3C6 (flavones) increase in 
leaves, while in the roots—C6C3C6 (isoflavones) due to a decrease in the level of C6C3. It has 
been shown that the response of roots to UV-B is manifested in a negligible level of phenyl￾alanine and an increased level of PAL transcription, indicating that the synthesis of phenolic 
compounds is activated by activation of the corresponding genes, not by phenylalanine.
The interaction of signaling pathways of photomorphogenesis associated with photore￾ceptors UVR8, CRY1-2, PHYA-B, PHOT1 has been shown (see Fig. 2B).
3.2.2 Physiological reactions controlled by UVR8
UV-B induces many physiological responses that determine the direction of plant growth 
and development (Tilbrook et al., 2013). On the basis of a general knowledge of photoregula￾tion, an idea is being formed about the participation of UVR8 in plant adaptation to UV-B and 
therefore in the prevention of damage and stress caused by UV-B.
The most well-studied physiological responses to UV-B by UVR8 include inhibition of 
hypocotyl growth and accumulation of UV-B absorbing secondary metabolites (e.g., flavo￾nol glycosides). The latter reactions are caused by UV-B-induced expression of a number of 
genes encoding enzymes of their biosynthesis, including CHS (Kliebenstein et al., 2002; Ulm 
et al., 2004; Brown et al., 2005; Favory et al., 2009). Along with this, UVR8 controls endore￾duplication, stomata formation, and leaf morphogenesis, and also maintains the efficiency 
of photosynthesis under conditions of increased UV-B flux. The UVR8-dependent capture of 
the circadian clock and the formation of resistance to pathogens have been shown. The role 
of the tomato UVR8 gene (SlUVR8) in the regulation of chloroplast development under the 
influence of UV-B radiation has been shown. Photoreceptor SlUVR8 promotes adaptation of 
tomato plants to stress UV-B flux values by regulating expression of UV-B sensitive genes 
(HY5 and CHS) and accumulation of UV-B-absorbing compounds. SlUVR8 promotes the de￾velopment of fetal chloroplasts by increasing the accumulation of the SlGLK2 transcription 
factor (GOLDEN2-LIKE2), which determines the number of chloroplasts and chlorophyll 
content (Li et al., 2018).3. UV-B signaling in the plant 41
The functions of the MYB transcription factors in UV-B signaling are mediated by inter￾action with UVR8 (see Fig. 3). MYB73 and MYB77 act below UVR8 by regulating lateral root 
growth through upregulation of the expression of auxin-sensitive genes when directly linked 
to their promoters (Yang et al., 2020). MYB13 is predominantly expressed in cotyledons and 
positively regulates UV-B-induced cotyledon outgrowth and acclimatization to stress, di￾rectly regulating the expression of auxin-dependent genes and genes for flavonoid biosyn￾thesis. The myb13 mutant lacks UV-B-induced cotyledon outgrowth and is hypersensitive to 
UV-B stress, as does the uvr8 mutant (Qian et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2021).
HY5 binds the promoter elements of the CHS and MYB12 genes activated by UVB (Stracke 
et al., 2010). In Arabidopsis, MYB12 belongs to the subgroup of R2R3-MYB transcription fac￾tors (MYB12, MYB11, and MYB111), which are specifically involved in the regulation of flavo￾nol biosynthesis, including CHS expression.
COP1 is the negative regulator of many proteins involved in photomorphogenesis. However, 
COP1 plays a positive role in the UV-B signaling pathway and is required for the expression 
of genes regulated by UVR8. HY5 and HYH (HY5 HOMOLOG) are transcription factors that 
act downstream of UVR8 and COP1, regulating the expression of many UVR8 target genes 
(Brown et al., 2005; Favory et al., 2009). In addition, UVR8 has been found to directly interact 
with specific transcription factors, mediating responses to UV-B (Liang et al., 2018).
UVR8-mediated plant defense reactions occur at low UV-B radiation (see Fig. 4, 1a). They 
provide photosynthetic acclimatization by regulating gene expression. In particular, UVR8 
is known to increase the expression of chloroplast proteins genes such as SIG5 and ELIP. 
Signaling cascades controlled by UVR8 regulate the synthesis of secondary metabolites, facil￾itating plant adaptation to stress and ensuring their survival (Singh et al., 2014).
In general, the UVR8-dependent pathway provides plant protection against potentially 
harmful UV-B waves and initiates morphogenic and physiological responses. However, it 
became apparent that there are other pathways that mediate UV-B responses without UVR8 
involvement.
3.3 UV-B signaling without UVR8
Plants perceive UV-B radiation as an information signal transmitted via a UVR8 controlled 
pathway, activating photomorphic and acclimatization reactions. In addition to UVR8, addi￾tional UV-B signaling pathways have been suggested. High induction of gene expression in 
HY5/HYH
UV-B
UVR8
MYB 111
MYB 7
MYB 4
MYB 11
MYB 12
MYB 13
MYB 77
MYB 73
COP1-SPA
- stimulation
Auxin-sensitive
genes
Lateral root growth
Hydroxycinnamate esters
Flavonoids,
anthocyanins,
lignin
Overgrowth of cotyledons
CHS
and other genes
C4H - inhibition
FIG. 3 Involvement of MYB family transcription factors in UV-B signal transduction (C4H—cinnamate 4-hydroxylase) 
(Zhao et al., 2007; Jenkins, 2009; Fornalé et al., 2014; Liang et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2020; Qian et al., 2020).42 2. Effect of UV-B radiation on plants growth, active constituents, and productivity
response to different wavelengths in the UV-B range is suggested as evidence, as well as re￾sponses that still occur in uvr8 and cop1 mutants that lack the UVR8 mediated UV-B signaling 
pathway (Ulm et al., 2004).
In addition, the response to stress UV-B includes signaling cascades of mitogen-activated 
protein kinase (MAPK). In this case, the appearance of pyrimidine dimers formed by UV-B in 
DNA may signal additional stress-activated UV-B signaling by MAP kinase.
For an adequate response to DNA damage, the cell must perceive and respond to these 
DNA damage. Therefore, if there is an induction of DNA repair mechanisms, then the genome 
is restored. However, if the damaged DNA cannot be repaired, then the cell death program is 
triggered. The protein AtPDCD5 (PROGRAMMED CELL DEATH PROTEIN5) from A. thali￾ana is induced by UV-B radiation and is involved in programmed cell death in response to 
UV-B DNA damage. AtPDCD5 is localized both in the nucleus and in the cytosol. AtPDCD5 
interacts with HAM proteins. It has been suggested that these proteins are jointly involved in 
responses to DNA damage (Falcone Ferreyra et al., 2016).
Chromatin remodeling proteins are involved in the repair of DNA damaged by UVB. 
HAM1 and HAM2 (HISTONE ACETYLTRANSFERASE OF THE MYST FAMILY 1 and 2) 
acetylate histones during DNA repair in Zea mays and A. thaliana. In the repair of DNA dam￾age are also involved NFC102/NFC4 and SDG102/SDG26 (Campi et al., 2012).
UV-B
PR-5
PR-2
PR-1
SA
High energy flux UV-B
CPD
8-oxo-guanine,
Thymine glycol,
5,6-dihydro￾thymine,
Cytosine
photohydrate
MEKK1
?
Cell death
- stimulation - inhibition
Other responce
Stress reactions
Immune
responses
PDCD5
MKR1
MKK6 MKK2
DNA damage MAPK cascade:
NADPH-oxidase, other enzyme
UVR8-independent reactions
ROS
3
c
SIG5
Flavonoids,
Anthocyanins
Lignin
Indole alkaloid
Coumarins
Polyamines
Carotenoids
Acclimatization reactions
HSP20-like
chaperone
ABA￾dependent
gene
Boron￾dependent
gene
At2g41730
At3g22060
At5g51440
ANAC13
?
a b
1 2
PAL1
FLS
CHS
GLK2
ELIP
UVR8
UVR8-dependent reactions
Low energy flux UV-B
MPK3 MPK6 MPK4
FIG. 4 Pathways of regulating gene expression and plant responses depending on the intensity of UV-B radiation.3. UV-B signaling in the plant 43
ROS are formed during various stresses in response to negative environmental factors and 
activating MAPK. ROS are produced by chloroplasts, mitochondria, peroxisomes, microsomes 
and cell wall NADPH oxidases, peroxidases, while they are absorbed by antioxidants. The 
levels and types of ROS produced by various isoforms of Rboh (NADPH oxidase) determine 
the protective or destructive functions of these molecules. The MAPK (mitogen-activated 
protein kinase) cascade, composed of the three-level components MAPKKKs, MAPKKs, 
and MAPKs, carries out a series of phosphorylation reactions from an upstream receptor to 
a downstream target (transcription factors, other kinases, phosphatases and cytoskeleton￾associated proteins) (Jalmi and Sinha, 2015). Abiotic stimuli (salt, cold, wound and drought) 
activate the MKK2-MPK4/6 module in Arabidopsis by means of MEKK1 (mitogen-activated 
protein kinase 1). It is also known that resistance to UV rays in rice provides a cascade: H2O2
activates MPK3 and MPK6 (Mitogen-activated protein kinase 3 and 6) and is activated by the 
upstream kinase MKK6 (Mitogen-activated protein kinase 6). Exogenous phytohormone SA 
increases ROS production regardless of MPK3 activation (see Fig. 4, 3c).
The loss of MKP1 (MAP kinase phosphatase 1) in the mkp1 mutant leads to hypersensi￾tivity to stress induced by high UV-B flux (González Besteiro et al., 2011). Proteins interacting 
with MKP1, MPK3 and MPK6 are activated by stress UV-B flux and are hyperactivated in 
mkp1. In addition, other mutants mpk3 and mpk6 show increased resistance to UV-B. The 
MKP1-regulated MAPK pathway to stress response is independent of the UVR8 photore￾ceptor, but MKP1 promotes survival in artificial sunlight. González Besteiro et al. (2011) sug￾gested a joint action of two mechanisms in the formation of plant resistance to UV-B. One of 
the mechanisms is mediated by the action of UVR8 in plant acclimation to UV-B, while the 
other uses MKP1 to transmit stress signals arising from damage and inadequate UV-B repair 
and protection responses.
UV-B radiation regulates the expression of a large number of plant genes. This allows them 
to reprogram their transcriptome and re-regulate their metabolism, morphology and physiol￾ogy to adapt to changes in the radiation environment.
Transcriptome analysis revealed genes regulated by different UV-B flux densities, inde￾pendently and dependent on UVR8 and stress signaling. Of the total number of genes (639 
genes) induced in response to UV-B (3μmolm− 2 s
− 1
), 72 depend on UVR8. Accordingly, many 
genes are induced by the UVR8-independent pathway (O’Hara et al., 2019). The sensitivity 
of the genome to low UV-B flux density (0.3 and 1μmolm− 2 s
− 1
 for 4h), which initiates the 
expression of photomorphic genes, but does not activate nonspecific stress reactions, was also 
elucidated. According to each of the UV-B streams, 549 and 572 genes were activated.
Of interest are the data that of the 169 induced genes common to 3 UV-B fluxes (0.3, 1, and 
3 μmolm− 2 s
− 1
), 10% of genes are specific for an intermediate flux rate (UV-B 1 μmolm− 2 s
− 1
), 
while 33% and 49% of genes are specific for 0.3 and 3μmolm− 2 s
− 1
 treatments, respectively. 
At the same time, genes regulated by UVR8 are expressed at lower UV-B flux rates. At 
0.3 μmolm− 2 s
− 1
 UV-B, 28% of genes depend on UVR8. In contrast, at 3μmolm− 2 s
− 1
 UV￾B, only 6% of genes are UVR8-dependent. However, the above analysis shows that a sig￾nificant number of genes induced by low UV-B flux density are not regulated by UVR8. 
In A. thaliana, a UVR8-independent pathway regulating gene expression was characterized 
using the uvr8 mutant. O’Hara et  al. (2019) investigated a number of genes identified as 
UVR8-independent: ANAC13 (ARABIDOPSIS NAC DOMAIN CONTAINING PROTEIN 13), 
At5g51440 (putative HSP20-like chaperone), At3g22060 (gene expressed in response to abscisic acid) 44 2. Effect of UV-B radiation on plants growth, active constituents, and productivity
and At2g41730 (gene expressed in in the leaves of the rosette and reacts to high boron concentrations) 
(see Fig. 4, 2b). All four genes were induced by low energy flux UV-B: ANAC13, At2g41730, 
and At3g22060 were induced at 0.1 μmolm− 2 s
− 1
, similar to CHS, while At5g51440 was in￾duced at 0.2 μmolm− 2 s
− 1
. The maximum level of transcripts accumulated approximately 
6–12h after the start of UV-B exposure. This increase in expression was slower than the 
increase in expression of the UVR8-dependent transcription factor HY5 and CHS, which is 
downstream of the UV-B UVR8/HY5 pathway.
Expression of the gene encoding transcription factor ANAC13 is induced by UV-B (max 
310nm, 0.1μmolm− 2 s
− 1
), but does not depend on known photoreceptors (UVR8, CRY1-2, 
PHOT1-2, PHYA-B, PHYD-E) and morphogenetic factors COP1 and HY5/HYH (O’Hara 
et al., 2019). ANAC13 encodes a transcription factor containing the NAC domain. Proteins 
containing the NAC domain (NAM, ATAF1/2 and CUC2) are presumably involved in stress 
responses, plant growth and development.
Signaling processes initiated by UV-B stress treatment are reported to include DNA dam￾age signaling, ROS signaling, MAPK kinase activity, and wound/defense signaling mole￾cules (see Fig. 4, 3c). Hideg et al. (2013) emphasize the difference between constructive stress, 
called eustress, which promotes acclimatization, and destructive stress in UV-B responses. It 
is possible that UV-B signaling of even very low flux densities to plants that have not previ￾ously been exposed to UV-B is sufficient to activate “eustress” rather than “damaging stress” 
(distress), and that it is UV-B-induced eustress-reaction is at least partially independent of 
UVR8.
It has been shown that some of the genes that are sensitive to UV-B are regulated inde￾pendently of both UVR8 and stress signaling. This may be due to the activation of eustress 
responses that facilitate adaptation to changing conditions (O’Hara et al., 2019).
The use of multiple mechanisms mediating the response to low energy flux UV-B results in 
redundancy, which is common in photoreception and plant signaling as it permits key stimuli 
such as UV-B to be perceived and introduces flexibility in the response (O’Hara et al., 2019). 
It has been suggested that carbohydrate metabolism may also be an important function of 
genes regulated by UV-B signaling of stress-independent pathways.
In the process of life, the plants have developed highly effective mechanisms of adap￾tation to stressful conditions. During adaptation, environmental signals activate transcrip￾tion factors that express stress-sensitive genes. Transcription factors from the MYB family are 
involved in plant development and stress responses through interaction with the MYB cis 
elements in the promoters of target genes. In addition, the important role of MYB in the bio￾synthesis of secondary metabolites in plants, including anthocyanins, flavonols, and lignin, 
is noted. These functions determine the involvement of MYB in responses to abiotic stresses 
such as drought, salt, and cold (Wang et al., 2021).
MYB has been shown to play a dual role in both UV-B resistance and signaling (Wang 
et al., 2021). Exposing plants to strong UV-B radiation induces stress responses such as sup￾pression of photosynthesis and damage to DNA and other molecules. Plants synthesize hy￾droxycinnamic acid derivatives (synapate esters) and flavonoids that absorb UV-B, thereby 
protecting plants from the harmful effects of UV radiation (Jin et al., 2000). MYB4 is known 
as a key regulator of Arabidopsis UV tolerance due to its negative role in the biosynthesis of 
UV protective chemical compounds. MYB4 directly inhibits the transcription of the C4H
(cinnamate 4-hydroxylase) gene, a key enzyme in the biosynthesis of the UV-protective 4. Plants protection mechanisms from the negative effects of UV-B 45
hydroxycinnamate ester. UV-B light stimulates C4H expression by negatively regulating 
MYB4 expression (see Fig. 3). The loss-of-function mutant MYB4 showed resistance to UV-B 
due to an increased accumulation of hydroxycinnamate esters, while overexpression of 
MYB4 caused a decrease in the level of UV-B absorbing compounds, resulting in hypersen￾sitivity to UV-B (Jenkins, 2009). Expression and localization of MYB4 is well controlled. In 
addition, MYB4 can suppress MYB4 expression by binding to its own promoter. While the 
imported β-like protein, SAD2, interacts with MYB4 via the conserved GY/FDFLGL motif, 
facilitating the nuclear transport of MYB4 to regulate C4H expression. The sad2 mutant has 
an increased level of MYB4 in the cytoplasm (Zhao et al., 2007). MYB7, the closest homo￾logue of MYB4, is also involved in the repression of flavonol biosynthesis (Wang et al., 2021). 
Several genes involved in the biosynthesis of flavonols are activated, and the amount of the 
corresponding compounds increases in mutant myb7 plants (Fornalé et al., 2014).
The effect of UV-B on the plant reproductive system is expressed in genotoxic (through 
damage to the DNA of meristem cells) and photoinductive effects (through accelerated flow￾ering and differentiation of gametophytes) (Kravets et al., 2008). Irradiation with UV-B of bar￾ley seedlings affects the growth and development of the reproductive elements of the spike: 
it accelerates the differentiation of the sporogenic tissue of the anther and male gametophyte, 
which is accompanied by an increase in the asynchrony of microgametogenesis, heterogene￾ity of pollen grains, and an increase in the sterility of pollen grains. Deviations in the devel￾opment of pollen grains are often associated with insufficient synthesis of the cytoplasm in 
the microspore and vegetative cell, a decrease in the intensity of pollen grain growth and a 
violation of its specific polarity. With an increase in the UV-B dose, the number of disorders in 
the development of the male gametophyte also increases. There are accumulations of micro￾spores that stopped developing after being released from tetrads.
4. Plants protection mechanisms from the negative effects of UV-B
Plants are known to employ a number of strategies to counteract UV-B radiation, including 
increasing leaf thickness, increasing UV-B reflective properties of surfaces, and cellular levels 
of UV-B absorbing metabolites.
Prolonged exposure of plants to high fluxes of solar radiation upsets the balance between 
the absorbed light energy and the ability of its photochemical use, which leads to photoinhi￾bition and damage to plants. In such situations, limiting the absorption of light by the pho￾tosynthetic apparatus effectively increases the universal photoprotective mechanisms of the 
plant cell: regeneration of macromolecules, removal of ROS, and thermal dissipation of excess 
absorbed light energy.
Under stressful conditions associated with intense solar radiation, plants accumulate pig￾ments in the epidermis that can attenuate radiation in the UV and visible parts of the spec￾trum. This answer is very flexible and can happen in minutes or hours. There are four groups 
of photoprotective pigments: mycosporin-like amino acids, phenolic compounds (phenolic 
acids, flavonoids and anthocyanins), alkaloids (betalains) and carotenoids. Plants of different 
taxa can use pigments of different nature to protect against damage. Mycosporin-like amino 
acids are used for protection in lower plants, and phenolic compounds in higher plants. In 
addition, if plants are devoid of anthocyanins, then their function can be performed by other 46 2. Effect of UV-B radiation on plants growth, active constituents, and productivity
compounds, such as keto-carotenoids or betalains, which have similar spectral properties. 
Extratilakoid carotenoids, betalains, and anthocyanins play an important role not only in 
protecting plants from photodamage but also in long-term adaptation to lighting conditions 
(Solovchenko and Merzlyak, 2008).
An assessment of the UV-B-protective ability of phenolic compounds accumulated in the 
skin of fruits of two Malus domestica Borkh. varieties (Braeburn and Granny Smith) was carried 
out. The degree of UV-B induced damage to apple skin PSII correlated with quercetin glyco￾side content. Anthocyanins, a special group of water-soluble phenolic pigments, showed no 
additional effect in protection against UV-B (Solovchenko and Schmitz-Eiberger, 2003). This 
fact is probably associated with the predominant absorption of anthocyanins in the far UV-C 
and green visible light (520–530nm) (Solovchenko and Chivkunova, 2011).
However, another protection against UV-B of plant tissues is possible, associated with the 
creation of conditions for the reflection of UV radiation: a change in the reflectance of leaves 
and flowers. Valenta et al. (2020) found that plants protected from UV-B exposure reduced the 
reflectivity of UV-B. At the same time, plants exposed to increased levels of UV light tend to 
increase their UV-B reflection. Many species of vertebrate and invertebrate predators and pol￾linators readily distinguish between UV-B reflectivity and exhibit behavioral responses to it. 
Thus, with an increase in UV-B exposure to plants, the herbivorousness of insects decreases.
Beta vulgaris L. plants exhibit different defense mechanisms in response to UV-B irradi￾ation (9.126kJm− 2day− 1
). They increase antioxidant enzyme activity, total protein, com￾patible osmolytes, total free amino acids, and total betalain, which reduce stress. In plants 
exposed to UV radiation, a significant induction of the accumulation of salicylic acid (SA) 
is observed (Khan et al., 2015). The genes responsible for the resistance of Glycine max L. to 
UV-B (Glyma.02g017500 and Glyma.06g103200) have been found, which encode cryptochrome 
(CRY) and cryptochrome 1 (CRY1), which play a role in DNA repair during photoreactivation 
(Lee et al., 2021). It was shown that the CRY1 gene was expressed significantly higher in UV-B 
resistant G. max compared with susceptible G. max after 6h of UV-B irradiation.
4.1 UV-B and secondary metabolites
4.1.1 Flavonoids and UV-B
It is known that the biosynthesis of secondary metabolites plays an important role in plant 
protection and forms a protective shield against excessive UV-B radiation. In particular, the 
content of stilbenes and other phenolic compounds in plants increases sharply after UV-B ir￾radiation. Exogenous stilbenes increase the resistance of Arabidopsis thaliana to shock induced 
by UV-B radiation (1800μWcm− 2
) for 10min (Ogneva et al., 2021).
In response to high UV-B, there has been an increased biosynthesis of flavonoids (Fla) and 
related phenolic compounds in plants basil, blueberry leaves, broccoli, lettuce, and wheat. 
The accumulated phenolic resins act as UV-shielding pigments in the epidermal tissues and 
antioxidant to trap ROS produced by UV-B exposure.
Short-term exposure to UV-B prior to harvest increases phenols without adversely affect￾ing Ocimum basilicum growth and photosynthesis (Nascimento et al., 2020).
Excessive UV-B (253.7nm) with an intensity of 75μWcm− 2
 for 3  days can cause geno￾toxic effects in the Phoenix dactylifera. Analysis of the transcriptome under stress conditions 
revealed 10,249 and 12,426 genes, the expression of which was increased and suppressed, 4. Plants protection mechanisms from the negative effects of UV-B 47
respectively, compared with genes in the control. In addition, the differentially expressed 
genes included genes encoding transcription factors and genes related to chloroplasts and 
photosystem. After exposure to excess UV-B, changes were noted in the content of 50 me￾tabolites, including amino acids, Fla and phenylpropanoids. Maher et al. (2021) believe that 
amino acids can increase the function of ROS scavengers by synthesizing Fla in response to 
UV-B treatment.
4.1.2 Ascorbate and tocopherol and UV-B
Yao et al. (2015) evaluated the protective functions of phenylpropanoids. Increased syn￾thesis of phenylpropanoids was observed when the leaves of the Arabidopsis thaliana mutant 
plant were exposed to high levels of UV-B radiation. Ascorbate and tocopherol are important 
hydrophilic or lipophilic antioxidants in plants. They play a decisive role in the antioxidant 
defense system under the influence of UV-B radiation. It was shown that the loss of ascorbate 
(vtc1 and vtc2) or tocopherol (vte1) in Arabidopsis thaliana mutants caused a decrease in the 
content of phenylpropanoid and flavonol glycosidic compounds, as well as a decrease in the 
activity of superoxide dismutase and the general antioxidant capacity of cells in response 
to UV-B radiation. This resulted in higher oxidative stress as well as lower levels of photo￾synthetic pigments (carotenoids and chlorophylls) and CO2 assimilation rate than wild type 
under UV-B radiation. On the other hand, the loss of tocopherol in the vte1 mutants was com￾pensated for by an increase in zeaxanthin and anthocyanin, which provided the vte1 mutants 
with a higher heat dissipation ability in PS II and a higher antioxidant capacity than the vtc
mutants (Yao et al., 2015). Arabidopsis plants with impaired production of ascorbate, an ROS 
scavenger, are more sensitive to UV-B. This suggests that enhanced ascorbate synthesis helps 
plants cope with UV-B stress (Sztatelman et al., 2015).
4.1.3 Polyamines and UV-B
Polyamines (PA) are low-molecular-weight aliphatic nitrogenous bases containing two or 
more amino groups (Chen et al., 2019). In higher plants, PA is mainly present in free form. The 
main PAs in plants are putrescine (Put), spermidine (Spd), spermine (Spm), thermospermine 
(Tspm), and cadaverine (Cad). PAs are specifically distributed between tissues and organs in 
a plant. In particular, in leaves, Put levels were three times higher than Spd and Spm levels. At 
the same time, Spd was found to be the most abundant PA in other organs. Different types of 
PA have different localization within cells. It was found that, in carrot cells, Put accumulates 
in the cytoplasm, while Spm accumulates in the cell wall. It has been shown that the levels 
of expression of the spermidine synthase GtSPDS and spermine synthase GTSPMS genes 
temporarily increase from vegetative to reproductive phase of growth, and overexpression 
of these genes accelerates flowering (Imamura et al., 2015). PA regulate various physiological 
processes, including embryogenesis, organogenesis, flower development, fruit development 
and maturation, aging, and resistance to biotic and abiotic environmental factors. The latter 
function in plants is associated with the fact that free and conjugated forms of PA of the pu￾trescine series are part of the antioxidant system (Chen et al., 2019).
When studying the short-term effect of UV-B radiation (12.5kJm− 2
) on plants Thellungiella 
salsuginea, Salvia officinalis L., Plantago major L. and Geum urbanum L., the greatest role of Put 
in the protective response of plants to the action of UV radiation of the medium wavelength 
range was shown. The relative contribution of specific forms of PA to the defense response 48 2. Effect of UV-B radiation on plants growth, active constituents, and productivity
is primarily determined by the species belonging of the studied plants. Conjugated forms of 
PA can serve as a reserve for the rapid restoration of the required level of endogenous free 
forms of PA (Radyukina et al., 2017). The accumulation of free PA in the studied plants is 
organ-specific. This is manifested in various tendencies of changes in the level of both free 
and conjugated forms of PA in the roots and leaves of plants of a certain species in response 
to the action of UV-B radiation.
PA signaling is involved in direct interactions with various metabolic pathways and in 
complex hormonal cross-talk (Alcázar et al., 2010). PA and abscisic acid (ABA) crosstalk is as￾sociated with ROS, NO signaling, modulation of ion channel activity, and Ca2 + homeostasis. 
PA accumulation occurs in response to adverse environmental conditions, including UV-B 
and UV-C, ozone, heat, cold, drought, and other. PA functions in increasing plant resistance 
to stress, mainly by modulating ROS homeostasis, which is achieved through regulation of 
antioxidant systems or suppression of ROS production (Liu et al., 2015).
It was found that high Put and Spd levels inhibit the accumulation of IAA and gibberellin 
(GA). PAs play a vital role in the induction of cell division and promote regeneration in plant 
tissues and cell cultures (Chen et al., 2019). Exogenous Spd and Spm treatments can increase 
the PA content of cut flowers, slow down their aging. In particular, in Anthurium andraeanum, 
spraying with GA3 + Spm delayed the aging of cut flowers (Simões et al., 2018). Delayed leaf 
aging was found to be associated with higher Spm levels, decreased production ROS and 
increased NO levels (Sobieszczuk-Nowicka, 2017). It turned out that PA delay aging by inhib￾iting ethylene biosynthesis (Woo et al., 2013; Anwar et al., 2015).
PA play an important role in plant oxidative stress (Minocha et al., 2014), since they can 
increase the activity of various antioxidant enzymes in plants. Under temperature stress PA 
can promote photosynthesis and increase the antioxidant capacity and the ability of plants to 
regulate osmotic pressure. PA can bind to a phospholipid site of the cell membrane to prevent 
cytolysis and improve cold resistance (Li and He, 2012). Increased resistance to stress can be 
achieved by increasing the level of endogenous PA due to exogenous supply of PA or overex￾pression of PA biosynthesis genes.
4.1.4 Coumarins and UV-B
The medicinal properties of Mikania glomerata Spreng can be explained by the presence 
in the plant of coumarins (1-2-benzopyrones), secondary metabolites formed along the path 
of shikimic acid by condensation of two glucose metabolites, namely, phosphoenolpyruvate 
and erythroso-4-phosphate (Alves and Deschamps, 2019). Yang et al. (2016) observed that 
exposure of Clematis terniflora to high levels of UV-B radiation stimulated the synthesis of 
coumarin at concentrations that were twice that of plants grown in the shade.
4.1.5 γ-Aminobutyric acid and UV-B
High intensity UV-B irradiation with dark treatment resulted in the accumulation of sec￾ondary metabolites of the Clematis terniflora leaf, which has potential pharmaceutical value. 
The metabolites (carbohydrates, fatty acids, and amino acids and/or proteins) associated with 
stress, cell wall and amino acid metabolism gradually increased. An increase in the content 
of S-adenosylmethionine synthase and cysteine synthase, as well as the absorption activity of 
1,1-diphenyl-2-picrylhydrazyl, was shown. In addition, after UV-B irradiation, the content of 
dihydrolipoyl dehydrogenase/glutamate dehydrogenase and the content of γ-aminobutyric 4. Plants protection mechanisms from the negative effects of UV-B 49
acid increase. Taken together, these results suggest that UV-B radiation in combination with 
exposure in the dark causes the activation of the ROS trapping system and the γ-aminobutyric 
acid shunt pathway in C. terniflora leaves (Yang et al., 2016).
4.1.6 Indole alkaloids and UV-B
UV-B can cause accumulation of indole alkaloids. In particular, the accumulation of methyl 
ester of indole alkaloid (6-hydroxyl-1H-indol-3-yl-carboxylic acid) with cytotoxic activity in 
the leaves of Clematis terniflora DC was found. After exposure to high levels of UV-B radiation 
and subsequent incubation in the dark (Gao et al., 2016). At the same time, there is a decrease 
in photosynthesis and carbohydrate metabolism. In contrast, amino acid metabolism is acti￾vated by this binary stress. An increase in serine level and L-serine deaminase (L-SD) activity 
was noted, which probably leads to the accumulation of pyruvate, which, in turn, provides 
the metabolic pathway of shikimate. The content of metabolites involved in the biosynthesis 
pathway of indole (shikimate metabolism), anthranilate, indole and L-tryptophan increases. 
In addition, an increase in the activity of the enzymes L-SD and L-tryptophan synthase is 
observed (Gao et al., 2016).
4.2 Hormones and UV-B resistance of plants
Under the action of UV-B, endogenous growth regulators (phytohormones) coordinate 
growth and defense reactions in plants. The effects of UV-B on hormonal function are contro￾versial. UV-B suppresses growth hormones but increases stress hormone (Vanhaelewyn et al., 
2016). Stress hormones include jasmonates, salicylates, abscisic acid (ABA) and ethylene. The 
double-acting hormones include brassinosteroids and melatonin.
4.2.1 Brassinosteroids and UV-B
Liang et al. (2020) report the involvement of brassinosteroids (BR) in responses to the UV-B 
stress factor (see Fig. 5). BR signaling inhibits UV-B induced stress responses in plants by 
controlling the biosynthesis of flavonoids (Fla). Liang et al. (2020) show that BES1 (BRI1-EMS￾SUPPRESSOR 1), as a transcription factor, is involved in switching the growth program to the 
Flavonoid
biosynthesis
Growth
MYB111
- stimulation - inhibition
MYB11 MYB12
BES1
UV-B BR
FIG. 5 Crossing of the UV-B and brassinosteroids (BR) signaling pathways.50 2. Effect of UV-B radiation on plants growth, active constituents, and productivity
program for the formation of UV-B protective responses. At the same time, BES1 is involved 
in BR signaling by suppressing the expression of the genes of the transcription factors MYB11, 
MYB12 and MYB111, which activate Fla biosynthesis. In the presence of BR, BES1 binds di￾rectly to the promoters of these MYBs, suppressing their expression, thereby decreasing the 
accumulation of Fla and promoting growth. However, exposure to UV-B suppresses BES1 
expression, and thus promotes the accumulation of Fla.
4.2.2 Melatonin and UV-B
Melatonin (Mel, N-acetyl-5-methoxytryptamine) is another hormone involved in plant 
protection against various biotic and abiotic stresses, including UV-B stress. The direction of 
action of melatonin depends on the dose, intensity and quality of light (Golovatskaya and 
Boyko, 2020). Yao et al. (2020) show that Mel affects molecular signaling pathways, physi￾ological changes and resistance to UV-B stress in Arabidopsis. Exogenous and endogenous 
Mel affects the expression of genes for the UV-B signaling pathway. Experiments using the 
cop1-4 and hy5-215 mutants have shown that Mel not only acts as an antioxidant, promoting 
resistance to UV-B stress, but also regulates the expression of several key components of the 
UV-B signaling pathway, including COP1, transcription factors (HY5, HYH) and RUP1/2. 
The results of studies by Yao et al. (2020) show that Mel delays and then enhances the ex￾pression of COP1, HY5, HYH and RUP1/2 genes, which act as central effectors in the UV-B 
signaling pathway, thus regulating their effect on antioxidant systems to protect plants from 
stress caused by UV-B.
4.2.3 Gibberellins and UV-B
UV-B influences the growth of leaves of many plant species. For example, UV-B inhibits 
the growth of leaves in Zea mays. This decrease in leaf growth is a consequence of a decrease 
in cell production and a shortened growth zone (Fina et al., 2017). The relationship between 
observed inhibition of leaf growth and the expression of specific cell cycle and developmental 
genes, including growth regulatory factors and transcripts of proteins involved in various 
hormonal pathways. Interestingly, a decrease in the size of the growth zone correlates with 
a decrease in the concentration of GA19, the immediate precursor of active gibberellin, GA1
(Fina et al., 2017).
4.2.4 Ethylene and UV-B
It was studied the involvement of the signaling pathway of ethylene in the regulation 
of ABA accumulation during adaptation of wild-type Arabidopsis thaliana (WT) and mu￾tant spms1-1 that does not synthesize Spm to moderate 7kJm− 2
, high 14kJm− 2
, and lethal 
21kJm− 2
 dose UV-B radiation. It was found that UV-B induces an increase in ethylene release, 
accumulation of ABA and Put. Twofold decrease in resistance to moderate and high doses of 
UV-B in WT and spms1-1 plants with a blocked receptor of the ethylene signaling pathway by 
1-methylcyclopropene indicates the existence of an ethylene-regulated process involved in 
plant adaptation to UV-B radiation (Prudnikova et al., 2019).
4.2.5 Salicylic acid and UV-B
Elevated UV-B radiation deleteriously affects Oryza sativa L. yields. Salicylic acid (SA) treat￾ment regulates antioxidant levels, preventing oxidative damage to structural components of 4. Plants protection mechanisms from the negative effects of UV-B 51
cells. Application of SA (12.9gha− 1
) to leaves increased O. sativa yield under elevated UV-B 
(Mohammed and Tarpley, 2013). UV-B regulation of photosynthetic genes (Lhcb and psbA) 
and pathogenic (PR) genes (PR-1, PR-2 и PR-5) is via separate signal-transduction pathways 
(Surplus et al., 1998). UV-B radiation leads to the formation of ROS, which are necessary for 
UV-B-induced downregulation of the photosynthetic genes and up-regulation of PR genes. 
One of the ROS signaling pathways is associated with SA, which controls the level of PR pro￾teins in A. thaliana plants.
The UV-B dose 0.75kJm− 2
 decreased the cell division, and the UV-B dose to 1kJm− 2
 in￾duced the chromosomal aberrations (CAs) in root tip meristematic cells of Crepis capillaris. 
SA (10–4 M) had the protective effect on CA induction (Ranceliene and Vyšniauskienė, 2012).
In Hordeum vulgare L. cv. Granal plants exposed to sequential exposure to UV-B 
(24kJm− 2day− 1
 or 0.84Wm− 2
) and droughts (water potential 0.5MPa), administered sepa￾rately and together, caused, depending on time, an increase in SA content in roots and leaves 
(Bandurska and Cieślak, 2013).
UV affects resistance to tomato pathogens Pseudomonas syringae pv. DC3000 that is suscep￾tible to SA-mediated defenses (Escobar Bravo et al., 2019).
In the presence of UV-B (5kJm− 2day− 1
), exogenous SA significantly enhanced all aspects 
of growth and biomass accumulation in Pisum sativum L. plants. Exposure to UV-B radiation 
influenced stem height, leaf area, and growth rate. In addition, SA significantly increased net 
CO2 assimilation and slightly increased chlorophyll content, but did not affect chlorophyll 
fluorescence or protective compounds. Several significant relationships were found between 
the parameters studied. Plants grown in UV-B with SA had the most leaves, while plants 
grown in UV-B without SA had the least. Similarly, plants grown under SA control had the 
largest leaves, while plants grown under UV-B without SA had the smallest leaves. This study 
showed that UV-B has an adverse effect on P. sativum plants, and some of the deleterious ef￾fects of these stress factors can be mitigated by exogenous SA (Martel and Qaderi, 2016). SA 
has a crucial role in modulating the cell redox balance and protecting the plants from oxida￾tive damage. SA significantly reduced the salinity-caused effects on the overall performance 
of plants Brassica carinata and their antioxidant systems (Husen et al., 2018).
4.2.6 Jasmonates and UV-B
The protective role of JA under the influence of UV radiation has been shown (Raza et al., 
2020). The lack of UV-B-induced protection against herbivores in tobacco in jasmonate-free 
(JA) species suggests that JA signaling primarily confers resistance against herbivorous in￾sects. In contrast, in wild-type plants, this led to a high accumulation of phenylpropanoid 
derivatives to improve the defense mechanism of plants and an increase in the expression of 
genes that induce a reaction to a wound and genes induced by JA, such as trypsin proteinase 
inhibitor.
UV radiation enhanced Solanum lycopersicum resistance to Frankliniella occidentalis at the 
expense increased jasmonic acid-isoleucine (JA-Ile) and SA levels, as well as the expression of 
JA and SA-responsive genes, before thrips herbivory (Escobar Bravo et al., 2019).
Qi et al. (2018) established the role of JA in increasing plant resistance to lepidoptera larvae 
using A. thaliana, Nicotiana attuate, O. sativa, and Z. mays. In A. thaliana, UV-B enhanced plant 
defense against Spodoptera litura by increasing secondary metabolites via the JA and/or JA￾Ile pathways and the content of protective glucosinolate metabolites induced by herbivores.52 2. Effect of UV-B radiation on plants growth, active constituents, and productivity
Based on the available data, it can be concluded that under the action of several factors, 
cross-adaptation is observed, when the process of increasing the body's resistance to one 
factor occurs as a result of adaptation to a factor of a different nature (UV-B). In particular, 
the cross-adaptation of plants to the factors of injury and UV-B is based on the functioning 
of the mechanisms of regulation of the secondary metabolism and the oxidative status of the 
organism.
5. Applications of UV-B radiation in practice
5.1 UV-B and storage of agricultural products
Post-harvest technologies in agricultural production use sublethal doses of UV-B, which 
prevent yellowing (aging) of products during storage (Sztatelman et al., 2015).
5.2 UV-B and plant protection against pathogens
UV-B irradiation is used as an alternative to chemical treatments to reduce fungal infec￾tions in fruits of agricultural products, in particular pepper (Kasim and Kasim, 2018). UV-B 
(4.46kJm− 2
) not only reduces the degree of rotting, but also contributes to the preservation of 
the red color of the fruit. It is assumed that UV-B induces protective mechanisms, in particu￾lar, increases the level of polyamines in cells.
5.3 UV-B and cultivation
Research on plant resistance allows the selection of species and varieties for cultivation in 
areas contaminated with UV-B. For Beta vulgaris L., the same of growth inhibition was shown 
under the action of various ranges and doses of UV-B radiation. This makes it possible to rec￾ommend the investigated species for cultivation in areas with high doses of UV-B radiation 
(Rahimzadeh Karvansara and Razavi, 2019).
5.4 UV-B and plant breeding
The search for candidate genes responsible for the UV-B resistance of Glycine max L. pro￾vides valuable information for the selection of UV-B resistant varieties in a changing climate. 
Among these candidate genes, Glyma.02g017500 and Glyma.06g103200 are shown, which en￾code cryptochrome (CRY) and cryptochrome 1 (CRY1), respectively, which play an important 
role in DNA repair during photoreactivation (Lee et al., 2021).
5.5 UV-B and reconstruction of paleo dynamics of surface UV-B radiation
Pollen grains and spores are well preserved in fossils due to the highly stable biopolymer 
sporopollenin entering the outer wall (exine). Based on the chemical composition of pollen 
grains, Jardine et al. (2020) reconstructed the dynamics of surface UV-B radiation over the 
past 650 years. They found a statistically significant positive relationship between the content 
of UV-B absorbing compounds in pine pollen and simulated solar UV-B radiation.5. Applications of UV-B radiation in practice 53
5.6 UV-B and determination of the integrity of the ozone layer of the Earth
Mironov et  al. (2020) found that sphagnum inhibits growth when exposed to 286nm, 
the shortest wavelength of solar UV radiation that travels through the Earth's ozone layer. 
These data can be used to determine the carrying capacity of the Earth's ozone layer for trace 
amounts of UV-B at the shortest wavelengths not recorded by spectroradiometers.
5.7 UV-B and preservation of biocenoses
Studies of the state of lichens allow us to recommend a modification of the existing har￾vesting practice (Trest et al., 2015). In areas affected by ozone holes (Isla Navarino island, 
winter and spring), UV-B and PAR levels increase, contributing to damage to sensitive li￾chens and a change in the composition of their communities. With the continuous thinning 
of the forest, the situation is aggravated. Based on this, recommendations are being de￾veloped for loggers, which should not leave single trees, but their dense groups. This will 
contribute to the preservation of nitrogen-fixing cyanolichens and partially support the 
biocenosis.
5.8 UV-B and biosphere cycles
With wide distribution, lichens, mosses and bryophytes play an important role in the car￾bon and nitrogen cycles of the Earth's biosphere. For example, cyanolichens, which include 
cyanobacteria, usually convert atmospheric nitrogen into an accessible chemical form suit￾able for use by other organisms (Trest et al., 2015). With the destruction of the ozone layer 
by chlorofluorocarbon pollutants, the negative effect of UV-B on the organisms listed above 
increases and the biospheric cycles of substances are disrupted.
5.9 UV-B and pharmacology
UV-B can enhance the medicinal properties of plants by causing the accumulation of bio￾logically active substances. It has been shown that UV-B radiation causes the enrichment of 
plants with indole alkaloids, which are pharmaceutically significant substances. In particular, 
it was found that the methyl ester of the indole alkaloid (6-hydroxyl-1H-indol-3-yl) carbox￾ylic acid with cytotoxic activity accumulates in the leaves of Clematis terniflora DC. after expo￾sure to high levels of UV-B radiation and darkness (Gao et al., 2016).
5.10 UV-B and medicine
5.10.1. Based on the assessment of the photoprotective potential of the Viburnum grandiflorum
(VG) extract in the UV-B-induced responses of the culture of keratinocytes—the main 
cells of the human skin epidermis—of the HaCaT line (Liu et al., 2021), its maximum 
absorption was shown in the range from 240 to 320nm. After pretreatment with 
VG + UV-B and VG cells, stabilization of intracellular ROS levels and antioxidant 
enzyme activity is observed. This allows VG to be recommended against UV-B-induced 
photodamage.54 2. Effect of UV-B radiation on plants growth, active constituents, and productivity
5.10.2. DNA film is used as an alternative biocompatible insulating material for human 
wounds. It is formed as a result of changes in the chemical properties of DNA during 
absorption of ultraviolet radiation, while remaining optically transparent. DNA film can 
provide continuous wound monitoring without exposure to the external environment 
and protection from UV photodamage. It reduces the rate of evaporation of water from 
the skin, which promotes faster wound healing (Gasperini et al., 2017).
5.10.3. Animals without access to sunlight do not produce vitamin D 25-hydroxyvitamin 
D3 (25OHD3). In particular, Jakobsen et al. (2015) showed a decrease in its level in the 
milk of dairy cows. This decline can be prevented by exposing the animals to artificial 
UV-B (1, 2, 3, or 4h in 24 days). The maximum synthesis of the precursor of vitamin D3, 
previtamin D3, in the skin occurs at a wavelength of 295–300nm.
6. Conclusion
In the presence of constant UV-B radiation, the structure of plant communities can change 
significantly. UV-B sensitive species can gain a competitive advantage over resistant plant 
species because they have a wide range of responses that can enhance their fitness and repro￾duction in the community. Plants benefit from increased production of secondary metabo￾lites, changes in UV-B reflectivity, germination and propagation times.
The regulation of plants genes expression by UV-B depends on the energy flux and occurs 
in different pathways. Low UV-B fluxes can regulate gene expression through pathways asso￾ciated with the UV-B-absorbing photoreceptor, UVR8 (see Fig. 4, 1a). A small number of genes 
can be expressed at a wide range of UV-B flux density, and this may be associated with the 
activation of eustress responses (see Fig. 4, 2b), which contribute to adaptation to changing 
conditions. Together with that, exposure of plants to high energy density UV-B induces gene 
expression through stress-related signaling pathways (see Fig. 4, 3c), which are not specific 
for the UV-B stimulus. Low level of UV-B flux density modulates gene regulation for photo￾morphic reactions, circadian rhythms, infection tolerance and secondary metabolites biosyn￾thesis. Exposure to increased UV-B damages the photosynthetic and reproductive function 
of plants, leading to death. Research on plant resistance allows the selection of crop species 
and varieties for cultivation in areas contaminated with UV-B. At the same time, the study of 
plants cross-adaptation to different factors makes it possible to develop methods for increas￾ing UV-B-resistance and plant productivity.
References
Alcázar, R., Altabella, T., Marco, F., Bortolotti, C., Reymond, M., Koncz, C., et al., 2010. Polyamines: molecules with 
regulatory functions in plant abiotic stress tolerance. Planta. 231, 1237–1249.
Alves, L., Deschamps, C., 2019. Radiation levels of UV-A and UV-B on growth parameters and coumarin content in 
guaco. Ciência Rural. 49, e20190042.
Anwar, R., Mattoo, A.K., Handa, A.K., 2015. Polyamine interactions with plant hormones: crosstalk at several levels. 
Int. J. Hydrogen Energy. 38, 1039–1051.
Bandurska, H., Cieślak, M., 2013. The interactive effect of water deficit and UV-B radiation on salicylic acid accumu￾lation in barley roots and leaves. Environ Exp. Bot. 94, 9–18.Bergo, E., Segalla, A., Giacometti, G.M., Tarantino, D., Soave, C., Andreucci, F., et al., 2003. Role of visible light in 
the recovery of photosystem II structure and function from ultraviolet-B stress in higher plants. J Exp Bot. 54, 
1665–1673.
Binkert, M., Kozma-Bognár, L., Terecskei, K., De Veylder, L., Nagy, F., Ulm, R., 2014. UV-B-responsive association 
of the Arabidopsis bZIP transcription factor ELONGATED HYPOCOTYL5 with target genes, including its own 
promoter. Plant Cell. 26, 4200–4213.
Boyko, A., Greer, M., Kovalchuk, I., 2006. Acute exposure to UVB has a more profound effect on plant genome stabil￾ity than chronic exposure. Mut Res Fund Mol Mech Mutagen. 602, 100–109.
Brown, B.A., Cloix, C., Jiang, G.H., Kaiserli, E., Herzyk, P., Kliebenstein, D.J., et al., 2005. A UV-B-specific signaling 
component orchestrates plant UV protection. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 102, 18225–18230.
Caldwell, M.M., Bjorn, L.O., Bornman, J.F., Flint, S.D., Kulandaivelu, G., Teramura, A.H., et al., 1998. Effects of in￾creased solar ultraviolet radiation on terrestrial ecosystems. J Photochem Photobiol B. 46, 40–52.
Camacho, I.S., Theisen, A., Johannissen, L.O., Diaz-Ramos, L.A., Christie, J.M., et al., 2019. Native mass spectrometry 
reveals the conformational diversity of the UVR8 photoreceptor. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 116, 1116–1125.
Campi, M., D'Andrea, L., Emiliani, J., Casati, P., 2012. Participation of chromatin-remodeling proteins in the repair of 
ultraviolet-B-damaged DNA. Plant Physiol. 158, 981–995.
Chen, M., Chory, J., Fankhauser, C., 2004. Light signal transduction in higher plants. Annu Rev Genet. 38, 87–117.
Chen, Z., Jiang, H.B., Gao, K., Qiu, B.S., 2020. Acclimation to low ultraviolet-B radiation increases photosystem I 
abundance and cyclic electron transfer with enhanced photosynthesis and growth in the cyanobacterium Nostoc 
sphaeroides. Environ Microbiol. 22, 183–197.
Chen, D., Shao, Q., Yin, L., Younis, A., Zheng, B., 2019. Polyamine function in plants: metabolism, regulation on de￾velopment, and roles in abiotic stress responses. Front. Plant Sci. 9, 1945.
Christie, J.M., Arvai, A.S., Baxter, K.J., Heilmann, M., Pratt, A.J., O'Hara, A., et al., 2012. Plant UVR8 photoreceptor 
senses UV-B by tryptophan-mediated disruption of cross-dimer salt bridges. Science. 335, 1492–1496.
Cloix, C., Kaiserli, E., Heilmann, M., Baxter, K.J., Brown, B.A., O’Hara, A., et al., 2012. C-terminal region of the UV-B 
photoreceptor UVR8 initiates signaling through interaction with the COP1 protein. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 109, 
16366–16370.
De Gruijl, F.R., 2002. Photocarcinogenesis: UVA vs. UV-B radiation. Skin Pharmacol Physiol. 15, 316–320.
Deepti, Bachheti, A.J., Chauhan, K., Bachheti, R.K., Husen, H., 2022. Impact of UV radiation on the growth and 
pharmaceutical properties of medicinal plants. In: Husen, A. (Ed.), Environmental Pollution and Medicinal Plants. 
CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, pp. 47–64. https://doi.org/10.1201/9781003178866-3.
Dotto, M., Gómez, M.S., Soto, M.S., Casati, P., 2018. UV-B radiation delays flowering time through changes in the 
PRC2 complex activity and miR156 levels in Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant Cell Environ. 41, 1394–1406.
Du, M., Wang, Y., Chen, H., Han, R., 2020. Actin filaments mediated root growth inhibition by changing their distri￾bution under UV-B and hydrogen peroxide exposure in Arabidopsis. Biol Res. 53, 54.
Escobar Bravo, R., Chen, G., Grosser, K., Van Dam, N.M., Leiss, K.A., Klinkhamer, P.G.L., 2019. Ultraviolet radiation 
enhances salicylic acid-mediated defense signaling and resistance to Pseudomonas syringae DC3000 in a jasmonic 
acid-deficient tomato mutant. Plant Signal Behav. 14, e1581560.
Falcone Ferreyra, M.L., Casadevall, R., D'Andrea, L., AbdElgawad, H., Beemster, G.T., Casati, P., 2016. AtPDCD5 
plays a role in programmed cell death after UV-B exposure in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol. 170, 2444–2460.
Favory, J.-J., Stec, A., Gruber, H., Rizzini, L., Oravecz, A., Funk, M., et al., 2009. Interaction of COP1 and UVR8 regu￾lates UV-B-induced photomorphogenesis and stress acclimation in Arabidopsis. EMBO J. 28, 591–601.
Fedina, I.S., Grigorova, I.D., Georgieva, K.M., 2003. Response of barley seedlings to UV-B radiation as affected by 
NaCl. J Plant Physiol. 160, 205–208.
Fina, J., Casadevall, R., AbdElgawad, H., Prinsen, E., Markakis, M.N., Beemster, G.T.S., et al., 2017. UV-B Inhibits leaf 
growth through changes in growth regulating factors and gibberellin levels. Plant Physiol. 174, 1110–1126.
Fornalé, S., Lopez, E., Salazar-Henao, J.E., Fernández-Nohales, P., Rigau, J., Caparros-Ruiz, D., 2014. AtMYB7, a new 
player in the regulation of UV-sunscreens in Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant Cell Physiol. 55, 507–516.
Frohnmeyer, H., Staiger, D., 2003. Ultraviolet-B radiation-mediated responses in plants. Balancing damage and pro￾tection. Plant Physiol. 133, 1420–1428.
Galvão, R.M., Li, M., Kothadia, S.M., Haskel, J.D., Decker, P.V., van Buskirk, E.K., et al., 2012. Photoactivated phyto￾chromes interact with HEMERA and promote its accumulation to establish photomorphogenesis in Arabidopsis. 
Gen. Dev. 26, 1851–1863.
References 5556 2. Effect of UV-B radiation on plants growth, active constituents, and productivity
Gao, C., Yang, B., Zhang, D., Chen, M., Tian, J., 2016. Enhanced metabolic process to indole alkaloids in Clematis terni￾flora DC. after exposure to high level of UV-B irradiation followed by the dark. BMC Plant Biol. 16, 231.
Gasperini, A.E., Sanchez, S., Doiron, A.L., Lyles, M., German, G.K., 2017. Non-ionising UV light increases the optical 
density of hygroscopic self assembled DNA crystal films. Sci Rep. 7, 6631.
Gehrke, C., Johanson, U., Callaghan, T.V., Chadwick, D., Robinson, C.H., 1995. The impact of enhanced ultraviolet-B 
radiation on litter quality and decomposition processes in Vaccinium leaves from the Subarctic. Oikos. 72, 213–222.
Golovatskaya, I.F., Boyko, E.V., 2020. Melatonin and the transmission of light and auxin signals in plants. In: Baluška, 
F., Mukherjee, S., Ramakrishna, A. (Eds.), Neurotransmitters in Plant Signaling and Communication. Signaling 
and Communication in Plants, Springer, Cham, pp. 189–211.
Golovatskaya, I.F., Karnachuk, R.A., 2015. Role of green light in physiological activity of plants. Russian J Plant 
Physiol. 62, 727–740.
González Besteiro, M.A., Bartels, S., Albert, A., Ulm, R., 2011. Arabidopsis MAP kinase phosphatase 1 and its target 
MAP kinases 3 and 6 antagonistically determine UV-B stress tolerance, independent of the UVR8 photoreceptor 
pathway. Plant J. 68, 727–737.
Hall, R.S.B., Bornman, J.F., Björn, L.O., 2002. UV-induced changes in pigment content and light penetration in the 
fruticose lichen Cladonia arbuscula ssp. mitis. J Photochem Photobiol B. 66, 13–20.
Heijde, M., Ulm, R., 2013. Reversion of the Arabidopsis UV-B photoreceptor UVR8 to the homodimeric ground state. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 110, 1113–1118.
Hideg, E., Jansen, M.A., Strid, A., 2013. UV-B exposure, ROS, and stress: inseparable companions or loosely linked 
associates? Trends Plant Sci. 18, 107–115.
Huang, X., Yang, P., Ouyang, X., Chen, L., Deng, X.W., 2014. Photoactivated UVR8-COP1 module determines photo￾morphogenic UV-B signaling output in Arabidopsis. PLoS Genetics. 10, e1004218.
Hunt, J., Mcneil, D., 1998. Nitrogen status affects UV-B sensitivity of cucumber. Funct Plant Biol. 25, 79–86.
Husen, A., 2021a. Harsh Environment and Plant Resilience (Molecular and Functional Aspects). Springer Nature 
Switzerland AG, Cham, Switzerland. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-65912-7.
Husen, A., 2021b. Plant Performance Under Environmental Stress (Hormones, Biostimulants and Sustainable 
Plant Growth Management). Springer Nature Switzerland AG, Cham, Switzerland. https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-030-78521-5.
Husen, A., Iqbal, M., Sohrab, S.S., Ansari, M.K.A., 2018. Salicylic acid alleviates salinity-caused damage to foliar func￾tions, plant growth and antioxidant system in Ethiopian mustard (Brassica carinata A. Br.). Agric Food Secur. 7, 44.
Imamura, T., Fujita, K., Tasaki, K., Al, E., 2015. Characterization of spermidine synthase and spermine synthase—the 
polyamine-synthetic enzymes that induce early flowering in Gentiana triflora. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 
463, 781–786.
Ito, S., Song, Y.H., Imaizumi, T., 2012. LOV domain-containing F-box proteins: light-dependent protein degradation 
modules in Arabidopsis. Mol. Plant. 5, 573–582.
Jakobsen, J., Jensen, S.K., Hymøller, L., Andersen, E.W., Kaas, P., Burild, A., et al., 2015. Short communication: arti￾ficial ultraviolet B light exposure increases vitamin D levels in cow plasma and milk. J. Dairy Sci. 98, 6492–6498.
Jalmi, S.K., Sinha, A.K., 2015. ROS mediated MAPK signaling in abiotic and biotic stress-striking similarities and 
differences. Front. Plant Sci. 6, 769.
Jardine, P.E., Fraser, W.T., Gosling, W.D., Roberts, C.N., Eastwood, W.J., Lomax, B.H., 2020. Proxy reconstruction of 
ultraviolet-B irradiance at the Earth’s surface, and its relationship with solar activity and ozone thickness. The 
Holocene. 30, 155–161.
Jenkins, G.I., 2009. Signal transduction in responses to UV-B radiation. Annu. Rev. Plant Biol. 60, 407–431.
Jiang, Y., Rabbi, M., Kim, M., Ke, C., Lee, W., Clark, R.L., et al., 2009. UVA generates pyrimidine dimers in DNA 
directly. Biophys J. 96, 1151–1158.
Jin, H., Cominell, I.E., Bailey, P., Parr, A., Mehrtens, F., Jones, J., et al., 2000. Transcriptional repression by AtMYB4 
controls production of UV-protecting sunscreens in Arabidopsis. EMBO J. 19, 6150–6161.
John, C.F., Morris, K., Jordan, B.R., Thomas, B., A-H-Mackerness, S., 2001. Ultraviolet-B exposure leads to up￾regulation of senescence-associated genes in Arabidopsis thaliana. J Exp Bot. 52, 1367–1373.
Kagawa, T., Sakai, T., Suetsugu, N., Oikawa, K., Ishiguro, S., Kato, T., et al., 2001. Arabidopsis NPL1: a phototropin 
homolog controlling the chloroplast high-light avoidance response. Science. 291, 21384–21391.
Kaiserli, E., Jenkins, G.I., 2007. UV-B promotes rapid nucleartranslocation of the Arabidopsis UV-B-specific signaling 
component UVR8 and activates its function in the nucleus. Plant Cell. 19, 2662–2673.Kakani, V.G., Reddy, K.R., Zhao, D., Gao, W., 2004. Senescence and hyperspectral reflectance of cotton leaves exposed 
to ultraviolet‐B radiation and carbon dioxide. Physiol Plant. 121, 250–257.
Kasim, M.U., Kasim, R., 2018. The effects of ultraviolet B (UV-B) irradiation on color quality and decay rate of Capia 
pepper during postharvest storage. Food Sci. Technol. Campinas. 38, 363–368.
Kataria, S., Guruprasad, K.N., 2018. Interaction of cytokinins with UV-B (280-315nm) on the expansion growth of 
cucumber cotyledons. Horticult Int J. 2, 46–54.
Kataria, S., Jain, M., Rastogi, A., Brestic, M., 2021. Static magnetic field treatment enhanced photosynthetic perfor￾mance in soybean under supplemental ultraviolet-B radiation. Photosynth Res.
Khan, M.I., Fatma, M., Per, T.S., Anjum, N.A., Khan, N.A., 2015. Salicylic acid-induced abiotic stress tolerance and 
underlying mechanisms in plants. Front Plant Sci. 6, 462.
Kimura, M., Yamamoto, Y.Y., Seki, M., Sakurai, T., Sato, M., Abe, T., et al., 2003. Identification of Arabidopsis genes 
regulated by high light-stress using cDNA microarray. Photochem Photobiol. 77, 226–233.
Kliebenstein, D.J., Lim, J.E., Landry, L.G., Last, R.L., 2002. Arabidopsis UVR8 regulates ultraviolet-B signal transduc￾tion and tolerance and contains sequence similarity to human Regulator of Chromatin Condensation 1. Plant 
Physiol. 130, 234–243.
Kravets, E.A., Grodzinsky, D.M., Gushcha, N.I., 2008. The influence of UV-B radiation on reproductive function of 
Hordeum vulgare L. plants. Cyt Gen. 5, 9–15.
Kryvokhyzha, M., Libantova, Y., Rashydov, N., 2019. Influence of short-wavelenth ultraviolet light on genes expres￾sion in Arabidopsis thaliana plants. Biotechnologia Acta. 12, 57–66.
Kusano, M., Tohge, T., Fukushima, A., Kobayashi, M., Hayashi, N., Otsuki, H., et al., 2011. Metabolomics reveals com￾prehensive reprogramming involving two independent metabolic responses of Arabidopsis to UV-B light. Plant J. 
67, 354–369.
Lake, J.A., Field, K.J., Davey, M.P., Beerling, D.J., Lomax, B.H., 2009. Metabolomic and physiological responses reveal 
multiphasic acclimation of Arabidopsis thaliana to chronic UV radiation. Plant Cell Env. 32, 1377–1389.
Lee, T., Kim, K.D., Kim, J.M., Shin, I., Heo, J., Jung, J., et al., 2021. Genome-wide association study for ultraviolet-B 
resistance in soybean (Glycine max L.). Plants (Basel). 10, 1335.
Li, Y., He, J., 2012. Advance in metabolism and response to stress of polyamines in plant. Acta Agric. Boreali Sinica. 
27, 240–245.
Li, H., Li, Y., Deng, H., Sun, X., Wang, A., Tang, X., et al., 2018. Tomato UV-B receptor SlUVR8 mediates plant accli￾mation to UV-B radiation and enhances fruit chloroplast development via regulating SlGLK2. Sci Rep. 8, 6097.
Li, Z., Wakao, S., Fischer, B.B., Niyogi, K.K., 2009. Sensing and responding to excess light. Annu. Rev. Plant Biol. 60, 
239–260.
Liang, T., Mei, S., Shi, C., Yang, Y., Peng, Y., Ma, L., et al., 2018. UVR8 interacts with BES1 and BIM1 to regulate tran￾scription and photomorphogenesis in Arabidopsis. Dev. Cell. 44, 512–523.
Liang, T., Shi, C., Peng, Y., Tan, H., Xin, P., Yang, Y., et al., 2020. Brassinosteroid-activated BRI1-EMS-SUPPRESSOR 1 
inhibits flavonoid biosynthesis and coordinates growth and UV-B stress responses in plants. Plant Cell. tpc.00048.
Lin, L., Dong, H., Yang, G., Yin, R., 2020. The C-terminal 17 amino acids of the photoreceptor UVR8 is involved in the 
fine-tuning of UV-B signaling. JIPB. 62, 1327–1340.
Liscum, E., Hodgson, D.W., Campbell, T.J., 2003. Blue light signaling through the cryptochromes and phototropins. 
So that's what the blues is all about. Plant Physiol. 133, 1429–1436.
Liu, Y., Liu, J., Abozeid, A., Wu, K.-X., Guo, X.-R., Mu, L.-Q., et al., 2020. UV-B radiation largely promoted the trans￾formation of primary metabolites to phenols in Astragalus mongholicus seedlings. Biomolecules. 10, 504.
Liu, J.-H., Wang, W., Wu, H., Gong, X., Moriguchi, T., 2015. Polyamines function in stress tolerance: from synthesis 
to regulation. Front. Plant Sci. 6, 827.
Liu, H., Zhang, H., Dang, M., Lin, Y., Yan, H., 2021. Protective effect of Viburnum grandiflorum against ultraviolet-B 
radiation-induced cellular and molecular changes in human epidermal keratinocytes. Phcog Mag. 17, 200–206.
Maher, M., Ahmad, H., Nishawy, E., Li, Y., Luo, J., 2021. Novel transcriptome study and detection of metabolic vari￾ations in UV-B-treated date palm (Phoenix dactylifera cv. Khalas). Int J Mol Sci. 22, 2564.
Martel, A.B., Qaderi, M.M., 2016. Does salicylic acid mitigate the adverse effects of temperature and ultraviolet-B 
radiation on pea (Pisum sativum) plants? Environ Exp Bot. 122, 39–48.
Maulión, E., Gomez, M.S., Bustamante, C.A., Casati, P., 2019. AtCAF-1 mutants show different DNA damage re￾sponses after ultraviolet-B than those activated by other genotoxic agents in leaves. Plant Cell Environ. 42, 
2730–2745.
References 5758 2. Effect of UV-B radiation on plants growth, active constituents, and productivity
Minocha, R., Majumdar, R., Minocha, S.C., 2014. Polyamines and abiotic stress in plants: a complex relationship. 
Front. Plant Sci. 5, 175.
Mironov, V.L., Kondratev, A.Y., Mironova, A.V., 2020. Sphagnum growth as an indicator of wavelength-specific UV-B 
penetration through the ozone layer. Ecological Indicators. 116, 106430.
Moglich, A., Moffat, K., 2010. Engineered photoreceptors as novel optogenetic tools. Photochem Photobiol. Sci. 9, 
1286–1300.
Mohammed, A.R., Tarpley, L., 2013. Effects of enhanced ultraviolet-B (UV-B) radiation and antioxidative-type plant 
growth regulators on rice (Oryza sativa L.) leaf photosynthetic rate, photochemistry and physiology. J. Agric. Sci. 
5, 115–128.
Nascimento, L.B.D.S., Brunetti, C., Agati, G., Iacono, C.L., Detti, C., Giordani, E., et al., 2020. Short-term pre-harvest 
UV-B supplement enhances the polyphenol content and antioxidant capacity of Ocimum basilicum leaves during 
storage. Plants. 9, 797.
Nguyen, K.H., Chollet-Krugler, M., Gouault, N., Tomasi, S., 2013. UV-protectant metabolites from lichens and their 
symbiotic partners. Natural Products Reports. 30, 1490–1508.
O’Hara, A., Headland, L.R., Díaz-Ramos, L.A., Morales, L.O., Strid, А., Jenkins, G.I., 2019. Regulation of Arabidopsis
gene expression by low fluence rate UV-B independently of UVR8 and stress signaling. Photochem Photobiol Sci. 
18, 1675–1684.
O’Hara, A., Jenkins, G.I., 2012. In vivo function of tryptophans in the Arabidopsis UV-B photoreceptor UVR8. Plant 
Cell. 24, 3755–3766.
Ogneva, Z.V., Volkonskaia, V.V., Dubrovina, A.S., Suprun, A.R., Aleynova, O.A., Kiselev, K.V., 2021. Exogenous stil￾benes improved tolerance of Arabidopsis thaliana to a shock of ultraviolet B radiation. Plants (Basel, Switzerland). 
10, 1282.
Oravecz, A., Baumann, A., Máté, Z., Brzezinska, A., Molinier, J., Oakeley, E.J., et al., 2006. Constitutively photomor￾phogenic1 is required for the UV-B response in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell. 18, 1975–1990.
Ortega-Hernández, E., Nair, V., Welti-Chanes, J., Cisneros-Zevallos, L., Jacobo-Velázquez, D.A., 2019. Wounding and 
UVB light synergistically induce the biosynthesis of phenolic compounds and ascorbic acid in red prickly pears 
(Opuntia ficus-indica cv. Rojo Vigor). Int J Mol Sci. 20, 5327.
Osterlund, M.T., Hardtke, C.S., Wei, N., Deng, X.W., 2000. Targeted destabilization of HY5 during light-regulated 
development of Arabidopsis. Nature. 25, 462–466.
Palma, C.F.F., Castro-Alves, V., Morales, L.O., Rosenqvist, E., Ottosen, C.O., Strid, A., 2021. Spectral composition of 
light affects sensitivity to UV-B and photoinhibition in cucumber. Front. Plant Sci. 11, 610011.
Podolec, R., Ulm, R., 2018. Photoreceptor-mediated regulation of the COP1/SPA E3 ubiquitin ligase. Curr Opin Plant 
Biol. 45, 18–25.
Pradhan, M., Nayak, L., Joshi, P., Mohapatra, P., Patro, L., Biswal, B., et al., 2008. Developmental phase-dependent 
photosynthetic responses to ultraviolet-B radiation: damage, defence, and adaptation of primary leaves of wheat 
seedlings. Photosynthetica. 46, 370–377.
Prudnikova, O.N., Rakitina, T.Y., Karyagin, V.V., Rakitin, V.Y., 2019. Adaptation to UV-B radiation in the ontogenesis 
of Arabidopsis thaliana. The participation of ethylene. ABA and polyamines. Ontogenesis. 50, 319–326 (In Russian).
Qi, J., Zhang, M., Lu, C., Hettenhausen, C., Tan, Q., Cao, G., et al., 2018. Ultraviolet-B enhances the resistance of mul￾tiple plant species to lepidopteran insect herbivory through the jasmonic acid pathway. Sci Rep. 8, 1–9.
Qian, C., Chen, Z., Liu, Q., Mao, W., Chen, Y., Tian, W., et al., 2020. Coordinated transcriptional regulation by the 
UV-B photoreceptor and multiple transcription factors for plant UV-B responses. Mol. Plant. 13, 777–792.
Radyukina, N.L., Ivanov, Y.V., Mapelli, S., Mikheeva, L.E., Karbysheva, E.A., 2017. The effect of medium wave ultra￾violet radiation on the content and spectrum of polyamines in leaves and roots of wild-growing plants. Bulletin of 
the Moscow University. Series 16. Biology. 72, 179–183.
Rahimzadeh Karvansara, P., Razavi, S.M., 2019. Physiological and biochemical responses of sugar beet (Beta vulgaris
L.) to ultraviolet-B radiation. PeerJ. 7, e6790.
Rai, N., Morales, L.O., Aphalo, P.J., 2021. Perception of solar UV radiation by plants: photoreceptors and mecha￾nisms. Plant Physiol. 186, 1382–1396.
Ranceliene, V., Vyšniauskienė, R., 2012. Modification of UV-B radiation effect on Crepis capillaris by antioxidant and 
environmental conditions. Emirates J. Food Agric. 24, 614–620.
Raza, A., Charagh, S., Zahid, Z., Mubarik, M.S., Javed, R., Siddiqui, M.H., et al., 2020. Jasmonic acid: a key frontier in 
conferring abiotic stress tolerance in plants. Plant Cell Reports. 8, 1513–1541.Rizzini, L., Favory, J.J., Cloix, C., Faggionato, D., O'Hara, A., Kaiserli, E., et  al., 2011. Perception of UV-B by the 
Arabidopsis UVR8 protein. Science. 332, 103–106.
Rozema, J., Van De Staij, J., Bjorn, L.-O., Caldwell, M., 1997. UV-B as an environmental factor in plant life: stress and 
regulation. Trends Ecol Evol. 12, 22–28.
Sarvikas, P., Hakala, M., Pätsikkä, E., Tyystjärvi, T., Tyystjärvi, E., 2006. Action spectrum of photoinhibition in leaves 
of wild type and npq1-2 and npq4-1 mutants of Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant Cell Physiol. 47, 391–400.
Shornikov, D.G., Abyzov, V.V., 2011. Effect of ultraviolet radiation on strawberry and actinidia’s genotypes photosyn￾thetic activity. Tomsk State University Journal of Biology. 19, 1373–1376 (In Russian).
Simões, A.D.N., Diniz, N.B., Vieira, M.R.D.S., Ferreira-Silva, S.L., da Silva, M.B., Minatel, I.O., et al., 2018. Impact 
of GA3 and spermine on postharvest quality of anthurium cut flowers (Anthurium andraeanum) cv. Arizona. Sci. 
Horticult. 241, 178–186.
Simontacchi, M., Galatro, A., Ramos-Artuso, F., Santa-María, G.E., 2015. Plant survival in a changing environment: 
the role of nitric oxide in plant responses to abiotic stress. Front Plant Sci. 6, 977.
Singh, S., Agrawal, S.B., Agrawal, M., 2014. UVR8 mediated plant protective responses under low UV-B radiation 
leading to photosynthetic acclimation. J Photochem Photobiol B. 137, 67–76.
Sobieszczuk-Nowicka, E., 2017. Polyamine catabolism adds fuel to leaf senescence. Amino Acids. 49, 49–56.
Solhaug, K.A., Gauslaa, Y., Nybakken, L., Bilger, W., 2003. UV-induction of sun-screening pigments in lichens. New 
Phytologist. 158, 91–100.
Solovchenko, A.E., Chivkunova, O.B., 2011. Physiological role of anthocyanin accumulation in common hazel juve￾nile leaves. Russian J Plant Physiol. 58, 674–680.
Solovchenko, A.E., Merzlyak, M.N., 2008. Screening of visible and UV radiation as a photoprotective mechanism in 
plants. Russian J Plant Physiol. 55, 719–737.
Solovchenko, A., Schmitz-Eiberger, M., 2003. Significance of skin flavonoids for UV-B-protection in apple fruits. J 
Exp Bot. 54, 1977–1984.
SORCE, 2020. Solar Radiation and Climate Experiment. https://lasp.colorado.edu/home/sorce/.
Soule, T., Stout, V., Swingley, W.D., Meeks, J.C., Garcia-Pichel, F., 2007. Molecular genetics and genomic analysis of 
scytonemin biosynthesis in Nostoc punctiforme ATCC 29133. J Bacteriol. 189, 4465–4472.
Stracke, R., Favory, J.J., Gruber, H., Bartelniewoehner, L., Bartels, S., Binkert, M., et al., 2010. The Arabidopsis bZIP 
transcription factor HY5 regulates expression of the PFG1/MYB12 gene in response to light and ultraviolet-B 
radiation. Plant Cell Environ. 33, 88–103.
STRING, 2022. Version: 11.5. https://string-db.org/cgi/network?taskId=bFixOidIiXin&sessionId=bp4PpzH6Z4eI.
Suchar, V.A., Robberecht, R., 2018. Integration and scaling of UV-B radiation effects on plants: the relative sensitivity 
of growth forms and interspecies interactions. J Plant Ecol. 11, 656–670.
Surplus, S.L., Jordan, B.R., Murphy, A.M., Carr, J.P., Thomas, B., Mackerness, S.A.-H., 1998. Ultraviolet-B-induced 
responses in Arabidopsis thaliana: role of salicylic acid and reactive oxygen species in the regulation of transcripts 
encoding photosynthetic and acidic pathogenesis-related proteins. Plant Cell Environ. 21, 685–694.
Suyono, E.A., Pradani, L., Muavatun, U., Habiba, R.N., Rohma, E.F., 2015. Combination of blue, red, white, and 
ultraviolet lights for increasing carotenoids and biomass of microalga Haematococcus pluvialis. Procedia Environ. 
Sci. 28, 399–405.
Sztatelman, O., Grzyb, J., Gabrys, H., Banas, A.K., 2015. The effect of UV-B on Arabidopsis leaves depends on light 
conditions after treatment. BMC Plant Biology. 15, 281.
Tilbrook, K., Arongaus, A.B., Binkert, M., Heijde, M., Yin, R., Ulm, R., 2013. The UVR8 UV-B photoreceptor: percep￾tion, signaling and response. Arabidopsis Book. 11, e0164.
Tissot, N., Ulm, R., 2020. Cryptochrome-mediated blue-light signalling modulates UVR8 photoreceptor activity and 
contributes to UV-B tolerance in Arabidopsis. Nat Commun. 11, 1323.
Trest, M.T., Will-wolf, S., Keuler, R., Shay, N., Hill, K., Studer, A., et al., 2015. Potential impacts of UV exposure on 
lichen communities: a pilot study of Nothofagus dombeyi trunks in southernmost chile. Ecosystem Health and 
Sustainability. 1, 4.
Ulm, R., Baumann, A., Oravecz, A., Máté, Z., Adám, E., Oakeley, E.J., et al., 2004. Genome-wide analysis of gene 
expression reveals function of the bZIP transcription factor HY5 in the UV-B response of Arabidopsis. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci USA. 101, 1397–1402.
Valenta, K., Dimac-Stohl, K., Baines, F., Smith, T., Piotrowski, G., Hill, N., et al., 2020. Ultraviolet radiation changes 
plant color. BMC Plant Biol. 20, 253.
References 5960 2. Effect of UV-B radiation on plants growth, active constituents, and productivity
Vanhaelewyn, L., Prinsen, E., Van Der Straeten, D., Vandenbussche, F., 2016. Hormone controlled UV-B responses in 
plants. J Exp Bot. 67, 4469–4482.
Wang, X., Niu, Y., Zheng, Y., 2021. Multiple functions of MYB transcription factors in abiotic stress responses. Int. J. 
Mol. Sci. 22, 6125.
Woo, H.R., Kim, H.J., Nam, H.G., Lim, P.O., 2013. Plant leaf senescence and death-regulation by multiple layers of 
control and implications for aging in general. J. Cell Sci. 126, 4823–4833.
Wu, M., Grahn, E., Eriksson, L.A., Strid, А., 2011. Computational evidence for the role of Arabidopsis thaliana UVR8 
as UV-B photoreceptor and identification of its chromophore amino acids. Journal of Chemical Information and 
Modeling. 51, 1287–1295.
Wu, D., Hu, Q., Yan, Z., Chen, W., Yan, C., Huang, X., et al., 2012. Structural basis of ultraviolet-B perception by 
UVR8. Nature. 484, 214–219.
Yadav, A., Singh, D., Lingwan, M., Yadukrishnan, P., Masakapalli, S.K., Datta, S., 2020. Light signaling and UV-B￾mediated plant growth regulation. JIPB. 62, 1270–1292.
Yang, B., Wang, X., Gao, C., Chen, M., Guan, Q., Tian, J., et al., 2016. Proteomic and metabolomic analyses of leaf from 
Clematis terniflora DC. exposed to high-level ultraviolet-B irradiation with dark treatment. Journal of proteome 
research. 15, 2643–2657.
Yang, Y., Zhang, L., Chen, P., Liang, T., Li, X., Liu, H., 2020. UV-B photoreceptor UVR8 interacts with MYB73/MYB77 
to regulate auxin responses and lateral root development. EMBO J. 39, e101928.
Yao, J., Ma, Z., Ma, Y., Zhu, Y., Lei, M., Hao, C., et al., 2020. Role of melatonin in UV-B signaling pathway and UV-B 
stress resistance in Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant Cell Environ. 44, 114–129.
Yao, Y., You, J., Ou, Y., Ma, J., Wu, X., Xu, G., 2015. Ultraviolet-B protection of ascorbate and tocopherol in plants re￾lated with their function on the stability on carotenoid and phenylpropanoid compounds. Plant Physiol. Biochem. 
90, 23–31.
Yi, C., Deng, X.W., 2005. COP1—from plant photomorphogenesis to mammalian tumorigenesis. Trends Cell Biol. 15, 
618–625.
Yin, R., Arongaus, A.B., Binkert, M., Ulm, R., 2015. Two distinct domains of the UVR8 photoreceptor interact with 
COP1 to initiate UV-B signaling in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell Online. 27, 202–213.
Yoon, H.I., Kim, H.Y., Kim, J., Oh, M.M., Son, J.E., 2021. Quantitative analysis of UV-B radiation interception in 3D 
plant structures and intraindividual distribution of phenolic contents. Int J Mol Sci. 22, 2701.
Zhao, J., Zhang, W., Zhao, Y., Gong, X., Guo, L., Zhu, G., et al., 2007. SAD2, an importin β-Like protein, is required for 
UV-B response in Arabidopsis by mediating MYB4 nuclear trafficking. Plant Cell. 19, 3805–3818.
Zouzoulas, D., Vardavakis, E., Koutroubas, S.D., Kazantzidis, A., Salamalikis, V., 2020. Ultraviolet B radiation affects 
growth, physiology and fiber quality of cotton. African J Agricul Res. 15, 473–482.
Zuk-Golaszewska, K., Upadhyaya, M.K., Golaszewski, J., 2003. The effect of UV-B radiation on plant growth and 
development. Plant Soil Environ. 49, 135–140.
Further reading
Brown, B.A., Jenkins, G.I., 2008. UV-B signaling pathways with different fluence-rate response profiles are distin￾guished in mature Arabidopsis leaf tissue by requirement for UVR8, HY5, and HYH. Plant Physiol. 146, 576–588.
Demkura, P.V., Abdala, G., Baldwin, I.T., Ballaré, C.L., 2010. Jasmonat-dependent and -independent pathways medi￾ate specific effects of solar ultraviolet B radiation on leaf phenolics and antiherbivore defense. Plant Physiol. 152, 
1084–1095.
Dunning, C.A., Chalker Scott, L., Scott, J.D., 1994. Exposure to ultraviolet-B radiation increases cold hardiness in 
Rhododendron. Physiol Plant. 92, 516–520.
Jenkins, G.I., 2017. Photomorphogenic responses to ultraviolet-B light. Plant, Cell and Environment. 40, 2544–2557.
Suetsugu, N., Wada, M., 2013. Evolution of three LOV blue light receptor families in green plants and photosynthetic 
stramenopiles: phototropin, ZTL/FKF1/LKP2 and aureochrome. Plant Cell Physiol. 54, 8–23.
 Plants and their Interaction to Environmental Pollution 61 Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-99978-6.00016-9
CHAPTER
3
Effect of elevated CO2 on plant 
growth, active constituents, 
and production
Harmanjot Kaura
, Antul Kumara
, Anuj Choudharya
, 
Shivam Sharmab
, D.R. Choudharyb
, and Sahil Mehtac
a
Department of Botany, Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana, Punjab, India, b
Department 
of Vegetable Science and Floriculture, CSK HPKV, Palampur, Himachal Pradesh, India, c
Department of Botany, Hansraj College, University of Delhi, New Delhi, India
1. Introduction
Carbon dioxide (CO2) is a primary greenhouse gas released primarily by the combus￾tion of fossil fuels, and it is a key contributor to global climate change (Zheng et al., 2020; 
Almuhayawi et al., 2020, 2021). The amount of CO2 in the atmosphere is steadily increasing, 
and current levels have increased to 411ppm, a significant increase when compared with 
previous levels over the last 400,000years. Increased CO2 in the atmosphere, also known 
as elevated CO2 (e[CO2]), traps heat from the Earth’s surface, resulting in an increase in 
temperature and, in turn, climate change (Choudhary et al., 2022). Because CO2 is the main 
chemical for plants to absorb carbon, e[CO2] is expected to affect their photosynthetic ca￾pacity (Balbinot et  al., 2021; Cohen et  al., 2018, 2019; Jeong et  al., 2018; Jose et  al., 2019; 
Unnikrishnan et al., 2021; Roy and Piyush, 2021; Rangaswamy et al., 2021). CO2 concentra￾tion processes have evolved as a result of adaptation to lower CO2 levels found in tropical 
or desert climates. However, how plants adjust to e[CO2] remains a mystery. Experiments 
utilizing free-air carbon dioxide enrichment (FACE), in which plants are grown at e[CO2] 
concentrations in the field, have demonstrated that e[CO2] boosts photosynthetic rates and 
agricultural output. However, greater output has been linked to a drop in the nutritional 
content of food crops (Souza et al., 2008; Abbas et al., 2009). This last effect is particularly 
difficult because it directly affects human health.62 3. Effect of elevated CO2 on plant growth
Plant growth and yield are directly influenced by the effects of e[CO2] on photosyn￾thetic and respiratory rates. Both of these metabolic pathways produce ATP, which is used 
by plants to power a variety of physiological functions. ATP is produced in cell organelles 
like chloroplasts and is utilized within these organelles, providing energy for the biosyn￾thesis of various plastidic processes except energy-intensive mechanisms in other com￾partments of the cell (Jeong et al., 2018; Cohen et al., 2019; Jose et al., 2019; Unnikrishnan 
et al., 2021; Roy and Piyush, 2021). On the other hand, the role of respiratory ATP is not 
only restricted to supporting mitochondrial biochemical activities but instantly drives a 
variety of physiological processes in other parts of the cell. e[CO2] concentration affects 
plant species at various life phases (Abdelgawad et al., 2015; Ahmed et al., 2017) including 
growth and development (improved plant height, fruit quality, grain size, leaf canopy, 
biomass, leaf area, size, fruit size, root biomass, root architecture, and leaf mesophyll tis￾sue), physiochemical response (uptake of water, mineral, organic acids, carbohydrates, re￾duced stomatal conductance, photorespiration, enhanced RuBisCO transcript expression, 
carboxylation efficiency, photosynthetic rate, and C:N ratio), Phytohormonal modulation 
involves enhanced production of cytokinins, indole acetic acid, salicylic acid, enhanced ex￾pression of SA-dependant genes, reduction of Ethylene, Jasmonic acid; reduced expression 
of Jasmonic acid-inducible genes associated with pathogenesis-dependant protein (Das 
et al., 2021; Keshan et al., 2021). The production of secondary metabolites (N-containing 
metabolites) increased accumulation of flavonoids, polyphenols, phenolics, and enzymes 
associated with secondary metabolites production (Salazar-Parra et al., 2012; Parvin et al., 
2019; Rangaswamy et al., 2021; Unnikrishnan et al., 2021; Roy and Piyush, 2021).
2. Current status of CO2 and historical perspectives
The worldwide concentration of atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) has enhanced up to 
30% in the last 100years, from 290 to 375mmol/mol, with the highest rise in recent decades, 
as per the data recorded by Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). It was ex￾pected that CO2 concentrations continue to rise, possibly reaching 550mmol per mol in the 
mid of the century (IPCC, 2007). The constant enhancement of atmospheric CO2 is anticipated 
to have an impact on biota, causing changes in plant growth and yield, as well as plant quality 
as food (Medek et al., 2017; Myers et al., 2014). According to the WMO (World Meteorological 
Organization), the COVID-19 pandemic-induced industrial slowdown has not resulted in 
significant reductions in greenhouse gas levels, which trap heat and raise the atmosphere 
temperature, and drive more extreme weather, ice melt, sea-level rise, and ocean acidifica￾tion (WMO). As a result of the closure, several polluting agents as well as greenhouse gases, 
including CO2, have been reduced. Any influence on CO2 rise as a result of past and present 
emissions, on the other hand, is little more than the carbon cycle’s normal year-to-year oscil￾lations and the large natural variability in carbon sinks like vegetation (Leakey et al., 2009; 
Turetsky, 2019; Lamichaney and Maity, 2021).
According to the reports of WMO Greenhouse Gas Bulletin, CO2 levels increased again 
in 2019, with the yearly world average surpassing the critical barrier of 410ppm. In 2020, 
the upward trend has persisted. Long-lived greenhouse gases have grown since 1990, ac￾counting for four-fifths of the overall radiative forcing increase (the warming influence on 2. Current status of CO2 and historical perspectives 63
the climate). CO2 may last for millennia in the atmosphere and much longer in the ocean 
(IPCC, 2007; Britannica, 2021). CO2 levels were previously this high on Earth 3-5 million 
years ago when temperatures were 2-3 degrees warmer and sea levels were 10-20m higher 
than they are presently (Abdelgawad et al., 2015; Thompson et al., 2017; Ahmed et al., 2017; 
Balbinot et al., 2021). Climate change is not being addressed by the COVID-19 pandemic. It 
does, however, create the foundation for more long-term and ambitious climate action, such 
as a total transformation of our industrial, energy, and transportation sectors to achieve net￾zero emissions. The necessary modifications are both economically and technically feasible, 
and they will have only a minor impact on our daily lives. It is encouraging to see a rising 
number of governments and businesses committing to carbon neutrality (Bourgault et al., 
2016, 2017).
According to the Global Carbon Project, because of population confinement, daily CO2
emissions predictably have been deducted by up to 17% throughout the globe during the 
most severe period of the shutdown (Le Quéré et al., 2020). The overall yearly emission 
reduction prediction for 2020 is extremely unpredictable because of the undetermined 
duration and intensity of confinement measures. According to preliminary projections, 
annual global emissions will be reduced by 4.2%–7.5% (Raupach et al., 2007; Le Quéré 
et al., 2020). On a global scale, a reduction in emissions of this magnitude will not result in 
a decrease in atmospheric CO2. CO2 levels will climb at a slower pace of 0.08-0.23 ppm per 
year. This is substantially less than the 1 ppm natural interannual variations. CO2 is the 
most important long-lived greenhouse gas in the atmosphere, accounting for more than 
two-thirds of all radioactive forcing (Ballantyne et al., 2012; Le Quéré et al., 2020). CO2
levels globally averaged 410.5 ppm (ppm) in 2019, after exceeding the 400 ppm milestone 
in 2015. This was an increase over the previous year’s 407.9 ppm (ppm). The rise in CO2
between 2018 and 2019 was higher than the 10-year average and the increase between 
2017 and 2018. In 2019, emissions from fossil fuel combustion and cement production, as 
well as deforestation events and other land-rephrase changes, boosted atmospheric CO2
to more than 148% of its preindustrial level of 278 ppm, suggesting a flux balance between 
the atmosphere, oceans, and land biosphere. Around 44% of CO2 remained in the atmo￾sphere during the preceding decade, while 23% was absorbed through the ocean and 29% 
via the terrestrial system, leaving 4% unaccounted for (Thompson et al., 2017).
In 2019, methane is also considered as an emerging strong greenhouse gas that lasts 
less than a decade in the atmosphere, which was 260% higher than preindustrial levels. 
Although the rise from 2018 to 2019 was observed to be lower than that from 2017 to 
2018, it was still greater than the 10-year average. Methane is responsible for around 
16% of the radiative force emitted by preexisting greenhouse gases (Turner et al., 2019; 
Le Quéré et al., 2020). Around 40% of methane is released into the atmosphere by nat￾ural sources (such as wetlands and termites), with the other 60% coming from artificial 
sources (e.g., ruminants, rice agriculture, fossil fuel exploitation, landfills, and biomass 
burning).
Nitrous oxide, as another greenhouse gas that depletes the ozone layer, increased by 123% 
from preindustrial marks up to 332.0 parts per billion levels in 2019. The rise from 2018 to 
2019 was similarly smaller than the increase from 2017 to 2018 and was nearly identical to the 
10-year average growth rate. The Bulletin also addresses other gases, such as ozone-depleting 
chemicals governed by the Montreal Protocol (Kanter et al., 2013).64 3. Effect of elevated CO2 on plant growth
3. Effect of high CO2 on plant growth
Various response of e[CO2] on physiochemical processes of different crop species is pre￾sented in Table  1 and Fig.  1. Additionally, the adaptation and survival response of plants 
under elevated carbon dioxide levels are illustrated in Fig. 2.
3.1 Photosynthesis
Photosynthesis is a vital mechanism for regulating crop growth characteristics, and sub￾jecting C3 plants to e[CO2] boosts it in general. The increase in ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate 
(RuBP) carboxylase/oxygenase (RuBisCO) activity in the presence of e[CO2] is mostly be￾cause of enhanced activity of enzyme ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate (RuBP) carboxylase/oxygen￾ase (RuBisCO) (Coleman et al., 1993; Pang et al., 2020). RuBisCO not only catalyzes RuBP 
carboxylation, which is necessary for CO2 fixation, but it also oxygenates RuBP utilizing O2 as 
a substrate in a process known as photorespiration. Because RuBP’s carboxylation pathway 
is neither saturated at current atmospheric CO2, the rate of carboxylation will rise when CO2
availability increases under e[CO2] circumstances. Photorespiration, on the other hand, is a 
waste of energy because it costs the plant extra energy and does not result in any energy or 
carbon gains (Burkey et al., 2007; Bunce, 2016; Arren, 2018).
Increases in atmospheric CO2 levels, on the other hand, increase the [CO2] surrounding 
RuBisCO, altering the CO2:O2 ratio and therefore enhancing carboxylation while decreasing 
oxygenation. Increases in CO2 levels in the atmosphere, on the other hand, elevate the [CO2] 
near RuBisCO, altering the CO2:O2 ratio and therefore encouraging carboxylation while limit￾ing oxygenation, a process known as photosynthetic acclimation (Thompson et al., 2017). The 
impacts of e[CO2 beneficial] on photosynthesis, on the other hand, are not necessarily totally 
negated by photosynthetic acclimation. For example, following acclimatization, white clover 
was planted for 8years with higher e[CO2] (600ppm) and maintained a 37% increase in pho￾tosynthesis. The amount of plant acclimatization to e[CO2] appears to be a major determinant 
of the final growth response to e[CO2]. Various theories have been proposed as to why pho￾tosynthetic acclimation occurs. One possible explanation is a decrease in leaf nitrogen (N).
e[CO2] reduced N allocation into leaf blades in rice research, leading to lower RuBisCO 
content and another protein synthesis. Increased sugar synthesis hinders the source-sink bal￾ance, ultimately leading to synthesizing of more sugars that are in source tissues than can 
be used in sink tissues, according to another explanation for plant e[CO2] acclimatization. 
Single gene mutations were used in a FACE experiment to test whether photosynthetic ad￾aptation is possible, caused by a lack of sink capacity (Parvin et  al., 2019; Jin et  al., 2019; 
Bourgault et al., 2017). When a determinate soybean cultivar (Elf) was changed to an indeter￾minate variety, however, there was no increase in photosynthesis. Sugars are thus expected to 
play a role in photosynthetic acclimation, in which excess carbohydrates synthesized under 
e[CO2] induce downregulation of photosynthetic gene transcripts and reduce protein synthe￾sis leading to reducing photosynthesis rates. RuBisCO, a key enzyme in the photosynthetic 
process, has been shown to be reduced in leaves with a carbohydrate buildup (Britannica, 
2021). Only senescing leaves showed down-regulation of photosynthetic genes, with no evi￾dence of increasing sugar levels. All of the experiments used various plant species, implying 
that certain species adapt to e[CO2] in different ways than others. As a result, this shows that TABLE 1 Impact of e[CO2] on physiochemical processes of different crop species.
S. no. Plant species Target plant part Physiochemical changes/effect References
1. Cicer arietinum Seed Decreased protease activity, 
reduced protein content, lower 
sugar content in seeds
Lamichaney and 
Maity (2021)
2. Cajanus cajan Seed Increase in total carbohydrates, 
essential amino acids content
Unnikrishnan et al. 
(2021)
3. Panicum miliaceum Increased carbon and nitrogen 
content with water use efficiency
Zhang et al. (2021)
4. Solanum lycopersicon Leaf Higher Fe accumulation in 
shoots, increase in total nitrogen, 
phosphorus, and potassium
Rangaswamy et al. 
(2021), Jin et al. 
(2009)
Root Higher root length, root dry 
weight, and surface area
Cohen et al. (2018), 
Itay et al. (2018)
5. Glycine max Leaf Reduced Fe concentration Li et al. (2018b)
Seed Both increase and decrease oil 
content observed specifically oleic 
acid
Zheng et al. (2020), 
Li et al. (2018b)
6. Vicia faba Leaf Reduction in Fe, Zn, P, and S 
concentrations
Parvin et al. (2019)
7. Pisum sativum Leaf Reduced Fe concentration Jin et al. (2019)
8. Cucumus sativa Leaf Enhanced amino acids and 
carbohydrate synthesis
Li et al. (2018a)
9. Lactuca sativa Leaf Decrease in leaf Mg, K, Ca Mn, 
and Mo concentrations
Sublett et al. (2018)
10. Q. gilva and 
Eucalyptus saligna
Leaf Reduced N content Jeong et al. (2018), 
Murray et al. (2013)
11. H. hamabo and 
P. ramosissimus
Leaf Increased C:N ratio Jeong et al. (2018), 
Leakey et al. (2009)
12. Q. gilva and H. hamabo Leaf Increased leaf chlorophyll Jeong et al. (2018)
13. Hordeum vulgare Leaf Reduced protein content Medek et al. (2017)
14. Triticum aestivum Leaf Increased grain Zn Velu et al. (2016)
15. Spinacea oleracea Leaf Decrease in protein content Giri et al. (2016)
16. Cyanadon dactylon Leaf Accumulation of soluble sugars, 
proline, and glycine betaine
Yu et al. (2015)
17. T. aestivum Leaf Reduced mineral, phytate 
concentration
Loladze (2014), 
Myers et al. (2014)
18. Oryza sativa Leaf Increased seed yield
(Steffens et al. 2005)
Madan et al. (2012)
19. Zea mays Leaf Increased N, Ca, Mg, Cu, and Zn 
accumulation
Da et al. (2010)
20. Saccharum officinarum Stem Sucrose content was found to be 
enhanced by 30%
Souza et al. (2008)
21. T. aestivum Root and leaf Reduction in leaf and root nutrient 
accumulation (B, Cu, and Zn)
Steffens et al. (2005)66 3. Effect of elevated CO2 on plant growth
Increase leaf
biomass, leaf area, by
spongy mesophyll
layer thickness
Lower fresh
weight in
seedings
Morphology,
physiology, and
metabolite production
in plants under
elevated
CO2
Digoxin, quercetin,
papaverine, hypericin,
methyl-sulfinylalkyl
glucosinolates and glucoiberin
Phytic acid,
Keampferolaglycon,
bilobalide and
isorhamnetin
Reduce stomatal resistance
and decreased the number
of plastoglobuli in
chloroplasts
Increased tiller number,
plant height, root-collar
diameter, root elongation
and root branching
C:N Increase C:N ratio
and available
nutrient content
Enhance the rates of
photosynthesis and dark
respiration, increased
net assimilation rate
FIG. 1 Plant response to enhanced CO2 level.
Mitigation
effects
by
sequestering
the
elevated
carbon
dioxide
levels
Increment
in above
and ground
plant
biomass by
elevating
the net
photo￾synthetic
activity
Increasing
the leaf
water
potential to
maintaining
the
adequate
leaf water
content
Plants
become
taller and
maximum
biomass
production
during
higher CO2
conditions
Net primary productivity
Rubisco activity
Carbon allocation
Carbohydrate accumulation
Water use efficiency
Dry biomass production
Elevation in
photo￾synthetic
activity in
plants is
related with
rubisco
activity
Adaptive
responses
and survival
strategies
At high
CO2,
rapid
leaf area
development
for
enhanced
transpiration
rate
FIG. 2 Adaptation and survival response of plants under elevated carbon dioxide levels.3. Effect of high CO2 on plant growth 67
photosynthetic acclimation is caused by several processes, each of which contributes to vary￾ing degrees (Niklaus et al., 2007; John et al., 2014).
3.2 Carbohydrates assimilation and allocation
When photosynthesis is increased in the presence of e[CO2], more carbohydrates are 
produced than when photosynthesis is not increased. Sucrose levels rise in all parts of pea 
plants exposed to e[CO2] under controlled conditions, although glucose levels remain steady. 
Because glucose content in some plants fluctuates during the day, increasing and then drop￾ping as the day passes, glucose assays may be unreliable. As a result, the ratio of hexose to 
sucrose varies depending on when glucose levels are measured (Lemoine et al., 2013). When 
concentrations of glucose are naturally reduced, the hexose to sucrose ratio will be lower than 
when glucose levels are evaluated during a certain time of high glucose levels. Sucrose levels 
increased by one-third on average in castor oil plants cultivated in growth chambers with 
700ppm CO2 compared with 350ppm CO2 (Grimmer et al., 2002).
Sucrose levels are greater than hexoses in both open and controlled chamber studies; how￾ever, the ratio of sucrose-carbon to hexose-carbon in soybean leaves enhances with treat￾ment to e[CO2], reaching a five-times bigger ratio near the conclusion of the growth season 
(Gregory et al., 2017; Rogers et al., 2004). Variations in the ratio between hexose to sucrose 
may affect plant source and sink activities throughout growth. Plants growing under e[CO2] 
have more starch, which is a key storage carbohydrate.
Because starch is converted to sucrose overnight, the rise in starch more significantly con￾tributes to the elevated amounts of sucrose detected with exposure of e[CO2]. This conversion 
is necessary for appropriate plant growth in the environment. It may, however, contribute 
to the buildup of sucrose in the presence of e[CO2]. The starch composition of plants culti￾vated under ambient [CO2] rises substantially throughout the day and disappears at night. 
However, because of the enhanced starch production under e[CO2], neither plant’s starch re￾serves are reduced during the night, resulting in a progressive buildup of starch in the leaves 
over time (Gregory et al., 2017). In comparison with starch, various plant species collect var￾ied sucrose concentrations; for instance, accumulations of spinach exhibit more concentration 
of sucrose while cotton accumulates more starch. The additional carbohydrates that build 
up in leaves are distributed throughout the plant in variable proportions, with some organs 
receiving more than others (Zhu et al., 2018; Smith et al., 2004).
The carbohydrates allocation under e[CO2] has received little attention, however, the fol￾lowing papers have looked into it. Carbohydrate allocation varies by species under e[CO2]. 
Some species concentrate carbon in their seeds, whereas others concentrate it in their shoots, 
leaves, and roots. e[CO2] enhances the transfer of stored carbohydrates in various vegetative 
tissues including panicles, and assigning freshly fixed carbs toward panicle tissues, where 
they are stored in form of starch, during the stage of grain filling in rice plants. Increased root 
development under e[CO2] would allow for greater nutrient and/or water uptake, assisting 
in the maintenance of nutritional balance within the plant (Goufo et al., 2014).
3.3 Carbon nitrogen and phosphorous ratio
CO2 concentration is not the sole factor that affects carbohydrate partitioning; a variety of 
other elements also play a role. The manner plants employ to take up nitrogen can influence 68 3. Effect of elevated CO2 on plant growth
sucrose-like carbohydrates and induce additional carbon to be partitioned into other plant 
parts. Aranjuelo et al. (2013) discovered that when NO-3-fed and N2-fixing plants were ex￾posed to e[CO2], their sucrose content changed substantially. Sucrose levels rose 366% in 
NO3-fed plants, but just 56% in N2-fixing plants. Because e[CO2] has been shown to alter N 
uptake and assimilation in plants, this could indicate a relationship between N intake and 
allocation of carbohydrate to roots, allowing for greater nutrient uptake. The technique of 
plant growth (glasshouse, field, etc.) has an impact on carbon allocation. In outdoor settings, 
higher e[CO2] promotes greater allocation of carbon to ryegrass (perennial) roots, resulting in 
enhanced dry matter in the root; yet, when cultivated in controlled environment chambers, 
no such effects occur. This result was attributed to differences in plant age, N availability, and 
strength of shoot sink in ryegrass.
The sink strength for carbon in nodules of N2-fixing plants affects carbon allocation be￾cause it allows for greater carbohydrate storage, which avoids excess carbohydrates from 
limiting photosynthesis (Libault, 2014). This could imply that the availability of carbon sinks 
has an impact on carbon allocation control. Another factor that could alter carbohydrate al￾location in the presence of e[CO2], is the effect e[CO2] has on leaf area, as it did in rice. Plants 
with less varied responses toward leaf area underexposure of e[CO2] may shift more carbo￾hydrates to roots because their capacity for leaf sink does not change to handle the increased 
carbohydrate output (Zheng et al., 2019). Root development is boosted when some plants 
are exposed to e[CO2], which may improve their sink capacity, allowing more carbohydrates 
to be allocated to this organ. As demonstrated in a low pH medium under e[CO2], plants 
growing in a low pH media gather most of the carbon generated from photosynthesis in the 
regions of shoots tissues (Long et al., 2017).
3.4 Increase carbon uptake
Despite photosynthetic capacity adaptation, recent FACE analyses of C3 photosynthetic 
responses revealed that increased level of [CO2] observed to be alleviated due to e[CO2] sig￾nificantly improves photosynthetic carbon absorption (A). A decrease in RuBisCO maximum 
electron transport rate and, maximum carboxylation rate (Vc, max), leads to regeneration of 
ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate and is considered as the most common sign of photosynthetic ad￾aptation (Jmax). An early study on C3 plants cultivated in pots or in controlled conditions 
demonstrated that photosynthetic capacity adaptation might keep the plant from dying. Despite 
minor decreases in Vc, max, and Jmax, current data from FACE experiments show that the light￾saturated pace of photosynthetic carbon absorption (Asat) in C3 plants growing at higher [CO2] 
is significantly enhanced (Hikosaka et al., 2011; Hogy and Fangmeier, 2008). The results of FACE 
studies, on the other hand, show that the degree of A stimulation differs among various plant 
species and experimental circumstances (Parvin et al., 2019; Jin et al., 2019; Leakey et al., 2009).
Decreased or inadequate capacity of sink caused by management, genetic or environ￾mental tactics, produces an enhance in foliar carbohydrates and, as a result, a downregu￾lation of photosynthetic activity, according to field research. In a managed Trifolium repens
and Lolium perenne grassland subjected to raised e[CO2] for 10 years, seasonal and har￾vest methods, for example, impacted the photosynthetic response of both L. perenne and 
T. repens to elevated e[CO2]. However, in the spring, with radiation and day length were 4. Effect on the production of active constituents 69
both high, Moreover, plants were more unlikely to be sink-dependent, and there was nei￾ther a difference in the photosynthetic efficiency between plants obtained at ambient and 
e[CO2] (Ainsworth and Long, 2021).
4. Effect on the production of active constituents
4.1 Production of flavonoids and phenols
In this investigation, increased [CO2] had a deleterious impact on both free and bound 
phenolic chemicals in all rice grain milling fractions. Increased e[CO2] has been shown to im￾prove the sink capacity (number of panicles and grains) and thus the grain’s ability to attract 
carbon for growth. This process most likely moved carbon away from carbon-based second￾ary pathways. The deamination of phenylalanine to trans-cinnamic acid is the initial step in 
the production of phenolic compounds. Phenylalanine is an important amino acid for protein 
synthesis at the same time. Phenylalanine was not found in the white rice or the husk during 
this testing. However, with high [CO2], phenylalanine content was lower in bran and brown 
rice, with declines of 22% and 15%, respectively (Ujiie et al., 2019). Reduced phenylalanine 
levels in the grain under e[CO2] may have reduced the amount assigned to phenolic path￾ways because more phenylalanine was required to produce proteins and meet the increasing 
grain’s growth demand (Guillaume et al., 2020).
4.2 Tocopherols and tocotrienols
The amounts of tocopherols and tocotrienols in both white and brown rice were found to 
be significantly lower. Phytol and later tocopherols are made from chlorophyll as a substrate. 
All vegetative organs and panicles showed a considerable decrease in chlorophyll a content 
in this study, with the panicles showing the greatest decline of 42% during the grain ripening 
stage. As a result, the observed drop in tocopherols could have been caused by this process. 
A decrease in tyrosine concentration, which is an immediate precursor for tocotrienol biosyn￾thesis, was also seen in all rice milling fractions, which could explain why tocotrienol levels 
dropped (Mène‐Saffrané and Pellaud, 2017). These reductions were only seen in white and 
brown rice. The increase in bran was most likely because the bran is the site of tocopherol and 
tocotrienol synthesis in maturing grains and collects the majority of them. Antioxidants pref￾erential export to the husk is likely a reflection of their natural role in protecting the maturing 
rice caryopsis from oxidative degradation, thereby providing additional protection to the rice 
grain under high [CO2] (Sera et al., 2019) (Table 2).
4.3 Terpenes
e[CO2] affects the level of various terpenes and their derivatives in crop species (Dong 
et al., 2018). According to Gonçalves et al. (2009), e[CO2] did not impact the quality of wines 
and grapefruits in related polyphenols and anthocyanins, but, there was significant variation 
in the composition of volatile organic compounds in wine.70 3. Effect of elevated CO2 on plant growth
4.4 Polyphenols and amino acids
The e[CO2] causes alteration in fruit nutritional quality and showed the regulatory impact 
of amino acids, polyphenols, organic acids in various crop plants. Except these, enhanced 
[CO2] is well known to favor secondary metabolites production in green tea (Balasooriya 
et al., 2019; Li et al., 2017; Almuhayawi et al., 2020; Jia et al., 2018; Klaiber et al., 2013). Further, 
e[CO2] shows huge upregulation in amino acids and total polyphenol concentration while 
lowers in caffeine levels in green tea. The findings confirm the role of transcripts in the bio￾synthesis of amino acids and catechin and are directly associated with the expression of genes 
confirmed through RT-PCR (Li et al., 2017). Later on, Li et al., 2019, analyzed that the biosyn￾thesis of flavonoids has been exhibited to be regulated via alleviated production of salicylic 
acids and Nitric oxide.
TABLE 2 Effect of e[CO2] on secondary metabolites production.
S. no. Class Crop Mechanism used Results References
1. Glucosinolates Broccoli Raised CO2 Increased levels of 
glucoraphanin and 
sulforaphane
Almuhayawi 
et al. (2020)
2. Flavonoid Tea Elevated CO2 Increase in flavonoids, 
nitric oxide content
Li et al. (2019)
3. Phenolics Populus tremula Higher CO2 Females had significantly 
higher flavonoids under 
elevated CO2 compared 
with males
Sobuj et al. (2018)
4. Flavonoids Lettuce Salinity Increased flavonoids and 
saponins content
Jia et al. (2018)
5. Phenolics Tea Elevated CO2 Increase in total 
polyphenols and decrease 
in caffeine content
Li et al. (2017)
6. Phenolics Lettuce Salinity and 
severe drought
Enhanced phenolics 
especially luteolin
Sgherri et al. 
(2017)
7. Phenolics Lettuce Elevated CO2
with drought
Higher concentration of 
phenolic compounds, in 
particularly luteolin
Pérez-López 
et al. (2015)
8. Phenolics Catharanthus 
roseus
Raised CO2 Increase in phenolics and 
total alkaloid concentration
Singh and 
Agrawal (2015)
9. Glucosinolates Brassica oleracea Elevated CO2 Increase in total 
glucosinolates content
Klaiber et al. 
(2013)
10. Phenolics Grapevines Elevated 
CO2, high 
temperature, and 
drought
Superoxide dismutase 
(SOD), ascorbate 
peroxidase (APX), and 
catalase (CAT) were 
significantly enhanced
Salazar-Parra 
et al. (2012)5. Deleterious effect of alleviated CO2 on the plant architecture 71
4.5 Phenolics and other secondary metabolites
The amount of Phenolics and other secondary metabolites regulated by treatment of 
e[CO2] varies plant behaviors and responses. According to Sobuj et al. (2018), e[CO2] directly 
increases the production of phenolics in Populus tremula. More likely, the work also differen￾tiates the demarcation of flavonoids composition in female and male plants under e[CO2]. In 
Catharanthus rosea, the results depicted that exposure of e[CO2] significantly alleviates the total 
alkaloids and phenolics content. However, the concentration of S and N containing second￾ary metabolites as well as other glucosinolates increases significantly in family Brassicaceae 
under e[CO2] (Almuhayawi et al., 2020; Li et al., 2017). Additionally, the treatment of sprouts 
with e[CO2] in members of Brassicaceae increased the amount of sulforaphane and gluco￾raphanin that augment anticancerous and antiinflammatory traits in broccoli plants (Amer 
et al., 2021).
In the case of Salix, variable response in the production of secondary metabolites was ob￾served under e[CO2] treatment. Conceptually, exposure of e[CO2] upregulates the production 
of metabolites in glycolysis and shikimate pathways ultimately affect the level of phenolics 
and other secondary metabolites in plants. It was predicted that e[CO2] favors more invest￾ment of carbon in isoprene that help plant against environmental stress (Jia et al., 2018; Singh 
and Agrawal, 2015).
5. Deleterious effect of alleviated CO2 on the plant architecture
Plants differ in their ability to store accumulated carbon under e[CO2] which causes a 
change in the shoot/root carbon ratio toward more root carbon in some plants. Although 
it is unknown how this additional carbon impacts roots, knowing how much sugar affects 
roots will serve as a starting point for research into the effect of e[CO2] on roots. Increased 
sucrose concentrations have a similar effect on root growth as e[CO2]. This could mean 
that e[CO2] influences root growth by increasing the amount of carbohydrates available 
to roots. Increased [CO2] enhances root length and total root number and, as well as root 
diameter, in A. thaliana (Walton et al., 2007). Increasing the sucrose concentration in plants 
growing in ambient [CO2] has comparable consequences to e[CO2]. Increased [CO2] may 
promote root development by balancing nutrient absorption with the rate of sugar gen￾eration from increased photosynthesis, or it may function as a sink for sugar surpluses to 
be stored. Gaining a greater knowledge of how e[CO2] influences root growth could help 
explain why e[CO2] causes changes in nutritional status, such as iron and zinc deficits in 
wheat. Because both e[CO2] and sugars promote plant root growth, you’d expect higher 
nutrient uptake rates, alleviating nutrient deficits. Plant glucose situation has a big impact 
on root architecture (Del Bianco and Kepinski, 2018). In the growth zones of A. thaliana
roots, the hexoses glucose and fructose, for example, are positively associated with both 
root branching density and elongation rate. However, not all hexoses enhance root exten￾sion; mannose suppresses root elongation via a hexokinase-activated signaling pathway 
(Granot et al., 2013).
According to (Baskin, 2001), another hexose, galactose, slowed root growth, but only 
slightly. A third hexose, psicose, is a fructose analog that suppresses root development. 72 3. Effect of elevated CO2 on plant growth
It was discovered to limit root growth in lettuce seedlings, but unlike mannose, it does not 
appear to be caused by a hexokinase-mediated mechanism. In FACE and open-top cham￾bers, increased [CO2] promotes root development. e[CO2] is observed to improve both root 
branching and elongation in Sedum alfredii, while other studies have found increased fine 
root development in a range of plant species (Thompson et al., 2017). In response to e[CO2], 
a meta-analysis of FACE and OTCs indicated an overall rise in root biomass, with root 
length increasing more than root diameter. Increased fine root biomass was likewise re￾vealed to be the predominant component of the total biomass increase in the meta-analysis 
(Parvin et al., 2019; Jin et al., 2019). If e[CO2] is implicated in the sugar-stimulated increase 
in root growth, it could suggest that more carbon is partitioned into sugars like glucose, 
which can stimulate root growth, rather than mannose or psicose, which can inhibit root 
growth (Leakey et  al., 2009; Thompson et  al., 2017; Parvin et  al., 2019; Jin et  al., 2019). 
Understanding how e[CO2] influences diurnal sugar composition changes would help re￾searchers better understand the role sugars play in gene expression leads to root growth in 
response to e[CO2].
In A. thaliana roots, glucose has a role that goes beyond branching density and root 
elongation rate. It has also been shown that it can affect root development direction in A. 
thaliana and that this is independent of root length alterations (Ogura et  al., 2019). Both 
hexokinase-dependent and -independent approaches are used to induce glucose-induced 
directional changes. Increased lateral root formation is also a result of the hexokinase 
glucose-sensing pathway. Furthermore, glucose stimulates root meristem activation via the 
target-of-rapamycin (TOR) signaling network. The glucose-TOR connection depends on 
the energy of glycolysis–mitochondrial that relays to control root meristem activation. This 
signal network, in turn, encourages root development. Sucrose has been discovered as an 
essential signal for primary root growth and development in A. thaliana seedlings, where su￾crose is delivered to the roots via the sucrose transporter SUC2 from the cotyledons (Kircher 
and Schopfer, 2012).
Sucrose also encourages the formation of secondary roots. Sucrose also has the power to 
save plants from circumstances that stifle root growth. The addition of sucrose overcomes the 
suppression of root growth induced by both mannose and psicose, as previously mentioned. 
This suggests that the inhibition by mannose and psicose is unlikely to be confined in plants 
that generate more sucrose under e[CO2] than hexoses. As previously stated, sucrose is im￾portant in encouraging the production of lateral root primordia; however, rather than sucrose 
functioning as a signal, this regulation is triggered by sucrose metabolism (MacGregor et al., 
2008). They came to this conclusion after observing that sucrose and its downstream metab￾olites glucose-6-phosphate, fructose, glucose, and all other carbohydrates promoted lateral 
root primordia formation, but not the exogenous treatment of sucrose and nonmetabolized 
glucose analogue 3-O-methyl glucose, that only promoted lateral root primordia formation in 
the hexokinase mutant gin2. Instead, certain sugars, notably sucrose, which is not detected by 
hexokinase, might be argued to act as signals independent of hexokinase. Despite evidence 
that sugars stimulate lateral root development, a recent study found that sucrose and glucose 
increase the expression of the WOX7 gene in A. thaliana, inhibiting lateral root development. 
Auxin, a hormone that increases lateral root development and is increased by sugars, sup￾presses WOX7 expression, confounding the effect of sugars on regulatory pathways even 
more (Kong et al., 2015).References 73
6. Conclusion
The increased CO2 concentration affects physiological, biochemical, and molecular traits 
at different plant growth phases. The changes in edaphic factors primarily alter signaling 
networks related to the growth and production of cell components. Notably, duration of ex￾posure including short term or long term directly defines the amount of changes in plant 
growth as well as production of secondary metabolites. Altered gene regulation is involved 
in carbohydrate metabolism and plant growth changes under the e[CO2] levels. Nutritional 
quality of fruits and seeds severely altered by e[CO2], while few reports have confirmed so 
far. However, combinatorial studies on the impact of e[CO2], ozone, temperature, light, etc. 
should always take into account when evaluating the complete impact of e[CO2]. From these 
studies, we can begin to think about what changes might occur in different parts of plants 
grown under e[CO2] levels.
References
Abbas, S., Sharmila, P., Uprety, D., Saradhi, P., 2009. Effects of elevated CO2 on soil physicochemical characteristics 
under free air CO2 enrichment (FACE) technology. IOP Conf. Ser.: Earth Env. Sci. 6, 292045.
Abdelgawad, H., Farfan-Vignolo, E.R., Vos, D., Asard, H., 2015. Elevated CO2 mitigates drought and temperature￾induced oxidative stress differently in grasses and legumes. Plant Sci. 231, 1–10.
Ahmed, M., Stöckle, C.O., Nelson, R., Higgins, S., 2017. Assessment of climate change and atmospheric CO2 impact 
on winter wheat in the Pacific Northwest using a multimodel ensemble. Front. Ecol. Environ. 5, 51.
Ainsworth, E.A., Long, S.P., 2021. 30 years of free‐air carbon dioxide enrichment (FACE): what have we learned about 
future crop productivity and its potential for adaptation? Glob. Change Biol. 27 (1), 27–49.
Almuhayawi, M.S., AbdElgawad, H., Al-Jaouni, S.K., et al., 2020. Elevated CO2 improves glucosinolate metabolism 
and stimulates anticancer and anti-inflammatory properties of broccoli sprouts. Food Chem. 328, 127102.
Almuhayawi, M.S., Hassan, A.H.A., Al-Jaouni, S.K., et al., 2021. Infuence of elevated CO2 on nutritive value and 
health-promoting prospective of three genotypes of Alfalfa sprouts (Medicago sativa). Food Chem. 340. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem. 2020.128147, 128147.
Amer, M.A., Thoria, R.M., Raoufa, A., Abdel, R., Manal, A., Abdelfattah, B., 2021. Studies on exogenous elicitors 
promotion of sulforaphane content in broccoli sprouts and its effect on the MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cell line. 
Ann. Agric. Sci. 66, 46–52.
Aranjuelo, I., Cabrerizo, P.M., Arrese-Igor, C., Aparicio-Tejo, P.M., 2013. Pea plant responsiveness under elevated 
[CO2] is conditioned by the N source (N2 fixation versus NO3− fertilization). Environ. Exp. Bot. 95, 34–40.
Arren, B.E., 2018. Daring metabolic designs for enhanced plant carbon fixation. Plant Sci. 273, 71–83.
Balasooriya, H.N., Dassanayake, K.B., Ajlouni, S., 2019. The impact of elevated CO2 and high temperature on the 
nutritional quality of fruits-a short review. Am. J. Agric. Res. https://doi.org/10.28933/ajar-2018-12-1608.
Balbinot, A., da Rosa, F.A., Fipke, M.V., Rockenbach, D., Massey, J.H., Camargo, E.R., Mesko, M.F., Scaglioni, P.T., de 
Avila, L.A., 2021. Effects of elevated atmospheric CO2 concentration and water regime on rice yield, water use 
efficiency, and arsenic and cadmium accumulation in grain. Agriculture 11, 705.
Ballantyne, A.Á., Alden, C.Á., Miller, J.Á., Tans, P.Á., White, J.W.C., 2012. Increase in observed net carbon dioxide 
uptake by land and oceans during the past 50 years. Nature 488, 70–72.
Baskin, T.I., 2001. On the alignment of cellulose microfibrils by cortical microtubules: a review and a model. 
Protoplasma 215 (1), 150–171.
Bourgault, M., Brand, J., Tausz, M., Fitzgerald, G.J., 2016. Yield, growth and grain nitrogen response to elevated CO2 
of five field pea (Pisum sativum L.) cultivars in a low rainfall environment. Field Crop Res 196, 1–9.
Bourgault, M., Brand, J., Tausz-Posch, S., Armstrong, R.D., O’Leary, G.L., et al., 2017. Yield, growth and grain nitro￾gen response to elevated CO2 in six lentil (Lens culinaris) cultivars grown under free air CO2 enrichment (FACE) in 
a semiarid environment. Eur. J. Agron. 87, 50–58.
Britannica, 2021. The Editors of Encyclopaedia. “acclimatization”. Encyclopedia Britannica, 31 Oct. 2021, https://
www.britannica.com/science/acclimatization. Accessed 5 February 2022.74 3. Effect of elevated CO2 on plant growth
Bunce, J.A., 2016. Responses of soybeans and wheat to elevated CO2 in free-air and open top chamber systems. Field 
Crop Res 186, 78–85.
Burkey, O.K., Booker, F.L., Pursley, W.A., Heagle, A.S., 2007. Elevated carbon dioxide and ozone effects on peanut: II. 
Seed yield and quality. Crop. Sci. 47, 1488–1497.
Cohen, I., Tal, R., Reut, T.B., Shimon, R., 2018. The effects of elevated CO2 and nitrogen nutrition on root dynamics. 
Plant Sci. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plantsci.2018.03.034.
Choudhary, A., Kumar, A., Kaur, H., Singh, M., Suri, G.S., Kaur, G., Mehta, S., 2022. Effect of elevated CO2 conditions 
on medicinal plants: a relatively unexplored aspect. In: Husen, A. (Ed.), Environmental Pollution and Medicinal 
Plants. CRC Press, London, pp. 95–111. https://doi.org/10.1201/9781003178866-5.
Cohen, I., Moshe, H., Uri, Y., Asher, B., Tanya, G., Shimon, R., 2019. CO2 and nitrogen interaction alters root anat￾omy, morphology, nitrogen partitioning and photosynthetic acclimation of tomato plants. Planta. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s00425-019-03232-0.
Coleman, J.S., McConnaughay, K.D.M., Bazzaz, F.A., 1993. Elevated CO2 and plant nitrogen-use: is reduced tissue 
nitrogen concentration size-dependent? Oecologia 93, 195–200.
Da, G.T., Sui, F.G., Sa, N., Sun, N.B., Ha, X., Tong, C.L., 2010. Differential responses of yield and selected nutritional 
compositions to drought stress in summer maize grains. J. Plant Nutr. 33, 1811–1818.
Das, A., Mehta, S., Abdelmotelb, K.F., Lavale, S.A., Aggarwal, S.K., Jat, B.S., Tripathi, A., Garg, S., 2021. 
Jasmonic acid for sustainable plant growth and production under adverse environmental conditions. In: 
Husen, A. (Ed.), Plant Performance Under Environmental Stress. Springer, Cham, pp. 71–98. https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-030-78521-5_4.
Del Bianco, M., Kepinski, S., 2018. Building a future with root architecture. J. Exp. Bot. 69. https://doi.org/10.1093/
jxb/ery390.
Dong, J., Gruda, N., Lam, S.K., Li, X., Duan, Z., 2018. Effects of elevated CO2 on nutritional quality of vegetables: a 
review. Front. Plant Sci. 9, 924.
Giri, A., Armstrong, B., Rajashekar, C.B., 2016. Elevated carbon dioxide level suppresses nutritional quality of lettuce 
and spinach. Am. J. Plant Sci. 7, 246–258. https://doi.org/10.4236/ajps.2016.71024.
Gonçalves, B., Falco, V., Moutinho-Pereira, J., 2009. Efects of elevated CO2 on grapevine (Vitis vinifera L.): volatile 
composition, phenolic content, and invitro antioxidant activity of red wine. J. Agric. Food Chem. 57, 265–273.
Goufo, P., Pereira, J., Moutinho-Pereira, J., Correia, C.M., Figueiredo, N., Carranca, C., Trindade, H., 2014. Rice (Oryza 
sativa L.) phenolic compounds under elevated carbon dioxide (CO2) concentration. Environ. Exp. Bot. 99, 28–37.
Granot, D., David-Schwartz, R., Kelly, G., 2013. Hexose kinases and their role in sugar-sensing and plant develop￾ment. Front. Plant Sci. 4, 44.
Gregory, J.M., Sahar, M., Mark, A.A., Jenelle, A., Patterson, I.J., Tetlow, M.J., 2017. Starch as a source, starch as a sink: 
the bifunctional role of starch in carbon allocation. J. Exp. Bot. 68, 4433–4453.
Grimmer, C., Bachfischer, T., Komor, E., 2002. Carbohydrate partitioning into starch in leaves of Ricinus communis L. 
grown under elevated CO2 is controlled by sucrose. Plant Cell Environ. 22, 1275–1280.
Guillaume, T., Sinda, B.M., Luis, L., Jose, M., García, M., Angel, M., Alberto, P., 2020. Elevated CO2 has concurrent 
effects on leaf and grain metabolism but minimal effects on yield in wheat. J. Exp. Bot. 71, 5990–6003.
Hikosaka, K., Kinugasa, T., Oikawa, S., Onoda, Y., Hirose, T., 2011. Effects of elevated CO2 concentration on seed 
production in C3 annual plants. J. Exp. Bot. 62, 1523–1530.
Hogy, P., Fangmeier, A., 2008. Effects of elevated atmospheric CO2 on grain quality of wheat. J. Cereal Sci. 48, 580–591.
IPCC, 2007. Climate change 2007: Mitigation of climate change. Contribution of Working Group III to the Fourth 
Assessment Report of the lnter-Governmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Itay, C., Tal, R., Reut, T.B., Shimon, R., 2018. The effects of elevated CO2 and nitrogen nutrition on root dynamics. 
Plant Sci. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plantsci.2018.03.034.
Jeong, H.M., Kim, H.R., Hong, S., You, Y.H., 2018. Effects of elevated CO2 concentration and increased tempera￾ture on leaf quality responses of rare and endangered plants. J. Ecol. Environ. 42, 1. https://doi.org/10.1186/
s41610-017-0061-0.
Jia, X., Zhao, Y., Liu, T., Huang, S., 2018. Elevated CO2 afects secondary metabolites in Robinia pseudoaca￾cia L. seedlings in Cd-and Pbcontaminated soils. Chemosphere 160, 199–207. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
chemosphere.2016.06.089.
Jin, C.W., Du, S.T., Chen, W.W., Li, G.X., Zhang, Y.S., Zheng, S.J., 2009. Elevated carbon dioxide improves plant 
iron nutrition through enhancing the iron-deficiency-induced responses under iron-limited conditions in tomato. 
Plant Physiol. 150, 272–280.References 75
Jin, J., Armstrong, R., Tang, C., 2019. Impact of elevated CO2 on grain nutrient concentration varies with crops and 
soils—a long-term FACE study. Sci. Total Environ. 651, 2641–2647.
John, S., Andrew, R., Smith, D., Gwynn-Jones, D.L., Jones, D.L., 2014. Deciduous woodland exposed to elevated at￾mospheric CO2 has species-specific impacts on anecic earthworms. Appl. Soil Ecol. 80, 84–92.
Jose, C.S., Carla, S.S., Susana, M.P.C., Manuela, M.P., Marta, W.V., 2019. Preserving the nutritional quality of crop 
plants under a changing climate: importance and strategies. Plant and Soil 443, 1–26.
Kanter, D., Mauzerall, D.L., Ravishankara, A.R., Daniel, J.S., Portmann, R.W., Grabiel, P.M., Galloway, J.N., 2013. 
A post-Kyoto partner: considering the stratospheric ozone regime as a tool to manage nitrous oxide. Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. 110 (12), 4451–4457.
Keshan, R., Mehta, S., Abdelmotelb, K.F., Aggarwal, S.K., Lavale, S.A., Jat, B.S., Tripathi, A., Rajput, L.S., 
2021. Salicylic acid for vigorous plant growth and enhanced yield under harsh environment. In: Husen, 
A. (Ed.), Plant Performance Under Environmental Stress. Springer, Cham, pp. 99–127. https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-030-78521-5_5.
Kircher, S., Schopfer, P., 2012. Photosynthetic sucrose acts as cotyledon-derived long-distance signal to control root 
growth during early seedling development in Arabidopsis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 109 (28), 11217–11221.
Klaiber, J., Dorn, S., Najar-Rodriguez, A.J., 2013. Acclimation to elevated CO2 increases constitutive glucosinolate 
levels of brassica plants and affects the performance of specialized herbivores from contrasting feeding guilds. J. 
Chem. Ecol. 39, 653–665.
Kong, D., Hao, Y., Cui, H., 2015. The WUSCHEL related homeobox protein WOX7 regulates the sugar response of 
lateral root development in Arabidopsis thaliana. Mol. Plant 9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molp.2015.11.006.
Lamichaney, A., Maity, A., 2021. Implications of rising atmospheric carbon dioxide concentration on seed quality. Int. 
J. Biometeorol. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00484-020-02073-x.
Le Quéré, Q., Jackson, R.B., Jones, M.W., 2020. Temporary reduction in daily global CO2emissions during the 
COVID-19 forced confinement. Nat. Clim. Chang. 10, 647–653.
Leakey, A.D.B., Ainsworth, E.A., Bernacchi, C.J., Rogers, A., Long, S.P., Ort, D.R., 2009. Elevated CO2 effects on plant 
carbon, nitrogen, and water relations: six important lessons from FACE. J. Exp. Bot. 60, 2859–2876.
Lemoine, R., La, C.S., Atanassova, R., Dédaldéchamp, F., Allario, T., Pourtau, N., Bonnemain, J.L., Laloi, M., Coutos￾Thévenot, P., Maurousset, L., Faucher, M., Girousse, C., Lemonnier, P., Parrilla, J., Durand, M., 2013. Source-to-sink 
transport of sugar and regulation by environmental factors. Front. Plant Sci. 4, 272.
Li, X., Zhang, L., Ahammed, G.J., Li, Z.X., et al., 2017. Stimulation in primary and secondary metabolism by elevated 
carbon dioxide alters green tea quality in Camellia sinensis L. Sci. Rep. 7, 1–2.
Li, M., Li, Y., Zhang, W., Li, S., Gao, Y., Ai, X., Zhang, D., Liu, B., Li, Q., 2018a. Metabolomics analysis reveals 
that elevated atmospheric CO2 alleviates drought stress in cucumber seedling leaves. Anal. Biochem. 559, 
71–85.
Li, Y., Yu, Z., Jin, J., 2018b. Impact of elevated CO2 on seed quality of soybean at the fresh edible and mature stages. 
Front. Plant Sci. 9, 1413. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2018.01413.
Li, X., Zhang, L., Ahammed, G.J., Li, Y.T., et al., 2019. Salicylic acid acts upstream of nitric oxide in elevated carbon 
dioxide-induced favonoid biosynthesis in tea plant (Camellia sinensis L.). Environ. Exp. Bot. 161, 367–374.
Libault, M., 2014. The carbon-nitrogen balance of the nodule and its regulation under elevated carbon dioxide con￾centration. Biomed. Res. Int. 2014. https://doi.org/10.1155/2014/507946, 507946.
Loladze, I., 2014. Hidden shift of the ionome of plants exposed to elevated CO2 depletes minerals at the base of hu￾man nutrition. Elife 3, e02245.
Long, A., Zhang, J., Yang, L.T., Ye, X., Lai, N.W., Tan, L.L., Lin, D., Chen, L.S., 2017. Effects of low pH on photosynthe￾sis, related physiological parameters, and nutrient profiles ofcitrus. Front. Plant Sci. 8, 185.
MacGregor, D.R., Deak, K.I., Ingram, P.A., Malamy, J.E., 2008. Root system architecture in Arabidopsis grown in 
culture is regulated by sucrose uptake in the aerial tissues. Plant Cell 20 (10), 2643–2660.
Madan, P., Jagadish, S., Craufurd, P., Fitzgerald, M., Lafarge, T., Wheeler, T., 2012. Effect of elevated CO2 and high 
temperature on seed-set and grain quality of rice. J. Exp. Bot. 63, 3843–3852.
Medek, D.E., Schwartz, J., Myers, S.S., 2017. Estimated effects of future atmospheric CO2 concentrations on protein 
intake and the risk of protein deficiency by country and region. Environ. Health Perspect. 125, 087002.
Mène‐Saffrané, L., Pellaud, S., 2017. Current strategies for vitamin E biofortification of crops. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 
44, 189–197.
Murray, T.J., Ellsworth, D.S., Tissue, D.T., Riegler, M., 2013. Interactive direct and plant-mediated effects of elevated 
atmospheric [CO2] and temperature on a eucalypt-feeding insect herbivore. Gl. Change Biol. 19, 1407–1416.76 3. Effect of elevated CO2 on plant growth
Myers, S.S., Zanobetti, A., Kloog, I., Huybers, P., Leakey, A.D.B., Bloom, A.J., Carlisle, E., Dietterich, L.H., Fitzgerald, 
G., Hasegawa, T., Holbrook, N.M., Nelson, R.L., Ottman, M.J., Raboy, V., Sakai, H., Sartor, K.A., Schwartz, J., 
Seneweera, S., Tausz, M., Usui, Y., 2014. Increasing CO2 threatens human nutrition. Nature 510, 139–142. https://
doi.org/10.1038/nature13179.
Niklaus, P.A., Alphei, J., Kampichler, C., Kandeler, E., Körner, C., Tscherko, D., Wohlfender, M., 2007. Interactive 
effects of plant species diversity and elevated CO2 on soil biota and nutrient cycling. Ecology 88, 3153–3163.
Ogura, T., Goeschl, C., Filiault, D., Mirea, M., Slovak, R., Wolhrab, B., Busch, W., 2019. Root system depth in 
Arabidopsis is shaped by EXOCYST70A3 via the dynamic modulation of auxin transport. Cell 178 (2), 400–412.
Pang, J.J., Shin, J.S., Li, S.Y., 2020. The catalytic role of RuBisCO for in situ CO2 recycling in Escherichia coli. Front. 
Bioeng. Biotechnol. 8, 543807.
Parvin, S., Uddin, S., Tausz-Posch, S., Armstrong, R., Fitzgerald, G., Tausz, M., 2019. Grain mineral quality of dryland 
legumes as affected by elevated CO2 and drought: a FACE study on lentil (Lens culinaris) and faba bean (Vicia faba). 
Crop Pasture Sci. 70, 244–253.
Pérez-López, U., Miranda-Apodaca, J., Lacuesta, M., 2015. Growth and nutritional quality improvement in two dif￾ferently pigmented lettuce cultivars grown under elevated CO2 and/or salinity. Sci. Hortic. 195, 56–66.
Rangaswamy, T.C., Sridhara, S., Manoj, K.N., Gopakkali, P., Ramesh, N., Shokralla, S., Zin El-Abedin, T.K., Almutairi, 
K.F., Elansary, H.O., 2021. Impact of elevated CO2 and temperature on growth, development and nutrient uptake 
of tomato. Horticulturae 7, 509.
Raupach, M.R., Marland, G., Ciais, P., Le Quéré, C., Canadell, J.G., Klepper, G., Field, C.B., 2007. Global and regional 
drivers of accelerating CO2 emissions. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 104, 10288–10293.
Rogers, A., Allen, D.J., Davey, P.A., Morgan, P.B., Ainsworth, E.A., Bernacchi, C.J., Long, S.P., 2004. Leaf photosyn￾thesis and carbohydrate dynamics of soybeans grown throughout their life‐cycle under free‐air carbon dioxide 
enrichment. Plant Cell Environ. 27 (4), 449–458.
Roy, S., Piyush, M., 2021. Delineating the mechanisms of elevated CO2 mediated growth, stress tolerance and phyto￾hormonal regulation in plant. Plant Cell Rep. 40, 1345–1365.
Salazar-Parra, C., Aguirreolea, J., Sánchez-Díaz, M., 2012. Climate change (elevated CO2, elevated temperature and 
moderate drought) triggers the antioxidant enzymes’ response of grapevine cv. Tempranillo, avoiding oxidative 
damage. Physiol. Plant. 144, 99–110.
Sera, Y., Hanamata, S., Sakamoto, S., Ono, S., Kaneko, K., Mitsui, Y., Kuchitsu, K., 2019. Essential roles of autophagy 
in metabolic regulation in endosperm development during rice seed maturation. Sci. Rep. 9, 1–14.
Sgherri, C., Pérez-López, U., Micaelli, F., 2017. Elevated CO2 and salinity are responsible for phenolics-enrichment in 
two differently pigmented lettuces. Pl. Physiol. Biochem. 115, 269–278.
Singh, A., Agrawal, M., 2015. Effects of ambient and elevated CO2 on growth, chlorophyll fluorescence, photosyn￾thetic pigments, antioxidants, and secondary metabolites of Catharanthus roseus (L.) G Don. Grown under three 
different soil N levels. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 22, 3936–3946.
Smith, S.M., Fulton, D.C., Chia, T., Thorneycroft, D., Chapple, A., Dunstan, H., 2004. Diurnal changes in the transcrip￾tome encoding enzymes of starch metabolism provide evidence for both transcriptional and posttranscriptional 
regulation of starch metabolism in Arabidopsis leaves. Plant Physiol. 136, 2687–2699.
Sobuj, N., Virjamo, V., Zhang, Y., 2018. Impacts of elevated temperature and CO2 concentration on growth and phe￾nolics in the sexually dimorphic Populus tremula (L.). Environ. Exp. Bot. 146, 34–44.
Souza, A.P., Gaspar, M., Da-Silva, E.A., 2008. Elevated CO2 increases photosynthesis, biomass and productivity, and 
modifies gene expression in sugarcane. Plant Cell Environ. 31, 1116–1127.
Steffens, D., Hutsch, B., Eschholz, T., Losak, T., Schubert, S., 2005. Water logging may inhibit plant growth primarily 
by nutrient deficiency rather than nutrient toxicity. Plant Soil Environ. 51, 545.
Sublett, W., Barickman, T., Sams, C., 2018. Effects of elevated temperature and potassium on biomass and quality of 
dark red ‘Lollo Rosso’lettuce. Horticulture 4, 11.
Thompson, M., Gamage, D., Hirotsu, N., Martin, A., Seneweera, S., 2017. Effects of elevated carbon dioxide on photo￾synthesis and carbon partitioning: a perspective on root sugar sensing and hormonal crosstalk. Front. Physiol. 8, 578.
Turetsky, M., 2019. Permafrost collapse is accelerating carbon release. Nature 569, 32–34.
Turner, A.J., Frankenberg, C., Kort, E.A., 2019. Interpreting contemporary trends in atmospheric methane. Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. 116, 2805–2813.
Ujiie, K., Ishimaru, K., Hirotsu, N., Nagasaka, S., Miyakoshi, Y., Ota, M., Tokida, T., Sakai, H., Usui, Y., Ono, K., 
Kobayashi, K., Nakano, H., Yoshinaga, S., Kashiwagi, T., Magoshi, J., 2019. How elevated CO2 affects our nutrition 
in rice, and how we can deal with it. PLoS One 14, e0212840.Unnikrishnan, D.K., Sreeharsha, R.V., Reddy, A.R., 2021. Growth, seed yield andnutritional characteristics ofpigeon 
pea grown underelevated CO2 atmosphere. Acta Physiol. Pl. 43, 80.
Velu, G., Guzman, C., Mondal, S., Autrique, J.E., Huerta, J., Singh, R.P., 2016. Effect of drought and elevated tempera￾ture on grain zinc and iron concentrations in CIMMYT spring wheat. J. Cereal Sci. 6, 182–186.
Walton, L., Reid, D., Yeung, E., Kurepin, L., Lee-Ho, E., 2007. Effects of elevated carbon dioxide and sucrose concen￾trations on Arabidopsis thaliana root architecture and anatomy. Can. J. Bot. 85, 324–330.
Yu, J., Sun, L., Fan, N., Yang, Z., Huang, B., 2015. Physiological factors involved in positive effects of elevated carbon 
dioxide concentration on bermudagrass tolerance to salinity stress. Environ. Exp. Bot. 115, 20–27.
Zhang, D., Li, A., Lam, S.K., 2021. Increased carbon uptake under elevated CO2 concentration enhances water-use 
efficiency of C4 broomcorn millet under drought. Agric Water Manag 245, 106631.
Zheng, Y., Li, F., Hao, L., 2019. Elevated CO2concentration induces photosynthetic down-regulation with changes in 
leaf structure, non-structural carbohydrates and nitrogen content of soybean. BMC Plant Biol. 19, 255.
Zheng, G., Chen, J., Li, W., 2020. Impacts of CO2 elevation on the physiology and seed quality of soybean. Plant 
Divers. 42, 44–51.
Zhu, J., Qi, J., Fang, Y., Xiao, X., Li, J., Lan, J., Tang, C., 2018. Characterization of sugar contents and sucrose metabo￾lizing enzymes in developing leaves ofHevea brasiliensis. Front. Plant Sci. 9, 58.
References 77This page intentionally left blankPlants and their Interaction to Environmental Pollution 79 Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-99978-6.00020-0
CHAPTER
4
Effect of elevated O3 on plants growth, 
active constituents, and production
Priti Chauhan and Neeti Sharma
Department of Biosciences and Biotechnology, Banasthali Vidyapith, Jaipur, Rajasthan, India
1. Introduction
Air pollution harms all living body in the world, and air pollution plays a critical role in 
human health, atmospheric climate change, and the health of ecosystem (Cohen et al., 2017). 
Ozone (O3) has been recognized to occur in the atmosphere from old days and has played 
an important part in the survival of life on Earth. O3 is a highly reactive form of oxygen that 
is very unstable. The O3 molecule is composed of three bonded oxygen atoms, whereas the 
oxygen (O2) we breathe includes just two oxygen atoms (Prabha et al., 2015). When ultravi￾olet (UV) light reaches the Earth’s surface, O3 is produced as a by-product of oxygen syn￾thesis. There are two atmospheric zones where O3 may be found. The stratosphere, which 
stretches between 10 and 50km and contains a considerably high concentration of O3, is the 
upper zone. This contribution to the protection of the lowest layers of the atmosphere from 
the sun’s harmful UV rays. The troposphere, which extends from the Earth’s surface to the 
stratosphere, is a layer of air that exists between the stratosphere and the atmosphere. The 
role of O3 is inverted in the lower atmospheric zone, because of its highly oxidizing nature 
it serves as an extremely damaging molecule (Sharma et al., 2012; Baier et al., 2005). Smog is 
mostly made up of ground level O3. Because of its phytotoxicity and large concentrations in 
rural parts of the country, it is widely regarded as the most damaging atmospheric pollutants 
to plants (Ainsworth et al., 2012).
O3 pollution has a significant impact on urban and rural agriculture in India (Bell et al., 
2011). Active photochemical zones for O3 formation in the atmosphere are generally referred 
to as tropical areas (Kunhikrishnan et al., 2004). O3 levels were typically highest from March 
to June, with the lowest levels observed from June to September. Higher O3 levels damage 
plants in a number of ways, including premature leaf fall, lower photosynthetic activity, and 
biomass loss (Tetteh et al., 2015). In the absence of foliar damage, physiological and growth 
changes occur (Rai et al., 2015). Plant frailty, reduced growth, poor crop quality, altered carbon 
metabolism, and poorer yields are all negative consequences of ambient ozone on important 80 4. Effect of elevated O3 on plants growth and active constituents
crop species and physiological processes (Fiscus et al., 2005; Li et al., 2015). Elevated O3 levels 
may enhance both enzyme activity and antioxidant concentrations linked with general plant 
defense systems (Caregnato et al., 2013; Kumari et al., 2015).
O3 is a highly reactive chemical in the atmosphere that forms and degrades fast. 
Through a photochemical cycle, O3 is present in the low troposphere in concentrations 
ranging from 0 to more than 100 ppb, depending on the quantity of its precursors, primar￾ily NOx (nitrogen oxides) and VOC (Volatile Organic Compounds) (Monks, 2005). Over 
the previous two decades, Carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O), 
and tropospheric O3 (hereafter referred to as O3) have all increased significantly in world 
average amounts.
In grains including wheat, rice, maize, and chickpeas, CO2 and O3 are particularly critical 
for plant growth, yield, and quality (Abebe et al., 2016). Reactive oxygen species (ROS) such as 
hydrogen peroxide and superoxide are produced when O3 enters plants through the stomata 
and reacts with the plasmalemma, which can change cellular components, activate signaling 
cascades, and finally induce cellular damage or even programmed cell death (Ainsworth, 
2017; Fiscus et al., 2005; Li et al., 2017). Elevated O3 generally has a detrimental influence on 
plants, resulting in early leaf senescence (Krupa and Kickert, 1989), reduced photosynthesis, 
altered assimilate partitioning, and yield suppression (Heagle, 1989; Nouchi et al., 1995). O3
has been shown to be detrimental to health, vegetation, and crop productivity (Dentener 
et al., 2006). The negative effects of O3 were originally discovered in grapevines (Richards 
et al., 1958), and it is currently acknowledged as the significant rural air pollutant harming 
human health, vegetation, or oxidation-sensitive materials (Ashmore, 2005). Moreover, in 
various crops and forages, O3 sensitive plants commonly demonstrate obvious foliar damage 
as well as a drop in nutritional quality (Booker et al., 2009). These effects might be attributed 
to participation of O3 in plant physiological activities such stomatal activity, photosynthe￾sis, respiration, and photosynthate transfer (Kainulainen et al., 2000). Plant development is 
slowed and plant metabolism is altered as a result of high O3 levels, resulting in lower crop 
yields (Emberson et al., 2003).
2. Chemistry of tropospheric O3 formation
While O3 filters UV light in the stratosphere, it is a harmful air pollutant in the tropo￾sphere, causing adverse effects to human health and plants. Tropospheric O3 (trioxygen) is 
produced by chemical interactions involving two chemically distinct precursors: nitrogen ox￾ides (NOx=NO + NO2) and reactive carbon molecules such carbon monoxide (CO), methane 
(CH4), and volatile organic compounds (VOCs). Sunlight, NOx, and reactive carbon mole￾cules like methane and volatile organic compounds, as well as their relative proportions af￾fect the rate of O3 production (VOCs). The primary process to produce O3 in the troposphere 
is the interaction of nitric oxide (NO) with the peroxy radical (R 2) (Atkinson, 2000). NO 
is transformed to NO2 in this process (Fig. 1), which is quickly photolyzed to generate O3
and recycle NO. The effectiveness with which NOx pollution creates O3 varies depending on 
where and when it is emitted. For example, NOx reacts quickly to form HNO3 in polluted 
areas near the Earth’s surface, which acts as a NOx reservoir. NO2 photolysis competes more 
efficiently with HNO3 generation in less polluted locations, resulting in more NOx molecules 3. Mechanisms by which O3 damages plant tissue 81
reacting with peroxy radicals to generate O3. O3 generation is particularly efficient in places 
where NOx is blown into the free troposphere, such as the tropics (Jacob et al., 1996). The 
O3 concentration is also determined by the VOC: NOx ratio (Simon et  al., 2015). Because 
VOCs restrict O3 production in urban areas with high NOx levels due to high emissions, O3
concentrations are reduced locally. NOx can combine with VOCs as it travels out from cities, 
resulting in higher O3 concentrations in suburban regions.
3. Mechanisms by which O3 damages plant tissue
Plants are continuously exposed to adverse environmental conditions that impair grow 
and fitness (Suzuki et al., 2014). O3 is a plant-damaging atmospheric pollutant that lowers 
agricultural yields across the world (Ainsworth et al., 2012). O3 enters the plant through the 
stomata and is broken down in the apoplast into reactive oxygen species (ROS) such super￾oxide (O2
–
) and hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) (Ainsworth, 2017; Waszczak et al., 2018). Sensitive 
plant species activate cell death processes in response to changes in O3 concentration, lesion 
formation (Brosche et al., 2010; Langebartels et al., 2002). O3 exposure can cause biogenically 
generated oxidative bursts, which increase ROS production (Kangasjarvi et al., 2005). Protein 
oxidation, altered gene expression, hazardous intermediate formation, and ozonolysis of 
membrane lipids, result in reduced photosynthesis, increased ethylene generation, increased 
senescence, and negative metabolic effects (Fuhrer and Booker, 2003; Long and Naidu, 2002; 
Matyssek et al., 2008; Kangasjarvi et al., 2005). Most abiotic and biotic stressors, including O3, 
promote the production of ROS, which can have harmful effects on DNA, proteins, lipids, 
and carbohydrates. However, ROS are not only toxic compounds; they also begin signaling 
processes that assist plants in adapting to stress (Jaspers and Kangasjärvi, 2010; Waszczak 
et al., 2018).
ROS are actively produced by plants as signaling molecules to govern developmental 
and defensive activities (Huang et al., 2019). Increased apoplastic ROS generation is one 
of the first observable reactions in defense against infections and abiotic stressors (of￾ten referred to a ROS burst; Choudhury et al., 2017; Qi et al., 2017). O3 is a particularly 
With the help of sunlight,
nitrogen dioxide
molecules disintegrate
O
O2 O3
O
N
Free oxygen is not
stable. It attached onto
oxygen molecules.
Ozone (O3) formation
FIG. 1 Tropospheric ozone (O3) formation.82 4. Effect of elevated O3 on plants growth and active constituents
valuable tool for studying general processes of ROS signaling and its function in cell 
death, defense signaling, and gene expression regulation because it allows a regulated 
distribution of apoplastic ROS to plants without additional modification (Vainonen and 
Kangasjärvi, 2015; Xu et al., 2015). Apoptotic ROS signaling, which is mediated by O3, 
causes large-scale changes in gene expression and metabolic profile (Blomster et al., 2011) 
(Fig. 2).
Some of the O3-induced changes in plant metabolism emerge as a variety of foliar dam￾age symptoms (Krupa et al., 2001), despite the fact that reduced net photosynthesis (A) and 
biomass output can occur without causing visual damage (Reich, 1987). Plants can defend 
themselves from irreversible damage caused by O3 exposure by developing thick cuticles, 
closing stomata, or detoxifying O3 near or within sensitive tissue. These precautions come 
at a cost: either a reduction in photosynthesis, as with stomatal closure, or a reduction in the 
carbohydrate required to build detoxifying systems (Andersen and Rygiewicz, 1991). The 
plant appears to produce an antioxidant that interacts with O3, protecting the tissue from 
injury and allowing detoxification to occur (Heath, 1988). Reduced net photosynthesis, ac￾celerated senescence, and harm to reproductive systems are all physiological consequences 
of O3 absorption. As a result, O3 exposure will affect plant development and agricultural 
production.
4. Volatile organic compounds (VOCs)
Isoprene, monoterpenes, and higher terpenoids are among the biogenic VOCs produced 
by plants. Isoprene is emitted in large quantities by terrestrial plants (400–600 Tg C year− 1
). 
In the troposphere, it exhibits a high chemical reactivity (Guenther, 2012). Isoprene has a 
tropospheric lifetime of 1–2 h and is rapidly oxidized by hydroxyl and nitrate radicals 
NO2+ CO +CH4+
O3
O3 ROS (-H2O, -O2-, -OH, H2O2)
UV
VOCs Emission
Plant Uptake
O3 formation
Production
• Protein Oxidation.
Stomatal Regulation
• Lipids.
• Protein.
• Amino acids.
• Carbohydrate.
• Root Senescence
• C- assimilation
• Shoot Biomass 
• Root Activity 
• Secondary Metabolites 
• Proline 
• Polyphenolics 
• Antioxidant enzymes 
Pigmentation
Chlorosis
Growth Parameters
• Premature Senescence
• Photosynthetic rate
• Ethylene
• Negative Metabolic effect
• Altered Gene Expression.
• Ozonolysis of membrane
 lipids.
ROS
Signals
Biochemical Effects
Visible Effects
Yiels
Loss
Growth
Reduction
Programmed
Cell Death
(PCD)
Abiotic/
Biotic Stress
Signals
FIG. 2 Mechanism of ozone (O3) plant response.6. The effects of ozone on plants 83
(NO3) (Squire, 2015). Peroxyl radicals are formed during the breakdown of VOCs. These 
react with NO to form NO2, which then photosynthesizes to become O3. In regions where 
NOx levels are exceptionally low, peroxy radicals formed by isoprene oxidation react 
with one other or with O3, resulting in net O3 destruction. Modeling studies suggest 
that forest-emitted isoprene raises tropospheric O3 concentrations by 15%–18% globally 
(Monson and Holland, 2001). Peroxyacylnitrates (PANs) can be carried great distances in 
cold, high-altitude circumstances when isoprene is oxidized. Long-distance PAN transfer 
can lead to O3 production distant from the pollution source (Harley, 1999). Despite large 
differences in isoprene emissions between ecosystems and species, biogenic VOCs contrib￾ute to O3 generation in the troposphere on a worldwide scale (Guenther, 2006). For exam￾ple, isoprene emissions from broadleaf forests average 12.6 mg m2 h1
, whereas needle-leaf 
evergreen trees emit 2.0 mg m2 h1
 and crops release very little, just 0.09 mg m2 h1
. This dif￾ference in emission has sparked concerns that extending the planting of isoprene-emitting 
bioenergy species may result in increased O3 stress, resulting in crop loss and increased 
human death (Ashworth, 2013).
5. Toxicology of plants
Plants are subjected to both acute and chronic O3 exposure at ground level. Acute expo￾sure is characterized as a period of time with relatively high O3 concentrations (> 80nL/
liter) that can last anywhere from a many hour to several days. A chronic exposure, on the 
other hand, involves relatively low O3 concentrations (e.g., 40nL/liter) throughout a plant’s 
life, with random periods of high concentrations. On susceptible plants, both acute and 
chronic O3 exposures can cause foliar damage. The reaction of plants to O3 differs by genus, 
species, cultivar or variation, and genotype. However, several plant species have been iden￾tified as biological markers for the development of O3 damage symptoms and are used to 
measure relative O3 exposures at various geographic areas. Tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum L.) 
cv. Bel-W3 (O3-sensitive) and cv. Bel-B (O3-tolerant) are the most well-known and widely 
utilized indicator plants on the world. During the 1990s, for example, 20,000 households 
in the British Isles voluntarily cultivated. As part of a biomonitoring network, two tobacco 
cultivars are being grown in pots. It helps map the geographic distribution of phytotoxic O3
concentrations (Heggestad, 1991). Foliar injury, on the other hand, is not necessarily linked 
to yield reductions.
6. The effects of ozone on plants
Diffusion deposits O3 from the environment on plant canopies and stomata allow it to 
enter the leaf. O3 penetrates plants through the stomatal pores as part of the natural gas 
exchange process (CLRTAP, 2017) and accumulates in leaves. The effects of O3 on physi￾ological, biochemical, growth, yield, and other associated factors that encourage stomatal 
opening raise the risk of O3 visible injury (Krupa et al., 1998), senescence (Gelang et al., 2000; 
Dermody et al., 2006), and reactive oxygen species (Farage and Long, 1995), such as SOD 84 4. Effect of elevated O3 on plants growth and active constituents
(Percy et al., 2003), catalase (Heath, 2008), stress enzymes, and peroxidase (Singh et al., 2011). 
On the other hand, plant height (Sarkar and Agrawal, 2010a,b), leaf area and number of 
leaves, total chlorophyll (Pleijel et al., 2006), biomass (Calatayud and Barreno, 2004), photo￾synthetic rate (Biswas et al., 2008), stomatal conductance (Singh et al., 2009), rubisco enzyme 
activity (Guidi et al., 2002), ascorbic acid (Andersen, 2003), C-allocation (Grantz et al., 2006), 
belowground root exudates (Kanerva et al., 2006), soil microbial community, methane and 
NOx emissions (Kanerva et al., 2007), grain yield (Vandermeiren et al., 2005), grain protein 
(Pleijel et al., 1999), and grain sugar and starch (Anguissola et al., 1994) are all decreased by 
O3. Further, impact of O3 on different plant growth parameters is given in Table 1.
Numerous components of the light-harvesting complex in chloroplasts might be harmed 
by O3, according to the studies of chlorophyll fluorescence. Foliar damage lowers the number 
of functional complexes in sensitive plants, reducing the plant’s potential to use sunlight for 
photosynthesis (Guidi et al., 2000). O3 can interfere with the generation of electrons at lower 
concentrations, decreasing the energy available to “fix” CO2 in tolerant plants (Guidi et al., 
1997). Although O3 has the ability to alter these numerous processes in the photosynthetic 
pathway, the sensitivities of the individual components, the order of events that occur, and 
the particular locations of harm are yet unknown. In addition to its influence on shoots, O3
has been shown to have a negative impact on carbon transport to roots, as well as their biol￾ogy and biomass.
TABLE 1 Impact of tropospheric ozone (O3) on some selected plant species.
Plant name Variable name Effects of O3 References
Wheat Yield Significant yield losses Wang et al. (2007)
Soybean Yield production Decease the crop yield Nali et al. (2002), Morgan 
et al. (2003)
Rice Total yield Yield loss in crop Ainsworth (2008)
Phoebe bournei and 
Phoebe zhennan
Net photosynthesis rates (Pn) 
and leaf, root, and total biomass
Polysaccharide
Decreased Pn and total 
biomass
Increased polysaccharides
Chen et al. (2018)
Liriodendron
chinense:
Visible injury, Photosynthesis 
rate
Decreased in both 
parameters
Zhang et al. (2011)
Metasequoia 
glyptostroboides Glycine 
max
Plant growth Inhibited the plant growth Feng et al. (2008a,b), 
Zhang et al. (2014a,b)
Soybean Growth response
Quercetin and ABA 
concentration
Decreased root biomass
Both concentrations 
increased with elevated O3
Mao et al. (2017a,b)
Poplar Photosynthetic rate, 
morphological, and biomass
significant negative 
relationships with 
photosynthesis rate, 
chlorophyll content, leaf 
mass per area and root 
biomass
Shang et al. (2017)8. Visible injury and physiological effects 85
7. Measurements of ozone-induced changes
The effects of O3 on plants have been researched in both lab and field trials, through the 
use of controlled greenhouses or growth chambers, open-top chambers (OTCs), or field 
plots (Krupa and Manning, 1988). Plants are the focus of our research since they have 
been the subject of the majority of investigations (MacKenzie and El-Ashry, 1989). The 
majority of research has employed ozone to treat seedlings in growth chambers (Zheng 
et al., 1998). O3 has a variety of negative physiological impacts on plants, including obvi￾ous leaf damage, poor hydraulic status, photosynthetic decreases, Primary and secondary 
metabolisms have been altered and hastened leaf senescence (Dizengremel, 2001; Fares 
et al., 2013; Wittig et al., 2007) (Fig. 3). As a result, greater O3 levels will reduce the produc￾tivity and performance of economically important plants in both agricultural and forest 
environments settings (Basahi et al., 2016). Increased O3 concentration (0.07 mmol mol− 1
) 
had negative impacts on biomass, yield, photosynthetic rate, chlorophyll, carotenoid, 
and ascorbic acid concentrations are all measured as well as CAT activity, according to 
Ambasht and Agrawal (2003) However, total phenol content and POX activity had bene￾ficial effects.
8. Visible injury and physiological effects
Visible darkening of foliage was the initial criteria for O3 harm. Chlorosis, premature se￾nescence, and changes in pigmentation or bronzing are visible injuries caused by persistent 
exposure to low O3 concentrations. Flecking and stippling may appear after an acute expo￾sure to high O3 levels (Krupa and Manning, 1988; Krupa et al., 2001). In several plants, such 
as yellow poplar Rebbeck and Scherzer, 2002), wheat (Sarkar and Agrawal, 2010a,b; Singh 
et al., 2018), cotton, sorghum, and Zea mays (Singh et al., 2014), Reduced photosynthesis, in￾creased antioxidant system turnover (Du et al., 2018), reproductive process damage (Stewart 
et al., 1996; Leisner and Ainsworth, 2012), and diminished carbon transfer to roots are all 
physiological impacts of O3 exposure (Coleman et al., 1995; Andersen, 2003). For crops such 
FIG. 3 O3 injury on potato and watermelon plants. Adopted from Bhushan, A., 2018. Impact of air pollution on vegetable 
crops. Open Access J. Sci. 2(6), 367–368.86 4. Effect of elevated O3 on plants growth and active constituents
as clover and wheat, Reich and Amundson (1985) observed a 50% loss in photosynthesis in 
red pine, but only a 10% reduction in photosynthesis in white pine.
9. Effects on plant growth
In several plants, such as soyabean, increased O3 treatments resulted in significantly de￾creased root and nodule biomass, as well as root activity (Mao et al., 2017a,b). Root senes￾cence or mortality may be exacerbated by reduced root nodule biomass, which may reduce 
N intake by roots. Elevated O3 has been shown to reduce carbon availability in leaves by 
degrading stomatal function and changing Rubisco carboxylation capacity, which can change 
the carbon balance of plants by reducing carbon allocation to roots and shoots and altering 
shoot and root biomass (Fiscus et al., 2005; Matyssek et al., 2008; Wyness et al., 2011; Zhang 
et al., 2014a,b).
The mesophyll tissue is most affected by O3. The plant’s stomata and epidermal cells will 
fight until it is completely dead. Pye (1988) found a wide range of negative biomass reactions 
of numerous species to high O3 levels, the most significant of which was a 69% drop in bio￾mass. The Southern Commercial Forest Research Cooperative analyzed the growth decreases 
of loblolly pine in the Southeast United States and determined that O3 was responsible for 
a 2%–5% yearly growth reduction. Reduced photosynthesis leads to slower growth rates, 
which are commonly expressed in terms of volume or biomass. Many studies suggest that 
increased O3 did not affect the initial maximum photosynthetic capacity of the leaf, however, 
the pace of photosynthetic capacity decrease has accelerated (Morgan et al., 2004; Feng et al., 
2011). According to this research, plants are more sensitive to higher O3 concentrations during 
reproductive periods near the end of the growth season (Fiscus et al., 2005).
Exposure to O3 has been shown in several investigations to reduce photosynthesis 
(Fiscus et al., 2005). Through stomatal closure or membrane nonpermeability, air contam￾inants may be physically kept out of tissues and cells. Closure of stomata isn’t always 
complete, and O3 exposure can impair stomatal function (Paoletti and Grulke, 2005). 
Except for stem biomass, elevated O3 had a substantial P. bournei and P. zhennan seed￾lings have different effects on dry biomass. The O3 treatment reduced P. bournei leaf, root, 
and total biomass by 66.49%, 51.78%, and 44.04%, respectively, when compared with the 
CF treatment. Another study found that 6-month O3 exposure reduced the biomass of 
broadleaved evergreen Phoebes by 40%–50%, which was substantially higher than the 
previously investigated Chinese broadleaved evergreen tree species (Feng et  al., 2011). 
The significant drop in biomass might be attributable to the Phoebe species’ vulnerability 
to long-term O3 exposure. Ambient O3 influenced glucose metabolism in P. bournei leaves 
and roots in a prior research, indicating that P. bournei was sensitive to O3 (Chen et al., 
2015). Photosynthesis will be reduced (as a result of a decrease in chlorophyll content and 
photosynthetic capacity) as a result, C absorption will be lowered. The decreases in C 
assimilation are caused by either direct O3 impact on the photosynthetic system or indi￾rect O3 influence on leaf senescence, which is an intriguing subject. Increased O3 concen￾trations and UV-B radiation have been studied extensively for their impact on soybean 
aboveground growth, morphology, and yield (Li et al., 2002; Kakani et al., 2003; Feng and 
Kobayashi, 2009; VanLoocke et al., 2012; Kataria et al., 2017).10. Biochemical effects of O3 87
10. Biochemical effects of O3
As the initial site of ‘ozone attack,’ the plasma membrane is assumed to play a key role. 
Apoplastic enzymes, plasma membrane, lipids, and sensitive amino acids in plasma mem￾brane proteins among the initial targets for O3 and its ROS products are a variety of chemical 
molecules found in the apoplast (Fiscus et al., 2005). Plasma membrane dysfunction is caused 
by these apoplast-plasma membrane interactions. Cells and membrane-bound organelles 
may be harmed as a result of membrane leakage (Heath, 2008) or within the membrane, 
alterations in signal transduction proteins (Rossard et al., 2006). A cascade of cellular and 
metabolic responses can be triggered by physical changes in the plasma membrane (Farnese 
et al., 2016). The assault of O3 and related ROS on the guard cells that make up the stomatal 
complex is an essential reaction because it determines subsequent O3 absorption (Fiscus et al., 
2005). Short-term O3 exposures that result in an increase in H2O2 has been linked to ABA￾induced stomata closure via a calcium influx increase in guard cells (Schroeder et al., 2001).
The concentrations of flavonoid, quercetin, and rutin were significantly increased at flow￾ering stage and pod stage after exposure to O3. There were no significant variations in the 
amounts of polyphenols and P-coumaric acid in soybean root (Mao et al., 2017a,b). To protect 
themselves from oxidative stress, enzymatic antioxidants are abundant in plants (such as 
POD, SOD, CAT, and APX) (Gill and Tuteja, 2010; Chauhan and Mathur, 2020). O3 exposure 
had no effect on hydrogen peroxide or thiol levels in another study. However, it reduced the 
activity of glutathione reductase and dehydroascorbate reductase, increased ascorbate oxida￾tion, and increased total ascorbate levels in date palms (Du et al., 2018).
The antioxidant thiol molecule glutathione is found in the highest concentration in leaves 
and its amount as well as its redox states may be important for O3-induced ROS detoxification 
(Kangasjarvi et al., 2005; Foyer and Noctor, 2005). Glutathione content increased by 80% in 
soybeans exposed to high O3 levels, but not in garden peas or common beans (Yendrek et al., 
2015). There was no change in ascorbate concentration in a study of the responses of tropical 
maize to O3 stress, while thiol content rose (Singh et al., 2014; Sarkar et al., 2015). Many stud￾ies have also found that antioxidant localization, rather than total foliar content, is important 
in determining detoxifying ability (Dusart et al., 2019).
Ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase, sometimes known as ‘rubisco,’ is a 
carboxylase/oxygenase enzyme that converts ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate to ribulose 1,5. It is 
one of the most important enzymes in the Calvin cycle. Galmés et al. (2013) found in a recent 
study of 20 experimental investigations, O3 causes a drop in rubisco concentration rather than 
the activation state. A decrease in the production of the rubisco enzyme’s messenger RNA 
has been blamed for this (Ainsworth et al., 2012; Kubis and Bar-Even, 2019). Eckardt and Pell 
(1994) found a significant drop in rubisco content at conditions where extra synthesis should 
be low, implying that increased degradation rather than reduced production was the primary 
source of the drop in rubisco content.
Alonso et al. (2001) discovered that the combined impacts of O3 and drought stress had no 
effect on antioxidant enzyme activity. In general, O3 increased the activity of antioxidant en￾zymes significantly (Wu and Tiedemann, 2002; Baek et al., 2018). Antioxidant modifications 
are triggered to aid cellular repairs, the oxidative damage produced by O3 at first, especially 
the form and function of plasma membranes (Nali et al., 2004). Antioxidant metabolites and 
enzymes have been studied in two investigations (Herbinger et al., 2002; Nali et al., 2004). It’s 88 4. Effect of elevated O3 on plants growth and active constituents
probable that the ability to increase antioxidant levels in reaction to O3 aided in the protection 
of the photosynthetic machinery, oxidative stress and membrane function. As a result, boost￾ing apoplastic ascorbate levels is beneficial. It’s hypothesized that enhancing its recycling in 
the Foyer-Halliwell-Asada cycle is a better defense against oxidative damage than reducing 
stomatal conductance. This would make photosynthetic CO2 fixation more difficult (Chen 
and Gallie, 2005). In another research, when exposed to O3, total ascorbate and DHA levels 
rose, but decreased ascorbate levels remained steady, indicating greater ROS scavenging, as 
shown in Sedum album leaves (Castillo and Greppin, 1988). On the other hand, decreased 
in vitro GR and DHAR activity in date palm leaves exposed to O3 imply a lower capability for 
ascorbate regeneration through the Foyer-Halliwell-Asada cycle. Several studies show that 
increased O3 levels caused oxidative damage in plant cells, resulting in changes in secondary 
metabolite concentrations and enzyme activity (Rai and Agrawal, 2008; Tripathi et al., 2011).
11. Productivity measurements
For symptomatic species, certain visual signs are unambiguous and can be duplicated with 
controlled O3 doses (Grulke and Heath, 2020). Visible signs have been associated to losses in 
seed (sand blackberry, Rubus cuneifolius—Pursh; Chappelka, 2002) and biomass (Ponderosa 
pine; Arbaugh et  al., 1998) output. However, other species experience production declines 
without exhibiting any obvious signs (white fir; Retzlaff et al., 2000). Loss in crops refers to 
the economically important plant part: seeds (soybean, Glycine max (L.) Merr.; Zhang et al., 
2014a,b; common bean, Phaseolus vulgaris L.; Burkey et al., 2012), fruits (common grape vine, 
Vitis vinifera L.), Lactuca sativa L. (Temple et al., 1986). Cotton, grape (V. vinifera L.), lettuce, 
oat (Aveva sativa L.), peanut, potato (Solanum tuberosum L.), rape (Brassica napus L.), rice, soy￾bean, spinach (Spinacia oleracea L.), tobacco, tomato, watermelon (Citrullus lanatus Thunb.), 
and wheat are among the O3 sensitive crops (Morgan et al., 2003; Ainsworth, 2008; Booker 
et al., 2009). When NCLAN data from 12 species and 38 cultivars was combined and a Weibull 
statistical function was applied, it was discovered that cultivars from seven species (cotton, 
peanut, spinach, soybean, tomato, turnip (Brassica rapa L.), and wheat) would lose 10% of 
their yield when exposed to a 7-h seasonal average O3 concentration.
When compared with CF air controls, seasonal O3 concentrations of 62, 45, and 42nL/L 
lowered yields by 14%, 10%, and 18%, respectively, according to the meta-analyses of O3
effects studies on rice, soybean, and wheat (Morgan et  al., 2003; Ainsworth, 2008; Feng 
et al., 2008a,b). Chronic O3 exposure might result in yield decrease at the whole plant level 
(Ashmore, 2005; Feng et al., 2008a,b). Adaros et al. (1991) found a 435% decline in rape seed 
output, whereas others found a 420% rise (Köllner and Krause, 2003). When seed crops were 
exposed to O3 from the vegetative stage to maturity, their sensitivity to O3 was highest (Lee 
et al., 1988), experiments on beans (P. vulgaris; Younglove et al., 1994) and spring wheat (Ewert 
and Pleijel, 1999) corroborated this hypothesis.
Unfortunately, the bulk of O3 research has been done on open-grown plants, which are 
generally cultivated in pots with little or no competition above and below ground. Predicting 
maturity is a risky proposition. The utilization of a series of resistances (to simulate O3 trans￾port through: I the atmosphere (ii) the crop canopy boundary layer) is similar to all models. 
According to Beer’s rule, the canopy is represented as a ‘big-leaf’ split into light and shadow 14. Ozone as a disinfectant for the surface 89
fractions. We do know, however, that [O3] and wind speed change with canopy depth. We 
also know that leaf cohorts of a similar age (and hence O3 exposure) will prefer to cluster 
together in the canopy.
Modeling should ideally account for these various factors. Both in terms of O3 absorption 
(and hence canopy accumulation) and O3 damage; the latter would demand a better knowl￾edge of the effect of O3 dosage on C assimilation of various ages of leaves, as well as their role 
within the canopy in terms of contribution to yield.
12. The impact on crops and trees
A number of studies have indicated that prolonged O3 exposure throughout the course 
of a growing season or a crop’s life cycle can result in a loss of marketable yield (US, EPA, 
1996). The long-term impacts of the effects of O3 on tree populations have ramifications for 
the aesthetic and recreational aspects of our national forests and national parks, and govern￾ment agencies are worried. The forests of Southern California’s San Bernardino Mountains 
are a good illustration of ambient O3’s long-term impact on a forest ecosystem (Miller and 
McBride, 1998). With or without indications of O3-induced foliar damage, growth and yield 
might be affected. However, it is estimated that ambient O3 exposure costs the United States 
$0.8 billion in crop losses each year, based on multiple experimental investigations (US, EPA, 
1996). Despite the lack of a similar estimate for tree species, O3 has clear harmful effects on 
our national parks and forests (McLaughlin and Percy, 1999).
13. Ozone and reactive oxygen species
Plant tissue damage is not caused by all O3 interactions. Plants can absorb a certain quan￾tity of O3 and utilize it to their advantage. ‘Effective ozone flux’ is defined as a balance be￾tween stomatal flow and leaf cellular detoxification (Dizengremel et al., 2009). The number 
of O3 molecules that enter the leaf and are then changed into Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS) 
such as superoxide (O2-), hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), and hydroxyl radical (OH), all of which 
are involved in numerous metabolic processes, is regulated by the degree of stomatal open￾ing (Mittler, 2017). Plant tissue may so digest modest levels of O3 without being harmed. The 
doses, as in many other cases, could be the determining factor in determining whether O3
causes harm or benefits.
14. Ozone as a disinfectant for the surface
O3 and ROS have a high oxidation potential; for example, the hydroxyl radical has an 
oxidation potential of 2,83V, which is greater than that of O3 (2,08V) and very near to that of 
fluor (2,87V), which is the highest of any natural element on the planet (Hoigné and Bader, 
1977). This feature, together with its low residuality, makes it an ecologically favorable op￾tion for eradicating undesirable microbes during specific periods of crop growth (Prabha 
et al., 2015; Msayleb et al., 2017). In Lillium sp. and Dioscorea sp., microbial disinfection was 90 4. Effect of elevated O3 on plants growth and active constituents
achieved during the commencement of in vitro tissue culture (Cabrera and González, 2014; 
Cardarelli and Cardona, 2017). Similar effects have been achieved when harmful substances 
such as chemical fungicides or sodium hypochlorite were replaced in both situations during 
the postharvest treatment of fruits and vegetables (Bataller et al., 2012; Aguayo et al., 2013).
Furthermore, O3 treatment, both in the atmosphere and in dissolved O3 in water, leads to 
increased economic efficiency in all related scenarios.
15. ROS and plant cell metabolism
In plant biology, reactive oxygen species (ROS) serve a dual function. They are required for 
a variety of vital signaling functions, such as growth, development, and environmental re￾actions, but they are also toxic byproducts of aerobic metabolism (Mittler, 2017; Sandermann 
et al., 1998; Inupakutika et al., 2016). H2O2 has been found to have a good effect on seed 
germination and quality in previous studies. Hydrogen peroxide has a beneficial effect on 
the root and development of wheat seedlings (Hameed et al., 2004). The germination of rice 
seeds and the development of seedlings were both improved by another group in Japan 
(Sasaki et al., 2005). In canola seeds, Orabi and colleagues reported comparable results (Orabi 
et al., 2018). Later, it was shown that O3 treatment can cause ROS signaling in various plant 
hormone pathways, which includes the routes for salicylic acid (SA) and jasmonic acid (JA) 
(Pazarlar et al., 2017; Jwa and Hwang, 2017) that play an important role in systemic acquired 
resistance (SAR), a plant’s defense against biotic and abiotic stress (Muhammad et al., 2018; 
Wany et al., 2018).
According to the studies, ROS are essential for a variety of basic biological activities, in￾cluding cellular proliferation and differentiation. Furthermore, cell death, which was pre￾viously thought to be the result of ROS directly oxidizing cells, is now thought to be the 
result of ROS triggering a natural or intentional cell death process, making maintaining a low 
amount of ROS in cells critical for survival (Mittler, 2017). More research is required to fully 
understand all aspects of metabolic ROS pathways. Once again, the precise dosing is critical 
in order to achieve a positive rather than damaging impact. In this regard, O3 applied to vege￾table seedlings produced sanitation efficiencies ranging from 29% to 59% (Paylan et al., 2014).
16. Conclusion
Crop growth and production are influenced by atmospheric O3 levels. There is a need for 
research on both sides of the O3–plant interaction. First, scientists must enhance their capac￾ity to quantify and predict the impacts of O3 on agricultural yields. Improved crop breeding 
and agronomic methods would be ideal for avoiding the harshest impacts of O3 pollution 
while also developing resilient agricultural systems. Second, a greater knowledge of meta￾bolic activities signaled by ROS in plants during biotic or abiotic stress would be beneficial. 
Quantifying the influence of ambient O3 in open field circumstances on novel crop cultivars 
that are cultivated without considering their sensitivity to O3 is necessary. In order to main￾tain and improve crop yields and nutritional quality, crop breeding programs must include 
selection of characteristics for increased plant tolerance to ambient O3.References 91
References
Abebe, A., Pathak, H., Singh, S.D., Bhatia, A., Harit, R., Kumar, V., 2016. Growth, yield and quality of maize with 
elevated atmospheric carbon dioxide and temperature in North West India. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 218, 66–72.
Adaros, G., Weigel, H.J., Jäger, H.J., 1991. Concurrent exposure to SO2 and/or NO2 alters growth and yield responses 
of wheat and barley to low concentrations of O3. New Phytol. 118 (4), 581–591.
Aguayo, E., Escalona, V., Silveira, A.C., Artés, F., 2013. Quality of tomato slices disinfected with ozonated water. Food 
Sci. Technol. Int. 20 (3), 227–235.
Ainsworth, E.A., 2008. Rice production in a changing climate: a metal analysis of responses to elevated carbon diox￾ide and elevated ozone concentration. Glob. Chang. Biol. 14 (7), 1642–1650.
Ainsworth, E.A., 2017. Understanding and improving global crop response to ozone pollution. Plant J. 90, 886–897.
Ainsworth, E.A., Yendrek, C.R., Sitch, S., Collins, W.J., Emberson, L.D., 2012. The effects of tropospheric ozone on net 
primary productivity and implications for climate change. Annu. Rev. Plant Biol., 637–663.
Alonso, R., Elvira, S., Castillo, F.J., Gimeno, B.S., 2001. Interactive effects of ozone and drought stress on pigments and 
activities of antioxidative enzymes in Pinus halepensis. Plant Cell Environ. 24 (9), 905–916.
Ambasht, N.K., Agrawal, M., 2003. Effects of enhanced UV-B radiation and tropospheric ozone on physiological and 
biochemical characteristics of field grown wheat. Biol. Plant. 47, 625–628.
Andersen, C.P., 2003. Source–sink balance and carbon allocation below ground in plants exposed to ozone. New 
Phytol. 157 (2), 213–228.
Andersen, C.P., Rygiewicz, P.T., 1991. Stress interaction and mycorrhizal plant response: understanding carbon allo￾cation priorities. Environ. Pollut. 73, 217–244.
Anguissola, J., Scotti, S., Botteschi, G., 1994. Effects of ozone on grain quality of wheat grown in open-top chambers: 
three years of experimentation. Environ. Pollut. 86, 31–35.
Arbaugh, M.J., Miller, P.R., Carroll, J.J., Takemoto, B., Procter, T., 1998. Relationships of ozone exposure to pine injury 
in the Sierra Nevada and San Bernardino Mountains of California, USA. Environ. Pollut. 101 (2), 291–301.
Ashmore, M.R., 2005. Assessing the future global impacts of ozone on vegetation. Plant Cell Environ. 28 (8), 949–964.
Ashworth, K., 2013. Impacts of biofuel cultivation on mortality and crop yields. Nat. Clim. Chang. 3, 492–496.
Atkinson, R., 2000. Atmospheric chemistry of VOCs and NOx. Atmos. Environ. 34, 2063–2101.
Baek, S.G., Park, J.H., Kwak, M.J., Lee, J.K., Na, C.S., Lee, B., Woo, S.Y., 2018. Physiological and biochemical responses 
of elevated ozone on Pterocarpus indicus under well-watered and drought conditions. Forest Sci. Technol. 14 (4), 
153–159.
Baier, M., Kandlbinder, A., Golidack, D., Dietz, K.-J., 2005. Oxidative stress and ozone preception signalling and 
response. Plant Cell Enivron. 28, 1012–1020.
Basahi, J.M., Ismail, I.M., Haiba, N.S., Hassan, I.A., Lorenzini, G., 2016. Assessing ambient ozone injury in olive (Olea 
europaea L.) plants by using the antioxidant ethylenediurea (EDU) in Saudi Arabia. Environ. Monit. Assess. 188 
(6), 1–11.
Bataller, M., González, J.E., Véliz, E., Fernández, L.A., 2012. Ozone applications in the post-harvest of papaya (Carica 
papaya L.): an alternative of Amistar fungicide. Ozone Sci. Eng. 34 (3), 151–155.
Bell, J., Power, S.A., Jarraud, N., Agrawal, M., Davies, C., 2011. The effects of air pollution on urban ecosystems and 
agriculture. Int. J. Sustain. Dev. World Ecol. 18 (3), 226–235.
Biswas, D.K., Xu, H., Li, Y.G., Sun, J.Z., Wang, X.Z., 2008. Genotypic differences in leaf biochemical, physiological 
and growth responses to ozone in 20 winter wheat cultivars released over the past 60 years. Glob. Chang. Biol. 
14, 46–59.
Blomster, T., Salojarvi, J., Sipari, N., Brosche, M., Ahlfors, R., Keinanen, M., Overmyer, K., Kangasjarvi, J., 2011. 
Apoplastic reactive oxygen species transiently decrease auxin signalling and cause stress-induced morphogenic 
response in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol. 157, 1866–1883.
Booker, F., Muntifering, R., McGrath, M., Burkey, K., Decoteau, D., Fiscus, E., Manning, W., Krupa, S., Chappelka, A., 
Grantz, D., 2009. The ozone component of global change: potential effects on agricultural and horticultural plant 
yield, product quality, and interactions with invasive species. J. Integr. Plant Biol. 51, 337–351.
Brosche, M., Merilo, E., Mayer, F., Pechter, P., Puzõrjova, I., Brader, G., Kangasjärvi, J., Kollist, H., 2010. Natural varia￾tion in ozone sensitivity among Arabidopsis thaliana accessions and its relation to stomatal conductance. Plant Cell 
Environ. 33, 914–925.
Burkey, K.O., Booker, F.L., Ainsworth, E.A., Nelson, R.L., 2012. Field assessment of a snap bean ozone bioindicator 
system under elevated ozone and carbon dioxide in a free air system. Environ. Pollut. 166, 167–171.92 4. Effect of elevated O3 on plants growth and active constituents
Cabrera, M., González, J.E., 2014. Ozone as an alternative for disinfection of explants during in vitro mass plant prop￾agation. Ozone Sci. Eng. 36 (5), 435–439.
Calatayud, A., Barreno, E., 2004. Response to ozone in two lettuce varieties on chlorophyll a fluorescence, photosyn￾thetic pigments and lipid peroxidation. Plant Physiol Biochem 42 (6), 549–555.
Cardarelli, M., Cardona, C.M., 2017. Influence of ozone treatments on in vitro propagation of Liliumin bioreactor. 
Acta Hortic. 1155, 381–385.
Caregnato, F.F., Bortolin, R.C., Junior, A.M.D., Cláudio, J., Moreira, F., 2013. Exposure to elevated ozone levels dif￾ferentially affects the antioxidant capacity and the redox homeostasis of two subtropical Phaseolus vulgaris L. 
varieties. Chemosphere 93, 320–330.
Castillo, F.J., Greppin, H., 1988. Extracellular ascorbic acid and enzyme activities related to ascorbic acid metabolism 
in Sedum album L. leaves after ozone exposure. Environ. Exp. Bot. 28, 231–238.
Chappelka, A.H., 2002. Reproductive development of blackberry (Rubus cuneifolius), as influenced by ozone. New 
Phytol. 155 (2), 249–255.
Chauhan, P., Mathur, J., 2020. Phytoremediation efficiency of Helianthus annuus L. for reclamation of heavy 
metals-contaminated industrial soil. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 27, 29954–29966.
Chen, Z., Gallie, D.R., 2005. Increasing tolerance to ozone by elevating foliar ascorbic acid confers greater protection 
against ozone than increasing avoidance. Plant Physiol. 138, 1673–1689.
Chen, Z., Shang, H., Cao, J., Yu, H., 2015. Effects of ambient ozone concentrations on contents of nonstructural carbo￾hydrates in Phoebe bournei and Pinus massoniana seedlings in subtropical China. Water Air Soil Pollut. 226, 310–317.
Chen, Z., Cao, J., Yu, H., Shang, H., 2018. Effects of elevated ozone levels on photosynthesis, biomass and non￾structural carbohydrates of Phoebe bournei and Phoebe zhennan in subtropical China. Front. Plant Sci. 9, 1764.
Choudhury, F.K., Rivero, R.M., Blumwald, E., Mittler, R., 2017. Reactive oxygen species, abiotic stress and stress 
combination. Plant J. 90, 856–867.
CLRTAP, 2017. Mapping Critical Levels for Vegetation, Chapter III of Manual on Methodologies and Criteria 
for Modelling and Mapping Critical Loads and Levels and Air Pollution Effects, Risks and Trends. UNECE 
Convention on Long-range Trans boundary Air Pollution.
Cohen, A.J., Brauer, M., Burnett, R., Anderson, H.R., Frostad, J., Estep, K., Feigin, V., 2017. Estimates and 25-year 
trends of the global burden of disease attributable to ambient air pollution: an analysis of data from the global 
burden of diseases study 2015. Lancet 389 (10082), 1907–1918.
Coleman, M.D., Dickson, R.E., Isebrands, J.G., Karnosky, D.F., 1995. Carbon allocation and partitioning in aspen 
clones varying in sensitivity to tropospheric ozone. Tree Physiol. 15 (9), 593–604.
Dentener, F., Stevenson, D., Ellingsen, K., 2006. The global atmospheric environment for the next generation. Environ. 
Sci. Technol. 40, 3586–3594.
Dermody, O., Long, S.P., DeLucia, E.H., 2006. How does elevated CO2 or ozone affect the leaf-area index of soybean 
when applied independently? New Phytol. 169, 145–155.
Dizengremel, P., 2001. Effects of ozone on the carbon metabolism of forest trees. Plant Physiol. Biochem. 39, 729–742.
Dizengremel, P., Le Thiec, D., Hasenfratz, S.M.P., Vaultier, M.N., Bagard, M., et  al., 2009. Metabolic-dependent 
changes in plant cell redox power after ozone exposure. Plant Biol. 11, 35–42.
Du, B., Kreuzwieser, J., Winkler, J.B., Ghirardo, A., Schnitzler, J.P., Ache, P., Rennenberg, H., 2018. Physiological re￾sponses of date palm (Phoenix dactylifera) seedlings to acute ozone exposure at high temperature. Environ. Pollut. 
242, 905–913.
Dusart, N., et al., 2019. Integrated analysis of the detoxification responses of two Euramerican poplar genotypes 
exposed to ozone and water deficit: focus on the ascorbate–glutathione cycle. Sci. Total Environ. 651, 2365–2379.
Eckardt, N.A., Pell, E.J., 1994. O3 induced degradation of rubisco protein and loss of rubisco mRNA in relation to leaf 
age in Solanum tuberosum L. New Phytol. 127 (4), 741–748.
Emberson, L.D., Ashmore, M. R., Murray, F., eds, 2003. Air Pollution Impacts on Crops and Forests. A Global 
Assessment. London: Imperial College Press. pp. xiii + 372 pp.
Ewert, F., Pleijel, H., 1999. Phenological development, leaf emergence, tillering and leaf area index, and duration of 
spring wheat across Europe in response to CO2 and ozone. Eur. J. Agron. 10 (3–4), 171–184.
Farage, P.K., Long, S.P., 1995. An in vivo analysis of photosynthesis during short-term O3 exposure in three contrast￾ing species. Photosynth. Res. 43, 11–18.
Fares, S., Vargas, R., Detto, M., Goldstein, A.H., Karlik, J., Paoletti, E., Vitale, M., 2013. Tropospheric ozone reduces 
carbon assimilation in trees: estimates from analysis of continuous flux measurements. Glob. Chang. Biol. 19, 
2427–2443.References 93
Farnese, F.S., Menezes-Silva, P.E., Gusman, G.S., Oliveira, J.A., 2016. When bad guys become good ones: the key role 
of reactive oxygen species and nitric oxide in the plant responses to abiotic stress. Front. Plant Sci. 7, 471.
Feng, Z.Z., Kobayashi, K., 2009. Assessing the impacts of current and future concentrations of surface ozone on crop 
yield with meta-analysis. Atmos. Environ. 43, 1510–1519.
Feng, Z., Kobayashi, K., Ainsworth, E.A., 2008a. Impact of elevated ozone concentration on growth, physiology, and 
yield of wheat (Triticum aestivum L.): a metal analysis. Glob. Chang. Biol. 14 (11), 2696–2708.
Feng, Z.Z., Zheng, H.Q., Wang, X.K., Zheng, Q.W., Feng, Z.Z., 2008b. Sensitivity of Metasequoia glyptostroboides to 
ozone stress. Photosynthetica 46, 463–465.
Feng, Z., Pang, J., Kobayashi, K., Zhu, J., Ort, D.R., 2011. Differential responses in two varieties of winter wheat to 
elevated ozone concentration under fully open-air field conditions. Glob. Chang. Biol. 17, 580–591.
Fiscus, E.L., Booker, F.L., Burkey, K.O., 2005. Crop responses to ozone: uptake, modes of action, carbon assimilation 
and partitioning. Plant Cell Environ. 28, 997–1011.
Foyer, C.H., Noctor, G., 2005. Oxidant and antioxidant signalling in plants: a re-evaluation of the concept of oxidative 
stress in a physiological context. Plant Cell Environ. 28, 1056–1071.
Fuhrer, J., Booker, F.L., 2003. Ecological issues related to ozone: agricultural issues. Environ. Int. 29, 141–154.
Galmés, J., Aranjuelo, I., Medrano, H., Flexas, J., 2013. Variation in rubisco content and activity under variable cli￾matic factors. Photosynth. Res. 117 (1), 73–90.
Gelang, J., Pleijel, H., Sild, E., Danielsson, H., Younis, S., 2000. Rate and duration of grain filling in relation to flag 
leaf senescence and grain yield in spring wheat (Triticum aestivum) exposed to different concentrations of ozone. 
Physiol. Plant. 110, 366–375.
Gill, S.S., Tuteja, N., 2010. Reactive oxygen species and antioxidant machinery in abiotic stress tolerance in crop 
plants. Plant Physiol. Biochem. 48, 909–930.
Grantz, D.A., Gunn, S., Vu, H.B., 2006. O3 impacts on plant development: a meta-analysis of root/shoot allocation 
and growth. Plant Cell Environ. 29, 1193–1209.
Grulke, N.E., Heath, R.L., 2020. Ozone effects on plants in natural ecosystems. Plant Biol. 22, 12–37.
Guenther, A., 2006. Estimates of global terrestrial isoprene emissions using MEGAN (model of emission of gases and 
aerosols from nature). Atmo. Chem. Phys. 6, 3181–3210.
Guenther, A., 2012. The model of emissions of gases and aerosols from nature version 2.1 (MEGAN2.1): an extended 
and updated framework for modelling biogenic emissions. Geosci. Model Dev. 5, 1471–1492.
Guidi, L., Nali, C., Ciompi, S., Lorenzini, G., Soldatini, G.F., 1997. The use of chlorophyll fluorescence and leaf 
gas exchange as methods for studying the different responses to ozone of two bean cultivars. J. Exp. Bot. 48, 
173–179.
Guidi, L., Di Cagno, R., Soldatini, G.F., 2000. Screening of bean cultivars for their response to ozone as evaluated by 
visible symptoms and leaf chlorophyll fluorescence. Environ. Pollut. 107, 349–355.
Guidi, L., Degl’Innocenti, E., Soldatini, G.F., 2002. Assimilation of CO2, enzyme activation and photosynthetic elec￾tron transport in bean leaves, as affected by high light and ozone. New Phytol. 156 (3), 377–388.
Hameed, A., Farooq, S., Iqbal, N., Arshad, R., 2004. Influence of exogenous application of hydrogen peroxide on root 
and seedling growth on wheat (Triticum aestivum L.). Int. J. Agric. Biol. 6 (2), 366–369.
Harley, P.C., 1999. Ecological and evolutionary aspects of isoprene emission from plants. Oecologia 118, 109–123.
Heagle, A.S., 1989. Ozone and crop yield. Annu. Rev. Phytopathol. 27, 397–423.
Heath, R.L., 1988. Biochemical mechanisms of pollutant stress. In: Assessment of Crop Loss from Air Pollutants. 
Springer, Dordrecht, pp. 259–286.
Heath, R.L., 2008. Modification of the biochemical pathways of plants induced by ozone: what is the varied route to 
changes? Environ. Pollut. 155, 453–463.
Heggestad, H.E., 1991. Origin of Bel-W3, Bel-C and Bel-B tobacco varieties and their use as indicators of ozone. 
Environ. Pollut. 74, 264–291.
Herbinger, K., Tausz, M., Wonisch, A., Soja, G., Sorger, A., Grill, D., 2002. Complex interactive effects of drought and 
ozone stress on the antioxidant defense systems of two wheat cultivars. Plant Physiol. Biochem. 40 (6–8), 691–696.
Hoigné, J., Bader, H., 1977. The role of hydroxyl radical reactions in ozonation processes in aqueous solutions. Water 
Res. 10 (5), 377–386.
Huang, H., Ullah, F., Zhou, D.X., Yi, M., Zhao, Y., 2019. Mechanisms of ROS regulation of plant development and 
stress responses. Front. Plant Sci. 10, 800.
Inupakutika, M.A., Sengupta, S., Devireddy, A.R., Azad, R.K., Mittler, R., et al., 2016. The evolution of reactive oxy￾gen species metabolism. J. Exp. Bot. 67 (21), 5933–5943.94 4. Effect of elevated O3 on plants growth and active constituents
Jacob, D.J., Heikes, B.G., Fan, S.M., Logan, J.A., Mauzerall, D.L., Bradshaw, J.D., Singh, H.B., Gregory, G.L., Talbot, 
R.W., Blake, D.R., Sachse, G.W., 1996. Origin of ozone and NOx in the tropical troposphere: a photochemical anal￾ysis of aircraft observations over the South Atlantic basin. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos. 101, 24235–24250.
Jaspers, P., Kangasjärvi, J., 2010. Reactive oxygen species in abiotic stress signaling. Physiol. Plant. 138, 405–413.
Jwa, N.S., Hwang, B.K., 2017. Convergent evolution of pathogen effectors toward reactive oxygen species Signaling 
networks in plants. Front. Plant Sci. 8, 1687.
Kainulainen, P., Holopainen, J.K., Holopainen, T., 2000. Combined effects of ozone and nitrogen on secondary com￾pounds, amino acids, and aphid performance in Scots pine. J. Environ. Qual. 29, 334–342.
Kakani, V.G., Reddy, K.R., Zhao, D., Sailaja, K., 2003. Field crop responses to ultraviolet-B radiation: a review. Agric. 
For. Meteorol. 120, 191–218.
Kanerva, T., Palojarvi, A., Ramo, K., Ojanpera, K., Esala, M., 2006. A 3-year exposure to CO2 and O3 induced minor 
changes in soil N cycling in a meadow ecosystem. Plant and Soil 286, 61–73.
Kanerva, T., Regina, K., Ramo, K., Ojanpera, K., Manninen, S., 2007. Fluxes of N2O, CH4 and CO2 in a meadow eco￾system exposed to elevated ozone and carbon dioxide for three years. Environ. Pollut. 145, 818–828.
Kangasjarvi, J., Jaspers, P., Kollist, H., 2005. Signalling and cell death in ozone-exposed plants. Plant Cell Environ. 
28, 1021–1036.
Kataria, S., Baghel, L., Guruprasad, K.N., 2017. Alleviation of adverse effects of ambient UV stress on growth and 
some potential physiological attributes in soybean (Glycine max) by seed pre-treatment with static magnetic field. 
J. Plant Growth Regul. 36, 550.
Köllner, B., Krause, G.H.M., 2003. Effects of two different ozone exposure regimes on chlorophyll and sucrose content 
of leaves and yield parameters of sugar beet (Beta vulgaris L.) and rape (Brassica napus L.). Water Air Soil Pollut. 
144 (1), 317–332.
Krupa, S.V., Kickert, R.N., 1989. The greenhouse effect: impacts of ultraviolet-B (UV-B) radiation, carbon dioxide 
(CO2) and ozone (O3) on vegetation. Environ. Pollut. 61, 263–391.
Krupa, S.V., Tonneijck, A.E.G., Manning, W.J., 1998. Ozone. Pages 2-1 to 2-28, In: Flagler, R.B. (Ed.), Recognition of Air 
Pollution Injury to Vegetation: A Pictorial Atlas. Air & Waste Management Association, Pittsburgh, PA.
Krupa, S.V., Manning, W.J., 1988. Atmospheric ozone: formation and effects on vegetation. Environmet Pol 50 (1–2), 
101–137.
Krupa, S., McGrath, M.T., Andersen, C.P., Booker, F.L., Burkey, K.O., Chappelka, A.H., Zilinskas, B.A., 2001. Ambient 
ozone and plant health. Plant Dis. 85 (1), 4–12.
Kubis, A., Bar-Even, A., 2019. Synthetic biology approaches for improving photosynthesis. J. Exp. Bot. 70 (5), 1425–1433.
Kumari, S., Agrawal, M., Singh, A., 2015. Effects of ambient and elevated CO2 and ozone on physiological charac￾teristics, antioxidative defense system and metabolites of potato in relation to ozone flux. Environ. Exp. Bot. 109, 
276–287.
Kunhikrishnan, T., Lawrence, M.G., von Kuhlmann, R., Richter, A., Ladstätter-Weißenmayer, A., Burrows, J.P., 2004. 
Analysis of tropospheric NOx over Asia using the model of atmospheric transport and chemistry (MATCH￾MPIC) and GOME-satellite observations. Atmos. Environ. 38 (4), 581–596.
Langebartels, C., Wohlgemuth, H., Kschieschan, S., Grün, S., Sandermann, H., 2002. Oxidative burst and cell death in 
ozone-exposed plants. Plant Physiol. Biochem. 40, 567–575.
Lee, E.H., Tingey, D.T., Hogsett, W.E., 1988. Evaluation of ozone exposure indices in exposure–response modelling. 
Environ Pol 53, 43–62.
Leisner, C.P., Ainsworth, E.A., 2012. Quantifying the effects of ozone on plant reproductive growth and development. 
Glob. Chang. Biol. 18 (2), 606–616.
Li, Y., Zu, Y.Q., Chen, J.J., Chen, H.Y., 2002. Intraspecific responses in crop growth and yield of 20 soybean cultivars 
to enhanced ultraviolet-B radiation under field conditions. Field Crop Res 78, 1–8.
Li, P., Feng, Z., Catalayud, V., Yuan, X., Xu, Y., Paoletti, E., 2017. A meta‐analysis on growth, physiological and bio￾chemical responses of woody species to ground‐ level ozone highlights the role of plant functional types. Plant 
Cell Environ. 40, 2369–2380.
Li, T., Hasegawa, T., Yin, X., Zhu, Y.A.N., Boote, K., Adam, M., Bregaglio, S., Buis, S., Confalonieri, R., Fumoto, T., 
Gaydon, D., Iii, M.M., 2015. Uncertainties in predicting rice yield by current crop models under a wide range of 
climatic conditions. Glob. Chang. Biol. 21, 1328–1341.
Long, S.P., Naidu, S.L., 2002. Effects of oxidants at the biochemical, cell and physiological levels, with particular 
reference to ozone. In: Bell, J.N.B., Treshow, M. (Eds.), Air Pollution and Plant Life, second ed. John Wiley & Sons, 
Ltd., Chichester, pp. 69–88.References 95
MacKenzie, J.J., El-Ashry, M.T. (Eds.), 1989. Air Pollution’s Toll on Forests and Crops. Yale University Press, New 
Haven, p. 376.
Mao, B., Wang, Y., Zhao, T.H., Tian, R.R., Wang, W., Ye, J.S., 2017a. Combined effects of elevated O3 concentrations and 
enhanced UV-B radiation of the biometric and biochemical properties of soybean roots. Front. Plant Sci. 8, 1568.
Mao, B., Yin, H., Wang, Y., Zhao, T.H., Tian, R.R., Wang, W., Ye, J.S., 2017b. Combined effects of O3 and UV radiation 
on secondary metabolites and endogenous hormones of soybean leaves. PLoS One 12 (8), e0183147.
Matyssek, R., Sandermann, H., Wieser, G., Booker, F., Cieslik, S., Musselman, R., Ernst, D., 2008. The challenge of 
making ozone risk assessment for forest trees more mechanistic. Environ. Pollut. 156 (3), 567–582.
McLaughlin, S., Percy, K., 1999. Forest health in North America: some perspectives on actual and potential roles of 
climate and air pollution. Water Air Soil Pollut. 116, 151–197.
Miller, P.R., McBride, J.R. (Eds.), 1998. Oxidant air pollution impacts in the Montane forests of Southern California. 
In: Ecological Studies. 134. Springer Verlag, New York.
Mittler, R., 2017. ROS are good. Trends Plant Sci. 22 (1), 11–19.
Monks, P.S., 2005. Gas-phase radical chemistry in the troposphere. Chem. Soc. Rev. 34, 376–395.
Monson, R.K., Holland, E.A., 2001. Biospheric trace gas fluxes and their control over tropospheric chemistry. Annu. 
Rev. Ecol. Syst. 32, 547–576.
Morgan, P.B., Ainsworth, E.A., Long, S.P., 2003. How does elevated ozone impact soybean? A metal analysis of pho￾tosynthesis, growth and yield. Plant Cell Environ. 26 (8), 1317–1328.
Morgan, P.B., Bernacchi, C.J., Ort, D.R., Long, S.P., 2004. An in vivo analysis of the effect of season-long open-air ele￾vation of ozone to anticipated 2050 levels on photosynthesis in soybean. Plant Physiol. 135, 2348–2357.
Msayleb, N., Kanwar, R., Wu, H., Van Leeuwen, J., 2017. Soil ozonation for nematode disinfestation as an alternative 
to methyl bromide and nematicides. Scient. Pages Environ. Stud. 1 (1), 11–19.
Muhammad, A., Cheng, Z., Ahmad, H., Hayat, S., 2018. Reactive oxygen species (ROS) as defences against a broad 
range of plant fungal infections and case study on ROS employed by crops against Verticillium dahliae wilts. J. 
Plant Interact. 13 (1), 353–363.
Nali, C., Paoletti, E., Marabottini, R., Della Rocca, G., Lorenzini, G., Paolacci, A.R., Badiani, M., 2004. Ecophysiological 
and biochemical strategies of response to ozone in Mediterranean evergreen broadleaf species. Atmos Environ 38 
(15), 2247–2257.
Nali, C., Pucciariello, C., Lorenzini, G., 2002. Ozone distribution in Central Italy and its effect on crop productivity. 
Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 90, 277–289.
Nouchi, I., Osamu, I., Harazono, Y., Kouchi, H., 1995. Acceleration of 13C-labelled photosynthate partitioning from 
leaves to panicles in rice plants exposed to chronic ozone at the reproductive stage. Environ. Pollut. 88, 253–260.
Orabi, S.A., Hussein, M.M., Sazaki, S., Sharara, F.A., 2018. Influence of hydrogen peroxide on growth, yield and 
biochemical constituents of canola plants grown under different irrigation intervals. Curr. Sci. Int. 07 (3), 407–418.
Paoletti, E., Grulke, N.E., 2005. Does living in elevated CO2 ameliorate tree response to ozone? A review on stomatal 
responses. Environ. Pollut. 137, 483–493.
Paylan, I.C., Erkan, S., Cetinkaya, N., Ergun, M., Pazarlar, S., 2014. Effects of different treatments on the inactivation 
of various seedborne viruses in some vegetables. Ozone Sci. Eng. 36 (5), 422–426.
Pazarlar, S., Cetinkaya, N., Bor, M., Ozdemir, F., 2017. Ozone triggers different defence mechanisms against powdery 
mildew (Blumeria graminis DC. Speer f. sp. tritici) in susceptible and resistant wheat genotypes. Funct. Plant Biol. 
44 (10), 1016–1028.
Percy, K.E., Legge, A.H., Krupa, S.V., 2003. Troposphere ozone: a continuing threat to global forests? In: Karnosky, 
D.F. (Ed.), Air Pollution, Global Change and Forests in the New Millenium. Elsevier Ltd, pp. 85–118.
Pleijel, H., Mortensen, L., Fuhrer, J., Ojanpera, K., Danielsson, H., 1999. Grain protein accumulation in relation to 
grain yield of spring wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) grown in open-top chambers with different concentrations of 
ozone, carbon dioxide and water availability. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 72, 265–270.
Pleijel, H., Eriksen, A.B., Danielsson, H., Bondesson, N., Sellden, G., 2006. Differential ozone sensitivity in an old and 
a modern Swedish wheat cultivar-grain yield and quality, leaf chlorophyll and stomatal conductance. Environ. 
Exp. Bot. 56, 63–71.
Prabha, V., Barma, R.D., Singh, R., Madan, A., 2015. Ozone technology in food processing: a review. Trends Biosci. 8 
(16), 4031–4047.
Pye, J.M., 1988. Impact of ozone on the growth and yield of trees: a review. J. Environ. Qual. 17, 347–360.
Qi, J., Wang, J., Gong, Z., Zhou, J.M., 2017. Apoplastic ROS signaling in plant immunity. Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 38, 
92–100.96 4. Effect of elevated O3 on plants growth and active constituents
Rai, R., Agrawal, M., 2008. Evaluation of physiological and biochemical responses of two rice (Oryza sativa L.) cul￾tivars to ambient air pollution using open top chambers at a rural site in India. Sci. Total Environ. 407, 679–691.
Rai, R., Agrawal, M., Choudhary, K.K., Agrawal, S., Emberson, L., Büker, P., 2015. Application of ethylenediurea 
(EDU) in assessing the response of a tropical soybean cultivar to ambient O3: nitrogen metabolism, antioxidants, 
reproductive development and yield. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 112, 29–38.
Rebbeck, J., Scherzer, A.J., 2002. Growth responses of yellow poplar (Liriodendron tulipifera L.) exposed to 5 years of 
O3 alone or combined with elevated CO2. Plant Cell Environ. 25 (11), 1527–1537.
Reich, P.B., 1987. Quantifying plant response to ozone: a unifying theory. Tree Physiol. 3, 63–91.
Reich, P.B., Amundson, R.G., 1985. Ambient levels of ozone reduce net photosynthesis in tree and crop species. 
Science 230 (4725), 566–570.
Retzlaff, W.A., Arthur, M.A., Grulke, N.E., Weinstein, D.A., Gollands, B., 2000. Use of a single-tree simulation model 
to predict effects of ozone and drought on growth of a white fir tree. Tree Physiol. 20 (3), 195–202.
Richards, B.L., Middleton, J.T., Hewitt, W.B., 1958. Air pollution with reference to agronomic crops. Agronomy 50, 
559–561.
Rossard, S., Luini, E., Pérault, J.M., Bonmort, J., Roblin, G., 2006. Early changes in membrane permeability, produc￾tion of oxidative burst and modification of PAL activity induced by ergosterol in cotyledons of Mimosa pudica. J. 
Exp. Bot. 57, 1245–1252.
Sandermann, H., Ernst, D., Heller, W., Langebartels, C., 1998. Ozone: an abiotic elicitor of plant defence reactions. 
Trends Plant Sci. 3 (2), 47–50.
Sarkar, A., Agrawal, S.B., 2010a. Elevated ozone and two modern wheat cultivars: an assessment of dose dependent 
sensitivity with respect to growth, reproductive and yield parameters. Environ. Exp. Bot. 69 (3), 328–337.
Sarkar, A., Agrawal, S.B., 2010b. Identification of ozone stress in Indian rice through foliar injury and differential 
protein profile. Environ. Monit. Assess. 161, 205–215.
Sarkar, A., Singh, A.A., Agrawal, S.B., Ahmad, A., Rai, S.P., 2015. Cultivar specific variations in antioxidative de￾fense system, genome and proteome of two tropical rice cultivars against ambient and elevated ozone. Ecotoxicol. 
Environ. Saf. 115, 101–111.
Sasaki, K., Kishitani, S., Abe, F., Sato, T., 2005. Promotion of seedling growth of seeds of rice (Oryza sativa L. cv. 
Hitomebore) by treatment with H2O2 before sowing. Plant Prod. Sci. 8 (5), 509–514.
Schroeder, J.I., Allen, G.J., Hugouvieux, V., Kwak, J.M., Waner, D., 2001. Guard cell signal transduction. Annu. Rev. 
Plant Biol. 52 (1), 627–658.
Shang, B., Feng, Z., Li, P., Yuan, X., Xu, Y., Calatayud, V., 2017. Ozone exposure-and flux-based response relationships 
with photosynthesis, leaf morphology and biomass in two poplar clones. Sci. Total Environ. 603, 185–195.
Sharma, P., Jha, A.B., Dubey, R.S., Pessarakli, M., 2012. Reactive oxygen species, oxidative damage, and antioxidative 
defense mechanism in plants under stressful conditions. J. Bot. 2012, 1–26.
Simon, H., Reff, A., Wells, B., Xing, J., Frank, N., 2015. Ozone trends across the United States over a period of decreas￾ing NOx and VOC emissions. Environ. Sci. Technol. 49, 186–195.
Singh, E., Tiwari, S., Agrawal, M., 2009. Effects of elevated ozone on photosynthesis and stomatal conductance of 
two soybean varieties: a case study to assess impacts of one component of predicted global climate change. Plant 
Biol. 11, 101–108.
Singh, P., Agrawal, M., Agrawal, S.B., 2011. Differences in ozone sensitivity at different NPK levels of three tropical 
varieties of mustard (Brassica campestris L.): photosynthetic pigments, metabolites, and antioxidants. Water Air 
Soil Pollut. 214, 435–450.
Singh, A.A., Agrawal, S.B., Shahi, J.P., Agrawal, M., 2014. Investigating the response of tropical maize (Zea mays L.) 
cultivars against elevated levels of O3 at two developmental stages. Ecotoxicology 23 (8), 1447–1463.
Singh, A.A., Fatima, A., Mishra, A.K., Chaudhary, N., Mukherjee, A., Agrawal, M., Agrawal, S.B., 2018. Assessment of 
ozone toxicity among 14 Indian wheat cultivars under field conditions: growth and productivity. Environ Monit 
Asess. 190 (4), 1–14.
Squire, O.J., 2015. Influence of isoprene chemical mechanism on modelled changes in tropospheric ozone due to 
climate and land use over the 21st century. Atmos. Chem. Phys. 15, 5123–5143.
Stewart, C.A., Black, V.J., Black, C.R., Roberts, J.A., 1996. Direct effects of ozone on the reproductive development of 
Brassica species. J. Plant Physiol. 148 (1–2), 172–178.
Suzuki, N., Rivero, R.M., Shulaev, V., Blumwald, E., Mittler, R., 2014. Abiotic and biotic stress combinations. New 
Phytol. 203, 32–43.Temple, P.J., Taylor, O.C., Benoit, L.F., 1986. Yield response of head lettuce (Lactuca sativa L.) to ozone. Environ. Exp. 
Bot. 26 (1), 53–58.
Tetteh, R., Yamaguchi, M., Wada, Y., Funada, R., Izuta, T., 2015. Effects of ozone on growth, net photosynthesis and 
yield of two African varieties of Vigna unguiculata. Environ. Pollut. 196, 230–238.
Tripathi, R., Sarkar, A., Rai, P.S., Agrawal, S.B., 2011. Supplemental ultraviolet-B and ozone: impact on antioxidants, 
proteome and genome of linseed (Linum usitatissimum L. cv. Padmini). Plant Biol. 13, 93–104.
US, EPA, 1996. Air quality criteria for ozone and other photochemical oxidants. In: Office of Research and 
Development. National Center for Environmental Assessment, Washington, DC. EPA/600/P-93/004bF.
Vainonen, J.P., Kangasjärvi, J., 2015. Plant signalling in acute ozone exposure. Plant Cell Environ. 38, 240–252.
Vandermeiren, K., Black, C., Pleijel, H., de Temmerman, L., 2005. Impact of rising tropospheric ozone on potato: 
effects on photosynthesis, growth, productivity and yield quality. Plant Cell Environ. 28, 982–996.
VanLoocke, A., Betzelberger, A.M., Ainsworth, E.A., Bernacchi, C.J., 2012. Rising ozone concentrations decrease 
soybean evapotranspiration and water use efficiency whilst increasing canopy temperature. New Phytol. 195, 
164–171.
Wang, X., Zheng, Q., Yao, F., Chen, Z., Feng, Z., Manning, W.J., 2007. Assessing the impact of ambient ozone on 
growth and yield of a rice (Oryza sativa L.) and a wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) cultivar grown in the Yangtze Delta, 
China, using three rates of application of ethylenediurea (EDU). Environ. Pollut. 148 (2), 390–395.
Wany, A., Foyer, C.H., Gupta, K.J., 2018. Nitrate, NO and ROS signaling in stem cell homeostasis. Trends Plant Sci. 
23 (12), 1041–1044.
Waszczak, C., Carmody, M., Kangasjärvi, J., 2018. Reactive oxygen species in plant signaling. Annu. Rev. Plant Biol. 
69, 209–236.
Wittig, V.E., Ainsworth, E.A., Long, S.P., 2007. To what extent do current and projected increases in surface ozone 
affect photosynthesis and stomatal conductance of trees? A meta-analytic review of the last 3 decades of experi￾ments. Plant Cell Environ. 30, 1150–1162.
Wu, Y.X., Tiedemann, A.V., 2002. Impact of fungicides on active oxygen species and antioxidant enzymes in spring 
barley (Hordeum vulgare L.) exposed to ozone. Environ. Pollut. 116 (1), 37–47.
Wyness, K., Mills, G., Jones, L., Barnes, J.D., Jones, D.L., 2011. Enhanced nitrogen deposition exacerbates the negative 
effect of increasing background ozone in Dactylis glomerata, but not Ranunculus acris. Environ. Pollut. 159 (10), 
2493–2499.
Xu, E., Vaahtera, L., Brosche, M., 2015. Roles of defense hormones in the regulation of ozone-induced changes in gene 
expression and cell death. Mol. Plant 8, 1776–1794.
Yendrek, C.R., et al., 2015. A comparative analysis of transcriptomic, biochemical, and physiological responses to 
elevated ozone identifies species-specific mechanisms of resilience in legume crops. J. Exp. Bot. 66, 7101–7112.
Younglove, T., McCool, P.M., Musselman, R.C., Kahl, M.E., 1994. Growth-stage dependent crop yield response to 
ozone exposure. Environ. Pollut. 86 (3), 287–295.
Zhang, W.W., Niu, J.F., Wang, X.K., Tian, Y., Yao, F.F., Feng, Z.Z., 2011. Effects of ozone exposure on growth and 
photosynthesis of the seedlings of Liriodendron chinense (Hemsl.) Sarg, a native tree species of subtropical China. 
Photosynthetica 49, 29–36.
Zhang, W., Wang, G., Liu, X., Feng, Z., 2014a. Effects of elevated O3 exposure on seed yield, N concentration and 
photosynthesis of nine soybean cultivars (Glycine max (L.) Merr.) in Northeast China. Plant Sci. 226, 172–181.
Zhang, W.W., Feng, Z.Z., Wang, X.K., Niu, J.F., 2014b. Impacts of elevated ozone on growth and photosynthesis of 
Metasequoia glyptostroboides Hu et Cheng. Plant Sci. 226, 182–188.
Zheng, Y., Stevenson, K.J., Barrowcliffe, R., Chen, R., Wang, H., Barnes, J.D., 1998. Ozone levels in Chongqing: a po￾tential threat to crop plants commonly grown in the region? Environ. Pollut. 99, 299–308.
 
References 97This page intentionally left blankPlants and their Interaction to Environmental Pollution 99 Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-99978-6.00017-0
CHAPTER
5
Plants response to SO2
or acid deposition
Suchisree Jhaa
 and Ashok Yadavb
a
Plant Nutrition Department, Indofil Industries Limited, Thane, Maharashtra, India, 
b
ICAR-Central Agroforestry Research Institute, Jhansi, Uttar Pradesh, India
Abbreviations 
RNS reactive nitrogen species
ROS reactive oxygen species
SO2 sulfur dioxide
SOD superoxide dismutase
1. Introduction
The air pollution is rapidly increasing all over the world due to the progressively rising 
demand for natural resources and energy. Industries are the core contributors of the global 
air pollution (Lamego et  al., 2000; Choudhary et  al., 2022). Different form of sulfur oxide 
(SO2), their salts and corresponding acids generate air pollution. Large amounts of SO2 are 
emitted into the atmosphere owing to burning of sulfurous fossil fuels. Both gaseous and 
aqueous sulfur affect the total ecosystem by affecting plant kingdom mainly. Only plants are 
able to produce carbohydrate and transform it into biomass by using light and CO2 through 
a well-known process termed as photosynthesis on which total food ecosystem is depen￾dent (Kumar et al., 2022). Photosynthesis is initially affected by the intensity of SO2 as the 
metabolic function of chloroplast, the organelle involved in this process, exposed to air pol￾lution has lowered the ability to carbon fixation. Beside this, SO2 promotes the opening of 
the stomata, resulting increasing transpiration rate in plant body. Although certain amount 
of sulfur is required for plant growth and metabolism but the SO2 caused cellular damage 
after reaching at certain concentration. Usually impact of SO2 is more severe when it com￾bines with other air pollutants, namely, nitrogen oxides, fluorides and ozone. Overall, SO2
has been explored more extensively than the other pollutants. SO2 shows visible damage to 100 5. Plants response to SO2 or acid deposition
plant leaves at higher concentration (Husen, 1997, 2021, 2022) and invisible damage, linking 
to physiological and biochemical changes (Husen, 1997, 2021; Husen et al., 1999; Husen and 
Iqbal, 2004; Mahmooduzzafar and Iqbal, 1999, 2000, 2008; Rahman and Husen, 2022). It has 
also been reported that SO2 is the major air pollutant produced during the combustion of 
coal (Smith, 1990; Iqbal et al., 2000; Husen, 2021). The main aim of this chapter is to explore 
how plants response to SO2; how acid deposition changes plants metabolism and how plants 
develop their defense system to minimize the effect of these pollutants.
2. Plant and SO2 or acid rain
Kopriva et al. (2019) was reported the essentiality of sulfur for plant growth. At low con￾centration, sulfur acts as a plant nutrient. Healthy plant leaves generally contain 0.5–14mg/g 
sulfur (on a dry weight basis) (Varshney and Garg, 1979). Plant absorbs sulfur from soil as 
sulfate form and leaves absorb from atmosphere as sulfur oxide. Only beyond the critical 
level SO2 showed adverse effects on plant growth and development. A concentration (429μg 
SO2 per m3
) has been widely considered as threshold level (Zahn, 1963; Awanish, 2014). The 
SO2 has no injurious effects in higher plant below threshold level even prolonged exposure. 
But enduring exposure may develop irreversible injury and eventually death of plants. The 
effects of sulfur dioxide (gaseous form) or the acid rain (dissolution of SO2 in water) can be 
analyzed from two perspectives. First is the effect at individual plant level and second is the 
effect at the community level.
SO2 changed into H2SO4 within environment as a result of photochemical reaction happen 
outside clouds or inside the cloud droplets. These acids can float in air by wind before finally 
being deposited on the ground. These acids are deposited through two different processes: 
“wet deposition” (as acid rain or acidic snow fall) and “dry deposition” (acid remains in aero￾sol particles and carried away by the wind). The acid deposition changes the soil pH by de￾creasing pH within 5.0–5.6 range. The soil acidity not only depends on the pH of substances 
but also depends on the concentration and the amount of substances deposition. Moreover, 
the strength of the acid depends on the concentration of deposited substances and amount of 
the acids. Acid deposition affected ecosystem by affecting one of these environmental com￾ponents: soil, water, forest and living organism. Aid deposition harmed the forest ecosystem 
by (1) increasing aluminum poisoning, (2) changing soil pH and salt, (3) multiple stresses and 
(4) tropospheric ozone (Fig. 1). It is difficult to conclude that the acid deposition is the single 
reason for environmental changes but it is likely one of the major causes.
3. Plants response to SO2 or acid deposition
3.1 Changes in plant morphology and physiology process
The sensitivity of plants to SO2 depends on seasonal variation, day length, physiology and 
maturity of leaves as stomata is the foremost avenues to diffuse in pollutants. Day time plays 
a critical role for sulfur dioxide injury because stomata opens only at that time (most of the 
plant). By changing the morphological structure, SO2 can alter the physiological processes 3. Plants response to SO2 or acid deposition 101
of plant such as photosynthesis, respiration and transpiration (Fig. 2). High concentration of 
SO2 decreases the photosynthetic rate and simultaneously increased the rate of respiration 
(Gheorghe and Barbu, 2011). The alterations of physiological processes have been revealed to 
be associated with stomatal response (Verma and Singh, 2006). The SO2 is absorbed into leaf 
mesophyll through stomata and get deposited to wet surface where it dissociates into sulfite 
or bi-sulfate form. The SO2 as dissociate form reacts with cuticular waxes to such an extent 
that more SO2 can enter via damage cuticle (Wellburn, 1994). After entering by stomata, the 
SO2 accumulated within intercellular space of mesophyll tissue where it interacts with cellu￾lar water to form sulfurous acid (H2SO3) and again H2SO3 dissociates to H+ and HSO3
− ions 
(Beauregard, 1991; Lewandowska and Sirko, 2008). Thus, SO2 or its breakdown products re￾act with cellular organelles specially cell membranes causing death of tissue (Richard, 1965) 
and exhibited interveinal necrosis (Rao et al., 1985). Mature leaves are comparatively more 
FIG. 1 Plant response to SO2 or acid deposition: a schematic representation.102 5. Plants response to SO2 or acid deposition
susceptible to SO2 because of large intercellular space than young one which facilitates more 
rapid gas flow (Kumar and Singh, 1986). Young leaves are little bit resistant to pollutant as 
they can synthesize the metabolites against pollutant at their juvenile phase (or synthetic or 
anabolic phase), whereas mature leaves at their catabolic phase (degrading phase) accelerates 
more degeneration of tissues by SO2 pollutant.
The ultrastructure of chloroplast is disorganized having swelled up thylakoid disc and other 
interchloroplast membranes deformed in the presence of pollutant (SO2), creating small vesi￾cles (Awanish, 2014). The content of plant pigments within leaf also affected by SO2 exposure. 
Awanish and Kumar (2010) observed that chlorophyll a, chlorophyll b and carotenoid content 
gradually decreases with the time of SO2 exposure in comparison with control plant. SO2 may 
react with pigments in three ways: (1) loss of color (known as bleaching), (2) deterioration of 
chlorophyll molecules to pheophytin (known as phaeophytinization) and (3) blue shifting in pig￾ment spectrum (Nieboer et al., 1976). In phaeophytinization, Mg2 +
 ions from tetrapyrrole ring 
of chlorophyll is replaced by free H+
 ion to convert into pheophytin, a brown pigment involved 
in electron transport chain in light reaction of photosynthesis. The function of electron transport 
chain also alters by SO2 by damaging photosystem (PS) II (Calatayud et al., 2013). However, the 
mode of action and toxicity of SO2 on electron transport through PS II is still unclear.
The SO2 increases chlorophyllase activity, involved in chlorophyll degradation 
(Jeyakumar et  al., 2003). Carotenoid is highly sensitive to SO2. Sosnovschi et  al. (2003)
reported that carotenoid content is reduced by 93.01% in the presence of SO2 pollution. 
Moreover, another significant factor affected by SO2 is RuBP carboxylase, an enzyme 
^KϮ
^KϮ
^Kϰ
Ϯʹ
^Kϰ
Ϯʹ
^Kϯ ,^K Ϯʹ ϯ
ʹ ,ϮK
^ƚŽŵĂƚĂ
,н
ŽŶǀĞƌƐŝŽŶŽĨ
ŚůŽƌŽƉŚǇůůƚŽ
ƉŚĞŽƉŚǇƟŶ ZĞĚƵĐƟŽŶŽĨŚůŽƌŽƉŚǇůůĂ͕ĐŚůͲďΘĐĂƌŽƚĞŶŽŝĚ
^ǁĞůůŝŶŐƚŚǇůĂŬŽŝĚΘ
ĚĞŐĞŶĞƌĂƟŽŶŽĨƚŚǇůĂŬŽŝĚ
ŵĞŵďƌĂŶĞ
ĂŵĂŐĞĚůĞĂĨŽƌŝŶƚĞƌǀĞŝŶĂůŶĞĐƌŽƐŝƐ

 
Ϯ
Ϯ 
K K
K
K K
K



 


E E
DŐ
E E
ZĞĚƵĐĞŇŽǁĞƌŝŶŐΘ
ĨƌƵŝƚŝŶŐΘƉŽůůĞŶ
ŐĞƌŵŝŶĂƚŝŽŶ
ZĞĚƵĐĞĂĐƟǀŝƚǇ
ŽĨĞůĞĐƚƌŽŶ
ƚƌĂŶƐƉŽƌƚ
ƐǇƐƚĞŵ;W^//
ĚĞĨŽƌŵĂƟŽŶͿ
ZĞĚƵĐĞZƵW
ĐĂƌďŽǆǇůĂƐĞ
ĂĐƟǀŝƚǇΘ
/ŶĐƌĞĂƐĞ
ĐŚůŽƌŽƉŚǇůůĂƐĞ
ĂĐƟǀŝƚǇ
^KϮ
FIG. 2 Effects of SO2 on plant morphology and physiology process.3. Plants response to SO2 or acid deposition 103
involved in photosynthesis. The SO2 competes with CO2 for the reaction site of the RuBP 
that affected the function of the enzyme causing growth reduction by reducing photosyn￾thetic rate (Mansfield and Jones, 1984).
The inhibition of photosynthesis by SO2 may injure the reproductive process, ultimately 
lead to a drop in the flowering or fruiting (Hetherington and Woodward, 2003). Decreasing 
the number of fruits per plant may result in reduction in flower pollination and fertilization 
or inadequate development of fruit. Flowering is also affected by the inhibition of pollen 
germination and pollen tube growth (Varshney and Varshney, 1981). An in vitro experiment 
by Du Bay and Murdy (1983) revealed that SO2 in the presence of water (on the moist surface 
of stigma) reduced pollen germination by 50% from control in Lepidium virginicum. Kumar 
and Singh (1985, 1986) and Awanish and Kumar (2010) had reported advance flowering in 
some plant species (Cicer arietinum, Pisum sativum, Vigna sinensis, and Triticum aestivum) as a 
consequence of SO2 pollution. This may be the reason for plant to complete their life cycles in 
hurry under stress conditions.
3.2 Changes in plant biochemical and enzymatic response
The SO2 or acid deposition has significant effects on the biochemical components of plant, 
often leading to generate free radicals such as reactive oxygen species (ROS) and reactive 
nitrogen species (RNS) and develop oxidative damage in leaves (Dat et al., 2000; Singh et al., 
2022). Free radicals (ROS and/or RNS) are the molecules having free lone paired electrons at 
their outer most orbits due to those free radicals become unstable and reactive. Free radicals 
becoming stable by donating or accepting free electrons from stable molecules (Suppose mol￾ecule A) but now second molecules (molecule A) become unstable and they again react with 
other stable molecules for their stability. Thus, a chain reaction of ROS goes on leading the 
cell damage under environmental stress (Almohisen, 2014). Detoxification reaction of sulfite 
to sulfate (SO3
2 − to SO4
2 −) generates ROS such as hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) and/or super￾oxide (O2
−) in plant cells (Kong et al., 1999; Omasa et al., 2012). Hydrogen per oxide (H2O2) 
is a versatile biomolecule produced within chloroplast; lead a dual role in plant system (i.e., 
beneficial vs harmful) (Dat et al., 2000). The H2O2 generates within cell in high quantity when 
the plant exposed to stress condition and causing cell damage due to its elevated membrane 
permeability and extended self-life. Apart from destructive nature, H2O2 can also help to 
adapt changing environment by activating defense response in plant system against stressful 
environment (Neill et al., 2002; Quan et al., 2008). Appalasamy et al. (2017) reported that H2O2
level was increased to SO2 exposure in Trichilia dregeana leaves than the control set. Generation 
of H2O2 affects stomatal movement (Zhang et al., 2001). The SO2 increased the level of ROS 
(both O2
− and H2O2) and antioxidant enzyme in plant (Arabidopsis thaliana) (Li and Yi, 2012). 
Increased free radicals inversely proportionate to nucleic acids, proteins, peptides and lipids 
synthesis (Mittler et al., 2004; Foyer and Noctor, 2005; Yi et al., 2005). Significant reductions 
are observed by Awanish and Kumar (2010) in total protein content of mature plants due to 
exposure of SO2. Superoxide dismutase (SOD) is an important enzyme acting as antioxidant 
molecule that scavenges free radicals, namely, O2
− and H2O2 (Huang et al., 2015).
Several studies have been performed on the lipid peroxidation within cell, mediated by 
free radicals and defense mechanism of plants to SO2 or acid deposition (Wei et al., 2015). A 
product of lipid peroxidation known as malondialdehyde (MDA) formed by reactions with 104 5. Plants response to SO2 or acid deposition
ROS (Suzuki and Mittler, 2006; Tommasino et al., 2012) and long-term exposure to high SO2
increases MDA contents (Li and Yi, 2012). Thus, a consequent event of oxidative stress gener￾ation (due to ROS/RNS) and defense development against stress carried out simultaneously 
due to SO2 pollutant.
3.3 Metabolic pathways affected by SO2 or acid deposition
The SO2 or acid deposition affected different plant metabolic and catabolic cellular path￾ways. Acid deposition (or SO2 in aqueous state) can inhibit metabolic pathways by accept￾ing or donating an electron, interfering with cellular electron transport chain (Osmond and 
Avadhani, 1970). The reduction in plant growth and yield under SO2 exposure reflects the 
interaction of it with cellular metabolism (Malhotra, 1976). Most cellular reactions take place 
within membrane-bounded structure. Pollutants affect plant metabolic pathways when 
they enter and accumulate in membrane bound organelles in their active form. Due to ionic 
strength, the SO2 and H2SO3 are more membrane permeable and after entering into cell, it is 
assumed that HSO3
− and/or H2SO3 are dissociated to build acidification (Malhotra, 1976). 
Acidification of cytosol leads to convert pyruvate into lactate and ethanol represent main fer￾mentation reaction in plant by glycolysis. Interference of SO2 with cell membrane and cellular 
enzymes affected various metabolic and cellular processes, namely, photosynthesis, pentose 
phosphate pathways, electron transport chain, transcription and translation within plant cell. 
Enzyme mediated cellular processes affected by pollutant as it deactivation enzymes by split￾ting disulfide linkage of it (Cecil and Wake, 1962) and activating some hydrolytic enzymes 
concurrently.
Exposure of plants to SO2 at high concentration leads to increase mortality of the plant 
cells (Yi et al., 2012) by oxidative cell damage (Xing et al., 2007), enzyme dysfunction (Wei 
et al., 2015), metabolic processes such as photosynthesis and transpiration inhibition (Yang 
and Wang, 2012; Darrall, 1989), leaf necrosis, reduction in crop yield and final plant death 
(Thomas, 1958).
3.4 Effects on plant vegetation and ecosystem
Other air pollutant such as ozone caused oxidative type of smog by reacting with sun￾light specially UV component and formed “Ozone smog.” In contrast, SO2 exhibited reducing 
characters. There was an evidence to form SO2 smog in London named as “London smog” 
(Ziegler, 1975). SO2 smog is mainly observed in industrial areas or on orographic-exposed 
locations even a distance, affected terrestrial plant vegetation. Especially sensitive plant such 
as lichens and bryophytes becoming extinct and due to sensitivity, some time they are used 
as indicators of pollution. Lichens and bryophytes showed toxic effects at very low concen￾tration of SO2 than those causing injury to higher vascular plant group, thus these two will be 
often used to determine the critical level set in environmental for SO2. Over 100years or so, a 
dramatic decline was reported on lichens and bryophytes vegetation in urban and industrial￾ized areas (Nash III and Wirth, 1988). Most field investigation failed to conclude that, is SO2 or 
acid deposition responsible for dramatic declination of these two lower groups of plant spe￾cies or a mixture of pollutant is more serious for degeneration of plant vegetation (Von Arb 
and Brunold, 1990)? Bryophytes are continuously exposed to pollution mainly when they are 4. Plants develops their defense system 105
in moist condition and sensitive to soluble SO2. The SO2 directly affected the metabolism of 
bryophytes by increasing membrane leakage, reduction in photosynthesis and respiration 
rate and deformation of photosynthetic pigments. But the impairment of SO2 differ widely in 
three group of bryophytes, namely, the liverworts, hornworts and the mosses because of dif￾ference in their habitat pattern, growth form and their morphological, physiological distinc￾tion. Epiphytic species grown up on tree trunks and branches often exhibited more sensitivity 
to sulfur dioxide in comparison with other species that inhabit within sheltered niches (e.g., 
soil in forests). Thus, differential sensitivity creates distinguishable zonation of SO2. Gilbert 
(1968, 1970) intellectually used this zonation phenomenon to approach biomonitoring and 
help to roughly predict approximate SO2 concentration of the environment from the assem￾blages of the species.
Lichen is a complex life form of two different organisms one is fungus and other is algae, 
grown with symbiotic partnership. In symbiosis, carbohydrate transfer from algae to fungus 
is a critical process which is mediated by a specific carrier protein. Cumulative effects of SO2
is found in Lichen as both organism involved in this association are individually affected by 
SO2. Lichens are relatively susceptible to SO2 than higher plant due to lack of cuticle and low 
amount of chlorophylls. Accessible of photosynthetic apparatus is deformed in the presence 
of SO2 or acid deposition in algal part. Beside this, protein involved in carbohydrate from 
algae to fungus loss their function by this pollutant. Few species of Lichen (Lecanora conizaeoi￾des) are able to tolerate the effects of SO2 (Shirtcliffe et al., 2006). Surface hydrophobicity is the 
core factor monitoring SO2 tolerance in lichens (Hauck et al., 2008). Leakage of potassium (K+) 
ions has been increased to SO2 exposure. Potassium leakage appears to be simple methods of 
evaluating lichen sensitivity to SO2 (Nieboer et al., 1976).
Acid deposition has inconsistent impact on near shore water bodies (i.e., lake, pond and 
ocean water). Acidification of the water hampers the ability of water organism by hamper￾ing the food chain of the water ecosystem (by affecting primary producer and primary con￾sumer). An overall impact on vegetation and ecosystem was reported by various researchers 
as all organisms are interconnected within an ecosystem.
4. Plants develops their defense system
The injurious effects of SO2 on plant system and the defense responses to pollutant are 
being widely investigated by Yi et al. (2012) and Wei et al. (2013). Plants are able to gen￾erate antioxidant-mediated defense mechanisms against oxidative stress. Antioxidants are 
the enzymatic and nonenzymatic molecules, scavenging the free radicals. When plants are 
exposed to environmental stress, initially the balance between the ROS generation and an￾tioxidant activity is disturbed, cause oxidative damage. But gradually plants develop more 
antioxidant to overcome the stress period and the level of increasing antioxidant directly 
proportionate with pollutant (Tiwari et al., 2006). Whenever a balancing between ROS gen￾eration and scavenging activity of antioxidant develop, plants turn out to be tolerated in 
stress environment. Interestingly, activity of various enzymatic antioxidants, namely, super￾oxide dismutase (SOD), peroxidase decreased to high concentration of SO2. Moreover, an 
extensive investigation on SO2-mediated ROS balancing to develop plant defense system is 
required.106 5. Plants response to SO2 or acid deposition
5. Conclusion
Air pollutants are emitted from numerous sources into the atmosphere. Coal-smoke pol￾lution and industrialization are the core factor for increasing the global SO2 pollution and 
in some parts of the world has reached its peak. Industrialization is necessary for every 
developing country for their economy. Hence, the complete check of SO2 cannot be possible. 
Moreover, the effects of the pollutant can be alleviated by supplementation of ameliorating 
agents such as antioxidant molecules. Plant response to SO2 or acid deposition depends on 
the developmental stages of the plant. At different stages of their life cycle, plant reacts to 
pollutant differently even at same concentration. Plant response to SO2 at altered develop￾mental stages need to be studied in detail for better understand. Further, the biochemical 
composition varied with the variation in plant species and plants are also morphologically 
distinct (C3, C4 and CAM plant), thus response may differ. The mode of action of SO2 on var￾ious metabolic processes in different plant groups (C3, C4 and CAM) may differ, is need to be 
explored and examined in terms of defense mechanism, adaptation, tolerance and damage 
detection.
References
Almohisen, I.A., 2014. Response of free amino acids in four legumes plants to air pollution. J. Biol. Todays World 3, 
169–173.
Appalasamy, M., Varghese, B., Ismail, R., Sershen, 2017. Responses of Trichilia dregeana leaves to sulphur dioxide pol￾lution: a comparison of morphological, physiological and biochemical biomarkers. Atmos. Pollut. Res. 8, 729–740.
Awanish, 2014. Plant responses to SO2 pollution and its amelioration. Int. J. Plant Sci. 9, 441–448.
Awanish, Kumar, N., 2010. Amelioration of SO2 induced phytotoxicity in Triticum aestivum L. cv. PBW-343. Asian J. 
Environ. Sci. 5, 29–36.
Beauregard, M., 1991. Involvement of sulfite and sulfate anions in the SO2-induced inhibition of the oxygen evolving 
enzyme photosystem II in chloroplasts: a review. Environ. Exp. Bot. 31, 11–21.
Calatayud, A., Bautista, A.S., Pascual, B., Maroto, J.V., Lopez-Galarza, S., 2013. Use of chlorophyll fluorescence imag￾ing as diagnostic technique to predict compatibility in melon graft. Sci. Hortic. 149, 13–18.
Cecil, R., Wake, R.C., 1962. The reactions of inter and intra-chain disulphide bonds in protein with sulphite. Biochem. 
J. 82, 401.
Choudhary, A., Kumar, A., Kaur, H., Singh, M., Suri, G.S., Kaur, G., Mehta, S., 2022. Effect of elevated CO2 condi￾tions on medicinal plants: A relatively unexplored aspect. In: Environmental Pollution and Medicinal Plants. CRC 
Press, pp. 95–111.
Darrall, N.M., 1989. The effect of air pollutants on physiological processes in plants. Plant Cell Environ. 12, 1–30.
Dat, J., Vandenabeele, S., Vranova, E., Van Montagu, M., Inze, D., Van Breusegem, F., 2000. Dual action of the active 
oxygen species during plant stress responses. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 57, 779–795.
Du Bay, D.T., Murdy, W.H., 1983. Impact of sulfur dioxide on plant sexual reproduction: in vivo and in vitro effects 
compared. J. Environ. Qual. 12, 147–149.
Foyer, C.H., Noctor, G., 2005. Oxidant and antioxidant signalling in plants: a revaluation of the concept of oxidative 
stress in a physiological context. Plant Cell Environ. 28, 1056–1071.
Gheorghe, I., Barbu, I., 2011. The effect of air pollutants on vegetation and the role of vegetation in reducing atmo￾spheric pollution.
Gilbert, O.L., 1968. Bryophytes as indicators of air pollution in the Tyne valley. New Phytol. 67, 15–30.
Gilbert, O.L., 1970. A biological scale for the estimation of sulfur dioxide air pollution. New Phytol. 69, 629–634.
Hauck, M., Jurgens, S.R., Brinkmann, M., Herminghaus, S., 2008. Surface hydrophobicity causes SO2 tolerance in 
Lichens. Ann. Bot. 101, 531–539.
Hetherington, A.M., Woodward, F.I., 2003. The role of stomata in sensing and driving environmental change. Nature 
424, 901–908.References 107
Huang, C.J., Wei, G., Jie, Y.C., Xu, J.J., Zhao, S.Y., Wang, L.C., Anjum, S.A., 2015. Responses of gas exchange, chlo￾rophyll synthesis and ROS-scavenging systems to salinity stress in two ramie (Boehmeria nivea L.) cultivars. 
Photosynthetica 53, 455–463.
Husen, A., 1997. Impact of air pollution on the growth and development of Datura innoxia Mill. Dissertation M.Sc, 
Jamia Hamdard, New Delhi, India.
Husen, A., 2021. Morpho-anatomical, physiological, biochemical andmolecular responses ofplants toair pollution. 
In: Husen, A. (Ed.), Harsh Environment and Plant Resilience. Springer International Publishing AG, Cham, pp. 
203–234, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-65912-7_9.
Husen, A., 2022. Environmental Pollution and Medicinal Plants. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, https://doi.
org/10.1201/9781003178866. 33487-2742.
Husen, A., Iqbal, M., 2004. Growth performance of Datura innoxia Mill. under the stress of coal-smoke pollution. Ann. 
For. 12, 182–190.
Husen, A., Ali, S.T., Mahmooduzzafar, Iqbal, M., 1999. Structural, functional and biochemical responses of Datura 
innoxia Mill. to coal-smoke pollution. Proc. Acad. Environ. Biol. 8, 61–72.
Iqbal, M., Srivastava, P.S., Siddiqi, T.O., 2000. Anthropogenic stresses in the environment and their consequences. In: 
Iqbal, M., Srivastava, P.S., Siddiqi, T.O. (Eds.), Environmental Hazards: Plants and People. CBS Publishers, New 
Delhi, pp. 1–37.
Jeyakumar, M., Jayabalan, N., Arockiasamy, D.I., 2003. Effect of SO2 on maize (Zea mays L.) var. Co.1 seedlings at 
lethal dose 50. Physiol. Mol. Biol. Plants 9, 147–151.
Kong, F.X., Hu, W., Chao, S.Y., Sang, W.L., Wang, L.S., 1999. Physiological responses of the lichen Xanthoparmelia 
mexicana to oxidative stress of SO2. Environ. Exp. Bot. 42, 201–209.
Kopriva, S., Malagoli, M., Takahashi, H., 2019. Sulfur nutrition: impacts on plant development, metabolism, and 
stress responses. J. Exp. Bot. 70, 4069–4073.
Kumar, A., Choudhary, A., Kaur, H., Kumar, R., Sharma, R., Gautam, H., Mehta, S., 2022. Water pollution and medic￾inal plants: insights into the impact and adaptation responses. In: Environmental Pollution and Medicinal Plants. 
CRC Press, pp. 117–129.
Kumar, N., Singh, V., 1985. Sensitivity of two cultivars of Pisum sativum L. to SO2 pollution. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 55, 
334–338.
Kumar, N., Singh, V., 1986. Growth response to Vigna sinensis to SO2 pollution. Proc. Indian Acad. Sci. (Plant Sci.). 
96, 419–427.
Lamego, M.M., de Souza Jr., P.A., Ferriera, E.P., Garg, V.K., 2000. Quantification of air pollution sources. Revista 
Controle Automacao 11, 77–81.
Lewandowska, M., Sirko, A., 2008. Recent advances in understanding plant response to sulfur-deficiency stress. Acta 
Biochim. Pol. 55, 57–71.
Li, L., Yi, H., 2012. Effect of sulfur dioxide on ROS production, gene expression and antioxidant enzyme activity in 
Arabidopsis plants. Plant Physiol. Biochem. 58, 46–53.
Mahmooduzzafar, N.F., Iqbal, M., 1999. Foliar responses of Peristrophe bicalyculata to coal smoke pollution. J. Plant 
Biol. 42, 205–212.
Mahmooduzzafar, N.F., Iqbal, M., 2000. Stomatal conductance, photosynthetic rate, and pigment content in Ruellia 
tuberosa leaves as affected by coal-smoke pollution. Biol. Plant. 43, 263–267.
Mahmooduzzafar, N.F., Iqbal, M., 2008. Coal-smoke pollution modifies physio-chemical characteristics of tissues 
during the ontogeny ofPeristrophe bicalyculata. Biologia 63, 1128–1134.
Malhotra, S.S., 1976. Effects of sulfur dioxide on biochemical activity and ultrastructural organization of pine needle 
chloroplasts. New Phytol. 76, 239.
Mansfield, T.A., Jones, T., Mooneyand, H.A., Goldsteinm, R., 1984. Growth environment interactions in SO2 responses 
of grasses. In: Winner, W.E. (Ed.), SO2 Pollution and Plant Productivity. Stanford University Press, Stanford, pp. 3–26.
Mittler, R., Vanderauwera, S., Gollery, M., Van Breusegem, F., 2004. Reactive oxygen gene network of plants. Trends 
Plant Sci. 9, 490–498.
Nash III, T.H., Wirth, V. (Eds.), 1988. Lichens, Bryophytes and Air Quality, pp. 201–216. Bibliotheca Lichenologica. J. 
Cramer Berlin Stuttgart 30.
Neill, S., Desikan, R., Hancock, J., 2002. Hydrogen peroxide signaling. Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 5, 388–395.
Nieboer, F., Richardson, D.H.S., Pucket, K.J., Tomassini, F.D., Mansfield, T.A., 1976. The phytotoxicity of sulphur 
dioxide to measurable responses in lichens. In: Effect of Air Pollution in Plants. Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, England, p. 61.108 5. Plants response to SO2 or acid deposition
Omasa, K., Saji, H., Youssefian, S., Kondo, N., 2012. Air pollution and plant biotechnology: prospects for phytomon￾itoring and phytoremediation. Springer Science & Business Media. 4-8, 26-28.
Osmond, C.G., Avadhani, P.N., 1970. Inhibition of the β-carboxylation pathway of CO2 fixation by bisulfate com￾pounds. Plant physiol. Lancaster 45, 228.
Quan, L.J., Zhang, B., Shi, W.W., Li, H.Y., 2008. Hydrogen peroxide in plants: a versatile molecule of the reactive 
oxygen species network. J. Integr. Plant Biol. 501, 2–18.
Rahman, S., Husen, A., 2022. Impact of sulphur dioxide deposition on medicinal plants’ growth and production of 
active constituents. In: Husen, A. (Ed.), Environmental Pollution and Medicinal Plants. CRC Press, Boca Raton, 
FL, pp. 65–93, https://doi.org/10.1201/9781003178866-4. 33487-2742.
Rao, D.N., Nandi, P.K., Agrawal, M., 1985. Studies on the amelioration of air pollution effects. Trends Plant Res., 437–445.
Richard, F.E., 1965. Microscopic analysis of plants and fungi under environmental stress from air pollution. Arch. 
Environ. Contam. Toxicol. 18, 177–284.
Shirtcliffe, N.J., Pyatt, F.B., Newton, M.I., McHale, G., 2006. A lichen protected by a super-hydrophobic and breath￾able structure. J. Plant Physiol. 163, 1193–1197.
Singh, A., Mehta, S., Yadav, S., Nagar, G., Ghosh, R., Roy, A., Chakraborty, A., Singh, I.K., 2022. How to cope with the 
challenges of environmental stresses in the era of global climate change: an update on ROS stave off in plants. Int. 
J. Mol. Sci. 23 (4), 1995.
Smith, W.H., 1990. Air Pollution and Forests. Springer-Verlag, New York, p. 618.
Sosnovschi, E., Tofan, L., Negreanu, T., 2003. The study of morphological and physiological changes at Triticum vul￾gare in the experimental conditions of contamination with NO2 and SO2. J. Environ. Prot. Ecol. 4, 65–69.
Suzuki, N., Mittler, R., 2006. Reactive oxygen species and temperature stresses: a delicate balance between signaling 
and destruction. Physiol. Plant. 126, 45–51.
Thomas, M.D., 1958. Air pollution with relation to agronomic crops: I. general status of research on the effects of air 
pollution on plants. Agron. J. 50, 545–550.
Tiwari, S., Agrawal, M., Marshall, F.M., 2006. Evaluation of ambient air pollution impact on carrot plants at a sub 
urban site using open top chambers. Environ. Monit. Assess. 119, 15–30.
Tommasino, E., Griffa, S., Grunberg, K., Ribotta, A., Lopez, E., Carloni, E., Quiroga, M.P., Luna, C.M., 2012. 
Malondialdehyde content as a potential biochemical indicator of tolerant Cenchrus ciliaris L. genotypes under heat 
stress treatment. Grass Forage Sci. 67, 456–459.
Varshney, C.K., Garg, J.K., 1979. Plant responses to sulphur dioxide pollution. CRC Crit. Rev. Environ. Control. 9, 27–49.
Varshney, S.R.K., Varshney, C.K., 1981. Effect of sulphur dioxide on pollen germination and pollen tube growth. 
Environ. Pollut. Series A 24, 87–92.
Verma, A., Singh, S.N., 2006. Biochemical and ultrastructural changes in plant foliage exposed to auto-pollution. 
Environ. Monit. Assess. 120, 585–602.
Von Arb, C., Brunold, C., 1990. Lichen physiology and air pollution. I. Physiological responses of in situ Parmelia 
sulcata among air pollution zones within Biel, Switzerland. Canadian J. Bot. 68, 35–42.
Wei, A.I., Fu, B.C., Wang, Y.S., Zhai, X.Y., Xin, X.J., Zhang, C., Cao, D.M., Zhang, X.B., 2015. Involvement of NO and 
ROS in sulfur dioxide induced guard cells apoptosis in Tagetes erecta. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 114, 198–203.
Wellburn, A., 1994. Air Pollution and Climate Change, second ed. Longman Scientific and Technical, New York.
Xing, B., Li, D., Zhang, L., 2007. Involvement of NADPH oxidase in sulfurdioxide-induced oxidative stress in plant 
cells. Photochem. Photobiol. Sci. 6, 628–634.
Yang, G., Wang, Y., 2012. Modeled dosage-response relationship on the net photosynthetic rate for the sensitivity to 
acid rain of 21 plant species. Bull. Environ. Contam. Toxicol. 89, 251–256.
Yi, H., Liu, J., Zheng, K., 2005. Effect of sulfur dioxide hydrates on cell cycle, sister chromatid exchange, and micro￾nuclei in barley. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 62, 421–426.
Yi, H.L., Yin, J., Liu, X., Jing, X., Fan, S., Zhang, H., 2012. Sulfur dioxide induced programmed cell death in Vicia 
guard cells. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 78, 281–286.
Zahn, R., 1963. Untersuchungen uber die Bedentung Kontinnierlichenand intermittie render Schwefel- dioxidein￾wirkung fur Pflanzenreaktion. Staub 23, 343.
Zhang, X., Zhang, L., Dong, F., Gao, J., Galbraith, D.W., Song, C.P., 2001. Hydrogen peroxide is involved in abscisic 
acid-induced stomatal closure in Vicia faba. Plant Physiol. 126, 1438–1448.
Ziegler, I., 1975. The effect of SO2 pollution on plant metabolism. In: Gunther, F.A. (Ed.), Residue Reviews. Springer, 
New York, NY, p. 56.
 Plants and their Interaction to Environmental Pollution 109 Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-99978-6.00022-4
CHAPTER
6
Fly ash toxicity, concerned issues and 
possible impacts on plant health and 
production
Saurabh Sonwania
, Anshu Guptab
, Pallavi Saxenac
, 
and Anita Ranid
a
Department of Environmental Studies, Zakir Husain Delhi College, University of Delhi, Delhi, 
India, b
Department of Environmental Science, Government Degree College, Jammu, India, c
Department of Environmental Sciences, Hindu College, University of Delhi, Delhi, India, 
d
Department of Botany, Dyal Singh College, University of Delhi, Delhi, India
Abbreviations
PAHs polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons
PCBs polychlorinated biphenyls
1. Introduction
Fly ash is produced during coal burning process where it combust, produce heat energy 
and remains of liquified minerals that is being transferred in the flue gas and generally col￾lected from flue gas with the help of collecting devices like cyclones and electrostatic precipi￾tators. Coal is the main fuel used in thermal power plants for electricity generation at a global 
scale. In India, ∼ 1.1E+08 tons of fly ash are produced from coal-based power plants (Tiwari 
et al., 2008) that can rise to ∼ 230 million in coming years (Lokeshappa and Dikshit, 2011). 
Moreover, ∼ 120 metric ton (MT) per year of coal fly ash is generated from > 85 coal-based 
power plants, that may be rise to probably 442 metric ton per year by the end of 2035. India 
secured third place when compared with other countries mainly United States, South Africa, 
Japan, Italy, and Australia (Panda et  al., 2020). Therefore, lack of sustainable technologies 
to dispose a large mass of fly ash effectively is a great challenge in many of the developing 
countries like India and others.110 6. Fly ash toxicity and impacts on plant health and production
Fly ash is regarded as toxic waste responsible for causing various hazards at worldwide 
level (Bryan et al., 2012). It contains low content of nitrogen and phosphorus and deadly met￾als like Hg, As, Cr, Al, Cd, Pb, Cd, Cr, etc. and causes imbalance in enzymatic activities in the 
plants growing nearby ash contaminated sites (Tiwari et al., 2008). Fly ash also contains toxic 
and deadly organic pollutants which consist of polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), organo￾chlorine and organophosphate compounds and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs). 
The pH of fly ash found in the range of 4.5–12.0 depending upon the richness of coal used. 
The microbes population in the soil also decreases due to contamination caused by fly ash 
in the soil (Gupta et al., 2002). This fly ash contaminated soil also degrades the groundwater 
quality, vegetation and bird’s population nesting around this site (Rahmawati et al., 2020). 
Residents of nearby villages of thermal power plants were suffered from cancer and respira￾tory disorders (USEPA, 2007). Moreover, tiny particles of fly ash when assimilated in air can 
cause dermal, ocular and throat irritation in human beings and also responsible for arsenic 
poisoning (Kishor et al., 2010).
Heavy metals cause toxic effect on plant growth and reduction in crop yield (Husen, 2021). 
However, few heavy metals such as Fe, Cu, Mn and Co are needed for causing homeostasis 
in soil and in plant species until their concentrations rises up and crossing their permissible 
limits and further responsible for causing contamination in the plant species. (Van Bussel 
et al., 2014). Hazardous impact of heavy metal not only produces alteration in a unidirectional 
pathway or relationship with single molecule but also produces its impact on many physio￾logical and biochemical pathways in plant cells that leads to stunted plant growth (Pohanka, 
2014a,b). The impact of heavy metals present in fly ash can have direct or indirect effect on the 
growth of the plants. Direct effects comprise decline in chlorophyll content, amino acid con￾tent, photosynthetic rate, seed germination and indirect impacts consists of elevated reactive 
oxygen species (ROS) levels, antioxidant and enzymatic activity and membrane permeability 
loss (Surabhi, 2017). The heavy metal stress in plants depends on two types of factors: biotic 
and abiotic. The biotic factor constitutes age of the plant, growth enhancing rhizobacteria, 
viruses, fungi and abiotic factor consists of sunlight, heat intensity, temperature, pH, etc. pH 
is an important abiotic factor that have a significant role in maintaining the soil homeostasis 
(Basu et al., 2009). It has also an important role in maintaining the solubility of major and mi￾nor elements in soil however, act as a contaminant at pH under 7. It is due to the reason that 
the greater pH level present in soil due to the presence of fly ash leads to reduction in uptake 
of metals in plant tissues (Saraswat and Chaudhary, 2014).
Heavy metals and trace elements are important constituents of fly ash and when they as￾similated and transfer within the food chain; create hazardous impacts in living organisms 
and also on human health. Therefore, the contamination produced by constituents of fly ash 
has a major role to cause harmful impacts in living organisms like vegetation, birds, ani￾mals, human beings and also in abiotic components like groundwater, soil and water bodies. 
Nevertheless, fly ash produce toxicity in plant species, however, it also has positive effects as 
it comprises nutrients and some minor elements that are needed for a plant for its balanced 
growth. Because of this reason, it can be used as growth promotor and maintain soil moisture 
content in the soil mixture. Hence, research on contamination due to fly ash and its usefulness 
in other ways is an interesting piece of investigation in the field of plant sciences. The aim 
of this chapter is to focus on fly ash toxicity, concerned issues and possible impacts on plant 
health and production.2. Fly ash composition 111
2. Fly ash composition
Fly ash consists of ferroaluminosilicate (Adriano et al., 2004). It includes about maximum 
percentage of Ca, Al, Fe and ∼ 3% of S, K, P, Na and remaining are micro elements that com￾prises mainly Mo, Se and B. Nevertheless, the elemental composition differs with the nature 
of parent coal composition. Main and micro elements present in fly ash are shown in Table 1. 
So, fly ash includes majorly micro/trace elements required for the growth of plant. Fly ash 
has less amount of nitrogen as it is volatilized from coal however, it contains good amount 
of phosphorus (Abhilash et al., 2016). The physico-chemical and mineralogical properties of 
fly ash majorly depends on the richness of parent coal composition. Fly ash comprises huge 
quantities of trace elements like B, Cd, Mn, Cr, As, Na, Va, Se, hyroxides, and oxides and 
sulfates of Ca and Fe (Lim and Choi, 2014). Fly ash is formed from four different varieties 
of coal and each type of coal unique in its nature such as it differs in its chemical configura￾tion, geological source, ash content and ignition value. There are various varieties of coal like 
anthracite, bituminous, sub-bituminous and lignite. The bituminous coal fly ash consists of 
oxides of iron, silica, calcium, carbon and alumina. Fly ash also consists of two varieties of fly 
ash which includes class C, i.e., high lime and class F, i.e., low lime based on iron oxide (FeO), 
Ca, alumina and silica content of fly ash. The basic difference between Class C and F is in the 
quantity of Fe, Ca, silica and alumina content in the fly ash (Bhatt, 2006).
TABLE 1 Concentration of major and trace elements in fly ash.
Major elements Concentration in % (w/w) Trace elements Concentration in % (w/w)
Al 1.5 As 0.63
Ca 23 B 0.06
Fe 36 Sb 0.002
Si 2.0 Cd 0.013
Mg 7.6 Co 0.052
Na 2.0 Cr 0.01
K 23 Cu 0.28
S 1.5 Hg 0.001
P 3.5 Mn 0.3
N NIL Mo 0.016
Ni 0.43
Pb 0.50
Se 0.013
Zn 0.35
Adopted from Basu, M., Pande, M., Bhadoria, P.B.S., Mahapatra, S.C., 2009. Potential fly ash utilization in agriculture: a 
global review. Prog. Nat. Sci. 19, 1173–1186.112 6. Fly ash toxicity and impacts on plant health and production
3. Causes of fly ash toxicity
Coal-based power plants individually produce an average of about 1.1E + 08 tons of fly 
ash in India (Dhadse et al., 2008). Fly ash has been considered hazardous for living organisms 
due to microscopic particle size as well as occurrence of potentially toxic elements such as 
arsenic, chromium, vanadium and antimony. Some heavy metals from the fly ash ponds may 
leach out causing pollution of the soil, surface and ground water. These heavy metals have 
been known to limit the survival and growth of plants and microbial population (Henrique 
et al., 2016). Previous studies by Hossain et al. (2012), Awoyemi et al. (2014), Emamverdian 
et al. (2015), and Singh et al. (2016), have revealed that constituents of coal fly ash (CFA) that 
are generally implicated in causing toxicity are heavy metals, including As, Cu, Ni, Zn, Pb, 
Cd, Cr, Hg, and the adverse effects on living systems have been attributed to several oxidative 
stress reactions. Adverse effects were seen in birds nesting near by the fly ash basins and ac￾cumulation of metals like As, Cd, etc. was found in their offspring (Bryan et al., 2012). People 
residing in villages close to thermal power plants were affected to suffer from cancer and 
respiratory ailments (USEPA, 2007).
3.1 Organic pollutants
A number of complex organic molecules are usually present in Fly ash including 
Polyaromatic hydrocarbons (PAH), polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins (PCDDs), polychlori￾nated biphenyls (PCB), polychlorinated dibenzofurans (PCDFs), monomethyl and dimethyl 
sulfate (Sahu et al., 2004). Sahu et al. (2009) have reported the level of Benzopyrene to be 
9mg/kg which is supposed to be a carcinogen. They have also reported that the concentra￾tion of two organic molecules that is polysaturated and polyunsaturated hydrocarbons was 
found to be in the range of 0.04–0.94mg/kg, respectively, in India. The reason behind the 
elevated concentrations of PAH in Fly ash is due to large quantity of organic matter present 
in the coal (Sahu et al., 2009). Lower molecular weight PAHs are also found to be present in 
fly ash (Sabry et al., 2014).
3.2 Heavy metals and trace elements
Fly ash consists of a number of heavy metals like Cd, As, Cu, Zn, etc. (Lee et al., 2006). Trace 
quantities of some heavy toxic metals like molybdenum, mercury, selenium, cadmium, etc. 
may often be contained in Fly ash. Some metals are enriched in fly ash such as Cd, Cr, Ni, Pb 
and Zn. Others have intermediate enriched like Al, Fe, Mn, Mg and Si (Adriano et al., 1980). 
The trace elements and heavy metals present in fly ash have the tendency to bioaccumulate 
and they get biomagnified once they enter the food chain and causes harmful diseases in 
human beings.
The fly ash exhibits toxicities primarily due to below cited heavy metals:
3.2.1 Arsenic
Flue gas emission from coal powered thermal power plants is the principal source of 
arsenic in the environment. Besides that, coal pyrite also adds it to the environment. The 
concentration of Arsenic ranges from 4 to 440mg/kg in fly ash. However, the concentration 4. Impact of fly ash on crop health and productivity 113
can be as high up to 1000mg/kg depending on the coal richness. Usually leaching of Arsenic 
occurs from ash pond close to power stations and its mobility from fly ash depends on chem￾ical nature of ash. The presence of the oxides of Al and Fe enhances the adsorption rate of 
Arsenic. Normally, arsenate ions are stick to the surfaces of these oxides. Two main varieties 
of Arsenic viz. As (V) and As (III) were noticed, whereas As (V) was found in higher concen￾trations (Huggins et al., 2007).
3.2.2 Mercury
Amongst the sources of mercury emissions in India, coal-based power plants are the sec￾ond largest ones (Srivastava, 2001). In a single year, over 10kg of mercury can be emitted by 
a typical 100-Megawatt thermal power plant (Wankhade, 2003). Mercury occurs as a natural 
component in coal along with other elements in trace amounts (0.04–0.7mg/kg) (Sahu, 1991). 
Mercury content in coal sample as 0.11ppm has been reported by Sahu et al. (2004). In Indian 
coal the concentration of Mercury ranges from 0.01 to 1.1ppm as reported by Wankhade 
(2003). In India, ∼ 200 metric tons of toxic mercury discharges from the industrial chimneys 
in a year. The mercury concentrations in sea water, soil and rivers are higher than permissible 
limits in India, as per the reports (Pandey et al., 2009a,b). Usage of Coal in power stations en￾hances the concentration of mercury above 1ppm in soil and higher than 10ppm in ground￾water and ash ponds. It is a potent neurotoxin and it leads to permanent damage to human 
Central Nervous System even at extremely low levels of exposure. Due to its persistent prev￾alence in the environment as well as its documented toxic and cancer-causing effects it has 
been the focus of regulating activity (Agrawal et al., 2008).
3.2.3 Boron
The concentration of Boron in Fly ash depends upon the source and nature of coal. Boron 
has the nature to adsorb in soil particles. It causes phytotoxicity leading to undesirable and 
stunted growth in plants growing in fly ash amended soils. The concentration of Boron in soil 
decreases gradually with the occurrence of leaching of fly ash (Haynes, 2009).
4. Impact of fly ash on crop health and productivity
Even though, fly ash is toxic but it also has nutrients and micro/trace elements necessary 
for the growth of plant species. Studies have also revealed that the toxicity of CFA is concen￾tration dependent; consequently, care must be exercised in the usage of CFA for agriculture 
purpose (Pandey et al., 2009a). A number of studies have been carried out to find the effect of 
fly ash application on the germination, growth and yield of several crops. They have stated 
that it leads to either reduction or augmentation in crop yield (Sharma and Kalra, 2006). 
When applied at a lower rate, it does not have any detrimental impacts on the crop growth 
(Mahale et al., 2012), whereas increased doses affect plant metabolism (Pandey et al., 2009b). 
According to Dwivedi et al. (2007), application of fly ash favor plant growth, however, these 
impacts turn into positive when weathered fly ash is applied for plant growth and productiv￾ity after taking various factors like pH, salinity, phytotoxicity and pH (Ukwattage et al., 2013). 
Some tolerant plant species have the capacity to fight against fly ash contamination as they 
effective internal defense ways such as the presence of antioxidants like ascorbate peroxidase, 114 6. Fly ash toxicity and impacts on plant health and production
catalase, thiols, etc. (Pandey et al., 2009a,b). These defense reactions may cleave ROS gener￾ated via elevated antioxidant defense system in the tissue, whereas higher concentration of 
pollutants leads to damaged defense system and consequent unbalanced metabolism (Gupta 
and Rajamani, 2015). When fly ash is applied at higher levels in soils, factors responsible for 
limited plant growth and phytotoxicity have been shown in Fig. 1.
4.1 Fly ash and nutrients
Nutrients necessary for the growth of plants are present in adequate concentrations in fly 
ash generally. Though, C and N are present in small amounts, followed by available K, whereas 
the concentration of available P is high. The content of K is higher in lignatic fly ash when 
compared with non-lignatic coal fly ash. These constituents of fly ash may turn out to be good 
for reclaiming salt affected as well as alkali soils. They may also enhance the nutrients of soil 
with time (Mahalingam, 1973; Cary et al. (1983)). In nutrient limited soil and soil with inherent 
structural limitation, fly ash is testified to enhance crop yield (Ukwattage et al., 2013). Due to 
insufficiencies of nutrient such as nitrogen, plant growth can be restricted (Haynes, 2009).
4.2 Effect of fly ash on seed germination
Mahale et al. (2012) studied the comparative results of the effect of fly ash application and 
its absence on seed germination. They showed that the use of fly ash increases seed germina￾tion capacity significantly, however, in control sample, the rate of seed germination was very 
slow. Using various ratios of fly ash ranging from 0% to 60% a seed germination experiment 
was done by Mahale et al. (2012) on Mung bean (Vigna radiata), Urad beans (Vigna mungo) and 
Wheat (Triticum aestivum). The control used in experiment was normal soil in which there was 
High soluble salts & pH,
lack of microbial activity
Restriction of Plant
growth &
Phytotoxicity in Fly
ash amended soils
Damaged defense system
and unbalanced plant
metabolism
Phytotoxic levels of trace
elements (specially Boron)&
Deficiency of N
Affect on
Transpiration and
Osmotic potential
Pollution of soil, and water
(surface and ground water by
leaching of heavy metals)
Compaction of Fly ash
Particles causing
limited root growth
FIG. 1 Factors responsible for limited plant growth and phytotoxicity in fly ash amended soils at higher levels.4. Impact of fly ash on crop health and productivity 115
no addition of fly ash. It was reported that seed germination was increased in fly ash treated 
one, whereas the germination in control was observed to be slow comparatively. With the rise 
in the usage rate of fly ash, germination rate of wheat seeds was reduced. The reason behind 
this reduction may be the presence of high levels of trace elements like Ni, Al, Cr, Co, Al, etc. 
At the same time a high germination rate was seen case of Mung and Urad with fly ash appli￾cation of 60%. Likewise, 20% usage ratio is suitable for high yields of Urad and Mung bean. 
Therefore, the study showed that lower usage rate of fly ash does not have any detrimental 
impacts on the growth of crops (Mahale et al., 2012). In another experiment, two soil types 
treated with fly ash addition (0%–100%, wt. basis) were taken for seed germination of gram, 
wheat, maize and sorghum. Soils treated with ash (up to 10%) showed increased percentage 
of germination in most crops and showed decreased germination percentage with fly ash 
application of more than 10% except the seeds of gram. Gram seeds tolerated the fly ash ap￾plication up to 30% (Mishra and Shukla, 1986a,b).
4.3 Effect of fly ash on plant growth and yield
In fly ash dumping locations, growth of plants is hindered by diverse characteristics of fly 
ash like physico-chemical and microbiological. Physical factors include limited root growth 
due to compaction of fly ash particles. Amongst the chemical factors accountable for re￾striction are high soluble salt levels and pH. The absence of microbial activity, low nutrient 
status and nonexistence of inoculums of symbiotic microorganism such as Rhizobium and 
Mycorrhizae are the microbial limitations. Plant growth can also be restricted by phytotoxic 
levels of trace elements, particularly Boron and insufficiencies of nutrient such as Nitrogen 
(Haynes, 2009). Application of lower doses of fly ash (5%–10%) support plant growth and 
productivity, whereas increased doses (20%–30%) affects the plant metabolism (Pandey et al., 
2009b). When fly ash is applied to soil, it supports excellently the growth of oil seed crops 
such as groundnut (Arachis hypogaea) and sunflower (Helianthus sp.) (Jala and Goyal, 2006).
4.4 Impact of fly ash on plant species or crop yield
Singh and Singh (1986) have reported that with the application of fly ash, up to 20%, rice 
shows significantly higher grain as well as straw yield, whereas the yield reduced with the 
addition of fly ash more than 20%. Young, middle aged and mature basil, tomato and sun￾flower plants were grown in soil amended with 5%, 10% and 20% fly ash (w/w). Experiment 
carried out with various ratios of fly ash ranging upto 20% by growing Beta vulgaris L. showed 
that higher concentrations of fly ash that is 15% and 20% caused decline in growth and yield 
(Singh et al., 2016). Fly ash used in amalgamation with organic sources (10t/ha), was ob￾served to elevate in the rice and pod yield of peanut and equivalent yield of both crops by 
31%, 24% and 26%, respectively, than chemical fertilizers alone (Mittra et al., 2005). Net pri￾mary productivity and dry weight of maize and soyabean increased due to accumulation of 
fly ash particles (4g/m2
/day) on crop canopies. Plant growth of maize and soyabean was 
decreased due to deposition of fly ash more than this level (Krajickova and Mejstrik, 1984). 
Gupta and Sinha (2006) reported rise in treated plant biomass than control plants of Brassica 
juncea grown on soil mixed with 25% fly ash. Brinjal (Solanum melongena), tomato and cab￾bage exhibited increased produce when fly ash was applied at 25%. Oil yielding crops like 116 6. Fly ash toxicity and impacts on plant health and production
sunflower (Helianthus sp.) and groundnut (A. hypogaea) too showed favorable results to fly ash 
mixture soil. Medicinal plant species such as corn mint (Mentha arvensis) and vetiver (Vetiver 
zizanoides) were planted in fly ash amended soil in combination with 20% farmyard manure 
(FYM) and mycorrhiza (Sharma et al., 2001). It has also been reported that fly ash application 
by aerial spray method, with different doses increased a number of parameters of maize and 
soyabean like leaf area, metabolic rate; also augmented photosynthetic pigments as well as 
dry matter when compared with their respective controls (Mishra and Shukla, 1986a,b).
4.5 Metal uptake by crops in fly ash amended soils
Owing to the alkaline nature of fly ash, plants cultivated in fly ash enriched soil, reported 
elevated levels of Se, Mo, Sr, etc. in plant tissue when compared with concentrations of other 
metals like Fe, Mn, Ca and Cr have been found to reduced (Adriano et al., 2002). Fig. 2 clearly 
shows the plant responses to different heavy metals present in fly ash. The adsorption rate of 
heavy metals by plants depends upon a number of factors such as heavy metals content in fly 
ash, soil type, and rate of addition of fly ash, type of soil, pH and species of plant. Amongst all 
the species of plants cultivated on fly ash amended soils, legumes had significantly increased 
levels of B, grasses had augmented Se and in all the species Mo had shown steady upsurge. 
In all the plants Se, Cu and Pb were high (Gutenmann et al., 1981). Toxic levels of Se have 
been observed in vegetation cultivated on fly ash; also higher levels of Se were reported in 
plant species that were grown on fly ash dump. In fly ash enriched soil, hazardous levels of 
Se were reported in vegetation (Haynes, 2009). It has been reported earlier that application 
of fly ash in heavy metal polluted soil reduced the concentrations of heavy metals. Another 
Heavy metal inhibits the
proton pump &
production of
biomolecule.
Variations in cellular
structure and metabolism
due to ROS
Decrease/Increase
Transpiration
As Ni Cr
Al Cu
Hg Pb
Zn
Cd
Chloroplast disorganization
and condense
photosynthesis and reduced
chlorophyl
Heavy metal uptake by soil
Heavy metals cause
decrease in
photosynthetic activity.
Heavy metals cause over
production of ROS.
FIG. 2 Plant responses to heavy metals present in fly ash.5. Effects of heavy metals on plant metabolism and physiology 117
similar experiment has also been carried out on heavy metal polluted acidic soil where rice 
was grown. It was found that Fly ash usage at 20g/kg was effective to mitigate heavy metal 
polluted acidic soil (Gu et al., 2013).
In an experiment conducted with cultivation of rice plant, it was observed that rice crop 
(Oryza sativa) reported the uptake of K, Si and P due to the usage of fly ash. In fly ash enriched 
soils, the levels of heavy metal was found in the normal range (Lee et al., 2006).
Because of alkalinity of fly ash due to high concentration of calcium, the bioavailability of 
Pb and Cu via leaching in soil can be decreased by usage of fly ash and peat. If fly ash is ap￾plied in soil then it will make the pH of soil alkaline and has a significant role in the mobility 
and translocation of metals. That is why, declining metal accumulation in plant shoot and 
toxicity to plants leads to increasing the seed germination capacity (Kumpiene et al., 2007).
In fly ash enriched soil, plants cultivated are observed to be rich in elements like B, As, Sr, 
Ba, etc. For plant growth and animal nutrition these elements are required in trace amounts 
and higher concentration of these elements can be toxic. Plant growth is adversely affected 
and often the plants die because of highly phytotoxic elements. Some minor elements like Mo 
and Se are not that hazardous to plants but are assimilated in plant tissues that results in tox￾icity in grazing animals. Addition of fly ash at elevated concentrations in soil may accumulate 
Mo and hence produces molybdenosis in cattle (Gupta and Sinha, 2006).
In a one pot experiment Cajanus cajan was grown and showed accumulation and translo￾cation of heavy metals due to fly ash amendment ratios (Pandey et al., 2009a,b). It was found 
that for C. cajan, 25% concentration is suitable as it enhanced the production rate of C. cajan, 
but heavy metal values in its edible portions was within the threshold limits (Pandey et al., 
2009a,b). In fly ash amended soils, B. juncea can also be used for phytoextraction of metals 
Ni (Gupta and Sinha, 2006). Cultivars of Tomato had established increased tolerance to wilt 
fungus Fusarium oxysporum grown on fly ash amended soils (Khan and Singh, 2001).
4.6 Effect on transpiration and osmotic potential
Most of the air pollutants act as hinderance in stomatal aperture process even at low con￾centrations. These tiny openings are highly responsible for altering the fundamental processes 
of respiration and transpiration in plants. That is why; they have the capacity to disturb the 
hydrological balance of the leaf or the whole plant (Gupta, 2016). Fly ash particles concentrate 
on the guard cells preventing the guard cells to close by stimulating the mechanism that reg￾ulates the opening and closing of stomata leading to enhanced rate of transpiration. On the 
other hand, the rate of transpiration gets decreased due to a thick layer of heavily dusted fly 
ash formed on the plants thereby forming physical barrier and a boundary layer reducing the 
water vapor loss from the plant (Krajickova and Mejstrik, 1984).
Application of fly ash encompassing soluble ions like Na+, SO4
2 −, Ca2 + and K+ affects the 
physiology of plant. These soluble ions can lead to toxicity as well as bring changes in osmotic 
potential (Haynes, 2009).
5. Effects of heavy metals on plant metabolism and physiology
The exposure of plants species by different kinds of heavy metals leads to disturbance in 
physiological processes like microbial respiration, photosynthesis and CO2 fixation. That is 118 6. Fly ash toxicity and impacts on plant health and production
why; heavy metal contamination is an important physical stress responsible for decline in 
the crop productivity rate. It also results in disturbance in cellular activity and physiological 
malfunctioning that leads to more ROS production in the plant species. Very few studies are 
reported so far on the role of various heavy metals on the plants including their morpholog￾ical characteristics and biochemical properties and assessment of antioxidant potential. All 
these parameters are discussed below in detail in different sections.
5.1 Chromium and arsenic impacts on plants
Chromium (Cr) is highly hazardous to plant health as it prohibits the growth and develop￾ment in plant species. Cr concentration is supposed to be normal in the range of 1–3000mg/
kg and becomes highly hazardous for plant species in the range of 5–100μg/g in soil. Fly ash 
is formed due to the burning of coal and it consists of Cr. Shanker et al. (2005) observed the 
deposition of heavy metals by Chickpea cultivated in fly ash treat soil. High amount of Cr was 
found to be maximum in roots trailed by shoots and seeds, respectively. The Cr levels were 
found in the range of 3–11μg/g in chickpea cultivated on fly ash enriched soil. Chromium 
also produces disturbance in photosynthetic processes, water retention potential from soil to 
plant and uptake of mineral nutrition. Singh et al. (2015) have observed less photosynthetic 
activity in wheat crop due to exposure to Cr that results in chlorosis, damage to root tissues, 
enzyme inactivity, declined growth and ultimately death of the plant.
Arsenic (As) is mostly found in the form of particles. Low levels of As is observed in al￾luvial soils, while fly ash generated from power stations leads to increased values of As that 
possibly rise up to many thousands of mg/kg. When plant is exposed to As, then As combines 
with central atom of chlorophyll and leads to replacement of Mg molecule that is responsible 
for distortion of chlorophyll which will affect photosynthetic rate and reduced growth rate. It 
will also cause imbalance in metabolic processes, protein dysfunction and also results in re￾placement of phosphate portion of ATP. As and Mercury (Hg) fixes with SH-group of protein 
and forms S-Hg-S bridge, leads to alteration of protein bond stability and results in decrease 
in seed germination and plant growth (Vajpayee et al., 2000).
5.2 Zinc and copper impacts on plants
Zinc (Zn) is an important trace element and produce alterations in metabolic processes of 
plants. Sewage sludge, urban compost, fertilizers, fly ash, emissions from municipal waste 
incinerators and other anthropogenic activities are the main sources of zinc and have a sig￾nificant role in causing soil pollution which leads to retarded plant growth and development. 
High concentration of Zn produced from fly ash produces chlorosis and root-shoot shorten￾ing in plants (Pandey et al., 2010). Chlorosis causes Fe and Mn nutrient deficiency that inhib￾its the entry of such elements from roots to shoots in the plant (Patra et al., 2004). Elevated 
Zn levels in soil can obstruct different metabolic activities in the plants which leads to short 
growth and early death in plant species (Shahid et al., 2014).
Copper (Cu) is amongst all important elements present in plants that plays a significant 
role in assimilation of CO2 and in ATP synthesis. Fly ash contains significant concentration of 
Cu. If Cu content high in fly ash-soil mixture then it produces stress and results in injury in 
plant species which causes declined growth and necrosis in plant leaves (Demirevska-kepova 6. Conclusion 119
et al., 2004). Plants under high Cu stress leads to oxidative damage and high generation of 
ROS species (Singh et al., 2015). Oxidative stress produces disturbance in metabolism and 
denaturation in protein present in plant species (Sangwan et al., 2014).
5.3 Cobalt, nickel and lead impacts on plants
Cobalt (Co) is available inside earth’s crust in various forms like cobaltite, smaltite and 
erythrite in the range of 1–20mg/kg (Kukier et al., 2004). The Co concentration rises up due to 
fly ash amendment in soil. The Co absorption in plants leads to disturbance in physiological 
activities in plant species or reductions in crop yield. Moreover, Co is very well distributed 
in different species with the help of various mechanisms (Li et al., 2009). Hazardous impacts 
of Co on various crops like barley, oilseed, rape seed and tomato have observed harmful im￾pacts on organic matter content and growth of plants (Bakkaus et al., 2005). Co stress effects 
biomass productivity, degradation of chlorophyll content, alters protein structure and stops 
catalyze activity in cauliflower leaves (Chatterjee and Chatterjee, 2000).
Nickel (Ni), a metal found normally in the range of 10–1000mg/kg in natural soil. The 
concentration of Ni2 + rises to 200–26,000mg/kg in soil because of different anthropogenic 
activities like biomass burning, mining operations, emission from sewage, fly ash enriched 
soil and addition of pesticides and fertilizers (Jankowski et al., 2006). Elevated concentrations 
of Ni was observed in Cassia siamea cultivated in fly ash and its number of treatments that 
lead to rise in SOD activity and lack of protein thiol content (Parlak, 2016). Surplus amount 
of Ni2 + resulted in alteration in physiological activities which leads to toxicity symptoms 
like chlorosis and necrosis in different plant species (Saraswat and Chaudhary, 2014). Plants 
exposed to high Ni2 + levels leads to nutrient imbalance in cells which leads to membrane 
permeability loss and alteration in the composition of lipid and plasma membrane H-ATPase 
activity (Ram et al., 2006).
Lead (Pb) is present in natural soil in the range of 10–50mg/kg. The major reasons of 
lead contamination in soil is due to paper, pulp, paints and explosives consisting of lead, 
mining and smelting activities, fly ash amendment, disposal of municipal sewage sludge, 
etc. Elevated levels of Pb (150–10,000mg/kg) mainly affect photosynthetic pigments, growth 
and morphological characteristics of the plants. It also affects enzyme activity, water balance 
and membrane permeability (Sharma and Dubey, 2005). High levels of Pb (at 800ppm) when 
reacts with sulfhydrl groups produces prohibition of enzymatic activity inside cells and pro￾duces oxidative stress due to excess formation of ROS in plants (Jambhulkar and Juwarkar, 
2009). Pb also has a role in the reduction of various physiological and metabolic activities in 
plants which comprise alterations taking place in nitrogenous compounds, metabolism of 
sugar and absorption of water (Jala and Goyal, 2006). Lead toxicity also disturbs the microbial 
processes in soil which leads to soil fertility loss and physiological imbalance in plants and 
responsible for loss of crop yield (Hamid et al., 2010).
6. Conclusion
Fly ash toxicity is one of the major causes of environmental pollution. Though, fly ash 
application in soil has many advantages but on the other side, drawbacks of using fly ash in 120 6. Fly ash toxicity and impacts on plant health and production
high amount produces causes heavy metal pollution and toxicity in soil, crops and surface 
water. Adverse changes in different morphological, biochemical and physiological properties 
in plants have also been caused due to fly ash toxicity that can directly or indirectly causes 
ecological imbalance in environment. In plants or crops, heavy metal toxicity causes produc￾tion of ROS. This abiotic stress causes disturbance in physiological activity of plants which 
leads to oxidative stress. Under the exposure effect of heavy metals, ROS activity increased 
which can further reacts to lipids, DNA and protein of plants resulted in lipid peroxidation, 
malfunctioning of physiological activity and cell viability. Study about the two interesting 
sides of fly ash as benefit and negative effect in plant species is a very important concept that 
needs to configure and act as a platform to search a better solution to fly ash related contam￾ination problem in soil, surface water and vegetation health.
References
Abhilash, P.C., Tripathi, V., Edrisi, S.A., Dubey, R.K., Bakshi, M., Dubey, P.K., Singh, H.B., Ebbs, S.D., 2016. 
Sustainability of crop production from polluted lands. Energy Ecol. Environ. 1, 54–65.
Adriano, D.C., Page, A., Elseewi, A., Chang, A., Straughan, I., 1980. Utilization and disposal of fly ash and other coal 
residues in terrestrial ecosystems: a review. J. Environ. Qual. 9 (3), 333–344.
Adriano, D.C., Weber, J., Bolan, N.S., Paramsivam, S., Bon-Jun, K., Sajwan, K.S., 2002. Effects of high rates of coal fly 
ash on soil, turf grass and groundwater quality. Water Air Soil Pollut. 139, 365–385.
Adriano, D.C., Wenzel, W.W., Vangronsveld, J., Bolan, N.S., 2004. Role of assisted natural remediation in environ￾mental cleanup. Geoderma 122, 121–142.
Agrawal, P., Mittal, A., Kumar, M., Tripathi, S.K., 2008. Mercury exposure in Indian environment due to coal fired 
thermal power plants and existing legislations. Int. J. Forensic Med. Pathol. 1, 41.
Awoyemi, O.M., Bawa-Allah, K.A., Otitoloju, A.A., 2014. Accumulation and antioxidant enzymes as biomarkers of 
heavy metal exposure in Clarias gariepinus and Oreochromis niloticus. Appl. Ecol. Environ. Sci. 2 (5), 114–122.
Bakkaus, E., Gouget, B., Gallien, J.P., Khodja, H., Carrot, H., Morel, J.L., Collins, R., 2005. Concentration and distri￾bution of cobalt in higher plants: the use of micro-PIXE spectroscopy. Nucl. Instrum. Methods B 231, 350–356.
Basu, M., Pande, M., Bhadoria, P.B.S., Mahapatra, S.C., 2009. Potential fly ash utilization in agriculture: a global re￾view. Prog. Nat. Sci. 19, 1173–1186.
Bhatt, M.S., 2006. Effect of ash in coal on the performance of coal fired thermal power plants. Part I: primary energy 
effects. Energy Sources A 28, 25–41.
Bryan, A.L., Hopkins, W.A., Parikh, J.H., Jackson, B.P., Unrine, J.M., 2012. Coal fly ash basins as an attractive nuisance 
to birds: parental provisioning exposes nestlings to harmful trace elements. Environ. Pollut. 161, 170–177.
Cary, E.E., Gilbert, M., Bache, C.A., Gutenmann, W.H., Lisk, D.J., 1983. Elemental composition of potted vegetables 
and millet grown on hard coal bottom ash-amended soil. Bull. Environ. Contam. Toxicol. 31 (4), 418–423.
Chatterjee, J., Chatterjee, C., 2000. Phytotoxicity of cobalt, chromium and copper in cauliflower. Environ. Pollut. 109, 69–74.
Demirevska-kepova, K., Simova-Stoilova, L., Stoyanova, Z., Holzer, R., Feller, U., 2004. Biochemical changes in barley 
plants after successive supply of copper and manganese. Environ. Exp. Bot. 52, 253–266.
Dhadse, S., Kumari, P., Bhagia, L.J., 2008. Fly ash characterization, utilization and government initiatives in India—a 
review. J. Sci. Ind. Res. 67, 11.
Dwivedi, S., Tripathi, R.D., Srivastava, S., Mishra, S., Shukla, M.K., Tiwari, K.K., Singh, R., Rai, U.N., 2007. Growth 
performance and biochemical responses of three rice (Oryza sativa L) cultivars grown in fly ash amended soil. 
Chemosphere 67, 140–151.
Emamverdian, A., Ding, Y., Mokhberdoran, F., Xie, Y., 2015. Review: heavy metal stress and some mechanisms of 
plant defense response. Sci. World J. 2015, 1–18.
Gu, H., Li, F.P., Guan, X., Xu, Y.L., Liu, Y.J., Chen, X.T., 2013. Effects of fly ash on heavy metal uptake of rice growing 
on multi-metal contaminated acidic soil. Adv. Mater. Res. 680, 94–99.
Gupta, A., 2016. Effect of air pollutants on plant gaseous exchange process: effect on stomata and respiration. In: 
Kulshrestha, U., Saxena, P. (Eds.), Plant Responses to Air Pollution. Springer, Singapore.
Gupta, A., Rajamani, P., 2015. Toxicity assessment of municipal solid waste landfill leachate collected in different 
seasons from Okhla landfill site of Delhi. J. Biomed. Sci. Eng. 8 (06), 357.References 121
Gupta, A.K., Sinha, S., 2006. Role of Brassica juncea (L) Czern. (var. Vaibhav) in the phytoextraction of Ni from soil 
amended with fly ash: selection of extractant for metal bioavailability. J. Hazard. Mater. 136 (2), 371–378.
Gupta, D.K., Rai, U.N., Tripathi, R.D., Inouhe, M., 2002. Impacts of fly ash on soil and plant responses. Plant Res. 
115, 401–409.
Gutenmann, W.H., Eifving, D.C., Valentino, D.I., Lisk, D.J., 1981. Trace element absorption on soil amended with 
soft-coal fly ash. BioCycle; (United States) 22 (2).
Hamid, N., Bukhari, N., Jawaid, F., 2010. Physiological responses of Phaseolus vulgaris in different lead concentration. 
Pak. J. Bot. 42, 239–246.
Haynes, R.J., 2009. Reclamation and revegetation of fly ash disposal sites: challenges and research needs. J. Environ. 
Manag. 90, 43–53.
Henrique, F., Rabeˆlo, S., Borgo, L., 2016. Changes caused by heavy metals in micronutrient content and antioxidant 
system of forage grasses used for phytoremediation: an overview. Cienc. Rural 46 (8), 1368–1375.
Hossain, M.A., Piyatida, P., Jaime, A., da Silva, T., Fujita, M., 2012. Molecular mechanism of heavy metal toxicity and 
tolerance in plants: central role of glutathione in detoxification of reactive oxygen species and methylglyoxal and 
in heavy metal chelation. J. Bot. 2012, 1–37.
Huggins, P.E., Senior, C.L., Chu, P., Ladwig, K., Huffman, G.P., 2007. Selenium and arsenic speciation in fly ash from 
full scale coal burning utility plants. Environ. Sci. Technol. 41, 3284–3290.
Husen, A., 2021. Harsh Environment and Plant Resilience (Molecular and Functional Aspects). Springer Nature 
Switzerland AG, Cham, Switzerland, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-65912-7.
Jala, S., Goyal, A., 2006. Fly ash as a soil ameliorant for improving crop production—a review. Bioresour. Technol. 
97, 1136–1147.
Jambhulkar, H.P., Juwarkar, A.A., 2009. Bioaccumulation of heavy metals on different plant species grown on fly ash 
dump. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 72, 1122–1128.
Jankowski, J., Ward, C.R., French, D., Groves, S., 2006. Mobility of trace elements from selected Australian fly ashes 
and its potential impact on aquatic ecosystems. Fuel Res. 85, 243–256.
Khan, M.R., Singh, W.N., 2001. Effects of soil application of fly ash on the fusarial wilt of tomato cultivars. Int. J. Pest 
Mng. 47 (4), 293–297.
Kishor, P., Ghosh, A.K., Kumar, D., 2010. Use of fly ash in agriculture: a way to improve soil fertility and its produc￾tivity. Asian J. Agric. Res. 4, 1–14.
Krajickova, A., Mejstrik, V., 1984. The effect of fly ash particles on the plugging of stomata. Environ. Poll. Series A, 
Ecol. Biol. 36 (1), 83–93.
Kukier, U., Peters, C.A., Chaney, R.L., Angle, J.S., Roseberg, R.J., 2004. The effect of pH on metal accumulation in two 
Alyssum species. J. Environ. Qual. 33, 2090–2102.
Kumpiene, J., Ore, S., Lagerkvist, A., Maurice, C., 2007. Stabilization of Pb and Cu contaminated soil using coal fly 
ash and peat. Environ. Pollut. 145 (1), 365–373.
Lee, H., Ha, H.S., Lee, C.S., Lee, Y.B., Kim, P.J., 2006. Fly ash effect on improving soil properties and rice productivity 
in Korean paddy soil. Bioresour. Technol. 97, 1490.
Li, H.F., Gray, C., Mico, C., Zhao, F.J., McGrath, S.P., 2009. Phytotoxicity and bioavailability of cobalt to plants in a 
range of soils. Chemosphere 75, 979–986.
Lim, S.S., Choi, W.J., 2014. Changes in microbial biomass, CH4 and CO2 emissions and soil carbon content by fly 
ash co applied with organic inputs with contrasting substrate quality under changing water regimes. Soil Biol. 
Biochem. 68, 494–502.
Lokeshappa, B., Dikshit, A.K., 2011. Disposal and management of fly ash. In: International Conference on Life Science 
and Technology. Vol. 3. IPCBEE, Singapore.
Mahale, N.K., Patil, S.D., Sarode, D.B., Attarde, S.B., 2012. Effect of fly ash as an admixture in agriculture and the 
study of heavy metal accumulation in wheat (Triticum aestivum), Mung Bean (Vigna radiata) and Urad Beans (Vigna 
mungo). Pol. J. Environ. Stud. 21 (6), 1713–1719.
Mahalingam, P.K., 1973. Ameliorative properties of lignite fly ash in reclaiming saline and alkali soils. Madras Agric. 
J.; (India) 60 (8).
Mishra, L.C., Shukla, K.N., 1986a. Effects of fly ash deposition on growth, metabolism and dry matter production of 
maize and soybean. Environ. Poll. Series A, Ecol. Biol. 42 (1), 1–13.
Mishra, L.C., Shukla, K.N., 1986b. Edaphic properties of fly ash from a coal-fired power plant at Kanpur, India. 
Environ. Poll. Series B, Chem. Phys. 11 (1), 55–66.
Mittra, B.N., Karamkar, S., Swain, D.K., Ghosh, B.C., 2005. Fly ash a potential source of soil amendment and a com￾ponent of integrated plant nutrient supply system. Fuel 84, 1447–1451.122 6. Fly ash toxicity and impacts on plant health and production
Panda, D., Mandal, L., Barik, J., 2020. Phytoremediation potential of naturally growing weed plants grown on fly 
ash-amended soil for restoration of fly ash deposit. Int. J. Phytoremediation 22 (11), 1195–1203.
Pandey, V.C., Abhilash, P.C., Singh, N., 2009a. The Indian perspective of utilizing fly ash in phytoremediation, 
phyto-management and biomass production. J. Environ. Manag. 90 (10), 2943–2958.
Pandey, V.C., Abhilash, P.C., Upadhyay, R.N., Tewari, D.D., 2009b. Application of fly ash on the growth performance 
and translocation of toxic heavy metals within Cajanus cajan L: implication for safe utilization of fly ash for agri￾culture production. J. Hazard. Mater. 166, 255–259.
Pandey, V.C., Singh, J.S., Kumar, A., Tiwari, D.D., 2010. Accumulation of heavy metals by Chickpea grown in fly ash 
treated soil: effect on antioxidants. CLEAN Soil Air Water 38 (12), 1116–1123.
Parlak, K.U., 2016. Effect of nickel on growth and biochemical characteristics of wheat (Triticum sativum L.) seedlings. 
Wagening J. Life Sci. 76, 1–5.
Patra, M., Bhowmik, N., Bandopadhyay, B., Sharma, A., 2004. Comparison of mercury, lead and arsenic with respect 
to genotoxic effects on plant systems and the development of genetic tolerance. Indian Acad. Sci. 3, 199–223.
Pohanka, M., 2014a. Alzheimer’s disease and oxidative stress. A review. Curr. Med. Chem. 21 (3), 356–364.
Pohanka, M., 2014b. Copper, aluminum, iron and calcium inhibit human acetyl cholinesterase in  vitro. Environ. 
Toxicol. Pharmacol. 37 (1), 455–459.
Rahmawati, N.U.S., Sutopo, N.R., Yulia, N., Eko, H., 2020. Phytotoxicity of coal fly ash on plant growth and heavy 
metal uptake by plant in an acid soil. J. Degrad. Min. Land Manag. 7 (3), 2233–2240.
Ram, L.C., Srivastava, N.K., Tripathi, R.C., Jha, S.K., Sinha, A.K., Singh, G., 2006. Management of mine spoil for crop 
productivity with lignite fly ash and biological amendments. J. Environ. Manag. 79, 173–187.
Sabry, M., Shaheen, P., Hooda, S., Christos, D., Tsadilas, F., 2014. Opportunities and challenges in the use of coal fly 
ash for soil improvements—a review. J. Environ. Manag. 145, 249–267.
Sahu, K.C., 1991. Coal and fly ash problem. In: Proceeding of International Seminar, IIT Mumbai.
Sahu, S.K., Pandit, G.G., Sadasivan, S., 2004. Precipitation scavenging of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in 
Mumbai, India. Sci. Total Environ. 318, 245–249.
Sahu, S.K., Bhangare, R.C., Ajmal, P.Y., Sharma, S., Pandit, G.G., Puranik, V.D., 2009. Characterization and quantifi￾cation of persistent organic pollutants in fly ash from coal fuelled thermal power stations in India. Microchem. J. 
92, 92–96.
Sangwan, P., Kumar, V., Joshi, U., 2014. Effect of chromium (VI) toxicity on enzymes of nitrogen metabolism in cluster 
beans (Cyamopsis tetragonoloba L.). Enzyme Res. 7, 836–840.
Saraswat, P.K., Chaudhary, K., 2014. Effect of fly ash (FA) to improving soil quality and increase the efficiency of crop 
productivity. Eur. J. Biotechnol. Biosci. 2 (6), 72–78.
Shahid, M., Dumat, C., Pourrut, B., Sabir, M., Pinelli, E., 2014. Assessing the effect of metal speciation on lead toxicity 
to Vicia faba pigment contents. J. Geochem. Explor. 144, 290–297.
Shanker, A.K., Cervantes, C., Loza-Tavera, H., Avudainayagam, S., 2005. Chromium toxicity in plants. Environ. Int. 
31, 739–753.
Sharma, P., Dubey, R.S., 2005. Lead toxicity in plants. Braz. J. Plant Physiol. 17, 35–52.
Sharma, S.K., Kalra, N., 2006. Effect of fly ash incorporation on soil properties and productivity of crops: a review. J. 
Sci. Ind. Res. 65, 383–390.
Sharma, M.P., Tanu, U., Adholeya, A., 2001. Growth and yield of Cymbopogon martinii as influenced by fly ash, AM 
fungi inoculation and farmyard manure application. In: 7th International Symposium on Soil and Plant Analysis, 
Edmonton, AB, Canada.
Singh, N.B., Singh, M., 1986. Effect of fly ash application on saline soil and on yield components, yield and uptake of 
NPK of rice and wheat at varying fertility levels. Ann. Agric. Res. 7 (2), 245–257.
Singh, M., Kumar, J., Singh, S., Singh, V.P., Prasad, S.M., Singh, M.P.V.V.B., 2015. Adaptation strategies of plants 
against heavy metal toxicity: a short review. Biochem. Pharmacol. 4 (2), 1–7.
Singh, P., Tripathi, P., Dwivedi, S., Awasthi, S., Shri, M., Chakrabarty, D., Tripathi, R., 2016. Fly ash augmented soil 
enhances heavy metal accumulation and phytotoxicity in rice (Oryza sativa L.); a concern for fly-ash amendments 
in agriculture sector. Plant Growth Regul. 78, 21–30.
Srivastava, R.C., 2001. Guidance and Awareness Raising Materials Under New UNEP Mercury Programs (Indian 
Scenario). Centre for Environment Pollution Monitoring and Mitigation, pp. 1–28.
Surabhi, S., 2017. Fly ash in India: generation vis e a-vis utilization and global perspective. Int. J. Appl. Chem. 13 (1), 
29–52.References 123
Tiwari, S., Kumari, B., Singh, S.N., 2008. Evaluation of metal mobility/immobility in fly ash induced by bacterial 
strains isolated from the rhizospheric zone of Typha latifolia growing on fly ash dumps. Bioresour. Technol. 99, 
1305–1310.
Ukwattage, N.L., Ranjith, P.G., Bouazza, M., 2013. The use of coal combustion fly ash as a soil amendment in agri￾culture lands (with comments on its potential to improve food security and sequester carbon). Fuel 109, 400–408.
USEPA, 2007. Human and Ecological Risk Assessment of Coal Combustion Wastes. USEPA.
Vajpayee, P., Tripathi, R.D., Rai, U.N., Ali, M.B., Singh, S.N., 2000. Chromium accumulation reduces chlorophyll bio￾synthesis, nitrate reductase activity and protein content in Nympaea alba L. Chemosphere 41, 1075–1082.
Van Bussel, C.G.J., Schroeder, J.P., Mahlmann, L., Schulz, C., 2014. Aquatic accumulation of dietary metals (Fe, Zn, 
Cu, Co, Mn) in recirculating aquaculture systems (RAS) changes body composition but not performance and 
health of juvenile turbot (Psetta maxima). Aquac. Eng. 61, 35–42.
Wankhade, K.K., 2003. Mercury in India. Toxic Pathways. Toxic link.
 This page intentionally left blankPlants and their Interaction to Environmental Pollution 125 Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-99978-6.00011-X
CHAPTER
7
Effect of coal-smoke pollution 
on plants growth, metabolism 
and production
Saumya Srivastavaa
, Rajlaxmi Singha
, and Prahlad Arya (Kumar)b
a
Department of Botany, Patna University, Patna, Bihar, India, b
Department of Geology, 
Patna Science College, Patna University, Patna, Bihar, India
Abbreviations
As arsenic
AsIII arsenite
AsV arsenate
Cd cadmium
CH4 methane
CO carbon monoxide
Hg mercury
NOx nitrogen oxides
Pb lead
PM particulate matter
SO2 sulfur dioxide
VOC volatile organic carbon
1. Introduction
1.1 Composition of smoke produced by coal combustion
Coal (a nonrenewable fossil fuel) has been a reliable source of energy for mankind. It is a 
necessity especially in developing nations where it is still considered a cheap source of energy 
and this cheap source of energy comes with a great price. Coal use is associated with sev￾eral operational and environmental problems (Choudhary et al., 2022). Its combustion causes 
enormous amount of air pollution which is detrimental for health of mankind, environment 
and even vegetation across the globe.126 7. Effect of coal-smoke pollution on plants growth
During combustion of coal, chemical bonds holding carbon (C) are broken, releasing tremen￾dous amount of energy. But it also supplements in the environment, many airborne pollutants 
and heavy metals and metalloids (Dhakate et al., 2019). Its main emissions include sulfur diox￾ide (SO2), nitrogen oxides (NOx), fly ash, particulate matter (PM), heavy metals like arsenic (As), 
mercury (Hg), cadmium (Cd), lead (Pb) and other pollutant elements like carbon monoxide 
(CO), volatile organic carbon (VOC), methane (CH4), etc. A large proportion of inorganic matter 
is also collected as ash (fly ash). Fine particles with diameter of less than 10μm (PM10) and less 
than 2.5μm (PM2.5) have deleterious effect on human health. The particulate and trace element 
emissions limit is becoming more and more stringent around the world. The control of partic￾ulate in developed countries is satisfactory; however, in developing nations, it is still a great 
environmental concern. Coal contains a wide variety of elements including trace elements, and 
increasing concern about the effects of trace pollutants especially heavy metals in the environ￾ment has led to the introduction of emission standards for some of these elements.
Another problem of concern is generation of fly ash via thermal power plants which rely 
on coal as the fuel source, and release tremendous amount of fly ash (Jambhulkar et al., 2018). 
Around 70% of this fly ash is now being utilized from earlier only 8%, but still 40% is unuti￾lized and, is thus considered a toxic waste containing many heavy metals extremely hazard￾ous to the environment (Surabhi, 2017).
1.2 Impact of coal smoke pollution on vegetation
"The environment for plant growth is affected in three ways by the presence of coal smoke 
(1) by a reduction in the amount of light available to the plants, (2) by an alteration in soil 
conditions and (3) by the contamination of the air by foreign gases. The smoke haze in or near 
industrial areas reduced the light available to plants for photosynthesis, thus reducing their 
growth rate. The tarry deposit on leaves further reduced the light available to the plant and 
lowered the assimilation rate. It was generally thought that rain falling in or near industrial 
areas dissolved the predominantly acidic polluting gases from the air and leached bases from 
the soil. Rainwater collected showed a reduced number of soil bacteria, resulting in a reduc￾tion in the availability of plant nutrients. The most common and abundant gaseous pollutant 
in Britain was sulfur dioxide formed from the sulfur contained in coal. Concentrations of 
0.5parts per million induced symptoms of leaf scorch in many species".a
Considering the above facts, this chapter aims to provide its readers a general layout of 
the coal smoke pollution and its various components’ deleterious effect on vegetation around 
the world.
2. Principal phytotoxic gases of coal burning and their impact on flora
2.1 Sulfur dioxide
Burning of fossil fuel like coal combustion produces emissions like SO2 and NOx. Both 
have shown damaging effects on plants growth and developmental processes.
a Source: https://www.osti.gov/etdeweb/biblio/64511482. Principal phytotoxic gases of coal burning and their impact on flora 127
It is generally seen that foliage of the plants is the most sensitive part to SO2 injury than 
stem and flowers. Concentration, duration and frequency of SO2 exposure determine the ex￾tent to which foliage responds to SO2. Based on symptoms and SO2 concentrations, foliage 
injury by SO2 can be characterized as either acute or chronic. An acute injury can be defined 
as a short duration SO2 exposure of minutes to hours which results in the expression of ne￾crotic symptom to the foliage within a few hours or days. In plants having broad leaves, acute 
injury symptoms of SO2 consist of marginal and/or necrosis in between veins of the leaves 
when they are fully developed. The color of the necrotic area range from white to reddish 
brown to black depending on the plant species. Necrotic areas have irregular margins and are 
darkly pigmented. In monocots, the tip of the leaves is affected first. The symptoms spread 
to lower areas of the leaf as necrotic and chlorotic streaks with dark pigmentation. In coni￾fers, acute SO2 injury symptoms are shown by second year or older needles which consists 
of brown necrotic areas appearing first at the tip and spreading toward the base. Premature 
abscission of needles is also a common symptom (Legge and Krupa, 2002).
Moreover, at the time of exposure to SO2, if leaf surfaces are wet, water droplets present on 
the surface of the leaf absorbs SO2 forming sulfuric acid. This acidic wet deposition causes ne￾crotic areas with regular margins. The chemical composition of epicuticular waxes of plants 
may get changed due to this impact (Percy et al., 1994). Chronic SO2 exposure may be defined 
as low concentration of SO2 exposures which occur during the entire life cycle of a plant with 
periodic intermittent and random peak levels (Krupa, 1996). Chronic SO2 exposures reduces 
plant growth and productivity (biomass) in many crops (Bell, 1982), in grasses under winter 
conditions and also in pines (Legge et al., 1996).
Rao and Leblanc (1966) and LeBlanc and Rao (1975) have demonstrated that SO2 bleaches 
the leaf pigment. SO2 on entry into leaves through stomatal pores reacts with water to form 
sulfurous acid (H2SO3) in the intercellular spaces. This acid damages the membrane activity 
and converts chlorophyll a to phaeophytin a. Chlorophyll is a blue-green pigment whereas 
phaeophytin is a gray-brown pigment. Disintegration of chlorophyll to phaeophytin and loss 
of magnesium affects photosynthetic rate (Ambasht and Ambasht, 2002).
SO2 also reacts with water present in the atmosphere which comes down to the surface 
of earth producing acid rain. The acidic nature of acid rain causes a pH imbalance in the 
soil. Due to the change in soil quality, the growth of the plant is affected. This is due to loss 
of ability to absorb essential nutrients. The plant suffers from nutrient deficiency resulting 
into yellowing and drying out of its parts. The uptake of acidic water by the roots damages 
vascular system of the plant. Waxy coating on the surface of the leaf which gives protection 
from pathogens is also lost making it susceptible to pathogenic attack (Kingston et al., 2014).
In Datura innoxia, it has been observed that there was slight reduction in the number of 
leaves per plant due to SO2 from coal smoke pollution (Husen, 1997, 2021; Husen et  al., 
1999). A significant reduction in leaf length, single leaf area and total leaf area per plant was 
observed. Rate of photosynthesis and stomatal conductance also became low. There was 
SO2 2   H O H S2 3 O
H S2 3 O H   SO3 H
2H Chlorophyll Phaeophytina Mg    a 128 7. Effect of coal-smoke pollution on plants growth
reduction in the levels of chlorophyll a and b, total chlorophyll and carotenoids, together 
with significant decline in levels of protein, reducing sugar and nitrate reductase activity. 
However, a significant increase in sulfur content in roots, stem, leaves and seeds was noticed 
(Nighat et al., 2008).
In another study, which was done in Mangifera indica, a general lowering of photosynthetic 
pigment content was observed on SO2 exposure as reported by Pawar and Dubey (1982). 
High sulfur content was reported in the leaves of mango and alfalfa due to coal smoke pol￾lution (Rao, 1971). Shringi in 1982 reported that dry matter production and photosynthetic 
pigments were adversely affected in okra plants exposed to 0.5–2.0ppm of SO2. Similar ob￾servations were reported in Cajanus cajan, Capsicum annum, Glycine max, Sorghum vulgare and 
Cicer arientum. Sensitivity of Cajanus cajan toward SO2 pollution was seem to be more when 
compared with that of Capsicum annum (Subrahmanyam and Sambamurty, 2000).
As far as ornamental plants are concerned, there was an adverse effect on the growth of 
Calendula officinalis and Dahlia rosea when treated with SO2. Characteristic foliar injury symp￾toms were shown by the plants. Plants also showed retarded growth as shown in root and 
shoot lengths and dry matter accumulation (Subrahmanyam and Sambamurty, 2000). SO2
caused widening of stomatal openings, degradation of photosynthetic pigments and pro￾tein, lowering of leaf extract pH, and reduction in flower size particularly in Calendula, and 
eventually increased senescence (Yunus et al., 1985). It was also seen that there was an ac￾cumulation of total sulfur (S) in SO2 fumigated soybean plants along with reduction in total 
leaf chlorophyll content (Pratt et al., 1983). A reduction in total ATP (adenosine triphosphate) 
content in pine needles was observed when given chronic SO2 exposures, suggesting possible 
reduction in the rate of oxidative phosphorylation and/or increased energy consumption in 
stress repair. It is already known that stress due to infections by foliar pathogens can result in 
increase in the rate of respiration in the infected tissue (Kosuge and Kimpel, 1981).
Secondary metabolism is also altered by SO2 exposures. Induction in cell wall rigidity by 
direct exposure to SO2 through increased production of phenols (Hyodo et  al., 1978) and 
peroxidases and consequently increased oxidation of phenols is seen in few cases (Biggs and 
Fry, 1987). According to Mayo et al. (1992), sulfur gas fumigation and sulfur dust deposition, 
combined with the accumulation of phenolic compounds, were associated with increased 
concentrations of soluble aluminum and iron and altered elastic properties of the cell wall 
and water relations. Leaf diffusion resistance and photosynthesis were altered by changes in 
stomatal physiology and a reduction in carbon assimilation (Legge and Krupa, 2002).
2.2 Nitrogen oxides
Coal combustion results in production of nitrogen oxides which adversely affects vege￾tation. NOx like NO and NO2 are toxic to plants (Taylor et al., 1975). High concentrations of 
NO2 (upto 250ppm) used for fumigation results in deleterious effects on plants. Smith (1981)
emphasized that leaf injury in trees occurred only at doses of 1.6–2.6ppm for periods upto 
48h, and a concentration of 20ppm was required to produce visible symptoms in just 1h. 
NO2 toxicity increases synergistically with SO2 exposure (Fujiwara, 1973; Tingey et al., 1971).
There is both dry and wet deposition of atmospheric NO2 on plant leaves. Plant absorp￾tion of NO2 disturbs plant normal growth and physiological metabolism, including vege￾tative growth and reproductive growth, nitrate reductase (NaR) activity, nitrite reductase 3. Other gases/release of coal burning and their impact on vegetation of the world 129
(NiR) activity, nitrogen uptake, photosynthetic and other physiological metabolic processes. 
Regarding visible symptoms, chlorosis of young needles is a common symptom. Needle tip 
burn symptom of older needles is often seen in coniferous species. Pine trees display bleach￾ing followed by sharply defined red/brown bands between necrotic and healthy tissue in 
older needles. Immediate abscission of older needles occurs in spruce. Herring bone necrosis 
in the older leaves of beech, hazel and apple trees have been observed. Ivory necrosis, red/
brown necrosis and black necrosis have been recorded in certain species.
Many species show water soaked appearance on the leaves followed by necrosis in response 
to acute NOx exposure. Leaf glazing has been observed in annual pea, cabbage and spinach. 
Necrotic streaking and interveinal necrosis has been recorded in many narrow-leaved and 
broad-leaved species. Legumes among many other species show ivory necrosis while some 
species display yellow, orange or brown necrosis. Tip necrosis has been observed on other 
plant parts such as awns, bracts and sepals.
Young leaves and needles are more sensitive to NOx than older ones. High relative humid￾ity and N deficiency increase plant sensitivity to NOx, whereas excess N and drought condi￾tions decrease sensitivity. NOx-sensitive conditions are associated with high VOC/NOx ratios 
and VOC-sensitive conditions are associated with low VOC/NOx ratios. A more reactive 
VOC mix is associated with NOx-sensitive conditions. NOx-sensitive versus VOC-sensitive 
conditions is correlated with the ratio of reactivity-weighted VOC to NOx, rather than the ra￾tio of the simple sum of VOC to NOx. Naturally occurring VOC (especially isoprene, emitted 
primarily by oaks and other deciduous trees) represents a significant fraction of total ambient 
VOC, especially in suburban and rural settings and when VOC is weighted by reactivity. 
Biogenic VOC is especially important because they are usually highly reactive. Biogenic NOx
is far smaller relative to the anthropogenic source. A high rate of biogenic VOC increases the 
ratio of reactivity-weighted VOC to NOx and makes NOx-sensitive conditions more likely 
(Chameides, 1992; Chameides et al., 1988; Pierce et al., 1998).
When nitrogen oxides and volatile organic compounds react with sunlight, a brown haze is 
created. This is known as photochemical smog. The lower surface of the leaf becomes silvery. 
Necrosis is also a common symptom (Koritz and Went, 1953). NOx also results in formation 
of PAN (Peroxy acetyl nitrate) which is a secondary air pollutant affecting vegetations. It is 
formed from reactions between nitrogen oxides and volatile organic compounds. It causes 
inhibition of photophosphorylation by targeting enzyme system.
3. Other gases/release of coal burning and their impact on vegetation 
of the world
3.1 Carbon dioxide
The atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) concentration was stable for at least 1000years prior 
to the start of the Industrial Revolution. However, after the industrial revolution, atmospheric 
CO2 levels across the globe have risen rapidly, increasing from 280ppm to presently over 
400ppm (Tans and Keeling, 2016; NOAA, ESRI, 2019). It is predicted that the global CO2 con￾centration will continue to rise due to ever increasing carbon emissions (Meehl et al., 2007). 
Despite initial steps taken under the Kyoto Protocol, the world appears to be on a path that is 130 7. Effect of coal-smoke pollution on plants growth
likely to lead to a CO2 that exceeds the highest IPCC emissions scenario (A1FI) (Choudhary 
et al., 2022). It is speculated that CO2 concentrations will rise to as much as 500–1000ppm by 
the year 2100 (IPCC Climate Change, 2007).
Increase in global CO2 concentrations not only have serious consequences on humans and 
animals but also lead to an array of both positive and negative effects on major agricultural 
crops used to feed the global population. Elevated levels of atmospheric CO2 acts as a carbon 
fertilizer, as it improves plant growth and yield of crops (Deryang et al., 2016; Vander Kooi 
et al., 2016) but on the other hand it negatively impacts the contents of nutrients like iron, 
zinc and proteins in the grains (Broberg et al., 2017). The positive effects of enhanced CO2 is 
reflected more in C3 plants than C4 plants (Mishra et al., 2013; Pleijel and Hogy, 2015). Since 
rising CO2 levels can cause accumulation of excess C and reduction in nutrients, it could 
alter the C, N metabolism in C3 plants (Hogy et al., 2013). Enhanced CO2 is known to cause 
reduction in rice milling percentage, head rice recovery, protein content and nutritional qual￾ity of grains in C3 plants such as wheat and rice (Myers et al., 2014). Numerous studies have 
reported inconsistent changes in micro- and macronutrients levels in grains of cereals like 
wheat under elevated CO2 condition (Hogy, 2008).
CO2 concentrations have profound direct effects on the growth, physiology, and chemistry 
of plants, independent of any effects on climate (Ziska, 2008). This impact is result of the fact 
that CO2 is of utmost importance to plant metabolism. As photosynthetic organisms, plants 
take up atmospheric CO2, chemically reducing the carbon which eventually leads to acqui￾sition of stored chemical energy and also the carbon skeletons for the organic molecules that 
make up a plants’ overall structure. On the whole, carbon, hydrogen and oxygen assimilated 
into organic molecules by photosynthesis make up around 96% of the total dry mass of a 
typical plant (Marschner, 1995). Photosynthesis is the center as far as nutritional metabolism 
of plants is concerned, and increasing the accessibility of CO2 for photosynthesis can have 
numerous effects on growth and many aspects of plant physiology. For effective analysis of 
elevated CO2 levels on plants, techniques like Free-Air Carbon dioxide Enrichment (FACE) 
have been developed that have allowed natural or agricultural ecosystems to be fumigated 
with elevated concentrations of CO2 in the field without use of chambers which provides a 
more realistic approach for studying the effects of elevated carbon dioxide levels on plants 
and provides the best indication of the responses of plants to increased CO2 under the real￾world conditions of the future. It is seen in many FACE experiments, that growth of plants 
at CO2 concentrations of 475–600ppm increases photosynthetic rates by an average of 40% 
(Ainsworth and Rogers, 2007). CO2 concentrations are also critical in regulating the stomatal 
opening. As CO2 concentrations increase, plants can maintain high photosynthetic rates with 
relatively low stomatal conductance. Among various FACE experiments, development under 
enhanced CO2levels decrease stomatal conductance of water by an average of 22% (Ainsworth 
and Rogers, 2007; Kumar et al., 2022). This is believed to reduce overall water use of plant, 
although the extent of the total effect of CO2 will largely depend on how it affects other de￾terminants of plant water use, like plant size, morphology, and temperature of leaf. Overall, 
FACE experiments show decreases in whole plant water use of 5%–20% under elevated CO2.
The availability of additional photosynthate enables most plants to grow faster under el￾evated CO2, with dry matter production in FACE experiments being increased on average 
(Ainsworth and Long, 2005; de Graaff et al., 2006). This increased growth is also reflected in 
the harvestable yield of crops, with wheat, rice and soybean all showing increases in yield 3. Other gases/release of coal burning and their impact on vegetation of the world 131
of 12%–14% under elevated CO2 in FACE experiments (Ainsworth, 2008; Long et al., 2006). 
Elevated CO2 also results into alterations in the chemical composition of tissues of plant. Due 
to increased photosynthetic activity, leaf nonstructural carbohydrates (sugars and starches) 
per unit leaf area increase on average by 30%–40% under FACE elevated CO2 (Ainsworth, 
2008; Ainsworth and Long, 2005). Leaf nitrogen concentrations in plant tissues typically de￾crease in FACE under elevated CO2, with nitrogen per unit leaf mass decreasing on average 
by 13% (Ainsworth and Long, 2005). This decrease is because of dilution of nitrogen from 
greater than before carbohydrate concentrations; reduced uptake of minerals from the soil, 
because of less stomatal conductance (Taub and Wang, 2008); and reduction in the rate of 
nitrate assimilation into organic compounds (Bloom et al., 2010).
Protein concentrations in tissues of plant are coupled to nitrogen status of plant. Changes in 
plant tissue nitrogen are therefore likely to have important effects on species at higher trophic 
levels. Performance is typically diminished for insect herbivores feeding on plants grown in 
elevated CO2 (Zvereva and Kozlov, 2005). This can result into increased consumption of plant 
tissues as herbivores balance for depreciated food quality (Stiling and Cornelissen, 2007). 
Effects on human nutrition are likely as well. In FACE experiments, protein concentrations 
in grains of wheat, rice and barley, and in potato tubers, are decreased by 5%–14% under el￾evated CO2 (Taub and Wang, 2008). Crop concentrations of nutritionally important minerals 
including calcium, magnesium and phosphorus may also be decreased under elevated CO2
(Loladze, 2002; Taub and Wang, 2008). Environmental factors influence the effects of elevated 
CO2 on plants. It is established that increased CO2 makes carbon more accessible, yet plants 
also need other resources like minerals obtained from the soil. Elevated CO2 does not di￾rectly make these mineral elements more available and, even decrease the uptake of some 
elements. The capability of plants to react to elevated CO2 with increased photosynthesis 
and growth may thus be restricted under conditions of low mineral accessibility. This result 
has been very well studied for nitrogen. In FACE experiments, there is less enhancement of 
photosynthesis by elevated CO2 under low than high soil N conditions (Ainsworth and Long, 
2005; Ainsworth and Rogers, 2007). In FACE experiments, crop yield appears to be enhanced 
by elevated CO2 to a lesser extent under low-N conditions than under high-N (Ainsworth 
and Long 2005; Ainsworth 2008; Long et al., 2006). It is generally seen that in all kinds of 
technologies regarding CO2 fumigation, there is a lower incrementing biomass production 
under low-nutrient conditions (Poorter and Navas, 2003). Crops grown with low amounts 
of nitrogen fertilization reflect a greater reduction in protein concentrations under enhanced 
CO2 than crops grown under higher N fertilization (Taub and Wang, 2008).
Recent reports suggest that the concentrations of atmospheric CO2 predicted for the year 2100 
will have major implications for physiology and growth of plants. It is now an established fact 
that under increased CO2conditions, most plant species show higher rates of photosynthesis, 
enhanced growth, reduced water use and lowered concentrations of nitrogen and protein in the 
tissues. Rising CO2 is very likely to influence both agricultural production and quality of food. 
The results of enhanced CO2 are also not uniform; some species, especially C4 plants, show less 
response to elevated CO2 than do other types of plants. Rise in CO2 is thus likely to have complex 
results on the growth and composition of natural plant communities (Taub, 2010).
Thickening of leaves is also seen as one of the side effects of increase in atmospheric CO2
levels. Scientists have discovered that plants with thicker leaves may worsen the effects of 
climate change because they would be less efficient in sequestering atmospheric carbon, a fact 132 7. Effect of coal-smoke pollution on plants growth
that climate change models to date have not taken into account. Scientists still do not know 
the reason why plants thicken their leaves when carbon dioxide levels rise in the atmosphere. 
But the response has been acknowledged across many different types of plant species, like 
woody trees, staple crops and other plants that undergo C3 carbon fixation, a form of photo￾synthesis that accounts for about 95% of photosynthetic activity on Earth. Leaves can thicken 
by as much as a third, and it changes the ratio of surface area to mass in the leaf and alters 
plant activities like photosynthesis, gas exchange, evaporative cooling and sugar storage. It 
is believed that this critical and predictable leaf-thickening response is an ideal starting point 
to try to understand how widespread changes to plant physiology will affect Earth’s climate.
3.2 Carbon monoxide
Among emitted harmful gases, carbon monoxide (CO) is a poisonous gas to mammals, 
and has many similar qualities and effects to those of carbon dioxide (CO2), except for its 
flammability at high concentration (Wang et al., 2009). As an important signaling molecule in 
physiological activity, CO has a similar toxic effect to that of cyanide, the inhibitory effect of 
a higher ratio of CO to O2 (above 4:1) on enzyme cytochrome c oxidase in the mitochondria 
at the cellular level or the effect on the detoxification enzyme P-450 in them on oxygen as 
system; and multiprotein complex proteins in chloroplasts. In plants like strawberry, effects 
of CO can be seen as reduction of primary metabolism, i.e., photosynthesis, and closure of 
stomata, which resulted in a reduction of protein, carbohydrate and sucrose content due to 
production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) under prolonged exposure of gas stress (Muneer 
et al., 2014). However, on the other hand, CO has positive effects on seed germination, root 
development, and stomatal closure. Also, CO is shown to enhance plant abiotic stress resis￾tance commonly through the enhancement of antioxidant defense system (Wang and Liao, 
2016).
3.3 Particulate matter
Another discharge from coal burning is the particulate matter, which is the sum of all solid 
and liquid particles suspended in air many of which are hazardous. This complex mixture 
includes both organic and inorganic particles like dust, pollen, soot, smoke and liquid drop￾lets. In case of burning of coal, unburned or half-burned particles of coal can be categorized 
as soot. Soot can carry any number of the contaminants, which are harmful to the animals as 
well as plants.
3.4 Fly ash
The thermal power units are mainly based on coal which is used for the fuel purpose. 
After burning of the coal huge amount of ash is generated. The finer ash (flyash) material 
is separated from slightly coarser ash. Handling and dumping of the ash formed is a big 
job (Basu et al., 2008). The ash is known to contain some trace elements, heavy metals and 
radionuclides which are potential hazardous wastes (Sikka and Kansal, 1994). The high ash 
content (30%–50%) of the coal makes this problem complex. The plants that grow nearby ash 
dumps show many deleterious effects. Even soils get depleted of many important microbes 3. Other gases/release of coal burning and their impact on vegetation of the world 133
needed for its fertility. Safe disposal of the ash without adversely affecting the environment 
and the large storage area required for dumping are the major concerns. Hence attempts are 
being made to exploit the fly ash rather than discarding it. The coal ash is now mostly utilized 
in agriculture field crops for improving soil properties and nutrient supply. However, direct 
application of fly ash to agricultural ground would not be quite advantageous to crops, due to 
little availability of most of the essential nutrient elements viz. nitrogen (N) and phosphorous 
(P), and a lower rate of fly ash degradation after its application in soil. Moreover, fly ash has 
a prevalence of heavy metals (Jambhulkar et al., 2018) which are toxic for plants especially at 
high levels (Rautaray et al., 2003; Verma et al., 2016; Singh et al., 2019). These can bioaccumu￾late and enter food chain, which can be severely deleterious.
3.5 Heavy metals
During the process of coal burning, the chemical bonds which hold the carbon atoms in 
place are broken and eventually releasing energy. Together with these, other chemical reac￾tions also occur, out of which many carry toxic airborne pollutants as well as heavy metals 
into the environment. Major heavy metals released here are mercury, cadmium, lead and ar￾senic. These elements do not play any beneficial role in growth of plant, and adverse impact 
have been recorded even at very small concentrations of these metals in the growth medium.
It is generally seen that lead (Pb) exerts adverse effect on morphology, growth and pho￾tosynthetic processes of plants. High levels of it cause inhibition of enzyme activities, water 
imbalance, changes in permeability of membrane and, also disturb mineral nutrition (Sharma 
and Dubey, 2005). Pb hampers the activity of enzymes at cellular level by interacting with 
their sulfhydryl groups. High Pb concentration also induces oxidative stress by increasing the 
production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in plants (Reddy et al., 2005; Singh et al., 2022).
The large input of mercury (Hg) into the agricultural lands has caused the widespread 
incidence of mercury-contamination in the entire food chain. Hg is an exclusive metal owing 
to its existence in various forms, e.g., HgS, Hg2 +, Hg°, and methyl-Hg (Kumar et al., 2021). 
However, in agricultural soil, ionic form (Hg2 +) is predominant (Han et al., 2006). High level 
of Hg2 + is strongly phytotoxic to plant cells. Toxic level of Hg2 + can cause visible injuries 
and physiological disorders in plants (Zhou et al., 2007). For example, Hg2 + can bind to wa￾ter channel proteins, thus inducing leaf stomata to close and physical obstruction of water 
flow in plants (Zhang and Tyerman, 1999). High level of Hg2 + interfere the mitochondrial 
activity and induces oxidative stress by triggering the generation of ROS. This leads to the 
disruption of biomembrane lipids and cellular metabolism in plants (Messer et  al., 2005; 
Israr et al., 2006; Cargnelutti et al., 2006).
Plants exposed to high levels of cadmium (Cd) shows reduction in photosynthesis, water 
and nutrient uptake. Plants grown in soil containing high amounts of Cd show visible symp￾toms of injury reflected in terms of chlorosis, inhibition of growth, browning of root tips, and 
eventually death (Wójcik and Tukiendorf, 2004; Mohanpuria et al., 2007).
The two forms of inorganic arsenic (As), arsenate (AsV) and arsenite (AsIII), are without 
any difficulty taken up by the cells of the plant root (Yadav et al., 2021). Once inside the cell, 
AsV can be easily converted to AsIII, which is the more toxic of the two forms. AsV and AsIII 
both interrupt plant metabolism, but through distinctive mechanisms. AsV is a chemical an￾alog of phosphate that can disrupt at least few phosphate-dependent aspects of metabolism. 134 7. Effect of coal-smoke pollution on plants growth
AsIII is a dithiol reactive compound that binds to and potentially inactivates enzymes con￾taining closely spaced cysteine residues or dithiol cofactors. Arsenic exposure generally re￾sults in the production of reactive oxygen species that leads to the creation of antioxidant 
metabolites and various enzymes concerned with the antioxidant defense. Oxidative carbon 
metabolism, amino acid and protein relationships, and nitrogen and sulfur assimilation path￾ways are also influenced by As exposure.
4. Conclusion
This chapter gives an overall picture of the composition of coal smoke and the pollution 
it causes. Its harmful impact on vegetation of the world has been explained. The principal 
phytotoxic gases of coal burning, and therefore, their effects on flora are dealt in detail. It 
highlights the consequences of other coal smoke constituents like CO2, CO, particulate mat￾ter, heavy metals and very importantly fly ash, on the growth, physiochemical parameters, 
metabolism, and yield of various plants. However, a more detailed study required on the coal 
smoke composition and their impact in terms of exposure, tolerance, adaptation, physiolog￾ical and molecular performance in different species compositions. Additionally, coal smoke 
pollution and their interaction with a specific ecosystem need to be investigated.
References
Ainsworth, E.A., 2008. Rice production in a changing climate: a meta-analysis of responses to elevated carbon diox￾ide and elevated ozone concentration. Glob. Chang. Biol. 14, 1642–1650.
Ainsworth, E.A., Long, S.P., 2005. What have we learned from 15  years of free-air CO2 enrichment (FACE)? A 
meta-analytic review of the responses of photosynthesis, canopy properties and plant production to rising CO2. 
New Phytol. 165, 351–372.
Ainsworth, E.A., Rogers, A., 2007. The response of photosynthesis and stomatal conductance to rising (CO2): mech￾anisms and environmental interactions. Plant Cell Environ. 30, 258–270.
Ambasht, N.K., Ambasht, R.S., 2002. Environmental pollution. In: A Text Book of Plant Ecology, fourteenth ed. CBS 
Publishers, p. 312.
Basu, M., Pande, M., Bhadoria, P.B.S., Mahapatra, S.C., 2008. Potential Fly-ash Utilization in Agriculture: A Global 
Review., https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pnsc.2008.12.006.
Bell, J.N.B., 1982. Response of plants to sulphur dioxide. Nature 284, 399–400.
Biggs, K., Fry, C., 1987. Phenolic cross linking in the cell wall. In: Cosgrove, D.J., Knievel, D.P. (Eds.), Physiology of 
cell expansion during plant growth. American Society of Plant Physiologists, Rockville, MD, pp. 46–57.
Bloom, A.J., Burger, M., et al., 2010. Carbon dioxide inhibits nitrate assimilation in wheat and Arabidopsis. Science 
328, 899–903.
Broberg, M.C., Uddling, J.M.G., Peijel, H., 2017. Fertilizer efficiency in wheat is reduced by ozone pollution. Sci. Total 
Environ. 607–608, 876–880.
Cargnelutti, D., Tabaldi, L.A., Spanevello, R.M., Jucoski, G.O., Battisti, V., Redin, M., Linares, C.E.B., Dressler, V.L., 
Flores, M.M., Nicoloso, F.T., Morsch, V.M., Schetinger, M.R.C., 2006. Mercury toxicity induces oxidative stress in 
growing cucumber seedlings. Chemosphere 65, 999–1006.
Chameides, W.L., et  al., 1992. Ozone precursor relationships in the ambient atmosphere, d. Geophys. Res. 97, 
6037–6055.
Chameides, W.L., Lindsay, R.W., Richardson, J., Kiang, C.S., 1988. The role of biogenic hydrocarbons in urban photo￾chemical smog: Atlanta as a case study. Science 241, 1473–1475.
Choudhary, A., Kumar, A., Kaur, H., Singh, M., Suri, G.S., Kaur, G., Mehta, S., 2022. Effect of elevated CO2 conditions 
on medicinal plants: a relatively unexplored aspect. In: Environmental Pollution and Medicinal Plants. CRC Press, 
pp. 95–111.References 135
de Graaff, M.A., Van Groenigen, K.J., et al., 2006. Interactions between plant growth and soil nutrient cycling under 
elevated CO2: a meta-analysis. Glob. Chang. Biol. 12, 2077–2091.
Deryang, D., Joshua, E., Christian, F., Christoph, M., Thomas, A.M.P., Kenneth, J.B., Declan, C., Alex, C.R., Dieter, 
G., James, W.J., Nikolay, K., Stefan, O., Sibyll, S., Erwin, S., Hong, Y., Cynthia, R., 2016. Regional disparities in 
the beneficial effects of rising CO2 concentrations on crop water productivity. Nat. Clim. Change Lett. 6, 786–790.
Dhakate, P., Sharma, P., Mehta, S., Akter, J., Bhatt, V., Chandanshive, S., Chakravarty, D., Rahman, M., Islam, M., 2019. 
Beneficial role of metalloids in plants: molecular understanding and applicability. In: Recent Approaches in Omics 
for Plant Resilience to Climate Change. Springer, Cham, pp. 357–387.
Fujiwara, T., 1973. Effects of nitrogen oxides in the atmosphere on vegetation. J. Pollut. Cont. 9, 253–257.
Han, F.X., Su, Y., Monts, D.L., Waggoner, A.C., Plodinec, J.M., 2006. Binding, distribution, and plant uptake of mer￾cury in a soil from Oak Ridge, Tennessee, USA. Sci. Total Environ. 368, 753–768.
Hogy, P., 2008. Effects of elevated CO2 on grain quality of wheat. J. Cereal Sci. 48 (3), 580–591.
Hogy, P., Brunnbaur, M., Koehler, P., Schwadorf, K., Breuer, J., Franzaring, J., et al., 2013. Grain quality characteristics 
of spring wheat (Triticum aestivum) as affected by free-air CO2 enrichment. Environ. Exp. Bot. 88, 11–18.
Husen, A., 1997. Impact of Air Pollution on the Growth and Development of Datura innoxia Mill. M.Sc. dissertation, 
Jamia Hamdard, New Delhi, India.
Husen, A., 2021. Morpho-anatomical, physiological, biochemical andmolecular responses ofplants toair pollution. 
In: Husen, A. (Ed.), arsh Environment and Plant Resilience. Springer International Publishing AG, Cham, pp. 
203–234, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-65912-7_9.
Husen, A., Ali, S.T., Mahmooduzzafar, Iqbal, M., 1999. Structural, functional and biochemical responses of Datura 
innoxia Mill. to coal-smoke pollution. Proc. Acad. Environ. Biol. 8 (1), 61–72.
Hyodo, H., Kuroda, H., Yang, S.F., 1978. Induction of phenylalanine ammonia-lyase and increase in phenolics in 
lettuce leaves in relation to the development of russet spotting caused by ethylene. Plant Physiol. 62, 31–35.
IPCC Climate Change, 2007. The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fourth Assessment 
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Israr, M., Sahi, S., Datta, R., Sarkar, D., 2006. Bioaccumulation and physiological effects of mercury in Sesbania drum￾monii. Chemosphere 65, 591–598.
Jambhulkar, H.P., Shaikh, S.M.S., Kumar, M.S., 2018. Fly ash toxicity, emerging issues and possible implica￾tions for its exploitation in agriculture; Indian scenario: a review. Chemosphere. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
chemosphere.2018.09.045.
Kingston, C.E., Haworth, M., McElwain, J.C., 2014. Damage structures in leaf epidermis and cuticle as an indicator of 
elevated atmospheric sulphur dioxide in early Mesozoic floras. Rev. Palaeobot. Palynol. 208, 25–42.
Koritz, H.G., Went, F.W., 1953. The Physiological action of smog on plants. 1. Initial growth and transpiration studies. 
Plant Physiol. 28 (1), 50–62.
Kosuge, T., Kimpel, J.A., 1981. Energy use and metabolic regulation in plant-pathogen interactions. In: Ayers, P.G. 
(Ed.), Effects of disease on the physiology of the growing plant. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 
29–46.
Krupa, S.V., 1996. The role of atmospheric chemistry in the assessment of crop growth and productivity. In: Yunus, 
M., Iqbal, M. (Eds.), Plant Response to Air Pollution. John Wiley & Sons, England, pp. 35–73.
Kumar, A., Choudhary, A., Kaur, H., Kumar, R., Sharma, R., Gautam, H., Mehta, S., 2022. Water pollution and medic￾inal plants: insights into the impact and adaptation responses. In: Environmental Pollution and Medicinal Plants. 
CRC Press, pp. 117–129.
Kumar, A., Choudhary, A., Kaur, H., Mehta, S., Husen, A., 2021. Metal-based nanoparticles, sensors, and their multi￾faceted application in food packaging. J. Nanobiotechnol. 19 (1), 1–25.
LeBlanc, F., Rao, D.N., 1975. Effects of air pollution on lichens and Bryophytes. In: Mudd, J.B., Kozlowski, T.T. (Eds.), 
Responses of Plants to Air Pollution. Academic Press, New York.
Legge, A.H., Krupa, S.V., 2002. Effects of sulphur dioxide. In: Bell, J.N.B., Treshow, M. (Eds.), Air Pollution and Plant 
Life. John Willey & Sons, Ltd, England, pp. 135–162.
Legge, A.H., Nosal, M., Krupa, S.V., 1996. Modeling the numerical relationships between chronic ambient sulphur 
dioxide exposures and tree growth. Can. J. Forest Res. 26, 689–695.
Loladze, I., 2002. Rising atmospheric CO2 and human nutrition: toward globally imbalanced plant stoichiometry? 
Trends Ecol. Evol. 17, 457–461.
Long, S.P., Ainsworth, E.A., et al., 2006. Food for thought: lower-than-expected crop yield stimulation with rising 
CO2 concentrations. Science 312, 1918–1921.136 7. Effect of coal-smoke pollution on plants growth
Marschner, H., 1995. Mineral Nutrition of Higher Plants, second ed. Academic Press, London.
Mayo, J.M., Legge, A.H., Yeung, E.C., Krupa, S.V., Bogner, J.C., 1992. The effects of sulphur gas and elemental sulphur 
dust deposition on Pinus contorta × Pinus banksiana: cell walls and water relations. Environ. Pollut. 76 (1), 43–50.
Meehl, G., Stocker, T., Collins, W.D., Friedlingstein, P., Gaye, A.T., Gregory, J.M., Kitoh, A., Knutti, R., Murphy, J.M., 
Noda, A., SCB, R., Watterson, I.G., Weaver, A.J., Zhao, Z.C., 2007. Global Climate Projections Climate Change 2007: 
The Physical Science Basis. The Physical Science Basis. pp. 747–845.
Messer, R.L., Lockwood, P.E., Tseng, W.Y., Edwards, K., Shaw, M., Caughman, G.B., Lewis, J.B., Wataha, J.C., 2005. 
Mercury (II) alters mitochondrial activity of monocytes at sublethal doses via oxidative stress mechanisms. J. 
Biomed. Mater. Res. B 75, 257–263.
Mishra, A.K., Rai, R., Agrawal, S.B., 2013. Differential response of dwarf and tall tropical wheat cultivars to elevated 
ozone with and without carbon dioxide enrichment: growth, yield and grain quality. Field Crop Res. 145, 21–32.
Mohanpuria, P., Rana, N.K., Yadav, S.K., 2007. Cadmium induced oxidative stress influence on glutathione metabolic 
genes of Camellia sinensis (L.) O. Kuntze. Environ. Toxicol. 22, 368–374.
Muneer, S., Kim, T.H., Choi, B.C., Lee, B.S., Lee, J.H., 2014. Effect of CO, NOx and SO2 on ROS production, photosyn￾thesis and ascorbate–glutathione pathway to induce Fragaria×annasaas a hyperaccumulator. Redox Biol. 2, 91–98.
Myers, S.S., Zanobetti, A., Kloog, I., Huybers, P., Leaky, A.D., Bloom, A.J., Carlisle, E., Dietterich, L.H., Fitzgerald, G., 
Hasegawa, T., Holbrook, N.M., 2014. Increasing CO2threatens human nutrition. Nature 510, 139–142.
Nighat, F., Mahmooduzzafar, Iqbal, M., 2008. Coal-smoke pollution modifies physio-chemical characteristics of tis￾sues during the ontogeny of Peristrophe bicalyculata. Biologia 63, 1128–1134.
NOAA, ESRI, 2019. Mauna Loa CO2 Annual Mean Data.
Pawar, K., Dubey, P.S., 1982. Effect of atmospheric pollutant on the morphology and pigment content 2, 501–507.
Percy, K.E., McQuattie, C.J., Rebbeck, 1994. Effects of air pollutants on epicuticular wax chemical composition. Air 
pollutants and the leaf cuticle. NATO ASI Series 36, 67–79.
Pierce, T., Geron, C., Bender, L., Dennis, R., Tonnesen, G., Guenther, A., 1998. Influence of increased isoprene emis￾sions on regional ozone modeling. J. Geophys. Res. 103, 25611–25630.
Pleijel, H., Hogy, P., 2015. CO2 dose response functions for wheat grains, protein and mineral yield based on FACE 
and open top chamber experiments. Environ. Pollut. 198, 70–77.
Poorter, H., Navas, M.L., 2003. Plant growth and competition at elevated CO2: on winners, losers and functional 
groups. New Phytol. 157, 175–198.
Pratt, G.S., Kromroy, K.W., Be, S.V., 1983. Effects of ozone and sulphur dioxide on injury and foliar concentrations of 
sulphur and chlorophyll in soybean, Glycine max. Environ. Pollut. Ser. A 32 (2), 91–99.
Rao, D.N., 1971. A study of Air pollution problem due to coal unloading in Varanasi-India. In: Proceedings of the 
Second International Clean Air Congress, pp. 270–273.
Rao, D.N., Leblanc, F., 1966. Effect of sulphur dioxide of the Lichen alga with special reference to chlorophyll. 
Bryologist 69, 69–75.
Rautaray, S.K., Ghosh, B.C., Mittra, B.N., 2003. Effect of fly ash, organic wastes and chemical fertilizers on yield, nu￾trient uptake, heavymetal content and residual fertility in a rice-mustard cropping sequence under acid lateritic 
soils. Bioresour. Technol. 90, 275–283.
Reddy, A.M., Kumar, S.G., Jyonthsnakumari, G., Thimmanaik, S., Sudhakar, C., 2005. Lead induced changes in an￾tioxidant metabolism of horsegram (Macrotyloma uniflorum (Lam.) Verdc.) and Bengal gram (Cicer arietinum L.). 
Chemosphere 60, 97–104.
Sharma, P., Dubey, R., 2005. Lead toxicity in plants. Braz. J. Plant Physiol. 17. https://doi.org/10.1590/
S1677-04202005000100004.
Sikka, R., Kansal, B.D., 1994. Characterization of thermal power plant flyash for agronomic purposes and to identify 
pollution hazards. Bioresour. Technol. 50, 269–273.
Singh, A., Mehta, S., Yadav, S., Nagar, G., Ghosh, R., Roy, A., Chakraborty, A., Singh, I.K., 2022. How to cope with the 
challenges of environmental stresses in the era of global climate change: an update on ROS stave off in plants. Int. 
J. Mol. Sci. 23 (4), 1995.
Singh, P.S., Shriwastav, A., Gupta, A., 2019. Strategies for collection, treatment, and recycling of fly ash from thermal 
power plants. In: Agarwal, R., Agarwal, A., Gupta, T., Sharma, N. (Eds.), Pollutants from Energy Sources. Energy, 
Environment, and Sustainability. Springer, Singapore, pp. 91–103.
Smith, W.H., 1981. Forest tree reproduction: influence of air pollutants. In: Air Pollution and Forests. Springer Series 
on Environmental Management. Springer, New York, NY. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4684-0104-2_7.Stiling, P., Cornelissen, T., 2007. How does elevated carbon dioxide (CO2) affect plant-herbivore interactions? A field 
experiment and meta-analysis of CO2-mediated changes on plant chemistry and herbivore performance. Glob. 
Chang. Biol. 13, 1823–1842.
Subrahmanyam, N.S., Sambamurty, A.V.S.S., 2000. Environmental pollution. Ecology 2, 298–343.
Surabhi, S., 2017. Fly ash in India: generation vis-a-vis utilization and global perspective. Int. J. Appl. Chem. 13 (1), 
29–52.
Tans, P., Keeling, R., 2016. Trends in Atmospheric Carbon Dioxide [Online]. NOAA. Available online at: http://www.
esrl.noaa.gov/gmd/ccgg/trends.
Taub, D., 2010. Effects of rising atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide on plants. Nat. Educ. Know. 3 (10), 21.
Taub, D.R., Wang, X.Z., 2008. Why are nitrogen concentrations in plant tissues lower under elevated CO2? A critical 
examination of the hypotheses. J. Integr. Plant Biol. 50, 1365–1374.
Taylor, B.K., van den Ende, B., Canterford, R.L., 1975. Effects of rate and timing of nitrogen applications on the 
performance and chemical composition of young pear trees, cv Williams’ Bon Chrétien. J. Hortic. Sci. 50, 29–40.
Tingey, D.T., Reinert, R.A., Dunning, J.A., Heck, W.W., 1971. Vegetation injury from the interaction of nitrogen diox￾ide and sulfur dioxide. Phytopathology 61, 1506–1511.
Vander Kooi, C.J., Reich, M., Low, M., De Kok, L.J., Tausz, M., 2016. Growth and yield stimulation under elevated 
CO2 and drought: a meta-analysis on crops. Environ. Exp. Biol. 122, 150–157.
Verma, C., Madan, S., Hussain, A., Dubey, S., 2016. Heavy metal contamination of groundwater due to fly ash dis￾posal of coal-fired thermal power plant, Parichha, Jhansi. India Cogent Engg. 3 (1), 117–243.
Wang, M., Liao, W., 2016. Carbon monoxide as a signaling molecule in plants. Front. Plant Sci. 7, 572. https://doi.
org/10.3389/fpls.2016.00572.
Wang, J.Z., Cui, L.J., Wang, Y., Li, J.L., 2009. Growth, lipid peroxidation and photosynthesis in two tall fescue culti￾vars differing in heat tolerance. Biol. Plant. 53, 237–242.
Wójcik, M., Tukiendorf, A., 2004. Phytochelatin synthesis and cadmium localization in wild type of Arabidopsis thali￾ana. Plant Growth Regul. 44, 71–80.
Yadav, B., Jogawat, A., Lal, S.K., Lakra, N., Mehta, S., Shabek, N., Narayan, O.P., 2021. Plant mineral transport sys￾tems and the potential for crop improvement. Planta 253 (2), 1–30.
Yunus, M., Dwivedi, A.K., Kulshreshtha, K., Ahmad, K.J., 1985. Dust loadings on some common plants near Lucknow 
city. Environ. Pollut. (Ser. B) 9, 71–80.
Zhang, W.H., Tyerman, S.D., 1999. Inhibition of water channels by HgCl2 in intact wheat root cells. Plant Physiol. 
120, 849–857.
Zhou, Z.S., Huang, S.Q., Guo, K., Mehta, S.K., Zhang, P.C., Yang, Z.M., 2007. Metabolic adaptations to mercury-induced 
oxidative stress in roots of Medicago sativa L. J. Inorg. Biochem. 101, 1–9.
Ziska, L.H., 2008. Rising atmospheric carbon dioxide and plant biology: the overlooked paradigm. In: Kleinman, 
D.L., Cloud-Hansen, K.A., et al. (Eds.), Controversies in Science and Technology, From Climate to Chromosomes. 
Liebert, Inc, New Rochele, pp. 379–400.
Zvereva, E.L., Kozlov, M.V., 2005. Consequences of simultaneous elevation of carbon dioxide and temperature for 
plant–herbivore interactions: a metaanalysis. Glob. Chang. Biol. 12 (1), 27–41.
References 137This page intentionally left blankPlants and their Interaction to Environmental Pollution 139 Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-99978-6.00006-6
CHAPTER
8
Effect of heavy metals on growth, 
physiological and biochemical 
responses of plants
Arslan Hafeez, Rizwan Rasheed, Muhammad Arslan Ashraf, 
Freeha Fatima Qureshi, Iqbal Hussain, and Muhammad Iqbal
Department of Botany, Government College University Faisalabad, Faisalabad, Pakistan
Abbreviations
OH• hydroxyl radicals
Al aluminum
As arsenic
Cd cadmium
Cr Chromium
Cu copper
H2O2 hydrogen peroxide
Hg mercury
Mn manganese
NOXs NADPH oxidases
O2
•− superoxide
Pb lead
ROS reactive oxygen species
Sb antimony
Zn zinc
1. Introduction
The elements with specific gravity five times greater than water are referred to as heavy 
metals (Abdullateef et al., 2014; Yadav et al., 2021). Plants are subjected to variety of biotic and 
abiotic environmental stresses due to their sessile nature (Husen, 1997, 2021a,b,c, 2022). In 
spite of all other environmental stresses, heavy metal (HM) stress is one of the most important 140 8. Effect of heavy metal pollution on plants
stresses having negative impact on plant growth, development and yield. Also, heavy metal 
toxicity modulates physiological and biochemical responses in plants. Metallic elements 
which are relatively high in their density and are toxic even at very low concentration are 
known as heavy metals. Heavy metals is a collective term refers to group of metalloids and 
metals having atomic density three or more times greater than that of water or higher than 
4g/cm3
 (Onakpa et al., 2018). Therefore, when compared with density of heavy metals chem￾ical properties are most prompting factor (Gill, 2014).
Heavy metals are cadmium (Cd), Chromium (Cr), lead (Pd), Nickel (Ni), arsenic (As), 
Cobalt (Co), iron (Fe), Silver (Ag), Zinc (Zn) and Platinum (Pt) group elements (Ghori et al., 
2019). Heavy metals contamination in soil occurs in environment through both natural and 
anthropogenic activities. The parent material is the main source of pollution from which they 
are originated in soil(Choudhary et al., 2022; Kumar et al., 2022). Ninety five percent of to￾tal earth’s crust is composed of ingenious rocks while almost 5% is made up of sedimen￾tary rocks (Sarwar et al., 2017). Overall, basaltic ingenious rocks contain a large amount of 
heavy metals such as Cd, Co, Ni and Cu, however, shales are rich in Cd, Cu, Pb, Mn and Zn. 
Heavy metals from these rocks enters into the soil environment through natural processes 
such as terrestrial, meteoric, biogenic, and volcanic processes, leaching, surface winds, and 
erosion (Muradoglu et al., 2015). Urbanization and industrialization are the main anthropo￾genic sources that contributes to the entry of heavy metals into the biosphere (Bi et al., 2020). 
Other anthropogenic activities such as application of fertilizers (Atafar et al., 2010), pesticides 
(Zhang and Wang, 2020), fossil fuel combustion (Muradoglu et al., 2015), sewage irrigation 
(Sun et al., 2013), smelting and mining (Chen et al., 2015a,b) and municipal wastes disposal 
(Khan et al., 2016) significantly contributes to increased heavy metal concentration in agricul￾tural soils.
As an illustration, irrigation with wastewater of industries results in significant heavy 
metal contamination of agricultural lands. In general, there may be different types of heavy 
metals pollution in the soils at the industrial areas, depending on the kind of industries, raw 
material used and their products (He et al., 2015). Plants uptake heavy metals via roots, so 
their accumulation in fruit trees, vegetables and other crops may occur, leading to the entry 
of heavy metals into the food chain. The entry of toxic heavy metals into the food chain 
through plants is the major pathway through which humans and animals are exposed to 
them. Exposure to heavy metals may cause several types of cancer, growth retardation, en￾docrine disruption, kidney damage, neurological and immunological effects in humans. In 
plants, growth and yield of many crops may be affected by high concentrations of heavy met￾als (Edelstein and Ben-Hur, 2018). Usually in urban areas soils are contaminated with Cu, Pb, 
Cd and Zn from paints, traffic, industrial wastes and many other sources (Iqbal et al., 2020).
2. Effect of heavy metal pollution on plants
As heavy metals are nonbiodegradable and some of them like Hg, Mn, Fe, Cu, Co, Zn, 
As, and Ni are accumulated in soil for long time through sewage disposal and industrial 
waste (Ashraf et al. 2017; Yadav et al., 2021)(Ashraf et al., 2017; Yadav et al., 2021). Even 
though some of the heavy metals are necessary for normal growth and functioning of 
plants and are considered as essential micronutrients, however, many can have deleterious 2. Effect of heavy metal pollution on plants 141
effects and may directly affect the metabolism, senescence, physiology and growth of 
plants (Ghori et al., 2019). Soil physiochemical properties plays a principal role in the the 
uptake and accumulation of heavy metals in plants. Mainly, heavy metals are accumulated 
in the root cells of plants because cell walls may trap them or casparian strips may block 
them. Excessive accumulation of heavy metals in plant tissues may directly or indirectly 
impairs several morphological, biochemical and physiological functions and successively 
interferes with the productivity of crop (Mehta et al., 2020). Production of crop is reduced 
by heavy metals through induction of harmful effects to different physiological functions 
in plants such as photosynthesis, germination of seed, seed reserves remobilization and ac￾cumulation during germination and plant growth (Shahid et al., 2014). Generation of reac￾tive oxygen species (ROS) including radicals such as hydroxyl radicals (OH•
), superoxide 
radicals (O2
•−) and nonradicals likes singlet oxygen and hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), is one 
of the most rapid effects of toxic heavy metals in plants (Smeets et al., 2005; Singh et al., 
2022; Tamás et al., 2017). Reactive oxygen species may generate either indirectly, through 
NADPH oxidases (NOXs) or through the inhibition of enzymes via essential cations dis￾placement or directly, by the ROS-active metals via Haber-Weiss/Fenton reactions (Shahid 
et al., 2014). In plants, major sites for the production of ROS are mitochondria, chloroplasts 
and peroxisomes as well as in the endoplasmic reticulum, cell wall and plasma membrane 
(Das and Roychoudhury, 2014; Kärkönen and Kuchitsu, 2015). A mechanistic diagram il￾lustrating the effects of heavy metals on plants is given in Fig. 1.
FIG. 1 Schematic representation of phytotoxic effects of heavy metal(loid)s on plants and different defense re￾sponses in plants to tolerate metal toxicity.142 8. Effect of heavy metal pollution on plants
3. Cadmium (Cd)
Cadmium (Cd) is a highly toxic metal that is nonessential for plants and have become a 
significant pollutant in the environment largely due to anthropogenic activities such as in￾dustrial waste, mining, extensive fertilizer, pesticide application, wastewater irrigation, and 
vehicular use. Plants can efficiently uptake Cd and translocate it to the aerial parts such as 
stem, leaves, flowers, and fruits. Cd stress evokes alterations in various morphological, phys￾iological, biochemical, anatomical and molecular processes of plants. Major phytotoxic symp￾toms of Cd stress includes nutritional imbalance, reduced photosynthesis and chlorophyll 
biosynthesis, leaf chlorosis, disruption of membrane integrity, oxidative stress, inhibited root 
and shoot growth and biomass, reduced seed germination, browning of root tip, enzyme 
inhibition, disrupted respiration and hampered nucleic acid synthesis (Li et al., 2021a,b,c,d; 
Wang et al., 2019; Guo et al., 2017). Cd stress negatively influence plants from seed germina￾tion up to final yield stage. Consistently, Moori and Ahmadi-Lahijani (2020) reported that Cd 
stress caused significant reduction in seed germination percentage, seed germination rate and 
seed vigor index in thyme seeds. Sweet basil (Ocimum basilicum L.) seeds exposed to varying 
cadmium levels also showed reduced seed germination percentage (Fattahi et al., 2019). Cd 
concentration of 50mg/kg in soil considerably reduced seed germination of Coriandrum sa￾tivum seeds (Sardar et al., 2021). Cd-induced alteration in physiological and biochemical pro￾cesses in seeds, such as inhibition of seed imbibition, a crucial step in hydration of enzymes 
involved in significant metabolic activities, is one of the primary reasons for reduced seed 
germination (Huybrechts et al., 2019; Zayneb et al., 2015). Exposure to low concentrations 
of heavy metals including Cd resulted in prolonged seed dormancy at room temperature 
(Kranner and Colville, 2011). Sassafras seedlings under aggravating Cd levels in soil man￾ifested reduced plant height and biomass of leaves, branches and roots (Zhao et al., 2021). 
Mung bean seedlings exposed to two different doses of cadmium (50 and 100μM) exhibited 
remarkably reduced plant height, shoot and root dry weights, root length and number of 
lateral roots. However, the Cd induced inhibitory effects was highly significant in treatment 
with 100μM (Leng et al., 2021). Similarly, wheat seedlings under 5μM/L Cd stress manifested 
lower fresh and dry biomass along with reduced root and shoot length (Zeshan et al., 2021). 
Strawberry seedlings turned yellow and appeared macular with inhibited growth and de￾creased biomass when exposed to Cd stress (Wu et al., 2021). Rice seedlings grown for 7days 
on a nutrient solution contaminated with Cd resulted in significantly reduced shoot and root 
length, fresh and dry weights. This was attributed to high concentration of Cd in aerial plant 
parts, which also caused toxic symptoms on the plants. Further, authors also mentioned that 
the presence of high concentration of Cd in the shoots might have disturbed the photosys￾tems (Riaz et  al., 2021). Spinach (Spinacia oleracea) plants exposed to Cd stress manifested 
reduced plant height, fresh and dry biomass, root length, leaf length and area (Waheed et al., 
2021). The presence of high Cd content in plants interrupt important metabolic processes that 
leads to necrosis and ultimately hampers the growth (Xue et al., 2013). Moreover, Cd stress in 
plants reduces hydraulic conductivity thus reducing cell wall extensibility and retardation in 
growth (Zhang et al., 2013; Liu et al., 2021; Abd_Allah et al., 2017).
Two melon cultivars namely Xiulv (Cd-sensitive) and Hamilv (Cd-tolerant) under Cd 
stress manifested differential growth inhibition response. Cd stress significantly reduced dry 
mass of shoots and roots in both cultivars. However, the reduction was greater in Xiulv than 3. Cadmium (Cd) 143
Hamilv (Zhang et al., 2015). Similarly, different chickpea cultivars were subjected to two Cd 
levels (25 and 50μM). Cadmium toxicity considerably reduced fresh and dry biomass as well 
as plant height of all cultivars examined. Maximum reduction in these attributes was evi￾dent at 50μM Cd stress. Cultivars namely IC8 and NC2 outperformed under Cd treatments 
with greater growth, biomass and plant water content and indicated as Cd tolerant cultivars. 
Whereas, IC8-B exhibited greater reductions and indicated as Cd sensitive cultivar (Ullah 
et al., 2020). Rasheed et al. (2018) reported that Cd stress significantly reduced the shoot and 
root fresh and dry biomass in two okra cultivars namely Shabnum 786 and Arka Anamika 
with greater reduction observed in cv. Arka Anamika. This reduction in growth of okra plants 
was attributed to increased chlorophyll degradation, disturbed plant water relations, altered 
nutrient uptake and their distribution pattern under Cd stress.
The loss of chlorophyll pigments is one of the most extensively reported manifestations 
of Cd stress in plants (Ci et al., 2010; Daud et al., 2015; Per et al., 2016; Ma et al., 2018). It has 
been reported that Cd stress can alter the process of chlorophyll biosynthesis via interacting 
with the thiol groups of the enzymes 5-aminolevulinic acid synthesis and protochlorophyl￾lide reductase complex or elevated ROS generation (Choudhury et al., 2017; Wu et al., 2019). 
Recently, Zhou et al. (2021) reported that Cd stress significantly impacted chlorophyll content 
and photosynthetic parameters in two wheat varieties. Savory (Satureja hortensis) plants un￾der Cd stress exhibited reduced concentrations of chlorophyll pigments (a and b), total chlo￾rophyll and carotenoids content (Azizi et al., 2020).
Cadmium stress significantly reduced net photosynthetic rate (Pn), stomatal conductance 
(Gs), transpiration rate (Tr), chlorophyll a, b and total chlorophyll content, whereas, increased 
intercellular CO2 concentration (Ci) (El Rasafi et al. 2020). Similarly, Kaya et al. (2020) reported 
considerable reduction in chlorophyll a, b content as well as maximum photochemical effi￾ciency of photosystem II (Fv/Fm) in wheat plants under 0.10mM Cd stress. In maize hybrids 
subjected to Cd stress, significant reduction in physiological attributes such as photosynthe￾sis rate, transpiration rate, chlorophyll content and stomatal conductance was recorded and 
the highest reduction in these traits was attained at maximum level (15μM) of Cd stress used 
in the study. Moreover, maize hybrids showed variable response to Cd doses (Akhtar et al., 
2017). Another study on maize plants reported remarkable reduction in chlorophyll fluores￾cence parameters like maximum quantum yield of PSII (Fv/Fm), quantum yield of PSII elec￾tron transport (ΦPSII) and coefficient for photochemical quenching (qP), whereas, an increase 
was evident in nonphotochemical quenching (NPQ) values (Qu et al., 2019).
Cadmium stress causes oxidative damage in plants through excessive production of ROS 
such as singlet oxygen (1
O2), superoxide radicals (O2
•−
), hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), and hy￾droxyl radicals (OH•
) (Rasheed et al., 2018; Rahman et al., 2016). Plants cope with oxidative 
stress by scavenging toxic ROS mainly through upregulating enzymatic and nonenzymatic an￾tioxidant systems (Nadarajah, 2020; Pandey et al., 2017; Ashraf et al., 2018). Cd stress increases 
accumulation of malondialdehyde (MDA), a biomarker for peroxidation of lipids under oxi￾dative stress (Guo et al., 2014) which is strongly associated with increased production of ROS 
under stress (Li et al., 2012). Cadmium induced oxidative stress has been reported in various 
crops such as tomato (Wei et al., 2021a,b; Faizan et al., 2021; Kumar et al., 2021), Brassica rapa
(Li et al., 2021a,b,c,d) aromatic rice (Imran et al., 2021), canola (Sanjari et al., 2019); common 
bean (Rady et al., 2019), saffron (Moradi et al., 2019). Maize plants subjected to Cd stress (100 
and 200μM) displayed increased H2O2, MDA levels and electrolyte leakage (EL) percentage. 144 8. Effect of heavy metal pollution on plants
Activities of superoxide dismutase (SOD) and catalase (CAT) antioxidant enzymes signifi￾cantly enhanced while decrease in glutathione S-transferase (GST) activity was observed 
under Cd stress. Maximum enhancement in aforementioned attributes was at 200μM than 
100μM (Alam et al., 2021). Okra plants exposed to Cd stress (1mM) displayed higher cellu￾lar levels of H2O2 and MDA along with enhanced activities of enzymatic (SOD, POD, APX) 
and nonenzymatic (phenolics, ascorbic acid, flavonoids, and anthocyanins) antioxidants. 
Moreover, levels of proline, total free amino acid, total soluble protein also increased with de￾creased CAT activity and reducing sugars under Cd stress. In this study, Cd stress exerted no 
influence on total soluble sugars of okra plants (Rasheed et al., 2018). In chickpea plants, Cd 
stress elevated H2O2 (215.66%), MDA (61.70%) and EL (76.25%) when compared with control 
plants. Increased activities of SOD (89.76%), CAT (110.25%), APX (59.66%) glutathione reduc￾tase (GR; 46.78%), GST (100.19%), reduced glutathione (GSH; 63.47%), oxidized glutathione 
(GSSG; 39.57%) and GSH/GSSG ratio (17.06%) was observed in Cd treated plants. In contrast, 
activity of dehydroascorbate reductase (DHAR; 46.78%) and monodehydroascorbate reduc￾tase (MDHAR; 45.90%), ascorbic acid (ASA; 59.18%) was decreased under Cd stress. Methyl 
glyoxal (MG) increased by 82.98% in Cd supplied plants whereas, glyoxalase system enzymes, 
glyoxalase (Gly) I and GlyII activities declined by 38.82% and 28.57%, respectively, under Cd 
stress (Ahmad et al., 2021a,b). A different response was noted in Cd stressed pea plants as they 
demonstrated reduced GSSG content and enhanced GlyI activity. Authors suggested that de￾cline in GlyII activity of pea plants under Cd stress might be due to the proteolytic degradation 
of enzymes (Jan et al., 2018). Rahul and Sharma (2021) found that Cd stress (500μM) resulted in 
greater accumulation of H2O2 and MDA content in Cd-sensitive genotypes S1 and S2 whereas, 
a nonsignificant alteration was observed in Cd-tolerant genotypes T1 and T2 of castor (Ricinus 
communis) when compared with their respective control plants.
Plants require essential nutrients to grow normally. Cd has a deleterious impact on plant 
physiology, biochemistry, growth, yield, and productivity by interacting with other essen￾tial nutrients, causing nutritional imbalance. Cd interactions with other nutrients have been 
shown to restrict their absorption and translocation in several crops such as wheat (Rahman 
et al., 2021), rice (Mapodzeke et al., 2021), mulberry (Guo and Li, 2021), maize (Abbas et al., 
2020), soybean (El-Esawi et al., 2020), okra (Rasheed et al., 2018), tomato (Hédiji et al., 2015), 
barley (González et  al., 2015). It has been reported that Cd being a bivalent cation in na￾ture competes with Ca, Fe, Mg, Mn, and Zn during transport across membranes (Verbruggen 
et al., 2009). Moreover, some metal transporters from NRAMP (natural resistance-associated 
macrophage protein) and ZIP (zinc regulated transporter/iron regulated transporter related 
protein) families has been reported to transport Mn, Fe as well as Cd (Ajeesh Krishna et al., 
2020; Chen et al., 2021). Recently, it has been observed that Cd stress in two menthol mint 
(Mentha arvensis L.) cultivars namely kosi and kushal reduced the concentrations of three 
mineral nutrients namely N, P, and K in both cultivars. Cultivar kosi exhibited 50% decrease 
in N, 39.53% in P and 49.76% in K concentrations, whereas cultivar kushal displayed 57.57% 
decrease in N, 14.58% in P, and 44.97% in K concentrations under Cd stress compared with 
their respective control plants (Zaid et al., 2020). A submerged macrophyte Potamogeton crispus
L. under Cd polluted environment exhibited increased content of Ca, Na, Fe, and Mn while 
a conspicuous decrease was observed in K and P content of leaves, which was attributed to 
the reduced availability of energy (ATP) (Yang et al., 2011). Cadmium toxicity considerably 
reduced N, Ca, Mg, and P contents in roots and shoots of alfalfa (Zhang et al., 2019). In shoots 4. Lead (Pb) 145
of Trifolium repens L. plants, Cd toxicity depreciated Cu, Mg, Fe, and K but considerably im￾proved the Ca content. However, Cd stress significantly reduced the Ca, Mg, and Fe content 
but increased the content of K and Cu in roots when compared with control plants. Authors 
suggested that Cd may entered the roots by employing Ca, Mg, and Fe transporters and is 
further transported from roots to shoots via Cu and K transporters. Moreover, decrease in 
root Ca content might be due to the competition among Cd and Ca at Ca+ permeable chan￾nels site in the plasma membranes for entrance into the root cells (Liu et al., 2015). Wahid 
et al. (2008) studied the effect of Cd stress on shoot nutrient content of mung bean at different 
growth stages in sensitive and tolerant cultivars. There exists a remarkable difference among 
both cultivars with a decline in content of K, Mg, Mn, and Fe at the seedling, vegetative and 
reproductive stages under Cd toxicity. However, sensitive cultivar showed greater reduction 
in nutrient content when compared with tolerant cultivar. Authors also suggested that better 
nutrient accumulation pattern manifested by tolerant mungbean cultivar is imperative for its 
Cd tolerance.
4. Lead (Pb)
Anthropogenic activities like industrial development causing soil contamination with dif￾ferent heavy metals, which is a growing ecological concern. Concentrations of heavy metals 
in soil-plant system greatly impact agricultural production and yield. Lead (Pb) is a nones￾sential potentially hazardous metal for plants as well as for human and animal health upon 
entering the food chain. Pb released into the environment mainly through mining and smelt￾ing activities, metal plating, Pb-based paints, cosmetics, automobiles, chimneys of factories, 
pesticides and fertilizers (Tchounwou et al., 2012). The presence of Pb in agricultural soils 
provokes detrimental effects on plant growth, reduced cell division, inhibition of enzymatic 
activities, reduced photosynthesis, decreased seed germination, altered mineral nutrition pat￾tern, and water imbalance in plants (Kalaivanan and Ganeshamurthy, 2016). Pb stress induces 
excessive accumulation of highly toxic reactive oxygen species (ROS) in plants, which causes 
oxidative damage to nucleic acids, lipids, and proteins (Shahzad et al., 2018).
Lead toxicity adversely impact physiology and morphology of seeds obstructing germi￾nation process and early seedling growth (Seneviratne et al., 2019). During seed germination 
process, Pb known to affect hydrolytic enzymes activity of α-amylase, β-amylase and protease, 
which impose contrary impacts on radicle and hypocotyl growth. According to Sidhu et al. 
(2017) increasing levels of Pb in Coronopus didymus L. (Brassicaceae) caused a significant gradual 
decline in the activities of all hydrolytic enzymes (α-, β-amylase and protease) in both roots 
and shoots. Likewise, Pb stress reduced starch hydrolyzing enzymes activities resulting in 
starch immobilization in Brassica campestris (Singh et al., 2011). Heavy metal induced reduction 
in seed germination rate has also been attributed towards increasing levels of abscisic acid 
(ABA) in seeds and also the generation of NADH-dependent extracellular H2O2 (Yang et al., 
2010; Fattahi et al., 2019). When maize seeds were allowed to germinate on Pb contaminated 
soil with varying levels of Pb (0, 1, 2, 5, 10, and 20mM), seeds exhibited inhibited germina￾tion percentage in a concentration dependent manner. Least germination percentage (15%) 
was recorded at highest (20mM) Pb concentration (Zhang et al., 2018). In another study on 
maize, Pb adversely affected seed germination and seedling growth of two maize genotypes 146 8. Effect of heavy metal pollution on plants
namely EV-1098 and EV-77. A consistent decrease was evident in germination percentage 
and index, plumule and radicle length, fresh and dry weight of seedlings with increasing Pb 
levels. Maximal reduction in these parameters was recorded at the highest Pb concentration 
(1.0mg/L) provided in the growth medium. However, Pb toxicity exerted more inhibitory 
effect on radicle length in genotype EV-1098 when compared with EV-77 (Ahmad et al., 2011). 
Recently, Jatav et al. (2021) evaluated the crop specific response of pearl millet, finger millet 
and oat under Pb stress and observed that all the three species did not vary in germination re￾sponse under control conditions. However, a gradual reduction in seed germination efficiency 
of all three species under increasing levels of Pb toxicity was observed. At Pb levels ≥ 30mg/L, 
oat seeds exhibited significantly maximum reduction in seed germination efficiency than pearl 
millet and finger millet. Lead induced reduction in seed germination has also been observed 
in wheat (Yang et al., 2010), Brassica juncea L. (Soares et al., 2020), Ocimum basilicum L. (Fattahi 
et al., 2019) upland rice (Wang et al., 2020) and alfalfa (Yahaghi et al., 2019).
Maize plants at seedling stage exposed to Pb toxicity showed considerably reduced fresh 
and dry weight of shoots and roots. Roots being more vulnerable to metal stresses, Pb stress 
induced alterations in anatomical features of maize seedling root tissues revealed increased 
central cylinder diameter, cortex and endodermis thickness to 20%, 19%, and 53%, respec￾tively, while no change has been observed in metaxylem and protoxylem diameters under Pb 
toxicity (Zanganeh et al., 2021). Fragrant rice cultivars grown in Pb polluted soil accumulated 
varying concentrations of Pb, with highest concentration in roots and the lowest in grains 
(Ashraf et al., 2020). Tartary buckwheat plants grown under varying levels of Pb stress (0, 100, 
200, and 300μM) for 15 and 30days after sowing (DAS). Plants showed noteworthy reduction 
in root and shoot length at both 15 and 30 DAS with increasing levels of Pb stress. However, 
maximal reduction was observed at 30 DAS at 300μM Pb stress level. Plant biomass accumu￾lation also displayed gradual decline with increasing Pb stress levels. The maximal reduction 
was recorded in fresh and dry biomass accumulation to 61% and 94%, respectively, 15days 
after sowing. Authors reported that decline in growth related attributes might be the result of 
Pb-induced inhibition of mitosis and restrained aquaporins, resulting in structural deformities 
that hinder plant growth (Pirzadah et al., 2020). Wheat seedlings subjected to 2mM Pb toxic￾ity exhibited reduced shoot and root length, fresh and dry weight. Also, a decline in Rubisco 
and ATP sulfurylase (ATP-S) activities, total chlorophyll content, relative water content and 
nutrient concentration was evident under Pb stress. The reduction in the growth parameters 
might be linked with Pb stress disturbed physio-biochemical processes like ions concentration, 
enzymes activity, respiration and photosynthesis (Alamri et al., 2018). Weryszko‐Chmielewska 
and Chwil (2005) did a comprehensive microscopic analysis on soybean leaf exposed to var￾ied levels of Pb. They observed that Pb stress reduced the area of cotyledons and leaf blades 
in soybean cv. Polan plants. Lead toxicity induced leaf epidermal alterations such as reduced 
guard cell size, increased wax coating, number of stomata and trichomes per unit area. Lead 
stress reduced leaf blade thickness, xylem and phloem area, and xylem vessel diameter. Also, 
Pb stress caused chloroplast disintegration in leaf mesophyll cells. Bursted thylakoid stroma 
and cracked chloroplast envelopes were also seen under Pb stress.
Robinia pseudoacacia plants grown in contaminated soil with varying levels of Pb showed 
gradual reduction in photosynthetic pigments such as chl a, chl b and total chlorophyll con￾tent as Pb concentration increased. A progressive decrease was observed in photosynthetic 
characteristics such as net photosynthetic rate (Pn), stomatal conductance (gs), transpiration 5. Arsenic (As) 147
rate (Tr) and mesophyll intercellular CO2 concentration (Ci) under increasing levels of Pb 
stress. Furthermore, Pb stress also caused decrease in chlorophyll fluorescence parameters 
namely maximum photochemical efficiency of photosystem (PS) II (Fv/Fm), quantum yield 
(ΦPSII) and photochemical quenching (qP). However, a gradual increase was observed in ini￾tial fluorescence (Fo) and nonphotochemical quenching (qN) (Zhou et al., 2017). Previous lit￾erature showed that Pb toxicity negatively affects photosynthesis, which could be attributed 
to metal induced reduction in photosynthetic related pigments (Hussain et al., 2017), inhib￾ited electron transport system (Gajić et al., 2009), alteration in chloroplast structure and sto￾matal closure (Islam et al., 2008).
Lead toxicity induces oxidative stress in plants, which has been indicated through ex￾cessive generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) that damages cellular membranes and 
organelles measured generally through lipid peroxidation markers such as malondialde￾hyde (MDA) and hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) (Zanganeh et  al. 2021). Plants neutralizes ROS 
through well-established antioxidant system comprised of both enzymatic such as superox￾ide dismutase (SOD), peroxidase (POD) and catalase (CAT) and nonenzymatic antioxidants 
namely carotenoids, glutathione, ascorbate, flavonoids, phenylpropanoids and phenolic acids 
(Hasanuzzaman et al., 2020). In a recent study, coriander (Coriandrum sativum L.) plants grown 
in Pb contaminated soil with different concentrations of 0, 500, 1000, and 1500mg/kg of soil 
showed significantly higher MDA content with maximal accumulation at 1000mg/kg Pb with 
decrease at higher concentration. Flavonoids were also higher under Pb stress at 1500mg/kg 
Pb. Enzymatic activities of SOD and POD were significantly enhanced at 1000mg/kg Pb and 
reduced at 1500mg/kg Pb, while CAT activity showed increment at 500mg/kg Pb and de￾creased at higher concentrations. A 15% decrease in vitamin C content was also observed under 
1500mg/kg Pb. A notable increase of 93% in anthocyanin was observed at 500mg/kg Pb while 
it decreased at higher Pb concentrations when compared with control (Fatemi et al., 2021).
Lead toxicity in wheat plants caused higher cell oxidation levels (MDA and Lipoxygenase; 
LOX). The relative gene expression and activities of SOD, CAT, guaiacol peroxidase (GPX) 
and ascorbate peroxidase (APX) were significantly enhanced in both leaves and root tis￾sues under Pb stress at late booting stage. However, the gene expression level and activities 
of antioxidant enzymes were greater in roots than the leaf tissue (Navabpour et al., 2020). 
Another study on wheat reported that Pb stress aggravated the MDA content, O2
•− and H2O2
generation. Lead toxicity resulted in a considerable increase in activities of SOD, glutathi￾oneS-transferase (GST), APX and greater accumulation of proline with decreased leaf relative 
water content (LRWC). Whereas, glutathione peroxidase (GPX), monodehydroascorbate re￾ductase (MDHAR) and dehydroascorbate reductase (DHAR) activities and ascorbate content 
reduced with increasing Pb levels. Both glyoxalase (Gly) system enzymes activities GlyI and 
GlyII were diminished under Pb stress with a concomitant increase in methylglyoxal (MG) 
content (Hasanuzzaman et al., 2018).
5. Arsenic (As)
Arsenic (As) is commonly present in soils and is a potentially toxic metalloid for plants 
(Dhakate et al., 2019). It significantly hampers plant growth and development leading to 
reduced plant biomass and yield, which is a matter of great concern. Some anthropogenic 148 8. Effect of heavy metal pollution on plants
activities such as applications of herbicides or pesticides, coal burning and timber preser￾vatives contribute to the As contamination in the environment. Arsenic also causes dif￾ferent medical abnormalities in humans such as disturbed functioning of circulatory and 
nervous system, oxidative stress, skin cancer, pulmonary diseases, urinary bladder and 
kidney diseases (Bhat et al., 2021). Plants uptake As through phosphate transporters and 
nodulin 26-like intrinsic aquaporin (NIP) channels. Arsenic modulates several metabolic 
processes in plants resulting in reduced germination, growth and yield. Arsenic has been 
reported to interact with the starch metabolism enzymes decreasing the seed germination 
(Zia et al., 2017). Recently, Wu et al. (2020) reported that As exposure significantly reduced 
seed germination percentage in rice plants. Similarly, garden cress (Lepidium sativum) seeds 
showed significant inhibition in germination exposed to As stress (Nouri and Haddioui, 
2021). Two maize plants administered As stress exhibited notably decreased plant height, 
leaf area and stem diameter. However, the reductions was more prominent in Run Nong 
35 than Dong Dan 80 (Anjum et al., 2016). Farooq et al. (2015) reported that As stress con￾siderably reduced root and shoot length and biomass in Brassica napus L. plants. Arsenic 
toxicity lowers mitotic activity in root meristem resulting in reduced cell division rate in the 
apical meristem, leading to inhibited expansion and elongation of the newly formed cells 
(Mumthas et al., 2010). Reduction in plant biomass under As stress is generally attributed 
to the reduced photosynthesis, soluble protein content, peroxidase activity and other phys￾iological mechanisms (Ahsan et al., 2008). Tomato plants treated with As stress showed a 
visible As toxicity symptoms mirrored as conspicuous wilting and leaf necrosis alongside 
reduced germination percentage and seedling shoot elongation (Marmiroli et  al., 2014). 
Arsenic negatively affected the plant water relations in soybean reflected as significantly 
reduced root absorption rate, leaf and root relative water content, stomatal conductance, 
shoot water and osmotic potentials under As stress (Vezza et al., 2018). Arsenic stress neg￾atively influenced photosynthetic pigments in plants (Bali and Sidhu, 2021). For example, 
a significant reduction was recorded in Chl. a, Chl. b content and Chl. a/b ratio in wheat 
plants. Moreover, As adversely affected gas exchange attributes such as photosynthetic and 
transpiration rates, water use efficiency, stomatal conductance, and internal CO2 concentra￾tion in wheat plants (Ali and Perveen, 2020). Rubisco activity and maximum efficiency of 
photosystem (PS) II was also reported to be declined under As stress in rice plants (Khan 
et al., 2021). Similarly, tea plants (Camellia sinensis L.) under As stress also showed marked 
decrease in maximum photochemical efficiency of PSII (Fv/Fm), showing negative impact 
of As on PSII activities (Li et al., 2021a,b,c,d). Arsenic induces oxidative stress in plants by 
generating reactive oxygen species (ROS) that reacts and damage different cellular compo￾nents such as nucleic acid, proteins, and membrane lipids (Farooq et al., 2018). For example, 
Zargari et al. (2020) reported an increase in hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) and malondialde￾hyde (MDA) content in alfalfa plants exposed to different levels of As stress. Plant detoxify 
ROS through modulation in enzymatic and nonenzymatic antioxidant system. For instance, 
Vetiver grass (Vetiveria zizanioides L. Nash) under As stress showed significantly higher 
antioxidant activities of superoxide dismutase (SOD), ascorbate peroxidase (APX), catalase 
(CAT), guaiacol peroxidase (GPX) and glutathione S-transferase (GST), which enhanced 
plant tolerance to As induced oxidative stress (Singh et al., 2017). Osmolytes such as pro￾line, glycine betaine, soluble sugars and total proteins has also been reported to be higher 
under As toxicity in pea plants (Garg and Singla, 2012).6. Mercury (Hg) 149
6. Mercury (Hg)
Mercury (Hg) is a nonessential phytotoxic metal pollutant naturally found in soil. Many 
anthropogenic activities such as seed disinfectants, untreated industrial wastes, synthetic fer￾tilizers, herbicides, and pharmaceuticals are significant sources of Hg contamination in the 
environment. Its presence in agricultural soils is of great concern globally because Hg toxicity 
affects plant growth, development, and yield at all growth stages. Exposure to Hg causes ab￾normal germination, reduces biomass, inhibits photosynthesis, disturbs protein functioning, 
water relations and nutrient imbalance in plants (Azevedo et al., 2018; Safari et al., 2019; Sun 
et al., 2018). Previous report suggested that wheat germination rate and number of seedlings 
was significantly decreased under Hg stress (Popa et al., 2007). Reduced seed germination 
under Hg stress has also been reported in crops such as maize (Deng et al., 2016) and Brassica
spp. (Ling et al., 2010). Cucumber seedlings administered various levels of Hg stress showed 
stunted growth mirrored as reduced biomass, root and shoot length (Cargnelutti et al., 2006). 
Similarly, three soybean cultivars namely Pusa-24, Pusa-37, and Pusa-40 treated with Hg stress 
also showed reduced shoot and root length. However, the maximum reduction in both attri￾butes was more prominent in cultivar Pusa-24. Authors also observed high concentration of 
Hg in the roots than shoots of Hg stressed soybean plants (Ahmad et al., 2021a,b). In contrast, 
Mohammadi et al. (2021) observed higher accumulation of Hg in shoots when compared with 
roots in okra plants under HgCl2 stress and recommended it as a hyperaccumulator plant for 
phytoremediation of Hg polluted soil and waters. Rice plants under Hg toxicity exhibited 
sharp reduction in average root length when compared with their respective controls (Chen 
et al., 2015a,b). Elevated levels of Hg stress impaired chlorophyll content and photosynthesis 
rate in higher plant species (Teixeira et al., 2018). In Sesbania drummondii seedlings, Hg level 
up to 50mg/L did not exert any negative effects on photosynthetic integrity. However, Hg 
concentrations above 50mg/L exhibited slight reductions in Fv/Fm and Fv/Fo values (Israr 
et al., 2006). Safari et al. (2019) demonstrated significant reduction in chlorophyll pigments 
of lemon balm plants under Hg toxicity. Authors suggested that reduction in chlorophyll 
pigments was due to the Hg induced oxidative stress, disturbed mineral content uptake and 
replacement of metal ions by Hg in photosynthetic pigments. Okra plants subjected to Hg 
toxicity exhibited marked augmentation in total phenol, total flavonoids and anthocyanins 
content. Further, phenol profiling showed that Hg-treated okra plants exhibited increase in 
chlorogenic acid, rosmaric acid, apigenin, quercetin and rutin content (Mohammadi et al., 
2021). Mercury stress exert negative effect on nutrient uptake in plants (Tran et al., 2021). 
For example, wheat plants grown under various concentrations of Hg stress demonstrated 
reduced level of K, Ca, and Mg alongside increased electrolyte leakage in leaf tissues, which 
is one of the main reasons for the impaired nutrient acquisition (Sahu et al., 2012).
Mercury toxicity provokes excessive production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) that dam￾ages different cellular components such as nucleic acids, proteins, membrane lipids, causing 
perturbation of many physiological, biochemical and molecular processes in plants (Nagajyoti 
et al., 2010; Zhang et al., 2017). Plants have evolved diverse defense mechanisms comprised 
of enzymatic and nonenzymatic antioxidants to detoxify ROS and prevent oxidative damage 
(Sewelam et al., 2016). Chicory plants treated with Hg stress showed conspicuous increase in 
H2O2 and thiobarbituric acid reactive substances (TBARS) along with increased activities of 
antioxidant enzymes such as superoxide dismutase (SOD), peroxidase (POD), catalase (CAT), 150 8. Effect of heavy metal pollution on plants
ascorbate peroxidase (APX), glutathione reductase (GR) and Glutathione S-transferase (GST) 
(Malik et al., 2019). Mercury stress resulted in increased accumulation of proline and soluble 
sugars in duckweed (Lemna minor), contributing to the improved cell turgor and membrane 
stability due to its function as osmolyte (Zhang et al., 2017).
7. Metal stress tolerance mechanisms in plants
Heavy metals (HMs) toxicity impairs plant growth and development through modulating 
different cellular metabolic processes. Plants have evolved various homeostatic mechanisms 
such as ROS signalling, upregulated antioxidant system, biosynthesis of root exudates, HMs 
binding to the cell wall, sequestration and compartmentation that regulate HMs uptake, trans￾port, accumulation and their detoxification processes (Berni et al., 2019; Rizvi and Khan, 2019; 
Fu et al., 2018; Jia et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2020). Root exudates such as amino acids, organic acids, 
phenolics, sugars and nonproteinaceous amino acids like phytosiderophores are the important 
components that involve in the metal detoxification and nutrient acquisition in the rhizosphere 
(Bali et al. 2020). These compounds bind and forms stable complexes with the HMs in rhizo￾sphere, rendering them nontoxic and restricting their uptake, thereby reducing their bioavail￾ability to the plants, hence, contributing to the metal stress tolerance in plants (Huang et al. 2021). 
For example, increased concentration of citric acid and malic acid in root exudates of makoi 
(Solanum nigrum) and parthenium weed (Parthenium hysterophorus) under Cr stress has likely to 
assist plant adaptation to Cr stress (UdDin et al., 2015). According to Javed et al. (2018), there is a 
positive correlation between root exudates (citric acid, malic acid, glutamic acid, oxalic acid, fu￾maric acid) and root Pb contents in Portulaca oleracea plants, which may also maintain optimum 
nutrient content and allow Portulaca oleracea adaptation to Pb spiked soil. In tomato plants, root 
oxalate exudation was a significant factor in preventing Cd from entering roots (Zhu et al. 2011). 
Phytosiderophores are natural chelating agents and have been reported to chelate Zn, Cu, Mn, 
and Cd (Thakur et al. 2022). Heavy metal toxicity causes excessive formation of reactive oxygen 
species (ROS) such as H2O2, O2
•−
, and OH•
. A high concentration of ROS in cellular environment 
causes oxidative stress, which results in lipid peroxidation of biomembranes alongside damage 
to nucleic acid and other biomolecules. Plants detoxify HM-induced ROS through activation 
of antioxidant system consisting enzymatic such as superoxide dismutase (SOD), peroxidase 
(POD), catalase (CAT) and nonenzymatic (glutathione, carotenoids, ascorbate) antioxidants. 
Two okra cultivars exhibited markedly higher antioxidant activities of SOD, POD, and ascor￾bate peroxidase (APX) under Cd stress. Moreover, the levels of nonenzymatic antioxidants such 
as ascorbic acid, phenolics, flavonoids and proline were also higher in plants under Cd toxic￾ity. However, the activities of these antioxidant enzymes were more prominent in resistant cv. 
Shabnam-786 than sensitive cv. Arka anamika (Rasheed et al. 2018). Metallothioneins are low 
molecular weight, cysteine-rich metal binding proteins, which has been reported to play a major 
physiological role in metal homeostasis and protect plants from oxidative damage through ROS 
scavenging and sequestration of the HMs (Chaudhary et al., 2018). In this context, rice seed￾lings exposed to Cr toxicity manifested higher concentration of Metallothioneins (Yu et al., 2019). 
Plants alleviate metal toxicity through activation of chaperones that protects and repair proteins 
and play a key role in maintaining cellular homeostasis. Moreover, chaperones like HSP70 also 
assist metallothioneins in sequestration and detoxification of metal ions (Haap et al., 2016).References 151
8. Conclusion
The presence of heavy metals (HMs) in agricultural soils and the food chain are detrimen￾tal to plants and human health, which is a significant concern. Albeit, HMs are present in soil 
naturally; however, many anthropogenic activities release excessive amounts of HMs into 
the environment, posing a serious threat to environmental quality and agricultural yield. 
This chapter implies that HMs stress negatively affects various metabolic processes in plants, 
resulting in reduced plant growth and productivity. Heavy metal stress causes a reduction 
in germination, seedling growth, shoot and root length, fresh and dry biomass, and chlo￾rophyll content. Moreover, HM toxicity impedes various processes such as photosynthesis, 
respiration, and mineral nutrition in plants. Heavy metal toxicity causes overproduction of 
ROS, which interact and damage vital cellular components such as nucleic acid, proteins, and 
lipids. Plants cope with HM toxicity through modulation in the antioxidant system and the 
accumulation of different secondary metabolites and osmolytes. However, the responses of 
plants to HM toxicity were specific to their genotype, species, and growth stages.
References
Abbas, S., Javed, M.T., Shahid, M., Hussain, I., Haider, M.Z., Chaudhary, H.J., Maqsood, A., 2020. Acinetobacter sp. 
SG-5 inoculation alleviates cadmium toxicity in differentially Cd tolerant maize cultivars as deciphered by im￾proved physio-biochemical attributes, antioxidants and nutrient physiology. Plant Physiol. Biochem. 155, 815–827.
Abd_Allah, E.F., Hashem, A., Alqarawi, A.A., Wirth, S., Egamberdieva, D., 2017. Calcium application enhances 
growth and alleviates the damaging effects induced by Cd stress in sesame (Sesamum indicum L.). J. Plant Interact. 
12, 237–243.
Abdullateef, B., Kolo, B.G., Waziri, I., Idris, M.A., 2014. Levels of heavy metals in soil as indicator of environmental 
pollution in Maiduguri, Borno State, Nigeria. Bull. Env. Pharmacol. Life Sci. 3, 133–136.
Ahmad, M.S.A., Ashraf, M., Tabassam, Q., Hussain, M., Firdous, H., 2011. Lead (Pb)-induced regulation of growth, 
photosynthesis, and mineral nutrition in maize (Zea mays L.) plants at early growth stages. Biol. Trace Elem. Res. 
144, 1229–1239.
Ahmad, P., Alyemeni, M.N., Wijaya, L., Ahanger, M.A., Ashraf, M., Alam, P., Paray, B.A., Rinklebe, J., 2021a. Nitric 
oxide donor, sodium nitroprusside, mitigates mercury toxicity in different cultivars of soybean. J. Hazard. Mater. 
408, 124852.
Ahmad, P., Raja, V., Ashraf, M., Wijaya, L., Bajguz, A., Alyemeni, M.N., 2021b. Jasmonic acid (JA) and gibberellic acid 
(GA3) mitigated Cd-toxicity in chickpea plants through restricted cd uptake and oxidative stress management. 
Sci. Rep. 11, 1–17.
Ahsan, N., Lee, D.G., Alam, I., Kim, P.J., Lee, J.J., Ahn, Y.O., Kwak, S.S., Lee, I.J., Bahk, J.D., Kang, K.Y., 2008. 
Comparative proteomic study of arsenic‐induced differentially expressed proteins in rice roots reveals glutathi￾one plays a central role during As stress. Proteomics 8, 3561–3576.
Ajeesh Krishna, T.P., Maharajan, T., Victor Roch, G., Ignacimuthu, S., Antony Ceasar, S., 2020. Structure, function, 
regulation and phylogenetic relationship of ZIP family transporters of plants. Front. Plant Sci. 11, 662.
Akhtar, T., Zia-ur-Rehman, M., Naeem, A., Nawaz, R., Ali, S., Murtaza, G., Rizwan, M., 2017. Photosynthesis and 
growth response of maize (Zea mays L.) hybrids exposed to cadmium stress. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 24, 5521–5529.
Alam, P., Balawi, T.A., Ashraf, M., Ahmad, P., 2021. 24-Epibrassinolide (EBR) reduces oxidative stress damage in￾duced by cadmium toxicity by restricting cd uptake and modulating some key antioxidant enzymes in maize 
plants. Pak. J. Bot. 53, 59–66.
Alamri, S.A., Siddiqui, M.H., Al-Khaishany, M.Y., Nasir Khan, M., Ali, H.M., Alaraidh, I.A., Mateen, M., 2018. 
Ascorbic acid improves the tolerance of wheat plants to lead toxicity. J. Plant Interact. 13, 409–419.
Ali, H.M.M., Perveen, S., 2020. Effect of foliar applied triacontanol on wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) under arsenic 
stress: a study of changes in growth, yield and photosynthetic characteristics. Physiol. Mol. Biol. 26, 1215–1224.152 8. Effect of heavy metal pollution on plants
Anjum, S.A., Tanveer, M., Hussain, S., Ashraf, U., Khan, I., Wang, L., 2016. Alteration in growth, leaf gas exchange, 
and photosynthetic pigments of maize plants under combined cadmium and arsenic stress. Water Air Soil Pollut. 
228, 13.
Ashraf, M.A., Akbar, A., Askari, S.H., Iqbal, M., Rasheed, R., Hussain, I., 2018. Recent advances in abiotic stress toler￾ance of plants through chemical priming: an overview. In: Advances in Seed Priming, pp. 51–79.
Ashraf, M.A., Hussain, I., Rasheed, R., Iqbal, M., Riaz, M., Arif, M.S., 2017. Advances in microbe-assisted reclamation 
of heavy metal contaminated soils over the last decade: a review. J. Environ. Manag. 198, 132–143.
Ashraf, U., Mahmood, M.H.U.R., Hussain, S., Abbas, F., Anjum, S.A., Tang, X., 2020. Lead (Pb) distribution and 
accumulation in different plant parts and its associations with grain Pb contents in fragrant rice. Chemosphere 
248, 126003.
Atafar, Z., Mesdaghinia, A., Nouri, J., Homaee, M., Yunesian, M., Ahmadimoghaddam, M., Mahvi, A.H., 2010. Effect 
of fertilizer application on soil heavy metal concentration. Environ. Monit. Assess. 160, 83–89.
Azevedo, R., Rodriguez, E., Mendes, R.J., Mariz-Ponte, N., Sario, S., Lopes, J.C., de Oliveira, J.M.P.F., Santos, C., 2018. 
Inorganic Hg toxicity in plants: a comparison of different genotoxic parameters. Plant Physiol. Biochem. 125, 247–254.
Azizi, I., Esmaielpour, B., Fatemi, H., 2020. Effect of foliar application of selenium on morphological and physiologi￾cal indices of savory (Satureja hortensis) under cadmium stress. Food Sci. Nutr. 8, 6539–6549.
Bali, A.S., Sidhu, G.P.S., 2021. Arsenic acquisition, toxicity and tolerance in plants—from physiology to remediation: 
a review. Chemosphere 283, 131050.
Bali, A.S., Sidhu, G.P.S., Kumar, V., 2020. Root exudates ameliorate cadmium tolerance in plants: a review. Environ. 
Chem. Lett. 18 (4), 1243–1275.
Berni, R., Luyckx, M., Xu, X., Legay, S., Sergeant, K., Hausman, J.-F., Lutts, S., Cai, G., Guerriero, G., 2019. Reactive 
oxygen species and heavy metal stress in plants: impact on the cell wall and secondary metabolism. Environ. Exp. 
Bot. 161, 98–106. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envexpbot.2018.10.017.
Bhat, J.A., Ahmad, P., Corpas, F.J., 2021. Main nitric oxide (NO) hallmarks to relieve arsenic stress in higher plants. J. 
Hazard. Mater. 406, 124289.
Bi, X., Zhang, M., Wu, Y., Fu, Z., Sun, G., Shang, L., Wang, P., 2020. Distribution patterns and sources of heavy metals 
in soils from an industry undeveloped city in Southern China. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 205, 111115.
Cargnelutti, D., Tabaldi, L.A., Spanevello, R.M., de Oliveira Jucoski, G., Battisti, V., Redin, M., Linares, C.E.B., 
Dressler, V.L., de Moraes Flores, É.M., Nicoloso, F.T., Morsch, V.M., Schetinger, M.R.C., 2006. Mercury toxicity 
induces oxidative stress in growing cucumber seedlings. Chemosphere 65, 999–1006.
Chaudhary, K., Agarwal, S., Khan, S., 2018. Role of phytochelatins (PCs), metallothioneins (MTs), and heavy metal 
ATPase (HMA) genes in heavy metal tolerance. In: Mycoremediation and Environmental Sustainability. Springer, 
pp. 39–60.
Chen, Z., Zhang, L., Zhu, C., 2015a. Exogenous nitric oxide mediates alleviation of mercury toxicity by promoting 
auxin transport in roots or preventing oxidative stress in leaves of rice seedlings. Acta Physiol. Plant. 37, 194.
Chen, Z., Zhao, Y., Fan, L., Xing, L., Yang, Y., 2015b. Cadmium (Cd) localization in tissues of cotton (Gossypium 
hirsutum L.), and its phytoremediation potential for Cd-contaminated soils. Bull. Environ. Contam. Toxicol. 95, 
784–789.
Chen, Y., Li, G., Yang, J., Zhao, X., Sun, Z., Hou, H., 2021. Role of Nramp transporter genes of Spirodela polyrhiza in 
cadmium accumulation. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 227, 112907.
Choudhary, A., Kumar, A., Kaur, H., Singh, M., Suri, G.S., Kaur, G., Mehta, S., 2022. Effect of elevated CO2 conditions 
on medicinal plants: a relatively unexplored aspect. In: Environmental Pollution and Medicinal Plants. CRC Press, 
pp. 95–111.
Choudhury, F.K., Rivero, R.M., Blumwald, E., Mittler, R., 2017. Reactive oxygen species, abiotic stress and stress 
combination. Plant J. 90, 856–867.
Ci, D., Jiang, D., Wollenweber, B., Dai, T., Jing, Q., Cao, W., 2010. Cadmium stress in wheat seedlings: growth, cad￾mium accumulation and photosynthesis. Acta Physiol. Plant. 32, 365–373.
Das, K., Roychoudhury, A., 2014. Reactive oxygen species (ROS) and response of antioxidants as ROS-scavengers 
during environmental stress in plants. Front. Environ. Sci. 2, 53.
Daud, M.K., Quiling, H., Lei, M., Ali, B., Zhu, S.J., 2015. Ultrastructural, metabolic and proteomic changes in leaves 
of upland cotton in response to cadmium stress. Chemosphere 120, 309–320.
Deng, B., Yang, K., Zhang, Y., Li, Z., 2016. Can heavy metal pollution defend seed germination against heat stress? 
Effect of heavy metals (Cu2+, Cd2+ and Hg2+) on maize seed germination under high temperature. Environ. Pollut. 
216, 46–52.References 153
Dhakate, P., Sharma, P., Mehta, S., Akter, J., Bhatt, V., Chandanshive, S., Chakravarty, D., Rahman, M., Islam, M., 2019. 
Beneficial role of metalloids in plants: molecular understanding and applicability. In: Recent Approaches in Omics 
for Plant Resilience to Climate Change. Springer, Cham, pp. 357–387.
Edelstein, M., Ben-Hur, M., 2018. Heavy metals and metalloids: sources, risks and strategies to reduce their accumu￾lation in horticultural crops. Sci. Hortic. 234, 431–444.
El Rasafi, T., Oukarroum, A., Haddioui, A., Song, H., Kwon, E.E., Bolan, N., Tack, F.M.G., Sebastian, A., Prasad, 
M.N.V., Rinklebe, J., 2020. Cadmium stress in plants: a critical review of the effects, mechanisms, and tolerance 
strategies. Crit. Rev. Environ. Sci. Technol., 1–52. https://doi.org/10.1080/10643389.2020.1835435.
El-Esawi, M.A., Elkelish, A., Soliman, M., Elansary, H.O., Zaid, A., Wani, S.H., 2020. Serratia marcescens BM1 en￾hances cadmium stress tolerance and phytoremediation potential of soybean through modulation of osmolytes, 
leaf gas exchange, antioxidant machinery, and stress-responsive genes expression. Antioxidants 9, 43.
Faizan, M., Faraz, A., Mir, A.R., Hayat, S., 2021. Role of zinc oxide nanoparticles in countering negative effects gener￾ated by cadmium in Lycopersicon esculentum. J. Plant Growth Regul. 40, 101–115.
Farooq, M.A., Li, L., Ali, B., Gill, R.A., Wang, J., Ali, S., Gill, M.B., Zhou, W., 2015. Oxidative injury and antioxidant 
enzymes regulation in arsenic-exposed seedlings of four Brassica napus L. cultivars. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 22, 
10699–10712.
Farooq, M.A., Islam, F., Yang, C., Nawaz, A., Athar, H.-U.-R., Gill, R.A., Ali, B., Song, W., Zhou, W., 2018. Methyl 
jasmonate alleviates arsenic-induced oxidative damage and modulates the ascorbate–glutathione cycle in oilseed 
rape roots. Plant Growth Regul. 84, 135–148.
Fatemi, H., Pour, B.E., Rizwan, M., 2021. Foliar application of silicon nanoparticles affected the growth, vitamin 
C, flavonoid, and antioxidant enzyme activities of coriander (Coriandrum sativum L.) plants grown in lead (Pb)-
spiked soil. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 28, 1417–1425.
Fattahi, B., Arzani, K., Souri, M.K., Barzegar, M., 2019. Effects of cadmium and lead on seed germination, morpholog￾ical traits, and essential oil composition of sweet basil (Ocimum basilicum L.). Ind. Crop. Prod. 138, 111584.
Fu, H., Yu, H., Li, T., Zhang, X., 2018. Influence of cadmium stress on root exudates of high cadmium accumulating 
rice line (Oryza sativa L.). Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 150, 168–175. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoenv.2017.12.014.
Gajić, G., Mitrović, M., Pavlović, P., Stevanović, B., Djurdjević, L., Kostić, O., 2009. An assessment of the tolerance 
of Ligustrum ovalifolium Hassk. to traffic-generated Pb using physiological and biochemical markers. Ecotoxicol. 
Environ. Saf. 72, 1090–1101.
Garg, N., Singla, P., 2012. The role of Glomus mosseae on key physiological and biochemical parameters of pea plants 
grown in arsenic contaminated soil. Sci. Hortic. 143, 92–101.
Ghori, N.H., Ghori, T., Hayat, M.Q., Imadi, S.R., Gul, A., Altay, V., Ozturk, M., 2019. Heavy metal stress and responses 
in plants. Int. J. Environ. Sci. Technol. 16, 1807–1828.
Gill, M., 2014. Heavy metal stress in plants: a review. Int. J. Adv. Res. 2, 1043–1055.
González, A., Gil-Díaz, M., Lobo, M.C., 2015. Response of two barley cultivars to increasing concentrations of cad￾mium or chromium in soil during the growing period. Biol. Trace Elem. Res. 163, 235–243.
Guo, X., Li, Y., 2021. Effects of biochar and AM fungi on growth, mineral elements and cadmium uptake of mulberry 
under cadmium stress. In: IOP Conference Series: Earth and Environmental Science (Vol. 687, No. 1, p. 012021). 
IOP Publishing.
Guo, Q., Meng, L., Mao, P.C., Tian, X.X., 2014. An assessment of Agropyron cristatum tolerance to cadmium contam￾inated soil. Biol. Plant. 58, 174–178.
Guo, Q., Meng, L., Zhang, Y.N., Mao, P.C., Tian, X.X., Li, S.S., Zhang, L., 2017. Antioxidative systems, metal ion ho￾meostasis and cadmium distribution in Iris lactea exposed to cadmium stress. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 139, 50–55.
Haap, T., Schwarz, S., Köhler, H.-R., 2016. Metallothionein and Hsp70 trade-off against one another in Daphnia 
magna cross-tolerance to cadmium and heat stress. Aquat. Toxicol. 170, 112–119. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
aquatox.2015.11.008.
Hasanuzzaman, M., Bhuyan, M.H.M., Zulfiqar, F., Raza, A., Mohsin, S.M., Mahmud, J.A., Fujita, M., Fotopoulos, V., 
2020. Reactive oxygen species and antioxidant defense in plants under abiotic stress: revisiting the crucial role of 
a universal defense regulator. Antioxidants 9 (8), 681.
Hasanuzzaman, M., Nahar, K., Rahman, A., Mahmud, J.A., Alharby, H.F., Fujita, M., 2018. Exogenous glutathione at￾tenuates lead-induced oxidative stress in wheat by improving antioxidant defense and physiological mechanisms. 
J. Plant Interact. 13, 203–212.
He, Z., Shentu, J., Yang, X., Baligar, V.C., Zhang, T., Stoffella, P.J., 2015. Heavy Metal Contamination of Soils: Sources, 
Indicators and Assessment.154 8. Effect of heavy metal pollution on plants
Hédiji, H., Djebali, W., Belkadhi, A., Cabasson, C., Moing, A., Rolin, D., Chaïbi, W., 2015. Impact of long-term cad￾mium exposure on mineral content of Solanum lycopersicum plants: consequences on fruit production. S. Afr. J. Bot. 
97, 176–181.
Huang, D., Yang, Y., Deng, R., Gong, X., Zhou, W., Chen, S., Li, B., Wang, G., 2021. Remediation of Cd-contaminated 
soil by modified nanoscale zero-valent iron: role of plant root exudates and inner mechanisms. Int. J. Environ. Res. 
Public Health 18 (11), 5887.
Husen, A., 1997. Impact of Air Pollution on the Growth and Development of Datura innoxia Mill. M.Sc. dissertation, 
Jamia Hamdard, New Delhi, India.
Husen, A., 2021a. Harsh Environment and Plant Resilience (Molecular and Functional Aspects). Springer Nature 
Switzerland AG, Cham, Switzerland, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-65912-7.
Husen, A., 2021b. Plant Performance Under Environmental Stress (Hormones, Biostimulants and Sustainable 
Plant Growth Management). Springer Nature Switzerland AG, Cham, Switzerland, https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-030-78521-5.
Husen, A., 2021c. The harsh environment andresilient plants: anoverview. In: Husen, A. (Ed.), Harsh Environment and 
Plant Resilience. Springer International Publishing AG, Cham, pp. 1–23, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-65912-7_1.
Husen, A., 2022. Environmental Pollution and Medicinal Plants. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, https://doi.
org/10.1201/9781003178866. 33487-2742.
Hussain, I., Siddique, A., Ashraf, M.A., Rasheed, R., Ibrahim, M., Iqbal, M., Imran, M., 2017. Does exogenous appli￾cation of ascorbic acid modulate growth, photosynthetic pigments and oxidative defense in okra (Abelmoschus 
esculentus (L.) Moench) under lead stress? Acta Physiol. Plant. 39, 144.
Huybrechts, M., Cuypers, A., Deckers, J., Iven, V., Vandionant, S., Jozefczak, M., Hendrix, S., 2019. Cadmium and 
plant development: an agony from seed to seed. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 20, 3971.
Imran, M., Hussain, S., He, L., Ashraf, M.F., Ihtisham, M., Warraich, E.A., Tang, X., 2021. Molybdenum-induced reg￾ulation of antioxidant defense-mitigated cadmium stress in aromatic rice and improved crop growth, yield, and 
quality traits. Antioxidants 10, 838.
Iqbal, N., Nazir, N., Nauman, M., Hayat, M.T., 2020. Agronomic crop responses and tolerance to metals/metalloids 
toxicity. In: Agronomic Crops. Springer Singapore, pp. 191–208.
Islam, E., Liu, D., Li, T., Yang, X., Jin, X., Mahmood, Q., Li, J., 2008. Effect of Pb toxicity on leaf growth, physiology 
and ultrastructure in the two ecotypes of Elsholtzia argyi. J. Hazard. Mater. 154, 914–926.
Israr, M., Sahi, S., Datta, R., Sarkar, D., 2006. Bioaccumulation and physiological effects of mercury in Sesbania drum￾mondii. Chemosphere 65, 591–598.
Jan, S., Alyemeni, M.N., Wijaya, L., Alam, P., Siddique, K.H., Ahmad, P., 2018. Interactive effect of 24-epibrassinolide 
and silicon alleviates cadmium stress via the modulation of antioxidant defense and glyoxalase systems and mac￾ronutrient content in Pisum sativum L. seedlings. BMC Plant Biol. 18, 1–18.
Jatav, P.K., Verma, R., Kothari, S.L., Jain, R., Kachhwaha, S., 2021. Relative morpho-physiological responses of millets 
and oats against lead toxicity. Environ. Exp. Bot. 192, 104658.
Javed, M.T., Akram, M.S., Habib, N., Tanwir, K., Ali, Q., Niazi, N.K., Gul, H., Iqbal, N., 2018. Deciphering the growth, 
organic acid exudations, and ionic homeostasis of Amaranthus viridis L. and Portulaca oleracea L. under lead 
chloride stress. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 25 (3), 2958–2971. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-017-0735-2.
Jia, H., Wang, X., Wei, T., Zhou, R., Muhammad, H., Hua, L., Ren, X., Guo, J., Ding, Y., 2019. Accumulation and fixa￾tion of Cd by tomato cell wall pectin under Cd stress. Environ. Exp. Bot. 167, 103829. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
envexpbot.2019.103829.
Kalaivanan, D., Ganeshamurthy, A.N., 2016. Mechanisms of heavy metal toxicity in plants. In: Abiotic Stress 
Physiology of Horticultural Crops. Springer New Delhi, pp. 85–102.
Kärkönen, A., Kuchitsu, K., 2015. Reactive oxygen species in cell wall metabolism and development in plants. 
Phytochemistry 112, 22–32.
Kaya, C., Ashraf, M., Alyemeni, M.N., Ahmad, P., 2020. Responses of nitric oxide and hydrogen sulfide in regulating 
oxidative defence system in wheat plants grown under cadmium stress. Physiol. Plant. 168, 345–360.
Khan, I., Ghani, A., Rehman, A.U., Awan, S.A., Noreen, A., Khalid, I., 2016. Comparative analysis of heavy metal 
profile of Brassica campestris (L.) and Raphanus sativus (L.) irrigated with municipal waste water of sargodha city. 
J. Clin. Toxicol. 6, 1–4.
Khan, M.I.R., Jahan, B., AlAjmi, M.F., Rehman, M.T., Iqbal, N., Irfan, M., Sehar, Z., Khan, N.A., 2021. Crosstalk of 
plant growth regulators protects photosynthetic performance from arsenic damage by modulating defense sys￾tems in rice. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 222, 112535.References 155
Kranner, I., Colville, L., 2011. Metals and seeds: biochemical and molecular implications and their significance for 
seed germination. Environ. Exp. Bot. 72, 93–105.
Kumar, A., Choudhary, A., Kaur, H., Kumar, R., Sharma, R., Gautam, H., Mehta, S., 2022. Water pollution and medic￾inal plants: insights into the impact and adaptation responses. In: Environmental Pollution and Medicinal Plants. 
CRC Press, pp. 117–129.
Kumar, A., Choudhary, A., Kaur, H., Mehta, S., Husen, A., 2021. Metal-based nanoparticles, sensors, and their multi￾faceted application in food packaging. J. Nanobiotechnol. 19 (1), 1–25.
Leng, Y., Li, Y., Ma, Y.H., He, L.F., Li, S.W., 2021. Abscisic acid modulates differential physiological and biochemical 
responses of roots, stems, and leaves in mung bean seedlings to cadmium stress. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 28, 
6030–6043.
Li, X., Zhang, L., Li, Y., Ma, L., Bu, N., Ma, C., 2012. Changes in photosynthesis, antioxidant enzymes and lipid per￾oxidation in soybean seedlings exposed to UV-B radiation and/or Cd. Plant Soil 352, 377–387.
Li, C., Zhang, T., Feng, P., Li, D., Brestic, M., Liu, Y., Yang, X., 2021a. Genetic engineering of glycinebetaine synthesis 
enhances cadmium tolerance in BADH-transgenic tobacco plants via reducing cadmium uptake and alleviating 
cadmium stress damage. Environ. Exp. Bot. 191, 104602.
Li, G., Shah, A.A., Khan, W.U., Yasin, N.A., Ahmad, A., Abbas, M., Safdar, N., 2021b. Hydrogen sulfide mitigates 
cadmium induced toxicity in Brassica rapa by modulating physiochemical attributes, osmolyte metabolism and 
antioxidative machinery. Chemosphere 263, 127999.
Li, X., Ahammed, G.J., Zhang, X.N., Zhang, L., Yan, P., Zhang, L.P., Fu, J.Y., Han, W.Y., 2021c. Melatonin-mediated 
regulation of anthocyanin biosynthesis and antioxidant defense confer tolerance to arsenic stress in Camellia 
sinensis L. J. Hazard. Mater. 403, 123922.
Li, Y., Sun, M., He, W., Wang, H., Pan, H., Yang, Q., Zhuge, Y., 2021d. Effect of phosphorus supplementation on 
growth, nutrient uptake, physiological responses, and cadmium absorption by tall fescue (Festuca arundinacea
Schreb.) exposed to cadmium. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 213, 112021.
Ling, T., Fangke, Y., Jun, R., 2010. Effect of mercury to seed germination, coleoptile growth and root elongation of four 
vegetables. Res. J. Phytochem. 4, 225–233.
Liu, S.L., Yang, R.J., Ma, M.D., Dan, F., Zhao, Y., Jiang, P., Wang, M.H., 2015. Effects of exogenous NO on the growth, 
mineral nutrient content, antioxidant system, and ATPase activities of Trifoliumrepens L. plants under cadmium 
stress. Acta Physiol. Plant. 37, 1721.
Liu, X., Meng, Y., Wei, S., Gu, W., 2021. Exogenous hemin confers cadmium tolerance by decreasing cadmium accu￾mulation and modulating water status and matter accumulation in maize seedlings. Agronomy 11, 739.
Ma, Y.L., Wang, H.F., Wang, P., Yu, C.G., Luo, S.Q., Zhang, Y.F., Xie, Y.F., 2018. Effects of cadmium stress on the anti￾oxidant system and chlorophyll fluorescence characteristics of two Taxodium clones. Plant Cell Rep. 37, 1547–1555.
Malik, B., Pirzadah, T.B., Tahir, I., Ul Rehman, R., 2019. Growth and physiological responses in chicory towards mer￾cury induced in vitro oxidative stress. Plant Physiol. Rep. 24, 236–248.
Mapodzeke, J.M., Adil, M.F., Wei, D., Joan, H.I., Ouyang, Y., Shamsi, I.H., 2021. Modulation of key physio-biochemical 
and ultrastructural attributes after synergistic application of zinc and silicon on rice under cadmium stress. Plants 
10 (1), 87.
Marmiroli, M., Pigoni, V., Savo-Sardaro, M.L., Marmiroli, N., 2014. The effect of silicon on the uptake and transloca￾tion of arsenic in tomato (Solanum lycopersicum L.). Environ. Exp. Bot. 99, 9–17.
Mehta, S., Gogna, M., Singh, B., Patra, A., Singh, I.K., Singh, A., 2020. Silicon: a plant nutritional “non-entity” for 
mitigating abiotic stresses. In: Plant Stress Biology. Springer, Singapore, pp. 17–49.
Mohammadi, S., Pourakbar, L., Siavash Moghaddam, S., Popović-Djordjević, J., 2021. The effect of EDTA and citric 
acid on biochemical processes and changes in phenolic compounds profile of okra (Abelmoschus esculentus L.) 
under mercury stress. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 208, 111607.
Moori, S., Ahmadi-Lahijani, M.J., 2020. Hormopriming instigates defense mechanisms in Thyme (Thymus vulgaris L.) 
seeds under cadmium stress. J. Appl. Res. Med. 19, 100268.
Moradi, R., Pourghasemian, N., Naghizadeh, M., 2019. Effect of beeswax waste biochar on growth, physiology and 
cadmium uptake in saffron. J. Clean. Prod. 229, 1251–1261.
Mumthas, S., Chidambaram, A.A., Sundaramoorthy, P., Ganesh, K.S., 2010. Effect of arsenic and manganese on root 
growth and cell division in root tip cells of green gram (Vigna radiate L.). Emir. J. Food Agric., 285–297.
Muradoglu, F., Gundogdu, M., Ercisli, S., Encu, T., Balta, F., Jaafar, H.Z., Zia-Ul-Haq, M., 2015. Cadmium toxicity af￾fects chlorophyll a and b content, antioxidant enzyme activities and mineral nutrient accumulation in strawberry. 
Biol. Res. 48, 1–7.156 8. Effect of heavy metal pollution on plants
Nadarajah, K.K., 2020. ROS homeostasis in abiotic stress tolerance in plants. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 21, 5208.
Nagajyoti, P.C., Lee, K.D., Sreekanth, T., 2010. Heavy metals, occurrence and toxicity for plants: a review. Environ. 
Chem. Lett. 8, 199–216.
Navabpour, S., Yamchi, A., Bagherikia, S., Kafi, H., 2020. Lead-induced oxidative stress and role of antioxidant de￾fense in wheat (Triticum aestivum L.). Physiol. Mol. Biol. Plants 26, 793–802.
Nouri, M., Haddioui, A., 2021. Improving seed germination and seedling growth of Lepidium sativum with different 
priming methods under arsenic stress. Acta Ecol. Sin. 41, 64–71.
Onakpa, M.M., Njan, A.A., Kalu, O.C., 2018. A review of heavy metal contamination of food crops in Nigeria. Ann. 
Glob. Health 84, 488.
Pandey, S., Fartyal, D., Agarwal, A., Shukla, T., James, D., Kaul, T., Reddy, M.K., 2017. Abiotic stress tolerance in 
plants: myriad roles of ascorbate peroxidase. Front. Plant Sci. 8, 581.
Per, T.S., Khan, S., Asgher, M., Bano, B., Khan, N.A., 2016. Photosynthetic and growth responses of two mustard cul￾tivars differing in phytocystatin activity under cadmium stress. Photosynthetica 54, 491–501.
Pirzadah, T.B., Malik, B., Tahir, I., Hakeem, K.R., Alharby, H.F., Rehman, R.U., 2020. Lead toxicity alters the antioxidant 
defense machinery and modulate the biomarkers in Tartary buckwheat plants. Int. Biodeterior. Biodegradation 
151, 104992.
Popa, K., Murariu, M., Molnar, R., Schlosser, G., Cecal, A., Drochioiu, G., 2007. Effect of radioactive and non-radioactive 
mercury on wheat germination and the anti-toxic role of glutathione. Isot. Environ. Health Stud. 43, 105–116.
Qu, D.Y., Gu, W.R., Zhang, L.G., Li, C.F., Chen, X.C., Li, J., Wei, S., 2019. Role of chitosan in the regulation of the 
growth, antioxidant system and photosynthetic characteristics of maize seedlings under cadmium stress. Russ. J. 
Plant Physiol. 66, 140–151.
Rady, M.M., Elrys, A.S., El-Maati, M.F.A., Desoky, E.S.M., 2019. Interplaying roles of silicon and proline effectively 
improve salt and cadmium stress tolerance in Phaseolus vulgaris plant. Plant Physiol. Biochem. 139, 558–568.
Rahman, A., Nahar, K., Hasanuzzaman, M., Fujita, M., 2016. Manganese-induced cadmium stress tolerance in rice 
seedlings: coordinated action of antioxidant defense, glyoxalase system and nutrient homeostasis. C. R. Biol. 339, 
462–474.
Rahman, S.U., Xuebin, Q., Kamran, M., Yasin, G., Cheng, H., Rehim, A., Riaz, L., Rizwan, M., Ali, S., Alsahli, A.A., 
Alyemeni, M.N., 2021. Silicon elevated cadmium tolerance in wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) by endorsing nutrients 
uptake and antioxidative defense mechanisms in the leaves. Plant Physiol. Biochem. 166, 148–159.
Rahul, R., Sharma, P., 2021. Identification of cadmium tolerant and sensitive genotypes of castor and their contrasting 
responses to cadmium treatment. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 1–14.
Rasheed, R., Arslan Ashraf, M., Kamran, S., Iqbal, M., Hussain, I., 2018. Menadione sodium bisulphite mediated 
growth, secondary metabolism, nutrient uptake and oxidative defense in okra (Abelmoschus esculentus Moench) 
under cadmium stress. J. Hazard. Mater. 360, 604–614. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2018.08.043.
Riaz, M., Kamran, M., Fang, Y., Yang, G., Rizwan, M., Ali, S., Wang, X., 2021. Boron supply alleviates cadmium tox￾icity in rice (Oryza sativa L.) by enhancing cadmium adsorption on cell wall and triggering antioxidant defense 
system in roots. Chemosphere 266, 128938.
Rizvi, A., Khan, M.S., 2019. Heavy metal-mediated toxicity to maize: oxidative damage, antioxidant defence response 
and metal distribution in plant organs. Int. J. Environ. Sci. Technol. 16 (8), 4873–4886. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s13762-018-1916-3.
Safari, F., Akramian, M., Salehi-Arjmand, H., Khadivi, A., 2019. Physiological and molecular mechanisms underly￾ing salicylic acid-mitigated mercury toxicity in lemon balm (Melissa officinalis L.). Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 183, 
109542.
Sahu, G.K., Upadhyay, S., Sahoo, B.B., 2012. Mercury induced phytotoxicity and oxidative stress in wheat (Triticum 
aestivum L.) plants. Physiol. Mol. Biol. Plants 18, 21–31.
Sanjari, S., Keramat, B., Nadernejad, N., Mozafari, H., 2019. Ameliorative effects of 24-epibrassinolide and thiamine 
on excess cadmium-induced oxidative stress in Canola (Brassica napus L.) plants. J. Plant Interact. 14, 359–368.
Sardar, R., Ahmed, S., Yasin, N.A., 2021. Role of exogenously applied putrescine in amelioration of cadmium stress 
in Coriandrum sativum by modulating antioxidant system. Int. J. Phytoremediation, 1–8.
Sarwar, N., Imran, M., Shaheen, M.R., Ishaque, W., Kamran, M.A., Matloob, A., Hussain, S., 2017. Phytoremediation strat￾egies for soils contaminated with heavy metals: modifications and future perspectives. Chemosphere 171, 710–721.
Seneviratne, M., Rajakaruna, N., Rizwan, M., Madawala, H.M.S.P., Ok, Y.S., Vithanage, M., 2019. Heavy metal-induced 
oxidative stress on seed germination and seedling development: a critical review. Environ. Geochem. Health 41, 
1813–1831.References 157
Sewelam, N., Kazan, K., Schenk, P.M., 2016. Global plant stress signaling: reactive oxygen species at the cross-road. 
Front. Plant Sci. 7.
Shahid, M., Pourrut, B., Dumat, C., Nadeem, M., Aslam, M., Pinelli, E., 2014. Heavy-metal-induced reactive oxygen 
species: phytotoxicity and physicochemical changes in plants. Rev. Environ. Contam. Toxicol. 232, 1–44.
Shahzad, B., Tanveer, M., Che, Z., Rehman, A., Cheema, S.A., Sharma, A., Zhaorong, D., 2018. Role of 24-epibrassinolide 
(EBL) in mediating heavy metal and pesticide induced oxidative stress in plants: a review. Ecotoxicol. Environ. 
Saf. 147, 935–944.
Sidhu, G.P.S., Singh, H.P., Batish, D.R., Kohli, R.K., 2017. Alterations in photosynthetic pigments, protein, and carbohy￾drate metabolism in a wild plant Coronopus didymus L.(Brassicaceae) under lead stress. Acta Physiol. Plant. 39, 1–9.
Singh, H.P., Kaur, G., Batish, D.R., Kohli, R.K., 2011. Lead (Pb)-inhibited radicle emergence in Brassica campestris
involves alterations in starch-metabolizing enzymes. Biol. Trace Elem. Res. 144, 1295–1301.
Singh, A., Mehta, S., Yadav, S., Nagar, G., Ghosh, R., Roy, A., Chakraborty, A., Singh, I.K., 2022. How to cope with the 
challenges of environmental stresses in the era of global climate change: an update on ROS stave off in plants. Int. 
J. Mol. Sci. 23 (4), 1995.
Singh, S., Sounderajan, S., Kumar, K., Fulzele, D.P., 2017. Investigation of arsenic accumulation and biochemical 
response of in vitro developed Vetiveria zizanoides plants. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 145, 50–56.
Smeets, K., Cuypers, A., Lambrechts, A., Semane, B., Hoet, P., Van Laere, A., Vangronsveld, J., 2005. Induction of 
oxidative stress and antioxidative mechanisms in Phaseolus vulgaris after Cd application. Plant Physiol. Biochem. 
43, 437–444.
Soares, T.F.S.N., dos Santos Dias, D.C.F., Oliveira, A.M.S., Ribeiro, D.M., dos Santos Dias, L.A., 2020. Exogenous 
brassinosteroids increase lead stress tolerance in seed germination and seedling growth of Brassica juncea L. 
Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 193, 110296.
Sun, W.H., Jiang, Y.X., Li, X., 2013. Research of the evaluation on heavy-metal pollution in rice by sewage irrigation. 
In: Applied Mechanics and Materials. vol. 295. Trans Tech Publications Ltd, pp. 1594–1599.
Sun, Y., Chao, J., Gu, W., Wang, M., Zhang, W., 2018. Photosynthesis characteristics and physiological indexes of 
Atracty lodeslancea (Thunb.) DC. under mercury stress. South. J. Agric. Econ. 49, 448–453.
Tamás, L., Mistrík, I., Zelinová, V., 2017. Heavy metal-induced reactive oxygen species and cell death in barley root 
tip. Environ. Exp. Bot. 140, 34–40.
Tchounwou, P.B., Yedjou, C.G., Patlolla, A.K., Sutton, D.J., 2012. Heavy metal toxicity and the environment. In: 
Molecular, Clinical and Environmental Toxicology, pp. 133–164.
Teixeira, D.C., Lacerda, L.D., Silva-Filho, E.V., 2018. Foliar mercury content from tropical trees and its correlation 
with physiological parameters in situ. Environ. Pollut. 242, 1050–1057.
Thakur, M., Praveen, S., Divte, P.R., Mitra, R., Kumar, M., Gupta, C.K., Kalidindi, U., Bansal, R., Roy, S., Anand, A., 
Singh, B., 2022. Metal tolerance in plants: molecular and physicochemical interface determines the “not so heavy 
effect” of heavy metals. Chemosphere 287, 131957. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2021.131957.
Tran, T.A.T., Dinh, Q.T., Zhou, F., Zhai, H., Xue, M., Du, Z., Bañuelos, G.S., Liang, D., 2021. Mechanisms underlying 
mercury detoxification in soil–plant systems after selenium application: a review. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 28, 
46852–46876.
UdDin, I., Bano, A., Masood, S., 2015. Chromium toxicity tolerance of Solanum nigrum L. and Parthenium hystero￾phorus L. plants with reference to ion pattern, antioxidation activity and root exudation. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 
113, 271–278. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoenv.2014.12.014.
Ullah, S., Khan, J., Hayat, K., Abdelfattah Elateeq, A., Salam, U., Yu, B., Tang, Z.H., 2020. Comparative study of 
growth, cadmium accumulation and tolerance of three chickpea (Cicer arietinum L.) cultivars. Plants 9, 310.
Verbruggen, N., Hermans, C., Schat, H., 2009. Mechanisms to cope with arsenic or cadmium excess in plants. Curr. 
Opin. Plant Biol. 12, 364–372.
Vezza, M.E., Llanes, A., Travaglia, C., Agostini, E., Talano, M.A., 2018. Arsenic stress effects on root water absorption 
in soybean plants: physiological and morphological aspects. Plant Physiol. Biochem. 123, 8–17.
Waheed, S., Ahmad, R., Irshad, M., Khan, S.A., Mahmood, Q., Shahzad, M., 2021. Ca2SiO4 chemigation reduces 
cadmium localization in the subcellular leaf fractions of spinach (Spinacia oleracea L.) under cadmium stress. 
Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 207, 111230.
Wahid, A., Ghani, A., Javed, F., 2008. Effect of cadmium on photosynthesis, nutrition and growth of mungbean. 
Agron. Sustain. Dev. 28, 273–280.
Wang, Y., Yang, R., Zheng, J., Shen, Z., Xu, X., 2019. Exogenous foliar application of fulvic acid alleviate cadmium 
toxicity in lettuce (Lactuca sativa L.). Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 167, 10–19.158 8. Effect of heavy metal pollution on plants
Wang, L., Liu, B., Wang, Y., Qin, Y., Zhou, Y., Qian, H., 2020. Influence and interaction of iron and lead on seed ger￾mination in upland rice. Plant Soil 455, 187–202.
Wei, T., Li, X., Yashir, N., Li, H., Sun, Y., Hua, L., Guo, J., 2021a. Effect of exogenous silicon and methyl jasmonate on 
the alleviation of cadmium-induced phytotoxicity in tomato plants. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 1–11.
Wei, T., Sun, Y., Yashir, N., Li, X., Guo, J., Liu, X., Hua, L., 2021b. Inoculation with rhizobacteria enhanced tolerance of 
tomato (Solanum lycopersicum L.) plants in response to cadmium stress. J. Plant Growth Regul., 1–16.
Weryszko‐Chmielewska, E., Chwil, M., 2005. Lead‐induced histological and ultrastructural changes in the leaves of 
soybean (Glycine max (L.) Merr.). Soil Sci. Plant Nutr. 51, 203–212.
Wu, Y., Liao, W., Dawuda, M.M., Hu, L., Yu, J., 2019. 5-Aminolevulinic acid (ALA) biosynthetic and metabolic path￾ways and its role in higher plants: a review. Plant Growth Regul. 87, 357–374.
Wu, F., Fang, Q., Yan, S., Pan, L., Tang, X., Ye, W., 2020. Effects of zinc oxide nanoparticles on arsenic stress in rice 
(Oryza sativa L.): germination, early growth, and arsenic uptake. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 27, 26974–26981.
Wu, S., Wang, Y., Zhang, J., Gong, X., Zhang, Z., Sun, J., Wang, Y., 2021. Exogenous melatonin improves physiological 
characteristics and promotes growth of strawberry seedlings under cadmium stress. Hortic. Plant J. 7, 13–22.
Xu, L., Zhang, F., Tang, M., Wang, Y., Dong, J., Ying, J., Chen, Y., Hu, B., Li, C., Liu, L., 2020. Melatonin confers cad￾mium tolerance by modulating critical heavy metal chelators and transporters in radish plants. J. Pineal Res. 69 
(1), e12659. https://doi.org/10.1111/jpi.12659.
Xue, Z.C., Gao, H.Y., Zhang, L.T., 2013. Effects of cadmium on growth, photosynthetic rate and chlorophyll content 
in leaves of soybean seedlings. Biol. Plant. 57, 587–590.
Yadav, B., Jogawat, A., Lal, S.K., Lakra, N., Mehta, S., Shabek, N., Narayan, O.P., 2021. Plant mineral transport sys￾tems and the potential for crop improvement. Planta 253 (2), 1–30.
Yahaghi, Z., Shirvani, M., Nourbakhsh, F., Pueyo, J.J., 2019. Uptake and effects of lead and zinc on alfalfa (Medicago sa￾tiva L.) seed germination and seedling growth: role of plant growth promoting bacteria. S. Afr. J. Bot. 124, 573–582.
Yang, Y., Wei, X., Lu, J., You, J., Wang, W., Shi, R., 2010. Lead-induced phytotoxicity mechanism involved in seed 
germination and seedling growth of wheat (Triticum aestivum L.). Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 73, 1982–1987.
Yang, H.Y., Shi, G.X., Xu, Q.S., Wang, H.X., 2011. Cadmium effects on mineral nutrition and stress in Potamogeton 
crispus. Russ. J. Plant Physiol. 58, 253–260.
Yu, X.Z., Lin, Y.J., Zhang, Q., 2019. Metallothioneins enhance chromium detoxification through scavenging ROS 
and stimulating metal chelation in Oryza sativa. Chemosphere 220, 300–313. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
chemosphere.2018.12.119.
Zaid, A., Mohammad, F., Fariduddin, Q., 2020. Plant growth regulators improve growth, photosynthesis, mineral 
nutrient and antioxidant system under cadmium stress in menthol mint (Mentha arvensis L.). Physiol. Mol. Biol. 
Plants 26, 25–39.
Zanganeh, R., Jamei, R., Rahmani, F., 2021. Response of maize plant to sodium hydrosulfide pretreatment under 
lead stress conditions at early stages of growth. Cereal Res. Commun. 49 (2), 267–276. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s42976-020-00095-0.
Zargari, F., Pourakbar, L., Salehi-Lisar, S.Y., Razeghi, J., Motafakker Azad, R., 2020. An assessment of oxidative stress 
and antioxidant system activity in alfalfa plants treated with different forms of mineral arsenic. J. Plant Process 
Funct. 9, 13–26.
Zayneb, C., Bassem, K., Zeineb, K., Grubb, C.D., Noureddine, D., Hafedh, M., Amine, E., 2015. Physiological re￾sponses of fenugreek seedlings and plants treated with cadmium. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 22, 10679–10689.
Zeshan, A., Abdullah, M., Adil, M.F., Wei, D., Noman, M., Ahmed, T., Shamsi, I.H., 2021. Improvement of 
morpho-physiological, ultrastructural and nutritional profiles in wheat seedlings through astaxanthin nanoparti￾cles alleviating the cadmium toxicity. J. Hazard. Mater., 126511.
Zhang, Z., Liu, C., Wang, X., Shi, G., 2013. Cadmium-induced alterations in morpho-physiology of two peanut culti￾vars differing in cadmium accumulation. Acta Physiol. Plant. 35, 2105–2112.
Zhang, Q., Wang, C., 2020. Natural and human factors affect the distribution of soil heavy metal pollution: a review. 
Wat. Air Soil Pollut. 231 (7), 1–3.
Zhang, Y., Xu, S., Yang, S., Chen, Y., 2015. Salicylic acid alleviates cadmium-induced inhibition of growth and photo￾synthesis through upregulating antioxidant defense system in two melon cultivars (Cucumis melo L.). Protoplasma 
252, 911–924.
Zhang, T., Lu, Q., Su, C., Yang, Y., Hu, D., Xu, Q., 2017. Mercury induced oxidative stress, DNA damage, and acti￾vation of antioxidative system and Hsp70 induction in duckweed (Lemna minor). Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 143, 
46–56.Zhang, Y., Deng, B., Li, Z., 2018. Inhibition of NADPH oxidase increases defense enzyme activities and improves 
maize seed germination under Pb stress. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 158, 187–192.
Zhang, F., Liu, M., Li, Y., Che, Y., Xiao, Y., 2019. Effects of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi, biochar and cadmium on the 
yield and element uptake of Medicago sativa. Sci. Total Environ. 655, 1150–1158.
Zhao, H., Guan, J., Liang, Q., Zhang, X., Hu, H., Zhang, J., 2021. Effects of cadmium stress on growth and physiolog￾ical characteristics of sassafras seedlings. Sci. Rep. 11, 1–11.
Zhou, J., Jiang, Z., Ma, J., Yang, L., Wei, Y., 2017. The effects of lead stress on photosynthetic function and chloroplast 
ultrastructure of Robinia pseudoacacia seedlings. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 24, 10718–10726.
Zhou, Z., Wei, C., Liu, H., Jiao, Q., Li, G., Zhang, J., Yang, S., 2021. Exogenous ascorbic acid application alleviates 
cadmium toxicity in seedlings of two wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) varieties by reducing cadmium uptake and 
enhancing antioxidative capacity. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 1–12.
Zhu, X.F., Zheng, C., Hu, Y.T., Jiang, T., Liu, Y., Dong, N.Y., Yang, J.L., Zheng, S.J., 2011. Cadmium-induced oxalate 
secretion from root apex is associated with cadmium exclusion and resistance in Lycopersicon esulentum. Plant 
Cell Environ. 34 (7), 1055–1064. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-3040.2011.02304.x.
Zia, Z., Bakhat, H.F., Saqib, Z.A., Shah, G.M., Fahad, S., Ashraf, M.R., Hammad, H.M., Naseem, W., Shahid, M., 
2017. Effect of water management and silicon on germination, growth, phosphorus and arsenic uptake in rice. 
Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 144, 11–18.
References 159This page intentionally left blankPlants and their Interaction to Environmental Pollution 161 Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-99978-6.00010-8
CHAPTER
9
Interaction of nanoparticles and 
nanocomposite with plant and 
environment
Chandrabose Selvaraja
, Chandrabose Yogeswarib
, 
and Sanjeev Kumar Singha
a
Computer-Aided Drug Design and Molecular Modeling Lab, Department of Bioinformatics, 
Science Block, Alagappa University, Karaikudi, Tamil Nadu, India, b
Ezhilnala Siddha Varma 
Hospital and Research Centre, Madurai, Tamil Nadu, India
Abbreviations
AuNPs gold nanoparticles
CuO copper oxide
CycB G2/mitotic-specific cyclin-B
DNA deoxyribonucleic acid
DOM dissolved organic matter
IAA indole-3-acetic acid
NSA nanostructured alumina
NtLRX1 NLR family; member X1
NtPIP1 1-Aquaporin
Pb platinum
PVPA poly(lactic-co-glycolic) acid
QD fluorescence quantum dot fluorescence
ROS reactive oxygen species
SiO2 NPs silica nanoparticles
TEM transmission electron microscope
TiO2 NPs titanium nanoparticles
ZnO zinc oxide162 9. Interaction of nanoparticles and nanocomposite
1. Introduction
It has been almost a thousand years since nanomaterials were first used, and they have 
been around for millions of years on Earth. Creating nanoparticles has been increasingly pop￾ular in recent decades due to improvements in technology and an increase in human capacity. 
In addition to cosmetics, medicines, and conservation, nanoparticles have a wide range of 
applications (Husen and Siddiqi, 2014a,b; Husen and Iqbal, 2019a,b; Husen and Pandey, 2020; 
Husen and Jawaid, 2020). Nanotechnology has been employed extensively in a wide range of 
fields, including chemistry, pharmaceuticals, therapies, and the diagnosis of various ailments 
in recent decades (Leso et al., 2019; Stefan and Monchaud, 2019; Li et al., 2020a,b; Alle et al., 
2021; Sharma et al., 2021a,b). Nanoparticle-based applications are becoming more popular 
around the world as the potential of this technology grows (Guzman et al., 2006). Nanoparticle 
synthesis production is expected to reach 58,000 tons by 2021, according to current projections 
(Roco, 2005). Their unique and overall features, such as particle size and surface reactivity 
have recently been enhanced by recent advancements in nanotechnology (Guzman et  al., 
2006; Roco, 2005; Nowack and Bucheli, 2007; Buffle, 2006). Additionally, nanoparticles’ atomic 
and molecular make-up contributes to their diversity, which has the potential to have a signif￾icant impact on both terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems (Blackford and Simons, 1987). Due to 
climate change and soil pollution, the agriculture and plants have been forced to face various 
tests, such as the use of fertilizers and insecticides (Pouratashi and Iravani, 2012). The delicate 
food chain is supported by natural biodiversity, which plays a critical role in ensuring that en￾vironmental and food production remain balanced in the face of ecological stress. Nanobased 
products and procedures are constantly being created and deployed in order to solve the is￾sues raised by the inherent unpredictability that affects food security (Rice and Garcia, 2011). 
Nanoparticles are increasingly being used in a wide variety of items because of their more 
effective activity than their bulk counterparts (Jeevanandam et al., 2018). Nanoparticles and 
their composites have so attracted equal attention in the fields of agriculture and food safety 
measures because of their developing properties. Nanoparticles are revolutionizing modern 
farming by enabling farmers to get the most out of their available resources by increasing pro￾duction to the highest possible level. Several nanomaterials including nanotubes, nanowires, 
and nanoclays have a unique surface area and both electrical and optical properties that offer 
them a good sensitivity, rapid response, and improved detection limits (Yaqoob et al., 2020; 
Kumbhakar et al., 2014). The use of nanoparticles as carriers for dynamic elements is becom￾ing increasingly common in current agriculture systems. The unwanted goods of agriculture 
are also used as nanocomposites that have enhanced mechanical and physical properties and 
are used for manufacturing commitments. The practical advantages of nanotechnology for 
pesticide risk assessment and for the production of nano fertilizer still require considerable 
research (Chen and Yada, 2011; de Oliveira et al., 2014; Amenta et al., 2015). Nanoparticles 
have a wide range of effects on the environment, but this chapter focuses on how these mate￾rials interact with plants and the surrounding environment.
2. Sources of nanomaterials
Nanomaterials are primarily retrieved from three major sources and have been classified 
into three categories. (1) Incidental nanomaterials are formed as a derivative of industrial pro￾cesses and from some natural processes such as forest fires, volcano eruptions. (2) Engineered 3. Classification of nanoparticles 163
nanomaterials which are produced by humans with enhanced properties of nanomaterials 
for desired application, and (3) Naturally produced nanomaterials are found in plants, an￾imals, and humans. Molecules contain atoms and serve as fundamental units of both liv￾ing and nonliving organisms; these atoms have been naturally deployed and converted into 
nanoparticles and play a crucial role. Both incidental and naturally arising nanoparticles are 
constantly produced and dispersed via ground and surface water content, soil, and atmo￾spheric air. In general, created nanoparticles are more ordered than incidental nanoparticles, 
and furthermore engineered nanoparticles are designed to showcase the distinctive property 
of their small size. This suggests that humans interact directly with synthetic nanomaterials 
because the metal nanoparticles are self-assembled from synthetic components (Jeevanandam 
et al., 2018).
3. Classification of nanoparticles
Nanomaterials are widely recognized as four major categories based on the materials such 
as carbon and other inorganic materials.
3.1 Carbon-based nanomaterials
This type of nanomaterials has carbon as a major component and originates in various 
morphologies such as spheres, hollow tubes, ellipsoids, graphene, carbon black, carbon nano￾fibers, and carbon onions. These carbon-based nanomaterials can be made using various 
techniques, including chemical vapor deposition, laser ablation, and arc discharge (Kumar 
et al., 2016). The release of carbon-based nanomaterials to the environment via atmospheric 
deposition, surface runoff, and agricultural application will increase the deposition of car￾bon nanoparticles in the soil at higher concentrations owing to the poor migratory nature 
(Mukherjee et al., 2016). Plants play a critical role in the passage of nanoparticles in the envi￾ronment via uptake and bioaccumulation of carbon-based nanoparticles via the food chain 
in all types of ecosystems (Rico et al., 2011). The increased accretion of nanoparticles in plant 
bodies may affect the plant growth, physiology by preventing the seed germination, altering 
gene expression, and increasing the generation of ROS (hydrogen peroxide, singlet oxygen, 
and hydroxyl radical) that induce macromolecule oxidation subsequently leads cell death 
(Mukherjee et al., 2016). Carbon-based nanoparticles have been shown to greatly stimulate 
plant growth in a number of investigations. The use of nanocarbons in the manufacturing 
of nanofertilizers improves soil nature, which improves plant nutrition and minimizes nu￾trient losses. Fullerenes are a type of carbon-based nanomaterial that has been utilized to 
help seeds germinate better. For example, the application of fullerenes in the aqueous natures 
(10–500mg/L) or by soil assimilation did not disturb the seed germination of wheat, rice, 
and cucumber. According to the findings, the absence of fullerenes affects seed germination 
via altering the permeability of the seed coat. Another study carried out by Liu et al. (2010)
stated that malonic acid (FMAD, C70(C(COOH)2)4–8) one the fullerenes derivative did not 
disturb the sprouting of Arabidopsis thaliana and effectively protect the seed coat. This type of 
nanomaterials effectively interacts with both rhizospheric and soil microbes thus, it highly in￾fluences the growth and development of crops. The accumulation of carbon-based nanopar￾ticles in certain crops’ tissues significantly reduces the growth of zucchini and effectively 
up-regulates the genes responsible for stress in tomato plants (Khodakovskaya et al., 2011). 164 9. Interaction of nanoparticles and nanocomposite
The carbon-based nanoparticles increase roots’ growth rate and increase the global histone 
acetylation in Oryza sativa roots (Yan et al., 2016).
3.2 Inorganic-based nanoparticles
These types of nanoparticles are included all the metal oxide nanoparticles like silver, gold, 
and other metal oxides, including titanium oxide (TiO2) and zinc oxide (ZnO) nanomateri￾als and semiconductors like silicon and ceramics. The widely used metal nanoparticles like 
gold, silver, aluminum, copper, Zinc etc. are effectively influence the chemical and biological 
routes in plants. For example, the high concentration of gold nanoparticles (Au-NPs) highly 
influences ethylene, leading to the production of a number of leaves in plants. It also induces 
the absorption of ethylene which increases the seed production. Another controversy studies 
have reported that the increased concentration of Au-NPs significantly reduces the rate of 
germination. In B. juncea, accumulation of Au-NPs influence the seed germination in addi￾tion, other phenomenon like darkening of roots and reduced biomass were also reported 
(Feichtmeier et al., 2015). The chemically synthesized silver nanoparticle (Ag-NPs) signifi￾cantly induces the oxidative stress and damage also effectively decreases the growth of roots 
in Oryza sativa (Nair and Chung, 2014). In another study, it was reported that the increased 
concentrations of green-synthesized Ag-NPs promote the root and shoot growth and increase 
the seedling length and biomass. The accumulation of silver ions in the root system induces 
the production of plant growth hormones at high dose; thus it effectively decreases the ROS 
production. The increased level of metallothionenin in plants reduces the toxicity of the sil￾ver via the formation of complex, reducing the ROS generation (Siddiqi and Husen, 2021). 
Several metal-based nanoparticles show both positive and negative impact on plants (Husen, 
2020a,b). The up-taking abilities of nanoparticles by various plants vary based on the diversity 
of morphology and physiology (Monica and Cremonini, 2009). For example, the up-taking 
mechanism of nanoparticles via root and vascular morphologies reaches inside of the plant 
tissues (Zhu et al., 2012). The interactions of the nanoparticles with plants are recognized as 
the first step of the accretion of nanoparticles in plants (Nair et al., 2010). The interactions 
of CuO-nanoparticles are initiated via adsorption on the surface of plant root and moder￾ately through mechanical adhesion. The adsorbed CuO nanoparticles do not be desorbed by 
opposing ions (Zhou et al., 2011). Larue et al. (2012) exposed that the accumulation of TiO2
nanoparticles in wheat roots is eventually distributed throughout the plant tissues without 
suspension of crystal phase modification. The study on the accumulation of Au nanoparticles 
in the root of four plant species indicated that the radish and ryegrass roots show a higher 
accumulation of Au nanoparticles than the rice. The study carried out by Lin and Xing (2007)
reported that the nanoparticle accumulation on the roots of plants significantly induces the 
elongation on six higher plant species including (radish, rape, lettuce, corn, cucumber, and 
ryegrass). Among the various types of nanoparticles Ag nanoparticles are have great atten￾tion owing to their intensive application in several products including antimicrobial agents, 
soap, toothpaste, and wastewater treatment (Boxall et al., 2007; Rai et al., 2018; Wijnhoven 
et al., 2009; Chandler et al., 2021). Owing to the wide range of applications, nanoparticles 
were produced promptly among which the US itself produced about 2500 tons/year of Ag 
nanoparticles of which about 150 tons were used in manure slurry (Khaydarov et al., 2009; 
El-Temsah and Joner, 2012), through the sludge and surface water Ag nanoparticles may cer￾tainly reach roots of the plants.5. Types of nanomaterials based on their source 165
3.3 Organic-based nanomaterials
Organic matter is combined with inorganic nanoparticles to create this form of 
nanoparticle. The nanoparticles show weak interactions and the design of particles that 
assist the production of preferred structures including micelles, liposomes, and polymers 
nanoparticles.
3.4 Composite-based nanomaterials
Nanocomposite is multiphase nanoparticles with one phase on the nanoscale element that 
can also combine nanoparticles with bulk-type materials and more complicated structures 
including metal-organic frameworks. This type of nanocomposite may be a combination of 
carbon-based or metal-based and organic-based nanomaterials with ceramic, polymer, metal, 
and bulk materials.
4. Organization of nanomaterials based on their sizes
Nanoparticles created at the nanoscale, based on size, will help many countries’ com￾mercial growth. Several types of nanoparticles have been reported, and they are classi￾fied based on their crystalline morphologies and natural arrangement. In 2007, Pokropivny 
and Skorokhod reported the novel arrangement of organization for nanomaterials which 
comprised the established composite such as 0D, 1D, 2D, and 3D nanomaterials (Tiwari 
et al., 2012; Pokropivny and Skorokhod, 2007). The capability to envisage the properties 
of nanomaterials strongly governs the grouping of nanomaterials. The grain boundary en￾gineering concept in Glieter’s arrangement characterized the nanoparticles based on the 
grain boundaries. The traditional inner size effects, reduction on melting point, and dis￾tribution augmentation will be gained via grain boundary engineering. The arrangements 
of nanoparticles by Pokropivny and Skorokhod suggested the nanomaterials based on the 
shape of the particle, dimensionality as per surface engineering concept (Pokropivny and 
Skorokhod, 2007).
5. Types of nanomaterials based on their source
In addition to size and shape, nanoparticles are categorized into two major classes based 
on their origin such as synthetic and natural.
(i) Natural nanomaterials can be made from organic or anthropogenic sources, depending 
on the process. The manufactures of the artificial surface with micro and nanoscale 
patterns and also have properties for industrial applications are easily produced 
from natural sources. The naturally synthesized nanoparticles are existing either 
on the surface of the earth and in the Earth’s, spheres including atmosphere (whole 
troposphere), hydrosphere (oceans, rivers, lakes, and groundwater), and lithosphere 
(rocks, soils, and lava). The biosphere of the earth includes both low and higher 
organisms ranging from microorganisms to humans (Hochella Jr. et al., 2015; Sharma 
et al., 2015; Wagner et al., 2014).166 9. Interaction of nanoparticles and nanocomposite
(ii) Synthetic nanomaterial; synthetic or manually produced nanoparticles belong to this 
category. Processes like mechanical grinding, physical, chemical, and biological methods 
are often used for the production of synthetic nanomaterials. In modern eras, there is 
an improved assembly and succeeding discharge of engineered nanoparticles that may 
be used in consumer products and industrialized uses. This risk valuation strategy 
is enhancing the forecasting comportment and fate of engineered nanomaterials in 
innumerable ecological sources (Duhan, 2017).
6. Types of nanoparticles related to plants
The agriculture field is getting more benefit from the recent advantages and techniques 
which give a strong solution to combat severe problems (Kumar et al., 2021a,b, 2022; Sharma 
et al., 2021a,b). The nanomaterials-based new technologies will become more capable and 
less pollutant nano formulations are often manufactured for viable cultivation (Fraceto et al., 
2016). These types of new-age materials can alter the physiology of the plants followed by 
the entry of nanoparticles in the plant system (Husen, 2020a,b). Furthermore, it is mandatory 
to have critical knowledge of the interaction between plants and nanoparticles for the metic￾ulous distribution of potent molecules. Understanding this knowledge could provide novel 
avenues for developing effective nanoparticle-based products (Batley et al., 2013). The up￾take mechanism of nanoparticles into the plants is highly influenced by their size, functional 
group that is doped on their surface, and chemical compositions. The interaction and uptake 
of the nanomaterials can alter the physiology of the plant via changing their molecular com￾positions (Jin et al., 2017). The carbon-based nanomaterial such as multiwalled carbon tubes 
significantly enhances the growth of tobacco cells in an exclusive molecular mechanism. The 
triggered genetic factors such as CycB, NtLRX1, and tobacco aquaporin (NtPIP1) are highly 
complicated in cell division, cell wall extension (Khodakovskaya et al., 2012). The capability 
of the nanomaterials to enter into the firm seed’s coat allows water importation for improved 
development and potency. In addition, the seed grooming method and nanotechnology are 
used as a new approach and incorporated to yield a large number of crops (Acharya et al., 
2020; Anand et al., 2020). The study stated that the use of multi-walled carbon nanotubes also 
disturbs the development of some important crops including barley, soybeans, and corn. The 
high accumulation of multi-walled carbon nanotubes in the endosperm of the seed was exam￾ined by Raman spectrum and TEM imaging, later the dispersion of nanoparticles to different 
plant parts and are interacts with prominent cellular machinery to enhance the plant growth 
(Lahiani et al., 2013). Nanoparticles synthesized from mesoporous silica effectively increase 
the photosynthesis by interacting with the other photosynthetic components such as chloro￾plast enhanced the seed germination, improved total proteins and chlorophyll contents. The 
high concentration of carbon-nanotubes does not report any negative impact and also it does 
not prompt oxidative stress in any of the plants (Sun et al., 2016). Silica nanoparticles play 
a dynamic role in providing nutrition to the plants and are also responsible for both biotic 
and abiotic stress. Though it assists to enrich the consequence of drought stress and upsurge 
the biomass in stress-affected plants (Ahmad et al., 2007). The preparation of silica nanopar￾ticles (SiO2 NPs) from rice husk shows a better response toward the maize plants, where 6. Types of nanoparticles related to plants 167
the uptake of silica nanoparticles was improved, and the roots were extended in the maize 
plants which assistances them to endure drought circumstances. Root segmenting of the 
maize plants also revealed the direct uptake of silica nanoparticles and accumulation in the 
epidermis cells (Suriyaprabha et al., 2012). Rastogi et al. (2019) reported the detailed influence 
of silica nanoparticles on agriculture. Titanium nanoparticles (TiO2 NPs) are other potential 
nanobased materials that significantly promote plant growth in canola (Brassica napus) via en￾hanced seed germination and potency. The maximum consequence at 1200–1500mg/L shows 
the better plumule growth and large radicle than control (Mahmoodzadeh et al., 2013). The 
accumulation of the tiny amount of TiO2 NPs is noticed in most of the plants compared with 
larger particles and these can lead to the impact of miRNA levels in those plants and pledgee 
the growth-promoting pathways (Boykov et al., 2019). Table 1 shows the widely used metal 
nanoparticles and their application in agriculture cultivation. Fe nanoparticles show better 
activity on Capsicum annum. It also increases the growth with minimal dose by increasing the 
chloroplast and grana staking. In contrast, at higher concentrations, it causes some harmful 
effects to the plants (Yuan et al., 2018). Other metal oxide nanoparticles, including ZnO and 
Cu nanoparticles, influence seeds’ germination in Vigna mungo (Raja et al., 2019). Platinum 
nanoparticles are less studied compared with other nanoparticles and chitosan nanoparticles 
are another widely used nanocomposite that shows an influence on seed germination and 
growth via uplifting the plant growth hormone indole-3-acetic acid (IAA) on Triticum aes￾tivum (Li et al., 2019).
TABLE 1 Agricultural application of some selected nanoparticles.
Nanoparticle Application in agriculture Reference
CuO Used as Biosensor for exposure of Aspergillus niger fungus Etefagh et al. (2013)
CuO Used as antifungal agent against pathogen like Colletotrichum 
gloeosporioides
Oussou-Azo et al. (2020)
Cu-TiO2 Effectively used as an electrochemical sensor for the recognition of 
methyl parathion pesticide
Tian et al. (2018)
CuO, ZnO Enhances bifenthrin insecticide uptake compared with only 
bifenthrin exposure
Li et al. (2020a,b)
SiO2 Widely used as nanofertilizer on Maize cultivation Elnaggar et al. (2020)
SiO2 Used as an effective Insecticide against leafworm (Spodoptera littoralis) Ayoub et al. (2017)
TiO2 Antifungal activity against wheat rust Irshad et al. (2020)
ZnO Used as effective insecticide also improves thiamethoxam insecticidal 
activity
Jameel et al. (2020)
ZnO Low concentration of Zn leads Remediation and fortification of rice Bala et al. (2019)
ZnO Used in quantum dot Sensor to determine the pesticide in water Sahoo et al. (2018)
ZnO Used and potent fungicidal agents against number of pathogenic 
fungi
Ahmad et al. (2020)168 9. Interaction of nanoparticles and nanocomposite
7. Cerium NPs (CeO NPs)
Nanoceria is a type of nanoparticle that belongs to the family of CeO nanoparticles shows 
an extensive range of uses. Owing to their effective antioxidant property it has been used 
in biomedical industries. In plants, the exposure of nanoceria shows broad implications on 
plant health, being contingent on the dose, surface charge, coating, and growth condition 
(Milenkovic et al., 2019). However, it also causes severe effects on plants. The potential interac￾tion of nanoparticles with the nano-bio interface leads to the tolerance against numerous abi￾otic stresses of plants via changeable and crucial pathways (Saxena et al., 2016). For example, 
abiotic stress leads to the generation of (ROS) and subsequently decreases the photosynthetic 
process in plants that lead the biomedical oxidation (Wakeel et al., 2020).
Moreover, the CeO2 nanoparticles with other metals like Ce3 +/
Ce4 + mimic superoxide dis￾mutase and produce hydrogen peroxide that also mimics catalysis activity at a low Ce3 +/
Ce4 +
ratio that indicated that their capability to scavenge the free radicals (Wang et al., 2012a,b; 
Ma et al., 2015; Pulido-Reyes et al., 2015). The other stress like heat, excess of light, and dark 
chilling also extend the oxidative scavenging effect and leads to a considerable decrease in the 
production of photosystem II and chlorophyll subsequently changes the plant morphology 
(Chen et al., 2020; Gao et al., 2020). The maintenance of ion ratio such as Na+/K+ is signifi￾cantly influences the stress of salinity, CeO nanoparticles effectively enhance the tolerance 
against salinity stress, and directly affects the generation of hydroxyl radical by which it in￾hibits the transport of K+ ions through the plasma membrane of mesophyll and increases 
the photosynthetic performance of the plants (Wu et al., 2018). Owing to the ability of CeO2
nanoparticles on catalytic scavenging it has been widely used to manage drought stress. The 
extremely competent action on drought stress was reported in sorghum plants at low concen￾trations (10mg/L). The elevated level of ROS and lipid peroxidase improved the assimilation 
of carbon rates as well as germination of pollen. The salinity stress on the seeding stage is also 
enhanced by CeO nanoparticles (Djanaguiraman et al., 2018). The doping of CeO2 nanoparti￾cles with poly-acrylic acid enhanced the seed germination in salinity stress at a concentration 
of 500mg/L in water at 24h incubation (An et al., 2020).
The nature of the soil is also a critical factor and plays a vital role in the interaction of CeO2
nanoparticles with plants and soil microbes. The higher organic content of the soil enhanced 
the availability of the CeO2 nanoparticles to Phaseolus vulgaris var. red hawk (Rico et al., 2011), 
and also the raw materials in the soil may intermingle with CeO2 and alter the uptake by 
plants (Guo et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2018). The texture soil highly influences the transport 
of CeO2 nanoparticles and the adsorption by the surface coating of CeO2 nanoparticles. The 
positively charged CeO2 shows a resilient attraction toward the kaolin (Zhang et al., 2018). 
However, there is a need to understand the distinctive role of both extrinsic and intrinsic fac￾tors in modifying the uptake mechanism and regulation of complex interaction between the 
nanoparticles and plants in the rhizosphere; it would help to explore the uptake mechanism 
and transportation of nanoparticles in different plant tissues.
8. Silicon NPs (SiNPs)
Silicon nanoparticles are highly interacting with both plants and soils that deliberate phys￾iological and morphological changes by which it enhances the tolerance against various bi￾otic and abiotic stresses. Silicon (Si) is the second most lavish component on earth and has 9. Titanium dioxide NPs (TiO2 NPs) 169
extended substantial significance in agriculture. Silicon is deliberated as both an essential and 
non-essential component for plants because it does not directly influence the plant growth, 
though the presence of these nanoparticles may help the plants to get considerable benefit 
against stress (Luyckx et al., 2017). It also provides beneficial effects including increasing the 
biomass, physiology, and anatomy of plants and modifying the plant tissues to activate the 
defense mechanism which supports in adapting to stress environments (Babajani et al., 2019). 
Silicon nanoparticles exhibited a very good anti-stress effect at different doses toward abiotic 
stress in Hawthorns. Based on the concentration of silicon nanoparticles, responses varied 
in the seedling and different stages of drought stress. These effects exclusively improved 
the photosynthetic ability, and elevated the level of chlorophylls, proline, and carotenoids 
(Ashkavand et al., 2015). This improved tolerance of plants in a salty atmosphere deliberated 
by the utilization of silicon nanoparticles via accumulation of proline, it helps to sustain ionic 
stability and enhance the antioxidant system (Soleymanzadeh et al., 2020).
In addition, silicon nanoparticles significantly increase the water use efficiency of plants 
under salt stress and also increase the transpiration rate, stomatal conductance (Haghighi and 
Pessarakli, 2013). The use of silicon nanoparticles in strawberry plants shows improved epi￾cuticle wax erection and viscosity than other salt-stressed plants. The study on sweet pepper 
with silicon nanoparticles enhances the salt stress with substantial variations in association to 
their bulk counterpart (Avestan et al., 2019; Tantawy et al., 2015). The supplement of silicon 
nanoparticles to the plants with low concentration for weeks results in improved biomass. 
The dose-dependent activity on potato plants revealed the different salt stress; at low concen￾tration it shows better stress ameliorations (Gowayed et al., 2017). Plant hormones also play a 
crucial role in peripheral stress circumstances and the improved alteration to diverse altering 
ecological situations (Raja et al., 2019). For instance, the Gibberellin has a significant role in 
plant response against innumerable abiotic stresses such as, flooding, heat, and droughts 
are responsible for reducing plant growth (Colebrook et al., 2014). Plant hormones are also 
utilized with nanomaterials, for example, the mesoporous silica entangling abscisic acid was 
used on A. thaliana for sustained discharge of hormones and additional enhanced drought 
resistance (Sun et al., 2018).
9. Titanium dioxide NPs (TiO2 NPs)
The application of nanotechnology becomes a new approach to enhance the growth and 
performance of plants under abiotic stress. Owing to their tiny size and unique quality; thus, 
nanoparticles have been used in various applications (Duhan, 2017). TiO2 nanoparticles show 
a significant impact on morphological, biochemical, and physiological properties in some 
plant species. For instance, the exposure of TiO2 nanoparticles effectively increases the level 
of chlorophyll by altering the antioxidant mechanism which results in the reduced level of 
hydrogen peroxide, malondialdehyde, and assembly of proline to maintain the osmotic bal￾ance (Abdel Latef et al., 2018). Also, the activation of the expression of non-coding RNA by 
TiO2 also influences the abiotic stress-resistance mechanism. The study reported by Frazier 
et al. (2014) suggested that the expression of 11 conserved miRNA in tobacco seedlings in 
the presence of TiO2 nanoparticles also rescues plants from the heavy metal stress. Lei et al. 
(2008) reported that the improved action of antioxidant enzymes, photosynthetic rate, and 
formation of chlorophyll in crop species in the presence of TiO2 nanoparticles subsequently 
enhance the yield.170 9. Interaction of nanoparticles and nanocomposite
Another study, Abdel Latef et al., 2018 stated an optimistic effect of TiO2 nanoparticles in 
plants under saline conditions. It effectively increases plant growth, soluble sugars, proline 
content, and antioxidant enzyme activities. Khan (2016) reported the mitigation of salt stress 
by TiO2 nanoparticles in tomatoes for the improvement of agronomic traits, chlorophyll con￾tent in leaves. It also increases the antioxidant capacity, phenolic content to enhance the yield. 
TiO2 nanoparticles are widely used as a potent stimulating agent and activate the diverse 
defense mechanisms complicated in the plant tolerance (Lei et al., 2008). Under various en￾vironmental conditions, the effect of TiO2 nanoparticles may vary on different plants based 
on the concentration (Feizi et al., 2012). Compared with other nanoparticles TiO2 in plants 
shows toxic effects at high concentrations in plants at various stages. Therefore, the size and 
technique of handling, mechanism of uptake, reactivity, and translocation of nanoparticles 
into different plant parts could regulate nanoparticles’ intrusion with metallic activities (Nair 
et al., 2010; Mattiello, 2015; Rastogi et al., 2017).
Water deficit is one of the major issues in plant cultivation and is also responsible for dam￾age of potency and cause unadorned injury to the crops. The application of TiO2 significantly 
improves the hydration of plants thus enhances the activity of nitrate reductase enzymes. 
The high level of nitrate reductase enzyme leads to the production of nitric oxide subse￾quently leads to the induction of proline and glycine betaine synthesis (Khan et al., 2020). A 
TiO2 nanoparticle enhanced both enzymatic and non-enzymatic defense mechanisms against 
stress in plants and also regulates the other enzymes including glutamate hydrogenase, glu￾tamine synthase that is responsible for the accumulation of nutrients and essential oil produc￾tion (Ahmad et al., 2018). The treatment of TiO2 in plants shows a profound effect on essential 
oil production under normal conditions (Gohari et al., 2020).
10. Nano pesticides
Plants and their products are utilized by most of the populations all over the world for their 
survival; hence it has a great concern to enhance productivity and to care for health. A num￾ber of biotic and abiotic factors have been associated with plants including pathogen, soil/
air pollution, and nutrient deficiency that effectively influence the health of the plant and are 
also responsible for damages of plant parts which lead to reduced crop and fruit yield (Husen, 
2021a,b). The occurrence of plant diseases by microorganisms or pests and insects highly in￾fluences the yield in agriculture crops, because it may demolish the growth of crops and also 
stored food; therefore it deteriorates the value of food. As per US Environmental Protection 
Agency, pesticides are the “substance that deliberately prevent, repel and demolish and pests”. 
Generally, insecticides are widely used to improve the yield and also can protect plants from 
harmful factors (Jampílek and Králová, 2017). Though, the application of pesticides may cause 
fatal and noxious effects to the environment and also affects the health of humans and animals. 
Hence, various insecticides are excluded by both national and international authorities.
The application of insecticides at maximum concentrations damages the environment, ag￾gregate the bioaccumulation, disturbing its microbiota (Meena et al., 2020). Recent years’ syn￾thesis of active and nontoxic insecticides with aid of nanotechnology provides an amended 
solution (Sasson et  al., 2007). Nanotechnology has a substantial influence on drug delivery. 
With advanced techniques of nanotechnology that have been used as a promising application 10. Nano pesticides 171
in the farming and food sector, it is also used to minimize waste, enhance the food quality, 
plant growth, and worldwide food manufacture (Jampílek and Králová, 2017). The widely used 
nanopesticides, nanoherbicides, and nanofertilizers are depicted in the Table 2. Nanostructured 
alumina (NSA) synthesized via nanoengineered materials used as an effective insecticide. The 
process of oxidation metal exposure to the fixed electric charge makes the formation of nano￾structured alumina and it can combat insects. Insects have an electric charge due to triboelec￾trification. This tribo-charge exchange energy of electrification is produced by non-conductive 
bodies. The exciting method of action of NSA take benefit of insect tribo-charging is accom￾plished in dualistic unique phases; initially, the negatively charged NSA particles triggers the 
binding of the positive charge of insects via a strong sorptive stuff of NSA particles which 
detach from the cuticle layer of insect then its leads the death of insects due to dehydration 
(Stadler et al., 2018).
The nanobased pesticides are used as a potent supplement for both the original and insect￾resistant transgenic crop (Bt-cotton). Bt-Cotton was designed to battle their pest bollworm. 
The insecticidal activity of nanoparticles specifically Cu nanoparticles at minimum concentra￾tion (10mg/L) shows the potent insecticidal activity on Bt cotton which significantly increase 
the expression of microbial proteins of B. thuringiensis which coded production of Bt toxin in 
plant tissues and enhances the resistance (Zhao et al., 2012). The TiO2 and ZnO nanoparticles 
are effectively used in tomato plants during spot diseases. Both nanoparticles act as effective 
antimicrobial agents, when exposed to high light, it generates electrons in the existence of 
oxygen and synthesis superoxide radicals via electron transfer. It also shows good inhibitory 
activity on various microbes thus having potent antimicrobial efficacy on X. perforans (Paret 
et al., 2013). The interaction of pesticides and soil may alter the biochemical process which is 
mainly activated by soil microorganisms. Soils also have a number of enzymes, immobilized, 
extracellular, intracellular entities which are responsible for the soil quality and highly influ￾ence the disintegration of nutrient elements and organic matter (Karaca et al., 2011).
TABLE 2 Widely used nano fertilizer in various agriculture crops.
Nano fertilizer Plants Application
Citric-acid-coated 
nano-Fe2O
Soybean Exposure of citric-acid-coated nano-Fe2O3 effectively improve the 
length of root and photosynthetic rate
Cu-chitosan NPs Maize Enhanced maize seedling via increased the α-amylase and the 
starch content
FeOXNPs Lettuce (Lactuca sativa) Effectively improve the length of shoot in lettuce
Fe2O3NPs Soybean (Glycine max L. 
Oxley)
Increase the level of chlorophyll content in hydroponically 
cultivated soybean
MgNPs Black-eyed pea Significantly increased photosynthesis
MgONPs Tobacco Enhance the activity of SOD and POD in grown in matrix media
ZnONPs Mung bean (Vigna 
radiata)
Exposure of Zn NPs increased biomass of the roots
ZnONPs Maize ZnONPs effectively enhances the percentage of seed germination172 9. Interaction of nanoparticles and nanocomposite
Currently, two types of nanobased materials such as copper and silver nanoparticles are 
used as commercial agrochemicals in the market. Copper nano pesticides are used as an ef￾fective fungicide against various infections on fruit trees, vegetables, and crops. The colloidal 
silver nanoparticles are used for the treatment of various function infections on vegetative 
plants (He et al., 2019). Copper plays a key role in essential nutrients for living organisms and 
plants. Some of the copper-based insecticides are widely used in organic agricultural filed 
as potent antimicrobial agents on grapes, and other fruits. Copper-based insecticides such 
as hydroxide, cuprous oxide, copper chloride, and copper octanoate are widely used owing 
to their solubility which favors phytotoxicity and reduce the importunity of the plant leaves, 
fruits as best fungicide agents. The fixed copper nanoparticles effectively adherence to leaves 
and discharge the copper ions, hence the copper nanoparticles are rapidly industrialized to 
increase the quality (He et al., 2019). Table 3 depicted the widely used metal nanoparticle and 
their action on plants.
TABLE 3 Widely used metal nanoparticles and the important action on plants.
Type of 
nanoparticles Plant Action Reference
Ag sorghum (Sorghum 
bicolor)
Act as effective fungicidal activity against 
agricultural pathogens
Paulkumar et al. (2014)
Ag Lettuce (Lactuca sativa) Ag NPs were imprisoned in lettuce leaves Larue et al. (2014)
Ag Mung bean (Phaseolus 
radiates) and sorghum 
(Sorghum bicolor)
Affect Seedling growth presence of Ag 
in soil media affects the growth rate of P. 
radiatus
Lee et al. (2012)
Ag. Carrot (Daucus carota) Affect seed germination and increased 
chlorophyll, and H2O2 content
Park and Ahn (2016)
Au Arabidopsis thaliana Improve the yield and seed germination 
rate, and also enhance radical scavenging 
activity
Tymoszuk and Miler 
(2019)
Au Brassica juncea Enhances length of plant and abridged 
sugar content
Arora et al. (2012)
Chitosan doping 
with Cu and 
salicylic acid
Maize Used as nano fertilizer for obtaining higher 
crop yield
Sharma et al. (2020)
Cu nanowires Alfalfa Plants It significantly influenced the physiological 
performance in plants
Cota-Ruiz et al. (2020)
Cu NPs Monilinia fructicola Acts as effective fungicides with synergic 
action
Malandrakis et al. (2020)
Fe, Cu, Ni Triticum vulgare Fe NPs induce development and also 
caused toxic effects on growth
Mikhailovna Korotkova 
et al. (2017)
Phytochemical 
capped Au NPs
Maize Enhanced the germination of aged maize 
seed
Mahakham et al. (2016)12. Interaction of NMs with soil and rhizosphere 173
11. Nanoemulsion
Nanoemulsion is composed of oil-in-water act as an effective pesticide and is distributed 
as nanodroplets in water. The foremost benefit of the Nanoemulsion is highly increased sol￾ubility of the pesticide’s active constituents. For example, the Nanoemulsion of neem oil il￾lustrates the tranquil uptake with decreased size of droplet (Anjali et  al., 2012). The high 
efficiency of the permethrin Nanoemulsion is used against yellow fever mosquitoes and 
also enhances the uptake mechanism (Kumar et al., 2013). For instance, the coarse emulsion 
against cotton bollworm and Nanoemulsion of chlorpyrifos are used as commercially avail￾able (Qi-liang et al., 2006).
12. Interaction of NMs with soil and rhizosphere
The term rhizosphere was coined by Lorenz Hiltner as the zone of soil with rich in mi￾crobes that are highly influence the root system of the plants. The microbes’ rich rhizosphere 
has abundant nutrients such as nitrogen and phosphorous (Burke et al., 2015). The relation￾ship between the plants and microbes on the rhizosphere modify the plants nature. Basically 
rhizosphere has three parts endorhizosphere which has cortical layer of root tissues, rhizo￾plane is another part present on the root surface along with endodermis and the final part ec￾torhizosphere present near the root (Badri and Vivanco, 2009). The inhabited microorganism 
of rhizosphere with metabolites, and specific chemical agents, hence they mediate the inter￾action of plants, microbes and pathogen and soil. Rhizosphere microbes can also influence the 
soil nature, productivity and yield (Fig. 1). Nanomaterials have both positive and negative 
impacts with plants and rhizosphere communities (Raffi and Husen, 2019). The larger amount 
of nanoparticles in soil cause hazardous effects on environment (Eduok et al., 2013). The other 
component including physicochemistry, growth medium, concentrations are highly influence 
the interaction of nanoparticles on microbes (Haris and Ahmad, 2017; Raffi and Husen, 2019; 
FIG. 1 Depicted the interaction of nanoparticle in the rhizosphere and plants.174 9. Interaction of nanoparticles and nanocomposite
Wagay et al., 2019). Owing to the colloidal nature of the nanoparticles which make difficult 
in their uptake, therefore they are alleged to exert toxicity (Kloepfer et al., 2005). The produc￾tion of free radicals by nanoparticles also impede microorganism by cell-wall and nuclear 
damage, biofilm biosynthesis and lipid peroxidation (Pelletier et al., 2010). Recent days, the 
nanoparticles on rhizosphere penetrate into soils and may enter the food chains and living 
organisms. The biological process including nitrogen fixation, potassium uptake, and ionic 
homeostasis, within rhizosphere are worse affected by deposition of nanoparticles (Huang 
et al., 2005). Copper nanoparticle show significant effect on plant growth, as essential micro￾nutrients, but at the increased level of copper ions in the soil may causes hazardous effect. 
The plant itself develops various mechanisms to maintain the homeostasis by regulating the 
uptake of copper ions. It also increases the production of root exudates via regulating the 
bioavailability of copper (Michaud et al., 2007; Clemens, 2001). The increased accumulation 
or demands of nanomaterials are highly influence the production of crops. The most of the 
accumulated nanoparticles into the environment leads the nanopolution. About, 63%–91% 
of nanomaterials are directly introduced into the landfills as byproducts of industrial waste 
(Maurer-Jones et al., 2013; Keller et al., 2010). The introduction of nanoparticles in the soil 
environment via sludge and effluents and enters into the soil in their original form, though 
owing to the rich organically rich and reactive environment (Gallego-Urrea et al., 2010).
13. Interaction of NMs with overall environment
In the ultrafine particle, nanomaterials are present in the airs that are generated from vari￾ous physical processes including erosion to fuel combustion. The nanoparticle present in soil 
are termed as colloids these naturally occurring nanoparticles as well the synthetic nanoma￾terials present in the environment are extensively distributed in atmosphere, soil, water sur￾face and also living organism (Bundschuh et al., 2018). For instance, the volcanic eruptions, 
photochemical reactions, radioactive decay, and forest fires, are the major natural process 
that generates nanoparticles and releasing into the environment. In urban areas, industrial 
and vehicular emissions are the primary source of releasing nanoparticles into the environ￾ments (Sharma et al., 2019; Griffin et al., 2018). The synthesis of nanoparticles in a specific 
method show high catalytic activity and sustain various environmental conditions. The dif￾ferent shape and size of the nanoparticles are differing compared with naturally occurring 
one. For instance, the synthesis of various metal nanoparticles including Au-NPs, Ag-NPs, 
Cu-NPs, ZnO-NPs and Se-NPs are widely used in various types of sectors. The presence 
of these nanoparticles in the soil microbial ecosystem remains suspended and extended for 
long periods in the form of dust in the air (Ermolin et al., 2018). The commercially-produced 
nanomaterials are often discharged into the aquatic medium these nanomaterials slowly mi￾grate to both ground and surface water environment that can later be taken up in plants and 
animals (Fig. 2). Silicon nanoparticles are also distributed to the atmosphere from volcanic 
eruption, these silicon dioxide nanomaterials may lead eye irritation (Lungu et  al., 2015). 
Mercury nanoparticles are also suspended in air and can easily migrate into other natural 
resourced including soil and water (Ghoshdastidar and Ariya, 2019). The mobility of nano￾materials including hydroxides and oxides are present with other trace elements in the water. 
The bioavailability of the essential and toxic metal ions in natural water bodies may form 14. Factors influencing the uptake and translocation of NPs 175
complexation with other complex. The external factors such as ionic strength, pH, signifi￾cantly influence the interaction of nanoparticles with environment and this interaction is 
widely studied to insights the impact of nanomaterials in soil (Hochella et al., 2019). Sustain 
of nanoparticles in the soil can impact the rhizosphere subsequently in the food products; 
however, there is limitation on the study of interaction of nanomaterials in the natural envi￾ronment (Malakar and Snow, 2020).
14. Factors influencing the uptake and translocation of NPs
A number of factors have been associated with the uptake mechanism and transformation 
of nanoparticles in plants and the environment. The transformation of nanoparticles prom￾inently plants physiology and physicochemical properties. The size, shape, surface charge 
also influences the potential interaction of nanoparticles with plants (Pérez-de-Luque, 2017; 
Siddiqi and Husen, 2016, 2017).
Aquatic system
Release of ions
Alter the speciation &
bioavailability
Increase ROS
Production
Alter membrane
permeability
Damage DNA
Influence the
Plant growth, germination
and foliar application
Damage Cell wall
Molecular level Plant system
FIG. 2 Represent the overall interaction of nanoparticles with environmental organism.176 9. Interaction of nanoparticles and nanocomposite
14.1 Size influences in uptake of NPs
The size of the nanoparticles is one of the significant parameters and also influences the 
uptake mechanism in plants. The entry of nanoparticles into the plants is not a difficult pro￾cess, because the obstructions restricted in plants are in the range of μm to nm, hence it can 
make their way through the plants. For example, the cells of foliar epidermis form cuticle 
membranes, the stromata present in the epidermis have two protector cells that form a pore 
ranging from 3 to 12μm extensive and 10 to 30μm length throughout the gaseous exchange. 
This μm wide stromal opening may act as a virtue for the nanoparticle entry. In addition, 
permeation properties of membrane or another layer considerably diverge in the cuticle layer 
on epidermis and trichrome of the stomata, also the amount of cuticle layer present in the leaf 
epidermis with size limited limit in the range of nanometer (Wang et al., 2016). The size of the 
nanoparticles is ranging from 4 to 100nm hence they can easily cross the cuticle by distracting 
the waxy layer (Larue et al., 2014). For instance, the fluorescently tagged nanoparticles are ac￾cumulated in the epidermis (Nadiminti et al., 2013). The polymeric nanoparticles with 43nm 
size are easily penetrating the leaves via stomata (Eichert et al., 2008).
The small-sized nanoparticles are easily penetrated, for example, Fe3O4 nanoparticles are 
entry was observed via TEM studies on Nicotiana benthamiana, the size of the cell walls of 
these plants are in the range of 3.5 to 20nm, mostly around 5nm hence the nanoparticle 
smaller than 5nm can easily cross the cell walls and make interaction with cells (Cai et al., 
2020; Palocci et al., 2017). The size of the nanoparticle within the range of the frontier giving 
the size of the wall pore can cross through it (Wu et al., 2017). Li et al. (2020a,b) reported that 
Ag nanoparticles with a range of 24.8–38.6nm were present in the lettuce leaves and may 
enter via the foliar route of the plant. In addition, the translocation of Ag nanoparticles was 
also reported to explain the biotransformation of AgNO3 in plants. The communication of 
nanoparticles with plant cell walls creates large pores and facilitates the entry of nanoparti￾cles (Carlson et al., 2008). Several studies have been reported that the plant protoplasts are 
effectively utilized as a model to comprehend the uptake mechanism of nanoparticles via the 
cell membrane. Several factors can influence the accretion of large-sized nanoparticles in the 
cell wall as well as cytoplasm of plants. After entry into the plant, nanoparticles have effi￾ciently recognized the way and follow to transport and accumulate. Generally, nanoparticles 
are following two important routes such as apoplast and symplast for moving up and down 
in the plant. The symplastic route allows the nanoparticles via cytoplasm of the two adjacent 
cells, whereas the apoplast routes allow via extracellular space involved in two neighboring 
cell and xylem vessels (Roberts and Oparka, 2003; Sattelmacher, 2001). The cell-to-cell trans￾ports of nanoparticles take place via plasmodesmata which acts as a cytoplasmic bridge to 
enable the undertaking of nanoparticles between adjacent cells.
14.2 Surface charge influence of NPs uptake
Nanoparticles show different surface charges with differential capacity for aggregation 
properties. Hence it has a great degree of freedom for their uptake, entry, and absorptions 
in plants (Juárez-Maldonado et al., 2019; Hotze et al., 2010). In plants, cell membrane pos￾sesses both hydrophobic and hydrophilic constituents with inadequate dispersal of negative 
charges. This negatively charged cell wall acts on the surface for the conversation of ions 14. Factors influencing the uptake and translocation of NPs 177
and encourages the diffusion of cationic rather than anionic nanoparticles (Zeng et al., 2017; 
Meychik et al., 2005). In contrast, the efficiency of transportation is improved by the negatively 
charged nanoparticles. Zhu et al. (2012) reported the surface-charge-dependent uptake of Au 
nanoparticles with much adsorption of positively charged nanoparticles at the root surface. 
Though the negatively charged nanoparticles show an advanced internalization rate. The 
CeO nanoparticles show a positive charge that is sturdily adsorbed on the root surface, while 
the negatively charged CeO2 nanoparticles are accumulated at a very low concentration with 
higher shoot internalization to overcome the electrostatic repulsion (Liu et al., 2019). Also, the 
surface charge-dependent Au nanoparticles uptake is reported by Milewska-Hendel, in addi￾tion, it also reported the transportation of nanoparticles from roots to shoots. The negatively 
charged nanoparticles assist two important routes (symplastic and apoplastic) to transporta￾tion into the vascular system via roots to shoots (Fig. 3) (Milewska-Hendel et al., 2019).
14.3 Anatomical difference and mode of application-related NP uptake
Anatomical or physiological changes of plants are highly associated with the surface 
charge of nanoparticles. This association leads to the accumulation of charged nanoparticles 
in the root and also facilitates the translocation from root to shoot. For instance, the positively 
Symplastic pathway
Epidermis
Co
Xylem
mpanion cells
Cortex
Phloem
Apoplastic pathway
FIG. 3 Represent the uptake and movement of nanoparticles in plants via two important pathways.178 9. Interaction of nanoparticles and nanocomposite
charged cerium oxide nanoparticles are highly associated with dicot plants such as lettuce 
and tomato with large root surface areas. Though, the translocation of cerium nanoparticles 
was detected with impartial and negatively charged nanoparticles (Spielman-Sun et al., 2019; 
de Almeida et al., 2021). This observation suggested that the difference in both anatomical 
and physiology of the plants and influence the uptake patterns and varied patterns of ac￾cretion and absorption of distinctive classes like TiO2, carbon-coated, and Au nanoparticles 
(Cifuentes et al., 2010; Larue et al., 2012). Compared with monocot plants, dicots show an 
increased level of nanoparticle uptake owing to their more penetrability of cuticles. Several 
studies have been reported to prove this process with a liquid-based liquid crystalline nano￾structure that was used as an effective carrier molecule for drug delivery (Nadiminti et al., 
2013); it is also influenced by the configuration of the cell wall in mono and dicots. Compared 
with dicots, monocot plants have pectin polymer and lightly packed cellulose, and also the 
leaf architecture shoe difference. In monocots, stomata show dumbbell-shaped while dicot 
plants show kidney-shaped stomata which also influence the degree of uptake and translo￾cation efficiencies of nanoparticles. In addition, monocot plants that show parallel veins on 
leaves are responsible for more resistance to scratching and also give more strength (Avellan 
et al., 2017; Schwab et al., 2015).
Plants adapt themselves with tighter walls, cuticles, Casparian strips, and other berries to 
overcome drought resistance, also these adaptations help to minimize dehydration during 
lack of water environment (Riederer and Schreiber, 2001). Other crucial factor like humic acid 
and organic matter of the soil make nanoparticles more constant and conversely improves 
the bioavailability (Navarro et al., 2012). The exposure of soil microbes including bacteria and 
mycorrhizal fungi also influences the uptake of nanoparticles. For example, the transport of 
copper nanoparticles from root to shoot takes place via the xylem, and the reverse transport 
from shoot to root will take place by phloem (Feng et  al., 2013). Generally, nanoparticles 
utilize the clathrin-independent endocytic pathway for uptake of nanoparticles. The poly 
(lactic-co-glycolic) acid (PVPA) nanoparticles effectively used this pathway to enter into the 
grapevine protoplast. Both the size and surface of the nanoparticles also influences the up￾take of nanoparticles into plants. For instance, the entry of AuNPs into wheat plants depicted 
the effective transportation of small size nanoparticles with a surface coating of PVPA-Au 
nanoparticles rather than citrate-coated Au nanoparticles (Avellan et al., 2017).
15. NPs for plant pathogen detection
Interaction of plant-pathogen and nanoparticles is a key process that has been studied 
to understand the infection caused by several plant pathogens. Hence nanoparticles can be 
used as a potential biomarker to diagnose the plant pathogen as a sign for perceiving precise 
infections. For example, Au nanoparticles-based immunosensors have been developed and 
exploited for sensing the Karnal bunt disease in wheat with aid of surface plasmon resonance 
(Singh et al., 2010). Most of the nanoparticles are significantly interact with highly patho￾genic viruses and their vectors in host plants (Farooq et al., 2021). Fluorescence tagged silicon 
nanoparticles incorporated with Ab used as a potential biomarker to perceive Xanthomonas 
axonopodis py. vesicatoria that are responsible for bacterial spot infection in Solanaceae plants 
(Yao et al., 2009). The advancement of nanotechnology with nanochips and microarray with 16. Transport and interaction 179
oligo probes tagged with fluorescent was developed to detect hybridization (López et al., 
2009). Another immunosensor QD fluorescence resonance energy transfer-based immuno￾sensors was used to identify the Phytoplasma aurantifolia that causes broom disease in lime 
(Rad et al., 2012). During the pathogenic infection, plants generally produce unique volatile 
components; hence the detection of this kind of volatile compounds in the plant may help 
to confirm the pathogenic infection in plants. During the pathogenic infection, Phytophthora 
cactorum produces p-ethylguaiacol, the application of TiO2 and SiO2 nanoparticles with 
screen-printed carbon electrodes it detects the p-ethylguaiacol via an electrochemical sensing 
system. Both nanoparticles exhibited high sensitivity (Fang et al., 2014).
16. Transport and interaction
Interaction and transport of nanoparticles into plants are taken place by two important 
pathways such as apoplast and symplast. The apoplastic pathway proceeds outside the 
plasma membrane via the extracellular spaces, between two adjacent cell wall (Sattelmacher, 
2001), where the symplastic pathway takes place between adjacent cytoplasm via plasmodes￾mata and sieve plate which involve in the movement of water and substance between two 
cells (Sattelmacher, 2001; Roberts and Oparka, 2003). In addition, the apoplastic pathway is 
playing a major role in the radial movement inside plant tissues and upward movement. 
In this case, nanoparticle translocation needs to cross the barrier present in the plants fol￾lowing lipophilic and hydrophilic pathways. Lipophilic movements involve classical diffu￾sion, where the hydrophilic movement takes place via aqueous pore present on cuticle or 
stomata (Schönherr, 2002; Eichert et al., 2008). Owing to their width of cuticular pores that are 
highly involved in the transportation of nanoparticles into the plants via the stomatal path￾way (Eichert et al., 2008). The route of movement of nanoparticles into the plants is essential 
for the information about the plant parts where the accumulation takes place. For instance, 
if the nanoparticles enter into the plants via xylem, they will move upward direction, i.e., 
from roots to shoots, and then reach leaves, whereas if the nanoparticles are transported via 
phloem they only move in a downward direction. In contrast, in some cases, the nanoparti￾cles show good translocation via phloem and should be done via foliar spraying and likely 
accumulate in plant parts like fruits, grains. Based on the nature, characteristic features of 
the nanoparticles also influence the translocation and accumulation. Several studies have 
been carried out to report that the same kind of nanoparticles shows diverse transportation 
and accretion in various plant species (Cifuentes et al., 2010; Zhu et al., 2012). Another study, 
Cifuentes et al. (2010) stated that accretion of carbon-coated iron nanoparticles in the root of 
pea than sunflower and wheat, the earlier and higher transformation of nanoparticle in the 
aerial parts were observed in pea and wheat than tomato and sunflower (Zhu et al., 2012). 
Generally, nanoparticles are accumulated in certain tissues and organs of plants and also in 
the same way accumulate in animals (Varna et al., 2012). In plants, nanoparticles are accumu￾lated mainly in fruits, grains, and young leaves via the vascular system (Servin et al., 2013; 
Koo et al., 2015). In some cases, nanoparticles are transformed into the plants and degraded 
later (Wang et al., 2012a,b; Lv et al., 2015). To enter into the plant via symplastic pathways, 
nanoparticles are adopted by the plant cells and across cell membranes. Several nanoparti￾cles are entering via this pathway and also this mechanism was exclusively studied in both 180 9. Interaction of nanoparticles and nanocomposite
plants and animals (Rico et  al., 2011; Schwab et  al., 2015). Endocytosis is another process 
through which nanoparticles are bound with cell membrane by invagination and reach 
the cells (Etxeberria et al., 2006). Another passage, pore formation by which nanoparticles 
cross into the cell via disrupting the plasma membrane and reaching the cytoplasm with￾out incorporation of any cell organelle (Wong et al., 2016: Serag et al., 2011). In some plants, 
nanoparticles are bound with surrounding cellular protein which acts as a carrier molecule 
for the internalization and uptake of nanoparticles into the cell (Nel et al., 2009). For example, 
aquaporins are involved in the transportation of nanoparticles into the cell due to small size 
(2.8 and 3.4Å) which makes them unlikely as channels for nanoparticles penetration (Wu and 
Beitz, 2007; Schwab et al., 2015). Plasmodesmata are the unique pore present in between two 
cells that significantly influence the transport of nanoparticles via symplastic mechanism and 
are playing a key role in plants for nanoparticle transportation via the phloem (Zhai et al., 
2014). Ion-channels have also been used as a possible pathway for nanoparticle movement to 
the plant cells effectively without any modification due to the size of Ion-channels (Schwab 
et al., 2015; Rico et al., 2011).
17. Nanoparticle-plant interaction pathways
Interaction of nanoparticles with plants is taken place via several mechanisms and effec￾tively inhibit the plant metabolism including supplement of micronutrients to the plants, 
gene regulation, or inquisitive with the oxidative process which results in the oxidative burst 
(Fig. 4) (Liu and Lal, 2015; Nair and Chung, 2014). Several studies have been described that 
the excess number of nanoparticles may induce the generation of ROS in the plant by inter￾fering with the oxidative mechanism. While the other collaborating pathways are interpreted 
and still there is a need for considerable research to insight the other pathway. In addition, the 
FIG. 4 Graphical representation of nanoparticle interaction with plants.18. Effects of ion-releasing NP 181
entry of nanoparticles significantly interferes with electron transport systems in mitochondria 
and chloroplast which results in the oxidative burst and rise of ROS production (Pakrashi 
et al., 2014; Jiang et al., 2014). The other factors such as the rate of carbon fixation increase the 
photoinhibition and steer the photosystem toward the production of superoxide radical and 
H2O in excess amount. The overproduction of superoxide radicals leads to the interaction 
of the nanoparticles specifically with cellular components and leads to the modification in 
protein, lipid peroxidation, and DNA damage (Foyer and Noctor, 2005; Van Breusegem and 
Dat, 2006). A number of evidence has been reported that the increased lipid peroxidation and 
DNA damage in plants are highly associated with interaction of nanoparticle confirms that 
the interaction of plants and nanoparticles may lead to lipid peroxidation and ROS signifi￾cantly induce apoptosis or necrosis which leads to cell death in plants. Though ROS produc￾tion may lead to cell death and is crucial for cellular processes such as it provides tolerance 
against environmental stress (Faisal et al., 2013; Sharma et al., 2012).
The antioxidant mechanism shows the generation of enzymatic molecules such as catalase, 
superoxide dismutase, and glutathione, carotenoids, phenolic, respectively (Sharma et  al., 
2012). The increased level of antioxidant molecules may be influenced by nanoparticles and 
endorses the directive of the antioxidant system as a response to nanoparticle interaction with 
plants. In some cases, the high level of the antioxidant molecule is unable to control the ROS 
production, where it oxidizes the cell macromolecules and leads to cell death either by apop￾tosis or necrosis. A recent study has been reported that the phytohormone also influences 
the plant stress signaling mechanisms (Sharma et al., 2012; O'Brien and Benková, 2013). The 
hormonal influence on plant growth and stress alteration is reported via a complex network 
and aggressive interaction with innumerable hormones. The increased level of ROS has been 
associated with hormonal signaling mechanisms and influenced other cellular activity (Kwak 
et al., 2006). Both the suppressed and expressed hormonal pathways are also influence the 
types of environmental stress, for example, the increased level of cytokine in Capsicum annum
significantly responds to Ag nanoparticle stress, and the decreased level of IAA and ABA 
in cotton plants are highly influenced by CuO nanoparticles which indicated the nanopar￾ticles highly impacts hormonal balance in plants and affects metabolism. In aerobic condi￾tions, plants used an electron transport chain and thus produce an increased level of ROS 
(Foyer and Shigeoka, 2011). Photosynthesis considers a major energy input in plants; hence 
the quantity of photosynthetic pigment and their activity is a noble extent to assess the effect 
of stress factors. Several studies have been reported that nanoparticle entry into the plant 
highly influences the photosynthetic pigment concentration and also their activity (Perreault 
et al., 2014; Tripathi et al., 2017). The accumulation of a high concentration of nanoparticles in 
plants may affect photosynthesis and subsequently lead to the suppression of plant growth. 
Generally, the root of the plant is the primary part that is involved in the primary up-taking 
mechanism (Tripathi et al., 2017; Vinković et al., 2017).
18. Effects of ion-releasing NP
The dissolution of nanoparticles in soil or water stimulated the discharge of ions from 
their surface during the life cycle (Batley et al., 2013). Several pieces of research have been 
reported that ion releasing form nanoparticles and also the mechanism of toxicity induced 
ion releasing from nanoparticles. Among the different types of nanoparticles, Ag nanopar￾ticles are often used in various applications, the ions releasing from Ag nanoparticles are 182 9. Interaction of nanoparticles and nanocomposite
recognized as large proportion and also observed toxicity in various soil microbes (Gil-Allué 
et al., 2015; Jo et al., 2012; Volker et al., 2015). In industries like agriculture, nanotechnologies 
play a significant role, because nanomaterials show different unique properties and may in￾terrelate with other bulk size materials (Pena et al., 2005; Mayo et al., 2007). The adsorption 
of nanomaterials provides improved effectiveness compared with other bulk components. 
For example, the different types of metal oxide nanoparticles including zinc oxide, titanium 
dioxide, alumina, and CuO have been used as effective nanoadsorbents (Lata and Samadder, 
2016). In particular, CuO shows maximum adsorption property. As reported while the max￾imum removal of As (Arsenic) from water by bulk CuO was reported as 369μg/g (Reddy 
and Roth, 2013; Martinson and Reddy, 2009). This adsorption property was highly influenced 
by pH, the range of pH from 6 to 11 showed 62–83% of adsorption capacities, whereas the 
pH-independent showed 90 to 97%. The As (III) can be corroded into As (V) when adsorbed 
to the surface of CuO nanoparticles (McDonald et al., 2015). The presence of ions like sili￾cate, phosphate, and sulfate does not show a substantial consequence on As adsorption at 
maximum dose, hence the desorption, reuse, and regeneration of CuO nanoparticles used 
to elucidate the difficult of water sludge and disposal (Martinson and Reddy, 2009). CuO 
nanoparticles are widely used in industries in the form of regeneration; hence the physico￾chemical nature of water such as pH, major elements, including Cu were affected the adsorp￾tion properties (Reddy et al., 2013).
19. Impact of natural organic material on NP-induced effects
In addition to the plants, nanoparticles are also interacting with an abiotic component sur￾rounding them that also influences their ecotoxicological property (Bundschuh et al., 2016). 
The interlinking between the organic molecules of the environment and nanoparticles is ex￾clusively reviewed. For instance, the dissolved organic matter (DOM) coats the nanoparti￾cle for stabilizing their particle size owing to their electrostatic repulsion (Hall et al., 2009; 
Hyung et al., 2007). This process is effectively increasing the hydrophobicity of DOM and 
subsequently, it reduces the ecotoxicological nature thus resulting in the availability of the 
reactive surface (Seitz et al., 2016). In some cases, gum arabic or citrate or natural organic mat￾ter coats Ag nanoparticles to release the potential toxic ions into surrounding environments, 
or the bioavailability of nanoparticles and their bioavailability are significantly reducing the 
environmental factors, especially with non-living matter. In contrast, humic acid effectively 
triggers the ion release from Pb nanoparticles (Chiang et  al., 2016). Bicho et  al. (2016) de￾scribed the maximum accumulation of nanoparticles in the soil influences the soil properties 
and toxicity to the soil organism. The organic matter of the soil highly influences the differ￾ence in toxicity. The decreased level of organic carbon in soil may increase the toxicity of 
PVP-coated Ag nanoparticles to E. crypticus (Topuz and van Gestel, 2017). The low toxicity of 
the Ag nanoparticles is observed in both dicotyledonous and monocotyledonous plants and 
also in animals like collembolan and earthworms (Velicogna et al., 2016). With the increased 
level of pH in soil, the ZnO nanoparticle significantly suppresses the reproduction of Folsomia 
candida (Waalewijn-Kool et al., 2013). While considering the time as a factor, nanoparticles 
in the exposure of DOM significantly reduced or and also not involved in the toxicity of the 
Ag and ZnO nanoparticles (Cupi et al., 2015). In contrast, the aging of TiO2 nanoparticles in References 183
the exposure of organic molecules faintly improved toxicity on daphnids, but in the case of 
longer periods, it reduced NP-induced effects significantly as nanoparticles which surpassed 
in the size range retained by daphnid’s filter apparatus (Seitz et al., 2015).
20. Concluding remarks
In recent days, nanotechnology is one of the emerging fields owing to its wide range of 
applications. Although nanoparticles have several distinct characteristics, they also have a 
different toxicity profile than their bulk components. Long-term exposure to nanoparticles in 
the environment has the potential to be hazardous to both living and nonliving objects. There 
are limited studies that have been reported that focused on the microorganism, plants, and 
human cells. Thus, it is critical to gather knowledge about how nanoparticles interact with 
plants and their surroundings. Numbers of studies have been reported that nanoparticles 
show many beneficial health effects in both plants and animals, in contrast, it also is toxic for 
different organisms including plants. Because of this, a number of countries are conducting 
study on the effects of nanoparticles on plants and the environment. We need more under￾standing about how nanoparticles affect animals, plants and the ecosystem in order to make 
an informed decision. The nanopesticides (encapsulation with different nanoparticles and 
nano formulations) provide enhanced application. The nanofertilizers and nanopesticides are 
still under progress and few are currently available in the market for their effective action 
particularly in the agriculture industry. So, the study of the interaction of nanoparticles with 
plants and the environment is the key process to understanding both the physiological and 
biochemical responses of plants. The use of advanced nanotechnology techniques to deter￾mine the quantity and position of nanoparticles in the plant system enables us to better un￾derstand their movement and safety features, which are briefed through this chapter.
Acknowledgment
The authors CS and SKS thankfully acknowledge the Tamil Nadu State Council for Higher Education (TANSCHE) 
for the research grant (Au/S.o. (P&D): TANSCHE Projects: 117/2021).
References
Abdel Latef, A.A.H., Srivastava, A.K., El-sadek, M.S.A., Kordrostami, M., Tran, L.S.P., 2018. Titanium dioxide 
nanoparticles improve growth and enhance tolerance of broad bean plants under saline soil conditions. Land 
Degrad. Dev. 29, 1065–1073.
Acharya, P., Jayaprakasha, G.K., Crosby, K.M., Jifon, J.L., Patil, B.S., 2020. Nanoparticle-mediated seed priming im￾proves germination, growth, yield, and quality of watermelons (Citrullus lanatus) at multi-locations in Texas. Sci. 
Rep. 10, 5037.
Ahmad, F., Aziz, T., Maqsood, M.A., Tahir, M.A., Kanwal, S., 2007. Effect of silicon application on wheat (Triticum 
aestivum L.) growth under water deficiency stress. J. Food Agric. 7, 1–7.
Ahmad, B., Shabbir, A., Jaleel, H., Khan, M.M.A., Sadiq, Y., 2018. Efficacy of titanium dioxide nanoparticles in mod￾ulating photosynthesis, peltate glandular trichomes and essential oil production and quality in Mentha piperita 
L. Curr. Plant. Biol. 13, 6–15.
Ahmad, H., Venugopal, K., Rajagopal, K., De Britto, S., Nandini, B., Pushpalatha, H.G., Konappa, N., Udayashankar, 
A.C., Geetha, N., Jogaiah, S., 2020. Green synthesis and characterization of zinc oxide nanoparticles using 
Eucalyptus globules and their fungicidal ability against pathogenic fungi of apple orchards. Biomolecules 10, 425.184 9. Interaction of nanoparticles and nanocomposite
Alle, M., Bandi, R., Sharma, G., Dadigala, R., Husen, A., 2021. Current trends in engineered gold nanoparticles for 
cancer therapy. In: Kim, J.C., Kim, J.C., Alle, M., Husen, A. (Eds.), Smart Nanomaterials in Biomedical Applications. 
Nanotechnology in the Life Sciences. Springer, Cham, pp. 1–40, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-84262-8_1.
de Almeida, M.S., Susnik, E., Drasler, B., Taladriz-Blanco, P., Petri-Fink, A., Rothen-Rutishauser, B., 2021. 
Understanding nanoparticle endocytosis to improve targeting strategies in nanomedicine. Chem. Soc. Rev. 50, 
5397–5434.
Amenta, V., Aschberger, K., Arena, M., Bouwmeester, H., Moniz, F.B., Brandhoff, P., 2015. Regulatory aspects of nan￾otechnology in the agri/feed/food sector in EU and non-EU countries. Regul. Toxicol. Pharmacol. 73, 463–476.
An, J., Hu, P., Li, F., Wu, H., Shen, Y., White, J.C., 2020. Emerging investigator series: molecular mechanisms of plant 
salinity stress tolerance improvement by seed priming with cerium oxide nanoparticles. Environ. Sci. Nano 7, 
2214–2228.
Anand, K.V., Anugraga, A.R., Kannan, M., Singaravelu, G., Govindaraju, K., 2020. Bio-engineered magnesium oxide 
nanoparticles as nano-priming agent for enhancing seed germination and seedling vigor of green gram (Vigna 
radiata L.). Mater. Lett. 8, 127792.
Anjali, C.H., Sharma, Y., Mukherjee, A., Chandrasekaran, N., 2012. Neem oil (Azadirachta indica) nanoemulsion—a 
potent larvicidal agent against Culex quinquefasciatus. Pest Manag. Sci. 68, 158–163.
Arora, S., Sharma, P., Kumar, S., Nayan, R., Khanna, P.K., Zaidi, M.G.H., 2012. Gold-nanoparticle induced enhance￾ment in growth and seed yield of Brassica juncea. Plant Growth Regul. 66, 303–310.
Ashkavand, P., Tabari, M., Zarafshar, M., Tomášková, I., Struve, D., 2015. Effect of SiO2 nanoparticles on drought 
resistance in hawthorn seedlings. For. Res. Pap. 76, 350–359.
Avellan, A., Schwab, F., Masion, A., Chaurand, P., Borschneck, D., Vidal, V., 2017. Nanoparticle uptake in plants: gold 
nanomaterial localized in roots of Arabidopsis thaliana by X-ray computed nanotomography and hyperspectral 
imaging. Environ. Sci. Technol. 51, 8682–8691.
Avestan, S., Ghasemnezhad, M., Esfahani, M., Byrt, C.S., 2019. Application of nano-silicon dioxide improves salt 
stress tolerance in strawberry plants. Agronomy 9, 246.
Ayoub, H.A., Khairy, M., Rashwan, F.A., Abdel-Hafez, H.F., 2017. Synthesis and characterization of silica nanostruc￾tures for cotton leaf worm control. J. Nanostruct. Chem. 7, 91–100.
Babajani, A., Iranbakhsh, A., Ardebili, Z.O., Eslami, B., 2019. Differential growth, nutrition, physiology, and gene 
expression in Melissa officinalis mediated by zinc oxide and elemental selenium nanoparticles. Environ. Sci. Pollut. 
Res. 26, 24430–24444.
Badri, D., Vivanco, J., 2009. Regulation and function of root exudates. Plant Cell Environ. 32, 666–681.
Bala, R., Kalia, A., Dhaliwal, S.S., 2019. Evaluation of efficacy of ZnO nanoparticles as remedial zinc nanofertilizer for 
Rice. J. Soil Sci. Plant Nutr. 19, 379–389.
Batley, G.E., Kirby, J.K., McLaughlin, M.J., 2013. Fate and risks of nanomaterials in aquatic and terrestrial environ￾ments. Acc. Chem. Res. 46, 854–862.
Bicho, R.C., Soares, A.M.V.M., Nogueira, H.I.S., Amorim, M.J.B., 2016. Effects of europium polyoxometalate encapsu￾lated in silica nanoparticles (nanocarriers) in soil invertebrates. J. Nanopart. Res. 18, 360.
Blackford, D.B., Simons, G.R., 1987. Particle-size analysis of carbon-black. Part. Charact., 112–117.
Boxall, A., Chaudhry, Q., Sinclair, C., Jones, A., Aitken, R., Jefferson, B., Watts, C., 2007. Current and Future Predicted 
Environmental Exposure to Engineered Nanoparticles. Central Science Laboratory, York, UK.
Boykov, I.N., Shuford, E., Zhang, B., 2019. Nanoparticle titanium dioxide affects the growth and microRNA expres￾sion of switchgrass (Panicum virgatum). Genomics 111, 450–456.
Buffle, J., 2006. The key role of environmental colloids/nanoparticles for the sustainability of life. Environ. Chem. 
2006 (3), 155–158.
Bundschuh, M., Filser, J., Lüderwald, S., McKee, M.S., Metreveli, G., Schaumann, G.E., Schulz, R., Wagner, S., 2018. 
Nanoparticles in the environment: where do we come from, where do we go to? Environ. Sci. Eur. 30, 1–17.
Bundschuh, M., Seitz, F., Rosenfeldt, R.R., Schulz, R., 2016. Effects of nanoparticles in fresh waters—risks, mecha￾nisms and interactions. Freshw. Biol. 61, 2185–2196.
Burke, D.J., Pietrasiak, N., Situ, S.F., Abenojar, E.C., Porche, M., Kraj, P., Lakliang, Y., Samia, A.C.S., 2015. Iron oxide 
and titanium dioxide nanoparticle effects on plant performance and root associated microbes. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 16, 
23630–23650.
Cai, L., Cai, L., Jia, H., Liu, C., Wang, D., Sun, X., 2020. Foliar exposure of Fe3O4 nanoparticles on Nicotiana benthami￾ana: evidence for nanoparticles uptake, plant growth promoter and defense response elicitor against plant virus. 
J. Hazard. Mater. 393, 122415.References 185
Carlson, C., Hussain, S.M., Schrand, A.M., Braydich-Stolle, K.L., Hess, K.L., Jones, R.L., Schlager, J.J., 2008. Unique 
cellular interaction of silver nanoparticles: size-dependent generation of reactive oxygen species. J. Phys. Chem. 
B 112 (43), 13608–13619.
Chandler, M., Johnson, B., Khisamutdinov, E., Dobrovolskaia, M.A., Sztuba-Solinska, J., Salem, A.K., Breyne, K., 
Chammas, R., Walter, N.G., Contreras, L.M., Guo, P., Afonin, K.A., 2021. The international society of RNA nano￾technology and nanomedicine (ISRNN): the present and future of the burgeoning field. ACS Nano 15, 16957–16973.
Chen, Y.E., Mao, H.T., Wu, N., Mohi Ud Din, A., Khan, A., Zhang, H.Y., 2020. Salicylic acid protects photosystem II by 
alleviating photoinhibition in Arabidopsis thaliana under high light. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 21, 1229.
Chen, H., Yada, R., 2011. Nanotechnologies in agriculture: new tools for sustainable development. Trends Food Sci. 
Technol. 22, 585–594.
Chiang, C.W., Ng, D.Q., Lin, Y.P., Chen, P.J., 2016. Dissolved organic matter or salts change the bioavailability pro￾cesses and toxicity of the nanoscale tetravalent lead corrosion product PbO2 to medaka fish. Environ. Sci. Technol. 
50, 11292–11301.
Cifuentes, Z., Custardoy, L., de la Fuente, J.M., Marquina, C., Ibarra, M.R., Rubiales, D., 2010. Absorption and trans￾location to the aerial part of magnetic carbon-coated nanoparticles through the root of different crop plants. J. 
Nanobiotechnol. 8, 26.
Clemens, S., 2001. Molecular mechanisms of plant metal tolerance and homeostasis. Planta 212, 475–486.
Colebrook, E.H., Thomas, S.G., Phillips, A.L., Hedden, P., 2014. The role of gibberellin signaling in plant responses to 
abiotic stress. J. Exp. Boil. 217, 67–75.
Cota-Ruiz, K., Ye, Y., Valdes, C., Deng, C., Wang, Y., Hernández-Viezcas, J.A., Duarte-Gardea, M., Gardea-Torresdey, 
J.L., 2020. Copper nanowires as nanofertilizers for alfalfa plants: understanding nano-bio systems interactions 
from microbial genomics, plant molecular responses and spectroscopic studies. Sci. Total Environ. 742, 140572.
Cupi, D., Hartmann, N.B., Baun, A., 2015. The influence of natural organic matter and aging on suspension stability 
in guideline toxicity testing of silver, zinc oxide, and titanium dioxide nanoparticles with Daphnia magna. Environ. 
Toxicol. Chem. 34, 497–506.
Djanaguiraman, M., Belliraj, N., Bossmann, S.H., Prasad, P.V., 2018. Hightemperature stress alleviation by selenium 
nanoparticle treatment in grain sorghum. ACS Omega 3, 2479–2491.
Duhan, J.S., 2017. Nanotechnology: the new perspective in precision agriculture. Biotechnol. Rep. 15, 11–23.
Eduok, S., Martin, B., Villa, R., Nocker, A., Jefferson, B., Coulon, F., 2013. Evaluation of engineered nanoparticle toxic 
effect on wastewater microorganisms: current status and challenges. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 95, 1–9.
Eichert, T., Kurtz, A., Steiner, U., Goldbach, H.E., 2008. Size exclusion limits and lateral heterogeneity of the stomatal 
foliar uptake pathway for aqueous solutes and water-suspended nanoparticles. Physiol. Plant. 134, 151–160.
Elnaggar, M., Abdelsalam, N., Fouda, M., Mackled, M., Al-Jaddadi, M., Ali, H., Siddiqui, M.H., Kandil, E., 2020. Soil 
application of nano silica on maize yield and its insecticidal activity against some stored insects after the post￾harvest. Nanomaterials 10, 739.
El-Temsah, Y.S., Joner, E.J., 2012. Ecotoxicological effects on earthworms of fresh and aged nano-sized zero-valent 
iron (nZVI) in soil. Chemosphere 89, 76–82.
Ermolin, M.S., Fedotov, P.S., Malik, N.A., Karandashev, V.K., 2018. Nanoparticles of volcanic ash as a carrier for toxic 
elements on the global scale. Chemosphere 200, 16–22.
Etefagh, R., Azhir, E., Shahtahmasebi, N., 2013. Synthesis of CuO nanoparticles and fabrication of nanostructural 
layer biosensors for detecting Aspergillus niger fungi. Sci. Iran. 20, 1055–1058.
Etxeberria, E., Gonzalez, P., Baroja-Fernandez, E., Romero, J.P., 2006. Fluid phase endocytic uptake of artificial 
nano-spheres and fluorescent quantum dots by sycamore cultured cells: evidence for the distribution of solutes to 
different intracellular compartments. Plant Signal. Behav. 1, 196–200.
Faisal, M., Saquib, Q., Alatar, A.A., Al-Khedhairy, A.A., Hegazy, A.K., Musarrat, J., 2013. Phytotoxic hazards of NiO￾nanoparticles in tomato: a study on mechanism of cell death. J. Hazard. Mater. 250–251, 318–332.
Fang, Y., Umasankar, Y., Ramasamy, R.P., 2014. Electrochemical detection of p-ethylguaiacol, a fungi infected fruit 
volatile using metal oxide nanoparticles. Analyst 139, 3804–3810.
Farooq, T., Adeel, M., He, Z., Umar, M., Shakoor, N., da Silva, W., Elmer, W., White, J.C., Rui, Y., 2021. Nanotechnology 
and plant viruses: an emerging disease management approach for resistant pathogens. ACS Nano 15 (4), 6030–6037.
Feichtmeier, N.S., Walther, P., Leopold, K., 2015. Uptake, effects, and regeneration of barley plants exposed to gold 
nanoparticles. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 22, 8549–8558.
Feizi, H., Moghaddam, P.R., Shahtahmassebi, N., Fotovat, A., 2012. Impact of bulk and nanosized titanium dioxide 
(TiO2) on wheat seed germination and seedling growth. Biol. Trace Elem. Res. 146, 101–106.186 9. Interaction of nanoparticles and nanocomposite
Feng, Y., Cui, X., He, S., Dong, G., Chen, M., Wang, J., 2013. The role of metal nanoparticles in influencing arbuscular 
mycorrhizal fungi effects on plant growth. Environ. Sci. Technol. 47, 9496–9504.
Foyer, C.H., Noctor, G., 2005. Redox homeostasis and antioxidant signaling: a metabolic interface between stress 
perception and physiological responses. Plant Cell 17, 1866–1875.
Foyer, C.H., Shigeoka, S., 2011. Understanding oxidative stress and antioxidant functions to enhance photosynthesis. 
Plant Physiol. 155, 93–100.
Fraceto, L.F., Grillo, R., de Medeiros, G.A., Scognamiglio, V., Rea, G., Bartolucci, C., 2016. Nanotechnology in agricul￾ture: which innovation potential does it have? Front. Environ. Sci. 4, 20.
Frazier, T.P., Burklew, C.E., Zhang, B., 2014. Titanium dioxide nanoparticles affect the growth and microRNA expres￾sion of tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum). Funct. Integr. Genomics 14, 75–83.
Gallego-Urrea, J.A., Tuoriniemi, J., Pallander, T., Hassellöv, M., 2010. Measurements of nanoparticle number concen￾trations and size distributions in contrasting aquatic environments using nanoparticle tracking analysis. Environ. 
Chem. 7, 67–81.
Gao, G., Tester, M.A., Julkowska, M.M., 2020. The use of high-throughput phenotyping for assessment of heat 
stress-induced changes in arabidopsis. Plant Phenom. 2020, 14.
Ghoshdastidar, A.J., Ariya, P.A., 2019. The existence of airborne mercury nanoparticles. Sci. Rep. 9, 10733.
Gil-Allué, C., Schirmer, K., Tlili, A., Gessner, M.O., Behra, R., 2015. Silver nanoparticle effects on stream periphyton 
during short-term exposures. Environ. Sci. Technol. 49, 1165–1172.
Gohari, G., Mohammadi, A., Akbari, A., Panahirad, S., Dadpour, M.R., Fotopoulos, V., 2020. Titanium dioxide 
nanoparticles (TiO2 NPs) promote growth and ameliorate salinity stress effects on essential oil profile and bio￾chemical attributes of Dracocephalum moldavica. Sci. Rep. 10, 912.
Gowayed, M.H., Al-Zahrani, H.S., Metwali, E.M., 2017. Improving the salinity tolerance in potato (Solanum tubero￾sum) by exogenous application of silicon dioxide nanoparticles. Int. J. Agric. Biol. 19, 183–194.
Griffin, S., Masood, M.I., Nasim, M.J., Sarfraz, M., Ebokaiwe, A.P., Schafer, K.H., Keck, C.M., Jacob, C., 2018. Natural 
nanoparticles: a particular matter inspired by nature. Antioxidants 7, 3.
Guo, B., Jiang, J., Serem, W., Sharma, V.K., Ma, X., 2019. Attachment of cerium oxide nanoparticles of different surface 
charges to kaolinite: molecular and atomic mechanisms. Environ. Res. 177, 108645.
Guzman, K.A.D., Taylor, M.R., Banfield, J.F., 2006. Environmental risks of nanotechnology: national nanotechnology 
initiative funding, 2000–2004. Environ. Sci. Technol. 40, 1401–1407.
Haghighi, M., Pessarakli, M., 2013. Influence of silicon and nano-silicon on salinity tolerance of cherry tomatoes 
(Solanum lycopersicum L.) at early growth stage. Sci. Hortic. 161, 111–117.
Hall, S., Bradley, T., Moore, J.T., Kuykindall, T., Minella, L., 2009. Acute and chronic toxicity of nano-scale TiO2, 
particles to freshwater fish, cladocerans, and green algae, and effects of organic and inorganic substrate on TiO2
toxicity. Nanotoxicology 3, 91–97.
Haris, Z., Ahmad, I., 2017. Impact of metal oxide nanoparticles on beneficial soil microorganisms and their secondary 
metabolites. Int. J. Life Sci. Sci. Res. 3, 1020–1030.
He, X., Deng, H., Hwang, H., 2019. The current application of nanotechnology in food and agriculture. J. Food Drug 
Anal. 27, 1–21.
Hochella Jr., M.F., Spencer, M.G., Jones, K.L., 2015. Nanotechnology: nature's gift or scientists' brainchild? Environ. 
Sci. Nano 2, 114–119.
Hochella, M.F., Mogk, D.W., Ranville, J., Allen, I.C., Luther, G.W., Marr, L.C., McGrail, B.P., Murayama, M., Qafoku, 
N.P., Rosso, K.M., Sahai, N., Schroeder, P.A., Vikesland, P., Westerhoff, P., Yang, Y., 2019. Natural, incidental, and 
engineered nanomaterials and their impacts on the earth system. Science 363, 6434.
Hotze, E.M., Phenrat, T., Lowry, G.V., 2010. Nanoparticle aggregation: challenges to understanding transport and 
reactivity in the environment. J. Environ. Qual. 39, 1909–1924.
Huang, L., Li, D., Lin, Y., Evans, D.G., Duan, X., 2005. Influence of nano-MgO particle size on bactericidal action 
against Bacillus subtilis var. niger. Chin. Sci. Bull. 50, 514–519.
Husen, A., 2020a. Interactions of metal and metal-oxide nanomaterials with agricultural crops: an overview. In: 
Husen, A., Jawaid, M. (Eds.), Nanomaterials for Agriculture and Forestry Applications. Elsevier Inc, 50 Hampshire 
St., 5th Floor, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA, pp. 167–197, https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-817852-2.00007-X.
Husen, A., 2020b. In: Husen, A., Jawaid, M. (Eds.), Carbon-based nanomaterials and their interactions with agri￾cultural crops. Elsevier Inc, 50 Hampshire St., 5th Floor, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA, pp. 199–218, https://doi.
org/10.1016/B978-0-12-817852-2.00008-1.Husen, A., 2021a. Harsh Environment and Plant Resilience (Molecular and Functional Aspects). Springer Nature 
Switzerland AG, Cham, Switzerland, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-65912-7.
Husen, A., 2021b. Plant Performance Under Environmental Stress (Hormones, Biostimulants and Sustainable 
Plant Growth Management). Springer Nature Switzerland AG, Cham, Switzerland, https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-030-78521-5.
Husen, A., Iqbal, M., 2019a. Nanomaterials and Plant Potential. Springer International Publishing AG, Cham, 
Switzerland, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-05569-1.
Husen, A., Iqbal, M., 2019b. Nanomaterials and plant potential: an overview. In: Husen, A., Iqbal, M. (Eds.), 
Nanomaterials and Plant Potential. Springer International Publishing AG, Cham, pp. 3–29, https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-030-05569-1_1.
Husen, A., Jawaid, M., 2020. Nanomaterials for Agriculture and Forestry Applications. Elsevier Inc, 50 Hampshire 
St., 5th Floor, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA, https://doi.org/10.1016/C2018-0-02349-X.
Husen, A., Pandey, S.B.S., 2020. Nanofertilizers for smart agricultural practices. In: National Seminar (Under ICAR, 
New Delhi, India) on Smart-Horticulture, 30-31 January, 2020, Agricultural.
Husen, A., Siddiqi, K.S., 2014a. Phytosynthesis of nanoparticles: concept, controversy and application. Nanoscale 
Res. Lett. 9, 229. https://doi.org/10.1186/1556-276X-9-229.
Husen, A., Siddiqi, K.S., 2014b. Carbon and fullerene nanomaterials in plant system. J. Nanobiotechnol. 12, 16. 
https://doi.org/10.1186/1477-3155-12-16.
Hyung, H., Fortner, J.D., Hughes, J.B., Kim, J.H., 2007. Natural organic matter stabilizes carbon nanotubes in the 
aqueous phase. Environ. Sci. Technol. 41, 179–184.
Irshad, M.A., Nawaz, R., Zia Ur Rehman, M., Imran, M., Ahmad, J., Ahmad, S., Inam, A., Razzaq, A., Rizwan, M., 
Ali, S., 2020. Synthesis and characterization of titanium dioxide nanoparticles by chemical and green methods and 
their antifungal activities against wheat rust. Chemosphere 258, 127352.
Jameel, M., Shoeb, M., Khan, M.T., Ullah, R., Mobin, M., Farooqi, M.K., Adnan, S.M., 2020. Enhanced insecticidal 
activity of thiamethoxam by zinc oxide nanoparticles: a novel nanotechnology approach for pest control. ACS 
Omega. 5, 1607–1615.
Jampílek, J., Králová, K., 2017. Nanopesticides: preparation, targeting, and controlled release. In: Grumezescu, A.M. 
(Ed.), New Pesticides and Soil Sensors. Academic Press, pp. 81–127.
Jeevanandam, J., Barhoum, A., Chan, Y.S., Dufresne, A., Danquah, M.K., 2018. Review on nanoparticles and nano￾structured materials: history, sources, toxicity and regulations. Beilstein J. Nanotechnol. 9, 1050–1074.
Jiang, H.S., Qiu, X.N., Li, G.B., Li, W., Yin, L.Y., 2014. Silver nanoparticles induced accumulation of reactive oxygen 
species and alteration of antioxidant systems in the aquatic plant Spirodela polyrhiza. Environ. Toxicol. Chem. 33, 
1398–1405.
Jin, Y., Fan, X., Li, X., Zhang, Z., Sun, L., Fu, Z., 2017. Distinct physiological and molecular responses in Arabidopsis 
thaliana exposed to aluminum oxide nanoparticles and ionic aluminum. Environ. Pollut. 228, 517–527.
Jo, H.J., Choi, J.W., Lee, S.H., Hong, S.W., 2012. Acute toxicity of Ag and CuO nanoparticle suspensions against 
Daphnia magna: the importance of their dissolved fraction varying with preparation methods. J. Hazard. Mater. 
228, 301–308.
Juárez-Maldonado, A., Ortega-Ortíz, H., Morales-Díaz, A.B., González-Morales, S., Morelos-Moreno, Á., Sandoval￾Rangel, A., 2019. Nanoparticles and nanomaterials as plant biostimulants. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 20, 162.
Karaca, A., Cetin, S.C., Turgay, O.C., Kizilkaya, R., 2011. Soil enzymes as indication of soil quality. In: Shukla, G., 
Varma, A. (Eds.), Soil Enzymology. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 19–148.
Keller, A.A., Wang, H., Zhou, D., Lenihan, H.S., Cherr, G., Cardinale, B.J., Miller, R., Ji, Z., 2010. Stability and aggrega￾tion of metal oxide nanoparticles in natural aqueous matrices. Environ. Sci. Technol. 44, 1962–1967.
Khan, M.N., 2016. Nano-titanium dioxide (Nano-TiO2) mitigates NaCl stress by enhancing antioxidative enzymes 
and accumulation of compatible solutes in tomato (Lycopersicon esculentum Mill.). J. Plant. Sci. 11, 1–11.
Khan, M.N., AlSolami, M.A., Basahi, R.A., Siddiqui, M.H., Al-Huqail, A.A., Abbas, Z.K., 2020. Nitric oxide is involved 
in nano-titanium dioxide-induced activation of antioxidant defense system and accumulation of osmolytes under 
water-deficit stress in Vicia faba L. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 190, 110152.
Khaydarov, R.R., Khaydarov, R.A., Gapurova, O., Estrin, Y., Evgrafova, S., Scheper, T., 2009. Antimicrobial effects 
of silver nanoparticles synthesized by an electrochemical method. In: Reithmaier, J.P., Petkov, P., Kulisch, W., 
Popov, C. (Eds.), Nanostructured Material for Advanced Technological Applications, NATO Science for Peace and 
Security Series B: Physics and Biophysics, Part 5. Springer, Dordrecht, pp. 215–218.
References 187188 9. Interaction of nanoparticles and nanocomposite
Khodakovskaya, M.V., De Silva, K., Biris, A.S., Dervishi, E., Villagarcia, H., 2012. Carbon nanotubes induce growth 
enhancement of tobacco cells. ACS Nano 6, 2128–2135.
Khodakovskaya, M.V., de Silva, K., Nedosekin, D., Dervishi, E., Biris, A.S., Shashkov, E.V., Galanzha, E.I., Zharov, 
V.P., 2011. Complex genetic, photothermal, and photoacoustic analysis of nanoparticle-plant interactions. Proc. 
Natl. Acad. Sci. 108, 1028–1033.
Kloepfer, J.A., Mielke, R.E., Nadeau, J.L., 2005. Uptake of CdSe and CdSe/ZnS quantum dots into bacteria via 
purine-dependent mechanisms. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 71, 2548–2557.
Koo, Y., Wang, J., Zhang, Q., Zhu, H., Chehab, E.W., Colvin, V.L., 2015. Fluorescence reports intact quantum dot up￾take into roots and translocation to leaves of Arabidopsis thaliana and subsequent ingestion by insect herbivores. 
Environ. Sci. Technol. 49, 626–632.
Kumar, A., Choudhary, A., Kaur, H., Guha, S., Mehta, S., Husen, A., 2022. Potential applications of engineered 
nanoparticles in plant disease management: a critical update. Chemosphere 295. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.che￾mosphere.2022.133798, 133798.
Kumar, A., Choudhary, A., Kaur, H., Mehta, S., Husen, A., 2021a. Metal-based nanoparticles, sensors and their mul￾tifaceted application in food packaging. J. Nanobiotechnol. 19, 256. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12951-021-00996-0.
Kumar, A., Choudhary, A., Kaur, H., Mehta, S., Husen, A., 2021b. Smart nanomaterial and nanocomposite with ad￾vanced agrochemical activities. Nanoscale Res. Lett. 16, 156. https://doi.org/10.1186/s11671-021-03612-0.
Kumar, B., Rao, G.K., Saha, S., Ganguli, A.K., 2016. Cu‐based nanocomposites as multifunctional catalysts. 
ChemPhysChem 17 (1), 155–161.
Kumar, R.S., Shiny, P.J., Anjali, C.H., Jerobin, J., Goshen, K.M., Magdassi, S., 2013. Distinctive effects of nano-sized 
permethrin in the environment. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. Int. 20, 2593–2602.
Kumbhakar, P., Ray, S.S., Stepanov, A.L., 2014. Optical properties of nanoparticles and nanocomposites. J. Nanomater. 
2014, 181365.
Kwak, J.M., Nguyen, V., Schroeder, J.I., 2006. The role of reactive oxygen species in hormonal responses. Plant 
Physiol. 141, 323–329.
Lahiani, M.H., Dervishi, E., Chen, J., Nima, Z., Gaume, A., Biris, A.S., 2013. Impact of carbon nanotube exposure to 
seeds of valuable crops. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 5, 7965–7973.
Larue, C., Castillo-Michel, H., Sobanska, S., Cécillon, L., Bureau, S., Barthès, V., Ouerdane, L., Carrière, M., Sarret, G., 
2014. Foliar exposure of the crop Lactuca sativa to silver nanoparticles: evidence for internalization and changes in 
ag speciation. J. Hazard. Mater. 264, 98–106.
Larue, C., Laurette, J., Herlin-Boime, N., Khodja, H., Fayard, B., Flank, A.M., 2012. Accumulation, translocation and 
impact of TiO2 nanoparticles in wheat (Triticum aestivum spp.): influence of diameter and crystal phase. Sci. Total 
Environ. 431, 197–208.
Lata, S., Samadder, S.R., 2016. Removal of arsenic from water using nano adsorbents and challenges: a review. J. 
Environ. Manage. 166, 387–406.
Lee, W.M., Kwak, J.I., An, Y.J., 2012. Effect of silver nanoparticles in crop plants Phaseolus radiatus and Sorghum bicolor: 
media effect on phytotoxicity. Chemosphere 86, 491–499.
Lei, Z., Mingyu, S., Xiao, W., 2008. Antioxidant stress is promoted by nano-anatase in spinach chloroplasts under 
UV-B radiation. Biol. Trace Elem. Res. 121, 69–79.
Leso, V., Fontana, L., Iavicoli, I., 2019. Biomedical nanotechnology: occupational views. Nano Today 24, 10–14.
Li, R., He, J., Xie, H., Wang, W., Bose, S.K., Sun, Y., 2019. Effects of chitosan nanoparticles on seed germination and 
seedling growth of wheat (Triticum aestivum L.). Int. J. Boil. Macromol. 126, 91–100.
Li, W.Q., Qing, T., Li, C.C., Li, F., Ge, F., Fei, J.J., 2020a. Integration of subcellular partitioning and chemical forms 
to understand silver nanoparticles toxicity to lettuce (Lactuca sativa L.) under different exposure pathways. 
Chemosphere 258, 127349.
Li, M., Xu, G., Yang, X., Zeng, Y., Yu, Y., 2020b. Metal oxide nanoparticles facilitate the accumulation of bifenthrin in 
earthworms by causing damage to body cavity. Environ. Pollut. 263, 114629.
Lin, D., Xing, B., 2007. Phytotoxicity of nanoparticles: inhibition of seed germination and root growth. Environ. 
Pollut. 150, 243–250.
Liu, M., Feng, S., Ma, Y., Xie, C., He, X., Ding, Y., 2019. Influence of surface charge on the phytotoxicity, transforma￾tion, and translocation of CeO2 nanoparticles in cucumber plants. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 11, 16905–16913.
Liu, R., Lal, R., 2015. Synthetic apatite nanoparticles as a phosphorus fertilizer for soybean (Glycine max). Sci. Rep. 
4, 5686.Liu, Q., Zhao, Y., Wan, Y., Zheng, J., Zhang, X., Wang, C., Lin, J., 2010. Study of the inhibitory effect of water-soluble 
fullerenes on plant growth at the cellular level. ACS Nano. 4 (10), 5743–5748.
López, M.M., Llop, P., Olmos, A., Marco-Noales, E., Cambra, M., Bertolini, E., 2009. Are molecular tools solving the 
challenges posed by detection of plant pathogenic bacteria and viruses? Curr. Issues Mol. Biol. 11, 13–46.
Lungu, M., Neculae, A., Bunoiu, M., Biris, C., 2015. Nanoparticles’ Promises and Risks, Nanoparticles’ Promises 
and Risks: Characterization, Manipulation, and Potential Hazards to Humanity and the Environment. Springer 
International Publishing, Cham.
Luyckx, M., Hausman, J.F., Lutts, S., Guerriero, G., 2017. Silicon and plants: current knowledge and technological 
perspectives. Front. Plant Sci. 8, 411.
Lv, J., Zhang, S., Luo, L., Zhang, J., Yangc, K., Christie, P., 2015. Accumulation, speciation and uptake pathway of ZnO 
nanoparticles in maize. Environ. Sci. Nano 2, 68–77.
Ma, C., Rui, Y., Liu, S., Li, X., Xing, B., Liu, L., 2015. Phytotoxic mechanism of nanoparticles: destruction of chloro￾plasts and vascular bundles and alteration of nutrient absorption. Sci. Rep. 5, 11618.
Mahakham, W., Theerakulpisut, P., Maensiri, S., Phumying, S., Sarmah, A.K., 2016. Environmentally benign synthe￾sis of phytochemicals-capped gold nanoparticles as nanopriming agent for promoting maize seed germination. 
Sci. Total Environ. 573, 1089–1102.
Mahmoodzadeh, H., Nabavi, M., Kashefi, H., 2013. Effect of nanoscale titanium dioxide particles on the germination 
and growth of canola (Brassica napus). J. Ornam. Hortic. Plants 3, 25–32.
Malakar, A., Snow, D.D., 2020. Nanoparticles as inorganic pollutant in water. In: Devi, P., Singh, P., Kansal, S.K. (Eds.), 
Inorganic Pollutants in Water. Elsevier, Oxford, UK, p. 440.
Malandrakis, A.A., Kavroulakis, N., Chrysikopoulos, C.V., 2020. Synergy between Cu-NPs and fungicides against 
Botrytis cinerea. Sci. Total Environ. 703, 135557.
Martinson, C.A., Reddy, K.J., 2009. Adsorption of arsenic(III) andarsenic (V) by cupric oxide nanoparticles. J. Colloid 
Interface Sci. 336, 406–411.
Mattiello, A., 2015. Evidence of phytotoxicity and genotoxicity in Hordeum vulgare L. exposed to CeO2 and TiO2
nanoparticles. Front. Plant Sci. 6, 1043–1050.
Maurer-Jones, M.A., Gunsolus, I.L., Murphy, C.J., Haynes, C.L., 2013. Toxicity of engineered nanoparticles in the 
environment. Anal. Chem. 85, 3036–3049.
Mayo, J.T., Yavuz, C., Yean, S., Cong, L., Shipley, H., Yu, W., Falkner, J., Kan, A., Tomson, M., Colvin, V.L., 2007. The 
effect of nanocrystalline magnetitesize on arsenic removal. Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater. 8, 71–75.
McDonald, K.J., Reynolds, B., Reddy, K.J., 2015. Intrinsic properties ofcupric oxide nanoparticles enable effective 
filtration of arsenic fromwater. Sci. Rep. 5.
Meena, R.S., Kumar, S., Datta, R., Lal, R., Vijayakumar, V., Brtnicky, M., 2020. Impact of agrochemicals on soil micro￾biota and management: a review. Land 9, 34.
Meychik, N.R., Nikolaeva, J.I., Yermakov, I.P., 2005. Ion exchange properties of the root cell walls isolated from the 
halophyte plants (Suaeda altissima L.) grown under conditions of different salinity. Plant and Soil 277, 163.
Michaud, A.M., Bravin, M.N., Galleguillos, M., Hinsinger, P., 2007. Copper uptake and phytotoxicity as assessed in 
situ for durum wheat (Triticum turgidum durum L.) cultivated in Cu-contaminated, former vineyard soils. Plant 
and Soil 298, 99–111.
Mikhailovna Korotkova, A., Lebedev, S.V., Sizova, F.G.K., 2017. Biological effects in wheat (Triticum vulgare L.) under 
the influence of metal nanoparticles (Fe, Cu, Ni) and their oxides (Fe3Oe4, CuO, NiO). Agrobiology 52, 172–182.
Milenkovic, I., Mitrovic, A., Algarra, M., Lázaro-Martínez, J.M., Rodríguez-Castellón, E., Maksimovic, V., 2019. 
Interaction of carbohydrate coated´ cerium-oxide nanoparticles with wheat and pea: stress induction potential 
and effect on development. Plants 8, 478.
Milewska-Hendel, A., Zubko, M., Stróz, D., Kurczynska, E.U., 2019. Effect of nanoparticles surface charge on the Arabidopsis 
thaliana (L.) roots development and their movement into the root cells and protoplasts. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 20, 1650.
Monica, R.C., Cremonini, R., 2009. Nanoparticles and higher plants. Caryologia 62, 161–165.
Mukherjee, A., Majumdar, S., Servin, A.D., Pagano, L., Dhankher, O.P., White, J.C., 2016. Carbon nanomaterials in 
agriculture: a critical review. Front. Plant Sci. 7, 172.
Nadiminti, P.P., Dong, Y.D., Sayer, C., Hay, P., Rookes, J.E., Boyd, B.J., 2013. Nanostructured liquid crystalline parti￾cles as an alternative delivery vehicle for plant agrochemicals. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 5, 1818–1826.
Nair, P.M.G., Chung, I.M., 2014. Physiological and molecular level effects of silver nanoparticles exposure in rice 
(Oryza sativa L.) seedlings. Chemosphere 112, 105–113.
References 189190 9. Interaction of nanoparticles and nanocomposite
de Oliveira, J.L., Campos, E.V., Bakshi, M., Abhilash, P.C., Fraceto, L.F., 2014. Application of nanotechnology for the 
encapsulation of botanical insecticides for sustainable agriculture: prospects and promises. Biotechnol. Adv. 32, 
1550–1561.
Sharma, P., Pandey, V., Sharma, M.M.M., Patra, A., Singh, B., Mehta, S., Husen, A., 2021a. A review on biosen￾sors and nanosensors application in agroecosystems. Nanoscale Res. Lett. 16, 136. https://doi.org/10.1186/
s11671-021-03593-0.
Sharma, G., Nim, S., Alle, M., Husen, A., Kim, J.C., 2021b. Nanoparticle-mediated delivery of flavonoids for 
cancer therapy: Prevention and treatment. In: Kim, J.C., Alle, M., Husen, A. (Eds.), Smart Nanomaterials in 
Biomedical Applications. Nanotechnology in the Life Sciences. Springer, Cham, pp. 61–100, https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-030-84262-8_3.
Nair, R., Varghese, S.H., Nair, B.G., 2010. Nanoparticulate material delivery to plants. Plant Sci. 179, 154–163.
Navarro, D.A., Bisson, M.A., Aga, D.S., 2012. Investigating uptake of water-dispersible CdSe/ZnS quantum dot 
nanoparticles by Arabidopsis thaliana plants. J. Hazard. Mater. 211, 427–435.
Nel, A.E., Mädler, L., Velegol, D., Xia, T., Hoek, E.M., Somasundaran, P., 2009. Understanding biophysicochemical 
interactions at the nano-bio interface. Nat. Mater. 8, 543–557.
Nowack, B., Bucheli, T.D., 2007. Occurrence, behavior and effects of nanoparticles in the environment. Environ. 
Pollut. 150, 5–22.
O'Brien, J.A., Benková, E., 2013. Cytokinin cross-talking during biotic and abiotic stress responses. Front. Plant Sci. 
4, 451.
Oussou-Azo, A., Nakama, T., Nakamura, M., Futagami, T., Vestergaard, M., 2020. Antifungal potential of nanostruc￾tured crystalline copper and its oxide forms. Nanomaterials 10, 1003.
Pakrashi, S., Jain, N., Dalai, S., Jayakumar, J., Chandrasekaran, P.T., Raichur, A.M., 2014. In vivo genotoxicity assess￾ment of titanium dioxide nanoparticles by Allium cepa root tip assay at high exposure concentrations. PLoS One 
9, e87789.
Palocci, C., Valletta, A., Chronopoulou, L., Donati, L., Bramosanti, M., Brasili, E., 2017. Endocytic pathways involved 
in PLGA nanoparticle uptake by grapevine cells and role of cell wall and membrane in size selection. Plant Cell 
Rep. 36, 1917–1928.
Paret, M.L., Vallad, G.E., Averett, D.R., Jones, J.B., Olson, S.M., 2013. Photocatalysis: effect of light-activated na￾noscale formulations of TiO2 on Xanthomonas perforans and control of bacterial spot of tomato. Phytopathology 
103, 228–236.
Park, S., Ahn, Y.J., 2016. Multi-walled carbon nanotubes and silver nanoparticles differentially affect seed germi￾nation, chlorophyll content, and hydrogen peroxide accumulation in carrot (Daucus carota L.). Biocatal. Agric. 
Biotechnol. 8, 257–262.
Paulkumar, K., Gnanajobitha, G., Vanaja, M., Rajeshkumar, S., Malarkodi, C., Pandian, K., Annadurai, G., 2014. Piper 
nigrum leaf and stem assisted green synthesis of silver nanoparticles and evaluation of its antibacterial activity 
against agricultural plant pathogens. Sci. World J. 2014, 829894.
Pelletier, D.A., Suresh, A.K., Holton, G.A., McKeown, C.K., Wang, W., Gu, B., Mortensen, N.P., Allison, D.P., Joy, 
D.C., Allison, M.R., Brown, S.D., 2010. Effects of engineered cerium oxide nanoparticles on bacterial growth and 
viability. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 76, 7981–7989.
Pena, M.E., Korfiatis, G.P., Patel, M., Lippincott, L., Meng, X.G., 2005. Adsorption of As(V) and As(III) by nanocrys￾talline titanium dioxide. Water Res. 39, 2327–2337.
Pérez-de-Luque, A., 2017. Interaction of nanomaterials with plants: what do we need for real applications in agricul￾ture. Front. Environ. Sci. 5, 12.
Perreault, F., Samadani, M., Dewez, D., 2014. Effect of soluble copper released from copper oxide nanoparticles solu￾bilisation on growth and photosynthetic processes of Lemna gibba L. Nanotoxicology 8, 374–382.
Pokropivny, V.V., Skorokhod, V.V., 2007. Classification of nanostructures by dimensionality and concept of surface 
forms engineering in nanomaterial science. Mater. Sci. Eng. C 27, 990–993.
Pouratashi, M., Iravani, H., 2012. Farmers’ knowledge of integrated pest management and learning style preferences: 
implications for information delivery. Int. J. Pest Manage. 58, 347–353.
Pulido-Reyes, G., Rodea-Palomares, I., Das, S., Sakthivel, T.S., Leganes, F., Rosal, R., 2015. Untangling the biological 
effects of cerium oxide nanoparticles: the role of surface valence states. Sci. Rep. 5, 15613.
Qi-liang, H.U., Wen-ji, Z.H., Feng-min, L.I., Dong-mei, S.H., Chun-hua, Z.H., Xiao-li, B.U., 2006. Solubilization 
of chlorpyrifos in the mixed system of surfactants and the bioactivity evaluation. Chin. J. Pestic. Sci. 8, 
71–76.Rad, F., Mohsenifar, A., Tabatabaei, M., Safarnejad, M.R., Shahryari, F., Safarpour, H., 2012. Detection of candidatus 
Phytoplasma aurantifolia with a quantum dots FRET-based biosensor. J. Plant Pathol. 1, 525–534.
Raffi, M.M., Husen, A., 2019. Impact of fabricated nanoparticles on the rhizospheric microorganisms and soil envi￾ronment. In: Husen, A., Iqbal, M. (Eds.), Nanomaterials and Plant Potential. Springer International Publishing AG, 
Cham, pp. 529–552, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-05569-1_21.
Wagay, J.A., Singh, S., Raffi, M.M., Rahman, Q.I., Husen, A., 2019. Effect of carbon-based nanomaterials on plant func￾tioning and rhizosphere. In: Husen, A., Iqbal, M. (Eds.), Nanomaterials and Plant Potential. Springer International 
Publishing AG, Cham, pp. 553–575, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-05569-1_22.
Rai, P.K., Kumar, V., Lee, S.S., Raza, N., Kim, K.H., Ok, Y.S., Tsang, D.C.W., 2018. Nanoparticle-plant interaction: 
implications in energy, environment, and agriculture. Environ. Int. 119, 1–19.
Raja, K., Sowmya, R., Sudhagar, R., Moorthy, P.S., Govindaraju, K., Subramanian, K.S., 2019. Biogenic ZnO and cu 
nanoparticles to improve seed germination quality in blackgram (Vigna mungo). Mater. Lett. 235, 164–167.
Rastogi, A., Marek, Z., Oksana, S., Hazem, K.M., Xiaolan, H., Sonia, M., Marian, B., 2017. Impact of metal and metal 
boxide nanoparticles on plant: a critical review. Front. Chem. 78, 1–16.
Rastogi, A., Tripathi, D.K., Yadav, S., Chauhan, D.K., Živcák, M., Ghorbanpour, M., 2019. Application of silicon 
nanoparticles in agriculture. 3 Biotech 9, 90.
Reddy, K.J., McDonald, K.J., King, H., 2013. A novel arsenic removalprocess for water using cupric oxide nanoparti￾cles. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 397, 96–102.
Reddy, K.J., Roth, T.R., 2013. Arsenic removal from natural ground water using cupric oxide. Ground Water 51, 83–91.
Rice, J.C., Garcia, S.M., 2011. Fisheries, food security, climate change, and biodiversity: characteristics of the sector 
and perspectives on emerging issues. ICES J. Mar. Sci. 68, 1343–1353.
Rico, C.M., Majumdar, S., Duarte-Gardea, M., Peralta-Videa, J.R., Gardea Torresdey, J.L., 2011. Interaction of nanopar￾ticles with edible plants and their possible implications in the food chain. J. Agric. Food Chem. 59, 3485–3498.
Riederer, M., Schreiber, L., 2001. Protecting against water loss: analysis of the barrier properties of plant cuticles. J. 
Exp. Bot. 52, 2023–2032.
Roberts, A., Oparka, K.J., 2003. Plasmodesmata and the control of symplastic transport. Plant Cell Environ. 26, 
103–124.
Roco, M.C., 2005. Environmentally responsible development of nanotechnology. Environ. Sci. Technol. 39, 106A–112A.
Sahoo, D., Mandal, A., Mitra, T., Chakraborty, K., Bardhan, M., Dasgupta, A.K., 2018. Nanosensing of pesticides by 
zinc oxide quantum dot: an optical and electrochemical approach for the detection of pesticides in water. J. Agric. 
Food Chem. 66, 414–423.
Sasson, Y., Levy-Ruso, G., Toledano, O., Ishaaya, I., 2007. Nanosuspensions: emerging novel agrochemical formula￾tions. In: Insecticides Design Using Advanced Technologies. Springer, Berlin; Heidelberg, pp. 1–39.
Sattelmacher, B., 2001. The apoplast and its significance for plant mineral nutrition. New Phytol. 149, 167–192.
Saxena, R., Tomar, R.S., Kumar, M., 2016. Exploring nanobiotechnology to mitigate abiotic stress in crop plants. J. 
Pharm. Sci. Res. 8, 974.
Schönherr, J., 2002. A mechanistic analysis of penetration of glyphosate salts across astomatous cuticular membranes. 
Pest Manag. Sci. 58, 343–351.
Schwab, F., Zhai, G., Kern, M., Turner, A., Schnoor, J.L., Wiesner, M.R., 2015. Barriers, pathways and processes for 
uptake, translocation and accumulation of nanomaterials in plants-critical review. Nanotoxicology 10, 257–278.
Seitz, F., Rosenfeldt, R.R., Lüderwald, S., Schulz, R., Bundschuh, M., 2015. Aging of TiO2 nanoparticles transiently 
increases their toxicity to the pelagic microcrustacean Daphnia magna. PLoS One 10, e0126021.
Seitz, F., Rosenfeldt, R.R., Müller, M., Lüderwald, S., Schulz, R., Bundschuh, M., 2016. Quantity and quality of natural 
organic matter influence the ecotoxicity of titanium dioxide nanoparticles. Nanotoxicology 10, 1415–1421.
Serag, M.F., Kaji, N., Gaillard, C., Okamoto, Y., Terasaka, K., Jabasini, M., 2011. Trafficking and subcellular localiza￾tion of multiwalled carbon nanotubes in plant cells. ACS Nano 5, 493–499.
Servin, A.D., Morales, M.I., Castillo-Michel, H., Hernandez-Viezcas, J.A., Munoz, B., Zhao, L., 2013. Synchrotron ver￾ification of TiO2 accumulation in cucumber fruit: a possible pathway of TiO2 nanoparticle transfer from soil into 
the food chain. Environ. Sci. Technol. 47, 11592–11598.
Sharma, D., Kanchi, S., Bisetty, K., 2019. Biogenic synthesis of nanoparticles: a review. Arab. J. Chem. 12, 3576–3600.
Sharma, G., Kumar, A., Devi, K.A., Prajapati, D., Bhagat, D., Pal, A., Raliya, R., Biswas, P., Saharan, V., 2020. Chitosan 
nanofertilizer to foster source activity in maize. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 145, 226–234.
Sharma, P., Jha, A.B., Dubey, R.S., Pessarakli, M., 2012. Reactive oxygen species, oxidative damage, and antioxidative 
defense mechanism in plants under stressful conditions. J. Bot. 2012, 217037.
References 191192 9. Interaction of nanoparticles and nanocomposite
Sharma, V.K., Filip, J., Zboril, R., Varma, R.S., 2015. Natural inorganic nanoparticles—formation, fate, and toxicity in 
the environment. Chem. Soc. Rev. 44, 8410–8423.
Siddiqi, K.S., Husen, A., 2016. Engineered gold nanoparticles and plant adaptation potential. Nanoscale Res. Lett. 11, 
400. https://doi.org/10.1186/s11671-016-1607-2.
Siddiqi, K.S., Husen, A., 2017. Plant response to engineered metal oxide nanoparticles. Nanoscale Res. Lett. 12, 92. 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s11671-017-1861-y.
Siddiqi, K.S., Husen, A., 2021. Plant response to silver nanoparticles: a critical review. Crit. Rev. Biotechnol. https://
doi.org/10.1080/07388551.2021.1975091.
Singh, S., Singh, M., Agrawal, V.V., Kumar, A., 2010. An attempt to develop surface plasmon resonance based im￾munosensor for Karnal bunt (Tilletia indica) diagnosis based on the experience of nano-gold based lateral flow 
immuno-dipstick test. Thin Solid Films 519, 1156–1159.
Soleymanzadeh, R., Iranbakhsh, A., Habibi, G., Ardebili, Z.O., 2020. Selenium nanoparticle protected strawberry 
against salt stress through modifications in salicylic acid, ion homeostasis, antioxidant machinery, and photosyn￾thesis performance. Acta Biol. Cracov. Bot. 62, 33–42.
Spielman-Sun, E., Avellan, A., Bland, G.D., Tappero, R.V., Acerbo, A.S., Unrine, J.M., 2019. Nanoparticle surface 
charge influences translocation and leaf distribution in vascular plants with contrasting anatomy. Environ. Sci. 
Nano 6, 2508–2519.
Stadler, T., Buteler, M., Valdez, S.R., Gitto, J.G., 2018. Particulate nanoinsecticides: a new concept in insect pest man￾agement. In: Insectic. Agricul. Toxicol. vol. 83, p. 72448.
Stefan, L., Monchaud, D., 2019. Applications of guanine quartets in nanotechnology and chemical biology. Nat. Rev. 
Chem. 3, 650–668.
Sun, D., Hussain, H.I., Yi, Z., Rookes, J.E., Kong, L., Cahill, D.M., 2016. Mesoporous silica nanoparticles enhance 
seedling growth and photosynthesis in wheat and lupin. Chemosphere 152, 81–91.
Sun, D., Hussain, H.I., Yi, Z., Rookes, J.E., Kong, L., Cahill, D.M., 2018. Delivery of abscisic acid to plants using glu￾tathione responsive mesoporous silica nanoparticles. J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol. 18, 1615–1625.
Suriyaprabha, R., Karunakaran, G., Yuvakkumar, R., Rajendran, V., Kannan, N., 2012. Silica nanoparticles for in￾creased silica availability in maize (Zea mays. L) seeds under hydroponic conditions. Curr. Nanosci. 8, 902–908.
Tantawy, A.S., Salama, Y.A.M., El-Nemr, M.A., Abdel-Mawgoud, A.M.R., 2015. Nano silicon application improves 
salinity tolerance of sweet pepper plants. Int. J. Chem. Tech. Res. 8, 11–17.
Tian, X., Liu, L., Li, Y., Yang, C., Zhou, Z., Nie, Y., Wang, Y., 2018. Nonenzymatic electrochemical sensor based on 
CuO-TiO2 for sensitive and selective detection of methyl parathion pesticide in ground water. Sens. Actuators B 
Chem. 256, 135–142.
Tiwari, J.N., Tiwari, R.N., Kim, K.S., 2012. Zero-dimensional, one-dimensional, two-dimensional and three￾dimensional nanostructured materials for advanced electrochemical energy devices. Prog. Mater. Sci. 57, 724–803.
Topuz, E., van Gestel, C.A.M., 2017. The effect of soil properties on the toxicity and bioaccumulation of Ag nanopar￾ticles and Ag ions in Enchytraeus crypticus. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 144, 330–337.
Tripathi, D.K., Singh, S., Singh, S., Srivastava, P.K., Singh, V.P., Singh, S., 2017. Nitric oxide alleviates silver nanopar￾ticles (AgNps)-induced phytotoxicity in Pisum sativum seedlings. Plant Physiol. Biochem. 110, 167–177.
Tymoszuk, A., Miler, N., 2019. Silver and gold nanoparticles impact on in vitro adventitious organogenesis in chry￾santhemum, gerbera and Cape Primrose. Sci. Hortic. 257, 108766.
Van Breusegem, F., Dat, J.F., 2006. Reactive oxygen species in plant cell death. Plant Physiol. 141, 384–390.
Varna, M., Ratajczak, P., Ferreira, I., Leboeuf, C., Bousquet, G., Janin, A., 2012. In  vivo distribution of inorganic 
nanoparticles in preclinical models. J. Biomater. Nanobiotechnol. 3, 269–279.
Velicogna, J.R., Ritchie, E.E., Scroggins, R.P., Princz, J.I., 2016. A comparison of the effects of silver nanoparticles and 
silver nitrate on a suite of soil dwelling organisms in two field soils. Nanotoxicology 10, 1144–1151.
Vinković, T., Novák, O., Strnad, M., Goessler, W., Jurašin, D.D., Paradiković, N., 2017. Cytokinin response in pepper 
plants (Capsicum annuum L.) exposed to silver nanoparticles. Environ. Res. 156, 10–18.
Volker, C., Kampken, I., Boedicker, C., Oehlmann, J., Oetken, M., 2015. Toxicity of silver nanoparticles and ionic sil￾ver: comparison of adverse effects and potential toxicity mechanisms in the freshwater clam Sphaerium corneum. 
Nanotoxicology 9, 677–685.
Waalewijn-Kool, P.L., Ortiz, M.D., Lofts, S., van Gestel, C.A.M., 2013. The effect of pH on the toxicity of zinc oxide 
nanoparticles to Folsomia candida in amended field soil. Environ. Toxicol. Chem. 32, 2349–2355.
Wagner, S., Gondikas, A., Neubauer, E., Hofmann, T., von der Kammer, F., 2014. Spot the difference: engineered and 
natural nanoparticles in the environment—release, behavior, and fate. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 53, 12398–12419.Wakeel, A., Xu, M., Gan, Y., 2020. Chromium-induced reactive oxygen species accumulation by altering the en￾zymatic antioxidant system and associated cytotoxic, genotoxic, ultrastructural, and photosynthetic changes in 
plants. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 21, 728.
Wang, P., Lombi, E., Zhao, F.J., Kopittke, P.M., 2016. Nanotechnology: a new opportunity in plant sciences. Trends 
Plant Sci. 21, 699–712.
Wang, Q., Ma, X., Zhang, W., Pei, H., Chen, Y., 2012b. The impact of cerium oxide nanoparticles on tomato (Solanum 
lycopersicum L.) and its implications for food safety. Metallomics 4, 1105–1112.
Wang, Z., Xie, X., Zhao, J., Liu, X., Feng, W., White, J.C., 2012a. Xylem- and phloem-based transport of CuO nanopar￾ticles in maize (Zea mays L.). Environ. Sci. Technol. 46, 4434–4441.
Wijnhoven, S.W.P., Peijnenburg, W.J.G.M., Herberts, C.A., Hagens, W.I., Oomen, A.G., Heugens, E.H.W., Roszek, 
B., Bisschops, J., Gosens, I., Van De Meent, D., Dekkers, S., De Jong, W.H., Van Zijverden, M., Sips, A.J.A.M., 
Geertsma, R.E., 2009. Nano-silver—a review of available data and knowledge gaps in human and environmental 
risk assessment. Nanotoxicology 3, 109–138.
Wong, M.H., Misra, R.P., Giraldo, J.P., Kwak, S.Y., Son, Y., Landry, M.P., 2016. Lipid exchange envelope penetration 
(LEEP) of nanoparticles for plant engineering: a universal localization mechanism. Nano Lett. 16, 1161–1172.
Wu, B., Beitz, E., 2007. Aquaporins with selectivity for unconventional permeants. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 64, 2413–2421.
Wu, H., Santana, I., Dansie, J., Giraldo, J.P., 2017. In vivo delivery of nanoparticles into plant leaves. Curr. Protoc. 
Chem. Biol. 9, 269–284.
Wu, H., Shabala, L., Shabala, S., Giraldo, J.P., 2018. Hydroxyl radical scavenging by cerium oxide nanoparticles 
improves arabidopsis salinity tolerance by enhancing leaf mesophyll potassium retention. Environ. Sci. Nano 5, 
1567–1583.
Yan, S., Zhang, H., Huang, Y., Tan, J., Wang, P., Wang, Y., Hou, H., Huang, J., Li, L., 2016. Single-wall and multi-wall 
carbon nanotubes promote rice root growth by eliciting the similar molecular pathways and epigenetic regulation. 
IET Nanobiotechnol. 10, 222–229.
Yao, K.S., Li, S.J., Tzeng, K.C., Cheng, T.C., Chang, C.Y., Chiu, C.Y., 2009. Fluorescence silica nano probe as a bio￾marker for rapid detection of plant pathogens. Adv. Mater. Res. 79, 513–516.
Yaqoob, A.A., Parveen, T., Umar, K., Mohamad, M.N., 2020. Role of nanomaterials in the treatment of wastewater: a 
review. Water 12, 495.
Yuan, J., Chen, Y., Li, H., Lu, J., Zhao, H., Liu, M., 2018. New insights into the cellular responses to iron nanoparticles 
in Capsicum annuum. Sci. Rep. 8, 3228.
Zeng, Y., Himmel, M.E., Ding, S.Y., 2017. Visualizing chemical functionality in plant cell walls. Biotechnol. Biofuels 
10, 1–16.
Zhai, G., Walters, K.S., Peate, D.W., Alvarez, P.J., Schnoor, J.L., 2014. Transport of gold nanoparticles through plas￾modesmata and precipitation of gold ions in woody poplar. Environ. Sci. Technol. Lett. 1, 146–151.
Zhang, W., Schwab, A.P., White, J.C., Ma, X., 2018. Impact of nanoparticle surface properties on the attachment of 
cerium oxide nanoparticles to sand and kaolin. J. Environ. Qual. 47, 129–138.
Zhao, L., Peralta-Videa, J.R., Varela-Ramirez, A., Castillo-Michel, H., Li, C., Zhang, J., Aguilera, R.J., Keller, A.A., 
Gardea-Torresdey, J.L., 2012. Effect of surface coating and organic matter on the uptake of CeO2 NPs by corn 
plants grown in soil: insight into the uptake mechanism. J. Hazard. Mater. 225, 131–138.
Zhou, D., Jin, S., Li, L., 2011. Quantifying the adsorption and uptake of CuO nanoparticles by wheat root based on 
chemical extractions. J. Environ. Sci. 23, 1852–1857.
Zhu, Z.J., Wang, H., Yan, B., Zheng, H., Jiang, Y., Miranda, O.R., 2012. Effect of surface charge on the uptake and 
distribution of gold nanoparticles in four plant species. Environ. Sci. Technol. 46, 12391–12398.
 
References 193This page intentionally left blankPlants and their Interaction to Environmental Pollution 195 Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-99978-6.00009-1
CHAPTER
10
Toxic effects of essential metals on 
plants: From damage to adaptation 
responses
Shivam Sharmaa
, D.R. Choudharya
, Viveka Katochb
, 
Antul Kumarc
, Anuj Choudharyc
, B.M. Harisha
, 
Harmanjot Kaurc
, and Sahil Mehtad
a
Department of Vegetable Science and Floriculture, CSK HPKV, Palampur, Himachal Pradesh, 
India, b
Department of Seed Science and Technology, CSK HPKV Palampur, Himachal Pradesh, 
India, c
Department of Botany, Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana, Punjab, India, 
d
Department of Botany, Hansraj College, University of Delhi, New Delhi, India
1. Introduction
Food and feed safety poses a great challenge to sustaining the biological system and the pri￾mary reason contributing to this challenge is metal toxicity (Kumar et al., 2021). Man-made ac￾tivities such as agriculture, mining, smelting, steel, iron, and chemical industry (Cooper et al., 
2020; Javid et al., 2018) along with the ridiculous effect of sewage sludge, compost refuse, and 
fly ash (Meng et al., 2022) are the chief reason of release and accumulation of heavy metals into 
the environment through groundwater, soil, and ultimately in food crops (Singh et al., 2022). 
As toxic form metal and their metalloids are posing bad impact on the health of human beings 
and livestock. For that reason, this proves fatal to human health when such types of crops 
are consumed. Utilization of heavy metal-contaminated water for household and irrigation 
consumption over a long duration led to the accumulation of heavy metal concentration more 
than its safe permitted limit (Bindu et al., 2021). Nowadays heavy metal toxicity is creating 
health issues in both developed and underdeveloped countries due to its nature of high stabil￾ity, nonbiodegradability, and bioaccumulation in living cells (Riyazuddin et al., 2022).
The cross-contamination of heavy metal bioaccumulation via the food chain always proves 
fatal for both humans and domestic animals (Khan et al., 2008). Micronutrients, viz., iron (Fe), 
zinc (Zn), and manganese (Mn) are always vital for vegetables in minute amount always, as 196 10. Toxic effects of essential metals on plants
their absence it creates the problem of “hidden hunger” which cause serious health issues in 
form of typical deficiency symptoms (Woldetsadik et al., 2017). On the other side, mercury 
(Hg), lead (Pb), cadmium (Cd), and aluminum (Al), are regarded as nonessential as they are 
not required at all for plant growth and their excessive accumulation in a biological system 
always led cross-contamination and heavy toxicity (Boyd and Rajakaruna, 2013). Besides this, 
both micronutrients and nonessential metals always perform their specified functions in the 
metabolic pathways when their availability is regulated at the desired amount. Vegetables 
being protective foods are eaten for vitamin and mineral enrichment to nourish the human 
body as they are a power pack of nutrients (Boeing et al., 2012). Effective good soil insects 
(specifically in the agriculture sector) which can be utilized as typical and natural biocontrol 
agents are also affected via soil toxicity as a result of heavy metal toxicity in soil (Rai et al., 
2018; Bartron and Penuelas, 2017). Riyazuddin et al. (2022) reported retardation within the 
process of photosynthesis through heavy metal toxicity was the result of chlorophyll degra￾dation molecules by stimulating both photolytic and chlorophyllase activity. Replacing the 
central Mg2+ ion from the porphyrin ring is also was one of the chief reasons for affecting 
plant growth and yield when exposed to metal toxicity (Gall et al., 2015)
Olericulture exposed to heavy metals sources accumulates an extended amount of heavy 
metals than normal ones whose biotoxic effects on the human body truly depend upon the 
concentration, heavy metal’s state of oxidation, source type, and mean of accumulation 
(Duruibe et  al., 2007). Heavy metals enter the different tissues by their accumulation on 
the vegetable surface (Kachenko and Singh, 2005). Leafy vegetables among all vegetable 
groups are known to accumulate the highest heavy metals in their roots and leaves poten￾tially when compared with stems and fruits of the rest of the vegetables (Yargholi and Azimi, 
2008). Proper implementation of imposed rules and regulations on food quality by different 
organizations proves helpful in restricting toxic metals through awareness among house￾holds and vegetable consumers (Tyagi, 2014). Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) and Food 
and Drug Administration, i.e., FDA (Suruchi and Khanna, 2011) ensure regulation of norms 
and conditions particular to heavy metal exposure, accumulation, and safe limits regarding 
food crops. The most common diseases in response to heavy metal accumulation include 
anemia, lung cancer, and infertility in males (Kumari et al., 2016). Lastly, this review also dis￾cusses the response of toxic/essential metals on plants, damage detection, repair strategies, 
and adaptation responses. Munir et al. (2022) highlighted the impact of heavy metal depo￾sition concerning other inhabitants of soil with their impact on human health. Regarding to 
this research, it was found that veggies grown over toxified heavy metal soil gather higher 
volume when compared with unpolluted soil-grown vegetable crops (Table 1). In addition, 
dense water accumulation, i.e., air, H2O, and food crops also decline the nutritional quality 
derived from fruit and vegetables.
Multiple risky heavy metals and their compounds, i.e., metalloids such as Pb, Al, Cr, As, 
and Hg are regarded as nonessential/unuseful to the biological functions of a living system. 
Being preferred deleterious in a biological system (Gall et al., 2015), they are involved among 
most top 20 list of most fatal materials by United States Environment Protection Agencies 
(ATSDR, 2007; Khalid et al., 2017). In addition, vegetables grown under protected structures 
like greenhouses are most affected by heavy metals toxicity concerning open field vegeta￾bles, i.e., less illumination. Meng et al. (2022) assessed arsenic accumulation and toxicity via 
spinach and lettuce with target hazard point (THQ) and safe threshold values for studied 
leafy vegetables were higher than quality standards and norms and conditions set by China. 2. Metal toxicity in plants 197
To meet out this objective, this review tried to expose the direct and indirect sources of 
heavy metal contamination and pollution within the edaphic environment affecting vegeta￾bles with their consequences on human health.
2. Metal toxicity in plants
Hence, nonessential trace elements, viz., mercury, aluminum, chromium, lead, and arsenic 
are fatal even at a slight amount to the living system. However, factors like plant type, soil 
pH, soil type, and fertilizer dose-effect metal uptake/accumulation from the soil solution 
TABLE 1 Heavy metal contamination from diverse sources in global vegetable crops.
S. no. Vegetable crop Heavy metals
Source of 
heavy water 
contamination Country References
1. Lettuce Cd, Cu, Pb, and Zn Wastewater Port Kembla and 
Boolaroo, Australia
Manwani et al. (2022)
2. Potato Cu, Cr, Pb, Cd, 
and Zn
Inadequately 
treated wastewater
Egypt El-Kady and Abdel￾Wahhab (2018)
3. Lettuce As Pot experiment 
with the exogenous 
supply of Cd
United States 
(Florida)
de Oliveira et al. 
(2017)
4. Chinese cabbage Cd Wastewater China Junhe et al. (2017)
5. French bean and 
leafy vegetables
Pd, Cd, As Wastewater Northern Vietnam Bui et al. (2016)
6. Radish and carrot Pb, Cd, Cu, Zn, 
and As
Waste untreated Shizhuyuan area 
in China
Zhou et al. (2016)
7. Ash gourd, 
amaranthus, and 
okra
Pb, Cd, Cu, 
and Zn
Wastewater Samta village in 
Jessore district, 
Bangladesh
Alam et al. (2003)
8. Spinach and 
tomato
Pd, Cd Amba canal in 
Amravati (MH)
India Mohod (2015)
9. Lettuce and sweet 
potato
Cr, Ni, Cu, Pb, 
and Cd
Waste untreated Guangzhou, South 
China
Ning et al. (2015)
10. French bean, 
beetroot, and kale
Cr, Pd, Cu, Zn Urban stormwater Australia Tom et al. (2014)
11. Mustard Fe, Cu, Zn, and Pb Sekmai river Manipur, India Singh and Singh 
(2014)
12. Onion, tomato, 
and brinjal
Cu, Ni, Zn, Cr, Fe, 
Mn, Co, and Pb
Polluted water Mardan, Pakistan Amin et al. (2013)
13. Capsicum Cd, Cr, Cu, Ni, Pb, 
and Zn
Wastewater Istanbul province, 
Turkey
Osma et al. (2013)
14. Pea Cd, Cu, Pb, and Zn Wastewater China Luo et al. (2011)198 10. Toxic effects of essential metals on plants
(Bindu et al., 2021). The food crops can be categorized into two different categories, i.e., accu￾mulators and excluders of heavy metals. Vegetables possess well-ordered pathways to derive 
essential nutrients from the soil. Symbiosis of the vegetable root system with chelating agents 
eases bioavailability and uptake of micronutrients. A highly organized and well-efficient sys￾tem helps in the ascent of sap, with the management of heavy metals and metalloids. The 
process of evapotranspiration contributes to its role by allowing the contaminants migration 
into the veggies roots and shoots. Metal more than their own fresh weight. The phytoreme￾diation technique facilitates the management of heavy metals as phytoremediation technique 
(Salido et al., 2003).
Vegetables like lettuce, radish, beans, and tomatoes are all known for their potential for 
heavy metal accumulation in their leaves, roots, and fruits. In tomato and beans, lead (Pb) 
uptake and translocation were higher, while in the same plant cadmium (Cd) and arsenic 
(As) uptake was lower than zinc (Zn) uptake. In China, bioaccumulation of heavy metals 
in studied vegetables was reported with the highest in leaves. The Target Hazard Quotient 
(THQ) matching point no. 5, revealed that studied vegetables possess the great capability to 
develop serious health risks upon their consumption (Zhou et al., 2016). Moreover, it was also 
confirmed via atomic adsorption spectroscopy that they have the potential of creating fatal 
health risks as mean concentrations of metals and metalloids were found so high in ground￾water from safe threshold values given by WHO (Ashraf et al., 2021)
Use of the right mechanisms tangled in the foliar heavy metal translocation is also re￾quired to minimize health risks. In Lactuca sativa, Pb uptake via leaves chiefly occurred by the 
adsorption phenomenon of cuticle/stomatal apertures (Schreck et al., 2014). Transportation 
of heavy metals, i.e., the ascent of sap takes place by xylem transportation, in addition, the 
phloem vascular system favors foliar transportation. Regarding the mechanism of heavy 
metal accumulation and transportation, foliar translocation is less studied when compared 
with respect to transportation/ascent of sap from root (Sahid et al., 2016). On quantitative 
analysis of different studied vegetables, viz., mustard, cauliflower, cabbage, and spinach, the 
proportion of Fe and Zn was found significantly higher than the safe threshold limit. The iron 
(Fe) and copper (Cu) content of studied vegetables were significantly higher than permissible 
limits (Singh and Singh, 2014). Moreover, in spinach and tomato, lead was also beyond the 
optimum/safe permissible limit according to WHO. In spinach and tomato, the amounts of 
Cd signify its potential in causing different fatal health issues among vegetable consumers 
(Mohod, 2015). A study by Bui et al. (2016) also confirmed earlier results with the fact that 
mean concentrations of both Pb and As surpass maximum levels beyond international food 
safety standards with 70.6% in Pb and 44.1% in As. They claimed irrigation H2O is a primary 
cause of heavy metal accumulation and toxicity.
Veggies with polluted groundwater irrigation are greatly affected by heavy metals toxicity. 
Deposition of multiple nonessential trace metals is reported already in multiple vegetables on 
the treatment with wastewater (Amin et al., 2013). Heavy metals accumulation and loading 
were significantly higher in wastewater treatment with respect to tube-well water. Moreover, 
onion toxicity having 50 times high concerning (w.r.t.) tube well water irrigated soil. By using 
the principle of target hazard quotient (THQ) on studying leafy vegetables, were found to 
accumulate more heavy metals when evaluated with cucurbits, this showed that cucurbits 
cultivation especially melons is more suitable to heavy metal toxicity prone areas (Zhou et al., 
2016). In comparison to households, children were more vulnerable to harmful impacts of 
heavy metal consumption because the THQ value of children (5.41) was greater than adults 2. Metal toxicity in plants 199
(4.12), respectively. By using plasma emission in taro, elephant foot yam, it was greater with 
respect to the safe permissible limit of heavy metal set by norms and conditions of WHO 
(Alam et al., 2003). The potential of Pb accumulation was higher in bottle ground leaf, taro, 
and elephant foot yam than that of Cd. In addition, okra and potato had the bioconcentration 
factors of 0.001 and 0.006. Hence the huge amount of As can impose fatal health seriousness on 
the daily vegetable consumers (Alam et al., 2003). Osma et al. (2013) studied leafy vegetables 
with both criteria, i.e., washed and unwashed for metal presence or absence. Moreover, he 
found to lead to be the most toxic with the highest concentration among studied vegetables. 
Gupta et al. (2022) assessed the bioconcentration aspect in association with noncarcinogenic 
health risks to know the potential of veggies to absorb and accumulate heavy metals inside 
them and their screening for carcinogenic or noncarcinogenic factors. In coriander and onion, 
Zn and Mn were with significant accumulation on revealing their bioconcentration factor.
Ning et al. (2015) get the peak heights, i.e., 71.2μgg− 1
 in bitter lettuce. In addition, both 
Cd and Pb were screened for carcinogenic and noncarcinogenic properties. Aerial parts and 
roots of vegetables possessed a higher amount of heavy metal than soil, which specified high 
bioaccumulation of heavy metal from soil. However, in addition, Delbari and Kulkarni (2013)
also found that among leafy vegetables spinach deposited the highest quantity of nonessential 
trace elements regardless of season. Despite this, reasonably, nickel and zinc together were 
found more during spring and summer, while the amount was following their safe permis￾sible limits. Islam et al. (2016) monitored heavy metals in potato, red onion, and wild carrot 
which were found higher than the FAO/WHO recommended permissible safe limits. Higher 
acceptance from the soil might be the key cause of cross-contamination in the food chain. 
THQs mirrored the consumption of nonessential trace elements more than their recommended 
level revealing the possibility of carcinogenic health issues in long run for such people.
2.1 Effect of metal toxicity on plant physiological processes
Plants vary in terms of their sensitivity to nutrient and metal concentrations, as a result, 
they show different behavioral changes in pigment amount, dry/fresh weight, water quan￾tity, physiology, and in overall growth performance (Iqbal et al., 2015; Husen, 2021a, 2021b). 
Ultimately, these behavior changes led to absorption, emission, and reflectance of light char￾acteristics, which can be potentially utilized as a soil contamination indicator to observe the 
physiological position of the plant. Physiological changes by metal toxicity in veggies involve 
seed germination retardation, growth and development delay, uneven photosynthetic ten￾dency, and high respiration/transpiration (Table 2).
Galal et al. (2021) reported horticultural performance variation as the fresh weight of gar￾den pea was drastically lowered when they studied it over both polluted and nonpolluted 
sites. Moreover, seed production gets lost by 85.2% under true pollution stress. Riyazuddin 
et al. (2022) mentioned that integrated treatment of both Cu and Cd to brinjal (Solanum melon￾gena) drastically lowered seed germination and plantlet growth. Naciri et al. (2021) observed 
the hazardous effect of cadmium when it is present in different concentrations in cells, i.e., on 
root/shoot dry weight, root anatomy/morphology, and translocation factor. Multiple studies 
reflected that spectral reflectance of vegetable changes to reflect behavior response of metal and 
nutrient stress which are capable of creating physiological, biochemical, and molecular alterna￾tions in the plants. Kaya et al. (2020) also reported the same trend in which cadmium (Cd) stress 
decreased plant quality and quantity attributes with declined activities of antioxidant enzymes.200 10. Toxic effects of essential metals on plants
3. Metal toxicity and its damage detection
Through soil, most of the heavy metals and metalloids get accumulated in cells and tissues 
of vegetables which create a primary source of contamination to others in form of the food 
chain, i.e., humans and livestock (Dickin et al., 2016). Hence consumption of such vegetables 
TABLE 2 Effect of heavy metal toxicity on plant physiological processes.
S. no. Vegetable crops Remarks References
1. Spinach Drop in leaf number, area, and biomass Zaheer et al. (2019)
2. Colocasia The levels of total chlorophyll and total amino acids 
decreased, whereas those of soluble sugars, total protein, 
ascorbic acid, and phenol increased
Waterlot et al. (2017)
3. Spinach The fresh weight and dry weights decreased by 10.1% and 35.1% 
while the total protein, fiber, and moisture contents of spinach 
decreased by 31%, 29%, and 33%, at the highest dose of Cd
Alia et al. (2015)
4. Collard, radish, 
lettuce, tomato, 
and pepper
Cu and Zn concentrations increased significantly in the fruits 
of the tomato plants compared with other plants
Sridhar et al. (2014)
5. Turnip Toxicity symptoms included chlorosis in young leaves, 
browning of coralloid roots, and serious inhibition of plant 
growth. Shoot fresh weight (FW) progressively decreased with 
increasing Zn concentrations
Koo et al. (2013)
6. Chilli Lower concentrations of capsaicin and dihydrocapsaicin, 
resulting in lower pungency levels
Pascual et al. (2010)
7. Carrot Decreases the synthesis of proteins due to less photosynthetic 
activity
Auda and Ali (2010)
8. Tomato Plant growth was reduced, leaf chlorosis, necrosis, and 
root browning were followed by an increase in activity of 
phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase in response to Cd treatment
Millan et al. (2009)
9. Mustard High content of Pb showed a 77% reduction in protein content Weihong et al. (2009)
Reduction in the protein content with increased Zn 
concentrations due to degradation of protein with increasing 
protease activity
John et al. (2009) and Xu 
et al. (2006)
10. Wild carrot Reduction in protein content with a high dose of Cd Lin et al. (2007) and 
Mahmood et al. (2005)
11. Radish and 
French bean
Reduction in root: shoot ratio and biomass ratio Martin et al. (2006)
12. Chinese 
cabbage
Cu treatment considerably reduced the germination rate, root 
and shoot lengths
Xiong and Wang (2005)
13. Vegetable seeds Aluminum coagulants at the tested concentrations had a 
poisonous effect on the germination of vegetable seeds
Zhang and Zhou (2005); 
Yang et al. (2002)3. Metal toxicity and its damage detection 201
invites health aliment, viz., gastrointestinal cancer, malnutrition, and weak immunological 
response (Gress et al., 2015; El-Kady and Abdel-Wahhab, 2018). Ease with transportation with 
their deposition within cells and tissues of vegetables is a key factor to detect and judge global 
human health issues (Woldetsadik et al., 2017). Through food chain and dietary intake, they 
get easily accumulated in bones and adipose tissue which they can easily process into fatal 
health ailments including depletion of nutrients. Thereby these heavy metals and metalloids 
are involved in disrupting normal physiological functions of cells upon long-term ingestion 
(Rai, 2018). For example, Pb contamination is well known for its negative impacts on mental 
health by creating neurological degradation (Zhou et al., 2016; Al-Saleh et al., 2017). In ad￾dition, cadmium and lead are also well known for their carcinogenic effects and also prove 
fatal to bones and more specifically immunological response (El-Kady and Abdel-Wahhab, 
2018). Catalogs of nonessential elements within plant soil in association with the probability 
of health risks are well proposed to describe the ascent of the vegetables sap (Yang et al., 
2018). This section describes different indices that can be utilized to evaluate/quantify the 
possible ecotoxicological effects, remedial damage detection, and associated health risks from 
ingested-contaminated vegetable crops.
The exclusive proportion of Zn beyond the requirement of the human body interrupts the 
immune system and imposes a negative impact on high-density lipoprotein status (Zhou 
et al., 2016). Moreover, in multiple studies, liver damage detection and other gastric-intestinal 
problems are reported on excessive intake of Cu (Rahman et al., 2014). The ingestion of veg￾gies grown over the polluted site can lead to gastrointestinal cancer due to heavy metal ac￾cumulation in the body creating health ailments such as kidney stones. In addition, further 
studies were also carried out to reach the same conclusion by quantifying the concentration 
of radish and carrot within the gastrointestinal tract (Intawongse and Dean, 2006). Amin 
et al. (2020) researched to find out target hazard quotient (THQ) of lead (Pb) and chromium 
(Cr) in pumpkin and amaranthus vegetables revealed THQ levels > 1 and at an unacceptable 
range showing chances for risk of cancer in such vegetable consuming households.
Initially, only the enrichment factor (EF) was taken into consideration to be used as a 
source of quantifying soil-plant relation of heavy metal transfer. But over the period Bio 
Concentration Factor (BCF) replaces the enrichment factor with high precision and accuracy 
for the same (Chang et al., 2014). Several studies have reflected BCF values in vegetables in 
descending order: Leafy vegetables>tuberous ones>fruit crops (Liu et al., 2012). However, 
principles of the metal transfer factor are synonyms as that of BCF in documented works of 
literature (Rashed, 2010; Khan et al., 2013).
Moreover, the index used for pollution estimation was also used to find the severity of 
heavy metals in vegetables. Cross-contamination of heavy assessment through different in￾dexes, i.e., hazard index (HI) and hazard quotient (HQ). If the hazard quotient is < 1, then it 
is safe, whereas if it is ≥ 1 could create a health risk (Chary et al., 2008). If Health Risk Index 
(HRI) is < 1, then it is safe to limit, whereas if it is equal to or > 1, it imparts health risk (Oves 
et al., 2012). However, risk index signifies the integration of risk factors associated with a soil 
sample and it is classified as low, i.e., more than 50; moderate, i.e., 50–100; considerable, i.e., 
100–200 and intense/high, i.e., > 200 (Chabukdhara et al., 2016). Incremental lifetime cancer 
risk to assess the potential of heavy metals and metalloids in causing cancer and spreading it 
out in the environment (Liu et al. 2013).202 10. Toxic effects of essential metals on plants
4. Repair strategies and plant response
Mechanism of avoidance and tolerance can prove helpful in minimizing the toxicity of 
heavy metals. Avoidance prevents heavy metals to enter into shoots and leaves through roots 
(Krzeslowska et al., 2010). Activation of peroxidase activity resulted in dense root cell wall 
formation following the mechanism of avoidance (Probst et al., 2009). In addition, apoplastic 
pathways work as an effective approach to limit their access to the symplast pathway. Role 
of the physiological barrier played by plasma membrane which is known to work against 
heavy metal toxicity by utilizing the mechanism of lipo-peroxidation (Ovečka and Takáč, 
2014). Although the part of phytochelatins in the bioaccumulation reduction process can also 
have adverse effects, the process of phytochelatin in combination with immobilization via 
the presence of lignocellulose in the vacuole is a chief technique for heavy metals tolerance in 
repair strategies (Clemens and Ma, 2016).
Minimizing nonessential sources is an operative strategy for improving the quality of 
mankind. Eliminating insufficiently treated garbage and sewage left-outs might positively 
decline their deposition in vegetables. Regular supervision regulates less particulate matter 
deposition in the soil and thereby reduces the probability of cross-contamination through 
the food chain. The number of nonessential trace elements especially cadmium was higher 
among people who consumed veggies grown over fields irrigated with clean water, i.e., hair 
and soil samples (Massaquoi et al. (2015).
Heavy metal contamination in Algeria, for cucumbers and other solanaceous vegetables, 
i.e., potato and tomato were reduced by avoiding the use of incompetently polluted water 
(Cherfi et al., 2015). Edible food safety can also be achieved through land-use optimization 
because roadside grown vegetables are more prone to this kind of toxicity, accumulation, and 
cross-contamination, viz., lead (Pb) in Amaranthus dubius leaves via particulate matter (PM) 
accumulation on their leaves (Liao et al., 2016). Root vegetables being least affected than leafy 
vegetables are more suitable for greenhouse production but it also allows the risk of Hg and 
Pd toxicity (Fan et al., 2017; Hu et al., 2017). In addition, studies by Xu et al. (2015) and Acosta 
et al. (2011) also claimed the same anthropogenic factors as a major reason for accumulation 
and toxicity under protected conditions. In addition, another study also matched the same 
results with the fact that heavy metals contamination was imitative of human activity causes 
and lead (Pb) from natural ones.
Application of low-grade fertilizer under greenhouse conditions also resulted in heavy 
metal accumulation (Fan et al., 2017). Heavy metals immobilization is always a major issue 
and biochar might be a good remedial measure which is not been efficiently studied to date 
(Nejad et al., 2018). Nanoparticles (NPs) curiously enhance the active sites and biochar tex￾ture properties (Ho et al., 2017), extensive study is a must for effective planning of fortified 
biochar with NPs are also showed promising results (Zhu et al., 2017).
Heavy metal phytoremediation is an eco-green tactic involving the use of multiple in￾tegrated approaches. Abovementioned phytotechnologies are more specifically relevant to 
moisture-loving plants. Metal devoid growth with boosted human health through immuno￾logical response is the main aim of the phytoremediation strategy (Saif et al., 2017). Moreover, 
another benefit of phytoremediation is its cost-effective and eco-sustainable policy (Gall et al., 
2015). On contrary, bioremediation is an eco-friendly and economic method to maintain eco￾logical balance (Hasegawa et al., 2016; Kang et al., 2016). Using nanotools might be helpful 5. Adaptation responses 203
for nanotechnological driven sustainable olericulture (Rai et al., 2018). Further, for more pre￾cision nanosensors can be used to track progress in agricultural food security, more precisely 
when judging the intensity of defectiveness (Kuswandi et al., 2017). Procedures facilitating 
the management of heavy metal-contaminated wastewater must be developed (Hazra et al., 
2017). Cooper et al. (2020) reported the same results with arsenic for Swiss chard, so proper 
testing, handling, and management of such toxic heavy metals is a must to avoid any fatal 
health issues.
5. Adaptation responses
In heavy metal toxicity, plant shows various adaptation response at the morphophysiolog￾ical, biochemical and molecular level. Morphophysiological responses involve reducing leaf 
area, transpiration, thickening of cell wall via lignification, etc. A wide diversity of antioxi￾dant enzymes, viz., catalase, dismutase, glutathione-s-transferase, and peroxidase is always 
there which are known for their efficient work to convert superoxide radicals into H2O2 which 
degrade to form H2O and O2 which facilitates detoxification of reactive oxygen species (ROS). 
Proline functions as a plant growth regulator (PGR) which maintains the osmotic adjustments 
and facilitates cell protection against ROS. Moreover, for biochemical response to heavy metal 
stress, proline plays a key role in plant adaptation responses (Table 3; Fig. 1).
TABLE 3 Biochemical response of veggies exposed to heavy metals.
S. no Vegetable crop Heavy metals Effects References
1. Spinach Arsenic The high activity of superoxide dismutase, 
glutathione peroxidase, and catalase; and the 
high content of phytochelatin in the roots
Meng et al. (2022)
2. Lettuce Cadmium A reduction in maximal photochemical 
efficiency, effective quantum yield of 
photosystem II, and photosynthetic electron 
transport rate
Gao et al. (2020)
3. Chinese mustard Cadmium Increase in proline content, accumulation of 
nonenzymatic antioxidants such as proline, 
ascorbate, and glutathione, and increased 
activities of enzymatic antioxidants including 
SOD, CAT, GST, GR, APX, and POX
Chowardhara et al. 
(2020)
4. Lettuce Cadmium Activity of superoxide dismutase, peroxidase, 
and catalase decreased
Meng et al. (2019)
5. Brinjal Cadmium Protect membranes, enhance growth, 
reduce oxidative stress through antioxidant 
mechanisms, and provide molecular 
mechanisms of proline-mediated tolerance
Singh et al. (2015)
and Singh and 
Prasad (2014)
6. Beans Selenium Signaling molecule, redox balancing reduces 
phytotoxic effects by minimizing oxidative 
stress
Aggarwa et al. 
(2011)204 10. Toxic effects of essential metals on plants
Several genes might express themselves which activates particular enzymes to silence bad 
impacts on the plant. Resistance to CH3 Hg+ was seen in GMOs, i.e., in callus of tobacco 
than in their wild relatives (Nagata et al., 2010). As merB gene was responsible to boost to￾bacco detoxification potential under severe under As and Cd stress (Wojas et al., 2008, 2010). 
Research on several vegetable crops also revealed exceeding rates of heavy metals. In addi￾tion, the hazardous index estimation for the studied crop was > 1, which poses chances of the 
fatal health issue to people living near the smelting area. However, all solanaceous crops fall 
at a less-risk index, revealing for consumption purposes, these are safe (Wang et al., 2021). 
Likewise, Clemens and Ma (2016) in their study claimed cadmium toxicity by utilizing Ca2 +
transport channels. Furthermore, some genes were also detected as hyperaccumulator under 
heavy metal stress, i.e., HMA4. Likewise, MT2b-orthologous genes were overexpressed in 
extra-accumulator phenotypes, specifically in metallicolous accessions (Hassinen et al., 2009). 
In this way, proline enhanced the mechanism of tolerance in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii with 
an exceeded dose of Cd encoding for moth bean gene, regulating amino acid specifically pro￾line synthesis, and get added with C. reinhardtii releasing 80% elevated proline levels when 
compared with wild-type cells under higher Cd concentrations.
Zhou et al. (2019) signifies the transcriptomic study of cadmium provided with a dose of 
5 μM in SJ19 cultivar root and shoot, i.e., low and high Cd depositing varieties of Chinese 
cabbage, i.e., CX4. In both SJ19 and CX4 cultivar roots, antioxidant enzymes located in per￾oxisome were upregulated, while production of glutathione gets activated in roots of SJ19 to 
mitigate Cd-induced damages pathways of photosynthesis and cell growth were activated 
in SJ19 shoots. In addition, Rolli et  al. (2020) evaluated the heavy metal level of veggies 
grown with the sewage water. On assessment, it was found that accumulation was higher 
in beetroot, i.e., Zn (72.9±1.58 μgg− 1
), Cu (5.90±0.61 μgg− 1
), Mn (171.14±1.54 μgg− 1
), Ni 
FIG. 1 Biochemical action of proline in response to heavy metals.References 205
(5.90±0.51 μgg− 1
), Pb (30.40±0.6 μgg− 1
) and Cd in (2.91±1.84 μgg− 1
). Research by Balali￾Mood et al. (2021) reflected chelation therapy application for metal poisoning management 
might be an alternative approach. In addition, Mitra et al. (2022) confirmed heavy metal 
removal by using a variety of nanomaterials.
6. Conclusion
ROS formed during normal metabolic processes are involved in the instruction of multiple 
biological and physiological processes; however, their boosted amount is one of the factors 
in creating plant food complications (Singh et  al., 2022). The situation gets more fatal an￾thropogenic activities which led to heavy metal toxicity in humans and livestock through 
the environment in form of a food chain. The immediate effect of heavy metals toxicity ap￾pears as overproduction of ROS which show huge potential in fatal activities of destroy￾ing macromolecules, i.e., carbohydrates, protein, and lipids. To design high metal tolerance 
among vegetable crops, it becomes mandatory to find a key permanent solution to problems 
at physiological, biochemical, and molecular levels. Health risk assessment of humans is al￾ready evaluated worldwide; however, full-fledged epidemiological and more importantly 
eco-friendly solutions are very less.
Additionally, bioremediation involving phytoremedial measures is also an environmen￾tally favored and economic approach with less/moderately contaminated edaphic factors of 
soil. Moreover, metal toxicity to humans beings truly depends on their daily intake, but at low 
proportions, heavy metals are potentially able to create fatal side effects in long run. Also, the 
role of the farming community cannot be declined, so they should be properly motivated to 
go for heavy metal-free vegetable production.
References
Acosta, J.A., Faz, Á., Kalbitz, K., Jansen, B., Martínez-Martínez, S., 2011. Heavy metal concentrations in particle size 
fractions from street dust of Murcia (Spain) as the basis for risk assessment. J. Environ. Monitor. 13, 3087–3096.
Aggarwa, M., Sharma, S., Kaur, N., Pathania, D., Bhandhari, K., et al., 2011. Exogenous proline application reduces 
phytotoxic effects of selenium by minimising oxidative stress and improves growth in bean (Phaseolus vulgaris 
L.) seedlings. Biol. Trace Elem. Res. 140, 354–367.
Alam, M.G.M., Snow, E.T., Tanaka, A., 2003. Arsenic and heavy metal contamination of vegetables grown in Samta 
village, Bangladesh. Sci. Total Environ. 308, 83–96. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0048-9697(02)00651-4.
Alia, N., Sardar, K., Said, M., Salma, K., Sadia, A., Sadaf, S., Toqeer, A., Miklas, S., 2015. Toxicity and bioaccumulation 
of heavy metals in spinach (Spinacia oleracea) grown in a controlled environment. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 
12, 7400–7416. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph120707400.
Al-Saleh, I., Al-Rouqi, R., Elkhatib, R., Abduljabbar, M., Al-Rajudi, T., 2017. Risk assessment of environmental expo￾sure to heavy metals in mothers and their respective infants. Int. J. Hyg. Environ. Health 220, 1252–1278.
Amin, N., Hussain, A., Alamzeb, S., Begum, S., 2013. Accumulation of heavy metals in edible parts of vegetables 
irrigated with waste water and their daily intake to adults and children, district Mardan, Pakistan. Food Chem. 
136, 1515–1523. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2012.09.058.
Amin, A.M., Rahman, E.M., Hossain, S., Rahman, M.M., Jakariya, M., Sikder, T.M., 2020. Trace metals in vegetables 
and associated health risks in industrial areas of Savar, Bangladesh. J Health Pollut. 10 (27), 200905. Published 
online 2020 Aug 19 https://doi.org/10.5696/2156-9614-10.27.200905.
Ashraf, I., Ahmad, F., Sharif, A., Raza, A.A., Teng, H., 2021. Heavy metals assessment inwater, soil, vegetables 
andtheir associated health risks viaconsumption ofvegetables, district Kasur, Pakistan. SN Appl. Sci. 3. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s42452-021-04547-y, 552.206 10. Toxic effects of essential metals on plants
ATSDR, 2007. Toxicological Profile for Barium. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health 
Service, Atlanta, GA.
Auda, A.M., Ali, E.S., 2010. Cadmium and zinc toxicity effects on growth and mineral nutrients of carrot (Daucus 
carota). Pak. J. Bot. 42, 341–351.
Balali-Mood, M., Naseri, K., Tahergorabi, Z., Khazdair, M.R., Sadeghi, M., 2021. Toxic mechanisms of five heavy 
metals: mercury, lead, chromium, cadmium, and arsenic. Front. Pharmacol. 12. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fphar.2021.643972, 643972.
Bartron, M., Penuelas, J., 2017. Pharmaceutical and personal-care products in plants. Trends Plant Sci. 22 (3), 194–203.
Bindu, Y., Abhimanyu, J., Lal, S.K., Nita, L., Sahil, M., Nitzan, S., Narayan, O.P., 2021. Plant mineral transport systems 
and the potential for crop improvement. Planta 253, 45.
Boeing, H., Bechthold, A., Bub, A., Ellinger, S., Haller, D., Kroke, A., Leschik-Bonnet, E., Müller, M.J., Oberritter, H., 
Schulze, M., Stehle, P., Watzl, B., 2012. Critical review: vegetables and fruit in the prevention of chronic diseases. 
Eur. J. Nutr. 51 (6), 637–663.
Boyd, R.S., Rajakaruna, N., 2013. Heavy metal tolerance. In: Gibson, D. (Ed.), Oxford Bibliographies in Ecology. 
Oxford University Press, New York, pp. 1–24.
Bui, A.T.K., Nguyen, H.T.H., Nguyen, M.N., Tran, T.H.T., Vu, T.V., Nguyen, C.H., Reynolds, H.L., 2016. Accumulation 
and potential health risks of cadmium, lead and arsenic in vegetables grown near mining sites in Northern 
Vietnam. Environ. Monit. Assess. 188, 525. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10661-016-5535-5.
Chabukdhara, M., Munjal, A., Nema, A.K., Gupta, S.K., Kaushal, R.K., 2016. Heavy metal contamination in vegeta￾bles grown around peri-urban and urban-industrial clusters in Ghaziabad, India. Hum. Ecol. Risk. Assess. 22 (3), 
736–752.
Chang, C.Y., Yu, H.Y., Chen, J.J., Li, F.B., Zhang, H.H., 2014. Accumulation of heavy metals in leaf vegetables from 
agricultural soils and associated potential health risks in the Pearl River Delta, South China. Environ. Monit. 
Assess. 186, 1547–1560.
Chary, N.S., Kamala, C.T., Raj, D.S.S., 2008. Assessing risk of heavy metals from consuming food grown on sewage 
irrigated soils and food chain transfer. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 69, 513–524.
Cherfi, A., et al., 2015. Health risk assessment of heavy metals through consumption of vegetables irrigated with 
reclaimed urban wastewater in Algeria. Process. Saf. Environ. Prot. 98, 245–252.
Chowardhara, B., Borgohain, P., Saha, B., Awasthi, J.P., Panda, S.K., 2020. Differential oxidative stress responses in 
Brassica juncea (L.) Czern and Coss cultivars induced by cadmium at germination and early seedling stage. Acta 
Physiol. Plant. 42, 105.
Clemens, S., Ma, J.H., 2016. Toxic heavy metal and metalloid accumulation in crop plants and foods. Annu. Rev. Plant 
Biol. 67, 489–512.
Cooper, A.M., Felix, D., Alcantara, F., Zaslavsky, I., Work, A., Watson, P.L., Pezzoli, K., Yu, Q., Zhu, D., Scavo, A.J., 
Zarabi, Y., Schroeder, J.I., 2020. Monitoring and mitigation of toxic heavy metals and arsenic accumulation in 
food crops: a case study of an urban community garden. Plant Direct 4 (1), e00198. Published online 2020 Jan 14 
https://doi.org/10.1002/pld3.198.
de Oliveira, L.M., Suchismita, D., et al., 2017. Arsenic uptake by lettuce from As-contaminated soil remediated with 
Pteris vittate and organic amendment. Chemosphere 176, 249–254.
Delbari, A.S., Kulkarni, D.K., 2013. Determination of heavy metal pollution in vegetables grown along the roadside 
in Tehran-Iran. Ann. Biol. Res. 4, 224–233.
Dickin, S.K., Schuster-Wallace, C.J., Quadir, M., Pizzacalla, K., 2016. A review of health risks and pathways for expo￾sure to wastewater use in agriculture. Environ. Health Perspect. 124 (7), 900–909.
Duruibe, J.O., Ogwuegbu, M.D.C., Egwurugwu, J.N., 2007. Heavy metal pollution and human biotoxic effects. Int. 
J. Phys. Sci. 2, 112–118.
El-Kady, A.A., Abdel-Wahhab, M.A., 2018. Occurance of trace metals in food stuffs and their health impact. Trends 
Food Sci. Technol. 75, 35–45.
Fan, Y., et al., 2017. Accumulation characteristics and potential risk of heavy metals in soil-vegetable system under 
greenhouse cultivation condition in Northern China. Ecol. Eng. 102, 367–373.
Galal, T.M., Hassan, L.M., Ahmed, D.A., Alamri, S.A.M., Alrumman, S.A., Eid, E.M., 2021. Heavy metals uptake by 
the global economic crop (Pisum sativum L.) grown in contaminated soils and its associated health risks. PLoS 
One 16 (6). https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0252229, e0252229.
Gall, J.E., Boyd, R.S., Rajakaruna, N., 2015. Transfer of heavy metals through terrestrial food webs: a review. Environ. 
Monit. Assess. 187, 201.References 207
Gao, M., Chang, X., Yang, Y., Song, Z., 2020. Foliar graphene oxide treatment increases photosynthetic capacity and 
reduces oxidative stress in cadmium-stressed lettuce. Plant Physiol. Biochem. 154, 287–294.
Gress, J., de Oleviera, L.M., da Silva, E.B., Lessl, J.M., Wilson, P.C., Townsend, T., Ma, L.Q., 2015. Cleaning 
induced-arsenic mobilization and chromium oxidation from CCA-wood deck: potential risk to children. Environ. 
Pollut. 154, 212–218.
Gupta, N., Yadav, K.K., Kumar, V., Prasad, S., Cabral-Pinto, M.M.S., Jeon, B.-H., Kumar, S., Abdellattif, M.H., 
Alsukaibia, A.K.D., 2022. Investigation of heavy metal accumulation in vegetables and health risk to humans from 
their consumption. Front. Environ. Sci. 10. https://doi.org/10.3389/fenvs.2022.791052, 791052.
Hasegawa, H., Rahman, I., Rahman, M., 2016. Environmental Remediation Technologies for Metal-contaminated 
Soils. Springer.
Hassinen, V.H., Tuomainen, M., Peräniemi, S., Schat, H., Kärenlampi, S.O., et al., 2009. Metallothioneins 2 and 3 
contribute to the metal-adapted phenotype but are not directly linked to Zn accumulation in the metal hyperac￾cumulator, Thlaspi caerulescens. J. Exp. Bot. 60, 187–196.
Hazra, D., Karmakar, R., Rajlakshmi, P., Bhattacharya, S., Mondal, S., 2017. Recent advances in pesticide formulations 
for eco-friendly and sustainable vegetable pest management: a review. Arch. Agri. Environ. Sci. 2 (3), 232–237.
Ho, S., et al., 2017. Recent advances in nanoscale-metal assisted biochar derived from waste biomass used for heavy 
metals removal. Bioresour. Technol. 246, 123–134.
Hu, W., et al., 2017. Heavy metals in intensive greenhouse vegetable production systems along Yellow Sea of China: 
levels, transfer and health risk. Chemosphere 167, 82–90.
Husen, A., 2021a. Harsh Environment and Plant Resilience (Molecular and Functional Aspects). Springer Nature 
Switzerland AG, Cham, Switzerland, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-65912-7.
Husen, A., 2021b. Plant Performance Under Environmental Stress (Hormones, Biostimulants and Sustainable 
Plant Growth Management). Springer Nature Switzerland AG, Cham, Switzerland, https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-030-78521-5.
Intawongse, M., Dean, J.R., 2006. Uptake of heavy metals by vegetable plants grown on contaminated soil and their 
bioavailability in the human gastrointestinal tract. Food Addit. Contam. 23 (1), 36–48.
Iqbal, M., Ahmad, A., Ansari, M.K.A., Qureshi, M.I., Aref, I.M., Khan, P.R., Hegazy, S.S., El-Atta, H., Husen, A., 
Hakeem, K.R., 2015. Improving the phytoextraction capacity of plants to scavenge metal(loid)-contaminated sites. 
Environ. Rev. 23, 44–65. https://doi.org/10.1139/er-2014-0043.
Islam, M.S., Ahmed, M.K., Mamun, M.H., Raknuzzaman, M., Ali, M., Eaton, D.W., 2016. Health risk assessment 
due to heavy metal exposure from commonly consumed fish and vegetables. Environ. Syst. Decis. 36, 253–265. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10669-016-9592-7.
Javid, M., Manoj, S., Khursheed, A.W., 2018. Heavy metals in vegetables and their impact on the nutrient quality of 
vegetables: a review. J. Plant Nutr. https://doi.org/10.1080/01904167.2018.1462382.
John, R., Ahmad, P., Gadgil, K., Sharma, S., 2009. Heavy metal toxicity: effect on plant growth, biochemical parame￾ters and metal accumulation by Brassica juncea. Int. J. Plant Prod. 3, 65–75.
Junhe, L.U., et al., 2017. Predicting cadmium safety thresholds in soils based on cadmium uptake by Chinese cab￾bage. Pedosphere 27 (3), 475–481.
Kachenko, A.G., Singh, B., 2005. Heavy metals contamination in vegetables grown in urban and metal smelter con￾taminated sites in Australia. Water Air Soil Pollut. 169, 101–123. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11270-006-2027-1.
Kang, C.-H., Kwon, Y.-J., So, J.-S., 2016. Bioremediation of heavy metals by using bacterial mixtures. Ecol. Eng. 89, 64–69.
Kaya, C., Ashraf, M., Alyemeni, M.N., Ahmad, P., 2020. The role of nitrate reductase in brassinosteroid-induced 
endogenous nitric oxide generation to improve cadmium stress tolerance of pepper plants by upregulating the 
ascorbate-glutathione cycle. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 196, 110483. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoenv.2020.110483. 
Epub 2020 Apr 1.
Khalid, S., Sahid, M., Niazi, N.K., Murtaza, B., Bibi, I., Dumat, C., 2017. A comparison of technologies for remediation 
of heavy metal contaminated soils. J. Geochem. Explor. 182 (B), 247–268.
Khan, S., Cao, Q., Zheng, Y.M., Huang, Y.Z., Zhu, Y.G., 2008. Health risks of heavy metals in contaminated soils and 
food crops irrigated with wastewater in Beijing, China. Environ. Pollut. 152, 686–692. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
envpol.2007.06.056.
Khan, M.U., Malik, R.N., Muhammad, S., 2013. Human health risk from heavy metal via food crops consumption 
with wastewater irrigation practices in Pakistan. Chemosphere 93, 2230–2238.
Koo, B.J., Chang, A.C., Crowley, D.E., Page, A.L., Taylor, A., 2013. Availability and plant uptake of biosolid-borne 
metals. Appl. Environ. Soil Sci., 1–11. Article ID 892036.208 10. Toxic effects of essential metals on plants
Krzeslowska, M., et al., 2010. Lead deposited in the cell wall of Funaria hygrometrica protonemata is not stable—a 
remobilization can occur. Environ. Pollut., 325–338.
Kumar, A., Choudhary, A., Kaur, H., Mehta, S., Husen, A., 2021. Metal-based nanoparticles, sensors, and their multi￾faceted application in food packaging. J. Nanobiotech. 19, 1–25.
Kumari, A., Lal, B., Rai, U.N., 2016. Assessment of native plant species for phytoremediation of heavy metals grow￾ing in the vicinity of NTPC sites, Kahalgaon, India. Int. J. Phytoremediation 18, 592–597. https://doi.org/10.108
0/15226514.2015.1086301.
Kuswandi, B., et al., 2017. Nanosensors for the detection of food contaminants. In: Nanotechnology Applications in 
Food. Elsevier Inc, pp. 307–333.
Liao, J., et al., 2016. Distribution and migration of heavy metals in soil and crops affected by acid mine drainage: 
public health implications in Guangdong Province. China. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 124, 460–469.
Lin, R.Z., Wang, X.R., Luo, Y., Du, W.C., Guo, H.Y., Yin, D.Q., 2007. Effects of soil cadmium on growth, oxidative 
stress and antioxidant system in wheat seedlings (Triticum aestivum l.). Chemosphere 69, 89–98. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2007.04.041.
Liu, L., Hu, L.L., Tang, J.J., Li, Y.F., Zhang, Q., Chen, X., 2012. Food safety assessment of planting patterns of four 
vegetable type crops grown in soil contaminated by electronic waste activities. J. Environ. Manag. 93 (1), 22–30.
Liu, X., Song, Q., Tang, Y., et al., 2013. Human health risk assessment of heavy metals in soil-vegetable system: a 
multi-medium analysis. Sci. Total Environ. 463-464, 530–540.
Luo, C., Liu, C., Wang, Y., Liu, X., Li, F., Zhang, G., Li, X., 2011. Heavy metal contamination in soils and vege￾tables near an e-waste processing site, South China. J. Hazard. Mater. 186, 481–490. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jhazmat.2010.11.024.
Mahmood, S., Hussain, A., Saeed, Z., Athar, M., 2005. Germination and seedling growth of corn (zea mays l.) under 
varying levels of copper and zinc. Int. J. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2, 269–274. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF03325886.
Manwani, S., Vanisree, C.R., Vibha, J., Awasthi, K.K., Chandra, S.Y., Sankhla, M.S., Pritam, P.P., Garima, A., 2022. 
Heavy Metal Contamination in Vegetables and Their Toxic Effects on Human Health., https://doi.org/10.5772/
intechopen.102651.
Martin, D., Vollenweider, P., Buttler, A., Madeleine, S., Goerg, G., 2006. Bio indication of heavy metal contamination 
in vegetable gardens. For. Snow Landsc. Res. 80, 169–180.
Massaquoi, L.D., et al., 2015. Heavy metal accumulation in soils, plants, and hair samples: an assessment of heavy 
metal exposure risks from the consumption of vegetables grown on soils previously irrigated with wastewater. 
Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 22.
Meng, D., Li, J., Liu, T., Liu, Y., Yan, M., Hu, J., et al., 2019. Effects of redox potential on soil cadmium solubility: in￾sight into microbial community. J. Environ. Sci. 75, 224–232.
Meng, Y., Zhang, L., Yao, Z.-L., Ren, Y.-B., Wang, L.-Q., Ou, X.-B., 2022. Arsenic accumulation and physiological 
response of three leafy vegetable varieties to as stress. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 19, 2501. https://doi.
org/10.3390/ijerph19052501.
Millan, A.F.L., Sagardoy, R., Solanas, M., Abadıa, A., Abadia, J., 2009. Cadmium toxicity in tomato (lycopersi￾con esculentum) plants grown in hydroponics. Environ. Exp. Bot. 65, 376–385. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
envexpbot.2008.11.010.
Mitra, S., Chakraborty, A.J., Tareq, A.M., Emran, T.B., Nainu, F., Khusro, A., Idris, A.M., Khandaker, M.U., Osman, 
H., Alhumaydhi, F.A., Gandara, J.S., 2022. Impact of heavy metals on the environment and human health: novel 
therapeutic insights to counter the toxicity. J. King Saud Univ. Sci. 34 (3), 101865.
Mohod, V.C., 2015. A review on the concentration of the heavy metals in vegetable samples like spinach and tomato 
grown near the area of Amba Nalla of Amravati City. Int. J. Innov. Res. Sci. Eng. Technol. 4 (5), 2788–2792. https://
doi.org/10.15680/IJIRSET.2015.0405019.
Munir, N., Jahangeer, M., Bouyahya, A., El Omari, N., Ghchime, R., Balahbib, A., Aboulaghras, S., Mahmood, Z., 
Akram, M., Ali Shah, S.M., et al., 2022. Heavy metal contamination of natural foods is a serious health issue: a 
review. Sustainability 14, 161. https://doi.org/10.3390/su14010161.
Naciri, R., Lahrir, M., Benadis, C., Chtouki, M., Oukarroum, A., 2021. Interactive effect of potassium and cadmium on 
growth,root morphology and chlorophyll a fluorescence in tomato plant. Sci. Rep. 11, 1–10.
Nagata, T., Morita, H., Akizawa, T., Pan-Hou, H., 2010. Development of a transgenic tobacco plant for phytoremedi￾ation of methylmercury pollution. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 87, 781–786.
Nejad, Z.D., Jung, M.C., Kim, K.H., 2018. Remediation of soils contaminated with heavy metals with an emphasis on 
immobilization technology. Environ. Geochem. Health 40 (3), 927–953.References 209
Ning, L., Kang, Y., Pan, W., Zeng, L., Zhang, Q., Luo, J., 2015. Concentration and transportation of heavy metals in 
vegetables and risk assessment of human exposure to bioaccessible heavy metals in soil near a waste-incinerator 
site, South China. Sci. Total Environ. 521–2, 144–151. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2015.03.081.
Osma, E., Serin, M., Leblebici, Z., Aksoy, A., 2013. Assessment of heavy metal accumulation (Cd, Cr, Cu, Ni, Pb, and 
Zn) in vegetable and soils. Pol. J. Environ. Stud. 22, 1449–1455.
Ovečka, M., Takáč, T., 2014. Managing heavy metal toxicity stress in plants: biological and biotechnological tools. 
Biotechnol. Adv. 32, 73–86.
Oves, M., Khan, M.S., Zaidi, A., Ahmad, E., 2012. Soil contamination, nutritive value, and human health risk as￾sessment of heavymetals: an overview. In: Zaidi, A., Wani, P.A., Khan, M.S. (Eds.), Toxicity of Heavy Metals to 
Legumes and Bioremediation. Springer, New York, pp. 1–27.
Pascual, I., Azcona, I., Aguirreolea, J., Morales, F., Corpas, F.J., Palma, J.M., Alvarez, R.R., Diaz, M.S., 2010. Growth, 
yield, and fruit quality of pepper plants amended with two sanitized sewage sludges. J. Agric. Food Chem. 58, 
6951–6959. https://doi.org/10.1021/jf100282f.
Probst, A., et al., 2009. Response of Vicia faba L. to metal toxicity on mine tailing sub strate: geochemical and mor￾phological changes in leaf and root. Environ. Exp. Bot. 66, 297–308.
Rahman, M.A., Rahman, M.M., Reichman, S.M., Lim, R.P., Naidu, R., 2014. Heavy metals in Australian grown and 
imported rice and vegetables on sale in Australia: health hazard. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 100, 53–60.
Rai, P.K., 2018. Phytoremediation of Emerging Contaminants in Wetlands. CRC Press, Taylor and Francis, Boca 
Raton, FL, p. 248.
Rai, P.K., Lee, J., Kailasa, S.K., et al., 2018. A critical review of ferrate (VI)-based remediation of soil and groundwater. 
J. Environ. Res. 160, 420–448.
Rashed, M.N., 2010. Monitoring of contaminated toxic and heavy metals, from mine tailings through age accumula￾tion, in soil and some wild plants at Southeast Egypt. J. Hazard. Mater. 178, 739–746.
Riyazuddin, R., Nisha, N., Ejaz, B., Khan, M.I.R., Kumar, M., Ramteke, P.W., Gupta, R., 2022. A comprehensive re￾view on the heavy metal toxicity and sequestration in plants. Biomolecules 12, 43. https://doi.org/10.3390/
biom12010043. Academic Editors: G.
Rolli, N.M., Gurumath, S.V., Chavan, R.R., Anantpur, A.S., Taranath, T.C., 2020. Heavy metal accumulation in vege￾tables cultivated in agricultural soil irrigated with sewage and its impact on health. Int. J. Recent Sci. Res. 11 (04), 
38144–38150. https://doi.org/10.24327/IJRSR.
Sahid, M., Dumat, C., Khalid, S., Schreck, E., Xiong, T., Niazi, N.K., 2016. Foliar heavy metal uptake, toxicity and 
detoxification in plants: a comparison of foliar and root metal uptake. J. Hazard. Mater. 325, 36–58.
Saif, S., et al., 2017. Metal toxicity to certain vegetables and bioremediation of metal polluted soils. In: Microbial 
Strategies for Vegetable Production, pp. 167–196.
Salido, A.L., Hasty, K.L., Lim, J.M., Butcher, D.J., 2003. Phytoremediation of arsenic and lead in contaminated soil 
using Chinese Brake ferns (Pteris vittata) and Indian mustard (Brassica juncea). Int. J. Phytoremediation 5, 89–103. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/713610173.
Schreck, E., et al., 2014. Foliar or root exposure to smelter particles: consequences for lead compartmentalization and 
speciation in plant leaves. Sci. Total Environ. 476-477, 667–676.
Singh, S., Prasad, S.M., 2014. Growth photosynthesis and oxidative responses of Solanum melongena L. seedlings to 
cadmium stress: mechanism of toxicity amelioration by kinetin. Sci. Hortic. 176, 1–10.
Singh, N.M., Singh, N.R., 2014. A quantitative analysis of heavy metals in vegetables grown at Kakching-Wabagai 
Area, Thoubal District Manipur. Paripex Indian J. Res. 3, 1–2.
Singh, M., Kumar, J., Singh, S., Singh, V.P., Prasad, S.M., et al., 2015. Adaptation strategies of plants against heavy metal 
toxicity: a short review. Biochem. Pharmacol. (Los Angel) 4, 161. https://doi.org/10.4172/2167-0501.1000161.
Singh, A., Mehta, S., Yadav, S., Nagar, G., Ghosh, R., Roy, A., Chakraborty, A., Singh, I.K., 2022. How to cope with the 
challenges of environmental stresses in the era of global climate change: an update on ROS stave off in plants. Int. 
J. Mol. Sci. 23, 1995.
Sridhar, B.B.M., Witter, J.D., Wu, C., Spongberg, A.L., Vincent, R.K., 2014. Effect of biosolid amendments on the metal 
and nutrient uptake and spectral characteristics of five vegetable plants. Water Air Soil Pollut. 225, 2092–2099. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11270-014-2092-9.
Suruchi, Khanna, P., 2011. Assessment of heavy metal contamination in different vegetables grown in and around 
urban areas. Res. J. Environ. Toxicol. 5, 162–179. https://doi.org/10.3923/rjet.2011.162.179.
Tom, M., Fletcher, T.D., McCarthy, D.T., 2014. Heavy metal contamination of vegetables irrigated by urban storm 
water: a matter of time. PLoS One, 1–21.210 10. Toxic effects of essential metals on plants
Tyagi, R., 2014. Assessment of the Uptake of Toxic Heavy Metals on Cultivation of Vegetables of Family Solanaceae 
in Contaminated Soil (PhD diss.). University of Kota, Kota.
Wang, Z., Bao, J., Wang, T., Moryani, H.T., Kang, W., Zheng, J., Zhan, C., Xiao, W., 2021. Hazardous heavy metals ac￾cumulation and health risk assessment of different vegetable species in contaminated soils from a typical mining 
city, Central China. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 18, 2617. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph18052617.
Waterlot, C., et al., 2017. Impact of a phosphate amendment on the environmental availability and phytoavailability 
of Cd and Pb in moderately and highly carbonated kitchen garden soils. Pedosphere 27 (3), 588–605.
Weihong, X., Wenyi, L., Jianping, H., Singh, B., Zhiting, X., 2009. Effects of insoluble Zn, Cd, and EDTA on the growth, 
activities of antioxidant enzymes and uptake of Zn and Cd in Vetiveria zizanioides. J. Environ. Sci. 21, 186–192. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S1001-0742(08)62249-4.
Wojas, S., Clemens, S., Hennig, J., Sklodowska, A., Kopera, E., et al., 2008. Overexpression of phytochelatin syn￾thase in tobacco: distinctive effects of AtPCS1 and CePCS genes on plant response to cadmium. J. Exp. Bot. 59, 
2205–2219.
Wojas, S., Clemens, S., Maria, A.D., 2010. Arsenic response of AtPCS1- and CePCS-expressing plants—effects of 
external As (V) concentration on As-accumulation pattern and NPT metabolism. J. Plant Physiol. 167, 169–175.
Woldetsadik, D., Drechsel, P., Keraita, B., Itanna, F., Gebrekidan, H., 2017. Heavy metal accumulation and health risk 
assessment in wastewater-irrigated urban vegetable farming sites of Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. Int. J. Food Contam. 
4, 9.
Xiong, Z.T., Wang, H., 2005. Copper toxicity and bioaccumulation in Chinese cabbage (Brassica pekinensis rupr.). 
Environ. Toxicol. 20, 188–194. https://doi.org/10.1002/tox.20094.
Xu, J., Yang, L., Wang, Z., Dong, G., Huang, J., Wang, Y., 2006. Toxicity of copper on rice growth and accumula￾tion of copper in rice grain in copper contaminated soil. Chemosphere 62, 602–607. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
chemosphere.2005.05.050.
Xu, L., et al., 2015. Accumulation status, sources and phytoavailability of metals in greenhouse vegetable production 
systems in Beijing. China. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 122, 214–220.
Yang, X.E., Long, X.X., Ni, W.Z., Ye, Z.Q., He, Z.L., Stoffella, P.J., Calvert, D.V., 2002. Assessing copper thresholds 
for phytotoxicity and potential dietary toxicity in selected vegetables crops. J. Environ. Sci. Health B 37, 625–635. 
https://doi.org/10.1081/PFC-120015443.
Yang, Y., et al., 2018. Assessing cadmium exposure risks of vegetables with plant uptake factor and soil property. 
Environ. Pollut. 238, 263–269.
Yargholi, B., Azimi, A.A., 2008. Investigation of cadmium absorption and accumulation in different parts of some 
vegetables. Am.-Eurasian J. Agric. Environ. Sci. 3, 357–364.
Zaheer, I.E., Ali, S., Rizwan, M., Abbas, Z., Bukhari, S.A.H., Wijaya, L., Alyemeni, M.N., Ahmad, P., 2019. Zinc-lysine 
prevents chromium-induced morphological, photosynthetic, and oxidative alterations in spinach irrigated with 
tannery wastewater. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 26, 28951–28961.
Zhang, K.S., Zhou, Q.X., 2005. Toxic effects of Al-based coagulants on brassica chinensis and raphanus sativus grow￾ing in acid and neutral conditions. Environ. Toxicol. 20, 179–187. https://doi.org/10.1002/tox.20093.
Zhou, H., Yang, W.T., Zhou, X., Liu, L., Gu, J.F., Wang, W.L., Zou, J.L., Tian, T., Peng, P.Q., Liao, B.H., 2016. 
Accumulation of heavy metals in vegetable species planted in contaminated soils and the health risk assessment. 
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 13, 289. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph13030289.
Zhou, Q., Yang, Y., Yang, Z., 2019. Molecular dissection of cadmium-responsive transcriptome profile in a 
low-cadmium-accumulating cultivar of Brassica parachinensis. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 176, 85–94.
Zhu, S., et al., 2017. Magnetic nanoscale zerovalent iron assisted biochar: interfacial chemical behaviors and heavy 
metals remediation performance. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 5 (11), 9673–9682.Plants and their Interaction to Environmental Pollution 211 Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-99978-6.00012-1
CHAPTER
11
Phytoremediation strategies of plants: 
Challenges and opportunities
Poonam Sharmaa
, Smita Raib
, Krishna Gautamc
, 
and Swati Sharmab
a
Department of Bioengineering, Integral University, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India, 
b
Department of Biosciences, Integral University, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India, c
Centre for 
Energy and Environmental Sustainability, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India
Abbreviations
EU European Union
HMs heavy metals
SRC short rotation coppice
RES renewable energy sources
GHG greenhouse gas
1. Introduction
Phytoremediation had emerged as “green remediation” technique in 1991, it comprises 
of two words “phyto” a Greek word that means “plants” and “remedium” is a Latin word 
meaning “remove an evil”, the word phytoremediation combined refers to plants-mediated￾reclamation of contaminated areas(Tangahu et  al., 2011). Phytoremediation is also known 
as “bioremediation,” “botanical remediation”, “green remediation”, “agroremediation” or 
“vegetative remediation” (Ali et al., 2020). It is a highly effective, natural process for contam￾inating soil and water bodies remediation. Soil contamination is a massive challenge among 
plenty of developed countries. In European Union (EU) approximately 3.5 million poten￾tially contaminated sites and 0.5 million highly contaminated sites were identified which 
need immediate remediation. Similarly, in European countries like England, Italy, Germany, 
Netherlands, Denmark, Spain, and Finland around 400,000 polluted sites were identified 
while in France, Sweden, Slovakia, Hungary, and Austria about 200,000 contaminated sites 212 11. Phytoremediation strategies of plants
were reported to be needy of remediation. In America, approximately 600,000 heavy metals 
polluted brownfield sites were identified for remediation (Mahar et al., 2016).
Plants are solar-guided pumping/filtering systems that take up contaminants through 
their roots, assimilate them, or transfer/transport them to various plant tissues for metabo￾lization, sequestering, or volatilization. So, in the phytoremediation process plants are used 
as a containment system, destruction unit, immobilization, or for extraction of contaminat￾ing organic or inorganic moieties like pesticides, heavy metals, radionuclides, bisphenyl, 
polychlorinated compounds, polyaromatic hydrocarbons, and hydrocarbons (Moosavi and 
Seghatoleslami, 2013). In modern phytoremediation, the mode of remediation is based upon 
the contaminant uptake mechanism therefore an array of techniques like phytostabilization, 
phytoevaporation, phytoextraction, phytodesalination, rhizofiltration, and rhizodegradation 
are ventured to achieve soil or water bodies reclamation (Fig. 1). Various mechanism of plant 
mediated uptake of contaminants is shown in Table 1. To enhance the efficacy of remediation 
and to reduce the contaminants upto an acceptable level, different physical, chemical, and bi￾ological methods were integrated with the phytoremediation process. It was evident that col￾laboration of chemical treatment (Chelating agents like ethylene diamine tetraacetic acid, and 
ethylene glycol tetraacetic acid) with phytoremediation, enhances the metal bioavailability, 
rate of plant uptake, and therefore efficiency of pollutants removal was also increased(Kumar 
Yadav et al., 2018). Phytoremediation is a novel, economic, efficient, ecofriendly remediation 
Sunlight
Phytovolatalization
Phytostimulation
Phytooxidation
Phytostabilization
Oxygen
Rhizofiltration
Phytodegradation
Phytoextraction
Water
FIG. 1 Figure depicting various strategies of phytoremediation.TABLE 1 Mechanism adapted by plants for remediation of metal contaminated soil.
Plant Metals
Type of 
phytoremediation Mechanism References
Athyriumwardii Cd, Pb Phytostabilization Root retention of metals (Zhang et al., 2012)
Silene vulgaris Fe, Ni, Cu, Al, Sn, Zn Phytostabilization Binding with a protein with 
oxalate oxidase activity in cell wall 
accumulation in cell wall as silicates
(Bringezu et al., 1999)
Sedum alfredii Pb, Cd Phytostabilization Induction of glutathione biosynthesis 
that bind metals in roots
(Anjum et al., 2012; Gupta 
et al., 2010; Zhang et al., 2008)
Ceratophyllumdemersum Cd Phytoextraction Production of phytochelatin for metal 
binding in shoots
Activation of cysteine synthase, 
glutathione-S-transferase, glutathione
(Mishra et al., 2009)
Salicomiabigevii Se Phytovolatilization Volatilization as dimethyleselenide (Lin et al., 2000)
Sedum alfredii Cd, Pb Phytoextraction Induction and accumulation of 
phytochelatin that binds metals in 
above ground parts
(Zhang et al., 2008)
Lupinusalbus Cd, As Phytostabilization Metal accumulation in root nodiles, 
increasing the pH in rhizosphere by 
citrate release
(Vázquez et al., 2006)
Imperata cylindrical, 
Miscanthusfloridilus
Zn, Pb, Cd, Cu Phytostabilization Fibrous root system retaining the metals (Peng et al., 2007)
Glomusmosseae Cd, Cu, Zn, Ni Phytoimmobilization/ 
phytoextraction
achieved by complexing the 
contaminants or by increasing the soil 
pH by liming
(Wills, 1988),
Euphorbia cyparissias Zn Phytoextraction Contaminated wastes and found higher 
concentrations of Zn as crystaloids 
deposited within the fungal mycelium 
and cortical cells of mycorrhizal roots
(Galli et al., 1993; Leyval et al., 
1995)214 11. Phytoremediation strategies of plants
technique for reclamation of polluted sites with remarkable public acceptance (Adiloğlu, 
2017; Moosavi and Seghatoleslami, 2013). The economic benefits associated with phytoreme￾diation technique include plant-based extraction of financially uplifting metals like Ni, reduc￾ing contaminants associated risk, and sustainable improvement in soil fertility and quality for 
generating revenue by Agriculture (Mahar et al., 2016).
Plants have the extraordinary potential of absorbing heavy metals contaminants which they 
utilize as their growth regulators (Zn, Fe, Cu, Mn, Mo, Mg, and Ni) while some metal accu￾mulates in various plant tissues like Pb, Cr, Cd, Co, Se, Ag, Hg, etc.(Tangahu et al., 2011; Iqbal 
et al., 2015). In wild, metal hyperaccumulators plants the capacity of contaminants removal 
was found to be 10–500 times higher when compared with the cultivated crops(Adiloğlu, 
2017). Approximately 400 plant species of hyperaccumulator plants including the members 
of Brassicaceae, Euphorbiaceae, Fabaceae, Lamiaceae, Asterraceae, and Scrophulariaceae 
family and crops like Indian mustard (Brassica juncea L.), sunflower (Helianthus annuus L.) 
maize (Zea mays L.), and Willow (Salix viminalis L.), were found to exhibit high tolerance 
and uptake of heavy metals whereas crops including Ipomea alpine, Alpine pennycress (Thlaspi 
caerulescens), Haumania strumrobertii, Sebertia acuminate, and Astragalus racemosus, have a very 
high potential for Cd/Zn, Cu, Co, Se and Ni, bioaccumulation. (Carvalho et al., 2014).
Reclamation of contaminated wastewater via phytoremediation is a need of time, to meet 
the demand of water supply for various agricultural activities and industrial usage. A pleth￾ora of plants including free-floating aquatic plants (Eichhornia crassipes, Pistia stratiotes, Azolla 
pinnata, Landoltia punctata, Salvinia molesta, Spirodela polyrhiza, Marsilea mutica, Riccia fluitans,
and Lemna spp.), aquatic submerged plants (Najas marina, Hygrophilla corymbosa, Hydrilla 
verticillata, Ruppia maritima, Egeria densa, Myriophyllum aquaticum, and Vallisneria americana), 
and emerged plants (Distichlis spicata, Imperata cylindrical, Cyperus spp., Iris virginica, Justicia 
American, Diodia virginiana, Nupharlutea spp, Typha spp., Nymphaea spp., Hydrochlo acarolinien￾sis, and Phragmites autralis) present in aquatic ecosystem had exhibited significant contribu￾tion towards phytoremediation processes (Mustafa and Hayder, 2021).
2. Mechanism of heavy metal remediation
Soils act as the major sink for contaminating metals(Gadd, 2010). Plants are highly affected 
by heavy metals (HMs) pollution exceptionally in contaminated soils. Persistent organic con￾taminants or pesticides are generally xenobiotic to plants, but inorganic contaminants such 
as involve cobalt (Co2 +), copper (Cu2 +), iron (Fe1 +), manganese (Mn2 +), zinc (Zn2 +), and 
molybdenum (Mo4 +) are important micronutrients that are usually found in low concentra￾tions in the soil and are required for plant growth. Other metals are nonessential for plants 
and commonly found as contaminant, including arsenic (As3 +), cadmium (Cd2 +), chromium 
(Cr3 +), mercury (Hg0
), nickel (Ni2 +), lead (Pb2 +), selenium (Se2-), uranium (U3 +), vanadium 
(V2 +), and wolfram alpha (W). Some metals can be responsible toxic effect on plants even 
at minimum concentration (Ali et al., 2020). Plant survival becomes difficult and its overall 
health deteriorates under metals stress (Mishra et  al., 2017). Conventional remedial strat￾egies can costly or either produce toxic by-products, which negatively affect for environ￾ment. Remediation process of heavy metals is carried out by contaminated soil for physical 
and chemical processes which are exorbitant, nondurable, and time-consuming. Therefore, 2. Mechanism of heavy metal remediation 215
the requirement for safe environmentally strategy drives interest in biological techniques 
(Gupta and Diwan, 2017). Currently, phytoremediation is thought to be a more sustainable 
approaches than physical and chemical treatment options to remove/stabilize heavy metals 
(HMs) from contaminated soils. Wetlands, reed beds, and floating-plant systems are built to 
treat certain types of wastewater have been common for many years. Recent research efforts 
are currently focusing on extending phytoremediation to address air contaminants and con￾taminated soil (Cunningham et al., 1995; Pinto et al., 2015; Ribeiro et al., 2019).
The efficiency of plants and their associated microbes to remove contaminants from soils 
can depend on several factors, such as their metal uptake potential, plant biomass production 
as well as prevailing environmental conditions (Ma et al., 2019) for example, the presence of 
acidic pH conditions in the rhizosphere favor adsorption and bioavailability of HM. They 
can transform, accumulate, or detoxify HM through chelation, precipitation, complexation, 
acidification, and redox reactions (Merdy et al., 2009). In contaminated soils, the rhizospheric 
population plays a significant role in metal detoxification., due to synergistic action of the 
plant-microbe system. Due to the higher metabolic activities of microbes, both eukaryotes, 
and prokaryotes, near the vicinity of plant roots, there is an increase in HM remediation 
(Kuiper et al., 2004). This process of the plants rhizomicrobial populations is also referred to 
as rhizoremediation. Hence the method becomes more environmentally safe, cost-effective 
and in situ operable.
Plant or soil microbes and metalics ion interactions can be occured by various mechanisms. 
These can be classified based on metabolic pathway and involved as an active or passive 
uptake of metal ions based on their interactions. These interactions have to biologically trans￾formed them and either a less toxicity or minimum available (less usable) immobilization to 
prevent their breach in biosystems. Moreover, metal tolerance or resistance can be specific or 
either nonspecific. Specific resistance involves a causative mechanism of tolerance, for exam￾ple, the transformation of Hg (mercury) through methylation but such methylation property 
of mercury shows highly toxic and unstable in nature. Nonspecific resistance can be inductive 
or constitutional. (Rajendran et al., 2003).
The reclamation of heavy metal contaminants can be done using strategies as phytovolati￾zation, phytostabilization, rhizofiltration phytodegradation, phytostimulation, phytostabili￾zation, or phytodesalination.
2.1 Photovolatolization
Plants cause extreme loss of soil, water both by evaporation and by transpiration also called 
as evapotranspiration. This also leads to phytovolatilization (Mahar et al., 2016). The process 
of phytovolatilization entails plants absorbing pollutant from the soil, converting them into 
less toxic forms, and releasing these substances into the environment via transpiration. For 
example, trichloroethylene can be changed to chlorinated acetates and CO2 by hybrid poplar 
trees moreover, metals as Se can also by plants by changing into dimethylselenide (Greipsson, 
2011). These heavy metals (metalloid) contaminants. Compared with other phytoremedia￾tion strategies, the advantage of phytovolatilization is that they get removal from the site 
and spread directly as gaseous compounds. There is no issue of harvesting or disposal. As a 
remedial strategy, however, phytovolatilization does not removal of pollutants completely. 
Pollutants remain present in the environment. Pollutants only get transferred from soil to the 216 11. Phytoremediation strategies of plants
atmosphere, where the ambient air gets polluted by the toxic volatile compounds. Further, 
precipitation may result in their deposition on the soil (Vangronsveld et al., 2009).
2.2 Phytoevaporation
Phytoevaporation is the method of soil contaminants uptake via plants. This process does 
not fix the contaminations completely, only from soil microbes to atmosphere transfers pol￾lutants where it can be redeposited. Plants changes the contaminants into volatile form and 
subsequently release them into the atmosphere. This method can be applied for removal of 
some organic pollutants like Hg and Se. Members of Brassicaceae family as Brassica juncea can 
be used for the removal of up to 40g of Se/Hg (Padmavathiamma and Li, 2007).
2.3 phytoextraction
Phytoextraction application for the capability of plants to accelerate contaminants in the 
aboveground biomass. To lower the concentration of contaminants in the soil this process 
involves the production and harvesting of the biomass (Jacob et al., 2018). Phytoextraction 
can be of two types. It can be either an activated process, using chemicals which are involved 
to increase the solubilization of metals in the soil. It can also be a continuous process, which 
involves using metal hyperaccumulating plants, or fast-growing plants. Continuous phyto￾extraction is dependent on the accumulation of contaminants (mainly metals) by plants into 
their biomass. In recent years, phytoextraction has become one of the most important phy￾toremediation techniques that researchers use for the reformation of heavy metals and metal￾loids from polluted soil (Sarwar et al., 2017).
2.4 Phytostabilization
In Phytostabilization, metal-tolerant plant species are used for the immobilization of heavy 
underground metals and the reduction of their bioavailability. This process prevents their 
immigration into the ecosystem and reduces the chances of metals finding their way into the 
food chain (Marques et al., 2009). Stabilization of contaminants has to done in the roots or 
inside the rhizosphere. The toxic effects of a contaminant in the soil can be diminish by soil 
microbes, for example, Cd toxicity in plants can be cut down by exudates (peptides) from the 
bacterium Pseudomonas putida. Moreover, it is possible for plants to convert microbial contam￾inations into toxic forms, or decrease their biosolubilities. Within the rhizosphere, complexes 
with metals are generated by the discharge of natural chelates like siderophores, phenolics, 
and organic acids in the roots of certain plants (Rajkumar et al., 2010). Phytostabilization can 
happen through a reduction in metal valence in the rhizosphere or absorption of heavy metal 
and segregation within root tissues, or adsorption onto root cell walls (Gerhardt et al., 2017). 
Phytostabilization prevents further dispersal and aims to retain contaminants in the soil.
2.5 Rhizofiltration
Rhizofiltration is surface assimilation of contaminants from rhizospheric soil solution 
onto plant roots by absorption. Rhizofiltration is a hydroponics-based green technology that 2. Mechanism of heavy metal remediation 217
uses aquatic and terrestrial plants to concentrate water treatment, absorb heavy metals from 
wastewater, and precipitate them (Mesjasz-Przybyłowicz et al., 2004). Moreover, chemicals 
released by plants and plant-associated soil microbes can work as biosurfactants in the soil. 
This can lead to an increased uptake of contaminants. Contaminants can be stable in nature. 
Through a process called photofiltaration, they can also produce wetlands. This involves 
rhizome-filtration where metals such as cadmium, lead, uranium, cobalt, copper, arsenic are 
precipitated within the rhizosphere. The release of oxygen via the aerenchyma of roots results 
in the formation of metal-plaque on the root of wetland plants (Parmar and Singh, 2015). 
Sunflower, tobacco, spinach, Indian mustard and rye are some examples of plants that are 
active for rhizofiltration. As the heavy metals do not translocate to the shoots, plant species 
besides hyperaccumulators can be used (Henry, 2000).
2.6 Rhizodegradation (phytostimulation)
When microorganisms in the rhizospheric degrade organic contaminants in the soil, the 
process of Rhizodegradation is adopted. Fungi, bacteria, and yeasts are some examples 
of microorganisms that perform rhizodegradation. Morever, microorganisms are pres￾ent on the surface of the soil and ground in the rhizosphere (Dos Santos and Maranho, 
2018). Rhizodegradation improved contaminant bioavailability and microbial commu￾nity hotspots in the soil rhizosphere have become an important strategy for the treatment 
of PAH-contaminated soils (Kotoky et al., 2018). Due to some in rich nutrient in envi￾ronment, the efficacy of extraction and increase the removal of contaminants. Further, 
stimulation of the microbial growth of the soil and organic pollutants degradation in the 
soil is achieved by the enzymes released by the plants. Phytostimulation promotes the 
proliferation of rotting rhizosphere microorganisms which uses plant exudates and me￾tabolites as a source of carbon and energy. In addition, plants can excrete biodegrading 
enzymes themselves (Awa and Hadibarata, 2020). Also, plants may exude biodegrading 
enzymes themselves. The application of phytostimulation is limited to organic pollutants. 
However, the efficiency of rhizodegradation is lowered in a depth of 20cm onwards in 
soil,. Additionally, the growth of roots towards deeper soil is limited by the soil’s physical 
structure (Kuppusamy et al., 2017).
2.7 Phytodesalination
In phytodesalination, the use of halophytes to remove excess salts from saline soils is 
a relatively new technology. Plants as Sesuvium portulacastrum and Suaeda maritima were 
found to be efficient in removing and storing NaCl from highly saline soils (Favas et al., 
2014).
In any case of the soil characteristics are largely depends on the nature, pollution and de￾gree of microbial contaminations. These techniques are finaled for the restoration technique, 
and also they have innovative availability and cost benefit of these techniques. The preference 
of the use of "in situ" treatment is generally developed due to following benefits viz; costs￾effectiveness, less destructive, and environmental friendly nature. It encompass several chal￾lenges like slower processing, difficult implementation, direct contact with decontaminating 
agents, etc. (Terry and Banuelos, 2020).218 11. Phytoremediation strategies of plants
3. Phytoremediation of contaminated soil to grow food
With increasing food production, environmental pressure and soil pollutions, sustainable 
energy and it’s a major challenge for the everincreasing world population. Due to high con￾centrations of contaminants, this strategy is destined to agricultural soils recover that are 
harmfull for safe food production and legally restricted. Its purpose is to remove or removal 
of pollutants from the ground soil until the total or concentration to the bioavailabilityof 
the pollutants falls under the threshold at which food production can take in a safely place. 
Organic contaminants may be destroyed in the plant or its rhizosphere during the cultivation 
cycle or during postharvest treatment, while inorganic pollutants must be collected from har￾vested biomass and safely disposed off (Liu et al., 2020).
3.1 Bioenergy crops mediated remediation
Energy crops are comprehensive farming involving high plant density and systematiza￾tion, less rotation (1–4 years), and plant cycle rotation (less than 20 years). There are two types 
of energy crops: annuals and perennials. Forests are typically grown in small rotation crops 
(SRC). In this practice, which is a traditional form of woodland management, multiple trunks 
are allowed to grow from fallen tree stumps. Phytoremediation is quickly becoming a more 
sustainable method for the treatment of contaminated sites. The expenditure incurred when 
using this treatment method is generally lower than that of other well-known remedial tech￾niques. Moreover, some environmental impacts, including atmospheric emissions and waste 
generation, are not present. Biomass produced in phytoremediation can be economically 
valuable (Table 2). It can be used as a form of bioenergy (biogas, biofuels, and combustion for 
energy production and heating). It can bring significant environmental cobenefits, including 
but not limited to erosion control and wildlife habitat (Gomes, 2012). In ecological recycling 
of heavy metals and metalloids, phytoremediation activities can also help. Economically ben￾eficial treatments of soil could not compete with food production and energy plantations 
established on marginall and provide environmentally. Therefore, combining with phytore￾mediation, bioenergy production may play an important role in energy self-sufficiency and 
environmental remediation of polluted lands. The main purpose of energy crop, especially 
short rotation coppice (SRC) plantations of contaminated soil is a fast developing field in 
phytoremediation. By contributing to the energy supply, biomass can play an important role 
for use of renewable energy sources (RES) (Hauptvogl et al., 2020).
3.2 Hyperaccumulator plants for phytomining
The term "hyperaccumulator" is used to identify several plants that involved from dis￾tantly related families but share the capacity to grow on metalized soils and accumulate 
heavy metals in exceptionally high amounts in aerial organs without phytotoxic effects. Three 
basic ensigns distinguish hyperaccumulators from related hyperactive accumulating order. 
Completely stimulate the rate of which is the uptake of heavy metal occurs, a faster root￾shoot translocation, and have a greater ability to detoxify and appropriate heavy metals in 
plants leave (Rascio and Navari-Izzo, 2011).3. Phytoremediation of contaminated soil to grow food 219
Phytomining is the formation of a plants crop of a metal by growing a high level of biomass 
plants that accumulated strong metal concentrations. Some of the plants are natural hyper￾accumulators in others and the property can be induced. In phytomining, plants are capable 
to inlarge high-mineral environments are applied to the extract a particular metal taking up 
from the soil and concentrate it within their tissues (Ali et al., 2013). After harvest crop and 
dried, the biomass is treated for metal enrichment and recovery. Being a very cheap technol￾ogy, phytomining has the potential to allow economic exploitation of low-graded ores surface 
or mineralized soils that metal are too poor for conventional mining. The overall outcome 
is a saleable metal product and land that has been rendered more suitable for agriculture 
than before phytomining operations (Wuana and Okieimen, 2011). Phytoremediation and 
phytomining are done by plant species known as ‘hyperaccumulators’. Hyperaccumulators 
are capable of taking up and storing large quantities of heavy metals without experiencing 
TABLE 2 Valorization of phytoremediation by-product crops.
Crop Target contaminants End use of crop residues References
Hemp (Cannabis sativa) Cd Biomass for bioenergy (Gomes, 2012)
Flax (Linumusitatissimum) Cd Biomass for bioenergy (Gomes, 2012)
Peanut (Arachis hypogaea) Cd Biomass for bioenergy (Gomes, 2012)
Willow (Salix spp.) CO2 abatement Biomass for bioenergy (Gomes, 2012)
Energy maize (Zea mays) Cd biodiesel (Chen et al., 2017)
Rapeseed (Brassica napus) Cd biodiesel (Chen et al., 2017)
Soybean (Glycine max) Cd biodiesel (Chen et al., 2017)
Castor (Ricinus communis)
Cassava (Manihot esculenta)
Rubber tree (Hevea brasiliensis)
Cd, Pb, Ni, As, Cu, and 
some pesticides
Biodiesel/biomass for 
bioenergy
(Huang et al., 2011) and 
(Bauddh et al., 2015)
Physic nut (Jatropha curcas) Cr, Zn, Pb, Zn Biodiesel/biomass for 
bioenergy
(Barbosa et al., 2015)
Giant reed (Arundodonax) Cr, Zn, Pb, Zn Biodiesel/biomass for 
bioenergy
(Barbosa et al., 2015)
Miscanthus spp. Cd Biomass for bioenergy (Barbosa et al., 2015) and 
(Pogrzeba et al., 2018)
Brassica spp. Cd, Pb Bioenergy/biofuel (Barbosa et al., 2015) and 
(Salido et al., 2010)
Sunflower (Helianthus annuus) Cu Biodiesel (Tandon et al., 2013)
Populus spp. Cd, Pb, Zn, Ni Biomass for bioenergy/
biofuel
(Baycu et al., 2006)
Sweet Sorghum (Sorghum 
bicolor)
Cd, Cu Bioethanol production (Jia et al., 2016)220 11. Phytoremediation strategies of plants
toxic physiological effects. Therefore, mechanisms of heavy metal hyperaccumulation and 
depolution in hyperaccumulator plants are not yet fully understood; however, a substantial 
research effort linked to the commercialization of phytoremediation and phytomining pro￾cesses is underway. Several hyperaccumulator species have been considered as aphytomin￾ing of metals such as nickel, cobalt, and thallium (Van der Ent et al., 2020). Most of this prior 
work has focused on either the biological aspects of phytomining operations, such as biomass 
accumulation and metal uptake levels, or on agronomic issues such as seed collection, sow￾ing, fertilization, weed control, and harvesting procedures. An essential step in phytomining 
is the generation of a metal-enriched product from the harvested plant biomass. Incineration 
of plant tissues to yield a ‘bio-ore’ with high residual metal concentration, followed by strong 
smelting or smelting/roasting/sintering, has been recommended as an appropriate process￾ing strategy for metal recovery.
4. Phytoremediation for bioenergy production
One of the most important milestones in moving toward a more sustainable future is the 
shift to energy sustainability. Sustainable energy is defined as the production of green energy 
from renewable natural resources such as sun, wind, geothermal, hydropower, and biomass. 
Biomass is one of the most plentiful renewable energy supplies on the earth (Guo et al., 2015). 
It may be utilized to generate bioenergy, which is either thermal or electrical energy (through 
direct burning), as well as biofuels (through various conversion processes). From an environ￾mental perspective, using plant biomass for bioenergy production may play a critical role, as 
well as open up new economic and profitable agricultural possibilities. Phytoremediation not 
only provides a realistic solution for the remediation and long-term management of polluted 
areas, but it also generates high-value products that may be utilized in the bioenergy industry 
(Grifoni et al., 2021). Various research on this combined phytoremediation-bioenergy method 
hasdemonstrated that biomass use for energy is a major aspect of contemporary phytore￾mediation programs. Identifying phytoremediation species with high bioenergy potential is 
critical in this combination strategy (Grifoni et al., 2021). Meanwhile, one of the most appeal￾ing ideas for meeting growing global energy demand is the utilization of biomass to manu￾facture fuels. As a result, several authors have focused on the management of metal-polluted 
biomass after phytoremediation, exhibiting great potential in integrating phytoremediation 
biomass with bioenergy technology based on biochemical, thermal, and thermochemical pro￾cesses (Ali et al., 2020; Dastyar et al., 2019; Kumar Yadav et al., 2018).
Biomass may also be converted into gaseous fuels such as biohydrogen, biomethane, biobu￾tane, and biopropane by anaerobic fermentation of biomass (Lee and Ofori-Boateng, 2013). In 
addition to this, biogas, which mostly consists of methane, butane, and propane, is another 
source of energy (Padilla-Rivera et al., 2019). Several further publications that demonstrate 
the inclusion of biomass from phytoremediation into gaseous bioenergy generating methods 
have been reported earlier. Thermal and biochemical conversion may be utilized to make liq￾uid biofuels, and they have been intensively explored, mostly to replace current liquid fuels 
such as petrol and diesel (Tsita et al., 2020), as a carbon-neutral resource that helps to reduce 
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions (Ramos et al., 2016). Bioethanol manufacturing has lately 
increased interest in a majority of nations throughout the world (Demirbas, 2017; Sandesh 5. Valorization of phytoremediation by-products 221
and Ujwal, 2021). Due to its high octane level, it is inexpensive to blend with gasoline, de￾creasing pollution and boosting engine performance. It is also made from the fermentation of 
edible or nonedible biomass (Rodionova et al., 2017), similar to biodiesel production(Yadav 
et al., 2017). Phytoremediation of contaminated soils containing hazardous metals, radionu￾clides, and organic compounds can be exploited to produce low-carbon fuels like diesel and 
natural gas. Cannabis has been described as a multipurpose crop for phytoremediation of 
pesticide and fertilizer-polluted soils for bioenergy generation (Rheay et al., 2021). Bioenergy 
may be produced from phytoremediation biomass, but the procedure must be carefully cho￾sen because toxins may be discharged into the environment. The bioenergy generation pro￾cess should be carefully designed depending on the kind of pollutant and its fate in the plant, 
since it may result in dangerous levels of pollution. Some safety and regulatory problems are 
still being worked out, but the technology is getting closer to being used in bioenergy conver￾sion (Shrinkhal, 2017). Jung (Jung et al., 2020)described a similar scenario in which nonedible 
cockspur grass (Echinochloa crus-galli) seeds from phytoremediation studies were utilized to 
make biodiesel. While tracking the development of the grass and the direct conversion of 
cockspur grass seeds into biodiesel, the phytoremediation capacity of hazardous metals was 
investigated.
According to some studies, biomass combustion generates around 96 percent of the 
world's bioenergy (Popp et al., 2021). Furthermore, the biomass generated during phytore￾mediation might be commercially valorized as bioenergy, such as biofuels, biogas, and com￾bustion (Table 2). (Edgar et al., 2021; Gomes, 2012). In addition, phytoremediation is used 
in conjunction with oil production to create biofuels to achieve low-cost decontamination 
(Bauddh et al., 2015). Oil-bearing plants, that are classified into an edible (sesame oil, ground￾nut oil, mustard, sunflower, corn oil, cottonseed, and safflower) and nonedible oil (castor, 
rapeseed, jatropha) yields, are used in phytoremediation (Prabha et al., 2021; Tandon et al., 
2013). Following the removal of oilseeds, the biomass leftovers can be utilized directly to 
generate heat energy or converted to fuels by pyrolysis. The sunflower (Helianthus annuus L.) 
is one of the edible crops that accumulates copper through roots and leaves at various Cu2
+
concentrations without being impacted by Cu toxicity, which might be owing to limited tran￾sit between root and shoot in this case(Tandon et al., 2013).
5. Valorization of phytoremediation by-products
Phytoremediation may be used to increase the circular economy, revenue, energy, car￾bon sequestration, feedstock production, phytoproduct cogeneration, and highly valuable 
by-products (Edgar et al., 2021). An integrated assisted phytoremediation-bioenergy strat￾egy is therefore a potential technique that advances the concept of generating sustainable 
energy by valorizing biomass derived from diverse assisted phytoremediation strategies 
(Tripathi et al., 2016). Biomass/waste valorization is the conversion of wastes into alterna￾tive fuels, energy, and other valuable value-added products that fall under the umbrella 
of the circular economy and bioeconomy, with a focus on sustainability and environmen￾tal goals. To improve phytoremediation's financial feasibility, provide energy, and recover 
high-value components, Jiang et al. (2015) presented an integrated strategy. If phytoreme￾diation is carefully managed, this model suggests that high-biomass-yield plant species can 222 11. Phytoremediation strategies of plants
earn a considerable financial return from recovering elements such as Ni, Pt, and As. Other 
than that integration of biomass (polluted or not) into energy production systems has been 
studied in recent decades to improve economic and environmental advantages. This linkage 
has the potential to alleviate the financial constraints of phytoremediation while also reduc￾ing metal remobilization (Edgar et al., 2021). The valorization of phytoremediation residual 
biomass produced phytoproducts such as biodiesel, bioethanol, heat, and biogas would 
not only assist meet global energy demand but would also give an option for encouraging 
a biobased economy for sustainable development (Tripathi et al., 2016). Using the concept 
of life cycle assessment to improve the value of polluted biomass from phytoremediation 
sites would provide another practical option to conserve natural resources and reduce en￾vironmental damage (Fig. 2). Similarly, biomass gathered from phytoremediation sites may 
be used to make biofuels, and this strategy also helps to reduce CO2 emissions (Jung et al., 
2020). As a result, the financial benefits of reducing the net cost of phytoremediation imple￾mentation can be realized by valorizing phytoremediation biomass as timber, biofuel, es￾sential oils, activated carbon, and biochar (Gerhardt et al., 2017). Furthermore, volarization 
of phytoremediation biomass utilizing phytomanagement systems has several advantages, 
including social (land reuse for parks and green space) and environmental protection (agri￾cultural soils, reduction in carbon footprint by CO2 sequestration and protection of vulnera￾ble species in ecosystem). Meanwhile, in addition to money from biomass, special attention 
should be made on economic advantages (e.g., job creation, post-reform land value rise) 
(Gerhardt et al., 2017).
Phyto
remediation
Pre-treatment of
Biomass
Biochar
Syngas
Bio-oil
Biochar
Biogas
Biogas
Bioethanol
Biodiesel
Gasification
Combustion
Pyrolysis
Liquefaction
Anaerobic
Conversion
Fermentation
Mechanical
Extraction
Physical
Conversion
Thermo-Chemical
Conversion
Bio-Chemical
Conversion Biomass
FIG. 2 Value-added products obtained from processing of phytoremediation by-products.6. Challenges associated with phytoremediation 223
6. Challenges associated with phytoremediation
In comparison to engineering-based alternatives, phytoremediation approaches for soil 
decontamination have long been regarded to be more environmentally friendly, less costly, 
and require less maintenance (Tiodar et al., 2021). Phytoremediation has been discovered to 
be an appealing solution for metal removal from polluted areas, however, there are various 
challenges associated with this technique (Patra et al., 2020), including as (i) it will take several 
years to completely remediate polluted areas, (ii) low biomass of hyperaccumulators species, 
(iii) species cultivation and development are challenging, (iv) reduction in bioaccumulation 
ability of plant in presence of the pest, (v) after the introduction of new species into polluted 
areas, there is a disturbance in local diversity, (vi) contaminated biomass disposal, and (vii) 
plant-based metal remediation may be influenced by climate conditions. Furthermore, phy￾toremediation technology can be applied to sites with low to moderate-heavy metal con￾centrations because metals can be transferred to the food chain if contaminated biomass is 
mismanaged, and it can be limited to shallow groundwater, soils, and sediments because soil 
phytoremediation is only applicable to surface soils (Arora and Khosla, 2021; Odoh et al., 
2019; Peng et al., 2018). To summarise, phytoremediation is not capable of achieving a 100 
percent reduction owing to various reasons, including inconsistent government policy and 
regulatory agency enforcement, dynamic complexity of the ecosystem, and a lack of techni￾cal know-how and information gaps (Odoh et al., 2019; Patra et al., 2020). Phytoremediation 
alsohas many technical restrictions, including the requirement that contaminants be con￾tained inside the root zones of plants employed for phytoremediation. This may put plants 
under stress in terms of water, nutrients, depth, and other elements that are necessary for 
plant growth (Schwitzguébel, 2017). The most significant limitation of phytoremediation 
systems is the slower pace of remediation. Contaminated soil limits plant growth and sur￾vival, limiting catabolism, and other abiotic (temperature, light, nutrient, precipitation, and 
atmospheric CO2) and biotic (competition with grass and herbs, plant pathogens,herbivory 
by insects or animals) factors may also limit plantgrowth and survivalin the field (Tripathi 
et al., 2019). Another significant limitation of the phytoremediation technique is the depth 
to which soil is poisoned with a specific pollutant of interest, which is generally 50 cm in 
most situations. Trees with deeper roots allow for more thorough remediation. Furthermore, 
if the roots and woods are polluted after the cleanup is completed, there may be a disposal 
difficulty (Tripathi et al., 2019). As a result, it is limited to remote/isolated regions and is in￾effective in situations where people and other ecological receivers are in immediate danger. 
Furthermore, hyperaccumulators can only accumulate around 0.2% (dry weight) of highly 
harmful poisonous elements (Pb, Cd) and about 2% of less toxic elements (Zn, Ni, and Cu), 
limiting their use to places with low HM concentrations and potentially allowing invasive 
species to establish (Diarra et al., 2021). Contaminants cannot be eliminated by phytoreme￾diation techniques, and if accumulator plants are consumed by animals, they may enter the 
food chain (Hauptvogl et al., 2020). In extremely polluted locations, it can't compete with 
the traditional cleanup. Another drawback is that phytoremediation techniques are still in 
the early stages of research, thus they are not widely acknowledged by regulatory bodies.
(Hauptvogl et al., 2020). It has been stated that the potential for phytoremediation has not 
been completely exploited. This method has few commercial-scale uses for detoxifying pol￾luted soil and water (Mosa et al., 2016). Inadequate financing for phytoremediation research 224 11. Phytoremediation strategies of plants
is also a significant issue. Concerns have also been raised concerning the presence of toxic 
substances in the biomass of energy crops grown on the polluted ground, which might result 
in dangerous emissions (Hauptvogl et al., 2020). In situ bacterium-assisted phytoremediation 
is a method that uses bacteria and plants to remediate organic pollutants and heavy metals. 
The disadvantages are that this process takes a long time, there is seasonal fluctuation in mi￾crobial activity, and the use of treatment chemicals for increased breakdown becomes difficult 
in the natural environment. Furthermore, the in situ application becomes less feasible in a few 
cases (Girolkar et al., 2021).
7. Conclusion and future perspective
To summarize, several advances in phytoremediation have been made in the last ten 
years, primarily in developed countries; however, phytoremediation practices have 
yet to gain widespread acceptance among practitioners and scientific communities. 
Phytoremediation is a solar-powered, all-natural method that may be used "in situ" to 
treat and rehabilitate heavy metal-contaminated soil and water areas. It also outper￾forms other physical and chemical cleansing approaches in terms of environmental and 
social benefits. Phytoremediation procedures require specific tactics to be promoted and 
implemented, but we must pick plant species that have particular traits, such as be￾ing valuable, native everlasting in nature, fast-growing, and with well-developed root 
systems. The approach employed here is both effective and long-term. A plethora of 
phytoremediation processes and field initiatives have been successfully completed, 
demonstrating the effectiveness of phytoremediation. Practitioners can utilize the phy￾toremediation knowledge and insights offered here to act immediately on the ground. 
National and international rules and regulations should promote phytoremediation 
activities. However, to get the most out of the phytoremediation strategy, a thorough 
understanding of metal ion fate is necessary, including accumulation, absorption, and 
transportation, sensitivity, dispersion, tolerance, rhizosphere interactions, and diverse 
environmental circumstances. Therefore, various field experts such as biotechnologists, 
plant breeders, agronomists, soil scientists, physiologists, environmentalists, and bio￾chemists must collaborate to develop solid approaches for developing transgenic plants 
and strengthening the potential of existing crop species to perform better metal tox￾icity remediation activities. Inever-changing environments and scenarios, factors such 
as higher increased input utilization, biomass production, optimum/enhanced crop in￾creased rate of photosynthesis, growth rates, improved heavy metal bioavailability with 
increased sink capacity, increased metal toxicity tolerance, and adaptation to a variety 
of different climatic conditions are all more pronounced. These factors can make phy￾toremediation more challenging. Apart from the scientific and engineering aspects of 
phytoremediation, plant genetic conservators should be included to maintain local bio￾diversity and give a detailed risk assessment before appealing to alien/transgenic spe￾cies for phytoremediation. Phytoremediation difficulties for specified locations should 
be addressed together by science administration and hands-on employees. In addition, 
other stakeholders, such as agricultural and pharmaceutical firms, should be consulted References 225
at the outset to help hasten the creation of acceptable business models/policies. This 
significant policy change is required for current polluted areas as well as any potential 
future pollutants:
(1) After phytoremediation of a polluted site, the quality of high valued products must be 
evaluated.
(2) Use of main products of the plants used for phytoremediation to estimate the least 
risk.
(3) Evaluating the indirect and direct advantages of phytoremediation plants.
(4) Lifecycle evaluation of essential oil and biodieselproduction, as well as other 
phytoproducts from contaminated areas.
(5) Pollutant interactions between plants and microbes in phytoremediation.
(6) Gaining a better grasp of the phytoremediation of soil that has been polluted with 
numerous contaminants.
(7) Transgenic plants with improved plant-microbe interaction or rhizosphere microbial 
activity are being developed.
(8) Multigenetechnique is needed that involves the simultaneous transfer of numerous 
genes into appropriate candidate plants may aid in the removal of mixed or 
complicated pollutants.
(9) It is necessary to identify a target and a site-specific cropping system.
(10) Developing and identifying low-cost bio-ore processing technologies.
(11) Policy and regulation implementation in phytoremediation activities at micro as well 
as macrolevel farms.
References
Adiloğlu, S., 2017. Heavy metal removal with phytoremediation. Adv. Bioremed. Phytoremed., 115–126.
Ali, S., Abbas, Z., Rizwan, M., Zaheer, I.E., Yavas, I., Ünay, A., Abdel-Daim, M.M., Bin-Jumah, M., Hasanuzzaman, 
M., Kalderis, D., 2020. Application of floating aquatic plants in phytoremediation of heavy metals polluted water: 
a review. Sustainability. https://doi.org/10.3390/su12051927.
Ali, H., Khan, E., Sajad, M.A., 2013. Phytoremediation of heavy metals—concepts and applications. Chemosphere 
91 (7), 869–881.
Anjum, N.A., Ahmad, I., Mohmood, I., Pacheco, M., Duarte, A.C., Pereira, E., Umar, S., Ahmad, A., Khan, N.A., Iqbal, 
M., Prasad, M.N.V., 2012. Modulation of glutathione and its related enzymes in plants’ responses to toxic metals 
and metalloids—a review. Environ. Exp. Bot. 75, 307–324. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ENVEXPBOT.2011.07.002.
Arora, V., Khosla, B., 2021. Conventional and contemporary techniques for removal of heavy metals from soil. In: 
Biodegradation., https://doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.98569.
Awa, S.H., Hadibarata, T., 2020. Removal of heavy metals in contaminated soil by phytoremediation mechanism: a 
review. Water Air Soil Pollut. 231 (2), 1–15.
Barbosa, B., Boléo, S., Sidella, S., Costa, J., Duarte, M.P., Mendes, B., Cosentino, S.L., Fernando, A.L., 2015. 
Phytoremediation of heavy metal-contaminated soils using the perennial energy crops Miscanthus spp. and 
Arundo donax L. Bioenergy Res. 8, 1500–1511. https://doi.org/10.1007/S12155-015-9688-9/FIGURES/2.
Bauddh, K., Singh, K., Singh, B., Singh, R.P., 2015. Ricinus communis: a robust plant for bio-energy and phytoremedi￾ation of toxic metals from contaminated soil. Ecol. Eng. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoleng.2015.09.038.
Baycu, G., Tolunay, D., Özden, H., Günebakan, S., 2006. Ecophysiological and seasonal variations in Cd, Pb, Zn, and 
Ni concentrations in the leaves of urban deciduous trees in Istanbul. Environ. Pollut. 143, 545–554. https://doi.
org/10.1016/J.ENVPOL.2005.10.050.
Bringezu, K., Lichtenberger, O., Leopold, I., Neumann, D., 1999. Heavy metal tolerance of Silene vulgaris. J. Plant 
Physiol. 154, 536–546. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0176-1617(99)80295-8.226 11. Phytoremediation strategies of plants
Carvalho, P.N., Basto, M.C.P., Almeida, C.M.R., Brix, H., 2014. A review of plant-pharmaceutical interactions: from 
uptake and effects in crop plants to phytoremediation in constructed wetlands. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 21, 
11729–11763.
Chen, Z., Zheng, Y., Ding, C., Ren, X., Yuan, J., Sun, F., Li, Y., 2017. Integrated metagenomics and molecular ecological 
network analysis of bacterial community composition during the phytoremediation of cadmium-contaminated 
soils by bioenergy crops. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 145, 111–118. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ECOENV.2017.07.019.
Cunningham, S.D., Berti, W.R., Huang, J.W., 1995. Phytoremediation of contaminated soils. Trends Biotechnol. 13, 
393–397.
Dastyar, W., Raheem, A., He, J., Zhao, M., 2019. Biofuel production using thermochemical conversion of heavy 
metal-contaminated biomass (HMCB) harvested from phytoextraction process. Chem. Eng. J. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.cej.2018.08.111.
Demirbas, A., 2017. Tomorrow’s Biofuels: Goals and Hopes. Energy Sources, Part A Recover. Util. Environ. Eff, 
https://doi.org/10.1080/15567036.2016.1252815.
Diarra, I., Kotra, K.K., Prasad, S., 2021. Application of phytoremediation for heavy metal contaminated sites in the 
South Pacific: strategies, current challenges and future prospects. Appl. Spectrosc. Rev. https://doi.org/10.1080
/05704928.2021.1904410.
Dos Santos, J.J., Maranho, L.T., 2018. Rhizospheric microorganisms as a solution for the recovery of soils contami￾nated by petroleum: a review. J. Environ. Manage. 210, 104–113.
Edgar, V.N., Fabián, F.L., Julián Mario, P.C., Ileana, V.R., 2021. Coupling plant biomass derived from phytoremedia￾tion of potential toxic-metal-polluted soils to bioenergy production and high-value by-products—a review. Appl. 
Sci. https://doi.org/10.3390/app11072982.
Favas, P.J., Pratas, J., Varun, M., D’Souza, R., Paul, M.S., 2014. Phytoremediation of soils contaminated with metals and 
metalloids at mining areas: potential of native flora. In: Environmental Risk Assessment of Soil Contamination. 
vol. 3. IntechOpen, pp. 485–516.
Gadd, G.M., 2010. Metals, minerals and microbes: geomicrobiology and bioremediation. Microbiology 156, 609–643.
Galli, U., Meier, M., Brunold, C., 1993. Effects of cadmium on non-mycorrhizal and mycorrhizal Norway 
spruce seedlings [Picea abies (L.) Karst.] and its ectomycorrhizal fungus Laccaria laccata (Scop, ex Fr.) Bk. 
& Br.: sulphate reduction, thiols and distribution of the heavy metal. New Phytol. 125, 837–843. https://doi.
org/10.1111/J.1469-8137.1993.TB03932.X.
Gerhardt, K.E., Gerwing, P.D., Greenberg, B.M., 2017. Opinion: taking phytoremediation from proven technology to 
accepted practice. Plant Sci. 256, 170–185.
Girolkar, S., Thawale, P., Juwarkar, A., 2021. Bacteria-assisted phytoremediation of heavy metals and organic pol￾lutants: challenges and future prospects. In: Bioremediation for Environmental Sustainability., https://doi.
org/10.1016/b978-0-12-820318-7.00012-5.
Gomes, H.I., 2012. Phytoremediation for bioenergy: challenges and opportunities. Environ. Technol. Rev. https://
doi.org/10.1080/09593330.2012.696715.
Greipsson, S., 2011. Phytoremediation. Nat. Edu. Know. 3 (10), 7.
Grifoni, M., Pedron, F., Barbafieri, M., Rosellini, I., Petruzzelli, G., Franchi, E., 2021. Sustainable valorization of bio￾mass: from assisted phytoremediation to green energy production. In: Handbook of Assisted and Amendment: 
Enhanced Sustainable Remediation Technology., https://doi.org/10.1002/9781119670391.ch2.
Guo, M., Song, W., Buhain, J., 2015. Bioenergy and biofuels: history, status, and perspective. Renew. Sust. Energ. Rev. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2014.10.013.
Gupta, P., Diwan, B., 2017. Bacterial exopolysaccharide mediated heavy metal removal: a review on biosynthesis, 
mechanism and remediation strategies. Biotechnol. Rep. 13, 58–71.
Gupta, D.K., Huang, H.G., Yang, X.E., Razafindrabe, B.H.N., Inouhe, M., 2010. The detoxification of lead in Sedum 
alfredii H. is not related to phytochelatins but the glutathione. J. Hazard. Mater. 177, 437–444. https://doi.
org/10.1016/J.JHAZMAT.2009.12.052.
Hauptvogl, M., Kotrla, M., Prčík, M., Pauková, Ž., Kováčik, M., Lošák, T., 2020. Phytoremediation potential of fast-growing 
energy plants: challenges and perspectives—a review. Pol. J. Environ. Stud. https://doi.org/10.15244/pjoes/101621.
Henry, J.R., 2000. An Overview of the Phytoremediation of Lead and Mercury. US Environmental Protection Agency, 
Office of Solid Waste and Emergency Response, Technology Innovation Office, Washington, DC, pp. 1–31.
Huang, H., Yu, N., Wang, L., Gupta, D.K., He, Z., Wang, K., Zhu, Z., Yan, X., Li, T., Yang, X.E., 2011. The phytore￾mediation potential of bioenergy crop Ricinus communis for DDTs and cadmium co-contaminated soil. Bioresour. 
Technol. 102, 11034–11038. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.BIORTECH.2011.09.067.Iqbal, M., Ahmad, A., Ansari, M.K.A., Qureshi, M.I., Aref, I.M., Khan, P.R., Hegazy, S.S., El-Atta, H., Husen, A., 
Hakeem, K.R., 2015. Improving the phytoextraction capacity of plants to scavenge metal(loid)-contaminated sites. 
Environ. Rev. 23, 44–65. https://doi.org/10.1139/er-2014-0043.
Jacob, J.M., Karthik, C., Saratale, R.G., Kumar, S.S., Prabakar, D., Kadirvelu, K., Pugazhendhi, A., 2018. Biological 
approaches to tackle heavy metal pollution: a survey of literature. J. Environ. Manage. 217, 56–70.
Jia, W., Lv, S., Feng, J., Li, J., Li, Y., Li, S., 2016. Morphophysiological characteristic analysis demonstrated the poten￾tial of sweet sorghum (Sorghum bicolor (L.) Moench) in the phytoremediation of cadmium-contaminated soils. 
Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 23, 18823–18831. https://doi.org/10.1007/S11356-016-7083-5/FIGURES/6.
Jiang, Y., Lei, M., Duan, L., Longhurst, P., 2015. Integrating phytoremediation with biomass valorisation and crit￾ical element recovery: a UK contaminated land perspective. Biomass Bioenergy. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
biombioe.2015.10.013.
Jung, S., Kim, M., Moon, H., Park, Y.K., Rinklebe, J., Park, C.J., Kwon, E.E., 2020. Valorization of phytoremediation 
byproduct via synthesis of biodiesel from cockspur grass (Echinochloa crus-galli) seed. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acssuschemeng.0c02794.
Kotoky, R., Rajkumari, J., Pandey, P., 2018. The rhizosphere microbiome: Significance in rhizoremediation of polyar￾omatic hydrocarbon contaminated soil. J. Environ. Manage. 217, 858–870.
Kuiper, I., Lagendijk, E.L., Bloemberg, G.V., Lugtenberg, B.J.J., 2004. Rhizoremediation: a beneficial plant-microbe 
interaction. Mol. Plant-Microbe Interact. 17, 6–15.
Kumar Yadav, K., Gupta, N., Kumar, A., Reece, L.M., Singh, N., Rezania, S., Ahmad Khan, S., 2018. Mechanistic un￾derstanding and holistic approach of phytoremediation: a review on application and future prospects. Ecol. Eng. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoleng.2018.05.039.
Kuppusamy, S., Thavamani, P., Venkateswarlu, K., Lee, Y.B., Naidu, R., Megharaj, M., 2017. Remediation approaches 
for polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) contaminated soils: Technological constraints, emerging trends and 
future directions. Chemosphere 168, 944–968.
Lee, K.T., Ofori-Boateng, C., 2013. Biofuels: production technologies, global profile, and market potentials. Green 
Energy Technol. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-4451-70-3_2.
Leyval, C., Singh, B.R., Joner, E.J., 1995. Occurrence and infectivity of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi in some nor￾wegian soils influenced by heavy metals and soil properties. Water Air Soil Pollut. 84, 203–216. https://doi.
org/10.1007/BF00475340.
Lin, Z.-Q., Schemenauer, R.S., Cervinka, V., Zayed, A., Lee, A., Terry, N., 2000. Selenium volatilization from a soil—
plant system for the remediation of contaminated water and soil in the San Joaquin Valley. J. Environ. Qual. 29, 
1048–1056. https://doi.org/10.2134/JEQ2000.00472425002900040003X.
Liu, S., Yang, B., Liang, Y., Xiao, Y., Fang, J., 2020. Prospect of phytoremediation combined with other approaches for 
remediation of heavy metal-polluted soils. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 27 (14), 16069–16085.
Ma, Y., Rajkumar, M., Oliveira, R.S., Zhang, C., Freitas, H., 2019. Potential of plant beneficial bacteria and arbuscular 
mycorrhizal fungi in phytoremediation of metal-contaminated saline soils. J. Hazard. Mater. 379, 120813.
Mahar, A., Wang, P., Ali, A., Awasthi, M.K., Lahori, A.H., Wang, Q., Li, R., Zhang, Z., 2016. Challenges and opportu￾nities in the phytoremediation of heavy metals contaminated soils: a review. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 126, 111–121.
Marques, A.P., Rangel, A.O., Castro, P.M., 2009. Remediation of heavy metal contaminated soils: phytoremediation as 
a potentially promising clean-up technology. Crit. Rev. Environ. Sci. Technol. 39 (8), 622–654.
Merdy, P., Gharbi, L.T., Lucas, Y., 2009. Pb, Cu and Cr interactions with soil: sorption experiments and modelling. 
Colloids Surfaces A Physicochem. Eng. Asp. 347, 192–199.
Mesjasz-Przybyłowicz, J.O.L.A.N.T.A., Nakonieczny, M.I.R.O.S.Ł.A.W., Migula, P.A.W.E.Ł., Augustyniak, M.A.R.I.A., 
Tarnawska, M.O.N.I.K.A., Reimold, W.U., Koeberl, C.H.R.I.S.T.I.A.N., Przybyłowicz, W.O.J.C.I.E.C.H., Głowacka, 
E.L.Ż.B.I.E.T.A., 2004. Uptake of cadmium, lead nickel and zinc from soil and water solutions by the nickel hyper￾accumulator Berkheya coddii. Acta Biol. Cracoviensia Ser. Bot 46, 75–85.
Mishra, J., Singh, R., Arora, N.K., 2017. Alleviation of heavy metal stress in plants and remediation of soil by rhizo￾sphere microorganisms. Front. Microbiol. 8, 1706.
Mishra, S., Tripathi, R.D., Srivastava, S., Dwivedi, S., Trivedi, P.K., Dhankher, O.P., Khare, A., 2009. Thiol metabolism 
play significant role during cadmium detoxification by Ceratophyllum demersum L. Bioresour. Technol. 100, 
2155–2161. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.BIORTECH.2008.10.041.
Moosavi, S.G., Seghatoleslami, M.J., 2013. Phytoremediation: a review. Adv. Agric. Biol. 1, 5–11.
Mosa, K.A., Saadoun, I., Kumar, K., Helmy, M., Dhankher, O.P., 2016. Potential biotechnological strategies for the 
cleanup of heavy metals and metalloids. Front. Plant Sci. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2016.00303.
References 227228 11. Phytoremediation strategies of plants
Mustafa, H.M., Hayder, G., 2021. Recent studies on applications of aquatic weed plants in phytoremediation of 
wastewater: a review article. Ain Shams Eng. J. 12, 355–365.
Odoh, C.K., Zabbey, N., Sam, K., Eze, C.N., 2019. Status, progress and challenges of phytoremediation—an African 
scenario. J. Environ. Manag. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2019.02.090.
Padilla-Rivera, A., Paredes, M.G., Güereca, L.P., 2019. A systematic review of the sustainability assessment of bioen￾ergy: the case of gaseous biofuels. Biomass Bioenergy. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biombioe.2019.03.014.
Padmavathiamma, P.K., Li, L.Y., 2007. Phytoremediation technology: hyper-accumulation metals in plants. Water Air 
Soil Pollut. 184 (1), 105–126.
Parmar, S., Singh, V., 2015. Water quality parameters of river Yamuna in Delhi after 20 years of the Yamuna action 
plan. Int. J. Sci. Nat. 6 (4), 662–669.
Patra, D.K., Pradhan, C., Patra, H.K., 2020. Toxic metal decontamination by phytoremediation approach: con￾cept, challenges, opportunities and future perspectives. Environ. Technol. Innov. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
eti.2020.100672.
Peng, K., Li, X., Luo, C., Shen, Z., 2007. Vegetation composition and heavy metal uptake by wild plants at three contam￾inated sites in Xiangxi area, China. J. Environ. Sci. Health 41, 65–76. https://doi.org/10.1080/10934520500298838.
Peng, W., Li, X., Xiao, S., Fan, W., 2018. Review of remediation technologies for sediments contaminated by heavy 
metals. J. Soils Sediments. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11368-018-1921-7.
Pinto, A.P., De Varennes, A., Fonseca, R., Teixeira, D.M., 2015. Phytoremediation of soils contaminated with heavy 
metals: techniques and strategies. In: Phytoremediation. Springer, pp. 133–155.
Pogrzeba, M., Krzyżak, J., Rusinowski, S., Hebner, A., Kopielski, K., Werle, S., Ratman-Kłosińska, I., 2018. 
Possibility of using energy crops for phytoremediation of heavy metals contaminated land—a three-year 
experience. In: Renewable Energy Sources: Engineering, Technology, Innovation, pp. 33–45, https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-319-72371-6_4.
Popp, J., Kovács, S., Oláh, J., Divéki, Z., Balázs, E., 2021. Bioeconomy: biomass and biomass-based energy supply and 
demand. New Biotechnol. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nbt.2020.10.004.
Prabha, J., Kumar, M., Tripathi, R., 2021. Opportunities and challenges of utilizing energy crops in phytoremedi￾ation of environmental pollutants: a review. In: Bioremediation for Environmental Sustainability., https://doi.
org/10.1016/b978-0-12-820318-7.00017-4.
Rajendran, P., Muthukrishnan, J., Gunasekaran, P., 2003. Microbes in heavy metal remediation. Indian J. Exp. Biol. 41.
Rajkumar, M., Ae, N., Prasad, M.N.V., Freitas, H., 2010. Potential of siderophore-producing bacteria for improving 
heavy metal phytoextraction. Trends Biotechnol. 28 (3), 142–149.
Ramos, J.L., Valdivia, M., García-Lorente, F., Segura, A., 2016. Benefits and perspectives on the use of biofuels. 
Microb. Biotechnol. https://doi.org/10.1111/1751-7915.12356.
Rascio, N., Navari-Izzo, F., 2011. Interesting? Plant Sci. 180 (2), 169–181.
Rheay, H.T., Omondi, E.C., Brewer, C.E., 2021. Potential of hemp (Cannabis sativa L.) for paired phytoremediation 
and bioenergy production. In: GCB Bioenergy., https://doi.org/10.1111/gcbb.12782.
Ribeiro, B.G., Dos Santos, M.M., Pinto, M.I.S., Meira, H.M., Durval, I.B., Guerra, J.M.C., Sarubbo, L., 2019. Production 
and optimization of the extraction conditions of a biosurfactant of Candida utilis UFPEDA1009 with potential of 
application in the food industry. Chem. Eng. Trans. 74, 1477–1482.
Rodionova, M.V., Poudyal, R.S., Tiwari, I., Voloshin, R.A., Zharmukhamedov, S.K., Nam, H.G., Zayadan, B.K., Bruce, 
B.D., Hou, H.J.M., Allakhverdiev, S.I., 2017. Biofuel production: challenges and opportunities. Int. J. Hydrog. 
Energy. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2016.11.125.
Salido, A.L., Hasty, K.L., Lim, J.M., Butcher, D.J., 2010. Phytoremediation of arsenic and lead in contaminated soil 
using chinese brake ferns (Pteris vittata) and Indian mustard (Brassica juncea). Int. J. Phytoremed. 5, 89–103. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/713610173.
Sandesh, K., Ujwal, P., 2021. Trends and perspectives of liquid biofuel—process and industrial viability. Energy 
Convers. Manag. X. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecmx.2020.100075.
Sarwar, N., Imran, M., Shaheen, M.R., Ishaque, W., Kamran, M.A., Matloob, A., Rehim, A., Hussain, S., 2017. 
Phytoremediation strategies for soils contaminated with heavy metals: modifications and future perspectives. 
Chemosphere 171, 710–721.
Schwitzguébel, J.P., 2017. Phytoremediation of soils contaminated by organic compounds: hype, hope and facts. J. 
Soils Sediments. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11368-015-1253-9.
Shrinkhal, R., 2017. Coupling phytoremediation appositeness with bioenergy plants: a sociolegal perspective. In: 
Phytoremediation Potential of Bioenergy Plants., https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-3084-0_19.Tandon, M., Vasudevan, P., Naik, S.N., Davies, P., 2013. Oil bearing seasonal crops in India: energy and phytoreme￾diation potential. Int. J. Energy Sect. Manag. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJESM-02-2013-0005.
Tangahu, B.V., Sheikh Abdullah, S.R., Basri, H., Idris, M., Anuar, N., Mukhlisin, M., 2011. A review on heavy metals 
(As, Pb, and Hg) uptake by plants through phytoremediation. Int. J. Chem. Eng., 2011.
Terry, N., Banuelos, G.S. (Eds.), 2020. Phytoremediation of Contaminated Soil and Water. CRC Press.
Tiodar, E.D., Văcar, C.L., Podar, D., 2021. Phytoremediation and microorganisms-assisted phytoremediation of 
mercury-contaminated soils: challenges and perspectives. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health. https://doi.
org/10.3390/ijerph18052435.
Tripathi, V., Edrisi, S.A., Abhilash, P.C., 2016. Towards the coupling of phytoremediation with bioenergy production. 
Renew. Sust. Energ. Rev. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2015.12.116.
Tripathi, S., Singh, V.K., Srivastava, P., Singh, R., Devi, R.S., Kumar, A., Bhadouria, R., 2019. Phytoremediation of 
organic pollutants: current status and future directions. In: Abatement of Environmental Pollutants: Trends and 
Strategies., https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-818095-2.00004-7.
Tsita, K.G., Kiartzis, S.J., Ntavos, N.K., Pilavachi, P.A., 2020. Next generation biofuels derived from thermal and chem￾ical conversion of the Greek transport sector. Therm. Sci. Eng. Prog. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tsep.2019.100387.
Van der Ent, A., Baker, A.J., Echevarria, G., Simonnot, M.O., Morel, J.L. (Eds.), 2020. Agromining: Farming for Metals: 
Extracting Unconventional Resources Using Plants. Springer Nature.
Vangronsveld, J., Herzig, R., Weyens, N., Boulet, J., Adriaensen, K., Ruttens, A., Thewys, T., Vassilev, A., Meers, E., 
Nehnevajova, E., van der Lelie, D., 2009. Phytoremediation of contaminated soils and groundwater: lessons from 
the field. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 16 (7), 765–794.
Vázquez, S., Agha, R., Granado, A., Sarro, M.J., Esteban, E., Peñalosa, J.M., Carpena, R.O., 2006. Use of white lupin 
plant for phytostabilization of Cd and As polluted acid soil. Water Air Soil Pollut. 177, 349–365. https://doi.
org/10.1007/S11270-006-9178-Y.
Wills, B.A., 1988. Technical note: a rapid method for measurement of fineness of grind. Miner. Eng. 1, 81–84. https://
doi.org/10.1016/0892-6875(88)90069-6.
Wuana, R.A. and Okieimen, F.E., 2011. Heavy metals in contaminated soils: a review of sources, chemistry, risks and 
best available strategies for remediation. Int. Sch. Res. Notices 2011, doi:10.5402/2011/402647.
Yadav, C., Saini, A., Bera, M., Maji, P.K., 2017. Thermo-analytical characterizations of biodiesel produced from edible 
and non-edible oils. Fuel Process. Technol. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuproc.2017.07.026.
Zhang, Z., Gao, X., Qiu, B., 2008. Detection of phytochelatins in the hyperaccumulator Sedum alfredii exposed to 
cadmium and lead. Phytochemistry 69, 911–918. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.PHYTOCHEM.2007.10.012.
Zhang, S., Li, T., Huang, H., Zou, T., Zhang, X., Yu, H., Zheng, Z., Wang, Y., 2012. Cd accumulation and phytostabili￾zation potential of dominant plants surrounding mining tailings. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 19, 3879–3888. https://
doi.org/10.1007/S11356-012-1060-4/TABLES/8.
 
References 229This page intentionally left blankPlants and their Interaction to Environmental Pollution 231 Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-99978-6.00008-X
CHAPTER
12
Pesticide toxicity and their impact on 
plant growth, active constituents and 
productivity
Himani Gautama
, Shubhra Singha
, Hema Prashada
, Antul 
Kumarb
, Anuj Choudharyb
, Harmanjot Kaurb
, Om Prakash 
Narayanc
, Shambhu Krishan Lald,e
, and Sahil Mehtaf
a
Department of Entomology, Dr. YS Parmar University of Horticulture and Forestry, Nauni 
Solan, Himachal Pradesh, India, b
Department of Botany, Punjab Agricultural University, 
Ludhiana, Punjab, India, c
BME Department, Tufts University, Medford, MA, United States, 
d
School of Genetic Engineering, ICAR–Indian Institute of Agricultural Biotechnology, Ranchi, 
Jharkhand, India, e
International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, New Delhi, 
India, f
Department of Botany, Hansraj College, University of Delhi, New Delhi, India
Abbreviations
A. cepa Allium cepa
ABA-3 abamectin
APOX ascorbate peroxidase
B boron
Ca calcium
CAT catalase
Co cobalt
CO2 carbon dioxide
Cu copper
ETL economic threshold level
Fe iron
GBH glyphosate-based herbicides
GPOX glutathione peroxidase
GR glutathione reductase
GSH reduced glutathione
GST glutathione S-transferase
H2O water232 12. Pesticide toxicity and their impact on plant growth, active constituents and productivity
H2O2 hydrogen peroxide
IAA indole-3 acetic acid
IPM integrated pest management
K potassium
L. esculentum Lycopersicon esculentum
MDA malondialdehyde
Mg magnesium
Mn manganese
Mo molybdenum
O2 oxygen
P phosphorus
P. vera Pistacia vera
PGPRs plant growth-promoting bacteria
POD peroxidase
REI restricted entry interval
RL root length
ROS reactive oxygen species
RSL root shoot length
SL shoot length
SOD superoxide dismutase
THM-1 trihalomethanes
V. radiate Vigna radiate
Z. mays Zea mays
Zn zinc
1. Introduction
Day by day growing population is exerting pressure on land and agriculture which is threat￾ening food security (Mehta et al., 2019; Rahman et al., 2019; Singh et al., 2019; Kumar et al., 2021a, 
2021c). Due to which the demand for food is continuously increasing which has forced human 
beings to utilize synthetic chemical pesticides for improving the crop (Mehta et al. (2020); Kumar 
et al., 2021b, 2021d; Tomer, 2013; Fig. 1). Pesticide is a hazardous chemical substance or biological 
compound that are significantly liberated into the surrounding to deter, avert and overall check 
the populations of weeds, insects, fungi, rodents, or other crop enemies (Homayoonzadeh et al., 
2021). They seduce, attract and then destroy or eliminate the pests (Kaur et al., 2019).
Pest can be defined as “the plants or animals that jeopardize our food, health and/or 
comfort” (Kaur et al., 2019). Crop pathogens infect crops from field to post-harvest/storage. 
However, the pesticide is being considered as a safeguard of crops that protect the plant from 
qualitative and quantitative damage (Goh et al., 2011). Moreover, the usage of pest-resistant 
transgenic varieties and biopesticides helps to mitigate the challenges of crop pests. Though, 
chemical pesticides are the main line of defense in protecting the crops from the damage of 
insects or pests and the use of chemical pesticides also results in increase yield of crops (Kaur 
et al., 2019).
Historically, in 1962, a book named “Silent Spring” was published by Rachel Carson and 
in her book, she wrote about the detrimental effects of pesticides on the environment. After 
that, a lot of research was conducted in this regard (Casida and Quistad, 1998). The use of 
pesticides in agroecosystems has raised public concern due to the harmful impacts of these 
substances on human as well as environmental health. Furthermore, the phytotoxic effects 2. Phytotoxicity effects on plants 233
of some pesticides have also been recognized. As a source of carbon and nutrients, many 
beneficial soil microbes consume pesticides, furthermore decline soil health (Hassaan and 
El Nemr, 2020). Pesticides applications cause a deleterious effect on germination and pho￾tosynthetic pigments on various plants species such as using 100mg/kg Chlorpyrifos to af￾fect seed germination in Cenchrus setigerus (Dubey and Fulekar, 2011), Emamectin benzoate, 
Cypermethrin, Lambda-cyhalothrin, and Imidacloprid shows inhibitory effect in Lycopersicon 
esculentum (Shakir et al., 2016), Mancozeb and Chlorpyrifos ranges from 10 to 150ppm nega￾tively affect germination phase (Fatma et al., 2017). Pesticides like mancozeb and chlorpyrifos 
show the phytotoxic effect on growth and development of onion (Fatma et al., 2018) (Table 1).
2. Phytotoxicity effects on plants
The excessive application of pesticides causes contamination in plants that negatively reg￾ulating their cellular components. It significantly alters the respiration rate, leaf function, os￾motic imbalance, hormonal signaling, and removal of wax and cuticle layer in the root system 
(Mehta et al., 2021, 2022). However, miscalculation and excessive doses of pesticides products 
used in reserve tanks can also enhance penetration rate into plant cells. (Snell Scientifics LLC, 
2017). Besides these, environmental factors like temperature, humidity, and light play a cru￾cial role in the likelihood of plant phytotoxicity whereas temperatures above 80°F alleviate 
phytotoxic injuries in plants. Several phytotoxicity symptoms such as chlorosis, leaf margin 
necrosis, leaf speckling, brown or leaf cupping ultimately may lead to plant death. For exam￾ple, Geranium leaves exhibit phytotoxic symptoms from a chlormequat chloride-containing 
plant growth regulator. In another study, Aluthmuhandiram et al., 2021 demonstrated the 
FIG. 1 Diagrammatic flowchart of flow and uptake of pesticides when applied in fields.TABLE 1 Impacts of pesticides on growth and germination of different plants.
S. no. Plant species Pesticide used
Type of 
pesticide Amount used
Mode of 
application Effect of pesticide References
Impact on germination
1. Cucumis sativus
and Zea mays
Paraquat and 
Glufosinate-ammonium
Herbicides Paraquat, glufosinate￾ammonium at 200, 400, 
600, and 800g a.i. ha−1
Field The germination rate 
of more than 90% 
was observed than 
untreated
Wibawa et al. (2009)
2. Cenchrus setigerus, 
Pennisetumn 
pedicellatum
Chlorpyrifos, 
Fenvalerate and 
Cypermethrin
Insecticides 0–100mg/kg Soil Significant reduction 
and delay in seed 
germination
Dubey and Fulekar 
(2011)
3. Z. mays Pendimethalin Herbicides 0–10ppm Hoagland’s 
nutrient 
solution
Percent germination, 
length of plumule, and 
radicle decreased
Rajashekhar et al. 
(2012)
4. Lycopersicon 
esculentum
Emamectin benzoate Insecticides Emamectin benzoate 
at 10, 20, 40, 80 and 
160mg/L
Soaking of seeds 
in pesticide 
soultions
Up to 3days after 
pesticide application 
the highest dosages of 
all the pesticides almost 
completely inhibited 
the germination and 
in later days also 
germination was lower 
when compared with 
control.
Shakir et al. (2016)
Cypermethrin Cypermethrin at 30, 60, 
125, 250 and 500mg/L
Lambda-cyhalothrin Lambda-cyhalothrin 
at 15, 30, 56, 120 and 
240mg/L
Imidacloprid Imidacloprid at 125, 
250, 500, 1000 and 
2000mg/L
5. Brassica juncea Mancozeb Fungicide 1, 2 and 4mg/kg Seed treatment The decline of 
30%–60% and 
17%–55% was recorded 
at the application rate 
of 2 and 4mg/kg in 
RH-30 and Laxmi 
variety, respectively, 
in comparison with 
control
Monika and Kidwai 
(2017)6. Allium cepa Mancozeb and 
chlorpyrifos
Fungicide and 
insecticide
Mancozeb at 10, 30, 
50, 70, 90, 110, 130 and 
150ppm
Chlorpyrifos at 5, 10, 15, 
20, 25 and 30ppm
Seed treatment Seed treatment with 
150ppm Mancozeb 
decreased germination, 
up to 41.66%; 
germination of 30ppm 
chlorpyrifos treated 
seeds show an 18.33% 
decline
Fatma et al. (2017)
Impact on chlorophyll content
7. L. esculentum Emamectin benzoate Insecticides Emamectin benzoate 
at 10, 20, 40, 80 and 
160mg/L
Soaking of seeds 
in pesticide 
solutions
With the increase in 
pesticide dose, total 
chlorophyll content got 
decreased
Shakir et al. (2016)
Cypermethrin Cypermethrin at 30, 60, 
125, 250 and 500mg/L
Lambda-cyhalothrin Lambda-cyhalothrin at 
15, 30, 56, 120 and 240
Imidacloprid Imidacloprid at 125, 250, 
500, 1000 and 2000
8. Vigna radiata L. Chlorpyrifos Insecticides 0.6 and 1.5mM Foliar 
application
20% decline in 
photosynthetic 
pigments at 1.5mM 
chlorpyrifos
Parween et al. (2011a,b)
9. L. esculentum Acetamiprid, 
Imidacloprid, 
Abamectin, 
Thiamethoxam, 
Abamectin+
Chlorantraniliprole
Insecticides Acetamiprid @ 30mg, 
Imidacloprid @ 100mg
Abamectin @ 25mg
Thiamethoxam @ 
100mg and Abamectin+
Chlorantraniliprole @ 
90mg in 100L water
Spray Decreased total 
chlorophyll content 
and net photosynthetic 
rate
Yildiztekin et al. (2019)
10. B. juncea Mancozeb Fungicide 1, 2 and 4mg/kg Seed treatment Chlorophyll content 
reduced with the 
increase in dosages of 
Mancozeb
Monika and Kidwai 
(2017)
11. Pistacia vera L. Imidacloprid and 
phosalone
Insecticides 0.21g a.i./l and 1.21g 
a.i./l,
Spray Little change was 
observed in total 
chlorophyll content
Homayoonzadeh et al. 
(2021)236 12. Pesticide toxicity and their impact on plant growth, active constituents and productivity
temperature effects on phytotoxin-induced virulence in Lasiodiplodia theobromae. Findings sug￾gested that an increase in temperature causes significant alleviates phytotoxicity of detached 
leaves of the grapevine. Moreover, temperature above 35°C also causes major necrotic leaf 
lesions, if inoculated with crude culture filtrates (Aluthmuhandiram et al., 2021).
Recent studies demonstrated that leaf miner infestations in Poke Choy and Correnta in 
spinach could be detected accurately by using the Hyperspectral remote sensing technique 
(Nguyen and Nansen, 2020). Visual phytotoxicity inspection of three ornamental plants, i.e., 
Zinnia elegans, Tagetes patula, and Gerbera sp. was done for detection of a numbered phytotoxic 
compound (V-10433) which was applied at different doses (Nansen et al., 2021).
3. Pesticides phytotoxicity symptoms on plants
Plants having insecticide phytotoxicity include the following symptoms: Abnormal 
Growth, Chlorosis, Leaf Distortion, Stunting, Necrosis, Vein clearing, Epinasty, Hyponasty, 
etc. (Shakir et al., 2016; Homayoonzadeh et al., 2020).
For example, studies conducted by Ebel et  al. (2000) observed the imidacloprid phyto￾toxicity on cucumber and tomato in the controlled conditions. In tomato (L. esculentum Mill. 
“Rutgers”) and cucumber (Cucumis sativus L. “Turbo”), exogenous application of Marathon 
(imidacloprid) using of at 0, 1/8, 1/4, 1/2, 3/4, and 1 tsp. (0, 5, 10, 20, 30, and 40mg a.i.) 
per 4.5in. (550mL) pot. Results of their study revealed that phytotoxic symptoms appear on 
various imidacloprid-treated plants within 6–7days after application. On both tomato and 
cucumber plants phytotoxicity, signs of leaf chlorosis appeared primarily on the oldest leaves, 
whereas young leaves show marginal necrosis and distorted growth within 1week after ap￾plication. The above findings suggested that the lowest application rate has resulted in the 
development of phytotoxicity symptoms in both plants (Fatma et al., 2017; Yildiztekin et al., 
2019; Homayoonzadeh et al., 2021). Visual symptoms were somewhat similar to Ca (calcium) 
deficiency symptoms but after the foliar analysis of cucumber no difference was found in Ca 
(Calcium), Co (Cobalt), Fe (Iron), Zn (Zinc) amid rates of imidacloprid insecticide. Although 
the concentration of B (Boron) and Mg (Magnesium) reduced whereas, Mn (Manganese) and 
K (Potassium) linearly enhanced with imidacloprid rates.
Cu (Copper), Mo (Molybdenum), and P (Phosphorus) altered quadratically using 20mg 
a.i. or 1/2 tsp. per pot having the reduced level of Cu, Mo, and P and that observed to be 
alleviating at the greater rates. Results concluded that imidacloprid can adjust nutrition in 
the plant. On the contrary, Hasan et al. (2016) used the tomato plants to evaluate the indox￾acarb effect against Helicoverpa armigera Hub. (tomato fruit borer) and induce phytotoxicity 
(Monika and Kidwai, 2017; Fatma et al., 2017; Yildiztekin et al., 2019). Indoxacarb was applied 
at application rates of 30, 40, 50, 60, and 75g a.i./ha on tomato plants. However, treatment 
with indoxacarb such as 150 and 250g a.i./ha concentration doesn’t show any phytotoxic 
effect.
Similarly, another study conducted by Balikai and Mallapur (2017) revealed that fluben￾diamide applied at different concentrations did not show any visible phytotoxic symptoms 
on gherkin plants at 1, 3, 5, 7, 10, and 15days. According to Homayoonzadeh et al. (2021), 
insecticides like Phosalone and imidacloprid of concentration 0.21g a.i./l and 1.21g a.i./l, 
respectively, affect chlorophyll content in Pistacia vera. In another study, foliar application 4. Impact of pesticide toxicity on soil health and plant 237
of various pesticides such as Acetamiprid, Imidacloprid, Abamectin, Thiamethoxam, 
Abamectin+Chlorantraniliprole causes a reduction in chlorophyll content in L. esculentum
(Yildiztekin et al., 2019). Despite these, several reports also mentioned that the application of 
pesticides has adverse effects on plant physiology, including alteration of nitrogen content, 
carbon metabolism, reduction in growth, perturbation flower development, and/or (Parween 
et al., 2011a,b; Shakir et al., 2016; Homayoonzadeh et al., 2021).
4. Impact of pesticide toxicity on soil health and plant
4.1 Soil health
The pesticides are used to inhibit pest attack and increase productivity but pesticides show 
hazardous effects on the environment too. Due to their excessive pesticide usage and its res￾idues significantly accumulate in the plant and soil causes an enhanced contamination rate, 
which affects biodiversity directly or indirectly (Biondi et al., 2012; Han et al., 2017). Pesticides 
can adversely affect the biological and physico-chemical properties of the soil (Reddy et al., 2021). 
Moreover, pesticides can also disrupt the activities of soil microbes (Nannipieri et al., 2013).
Al-Ani et  al. (2019) observed the impact of two insecticides, Malathion 50% and 
Alphacypermethrin 10% WP on soil microbes including bacteria, fungi other actinomycetes, 
and production of CO2 (carbon dioxide). Results confirmed that production of CO2 was sig￾nificantly reduced for malathion and Alphacypermethrin. However, observation at 42–45days 
shows that values for the production of CO2 were 36% and 32% using Alphacypermethrin 
concentrations 200 and 100ppm, respectively. Besides these, the application of Malathion (50, 
100, and 200ppm) lowered CO2 production by 42%, 45%, and 52%, respectively. Additionally, 
microorganisms’ concentration and their activity depend upon the insecticide’s dosage ap￾plied to the soil samples. Another, Baćmaga et al. (2016) revealed the impact of fungicides 
like Falcon 460 EC in soil that significantly suppresses the various enzymatic activity of ure￾ase, catalase, dehydrogenase, and alkaline phosphatase. Furthermore, upregulation of active 
ingredients causes deleterious effects on soil residing in microbes communities. Similarly, 
Baćmaga et al. (2018) also stated the influence of Chlorothalonil on the biochemical properties 
and soil-borne microorganisms.
4.2 Plant’s growth and active constituents
Seed’s treatment using pesticides positively helps in protecting seedlings from the patho￾gen infestation via prevent the entry of pathogenic components and but negatively affect 
germination rate and seedling growth (Dhanamanjuri et al., 2013; Lal et al., 2018). Through 
transpiration, pesticides absorb from the soil into various parts of the plant (Sharma et al., 
2019a,b; Lushchak et  al., 2018). These ill effects of high dosage or nonselective pesticides 
can be visible and measured by the rate of burns, leaves twisting, chlorosis, necrosis, and 
stunting percentage (Sharma et al., 2015a,b,c; Sharma et al., 2018a). For instance, Parween 
et  al. (2011a,b) using Chlorpyrifos (an organophosphate insecticide) for managing insects 
reported Vigna radiata L. that cause a reduction in nitrogen metabolism and plant growth. 
Additionally, Homayoonzadeh et al. (2020) sprayed dichlorvos and imidacloprid on Cucumis 238 12. Pesticide toxicity and their impact on plant growth, active constituents and productivity
sativus seedlings to control the damage of whiteflies. Results revealed that spraying both (di￾chlorvos and imidacloprid) pesticides directly enhanced the enzymatic activities including 
ascorbate peroxidase, catalase, guaiacol peroxide, phenylalanine ammonia-lyase, and super￾oxide dismutase in C. sativus seedlings. Furthermore, carbohydrates, proline, total protein, 
total phenolic content, and total soluble sugar content are also alleviated in a significant way. 
Interestingly, dichlorvos and imidacloprid treatments led to a reduction in the activity of 
polyphenol oxidase but show very few changes in malondialdehyde content, electrolyte leak￾age, and hydrogen peroxide in P. vera L. (Homayoonzadeh et al., 2021).
The use of pesticides has adverse effects on seed germination. Rajashekhar et al. (2012)
conducted a study using pendimethalin on Z. mays L. and they observed maximum germi￾nation percentage (95%) under controlled conditions, whereas the drastic decline in germi￾nation percentage was measured with increasing dosage of pendimethalin. The reduction 
was recorded up to 69% at an increased amount of pendimethalin (>10.0ppm) (Table  1). 
Interestingly, which may be due to the injurious effect of pendimethalin causes adverse ef￾fects on seed reserves inhibits mobilization and degradation rate. Studies were conducted by 
Moore and Kroger (2010) to evaluate the impact of two herbicides and three insecticides on 
seedling of Oryza sativa germination based on exposure up to 4–5days. In tested insecticides, 
diazinon had an improved germination percentage (85%) compared with control whereas 
fipronil has reduced seed germination (76%) when compared with control (80%). In the case 
of herbicide atrazine/metolachlor mixture, a better germination rate (81%) was recorded in 
comparison with single herbicide atrazine in the O. sativa seedlings. Inhibitory effects of pen￾dimethalin and trifluralin were observed by (Nehru et al., 1999) on germination traits and 
initial growth in Z. mays and V. radiata L, respectively.
Similarly, Fatma et al. (2017) reported a remarkable reducing effect of pesticides on germi￾nation parameters, and their effect gets increased with an increase in pesticide dose (Table 1). 
Koornneef et al. (2002) revealed that seed germination is highly affected by environmental 
stress, Goswami et al. (2013) also reported that seed germination is very sensitive to pesti￾cides. Root length, root/shoot length ratio, shoot length, and survival percentage of treated 
Allium seeds with various pesticides concentrations such as Mancozeb and Chlorpyrifos were 
observed lower than that of control exhibiting a dose-based reduction (Fatma et al., 2017). This 
proved that the nature of these pesticides (Mancozeb and Chlorpyrifos) is phytotoxic. Earlier 
(Nielson and Rank, 1994; Amin, 2002) also stated that growth traits like root length (RL), Root 
shoot length (RSL) and shoot length (SL) could be used to measure toxicity like pesticides. 
Reduction in plants growth was observed when pesticides were applied at higher concentra￾tions which ultimately resulted in cell elongation, cell division reduction, and indole-3 acetic 
acid (IAA) conversion into different photo-oxidative products because these components act 
as IAA antagonists (Tevini and Teramura, 2008). In Allium cepa seedlings, significant variation 
in Seedling vigor index (SVI) was observed between different treatments for Mancozeb and 
Chlorpyrifos (Fatma et al., 2017). Similarly, Habtamu et al. (2013) also experimented on seed￾ling growth and germination rate of haricot bean cultivars. The finding revealed that a signif￾icant dose-dependent decrease in shoot-root length was observed at higher levels of copper 
sulfate solution. Phytotoxic effects enhanced significantly which is an indicator of pesticidal 
toxicity used in their experiment.
Plants use their antioxidant enzyme system including SOD, CAT, and POD (superoxide, dis￾mutase and catalase, peroxidase) (Jiang and Yang, 2009) (Fig. 2). Fatma et al. (2017) explained 4. Impact of pesticide toxicity on soil health and plant 239
that the application of pesticides using A. cepa seedlings viz., Mancozeb, and Chlorpyrifos im￾posed oxidative stress on plants to environmental stress. Similar results also suggest the inter￾action between pesticides and the activity of the antioxidative enzymes. (Pandey and Rizvi, 
2010; Jan et al., 2012) Oxidoreductase activity of CAT help in the liberation of H2O2 (hydrogen 
peroxide) by converting H2O2 to H2O (water) and O2 (oxygen). Zhang et al. (2009) demon￾strated the same results in rice and wheat plants after application of 1,2,4-trichlorobenzene 
dimethoate (Mishra et al., 2009). In Allium seedlings, significant enhancement in CAT activity 
and increased in dose manner (Mei et al., 2009; Fatma et al., 2017).
Enhanced activities of SOD-like enzyme were observed in Glycine max L. under high in￾secticide dosage (Bashir et al., 2007). In wheat, herbicidal exposure indicates upregulation of 
FIG. 2 Schematic presentation of pesticide detoxification by plants enzymatic and nonenzymatic machinery.240 12. Pesticide toxicity and their impact on plant growth, active constituents and productivity
SOD activity was regulated by O−, scavenging and causes damage in Allium seedling induced 
toxicity from chlorpyrifos and mancozeb (Jianga et al., 2010; Wu et al., 2010).
4.3 Plant production
There are many evident visual symptoms like necrosis, discoloration, and deformation, 
etc. and in many cases, effects on yield (weight and appearance) are also recorded upon 
used of pesticides. Some important effects may only become apparent after repeated treat￾ments and not necessarily translate into visible necrosis (Ferree, 1979). In many cases, the 
phytotoxic effects of insecticide application result in the yield loss of the treated crop. Shahid 
et al., 2018 studies the glyphosate-based herbicides (GBH) effect on Medicago sativa L. The 
finding showed an alleviate in lipid peroxidation that causes the suppression of shoots and 
roots growth (Fernandes et al., 2021). Parween (2012) conducted a study on mungbean seed￾ling using a foliar application of chlorpyrifos. The results concluded that 0.3mM chlorpyrifos 
exposure improved the yield associating traits, i.e., number of seeds per plant, the highest 
number of pods, and dry seed weight. However, higher leaf area, enhanced plant height, and 
more uptakes of nutrients would have increased the translocation of photosynthates which 
ultimately resulted in higher pods number per plant.
Application of Chitosan at the early phase of growth promoted seed formation in soybean 
and rice (Chibu et al., 2002). However, results were similarly reported by Boonlertnirun et al. 
(2005) in rice and Rehim et al. (2009) in maize and bean. Among pulses, the use of glyphosate 
concentration above 3000μgml−1
 not only affects plant growth and yield but is also responsi￾ble for genotoxicity (Sharma et al., 2019a,b; Liu et al., 2020).
4.4 Physiological responses of plants to pesticide toxicity
Excessive usage of pesticides induces toxicity and symptoms can visible in the form of 
necrosis, chlorosis, stunting, burns, and twisting of leaves, etc. (Sharma et al., 2018a; Donald, 
2004). Toxicity depends upon various factors including rate of application, spraying tech￾nique, use of pesticides, climate conditions, floral organization, humidity, soil texture pH, 
moisture, temperature, and microbial interaction (Sharma et al., 2015a,b,c, 2016a). Pesticide 
application adversely affects the plant growth and development reported by Shahzad et al. 
(2018).
According to Sharma et al. (2018b), the application of pesticides induces oxidative injuries 
induces by ROS production. Oxidative stress promotes the degradation of proteins and chlo￾rophyll pigments, which ultimately decrease the photosynthetic efficiency (Xia et al., 2006; 
Sharma et al., 2015a,b,c). To manage the damage of oxidative stress activates an antioxidative 
defense mechanism that involves a nonenzymatic and enzymatic antioxidants system (Xia 
et al., 2009; Sharma et al., 2016). According to Sharma et al., 2017, ROS scavenging elicited by 
activation of the antioxidative defense system aids with reduction of the oxidative stress in 
plants induced pesticide toxicity.
Pesticide application results in oxidative stress to plants by the production of ROS which 
then led to decrease photosynthetic efficiency and retarded growth in the plant. Some ex￾amples of physiological changes in plants after pesticide treatments are well tabulated in 
Tables 2–4.TABLE 2 Impact of pesticides application on reactive oxygen species in different plants species.
S. no. Pesticides used Crop
Application 
mode
Pesticide 
concentration
Treatment 
time Plant parts
Effect of pesticide on 
reactive oxygen species
Parameter Effects References
1. Imidacloprid Rice Soil 0.015% 12days Seedling O2·−
H2O2
MDA
Increase
Increase
Increase
Sharma et al. (2015a,b,c)
2. Chlorpyrifos Rice Soil 0.04% 12days Seedling O2·−
H2O2
MDA
Increase
Increase
Increase
Sharma et al. (2015a,b,c)
3. Deltamethrin Soybean Spray 0.20% 10days Leaves MDA Increase Bashir et al. (2007)
4. Chlorpyrifos Mung Bean Spray 15mM 10days Leaves TBARS Increase Parween et al. (2012)
5. Dimethoate Mung Bean Culture 
solution
150ppm 4days Leaves O2·−
H2O2
MDA
OH−
Increase
Increase
Increase
Increase
Singh et al. (2014)
6. Glyphosate Soybean Foliar spray ∼1% 1day Leaves MDA Increase Li et al. (2019)
7. Clodinafop￾Propargyl Wheat Foliar spray 800μg/L 7days Leaves O2·− Increased Aliverdi et al. (2009)
8. Paraquat Opium 
poppy
Foliar spray ∼50% 1day Leaves MDA Increase Yuan et al. (2017)
9. Atrazine Rice Hoagland 
solution
0.4mg/L 6days Leaves H2O2 Increase Zhang et al. (2014)
10. Chlorotoluron Wheat Soil 25mg/kg 10days Leaves H2O2 Increase Song et al. (2010)
11. Granstar Oat Spray 300μg/L 3days Leaves MDA Increase Gar’kova et al. (2011)
12. Isoproturon Pea Soil 10mM 15days Leaves MDA Increase Singh et al. (2016)
13. Dichlorobenzene Maize Hoagland 
solution
80mg/L 7days Roots H2O2 Increase Zhang et al. (2018)
14. Trichlorobenzene Maize Hoagland 
solution
80mg/L 7days Leaves H2O2 Increase San Miguel et al. (2012)TABLE 3 Impact of different pesticides on the activity of enzymatic antioxidants among different plants.
S. no. Pesticides used Plant studied
Application 
mode
Concentration 
used
Time after 
treatment
Part of plant 
analyzed
Effect of pesticide 
on the activity of 
enzymatic antioxidants
Parameter Effects References
1. Imidacloprid Mustard Soil 300mg/kg 65days Leaves GR
GST
POD
Increase
Increase
Increase
Sharma et al. (2016b)
80days Green Pods APOX
GPOX
GR
GST
POD
Increase
Increase
Increase
Increase
Increase
Sharma et al. (2017c)
2. DDT Soybean Soil 63.5ng/g 60days Root leaves GST
GST
Increase
Decrease
Mitton et al. (2016)
3. Chlorpyrifos Mung Bean Foliar spray 15mM 10days Leaves APOX
GR
SOD
CAT
Increase
Increase
Increase
Decrease
Parween et al. (2012)
4. Deltamethrin Soybean Foliar spray 0.20% 10days Leaves APOX
GR
SOD
CAT
Increase
Increase
Increase 
Decrease
Bashir et al. (2007)
5. Atrazine Maize Foliar spray 1.79kg a.i. ha-1 12days Shoot SOD
APOX
CAT
POD
Increase
Decrease
Decrease
Decrease
Hassan and Alla (2005)
6. Glyphosate Soybean Spray ∼1% 1day Root CAT
POX
Increase
Increase
Pall (2019)
7. Fusilade Peanut Spray 60ppm 14days Leaves POD
CAT
Increase
Decrease
Osman et al. (2016)8. Fluroxypyr Rice Culture 
solution
0.8mg/L 6days Leaves POD
SOD
Increase
Decrease
Zhang et al. (2014)
9. Isoproturon Wheat Soil 4mg/kg 10days Roots GR
POD
SOD
Increase
Increase
Increase
Liang et al. (2012)
10. Dichlorobenzene Maize Hoagland 
solution
80mg/L 7days Leaves POD
GR
Decrease
Decrease
San Miguel et al. (2012)
11. Monochlorobenzene Maize Hoagland 
solution
80mg/L 7days Roots POD
GR
Increase
Decrease
San Miguel et al. (2012)
12. Chlorotoluron Wheat Soil 25mg/ Kg 10days Roots SOD
CAT
Increase
Decrease
Song et al. (2010)
13. Granstar Wheat Leaf disk 300μg/L 3h Leaves CAT
APX
Increase
Increase
Sharma et al. (2019a,b)TABLE 4 Effect of pesticides on nonenzymatic antioxidants in plants.
S. 
no. Pesticide name
Mode of 
application
Pesticide 
concentration Plant name
Treatment 
time
Plant part 
analyzed
Effect of pesticide on 
oxidative stress markers
Parameter Effect References
1. Chlorantraniliprole Seed 0.5ppm Maize 7days Leaves Proline Increase Kilic et al. (2015)
2. Imidacloprid Sand 0.02% Rice 12days Seedlings Proline Increase Sharma et al. (2013)
3. Pendimethalin Soil 8.5mg/L Fennel 84days Leaves Total 
phenolics
Increase El-Awadi and Hassan (2011)
4. Chlorpyrifos Spray 15mM Mungbean 10days Leaves Proline Increase Parween et al. (2018)
5. Deltamethrin Spray 0.20% Soybean 10days Leaves Ascorbate
GSH
Increase
Increase
Sharma et al. (2019a,b)
6. Atrazine Soil 1.79kg/ha Maize 8days Shoot Ascorbate
GSH
Increase
Decrease
Akbulut and Yigit (2010)
7. Diuron Soil 2ppm Soybean 7days Leaves Proline Increase Fayez (2000)
8. Bentazon Spray 1.6g/L Peanut 14days Leaves Proline Increase Fayez et al. (2013)
9. Imazapic Spray 0.12mM Tobacco 9days Leaves GSH Increase Kaya and Doganlar (2016)
10. Fomesafen Spray 1000g/ha Soybean 2days Leaves GSH Increase Matzenbacher et al. (2014)
11. Oxyfluorfen Spray 2500g/ha Soybean 2days Leaves GSH Increase Benekos et al. (2010)4. Impact of pesticide toxicity on soil health and plant 245
Pesticides affect crop physiology by different disruptions reproductive organs develop￾ment, alteration in nutrients metabolism, growth reduction. The physiological disruptions 
solely rely upon the pesticide specificity and their mode of application (Petit et al., 2012). 
It abrupt photophosphorylation, photosynthesis process, electron flow, lipids solubilization 
and conformational changes (Murthy, 1983; Krugh and Miles, 1996) and/or mechanical ef￾fects (Ferree, 1979). Adverse effects of various pesticides applications on photosynthesis have 
been reported in lettuce (Toscano et al., 1982; Haile et al., 2000) cotton (Youngman et al., 1990), 
alfalfa (Haile et  al., 1999), citrus (Jones et  al., 1983), strawberry (Laprè et  al., 1982), maize 
(Godfrey and Holtzer, 1992), peach (Andersen et al., 1986), soybean (Abdel-Reheem et al., 
1991), azalea (Kingleman et al., 2000) and pecan (Wood and Payne, 1986). On the contrary, no 
considerable effect of excessive insecticide exposure/toxicity on photosynthetic rate (Krugh 
and Miles, 1996; Haile et al., 1999; Lloyd and Krieg, 1987).
Acetamiprid, imidacloprid, abamectin, thiamethoxam, and abamectin+chlorantranilip￾role were applied on Hazera 5656 F1 variety of (L. esculentum Mill.) tomato under green￾house conditions in Köyceğiz region of Muğla. It was found that the use of higher doses of 
pesticides adversely affected the physiological and biochemical properties of tomato plants. 
MDA (malondialdehyde), proline, H2O2, SOD, POD contents, and CAT activities increased 
with the increase in pesticide doses. Increasing pesticides dose decreased the Dry Matter %, 
total chlorophyll, and carotenoid contents. Plants on which ABAC-3 was sprayed contained 
56% proline content when compared with the control plants. Samples treated with ABA-3 
(Abamectin) showed a maximum increase in superoxide dismutase (SOD) activities and the 
least decrease was shown by samples treated with THM-1(Trihalomethanes). In maximum 
cases, the highest doses of applied pesticides increased CAT and POD activities (Yildiztekin 
et al., 2019).
Giménez-Moolhuyzen et al. (2020) tested the effect of 22 pesticides (commonly used in￾secticides and acaricides) on the photosynthetic activity of capsicum leaves during the initial 
stage of adoption of Integrated Pest Management (IPM). In this IPM system, 9 out of 22 stud￾ied pesticides showed a reduction in the photosynthesis activities of capsicum leaves after 
a single application. Whereas impact on the photosynthesis rate and duration of the impact 
varied for different pesticides. Among the studied phytosanitary products two types of effects 
on photosynthesis were observed. The first one is a transient effect, immediately after the 
treatment, possibly caused by a short-term effect on the stomatal conductance. Phytosanitary 
products which have this type of effect include vegetable oil (Addit) and an organic soap 
(Biosoap) (Giménez-Moolhuyzen et al., 2020; Winnicki et al., 2021).
Parween et al. (2012) investigated the effect of chlorpyrifos insecticides on the antioxida￾tive enzymatic system of V. radiata L. metabolism. The enhanced rate of proline content and 
lipid peroxidation whereas the level of glutathione and declined significantly during the dif￾ferent developmental phases. In Brassica juncea, activities of antioxidant enzymes increased 
with the application of Imidacloprid insecticide (Sharma et al., 2015a,b,c).
Raja et al. (2013) investigated to find out the effect of endosulfan at the various amount 
of 0, 50, 100, 200, 400, and 600ppm on photosynthetic pigments, ascorbic acid, dry weight, 
fresh weight, stress proteins, enzymes (nitrate reductase) and nitrate uptake on water fern, 
Azolla microphylla. The dose-dependent effect of endosulfan was noticed. Endosulfan affected 
the cellular activities which led to the increase and gradually decrease in Vitamin-C con￾tent at lower concentrations and higher concentrations, respectively. A decline in protein 246 12. Pesticide toxicity and their impact on plant growth, active constituents and productivity
concentration was also noticed whereas metabolic activities and nitrate uptake enhanced up 
to a particular level and got declined at higher concentrations. The total protein content of 
PGPRs (plant growth-promoting bacteria) was maximally decreased by 80% at a three-fold 
increase in kitazin, indicating its inhibitory effect on the bacterial protein synthesis mecha￾nism (Shahid et al., 2020).
5. Other measures for the prevention of pesticides phytotoxicity
Chemical control is not the only option to control pests. There are other measures like cul￾tural, mechanical, physical, and biological control, etc. also for controlling the pests. Do not 
rely only on the chemical control of pests. Plant protection measures other than chemical con￾trol should be adopted. Cultural control measures are the cornerstones of pest management 
in a protected environment; chemical controls cannot overcome poor or sloppy management. 
Numerous deleterious effects of pesticide toxicity can be mitigated by using alternative but 
efficient pest management approaches. However, in controlled growth chambers for horti￾culture, pest control depends upon parasitoids (arthropod) can causes better options over 
conventional synthetic agrochemicals (Van Lenteren, 2007). Furthermore, pesticides nanocar￾riers systems also play an imperative role in protecting our crops from fungal diseases. In this 
context, Maluin et al. (2020) conducted a study in which chitosan was used as nanocarriers for 
dazomet or hexaconazole-like fungicide in preparing a new agronanofungicides generation 
with an improved antifungal potent agent that exhibited no phytotoxic effect on plant and 
environment.
Results revealed that chitosan-fungicides-based nanoparticles significantly reduced the 
phytotoxic effect of fungicides when compared with their counterparts, pure fungicides in 
oil palm seedlings (Sangwan et al., 2023). In addition, the use of chitosan-fungicides-based 
nanoparticles is also a reliable approach to reduce the fungicide’s phytotoxicity. These 
chitosan-agronanofungicides were observed to alleviate the photosynthetic rate in the seed￾ling of oil palm. Chitosan nanoparticles are also used as an antifungal agent on Ganoderma 
boninense, which makes it a promising candidate in the regulation and management of stem 
rot disease in the basal region of oil palms (Maluin et al., 2019).
6. Conclusion
The ever-increasing population of the world is exerting pressure on land as well as agricul￾ture which is threatening food security in the coming future. Insect pests, diseases, and weeds 
are responsible for lowering agriculture production. Therefore, to manage them and to fulfill 
the demand for food human beings are using chemical pesticides on their crops. But several 
studies have shown that pesticide application leads to the development of phytotoxicity in 
plants and it impairs the growth, production, and active constituents of plants. Seed germi￾nation, photosynthesis, and oxidants levels also get affected due to phytotoxicity. Pesticides 
will remain an imperative tool for the management of insect pests and play an important role 
in optimizing yields from the crops. Thus, the development of new pesticide molecules with 
lesser phytotoxic effect on crops is the need of the hour. In addition to these growers have to References 247
use pesticides safely at the recommended dose and on recommended crops after following 
all the given guidelines.
Furthermore, users should not only rely on chemical control of insect pests, diseases, and 
weeds. Farmers should opt for other control measures like cultural, mechanical, physical, and 
biological control also. By doing this not only the plant yield will be improved but it will also 
benefit the environment and human health. Furthermore, future investigation is required in 
the regard to generate more reliable data and prepare a comprehensive model.
References
Abdel-Reheem, S., Belal, M.H., Gupta, G., 1991. Photosynthesis inhibition of soybean leaves by insecticides. Environ. 
Pollut. 74, 245–250.
Akbulut, G.B., Yigit, E., 2010. The changes in some biochemical parameters in Zea mays cv. “Martha F1” treated with 
atrazine. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 73, 1429–1432.
Al-Ani, M.A.M., Hmoshi, R.M., Kanaan, I.A., Thanoon, A.A., 2019. Effect of pesticides on soil microorganisms. J. 
Phys. Conf. Ser. 1294, 072007.
Aliverdi, A., Mohassel, M.H.R., Zand, E., Mahallati, M.N., 2009. Increased foliar activity of clodinafop‐propargyl 
and/or tribenuron‐methyl by surfactants and their synergistic action on wild oat (Avena ludoviciana) and wild 
mustard (Sinapis arvensis). Weed Biol. Manag. 9, 292–299.
Aluthmuhandiram, J.V.S., Chethana, K.W.T., Zhang, W., Peng, J., Zhao, E., Li, X.H., Saichana, N., Yan, J., 2021. 
Impact of temperature variation on the phytotoxic secondary metabolite production by Lasiodiplodia theobromae. J. 
Phytopathol. https://doi.org/10.1111/jph.13043.
Amin, A.W., 2002. Cytotoxicity testing of sewage water treatment using Allium cepa chromosome aberration assay. 
Pak. J. Biol. Sci. 5, 184–188.
Andersen, P.C., Mizell, R.F., French, W.J., Aldrich, J.H., 1986. Effect of multiple applications of pesticides on leaf gas 
exchange of peach. Hortic. Sci. 21, 508–510.
Baćmaga, M., Wyszkowska, J., Kucharski, J., 2016. The effect of the Falcon 460 EC fungicide on soil microbial com￾munities, enzyme activities and plant growth. Ecotoxicology 25, 1575–1587.
Baćmaga, M., Wyszkowska, J., Kucharski, J., 2018. The influence of chlorothalonil on the activity of soil microorgan￾isms and enzymes. Ecotoxicology 27, 1188–1202.
Balikai, R.A., Mallapur, C.P., 2017. Bio-efficacy of flubendiamide 480 SC (Fame 480 SC) against fruit borer in Gherkin. 
Int. J. Horticult. 7, 250–261.
Bashir, F., Mahmooduzzafar, Siddiqi, T.O., Iqbal, M., 2007. The antioxidative response system in Glycine max (L.) 
Merr. exposed to deltamethrin, a synthetic pyrethroid insecticide. Environ. Pollut. 147, 94–100.
Benekos, K., Kissoudis, C., Nianiou-Obeidat, I., Labrou, N., Madesis, P., Kalamaki, M., Tsaftaris, A., 2010. 
Overexpression of a specific soybean GmGSTU4 isoenzyme improves diphenyl ether and chloroacetanilide herbi￾cide tolerance of transgenic tobacco plants. J. Biotechnol. 150, 195–201.
Biondi, A., Desneux, N., Siscaro, G., Zappalà, L., 2012. Using organic-certified rather than synthetic pesticides may 
not be safer for biological control agents: selectivity and side effects of 14 pesticides on the predator Orius laevig￾atus. Chemosphere 87, 803–812.
Boonlertnirun, S., Boonlertnirun, K., Sooksathan, I., 2005. Proceedings of 43rd Kasetsart University Annual 
Conference, Thailand, 1–4 February. pp. 37–43.
Casida, J.E., Quistad, G.B., 1998. Golden age of insecticide research: past, present, or future? Annu. Rev. Entomol. 43, 1–16.
Chibu, H., Shibayama, H., Arimas, S., 2002. Effects of chitisan application on the shoot growth of rice and soybean. 
Japan. J. Crop Sci. 71, 206–211.
Dhanamanjuri, W., Thoudam, R., Dutta, B.K., 2013. Effect of some pesticides (fungicides) on the germination and 
growth of seeds/seedlings of some crop plants (i.e. Cicer arietinum and Zea mays). Middle-East J. Sci. Res. 17, 627–632.
Donald, P.F., 2004. Biodiversity impacts of some agricultural commodity production systems. Conserv. Biol. 18, 17–37.
Dubey, K.K., Fulekar, M.H., 2011. Effect of pesticides on the seed germination of Cenchrus setigerus and Pennisetum 
pedicellatum as monocropping and co-cropping system: implications for rhizospheric bioremediation. Roman. 
Biotechnol. Lett. 16, 5909–5918.248 12. Pesticide toxicity and their impact on plant growth, active constituents and productivity
Ebel, R.C., Wallace, B., Elkins, C., 2000. Phytotoxicity of the systemic insecticide imidacloprid on tomato and cucum￾ber in the greenhouse. HortTechnology 10, 144–147.
El-Awadi, M.E., Hassan, E.A., 2011. Improving growth and productivity of fennel plant exposed to pendimethalin 
herbicide: stress–recovery treatments. Nat. Sci. 9, 97–108.
Fatma, F., Verma, S., Kamal, A., Srivastava, A., 2017. Phytotoxicity of pesticides mancozeb and chlorpyrifos: correla￾tion with the antioxidative defence system in Allium cepa. Physiol. Mol. Biol. Plants 24, 115–123.
Fatma, F., Verma, S., Kamal, A., Srivastava, A., 2018. Phytotoxicity of pesticides mancozeb and chlorpyrifos: correla￾tion with the antioxidative defence system in Allium cepa. Physiol. Mol. Biol. Plants 24, 115–123.
Fayez, K.A., 2000. Action of photosynthetic diuron herbicide on cell organelles and biochemical constituents of the 
leaves of two soybean cultivars. Pestic. Biochem. Physiol. 66, 105–115.
Fayez, K., Radwan, D., Khalaf, A., Abdelrahman, A.M., 2013. Herbicides and salicylic acid applications caused alter￾ations in total amino acids and proline contents of peanut cultivars. J. Environ. Stud. 6, 55–61.
Fernandes, J.P.T., Nascente, A.S., Filippi, M.C.C., Silva, M.A., 2021. Upland rice seedling performance promoted by 
multifunctional microorganisms. Semina: Ciênc. Agrár. 1, 429–438.
Ferree, D.C., 1979. Influence of pesticides on photosynthesis of crop plants. In: Marcelle, R., Clijsters, H., van Poucke, 
M. (Eds.), Photosynthesis and Plant Development. Junk, The Hague, The Netherlands, pp. 331–341.
Gar’kova, A.N., Rusyaeva, M.M., Nushtaeva, O.V., Aroslankina, Y.N., Lukatkin, A.S., 2011. Treatment with the herbi￾cide granstar induces oxidative stress in cereal leaves. Russ. J. Plant Physiol. 58, 1074–1081.
Giménez-Moolhuyzen, M., Blom, J., Lorenzo-Mínguez, P., Cabello, T., Crisol-Martínez, E., 2020. Photosynthesis in￾hibiting effects of pesticides on sweet pepper leaves. Insects 11, 69.
Godfrey, L.D., Holtzer, T.O., 1992. Effects of soil-incorporated insecticides and foliar applied chemicals on corn 
gas-exchange parameters. Crop Prot. 11, 427–432.
Goh, W.L., Yiu, P.H., Wong, S.C., Rajan, A., 2011. Safe use of chlorpyrifos for insect pest management in leaf mustard 
(Brassica juncea L. Coss.). J. Food Agric. Environ. 9, 1064–1066.
Goswami, M.R., Banerjee, P., Swarnakar, S., Mukhopadhyay, A., 2013. Carbaryl mediated biochemical alterations in 
eggplant (Solanum melongena L.). Int. J. Environ. Sci. Technol. 3, 51.
Habtamu, A., Shelema, M., Kedar, R., Ebsa, S., 2013. Seed germination and seedling growth of Haricot bean (Phaseolus 
vulgaris) cultivars as influenced by copper sulphate. World Sci. Res. J. 10, 312–317.
Haile, F.J., Peterson, R.K.D., Higley, L.G., 1999. Gas-exchange responses of alfalfa and soybean treated with insecti￾cides. J. Econ. Entomol. 92, 954–959.
Haile, F.J., Kerns, D.L., Richardson, J.M., Higley, L.G., 2000. Impact of insecticides and surfactant on lettuce physiol￾ogy and yield. J. Econ. Entomol. 93, 788–794.
Han, Y., Mo, R., Yuan, X., Zhong, D., Tang, F., Ye, C., Liu, Y., 2017. Pesticide residues in nut-planted soils of China and 
their relationship between nut/soil. Chemosphere 180, 42–47.
Hasan, W., Chhibber, R.C., Singh, C.P., 2016. Effect of indoxacarb against tomato fruit borer (Helicoverpa armigera
Hub.) and phytotoxicity to tomato plants. Adv. Plants Agric. Res. 3, 51–54.
Hassaan, M., El Nemr, A., 2020. Pesticides pollution: classifications, human health impact, extraction and treatment 
techniques. Egypt. J. Aquat. Res. 46. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejar.2020.08.007.
Hassan, N.M., Alla, M.M.N., 2005. Oxidative stress in herbicide-treated broad bean and maize plants. Acta Physiol. 
Plant. 27, 429–438.
Homayoonzadeh, M., Moeini, P., Talebi, K., Roessner, U., Hosseininaveh, V., 2020. Antioxidant system status of cucum￾ber plants under pesticides treatment. Acta Physiol. Plant. 42, 161. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11738-020-03150-9.
Homayoonzadeh, M., Hosseininaveh, V., Haghighi, S.R., Talebi, K., Roessner, U., Maali-Amiri, R., 2021. Evaluation of 
physiological and biochemical responses of pistachio plants (Pistacia vera L.) exposed to pesticides. Ecotoxicology. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10646-021-02434-1.
Jan, S., Parween, T., Siddiqi, T.O., Mahmooduzzafar, 2012. Effect of gamma radiation on morphological, biochemical 
and physiological aspects of plants and plant products. Environ. Rev. 20, 7–39.
Jiang, L., Yang, H., 2009. Prometryne-induced oxidative stress and impact on antioxidant enzymes in wheat. 
Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 72, 1687–1693.
Jianga, L., Maa, L., Suia, Y., Hna, S.Q., Wua, Z.Y., Fenga, Y.X., Yanga, H., 2010. Effect of manure compost on the her￾bicide prometryne bioavailability to wheat plants. J. Hazard. Mater. 184, 337–344.
Jones, V.P., Youngman, R.R., Parrella, M.P., 1983. Effect of selected acaricides on photosynthetic rates of lemon and 
orange leaves in California. J. Econ. Entomol. 76, 1179–1180.Kaur, R., Kaur, G.M., Raghav, S., 2019. Pesticides classification and its impact on environment. Int. J. Curr. Microbiol. 
App. Sci. 8, 1889–1897.
Kaya, A., Doganlar, Z.B., 2016. Exogenous jasmonic acid induces stress tolerance in tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum) ex￾posed to imazapic. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 124, 470–479.
Kilic, S., Duran, R.E., Coskun, Y., 2015. Morphological and physiological responses of maize (Zea mays L.) seeds 
grown under increasing concentrations of chlorantraniliprole insecticide. Pol. J. Environ. Stud. 24, 1069–1075.
Kingleman, W.E., Buntin, G.D., van Iersel, M.W., Braman, S.K., 2000. Whole plant gas exchange, not individual 
leaf-measurements, accurately assesses azalea response to insecticides. Crop Prot. 19, 407–415.
Koornneef, M., Bentsink, L., Hilhorst, H., 2002. Seed dormancy and germination. Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 5, 33.
Krugh, B.W., Miles, D., 1996. Monitoring the effects of five “nonherbicidal pesticide chemicals on terrestrial plants 
using chlorophyll fluorescence”. Environ. Toxicol. Chem. 15, 495–500.
Kumar, A., Sharma, A., Sharma, R., Srivastva, P., Choudhary, A., 2021a. Exploration of wheat wild relative diver￾sity from Lahaul valley: a cold arid desert of Indian Himalayas. Cereal Res. Commun. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s42976-021-00166-w.
Kumar, A., Sharma, A., Sharma, R., Choudhary, A., Srivastava, P., Kaur, H., Padhy, A.K., 2021b. Morpho-physiological 
evaluation of Elymus semicostatus (Nees ex Steud.) Melderis as potential donor for drought tolerance in wheat 
(Triticum aestivum L.). Genet. Resour. Crop. Evol. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10722-021-01241-1.
Kumar, A., Choudhary, A., Kaur, N., Kaur, H., 2021c. Wake up: it’s time to bloom. Russ. J. Plant Physiol. 68, 579–595.
Kumar, A., Choudhary, A., Kaur, H., Mehta, S., Husen, A., 2021d. Metal-based nanoparticles, sensors, and their mul￾tifaceted application in food packaging. J. Nanobiotechnol. 19, 256.
Lal, S.K., Kumar, S., Sheri, V., Mehta, S., Varakumar, P., Ram, B., Borphukan, B., James, D., Fartyal, D., Reddy, M.K., 
2018. Seed priming: an emerging technology to impart abiotic stress tolerance in crop plants. In: Advances in Seed 
Priming. Springer, Singapore, pp. 41–50.
Laprè, L.F., Sances, F.V., Toscano, N.C., Oatman, E.R., Voth, V., Johnson, M.W., 1982. The effects of acaricides on the 
physiology, growth, and yield of strawberries. J. Econ. Entomol. 75, 616–619.
Li, W.Y., Lu, P., Xie, H., Li, G.Q., Wang, J.X., Guo, D.Y., Liang, X.Y., 2019. Effects of glyphosate on soybean metabolism 
in strains bred for glyphosate-resistance. Physiol. Mol. Biol. Plants 25, 523–532.
Liang, L., Lu, Y.L., Yang, H., 2012. Toxicology of isoproturon to the food crop wheat as affected by salicylic acid. 
Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 19, 2044–2054.
Liu, W., Li, Y., Feng, Y., 2020. The effectiveness of nanobiochar for reducing phytotoxicity and improving soil reme￾diation in cadmium-contaminated soil. Sci. Rep. 10, 858.
Lloyd, R.W., Krieg, D.R., 1987. Cotton development and yield as affected by insecticides. J. Econ. Entomol. 80, 
854–858.
Lushchak, V.I., Matviishyn, T.M., Husak, V.V., Storey, J.M., Storey, K.B., 2018. Pesticide toxicity: a mechanistic ap￾proach. EXCLI J. 17, 1101–1136.
Maluin, F., Hussein, M., Yusof, N., Fakurazi, S., Abu, S.I., Zainol, H., Nur, H., Daim, L., 2019. Enhanced fungicidal 
efficacy on Ganoderma boninense by simultaneous co-delivery of hexaconazole and dazomet from their chitosan 
nanoparticles. RSC Adv. 9, 27083–27095.
Maluin, F.N., Hussein, M.Z., Yusof, N.A., Fakurazi, S., Idris, A.S., Hilmi, N.H.Z., 2020. Phytotoxicity of chitosan-based 
agronanofungicides in the vegetative growth of oil palm seedling. PLoS One 15, e0231315.
Matzenbacher, F.D.O., Vidal, R.A., Merotto Jr., A., Trezzi, M.M., 2014. Environmental and physiological factors that 
affect the efficacy of herbicides that inhibit the enzyme protoporphyrinogen oxidase: a literature review. Planta 
Daninha 32, 457–463.
Mehta, S., Gogna, M., Singh, B., Patra, A., Singh, I.K., Singh, A., 2020. Silicon: a plant nutritional “non-entity” for 
mitigating abiotic stresses. In: Plant Stress Biology. Springer, Singapore, pp. 17–49.
Mehta, S., Kumar, A., Achary, V.M.M., Ganesan, P., Patel, A., Singh, A., Rathi, N., Das, T.K., Lal, S.K., Reddy, M.K., 
2022. Antifungal and defense elicitor activity of Potassium phosphite against fungal blast disease on ptxD-OE 
transgenic indica rice and its acceptor parent. Pestic. Biochem. Physiol. 182, 105026.
Mehta, S., Kumar, A., Achary, V.M.M., Ganesan, P., Rathi, N., Singh, A., Sahu, K.P., Lal, S.K., Das, T.K., Reddy, M.K., 
2021. Antifungal activity of glyphosate against fungal blast disease on glyphosate-tolerant OsmEPSPS transgenic 
rice. Plant Sci. 311, 111009.
Mehta, S., Singh, B., Dhakate, P., Rahman, M., Islam, M.A., 2019. Rice, marker-assisted breeding, and disease resis￾tance. In: Disease Resistance in Crop Plants. Springer, Cham, pp. 83–111.
References 249250 12. Pesticide toxicity and their impact on plant growth, active constituents and productivity
Mei, X., Lin, D.H., Xu, Y., Wu, Y.Y., Tu, Y.Y., 2009. Effects of phenanthrene on chemical composition and enzyme ac￾tivity in fresh tea leaves. Food Chem. 115, 569–573.
Mishra, V., Srivastava, G., Prasad, S.M., 2009. Antioxidant response of bitter gourd (Momordica charantia L.) seedlings 
to interactive effect of dimethoate and UVB irradiation. Sci. Hortic. 120, 373–378.
Mitton, F.M., Ferreira, J.L.R., Gonzalez, M., Miglioranza, K.S.B., Monserrat, J.M., 2016. Antioxidant responses in soy￾bean and alfalfa plants grown in DDTs contaminated soils: useful variables for selecting plants for soil phytore￾mediation? Pestic. Biochem. Physiol. 130, 17–21.
Monika, Kidwai, M.K., 2017. Effect of mancozeb on mustard (Brassica juncea L.): an in-vitro study. Trop. Plant Res. 4, 
55–61.
Moore, M.T., Kroger, R., 2010. Effect of three insecticides and two herbicides on rice (Oryza sativa) seedling germina￾tion and growth. Arch. Environ. Contam. Toxicol. 59, 574–581.
Murthy, C.S.H.N., 1983. Effect of pesticides on photosynthesis. Residue Rev. 86, 107–129.
Nannipieri, P., Giagnoni, L., Renella, G., Puglisi, E., Ceccanti, B., Masciandaro, G., Fornasier, F., Moscatelli, M.C., 
Marinari, S., 2013. Soil enzymology: classical and molecular approaches. Biol. Fertil. Soils 48, 743–762.
Nansen, C., Purington, R., Murdock, M., 2021. Using advanced optical sensing to quantify phytotoxicity in ornamen￾tal plants. HortTechnology 31, 532–534.
Nehru, S.D., Rangaiah, S., Ramarao, G., Shekar, G.C., 1999. Effect of some herbicide on seed germination and seed￾ling vigour in mungbean. Crop. Res. 17, 425–426.
Nguyen, H., Nansen, C., 2020. Hyperspectral remote sensing to detect leafminer-induced stress in bok choy and 
spinach according to fertilizer regime and timing. Pest Manag. Sci. 76, 2208–2216.
Nielson, M.H., Rank, J., 1994. Screening of toxicity and genotoxicity in waste water by the use of Allium test. Hereditas 
121, 249–254.
Osman, M.E.H., Abo-Shady, A.M., El-Nagar, M.M., 2016. Cyanobacterial Arthrospira (Spirulina platensis) as safener 
against harmful effects of fusilade herbicide on faba bean plant. Rendiconti Lincei 27, 455–462.
Pall, A., 2019. Mitigation of Glyphosate-Induced Plant Stress in Soybean Using Salicylic Acid. McGill University 
(Canada).
Pandey, K.B., Rizvi, S.I., 2010. Markers of oxidative stress in erythrocytes and plasma during aging in humans. 
Oxidative Med. Cell. Longev. 3, 2–12.
Parween, T., 2012. Effect of agrochemical pollution on growth, structure and some physiochemical aspects of Vigna 
radiata L. Ph.D thesis, (Awarded) Department of Biosciences, Jamia Millia Islamia, New Delhi, India.
Parween, T., Jan, S., Mahmooduzzafar, Fatma, T., 2011a. Alteration in nitrogen metabolism and plant growth during 
different develop- mental stages of green gram (Vigna radiata L.) in response to chlorpyrifos. Acta Physiol. Plant. 
33, 2321–2328.
Parween, T., Jan, S., Mahmooduzzafar, Fatma, T., 2011b. Assessing the impact of chlorpyrifos on growth, photosyn￾thetic pigments and yield in Vigna radiata L. at different phenological stages. Afr. J. Agric. Res. 6, 4432–4440.
Parween, T., Jan, S., Fatma, M.T., 2012. Evaluation of oxidative stress in Vigna radiata L. in response to chlorpyrifos. 
Int. J. Environ. Sci. Technol. 9, 605–612.
Parween, T., Jan, S., Fatma, T., 2018. Variation in elemental composition as influenced by chlorpyrifos application in 
mung bean (Vigna radiata L.). Saudi J. Biol. Sci. 25, 1439–1445.
Petit, A.N., Fontaine, F., Vatsa, P., Clément, C., Vaillant-Gaveau, N., 2012. Fungicide impacts on photosynthesis in 
crop plants. Photosynth. Res. 111, 315–326.
Rahman, M., Sultana, S., Nath, D., Kalita, S., Chakravarty, D., Mehta, S., Wani, S.H., Islam, M.A., 2019. Molecular 
breeding approaches for disease resistance in sugarcane. In: Disease Resistance in Crop Plants. Springer, Cham, 
pp. 131–155.
Raja, W., Rathau, P., John, S.A., Ramteke, P., 2013. Photosynthetic, biochemical and enzymatic investigation of Azolla 
microphylla in response to an insecticide-Hexachlorohexahydro-Methano-Benzodioxathiepine-Oxide. Our Nature 
10, 145–155.
Rajashekhar, N., Prakasha, Murthy, T.C.S., 2012. Seed germination and physiological behavior of maize (cv. Nac￾6002) seedlings under abiotic stress (Pendimethalin) condition. Asian J. Crop Sci. 4, 80–85.
Reddy, B., Kumar, A., Mehta, S., Sahu, K.P., 2021. Methods of assessments of microbial diversity and their functional 
role in soil fertility and crop productivity. Plant, Soil and Microbes in Tropical Ecosystems. Springer, Singapore, 
pp. 293–314.
Rehim, H.A.A., Hegazy, E.A., El-Barbary, A.M., 2009. Radiation modification of natural polysaccharides for applica￾tion in agriculture. Polymer 50, 1952–1957.San Miguel, A., Faure, M., Ravanel, P., Raveton, M., 2012. Biological responses of maize (Zea mays) plants exposed 
to chlorobenzenes. Case study of monochloro-, 1, 4-dichloro-and 1, 2, 4-trichloro-benzenes. Ecotoxicology 21, 
315–324.
Sangwan, S., Sharma, P., Wati, L., Mehta, S., 2023. Effect of chitosan nanoparticles on growth and physiology of 
crop plants. In: Engineered Nanomaterials for Sustainable Agricultural Production, Soil Improvement and Stress 
Management. Academic Press, pp. 99–123.
Shahid, M., Ahmed, B., Zaidi, A., Khan, M.S., 2018. Toxicity of fungicides to Pisum sativum: a study of oxidative dam￾age, growth suppression, cellular death and morpho-anatomical changes. RSC Adv. 8, 38483–38498.
Shahid, M., Khan, M.S., Zaidi, A., 2020. Fungicide toxicity to legumes and its microbial remediation: a current per￾spective. In: Pesticides in Crop Production: Physiological and Biochemical Action. Wiley, pp. 15–33.
Shahzad, B., Tanveer, M., Che, Z., Rehman, A., Cheema, S.A., Sharma, A., Song, H., Rehman, S., Zhaorong, D., 2018. 
Role of 24-epibrassinolide (EBL) in mediating heavy metal and pesticide induced oxidative stress in plants: a 
review. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 147, 935–944.
Shakir, S.K., Kanwal, M., Murad, W., Rehman, Z., Rehman, S., Daud, M.K., Azizullah, A., 2016. Effect of some 
commonly used pesticides on seed germination, biomass production and photosynthetic pigments in tomato 
(Lycopersicon esculentum). Ecotoxicology. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10646-015-1591-9.
Sharma, I., Bhardwaj, R., Pati, P.K., 2013. Stress modulation response of 24-epibrassinolide against imidacloprid in an 
elite indica rice variety Pusa Basmati-1. Pestic. Biochem. Physiol. 105, 144–153.
Sharma, I., Bhardwaj, R., Pati, P.K., 2015a. Exogenous application of 28-homobrassinolide modulates the dynamics 
of salt and pesticides induced stress responses in an elite rice variety Pusa Basmati-1. J. Plant Growth Regul. 34, 
509–518.
Sharma, A., Kumar, V., Kanwar, M.K., Thukral, A.K., Bhardwaj, R., 2017c. Ameliorating imidacloprid induced oxida￾tive stress by 24- epibrassinolide in Brassica juncea L. Russ. J. Plant Physiol. 64, 509–517.
Sharma, A., Kumar, V., Kohli, S.K., Thukral, A.K., Bhardwaj, R., 2015b. Phytochemicals in Brassica juncea L. seedlings 
under imidaclopridepibrassinolide treatment using GC-MS. J. Chem. Pharm. Res. 7, 708–711.
Sharma, A., Kumar, V., Singh, R., Thukral, A.K., Bhardwaj, R., 2015c. 24-Epibrassinolide induces the synthesis of 
phytochemicals effected by imidacloprid pesticide stress in Brassica juncea L. J. Pharmacogn. Phytochem. 4, 60–64.
Sharma, A., Kumar, V., Singh, R., Thukral, A.K., Bhardwaj, R., 2016a. Effect of seed pre-soaking with 24-epibrassinolide 
on growth and photosynthetic parameters of Brassica juncea L. in imidacloprid soil. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 133, 
195–201.
Sharma, A., Bhardwaj, R., Kumar, V., Thukral, A.K., 2016b. GC-MS studies reveal stimulated pesticide detoxification 
by brassinolide application in Brassica juncea L. plants. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 23, 14518–14525.
Sharma, A., Kumar, V., Kanwar, M.K., Thukral, A.K., Bhardwaj, R., 2017a. Ameliorating imidacloprid induced oxida￾tive stress by 24- epibrassinolide in Brassica juncea L. Russ. J. Plant Physiol. 64, 509–517.
Sharma, A., Kumar, V., Kumar, R., Shahzad, B., Thukral, A.K., Bhardwaj, R., 2018a. Brassinosteroid-mediated pesti￾cide detoxification in plants: a mini-review. Cogent Food Agric. 4. https://doi.org/10.1080/23311932.2018.1436
212.
Sharma, A., Kumar, V., Yuan, H., Kanwar, M.K., Bhardwaj, R., Thukral, A.K., Zheng, B., 2018b. Jasmonic acid 
seed treatment stimulates insecticide detoxification in Brassica juncea L. Front. Plant Sci. 9, 1609. https://doi.
org/10.3389/fpls.2018.01609.
Sharma, A., Kumar, V., Shahzad, B., Tanveer, M., Sidhu, G.P.S., Handa, N., Kohli, S.K., Yadav, P., Bali, A.S., Parihar, 
R.D., 2019a. Worldwide pesticide usage and its impacts on ecosystem. SN Appl. Sci. 1, 1446.
Sharma, A., Kumar, V., Thukral, A.K., Bhardwaj, R., 2019b. Responses of plants to pesticide toxicity: an overview. 
Planta Daninha 37.
Singh, V.P., Kumar, J., Singh, S., Prasad, S.M., 2014. Dimethoate modifies enhanced UV-B effects on growth, pho￾tosynthesis and oxidative stress in mung bean (Vigna radiata L.) seedlings: implication of salicylic acid. Pestic. 
Biochem. Physiol. 116, 13–23.
Singh, B., Mehta, S., Aggarwal, S.K., Tiwari, M., Bhuyan, S.I., Bhatia, S., Islam, M.A., 2019. Barley, disease resistance, 
and molecular breeding approaches. In: Disease Resistance in Crop Plants. Springer, Cham, pp. 261–299.
Singh, H., Singh, N.B., Singh, A., Hussain, I., Yadav, V., 2016. Physiological and biochemical effects of salicylic acid on 
Pisum sativum exposed to isoproturon. Arch. Agron. Soil Sci. 62, 1425–1436.
Snell Scientifics, LLC, 2017. Phytotoxicity of insecticides, fungicides and herbicides; symptoms, testing formulations 
& more. https://www.snellsci.com/phytotoxicity-of-insecticides-fungicides-herbicides-symptoms-testing-for￾mulations-more/.
References 251252 12. Pesticide toxicity and their impact on plant growth, active constituents and productivity
Song, N.H., Zhang, S., Hong, M., Yang, H., 2010. Impact of dissolved organic matter on bioavailability of chloro￾toluron to wheat. Environ. Pollut. 158, 906–912.
Tevini, M., Teramura, A., 2008. UV-B effects on terrestrial plant. Photochem. Photobiol. 50, 479–487.
Tomer, N., 2013. Determination of chlorinated pesticide in vegetables, cereals and pulses by gas chromatography in 
east national capital region, Delhi, India. Res. J. Agric. Forest. Sci. 1, 27–28.
Toscano, N.C., Sances, M.W., Jonson, M.W., LaPré, L.F., 1982. Effect of various pesticides on lettuce physiology and 
yield. J. Econ. Entomol. 75, 738–741.
Van Lenteren, J.C., 2007. Biological control for insect pests in greenhouses: an unexpected success. In: Charles Vincent, 
C., Goettel, M.S., Lazarovits, G. (Eds.), Biological Control: A Global Perspective: Case Studies from Around the 
World. CAB Int, Wallingford, UK, pp. 105–117.
Wibawa, W., Mohamad, R.B., Puteh, A.B., Omar, D., Juraimi, A.S., Abdullah, S.A., 2009. Residual phytotoxicity effects 
of paraquat, glyphosate and glufosinate-ammonium herbicides in soils from field treated plots. Int. J. Agric. Biol. 
11, 214–216.
Winnicki, K., Łudzik, K., Żabka, A., 2021. Anti-algal activity of the 12-5-12 gemini surfactant results from its impact 
on the photosynthetic apparatus. Sci. Rep. 11, 2360.
Wood, B.W., Payne, J.A., 1986. Net photosynthesis of orchard grown pecan leaves reduces by insecticide sprays. 
Hortic. Sci. 21, 112–113.
Wu, G.L., Cui, E.J., Tao, E.L., Yang, E.H., 2010. Fluroxypyr triggers oxidative damage by producing superoxide and 
hydrogen peroxide in rice (Oryza sativa). Ecotoxicology 19, 24–132.
Xia, X.J., Huang, Y.Y., Wang, L., Huang, L.F., Yu, W.L., Zhou, Y.H., Yu, J.Q., 2006. Pesticides induced depression of 
photosynthesis was alleviated by 24-epi-brassinolide pre-treatment in Cucumis sativus L. Pestic. Biochem. Physiol. 
86, 42–48.
Xia, X.J., Zhang, Y., Wu, J.X., Wang, J.T., Zhou, Y.H., Shi, K., 2009. Brassinosteroids promote metabolism of pesticides 
in cucumber. J. Agric. Food Chem. 57, 8406–8413.
Yildiztekin, M., Ozler, M.A., Nadeem, S., Atilla Levent Tuna, A.L., 2019. Investigations on the effects of commonly 
used pesticides on tomato plant growth. Fresenius Environ. Bull. 28, 376–382.
Youngman, R.R., Leigh, T.F., Kerby, T.A., Toscano, N.C., Jackson, C.E., 1990. Pesticides and cotton: effect on photosyn￾thesis, growth, and fruiting. J. Econ. Entomol. 83, 1549–1557.
Yuan, X.Y., Zhang, L.G., Huang, L., Yang, H.J., Zhong, Y.T., Ning, N., Guo, P.Y., 2017. Spraying brassinolide improves 
sigma broad tolerance in foxtail millet (Setaria italica L.) through modulation of antioxidant activity and photosyn￾thetic capacity. Sci. Rep. 7, 1–9.
Zhang, G.L., Chen, W.J., Qiu, L.M., Sun, G.R., Dai, Q.G., Zhang, H.C., 2009. Physiological response to 
124-trichlorobenzene stress of different rice genotypes. Acta Agron. Sin. 35, 733–740.
Zhang, J.J., Lu, Y.C., Zhang, J.J., Tan, L.R., Yang, H., 2014. Accumulation and toxicological response of atrazine in rice 
crops. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 102, 105–112.
Zhang, S., Hu, X., Li, L., Huangfu, X., Xu, Y., Qin, Y., 2018. Activation of sodium percarbonate with ferrous ions for 
degradation of chlorobenzene in aqueous solution: mechanism, pathway and comparison with hydrogen perox￾ide. Environ. Chem. 14, 486–494.
 Plants and their Interaction to Environmental Pollution 253 Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-99978-6.00003-0
CHAPTER
13
Plant responses to water pollution
Nirmal Singha
, Sourabhb,∗
, Pramod Kumarc
, Preetid
, 
and Sahil Mehtae
a
Department of Seed Science and Technology, CCS Haryana Agricultural University, Hisar, 
Haryana, India, b
ICAR – Central Arid Zone Research Institute, Jodhpur, Rajasthan, India, c
Department of Agronomy, CCS Haryana Agricultural University, Hisar, Haryana, India, 
d
ICAR-National Bureau of Plant Genetic Resources, New Delhi, India, e
Department of Botany, 
Hansraj College, University of Delhi, New Delhi, India 
*corresponding author: sourabhjakhar@hotmail.com
1. Introduction
The most fundamental pillar for the existence and nourishment of being on this planet is 
water, the wonder’s indispensable molecular form (Kumar et al., 2022). Water quality is the 
most affected by human advancement toward so-called civilization. The fate of capitalist soci￾ety is indiscriminate but inevitable industrialization and urbanization. Around 2030, a severe 
lack of fresh drinking water may emerge as a major issue. Clean water is essential for natural 
vegetation’s normal healthy growth and development, as well as their natural genetic inheri￾tance. Freshwater availability on earth is extremely inadequate; no addition to that amount, but 
a negligent rate of human population growth and their insatiable desire, along with a mentality 
of imperialism, destroys the plant world. Overall, 80% of freshwater is polluted, which has a 
severe effect on plant metabolism, restricting their ability to reproduce. This chapter examines 
different types of water pollution and pollutants, as well as their effects on plant morphol￾ogy, physiology, molecular biology, and reproductive systems, leading to genetic configuration, 
stress responses, and simultaneous increases in antioxidant levels, gene expression, and adap￾tation as a tolerant plant. We discuss about how signal transduction is modulated, as well as 
how a waste water-based agricultural irrigation system degrades the quality of food grains(Kar 
et al., 2017).254 13. Plant responses to water pollution
2. Water pollution: Definition, types, and extent of the problem
The chemical formula of water is H2O. It is a chemical substance that is inorganic, transpar￾ent, tasteless, odorless, and colorless. Covalent connections join one oxygen and two hydrogen 
atoms, providing the most vital fluid for living organisms’ cells. It is the primary component 
of the Earth’s hydrosphere (70.90%) and being a universal solvent, it is the primary driving 
force for life on this planet. The water cycle is maintained by evaporation, transpiration, con￾densation, precipitation, and runoff in many natural forms of water such as precipitation, fog, 
clouds, ice, snow, and water vapor. Ground and surface water are contaminated as a result of 
water pollution in the soil (Foster et al., 2003). Some other pollutants which were mentioned 
by Jiménez (2009) are suspended particles, organic and inorganic contaminants, radioactive, 
thermal, nutrient, and agriculture contaminants (Fig. 1).
Inorganic water pollutants take account of silver (Ag), arsenic (As), boron (B), barium 
(Ba), beryllium (Be), calcium (Ca), cadmium (Cd), chloride (Cl−), cobalt (Co), chromium (Cr), 
copper (Cu), iron (Fe), fluoride, mercury (Hg), potassium (K), magnesium (Mg), manganese 
(Mn), molybdenum (Mo), sodium (Na), nickel (Ni), nitrite (NO2
−), nitrate (NO3
−), phospho￾PRIMARY
METABOLISM
INDUSTRIALIZATION
URBANIZATION
DOMESTIC WASTE
DYES AND
DETERGENTS
TANNERY WASTE,
ANTIBIOTIC,
ORGANIC WASTE
AGROINDUSTRIES,
FERTILIZERS
ACID RAIN
PHOTOSYNTHESIS
RESPIRATION
NITROGEN METABOLISM
OTHER
METABOLIC
INTERMEDIATES
HORMONAL
BIOSYNTHESIS
BIOMOLECULAR
METABOLISM
WATER POLLUTION
SECONDARY
METABOLISM BIOSYNTHESIS OF
ALKALOIDS
FLAVONOIDS
PHENOLICS
TERPINOIDS
FIG. 1 Water pollution and its types and impact. Acid rain contains sulfuric and nitric acid, which can damage tree 
leaves and bark and hurt the fine root hairs of many plants.Water pollution from substances can disrupt photosyn￾thesis in aquatic plants. Photosynthesis is the process in which plants use the energy from sunlight to produce sugar, 
or glucose, by converting carbon dioxide into carbohydrates. However, when water is polluted, the capacity of water 
to dissolve gases such as carbon dioxide is negatively affected.2. Water pollution: Definition, types, and extent of the problem 255
rus (P), lead (Pb), phosphates (PO4
−), antimony (Sb), selenium (Se), silica (SiO2), andsulfate 
(SO4
2 −). Non-biodegradable pollutants which abolish aquatic flora are concentrated cyanides, 
heavy metals, inorganic salts, metal complexes, mineral acids, organic compounds, sulfates, 
and trace elements. The chemical manufacturing industry produces carcinogenic, mutagenic, 
nonbiodegradable, and toxic substances which are acids, agricultural chemicals, alkali, dyes, 
fertilizers, inorganic or organic chemicals, paper, and pulp petrochemicals, pharmaceutical 
products, polymers, and derivatives (Awaleh and Soubaneh, 2014).
Organic water pollutants include agricultural runoffs, bacteria, and organic pollutants 
from sewage, fertilizers, food processing, forestry, industrial waste, tree, and brush debris. 
The chemical industry and wastewater are inextricably linked. Some other important pol￾lutants mentioned by Verma and Dwivedi (2013) are arsenic (As), cadmium (Cd), chromium 
(Cr), copper (Cu), lead (Pb), mercury (Hg), molybdenum (Mo), nickel (Ni), vanadium (V), 
and zinc (Zn) produced from bangle industry, battery industry Chlor-alkali plants, chro￾mium salts manufacturing, ceramics, e-waste, electrical appliances, electroplating, fluores￾cent lamps, fuel, geogenic and natural processes, hospital waste (damaged thermometers, 
barometers, and sphygmomanometers), industrial coolants, leather tanning, mining, paints, 
smelters, sulfuric acid plant, and thermal power plants.
The photosynthesis process of plants is obstructed due to water pollution because pollut￾ants are observed by plants from water and pass them to consumers such as humans and ani￾mals through the food chain resulting in ecosystem disruption. Water contains large quantities 
of sodium chloride and pesticides, which plants absorb. Dissolved oxygen in water is reduced 
by oxygen-demanding chemicals which are produced by breweries, milk processing plants, 
municipal wastewater treatments, and paper mills. Construction and demolition of buildings, 
agricultural practices, and mining produce sediments and suspended particles that interrupt 
aquatic life. Eutrophication (speedy biological deterioration) of lakes, streams, and estuaries 
can be accelerated by nitrogen and phosphorus nutrients. Phosphorus binds to inorganic sedi￾ments, while nitrogen binds to organic materials, both of which leach into groundwater.
Due to the inverse relationship between temperature and the solubility of gases in wa￾ter, heated effluents reduce the amount of dissolved oxygen available to aerobic (oxygen￾dependent) species in the water. Municipal garbage discharge is a serious pollution event 
because there are no treatment systems in place for the majority of municipalities. Agricultural 
wastes that are dumped straight into bodies of water contain high levels of phosphate and 
nitrogen, as well as decomposable organic carbon, fecal coliform bacteria, and pesticide resi￾dues (Singh et al., 2022). Because of the excessive use of fertilizer and pesticides, aquaculture 
degrades water quality in conjunction with agricultural operations. Automobile exhaust con￾tains petroleum-based hydrocarbons, which are deposited on road surfaces daily. These sed￾iments wash and drain into nearby streams and lakes in all cities and regions when it rains.
Water pollutants can be solid, liquid, or semisolidand are calledbiodegradable, nonbiode￾gradable, or carcinogenic, depending on whether they come from a point source, nonpoint 
source, or trans boundary source. These can be both dangerous and non-dangerous. Chemical, 
biological, radiological, and physical criteria are commonly used to check the quality of water 
(WHO and FAO decide on unobjectionable quantities of every contaminant) for numerous reuse 
purposes Alam et al., 2020; Popa et al., 2012). Biological oxygen demand (BOD), dissolved oxy￾gen (DO), electrical conductivity (EC), pH (acidic or basic), total coliform, turbidity, total solids, 
and temperature are indicators of water quality. Plant metabolism is disrupted by bioavailable 
metals, which damage cell membranes and alter enzymes involved in chlorophyll formation, 256 13. Plant responses to water pollution
reducing photosynthetic activity, pollen viability, and seed viability. Dyes, which are water￾soluble substances derived from textiles, leather, tanning, food, and paper, are detrimental to 
aquatic organisms and plantgrowth. Because water produces hydration shells around ions, pol￾lutants dissolve quickly in water. Antibiotics and other discarded medications, as well as med￾ical waste, constitute a serious hazard to the aquatic ecology since these compounds harm soil 
microorganisms. These soil bacteria aid in the growth and development of plants. Tetracycline 
enhanced radish yields while decreasing pinto bean yield. The actions of the plant stress pro￾teins glutathione S-transferase and peroxidase amplified dramatically in maize plants grown in 
soil treated with chlortetracycline, indicating that chlortetracycline boosted the activities of these 
proteins (Batchelder, 1982). Emerging contaminants (ECs), which include a wide range of com￾pounds, are found in a wide range of products, including human and veterinary medications, 
nanomaterials, hygiene items, and paints and varnishes, to name a few, have recently been an 
areaof concern for water contamination. Water pollution is caused by a variety of factors. Water 
pollution comes from three major sources:home, agriculture, and industry. They do manifest the 
reasons like animal west, contamination of groundwater through drilling, deforestation, eroded 
sediments, eutrophication, failing septic systems, flood carries waste deposits into water (mainly 
in the river Ganges in India), heavy metals, herbicides, and fertilizer, high urbanization density, 
household chemicals, illegal dumping of industrial waste into water (extremely harmful to the 
ecosystem), littering, insect killer, sewage leakage, soil digging inside river area (Fig. 2), noxious 
waste dumping, using high yielding variety seed and heat (Industrial areas hot water mixed into 
cold water and polluted: Farakka thermal power project area: hot water mixed with Feeder canal 
water). It was also observed by Kar et al. (2017) that tidal action on a river flow often is linked 
with the deposition of municipal garbage through the outfalls into the river and the concentra￾tion of pollutants is recorded differently according to seasons (Fig. 3).
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
AGRI AND
INDUSTRY
MINING LAND DISPOSAL FORESTRY OTHERS
PERCENTAGE OF POLLUTION
DIFFERENT SOURCES
RIVER POLLUTION
FIG. 2 The extent of different sources of pollution in river water, the main source of freshwater. Every day, in￾dustries produce large amounts of waste. This waste contains pollutants and toxic chemicals such as mercury, lead, 
asbestos, sulfur, and nitrates among other harmful chemicals. Most industries lack a proper waste management 
system. This causes the waste to drain into water bodies such as rivers and the sea through waste disposal canals. 
Mining is the process of crushing rock and extracting coal and other minerals from the underground. These elements, 
when extracted in the raw form, contain harmful chemicals and can increase the number of toxic elements when 
mixed up with water. The improper disposal of solid waste is a major source of water pollution. Solid waste includes 
garbage, rubbish, electronic waste, trash, and construction and demolition waste, all of which are generated by indi￾vidual, residential, commercial, institutional, and industrial activities.3. Plant and water pollution 257
3. Plant and water pollution
Plants are harmed by various water contaminants, particularly the irrigation water 
source. The major rivers that flow through the world’s major cities, as well as in India, are 
pollutant-contaminated. Industrial pollutants, dyes, inorganic wastes, residential efflu￾ents, and heavy metals all hurt plant morphology and metabolism (Fig. 4). Mahmoud and 
Ghoneim (2016) showed varying grades of heavy metal contamination like Cd (Cadmium), 
Cr (Chromium), Ni (Nickel), Pb (Lead), Zn (Zinc) on carrots, and other economically import￾ant plants. Kar et al. (2017) scrutinized the presence of high levels of contaminants in a variety 
of common vegetables and commercially important plants.
Bonanno et  al. (2013) stated that the species Phragmites australis and Typha domingensis
have the potential to be used as biomonitors of trace element pollution in sediment samples. 
According to Singh and Gupta (2017), there is a variety of sources of water pollution, as well 
as their effects on different parts of the plant kingdom. Acid deposition, agricultural chemi￾cals, detergent deposition, industrial wastes, nutrient enrichment, nutrient shortage, organic 
matter deposition, oil spillage, phytotoxicity, silt deposition, thermal pollution, and other fac￾tors cause the plant system to become disrupted. Water pollution has the greatest impact on 
macrophytes, algae, and submerged aquatic plants.
Antibiotic contamination in irrigated food plants has just recently become a problem due 
to discarded expired medications in water. Zhang et al. (2017) observed serious damage to 
the plant system by antibiotics, especially the known antibiotics such as tetracycline, ceph￾alexin, and sulfamethoxazole at a 50% lethal dose. Brassica chinensis, Ipomoea aquatica, 
FIG. 3 Effect of river tide on polluted water of the city. At the time of flooding, river discharge pushes pollutants 
into the sea, while at a small discharge the pollutant moves upstream. Tidal currents affect the shifting of pollutants 
along the estuary, moving upstream at high tide and downstream at low tide.258 13. Plant responses to water pollution
Azolla, Salvinia, Hydrilla, Tradescantia, different water plants, Oedogonium, Cladophora, Chara, 
and Nitella are some of the common victims of water pollution. Table 1 enlists all the plants 
that show tolerance toward water pollution.
The influence of various water contaminants on plant morphology is concentration￾dependent. Some of the parameters that indicate the direct effect of water pollution on plants 
include leaf size and shape, phyllotaxy, stem diameter, node/intermodal length, root length, 
inflorescence appearance or flower bud appearance time, pollen tube extension, stigmatic 
surface choice, fruiting delay, abscission zone development, and stomatal closure. Water pol￾lution has a huge effect on biochemical aspects or metabolic activities associated to plant 
production, growth, and development, such as photosynthetic activity, respiratory, nutrient 
uptake, transpiration, and water conductance (Osakabe et  al., 2014; Al-Zurfi et  al., 2018). 
Pesticides, herbicides, and endocrine disruptors, as well as metals and metalloids found in 
wastewater, industrial wastes, sediments, and nutrients, as well as medicines, polycyclic ar￾omatic hydrocarbons, and flame retardants, are all important stressors for plants. Griboff 
et al. (2018) observed water pollution with heavy metals in plants. Due to water pollution 
conductivity in leaves, free proline content in leaves, and chlorophyll a/b ratio in leaves are 
also affected (Zhang et  al., 2019). Agricultural fertilizers, acid rains, heavy metals (HMs), 
household wastewaters industrial waste, oil, inorganic, and organic chemical compounds are 
major contributors to water contamination (Verla et al., 2018).
Heavy metals like cadmium (Cd), Chromium (Cr), copper (Cu), nickel (Ni), lead (Pb), se￾lenium (Se), vanadium (V), and zinc (Zn) contaminate water for human use which can be 
controlled with distinct awareness (Kumar et al., 2021; Eid et al., 2020). These heavy metals by 
synthesizing ROS (reactive oxygen species) disturb metabolic processes like photosynthesis, 
and respiration and initiate premature death of the plant (Zhang et al., 2017). Although many 
plants can tolerate heavy metal stress through anthocyanin, thiol, and antioxidants (Leão 
et al., 2014), organic pollutants are also reported to create hazards to plant systems (Liu and 
EFFECT ON PLANT IN RESPONSE TO WATER
POLLUTION
MORPHOLOGY
NODE AND
INTERNODAL
LENGTH, STEM
GIRTH
PLANT HEIGHT
LEAF SIZE
LEAF
STRUCTURE
ROOT LENGTH,
ROOT HAIRS
FRUITS, SEEDS,
INFLORESCENCE
FIG. 4 Effect of water pollution on plants. Ground-level pollutants like ozone, physically damage the plant leaves, 
causing chlorosis or an abnormal yellowing of leaves. A stressed plant cannot flower as it will use all resources it has 
to fight and survive the threat. Acidic conditions accumulate a lot of aluminum ions in the soil, which destroys roots 
systems and prevents the uptake of important nutrients and ions. Pollution impacts a plant’s structure reducing the 
size of the stomata and when gas exchange is compromised, photosynthesis slows.3. Plant and water pollution 259
Wu, 2018). Around 400 plant species that hyper accumulate metals were reported by Zhou 
et al. (2018). Some common examples of aquatic plant species that hyper accumulate metals, 
metalloids contaminants, and phytoremediation are Alternanthera, Azolla, Crinum, Crysopogon, 
Eichhornia, Hydrilla, Lemna, Pistia, Phragmites, Spirodela, Typha, Wolfia, and Wolfialla (Upadhyay 
and Tripathi, 2007).
Acid rain pollutes the water, which is generally acidic due to dissolved CO2. Acid rain is 
caused by pollutants in the atmosphere such as sulfur dioxide (SO2), nitrogen oxides (NOX), 
and the byproducts of fossil fuel combustion. Acid rain causes considerable harm to aquatic 
life, as well as plants, forest trees, forest bed vegetation, and soil (Brezonik, 1994). Plants 
have antioxidant defense mechanisms in response to various levels of water pollution. 
Enzymatic and non-enzymatic processes are also possible. Superoxide dismutase (SOD, EC 
1.15.1.9), catalase (CAT, EC 1.11.1.6), ascorbate peroxidase (APX, EC 1.11.1.11), and guaiacol 
peroxidase are antioxidant enzymes that protect plants from oxidative damage (GPX, EC 
1.11.1.9). The SOD enzyme is the first line of defense against O2•- radical production (Gill 
and Tuteja, 2010), since it transforms and eliminates radical O2•- to H2O2 (Muradoglu et al., 
2015). However, because H2O2 is poisonous to cells, it must be removed from them. H2O2
is converted to water and oxygen by the enzymes involved in this process (CAT, APX, and 
GPX). The antioxidant systems and the ROS concentration must be in equilibrium. This will 
assist the cellular metabolic process in maintaining a stable condition (Halliwell, 2006). The 
TABLE 1 List of plants that show tolerance toward water pollution.
Botanical name (family) Local name Habit
Oxalis corniculata (Oxalidaceae) Amrul, Tinpatta Marginal
Oldenlandia corymbosa (Rubiaceae) Khetpapra Marginal
Hygrophila auriculata (Acanthaceae) Kullikhara Marginal
Alternanthera sessilis (Amaranthaceae) Gurundi Marginal
Ranunculus scleratus (Ranunculaceae) Jaldhania Marginal
Ammannia baccifera (Lythraceae) Dadmari Marginal
Spillanthes acmella (Asteraceae) Akarkara Marginal
Eclipta prostrate (Asteraceae) Bhingraj Marginal
Rumex dentatus (Polygonaceae) Jangli palak Marginal
Ipomea aquatica (Convolvulaceae) Kalmisag Immersed
Nymphoides indicum (Menyanthaceae) Kumudni Immersed
Centella asiatica (Apiaceae) Thankuni, Gotakola Immersed
Ludwigia adscendens (Onagraceae) Labangi Immersed
Utricularia aurea (Lentibulariaceae) Jhangi Submerged
Eichhornia crassipes (Pontederiaceae) Jalkumbhi Floating
Marselia quadrifolia (Marseliaceae) Susni saag Marginal260 13. Plant responses to water pollution
involvement of antioxidant metabolism in Azolla caroliniana wild’s phytoremediation of 
arsenic-contaminated water. Leão et al. (2017) contributed an intriguing chapter in which he 
demonstrated the significance of the Azolla plant and the concomitant antioxidant metabolic 
pathway in arsenic-contaminated water. It was shown that the activities of antioxidant en￾zymes such as superoxide dismutase, peroxidases, catalases, and glutathione reductase are 
associated with concentrations of heavy metals, with inactivity persisting at greater concen￾trations. As a result, water pollutants have a direct impact on plant tolerance by modifying 
the antioxidant system. On the other hand, metabolic pathways are likewise vulnerable to 
pollutants’ stress concentrations.
Systemic signaling pathways, such as ROS (reactive oxygen species) in biological systems 
(Mittler et al., 2011) along withcalcium waves (Toyota et al., 2018), electric signals (Nguyen 
et al., 2018), or hydraulic waves (Christmann et al., 2013), are activated in response to various 
contaminants. The rapid response mechanism is controlled by ABA (abscisic acid) and ROS 
waves. Another assay to detect an early reaction to a metabolic problem caused by pollution is 
stomatal movement (Kangasjarvi et al., 2009). The glutamate receptor (GLR)-like proteins trig￾ger an early surge in Ca2 + wave as a result of abiotic stress (Toyota et al., 2018; Nguyen et al., 
2018). Micro RNAs and gene expression for membrane transporters are induced by metal con￾tamination (Memon, 2016). At least in Brassica juncea L., metal accumulation enhances shoot 
biomass (Cevher-Keskin et al., 2019; Dalyan et al., 2017). Metal absorption, transport, seques￾tration, and storage in specialized organelles are all performed by 155 proteins in plants. They 
are also necessary for plant cell metal homeostasis (Memon, 2016). Natural resistant-associated 
macrophage protein (NRAMP), ZRT/RT-like protein (ZIP), cation diffusion facilitator (CDF) 
transporters, yellow stripe-like (YSL) proteins, and P1B-type heavy metal ATPases are the six 
main categories of metal transporters (Memon, 2016); Bastow et al., 2018).
Brassica napus genome contains 22 NRAMP transporter genes, which are divided into six 
subfamilies based on sequence identity. RNA-seq analysis verified that 19 NRAMP trans￾porters and 10 NRAMP genes were differently expressed during Cd exposure (Meng, 2017). 
RNA sequencing was used to confirm the majority of the ABC genes. Of the 132 genes that 
were differently expressed, 84 genes were substantially expressed by the Cd stress impact 
(Gong et al., 2017). The plant cannot absorb too much nitrate as fertilizer, resulting in stunted 
development. Natural water with a little phosphate concentration enhances algal density 
and promotes the growth of many aquatic plants. This event causes eutrophication of the 
aquatic ecosystem. On the other hand, the common occurrence of chloride, bromide, and 
fluoride in water results in salinity which limits the uptake of water by the plant. In maize, 
the height of the seedling, the size of the leaf, root/shoot height, chlorophyll synthesis, and 
photosynthetic rate decreased by their presence which is indicated by the increased con￾centration of superoxide dismutase, peroxidase, and catalase. Organic pollutants like ox￾ygen demanding and synthetic salts in municipal sewage, food processing units, canning 
industries, domestic outlets, paper and pulp industries, butcheries, breweries, tanneries, 
distilleries, synthetic detergents, synthetic pesticides, food additives, insecticides, pharma￾ceuticals, paints, plastics, synthetic fibers, volatile organic compounds (VOCs) and solvents, 
cosmetics, dyes, Persistent organic pollutants (POPs), petroleum organic pollutants, contain￾ing polychlorinated dibenzo-pdioxins, polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), organochlorine 
pesticides (OCPs), perfluorooctanoate (PFOA), dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethanes (DDTs) 
and hexachlorocyclohexanes (HCHs) lindane or polybrominated diphenyl ethers (PBDEs) References 261
and perfluorooctane sulfonate (PFOS), DDT, and dicofo-containing antifouling paints indus￾try are water-soluble toxic chemicals which reduce the quality of the agricultural product 
like grains, fruits, and vegetables and primary metabolic process of aquatic plants. Colored 
papers, towels used in wiping body, and cooking leach color in water which damages the 
domestic garden plants (Madhav et al., 2020).
Prosposito et al. (2020) invented a nanoparticle-based chemosensor for the colorimetric es￾timation of water pollutants especially Ni(II), Hg(II), Cu(II), Mn(II), Fe(III), Cr(III/V), Cd(II), 
Co(II), Pb(II), and other trace elements. Heavy metal contamination incites the synthesis of 
secondary metabolites and detoxification pathways (Lajayer et al., 2017). In response to both 
domestic and industrial wastewater, low-molecular-weight peptides (0.5–3.0kDa) are syn￾thesized in plants. These plant peptides are characterized through Mass spectrometry and 
HPLC. Those bioactive peptides are expressed within the range of 1000 to 3000Da and bear 
secondary structure (Bhattacharya et al., 2014; Kar et al., 2017).
4. Concluding remarks
It is a very concerning area of knowledge about water pollution and its effect on plants. 
Water contaminants with natural inorganic and organic pollutants enhance metabolic disor￾ders with simultaneous changes in morphology and anatomy of the plants. In this chapter, 
the impact of wastewater and induced changes on secondary metabolites are discussed based 
on interesting data from recent reviewers. A different aquatic plant shows sensitivity to water 
pollutants. A plant’s tolerance to water pollutants is initiated through the synthesis of several 
transporter molecules or signaling systems and targeted genes are expressed. Low-molecular￾weight peptides (0.5–3.0kDa) are also reported in response to wastewater which inhibits seed 
germination (Bhattacharya et al., 2014; Kar et al., 2017; Singh et al., 2021). Wastewater with 
toxic pollutants may inhibit the growth and development of plants but within the limit of the 
concentration, it is a good fertilizer.
In the future, extensive research work on the plant metabolites, especially the low￾molecular-weight range will answer the stress tolerance system of the plant. The inhib￾itory effect of pesticides, personal care products, medical garbage, paints, and change in 
the natural compounds through different water sources on food, medicinal, aquatic, and 
common plant systems, as well as ecological perspectives, will be the future study of in￾terest (Matich et al., 2019).
References
Alam, M.K., Negishi, J.N., Mirza, A.T.M., Rahman, T., Tolod, J.R., 2020. Stable isotope ratios of emergent adult aquatic 
insects can be used as indicators of water pollution in the hyporheic food web. Ecol. Indic. 118, 106738.
Al-Zurfi, S.K.L., Alisaw, A., Aflog Al-Shafai, G.A., 2018. Anatomical and physiological effects of cadmium in aquatic 
plant Hydrilla verticillata. Plant Arch. 18 (1), 839–846.
Awaleh, M.S., Soubaneh, Y.D., 2014. Waste water treatment in chemical industries: the concept and current technol￾ogies. Hydrol. Curr. Res. 5, 1.
Bastow, E.L., Vanesa, S., de la Torre, G., Maclean, A.E., Green, R.T., Merlot, S., Thomine, S., Balk, J., 2018. Vacuolar 
Iron stores gated by NRAMP3 and NRAMP4 are the primary source of Iron in germinating seeds. Plant Physiol. 
177 (3), 1267–1276. https://doi.org/10.1104/pp.18.00478.262 13. Plant responses to water pollution
Batchelder, A.R., 1982. Chlortetracycline and Oxytetracycline effects on plant growth and development in soil sys￾tem. J. Environ. Qual. https://doi.org/10.2134/jeq1982.00472425001100040023x.
Bhattacharya, P., Ghosh, A., Kazi, H., 2014. Effect of city drain water on low molecular weight peptide profile (0.5-
3.0Kda) in relation to germination and antioxidant parameters of common edible seeds. Ind. J. Mul. Acad. Res. 1, 
9–16.
Bonanno, G., Luigi Cirelli, G., Toscano, A., Lo Giudice, R. and Pavone, P. 2013. Heavy metal content in ash of en￾ergy crops growing in sewage-contaminated natural wetlands: potential applications in agriculture and forestry. 
Science of the Total environment., 452-453C, 349-354.
Brezonik, P.L., 1994. Chemical Kinetics and Process Dynamics in Aquatic Systems. Lewis-CRC Press, Boca Raton, 
Florida. 754 pp.
Cevher-Keskin, B., Yıldızhan, Y., Yüksel, B., Dalyan, E., Memon, A.R., 2019. Characterization of differentially ex￾pressed genes to Cu stress in Brassica nigra by Arabidopsis genome arrays. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 26 (1), 299–311.
Christmann, A., Grill, E., Huang, J., 2013. Hydraulic signals in long-distance signaling. Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 16, 
293–300.
Dalyan, E., Yüzbaşıoğlu, E., Cevher Keskin, B., Yıldızhan, Y., Memon, A., Ünal, M., Yüksel, B., 2017. The identification 
of genes associated with Pb and Cd response mechanism in Brassica juncea L. by using Arabidopsis expression 
array. Environ. Exp. Bot. 139, 105–115.
Eid, M.E., Gala, T.M., Sewelam, N.A., Talha, N.I. and Abdallah, S.M. 2020. Phytoremediation of heavy metals by four 
aquatic macrophytes and their potential use as a contamination indicators: a comparative assessment. Environ. 
Sci. Pollut. Res., https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-020-07839-9 (Google Scholar).
Foster, S.D., Hirata, R., Gomes, D., D’Elia, M., Paris, M., 2003. Groundwater Quality Protection: A Guide for Water 
Utilities, Municipal Authorities, and Environment Agencies. The World Bank, Washington, DC.
Gill, S.S., Tuteja, N., 2010. Reactive oxygen species and antioxidant machinery induce abiotic stress tolerance in crop 
plants. Plant Physiol. Biochem. 48, 909–930.
Gong, B., Nie, W., Yan, Y., Gao, Z., Shi, Q., 2017. Unravelling cadmium toxicity and nitric oxide induced tolerance in 
Cucumis sativus: insight into regulatory mechanisms using proteomics. J. Hazard. Mater. 336, 202–213.
Griboff, J., Horacek, M., Wunderlin, D.A., Monferran, M.V., 2018. Bioaccumulation and trophic transfer of metals, As 
and Se through a freshwater food web affected by antrophic pollution in Córdoba, Argentina. Ecotoxicol. Environ. 
Saf. 148, 275–284.
Halliwell, B., 2006. Reactive species and antioxidants. Redox biology is a fundamental theme of aerobic life. Plant 
Physiol. 141, 312–322.
Jiménez, B., 2009. Coming to terms with nature: Water reuse new paradigm towards integrated water resources 
management. In: Encyclopedia of Biological, Physiological and Health Sciences, Water and Health. 2: Life Support 
System. EOLSS Publishers/UNESCO, Oxford, pp. 398–428.
Kangasjarvi, S., Nurmi, M., Tikkanen, M., 2009. Cell-specific mechanisms and systemic signalling as emerging 
themes in light acclimation of C3 plants. Plant Cell Environ. 32, 1230–1240.
Kar, S., Ghosh, A., Aitch, P., Bhandari, G., 2017. The assessment of morphological-biochemical changes and the bioac￾tivity of low molecular weight peptide(s) isolated from waste water treated mung bean (Vigna radiata). Plant Int. 
J. Eng. Sci. Math. 6 (6), 199–208.
Kumar, A., Choudhary, A., Kaur, H., Kumar, R., Sharma, R., Gautam, H., Mehta, S., 2022. Water pollution and medic￾inal plants: insights into the impact and adaptation responses. In: Husen, A. (Ed.), Environmental Pollution and 
Medicinal Plants. CRC Press, London, pp. 117–129. https://doi.org/10.1201/9781003178866-6.
Kumar, A., Choudhary, A., Kaur, H., Mehta, S., Husen, A., 2021. Metal-based nanoparticles, sensors, and their multi￾faceted application in food packaging. J. Nanobiotech. 19, 1–25.
Lajayer, B.A., Ghorbanpour, M., Nikabadi, S., 2017. Heavy metals in contaminated environment: Destiny of second￾ary metabolite biosynthesis, oxidative status and phytoextraction in medicinal plants. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 
145, 377–390.
Leão, G.A., de Oliveira, J.A., Felipe, R.T.A., Farnese, F.S., 2017. Phytoremediation of arsenic-contaminated water: the 
role of antioxidant metabolism of Azolla caroliniana Wild. (Salviniales). Acta Bot. Brasil. 31 (2), 161–168. https://
doi.org/10.1590/0102-33062016abb0407.
Leão, G.A., de Oliveira, J.A., Felipe, R.T.A., Farnese, F.S., Gusman, G.S., 2014. Anthocyanins, thiols, and antioxidant 
scavenging enzymes are involved in Lemna gibba tolerance to arsenic. J. Plant Interact. 9 (1), 143–151.
Liu, N., Wu, Z., 2018. Toxic effects of linear alkylbenzenesulfonate on Chara vulgaris L. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 25, 
4934–4941.Further reading 263
Madhav, S., Ahamad, A., Singh, A.K., Kushawaha, J., Singh Chauhan, J., Sharma, S., Singh, P., 2020. Water pollutants: 
sources and impact on the environment and human health. In: Pooja, D., et al. (Eds.), Sensors in Water Pollutants 
Monitoring: Role of Material, Advanced Functional Materials and Sensors. Abstract © Springer Nature Singapore 
Pte Ltd., https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-15-0671-0_4.
Mahmoud, E.K., Ghoneim, A.M., 2016. Effect of polluted water on soil and plant contamination by heavy metals in 
El-Mahla El-Kobra, Egypt. Solid Earth 7, 703–711. https://doi.org/10.5194/se-7-703-2016.
Matich, E.K., Nita, G., Chavez Soria, N.G., Aga, D.S., Atilla-Gokcumen, G.E., 2019. Applications of metabolomics in 
assessing ecological effects of emerging contaminants and pollutants on plants. J. Hazard. Mater. 373, 527–535.
Memon, A.R., 2016. Metal hyperaccumulators: mechanisms of hyperaccumulation and metal tolerance. 
Phytoremediation. Springer, Cham, pp. 239–268.
Meng, Q., 2017. The impacts of fracking on the environment: a total environmental study paradigm. Sci. Total 
Environ. 580, 953–957.
Mittler, R., Vanderauwera, S., Suzuki, N., GadMiller, Tognetti, V.B., Vandepoele, K., Gollery, M., Van Breusegem, F., 
2011. ROS signaling: the new wave. Trends Plant Sci. 13, 300–309.
Muradoglu, F., Gundogdu, M., Ercisli, S., Enuc, T., Balta, F., Jaafar, H.Z.E., 2015. Cadmium toxicity affects chlorophyll 
a and b content, antioxidant enzyme activities and mineral nutrient accumulation in strawberry. Biol. Res. 48, 11.
Nguyen, C.T., Kurenda, A., Stolz, S., Chételat, A., Farme, E.E., 2018. Identification of cell populations necessary for 
leaf-to-leaf electrical signaling in a wounded plant. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 115, 10178–10183.
Osakabe, Y., Osakabe, K., Shinozaki, K., Tran, L., 2014. Response of plants to water stress. Front. Plant Sci. https://
doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2014.00086.
Popa, P., Timofti, M., Voiculescu, M., Dragan, S., Trif, C., Lucian, P., Georgescu, L.P., 2012. Study of physico-chemical 
characteristics of wastewater in an urban agglomeration in Romania. Sci. World J. 2012, 1–10.
Prosposito, P., Burratti, L., Venditti, I., 2020. Silver nanoparticles as colorimetric sensors for water pollutants. Chem. 
Aust. 8 (2), 26. https://doi.org/10.3390/chemosensors8020026. www.mdpi.com/journal/chemosensors.
Singh, R.M., Gupta, A., 2017. Water pollution-sources, effects and control. Res. Gate. 5 (3), 1–17.
Singh, N., Bhuker, A., Jeevanadam, J., 2021. Effects of metal nanoparticle-mediated treatment on seed quality param￾eters of different crops. Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch. Pharmacol. 394 (6), 1067–1089.
Singh, A., Mehta, S., Yadav, S., Nagar, G., Ghosh, R., Roy, A., Chakraborty, A., Singh, I.K., 2022. How to cope with the 
challenges of environmental stresses in the era of global climate change: an update on ROS stave off in plants. Int. 
J. Mol. Sci. 23, 1995.
Toyota, M., Spencers, D., Toyota, A.S., Jiaqui, Z., Zhang, T., Howe, A.K., Gilroy, S., 2018. Glutamate triggers long￾distance, calcium-based plant defense signaling. Science 361, 1112–1115.
Upadhyay, A.R., Tripathi, B.D., 2007. Principle and process of biofiltration of Cd, Cr Co, Ni & Pb from tropical open￾cast coalmine effluent. Water Air Soil Pollut. 180 (1–4), 213–223.
Verla, A.W., Verla, E.N., Amaobi, C.E., Enyoh, C.E., 2018. Water pollution scenario at river Uramurukwa flowing 
through Owerri metropolis, Imo State, Nigeria. Int. J. Appl. Sci. Res. 3, 40–46.
Verma, R., Dwivedi, P., 2013. Heavy metal water pollution—a case study. Recent Res. Sci. Technol. 5 (5), 98–99.
Zhang, S., Feng, M., Chen, W., Zhou, X., Lu, J., Wang, Y., Li, Y., et al., 2019. In rose, transcription factor PTM balances 
growth and drought survival via PIP2; 1 aquaporin. Nat. Plants 5 (3), 290–299.
Zhang, T., Lu, Q., Su, C., Yang, Y., Hu, D., Xu, Q., 2017. Mercury induced oxidative stress, DNA damage, and activa￾tion of antioxidative system and Hsp70 induction in duckweed (Lemna minor). Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 143, 46–56.
Zhou, J., Wu, Z., Yu, D., Pang, Y., Cai, H., Liu, Y., 2018. Toxicity of linear alkylbenzene sulfonate to aquatic plant 
Potamogeton perfoliatus L. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 25, 32303–32311.
Further reading
Choudhury, F.K., Devireddy, A.R., Azad, R.K., Shulaev, V., Mittler, R., 2018. Rapid accumulation of glutathione 
during light stress in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell Physiol. 59, 1817–1826.
Foster, S., MacDonald, A., 2014. ‘Water security’ dialogue: why it needs to be better informed about groundwater. 
Hydrgeol. J. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10040-014-1157-6.
Hajihashemi, S., Mbarki, S., Skalicky, M., Noedoost, F., Raeisi, M., Brestic, M., 2020. Effect of wastewater irrigation 
on photosynthesis, growth, and anatomical features of two wheat cultivars (Triticum aestivum L.). Water 12, 607. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/w12020607. www.mdpi.com/journal/water.Suzuki, N., Devireddy, A.R., Inupakutika, M.A., Aaron, B., Miller, G., Song, L., Shulaev, E., Azad, R.K., Shulaev, V., 
Mittler, R., 2015. Ultra-fast alterations in mRNA levels uncover multiple players in light stress acclimation in 
plants. Plant J. 84, 760–772.
Verla, A.W., Verla, E.N., Enyoh, C.E., Leizou, K., Peter, N.O., 2019. Using physicochemical properties in assessment 
of river water for consumption and irrigation in Nigeria. Eurasian J. Anal. Chem. 5, 14–23.
World Health Organization and UNICEF, 2006. Meeting the MDG Drinking Water and Sanitation Target: The urban 
and rural challenge of the decade. pp. 1–47. https://www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/monitoring/jmpfi￾nal.pdf.
Zhang, R., Lu, C., Lee, J., Feng, Y., Chiu, Y., 2019. Dynamic environmental efficiency assessment of industrial water 
pollution. Sustainability 11 (11), 3053. https://doi.org/10.3390/su11113053.
 
264 13. Plant responses to water pollutionPlants and their Interaction to Environmental Pollution 265 Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-99978-6.00007-8
CHAPTER
14
Plant response to industrial waste
Sana Ashrafa
, Ayesha Anwarb
, Qasim Alic
, Azna Safdarb
, 
and Kehkashanb
a
College of Earth and Environmental Sciences, Quaid-e-Azam Campus, University of the Punjab, 
Lahore, Pakistan, b
Institute of Soil and Environmental Sciences, University of Agriculture, 
Faisalabad, Pakistan, c
Department of Soil Sciences, Faculty of Agriculture and Environment, 
The Islamia University of Bahawalpur, Bahawalpur, Pakistan
1. Introduction
1.1 Industrial waste and their effects
The major issue that world is facing right now is the treatment of the wastes, chemicals, 
and polluted water which are released by the industries in high volume. Industrial solid 
wastes and by-products, metals, radioactive waste, chemical solvents, paints, surfactants, and 
paper products are some examples of industrial waste which are hazardous for the ecosys￾tem. There are some industries that have proper facilities for treatment of pollutants before 
their releases, but they are failed to manage the waste effectively. Improper disposal of all 
forms of industrial pollutants adversely affects the environment. Release of industrial waste 
containing various heavy metals and other compounds, into the environment affect the crop 
growth and yield in different ways. This effect can be beneficial or harmful depending upon 
the type and characteristics of plants. However, different elements accumulate in plants thus 
influence metabolic processes and pathways in affected plants. The nature and intensity of 
effects posed by a pollutant depends on its type. Pollutants can be organic, inorganic, metals, 
heavy metals, metalloids, nanoparticles, etc.
In addition, various contaminants present in untreated or partially treated wastewater 
are found to be harmful for plant and animal model organisms. Studies have shown that 
fauna and flora of areas near industries is destroyed by the industrial effluents. Consequently, 
these wastes not only pollute the water bodies but also the agricultural lands (Arjun, 2013). 
Industries discharge their effluents into the water bodies resulting in increased biochemical 
oxygen demand (BOD), chemical oxygen demand (COD), total suspended solid (SSD), and 
total dissolved solid (TDS), etc. due to the presence of a variety of inorganic and organic com￾pounds in effluents. Such water bodies are unsuitable for irrigation and drinking purposes. 266 14. Plant response to industrial waste
Reduced soil health, plant growth, and yield have been recorded when farmers irrigated the 
land using effluents (Nandy and Kaul, 1994). The elimination of toxic metals from biosphere 
is challenging because these metals cannot be degraded chemically or biologically. Pollutants 
releasing from different industries are interlinked and some types of industries and pollut￾ants discharged by them are shown in Fig. 1 (Abbas et al., 2015).
Discharge of untreated wastewater directly to aquatic system by the textile industries is 
a global dilemma which negatively affect the aquatic life. The global usage of organically 
bound chlorine containing colorants (carcinogenic in nature) is 40%. The aquatic fauna and 
flora are mainly disturbed by the textile dyes. These synthetic chemicals prevent the pene￾tration of light which ultimately reduce the photosynthetic activity in the water bodies. The 
synthetic dyes usually derived from coal tar and petroleum-based intermediates (Kant, 2012).
The sources of heavy metals are pesticides, fertilizers, pulp and paper, oil refinery, leather, 
electroplating, paints, pharmaceuticals, etc. The pulp and paper industry are the 6th most 
pollutant-producing industry in the world. It produces large number of hazardous pollutants 
during pulping and bleaching process (Uğurlu et al., 2008; Sharma et al., 2020). Even after 
secondary treatment, sludge and effluent of such industries contain > 250 known noxious 
chemicals and components such as fatty acids, sterols, resin acids, and metals (Ratia et al., 
2013). Accumulation of heavy metals cause biochemical and physiological disorders in plants 
(Fisher et al., 1981). Jadoon et al. (2013) examined the effects of industrial wastewater irriga￾tion on vegetable growth grown in district Faisalabad of Pakistan. The results showed that 
FIG. 1 Types of industries and most common elements released by them as pollutants. M: Metals; NM: Non-metal; 
IO: Inorganic; M/NPs: Metals/nanoparticles.1. Introduction 267
wastewater of various industries contained heavy metals such as Cr, Cd, Pb, zinc (Zn), copper 
(Cu), and nickel (Ni). These metals inhibited the water and nutrient uptake and ultimately 
plant growth and yield were also reduced.
With the increasing need of nanotechnology in industries, load of nanoparticles in the en￾vironment is also increasing (Rastogi et al., 2017). Some of the industries exhibiting intensive 
application of nanoparticles in their processes are paint, packaging, electronics, medicine, 
cosmetics, fabric, biobased, and auto industries (Dumont et al., 2015). Recently, some studies 
have confirmed the trophic transfer of various nanoparticles via aquatic or terrestrial food 
chain (Judy et al., 2012; Unrine et al., 2012; Hawthorne et al., 2014; De la Torre Roche et al., 
2015; Tangaa et al., 2016). Commonly used metal or metal oxide nanoparticles having wide 
applications in industries are silver, copper, aluminum, iron, nickel, titanium dioxide (TiO2), 
cerium dioxide, copper oxide, and zinc oxide (Rajput et al., 2018).
Wastewater contains a significant amount of nutrients such as Ca, N, P, and K (Niroula, 
2003). But demerits of using this water are more than the merits which reduce the plant 
growth and health including vegetable (Ramana et al., 2002; Saravanamoorthy and Kumari, 
2007). The effluents not only reduce the plant development rate and germination percentage 
but also deteriorate the human and environmental health. This also interferes the normal 
functioning of ecosystem existing in biosphere. Fig. 2 shows the effects of wastewater irri￾gation on soil and plant health. The discharge of contaminants in the body of plants also 
considered as pollution source (Uaboi-Egbenni et al., 2009). Industries plays important part in 
country’s progress so they cannot be terminated but the way industries releasing unhealthy 
chemicals in a large quantity also cannot be ignored (Ajmal et al., 1984). In the district of 
Rancaekek West Java, a study was performed in lowland rice area to examine the industrial 
Labile PTE in soil
solution
Treat of food
chain
contamination Affect plant
growth
Wastewater application
Absorption
Increases soil HM
contents
Modifies soil
Root activities
Root exudates
properties
PH, OM, CEC, texture, cations
Metal-oxides and clay particles
biological materials
Leaching to groundwater
Complexed or adsorbed
PTE in soil
FIG. 2 Effect of wastewater irrigation having potentially toxic elements (PTEs) on soil and plants.268 14. Plant response to industrial waste
pollution. The textile industry of this area released wastewater that was highly contaminated 
with heavy metals. The three rivers were being used for watering the fields of rice and all 
those rivers were polluted with industrial water resulting in contamination of nearly 720ha 
area. A high accumulation of Cd, Pb, and B was reported in three cities of Rancaekek dis￾trict through a soil survey by Agus et al. (2003). Reduction in soil productivity in these areas 
directly affected the income of farmers. The yield of rice was declined by 80% after 2 decades 
owing to soil contamination, with the decrease in initial yield from 4 to 6mt− 1ha to 1mt− 1ha. 
On the other hand, soil showed 18%–8% rise in heavy metals concentration when compared 
with normal soil. Therefore, it is mandatory to study the effects of effluents on plants prior to 
their use for irrigation (Thamizhiniyan et al., 2009).
2. Types of plants
Three basic growth strategies have been developed by plants in contaminated soil (Raskin 
et al., 1994) as discussed below.
2.1 Excluders
They limit the toxins in their roots by preventing entry of waste materials into their aerial 
parts or by restricting a small and constant amount of waste material in soil. These plants can 
modulate its cell membrane permeability, secrete chelating molecules in greater amount or 
the cell wall ability to bind the metals (Cunningham, 1995).
2.2 Indicators
Species which exhibit active accumulation of contaminants in their aerial tissues gener￾ally indicate the level of waste materials in the soil. They can tolerate the prevailing level of 
pollutants by synthesizing chelators or intracellular chemical compounds or by storing pol￾lutants in nonsensitive parts (compartmentalization). Some examples of indicators are given 
in Table 1.
2.3 Accumulator
These plants restrict the concentration of pollutants in their arial parts, to levels higher 
than soil. Plants having ability to accumulate contaminants in greater amounts in their body 
parts (root, shoot, or leaves) are known as hyperaccumulators. According to Baker and Brooks 
(1989), hyperaccumulators are plants that contain up to or more than 0.1% (> 1000mg/g) Cr, 
Pb, Cd, Ni, Co, Cu, or 1% (> 10,000mg/g) of Mn and Zn in the dry matter content. This 
percent concentration is > 0.01% by dry weight for cd and other rare metals. Researchers col￾lected the plants from highly contaminated soils and identified the hyperaccumulator plant 
species (Gleba et al., 1999). About 400 hyperaccumulator species have been identified from 
22 families. Many hyperaccumulators belong to Brassicaceae family with the widest range of 
metals, with 87 species from 11 genera (Baker and Brooks, 1989).2. Types of plants 269
Industrial activities by humans are major source of environmental pollution worldwide 
because industries generate solid, semisolid and liquid waste at large scale (Uzair et al., 2009). 
The dilemma of improper disposal or dumping of industrial waste into the land and water 
bodies has increased the proportion of pollutants including heavy metals in the environment 
(Dixit et al., 2015). Heavy metals from the affected soils enter plants via roots and contaminate 
the food chain as well. Consequently, heavy metals-containing soils are reducing the agricul￾tural productivity as well as food safety (Salt et al., 1995). Moreover, irrigation using indus￾trial wastewater resulted in accumulation of Pb in vegetables grown in Faisalabad region as 
reported by Rehman et al. (2013). Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has featured he 
heavy metals as high environmental-pollution causing agents. Phytoremediation can be an 
effective tool to remove pollutants from water (Hu et al., 2020). Metal absorption and trans￾location in plants are regulated by numerous molecules, ion transporters, and complexing 
agent. Channel membranes are vital for uptake of metallic ions from the ground (Yan et al., 
2020). During absorption, various other competing metallic ions are also absorbed by the 
roots (DalCorso et al., 2019) as recently reported by the Sharma et al. (2020) and Chandra et al. 
(2009, 2018) that weeds, crops, and native plants absorbed the heavy metals from organome￾tallic waste contaminated sites.
The composition, properties, reactivity, translocation, and penetration cany vary in dif￾ferent conditions which may result in variable responses of plant to the same nanoparticles. 
For instance, a difference between plan responses to capped and bare nanoparticles have 
been reported by Barrios et al. (2016). Some studies have reported the beneficial effects of 
nanoparticles (such as increase in growth and yield) whereas many studies showed the ad￾verse effects of nanoparticles on plants (Ruffini Castiglione et al., 2011; Dimkpa et al., 2013; 
Jiang et al., 2014; Raliya et al., 2015; Okupnik and Pflugmacher, 2016; Cvjetko et al., 2017; 
Tripathi et al., 2017).
TABLE 1 Ten classes of plant species against heavy metals like Cu, Cd, Zn, Ni, Pb, and Cr.
Plant species Accumulator Excluder Indicator References
Ludwigia stolonifera (Ghill. & 
Pers) Raven
Cd and Pb Elifantz and Tel-Or (2002)
Leersia hexandra SW. Pb and Ni Ogundiran and Osibanjo (2008)
Sphaeranthus gomphrenoides 
O. Hoffm
Ni and Cd Ogundiran and Osibanjo (2008)
Typha capensis Pers Cd Ni Ellis and Ellis (1994)
Cyperus articulatus L. Cd Zn Anoliefo et al. (2008)
Agave sisalana Perr. Cr Zn, Pb, and Ni Boyd et al. (1999)
Hoslundia opposita Vahl Cd, Pb, Cr Porebska and Ostrowska (1999)
Cyperus exaltatus L. Zn, Cd, and Ni Pb Elifantz and Tel-Or (2002)
Pluchea dioscoridis (L) DC Cr Cd and Ni Pb Elifantz and Tel-Or (2002)
Crinum papilosum L. Cd and Cr Ni Boyd et al. (1999)270 14. Plant response to industrial waste
3. Response of plant to industrial waste
3.1 Growth responses and metal tolerance index
Wastewater contains a significant amount of various nutrients and organic matter (e.g., 
Ca, Cu, Mn, S, Zn, N, P, and K) which can enhance the crop growth and yield (Niroula, 
2003; Kocak et al., 2005; Nath et al., 2009; Nagajyothi et al., 2009). For instance, it has been 
reported that wastewater from a distillery industry having inorganic and organic nutrients 
had positive effects on yield of crop (Pathak et al., 1999; Ramana et al., 2001). Hence, instead 
of spending money on fertilizers, farmers use industrial wastewater for irrigation. In con￾trary, different studies reveled the adverse effects of untreated wastewater on plants owing 
to its high pH and load of different harmful compounds especially heavy metals such as 
Cu, Cd, Ni, Cr, Pb, and Mn which can adversely affect crop growth and yield (Yadav et al., 
2002; Aslam et al., 2004). High concentration of heavy metals hampers the normal meta￾bolic and physiological functioning in plants (Ahmad et al., 2011). In Pakistan, application 
of municipal and industrial wastewater is common practice (Ullah et al., 2012). Studies have 
reported contradictory results regarding effects of wastewater irrigation. Uzma et al. (2016)
conducted a study to evaluate the growth responses of four vegetables (Cucumis sativus, 
Lactuca sativa, Hibiscus esculentus, and Cucumis melo) to application of wastewater from two 
industries (match alam and marble industry). The results revealed that effluent from mar￾ble industry caused negligible inhibition of seed germination in H. esculentus. In contrary, 
wastewater from match alam industry had no effect on seed germination of L. sativa and H. 
esculentus but increased seed germination in C. sativus and C. melo. Moreover, wastewater 
decreased the shoot and root length in C. sativus but increased these parameters in C. melo, 
H. esculentus, and L. sativa. Hussain et al. (2010) observed adverse effects of tannery indus￾try’s effluent on carbohydrate, protein, chlorophyll contents, germination, and growth rate 
of sunflower. In Chrysanthemum, lower concentration of effluent from tannery industry 
increased the seed germination and seedling growth (Singh et al., 2011). Similarly, Murugan 
(2010) reported higher germination and seedling growth when compared with control at 
lower concentration of effluent from textile mill, however, high concentration of effluent 
negatively affected the germination and growth. Moreover, Gvozdenac and Inđić (2012) re￾ported inhibited germination and root elongation in cucumber, maize, and barley irrigated 
with Cr-contaminated industrial wastewater.
The analyses of the treated industrial wastewaters, sampled in the summer and in the win￾ter, showed diverse arrays of contaminants that may elicit different toxicity mechanisms. The 
treated industrial wastewaters contained different amounts of HM, nitrogenous and phos￾phorus compounds, surfactants, and hydrocarbons (Basiglini et al., 2018).
The efficient removal of pollutants from wastewater is influenced by pollutant type 
and its properties as well as efficacy of treatment plants. Occasionally, hazardous sub￾stances are not completely removed during wastewater treatment (Boari et al., 1997). The 
concentration of pollutants in treated industrial wastewater also vary with the seasonal 
temperature.
Disposal or storage of fly ash from coal-based industries is a global issue (Pandey, 2013) 
because fly ash comprises of noxious metals (Haynes, 2009; Kisku et al., 2018). In an in situ 3. Response of plant to industrial waste 271
experiment, growth parameters of castor (Ricinus communis L.) were evaluated under differ￾ent concentration of fly ash as amendment. Significant inhibition of castor growth under bare 
fly ash was observed when compared with other treatments. In addition, higher plant growth 
was recorded under 50% fly ash over other treatments. A significant increase of 37% in plant 
biomass was recorded under fly ash-containing soil over garden soil while 80% reduction in 
biomass was recorded under bare fly ash (Panda et al., 2020). This decrease might be due to 
high concentration of toxic metals and low amount of essential nutrients and minerals (Verma 
et al., 2014).
In contrary, under 25% fly ash, plant biomass, root, shoot, metal tolerance index, and other 
growth parameters were increased when compared with plants grown on garden soil but 
subsequently these parameters were decreased gradually at 50%, 75%, and 100% (Panda 
et al., 2018a). This might be due to poor development of roots and subsequently poor water 
and nutrients uptake caused by metal toxicity (Boonyapookana et al., 2005). Low concentra￾tion of fly ash did not induce oxidative stress in plants while elevated concentration of fly ash 
can disturb cell membrane structure and metabolic processes as reported in Triticum aestivum, 
Salix integra, and Oryza nivara (Zhang et al., 2010; Wang et al., 2014; Bisoi et al., 2017). The 
higher levels of Cu, Zn, Cr, Mn, Fe, and Al in R. communis were found under 50% fly ash used 
as soil amendment. Except Fe, level of remaining heavy metals was higher in roots when 
compared with shoots (Panda et al., 2020). Similar results were reported by Pandey (2013)
who conducted in situ study to investigate the availability of metals in R. communis under fly 
ash pond.
Numerous studies have documented the negative effects of nanoparticles on plants such 
as decreased pigments, growth and yield (Landa et al., 2016; Tripathi et al., 2017). In con￾trary, nanoparticles designed through advance techniques are still used for improving the 
agricultural productivity in the form of nanopesticides, growth stimulators, nanofertilizers, 
indicators of various agricultural parameters, and soil improving agents (Fraceto et al., 2016; 
Wang et al., 2016).
3.2 Physiological responses
Numerous studies have reported the physiological disorders prior to visible symptoms 
in plants grown under polluted environment (Begum and Harikrishna, 2010). The sewage 
water of Arab El-Madabegh and wastewater from two industries, namely Bani Qura (oils and 
detergents) and Manquabad (fertilizer) were assessed for their physiochemical and phyto￾toxic properties. The wastewater from three different sources showed phytotoxic effects on 
sunflower. The transpiration was slow in wastewater-treated plants compared with control 
(Gadallah, 1996).
A comparative study on physiological and antioxidant response of Origanum vulgare L. and 
Ocimum basilicum L. grown on industrially polluted soil revealed that plants accumulated the 
Cd in roots of both plants while Pb accumulated only in shoots of oregano. The leaf blade 
thickness was also increased in both plants. Basil plant showed increase in gaseous exchange, 
transpiration, and stomal conductivity but decrease in water-use efficiency. In oregano plants, 
transpiration and gas exchange were declined but water-use efficiency and stomatal conduc￾tivity was increased (Stancheva et al., 2014).272 14. Plant response to industrial waste
Inhibition of photosynthesis by toxic metals from ash can occur at various physiological 
levels: structure, pigments, chloroplast function, and gas exchange (Reid et al., 2004; Guidi 
et al., 2011; Gajić et al., 2013). R. communis undergo inhibited photosynthesis caused by high 
amount of fly ash. Photosynthetic inhibition might be due to inhibition of stomatal conduc￾tance, impaired photosystem (PS) II activity, and deficiency of chlorophyll pigments (Panda 
et al., 2020) as reported earlier (Guidi et al., 2011; Panda et al., 2018b). Nevertheless, PS II 
activity, stomatal conductance, and leaf photosynthetic rate were not affected in lemongrass 
(Cymbopogon citratus (D.C.) Stapf.) under 25% fly ash-containing soil over garden soil. With 
increasing level of fly ash, these parameters were also reduced (Panda et al., 2018a) Under 
high level of fly ash, significant reduction in lemongrass may be caused by high concentra￾tion of metallic ions or loss of Chl stimulated by oxidative stress (Mathur et al., 2016; Bisoi 
et al., 2017).
Moreover, Different studies have confirmed the influence of nanoparticles on the pho￾tosynthetic pigments (Qian et al., 2013; Perreault et al., 2014; Tripathi et al., 2017). Effects of 
AgNp on physiological parameters of plants have been observed in the form of decreased 
chlorophyll concentration (Mirzajani et al., 2013; Qian et al., 2013; Tripathi et al., 2017), fluo￾rescence (Tripathi et al., 2017), and transpiration (Hawthorne et al., 2012).
When two different varieties of H. annuus (Phule Bhaskar (PBH) and DRSF-108) were 
grown on normal and heavy metal-containing soil collected from industrial areas, enzymatic 
activity as well as proline and polyphenol contents were increased in plantlets and enabled 
them to survive the metal stress. PBH variety accumulated high concentration of heavy met￾als compared with DRSF-108 which might be due to high antioxidant activity and contents 
organic compounds. The study concluded that contaminated soil had negative effects on 
H. annuus growth parameters (Chauhan and Mathur, 2020).
The concentration of arsenic (As) in fly ash can ranged from 2 to 1000mgkg− 1
 and greatly 
depends upon parent coal and combustion process. In acidic fly ash, estimated average value 
of As can vary from 7.4 to 25.0mgkg− 1
, while mean value of As in alkali fly ash is in the 
range of 56.0–89.0mgkg− 1
 (Pandey et al., 2011). In Dactylis glomerata L. grown under As stress 
caused by fly ash deposits, the results of Chl a fluorescence and pigments response to As 
stress revealed lower values of maximal (Fm) and variable (Fv) fluorescence as well as pho￾tosynthetic efficiency (Fv/Fm) (Gajić et al., 2020). Lower values of photosynthetic efficiency 
were also observed in different trees, shrubs and herbaceous plants grown on fly ash deposits 
i.e., Robinia pseudoaccacia, Populus alba, Tamarix tetandra, Spiraea van-houttei, Amorpha fruticosa
(Pavlović et al., 2004; Kostić et al., 2012), Cirsium arvense, Crepis bienis, Festuca rubra, Verbascum 
phlomoides, Oenothera biennis, Eupatorium cannabinum, and Calamagrostis epigejos (Mitrović
et al., 2008; Gajić et al., 2016). As negatively affected the carotenoids and chlorophyll con￾tents in Avena sativa (Stoeva and Bineva, 2003), Nostoc muscorum (Patel et al., 2018), Zea mays
(Morales and Munné-Bosch, 2019), F. rubra (Gajić et al., 2016), Oryza sativa (Rahman et al., 
2007), Lemna gibba (Leão et al., 2014), Sesuvium portulacastrum (Lokhande et al., 2013), Pistia 
stratoides (Farnese et al., 2014), and Hydrilla verticillata (Srivastava et al., 2013). However, As 
stress did not affected the concentration of photopigments in L. sativa (Gusman et al., 2013). 
The content of Chl a, b, the ratio of Chl a/b and Chl a+b, content of total anthocyanins and 
carotenoids were substantially decreased in D. glomerata when grown on fly ash site than at 
the control site (Gajić et al., 2020).3. Response of plant to industrial waste 273
3.3 Biochemical responses
Different pollutants can stimulate production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in plants 
thus causing imbalance between scavenging and ROS production (Mittler, 2002). This 
imbalance also disturbs the plant physiology. Illustration of negative effects of ROS on plants 
is shown in Fig. 3. Plants combat this stress via producing of antioxidant molecules or increas￾ing antioxidant enzyme activities (Emamverdian et al., 2015) as shown in Table 2. Numerous 
studies have documented the important role of antioxidant enzymes in plants under ROS 
stress (De Pinto et al., 2015; Bernard et al., 2015). Phenolics act as antioxidant molecule in 
plants and play a defensive role, along with other scavenger enzymes and antioxidant mol￾ecules, against oxidative stress. When duckweed was grown in Hoagland medium (control) 
and treated industrial wastewater for seven days in winter and summer, Basiglini et al. (2018)
found 24% increase in phenolics content in treated plants in winter (when the load of pollut￾ants was higher in wastewater) compared with control. In contrary, phenolics content rem￾ined lower in summer.
Plants have different nonenzymatic and enzymatic antioxidative mechanisms to coun￾teract the high level of ROS (Procházková and Wilhelmová, 2010). Increased synthesis of 
antioxidants to improve antioxidant activity indicates exposure to suboptimal conditions. 
Aromatic plants contains high level of phenolic antioxidant compounds; their antioxidant 
activity is attributed to chemical structure and redox properties, which can play a crucial Oxidative stress signals Oxidative stress Generation of ROS ROS
Imbalance in stressed plants
Growth
reduction
and yield
loss
Programmed
cell death
Cellular
damage
Molecular
damage
O2
O2
•-
H2O2
•
OH
1O2
AOX
FIG. 3 Illustration of negative effects of ROS on stressed plants.274 14. Plant response to industrial waste
TABLE 2 Antioxidant response of different plant species to heavy metals stress.
Heavy 
metals Plant species
Antioxidant 
enzymes (enzymatic 
or nonenzymatic) Response (increase or decrease) References
Cr Helianthus 
annus and 
Solanum 
nigrum
SOD, GSH 
(glutathione), and 
CAT
The antioxidant activity of sunflower was 
decreased with increasing Cr concentration 
in soil. Cat, SOD, and GSH activity was 
increased with increasing heavy metal 
concentration in soil
Vijayalakshmi 
et al. (2010)
Cu, Fe, Cr, 
Zn, and Cd
C. arietinum POD and CAT Activity of antioxidants increased in fly ash 
amended soils. Roots of chickpea contained 
higher level of antioxidants than shoots
Pandey et al. 
(2010)
Cd Nicotiana 
tobacum
GPOD and SOD Under Cd stress, GPOD concentration 
increased in older and younger leaves. 
Increase in SOD level was higher in older 
leaves than in younger leaves
Martins et al. 
(2011)
Cu, Pb, and 
Zn
Euplotes 
crassus
Antioxidant enzyme 
coding genes 
(Ec-GPx, Ec-GST￾thetaand Ec-GR) 
GST (glutathione-S￾transferase)
Pb significantly decreased the expression of 
Ec-GPx, Ec-GST-theta, and Ec-GR, whereas 
on exposure of Zn and Cu expression of all 
the genes increased significantly
Kim et al. 
(2012)
Cd Erica and 
evalensis
Phenolic compounds Phenolic contents were increased in all 
treatments under Cd stress
Márquez￾García et al. 
(2012)
Zn, Pb, Cd, 
and Cu
Pisum sativum CAT, SOD, and GR Oxidative stress caused by heavy metals 
enhanced the antioxidant activities in pea 
plant roots
Malecka et al. 
(2012)
Cd, Pb and 
Cr
Cicer arietinum
L., Brassica 
juncea
Proline Low concentration of proline in chickpea 
and high concentration of proline in B. 
juncea was observed
Junaid et al. 
(2013)
Zn, Cd, Ni, 
Cu, Pb
Vicia faba Guaiacol peroxidase 
(POD), Proline, and 
CAT
Proline and Guaiacol peroxidase content 
increased in stem and leaves of plants under 
all treatments. Higher CAT contents were 
found in stem than leaves
Nadgórska￾Socha et al. 
(2013)
Zn, Cd, and 
Pb
Vaccinium 
myrtillus L.
POD, Nonprotein 
thiols, Proline, 
Glutathione
Zn, Pb and Cd toxicity resulted in decreased 
POD activity. Decreased glutathione 
contents were recorded with the increase 
in Mn and Fe concentration in blueberry 
leaves
Kandziora￾Ciupa et al. 
(2013)
Pb, Cr, Cd Jatropha curcas
L.
CAT, SOD, 
phenylalanine 
ammonia lyase 
(PAL), polyphenol 
oxidase (PPO), and 
peroxidase (POD)
CAT, SOD and POD activity increased in 
stem and roots. High concentration of PAL 
activity was observed in roots over stem 
and leaves under Pb and Cd. Pb, Cd, and Cr 
stimulated the PPO activity in roots when 
compared with stem and leaves.
Devi 
Chinmayee 
et al. (2014)3. Response of plant to industrial waste 275
role neutralizing the effects of single and triplet oxygen, free radicals, and peroxides 
(Zheng and Wang, 2001). Excessive concentration of heavy metals in soil contaminated 
by industrial waste is absorbed by plants which ultimately restrict the seed germination 
and root and shoot development. This situation leads to wilting, chlorosis, decreased pro￾tein and chlorophyll content, enzymatic, and photosynthetic activities (Kalaivanan and 
Ganeshamurthy, 2016).
Various studies revealed that when plants are exposed to the heavy metals, activity of 
antioxidant enzymes is usually increased. For instance, Alternanthera philoxeroide (L.) and 
Eclipta alba (L.) showed enhanced activity of antioxidant enzymes when grown on heavy 
metals containing sludge and effluent od pulp and paper industry (Sharma et al., 2021).
The results showed that Cys contents of shoots, roots, and leaves of both plants were also 
increased (78.01%–88.07%). Cys is an amino acid which contains –SH group and is a key 
component of phytochelatin, thus plays a vital role in detoxification of metals. In addition, 
TABLE 2 Antioxidant response of different plant species to heavy metals stress—cont’d
Heavy 
metals Plant species
Antioxidant 
enzymes (enzymatic 
or nonenzymatic) Response (increase or decrease) References
Cd, As and 
Pb
Shorea robusta Polyphenols and 
ascorbic acid
Heavy metal accumulation in plants 
resulted in increased ascorbic acid and 
polyphenols accumulation
Pant and 
Tripathi (2014)
Zn, Fe, Mn 
and Cu
Calendula 
officinalis L.
Polyphenols and 
flavonoids
Except Fe, concentration of heavy metals 
decreased owing to high level of phenolic 
compounds and antioxidant activity
Veličković
et al. (2014)
Zn, Cu and 
Pb
Nephrolepis 
biserrata
CAT, APX, and SO APx and Catalase activity was higher in 
contaminated soil. SOD activity was same 
in both normal and contaminated soil
Manan et al. 
(2015)
Fe, Mn, Zn, 
Pb, and Cd
Pinus sylvestris
L.
GPX (glutathione 
peroxidase)
Under Mn stress, GPX activity stimulated 
but glutathione level was decreased
Kandziora￾Ciupa et al. 
(2016)
Cu, Fe, Zn, 
and Mn
Forage grasses SOD, CAT, APX, and 
GPX (glutathione 
peroxidase)
Enzyme activity decreased owing to heavy 
metal stress
Rabêlo and 
Borgo (2016)
Cu Solanum 
lycopersicum
Ascorbate peroxidase 
(APX) and CAT
Increased APX and catalase activity 
was recorded in shoots but decreased in 
domestic species
Branco‐Neves 
et al. (2017)
Cu, Cd, and 
Pb
S. lycopersicum POD, APX, and SOD Increased APX and SOD activity in roots 
and leaves of tomato plants under Cd stress 
was recorded but their activity was reduced 
under Cu stress. POD activity was reduced 
under heavy metal stress
Dursun (2018)
Ni, Zn, Cu Ocimum 
basilicum L.
SOD, APX, CAT, 
and NR (Nitrate 
reductase), FRAP
In FRAP, the antioxidant activity decreased 
with increasing heavy metals. Down 
regulation of enzymes under heavy metal 
treatment
Georgiadou 
et al. (2018)276 14. Plant response to industrial waste
maximum ascorbic acid accumulation was recorded in E. alba and A. philoxeroide, i.e., 53% and 
67% compared with control. Enhanced antioxidant activity was also recorded in stem and 
leaves (Sharma et al., 2021).
Stancheva et al. (2014) reported enhanced CAT levels in response to high concentration of 
H2O2 in O. vulgare and O. basilicum grown on industrially contaminated soil. Moreover, accu￾mulation of GSH, flavonoids, and phenols was also observed in aboveground parts of basil 
plants. Antioxidant capacity of both plants was also improved but higher in basil plants. In 
oregano, ascorbate, oregano, and glutathione contents were increased. In both plants, DHAR 
and MDHAR were decreased while enzymatic activity was increased especially quaiacol per￾oxidase, glutathione reductase, glutathione peroxidase, and glutathione S-transferase. The 
reduced ratio for ascorbate/H2O2, ascorbate/dehydroascorbate, and glutathione/oxidized 
glutathione increased in aboveground parts of treated oregano plants indicating the effective￾ness of glutathione cycle (Stancheva et al., 2014).
In R. communis grown under fly ash, improved antioxidant enzymes activity enabled the 
plants to survive the heavy metals stress. An increase of SOD, APX, GPX, and CAT activities 
were also observed. Th activity of GPX, APX and SOD was higher in leaves followed by stem 
and root tissues. However, CAT activity was maximum in roots. This higher enzymatic activity 
can be considered as plant’s response to oxidative stress induced by metals (Panda et al., 2020). 
Gajić et al. (2020) reported higher content of ascorbic acid and phenolics (bound, free, and total) 
in roots and leaves of D. glomerata grown on fly ash deposits when compared with control plants.
Increased antioxidant enzyme activity such as ascorbate peroxidase, superoxide dis￾mutase, and guaiacol peroxidase compared with control was recorded in lemongrass when 
treated different levels of fly ash (Panda et al., 2018a). Similarly, induction of malondialde￾hyde (MDA) was found in R. communis tissues (Panda et al., 2020) and leaves of D. glomerata
(Gajić et al., 2020) when grown on fly ash. MDA is produced during lipid peroxidation and 
help in quantification of membrane damage due to oxidative stress (Panda, 2007).
The waste from smelters and metal mines is highly toxic and consist of post floatation 
sediments and mining sludge. Such waste is rich in metalloids and heavy metals and highly 
toxic for ecosystem. When mining sludge (exhibiting high salinity level, pH and As concen￾tration) was used as growth medium for two years old Tilia cordata Mill and Acer platanoides
L., biosynthesis of phenolic compounds was enhanced in both plants especially in T. cordata. 
Moreover, A. platanoides showed higher contents of organic ligands (low molecular weight 
organic acids and glutathione) (Drzewiecka et al., 2019).
4. Conclusion
The increasing industrialization with increased waste generation rate indicating a global 
environmental challenge. Industrial wastes containing hazardous inorganic and organic pol￾lutants are major source of soil contamination. Improper handling and disposal of industrial 
waste in soil alter the natural physicochemical properties of soil making it unsuitable for the 
agriculture. The accumulation of these pollutants in biosphere disturbs the balance among 
various levels of the ecosystem. Plants response as excluder, indicator, or accumulator toward 
soil contaminants and can tolerate the stresses posed by toxic contaminants via various mecha￾nisms. Increasing public concern regarding such pollutants released form industries demands 
the implementation of strict policies to maintain the sustainability of natural ecosystem.References 277
References
Abbas, M.A., Iftikhar, H., Gul, A., 2015. Effect of industrial pollution on crop productivity. In: Crop Production and 
Global Environmental Issues. Springer, Cham, pp. 123–151.
Agus, F., Watung, R.L., Suganda, H., Tala’ohu, S.H., Wahyunto, S.S., Setiyanto, A., Mayrowani, H., Nurmanaf, A.R., 
Kundarto, K., 2003. In: Kurnia, D.U., et al. (Eds.), Prosiding Seminar Nasional Multifungsi dan Konversi Lahan 
Pertanian. Vol. 2. Bogor.
Ahmad, K., Ejaz, A., Azam, M., Khan, Z.I., Ashraf, M., Al-Qurainy, F., Fardous, A., Gondal, S., Bayat, A.R., Valeem, 
E.E., 2011. Lead, cadmium and chromium contents of canola irrigated with sewage water. Pak. J. Bot. 43, 1403–1410.
Ajmal, M., Nomani, A.A., Ahmad, A., 1984. Acute toxicity of chrome electroplating wastes to microorganisms: ad￾sorption of chromate and chromium (VI) on a mixture of clay and sand. Water Air Soil Pollut. 23, 119–127.
Anoliefo, G.O., Ikhajiagbe, B., Okonokhua, B.O., Edegbai, B.O., Obasuyi, D.C., 2008. Metal tolerant species distri￾bution and richness in and around the metal-based industries: possible candidates for phytoremediation. Afr. J. 
Environ. Sci. Tech. 11, 360–370.
Arjun, K.M., 2013. Indian agriculture-status, importance and role in Indian economy. Int. J. Agri. Food Sci. Technol. 
4 (4), 343–346.
Aslam, M.M., Baig, M.A., Hassan, I., Qazi, I.A., Malik, M., Saeed, H., 2004. Textile waste water characterization and 
reduction of its COD and BOD by oxidation. Electron. J. Environ. Agric. Food Chem. 3, 804–811.
Baker, A.J., Brooks, R., 1989. Terrestrial higher plants which hyperaccumulate metallic elements. A review of their 
distribution, ecology and phytochemistry. Biorecovery 1, 81–126.
Barrios, A.C., Rico, C.M., Trujillo-Reyes, J., Medina-Velo, I.A., Peralta-Videa, J.R., Gardea-Torresdey, J.L., 2016. Effects 
of uncoated and citric acid coated cerium oxide nanoparticles, bulk cerium oxide, cerium acetate, and citric acid 
on tomato plants. Sci. Total Environ. 563, 956–964.
Basiglini, E., Pintore, M., Forni, C., 2018. Effects of treated industrial wastewaters and temperatures on growth and 
enzymatic activities of duckweed (Lemna minor L.). Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 153, 54–59.
Begum, A., Harikrishna, S., 2010. Evaluation of some tree species to absorb air pollutants in three industrial locations 
of South Bengaluru, India. J. Chem. 7, 151–156. https://doi.org/10.1155/2010/398382.
Bernard, F., Brulle, F., Dumez, S., Platel, A., Nesslany, F., Cuny, D., Deram, A., Vandenbulcke, F., 2015. Antioxidant 
responses of Annelids, Brassicaceae and Fabaceae to pollutants: a review. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 114, 273–303.
Bisoi, S.S., Mishra, S.S., Barik, J., Panda, D., 2017. Effects of different treatments of fly ash and mining soil on growth 
and antioxidant protection of Indian wild rice. Int. J. Phytoremediation 19, 446–452.
Boari, G., Mancini, I.M., Trulli, E., 1997. Technology of water and wastewater treatment.
Boonyapookana, B., Parkpian, P., Techapinyawat, S., DeLaune, R.D., Jugsujinda, A., 2005. Phytoaccumulation of lead 
by sunflower (Helianthus annuus), tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum), and vetiver (Vetiveria zizanioides). J. Environ. Sci. 
Health 40, 117–137.
Boyd, R.S., Jaffré, T. and Odom, J.W., 1999. Variation in Nickel Content in the Nickel‐Hyperaccumulating Shrub 
Psychotria douarrei (Rubiaceae) from New Caledonia 1. Biotropica 31, 403–410.
Branco‐Neves, S., Soares, C., de Sousa, A., Martins, V., Azenha, M., Gerós, H., Fidalgo, F., 2017. An efficient antioxi￾dant system and heavy metal exclusion from leaves make Solanum cheesmaniae more tolerant to cu than its culti￾vated counterpart. Food Energy Secur. 6, 123–133. https://doi.org/10.1002/fes3.114.
Chandra, R., Bharagava, R.N., Yadav, S., Mohan, D., 2009. Accumulation and distribution of toxic metals in wheat 
(Triticum aestivum L.) and Indian mustard (Brassica campestris L.) irrigated with distillery and tannery effluents. J. 
Hazard. Mater. 162, 1514–1521.
Chandra, R., Sharma, P., Yadav, S., Tripathi, S., 2018. Biodegradation of endocrine disrupting chemicals and re￾sidual organic pollutants of pulp paper mill effluent by biostimulation. Front. Microbiol. 9, 1–15. https://doi.
org/10.3389/fmicb.2018.00960.
Chauhan, P., Mathur, J., 2020. Phytoremediation efficiency of Helianthus annuus L. for reclamation of heavy 
metals-contaminated industrial soil. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 27, 29954–29966.
Cunningham, S., 1995. Will plants have a role in bioremediation? In Proceedings/Abstracts of the Fourteenth Annual 
Symposium, Current Topics in Plant Biochemistry, − Physiology, and Molecular Biology Columbia, pp. 47–48.
Cvjetko, P., Milošić, A., Domijan, A.M., Vrček, I.V., Tolić, S., Štefanić, P.P., Letofsky-Papst, I., Tkalec, M., Balen, B., 
2017. Toxicity of silver ions and differently coated silver nanoparticles in Allium cepa roots. Ecotoxicol. Environ. 
Saf. 137, 18–28.
DalCorso, G., Fasani, E., Manara, A., Visioli, G., Furini, A., 2019. Heavy metal pollutions: state of the art and innova￾tion in phytoremediation. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 20, 3412.278 14. Plant response to industrial waste
De la Torre Roche, R., Servin, A., Hawthorne, J., Xing, B., Newman, L.A., Ma, X., Chen, G., White, J.C., 2015. 
Terrestrial trophic transfer of bulk and nanoparticle La2O3 does not depend on particle size. Environ. Sci. Technol. 
49, 11866–11874.
De Pinto, M.C., Locato, V., Paradiso, A., De Gara, L., 2015. Role of redox homeostasis in thermo-tolerance under 
climate change scenario. Ann. Bot. 116, 487–496.
Devi Chinmayee, M., Anu, M.S., Mahesh, B., Mary Sheeba, A., Mini, I., Swapna, T.S., 2014. A comparative study of 
heavy metal accumulation and antioxidant responses in Jatropha curcas L. IOSR. J. Environ. Sci. Bull. Food Technol. 
8, 58–67.
Dimkpa, C.O., McLean, J.E., Martineau, N., Britt, D.W., Haverkamp, R., Anderson, A.J., 2013. Silver nanoparticles 
disrupt wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) growth in a sand matrix. Environ. Sci. Technol. 47, 1082–1090.
Dixit, R., Malaviya, D., Pandiyan, K., Singh, U.B., Sahu, A., Shukla, R., Singh, B.P., Rai, J.P., Sharma, P.K., Lade, H., 
Paul, D., 2015. Bioremediation of heavy metals from soil and aquatic environment: an overview of principles and 
criteria of fundamental processes. Sustainability 7, 2189–2212.
Drzewiecka, K., Piechalak, A., Goliński, P., Gąsecka, M., Magdziak, Z., Szostek, M., Budzyńska, S., Niedzielski, P., 
Mleczek, M., 2019. Differences of Acer platanoides L. and Tilia cordata Mill. Response patterns/survival strategies 
during cultivation in extremely polluted mining sludge—a pot trial. Chemosphere 229, 589–601.
Dumont, E., Johnson, A.C., Keller, V.D., Williams, R.J., 2015. Nano silver and nano zinc-oxide in surface waters—ex￾posure estimation for Europe at high spatial and temporal resolution. Environ. Pollut. 196, 341–349.
Dursun, K.I.S.A., 2018. The responses of antioxidant system against the heavy metal-induced stress in tomato. J. Nat. 
Appl. Sci. 22, 1–6. https://doi.org/10.19113/sdufbed.52379.
Elifantz, H., Tel-Or, E., 2002. Heavy metal biosorption by plant biomass of the macrophyte Ludwigia stolonifera. 
Water Air Soil Pollut. 141, 207–218.
Ellis, R., Ellis, R.R., 1994. The Study of Second Language Acquisition. Oxford University.
Emamverdian, A., Ding, Y., Mokhberdoran, F., Xie, Y., 2015. Heavy metal stress and some mechanisms of plant de￾fense response (Article ID 756120). Sci. World J. 18. https://doi.org/10.1155/2015/756120.
Farnese, F.S., Oliveira, J.T.A., Farnese, M.S., Gusman, G.S., Silveira, N.M., Siman, L.I., 2014. Uptake arsenic by plants: 
effects on mineral nutrition, growth and antioxidant capacity. IDESIA 32, 99–106.
Fisher, N.S., Jones, G.J., Nelson, D.M., 1981. Effects of copper and zinc on growth, morphology, and metabolism of 
Asterionella japonica (Cleve) 1. J. Exp. Biol. Ecol. 51, 37–56.
Fraceto, L.F., Grillo, R., de Medeiros, G.A., Scognamiglio, V., Rea, G., Bartolucci, C., 2016. Nanotechnology in agricul￾ture: which innovation potential does it have? Front. Environ. Sci. 4, 20.
Gadallah, M.A.A., 1996. Phytotoxic effects of industrial and sewage waste waters on growth, chlorophyll content, 
transpiration rate and relative water content of potted sunflower plants. Water Air Soil Pollut. 89, 33–47.
Gajić, G., Pavlović, P., Kostić, O., Jarić, S., Đurđević, L., Pavlović, D., Mitrović, M., 2013. Ecophysiological and bio￾chemical traits of three herbaceous plants growing on the disposed coal combustion fly ash of different weather￾ing stage. Arch. Biol. Sci. 65, 1651–1667.
Gajić, G., Djurdjević, L., Kostić, O., Jarić, S., Mitrović, M., Stevanović, B., Pavlović, P., 2016. Assessment of the phy￾toremediation potential and an adaptive response of Festuca rubra L. sown on fly ash deposits: native grass has a 
pivotal role in ecorestoration management. Ecol. Eng. 93, 250–261.
Gajić, G., Djurdjević, L., Kostić, O., Jarić, S., Stevanović, B., Mitrović, M., Pavlović, P., 2020. Phytoremediation poten￾tial, photosynthetic and antioxidant response to arsenic-induced stress of Dactylis glomerata L. sown on fly ash 
deposits. Plan. Theory 9, 657.
Georgiadou, E.C., Kowalska, E., Patla, K., Kulbat, K., Smolińska, B., Leszczyńska, J., Fotopoulos, V., 2018. Influence of 
heavy metals (Ni, cu, and Zn) on nitro-oxidative stress responses, proteome regulation and allergen production in 
Basil (Ocimum basilicum L.) plants. Front. Plant Sci. 9, 1–16. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2018.00862.
Gleba, D., Borisjuk, N.V., Borisjuk, L.G., Kneer, R., Poulev, A., Skarzhinskaya, M., Dushenkov, S., Logendra, S., Gleba, 
Y.Y., Raskin, I., 1999. Use of plant roots for phytoremediation and molecular farming. Process Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 
96, 5973–5977.
Guidi, L., Degl’Innocenti, E., Carmassi, G., Massa, D., Pardossi, A., 2011. Effects of boron on leaf chlorophyll fluores￾cence of greenhouse tomato grown with saline water. Environ. Exp. Bot. 73, 57–63.
Gusman, G.S., Oliveira, J.A., Farnese, F.S., Cambraia, J., 2013. Mineral nutrition and enzymatic adaptation induced 
by arsenate and arsenite exposure in lettuce plants. Plant Physiol. Biochem. 71, 307–314.
Gvozdenac, S., Inđić, D., 2012. International Conference on BioScience: biotechnology and biodiversity—step in the 
future. The Forth Joint UNS-PSU Conference, pp. 331–341.References 279
Hawthorne, J., Musante, C., Sinha, S.K., White, J.C., 2012. Accumulation and phytotoxicity of engineered nanoparti￾cles to Cucurbita pepo. Int. J. Phytoremediation 14, 429–442.
Hawthorne, J., De la Torre Roche, R., Xing, B., Newman, L.A., Ma, X., Majumdar, S., Gardea-Torresdey, J., White, J.C., 
2014. Particle-size dependent accumulation and trophic transfer of cerium oxide through a terrestrial food chain. 
Environ. Sci. Technol. 48, 13102–13109.
Haynes, R.J., 2009. Reclamation and revegetation of fly ash disposal sites—challenges and research needs. J. Environ. 
Manage. 90, 43–53.
Hu, H., Li, X., Wu, S., Yang, C., 2020. Sustainable livestock wastewater treatment via phytoremediation: current 
status and future perspectives. Bioresour. Technol. 315. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2020.123809, 123809.
Hussain, F., Malik, S.A., Athar, M., Bashir, N., Younis, U., Hassan, M., Mahmood, S., 2010. Effect of tannery effluents 
on seed germination and growth of two sunflower cultivars. Afr. J. Biotechnol. 9, 5113–5120.
Jadoon, K.B.I., Ali, S., Jadoon, K.B.Q., Shakoor, B.M., Bharwana, A.S., Farooq, A.M., 2013. Effects of irrigation with 
wastewater from different industries on vegetables grown in vicinity of Faisalabad, Pakistan; a review. Inter. Res. 
J. Plant Sci. 4 (6), 144–148.
Jiang, H.S., Qiu, X.N., Li, G.B., Li, W., Yin, L.Y., 2014. Silver nanoparticles induced accumulation of reactive oxygen 
species and alteration of antioxidant systems in the aquatic plant Spirodela polyrhiza. Environ. Toxicol. Chem. 33, 
1398–1405.
Judy, J.D., Unrine, J.M., Rao, W., Bertsch, P.M., 2012. Bioaccumulation of gold nanomaterials by Manduca sexta through 
dietary uptake of surface contaminated plant tissue. Environ. Sci. Technol. 46, 12672–12678.
Junaid, M., Adnan, M., Khan, N., Khan, N., Ali, N., 2013. Plant growth, biochemical, characteristics and heavy metals 
contents of Medicago sativa L., Brassica juncea (L.) Czern and Cicer arietinum. Fuuast. J. Biol. 3, 5–103.
Kalaivanan, D., Ganeshamurthy, A.N., 2016. Mechanisms of heavy metal toxicity in plants. In: Abiotic Stress 
Physiology of Horticultural Crops. Springer, New Delhi, pp. 85–110.
Kandziora-Ciupa, M., Ciepał, R., Nadgórska-Socha, A., Barczyk, G., 2013. A comparative study of heavy metal accu￾mulation and antioxidant responses in Vaccinium myrtillus L. leaves in polluted and non-polluted areas. Environ. 
Sci. Pollut. Res. Int. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-012-1461-4. 204920-4932.
Kandziora-Ciupa, M., Ciepał, R., Nadgórska-Socha, A., Barczyk, G., 2016. Accumulation of heavy metals and an￾tioxidant responses in Pinus sylvestris L. needles in polluted and non-polluted sites. Ecotoxicology 25, 970–981. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10646-016-1654-6.
Kant, R., 2012. Textile dyeing industry an environmental hazard. J. Nat. Sci. 4, 22–26.
Kim, S.H., Jung, M.Y., Lee, Y.M., 2012. Effect of heavy metals on the antioxidant enzymes in the marine ciliate Euplotes 
crassus. Toxicol. Environ. Health Sci. 3, 213–219.
Kisku, G.C., Kumar, V., Sahu, P., Kumar, P., Kumar, N., 2018. Characterization of coal fly ash and use of plants grow￾ing in ash pond for phytoremediation of metals from contaminated agricultural land. Int. J. Phytoremediation 20, 
330–337.
Kocak, S., Tokusoglu, O., Aycan, S., 2005. Some heavy metal and trace essential element detection in canned vegeta￾ble foodstuffs by differential pulse polarography (DPP). Electron. J. Environ. Agric. Food Chem. 4, 871–878.
Kostić, O., Mitrović, M., Knežević, M., Jarić, S., Gajić, G., Đurđević, L., Pavlović, P., 2012. The potential of four woody 
species for the revegetation of fly ash deposits from the ‘Nikola tesla—a’ thermoelectric plant (Obenovac, Serbia). 
Arch. Biol. Sci. 64, 145–158.
Landa, P., Cyrusova, T., Jerabkova, J., Drabek, O., Vanek, T., Podlipna, R., 2016. Effect of metal oxides on plant germi￾nation: phytotoxicity of nanoparticles, bulk materials, and metal ions. Water Air Soil Pollut. 227, 1–10.
Leão, G.A., de Oliveira, J.A., Felipe, R.T.A., Farnese, F.S., Gusman, G.S., 2014. Anthocyanins, thiols, and antioxidant 
scavenging enzymes are involved in Lemna gibba tolerance to arsenic. J. Plant Interact. 9, 143–151.
Lokhande, V.H., Gor, B.K., Desai, N.S., Nikam, T.D., Suprasanna, P., 2013. Sesuvium portulacastrum a plant for drought, 
salt stress, sand fixation, food and phytoremediation. A review. Agron. Sustain. Dev. 33, 329–348.
Malecka, A., Piechalak, A., Mensinger, A., Hanć, A., Baralkiewicz, D., Tomaszewska, B., 2012. Antioxidative defense 
system in Pisum sativum roots exposed to heavy metals (Pb, Cu, Cd, Zn). Pol. J. Environ. Stud. 21, 1721–1730.
Manan, F.A., Mamat, D.D., Samad, A.A., Ong, Y.S., Ooh, K.F., Chai, T.T., 2015. Heavy metal accumulation and an￾tioxidant properties of Nephrolepis biserrata growing in heavy metal-contaminated soil. Global NEST J. 17, 1–11.
Márquez-García, B., Fernández-Recamales, M., Córdoba, F., 2012. Effects of cadmium on phenolic composition and 
antioxidant activities of Erica andevalensis. J. Bot. https://doi.org/10.1155/2012/936950.
Martins, L.L., Mourato, M.P., Cardoso, A.I., Pinto, A.P., Mota, A.M., de Lurdes, S., Gonçalves, M., de Varennes, A., 
2011. Oxidative stress induced by cadmium in Nicotiana tabacum L.: effects on growth parameters, oxidative 280 14. Plant response to industrial waste
damage and antioxidant responses in different plant parts. Acta Physiol. Plant. 33, 1375–1383. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s11738-010-0671-y.
Mathur, S., Kalaji, H.M., Jajoo, A., 2016. Investigation of deleterious effects of chromium phytotoxicity and photosyn￾thesis in wheat plant. Photosynthetica 54, 185–192.
Mirzajani, F., Askari, H., Hamzelou, S., Farzaneh, M., Ghassempour, A., 2013. Effect of silver nanoparticles on Oryza 
sativa L. and its rhizosphere bacteria. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 88, 48–54.
Mitrović, M., Pavlović, P., Lakušić, D., Djurdjević, L., Stevanović, B., Kostić, O., Gajić, G., 2008. The potential of 
Festuca rubra and Calamagrostis epigejos for the revegetation on fly ash deposits. Sci. Total Environ. 72, 1090–1101.
Mittler, R., 2002. Oxidative stress, antioxidants and stress tolerance. Trends Plant Sci. 7, 405–410.
Morales, M., Munné-Bosch, S., 2019. Malondialdehyde: facts and artifacts. Plant Physiol. 180, 1246–1250.
Murugan, M., 2010. Effect of textile mill effluent on growth and germination of black gram Vigna mungo (L.) Hepper. 
Int. J. Pharma Biosci. 1, 1–7.
Nadgórska-Socha, A., Kafel, A., Kandziora-Ciupa, M., Gospodarek, J., Zawisza-Raszka, A., 2013. Accumulation of 
heavy metals and antioxidant responses in Vicia faba plants grown on non-metallic contaminated soil. Environ. Sci. 
Pollut. Res. 20, 1124–1134. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-012-1191-7.
Nagajyothi, P.C., Dinakar, N., Suresh, S., Udaykiran, Y., Suresh, C., Damodharam, T., 2009. Effect of industrial efflu￾ent on the morphological parameters and chlorophyll content of green gram (Phaseolus aureus Roxb). J. Environ. 
Biol. 30, 385–388.
Nandy, T., Kaul, S.N., 1994. Wastewater management for tapioca based sago industry. Indian J. Environ. Health 14, 
721–728.
Nath, K., Singh, D., Shyam, S., Sharma, Y.K., 2009. Phytotoxic effects of chromium and tannery effluent on growth 
and metabolism of Phaseolus mungo Roxb. J. Environ. Biol. 30, 227–234.
Niroula, B., 2003. Comparative effects of industrial effluents and sub-metropolitan sewage of Biratnagar on germina￾tion and seedling growth of Rice and Blackgram. Our Nat. 11, 10–14.
Ogundiran, M.B., Osibanjo, O., 2008. Heavy metal concentrations in soils and accumulation in plants growing in a 
deserted slag dumpsite in Nigeria. Afr. J. Biotechnol. 7, 3053–3060.
Okupnik, A., Pflugmacher, S., 2016. Oxidative stress response of the aquatic macrophyte Hydrilla verticillata exposed 
to TiO2 nanoparticles. Environ. Toxicol. Chem. 35, 2859–2866.
Panda, S.K., 2007. Chromium-mediated oxidative stress and ultrastructural changes in root cells of developing rice 
seedlings. J. Plant Physiol. 164, 1419–1428.
Panda, D., Panda, D., Padhan, B., Biswas, M., 2018a. Growth and physiological response of lemongrass (Cymbopogon 
citratus (DC) Stapf.) under different levels of fly ash-amended soil. Int. J. Phytoremediation 20, 538–544.
Panda, D., Mandal, L., Padhan, B., Mishra, S.S., Barik, J., 2018b. Improvement of growth, photosynthesis and antioxidant 
defense in rice (Oryza sativa L.) grown in fly ash-amended soil. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. India B Biol. Sci. 89, 853–860.
Panda, D., Mandal, L., Barik, J., 2020. Phytoremediation potential of naturally growing weed plants grown on fly 
ash-amended soil for restoration of fly ash deposit. Int. J. Phytoremediation 22, 1195–1203.
Pandey, V.C., 2013. Suitability of Ricinus communis L. cultivation for phytoremediation of fly ash disposal site. Ecol. 
Eng. 57, 336–341.
Pandey, V.C., Singh, J.S., Kumar, A., Tewari, D.D., 2010. Accumulation of heavy metals by chickpea grown in fly ash 
treated soil: effect on antioxidants. CLEAN Soil Air Water 38, 1116–1123. https://doi.org/10.1002/clen.201000178.
Pandey, V.C., Singh, J.S., Singh, R.P., Singh, N., Yunus, M., 2011. Arsenic hazards in coal fly ash and its fate in Indian 
scenario. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 55, 819–835.
Pant, P.P., Tripathi, A.K., 2014. Impact of heavy metals on morphological and biochemical parameters of Shorea ro￾busta plant. Ekolo’gia (Bratislava). 33, 116–126. https://doi.org/10.2478/eko-2014-0012.
Patel, A., Tiwari, S., Prasad, S.M., 2018. Toxicity assessment of arsenate and arsenite on growth, chlorophyll a, fluo￾rescence and antioxidant machinery in Nostoc muscorum. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 157, 369–379.
Pathak, H., Joshi, R.C., Chaudhary, A., Chaudhury, R., Kalra, N., Dwivedi, M.K., 1999. Distillery effluent as soil 
amendment for wheat and rice. Water Air Soil Pollut. 113, 133–140.
Pavlović, P., Mitrović, M., Djurdjević, L., 2004. An ecophysiological study of plants growing on the fly ash deposits 
from the “Nikola Tesla—A” thermal power station in Serbia. Environ. Manag. 33, 654–663.
Perreault, F., Samadani, M., Dewez, D., 2014. Effect of soluble copper released from copper oxide nanoparticles solu￾bilisation on growth and photosynthetic processes of Lemna gibba L. Nanotoxicology 8, 374–382.
Porebska, G., Ostrowska, A., 1999. Heavy metal accumulation in wild plants: implications for phytoremediation. Pol. 
J. Environ. Studies 8, 433–442.Procházková, D., Wilhelmová, N., 2010. Antioxidant protection during abiotic stresses. In: Pessarakli, M. (Ed.), 
Handbook of Plant and Crop Stress, third ed. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, USA, pp. 89–139.
Qian, H., Peng, X., Han, X., Ren, J., Sun, L., Fu, Z., 2013. Comparison of the toxicity of silver nanoparticles and silver 
ions on the growth of terrestrial plant model Arabidopsis thaliana. J. Environ. Sci. 25, 1947–1956.
Rabêlo, F.H.S., Borgo, L., 2016. Changes caused by heavy metals in micronutrient content and antioxidant sys￾tem of forage grasses used for phytoremediation: an overview. Cieˆncia Rural 46, 1368–1375. https://doi.
org/10.1590/0103-8478cr20151291.
Rahman, M.A., Hasegawa, H., Rahman, M.M., Islam, M.N., Miah, M.M., Tasmen, A., 2007. Effect of arsenic on photo￾synthesis, growth and yield of five widely cultivated rice (Oryza sativa L.) varieties in Bangladesh. Chemosphere 
67, 1072–1079.
Rajput, V.D., Minkina, T.M., Behal, A., Sushkova, S.N., Mandzhieva, S., Singh, R., Gorovtsov, A., Tsitsuashvili, V.S., 
Purvis, W.O., Ghazaryan, K.A., Movsesyan, H.S., 2018. Effects of zinc-oxide nanoparticles on soil, plants, ani￾mals and soil organisms: a review. Environ. Nanotechnol. Monit. Manag. 9, 76–84. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
enmm.2017.12.006.
Raliya, R., Nair, R., Chavalmane, S., Wang, W.N., Biswas, P., 2015. Mechanistic evaluation of translocation and phys￾iological impact of titanium dioxide and zinc oxide nanoparticles on the tomato (Solanum lycopersicum L.) plant. 
Metallomics 7, 1584–1594.
Ramana, S., Biswas, A.K., Singh, A.B., Yadava, R.B.R., 2001. Relative efficacy of different distillery effluents on 
growth, nitrogen fixation and yield of groundnut. Bioresour. Technol. 81, 117–121.
Ramana, S., Biswas, A.K., Kundu, S., Saha, J.K., Yadava, R.B.R., 2002. Effect of distillery effluent on seed germination 
in some vegetable crops. Bioresour. Technol. 82, 273–275.
Raskin, I., Kumar, P.N., Dushenkov, S., Salt, D.E., 1994. Bioconcentration of heavy metals by plants. Curr. Opin. 
Biotechnol. 5, 285–290.
Rastogi, A., Zivcak, M., Sytar, O., Kalaji, H.M., He, X., Mbarki, S., Brestic, M., 2017. Impact of metal and metal oxide 
nanoparticles on plant: a critical review. Front. Chem. 5, 78.
Ratia, H., Rämänen, H., Lensu, A., Oikari, A., 2013. Betulinol and wood sterols in sediments contaminated by pulp 
and paper mill effluents: dissolution and spatial distribution. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 20, 4562–4573.
Rehman, K., Ashraf, S., Rashid, U., Ibrahim, M., Hina, S., Iftikhar, T., Ramzan, S., 2013. Comparison of proximate and 
heavy metal contents of vegetables grown with fresh and wastewater. Pak. J. Bot. 45, 391–400.
Reid, R.J., Hayes, J.E., Post, A., Stangoulis, J.C.R., Graham, R.D., 2004. A critical analysis of the causes of boron toxic￾ity in plants. Plant Cell Environ. 27, 1405–1414.
Ruffini Castiglione, M., Giorgetti, L., Geri, C., Cremonini, R., 2011. The effects of nano-TiO2 on seed germination, 
development and mitosis of root tip cells of Vicia narbonensis L. and Zea mays L. J. Nanopart. Res. 13, 2443–2449.
Salt, D.E., Blaylock, M., Kumar, N.P., Dushenkov, V., Ensley, B.D., Chet, I., Raskin, I., 1995. Phytoremediation: a novel 
strategy for the removal of toxic metals from the environment using plant. Biotechnology 13, 468–474.
Saravanamoorthy, M.D., Kumari, B.R., 2007. Effect of textile waste water on morphophysiology and yield on two 
varieties of peanut (Arachis hypogaea L.). J. Agric. Sci. Technol. 3, 335–343.
Sharma, P., Tripathi, S., Chandra, R., 2020. Accumulation and histological observation of heavy metal in Brassica 
campestris L. and Chenopodium album L. growing on sludge waste of pulp paper industry after secondary treat￾ment. J. Exp. Biol. Agric. Sci. 8, 320–333.
Sharma, P., Tripathi, S., Chandra, R., 2021. Highly efficient phytoremediation potential of metal and metalloids from 
the pulp paper industry waste employing Eclipta alba (L) and Alternanthera philoxeroide (L): biosorption and pollu￾tion reduction. Bioresour. Technol. 319, 124147.
Singh, P.K., Kumar, V., Singh, S., 2011. Management of tannery waste: it use as planting medium for chrysanthemum 
plants. J. Environ. Sci. Technol. 4, 560–567.
Srivastava, S., Srivastava, A.K., Singh, B., Suprasanna, P., D’souza, S.F., 2013. The effect of arsenic on pigment com￾position, and photosynthesis in Hydrilla verticillata. Biol. Plantarum 57, 385–389.
Stancheva, I., Geneva, M., Markovska, Y., Tzvetkova, N., Mitova, I., Todorova, M., Petrov, P., 2014. A comparative 
study on plant morphology, gas exchange parameters, and antioxidant response of Ocimum basilicum L. and 
Origanum vulgare L. grown on industrially polluted soil. Turk. J. Biol. 38, 89–102.
Stoeva, N., Bineva, T., 2003. Oxidative changes and photosynthesis in oat plants grown in As-contaminated soil. 
Bulg. J. Plant Physiol. 29, 87–95.
Tangaa, S.R., Selck, H., Winther-Nielsen, M., Khan, F.R., 2016. Trophic transfer of metal-based nanoparticles in 
aquatic environments: a review and recommendations for future research focus. Environ. Sci. Nano 3, 966–981.
References 281282 14. Plant response to industrial waste
Thamizhiniyan, P., Sivakumar, P.V., Lenin, M., Sivaraman, M., 2009. Sugar mill effluent toxicity in crop plants. J. 
Phytology 1, 68–74.
Tripathi, D.K., Singh, S., Singh, S., Srivastava, P.K., Singh, V.P., Singh, S., Prasad, S.M., Singh, P.K., Dubey, N.K., 
Pandey, A.C., Chauhan, D.K., 2017. Nitric oxide alleviates silver nanoparticles (AgNps)-induced phytotoxicity in 
Pisum sativum seedlings. Plant Physiol. Biochem. 110, 167–177.
Uaboi-Egbenni, P.O., Okolie, P.N., Adejuyitan, O.E., Sobande, A.O., Akinyemi, O., 2009. Effect of industrial effluents 
on the growth and anatomical structures of Abelmoschus esculentus okra. Afr. J. Biotechnol. 8, 3251–3260.
Uğurlu, M., Gürses, A., Doğar, Ç., Yalçın, M., 2008. The removal of lignin and phenol from paper mill effluents by 
electrocoagulation. J. Environ. Manage. 87, 420–428.
Ullah, H., Khan, I., Ullah, I., 2012. Impact of sewage contaminated water on soil, vegetables and underground water 
of peri-urban Peshawar, Pakistan. Environ. Monit. Assess. 84, 6411–6421.
Unrine, J.M., Shoults-Wilson, W.A., Zhurbich, O., Bertsch, P.M., Tsyusko, O.V., 2012. Trophic transfer of Au nanopar￾ticles from soil along a simulated terrestrial food chain. Environ. Sci. Technol. 46, 9753–9760.
Uzair, M., Ahmad, M., Nazim, K., 2009. Effects of industrial waste on seed bank and growth of wild plants in Dhabeji 
area, Karachi, Pakistan. Pak. J. Bot. 41, 1659–1665.
Uzma, S., Azizullah, A., Bibi, R., Nabeela, F., Muhammad, U., Ali, I., Rehman, Z.U., Häder, D.P., 2016. Effects of in￾dustrial wastewater on growth and biomass production in commonly grown vegetables. Environ. Monit. Assess. 
188, 1–13.
Veličković, J.M., Dimitrijević, D.S., Mitić, S.S., Mitić, M.N., Kostić, D.A., 2014. The determination of phenolic compo￾sition, antioxidative activity and the heavy metals in the extracts of Calendula officinalis L. Adv. Technol. 3, 46–51.
Verma, S.K., Singh, K., Gupta, A.K., Pandey, V.C., Trivedi, P., Verma, R.J., Patra, D.D., 2014. Aromatic grasses for 
phytomanagement of coal fly ash hazards. Ecol. Eng. 73, 425–428.
Vijayalakshmi, V.K., Revathi, K., Sudha, P.N., 2010. Comparative studies on the effect of antioxidant properties of the 
plants Helianthus annus and Solanum nigrum exposed to the heavy metal chromium. J. Pharm. Sci. Res. 2, 889–895.
Wang, S., Shi, X., Sun, H., Chen, Y., Pan, H., Yang, X., Rafiq, T., 2014. Variations in metal tolerance and accumulation 
in three hydroponically cultivated varieties of Salix integra treated with lead. PLoS One 9, 108–568.
Wang, P., Lombi, E., Zhao, F.J., Kopittke, P.M., 2016. Nanotechnology: a new opportunity in plant sciences. Trends 
Plant Sci. 21, 699–712.
Yadav, R.K., Goyal, B., Sharma, R.K., Dubey, S.K., Minhas, P.S., 2002. Post irrigation impact of domestic sewage efflu￾ent on composition of soils, crops and ground water—a case study. Environ. Int. 28, 481–486.
Yan, A., Wang, Y., Tan, S.N., Mohd Yusof, M.L., Ghosh, S., Chen, Z., 2020. Phytoremediation: a promising approach 
for revegetation of heavy metal-polluted land. Front. Plant Sci. 11. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2020.00359, 359. 
In this issue https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fpls.2020.00359/full; 2020. (Accessed 30 April 2020).
Zhang, H., Hu, L.Y., Li, P., Hu, K.D., Jiang, C.X., Luo, J.P., 2010. Hydrogen sulfide alleviated chromium toxicity in 
wheat. Biol. Plant. 54, 743–747.
Zheng, W., Wang, S.Y., 2001. Antioxidant activity and phenolic compounds in selected herbs. J. Environ. Agric. Food 
Chem. 49, 5165–5170.
 Plants and their Interaction to Environmental Pollution 283 Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-99978-6.00015-7
CHAPTER
15
Radioisotopes and their impact 
on plants
K.F. Abdelmotelba
, Shri Hari Prasadb
, Shivaji Ajinath Lavaleb
, 
Akash Ravindra Chichagharec
, and Sahil Mehtad
a
Department of Genetics, Faculty of Agriculture, Zagazig University, Zagazig, Egypt, b
Centre 
for Plant Biotechnology and Molecular Biology, Kerala Agricultural University, Thrissur, 
Kerala, India, c
Department of Silviculture and Agroforestry, Kerala Agricultural University, 
Thrissur, Kerala, India, d
Department of Botany, Hansraj College, University of Delhi, 
New Delhi, India
1. Introduction to radioisotopes
The phenomenon of spontaneous emission of invisible but energetic radiations from at￾oms of substances that can pass through materials that are usually opaque to visible light 
is called radioactivity (Lawson, 1999). In simple words, radioisotopes are atoms with nuclei 
that emit radiation to achieve a more stable nuclear configuration (US Nuclear Regulatory 
Commission, 1996). A radioisotope is commonly depicted by its name followed by a number, 
such as carbon-14 (C-14) or fluorine-18 (F-18). The atomic weight, or the total amount of pro￾tons and neutrons of an atom, is represented by this number. This fascinating phenomenon 
was discovered in 1896 by French physicist, Henri Becquerel while working on the phospho￾rescence activities of uranium and potassium. Further, Marie Curie discovered that another 
material, thorium, emitted similar rays in the same way that uranium did and she coined 
the name “radioactivity” to describe the phenomena. She also discovered that radioactivity 
was a property of the atoms themselves, and it was unaffected by any physical or chemical 
processes that the substance went through. For their work on radioactivity, Henri Becquerel, 
Marie Curie, and Pierre Curie shared the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1903. Later in 1911, Marie 
Curie received the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in the year of 1911 for her discovery of radium 
(Lawson, 1999).
Many radioactive substances occur naturally especially potassium-40 (K-40) in soil 
or artificially in nuclear power plants or from machine-produced nuclear interactions in 284 15. Radioisotopes and their impact on plants 
devices, such as linear accelerators and cyclotrons. Naturally occurring Th-232, U-238, and 
U-235 radioactive series and K-40 largely contribute to the natural irradiation (Markovic 
and Stevovic, 2019). Many anthropogenic activities also give rise to various manmade 
radionuclides. For example, due to the nuclear test in the 1960s and the Chernobyl nu￾clear plant accident in 1986, Cs-137 was disseminated in the ecosystem for a longer period 
(Karacan, 2011). Based on the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic 
Radiation (UNSCEAR) report, it was estimated that the medium activity concentration of 
U-238, Th-232, and 40-K in the global soil around the globe sums 33.45 and 412 mCi kg− 1
, 
respectively (UNCSEAR, 2010).
Radiation is a process in which an unstable nucleus’ surplus energy is expelled in the form 
of particles or waves to achieve stability. The radiation can be classified into ionizing radia￾tion and nonionizing radiation. Like α-particles, β-particles, γ-rays, and X-rays pass through 
matter, they transfer energy to the atoms, causing electrons to be knocked out of the atom 
known as ionization, or raised to higher energy levels, known as excitation (Lawson, 1999). 
Thus, α-particles, β-particles, γ-rays, and X-rays are called as ionizing radiations. α-particles 
are positively charged, have two protons and two neutrons, emitted by naturally occurring 
or manmade substances such as uranium and radium, have less penetrating power, and can 
be stopped by the layer of skin or a paper sheet.
On the other hand, β-radiations are fast-moving electrons ejected from the nuclei of atoms, 
smaller than α-particles, and can penetrate up to 1–2cm of water or human flesh but can be 
stopped by a few mm of aluminum sheet. γ- or X-radiations have no charge or weight, are 
behave like light, represent energy transmitted in the form of the electromagnetic wave with￾out the movement of material, just as light travels through space. X-rays and γ-rays are nearly 
identical, with the exception that X-rays are generated artificially rather than emanating from 
the nucleus of an atom. Unlike light, X-rays and γ-rays are highly penetrating and can pene￾trate through the living body. Though these radiations are known to have a beneficial appli￾cation, they are also known to harm living cells (Hall et al., 2016).
When the radiation interacts with target atoms or molecules in exposed cells, one of two re￾sponses occurs ionization or excitation (Lachumy et al., 2013). The emissions can be absorbed 
and distributed in plants by direct (exposures at aerial organs such as leaves, stems, and 
tendrils) or indirect (via root systems in soil-related contamination) channels (Fig. 1). The ra￾diation absorbed damages the molecular structures of cells in two ways. Either the absorption 
of high linear energy transfer radiation, such as α-particles and neutrons by plants will cause 
electron loss, thereby inducing bond breakage which further leads to functional changes in 
cellular macromolecules such as proteins, lipids, and DNA (Hosoya and Miyagawa, 2014). 
Instead of interacting with macromolecules, the radiated energy interacts directly with water 
molecules, and ionization of the water molecules in cells resulted in the production of free 
radicals. Because water makes up three-quarters of a cell’s bulk, most of the ionization reac￾tion triggered by the radiations takes place in water molecules (Sreedhar et al., 2013).
As several radionuclides may exist in more than one oxidation state in the environment 
at a given time, the precipitation and absorption behavior of distinct states are known to 
vary extensively. Thus, radionuclide transfer pathways and transfer efficiencies vary widely. 
These may depend on factors such as (1) the chemical nature and reactivity of the iso￾tope, which may affect the isotope’s solubility and transport through water present in soil 
pore within the plant rhizosphere, (2) exposure route of radiation, (3) plant characteristics 2. Radioisotopes as pollutants 285
(species, physical stature, age, root structure, and root–shoot ratio, among other factors), (4) 
nutrient availability and requirement of the plant, and (5) the level of the radioisotope in the 
soil (Gupta et al., 2016).
2. Radioisotopes as pollutants
The functionality of radioisotopes and radiations hold a lot of promise in agriculture. 
However, in the case of a nuclear disaster or radionucleotide pollution, the direct and in￾direct effects of radionuclide and radiation transfers in the soil–plant–air environment are 
expected to affect the entire food chain. This holds significance since the radiations emitted 
by any radioisotope interact with matter and could change its biochemical, biophysical, and 
biological features, even though they are invisible and cannot be seen or felt. The interaction 
of ionizing radiation with the human body, as well as the resulting health effects, are thor￾oughly documented and measured utilizing data gathered from radiation workers and/or 
nuclear accidents all over the world. The influence of radiation on agriculture and economic 
output, on the other hand, is little understood, and the current data is sparse, scattered, and 
inconclusive (Ahuja et al., 2014).
The study of transfer factors is crucial to evaluate the radiation risk and the transport and 
distribution of radionuclides in the soil-to-plant. Type of radionuclide, type of plant, type of 
soil, concentrations of stable chemical elements in soils, and local climate decide the level of 
transfer factors of radionuclides. Markovic and Stevovic (2019) evaluated the effects of radio￾nuclides in contaminated soil of Pcinja District, northern Serbia, and reported that specific 
activities for Ra-226, Th-232, K-40, U-238, and U-235 were 22–45, 29–55, 460–730, 22–51, and 
1.1–2.7Bq/kg, respectively. They also indicated that K-40 and Ra-226 were the main radio￾nuclides transferred into the cereal grain and reported that out of total plant total activity, a 
small fraction of is plant is accumulated in the root system, while 1%–16% accumulated in 
Nuclear power
Molecular effect
Morphological effect
Cellular effect
Physiological effect
Transgenerational effect
Reproductive and genetic effect
Factories
Soil contamination
FIG. 1 Effect of radioisotopes on plants.286 15. Radioisotopes and their impact on plants 
the grain (Markovic and Stevovic, 2019). To understand more about the pattern of radiation 
effects on plants and other biological communities, microcosm experiments and large-scale 
studies of natural ecosystems externally exposed to radiation are being carried out.
From various researches on plants and animals, it proved that ionizing radiation might 
produce genetic changes that alter or modify generations. The extent of damage caused by 
radiation varies with dose, dose rate, type of radiation, body part exposed, age, and health 
(Hall et al., 2016). The quantity of damage done relies on the amount of energy deposited 
as well as the amount of material involved. Radiation damage increases as the quantity of 
energy deposited increases and reduce when the energy is dispersed across a larger area. As 
a result, the radiation absorbed dosage is calculated by dividing the energy absorbed by the 
mass of the substance involved. An absorbed dosage of one gray (written 1Gy) is defined as 
one Joule of energy absorbed in per kilogram of material. We usually deal with dosages that 
are a thousandth of a gray or one milligray, therefore we utilize this measurement (written 
1mGy) (Lawson, 1999). The radiation absorbed by a plant depends upon the case of radiation 
exposure (external exposure or radiation accident) which influences the type of source, radia￾tion, and dose vary and is said to have different influences on plants (Table 1).
3. Effects of radiation on plant diversity
Over the past few decades, research has shown that ecosystems are vulnerable to human￾induced environmental pressures, resulting in a progressive loss of biodiversity and general 
reductions in plant health. Several studies have been carried out in the USA, Canada, France, 
and Russia across different types of ecosystems reveal that ecosystem structure changed as a 
consequence of dosage. The effect is stronger with higher radiation doses and at higher expo￾sure; the structure of the ecosystem tends to be simpler. Within a population, species react to 
radiation differently depending on their radiosensitivity and competition with other species. 
As a result, the productivity of a particular population may grow at intermediate treatment 
rates, despite the radically altered species composition (Smirnov et  al., 1983). Woodwell 
(1967) derived at a conclusion that larger and long-lived plant species disappear and pave 
TABLE 1 Comparison of the factors affecting absorbed dose distribution in ecosystems in case of radiations 
accident and external exposure.
Characteristics External exposure Radiation accident
Source of exposure Point source Distributed source
Type of radiation γ- or neutrons α, β, and γ in different combinations
Distribution of 
absorbed doses in 
the ecosystem
Relatively uniform. The dose 
is decreased with the distance 
from the source
Extremely heterogeneous
Type of exposure External External and internal
Dose distribution 
over time
Uniform Intensive short-term exposure, followed by a slow decline 
in dose rate. Redistribution of radiation exposure in the 
ecosystem components due to the migration of radionuclides4. Effects of radiation in plant morphology 287
the way to smaller, more competitive short-lived plant species. In general, changes in species 
dominance, loss in species diversity and productivity reductions, and changes in community 
structure are all common reactions of plant communities to large doses of irradiation.
4. Effects of radiation in plant morphology
Plants being living entities, respond to growing challenges in various ways. Growth prob￾lems can be either exogenous or endogenous. The effect of radiation in plant morphology is 
highly influenced by the time and dose of exposure to irradiation. It has been observed that 
a relatively low dose of radiation (1–5Gy) has no visible changes in plant morphology (Wi 
et al., 2007). Many studies have been conducted on seed germination and seedling growth 
of irradiated plants to discover if there is a link between their growth and the dose of irra￾diation. An inhibition in germination and a reduction in seedling survival were found to be 
directly linked to the dose of irradiation. γ-Radiation at a higher dose of 50Gy was found 
to inhibit seedling growth remarkably in Arabidopsis seedlings (Wi et al., 2007). This reduc￾tion was observed by Kumar and Ratnam (2010) in sunflower, by Swaminathan and Gupta 
(1967) in Brassica campestris, by Khan (1979) in mungbean, and by Cheema and Atta (2003)
in rice. γ-Irradiation of more than 0.05kGy was found to inhibit the seedling growth of the 
wheat, garden pea, field pea, and spinach, whereas even a low dose of 0.005 kGy inhibited 
the seedling growth in okra (Singh et al., 2014). Borzouei et al. (2010) revealed that varying 
doses of γ- irradiation (100–400Gy) treatment in two wheat genotypes displayed a delay in 
germination time. Aref et al. (2016) have reported that γ-radiation of 5Gy and more nega￾tively influenced germ inability in Datura innoxia, whereas Verma et al. (2017) revealed that 
germination and seedling survival of Cuminum cyminum declined at higher doses particu￾larly at 500Gy and Amaranthus curentus at 250Gy (Aynehband and Afsharinafar, 2012). Goh 
et al. (2014) observed a significant reduction in plant growth after irradiation with 200Gy 
in Arabidopsis seedlings. The height, the number of branches, and the number of siliques of 
intensely irradiated plants were all considerably reduced.
As γ-radiation is perceived by the plant such as any other abiotic stress, and it responds by 
slowing cellular activity and arresting growth (Chagvardieff et al., 1989), which likely could 
be the cause of reduction in plant biomass and leaf area. At higher doses of γ-irradiation 
(0.05kGy), 30%–50% reduction in plant biomass is observed (Singh et al., 2014). Both low and 
high accumulation of cesium was found to decrease plant biomass, whereas strontium accu￾mulation was found to reduce both roots as well as plant biomass (Burger et al., 2019). Plant 
biomass in spinach, garden pea, wheat, and field pea was reduced by 30%–50% in response 
to the highest dose of 0.05kG γ-radiation (Singh et al., 2014).
A reduction in leaf area (size) was observed in wheat, garden pea, and field pea by Singh 
et al. (2014) when they were subjected to even small doses (0.005kGy) of γ-irradiation. Similar 
results were obtained by Olasupo et al. (2016) in cowpea and Asare et al. (2017) in okra. Sr 
and Cs in both low and high concentrations resulted in a considerable reduction in leaf size 
and dry weight (Burger et  al., 2019). The inhibition of root as well as shoot growth upon 
exposure to high γ-irradiation has been reported by many researchers, like Singh and Datta 
(2010), Ahuja et al. (2014), and Kumar et al. (2016). Asare et al. (2017), Borzouei et al. (2010), 
and Marcu et al. (2013) observed a steep decline in root growth when the plant was subjected 288 15. Radioisotopes and their impact on plants 
to a radiation of 1kGy and more in okra, wheat, and maize, while Marcu et al. (2013) ob￾served a reduction in stem diameter as well. Massive doses of γ-irradiation (1–3kGy) were 
demonstrated to generate severe abiotic stress in Arabidopsis thaliana, resulting in AOS-linked 
morphological alterations in γ-irradiated Arabidopsis roots (Singhal et al., 2009; Nagata et al., 
2004). Substantial reduction in plant height, survival %, and 1000-grain weight were observed 
when exposed to strong γ-ray doses (30kR and 40kR) (Irfaq and Nawab, 2001).
When the plants are grown on radionuclide contaminated soils, the principal radionu￾clides transmitted into cereal grain are 40K and 226Ra. It has been observed that the root 
system accumulates a tiny % of the overall activity present in the plant, while the grain accu￾mulates 1%–16%. The formation of phosphate salts with low solubility lowers the availability 
of thorium for root uptake when phosphate is added to the soil (Markovic and Stevovic, 
2019). Pollen sterility was also found to be directly linked to the dose of γ-irradiation; an 
increase in pollen sterility was reported by Singh and Roy (1971) in Trigonella, by Sinha and 
Godward (1972) in Lens culinaris, by Sushil and Dubey (1998) in Lathyrus sativus L, by Singh 
(2007) in Nigella sativa, and by Kumar and Ratnam (2010) in sunflower.
Even though there is a significant increase in the number of seeds produced in the scot pine 
population exposed to the Chernobyl radiation, only a fraction of it was found to develop 
into adult plants (Geras’kin et al., 2011). Thus trees exposed to contaminants should produce 
a higher % of tolerant offspring, but the trend was not observed in the case of the Chernobyl 
event. It was observed that a significant reduction in pine reproductive capabilities (reduced 
seed mass and number per cone and increased abortiveness in seeds) was observed in the 
first year itself (Ipatyev et al., 1999; Fedotov et al., 2006) and the trend is observed even after 
11years of Chernobyl event (Geras’kin et al., 2011). A similar effect on pine tree reproductive 
capabilities was also detected at the South Urals radioactive trail. Pine trees were exposed to 
radiation at dose rates of 4.2–6.3Gy/h for a while, resulting in a considerable decrease in seed 
mass and an increase in the fraction of abortive seeds (Kalchenko and Spirin, 1989). The expo￾sure to severe γ-irradiation leads to reduced seed setting in tomato and Capsicum (Yamakawa 
and Sparrow, 1966), Indian pea (Sushil and Dubey, 1998), groundnut (Mensah and Obadoni, 
2007), and sunflower (Kumar and Ratnam, 2010).
5. Effects of radiation in plant physiology and molecular biology
Plant growth and development are governed by several mechanisms that include proper 
mobilization of growth hormones, cell cycle regulation, the activity of relevant enzymes, 
proper metabolic machinery functioning, and timely expression of genes that regulate growth 
phenomena (Das et al., 2021; Keshan et al., 2021; Singh et al., 2022). When plants are exposed 
to radiation or accumulation of radioisotopes could lead to alteration in the metabolic state of 
an organism, which orchestrates a cascade of molecular reactions.
5.1 Effect on genetic material like DNA
Radiation either directly or indirectly disrupts an organism’s molecular state, triggering 
a chain of molecular reactions which cause massive changes in cellular mechanisms. Several 
mechanisms result in mutagenic alterations in living cells when plant materials, specifically 
seeds, are exposed to γ-irradiation. Due to the high energy and increased penetrability of 5. Effects of radiation in plant physiology and molecular biology 289
γ-radiation into exposed cells and tissues, the DNA of the subject material may be severely 
altered (Jorgensen, 2009; Zhang et al., 2014). These changes can occur as a result of direct γ￾irradiation physical strikes on DNA or as a result of the production of reactive O2 species such 
as hydrogen peroxides, hydroxyl ions, and other active atomic oxygen that can interact with 
DNA and other cellular components and biomolecules, resulting in ionization, functional 
changes in proteins and enzymes, and overall metabolic activities (Zaka et al., 2004; Majeed 
et al., 2017). Radiation-induced DNA damage will result in the presence of DNA lesions, oxi￾dized purines and pyrimidines, point mutations, single-strand breakage (SSB), double-strand 
breakage (DSB), cross-linking, as well as cluster damage (Kryston et al., 2011).
SSB and DSB have unavoidable repercussions such as chromosome defects and instability, 
micronucleus formation, and genetic disability (Zhao et al., 2020). Research has also identi￾fied the presence of chromosomal aberrations following radiation exposure (Dowlath et al., 
2021). According to these studies, stable chromosomal translocations exist long after IR expo￾sure (Katsube et al., 2017). Radiation can cause either apoptosis or a DNA repair process. SSBs 
have a minimal chance of triggering cell death or mutation since they are often repaired by 
biological mechanisms. DSBs caused mutagenesis or death because they are difficult to repair 
(Neijenhuis et al., 2009). Thus damage in DNA as a result of irradiation will cause a drastic 
change in the transcriptome and proteome of the organism, which ultimately affects the met￾abolic process of the organism, either leading to impaired metabolism or in severe cases cell 
death. Such lethal mutations are responsible for the high amount of abortive seeds in plants 
that are exposed to irradiation (Geras’kin et al., 2011).
Geras’kin et al. (2003) conducted a study of cytogenetic effects in three generations of win￾ter rye and wheat (from 1987 to 1989), cultivated at four plots with varying degrees of ra￾dioactive pollution within 10km Chernobyl Nuclear Power Plant zone. It was noticed that 
the frequency of aberrant cells in the intercalary meristem of winter rye and wheat of the 
second and third generations was much greater than that of the first generations in the fall of 
1989. Because all three generations of plants were kept in the same circumstances and were 
subjected to the same radiation, the most likely explanation for the observed phenomena is 
genomic instability in plants of the second and third generations that were developed from 
radiation-affected seeds. Popova et al. (1984) reported the first data on cytogenetic impacts 
in wild vetch plants, which were collected from a radium industry waste site in the Komi 
Republic. Comparing the data of Geras’kin et al. (2003) and Evseeva et al. (2009), it was dis￾covered that the frequency of chromosomal aberration in root tips of wild vetch seedlings 
reduced by 28% over 22years, while the dosage rate decreased by 56%, which could be due 
to the flat denudation typical of river terraces, causing a decline in radiation exposure at a 
location having a high level of long-lived radionuclides (Evseeva et al., 2012). It was also ob￾served that the chromosomal aberration frequency fell by 1.3% each year on average, whereas 
the absorbed dosage was reduced by 2.3% per year. A decrease in absorbed dosage appears to 
happen rapidly than a decrease in aberration.
5.2 Effect on cellular structure
Ionizing radiation, such as γ-rays, interacts with atoms or molecules to form free radicals 
in cells. These radicals are known to alter or destroy essential components of plant cells, 
and they have been shown to influence plant morphology, anatomy, biochemistry, and 
physiology differently depending on the intensity of irradiation. Alterations in plant 290 15. Radioisotopes and their impact on plants 
cellular structure and metabolism, such as dilatation of thylakoid membranes, changes in 
photosynthesis, modification of the antioxidative system, and accumulation of phenolic 
compounds are among these consequences (Kim et al., 2004; Kovacs and Keresztes, 2002; 
Wi et al., 2005).
In a study conducted by Wi et al. (2005) to understand the ultrastructural changes of cell 
organelles after γ-irradiation, it was observed that the chloroplast structure in the cortical 
cells of stems was noticeably altered when they were subjected to γ-irradiation exceeding 
50Gy in Arabidopsis. The thylakoids were enlarged and destructed to a significant degree. The 
size of chloroplasts in low-dose and high-dose irradiation stems, however, did not change 
appreciably. Mitochondria also displayed distortion in shape as well as dilation in endoplas￾mic reticulum (ER) membranes when exposed to γ-irradiation exceeding 50Gy. It was also 
observed that higher exposure to γ-irradiation causes separation of plasmalemma from the 
cell wall. The studies by Bondada and Oosterhuis (2003) and Carmi and Shomer (1979) have 
observed that, following high-dose of irradiation, multiple plastoglobuli (plastid lipoprotein 
particles surrounded by a lipid monolayer membrane) were found to accumulate on the chlo￾roplasts of stems, with the larger ones primarily in the stroma areas. After high-dose irradi￾ation, starch granules were clearly visible in the chloroplasts, similar to the appearance of 
plastoglobuli. The build-up of starch in chloroplasts, as well as damage and disorientation of 
grana and thylakoids, would suggest carbohydrate transport inhibition.
The ROS and free radicals generated due to oxidative stress cause the oxidative breakdown 
of lipids as a result of stress is known as lipid peroxidation. Lipid peroxidation is especially 
dangerous for cellular and organellar membranes since phospholipids integral component 
of biological membranes, undergo lipid peroxidation and thus promote oxidative membrane 
damage (Pannkuk et al., 2016). The ROS could also cause lipid peroxidation (LPO) of poly￾unsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs), chromatin lipids, lipoproteins, and lipid-rich membranes 
(Makhlouf and Makhlouf, 2012). This could cause cellular disfunction and could affect cellu￾lar processes such as ion transport and cell signaling (Van der Paal et al., 2016).
5.3 Effect on cellular pigments
Irradiation generated (ROS), superoxide radicals, and hydroxyl radicals, all are known 
to have negative repercussions for photosynthetic pigments and electron transport (Singh 
et al., 2022). The formation of free radicals at certain radiation doses could directly impair 
the photosynthetic mechanism and impede electron transport. Also, it has been noted that 
after irradiation the level of photosynthetic pigments is associated with one another (Goh 
et al., 2014). Due to the prevention of chlorophyll accumulation after radiation exposure and 
promotes chlorophyll breakdown and a reduction in plant photosynthetic activity a marked 
decrease in chlorophyll and carotenoid pigments are observed (Saleh, 2002; Wi et al., 2007). 
Among the photosynthetic pigments, carotenoid was found to be more prone to irradiation 
damage because carotenoids absorb light and help protect chlorophyll from photooxidative 
degradation and the carotenoid content displayed a negative relation to irradiation dosage 
(Kim et al., 2004). Even though carotenoids can respond to oxidative stress by scavenging 
singlet oxygen species, it helps in the survival of the cell, but the study by Singh et al. (2011)
identified that the carotenoid content decreases in bean plants exposed to UV-B irradiation.5. Effects of radiation in plant physiology and molecular biology 291
5.4 Effect on proteins
Proteins present inside cells are important biological targets for oxidative damage and are 
impacted by irradiation in a variety of ways, including oxidation, cleavage, carbonylation, 
cross-linking amino acid conversion, and redox processes produced by ROS (Nambiar et al., 
2011; Xie et al., 2019). According to Garrison (1987), irradiation-induced oxidation of proteins 
could cause the oxidation of cysteine side chains and result in the formation of mixed disul￾fide bonds between protein thiols and low molecular weight groups. When peptide bonds are 
cleaved, α-amidation or diamide might result in the cleavage of protein derivatives (Garrison, 
1987). The interaction of the carbonyl groups of oxidized proteins can produce inter- and 
intra-protein cross-linking (Suzuki, 2019). In short, when proteins are exposed to a high dose 
of radiation, they degrade and lose function.
5.5 Effect on cellular oxidative states
When radiations interact with biological systems, excessive amounts of reactive oxygen 
species (ROS) such as OH−, H2O2, and superoxide molecules (O2-) are produced (Ali et al., 
2015; Dadupanthi and Garu, 2014). The negative effects of radiation exposures are mostly 
linked to the overproduction of reactive oxygen species (ROS), which produces harmful con￾sequences in biological systems. When the level of reactive oxygen species (ROS) increases 
in comparison to the endogenous level of antioxidants it causes oxidative damage (Gultekin 
et al., 2013). This harms cellular macromolecules, causing structural and functional damage 
to cellular processes and decreasing plant productivity (Gill and Tuteja, 2010; Rahman et al., 
2012). Within chloroplasts, oxygen serves as the last electron acceptor, allowing the respira￾tory system to create free radicals. Cell walls and membrane structures can be attacked by 
free radicals produced by irradiation, resulting in membrane disintegration (Casarett, 1968).
H2O2 is a typical metabolite in cells under ideal plant development conditions and is not 
particularly harmful, but when its concentrations are elevated by environmental stressors or 
ionizing radiation, it can cause cell death (Halliwell, 1974). Furthermore, a rise in endogenous 
H2O2 levels has been linked to the induction of leaf senescence (Mondal and Choudhuri, 
1981). The interactions between cellular macromolecules and ionizing radiation or ROS pro￾duced by water radiolysis are responsible for these findings. Thus, the increased appearance 
of CPDs in irradiated plants could be due to the inhibition of antioxidant enzyme activities for 
H2O2 detoxification or to increased H2O2 production through enzyme-mediated reactions as 
well as water radiolysis, e.g., extracellular oxalate oxidase and amine oxidase in the apoplast, 
and NADPH oxidase in plasma membranes (Dwyer et al., 1996; Hurkman and Tanaka, 1996; 
Remo and Bertani, 1989). Wi et al. (2007) has reported the presence of a high level of H2O2 in 
the leaf, hypocotyl, and petiole of γ-irradiated pumpkin plants.
5.6 Cell death
Oxidative stress destroys biomolecules such as proteins and lipids and induces mito￾chondrial depolarization, resulting in an imbalance in the redox state of cells. This trig￾gers a chain of events that results in cell death (Pardo et al., 2019). Through the channels 292 15. Radioisotopes and their impact on plants 
of proapoptotic proteins such BAX and BAK, mitochondrial depolarization releases cyto￾chrome C into the cytoplasm (Düssmann et al., 2017).
Further, cytochrome C binds to the APAF-1 proteins to form an apoptosome complex that 
starts the caspase cascade (Rahmanian et al., 2016). When the caspase pathway is activated, 
DNAse breaks the DNA and cleaves cytosolic and nuclear proteins, resulting in cell death. 
Another apoptosis mechanism is triggered by radiation-induced cellular damage or extreme 
oxidative stress, and it is regulated by the p53 protein (Kulaberoglu et  al., 2016; Sueiro￾Benavides et al., 2021). BAX in the cytosol is activated by further modulation of pro-apoptotic 
proteins such as PUMA (p53 upregulated modulator of apoptosis). The membrane-bound 
form of activated BAX opens the voltage-dependent anion channel in mitochondria, allowing 
cytochrome C to be released. As previously explained, the release of cytochrome C triggers a 
cascade of proteins that results in cell death.
6. Radio-adaptation by plants
Two types of consequences have been discovered in radiation-affected ecosystems. 
Direct effects arise in the first few days following an accident when short-lived radionu￾clides are the predominant contributors to the dosage. This sort of influence is determined 
by the radiosensitivity of the species that make up an ecosystem. Direct effects might range 
from growth inhibition to mortality or even changes in community structure, depending 
on the dosage. Lethal dosage for species is extraordinarily broad, spanning several orders 
of magnitude (Whicker and Schultz, 1982). Only a portion of the lethal dosage ranges for 
various species overlap. As a result, some radiosensitive organisms perish after receiving 
large doses of radiation, while others have crucial activities repressed, while the same 
amount is innocuous or even stimulating for radioresistant species. This sets the stage for 
the emergence of indirect impacts in exposed ecosystems. Each ecological community is 
a self-contained, structured system in which a variety of ecological interactions help to 
maintain stability. Irradiation can cause ecological connections between ecosystem com￾ponents to be disrupted. Such impacts may operate as a perturbation trigger, resulting 
in outcomes that differ from what would be predicted from direct effects detected at the 
organismal level.
Exposure to radionuclides has a temporal effect on an organism’s progress through￾out multiple organizational levels, beginning with the initiation of critical changes in 
structures and biomolecules, which later trigger the repair mechanisms, resulting in cell 
death or mutations. As revealed by the meta-analysis conducted by Kozlov and Zvereva 
(2011) on the reactions of terrestrial biota to industrial pollution, the relative abundance 
of organisms decreases with time from the start of pollution, while the effect on the indi￾vidual performance of organisms living in polluted environments tends to weaken. As a 
result, populations living near a contaminated site may be subjected to selective pressure, 
which may result in greater pollution resistance. If it can be proved that individuals from 
a contaminated location have greater resistance and that differences in resistance between 
populations have a genetic base, thus comparing radiosensitivity of populations across 
sites may confirm radioadaptation. Due to selection for enhanced repair system effective￾ness, the population resistance shows a divergence. This has been proved by laboratory 6. Radio-adaptation by plants 293
studies of repair inhibitions, dose-effect relationships for low- and high-LET radiations, 
measurements of unscheduled DNA synthesis, and the efficacy of single-strand break re￾covery (Shevchenko et al., 1992). The probable mechanisms of adaptation to radioisotope 
contamination were studied by Kovalchuk et al. (2004), it was identified that chronically 
irradiated plants exhibited exceptionally low recombination levels but the level of global 
genome methylation was identified to be high, which could have prevented massive ge￾nome rearrangements.
Even if there are many types of research regarding the abrupt evolutionary change in 
plants in response to radiation and radioisotope exposure, the majority of studies have used 
plants with short life cycles. Such studies in perennials are very rare, even though perennials 
are dominant plants in most of the environment. It is presumed that under reduced selection 
pressure, the lengthy generation periods among perennials likely restrict the rate at which 
populations become significantly more resistant to contaminants. Furthermore, the study by 
Hoffmann and Sgro (2011) suggests that an abrupt change in environmental conditions as a 
result of a serious radiation accident could lead to extinction rather than the evolution of the 
organism. Thus a question that arises is could perennial species evolve rapidly thus allowing 
them to adapt to the rapid environmental change? According to the study of Geras’kin et al. 
(2005) seeds from Scots pine populations growing in the vicinity of the “Radon” radioac￾tive waste storage facility showed higher resistance to acute gamma ray exposure. A simi￾lar finding was by Kal'Chenko and Fedotov (2001) in Scots pine seedlings exposed to acute 
g-radiation in Chernobyl in 1997. These observations suggest that the evolutionary change in 
long-lived trees may also be extraordinarily rapid.
A possible explanation for radio-adaptation is that cells are selected based on their radio￾sensitivity, with sensitive cells being eliminated and replaced with more radioresistant cells 
(Kal'Chenko and Fedotov, 2001). An alternate hypothesis involves the existence of heritable 
epigenetic alterations in the activity of functional genes throughout several cell generations, 
which was observed in the case of genomic DNA of pine trees exposed to the Chernobyl 
tragedy, which showed significant hypermethylation and was found to be dose-dependent 
(Kovalchuk et al., 2003). According to the observations of Angers et al. (2010), methylation 
patterns are thought to be passed down through generations, and any change in them could 
cause a change in the expression of a variety of stress-related and housekeeping genes. More 
research is certainly needed to determine the role of epigenetic mechanisms in wild plant 
populations’ adaptive responses to prolonged radiation exposure.
In general evolutionary adaptation can happen quickly, and it can help organisms to cope 
with stressful situations or seize opportunities coming from changes in the environment. But, 
such a conclusion does not apply in all instances. The difficulties include determining when 
evolution will occur and identifying prospective winners and losers. Thus there could be 
instances where a negative effect is acquired by an organism. Such changes could lead to 
a negative influence on evolutionary adaptation and could also lead to the extinction of an 
organism. In contrast to the observations of Shevchenko et al. (1992) and Kal'Chenko and 
Fedotov (2001), no significant and reproducible difference in resistance was observed be￾tween seeds collected from the reference and exposed Scots pine populations which were 
subjected to subsequent gamma-ray exposure from the Chernobyl accident (Bryansk Region) 
(Geras’kin et al., 2011). Likewise, the crested hairgrass seeds that have been exposed to ra￾diation for over half-century and have high levels of chromosomal aberrations did not 294 15. Radioisotopes and their impact on plants 
demonstrate any meaningful improvement in resistance to the extra acute gamma-ray ex￾posure (Geras’kin et al., 2012). The results were unaffected by a significant drop in the acute 
irradiation dose rate (from 2970Gy/h to 39Gy/h). The lack of adaptation to prolonged ra￾diation exposure observed in some plant populations raises concerns about the parameters 
under which radio-adaptation may occur and raises questions like under which conditions 
radio-adaptation occurs and what are the variables which influence such an adaptive re￾sponse and whether these adaptations will be adequate to keep up with the level of radioiso￾tope contamination in case of a spontaneous event?
7. Use of radioisotopes in crop improvement: A positive side
Radioisotopes and related controlled radiation are used in crop improvement, food preser￾vation, groundwater determination, and sterilization of medical supplies, hormone analysis, 
industrial processes, and study of environmental pollution. Nutrients labeled with radioac￾tive isotopes such as P-32 or N-15 are used to study absorption by the plant and the loss of nu￾trients in the environment. The amount of atmospheric N-fixation can be directly assessed by 
isotope N-15. Ionizing radiation is applied to male insects through the sterile insect technique 
(SIT) to make them sterile for plant protection. In latest years, contributions of radiation￾induced genetic modifications in crop improvement are notable. Radiation is utilized to im￾prove the genetic constitution of plants to equip the exiting crop to withstand harsh climatic 
conditions as well as increase pest and disease resistance. The genetic variability of the crop is 
a valuable asset for crop improvement, mutations generated by exposure to different forms of 
radiations could be used to develop desired mutant lines that are dis of higher quality, early 
yielding, early germinating, stress-resistant, and more. About 200 crop varieties and more 
or less 200 ornamental cultivars based on induced mutations were released and approved 
commercially, out of which many becomes economically important later. Pesticides that are 
radiolabelled are used to track the persistence of pesticide residues in food, soil, groundwater, 
and the environment. This research has aided in tracing and minimizing pesticide and insec￾ticide adverse effects (Singh et al., 2013).
8. Conclusion
Studies of plant genetics and development on exposure to amounts of radionuclides offer 
an opportunity to experimentally investigate exposure to a wide range of ionizing radiation 
sources. Current knowledge suggests that many plants are vulnerable to such exposures as 
evidenced by the many examples of genetic damage and developmental abnormalities not 
widely seen under “normal” conditions. Lower doses stimulate the plant growth plant by ei￾ther direct genome modifications or regulation of cellular processes. Conversely, higher doses 
cause genomic damage, production of free radicals, and reactive oxygen species which neg￾atively influence germination and growth factors resulting in arrested germination, survival, 
and growth abnormalities. Although the optimum dose of irradiation is difficult to suggest. 
However, it seems that in most studies radiation doses (above than 100Gy) correspond to bad 
effects on many plant species.References 295
References
Ahuja, S., Kumar, M., Kumar, P., Gupta, V.K., Singhal, R.K., Yadav, A., Singh, B., 2014. Metabolic and biochemical 
changes caused by gamma irradiation in plants. J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem. 300 (1), 199–212.
Ali, Y.F., Desouky, O.S., Selim, N.S., Ereiba, K.M., 2015. Assessment of the role of α-lipoic acid against the oxidative 
stress of induced iron overload. J. Radiat. Res. Appl. Sci. 8 (1), 26–35.
Angers, B., Castonguay, E., Massicotte, R., 2010. Environmentally induced phenotypes and DNA methylation: how 
to deal with unpredictable conditions until the next generation and after. Mol. Ecol. 19 (7), 1283–1295.
Aref, I.M., Khan, P.R., Al Sahli, A.A., Husen, A., Ansari, M.K.A., Iqbal, M., 2016. Response of Datura innoxia Linn. to gamma 
rays and its impact on plant growth and productivity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., India Sec. B: Biol. Sci. 86 (3), 623–629.
Asare, A.T., Mensah, F., Acheampong, S., Asare-Bediako, E., Armah, J., 2017. Effects of gamma irradiation on agro￾morphological characteristics of okra (Abelmoschus esculentus L. Moench.). Adv. Agricult.
Aynehband, A., Afsharinafar, K., 2012. Effect of gamma irradiation on germination characters of amaranth seeds. 
European J. Exp. Biol 2 (4), 995–999.
Bondada, B.R., Oosterhuis, D.M., 2003. Morphometric analysis of chloroplasts of cotton leaf and fruiting organs. Biol. 
Plant. 47 (2), 281–284.
Borzouei, A., Kafi, M., Khazaei, H., Naseriyan, B., Majdabadi, A., 2010. Effects of gamma radiation on germination 
and physiological aspects of wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) seedlings. Pak. J. Bot. 42 (4), 2281–2290.
Burger, A., Weidinger, M., Adlassnig, W., Puschenreiter, M., Lichtscheidl, I., 2019. Response of Plantago major to 
cesium and strontium in hydroponics: absorption and effects on morphology, physiology and photosynthesis. 
Environ. Pollut. 254, 113084.
Carmi, A., Shomer, I., 1979. Starch accumulation and photosynthetic activity in primary leaves of bean (Phaseolus 
vulgaris L.). Ann. Bot. 44 (4), 479–484.
Casarett, A.P., 1968. Radiation chemistry and effects of gamma radiation on the cell. In: Casarett, A.P. (Ed.), Radiation 
Biology. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
Chagvardieff, P., Dimon, B., Carrier, P., Triantaphylides, C., 1989. Cell division arrest by gamma-irradiation in photo￾autotrophic suspension culture of Euphorbia characias: maintenance of photosynthetic capacity and overaccumula￾tion of sucrose. Plant Cell Tiss. Org. Cult. 19 (2), 141–149.
Cheema, A.A., Atta, B.M., 2003. Radiosensitivity studies in basmati rice. Pak. J. Bot. 35 (2), 197–207.
Dadupanthi, P., Garu, U., 2014. The radioprotective effect of Aloe vera in liver of Swiss albino mice. World J. Pharm. 
Pharm. Sci., 1506–1510.
Das, A., Mehta, S., Abdelmotelb, K.F., Lavale, S.A., Aggarwal, S.K., Jat, B.S., Tripathi, A., Garg, S., 2021. 
Jasmonic Acid for Sustainable Plant Growth and Production Under Adverse Environmental Conditions. In: 
Husen, A. (Ed.), Plant Performance Under Environmental Stress. Springer, Cham, pp. 71–98. https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-030-78521-5_4.
Dowlath, M.J., Karuppannan, S.K., Sinha, P., Dowlath, N.S., Arunachalam, K.D., Ravindran, B., Chang, S.W., Nguyen￾Tri, P., Nguyen, D.D., 2021. Effects of radiation and role of plants in radioprotection: a critical review. Sci. Total 
Environ. 779, 146431. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.146431.
Düssmann, H., Perez-Alvarez, S., Anilkumar, U., Papkovsky, D.B., Prehn, J.H., 2017. Single-cell time-lapse imaging 
of intracellular O 2 in response to metabolic inhibition and mitochondrial cytochrome-c release. Cell Death Dis. 
8 (6). e2853-e2853.
Dwyer, S.C., Legendre, L., Low, P.S., Leto, T.L., 1996. Plant and human neutrophil oxidative burst complexes contain 
immunologically related proteins. Biochim. Biophys. Acta (BBA)-Gen. Sub. 1289 (2), 231–237.
Evseeva, T., Majstrenko, T., Geras’kin, S., Brown, J.E., Belykh, E., 2009. Estimation of ionizing radiation impact on 
natural Vicia cracca populations inhabiting areas contaminated with uranium mill tailings and radium production 
wastes. Sci. Total Environ. 407 (20), 5335–5343.
Evseeva, T.I., Belykh, E.S., Maĭstrenko, T.A., Geras’kin, S.A., Taskaev, A.I., Vakhrusheva, O.M., 2012. Regularities of 
lateral distribution of uranium and thorium decay series radionuclides in the anthropogenically changed soils 
from the area of radium production waste storage. Radiats. Biol. Radioecol. 52 (1), 103–112.
Fedotov, I.S., Kal'chenko, V.A., Igoninna, E.V., Rubanovich, A.V., 2006. Radiation and genetic consequences of ioniz￾ing irradiation on population of Pinus sylvestris L. within the zone of the Chernobyl NPP. Radiats. Biol. Radioecol. 
46 (3), 268–278.
Garrison, W.M., 1987. Reaction mechanisms in the radiolysis of peptides, polypeptides, and proteins. Chem. Rev. 87 
(2), 381–398.296 15. Radioisotopes and their impact on plants 
Geras’kin, S.A., Dikarev, V.G., Zyablitskaya, Y.Y., Oudalova, A.A., Spirin, Y.V., Alexakhin, R.M., 2003. Genetic consequences 
of radioactive contamination by the Chernobyl fallout to agricultural crops. J. Environ. Radioact. 66 (1–2), 155–169.
Geras’kin, S.A., Kim, J.K., Oudalova, A.A., Vasiliyev, D.V., Dikareva, N.S., Zimin, V.L., Dikarev, V.G., 2005. Bio￾monitoring the genotoxicity of populations of Scots pine in the vicinity of a radioactive waste storage facility. 
Mutat. Res./Genet. Toxicol. Environ. Mutagen. 583 (1), 55–66.
Geras’kin, S., Oudalova, A., Dikareva, N., Spiridonov, S., Hinton, T., Chernonog, E., Garnier-Laplace, J., 2011. Effects of radio￾active contamination on Scots pines in the remote period after the Chernobyl accident. Ecotoxicology 20 (6), 1195–1208.
Geras’kin, S.A., Oudalova, A.A., Dikarev, V.G., Dikareva, N.S., Mozolin, E.M., Hinton, T., Spiridonov, S.I., 
Copplestone, D., Garnier-Laplace, J., 2012. Effects of chronic exposure in populations of Koeleria gracilis Pers. from 
the Semipalatinsk nuclear test site, Kazakhstan. J. Environ. Radioact. 104, 55–63.
Gill, S.S., Tuteja, N., 2010. Reactive oxygen species and antioxidant machinery in abiotic stress tolerance in crop 
plants. Plant Physiol. Biochem. 48 (12), 909–930.
Goh, E.J., Kim, J.B., Kim, W.J., Ha, B.K., Kim, S.H., Kang, S.Y., Seo, Y.W., Kim, D.S., 2014. Physiological changes and anti￾oxidative responses of Arabidopsis plants after acute and chronic γ-irradiation. Radiat. Environ. Biophys. 53 (4), 677–693.
Gultekin, F.A., Bakkal, B.H., Guven, B., Tasdoven, I., Bektas, S., Can, M., Comert, M., 2013. Effects of ozone oxidative 
preconditioning on radiation-induced organ damage in rats. J. Radiat. Res. 54 (1), 36–44.
Gupta, D.K., Chatterjee, S., Datta, S., Voronina, A.V., Walther, C., 2016. Radionuclides: accumulation and transport in 
plants. Rev. Environ. Contam. Toxicol. 241, 139–160.
Hall, S., Rudrawar, S., Zunk, M., Bernaitis, N., Arora, D., McDermott, C.M., Anoopkumar-Dukie, S., 2016. Protection 
against radiotherapy-induced toxicity. Antioxidants 5 (3), 22.
Halliwell, B., 1974. Superoxide dismutase, catalase and glutathione peroxidase: solutions to the problems of living 
with oxygen. New Phytol. 73 (6), 1075–1086.
Hoffmann, A.A., Sgro, C.M., 2011. Climate change and evolutionary adaptation. Nature 470, 479e485.
Hosoya, N., Miyagawa, K., 2014. Targeting DNA damage response in cancer therapy. Cancer Sci. 105 (4), 370–388.
Hurkman, W.J., Tanaka, C.K., 1996. Effect of salt stress on germin gene expression in barley roots. Plant Physiol. 110 
(3), 971–977.
Ipatyev, V., Bulavik, I., Baginsky, V., Goncharenko, G., Dvornik, A., 1999. Forest and Chernobyl: forest ecosystems 
after the Chernobyl nuclear power plant accident: 1986–1994. J. Environ. Radioact. 42 (1), 9–38.
Irfaq, M., Nawab, K., 2001. Effect of gamma irradiation on some morphological characteristics of three wheat 
(Triticum aestivum L.) cultivars. J. Biol. Sci. 1 (10), 935–945.
Jorgensen, T.J., 2009. Enhancing radiosensitivity: targeting the DNA repair pathways. Cancer Biol. Ther. 8 (8), 665–670.
Kal'Chenko, V.A., Fedotov, I.S., 2001. Genetic effects of acute and chronic ionizing irradiation on Pinus sylvestris L. 
inhabiting the Chernobyl Meltdown Area. Russ. J. Genet. 37 (4), 341–350.
Kalchenko, V.A., Spirin, D.A., 1989. Genetic-effects revealed in populations of Pinus sylvestris L. growing under ex￾posure to small doses of chronic irradiation. Genetika 25 (6), 1059–1064.
Karacan, F., 2011. The simple radiochemical determination of 90 Sr in environmental solid samples by solvent ex￾traction. J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem. 288 (3), 685–691.
Katsube, T., Bing, W., Kaoru, T., Yasuharu, N., Guillaume, V., Taiki, K., Naoko, S., Yoshihisa, K., Qiang, L., Akinori, 
M., Tetsuo, N., Mitsuru, N., 2017. Effects of chronic restraint-induced stress on radiation-induced chromosomal 
aberrations in mouse splenocytes. Mutat. Res. Genet. Toxicol. Environ. Mutagen. 813, 1383–5718. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.mrgentox.2016.11.005.
Keshan, R., Mehta, S., Abdelmotelb, K.F., Aggarwal, S.K., Lavale, S.A., Jat, B.S., Tripathi, A., Rajput, L.S., 2021. Salicylic 
acid for vigorous plant growth and enhanced yield under harsh environment. In: Husen, A. (Ed.), Plant Performance 
Under Environmental Stress. Springer, Cham, pp. 99–127. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-78521-5_5.
Khan, I.A., 1979. Induced quantitative variability in mung bean (Phaseolus aureus Roxb.). J. Cytol. Genet. 14, 142–145.
Kim, J.H., Baek, M.H., Chung, B.Y., Wi, S.G., Kim, J.S., 2004. Alterations in the photosynthetic pigments and antioxidant 
machineries of red pepper (Capsicum annuum L.) seedlings from gamma-irradiated seeds. J. Plant Biol. 47 (4), 314–321.
Kovacs, E., Keresztes, A., 2002. Effect of gamma and UV-B/C radiation on plant cells. Micron 33 (2), 199–210.
Kovalchuk, O., Burke, P., Arkhipov, A., Kuchma, N., James, S.J., Kovalchuk, I., Pogribny, I., 2003. Genome hyper￾methylation in Pinus silvestris of Chernobyl—a mechanism for radiation adaptation? Mutat. Res./Fundam. Mol. 
Mech. Mutagen. 529 (1–2), 13–20.
Kovalchuk, I., Abramov, V., Pogribny, I., Kovalchuk, O., 2004. Molecular aspects of plant adaptation to life in the 
Chernobyl zone. Plant Physiol. 135 (1), 357–363.
Kozlov, M.V., Zvereva, E.L., 2011. A second life for old data: global patterns in pollution ecology revealed from pub￾lished observational studies. Environ. Pollut. 159 (5), 1067–1075.References 297
Kryston, T.B., Georgiev, A.B., Pissis, P., Georgakilas, A.G., 2011. Role of oxidative stress and DNA damage in human 
carcinogenesis. Mutat. Res./Fundam. Mol. Mech. Mutagen. 711 (1–2), 193–201.
Kulaberoglu, Y., Gundogdu, R., Hergovich, A., 2016. The Role of p53/p21/p16 in DNA damage Signaling and DNA 
Repair. In: Genome Stability: From Virus to Human Application. Elsevier Inc, pp. 243–256.
Kumar, P.R.R., Ratnam, S.V., 2010. Mutagenic effectiveness and efficiency in varieties of sunflower (Helianthus 
annuus L.) by separate and combined treatment with gamma-rays and sodium azide. Afr. J. Biotechnol. 9 (39), 
6517–6521.
Kumar, P., Sharma, V., Raje, R.S., Singh, B., 2016. Low-dose gamma irradiation i nduces water activity, leaf K+/Na+, 
glycine betaine, antioxidant enzyme activity and reduces lipid peroxidation and protease activity to enhance salt 
tolerance in pigeon pea [Cajanus cajan (L.) Millsp]. J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem. 308 (3), 965–980.
Lachumy, S.J., Oon, C.E., Deivanai, S., Saravanan, D., Vijayarathna, S., Choong, Y.S., Yeng, C., Latha, L.Y., Sasidharan, 
S., 2013. Herbal remedies for combating irradiation: a green anti-irradiation approach. Asian Pac. J. Cancer Prev. 
14 (10), 5553–5565.
Lawson, R.S., 1999. An Introduction to Radioactivity. Manchester Royal Infirmary, UK.
Majeed, A., Muhammad, Z., Ullah, R., Ullah, Z., Ullah, R., Chaudhry, Z., Siyar, S., 2017. Effect of gamma irradiation 
on growth and post-harvest storage of vegetables. PSM Biol. Res. 2 (1), 30–35.
Makhlouf, R., Makhlouf, I., 2012. Evaluation of the effect of Spirulina against gamma irradiation induced oxidative 
stress and tissue injury in rats. Int. J. Appl. Sci. Eng. Res 1 (2), 152–164.
Marcu, D., Damian, G., Cosma, C., Cristea, V., 2013. Gamma radiation effects on seed germination, growth and pig￾ment content, and ESR study of induced free radicals in maize (Zea mays). J. Biol. Phys. 39 (4), 625–634.
Markovic, J., Stevovic, S., 2019. Radioactive isotopes in soils and their impact on plant growth. In: Metals in Soil, p. 43.
Mensah, J.K., Obadoni, B., 2007. Effects of sodium azide on yield parameters of groundnut (Arachis hypogaea L.). Afr. 
J. Biotechnol. 6 (6).
Mondal, R., Choudhuri, M.A., 1981. Role of hydrogen peroxide in senescence of excised leaves of rice and maize. 
Biochem. Physiol. Pflanz. 176 (8), 700–709.
Nagata, T., Todoriki, S., Kikuchi, S., 2004. Radial expansion of root cells and elongation of root hairs of Arabidopsis 
thaliana induced by massive doses of gamma irradiation. Plant Cell Physiol. 45 (11), 1557–1565.
Nambiar, D., Rajamani, P., Singh, R.P., 2011. Effects of phytochemicals on ionization radiation-mediated carcinogen￾esis and cancer therapy. Mutat. Res./Rev. Mutat. Res. 728 (3), 139–157.
Neijenhuis, S., Verwijs-Janssen, M., Kasten-Pisula, U., Rumping, G., Borgmann, K., Dikomey, E., Begg, A.C., Vens, 
C., 2009. Mechanism of cell killing after ionizing radiation by a dominant negative DNA polymerase beta. DNA 
Repair 8 (3), 336–346.
Olasupo, F.O., Ilori, C.O., Forster, B.P., Bado, S., 2016. Mutagenic effects of gamma radiation on eight accessions of 
cowpea (Vigna unguiculata [L.] Walp.). Am. J. Plant Sci. 7 (2), 339–351.
Pannkuk, E.L., Laiakis, E.C., Mak, T.D., Astarita, G., Authier, S., Wong, K., Fornace, A.J., 2016. A lipidomic and metab￾olomic serum signature from nonhuman primates exposed to ionizing radiation. Metabolomics 12 (5), 80.
Pardo, M., Xu, F., Shemesh, M., Qiu, X., Barak, Y., Zhu, T., Rudich, Y., 2019. Nrf2 protects against diverse PM2. 5 
components-induced mitochondrial oxidative damage in lung cells. Sci. Total Environ. 669, 303–313.
Popova, O.N., Shershunova, V.I., Kodaneva, R.P., Taskaev, A.I., Nikiforov, V.S., 1984. Incidence of chromosome ab￾errations in a natural population of Vicia cracca L. in conditions of experimental uraniumeradium contamination. 
Radiobiology 24, 397–400 (in Russian).
Rahman, T., Hosen, I., Islam, M., Shekhar, H., 2012. Oxidative stress and human health. Adv. Biosci. Biotechnol. 3, 
997–1019. https://doi.org/10.4236/abb.2012.327123.
Rahmanian, N., Hosseinimehr, S.J., Khalaj, A., 2016. The paradox role of caspase cascade in ionizing radiation ther￾apy. J. Biomed. Sci. 23 (1), 1–13.
Remo, R., Bertani, A., 1989. Effect of decreasing oxygen concentration on polyamine metabolism in rice and wheat 
shoots. J. Plant Physiol. 135 (3), 375–377.
Saleh, O.M., 2002. Molecular genetic studies on irradiated wheat plants. IAEA, Thesis.
Shevchenko, V.A., Pechkurenkov, V.L., Abramov, V.I., 1992. Radiatsionnaya genetika prirodnykh populyatsii. Geneti 
cheskie posledstviya Kyshtymskoi avarii (Radiation Genetics of Natural Populations: Genetic Consequences of 
the Kyshtym Accident). Nauka, Moscow.
Singh, A.K., 2007. Mutagenic effectiveness and efficiency of gamma rays and ethyl methane sulphonate in mung￾bean. Madras Agric. J. 94 (1/6), 7–13.
Singh, B., Datta, P.S., 2010. Gamma irradiation to improve plant vigour, grain development, and yield attributes of 
wheat. Radiat. Phys. Chem. 79 (2), 139–143.298 15. Radioisotopes and their impact on plants 
Singh, A., Mehta, S., Yadav, S., Nagar, G., Ghosh, R., Roy, A., Chakraborty, A., Singh, I.K., 2022. How to Cope with 
the challenges of environmental stresses in the era of global climate change: an update on ROS stave off in plants. 
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 23, 1995.
Singh, A., Roy, R.P., 1971. X irradiation studies on Trigonella foenum-graecum L. Genet. Iber. 23, 44–66.
Singh, R., Singh, S., Tripathi, R., Agrawal, S.B., 2011. Supplemental UV-B radiation induced changes in growth, pig￾ments and antioxidant pool of bean (Dolichos lablab) under field conditions. J. Environ. Biol. 32 (2), 139–145.
Singh, B., Singh, J., Kaur, A., 2013. Applications of radioisotopes in agriculture. Int. J. Biotechnol. Bioeng. Res. 4 (3), 
167–174.
Singh, B., Ahuja, S., Singhal, R.K., Babu, P.V., 2014. Radiosensitivity studies and radiostability of ribulose-1,5 bis￾carboxylase and gas exchange characteristics in wheat, garden pea, field pea, spinach, and okra. Water Air Soil 
Pollut. 225 (1), 1–8.
Singhal, R.K., Ajay, K., Usha, N., Reddy, A.V.R., 2009. Evaluation of doses from ionising radiation to non-human 
species at Trombay, Mumbai, India. Radiat. Prot. Dosimetry 133 (4), 214–222.
Sinha, S.S.N., Godward, M.B.E., 1972. Radiation studies in Lens culinaris meiosis: abnormalities induced due to 
gamma radiation and its consequences. Cytologia 37 (4), 685–695.
Smirnov, E.G., Shein, G.P., Guro, N.B., Maltseva, L.N., 1983. Effect of acute gamma exposure on grassland. Russ. J. 
Ecol. 14, 34–38.
Sreedhar, M., Anurag, C., Aparna, M., Kumar, D.P., Singhal, R.K., Venu-Babu, P., 2013. Influence of γ-radiation stress 
on scavenging enzyme activity and cell ultra structure in groundnut (Arachis hypogaea L.). Adv. Appl. Sci. Res. 4 
(2), 35–44.
Sueiro-Benavides, R.A., Leiro-Vidal, J.M., Salas-Sánchez, A.Á., Rodríguez-González, J.A., Ares-Pena, F.J., López￾Martín, M.E., 2021. Radiofrequency at 2.45 GHz increases toxicity, pro-inflammatory and pre-apoptotic activity 
caused by black carbon in the RAW 264.7 macrophage cell line. Sci. Total Environ. 765, 142681.
Sushil, K., Dubey, D.K., 1998. Mutagenic efficiency and effectiveness of separate and combined treatments with 
gamma-rays, EMS and DES in khesari (Lathyrus sativus L.). J. Indian Bot. Soc. 77, 1–4.
Suzuki, Y.J., 2019. Oxidant-mediated protein amino acid conversion. Antioxidants 8 (2), 50.
Swaminathan, M.S., Gupta, L.K., 1967. Induced variability and selection advance for breeding in autotetraploid of 
Brassica compestris var. toria. Radiat. Bot. 7, 521–527.
UNCSEAR (United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation), 2010. Report to the general as￾sembly with Scientific Annexes. Annex B: Exposure of the Public and Workers from Various Sources of Radiation. 
New York, USA.
US Nuclear Regulatory Commission, 1996. The Regulation and Use of Radioisotopes in Today's World. Vol. 217 US 
Nuclear Regulatory Commission.
Van der Paal, J., Neyts, E.C., Verlackt, C.C., Bogaerts, A., 2016. Effect of lipid peroxidation on membrane permeability 
of cancer and normal cells subjected to oxidative stress. Chem. Sci. 7 (1), 489–498.
Verma, A.K., Reddy, K.S., Dhansekar, P., Singh, B., 2017. Effect of acute gamma radiation exposure on seed germina￾tion, survivability and seedling growth in cumin cv. Gujarat Cumin-4. Int. J. Seed Spices 7, 23–28.
Whicker, F.W., Schultz, V., 1982. Radioecology: Nuclear Energy and the Environment. vol. 1 CRC Press, Boca Raton, 
FL, pp. 75–150.
Wi, S.G., Chung, B.Y., Kim, J.H., Baek, M.H., Yang, D.H., Lee, J.W., Kim, J.S., 2005. Ultrastructural changes of cell 
organelles in Arabidopsis stems after gamma irradation. J. Plant Biol. 48 (2), 195–200.
Wi, S.G., Byung, Y.C., Jae-Sung, K., Jin-Hong, K., Myung-Hwa, B., Ju-Woon, L., Yoon, S.K., 2007. Effects of gamma 
irradiation on morphological changes and biological responses in plants. Micron 38 (6), 553–564.
Woodwell, G.M., 1967. Radiation and the patterns of nature: sensitivity of natural plant populations to ionizing radi￾ation seems to follow known ecological patterns. Science 156 (3774), 461–470.
Xie, L., Solhaug, K.A., Song, Y., Brede, D.A., Lind, O.C., Salbu, B., Tollefsen, K.E., 2019. Modes of action and adverse 
effects of gamma radiation in an aquatic macrophyte Lemna minor. Sci. Total Environ. 680, 23–34.
Yamakawa, K., Sparrow, A.H., 1966. The correlation of interphase chromosome volume with pollen abortion induced 
by chronic gamma irradiation. Radiat. Bot. 6 (1), 21–38.
Zaka, R., Chenal, C., Misset, M.T., 2004. Effects of low doses of short-term gamma irradiation on growth and devel￾opment through two generations of Pisum sativum. Sci. Total Environ. 320 (2–3), 121–129.
Zhang, Y., Guo, J., Qi, Y., Shao, Q., Liang, J., 2014. The prevention of radiation-induced DNA damage and apoptosis 
in human intestinal epithelial cells by salvianic acid A. J. Radiat. Res. Appl. Sci. 7 (3), 274–285.
Zhao, L., He, X., Shang, Y., Bao, C., Peng, A., Lei, X., Han, P., Mi, D., Sun, Y., 2020. Identification of potential 
radiation-responsive biomarkers based on human orthologous genes with possible roles in DNA repair pathways 
by comparison between Arabidopsis thaliana and homo sapiens. Sci. Total Environ. 702, 135076.
 Plants and their Interaction to Environmental Pollution 299 Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-99978-6.00013-3
CHAPTER
16
Effects of cell phone radiation 
on plants growth, active constituents 
and production
Ashok Yadava
 and Suchisree Jhab
a
ICAR-Central Agroforestry Research Institute, Jhansi, Uttar Pradesh, India, b
Plant Nutrition 
Department, Indofil Industries Limited, Thane, Maharashtra, India
Abbreviations
APX ascorbate peroxidase
CAT catalase
EMFr electromagnetic field radiations
EMr electromagnetic radiation
GSM global system for mobile
H2O2 hydrogen peroxide
MDA malonaldehyde
POD or POX peroxidase
PPO polyphenol oxidase
PPX exopolyphosphatase
RF radiofrequency
RNS reactive nitrogen species
ROS reactive oxygen species
SOD superoxide dismutase
WHO World Health Organization
1. Introduction
Since past decade, usage of cell phone has been immensely increased. The global system 
for mobile communication (GSM) technology is mainly responsible to transmit voice and 
data service in cell phone. In the GSM technology, 800–2400MHz nonionizing electromag￾netic field radiations (EMFr) are used for cell phone communication. Cell phones are the first 
(EMF) device used worldwide at high frequency (Kundi, 2009). At present there, 96.2% of 300 16. Effects of cell phone radiation on plants growth
total world population including both children and adults used cell phone (ITU, 2015). The 
gradual increasing of mobile/cell phone user is a matter of concern due to the adverse health 
effects of the radiation emitted from this device. The World Health Organization (WHO) re￾ported radiofrequency (RF) radiation of cell phone as “Possible Human Carcinogen” because 
it might convert normal human cells to cancer cells (WHO, 2011). These radiations also ad￾versely affect the plant system. The physiological pattern of plant system, rate of seed germi￾nation, root development, biomass of plant is reported to be changed in presence of cellular 
radiation (Tkalec et al., 2009; Akbal et al., 2012). These radiations also alter the epidermal mer￾istem formation, micronuclei production and chromosomal structure (Tafforeau et al., 2002, 
2004; Gustavino et al., 2014, 2015). Additionally, several transcription factors namely calmod￾ulin, Leb IPI, protease inhibitors etc. are affect at molecular level by electromagnetic radiation 
(Vian et al., 2006; Beaubois et al., 2007; Roux et al., 2008a,b). However, the exact mechanism by 
which plant reacts to stress generated due to cell phone radiation is largely unknown.
2. Plants and cell phone radiation or GSM radiation
In the current era of industrialization, the environment is deteriorating due to anthropo￾genic activities such as uses of pesticides, chemical based fertilizer, burning of fossil fuels, etc. 
(Singh et al., 2022). Like any other biological entity, plant can sense the changes around their 
habitat and they are seriously influenced by polluted environment due to their sessile nature 
(Khan et al., 2018; Mehta et al., 2019). All over the world (mostly) are concealed with different 
source of electromagnetic radiation (EMR) such as radio, television transmitters, base station 
for communication and GSM technology causes electromagnetic smog (Sharma et al., 2009). 
The electromagnetic radiation can be considered as a pollutant for the environment because 
it adversely affects civilization and environment. Previous researches have focused on the 
effects of EMR on animal cells, especially in humans. However, very limited studies have 
been reported on the effects of radiation-mediated pollution on plant system. The EMR have 
nonionizing behavior and plants are very sensitive to it.
3. Effects of cell phone radiation on plant system
3.1 Plant physiological response to radiation
Since the times immemorial, plants are the primary producers of food ecology and serve as 
important foundations in almost all food chains. Hence, it is pertinent to study the effects of 
cell phone radiation on plant system. Kouzmanova et al. (2009) reported that plants can per￾ceive the radiofrequency electromagnetic radiation (EMFr) emitted from cell phone and re￾spond accordingly. Plants absorb the EMFr and transform it into weak electro current, which 
damages the endodermis and leads to cell leakage (Goldsworthy, 2006). Plant cells respond 
to electromagnetic stimuli by changing their physiological, morphological and biochemical 
structure (Kumar et al., 2015). Previous studies have found a possible inverse link between 
EMFr and plant physiological processes, such as oxidative metabolism (Sharma et al., 2009; 
Tkalec et al., 2007), DNA damage (Li and Chow, 2001), enzyme activities (Sharma et al., 2010), 
alteration in mitosis (Tkalec et al., 2009) and ultimately cell death (Sharma et al., 2010).3. Effects of cell phone radiation on plant system 301
All researchers have either used cell phone or simulators for electromagnetic radiation, 
using various radiation frequencies and strengths in their experiment for different time in￾tervals. Few of them (like Hussein and El-Maghraby, 2014) consider a different approach of 
exposure. They conducted their study on wheat growth under several attributes like dis￾tance from cell phone, brand and condition of cell phone. More than a few studies have been 
conducted on germination, biomass production, transcription factors regulation and antiox￾idative metabolism to explore the possible toxic effects of EMFr on different plants such as 
soybean (Atak et al., 2003), duckweed (Tkalec et al., 2005, 2007), onion (Tkalec et al., 2009; 
Pesnya and Romanovsky, 2013), wheat (Hussein and El-Maghraby, 2014) and maize (Zare 
et  al., 2015a,b,c; Kumar et  al., 2015; Racuciu et  al., 2014), Pea and fenugreek (Sharma and 
Parihar, 2014).
Sharma et al. (2010) reported that cell phone radiation directly affects the growth rate of 
the Vigna radiate (Mung Bean) seedling by inducing various biochemical changes. Treatment 
with 60MHz radiation during sprouting stage of Raphanus sativus delayed the seed germi￾nation and affected the overall plant performance (Smith and Liboff, 1993). The growth rate 
of Lemna minor was reduced when exposed to 900MHz, however, no reduction or inhibition 
was observed with 400MHz. Therefore, it can be stated that the effects of radiation depend 
on the frequency and time of radiation. Kumar et al. (2015) revealed that alteration in starch 
and sucrose metabolism appeared in maize plant when maize seed exposed to cell phone ra￾diation (1800MHz for 4h). However, the exact mechanism of action of cell phone radiation in 
inhibition of plant growth and plant physiological processes are not clearly explained.
In contrast, Selvarani et al. (2020) suggested to use EMFr as a pre sowing seed treatment 
instead of chemicals, as the EMFr had significant effects on physiological attributes of rice 
(Oryza sativa. L) seedling. According to Selvarani et al. (2020), germination percentage, root 
length, shoot length, seedling length and vigor index was increased under EMFr by stimu￾lating cellular protein, ions and protection in polar cells. Similarly, Rotcharoen et al. (2003)
found the enhanced growth in rice plant under electric field (28.5kVm− 2
), whereas yield 
reduction in wheat and corn was reported by Soja et al. (2003) in field near high tension lines. 
Induction of plant epidermal meristems was observed under exposure to 900MHz EMFr and 
it reduced cellular ions (e.g., Ca+, Na+, and K+) contents (Tafforeau et al., 2002). Exposure to 
magnetic radiation stimulated seed germination, root and shoot regeneration and increased 
total chlorophyll content along with fresh weight of soybean seedlings (Atak et al., 2003). In 
compare, Sandu et al. (2005) reported a decrease in chlorophyll content in Robinia pseudoacacia
leaves with 400MHz EMFr.
The mobile phone radiation may be affected plant physiological process positively or neg￾atively. Nitrogen fixation is a fundamental physiological event found in legumes plant. Plants 
have ability to fix nitrogen and help to maintain soil fertility because of their symbiotic nature 
with the Rhizobium bacteria (Lavoisier, 2000). Nodulation occurs in plant roots due to symbi￾otic bacteria (Beijerinck, 1888). The nodulation in leguminous plant is affected by cell phone 
radiation (Sharma and Parihar, 2014). According to them, 2G and 3G cell phone radiation 
improve the rooting system in Pea and Fenugreek plant by increasing length of roots, number 
of nodules and size of nodules in the root. Plants (Pea and Fenugreek) develop their defense 
system against the stress caused by cell phone radiation, which increases the amount of en￾zymatic antioxidants such as guaiacol peroxidase and cellular protein, lipid content (Sharma 
and Parihar, 2014).302 16. Effects of cell phone radiation on plants growth
The enzymes are proteins, acts as catalysts that accelerate biological reaction without 
changing equilibrium of the reaction and a single enzyme can perform many rounds of catal￾ysis. It was reported that electromagnetic radiation of cell phone alters the configuration and 
function of some human protein (Stefi et al., 2019). Mobile phone radiation might alter the 
function of enzymes by altering protein configuration or function of the protein in plant sys￾tem also. Moreover, physiological processes which accelerated by enzymes, might be affected 
by cell phone radiation directly or indirectly. But no evidence was reported yet on the same. 
Therefore, detailed studies on the structural and functional changes of plant bio-molecules 
under cell phone radiation are required.
3.2 Biochemical response to radiation and defense system in plant
The several scientific reports have revealed that EMFr leads to oxidative stress in plant 
systems where modifications of biochemical process, enzymatic activities, and gene regula￾tion occurred. Under stressful condition, plants either upregulate or downregulate the anti￾oxidant production to counteract the complex chain reaction of free radicals such as reactive 
oxygen species (ROS) or reactive nitrogen species (RNS) which are highly toxic for cell even 
in limited quantity (Daud et al., 2016). Researchers have used several oxidative stress mark￾ers namely malonaldehyde (MDA), hydrogen peroxide (H2O2); metabolism related enzymes 
namely amylases, ATP, invertases and metabolic antioxidants such as catalase (CAT), perox￾idase (POD), polyphenol oxidase (PPO), and superoxide dismutase (SOD). Beaubois et al. 
(2007) and Ledoigt and Belpomme (2013) hypothesize membrane Ca++ ions to be initial target 
by Electromagnetic radiation (EMr) to stimulate the cell. The EMr alters the confirmation of 
NADPH plasmic membrane oxidase, leads ROS generation that may alter cellular proteomic 
functions.
Invertases hydrolyzed the sucrose to hexose monomers and supply to cellular processes 
whenever needed and thus play an important role to modulate the environmental stress 
(Roitsch and Gonzalez, 2004). Moreover, hexose mainly helps to maintain the osmotic pres￾sure, defense response and cell development (Sturm and Tang, 1999). Hence, the decreased 
activity of invertase indirectly interferes with growth regulation, development and carbon 
partitioning (Ranwala and Miller, 1998). Canli et al. (2011) and Taskin et al. (2013) reported the 
production of invertase in plant cell (Rhodotorula glutinis and Aspergillus niger) on exposure to 
EMFr. Kumar et al. (2015) observed an increasing invertases enzyme activity and accumula￾tion of total carbohydrate in the cell depending on the dose of EMFr exposure.
To avoid stressful situation, plant accumulates various metabolites and carbohydrates 
(Ranwala and Miller, 1998). However, after reaching threshold stress levels (extreme stressful 
condition from where plant cannot revive their capability), carbohydrate accumulation grad￾ually declined (Ranwala and Miller, 1998; Kumar et al., 2015). The carbohydrate decreasing 
under EMFr might be due to the incline of starch hydrolyzing enzymes activity or reduction 
in photosynthesis process.
Sharma et al. (2009) revealed that EMFr from mobile/cell phone induced oxidative stress 
in terms of enhanced electrolyte leakage, MDA and H2O2 accumulation. The increasing rate 
of MDA and H2O2 accumulation reflects the presence of stressful situation inside living bod￾ies. The MDA and H2O2 may cause DNA damage; protein, peptide and amino acid oxida￾tion or lipid peroxidation of membrane bounded organelles of plant cells (Fig. 1). The MDA 3. Effects of cell phone radiation on plant system 303
and H2O2 content significantly increased in various plants namely mung bean (Sharma 
et al., 2009; Singh et al., 2012; Afzal and Mansoor, 2012; Parihar and Mawal, 2015), mustard 
(Singh and Sharma, 2011), pea and fenugreek (Sharma and Parihar, 2014), soybean (Rana 
and Parihar, 2014).
The osmolytes (e.g., protein, proline, and sugars) accumulated in cell during stress con￾dition. The osmolyte is small active metabolites or inert solutes, help in combating stress by 
balancing the osmotic difference within cell (cytosol) and the surroundings. The cell phone 
radiation increases the accumulation of different osmolytes namely proline, protein and vi￾tamin C in plant cell (Singh et al., 2012; Rana and Parihar, 2014; Sharma and Parihar, 2014; 
Bellad and Kubihal, 2015). However, Sharma et al. (2009, 2010), and Parihar and Mawal (2015)
have noted decline in osmolytes accumulation in their experimental plant under cell phone 
radiation. The metabolism related enzymes (amylases, invertase, ATP), nonenzymatic antiox￾idant (vitamin C, vitamin E, polyphenol, glutathione and carotenoids) are capable to protect 
plant cell from oxidative damage. All these bio-molecules are usually upregulated in stressful 
condition. Researchers have noted an incline in their activity using GSM radiation (Zare et al., 
2015a,b,c; Kumar et al., 2015).
The enzymatic and nonenzymatic antioxidant deposits have been investigated under cell 
phone radiation. The activity of exopolyphosphatase (PPX), peroxidase (POX), ascorbate per￾oxidase (APX), and catalase (CAT) pronouncedly increased in duckweed (Tkalec et al., 2005, 
FIG. 1 Effects of electromagnetic radiation emitted by cell phone on plant system.304 16. Effects of cell phone radiation on plants growth
2007) and in maize (Zare et al., 2015a,b,c) at the highest EMF amplitude (23Vm− 1
) but the en￾zyme contents could no significantly increased in case of prolonged exposure (4h) at medium 
EMF strength. Moreover, the isozyme pattern (on-gel assay) does not reveal any deference 
after EMF exposure. The up regulation of enzymatic and nonenzymatic antioxidant (gluta￾thione reductase, GR) have been found in mung bean (Sharma et al., 2009, 2010; Singh et al., 
2012; Afzal and Mansoor, 2012; Parihar and Mawal, 2015), in mustard (Singh and Sharma, 
2011), in soybean (Rana and Parihar, 2014), in pea and fenugreek (Sharma and Parihar, 2014), 
in moth bean (Bellad and Kubihal, 2015). All previous studies have found an increase in 
peroxidase. Furthermore, low expression of ATP (the main energy molecule) in tomato has 
reported by Roux et al. (2008a,b) upon exposure to EMFr (900MHz).
3.3 Molecular and genetic response to radiation
There have been number of studies on molecular response of various plants under the cell 
phone radiation. The electrical component EMFr affects cellular dipolar molecules like ionic 
pumps, cellular enzymes and nucleotide molecules (Goodman et al., 1995). Selga and Selga 
(1996) observed cytological ultra structural changes and alteration in mitotic division under 
EMFr in pines. A number of researchers have documented an increase in the expression of 
stress related transcription factors such as calmodulin, chloroplast mRNA-binding protein 
and protease inhibitor under EMFr (Roux et al., 2006). Vian et al. (2006) and Beaubois et al. 
(2007) observed higher accumulation of mRNA transcript (ZIP1) and bZIP, Pin2 in young 
leaves of tomato plant, respectively, under radiation.
Very few studies have been conducted on effects of cell phone radiation or EMFr on cy￾tological attributes of plant system. Cellular organelles especially chromosome are very 
sensitive to EMFr. Akbal et al. (2012) observed the c-mitosis rate increasing in lentil seeds a 
dormant stage under radiation. Gustavino et al. (2014, 2015) noted profound enhancement 
in the frequency of micronuclei in secondary roots of broad bean under radiation (915MHz). 
The mitotic index, chromosomal stickiness and chromosomal aberration have been studied as 
cytogenetic markers under radiation. The mitotic index and mitotic abnormalities have been 
increased under EMF radiation (Tkalec et al., 2009). Pesnya and Romanovsky (2013) observed 
genotoxic effects on onion root meristem under GSM 900 cell phone radiation. Chromosomal 
abnormalities like lagging chromosome, amitosis, giant polyploidy, chromosomal sticki￾ness and total mitotic abnormalities in onion root were reported under cell phone radiation 
(Pesnya and Romanovsky, 2013). Furthermore, there was an increase in the number of divid￾ing meristematic root cells, frequencies of bridges, fragments and micronuclei in onion root 
under radiation for 9h. Chandel et al. (2019) reported the various chromosomal aberrations 
such as chromosomal rings formation, polyploidy, laggard, vagrant, stickiness, mitotic bridge 
formation, spindle disturbance at anaphase and morphological alteration and DNA damage 
at longer exposures to cell phone radiation.
4. Conclusion
In the present era, we live in a much globalized world and cannot think without technol￾ogy. The exponential increase in cell/mobile phone has given rise to controversy over their References 305
biological effects. Due to the increasing use of high-frequency EMFr in communication sys￾tems, there is growing concern about the potential for mobile phone emissions to affect living 
creatures. Advance research is obligatory to formulate effective substances to mitigate the 
harmful effects of these radiations. We can overcome the negativity of technology by develop￾ing new and improved forms. Moreover, in the present scenario, scientists have to introduce 
cost-effective strategies to reduce the effects of stress generated by radiation on plant system. 
Farmer can use various beneficial rhizospheric and endophytic microbes to enhance plant 
growth, or even use stress-relieving substances (i.e., antioxidant) for better plant performance 
under stressful conditions.
References
Afzal, M., Mansoor, S., 2012. Effect of mobile phone radiations on morphological and biochemical parameters of 
mung bean (Vigna radiata) and wheat (Triticum aestivum) seedlings. Asian J. Agric. Sci. 4, 149–152.
Akbal, A., Kiran, Y., Sahin, A., 2012. Effects of electromagnetic waves emitted by mobile phones on germination, root 
growth, and root tip cell mitotic division of Lens culinaris medic. Pol. J. Environ. Stud. 21, 23–29.
Atak, C., Emiroglu, O., Alikamanoglu, S., Rzakoulieva, A., 2003. Stimulation of regeneration by magnetic field in 
soybean (Glycine max L. Merrill) tissue cultures. J. Cell Mol. Biol. 2, 113–119.
Beaubois, E., Girard, S., Lallechere, S., Davies, E., Paladian, F., Bonnet, P., Ledoigt, G., Vian, A., 2007. Intercellular 
communication in plants: evidence for two rapidly transmitted systemic signals generated in response to electro￾magnetic field stimulation in tomato. Plant Cell Environ. 30, 834–844.
Beijerinck, M.W., 1888. Die Bacterien der Papilionaceenknollchen. Bot. Ztg 46, 725–804.
Bellad, A., Kubihal, C.V., 2015. Effect of cell phone radiations on morphological and biochemical parameters of moth 
bean (Vigna aconitifolia) and wheat (Triticum aestivum)-GSM vs CDMA. India J. Nutr. Diet. 52, 390–396.
Canli, O., Erdal, S., Taskin, M., Kurbanoglu, E.B., 2011. Effects of extremely low magnetic field on the production of 
invertase by Rhodotorula glutinis. Toxicol. Ind. Health 27, 35–39.
Chandel, S., Kaur, S., Issa, M., Singh, H.P., Batish, D.R., Kohli, R.K., 2019. Exposure to mobile phone radiations at 2350 
MHz incites cyto- and genotoxic effects in root meristems of Allium cepa. J. Environ. Health Sci. Eng. 17, 97–104.
Daud, M.K., Mei, L., Azizullah, A., Dawood, M., Ali, I., Mahmood, Q., Ullah, W., Jamil, M., Zhu, S.J., 2016. Leaf￾based physiological, metabolic, and ultrastructural changes in cultivated cotton cultivars under cadmium stress 
mediated by glutathione. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 23, 15551–15564. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-016-6739-5.
Goldsworthy, A., 2006. Effects of electrical and electromagnetic fields on plants and related topics. In: Volkov, A.G. 
(Ed.), Plant Electrophysiology Theory and Methods. Springer, Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 247–267.
Goodman, E.M., Greenebaum, B., Marron, M.T., 1995. Effects of electromagnetic fields on molecules and cells. Int. 
Rev. Cytol. 158, 279–338.
Gustavino, B., Carboni, G., Petrillo, R., Rizzoni, M., Santovetti, E., 2014. Micronucleus Induction by 915 MHz 
Radiofrequency Radiation in Vicia faba Root Tips. arXiv preprint arXiv:1409-1431.
Gustavino, B., Carboni, G., Petrillo, R., Paoluzzi, G., Santovetti, E., Rizzoni, M., 2015. Exposure to 915MHz radiation 
induces micronuclei in Vicia faba root tips. Mutagenesis, 1–6.
Hussein, R.A., El-Maghraby, M.A., 2014. Effect of two brands of cell phone on germination rate and seedling of wheat 
(Triticum aestivum). J. Environ. Pollut. Hum. Health 2, 85–90.
ITU (International Telecommunication Union), 2015. ITU World Telecommunication/ICT Indicators Database, 2014. 
Available online at URL: http://www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/Documents/statistics/2015/ITU_Key_2005-
015_ICT_data.xlsPages/publications/wtidaspx.
Khan, M.D., Ali, S., Azizullah, A., Shuijin, Z., 2018. Use of various biomarkers to explore the effecs of GSM and GSM￾like radiations on flowering plants. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 25, 1–18.
Kouzmanova, M., Dimitrova, M., Dragolova, D., Atanasova, G., Atanasov, N., 2009. Alterations in enzyme activi￾ties in leaves after exposure of Plectranthus sp. plants to 900 MHz electromagnetic field. Biotechnol. Biotechnol. 
Equip. 23, 611–615.
Kumar, A., Singh, H.P., Batish, D.R., Kaur, S., Kohli, R.K., 2015. EMF radiations (1800 MHz)-inhibited early seedling 
growth of maize (Zea mays) involves alterations in starch and sucrose metabolism. Protoplasma 253, 1–7. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s00709-015-0863-9.306 16. Effects of cell phone radiation on plants growth
Kundi, M., 2009. The controversy about a possible relationship between mobile phone use and cancer. Environ. 
Health Perspect. 117, 317–324.
Lavoisier, A.L., 2000. Elements of Chemistry in a New Systematic Order Containing all the Modern Discoveries. 
Courier Dover Publications, p. 15.
Ledoigt, G., Belpomme, D., 2013. Cancer induction molecular pathways and HF-EMF irradiation. Adv. Biol. Chem. 
3, 177–186.
Li, S.H., Chow, K.C., 2001. Magnetic field exposure induces DNA degradation. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 
280, 1385–1388.
Mehta, S., James, D., Reddy, M.K., 2019. Omics technologies for abiotic stress tolerance in plants: current status and 
prospects. Recent Approaches in Omics for Plant Resilience to Climate Change. Springer, Singapore, pp. 1–34.
Parihar, L., Mawal, P., 2015. Effects of 2G and 3G mobile phone radiations on germination of seeds and growth of 
seedlings of pulses. J. Chem. Pharm. Res. 7, 268–271.
Pesnya, D.S., Romanovsky, A.V., 2013. Comparison of cytotoxic and genotoxic effects of plutonium-239 alpha parti￾cles and mobile phone GSM 900 radiation in the Allium cepa test. Mutat. Res. Genet. Toxicol. Environ. Mutagen. 
750, 27–33.
Racuciu, M., Iftode, C., Miclaus, S., 2014. Inhibitory effects of low thermal radiofrequency radiation on physiological 
parameters of Zea Mays seedlings growth. Rom. J. Phys. 60, 603–612.
Rana, H., Parihar, L., 2014. Effect of mobile phone radiations on protein contents of soybean seeds. Int. J. Bot. Res. 4, 
1–10.
Ranwala, A.P., Miller, W.B., 1998. Sucrose cleaving enzymes and carbohydrate pools in Lilium longiflorum floral 
organs. Physiol. Plant. 103, 541–550.
Roitsch, T., Gonzalez, M.C., 2004. Function and regulation of plant invertases: sweet sensations. Trends Plant Sci. 9, 
606–613.
Rotcharoen, T., Khan-ngern, W., Nitta, S., 2003. The study of rice growing with the electromagnetic field effect 
simulated from 300 kV switching substation. In: Asia-Pacific Conference on Environmental Electromagnetics, 
CEEM 2003. Proceedings., https://doi.org/10.1109/CEEM.2003.237814.
Roux, D., Vian, A., Girard, S., Bonnet, P., Paladian, F., Davies, E., Ledoigt, G., 2006. Electromagnetic fields (900 MHz) 
evoke consistent molecular responses in tomato plants. Physiol. Plant. 128, 283–288.
Roux, D., Faure, C., Bonnet, P., Girard, S., Ledoigt, G., Davies, E., Gendraud, M., Paladian, F., Vian, A., 2008a. A pos￾sible role for extra-cellular ATP in plant responses to high frequency, low amplitude electromagnetic field. Plant 
Signal. Behav. 3, 383–385.
Roux, D., Vian, A., Girard, S., Bonnet, P., Paladian, F., Davies, E., Ledoigt, G., 2008b. High frequency (900 MHz) low 
amplitude (5 Vm−1
) electromagnetic field: a genuine environmental stimulus that affects transcription, translation, 
calcium and energy charge in tomato. Planta 227, 883–891.
Sandu, D.D., Goiceanu, I.C., Ispas, A., Creanga, I., Miclaus, S., Creanga, D.E., 2005. A preliminary study on ultra high 
frequency electromagnetic fields effect on black locust chlorophylls. Acta Biol. Hung. 56, 109–117.
Selga, T., Selga, M., 1996. Response of Pinus sylvestris L. needles to electromagnetic fields, cytological and ultrastruc￾tural aspects. Sci. Total Environ. 180, 65–73.
Selvarani, K., Rajasekaran, M.P., Pothirasan, N., Muneeswaran, V., 2020. Compendious analysis of exploiting mobile 
phone radiations on invigorating physiological parameters of rice (Oryza sativa L.) seedlings. Mater. Today Proc. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matpr.2020.10.761.
Sharma, S., Parihar, L., 2014. Effect of mobile phone radiation on nodule formation in the leguminous plants. Curr. 
World Environ. 9, 145–155.
Sharma, V.P., Singh, H.P., Kohli, R.K., Batish, D.R., 2009. Mobile phone radiation inhibits Vigna radiata (mung bean) 
root growth by inducing oxidative stress. Sci. Total Environ. 407, 5543–5547.
Sharma, V.P., Singh, H.P., Batish, D.R., Kohli, R.K., 2010. Cell phone radiations affect early growth of Vigna radiata 
(mung bean) through biochemical alterations. Z. Naturforsch. C 65, 66–72.
Singh, A., Mehta, S., Yadav, S., Nagar, G., Ghosh, R., Roy, A., Chakraborty, A., Singh, I.K., 2022. How to cope with the 
challenges of environmental stresses in the era of global climate change: an update on ROS stave off in plants. Int. 
J. Mol. Sci. 23 (4), 1995.
Singh, H.P., Sharma, V.P., 2011. Electromagnetic radiations from cell phone inhibit plant root growth through induc￾tion of oxidative damage. Epidemiology 22, S249.
Singh, H.P., Sharma, V.P., Batish, D.R., Kohli, R.K., 2012. Cell phone electromagnetic field radiations affect rhizogen￾esis through impairment of biochemical processes. Environ. Monit. Assess. 184, 1813–1821.References 307
Smith, A.D., Liboff, A.R., 1993. Effects of CR-tuned 60 Hz magnetic fields on sprouting and early growth of Raphanus 
sativus. Bioelectrochem. Bioenerg. 32, 67–76.
Soja, G., Kunsch, B., Gerzabek, M.H., Reichenauer, T., Soja, A.M., Rippar, G., Bolhar-Nordenkampf, H., 2003. Growth 
and yield of winter wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) and corn (Zea mays L.) near a high voltage transmission line. 
Bioelectromagnetics 24, 91–102.
Stefi, A.L., Margaritis, L.H., Skouroliakou, A.S., Vassilacopoulou, D., 2019. Mobile phone electromagnetic radiation 
affects amyloid precursor protein and α-synuclein metabolism in SH-SY5Y cells. Pahophysiology 26, 203–2012.
Sturm, A., Tang, G.Q., 1999. The sucrose-cleaving enzymes of plants are crucial for development, growth and carbon 
partitioning. Trends Plant Sci. 4, 401–407.
Tafforeau, M., Verdus, M.C., Norris, V., White, G., Demarty, M., Thellier, M., Ripoll, C., 2002. SIMS study of the 
calcium-deprivation step related to epidermal meristem production induced in flax by cold shock or radiation 
from a GSM telephone. J. Trace Microprobe Tech. 20, 611–623.
Tafforeau, M., Verdus, M.C., Norris, V., White, G.J., Cole, M., Demarty, M., Thellier, M., Ripoll, C., 2004. Plant sensi￾tivity to low intensity 105 GHz electromagnetic radiation. Bioelectromagnetics 25, 403–407.
Taskin, M., Esim, N., Genisel, M., Ortucu, S., Hasenekoglu, I., Canli, O., Erdal, S., 2013. Enhancement of invertase 
production by Aspergillus niger OZ-3 using low-intensity static magnetic fields. Prep. Biochem. Biotechnol. 43, 
177–188.
Tkalec, M., Malaric, K., Pevalek-Kozlina, B., 2005. Influence of 400, 900 and 1900 MHz electromagnetic fields on 
Lemna minor growth and peroxidase activity. Bioelectromagnetics 26, 185–193.
Tkalec, M., Malaric, K., Pevalek-Kozlina, B., 2007. Exposure to radiofrequency radiation induces oxidative stress in 
duckweed Lemna minor L. Sci. Total Environ. 388, 78–89.
Tkalec, M., Malaric, K., Pavlica, M., Pevalek-Kozlina, B., Vidaković-Cifreka, Z., 2009. Effects of radiofrequency elec￾tromagnetic fields on seed germination and root meristematic cells of Allium cepa L. Mutat. Res. 672, 76–81.
Vian, A., Roux, D., Girard, S., Bonnet, P., Paladian, F., Davies, E., Ledoigt, G., 2006. Microwave irradiation affects gene 
expression in plants. Plant Signal. Behav. 1, 67–69.
WHO, 2011. IARC Classifies Radiofrequency Electromagnetic Fields as Possibly Carcinogenic to Humans. World 
Health Organization, Lyon, France. Press Release No: 208.
Zare, H., Mohsenzadeh, S., Moradshahi, A., 2015a. Effects of electromagnetic waves with high frequency (940 MHz) 
cause increase catalase and H2O2 in Zea mays L. Int. J. Agric. Crop. Sci. 8, 642–649.
Zare, H., Mohsenzadeh, S., Moradshahi, A., 2015b. Effects of electromagnetic waves with high frequency (940 MHz) 
cause increase H2O2 as a signaling molecule in Zea mays. Int. J. Rev. Life Sci. 5, 327–332.
Zare, H., Mohsenzadeh, S., Moradshahi, A., 2015c. Electromagnetic waves from GSM mobile phone simulator and 
abiotic stress in Zea mays L. J. Nutr. Food Sci. S11, 1–2. https://doi.org/10.4172/2155-9600.S11-003.This page intentionally left blankPlants and their Interaction to Environmental Pollution 309 Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-99978-6.00019-4
CHAPTER
17
Effects of major munitions compounds 
on plant health and function
Stephen M. Viaa
 and Paul V. Manleyb
a
Department of Biology, College of Science, Engineering, and Technology, Norfolk State 
University, Norfolk, VA, United States, b
Department of Civil, Architectural and Environmental 
Engineering, College of Engineering and Computing, Missouri University of Science and 
Technology, Rolla, MO, United States
Abbreviations
ETR electron transport rate
FV′/FM′ light adapted effective quantum use efficiency
Fo dark minimal fluorescence
FV/FM dark-adapted maximum potential quantum efficiency
gs stomatal conductance
NG nitroglycerin
NPQ nonphotochemical quenching
PSI photosystem I
PSII photosystem II
qN fluorescence quenching
RDX cyclonite
TNT trinitrotoluene
UAV unmanned aerial vehicle
UXO unexploded ordnance
∆F/FM′ fraction of absorbed photons
1. Warfare and the environment
War is inherently destructive (Smirnov, 1989), and as humanity shifted into the mod￾ern industrial age the destructive capabilities of the tools used in conflicts increased 
exponentially (Hupy and Schaetzl, 2006; Ducheine et al., 2016). Following the advent of in￾dustrialized warfare in World Wars I and II, the ability of man to mold and manipulate the 
landscape progressed on an entirely unprecedented scale (Hupy, 2008; Heiderscheidt, 2018). 310 17. Effects of munitions compounds on plant health and function
Modern warfare heavily modifies the physical surroundings, disturbing pedological (Hupy 
and Schaetzl, 2008; Certini et  al., 2013), geological (Doyle and Bennett, 2002; Hupy and 
Koehler, 2012), and hydrological (Francis, 2011; Lacombe and Pierret, 2013) aspects of the 
landscape (Pathak, 2020). Coined as bombturbation, perturbation of soils caused by muni￾tions detonation (Hupy and Schaetzl, 2006) permanently alters geological and hydrological 
function (Fig. 1; Hupy and Schaetzl, 2008).
With many historic battles causing devastation that rival natural environmental and climate 
catastrophes (Westing, 1980), warfare can have significant influence on a region’s ecological 
health long after the dust has settled (Literathy, 1992; Mannion, 2003; Martinovic-Vitanovic 
and Kalafatic, 2009; Brady, 2012; Bürgi et al., 2017). To this day, we are still investigating the re￾calcitrant impacts of global conflicts some 60–100years past (Milburn, 2012). Even long-silent 
battlefields still show the scars of combat and the defensive works erected in preparation 
FIG. 1 Satellite imagery of: (A) Lochnagar Mine (La Boisselle, France) a WWI blast crater, (B) Newfoundland 
Memorial (Beaumont-Hamel, France) showing relic WWI trenchworks, and (C) La Pointe Du Hoc (Cricqueville-en￾Bessin, France) exhibiting WWII blast craters from the D-Day invasion. Image acquired from Google Maps in August 
2021. Google, 2021. Newfoundland Memorial Beaumont-Hamel, France. Retrieved: August 1st, 2012, from https://goo.gl/maps/
q9soWqkfvrSp3S8L9.2. Global munitions issue 311
(Fig. 1). Many examples of largely intact trenchworks are still present through much of the 
Mid-Atlantic United States (US) from the Civil War (1861–65) and across the French (FR) coun￾tryside from World War I (WWI; 1914–18; Fig. 1). Damage like this is not isolated to only a few 
select locals but is present the world over. No place on Earth has been untouched by warfare.
2. Global munitions issue
The use of reactive compounds as weapons in warfare has a long history, with records dat￾ing their use as far back as CE 969 in China (Kelly, 2004). The reliance on these types of weap￾ons has only increased with time and is the primary tool for modern combat. The introduction 
of mechanized warfare saw the use of these weapons not only increase, but spread farther 
than ever before. World War II (WWII) saw military action that spanned the globe with mili￾tary activities even occurring at the poles (Lackenbauer et al., 2017). Over the course of WWII, 
Germany and occupied Europe saw roughly 2–2.7 million tons of bombs fall from the sky. 
With a known failure rate of 5%–15% (Eckardt, 2012), roughly 27,000–300,000 munitions did 
not detonate as intended, and many are still present today (Abad-Santos, 2012). In Germany, 
there is an estimated 391,000ha of land which still have unexploded ordnance (UXOs) present 
(Crossland, 2008) with more than 3000 UXOs known to be in Berlin alone (Huggler, 2015). 
More recent conflicts have also left staggering numbers of such UXOs, as well. The Pacific is 
littered with relic munitions from both Korean and Vietnam conflicts, with Korea possessing 
9100ha of mined land outside the demilitarized zone (DMZ; The Monitor, 2009), and Laos 
containing over 750,000 tons of ordnance in its soils (Suthinithet, 2010; Pichtel, 2012). In the 
Middle East, Iraq is estimated to have ∼20 million landmines covering ∼150 million ha of 
land (CISR, 2013), and along the Syria-Turkey border there are an estimated 613,000–715,000 
landmines present (HRW, 2014).
As of 2021, 68 nations across the globe publicly acknowledge munitions related threats 
within their borders. The United States (US) is among these, and despite having not seen a 
major armed conflict on its soil since 1865, thousands of sites are contaminated with UXOs 
and explosive compounds (Jenkins et al., 2006; EPA, 2014). Many US Department of Defense 
(DoD) locations, munitions production facilities, chemical plants, military training grounds, 
storage facilities, and disposal sites are known to be contaminated, with a number being 
listed as past, present, or planned US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Superfund 
Sites (FATE, 2006; CLU-IN, 2018). These long-lasting relics of wars passed not only serve as a 
constant risk to human life, but also by slowly poisoning the areas in which they lay.
When trying to quantify and investigate the impacts of war through an environmental or 
ecological lens, one has to consider the many complex and interacting factors at play. The 
“common sense” understanding of damage to any system is that nature will recover, and 
while superficially this is true with many organisms re-establishing after enough time, it is a 
gross oversimplification (Goodall, 2003). As systems recover, the habitat or community that is 
developing is not the same one that was lost (Kharrazi et al., 2018). Despite the highly visible 
nature of warfare, there are numerous invisible threats from conflict that are much harder 
to recognize and quantify. Chemical contamination of soil and water, such as that from mu￾nitions, vehicles, as well as manufacturing of required goods, is a major component of the 
impact of war on natural systems (Cook, 1997; Pennington and Brannon, 2002).312 17. Effects of munitions compounds on plant health and function
3. Chemical relics of war
The military industrial complex (MIC) serves as a point source for a wide array of contam￾inants, but one type that is particularly unique to military actions is explosive compounds 
(Schneider et al., 1995; Zellmer et al., 1995; Best et al., 1997). Other activities can act as en￾vironmental sources of explosive contamination, such as industrial mining operations and 
civilian firearms use, but the largest contributor of these compounds by far are militaries 
and related industries (Myler and Sisk, 1991). The vast quantity of munitions consumed by 
militaries around the world has made explosives contamination a global concern. There is the 
potential for acute and chronic environmental contamination at every stage of a munition’s 
life cycle (Fig. 2; Pugh, 1982; Best et al., 1999; Just and Schnoor, 2004; Pichtel, 2012; Certini 
et al., 2013). Industrial spills and mishandling of production effluent can release large vol￾umes of contaminants into areas surrounding production facilities (Thiboutot et al., 2002) and 
long-term storage centers, such as armories, can see toxin releases via dry particle deposition 
and contaminant leaching (Taylor et al., 2015a,b). Proper use of munitions only leaves traces 
of its payload behind, but these traces can accumulate over time (Hewitt et al., 2005; Jenkins 
et al., 2006). Failed or partially detonated munitions pose the greatest risk as they are widely 
dispersed (Taylor et al., 2015a,b), act as a prolonged source releasing toxins in pulses (Fig. 3; 
Lever et al., 2005; Taylor et al., 2009), and are still capable of detonation (MacDonald et al., 
2009). These UXOs can range from intact bombs, mortar rounds, landmines, and abandoned 
small arms ammunition (Brannon, 1999).
FIG. 2 Life cycle of a typical munition. Red boxes (black in print version) show spillage sources, orange (gray in print 
version) shows leaching, and blue (dark gray in print version) show trace release sources. Boxes that fit multiple point 
course categories will have multiple colors. Modified from Pichtel, J., 2012. Distribution and fate of military explosives and 
propellants in soil: a review. Appl. Environ. Soil Sci. 2012. https://doi.org/10.1155/2012/617236.4. Environmental behavior 313
Explosives used in conventional munitions are classed as primary, secondary, or tertiary 
based on ease of initiation with sensitivity being highest in primary and lowest in tertiary ex￾plosives (Table 1; Dobratz, 1981) and fall into one of three main categories based on structural 
composition (Fig. 4):
1. Nitroaromatics are characterized by their central aromatic ring with bound NO2 groups.
2. Nitroamines have a central heterocyclic ring possessing N-nitro groups which are linked 
to NO2 groups.
3. Nitrate esters are esters of alcohols and nitric acid where NO2 groups are bound to an 
aliphatic carbon bound oxygen atom.
Comprising a large proportion of the payload in munitions used in military actions since 
WWI, nitroaromatics and nitroamines are the most common classes of explosive compounds 
found in the environment (Pennington and Brannon, 2002; Pichtel, 2012). Trinitrotoluene 
(TNT) is the most common nitroaromatic in the environment, cyclonite (RDX) the most com￾mon nitroamine, and glycerol trinitrate (nitroglycerin; NG) the most common nitrate ester 
(Table 1; Brannon, 1999; Pichtel, 2012).
There is also an emerging fourth class of explosive, referred to as insensitive munition 
compounds, and are largely comprised of a central aromatic or hetero-aromatic structure 
with a high degree of hydrogen bonding, low oxygen balance, and low free space. These 
structures have highly efficient crystal packing which reduces sensitivity to triggering stimuli 
(Pagoria 2016). Given their relatively short field use to date, these compounds have only re￾cently started to garner focus in ecotoxicological studies (Dontsova et al., 2014; Madeira et al., 
2018; Panja et al., 2018).
4. Environmental behavior
Explosives are predominantly found in soils at contaminated sites and can persist 
as particles, residues, or intact payloads in UXOs. Predicting the behavior of any one 
compound is difficult as there are many factors which greatly influence how it moves, 
FIG.  3 Anatomy of common munitions illustrating explosive compound capacity. Munitions are not drawn 
to scale.314 17. Effects of munitions compounds on plant health and function
TABLE 1 Table illustrating basic chemical attributes of major explosives.
TNT RDX HMX PETN Nitroglycerin
CAS 118-96-7 2691-41-0 78-11-5 55-63-0
Formula C7H5N3O6 C3H6N6O6 C4H8N8O8 C5H8N4O12 C3H5N3O9
Class Nitroaromatic Nitroamine Nitroamine Nitrate ester Nitrate ester
Secondary 
explosive
Secondary 
explosive/propellant
Secondary 
explosive/
propellant
Primary 
explosive/
booster
Primary 
explosive/
propellant
Use Artillery, 
dynamite, 
landmines, 
bombs, industrial 
explosives
Artillery, dynamite, 
landmines, bombs, 
industrial explosives
Missiles, nuclear 
bombs, rockets
Ammunition, 
landmines, 
atomic bombs
Ammunition, 
dynamite, 
cordite, 
industrial 
explosives
Discovery 1863 1898 1930 1894 1847
Application Industry/
military
Military Military Military Medical/
industry/
military
Molecular 
mass
227.13 222.12 296.16 316.14 227.09
Solubility in 
water (mgL1
)
130 18–85 5 1.55 140
log10 Kow 1.6 0.87 0.16 1.61 1.62
Adsorption to 
soils
Reversible Nearly irreversible Reversible-nearly 
irreversible
Reversible-nearly 
irreversible
Reversible
Kd (Lkg1
) 1–18 0.12–2.37 2.7–3.7 3.1–5.3 3
FIG. 4 Compound structure of the three munitions discussed here.4. Environmental behavior 315
where it binds, or to what degree it is taken up by organisms (Pichtel, 2012). Long persist￾ing particles can act as periodic point sources of contamination via contact with rain or 
ground water (Pennington et al., 2006; Kalderis et al., 2011). Once in the soil matrix, most 
explosive compounds are mobile (Pennington and Brannon, 2002, Kiiskila et  al., 2015; 
Taylor et al., 2015a,b; Fig. 5) with behavior determined by concentration and molecular 
solubility.
Soil composition can play a significant role in contaminant movement through the 
soil matrix with different types of soil components having vastly different binding po￾tentials (Pennington and Brannon, 2002; Monteil-Rivera et al., 2009). Soils with a lower 
organic material (OM) fraction have far less binding potential for explosive compounds 
than soils with higher levels of OM, increasing bioavailability of contamination (Vierling 
and Kimpel, 1992). Sandy soils have the lowest sorption of explosive compounds due to 
limited binding sites on sand grains and rapid water infiltration. Clay soils will sorb more 
explosive compounds than sandy soils (Larson et al., 2008; Vierling and Kimpel, 1992) due 
to increased binding potential of the clay particles as well as a longer retention time due 
to low infiltration rates (Pilon-Smits, 2005). Humic soils have been shown to bind specifi￾cally more TNT than other soil types (Comfort et al., 1995; Larson et al., 2008). Compound 
sorption occurrence and permanence are heavily influenced by compound structure 
(Yamamoto et al., 2004) and can be predicted using the molecule’s the log10 octanol-water 
partition coefficient (Kow; Larson et  al., 2008; Clausen et  al., 2010). Nitroaromatics will 
bind to soil particles and the process is largely a reversible one. Nitroamines and nitrate 
esters on the other hand, are not readily sorbed to soils and when it does occur the bond is 
exceedingly difficult to break (Pennington and Brannon, 2002; Larson et al., 2008). Highly 
mobile compounds, like NG and RDX, will flow through a system much faster than the 
less mobile TNT and will bind far less as a result (Comfort et al., 1995; Best et al., 1999; 
Pennington and Brannon, 2002). These characteristics that control the behavior of explo￾sives compounds in soils also play pivotal roles in their interaction with plants (Yamamoto 
et al., 2004; Pilon-Smits, 2005).
FIG. 5 Pathways of explosive compound release into the environment via military activities.316 17. Effects of munitions compounds on plant health and function
5. Explosives and vegetation
Contaminants in solution within the soil pore matrix can be transported into the plant body 
via the roots as a result of bulk flow water movement driven by leaf transpiration (Paterson 
et al., 1990; Harvey et al., 2002; Singh and Mishra, 2014). Log Kow greatly influences uptake 
potential as well as the final resting place in a plant body (Vila et al., 2007). Whether a com￾pound can cross cellular membranes or whether it can be acted upon by innate defenses are 
dependent on this. Log Kow values between 0.5 and 3 are ideal for plant uptake and all classes 
of explosive compounds fall within this range (Table 1; Burken and Schnoor, 1998; Panz and 
Miksch, 2012; Vila et al., 2007). Once taken up into root tissues, explosive compounds can 
travel between intermembrane spaces (Ghosh and Singh, 2005) and pass through the protec￾tive Casparian strip to enter the vascular system. From there, they can be distributed through￾out the entire organism (Pilon-Smits, 2005).
Nitrate esters, are rapidly taken into the plant body due to the high mobility of the com￾pounds and are rapidly degraded into largely inert forms (Goel et  al., 1997; Riefler et  al., 
2006; Riefler and Medina, 2006; Podlipná et al., 2008). Nitroamines are also highly mobile and 
rapidly absorb into the plant body, but unlike nitrate esters, are not readily degraded, e.g., 
upwards of 90% on sequestered RDX remains extractable in its parent form (Ahmadi et al., 
1980; Thompson et al., 1999; Sheremata et al., 2001; Best et al., 2006). Moving via bulk flow of 
water, both nitrate esters and nitroamines are primarily deposited in above-ground portions 
of plants. The largest fraction of this is deposited into leaves (Thompson et al., 1999; Price 
et al., 2002; Riefler and Medina, 2006; Vila et al., 2007). As it is recalcitrant to degradation, 
much of the RDX is bound into lignin or cellulose complexes or stored in vacuoles (Vila et al., 
2007). Once incorporated however, RDX can still pose a threat as it is susceptible to degrada￾tion via photolysis, creating a variety of compounds (Pichtel, 2012), some harmful including 
other nitroamines like HMX and some benign (e.g., CO2; Just and Schnoor, 2004).
Nitroaromatics are predominantly stored in belowground structures and can be degraded 
by cellular processes, even being utilized as a nitrogen source in some cases (Ahmadi et al., 
1980; Sheremata et  al., 2001; Winfield et  al., 2004). Inside the plant body, TNT can be de￾graded or bound to organic compounds. Conjugates appear to be the pathway for TNT to 
become a bound residue (Burken, 2003). A large fraction of TNT, and its metabolites, in the 
plant body will bind to large molecules like pectin, lignin, and/or cellulose (Sens et al., 1999; 
Khatisashvili et al., 2009), with lignin sequestering the most (Burken, 2003; Sens et al., 1999). 
Patterns of explosive compound contamination partitioning is largely conserved across spe￾cies, yet plant health and function responses are not (Via and Zinnert, 2016).
5.1 Morphological responses
Explosive compounds are highly phytotoxic and can induce unique suites of stress re￾sponses depending on plant species, functional traits, and life stage (Robidoux et al., 2003; 
Winfield et al., 2004; Just and Schnoor, 2004; Vila et al., 2008; Ali et al., 2014; Via et al., 2014; 
Al-Traboulsi and Alaib, 2021).
5.1.1 Nitrate esters (NG)
Despite their short residence time in the plant body (Riefler and Medina, 2006; Podlipná 
et al., 2008) nitrate esters can have significant impacts on plant development and morphology 5. Explosives and vegetation 317
(French et al., 1999; Podlipná et al., 2010; Rocheleau et al., 2011). Nitroglycerin exposure causes 
stunted and abnormal root development (French et al., 1999; Podlipná et al., 2010) while also 
significantly reducing shoot growth (French et al., 1999; Rocheleau et al., 2011; Asbaghi, 2012) 
and inducing chlorosis in leaves (Trensey, 2013). Nitroglycerin is the only of the three explo￾sives highlighted here which causes equally significant damage to both aboveground and 
belowground portions of the plant body.
5.1.2 Nitroamines (RDX)
Effects of RDX on plant biomass are largely negative (Best et al., 2006; Hagan et al., 2016), 
however, some species can exhibit a net positive effect on grown at lower concentrations (Best 
et al., 2006). The mobility of RDX ensures that it passes quickly into and through the plant 
body following the flow of water through the xylem, limiting exposure time to root tissues. 
RDX does not generally cause significant damage to root structures, but some species are 
more sensitive showing reduced root biomass (Winfield et al., 2004; Hagan et al., 2016) and 
curled or otherwise malformed root tips (Winfield et al., 2004). Interestingly, pines are one 
of the few plant groups which accumulate significant concentrations of RDX in root tissues 
(Schoenmuth et al., 2014, 2015). (Schoenmuth et al., 2014) suggested that this increased subter￾ranean sequestration of RDX may be due to unique morphology, anatomy, tissue structuring, 
cell wall composition, and/or water economy. In most plants however, RDX passes through 
the roots quickly to move upwards through the plant body.
RDX will bind to chloroplasts and cell walls (Brentner et al., 2010) in stems and leaves 
(Harvey et al., 1991; Thompson et al., 1999) leading to a variety of morphological responses. 
Stem bleaching can occur in some herbaceous species (Best et al., 2006) but it is the leaf which 
exhibits the greatest degree of damage. Older leaves will turn chlorotic and eventually ne￾crotic, the damage spreading inward from the leaf margins resulting in eventual leaf death 
and senescence (Vila et al., 2007; Brentner et al., 2010; Via et al., 2014, 2015; Doskey, 2020). 
Newly formed leaves will have altered or disfigured leaf margins, reduced leaf size, and 
atypical bilateral symmetry (Winfield et al., 2004; Vila et al., 2007; Khatisashvili et al., 2009; 
Singh and Mishra, 2014; Via et al., 2014; Fig. 6). While not immediately present, even leaves 
formed postexposure will eventually develop necrotic lesions around the margin (Via et al., 
2014, 2015). The inward progression of necrotic legions may be a result of RDX preferentially 
accumulating in tissues with higher chlorophyll concentrations (Reynolds et al., 2013). It ap￾pears that RDX may be directly interacting with the chlorophyll in leaves as it can induce 
chlorophyll bleaching and increased levels of red pigmentation (Best et al., 2006; Hagan et al., 
2016).
5.1.3 Nitroaromatics (TNT)
While found in all parts of exposed plants, nitroaromatics largely accumulate in root tis￾sues (Best et al., 1999; Vila et al., 2007). The impacts that TNT has on plant growth and overall 
biomass are largely negative (Krishnan et al., 2000; Gholamian and Gholamian, 2007; Best 
et al., 2008) although some species have been observed to have a slight positive response 
in growth when in the presence of lower concentrations (Gong et al., 1999; Best et al., 2006; 
Khatisashvili et al., 2009). Morphological responses reflect compound accumulation and so 
almost exclusively effect root morphology in most species (Peterson et al., 1998; Vila et al., 
2007; Khatisashvili et al., 2009; Singh and Mishra, 2014). The most common impact is impaired 318 17. Effects of munitions compounds on plant health and function
growth, characterized by shorter root structures, reduced root area, and reduced root mass. 
Clear negative correlative trends have been observed for root growth with respect to TNT 
concentration (Peterson et al., 1996; Krishnan et al., 2000).
TNT contamination can also lead to the destruction of existing root structures (Peterson 
et al., 1998; Gong et al., 1999; Krishnan et al., 2000; Vila et al., 2007; Khatisashvili et al., 2009) 
where primary roots are left intact but secondary roots and root hairs are destroyed (Peterson 
et al., 1996, 1998; Krishnan et al., 2000). Roots formed postexposure often exhibit significant 
malformation (Peterson et al., 1996, 1998; Krishnan et al., 2000) and in emergent seedlings 
meristematic regions can even become necrotic (Peterson et  al., 1996, 1998). Responses to 
TNT are similar to those caused by dinitroaniline herbicides which disrupt mitotic division 
(Peterson et al., 1996). Impaired cell division in the meristem can cause root tips to swell as 
the region continues to expand outward despite no longer growing forward (Strachan and 
Hess, 1983; Ahrens, 1994; Peterson et al., 1996, 1998; Krishnan et al., 2000). Some species of 
plant exhibit extreme avoidance behaviors when in the presence of TNT and if growing in 
areas where contamination is stratified, the roots will not penetrate into the contaminated 
zone, instead growing around it (Krishnan et al., 2000). Changes to morphology are often 
coupled with changes in physiology, but physiological responses to explosives contamination 
is poorly understood (Winfield et al., 2004; Naumann et al., 2010a, 2010b; Zinnert, 2012).
5.2 Physiological responses
Physiological stress reactions in plants generally activate similar pathways regardless of 
the stressor in question (Chapin III, 1991). Under natural conditions, stress induces modula￾tion of physiological processes to compensate or counteract the direct effects of the stressor 
or due to damage (Sulmon et al., 2015). Some physiological functions are intrinsically linked 
and modifications to one will induce predictable shifts in the other (Xiong and Nadal, 2020). 
Explosive compounds are unique among xenobiotics in that their associated stress responses 
FIG. 6 Morphological changes induced by RDX (left) and TNT (Right) on seedlings of Morella cerifera. Modified 
from Via, S.M., Zinnert, J.C., Young, D.R., 2015. Differential effects of two explosive compounds on seed germination and 
seedling morphology of a woody shrub, Morella cerifera, Ecotoxicology 24(1), 194–201.5. Explosives and vegetation 319
do not always follow typical patterns (Flexas et  al., 1999; Zinnert, 2012; Via et  al., 2014). 
Morphological responses of plants to explosive contaminants are relatively well understood 
and yet there are substantial gaps in the literature regarding physiological responses (Via, 
2020). To the authors’ knowledge, at this time no work has been undertaken to investigate the 
physiological impacts of nitrate esters or insensitive explosives on plant species. Genetic and 
molecular level investigations have been undertaken for most major explosive compounds 
but are largely beyond the scope of this work. For a comprehensive summary of this, see 
Rylott and Bruce (2019).
5.2.1 Nitroamines (RDX)
Plants exposed to RDX exhibit significant declines in photosynthetic capabilities (Zinnert, 
2012; Zinnert et al., 2013; Via et al., 2014). Some species even exhibit an inverse relationship 
between stomatal conductance and photosynthesis in the presence of RDX, which is contrary 
to impacts of other explosive compounds as well as natural environmental stressors (Sande 
and Young, 1992; Flexas et al., 1999; Subrahmanyam et al., 2006). Though the specific mech￾anisms through which RDX impacts plant physiology are not well understood, the literature 
suggests that RDX may impact photosynthesis through interactions with the Calvin-Benson 
cycle, as little of light-dependent reactions appear directly impaired (Zinnert, 2012).
Specifically, as described by Zinnert et al. (2012), a significant decline in effective quan￾tum yield (∆F/FM′), electron transport rate (ETR), and light-adapted effective quantum use 
efficiency (FV′/FM′) coincided with elevated levels of RDX. The overall effect to these pa￾rameters was not as severe as is typically seen with drought and salinity (Zinnert, 2012). 
Limited change in dark-adapted quantum yield (FV/FM) was only observed in the highest 
tested concentration (1500mgkg1
) showing that no photoinhibition occurred at lower levels. 
A similar lack of change in FV/FM at relatively low levels was observed by Weber (2008) and 
Yang et al. (2021). The most striking thing that Zinnert (2012) described was the lack of change 
to nonphotochemical quenching (NPQ) which highlighted physiological responses to RDX as 
markedly distinct compared with nonanthropogenic stressors. Based on the available litera￾ture, RDX has limited impacts on plant-water relations. Stomatal conductance (gs) and water 
potentials exhibit only slight increases in the presence of RDX (Zinnert, 2012) and leaf water 
content has been shown to remain constant (Hagan et al., 2016). Findings in Zinnert (2012)
were supported by Via et al. (2014) with one particularly notable difference: Myrica cerifera
tested by Via et al. (2014) exhibited significantly increased stomatal gs while all other tested 
parameters followed similar patterns to those of Baccharis halimifolia tested by Zinnert (2012). 
This is particularly unique in that it caused an inverted relationship between photosynthesis 
and stomatal conductance, further differentiating the effect of RDX uptake from those of nat￾ural stress sources (Sande and Young, 1992; Flexas et al., 1999; Subrahmanyam et al., 2006).
5.2.2 Nitroaromatics (TNT)
TNT exposure induces significant reductions in cellular respiration and photosynthesis 
(Peterson et al., 1996; Pavlostathis et al., 1998; Thompson et al., 1998; Cruz-Uribe and Rorrer, 
2006; Ali et al., 2006; Zinnert, 2012; Via et al., 2014) Differentiating the impact of TNT from 
those of RDX, these reductions occur in a linear fashion much like that induced by natural 
stressors (Farquhar and Sharkey, 1982; Sande and Young, 1992). It is thought that TNT 
inhibits photosynthesis by some interaction with Photosystem I (PSI) or Photosystem 320 17. Effects of munitions compounds on plant health and function
II (PSII; Cruz-Uribe and Rorrer, 2006), potentially via degradation of PSII energy storage 
capabilities, damage to the light harvesting complex itself (Ali et al., 2006), or impairing the 
water splitting system (Ali et al., 2006; Via et al., 2014). When exposed to TNT, plants exhibit 
a reduction in ETR accompanied by strong fluorescence quenching (qN), increased NPQ, and 
increased dark minimal fluorescence (Fo) dissipation, all without greater than 10% change in 
FV/FM (Ali et al., 2006; Yang et al., 2021). These findings are supported by those of Naumann 
et  al. (2010a,b) and Via et  al. (2014) which also found negligible reductions in FV/FM in 
both greenhouse and field settings. Significant reductions in FV/FM have been observed in 
Arabidopsis sp. and Medicago sativa grown in nutrient media (You et al., 2015; Yang et al., 2021), 
warranting further investigation into the mechanisms of photosynthetic impairment and po￾tential species- and dose-dependent variations.
Via et al. (2014) and Naumann et al. (2010a,b) also recorded significant reductions to gs
which could potentially act as a photosynthetic limiter by reducing evapotranspiration and 
gas exchange (Lambers and Oliveira, 2019). Stomatal closure can often occur in response to 
water stress; however, Via et al. (2014) found that leaf water potential did not change in the 
presence of TNT, suggesting that the plants were not under any kind of water stress and 
that some other internal mechanism was the cause (Lambers and Oliveira, 2019). What is 
interestingly conserved across the literature is the consistent linear relationship of reduced 
carbon fixation with increased TNT concentration. Given the highly varied nature of explo￾sive compound toxicity, these responses may be due to unique aspects of the different species 
tested, interactions of the soils used, variations in plant age, or to contaminant concentrations 
(Pilon-Smits, 2005).
While there are certainly phytotoxic effects of explosive compounds on plant species, sig￾nificant gaps in the literature prevent the development of any concrete assertions to the mech￾anisms at play. Far more work needs to be done on a broader range of species in more diverse 
conditions. One interesting path forward into this work is through the use of remote sensing 
to quantify plant health and function from a distance.
6. Monitoring going forward
The continual expansion and concentration of anthropogenic waste increasingly threatens 
the health and safety of the environment and its inhabitants (Crutzen, 2006). The number 
and diversity of harmful pollutants is rapidly expanding and a large part of assessing current 
damage and future threats is environmental monitoring (Huete, 2004). The last few decades 
have birthed and matured remote sensing technologies (Kang, 2021) that have expanded our 
capacity to efficiently and rapidly monitor the Earth’s surface, and through vegetation, even 
the subsurface (Manley et al., 2019). Starting as large units that required vehicles to be de￾ployed, to smaller backpack-sized units, the sensors of today can easily be carried by un￾manned aerial vehicles (UAVs) or placed into microsatellites.
Through widespread applicability and large-scale adoption, remote sensing is now essen￾tial to many industries (i.e., agriculture and engineering) and governmental agencies (Zhao 
et al., 2019). The purpose of a majority of remote sensing efforts is to measure or quantify 
directly what the sensor can “see,” or detect, with much of this being beyond a human’s natu￾ral capabilities (Fig. 7). With such an intimate connection between plants and the subsurface, 6. Monitoring going forward 321
sensing plant stress in above-ground tissues may be conducted to translate plant-contaminant 
interactions and to delineate the extent of below-ground contamination (Burken et al., 2011).
Plants are ideal surrogates for remote detection of subsurface contaminants as 30% of the 
Earth’s surface is covered by forests, meaning their physical sampling potential is rather sig￾nificant (Huete, 2012). Because of their extensive root network and ability to extract massive 
amounts of water, plants have the capacity to act as active samplers. This extraction of water 
and nutrients results in plants sampling the entire rooted area comprised of groundwater, soil 
vapor, and soil via direct contact. Plant tissues can be used in many applications for delin￾eating a wide range of pollutants. This is called phytoforensics or phytoscreening (Vroblesky, 
2008; Karnjanapiboonwong et al., 2012; Limmer and Burken, 2014). The sheer scale of po￾tentially contaminated sites and diversity of explosive compounds in the subsurface drives 
the need for a novel technique that accurately screens for contaminants inexpensively and 
efficiently, that then guides more thorough ground-based environmental sampling.
Explosives-induced stress in plants causes shifts in cellular processing and pigment content 
(Fang et al., 1998). As plant responses can be species- and contaminant-specific, discriminat￾ing between both natural (i.e., drought or nutrient deficiency), and anthropogenic stressors 
is crucial for the accurate remote detection of any specific pollutant (Zinnert, 2012). Stress 
induced by explosives has been linked to spectral responses that are detectable via multi- and 
hyperspectral sensors and quantified with reflectance indices (Zinnert, 2012; Manley et al., 
2019). Vegetation exposed to explosives has been shown to differentiate from reference plants 
and plants under natural stress (Fig. 8). However, research on this has been limited.
Hyperspectral imagery (HSI) senses hundreds of wavelengths, or bands, that are re￾flected back to the sensor (Maimaitijiang et al., 2017). The visible region of detection (VIS; 
400–700nm) is referred to as the chemical region of a plant’s spectral signature because this 
portion encompasses chlorophylls a and b, carotenoids, and accessory pigments within plant 
leaves (Moroni et al., 2013; Hallik et al., 2017). RDX has been shown to cause reductions in 
pigment concentrations which can be interpreted as increased reflectance in VIS wavelengths 
FIG. 7 Illustration of the basics of remote sensing. Sensors can work off of passive light (as with the satellite) or 
active signals (as with the plane).322 17. Effects of munitions compounds on plant health and function
(Vila et al., 2007; Zinnert, 2012). The red edge, wavelengths from ~700 to 750nm, can be indic￾ative of stress by exhibiting a “blue shift,” or increased reflectance along the red edge range 
of wavelengths (Gates et al., 1965; Zagajewski et al., 2017). A red edge that is shifted towards 
NIR wavelengths is suggestive of higher chlorophyll concentrations (Chappelle et al., 1991; 
Sanches et al., 2013). Reflectance in the near-infrared (NIR; ~750–2500nm) region represents 
biomass due to internal scattering of longer wavelengths within leaves caused by cellulose, 
lignin, and other physical structures (Colwell, 1974; Curran, 1989). Both regions react to pres￾ence of explosives in plants (Fig. 9). Biomass can be reduced and is evident via decreased NIR 
reflectance, depending on the concentration and species (Zinnert et al., 2013; Manley et al., 
2019).
Hyperspectral imagery by nature is a complicated data type because of its structure and as￾sociated file sizes (Zhao et al., 2019). A more efficient approach involves the use of reflectance 
indices, which are generally simple equations that have been designed to focus on the change 
in reflectance at one particular wavelength compared with a reference wavelength (Table 2). 
Not a direct measurement of morphology and physiology, reflectance indices are proxies that 
offer a rapid assessment of a plant’s health status, signified by increases or decreases in an 
index’s value, depending on the nature of the index (Xue and Su, 2017). For instance, higher 
FIG.  8 Principle Components Analysis (PCA) of reflectance indices for two crop species, Zea mays (corn) and 
Sorghum bicolor (sorghum), each broken into three groups: control, drought, RDX-exposed. From Manley, P.V., Sagan, 
V., Fritschi, F.B., Burken, J.G., 2019. Remote sensing of explosives-induced stress in plants: hyperspectral imaging analysis for 
remote detection of unexploded ordnance. Remote Sens. 11(15).6. Monitoring going forward 323
values of the Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI) usually represent healthier 
plants, while higher values of the Anthocyanin Reflectance Index (ARI) can indicate plant 
stress (Gitelson et al., 2001; Coops and Stone, 2005; McVeagh et al., 2012). Reflectance indices 
also provide a means for dimension reduction by excluding many redundant bands, thereby 
greatly reducing the amount of time and processing power necessary to perform statisti￾cal analyses (Haboudane et al., 2008). Utilization of specific reflectance indices is useful for 
analyzing large datasets with Principle Component Analysis (Fig. 8) and machine learning 
techniques (i.e., Support Vector Machine) while keeping computation costs and times low.
Explosive contamination can induce both dramatic and subtle changes in organisms when 
exposed (Robidoux et al., 2003; Winfield et al., 2004; Just and Schnoor, 2004; Vila et al., 2008; 
Ali et al., 2014; Via et al., 2014; Al-Traboulsi and Alaib, 2021). To fully understand the ex￾tent of the impact, these compounds have on plant species, it is imperative to understand 
physiological changes as well as physical ones (Peterson et al., 1996; Pavlostathis et al., 1998; 
Thompson et al., 1998; Cruz-Uribe and Rorrer, 2006; Ali et al., 2006; Zinnert, 2012; Via et al., 
2014). Much of the work to date has investigated these interactions with a focus on remedi￾ation of contaminants (Via, 2020), while very little attention has been paid to the condition 
of those plants beyond physical appearance and survival. Explosive compounds are highly 
phytotoxic and once absorbed can induce a wide array of stress responses. There is much 
that we do not know about these responses or the mechanisms behind them, but it is clear 
that explosives can induce novel reactions compared with other xenobiotics or even natural 
Wavelength (nm)
Drought-tolerant Z. mays (AMX)
Control
RDX significant from drought (α= 0.05)
Significant from control (α= 0.05)
RDX 250 mg kg-1
Drought
Average reflectance
398
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
509 620 731 843 954
FIG. 9 Hyperspectral reflectance of Zea mays (corn) placed into three groups: control, drought, and RDX-exposed. 
Red (black in print version) portions of lines indicate statistically significant differences of reflectance values when 
compared with control. Gray hatched areas indicate areas where the drought and RDX groups significantly differ. 
Significant differences were calculated from t-tests with an α=0.05. From Manley, P.V., Sagan, V., Fritschi, F.B., Burken, 
J.G., 2019. Remote sensing of explosives-induced stress in plants: hyperspectral imaging analysis for remote detection of unex￾ploded ordnance. Remote Sens. 11(15).324 17. Effects of munitions compounds on plant health and function
stressors (Zinnert et al., 2013; Via et al., 2014, 2016; Yang et al., 2021). Understanding phys￾iological shifts associated with exposure not only provide a window into plant health 
and function but can be utilized as means for large scale investigations (Vroblesky, 2008; 
Karnjanapiboonwong et al., 2012; Limmer and Burken, 2014). With the advancement of re￾motely based analytic tools, future research will be able to incorporate remote sensing tech￾niques to gain greater insight into these and other chemical-plant interactions with higher 
throughput than traditional methods.
The ability to delineate subsurface explosives contamination over large areas at a canopy 
scale may be possible by analyzing HSI of vegetation that has been exposed to explosives, 
as changes to plant form and function are accounted for in spectral characteristics. Current 
detection methods for explosives all require investigators to be physically located within the 
area of concern. These methods are time consuming, expensive, and require people to work 
in close proximity to potential danger. Using HSI for contaminated areas that are vegetated 
could be highly informative and applicable over tracts of land in a relatively short amount of 
time (Manley et al., 2019). The sensors and vehicles are already commercially available; what 
is needed is more fundamental research investigating the effects of explosives contamination 
on plants.
TABLE 2 Commonly used reflectance indices for remote detection of plant health.
Index Abbreviation Relates to References
Green difference vegetation index GDVI Biomass Sripada et al. (2006)
Leaf area index LAI Biomass Boegh et al. (2002)
Normalized difference vegetation index NDVI Biomass Rouse et al. (1973)
Green ratio vegetation index GRVI Photosynthesis Sripada et al. (2006)
Modified red edge simple ratio MRESR Photosynthesis Sims and Gamon (2002)
Photochemical reflectance index PRI Photosynthesis Gamon et al. (1992)
Anthocyanin reflectance index 1 ARI1 Pigments Gitelson et al. (2001)
Anthocyanin reflectance index 2 ARI2 Pigments Gitelson et al. (2001)
Carotenoid reflectance index 1 CRI1 Pigments Gitelson et al. (2002)
Carotenoid reflectance index 2 CRI2 Pigments Gitelson et al. (2002)
Green normalized difference vegetation index GNDVI Pigments Gitelson and Merzlyak (1997)
Modified chlorophyll absorption ratio index MCARI Pigments Daughtry et al. (2000)
Structure-insensitive pigment index SIPI Pigments Peñuelas et al. (1995)
Vogelmann red edge index 1 VREI1 Pigments Vogelmann et al. (1993)
Vogelmann red edge index 2 VREI2 Pigments Vogelmann et al. (1993)
Plant senescence reflectance index PSRI Stress Merzlyak et al. (1999)
Red edge position index REPI Stress Curran et al. (1995)
Water band index WBI Water content Peñuelas et al. (1993)References 325
References
Abad-Santos, A., 2012. Relax, Finding Gigantic Undetonated Bombs from WWII is Totally Normal. The Wire. 
Available at: https://www.thewire.com/global/2012/08/relax-finding-gigantic-undetonated-bombs-wwii-to￾tally-normal-europe/56284/. Accessed Aug 2019.
Ahmadi, M.S., Haderlie, L.C., Wicks, G.A., 1980. Effect of growth stage and water stress on Barnyardgrass 
(Echinochloa crus-galli) control and on glyphosate absorption and translocation. Weed Sci. 28 (3), 277–282.
Ahren, W.H., 1994. Herbicide Handbook. Weed Science Society of America, Champaign. IL.
Ali, N.A., Dewez, D., Robidoux, P.Y., Popovic, R., 2006. Photosynthetic parameters as indicators of trinitrotoluene 
(TNT) inhibitory effect: change in chlorophyll a fluorescence induction upon exposure of lactuca sativa to TNT. 
Ecotoxicology 15 (5), 437–441.
Ali, A., Zinnert, J.C., Muthukumar, B., Peng, Y., Chung, S.M., Stewart, C.N., 2014. Physiological and transcriptional 
responses of Baccharis halimifolia to the explosive “composition B” (RDX/TNT) in amended soil. Environ. Sci. 
Pollut. Res. 21 (13), 8261–8270.
Al-Traboulsi, M., Alaib, M.A., 2021. Phytotoxic effects of soil contaminated with explosive residues of landmines 
on germination and growth of Vicia faba. L. Geol. Ecol. Landsc. https://doi.org/10.1080/24749508.2021.1952765.
Asbaghi, N., 2012. In: Pichtel, J. (Ed.), Phytoremediation of Nitroglycerin in Smokeless Powders. Ball State University. 
PhD http://cardinalscholar.bsu.edu/handle/123456789/196102.
Best, E.P.H., Geter, K.N., Tatem, H.E., Lane, B.K., 2006. Effects, transfer, and fate of RDX from aged soil in plants and 
worms. Chemosphere 62 (4), 616–625.
Best, E.P.H., Smith, T.S., Hagen, F.L., Dawson, J.O., Torrey, A.J., 2008. Capacities of candidate herbaceous plants 
for phytoremediation of soil-based TNT and RDX on ranges. https://erdc-library.erdc.dren.mil/jspui/
handle/11681/8582.
Best, E.P., Sprecher, S.L., Fredrickson, H.L., Zappi, M.E., Larson, S.L., 1997. Screening submersed plant species for 
phytoremediation of explosives-contaminated groundwater from the Milan Army Ammunition Plant, Milan, 
Tennessee. In: Army Engineer Waterways Experimental Station Vicksburg MS. Environmental Lab. https://apps.
dtic.mil/sti/citations/ADA334994.
Best, E.P., Sprecher, S.L., Larson, S.L., Fredrickson, H.L., Bader, D.F., 1999. Environmental behavior of explosives in 
groundwater from the Milan Army ammunition plant in aquatic and wetland plant treatments. Uptake and fate 
of TNT and RDX in plants. Chemosphere 39 (12), 2057–2072.
Boegh, E., Soegaard, H., Broge, N., Hasager, C.B., Jensen, N.O., Schelde, K., Thomsen, A., 2002. Airborne multispec￾tral data for quantifying leaf area index, nitrogen concentration, and photosynthetic efficiency in agriculture. 
Remote Sens. Environ. 81 (2–3), 179–193.
Brady, L.M., 2012. From battlefield to fertile ground: the development of civil war environmental history. Civil War 
Hist. 58 (3), 305–321.
Brannon, J.M., 1999. Conceptual Model and Process Descriptor Formulations for Fate and Transport of UXO. U.S. 
Army Engineer Waterways Experiment Station.
Brentner, L.B., Mukherji, S.T., Walsh, S.A., Schnoor, J.L., 2010. Localization of hexahydro-1,3,5-trinitro-1,3,5-triazine 
(RDX) and 2,4,6-trinitrotoluene (TNT) in poplar and switchgrass plants using phosphor imager autoradiography. 
Environ. Pollut. 158, 470–475.
Bürgi, M., Östlund, L., Mladenoff, D.J., 2017. Legacy effects of human land use: ecosystems as time-lagged systems. 
Ecosystems 20 (1), 94–103.
Burken, J.G., 2003. Uptake and metabolism of organic compounds: green-liver model. In: Phytoremediation: 
Transformation and Control of Contaminants. vol. 59. Wiley, pp. 59–84.
Burken, J.G., Schnoor, J.L., 1998. Predictive relationships for uptake of organic contaminants by hybrid poplar trees. 
Environ. Sci. Technol. 32 (21), 3379–3385.
Burken, J.G., Vroblesky, D.A., Balouet, J.C., 2011. Phytoforensics, dendrochemistry, and phytoscreening: new green 
tools for delineating contaminants from past and present. Environ. Sci. Technol. 45 (15), 6218–6226.
Certini, G., Scalenghe, R., Woods, W.I., 2013. The impact of warfare on the soil environment. Earth Sci. Rev. 127, 1–15.
Chapin III, F.S., 1991. Integrated responses of plants to stress. Bioscience 41 (1), 29–36.
Chappelle, E.W., Kim, M.S., McMurtrey, J.E., 1991. The red edge shift: an explanation of its relationship to stress and the 
concentration of chlorophyll A. In: Remote Sensing: Global Monitoring for Earth Management, Espoo, June 3–6, 1991.
CISR (Center for International Stabilization and Recovery), 2013. To Walk the Earth in Safety. Available at: https://
www.jmu.edu/cisr/index.shtml. Accessed May 2020.326 17. Effects of munitions compounds on plant health and function
Clausen, J.L., Scott, C.L., Mulherin, N.D., Bigl, S.R., Gooch, G.E., Douglas, T.A., Osgerby, I.T., Palm, B., 2010. 
Adsorption/Desorption Measurements of Nitroglycerin and Dinitrotoluene in Camp Edwards, Massachusetts 
Soil. https://erdc-library.erdc.dren.mil/jspui/handle/11681/5541.
CLU-IN (Contaminated Site Clean-Up Information), 2018. Explosives. Available at: https://clu-in.org/characteriza￾tion/technologies/exp.cfm. Accessed Oct 2021.
Colwell, J.E., 1974. Vegetation canopy reflectance. Remote Sens. Environ. 3, 175–183.
Comfort, S.D., Shea, P.J., Hundal, L.S., Li, Z., Woodbury, B.L., Martin, J.L., Powers, W.L., 1995. TNT transport and fate 
in contaminated soil. J. Environ. Qual. 24 (6), 1174–1182.
Cook, D.S., 1997. Military Impact Areas as a Source of Environmental Contamination. Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology. https://dspace.mit.edu/bitstream/handle/1721.1/10368/37519904-MIT.pdf?sequence=2.
Coops, N.C., Stone, C.A., 2005. A comparison of feld-based and modelled reflectance spectra from damaged Pinus 
radiata foliage. Aust. J. Bot. 53 (5), 417–429.
Crossland, D., 2008. Unexploded Bombs in Germany: The Lethal Legacy of WorldWar II. Der Spieg. Available at: 
https://www.spiegel.de/international/germany/unexploded-bombs-in-germany-the-lethal-legacy-of-world￾war-ii-a-584091.html. Accessed June 2014.
Crutzen, P.J., 2006. The “Anthropocene”. In: Ehlers, E., Krafft, T. (Eds.), Earth System Science in the Anthropocene. 
Springer, Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 13–18.
Cruz-Uribe, O., Rorrer, G.L., 2006. Uptake and biotransformation of 2,4,6-trinitrotoluene (TNT) by microplantlet 
suspension culture of the marine red macroalga Portieria hornemannii. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 93 (3), 401–412.
Curran, P.J., 1989. Remote sensing of foliar chemistry. Remote Sens. Environ. 30, 271–278.
Curran, P., Windham, W., Gholz, H., 1995. Exploring the relationship between reflectance red edge and chlorophyll 
concentration in slash pine leaves. Tree Physiol. 15, 203–206.
Daughtry, C.S.T., Walthall, C.L., Kim, M.S., de Colstoun, E.B., McMurtrey, J.E., 2000. Estimating corn leaf chlorophyll 
concentration from leaf and canopy reflectance. Remote Sens. Environ. 74, 229–239.
Dobratz, B.M., 1981. LLNL Explosives Handbook: Properties of Chemical Explosives and Explosives and Explosive 
Simulants. Web.
Dontsova, K., Taylor, S., Pesce-Rodriguez, R., Brusseau, M., Arthur, J., Mark, N., Walsh, M., Lever, J., Šimůnek, J., 2014. 
Dissolution of NTO, DNAN, and Insensitive Munitions Formulations and Their Fates in Soils (No. TR-14-23). The 
U.S. Army Engineer Research and Development Center Cold Regions Research and Engineering Laboratory.
Doskey, C.M., 2020. Uptake and Fate of Hexahydro-1,3,5-Trinitro-1,3,5-Triazine by Chrysopogon zizanioides. Michigan 
Technological University, https://doi.org/10.37099/mtu.dc.etds/198.
Doyle, P., Bennett, M.R. (Eds.), 2002. Fields of Battle: Terrain in Military History. Springer, Dordrecht.
Ducheine, P.A.L., Schmitt, M.N., Osinga, F.P.B., 2016. In: Ducheine, P.A.L., Schmitt, M.N., Osinga, F.P.B. (Eds.), 
Targeting: The Challenges of Modern Warfare. T.M.C. Asser Press, The Hague.
Eckardt, A., 2012. Experts Blow Up 550-Pound WWII Bomb Found in Munich. NBCNews. Available at: https://
worldnews.nbcnews.com/_news/2012/08/28/13523220-experts-blow-up-550-pound-wwii-bomb-found-in-mu￾nich?lite. Accessed April 2013.
EPA (Environmental Protection Agency), 2014. Available at: https://www.epa.gov/superfund/. Accessed Oct 2019.
Fang, Z., Bouwkamp, J.C., Solomos, T., 1998. Chlorophyllase activities and chlorophyll degradation during leaf se￾nescence in non-yellowing mutant and wild type of Phaseolus vulgaris L. J. Exp. Bot. 49 (320), 503–510.
Farquhar, G.D., Sharkey, T.D., 1982. Stomatal conductance and photosynthesis. Ann. Rev. Plant Physiol. 33 (1), 
317–345.
FATE (Field Analytic Technologies Encyclopedia), 2006. Explosives. Available at: https://fate.clu-in.org. Accessed 
2006.
Flexas, J., Escalona, J.M., Medrano, H., 1999. Water stress induces different levels of photosynthesis and electron 
transport rate regulation in grapevines. Plant Cell Environ. 22 (1), 39–48.
Francis, R.A., 2011. The impacts of modern warfare on freshwater ecosystems. Environ. Manag. 48 (5), 985–999.
French, C.E., Rosser, S.J., Davies, G.J., Nicklin, S., Bruce, N.C., 1999. Biodegradation of explosives by transgenic 
plants expressing pentaerythritol tetranitrate reductase. Nat. Biotechnol. 17 (5), 491–494.
Gamon, J.A., Penuelas, J., Field, C.B., 1992. A narrow-waveband spectral index that tracks diurnal changes in photo￾synthetic efficiency. Remote Sens. Environ. 41 (1), 35–44.
Gates, D.M., Keegan, H.J., Schleter, J.C., Weidner, V.R., 1965. Spectral properties of plants. Appl. Opt. 4 (1), 11–20.
Gholamian, F., Gholamian, F., 2007. Germination and growth parameters of Raphanus sativus L. and Triticum sativum 
L. plants exposed to TNT and HMX explosives. Indian J. Plant Physiol. 12 (3), 276.Ghosh, M., Singh, S.P., 2005. A review on phytoremediation of heavy metals and utilization of it’s by products. Asian 
J. Energy Environ. 6 (4), 18.
Gitelson, A.A., Merzlyak, M.N., 1997. Remote estimation of chlorophyll content in higher plant leaves. Int. J. Remote 
Sens. 18 (12), 2691–2697.
Gitelson, A.A., Merzlyak, M.N., Chivkunova, O.B., 2001. Optical properties and nondestructive estimation of antho￾cyanin content in plant leaves. Photochem. Photobiol. 74 (1), 38–45.
Gitelson, A.A., Zur, Y., Chivkunova, O.B., Merzlyak, M.N., 2002. Assessing carotenoid content in plant leaves with 
reflectance spectroscopy. Photochem. Photobiol. 75 (3), 272–281.
Goel, A., Kumar, G., Payne, G.F., Dube, S.K., 1997. Plant cell biodegradation of a xenobiotic nitrate ester, nitroglyc￾erin. Nat. Biotechnol. 15 (2), 174–177.
Gong, P., Wilke, B.M., Flieschmann, S., 1999. Soil-based phytotoxicity of 2,4,6-trinitrotoluene (TNT) to terrestrial 
higher plants. Arch. Environ. Contam. Toxicol. 36, 152–157.
Goodall, J., 2003. Disturbing facts about war and the environment. Front. Ecol. Environ. 1 (6), 283.
Haboudane, D., Tremblay, N., Miller, J.R., Vigneault, P., 2008. Remote estimation of crop chlorophyll content using 
spectral indices derived from hyperspectral data. IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. 46 (2), 423–437.
Hagan, F.L., Koeser, A.K., Dawson, J.O., 2016. Growth changes of eighteen herbaceous angiosperms induced by 
Hexahydro-1,3,5-trinitro-1,3,5-triazine (RDX) in soil. Int. J. Phytoremed. 18 (1), 94–102.
Hallik, L., Kazantsev, T., Kuusk, A., Galmes, J., Tomas, M., Niinemets, U., 2017. Generality of relationships between 
leaf pigment contents and spectral vegetation indices in Mallorca (Spain). Reg. Environ. Chang. 17, 2097–2109.
Harvey, P.J., Campanella, B.F., Castro, P.M.L., Harms, H., Lichtfouse, E., Schäffner, A.R., Smrcek, S., Werck-Reichhart, D., 
2002. Phytoremediation of polyaromatic hydrocarbons, anilines and phenols. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. Int. 9 (1), 29–47.
Harvey, S.D., Fellows, R.J., Cataldo, D.A., Bean, R.M., 1991. Fate of the explosive hexahydro-1,3,5-trinitro-1,3,5-
triazine (rdx) in soil and bioaccumulation in bush bean hydroponic plants. Environ. Toxicol. Chem./SETAC 10 
(7), 845–855.
Heiderscheidt, D., 2018. The impact of world war one on the forests and soils of Europe. Ursidae 7 (3), 3.
Hewitt, A.D., Jenkins, T.F., Walsh, M.E., Walsh, M.R., Taylor, S., 2005. RDX and TNT residues from live-fire and blow￾in-place detonations. Chemosphere 61 (6), 888–894.
HRW (Human Rights Watch), 2014. Syria/Turkey: Landmines Kill Civilians Fleeing Kobani. Available at: https://
www.hrw.org/news/2014/12/02/syria/turkey-landmines-kill-civilians-fleeing-kobani. Accessed April 2020.
Huete, A.R., 2004. Remote sensing for environmental monitoring. In: Environmental Monitoring and Characterization. 
Elsevier Science & Technology.
Huete, A.R., 2012. Vegetation indices, remote sensing and forest monitoring. Geogr. Compass 6 (9), 513–532.
Huggler, J., 2015. 3,000 Unexploded Second World War Bombs May be Buried in Berlin. Tele-graph. Available at: 
https://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/europe/germany/11326191/3000-unexploded-WWII-bombs￾may-be-buried-in-the-earth-in-Berlin.html. Accessed July 2015.
Hupy, J.P., 2008. The environmental footprint of war. Environ. Hist. 14 (3), 405–421.
Hupy, J.P., Koehler, T., 2012. Modern warfare as a significant form of zoogeomorphic disturbance upon the land￾scape. Geomorphology 157–158, 169–182.
Hupy, J.P., Schaetzl, R.J., 2006. Introducing “bombturbation,” a singular type of soil disturbance and mixing. Soil Sci. 
171 (11), 823–836.
Hupy, J.P., Schaetzl, R.J., 2008. Soil development on the WWI battlefield of Verdun, France. Geoderma 145 (1), 37–49.
Jenkins, T.F., Hewitt, A.D., Grant, C.L., Thiboutot, S., Ampleman, G., Walsh, M.E., Ranney, T.A., Ramsey, C.A., 
Palazzo, A.J., Pennington, J.C., 2006. Identity and distribution of residues of energetic compounds at army live￾fire training ranges. Chemosphere 63 (8), 1280–1290.
Just, C.L., Schnoor, J.L., 2004. Phytophotolysis of hexahydro-1,3,5-trinitro-1,3,5-triazine (RDX) in leaves of reed ca￾nary grass. Environ. Sci. Technol. 38 (1), 290–295.
Kalderis, D., Juhasz, A.L., Boopathy, R., Comfort, S., 2011. Soils contaminated with explosives: environmental fate and 
evaluation of state-of-the-art remediation processes. J. Macromol. Sci. Part A Pure Appl. Chem. 83 (7), 1407–1484.
Kang, R., 2021 9th International Conference on Agro-Geoinformatics, Agro-Geoinformatics 2021.
Karnjanapiboonwong, A., Mu, R., Yuan, Y., Shi, H., Ma, Y., Burken, J.G., 2012. Plant tissue analysis for explosive 
compounds in phytoremediation and phytoforensics. J. Environ. Sci. Health A Tox. Hazard. Subst. Environ. Eng. 
47, 2219–2229.
Kelly, J., 2004. Gunpowder: Alchemy, Bombards, and Pyrotechnics: The History of the Explosive that Changed the 
World. Basic Books (AZ).
References 327328 17. Effects of munitions compounds on plant health and function
Kharrazi, A., Kudo, S., Allasiw, D., 2018. Addressing misconceptions to the concept of resilience in environmental 
education. Sustainability 10 (12), 4682.
Khatisashvili, G., Gordeziani, M., Adamia, G., Kvesitadze, E., Sadunishvili, T., Kvesidatze, G., 2009. Higher plants 
ability to assimilate explosives. World Acad. Sci. Eng. Technol. 57, 265–270.
Kiiskila, J.D., Das, P., Sarkar, D., Datta, R., 2015. Phytoremediation of explosive-contaminated soils. Curr. Pollut. Rep. 
1 (1), 23–34.
Krishnan, G., Horst, G.L., Darnell, S., Powers, W.L., 2000. Growth and development of smooth bromegrass and tall 
fescue in TNT-contaminated soil. Environ. Pollut. 107 (1), 109–116.
Krishnan, G., Horst, G.L., Darnell, S., Powers, W.L., 2000. Growth and development of smooth bromegrass and tall 
fescue in TNT-contaminated soil. Environ. Pollut. 107(1), 109–116.
Lackenbauer, P.W., Kikkert, P., Eyre, K.C., 2017. Lessons in Arctic warfare: The army experience, 1945–55. In: Canadian 
Armed Forces Arctic Operations: Lessons Learned, Lost, and Relearned. Gregg Centre, Fredericton.
Lacombe, G., Pierret, A., 2013. Hydrological impact of war-induced deforestation in the Mekong Basin. Ecohydrology 
6, 901–903.
Lambers, H., Oliveira, R.S., 2019. Plant Physiological Ecology. Springer, Cham.
Larson, S.L., Martin, W.A., Escalon, B.L., Thompson, M., 2008. Dissolution, sorption, and kinetics involved in systems 
containing explosives, water, and soil. Environ. Sci. Technol. 42 (3), 786–792.
Lever, J.H., Taylor, S., Perovich, L., Bjella, K., Packer, B., 2005. Dissolution of composition B detonation residuals. 
Environ. Sci. Technol. 39 (22), 8803–8811.
Limmer, M.A., Burken, J.G., 2014. Plant translocation of organic compounds: molecular and physiochemical predic￾tors. Environ. Sci. Technol. Lett. 1 (2), 156–161.
Literathy, P., 1992. Environmental consequences of the Gulf war in Kuwait: impact on water resources. Water Sci. 
Technol. J. Int. Assoc. Water Pollut. Res. 26, 1–2.
MacDonald, J.A., Small, M.J., Morgan, M.G., 2009. Quantifying the risks of unexploded ordnance at closed military 
bases. Environ. Sci. Technol. 43 (2), 259–265.
Madeira, C.L., Field, J.A., Simonich, M.T., Tanguay, R.L., Chorover, J., Sierra-Alvarez, R., 2018. Ecotoxicity of the in￾sensitive munitions compound 3-nitro-1,2,4-triazol-5-one (NTO) and its reduced metabolite 3-amino-1,2,4-triazol￾5-one (ATO). J. Hazard. Mater. 343, 340–346.
Maimaitijiang, M., Ghulam, A., Sidike, P., Hartling, S., Maimaitiyiming, M., Peterson, K., Shavers, E., Fishman, J., 
Peterson, J., Kadam, S., Burken, J., Fritschi, F., 2017. Unmanned aerial system (UAS)-based phenotyping of soybean 
using multi-sensor data fusion and extreme machine learning. ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens. 134, 43–58.
Manley, P.V., Sagan, V., Fritschi, F.B., Burken, J.G., 2019. Remote sensing of explosives-induced stress in plants: hyper￾spectral imaging analysis for remote detection of unexploded ordnance. Remote Sens. 11 (15).
Mannion, A.M., 2003. The Environmental Impact of War Terrorism. Department of Geography, University of Reading.
Martinovic-Vitanovic, V., Kalafatic, V., 2009. Ecological impact on the Danube after NATO air strikes. In: Kassim, T.A., 
Barceló, D. (Eds.), Environmental Consequences of War and Aftermath. Springer, Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 53–282.
McVeagh, P., Yule, I., Grafton, M., 2012. Pasture yield mapping from your groundspread truck. In: Currie, L.D., 
Christensen, C.L. (Eds.), Advanced Nutrient Management: Gains from the Past—Goals for the Future. Fertilizer 
and Lime Research Centre, Massey University, Palmerston North, New Zealand, pp. 24–29. Occasional Re-port 
No. 25 http://frc.massey.ac.nz/publications.html.
Merzlyak, M.N., Gitelson, A.A., Chivkunova, O.B., Rakitin, V.Y., 1999. Non‐destructive optical detection of pigment 
changes during leaf senescence and fruit ripening. Physiol. Plant. 106 (1), 135–141.
Milburn, R., 2012. Mainstreaming the environment into postwar recovery: the case for “ecological development”. 
Int. Aff. 88 (5), 1083–1100.
Monteil-Rivera, F., Halasz, A., Groom, C., Zhao, J.S., Thiboutot, S., Ampleman, G., Hawari, J., 2009. Fate and trans￾port of explosives in the environment: a chemist’s view. In: Ecotoxicology of Explosives. CRC Press, pp. 33–62.
Moroni, M., Lupo, E., Cenedese, A., 2013. Hyperspectral proximal sensing of Salix alba trees in the Sacco River Valley 
(Latium, Italy). Sensors 13 (11), 14633–14649.
Myler, C.A., Sisk, W., 1991. Bioremediation of explosives contaminated soils (scientific questions/engineering reali￾ties). In: Sayler, G.S., Fox, R., Blackburn, J.W. (Eds.), Environmental Biotechnology for Waste Treatment. Springer 
US, pp. 137–146.
Naumann, J.C., Anderson, J.E., Young, D.R., 2010a. Remote detection of plant physiological responses to TNT soil 
contamination. Plant Soil 329 (1), 239–248.Naumann, J.C., Rubis, K., Young, D.R., 2010b. Fusing chlorophyll fluorescence and plant canopy reflectance to detect 
TNT contamination in soils. Proc. SPIE 7664, Detection and Sensing of Mines, Explosive Objects, and Obscured 
Targets XV, 76641L (April 29, 2010)., https://doi.org/10.1117/12.851220.
Pagoria, P., 2016. A comparison of the structure, synthesis, and properties of insensitive energetic compounds. 
Propellants Explos. Pyrotech. 41 (3), 452–469.
Panja, S., Sarkar, D., Datta, R., 2018. Vetiver grass (Chrysopogon zizanioides) is capable of removing insensitive high 
explosives from munition industry wastewater. Chemosphere 209, 920–927.
Panz, K., Miksch, K., 2012. Phytoremediation of explosives (TNT, RDX, HMX) by wild-type and transgenic plants. J. 
Environ. Manage. 113, 85–92.
Paterson, S., Mackay, D., Tam, D., Shiu, W.Y., 1990. Uptake of organic chemicals by plants: a review of processes, 
correlations and models. Chemosphere 21 (3), 297–331.
Pathak, S., 2020. Ecological footprints of war: an exploratory assessment of the long-term impact of violent conflicts 
on national biocapacity from 1962–2009. J. Environ. Stud. Sci. 10 (4), 380–393.
Pavlostathis, S.G., Comstock, K.K., Jacobson, M.E., Saunders, F.M., 1998. Transformation of 2,4,6-trinitrotoluene by 
the aquatic plant Myriophyllum spicatum. Environ. Toxicol. Chem. 17 (11), 2266–2273.
Pennington, J.C., Brannon, J.M., 2002. Environmental fate of explosives. Thermochim. Acta 384 (1–2), 163–172.
Pennington, J.C., Jenkins, T.F., Ampleman, G., Thiboutot, S., Brannon, J.M., Hewitt, A.D., Lewis, J., Brochu, S., Diaz, 
E., Walsh, M.R., 2006. Distribution and Fate of Energetics on DoD Test and Training Ranges. https://erdc-library.
erdc.dren.mil/jspui/handle/11681/8521.
Peterson, M.M., Horst, G.L., Shea, P.J., Comfort, S.D., Peterson, R.K., 1996. TNT and 4-amino-2,6-dinitrotoluene influ￾ence on germination and early seedling development of tall fescue. Environ. Pollut. 93 (1), 57–62.
Peñuelas, J., Baret, F., Filella, I., 1995. Semi-empirical indices to assess carotenoids/chlorophyll a ratio from leaf spec￾tral reflectance. Photosynthetica 31, 221–230.
Peñuelas, J., Filella, I., Biel, C., Serrano, L., Save, R., 1993. The reflectance at the 950–970 nm region as an indicator of 
plant water status. Int. J. Remote Sens. 14 (10), 1887–1905.
Peterson, M.M., Horst, G.L., Shea, P.J., Comfort, S.D., 1998. Germination and seedling development of switchgrass 
and smooth bromegrass exposed to 2,4,6-trinitrotoluene. Environ. Pollut. 99 (1), 53–59.
Pichtel, J., 2012. Distribution and fate of military explosives and propellants in soil: a review. Appl. Environ. Soil Sci. 
2012. https://doi.org/10.1155/2012/617236.
Pilon-Smits, E., 2005. Phytoremediation. Annu. Rev. Plant Biol. 56 (1), 15–39.
Podlipná, R., Fialová, Z., Vaněk, T., 2008. Toxic effect of nitroesters on plant tissue cultures. Plant Cell Tissue Organ 
Cult. 94 (3), 305–311.
Podlipná, R., Fialová, Z., Vaněk, T., 2010. Degradation of nitroesters by plant tissue cultures. J. Hazard. Mater. 184 
(1–3), 591–596.
Price, R.A., Pennington, J.C., Larson, S.L., Neumann, D., Hayes, C.A., 2002. Uptake of RDX and TNT by agronomic 
plants. Soil Sediment Contam. Int. J. 11 (3), 307–326.
Pugh, D.L., 1982. Milan Army Ammunition Plant Contamination Survey. USATHAMA Report DRXTH-FR-8213, US 
Army Toxic and Hazardous Materials Agency, Aberdeen, MD.
Reynolds, C.M., Charles, M., Ringelberg, D.B., Foley, K.L., Newman, L.A., Hadden, C.B.B., Rahn, T.W., 2013. RDX in 
Plant Tissue: Leading to Humification in Surface. No. TR-13-4. ERDC/CRREL https://erdc-library.erdc.dren.mil/
jspui/handle/11681/5479.
Riefler, R.G., Medina, V.F., 2006. Phytotreatment of propellant contamination. Chemosphere 63 (6), 1054–1059.
Riefler, G., Guruswamy, S., Medina, V., 2006. Uptake and Transformation of the Propellants 2, 4-DNT, Perchlorate 
and Nitroglycerin by Grasses. Ohio Univ, Athens. https://apps.dtic.mil/sti/citations/ADA452439.
Robidoux, P.Y., Bardai, G., Paquet, L., Ampleman, G., Thiboutot, S., Hawari, J., Sunahara, G.I., 2003. Phytotoxicity 
of 2,4,6-trinitrotoluene (TNT) and octahydro-1,3,5,7-tetranitro-1,3,5,7-tetrazocine (HMX) in spiked artificial and 
natural forest soils. Arch. Environ. Contam. Toxicol. 44 (2), 198–209.
Rocheleau, S., Kuperman, R.G., Dodard, S.G., Sarrazin, M., Savard, K., Paquet, L., Hawari, J., Checkai, R.T., Thiboutot, 
S., Ampleman, G., Sunahara, G.I., 2011. Phytotoxicity and uptake of nitroglycerin in a natural sandy loam soil. Sci. 
Total Environ. 409 (24), 5284–5291.
Rouse, J., Haas, R., Schell, J., Deering, D., 1973. Monitoring vegetation systems in the great plains with ERTS. In: 
Freden, S.C., Mercanti, E.P., Becker, M.A. (Eds.), Third Earth Resources Technology Satellite-1 Symposium—
Volume I: Technical Presentations. NASA SP-351. NASA, Washington, DC, p. 309.
References 329330 17. Effects of munitions compounds on plant health and function
Rylott, E.L., Bruce, N.C., 2019. Right on target: using plants and microbes to remediate explosives. Int. J. 
Phytoremediation 21 (11), 1051–1064.
Sanches, I.D., Souza Filho, C.R., Magalhaes, L.A., Quiterio, G.C.M., Alves, M.N., Oliveira, W.J., 2013. Assessing the 
impact of hydrocarbon leakages on vegetation using reflectance spectroscopy. ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote 
Sens. 78, 85–101.
Sande, E., Young, D.R., 1992. Effect of sodium chloride on growth and nitrogenase activity in seedlings of Myrica 
cerifera L. New Phytol. 120 (3), 345–350.
Schneider, J.F., Zellmer, S.D., Tomczyk, N.A., Rastorfer, J.R., Chen, D., 1995. Uptake of Explosives from Contaminated 
Soil by Existing Vegetation at the Iowa Army Ammunition Plant. Argonne National Lab IL, Energy and 
Environmental Systems Division. https://apps.dtic.mil/sti/citations/ADA296529.
Schoenmuth, B., Mueller, J.O., Scharnhorst, T., Schenke, D., Büttner, C., Pestemer, W., 2014. Elevated root retention 
of hexahydro-1,3,5-trinitro-1,3,5-triazine (RDX) in coniferous trees. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. Int. 21 (5), 3733–3743.
Schoenmuth, B., Schenke, D., Scharnhorst, T., Combrinck, S., McCrindle, R.I., Mueller, J.O., Büttner, C., Pestemer, W., 
2015. Binding of RDX to cell wall components of Pinus sylvestris and Picea glauca and three-year mineralisation 
study of tissue-associated RDX residues. Int. J. Phytoremed. 17 (7), 716–725.
Sens, C., Scheidemann, P., Werner, D., 1999. The distribution of 14C—TNT in different biochemical compartments of 
the monocotyledonous Triticum aestivum. Environ. Pollut. 104, 113–119.
Sheremata, T.W., Halasz, A., Paquet, L., Thiboutot, S., Ampleman, G., Hawari, J., 2001. The fate of the cyclic nitramine 
explosive RDX in natural soil. Environ. Sci. Technol. 35 (6), 1037–1040.
Sims, D.A., Gamon, J.A., 2002. Relationships between leaf pigment content and spectral reflectance across a wide 
range of species, leaf structures and developmental stages. Remote Sens. Environ. 81 (2–3), 337–354.
Singh, S.N., Mishra, S., 2014. Phytoremediation of TNT and RDX. In: Singh, S.N. (Ed.), Biological Remediation of 
Explosive Residues. Springer International Publishing, pp. 371–392.
Smirnov, N.N., 1989. The impact of conventional war on natural areas of the USSR. Environ. Conserv. 16 (4), 317–321.
Sripada, R.P., Heiniger, R.W., White, J.G., Meijer, A.D., 2006. Aerial color infrared photography for determining early 
in‐season nitrogen requirements in corn. Agron. J. 98 (4), 968–977.
Strachan, S.D., Hess, F.D., 1983. The biochemical mechanism of action of the dinitroaniline herbicide oryzalin. Pestic. 
Biochem. Physiol. 20 (2), 141–150.
Subrahmanyam, D., Subash, N., Haris, A., Sikka, A.K., 2006. Influence of water stress on leaf photosynthetic charac￾teristics in wheat cultivars differing in their susceptibility to drought. Photosynthetica 44 (1), 125–129.
Sulmon, C., van Baaren, J., Cabello-Hurtado, F., Gouesbet, G., Hennion, F., Mony, C., Renault, D., Bormans, M., El 
Amrani, A., Wiegand, C., Gérard, C., 2015. Abiotic stressors and stress responses: what commonalities appear 
between species across biological organization levels? Environ. Pollut. 202, 66–77.
Suthinithet, S., 2010. Land of a Million Bombs. Hyphen Mag. Available at: https://www.hyphenmagazine.com/
magazine/issue-21-new-legacy/land-million-bombs.
Taylor, S., Lever, J.H., Fadden, J., Perron, N., Packer, B., 2009. Simulated rainfall-driven dissolution of TNT, Tritonal, 
Comp B and Octol particles. Chemosphere 75 (8), 1074–1081.
Taylor, S., Bigl, S., Packer, B., 2015a. Condition of in situ unexploded ordnance. Sci. Total Environ. 505, 762–769.
Taylor, S., Dontsova, K., Walsh, M.E., Walsh, M.R., 2015b. Outdoor dissolution of detonation residues of three insen￾sitive munitions (IM) formulations. Chemosphere 134, 250–256.
The Monitor (The Landmine and Cluster Munition Monitor), 2009. Available at: https://www.the-monitor.org/in￾dex.php/publications/display?url1/4lm/2005/south_korea.html. Accessed June 2015.
Thiboutot, S., Ampleman, G., Hewitt, A.D., 2002. Guide for Characterization of Sites Contaminated with Energetic 
Materials. https://erdc-library.erdc.dren.mil/jspui/handle/11681/5441.
Thompson, P.L., Ramer, L.A., Schnoor, J.L., 1998. Uptake and transformation of TNT by hybrid poplar trees. Environ. 
Sci. Technol. 32 (7), 975–980.
Thompson, P.L., Ramer, L.A., Schnoor, J.L., 1999. Hexahydro-1,3,5-trinitro-1,3,5-triazine translocation in poplar trees. 
Environ. Toxicol. Chem. 18 (2), 279–284.
Trensey, J., 2013. In: Pichtel, J. (Ed.), Screening of Grasses and Legumes for Phytoremediation of Nitroglycerin in Soil. 
Ball State University. M.S http://cardinalscholar.bsu.edu/handle/123456789/197182.
Via, S.M., 2020. Phytoremediation of explosives. In: Concepts and Strategies in Plant Sciences. Springer International 
Publishing, pp. 261–284.
Via, S.M., Zinnert, J.C., 2016. Impacts of explosive compounds on vegetation: A need for community scale investiga￾tions. Environ. Pollut. 208(Pt B), 495–505.Further reading 331
Via, S.M., Zinnert, J.C., Butler, A.D., Young, D.R., 2014. Comparative physiological responses of Morella cerifera to 
RDX, TNT, and composition B contaminated soils. Environ. Exp. Bot. 99, 67–74.
Via, S.M., Zinnert, J.C., Young, D.R., 2015. Differential effects of two explosive compounds on seed germination and 
seedling morphology of a woody shrub, Morella cerifera. Ecotoxicology 24 (1), 194–201.
Via, S.M., Zinnert, J.C., Young, D.R., 2016. Legacy effects of explosive contamination on vegetative communities. 
Open J. Ecol. 06 (08), 496–508.
Vierling, E., Kimpel, J.A., 1992. Plant responses to environmental stress. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 3 (2), 164–170.
Vila, M., Lorber-Pascal, S., Laurent, F., 2007. Fate of RDX and TNT in agronomic plants. Environ. Pollut. 148 (1), 
148–154.
Vila, M., Lorber-Pascal, S., Laurent, F., 2008. Phytotoxicity to and uptake of TNT by rice. Environ. Geochem. Health 
30 (2), 199–203.
Vogelmann, J.E., Rock, B.N., Moss, D.M., 1993. Red edge spectral measurements from sugar maple leaves. Int. J. 
Remote Sens. 14, 1563–1575.
Vroblesky, D., 2008. User’s guide to the collection and analysis of tree cores to assess the distribution of subsurface 
volatile organic compounds. USGS Scientific Investigations report, 5088.
Weber, R.A., 2008. Uptake and Metabolism of the Explosive RDX by the Marine Seaweeds Portieria hornemannii and 
Acrosiphonia coalita, and Uptake of the Explosive TNT by Algal Extracts of Portieria hornemannii. https://ir.library.
oregonstate.edu/dspace/handle/1957/8937.
Westing, A.H., 1980. Warfare in a Fragile World: Military Impact on the Human Environment. Taylor Francis, London.
Winfield, L.E., Rodgers Jr., J.H., D’Surney, S.J., 2004. The responses of selected terrestrial plants to short (<12 days) 
and long term (2, 4 and 6 weeks) hexahydro-1,3,5-trinitro-1,3,5-triazine (RDX) exposure. Part I: growth and devel￾opmental effects. Ecotoxicology 13 (4), 335–347.
Xiong, D., Nadal, M., 2020. Linking water relations and hydraulics with photosynthesis. Plant J. 101 (4), 800–815.
Xue, J., Su, B., 2017. Significant remote sensing vegetation indices: a review of developments and applications. J. Sens. 
2017. https://doi.org/10.1155/2017/1353691.
Yamamoto, H., Morley, M.C., Speitel, G.E., Clausen, J., 2004. Fate and transport of high explosives in a Sandy soil: 
adsorption and desorption. Soil Sediment Contam. Int. J. 13 (5), 361–379.
Yang, X., Zhang, Y., Lai, J.L., Luo, X.G., Han, M.W., Zhao, S.-P., Zhu, Y.B., 2021. Analysis of the biodegradation and 
phytotoxicity mechanism of TNT, RDX, HMX in alfalfa (Medicago sativa). Chemosphere 281, 130842.
You, S.H., Zhu, B., Han, H.J., Wang, B., Peng, R.H., Yao, Q.H., 2015. Phytoremediation of 2,4,6-trinitrotoluene by 
Arabidopsis plants expressing a NAD(P)H-flavin nitroreductase from Enterobacter cloacae. Plant Biotechnol. 
Rep. 9 (6), 417–430.
Zagajewski, B., Tømmervik, H., Bjerke, J.W., Raczko, E., Bochenek, Z., Kłos, A., Jarocińska, A., Lavender, S., 
Ziółkowski, D., 2017. Intraspecific differences in spectral reflectance curves as indicators of reduced vitality in 
high-arctic plants. Remote Sens. 9 (12), 1–20.
Zellmer, S.D., Schneider, J.F., Tomczyk, N.A., Banwart, W.L., Chen, D., 1995. Plant Uptake of Explosives from 
Contaminated Soil at the Joliet Army Ammunition Plant. Argonne National Lab, Lemont, IL. https://apps.dtic.
mil/sti/citations/ADA296528.
Zhao, M., Zhou, Y., Li, X., Cao, W., He, C., Yu, B., Li, X., Elvidge, C.D., Cheng, W., Zhou, C., 2019. Applications of 
satellite remote sensing of nighttime light observations: advances, challenges, and perspectives. Remote Sens. 11 
(17), 1971.
Zinnert, J.C., 2012. Plants as Phytosensors: physiological responses of a woody plant in response to RDX exposure 
and potential for remote detection. Int. J. Plant Sci. 173 (9), 1005–1014.
Zinnert, J.C., Via, S.M., Young, D.R., 2013. Distinguishing natural from anthropogenic stress in plants: physiology, 
fluorescence and hyperspectral reflectance. Plant Soil 366 (1), 133–141.
Further reading
Best, E.P., Miller, J.L., Fredrickson, H.L., Larson, S.L., Zappi, M.E., 1998. Explosives removal from groundwater of the 
Iowa Army Ammunition Plant in continuous-flow laboratory systems planted with aquatic and wetland plants. 
In: Army Engineer Waterways Experimental Station Vicksburg MS. Environmental Lab. https://apps.dtic.mil/
sti/citations/ADA362974.
Bond, B.J., 2000. Age-related changes in photosynthesis of woody plants. Trends Plant Sci. 5 (8), 349–353.Burken, J.G., Schnoor, J.L., 1997. Uptake and metabolism of atrazine by poplar trees. Environ. Sci. Technol. 31 (5), 
1399–1406. https://doi.org/10.1021/es960629v.
Clausen, J.L., Scott, C., Osgerby, I., 2011. Fate of nitroglycerin and dinitrotoluene in soil at small arms training ranges. 
Soil Sediment Contam. Int. J. 20 (6), 649–671.
Donaldson, J.R., Stevens, M.T., Barnhill, H.R., Lindroth, R.L., 2006. Age-related shifts in leaf chemistry of clonal aspen 
(Populus tremuloides). J. Chem. Ecol. 32 (7), 1415–1429.
Eichengreen, B., Bordo, M.D., Capie, F., 1995. Europe’s Postwar Recovery. Cambridge Univ. Press.
Fellows, R.J., Harvey, S.D., Cataldo, D.A., 1995. Evaluation of the metabolic fate of munitions material (TNT & 
RDX) in plant systems and initial assessment of material interaction with plant genetic material. In: Validation of 
the Metabolic Fate of Munitions Materials (TNT, RDX) in Mature Crops. Pacific Northwest Lab, Richland, WA. 
https://www.osti.gov/biblio/187259.
Gangwar, A., 2003. Impact of war and landmines on environment. In: Forum Proceedings: Landmines-Challenges to 
Humanity and Environment. Srinigar, IN, p. 20.
Gholamian, F., Gholamian, F., 2008. Effects of HMX and TNT contaminations on biochemical constituents in Triticum 
sativum L. and Raphanus sativus L. plants. Indian J. Plant Physiol. 13 (3).
Google, 2021. Newfoundland Memorial Beaumont-Hamel, France. Retrieved: August 1st, 2012, from https://goo.
gl/maps/q9soWqkfvrSp3S8L9.
Habib, M.K., 2007. Controlled biological and biomimetic systems for landmine detection. Biosens. Bioelectron. 23, 
1–18.
Hagen, F., 2013. Induction of Growth and Pigmentation Changes by Hexahydro-1,3,5-Trinitro-1,3,5-Triazine (RDX) in 
Angiosperms. University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. http://www.ideals.illinois.edu/handle/2142/45657.
Hannink, N., Rosser, S.J., French, C.E., Basran, A., Murray, J.A., Nicklin, S., Bruce, N.C., 2001. Phytodetoxification of 
TNT by transgenic plants expressing a bacterial nitroreductase. Nat. Biotechnol. 19 (12), 1168–1172.
Hannink, N.K., Rosser, S.J., French, C.E., Bruce, N.C., 2003. Uptake and metabolism of TNT and GTN by plants ex￾pressing bacterial pentaerythritol tetranitrate reductase. Water Air Soil Pollut. 3 (3), 251–258.
Juvany, M., Müller, M., Munné-Bosch, S., 2013. Plant age-related changes in cytokinins, leaf growth and pigment 
accumulation in juvenile mastic trees. Environ. Exp. Bot. 87, 10–18.
Kanyamibwa, S., 1998. Impact of war on conservation: Rwandan environment and wildlife in agony. Biodivers. 
Conserv. 7 (11), 1399–1406.
Leeneer, I., Pastijn, H., 2002. Selecting land mine detection strategies by means of outranking MCDM techniques. Eur. 
J. Oper. Res. 139, 327–338.
Manley, P.V., 2016. Plant Functional Trait and Hyperspectral Reflectance Responses to Comp B Exposure: Efficacy of 
Plants as Landmine Detectors. Master’s thesis, https://doi.org/10.25772/NMWJ-JV46.
Naumann, J.C., Young, D.R., Anderson, J.E., 2007. Linking leaf chlorophyll fluorescence properties to physiological 
responses for detection of salt and drought stress in coastal plant species. Physiol. Plant. 131 (3), 422–433.
Niinemets, Ü., 2010. Responses of forest trees to single and multiple environmental stresses from seedlings to mature 
plants: past stress history, stress interactions, tolerance and acclimation. For. Ecol. Manag. 260 (10), 1623–1639.
Rajjou, L., Duval, M., Gallardo, K., Catusse, J., Bally, J., Job, C., Job, D., 2012. Seed germination and vigor. Annu. Rev. 
Plant Biol. 63, 507–533.
Rocheleau, S., Kuperman, R.G., Martel, M., Paquet, L., Bardai, G., Wong, S., Sarrazin, M., Dodard, S., Gong, P., Hawari, 
J., Checkai, R.T., Sunahara, G.I., 2006. Phytotoxicity of nitroaromatic energetic compounds freshly amended or 
weathered and aged in sandy loam soil. Chemosphere 62 (4), 545–558.
Taiz, L., Zeiger, E., 2002. Plant Physiology. Sinauer, Sunderland, MA.
Talmage, S.S., Opresko, D.M., Maxwell, C.J., Welsh, C.J., Cretella, F.M., Reno, P.H., Daniel, F.B., 1999. Nitroaromatic 
munition compounds: environmental effects and screening values. Rev. Environ. Contam. Toxicol. 161.
Žunić, Z.S., Miljević, N.R., 2009. Environmental and health impact assessment of ammunition containing transuranic 
elements. Handb. Environ. Chem. 209, 251.
 
332 17. Effects of munitions compounds on plant health and functionPlants and their Interaction to Environmental Pollution 333 Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-99978-6.00014-5
CHAPTER
18
Aquatic macrophytes and trace 
elements: Deleterious effects, 
biomarkers, adaptation mechanisms, 
and potential new wave of 
phytoremediation processes
Maha Krayema
, Sami El Khatiba
, and Pascal Labrousseb
a
LIU, Lebanese International University, Al Khyara-West Bekaa, Lebanon, b
Université de 
Limoges, PEIRENE EA 7500, Limoges, France
Abbreviations
ATP adenosine triphosphate
ADC arginine decarboxylase
APX ascorbate peroxidase
BCF bioconcentration factor
CAT catalase
CWs constructed wetlands (CWs),
DW dry weight
FTWs floating treatment wetlands
FSF CW free water surface flow
GSH gluthatione
GR glutathione reductase
GPX guaiacol peroxidase
HMA heavy metal ATPase
H2O2 hydrogen peroxide
*OH hydroxyl radical
*OOH hydroperoxyl radical
MDA malondialdehyde
NADPH nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate
ODC ornithine decarboxylase334 18. Aquatic macrophytes and trace elements
Ψs osmotic potential
PC phytochelatins
PAs polyamines
Ψp pressure potential
Put putrescine
RAPD random amplified polymorphic DNA
ROS reactive oxygen species 1
O2 singlet oxygen
Spd spermidine
Spm spermine
SPDS Spd synthase
SPMS Spm synthase
SCGE single cell gel electrophoresis
SSF CW subsurface flow
O2* superoxide anion
SODs superoxide dismutases
TUNEL terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labeling
TBARS thiobarbituric acid reactive substances
WFD water framework directive
Ψ water potential
1. Introduction
Nowadays, “water quality” becomes a worldwide concern. This scientific term defines 
the degree of suitability of water to sustain various uses (Ugya et al., 2017). In fact, accord￾ing to each use, water should fulfill certain physical, chemical, or biological requirements. 
Water quality is affected not only naturally by hydrogeological or climatic changes but also 
by anthropogenic activities due to the release of nontreated industrial, agricultural and do￾mestic wastewaters to rivers. Thus, these factors are affecting the aquatic ecosystem services. 
In this way, the European Council and Parliament on the October 23, 2000 set out the Water 
Framework Directive (WFD) and its daughter directives aiming to ensure a good water qual￾ity, chemically, and biologically, in 2015 (2008/105/EC, 2013/39/EC).
Consequently, water quality is monitored permanently (i) chemically by analyzing water 
samples, (ii) physically by measuring the pH, the light penetration, the water temperature 
and conductivity, and the oxygen content, and (iii) biologically by performing some biologi￾cal tests such as toxicity tests or monitoring biological biomarkers of fauna and flora living in 
the aquatic ecosystem.
Recently, the use of biological parameters to evaluate water quality has increased. In fact, 
chemical measurement of contaminants is limited by some technical and financial problems. 
Thus, biological indices are established to measure the degree of toxicity of pollutants. It 
started on fish, insect larvae, and diatoms such as River Fish Index, Standardized Global 
Biological Index and Diatom Biotic Index. Afterwards, other species including aquatic 
mosses, planktonic and benthic algae, aquatic ferns, and macrophytes were also used in wa￾ter monitoring (Ansari et al., 2016; Besse et al., 2012; Zhou et al., 2008). More specifically, the 
EU Water Framework Directive has integrated the aquatic macrophytes as sentinel species 
used in biomonitoring of water quality (Aguiar et al., 2014). By definition, sentinel species are 
sensitive species, allowing the detection of pollution even at low concentrations and acting 2. Trace elements and aquatic plants or macrophytes 335
as bioindicator of one or more pollutants (Kaiser, 2001). As described by Kaiser (2001), a sen￾tinel species “should be noninvasive, easily handled and able to grow in normal ecological 
conditions. In addition, it should be a bioindicator able to assess the degree of water pollu￾tion by evaluating its biomarkers affected.” Lagadic et al. (1998) define a plant biomarker as 
“an observable and/or measurable change at the molecular, biochemical, cellular, physiolog￾ical, or behavioral level that reveals past or present exposure of an individual to at least one 
pollutant.”
Regarding macrophytes, they are demonstrated as good bioindicator of water pollution 
in several studies (Krayem, 2015; Delmail, 2011; Chatenet et al., 2006). They showed external 
(morphology) and internal (physiology and/or biochemistry) changes after their exposure to 
poor water quality. However, some aquatic macrophytes were able to grow very well in such 
poor conditions. They also could improve their adaptation and tolerance mechanisms and, 
especially, for some of them, their ability to bioaccumulate and/or sequestrate trace elements 
within their tissues. Thus, aquatic macrophytes represent a promising potential to develop 
new wave of phytoremediation processes.
Thus, this chapter aims to establish a state of the art on water pollution especially by inor￾ganic trace elements in respect with the usefulness of macrophytes and their biomarkers to 
assess water quality. In addition, the defense mechanisms and adaptation produced by some 
macrophytes to prevent trace element stress will be also reviewed. Finally, the recent uses of 
macrophytes in the phytoremediation processes will also be investigated.
2. Trace elements and aquatic plants or macrophytes
Each year, huge amounts of pollutants including trace elements are released into the aquatic 
environment (INERIS, 2014), coming from natural or anthropic activities such as industrial, 
agricultural, and domestic wastes (Masindi and Muedi, 2018). Consequently, a decrease in 
species richness, a disturbance of biogeochemical cycles, and bioaccumulation of these haz￾ardous elements through food webs are observed (Pollard et al., 2014; van der Ent et al., 2013).
2.1 Trace elements: Trace metals and metalloids
Trace metals are defined as metallic elements found at low concentrations in both aquatic 
and terrestrial media. More specifically, trace metals are present at concentrations between 
10−15mol/L and 10−5mol/L (10μM) in the aquatic environments (Robbins et  al., 2019). 
In the periodic table, chemical elements belonging to rows IA, IIA, and transition elements 
are considered as trace metals. However, chemical elements showing mixed physicochemical 
properties related to metals and nonmetals and found along the stair-step line of the periodic 
table are defined as metalloids (Kelter et al., 2008; Zangi and Filella, 2012). Boron (B), Silicon 
(Si), Germanium (Ge), Arsenic (As), Antimony (Sb), Tellurium (Te), and Astatine (At) are the 
main metalloids known (Dixon and Vasiliu, 2017).
Trace elements in the environment originate naturally either by erosion of rocks and the 
earth's crust in form of oxides, carbonates, silicates or sulfides or by means of volcanism, 
wildfires and hot springs (Masindi and Muedi, 2018; Baize and Sterckeman, 2001). Moreover, 
anthropic activities such as mining, metallurgy, agriculture, urbanization, etc. cause the 336 18. Aquatic macrophytes and trace elements
discharge of huge amounts of trace element in the aquatic environment (Zhou et al., 2020a, 
2020b; Obinna and Ebere, 2019; Masindi and Muedi, 2018).
Trace elements are divided into two classes:
(i) essential trace elements, which are required at low concentrations for living organisms 
such as sodium, manganese, iron, chlorine, boron, molybdenum, copper, zinc, and 
nickel, and
(ii) nonessential trace elements which are not required for development of life such as 
chromium, cadmium, lead, mercury, antimony, silver, and arsenic (Vardhan et al., 2019).
However, essential or not, at higher doses than the critical normal concentrations (Table 1), 
these trace elements becomes toxic and carcinogenic in some cases (Masindi and Muedi, 
2018; Filipiak-Szok et al., 2015; Wood, 2011; Daby, 2006). Table 1 shows the critical normal 
concentrations of some trace elements in drinking water as determined by World Health 
Organization in 2017 and by the directive (EU) 2020/2184 of the European Parliament and of 
the Council of 16 December 2020 on the quality of water intended for human consumption 
(EU, 2020).
In general, trace metals and metalloids are both assimilated by plants and animals, and 
then accumulate throughout the food web presenting a major threat for humans (Jaiswal 
et al., 2018). In aquatic environment, trace metals and metalloids accumulation lead to del￾eterious effects on aquatic plants and animals. For example, several studies reported histo￾logical alterations and toxicities, malformations, organ ulceration, perturbations of cellular 
metabolism, and tissue death in fish (Jaiswal et al., 2018). Regarding aquatic plants, reduced 
TABLE 1 Critical concentrations of some trace elements (in μM) in drinking water according to 
World Health Organization (2017) and EU (2020).
Trace element 
(metal/metalloid)
Critical concentrations in drinking 
water (μM) (World Health 
Organization, 2017)
Critical concentrations 
in drinking water (μM) (EU, 2020)
Ag 0.93 –
As 0.13 0.13
Cd 0.03 0.04
Cr 0.96 0.48
Cu 31.5 31.5
Hg 0.03 0.005
Mn 7.27 0.91
Ni 1.2 0.34
Pb 0.05 0.02
Se 0.51 0.25
Zn – –2. Trace elements and aquatic plants or macrophytes 337
photosynthesis, phytotoxicity, alteration of mitosis, reduced growth, etc. are also observed 
(Clemens and Ma, 2016; Krayem, 2015; Delmail, 2011; Hawa Bibi et al., 2010; Dazy et al., 
2009; Calow, 2009).
These deleterious effects depend mainly from the absorption mechanism, the biologi￾cal and physicochemical properties of the studied organism, and the exposure concentra￾tion of the trace element (Amiard-Triquet and Rainbow, 2009; Calow, 2009). For example, 
boron induced a reduced growth of Lemna minor after an exposure to 2.3 mM for 7 days 
(Böcük et al., 2013). Another study presents similar results with an increase in the level 
of the antioxidative enzymes in these plants after an exposure for 7 days to 0.75 mM of 
boron (Gür et al., 2016). Similarly, chromium induced toxic effects on the aquatic moss 
Fontinalis antipyretica (Dazy et al., 2008) and on aquatic macrophytes Alternanthera philox￾eroides, Borreria scabiosoides, Polygonum ferrugineum, Eichhornia crassipes (Mangabeira et al., 
2011), and Callitriche cophocarpa (Augustynowicz et al., 2016). Moreover, copper, cadmium 
and arsenic are highly phytotoxic as observed on the aquatic plant Myriophyllum alterni￾florum in several studies (Decou et al., 2019, 2020; Krayem, 2015; Delmail, 2011; Chatenet 
et al., 2006).
2.2 Trace elements and their interactions with macrophytes
Aquatic macrophytes are included within seven classes of photosynthetic organisms: 
Cyanobacteria, Bryophyta, Pteridophyta, Chlorophyta, Rhodophyta, Xanthophyta, and 
Spermatophyta (Ansari et al., 2019; Akhtar et al., 2017).
Macrophytes are also divided into three major groups:
(i) Emergent macrophytes rooted in soil with, at least, a part of their stems in the air such 
as Phragmites sp., Typha sp., etc.
(ii) Free-floating macrophytes rooted in sediment (roots totally submerged in water) and 
aerial stems such as Pistia stratiotes, Eichhornia crassipes, etc.
(iii) Submerged macrophytes totally growing in water with roots attached to sediments 
such as Myriophyllum sp. and Hydrilla sp.
Trace element bioavailability to macrophytes depends mainly from its physicochemical 
speciation in the environment. In aquatic environment, they must be present in their free 
forms in order to be bioavailable for plants. However, other forms could be also observed 
such as hydrated with water molecules or complexed with other ligands (Ardestani et al., 
2014; Santore et al., 2001). Generally, all these forms depend on several physicochemical fac￾tors such as pH, temperature, conductivity, speciation of metal, competitor ions, and doses 
of inorganic and organic elements in the environment (Smith et al., 2015; Di Toro et al., 2001; 
Santore et al., 2001).
Once bioavailable, trace elements can also be adsorbed or precipitated at the root inter￾face. For example, arsenic adsorption is affected by iron oxi-hydroxides also known as the 
iron plaque (Punshon et al., 2017; Hu et al., 2015; Guan et al., 2009). In addition, compe￾tition with other anions such as carbonates, sulfates, phosphates, and silicates as well as 
organic matter can also affect this adsorption process (Violante and Caporale, 2015; Meng 
et al., 2000).338 18. Aquatic macrophytes and trace elements
After their adsorption, trace elements are assimilated and absorbed. Assimilation occurs 
via three independent pathways:
(i) Passive diffusion generally occurs down a concentration gradient, without energy 
consumption. Trace elements, in their free hydrophobic forms, can easily cross 
membranes.
(ii) Facilitated diffusion generally occurs through specific structures such as pores, 
canals, aquaporins, or permeases (Buffle and DeVitre, 1993). Trace elements in their 
hydrophilic and complex forms are concerned.
(iii) Active transport, generally consumes energy as adenosine triphosphate (ATP) because 
it occurs against concentration gradient. Thus, trace elements bind to a transmembrane 
protein known as ion pump or transporter. For example, copper is transported via five 
main families of specific membrane transporters (Pfeil et al., 2014) such as the family 
of Heavy Metal ATPase (HMA). Due to its similarity with phosphates, arsenic in form 
of arsenate As (V), as a nonessential element for plants, uses phosphate transporters to 
enter plant cells (Krayem et al., 2017; Farooq et al., 2016; Elias et al., 2012; Tawfik and 
Viola, 2011).
Finally, aquatic macrophytes have shown their capacity not only to assimilate but also 
to accumulate trace elements within their tissues in case of excess (Nedjimi, 2021; Bai et al., 
2018). This makes them best candidates for bioindication of water pollution through their po￾tential biomarkers and for treatment of contaminated water. Certainly, the macrophyte spe￾cies and its capacity to uptake trace element, environmental factors such as speciation forms, 
pollutant concentration, duration, temperature, pH, redox potential, and salinity as described 
previously could also affect their usefulness in phytoremediation processes (Akhtar et al., 
2017) (see Section 3 for more details).
3. Biomarkers and adaptation mechanisms of macrophytes
Once assimilated, essential trace elements at higher doses or nonessential elements like 
arsenic even at low doses are very toxic for plants. Reduction of growth, chlorosis, necro￾sis, reduction in photosynthesis and respiration activities, induction of an oxidative stress 
followed by the activation of antioxidative enzymes and sequestration of trace elements in￾side vacuoles through phytochelatins (Shabbir et al., 2020; Krayem et al., 2017; Delmail and 
Labrousse, 2012) are the main symptoms observed on macrophytes. These modifications at 
all plant levels constitute potential biomarkers. Only some relevant studies are mentioned 
within the next paragraphs but more studies are reviewed and listed in Table 2.
3.1 Morphological biomarkers
Plant growth and development include cell division, cell expansion, and cell differentiation. 
It occurs through embryogenesis and organogenesis as new organs (roots, leaves, branches, 
and flowers) production during all the plant lifespan. However, this growth phase could slow 
down and ends by ageing and senescence. Cell division occurs within specialized zones, called 
meristems (David, 2017). Senescence can be accelerated especially during stress periods and TABLE 2 Potential biomarkers for trace element (TE) pollution in some aquatic plants.
Metal/
metalloid 
stress Plant model
Morphological/
anatomical biomarkers
Physiological 
biomarkers Biochemical biomarkers
Histological/
molecular 
biomarkers Ref.
Arsenic (As) Vallisneria spiralis Relative growth rate Giri (2019)
Pistia stratiotes Dry biomass, chlorosis, 
darkening, and root 
growth
Reduced 
photosynthetic O2
evolution activity
Membrane peroxidation, 
ROS formation, antioxidant 
activity
Cell membrane 
damage
Campos et al. 
(2019)
Eichhornia crassipes Stunted growth, 
chlorosis, wilting, death
Jasrotia et al. 
(2017)
Spirodela intermedia 
W. Koch
Membrane peroxidation, 
ROS formation such as H2O2
and O2−, enzymatic and 
nonenzymatic antioxidant 
activity
Da-Silva et al. 
(2017)
Myriophyllum 
alterniflorum
Roots length, main stem 
length, and ramifications 
length
Photosynthetic and 
respiratory activities
H2O2 content, membrane 
lipid peroxidation, pigments 
content, phytochelatines
Micronucleii 
formation
Krayem et al. 
(2016a, 2016b, 
2019) and 
Krayem (2015)
Myriophyllum 
spicatum
Growth, biomass 
allocation
Pigments content Gross et al. 
(2016)
Ceratophyllum 
demersum
Chlorophyll precursors, 
pigments content
Mishra et al. 
(2016)
Vallisneria natans Chlorophyll content, 
malondialdehyde, and thiol 
levels
Chen et al. 
(2015)
Vallisneria gigantea, 
Azolla filiculoides, and 
Lemna minor
Photosystem system 
II quantum yield, 
photosynthesis
Carotenoid and flavonoid 
contents
Iriel et al. (2015)
Azolla caroliniana and 
Lemna minor
Relative growth rate Chlorophyll and 
anthocyanin content
Rofkar et al. 
(2014)
Ceratophyllum 
demersum
Photosynthesis Pigments content, starch 
content, oxidative stress
Mishra et al. 
(2014)
ContinuedNajas indica Electric conductivity Membrane lipid 
peroxidation, H2O2
content, protein content, 
thiols content, antioxidant 
enzymes, phytochelatin 
and phytochelatin synthase, 
amino acid profile
Tripathi et al. 
(2014)
Fontinalis antipyretica The net photosynthesis 
and dark respiration 
rates
Díaz et al. 
(2013)
Hydrilla verticillata The net photosynthetic 
rate, stomatal 
conductance, 
transpiration rate, 
electron transport rate, 
and substomatal CO2
concentration
The rate of superoxide 
radical, reduced ascorbate 
content, pigments content
Srivastava et al. 
(2013)
Wolffia globosa Thiols content (phytochelatins 
and glutathione)
Zhang et al. 
(2012)
Lemna minor Membrane lipid 
peroxidation, pigments 
content, antioxidant 
enzymes, protein content
Duman et al. 
(2010)
Nasturtium officinale Relative growth rate Membrane lipid 
peroxidation, pigments 
content, antioxidant 
enzymes, proline content
DNA damage Ozturk et al. 
(2010)
Cadmium 
(Cd)
Myriophyllum 
alterniflorum
Chlorophyllian 
ramification number 
and length, main-stem 
length and total length of 
the chlorophyllian parts, 
xylem-vessel number 
and dimeter
Hydric status Membrane peroxidation, 
chl a, chl b pigments, ROS 
formation, proline content
Delmail et al. 
(2011)
TABLE 2 Potential biomarkers for trace element (TE) pollution in some aquatic plants.—cont’d
Metal/
metalloid 
stress Plant model
Morphological/
anatomical biomarkers
Physiological 
biomarkers Biochemical biomarkers
Histological/
molecular 
biomarkers Ref.Chromium 
(Cr)
Eichhornia crassipes Relative growth rate Saha et al. 
(2017)
Lemna minor Relative growth rate Pigments content Uysal (2013)
Alternanthera 
philoxeroides, 
Borreria scabiosoides, 
Polygonum 
ferrugineum, and 
Eichhornia crassipes
Changes in the 
shape of the 
chloroplasts 
and nuclei in 
Alternanthera 
philoxeroides 
and Borreria 
scabiosoides.
Changes in the 
ultrastructure 
of leaves, stems 
and roots of 
Alternanthera 
philoxeroides
Mangabeira 
et al. (2011)
Copper (Cu) Spirodela polyrhiza Relative frond number Membrane peroxidation, 
antioxidant activity, chl a 
and b
Singh et al. 
(2020)
Ceratophyllum 
demersum
Relative rate growth Pigments content Hak et al. (2020)
Myriophyllum 
alterniflorum
Antioxidant activity Decou et al. 
(2020)
Myriophyllum 
alterniflorum
Membrane peroxidation Decou et al. 
(2019)
Hydrilla verticillata 
and Pistia stratiotes
Death and chlorosis Venkateswarlu 
et al. (2019)
Myriophyllum 
alterniflorum
Root growth and shoot 
branching
H2O2 content, pigments 
content
Krayem et al. 
(2018)
ContinuedPotamogeton pectinatus Chlorosis, necrosis, 
length, and number of 
leaves
Pigments content Costa et al. 
(2018)
Pistia stratiotes Withering of roots, 
chlorosis, necrosis, and 
accelerated senescence of 
older leaves
Pigments content Rolli et al. 
(2017)
Hydrilla verticillata ROS and membrane 
peroxidation, pigments 
content
Shi et al. (2017)
Vallisneria natans Relative growth rate and 
ground biomass
Pigments content Zhu et al. (2016)
Myriophyllum 
alterniflorum
Membrane peroxidation Krayem et al. 
(2016a)
Ceratophyllum 
demersum
Leaf size, stem, 
senescence of lowered 
leaves and chlorosis
Pigments content Thomas et al. 
(2013)
Myriophyllum 
alterniflorum
Chlorophyllian 
ramification number 
and length, the main￾stem length and the 
total length of the 
chlorophyllian parts
Membrane peroxidation, chl 
a, chl b pigments
Delmail et al. 
(2011)
Elodea densa Pigments content Nekrasova et al. 
(2011)
Spirodela polyrrhiza Dark brown color, 
necrosis, and dead leaves
Membrane peroxidation, chl 
a, and carotenoids pigments
Xing et al. 
(2010)
TABLE 2 Potential biomarkers for trace element (TE) pollution in some aquatic plants.—cont’d
Metal/
metalloid 
stress Plant model
Morphological/
anatomical biomarkers
Physiological 
biomarkers Biochemical biomarkers
Histological/
molecular 
biomarkers Ref.Lead (Pb) Ceratophyllum 
demersum and 
Myriophyllum 
spicatum
Chlorosis Pigments content, 
antioxidant activity, proline 
content
El-Khatib et al. 
(2014)
Lemna minor Pigments content Singh (2012)
Eichhornia crassipes Plant growth, root and 
shoot length of seedlings
MDA content, antioxidative 
enzymes activities.
Malar et al. 
(2016)
Manganese 
(Mn)
Eichhornia crassipes, 
Pistia stratiotes, 
and Alternanthera 
philoxeroides
Fresh weight, dry 
weight, and relative 
growth rate RGR
Pigments content Hua et al. (2012)
Mercury (Hg) Lemna minor Photosynthetic pigments 
content, malondialdehyde 
and lipoxygenase activities 
induction of enzymatic 
antioxidant activities, 
glutathione and ascorbic 
acid, accumulation of 
proline and soluble sugars 
and heat shock protein 70
Appearance of 
new bands and 
absence of normal 
DNA amplicons, 
genomic template 
stability (GTS)
Zhang et al. 
(2017)
Nickel (Ni) Hydrilla verticillata Plant growth Malondialdehyde content 
and the activities of defense 
enzymes
Song et al. 
(2018)
Pistia stratiotes Wilting, chlorosis in 
young leaves, browning 
of root tips and broken 
off roots
Relative water content Total chlorophyll contents, 
antioxidants, such as proline 
content and peroxidase 
activity
Singh and 
Pandey (2011)
Silver (Ag) Lemna minor Bright spots in roots, 
fresh/dry weight, 
phytotoxic injury, 
withered leaves, 
substantial chlorosis, and 
etiolation root abscission
Photosynthetic pigment 
contents, activities of 
superoxide dismutase 
(SOD), peroxidase (POD), 
and catalase (CAT), 
malondialdehyde (MDA) 
content
Alterations 
in RAPD 
profiles, loss of 
normal bands, 
appearance of 
new bands, and 
variation in band 
intensities
Li et al. (2020)
ContinuedAluminum 
(Al) and zinc 
(Zn)
Lemna minor Reduced efficiency of 
photosynthetic energy 
conversion
Antioxidant activity, lipid 
peroxidation as well as 
H2O2, proline and ascorbate
Radić et al. 
(2010)
Cadmium 
(Cd) and lead 
(Pb)
Wolffia arrhiza Biomass, chlorosis Chlorophyll a, 
monosaccharide level, 
protein level, hydrogen 
peroxide, MDA 
content, enzymatic and 
nonenzymatic antioxidant 
mechanisms
Piotrowska 
et al. (2010)
Cadmium 
(Cd) and zinc 
(Zn)
Thalia geniculate, 
Cyperus alternifolius, 
Canna indica, 
Eichhornia crassipes, 
Pistia stratiotes
Chlorosis and stunting, 
height and root length, 
crown root number
Sricoth et al. 
(2018)
Lead (Pb), zinc 
(Zn), cadmium 
(Cd), and 
manganese 
(Mn)
Eichhornia crassipes Relative growth rate Zhou et al. 
(2020a, 2020b)
TABLE 2 Potential biomarkers for trace element (TE) pollution in some aquatic plants.—cont’d
Metal/
metalloid 
stress Plant model
Morphological/
anatomical biomarkers
Physiological 
biomarkers Biochemical biomarkers
Histological/
molecular 
biomarkers Ref.3. Biomarkers and adaptation mechanisms of macrophytes 345
observed as growth reduction in some terrestrial plants such as wheat, soybean, pea, and 
maize (Lin et al., 2007; Sobkowiak and Deckert, 2003; Sandalio et al., 2001; Baccouch et al., 
1998). Chlorosis, necrosis, a decrease in the growth and fresh biomass, a decrease in root and 
shoot lengths, an accelerated senescence ending by their death are the main morphological 
changes observed in aquatic macrophytes (Table 2) (Singh et al., 2020; Hak et al., 2020; Campos 
et al., 2019; Sricoth et al., 2018; Jasrotia et al., 2017; Malar et al., 2016; Singh and Pandey, 2011). 
For example, after being exposed to 1.6μgAs (V)/g FW during 30days in eutrophic condition, 
Krayem et al. (2016b) observed a reduction of about 43% and 91% in stem and ramification 
lengths of the aquatic macrophyte Myriophyllum alterniflorum, respectively. In another exper￾iment performed by the same authors, Myriophyllum alterniflorum presented a reduction of 
15% and 40% in stem and root lengths at 21days in an aquarium system (143μgAs/g FW) 
(Krayem et al., 2019). Similarly, a 40% decrease in relative growth rate after 10days of exposure 
to 3.14μM of copper was observed in Ceratophyllum demersum (Hak et al., 2020).
3.2 Physiological biomarkers
3.2.1 Alteration of photosynthetic and respiratory activities
Photosynthesis, as its name implies, is the conversion of light energy into chemical energy 
stored as carbohydrates inside plant tissues. This mechanism is essential for both terrestrial 
and aquatic plants and for all the terrestrial food chains. It includes two reactions: (i) the light 
reactions ending by the formation of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and nicotinamide ade￾nine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) through the electron transport chain and (ii) the light 
independent reactions known as Calvin-Benson-Bassham cycle (Keller, 2015).
Photosynthesis can be affected by several environmental factors such as sunlight intensity, 
soil composition, temperature and CO2 concentration (Nielsen, 1993). In the same way, me￾tallic stress can also affect photosynthesis by lipoperoxidation of thylakoid membrane sys￾tem (Pinto et al., 2003). Moreover, the electron transport chain can be altered, inducing an 
overproduction of reactive oxygen species (ROS) (Fryzova et al., 2017; Chugh and Sawhney, 
1999). Díaz et al. (2013) observed a decrease in the net photosynthesis rate of the aquatic moss 
Fontinalis antipyretica after exposure to an As concentration ranging from 0.00133 to 133.33μM 
during 22days. In another study performed by Ritchie and Mekjinda (2016), a higher de￾crease, by 90%, in the maximum gross photosynthesis of the small aquatic angiosperm Wolffia 
arrhiza was observed after its exposure to arsenic at 0.1M for 24h. Moreover, in watermilfoil 
exposed during 14days to 1.33μM As (V) in eutrophic conditions, a decrease in net photosyn￾thesis (34%) and respiration (39%) was observed by Krayem et al. (2016b). This could be due 
to a reduction in chlorophyll a, b and carotenoids contents. Radić et al. (2010) also observed 
a reduced efficiency of photosynthetic energy conversion in duckweed (Lemna minor) treated 
with aluminum (Al) and zinc (Zn) at 0.15 and 0.3mM, respectively, over a 15-day period.
3.2.2 Alteration of plant’s osmotic potential
The osmotic potential (Ψs) also known as solutes potential, relies on the concentration of 
solutes present in a solution. From plant’s point of view, osmotic potential can be calculated 
from both the water potential (Ψ) and pressure potential (Ψp):
     p s (1)346 18. Aquatic macrophytes and trace elements
In a solution free of solutes, osmotic potential (Ψs) is nul. When the concentration of solutes 
increases, the osmotic potential (Ψs) becomes negative. Thus, in plants vacuoles containing 
different kinds of solutes, the osmotic potential (Ψs) is generally negative.
In this way, metallic stress or water enrichment by organic pollutants such as nitrates, 
phosphates act by decreasing the osmotic potential (Cao et al., 2007; Kronzucker and Britto, 
2002). In fact, metallic stress induces the formation of toxic radicals leading to an imbal￾ance between oxidative and antioxidative systems. The generated oxidative stress induces 
cellular damages. Consequently, the accumulation of certain soluble compounds such as 
proteins, sugars, phytochelatins, proline, etc. in the vacuole cause, not only a decrease in 
the osmotic potential but also prevents the formation of ROS (Sharma et  al., 2019). For 
example, Myriophyllum alterniflorum presented a decline in osmotic potential of ∼27% and 
65% in both young and adult leaves, respectively, after an exposure for 21days to 0.626 μM 
of copper in 400mL of synthetic medium (Delmail et al., 2011). Similarly, the same macro￾phyte exposed to 1.57 μM Cu in an aquarium experiment (150L of synthetic oligotrophic 
medium) combined with three hydrodynamic conditions (calm, turbulent and laminar), 
presented a significant decline in the osmotic potential of 22%, 16%, and 20% in the younger 
parts and 22%, 18%, and 17% in the older parts (Krayem et al., 2018). Nonessential elements 
such as arsenic can also cause a decrease in osmotic potential. For example, Tripathi et al. 
(2014) observed that a 2days exposure of the macrophyte Najas indica to increasing arsenate 
concentrations (from 0 to 0.244mM), caused an increase of ∼54% and 42% in amino acids 
and proteins contents, respectively, leading to a decrease in osmotic potential. In addition, a 
reduction of water use efficiency and an increased transpiration in Hydrilla verticillata were 
observed at 5mM As (V) exposure during 96h (Srivastava et al., 2013). This reduction in 
water use efficiency lead to increase the solutes concentration inside plant’s vacuoles and 
thus to decrease the osmotic potential. Finally, Krayem et al. (2016b) evidenced a 7% and 4% 
decrease in osmotic potential of Myriophyllum alterniflorum exposed to 1.6 μg As (V)/g FW 
in oligotrophic and eutrophic conditions, respectively. Similarly, at 6days of treatment, a 
decrease in relative water content was observed in Pistia stratiotes exposed to 17 and 170 μM 
of nickel (Singh and Pandey, 2011). Moreover, these authors observed an increase in proline 
and protein contents leading to a decrease in the osmotic potential.
3.3 Biochemical biomarkers
3.3.1 Oxidative stress and enzymatic defense system
Oxidative stress is induced by free radicals called reactive oxygen species (ROS) causing 
alterations of plant metabolism through proteins and membrane lipids degradation, DNA 
damage, enzyme inhibition, and apoptosis (Fryzova et al., 2017). The photosynthetic electron 
transport chain, Krebs cycle, Calvin-Benson cycle are the main sources of ROS in the organ￾ism (Fryzova et al., 2017; Gill and Tuteja, 2010). In addition, Fenton and Haber-Weiss reactions 
are other pathways of ROS production (Fig. 1). High concentrations of trace elements can also 
induce ROS formation and inhibit plants growth. There are two types of ROS:
(i) Primary ROS including superoxide anion (O2*), hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), hydroxyl 
radical (*OH), hydroperoxyl radical (*OOH), and singlet oxygen (1
O2) produced mainly 
by Mehler, Fenton, and Haber-Weiss reactions (Da Silva et al., 2013).3. Biomarkers and adaptation mechanisms of macrophytes 347
(ii) Secondary ROS such as alkyl R*, alkoxyl RO*, and peroxyl ROO* originated from the 
action of a primary ROS on other organic groups. For example, ROO* is formed by 
the action of a primary ROS on the chain of an unsaturated fatty acid; this reaction is 
known as lipid peroxidation or lipoperoxidation (Birben et al., 2012). The level of this 
peroxidation is determined by measuring the concentration of malondialdehyde (MDA) 
or MDA equivalent as thiobarbituric acid reactive substances (TBARS) (Xing et al., 2010).
The nonessential element arsenic is demonstrated in several studies (Hasanuzzaman et al., 
2015; Mallick et al., 2011; Ahsan et al., 2008) as an inducer of ROS formation: hydrogen perox￾ide (H2O2) (Campos et al., 2019; Krayem et al., 2016b, 2019; Pisani et al., 2011; Tripathi et al., 
2014), hydroxyl radical (HO*), and superoxide anions (O2*
−) (Srivastava et al., 2013; Yamanaka 
et al., 1997). For aquatic macrophytes, Krayem et al. (2016b) observed, in vitro, a 62% increase 
in H2O2 and a 35% increase in TBARS contents in the tissues of Myriophyllum alterniflorum ex￾posed for 21days to 1.33μM As (V). The same authors also noted a higher increase in hydrogen 
FIG. 1 Different forms of reactive oxygen species produced in the plant cell and their detoxification by enzymatic. 
(SOD, superoxide dismutase; CAT, catalase; POX, peroxidase; APX, ascorbate peroxidase; GPX, guaiacol peroxidase; 
MDHA, mono-dehydro-ascorbate; MDHAR, mono-dehydro-ascorbate reductase; NADP, nicotinamide adenine di￾nucleotide phosphate; NADPH, dihydronicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate; GSH, reduced glutathione; 
GSSG, oxidized glutathione and nonenzymatic defense system (Tocopherol, β-carotene, plastoquinones, carotenoids, 
proline, phytochelatins, polyamines.)) Superoxide anion (O2*); hydrogen peroxide (H2O2); hydroxyl radical (*OH); 
singlet oxygen (1O2); secondary ROS such as alkyl R*, alkoxyl RO* and peroxyl ROO*. Modified from Da Silva, E.C., de 
Albuquerque, M.B., de Azevedo Neto, A.D., da Silva Junior, C.D., 2013. Drought and its consequences to plants—from individ￾ual to ecosystem. In: Akinci, S. (Ed.), Responses of Organisms to Water Stress. InTech; Fryzova, R., Pohanka, M., Martinkova, P., 
Cihlarova, H., Brtnicky, M., Hladky, J., Kynicky, J., 2017. Oxidative stress and heavy metals in plants. In: de Voogt, P. (Ed.), 
Reviews of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology vol. 245, Reviews of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology. 
Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp. 129–156. https://doi.org/10.1007/398_2017_7.348 18. Aquatic macrophytes and trace elements
peroxide content in the apical than in the basal stem fraction of the same macrophyte exposed 
to 1.33μM As or 1.6μM Cu after 21days in an aquarium system (Krayem et al., 2018, 2019). 
Similarly, Chen et al. (2015) demonstrated that arsenic at 6.66 and 26.6μM was able to induce 
an 80% increase in the MDA content of Vallisneria natans after 96h of treatment. Similarly, 
Duman et al. (2010) observed, in Lemna minor, a 49% increase in the MDA content at 64μM 
arsenate after 6days of treatment. Tripathi et al. (2014) reported an increase in the MDA con￾tent of As-treated Najas indica compared with controls with a maximum induction of 80% and 
100%, respectively, after a 7days exposure to 250μM of As (V) and 50μM of AsIII in two sep￾arate experiments. In another experiment, Singh et al. (2020) treated the fronds of Spirodela 
polyrhiza, with excess Cu2+ in a 10% Hoagland’s medium. After 5days, a high concentration 
in MDA content was detected at the highest concentration of Cu2+ applied by these authors 
(40μM). Other studies also noted an increase in MDA content and in ROS production indicat￾ing severe oxidative damages to plant tissues treated with different trace elements (Table 2) 
(Singh et al., 2020; Campos et al., 2019; Song et al., 2018; Malar et al., 2016; Mishra et al., 2014).
Consequently, in order to prevent these toxic damages (Fig. 1), several antioxidative en￾zymes are activated, including:
(i) ascorbate peroxidase (APX) (EC 1.11.1.11): having a major role in converting H2O2 to 
water (Caverzan et al., 2012);
(ii) glutathione reductase (GR) (EC 1.8.1.7): scavenging H2O2 and activated mainly during 
low temperature, drought stresses, etc. (Hossain et al., 2015);
(iii) superoxide dismutases (SODs) (EC 1.15.1.1): converting the superoxide radicals (O2
−) 
into molecular oxygen (O2) and hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) (Del Río et al., 2018); and
(iv) guaiacol peroxidase (GPX) (EC 1.11.1.6) and catalase (CAT) (EC 1.15.1.1): similar to GR 
and detoxifying hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) (Puthur, 2016).
The antioxidant defense induced by metals/metalloids stress is quite important in terres￾trial and aquatic plants. For aquatic macrophytes, Schröder et al. (2009) noted an increase in 
enzyme activity of GR, APX, and peroxidases (POX) enzymes in Phragmites australis exposed 
to 10–500μM of lead, cadmium and arsenic. In this experiment, these authors also observed an 
increase in GR and PX activities with a decrease in APX activity in Typha latifolia. In Lemna mi￾nor, an increase in SOD, CAT, and APX activities was noted at increasing arsenic concentration 
(0, 1, 4, 16, and 64μM), with a maximum reached after 1–2days (Duman et al., 2010). Moreover, 
Singh et al. (2020) treated 3g of fronds of Spirodela polyrhiza, with excess Cu2+ and Hg2+ in a 
10% Hoagland’s medium. After 5days, an increase in the antioxidant activity of SOD and CAT 
at 10 and 20μM of Cu2+ and 0.2μM of Hg2+ was observed. In addition, increases in MDA and 
proline contents were observed at 40μM of Cu2+ and 0.4μM of Hg2+. However, in some stud￾ies, an inhibition of the activity of antioxidative enzymes has been noted at Cu concentrations 
between 0.4 and 100μM (Table 2) (Decou et al., 2020; Nekrasova et al., 2011; Kanoun-Boulé 
et al., 2009). Other studies involving aquatic macrophytes treated with trace elements reported 
an increase in the ROS formation and in the antioxidant activity (see Table 2).
3.3.2 Nonenzymatic defense system
Another defense system adopted by plants exists without the use of enzymes like the enzy￾matic antioxidative pathway described previously. However, it involves metal binding-ligands 
such as amino acids (histidine, cysteine, glycine, etc.), organic acids (malic acid, citric acid, etc.), 
vitamin E or α-tocopherol, carotenoids, flavonoids, phenols, proline (for review see Das and 3. Biomarkers and adaptation mechanisms of macrophytes 349
Roychoudhury, 2014), phytochelatins (PC) (Chaudhary et al., 2018; Kumar et al., 2016), and 
polyamines (Chen et al., 2019; Mustafavi et al., 2018). In this section, mainly phytochelatins and 
polyamines will be discussed.
Phytochelatins
Phytochelatins (PCs) are small peptides, rich in cysteine, chemically related to glutathi￾one (GSH) and formed by chain of oligomers (γ-Glu-Cys)n-Gly, n=2–11) in plants, fungi and 
other organisms (Yadav, 2010; Cobbett, 2000; Zenk, 1996). Phytochelatin synthase (PCS), a 
γ-glutamylcysteine dipeptidyl transpeptidase (EC 2.3.2.15), is the enzyme responsible of their 
formation by transpeptidation of γ-Glu-Cys unit from one GSH molecule to another.
Metallic stress is mainly characterized by an increase in PCs content (Zenk, 1996). These 
molecules bind the excessed metals with their thiol groups allowing their sequestration in 
vacuoles (Chaudhary et al., 2018) (Fig. 2). Thus, PCs are considered as specific biomarkers 
FIG. 2 Biosynthetic pathways of phytochelatins (A) and polyamines (B) in plants under trace element (TE) stress. 
(PCs-SH: phytochelatins having sulfhydryl groups used to chelate heavy metals; ADC, arginine decarboxylase; AIH, 
agmatine iminohydrolase; CPA, N-carbamoylputrescine amidohydrolase; ODC, ornithine decarboxylase; SPDS, 
spermidine synthase; SPMS, spermine synthase.) (A) Based on Chaudhary, K., Agarwal, S., Khan, S., 2018. Role of phyto￾chelatins (PCs), metallothioneins (MTs), and heavy metal ATPase (HMA) genes in heavy metal tolerance. In: Prasad, R. (Ed.), 
Mycoremediation and Environmental Sustainability, Fungal Biology. Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp. 39–60. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-77386-5_2; Kumar, D., Singh, D.P., Barman, S.C., Kumar, N., 2016. Heavy metal and their 
regulation in plant system: an overview. In: Singh, A., Prasad, S.M., Singh, R.P. (Eds.), Plant Responses to Xenobiotics. 
Springer, Singapore, pp. 19–38. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-2860-1_2; Rodrigo, M.A.M., Anjum, N.A., Heger, Z., 
Zitka, O., Vojtech, A., Pereira, E., Kizek, R., 2016. Role of phytochelatins in redox caused stress in plants and animals, abiotic 
and biotic stress in plants - recent advances and future perspectives. IntechOpen. https://doi.org/10.5772/62160; (B) Based on 
Chen, D., Shao, Q., Yin, L., Younis, A., Zheng, B., 2019. Polyamine function in plants: metabolism, regulation on development, 
and roles in abiotic stress responses. Front. Plant Sci. 9. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2018.01945; Mustafavi, S.H., Naghdi 
Badi, H., Sękara, A., Mehrafarin, A., Janda, T., Ghorbanpour, M., Rafiee, H., 2018. Polyamines and their possible mechanisms 
involved in plant physiological processes and elicitation of secondary metabolites. Acta Physiol. Plant. 40, 102. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s11738-018-2671-2350 18. Aquatic macrophytes and trace elements
of trace metal pollution (Pal and Rai, 2010; Yadav, 2010). High concentrations of essential 
elements like copper and nonessential contaminants such as arsenic, lead and cadmium 
clearly increase cytosolic PCs concentrations (Chandrakar et al., 2016; Farooq et al., 2016). 
PCs synthesis was first evidenced in terrestrial species Rubia tinctorum treated with Hg2+
(10μM), Ga3+, Ln3+, Pb2+, Zn2+, Ag+ (100μM), As3+, As5+, Cd2+, Cu2+, Ni2+, Pd2+, and Se4+
(1000μM) in Murashige and Skoog medium (Maitani et al., 1996). In a study done by Borisova 
et al. (2016), thiols content have increased in Lemna gibba followed by Ceratophyllum demer￾sum>Elodea canadensis>Potamogeton berchtoldii>Batrachium trichophyllum>Potamogeton perfo￾liatus plants sampled from 11 sites of Middle Urals lakes contaminated with Cu2+, Ni2+, Mn2+, 
Zn2+, and Fe3+ with a maximum accumulation found after copper exposure. In Myriophyllum 
alterniflorum treated for 21days by 1.33μM As (V) in eutrophic and oligotrophic conditions, 
an increase in PC2 (2 glutathione molecules) and PC3 (3 glutathione molecules) was observed 
starting from 3days with a maximum reached at 7days (Krayem, 2015). Similar trends were 
observed in Najas indica exposed from 10 to 250μM arsenate (Tripathi et al., 2014).
Similarly, after 4days, phytochelatins PC2 and PC3 are found in Hydrilla verticillata treated 
with 1–5μM Cu in a 10% Hoagland medium (Srivastava et al., 2006). Greco et al. (2019) ob￾served an increase in GSH and PCs up to PC5 in the marine species Zostera marina exposed to 
copper stress. Moreover, a 6–8 times increase in total PCs content (up to PC4) in Lemna minor, 
Elodea canadensis, and Salvinia natans was observed after an exposure to 65μM of Cu, Zn, and 
Cd each for 6days (Török et al., 2015). De Souza et al. (2021) exposed three macrophytes, 
Eichhornia crassipes, Salvinia biloba, and Pistia stratiotes, to chromium at 2.8mM and to copper 
at 2.3mM. After 48h, they observed an increase in the concentrations of GSH and PCs accom￾panied by an increase in the activity of the antioxidative enzymes CAT, APX, and guaiacol 
peroxidase (GPX) in Eichhornia crassipes only. This prevents Eichhornia crassipes from an ac￾celerated senescence. These effects are not observed in the others tested species. Moreover, 
PC2 were found in the extracts of Ceratophyllum demersum and M. spicatum with increasing 
concentrations from the hot spot and the downstream sites contaminated with mercury (Hg) 
released from a chlor-alkali plant along the Ebro River basin (North East Spain) (Turull et al., 
2017). Thus, PCs constitute a specific biochemical biomarker essential for the alleviation and 
the detoxification of heavy metal stress.
Polyamines
Polyamines (PAs) are small organic amine compounds. They are polycationic, presenting 
a positive charge at the cellular pH and playing various roles in plant metabolism (Mustafavi 
et al., 2018; Hussain et al., 2011). They are mainly located in the chloroplasts, mitochondria, 
cell wall fractions, and vacuoles of higher plants in mM concentrations (Kumar et al., 2017). 
Polyamines are divided into two classes: free and conjugated PAs. Putrescine (Put), spermi￾dine (Spd), and spermine (Spm) are the three main free PAs known in plants (Chen et al., 
2019).
Putrescine can be synthesized either directly through the ornithine decarboxylase (ODC, 
EC 4.1.1.17) pathway from ornithine or indirectly through the arginine decarboxylase (ADC, 
EC 4.1.1.19) pathway from arginine with agmatine and carbamoyl putrescine intermediates. 
While, Spd and Spm are synthesized through the successive addition of aminopropyl on Put 
and Spd by means of Spd synthase (SPDS, EC 2.5.1.16) and Spm synthase (SPMS, EC 2.5.1.22), 
respectively (Chen et al., 2019; Zouari et al., 2019; Hussain et al., 2011) (Fig. 2).3. Biomarkers and adaptation mechanisms of macrophytes 351
PAs play major roles in plant metabolism and processes such as cell division and elonga￾tion, root formation, flowering and fructification, DNA replication, transcription and trans￾lation, ribosome biogenesis, somatic embryogenesis, preservation of photosynthesis, and 
apoptosis (Bertoldi et al., 2004; Groppa et al., 2003; Navakoudis et al., 2003). Moreover, they 
are involved in the prevention of the toxic effects caused by environmental stresses (Hussain 
et  al., 2011; Yang et  al., 2010) by inhibiting ROS formation or collecting these toxic mole￾cules (Chen et al., 2019; Takahashi and Kakehi, 2010). In terrestrial plants, PAs concentrations 
changed during copper (Sharma, 2006; Groppa et al., 2003) and arsenic stresses (Vromman 
et al., 2011; Mascher et al., 2002). In their study, Xu et al. (2012) noted an increase in the Put 
level coupled with high level of polyamine oxidase activity in the roots of the macrophyte 
Sagittaria sagittifolia at high concentrations of copper (20 and 40μM Cu). Moreover, Dhir et al. 
(2012) observed that Salvinia natans accumulates free polyamines, Put and Spd after its expo￾sure to Pb and Fe for 48h. In addition, Ding et al. (2010) noted that Hg increased Put content, 
while the contents of Spd and Spm and the (Spd+Spm)/Put ratio decreased in water hyacinth 
leaves. However, the exogenous application of Spd (0.1mM) decreased the concentration of 
Put and increased Spd and Spm content, the (Spd+Spm)/Put ratio and the activities of ADC, 
ODC alleviating the negative effect of Hg on polyamine metabolism. However, for aquatic 
plants, a lack of studies was detected in literature as also mentioned by Kumar et al. (2017). 
Further investigations in this domain are needed in order to elucidate the role of polyamines 
in alleviating trace element stress. Indeed, we need to know which metabolic pathway is pri￾marily involved for PA synthesis (ADC/ODC) in macrophytes under stress and the cellular 
mechanisms behind their role in collecting ROS must be elucidated. Once these critical points 
are clarified, their role as a biomarker of stress could be confirmed.
3.3.3 Alteration of photosynthetic pigments
Photosynthetic pigments (Chl a, b and carotenoids) are the main actors of photosynthetic 
reactions by absorbing and converting light energy in chemical one. They are embedded in 
the thylakoid membranes of chloroplasts. Metallic stress is known to degrade the chloro￾phyll pigments by ROS formation. Moreover, substitution of the central cation (Mg2+) of the 
porphyrin ring in the core of the chlorophyll molecule by Cu2+, Cd2+ or Zn2+ is also a main 
problem during heavy metal stress (Thomas et al., 2016; Küpper et al., 2002; Prasad et al., 
2001). However, carotenoids acts as nonenzymatic antioxidant defense system and help in 
collecting and eliminating ROS (Das and Roychoudhury, 2014; Gill and Tuteja, 2010). Several 
studies reported a decrease in the pigments contents of the shoots of aquatic macrophytes 
exposed to copper stress (Singh et al., 2020; Hak et al., 2020; Krayem et al., 2018; Costa et al., 
2018; Rolli et al., 2017; Zhu et al., 2016; Delmail et al., 2011). However, only few studies re￾ported an increase in pigment content but this increase appears only at low Cu concentrations 
(from 0.06 until 0.4μM) (Shi et al., 2017; Nekrasova et al., 2011).
Regarding the nonessential trace element arsenic (As), a decrease in photosynthetic activ￾ities and chlorophyll pigments levels in different plant species are also observed (Srivastava 
et al., 2013; Rahman et al., 2007; Stoeva et al., 2005; Stoeva and Bineva, 2003). For example, a 
decrease of chlorophyll a and b contents was demonstrated in Lemna minor treated with arse￾nate (Duman et al., 2010), chromium and lead (Singh, 2012). In addition, Iriel et al. (2015) noted 
an increase in fluorescence, ranging from 400 to 500nm, related to an increase in carotenoid 
and flavonoid contents in Vallisneria gigantea and Azolla filiculoides exposed to 0.0266mM of 352 18. Aquatic macrophytes and trace elements
arsenate. Moreover, a 22%, 11% and 17% reduction in chlorophyll a, b and carotenoids con￾tents, respectively, was observed in watermilfoil exposed during 14days to 1.33μM As (V) in 
eutrophic conditions (Krayem et al., 2016b). More studies revealing a decrease in chlorophyll 
pigments contents in macrophytes exposed to different trace elements are reviewed and men￾tioned in Table 2. This decrease leads to a decrease in the photosynthetic efficiency of these 
plants.
3.4 Genotoxicity biomarkers
Trace metal/metalloid can also have toxic effects on plants genome. They occurs through 
DNA damage, chromosomal breakage and mutations (Gupta and Sarin, 2009). As described 
previously, trace elements in excess cause an oxidative stress characterized by ROS formation. 
These toxic species are able to damage the DNA and chromosomes leading to micronuclei 
formation (İşeri et al., 2011; Souguir et al., 2008; Yi and Si, 2007). The formation of other DNA 
subproducts by addition of hydroxyl group (OH) to the DNA backbone and amine bases, by 
DNA mutations caused by modification of guanine: cytosine sites, by an attack of the DNA 
pentose sugars by a hydrogen atom, and by inhibition of DNA repair enzymes such as DNA 
ligase, DNA glycosylases, and DNA polymerase β are the main toxic changes caused by ROS 
(Agarwal and Khan, 2020)
Meristematic cells as active dividing cells are the most susceptible cells to this stress. This 
susceptibility lead to their use in micronuclei assays, also known as MCN tests (Zaka et al., 
2002). Not only micronuclei formation (Fig. 3), but also a decline in mitosis and an increase in 
chromosomal, DNA and RNA aberrations were also reported in several studies (Anjum et al., 
2012; Béraud et al., 2007; Fusconi et al., 2006). Others tests such as comet assay (also known 
as single cell gel electrophoresis (SCGE)), Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick 
end labeling (TUNEL), and DNA-based techniques like Random Amplified Polymorphic 
FIG. 3 Formation of micronuclei in plant cells. Modified from Meneguetti, D.U. de O., da Silva, F.C., 2012. Adaptation 
of the micronucleus technique in Allium Cepa, for mutagenicity analysis of the Jamari River valley, Western Amazon, Brazil. J. 
Environ. Anal. Toxicol. 02. https://doi.org/10.4172/2161-0525.1000127.4. Macrophytes: A potential new wave of phytoremediation processes 353
DNA (RAPD) are also used to measure the degree of the genotoxicity level of trace elements 
(Agarwal and Khan, 2020; Delmail and Labrousse, 2014).
For aquatic macrophytes, Zn, Cr, Pb, Ni and Cd lead to an increase in the percentage of 
abnormal cells in the roots of Elodea canadensis. For example, an increase from 1.8% to 16.4% 
was observed in its roots treated with 8–17mgCu/kg (Zotina et al., 2015). In another study 
done by Mishra et al. (2016), Ceratophyllum demersum leaves treated with 1μM of arsenic, pre￾sented an increased concentration of arsenic in the nucleus of epidermal cells after 7days. In 
fact, due to its similarity with phosphorus, arsenic is able to substitute this element in nucleic 
acid synthesis (Elias et al., 2012). Cvjetko et al. (2010) noted, during their COMET assay on 
Lemna minor treated with 2.5 and 5μM of Cu (grown in a Steinberg nutrient solution during 
7days), an increase in the percentage of tail DNA. They linked this damage to an increase in 
MDA content and to an increase in the activities of antioxidative enzymes (CAT and PX) but 
they pointed out that the complex interaction observed in their study cannot be explained by 
simple antagonism and or synergism. Similarly, three marine macroalgae, i.e., Acanthophora 
spicifera, Chaetomorpha antennina, and Ulva reticulata, treated with Cu and Cd at 15.74μM and 
8.89μM, respectively, during 15days, presented increased DNA damages coupled with in￾creased MDA content, SOD, CAT and glutathione peroxidase (GPX) activities (Babu et al., 
2014). Finally, some studies have also reported modifications in DNA band intensity coupled 
with appearance and disappearance of new and old bands, changes in DNA demethylation 
and methylation (Greco et al., 2019; Shi et al., 2017; Delmail and Labrousse, 2014; Gupta and 
Sarin, 2009). However, here again, a lack of this kind of studies in aquatic plants was noted 
and the molecular mechanisms need to be more elucidated. Thus, research should focus on 
this domain in order to deeply elucidate the genotoxic effects caused by xenobiotic stress.
As a conclusion, biomarkers provide a powerful tool in bioindication studies and environ￾mental biomonitoring of water quality. The most pertinent and potential biomarkers studied 
and investigated in aquatic plants during trace metal/metalloid stress (specifically for As, 
Cu, Cr, Hg, Cd, Ni, Pb, Mn, Ag, and Zn) are summarized in Table 2.
4. Macrophytes: A potential new wave of phytoremediation processes
In order to study the ability of plants to bioaccumulate trace elements, scientists calculate 
an index called the bioconcentration factor (BCF) (Ebbs et al., 2016)
[M]plants is the concentration of metal or metalloid in plants (shoots or roots) in μg/kg FW
[M]water is the concentration of metal or metalloid in water in μg/L.
Several studies have shown that some macrophytes are potential strong metal bioaccumu￾lators (Table 2) (Fletcher et al., 2020; Wani et al., 2017; Yabanli et al., 2014). This absorption abil￾ity depends on several parameters such as macrophyte species, trace element concentration 
and speciation, exposure duration, and specified organ. For example, a BCF of 1 808.38 and 
1 536.02 was observed in Pistia stratiotes when exposed to 5 and 10μM AsIII (respectively). 
Moreover, Myriophyllum alterniflorum shoots presented a higher BCF for copper than for ar￾senic (Krayem et al., 2016a) indicating that each trace element/metalloid can be sequestrated 
BCF M plants M water    / 354 18. Aquatic macrophytes and trace elements
specifically in different target organ. In addition, Venkateswarlu et  al. (2019) showed that 
Hydrilla verticillata and Pistia stratiotes treated with 31.4, 78.7, and 110.2μM Cu for 28days 
have removed between 69% and 33.35% Cu (at lowest and highest applied Cu concentrations, 
respectively). Table 3 resume the most recent studies reporting the potential of aquatic mac￾rophytes to accumulate trace metal/metalloid especially for arsenic, copper, lead, mercury, 
chromium, manganese, cadmium, and nickel. This bibliography makes obvious the promis￾ing potential of aquatic macrophytes for phytoremediation processes.
4.1 What is phytoremediation?
The word phytoremediation comes from Greek: “phyto” meaning plant and from “reme￾dian” meaning remediation (Akhtar et al., 2017). Another definition proposed by the United 
Nations Environment Program (UNEP, 2019) is “the efficient use of plants to remove, detoxify 
or immobilize environmental contaminants.” Thus, phytoremediation is used to decontam￾inate areas from organic and inorganic contaminants or pollutants such as heavy metals, ra￾dionuclides, and petroleum hydrocarbons (Akhtar et al., 2017). Phytoremediation is a novel, 
efficient, in situ applicable, nonpolluting or green ecofriendly technique with small or no cost.
Plants used normally for phytoremediation should have a high growth rate with a deep 
root system. They have to be easily harvested and most important able to accumulate high 
levels of trace metals in their tissues (Nedjimi, 2021). In fact, a hyperaccumulator plant is 
characterized by a strong defense system allowing adaptation and resistance to trace ele￾ments. They can accumulate more than 1000ppm of trace metals within their tissues. Baker 
and Brooks (1989) determined the critical concentration for some hyperaccumulated metals 
in plants as follows: Cd=100ppm dry weight (DW), Ni, Cu, Co, Pb=1000ppm DW and Zn, 
Mn=10,000ppm DW (Nedjimi, 2021).
Aquatic plants are currently known for their low capacity of trace elements accumulation 
(Nguyen et al., 2020). However, some of them bear specific adaptations making them better 
than land plants. In fact, they are characterized by an important fresh biomass taking part 
in trace elements accumulation from water (Nguyen et al., 2020). The main types of macro￾phytes studied and used in phytoremediation are presented in Table 4. As reviewed in this ta￾ble, mainly submerged and free floating macrophytes are used in these processes. Among the 
submerged macrophytes, Hydrilla verticillata, Ceratophyllum demersum, and Myriophyllum sp. 
were the representative species. Lemna sp., Spirodela polyrhiza, Pistia stratiotes, and Eichhornia 
crassipes are the most studied floating species and the most used in heavy metals remediation. 
Phragmites sp. and Typha sp. represent the most used emergent macrophytes for surface water 
remediation.
Four types of phytoremediation techniques are useful for both organic and inorganic con￾taminants like trace elements (Ansari et al., 2020; Obinna and Ebere, 2019).
4.1.1 Phytoextraction
Phytoextraction involves the use of plants which roots absorb pollutants from soil or wa￾ter and translocate and accumulate them in shoots (Nedjimi, 2021; Ansari et al., 2020). The 
most commonly used plants for phytoextraction are two terrestrial plants: Brassica juncea and 
Thlaspi caerulescens (Akhtar et al., 2017). The time required for removal of heavy metal from 
the medium depends on the speciation and on the concentration of the trace element, on the TABLE 3 Trace element concentration and accumulation in some aquatic plants.
Trace metal/
metalloid stress Plant model used Dose and duration of TM exposure BCF or quantity of TM accumulated/removeda Studies
Arsenic (As) Vallisneria spiralis 0, 0.25, 0.63, 1.26, and 2.5μM AsIII; 20 
till 30days; modified 0.25M Hoagland 
solution; room temperature 30°C; 
photoperiod 16h; pH 6.8–7.2
Highest BCF at high concentration was 345 after 
20days (86% of accumulation)
Giri (2019)
Myriophyllum alterniflorum 1.3μM of As (V), synthetic vienne 
oligotrophic medium (150L) 
aquarium system; 21days
A BCF ranging between 170 and 420 in shoots and 
roots, respectively (accumulation range between 
200 and 500 200 and 500mgkg−1 plant dry weight 
(DW)
Krayem et al. (2019)
Pistia stratiotes 0 (control), 5, 10, and 20μM AsIII; 
24h; 0.5L of Clark’s (1975) nutrient 
solution; pH 6.5
A high BCF when exposed to 5 and 10μM AsIII 
(1808.38 and 1536.02, respectively)
Campos et al. (2019)
Potamogeton pectinatus; 
Potamogeton amphibian; 
Myriophyllum. Spicatum; 
Chara spp.; Elodea nuttallii
2 sites: Site 1 (87mg/kg) and 6 sites 
across the lake of Kinghorn Loch 
scotland (mean As concentration: 
160mg/kg
A mean of 8.8 in the 5 taxa mg/kg of DW Olszewska et al. (2016)
Myriophyllum alterniflorum 1.3μM of As (V), synthetic vienne 
medium eutrophic and oligotrophic; 
21days
90 and 100mg/kg of DW in stems and 110 and 
160mg/kg of DW in roots in eutrophic and 
oligotrophic conditions, respectively
Krayem et al. (2016a)
Hydrilla verticillata 500μM of As (V); Hoagland’s solution 
(pH 6.5); 96h
568mg/kg of DW Srivastava et al. (2013)
Najas indica 250μM of As (V); in10% Hoagland’s 
solution; 7days
645mg/kg of DW Tripathi et al. (2014)
Myriophyllum spicatum 0.01–0.013μM of As; field study 0.32mg/kg of DW in stems and 15.3mg/kg of DW 
in roots
Yabanli et al. (2014)
Najas indica 50μM of As (III); in10% Hoagland’s 
solution; 7days
1190mg/kg of DW Tripathi et al. (2014)
Nasturtium officinale 50μM of As (III); Hoagland’s medium; 
7days
1012mg/kg of DW Ozturk et al. (2010)
Hydrilla verticillata 20μM As (III); synthetic fresh water; 
4days
821mg/kg of DW Xue and Yan (2011)
Hydrilla verticillata 20μM As (V); synthetic fresh water; 
4days
715mg/kg of DW Xue and Yan (2011)
Spirodela polyrrhiza 320μM As (V); hydroponic culture 
solution; 7days
999±95mg/kg of DW Zhang et al. (2011)
ContinuedLemna minor 64μM of As (III) and As (V) 
separately; 10% Hoagland’s solution; 
6days
17,408mg/kg of DW and 8674mg/kg of DW, 
respectively
Duman et al. (2010)
Potamogeton lucens 4.87–20.3mg/kg As of sediment; 
<1μg/L in water; field study
<2mg/kg of DW in stems and 12.7mg/kg of DW 
in roots
Mazej and Germ (2009)
Najas marina <2mg/kg of DW in stems and 15.9mg/kg of DW 
in roots
Cadmium (Cd) Canna generalis Five contaminated aquatic 
environments, i.e., Gohar Rood 
river, Zarjoob river, Eynak lagoon, 
Anzali lagoon, and control solution 
(containing Cd: 0.09mM, Cr: 
0.192mM, Pb: 0.048mM, and Zn: 
0.15mM); 3-L plastic container; 
10weeks; 24–28°C; 1 plant in each
A highest BCF of cadmium in Canna rootsa Shirinpur-Valadi et al. 
(2019)
Pistia stratiotes Cd concentrations: 17.85, 35.71, and 
142.82μM, and Zn concentrations: 
152.92, 305.9, and 1223.6μM; 27–33°C; 
light intensity from 4600 to 12,560 lx; 
12/12-h photoperiod;15days
A highest BCF values for Cd and Zn occurred in 
shoots
Sricoth et al. (2018)
Eichhornia crassipes Cd concentrations: 17.85, 35.71, and 
142.82μM, and Zn concentrations: 
152.92, 305.9, and 1223.6μM; 27–33°C; 
light intensity from 4600 to 12,560 lx; 
12/12-h photoperiod;15days
A highest BCF values in roots of Eichhornia 
crassipes (>1500 and >700 for Cd and Zn, 
respectively) and in shoots (40.5–1437 and 
29.8–493.9) for Cd and Zn, respectively
Sricoth et al. (2018)
Chromium (Cr) Eichhornia crassipes 9.6, 14.42, 19.23, 38.46, 96.15μM; 25–
30°C; 250g (for 5L water) of Eichhornia 
crassipes; 5, 10, and 15days
A high bioaccumulation in roots 50%–60% 
followed by leaves and stems
Saha et al. (2017)
Lemna minor Chromium solutions at 4,8, 9.6, 19.23, 
38.46, 77, and 96μM; 23–25°C; 16h of 
photoperiod; 7 and 14days
A highest accumulation of chromium 
concentration 4.423mg/g
Uysal (2013)
TABLE 3 Trace element concentration and accumulation in some aquatic plants—cont’d
Trace metal/
metalloid stress Plant model used Dose and duration of TM exposure BCF or quantity of TM accumulated/removeda StudiesCopper (Cu) Ceratophyllum demersum 0.78, 1.57, 2.36, and 3.14μM 
concentrations; 5, 10, and 15days
270.18mg/kg DW after 15days Hak et al. (2020)
Ludwigia stolonifera 157.48, 787.4, and 1574.8μM, prepared 
in simulated wastewater, 96h
Accumulation of about 75% in just 6ha Saleh et al. (2019)
Hydrilla verticillata, Pistia 
stratiotes
31.4, 78.7, and 110.2μM 
concentrations, 28days, 5L of solution
69% at lowest concentration, 43.8% at 
intermediate, and 33.35% at highest concentration 
were removed by weeds after 28daysa
Venkateswarlu et al. 
(2019)
Myriophyllum alterniflorum Oligotrophic medium, 0.0626–
0.626μM in vitro, 27days
0.022mg/kg DW after 20days of exposure Decou et al. (2019)
Potamogeton pectinatus 0–1000μM; 96h; 500mL of 
dechlorinated tap water
3000mg/kg fresh weight accumulation in roots 
than in leaves and stems
Costa et al. (2018)
Myriophyllum alterniflorum 1.57μM; 21days; aquarium system 
(150L of synthetic oligotrophic medium)
Accumulation from 740 to 1740mg/kg DW after 
21days
Krayem et al. (2018)
Pistia stratiotes 31.4, 78.7, 157.48, 236.22, and 315μM; 
12days; Hoagland’s solution
8770.0mg/kg DW at high concentration applied 
after 12days exposure
Rolli et al. (2017)
Myriophyllum alterniflorum 1.57μM; 21days; batch system 
(400mL of synthetic oligotrophic and 
eutrophic medium
In oligotrophic conditions: 196±38mg/kg DW in 
shoots than in roots 99±23mg/kg DW). 
In eutrophic conditions: 145±31mg/kg DW in 
shoots against 56±12mg/kg DW in roots
Krayem et al. (2016a, 
2016b)
Ceratophyllum demersum 0, 0.0031, 0.0062, 0.0125, 0.0313, 0.0626, 
0.125, 0.313, and 0.626nM; aquarium 
containing 2L of continuously aerated 
medium; 6weeks
A strong accumulation of Cu in a dose-dependent 
manner; 350mg/kg DW at high concentration 
after 6weeks
Thomas et al. (2013)
Myriophyllum alterniflorum 0.626μM; 27days; synthetic medium An increase of Cu content progressively of about 
23.14% (0.03mg/kg DW) until the end of the 
experiment
Delmail et al. (2011)
Elodea densa 0.393, 3.93, 7.87, 15.74, 78.74μM; 
3days
An increase in Cu accumulation with a maximum 
reached at higher copper exposurea
Nekrasova et al. (2011)
Spirodela polyrrhiza 15.74, 157.4, and 1574μM; 24h; 10% 
Hoagland’s solution
A maximum of 10,140mg/kg DW after 24h at 
higher concentration of Cu
Xing et al. (2010)
Spirodela polyrrhiza, Lemna 
minor
25, 50, and 100μM; 72h; nutrient 
medium
200–1700mg/kg DW Cu in different populations 
at different range of Cu exposure
Kanoun-Boulé et al. 
(2009)
Pistia stratiotes 0–10μM; 24h; Hogland’s Nutrient 
solution
A maximum accumulation of about 12,000mg/kg 
Cu DW in roots and leaves at 100μM after 24h
Upadhyay and Panda 
(2009)
Potamogeton pusillus 0.0787, 0.314, 0.629, and 1.57μM; 
7days; synthetic medium
162mg/kg DW after 7days at high concentration Monferrán et al. (2009)
ContinuedLead (Pb) Eichhornia crassipes 0.3, 0.6, 1.2, 1.8, 2.4, and 3mM of Pb; 
Hoagland nutrient solution (500mL); 
pH=5.8; 10days
Accumulation of Pb was higher in roots (5.45%) 
than in petiole (2.72%) and leaf tissues (0.66%)
Malar et al. (2016)
Myriophyllum spicatum 0.12, 0.24, 0.36mM of Pb; 1–7days, 
100g fresh weight each
A maximum removal efficiencies were 87.69% at 
0.24mM of Pb after 7days
El-Khatib et al. (2014)
Ceratophyllum demersum A maximum removal efficiencies 92.8% at 0.36mM 
Pb after 7days
Lemna minor 0.05, 0.1, 0.15, 0.2, and 0.25mM; 
1000mL plastic tubes each; 20–28°C; 
pH adjusted to 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9; 2days
The highest bioconcentration potential of Pb 
(0.900) at pH 6
Singh (2012)
Manganese (Mn) Eichhornia crassipes, Pistia 
stratiotes
Four Mn levels: 0(control), 0.9, 3.6, 
7.27mM; 29°C and 36°C; 11-L plastic 
containers; 10L 1/4 Hoagland’s 
nutrient solution; 12days
Mn concentrations in plants significantly increased 
in dose-dependent mannera
Hua et al. (2012)
Mercury (Hg) Lemna minor 0, 10, 20, and 30μM; 114μmol/m2/s 
light irradiance; 14h photoperiod; 
25°C/20°C d/night temperature 
for a week; 1000mL 10% Hoagland 
solution; 2 and 6days
Accumulation of Hg in the fronds of L. minor
increased in a concentration- and time-dependent 
manner with a maximum accumulation in the 
fronds 7.4mg/g DW exposed to 30μM Hg for 
6days.
Zhang et al. (2017)
Typha domingensis Valdeazogues river basin in an east￾west direction through the Almadén 
mining district (Ciudad Real, Spain); 
1year; 9 sites; Hg concentrations in 
sediments between 0.77±0.01 and 
394±1mg/kg soil
BCF ranged between 121 and 3168 in roots. Lominchar et al. (2015)
TABLE 3 Trace element concentration and accumulation in some aquatic plants—cont’d
Trace metal/
metalloid stress Plant model used Dose and duration of TM exposure BCF or quantity of TM accumulated/removeda StudiesNickel (Ni) Lemna minor Five contaminated aquatic 
environments, i.e., Gohar Rood 
river, Zarjoob river, Eynak lagoon, 
Anzali lagoon, and control 
solution (containing Cd: 0.09mM, 
Cr: 0.192mM, Pb: 0.048mM, and 
Zn:0.15mM); 3-L plastic container; 
10weeks; 24–28°C; 1 plant in each
Highest bioconcentration factor (BCF) of nickel Shirinpur-Valadi et al. 
(2019)
Hydrilla verticillata 5, 10, 15, 20, or 40μM in 10% 
Hoagland's solution; 25±2°C; light 
intensity of 115μmol/m2/s and a 
photoperiod of 12h; 7, 14, or 21days
Maximum accumulation 1080mg/kg dry weight 
(DW) of Ni with a maximum bioconcentration 
factor of 1100
Song et al. (2018)
Pistia stratiotes 0, 0.064, 0.646, 6.46, and 64.62μM;10% 
Hoagland’s; 16h L–8h D dark; 
25±2°C; 1 plant each in 250mL beaker 
filled with 200mL solution; 6days
Accumulation of Nickel was high in roots 
(863.3μg/g dry weight) than leaves (116.2μg/g 
dry weight) at 6days
Singh and Pandey (2011)
Lead (Pb), zinc 
(Zn), cadmium 
(Cd), and 
manganese (Mn)
Eichhornia crassipes Concentrations of Pb, Zn, Cd, and Mn 
(0.96, 30.6, 0.17, and 3.63μM) used in 
the single-component experiments, 
respectively, studied over 6, 8, 16, and 
24days
Removal efficiencies was Mn (97.69%)>Pb 
(85.31%)>Cd (72.83%)>Zn (31.00%) 
accompanied with a high bioconcentration factor 
(Mn=199,567>Pb=19,605>Cd=3403>Zn=1913) 
after 24days
Zhou et al. (2020a, 2020b)
Copper (Cu), zinc 
(Zn), lead (Pb), 
and chromium 
(Cr)
Phragmites australis copper, zinc, lead, and chromium 
concentrations were as follows: 0.03, 
0.016, 0.0015, and 0.004mg/kg soil in 
Qingcaosha Reservoir in the Yangtze 
Estuary, 1year, floating artificial 
wetland
The highest BCF of each metal: Cr (0.091 in 
winter)>Cu (0.054 in autumn)>Pb (0.016 in 
summer)>Zn (0.011 in summer)
Huang et al. (2017)
BCF, bioconcentration factor; DW, dry weight.
a Not indicated.TABLE 4 Some potential macrophytes species that could be used for phytoremediation.
Type of macrophyte Plant model used Studies
Submerged aquatic macropyhtes Najas marina Mazej and Germ (2009)
Najas indica Tripathi et al. (2014)
Potamogeton lucens Mazej and Germ (2009)
Potamogeton pectinatus Costa et al. (2018) and Olszewska et al. (2016)
Potamogeton amphibia Olszewska et al. (2016)
Potamogeton pusillus Monferrán et al. (2009)
Nasturtium officinale Ozturk et al. (2010)
Hydrilla verticillata Xue and Yan (2011), Srivastava et al. (2006, 2013), Venkateswarlu et al. (2019), Song (2018), and Xue 
et al. (2010)
Myriophyllum. spicatum Olszewska et al. (2016), Yabanli et al. (2014), and El-Khatib et al. (2014)
Myriophyllum alterniflorum Krayem et al. (2016a, 2016b, 2018), Decou et al. (2019), and Delmail et al. (2011)
Ceratophyllum demersum El-Khatib et al. (2014), Hak et al. (2020), and Thomas et al. (2013)
Chara spp. Olszewska et al. (2016)
Elodea nuttallii Olszewska et al. (2016)
Elodea densa Nekrasova et al. (2011)
Vallisneria spiralis Giri (2019)
Floating aquatic macrophytes Lemna minor Duman et al. (2010), Shirinpur-Valadi et al. (2019), Singh (2012), Uysal (2013), and Zhang et al. (2017)
Lemna trisulca Prasad et al. (2001)
Spirodela polyrrhiza Zhang et al. (2011), Xing et al. (2010), and Kanoun-Boulé et al. (2009)
Pistia stratiotes Rolli et al. (2017), Campos et al. (2019), Venkateswarlu et al. (2019), Upadhyay and Panda (2009), Hua 
et al. (2012), Sricoth et al. (2018), and Singh and Pandey (2011)
Eichhornia crassipes Sricoth et al. (2018), Hua et al. (2012), Shirinpur-Valadi et al. (2019), Zhou et al. (2020a, 2020b), Saha 
et al. (2017), and Malar et al. (2016)
Ludwigia stolonifera Saleh et al. (2019)
Emergent aquatic macrophytes Canna generalis Shirinpur-Valadi et al. (2019)
Phragmites australis Guo and Cutright (2014), Huang et al. (2017), Bello et al. (2018), and Al-Homaidan et al. (2020)
Typha latifolia Yang and Shen (2020)
Typha capensis Wiafe et al. (2019)
Typha domingensis Lominchar et al. (2015)4. Macrophytes: A potential new wave of phytoremediation processes 361
duration of exposure and on the species used. This technology is mostly used for remediating 
large areas of land having low to moderate contamination level. Al-Homaidan et al. (2020)
demonstrated that Phragmites australis was able to accumulate Mn, Fe, Ni, Cu, Zn, Cd, and 
Pb from four contaminated sites located in the south and east of Riyadh city and two sites 
(Ashira valley and Sewage station) in Al Duwadimi city, Saudi Arabia. These sites are pol￾luted with heavy metals originating from municipal waste and urban emissions. Similarly, 
Lominchar et al. (2015) indicated that, during 1year, Typha domingensis was able to phytoex￾tract and accumulate Hg from nine polluted sites in Valdeazogues river basin (in an east-west 
direction through the Almadén mining district, Ciudad Real, Spain). The root BCF for Hg 
ranged between 121 and 3168.
4.1.2 Phytostabilization
Phytostabilization is the use of specific plants which root system is able to immobilize 
and stabilize pollutants in soils. In fact, pollutants are accumulated only in roots or become 
unavailable due to precipitation by root exudates (Nedjimi, 2021; Ansari et al., 2020). As a 
result, the accumulation of pollutants throughout the food chain is reduced. Since it is less ex￾pensive, ecofriendly, easy to use and possess an esthetic value, phytostabilization is preferred 
rather than other methods (Akhtar et al., 2017). For example, Phragmites australis removed 
by phytostabilization 93% of cadmium, 95% of lead, and 84% of nickel over a 6-week pe￾riod from a deep-water hydroponic system contaminated with 0.044mM cadmium, 0.024mM 
lead, and 0.085mM nickel (Bello et al., 2018).
4.1.3 Phytofiltration
Phytofiltration is the third method used involving adsorption and precipitation of pollut￾ants on roots surface (through the famous iron plaque) (Nedjimi, 2021; Ali et al., 2020; Ansari 
et al., 2020). The floating macrophytes such as water hyacinth (Eichhornia crassipes) and duck￾weed (Lemna minor) are the most commonly plants used for phytofiltration. They are used 
for the remediation of metals such as chromium, lead and zinc found in high concentrations 
in surface and ground water. For example, Eichhornia crassipes removed 99.5% of Cr(VI) in 
15days by phytofiltration from industrial mines wastewater contaminated with 38.46μM of 
Cr(VI) (Saha et al., 2017). In fact, these authors linked this removal to metal precipitation on 
root surfaces, to adsorption on colloids and organic matter and to coprecipitation with sec￾ondary minerals.
4.1.4 Phytovolatilization
Phytovolatilization is the fourth and last method by which inorganic pollutants are taken 
from the surroundings of the plants and then transpired through stomata after their conver￾sion to volatile compounds (Nedjimi, 2021; Ali et al., 2020; Ansari et al., 2020;). According to 
Ali et al. (2020), mercury and selenium are remediated by phytovolatilization. This method is 
not suitable for places near urban sites and is more expensive than the others.
Phytoremediation has many benefits since it is a natural, ecofriendly process, able to treat 
different kinds of pollutants. It is acceptable by the public since it is not disturbing and de￾grading the native areas. However some limitations exists since it is a long-term remediation 
process and as plants accumulate toxic pollutants they could reach human through the food 
chain if they are not properly treated and the processes perfectly mastered.362 18. Aquatic macrophytes and trace elements
4.2 Application of phytoremediation by macrophytes: Constructed wetlands
Three common macrophyte planting systems are known in phytoremediation: (i) con￾structed wetlands (CWs), (ii) wild macrophyte planting/harvesting, and (iii) floating treat￾ment wetlands (FTWs) (Fletcher et al., 2020). In this section, more details will be provided for 
the first type of planting system, which is constructed wetlands (CWs).
Constructed wetlands constitute a simple and less expensive solution for remediating 
contaminated water without disturbing native natural wetlands (Ali et al., 2020). Two kinds 
of wetlands are known: (a) Natural wetlands—used for domestic wastewater treatment; (b) 
Constructed wetlands—effective in treating of a wide range of wastewaters such as agricul￾tural (Vymazal and Březinová, 2015), municipal (Stefanakis, 2020; Abou-Elela et al., 2013), 
landfill leachate (Madera-Parra et al., 2015), storm water (Griffiths and Mitsch, 2017), and 
industrial wastewater (Ijaz et al., 2016) by decreasing the concentrations of organic matter, 
nitrogen, phosphorus, heavy metals, etc.
CWs are less expensive, easy to maintain and handle and have low impact on native areas 
(Ali et al., 2020). The first CW for wastewater treatment was developed by Seidel at the Max 
Planck Institute in Liebenburg-Othfresen, Germany, in 1974 (Verhoeven et al., 2006).
Two main types of constructed wetlands could be distinguished by the flow type: Free wa￾ter Surface Flow (FSF CW) and SubSurface Flow (SSF CW) (Ekperusi et al., 2019; Ghermandi 
et al., 2007) (Fig. 4):
1. Free water Surface Flow Constructed Wetlands (FSF CW) require more land, are 
easier and less expensive to design and build. FSF wetlands are mimicking natural 
marshes. Moreover, they are subdivided into three types such as floating, emergent 
and submerged wetlands depending on the macrophytes used (Ekperusi et al., 2019; 
Almuktar et al., 2018).
2. SubSurface Flow Constructed Wetlands (SSF CW) are more expensive than FSF CW. 
However, they are more efficient, they pose less aesthetic problems and they have no 
toxic effects on humans or wildlife. SSF CW is subdivided into horizontal and vertical 
flow constructed wetlands based on the flow type (Ekperusi et al., 2019; Almuktar et al., 
2018).
Aquatic plants are the main and most important constituent in CWs for the reme￾diation of polluted water (Ali et  al., 2020). In fact, their leaves and stems are suitable 
for a significant formation of microbial biofilms. Not only the aerial part but also the 
rhizosphere support microbial communities that could change the speciation of differ￾ent compounds such as trace elements making them bioavailable (Barra Caracciolo and 
Terenzi, 2021). Therefore, thanks to macrophytes, CWs could remediate water polluted 
with different kind of contaminants (Ekperusi et al., 2019; Almuktar et al., 2018). Trace el￾ement concentration in wetland macrophytes generally decreased in the following order: 
root > leaves > stems (Bonanno, 2011; Vymazal et  al., 2010). Several studies evidenced a 
higher accumulation of trace metals in the below-ground parts of macrophytes and a re￾striction of their translocation to the upper parts (Vymazal et al., 2009; Hadad et al., 2006). 
For example, Cr, Zn, Cd, Pb, and Fe were preferentially accumulated in the roots of three 
native plants, i.e., Typha latifolia, Cyperus alternifolius, and Cynodon dactylon. A lesser ac￾cumulation was noted in their leaves and stems during this experiment where they were 4. Macrophytes: A potential new wave of phytoremediation processes 363
submitted to secondary treated wastewater in pilot-scale vertical SSF CW under tropical 
conditions (Mustapha et al., 2018). This organ-specific sequestration allows plants to tol￾erate high concentration of trace elements in their environment and sometimes even to 
thrive in much stressed conditions. In addition, pollutants uptake depends in particular 
on the fresh biomass of the species. For example, under favorable conditions, Eichhornia 
crassipes is able to increase its fresh biomass within a few days making it a good wetland 
plant candidate for wastewater remediation (Rai, 2019) (Tables 3 and 4). In a study done 
by Sukumaran (2013), during 15 days, Eichhornia crassipes was able to remediate Cd, Pb, 
Cu, and Ar from industrial discharge in a constructed wetland. Moreover, in the same 
experiment, Eichhornia crassipes was able to remediate more efficiently Cu, Ni, Fe, Cd, Zn, 
and Cr than Pistia stratiotes and Spirodela polyrhiza (Sukumaran, 2013).
Constructed wetlands technology move forward and, over time, become more accept￾able for the treatment of various kind of polluted waters worldwide even in more arid area 
in the context of climate change (Ekperusi et al., 2019; Almuktar et al., 2018). Indeed, 87% 
of pollutants in wastewater was removed by constructed wetlands as reported by Zhang 
(2012). Machado et al. (2017) reported an increase in the use of constructed wetlands in 
Brazil because they were efficient in the remediation of a broad range of wastewaters. 
FIG. 4 Different types of constructed wetlands based on the water flow type (free water surface flow constructed 
wetland (FSF CW), horizontal subsurface flow constructed wetlands (HSSF CW), and vertical subsurface flow con￾structed wetlands (VSSF CW)). Modified from Ekperusi, A.O., Sikoki, F.D., Nwachukwu, E.O., 2019. Application of common 
duckweed (Lemna minor) in phytoremediation of chemicals in the environment: state and future perspective. Chemosphere 
223, 285–309. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2019.02.025; Ghermandi, A., Bixio, D., Thoeye, C., 2007. The role of free 
water surface constructed wetlands as polishing step in municipal wastewater reclamation and reuse. Sci. Total Environ. 380, 
247–258. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2006.12.038.364 18. Aquatic macrophytes and trace elements
Similarly, in their review, Zhang et al. (2015) showed that constructed wetlands were very 
efficient in the removal of organic pollutants from wastewater in tropical and subtropical 
regions within a long period from 2000 until 2013. Ladislas et al. (2015) noted that Cd, Zn, 
and Ni were accumulated in the roots of aquatic floating macrophytes Juncus effusus and 
Carex riparia growing in wetlands for stormwater treatment. Similarly, Fe, Cd, Zn, Ni, Pb, 
and Cr were removed efficiently by the common reed (Phragmites australis) (Reed-CW) or 
common rush (Juncus effusus) from landfill leachate in a CW filled with loamy soil and 
pumice stone (Dan et al., 2017). In another study done by Leung et al. (2017), three aquatic 
plants (Phragmites australis, Cyperus malaccensis, and Typha latifolia) presented a high re￾moval rate of heavy metals from wastewater of mining industries. Similarly, Phragmites 
australis was able to remediate heavy metals from municipal wastewater by accumulating 
most of the heavy metals in their roots with a low translocation to upper parts (Šíma et al., 
2019).
4.3 New wave application for macrophytes and constructed wetlands
Since their creation in 1974, our knowledge about the physical and biological functioning 
of CWs greatly evolves. In the last years, this increasing knowledge allows to highlight new 
potential applications of CWs to cope with climate change particularly with water deficiency 
and temperature rise in urban areas. This new green ecotechnology appears as greenroof, 
green cooling tower, and thermal green wall (Atta-Boateng et al., 2019). Greenroof based on 
CW technology are described since 2013 by Song et al. as a carbon sink that can be useful for 
carbon sequestration and moreover as a technology that offer thermal benefits in urban areas 
by decreasing the temperature. This interest for carbon capture and microclimate control was 
also underlined by Atta-Boateng et al. (2019) which indicate that green cooling tower and 
green wall could minimize urban heat island effects. In addition to these interesting “side 
effects,” the first function of CW incorporated in green roof remains their effects on water. 
Green roof could be used to realize stormwater retention allowing, here again climate regula￾tion in buildings, improvement of air quality, etc. as noted by Vo et al. (2019) in their review. 
Ramprasad et al. (2017) proposed a new system entitled GROW (standing for Green Roof-top 
Water Recycling System) that allow greywater treatment. The water treatment by GROW is 
effective as treated greywater reaches the USEPA standard limits for water reuse. This interest 
of green roof for water reuse was also indicated by Semeraro et al. (2019) in Italy and Alves 
et al. (2020) in Brazil. Indeed, this type of roof planted with aquatic macrophyte allows green 
recovery of rainwater but also of domestic water and their reuse for irrigation and nonpotable 
uses. Recently, Ingrao et al. (2020) reviewed the interests of CWs and highlighted their reduc￾tion of environmental impact offered by these systems. For green roof, Knapp et al. (2019) and 
Zehnsdorf et al. (2019) in their reviews clearly indicate that one of the advantages of green 
roof is also the support to biodiversity allowed by these systems even if they are not a substi￾tute for ground-level habitats. Even if a range of open questions still remains on green roof 
design and functioning; it clearly appears that the macrophyte/biofilm/substrate complex is 
of crucial importance to allow the best treatment in function of the wastewater type as sig￾naled by Kataki et al. (2021). In that sense, this strengthens the needs for a better knowledge of 
aquatic macrophytes functioning to optimize the potential new wave technology represented 
by green roof CWs.5 Conclusion 365
5 Conclusion
Water is essential for the survival of all living organisms. However, water is always exposed to 
a wide range of pollutants coming from natural and/or anthropic sources. Consequently, this situ￾ation constitutes a major threat for humans and all life forms. The governments and organizations 
should move to resolve this situation. Thus, this chapter reviewed the interest of using aquatic 
plant biomarkers in biomonitoring of pollutants contamination. In fact, bioindicators plants pro￾vide a powerful tool to study the toxic effects of xenobiotics (Brain and Cedergreen, 2009).
In this chapter, number of macrophytes species are checked and can be used as bioindi￾cators for metal pollution in rivers (Table 2). After exposure to metal/metalloid stress, many 
biomarkers could be monitored such as biochemical markers (ROS, PCs and PAs concen￾trations, chlorophyll pigment, and MDA contents, activities of enzymes of the antioxidant 
defense system such as APX, CAT, and SOD). As described previously, trace elements are able 
to induce an oxidative stress caused by the formation of ROS followed by a degradation of 
chlorophyll pigments and an increase in MDA content. To protect themselves, macrophytes 
activate antioxidative enzymes scavenging and detoxifying ROS. Moreover, PCs and PAs are 
synthesized and contribute to decrease the amount of toxic trace elements through complex￾ation and vacuole sequestration. However, more research studies are needed to elucidate the 
role of PCs and PAs biomarkers and to confirm that they could be used in natural environ￾ment where multiple stressors and environmental conditions could affect their responses.
After the degradation of photosynthetic pigments, physiological biomarkers such as pho￾tosynthesis and respiration will be affected. The osmotic potential decreases due to the accu￾mulation of osmolytes such as phytochelatins, polyamines, proline, and glycine betaine. The 
morphological markers are the less expensive biomarkers that could be studied such as stem 
length, root length, shoot branching, and biomass. Finally, the histological biomarkers such 
as the diameter of xylem vessels and micronuclei formation could be studied and give more 
informations about the toxic effects induced by trace elements. However, a lack of research 
in this domain was observed and evidenced in Table 2. Obviously, these biomarkers are not 
easily applicable in field studies that could restrict their use by water administrators.
Metal/metalloids accumulation in plants is also investigated in order to evaluate their po￾tential for bioremediation. This chapter reviewed a wide range of aquatic macrophytes spe￾cies and their application in phytoremediation. Hydrilla verticillata, Ceratophyllum demersum, 
Myriophyllum sp., Lemna sp., Spirodela polyrhiza, Pistia stratiotes, Eichhornia crassipes, Phragmites
sp., and Typha sp. are the most used in remediation of polluted surface water (Table 4). These 
aquatic plants are now well known and presented a great bioaccumulation potential (Tables 
3 and 4). Phytoremediation is a low cost, ecofriendly technology. More studies should focus 
in elucidating more deeply the mechanism of phytoremediation and all the underlying mo￾lecular mechanisms. However, phytoremediation is mainly limited by the risk of introducing 
invasive species, which is one of the biggest threats to native aquatic species.
Finally, nowadays, a large number of aquatic macrophytes are used in constructed wet￾lands. The effectiveness of trace metals remediation through CWs depends mainly from 
the type of wetland, the macrophyte species used, and the concentration of heavy metals. 
However, further investigations are still needed in order to improve the efficiency of these 
aquatic plants within constructed wetlands and to develop the new wave technology repre￾sented by green roof CWs, green cooling towers, and green walls.366 18. Aquatic macrophytes and trace elements
References
Abou-Elela, S.I., Golinielli, G., Abou-Taleb, E.M., Hellal, M.S., 2013. Municipal wastewater treatment in horizontal 
and vertical flows constructed wetlands. Ecol. Eng. 61, 460–468. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoleng.2013.10.010.
Agarwal, S., Khan, S., 2020. Heavy metal phytotoxicity: DNA damage. In: Faisal, M., Saquib, Q., 
Alatar, A.A., Al-Khedhairy, A.A. (Eds.), Cellular and Molecular Phytotoxicity of Heavy Metals. 
Nanotechnology in the Life Sciences, Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp. 157–177, https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-030-45975-8_10.
Aguiar, F.C., Segurado, P., Urbanič, G., Cambra, J., Chauvin, C., Ciadamidaro, S., Dörflinger, G., Ferreira, J., Germ, 
M., Manolaki, P., Minciardi, M.R., Munné, A., Papastergiadou, E., Ferreira, M.T., 2014. Comparability of river 
quality assessment using macrophytes: a multi-step procedure to overcome biogeographical differences. Sci. Total 
Environ. 476–477, 757–767. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2013.10.021.
Ahsan, N., Lee, D.-G., Alam, I., Kim, P.J., Lee, J.J., Ahn, Y.-O., Kwak, S.-S., Lee, I.-J., Bahk, J.D., Kang, K.Y., Renaut, 
J., Komatsu, S., Lee, B.-H., 2008. Comparative proteomic study of arsenic-induced differentially expressed pro￾teins in rice roots reveals glutathione plays a central role during As stress. Proteomics 8, 3561–3576. https://doi.
org/10.1002/pmic.200701189.
Akhtar, A.B.T., Yasar, A., Ali, R., Irfan, R., 2017. Phytoremediation using aquatic macrophytes. In: Ansari, A.A., Gill, 
S.S., Gill, R., Lanza, R., G., Newman, L. (Eds.), Phytoremediation. Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp. 
259–276, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-52381-1_8.
Al-Homaidan, A.A., Al-Otaibi, T.G., El-Sheikh, M.A., Al-Ghanayem, A.A., Ameen, F., 2020. Accumulation of heavy 
metals in a macrophyte Phragmites australis: implications to phytoremediation in the Arabian Peninsula wadis. 
Environ. Monit. Assess. 192, 202. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10661-020-8177-6.
Ali, S., Abbas, Z., Rizwan, M., Zaheer, I., Yavaş, İ., Ünay, A., Abdel-DAIM, M., Bin-Jumah, M., Hasanuzzaman, M., 
Kalderis, D., 2020. Application of floating aquatic plants in phytoremediation of heavy metals polluted water: a 
review. Sustainability 12, 1927. https://doi.org/10.3390/su12051927.
Almuktar, S.A.A.A.N., Abed, S.N., Scholz, M., 2018. Wetlands for wastewater treatment and subsequent recy￾cling of treated effluent: a review. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. Int. 25, 23595–23623. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11356-018-2629-3.
Alves, L.A., Vazquez, E.G., Peçanha, L., Naked, A.H., 2020. Proposal for implementation of green roof project using 
the wetland technique. J. Sustain. Dev. Energy Water Environ. Syst. 8 (2), 268–280. https://doi.org/10.13044/j.
sdewes.d7.0283.
Amiard-Triquet, C., Rainbow, P.S., 2009. Environmental Assessment of Estuarine Ecosystems: A Case Study. CRC 
Press.
Anjum, N.A., Ahmad, I., Mohmood, I., Pacheco, M., Duarte, A.C., Pereira, E., Umar, S., Ahmad, A., Khan, N.A., Iqbal, 
M., Prasad, M.N.V., 2012. Modulation of glutathione and its related enzymes in plants’ responses to toxic metals 
and metalloids—a review. Environ. Exp. Bot. 75, 307–324. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envexpbot.2011.07.002.
Ansari, A.A., Gill, S.S., Abbas, Z.K., Naeem, M., 2016. Plant Biodiversity: Monitoring, Assessment and Conservation. 
CABI.
Ansari, A.A., Gill, S.S., Gill, R., Lanza, G.R., Newman, L., 2019. Phytoremediation: Management of Environmental 
Contaminants. vol. 6 Springer.
Ansari, A.A., Naeem, M., Gill, S.S., AlZuaibr, F.M., 2020. Phytoremediation of contaminated waters: an eco￾friendly technology based on aquatic macrophytes application. Egypt. J. Aquat. Res. 46, 371–376. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ejar.2020.03.002.
Ardestani, M.M., van Straalen, N.M., van Gestel, C.A.M., 2014. The relationship between metal toxicity and bi￾otic ligand binding affinities in aquatic and soil organisms: a review. Environ. Pollut. 195, 133–147. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.envpol.2014.08.020.
Atta-Boateng, A., Berlyn, G.P., O'Hern, C.S., Felson, A.J., 2019. Suitability of wetland macrophyte in green cooling 
tower performance. Ecol. Eng. 127, 487–493.
Augustynowicz, J., Gajewski, Z., Kostecka-Gugała, A., Wróbel, P., Kołton, A., 2016. Accumulation patterns of Cr 
in Callitriche organs—qualitative and quantitative analysis. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 23, 2669–2676. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s11356-015-5499-y.
Babu, M.Y., Palanikumar, L., Nagarani, N., Devi, V.J., Kumar, S.R., Ramakritinan, C.M., Kumaraguru, A.K., 2014. 
Cadmium and copper toxicity in three marine macroalgae: evaluation of the biochemical responses and DNA 
damage. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 21, 9604–9616. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-014-2999-0.Baccouch, S., Chaoui, A., Ferjani, E.E., 1998. Nickel-induced oxidative damage and antioxidant responses in Zea mays
shoots. Plant Physiol. Biochem. 36, 689–694. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0981-9428(98)80018-1.
Bai, L., Liu, X.-L., Hu, J., Li, J., Wang, Z.-L., Han, G., Li, S.-L., Liu, C.-Q., 2018. Heavy metal accumulation in common 
aquatic plants in rivers and lakes in the Taihu Basin. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health. 15, 2857. https://doi.
org/10.3390/ijerph15122857.
Baize, D., Sterckeman, T., 2001. Of the necessity of knowledge of the natural pedo-geochemical background content 
in the evaluation of the contamination of soils by trace elements. Sci. Total Environ. 264, 127–139. https://doi.
org/10.1016/S0048-9697(00)00615-X.
Baker, A., Brooks, R., 1989. Terrestrial higher plants which hyperaccumulate metallic elements, a review of their dis￾tribution, ecology and phytochemistry. Biorecovery 1.
Barra Caracciolo, A., Terenzi, V., 2021. Rhizosphere microbial communities and heavy metals. Microorganisms 9, 
1462. https://doi.org/10.3390/microorganisms9071462.
Bello, A.O., Tawabini, B.S., Khalil, A.B., Boland, C.R., Saleh, T.A., 2018. Phytoremediation of cadmium-, lead- and 
nickel-contaminated water by Phragmites australis in hydroponic systems. Ecol. Eng. 120, 126–133. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ecoleng.2018.05.035.
Béraud, E., Cotelle, S., Leroy, P., Férard, J.-F., 2007. Genotoxic effects and induction of phytochelatins in the presence 
of cadmium in Vicia faba roots. Mutat. Res. 633, 112–116. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mrgentox.2006.05.013.
Bertoldi, D., Tassoni, A., Martinelli, L., Bagni, N., 2004. Polyamines and somatic embryogenesis in two Vitis vinifera
cultivars. Physiol. Plant. 120, 657–666. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.0031-9317.2004.0282.x.
Besse, J.-P., Geffard, O., Coquery, M., 2012. Relevance and applicability of active biomonitoring in continental wa￾ters under the Water Framework Directive. TrAC-Trends Anal. Chem. 36, 113–127. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
trac.2012.04.004.
Birben, E., Sahiner, U.M., Sackesen, C., Erzurum, S., Kalayci, O., 2012. Oxidative stress and antioxidant defense. 
World Allergy Organ. J. 5, 9–19. https://doi.org/10.1097/WOX.0b013e3182439613.
Böcük, H., Yakar, A., Türker, O.C., 2013. Assessment of Lemna gibba L. (duckweed) as a potential ecological indicator 
for contaminated aquatic ecosystem by boron mine effluent. Ecol. Indic. 29, 538–548. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ecolind.2013.01.029.
Bonanno, G., 2011. Trace element accumulation and distribution in the organs of Phragmites australis (common 
reed) and biomonitoring applications. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 74, 1057–1064. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ecoenv.2011.01.018.
Borisova, G., Chukina, N., Maleva, M., Kumar, A., Prasad, M.N.V., 2016. Thiols as biomarkers of heavy metal toler￾ance in the aquatic macrophytes of Middle Urals, Russia. Int. J. Phytoremediation 18, 1037–1045. https://doi.org
/10.1080/15226514.2016.1183572.
Brain, R.A., Cedergreen, N., 2009. Biomarkers in aquatic plants: selection and utility. In: Reviews of Environmental 
Contamination and Toxicology. vol. 198. Springer New York, New York, NY, pp. 1–61.
Buffle, J., DeVitre, R.R., 1993. Chemical and Biological Regulation of Aquatic Systems. CRC Press.
Calow, P.P., 2009. Handbook of Ecotoxicology. John Wiley & Sons.
Campos, F.V., de Oliveira, J.A., da Silva, A.A., Ribeiro, C., dos Santos Farnese, F., 2019. Phytoremediation of 
arsenite-contaminated environments: is Pistia stratiotes L. a useful tool? Ecol. Indic. 104, 794–801. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ecolind.2019.04.048.
Cao, T., Xie, P., Ni, L., Wu, A., Zhang, M., Wu, S., Smolders, A.J.P., 2007. The role of NH4
+ toxicity in the decline of 
the submersed macrophyte Vallisneria natans in lakes of the Yangtze River basin, China. Mar. Freshw. Res. 58, 581. 
https://doi.org/10.1071/MF06090.
Caverzan, A., Passaia, G., Rosa, S.B., Ribeiro, C.W., Lazzarotto, F., Margis-Pinheiro, M., 2012. Plant responses to 
stresses: role of ascorbate peroxidase in the antioxidant protection. Genet. Mol. Biol. 35, 1011–1019.
Chandrakar, V., Naithani, S.C., Keshavkant, S., 2016. Arsenic-induced metabolic disturbances and their mitigation 
mechanisms in crop plants: a review. Biologia 71, 367–377. https://doi.org/10.1515/biolog-2016-0052.
Chatenet, P., Froissard, D., Cook-Moreau, J., Hourdin, P., Ghestem, A., Botineau, M., Haury, J., 2006. Populations 
of Myriophyllum alterniflorum L. as bioindicators of pollution in acidic to neutral rivers in the Limousin region. 
Hydrobiologia 570, 61–65. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10750-006-0162-8.
Chaudhary, K., Agarwal, S., Khan, S., 2018. Role of phytochelatins (PCs), metallothioneins (MTs), and 
heavy metal ATPase (HMA) genes in heavy metal tolerance. In: Prasad, R. (Ed.), Mycoremediation and 
Environmental Sustainability. Fungal Biology, Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp. 39–60, https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-319-77386-5_2.
References 367368 18. Aquatic macrophytes and trace elements
Chen, G., Liu, X., Brookes, P.C., Xu, J., 2015. Opportunities for phytoremediation and bioindication of arsenic contam￾inated water using a submerged aquatic plant: Vallisneria natans (lour.) Hara. Int. J. Phytoremediation 17, 249–255. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/15226514.2014.883496.
Chen, D., Shao, Q., Yin, L., Younis, A., Zheng, B., 2019. Polyamine function in plants: metabolism, regulation on 
development, and roles in abiotic stress responses. Front. Plant Sci. 9. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2018.01945.
Chugh, L.K., Sawhney, S.K., 1999. Photosynthetic activities of Pisum sativum seedlings grown in presence of cad￾mium. Plant Physiol. Biochem. 37, 297–303. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0981-9428(99)80028-X.
Clemens, S., Ma, J.F., 2016. Toxic heavy metal and metalloid accumulation in crop plants and foods. Annu. Rev. Plant 
Biol. 67, 489–512. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-arplant-043015-112301.
Cobbett, C.S., 2000. Phytochelatins and their roles in heavy metal detoxification. Plant Physiol. 123, 825–832. https://
doi.org/10.1104/pp.123.3.825.
Costa, M.B., Tavares, F.V., Martinez, C.B., Colares, I.G., Martins, C.d.M.G., 2018. Accumulation and effects of copper 
on aquatic macrophytes Potamogeton pectinatus L.: potential application to environmental monitoring and phytore￾mediation. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 155, 117–124. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoenv.2018.01.062.
Cvjetko, P., Tolić, S., Šikić, S., Balen, B., Tkalec, M., Vidaković-Cifrek, Ž., Pavlica, M., 2010. Effect of copper on the tox￾icity and genotoxicity of cadmium in Duckweed (Lemna Minor L.). Arch. Industrial Hygiene Toxicol. 61. https://
doi.org/10.2478/10004-1254-61-2010-2059.
Da Silva, E.C., de Albuquerque, M.B., de Azevedo Neto, A.D., da Silva Junior, C.D., 2013. Drought and its conse￾quences to plants—from individual to ecosystem. In: Akinci, S. (Ed.), Responses of Organisms to Water Stress. 
InTech.
Daby, D., 2006. Coastal pollution and potential biomonitors of metals in Mauritius. Water Air Soil Pollut. 174, 63–91. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11270-005-9035-4.
Dan, A., Oka, M., Fujii, Y., Soda, S., Ishigaki, T., Machimura, T., Ike, M., 2017. Removal of heavy metals from synthetic 
landfill leachate in lab-scale vertical flow constructed wetlands. Sci. Total Environ. 584–585, 742–750. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2017.01.112.
Das, K., Roychoudhury, A., 2014. Reactive oxygen species (ROS) and response of antioxidants as ROS-scavengers 
during environmental stress in plants. Front. Environ. Sci. 2. https://doi.org/10.3389/fenvs.2014.00053.
Da-Silva, C.J., Canatto, R.A., Cardoso, A.A., Ribeiro, C., Oliveira, J.A., 2017. Arsenic-hyperaccumulation and antiox￾idant system in the aquatic macrophyte Spirodela intermedia W. Koch (Lemnaceae). Theor. Exp. Plant Physiol. 29, 
203–213. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40626-017-0096-8.
David, K., 2017. Cell division and cell differentiation. In: Encyclopedia of Applied Plant Sciences. Elsevier, pp. 149–
154, https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-394807-6.00117-9.
Dazy, M., Béraud, E., Cotelle, S., Meux, E., Masfaraud, J.-F., Férard, J.-F., 2008. Antioxidant enzyme activities as af￾fected by trivalent and hexavalent chromium species in Fontinalis antipyretica Hedw. Chemosphere 73, 281–290. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2008.06.044.
Dazy, M., Masfaraud, J.-F., Férard, J.-F., 2009. Induction of oxidative stress biomarkers associated with heavy metal stress 
in Fontinalis antipyretica Hedw. Chemosphere 75, 297–302. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2008.12.045.
De Souza, D.C., Fontaneli, A.C., Peron, A.P., Froehner, S., 2021. Physiological effects of exposure to copper and 
chromium in three floating aquatic macrophyte species. Water Air Soil Pollut. 232, 23. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11270-020-04960-w.
Decou, R., Bigot, S., Hourdin, P., Delmail, D., Labrousse, P., 2019. Comparative in vitro/in situ approaches to three 
biomarker responses of Myriophyllum alterniflorum exposed to metal stress. Chemosphere 222, 29–37. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2019.01.105.
Decou, R., Delmail, D., Labrousse, P., 2020. Myriophyllum alterniflorum biochemical changes during in  vitro Cu/
Cd metal stress: focusing on cell detoxifying enzymes. Aquat. Toxicol. 219. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aqua￾tox.2019.105361, 105361.
Del Río, L.A., Corpas, F.J., López-Huertas, E., Palma, J.M., 2018. Plant superoxide dismutases: function under abi￾otic stress conditions. In: Gupta, D.K., Palma, J.M., Corpas, F.J. (Eds.), Antioxidants and Antioxidant Enzymes in 
Higher Plants. Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp. 1–26, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-75088-0_1.
Delmail, D., 2011. Contribution de Myriophyllum alterniflorum et de son périphyton à la biosurveillance de la qual￾ité des eaux face aux métaux lourds [Contribution of Myriophyllum alterniflorum and its periphyton to the bio￾monitoring of water quality versus metallic stress]. Limoges.
Delmail, D., Labrousse, P., 2012. Plant ageing, a counteracting agent to xenobiotic stress. In: Nagata, T. (Ed.), 
Senescence. INTECH, https://doi.org/10.5772/31944.Delmail, D., Labrousse, P., 2014. Heavy-metal attack on freshwater side: physiological defense strategies of macrophytes 
and ecotoxicological ops. In: Ahmad, P., Wani, M. (Eds.), Physiological Mechanisms and Adaptation Strategies in 
Plants Under Changing Environment. Springer, New York, NY, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4614-8600-8_2.
Delmail, D., Labrousse, P., Hourdin, P., Larcher, L., Moesch, C., Botineau, M., 2011. Differential responses of 
Myriophyllum alterniflorum DC (Haloragaceae) organs to copper: physiological and developmental approaches. 
Hydrobiologia 664, 95–105. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10750-010-0589-9.
Dhir, B., Nasim, S.A., Samantary, S., Srivastava, S., 2012. Assessment of osmolyte accumulation in heavy metal ex￾posed Salvinia natans. Int. J. Bot. 8, 153–158. https://doi.org/10.3923/ijb.2012.153.158.
Di Toro, D.M., Allen, H.E., Bergman, H.L., Meyer, J.S., Paquin, P.R., Santore, R.C., 2001. Biotic ligand model of the 
acute toxicity of metals. 1. Technical Basis. Environ. Toxicol. Chem. 20, 2383–2396. https://doi.org/10.1002/
etc.5620201034.
Díaz, S., Villares, R., Vázquez, M.D., Carballeira, A., 2013. Physiological effects of exposure to arsenic, mercury, anti￾mony and selenium in the aquatic moss Fontinalis antipyretica Hedw. Water Air Soil Pollut. 224, 1659. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s11270-013-1659-1.
Ding, C., Shi, G., Xu, X., Yang, H., Xu, Y., 2010. Effect of exogenous spermidine on polyamine metabolism in 
water hyacinth leaves under mercury stress. Plant Growth Regul. 60, 61–67. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10725-009-9419-3.
Dixon, D.A., Vasiliu, M., 2017. Elements: metalloids. In: White, W.M. (Ed.), Encyclopedia of Geochemistry: A 
Comprehensive Reference Source on the Chemistry of the Earth. Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp. 
1–2, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-39193-9_63-1.
Duman, F., Ozturk, F., Aydin, Z., 2010. Biological responses of duckweed (Lemna minor L.) exposed to the inorganic 
arsenic species As(III) and As(V): effects of concentration and duration of exposure. Ecotoxicology 19, 983–993. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10646-010-0480-5.
Ebbs, S.D., Bradfield, S.J., Kumar, P., White, J.C., Musante, C., Ma, X., 2016. Accumulation of zinc, copper, or cerium in 
carrot (Daucus carota) exposed to metal oxide nanoparticles and metal ions. Environ. Sci. Nano 3, 114–126. https://
doi.org/10.1039/C5EN00161G.
Ekperusi, A.O., Sikoki, F.D., Nwachukwu, E.O., 2019. Application of common duckweed (Lemna minor) in phytore￾mediation of chemicals in the environment: state and future perspective. Chemosphere 223, 285–309. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2019.02.025.
Elias, M., Wellner, A., Goldin-Azulay, K., Chabriere, E., Vorholt, J.A., Erb, T.J., Tawfik, D.S., 2012. The molecular 
basis of phosphate discrimination in arsenate-rich environments. Nature 491, 134–137. https://doi.org/10.1038/
nature11517.
El-Khatib, A.A., Hegazy, A.K., Abo-El-Kassem, A.M., 2014. Bioaccumulation potential and physiological responses 
of aquatic macrophytes to Pb pollution. Int. J. Phytoremediation 16, 29–45. https://doi.org/10.1080/15226514.2
012.751355.
EU, 2020. Directive (EU) 2020/2184 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 December 2020 on the 
Quality of Water Intended for Human Consumption. EUR-Lex—32020L2184—EN—EUR-Lex [WWW Document]. 
URL https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/dir/2020/2184/oj. (Accessed 30 August 2021).
Farooq, M.A., Islam, F., Ali, B., Najeeb, U., Mao, B., Gill, R.A., Yan, G., Siddique, K.H.M., Zhou, W., 2016. Arsenic tox￾icity in plants: cellular and molecular mechanisms of its transport and metabolism. Environ. Exp. Bot. 132, 42–52. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envexpbot.2016.08.004.
Filipiak-Szok, A., Kurzawa, M., Szłyk, E., 2015. Determination of toxic metals by ICP-MS in Asiatic and European 
medicinal plants and dietary supplements. J. Trace Elem. Med. Biol. 30, 54–58. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jtemb.2014.10.008.
Fletcher, J., Willby, N., Oliver, D.M., Quilliam, R.S., 2020. Phytoremediation using aquatic plants. In: Shmaefsky, B.R. 
(Ed.), Phytoremediation: In-Situ Applications, Concepts and Strategies in Plant Sciences. Springer International 
Publishing, Cham, pp. 205–260, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-00099-8_7.
Fryzova, R., Pohanka, M., Martinkova, P., Cihlarova, H., Brtnicky, M., Hladky, J., Kynicky, J., 2017. Oxidative stress 
and heavy metals in plants. In: de Voogt, P. (Ed.), Reviews of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology. 
Reviews of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology, vol. 245. Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp. 
129–156, https://doi.org/10.1007/398_2017_7.
Fusconi, A., Repetto, O., Bona, E., Massa, N., Gallo, C., Dumas-Gaudot, E., Berta, G., 2006. Effects of cadmium on 
meristem activity and nucleus ploidy in roots of Pisum sativum L. cv. Frisson seedlings. Environ. Exp. Bot. 58, 
253–260. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envexpbot.2005.09.008.
References 369370 18. Aquatic macrophytes and trace elements
Ghermandi, A., Bixio, D., Thoeye, C., 2007. The role of free water surface constructed wetlands as polishing step 
in municipal wastewater reclamation and reuse. Sci. Total Environ. 380, 247–258. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
scitotenv.2006.12.038.
Gill, S.S., Tuteja, N., 2010. Reactive oxygen species and antioxidant machinery in abiotic stress tolerance in crop 
plants. Plant Physiol. Biochem. 48, 909–930. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plaphy.2010.08.016.
Giri, A.K., 2019. Bioaccumulation potential and toxicity of arsenite using rooted-submerged Vallisneria spiralis in a 
hydroponic culture and its characterization studies. J. Adv. Sci. Res. 10, 17–22.
Greco, M., Sáez, C.A., Contreras, R.A., Rodríguez-Rojas, F., Bitonti, M.B., Brown, M.T., 2019. Cadmium and/or cop￾per excess induce interdependent metal accumulation, DNA methylation, induction of metal chelators and anti￾oxidant defences in the seagrass Zostera marina. Chemosphere 224, 111–119.
Griffiths, L.N., Mitsch, W.J., 2017. Removal of nutrients from urban stormwater runoff by storm-pulsed and seasonally 
pulsed created wetlands in the subtropics. Ecol. Eng. 108, 414–424. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoleng.2017.06.053.
Groppa, M.D., Benavides, M.P., Tomaro, M.L., 2003. Polyamine metabolism in sunflower and wheat leaf discs under 
cadmium or copper stress. Plant Sci. 164, 293–299. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0168-9452(02)00412-0.
Gross, E.M., Nuttens, A., Paroshin, D., Hussner, A., 2016. Sensitive response of sediment-grown Myriophyllum 
spicatum L. to arsenic pollution under different CO2 availability. Hydrobiologia. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10750-016-2956-7.
Guan, X., Dong, H., Ma, J., Jiang, L., 2009. Removal of arsenic from water: effects of competing anions on As(III) re￾moval in KMnO4–Fe(II) process. Water Res. 43, 3891–3899. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2009.06.008.
Guo, L., Cutright, T.J., 2014. Remediation of acid mine drainage (AMD)-contaminated soil by Phragmites australis and 
rhizosphere bacteria. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 21, 7350–7360. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-014-2642-0.
Gupta, M., Sarin, N.B., 2009. Heavy metal induced DNA changes in aquatic macrophytes: random amplified poly￾morphic DNA analysis and identification of sequence characterized amplified region marker. J. Environ. Sci. 21, 
686–690. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1001-0742(08)62324-4.
Gür, N., Türker, O.C., Böcük, H., 2016. Toxicity assessment of boron (B) by Lemna minor L. and Lemna gibba L. and 
their possible use as model plants for ecological risk assessment of aquatic ecosystems with boron pollution. 
Chemosphere 157, 1–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2016.04.138.
Hadad, H.R., Maine, M.A., Bonetto, C.A., 2006. Macrophyte growth in a pilot-scale constructed wetland for indus￾trial wastewater treatment. Chemosphere 63, 1744–1753. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2005.09.014.
Hak, K., Ritchie, R.J., Dummee, V., 2020. Bioaccumulation and physiological responses of the Coontail, Ceratophyllum 
demersum exposed to copper, zinc and in combination. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 189. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ecoenv.2019.110049, 110049.
Hasanuzzaman, M., Nahar, K., Hakeem, K.R., Öztürk, M., Fujita, M., 2015. Arsenic toxicity in plants and possible 
remediation. In: Soil Remediation and Plants. Elsevier, pp. 433–501.
Hawa Bibi, M., Asaeda, T., Azim, E., 2010. Effects of Cd, Cr, and Zn on growth and metal accumulation in an aquatic 
macrophyte, Nitella graciliformis. Chem. Ecol. 26, 49–56. https://doi.org/10.1080/02757540903468110.
Hossain, M.A., Bhattacharjee, S., Armin, S.-M., Qian, P., Xin, W., Li, H.-Y., Burritt, D.J., Fujita, M., Tran, L.-S.P., 2015. 
Hydrogen peroxide priming modulates abiotic oxidative stress tolerance: insights from ROS detoxification and 
scavenging. Front. Plant Sci. 6. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2015.00420.
Hu, M., Li, F., Liu, C., Wu, W., 2015. The diversity and abundance of As(III) oxidizers on root iron plaque is critical 
for arsenic bioavailability to rice. Sci. Rep. 5, 13611. https://doi.org/10.1038/srep13611.
Hua, J., Zhang, C., Yin, Y., Chen, R., Wang, X., 2012. Phytoremediation potential of three aquatic macrophytes in 
manganese-contaminated water: phytoremediation potential of aquatic macrophytes. Water Environ. J. 26, 335–
342. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1747-6593.2011.00293.x.
Huang, X., Zhao, F., Yu, G., Song, C., Geng, Z., Zhuang, P., 2017. Removal of Cu, Zn, Pb, and Cr from Yangtze 
Estuary using the Phragmites australis artificial floating wetlands. Biomed. Res. Int. 2017, 1–10. https://doi.
org/10.1155/2017/6201048.
Hussain, S.S., Ali, M., Ahmad, M., Siddique, K.H.M., 2011. Polyamines: natural and engineered abiotic and biotic 
stress tolerance in plants. Biotechnol. Adv. 29, 300–311. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biotechadv.2011.01.003.
Ijaz, A., Iqbal, Z., Afzal, M., 2016. Remediation of sewage and industrial effluent using bacterially assisted float￾ing treatment wetlands vegetated with Typha domingensis. Water Sci. Technol. 74, 2192–2201. https://doi.
org/10.2166/wst.2016.405.
INERIS, 2014. Données technico-économiques sur les substances chimiques en France : cuivre, composés et alliages, 
DRC-14-136881-02236A, 91 p. (version mars 2015) [Technical and economic data on chemicals in France: copper, compounds and alloys, DRC-14-136881-02236A, 91 p. (March 2015 version)]. [WWW Document]. URL //rsde.
ineris.fr/ou http://www.ineris.fr/substances/fr/. (Accessed 19 December 2016).
Ingrao, C., Failla, S., Arcidiacono, C., 2020. A comprehensive review of environmental and operational issues of con￾structed wetland systems. Curr. Opin. Environ. Sci. Health 13, 35–45.
Iriel, A., Dundas, G., Fernández Cirelli, A., Lagorio, M.G., 2015. Effect of arsenic on reflectance spectra and chlorophyll 
fluorescence of aquatic plants. Chemosphere 119, 697–703. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2014.07.066.
İşeri, Ö.D., Körpe, D.A., Yurtcu, E., Sahin, F.I., Haberal, M., 2011. Copper-induced oxidative damage, antioxidant 
response and genotoxicity in Lycopersicum esculentum Mill. and Cucumis sativus L. Plant Cell Rep. 30, 1713–1721. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00299-011-1079-x.
Jaiswal, A., Verma, A., Jaiswal, P., 2018. Detrimental effects of heavy metals in soil, plants, and aquatic eco￾systems and in Humans. J. Environ. Pathol. Toxicol. Oncol. 37, 183–197. https://doi.org/10.1615/
JEnvironPatholToxicolOncol.2018025348.
Jasrotia, S., Kansal, A., Mehra, A., 2017. Performance of aquatic plant species for phytoremediation of arsenic￾contaminated water. Appl Water Sci 7, 889–896. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13201-015-0300-4.
Kaiser, J., 2001. Bioindicators and Biomarkers of Environmental Pollution and Risk Assessment. Science Publishers.
Kanoun-Boulé, M., Vicente, J.A.F., Nabais, C., Prasad, M.N.V., Freitas, H., 2009. Ecophysiological tolerance of duck￾weeds exposed to copper. Aquat. Toxicol. 91, 1–9.
Kataki, S., Chatterjee, S., Vairale, M.G., Dwivedi, S.K., Gupta, D.K., 2021. Constructed wetland, an eco-technology for 
wastewater treatment: a review on types of wastewater treated and components of the technology (macrophyte, 
biolfilm and substrate). J. Environ. Manag. 283, 111986.
Keller, M., 2015. Chapter 4—Photosynthesis and respiration. In: Keller, M. (Ed.), The Science of Grapevines, second 
ed. Academic Press, San Diego, CA, pp. 125–143.
Kelter, P.B., Mosher, M.D., Scott, A., 2008. Chemistry: The Practical Science. Cengage Learning.
Knapp, S., Schmauck, S., Zehnsdorf, A., 2019. Biodiversity impact of green roofs and constructed wetlands as pro￾gressive eco-technologies in urban areas. Sustainability 11, 5846. https://doi.org/10.3390/su11205846.
Krayem, M., 2015. Etude des effets de l’arsenic et du cuivre sur un macrophyte aquatique, Myriophyllum alterniflorum
D.C.: évaluation des biomarqueurs pour la détection précoce de pollution [Study of the effects of arsenic and cop￾per on an aquatic macrophyte, Myriophyllum alterniflorum D.C.: evaluation of biomarkers for the early detection 
of pollution]. Limoges.
Krayem, M., Baydoun, M., Deluchat, V., Lenain, J.-F., Kazpard, V., Labrousse, P., 2016a. Absorption and translocation 
of copper and arsenic in an aquatic macrophyte Myriophyllum alterniflorum DC. in oligotrophic and eutrophic 
conditions. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-016-6289-x.
Krayem, M., Deluchat, V., Rabiet, M., Cleries, K., Lenain, J.F., Saad, Z., Kazpard, V., Labrousse, P., 2016b. Effect 
of arsenate As (V) on the biomarkers of Myriophyllum alterniflorum in oligotrophic and eutrophic conditions. 
Chemosphere 147, 131–137. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2015.12.093.
Krayem, M., Deluchat, V., Decou, R., Labrousse, P., 2017. The arsenic threat in aquatic environments: from plant’s 
point of view. In: Arsenic: Risks of Exposure, Behavior in the Environment, and Toxicology. Chemistry Research 
and Applications, Nova Science Publishers, Inc, Hauppauge, New York.
Krayem, M., Deluchat, V., Hourdin, P., Fondanèche, P., Etangs, F.L.D., Kazpard, V., Moesch, C., Labrousse, P., 2018. 
Combined effect of copper and hydrodynamic conditions on Myriophyllum alterniflorum biomarkers. Chemosphere 
199, 427–434. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2018.02.050.
Krayem, M., Deluchat, V., Hourdin, P., Labrousse, P., 2019. Are Myriophyllum alterniflorum biomarker responses 
to arsenic stress differentially affected by hydrodynamic conditions? Chemosphere 225, 497–506. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2019.03.065.
Kronzucker, H.J., Britto, D.T., 2002. NH4
+ toxicity in higher plants: a critical review. Plant Physiol. 159, 567–584.
Kumar, D., Singh, D.P., Barman, S.C., Kumar, N., 2016. Heavy metal and their regulation in plant system: an over￾view. In: Singh, A., Prasad, S.M., Singh, R.P. (Eds.), Plant Responses to Xenobiotics. Springer, Singapore, pp. 19–38, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-2860-1_2.
Kumar, M., Kuzhiumparambil, U., Ralph, P.J., Contreras-Porcia, L., 2017. Polyamines: stress metabolite in ma￾rine macrophytes. In: Algal Green Chemistry: Recent Progress in Biotechnology. Elsevier, Amsterdam, Oxford, 
Cambridge, MA.
Küpper, H., Šetlík, I., Spiller, M., Küpper, F.C., Prášil, O., 2002. Heavy metal-induced inhibition of pho￾tosynthesis: targets of in  vivo heavy metal chlorophyll formation. J. Phycol. 38, 429–441. https://doi.
org/10.1046/j.1529-8817.2002.01148.x.
References 371372 18. Aquatic macrophytes and trace elements
Ladislas, S., Gérente, C., Chazarenc, F., Brisson, J., Andrès, Y., 2015. Floating treatment wetlands for heavy metal re￾moval in highway stormwater ponds. In: Ecological Engineering, Special Issue: 5th International Symposium on 
Wetland Pollutant Dynamics and Control 80, 85–91., https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoleng.2014.09.115.
Lagadic, L., Caquet, T., Amiard, J.C., Ramade, F., 1998. Utilisation de biomarqueurs pour la surveillance de la qualité 
de l’environnement [Use of biomarkers for monitoring the quality of the environment]. Tec & Doc Lavoisier.
Leung, H.M., Duzgoren-Aydin, N.S., Au, C.K., Krupanidhi, S., Fung, K.Y., Cheung, K.C., Wong, Y.K., Peng, X.L., Ye, 
Z.H., Yung, K.K.L., Tsui, M.T.K., 2017. Monitoring and assessment of heavy metal contamination in a constructed 
wetland in Shaoguan (Guangdong Province, China): bioaccumulation of Pb, Zn, Cu and Cd in aquatic and terres￾trial components. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. Int. 24, 9079–9088. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-016-6756-4.
Li, H., Mo, F., Li, Y., Wang, M., Li, Z., Hu, H., Deng, W., Zhang, R., 2020. Effects of silver(I) toxicity on microstructure, 
biochemical activities, and genic material of Lemna minor L. with special reference to application of bioindicator. 
Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 27, 22735–22748. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-020-08844-8.
Lin, R., Wang, X., Luo, Y., Du, W., Guo, H., Yin, D., 2007. Effects of soil cadmium on growth, oxidative stress and 
antioxidant system in wheat seedlings (Triticum aestivum L.). Chemosphere 69, 89–98. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
chemosphere.2007.04.041.
Lominchar, M.A., Sierra, M.J., Millán, R., 2015. Accumulation of mercury in Typha domingensis under field conditions. 
Chemosphere 119, 994–999. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2014.08.085.
Machado, A.I., Beretta, M., Fragoso, R., Duarte, E., 2017. Overview of the state of the art of constructed wetlands 
for decentralized wastewater management in Brazil. J. Environ. Manag. 187, 560–570. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jenvman.2016.11.015.
Madera-Parra, C.A., Peña-Salamanca, E.J., Peña, M.R., Rousseau, D.P.L., Lens, P.N.L., 2015. Phytoremediation of 
landfill leachate with Colocasia esculenta, Gynerum sagittatum and Heliconia psittacorum in constructed wetlands. 
Int. J. Phytoremediation 17, 16–24. https://doi.org/10.1080/15226514.2013.828014.
Maitani, T., Kubota, H., Sato, K., Yamada, T., 1996. The composition of metals bound to class III metallothionein (phy￾tochelatin and its desglycyl peptide) induced by various metals in root cultures of Rubia tinctorum. Plant Physiol. 
110, 1145–1150. https://doi.org/10.1104/pp.110.4.1145.
Malar, S., Shivendra Vikram, S., Favas, P.J.C., Perumal, V., 2016. Lead heavy metal toxicity induced changes on growth 
and antioxidative enzymes level in water hyacinths [Eichhornia crassipes (Mart.)]. Bot. Stud. 55, 1–11. https://doi.
org/10.1186/s40529-014-0054-6.
Mallick, S., Sinam, G., Sinha, S., 2011. Study on arsenate tolerant and sensitive cultivars of Zea mays L.: differen￾tial detoxification mechanism and effect on nutrients status. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 74, 1316–1324. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ecoenv.2011.02.012.
Mangabeira, P.A., Ferreira, A.S., de Almeida, A.-A.F., Fernandes, V.F., Lucena, E., Souza, V.L., dos Santos Júnior, A.J., Oliveira, 
A.H., Grenier-Loustalot, M.F., Barbier, F., Silva, D.C., 2011. Compartmentalization and ultrastructural alterations in￾duced by chromium in aquatic macrophytes. Biometals 24, 1017–1026. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10534-011-9459-9.
Mascher, R., Lippmann, B., Holzinger, S., Bergmann, H., 2002. Arsenate toxicity: effects on oxidative stress response 
molecules and enzymes in red clover plants. Plant Sci. 163, 961–969.
Masindi, V., Muedi, K.L., 2018. Environmental contamination by heavy metals. In: Saleh, H.E.-D.M., Aglan, R.F. 
(Eds.), Heavy Metals. INTECH, https://doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.76082.
Mazej, Z., Germ, M., 2009. Trace element accumulation and distribution in four aquatic macrophytes. Chemosphere 
74, 642–647. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2008.10.019.
Meng, X., Bang, S., Korfiatis, G.P., 2000. Effects of silicate, sulfate, and carbonate on arsenic removal by ferric chloride. 
Water Res. 34, 1255–1261. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0043-1354(99)00272-9.
Mishra, S., Stärk, H.-J., Küpper, H., 2014. A different sequence of events than previously reported leads to arsenic￾induced damage in Ceratophyllum demersum L. Metallomics 6, 444. https://doi.org/10.1039/c3mt00317e.
Mishra, S., Alfeld, M., Sobotka, R., Andresen, E., Falkenberg, G., Küpper, H., 2016. Analysis of sublethal arsenic tox￾icity to Ceratophyllum demersum : subcellular distribution of arsenic and inhibition of chlorophyll biosynthesis. J. 
Exp. Bot. 67, 4639–4646. https://doi.org/10.1093/jxb/erw238.
Monferrán, M.V., Sánchez Agudo, J.A., Pignata, M.L., Wunderlin, D.A., 2009. Copper-induced response of physio￾logical parameters and antioxidant enzymes in the aquatic macrophyte Potamogeton pusillus. Environ. Pollut. 157, 
2570–2576. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2009.02.034.
Mustafavi, S.H., Naghdi Badi, H., Sękara, A., Mehrafarin, A., Janda, T., Ghorbanpour, M., Rafiee, H., 2018. Polyamines 
and their possible mechanisms involved in plant physiological processes and elicitation of secondary metabolites. 
Acta Physiol. Plant. 40, 102. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11738-018-2671-2.Mustapha, H.I., van Bruggen, J.J.A., Lens, P.N.L., 2018. Fate of heavy metals in vertical subsurface flow constructed 
wetlands treating secondary treated petroleum refinery wastewater in Kaduna, Nigeria. Int. J. Phytoremediation 
20, 44–53. https://doi.org/10.1080/15226514.2017.1337062.
Navakoudis, E., Lütz, C., Langebartels, C., Lütz-Meindl, U., Kotzabasis, K., 2003. Ozone impact on the photosyn￾thetic apparatus and the protective role of polyamines. Biochim. Biophys. Acta Gen. Subj. 1621, 160–169. https://
doi.org/10.1016/S0304-4165(03)00056-4.
Nedjimi, B., 2021. Phytoremediation: a sustainable environmental technology for heavy metals decontamination. SN 
Appl. Sci. 3, 286. https://doi.org/10.1007/s42452-021-04301-4.
Nekrasova, G.F., Ushakova, O.S., Ermakov, A.E., Uimin, M.A., Byzov, I.V., 2011. Effects of copper(II) ions and 
copper oxide nanoparticles on Elodea densa Planch. Russ. J. Ecol. 42, 458–463. https://doi.org/10.1134/
S1067413611060117.
Nguyen, T.Q., Sesin, V., Kisiala, A., Emery, R.N., 2020. Phytohormonal roles in plant responses to heavy metal 
stress—implications for using macrophytes in phytoremediation of aquatic ecosystems. Environ. Toxicol. Chem., 
etc.4909. https://doi.org/10.1002/etc.4909.
Nielsen, S.L., 1993. A comparison of aerial and submerged photosynthesis in some Danish amphibious plants. Aquat. 
Bot. 45, 27–40. https://doi.org/10.1016/0304-3770(93)90050-7.
Obinna, I.B., Ebere, E.C., 2019. A review: water pollution by heavy metal and organic pollutants: brief review of 
sources, effects and progress on remediation with aquatic plants. Anal. Methods Environ. Chem. J. 2, 5–38. 
https://doi.org/10.24200/amecj.v2.i03.66.
Olszewska, J.P., Meharg, A.A., Heal, K.V., Carey, M., Gunn, I.D.M., Searle, K.R., Winfield, I.J., Spears, B.M., 2016. 
Assessing the legacy of red mud pollution in a shallow freshwater lake: arsenic accumulation and speciation in 
macrophytes. Environ. Sci. Technol. 50, 9044–9052. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.6b00942.
Ozturk, F., Duman, F., Leblebici, Z., Temizgul, R., 2010. Arsenic accumulation and biological responses of water￾cress (Nasturtium officinale R. Br.) exposed to arsenite. Environ. Exp. Bot. 69, 167–174. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
envexpbot.2010.03.006.
Pal, R., Rai, J.P.N., 2010. Phytochelatins: peptides involved in heavy metal detoxification. Appl. Biochem. Biotechnol. 
160, 945–963. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12010-009-8565-4.
Pfeil, B.E., Schoefs, B., Spetea, C., 2014. Function and evolution of channels and transporters in photosynthetic mem￾branes. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 71, 979–998. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00018-013-1412-3.
Pinto, E., Sigaud-kutner, T.C.S., Leitao, M.A.S., Okamoto, O.K., Morse, D., Colepicolo, P., 2003. Heavy metal-induced 
oxidative stress in algae. J. Phycol. 39, 1008–1018. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.0022-3646.2003.02-193.x.
Piotrowska, A., Bajguz, A., Godlewska-Żyłkiewicz, B., Zambrzycka, E., 2010. Changes in growth, biochemical com￾ponents, and antioxidant activity in aquatic plant Wolffia arrhiza (Lemnaceae) exposed to cadmium and lead. Arch. 
Environ. Contam. Toxicol. 58, 594–604. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00244-009-9408-6.
Pisani, T., Munzi, S., Paoli, L., Bačkor, M., Loppi, S., 2011. Physiological effects of arsenic in the lichen Xanthoria pari￾etina (L.) Th. Fr. Chemosphere 82, 963–969. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2010.10.079.
Pollard, A.J., Reeves, R.D., Baker, A.J.M., 2014. Facultative hyperaccumulation of heavy metals and metalloids. Plant 
Sci. 217–218, 8–17. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plantsci.2013.11.011.
Prasad, M.N.V., Malec, P., Waloszek, A., Bojko, M., Strzałka, K., 2001. Physiological responses of Lemna trisulca 
L. (duckweed) to cadmium and copper bioaccumulation. Plant Sci. 161, 881–889. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0168-9452(01)00478-2.
Punshon, T., Jackson, B.P., Meharg, A.A., Warczack, T., Scheckel, K., Guerinot, M.L., 2017. Understanding arsenic dy￾namics in agronomic systems to predict and prevent uptake by crop plants. Sci. Total Environ. 581–582, 209–220. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.12.111.
Puthur, J.T., 2016. Antioxidants and cellular antioxidation mechanism in plants. South Indian J. Biol. Sci. 2, 14. 
https://doi.org/10.22205/sijbs/2016/v2/i1/100335.
Radić, S., Babić, M., Skobić, D., Roje, V., Pevalek-Kozlina, B., 2010. Ecotoxicological effects of aluminum and zinc 
on growth and antioxidants in Lemna minor L. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 73, 336–342. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ecoenv.2009.10.014.
Rahman, M.A., Hasegawa, H., Rahman, M.M., Rahman, M.A., Miah, M.A.M., 2007. Accumulation of arsenic in tis￾sues of rice plant (Oryza sativa L.) and its distribution in fractions of rice grain. Chemosphere 69, 942–948. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2007.05.044.
Rai, P.K., 2019. Heavy metals/metalloids remediation from wastewater using free floating macrophytes of a natural 
wetland. Environ. Technol. Innov. 15. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eti.2019.100393, 100393.
References 373374 18. Aquatic macrophytes and trace elements
Ramprasad, C., Smith, C.S., Memon, F.A., Philip, L., 2017. Removal of chemical and microbial contaminants from 
greywater using a novel constructed wetland: GROW. Ecol. Eng. 106, 55–65.
Ritchie, R.J., Mekjinda, N., 2016. Arsenic toxicity in the water weed Wolffia arrhiza measured using pulse amplitude 
modulation fluorometry (PAM) measurements of photosynthesis. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 132, 178–185. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoenv.2016.06.004.
Robbins, L.J., Mänd, K., Planavsky, N.J., Alessi, D.S., Konhauser, K.O., 2019. Trace metals. In: Gargaud, M., Irvine, 
W.M., Amils, R., Cleaves, H.J., Pinti, D., Cernicharo Quintanilla, J., Viso, M. (Eds.), Encyclopedia of Astrobiology. 
Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 1–5, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-27833-4_5422-1.
Rofkar, J.R., Dwyer, D.F., Bobak, D.M., 2014. Uptake and toxicity of arsenic, copper, and silicon in Azolla caroliniana
and Lemna minor. Int. J. Phytoremediation 16, 155–166. https://doi.org/10.1080/15226514.2012.759534.
Rolli, N.M., Hujaratti, R.B., Giddanavar, H.S., Mulagund, G.S., Taranath, T.C., 2017. Toxicity effect of copper on aquatic 
macrophyte (Pistia Stratiotes L.). Int. J. Curr. Res. Rev. 9 (15), 14–20. https://doi.org/10.7324/IJCRR.2017.9153.
Saha, P., Shinde, O., Sarkar, S., 2017. Phytoremediation of industrial mines wastewater using water hyacinth. Int. J. 
Phytoremediation 19, 87–96. https://doi.org/10.1080/15226514.2016.1216078.
Saleh, H.M., Mahmoud, H.H., Aglan, R.F., Bayoumi, T.A., 2019. Biological treatment of wastewater contaminated 
with Cu(II), Fe(II) and Mn(II) using Ludwigia stolonifera aquatic plant. Environ. Eng. Manag. J. 18, 1327–1336.
Sandalio, L.M., Dalurzo, H.C., Gómez, M., Romero‐Puertas, M.C., del Río, L.A., 2001. Cadmium‐induced changes in the 
growth and oxidative metabolism of pea plants. J. Exp. Bot. 52, 2115–2126. https://doi.org/10.1093/jexbot/52.364.2115.
Santore, R.C., Di Toro, D.M., Paquin, P.R., Allen, H.E., Meyer, J.S., 2001. Biotic ligand model of the acute toxicity 
of metals. 2. Application to acute copper toxicity in freshwater fish and Daphnia. Environ. Toxicol. Chem. 20, 
2397–2402. https://doi.org/10.1002/etc.5620201035.
Schröder, P., Lyubenova, L., Huber, C., 2009. Do heavy metals and metalloids influence the detoxification of organic 
xenobiotics in plants? Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 16, 795–804. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-009-0168-7.
Semeraro, T., Aretano, R., Pomes, A., 2019. Green roof technology as a sustainable strategy to improve water urban 
availability. IOP Conf. Ser.: Mater. Sci. Eng. 471, 092065.
Shabbir, Z., Sardar, A., Shabbir, A., Abbas, G., Shamshad, S., Khalid, S., Natasha, Murtaza, G., Dumat, C., Shahid, 
M., 2020. Copper uptake, essentiality, toxicity, detoxification and risk assessment in soil-plant environment. 
Chemosphere 259. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2020.127436, 127436.
Sharma, S.S., 2006. The significance of amino acids and amino acid-derived molecules in plant responses and adap￾tation to heavy metal stress. J. Exp. Bot. 57, 711–726. https://doi.org/10.1093/jxb/erj073.
Sharma, A., Shahzad, B., Kumar, V., Kohli, S.K., Sidhu, G.P.S., Bali, A.S., Handa, N., Kapoor, D., Bhardwaj, R., Zheng, 
B., 2019. Phytohormones regulate accumulation of osmolytes under abiotic stress. Biomolecules 9, 285. https://
doi.org/10.3390/biom9070285.
Shi, D., Zhuang, K., Xia, Y., Zhu, C., Chen, C., Hu, Z., Shen, Z., 2017. Hydrilla verticillata employs two different ways 
to affect DNA methylation under excess copper stress. Aquat. Toxicol. 193, 97–104. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
aquatox.2017.10.007.
Shirinpur-Valadi, A., Hatamzadeh, A., Sedaghathoor, S., 2019. Study of the accumulation of contaminants by Cyperus 
alternifolius, Lemna minor, Eichhornia crassipes, and Canna × generalis in some contaminated aquatic environments. 
Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 26, 21340–21350. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-019-05203-0.
Šíma, J., Svoboda, L., Šeda, M., Krejsa, J., Jahodová, J., 2019. The fate of selected heavy metals and arsenic in a con￾structed wetland. J. Environ. Sci. Health A 54, 56–64. https://doi.org/10.1080/10934529.2018.1515519.
Singh, D., 2012. Potential of duckweed (Lemna minor) for removal of lead from wastewater by phytoremediation. J. 
Pharm. Res., 5.
Singh, K., Pandey, S.N., 2011. Effect of nickel-stresses on uptake, pigments and antioxidative responses of water let￾tuce, Pistia stratiotes L. J. Environ. Biol. 32, 391–394.
Singh, H., Kumar, D., Soni, V., 2020. Copper and mercury induced oxidative stresses and antioxidant responses of 
Spirodela polyrhiza (L.) Schleid. Biochem. Biophys. Rep. 23. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrep.2020.100781, 100781.
Smith, K.S., Balistrieri, L.S., Todd, A.S., 2015. Using biotic ligand models to predict metal toxicity in mineralized 
systems. Appl. Geochem. 57, 55–72. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apgeochem.2014.07.005.
Sobkowiak, R., Deckert, J., 2003. Cadmium-induced changes in growth and cell cycle gene expression in 
suspension-culture cells of soybean. Plant Physiol. Biochem. 41, 767–772. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0981-9428(03)00101-3.
Song, U., Kim, E., Hwan, B.J., Joo, S.D., Waldman, B., Ju, L.E., 2013. Wetlands are an effective green roof system. 
Build. Environ. 66, 141–147.Song, Y., Zhang, L.-L., Li, J., He, X.-J., Chen, M., Deng, Y., 2018. High-potential accumulation and tolerance in the 
submerged hydrophyte Hydrilla verticillata (L.f.) Royle for nickel-contaminated water. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 
161, 553–562. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoenv.2018.06.032.
Souguir, D., Ferjani, E., Ledoigt, G., Goupil, P., 2008. Exposure of Vicia faba and Pisum sativum to copper-induced 
genotoxicity. Protoplasma 233, 203–207. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00709-008-0004-9.
Sricoth, T., Meeinkuirt, W., Saengwilai, P., Pichtel, J., Taeprayoon, P., 2018. Aquatic plants for phytostabilization of cad￾mium and zinc in hydroponic experiments. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 25, 14964–14976. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11356-018-1714-y.
Srivastava, S., Mishra, S., Tripathi, R.D., Dwivedi, S., Gupta, D.K., 2006. Copper-induced oxidative stress and re￾sponses of antioxidants and phytochelatins in Hydrilla verticillata (L.f.) Royle. Aquat. Toxicol. 80, 405–415. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.aquatox.2006.10.006.
Srivastava, S., Srivastava, A.K., Singh, B., Suprasanna, P., D’souza, S.F., 2013. The effect of arsenic on pigment 
composition and photosynthesis in Hydrilla verticillata. Biol. Plant. 57, 385–389. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10535-012-0288-7.
Stefanakis, A.I., 2020. Constructed wetlands for sustainable wastewater treatment in hot and arid climates: opportu￾nities, challenges and case studies in the Middle East. Water 12, 1665. https://doi.org/10.3390/w12061665.
Stoeva, N., Bineva, T., 2003. Oxidative changes and photosynthesis in oat plants grown in As-contaminated soil. 
Bulg. J. Plant Physiol. 29, 87–95.
Stoeva, N., Berova, M., Zlatev, Z., 2005. Effect of arsenic on some physiological parameters in bean plants. Biol. Plant. 
49, 293–296.
Sukumaran, D., 2013. Phytoremediation of heavy metals from industrial effluent using constructed wetland technol￾ogy. Appl. Ecol. Environ. Sci. 1, 92–97. https://doi.org/10.12691/aees-1-5-4.
Takahashi, T., Kakehi, J.-I., 2010. Polyamines: ubiquitous polycations with unique roles in growth and stress re￾sponses. Ann. Bot. 105, 1–6. https://doi.org/10.1093/aob/mcp259.
Tawfik, D.S., Viola, R.E., 2011. Arsenate replacing phosphate: alternative life chemistries and ion promiscuity. 
Biochemistry 50, 1128–1134. https://doi.org/10.1021/bi200002a.
Thomas, G., Stärk, H.-J., Wellenreuther, G., Dickinson, B.C., Küpper, H., 2013. Effects of nanomolar copper on water 
plants—comparison of biochemical and biophysical mechanisms of deficiency and sublethal toxicity under envi￾ronmentally relevant conditions. Aquat. Toxicol. 140–141, 27–36. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aquatox.2013.05.008.
Thomas, G., Andresen, E., Mattusch, J., Hubáček, T., Küpper, H., 2016. Deficiency and toxicity of nanomolar cop￾per in low irradiance—a physiological and metalloproteomic study in the aquatic plant Ceratophyllum demersum. 
Aquat. Toxicol. 177, 226–236. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aquatox.2016.05.016.
Török, A., Gulyás, Z., Szalai, G., Kocsy, G., Majdik, C., 2015. Phytoremediation capacity of aquatic plants is associ￾ated with the degree of phytochelatin polymerization. J. Hazard. Mater. 299, 371–378. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jhazmat.2015.06.042.
Tripathi, R.D., Singh, R., Tripathi, P., Dwivedi, S., Chauhan, R., Adhikari, B., Trivedi, P.K., 2014. Arsenic accumulation 
and tolerance in rootless macrophyte Najas indica are mediated through antioxidants, amino acids and phytoche￾latins. Aquat. Toxicol. 157, 70–80. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aquatox.2014.09.011.
Turull, M., Grmanova, G., Dago, À., Ariño, C., Díez, S., Díaz-Cruz, J.M., Esteban, M., 2017. Phytochelatin synthe￾sis in response to Hg uptake in aquatic plants near a chlor-alkali factory. Chemosphere 176, 74–80. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2017.02.092.
Ugya, A.Y., Imam, T.S., Tahir, S.M., 2017. Emerging Trends in the Remediation of Pollution. Lap Lambert Academic 
Publ, s.l.
UNEP, 2019. Phytoremediation: an environmentally sound technology for pollution prevention, control and remedia￾tion. An introductory guide to decision-makers. In: Newsletter and Technical Publications Freshwater Management 
Series No. 2 United Nations Environment Programme Division of Technology, Industry, and Economics. UNEP 
Division of Technology, Industry and Economics, International Environmental Technology Centre.
Upadhyay, R.K., Panda, S.K., 2009. Copper-induced growth inhibition, oxidative stress and ultrastructural alter￾ations in freshly grown water lettuce (Pistia stratiotes L.). C. R. Biol. 332, 623–632. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
crvi.2009.03.001.
Uysal, Y., 2013. Removal of chromium ions from wastewater by duckweed, Lemna minor L. by using a pilot system 
with continuous flow. J. Hazard. Mater. 263, 486–492.
van der Ent, A., Baker, A.J.M., Reeves, R.D., Pollard, A.J., Schat, H., 2013. Hyperaccumulators of metal and metalloid 
trace elements: facts and fiction. Plant Soil 362, 319–334. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11104-012-1287-3.
References 375376 18. Aquatic macrophytes and trace elements
Vardhan, K.H., Kumar, P.S., Panda, R.C., 2019. A review on heavy metal pollution, toxicity and remedial measures: 
current trends and future perspectives. J. Mol. Liq. 290. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molliq.2019.111197, 111197.
Venkateswarlu, V., Venkatrayulu, C.H., Bai, T.J.L., 2019. Phytoremediation of heavy metal copper (II) from aqueous 
environment by using aquatic macrophytes Hydrilla verticillata and Pistia stratiotes. Int. J. Fish. Aquat. Stud. 7, 
390–393.
Verhoeven, J.T.A., Beltman, B., Bobbink, R., Whigham, D.F. (Eds.), 2006. Wetlands and Natural Resource Management, 
Ecological Studies. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-33187-2.
Violante, A., Caporale, A.G., 2015. Biogeochemical processes at soil-root interface. J. Soil Sci. Plant Nutr. 15, 422–448. 
https://doi.org/10.4067/S0718-95162015005000038.
Vo, T.D.H., Bui, X.T., Lin, C., Nguyen, V.T., Hoang, T.K.D., Nguyen, H.H., Nguyen, P.D., Ngo, H.H., Guo, W., 2019. A 
mini-review on shallow-bed constructed wetlands: a promising innovative green roof. Curr. Opin. Environ. Sci. 
Health 12, 38–47.
Vromman, D., Flores-Bavestrello, A., Šlejkovec, Z., Lapaille, S., Teixeira-Cardoso, C., Briceño, M., Kumar, M., 
Martínez, J.-P., Lutts, S., 2011. Arsenic accumulation and distribution in relation to young seedling growth in 
Atriplex atacamensis Phil. Sci. Total Environ. 412–413, 286–295. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2011.09.085.
Vymazal, J., Březinová, T., 2015. The use of constructed wetlands for removal of pesticides from agricultural runoff 
and drainage: a review. Environ. Int. 75, 11–20. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2014.10.026.
Vymazal, J., Kröpfelová, L., Švehla, J., Chrastný, V., Štíchová, J., 2009. Trace elements in Phragmites australis growing 
in constructed wetlands for treatment of municipal wastewater. Ecol. Eng. 35, 303–309. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ecoleng.2008.04.007.
Vymazal, J., Kröpfelová, L., Švehla, J., Štíchová, J., 2010. Can multiple harvest of aboveground biomass enhance 
removal of trace elements in constructed wetlands receiving municipal sewage? Ecol. Eng. 36, 939–945. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoleng.2010.04.010.
Wani, R.A., Ganai, B.A., Shah, M.A., Uqab, B., 2017. Heavy metal uptake potential of aquatic plants through phy￾toremediation technique—a review. J. Bioremediat. Biodegrad. 08. https://doi.org/10.4172/2155-6199.1000404.
Wiafe, S., Buamah, R., Essandoh, H., Darkwah, L., 2019. Assessment of Typha capensis for the remediation of soil con￾taminated with As, Hg, Cd and Pb. Environ. Monit. Assess. 191, 346. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10661-019-7484-2.
Wood, C.M., 2011. An introduction to metals in fish physiology and toxicology: basic principles. In: Fish Physiology. 
Elsevier, pp. 1–51.
World Health Organization (Ed.), 2017. Guidelines for Drinking-Water Quality: Fourth Edition Incorporating First 
Addendum, fourth ed. + first add. ed. World Health Organization, Geneva.
Xing, W., Huang, W., Liu, G., 2010. Effect of excess iron and copper on physiology of aquatic plant Spirodela polyrrhiza 
(L.) Schleid. Environ. Toxicol. 25, 103–112. https://doi.org/10.1002/tox.20480.
Xu, X., Shi, G., Jia, R., 2012. Changes of polyamine levels in roots of Sagittaria sagittifolia L. under copper stress. 
Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 19, 2973–2982. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-012-0808-1.
Xue, P., Li, G., Liu, W., Yan, C., 2010. Copper uptake and translocation in a submerged aquatic plant Hydrilla verticil￾lata (L.f.) Royle. Chemosphere 81, 1098–1103. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2010.09.023.
Xue, P., Yan, C., 2011. Arsenic accumulation and translocation in the submerged macrophyte Hydrilla verticillata (L.f.)
Royle. Chemosphere 85, 1176–1181. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2011.09.051.
Yabanli, M., Yozukmaz, A., Sel, F., 2014. Heavy metal accumulation in the leaves, stem and root of the invasive sub￾merged macrophyte Myriophyllum spicatum L. (Haloragaceae): an example of Kadın Creek (Mugla, Turkey). Braz. 
Arch. Biol. Technol. 57. https://doi.org/10.1590/S1516-8913201401962.
Yadav, S.K., 2010. Heavy metals toxicity in plants: an overview on the role of glutathione and phytochelatins in heavy 
metal stress tolerance of plants. S. Afr. J. Bot. 76, 167–179. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sajb.2009.10.007.
Yamanaka, K., Hayashi, H., Tachikawa, M., Kato, K., Hasegawa, A., Oku, N., Okada, S., 1997. Metabolic methyl￾ation is a possible genotoxicity-enhancing process of inorganic arsenics. Mutat. Res. 394, 95–101. https://doi.
org/10.1016/S1383-5718(97)00130-7.
Yang, Y., Shen, Q., 2020. Phytoremediation of cadmium-contaminated wetland soil with Typha latifolia L. and the un￾derlying mechanisms involved in the heavy-metal uptake and removal. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 27, 4905–4916. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-019-07256-7.
Yang, H., Shi, G., Wang, H., Xu, Q., 2010. Involvement of polyamines in adaptation of Potamogeton crispus L. to cad￾mium stress. Aquat. Toxicol. 100, 282–288. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aquatox.2010.07.026.
Yi, H., Si, L., 2007. Vicia root-mirconucleus and sister chromatid exchange assays on the genotoxicity of selenium 
compounds. Mutat. Res. 630, 92–96. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mrgentox.2007.03.003.Zaka, R., Chenal, C., Misset, M.T., 2002. Study of external low irradiation dose effects on induction of chro￾mosome aberrations in Pisum sativum root tip meristem. Mutat. Res. 517, 87–99. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S1383-5718(02)00056-6.
Zangi, R., Filella, M., 2012. Transport routes of metalloids into and out of the cell: a review of the current knowledge. 
Chem. Biol. Interact. 197, 47–57. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cbi.2012.02.001.
Zehnsdorf, A., Willebrand, K.C.U., Trabitzsch, R., Knechtel, S., Blumberg, M., Müller, R.A., 2019. Wetland roofs as 
an attractive option for decentralized water management and air conditioning enhancement in growing cities—a 
review. Water 11 (9), 1845. https://doi.org/10.3390/w11091845.
Zenk, M.H., 1996. Heavy metal detoxification in higher plants—a review. Gene 179, 21–30. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0378-1119(96)00422-2.
Zhang, Y., 2012. Design of a constructed wetland for wastewater treatment and reuse in Mount Pleasant, Utah. All 
Graduate Plan B and other Reports.
Zhang, X., Hu, Y., Liu, Y., Chen, B., 2011. Arsenic uptake, accumulation and phytofiltration by duckweed (Spirodela 
polyrhiza L.). J. Environ. Sci. 23, 601–606. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1001-0742(10)60454-8.
Zhang, X., Uroic, M.K., Xie, W.-Y., Zhu, Y.-G., Chen, B.-D., McGrath, S.P., Feldmann, J., Zhao, F.-J., 2012. Phytochelatins 
play a key role in arsenic accumulation and tolerance in the aquatic macrophyte Wolffia globosa. Environ. Pollut. 
165, 18–24. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2012.02.009.
Zhang, D.-Q., Jinadasa, K.B.S.N., Gersberg, R.M., Liu, Y., Tan, S.K., Ng, W.J., 2015. Application of constructed wet￾lands for wastewater treatment in tropical and subtropical regions (2000–2013). J. Environ. Sci. 30, 30–46. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jes.2014.10.013.
Zhang, T., Lu, Q., Su, C., Yang, Y., Hu, D., Xu, Q., 2017. Mercury induced oxidative stress, DNA damage, and activa￾tion of antioxidative system and Hsp70 induction in duckweed (Lemna minor). Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 143, 46–56. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoenv.2017.04.058.
Zhou, Q., Zhang, J., Fu, J., Shi, J., Jiang, G., 2008. Biomonitoring: an appealing tool for assessment of metal pollution 
in the aquatic ecosystem. Anal. Chim. Acta 606, 135–150. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aca.2007.11.018.
Zhou, J.-M., Jiang, Z.-C., Qin, X.-Q., Zhang, L.-K., Huang, Q.-B., Xu, G.-L., Dionysiou, D.D., 2020a. Efficiency of 
Pb, Zn, Cd, and Mn removal from karst water by Eichhornia crassipes. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 17, 5329. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph17155329.
Zhou, Q., Yang, N., Li, Y., Ren, B., Ding, X., Bian, H., Yao, X., 2020b. Total concentrations and sources of heavy 
metal pollution in global river and lake water bodies from 1972 to 2017. Glob. Ecol. Conserv. 22. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.gecco.2020.e00925, e00925.
Zhu, Z., Song, S., Li, P., Jeelani, N., Wang, P., Yuan, H., Zhang, J., An, S., Leng, X., 2016. Growth and physiological 
responses of submerged plant Vallisneria natans to water column ammonia nitrogen and sediment copper. PeerJ 4. 
https://doi.org/10.7717/peerj.1953, e1953.
Zotina, T., Medvedeva, M., Trofimova, E., Alexandrova, Y., Dementyev, D., Bolsunovsky, A., 2015. Chromosomal 
abnormalities in roots of aquatic plant Elodea canadensis as a tool for testing genotoxicity of bottom sediments. 
Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 122, 384–391. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoenv.2015.08.021.
Zouari, M., Hassena, A.B., Trabelsi, L., Rouina, B.B., Decou, R., Labrousse, P., 2019. Exogenous proline-mediated abi￾otic stress tolerance in plants: possible mechanisms. In: Hossain, M.A., Kumar, V., Burritt, D.J., Fujita, M., Mäkelä, 
P.S.A. (Eds.), Osmoprotectant-Mediated Abiotic Stress Tolerance in Plants. Springer International Publishing, 
Cham, pp. 99–121, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-27423-8_4. 
References 377This page intentionally left blankPlants and their Interaction to Environmental Pollution 379 Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-99978-6.00018-2
CHAPTER
19
Production and role of plants 
secondary metabolites under various 
environmental pollution
Phaniendra Alugojua,b
 and Tewin Tencomnaoa,b,c
a
Natural Products for Neuroprotection and Anti-Ageing Research Unit, Chulalongkorn 
University, Bangkok, Thailand, b
Department of Clinical Chemistry, Faculty of Allied Health 
Sciences, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand, c
Department of Physiology, University 
of Kentucky, Lexington, KY, United States
Abbreviations
ABA abscisic acid
AED aerodynamic equivalent diameter
As arsenic
C/N ratios carbon/nitrogen ratio
Cd cadmium
CO2 carbon dioxide
Cr chromium
EC elevated carbon dioxide
EO elevated ozone
G POD-G-peroxidase
H2S hydrogen sulfide
JA jasmonic acid
Ni nickel
NO nitric oxide
NO2 nitrogen dioxide
NOx oxides of nitrogen
O3 ozone
PAL phenylalanine ammonia lyase
Pb lead
PM particulate matter
PPO polyphenol oxidase
PSM plant secondary metabolites
SA salicylic acid380 19. Production and role of plants secondary metabolites
SNP sodium nitroprusside
SO2 sulfur dioxide
TF total flavonoids
TP total phenolics
TYLCV tomato yellow leaf curl virus
VOCs volatile organic compounds
1. Introduction
Plants synthesize a wide range of secondary metabolites which show a great structural 
and chemical diversity and these plant secondary metabolites (PSMs) are synthesized from 
primary metabolites through different metabolic pathways (Holopainen et al., 2018; Kumari 
et al., 2021). PSMs are derived mostly from three major biosynthetic pathways such as the 
phenylpropanoid (Iriti and Faoro, 2009), the isoprenoid (Holstein and Hohl, 2004), and the 
alkaloid pathways (Facchini, 2001). Indeed, plants spend excess energy for the synthesis of 
these PSMs than for the synthesis of primary metabolites (Jia et al., 2016). PSMs act as de￾fense compounds against both biotic (herbivores and insects) and abiotic stresses. In addition, 
PSMs have been reported to possess a wide range of pharmacological properties with potent 
beneficial roles to humans. Unfortunately, dramatic climatic changes negatively affect the 
quality and quantity of these PSMs (Jamloki et al., 2021). Nevertheless, PSMs play a signifi￾cant role in the adaptation of plants to dynamic environmental changes and stress conditions 
as well as offers protection against pathogenic microorganisms. Global climate change is a 
serious threat to the sustainability of agricultural production. Change in the environmental 
factors such as atmospheric CO2 and ozone (O3), sulfur dioxide, heavy metals, etc. can have 
a considerable impact on the chemical composition and concentration of PSMs, which in 
turn may influence rates of herbivory or pathogen attack (Bidart-Bouzat and Imeh-Nathaniel, 
2008; Mikkelsen et al., 2015; Bachheti et al., 2019, 2021; Deepti et al. 2022a,b; Rahman and 
Husen, 2022; Husen 2022). Fig. 1 represents the generalized scheme of effects of various envi￾ronmental pollutants on the production and role of PSMs. Global change in the environmen￾tal factors may enhance invasions of exotic plant species by directly promoting the growth of 
exotic plant species or by preventing the growth of native plants (Johnson and Hartley, 2018). 
Therefore, it is very essential to understand the adaptation of plants to the increasing envi￾ronmental pollution and the effect of environmental pollutants on the production of PSMs 
(McKiernan et al., 2012). In the following sections of this book, we have discussed the effect 
of various environmental pollutants such as elevated CO2 (EC), ozone (O3), other toxic gases 
(SO2, H2S, and nitrogen oxides), heavy metals, and particulate matter (PM) on the production 
of PSMs (Choudhary et al., 2022; Kumar et al., 2022). In addition, we have also discussed the 
role of these PSMs in the plant-pathogen or plant-herbivore interactions.
2. Effect of elevated CO2 (EC) levels on PSMs
Anthropogenic activities such as the huge burning of fossil fuels, rapid deforestation, and 
rapid industrialization lead to increased atmospheric CO2 concentrations (Choudhary et al., 
2022; Singh et al., 2022). Current atmospheric CO2 concentrations increased about 30% from 
the preindustrialization era (Peñuelas and Estiarte, 1998). It is estimated that the atmospheric 2. Effect of elevated CO2 (EC) levels on PSMs 381
CO2 concentrations will increase from the current CO2 levels of 360μmolmol− 1
 to between 
550 and 1000μmolmol− 1
 in the next hundred years (Davey et al., 2004). Elevated CO2 (EC) 
levels can have a significant impact on plant growth as well as on the production of second￾ary metabolites in plants (Table 1). Not only increasing the plant growth and photosynthetic 
rate, but EC levels can also greatly influence ecosystem functioning. Investigation on the 
effect of EC on the fate of PSMs is very essential to understand how plants allocate metabolic 
resources under future climates with rising CO2 levels (Huang et al., 2017a). Forest vegetation 
plays an important role in the mitigation of climate change mediated by increased carbon 
dioxide levels. It has been suggested that the CO2 sequestration by natural and forest veg￾etations is possibly a common mitigation approach. Experimental analysis Utomo et al. on 
high economically important Aquilaria species (agarwood) revealed that Aquilaria malaccensis
has the potential to absorb carbon dioxide thus has the potential to conserve for the future 
(Utomo et  al., 2021). It has been reported that agarwood plants have adapted to grow in 
FIG. 1 Effects of various environmental pollutants on the production and role of plant secondary metabolites 
(PSMs). Industrialization and other human anthropogenic activities lead to air pollution due to increased levels of 
atmospheric gaseous pollutants (CO2, O3, SO2, and H2S) or particulate matter (PM) as well as soil pollution due to 
the accumulation of heavy metals and oils spillages. The gaseous pollutants enter through the stomata, whilst the 
heavy metals through the roots result in the alterations in the biosynthesis of primary metabolites, and consequent 
alteration in the levels of PSMs. Changes in the levels of PSMs not only alter the plant-insect or plant-herbivore in￾teractions but also show a significant impact on humans. As these PSMs are associated with potent pharmacological 
benefits to humans, any alteration in the levels of PSMs will ultimately have a significant on humans as well.382 19. Production and role of plants secondary metabolites
TABLE 1 Effect of elevated levels or high concentration of different environmental pollutants on the 
production of plant secondary metabolites (PSMs).
Plant name Plant secondary metabolites (PSMs) Reference
Carbon dioxide (CO2)
Tobacco • Phenylpropanoids ↑
• Chlorogenic acid (CGA) ↑
• Coumarins (scopolin and scopoletin) ↑
• Nicotine ↓
Matros et al. (2006)
Ficus insipid, Luehea 
seemannii, Anacardium 
excelsum, Antirrhoea 
trichantha, Cordia alliodora, 
Calophyllum longifolium, 
Tetragastris panamensis, 
Virola surinamensis
• Leaf phenolic content ↑ Coley et al. (2002)
Cecropia longipes • Leaf phenolic content ↓ Coley et al. (2002)
Pine trees • Phenolic content ↓ (in Norway spruce needles) Sallas et al. (2003)
Plantago maritima • Foliar caffeic acid ↑
• Roots p-coumaric acid and verbascoside ↑
Davey et al. (2004)
Zingiber officinale • Total flavonoids ↑ (in leaves, stems and rhizomes)
• Total phenolics ↑ (in leaves, stems and rhizomes)
Ghasemzadeh and Jaafar 
(2011)
Strawberry fruits • Anthocyanin ↑
• Phenolic content ↑ (compounds like p-coumaroyl 
glucose, dihydroflavonol, quercetin 3-glucoside, 
quercetin 3-glucuronide, kaempferol 3-glucoside, 
cyanidin 3-glucoside, pelargonidin 3-glucoside, and 
pelargonidin 3-glucoside- succinate were increased)
Wang et al. (2003)
Labisia pumila • Total flavonoids ↑ (in seedlings)
• Total phenolics ↑ (in seedlings)
Ibrahim et al. (2010) and 
Ibrahim and Jaafar (2011a)
Asparagopsis taxiformis • Halogenated secondary metabolites ↑
• (e.g., bromoform and dibromoacetic acid)
Mata et al. (2012)
Thymus vulgaris • Thymol ↑ Tisserat and Vaughn (2001)
Elaeis guineensis • Total flavonoids ↑ (in seedlings)
• Total phenolics contents ↑ (in seedlings)
Ibrahim and Jaafar (2012)
Gynostemma pentaphyllum • Gypenoside A ↑
• Total phenolics and flavonoids ↓ (in leaves, stems, 
and inflorescences) (under elevated CO2 and 
temperature)
Chang et al. (2016)
Triticum aestivum • Secondary metabolites ↑ via upregulation of auxin 
and jasmonate levels
Huang et al. (2017b)
Camellia sinensis • Tea polyphenol (theanine) ↑ (in leaves)
• Total catechins ↑ (in leaves)
• Caffeine content ↓ (in leaves)
Li et al. (2017)2. Effect of elevated CO2 (EC) levels on PSMs 383
TABLE 1 Effect of elevated levels or high concentration of different environmental pollutants on the 
production of plant secondary metabolites (PSMs)—cont’d
Plant name Plant secondary metabolites (PSMs) Reference
Lettuce • Phenolic acids ↑
• Flavonoids ↑ compounds like free chlorogenic acid, 
ferulic acid, cyanidin, and conjugated caffeic acid, 
quercetin, quercitrin, rutin, kaempferol, quercetin￾3-O-glucoside, quercetin-3-O-glucuronide, and 
luteolin-7-O-glucoside were increased)
Sgherri et al. (2017) and 
Pérez-López et al. (2018)
Ocimum basilicum
Mentha piperita
• Phylloquinone (vitamin K1) ↑
• Anthocyanins ↑
• Flavonoids ↑
Al Jaouni et al. (2018)
Mentha piperita • Phylloquinone (vitamin K1) ↑
• Anthocyanins ↑
• Flavonoids ↑
Al Jaouni et al. (2018)
Petroselinum crispum • Total phenolics ↑
• Total flavonoids ↑
Saleh et al. (2018)
Anethum graveolens • Total phenolics ↑
• Total flavonoids ↑
Saleh et al. (2018)
Catharanthus roseus • Total alkaloids ↑ (increased maximally at 
recommended nitrogen level),
• Total phenolics ↑ (without supplemental nitrogen)
Singh and Agrawal (2015)
Medicago sativa • Foliar genistin ↑ (in leaves)
• Foliar ferulic acid ↑ (in leaves)
Yan et al. (2018)
Medicago truncatula • Total phenolic content ↑ Yan et al. (2020)
Tea plants • Theanine ↑ (in leaves)
• Polyphenols ↑ (in leaves)
• Caffeine ↓ (in leaves)
• Jasmonic acid ↑ (in leaves)
• Salicylic acid ↑ (in leaves)
Li et al. (2019a)
Cucumber • Isoferulic acid ↑
• m-Coumaric acid ↑
• Salicyluric acid ↑
Li et al. (2018)
Calluna vulgaris • Monoterpene ↑ (Li et al., 2020)
Ozone (O3)
Betula pendula • Totals phenylpropanoids ↑ Pääkkönen et al. (1998)
Hypericum perforatum • Hypericin ↑ Xu et al. (2011)
Betula sp. • Total and polymeric Proanthocyanidins ↑ (under 
combined action of elevated CO2 and ozone)
Glycine max • Isoflavonoid compounds ↑ (in leaf) (daidzein, 
coumestrol, and sojagol)
Keen and Taylor (1975)
Continued384 19. Production and role of plants secondary metabolites
TABLE 1 Effect of elevated levels or high concentration of different environmental pollutants on the 
production of plant secondary metabolites (PSMs)—cont’d
Plant name Plant secondary metabolites (PSMs) Reference
Soybean • Total flavonoids ↑ (in leaf)
• Rutin ↑, quercetin ↑ (in leaf)
Mao et al. (2017b)
Soybean • Quercetin ↑ (in root)
• ABA ↑ (in root)
Mao et al. (2017a)
Bean seeds • Total polyphenol content ↑
• Flavonols (aglycone kaempferol and its 3-glucoside 
derivative) ↓
• Hydroxycinnamates (caffeic, p-coumaric, and 
sinapic acids) ↓
• Total anthocyanins ↓
Iriti et al. (2009)
Zea mays • Total phenol ↑, flavonoids ↑ and anthocyanin 
pigments ↑
Singh et al. (2014)
Date palms • Foliar phenolic compounds ↑
• Roots phenolic compounds ↓
• Roots total phenol contents ↑
Du et al. (2018)
Costus pictus • Tannins, lignin, saponins and alkaloids ↑ (in both 
leaves and rhizomes)
• Phytosterols ↑ only in rhizomes
• Corosolic acid ↑
Ansari et al. (2021b)
Linum usitatissimum • Flavonoids ↑
• Anthocyanin ↑
• Lignin ↑
Tripathi and Agrawal (2013)
Pinus taeda • Did not affect the total phenolic content
• But increased the foliar tannin content ↑
Jordan et al. (1991)
Asclepias curassavica • Foliar cardenolides ↑
• Foliar total phenols ↑
Bolsinger et al. (1991)
Pine trees • Resin acids ↑ (such as anticopalic, 3-oxoanticopalic, 
3beta-hydroxyanticopalic, and 3,4-cycloanticopalic 
acids, and anticopalic acid)
• Phenolic acids ↓ (3-hydroxybenzoic acid and 
3,4-dihydroxybenzoic acid)
Shadkami et al. (2007)
Ginkago biloba • Foliar terpenes ↑ (in leaves)
• Foliar phenolics ↓ (in leaves)
He et al. (2009)
Capsicum baccatum • Capsaicin levels ↓ (in pericarp)
• Total carotenoid content ↑ (in pericarp)
Bortolin et al. (2016)
Tomato (elevated O₃ and 
TYLCV infection, alone 
and in combination)
• Total phenolics ↑
• Condensed tannins ↑
• Salicylic acid (SA) content ↑
Cui et al. (2016)
Medicago sativa • Foliar genistin content ↑ (at the vegetative stage) 
foliar ferulic acid ↑ (at the reproductive stage)
Yan et al. (2018))
Quercus ilex • Leaf monoterpenes ↑ Loreto et al. (2004)
Sida cordifolia • Steroid metabolites ↑ (in root and leaves) Ansari et al. (2021a)2. Effect of elevated CO2 (EC) levels on PSMs 385
TABLE 1 Effect of elevated levels or high concentration of different environmental pollutants on the 
production of plant secondary metabolites (PSMs)—cont’d
Plant name Plant secondary metabolites (PSMs) Reference
Toxic gases
Psoralea corylifolia • Foliar carotenoids ↓
• Psoralen (a linear furanocoumarin) ↓ (in seeds and 
leaves)
Ali et al. (2008)
Wheat plants • Total phenolics ↑ Agrawal and Deepak (2003)
Tobacco plants (under 
high temperature)
• Nicotine ↑ Chen et al. (2016)
Cucumber plants • Cucurbitacin C content ↑ (a triterpenoid) Liu et al. (2019)
Brassica oleracea • Carotenoids ↑, anthocyanins ↑, flavonols ↑, total 
phenolics ↑, and sinigrin ↑
Montesinos‐Pereira et al. 
(2016)
Catharanthus roseus L • Total phenolic content ↑ (in roots)
• Vincristine and vinblastine ↑ (in leaf)
Liu et al. (2016)
Heavy metals
Phyllanthus amarus • Carotenoids content ↓
• Lignin compounds (such as phyllanthin and 
hypophyllanthin) ↑
Rai et al. (2005)
Citrus rootstock Citrumelo • Soluble phenolics (SPs) ↑ (in roots)
• Lignin ↑ (in roots)
Podazza et al. (2012)
Hypericum perforatum • Total soluble phenols ↑ (in the shoot)
• Procyanidins ↑ (in the shoot)
• Flavonols (astragalin, hyperoside, quercetin, 
quercitrin, and rutin) ↑ (in the shoot)
• Hyperforin ↑ (in the shoot)
• Total soluble phenols ↑ (in roots)
• Procyanidins & flavonols ↓ (e.g., astragalin, 
hyperoside, quercetin, quercitrin, and rutin) (in roots)
Babula et al. (2015)
Hypoxis hemerocallidea • Total phenolics and flavonoids ↑
• Hypoxoside ↓
Okem et al. (2015)
Robinia pseudoacacia • Phenolics, flavonoids and saponins ↑ (in leaves and 
stems)
• Alkaloid compounds ↑ (in leaves)
• Alkaloid compounds ↓ (in stems)
Zhao et al. (2016)
Artemisia annua • Artemisinic metabolites (artemisinic acid, 
arteannuin B, and artemisinin) ↑
Mishra et al. (2019)
Panax notoginseng • Panax notoginseng saponins (PNS) ↓ Mishra et al. (2019)
Withania somnifera • Withanolides ↑ Mishra et al. (2019)
Cannabis sativa • Cannabidiol content ↑ (in floral buds) Husain et al. (2019)
Cicer arietinum • Total phenolic content ↑ (in seedlings) Mohajel Kazemi et al. (2020)
Continued386 19. Production and role of plants secondary metabolites
TABLE 1 Effect of elevated levels or high concentration of different environmental pollutants on the 
production of plant secondary metabolites (PSMs)—cont’d
Plant name Plant secondary metabolites (PSMs) Reference
Brassica juncea • Anthocyanin content ↑ (in the seedlings) Kapoor et al. (2019)
Larix olgensis • Tannins and phenolic acids ↑ (at low concentration 
of Cd)
• Tannins and phenolic acids ↓ (at high concentration 
of Cd)
Jiang et al. (2020)
Medicago sativa • (iso)Flavone Conjugates ↑ Gutsch et al. (2020)
Andrographis paniculata • ent-Labdane-related diterpenes (such as 
andrographolid, neoandrographolide, 
14-deoxy-11,12-didehydroandrographolide and 
andrograpanin) ↑
• Flavonoid (5,7,2′,3′-tetra methoxy flavanone) ↑
Das et al. (2021)
Rosemary • Phenol, flavonoid, anthocyanin, and essential oil ↑ Farouk and Al-Amri (2019)
Artemisia annua • Arsenic exposure enhanced the content of both 
carotenoids and flavonoids ↑
• Artemisinin and flavonoids ↑ (under combined 
treatment of Arsenic and salicylic acid)
Kumari and Pandey-Rai 
(2018) and Kumari et al. 
(2018)
Tomato • Total phenols, polyphenols, flavonoids, and 
anthocyanin ↑ (in tomato seedlings)
Bali et al. (2019)
Glycine max • Lignin content ↑ (in roots) Pawlak-Sprada et al. (2011)
Lupinus luteus • Lignin content ↓ (in roots) Pawlak-Sprada et al. (2011)
Phyllanthus amarus plants • Carotenoids ↓
• Phyllanthin and hypophyllanthin ↑
Rai and Mehrotra (2008)
Brassica. juncea • Total phenols and flavonoids ↑ (in seedlings) Handa et al. (2018)
Plantago ovata • Polyphenols and carotenoids ↑ Kundu et al. (2018)
Rice • Total phenols and flavonoids ↑ (in seedlings) Dubey et al. (2018)
Catharanthus roseus • Anticancer alkaloids such as vincristine and 
vinblastine contents ↑
Rai et al. (2014)
Datura innoxia • Scopolamine content ↑ (in leaves) Vernay et al. (2008)
Helianthus annuus • Phenols and flavonoids ↑ Qadir et al. (2020)
Tomato • Anthocyanins, phenols, and flavonoids ↑ (in seedlings) Jahan et al. (2020)
Particulate matter
Azadirachta indica • Phenols and tannins ↑
• Carotenoids ↓
Sharma et al. (2020)
Solanum lycopersicum • Leaf carotenoids ↑ Daresta et al. (2015)
Artemisia argyi • Secondary metabolites ↑ Zhang et al. (2021)
Ocimum basilicum • Monoterpenoid Linalool (an essential oil) ↑ Hubai et al. (2021)
Note: ↓, decreased; ↑, increased.2. Effect of elevated CO2 (EC) levels on PSMs 387
petroleum oil-contaminated agriculture fields (Ghosh, 2018). Altogether, it can be suggested 
that planting more economically important plants such as agarwood will substantially affect 
the secondary metabolites production, therefore enhancing economic growth. Additionally, 
this approach will also help to reduce the EC levels (Utomo et al., 2021).
In general, EC level can decrease leaf nitrogen content whilst increase the carbon-based 
secondary metabolites (phenolics and terpenes) or structural polysaccharides (cellulose, 
hemicelluloses, and pectin) (Penuelas et al., 1997). Phenylalanine ammonia-lyase (PAL) en￾zyme catalyzes the initial step of the phenylpropanoid pathway and is therefore involved in 
the synthesis of polyphenol compounds such as phenylpropanoids, flavonoids, and lignin 
in plants (Medda et al., 2020). EC exposure (350 and 1000ppm) to tobacco plants leads to 
a significant rise in the contents of foliar phenylpropanoids, chlorogenic acid (CGA), and 
coumarins (e.g., scopolin and scopoletin) under two nitrogen concentrations (5 and 8mM 
NH4NO3). This increase in phenylpropanoids was mainly due to the increased activity of 
the PAL enzyme in leaves and roots of the tobacco plant, which was even higher at the lower 
nitrogen supply. In contrast, EC level decreased nicotine content only under low nitrogen 
supply. This suggests that elevated CO2 mediated induction of secondary metabolite compo￾sition depends on the nitrogen content (Matros et al., 2006).
Besides, it is also suggested that under different nitrogen and CO2 regimens, coordination 
exists between carbon and nitrogen metabolism, which in turn regulate nitrogen assimila￾tion, starch accumulation, and photosynthesis (Causin et al., 2006). Arid lands exhibit spatial 
and seasonal variation in total nitrogen and the relative amounts of nitrate and ammonia. 
Therefore, researchers have investigated the effect of EC (650ppm) on the fate of primary 
and secondary metabolites in the seedlings of arid land plant species (Prosopis flexuosa and 
Prosopis glandulosa) under two different nitrogen levels (low (0.8mM) and high (8.0mM)) and 
at either 1:1 or 3:1 nitrate to ammonia. EC increased assimilation rate, water use efficiency, 
and primary metabolites in the seedlings of two aridland plants which is dependent on the 
concentration of nitrogen supply. However, EC could not enhance the PSMs (i.e., phenolics) 
in the seedlings of two arid land plant species (Causin et al., 2006). This study highlights the 
importance of soil nitrogen content and its chemical composition (i.e., nitrogen availability as 
well as relative amounts of nitrate and ammonia) which can strongly influence the effects of 
EC and help in the establishment of arid land plants under high CO2 environments. Under 
EC levels, the response of Catharanthus roseus plants depends on the available nitrogen. EC 
increased the total alkaloids content under nitrogen supplementation but increased the total 
phenolics in the absence of nitrogen supplementation (Singh and Agrawal, 2015).
In general, EC tends to increase the concentrations of carbon-based plant secondary com￾pounds such as phenols and tannins. A previous study was conducted to examine the effects 
of EC levels on secondary metabolites in nine species of saplings of trees were grown in 
the open-top chambers at ambient and EC (about twice ambient). EC increased leaf pheno￾lic concentrations in eight species including Ficus insipid, Luehea seemannii, Anacardium ex￾celsum, Antirrhoea trichantha, Cordia alliodora, Calophyllum longifolium, Tetragastris panamensis, 
and Virola surinamensis. Moreover, EC increased starch, total nonstructural carbohydrates and 
C/N ratios, but does not affect the biomass accumulation. In contrast, EC decreased the phe￾nolic concentrations in only one species Cecropia longipes (Coley et al., 2002). Similarly, Sallas 
et al. also reported that EC reduced the total phenolic content in Norway spruce needles, but 
did not affect total phenolic content in Scott pine needles. The EC-induced decline in total 388 19. Production and role of plants secondary metabolites
phenolics in Norway spruce needles is probably due to increased growth. Terpenoids were 
more responsive to EC compared with total phenolics. Generally, EC reduced terpenoid con￾centrations (Sallas et al., 2003). This could be probably due to EC-induced inhibition of mono￾terpene synthases, the enzymes involved in the synthesis of most abundant monoterpenes 
(e.g., α-pinene, β-pinene, and sabinene) (Loreto et al., 2001). Plantago maritima plants exposed 
to EC showed increased lignin metabolites which could be the reason for the increased num￾ber of lignified leaf vessels and root vessels. In addition, EC exposure resulted in an increased 
accumulation of caffeic acid in the foliage and an increased accumulation of p-coumaric acid 
and verbascoside in the roots (Davey et al., 2004).
According to the carbon-nutrient balance theory, as the carbon to nitrogen ratio increases 
under an EC condition, a greater amount of the plant’s carbohydrates can then be allocated 
to the secondary metabolism, resulting in the production of higher content of carbon-based 
PSMs (Deng and Zeng, 2006; Ghasemzadeh and Jaafar, 2011). Phenolics and flavonoids de￾rived from the phenylpropanoid pathways are the most important carbon-based secondary 
metabolites (Ibrahim et al., 2010). A study was conducted in the Zingiber officinale to investi￾gate the effect of EC on the secondary metabolites content and associated antioxidant activity. 
In this study, EC (800μmolmol− 1
) exposure significantly increased the photosynthesis rate, 
plant biomass, and concentration of primary (total soluble carbohydrates, starch) and second￾ary metabolites (total flavonoids and total phenolics) in all parts (leaves, stems, and rhizomes) 
of the ginger varieties. Ginger plants with the highest rate of photosynthesis had the highest 
total soluble carbohydrates and phenolic content. Moreover, the antioxidant activity was also 
increased in ginger grown under EC (Ghasemzadeh and Jaafar, 2011). Strawberry fruits grown 
under high CO2 environments showed enhanced oxygen radical absorbance activity. EC (300 
and 600μmolmol− 1
) concentrations increased ascorbic acid, glutathione, and anthocyanin 
and phenolic content in strawberry fruit. It was also found that EC significantly enhanced 
p-coumaroyl glucose, dihydroflavonol, quercetin 3-glucoside, quercetin 3-glucuronide, and 
kaempferol 3-glucoside contents, as well as cyanidin 3-glucoside, pelargonidin 3-glucoside, 
and pelargonidin 3-glucoside-succinate content in the strawberry fruit (Wang et al., 2003). 
EC (1200μmolmol− 1
) exposure enhanced the total flavonoids and phenolics of Labisia pumila
seedling when compared with ambient CO2 level exposure. However, EC enhanced the con￾tent of these PSMs only under nitrogen deficiency but reduced the content of PSMs under 
high nitrogen content (Ibrahim et al., 2010). In another study, researchers have also shown 
that as the EC increased from 400 to 1200μmolmol− 1
, there is increased net photosynthe￾sis, enhanced production of carbohydrates and secondary metabolites (total flavonoids-TF 
and total phenolics-TP) in Labisia pumila seedlings (Ibrahim and Jaafar, 2011a). This increase 
in TP and TF contents also contributes to the higher antioxidant activity of Labisia pumila
(Ibrahim and Jaafar, 2011b). The halogenated secondary metabolites (e.g., bromoform and 
dibromoacetic acid) were associated with amazing antimicrobial activity. Elevated CO2 in 
the growth medium was found to increase the production of halocarbon secondary metab￾olites in the Asparagopsis taxiformis (Mata et al., 2012). A previous study also reported that 
ultra-high CO2 levels (i.e., ≥ 3000μmolmol− 1
 CO2) substantially increased levels of secondary 
compounds (thymol) in Thymus vulgaris in vitro and in vivo (Tisserat and Vaughn, 2001). In 
Elaeis guineensis (oil palm) seedlings, EC (1200μmolmol− 1
) exposure significantly increased 
the production of total flavonoids and phenolics contents, which could be due to increased 
PAL activity EC (1200μmolmol− 1
). The antioxidant activity is also increased with increasing 2. Effect of elevated CO2 (EC) levels on PSMs 389
CO₂ levels (Ibrahim and Jaafar, 2012). Another interesting study conducted in Eucalyptus 
seedlings revealed that EC did not affect the content of PSMs (such as total phenolics, con￾densed tannins, or the total oil yield), suggesting that stronger genetic control on the pro￾duction of secondary metabolites (McKiernan et al., 2012). Metaanalysis study revealed that 
under EC levels, nitrogen-based secondary metabolites decreased, total phenolics, condensed 
tannins, and flavonoids increased, and plant terpenoid concentrations decreased (Robinson 
et al., 2012). With the increasing EC levels from elevated (400 and 1500ppm) to superelevated 
levels (10,000ppm), a progressive increase in the accumulation of flavonoids was reported 
in wheat and the major flavonoid was found to be 6-C-glucosyl luteolin (Levine et al., 2008).
To reveal how EC and temperature will affect the growth and production of PSMs, re￾searchers have conducted experiments in Gynostemma pentaphyllum. Their results revealed 
that EC increased the content of gypenoside A, but decreased the total antioxidant capacity. 
However, EC and temperature decreased the accumulation of total phenolics and flavonoids 
in leaves, stems, and inflorescences, this indicates that the elevated atmospheric tempera￾tures and CO2 in the future may reduce the antioxidant properties Gynostemma pentaphyllum
(Chang et al., 2016). Soluble sugars not only act as substrates for growth and metabolism but 
also act as signaling molecules, therefore sugars can interact with plant hormones to mediate 
plant stress responses (Rolland et al., 2006; Lastdrager et al., 2014). EC levels (680ppm) stim￾ulated growth, increased the accumulation of soluble sugars, and production of secondary 
metabolites via upregulation of auxin and jasmonate levels in wheat. This further point to 
the fact that increased carbon availability (i.e., soluble sugars) can induce the production of 
secondary metabolites via modulating the plant hormones in Triticum aestivum (Huang et al., 
2017b). EC exposure (800μmolmol− 1
 for 24days) to tea plants (Camellia sinensis L.) signifi￾cantly increased the concentrations of tea polyphenol, theanine, total catechins, but decreased 
the caffeine concentration. This could be due to EC-induced upregulation of expression cat￾echins and theanine biosynthetic genes and downregulation of caffeine synthetic genes in 
tea leaves (Li et al., 2017). In lettuce, EC (700ppm) could induce the production of phenolic 
acids and flavonoids, thereby provided with a higher antioxidant capacity. EC induced the 
accumulation of free chlorogenic acid, ferulic acid, cyanidin, and conjugated caffeic as well as 
quercetin, quercitrin, rutin, kaempferol quercetin-3-O-glucoside, quercetin-3-O-glucuronide, 
and luteolin-7-O-glucoside (Sgherri et  al., 2017; Pérez-López et  al., 2018). Another study 
showed that EC (620ppm) increased the levels of nonstructural carbohydrates, fumarate, 
glutamine, glutathione, ascorbate, phylloquinone (vitamin K1), anthocyanins, and a majority 
of flavonoids in both Ocimum basilicum L. and Mentha piperita L. (Al Jaouni et al., 2018). In 
both Petroselinum crispum L. and Anethum graveolens L, EC (627±24μmolmol− 1
) enhanced the 
levels of soluble sugars, starch, organic acids, total phenolics, total flavonoids, and vitamins 
A and E (Saleh et al., 2018).
Previous studies have speculated that EC alters the interplay between PSMs and herbivo￾rous insects (Robinson et al., 2012; Lu et al., 2018; Yan et al., 2018, 2020). It is exceptionally im￾portant to understand the EC impact on interactions of plants and insects, which in turn help 
to predict the impact of ECO2 on future agroecosystems (Lu et al., 2018). Yan et al. showed 
that Elevated CO2 could increase foliar genistin and ferulic acid contents at both the vegeta￾tive as well as reproductive stages of Medicago sativa. This study also shows that EC can affect 
the feeding behavior of aphids by altering PSMs (Yan et al., 2018). Yan et al.’s study is on par 
with metaanalysis studies (Robinson et al., 2012), further confirming the fact that PSMs can 390 19. Production and role of plants secondary metabolites
alter the interaction between plants and herbivores. Similarly, in another study, EC-induced 
PSMs could influence the plant-herbivore insect interaction. EC increased the total phenolic 
content of Medicago truncatula, thereby altering the performance of different genotypes of 
aphids (Pink and green aphids). EC exhibited contrasting effects on pink and green genotypes 
of aphids; the green genotype showed increased population abundance, fecundity, growth, 
and feeding efficiency, while the pink genotype showed decreased fitness (Yan et al., 2020).
In tea plants, a substantial increase in the foliar content of theanine and polyphenols and a 
reduction in the foliar content of caffeine were observed under EC. EC also increased the fo￾liar contents of jasmonic acid (JA) and salicylic acid (SA) in the tea seedlings when compared 
with tea plants grown under ambient CO2. In addition, EC exposure promoted an increase in 
the number of tea aphids (Toxoptera aurantii) on tea seedlings when compared with ambient 
CO2, indicating that EC alters the PSMs, consequently the population dynamics of tea aphids 
(Li et al., 2019a). Interestingly, a previous study also reported that EC can alleviate drought 
stress in cucumber seedling leaves. EC could promote the accumulation of secondary metabo￾lites (such as salicyluric acid, m-coumaric acid, and isoferulic acid) under drought conditions, 
indicating that CO2 fertilization may endue drought stress tolerance to plants (Li et al., 2018).
PSMs such as terpenoids (isoprene, monoterpenes, and sesquiterpenes) are the volatile or￾ganic compounds (VOCs) of the plants. VOCs not only act as antioxidants but also implicated 
in a wide range of ecological interactions such as the attraction of plant pollinators and seed 
dispersers, plant-microbe interactions, plant-herbivore interactions, and chemical signaling 
between and within plants (Hare, 2011; Li et al., 2020). It has been reported that EC exposure 
for 6years leads to a significant increase in the content VOCs (e.g., monoterpene) in Calluna 
vulgaris (Li et al., 2020).
3. Effect of ozone (O3) on PSMs
Ozone (O3) is the second most important gaseous air pollutant (Mehta et al., 2019). It occurs 
in two different pools in the atmosphere, the stratospheric ozone layer that absorbs the harm￾ful UV-B and UV-C radiations, thus beneficial to the living organisms (Langematz, 2019). On 
the contrary, the tropospheric ozone is regarded as a pollutant, because it is produced through 
reactions between primary pollutants (mainly hydrocarbons, nitrogen oxides, VOCs, sulfur 
oxides, and carbon oxides) catalyzed by sunlight (Lu et al., 2021). Ambient ozone concentra￾tions are typically in the range between 20 and 60nLL− 1
, however, elevated O3 (EO) levels 
can rise to 250nLL− 1
. Following stomatal uptake, most of the O3 is decomposed into sec￾ondary messenger molecules in the apoplastic fluid. These ozone decomposition products in 
turn affect the plant biochemical processes possibly through an ozone receptor, an oxidative 
burst, and induction of and up- or down-regulation of genes (Laisk et al., 1989; Sandermann 
Jr., 1996; Cho et al., 2011). Ozone is known to significantly reduce photosynthesis, growth, 
and yield and to cause foliar injury and senescence (Cho et al., 2008). Current elevated levels 
of tropospheric ozone are critically alarming and became the major concern for plant growth. 
However, plants in nature commonly respond to elevated levels of ozone by accumulating an 
array of secondary metabolites (Table 1) (Xu et al., 2011). Chronic exposure to ozone induces 
a shift of the available resources in favor of the synthesis of a plethora of secondary products 
(Iriti and Faoro, 2009).3. Effect of ozone (O3) on PSMs 391
Phenylpropanoids are the largest group of PSMs with antioxidant and free radical scav￾enging properties and they are produced in response to various biotic or abiotic stresses such 
as pathogenic infections, herbivores, UV irradiation, wounding, and exposure to a variety of 
pollutants including ozone (Korkina, 2007). Phenylpropanoids are parent molecules for the 
biosynthesis of a diverse range of polyphenols (simple phenolic acids and esters, flavonoids, 
isoflavonoids, stilbenes, coumarins, curcuminoids, lignans, proanthocyanidins, etc.), which 
have been reported to possess a multitude of pharmacological benefits (Korkina et al., 2011). 
Phenylpropanoids can also act as precursors of lignin, a structural biopolymer of the plant cell 
wall. Therefore, elevated Phenylpropanoids levels led to increased synthesis of lignin which 
can protect plant cells from ROS injury, thus preventing damages due to lipid peroxidation, in￾dicating an important defense mechanism of lignin (Iriti and Faoro, 2004). Ozone can enhance 
the biosynthesis of phenylpropanoids in plants (Toumainen et al., 1996). For example, chronic 
exposure of ozone to Betula pendula led to an increase in total phenylpropanoids (Pääkkönen 
et al., 1998). O3 activates two distinct signaling pathways such as a salicylic acid (SA) depen￾dent polyamine biosynthesis pathway and SA-independent ethylene pathway (Langebartels 
et al., 1991; Sahil et al., 2021b). Polyamines are the precursors of alkaloids and they provide 
ozone tolerance. O3 exposure leads to an increase in the accumulation of polyamines, conse￾quently an increase in the accumulation of pyrrolidine, tropane, and pyrrolizidine alkaloids 
in plants (Iriti and Faoro, 2009). Ozone exposure can significantly increase the hypericin syn￾thesis in Hypericum perforatum (Xu et al., 2011). Proanthocyanidins or condensed tannins are 
a major group of phenolic compounds in the leaves of many woody and herbaceous plants. 
Interestingly, the combined action of EC (544ppm) and O3 (66ppb) significantly increased the 
foliar total and polymeric Proanthocyanidins in Betula plant species suggesting an additive 
influence of EC and O3 on the biosynthesis of phenylpropanoids (Karonen et al., 2006).
Ozone exposure caused stippling and silvering simultaneously with increased accumula￾tion of isoflavonoid compounds (daidzein, coumestrol, and sojagol) in soybean (Glycine max 
L.) leaves (Keen and Taylor, 1975). EO treatment also increased the soybean leaf concentrations 
of rutin, quercetin, and total flavonoids (Mao et al., 2017b) and soybean root concentrations of 
quercetin and abscisic acid (ABA) (Mao et al., 2017a). Ozone exposure leads to a substantial 
decrease in the concentrations of some flavonols (aglycone kaempferol and its 3-glucoside 
derivative) and hydroxycinnamates (caffeic, p-coumaric, and sinapic acids) and total an￾thocyanins with a slight increase in total polyphenol content in bean seeds. Nevertheless, 
ozone-exposed bean seeds showed higher antioxidant activity (Iriti et al., 2009). Secondary 
metabolites like total phenol, flavonoids, and anthocyanin pigments also increased in maize
(Zea mays L.) plants under EO (Singh et al., 2014). Short-term O3 exposure enhanced the accu￾mulation of several phenolic compounds in leaves, but declined in roots, however, the total 
phenol content significantly increased in the roots of date palms. This indicates that local and 
systemic changes in secondary metabolism contribute to the high tolerance of date palms to 
acute ozone exposure (Du et al., 2018). EO has been shown to exert a differential response 
in flavonoids and anthocyanin contents in different growth stages of Costus pictus (insulin 
plant). PSMs (tannins, lignin, saponins, and alkaloids) were increased in both leaves and rhi￾zomes, whereas phytosterols were accumulated only in rhizomes. The synthesis of corosolic 
acid was shown to be stimulated under EO at later stages of growth in insulin plants (Ansari 
et al., 2021b). Ozone exposure (ambient+10ppb) significantly increased the synthesis of PSMs 
such as flavonoids, anthocyanin, lignin, and wax in linseed (Linum usitatissimum L.) plants. 392 19. Production and role of plants secondary metabolites
Among the two cultivars exposed to O3, the T-397 cultivar was found to accumulate higher 
concentrations of secondary metabolites, thereby T-397 is more resistant to O3 stress-induced 
damage than the Padmini cultivar (Tripathi and Agrawal, 2013).
Exposure to high concentrations of O3 did not affect the total phenolic content, but in￾creased the foliar tannin content in both O3-sensitive and O3-tolerant Pinus taeda L plants, 
indicating that the ozone-related increase in foliar tannins was due to changes in allocation 
within the phenolic group rather than to increases in total phenolics (Jordan et al., 1991). In 
Asclepias curassavica L. plants, exposure to ozone for up to 16days in continuous-flow stirred 
reactors led to a significant increase in the concentrations of foliar cardenolides and total phe￾nols (Bolsinger et al., 1991). Tobacco plants in response to O3 accumulate aromatic secondary 
metabolites via the three aromatic amino acids phenylalanine, tyrosine, and tryptophan. This 
is due to O3 mediated induction of the accumulation of mRNA levels of genes which encode 
seven enzymes involved in the first seven steps of the shikimate pathway (the prechorismate 
pathway), the biosynthetic pathway common for the synthesis of all three aromatic amino 
acids, indicating the impact of ozone on the biosynthesis of the aromatic amino acids and 
consequently the accumulation of PSMs (Janzik et al., 2005).
Phenotypic variation may also affect the response of plants to adapt differently to the 
air pollutants. For example, O3 exposure led to the accumulation of resin acids such as an￾ticopalic, 3-oxoanticopalic, 3beta-hydroxyanticopalic, and 3,4-cycloanticopalic acids in 
O3-sensitive pine, whereas only anticopalic acid was accumulated in the O3-tolerant pine. 
Moreover, a substantial decrease in the levels of two phenolic acids, i.e., 3-hydroxybenzoic 
and 3,4-dihydroxybenzoic acid was observed with an increase in ozone exposure to pine 
needles, this could be probably linked to inhibition of the shikimate pathway upon ozone 
exposure. The decrease in these two phenolic acids in pine trees acts as O3-sensitive indicators 
to monitor the levels of O3 and its impact on forest productivity (Shadkami et al., 2007).
Ozone can induce purple stippling which results in the reduction in active photosynthetic 
leaf surface, consequently reduction in plant’s ability to produce photosynthates for growth, 
maintenance, and storage (Bolsinger et  al., 1991; Howell, 1974). EO increased the concen￾trations of terpenes but decreased the concentrations of phenolics in Ginkago biloba leaves. 
Reduction in phenolic content may decrease the resistance of Ginkago biloba to O3, but the ac￾cumulation of terpenes may enhance the antioxidant properties of Ginkago biloba leaves upon 
exposure to elevated O3 (He et al., 2009). To investigate the effect of a high concentration of 
O3 on the quality of fruit and vegetables, a study was conducted in an open-top chamber in 
which Capsicum baccatum pepper plants were exposed to O3 (171.6μgm− 3
) for 62days. A sub￾stantial decrease in Capsaicin levels and increase total carotenoids, as well as total phenolic 
contents, was observed in the pericarp, indicating that O3 alters the PSM profile of Capsicum 
baccatum pepper fruits and, consequently, their biological activity (Bortolin et al., 2016).
Another most interesting experiment was conducted to investigate the combined effects of 
EO and virus infection on herbivorous insect (whitefly, Bemisia tabaci) performance on tomato 
plants using an open-top chamber in the field. Elevated ozone (EO) and Tomato yellow leaf curl 
virus (TYLCV) infection, alone and in combination, significantly enhanced the leaf contents 
of total phenolics and condensed tannins, as well as salicylic acid (SA). The JA signaling 
pathway was upregulated by EO but downregulated by TYLCV infection and O₃+TYLCV 
infection. In both the tomato genotypes, EO, TYLCV infection, or EO+TYLCV infection sig￾nificantly decreased the fecundity and abundance of whiteflies. These results indicate that 4. Effect of toxic gases on the production of PSMs 393
EO and TYLCV infection, alone and in combination, reduced the population of whiteflies by 
increasing the contents of PSMs in tomato plants (Cui et al., 2016).
It has been reported that O3 had different effects on feeding behaviors of two aphids (pea 
aphids (Acyrthosiphon pisum) and cowpea aphids (Aphis craccivora) through altering foliar PSMs 
content in alfalfa (Medicago sativa). EO increased foliar genistin content at the vegetative stage, 
whilst increased ferulic acid at the reproductive stage. For pea aphids, feeding efficiency was 
decreased under EO at the vegetative stage. For cowpea aphids, feeding efficiency was de￾creased under EO at both reproductive and vegetative stages (Yan et al., 2018). Glucosinolates 
are nitrogen and sulfur-containing metabolites characteristic of the Brassicaceae and they pre￾vent many generalist herbivores but may stimulate feeding by specialist herbivores adapted 
to brassicaceous plants (Miles et al., 2005; Noret et al., 2005; Smallegange et al., 2007). EO 
exposure may affect the plant-herbivore interactions by altering both primary and secondary 
metabolism. Ozone exposure exerted a negative effect on the performance and preferences 
of a specialist herbivore Pieris brassicae development on the Brassica nigra. Therefore, Pieris 
brassicae’s behavior and performance were associated with ozone-induced alterations to glu￾cosinolate and phenolic pools in Brassica nigra plants (Khaling et al., 2015).
Isoprenoids can be synthesized to tolerate ozone injury by plants. For example, Isoprene 
protects the O3 mediated damage of photosynthetic apparatus by quenching ozone prod￾ucts (Loreto and Velikova, 2001). Ozone exposure also increases monoterpenes in Quercus 
ilex leaves may also exert an isoprene-like antioxidant activity (Loreto et al., 2004). VOCs (like 
isoprenoids) are also involved in tritrophic signaling, i.e., the relationship between plant, 
herbivorous and carnivorous arthropods (Brilli et al., 2009). EO exposure can modify the com￾position of the VOCs (Freiwald et al., 2008), thereby negatively affecting the tritrophic interac￾tions and subsequent weakening of plant defense responses against arthropods (Alstad et al., 
1982). The steroid metabolites showed an increase in root and leaves of Sida cordifolia L. plant 
under EO, while terpenes showed a variable response. This suggests that the future increase 
in the EO will have a significant impact on the content of PSMs of medicinal plants growing 
in tropical countries (Ansari et al., 2021a).
4. Effect of toxic gases on the production of PSMs
Toxic gaseous air pollutants such as sulfur dioxide (SO2), hydrogen sulfide (H2S), and ni￾trogen oxides (NO2 and NO) can affect plant cell physiology as well as affect the levels of 
various PSMs (Table 1) (Chandawat et al., 2014). Sulfur is an essential nutrient that promotes 
the growth of plants. Indeed, sulfur-containing compounds play a crucial role in a wide range 
of physiological and biochemical processes that aid in the proper growth of plants (Lee et al., 
2017). Atmospheric SO2 enters the plants through stomata and is utilized for the biosynthe￾sis of two important sulfur-containing amino acids such as cysteine and methionine. A low 
level of atmospheric SO2 is beneficial for plant growth and functioning. However, increased 
air pollution by SO2 is a major concern for plant growth. SO2 is one of the important toxic 
gaseous air pollutants which are released into the atmosphere mainly during the industrial 
processing of sulfur-containing ores and industrial energy production from petroleum or 
coal. It is estimated that about 1.5×108
 tons of SO2 are generated from combustion processes 
(Ziegler, 1975). At the ecosystem level, SO2 pollution may lead to the elimination of sensitive 394 19. Production and role of plants secondary metabolites
plant species (such as lichens and bryophytes), thus SO2 can have a remarkable impact on 
the species composition. Therefore, lichens and bryophytes have been successfully used as 
indicators of SO2 pollution (Varshney et  al., 1979). Elevated SO2 promotes the opening of 
the stomata, resulting in the excessive loss of water and subsequently causing severe dam￾age varying from reversible to irreversible, consequently reducing the quality and quantity 
of plant yield (Wilhelm, 1976). Both gaseous and aqueous forms of SO2 are harmful to the 
living organism. Interaction of SO2 with atmospheric water vapor results in the formation 
of droplets of sulfurous acid and sulfuric acid which reach the earth’s surface through acid 
rains which in turn significantly affect almost all ecosystems (Varshney et al., 1979). It is also 
important to note that SO2 can also alter the levels of secondary metabolites in plants. For in￾stance, SO2 stress greatly reduced the content of foliar carotenoids in Psoralea corylifolia plants. 
In addition, SO2 stress also reduced the content of Psoralen (a linear furanocoumarin) an 
anticancer compound in the seeds and leaves of Psoralea corylifolia plants (Ali et al., 2008). 
In wheat plants, the respiration rate, total soluble sugars, and total phenolics, however, in￾creased in response to SO2 treatment (Agrawal and Deepak, 2003).
H2S is another important gaseous air pollutant present at higher levels in various regions 
of the atmosphere (Sharma et al., 2022; Watts, 2000). H2S can pass through the cell membranes 
and trigger a multitude of responses to various stress conditions such as drought, heat, os￾motic, heavy metal, and multiple biotic stresses (Shivaraj et al., 2020). H2S can also serve as a 
source of sulfur to the plants. H2S can participate in various physiological processes related to 
plant stress resistance. However, elevated levels of H2S negatively affect plant growth and sur￾vival (Ausma and De Kok, 2019). H2S acts as a signal to induce many physiological processes 
and can also influence the secondary metabolism in plants. The plant hormone, Jasmonic acid 
(JA) is a plant hormone that promotes the biosynthesis of secondary metabolites in plants and 
thereby plays a central role in plant defense against herbivores (Wang and Wu, 2013). Under 
high temperatures, H2S acts upstream of JA signaling pathway and promotes the biosyn￾thesis of nicotine in tobacco plants (Chen et al., 2016). Cucurbitacin C is a triterpenoid plant 
secondary metabolite that confers the resistance of cucumber plants to pathogenic bacteria 
and insect herbivores. Exogenous H2S exposure upregulated the expression of Cucurbitacin 
C synthetase-encoding genes and the resulting Cucurbitacin C content in cucumber leaves, 
indicating the crucial role of H2S in enhancing the cucumber plants’ resistance against abi￾otic stresses and biotic stresses through the modulating the biosynthesis of PSMs (Liu et al., 
2019). Sodium hydrosulfide (NaSH) is a potential donor of H2S. Application of high doses of 
NaSH increased the accumulation of PSMs such as carotenoids, anthocyanins, flavonols, total 
phenolics, and sinigrin in Brassica oleracea (cabbage) plants (Montesinos‐Pereira et al., 2016).
Nitrogen dioxide (NO2) at a high concentration is one of the most common and harmful air 
pollutants and cause severe oxidative mediated damage to plants (Liu et al., 2015; Sheng and 
Zhu, 2019). Elevated oxides of nitrogen in the atmosphere can cause an increase in surface 
ozone concentration and flux of oxidized nitrogen compounds from the atmosphere to the 
land surface which in turn negatively affect plant growth rate by damaging the photosyn￾thetic apparatus (Semenov, 2001; Kasten et al., 2017; Yue et al., 2020). Nutrient availability 
greatly regulates ecosystem processes and functions of tropical forests. It has been reported 
that elevated nitrogen deposition in the future stimulates the tropical soil microbial activities 
in wet seasons, which will further enhance soil N₂O emission (Wang et al., 2014). This sug￾gests the importance of reducing soil N2O emissions. Nitric oxide (NO) is a very small-sized 5. Effect of heavy metals on PSMs 395
gaseous signaling molecule that can activate a cascade of biochemical events that result in 
plant tolerance to environmental stresses (Shivaraj et al., 2020; Goyal et al., 2021; Pandey et al., 
2021). Exposure to sodium nitroprusside, a nitric oxide (NO) donor promoted the synthesis 
of amino acids and the total phenolic content in the roots of Catharanthus roseus L plants. This 
could be due to increased phenylalanine ammonia-lyase activity by SNP treatment. Most 
interestingly, SNP exposure also increased the contents of leaf vincristine and vinblastine as 
well as the total alkaloid content in Catharanthus roseus plants, suggesting the influence of 
nitrogen oxides on the bioactive secondary metabolites in plants (Liu et al., 2016).
5. Effect of heavy metals on PSMs
Soil contamination by increased accumulation of heavy metals is one of the serious en￾vironmental issues which negatively affect plant production (Reddy et al., 2021). Elevated 
levels of heavy metals in the soil result in the alteration of the soil pH, this, in turn, affects the 
bioavailability and mobility of metals. The term heavy metal refers to the group of metals and 
metalloids of relatively high atomic number and mass. These heavy metals are classified into 
two groups. Essential heavy metals (e.g., zinc (Zn), copper (Cu), nickel (Ni), molybdenum 
(Mo), manganese (Mn), chromium (Cr) and iron (Fe)) which are implicated in many struc￾tural and biochemical function in plants, whereas Nonessential heavy metals (e.g., cadmium 
(Cd), lead (Pb), mercury (Hg) and arsenic (As)) with unknown biological function which are 
toxic to plants even at low concentrations (Asgari Lajayer et al., 2017). These heavy metals 
promote the accumulation of ROS and cause severe oxidative stress-mediated damage in 
plants (Singh et al., 2011; Shahid et al., 2014). Soil pollution by heavy metals causes mod￾ification of a plant’s metabolic pathways, alters bioactive PSMs production (Table  1), and 
consequently aggravates human health problems (Arsenov et al., 2021). However, plants can 
adapt to excess heavy metal stress by modulating the production of secondary metabolites in 
plant tissues. Soil pollution not only influences PSM production but also greatly disturbs the 
diversity and functions of plant-microbial interactions (Pham et al., 2017).
5.1 Cadmium (Cd)
Cadmium (Cd) is the most widespread soil pollutant accumulating in agricultural soils 
through anthropogenic activities. Cd is one of the most toxic heavy metals posing a severe 
threat to soil quality and plant production (Huang et al., 2020). Cd is present in the soil as 
free hydrated ions or as complexes with organic or inorganic ligands and enters the plants 
through roots, thus roots act as an interface between the soil and the plant (Singh et al., 2011). 
Excess Cd accumulation in plants results in reduced plant growth, yellowing of leaves (i.e., 
chlorosis), stomatal closure, and damage to photosynthetic apparatus in plants (Siatka et al., 
2012). Excess cadmium can substantially influence the levels of accumulation of secondary 
metabolites in plants. In Phyllanthus amarus plants, Cd significantly decreased the content 
of carotenoids, but enhanced the levels of therapeutically active lignin compounds such as 
phyllanthin and hypophyllanthin (Rai et al., 2005). Soluble phenolics (SPs) are implicated in 
the scavenging of ROS due to the availability of hydroxyl groups in their molecules. The Cd 
treatment increased the content of secondary metabolites such as SPs and lignin in roots of 396 19. Production and role of plants secondary metabolites
the citrus rootstock Citrumelo (Podazza et al., 2012). Scientific studies revealed the positive 
correlation between the activity of G-peroxidase (G-POD) (which catalyze the last synthesiz￾ing steps in lignin polymerization using H2O2 as co-substrate) and SPs accumulation under 
heavy metal stress (Uraguchi et  al., 2006; Kovácik and Klejdus, 2008). Cd treated roots of 
Citrumelo showed an increase in both G-peroxidase (G-POD) activity and SPs indicating the 
increased root lignification and ROS scavenging, respectively, as the active mechanisms by 
which cadmium is retained in the roots avoiding its transport to aerial parts (Podazza et al., 
2012).
Excess cadmium was found to increase the accumulation of total soluble phenols, 
Procyanidins, and flavonols (astragalin, hyperoside, quercetin, quercitrin, and rutin) and also 
another most important bioactive phytochemical hyperforin in the shoot of Hypericum perfor￾atum. However, in the roots of Hypericum perforatum, a slight increase in total soluble phenols 
and a decrease in procyanidins and flavonols (astragalin, hyperoside, quercetin, quercitrin, 
and rutin) were noticed under excess Cadmium stress (Babula et  al., 2015). Okem et  al.’s 
experiments also revealed that Cd exposure (5mgL− 1
) can substantially increase the accumu￾lation of total phenolics and flavonoids, whilst significantly decreasing the accumulation of 
hypoxoside in Hypoxis hemerocallidea (Okem et al., 2015). Cd exposure to Robinia pseudoacacia
cause a subastntial increase in the accumulation of phenolics, flavonoids, and saponins in 
leaves and stems; alkaloid compounds increased in leaves and decreased in stems, suggest￾ing that Robinia pseudoacacia plants accumulate PSMs as protective and defense mechanisms 
against heavy metal toxicity (Zhao et al., 2016).
Cd exposure can modulate the expression of genes involved in the biosynthetic pathways 
of secondary metabolites. For instance, Cd exposure upregulated the expression of genes in￾volved in the artemisinin biosynthesis (Zhou et al., 2017) and downregulated the expression 
of genes involved in the terpenoid backbone biosynthesis pathway (Liao et al., 2018), thereby 
increasing the levels of artemisinic metabolites (artemisinic acid, arteannuin B, and artemisi￾nin) in Artemisia annua and decreased Panax notoginseng saponins (PNS) in Panax notoginseng
plants, respectively. Cadmium exposure also increased the expression of genes involved in 
the withanolide biosynthetic pathway which was correlated with enhanced withanolides in 
Withania somnifera (Mishra et al., 2019). Husain et al. have conducted experiments in which 
secondary metabolites were analyzed in the floral buds of hemp (Cannabis sativa L.) plants 
grown in mine land soil. They also observed an increase in the expression of the cannabidi￾olic acid synthase gene in plants grown on mine land soil, thereby floral buds of hemp plants 
displayed a significant increase in the total Cannabidiol content when compared with control 
soil (Husain et al., 2019). Altogether these studies further support the fact that plants grown 
in heavy metal-loaded soils develop a high tolerance to heavy metals through the modulation 
of secondary metabolite synthesis.
Cadmium exposure increased the total phenolic content in chickpea (Cicer arietinum) seed￾lings (Mohajel Kazemi et al., 2020), but anthocyanin content in the seedlings of Brassica jun￾cea (Kapoor et al., 2019). Tomato (Lycopersicon esculentum) plants grown in Cd-loaded soils 
also showed accumulated levels of phenolic compounds. Microbial fortification of tomato 
plants with bacterial strains such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Burkholderia gladioli further 
elevated the levels of secondary metabolite in tomato plants, suggesting the use of rhizobac￾teria as stress alleviators for sustainable agriculture in the future heavy metal contaminated 
lands (Khanna et al., 2019). PSMs contributed to the resistance of Larix olgensis seedlings to 5. Effect of heavy metals on PSMs 397
the gypsy moth larvae. Cd at low concentrations significantly increased the content of sec￾ondary metabolites (tannins and phenolic acids) but at high concentrations significantly de￾creased secondary metabolites (tannins and phenolic acids) in Larix olgensis seedlings. These 
results suggest the necessity to adjust and optimize pest control strategies in heavy metal 
polluted lands (Jiang et al., 2020). Chronic exposure of Cd to Medicago sativa plants stimulated 
the phenylpropanoid pathway that led to the accumulation of secondary metabolites ((iso)
Flavone Conjugates) in stems (Gutsch et al., 2020).
A major concern in the agriculture field is the application of excess phosphorus fertilizers 
and fungicides which leads to the accumulation of high concentrations of cadmium (Cd) in 
the soil. Therefore, there is a need for the implementation of appropriate agricultural strat￾egies to improve the heavy metal tolerance of plants in agriculture. One such appropriate 
strategy is the symbiotic association of mycorrhizae with crop plants. The fungi that are in 
symbiotic association with the plants can immobilize the heavy metals and thereby limit/
prevents their uptake into plants. Experimental results of Janeeshma et al. revealed that my￾corrhization could improve the Cd stress tolerance of maize plants. This indicates that mycor￾rhization may stabilize heavy metal ions in the soil and/or limit their uptake into the plants, 
thereby suggesting the implementation of mycorrhization strategies in the future to improve 
the plant tolerance in heavy metal-loaded soils (Janeeshma et al., 2022).
Contaminations of heavy metals in plants not only restrict their safe consumption due 
to health hazards but also lower their productivity. Biochar has been widely used as a soil 
amendment to improve the quality of the soil. Biochar is a carbon-rich product of biomass 
that has been widely used as a soil amendment to improve the quality of soil by increasing the 
soil water-holding capacity and nutrient availability, and also by increasing the pH in acidic 
soil. Experiments have been conducted on plants grown in a greenhouse in soil contaminated 
with heavy metals and with or without biochar. The experimental results showed that biochar 
amendment significantly reduced the health hazard quotient. Biochar amendment not only 
improved plant biomass, photosynthesis rate, chlorophyll, and protein contents but also en￾hanced the levels of secondary metabolites in the plants grown in heavy metal contaminated 
soil. These results suggest the beneficial effects of biochar supplementation in metal-loaded 
soil as a sustainable approach in the future for the safe cultivation of plants in polluted soils 
(Nigam et al., 2021).
5.2 Arsenic (As)
Arsenic (As) is a nonessential ubiquitous metal and toxic to plants (Zvobgo et al., 2018). 
Arsenic can also influence the synthesis and production of different secondary metabolites 
in plants. Arsenic uptake increased the expression of ApCPS2 (a leaf abundant ent-copalyl 
diphosphate synthase which is involved in the biosynthesis pathway of andrographolide) 
resulting in the elevated levels of pharmacologically important ent-labdane-related di￾terpenes (ent-LRDs) such as andrographolide, neoandrographolide, 14-deoxy-11,12-
didehydroandrographolide and andrograpanin in Andrographis paniculata. Also, Arsenic 
enhanced the flavonoid (5,7,2′,3′-tetra methoxy flavanone) content in these plants (Das et al., 
2021). Anthocyanins have been reported to enhance the arsenic tolerance of plants; therefore, 
anthocyanin manipulation can improve the growth and yield of crop plants prone to arse￾nic pollution (Ahammed and Yang, 2022). Arsenic increased the levels of phenol, flavonoid, 398 19. Production and role of plants secondary metabolites
anthocyanin, and essential oil in rosemary plants (Farouk and Al-Amri, 2019). Arsenic ex￾posure enhanced the content of both carotenoids and flavonoids in Artemisia annua plants. 
Most interestingly, combined treatment of Arsenic and salicylic acid (SA) more substantially 
enhanced the expression of genes involved in different secondary metabolic pathways such 
as the artemisinin biosynthetic pathway and flavonoids pathway, therefore higher contents 
of artemisinin and flavonoids, respectively, in Artemisia annua plants (Kumari and Pandey￾Rai, 2018; Kumari et al., 2018). These studies suggest that exogenous application of SA may 
enhance the stress tolerance of plants in Arsenic contaminated soils.
5.3 Lead (Pb)
Lead (Pb) is one of the hazardous heavy metals that accumulate in soil and water bod￾ies. Pb is released from various sources like automobile exhaust, paints, and discharge from 
batteries. Pb exposure also enhanced the contents of secondary metabolites (total phenols, 
polyphenols, flavonoids, and anthocyanin) in tomato seedlings (Bali et al., 2019). Jasmonic 
acid (JA) is an important phytohormone associated with defense responses against stress 
(Sahil et  al., 2021a). In addition, JA further increased these secondary metabolites in Pb 
stressed tomato seedlings. This indicates that JA priming may mitigate Pb toxicity by elevat￾ing the levels of secondary metabolites, metal ligation compounds, organic acids, and poly￾amine accumulation plants (Bali et al., 2019). A higher concentration of Pb was also found to 
enhance the activity of phenylalanine ammonia-lyase (PAL) in both in roots of both soybean 
(Glycine max L.) and lupine (Lupinus luteus L.) seedlings. In soybean, Pb stress enhanced the 
lignin content, while in lupine decreased the lignin content. This indicates that heavy metals 
may activate the phenylpropanoid pathway via enhanced PAL activity to produce secondary 
metabolites other than lignin (Pawlak-Sprada et al., 2011).
5.4 Chromium (Cr)
Chromium (Cr) compounds have been widely used for various industrial purposes such 
as in leather processing, steel-manufacture, wood preservatives, electroplating industries, 
and chemical manufacturing industries (Kotaś and Stasicka, 2000) resulting in the contamina￾tion of agriculture fields with chromium. Excess Cr in the environment is harmful to all living 
beings including plants. Chromium toxicity is also associated with changes in components of 
antioxidant systems as well as secondary metabolites which results in plant growth inhibition 
(Dubey et al., 2018). Cr exposure caused a significant decrease in carotenoids in Phyllanthus 
amarus plants, but the concentration of therapeutically active secondary metabolites such as 
phyllanthin and hypophyllanthin was increased up to a certain level of Cr (Rai and Mehrotra, 
2008). Cr exposure also led to increased accumulation of both primary (total sugars, reducing 
sugars, and nonreducing sugars) and secondary metabolites (total phenols and flavonoids) 
in Brassica juncea seedlings. Interestingly, the application of Selenium (Se) in combination 
with Cr further enhanced the levels of these both primary and secondary metabolites. In ad￾dition, Se supplementation could also reduce the uptake of Cr by plants. This indicates that 
Se alleviates the Cr toxicity in Brassica juncea seedlings and enhances the tolerance against 
stress (Handa et al., 2018). Plants such as Plantago ovata grows in Cr contaminated soils in 
India. Cr exposure enhanced the expression of genes (PAL-phenylalanine ammonia-lyase and 6. Effect of particulate matter (PM) on PSMs 399
PPO-Polyphenol oxidase) involved in the phenylpropanoid pathway, therefore increased the 
content of secondary metabolites like polyphenols and carotenoids, consequently enhanced 
total antioxidant activity in Plantago ovata plants (Kundu et al., 2018). Cr stressed rice seed￾lings were also found to accumulate significantly higher levels of total phenols and flavo￾noids when compared with nonstressed plants (Dubey et al., 2018). The anticancer alkaloids 
such as vincristine and vinblastine contents were increased in Catharanthus roseus (L.) plants 
under Cr stress (Rai et al., 2014). Previous experimental studies also revealed that chromium 
contamination can change the composition of the secondary metabolites. For example, both 
Cr(III) and Cr(VI) enhanced the scopolamine content but not hyoscyamine content in the 
leaves of Datura innoxia. This infers that heavy metals pollution may also influence the qual￾ity, safety, and efficacy of natural products by altering the synthesis of specific PSMs in plants 
(Vernay et al., 2008). Recently, researchers have demonstrated that symbiotic microbes aid to 
improve metal stress tolerance in plants by enhancing the accumulation of secondary me￾tabolites. Their studies showed that chromate resistant Staphylococcus arlettae alleviated Cr 
stress by suppressing the chromate intake by the plants, modulating phytohormones, and 
strengthening the host’s antioxidant system through enhancing the accumulation of phenols 
and flavonoids, thereby promoted growth in sunflower (Helianthus annuus L.) plants (Qadir 
et al., 2020). These studies further point to the fact that heavy metal-related environmental 
challenges can be mitigated by using the plant symbiotic microbes that can improve plant 
growth through phytohormones secretion and metal chelation.
5.5 Nickel (Ni)
Nickel (Ni) at very low concentrations is important for plant development, growth, and 
defense mechanisms (Rizwan et al., 2017). But, at elevated levels, Ni can adversely affect the 
plant growth by hampering uptake, absorption, and translocation of nutrients (Fe, Cu, Zn, 
and Mn), destroying photosystem and membrane integrity and promoting chlorosis, necro￾sis, and senescence in plants (Yusuf et al., 2011; Amjad et al., 2019). PSMs (anthocyanins, total 
phenols, and flavonoids) are known for their role in combating heavy metal stress. Ni stress 
elevated the expression of genes such as PAL and CHS, thereby a significant increase in the 
contents of anthocyanins and phenols, and flavonoids, respectively, in Ni-stressed tomato 
seedlings compared with the control (Jahan et al., 2020).
6. Effect of particulate matter (PM) on PSMs
Atmospheric particulate matter (PM) pollution is a global environmental issue harming 
ecosystems. PM is one of the important air pollutants worldwide. It is a complex mixture of 
extremely small particles and liquid droplets composed of acids, organic chemicals, metals, 
and soil or dust particles. The main sources of PM include both natural sources (e.g., fires, 
dust storms, volcanoes, and aerosolized sea salt) and anthropogenic sources (e.g., combustion 
in mechanical and industrial processes, cement factories, Power stations, vehicle emissions, 
and tobacco smoke). Based on the aerodynamic equivalent diameter (AED), PM can be clas￾sified into three types such as PM10, PM2.5, and PM0.1 having an AED of < 10, < 2.5, and 
< 0.1μm, respectively (Anderson et al., 2012). PM causes severe physical damage to plants 400 19. Production and role of plants secondary metabolites
by blocking stomata and its damaging effects are owing to its small diameter and complex 
composition (Feretti et  al., 2019). PM can cause severe damage to plant growth by direct 
deposition on the aerial parts and consequent penetration into the plants. Besides, PM can 
also affect green plants indirectly via soil-root interaction (Tremlová et al., 2013). PM can also 
participate in other secondary chemical reactions in the atmosphere to generate secondary 
PM composed of other toxic compounds such as sulfur dioxide (SO2), oxides of nitrogen 
(NOx), polyaromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), and volatile organic compounds (VOCs) (Janssen 
et al., 1997; Bosco et al., 2005; Maceira et al., 2020). PM2.5 is the highly harmful PM composed 
of heavy metals, polychlorinated biphenyls, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), and 
other potential carcinogens (Mo et al., 2015). Since PM contain trace metals (such as Pb, Cr, 
and Cd), its deposition on plants significantly contributes to the accumulation of the trace 
metals in the plants (Luo et al., 2019). These trace metals present in the PM contribute to the 
characteristic toxicity of the PM and it has been reported that PM causes significant damage 
for plant nitrogen metabolism (Pavlík et al., 2012). PM blocks the stomatal pores which re￾sult in altered gaseous exchanges, consequently disturbing the plant physiology (Chandawat 
et al., 2014). However, the impact of PM on secondary metabolism cannot be ignored as well. 
Many previous reports showed that PM can also alter the levels of secondary metabolites 
in plants (Table 1). Exposure to PM can differentially alter the levels of PSMs in plants. For 
example, Azadirachta indica trees exposed to high particulate matter showed elevated phenols 
and tannins but decreased levels of carotenoids (Sharma et al., 2020). In an experiment to 
study the effect of PM on the secondary metabolites, tomato (Solanum lycopersicum L.) plants 
were directly grown on PM10 collected on quartz fiber filters. These experimental results 
revealed a decrease in the chlorophyll content in tomato plants is attributed to the direct 
influence of PM on the biosynthesis of chlorophyll or by indirect PM-induced destruction of 
chlorophyll. Carotenoids are known for their vital photoprotective role in the prevention of 
photoxidative destruction of chlorophyll. Tomato plants grown on PM showed an increase 
in the leaf carotenoid content; this indicates the adaptive response of plants to alleviate the 
PM-induced oxidative stress-mediated damage in plants (Daresta et al., 2015). Plants accu￾mulate organic acids which in turn form complexes to detoxify the environmental pollutants 
including metals and metalloids, thus organic acids provide stress tolerance to environmental 
pollution (Singh and Chauhan, 2011; Anjum et al., 2015; Osmolovskaya et al., 2018). High con￾tents of organic acids indicate the presence of PM10 particulate matter in the environment. It 
was also reported that plants from air pollution affected areas (with very high average daily 
concentrations of PM10 particles) accumulate high concentrations of total organic acids in the 
leaves and the bark compared with control plants, this indicates the fact that plants produce 
secondary metabolites to acquire resistance against air pollution (Sebek, 2020).
Haze is one kind of serious air pollution caused by the accumulation of PM2.5 in the atmo￾sphere (Tan et al., 2009; Li et al., 2019b). Haze consists of major pollutants including particu￾late matter, carbon monoxide (CO), SO2, NO2, and O3 (Aziz et al., 2018). Haze greatly affects 
the amount of solar radiation reaching the earth’s surface, thereby altering the temperature 
and relative humidity which results in reduced plant photosynthetic activity (Davies and 
Unam, 1999). Not only affect the photosynthetic rate of the plants but haze can also affect 
the content of the secondary metabolites in plants. For instance, Artemisia argyi plants grown 
under haze environments not only showed increased levels of primary metabolites but also 
substantially elevated levels of secondary metabolites. This increase in secondary metabolite References 401
content indicates the adaptive strategy of plants to cope up with the haze-mediated plant 
damage (Zhang et al., 2021). PM-associated toxic compounds such as polyaromatic hydro￾carbons (PAHs) can trigger ROS production (Maceira et al., 2020). It has also been reported 
that PM-bound, traffic-related PAH emissions increased the content of a bioactive monoter￾penoid Linalool but not the eugenol in sweet basil (Ocimum basilicum L.), this indicates that 
PM-bound PAH can influence essential oil linalool production in sweet basil (Hubai et al., 
2021). Endophytes (ranging from fungi to bacteria) are considered to mediate interactions 
between plants and their competitors, seed dispersers, herbivores, and pathogens. An inter￾esting point is to be noted that, PM can also influence the colonization of these endophytes. 
The emission of suspended particulate matter was negatively correlated with the frequency 
of colonization of endophytes of Tinospora cordifolia, indicating that PM might affect the in￾teractions between plants and herbivores, thereby might alter the secondary metabolism in 
plants (Mishra et al., 2012).
7. Conclusion
Growing industrialization and increased anthropogenic activities lead to dramatic cli￾matic change in the environment causing severe atmospheric pollution which has become 
a global concern in the 21st century. Dynamic environmental changes not only affect the 
plant primary productivity but also affect the production of plant secondary metabolites. 
These PSMs are associated with an essential role in the defense against herbivores and 
pathogens and also implicated in the adaptation of plants to a wide range of biotic and 
abiotic stressors. A majority of these PSMs have been reported to possess a wide array of 
pharmacological properties such as antioxidant, anticancer, antidiabetic, antiaging activi￾ties, etc. Increasing environmental pollution is increasingly hazardous to all living organ￾isms including plants. Especially, the production of various PSMs is highly influenced by 
the accumulation of different environmental pollutants. This not only affects the plant’s 
adaptive response to a variety of stressors but also substantially alters the interaction of 
plant-herbivore or plant-microbe interactions, ultimately posing a persistent threat to the 
plant ecosystems and subsequent maintenance of ecosystem functioning. Appropriate sus￾tainable agricultural approaches are necessary to combat pollutant-mediated stress and to 
improve plant growth and yield. Promising agricultural approaches such as soil amend￾ment with biochar may be considered as a good approach to mitigate the heavy metal￾induced toxicity. Conservation of natural resources or minimization of forest combustion, 
carbon sequestration possibly by plantation will certainly mitigate the greenhouse effect 
and subsequently ensure the proper functioning of ecosystems.
References
Agrawal, M., Deepak, S.S., 2003. Physiological and biochemical responses of two cultivars of wheat to elevated levels 
of CO2 and SO2, singly and in combination. Environ. Pollut. 121, 189–197.
Ahammed, G.J., Yang, Y., 2022. Anthocyanin-mediated arsenic tolerance in plants. Environ. Pollut. 292, 118475.
Al Jaouni, S., Saleh, A.M., Wadaan, M.A.M., Hozzein, W.N., Selim, S., AbdElgawad, H., 2018. Elevated CO(2) induces 
a global metabolic change in basil (Ocimum basilicum L.) and peppermint (Mentha piperita L.) and improves their 
biological activity. J. Plant Physiol. 224-225, 121–131.402 19. Production and role of plants secondary metabolites
Ali, S.T., Mahmooduzzafar, Abdin, M.Z., Iqbal, M., 2008. Ontogenetic changes in foliar features and psoralen content 
of Psoralea corylifolia Linn. Exposed to SO2 stress. J. Environ. Biol. 29, 661–668.
Alstad, D., Edmunds Jr., G., Weinstein, L., 1982. Effects of air pollutants on insect populations. Annu. Rev. Entomol. 
27, 369–384.
Amjad, M., Raza, H., Murtaza, B., Abbas, G., Imran, M., Shahid, M., Naeem, M.A., Zakir, A., Iqbal, M.M., 2019. Nickel 
toxicity induced changes in nutrient dynamics and antioxidant profiling in two maize (Zea mays L.) hybrids. 
Plants (Basel) 9, 5.
Anderson, J.O., Thundiyil, J.G., Stolbach, A., 2012. Clearing the air: a review of the effects of particulate matter air 
pollution on human health. J. Med. Toxicol. 8, 166–175.
Anjum, N.A., Hasanuzzaman, M., Hossain, M.A., Thangavel, P., Roychoudhury, A., Gill, S.S., Rodrigo, M.A.M., 
Adam, V., Fujita, M., Kizek, R., Duarte, A.C., Pereira, E., Ahmad, I., 2015. Jacks of metal/metalloid chelation trade 
in plants-an overview. Front. Plant Sci. 6, 192.
Ansari, N., Agrawal, M., Agrawal, S.B., 2021a. An assessment of growth, floral morphology, and metabolites of a 
medicinal plant Sida cordifolia L. under the influence of elevated ozone. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. Int. 28, 832–845.
Ansari, N., Yadav, D.S., Agrawal, M., Agrawal, S.B., 2021b. The impact of elevated ozone on growth, secondary me￾tabolites, production of reactive oxygen species and antioxidant response in an anti-diabetic plant Costus pictus. 
Funct. Plant Biol. 48, 597–610.
Arsenov, D., Župunski, M., Pajević, S., Nemeš, I., Simin, N., Alnuqaydan, A.M., Watson, M., Aloliqi, A.A., Mimica￾Dukić, N., 2021. Roots of Apium graveolens and Petroselinum crispum-insight into phenolic status against toxicity 
level of trace elements. Plants (Basel) 10.
Asgari Lajayer, B., Ghorbanpour, M., Nikabadi, S., 2017. Heavy metals in contaminated environment: destiny of 
secondary metabolite biosynthesis, oxidative status and phytoextraction in medicinal plants. Ecotoxicol. Environ. 
Saf. 145, 377–390.
Ausma, T., De Kok, L.J., 2019. Atmospheric H2S: impact on plant functioning. Front. Plant Sci. 10.
Aziz, R., Zabawi, A., Abdullah, F., Azdawiyah, S., Rashid, M.A., 2018. Effects of haze on net photosynthetic rate, 
stomatal conductance and yield of Malaysian rice (Oryza sativa L.) varieties. J. Trop. Agric. Food Sci. 46, 157–169.
Babula, P., Klejdus, B., Kovacik, J., Hedbavny, J., Hlavna, M., 2015. Lanthanum rather than cadmium induces oxida￾tive stress and metabolite changes in Hypericum perforatum. J. Hazard. Mater. 286, 334–342.
Bachheti, A., Sharma, A., Bachheti, R.K., Husen, A., Pandey, D.P., 2019. Plant allelochemicals and their var￾ious application. In: Mérillon, J.M., Ramawat, K.G. (Eds.), Co-Evolution of Secondary Metabolites, 
Reference Series in Phytochemistry. Springer International publishing AG, Cham, pp. 441–465, https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-319-76887-8_14-1.
Bachheti, A., Bachheti, D.R.K., Husen, A., 2021. Medicinal plants and their pharmaceutical properties under adverse 
environmental conditions. In: Husen, A. (Ed.), Harsh Environment and Plant Resilience. Springer International 
Publishing AG, Cham, pp. 457–502, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-65912-7_19.
Bali, S., Jamwal, V.L., Kohli, S.K., Kaur, P., Tejpal, R., Bhalla, V., Ohri, P., Gandhi, S.G., Bhardwaj, R., Al-Huqail, A.A., 
Siddiqui, M.H., Ali, H.M., Ahmad, P., 2019. Jasmonic acid application triggers detoxification of lead (Pb) toxicity 
in tomato through the modifications of secondary metabolites and gene expression. Chemosphere 235, 734–748.
Bidart-Bouzat, M.G., Imeh-Nathaniel, A., 2008. Global change effects on plant chemical defenses against insect her￾bivores. J. Integr. Plant Biol. 50, 1339–1354.
Bolsinger, M., Lier, M.E., Lansky, D.M., Hughes, P.R., 1991. Influence of ozone air pollution on plant-herbivore inter￾actions. Part 1: biochemical changes in ornamental milkweed (Asclepias curassavica L.; asclepiadaceae) induced by 
ozone. Environ. Pollut. 72, 69–83.
Bortolin, R.C., Caregnato, F.F., Divan Junior, A.M., Zanotto-Filho, A., Moresco, K.S., Rios Ade, O., Salvi Ade, O., 
Ortmann, C.F., de Carvalho, P., Reginatto, F.H., Gelain, D.P., Moreira, J.C., 2016. Chronic ozone exposure alters the 
secondary metabolite profile, antioxidant potential, anti-inflammatory property, and quality of red pepper fruit 
from Capsicum baccatum. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 129, 16–24.
Bosco, M.L., Varrica, D., Dongarrà, G., 2005. Case study: inorganic pollutants associated with particulate matter from 
an area near a petrochemical plant. Environ. Res. 99, 18–30.
Brilli, F., Ciccioli, P., Frattoni, M., Prestininzi, M., Spanedda, A.F., Loreto, F., 2009. Constitutive and herbivore-induced 
monoterpenes emitted by Populus x euroamericana leaves are key volatiles that orient Chrysomela populi beetles. 
Plant Cell Environ. 32, 542–552.
Causin, H.F., Rufty, T.W., Reynolds, J.F., 2006. Gas exchange and carbon metabolism in two Prosopis species 
(Fabaceae) from semiarid habitats: effects of elevated CO2, N supply, and N source. Am. J. Bot. 93, 716–723.References 403
Chandawat, D.K., Verma, P., Solanki, H., Patel, Y., 2014. Role of total phenol in the resistance mechanism of plants 
against air pollution. Biolife 2, 586–592.
Chang, J.D., Mantri, N., Sun, B., Jiang, L., Chen, P., Jiang, B., Jiang, Z., Zhang, J., Shen, J., Lu, H., Liang, Z., 2016. Effects 
of elevated CO2 and temperature on Gynostemma pentaphyllum physiology and bioactive compounds. J. Plant 
Physiol. 196-197, 41–52.
Chen, X., Chen, Q., Zhang, X., Li, R., Jia, Y., Ef, A.A., Jia, A., Hu, L., Hu, X., 2016. Hydrogen sulfide mediates nicotine 
biosynthesis in tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum) under high temperature conditions. Plant Physiol. Biochem. 104, 174–179.
Cho, K., Shibato, J., Agrawal, G.K., Jung, Y.H., Kubo, A., Jwa, N.S., Tamogami, S., Satoh, K., Kikuchi, S., Higashi, T., 
Kimura, S., Saji, H., Tanaka, Y., Iwahashi, H., Masuo, Y., Rakwal, R., 2008. Integrated transcriptomics, proteomics, 
and metabolomics analyses to survey ozone responses in the leaves of rice seedling. J. Proteome Res. 7, 2980–2998.
Cho, K., Tiwari, S., Agrawal, S.B., Torres, N.L., Agrawal, M., Sarkar, A., Shibato, J., Agrawal, G.K., Kubo, A., Rakwal, 
R., 2011. Tropospheric ozone and plants: absorption, responses, and consequences. Rev. Environ. Contam. Toxicol. 
212, 61–111.
Choudhary, A., Kumar, A., Kaur, H., Singh, M., Suri, G.S., Kaur, G., Mehta, S., 2022. Effect of elevated CO2 conditions 
on medicinal plants: a relatively unexplored aspect. In: Environmental Pollution and Medicinal Plants. CRC Press, 
pp. 95–111.
Coley, P., Massa, M., Lovelock, C., Winter, K., 2002. Effects of elevated CO2 on foliar chemistry of saplings of nine 
species of tropical tree. Oecologia 133, 62–69.
Cui, H., Sun, Y., Chen, F., Zhang, Y., Ge, F., 2016. Elevated O₃ and TYLCV infection reduce the suitability of tomato as 
a host for the whitefly Bemisia tabaci. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 17.
Daresta, B.E., Italiano, F., Gennaro, G., Trotta, M., Tutino, M., Veronico, P., 2015. Atmospheric particulate matter (PM) 
effect on the growth of Solanum lycopersicum cv. Roma plants. Chemosphere 119, 37–42.
Das, P., Khare, P., Singh, R.P., Yadav, V., Tripathi, P., Kumar, A., Pandey, V., Gaur, P., Singh, A., Das, R., Hiremath, C., 
Verma, A.K., Shukla, A.K., Shanker, K., 2021. Arsenic-induced differential expression of oxidative stress and sec￾ondary metabolite content in two genotypes of Andrographis paniculata. J. Hazard. Mater. 406, 124302.
Davey, M.P., Bryant, D.N., Cummins, I., Ashenden, T.W., Gates, P., Baxter, R., Edwards, R., 2004. Effects of elevated 
CO2 on the vasculature and phenolic secondary metabolism of Plantago maritima. Phytochemistry 65, 2197–2204.
Davies, S.J., Unam, L., 1999. Smoke-haze from the 1997 Indonesian forest fires: effects on pollution levels, local cli￾mate, atmospheric CO2 concentrations, and tree photosynthesis. For. Ecol. Manag. 124, 137–144.
Deepti, B.A.J., Bhalla, P., Bachheti, R.K., Husen, A., 2022a. Growth and development of medicinal plants, and produc￾tion of secondary metabolites under ozone pollution. In: Husen, A. (Ed.), Environmental Pollution and Medicinal 
Plants. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, pp. 25–45, https://doi.org/10.1201/9781003178866-2.
Deepti, B.A.J., Chauhan, K., Bachheti, R.K., Husen, H., 2022b. Impact of UV radiation on the growth and pharma￾ceutical properties of medicinal plants. In: Husen, A. (Ed.), Environmental Pollution and Medicinal Plants. CRC 
Press, Boca Raton, FL, pp. 47–64, https://doi.org/10.1201/9781003178866-3.
Deng, B., Zeng, D., 2006. Carbon-nutrient balance hypothesis on plant defense. Chin. J. Ecol. 25, 449–455.
Du, B., Kreuzwieser, J., Winkler, J.B., Ghirardo, A., Schnitzler, J.P., Ache, P., Alfarraj, S., Hedrich, R., White, P., 
Rennenberg, H., 2018. Physiological responses of date palm (Phoenix dactylifera) seedlings to acute ozone exposure 
at high temperature. Environ. Pollut. 242, 905–913.
Dubey, S., Gupta, A., Khare, A., Jain, G., Bose, S., Rani, V., 2018. Long- and short-term protective responses of rice 
seedling to combat Cr(VI) toxicity. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. Int. 25, 36163–36172.
Facchini, P.J., 2001. Alkaloid biosynthesis in plants: biochemistry, cell biology, molecular regulation, and metabolic 
engineering applications. Annu. Rev. Plant Physiol. Plant Mol. Biol. 52, 29–66.
Farouk, S., Al-Amri, S.M., 2019. Exogenous melatonin-mediated modulation of arsenic tolerance with improved 
accretion of secondary metabolite production, activating antioxidant capacity and improved chloroplast ultra￾structure in rosemary herb. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 180, 333–347.
Feretti, D., Pedrazzani, R., Ceretti, E., Dal Grande, M., Zerbini, I., Viola, G.C.V., Gelatti, U., Donato, F., Zani, C., 2019. 
“Risk is in the air”: polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, metals and mutagenicity of atmospheric particulate matter 
in a town of northern Italy (Respira study). Mutat. Res./Genet. Toxicol. Environ. Mutagen. 842, 35–49.
Freiwald, V., Häikiö, E., Julkunen‐Tiitto, R., Holopainen, J., Oksanen, E., 2008. Elevated ozone modifies the feeding 
behaviour of the common leaf weevil on hybrid aspen through shifts in developmental, chemical, and structural 
properties of leaves. Entomol. Exp. Appl. 128, 66–72.
Ghasemzadeh, A., Jaafar, H.Z., 2011. Effect of CO(2) enrichment on synthesis of some primary and secondary metab￾olites in ginger (Zingiber officinale roscoe). Int. J. Mol. Sci. 12, 1101–1114.404 19. Production and role of plants secondary metabolites
Ghosh, S., 2018, October 18. Mongabay. Home Gardens and Polluted Fields are Helping Conserve this Perfume 
Source. https://india.mongabay.com/2018/10/home-gardens-and-polluted-fields-are-helping-conserve-this￾perfume-source/.
Goyal, V., Jhanghel, D., Mehrotra, S., 2021. Emerging warriors against salinity in plants: nitric oxide and hydrogen 
sulphide. Physiol. Plant. 171, 896–908.
Gutsch, A., Hendrix, S., Guerriero, G., Renaut, J., Lutts, S., Alseekh, S., Fernie, A.R., Hausman, J.F., Vangronsveld, 
J., Cuypers, A., Sergeant, K., 2020. Long-term cd exposure alters the metabolite profile in stem tissue of Medicago 
sativa. Cell 9.
Handa, N., Kohli, S.K., Thukral, A.K., Bhardwaj, R., Alyemeni, M.N., Wijaya, L., Ahmad, P., 2018. Protective role of 
selenium against chromium stress involving metabolites and essential elements in Brassica juncea L. seedlings. 3 
Biotech 8, 66.
Hare, J.D., 2011. Ecological role of volatiles produced by plants in response to damage by herbivorous insects. Annu. 
Rev. Entomol. 56, 161–180.
He, X., Huang, W., Chen, W., Dong, T., Liu, C., Chen, Z., Xu, S., Ruan, Y., 2009. Changes of main secondary metabo￾lites in leaves of Ginkgo biloba in response to ozone fumigation. J. Environ. Sci. (China) 21, 199–203.
Holopainen, J.K., Virjamo, V., Ghimire, R.P., Blande, J.D., Julkunen-Tiitto, R., Kivimäenpää, M., 2018. Climate change 
effects on secondary compounds of Forest trees in the northern hemisphere. Front. Plant Sci. 9, 1445.
Holstein, S.A., Hohl, R.J., 2004. Isoprenoids: remarkable diversity of form and function. Lipids 39, 293–309.
Howell, R.K., 1974. Phenols, ozone, and their involvement in pigmentation and physiology of plant injury. In: 
Dugger, M. (Ed.), Air Pollution Effects on Plant Growth. American Chemical Society, Washington, DC, pp. 94–105.
Huang, J., Hammerbacher, A., Forkelová, L., Hartmann, H., 2017a. Release of resource constraints allows greater 
carbon allocation to secondary metabolites and storage in winter wheat. Plant Cell Environ. 40, 672–685.
Huang, J., Reichelt, M., Chowdhury, S., Hammerbacher, A., Hartmann, H., 2017b. Increasing carbon availability 
stimulates growth and secondary metabolites via modulation of phytohormones in winter wheat. J. Exp. Bot. 68, 
1251–1263.
Huang, X., Duan, S., Wu, Q., Yu, M., Shabala, S., 2020. Reducing cadmium accumulation in plants: structure-function 
relations and tissue-specific operation of transporters in the spotlight. Plants (Basel) 9, 223.
Hubai, K., Székely, O., Teke, G., Kováts, N., 2021. Is essential oil production influenced by air pollution in Ocimum 
basilicum L.? Biochem. Syst. Ecol. 96, 104248.
Husain, R., Weeden, H., Bogush, D., Deguchi, M., Soliman, M., Potlakayala, S., Katam, R., Goldman, S., Rudrabhatla, 
S., 2019. Enhanced tolerance of industrial hemp (Cannabis sativa L.) plants on abandoned mine land soil leads to 
overexpression of cannabinoids. PLoS One 14, e0221570.
Husen, H., 2022. Environmental Pollution and Medicinal Plants. Taylor & Francis Group, LLC, Boca Raton, FL, 
https://doi.org/10.1201/9781003178866.
Ibrahim, M.H., Jaafar, H.Z., 2011a. Enhancement of leaf gas exchange and primary metabolites under carbon diox￾ide enrichment up-regulates the production of secondary metabolites in Labisia pumila seedlings. Molecules 16, 
3761–3777.
Ibrahim, M.H., Jaafar, H.Z., 2011b. Increased carbon dioxide concentration improves the antioxidative properties of 
the Malaysian herb kacip fatimah (Labisia pumila Blume). Molecules 16, 6068–6081.
Ibrahim, M.H., Jaafar, H.Z., 2012. Impact of elevated carbon dioxide on primary, secondary metabolites and antioxi￾dant responses of Eleais guineensis Jacq. (oil palm) seedlings. Molecules 17, 5195–5211.
Ibrahim, M.H., Jaafar, H.Z., Rahmat, A., Rahman, Z.A., 2010. The relationship between phenolics and flavonoids 
production with total non structural carbohydrate and photosynthetic rate in Labisia pumila Benth. Under high 
CO2 and nitrogen fertilization. Molecules 16, 162–174.
Iriti, M., Faoro, F., 2004. Plant Defense and Human Nutrition: Phenylpropanoids on the Menu. Curr. Top. Nutraceutical 
Res. vol. 2, 47–65.
Iriti, M., Faoro, F., 2009. Chemical diversity and defence metabolism: how plants cope with pathogens and ozone 
pollution. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 10, 3371–3399.
Iriti, M., Di Maro, A., Bernasconi, S., Burlini, N., Simonetti, P., Picchi, V., Panigada, C., Gerosa, G., Parente, A., Faoro, 
F., 2009. Nutritional traits of bean (Phaseolus vulgaris) seeds from plants chronically exposed to ozone pollution. J. 
Agric. Food Chem. 57, 201–208.
Jahan, M.S., Guo, S., Baloch, A.R., Sun, J., Shu, S., Wang, Y., Ahammed, G.J., Kabir, K., Roy, R., 2020. Melatonin alle￾viates nickel phytotoxicity by improving photosynthesis, secondary metabolism and oxidative stress tolerance in 
tomato seedlings. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 197, 110593.References 405
Jamloki, A., Bhattacharyya, M., Nautiyal, M.C., Patni, B., 2021. Elucidating the relevance of high temperature and 
elevated CO(2) in plant secondary metabolites (PSMs) production. Heliyon 7, e07709.
Janeeshma, E., Puthur, J.T., Wróbel, J., Kalaji, H.M., 2022. Metabolic alterations elicited by Cd and Zn toxicity in Zea 
mays with the association of Claroideoglomus claroideum. Ecotoxicology 31, 92–113.
Janssen, N.A., Van Mansom, D.F., Van Der Jagt, K., Harssema, H., Hoek, G., 1997. Mass concentration and elemental 
composition of airborne particulate matter at street and background locations. Atmos. Environ. 31, 1185–1193.
Janzik, I., Preiskowski, S., Kneifel, H., 2005. Ozone has dramatic effects on the regulation of the prechorismate path￾way in tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum L. cv. Bel W3). Planta 223, 20–27.
Jia, X., Zhao, Y., Liu, T., Huang, S., 2016. Elevated CO2 affects secondary metabolites in Robinia pseudoacacia L. seed￾lings in Cd- and Pb-contaminated soils. Chemosphere 160, 199–207.
Jiang, D., Wang, G.R., Yan, S.C., 2020. The improved resistance against gypsy moth in Larix olgensis seedlings ex￾posed to cd stress association with elemental and chemical defenses. Pest Manag. Sci. 76, 1713–1721.
Johnson, S.N., Hartley, S.E., 2018. Elevated carbon dioxide and warming impact silicon and phenolic-based defences 
differently in native and exotic grasses. Glob. Chang. Biol. 24, 3886–3896.
Jordan, D.N., Green, T.H., Chappelka, A.H., Lockaby, B.G., Meldahl, R.S., Gjerstad, D.H., 1991. Response of total 
tannins and phenolics in loblolly pine foliage exposed to ozone and acid rain. J. Chem. Ecol. 17, 505–513.
Kapoor, D., Singh, M.P., Kaur, S., Bhardwaj, R., Zheng, B., Sharma, A., 2019. Modulation of the functional compo￾nents of growth, photosynthesis, and anti-oxidant stress markers in cadmium exposed Brassica juncea L. Plants 
(Basel) 8.
Karonen, M., Ossipov, V., Ossipova, S., Kapari, L., Loponen, J., Matsumura, H., Kohno, Y., Mikami, C., Sakai, Y., Izuta, 
T., Pihlaja, K., 2006. Effects of elevated carbon dioxide and ozone on foliar proanthocyanidins in Betula platyphylla, 
Betula ermanii, and Fagus crenata seedlings. J. Chem. Ecol. 32, 1445–1458.
Kasten, D., Durner, J., Gaupels, F., 2017. Gas alert: the NO(2) pitfall during NO fumigation of plants. Front. Plant Sci. 
8, 85.
Keen, N.T., Taylor, O.C., 1975. Ozone injury in soybeans: isoflavonoid accumulation is related to necrosis. Plant 
Physiol. 55, 731–733.
Khaling, E., Papazian, S., Poelman, E.H., Holopainen, J.K., Albrectsen, B.R., Blande, J.D., 2015. Ozone affects growth 
and development of Pieris brassicae on the wild host plant Brassica nigra. Environ. Pollut. 199, 119–129.
Khanna, K., Kohli, S.K., Ohri, P., Bhardwaj, R., Al-Huqail, A.A., Siddiqui, M.H., Alosaimi, G.S., Ahmad, P., 2019. 
Microbial fortification improved photosynthetic efficiency and secondary metabolism in Lycopersicon esculentum
plants under cd stress. Biomol. Ther. 9.
Korkina, L.G., 2007. Phenylpropanoids as naturally occurring antioxidants: from plant defense to human health. 
Cell. Mol. Biol. 53, 15–25.
Korkina, L., Kostyuk, V., De Luca, C., Pastore, S., 2011. Plant phenylpropanoids as emerging anti-inflammatory 
agents. Mini Rev. Med. Chem. 11, 823–835.
Kotaś, J., Stasicka, Z., 2000. Chromium occurrence in the environment and methods of its speciation. Environ. Pollut. 
107, 263–283.
Kovácik, J., Klejdus, B., 2008. Dynamics of phenolic acids and lignin accumulation in metal-treated Matricaria cham￾omilla roots. Plant Cell Rep. 27, 605–615.
Kumari, A., Pandey-Rai, S., 2018. Enhanced arsenic tolerance and secondary metabolism by modulation of gene 
expression and proteome profile in Artemisia annua L. after application of exogenous salicylic acid. Plant Physiol. 
Biochem. 132, 590–602.
Kumar, A., Choudhary, A., Kaur, H., Kumar, R., Sharma, R., Gautam, H., Mehta, S., 2022. Water pollution and medic￾inal plants: insights into the impact and adaptation responses. In: Environmental Pollution and Medicinal Plants. 
CRC Press, pp. 117–129.
Kumari, P., Kumar, S., Patra, A., Singh, B., Pandey, V., Mehta, S., 2021. Plant-microbe symbiosis led synthesis of bio￾active compounds. In: Antioxidants in Plant-Microbe Interaction. Springer, Singapore, pp. 21–40.
Kumari, A., Pandey, N., Pandey-Rai, S., 2018. Exogenous salicylic acid-mediated modulation of arsenic stress toler￾ance with enhanced accumulation of secondary metabolites and improved size of glandular trichomes in Artemisia 
annua L. Protoplasma 255, 139–152.
Kundu, D., Dey, S., Raychaudhuri, S.S., 2018. Chromium (VI) - induced stress response in the plant Plantago ovata
Forsk in vitro. Genes Environ. 40, 21.
Laisk, A., Kull, O., Moldau, H., 1989. Ozone concentration in leaf intercellular air spaces is close to zero. Plant Physiol. 
90, 1163–1167.406 19. Production and role of plants secondary metabolites
Langebartels, C., Kerner, K., Leonardi, S., Schraudner, M., Trost, M., Heller, W., Sandermann, H., 1991. Biochemical 
plant responses to ozone: I. differential induction of polyamine and ethylene biosynthesis in tobacco. Plant 
Physiol. 95, 882–889.
Langematz, U., 2019. Stratospheric ozone: down and up through the anthropocene. ChemTexts 5, 8.
Lastdrager, J., Hanson, J., Smeekens, S., 2014. Sugar signals and the control of plant growth and development. J. Exp. 
Bot. 65, 799–807.
Lee, H.K., Khaine, I., Kwak, M.J., Jang, J.H., Lee, T.Y., Lee, J.K., Kim, I.R., Kim, W.I., Oh, K.S., Woo, S.Y., 2017. The 
relationship between SO2 exposure and plant physiology: a mini review. Hortic. Environ. Biotechnol. 58, 523–529.
Levine, L.H., Kasahara, H., Kopka, J., Erban, A., Fehrl, I., Kaplan, F., Zhao, W., Littell, R.C., Guy, C., Wheeler, R., 
Sager, J., Mills, A., Levine, H.G., 2008. Physiologic and metabolic responses of wheat seedlings to elevated and 
super-elevated carbon dioxide. Adv. Space Res. 42, 1917–1928.
Li, X., Zhang, L., Ahammed, G.J., Li, Z.X., Wei, J.P., Shen, C., Yan, P., Zhang, L.P., Han, W.Y., 2017. Stimulation in 
primary and secondary metabolism by elevated carbon dioxide alters green tea quality in Camellia sinensis L. Sci. 
Rep. 7, 7937.
Li, M., Li, Y., Zhang, W., Li, S., Gao, Y., Ai, X., Zhang, D., Liu, B., Li, Q., 2018. Metabolomics analysis reveals that 
elevated atmospheric CO(2) alleviates drought stress in cucumber seedling leaves. Anal. Biochem. 559, 71–85.
Li, L., Wang, M., Pokharel, S.S., Li, C., Parajulee, M.N., Chen, F., Fang, W., 2019a. Effects of elevated CO(2) on foliar 
soluble nutrients and functional components of tea, and population dynamics of tea aphid, Toxoptera aurantii. 
Plant Physiol. Biochem. 145, 84–94.
Li, Y., Zheng, C., Ma, Z., Quan, W., 2019b. Acute and cumulative effects of haze fine particles on mortality and the 
seasonal characteristics in Beijing, China, 2005-2013: a time-stratified case-crossover study. Int. J. Environ. Res. 
Public Health 16, 2383.
Li, T., Tiiva, P., Rinnan, Å., Julkunen-Tiitto, R., Michelsen, A., Rinnan, R., 2020. Long-term effects of elevated CO2, 
nighttime warming and drought on plant secondary metabolites in a temperate heath ecosystem. Ann. Bot. 125, 
1065–1075.
Liao, P., Shi, Y., Li, Z., Chen, Q., Xu, T.R., Cui, X., Guan, H., Guo, L., Yang, Y., 2018. Impaired terpenoid backbone 
biosynthesis reduces saponin accumulation in Panax notoginseng under cd stress. Funct. Plant Biol. 46, 56–68.
Liu, X., Hou, F., Li, G., Sang, N., 2015. Effects of nitrogen dioxide and its acid mist on reactive oxygen species produc￾tion and antioxidant enzyme activity in Arabidopsis plants. J. Environ. Sci. (China) 34, 93–99.
Liu, S., Yang, R., Pan, Y., Ren, B., Chen, Q., Li, X., Xiong, X., Tao, J., Cheng, Q., Ma, M., 2016. Beneficial behavior of 
nitric oxide in copper-treated medicinal plants. J. Hazard. Mater. 314, 140–154.
Liu, Z., Li, Y., Cao, C., Liang, S., Ma, Y., Liu, X., Pei, Y., 2019. The role of H(2)S in low temperature-induced cucurbita￾cin C increases in cucumber. Plant Mol. Biol. 99, 535–544.
Loreto, F., Velikova, V., 2001. Isoprene produced by leaves protects the photosynthetic apparatus against ozone 
damage, quenches ozone products, and reduces lipid peroxidation of cellular membranes. Plant Physiol. 127, 
1781–1787.
Loreto, F., Fischbach, R., Schnitzler, J.-P., Ciccioli, P., Brancaleoni, E., Calfapietra, C., Seufert, G., 2001. Monoterpene 
emission and monoterpene synthase activities in the Mediterranean evergreen oak Quercus ilex L. grown at ele￾vated CO2 concentrations. Glob. Chang. Biol. 7, 709–717.
Loreto, F., Pinelli, P., Manes, F., Kollist, H., 2004. Impact of ozone on monoterpene emissions and evidence for an 
isoprene-like antioxidant action of monoterpenes emitted by Quercus ilex leaves. Tree Physiol. 24, 361–367.
Lu, C., Qi, J., Hettenhausen, C., Lei, Y., Zhang, J., Zhang, M., Zhang, C., Song, J., Li, J., Cao, G., Malook, S.U., Wu, J., 
2018. Elevated CO(2) differentially affects tobacco and rice defense against lepidopteran larvae via the jasmonic 
acid signaling pathway. J. Integr. Plant Biol. 60, 412–431.
Lu, X., Zhang, L., Shen, L., 2021. Chapter 2—Tropospheric ozone interacts with weather and climate. In: Gao, M., 
Wang, Z., Carmichael, G. (Eds.), Air Pollution, Climate, and Health. Elsevier, pp. 15–46.
Luo, X., Bing, H., Luo, Z., Wang, Y., Jin, L., 2019. Impacts of atmospheric particulate matter pollution on environmen￾tal biogeochemistry of trace metals in soil-plant system: a review. Environ. Pollut. 255, 113138.
Maceira, A., Marcé, R.M., Borrull, F., 2020. Analytical methods for determining organic compounds present in the 
particulate matter from outdoor air. TrAC Trends Anal. Chem. 122, 115707.
Mao, B., Wang, Y., Zhao, T.H., Tian, R.R., Wang, W., Ye, J.S., 2017a. Combined effects of elevated O(3) concentrations 
and enhanced UV-B radiation of the biometric and biochemical properties of soybean roots. Front. Plant Sci. 8, 1568.
Mao, B., Yin, H., Wang, Y., Zhao, T.H., Tian, R.R., Wang, W., Ye, J.S., 2017b. Combined effects of O3 and UV radiation 
on secondary metabolites and endogenous hormones of soybean leaves. PLoS One 12, e0183147.References 407
Mata, L., Gaspar, H., Santos, R., 2012. Carbon/nutrient balance in relation to biomass production and halogenated 
compound content in the red alga Asparagopsis Taxiformis (Bonnemaisoniaceae)(1). J. Phycol. 48, 248–253.
Matros, A., Amme, S., Kettig, B., Buck-Sorlin, G.H., Sonnewald, U., Mock, H.P., 2006. Growth at elevated CO2 concen￾trations leads to modified profiles of secondary metabolites in tobacco cv. SamsunNN and to increased resistance 
against infection with potato virus Y. Plant Cell Environ. 29, 126–137.
McKiernan, A.B., O'Reilly-Wapstra, J.M., Price, C., Davies, N.W., Potts, B.M., Hovenden, M.J., 2012. Stability of plant de￾fensive traits among populations in two eucalyptus species under elevated carbon dioxide. J. Chem. Ecol. 38, 204–212.
Medda, S., Dessena, L., Mulas, M., 2020. Monitoring of the PAL enzymatic activity and polyphenolic compounds in 
leaves and fruits of two Myrtle cultivars during maturation. Agriculture 10, 389.
Mehta, S., James, D., Reddy, M.K., 2019. Omics technologies for abiotic stress tolerance in plants: current status and 
prospects. Recent Approaches in Omics for Plant Resilience to Climate Change. Springer, Singapore, pp. 1–34.
Mikkelsen, B.L., Olsen, C.E., Lyngkjær, M.F., 2015. Accumulation of secondary metabolites in healthy and diseased 
barley, grown under future climate levels of CO2, ozone and temperature. Phytochemistry 118, 162–173.
Miles, C.I., del Campo, M.L., Renwick, J.A., 2005. Behavioral and chemosensory responses to a host recognition cue 
by larvae of Pieris rapae. J. Comp. Physiol. Neuroethol. Sens. Neural Behav. Physiol. 191, 147–155.
Mishra, A., Gond, S.K., Kumar, A., Sharma, V.K., Verma, S.K., Kharwar, R.N., Sieber, T.N., 2012. Season and tissue 
type affect fungal endophyte communities of the Indian medicinal plant Tinospora cordifolia more strongly than 
geographic location. Microb. Ecol. 64, 388–398.
Mishra, B., Chand, S., Singh Sangwan, N., 2019. ROS management is mediated by ascorbate-glutathione-α-tocopherol 
triad in co-ordination with secondary metabolic pathway under cadmium stress in Withania somnifera. Plant 
Physiol. Biochem. 139, 620–629.
Mo, L., Ma, Z., Xu, Y., Sun, F., Lun, X., Liu, X., Chen, J., Yu, X., 2015. Assessing the capacity of plant species to accu￾mulate particulate matter in Beijing, China. PLoS One 10, e0140664.
Mohajel Kazemi, E., Kolahi, M., Yazdi, M., Goldson-Barnaby, A., 2020. Anatomic features, tolerance index, secondary 
metabolites and protein content of chickpea (Cicer arietinum) seedlings under cadmium induction and identifica￾tion of PCS and FC genes. Physiol. Mol. Biol. Plants 26, 1551–1568.
Montesinos‐Pereira, D., Barrameda‐Medina, Y., Baenas, N., Moreno, D.A., Sámchez-Rodríguez, E., Ruiz, J., 2016. 
Evaluation of hydrogen sulfide supply to biostimulate the nutritive and phytochemical quality and the antioxi￾dant capacity of cabbage (Brassica oleracea L. ‘bronco’). J. Appl. Bot. Food Qual. 89.
Nigam, N., Khare, P., Ahsan, M., Yadav, V., Shanker, K., Singh, R.P., Panday, V., Das, P., Singh, A., Yadav, R., Tripathi, 
P., Sinam, G., Shukla, A.K., Karak, T., 2021. Biochar amendment reduced the risk associated with metal uptake and 
improved metabolite content in medicinal herbs. Physiol. Plant. 173, 321–339.
Noret, N., Meerts, P., Tolrà, R., Poschenrieder, C., Barceló, J., Escarre, J., 2005. Palatability of Thlaspi caerulescens for 
snails: influence of zinc and glucosinolates. New Phytol. 165, 763–771.
Okem, A., Stirk, W.A., Street, R.A., Southway, C., Finnie, J.F., Van Staden, J., 2015. Effects of cd and Al stress on sec￾ondary metabolites, antioxidant and antibacterial activity of Hypoxis hemerocallidea Fisch. & C.A. Mey. Plant 
Physiol. Biochem. 97, 147–155.
Osmolovskaya, N., Vu, D., Kuchaeva, L., 2018. The role of organic acids in heavy metal tolerance in plants. Biol. 
Commun. 63, 9–16.
Pääkkönen, E., Seppänen, S., Holopainen, T., Kokko, H., Kärenlampi, S., Kärenlampi, L., Kangasjärvi, J., 1998. 
Induction of genes for the stress proteins PR-10 and PAL in relation to growth, visible injuries and stomatal con￾ductance in birch (Betula pendula) clones exposed to ozone and/or drought. New Phytol. 138, 295–305.
Pandey, P., Pallujam, A.D., Leelavathi, S., Mehta, S., Dagla, M.C., Bhushan, B., Aggarwal, S.K., 2021. Nitric oxide: a 
key modulator of plant responses under environmental stress. In: Plant Performance Under Environmental Stress. 
Springer, Cham, pp. 301–328.
Pavlík, M., Pavlíková, D., Zemanová, V., Hnilička, F., Urbanová, V., Száková, J., 2012. Trace elements present in air￾borne particulate matter- -stressors of plant metabolism. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 79, 101–107.
Pawlak-Sprada, S., Arasimowicz-Jelonek, M., Podgórska, M., Deckert, J., 2011. Activation of phenylpropanoid 
pathway in legume plants exposed to heavy metals. Part I. effects of cadmium and lead on phenylalanine 
ammonia-lyase gene expression, enzyme activity and lignin content. Acta Biochim. Pol. 58, 211–216.
Peñuelas, J., Estiarte, M., 1998. Can elevated CO(2) affect secondary metabolism and ecosystem function? Trends 
Ecol. Evol. 13, 20–24.
Penuelas, J., Estiarte, M., Llusia, J., 1997. Carbon-based secondary compounds at elevated CO2. Photosynthetica 33, 
313–319.408 19. Production and role of plants secondary metabolites
Pérez-López, U., Sgherri, C., Miranda-Apodaca, J., Micaelli, F., Lacuesta, M., Mena-Petite, A., Quartacci, M.F., Muñoz￾Rueda, A., 2018. Concentration of phenolic compounds is increased in lettuce grown under high light intensity 
and elevated CO(2). Plant Physiol. Biochem. 123, 233–241.
Pham, H.N., Michalet, S., Bodillis, J., Nguyen, T.D., Nguyen, T.K.O., Le, T.P.Q., Haddad, M., Nazaret, S., Dijoux￾Franca, M.G., 2017. Impact of metal stress on the production of secondary metabolites in Pteris vittata L. and 
associated rhizosphere bacterial communities. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. Int. 24, 16735–16750.
Podazza, G., Arias, M., Prado, F.E., 2012. Cadmium accumulation and strategies to avoid its toxicity in roots of the 
citrus rootstock Citrumelo. J. Hazard. Mater. 215-216, 83–89.
Qadir, M., Hussain, A., Hamayun, M., Shah, M., Iqbal, A., Husna, Murad, W., 2020. Phytohormones producing rhi￾zobacterium alleviates chromium toxicity in Helianthus annuus L. by reducing chromate uptake and strengthening 
antioxidant system. Chemosphere 258, 127386.
Rahman, S., Husen, A., 2022. Impact of sulphur dioxide deposition on medicinal plants’ growth and production of 
active constituents. In: Husen, A. (Ed.), Environmental Pollution and Medicinal Plants. CRC Press, Boca Raton, 
FL, pp. 65–93, https://doi.org/10.1201/9781003178866-4.
Rai, V., Mehrotra, S., 2008. Chromium-induced changes in ultramorphology and secondary metabolites of Phyllanthus 
amarus Schum & Thonn. – an hepatoprotective plant. Environ. Monit. Assess. 147, 307–315.
Rai, V., Khatoon, S., Bisht, S.S., Mehrotra, S., 2005. Effect of cadmium on growth, ultramorphology of leaf and second￾ary metabolites of Phyllanthus amarus Schum. And Thonn. Chemosphere 61, 1644–1650.
Rai, V., Tandon, P.K., Khatoon, S., 2014. Effect of chromium on antioxidant potential of Catharanthus roseus varieties 
and production of their anticancer alkaloids: vincristine and vinblastine. Biomed. Res. Int. 2014, 934182.
Reddy, B., Kumar, A., Mehta, S., Sahu, K.P., 2021. Methods of assessments of microbial diversity and their functional 
role in soil fertility and crop productivity. Plant, Soil and Microbes in Tropical Ecosystems. Springer, Singapore, 
pp. 293–314.
Rizwan, M., Imtiaz, M., Dai, Z., Mehmood, S., Adeel, M., Liu, J., Tu, S., 2017. Nickel stressed responses of rice in 
Ni subcellular distribution, antioxidant production, and osmolyte accumulation. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 24, 
20587–20598.
Robinson, E.A., Ryan, G.D., Newman, J.A., 2012. A meta-analytical review of the effects of elevated CO2 on 
plant-arthropod interactions highlights the importance of interacting environmental and biological variables. 
New Phytol. 194, 321–336.
Rolland, F., Baena-Gonzalez, E., Sheen, J., 2006. Sugar sensing and signaling in plants: conserved and novel mecha￾nisms. Annu. Rev. Plant Biol. 57, 675–709.
Sahil, Das, A., Mehta, S., Abdelmotelb, K.F., Lavale, S.A., Aggarwal, S.K., Jat, B.S., Tripathi, A., Garg, S., 2021a. 
Jasmonic acid for sustainable plant growth and production under adverse environmental conditions. In: Plant 
Performance Under Environmental Stress. Springer, Cham, pp. 71–98.
Sahil, Kesan, R., Mehta, S., Abdelmotelb, K.F., Aggarwal, S.K., Lavale, S.A., Jat, B.S., Tripathi, A., Rajput, L.S., 2021b. 
Salicylic acid for vigorous plant growth and enhanced yield under harsh environment. In: Plant Performance Under 
Environmental Stress: Hormones, Biostimulants and Sustainable Plant Growth Management. Springer, p. 99.
Saleh, A.M., Selim, S., Jaouni, S.A., AbdElgawad, H., 2018. CO(2) enrichment can enhance the nutritional and health 
benefits of parsley (Petroselinum crispum L.) and dill (Anethum graveolens L.). Food Chem. 269, 519–526.
Sallas, L., Luomala, E.M., Ultriainen, J., Kainulainen, P., Holopainen, J.K., 2003. Contrasting effects of elevated carbon 
dioxide concentration and temperature on rubisco activity, chlorophyll fluorescence, needle ultrastructure and 
secondary metabolites in conifer seedlings. Tree Physiol. 23, 97–108.
Sandermann Jr., H., 1996. Ozone and plant health. Annu. Rev. Phytopathol. 34, 347–366.
Sebek, G., 2020. Influence of air pollution to amount of total organic acids in wild fruits plants in Pljevlja region. J. 
Hyg. Eng. Des. 29, 81–85.
Semenov, S., 2001. An approach to balancing the positive and negative effects of elevated nitrogen oxides in the lower 
atmosphere on terrestrial plants. ScientificWorldJournal 1 (Suppl 2), 467–471.
Sgherri, C., Pérez-López, U., Micaelli, F., Miranda-Apodaca, J., Mena-Petite, A., Muñoz-Rueda, A., Quartacci, M.F., 
2017. Elevated CO(2) and salinity are responsible for phenolics-enrichment in two differently pigmented lettuces. 
Plant Physiol. Biochem. 115, 269–278.
Shadkami, F., Helleur, R.J., Cox, R.M., 2007. Profiling secondary metabolites of needles of ozone-fumigated white 
pine (Pinus strobus) clones by thermally assisted hydrolysis/methylation GC/MS. J. Chem. Ecol. 33, 1467–1476.
Shahid, M., Pourrut, B., Dumat, C., Nadeem, M., Aslam, M., Pinelli, E., 2014. Heavy-metal-induced reactive oxygen 
species: phytotoxicity and physicochemical changes in plants. Rev. Environ. Contam. Toxicol. 232, 1–44.References 409
Sharma, P., Meyyazhagan, A., Easwaran, M., Sharma, M.M.M., Mehta, S., Pandey, V., Liu, W.C., Kamyab, H., 
Balasubramanian, B., Baskaran, R., Klemeš, J.J., 2022. Hydrogen sulfide: a new warrior in assisting seed germina￾tion during adverse environmental conditions. Plant Growth Regul., 1–20.
Sharma, G., Rahul, Guleria, R., Mathur, V., 2020. Differences in plant metabolites and microbes associated with 
Azadirachta indica with variation in air pollution. Environ. Pollut. 257, 113595.
Sheng, Q., Zhu, Z., 2019. Effects of nitrogen dioxide on biochemical responses in 41 garden plants. Plants (Basel) 8.
Shivaraj, S.M., Vats, S., Bhat, J.A., Dhakte, P., Goyal, V., Khatri, P., Kumawat, S., Singh, A., Prasad, M., Sonah, H., 
Sharma, T.R., Deshmukh, R., 2020. Nitric oxide and hydrogen sulfide crosstalk during heavy metal stress in 
plants. Physiol. Plant. 168, 437–455.
Siatka, T., Kašparová, M., Spilková, J., 2012. Effects of zinc and cadmium ions on cell growth and production of cou￾marins in cell suspension cultures of Angelica archangelica L. Ceska Slov. Farm. 61, 261–266.
Singh, A., Agrawal, M., 2015. Effects of ambient and elevated CO2 on growth, chlorophyll fluorescence, photosyn￾thetic pigments, antioxidants, and secondary metabolites of Catharanthus roseus (L.) G Don. Grown under three 
different soil N levels. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. Int. 22, 3936–3946.
Singh, D., Chauhan, S.K., 2011. Organic acids of crop plants in aluminium detoxification. Curr. Sci. 100, 1509–1515.
Singh, R., Gautam, N., Mishra, A., Gupta, R., 2011. Heavy metals and living systems: an overview. Indian J. Pharmacol. 
43, 246–253.
Singh, A.A., Agrawal, S.B., Shahi, J.P., Agrawal, M., 2014. Investigating the response of tropical maize (Zea mays
L.) cultivars against elevated levels of O3 at two developmental stages. Ecotoxicology (London, England) 23, 
1447–1463.
Singh, A., Mehta, S., Yadav, S., Nagar, G., Ghosh, R., Roy, A., Chakraborty, A., Singh, I.K., 2022. How to cope with the 
challenges of environmental stresses in the era of global climate change: an update on ROS stave off in plants. Int. 
J. Mol. Sci. 23 (4), 1995.
Smallegange, R.C., van Loon, J.J.A., Blatt, S.E., Harvey, J.A., Agerbirk, N., Dicke, M., 2007. Flower vs. leaf feeding by 
Pieris brassicae: glucosinolate-rich flower tissues are preferred and sustain higher growth rate. J. Chem. Ecol. 33, 
1831–1844.
Tan, J., Duan, J., He, K., Ma, Y., Duan, F., Chen, Y., Fu, J., 2009. Chemical characteristics of PM2.5 during a typical haze 
episode in Guangzhou. J. Environ. Sci. 21, 774–781.
Tisserat, B., Vaughn, S.F., 2001. Essential oils enhanced by ultra-high carbon dioxide levels from Lamiaceae species 
grown in vitro and in vivo. Plant Cell Rep. 20, 361–368.
Toumainen, J., Pellinen, R., Roy, S., Kiiskinen, M., Eloranta, T., Karjalainen, R., Kangasjärvi, J., 1996. Ozone affect 
birch (Betula pendula Roth) phenylpropanoid, polyamine and reactive oxygen detoxifying pathways at biochemi￾cal and gene expression levels. J. Plant Physiol. 148, 179–188.
Tremlová, J., Száková, J., Sysalová, J., Tlustoš, P., 2013. Bioavailability of arsenic, cadmium, iron and zinc in leafy 
vegetables amended with urban particulate matter suspension. J. Sci. Food Agric. 93, 1378–1384.
Tripathi, R., Agrawal, S.B., 2013. Evaluation of changes in lipid peroxidation, ROS production, surface structures, 
secondary metabolites and yield of linseed (Linum usitatissimum L.) under individual and combined stress of 
ultraviolet-B and ozone using open top chambers. Indian J. Biochem. Biophys. 50, 318–325.
Uraguchi, S., Watanabe, I., Yoshitomi, A., Kiyono, M., Kuno, K., 2006. Characteristics of cadmium accumulation and 
tolerance in novel cd-accumulating crops, Avena strigosa and Crotalaria juncea. J. Exp. Bot. 57, 2955–2965.
Utomo, S., Pambudi, P., Pramudianto, A., Sudaryanto, 2021. The carbon dioxide (CO 2) sequestration potential of 
conservation plant Aquilaria malaccensis. IOP Conf. Ser.: Earth Environ. Sci. 724, 012063.
Varshney, C.K., Garg, J.K., Lauenroth, W.K., Heitschmidt, R.K., 1979. Plant responses to sulfur dioxide pollution. Crit. 
Rev. Environ. Control 9, 27–49.
Vernay, P., Gauthier-Moussard, C., Jean, L., Bordas, F., Faure, O., Ledoigt, G., Hitmi, A., 2008. Effect of chromium 
species on phytochemical and physiological parameters in Datura innoxia. Chemosphere 72, 763–771.
Wang, L., Wu, J., 2013. The essential role of jasmonic acid in plant-herbivore interactions- -using the wild tobacco 
Nicotiana attenuata as a model. J. Genet. Genomics 40, 597–606.
Wang, S.Y., Bunce, J.A., Maas, J.L., 2003. Elevated carbon dioxide increases contents of antioxidant compounds in 
field-grown strawberries. J. Agric. Food Chem. 51, 4315–4320.
Wang, F., Li, J., Wang, X., Zhang, W., Zou, B., Neher, D.A., Li, Z., 2014. Nitrogen and phosphorus addition impact soil 
N₂O emission in a secondary tropical forest of South China. Sci. Rep. 4, 5615.
Watts, S.F., 2000. The mass budgets of carbonyl sulfide, dimethyl sulfide, carbon disulfide and hydrogen sulfide. 
Atmos. Environ. 34, 761–779.Wilhelm, K., 1976. Effects of Sulfur dioxide on terrestrial vegetation. Ambio 5, 213–218.
Xu, M., Yang, B., Dong, J., Lu, D., Jin, H., Sun, L., Zhu, Y., Xu, X., 2011. Enhancing hypericin production of Hypericum 
perforatum cell suspension culture by ozone exposure. Biotechnol. Prog. 27, 1101–1106.
Yan, H., Guo, H., Yuan, E., Sun, Y., Ge, F., 2018. Elevated CO(2) and O(3) alter the feeding efficiency of Acyrthosiphon 
pisum and Aphis craccivora via changes in foliar secondary metabolites. Sci. Rep. 8, 9964.
Yan, H.Y., Guo, H.G., Sun, Y.C., Ge, F., 2020. Plant phenolics mediated bottom-up effects of elevated CO(2) on 
Acyrthosiphon pisum and its parasitoid Aphidius avenae. Insect Sci. 27, 170–184.
Yue, W., Huihui, Z., Jiechen, W., Hancheng, Z., Guoqiang, H., Dan, H., Fuwen, Y., Meichun, Z., Yanhui, C., Zhiyuan, 
T., Guanjun, L., Guangyu, S., 2020. Elevated NO(2) damages the photosynthetic apparatus by inducing the accu￾mulation of superoxide anions and peroxynitrite in tobacco seedling leaves. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 196, 110534.
Yusuf, M., Fariduddin, Q., Hayat, S., Ahmad, A., 2011. Nickel: an overview of uptake, essentiality and toxicity in 
plants. Bull. Environ. Contam. Toxicol. 86, 1–17.
Zhang, Y.Z., Jiang, D.Y., Zhang, C., Yang, K., Wang, H.F., Xia, X.W., Ding, W.J., 2021. Pathological impact on the phyl￾losphere microbiota of Artemisia argyi by haze. J. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 31, 510–519.
Zhao, Y.H., Jia, X., Wang, W.K., Liu, T., Huang, S.P., Yang, M.Y., 2016. Growth under elevated air temperature alters 
secondary metabolites in Robinia pseudoacacia L. seedlings in cd- and Pb-contaminated soils. Sci. Total Environ. 
565, 586–594.
Zhou, L., Yang, G., Sun, H., Tang, J., Yang, J., Wang, Y., Garran, T.A., Guo, L., 2017. Effects of different doses of cad￾mium on secondary metabolites and gene expression in Artemisia annua L. Front Med. 11, 137–146.
Ziegler, I., 1975. The effect of SO2 pollution on plant metabolism. In: Gunther, F.A. (Ed.), Residue Reviews. Springer, 
New York, NY, pp. 79–105.
Zvobgo, G., Sagonda, T., Lwalaba, J.L.W., Mapodzeke, J.M., Muhammad, N., Chen, G., Shamsi, I.H., Zhang, G., 2018. 
Transcriptomic comparison of two barley genotypes differing in arsenic tolerance exposed to arsenate and phos￾phate treatments. Plant Physiol. Biochem. 130, 589–603.
 
410 19. Production and role of plants secondary metabolitesPlants and their Interaction to Environmental Pollution 411 Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-99978-6.00023-6
CHAPTER
20
Plant proteomics and environmental 
pollution
B.M. Harisha
, Shivam Sharmaa
, D.R. Choudharya
, Antul 
Kumarb
, Anuj Choudharyb
, Harmanjot Kaurb
, Manisha 
Lakhanpalc
, Wajahat Ali Khand
, and Sahil Mehtae
a
Department of Vegetable Science and Floriculture, CSK HPKV, Palampur, Himachal Pradesh, 
India, b
Department of Botany, Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana, Punjab, India, c
Department of Forest Products (Medicinal and Aromatic Plants), Dr YS Parmar university of 
Horticulture and Forestry, Nauni, Himachal Pradesh, India, d
International Centre for Genetic 
Engineering and Biotechnology, New Delhi, Delhi, India, e
Department of Botany, Hansraj 
College, University of Delhi, New Delhi, India
1. Introduction
As that is already well-known, the plants inhale the CO2 like detrimental gasses during 
the processes of photosynthesis and liberate the O2 in return, which may otherwise be￾come the main cause of environmental pollution (Choudhary et al., 2022). Likewise the 
plants also absorb some of the pollution causing heavy metals from the soil for the me￾tabolism and also prevents the soil being polluted and also some plants are known to 
absorb the high frequency sounds and taking part in controlling noise pollution (Kumar 
et al., 2013) and also some of the aquatic or marine plants are known to absorb the pol￾lutants from the water bodies and resulting in the healthy water resources by reducing 
the water pollution (Kumar et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2019). Similarly, the plant kingdom 
is being involved in the controlling of the different types of environmental pollution but, 
as commonly there will be the tolerance limit for this action also, after the limit these 
various pollutions start showing some of the detrimental effects on plant species, viz., air 
pollution results in necrotic lesions on leaves, stunted plant growth, changes in leaf color 
including chlorosis (yellowing leaves), reddening, bronzing, mottling (Leghari and Zaidi, 
2013); ozone pollution will come in the way of photosynthesis and obstructing stomata, 412 20. Plant proteomics and environmental pollution
restricting respiration and stunting plant growth (Goyal et al., 2020a); soil pollution in the 
sense of change in the pH of the media will be potential of bringing deficiency effect of 
some of the minerals (Loyal et al., 2023; Reddy et al., 2021), for instance, the in pH above 
7.5 there will be hindered uptake of iron that causes the leaf necrosis and albinism of the 
plant (Luo et al., 2012). For all these detrimental actions, the plant species also have the 
responses that will be beneficial in indicating and overcoming the negative effects of the 
different environmental pollution-induced stress, those can be understood by the study of 
plant proteomics (Osakabe et al., 2014; Kumar and Singh, 2020).
“Protein” in Greek which is proteios, meaning “the first rank” Berzelius has given 
this term in 1838 (Cristea et al., 2004). Marc Wilkins for the first time in 1996 used the 
term “proteome” which can be considered as the “PROTein” complement of a “genOME” 
(Wilkins et al., 1996). A proteome is the generalized term of protein content in a cell that 
has specific localization, interactions, post-translational modifications (PTM), and turn￾over, at a particular time and situation (Bharti et al., 2021). Proteomics can be stated as the 
analysis of the entire protein complement of a cell, tissue, or organism under a specific, de￾fined set of conditions. Since the plants react to the different environmental stress through 
the production of protein in a target cell or tissue, proteomics is the one tool that helps to 
study the plant’s physiology toward the changes that take in the environment due to the 
act of pollution (Liu et al., 2019). Some harmful gasses that are added to the atmosphere 
are very potential in bringing notable changes in the physiology of the plants, viz., SO2 is 
one the main greenhouse gases that are seen at the level that can be sufficient in causing 
the physiological imbalances like hampered photosynthetic rate and distribution of pho￾tosynthates, impairing of stomatal responses, i.e., the inability of stomata to close correctly 
under environmental stress. This increased SO2 also influences reducing the carbon alloca￾tion and water use efficiency WUE. The higher chronic effect of SO2 is found to disrupt the 
thylakoid function and disturb the electron transport chain (Lee et al., 2017).
Another atmospheric pollutant is CO2 which would be responsible for the many physio￾logical imbalances as Rahmani et al. (2020) found that the increased exposure to multiwalled 
carbon nanotubes had is ill effects on photosynthetic pigments and increasing of rosemerinic 
acid in S. verticillata a medicinal plant, and also many atmospheric gaseous pollutants like 
O3 (Ozone), NO (nitrous oxide), and CO (carbon monoxide), etc., are very potent in affecting 
the vital physiological activities of the crop plants (Goyal et al., 2020a; Singh et al., 2022). 
Likewise, the heavy metals that cause the environmental pollution also have their negative 
or detrimental effects on the plant physiology as the chromium affects the maize seedlings 
and Brassica seedlings by interfering in cell viability, lipid peroxidation, and plant growth by 
increasing the accumulation of hydrogen peroxide (Terzi and Yıldız, 2021) and another heavy 
metal pollutant, i.e., cadmium its negative effects on tobacco plants are found to be decreased 
chlorophyll content and this, in turn, affected photosystem II and significantly reducing the 
biomass yield of tobacco (Zhang et al., 2020). The rice crop grown in heavy metal toxic soil 
exhibited devastating changes in leaf area, shoot length and root length and plant growth 
performance, dissolution and reduction of parenchymatous cells, mesophyll cells, and de￾crease in the number of xylem vessels thereby affecting the effective conductance of water to 
parts of plants (Arif et al., 2019). All these and other air and soil pollutants and their adverse 
effects on plant growth and physiology are can be controlled by a thorough study of avail￾able improved analysis methods like proteomics especially because of heavy metals that are 3. Plant proteomic technologies—Recent innovations and their applications 413
present in air and soil (Goyal et al., 2020b). This chapter deals with the approaches and chal￾lenges with present innovative technologies that are helpful in quantitative plant proteomics 
that may be employed in the studies of the cellular proteome to subcellular protein catalogues 
and organ-specific proteome analysis of abiotic stress responses in plants with special interest 
toward the proteomic responses of the plant toward the effect of environmental pollution.
2. Approaches and challenges in crop plant proteomics
Proteomics is the characterization of the proteome, including expression, structure, 
functions, interactions, and modifications of proteins at any stage of the whole plant or 
any specific organ (Domon and Aebersold, 2006). Coming to the choice of the specific 
proteomic technology for the specific study is the most important aspect to take an over￾view of the stress-responsive mechanisms, viz., formation of a new set of protein or the 
modification in the existing range of proteins (Liu et  al., 2019; Fatemeh, 2022). Many 
model plants like Arabidopsis thaliana in dicots, monocots like rice and purple false 
brome (Brachypodium distachyon), and many others for which the success in genome se￾quencing is evidenced, and the genomic data and transcriptomic profiles are linked to the 
spatial and temporal expression, biological function, and functional network of proteins 
that have gained the considerable attention (Wienkoop et al., 2010a). In recent years, the 
studies regarding proteomics, viz., quantitative proteomics, the plant’s responses, and 
their adaptation to the adverse environment by using high resolution and mass accuracy 
instruments are very successful for the understanding of plant growth, development, and 
interactions with the environment that can be also useful in the fields like crop improve￾ment (Hu et al., 2015; Fatemeh, 2022).
In the past decades, many proteomic techniques are being employed in the process of de￾scribing protein profiles, posttranslational modifications, and interactions. Though the im￾portant factors that depict the sense of proteomics are isolation, separation, visualization, 
and accurate identification of proteins (Komatsu and Jorrin-Novo, 2021), many advanced 
proteomic approaches are proposed by various scientists, viz., methodologies of sample 
preparation, data acquisition, processing, and post-processing in the field of seed proteom￾ics (Smolikova et al., 2020) in the same way for the identification of very less abundant 
proteins in the soil sample, was emphasized to overcome the challenges in the proteomics 
(Tartaglia et al., 2020). Moreover, nanoparticles sometimes also act as efficient pollutants 
that make plants suffer in many ways. Therefore, the study of proteomics and understand￾ing of the plant responses to nanoparticles were comprehended by Hossain et al. (2020).
3. Plant proteomic technologies—Recent innovations and their applications
Quantitative plant proteomics is the branch that deals with the quantification of the pro￾teins that are secreted by the plants in the target cell, tissue, or organelle, which are not only 
useful in elevating the growth and yield parameters of the plant and also helpful in making 
the researchers understand about the proteomic mechanisms that contribute to the plant’s tol￾erance toward the environmental stress. As there are already many quantitative proteomics 414 20. Plant proteomics and environmental pollution
technologies that exist for the understanding of protein functions, these proteomics have been 
developed as a substitute to transcriptomic and genomics-like techniques after the genome 
sequencing period (Wienkoop et al., 2010b; Bilal et al., 2017).
Since from conventional to modern times, proteomic techniques have improved in gain￾ing sufficient information regarding the protein structure and their response to specific 
stress. Ion exchange chromatography (IEC), size exclusion chromatography (SEC), and 
affinity chromatography are the conventional techniques are developed to employ in the 
purification of proteins (Jungbauer and Hahn, 2009; Voedisch and Thie, 2010; Hage et al. 
(2013)). On the other hand, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and western 
blotting are the techniques or methodologies that are very cooperative for the analysis 
of selective proteins. These conventional methods have the limitations of incapability of 
the defining the protein expression level and also have the restriction of analyzing the 
few individual proteins only (Lequin, 2005; Kurien and Scofield, 2006). Sodium dodecyl 
sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE), two-dimensional gel electropho￾resis (2-DE) and two-dimensional differential gel electrophoresis (2D-DIGE) techniques are 
having their effective participation in the separation of complex protein samples (Dunn, 
1986; Issaq and Veenstra, 2008; Marouga et al., 2005). Though protein microarrays or chips 
are found to be very accurate and rapid proteomic approaches, the challenges that exist 
in the development of these advanced techniques are considerable (Sutandy et al., 2001; 
Syafrizayanti and Di, 2017; Neagu et al., 2019).
Mass spectrometry (MS) analysis is one of the proteomic approaches that is considered 
most suitable for the complex protein aggregates and with higher sensitivity (Yates III, 
2011). Complimentary to this, Edman degradation/Edman sequencing has been devel￾oped to determine the amino acid sequence of a particular protein (Smith, 2001). Isotope￾coded affinity tag (ICAT) labeling, stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture 
(SILAC), and isobaric tag for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) techniques 
have recently been developed for quantitative proteomic (Shiio and Aebersold, 2006; 
Ong and Mann, 2006; Wiese et al., 2007; Kroksveen et al., 2015). The biological function 
of the protein will be very much understood if its three-dimensional (3D) structure is 
made available, the two technologies, viz., X-ray crystallography and nuclear magnetic 
resonance (NMR) spectroscopy made this task of getting 3D structure easy (Wiese et al., 
2007; Smyth and Martin, 2000), through this, a large amount of proteomics data can be 
collected.
That collected data can be made easily available and safely stored for further analysis 
through the bioinformatics databases along with the storage and handling of the databases 
many bioinformatics tools are useful for the 3D structure prediction, protein domain, and 
motif analysis, rapid analysis of protein–protein interaction, and data analysis of mass spec￾troscopy. The evolutionary relationship between and/or within the proteins can be under￾stood by the alignment tools that are mainly employed in sequence and structure alignment 
(Vihinen, 2001; Perez-Riverol et al., 2015). The different quantitative proteomics technologies 
are presented in flow chart form in Fig. 1 and their sequential application in proteomics study 
is depicted in Fig. 2. Among the techniques and approaches mentioned the proteomic study 
ay use single or a set of combined approaches to reveal the response of a target cell toward 
the specific stress.4. Cellular proteome to subcellular protein catalogues 415
4. Cellular proteome to subcellular protein catalogues
Though there are improved proteomic techniques to make the researchers understand 
protein modification or novel protein production from various plant species at both cellu￾lar and whole plant level that are evidence for abiotic stress sensing and intracellular stress 
signal transduction mechanisms there is a need for an in-depth proteome study of subcellu￾lar organelles that can be more helpful in the way of generating much detailed information 
about the intrinsic mechanism of the stress response as it correlates the possible relationship 
between the protein abundance and plant stress tolerance (Hossain et al., 2012). The outer 
part of the cell, i.e., the cell wall that first experiences the stress signals and the entire event 
of sensing environmental changes and activating the responsive mechanism is highly sys￾temic (Heino and Tapio Palva, 2003). During any situation when plant cell experiences the 
abiotic stress that may be due to any type of pollution, the mainly produced element is ROS 
FIG. 1 An overview of various available proteomics techniques available for assessing proteome in plants.416 20. Plant proteomics and environmental pollution
(reactive oxygen species) that is mainly due to the over reduced transport chain during stress 
conditions, that is recognized as a signal to activate the plant defense response (Vranova 
et al., 2002). The considerable developments that took place in the proteome studies based on 
organelle just not only provided a better understanding regarding the localization of protein 
with functions that are specific to an organelle in plants life process but also they served good 
insights into the plant’s internal protein mechanisms regarding its stress responses and toler￾ances (Agrawal et al., 2011).
Any proteomic technique should fulfill the criteria that it should be able to separate the 
mere abundant proteins that are produced during the stress condition in organelle from 
its mixture of cell components. Proteomics studies are mainly done to recognize the target 
plant’s response in the early research works mainly upon the response toward abiotic stress 
mainly environmental pollutants (Table 1). Studies regarding the proteome of chloroplast 
in the wheat plants cell with the help of two complementary proteomic technologies they 
FIG. 2 Application of various techniques in understanding different characteristics of plant’s proteome in detail.TABLE 1 List of proteomic studies and different proteomics techniques used in various agricultural crops under various stresses.
Plants Tissue/organelle
Subcellular 
target
Proteomic technique 
applied Stress conditions Findings References
Rice (Oryza sativa) Roots – 2-DE, MALDI-TOF MS Aluminum heavy metal 
(100mM, 250mM)
17 Modified proteins 
found
Yang et al. (2006)
Rice (O. sativa) Leaves – 2-DE, MALDI-TOF MS 750/1140/1520ppm of 
CO2
59 Total upregulation 
proteins identified
Bokhari et al. (2007)
Rice (O. sativa) Roots – 2-DE, MALDI-TOF MS Cadmium heavy metal 
(10μM and 100μM)
21 Transporter-like 
proteins increased
Aina et al. (2007)
Rice (O. sativa) Seedlings – 2D/MALDI-TOF MS Copper (1.5mM) 25 Regulatory proteins 
related to antioxidants 
and stress were 
identified and key 
metabolic enzymes 
reduced
Ahsan et al. (2007a)
Rice (O. sativa) Seedlings – 2D/MALDI-TOF MS Cadmium (0.8mM) 21 Regulatory proteins 
related to antioxidants 
and stress were 
identified
Ahsan et al. (2007b)
Rice (O. sativa) Root – 2D/MALDI-TOF MS Arsenic heavy metal 
(50μM and 100μM)
23 Stress-related 
proteins were identified
Ahsan et al. (2008)
Rice (O. sativa) Roots Mitochondria 2-DE MALDI-TOF MS/
TOF MS, PMF and MS 
or MS
Salt stress 8 Programmed cell 
death-related proteins 
found
Chen et al. (2009)
Rice (O. sativa) Root tips Nucleus 2-DE/LC-TOF MS Water stress or 
dehydration
109 Water stress￾responsive proteins 
were found in the 
target cell
Choudhary et al. (2009)
Wheat (Triticum 
aestivum)
Seedlings, leaf and 
root
– 4-plex iTRAQ Mercury heavy metal 249 Proteins responded Kang et al. (2015)
Wheat (T. aestivum) Leaves Chloroplast 2-DE, LTQ-FTICR Swiss￾Prot database Saline soil 60 Proteins responded Kamal et al. (2012)
Wheat (T. aestivum) Leaves Chloroplast 
(thylakoid)
1-DE, LTQ-FTICR Swiss￾Prot database Saline soil 767 Unique proteins found Kamal et al. (2013)
ContinuedTABLE 1 List of proteomic studies and different proteomics techniques used in various agricultural crops under various stresses—cont’d
Plants Tissue/organelle
Subcellular 
target
Proteomic technique 
applied Stress conditions Findings References
Wheat (T. aestivum) Seedlings leaves 
and coleoptile
– 4-plex iTRAQ Hydrogen peroxide stress 157 Protein responded Ge et al. (2013)
Wheat (T. aestivum) Shoots Mitochondria 2D-DIGE (difference 
gel electrophoresis), 
nanoLC–MS/MS
Salt stress Out of 68 identified 
proteins, 4 were salt 
responsive
Jacoby et al. (2010)
Wheat (T. aestivum) Roots and shoots Mitochondria 2D-DIGE and 
MALDI-TOF/TOF
Salt stress Salt stress proteins 
were found in shoots 
(15) and roots (33).
Jacoby et al. (2013)
Poplar (Populus
spp.)
Leaves Chloroplast 2-DE, MALDI-TOF MS Ozone pollution 27 Responsive proteins 
found
Bohler et al. (2011)
Soybean (Glycine 
max)
Leaves Chloroplast 2-DE, MALDI-TOF MS Ozone pollution 32 Proteins of differed 
response
Ahsan et al. (2010)
Soybean (G. max) Roots and 
hypocotyl
Cell wall 2-DE, nanoLC–MS/MS, 
MALDI TOF/MS, Edman 
degradation
Flooding Out of 204 identified 
proteins, 16 were found 
responsive
Komatsu et al. (2010)
Soybean (G. max) Root tips Nucleus Gel-free nano LC-MS/
MS and label-free 
quantification
Flooding 39 Responsive proteins 
discovered
Komatsu et al. (2014)
Garden pea (Pisum 
sativum)
Leaves Mitochondria 2-DE, nanoLC-MS/MS Environmental stress 26 Proteins responded Taylor et al. (2005)
Garden pea 
(P. sativum)
Leaves Mitochondria 2-DE, BN-PAGE,
Q-TOF MS
Drought, cold, and 
herbicide
29 Novel proteins 
identified
Taylor et al. (2005)
Mouse-ear cress 
(Arabidopsis 
thaliana)
Whole plant Mitochondria SDS-PAGE/ MALDI-TOF 
MS
Oxidative stress 164 New proteins 
identified
Palacio-Lopez et al. 
(2018)
Maize
(Zea mays)
Root – 2D/MALDI-TOF MS Arsenic heavy metal 
(250μM and 300μM)
11 Stress-related 
proteins were identified
Requejo and Tena 
(2005)
Maize
(Z. mays)
Leaves Chloroplast 2-DE, MALDI-TOF MS Short term salt exposure 20 Proteins responded Zorb et al. (2009)
Maize
(Z. mays)
Root apex Cell wall 2-DE, nanoLC-MS/MS Water deficit/drought 152 Responsive 
proteins identified
Zhu et al. (2007)
Barley
(Hordeum vulgare)
Seed aleurone Plasma 
membrane
1-DE nanoLC-MS/MS Abiotic stress 46 Responding proteins 
were identified
Hynek et al. (2006)4. Cellular proteome to subcellular protein catalogues 419
are Tricine SDS–PAGE and 2-DE associated with the most reliable mass spectroscopy meth￾ods (LTQ-FTICR and MALDI-TOF/TOF) these became a milestone in knowing about the 
photosynthetic proteins that are stress-responsive in plastids (Kamal et al., 2012). At pres￾ent, cell or subcellular proteomic studies focus on relatively abundant, or easily isolated 
homogenous compartments (e.g., plastids, mitochondria, peroxisomes, and nuclei) in rice, 
wheat, barley, maize, and Arabidopsis (Hu et al., 2015; Gong et al., 2015). Under the salt 
and osmotic stress conditions, the chloroplast of the wheat seedlings was considered for 
the proteomic analysis by employing the label-free based quantitative proteomic method 
revealed that the chloroplast structure is disrupted by the accumulation of abscisic acid 
and methyl jasmonate along with this 194 and 169 chloroplast-localized differentially ac￾cumulated proteins (DAPs) were identified that are responsive to salt and osmotic stresses, 
respectively (Zhu et al., 2021).
As same in the Pea (Pisum sativum) mitochondrial proteome studies for its response or 
changes that were mainly due to drought, cold, and also herbicide treatments were taken 
up by performing 2-DE Blue Native PAGE with Q-TOFMS (Taylor et al., 2005). Both Zhu 
et al. (2007) and Komatsu et al. (2010) have performed the cell wall proteome study on major 
crops using various proteomic technologies employing those techniques in understanding 
either dehydration or water stress reactive proteomes in various functions like metabolism 
of carbohydrates, cell wall modification, redox mechanism-based defense, and cell signaling 
pathways, the crops and techniques are, viz., rice using 2-DE and nano LC–MS/MS, soybean 
using 2-DE, MALDI-TOFMS, and nano LC–MS/MS, and maize using 2-DE and Q-TOFMS. 
The extracellular environment will achieve contact with the cellular cytoplasm employing 
the plasma membrane that holds the important responsibility of signaling, communication, 
and absorption of nutrients (Alexandersson et al., 2004). Since these are very less in amount 
and their solubility limitations, to understand the osmotic stress-induced proteomes that 
are important factors of the antioxidative defense system, nano LC–MS/MS-based pro￾teomic technologies have been employed in soybean crop (Komatsu et al., 2009; Nouri and 
Komatsu, 2010).
Differentially regulated responding proteins were been found when the root tips of soy￾bean crop that was affected by flooding stress and experienced modifications in nuclear 
were analyzed by gel-free nano –LC–MS/MS (Komatsu et al., 2014). Likewise, as concerning 
abiotic stress, the proteomic study of the chloroplast of soybean crop leaves by using the 
2-DE and MALDI-TOFMS technique has spotlighted the increment in the expression level 
of various proteins that are involved in antioxidant defense and carbon metabolism, under 
the ozone pollution (Ahsan et  al., 2010). The scanty work that is done on environmental 
pollution and proteomics at the cellular and subcellular levels of different crops and the 
challenges like requirement of ability to identify genuine protein residents for accurate de￾scription of an organelle proteome (Table 1) and many more challenges remain, the functions 
of protein and their compliments and proteome analysis of plant cell are made very under￾standing by quantitative proteomic profiling of target organelles to aquent with the protein 
and their compliments of the organelle and also for protein confined to subcellular location 
and relative protein quantification. As an example, the quantitative proteomic approaches 
MS sequencing and peptide mass fingerprinting helped in the quantification of the protein 
that is present in the xylem sap of tomato after the plant is affected by the Fusarium oxyspo￾rum (Bilal et al., 2017).420 20. Plant proteomics and environmental pollution
5. Organ-specific proteome analysis of plants in concern 
to environmental pollutants
Since the plant is a compound organism, it has a different organ system that individually 
responds to the external stimuli in its own way (Choudhary et al., 2021; Kumar et al., 2021). 
The main organ systems of the plant, viz., leaf, conducting tissues (xylem and phloem), and 
root are intensively involved in the process like photosynthesis, channel of signaling path￾ways, transfer and absorption of nutrients, and water from the soil respectively (Ligat et al., 
2011). When these functional organs and organ systems are countered with environmental 
pollutants like toxic atmospheric gasses and heavy metals they are very much capable of re￾sponding to it by the production of a novel set of proteins or alteration of existing proteins in 
the target cells. Thus, organ-specific proteome analysis with regard to these pollutants will be 
helpful in better understanding of organ-specific proteomics and to take target cell-oriented 
management approaches. Using gel-based proteomics technique, the organ-specific response 
mechanism was studied one-week-old soybean seedlings under flooding stress via analyzing 
protein profiles in the roots, hypocotyls, and leaves (Komatsu and Hossain, 2013).
As mentioned prior environmental pollution being the important component of stress to 
plant growth and development, organ-specific proteome analysis made it easy to understand 
the responses of plants in their organs for a specific pollutant. In the research carried out by 
performing the single-cell 2D electrophoresis and mass spectroscopy on the root cell of onion 
(Allium cepa var. agrogarum L.), the results were found that the root growth was inhibited dras￾tically. Chromosomal aberrations were observed and accumulation of reactive oxygen species 
(ROS) in the root cells was found. A total of 17 differentially expressed proteins were identi￾fied that indicated decreased defensive response, decreased respiration, increased transcrip￾tion, increased pathogen invasion, reduced DNA replicating activity, reduced DNA repair 
activity due to lead (Pb) toxicity n the root cells, and enlightened about the chance of using 
these proteins as a marker of Pb toxicity in onion (Lyu et al., 2020). Same as the proteomic 
analysis of peanut roots revealed 4676 novel proteins that are helpful in detoxification of the 
cadmium heavy metal (Yu et al., 2019).
The soybean plants were subjected to flooding and drought stress and the organ-specific 
analysis through gel-free/label-free proteomic technique revealed that the proteins related to 
photosynthesis, RNA, DNA, signaling, and the tricarboxylic acid cycle was mostly disturbed 
in leaves and roots, along with the production of 17 proteins, consisting beta-glucosidase 
31 and beta-amylase 5 giving a clue that these three main proteins may be involved in the 
defense mechanism f root and leaves against the flood and drought (Wang et al., 2017). The 
abundance of toxic heavy metals in the soil not only affect the crops directly but also efficiently 
affects plant growth by making the essential plant nutrients unavailable to plant (Naushad 
et al., 2017) as proof for this, the shoot proteome analysis of potato plant was performed by 
using MALDI TOF/TOF mass spectrometry and 8 differentially responding proteins were 
found (Meise et al., 2017).
5.1 Effect of toxic atmospheric gasses and leaf proteomics
Ozone and sulfur dioxides being the most detrimental pollutant that occurs through envi￾ronmental pollution cause serious detrimental effects on the plant specifically the leaf, both 5. Organ-specific proteome analysis of plants in concern to environmental pollutants 421
on its physical structure and physiological activity, i.e., photosynthesis and senescence. The 
results like destroyed membrane integrity, decreasing photosynthesis rates, speeding up ac￾tion of leaf aging and finally contributed to the severe yield reduction (Oksanen et al., 2001). 
Likewise, many of the finest pollutants may be present in the polluted air and cause the same 
detrimental effects on the plant leaf, so it is important to study the plant proteomics of leaf 
photosynthesis and its senescence that would provide a better understanding.
As the potential crop yield is mainly dependent on the biomass produced by the action of 
photosynthesis based on chlorophyll. Chu and his associates (2015) revealed the facts about 
chlorophyll biosynthesis regulation and photosynthesis in the crop, and also highlighted the 
severe changes in protein structure during the development of chlorophyll deficient Brassica 
napus leaves. Moreover, speed in leaf aging and its photosynthetic rate of carbon-di-oxide 
consumption from the rice cultivars were found to be strongly in proportionate with the chlo￾rophyll content during the grain filling period (Panda and Sarkar, 2013). As concerned to the 
rice crop the limiting concentration of O3 and SO2 are 0.2ppm and 0.5ppm respectively above 
which may become detrimental to the crop productivity, considering this, the two-week-old 
rice seedlings are treated with the O3 and SO2 gasses and the 2-DE approach is employed 
to reveal the 52 and 27 CBB-stained proteins in the O3- and SO2-treated leaves, respectively, 
against the untreated control (Agrawal et  al., 2002; Rakwal and Agrawal, 2003). Similarly 
in crops like cultivated beans and maize, the young plants when treated with O3and eval￾uated under proteomics studies the CBB stained gel revealed the modification in RuBisCO 
(ribulose-15-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase) protein. As a conclusion when the 2-DE 
is performed after 72h of treatment with O3 was found useful in the identification of 25 and 
12 protein spots in bean and maize leaves, respectively, and also as an achievement, a new 
pathogenesis-related protein-2 is identified that is to be utilized as a marker for O3 stress in 
bean (Torres et al., 2007).
The other atmospheric greenhouse gas, i.e., carbon dioxide (CO2) needs special interest 
due to its devastating effect on photosynthesis. Increment in the CO2 concentration may in￾directly bring the improvement in the response toward the photorespiration by directly in￾creasing the temperature that will bring the accelerated RuBisCO-limited photosynthetic rate 
(Alonso et al., 2009). Besides this, the plants treated for a longer time with CO2 were noticed 
to be exhibiting the lower photosynthesis rate (Kim et al., 2001). Proteomics is found to be the 
efficient way to understand the response of the plants after exposure to the elevated CO2, viz., 
the soybean leaves which were treated with the higher CO2, experienced the oxidative stress 
and were found to be less efficient in producing their own food (Qiu et al., 2008). Similarly, 
the proteomics studies in other agricultural crops, viz., wheat, barley, soybean, etc., may help 
understand the effect of atmospheric pollutants and their action on protein modification or 
novel protein production (Sarkar et al., 2010).
The leaves of tobacco crop were subjected to the proteomic analysis using the TMT-based 
proteomics approach to reveal the effect of Cd heavy metals absorbed by the atmosphere on 
the chlorophyll and carotenoid contents, Cd stress was found to inhibit the expression of key 
enzymes during chlorophyll synthesis in leaves, resulting in a decrease in the Chlorophyll 
content and also affected the xanthophyll cycle (Zhang et al., 2020). Likewise, the effect of ar￾omatic hydrocarbons with other heavy metals on plant leaves and their detoxification mech￾anism was studied and results of these proteomics studies showed that the excess amount of 
these toxic pollutants in the atmosphere leads to the production of the reactive oxygen species 422 20. Plant proteomics and environmental pollution
(ROS) and also programmed cellular death to the induction of stress resistances (Molina and 
Segura, 2021). Ozone being the most devastating atmospheric pollutant, the effect of these 
pollutants were analyzed by leaf proteomics on the grape crop by performing HPLC fraction￾ation and LC–MS/MS analysis this revealed that the significant decrease in photosynthesis 
and the quantification proteomics revealed that the total of 6379 proteins was identified from 
the leaves of the “Cabernet Sauvignon” grape that was found to responsive to ozone pollu￾tion (Chen et al., 2020).
5.2 Effect of heavy metals and root proteomics
As we all know soil pollution is one of the very important components of environmental 
pollution and heavy metals are added to soil especially to the cropping land by means of 
chemical fertilizer or any other biochemical means (Giordani et al., 2005). These heavy metal 
contaminants not only affect the plant cells but also affects the consumer health adversely 
(Hart et al., 2006; Yadav et al., 2021), In recent years, proteomic techniques are widely adopted 
in the better understanding of the plant’s response toward the heavy metal stress (Ahsan 
et al., 2009). The foremost important heavy metal which is considered to be as the third abun￾dant element in the soil, i.e., Aluminum (Al), that becomes toxic in its solubilized form (Al3 +) 
in acidic soils, can be concerned as an important growth retarding pollutant of the crop plants 
(Kochian et al., 2004). With the intention to understand “Al” tolerance and sensitivity of the 
cultivars of rice Yang et al. (2007) put forth the findings that, cysteine synthase a key enzyme 
in the glutathione (GSH) biosynthesis pathway is the key factor in the adaptation of rice culti￾vars to “Al” toxicity. Although, arsenic (As) is the effective pollutant that affects both human 
and plant physiology, in maize (Requejo and Tena, 2005) and rice (Ahsan et al., 2008) crop the 
proteomic studies were carried out to reveal the response of plants toward the “As” toxicity 
and suggested that the proteins related to antioxidant defense and in signaling molecules 
are highly activated under “As” stress. The clue about the link between the iron, boron, and 
siderophore has been given because of increased activities of iron limiting 2 (IDS2), IDS3, and 
methylthio-ribose kinase that are involved in siderophore production in B-tolerant plants, 
this analysis was done by Patterson et al. (2007) by using the second-generation proteomics 
techniques, i.e., iTRAQ peptide tagging system.
Cadmium (Cd) is known to be toxic to plants in its ionic form, i.e., Cd+, mesophyll cells in 
the leaves of barley crop were found to be efficient in responding to this heavy metal since, 
c-tonoplast intrinsic protein (c-TIP) that might exhibit a specific function in the transport of 
this heavy metal into the vacuole and thus becoming important in Cd2 + detoxification in 
the bundle sheath cell of barley leaves, this fact was brought in to the light by the vacuolar 
proteomics approach by Schneider et al. (2009). As investigated by the proteome analysis of 
rice in root tissues, a high concentration of Cd strongly induced the expression of regulatory 
proteins including ER1-like receptor kinase and Cytokinin oxidase. The root proteome of 
Cannabis sativa has been analyzed under Cu-stress, and it was shown that among the up￾regulated proteins, an Aldo/keto reductase was the protein most up-regulated (Ahsan et al., 
2009; Zhang et al., 2020).
As the heavy metal chromium is found to cause many devastating effects on crops like 
maize and B. napus, the proteomic approach, i.e., MALDI-TOF/TOF mass spectrometry ev￾idenced 46 chromium stress-related proteins such as glutathione peroxidase, glutathione References 423
S-transferases, pathogenesis-related proteins, glyoxalases, and superoxide dismutase, etc., in 
the roots of both the crops (Terzi and Yıldız, 2021).
Further, the effect of copper that is above the toxic range in the soil and the counteraction 
of the plant against this was analyzed through root proteomics of Oenothera glazioviana by 
employing Label-free proteomic analysis indicated the presence of 58 differentially abundant 
proteins (DAPs) of the total 3149 proteins in the roots of O. glazioviana seedlings, consisting 
36 and 22 up-regulated and down-regulated proteins respectively (Wang et al., 2017). Lead 
is one of the important and most dangerous heavy metals that is present in both soil and 
atmosphere, the poplar plant which is the important accumulator of lead like heavy metals, 
and by that it is very notable in bioremediation, by performing the SWATH-MS proteomics 
methodology on the lead-exposed poplar plant roots 4388 unique proteins were brought in 
to the light, these proteins revealed that differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) primarily 
distributed in specialized biological processes like lignin and flavonoid biosynthesis (Shen 
et al., 2021).
6. Conclusion
As discussed in the chapter the various environmental pollutants that affect the plant health 
and in turn affects consumer health, indicates indirectly there is a need for assessment of the 
action or adverse effects of these pollutants on plant and response of target plants toward 
these agents. Plant proteomics is the one tool that helps the investigator in finding out the 
reactions and responses of the crop toward the specific pollutants. Though many advanced 
approaches are being present in the field of proteomics of plants the research works are being 
scanty in the in vitro or open field environments where the plants will be actually coming in 
contact with deadly pollutants and so analyzing the proteomics of such plants would become 
more helpful in understanding the effect of pollutants and the efficiency of plants to respond 
to that agent through the production of various target proteins and/or modification of the 
prior present set of protein. These proteomic studies are comparatively abundant in model 
crops, viz., A. thaliana in dicots, rice and purple false brome (B. distachyon) and many others 
for which the success in genome sequencing is evidenced like most of the field crops but, 
there is a need of this proteomics should be performed in nonmodel plants for instance in 
horticultural crops especially in vegetable crops since these vegetable crops are used in day 
to day life by major population on the earth, and the findings arrived from proteome study 
of these crops may help in many ways as those responses could be considered as the markers 
for certain pollutants thereby becoming cooperative in controlling the specific pollutant in a 
specific location and achieving the plant and human wellbeing.
References
Agrawal, G.K., Rakwal, R., Yonekura, M., Kubo, A., Saji, H., 2002. Proteomics 2, 947–959.
Agrawal, G.K., Bourguignon, J., Rolland, N., Ephritikhine, G., Ferro, M., Jaquinod, M., Alexiou, K.G., Chardot, T., 
Chakraborty, N., Jolivet, P., Doonan, J.H., Rakwal, R., 2011. Plant organelle proteomics: collaborating for optimal 
cell function. Mass Spectrom. Rev. 30, 772–853.
Ahsan, N., Lee, D.G., Lee, S.H., Kang, K.Y., Lee, J.J., Kim, P.J., 2007a. Excess copper induced physiological and pro￾teomic changes in germinating rice seeds. Chemosphere 67, 1182–1193.424 20. Plant proteomics and environmental pollution
Ahsan, N., Lee, S.H., Lee, D.G., Lee, H., Lee, S.W., Bahk, J.D., 2007b. Physiological and protein profiles alternation of 
germinating rice seedlings exposed to acute cadmium toxicity. C. R. Biol. 330, 735–746.
Ahsan, N., Lee, D.G., Alam, I., Kim, P.J., Lee, J.J., Ahn, Y.O., 2008. Comparative proteomic study of arsenic-induced 
differentially expressed proteins in rice roots reveals glutathione plays a central role during as stress. Proteomics 
8, 3561–3576.
Ahsan, N., Renaut, J., Komatsu, S., 2009. Recent developments in the application of proteomics to the analysis of 
plant responses to heavy metals. Proteomics 9, 2602–2621.
Ahsan, N., Nanjo, Y., Sawada, H., Kohno, Y., Komatsu, S., 2010. Ozone stress-induced proteomic changes in leaf total 
soluble and chloroplast proteins of soybean reveal that carbon allocation is involved in adaptation in the early 
developmental stage. Proteomics 10, 2605–2619.
Aina, R., Labra, M., Fumagalli, P., Vannini, C., Marsoni, M., Cucchi, U., 2007. Thiolpeptide level and proteomic 
changes in response to cadmium toxicity in Oryza sativa L. roots. Environ. Exp. Bot. 59, 381–392.
Alexandersson, E., Saalbach, G., Larsson, C., Kjellbom, P., 2004. Arabidopsis plasma membrane proteomics identifies 
components of transport, signal transduction and membrane trafficking. Plant Cell Physiol. 45, 1543–1556.
Alonso, A., Perez, P., Martinez-Carrasco, R., 2009. Growth in elevated CO2 enhances temperature response of photo￾synthesis in wheat. Physiol. Plant. 135, 109–120.
Arif, N., Sharma, N.C., Yadav, V., Ramawat, N., Dubey, N.K., Tripathi, D.K., Chauhan, D.K., Sahi, S., 2019. 
Understanding heavy metal stress in a rice crop: toxicity, tolerance mechanisms, and amelioration strategies. J. 
Plant Biol. 62 (4), 239–253.
Bharti, J., Mehta, S., Ahmad, S., Singh, B., Padhy, A.K., Srivastava, N., Pandey, V., 2021. Mitogen-activated protein 
kinase, plants, and heat stress. In: Harsh environment and plant resilience. Springer, Cham, pp. 323–354.
Bilal, A., Madiha, B., Muhammad, A.N., Mohsin, K., Muhammad, H.R., 2017. Proteomics: technologies and their 
applications. J. Chromatogr. Sci. 55, 182–196.
Bohler, S., Sergeant, K., Hoffmann, L., Dizengremel, P., Hausman, J.F., Renaut, J., Jolivet, Y., 2011. A difference gel 
electrophoresis study on thylakoids isolated from poplar leaves reveals a negative impact of ozone exposure on 
membrane proteins. J. Proteome Res. 10, 3003–3011.
Bokhari, S.A., Wan, X.Y., Yang, Y.W., Zhou, L., Tang, W.L., Liu, J.Y., 2007. Proteomic response of rice seedling leaves 
to elevated CO2 levels. J. Proteome Res. 6, 4624–4633.
Chen, X., Wang, Y., Li, J.Y., Jiang, A.L., Cheng, Y.W., Zhang, W., 2009. Mitochondrial proteome during salt 
stress-induced programmed cell death in rice. Plant Physiol. Biochem. 47, 407–415.
Chen, Z., Gao, Z., Sun, Y., Wang, Y., Yao, Y., Zhai, H., Du, Y., 2020. Analyzing the grape leaf proteome and photosyn￾thetic process provides insights into the injury mechanisms of ozone stress. Plant Growth Regul. 91 (1), 143–155.
Choudhary, M.K., Basu, D., Datta, A., Chakraborty, N., Chakraborty, S., 2009. Dehydration-responsive nuclear pro￾teome of rice (Oryza sativa L.) illustrates protein network, novel regulators of cellular adaptation, and evolutionary 
perspective. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 8, 1579–1598.
Choudhary, A., Kumar, A., Kaur, N., Kaur, H., 2021. MiRNA-the taskmaster of plant world. Biologia 76, 1551–1567.
Choudhary, A., Kumar, A., Kaur, H., Singh, M., Suri, G.S., Kaur, G., Mehta, S., 2022. Effect of elevated CO2 conditions 
on medicinal plants: a relatively unexplored aspect. In: Environmental Pollution and Medicinal Plants. CRC Press, 
pp. 95–111.
Chu, P., Yan, G.X., Yang, Q., Zhai, L.N., Zhang, C., Zhang, F.Q., 2015. iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomics analysis 
of Brassica napus leaves reveals pathways associated with chlorophyll deficiency. J. Proteomics 113, 110–126.
Cristea, I.M., Gaskell, S.J., Whetton, A.D., 2004. Proteomics techniques and their application to hematology. Blood 
103 (10), 3624–3634.
Domon, B., Aebersold, R., 2006. Mass spectrometry and protein analysis. Science 312 (5771), 212–217.
Dunn, M.J., 1986. Gel Electrophoresis of Proteins. Elsevier BV, Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford, UK.
Fatemeh, H., 2022. Plant proteome in response to abiotic stress. In: Hasanuzzaman, M., Nahar, M.K. (Eds.), 
Plant Stress Physiology—Perspectives in Agriculture [Working Title]. IntechOpen, https://doi.org/10.5772/
intechopen.102875.
Ge, P., Hao, P., Cao, M., Guo, G., Lv, D., Subburaj, S., 2013. iTRAQ based quantitative proteomic analysis reveals new 
metabolic pathways of wheat seedling growth under hydrogen peroxide stress. Proteomics 13 (20), 3046–3058.
Giordani, C., Cecchi, S., Zanchi, C., 2005. Phytoremediation of soil polluted by nickel using agricultural crops. 
Environ. Manag. 36, 675–681.
Gong, F., Hu, X., Wang, W., 2015. Proteomic analysis of crop plants under abiotic stress conditions: where to focus 
our research? Front. Plant Sci. 6, 418.Goyal, D., Yadav, A., Vats, T., 2020a. Air pollution and its role in stress physiology. In: Air Pollution and Environmental 
Health. Springer, Singapore, pp. 115–140.
Goyal, D., Yadav, A., Prasad, M., Singh, T.B., Shrivastav, P., Ali, A., Dantu, P.K., Mishra, S., 2020b. Effect of heavy 
metals on plant growth: an overview. In: Contaminants in Agriculture. Springer, Cham, pp. 79–101.
Hage, D.S., Anguizola, J.A., Bi, C., Li, R., Matsuda, R., Papastavros, E., 2013. Pharmaceutical and biomedical applica￾tions of affinity chromatography: recent trends and developments. J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal. 69, 93–105.
Hart, J.J., Welch, R.M., Norvell, W.A., Kochian, L.V., 2006. Characterization of cadmium uptake, translocation and 
storage in near-isogenic lines of durum wheat that differ in grain cadmium concentration. New Phytol. 172, 
261–271.
Heino, P., Tapio Palva, E., 2003. Signal transduction in plant cold acclimation. In: Hirt, H., Shinozaki, K. (Eds.), Plant 
Responses to Abiotic Stress. Topics in Current Genetics. vol. 4. Springer-Verlag, New York, pp. 151–186.
Hossain, Z., Nouri, M.Z., Komatsu, S., 2012. Plant cell organelle proteomics in response to abiotic stress. J. Proteome 
Res. 11, 37–48.
Hossain, Z., Yasmeen, F., Komatsu, S., 2020. Nanoparticles: synthesis, morpho-physiological effects, and proteomic 
responses of crop plants. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 21 (9), 3056.
Hu, J., Rampitsch, C., Bykova, N.V., 2015. Advances in plant proteomics toward improvement of crop productivity 
and stress resistance. Front. Plant Sci. 6, 209.
Hynek, R., Svensson, B., Jensen, O.N., Barkholt, V., Finnie, C., 2006. Enrichment and identification of integral mem￾brane proteins from barley aleurone layers by reverse phase chromatography, SDS-PAGE, and LC-MS/MS. 
J. Proteome Res. 5, 3105–3113.
Issaq, H., Veenstra, T., 2008. Two-dimensional polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (2D-PAGE): advances and perspec￾tives. Bio. Techniq. 44 (4), 697–700.
Jacoby, R.P., Millar, A.H., Taylor, N.L., 2010. Wheat mitochondrial proteomes provide new links between anti-oxidant 
defence and plant salinity tolerance. J. Proteome Res. 9, 6595–6604.
Jacoby, R.P., Millar, A.H., Taylor, N.L., 2013. Investigating the role of respiration in plant salinity tolerance by analys￾ing mitochondrial proteomes from wheat and a salinity-tolerant amphiploid (wheat × Lophopyrum elongatum). 
J. Proteome Res. 12, 4807–4829.
Jungbauer, A., Hahn, R., 2009. Ion-exchange chromatography. In: Methods in Enzymology. Elsevier BV, Massachusetts, 
USA, pp. 349–371.
Kamal, A.H., Cho, K., Kim, D.E., Uozumi, N., Chung, K.Y., Lee, S.Y., 2012. Changes in physiology and protein abun￾dance in salt-stressed wheat chloroplasts. Mol. Biol. Rep. 39, 9059–9074.
Kamal, A.H.M., Cho, K., Choi, J.S., Bae, K.H., Komatsu, S., Uozumi, N., 2013. The wheat chloroplastic proteome. 
J. Proteomics 93, 326–342.
Kang, G., Li, G., Wang, L., Wei, L., Yang, Y., Wang, P., 2015. Hg-responsive proteins identified in wheat seedlings 
using iTRAQ analysis and the role of ABA in hg stress. J. Proteome Res. 14, 249–267.
Kim, H.Y., Lieffering, M., Miura, S., Kobayashi, K., Okada, M., 2001. Growth and nitrogen uptake of CO2-enriched 
rice under field conditions. New Phytol. 150, 223–229.
Kochian, L.V., Hoeckenga, O.A., Pineros, M.A., 2004. How do crop plants tolerate acid soils? Mechanisms of alumin￾ium tolerance and phosphorus efficiency. Annal Rev. Plant Biol. 55, 459–493.
Komatsu, S., Hossain, Z., 2013. Organ-specific proteome analysis for identification of abiotic stress response mecha￾nism in crop. Front. Plant Sci. 4, 71.
Komatsu, S., Jorrin-Novo, J.V., 2021. Plant proteomic research 3.0: challenges and perspectives. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 22 (2), 766.
Komatsu, S., Wada, T., Abalea, Y., Nouri, M.Z., Nanjo, Y., Nakayama, N., 2009. Analysis of plasma membrane pro￾teome in soybean and application to flooding stress response. J. Proteome Res. 8, 4487–4499.
Komatsu, S., Kobayashi, Y., Nishizawa, K., Nanjo, Y., Furukawa, K., 2010. Comparative proteomics analysis of differ￾entially expressed proteins in soybean cell wall during flooding stress. Amino Acids 39, 1435–1449.
Komatsu, S., Hiraga, S., Nouri, M.Z., 2014. Analysis of flooding-responsive proteins localized in the nucleus of soy￾bean root tips. Mol. Biol. Rep. 41, 1127–1139.
Kroksveen, A.C., Jaffe, J.D., Aasebo, E., Barsnes, H., Bjorlykke, Y., Franciotta, D., 2015. Quantitative proteomics sug￾gests decrease in the secretogranin-1 cerebrospinal fluid levels during the disease course of multiple sclerosis. 
Proteomics 15 (19), 3361–3369.
Kumar, A., Choudhary, A., Kaur, H., Kumar, R., Sharma, R., Gautam, H., Mehta, S., 2022. Water pollution and medic￾inal plants: insights into the impact and adaptation responses. In: Environmental Pollution and Medicinal Plants. 
CRC Press, pp. 117–129.
References 425426 20. Plant proteomics and environmental pollution
Kumar, R.P., Singh, J.S., 2020. Invasive alien plant species: their impact on environment, ecosystem services and 
human health. Ecol. Indic. 111, 106020.
Kumar, S.R., Arumugam, T., Anandakumar, C., Balakrishnan, S., Rajavel, D., 2013. Use of plant species in controlling 
environmental pollution. Bull. Env. Pharmacol. Life Sci 2 (2), 52–63.
Kumar, A., Choudhary, A., Kaur, H., Javed, M., Mehta, S., 2021. Plant performance and defensive role of γ-gamma 
amino butyric acid under environmental stress. In: Plant Performance Under Environmental Stress. Springer, 
Cham, pp. 277–299.
Kurien, B., Scofield, R., 2006. Western blotting. Methods (San Diego, CA) 38 (4), 283–293.
Lee, H.K., Khaine, I., Kwak, M.J., Jang, J.H., Lee, T.Y., Lee, J.K., Kim, I.R., Kim, W.I., Oh, K.S., Woo, S.Y., 2017. The 
relationship between SO2 exposure and plant physiology: a mini review. Horti. Environ. Biotechn. 58 (6), 523–529.
Leghari, S.K., Zaidi, M.A., 2013. Effect of air pollution on the leaf morphology of common plant species of Quetta 
city. Pak. J. Bot. 45 (S1), 447–454.
Lequin, R.M., 2005. Enzyme immunoassay (EIA)/enzyme-linked Immuno sorbent assay (ELISA). Clin. Chem. 51 
(12), 2415–2418.
Ligat, L., Lauber, E., Albenne, C., Clemente, H.S., Valot, B., Zivy, M., Pont‐Lezica, R., Arlat, M., Jamet, E., 2011. 
Analysis of the xylem sap proteome of Brassica oleracea reveals a high content in secreted proteins. Proteomics 
11 (9), 1798–1813.
Liu, Y., Lu, S., Liu, K., 2019. Proteomics: a powerful tool to study plant responses to biotic stress. Plant Methods 15, 135.
Loyal, A., Pahuja, S.K., Sharma, P., Malik, A., Srivastava, R.K., Mehta, S., 2023. Potential environmental and hu￾man health implications of nanomaterials used in sustainable agriculture and soil improvement. In: Engineered 
Nanomaterials for Sustainable Agricultural Production, Soil Improvement and Stress Management. Academic 
Press, pp. 387–412.
Luo, B.F., Du, S.T., Lu, K.X., Liu, W.J., Lin, X.Y., Jin, C.W., 2012. Iron uptake system mediates nitrate-facilitated cad￾mium accumulation in tomato (Solanum lycopersicum) plants. J. Exp. Bot. 63 (8), 3127–3136.
Lyu, G., Li, D., Li, S., Ning, C., Qin, R., 2020. Genotoxic effects and proteomic analysis on Allium cepa var. agrogarum 
L. root cells under Pb stress. Ecotoxicology 29 (7), 959–972.
Marouga, R., David, S., Hawkins, E., 2005. The development of the DIGE system: 2D fluorescence difference gel 
analysis technology. Anal. Bio. Anal. Chem. 382, 669–678.
Meise, P., Jozefowicz, A.M., Uptmoor, R., Mock, H.P., Ordon, F., Schum, A., 2017. Comparative shoot proteome 
analysis of two potato (Solanum tuberosum L.) genotypes contrasting in nitrogen deficiency responses in vitro. 
J. Proteomics 166, 68–82.
Molina, L., Segura, A., 2021. Biochemical and metabolic plant responses toward polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons 
and heavy metals present in atmospheric pollution. Plan. Theory 10 (11), 2305.
Naushad, M., Ahamad, T., Al-Maswari, B.M., Alqadami, A.A., Alshehri, S.M., 2017. Nickel ferrite bearing 
nitrogen-doped mesoporous carbon as efficient adsorbent for the removal of highly toxic metal ion from aqueous 
medium. Chem. Eng. J. 330, 1351–1360.
Neagu, M., Bostan, M., Constantin, C., 2019. Protein microarray technology: assisting personalized medicine in on￾cology (review). World Acad. Sci. J. 1, 113–124.
Nouri, M.Z., Komatsu, S., 2010. Comparative analysis of soybean plasma membrane proteins under osmotic stress 
using gel-based and LCMS/MS-based proteomics approaches. Proteomics 10, 1930–1945.
Oksanen, E., Sober, J., Karnosky, D.F., 2001. Impacts of elevated CO2 and/or O3 on leaf ultrastructure of aspen 
(Populus tremuloides) andbirch (Betula papyrifera) in the Aspen FACE experiment. Environ. Pollut. 115 (3), 437–446.
Ong, S.E., Mann, M., 2006. Stable isotope labelling by amino acids in cell culture for quantitative proteomics. In: 
Quantitative Proteomics by Mass Spectrometry. Humana Press, Totowa, NJ, pp. 37–52.
Osakabe, Y., Osakabe, K., Shinozaki, K., Tran, L.S.P., 2014. Response of plants to water stress. Front. Plant Sci. 5, 86.
Palacio-Lopez, K., Keller, S.R., Molofsky, J., 2018. Genomic admixture between locally adapted populations of 
Arabidopsis thaliana (Mouse ear cress): Evidence of optimal genetic outcrossing distance. J. Hered. 109 (1), 38–46.
Panda, D., Sarkar, R.K., 2013. Natural leaf senescence: probed by chlorophyll fluorescence, CO2 photosynthetic rate 
and anti-oxidant enzyme activities during grain filling in different rice cultivars. Physiol. Mol. Biol. Plants 19, 43–51.
Patterson, J., Ford, K., Cassin, A., Natera, S., Bacic, A., 2007. Increased abundance of proteins involved in 
phyto-siderophore production in boron-tolerant barley. Plant Physiol. 144, 1612–1631.
Perez-Riverol, Y., Alpi, E., Wang, R., Hermjakob, H., Vizcaino, J.A., 2015. Making proteomics data accessible and 
reusable: current state of proteomics databases and repositories. Proteomics 15 (5–6), 930–949.Qiu, Q.S., Huber, J.L., Booker, F.L., Jain, V., Leakey, A.D., Fiscus, E.L., 2008. Increased protein carbonylation in leaves 
of Arabidopsis and soybean in response to elevated CO2. Photosynth. Res. 97, 155–166.
Rahmani, N., Radjabian, T., Soltani, B.M., 2020. Impacts of foliar exposure to multi-walled carbon nanotubes on 
physiological and molecular traits of Salvia verticillata L., as a medicinal plant. Plant Physiol. Biochem. 150, 27–38.
Rakwal, R., Agrawal, G.K., 2003. Rice proteomics: current status and future perspectives. Electrophoresis 24 (19–20), 
3378–3389.
Reddy, B., Kumar, A., Mehta, S., Sahu, K.P., 2021. Methods of assessments of microbial diversity and their functional 
role in soil fertility and crop productivity. Plant, Soil and Microbes in Tropical Ecosystems. Springer, Singapore, 
pp. 293–314.
Requejo, R., Tena, M., 2005. Proteome analysis of maize roots reveals that oxidative stress is a main contributing 
factor to plant arsenic toxicity. Phytochemistry 66, 1519–1528.
Sarkar, A., Rakwal, R., Bhushan Agrawal, S., Shibato, J., Ogawa, Y., Yoshida, Y., Kumar Agrawal, G., Agrawal, M., 
2010. Investigating the impact of elevated levels of ozone on tropical wheat using integrated phenotypical, phys￾iological, biochemical, and proteomics approaches. J. Proteome Res. 9 (9), 4565–4584.
Schneider, T., Schellenberg, M., Meyer, S., Keller, F., Gehrig, P., Riedel, K., 2009. Quantitative detection of changes 
in the leaf-mesophyll tonoplast proteome in dependency of a cadmium exposure of barley (Hordeum vulgare L.) 
plants. Proteomics 9, 2668–2677.
Shen, C.C., Chen, M.X., Xiao, T., Zhang, C., Shang, J., Zhang, K.L., Zhu, F.Y., 2021. Global proteome response to Pb 
(II) toxicity in poplar using SWATH-MS-based quantitative proteomics investigation. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 
220, 112410.
Shiio, Y., Aebersold, R., 2006. Quantitative proteome analysis using isotope coded affinity tags and mass spectrome￾try. Nat. Protoc. 1 (1), 139–145.
Singh, A., Mehta, S., Yadav, S., Nagar, G., Ghosh, R., Roy, A., Chakraborty, A., Singh, I.K., 2022. How to cope with the 
challenges of environmental stresses in the era of global climate change: an update on ROS stave off in plants. Int. 
J. Mol. Sci. 23 (4), 1995.
Smith, J.B., 2001. Peptide sequencing by Edman degradation. In: Encyclopedia of Life Sciences. Wiley-Blackwell, 
Hoboken, NJ.
Smolikova, G., Gorbach, D., Lukasheva, E., Mavropolo-Stolyarenko, G., Bilova, T., Soboleva, A., Tsarev, A., 
Romanovskaya, E., Podolskaya, E., Zhukov, V., Tikhonovich, I., 2020. Bringing new methods to the seed proteom￾ics platform: challenges and perspectives. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 21 (23), 9162.
Smyth, M.S., Martin, J.H., 2000. X ray crystallography. Mol. Pathol. 53 (1), 8–14.
Sutandy, F.X.R., Qian, J., Chen, C.S. and Zhu, H., 2001, Overview of Protein Microarrays. Current Protocols in Protein 
Science. Wiley-Blackwell.
Syafrizayanti, L.S., Di, C., 2017. Personalised proteome analysis by means of protein microarrays made from individ￾ual patient samples. Sci. Rep. 7, 39756.
Tartaglia, M., Bastida, F., Sciarrillo, R., Guarino, C., 2020. Soil metaproteomics for the study of the relationships 
between microorganisms and plants: a review of extraction protocols and ecological insights. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 21 
(22), 8455.
Taylor, N.L., Heazlewood, J.L., Day, D.A., Millar, A.H., 2005. Differential impact of environmental stresses on the pea 
mitochondrial proteome. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 4, 1122–1133.
Terzi, H., Yıldız, M., 2021. Proteomic analysis reveals the role of exogenous cysteine in alleviating chromium stress in 
maize seedlings. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 209, 111784.
Torres, N.L., Cho, K., Shibato, J., Hirano, M., Kubo, A., Masuo, Y., Iwahashi, H., Jwa, N.S., Agrawal, G.K., Rakwal, 
R., 2007, Gel‐based proteomics reveals potential novel protein markers of ozone stress in leaves of cultivated bean 
and maize species of Panama. Electrophoresis, 28(23), 4369–4381.
Vihinen, M., 2001. Bioinformatics in proteomics. Biomol. Eng. 18 (5), 241–248.
Voedisch, B., Thie, H., 2010. Size exclusion chromatography. In: Antibody Engineering. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 
pp. 607–612.
Vranova, E., Atichartpongkul, S., Villarroel, R., Van Montagu, M., Inze, D., Van Camp, W., 2002. Comprehensive 
analysis of gene expression in Nicotiana tabacum leaves acclimated to oxidative stress. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. 
A. 99 (16), 10870–10875.
Wang, X., Khodadadi, E., Fakheri, B., Komatsu, S., 2017. Organ-specific proteomics of soybean seedlings under flood￾ing and drought stresses. J. Proteomics 162, 62–72.
References 427428 20. Plant proteomics and environmental pollution
Wienkoop, S., Baginsky, S., Weckwerth, W., 2010a. (a), Arabidopsis thaliana as a model organism for plant proteome 
research. J. Proteomics 73 (11), 2239–2248.
Wienkoop, S., Weib, J., May, P., Kempa, S., Irgang, S., Recuenco-Munoz, L., Pietzke, M., Schwemmer, T., Rupprecht, J., 
Egelhofer, V., Weckwerth, W., 2010b. (b), Targeted proteomics for Chlamydomonas reinhardtii combined with rapid 
subcellular protein fractionation, metabolomics and metabolic flux analyses. Mol. Bio. Syst. 6, 1018–1031.
Wiese, S., Reidegeld, K.A., Meyer, H.E., Warscheid, B., 2007. Protein labelling by iTRAQ: a new tool for quantitative 
mass spectrometry in proteome research. Proteomics 7 (3), 340–350.
Wilkins, M.R., Pasquali, C., Appel, R.D., Ou, K., Golaz, O., Sanchez, J.C., Yan, J.X., Gooley, A., Hughes, G., Humphery￾Smith, I., Williams, K.L., 1996. From proteins to proteomes: large scale protein identification by two-dimensional 
electrophoresis and amino acid analysis. Bio/Technology 14 (1), 61–65.
Yadav, B., Jogawat, A., Lal, S.K., Lakra, N., Mehta, S., Shabek, N., Narayan, O.P., 2021. Plant mineral transport sys￾tems and the potential for crop improvement. Planta 253 (2), 1–30.
Yang, J.Y., Sun, Y., Sun, A.Q., Yi, S.Y., Qin, J., Li, M.H., 2006. The involvement of chloroplast HSP100/ClpB in the 
acquired thermo tolerance in tomato. Plant Mol. Biol. 62, 385–395.
Yang, Q., Wang, Y., Zhang, J., Shi, W., Qian, C., Peng, X., 2007. Identification of aluminium-responsive proteins in rice 
roots by a proteomic approach: cysteine synthase as a key player in Al response. Proteomics 7, 737–749.
Yates III, J.R., 2011. A century of mass spectrometry: from atoms to proteomes. Nat. Methods 8 (8), 633–637.
Yu, R., Jiang, Q., Xv, C., Li, L., Bu, S., Shi, G., 2019. Comparative proteomics analysis of peanut roots reveals dif￾ferential mechanisms of cadmium detoxification and translocation between two cultivars differing in cadmium 
accumulation. BMC Plant Biol. 19 (1), 1–15.
Zhang, H., Xu, Z., Guo, K., Huo, Y., He, G., Sun, H., Sun, G., 2020. Toxic effects of heavy metal cd and Zn on chloro￾phyll, carotenoid metabolism and photosynthetic function in tobacco leaves revealed by physiological and pro￾teomics analysis. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 202, 110856.
Zhou, Y., Meng, J., Zhang, M., Chen, S., He, B., Zhao, H., Li, Q., Zhang, S., Wang, T., 2019. Which type of pollutants 
need to be controlled with priority in wastewater treatment plants: traditional or emerging pollutants? Environ. 
Int. 131, 104982.
Zhu, J., Alvarez, S., Marsh, E.L., Lenoble, M.E., Cho, I.J., Sivaguru, M., 2007. Cell wall proteome in the maize primary 
root elongation zone. II. Region specific changes in water soluble and lightly ionically-bound proteins under wa￾ter deficit. Plant Physiol. 145, 1533–1548.
Zhu, D., Luo, F., Zou, R., Liu, J., Yan, Y., 2021. Integrated physiological and chloroplast proteome analysis of wheat 
seedling leaves under salt and osmotic stresses. J. Proteomics 234, 104097.
Zorb, C., Herbst, R., Forreiter, C., Schubert, S., 2009. Short-term effects of salt exposure on the maize chloroplast 
protein pattern. Proteomics 9, 4209–4220.
 Plants and their Interaction to Environmental Pollution 429 Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-99978-6.00001-7
CHAPTER
21
Genetic modification and genome 
engineering of plants for adverse 
environmental pollution
Khushboo Singha
, Geeta Bokenb
, and Sahil Mehtac
a
School of Agricultural Sciences, K.R. Mangalam University, Gurugram, Haryana, India, 
b
Department of Genetics and Plant Breeding, CCS Haryana Agricultural University, Hisar, 
Haryana, India, c
Department of Botany, Hansraj College, University of Delhi, New Delhi, India
1. Introduction
The large quantity of toxic pollutants has increased immensely during the last century, and 
their presence in the environment adversely affects all forms of life (Wolz et al., 2003; Tang 
et al., 2013). Environmental pollution comprises a complex mixture of organic and inorganic 
compounds, and they are despoiled into harmful small molecules. These small molecules are 
technically difficult to remove from the environment (Choudhary et al., 2022; Kumar et al., 
2022; Loyal et al., 2023). Because they are irreversible by any biological and physical process 
(Meagher, 2000). These are the main source of pollution responsible for several negative ef￾fects on animals and plants (Husen, 2021a,b,c,d, 2022). The global increase in environmental 
pollution also causes climate change leading to noticeable impacts on the life cycle and dis￾tribution of various plant species. Toxic elements, heavy metals, soil, water, light, noise, and 
air pollution adversely affect the biochemical, physiological, and cellular properties of plants. 
Environment stress leads to changes in climate conditions that affect the crops like drought, 
salinity, flooding, water, and nutrient deficiency, if the stress is persistent, plant development, 
and productivity are rigorously diminished.
However, at the same time, plants need to develop complex morphological, physiological, 
and biochemical adaptations to change and adapt to various environmental stress (Mehta 
et al., 2019). Genetic modification, transgenic, bioengineered, or genome editing provides the 
option of selecting desired genes or insertion of genes into desired cultivars (Chattopadhyay 
et al., 2022; Dilawari et al., 2021; Mehta et al., 2020). Specific stress alters the expression of a 
particular gene in a species and it causes modification in the efficiency of signal perception 430 21. Genetic modification and genome engineering of plants
and subsequent transcriptional alterations leading to the elicitation of a specific response and 
this change leads to adaption and finally higher stress tolerance (Singh et al., 2022). In this 
chapter, we will discuss the wide investigation of gene editing-based solutions to increase the 
productivity imposed by adverse environmental conditions.
2. Current scenario of globe and human towards pollution
To fight the prevalent effect of pollution on society, the world ministers of the environment, 
joined together at the United Nations environment assembly in 2017, speaking their political 
commitment to making a pollution-free planet. The government also takes resolutions target￾ing specific traits of pollution like air quality, water, soil, marine and microplastics, chemical, 
and waste pollution. The environmental assembly has received the plan and acknowledged 
it as the key vehicle for quick implementation. It has encouraged all member states and 
stakeholders to contribute to its implementation. UNEP background report and its report 
to UNEA3 provide a global picture of pollution and its effects, and contains information on 
pollution sources, effects, and solutions. UN assembly endorsed the action by the WMO and 
UNEP in jointly establishing the IPCC. It has 195 member states. Thousands of people from 
different countries work for the IPCC. For the assessment reports, IPCC scientists assess the 
scientific articles published every year and provide a summary of climate change, and its 
impact (Pedersen et al., 2022).
2.1 Need to do engineering for long term improvement
The biggest challenge that plant scientists and agriculturalists are facing is to complete the 
food demand for an ever-increasing population (Mehta et al., 2020). Environmental stresses 
cause major problems and make the situation even severer. Even with the induction of sev￾eral tolerance mechanisms, under extreme environmental conditions, sensitive plants fail to 
survive. Conventional breeding techniques have a limited approach and potential to improve 
plant genomes against extreme environmental conditions. In recent times, genetic engineer￾ing plays a major role in the development of genetically modified varieties of different crops 
like maize, rice, canola, and soybean. Research laboratories throughout the world now study 
on a wide variety of genes/traits and their subsequent introgression within sensitive crop 
species. New transgenic traits can be expected to appear depending mostly on the number 
of genes encoding them. Genetic engineering of main tolerance pathways, like pests and 
pathogens resistance, investigating regulatory defense assembly and innate immune signal￾ing in plants, osmosis regulation, antioxidant enzymes, accumulation of essential elements, 
are intensively needed to research. Through the use of transgenics, we can produce the plant, 
against a variety of environmental stresses like air quality, heat stress, water, soil, noise, salin￾ity, heavy metal, toxic element, tolerant to cold and heat and drought resistance.
2.2 Sources
Environmental pollution is one of the most complex problems in the modern world. 
Combustion of fossil fuels, urbanization, chemicals used in agriculture, traffic load, war 
weapons, airplanes, and industrialization results in increased emission of toxic gases. These 3. Pollution: Effects on plants 431
are the major sources of pollution (Husen, 2022; Deepti et al., 2022a,b; Rahman and Husen, 
2022). Natural pollutant emissions differ from one place to other places, due to different geo￾graphical and meterological conditions like the type of vegetation, volcanic eruptions, dust 
form, and forest fires. Domestic sources are major domestic activities like space heating CO, 
CO2, NO2, SO2, dust, cooking fat, particles, odors, washing solvent vapor, spray, garden￾ing pesticides, fertilizers, painting solvent vapor, washing detergent and soap. Commercial 
sources of pollution includes dry clean industry, restaurants, hotels, schools, printing, and 
painting, textile, and construction industries.
Agricultural sources are animal feed operation, harvesting and processing process, fer￾tilizer and explosive manufacture, pesticides, and insecticides. A few source industries are 
weapon and explosive industries, paper plants, natural gas cleaning and processing plant, oil 
refineries, synthetic fibers plant, cast iron, and other metallurgical processes. Transportation￾related sources like VOC, nitrogen oxides, lead, and carbon monoxide. Chemical pollutant 
sources are the petroleum industry, chemical plants like fertilizer, cement, ceramic, clay, glass 
manufacturing, and result production of H2S, SO2, fluorides, organic vapor, and dust. Use of 
a weapons in war emitted radiation nuclear, radioactive radiation, radium, and uranium, etc. 
(Husen, 1997, 2022; Husen et al., 1999; Idso et al., 2000; Iqbal et al., 2018).
3. Pollution: Effects on plants
Different environmental conditions are continuously reflected in the plants. Demanding 
industrial production usually leads to the emission of various pollutants to the environment 
(Kalandadze, 2003; Uaboi-Egbenni et al., 2009). These pollutants greatly affect the plants and 
these pollutants have long-term effects on plants by inducing CO2 contents, light intensity, 
temperature, and precipitation. Some authors (Bhatti and Iqbal, 1988; Godzik and Halbwacks, 
1986, Nivova et al., 1983) have described the effect of pollution on the morphology and anat￾omy of different plant species. The plant commonly adapt to high pollutant concentrations 
(Wyszkowski and Wyszkowska, 2003).
3.1 Morpho-anatomical
Studies have shown modifications in plants due to a wide range of environmental pollut￾ants, like Morpho-anatomical and physiological modifications (Kabata-Pendias and Pendias, 
2001; Linster, 1991; Patra and Sharma, 2000). Thickening of the cell wall, epicuticle wax depo￾sition, chlorosis, lower recurrences, stomatal and epidermal cell size is the alternation in 
leaves due to pollution (Setia et al., 1994; Rao and Dubey, 1991; Srivastava, 1999). Srivastava 
(1999) reported that plant development was influenced by mutilations in foliar epidermal 
characters. This trait is an indicator of the resistance or sensitivity of each species to pollution. 
Some Fabaceae species are affected by air pollutants confirming a stomatal decrease in size 
and increase in thickness of leaves and deposition of phenolic in palisade and parenchyma.
In another report, Saadabi (2011) Studies on the impact of micromorphology and leaf epi￾dermal components of plants show that in polluted sites, the leaf size gets reduced, decreases 
in length, width, and stomata index per leaves area. Adaption of plants to air pollution 
may alter the morphological structure of plants like thicker epidermal cells and additional 432 21. Genetic modification and genome engineering of plants
trichomes (Rangkuti, 2003). In a study, plants are subjected to acid rain which causes anatom￾ical and micromorphological modification in leaves of Eugenia uniflora and clustia robusta
(Alves et al., 2008).
3.2 Physiological
Mandal (2006) reported Nerium indicum Mill, Boerhaavia diffusa L., Amaranthus spinosus L., 
Cephalandra indica Naud, and Tabernaemontana divaricate L. can expand without much main￾tain a strategic distance from the effect of pollutants by changing their physiological mecha￾nism relating to photosynthesis and respiration. Closure of stomatal aperture of Boerhaavia, 
Amaranthus, Tabernaemontana divaricate, and Cephalandra stomatal clogging help in inhibiting 
the entry of poisonous gases. Pollutant affects the foliage which leads to a reduction in ascor￾bic acid and pigment contain decrease due to the formation of free radicals produced during 
chain reaction after absorption of pollutant into foliage which changes the plant’s physiolog￾ical condition (Petkovšek et al., 2008). A natural antioxidant, ascorbic acid plays a major role 
in pollution resistance (Chen et al., 1990).
In an experiment, Rui et al. (2017) used Arachis hypogaea seedlings and examined their yield, 
quality, physiological, and biochemical response in the amended sandy soil with various con￾centrations of silver NPs (50, 500, and 2000mgkg − 1
) for 98days. All growth-associated pa￾rameters, namely plant height, biomass, grain weight, and yield were remarkedly reduced in 
a dose-dependent manner. Jahani et al. (2019) have reported that in Calendula officinalis, the 
growth parameters (shoot length and biomass) and chlorophyll contents were increased at 
the lower concentrations of cerium dioxide NPs (50 and 100mgL− 1
) and decreased at higher 
doses. Further, copper oxide NPs have shown no response to seed germination of Zea mays
(Wang et al., 2012).
3.3 Biochemical
Thermal powerplants caused air pollution, their effect on Mangifera indica and Shorea robusra
were studied by Williams and Banerjee (1995). Joshi and Chauhan (2008) studies that primary 
air pollutants like suspended particulate matter, sulfur dioxide, nitrogen dioxide released from 
automobiles have negatively affected decreased the plant’s chlorophyll, carotenoid, ascorbic 
acid, pH, moisture content, and air pollution tolerance index of Oryza sativa L. Mixture of SO2 
and NO2 may be more harmful to plants (Wellburn et al., 1981). In an experiment, Joshi and 
Swami (2009) reported that the effect of air pollution can be measured by chlorophyll contain as 
it has a main role in plant metabolism. Air pollutant causes stomatal closure, which decreases 
CO2 accessibility in leaves and prevent carbon fixation. Suspended particulate matter, sulfur 
dioxide, and nitrogen dioxide are some of the pollutants absorbed by plant leaves which leads 
to a decrease in photosynthetic pigments which directly affect productivity.
The susceptibility of the plant to air pollution can be determined by the concentration of sol￾uble sugars. The increase in sugars contained in different parts of plants is high in response to 
adverse environmental conditions. A decrease in soluble sugar content in the polluted areas can 
be recognized by an increase in the rate of respiration and reduction in CO2 fixation due to chlo￾rophyll decline. Under stress conditions, proline accumulation is increased, which decreases 
the degradation of other proteins. Higher proline content in plants is an indicator of higher 
stress conditions like osmatic stress (Szekely et al., 2004; Thomas et al., 1992, Gupta et al., 2015).4. Engineering plants 433
3.4 Productivity
Sarkar and Agrawal (2010) also reported reduced levels of mRNA (both small and large 
subunits of RuBisCO) in the same plant under ozone exposure. In an experiment, Ghosh et al. 
(2020) used two sowing dates (timely sown and late sown) to explore the effect of elevated O3
on Triticum aestivum cv. HD 2967 growth including biomass, leaf gas exchange rate and other 
yield features such as the length of the ear plant, weight of ears plant, number of grains plant, 
the weight of grains plant, husk weight plant, straw-weight plant, harvest index, test weight 
of the grains and straw grain ratio.
Ghosh et  al. (2020) concluded that O3 stress affected growth and productivity and late 
sowing practice is not worthwhile for wheat cultivation. The effect of light quality includ￾ing white, yellow, blue, and red quinoline alkaloid production was observed in Camptotheca 
acuminate seedlings. It was found that compared with white light, redlight provoked the 
highest leaf biomass and camptothecin yield, whereas blue light led to the highest camptoth￾ecin content, higher activities of camptothecin biosynthesis-related enzymes (TSB, b-subunit 
of tryptophan synthase and TDC, tryptophan decarboxylase) and parallel transcript levels of 
TSB, TDC1, and TDC2 genes, but lowest leaf biomass. It was concluded that red light had the 
best effect on increasing the production of camptothecin in leaves of C. acuminata seedlings 
and suggested that light quality manipulation could be an effective approach to getting high 
camptothecin yield (Liu et al., 2015).
Agrawal et al. (1983) also found a significant decrease in the number of ears planted, num￾ber of seeds planted, and a decrease in yield in the wheat crops grown in the polluted areas. 
Thomas (1961) reported a significant reduction in yield in many cereals and pulses due to SO2 
pollution. Ozone, NO2, and SO2 individually and in mixing are effective to decrease the yield 
in many crop plants. Kurpa and Kickert (1989) reported that yield loss has been recognized 
to reduce in photosynthetic activity and assimilation supplies to support reproduction devel￾opment and seed growth.
4. Engineering plants
There is no clear definition of biotechnology, according to the National Agriculture Law 
Centre, biotechnology is defined as a newly developed method used to generate products 
by altering the genetic makeup of organisms and producing unique individuals or traits. 
These products are called transgenic, bioengineered, or genetically modified because they 
have foreign genetic material. These genetic engineering techniques, known as gene editing 
and gene-editing technique represent an innovative method of genome manipulation, called 
cisgenic, and that even affected crop breeding. In crop science, the transgenic technique has 
arisen as an important tool to adapt plants to quickly changing environmental conditions. 
The use of engineering plants has increased significantly over the past years. The main step 
in transgenic is to investigate the key gene regulators of different pathways, like frontline 
defense pathways, osmolyte synthesis, homeostasis, and antioxidant defense system (Ahmad 
et al., 2012).
Transgenic plants are those plants, whose DNA is modified by inserting one or more genes 
through genetic engineering techniques. The purpose of transgenics is to introduce a new 
trait that does not present naturally in species. A transgenic plant has a gene or genes that 434 21. Genetic modification and genome engineering of plants
have been artificially inserted. The introduced gene sequence is referred to as a transgene, it 
may be introduced from an unrelated plant or another species. The aim is that the resulting 
transgenic plant will become more useful and productive as possible. Through the use of ge￾netic engineering, we can produce the plant, against a variety of stresses like tolerance to cold 
and heat, and drought resistance, air pollution, water, and soil pollution. Genetic engineering 
of plants to simplify the recovery of soils and water polluted with inorganic pollutants is a 
novel field, profiting from the heterologous expression of genes that enhance the ability of the 
plant to mobilize, stabilize and accumulate metal. The proficiency of phytoremediation de￾pends on mechanism such as metal absorption, transportation, and detoxification. The inser￾tion of genes in these process leads to speed growth, higher biomass crops and also improve 
their recovery potential.
4.1 Transgenics/cisgenics
Transgenic/cisgenic plants of environmental profit usually involve plants that reduce the 
contribution of agrochemicals to the environment and create the biological remediation of the 
contaminated areas more effectively. Their aim includes the formation of a species that leads 
to a decrease the use of pesticides and species that have a gene for degradation of organic 
pollutants and accumulation of organics. Innovative approaches focus on the applicability 
of GM plants that produce insect pheromones and are designed for the phytoremediation of 
cadmium (Thomas et al., 2007).
Cisgenic consists of a new set of technologies that are not used foreign DNA and therefore 
do not introduce a gene from another species. But manipulate the genome of a single plant. 
There are three types of cisgenic techniques used in crop modification. CRISPR/Cas9 (clus￾tered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats). This technique alters the genome of 
the specific plant. These techniques have fewer issues with pleiotrophy. Cisgenic plants ex￾hibit results like conventional breeding in terms of impact on food safety and environmental 
consequences. Herbicides tolerant crops have been changing to survive being sprayed with 
different herbicides and reduced chemical usage. One application will take care of weeds 
without affecting crops. Insecticide crops contain the Bt gene that produced chemical tox￾ins for the corn borer, corn rootworm, cotton bollworm, and other caterpillars. Stack trans￾genic crops have these two types of gene modification in a single crop. Some other example 
of transgenic crop is corn, soybean, upland cotton, sugarbeets, and canola. Lee and Hwang 
(2015) reported that enhancement in metal tolerance can also be done by decreasing metal 
uptake and accumulation in tobacco for cadmium by overexpressing the endogenous class 
1 hemoglobin gene NtHb1. The overexpression of the Arabidopsis metal transporter AtHMA4
in tobacco-caused in the strengthening of the apoplastic barrier by cell wall lignification in 
the epidermal and cortex layer and decrease the absorption of cadmium as well as other toxic 
metal (Siemianowski et al., 2014).
Sasaki et al. (2006) studies that expressing the bacterial Hg transporter MerC in Arabidopsis and 
tobacco accumulate more Hg and make plants more sensitive to Hg when compared with wild￾type plants. Cysteine biosynthesis, glutathione pathway is favorable because thiol-containing 
compounds have a major role in metal chelation and the detoxification of reactive oxygen 
species. In plant genes, many genes involved in GSH biosynthesis promote the accumulation 
and detoxification of heavy metals. Glutathione synthetase and γ-glutamylcysteine synthetase 4. Engineering plants 435
genes were overexpressed in indian mustard to increase tolerance towards a combination of 
metal pollutants (Pachauri and Reisinger, 2008). The successful studies of hybrid polar transfor￾mation tree species overexpressing γ-ECS produced more cysteine, γ-glutamyl cysteine, and GHS 
and accumulate more cadmium in their roots than wild-type controls (Kopriva et al., 2002).
4.2 Genome editing
Genome editing changed plant biotechnology by providing the option of selecting desired 
genes or insertion of genes into desired cultivars. Specific stress alters the expression of a 
particular gene in a species and it causes modification in the efficiency of signal perception 
and subsequent transcriptional alterations leading to the elicitation of a specific response, 
this change leads to adaption and finally higher stress tolerance in adverse environmental 
condition. Here, we present a wide investigation of gene editing-based solutions to increase 
the productivity imposed by adverse environmental conditions. Agricultural productivity is 
decreased due to abiotic stress like poor air quality, salinity, soil pollution, water, and nutri￾ent deficiency due to changes in climate conditions. Current research efforts prove that gene 
editing is an effective tool in increasing resistance to crop tolerance. Gene editing played a 
leading role in identifying the desired gene not only to enhance drought tolerance but also to 
improve yield and yield contributing character. SnRK2 phosphorylates KATs and SLAC1 to 
help the stomatal opening to induce drought stress tolerance. Drought and salinity are two 
major abiotic stresses that affect rice, needed research explorations into the potential of gene 
editing for producing tolerant varieties.
CRISPR/Cas9 gene-editing technique is used to knockout OsRR22, a gene associated with 
salt susceptibility in rice (Zhang et al., 2019). Researchers found that gene edit variety has less 
reduction of biomass as compared with wild type in exposure to salt. Rice plant performance 
in high saline stress conditions was improved without affecting plant biomass and yield. The 
wild plant was 32% shorter in saline solution while edited lines were 19% shorter. The edited 
line had much less biomass reduction due to salt exposure to wild or unedited plants (Zhang 
et al., 2018). CRISPR/Cas9 has become a very suitable tool for crop improvement. Recently, 
a great improvement in plant gene editing has been reported. Single gene characters are con￾trolled by a single gene, these genes affect a specific character without compromising other 
agronomic characteristics during the mutation process, making gene editing tools suitable 
for them. AtNAC2 confirmed an improved tolerance under water stress conditions without 
affecting the yield and yield attributed character (Lee et al., 2017) Beyond generating mu￾tation breeding, and gene knockout, CRISPR/Cas9 tools can also aid gene knock-ins. Used 
CRISPR/Cas9 to insert a promoter at a specific maize locus to improve drought tolerance. 
This insertion allowed higher grain yield during flowering water stress. This method rep￾resents an intergenic technique in which a native maize genetic sequence was introduced at a 
new locus to make the plant more adaptive to abiotic stress.
Yu et al. (2017) reported that knocking out the metal transporter gene, OsNramp5 reduces 
the cadmium accumulation in rice. This is the most significant finding of CRISPR in phyto￾extraction and the promise of its use in gene transcription regulation. However, an area of 
CRISPR research has greater potential for phytoextraction improvement in the use of gRNA￾guided dCas9 to modulate gene expression. The transcription factor can be attached with 
dCas9 to enhance or repress transcription by RNA polymerase (Miglani, 2017).436 21. Genetic modification and genome engineering of plants
5. Conclusion and future prospects
Adverse environment condition studies using different transgene have yielded promising 
results so far, and added successes are likely to give the progress in DNA sequencing in the 
future, which result in more amount of DNA sequencing data available for environmental 
stress resistance species and also increase the number of species responsive to genetic trans￾formation. Especially, a good vision comes from the genetic modification of tree crops, like 
poplar which is high biomass species adapted to metal soil pollution (Lyyra et al., 2007) re￾ported the combination of bacterial merA and merB genes has tested for Hg decontamination 
in a poplar tree. Despite the clear potential of this technique, very few experiments are pres￾ent testing transgenic plants in the field for adverse environmental stress. Results attained 
in controlled conditions, like hydroponic culture, and in vitro, can provide a better idea to 
check the behavior of genetically modified lines instead of the field but it’s not completely 
consistent. On the another hand, experimentation and application of GM plants are restricted 
in many countries due to some ethical issues and contamination of the environment by GM 
plants. This restriction causes the detriment of progress in the field. Indeed, we need public 
opinion on the transgene introduction. It is very essential to do field trials and cultivation of 
transgenic plants for pollution.
The main reason for opposing GMOs is high risk to human health, and transgene release 
into the environment. We can use sterile plants for transformation, which has no risk to enter 
in the food chain and fruit production is not required. Recently, a new technique is used to 
produce marker-free transgene, leading to safer GMO crops. However, these genome modifi￾cation techniques of DNA transfer may give to the increase in acceptance of genetic engineer￾ing plants, as seen in many years, leading to public adaption in many countries, and taking 
advantage of GM plant cultivation and commercialization for the recovery of different types 
of pollutions, which may indicate an opportunity to reduce the skepticism about agriculture 
biotechnology (Shew et al., 2018). Further research will be needed to see how consumer ac￾ceptance of genome-edited crops evolves and whether experts have any say in how or where 
this technology might be used in support of better outcomes.
References
Agrawal, M., Nandi, P.K., 1983. Ozone and sulphur dioxide effects on Panicum miliaceum plants. Bull. Torrey Bot. 
Club, 435–441.
Ahmad, P., Ashraf, M., Younis, M., Hu, X., Kumar, A., Akram, N.A., Al-Qurainy, F., 2012. Role of transgenic plant in 
agriculture and biopharming. Biotechnol. Adv. 30, 524–540.
Alves, E.S., Tresmondi, F., Longui, E.L., 2008. Análise estrutural de folhas de Eugenia uniflora L. (Myrtaceae) coletadas 
em ambientes rural e urbano, SP, Brasil. Acta Bot. Brasil. 22 (1), 241–248.
Bhatti, G.H., Iqbal, M.Z., 1988. Investigations into the effect of automobile exhausts on the phenology, periodicity and 
productivity of some roadside trees. Acta Soc. Bot. Pol., 57.
Chattopadhyay, A., Purohit, J., Mehta, S., Parmar, H., Karippadakam, S., Rashid, A., Balamurugan, A., Bansal, S., 
Prakash, G., Achary, V.M.M., Reddy, M.K., 2022. Precision genome editing toolbox: applications and approaches 
for improving rice’s genetic resistance to pathogens. Agronomy 12 (3), 565.
Chen, Y.M., Lucas, P.W., Wellburn, A.R., 1990. Relative relationship between foliar injury and change in antioxidants 
levels in red and Norway spruce exposed to acidic mists. Environ. Pollut. 69, 1–15.
Choudhary, A., Kumar, A., Kaur, H., Singh, M., Suri, G.S., Kaur, G., Mehta, S., 2022. Effect of elevated CO2 conditions 
on medicinal plants: a relatively unexplored aspect. In: Environmental Pollution and Medicinal Plants. CRC Press, 
pp. 95–111.References 437
Deepti, B.A.J., Bhalla, P., Bachheti, R.K., Husen, A., 2022a. Growth and development of medicinal plants, and produc￾tion of secondary metabolites under ozone pollution. In: Husen, A. (Ed.), Environmental Pollution and Medicinal 
Plants. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, pp. 25–45, https://doi.org/10.1201/9781003178866-2.
Deepti, B.A.J., Chauhan, K., Bachheti, R.K., Husen, H., 2022b. Impact of UV radiation on the growth and pharmaceu￾tical properties of medicinal plants. In: Husen, A. (Ed.), Environmental pollution and medicinal Plants. CRC Press, 
Boca Raton, FL, pp. 47–64, https://doi.org/10.1201/9781003178866-3.
Dilawari, R., Kaur, N., Priyadarshi, N., Kumar, B., Abdelmotelb, K.F., Lal, S.K., Singh, B., Tripathi, A., Aggarwal, S.K., 
Jat, B.S., Mehta, S., 2021. Genome editing: a tool from the vault of science for engineering climate-resilient cereals. 
In: Harsh Environment and Plant Resilience. Springer, Cham, pp. 45–72.
Ghosh, A., Pandey, A.K., Agrawal, M., Agrawal, S.B., 2020. Assessment of growth, physiological, and yield attri￾butes of wheat cultivar HD 2967 under elevated ozone exposure adopting timely and delayed sowing conditions. 
Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. Int., 57–61. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-020-08325-y.
Godzik, S., Halbwacks, G., 1986. Structural alterations of Aesculus hippocastanum leaf surface by air pollutant. ZP 
Flanzekr. Pflanzenchutz 93, 590–596.
Gupta, G.P., Singh, S., Kumar, B., Kulshrestha, U.C., 2015. Industrial dust sulphate and its effects on biochemical and 
morphological characteristics of Morus (Morus alba) plant in NCR Delhi. Environ. Monit. Assess. 187, 67.
Husen, A., 1997. Impact of air pollution on the growth and development of Datura innoxia Mill. M.Sc. Dissertation, 
Jamia Hamdard, New Delhi, India.
Husen, A., 2021a. Harsh Environment and Plant Resilience (Molecular and Functional Aspects). Springer Nature 
Switzerland AG, Cham, Switzerland, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-65912-7.
Husen, A., 2021b. Plant Performance under Environmental Stress (Hormones, Biostimulants and Sustainable 
Plant Growth Management). Springer Nature Switzerland AG, Cham, Switzerland, https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-030-78521-5.
Husen, A., 2021c. Cross talk between autophagy and hormones for abiotic stress tolerance in plants. In: 
Husen, A. (Ed.), Plant Performance under Environmental Stress. Springer, Cham, pp. 1–15, https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-030-78521-5_1.
Husen, A., 2021d. Morpho-anatomical, physiological, biochemical and molecular responses of plants to air pollution. 
In: Husen, A. (Ed.), Harsh Environment and Plant Resilience. Springer International Publishing AG, Cham, pp. 
203–234, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-65912-7_9.
Husen, A., 2022. Environmental Pollution and Medicinal Plants. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL.
Husen, A., Ali, S.T., Mahmooduzzafar, I.M., 1999. Structural, functional and biochemical responses of Datura innoxia
Mill. to coal-smoke pollution. Proc. Acad. Environ. Biol. 8, 61–72.
Idso, S., Kimball, B., Pettit, G., 2000. Effects of atmospheric CO2 enrichment on the growth and development of 
Hymenocallis littoralis (Amaryllidaceae) and the concentrations of several antineoplastic and antiviral constituents 
of its bulbs. Am. J. Bot. 87 (6), 769–773.
Iqbal, M., Parveen, R., Parveen, A., Parveen, B., Aref, I.M., 2018. Establishing the botanical identity of plant drugs 
based on their active ingredients under diverse growth conditions. J. Environ. Biol. 39 (1), 123–136.
Jahani, S., Saadatmand, S., Mahmoodzadeh, H., Ali Khavari-Nejad, R., 2019. Effect of foliar application of cerium ox￾ide nanoparticles on growth, photosynthetic pigments, electrolyte leakage, compatible osmolytes and antioxidant 
enzymes activities of Calendula officinalis L. Biologia 74, 1063–1075.
Joshi, P.C., Chauhan, A., 2008. Performance of locally grown rice plants (Oryza sativa L.) exposed to air pollutants in 
a rapidly growing industrial area of district Haridwar, Uttarakhand, India. Life Sci. J. 5 (3), 41–45.
Joshi, P.C., Swami, A., 2009. Air pollution induced changes in the photosynthetic pigments of selected plant species. 
J. Environ. Biol. 35, 295–298.
Kabata-Pendias, A., Pendias, H., 2001. Trace Elements in Soils and Plants, 3rd. CRC Press.
Kalandadze, B., 2003. Influence of the ore mining and processing enterprise on soil types in adjoining areas. Agron. 
Res. 1, 131–137.
Kopriva, S., Büchert, T., Fritz, G., Suter, M., Benda, R., Schünemann, V., Koprivova, A., Schürmann, P., Trautwein, 
A.X., Kroneck, P.M., Brunold, C., 2002. The presence of an iron sulfur cluster in adenosine 5′-phosphosulfate re￾ductase separates organisms utilizing adenosine 5′-phosphosulfate and phosphoadenosine 5′-phosphosulfate for 
sulfate assimilation. J. Biol. Chem. 277 (24), 21786–21791.
Kumar, A., Choudhary, A., Kaur, H., Kumar, R., Sharma, R., Gautam, H., Mehta, S., 2022. Water pollution and medic￾inal plants: insights into the impact and adaptation responses. In: Environmental Pollution and Medicinal Plants. 
CRC Press, pp. 117–129.438 21. Genetic modification and genome engineering of plants
Kurpa, S.V., Kickert, R.N., 1989. The greenhouse effect: impacts of ultraviolet-B (UV-B) radiation, carbon dioxide 
(CO2) and ozone (O3) on vegetation. Environ. Pollut. 61, 263–392.
Lee, D.K., Chung, P.J., Jeong, J.S., Jang, G., Bang, S.W., Jung, H., Kim, Y.S., Ha, S.H., Choi, Y.D., Kim, J.K., 2017. The 
rice OsNAC6 transcription factor orchestrates multiple molecular mechanisms involving root structural adap￾tions and nicotianamine biosynthesis for drought tolerance. Plant Biotechnol. J. 15, 754–764.
Lee, H.S., Hwang, K.R., 2015. A new methodology in seismic torsion design of building structures. Proceedings of 
the ASEM’15 Conference, August. Seoul.
Linster, M., 1991. The impact of sewage sludge on agriculture. Towards Sustain. Agricult. Develop. 11, 320–336.
Liu, Y., Song, L., Yu, W., Hu, Y., Ma, X., Wu, J., Ying, Y., 2015. Light quality modifies camptothecin production and 
gene expression of biosynthesis in Camptotheca acuminata Decne seedlings. Ind. Crop Prod. 66, 137–143.
Loyal, A., Pahuja, S.K., Sharma, P., Malik, A., Srivastava, R.K., Mehta, S., 2023. Potential environmental and hu￾man health implications of nanomaterials used in sustainable agriculture and soil improvement. In: Engineered 
Nanomaterials for Sustainable Agricultural Production, Soil Improvement and Stress Management. Academic 
Press, pp. 387–412.
Lyyra, T., Pikkarainen, A., Tiikkainen, P. (toim.), 2007. Vanheneminen ja terveys. Tammer-Paino Oy, Tampere.
Mandal, M., 2006. Physiological changes in certain test plants under automobile exhaust pollution. J. Environ. Biol. 
27 (1), 43–47.
Meagher, R.B., 2000. Phytoremediation of toxic elemental and organic pollutants. Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 3, 153–162.
Miglani, G.S. Genome editing in crop improvement: Present scenario and future prospects. J. Crop Improv. 2017, 31, 
453–559. [CrossRef].
Mehta, S., Gogna, M., Singh, B., Patra, A., Singh, I.K., Singh, A., 2020. Silicon: a plant nutritional “non-entity” for 
mitigating abiotic stresses. In: Plant Stress Biology. Springer, Singapore, pp. 17–49.
Mehta, S., James, D., Reddy, M.K., 2019. Omics technologies for abiotic stress tolerance in plants: current status and 
prospects. Recent Approaches in Omics for Plant Resilience to Climate Change. Springer, Singapore, pp. 1–34.
Mehta, S., Lal, S.K., Sahu, K.P., Venkatapuram, A.K., Kumar, M., Sheri, V., Varakumar, P., Vishwakarma, C., Yadav, R., 
Jameel, M.R., Ali, M., 2020. CRISPR/Cas9-edited rice: a new frontier for sustainable agriculture. In: New Frontiers 
in Stress Management for Durable Agriculture. Springer, Singapore, pp. 427–458.
Nivova, D.J., Dushkova, P.I., Kovacheva, G.V., 1983. Anatomical, morphological studies of Platanus acerifolia at vari￾ous degrees of air pollution. Ecology (Sofia) 6, 35–47.
Pachauri, R.K., Reisinger, A. (Eds.), 2008. Climate Change 2007 [Electronic Resource]: Synthesis Report. IPCC.
Patra, M., Sharma, A., 2000. Mercury toxicity in plants. Bot. Rev. 66, 379–422.
Pedersen, J.T.S., van Vuuren, D., Gupta, J., Santos, F.D., Edmonds, J., Swart, R., 2022. IPCC emission scenarios: how 
did critiques affect their quality and relevance 1990–2022? Glob. Environ. Change 75, 102538.
Petkovšek, S.A.S., Batič, F., Lansik, C.R., 2008. Norway spruce needles as bioindicator of air pollution in the area of 
influence of the Šoštanj thermal Power plant. Slovenia. Environ. Poll. 151, 287–291.
Rahman, S., Husen, A., 2022. Impact of sulphur dioxide deposition on medicinal plants’ growth and production of 
active constituents. In: Husen, A. (Ed.), Environmental Pollution and Medicinal Plants. CRC Press, Boca Raton, 
FL, pp. 65–93, https://doi.org/10.1201/9781003178866-4.
Rangkuti, M.N., 2003. Kemampuan menjerap timbel (Pb) pada daun beberapa jenis tanaman penghijauan jalan tol 
Jagorawi: análisis struktur anatomi dan histokimia [Thesis].
Rao, M.V., Dubey, P.S., 1991. Detoxifying mechanism: probable role in determining the plant response to SO2 under 
different light intensities. Indian J. Environ. Toxicol. 1 (1).
Rui, M., Ma, C., Tang, X., Yang, J., Jiang, F., Pan, Y., et al., 2017. Phytotoxicity of silver nanoparticles to peanut (Arachis 
hypogaea L.): physiological responses and food safety. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 5, 6557–6567.
Saadabi, A.M.A., 2011. Effects of auto-exhaust pollution on the micro-morphology and leaf epidermal features of 
ornamental plants in Khartoum, Sudan. J. Appl. Sci. Res. 7 (3), 270.
Sarkar, A., Agrawal, S.B., 2010. Identification of ozone stress in Indian rice through foliar injury and differential pro￾tein profile. Environ. Monit. Assess. 161, 283–302.
Sasaki, Y., Hayakawa, T., Inoue, C., Miyazaki, A., Silver, S., Kusano, T., 2006. Generation of mercury-hyperaccumulating 
plants through transgenic expression of the bacterial mercury membrane transport protein MerC. Transgenic Res. 
15 (5), 615–625.
Setia, P., Childs, N., Wailes, E., Livezey, J., 1994. The U. S. Rice Industry. Agricultural Economic Report No. 700, U.S, 
Department of Agriculture Economic Research Service, Washington, DC.References 439
Shew, A.M., Nalley, L.L., Snell, H.A., Nayga, R.M., Dixon, B.L., 2018. CRISPR versus GMOs: public acceptance and 
valuation. Glob. Food Secur. 19, 71–80.
Siemianowski, O., Barabasz, A., Kendziorek, M., Ruszczyńska, A., Bulska, E., Williams, L.E., Antosiewicz, D.M., 2014. 
HMA4 expression in tobacco reduces Cd accumulation due to the induction of the apoplastic barrier. J. Exp. Bot. 
65 (4), 1125–1139.
Singh, A., Mehta, S., Yadav, S., Nagar, G., Ghosh, R., Roy, A., Chakraborty, A., Singh, I.K., 2022. How to cope with the 
challenges of environmental stresses in the era of global climate change: an update on ROS stave off in plants. Int. 
J. Mol. Sci. 23 (4), 1995.
Srivastava, H.S., 1999. Biochemical defense mechanism of plants to increased levels of Ozone and other atmospheric 
pollutants. Curr. Sci. 76, 525.
Szekely, M., Ferencz, C., Bognar, P., Lichtenberger, J., Hamar, D., Tarcsai, G., Timár, G., Molnár, G., Pásztor, S.Z., 
Steinbach, P., Székely, B., Ferencz, O.E., 2004. Crop yield estimation by satellite remote sensing. Int. J. Remote Sens. 
25 (20), 4113–4149.
Tang, Q., Liu, G., Zhou, C., Zhang, H., Sun, R., 2013. Distribution of environmentally sensitive elements in residential 
soils near a coal-fired power plant: potential risks to ecology and children's health. Chemosphere 93, 2473–2479.
Thomas, M.D., 1961. Effects of Air pollution WHO Monograph. Series No. 46, WHO, Geneva, pp. 233–278.
Thomas, S.M., DeMarco, M., D’Arcangelo, G., Halegoua, S., Brugge, J.S., 1992. Ras is essential for nerve growth 
factor-and phorbol ester-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of MAP kinases. Cell 68 (6), 1031–1040.
Thomas, E.S., Gomez, H.L., Li, R.K., Chung, H.C., Fein, L.E., Chan, V.F., Jassem, J., Pivot, X.B., Klimovsky, J.V., De 
Mendoza, F.H., Xu, B., 2007. Ixabepilone plus capecitabine for metastatic breast cancer progressing after anthracy￾cline and taxane treatment. J. Clin. Oncol. 25 (33), 5210–5217.
Uaboi-Egbenni, P.O., Okolie, P.N., Adejuyitan, O.E., Sobande, A.O., Akinyemi, O., 2009. Effect of industrial effluents 
on the growth and anatomical structures of Abelmoschus esculentus (okra). Afr. J. Biotechnol. 8, 3251–3260.
Wang, Z., Xie, X., Zhao, J., Liu, X., Feng, W., White, J.C., et al., 2012. Xylem-and phloem-based transport of CuO 
nanoparticles in maize (Zea mays L.). Environ. Sci. Technol. 46, 4434–4441.
Wellburn, A.R., Higginson, C., Robinson, D., Walmsley, C., 1981. Biochemical explanations of more than additive 
inhibitory effects of low atmospheric levels of Sulphur dioxide plus nitrogen dioxide upon plants. New Phytol. 
88, 223–237.
Williams, A.J., Banerjee, S.K., 1995. Effect of thermal power plant emissions on the metabolic activities of Mangifera 
indica and Shorea robusta. Environ. Ecol. 13, 914–919.
Wolz, S., Fenske, R.A., Simcox, N.J., Palcisko, G., Kissel, J.C., 2003. Residential arsenic and lead levels in an agricul￾tural community with a history of lead arsenate use. Environ. Res. 93, 293–300.
Wyszkowski, M., Wyszkowska, J., 2003. Effect of soil contamination by copper on the content of macro elements in 
spring barley. Pol. J. Nat. Sci. 14, 309–320.
Yu, X., Wang, X.B., Li, X.J., Lin, X.J., Yang, F., Tang, M.E., 2017. Three-dimensional finite difference forward modeling 
of the transient electromagnetic method in the time domain. Chin. J. Geophys. 60 (2), 810–819.
Zhang, Z., Ge, X., Luo, X., Wang, P., Fan, Q., Hu, G., et al., 2018. Simultaneous editing of two copies of Gh14-3-3d con￾fers enhanced transgene-clean plant defense against verticillium dahliae in allotetraploid upland cotton. Front. 
Plant Sci. 9, 842. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2018.00842.
Zhang, Y., Wang, Y., Yulin, B., Tang, B., Wang, M., Zhang, C., et  al., 2019. CRISPR/Cas9-mediated sheep MSTN 
gene knockout and promote SSMSCs differentiation. J. Cell. Biochem. 120, 1794–1806. https://doi.org/10.1002/
jcb.27474.This page intentionally left blank441
Index
A
Abscisic acid (ABA) crosstalk, 48
Accumulators, 197–198, 268–269
Acid deposition
metabolic pathways, 104
plant biochemical and enzymatic response, 103–104
plant morphology and physiology process, 100–103, 
102f
plant vegetation and ecosystem, 104–105
SO2, 99–100, 101f
Acid rain, 2–3, 258
dry deposition, 100
individual plant level and community level, 100
wet deposition, 100
Active constituents production
flavonoids and phenols, 69
phenolics, 71
polyphenols and amino acids, 70
terpenes, 69
tocopherols and tocotrienols, 69
Active transport, 338
Acute injury, 127
Adaptation responses
biochemical response of veggies, 203, 203t
Cd-induced damages pathways, 204–205
merB gene, 204
morphophysiological, 203
proline functions, 203, 204f
Adenosine triphosphate (ATP), 13
Adverse effects, 245
Aerodynamic equivalent diameter (AED), 399–400
Affinity chromatography, 414
Agricultural fertilizers, 258
Agricultural productivity, 435
Agricultural runoff, 11–12
Agriculture, 113–114
Air pollutants, 4, 4t
Air pollution, plant response, 3–6, 4t
Amino acids, 70
Anthocyanin Reflectance Index (ARI), 322–323
Anthocyanins, 46
Antioxidants, 105, 253, 259–260, 302–303
Apoplastic pathway, 179–180
Apoptotic ROS signaling, 81–82
Applications of UV-B radiation
biocenoses preservation, 53
biosphere cycles, 53
and cultivation, 52
medicine, 53–54
ozone layer of Earth, integrity of, 53
paleo dynamics reconstruction, 52
pharmacology, 53
and plant breeding, 52
plant protection against pathogens, 52
storage of agricultural products, 52
Aquatic macrophytes. See also Constructed wetlands 
(CWs); Phytoremediation; Trace elements
biochemical biomarkers
alteration of photosynthetic pigments, 351–352
nonenzymatic defense system, 348–351
oxidative stress and enzymatic defense system, 
346–348, 347f
defined, 337
genotoxicity biomarkers, 352–353, 352f
morphological biomarkers, 338–345, 339–344t
physiological biomarkers
alteration of plant’s osmotic potential, 345–346
photosynthetic and respiratory activities, 345
Architecture, plants, 71–72
Arsenic (As), 112–113, 118, 147–148, 397–398
Ascorbate and tocopherol, 47
Ascorbate peroxidase (APX), 147, 348
ATP sulfurylase (ATP-S) activity, 146
Audible sound wave technology, 12
Augmentation of zeaxanthin pools, 10
B
Biochemical effects, O3, 87–88
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD), 265–266
Bioconcentration factor (BCF), 201, 353
Bioenergy crops mediated remediation, 218
Bioenergy production, 220–221
Biogenic VOC, 129
Biological oxygen demand (BOD), 255–256
Biomarkers. See Aquatic macrophytes
Biomass, 220–221
Biosphere cycles, 53
Bleaching, 102
Blue light/UV-A photoreceptors cryptochromes, 26
Boron, 113
Note: Page numbers followed by f indicate figures and t indicate tables.442 Index
Brassinosteroids (BR), 49–50, 49f
Bryophytes, 104–105
Bt-cotton, 171
Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS), 196
C
Cadmium (Cd), 395–397, 422
availability of energy (ATP), 144–145
hydraulic conductivity, 142
loss of chlorophyll pigments, 143
methyl glyoxal (MG), 143–144
oxidative damage in plants, 143–144
phytotoxic symptoms of, 142
Sassafras seedlings, 142
shoot nutrient content, mung bean, 144–145
Camptotheca acuminate seedlings, 9
Carbohydrates assimilation and allocation, 67
Carbon-based nanomaterials
fullerenes, 163–164
morphology, 163–164
Oryza sativa roots, 163–164
Carbon dioxide (CO2). See also Architecture; Plant growth
environmental factors, 131
FACE experiments, 130–131
Kyoto Protocol, 129–130
leaf nitrogen concentrations, 130–131
methane, 63
Montreal Protocol, 63
nitrous oxide, 63
positive effects, 130
primary greenhouse gas, 61
thickening of leaves, 131–132
Carbon monoxide (CO), 132
Carbon nitrogen and phosphorous ratio, 67–68
Carotenoids, 399–400
Cation diffusion facilitator (CDF), 260
Cell death, 291–292
Cell phone radiation
and plants, 300
biochemical response, 302–304, 303f
molecular and genetic response, 304
physiological response, 300–302
“Possible Human Carcinogen”, 299–300
Cellular and subcellular protein catalogues
agricultural crops under various stresses, 417–418t
characteristics, 416f
herbicide treatments, 419
protein modification/novel protein production, 
415–416
salt and osmotic stress conditions, 416–419
two-DE (2-DE) and MALDI-TOFMS technique, 419
Cell wall fluidity, 13–14
Cerium NPs (CeO NPs), 168
Chemical oxygen demand (COD), 265–266
Chlorophyll a/b-binding proteins, 29
Chlorosis, 118, 233–238, 240
Chromatin remodeling proteins, 42
Chromium (Cr), 118, 398–399
Chronic injury, 5
Chronic SO2 exposure, 127
Chrysanthemum anabolism, 13
Civilization, 253
Coal burning, carbon dioxide (CO2), 129–132
Coal smoke pollution
chemical bonds, 126
chlorophyll disintegration, 127
nitrogen oxides (NO2), 128–129
nonrenewable fossil fuel, 125
sulfur dioxide (SO2), 126–128
on vegetation, 126
Cobalt (Co), 119
Composite-based nanomaterials, 165
Conifers, 7
Constructed wetlands (CWs)
aquatic plants, 362–363
defined, 362
less expensive, 362
and macrophytes, 364
removal of organic pollutants, 363–364
types, 362, 363f
Conventional remedial strategies, 214–215
Copper (Cu), 118–119
Copper-based insecticides, 172
Copper nano pesticides, 172
Coumarins, 48
C4 photosynthesis, 5–6
CRISPR/Cas9 gene-editing technique, 435
Crop health and productivity
agriculture purpose, 113–114
limited plant growth and phytotoxicity, 114f
metal uptake by crops, 116–117, 116f
and nutrients, 114
plant growth and yield, 115
plant species/crop yield, 115–116
seed germination, 114–115
transpiration and osmotic potential, 117
Crude petroleum oil hydrocarbons, 10–11
Cyclobutane-pyrimidine dimers (CPD), 28
D
Damage detection
enrichment factor (EF), 201
food chain, 200–201
heavy metal accumulation, 201
Pb contamination, 200–201
pollution estimation, 201
Detoxification, 215
Diatom Biotic Index, 334–335Index 443
Differentially abundant proteins (DAPs), 423
Digitalis lanata, 6
Digoxin, 6
Dissolved oxygen (DO), 255–256
DNA films, 28
Drought, 34–35, 435
Dry deposition, 100
E
Edible food safety, 202
Electrical conductivity (EC), 255–256
Electromagnetic field radiations (EMFr)
cell phone communication, 299–300
cellular dipolar molecules, 304
oxidative stress, plant system, 301
pre sowing seed treatment, 301
process, 300
toxic effects of, 301
Electromagnetic radiation (EMR), 300
Elevated CO2 (EC) levels. See also Active constituents 
production
anthropogenic activities, 380–387
arid lands, 387–388
carbon-nutrient balance theory, 388–389
EC exposure, 387
environmental pollutants, effects of, 381f, 
382–386t
future agroecosystems, 389–390
Gynostemma pentaphyllum, 389
jasmonic acid (JA), 390
photosynthetic and respiratory rates, 62
physiochemical processes, crop species, 64, 65t
salicylic acid (SA), 390
terpenoids, 390
Elevated ozone (O3)
active photochemical zones, 79–80
biochemical effects, 87–88
bonded oxygen atoms, 79
crops and trees, 89
effects on plants, 83–84, 84t, 86
ozone-induced changes, 85, 85f
plant cell metabolism, 90
plant tissue damage, 81–82
productivity measurements, 88–89
and reactive oxygen species, 89
role of, 79
sensitive plants, 80
surface disinfectant, 89–90
toxicology of plants, 83
tropospheric, 80–81, 81f
urban and rural agriculture, 79–80
visible injury and physiological effects, 85–86
Emergent macrophytes, 337
Emerging contaminants (ECs), 255–256
Endocytosis, 179–180
Endophytes, 400–401
Engineered nanomaterials, 162–163
Engineering plants
defined, 433
genome editing, 435
transgenic/cisgenic plants, 433–435
Enrichment factor (EF), 201
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 269
Environment pollution, 399–400
agricultural sources, 431
biochemical, 432
combustion of, 430–431
domestic sources, 430–431
morpho-anatomical, 431–432
natural pollutant emissions, 430–431
physiological, 432
plant response, 1–2, 2f
productivity, 433
Environment stress, 429–430
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), 414
Epinasty, 236
Epiphytic species, 104–105
Essential trace elements, 335–336
Eutrophication, 255
Evapotranspiration, 197–198
Excitation, 284
Excluders, 197–198, 268
Explosives
basic chemical attributes, 314t
compound structure, 314f
induced stress, plants, 321
pathways of, 315f
soil composition, 315
and vegetation (see Vegetation and explosives)
F
Farmyard manure (FYM), 115–116
Fertilizers, 11–12
Flavonoids, 69, 388–389
Floating-plant systems, 214–215
Flowering, 103
Fly ash, 132–133. See also Crop health and productivity
coal burning, 109
composition, 111, 111t
toxicity (see Toxicity of fly ash)
Food and Drug Administration (FDA), 196
Foyer-Halliwell-Asada cycle, 87–88
Free-air carbon dioxide enrichment (FACE), 61, 130
Free-floating aquatic plants, 214
Free-floating macrophytes, 337
Free radicals, 103
Free water surface flow (FSF CW), 362
FR photons, 9444 Index
G
γ-aminobutyric acid, 48–49
Gene editing, 433, 435
Gene expression, 29, 42f
Genetic engineering, 430
Gibberellins, 50, 169
Ginkgo biloba, 6
Global munitions
central aromatic/hetero-aromatic structure, 313
chemical contamination, 311
explosive compound capacity, 313f
life cycle, 312f
military industrial complex (MIC), 312
reactive compounds, 311
trinitrotoluene (TNT), 313
unexploded ordnance (UXOs), 311
US Department of Defense (DoD) locations, 311
Global system for mobile communication (GSM), 
299–300, 303–304
Glucosinolates, 5
Glutamate receptor (GLR)-like proteins, 260
Glutathione reductase (GR), 348
Glyphosate-based herbicides (GBH) effect, 240
Gold nanoparticles (Au-NPs), 164
Greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, 5, 220–221
“Green remediation” technique, 211–212
Greenroof, 364
Green roof-top water recycling system (GROW), 364
Growth responses, 270–271
Guaiacol peroxidase (GPX), 147, 348
H
Health Risk Index (HRI), 201
Heavy metal ATPase (HMA), 338
Heavy metals (HM), 133–134, 258
arsenic (As), 147–148
basaltic ingenious rocks, 140
bioaccumulation, 195–196, 197t
cadmium (Cd), 142–145
immobilization, 202
lead (Pb), 145–147
mercury (Hg), 149–150
metallic elements, 139–140
metal stress tolerance mechanisms, 150
phytoremediation, 202–203
pollution, 140–141, 141f, 214–215
stress, 139–140
toxicity, 139–140
trace elements, 110
Herring bone necrosis, 128–129
“Hidden hunger” problem, 195–196
Homeostasis, 15–16
Hormones
brassinosteroids (BR), 49–50, 49f
ethylene, 50
gibberellins, 50
jasmonates, 51–52
melatonin, 50
salicylic acid, 50–51
Hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), 81, 87, 90, 103
Hydrogen sulfide (H2S) signaling, 5, 394
Hydrophilic pathways, 179–180
Hyperaccumulator plants
by-product crops, 219t
defined, 218–220
Hyperspectral imagery (HSI), 321–324, 323f
Hyponasty, 236
I
Immunosensor QD fluorescence resonance energy 
transfer-based immunosensors, 178–179
Incidental nanomaterials, 162–163
Indicators, 268
Indole-3 acetic acid (IAA) conversion, 238
Indole alkaloids, 49
Industrialization, 140
Industrial pollutants
biochemical responses, 273–276, 273f, 274–275t
growth responses and metal tolerance index, 270–271
intensive application, nanoparticles, 267
nutrients, 267–268
physiological responses, 271–272
potentially toxic elements (PTEs), 267f
sources of heavy metals, 266–267
types of industries and elements, 266f
types of plants, contaminated soil
accumulator, 268–269
excluders, 268
indicators, 268
untreated wastewater discharge, 266
water bodies, 265–266
Inorganic-based nanoparticles, 164
Inorganic chemical compounds, 258
Inorganic water pollutants, 254–255
Integrated pest management (IPM), 245
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), 62
Invertases, 302
Ion-channels, 179–180
Ion exchange chromatography (IEC), 414
Ionization, 284
Ionizing radiation, 284
Ion-releasing NP effect, 181–182
Isobaric tag for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ), 
414, 422
Isoprenoids, 393
Isotope-coded affinity tag (ICAT) labeling, 414Index 445
J
Jasmonates, 51–52
K
Keto-carotenoids/betalains, 45–46
L
Lead (Pb), 119, 398
abscisic acid (ABA), 145–146
anthropogenic activities, 145
fragrant rice cultivars, 146
plant biomass accumulation, 146
seed germination process, 145–146
Leaf glazing, 129
Leaf relative water content (LRWC), 147
Lichens, 104–105
Light, 26
adapted Lobaria pulmonaria, 30
pollution, plant response to, 8–10
Lipid peroxidation (LPO), 202, 290
Lipophilic movements, 179–180
“London smog”, 104–105
Low-intensity red and infrared lights, 3
M
Malonaldehyde (MDA), 103–104, 302
Mass spectrometry (MS) analysis, 414
Mature weeds, 12–13
Medicinal plants, 6
Melatonin, 50
Mercury (Hg), 113, 149–150
Meristematic cells, 352–353
Mesophyll intercellular CO2 concentration (Ci), 146–147
Metallic stress, 349–350
Metalloids, 196–197
Metallothioneins, 150
Metal stress tolerance mechanisms
homeostatic, 150
metallothioneins, 150
phytosiderophores, 150
root exudates, 150
Metal tolerance index, 270–271
Metal toxicity, in plants
carcinogenic and noncarcinogenic properties, 199
daily vegetable consumers, 198–199
and damage detection, 200–201
nonessential trace elements, 197–198
phytoremediation technique, 197–198
plant physiological process, 199, 200t
transportation of heavy metals, 198
vegetables, 198
Military industrial complex (MIC), 312
Mineral nutrition, 34
Mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), 42
Montreal Protocol, 63
Mycosporin-like amino acids, 45–46
N
Nanoceria, 168
Nanocomposite, 165
Nanoemulsion, 173
Nano fertilizer, 171t
Nanomaterials. See Nanoparticles (NPs)
Nanoparticle-plant interaction pathways, 180–181, 180f
Nanoparticles (NPs). See also Cerium NPs (CeO NPs); 
Nanoemulsion; Nano pesticides; Plant pathogen 
detection; Silicon NPs (SiNPs); Titanium dioxide 
NPs (TiO2 NPs)
agricultural application, 166–167, 167t
anatomical difference and mode of application, 
177–178
carbon-based, 163–164
composite-based, 165
dynamic elements, 162
engineered, 162–163
fertilizers and insecticides, 162
incidental, 162–163
inorganic-based, 164
interaction and transport of, 179–180
natural, 162–163, 165, 182–183
organic-based, 165
with overall environment, 174–175, 175f
plant response, 14–15
rhizosphere, 173–174, 173f
size of, 165, 176
surface charge influence, 176–177
synthesis, 162
synthetic, 166
Nano pesticides, 170–172, 171–172t
Nanostructured alumina (NSA), 170–171
Nanotechnology, 162, 170–171
NASA-sponsored satellite mission, 27
Natural nanomaterial, 162–163, 165
Natural resistant-associated macrophage protein 
(NRAMP), 260
Natural wetlands, 362
Necrosis, 236
New secondary metabolites, 9
Nickel (Ni), 119, 399
Nitrate esters (NG), 313, 316–317
Nitrate reductase (NaR) activity, 29, 128–129
Nitroamines (RDX), 313, 317, 319
Nitroaromatics (TNT), 313, 316–320
Nitrogen dioxide (NO2), 128–129, 394–395
Nodulation, 301
Noise pollution, plant response, 12–14446 Index
Non-biodegradable pollutants, 254–255
Nonenzymatic defense system, 348–351
Nonessential trace elements, 335–336
Nonionizing radiation, 284
Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI), 
322–323
Nutrients, 114
O
Oil-bearing plants, 221
Olericulture, 196
Open-top chambers (OTCs), 85
O3 precursor emissions, 6–7
Organic-based nanomaterials, 165
Organic contaminants, 214–215, 218
Organic pesticides, 214–215
Organic pollutants, 112, 260–261
Organic water pollutants, 255
Organochlorine, 110
Organophosphate compounds, 110
Organ-specific proteome analysis, 420–423
chromosomal aberrations, 420
heavy metals and root proteomics, 422–423
organ systems, 420
soybean plants, 420
toxic atmospheric gasses and leaf proteomics, 
420–422
Organ-specific resistance of plants, 32
Osmolytes, 303
Oxidative stress, 48, 271–273, 346–348, 347f
Ozone (O3)
aphids, 393
chronic exposure, 390
description, 390
isoprenoids, 393
phenotypic variation, 392
phenylpropanoids, 391
polyamines, 391
proanthocyanidins, 391
short-term exposure, 391–392
stippling and silvering, 391–392
tobacco plants, 392
TYLCV infection, 392–393
“Ozone smog”, 104–105
P
Paeonia lactiflora, 10
PAN-compounds, 8
Particulate matter (PM), 132
air pollutants, 399–400
carotenoids, 399–400
haze, 400–401
organic acids, 399–400
secondary chemical reactions, 399–400
Passive diffusion, 338
P1B-type heavy metal ATPases, 260
Perennials, 218
Peroxyacylnitrates (PANs), 82–83
Pest, defined, 232
Pesticides
agroecosystems, 232–233
chitosan-fungicides-based nanoparticles, 246
cultural control measures, 246
flow and uptake of, 232, 233f
germination and photosynthetic pigments, 232–233
nanocarriers systems, 246
physiological responses, 240–246, 241–244t
phytotoxicity symptoms on plants, 236–237
plant production, 240
plant’s growth and active constituents, 237–240, 239f
soil health, 237
Petroleum hydrocarbons, 10–11
Phaeophytinization, 102
Phenolics, 71, 388–389
Phenols, 69
Phenylalanine ammonia-lyase (PAL) enzyme, 387
Phenylpropanoids, 391
Photochemical oxidants, 6–8
Photoreceptors, 26
Photorespiration, 64
Photosynthesis, 3, 64–67, 80–82, 84, 86
Photosynthetically active radiation (PAR), 8
Photosystem II (PSII), 29
Phototropins, 26
Photovolatolization, 215–216
Phytochelatins (PCs), 349–350, 349f
Phytodesalination, 217
Phytoevaporation, 216
Phytoextraction, 216, 354–361, 355–360t
Phytofiltration, 361
Phytohormonal modulation, 62
Phytomining, 219–220
Phytoremediation, 269
aquatic plants, 354
bioenergy crops mediated remediation, 218
bioenergy production, 220–221
challenges, 223–224
defined, 211–212, 354
free-floating aquatic plants, 214
“green remediation” technique, 211–212
hyperaccumulated metals, 354
hyperaccumulator plants, phytomining, 218–220, 219t
metal contaminated soil, 213t
phytoextraction, 354–361, 355–360t
phytofiltration, 361
phytostabilization, 361
phytovolatilization, 361
solar-guided pumping/filtering systems, 212–214Index 447
strategies of, 212f
valorization of, by-products, 221–222
Phytosiderophores, 150
Phytostabilization, 216, 361
Phytotoxicity effects on plants, 233–236, 234–235t
Phytovolatilization, 361
Plant and water pollution
antibiotic contamination, 257–258
antioxidant defense mechanisms, 259–260
biochemical aspects/metabolic activities, 258
biomonitors, 257
Brassica napus genome, 260–261
effect of, 258f
heavy metals, 258–259
irrigation water source, 257
parameters, 258
systemic signaling pathways, 260
Plant biomarker, 334–335
Plant breeding, 52
Plant cell metabolism, 90
Plant diversity, radioisotopes, 286–287
Plant growth, 115, 126–127, 130, 140–141, 147–148, 150
adaptation and survival response, 66f
carbohydrates assimilation and allocation, 67
carbon nitrogen and phosphorous ratio, 67–68
enhanced CO2 level, 66f
increase carbon uptake, 68–69
photosynthesis, 64–67
Plant health. See Crop health and productivity; Fly ash
Plant pathogen detection, 178–179
Plant pathogenesis, 35
Plant proteomics. See also Cellular and subcellular 
protein catalogues
proteome characterization, 413
quantitative, 413–414
techniques, 413, 415f
Plants and cell phone radiation, 300
Plant secondary metabolites (PSMs). See also Particulate 
matter (PM)
dynamic environmental changes and stress 
conditions, 380
elevated CO2 (EC) levels (see Elevated CO2 (EC) levels)
global change, 380
heavy metals
arsenic (As), 397–398
cadmium (Cd), 395–397
chromium (Cr), 398–399
lead (Pb), 398
nickel (Ni), 399
soil contamination, 395
ozone (O3) (see Ozone (O3))
toxic gases, 393–395
Plant sensitivity to UV-B flux, 31
Plant species/crop yield, 115–116
Plants protection mechanisms
photoprotective pigments, 45–46
photosynthetic apparatus, 45
UV-B absorbing metabolites, 45
Plant yield, 115
Plasmalemma, 13–14
Plasmodesmata, 179–180
Pollutants, 126, 133
Polyamines (PA), 112, 350–351
abscisic acid (ABA) crosstalk, 48
conjugated forms, 47–48
IAA and gibberellin, 48
low-molecular-weight aliphatic nitrogenous bases, 47
physiological processes, 47
plant oxidative stress, 48
Polyaromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), 391, 400–401
Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), 110, 112
Polychlorinated dibenzofurans (PCDFs), 112
Polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins (PCDDs), 112
Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), 110
Polyphenols, 70
Poly-unsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs), 290
Potentially toxic elements (PTEs), 267f
Primary and secondary metabolisms, 85
Primary consumer, 105
Primary producer, 105
Primary ROS, 346
Principle components analysis (PCA), 322f
Proanthocyanidins, 391
Protective proteins, 39
PSII D1 polypeptide, 29
Putrescine synthesis, 350
R
Radiation pollution. See Radioisotopes
Radioisotopes
anthropogenic activities, 283–284
cell death, 291–292
cellular oxidative states, 291
cellular pigments, 290
cellular structure, 289–290
classification, 284
in crop improvement, 294
defined, 283
emissions, 284
genetic material, DNA, 288–289
history of, 283
on plant diversity, 286–287
on plant morphology, 287–288
by plants, 292–294
as pollutants, 285–286, 286t
on proteins, 291
radionuclide transfer pathways and transfer 
efficiencies, 284–285448 Index
Reactive nitrogen species (RNS), 103, 302
Reactive oxygen species (ROS), 14–15, 28, 80–82, 82f, 90, 
103, 258–260, 302
Reduced photosynthesis, 7–8
Reed beds, 214–215
Reflectance indices, remote detection of plant health, 
324t
Remote sensing, 321f
Repair strategies, 202–203
Reproductive growth, 128–129
Reynoutria japonica, 10–11
Rhizodegradation (phytostimulation), 217
Rhizofiltration, 216–217
Rhizosphere, 173–174, 173f
River Fish Index, 334–335
Robinia pseudoacacia, 10
Root length (RL), 238
Root shoot length (RSL), 238
ROS accumulation, 11
S
Salicylic acid, 50–51
Salinity, 435
Secondary metabolism, 128
Secondary metabolites1. See Plant secondary 
metabolites (PSMs)
ascorbate and tocopherol, 47
coumarins, 48
flavonoids, 46–47
γ-aminobutyric acid, 48–49
indole alkaloids, 49
polyamines (PA), 47–48
Secondary ROS, 347
Seed germination, 114–115
Seedling vigor index (SVI), 238
Shoot length (SL), 238
Short rotation coppice (SRC) plantations, 218
Signaling, UV-B
signal transduction mechanism, 38–40
structure and sensing mechanism, 36–38, 36–37f
transducer system, 35
Silicon NPs (SiNPs), 168–169
Size exclusion chromatography (SEC), 414
Small rotation crops (SRC), 218
Smoke. See Coal smoke pollution
Sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel 
electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE), 414
Soil health, 237
Soil pollution, plant response, 10
Soils and freshwaters, 2–3
SO2 injury, 4
Solar UV-B radiation, 30
Solidago Canadensis, 10–11
Sound frequency technology, 12–13
Sound pressure level (SPL), 12–13
Sound waves, 12
The Southern Commercial Forest Research 
Cooperative, 86
Stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture 
(SILAC), 414
Standardized Global Biological Index, 334–335
Static magnetic field, 35
Stomatal conductance, 146–147
Stress tolerance, 15–16
Stunting, 236
Submerged macrophytes, 337
Subsurface flow (SSF CW), 362
Sulfur oxide (SO2), 126–128. See also Acid rain
photosynthesis, 99–100
PSMs, 393–394
Sunlight, 26
Sun-resistant Xanthoria parietina, 30
Superoxide dismutase (SOD), 13, 103, 149–150, 348
Sustainable energy, 220
Synthetic nanomaterial, 166
T
Target hazard quotient (THQ), 196–199, 201
Temperature, 34
Terpenes, 69
Thiobarbituric acid reactive substances (TBARS), 
149–150
Three-D (3D) plant structure, 32–33
Tip necrosis, 129
Titanium dioxide NPs (TiO2 NPs), 169–170
Tocopherols, 69
Tocotrienols, 69
Tomato yellow leaf curl virus (TYLCV) infection, 392–393
Total dissolved solid (TDS), 265–266
Total suspended solid (SSD), 265–266
Toxic heavy metals, 10
Toxicity of fly ash
adverse effects, 112
coal-based power plants, 112
heavy metals and trace elements
arsenic, 112–113
boron, 113
mercury, 113
Trace elements
bioavailability, 337
natural/anthropic activities, 335
root interface, 337
trace metals, 335–337
Trace metals
absorption mechanism, 337
anthropic activities, 335–336
aquatic plants and animals, 336–337
critical concentrations of, 336tIndex 449
defined, 335
essential and nonessential, 335–336
Transgenic/cisgenic plants, 433–435
Transpiration and osmotic potential, 117
Transpiration rate (Tr), 146–147
Trihalomethanes (THM-1), 245
Trinitrotoluene (TNT), 313
Two-dimensional differential gel electrophoresis 
(2D-DIGE), 414
Two-dimensional gel electrophoresis (2-DE), 414
U
Ultraviolet radiation (UV-B) radiation, 3. See also
Applications of UV-B radiation; Hormones; 
Plants protection mechanisms; Secondary 
metabolites; Signaling, UV-B
characteristics of, 27
and drought, 34–35
external environmental factor, 26–27
and mineral nutrition, 34
molecular and cellular processes, 28–31
organ-specific resistance of plants, 32
photosynthetic organisms, 31–32
and plant pathogenesis, 35
plants depends on their age, 32
plant sensitivity, 31
and salinization, 34
and static magnetic field, 35
and temperature factor, 34
three-D (3D) plant structure, 32–33
visible range of solar radiation, 33–34
Unexploded ordnance (UXOs), 311
United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of 
Atomic Radiation (UNSCEAR) report, 283–284
Un-manned aerial vehicles (UAVs), 320
Urbanization, 140
US Department of Defense (DoD) locations, 311
US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 311
UVR8 radiation
gene expression and plant responses, 42f
physiological reactions, 40–41, 41f
redimerization, 39
V
Value-added products, 222f
Vegetation, 126
carbon monoxide (CO), 132
CO2 (see Carbon dioxide (CO2))
nitrogen oxides (NO2), 128–129
Vegetation and explosives
morphological responses
contaminants, 316
nitrate esters (NG), 316–317
nitroamines (RDX), 317
nitroaromatics, 316–318
physiological responses
nitroamines (RDX), 319
nitroaromatics (TNT), 319–320
stress reactions, 318–319
Vegetative growth, 128–129
Vein clearing, 236
Volatile organic compounds (VOCs), 80–83, 390
W
Warfare and environment, 309–311, 310f
Water deficit, 170
Water Framework Directive (WFD), 334
Water pollution
colorimetric estimation, 261
definition, 254
effect of river tide, 257f
inorganic water pollutants, 254–255
municipal garbage discharge, 255
non-biodegradable pollutants, 254–255
organic water pollutants, 255
photosynthesis process, 255
and plants, 11–12, 257–261, 258f, 259t
solid, liquid/semisolid, 255–256
sources, 255–256, 256f
types and impact, 254, 254f
Water quality, 253
Weed species, 5–6
Wet deposition, 100
Wetlands, 214–215
World Meteorological Organization (WMO), 62
X
Xiulv (Cd-sensitive) melon cultivar, 142–143
Y
Yellow stripe-like (YSL) proteins, 260
Z
Zeaxanthin pools, 10
Zinc (Zn), 118
ZRT/RT-like protein (ZIP), 260This page intentionally left blank
