Series Editor: Naveen Kumar Arora
Microorganisms for Sustainability 37
Sagar Chhabra
Ram Prasad
Naga Raju Maddela
Narendra Tuteja   Editors
Plant Microbiome 
for Plant 
Productivity 
and Sustainable 
AgricultureMicroorganisms for Sustainability
Volume 37
Series Editor
Naveen Kumar Arora, Environmental Microbiology, School for Environmental
Science, Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar University, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, IndiaSagar Chhabra • Ram Prasad •
Naga Raju Maddela • Narendra Tuteja
Editors
Plant Microbiome for Plant
Productivity and Sustainable
AgricultureEditors
Sagar Chhabra
Department of Biosciences
School of Basic and Applied Sciences
Galgotias University
Greater Noida, Uttar Pradesh, India
Ram Prasad
Department of Botany
Mahatma Gandhi Central University
Motihari, Bihar, India
Naga Raju Maddela
Instituto de Investigación
Universidad Técnica de Manabí
Manabí, Ecuador
Narendra Tuteja
Plant Molecular Biology Group
International Centre for Genetic Engineering
New Delhi, India
ISSN 2512-1901 ISSN 2512-1898 (electronic)
Microorganisms for Sustainability
ISBN 978-981-19-5028-5 ISBN 978-981-19-5029-2 (eBook)
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-19-5029-2
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore
Pte Ltd. 2023
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are solely and exclusively licensed by the Publisher, whether
the whole or part of the material is concerned, specifically the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of
illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microfilms or in any other physical way, and
transmission or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by
similar or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication
does not imply, even in the absence of a specific statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant
protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors, and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this
book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the authors or
the editors give a warranty, expressed or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or for any
errors or omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
This Springer imprint is published by the registered company Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd.
The registered company address is: 152 Beach Road, #21-01/04 Gateway East, Singapore 189721,
SingaporePreface
Plants are colonized by a multitude of microorganisms, collectively called
“microbiome.” In this new era of ecology knowing plants at par with microbiome
is essential to address the growing demand and for sustainable agriculture.
Microbiomes associate with plants as commensals, symbionts, or pathogens and
are associated with multifarious functions such as nutrient acquisition and
augmenting plant defense against biotic and abiotic stresses in many cases. These
microbiomes occupy various niches in plants such as rhizosphere, root, seed, stem,
and leaves. Global agriculture is facing urgent challenges to sustainable food
production and to meet its growing demand. The quest to harness the potential of
useful microorganisms from ecological niches has shown many interesting results.
The book on Plant Microbiome for Plant Productivity and Sustainable Agricul￾ture features 18 chapters written by numerous renowned experts. The chapters
provide a comprehensive knowledge and understanding on the topic. The diversity,
distribution, functional potential of plant microbiota, and its associations with plants
in agroecosystems are described. The various technological constraints, approaches,
challenges to study microorganisms and prospects of using microbiomes for agri￾culture and sustainable production, and environment sustainability concepts are
described in this book.
Chapter 1 describes fungal microbiomes and plant growth-promoting potential
and opportunities for agriculture. Chapters 2 and 3 describe the rhizosphere and root
microbiomes and functional traits that are essential for plants productivity. Chapter 4
covers nanotechnology and prospects of microbiomes for sustainable agriculture.
Chapters 5 and 6 cover changes in plant microbiome and functional potential of
microbiomes in response to abiotic stress. Chapters 7, 8, and 9 cover beneficial plant￾microbe associations, and their diversity, distribution, and decoding using latest
techniques. Chapters 10, 11, and 12 highlight the essential functional traits and
function of Bacillus and Streptomyces for the management of biotic stresses in plants
and the omic route to utilize endophytes and their functional potentials in plant
growth promotion. Chapters 13, 14, 15, and 16 describe the functional traits of
microbiomes in siderophore production in iron uptake and plant biofortification,
plant microbiome diversity and potential for crops, endophytic microbiomes in plant
vvi Preface
hormone production, and endophyte microbiomes with potential in phosphate sol￾ubilization and phytoremediation of degraded lands. Chapters 17 and 18 cover the
molecular mechanisms of plant probiotics for the improvement of soil health and
plant microbiomes and the sustainability concepts for agriculture and in enhancing
the productivity in agroecosystems.
Most of the chapters also contain technical advancements which will be very
useful for microbiologists, agriculturalists, environmentalists, and Ph.D. students.
The book will be of interest to industrial experts, policymakers, and those interested
in environmental stewardship. The editors and contributing authors of this book
make an excellent attempt to bring together a deep understanding from the primitive
to the modern concepts about microorganism and their importance for crop improve￾ment. This volume is expected to attract professionals from all over the world.
The editors are thankful to Akansha Tyagi, Senior Editor, and Jayesh Kalleri,
Production Editor at Springer Nature, for their valuable help in formatting and
incorporating editorial changes in the manuscripts.
Greater Noida, Uttar Pradesh, India Sagar Chhabra
Motihari, Bihar, India Ram Prasad
Manabí, Ecuador Naga Raju Maddela
New Delhi, India Narendra TutejaContents
1 Fungal Microbiomes: The Functional Potential for Plant Growth
Promotion and Opportunities for Agriculture ................. 1
Angela T. Alleyne and Laurent Penet
2 Unearthing the Modern Trends and Concepts of Rhizosphere
Microbiome in Relation to Plant Productivity ................. 19
Hitakshi Gupta, Jahanvi Ganotra, Nikita Pathania,
Tirth Bhargavbhai Patel, Nisha Choudhary, Reia Rani,
Damini Supolia, and Deepak Kumar
3 The Role of the Root Microbiome in the Utilization of Functional
Traits for Increasing Plant Productivity ..................... 55
Rahul Chandnani and Leon V. Kochian
4 Crop Microbiome for Sustainable Agriculture in Special Reference
to Nanobiology ........................................ 81
Pratyusha Sambangi, Vadlamudi Srinivas,
and Subramaniam Gopalakrishnan
5 Changes in Plant Microbiome in Response to Abiotic Stress ..... . 99
Mishaal Irfan, Hira Aslam, Awais Maqsood, Syeda Khola Tazeen,
Faisal Mahmood, and Muhammad Shahid
6 Functional Potential of Plant Microbiome for Sustainable
Agriculture in Conditions of Abiotic Stresses ................. 121
Sudhakar Srivastava and Divya Singh
7 The Beneficial Plant Microbial Association for Sustainable
Agriculture ........................................... 137
Sivakumar Natesan, Shyamkumar Rajaram,
Devaprakash Manoharan, and Thirumalaivasan Ramachandran
viiviii Contents
8 Microbiome of Plants: The Diversity, Distribution, and Their
Potential for Sustainable Agriculture ....................... 211
Ajay Kumar Pandey, Shweta Mehta, Priyanka Bhati,
and Sagar Chhabra
9 Decoding Beneficial Plant Microbe Association with Latest
Techniques for Sustainable Agriculture ...................... 227
Bhawana Jangra, Pooja Bhadrecha, Pankaj Kumar,
and Jitendra Kumar
10 Phosphate Solubilizing Microorganisms: Multifarious
Applications .......................................... 245
Mahendra Kumar, Ajay Shankar, Shivani Chaudhary,
and Vishal Prasad
11 Bacillus and Streptomyces for Management of Biotic Stresses
in Plants for Sustainable Agriculture ........................ 263
A. Manikandan, R. Anandham, I. Johnson, R. Krishnamoorthy,
M. Senthilkumar, R. Raghu, N. O. Gopal, and P. K. Mukherjee
12 Omic Route to Utilize Endophytes and Their Functional Potentials
in Plant Growth Advancement ............................ 289
Charu Gupta, Dhan Prakash, Mohd Fadzelly Abu Bakar,
and Worapong Kitdamrongtham
13 Siderophore Production in Iron Uptake and Plant
Biofortification ........................................ 313
Neerja Srivastava
14 Plant Microbiome Diversity and Potential for Crops
and Sustainable Agriculture .............................. 331
Nazia Rifat Zaman, Farhana Tasnim Chowdhury, Haseena Khan,
and Mohammad Riazul Islam
15 Endophytic Phytohormone Production and Utilization
of Functional Traits in Plant Growth Promotion ............... 365
Aahuti Sharma, Pankaj Kumar, Vikas Pahal, Jitendra Kumar,
and Shiv Shankar Pandey
16 Role of Endophytic Microorganisms in Phosphate Solubilization
and Phytoremediation of Degraded Soils ..................... 387
Dipita Ghosh, B. S. Manisha Singh, Manish Kumar,
Subodh Kumar Maiti, and Nabin Kumar Dhal
17 Techniques to Study Plant–Microbe Interactions that Lead
to Efficient Sustainable Agriculture ......................... 401
Nishra Joshi, Janki A. Ruparelia, Meenu Saraf,
and Chaitanya Kumar JhaContents ix
18 Plant Microbiome in Agroecosystems for Sustainable Agriculture
and Environments ...................................... 423
Songita Sonowal, Sagar Chhabra, Naga Raju Maddela,
Narendra Tuteja, and Ram PrasadEditors and Contributors
About the Series Editor
Naveen Kumar Arora is Professor and Head, Department of Environmental Sci￾ence at Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar University (A Central University), Lucknow,
Uttar Pradesh, India. He is a renowned researcher in the field of environmental
microbiology and biotechnology. His specific area of research is plant-microbe
interactions, particularly plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria. He has more than
75 research articles published in premium international journals and several articles
published in magazines and dailies. He is an editor of 25 books, published by
Springer. He is a member of several national and international societies, Secretary
General of Society for Environmental Sustainability, on the editorial board of four
journals, and a reviewer of several international journals. He is also the editor in
chief of the journal Environmental Sustainability published by Springer Nature. He
has delivered lectures in conferences and seminars around the globe. He has a long￾standing interest in teaching at the PG level and is involved in taking courses in
bacteriology, microbial physiology, environmental microbiology, agriculture micro￾biology, and industrial microbiology. He has been advisor to 134 postgraduate and
11 doctoral students. He has been awarded for excellence in research by several
societies and national and international bodies/organizations. Although an academi￾cian and researcher by profession he has a huge obsession for the wildlife and its
conservation and has authored a book, Splendid Wilds. He is the President of Society
for Conservation of Wildlife and has a dedicated website www.naveenarora.co.in for
the cause of wildlife and environment conservation.About the Editors
xii Editors and Contributors
Sagar Chhabra received his Ph.D. in Environmental
Microbiology from the South East Technological Uni￾versity, Ireland, and has several years of postdoctoral
experience working in Canada and Ireland in the field of
agricultural and environmental microbiology and bio￾technology. Dr. Chhabra is currently working as an
Assistant Professor (Grade III) in the Department of
Biosciences at Galgotias University, India, and previ￾ously worked as a Senior Researcher and Scientist in an
industry in Ireland working on microbial product devel￾opment for plant growth promotion and environmental
clean-up. Dr. Chhabra has published several papers in
the areas of plant and soil microbiomes and microbial
ecology and has several national and international fel￾lowships, travel grants, and other awards as a researcher.
Ram Prasad, Ph.D. is associated with the Department of
Botany, Mahatma Gandhi Central University, Motihari,
Bihar, India. His research interest includes applied and
environmental microbiology, plant-microbe interac￾tions, sustainable agriculture, and nanobiotechnology.
Dr. Prasad has more than two hundred fifty publications
to his credit, including research papers, review articles,
and book chapters and seven patents issued or pending,
and edited or authored several books. Dr. Prasad has
thirteen years of teaching experience and has been
awarded the Young Scientist Award and Prof.
J.S. Datta Munshi Gold Medal by the International
Society for Ecological Communications; FSAB fellow￾ship by the Society for Applied Biotechnology; the
American Cancer Society UICC International Fellow￾ship for Beginning Investigators, USA; Outstanding
Scientist Award in the field of Microbiology; BRICPL
Science Investigator Award and Research Excellence
Award, Fellow of The Biotech Research Society,
India, etc. He has been serving as an editorial board
member of BMC Microbiology, BMC Biotechnology,
Current Microbiology, Archives of Microbiology,
Annals of Microbiology, IET Nanobiotechnology, Jour￾nal of Nanomaterials, Journal of Renewable Material,
Archives of Phytopathology and Plant Protection,Editors and Contributors xiii
Journal of Agriculture and Food Research, Environ￾mental Science & Ecotechnology including Series editor
of Nanotechnology in the Life Sciences, Springer
Nature, USA. Previously, Dr. Prasad served as Assistant
Professor at Amity University Uttar Pradesh, India;
Visiting Assistant Professor, Whiting School of Engi￾neering, Department of Mechanical Engineering at
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, United States;
and Research Associate Professor at School of Environ￾mental Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen Univer￾sity, Guangzhou, China. Citation: >11,500, h-index:
>53, i10-index: >164.
Naga Raju Maddela received his M.Sc. (1996–1998)
and Ph.D. (2012) in Microbiology from Sri
Krishnadevaraya University, Anantapuramu, India.
During his doctoral program in the area of Environmen￾tal Microbiology, he investigated the effects of indus￾trial effluents/insecticides on soil microorganisms and
their biological activities and worked as a Faculty in
Microbiology for 17 years, teaching undergraduate and
postgraduate students. He received “Prometeo Investi￾gator Fellowship” (2013–2015) from Secretaría de
Educación Superior, Ciencia, Tecnología e Innovación
(SENESCYT), Ecuador, and “Postdoctoral Fellowship”
(2016–2018) from Sun Yat-sen University, China. He
also received external funding from “China Postdoctoral
Science Foundation” in 2017, internal funding from
“Universidad Técnica de Manabí” in 2020, worked in
the area of Environmental Biotechnology, participated
in 20 national/international conferences, and presented
research data in China, Cuba, Ecuador, India, and Sin￾gapore. Currently, he is working as a full-time Professor
at the Facultad de Ciencias de la Salud, Universidad
Técnica de Manabí, Portoviejo, Ecuador. He has
published 7 books (Springer), 15 chapters (InTech
Open/Springer), and 50 research papers.Contributors
Angela T. Alleyne Department of Biological and Chemical Sciences, Faculty of
Science and Technology, The University of the West Indies, Cave Hill Campus,
Bridgetown, Barbados
R. Anandham Department of Agricultural Microbiology, Tamil Nadu Agricultural
University (TNAU), Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu, India
Hira Aslam Department of Bioinformatics and Biotechnology, Government Col￾lege University Faisalabad, Faisalabad, Pakistan
Mohd Fadzelly Abu Bakar Faculty of Applied Sciences and Technology,
Universiti Tun Hussein Onn Malaysia (UTHM), Johor, Malaysia
Pooja Bhadrecha University Institute of Biotechnology, Chandigarh University,
Mohali, Punjab, India
Priyanka Bhati Department of Biosciences, School of Basic and Applied Sciences,
Galgotias University, Greater Noida, Uttar Pradesh, India
Rahul Chandnani Global Institute for Food Security, University of Saskatchewan,
Saskatoon, SK, Canada
xiv Editors and Contributors
Narendra Tuteja An elected fellow of numerous
national and international science academies,
Dr. Narendra Tuteja is former Director and Professor
at Amity Institute of Microbial Technology, NOIDA,
India, and former Group leader and Senior Scientist at
International Centre for Genetic Engineering & Biotech￾nology (ICGEB), New Delhi, India. He has made sig￾nificant contributions to crop improvement under
adverse conditions, reporting the first helicase from
plant and human cells and demonstrating new roles of
Ku autoantigen, nucleolin, and eIF4A as DNA
helicases. Furthermore, he discovered novel functions
of helicases, G proteins, CBL-CIPK and LecRLK in
plant stress tolerance, and PLC and MAP kinase as
effectors for Gα and Gβ G proteins. Narendra Tuteja
also reported several high salinity stress tolerant genes
from plants and fungi and developed salt/drought￾tolerant plants. Recently Dr. Narendra Tuteja developed
and published the marker-free and reporter-free PDH45
transgenic rice by salt screening. Citation: >35,000,
h-index: >75, i10-index: >292.Shivani Chaudhary Institute of Environment and Sustainable Development,
Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh, India
Sagar Chhabra Department of Biosciences, School of Basic and Applied Sci￾ences, Galgotias University, Greater Noida, Uttar Pradesh, India
Nisha Choudhary Department of Botany, Central University of Jammu, Samba,
Jammu and Kashmir, India
Farhana Tasnim Chowdhury Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biol￾ogy, Faculty of Biological Sciences, University of Dhaka, Dhaka, Bangladesh
Manoharan Devaprakash Department of Molecular Microbiology, School of
Biotechnology, Madurai Kamaraj University, Madurai, Tamil Nadu, India
Nabin Kumar Dhal Environment Sustainability Department, CSIR-Institute of
Minerals and Materials Technology, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India
Jahanvi Ganotra Department of Botany, Central University of Jammu, Samba,
Jammu and Kashmir, India
Dipita Ghosh Ecological Restoration Laboratory, Department of Environmental
Science & Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology (ISM), Dhanbad, Jharkhand,
India
N. O. Gopal Department of Agricultural Microbiology, Tamil Nadu Agricultural
University (TNAU), Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu, India
Subramaniam Gopalakrishnan International Crops Research Institute for the
Semi-Arid Tropics (ICRISAT), Patancheru, Telangana, India
Charu Gupta Amity Institute of Herbal Research and Studies, Amity University￾Uttar Pradesh, Noida, Uttar Pradesh, India
Hitakshi Gupta Department of Botany, Central University of Jammu, Samba,
Jammu and Kashmir, India
Mishaal Irfan Department of Bioinformatics and Biotechnology, Government
College University Faisalabad, Faisalabad, Pakistan
Mohammad Riazul Islam Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
Faculty of Biological Sciences, University of Dhaka, Dhaka, Bangladesh
Bhawna Jangra University Institute of Biotechnology, Chandigarh University,
Mohali, Punjab, India
Chaitanya Kumar Jha Microbiology Department, Gujarat Arts and Science Col￾lege, Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India
I. Johnson Department of Plant Pathology, Tamil Nadu Agricultural University
(TNAU), Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu, India
Editors and Contributors xvNishra Joshi Microbiology Department, Gujarat Arts and Science College,
Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India
Haseena Khan Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Faculty of
Biological Sciences, University of Dhaka, Dhaka, Bangladesh
Worapong Kitdamrongtham Faculty of Engineering and Technology, North￾Chiang Mai University, Chiang Mai, Thailand
Leon V. Kochian Global Institute for Food Security, University of Saskatchewan,
Saskatoon, SK, Canada
R. Krishnamoorthy Department of Crop Management, Vanavarayar Institute of
Agriculture, Pollachi, Tamil Nadu, India
Deepak Kumar Centre for Advanced Study in Botany, Institute of Science, Bana￾ras Hindu University, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh, India
Jitendra Kumar Department of Biosciences, UIBT, Chandigarh University,
Mohali, Punjab, India
Mahendra Kumar Institute of Environment and Sustainable Development, Bana￾ras Hindu University, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh, India
Manish Kumar Environment Sustainability Department, CSIR-Institute of Min￾erals and Materials Technology, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India
Pankaj Kumar Department of Microbiology, Dolphin (PG) Institute of Biomedi￾cal and Natural Science, Dehradun, Uttarakhand, India
Rajaram Shyam Kumar Department of Biotechnology, Kamaraj College of Engi￾neering and Technology, Virudhunagar, Tamil Nadu, India
Naga Raju Maddela Departamento de Ciencias Biológicas, Facultad de Ciencias
de la Salud, Universidad Técnica de Manabí, Portoviejo, Ecuador
Faisal Mahmood Department of Environmental Science and Engineering, Gov￾ernment College University Faisalabad, Faisalabad, Pakistan
Subodh Kumar Maiti Ecological Restoration Laboratory, Department of Environ￾mental Science & Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology (ISM), Dhanbad,
Jharkhand, India
A. Manikandan Department of Agricultural Microbiology, Tamil Nadu Agricul￾tural University (TNAU), Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu, India
B. S. Manisha Singh Environment Sustainability Department, CSIR-Institute of
Minerals and Materials Technology, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India
Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), CSIR-Human Resource
Development Centre, (CSIR-HRDC) Campus, Ghaziabad, Uttar Pradesh, India
xvi Editors and ContributorsAwais Maqsood Department of Bioinformatics and Biotechnology, Government
College University Faisalabad, Faisalabad, Pakistan
Shweta Mehta Department of Biosciences, School of Basic and Applied Sciences,
Galgotias University, Greater Noida, Uttar Pradesh, India
P. K. Mukherjee Nuclear Agriculture and Biotechnology Division, Bhabha
Atomic Research Centre, Trombay, Mumbai, India
Vikas Pahal Department of Microbiology, Dolphin (PG) College of Science and
Agriculture, Fatehgarh Sahib, Punjab, India
Ajay Kumar Pandey Department of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Chhatrapati
Shahu Ji Maharaj University (CSJMU), Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh, India
Shiv Shankar Pandey Department of Biotechnology, CSIR-IHBT, Palampur,
Himachal Pradesh, India
Tirth Bhargavbhai Patel Biotechnology Department, Shri A.N. Patel PG Institute
of Science and Research, Anand, Gujarat, India
Nikita Pathania Department of Botany, Central University of Jammu, Samba,
Jammu and Kashmir, India
Laurent Penet INRAE, UR ASTRO, Petit-Bourg, Guadeloupe, France
Dhan Prakash Amity Institute of Herbal Research & Studies, Amity University￾Uttar Pradesh, Noida, Uttar Pradesh, India
Ram Prasad Department of Botany, School of Life Sciences, Mahatma Gandhi
Central University, Motihari, Bihar, India
Vishal Prasad Institute of Environment and Sustainable Development, Banaras
Hindu University, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh, India
R. Raghu Department of Agricultural Microbiology, Tamil Nadu Agricultural
University (TNAU), Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu, India
Reia Rani Department of Botany, Central University of Jammu, Samba, Jammu
and Kashmir, India
Janki A. Ruparelia Microbiology Department, Gujarat Arts and Science College,
Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India
Pratyusha Sambangi International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid
Tropics (ICRISAT), Patancheru, Telangana, India
Meenu Saraf Department of Microbiology and Biotechnology, University School
of Science, Gujarat University, Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India
M. Senthil Kumar Agricultural College and Research Institute, Tamil Nadu Agri￾cultural University (TNAU), Eachangkottai, Tamil Nadu, India
Editors and Contributors xviiMuhammad Shahid Department of Bioinformatics and Biotechnology, Govern￾ment College University Faisalabad, Faisalabad, Pakistan
Ajay Shankar Institute of Environment and Sustainable Development, Banaras
Hindu University, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh, India
Aahuti Sharma Department of Biotechnology, CSIR-IHBT, Palampur, Himachal
Pradesh, India
Divya Singh Plant Stress Biology Laboratory, Institute of Environment and Sus￾tainable Development, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh, India
Natesan Sivakumar Department of Molecular Microbiology, School of Biotech￾nology, Madurai Kamaraj University, Madurai, Tamil Nadu, India
Songita Sonowal Department of Botany, School of Life Sciences, Mahatma Gan￾dhi Central University, Motihari, Bihar, India
Vadlamudi Srinivas International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid
Tropics (ICRISAT), Patancheru, Telangana, India
Neerja Srivastava Department of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, School of
Sciences, CSJM University, Kanpur, India
Sudhakar Srivastava Plant Stress Biology Laboratory, Institute of Environment
and Sustainable Development, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh,
India
Damini Supolia Department of Botany, Central University of Jammu, Samba,
Jammu and Kashmir, India
Syeda Khola Tazeen Department of Bioinformatics and Biotechnology, Govern￾ment College University Faisalabad, Faisalabad, Pakistan
Ramachandran Thirumalaivasan Department of Molecular Microbiology,
School of Biotechnology, Madurai Kamaraj University, Madurai, Tamil Nadu, India
Narendra Tuteja International Centre for Genetic Engineering, Plant Molecular
Biology Group, New Delhi, India
Nazia Rifat Zaman Department of Biochemsitry, Primeasia University, Dhaka,
Bangladesh
xviii Editors and Contributors1
Chapter 1
Fungal Microbiomes: The Functional
Potential for Plant Growth Promotion
and Opportunities for Agriculture
Angela T. Alleyne and Laurent Penet
Abstract Fungal microbial communities in plant hosts, or the mycobiome, are
critical to key agriculture functions for increasing plant growth and improving
disease management. In this chapter, the fungal microbiome is explored for its use
as a tool in disease diagnosis, agroecology, and disease management in modern
agriculture. Molecular markers and specifically the internal transcribed regions (ITS)
are examined in their use as discriminants of community members in the
mycobiome. While widely used, the ITS is sometimes incapable of resolving
taxonomic complexities; thus, mycobiome analysis may require the use of several
additional barcode genes in fungi. Further, the impact of abiotic and biotic stresses
are examined and we discuss the application of microbiome therapy or using
microbial communities as a tool in combatting plant diseases while also improving
soil health.
Keywords Mycobiome · Fungi · ITS · Agroecology
1.1 Introduction
Living organisms are currently being re-examined in a wholistic manner as holobionts
and hologenomes in relation to their microbiomes (Bordenstein and Theis 2015; Berg
et al. 2020). Therefore, microbial communities or metagenomes have been recognized
as a second genome of multicellular eukaryotes and part of their extended phenotype.
Indeed, they may have effects beyond the organism that influence fitness. In plants,
they play beneficial roles in plant growth and development, and stress responses
in their hosts (Andreote et al. 2014; Patel et al. 2015; Zhang et al. 2021;
A. T. Alleyne (*)
Department of Biological and Chemical Sciences, Faculty of Science and Technology, The
University of the West Indies, Cave Hill Campus, Bridgetown, Barbados
e-mail: angela.alleyne@cavehill.uwi.edu
L. Penet
INRAE, UR ASTRO, Petit-Bourg, Guadeloupe, France
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2023
S. Chhabra et al. (eds.), Plant Microbiome for Plant Productivity and Sustainable
Agriculture, Microorganisms for Sustainability 37,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-19-5029-2_12 A. T. Alleyne and L. Penet
Fig. 1.1 The mycobiome: dynamic fungal community interactions in the phyllosphere and rhizo￾sphere with its plant host
Prasad and Zhang 2022). Fungi perform several critical functions in their plant hosts in
their roles as endosymbionts including biotrophic, necrotrophic, or saprophytic activ￾ities (Bonfante et al. 2019). Consequently, the fungal microbiome also known as the
mycobiome (Fig. 1.1) and the genomes of endophytic fungal communities contribute
to our understanding of major fields in agriculture such as agroecology and plant
pathology (Gao et al. 2021; Meunier and Bayır 2021).
One of the major applications of metagenomics is in disease diagnosis where
researchers can identify disease-causing agents that cannot be detected by traditional
methods (Raja et al. 2017). Metabarcoding has also shown that plant diseases are
sometimes more biologically complex than initially thought and disease symptoms
can be caused by a complex of microbes (Raja et al. 2017; Nilsson et al. 2019). As
such, the application of fungicides and other pest control agents can irreparably
damage and remove beneficial organisms in the microbiome. These side effects can
be reduced with a greater understanding of plant microbiomes, especially in fruits,
vegetables, and staple cereal crops such as wheat, rice, maize, yam, and cassava
(Clay and Schardl 2002; Edwards et al. 2015; Frediansyah 2021), in addition to
understanding the impact of the fungal microbiome or mycobiome in soils (Dubey
et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2021; Gao et al. 2021). Harnessing this major resource using
biotechnology and bioengineering is therefore important for producing metabolites,
improving crop yields, enhancing precision disease diagnosis, and providing alter￾natives to pesticide treatment in crops (Compant et al. 2019; Noman et al. 2021). In1 Fungal Microbiomes: The Functional Potential for Plant Growth... 3
this chapter, we examine the impact of the mycobiome in plant disease and agro￾ecological approaches to disease management, with applications for sustainable
agriculture.
1.2 The Fungal Microbiome (Mycobiomes)
The plant mycobiome represents a dynamic network of fungal communities found
throughout the plant holobiont (Fig. 1.1). Its importance is considered from the root
systems and soil health, to the phyllosphere or plant leaf system and plant immunity.
While the structure and composition of the mycobiome is important for its functional
aspect in promoting plant growth, recruitment and organizing of the holobiontic
plant system are also important characteristics left to be fully explored.
The vast majority of plant fungi in the plant holobiont are beneficial microorgan￾isms (Pagano et al. 2017). The incredible speed and read length produced by modern
NGS technologies are useful tools in probing the plant’s mycobiome and have been
used in the field of diagnostics, while aiding agronomic practices (Hartman et al.
2018). Additionally, the interaction of wild plants with cultivated varieties are being
re-examined in terms of their microbiome characteristics and potential for contrib￾uting to local microbial ecology. As such, the communities of fungi among wild
plants are more abundant than those of cultivated plants (Ma et al. 2021). Harnessing
endosymbiotic microbiota for their benefits as an application in smart agriculture
applications (Hartman et al. 2018) is therefore considered here.
1.2.1 Molecular Markers and Fungal Metagenomics
in Agriculture
Sequence-based metagenomics provides information on species composition by
either sequencing, annotating, and assembling all the genetic material obtained
from mixed samples, or by sequencing targeted gene regions in fungi (Ahmed
2016; Noman et al. 2021). Generally, when used in disease diagnosis, molecular
markers are based on a range of various hybridization techniques which are genome
specific, sometimes are more precise than direct observations of symptoms, and less
time-consuming and limiting than microbial cell culture (Schoch et al. 2012; Raja
et al. 2017; Hariharan and Prasannath 2021). Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and
next-generation sequencing (NGS) primers that target the rapidly evolving and
highly repetitive ribosomal DNA (rDNA) genes that transcribe rRNA and their
internal transcribed regions (ITS 1 and 2) are widely used to identify fungi at both
genus and species levels (Schoch et al. 2012; Crous et al. 2015; Raja et al. 2017;
Tedersoo et al. 2018). The full ITS region is approximately 600–650 base pairs long
and ITS1 and ITS2 are separated from each other by the 5.8 S rRNA (Schoch et al.4 A. T. Alleyne and L. Penet
Fig. 1.2 Polymerase chain reaction amplication and next-generation sequencing of internal tran￾scribed regions of fungal microbiome
2012; Edwards et al. 2017; Raja et al. 2017; Naranjo-Ortiz and Gabaldón 2019)
(Fig. 1.2). Notwithstanding this, in some instances, hybridization to the ITS is
insufficient in resolving taxonomic complexities in certain fungi, and therefore
secondary barcode genes are necessary to reach accurate taxonomic allocation or
identification. These include protein coding genes such as glyceraldehyde-3 phos￾phate dehydrogenase (GADPH), fungal-specific translation elongation factors
(TEF), beta tubulin (TUB), actin (ACT), and RNA polymerase II (RP2) (Schoch
et al. 2012; Stielow et al. 2015). Moreover, the border regions of the ITS designated
as the small subunit (SSU) or the large subunit (LSU) also provide further taxonomic
discrimination of fungi (Edwards et al. 2017) (Fig. 1.2). Additionally, in several
NGS studies of the plant mycobiome, ITS1 and ITS2 do not yield significant
differences in taxa assignment based on operational taxonomic units (OTUs)
(Blaalid et al. 2013), but ITS2 may provide better characterization of Ascomycota
fungi than the ITS1 region (Scibetta et al. 2018).
Notably, besides targeted amplicon sequencing of molecular markers, shotgun
metagenomics can be used to discern fungal taxa. Although more expensive than
amplicon-based NGS, shotgun metagenomics removes PCR bias and aids in the
discovery of novel or new lineages while also performing a quantitative function in
microbiome studies (Tedersoo et al. 2015; Donovan et al. 2018; Nilsson et al. 2019).
This is especially important in agriculture where knowledge of the extent of fungal
infection is usually desired but difficult to ascertain through real-time PCR (qPCR)
or other means that may not be readily available in field studies. Significantly,
metagenomic studies using molecular markers usually yield large numbers of
unidentified taxa (Cuadros-Orellana et al. 2013) many of which belong to
unidentified Ascomycota, which is challenging in well-established crops, and even
more so in less studied but important tropical crops such as the roots and tubers
including yam, cassava, and sweet potato (Gao et al. 2013; Chen et al. 2021; Xiong
et al. 2021). In fact, the partial genomes of these crops have only recently been
reported (Prochnik et al. 2012; Tamiru et al. 2017; Isobe et al. 2019). The incomplete1 Fungal Microbiomes: The Functional Potential for Plant Growth... 5
genomic data for these important agricultural crops including wheat, rice, cassava,
yam, and sweet potato remain an untapped resource for future development in
agriculture research and plant health in general.
1.2.2 Core Mycobiomes and Plant Health
General plant health has been attributed to the plant microbiome and healthy or
diseased status may be gleaned from an observation of specific organisms in the
rhizosphere, phyllosphere, or endosphere of the plant (Toju et al. 2018b). Variation
in the plant mycobiome in time and spatial compartments such as the phyllosphere,
rhizosphere, endosphere, and seed have been described for several major agricultural
crops such as wheat, maize, and rice (Clay and Schardl 2002; Kim and Lee 2020;
Zheng et al. 2021), and tropical roots such as cassava (Frediansyah 2021; Zhang
et al. 2021). Therefore, fungal communities are determined structurally by the
developmental plant growth stage, soil types, as well as the plant species (Carbone
et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2021). However, fungal endophytes of tropical plant systems
are less well known than those present in temperate grasses and shrubs. The latter are
also less diverse, are transmitted horizontally, and contribute less to host defense
than those found in woody angiosperms (Arnold et al. 2003).
From a developmental perspective, it has also been shown that root colonization
by microorganisms rapidly spreads throughout the plant and may be predicted by
functional roles assigned to plant–microbe interactions (de Souza et al. 2016; Toju
et al. 2016, 2018b; Bonfante et al. 2019; Varma et al. 2019a, b). Generally, studies
that examine commodity crops such as sugarcane and bananas have notable impacts
on such processes as biofuel production, food security, human health, and develop￾ment in countries heavily dependent on commodity exports (Yuan et al. 2021; Aslam
et al. 2022). In a critical review of the core fungal microbiome in sugarcane, it was
shown that yeast and yeast-like fungi dominate the various plant compartments and,
in the rhizosphere (de Souza et al. 2016), species such as Candida, Debaryomyces,
Hanseniaspora, Meyerozyma, Wickerhamiella, and Zygosaccharomyces made up
approximately up to 12% of all fungal diversity in the sugarcane stalk (de Souza
et al. 2016).
Suppressive soils rely heavily on studies of the plant microbiome. Disease
suppression in soils occurs when resident microorganisms compete with and limit
newer arrivals from occupying their niches, thereby coincidently reducing the
appearance of disease in plant hosts (Hartman et al. 2018; Pascale et al. 2020). In
a study on health status, it was found that the population of Fusarium decreases
during reductive soil disinfection (RSD) and when exposed to aerobic conditions
during replanting is more disease suppressive than in diseased soils (Huang et al.
2015).
Additionally, mycobiome studies have relied heavily on arbuscular mycorrhizae
(AM) and their function in improving plant health. As such, the vast array of6 A. T. Alleyne and L. Penet
pathogenic and non-pathogenic fungi that make up the core mycobiomes of plants
and soils remain to be further explored.
1.3 The Mycobiome and Sustainable Agriculture
1.3.1 Mycobiomes Boost Plant Growth
An overreliance on agricultural inputs such as fertilizers and pesticides has been
detrimental to plant biodiversity and soil microbial diversity or soil health (Hartman
et al. 2018). Sustainable agricultural practices such as tree-based intercropping and
use of RSD make use of microbial communities to improve soil health and encour￾age improved plant growth (Compant et al. 2019; Tedersoo et al. 2020). Mycorrhi￾zae act as a bridge in the rhizosphere to microbial communities, and with the roots of
its plant hosts. Importantly, established networks of AM fungi mediate nutrient
transfers between host and holobiont and function as significant nutrient trading
partners in plant–plant interactions in agricultural systems (Mendes et al. 2013;
Fitzpatrick et al. 2020; Tedersoo et al. 2020; Pozo et al. 2021; Varma et al. 2017a,
b, c). It has also been shown through network analysis that usually a small group of
organisms are key microbial players in the rhizosphere and phyllosphere and they
control these extended symbiont–symbiont networks (Toju et al. 2016). Three
processes are determined by these early colonizers and network organizers during
establishment of the microbiome network: (1) functional species recruitment,
(2) pathogen/pest blocking, and (3) core reinforcement (Toju et al. 2018a, b; Gao
et al. 2021). Nonetheless, the mycobiome is also conditioned by several ecological
factors that drive species composition including host plants, ecological drift, dis￾persal, and evolution (Fitzpatrick et al. 2020). Furthermore, it has been shown that
abiotic factors such as drought stresses may effect changes in the root microbiome.
As such, higher relative abundances in the fungal composition of the root
endosphere were seen in response to black-foot disease (Dactylonectria and
Cylindrocarpon) and the biocontrol agent Trichoderma, than in non-irrigated sys￾tems (Dubey et al. 2019; Carbone et al. 2021).
1.3.2 Plant Growth-Promoting Fungal Microbiomes
in Disease Management
Plant microbiota do not only demonstrate growth effects on plants, but they also
trigger plant resistance and increased protection against diseases. Resistance is
probably increased via different paths. Some commensals induce natural plant
immunity reactions despite not being pathogenic and causing no damage to plants,
thus yielding baseline responses before pathogens arrive and threaten plant health.1 Fungal Microbiomes: The Functional Potential for Plant Growth... 7
This increase in resistance is thus passive and possibly incurs a defensive cost to the
plant, especially if no further immunity-based reaction is required. Increasing
induced immunity when no pathogen is eventually encountered is an energetic
loss (Heil and Bostock 2002). When this loss involves only local collateral damage
with casual benefits (pathogens eventually arrive), then the whole process is still
advantageous. On the other hand, if immunity triggering commensals are numerous
and co-exist on the whole individual, then the global cost for the plant might exceed
its benefit, possibly at the cost of diverting ineffectual commitment to defense that
could have been spent on growth or other functions (Martin 2001; Fitzpatrick et al.
2020). Little is known yet whether these effects translate into the global fitness
balance for plants. Besides the plant’s natural self-defense via antibiotic secretions,
microbiota can extend plant protection whenever antibiosis is the result of commen￾sal microbes themselves. This would lend to self-selecting communities (based on
resistance genes to local compounds). Still, since it involves a classical arms race
scheme for microbiota components, any microbe may become part of a local niche,
including pathogens themselves whenever they evolve resistance to the local anti￾biosis conditions. Nevertheless, enhanced microbiota communities that would allow
for pathogen control via local out-competition or even antibiosis are promising
prospects in agriculture practice (Fitzpatrick et al. 2020).
As a matter of fact, application of useful microbiota will rely on careful choice,
and precise and descriptive characterization of species in use, side effects, and
potential pitfalls. Yet, sometimes benefits can be expected even from closely related
co-existing organisms, and even when both behave as pathogens. We will illustrate
here an example from Colletotrichum genus, a well-known group of fungi species￾complexes often drastically pathogenic among many crops, worldwide. A study on
weed hosting ability during yam intercropping revealed a tendency for two closely
related species, namely C. gloeosporioides and C. truncatum, while co-existing at
local scale on various weed species to segregate among different sub-communities
within field vegetation. So, C. gloeosporioides was found more often on erect weeds,
while C. truncatum was more frequent on vines and creeping species (Dentika et al.
2021). This segregation hinted at potential competition for the two fungi species.
Yet, while C. gloeosporioides may be strongly pathogenic on yams (Dioscorea
alata), C. truncatum is not considered a threat to this crop. Co-inoculation experi￾ences comparing either admixing or prior inoculation by C. truncatum demonstrated
that disease symptoms are aggravated in the first case, but were strongly reduced in
the second (Dentika et al. 2021). Prior presence of C. truncatum was thus detrimental
to the more pathogenic species on yams. Clearly, this means that competition
between species can be used to decrease disease onset, and potentially attenuate
epidemics on crops. Still, an overall benefit will depend on the agricultural context.
In this case, C. truncatum is not pathogenic on yams, but the species complex is
heavily damaging on other crops such as peppers (Than et al. 2008; Weir et al.
2012). Potential for control will therefore preclude its use where both yams and
peppers are intercropped.8 A. T. Alleyne and L. Penet
1.4 Agroecology, Sustainable Agriculture, and Fungal
Microbiomes
Microbiota help in at least two major functions that are relevant to agriculture:
helping plant growth via production of hormones and related compounds associated
with nutrient uptake, and inhibiting pathogenic organisms, thus helping crops defend
themselves against antagonists (Andreote et al. 2014; Bonfante et al. 2019; Compant
et al. 2019). Both phylloplane microbiota (on aerial plant parts) and rhizosphere
microbiota (soil microorganism communities around the roots) can thus significantly
contribute to food production once we work out the best components and combina￾tions from natural microbiota (Arif et al. 2020). Engineering optimal communities
may also involve cycling components, as phyllosphere microbes can also further
degrade plant litter and so improve cycling processes in the soil and humus (Mueller
and Sachs 2015; Arif et al. 2020). Consequently, recent progress in important and
widely cultivated crops such as rice has already identified microbe species of interest
with high potential for increasing yield and most probably with culturing potential
for future use in agriculture (Chen et al. 2021). Conversely, designing optimal
microbiota combinations will require assessing their potential turnover both during
cropping and intercropping, especially if rotation is involved and alternated crops do
not respond optimally to the same communities, or if turnover is faster than crop
duration. This issue may likely be less relevant to soil microbiota, which demon￾strate more stability over time, given that some latency is expected in modification of
the physicochemical properties of soil microbiota (Yuan et al. 2021). Additionally,
aerial microbiota of plants are less resilient than their rhizosphere counterparts to
meteorological conditions such as rain, temperature, humidity, and their daily
fluctuations, and crop management as well (especially spraying). So, some level of
turnover is expected, especially since dispersal from neighboring environments is
facilitated by the lack of a physical barrier to the flow and arrival of natural airborne
propagules. This drawback in the use of microbiota will also naturally be exacer￾bated by the nature of the microorganism: fungi are probably more resilient actors of
the microbiota than bacteria are, both in soil and as endophytes in the phyllosphere,
and therefore the very nature of their facilitation in microbiome networks will be
impacted (Hartman et al. 2018; Compant et al. 2019).
Meanwhile, although microbiota will no doubt become a major tool in more
sustainable agriculture systems, several challenges still need to be addressed before
their use can be generalized at a large scale. The first and most obvious challenge is
to delineate taxonomic contributions to ecosystemic services by microbial commu￾nities that would benefit cropping systems, and especially delineate potential differ￾ences in composition that will differ in diverse environments, especially
temperate vs. tropical, but also potential asymmetries for sub-temperate/sub-tropical
areas or humid vs. arid tropics. Of course, combining optimal components will be a
major asset of the use of microbiota, but these might also prove different for the
different plant organs, especially contrasting effects between leaves and flower
structures, and even tubers or fruits (Müller et al. 2015). While the emergent and1 Fungal Microbiomes: The Functional Potential for Plant Growth... 9
promising science of microbiome is growing exponentially in terms of studies and
knowledgeable insights, and it highlights the many opportunities for deploying
sustainable agriculture practices by potentially reducing an overreliance on chemis￾try, we still need to identify core microbial species, and core communities in
combination with all the different conditions they will face, before the optimization
process of communities may begin. The task is even more crucial because of climate
change, as it intensifies and may already be contributing to altering potentially
useful, but as yet unidentified microorganisms, or their current niches. In fact,
climate change is suggested to significantly impact shifts in microbial communities
(Dubey et al. 2019). Meanwhile, another dichotomy exists in the divide between
monocrop-intensive agriculture and small-scale diversified agroecological farming
systems, and therefore challenges in microbiota use will differ between these two
facets of current agriculture systems. We will explore this dynamic in more details in
the next section.
1.5 Opportunities for New Applications of Beneficial
Fungal Communities to Improve Soils, Plant Growth,
and Plant Health
Intensive agriculture, even within an ecologically intensive conceptual framework,
will often consist of simplified cropping systems when compared to agroecological
and agroforestry systems, and will thus more quickly benefit from applied
microbiota tools when those become available for large-scale use. Nevertheless,
issues highlighted previously will paradoxically also prove either more complex or
easier to include within highly diversified small-scale farming, which is still cur￾rently in widespread use in agriculture systems worldwide. We will review here how
enhanced microbiota approaches may translate within such systems, and whether a
common framework would apply in both cases, or if alternative solutions should be
worked out by the scientific community. There are grossly three levels for which
both approaches to agriculture are so divergent that they might rely on different
strategies for microbiota to be fully successful: the first deals with soil management
and fertilization, the second is concerned with crop diversity on a local scale, and the
last to the agronomic dark triad—weeds, pests, and diseases.
1.5.1 Soil Management and Fertilization
Currently, intensive agriculture mostly consists of broad-scale monocultures and has
historically given modest attention to soil (and by extension soil health), which was
viewed as an inert substrate and simple recipient for crops (Fedoroff 1987). More￾over, the concept of nutrient return in commercial agriculture is often optimized as a10 A. T. Alleyne and L. Penet
simple plant-specific formula to correctly balance and broadly compensate for
agronomic inputs and to compensate for exports from harvested crops, and less
frequently considers nutrient cycling via manure or other biotic factors. As a result,
many cultivated soils are damaged and impoverished, suffer from high levels of
run-off, and have become lifeless substrates on which efficient productivity will
require widespread use of external inputs (Pankhurst and Lynch 1995). Meanwhile,
the modern paradigm shift toward envisioning the soil as a living community of the
microbiome, together with the older substrate or subtractive narrative, and our need
to restock carbon lost from soils due to cultivated agriculture will provide us with
new tools or approaches to make food production both sustainable and more
environmentally friendly. Hence, provided specific regional mitigation, there are
already steps toward soil stewardship involving regenerative soil microbial commu￾nities (Pagano et al. 2017; Carbone et al. 2021). These will involve increased cycling
of organic matter, possibly through the local circular economy since soil resilience
involves large quantities of fungi biomass and fungi often require high levels of
organic matter (Pritsch and Garbaye 2011). While such fungi-based microbiota
composition needs to be precisely worked out, researchers should focus on fungal
taxa that are analogous in vegetative-stage evolution and create pioneer communities
that lend itself to natural evolution toward locally resilient communities, helping
both crops grow and resist diseases, while restoring prior soil health (Compant et al.
2019; Pozo et al. 2021). This is even more important than maintaining nutrient levels
in healthy soils based solely on intake and release by microbiota.
Contrastingly, agroecological systems are already based on cycling biomass and
enriching soils, be it in the form of compost use, green- and animal manure,
mulching, or even in the more extreme forms of recycling trees (hugelkultur
approach). Rich soils are known to be more resilient to drought and nutrient
run-off. Compared to impoverished soils, the challenge becomes more that of trying
to improve communities directly toward specifically optimized microbiota/plants
interactions. While little is known about communal stability of artificial microbial
assemblages, even less is known about whether replacement of constituent species is
even possible. Unless recurrent propagule import is brought up to a specific location,
we currently do not know if species can simply add up and build improved
microbiota with beneficial impacts on crops, even though classical ecology taught
us a lot about species displacement and competitive replacement, and specific
combinations might simply prove too complex to engineer. Yet, systems that are
naturally highly diverse often are resilient and self-sustained, so maybe the issue
becomes not so much optimizing individual components within the community, but
maintaining a functional collective entity with systematic efficiency. In this case,
scientific investigations should focus on the impact of practices and how they can
provide opportunities for improved functioning, stability, and benefit to crops.
Clearly, while still poorly documented from an academic perspective, several prac￾tices sometimes fancied by farmers who have adopted agroecological or permacul￾ture systems rely on the idea that microbiota are an important component of their
system, specifically indigenous microorganism enrichment procedures. The com￾mon basis for such practices is often conducted by collecting humus from local1 Fungal Microbiomes: The Functional Potential for Plant Growth... 11
forests and application of fermented solutions to seed fields with enriched solutions.
There are probably numerous avenues for research in this regard, especially to study
whether and at which rate beneficial organisms are transferred to cultivated plots,
and whether recipes can be specifically designed to orientate the taxonomic compo￾sition for specific functions. One of the advantages of these approaches is that both
local and low-tech solutions amenable to scaling up are included for small farmers
worldwide.
1.5.2 Crop Diversity at Local Scale
Although intensive agriculture is most often characterized by monoculture, notwith￾standing recent increased frequency in intercropping of a few crops, developing
microbiota tools will still target a single or only a few crops. The core concern of
microbiota as a productivity tool will thus develop around the question as to whether
there exist simple communities that will be generalist enough to confer growth or
resistance benefits to a broad and diverse array of crops, or whether optimal
microbiota will be more specific and dependent on the crop species cultivated.
Focus on core components of beneficial microbiota communities will probably
first lead to rapid advances and early use, until more specialist organisms can be
proposed for use whenever their benefits outperform those of core components.
There is a serious question around communal identity of commensal microbes in the
wild. Current literature highlights both the importance of space and local influence of
species components. So, microbiota broadly shared between plants growing here and
there, sometimes even on a large scale or region, and more specific interactions with
microbiota species in close relationship with specific plants are critical. There is thus
an important issue to resolve as to whether shared species components between local
plants could demonstrate benefits in general, or if they behave more simply as casual
commensals without strong interactions. Understanding both core components of
microbiota and specific specialized components is thus an important goal for applied
agriculture science.
In contrast, agroecological systems strive for diversity at every level of structural
organization. Agroecological agrodiversity generally involves both infra-specific
and inter-specific levels of diversity. In addition to that, spatial structuring of
diversity is not necessarily homogenous or controlled, but often occurs with quite
high degrees of admixing, especially in more traditional and small-scale agriculture
contexts. In this case, the potential benefits of microbiota strongly rely on whether
generalist beneficial communities can be proposed. When it comes to specific
components, the natural diversity will preclude any artificial optimization of specific
components. Therefore, as previously discussed, the focus should shift to integrated
management of naturally occurring microbiota, with the hope to realize the full
potential for improvement with targeted practices influencing microbiota evolution
and equilibrium.12 A. T. Alleyne and L. Penet
1.5.3 The Agronomic Dark Triad: Weeds, Pests, and Diseases
The agronomic dark triad (Fig. 1.3) affects any crop, independently of the nature of
the cultivation system being used, be it under intensive or agroecological
management.
Traditionally, intensive cropping systems relied on a suppressive approach via
chemical control of the triad curatively or even preventively, at the cost of side
effects extending way outside the field targets, and resulting in high levels of
environmental damage. Agroecological methods have diverse strategies for each
point of the triad, and no single generalization can be drawn, ranging from locally
suppressive (e.g., control of weeds via mulching, control via bio-stimulants) to
liberal/indifferent or even making use of that diversity (e.g., weeds used as pillars
of push–pull strategies). Also, crop admixing levels are facilitated due to its barrier
effect on plant diseases, which is a natural control of pathogens under agroecological
management.
How would a microbiota approach translate in this case? First, we should note
that historically, single microbial control was used very early in agricultural practice.
For example, the fungus Colletotrichum gloeosporioides is regularly suggested as a
control agent for weeds (or invasive plants), because it is a generalist, as a pathogen
(Cai et al. 2009). Obviously, this approach is useful if the control agent only attacks
its target, without collateral damage on crops. This was also the case with bacteria
Bacillus thuringiensis for insect pest control, to the point its insecticidal protein was
the gene used for developing transgenic crops very early in the history of agricultural
biotechnology. As expected, single, but specific, solutions can flourish and solve
precise issues in agriculture. However, the question regarding microbiota thus
becomes once again a more general one: are there any communities that could be
used in preventive management against the dark triad? While hard to predict with
Fig. 1.3 Schematic of the
three threats to sustainable
agriculture1 Fungal Microbiomes: The Functional Potential for Plant Growth... 13
certainty, little is probably to be expected regarding weed control, because a
microbiome approach would rely on component species behaving antagonistically
toward weeds, without doing so on crops. Similarly, control of pests may prove very
difficult as a communal strategy, and a single-species approach might be much easier
to develop for efficient management. This concern is greater for intensive agriculture
than it is for agroecological systems, as alternative ways beside microbiota are
already employed to manage insect pests, especially natural control via naturally
occurring pest antagonists (e.g., parasitoids) or push–pull strategies. Conversely, in
the dark triad, the feature most amenable to control via microbiota are crop diseases.
Current evidence seems to associate disease development with strong alteration and
even decrease in foliar fungal diversity. Scientists need to understand basic processes
involved in community changes, especially if these observations are simply
reflecting competitive displacement, including secretion of chemical compounds
by microbiota, predation, direct competition for local resources like nutrients, and
whether other processes might intervene. Little is known about interaction levels.
This is true of community or network composition, and in the case of the infection
process and plant disease we need to resolve not only mutualistic or commensal
interactions, but antagonisms as well, and how they could affect crop pathogens and
suppress disease. Accordingly, a large factor in the efficiency of microbiomes as
suppressive disease tools will depend on whether biological interactions are passive
and purely demographic as a competition effect, or if they can be active based on
aggressiveness within microbial communities and networks.
1.6 Conclusion
In summary, the next phase of agriculture is exciting and offers an opportunity for
researchers to adapt their knowledge of the microbiome to farming in practice.
Microbiota will certainly be an adequate tool to help agriculture evolve toward
improved sustainability without impairing productivity, and even possibly resulting
in increased yields. Nevertheless, there are still several challenges impeding its
general implementation on farms, given our current knowledge and the research
context. These include firstly, identification of core genera with relevant functions
for plants, to propose efficient synthetic communities; secondly, identification of
specific component species that match local (regional) or organ-specific character￾istics for improving baseline synthetic communities; and thirdly, investigating the
stability of synthetic communities over cropping cycles, to ensure benefits for food
production.
In this chapter, we examined the structure and function of the fungal microbiome
and provide specific recommendations for both intensive agriculture and small-scale
agroecological agriculture. Microbiota engineering and its application in agriculture
are the new frontiers in removing an unstainable dependency on chemical inputs for
both increased yields and enhanced disease management. Moreover, adopting inte￾grated pest management strategies which are key components in agroecology14 A. T. Alleyne and L. Penet
provides opportunities for a chemical independent, but microbiota-driven sustain￾able agriculture for increased plant growth and resistance to disease.
References
Ahmed A (2016) Analysis of metagenomics next generation sequence data for fungal ITS
barcoding: do you need advance bioinformatics experience? Front Microbiol 7:1061. https://
doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2016.01061
Andreote FD, Gumiere T, Durrer A (2014) Exploring interactions of plant microbiomes. Sci Agric
71:528–539. https://doi.org/10.1590/0103-9016-2014-0195
Arif I, Batool M, Schenk PM (2020) Plant microbiome engineering: expected benefits for improved
crop growth and resilience. Trends Biotechnol 38:1385–1396. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tibtech.
2020.04.015
Arnold AE, Mejía LC, Kyllo D et al (2003) Fungal endophytes limit pathogen damage in a tropical
tree. Proc Natl Acad Sci 100:15649–15654. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2533483100
Aslam MM, Okal EJ, Idris AL et al (2022) Rhizosphere microbiomes can regulate plant drought
tolerance. Pedosphere 32:61–74. https://doi.org/10.1016/s1002-0160(21)60061-9
Berg G, Rybakova D, Fischer D et al (2020) Microbiome definition re-visited: old concepts and new
challenges. Microbiome 8:103. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40168-020-00875-0
Blaalid R, Kumar S, Nilsson RH et al (2013) ITS1 versus ITS2 as DNA metabarcodes for fungi.
Mol Ecol Resour 13:218–224. https://doi.org/10.1111/1755-0998.12065
Bonfante P, Venice F, Lanfranco L (2019) The mycobiota: fungi take their place between plants and
bacteria. Curr Opin Microbiol 49:18–25. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mib.2019.08.004
Bordenstein SR, Theis KR (2015) Host biology in light of the microbiome: ten principles of
Holobionts and Hologenomes. PLoS Biol 13:e1002226. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.
1002226
Cai L, Hyde KD, Taylor PWJ et al (2009) A polyphasic approach for studying Colletotrichum.
Fungal Divers 39:183–204
Carbone MJ, Alaniz S, Mondino P et al (2021) Drought influences fungal community dynamics in
the grapevine rhizosphere and root microbiome. J Fungi 7:686. https://doi.org/10.3390/
jof7090686
Chen Q-L, Hu H-W, He Z-Y et al (2021) Potential of indigenous crop microbiomes for sustainable
agriculture. Nat Food 2:233–240. https://doi.org/10.1038/s43016-021-00253-5
Clay K, Schardl C (2002) Evolutionary origins and ecological consequences of endophyte symbi￾osis with grasses. Am Nat 160:S99–S127. https://doi.org/10.1086/342161
Compant S, Samad A, Faist H, Sessitsch A (2019) A review on the plant microbiome: ecology,
functions, and emerging trends in microbial application. J Adv Res 19:29–37. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.jare.2019.03.004
Crous PW, Hawksworth DL, Wingfield MJ (2015) Identifying and naming plant-pathogenic fungi:
past, present, and future. Annu Rev Phytopathol 53:1–21. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev￾phyto-080614-120245
Cuadros-Orellana S, Leite LR, Smith A et al (2013) Assessment of fungal diversity in the
environment using metagenomics: a decade in review. Fungal Genom Biol 3:1–13. https://
doi.org/10.4172/2165-8056.1000110
de Souza RSC, Okura VK, Armanhi JSL et al (2016) Unlocking the bacterial and fungal commu￾nities assemblages of sugarcane microbiome. Sci Rep 6:28774. https://doi.org/10.1038/
srep28774
Dentika P, Ozier-Lafontaine H, Penet L (2021) Weeds as pathogen hosts and disease risk for crops
in the wake of a reduced use of herbicides: evidence from yam (Dioscorea alata) fields and
Colletotrichum pathogens in the tropics. J Fungi 7:283. https://doi.org/10.3390/jof70402831 Fungal Microbiomes: The Functional Potential for Plant Growth... 15
Donovan PD, Gonzalez G, Higgins DG et al (2018) Identification of fungi in shotgun
metagenomics datasets. PLoS One 13:e0192898. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0192898
Dubey A, Malla MA, Khan F et al (2019) Soil microbiome: a key player for conservation of soil
health under changing climate. Biodivers Conserv 28:2405–2429. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10531-019-01760-5
Edwards J, Johnson C, Santos-Medellín C et al (2015) Structure, variation, and assembly of the
root-associated microbiomes of rice. Proc Natl Acad Sci 112:E911–E920. https://doi.org/10.
1073/pnas.1414592112
Edwards JE, Forster RJ, Callaghan TM et al (2017) PCR and omics based techniques to study the
diversity, ecology and biology of anaerobic fungi: insights, challenges and opportunities. Front
Microbiol 8:1657. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2017.01657
Fedoroff N (1987) Scientific basis for soil protection in the European Community. Springer,
New York, pp 65–85. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-009-3451-1_5
Fitzpatrick CR, Salas-González I, Conway JM et al (2020) The plant microbiome: from ecology to
reductionism and beyond. Annu Rev Microbiol 74:1–20. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev￾micro-022620-014327
Frediansyah A (ed) (2021) Cassava: biology, production, and use. IntechOpen, London. https://doi.
org/10.5772/intechopen.87488
Gao L, Tu Z, Millett BP, Bradeen JM (2013) Insights into organ-specific pathogen defense
responses in plants: RNA-seq analysis of potato tuber-Phytophthora infestans interactions.
BMC Genomics 14:340. https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2164-14-340
Gao M, Xiong C, Gao C et al (2021) Disease-induced changes in plant microbiome assembly and
functional adaptation. Microbiome 9:187. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40168-021-01138-2
Hariharan G, Prasannath K (2021) Recent advances in molecular diagnostics of fungal plant
pathogens: a mini review. Front Cell Infect Microbiol 10:600234. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fcimb.2020.600234
Hartman K, van der Heijden MGA, Wittwer RA et al (2018) Cropping practices manipulate
abundance patterns of root and soil microbiome members paving the way to smart farming.
Microbiome 6:14. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40168-017-0389-9
Heil M, Bostock RM (2002) Induced systemic resistance (ISR) against pathogens in the context of
induced plant defences. Ann Bot 89:503–512. https://doi.org/10.1093/aob/mcf076
Huang X, Liu L, Wen T et al (2015) Illumina MiSeq investigations on the changes of microbial
community in the Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. cubense infected soil during and after reductive
soil disinfestation. Microbiol Res 181:33–42. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.micres.2015.08.004
Isobe S, Shirasawa K, Hirakawa H (2019) Current status in whole genome sequencing and analysis
of ipomoea spp. Plant Cell Rep 38:1365–1371. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00299-019-02464-4
Kim H, Lee Y-H (2020) The rice microbiome: a model platform for crop Holobiome. Phytobiomes
J 4:5–18. https://doi.org/10.1094/pbiomes-07-19-0035-rvw
Ma Y, Fort T, Marais A et al (2021) Leaf-associated fungal and viral communities of wild plant
populations differ between cultivated and natural ecosystems. Plant Environ Interact 2:87–99.
https://doi.org/10.1002/pei3.10043
Martin H (2001) The ecological concept of costs of induced systemic resistance (ISR). Eur J Plant
Pathol 107:137–146. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1008793009517
Mendes R, Garbeva P, Raaijmakers JM (2013) The rhizosphere microbiome: significance of plant
beneficial, plant pathogenic, and human pathogenic microorganisms. FEMS Microbiol Rev 37:
634–663. https://doi.org/10.1111/1574-6976.12028
Meunier R, Bayır S (2021) Metagenomics approaches in microbial ecology and research for
sustainable agriculture. TATuP 30:24–29. https://doi.org/10.14512/tatup.30.2.24
Mueller UG, Sachs JL (2015) Engineering microbiomes to improve plant and animal health. Trends
Microbiol 23:606–617. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tim.2015.07.009
Müller DB, Vogel C, Bai Y, Vorholt JA (2015) The plant microbiota: systems-level insights and
perspectives. Annu Rev Genet 50:211–234. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-genet￾120215-03495216 A. T. Alleyne and L. Penet
Naranjo-Ortiz MA, Gabaldón T (2019) Fungal evolution: diversity, taxonomy and phylogeny of the
fungi. Biol Rev 94:2101–2137. https://doi.org/10.1111/brv.12550
Nilsson RH, Anslan S, Bahram M et al (2019) Mycobiome diversity: high-throughput sequencing
and identification of fungi. Nat Rev Microbiol 17:95–109. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41579-018-
0116-y
Noman M, Ahmed T, Ijaz U et al (2021) Plant–microbiome crosstalk: dawning from composition
and assembly of microbial community to improvement of disease resilience in plants. Int J Mol
Sci 22:6852. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms22136852
Pagano MC, Correa EJA, Duarte NF et al (2017) Advances in eco-efficient agriculture: the plant￾soil mycobiome. Agriculture 7:14. https://doi.org/10.3390/agriculture7020014
Pankhurst CE, Lynch JM (1995) 12 the role of soil microbiology in sustainable intensive agricul￾ture. Adv Plant Pathol 11:229–247. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0736-4539(06)80014-0
Pascale A, Proietti S, Pantelides IS, Stringlis IA (2020) Modulation of the root microbiome by plant
molecules: the basis for targeted disease suppression and plant growth promotion. Front Plant
Sci 10:1741. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2019.01741
Patel JS, Singh A, Singh HB, Sarma BK (2015) Plant genotype, microbial recruitment and
nutritional security. Front Plant Sci 6:608. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2015.00608
Pozo MJ, Zabalgogeazcoa I, de Aldana BRV, Martinez-Medina A (2021) Untapping the potential
of plant mycobiomes for applications in agriculture. Curr Opin Plant Biol 60:102034. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.pbi.2021.102034
Prasad R, Zhang S-H (2022) Benefical microorganisms in agriculture. Springer, Singapore. https://
link.springer.com/book/9789811907326
Pritsch K, Garbaye J (2011) Enzyme secretion by ECM fungi and exploitation of mineral nutrients
from soil organic matter. Ann Forest Sci 68:25–32. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13595-010-0004-8
Prochnik S, Marri PR, Desany B et al (2012) The cassava genome: current progress, future
directions. Trop Plant Biol 5:88–94. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12042-011-9088-z
Raja HA, Miller AN, Pearce CJ, Oberlies NH (2017) Fungal identification using molecular tools: a
primer for the natural products research community. J Nat Prod 80:756–770. https://doi.org/10.
1021/acs.jnatprod.6b01085
Schoch CL, Seifert KA, Huhndorf S et al (2012) Nuclear ribosomal internal transcribed spacer (ITS)
region as a universal DNA barcode marker for Fungi. Proc Natl Acad Sci 109:6241–6246.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1117018109
Scibetta S, Schena L, Abdelfattah A et al (2018) Selection and experimental evaluation of universal
primers to study the fungal microbiome of higher plants. Phytobiomes J 2:225–236. https://doi.
org/10.1094/pbiomes-02-18-0009-r
Stielow JB, Lévesque CA, Seifert KA et al (2015) One fungus, which genes? Development and
assessment of universal primers for potential secondary fungal DNA barcodes. Persoonia Mol
Phylogeny Evol Fungi 35:242–263. https://doi.org/10.3767/003158515x689135
Tamiru M, Natsume S, Takagi H et al (2017) Genome sequencing of the staple food crop white
Guinea yam enables the development of a molecular marker for sex determination. BMC Biol
15:86. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12915-017-0419-x
Tedersoo L, Anslan S, Bahram M et al (2015) Shotgun metagenomes and multiple primer pair￾barcode combinations of amplicons reveal biases in metabarcoding analyses of fungi. Mycokeys
10:1–43. https://doi.org/10.3897/mycokeys.10.4852
Tedersoo L, Sánchez-Ramírez S, Kõljalg U et al (2018) High-level classification of the Fungi and a
tool for evolutionary ecological analyses. Fungal Divers 90:135–159. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s13225-018-0401-0
Tedersoo L, Bahram M, Zobel M (2020) How mycorrhizal associations drive plant population and
community biology. Science 367(6480):eaba1223. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aba1223
Than PP, Jeewon R, Hyde KD et al (2008) Characterization and pathogenicity of Colletotrichum
species associated with anthracnose on chilli (Capsicum spp.) in Thailand. Plant Pathol 57:562–
572. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-3059.2007.01782.x1 Fungal Microbiomes: The Functional Potential for Plant Growth... 17
Toju H, Yamamoto S, Tanabe AS et al (2016) Network modules and hubs in plant-root fungal
biomes. J Roy Soc Interface 13:20151097. https://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2015.1097
Toju H, Kurokawa H, Kenta T (2018a) Factors influencing leaf- and root-associated communities of
bacteria and fungi across 33 plant orders in a grassland. Biorxiv. 439646. https://doi.org/10.
1101/439646
Toju H, Peay KG, Yamamichi M et al (2018b) Core microbiomes for sustainable agroecosystems.
Nat Plants 4:247–257. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41477-018-0139-4
Varma A, Prasad R, Tuteja N (2017a) Mycorrhiza: function, diversity and state-of-art. Springer
International Publishing. ISBN: 978-3-319-53064-2. http://www.springer.com/us/book/978331
9530635
Varma A, Prasad R, Tuteja N (2017b) Mycorrhiza: eco-physiology, secondary metabolites,
nanomaterials. Springer International Publishing. ISBN: 978-3-319-57849-1. http://www.
springer.com/us/book/9783319578484
Varma A, Prasad R, Tuteja N (2017c) Mycorrhiza: nutrient uptake, biocontrol, ecorestoration.
Springer International Publishing. ISBN: 978-3-319-68867-1. http://www.springer.com/us/
book/9783319688664
Varma A, Swati T, Prasad R (2019a) Plant biotic interactions: state of art. Springer International
Publishing. ISBN 978-3-030-26657-8. https://www.springer.com/gp/book/9783030266561
Varma A, Swati T, Prasad R (2019b) Plant microbe interface. Springer International Publishing.
ISBN 978-3-030-19831-2. https://www.springer.com/gp/book/9783030198305
Weir BS, Johnston PR, Damm U (2012) The Colletotrichum gloeosporioides species complex. Stud
Mycol 73:115–180. https://doi.org/10.3114/sim0011
Xiong C, Zhu Y, Wang J et al (2021) Host selection shapes crop microbiome assembly and network
complexity. New Phytol 229:1091–1104. https://doi.org/10.1111/nph.16890
Yuan X, Hong S, Xiong W et al (2021) Development of fungal-mediated soil suppressiveness
against Fusarium wilt disease via plant residue manipulation. Microbiome 9:200. https://doi.org/
10.1186/s40168-021-01133-7
Zhang L, Zhang J, Wei Y et al (2021) Microbiome-wide association studies reveal correlations
between the structure and metabolism of the rhizosphere microbiome and disease resistance in
cassava. Plant Biotechnol J 19:689–701. https://doi.org/10.1111/pbi.13495
Zheng Y, Li X, Cao H et al (2021) The assembly of wheat-associated fungal community differs
across growth stages. Appl Microbiol Biot 105:7427–7438. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00253-
021-11550-119
Chapter 2
Unearthing the Modern Trends
and Concepts of Rhizosphere Microbiome
in Relation to Plant Productivity
Hitakshi Gupta, Jahanvi Ganotra, Nikita Pathania,
Tirth Bhargavbhai Patel, Nisha Choudhary, Reia Rani, Damini Supolia,
and Deepak Kumar
Abstract The rhizosphere microbiome is crucial for plant growth and health,
providing defense against plethora of surrounding potential pathogens, improving
crops’ nutrient acquisition, and aiding in withstanding series of abiotic stresses.
Exchange of resources between plants and their associated soil environment is
supported by a pivotal interface termed as rhizosphere. Plants being sessile are
incessantly exposed to a diverse array of abiotic and biotic stresses under natural
conditions, thereby acting as major bottlenecks to hinder their growth and produc￾tion. However, it is possible to engineer plant rhizosphere microbiome as revealed
by the recent advances in research in context to the plant–microbe interactions.
Therefore, shaping of rhizosphere microbiome for developing promising strategies
can be vital in relation to plant productivity. Furthermore, exploring the structure and
dynamics of plant rhizosphere microbiome represents an exciting frontier of research
to protect plants from potential phytopathogens in a sustainable manner. Advances
in molecular tools are beneficial to unravel the concepts of plant–microbe associa￾tion, which could act as a key driver in drafting the future “biofertilizers.” Owing to
the current challenges in crop production, there is an urgent need to understand
plant–microbiome interactions in the rhizosphere to bring microbiome-based strat￾egies for incorporating beneficial resident microbial communities into practice. The
present chapter uncovers the concepts of plant rhizosphere microbiome, its diversity,
abundance, composition, and interplay with the plants. Additionally, elucidation of
H. Gupta · J. Ganotra · N. Pathania · N. Choudhary · R. Rani · D. Supolia
Department of Botany, Central University of Jammu, Samba, Jammu and Kashmir, India
T. B. Patel
Biotechnology Department, Shri A.N. Patel PG Institute of Science and Research, Anand,
Gujarat, India
D. Kumar (*)
Centre for Advanced Study in Botany, Institute of Science, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi,
Uttar Pradesh, India
e-mail: deepakkumar@bhu.ac.in
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2023
S. Chhabra et al. (eds.), Plant Microbiome for Plant Productivity and Sustainable
Agriculture, Microorganisms for Sustainability 37,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-19-5029-2_220 H. Gupta et al.
plant rhizosphere microbiome engineering and various factors and techniques
involved therein for enhancing plant productivity have been presented, thereby
helping meet food requirements of exponentially growing global population.
Keywords Rhizosphere microbiome · Holobiont · Root exudation · Rhizosphere
engineering · Bioinformatics
Abbreviations
CRISPR Clustered regularly interspaced short palindrome repeats
Fish Fluorescent in situ hybridization
MALDI-TOF Matrix-assisted laser desorption/light ionization time
NGS Next-generation sequencing
PCR Polymerase chain reaction
PGPR Plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria
RFLP Restriction fragment length polymorphism
2.1 Introduction
Plants share their habitat with diversity of microbes such as bacteria, fungi, and
viruses. The constitution of the plant microbiota is framed by complex interactions
between the abiotic environment and its biotic natives. Depending on the outcome of
an interaction for the host, microbes are considered as mutualistic, commensal, and
pathogenic. The term microbiome was first used by Joshua Lederberg and it refers to
the microorganisms inhabiting our body as commensals, symbionts, or pathogens
(Lynch 1990), and plant microbiome is defined as the dynamic community of
microorganisms associated with the plant. Regions of the plant which provide
niche for microbial community are phyllosphere, rhizosphere, and endosphere
(Berg et al. 2016).
The rhizosphere is represented as that zone of the soil which is in direct associ￾ation with the plant roots (Shrivastava et al. 2014). In other words, it is an environ￾ment under the influence of plant. Rhizosphere is relatively stable and nutrient-rich
environment and the rhizoplane encompasses the root surface and its adhering soil.
Various organic compounds are released from plant roots that primarily participate
in symbiotic functioning in the soil area which is under the influence of plant roots
(rhizosphere) (Barea et al. 2005; Gupta et al. 2022). Moreover, rhizosphere provides
a nutrient-rich environment for diazotrophic bacteria that fix atmospheric nitrogen,
thereby making the nitrogen available to plants. Number of bacteria, fungi, and
archaea is high in the rhizosphere due to the presence of nutrient-rich environment
(Egamberdiyeva et al. 2008; Mendes et al. 2011). Therefore, profound knowledge in
context to the diverse array of microorganisms and their respective functions in the2 Unearthing the Modern Trends and Concepts of Rhizosphere Microbiome... 21
rhizosphere acts as a requisite for enhancing the growth and productivity of crop
plants. The present chapter embodies the information on rhizosphere microbiome, its
diversity, abundance, composition, and communication with the plants. The targeted
application of beneficial plant microbiome to counteract abiotic and biotic stresses is
gaining importance and is considered as an exciting frontier of research. Advance￾ment in next-generation sequencing (NGS) platform, gene editing technologies, and
metagenomics and bioinformatics approaches allows us to untangle webs of inter￾actions of holobionts and core microbiomes for efficiently deploying the
microbiome to increase crops’ nutrient acquisition as well as resistance in response
to abiotic and biotic stresses. Henceforth, the present chapter also provides insights
into the concept of plant rhizosphere microbiome engineering, and various factors
and aforementioned techniques involved therein.
2.2 Composition, Abundance, and Diversity of Rhizosphere
Microbiome
The interface between plant and soil is termed as rhizosphere, and it functions as the
primary step of root microbiome recruitment and plant defense. It features a spe￾cialized microbial community, intensive microbe–plant and microbe–microbe inter￾actions, and sophisticated signal communication. It has already been recognized that
microbial life is present in quite many trifling areas of soil which are localized in hot
spots like rhizosphere, where the microorganisms have uninterrupted ingress to the
flow of number of plant-root-derived organic substrates (Nannipieri and Badalucco
2003). Flow of such nutrients along with biological factors and physicochemical
factors can influence microbial community structure and performance of rhizosphere
(Sorensen 1997; Brimecombe et al. 2001). Myriad of microorganisms inhabit the
plant rhizosphere. Figure 2.1 depicts the composition, abundance, and diversity of
microorganisms present in the rhizosphere zone.
2.3 Types of Interactions Between Microbes and Plants
Plants are non-motile but they constantly encounter the abiotic and biotic stresses.
There is a constant war between the microbes and the host plant. The rhizosphere is a
hot spot for potentially important microbes and copious organisms. Different types
of unicellular and multicellular organisms such as bacteria, archaea, algae, fungi,
protozoans, and arthropods together with plant roots form the most complex eco￾system on earth (Raaijmakers et al. 2009; Kushwaha et al. 2020). Plants release
adequate amount of nutrients in the form of rhizodeposits which determine both the
type and composition of rhizosphere microbiome. Various compounds are exuded
from plant roots such as sugars, organic acids, nucleotides, peptides, enzymes, and22 H. Gupta et al.
Virus
(107-108) g-1
Archea
(107-108) g-1
Fungi
(105-106) g-1
Algae
(103-106) g-1
Protozoa
(103-105) g-1
Bacteria
(108-109) g-1
Fig. 2.1 Generalized diagram showing abundance of microorganisms present in the rhizosphere.
The size of the circle is a measure of abundance of group of particular microbial community
other secondary metabolites which together regulate the microbial diversity and
activity inside the rhizosphere. The plants sometimes also exert selective pressure
by releasing unique rhizodeposits to stimulate the growth of beneficial microorgan￾isms for their growth and development (Cook et al. 1995). Rhizospheric microor￾ganisms can impart ecological fitness to their host plant and vice versa (Huang et al.
2014). Plant–microbiome communication is still fundamental and plant–microbiome
interactions vary between crops species (and even cultivars), between individual
members of the microbiome, and with environmental conditions. There is ample
evidence suggesting the plant–microbe relationship is uncertain to health, produc￾tivity, and the overall condition of the plant. There are many different kinds of
interactions between plants and microbes that traverse the whole variety from
beneficial to pathogenic, and the outcome of the interaction between a plant and a
microbe can vary among this range depending on plant species. Depending upon the
type of microorganisms, host plants, as well as existing environmental conditions,
both positive and negative plant–microbe interactions can persist in the rhizosphere.2 Unearthing the Modern Trends and Concepts of Rhizosphere Microbiome... 23
2.3.1 Negative Interactions in the Rhizosphere
Beneficial microorganisms colonize plant roots in response to root exudates, but they
can attract pathogenic population as well that can harm the plant. Plant diseases are
directly involved in damaging crop plants and destructing agricultural production
and thus agricultural economy. Soil-borne pathogens cause significant damage to the
crops, whereas fungi are the most devastating. Their damaging effects include both
mild and severe symptoms causing inconsiderate crop losses. Thus, they are major
threat to food production and economic stability worldwide. The most common
fungal pathogens include fungi of genus Aspergillus, Fusarium, Pythium,
Phytophthora, Mucor, Rhizopus, and Verticillium (Tournas and Katsoudas 2005),
as well as the common forest fungi, viz., Armillaria and Poria (Asiegbu et al. 2005).
Pathogens belonging to the genus Pseudomonas, Erwinia, Ralstonia, and
Xanthomonas are most common, as well as widely studied bacterial pathogens
(Tournas and Katsoudas 2005).
2.3.2 Positive Interactions in the Rhizosphere
In the rhizosphere, plant–microbe interactions are involved in various crucial ecosys￾tem functioning processes, such as nutrient mineralization and immobilization in
biogeochemical cycles. To establish a symbiotic relation with plants, microorganisms
form symbiotic associations with plants such as colonization of rhizosphere by plant
growth-promoting rhizobacteria (PGPR), mycorrhizae, and legume–rhizobium asso￾ciation. These interactions are beneficial for plants and are of three types, namely
biofertilizers, biocontrol agents, and biostimulants. Biofertilizers are the type of
microorganisms that increases the availability of the nutrients to plants (Giri et al.
2019). Biocontrol agents are the group of microbes that protects the plants from
pathogen attack and thus increases their growth indirectly. Biostimulants, on the
other hand, stimulate the plant growth by secreting growth-promoting hormones and
growth regulators such as auxins, cytokinins, and gibberellins (Sharma et al. 2022).
2.4 Evolution of Plant–Microbe Interaction
Co-evolution of microbes and plants is what has helped plants in growing and
adapting under varied environmental conditions. Microbes help plants in nutrient
acquisition and protection against various environmental stresses, thereby helping in
stimulating plant growth and development. They are known to be associated with a
specific group of microbes interacting with one another forming accumulation of
individuals often known as a “holobiont” (Bordenstein and Theis 2015; Theis et al.
2016). To select plants that are associated with microbial community often requires a24 H. Gupta et al.
wide range of selective pressure which majorly acts upon different components of
holobiont that put great impact on fitness of plant.
However, the varied variety of microbes found on various tissues of plant,
together with more early origin of microorganism and their fast generation time as
compared to their host, suggests that the microbe–microbe interactions are vital
selective force that forms a composite assemblage of microbes in different compart￾ments such as rhizosphere, phyllosphere, and endosphere. Understanding these
microbial exchanges for shaping more convoluted plant-associated communities of
microbes, along with their consequence for host health in a more natural environ￾ment, remains scarce. Plants secrete carbon-rich substrates with the help of their
roots; those substrates are likely favored by microbes that could quickly assimilate
them (Doornbos et al. 2012; Alqarawi et al. 2018). There are many success stories in
context to rhizosphere microbiome engineering (Chaparro et al. 2014), wherein most
of the antique lineages of plants depict a strong competence to alter the relative
abundance of rhizospheric microbes (Valverde et al. 2016). The differences in the
root exudate had resulted in the selection of contrasting microbiomes (Bais et al.
2006; Bell et al. 2015; Rasmann and Turlings 2016). The microbiome exerts
profound impact upon plant health and similarly the plants can also influence the
rhizosphere microbiome through a variety of mechanisms (Mohanram and Kumar
2019; Mendes et al. 2018). The reason behind this is phenotypic and genotypic
variations in plant traits that guide the specific microbiome responsible for enhanc￾ing the plant growth in a variety of ways (Kumar and Dubey 2020). The advances in
the plant–microbe interactions reveal that the plants are able to form their rhizo￾sphere microbiome, as evidenced by the fact that different plant species which are
host-specific microbial communities grow on the same soil. This complex plant￾associated microbial community is also known as the second genome of the plant
(Berendsen et al. 2012).
The plant–microbiome interactions are complex and depend on plant species, soil
type, and environmental conditions such as abiotic stress, biotic stress, climatic
conditions, and human intervention. Different textures of soils as well as different
kinds of environmental stresses (e.g., nutrient deficiencies, metal toxicity, and
pathogen attack) have been shown to prompt the plant-species-dependent physio￾logical responses and consequently exudation patterns (Quiza et al. 2015).
2.5 Rhizosphere Microbiome Assembly
Notably, there is crucial participation of plant root exudation in recruitment and
modulation of the rhizosphere microbiome. The root cap border cells serve as
rhizodeposit to enhance plant growth and also facilitate recruitment of new microbes
in the rhizosphere (Dennis et al. 2010; Hawes et al. 2000; Vermeer and McCully
1982). These rhizodeposits are a rich source of carbon and nitrogen along with
additional primary and secondary metabolites. Thus, they influence species-specific
growth in the rhizosphere microbiomes and function as vital components for the2 Unearthing the Modern Trends and Concepts of Rhizosphere Microbiome... 25
plant–microbe interface assembly. Along with factors such as plant species, geno￾types, and developmental stages, diurnal cycling of the plant also affects the
rhizosphere microassembly. Root exudates have been found to be affected and
secreted within a diurnal secretion pattern. Some pioneer plant species having high
levels of genetic diversity can naturally colonize sites which are important environ￾mental concern such as abandoned unrestored mines and many other kindred sites
that typically remain impoverished for decades, exposing to erosion, vast amounts of
waste, and various other factors limiting the revegetation of these sites, including
unfavorable abiotic and biotic conditions. This suggests that some plant genotypes
are likely more fitted for acclimation to the conditions with toxic waste around. In
some studies, it has been found that such plants improve soil health locally by
modifying the physicochemical properties such as higher nutrient content and pH of
the toxic waste and cause important shift in the microbial community composition,
from lithotrophic communities that dominate toxic waste environments to hetero￾trophic communities involved in nutrient cycling. Plant genotype and the type of
substrate in the rhizosphere are the main drivers of rhizosphere microbiome diversity
and community structure, in cases assessing the effect of genotype-by-environment
reciprocity by quantifying the physicochemical properties of the substrates and the
swap in microbial community congregation. Notably, the plant genotype act as a
selective pressure in modifying physicochemical properties of the substrate and
structuring rhizosphere microbial communities, particularly bacterial taxa. Also
genotype-by-environment interactions impact on the physicochemical properties of
substrates and the composition of the rhizosphere microbiome. The cooperative
harmonizing role of the soil type and host genotype bring forth the importance of
homogenized consideration of condition of soil and genetic variability of plant for
future development and synthetic microbiomes application. Besides, diagnosis of the
attune role by specific plant genotype in rhizosphere microbiome assembly delivers
us with an auspicious way for future breeding project to blend host traits engaged in
assembly of beneficial microbiota. The rhizosphere microbiome make-up and inter￾actions of microbe with microbe between soil types and plant genotypes forge ahead
our keen understanding of regulating the role of both the factors in the plant
rhizosphere microbiome assemblage.
2.5.1 Factors Affecting the Assembly of Microbial
Community in the Rhizosphere
The phenomenon that the rhizosphere microbial community differs from the com￾munity in bulk soil, suggesting that plant roots recruit and accumulate specific
microorganisms in the rhizosphere from bulk soil, is known as rhizosphere effect.
There are different evidences that suggested the presence of species-specific micro￾bial communities in the rhizosphere. A study of microbial communities in the
rhizosphere of 19 herbaceous plant species using the 16S rRNA gene amplicon26 H. Gupta et al.
sequencing showed that each tested plant species had 18–111 special operational
taxonomic units (OTUs) and that same species can also develop distinct rhizosphere
microbial communities, although the effect of the plant genotypes on the
microbiome assembly is quite weak (Bulgarelli et al. 2015; Walters et al. 2018).
These findings demonstrate that host genetics contribute to plant microbiome assem￾blies. A number of studies clarify that root phenotypes (Massalha et al. 2017), soil
type (Lundberg et al. 2012), and plant growth stages (Schlemper et al. 2017) also
shape the rhizosphere microbial communities. The assembly of rhizosphere
microbiomes was also being prone to different plant diseases. Quorum sensing
(QS) is well known as a signaling mechanism that depends on the manner in
which the rhizobacteria cell density regulates the gene expression of microbial
physiological activity (Hartmann 2020). Many plant-associated bacteria are enriched
in plant-associated environments by QS and require QS to regulate a series of
important processes, such as rhizosphere competition, conjugation, and biofilm
maturation (Newton and Fray 2004; Frederix and Downie 2011). The important
factors affecting the assemblage of microbial community in rhizosphere are men￾tioned below.
2.5.1.1 Plant Growth Changes Root Metabolite and Assembly
of the Rhizosphere Microbiome
Different factors influence the rhizosphere microbiome assemblage including plant
growth, aging, and propagation. For instance, plant roots release root cap border
cells into the rhizosphere as a kind of rhizodeposition to enhance the rhizospheric
effect and to recruit specific microorganisms (Dennis et al. 2010; Hawes et al. 2000;
Vermeer and McCully 1982). It has been reported that A. thaliana root caps release
border-like cells to promote Rhizobium sp. YAS34 accumulation (Vicré et al. 2005).
About 10% of photosynthetically fixed carbon and 15% of total plant nitrogen
are observed in root exudates, including primary metabolites and secondary metab￾olites, like sugars, organic acids, amino acids, mucilage, and so on (Jones et al. 2009;
Gargallo-Garriga et al. 2018). Plant roots release these metabolites with complex
transmembrane system (Canarini et al. 2019). Different plant species release differ￾ent root exudates. For example, cucumber roots secrete citric acid to assemble
B. amyloliquefaciens SQR9 and to shape a special biofilm (Zhang et al. 2014).
A. thaliana releases several amino acids in root exudate that aid in colonizing
B. subtilis in specific root segment. Antifungal Pseudomonas colonizes in the root
exudates of tomato root containing organic acids and sugar. Genotype and physio￾logical status of plant determine the root exudation. By different metabolomics
methods, it was observed that there were 19 A. thaliana genotypes that were present
with different exudation patterns (Mönchgesang et al. 2016). The root exudates in
A. thaliana were present at different development stages like seedling, vegetative,
bolting, and flowering stages; the abundances of four phyla, namely Acidobacteria,
Actinobacteria, Bacteroidetes, and Cyanobacteria, were significantly different at
varied developmental time points (Chaparro et al. 2014). The root exudate2 Unearthing the Modern Trends and Concepts of Rhizosphere Microbiome... 27
compounds mentioned such as amino acids, phenolics, sugars, or sugar alcohols
released by these four phyla show significant correlation. In addition to plant species,
genotypes, developmental stages, and diurnal cycling of the plant also affect the
rhizosphere microbiome, which breaks our orthodox notion that the rhizosphere
microbiome does not change within the short time. The circadian clock plays an
important role and is a key regulator of the plant diurnal physiological processes. An
impairment in circadian clock strongly influences the A. thaliana rhizosphere
microbiome, particularly the rare taxa; however, the important factors changing
the rhizosphere microbiota were not revealed (Hubbard et al. 2018). Thus, traits
including plant species, genotypes, developmental stages, as well as other charac￾teristics are strongly interlinked with the rhizosphere microbiome assembly by
modulating the physiological states of plants eventually resulting in the influence
on anabolism and root exudation. Plant root exudation is a key mechanism in
recruiting and modulation of the rhizosphere microbiome.
2.5.1.2 Abiotic and Biotic Stresses Modulate Root Exudation
and Recruit the Rhizosphere Microbiome
Different abiotic and biotic stresses affect the assemblage of rhizosphere
microbiome. In nature, plants are exposed to several abiotic and biotic stresses in
their lifetime (Sharma et al. 2021). The effect of these environmental stresses on the
microbiome assembly is of key concern while studying the plant–root interface.
Different environmental stresses shaping the rhizosphere microbiome, including
nutritional stress, such as phosphorus limitation, can activate phosphate starvation
responses (PSRs) to regulate important genes to mediate the synthesis of primary
and secondary metabolites and modify the root microbiome composition to alleviate
phosphate stress (Castrillo et al. 2017). Environmental contaminants like pesticide
residues modify the rhizosphere communities. A direct impact was detected as
inoculation of soil with atrazine significantly recruited three OTUs: Halobacillus,
Bacillus decolorationis, and Cesiribacter sp. JJ02 (Xu et al. 2018). Additionally,
maize can transfer glyphosate sprayed on the surface of leaves to soils and thus
significantly increase the amount of Fusarium on maize roots (Kremer and Means
2009). It was noticed that pesticides can also alter the rhizosphere microbiome
through modulating plant exudation. For example, in rice seedling after treatment
with diclofop methyl the root exudation of amino acids, fatty acids, and organic
acids increased. This increased the relative abundance of Massilia and Anderseniella
genera and changed the richness and diversity of rhizosphere microorganisms (Chen
et al. 2017).
Biotic stress such as plant pathogen infection modifies the rhizosphere commu￾nity. Infection of A. thaliana leaves with Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato modifies
plant root exudation patterns and significantly enriches the Roseiflexus genus in the
rhizosphere by increasing the exudation of amino acids, nucleotides, and long-chain
organic acids, and by decreasing the exudation of sugars, alcohols, and short-chain
organic acids. This change in exudation patterns recruits more beneficial rhizosphere28 H. Gupta et al.
microbes which help A. thaliana to resist above-ground pathogens (Yuan et al.
2018). Likewise, in accordance to a study, Carex arenaria root releases a set of
volatile organic compounds (VOCs) into the rhizosphere post Fusarium culmorum
infection, and recruits a special rhizosphere community that varies from the rhizo￾sphere of healthy plants (Schulz-Bohm et al. 2018). During pathogen attack, the
salicylic acid (SA) A. thaliana mutants establish specific bacterial taxa in the root
microbiome, possibly due to SA mutants changing the root exudate profiles (Lebeis
et al. 2015). Jasmonic acid (JA) mutants of A. thaliana (myc2, med25) possess a
different root microbiome composition and root exudates with lower levels of
ornithine, tryptophan, and asparagine, but harbor a higher abundance of
Enterobacteriaceae in the myc2 rhizosphere and Bacillus, Lysinibacillus, and Strep￾tomyces in the med25 rhizosphere (Carvalhais et al. 2015). From these studies it can
be concluded that the plant immune system and their rhizosphere microbiome are
closely interlinked. However, the mechanism behind this relationship is not known
and intense future research is required in this field.
2.6 Impact of Rhizosphere Communities on Plant Growth
and Diseases Resistance
It is well known that the resident rhizosphere communities of plant root microbiota
influence plant growth in more than one way. There are certain molecular mecha￾nisms that are at play, which influence this pattern. Selecting inoculants from a well￾growing microbiome community and applying it for growth purposes has been
successfully demonstrated in certain plant species. Examples have surfaced where
Rhizobia inoculants have been used for increasing crop yield and as an alternative to
chemical and synthetic fertilizers in agricultural communities. In addition to the
facilitation of biological atmospheric nitrogen fixation for plants by certain bacterial
communities, microbes also showcase involvement in overcoming various nutrient
limitations such as phosphate by making it accessible for plants. Additionally,
microorganisms have also been involved in providing siderophores to plants under
iron-limiting conditions.
Plant growth-promoting microorganisms (PGPM) impact plant yield by deter￾mining rhizosphere microbiome diversity. Different microbial communities exert
synergistic effects to promote growth activities. Additionally, increased diversity
also confers resistance against plethora of plant pathogens. Certain microbes belong￾ing to rhizosphere community release phytohormonal substances. In drought stress,
root growth and lateral root formation in wheat were stimulated by indole acetic acid
(IAA) derived from Azospirillum generated, which is beneficial to increase water and
nutrient absorption (Arzanesh et al. 2011). In addition, abscisic acid (ABA) was also
produced and released in response to water deficit stress. ABA helps in maintaining
plant transpiration rate and regulating stomatal behavior. According to a study,
inoculation of Arabidopsis thaliana with Phyllobacterium brassicacearum2 Unearthing the Modern Trends and Concepts of Rhizosphere Microbiome... 29
STM196 decreased leaf transpiration to elevate drought stress tolerance by secreting
ABA. Pseudomonas chlororaphis subsp. aureofaciens strain M71 synthesizes ABA
to modulate a higher extent of stomatal closure to enhance water use efficiency and
tomato growth (Brilli et al. 2019).
The term suppression deals with the resilient attitude of certain rhizospheric
communities against soil-borne pathogens. This property of microbes can be suc￾cessfully transferred between soils, thus conferring the “non-resistant soils” with a
form of induced resilience. Certain microbes synthesize antimicrobial compounds
imparting an inhibitory effect to host plant pathogens. Antibiotics and related
compounds are represented as major classes functioning to inhibit pathogen growth
(Mhlongo et al. 2018). Bacillus subtilis, a model Gram-positive bacterium, can shape
the biofilm on plant roots and has been utilized as a biopesticide. The biological
control activity of B. subtilis depends on the secretion of antibacterial compounds.
For example, B. subtilis strain 330-2 produce lytic enzymes (laminarase, cellulase,
and protease) responsible for degrading the pathogenic fungi cell wall and also
inhibit Rhizoctonia solani. In addition to disease suppressing of soils and production
of antimicrobial compounds, plant disease-resisting microorganisms (PDRM) are
capable of resisting diseases in the aerial parts of plants by long-term signaling
mechanisms involving induced systemic resistance.
Thus, understanding the role of microorganisms in promoting the growth and
disease resistance of crops is key to future development of bioproducts. However,
environmental factors and microbiome colonization are still crucial factors that
influence the benefit of microbial products. Determining the precise mechanisms
of rhizosphere microbiome colonization and assembly is still difficult. Further
exploration of the mechanisms will allow for a breakthrough in the application of
beneficial microbiomes in practical agricultural development.
2.6.1 Rhizosphere Engineering
Rhizosphere is central to microbial and nutrient dynamics and describes the zone of
soil surrounding roots of plant species which release organic substances
(Dommergues 1978). It is the main zone where the plant roots interact with its
environment and major activities like nutrient uptake and water absorption occur.
This region is highly susceptible to abiotic and biotic stresses (Giri et al. 2018). The
physical and chemical properties of the rhizosphere comprise the integration of
many competing processes that depend on the soil type, water content, composition,
biological activities of root-associated microbial communities, and the physiology of
the plant itself (Pinton et al. 2007). Plants can be engineered to modify the rhizo￾sphere pH or to release compounds to improve nutrient availability, protect against
abiotic and biotic stresses, or encourage the proliferation of beneficial microorgan￾isms (Bowen and Rovira 1999). Microorganisms form a vital component of the
rhizosphere where the total biomass and composition of rhizosphere microbial
populations distinctly aid in interactions between plants and the soil environment30 H. Gupta et al.
(Arshad et al. 1993). Microorganisms engineered in the rhizosphere exude exoge￾nous compounds that improve plant nutrition, suppress pathogenic microbes, and
minimize the consequences of abiotic or biotic stresses (Ryan et al. 2009). The
rhizosphere engineering results in the release of inorganic and organic substances
from the plant roots and this process is termed as rhizodeposition. The exudates
released by the roots are rhizodeposits. These exudates enhance nutrient accession to
avoid mineral stresses and also favor the growth of salutatory microorganisms. A
systemic approach is required for successful engineering of the rhizosphere
microbiome. By understanding the underlying mechanism behind shaping of the
associated rhizosphere, the sustainability and efficiency of crop production can be
enhanced just by imitating the beneficial symbiotic associations existing between the
soils, microbes, and plants (Kaushal and Prasad 2021).
2.6.2 Plant-Mediated Engineering
The beneficial plant traits are manipulated via two different approaches: genetic
engineering and plant breeding. Using plant breeding techniques for selecting a
specific microbial community is an interesting approach. Aim of this technique is to
increase crop yield, by providing plant resistance toward a variety of stresses (Ryan
et al. 2009). The main process of modification of rhizosphere through plants is by the
release of root exudates and this process is known as rhizodeposition. These
exudates can enrich nutrient accession, aid to elude mineral stresses, or cultivate
the growth of favorable microorganisms. Generation of membrane potential differ￾ence and an electrochemical gradient for H+ helps in many transport processes across
the plasma membrane in plants like nutrient uptake. In addition to generating a
driving force for membrane transport, H+ efflux can contribute to nutrient acquisition
by acidifying the rhizosphere (Hinsinger et al. 2003). The release of organic anions
such as citrate and malate, as well as phytases and phosphatases, helps some species
to access poorly soluble organic and inorganic phosphorus in a similar way
(Dinkelaker et al. 1995; Richardson et al. 2001; Vance et al. 2003). Henceforth,
the discharge of organic anions from roots exhibits an immense influence on plant
growth and nutrition. Through genetic engineering, rhizosphere can be modified by
manipulating the expression of genes controlling the exudates. Neal et al. (1973) in
their study used the substitution of chromosome between two wheat lines for
improving tolerance toward root rot disease and thereby preserving the group of
beneficial bacterial populations present in rhizosphere. In accordance to a study,
transgenic plants have greater ability to secrete citrate from the roots, which grow
better on phosphate-limited soil as compared to the wild type. In addition, this study
also suggested that crop plants with an enhanced ability to use aluminum phosphate
developed an enhanced ability to grow in acidic soils and tolerance toward alumi￾num (Koyama et al. 2000). Therefore, different studies are being conducted to
manipulate the genes controlling the useful exudates which help in developing
plant–microbiome interactions.2 Unearthing the Modern Trends and Concepts of Rhizosphere Microbiome... 31
2.6.3 Microbiome-Mediated Engineering
The microbiome is often called as secondary genome of the plant as plant and the
microbiome are interdependent. So, microbiome is also called as meta-organism or
holobiont (Sharma et al. 2022). This brings the “opine concept” that combines the
harmony of the host plants to secrete particular root exudates simultaneously with
the inoculation of microbes that are engineered to degrade this substrate. This often
results in the colonization of the rhizosphere by a specific type of microbial com￾munity. Hence, it was also noticed that the opines produced by transgenic plants lead
toward the selection of the host-specific microbial community that can maintain
themselves at very high concentrations, even after the transgenic plant is removed
(Savka et al. 2002). These approaches are highly peculiar as specific metabolites are
being utilized.
Bioengineering of synthetic microbial communities presents several opportuni￾ties for plant/crop growth promotion, disease resistance, and stress tolerance/regu￾lation. It has been identified that hundreds of bacterial strains possess many
beneficial effects; it is a challenge in engineering a sustainable synthetic microbial
community. For example, in a simple two-strain co-culture, six ecological interac￾tion factors must be taken into account (Grosskopf and Soyer 2014), including:
(1) Commensalism, in which one strain benefits from the other without affecting it,
for instance products from one strain serves as substrates for the other; (2) Compe￾tition, in which two strains compete for the same product, for instance substrate
competition; (3) Predation, in which predator benefits while the prey is harmed;
(4) No interaction, in which two strains have no or net zero effect on each other with
no shared substrates, no predator–prey relations, and no competition; (5) Coopera￾tion, in which both strains are profited from each other, and (6) Amensalism, in
which one strain is negatively affected while the other strains has no effect. The
complexity of these possible ecological interactions will scale linearly with the
addition of extra strains (Grosskopf and Soyer 2014). During rhizosphere engineer￾ing, the main challenges lie in minimizing the harmful or negative interactions like
parasitism and competition while maximizing beneficial effects and cooperation. As
even in two-strain co-cultures, competition tends to dominate temperature, nutrient
availability, and host plant exudates, which affect growth rates, seeding rate, stabi￾lization, susceptibility to pathogens, and sustainability of the synthetic microbial
community once applied. So, minimizing competition is quite challenging.
Many microbial genera are known that colonize the rhizosphere and can be
manipulated in genetic engineering efforts. Many plant growth-promoting
rhizobacteria (PGPR), free-living strains, are able to colonize roots and stimulate
plant growth (Prasad et al. 2015). Growth stimulation can be mediated directly via
enhanced nutrient acquisition or modulation of phytohormone synthesis, and indi￾rectly via induction of the plant’s own defense responses or antagonism of soil-borne
pathogens. Moreover, a number of other mechanisms of promotion can function
simultaneously in a single strain. These genera include Bacillus (Dong and Zhang
2014), Paenibacillus (Kim and Timmusk 2013), Streptomyces (Medema et al. 2011),32 H. Gupta et al.
and Rhizobium (Patel and Sinha 2011). While Streptomyces spp. offer great samples
of PGPRs with tractable genetic systems and much of obtainable complete genome
sequences, Streptomyces spp. have some drawbacks in that they need very large
genomes (on average ~ 7 MB) (Köberl et al. 2015) and have many mobile elements,
which make them difficult to engineer and/or grow in cooperative synthetic micro￾bial communities. Bacillus is the base of the synthetic microbial community, because
it is comparatively easy to genetically engineer (Dong and Zhang 2014), contains
many isolates that have plant growth proprieties (Köberl et al. 2013; Köberl et al.
2015), and/or is currently utilized in biocontrol applications. For example, Bacillus
could be engineered to contain a nitrogen-fixation machinery (e.g., NifH from
Paenibacillus) (Kim and Timmusk 2013), produce high concentrations of plant
hormones (Arkhipova et al. 2005), or add pathways from other Bacillus sp. to
control pathogens (Köberl et al. 2013). For increasing nitrogen fixation, Pseudomo￾nas, Rhizobium, and/or Bradyrhizobium genera might be added. A simple three￾strain member consortium, including an engineered Bacillus with two natural or
engineered nitrogen fixers like Pseudomonas, Rhizobium, and Bradyrhizobium,
could provide many of the benefits of a more complex natural rhizosphere commu￾nity. The potential ecological functional interactions increase with the number of
strains added; a three-strain consortium would potentially contain approximately
729 predicted interactions, and a four-member consortium 531,441 predicted inter￾actions (Grosskopf and Soyer 2014). Efforts should be taken to limit the number of
strains within a synthetic microbial community to three strains in order to exert
control of potential interactions rather quickly (Foster and Bell 2012). Thus, by
modifying the microbial community the crop productivity can be increased.
Table 2.1 enlists some more instances of crop productivity enhancement resulting
due to modification of microbial community.
2.6.4 Engineering the Interactions Between Plants
and Microbes
Engineering the interactions between plants and microbes is an exciting approach.
Several recent studies in this context have dealt with plant endophytes and
phytoremediation. For example, an endophytic Burkholderia cepacia strain was
transformed with a plasmid encoding toluene degradation, and was re-introduced
to yellow lupine (Lupinus luteus L.). Plants inoculated with the transformed strain
showed no sign of phytotoxicity at a high toluene concentration (1000 mg/L) and
sustained growth, while the control plants experienced phytotoxicity at levels above
100 mg/L. It has been observed that 50–70% reduction in toluene evapotranspiration
through the leaves occurred after plant–microbe association engineering. A similar
experiment using another strain of B. cepacia and another plasmid encoding toluene
degradation was conducted. Inoculation of poplar hybrids (P. trichocarpa 
P. deltoides) with the B. cepacia strain harboring the toluene-degrading plasmid2 Unearthing the Modern Trends and Concepts of Rhizosphere Microbiome... 33
Table 2.1 Crop productivity enhancement in response to modification of microbial community
Crop Microbial community Remarks References
Wheat (var. H1105
and PBW660) and
cowpea (var. PL-1
and PL-2)
Variovorax paradoxus
RAA3 and M11
Enhancement in plant growth
of wheat and cowpea by seed
bacterization; significant
increase in shoot/root length
(root parameter was not
observed in wheat), shoot and
root fresh/dry weight, chlo￾rophyll content, and also
increase in the NPK contents
Kumar
et al.
(2021)
Glycine max Co-inoculation of
Bradyrhizobium strain
along with Streptomyces
griseoflavus
Enhanced nodulation, nitro￾gen fixation, and nutrients
uptake
Htwe et al.
(2018)
Phaseolus vulgaris Co-inoculation of Bacillus
megaterium and
Paenibacillus polymyxa
along with Rhizobium
Enhancement in plant bio￾mass as compared to Rhizo￾bium inoculation alone
Korir et al.
(2017)
Maize, wheat, sun￾flower, and lettuce
Pseudomonas,
Azospirillum, Azotobacter,
and Bacillus
19–40% enhancement in
yield
Rubin
et al.
(2017)
Cicer arietinum Application of Serratia
strain 5D as an inoculum
25.55% and 30.85% increase
in the grain yield of crops
grown on fertile soil in irri￾gated areas and nutrient￾deficient soil in rainfed areas,
respectively
Zaheer
et al.
(2016)
had a positive effect on plant growth in the presence of toluene, and reduced the
amount of toluene released via evapotranspiration (Taghavi et al. 2005). Plant
inoculation with PGPR endophytes has also been reported. Antimicrobial metabo￾lites produced by a number of these bacteria, such as 2,4-diacetylphloroglucinol
(DAPG), can indeed enhance disease suppression in plants. This has been observed,
for instance, in eggplants (Solanum melongena) inoculated with DAPG producing
Pseudomonas, Enterobacter, or Bacillus isolates. Inoculated plants became partly
resistant to R. solanacearum as judged from the wilt incidence that was reduced by
over 70% compared to non-inoculated plants (Ramesh et al. 2009). The potential
value of plant–endophyte interaction engineering and the associated difficulties have
been extensively reviewed in the cases of phytoremediation (Weyens et al. 2009)
and plant growth promotion (Gaiero et al. 2013).
Opines are low-molecular-weight molecules that are typically synthesized in
crown gall tumors or hairy roots inoculated by Agrobacterium sp. The synthesis is
directed by the products of genes transferred by the bacteria to the host plant cells.
Opines play a major role in the Agrobacterium plant interaction and are used as
growth substrates by the inciting bacteria and as signals to induce the conjugal
transfer of the Ti-plasmid, the genetic element that bears most of the pathogenicity34 H. Gupta et al.
determinants (Dessaux et al. 1998). The opine concept stipulates that these mole￾cules help in the expansion of the pathogen and therefore dissemination of patho￾genicity. Interestingly, this approach can lead to the selection of indigenous strains
and is independent of plant species and soil type. Root exudation can also be
manipulated indirectly. The application of the flagellar peptideflg22 or that of the
bacterial toxin coronatine to the foliar system of Arabidopsis induced the expression
of the malic acid transporter ALMT1, which led to an increased malic acid concen￾tration in the rhizosphere of the plant Arabidopsis. Induced systemic resistance
response in plants against P. syringae pv. tomato was observed by increase in
concentration of malic acid, which led to increase in Bacillus subtilis strain
FB1A7. From all the above discussion, we can conclude that rhizosphere engineer￾ing is clearly more than a promising way to reduce the usage of agrochemicals, and
to improve soil and crop quality and productivity.
2.7 Techniques Associated with Rhizosphere Microbiome
in Relation to Plant Productivity
Biological agents are attracting worldwide attention for sustainable plant production,
yet investigating their potential for a multilayer environment such as the rhizosphere
is difficult. Therefore, knowledge of genomics as an independent cell tool to
understand the diversity and importance of the functioning of the rhizosphere
microbiome in sustainable agriculture is essential, although recent research in the
rhizosphere is carried out using evolving techniques such as metagenomics,
metaproteomics, and metatranscriptomics, as well as taking into account their
challenges, internal issues, impacts, and possible solutions.
In understanding soil compaction, the role of functional diversity and the taxon￾omy of soil microbiota and the role played by microbial metabolites in this process
have been analyzed and discussed in the context of a method known as “omics.”
“Omics” techniques are used to reveal important information about the diversity of
viruses, their response to various abiotic and biotic diseases, and the physiology of
stress for various diseases. The undoubted role of the rhizospheric microbiome in
plant production has been demonstrated by conventional methods, but the approach
to understand the non-invasive species and their ecology requires a combination of
multilayer technologies (Mendes et al. 2013). Thus, the molecular techniques and
“omics” studies have helped researchers to link the functional roles of the rhizo￾sphere microbiota to their ecosystem (Singh et al. 2017).
Metagenomics emerges as a genomics tool by combining a set of mechanisms, in
which the microbial genome is involved as a model for functional genetic identifi￾cation and diversity in conjunction with the help of bioinformatics to obtain infor￾mation from acquired data. Opportunities for rhizospheric microbiome studies as
well as metatranscriptomics and metaproteomics studies are introduced as a2 Unearthing the Modern Trends and Concepts of Rhizosphere Microbiome... 35
combination of molecular techniques and bioinformatics tools to present complex
microbial interactions in a rhizospheric active metagenomic environment.
2.7.1 Genomics
Genomics refers to the gene branch responsible for genome research. Genome refers
to a haploid set of genes or chromosomes present in living organisms. Genomics fall
under the genetic branch that can be described as structural and functional genomics
(Wang et al. 2020). Structural genomics includes location, physical characterization,
and genetic sequence present in the genome. The genomics approach is extended to
the functional part of the whole genome, including transcriptomics (RNA research),
proteomics (protein research), and metabolomics (metabolite research) (Soni et al.
2015; Suyal et al. 2019). In addition, the combination of many “meta-” and “omics”
technologies seems to benefit mankind, especially in the agricultural, industrial, and
medical fields (Rawat and Rangarajan 2019; Suyal et al. 2019). Several genomics
tools and techniques that appear on a daily basis are discussed here.
2.7.1.1 Polymerase Chain Reaction
The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) method was originally developed by Kary
Banks Mullis in 1983, who won the Nobel Prize in 1993 for the same that
transformed the entire field of molecular biology and still works today (Mullis
1990). This process involves the development of targeted DNA fragments extracted
from any source. Quantitative PCR (qPCR) technique involves measuring the
dynamic changes and relative abundance of fungal pathogens associated with
black-foot disease (Berlanas et al. 2019). In addition, PCR offers many benefits to
researchers in combination with gel electrophoresis approaches, i.e., agarose gel
electrophoresis, and temperature gradient gel electrophoresis, and enhances our
understanding in microbial community analysis.
2.7.2 Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism
Inhibitory enzymes are part of endonucleases that can separate DNA only in certain
areas. They are also considered to be cellular scissors. These enzymes are widely
used to make genome mapping (O’Donnell et al. 2020). Some of the methods that
test the endonuclease block system include restriction fragment length polymor￾phism (RFLP), amplified fragment length polymorphism, and plasmid
fingerprinting.36 H. Gupta et al.
2.7.3 DNA Sequencing
DNA sequencing is involved in identifying nucleotide sequences in a particular
genome. Nowadays, it is easy to track and analyze the entire genome by using high￾quality, automated, efficient, and reliable next-generation sequencing techniques
(Kumar et al. 2014). Several methods such as microfluidics and fluorescent activated
cell sorting (FACS) are popular in single cell tracking. This process involves a
variety of mechanisms such as DNA marking, classification, and fluorescent cell
sequence (O’Donnell et al. 2020).
2.7.4 Rhizospheric Microbiome Characterization by
Next-Generation Sequencing
Next-generation sequencing (NGS) is one of the most expensive and time-saving
tools used in the sequence of metagenomes. Prior to the discovery of NGS, studies
were mainly aimed at analyzing genetically modified genes consisting of consistent
sequences of genes with medical significance. This process involves a sequence of
high output because millions of DNA fragments from a single sample are in
sequence.
2.7.5 DNA Cloning
DNA cloning involves the transfer of a portion of DNA from one cell to another in
order to produce duplicate copies in vivo (O’Donnell et al. 2020). Various cloning
vectors have been developed in recent years, which can accommodate different types
and sizes of DNA fragments, including plasmids, hybrid vectors, and synthetic
chromosomes.
2.7.6 Blending Strategies
Hybridization method measures the level of genetic similarity between two different
nucleic acid molecules. The basic methods used by this system include: DNA
analysis/kinetic recombination and fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH). Also,
DNA microarray is an advanced mechanism based on it. Microarray involves the
mixing of a piece of DNA and a probe into a chip called a DNA chip. In most cases, a
DNA chip involves a single genome, but many genomes can also be explored. The
method known as the “representational difference analysis” (RDA) analyzes the
differences between the types of variables based on a previously tracked2 Unearthing the Modern Trends and Concepts of Rhizosphere Microbiome... 37
representative. This process involves a combination of techniques such as PCR and
DNA sequencing. It is a very popular method of analyzing prokaryotic genomes as
they can vary greatly in their genetic size (Barcellos et al. 2009).
However, a combination of genomics and other omics technologies is commonly
used in rhizospheric microbiome research (Goel et al. 2018). Also, the merging of
genetic approach with bioremediation is important to evaluate relationship among
microbial and plant communities and ecosystem, which possess the aim of improve￾ment of phytoremediation of contaminated regions (Agarwal et al. 2020). The advent
of bioinformatics tools with these technologies has opened up new avenues for
research and development in the field of microbial ecology.
2.8 Metagenomics
It is accepted that only about 0.1–1% (depending on local sample) of germs can be
grown in artificial growth sources and more than 99% of microbe variants remain
unused (Suyal et al. 2019). Germs to enter under active but indestructible conditions
are forced by various environmental pressures which also reduce their access
through the use of genomics. Biodiversity can therefore be underestimated in
identifying plant-based pathogens. In order to overcome the limitations and com￾plexities associated with farming technology, the metagenomics approach has
already emerged as a potential tool (Soni and Goel 2011; Soni et al. 2017; Joshi
et al. 2017; Kumar et al. 2019).
Metagenomics is concerned with the study of a genome collection of microbes
(metagenome) from any surrounding environment to provide information on ecol￾ogy and the diversity of small forms in a particular area. Due to the continued
reduction in costs of nucleotide sequencing and the development of high-throughput
sequences, it is now possible to sequence large amounts of DNA from biological mix
(Metzker 2010) and thus provide a deeper understanding of the rhizosphere. The
knowledge of certain members of the microbiome living in the rhizosphere is
provided by a high-resolution analysis of the taxonomic structure of the rhizosphere
soil (Lagos et al. 2015). In addition, metagenomics not only is effective in deter￾mining bacterial diversity but also helps assess the number of fungi in the rhizo￾sphere (LeBlanc et al. 2015). Explanation of soil profiles with a culturally
independent mold community and the rhizosphere of sugarcane planted in the field
reveals that the concentration of nitrogen fertilizer significantly alters the formation
but not the taxon richness of fungal communities in the rhizosphere and soil
(Paungfoo-Lonhienne et al. 2015).38 H. Gupta et al.
2.8.1 Integrated Metagenomics Methods
Various cellular techniques are successfully applied to microbial diversity analysis,
including polymerase chain reactions, cloning and ribosomal gene sequence, dena￾turing gradient gel electrophoresis, borderline polymorphism, polymorphism-length
terminal-restriction, and fluorescent hybridization. Additionally, the 16S rRNA gene
is used as a phylogenetic marker to analyze genetic diversity, as this gene has been
remarkably well preserved in the first few years of evolution.
There are different types of next-generation sequencing technology (NGS) that
have recently been used in microbial studies. These include internal transcribed
spacer (ITS) and amplicon gene sequence (target enlargement) of 16S rDNA stored
to investigate viral and fungal variants. Metagenome sequences obtain information
about the life force and genetic diversity of all viral communities present in a
particular area. Metatranscriptomics involves the sequence of cDNA (a modified
mRNA of active genes) to measure genetic expression in relation to genetic and
metagenome reference and thus to identify potential functional functions and active
microbes. Metaproteomics sequence of proteins is used to evaluate the expressed
proteins and their richness to provide information on the active function between
plants and living organisms. Metabolomics profile of metabolites is extracted using a
state-of-the-art mass spectrometry (MS) method to detect and measure molecular
growth and its possible involvement in the metabolic response of plants and bacterial
communities.
Recently, a combination of advanced chemical analysis techniques and molecular
biology such as gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS), capillary
electrophoresis-mass spectrometry (CE-MS), and liquid chromatography-mass spec￾trometry (LC-MS) has significantly improved the qualitative and quantitative ana￾lyses of the chemical and or metabolites of any plant or tissue component, the
rhizosphere, and the natural niche (Zhang et al. 2012; Zhang et al. 2015).
2.9 Bioinformatics Tools
2.9.1 Metagenome Analysis Software
Metagenome sequence generates a large amount of nucleotide sequence data that
need to be re-analyzed to obtain accurate results. Bioinformatics software is required
to process DNA sequences generated by Sanger sequence and a separate next￾generation sequencing (NGS) platform, i.e., 454 pyrosequencing and Illumina
producing long and short readings, respectively. There are various software available
for amplicon analysis and used for Sanger sequencing having 454 ribosomal pyro￾tag sequence. Quantitative Insights into Microbial Ecology (QIIME), MEGAN, and
CARMA are among the most important and widely used software for metagenomic
analysis (Caporaso et al. 2014; Gerlach and Stoye 2011; Huson and Weber 2013).2 Unearthing the Modern Trends and Concepts of Rhizosphere Microbiome... 39
Recently, software such as the Illumina study and PacBio study have been developed
for the purpose of metagenomic analysis of short-term readings and very long
sequences, respectively. There are a few metagenomic forums available that provide
information about the analysis of microbial diversity. One of the major challenges in
analyzing ecological sequences is data integration and the question of how to
analyze different types of data in an integrated manner that can provide information
in both taxonomic and operational analyses. In order to cope with these challenges,
community enabling cloud compatibility platform is available, which includes
IMG/M (Markowitz et al. 2006), CAMERA (Seshadri et al. 2007), and
WebCARMA (Gerlach et al. 2009). The Joint Genome Institute (JGI) supports
IMG (Integrated Microbial Genomes), which provides tools for analyzing microbial
genomes, genes, and functions. A community database for metagenomic data
deposition CAMERA (Cyberinfrastructure for Advanced Marine Microbial Ecology
Research and Analysis) is an important first step in developing methods for moni￾toring microbial communities. CARMA is a new software which characterizes the
species composition and the genetic potential of microbial samples using short,
unassembled reads. The Galaxy framework supports Cloud Virtual Resource
(CloVR) (Angiuoli et al. 2011), basic metagenomic analysis (Pond et al. 2009),
and Metagenomics Rapid Annotation using Subsystem Technology (MG-RAST)
(Wilke et al. 2011).
2.9.2 Transcriptomics
Rhizosphere biology has revolutionized recent advances in DNA sequencing tech￾nologies by recording microbial formation by deep integration with metagenomics.
However, functional understanding has not been provided by metagenomics, which
thus provides a functional role for the obscure functional rhizospheric microbiome.
Transcriptomics and metatranscriptomics both are desirable as they are able to
determine both the structure and function of the active rhizospheric microbiome
and thus complete metagenomics data. Transcriptomics is about the study of the
corresponding RNA content that is produced under a certain natural environment.
On the other hand, metatranscriptomics refers to the high sequence of complete RNA
isolated from a natural sample. And two of the most popular metatranscriptomics
tools used to study the rhizosphere include RNA sequence and gene expression
microarray.
RNA sequencing is a method used to sequence and measure RNA molecules in a
sample using next-generation sequencing (NGS) technology. RNA-seq reveals a
complete transcriptome with quantitative and qualitative properties of mRNA,
rRNA, and tRNA and is currently considered the gold standard for genetic analysis.
The first step in this RNA-seq process involves the breakdown of high-quality RNA
in rhizospheric soils, which is followed by conversion to cDNA fragments (cDNA
library) followed by NGS. Urich et al. (2008) for the first time used the
“Double-RNA approach” to determine the formation and function of bacterial40 H. Gupta et al.
communities in the soil by sequencing both rRNA and mRNA in a single
transcriptome.
Microarray is a technique that involves the collection of microscope probes
attached to a solid surface used to analyze high-resolution expression and compar￾ative studies of genomics hybridization (Martínez et al. 2015). This process is also
used to monitor genetic expression and to detect viruses present in different natural
samples. Mendes et al. (2011) used a microarray-based approach to characterize the
rhizosphere microbiome and identified 33,000 species of bacteria and fossils. Rhi￾zobium leguminosarum biovar viciae inoculation effect on gene expression of pea,
alfalfa, and sugar beet rhizosphere was previously studied with the help of a
microarray method that revealed the presence of preserved plant colonies
(Ramachandran et al. 2011).
2.9.3 Proteomics Methods
Proteomics has provided new opportunities to test soil biodiversity and functions. It
is one of the most relevant and alternative metagenomics methods that provide
useful information for key biological factors that perform key metabolic functions
to solve the mystery of soil-acquisition skills in a particular ecology (Ploetze et al.
2015).
Proteomics is a systematic biological approach and is considered a sensible
option to investigate plant and bacterial interactions. The investigation here was
based on a two-dimensional electrophoresis (2-DE) gel. The identification of clas￾sified proteins is determined by the sequential library available on the website.
Initially, the protein site is derived from agarose gel, which is then extracted and
subjected to electrolytic cleavage in which peptide fragments are formed. Strategies
such as matrix-assisted laser desorption/light ionization time (MALDI-TOF) mass
spectrometry (MS) analysis will be performed to analyze broken peptide fragments.
MALDI-TOF analysis produces a peptide list of broken fragments. A special feature
of the protein is the predictable fraction size from the gene sequence that is also
compared to the site of the peptide enumerated/sent for each open reading frame
(ORF) in the genome. If no similarity is found in the sequential database, then the
proteins can be analyzed in peptide sequence.
Also, proteomics has a missing list of applications including the diagnosis of
plant diseases and their management and the analysis of the diversity of
microbiomes by contact with soil, water, and other organisms. In addition, studying
plant diseases, resistance, or infection is highly beneficial for proteomics. Microarray
technology will be used to develop proteomics in such a way that the immune system
analyzes changes in protein levels with a large amount of protein in a chip in a
similar way to how mRNA mutations are currently measured. Proteomics is widely
used to classify intercellular proteins that provide insight into microbial activity in
the soil of the rhizosphere. Biological control of brown rice disease, caused by the
deadly virus Helminthosporium oryzae, was investigated and tripartite interactions2 Unearthing the Modern Trends and Concepts of Rhizosphere Microbiome... 41
between the pathogen-biocontrol agent (Bacillus) and rice were investigated using a
proteomics method. About nine proteins including ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate car￾boxylase, ATP synthase, serine/threonine protein kinases, 2-cys-peroxiredoxin,
trehalose-phosphatase, and 50S ribosomal proteins were obtained using 2-D poly￾acrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) analysis followed by a different expression
using strategies such as MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry (Prabhukarthikeyan et al.
2019). These proteins can however help in plant utilization and produce a protective
response against the brown spot pathogen. The proteomics method to study the
expression of protein in the soil of the rhizosphere during interactions between plant
organisms and soil was used by Wang et al. (2011). Therefore, proteomics is an
appropriate and alternative method and one of the most effective ways to solve
complex plant–bacterial interactions.
2.9.4 Metaproteomics Methods
Within the umbrella of the “omics,” metaproteomics is among the recent and most
innovative trends. This method examines the expression pattern of proteins within a
complex biological system and thus provides direct evidence of the physiological
and metabolic functions of the microbiome. Therefore, metaproteome expression
will help to improve the understanding of the microbial world and thus favor
microbial communities in natural functions (Wang et al. 2014). This process incor￾porates high-performance mass spectrometry to identify a suite of proteins that can
regulate metabolic functions in microbial communities (Hettich et al. 2013). Also,
the discovery of extensive metagenomic sequences from different microbial com￾munities has extended the genomics era to a new exit area of research in recent years.
However, metaproteomics is one of the best ways to analyze the bacterial
community in the soil. This process is basically done in four main steps, which
includes: (1) rhizosphere soil collection sample, (2) protein extraction, (3) purifica￾tion and separation, and analysis of MS, and finally (4) defining a protein and
analyzing it using bioinformatics (Wang et al. 2014). Also, two major workflows
have been developed for metaproteomics analysis including sodium dodecyl sulfate
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) combined with matrix-assisted
laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight (MALDI-TOF-TOF) mass spectrometry
analysis (MS) or electrospray ionization source tandem MS analysis (ESI-MS/MS)
and liquid chromatography combined with electrospray ionization source tandem
MS (LC-ESI-MS/MS).
To solve the mystery of interactions between plants and bacteria in the soil
ecosystem, the metaproteomics analysis of the rhizosphere soil is a very powerful
and useful scientific method. A standardized method was developed by Wang et al.
(2011) for protein extraction from different soil samples with the identification of
1000 different sites with high density and contaminated 2-DE gels. It was noted that
189 spots represent 122 proteins in 2-DE gel, which are rice samples identified by
MALDI-TOF/TOF-MS successfully. And the proteins identified mainly from rice42 H. Gupta et al.
and bacteria were involved in various metabolic activities including nucleotide,
energy, and secondary metabolism, as well as signal transmission and anti-stress￾related condition. In the sugarcane field, a physiological profile analysis (CLPP) of
rhizosphere soil involving metaproteomics analysis was performed to determine the
cause of the decline in sugarcane yields. It was noted that the amount of sugarcane
made significant changes in the activity of the enzyme in the soil, the catabolic
microbial community, and changes in the level of protein production in the soil. In
addition, they were also found to influence biochemical processes in the rhizosphere
ecosystem and thus contribute to intermediate sugarcane interactions and bacterial
interactions (Lin et al. 2013). On the basis of comparative metaproteomics analysis,
it was found that 38 proteins have been shown to vary in number in the soil of
sugarcane, which was responsible for the decline in yield. Also, metaproteomics
analysis of bacterial communities (bacteria and archaea) was performed in the soil of
the phyllosphere and the rhizosphere and the phyllosphere of rice by Knief et al.
(2012). Also, in the metaproteomics information analysis, a total of 4600 detected
proteins were found, and they reflected the process of single carbon conversion in the
phyllosphere and rhizosphere. Rhizosphere, however, was dominated by proteins
involved in methanogenesis and methanotrophy and phyllosphere was dominated by
methylobacterium. Also, the enzyme namely dinitrogenase reductase was found
entirely in the rhizosphere despite the presence of nifH genes (Knief et al. 2012).
2.9.5 Metabolomics
Metabolomics is a method of qualitative and quantitative study of low-molecular￾weight metabolites (<1 kDa). It serves as an important tool for the detection,
measurement, and clarification of cell interactions within the rhizosphere. Most
plant-to-microbial contact and microbe-to-microbe communication in the
rhizospheric niche are associated with group of secondary metabolites. Thus, explor￾ing these metabolites in the rhizosphere enhances the interaction of the various cells
operating in the plant–microbe interface that further reveals a number of important
signaling pathways involved in promoting plant growth and stress defense, and
creates systemic resistance against plant diseases (Nath et al. 2017). Metabolomics
therefore strengthens our understanding of the mechanisms of cells and cells oper￾ating in the rhizosphere.
There are usually three major steps in the normal course of mass spectrometry
(MS)-based metabolomics. The first step is to prepare a sample that involves the
release of metabolites using organic solvents or by using a solid-phase extraction
method. The second step is concerned with differentiation and extraction, in which
metabolites are categorized by different chromatographic techniques based on the
nature of the metabolites and then “obtained through the use of quantitative analy￾sis.” For flexible and stable thermal compresses, gas chromatography-mass spec￾trometry (GC-MS) is popular, which can separate the metabolites by gas
chromatography and obtain them by quadrupole, quadrupole time-of-flight2 Unearthing the Modern Trends and Concepts of Rhizosphere Microbiome... 43
(qTOF), or triple-quadrupole (QqQ) mass analysis (van Dam and Bouwmeester
2016). However, on the other hand, liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry
(LC-MS) usually uses standard phase (NP) or regression phase
(RP) chromatography to classify metabolites on the basis of their variability. Finally,
data is tested with free software such as MarVis1, MAVEN, Mzine, Metaboanalyst,
and MetAlign, or available commercial software such as Markerlynx, Profile Solu￾tions, and Mass Profiler Pro. Rhizosphere metabolomics was previously used to
study various plant growth compounds such as ACC deaminase, auxins, cytokinins,
abscisic acid, gibberellins, jasmonic acid, salicylic acid, and bacterial-derived
siderophores (Mhlongo et al. 2018). Also, metabolomics is one of the best tools to
study molecules that show root and nodule symbiosis, i.e., flavonoids. In addition,
the role of acyl homoserine lactones (AHLs) and its degrading products in the
rhizospheric microbial response was investigated by Rothballer et al. (2018). How￾ever, metabolomics also documented changes in the microbial community in the
grass (Avena barbata) rhizosphere during the period of development and biological
sequence in relation to substrate preferences in altering root exudates (Zhalnina et al.
2018). However, due to the limited public index site, the cost of equipment and the
lack of appropriate technology make metabolomics much more complex than
DNA-based sequencing methods.
2.9.6 Phenomics
Phenomics is a systematic study of phenotypes on a wide range of genome or a set of
multiple ways to study how the genome of living organism translates a complete set
of phenotypic traits. Because of large number of genes interacting with each other
and the nature to produce phenotype, the prediction of phenotype from genotype
does not get reflected. However, the metagenomics approach provided access to a
complete genotype of rhizospheric microbes up to genus, species, and subspecies
levels.
In addition to the traditional techniques for making phenotypic characters,
methods such as transcriptomics, proteomics, and metabolomics are widely used
tools that provide large-scale phenomics data, and thus explain the phenomics of
rhizospheric microbes (Houle et al. 2010). Rhizobia phenome (phenotypic traits) has
been studied to differentiate and thus classify into different candidate groups.
Phenomics has also been very useful for the study and management of pathogen
co-evolution and the interaction of pathogens at the cellular level. Also, the com￾plexity of biological processes at various stages of development needs to be
addressed with high-quality digital phenotypic data. Recently, the work on the
global Escherichia coli promoter was infiltrated through PFI boxes to obtain high￾level genetic data amid antibiotic stress (French et al. 2018). To achieve microbial
compatibility in any ecosystem, growth measurement is a key phenotype. However,
there are limited tools available to study the phenomics of rhizospheric bacteria.
However, there is a need for the development of advanced phenotyping tools andTechniques Objective of the study References
44 H. Gupta et al.
Table 2.2 Advanced molecular techniques involving metagenomics for the characterization of
rhizosphere microbial communities
Plant community
of microbes
Metagenome sequencing Grassland plant community rich￾ness and soil edaphic
454 pyrosequencing to analyze
rhizosphere fungal communities
during soybean growth
Soybean (Glycine
max) rhizosphere
LeBlanc
et al.
(2015),
Sugiyama
et al.
(2014)
Amplicon gene sequenc￾ing of conserved marker
genes, 16S rRNA
Bacterial and fungal rhizosphere
communities in hydrocarbon￾contaminated soils
Rhizobacterial
population of
Arachis hypogea
Rhizosphere of
apple (Malus
pumila) nurseries
Bell et al.
(2014),
Haldar and
Sengupta
(2015),
Sun et al.
(2014)
Metatranscriptome
sequencing
Rhizosphere microbiome assem￾blage affected by plant develop￾ment
Root surface microbiome
Arabidopsis
rhizosphere
Chaparro
et al.
(2014),
Ofek￾Lalzar
et al.
(2014)
Metaproteomics profiling Phyllosphere and rhizosphere
study
Sugarcane
(Saccharum
officinarum)
rhizosphere
Lin et al.
(2013)
Metabolomics profiling Mycorrhizal study of roots Tomato (Solanum
lycopersicum)
rhizosphere
Rivero
et al.
(2015)
advanced adaptation to deal with detailed phenomics of rhizospheric microorgan￾isms. Table 2.2 enlists various molecular techniques employed for the characteriza￾tion of rhizosphere microbial community.
2.10 The Role of CRISPR for Plant Development
CRISPR—Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short Palindrome Repeats—and
CRISPR-compliant nine protein pathways have been developed in more than
20 plants to date (Sedeek et al. 2019). Genome engineering for targeted crop
development for improvement of crop yield and stress management, including
management of biotic and abiotic conditions, is a promising tool for future improve￾ment of plant sciences. Biotic stress caused by various phytopathogenic bacteria
possesses serious challenges in crop loss around the globe, which can be overcome2 Unearthing the Modern Trends and Concepts of Rhizosphere Microbiome... 45
by using CRISPR technology by which we can develop disease-resisting tolerant
cultivars that reduce the crop losses in future.
A study by Wang et al. (2016) strongly reported an increase in plant resistance to
Magnaporthe outbreak using a targeted CRISPR/Cas9 transformation process in
ethylene responsive factor (ERF), OsERF922 in rice. Similarly, successful CRISPR/
Cas9-mediated genome engineering in soybeans (Glycine max)—using a different
transgene sgRNA and six sgRNAs that targeted multiple sites of two endogenous
soybeans (GmSHR and GmFEI2) and testing the efficacy of sgRNAs in the hairy
root system—was the first report by Cai et al. (2015). Several other studies employed
CRISPR to release Avr4/6, a genetic pathogen virulence in Phytophthora sojae
(Fang and Tyler 2016). Also, the Avolog4/6 mutation (NPT II), which is an induced
gene for the CRISPR/Cas9 gene, focuses on the contribution made by the gene
virulence to pathogen-induced pathogen production in soybeans, namely Rps4 and
Rps6. In addition, by identifying the CRISPR/Cas9 tools, two OsSWEET13s are
formed, which are flexible in directing its promoter, which thus led to improved
bacterial tolerance for rice. There are various important factors such as crop yield and
abiotic resistance that are controlled by influence of more than one gene. However,
in a variety of crop development programs, a few studies are trying to map out these
multifactor QTL, which plays a role in managing important aspects of agriculture.
There are a number of identified quantitative regions introduced to promote
advanced species in selected lines. Therefore, the CRISPR/Cas9 process can be a
useful tool for introducing and learning unusual mutations in crop plants. Therefore,
the use of the CRISPR/Cas9 genetics and genetically modified approach accelerates
research and increases researchers’ ability to produce genetic models (Borrelli et al.
2018).
2.11 Basics of CRISPR-Mediated Plant–Microbial
Interactions in Agriculture
Plant–bacterial interactions depend on genetics in both the microbiome and host
(Levy et al. 2018). Because of the important role of microorganisms in plant stress
resilience, identification of candidate gene responsible for plant–microbe interaction
is important in regulating the agronomic factor, which will help to improve desired
plant characteristics for agricultural and industrial purposes. CRISPR-based tools
have given novel insights into learning the genetic functions by initiating genetic
mutations in plants or viruses or bacteria. CRISPR-based tools have the unique
advantage of completely eliminating the target gene compared to genetic mutation as
part of the RNA interference (RNAi) method that produces a phenotype component
(Bisht et al. 2019; Sarma et al. 2021).
Therefore, with the help of CRISPR-based tools, one can gain accurate genetic
information, especially genetic function in plant–microbe interactions at the cellular
level. More recently, the CRISPR/Cas and ssDNA recombineering method was46 H. Gupta et al.
developed in the rhizospheric bacterium, i.e., Pseudomonas putida KT2440, to
modify various genes, including gene removal, replacement, and insertion (Sun
et al. 2018). However, mechanical research is important to assess the genetic link
for harmful or pathogenic plant–microbe interactions in the case of non-model
microbial isolation. Thus, genome engineering of non-model microbes with power￾ful CRISPR/Cas tools enables studies to make links between particular genes and
their respective functions. In addition, the latest method of using biomaterials either
in DNA, mRNA, or protein precedes the unique solution for the delivery of CRISPR/
Cas into biological implants in normal ways (Eoh and Gu 2019).
2.12 Conclusion
The purpose of rhizosphere microbiome to implement and maintain the ecosystem of
plant is well established. However, various conventional techniques used for under￾standing the function are still in infancy stage for vast majority of microorganisms
present in the rhizosphere. Unraveling new plant signal molecules and exudates from
roots in particular environment make available biochemical and microbial markers
for study about how beneficial microbes are recruited and stimulated by plants in
rhizosphere. The association present between crops and rhizospheric microbes has
catalyzed the view of plants as a holobiont. For the management of rhizosphere, all
the present components can be manipulated to favor the plant growth and produc￾tivity. Global climate change has one of the impacts on structure and function of
various microbial species in the rhizosphere microbiome. To decrypt the extent of
the effect of climate change on rhizosphere is still in need to be explored.
Acknowledgments D.K. acknowledges Institution of Eminence Seed Grant [Dev. No. 6031 (B)],
Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, India, for providing the financial support to the laboratory.
D.K. also acknowledges the Centre of Advanced Study in Botany, Institute of Science, Banaras
Hindu University, Varanasi, India, for providing necessary facilities and infrastructural support.
References
Agarwal P, Giri BS, Rani R (2020) Unravelling the role of rhizospheric plant-microbe synergy in
phytoremediation: a genomic perspective. Curr Genomics 21:334–342
Alqarawi AA, Hashem A, Kumar A, Al-Arjani ABF, Abd Allah EF, Dar BA, Wirth S, Davranov K,
Egamberdieva D (2018) Allelopathic effects of the aqueous extract of Rhazya stricta on growth
and metabolism of Salsola villosa. Plant Biosyst 152:1263–1273
Angiuoli SV, Matalka M, Gussman A, Galens K, Vangala M, Riley DR, Arze C, White JR,
White O, Fricke WF (2011) CloVR: a virtual machine for automated and portable sequence
analysis from the desktop using cloud computing. BMC Bioinformatics 12(1):1–5
Arkhipova TN, Veselov SU, Melentiev AI, Martynenko EV, Kudoyarova GR (2005) Ability of
bacterium Bacillus subtilis to produce cytokinin and to influence the growth and endogenous
hormone content of lettuce plants. Plant Soil 272:201–2092 Unearthing the Modern Trends and Concepts of Rhizosphere Microbiome... 47
Arshad M, Hussain A, Javed M, Frankenberger WT (1993) Effect of soil applied L-methionine on
growth, nodulation and chemical composition of Albizia lebbeck L. Plant Soil 148:129–135
Arzanesh MH, Alikhani HA, Khavazi K, Rahimian HA, Miransari M (2011) Wheat (Triticum
aestivum L.) growth enhancement by Azospirillum sp. under drought stress. World J Microbiol
Biotechnol 27:197–205
Asiegbu FO, Nahalkova J, Li G (2005) Pathogen-inducible cDNAs from the interaction of the root
rot fungus Heterobasidion annosum with Scots pine (Pinus sylvestris L). Plant Sci 168:365–372
Bais HP, Weir TL, Perry LG, Gilroy S, Vivanco JM (2006) The role of root exudates in rhizosphere
interactions with plants and other organisms. Annu Rev Plant Biol 57:233–266
Barcellos FG, Batista JSS, Menna P et al (2009) Genetic differences between Bradyrhizobium
japonicum variant strains contrasting in N2-fixation efficiency revealed by representational
difference analysis. Arch Microbiol 191:113–122
Barea JM, Pozo MJ, Azcon R, Aguilar CA (2005) Microbial co-operation in the rhizosphere. J Exp
Bot 56:1761–1778
Bell TH, Hassan SE, Lauron-Moreau A, Al-Otaibi F, Hijri M, Yergeau E, St-Arnaud M (2014)
Linkage between bacterial and fungal rhizosphere communities in hydrocarbon-contaminated
soils is related to plant phylogeny. ISME J 8:331–343
Bell CW, Asao S, Calderon F, Wolk B, Wallenstein MD (2015) Plant nitrogen uptake drives
rhizosphere bacterial community assembly during plant growth. Soil Biol Biochem 85:170–182
Berendsen RL, Pieterse CM, Bakker PA (2012) The rhizosphere microbiome and plant health.
Trends Plant Sci 17:478–486
Berg G, Rybakova D, Grube M, Koberl M (2016) The plant microbiome explored: implications for
experimental botany. J Exp Bot 67:995–1002
Berlanas C, Berbegal M, Elena G, Laidani M, Cibriain JF, Sagües A, Gramaje D (2019) The fungal
and bacterial rhizosphere microbiome associated with grapevine rootstock genotypes in mature
and young vineyards. Front Microbiol 10:1142
Bisht DS, Bhatia V, Bhattacharya R (2019) Improving plant-resistance to insect-pests and patho￾gens: the new opportunities through targeted genome editing. Semin Cell Dev Biol 96:65–76
Bordenstein SR, Theis KR (2015) Host biology in light of the microbiome: ten principles of
Holobionts and Hologenomes. PLoS Biol 13:e1002226
Borrelli VM, Brambilla V, Rogowsky P, Marocco A, Lanubile A (2018) The enhancement of plant
disease resistance using CRISPR/Cas9 technology. Front Plant Sci 9:1245
Bowen GD, Rovira AD (1999) The rhizosphere and its management to improve plant growth. Adv
Agron 66:1–102
Brilli F, Pollastri S, Raio A, Baraldi R, Neri L, Bartolini P, Podda A, Loreto F, Maserti BE,
Balestrini R (2019) Root colonization by Pseudomonas chlororaphis primes tomato
(Lycopersicum esculentum) plants for enhanced tolerance to water stress. J Plant Physiol 232:
82–93
Brimecombe MJ, De Leij FAAM, Lynch JM (2001) Effect of introduced Pseudomonas fluorescens
strains on soil nematode and protozoan populations in the rhizosphere of wheat and pea. Microb
Ecol 38:387–397
Bulgarelli D, Garrido-Oter R, Münch PC, Weiman A, Dröge J, Pan Y, McHardy AC, Schulze￾Lefert P (2015) Structure and function of the bacterial root microbiota in wild and domesticated
barley. Cell Host Microbe 17:392–403
Cai Y, Chen L, Liu X, Sun S, Wu C, Jiang B, Han T, Hou W (2015) CRISPR/CAS9-mediated
genome editing in soybean hairy roots. PLoS One 10(8):e0136064
Canarini A, Kaiser C, Merchant A, Richter A, Wanek W (2019) Root exudation of primary
metabolites: mechanisms and their roles in plant responses to environmental stimuli. Front
Plant Sci 10:157
Caporaso JG, Kuczynski J, Stombaugh J, Bittinger K, Bushman FD, Costello EK, Fierer N, Peña
AG, Goodrich JK, Gordon JI, Huttley GA, Kelley ST, Knights D, Koenig JE, Ley RE, Chaparro
JM, Badri DV, Vivanco JM (2014) Rhizosphere microbiome assemblage is affected by plant
development. ISME J 8:790–80348 H. Gupta et al.
Carvalhais LC, Dennis PG, Badri DV, Kidd BN, Vivanco JM, Schenk PM (2015) Linking jasmonic
acid signaling, root exudates, and rhizosphere microbiomes. Mol Plant-Microbe Interact 28:
1049–1058
Castrillo G, Teixeira PJ, Paredes SH, Law TF, de Lorenzo L, Feltcher ME, Finkel OM, Breakfield
NW, Mieczkowski P, Jones CD, Paz-Ares J (2017) Root microbiota drive direct integration of
phosphate stress and immunity. Nature 543:513–518
Chaparro JM, Badri DV, Vivanco JM (2014) Rhizosphere microbiome assemblage is affected by
plant development. ISME J 8:790–803
Chen S, Li X, Lavoie M, Jin Y, Xu J, Fu Z, Qian H (2017) Diclofop-methyl affects microbial
rhizosphere community and induces systemic acquired resistance in rice. J Environ Sci 51:352–
360
Cook RJ, Thomashow LS, Weller DM, Fujimoto D, Mazzola M, Bangera G, Kim DS (1995)
Molecular mechanisms of defense by rhizobacteria against root disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S
A 92:4197
Dennis PG, Miller AJ, Hirsch PR (2010) Are root exudates more important than other sources of
rhizodeposits in structuring rhizosphere bacterial communities? FEMS Microbiol Ecol 72:313–
327
Dessaux Y, Petit A, Farrand SK, Murphy PJ (1998) Opines and opine-like molecules involved in
plant-Rhizobiaceae interactions. In: The rhizobiaceae. Springer, Dordrecht, pp 173–197
Dinkelaker B, Hengeler C, Marschner HJBA (1995) Distribution and function of proteoid roots and
other root clusters. Bot Acta 108:183–200
Dommergues YR (1978) The plant–microorganism system. In: Developments in agricultural and
managed forest ecology, vol 4. Elsevier, pp 1–37
Dong H, Zhang D (2014) Current development in genetic engineering strategies of Bacillus species.
Microb Cell Factories 13:1–11
Doornbos RF, Van Loon LC, Bakker PA (2012) Impact of root exudates and plant defense signaling
on bacterial communities in the rhizosphere: a review. Agron Sustain Dev 32:227–243
Egamberdiyeva D, Kamiliva F, Validov S, Gafurova L, Kucharova Z, Lugentenberg B (2008) High
incidence of plant growth stimulating bacteria associated with the rhizosphere of wheat grown in
salinated soil in Uzbekistan. Environ Microbiol 10:1–9
Eoh J, Gu L (2019) Biomaterials as vectors for the delivery of CRISPR–Cas9. Biomater Sci 7(4):
1240–1261
Fang Y, Tyler BM (2016) Efficient disruption and replacement of an effector gene in the oomycete
Phytophthora sojae using CRISPR/Cas9. Mol Plant Pathol 17:127–139
Foster KR, Bell T (2012) Competition, not cooperation, dominates interactions among culturable
microbial species. Curr Biol 22:1845–1850
Frederix M, Downie JA (2011) Quorum sensing: regulating the regulators. Adv Microb Physiol 58:
23–80
French S, Coutts BE, Brown ED (2018) Open-source high-throughput phenomics of bacterial
promoter-reporter strains. Cell Syst 7:339–346
Gaiero JR, McCall CA, Thompson KA, Day NJ, Best AS, Dunfield KE (2013) Inside the root
microbiome: bacterial root endophytes and plant growth promotion. Am J Bot 100:1738–1750
Gargallo-Garriga A, Preece C, Sardans J, Oravec M, Urban O, Peñuelas J (2018) Root exudate
metabolomes change under drought and show limited capacity for recovery. Sci Rep 8(1):1–15
Gerlach W, Stoye J (2011) Taxonomic classification of metagenomic shotgun sequences with
CARMA3. Nucleic Acids Res 39:e91
Gerlach W, Jünemann S, Tille F, Goesmann A, Stoye J (2009) Web CARMA: a web application for
the functional and taxonomic classification of unassembled metagenomic reads. BMC Bioin￾formatics 10:430
Giri B, Prasad R, Varma A (2018) Root biology. Springer International Publishing. ISBN 978-3-
319-75910-4. https://www.springer.com/us/book/97833197590982 Unearthing the Modern Trends and Concepts of Rhizosphere Microbiome... 49
Giri B, Prasad R, Wu Q-S, Varma A (2019) Biofertilizers for sustainable agriculture and environ￾ment. Springer International Publishing. ISBN 978-3-030-18932-7. https://www.springer.com/
gp/book/9783030189327
Goel R, Kumar V, Suyal DC, Soni R (2018) Toward the unculturable microbes for sustainable
agricultural production. In: Meena VS, Mishra PK, Bisht JK, Pattanayak A (eds) Role of
rhizospheric microbes in soil. Springer, Singapore, pp 107–123
Grosskopf T, Soyer OS (2014) Synthetic microbial communities. Curropin Microbiol 18:72–77
Gupta A, Raina M, Kumar D (2022) Endophytic microorganisms: utilization as a tool in present and
future challenges in agriculture. In: Radhakrishnan EK, Kumar A, Aswani R (eds) Biocontrol
mechanisms of endophytic microorganisms. Academic, New York, pp 285–301. ISBN: 978-0-
323-88478-5.
Haldar S, Sengupta S (2015) Impact of plant development on the rhizobacterial population of
Arachis hypogaea: a multifactorial analysis. J Basic Microbiol 55:922–928
Hartmann A (2020) Quorum sensing N-acyl-homoserine lactone signal molecules of plant benefi￾cial gram-negative rhizobacteria support plant growth and resistance to pathogens. Rhizosphere
16:100258
Hawes MC, Gunawardena U, Miyasaka S, Zhao X (2000) The role of root border cells in plant
defense. Trends Plant Sci 5:128–133
Hettich RL, Pan C, Chourey K, Giannone RJ (2013) Metaproteomics: harnessing the power of
highperformance mass spectrometry to identify the suite of proteins that control metabolic
activities in microbial communities. Anal Chem 85:4203–4214
Hinsinger P, Plassard C, Tang C, Jaillard B (2003) Origins of root-mediated pH changes in the
rhizosphere and their responses to environmental constraints: a review. Plant Soil 248:43–59
Houle D, Govindaraju DR, Omholt S (2010) Phenomics: the next challenge. Nat Rev Genet 11:
855–866
Htwe AZ, Moh SM, Moe K, Yamakawa T (2018) Effects of co-inoculation of Bradyrhizobium
japonicum SAY3-7 and Streptomyces griseoflavus P4 on plant growth, nodulation, nitrogen
fixation, nutrient uptake, and yield of soybean in a field condition. Soil Sci Plant Nutr 64:222–
229
Huang XF, Chaparro JM, Reardon KF, Zhang R, Shen Q, Vivanco JM (2014) Rhizosphere
interactions: root exudates, microbes, and microbial communities. Botany 92:267–275
Hubbard CJ, Brock MT, van Diepen LT, Maignien L, Ewers BE, Weinig C (2018) The plant
circadian clock influences rhizosphere community structure and function. ISME J 12:400–410
Huson DH, Weber N (2013) Microbial community analysis using MEGAN. Methods Enzymol
531:465–485
Jones DL, Nguyen C, Finlay RD (2009) Carbon flow in the rhizosphere: carbon trading at the soil–
root interface. Plant Soil 321:5–33
Joshi D, Kumar S, Suyal DC, Goel R (2017) The microbiome of the Himalayan ecosystem. In:
Mining of microbial wealth and metagenomics. Springer, New York, pp 101–116
Kaushal M, Prasad R (2021) Microbial biotechnology in crop protection. Springer, Singapore.
ISBN: 978-981-16-0049-4. https://www.springer.com/gp/book/9789811600487
Kim SB, Timmusk S (2013) A simplified method for gene knockout and direct screening of
recombinant clones for application in Paenibacilluspolymyxa. PLoS One 8:e68092
Knief C, Delmotte N, Chaffron S, Stark M, Innerebner G, Wassmann R, von Mering C, Vorholt JA
(2012) Metaproteogenomic analysis of microbial communities in the phyllosphere and rhizo￾sphere of rice. ISME J 6:1378–1390
Köberl M, Ramadan EM, Adam M, Cardinale M, Hallmann J, Heuer H, Smalla K, Berg G (2013)
Bacillus and Streptomyces were selected as broad-spectrum antagonists against soilborne
pathogens from arid areas in Egypt. FEMS Microbiol Lett 342:168–178
Köberl M, White RA III, Erschen S, El-Arabi TF, Jansson JK, Berg G (2015) Draft genome
sequence of Streptomyces sp. strain Wb2n-11, a desert isolate with broad-spectrum antagonism
against soilborne phytopathogens. Genome Announc 3:e00860–e0081550 H. Gupta et al.
Korir H, Mungai NW, Thuita M, Hamba Y, Masso C (2017) Co-inoculation effect of rhizobia and
plant growth promoting rhizobacteria on common bean growth in a low phosphorus soil. Front
Plant Sci 8:141
Koyama H, Kawamura A, Kihara T, Hara T, Takita E, Shibata D (2000) Overexpression of
mitochondrial citrate synthase in Arabidopsis thaliana improved growth on a phosphorus￾limited soil. Plant Cell Physiol 41:1030–1037
Kremer RJ, Means NE (2009) Glyphosate and glyphosate-resistant crop interactions with rhizo￾sphere microorganisms. Eur J Agron 31:153–161
Kumar A, Dubey A (2020) Rhizosphere microbiome: engineering bacterial competitiveness for
enhancing crop production. J Adv Res 24:337–352
Kumar R, Eipers P, Little RB, Crowley M, Crossman DK, Lefkowitz EJ, Morrow CD (2014)
Getting started with microbiome analysis: sample acquisition to bioinformatics. Curr Protoc
Hum Genet 82(1):18–18
Kumar J, Sharma N, Kaushal G, Samurailatpam S, Sahoo D, Rai AK, Singh SP (2019)
Metagenomic insights into the taxonomic and functional features of kinema, a traditional
fermented soybean product of Sikkim Himalaya. Front Microbiol 1744
Kumar A, Chandra D, Sharma AK (2021) Impact of seed applied Rhizobacterial inoculants on
growth of wheat (Triticum aestivum) and cowpea (Vigna unguiculata) and their influence on
Rhizospheric microbial diversity. Agric Res 11:1–14
Kushwaha RK, Rodrigues V, Kumar V, Patel H, Raina M, Kumar D (2020) Soil microbes￾medicinal plants interactions: ecological diversity and future prospect. In: Varma A,
Tripathi S, Prasad R (eds) Plant microbe symbiosis. Springer, Cham, pp 263–286
Lagos L, Maruyama F, Nannipieri P, Mora ML, Ogram A, Jorquera MA (2015) Current overview
on the study of bacteria in the rhizosphere by modern molecular techniques: a mini–review. J
Soil Sci Plant Nutr 15:504–523
Lebeis SL, Paredes SH, Lundberg DS, Breakfield N, Gehring J, McDonald M, Malfatti S, Del Rio
TG, Jones CD, Tringe SG, Dangl JL (2015) Salicylic acid modulates colonization of the root
microbiome by specific bacterial taxa. Science 349:860–864
LeBlanc N, Kinkel LL, Kistler HC (2015) Soil fungal communities respond to grassland plant
community richness and soil edaphics. Microb Ecol 70:188–195
Levy A, Conway JM, Dangl JL, Woyke T (2018) Elucidating bacterial gene functions in the plant
microbiome. Cell Host Microbe 24:475–485
Lin W, Wu L, Lin S et al (2013) Metaproteomic analysis of ratoon sugarcane rhizospheric soil.
BMC Microbiol 13:135
Lundberg DS, Lebeis SL, Paredes SH, Yourstone S, Gehring J, Malfatti S et al (2012) Defining the
core Arabidopsis thaliana root microbiome. Nature 488:86–90
Lynch JM (1990) Soil biotechnology: beneficial interactions between microorganisms and roots.
Biotechnol Adv 8:335–346
Markowitz VM, Korzeniewski F, Palaniappan K, Szeto E, Werner G, Padki A, Zhao X, Dubchak I,
Hugenholtz P, Anderson I et al (2006) The integrated microbial genomes (IMG) system. Nucleic
Acids Res 34:D344–D348
Martínez MA, Soto-Del Río Mde L, Gutiérrez RM et al (2015) DNA microarray for detection of
gastrointestinal viruses. J Clin Microbiol 53:136–145
Massalha H, Korenblum E, Tholl D, Aharoni A (2017) Small molecules below-ground: the role of
specialized metabolites in the rhizosphere. Plant J 90:788–807
Medema MH, Blin K, Cimermancic P, De Jager V, Zakrzewski P, Fischbach MA, Weber T,
Takano E, Breitling R (2011) Anti SMASH: rapid identification, annotation and analysis of
secondary metabolite biosynthesis gene clusters in bacterial and fungal genome sequences.
Nucleic Acids Res 39:W339–W346
Mendes R, Kruijt M, de Bruijn I, Dekker E, der Voort V, Schneider M (2011) Deciphering the
rhizosphere microbiome for disease-suppressive bacteria. Science 332:1097–11002 Unearthing the Modern Trends and Concepts of Rhizosphere Microbiome... 51
Mendes R, Garbeva P, Raaijmakers JM (2013) The rhizosphere microbiome: significance of plant
beneficial, plant pathogenic, and human pathogenic microorganisms. FEMS Microbiol Rev 37:
634–663
Mendes LW, Raaijmakers JM, De Hollander M, Mendes R, Tsai SM (2018) Influence of resistance
breeding in common bean on rhizosphere microbiome composition and function. ISME J 12:
212–224
Metzker ML (2010) Sequencing technologies—the next generation. Nat Rev Genet 11:31–46
Mhlongo MI, Piater LA, Madala NE, Labuschagne N, Dubery IA (2018) The chemistry of plant–
microbe interactions in the rhizosphere and the potential for metabolomics to reveal signaling
related to defense priming and induced systemic resistance. Front Plant Sci 9:112
Mohanram S, Kumar P (2019) Rhizosphere microbiome: revisiting the synergy of plant-microbe
interactions. Ann Microbiol 69:307–320
Mönchgesang S, Strehmel N, Schmidt S, Westphal L, Taruttis F, Müller E, Herklotz S, Neumann S,
Scheel D (2016) Natural variation of root exudates in Arabidopsis thaliana linking metabolomic
and genomic data. Sci Rep 6:1–1
Mullis KB (1990) The unusual origin of the polymerase chain reaction. Sci Am 262(4):56–65
Nannipieri P, Badalucco L (2003) Biological processes. In: Bembi DK, Nieder R (eds) Handbook
of processes in the soil–plant system: modelling concepts and applications. The Haworth Press,
Binghamton, NY, pp 57–76
Nath M, Bhatt D, Prasad R, Tuteja N (2017) Reactive oxygen species (ROS) metabolism and
signaling in plant-mycorrhizal association under biotic and abiotic stress conditions. In: Varma
A, Prasad R, Tuteja N (eds) Mycorrhiza. Springer International Publishing AG, pp 223–232
Neal JL, Larson RI, Atkinson TG (1973) Changes in rhizosphere populations of selected physio￾logical groups of bacteria related to substitution of specific pairs of chromosomes in spring
wheat. Plant Soil 39:209–212
Newton JA, Fray RG (2004) Integration of environmental and host-derived signals with quorum
sensing during plant–microbe interactions. Cell Microbiol 6:213–224
O’Donnell ST, Ross RP, Stanton C (2020) The progress of multi-omics technologies: determining
function in lactic acid bacteria using a systems level approach. Front Microbiol 10:3084
Ofek-Lalzar M, Sela N, Goldman-Voronov M, Green SJ, Hadar Y, Minz D (2014) Niche and host￾associated functional signatures of the root surface microbiome. Nat Commun 5:1–9
Patel U, Sinha S (2011) Rhizobia species: a boon for “plant genetic engineering”. Indian J
Microbiol 51:521–527
Paungfoo-Lonhienne C, Yeoh YK, Kasinadhuni NR, Lonhienne TG, Robinson N, Hugenholtz P,
Ragan MA, Schmidt S (2015) Nitrogen fertilizer dose alters fungal communities in sugarcane
soil and rhizosphere. Sci Rep 5:1–6
Pinton R, Varanini Z, Nannipieri P (2007) The rhizosphere: biochemistry and organic substances at
the soil-plant interface. CRC Press, West Palm Beach, FL
Ploetze FA, Bertin PN, Carapito C (2015) Proteomic tools to decipher microbial community
structure and functioning. Environ Sci Pollut Res 22:13566–13612
Pond SK, Wadhawan S, Chiaromonte F, Ananda G, Chung WY, Taylor J, Nekrutenko A, Team G
(2009) Windshield splatter analysis with the Galaxy metagenomic pipeline. Genome Res 19
(11):2144–2153
Prabhukarthikeyan SR, Yadav MK, Anandan A, Aravindan S, Keerthana U, Raghu S, Baite MS,
Parameswaran C, Panneerselvam P, Rath PC (2019) Bio-protection of brown spot disease of rice
and insight into the molecular basis of interaction between Oryza sativa, Bipolaris oryzae and
Bacillus amyloliquefaciens. Biol Control 137:104018
Prasad R, Kumar M, Varma A (2015) Role of PGPR in soil fertility and plant health. In:
Egamberdieva D, Shrivastava S, Varma A (eds) Plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria
(PGPR) and medicinal plants. Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp 247–260
Quiza L, St-Arnaud M, Yergeau E (2015) Harnessing phytomicrobiome signaling for rhizosphere
microbiome engineering. Front Plant Sci 6:507
Raaijmakers JM, Paulitz TC, Steinberg C, Alabouvette C, Moenne-Loccoz Y (2009) The rhizo￾sphere: a playground and battlefield for soilborne pathogens and beneficial microorganisms.
Plant Soil 321:341–36152 H. Gupta et al.
Ramachandran VK, East AK, Karunakaran R, Downie JA, Poole PS (2011) Adaptation of Rhizo￾bium leguminosarum to pea, alfalfa and sugar beet rhizospheres investigated by comparative
transcriptomics. Genome Biol 12:R106
Ramesh R, Ghanekar A, Joshi M (2009) Pseudomonads: major antagonistic endophytes to suppress
bacterial wilt pathogen, Ralstonia solanacearum in eggplant (Solanum melanogena L.). World J
Microbiol Biotechnol 25:47–55
Rasmann S, Turlings TC (2016) Root signals that mediate mutualistic interactions in the rhizo￾sphere. Curr Opin Plant Biol 32:62–68
Rawat M, Rangarajan S (2019) Omics approaches for elucidating molecular mechanisms of
microbial bioremediation. In: Smart bioremediation technologies. Academic, New York, pp
191–203
Richardson AE, Hadobas PA, Hayes JE (2001) Extracellular secretion of Aspergillus phytase from
Arabidopsis roots enables plants to obtain phosphorus from phytate. Plant J 25:641–649
Rivero J, Gamir J, Aroca R, Pozo MJ, Flors V (2015) Metabolic transition in mycorrhizal tomato
roots. Front Microbiol 6:598
Rothballer M, Uhl J, Kunze J, Schmitt-Kopplin P, Hartmann A (2018) Detection of the bacterial
quorum-sensing signaling molecules N-acyl-homoserine lactones (HSL) and N-acyl￾homoserine (HS) with an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and via ultrahigh￾performance liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry (UHPLC-MS). Methods Mol
Biol 1673:61–72
Rubin RL, van Groenigen KJ, Hungate BA (2017) Plant growth promoting rhizobacteria are more
effective under drought: a meta-analysis. Plant Soil 416:309–323
Ryan PR, Dessaux Y, Thomashow LS, Weller DM (2009) Rhizosphere engineering and manage￾ment for sustainable agriculture. Plant Soil 321:363–383
Sarma H, Forid N, Prasad R, Prasad MNV, Ma LQ, Rinklebe J (2021) Enhancing phytoremediation
of hazardous metal(loid)s using genome engineering CRISPR–Cas9 technology. J Hazard
Mater. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2021.125493
Savka MA, Dessaux Y, Oger P, Rossbach S (2002) Engineering bacterial competitiveness and
persistence in the phytosphere. Mol Plant-Microbe Interact 15:866–874
Schlemper TR, Leite MF, Lucheta AR, Shimels M, Bouwmeester HJ, van Veen JA, Kuramae EE
(2017) Rhizobacterial community structure differences among Sorghum cultivars in different
growth stages and soils. FEMS Microbiol Ecol 93
Schulz-Bohm K, Gerards S, Hundscheid M, Melenhorst J, de Boer W, Garbeva P (2018) Calling
from distance: attraction of soil bacteria by plant root volatiles. ISME J 12:1252–1262
Sedeek KEM, Mahas A, Mahfouz M (2019) Plant genome engineering for targeted improvement of
crop traits. Front Plant Sci 10:114
Seshadri R, Kravitz SA, Smarr L, Gilna P, Frazier M (2007) CAMERA: a community resource for
metagenomics. PLoS Biol 5:e75
Sharma A, Singh A, Raina M, Kumar D (2021) Plant-fungal association: an ideal contrivance for
combating plant stress tolerance. In: Prasad R, Nayak SC, Kharwar RN, Dubey NK (eds)
Mycoremediation and environmental sustainability. Springer Nature, Cham. https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-3-030-54422-5_13
Sharma A, Raina M, Kumar D, Singh A, Chugh S, Jain S, Kumar M, Rustagi A (2022) Harnessing
phytomicrobiome signals for phytopathogenic stress management. J Biosci 47:6
Shrivastava S, Prasad R, Varma A (2014) Anatomy of root from eyes of a microbiologist. In: Morte
A, Varma A (eds) Root engineering, vol 40. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pp 3–22
Singh RP, Kothari R, Koringa PG, Singh SP (2017) Plant-pathogen interactions: a proteomic
approach. In: Kaur A, Kumar A, Reddy S (eds) Understanding host-microbiome interac￾tions—an omics approach. Springer, New York, pp 207–226
Soni R, Goel R (2011) nif-H homologs from soil metagenome. Ekologija 57:87–95
Soni P, Nutan KK, Soda N, Nongpiur RC, Roy S, Singla-Pareek SL, Pareek A (2015) Towards
understanding abiotic stress signaling in plants: convergence of genomic, transcriptomic,2 Unearthing the Modern Trends and Concepts of Rhizosphere Microbiome... 53
proteomic, and metabolomic approaches. In: Elucidation of abiotic stress signaling in plants.
Springer, pp 3–40
Soni R, Kumar V, Suyal DC, Jain L, Goel R (2017) Metagenomics of plant rhizosphere
microbiome. In: Understanding host-microbiome interactions—an omics approach. Springer,
pp 193–205
Sorensen J (1997) The rhizosphere as a habitat for soil microorganisms. In: Elsas JDV, Trevors JT,
EMH W (eds) Modern microbiology. Marcel Dekker, New York, pp 21–45
Sugiyama A, Ueda Y, Zushi T, Takase H, Yazaki K (2014) Changes in the bacterial community of
soybean rhizospheres during growth in the field. PLoS One 9:e100709
Sun J, Zhang Q, Zhou J, Wei Q (2014) Illumina amplicon sequencing of 16S rRNA tag reveals
bacterial community development in the rhizosphere of apple nurseries at a replant disease site
and a new planting site. PLoS One 9:e111744
Sun J, Wang Q, Jiang Y et al (2018) Genome editing and transcriptional repression in pseudomonas
putida KT2440 via the type II CRISPR system. Microb Cell Factories 17:41
Suyal DC, Joshi D, Debbarma P, Soni R, Das B, Goel R (2019) Soil metagenomics: unculturable
microbial diversity and its function. In: Mycorrhizosphere and Pedogenesis. Springer,
New York, pp 355–362
Taghavi S, Barac T, Greenberg B, Borremans B, Vangronsveld J, van der Lelie D (2005) Horizontal
gene transfer to endogenous endophytic bacteria from poplar improves phytoremediation of
toluene. Appl Environ Microbiol 71:8500–8505
Theis KR, Dheilly NM, Klassen JL, Brucker RM, Baines JF, Bosch TC, Cryan JF, Gilbert SF,
Goodnight CJ, Lloyd EA, Sapp J (2016) Getting the hologenome concept right: an
eco-evolutionary framework for hosts and their microbiomes. Msystems 1:e00028–e00016
Tournas VH, Katsoudas E (2005) Mould and yeast flora in fresh berries, grapes and citrus fruits. Int
J Food Microbiol 105:11–17
Urich T, Lanzén A, Qi J, Huson DH, Schleper C, Schuster SC (2008) Simultaneous assessment of
soil microbial community structure and function through analysis of the meta-transcriptome.
PLoS One 3:e2527
Valverde A, De Maayer P, Oberholster T, Henschel J, Louw MK, Cowan D (2016) Specific
microbial communities associate with the rhizosphere of Welwitschia mirabilis, a living fossil.
PLoS One 11:e0153353
van Dam NM, Bouwmeester HJ (2016) Metabolomics in the rhizosphere: tapping into belowground
chemical communication. Trends Plant Sci 21:256–265
Vance CP, Uhde-Stone C, Allan DL (2003) Phosphorus acquisition and use: critical adaptations by
plants for securing a nonrenewable resource. New Phytol 157:423–447
Vermeer J, McCully ME (1982) The rhizosphere in Zea: new insight into its structure and
development. Planta 156:45–61
Vicré M, Santaella C, Blanchet S, Gateau A, Driouich A (2005) Root border-like cells of
Arabidopsis. Microscopical characterization and role in the interaction with rhizobacteria.
Plant Physiol 138:998–1008
Walters WA, Jin Z, Youngblut N, Wallace JG, Sutter J, Zhang W, González-Peña A, Peiffer J,
Koren O, Shi Q, Knight R (2018) Large-scale replicated field study of maize rhizosphere
identifies heritable microbes. PNAS 115:7368–7373
Wang HB, Zhang ZX, Li H et al (2011) Characterization of meta-proteomics in crop rhizospheric
soil. J Proteome Res 10:932–940
Wang DZ, Xie ZX, Zhang SF (2014) Marine meta-proteomics: current status and future directions.
J Proteome 97:27–35
Wang F, Wang C, Liu P, Lei C, Hao W, Gao Y, Liu YG, Zhao K (2016) Enhanced Rice blast
resistance by CRISPR/Cas9-targeted mutagenesis of the ERF transcription factor gene
OsERF922. PLoS One 11(4):e0154027
Wang D, Li F, Cao S, Zhang K (2020) Genomic and functional genomics analyses of gluten
proteins and prospect for simultaneous improvement of end-use and health-related traits in
wheat. Theor Appl Genet 133(5):1521–153954 H. Gupta et al.
Weyens N, van der Lelie D, Taghavi S, Vangronsveld J (2009) Phytoremediation: plant–endophyte
partnerships take the challenge. Curr Opin Biotechnol 20:248–254
Wilke A, Wilkening J, Glass EM, Desai NL, Meyer F (2011) An experience report: porting the
MG-RAST rapid metagenomics analysis pipeline to the cloud. Concurr Comput Pract Exp 23:
2250–2257
Xu J, Zhang Y, Zhang P, Trivedi P, Riera N, Wang Y, Liu X, Fan G, Tang J, Coletta-Filho HD,
Cubero J (2018) The structure and function of the global citrus rhizosphere microbiome. Nat
Commun 9:4894
Yuan J, Zhao J, Wen T, Zhao M, Li R, Goossens P, Huang Q, Bai Y, Vivanco JM, Kowalchuk GA,
Berendsen RL (2018) Root exudates drive the soil-borne legacy of aboveground pathogen
infection. Microbiome 6:1–2
Zaheer A, Mirza BS, Mclean JE, Yasmin S, Shah TM, Malik KA, Mirza MS (2016) Association of
plant growth-promoting Serratia spp. with the root nodules of chickpea. Res Microbiol 167:
510–520
Zhalnina K, Louie KB, Hao Z, Mansoori N, da Rocha UN, Shi S, Cho H, Karaoz U, Loqué D,
Bowen BP et al (2018) Dynamic root exudates chemistry and microbial substrate preferences
drive patterns in rhizosphere microbial community assembly. Nat Microbiol 3:470–480
Zhang A, Sun H, Wang P, Han Y, Wang X (2012) Modern analytical techniques in metabolomics
analysis. Analyst 137(2):293–300
Zhang N, Wang D, Liu Y, Li S, Shen Q, Zhang R (2014) Effects of different plant root exudates and
their organic acid components on chemotaxis, biofilm formation and colonization by beneficial
rhizosphere-associated bacterial strains. Plant Soil 374:689–700
Zhang X, Qian Y, Cao C (2015) Effects of straw mulching on maize photosynthetic characteristics
1378 and rhizosphere soil micro-ecological environment. Chil J Agric Res 75:481–48755
Chapter 3
The Role of the Root Microbiome
in the Utilization of Functional Traits
for Increasing Plant Productivity
Rahul Chandnani and Leon V. Kochian
Abstract It is now clear that the root microbiome, which consists of bacteria,
archaea, and fungi that colonize both the rhizosphere and the internal space of the
root, is one of the most complex ecosystems in nature and is very important for root
and plant health and function.
In this chapter we have focused on the role of the root microbiome functional
traits in improvement of nutrient acquisition and abiotic stress tolerance, with a focus
on drought stress, the biocontrol of root and shoot plant diseases, and the role of root￾associated microbes in both producing plant growth-promoting hormones and
impacting the plant hormone metabolism and signaling pathways to alter root
growth. Additionally, we have also endeavored to give the readers an introduction
into the rapid advances in this field, from the metagenomic analyses that now have
become relatively routine for the study of “what is there” in the root microbiome,
regarding microbial composition, diversity, and abundance, to nascent studies
beginning to study the plant and microbial molecular and physiological mechanisms
and processes that underlie how the microbiome is assembled, and how the
microbiome confers improved functional crop traits. Furthermore, given the incred￾ible complexity of this ecosystem, we discuss the recent research involving systems
biology analysis of the root microbiome, which will be critical in deciphering the
trait–function links and interactions between roots and soil microbes. Finally, we
also discuss the agricultural and genetic interventions that are being employed to
modify the root microbiome via inoculation of the seed and plant with potentially
beneficial soil microbes, as well as the studies looking at the role of plant genetic and
molecular variation in impacting the composition and function of the microbiome.
Rahul Chandnani and Leon V. Kochian contributed equally with all other contributors.
R. Chandnani (*) · L. V. Kochian (*)
Global Institute for Food Security, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK, Canada
e-mail: rahul.chandnani@gifs.ca; leon.kochian@gifs.ca
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2023
S. Chhabra et al. (eds.), Plant Microbiome for Plant Productivity and Sustainable
Agriculture, Microorganisms for Sustainability 37,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-19-5029-2_3Keywords Root microbiome · Rhizobacteria · Functional traits · Metagenomics ·
Plant growth
56 R. Chandnani and L. V. Kochian
3.1 Introduction
Diverse microbial communities are an integral part of plant and animal life. A root–
microbial ecosystem that consists of soil microbes that colonize and inhabit the soil
at the root surface, the rhizosphere, and live and function in the root, comprise what
plant biologists commonly refer to as the root microbiome.
The composition, diversity, and microbial species structure of the root
microbiome can be plant species-specific and contain both beneficial and harmful
microorganisms (Bressan et al. 2009; Lugtenberg and Kamilova 2009; Takeuchi
et al. 1996). Root microbiome composition is shaped by the host plant and, often to a
greater degree, the soil microflora, and many of the microorganisms in this biome are
beneficial for host plant and root health and function. Research findings have shown
that beneficial microbes in the root microbiome can increase the solubility and
uptake of soil macro- and micronutrients such as phosphorus, nitrogen, and iron
(Yadav et al. 2021).
Several soil-based abiotic stresses such as drought and salinity can impact the
composition of the root microbiome, resulting in microbiome shifts that may confer
increased tolerance to these stresses (Chen et al. 2017; Marasco et al. 2012; Vurukonda
et al. 2016; Giri et al. 2018). Beneficial microorganisms in the root microbiome can
also enhance plant growth and development by both synthesizing growth phytohor￾mones and altering plant hormone metabolism required for plant growth and thereby
increase root system growth and crop productivity (Arkhipova et al. 2005; Duca et al.
2018; Kudoyarova et al. 2014; Ping and Boland 2004; Prasad and Zhang 2022). On the
other hand, there are microbial species in the root microbiome that are harmful and can
negatively affect plant and human health such as disease-causing bacteria and fungi
(Takeuchi et al. 1996). A saying that “nothing is free” also stands true for root and soil
microbial interactions as plant roots and root exudates serve as a source of carbon and
sugars that are required for the survival, growth, and replication of the microorganisms
in the root microbiome (Bais et al. 2006; Foster 1986). Furthermore, specific root
exudates play roles as signaling molecules between the root and soil microbes,
influencing the microbial composition of the root microbiome. The root microbiome
is one of the largest and most complex biomes in nature and plays significant roles in
the maintenance and growth of plants.
The exponential growth of the human population and diminishing agricultural
lands and input resources (e.g., water, fertilizer) required for efficient agricultural
output, warrants novel and sustainable ways to achieve food security. Employment
of genetically narrow crop germplasm (seeds or tissue specific to a species, geno￾type, or population maintained for plant breeding purposes) and intensive selection
techniques in current breeding programs have enhanced the vulnerability to agricul￾tural pests and diseases (Hammons 1976). Significant recent advances in molecular-3 The Role of the Root Microbiome in the Utilization of Functional... 57
based plant breeding include tools such as genomic selection, which has been shown
to improve genetic gain via prediction of crop performance without phenotypic
analysis of novel germplasm. Further improvements to genomic selection is enabling
plant breeders to improve genetic gain while not losing genetic diversity (see, for
example, Daetwyler et al. 2015). However powerful these advances in plant breed￾ing are, they have yet to be intensively applied to the “hidden half” of the plant—the
root, and especially the root microbiome.
It is important now to focus on the role of the root microbiome in functional plant
traits to continue to improve crop resiliency and sustainability. For example, appli￾cation of inorganic fertilizers and pesticides has significantly improved crop yields
since the dawn of the Green Revolution. However, increasing pesticide and patho￾gen resistance, the increasing cost of fertilizers, and especially the finite availability
of phosphorous fertilizer, as well as environmental degradation due to leaching of a
significant portion of applied fertilizer into surface and ground waters, make these
approaches unsustainable in the future (Denholm et al. 1998; Savci 2012). To
address these complex problems, a systems approach integrating advances in preci￾sion fertilizer and water management with fundamental research innovations
resulting in more nutrient and water-efficient crop varieties is needed (Macintosh
et al. 2019). A critical component of the research aimed at improving crop nutrient
and water acquisition will be the investigations that enhance our understanding of
the development and function of the root microbiome. This will provide new
strategies for improving crop yields and agricultural sustainability through modifi￾cation of the root microbiome in part via use of biofertilizers that enhance the
availability and acquisition of essential mineral nutrients and also through
microbial-based biocontrol approaches to enhance disease and pest resistance.
It has been known for well over 100 years that certain root–microbe interactions,
specifically N2-fixing bacteria in legume root nodules as well as arbuscular mycor￾rhizae (AM), play key roles in root N and P acquisition from the soil (Beijerinck
1901; Frank 1885; Hellriegel and Wilfarth 1888). In recent years with the realization
that microbiomes associated with eukaryotic organisms play key roles in that
organism’s health, well-being, and function, research on the root microbiome is
clearly demonstrating that in addition to N2-fixing bacteria and AM, many other
free-living or more intimately root-associated bacteria and fungi play roles in
improving mineral nutrient availability in the rhizosphere and enhance biotic and
abiotic stress tolerance. One example of this is microbial-mediated solubilization in
the rhizosphere of sparingly soluble essential minerals such as P, Fe, and Zn
(Fabiańska et al. 2019; Gururani et al. 2013; Harbort et al. 2020; Hiruma et al.
2016; Weiß et al. 2016). However, the molecular basis and physiological mecha￾nisms underlying these improvements in plant function are still quite poorly under￾stood. To effect changes in the root microbiome as a strategy to improve crop
resiliency, improve yields using less inputs, and enhance agricultural sustainability,
it is of great importance to understand the genetic and functional (molecular and
physiological) mechanisms and regulation underlying the structure and function of
root microbiomes. Quite a few studies have been successful in the identification and
the use of plant growth-promoting bacteria from the soil and plant tissues to improve
crop production (Ji et al. 2014; Kloepper et al. 1980; Li et al. 2021).58 R. Chandnani and L. V. Kochian
Certainly, the most significant advance in microbiome research over the past
decade has been the metagenomic analysis of microbiomes involving isolation of
microbial genomic DNA from bulk soil, the rhizosphere, and the root endosphere,
followed by amplification of specific highly variable regions of bacterial and fungal
genomes (16S rRNA for bacteria and the internal transcribed spacer [ITS]) region for
fungi. For a review, see Sczyrba et al. 2017. Next-generation sequencing of these
amplified bacterial and fungal gDNA regions and subsequent computational analysis
of the sequence is used to identify microbial operational taxonomic units, microbial
structure, and diversity. Furthermore, these types of studies have made it possible to
begin to probe possible functions of the root microbiome community and to postu￾late about gene-function links that may be useful in identifying or designing specific
root-associated microbes or communities of microbes that can be used in crop
improvement (Chen et al. 2017; Naylor and Coleman-Derr 2018; Shulse et al.
2019; Xu et al. 2018, 2021). Comparatively recent advances in genome-resolved
metagenomic and holo-omics approaches are finally enabling the researchers to
identify the changes in host plant metabolomes and possibly important causal
interactions between the root and microbes that could enhance nutrient uptake,
microbial phytohormone production resulting in root growth promotion, and greater
tolerance to abiotic and biotic stresses (Xu et al. 2021). In this chapter, we focus on
possible advantages the microbiome could confer to the root systems in terms of
acquiring resources for better plant growth, improving resistance to pathogens, and
microbiome gene-functional links that have been and can be exploited further for
these purposes.
3.2 Overview of the Root Microbiome
Dynamic and diverse groups of root-associated microorganisms, which include
plant-beneficial microbes, are recruited by plant roots via signaling between the
root and soil microbes (Hartman and Tringe 2019), to comprise the extremely
complex microhabitat, that is, the root microbiome. This ecosystem can have
impacts on plant health, growth, and function via direct or indirect pathways. The
root microbiome consists of bacteria and archaea, algae, fungi, and protozoa, with
bacteria being the most abundant component. The root microbiome can be quite
diverse, and can consist of microbiota with as many as 33,000 different bacterial and
archaea species (Mendes et al. 2011). Despite this amazing diversity, it has been
reported that there are primarily two bacterial phyla, Actinobacteria and
Proteobacteria, that dominate the global soil microbiome and root microbiome, for
example, in disease suppressive soils (Delgado-Baquerizo et al. 2018; Mendes et al.
2011).
The root microbiome is actively recruited by plant roots and specific microbial
communities are certainly influenced by the unique chemical composition of root
exudates (Berendsen et al. 2012; Doornbos et al. 2012). Plants acquire the majority
of their nutrients and water from the roots and, in return, low-molecular-weight3 The Role of the Root Microbiome in the Utilization of Functional... 59
organic compounds such as organic acids, sugars, phenolics, and amino acids are
secreted as root exudates (Antoun 2013). Published research findings have shown
that there can be an enrichment, for example, of unique organic acids in the root
exudates in different plant species that can play an important role in shaping the root
microbiome (Cotton et al. 2019; Hu et al. 2018; Huang et al. 2019; Tan et al. 2013;
Wang et al. 2021). Kamilova et al. (2006) demonstrated that tomato root-tip-specific
colonizing microbes had better growth and enrichment than other rhizobial
microbes, when tomatoes were grown on minimal media with citrate, a major tomato
root-tip organic exudate, as the primary carbon source. Furthermore, by introducing
the stable carbon isotope, 13CO2, into the rhizosphere of wheat, maize, rape, and
barrel clover plants, it was shown that there were differences in the sources of carbon
released from roots and used by different groups of microbes in the rhizosphere
(el Zahar Haichar et al. 2008).
Root exudate metabolites often play a beneficial role by modifying the
rhizobiome, which in turn can alter plant hormonal content and function. For
example, Hu et al. (2018) identified the secondary metabolite, benzoxazinoids,
which is released by maize roots and can shape the rhizobiome community. In
turn, this can favor plant defenses by increasing the production of the plant defense
hormone, jasmonic acid, conferring protection against herbivores. Differences in the
genotype of a plant species, which can significantly impact the composition of root
exudates, are another factor that not surprisingly influences the microbial composi￾tion of the root microbiome. It has been reported that transgenic Arabidopsis
thaliana plants expressing the sorghum CYP79A1 gene, resulted in the accumulation
of high levels of a derivative of the sulfur secondary metabolite, glucosinolate,
p-hydroxybenzylglucosinolate. This transgenic line exhibited significant alterations
in the profile of the root exudation of glucosinolate compounds, which altered the
microbial composition of root microbiome. This study showed that even small
modifications in root metabolism can have significant effects on root exudates and
the microbial composition of the root microbiome (Bressan et al. 2009).
There is a specific nomenclature used to define the microbiome on versus inside
the root. Root microbes residing inside the root tissue are known as endophytes
whereas the rhizomicrobiome is defined as microbes inhabiting the rhizosphere, the
thin layer of soil intimately associated with the root surface (Bulgarelli et al. 2012;
Edwards et al. 2015; Lundberg et al. 2012; Schlaeppi et al. 2014). Bulgarelli et al.
(2012) demonstrated that the endosphere microbiome is distinct and does not have
the same variation in microbial composition as does the rhizosphere, which is
certainly more strongly influenced by the microbial composition of the bulk soil
surrounding the root. Later, it was shown that the microbes residing on the surface of
roots, sometimes termed the rhizoplane microbiome, are also distinct from the other
two root microbiomes (the endomicrobiome and the rhizomicrobiome; Edwards
et al. 2015).60 R. Chandnani and L. V. Kochian
3.3 Functional Traits to Enhance Plant Productivity
3.3.1 Biofertilizers that Impact Mineral Nutrient Availability
and Acquisition by Roots
3.3.1.1 Nitrogen Fixation
Nitrogen is one of the most important mineral nutrients required for plant growth and
can be a significant limiting factor to crop yields. Of course, nitrogen is essential for
synthesis of amino acids, proteins, and enzymes that are prerequisite for many plant
physiological processes (Novoa and Loomis 1981). Furthermore, nitrogen is the core
component of chlorophyll that is required for photosynthesis, which provides the
fixed carbon that underpins plant growth. Due to absence of large amounts of
bioavailable nitrogen in the soil, most agricultural crop production relies upon the
application of nitrogen fertilizers, usually as ammonia or urea. However, the
increasing costs of nitrogen fertilizers and the significant environmental costs asso￾ciated with the leaching of as much as 50–60% of N fertilizer before the plant roots
can absorb it, often lead to nitrate pollution of ground waters and pose a greater risk
to the environment (McCasland et al. 1985). Biological nitrogen fixation (BNF) is
the process by which N2 gas in the atmosphere is converted to NH3 by nitrogenase
enzyme activity in microbial diazotrophs, which are prokaryotes that have the ability
to fix N2 gas to ammonia (Kim and Rees 1994). BNF has the potential to be a
sustainable alternative to fulfill the nitrogen requirement of plants. However, only a
few species of plants have the ability to be colonized by nitrogen-fixing bacteria as
symbiotic microbes. There are two types of diazotrophs defined based on their
habitat: (1) symbiotic N2 fixers which live within root nodules of primarily legumi￾nous crop species, which include bacteria in the genera Rhizobium and Frankia; and
(2) non-nodular diazotrophic bacteria that can establish either associative or free￾living relationships with roots where the bacteria reside on or near the root surface
(epiphytes). Other species of non-nodular N2-fixing bacteria form endophytic rela￾tionships with a wide range of non-legumes, where the bacteria colonize inner plant
tissues and reside within root and even shoot tissues. These free-living diazotrophic
bacteria include species within the genera Azospirillum, Azoarcus, and
Herbaspirillum (Santi et al. 2013).
Most current root-nodulated crops obtain fixed nitrogen by the activity of a
molybdenum (Mo)-dependent nitrogenase complex (Boyd et al. 2011; Rubio and
Ludden 2008). It has been shown that only three genes—nifH, nifD, and nifK—are
required to encode the structural subunits of nitrogenase enzyme (Seefeldt et al.
2009; Yang et al. 2018). Mo-dependent nitrogenase (Nif) complexes are a
two-component enzyme system. The dinitrogenase reductase component is a
homodimeric iron (Fe) protein encoded by the NifH gene that donates electrons,
and a dinitrogenase or heterotetrameric Mo–Fe protein component encoded by
NifDK that contains the Fe–Mo cofactor that serves as the substrate reduction site,
accepting electrons from the Fe–S electron transfer protein, ferredoxin (Bulen and3 The Role of the Root Microbiome in the Utilization of Functional... 61
LeComte 1966). Apart from these two components, maturation of the nitrogenase
enzyme complex for its activity also involves some regulatory proteins encoded by
nifE, nifN, and nifB genes. Due to high similarity in 16S rRNA phylogeny and
conserved nature of nif sequences, this similarity has been quite useful in identifying
nitrogen-fixing bacteria from a soil sample. Quite a few studies have employed nifH
as a phylogenetic marker to identify bacterial strains that make functional contribu￾tions to N2 fixation (Boyd et al. 2011; Bürgmann et al. 2004; Coelho et al. 2009;
Seefeldt et al. 2009).
Our understanding of the mechanisms and regulation of nitrogenase N2 fixation
and the nature of how and why these diazotrophs form these symbiotic relationships
with the host plants open potential opportunities to enable non-leguminous crops to
benefit from BNF. As cereals are the most widely grown food crops and are the
source of the largest proportion of calories consumed by the human population, there
has been considerable engineering biology research investigating and developing the
tools to transfer nodule-based symbiotic nitrogen fixation to cereal crops (Burén
et al. 2017; Ryu et al. 2020). This approach has been taken in the Burén et al. (2017)
publication from the Voight Lab at MIT. The focus is to express the genes in the
bacterial nitrogenase-dependent nitrogen-fixing pathway genes in the mitochondria
or chloroplasts of eukaryotes, as these organelles have an ancient bacterial origin and
thus are better suited for expression of bacterial genes than the nucleus of plant cells.
In the Burén et al. (2017) publication, they have reengineered the 16 gene nitroge￾nase pathway from an N2-fixing bacterium to remove its native regulation and
replaced it with well-understood synthetic genetic parts. They have ultimately
been able to express an important and functional section of the bacterial N2-fixing
pathway in the mitochondria eukaryotic model system, Saccharomyces cerevisiae,
which is an important first step in generating a functional nitrogenase enzyme in
plant cells.
A second approach to enhancing crop N nutrition via N2-fixing soil microbes
involves research focusing on free-living N2-fixing bacteria. There are different
approaches that are being explored for this and one of them is to transfer nitrogen￾fixation ability from non-native diazotrophs to plant-host-colonizing rhizobacteria
by introducing genomic islands that can encode the nitrogenase activity into free￾living bacteria that readily colonize plant roots. Fox et al. (2016) demonstrated that
transfer of X940 genomic island from Pseudomonas A1501 to the aerobic root￾associated beneficial bacterium, Pseudomonas protegens Pf-5, followed by the
inoculation of maize and wheat plants with this genetically modified bacterium,
enabled the host plant’s root surface (rhizoplane) and rhizosphere to be colonized by
Pf-5, providing enough radiolabeled fixed nitrogen to the roots to confer higher grain
and biomass yields.
3.3.1.2 Phosphorus Bioavailability and Uptake
Phosphorus is the second most important mineral nutrient for the plant (after N), and
can be a major limiting factor in plant growth as P deficiency is important to a wide62 R. Chandnani and L. V. Kochian
range of plant processes, including cell division, root and shoot development,
biomass production, photosynthesis, and reproduction (Hu and Schmidhalter 2005;
López-Arredondo et al. 2014; Razaq et al. 2017). Even if soils are not deficient in
total P, inorganic phosphate, which is the primary inorganic form of P absorbed by
plant roots, will readily bind to the Fe and Al oxides/hydroxides on the surface of soil
clay minerals, rendering them unavailable for root P absorption (López-Arredondo
et al. 2014). Root P acquisition is relatively inefficient, and only approximately
20–25% of the applied P fertilizer is taken up by the plant during the first season after
fertilizer application (Roberts and Johnston 2015). Much of the remaining phosphate
fertilizer is either fixed to soil minerals, or is lost as runoff into surface waters,
resulting in environmental damage including algal blooms in lakes and streams,
which are costly to remediate.
The availability of inorganic phosphate to plant roots also is highly dependent on
soil pH (Marschner 1995). In acidic soils (pH < 5.5), as mentioned above, the
phosphate anion binds to aluminum and iron in clay minerals, whereas at higher soil
pH values, insoluble calcium phosphate is formed that cannot be absorbed by roots
(Hinsinger 2001). Currently, more than half of the arable lands worldwide consist of
either acidic or alkaline soil and are deficient in inorganic phosphate (López￾Arredondo et al. 2014). Soil microbes can solubilize the phosphate bound to Fe
and Al in the soil, as they can release organic acids such as citric and malic acids
which are strong chelators of Fe and Al, which then will release the bound phosphate
into the soil solution for absorption by plant roots. Phosphorus also accumulates in
soil in relatively unavailable organic forms, thus being tied up in soil organisms and
plant litter. For example, phytic acid or phytate, an organic storage form of P,
accumulates in soil and plants and some rhizobacteria can release the enzyme,
phytase, which hydrolyzes phytate, releasing inorganic phosphate into the soil
solution where it also can be absorbed by roots (Ke et al. 2021; López-Arredondo
et al. 2014; Shulse et al. 2019). These P-solubilizing soil microbes open additional
avenues of research that may enable the development of sustainable microbial-based
strategies to improve phosphate availability, enhancing root P acquisition efficiency
in agricultural crops. Biofertilization is likely not sufficient to meet the complete
phosphorus requirement of crops. However, it clearly could be a strategy to signif￾icantly improve P bioavailability from applied phosphate fertilizer, increasing
farmer’s yields per unit of P fertilizer applied, and reduce the environmental costs
associated with remediating P pollution of waterways and ground water.
Research aimed at engineering rhizobacteria to increase P bioavailability was
recently conducted by Shulse et al. (2019). In this study, they demonstrated that
multiple rhizobacteria species (Pseudomonas and Ralstonia sp.), when transformed
with phytase genes, significantly increased the release of soluble phosphate from soil
phytate. In this study, a total of 6674 metagenomes were screened and 82 phyloge￾netically diverse phytase genes were selected and their sequences optimized for high
gene expression in three species of rhizobacteria. The researchers identified 12 strains
across three bacterial species that generated a significant increase in growth using
Arabidopsis thaliana grown on phytate as the sole phosphate source. However, to
take advantage of research findings such as the findings from Shulse et al. (2019)3 The Role of the Root Microbiome in the Utilization of Functional... 63
using genetically engineered soil microbes, it will be necessary to develop a more
comprehensive regulatory framework to foster the more facile movement of inven￾tions such as genetically modified soil microbes from the laboratory to the market￾place. This will likely require the development of real partnerships between
academia, government, and industry to produce a science-based regulatory system
which is predictable and straightforward to navigate.
In another study, to investigate the microbial community structure of the root
microbiome, metagenomic analysis of the root microbiome of Lotus japonicus, a
wild legume that has a history of reasonable growth and yield without phosphate
fertilizer, was done. It was found that specific bacterial phyla, including
Bacteroidetes, Betaproteobacteria, Chlorobi, Dehalococcoidetes, and
Methanobacteria, were specifically abundant in the root microbiome (Unno and
Shinano 2013). These rhizobacterial genera include bacterial strains that could
enhance phytic acid utilization, promoting plant growth using phytate as a P source.
Furthermore, several gene clusters possibly involved in phytic acid utilization,
including alkaline phosphatase and citrate synthase, were investigated by Chhabra
et al. (2013) who characterized the mineral phytate as well as phosphate solubiliza￾tion trait employing functional metagenomics of the barley rhizosphere. They
discovered that mineral phosphate solubilization screening of fosmid clones in
E. coli identified genes/operons related to phosphorus mineralization and uptake.
Further, Yadav et al. (2021) discovered that genes involved in gluconic acid
synthesis are involved in phosphate solubilization by creating transposon insertion
mutant libraries of Mesorhizobium ciceri Ca181, which is a symbiotic rhizobacteria
colonized with chickpea roots. Clearly, recent research in this area has identified
several rhizobacterial species that could play a role in root microbiome-induced
enhanced solubilization of P for root uptake from either fixed inorganic phosphate in
the soil or from organic P released from phytate.
3.3.1.3 Increasing Soil Iron Bioavailability via Bacterial Siderophores
Iron is an essential micronutrient required for several significant cellular processes
including chlorophyll synthesis, photosynthesis, respiration, nitrogen fixation, and
hormone production in plants (Vert et al. 2002). Iron is available in the soil as ferric
(Fe3+) and ferrous (Fe2+) ions depending on soil pH, and soil aeration and redox
potential. In aerobic soils, ferric iron predominates, and it is quite insoluble across
most soil pH values, except in highly acidic soils. Hence, most of the soluble ferrous
iron exists as ligands chelated by compounds such as organic acids, phenolics,
humic acids, and bacterial siderophores (Guerinot and Yi 1994). Root microbes
play an important role in soil iron solubility and uptake by releasing siderophores,
which are low-molecular-weight organic Fe3+ chelators that form strong ligands via
high-affinity binding with Fe3+ ions (Das et al. 2007). These Fe3+ siderophore
complexes are taken up into bacterial cells by specific bacterial membrane trans￾porters under iron-limiting conditions (Neilands 1984). The major classes of64 R. Chandnani and L. V. Kochian
compounds that function as bacterial siderophores include catecholates (also known
as phenolates), hydroxamates, and carboxylates (derivatives of citric acid).
Plants have also evolved their own mechanisms to acquire Fe3+ from the soil. In
dicots and non-gramineous monocots, they employ a root cell plasma membrane
ferric reductase to reduce extracellular chelated Fe(III) iron and the resulting Fe2+
ions are released by the ferric chelate and rapidly transported into the root cell by
iron-regulated transporter 1 (IRT1), a root cell plasma membrane Fe2+ transporter
(Guerinot and Yi 1994; Marschner 1995). Grass species use their own
phytosiderophore process, releasing non-protein amino acids in response to Fe
deficiency, which chelate ferric (Fe3+) ions in the soil and the Fe(III)-
phytosiderophore complex is transported in toto across the root cell plasma mem￾brane. Both types of plant Fe acquisition systems can absorb Fe chelated by bacterial
siderophores. Using the reductase-based system, dicots and non-grass monocots can
reduce the iron in the Fe(III)-siderophore complex at the root cell plasma membrane
and then the released Fe2+ ion is transported into root cells via the IRT1 transporter.
In grasses, it has been suggested that the uptake of Fe(III) complexes by bacterial
siderophores can occur by Fe exchange between siderophores and
phytosiderophores, or that the Fe-siderophore complex may be transported by the
plant root plasma membrane transporter specifically functioning to absorb Fe(III)-
phytosiderophore complexes (Bar-Ness et al. 1992; Crowley et al. 1988; Wang et al.
1993).
In addition to using bacterial siderophore release to enhance crop Fe acquisition
and nutrition, the agronomic use of siderophore-producing plant-beneficial microbes
can also be part of a strategy for biocontrol of plant pathogenic microbes. For
example, the fluorescent Pseudomonads contain a number of plant-beneficial bacte￾rial species. These fluorescent Pseudomonads release very high affinity Fe-binding
siderophores which cannot generally be used by pathogenic bacteria. Hence, by
decreasing the iron availability to phytopathogenic bacteria by chelating most of
iron, these Pseudomonads promote plant growth by acting as a biocontrol agent
against plant pathogens (Smarrelli and Castignetti 1986). Furthermore, fluorescent
Pseudomonas sp. is one of initial bacterial strains explored that produced
siderophores that have resulted in enhanced iron uptake in oat and mungbean
(Crowley et al. 1988; Sharma et al. 2003). Sharma et al. (2003) showed that
mungbean plants inoculated with a siderophore-producing Pseudomonas strain
GRP3, exhibited reduced chlorosis and increased chlorophyll content under low Fe
growth conditions. The rhizobacterial species, Rhizobium and Bradyrhizobuim, have
also been reported to produce siderophores under iron-deficient conditions (Nambiar
and Sivaramakrishnan 1987). Molecular microbiologists are dissecting the gene
pathways involved in regulating siderophore synthesis and release in response to
Fe-limiting conditions. One key regulator of these processes is the ferric uptake
regulator, or Fur protein, that regulates siderophore production in variable iron
conditions (Hassan and Troxell 2013). As the understanding of the regulation of
these processes advances, more molecular tools are becoming available that will
better facilitate the modification of rhizobacterial genomes, to enable agricultural
researchers to improve the root microbiome to enhance crop Fe nutrition in3 The Role of the Root Microbiome in the Utilization of Functional... 65
Fe-limiting soils, and to provide microbial-based biocontrol against certain species
of plant pathogenic bacteria.
3.3.2 Drought Tolerance
Drought stress is the most important abiotic stress limiting the yield of agricultural
crops worldwide (Daryanto et al. 2016; Zipper et al. 2016). Additionally, climate
change associated with global warming has exacerbated both the severity and
frequency of droughts with more dire impacts on food crops, and increases the
need for the identification of more sustainable approaches to improve crop perfor￾mance under drought, mitigating drought-induced yield losses. Applications of
beneficial rhizobacteria to both soils and via plant inoculation have been studied in
various crop species to investigate the role of soil microbes and the root microbiome
in enhanced resistance to drought stress, and have demonstrated some promising
prospects for coping with drought (Chen et al. 2017; Marasco et al. 2012;
Vurukonda et al. 2016). Beneficial rhizobacterial inoculants have been suggested
to enhance performance under drought in different ways. First is production of
enzymes that can catabolize stress-responsive phytohormones such as ACC deam￾inase enzyme that can degrade the ethylene precursor, ACC (1-aminocyclopropane￾1-carboxylic acid), and thereby reduce ethylene production which at high levels
inhibits root growth (Mayak et al. 2004). Another possible drought-resistance
strategy involving beneficial rhizobacteria involves alterations in the levels of
exopolysaccharides and the drought-associated amino acid, proline (Vardharajula
et al. 2011). Proline acts as an osmolyte and when its concentration increases in the
cell symplasm under drought, this creates a water potential gradient directed into the
cell and allows the water to flow into the cell even though the water potential outside
the cell has dropped due to drought. This confers the ability to increase the host
plant’s drought tolerance by increasing cellular osmotic and thus water potential,
thus maintaining cell water content under drought stress. Also, proline can play a
role in protecting cell membranes and other cell components against damage caused
by free radical production during drought. Exopolysaccharides produced by
rhizobacteria during drought stress can enhance soil aggregation and structure and
thereby retain soil water near the roots during drought stress (Khan et al. 2017;
Naseem and Bano 2014; Yoshiba et al. 1997).
Additionally, inoculation of plants with certain rhizobacteria can alter hormone￾mediated drought responses including changes in root system architecture via
modulation of phytohormones to increase lateral root growth and biomass, thereby
enhancing the host plant’s ability to acquire water from soils under drought
(Arzanesh et al. 2011; Shakir et al. 2012; Zahir et al. 2008). Another example of
this type of rhizobacterial drought response was a report about rhizobacterial￾induced drought-resistance mechanisms that involved the production of volatile
metabolites that led to a systemic response inducing stomatal closure and reduced
water loss during drought stress. This systemic response appears to involve the66 R. Chandnani and L. V. Kochian
volatile compound inducing interplay between ABA, jasmonic acid, and ethylene
(Cho et al. 2008).
Although a few published studies have shown that colonization of roots with
certain types of rhizobacteria resulted in improved plant performance under drought,
the functional physiological and molecular mechanisms that drive the recruitment of
a drought-responsive microbiome and the host plant responses remain poorly under￾stood. Research based on 16S rRNA sequencing and metagenomic analysis has shed
light on dynamic changes in the composition and function of the root microbiome
under drought, by enrichment of bacterial phyla such as Actinobacteria, primarily in
the root endosphere, but also in the rhizosphere (Edwards et al. 2015; Naylor and
Coleman-Derr 2018; Naylor et al. 2017; Xu et al. 2018). In the Xu et al. (2018)
study, a research approach integrating genome-resolved metagenomics,
transcriptomics, and plant root metabolomics was conducted in sorghum during
response to drought. The authors found that drought increased the abundance and
activity of monoderm bacteria (Actinobacteria, Firmicutes, and Chloroflexi), which
only have a single outer cell membrane and have thick cell walls. They also found
that drought increased the production of certain metabolites in the root, including
certain carbohydrates (especially glycerol-3-P) and amino acids, and that the
monoderm bacteria showed a concomitant increase in the expression of transporters
for these metabolites. Furthermore, inoculation of sorghum roots with monoderm
isolates suggested that increased abundance of monoderm bacteria in the root
microbiome increased plant growth during drought. These findings suggest that
production of specific root metabolites by drought and their transfer to monoderm
bacteria may play a role in reshaping the microbiome bacterial composition, to
enhance plant growth under drought. These findings indicate that it may be possible
to develop agricultural and/or genetic interventions that reshape the root microbiome
to enhance crop performance under drought in agricultural crops.
3.3.3 Biocontrol of Plant Diseases
Crop diseases caused by pathogens (bacteria and fungi) can result in up to 30% yield
loss in economically important crops (Soko et al. 2018; Tirnaz and Batley 2019).
Hence, the impact of plant pathogens on crop production is a major challenge to
global food security. For decades, chemical control measures have been applied to
control plant diseases; however, the lack of rapid rates of breakdown of these
chemicals into relatively safer constituents makes this approach detrimental to the
environment (Gilden et al. 2010). Additionally, rapid trends in the evolution of
pesticide resistance in plant pathogens have warranted the search for alternative and
environmentally sustainable approaches, such as biocontrol (Lucas et al. 2015),
which could be part of a broader strategy integrating biocontrol with plant genetics
and breeding, better agronomic practices, and new classes of pesticides. Therefore,
as the emphasis on environmentally friendly biocontrol strategies increases, over the
past 20 years there have been an increasing number of publications on the use of3 The Role of the Root Microbiome in the Utilization of Functional... 67
beneficial bacteria to help control plant pathogens (Akgül and Mirik 2008; Girish
and Umesha 2005; Mishra and Arora 2018; Sang et al. 2008). Even more recently,
root and soil microbiome metagenomic studies have been published and these types
of studies should ultimately increase our understanding of how the root microbiome
operates as a system to protect especially against root diseases (Wille et al. 2019).
For example, Lee et al. (2008) demonstrated the biocontrol of root diseases
employing Bacillus subtilis extracted from rhizosphere soil to control Phytophthora
blight of pepper caused by Phytophthora capsici, when seeds of pepper plants were
inoculated with Bacillus subtilis before planting. There have been reports of several
types of antibiotics produced by rhizobacteria that have been used to control plant
root pathogens such as: pyrrolnitrin, phloroglucinols, phenazines, cyclic
lipopeptides, and hydrogen cyanide (Haas and Défago 2005). Some of these antibi￾otics have been characterized functionally, including bacterial cyanide production
and soil antifungal activity against root fungal pathogens that are both mediated by
the GacA/GacS quorum sensing system in Pseudomonas sp. (Heeb and Haas 2001).
The GacA/GacS two-component system is involved in the synthesis and release of
secondary metabolites that have antifungal activity. The same GacA/GacS system is
used by the beneficial rhizobacterium Pseudomonas fluorescens F113, and is respon￾sible for HCN synthesis that enables P. fluorescens F113 to control the pathogenic
fungal species, Pythium ultimum, which causes damping off disease in important
agricultural crops (Aarons et al. 2000).
Another example of quorum sensing involved in production and release of
antifungal compounds was shown in a study on the PhzR/PhzI system in the plant￾beneficial bacterium, Pseudomonas chlororaphis 30-84. The PhzR/PhzI quorum
sensing system regulates the synthesis and release of phenazine derivatives that
are antibiotics with antifungal activity. The synthesis of phenazine is mediated by
PhzR, whereas PhzI encodes for acyl-homoserine-lactone (AHL) synthase. AHL is
the signal that activates PhzR to synthesize phenazine, which is then released into the
soil. Using this two-component system, Pseudomonas chlororaphis 30-84 was
effective at controlling the serious fungal disease, Take-all, in wheat (Chin-A￾Woeng et al. 2003; Pierson and Pierson 1996; Zhang and Pierson 2001).
In other publications, Bacillus amyloliquefaciens SQR9 has been reported to
control Fusarium wilt disease in cucumber, and Fusarium head blight in wheat
has been shown to be controlled by use of Bacillus amyloliquefaciens AS 43.3 (Cao
et al. 2011; Dunlap et al. 2013). It has been shown that regulation of bacterial
chemotaxis can impact biocontrol effectiveness. For example, Weng et al. (2013)
reported on a mutation in the AbrB gene in Bacillus amyloliquefaciens SQR9 that
regulates chemotaxis and biofilm formation around root, which resulted in the
enhancement of Bacillus amyloliquefaciens SQR9 chemotaxis and biofilm forma￾tion, thereby improving root colonization and biocontrol efficacy. Dunlap et al.
(2013) showed that whole-genome sequencing and analysis of Bacillus
amyloliquefaciens AS 43.3 identified a number of biosynthetic gene clusters (ribo￾somal and non-ribosomal) for synthesis of secondary metabolites that act as antibi￾otics such as surfactin, difficidin, and plantazolicin. Finally, recent advances in
genome-resolved metagenomics have enabled researchers to identify novel soil68 R. Chandnani and L. V. Kochian
bacteria that can be resources for genes involved in the synthesis of important
secondary metabolites (Crits-Christoph et al. 2018). In Crits-Christoph et al.
(2018), the authors reconstructed hundreds of near-complete genomes of bacteria
isolated from a natural grassland soil ecosystem and identified members of
understudied bacterial phyla such as Acidobacteria, Rokubacteria,
Gemmatimonadetes, and Verrucomicrobia that contain novel gene clusters encoding
important plant-beneficial bacterial biosynthetic pathways. In this study, they found
members of these phyla contained genes that encode diverse polyketides and
non-ribosomal peptides, and these classes of compounds include many antibiotics,
antifungals, and siderophores that thus could be used as novel beneficial
rhizobacteria.
3.3.4 Plant Hormone-Producing Bacteria
Optimal situation-dependent levels of plant hormones such as indole-3-acetic acid
(IAA), gibberellic acid (GA), the direct precursor of the hormone ethylene,
1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid (ACC) deaminase, ethylene, and cytokinin
are required for adequate plant growth due to their significant roles in all the stages of
plant growth development from embryogenesis to seed development (Chen et al.
2014; Davies 2010). Certain taxa of plant growth and performance promoting
bacteria enhance root and/or shoot growth by inducing alterations in plant hormonal
homeostasis that can lead to improved overall plant growth, root growth, abiotic
stress tolerance, and, ultimately, improved yield (Duca et al. 2018; Miransari 2014;
Vessey 2003). Although quite a few species of rhizobacteria have been reported to
produce phytohormones, Pseudomonas and Bacillus spp. have been studied more
extensively than other bacterial species with regard to microbial biosynthesis of
plant hormones (Duca et al. 2018; Patten and Glick 2002b; Shilev 2013; Vessey
2003).
3.3.4.1 Indole-3-Acetic Acid (IAA)
Plant root exudates often contain tryptophan, a precursor in the biosynthesis of the
predominant class of auxin compounds, indole-3-acetic acid (IAA) via the
indolepyruvic acid pathway (Patten and Glick 2002a). Root soil colonization in tea
(Camellia sinensis) with the IAA-producing rhizobacteria, Bacillus megaterium DE
BARY TRS-4, resulted in significantly improved tea plant growth and decreased level
of the fungal disease, brown root rot (Chakraborty et al. 2006). Gene sequences and
genetic pathways for IAA biosynthesis have been identified in Pseudomonas
sp. UW4 in Duan et al. (2013), and later this information was used by Duca et al.
(2018) to transform Pseudomonas sp. UW4, overexpressing four native IAA bio￾synthesis genes: ami, nit, nthAB, and phe. Overexpression of all four genes individ￾ually in Pseudomonas sp. UW4, resulted in significant increases in bacterial IAA3 The Role of the Root Microbiome in the Utilization of Functional... 69
concentrations. Canola seed inoculation with one of the four bacterial
overexpression lines and subsequent canola growth demonstrated that all four
overexpression lines had greater root growth in plants 10 days post inoculation.
The Pseudomonas sp. UW4 nit overexpression line had the greatest stimulation in
root growth (Duca et al. 2018). The authors also measured the activity of ACC
(1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid) deaminase in the transgenic and wildtype
bacterial lines and found significant decreases (30–70%) in enzyme activity in the
overexpression lines. As this enzyme decreases the amount of ACC, the direct
precursor to ethylene, they speculated that the root growth increase could be due
to a direct effect of IAA or one of the other auxin compounds released from the
transgenic overexpression lines colonizing canola roots, or reduction in root ACC
and ethylene by the increased levels of ACC deaminase could also increase root
growth.
Low levels of auxin are often associated with lower plant growth; however,
excessively high auxin levels can affect shoot and root growth adversely (Thimann
1939). Therefore, there have been a number of studies on bacterial genes and genetic
pathways that enhance degradation of IAA and their impact on plant growth
(Costacurta and Vanderleyden 1995; Patten and Glick 1996; Spaepen et al. 2007).
Leveau and Gerards (2008) identified and characterized a putative IAA degrading
iac gene cluster by using the Pseudomonas putida 1290 strain originally isolated
from pear tree foliage (Leveau and Lindow 2005). The iac gene cluster was shown to
introduce IAA degradability in the P. putida KT2440 sp., which does not have the
ability to degrade IAA, demonstrating the likeliness that some of the genes in this
operon are involved in IAA catabolism (Leveau and Gerards 2008). Subsequently,
Scott et al. (2013) conducted insertional inactivation of each of the genes in the iac
cluster, and expression of the altered gene cluster in E. coli were combined with
MS-based auxin metabolite analysis to demonstrate that iac-based degradation of
IAA involved the first gene in the cluster, iacA, and transcript profiling of a knockout
of another gene in the cluster, iacR, which encodes for a repressor of iacA expres￾sion, and this repression is overcome by exposure to IAA. As high levels of IAA also
inhibit Pseudomonas putida 1290 growth as they can with regard to plant growth,
the presence of this IAA degradation pathway in Pseudomonas putida might allow it
to better colonize root tips where higher levels of root-synthesized IAA might occur.
3.3.4.2 Cytokinin
Cytokinin is an essential phytohormone of paramount importance for plant growth
regulatory processes and cell division (Skoog and Armstrong 1970). Cytokinin
production has been reported by quite a few rhizobacteria such as members of the
genera Azospirillum, Rhizobium, Pseudomonas, and Bacillus (Cacciari et al. 1989;
García de Salamone et al. 2001; Grover et al. 2021; Timmusk et al. 1999). It has been
shown that inoculating plants with cytokinin-producing rhizobacteria can enhance
plant growth and yield (Arkhipova et al. 2005; Kudoyarova et al. 2014; Ping and
Boland 2004; Wang et al. 2018). Wang et al. (2018) showed that inoculation of70 R. Chandnani and L. V. Kochian
Arabidopsis cytokinin receptor knockout mutants with cytokinin-producing Bacillus
sp. LZR216 alters shoot growth and root system architecture, significantly stimulates
lateral root number and length, and inhibits tap root length, while increases leaf
surface area and shoot biomass. Bacillus sp. LZR216 treatment upregulated the gene
expression of the Arabidopsis cytokinin signaling genes AHK3/AHK4, AHP1/AHP3,
and ARR4/5/7/10/12/15 in root tips, suggesting that root-cytokinin-regulated genes
may play a role in interactions and signaling between the root and cytokinin￾producing bacteria such as Bacillus sp. LZR216.
3.3.4.3 ACC Deaminase Activity and Ethylene
Ethylene and its precursor 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate (ACC) play impor￾tant roles not only in plant developmental but also in plant defense and symbiotic
programs. Thus, it is likely that ethylene and ACC play a central role in the
regulation of bacterial colonization and formation of root and shoot microbiomes.
A number of rhizobacteria can produce significant amounts of the enzyme,
1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate (ACC) deaminase, enabling rhizobacteria to
degrade the ACC produced and exuded by plant roots and thereby reduce ethylene
levels in roots (Glick et al. 1998; Jacobson et al. 1994). ACC is an immediate
precursor to ethylene biosynthesis from methionine in plants (Adams and Yang
1979), and triggering of a surge in ethylene production can lead to root growth
inhibition (Jackson 1991). Although the catalyzing function of ACC deaminase was
first studied in free-living Pseudomonas spp., subsequently its activity was identified
in many other bacteria including rhizobacteria from the genera Rhizobium, Bacillus
pumilus, and Rhodococcus, and Burkholderia phytofirmans sp. Nov. (Glick 2005).
The ACC deaminase gene, acdS, is well characterized in the beneficial rhizobacteria,
Pseudomonas putida UW4, and it has been shown to be transcriptionally regulated
by an acdR gene that encodes the leucine-responsive regulatory protein (Lrp). Lrp
proteins have been found immediately upstream of many bacteria ACC deaminase
genes, suggesting transcriptional regulation of these deaminase genes by Lrp’s is a
key feature in the regulation of bacterial ACC deaminases. On the other hand, the
nifA gene, which is a master regulator of nitrogen fixation, has also been identified as
a regulator of an acdS gene in Mesorhizobium loti MAFF303099 (Kaneko et al.
2000). These results suggest evolution of parallel pathways of regulation of acdS
gene in different classes of proteobacteria that form symbiotic relationships with
plant roots.
ACC deaminases in rhizobacteria, which apparently enable the bacteria to mod￾ulate the levels of root ethylene in the host organ and increase or decrease root
growth where the bacteria reside, likely indicate this enzyme plays an important role
in root–rhizobacterial interactions. The ability to enzymatically modify root ethylene
levels is also a potential tool for agricultural researchers attempting to modulate the
composition and function of the root microbiome. But in order to effectively use this
information to facilitate root-microbiome-mediated enhancement of crop functional3 The Role of the Root Microbiome in the Utilization of Functional... 71
traits, it will be necessary to more deeply and completely understand the relationship
between ACC deaminase containing rhizobacteria and the plant root.
3.4 Conclusions
3.4.1 Genome-Level Investigations of the Root Microbiome
and Holo-Omics Are Required to Fully Exploit
Microbiome Functional Traits
Plant growth and performance promoting microbes (PGPPM) in the root
microbiome have the potential to be used as important alternative strategies to
plant breeding or agronomic methods to enhance crop productivity, by enhancing
nutrient acquisition, producing plant growth hormones, and enhancing disease and
pest resistance. The genome of the root microbiome can be thought of as a second
plant genome that needs to be decoded to provide the knowledge necessary to use
natural and genetically modified root microbes to improve crop yields by enhancing
root mineral nutrient and water acquisition, abiotic and biotic stress tolerance, and
root system growth and vigor via altered plant hormone homeostasis (Fig. 3.1).
Despite having great potential for the utilization of microbial functional traits,
efficient root colonization with beneficial microbes is certainly one of the major
challenges in enabling modification of root microbiomes to enhance crop functional
traits. There have been major advances in this research area that ranges from the use
of microbe-specific structural and functional markers to multi-omics approaches that
combine two or more omics technologies such as metagenomics, transcriptomics,
metabolomics, and proteomics to study the root microbiome at the genome level.
However, functional studies of the root and its associated microbiome are still in
their infancy, as scientists are developing and improving techniques to study the
microbiome. As these types of studies advance and mature, they will enable the next
steps, which will be to study the root microbiome as a functional ecosystem, using
approaches such as deep-sequencing-based genome-resolved metagenomics, holo￾omics, and microbiome/crop pan genome approaches. Using more systems-based
approaches will be necessary to gain a deeper understanding of the detailed genetic,
biochemical, and physiological networks underlying complex PGPPM-mediated
processes and interactions of the root microbiome with the host plant roots and
exudates, required for the microbial recruitment and root colonization resulting in
enhancement of important crop functional traits. It is imperative that more of our
efforts now focus on understanding the functional aspects of root–microbe interac￾tions, which will be necessary to more effectively and efficiently use root
microbiome modifications as a sustainable tool in our crop improvement toolbox
to enhance plant resiliency and productivity, to help ensure global food security.72 R. Chandnani and L. V. Kochian
Fig. 3.1 Sustainable improvement in crop productivity via root microbiome-related functional
traits. Genomic DNA or RNA is extracted from the root microbiome for meta-genomic and meta￾transcriptomic analyses. Plant metabolites are extracted from the root and/or collected as root
exudates (very difficult to currently do for roots in soil) for metabolomic analysis. The holo￾omics approaches involves combining and analyzing the different meta-omics data from root3 The Role of the Root Microbiome in the Utilization of Functional... 73
References
Aarons S, Abbas A, Adams C, Fenton A, O’Gara F (2000) A regulatory RNA (PrrB RNA)
modulates expression of secondary metabolite genes in Pseudomonas fluorescens F113. J
Bacteriol 182(14):3913–3919
Adams D, Yang SF (1979) Ethylene biosynthesis: identification of 1-aminocyclopropane-1-car￾boxylic acid as an intermediate in the conversion of methionine to ethylene. Proc Natl Acad Sci
76(1):170–174
Akgül D, Mirik M (2008) Biocontrol of Phytophthora capsici on pepper plants by Bacillus
megaterium strains. J Plant Pathol 90:29–34
Antoun H (2013) Plant-growth-promoting rhizobacteria. Brenner’s encyclopedia of genetics, vol
5, 2nd edn. Elsevier, Amsterdam
Arkhipova T, Veselov S, Melentiev A, Martynenko E, Kudoyarova G (2005) Ability of bacterium
Bacillus subtilis to produce cytokinins and to influence the growth and endogenous hormone
content of lettuce plants. Plant Soil 272(1):201–209
Arzanesh MH, Alikhani H, Khavazi K, Rahimian H, Miransari M (2011) Wheat (Triticum aestivum
L.) growth enhancement by Azospirillum sp. under drought stress. World J Microbiol
Biotechnol 27(2):197–205
Bais HP, Weir TL, Perry LG, Gilroy S, Vivanco JM (2006) The role of root exudates in rhizosphere
interactions with plants and other organisms. Annu Rev Plant Biol 57:233–266
Bar-Ness E, Hadar Y, Chen Y, Shanzer A, Libman J (1992) Iron uptake by plants from microbial
siderophores: a study with 7-nitrobenz-2 oxa-1, 3-diazole-desferrioxamine as fluorescent
ferrioxamine B analog. Plant Physiol 99(4):1329–1335
⁄
Fig. 3.1 (continued) microbes, root tissue, and root exudates, which will be necessary for a more
informative functional characterization of microbial plant performance promoting traits and to
identify gene-functional links and networks. Functional information will be important to identify
root beneficial microbes and to genetically manipulate naturally occurring bacteria that can be used
as plant growth and performance promoting microbes (PGPPM). Inoculation with naturally occur￾ring beneficial or genetically engineered rhizobacteria can possibly alter the root microbiome
composition (if the introduced microbial species can compete and be established in this ecosystem),
to increase plant productivity by different mechanisms such as biofertilization, abiotic and biotic
stress tolerance, and plant hormone homeostasis. PGPPM can provide the major macronutrient,
nitrogen, in the form of NH3 by fixing atmospheric N2 via nitrogenase in nodular and free-living
root-associated N2 fixing microbes. Inorganic phosphates that tend to be fixed in the soil, reducing
their availability to roots, can be solubilized by PGPPM to provide bioavailable phosphate to the
roots. Micronutrient iron can be provided to plant roots by siderophores released by bacteria in the
root microbiome. Exopolysaccharides produced by PGPPM and microbe-induced increases in
proline in plants can act as soil aggregants (exopolysaccharides) and root and shoot osmolytes
(proline) to contribute to drought stress resistance. Additionally, microbiome-induced changes in
plant hormone metabolism can alter root system architecture via increases in the number and length
of lateral roots to promote increases in water and mineral nutrient acquisition efficiency. Antibiotics
secreted by the root microbiome can act as biocontrol agents for fungal and bacterial soil-borne
diseases, and competition by PGPPM with pathogenic bacteria for carbon, Fe, and other nutrients
essential for microbial growth can also reduce the abundance of harmful microbes via competition
within the root microbiome. Various plant hormones such as cytokinin and IAA required for
adequate plant growth can be synthesized by specific members of the root microbiome and enhance
plant growth, whereas reduction in concentrations of root growth inhibiting hormones such as
ethylene by rhizobacterial-produced ACC deaminase can also promote root growth and plant
productivity74 R. Chandnani and L. V. Kochian
Beijerinck M (1901) Uber oligonitrophile mikroben. Zentralbl Bakterol Parasitenkd Infektionskr
Hyg Abt II 7:561–582
Berendsen RL, Pieterse CM, Bakker PA (2012) The rhizosphere microbiome and plant health.
Trends Plant Sci 17(8):478–486
Boyd E, Anbar A, Miller S, Hamilton T, Lavin M, Peters J (2011) A late methanogen origin for
molybdenum-dependent nitrogenase. Geobiology 9(3):221–232
Bressan M, Roncato M-A, Bellvert F, Comte G, el Zahar Haichar F, Achouak W, Berge O (2009)
Exogenous glucosinolate produced by Arabidopsis thaliana has an impact on microbes in the
rhizosphere and plant roots. ISME J 3(11):1243–1257
Bulen W, LeComte J (1966) The nitrogenase system from Azotobacter: two-enzyme requirement
for N2 reduction, ATP-dependent H2 evolution, and ATP hydrolysis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
56(3):979
Bulgarelli D, Rott M, Schlaeppi K, van Themaat EVL, Ahmadinejad N, Assenza F, Rauf P,
Huettel B, Reinhardt R, Schmelzer E (2012) Revealing structure and assembly cues for
Arabidopsis root-inhabiting bacterial microbiota. Nature 488(7409):91–95
Burén S, Jiang X, López-Torrejón G, Echavarri-Erasun C, Rubio LM (2017) Purification and
in vitro activity of mitochondria targeted nitrogenase cofactor maturase NifB. Front Plant Sci
8:1567
Bürgmann H, Widmer F, Von Sigler W, Zeyer J (2004) New molecular screening tools for analysis
of free-living diazotrophs in soil. Appl Environ Microbiol 70(1):240–247
Cacciari I, Lippi D, Pietrosanti T, Pietrosanti W (1989) Phytohormone-like substances produced by
single and mixed diazotrophic cultures of Azospirillum and Arthrobacter. Plant Soil 115(1):
151–153
Cao Y, Zhang Z, Ling N, Yuan Y, Zheng X, Shen B, Shen Q (2011) Bacillus subtilis SQR 9 can
control Fusarium wilt in cucumber by colonizing plant roots. Biol Fertil Soils 47(5):495–506
Chakraborty U, Chakraborty B, Basnet M (2006) Plant growth promotion and induction of
resistance in Camellia sinensis by Bacillus megaterium. J Basic Microbiol 46(3):186–195
Chen J, Lausser A, Dresselhaus T (2014) Hormonal responses during early embryogenesis in
maize. Portland Press, London
Chen C, Xin K, Liu H, Cheng J, Shen X, Wang Y, Zhang L (2017) Pantoea alhagi, a novel
endophytic bacterium with ability to improve growth and drought tolerance in wheat. Sci Rep
7(1):1–14
Chhabra S, Brazil D, Morrissey J, Burke JI, O’Gara F, Dowling DN (2013) Characterization of
mineral phosphate solubilization traits from a barley rhizosphere soil functional metagenome.
Microbiology 2(5):717–724
Chin-A-Woeng TF, Bloemberg GV, Lugtenberg BJ (2003) Phenazines and their role in biocontrol
by Pseudomonas bacteria. New Phytol 157(3):503–523
Cho SM, Kang BR, Han SH, Anderson AJ, Park J-Y, Lee Y-H, Cho BH, Yang K-Y, Ryu C-M, Kim
YC (2008) 2R, 3R-butanediol, a bacterial volatile produced by Pseudomonas chlororaphis O6,
is involved in induction of systemic tolerance to drought in Arabidopsis thaliana. Mol Plant￾Microbe Interact 21(8):1067–1075
Coelho MR, Marriel IE, Jenkins SN, Lanyon CV, Seldin L, O’Donnell AG (2009) Molecular
detection and quantification of nifH gene sequences in the rhizosphere of sorghum (Sorghum
bicolor) sown with two levels of nitrogen fertilizer. Appl Soil Ecol 42(1):48–53
Costacurta A, Vanderleyden J (1995) Synthesis of phytohormones by plant-associated bacteria. Crit
Rev Microbiol 21(1):1–18
Cotton TA, Pétriacq P, Cameron DD, Al Meselmani M, Schwarzenbacher R, Rolfe SA, Ton J
(2019) Metabolic regulation of the maize rhizobiome by benzoxazinoids. ISME J 13(7):
1647–1658
Crits-Christoph A, Diamond S, Butterfield CN, Thomas BC, Banfield JF (2018) Novel soil bacteria
possess diverse genes for secondary metabolite biosynthesis. Nature 558(7710):440–444
Crowley DE, Reid CP, Szaniszlo PJ (1988) Utilization of microbial siderophores in iron acquisition
by oat. Plant Physiol 87(3):680–6853 The Role of the Root Microbiome in the Utilization of Functional... 75
Daetwyler HD, Hayden MJ, Spangenberg GC, Hayes BJ (2015) Selection on optimal haploid value
increases genetic gain and preserves more genetic diversity relative to genomic selection.
Genetics 200(4):1341–1348
Daryanto S, Wang L, Jacinthe P-A (2016) Global synthesis of drought effects on maize and wheat
production. PLoS One 11(5):e0156362
Das A, Prasad R, Srivastava A, Giang PH, Bhatnagar K, Varma A (2007) Fungal siderophores:
structure, functions and regulations. In: Varma A, Chincholkar SB (eds) Microbial siderophores.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pp 1–42
Davies PJ (2010) The plant hormones: their nature, occurrence, and functions. In: Plant hormones.
Springer, New York, pp 1–15
Delgado-Baquerizo M, Oliverio AM, Brewer TE, Benavent-González A, Eldridge DJ, Bardgett
RD, Maestre FT, Singh BK, Fierer N (2018) A global atlas of the dominant bacteria found in
soil. Science 359(6373):320–325
Denholm I, Cahill M, Dennehy T, Horowitz A (1998) Challenges with managing insecticide
resistance in agricultural pests, exemplisfied by the whitefly Bemisia tabaci. Philos Trans R
Soc Lond B Biol Sci 353(1376):1757–1767
Doornbos RF, van Loon LC, Bakker PA (2012) Impact of root exudates and plant defense signaling
on bacterial communities in the rhizosphere. A review. Agron Sustain Dev 32(1):227–243
Duan J, Jiang W, Cheng Z, Heikkila JJ, Glick BR (2013) The complete genome sequence of the
plant growth-promoting bacterium Pseudomonas sp. UW4. PLoS One 8(3):e58640
Duca DR, Rose DR, Glick BR (2018) Indole acetic acid overproduction transformants of the
rhizobacterium Pseudomonas sp. UW4. Antonie Van Leeuwenhoek 111(9):1645–1660
Dunlap CA, Bowman MJ, Schisler DA (2013) Genomic analysis and secondary metabolite
production in Bacillus amyloliquefaciens AS 43.3: a biocontrol antagonist of Fusarium head
blight. Biol Control 64(2):166–175
Edwards J, Johnson C, Santos-Medellín C, Lurie E, Podishetty NK, Bhatnagar S, Eisen JA,
Sundaresan V (2015) Structure, variation, and assembly of the root-associated microbiomes
of rice. Proc Natl Acad Sci 112(8):E911–E920
el Zahar Haichar F, Marol C, Berge O, Rangel-Castro JI, Prosser JI, Balesdent J, Heulin T, Achouak
W (2008) Plant host habitat and root exudates shape soil bacterial community structure. ISME J
2(12):1221–1230
Fabiańska I, Gerlach N, Almario J, Bucher M (2019) Plant-mediated effects of soil phosphorus on
the root-associated fungal microbiota in Arabidopsis thaliana. New Phytol 221(4):2123–2137
Foster R (1986) The ultrastructure of the rhizoplane and rhizosphere. Annu Rev Phytopathol 24(1):
211–234
Fox AR, Soto G, Valverde C, Russo D, Lagares A Jr, Zorreguieta Á, Alleva K, Pascuan C, Frare R,
Mercado-Blanco J (2016) Major cereal crops benefit from biological nitrogen fixation when
inoculated with the nitrogen-fixing bacterium Pseudomonas protegens Pf-5 X940. Environ
Microbiol 18(10):3522–3534
Frank B (1885) Über die auf Wurzelsymbiose beruhende Ernährung gewisser Bäume durch
unterirdische Pilze. Plant Biol 3(4):128–145
García de Salamone IE, Hynes RK, Nelson LM (2001) Cytokinin production by plant growth
promoting rhizobacteria and selected mutants. Can J Microbiol 47(5):404–411
Gilden RC, Huffling K, Sattler B (2010) Pesticides and health risks. J Obstet Gynecol Neonatal
Nurs 39(1):103–110
Giri B, Prasad R, Varma A (2018) Root biology. Springer International Publishing. ISBN 978-3-
319-75910-4. https://www.springer.com/us/book/9783319759098
Girish N, Umesha S (2005) Effect of plant growth promoting rhizobacteria on bacterial canker of
tomato. Arch Phytopathol Plant Protect 38(3):235–243
Glick BR (2005) Modulation of plant ethylene levels by the bacterial enzyme ACC deaminase.
FEMS Microbiol Lett 251(1):1–7
Glick BR, Penrose DM, Li J (1998) A model for the lowering of plant ethylene concentrations by
plant growth-promoting bacteria. J Theor Biol 190(1):63–6876 R. Chandnani and L. V. Kochian
Grover M, Bodhankar S, Sharma A, Sharma P, Singh J, Nain L (2021) PGPR mediated alterations
in root traits: way toward sustainable crop production. Front Sustain Food Syst 4:287
Guerinot ML, Yi Y (1994) Iron: nutritious, noxious, and not readily available. Plant Physiol 104(3):
815
Gururani MA, Upadhyaya CP, Baskar V, Venkatesh J, Nookaraju A, Park SW (2013) Plant growth￾promoting rhizobacteria enhance abiotic stress tolerance in Solanum tuberosum through induc￾ing changes in the expression of ROS-scavenging enzymes and improved photosynthetic
performance. J Plant Growth Regul 32(2):245–258
Haas D, Défago G (2005) Biological control of soil-borne pathogens by fluorescent pseudomonads.
Nat Rev Microbiol 3(4):307–319
Hammons RO (1976) Peanuts: genetic vulnerability and breeding strategy 1. Crop Sci 16(4):
527–530
Harbort CJ, Hashimoto M, Inoue H, Niu Y, Guan R, Rombolà AD, Kopriva S, Voges MJ, Sattely
ES, Garrido-Oter R (2020) Root-secreted coumarins and the microbiota interact to improve iron
nutrition in Arabidopsis. Cell Host Microbe 28(6):825–837.e826
Hartman K, Tringe SG (2019) Interactions between plants and soil shaping the root microbiome
under abiotic stress. Biochem J 476(19):2705–2724
Hassan HM, Troxell B (2013) Transcriptional regulation by ferric uptake regulator (FUR) in
pathogenic bacteria. Front Cell Infect Microbiol 3:59
Heeb S, Haas D (2001) Regulatory roles of the GacS/GacA two-component system in plant￾associated and other gram-negative bacteria. Mol Plant-Microbe Interact 14(12):1351–1363
Hellriegel H, Wilfarth H (1888) Untersuchungen uber die Stickstoffnahrung der Gramineen und
Leguminosen. Buchdruckerei der "Post" Kayssler, Berlin
Hinsinger P (2001) Bioavailability of soil inorganic P in the rhizosphere as affected by root-induced
chemical changes: a review. Plant Soil 237(2):173–195
Hiruma K, Gerlach N, Sacristán S, Nakano RT, Hacquard S, Kracher B, Neumann U, Ramírez D,
Bucher M, O’Connell RJ (2016) Root endophyte Colletotrichum tofieldiae confers plant fitness
benefits that are phosphate status dependent. Cell 165(2):464–474
Hu Y, Schmidhalter U (2005) Drought and salinity: a comparison of their effects on mineral
nutrition of plants. J Plant Nutr Soil Sci 168(4):541–549
Hu L, Robert CA, Cadot S, Zhang X, Ye M, Li B, Manzo D, Chervet N, Steinger T, Van Der
Heijden MG (2018) Root exudate metabolites drive plant-soil feedbacks on growth and defense
by shaping the rhizosphere microbiota. Nat Commun 9(1):1–13
Huang AC, Jiang T, Liu Y-X, Bai Y-C, Reed J, Qu B, Goossens A, Nützmann H-W, Bai Y,
Osbourn A (2019) A specialized metabolic network selectively modulates Arabidopsis root
microbiota. Science 364(6440):eaau6389
Jackson M (1991) Ethylene in root growth and development. In: Matoo AK, Suttle JC (eds) The
plant hormone ethylene. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL
Jacobson C, Pasternak J, Glick B (1994) Partial purification and characterization of ACC deaminase
from the plant growth-promoting rhizobacterium Pseudomonas putida GR12-2. Can J
Microbiol 40(1):19–1025
Ji SH, Gururani MA, Chun S-C (2014) Isolation and characterization of plant growth promoting
endophytic diazotrophic bacteria from Korean rice cultivars. Microbiol Res 169(1):83–98
Kamilova F, Kravchenko LV, Shaposhnikov AI, Azarova T, Makarova N, Lugtenberg B (2006)
Organic acids, sugars, and L-tryptophane in exudates of vegetables growing on stonewool and
their effects on activities of rhizosphere bacteria. Mol Plant-Microbe Interact 19(3):250–256
Kaneko T, Nakamura Y, Sato S, Asamizu E, Kato T, Sasamoto S, Watanabe A, Idesawa K,
Ishikawa A, Kawashima K (2000) Complete genome structure of the nitrogen-fixing symbiotic
bacterium Mesorhizobium loti. DNA Res 7(6):331–338
Ke J, Wang B, Yoshikuni Y (2021) Microbiome engineering: synthetic biology of plant-associated
microbiomes in sustainable agriculture. Trends Biotechnol 39(3):244–2613 The Role of the Root Microbiome in the Utilization of Functional... 77
Khan N, Bano A, Babar M (2017) The root growth of wheat plants, the water conservation and
fertility status of sandy soils influenced by plant growth promoting rhizobacteria. Symbiosis
72(3):195–205
Kim J, Rees DC (1994) Nitrogenase and biological nitrogen fixation. Biochemistry 33(2):389–397
Kloepper JW, Leong J, Teintze M, Schroth MN (1980) Enhanced plant growth by siderophores
produced by plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria. Nature 286(5776):885–886
Kudoyarova GR, Melentiev AI, Martynenko EV, Timergalina LN, Arkhipova TN, Shendel GV,
Kuz'mina LY, Dodd IC, Veselov SY (2014) Cytokinin producing bacteria stimulate amino acid
deposition by wheat roots. Plant Physiol Biochem 83:285–291
Lee KJ, Kamala-Kannan S, Sub HS, Seong CK, Lee GW (2008) Biological control of Phytophthora
blight in red pepper (Capsicum annuum L.) using Bacillus subtilis. World J Microbiol
Biotechnol 24(7):1139–1145
Leveau JH, Gerards S (2008) Discovery of a bacterial gene cluster for catabolism of the plant
hormone indole 3-acetic acid. FEMS Microbiol Ecol 65(2):238–250
Leveau JH, Lindow SE (2005) Utilization of the plant hormone indole-3-acetic acid for growth by
Pseudomonas putida strain 1290. Appl Environ Microbiol 71(5):2365–2371
Li M, Wang J, Yao T, Wang Z, Zhang H, Li C (2021) Isolation and characterization of cold-adapted
PGPB and their effect on plant growth promotion. J Microbiol Biotechnol 31(9):1218–1230
López-Arredondo DL, Leyva-González MA, González-Morales SI, López-Bucio J, Herrera￾Estrella L (2014) Phosphate nutrition: improving low-phosphate tolerance in crops. Annu Rev
Plant Biol 65:95–123
Lucas JA, Hawkins NJ, Fraaije BA (2015) The evolution of fungicide resistance. Adv Appl
Microbiol 90:29–92
Lugtenberg B, Kamilova F (2009) Plant-growth-promoting rhizobacteria. Annu Rev Microbiol 63:
541–556
Lundberg DS, Lebeis SL, Paredes SH, Yourstone S, Gehring J, Malfatti S, Tremblay J,
Engelbrektson A, Kunin V, Del Rio TG (2012) Defining the core Arabidopsis thaliana root
microbiome. Nature 488(7409):86–90
Macintosh KA, Doody DG, Withers PJ, McDowell RW, Smith DR, Johnson LT, Bruulsema TW,
O’Flaherty V, McGrath JW (2019) Transforming soil phosphorus fertility management strate￾gies to support the delivery of multiple ecosystem services from agricultural systems. Sci Total
Environ 649:90–98
Marasco R, Rolli E, Ettoumi B, Vigani G, Mapelli F, Borin S, Abou-Hadid AF, El-Behairy UA,
Sorlini C, Cherif A (2012) A drought resistance-promoting microbiome is selected by root
system under desert farming. PLoS One 7(10):e48479
Marschner H (1995) Adaptation of plants to adverse chemical soil conditions. In: Mineral nutrition
of higher plants. Academic, New York
Mayak S, Tirosh T, Glick BR (2004) Plant growth-promoting bacteria that confer resistance to
water stress in tomatoes and peppers. Plant Sci 166(2):525–530
McCasland M, Trautmann NM, Wagenet RJ (1985) Nitrate: health effects in drinking water.
Cornell Cooperative Extension, Ithaca, NY
Mendes R, Kruijt M, De Bruijn I, Dekkers E, van der Voort M, Schneider JH, Piceno YM, DeSantis
TZ, Andersen GL, Bakker PA (2011) Deciphering the rhizosphere microbiome for disease￾suppressive bacteria. Science 332(6033):1097–1100
Miransari M (2014) Plant growth promoting rhizobacteria. J Plant Nutr 37(14):2227–2235
Mishra J, Arora NK (2018) Secondary metabolites of fluorescent pseudomonads in biocontrol of
phytopathogens for sustainable agriculture. Appl Soil Ecol 125:35–45
Nambiar P, Sivaramakrishnan S (1987) Detection and assay of siderophores in cowpea rhizobia
(Bradyrhizobium) using radioactive Fe (59Fe). Lett Appl Microbiol 4(2):37–40
Naseem H, Bano A (2014) Role of plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria and their
exopolysaccharide in drought tolerance of maize. J Plant Interact 9(1):689–701
Naylor D, Coleman-Derr D (2018) Drought stress and root-associated bacterial communities. Front
Plant Sci 8:222378 R. Chandnani and L. V. Kochian
Naylor D, DeGraaf S, Purdom E, Coleman-Derr D (2017) Drought and host selection influence
bacterial community dynamics in the grass root microbiome. ISME J 11(12):2691–2704
Neilands JB (1984) Methodology of siderophores. In: Siderophores from microorganisms and
plants. structure and bonding, vol 58. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg. https://doi.org/10.1007/
BFb0111309
Novoa R, Loomis R (1981) Nitrogen and plant production. Plant Soil 58(1):177–204
Patten CL, Glick BR (1996) Bacterial biosynthesis of indole-3-acetic acid. Can J Microbiol 42(3):
207–220
Patten CL, Glick BR (2002a) Regulation of indoleacetic acid production in Pseudomonas putida
GR12-2 by tryptophan and the stationary-phase sigma factor RpoS. Can J Microbiol 48(7):
635–642
Patten CL, Glick BR (2002b) Role of Pseudomonas putida indoleacetic acid in development of the
host plant root system. Appl Environ Microbiol 68(8):3795–3801
Pierson LS, Pierson EA (1996) Phenazine antibiotic production in Pseudomonas aureofaciens: role
in rhizosphere ecology and pathogen suppression. FEMS Microbiol Lett 136(2):101–108
Ping L, Boland W (2004) Signals from the underground: bacterial volatiles promote growth in
Arabidopsis. Trends Plant Sci 9(6):263–266
Prasad R, Zhang S-H (2022) Benefical microorganisms in agriculture. Springer, Singapore. https://
link.springer.com/book/9789811907326
Razaq M, Zhang P, Shen H-l (2017) Influence of nitrogen and phosphorous on the growth and root
morphology of Acer mono. PLoS One 12(2):e0171321
Roberts TL, Johnston AE (2015) Phosphorus use efficiency and management in agriculture. Resour
Conserv Recycl 105:275–281
Rubio LM, Ludden PW (2008) Biosynthesis of the iron-molybdenum cofactor of nitrogenase. Annu
Rev Microbiol 62:93–111. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.micro.62.081307.162737
Ryu M-H, Zhang J, Toth T, Khokhani D, Geddes BA, Mus F, Garcia-Costas A, Peters JW, Poole
PS, Ané J-M (2020) Control of nitrogen fixation in bacteria that associate with cereals. Nat
Microbiol 5(2):314–330
Sang MK, Chun S-C, Kim KD (2008) Biological control of Phytophthora blight of pepper by
antagonistic rhizobacteria selected from a sequential screening procedure. Biol Control 46(3):
424–433
Santi C, Bogusz D, Franche C (2013) Biological nitrogen fixation in non-legume plants. Ann Bot
111(5):743–767
Savci S (2012) An agricultural pollutant: chemical fertilizer. Int J Environ Sci Dev 3(1):73
Schlaeppi K, Dombrowski N, Oter RG, van Themaat EVL, Schulze-Lefert P (2014) Quantitative
divergence of the bacterial root microbiota in Arabidopsis thaliana relatives. Proc Natl Acad Sci
111(2):585–592
Scott JC, Greenhut IV, Leveau JH (2013) Functional characterization of the bacterial iac genes for
degradation of the plant hormone indole-3-acetic acid. J Chem Ecol 39(7):942–951
Sczyrba A, Hofmann P, Belmann P, Koslicki D, Janssen S, Dröge J, Gregor I, Majda S, Fiedler J,
Dahms E (2017) Critical assessment of metagenome interpretation—a benchmark of
metagenomics software. Nat Methods 14(11):1063–1071
Seefeldt LC, Hoffman BM, Dean DR (2009) Mechanism of Mo-dependent nitrogenase. Annu Rev
Biochem 78:701–722
Shakir MA, Asghari B, Muhammad A (2012) Rhizosphere bacteria containing ACC-deaminase
conferred drought tolerance in wheat grown under semi-arid climate. Soil Environ 31(1):
108–112
Sharma A, Johri B, Sharma A, Glick B (2003) Plant growth-promoting bacterium Pseudomonas
sp. strain GRP3 influences iron acquisition in mung bean (Vigna radiata L. Wilzeck). Soil Biol
Biochem 35(7):887–894
Shilev S (2013) Soil rhizobacteria regulating the uptake of nutrients and undesirable elements by
plants. In: Plant microbe symbiosis: fundamentals and advances. Springer, New York, pp
147–1673 The Role of the Root Microbiome in the Utilization of Functional... 79
Shulse CN, Chovatia M, Agosto C, Wang G, Hamilton M, Deutsch S, Yoshikuni Y, Blow MJ
(2019) Engineered root bacteria release plant-available phosphate from phytate. Appl Environ
Microbiol 85(18):e01210–e01219
Skoog F, Armstrong DJ (1970) Cytokinins. Ann Rev Plant Physiol 21(1):359–384
Smarrelli J Jr, Castignetti D (1986) Iron acquisition by plants: the reduction of ferrisiderophores by
higher plant NADH: nitrate reductase. Biochim Biophys Acta 882(3):337–342
Soko T, Bender CM, Prins R, Pretorius ZA (2018) Yield loss associated with different levels of
stem rust resistance in bread wheat. Plant Dis 102(12):2531–2538
Spaepen S, Vanderleyden J, Remans R (2007) Indole-3-acetic acid in microbial and
microorganism-plant signaling. FEMS Microbiol Rev 31(4):425–448
Takeuchi T, Sawada H, Tanaka F, Matsuda I (1996) Phylogenetic analysis of Streptomyces spp.
causing potato scab based on 16S rRNA sequences. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol 46(2):476–479
Tan S, Yang C, Mei X, Shen S, Raza W, Shen Q, Xu Y (2013) The effect of organic acids from
tomato root exudates on rhizosphere colonization of Bacillus amyloliquefaciens T-5. Appl Soil
Ecol 64:15–22
Thimann KV (1939) Auxins and the inhibition of plant growth. Biol Rev 14(3):314–337
Timmusk S, Nicander B, Granhall U, Tillberg E (1999) Cytokinin production by Paenibacillus
polymyxa. Soil Biol Biochem 31(13):1847–1852
Tirnaz S, Batley J (2019) DNA methylation: toward crop disease resistance improvement. Trends
Plant Sci 24(12):1137–1150
Unno Y, Shinano T (2013) Metagenomic analysis of the rhizosphere soil microbial community.
Mol Micro Ecol Rhizosp 1:1099–1103
Vardharajula S, Zulfikar Ali S, Grover M, Reddy G, Bandi V (2011) Drought-tolerant plant growth
promoting Bacillus spp.: effect on growth, osmolytes, and antioxidant status of maize under
drought stress. J Plant Interact 6(1):1–14
Vert G, Grotz N, Dédaldéchamp F, Gaymard F, Guerinot ML, Briat J-F, Curie C (2002) IRT1, an
Arabidopsis transporter essential for iron uptake from the soil and for plant growth. Plant Cell
14(6):1223–1233
Vessey JK (2003) Plant growth promoting rhizobacteria as biofertilizers. Plant Soil 255(2):571–586
Vurukonda SSKP, Vardharajula S, Shrivastava M, SkZ A (2016) Enhancement of drought stress
tolerance in crops by plant growth promoting rhizobacteria. Microbiol Res 184:13–24
Wang Y, Brown H, Crowley D, Szaniszlo P (1993) Evidence for direct utilization of a siderophore,
ferrioxamine B, in axenically grown cucumber. Plant Cell Environ 16(5):579–585
Wang J, Zhang Y, Jin J, Li Q, Zhao C, Nan W, Wang X, Ma R, Bi Y (2018) An intact cytokinin￾signaling pathway is required for Bacillus sp. LZR216-promoted plant growth and root system
architecture altereation in Arabidopsis thaliana seedlings. Plant Growth Regul 84(3):507–518
Wang P, Chai YN, Roston R, Dayan FE, Schachtman DP (2021) The Sorghum bicolor root exudate
Sorgoleone shapes bacterial communities and delays network formation. mSystems 6(2):
e00749-20
Weiß M, Waller F, Zuccaro A, Selosse MA (2016) Sebacinales–one thousand and one interactions
with land plants. New Phytol 211(1):20–40
Weng J, Wang Y, Li J, Shen Q, Zhang R (2013) Enhanced root colonization and biocontrol activity
of Bacillus amyloliquefaciens SQR9 by abrB gene disruption. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol
97(19):8823–8830
Wille L, Messmer MM, Studer B, Hohmann P (2019) Insights to plant–microbe interactions
provide opportunities to improve resistance breeding against root diseases in grain legumes.
Plant Cell Environ 42(1):20–40
Xu L, Naylor D, Dong Z, Simmons T, Pierroz G, Hixson KK, Kim Y-M, Zink EM, Engbrecht KM,
Wang Y (2018) Drought delays development of the sorghum root microbiome and enriches for
monoderm bacteria. Proc Natl Acad Sci 115(18):E4284–E4293
Xu L, Pierroz G, Wipf HM-L, Gao C, Taylor JW, Lemaux PG, Coleman-Derr D (2021) Holo-omics
for deciphering plant-microbiome interactions. Microbiome 9(1):1–1180 R. Chandnani and L. V. Kochian
Yadav A, Singh RP, Singh AL, Singh M (2021) Identification of genes involved in phosphate
solubilization and drought stress tolerance in chickpea symbiont Mesorhizobium ciceri Ca181.
Arch Microbiol 203(3):1167–1174
Yang J, Xie X, Xiang N, Tian Z-X, Dixon R, Wang Y-P (2018) Polyprotein strategy for stoichio￾metric assembly of nitrogen fixation components for synthetic biology. Proc Natl Acad Sci
115(36):E8509–E8517
Yoshiba Y, Kiyosue T, Nakashima K, Yamaguchi-Shinozaki K, Shinozaki K (1997) Regulation of
levels of proline as an osmolyte in plants under water stress. Plant Cell Physiol 38(10):
1095–1102
Zahir Z, Munir A, Asghar H, Shaharoona B, Arshad M (2008) Effectiveness of rhizobacteria
containing ACC deaminase for growth promotion of peas (Pisum sativum) under drought
conditions. J Microbiol Biotechnol 18(5):958–963
Zhang Z, Pierson LS (2001) A second quorum-sensing system regulates cell surface properties but
not phenazine antibiotic production in Pseudomonas aureofaciens. Appl Environ Microbiol
67(9):4305–4315
Zipper SC, Qiu J, Kucharik CJ (2016) Drought effects on US maize and soybean production:
spatiotemporal patterns and historical changes. Environ Res Lett 11(9):09402181
Chapter 4
Crop Microbiome for Sustainable
Agriculture in Special Reference
to Nanobiology
Pratyusha Sambangi, Vadlamudi Srinivas,
and Subramaniam Gopalakrishnan
Abstract The microbial population surrounding plant is regarded as the crop
microbiome and they are essential in crop development and sustenance. Specifically,
the plant growth-promoting microbes play a key role as growth enhancers and
disease suppressors. These plants associated microbiomes are often considered as
one of the essential agricultural components toward an enhanced crop yield. This has
led to a wide range of nanotechnological applications on the agricultural systems to
boost crop output. In this scenario, the nanoparticles are largely seen interacting with
the crop microbiomes and the plant systems. Hence, in the present chapter, the role
and response of these crop microbiomes and nanoparticles will be discussed in
detail. From the point of application of these nanoparticles, their effect on the
plant growth-promoting bacterial systems and to their biosynthesis utilizing the
crop microbiomes will be explored. Nanomaterials interaction with root colonizing
microbes often promised enhanced plant health during both abiotic and biotic stress
conditions through rhizobacterial metabolite changes. Nanotechnology, being a new
frontier in the modern agriculture practices, the challenges of nanoparticle dosage,
cost efficiency, and their footprint in the agricultural soils over a long time was one
of the vital areas to observe. On the other hand, nanoparticles are widely reported to
enhance the plant growth-promoting and defense traits of the crop microbiomes and
play a key role in global food production. The present chapter discusses the key
features of crop microbiomes, their response to nanoparticles, and together how they
could influence the crop yield and biotic stress resistance.
Keywords Crop microbiome · PGPR · Symbiosis · Nanoparticles · Agriculture
P. Sambangi · V. Srinivas · S. Gopalakrishnan (*)
International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics (ICRISAT), Patancheru,
Telangana, India
e-mail: s.pratyusha@cgiar.org; s.vadlamudi@cgiar.org; s.gopalakrishnan@cgiar.org
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2023
S. Chhabra et al. (eds.), Plant Microbiome for Plant Productivity and Sustainable
Agriculture, Microorganisms for Sustainability 37,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-19-5029-2_482 P. Sambangi et al.
4.1 Introduction
The crops are surrounded by a whole system of environment and diverse microor￾ganisms. These microbial communities associated with the crops are regarded as the
crop microbiome, and they are essential for plant sustenance and growth (Khatoon
et al. 2020). Crop microbiota consists of different types of living communities such
as archaea, bacteria, fungi, protozoans, and viruses that enhance the soil diversity
and fertility (Pedros-Ali and Manrubia 2016). They often support plant growth and
development through some significant processes, namely hormone synthesis, nitro￾gen fixation, and nutrient recycling (Tilak et al. 2005). Apart from that, this soil
microbiome also assists in plant protection against certain invading biotic and abiotic
factors (Müller et al. 2016). Crops with healthy microbiome will often facilitate rich
nutrients and metals into the agricultural cultivable lands (Fageria 2016). This results
in fertile and healthy soils that enhance agricultural crop production, which is an
important necessity at times of ever-increasing population and greater food demand.
Hence, agriculturalists across the world are adopting various technological develop￾ments such as varied microbial inoculants, bio-fertilizers, and microbiome nano￾engineering, further incorporating them into the traditional agricultural practices
(Chen and Yada 2011; Compant et al. 2019). These will surely flourish the crop
microbial ecosystem and sequentially enhance the crop resilience and yield.
Crop microbiomes are mostly influenced by the host plant and the environment
surrounding it. These microbes colonize in different parts of the plant, such as the
rhizosphere, endosphere, and phyllosphere. Among them, rhizosphere, i.e., plant
root surface and its associated microbes, is of paramount importance for undertaking
various metabolic and nutrient cycles (Lakshmanan et al. 2014). These root colo￾nizing beneficial bacteria, which are known as Plant Growth Promoting
Rhizobacteria (PGPR) and they, directly and indirectly, facilitate both plant growth
and protection (Table 4.1). The advantages of PGPR are attributed to their charac￾teristics features of nitrogen fixation, phosphate/potassium solubilization, phytohor￾mone/siderophore production, antibiotic/hydrolytic enzyme production, and induced
systemic resistance (Alekhya and Gopalakrishnan 2017; Vijayabharathi et al. 2018b;
Anusha et al. 2019; Gopalakrishnan and Vadlamudi 2019; Sambangi et al. 2021;
Prasad et al. 2015). Hence, these PGPR are used as an alternative to agrochemicals in
the form of bio-fertilizers/inoculants toward sustainable agriculture management.
Further, with the advanced technologies and multidisciplinary research, technologies
such as nano-encapsulation and nanomaterials are being utilized for the better
performance and productivity of these beneficial microbes (Dixshit et al. 2013;
Rana et al. 2021; Harish et al. 2022). Hence in the present chapter, the applications
of nanotechnology in the agriculture sector will be thoroughly analyzed with partic￾ular emphasis on the positive and negative impacts of these nanoparticles on the
essential soil crop microbiomes.4 Crop Microbiome for Sustainable Agriculture in Special Reference... 83
Table 4.1 Role of some plant growth promoting rhizobacteria (PGPR)
PGPR Beneficial effect Crops References
Azospirillum Nitrogen fixation, phos￾phate solubilization,
improved growth and
nodulation
Bean, wheat,
chickpea, rice,
maize, sugarcane
Hamaoui et al. (2001), Lucy
et al. (2004), Tejera et al.
(2005)
Bacillus Biofertilization,
bioprotection, nitrogen fixa￾tion, improved plant resis￾tance, growth and yield
Chickpea,
pigeonpea, rice,
groundnut, maize,
tomato, cucumber
Ongena and Jacques
(2008), Gopalakrishnan
et al. (2011, 2012b),
Beneduzi et al. (2012),
Gopalakrishnan et al.
(2016), Sharma et al.
(2017), Vaikundamoorthy
et al. (2018), Hashami et al.
(2019)
Pseudomonas Increase in plant yield,
stress resistance, nitrogen
fixation, P and Fe uptake,
effective symbiosis with
other beneficial bacteria
Rice, maize,
chickpea,
pigeonpea, wheat,
cotton
Shaharoona et al. (2008),
Yao et al. (2010),
Gopalakrishnan et al.
(2011, 2012b, 2016),
Paramanandham et al.
(2017), Cheng et al. (2019),
Lawrance et al. (2019)
Rhizobia Nitrogen fixation, bioreme￾diation, bioprotection
Legumes, rice,
tubers
Yanni et al. (2001), Garcia￾Fraile et al. (2012), Flores￾Felix et al. (2013),
Gopalakrishnan et al.
(2018), Vijayabharathi et al.
(2018b)
Streptomyces Enhanced nitrogen fixation,
increased plant growth,
yield, and disease resistance
Legumes, rice,
tomato, chili
Gopalakrishnan et al.
(2011, 2012a, b, 2016),
Alekhya and
Gopalakrishnan (2017),
Vijayabharathi et al.
(2018a), Ankati et al.
(2021), Srinivas et al.
(2020), Gopalakrishnan
et al. (2020, 2021),
Pratyusha et al. (2021)
4.2 Nanotechnology in Sustainable Agriculture
Nanotechnology, being one of the significant technological, scientific advancement in
recent times, has shown a tremendous impact on many fields, including agriculture. It
plays multiple roles in crop production/improvement, immunity against abiotic and
biotic factors, and environmental remediation (Mukhopadhyay 2014; Moulick et al.
2020; Prasad 2014; Prasad et al. 2014, 2017a). These nanoparticles being characteris￾tically smaller in size, have unique features such as a large surface area to volume,
physiochemical stability, aggregation ability, high reactivity, and targeted delivery
(Prasad et al. 2016; Srivastava et al. 2021). Thus, many nanoparticles, namely Ag,
Au, Carbon nanotubes, Cu, Fe, Si, TiO2, Zn, and ZnO, have exhibited some significantTypes References
84 P. Sambangi et al.
Table 4.2 List of nano-products utilized on various agriculturally important crops
Impact
Positive Negative
Nanofertilizers (e.g.,
NPs of urea, ZnO,
chitosan, NPK)
Quick and specific
release, improved
nutrient efficiency,
anti-microbial water
holding capacity
Overdose toxicity,
indirect effect on
PGPR and
environment
Gogos et al. (2012),
Chhipa (2017),
Pitambara and Shukla
(2019)
Nanopesticides
(e.g., Nano-Ag,
Nano-FeO, Nano￾silica, Nano-ZnO)
Low dose, enhance
bio-availability of
active ingredient,
targeted delivery
Unknown fate of the
carrier, slow degra￾dation, possible risk
to humans and
microbiome
John et al. (2017), Kah
et al. (2018),
Bundschuh et al.
(2018)
Nano-biopesticides
(e.g., Azadirachtin￾chitosan, Aloin￾AgNPs, phero￾mones-nanofibers;
garlic essential
oil-polyethylene
glycol)
Crop protection,
increase efficacy of
biologically active
compound, low dosage
Possible hazardous
effect on environ￾ment and soil
Yang et al. (2009),
Feng and Peng (2012),
Shah et al. (2016),
Bipin et al. (2017),
Vijayabharathi et al.
(2018a)
Nano-biosensors
(e.g., Aptasensors,
nanofibers,
nanocapsules)
Monitor of plant and
soil health, smart
delivery
Risk of toxicity and
untargeted dispersion
into soil and water
Rai et al. (2012),
Srivastava et al. (2018)
effects on plant development and protection (Pokropivny et al. 2007). Many researchers
employed nanotechnology to promote quick and low-cost agriculture systems toward
enhanced yield and crop diagnosis (Sekhon 2014; Kim et al. 2017; Abd-Elsalam and
Prasad 2018, 2019; Abd-Elsalam et al. 2019). Also, these nano-engineered technologies
have shown a promising increase in the agricultural yield through sustainable manner
and a better alternative to agrochemicals (Deepti et al. 2020; Prasad et al. 2017b, c).
With the necessity to feed the ever-increasing population, research and innova￾tion in agri-nanotechnology have led to varied applications leading to the develop￾ment of nano-biosensors, nano-fertilizers, nano-pesticides, and nano-encapsulated
products (Bhattacharyya et al. 2016). These different forms of nanomaterials have
strongly exhibited their plant growth and protection properties along with agricul￾tural soil remediation (Kah et al. 2019; Borah et al. 2022). Following (Table 4.2) are
some of the significant developments of nanotechnology, utilized in the agriculture
sector with strong impacts on agricultural crops, crop microbiomes, and soil status
(Sangeetha et al. 2017a, b, c).
4.2.1 Nano-Agrochemicals
Among all nano-products that are widely in the application, nano-pesticides and
nano-fertilizers together are considered as nano-agrochemicals and have gainedCompany Mechanism
4 Crop Microbiome for Sustainable Agriculture in Special Reference... 85
Table 4.3 List of marketing nano-agrochemicals produced by different agri-companies
Nano￾agrochemical
Nano-Gro Agro Nanotechnology Corp,
USA
Increases crop yield (FAO 2011)
Nano Green United Phosphorus Limited,
South Africa
Attacks pest respiratory system (FAO
2011)
PRIMo Maxx Syngenta, Switzerland Attacks pest neural system (FAO 2011)
Karate Zeon Syngenta, Switzerland Attacks pest neural system (FAO 2011)
Fruity Fresh Tamil Nadu Agricultural Uni￾versity, India
Enhances shelf life of fruits and vegetables
(TNAU 2019)
Nano-fert Geolife Agritech India Pvt. Ltd.,
India
Nutrition (Geolife group, www.
geolifegroup.com)
Fib-sol Fib-sol Pvt. Ltd., India PGPR benefits (www.fibsol.com)
much popularity due to their potential effectiveness. Nano-scale technology is
applied to these pesticides and fertilizers to enable their precise management and
better targeted-delivery than the conventional methods. Different types of nano￾formulations are utilized for these agrochemical applications, namely nano￾encapsulations, nano-emulsions, nano-tubes, nano-gels, and nano-suspensions (Liu
and Lal 2015; Prasad et al. 2019). Agriculture being the backbone to many devel￾oping countries, globally, many countries accepted the significance of this nano￾technology in agribusiness. By 2030, agribusiness expected to have a 3 trillion USD
market value globally. In that, nano-agrochemicals will contribute a significant share
with their vibrant developments in the sectors of food yield and plant protection. For
example, the leading agrochemical companies, namely Dow AgroSciences,
Syngenta AG, Bayer crop Sciences AG, and Baden Aniline and Soda Factory
(BASF), have already opened their nano-research divisions. In fact, Syngenta
already marketed nano-pesticides such as Banner MAXX fungicide, Cruise
MAXX Beans, and Primo MAXX Plant Growth Regulator (Bhan et al. 2018).
Likewise, agrochemical companies in Asia and America also are actively participat￾ing in the manufacturing of these nano-agrochemicals (Table 4.3).
Along with this extensive application of nano-agrochemicals, the question of the
risk assessment and the final fate of these products in the environment also been
raised over longer periods. There is uncertainty regarding their usage and safety
toward non-targeted living systems such as crop microbiomes and soil diversity.
Some studies reported adverse effects of these nano-agrochemicals on smaller living
organisms (Ostiguy et al. 2010). Apart from that, the biotransformation of these
nano-agrochemicals could accumulate in the plants, rhizobacteria, and food products
(Melanie and Rai 2020). Intrusion of plant-microbial symbiosis by these nano￾agrochemicals must be thoroughly analyzed before their fullest utilization.Effect/impact References
86 P. Sambangi et al.
4.3 Nanoparticles and Plant Microbiomes
It is evident that from many research reports that in the last few years, nanotechnol￾ogy has been playing a significant role in the agriculture sector in the forms of
different nano-products. The behavior and the impact of these widely introduced
nano-products on the environment are yet to be fully understood (Table 4.4). These
nanoparticles might have direct and indirect interactions on the plants and their most
closely associated soil bacterial communities (Shweta et al. 2018; Singh et al. 2019).
Many researchers have investigated the efficacy and effect of these NPs on the soil
rhizobacteria, and they include both positive and negative implications (Fig. 4.1).
Table 4.4 Nanoparticles effect on the soil microbiomes
Type of
nanoparticles
Ag Effects on enzymes Shin et al. (2012)
Ag Effects on β-glucosidase, acid phosphatase, dehydro￾genase, urease
Hänsch and
Emmerling (2010)
Ag Reduces enzymatic activities Peyrot et al. (2014)
Ag Changes/loss in the bacterial communities Colman et al. (2013)
Ag, Al2O3 Reduces the bacterial and archaeal amoA gene abun￾dance in soil
McGee et al. (2017)
Au Effects the nutrients, enzymes, and microbial
communities
Asadishad et al.
(2017)
Cu Reduces the C and N content and alters the microbial
structures in the soil
Kumar et al. (2012)
Cu & Fe Changes in soil humic contents Ben-Moshe et al.
(2013)
Ti Alters soil bacterial structures Ge et al. (2012)
Fig. 4.1 Impact of nanoparticles on the crop microbiomes4 Crop Microbiome for Sustainable Agriculture in Special Reference... 87
There were also reports of constant percolations of NPs into the soil for more
extended periods of time, leading to toxicity (Yadav et al. 2014). These NPs could
also alter the microscopic properties of soil, i.e., reduced humic acid contents,
resulting in disruption of the residing soil microbial diversity (Maurer-Jones et al.
2013). The introduction of these NPs into the natural environment along with
unintentional releases in the form of water and sewage pose a great threat to the
beneficial crop microbiomes (Coll et al. 2016).
4.3.1 Positive Impact
There are significant positive attributes of these NPs on the soil bacteria communi￾ties. For example, Au, Cu, and SiO2 NPs enhanced the number of microbial
communities in the soil and increased their metabolic rate (Shah and Belozerova
2009). In many reports, AgNPs in lower doses have increased the microbial density,
the nitrifying ability of PGPR, and exhibited anti-microbial activity against patho￾genic microbes (Pietrzak and Gutarowska 2015; Nawaz and Bano 2019). In addition,
the TiO2 and ZnO NPs have assisted in the degradation of organic pollutants in
agricultural soils (Ge et al. 2012). The natural soil nanoparticles, namely TiO2 have
enhanced the performance of the PGPR and, in turn, increased plant growth and
physiology (Timmusk et al. 2018). This implies that the NPs under proper monitor
and dose restrictions could enhance the PGPR abilities and pave the way to an
ecological solution of increased agricultural crop yields. It is also reported that some
NPs, namely Cu, Ag, and Zn, could act against the soil-borne pathogens and play a
vital role in protecting the plant and crop microbiomes against various biotic stress
factors (Malandrakis et al. 2019).
Application of these NPs in the form of nano-fertilizers, nano-pesticides, and
nano-formulations can replace chemical fertilizers to provide site-specific crop
nutrition (Kah et al. 2019), suppress weeds (Amna et al. 2019), and insect-disease￾specific resistance (Camara et al. 2019) with better efficiency for sustainable crop
production. For instance, the silver nanoparticles biosynthesized from Streptomyces
griseoplanus SAI-25 showed antifungal activity against the fungal pathogen
Macrophomina phaseolina (Vijayabharathi et al. 2018a). In another study, the
MgO nanoparticles had reported anti-fungal activity against the soil-borne patho￾gens, namely Phytophthora nicotianae and Thielaviopsis basicola (Juanni et al.
2020). Silver and copper NPs biosynthesized from Pseudomonas aeruginosa
exhibited anti-fungal activity against three pathogenic fungi Botrytis cinerea,
Pilidium concavum, and Pestalotia sp. (Bayat et al. 2021). These reports show us
the positive impacts of NPs in the management of soil-borne pathogens. Thus,
developing eco-friendly nano-formulations, establishing proper delivery system,
and validation of these nano-formulations under field conditions to manage pests
and weeds along with potential benefits such as biofortification in crops is the need
of the hour for sustainability in productivity and conservation of biodiversity in
agricultural production systems (Gupta et al. 2018; Ismail et al. 2017).88 P. Sambangi et al.
4.3.2 Negative Impact
The potential benefits of nanotechnology in the agriculture sector and its enormous
usage and applications have led to detecting NPs in the soil above the threshold
levels. This could significantly alter the biological and physiochemical properties of
the residing soil crop microbiomes (Vittori Antisari et al. 2013). These metallic NPs
were accumulated in the soil through different routes, and they could exhibit toxic
effects on PGPR, which might influence the plant health and the soil structures.
Apart from that, the accumulated NPs could also alter the associated microbial
carbon and nitrogen ecological cycles in the environment (Simonin et al. 2018).
The composition and type of the metallic NPs play a significant role in the effects
on the soil crop microbiomes. For example, the CuO NPs reduced the oxidative
potential of the soil (Schlich and Hund-Rinke 2015), and ZnO NPs decreased the
enzymatic activity of the residing rhizobacteria (Shen et al. 2015). Also, overdose
and continuous percolation of these NPs could accumulate and block the ion
channels of the bacteria. It was reported that the AgNPs impact the ion release
structure of the bacteria (Zhai et al. 2016) and hinder the bacterial enzymatic activity
(Lowry et al. 2012). The Fe3O4 NPs have shown increased toxicity toward the crop
microbiomes (Frenk et al. 2013). Gold NPs at higher concentrations in the soil led to
the loss of rhizobacterial diversity (Asadishad et al. 2017). In the end, these NPs
being present in abnormal quantities in the soil could possibly alter the natural soil
ecosystem and negatively effect on the plant-microbial symbiosis through mem￾brane disruption and cell wall damage.
4.3.3 Nanomaterial’s Role in Crop Abiotic Stress
Crops constantly expose to various abiotic stress factors such as salinity, drought,
extreme temperatures, and heavy metal stress (Zhang et al. 2022). Many researchers
are constantly working to utilize the applications of nanotechnology in minimizing
the abiotic stresses in the crops. Nanomaterials are being investigated to overcome
both the abiotic and biotic stresses in the plants through their promising and potential
nano-sizes. It was observed that the application of nano-silicon dioxide had lowered
the salinity stress in the strawberry crops (Avestan et al. 2019). Similarly, nano￾titanium dioxide had reduced the NaCl levels by increasing the antioxidative
enzymes and compatible solutes in tomato crops (Khan 2016). Nanoscale zero￾valent iron (nZVI) nanomaterials are known to attract the heavy metals and immo￾bilize them with their distinct structures (Fajardo et al. 2012). The application of
Cu-Zn nanoparticles showed an effective reduction in the drought levels in the
plants, especially in the wheat (Taran et al. 2017). In another study it was observed
that the application of SiO2 nanoparticles could increase the plant resistance to
drought conditions (Ashkavand et al. 2015).4 Crop Microbiome for Sustainable Agriculture in Special Reference... 89
4.4 Future Trends and Challenges
With a wide range of potential applications, agri-nanotechnology has been actively
researched at both institutional and industrial levels. The development of novel
nano-tools could be encouraged in the future for a sustainable agriculture. At
present, nanotechnology is the promising solution to meet the two most demanding
issues, i.e., efficient utilization of resources and reducing the output waste. Hence,
innovative nanomaterials and systems will be developed to improve the quality of
the soil, stimulate plant/rhizobacterial growth, and intensify sustainable agricultural
output (Yadav et al. 2020). The validation and safety limits of these nanoparticles
must be studied before proceeding to a wide range of utilization and commerciali￾zation. A proper regulatory guidelines and legislative paperwork must be enforced,
with risk management factors of nanoparticles. In this scenario, at both national and
international level the regulatory bodies namely Department of Biotechnology,
India, International Standard Organization, Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development, and US Food and Drug Administration have laid down guidelines
and practices, to ensure the proper utilization of these nanomaterials in various
sectors of agriculture (FAO/WHO 2013; DBT 2019). Strictly following these guide￾lines will minimize the adverse effects of these NPs on the natural environmental
factors such as vegetation, microbes, and soil over a long period and exhibit their
substantial positive impacts.
4.5 Conclusion
With the growing population and global warming application of nanotechnology
undoubtedly promise sustainable agriculture and enhanced food yield. But, in view
of the above-addressed reports of both positive and negative impacts of NPs on the
crop microbiomes, it is necessary to perform a proper risk-benefit assessment before
their application in the agricultural fields. It must explore a clear overview of the
plant-microbe-soil trophic chain transfer of these NPs. Indeed, the green synthesis of
nanoparticles is a safer approach and promising with less toxicity. In future, a
thorough physio-chemical assessment of these beneficial NPs in natural experimen￾tal designs such as agricultural fields could be advantageous to evaluate their actual
footprint in the ecological nature and on soil microbiota.
Acknowledgments We thank Mr. P.V.S. Prasad for his significant contribution in collecting the
literatures.90 P. Sambangi et al.
Conflict of Interest None.
References
Abd-Elsalam KA, Prasad R (2018) Nanobiotechnology applications in plant protection. Springer
International Publishing. ISBN 978-3-319-91161-8. https://www.springer.com/us/book/978331
9911601
Abd-Elsalam K, Prasad R (2019) Nanobiotechnology applications in plant protection, vol 2.
Springer International Publishing. ISBN 978-3-030-13295-8. https://www.springer.com/gp/
book/9783030132958
Abd-Elsalam K, Mohamed AA, Prasad R (2019) Magnetic nanostructures: environmental and
agricultural applications. Springer International Publishing. ISBN 978-3-030-16438-6. https://
www.springer.com/gp/book/9783030164386
Alekhya G, Gopalakrishnan S (2017) Biological control and plant growth-promotion traits of
Streptomyces species under greenhouse and field conditions in chickpea. Agribiol Res 6:410–
420. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40003-017-0278-2
Amna AHF, Hakeem KR, Qureshi MI (2019) Weed control through herbicide-loaded
nanoparticles. In: Husen A, Iqbal M (eds) Nanomaterials and plant potential. Springer, Cham.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-05569-1_20
Ankati S, Srinivas V, Pratyusha S, Gopalakrishnan S (2021) Streptomyces consortia-mediated plant
defense against Fusarium wilt and plant growth-promotion in chickpea. Microbial Pathog 157:
1–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.micpath.2021.104961. ISSN 0882-4010
Anusha B, Gopalakrishnan S, Naik MK, Sharma M (2019) Evaluation of Streptomyces spp. and
Bacillus spp. for biocontrol of Fusarium wilt in chickpea (Cicer arietinum L.). Arch
Phytopathol Plant Prot 52:1–26. https://doi.org/10.1080/03235408.2019.1635302
Asadishad B, Chaha S, Cianciarelli V, Zhou K, Tufenkji N (2017) Effect of gold NPs on
extracellular nutrient-cycling enzyme activity and bacterial community in soil slurries: role of
nanoparticle size and surface coating. Environ Sci Nano 4:907–918. https://doi.org/10.1039/
C6EN00567E
Ashkavand P, Tabari M, Zarafshar M, Tomášková I, Struve D (2015) Effect of SiO2 nanoparticles
on drought resistance in hawthorn seedlings. Forest Res Pap 76:350–359. https://doi.org/10.
1515/frp-2015-0034
Avestan S, Ghasemnezhad M, Esfahani M, Byrt CS (2019) Application of nano-silicon dioxide
improves salt stress tolerance in strawberry plants. Agronomy 9:246. https://doi.org/10.3390/
agronomy9050246
Bayat M, Zargar M, Chudinova E, Astarkhanova T, Pakina E (2021) In vitro evaluation of
antibacterial and antifungal activity of biogenic silver and copper nanoparticles: the first report
of applying biogenic nanoparticles against Pilidium concavum and Pestalotia sp. fungi. Mole￾cules 26:5402. https://doi.org/10.3390/molecules26175402
Beneduzi A, Ambrosini A, Passaglia LMP (2012) Plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria (PGPR):
their potential as antagonists and biocontrol agents. Genet Mol Biol 35:1044–1051. https://doi.
org/10.1590/S1415-47572012000600020
Ben-Moshe T, Frenk S, Dror I, Minz D, Berkowitz B (2013) Effects of metal oxide nanoparticles on
soil properties. Chemosphere 90:640–646. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2012.09.018
Bhattacharyya A, Duraisamy P, Govindarajan M, Buhroo AA, Prasad R (2016) Nano￾biofungicides: emerging trend in insect pest control. In: Prasad R (ed) Advances and applica￾tions through fungal nanobiotechnology. Springer International Publishing Switzerland, pp
307–319¼
4 Crop Microbiome for Sustainable Agriculture in Special Reference... 91
Bhan S, Mohan L, Srivastava CN (2018) Nanopesticides: a recent novel ecofriendly approach in
insect pest management. J Entomol Res 42:263. https://doi.org/10.5958/0974-4576.2018.
00044.0
Bipin L, Gogle DP, Nandeshwar SB (2017) Nano Bio pesticide to constraint plant destructive pests.
J Nanomed Res 6:1–9. https://doi.org/10.15406/jnmr.2017.06.00158
Borah SN, Koch N, Sen S, Prasad R, Sarma H (2022) Novel nanomaterials for nanobioremediation
of polyaromatic hydrocarbons. In: Sharma H, Dominguez DC, Lee W-Y (eds) Emerging
contaminants in the environment. Elsevier, pp 643–667
Bundschuh M, Filser J, Lüderwald S, Mckee MS, Metriveli G, Schaumann GE, Schulz R, Wagner S
(2018) Nanoparticles in the environment: where do we come from, where do we go to? Environ
Sci Eur 30:6. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12302-018-0132-6
Camara MC, Campos EVR, Monteiro RA, Pereira AES, Proenca PLDF, Fraceto LF (2019)
Development of stimuli-responsive nano-based pesticides: emerging opportunities for agricul￾ture. J Nanobiotechnol 17:100. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12951-019-0533-8
Chen H, Yada R (2011) Nanotechnologies in agriculture: new tools for sustainable development.
Trends Food Sci Technol 22:585–594. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tifs.2011.09.004
Cheng KY, Karthikeyan R, Wong JW (2019) Microbial electrochemical remediation of organic
contaminants: possibilities and perspective. Microb Electrochem Technol 25:613–640. https://
doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-444-64052-9.00025-X
Chhipa H (2017) Nanofertilizers and nanopesticides for agriculture. Environ Chem Lett 15:15–22.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10311-016-0600-4
Coll C, Notter D, Gottschalk F, Sun T, Som C, Nowack B (2016) Probabilistic environmental risk
assessment of five nanomaterials (nano-TiO2, nano-Ag, nano-ZnO, CNT, and fullerenes).
Nanotoxicology 10:436–444. https://doi.org/10.3109/17435390.2015.1073812
Colman BP, Arnaout CL, Anciaux S, Gunsch CK, Hochella MF Jr, Kim B, Lowry GV, McGill BM,
Reinsch BC, Richardson CJ, Unrine JM, Wright JP, Yin L, Bernhardt ES (2013) Low concen￾trations of silver nanoparticles in sewage sludge cause adverse ecosystem responses under
realistic field scenario. PLoS One 8:57189. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0057189
Compant S, Samad A, Faist H, Sessitsch A (2019) A review on the plant microbiome: ecology,
functions, and emerging trends in microbial application. J Adv Res 19:29–37. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.jare.2019.03.004
DBT (2019) Guidelines for evaluation of nano-a. http://dbtindia.gov.in/sites/default/files/DBT_
Draft1-Nano-Agri_Input_nd_Nano-Agri_Products.pdf. Agri input products and nano￾agriproducts in India. pp 1–26
Deepti M, Gurjeet K, Parul S, Karmveer Y, Azmal AS (2020) Nanoparticle-based sustainable
agriculture and food science: recent advances and future outlook. Front Nanotech 2:10. https://
doi.org/10.3389/fnano.2020.579954
Dixshit A, Shukla SK, Mishra RK (2013) Exploring nanomaterials with PGPR in current agricul￾ture scenario PGPR with special reference to nanomaterials lab Lambert. Academic, Berlin, p 51
Fageria NK (2016) In: Fageria NK (ed) The use of nutrients in crop plants. CRC Press,
New York, NY
Fajardo C, Ortiz LT, Rodriguez-Membibre ML, Nande M, Lobo MC, Martin M (2012) Assessing
the impact of zero-valent iron (ZVI) nanotechnology on soil microbial structure and function￾ality: a molecular approach. Chemosphere 86:802–808. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.
2011.11.041
FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations) (2011) The International Plant
Protection Convention at 60 years. http://www.fao.org/agriculture/crops/news-events-bulletins/
detail/en/item/116461/icode/?no_cache 1
FAO/WHO (2013) State of the art on the initiatives and activities relevant to risk assessment and
risk Management of Nanotechnologies in the food and agriculture sectors. FAO/WHO, Rome
Feng B, Peng L (2012) Synthesis and characterization of carboxymethyl chitosan carrying
ricinoleic functions as an emulsifier for azadirachtin. Carbohdr Polym 88:576–582. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2012.01.00292 P. Sambangi et al.
fibsol (n.d.). https://www.fibsol.com/product-category/gels/
Flores-Felix JD, Menendez E, Rivera LP (2013) Use of Rhizobium leguminosarum as a potential
biofertilizer for Lactuca sativa and Daucus carota crops. J Plant Nutr Soil Sci 176:876–882.
https://doi.org/10.1002/jpln.201300116
Frenk S, Ben-Moshe T, Dror I, Berkowitz B, Minz D (2013) Effect of metal oxide nanoparticles on
microbial community structure and function in two different soil types. PLoS One 8:84441.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0084441
Garcia-Fraile P, Carro L, Robledo M (2012) Rhizobium promotes non-legumes growth and quality
in several production steps: towards a biofertilization of edible raw vegetables healthy for
humans. PLoS One 7:e38122. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0038122
Ge Y, Schimel JP, Holdena PA (2012) Identification of soil bacteria susceptible to TiO2 and ZnO
NPs. Appl Environ Microbiol 78:6749–6758. https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.00941-12
geolifegroup (n.d.). https://www.geolifegroup.com/region/domestic-products/item/44-nano-fert
Gogos A, Knauer K, Bucheli TD (2012) Nanomaterials in plant protection and fertilization: current
state, foreseen applications, and research priorities. J Agric Food Chem 60:9781–9792. https://
doi.org/10.1021/jf302154y
Gopalakrishnan S, Vadlamudi S (2019) Management of soil-borne diseases of grain legumes
through broad-spectrum actinomycetes having plant growth-promoting and biocontrol
traits. In: Plant microbe interface. Springer, New York. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-
19831-2_5
Gopalakrishnan S, Humayun P, Kiran BK, Kannan GK, Sree Vidya M, Deepthi K, Rupela O (2011)
Evaluation of bacteria isolated from rice rhizosphere for biological control of charcoal rot of
sorghum caused by Macrophomina phaseolina (Tassi) Goid. World J Microbiol Biotech 27:
1313–1321. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11274-010-0579-0. ISSN: 09593993
Gopalakrishnan S, Pagidi H, Vadlamudi S, Vijayabharathi R, Bhimineni R, Rupela O (2012a) Plant
growth-promoting traits of Streptomyces with biocontrol potential isolated from herbal
vermicompost. Biocont Sci Technol 22:1199–1210. https://doi.org/10.1080/09583157.2012.
719151
Gopalakrishnan S, Upadhyaya HD, Vadlamudi S, Humayun P, Vidya MS, Alekhya G, Singh A,
Vijayabharathi R, Bhimineni RK, Seema M, Rathore A, Rupela O (2012b) Plant growth￾promoting traits of biocontrol potential bacteria isolated from rice rhizosphere. Springerplus
102:1–13. https://doi.org/10.1186/2193-1801-1-71
Gopalakrishnan S, Vadlamudi S, Samineni S, Sameer KCV (2016) Plant growth-promotion and
biofortification of chickpea and pigeonpea through inoculation of biocontrol potential bacteria,
isolated from organic soils. Springerplus 5:01–11. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40064-016-3590-6
Gopalakrishnan S, Srinivas V, Anil Kumar V, Samineni S, Rathore A (2018) Influence of
diazotrophic bacteria on nodulation, nitrogen fixation, growth promotion and yield traits in
five cultivars of chickpea. Biocatal Agri Biotech 15:35–42. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bcab.2018.
05.006
Gopalakrishnan S, Sharma R, Srinivas V, Naresh N, Mishra SP, Ankati S, Pratyusha S,
Govindaraj M, Gonzalez SV, Nervik S, Simic N (2020) Identification and characterization of
a Streptomyces albus strain and its secondary metabolite organophosphate against charcoal rot
of sorghum. Plan Theory 9:1–14. https://doi.org/10.3390/plants9121727
Gopalakrishnan S, Srinivas V, Naresh N, Pratyusha S, Ankati S, Madhuprakash J, Govindaraj M,
Sharma R (2021) Deciphering the antagonistic effect of Streptomyces spp. and host-plant
resistance induction against charcoal rot of sorghum. Planta 253:1–12. https://doi.org/10.
1007/s00425-021-03577-5
Gupta N, Upadhyaya CP, Singh A, Abd-Elsalam KA, Prasad R (2018) Applications of silver
nanoparticles in plant protection. In: Abd-Elsalam K, Prasad R (eds) Nanobiotechnology
applications in plant protection. Springer International Publishing AG, pp 247–266
Hamaoui B, Abbadi J, Burdman S, Rashid A, Sarig S, Okon Y (2001) Effects of inoculation with
Azospirillum brasilense on chickpeas (Cicer arietinum) and faba beans (Vicia faba) under
different growth conditions. Agronomy 21:553–560. https://doi.org/10.1051/agro:20011444 Crop Microbiome for Sustainable Agriculture in Special Reference... 93
Hänsch M, Emmerling C (2010) Effects of silver nanoparticles on the microbiota and enzyme
activity in soil. J Plant Nut Soil Sci 173:554–558
Harish V, Tewari D, Gaur M, Yadav AB, Swaroop S, Bechelany M, Barhoum A (2022) Review on
nanoparticles and nanostructured materials: bioimaging, biosensing, drug delivery, tissue engi￾neering, antimicrobial, and agro-food applications. Nano 12:457. https://doi.org/10.3390/
nano12030457
Hashami SZ, Nakamura H, Ohkama-Ohtsu N, Kojima K, Djedidi S, Fukuhara I et al (2019)
Evaluation of immune responses induced by simultaneous inoculations of soybean (Glycine
max [L.] Merr.) with soil bacteria and rhizobia. Microbes Environ 34(1):64–75. https://doi.org/
10.1264/jsme2.ME18110
Ismail M, Prasad R, Ibrahim AIM, Ahmed ISA (2017) Modern prospects of nanotechnology in
plant pathology. In: Prasad R, Kumar M, Kumar V (eds) Nanotechnology. Springer Nature
Singapore Pte Ltd, pp 305–317
John H, Lucas J, Clare W, Dusan L (2017) Nanopesticides: a review of current research and
perspectives. In: Grumezescu AM (ed) New pesticides and soil sensors. Academic, New York,
pp 193–225
Juanni C, Lintong W, Mei L, Shasha L, Ziyan L, Wei D (2020) Comparative study on the fungicidal
activity of metallic MgO nanoparticles and macroscale MgO against soilborne fungal phyto￾pathogens. Front Microbiol 11:365. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2020.00365
Kah M, Kookana RS, Gogos A, Bucheli TD (2018) A critical evaluation of nanopesticides and
nanofertilizers against their conventional analogues. Nat Nanotechnol 13:677–684. https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41565-018-0131-1
Kah M, Tufenkji N, White JC (2019) Nano-enabled strategies to enhance crop nutrition and
protection. Nat Nanotechnol 14:532–540. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41565-019-0439-5
Khan MN (2016) Nano-titanium dioxide (Nano-TiO2) mitigates NaCl stress by enhancing
antioxidative enzymes and accumulation of compatible solutes in tomato (Lycopersicon
esculentum Mill.). J Plant Sci 11:1–11
Khatoon Z, Huang S, Rafique M, Fakhar A, Kamran MA, Santoyo G (2020) Unlocking the
potential of plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria on soil health and the sustainability of
agricultural systems. J Environ Manag 273:111118. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2020.
111118
Kim DY, Kadam A, Shinde S, Saratale RG, Patra J, Ghodake GJ (2017) Recent developments in
nanotechnology transforming the agricultural sector: a transition replete with opportunities. Sci
Food Agric 98:849–864. https://doi.org/10.1002/jsfa.8749
Kumar N, Shah V, Walker VK (2012) Influence of a nanoparticle mixture on an arctic soil
community. Environ Toxicol Chem 31:131–135. https://doi.org/10.1002/etc.721
Lakshmanan V, Selvaraj G, Bais HP (2014) Functional soil microbiome: below ground solutions to
an above ground problem. Plant Physiol 166:689–700. https://doi.org/10.1104/pp.114.245811
Lawrance S, Varghese S, Varghese EM, Asok AK (2019) Quinoline derivatives producing Pseu￾domonas aeruginosa H6 as an efficient bioherbicide for weed management. Biocat Agric
Biotechnol 18:101096. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bcab.2019.101096
Liu R, Lal R (2015) Potentials of engineered nanoparticles as fertilizers for increasing agronomic
productions. Sci Total Environ 514:131–139. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2015.01.104
Lowry GV, Espinasse BP, Badireddy AR, Richardson CJ, Reinsch BC, Bryant LD, Colman BP
(2012) Long-term transformation and fate of manufactured Ag nanoparticles in a simulated
large scale freshwater emergent wetland. Environ Sci Technol 46:7027–7036. https://doi.org/
10.1021/es204608d
Lucy M, Reed E, Glick BR (2004) Applications of free-living plant growth-promoting
rhizobacteria. Antonie Van Leeuwenhoek 86:1–25. https://doi.org/10.1023/B:ANTO.
0000024903.10757.6e
Malandrakis AA, Kavroulakis N, Chrysikopoulos CV (2019) Use of copper, silver and zinc
nanoparticles against foliar and soil-borne plant pathogens. Sci Total Environ 670:292–299.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2019.03.21094 P. Sambangi et al.
Maurer-Jones MA, Ian L, Gunsolus IL, Murphy CJ, Haynes CL (2013) Toxicity of engineered
nanoparticles in the environment. Anal Chem 85:3036–3049. https://doi.org/10.1021/
ac303636s
McGee CF, Storey S, Clipson N, Doyle E (2017) Soil microbial community responses to contam￾ination with silver, aluminium oxide and silicon dioxide nanoparticles. Ecotoxicology 26:1–10.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10646-017-1776-5
Melanie K, Rai K (2020) Emerging investigator series: nanotechnology to develop novel agro￾chemicals: critical issues to consider in the global agricultural context. Environ Sci Nano 7:
1867–1873. https://doi.org/10.1039/D0EN00271B
Moulick RG, Das S, Debnath N, Bandyopadhyay K (2020) Potential use of nanotechnology in
sustainable and ‘smart’ agriculture: advancements made in the last decade. Plant Biotechnol Rep
14:505. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11816-020-00636-3
Mukhopadhyay SS (2014) Nanotechnology in agriculture prospects and constraints. Nanotechnol
Sci Appl 7:63–71. https://doi.org/10.2147/NSA.S39409
Müller DB, Vogel C, Bai Y, Vorholt JA (2016) The plant microbiota: systems-level insights and
perspectives. Annu Rev Genet 50:211–234. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-genet￾120215-034952
Nawaz S, Bano A (2019) Effects of PGPR (Pseudomonas sp.) and Ag-nanoparticles on enzymatic
activity and physiology of cucumber. Recent Pat Food Nutr Agric 11:124–136. https://doi.org/
10.2174/2212798410666190716162340
Ongena M, Jacques P (2008) Bacillus lipopeptides: versatile weapons for plant disease biocontrol.
Trends Microbiol 16:115–125. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tim.2007.12.009
Ostiguy C, Roberge B, Woods C, Soucy B (2010) Engineered nanoparticles: current knowledge
about OHS risks and prevention measures. Studies and research projects, report R-656, 2nd edn.
Institut Robert Sauvé de Recherche en Santé et Sécurité au Travail, Montréal
Paramanandham P, Rajkumari J, Pattnaik S, Busi S (2017) Biocontrol potential against Fusarium
oxysporum sp. lycopersici and Alternaria solani and tomato plant growth due to Plant Growth–
Promoting Rhizobacteria. Int J Veg Sci 23:294–303. https://doi.org/10.1080/19315260.2016.
1271850
Pedros-Ali C, Manrubia S (2016) The vast unknown microbial biosphere. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
113:6585–6587. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1606105113
Peyrot C, Wilkinson KJ, Desrosiers M, Sauvé S (2014) Effects of silver nanoparticles on soil
enzyme activities with and without added organic matter. Environ Toxicol Chem 33:115–125.
https://doi.org/10.1002/etc.2398
Pietrzak K, Gutarowska B (2015) Influence of the silver nanoparticles on microbial community
indifferent environments. Acta Biochim Pol 62:72–724. https://doi.org/10.18388/abp.2015_
1118
Pitambara A, Shukla YM (2019) Nanofertilizers: a recent approach in crop production. In:
Panpatte D, Jhala Y (eds) Nanotechnology for agriculture: crop production & protection.
Springer, Singapore. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-32-9374-8_2
Pokropivny V, Lohmus R, Hussainova I, Pokropivny A, Vlassov S (2007) Introduction to
nanomaterials and nanotechnology. University of Tartu, Tartu, p 225
Prasad R (2014) Synthesis of silver nanoparticles in photosynthetic plants. J Nanopart
2014:963961. https://doi.org/10.1155/2014/963961
Prasad R, Kumar V, Prasad KS (2014) Nanotechnology in sustainable agriculture: present concerns
and future aspects. Afr J Biotechnol 13(6):705–713
Prasad R, Kumar M, Varma A (2015) Role of PGPR in soil fertility and plant health. In:
Egamberdieva D, Shrivastava S, Varma A (eds) Plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria
(PGPR) and medicinal plants. Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp 247–260
Prasad R, Pandey R, Barman I (2016) Engineering tailored nanoparticles with microbes: quo vadis.
WIREs Nanomed Nanobiotechnol 8:316–330. https://doi.org/10.1002/wnan.13634 Crop Microbiome for Sustainable Agriculture in Special Reference... 95
Prasad R, Bhattacharyya A, Nguyen QD (2017a) Nanotechnology in sustainable agriculture: recent
developments, challenges, and perspectives. Front Microbiol 8:1014. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fmicb.2017.01014
Prasad R, Kumar M, Kumar V (2017b) Nanotechnology: an agriculture paradigm. Springer Nature
Singapore Pte Ltd. ISBN: 978-981-10-4573-8
Prasad R, Kumar V, Kumar M (2017c) Nanotechnology: food and environmental paradigm.
Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. ISBN 978-981-10-4678-0
Prasad R, Kumar V, Kumar M, Choudhary D (2019) Nanobiotechnology in bioformulations.
Springer International Publishing. ISBN 978-3-030-17061-5. https://www.springer.com/gp/
book/9783030170608
Pratyusha S, Vadlamudi S, Gopalakrishnan S (2021) Understanding the evolution of plant growth￾promoting rhizobacteria. In: Shrivastava N et al (eds) Symbiotic soil microorganisms, soil
biology. Springer, New York, p 60. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-51916-2_12
Rai V, Acharya S, Dey N (2012) Implications of nanobiosensors in agriculture. J Biomat
Nanobiotech 3:1–11. https://doi.org/10.4236/jbnb.2012.322039
Rana RA, Siddiqui MN, Skalicky M, Brestic M, Hossain A, Kayesh E, Popov M, Hejnak V, Gupta
DR, Mahmud NU et al (2021) Prospects of nanotechnology in improving the productivity and
quality of horticultural crops. Horticulturae 7:332. https://doi.org/10.3390/horticulturae7100332
Sambangi P, Srinivas V, Gopalakrishnan S (2021) Understanding the evolution of plant growth￾promoting Rhizobacteria. In: Shrivastava N, Mahajan S, Varma A (eds) Symbiotic soil micro￾organisms. Soil biology, vol 60. Springer, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-51916-2_
12
Sangeetha J, Thangadurai D, Hospet R, Harish ER, Purushotham P, Mujeeb MA, Shrinivas J, David
M, Mundaragi AC, Thimmappa AC, Arakera SB, Prasad R (2017a) Nanoagrotechnology for
soil quality, crop performance and environmental management. In: Prasad R, Kumar M, Kumar
V (eds) Nanotechnology. Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd, pp 73–97
Sangeetha J, Thangadurai D, Hospet R, Purushotham P, Karekalammanavar G, Mundaragi AC,
David M, Shinge MR, Thimmappa SC, Prasad R, Harish ER (2017b) Agricultural nanotech￾nology: concepts, benefits, and risks. In: Prasad R, Kumar M, Kumar V (eds) Nanotechnology.
Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd, pp 1–17
Sangeetha J, Thangadurai D, Hospet R, Purushotham P, Manowade KR, Mujeeb MA, Mundaragi
AC, Jogaiah S, David M, Thimmappa SC, Prasad R, Harish ER (2017c) Production of
bionanomaterials from agricultural wastes. In: Prasad R, Kumar M, Kumar V (eds) Nanotech￾nology. Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd, pp 33–58
Schlich K, Hund-Rinke K (2015) Influence of soil properties on the effect of silver nanomaterials on
microbial activity in five soils. Environ Pollut 196:321–330. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.
2014.10.021
Sekhon BS (2014) Nanotechnology in agri-food production: an overview. Nanotechnol Sci Appl 7:
31–53. https://doi.org/10.2147/NSA.S39406
Shah V, Belozerova I (2009) Influence of metal nanoparticles on the soil microbial community and
germination of lettuce seeds. Water Air Soil Pollut 197:143–148. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11270-008-9797-6
Shah M, Wani S, Khan A (2016) Nanotechnology and insecticidal formulations. J Food Bioeng
Nanoproc 1:285–310
Shaharoona B, Naveed M, Arshad M (2008) Fertilizer-dependent efficiency of Pseudomonas for
improving growth, yield, and nutrient use efficiency of wheat (Triticum aestivum L.). Appl
Microbiol Biotechnol 79:147–155. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00253-008-1419-0
Sharma R, Paliwal JS, Chopra P, Dogra D, Pooniya V, Bisaria VS, Swarnalakshmi K, Sharma S
(2017) Survival, efficacy and rhizospheric effects of bacterial inoculants on Cajanus cajan.
Agric Ecosyst Environ 240:244–252. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agee.2017.02.018
Shen Z, Chen Z, Hou Z, Li T, Lu X (2015) Ecotoxicological effect of zinc oxide NPs on soil
microorganisms. Front Environ Sci Eng 9:912–918. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11783-015-
0789-796 P. Sambangi et al.
Shin YJ, Kwak JI, An YJ (2012) Evidence for the inhibitory effects of silver nanoparticles on the
activities of soil exoenzymes. Chemosphere 88:524–529. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
chemosphere.2012.03.010
Shweta, Tripathi DK, Chauhan DK, Peralta-Videa JR (2018) Availability and risk assessment of
nanoparticles in living systems: a virtue or a peril? In: Nanomaterials in plants, algae, and
microorganisms. Academic, London, pp 1–31. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-34544-0
Simonin M, Cantarel AA, Crouzet A, Gervaix J, Martins JM, Richaume A (2018) Negative effects
of copper oxide nanoparticles on carbon and nitrogen cycle microbial activities in contrasting
agricultural soils and in presence of plants. Front Microbiol 9:3102. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fmicb.2018.03102
Singh J, Vishwakarma K, Ramawat N, Rai P, Singh VK, Mishra RK, Kumar V, Tripathi DK,
Sharma S (2019) Nanomaterials and microbes’ interactions: a contemporary overview. 3 Biotech
9:68. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13205-019-1576-0
Srinivas V, Gopalakrishnan S, Kamidi JP, Chander G (2020) Effect of plant growth-promoting
Streptomyces sp. on plant growth and yield of tomato and chilli. Andhra Pradesh J Agril Sci 6:
65–70. http://oar.icrisat.org/id/eprint/11668
Srivastava AK, Dev A, Karmakar S (2018) Nanosensors and nanobiosensors in food and agricul￾ture. Environ Chem Lett 16:161–182. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10311-017-0674-7
Srivastava S, Usmani Z, Atanasov AG, Singh VK, Singh NP, Abdel-Azeem AM, Prasad R, Gupta
G, Sharma M, Bhargava A (2021) Biological nanofactories: using living forms for metal
nanoparticle synthesis. Mini-Rev Med Chem 21(2):245–265
Taran N, Storozhenko V, Svietlova N et al (2017) Effect of zinc and copper nanoparticles on
drought resistance of wheat seedlings. Nanoscale Res Lett 12:60. https://doi.org/10.1186/
s11671-017-1839-9
Tejera N, Lluch C, Martínez-Toledo MV (2005) Isolation and characterization of Azotobacter and
Azospirillum strains from the sugarcane rhizosphere. Plant Soil 270:223–232. https://doi.org/10.
1007/s11104-004-1522-7
Tilak KVBR, Ranganayaki N, Pal KK, De R, Saxena AK, Nautiyal CS, Mittal S, Tripathi AK, Johri
BN (2005) Diversity of plant growth and soil health supporting bacteria. Curr Sci 89:136–150
Timmusk S, Seisenbaeva G, Behers L (2018) Titania (TiO2) nanoparticles enhance the performance
of growth-promoting rhizobacteria. Sci Rep 8:617. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-
18939-x
TNAU (2019) Crop protection guide horticulture crops. http://agritech.tnau.ac.in/pdf/
HORTICULTURE.pdf
Vaikundamoorthy R, Rajendran R, Selvaraju A, Moorthy K, Perumal S (2018) Development of
thermostable amylase enzyme from Bacillus cereus for potential antibiofilm activity. Bioorg
Chem 77:494–506. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bioorg.2018.02.014
Vijayabharathi R, Sathya A, Gopalakrishnan S (2018a) Extracellular biosynthesis of silver
nanoparticles using Streptomyces griseoplanus SAI-25 and its antifungal activity against
Macrophomina phaseolina, the charcoal rot pathogen of sorghum. Biocatal Agri Biotech 14:
166–171. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bcab.2018.03.006
Vijayabharathi R, Gopalakrishnan S, Arumugam S, Vadlamudi S, Sharma M (2018b) Deciphering
the tri-dimensional effect of endophytic Streptomyces sp. on chickpea for plant growth promo￾tion, helper effect with Mesorhizobium ciceri and host-plant resistance induction against
Botrytis cinerea. Microbl Pathog 122:98–107. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.micpath.2018.06.019
Vittori Antisari L, Carbone S, Gatti A, Vianello G, Nannipieri P (2013) Toxicity of metal oxide
(CeO2, Fe3O4, SnO2) engineered NPs on soil microbial biomass and their distribution in soil.
Soil Biol Biochem 60:87–94. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.soilbio.2013.01.016
Yadav T, Mungray AA, Mungray AK (2014) Fabricated nanoparticles: current status and potential
phytotoxic threats. Rev Environ Contam Toxicol 230:83–110. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
319-04411-8_44 Crop Microbiome for Sustainable Agriculture in Special Reference... 97
Yadav RV, Singh NB, Singh A, Yadav V, Bano C, Khare S, Niharika (2020) Expanding the
horizons of nanotechnology in agriculture: recent advances, challenges and future perspectives.
Vegetos 33:203–221. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnano.2020.579954
Yang FL, Li XG, Zhu F, Lei CL (2009) Structural characterization of nanoparticles loaded with
garlic essential oil and their insecticidal activity against Tribolium castaneum (Herbst) (Cole￾optera: Tenebrionidae). J Agric Food Chem 57:10156–10162. https://doi.org/10.1021/
jf9023118
Yanni Y, Rizk R, Abd-El Fattah F (2001) The beneficial plant growth-promoting association of
Rhizobium leguminosarum bv. trifolii with rice roots. Aust J Plant Physiol 28:845–870. https://
doi.org/10.1071/PP01069
Yao L, Wu Z, Zheng Y (2010) Growth promotion and protection against salt stress by Pseudomo￾nas putida Rs-198 on cotton. Eur J Soil Biol 46:49–54. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejsobi.2009.
11.002
Zhai Y, Hunting RE, Wouters M, Willie Peijnenburg WJGM, Vijver GM (2016) Silver
nanoparticles, ions, and shape governing soil microbial functional diversity: nano shapes
micro. Front Microbiol 7:1. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2016.01123
Zhang H, Zhu J, Gong Z et al (2022) Abiotic stress responses in plants. Nat Rev Genet 23:104–119.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41576-021-00413-099
Chapter 5
Changes in Plant Microbiome in Response
to Abiotic Stress
Mishaal Irfan, Hira Aslam, Awais Maqsood, Syeda Khola Tazeen,
Faisal Mahmood, and Muhammad Shahid
Abstract Heavy metal, drought, salinity, temperature, and nutrient shortage are
among abiotic factors that influence crop plants and jeopardize agricultural output.
The association of a variety of microbes with plants is very significant for the growth
and health of the plants for nutrient uptake, protection against phytopathogens,
hormonal signaling for homeostasis, and acquired tolerance against various abiotic
stresses. A community of these microbes that associates with plant is termed as plant
microbiome. Recent research reveals that phenotypic and genotypic traits including
length, water storage content, water storage capacity, nitrogen content, the phospho￾rus content of leaf, transpiration rate, and net photosynthetic rate are correlated with
the composition of bacterial, archaeal, and fungal communities. Hence, a shift in the
population density of these microbes in response to the abiotic stresses could
significantly affect plant morphology and physiology. For example, drought could
alter the microbial compositions in the rhizosphere and endosphere. The experimen￾tal studies revealed the depletion of several Acidobacteria, Verrucomicrobia, and
Deltaproteobacteria followed by the enrichment of Actinobacteria and Chloroflexi
during drought stress. Halotolerant microbes survive in high salt concentration
expressing such traits that help plants to live in elevated salinity environments. All
microorganisms respond to extreme temperatures by making specific polypeptides
called heat shock proteins (HSPs). Certain bacterial strains produce
exopolysaccharides (EPSs) that possess distinctive characteristics of holding water
and also has cementing characteristics. The higher temperature increased
Bacteroidetes and Verrucomicrobia while causing a decrease in the abundance of
Proteobacteria. Engineering the rhizosphere of plants with specific abiotic
M. Irfan · H. Aslam · A. Maqsood · S. K. Tazeen · M. Shahid (*)
Department of Bioinformatics and Biotechnology, Government College University Faisalabad,
Faisalabad, Pakistan
e-mail: mshahid@gcuf.edu.pk
F. Mahmood
Department of Environmental Science and Engineering, Government College University
Faisalabad, Faisalabad, Pakistan
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2023
S. Chhabra et al. (eds.), Plant Microbiome for Plant Productivity and Sustainable
Agriculture, Microorganisms for Sustainability 37,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-19-5029-2_5100 M. Irfan et al.
stress-tolerant microbes makes a specific environment for the plant to nourish. This
chapter will focus on different abiotic factors that affect the plant microbiome.
Keywords Abiotic stress · Microbiome · Rhizosphere · PGPM
5.1 Introduction
Microbial communities are essential for the survival of all living forms on the planet,
as they are involved in practically every biogeochemical cycle that occurs (van der
Heijden and Hartmann 2016). Microbiomes are made up of a diverse group of
microorganisms that live in close proximity to higher creatures. Microorganisms
can be found in all higher organisms, including animals, plants, and fish, as well as
insects, mice, apes, and people. The plant microbiome is a term used to describe the
collective groups of plant-associated bacteria (Barea 2015). Plant microbiome is the
key factor in maintaining plant’s fitness. Almost every part of the plant harbor
microorganisms, our focus is on the rhizosphere, phyllosphere (plant aerial parts),
and endosphere (internal tissues) (Tosi et al. 2020). The rhizosphere is a rich region
of soul-derived microbes colonizing root exudates. In contrast, phyllosphere is a
nutrient-poor region and is subjected to extreme temperature, radiation, and moisture
conditions. Epiphytes are microbial communities found in the rhizosphere and
endosphere. Microbes residing within plant parts comprise in endosphere. Microbes
are of immense importance as it is recognized that they have enormous potential to
increase host health. Microbes associated with plants are classified into three groups,
based on their effects on plants: beneficial, deleterious, and neutral (Spaepen et al.
2009). Some of the beneficial microbes can help plants maintain their productivity
under stressful conditions. The interaction of plants with microbes encompasses
multipart benefits in a plant’s cellular system.
Plants are subjected to a variety of biotic and abiotic stresses throughout their
lives, all of which have a favorable or negative impact on their growth. Changes in
transcriptomics and metabolomics can result in changes in tree, root, and leaf
exudates, affecting the plant-associated microbial population in the process. Plants
with microbiomes, particularly those that can withstand various abiotic challenges,
are not only beneficial to plants but also operate as a legacy and boost offspring
fitness, according to a growing body of evidence and research (Liu et al. 2020).
Microorganisms react to a wide range of stimuli, and their diverse stress responsive
systems interact with one another and have a role in pathogenicity.
Abiotic stressors caused by bad climatic conditions are one of the most important
limiting factors for agricultural output loss. According to a 2007 FAO assessment,
only 3.5% of the total land area is undisturbed by environmental limitations.
Dryness, low/high temperature, salt, and acidic environments, light intensity, sub￾mergence, nutritional inadequacies, drought, and heavy metal stress are all examples
of abiotic stressors. Drought has affected 64% of the land area, whereas flood
(anoxia) has affected 13%, salinity has affected 6%, mineral deficiency has affected
9%, acidic soils have affected 15%, and cold has affected 57%. Erosion, soil5 Changes in Plant Microbiome in Response to Abiotic Stress 101
Fig. 5.1 Diverse abiotic stress factors affecting plants
deterioration, and salt have damaged 3.6 billion hectares of dryland agriculture on
the planet’s 5.2 billion hectares. Half of the world’s irrigated land is expected to be
damaged by salt-affected soils, resulting in a US$12 billion economic loss (Ansari
2018). Similarly, the global annual cost of land degradation by salt in irrigated
countries might be US$ 27.3 billion owing to crop loss. Salinity has been shown to
have a negative impact on plant growth. The number of hectares of irrigated land that
is becoming increasingly salinized has nearly surpassed 34 million. Although it is
impossible to make an exact assessment of agricultural loss (decrease in crop yield
and soil health) as a result of abiotic stresses, it is clear that such pressures affect
large areas of land and have a major impact on crop quality and quantity.
The soil biodiversity is the multiplex of biological communities on the Earth, with
even more richness than tropical forests. Plant-associated microbes are critical to the
health of the soil ecosystem and fertility. Soil is a significant organic carbon sink. In
the soil, organic leftovers from diverse sources are converted by microbes into
humus, a dark-colored, complex organic substance that is degraded by numerous
types of bacteria, releasing CO2 and water (Pandey et al. 2018). Also, it contains
nutrients that are also supplied to plants by mineralization (Fig. 5.1).
5.2 Abiotic Stresses and Plants
A variety of abiotic stresses are experienced by plants such as drought flooding,
extreme temperatures, salinity, nutrition deficiency, heavy metals that affect the
productivity of plants. Because of the sessile nature of plants, these stresses impose
major restrictions such as limiting crop production and food security worldwide (Jha102 M. Irfan et al.
and Subramanian 2018). A plant’s ability to adjust to various stresses depends on its
photosynthetic ability and strength about other metabolisms related to its growth and
development. Under abiotic stresses, plants activate different enzymes, complex
gene interactions, and crosstalk with other metabolic pathways. In this chapter, we
have discussed the different effects of abiotic stresses on plants.
5.2.1 Consequences of Drought
Water makes up a major part of fresh biomass of non-woody plants, i.e., 80–95%
and is essential in growth, development, and other metabolic functions (Bagheri
et al. 2019). It maintains plant cell turgor thus helping in the respiration process
(Khalid et al. 2019). Water has characteristics like high-temperature vaporization,
high surface tension that makes it a good solvent. These characteristics allow water
to remain in liquid even at high temperatures and act as a solvent for many important
molecules, minerals, and ions. Scarcity of water is one of the major issues in plant
production. Drought causes almost 50% losses in crop yield. There are many causes
of water shortage such as low rainfall, high temperatures, high intensity of light, and
salinity. Rainfall is the principal source of water because arid and semi-arid land
covers roughly 35% of the Earth’s surface. Even places with adequate rainfall face
this problem because to the erratic distribution of rainfall throughout the year. As a
result of changing global climatic conditions, temperature rises, increasing water
evaporation from soil and plants (Salehi-Lisar and Bakhshayeshan-Agdam 2016).
Plant productivity is affected in a variety of ways by drought. Cell division,
elongation, and differentiation are all necessary for an organism’s growth and
development (Salehi-Lisar and Bakhshayeshan-Agdam 2016). Drought has a direct
impact on all of these stages since it causes turgor loss, enzyme disruption, and a
reduced photosynthesis rate due to a lack of energy. Reduced leaf size and number of
stomata, cutinization of leaf surface, increase in number of large vessels, cell wall
thickening, premature leaf senescence, and submersion of stomata are some of the
morphological and anatomical characteristics influenced by water stress in succulent
and xerophytes plants. The fundamental variables in optimal photosynthesis in
plants are appropriate leaf area development and stomatal openings. As a result of
the lower surface area, increased resistance to gas exchange due to fewer stomatal
openings, and increased leaf senescence in water stressed plants, the net photosyn￾thetic rate is reduced. Drought stress primarily affects plant morphology by reducing
plant size and biomass production (Khan et al. 2021a). To enhance water uptake
under water stress, plants stretch their roots and form ramified root systems. During
dehydration, the root to shoot ratio increases, while the total biomass of the plants
decreases dramatically.5 Changes in Plant Microbiome in Response to Abiotic Stress 103
5.2.2 Consequences of Flooding
Flooding, also known as damped, flooded, drenched, or ponded soil, is a severe
stress that harms plant growth and metabolism. One of the key drivers of global
warming is changes in environmental circumstances induced by the industrial
revolution’s release of greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide and methane
(Tewari and Mishra 2018). As a result, changing climatic circumstances have
influenced a number of abiotic stressors as well as biotic factors. Scientists have
several definitions of flooding, which is regarded as one of the multiple stress factors
that causes numerous alterations in plant tissues. Climate change is one of the main
causes of erratic rainfall, which causes floods in some parts of the world. Flooding
has a detrimental impact on about 13% of the total land area and 10% of agricultural
land in the United States (Tewari and Mishra 2018). Around 15–80% of the total
yield of crops is lost due to waterlogging condition. Despite the fact that a number of
reviews had been published on different stress factors, but very less data is available
on flooding stress. Plants can be deprived of CO2, O2, and sunlight if excess of water
is present. Flooding stress disrupts plant processes. Photosynthesis and aerobic
respiration are hampered by a lack of CO2, O2, and sunshine. Reduced photosyn￾thesis and aerobic respiration result in a shortage of carbohydrates, restricting plant
growth and development. This increased water level induces hypoxia (a drop in
oxygen levels) in a small duration, causing anoxia to roots. The redox potential of
wet soil and plants rises as a result of hypoxia, leading in the production of reactive
oxygen species (ROS). Although ROS is essential for intracellular and intercellular
signaling, it also oxidizes membrane lipids, pigments, proteins, and nucleic acids,
causing normal plant metabolism to be disrupted. Additionally, increased CO2 levels
in plant roots create phytotoxin buildup in decreased soil, limiting respiration (Blom
and Voesenek 1996; Fukao and Bailey-Serres 2008).
5.2.3 Consequences of Salinity
The increase in world population demands for an increase in food sources: that is
why more arable land is needed to grow more food crops to feed people (Amirjani
2010). This can be accomplished by increasing the amount of farmed land and crop
productivity which can be made possible by bringing agriculture to marginal lands.
But the agricultural productivity is limited by salt stress. Soil salinity has deleterious
effects on crop production all over the world. According to an estimation, salt
damage affects 20% of all irrigated farmland and reduce crop yield (Kumar et al.
2020). The total area of salt-affected soil on the planet is estimated to be 833 million
hectares (Negrão et al. 2017). Every year vast swaths of agricultural lands are lost
and become unfit for agriculture and that is why removed due to increasing soil
salinity. The main factors resulting for soil salinity are the irrigation through saline
irrigation water and the application of fertilizers.104 M. Irfan et al.
Fig. 5.2 Mechanism induced by salt stress in plants
An excessive amount of salts in soil mainly NaCl has negative results on plant
productivity. In the beginning, plant’s response to salinity can be divided into two
phases depending on the Na+ sensing; shoot ion-dependent response and shoot
ion-independent response (Negrão et al. 2017). The first phase occurs within minutes
to days and is followed by stomatal closure and inhibition of leaf expansion. The
second phase occurs over a longer period and causes the accumulation of Na+ in
shoot up to toxic concentrations, particularly in old leaves causing premature leaf
senses and ultimately reducing plant yield and even plant death.
Salinity alters the morphological, physiological, and biochemical responses of
plants, and plants respond to them by various mechanisms (Fig. 5.2). It results in
osmotic and ionic stress. On molecular level changes in gene expression can be
identified as a result of this effect. Suppressive growth can be seen in plants facing
salt stress, but all the plants have different tolerance levels to high salt concentra￾tions. Plants adapt different adaptive strategies to fight different stresses such as
production and accumulation of Free Amino Acids (FAA) such as proline by plant
tissues (Amirjani 2010). Proline adjusts the osmotic potential in the cytoplasm by
acting as a compatible solute. Because there is a major imbalance between reactive
oxygen species (ROS) and antioxidant defense synthesis, oxidative stress is a critical
signal in the case of biotic and abiotic stressors. Because they cause significant
damage to lipids, nucleic acids, and proteins, ROS have been labeled as harmful
chemicals (Gratão et al. 2005). They cause variety of injuries to plant metabolism
and damage photosynthetic pigments, inactivate proteins, enzymes, and
permeabilize membranes by causing lipid peroxidation.5 Changes in Plant Microbiome in Response to Abiotic Stress 105
5.2.4 Consequences of Extreme Temperature
The temperature around the plant determines the rate of (Hatfield 2015) growth and
development, and each species has a temperature range with a minimum, maximum,
and optimum temperature. Extreme events that occur throughout the summer would
have the greatest impact on plant productivity. Given the predicted global warming
of 1.5–2.0 C by 2050, heat stress is now regarded as one of the most essential
elements affecting plant growth and development. Many elements of vegetative
processes, such as growth, yield, and generative development, are influenced by
heat exposure. Extreme temperatures cause several physiological and metabolic
changes. If we specifically talk about photosynthesis many plant species are reported
for disruptive photosynthetic rate due to extreme temperatures. Some of them are
reported in Table 5.1. Lower growth, reduced photosynthesis, seed germination
suppression, incorrect development, changed secondary metabolism, and
overproduction of reactive oxygen species (ROS) leading in oxidative stress have
all been linked to higher temperatures.
In cell cultures of Perilla frutescens and strawberry, the ideal temperature (25 C)
enhances anthocyanin output. Lowering the temperature encourages the accumula￾tion of anthocyanins while restricting cell development. Strawberry cell culture
yielded the highest anthocyanin concentration at 15 C, which was around 13-fold
higher than that at 35 C. At the relatively high temperature of 28 C, anthocyanin
synthesis was dramatically reduced in Perilla frutescens suspension cultures,
whereas 25 C was ideal for pigment productivity. In Daucus carota cell suspension
cultures, similar findings on optimal anthocyanin productivity have been found
(Akula and Ravishankar 2011).
5.2.5 Consequences of Heavy Metals
Higher plants need trace levels of heavy metals like zinc (Zn) and copper (Cu) to
live, but others like cadmium (Cd) aren’t required. All heavy metals, however, are
dangerous at large doses (Riesen and Feller 2005). Because metals cannot be
decomposed, their remediation necessitates both immobilization and toxicity reduc￾tion or elimination. Scientists have been evaluating solutions including the use of
plants to clean contaminated areas in recent years. Phytoextraction (uptake) is the
process of using living green plants to extract inorganic toxins from polluted soils
and concentrate them in roots and easily harvestable shoots (Suman et al. 2018).
Metal ions (lanthanum, europium, silver, and cadmium) and oxalate have a role in
secondary metabolite synthesis. Because it is a major component of the urease
enzyme, the trace metal nickel (Ni) is necessary for plant development. Plant
development is stifled by Ni concentrations above a particular threshold. In response
to cadmium and lead stress, plant growth, pigment content, metabolic parameters,
and heavy metal uptake in Brassica juncea L. were investigated. Cd and PbPlant species Effect on photosynthetic systems References
(continued)
106 M. Irfan et al.
Table 5.1 Temperature effects on photosynthesis in several plant species
Temperature
stress
L. esculentum Cold
temperature
Chlorophyll content, leaf area, Pn, Gs, Et,
Ci, and Fv/Fm all decreased
A decrease in the expression of
photosynthesis-related proteins
Ahanger et al.
(2020)
Saccharum
officinarum
Cold
temperature
Chloroplast structural disruption, chloro￾plast microtubule and grana lamella
reduction, and overall photosynthetic
efficiency decline
Xalxo et al.
(2020)
T. aestivum Cold
temperature
Photosynthesis declines due to thylakoid
membrane damage
Djanaguiraman
et al. (2020)
High-tem￾perature
environment
Reduced net photosynthetic rate and thy￾lakoid membrane degradation
Djanaguiraman
et al. (2020)
High
temperature
Decline in CO2 assimilation rate and sto￾matal conductance
Djanaguiraman
et al. (2020)
Camellia
sinensis
Low
temperature
Reduction in Pn, Gs, Et, Ci, and maximal
photochemical efficiency of PS II
Zhang et al.
(2020)
Populus simonii High
temperature
Reduced electron transport, photosystem
disruptions, glycolate pathway activation
caused H2O2 production, damaging com￾plete photosynthetic apparatus
Sharma et al.
(2019)
L. esculentum Low
temperature
Damage to the thylakoid membrane,
resulting in a decrease in light energy
distribution and a decrease in electron
transport rate
Yang et al.
(2018)
T. aestivum High
temperature
Reduction in chlorophyll content and
photochemical activity of PS II
Liu et al. (2019)
Cucumis sativus High
temperature
Decreased net photosynthetic rate, actual
photochemical efficiency, photochemical
quenching coefficient, and starch content
He et al. (2018)
Pisum sativum High
temperature
Decreased CO2 assimilation, stomatal
conductance, and water use efficiency
Parvin et al.
(2019)
Glycine max High
temperature
Photosynthesis rates, stomatal and meso￾phyll conductance, photosystem II quan￾tum yield, carboxylation rate, and electron
transfer across CO2 levels have all
increased
Xu et al. (2016)
Cold
temperature
Due to a photo-biochemical process,
photosynthetic restriction occurs,
followed by stomatal and mesophyll lim￾itations. Photosynthesis is inhibited by the
build-up of carbohydrates and organic
acids
Gago et al.
(2020)
Citrullus lanatus Cold
environment
Reduction chlorophyll content, Pn, Gs, Et,
and Ci
Wang et al.
(2018)
Prosopis
chilensis &
Hot
environment
Photochemical efficiency and photosyn￾thetic rate are both decreasing
Wang et al.
(2018)Plant species Effect on photosynthetic systems
Prosopis
tamarugo
5 Changes in Plant Microbiome in Response to Abiotic Stress 107
Table 5.1 (continued)
Temperature
stress References
Hibiscus rosa￾sinensis
Cold
environment
PS II has a lower photochemistry effi￾ciency, electron transport, and quantum
yield
Banerjee and
Roychoudhury
(2019)
Zea mays Hot
environment
Decreased activities of RUBISCO
activase
Kim et al.
(2021)
Triticum
aestivum
Hot
environment
Enzymatic activities are destroyed
because of reduced chlorophyll
production
Zhou et al.
(2021)
Gossypium
barbadense
Hot
environment
Overall photosynthesis is diminishing due
to limited activity of ribulose-1,
5 bisphosphates and photosynthetic elec￾tron transport
Osei-Bonsu
(2020)
treatment reduced plant growth, chlorophyll content, and carotenoids, while Cd was
found to be more detrimental than Pb treatment. This is exemplified by B. juncea.
During the flowering stage, Cd (900 M) reduced protein level by 94%, whereas Pb
(1500 M) reduced protein content by 44%. Proline levels increased as Cd and Pb
levels decreased but declined at higher levels. B. juncea roots accumulated more Cd
and Pb than the shoots. Cd accumulates at a faster rate than Pb, while higher Pb
concentrations prevent Cd absorption.
5.2.6 Consequences of Nutrition Deficiency
When plants are stressed, secondary metabolite production may rise since growth is
often inhibited more than photosynthesis, and secondary metabolites are the main
source of carbon fixation. The relationship between soil pH, air and soil temperature,
available moisture, nutrient excesses, soil organic matter, and soil mineral content is
intricate. However, in some cases, visual signs may be used to indicate potential
difficulties. Deficiencies should be assessed through soil testing and plant tissue
analysis. Soil testing is the most exact technique of determining whether primary
nutrient levels are optimal for plant survival and growth. Nitrogen is normally a
unique test, but it is routinely applied at uniform rates to most crops (Hatfield 2015).
Crop health and productivity are harmed by nutrient shortages and toxicities,
which may manifest as unusual visual symptoms. Knowing the function and mobil￾ity of each essential nutrient in the plant will aid in determining which one is causing
a deficiency or toxicity symptom. Stunted development, chlorosis, interveinal chlo￾rosis, purple or red staining, and necrosis are all signs of general insufficiency.
Mobile nutrient shortages arise initially in older, lower leaves, while immobile
nutrient deficiencies appear first in younger, upper leaves. Overapplication of108 M. Irfan et al.
nutrients is the most common cause of nutrient poisoning, which causes abnormal
growth (excessive or stunted), chlorosis, leaf discoloration, and necrotic patches.
Many nutrients may impede the absorption of other nutrients when ingested in
excess, thus leading to deficiency symptoms.
5.3 Microbiome
Microbes are the collective communities of microorganisms in a particular environ￾ment. They are fundamental for the maintenance of life on Earth, as they play a
critical role in combating different diseases. We don’t know much about their
distribution, but we do know that they can be found in a variety of places, including
soils, oceans, the atmosphere, and even within our bodies (Berg et al. 2014). When it
comes to plant-associated microorganisms, it has a long history that dates back to
Lorenz Hiltner’s concept of the rhizosphere in 1904 (Berg et al. 2014). They
colonize a wide range of plant parts, from the surface to the roots and deep tissues,
and play a critical role in plant health, productivity, community composition, and
ecosystem functioning (Singh et al. 2019). This microbial diversity can resist a
variety of abiotic stressors (Table 5.2). Resistance and resiliency are two words
that come to mind when describing this. These microbial communities can assist
plants in coping with a variety of stressors.
5.3.1 Role of Microbiome in Relieving Drought
As the world population tends to reach nine billion by 2025, worldwide food security
is threatened (Hanjra and Qureshi 2010). As a result, 70% more food must be
produced to meet the growing population’s demand. Crop productivity is, however,
severely limited by difficult environmental circumstances. Drought stress is an
environmental limitation that poses a severe danger to agricultural growth and
productivity in most parts of the world. To cope up with this issue scientists are
focusing on improving drought resistance traits in crops with the help of molecular
breeding and transgenic approaches (Hussain et al. 2018). But these techniques have
certain limitations that make it difficult to develop drought resistance crops. There￾fore, there is need to explore and utilize the naturally occurring root microflora that
confer resistance in plants against drought and many other environmental stresses.
Because of its environmentally favorable nature and low-cost input, the use of
naturally existing microflora to combat drought stress is gaining traction around the
world. Microbes can be found in practically every component of the plant
(phyllosphere, endosphere, and rhizosphere), and the rhizosheath, which refers to
the “root-adhering soil fraction” and is also considered part of the plant microbiome,
has received less attention. Rhizosheaths are a mechanism that improves drought
tolerance in plants. They are made up of mucilage that is released from plants around5 Changes in Plant Microbiome in Response to Abiotic Stress 109
Table 5.2 Abiotic stress tolerance in common crop plants is mediated by Rhizobacteria species
Crop Stress Rhizobacteria References
Solanum
tuberosum
Salt/
drought/
HMs
Bacillus pumilus DH 11, Bacillus firmus 40 Khan et al.
(2021b)
Helianthus
annuus
Drought Achromobacter xylosoxidans (SF2) Bacillus
pumilus (SF3 and SF4)
Raghuwanshi
and Prasad
(2018)
Lycopersicon
esculentum
Heat Bacillus cereus Patel et al. (2017)
Oryza sativa Drought Azospirillum brasilense Az.39 Tisarum et al.
(2019)
Triticum
aestivum
Heat Bacillus velezensis 5113 Abd El-Daim
et al. (2019)
Triticum
aestivum
Heat Pseudomonas brassicacearum, Bacillus
thuringiensis, Bacillus subtilis
Khan et al.
(2021b)
Cucurbita
pepo
Drought Bacillus circulans ML2, Bacillus megaterium
ML3
Khan et al.
(2021b)
Lycopersicon
esculentum
Heavy
metal
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Burkholderia
gladioli
Khanna et al.
(2019)
Zea mays Drought Klebsiella variicola F2, Pseudomonas
fluorescens YX2, Raoultella planticola YL2
Razad et al.
(2021)
Abelmoschus
esculentus
Salinity Enterobacter spp. Sagar et al.
(2020)
Stevia
rebaudiana
Salinity Streptomyces spp. Khan et al.
(2021b)
Phaseolus
vulgaris
Salinity Aneurinibacillus aneurinilyticus, Paenibacillus
spp.
Gupta and
Pandey (2020)
Arachis
hypogea
Salinity Bacillus licheniformis K11 Subiramani et al.
(2020)
soil particles and forms a cylinder around the roots of drought-stressed plants. They
are known to host bacterial and fungal populations, as well as microbes that promote
plant growth (PGP) (Etesami 2021). Microbes that live in areas that are frequently
subjected to drought stress are more adaptable and resistant than those that do not.
Brassica rapa plants were exposed to recurrent drought stress in one study, and they
were better able to regulate bacterial abundance than control plants (Naylor and
Coleman-Derr 2018).
Plant responses to microbe-induced drought stress are poorly known. Rolli et al.
investigated grapevine and Arabidopsis growth in drought-stricken environments.
They put eight isolates to the test in vivo for 510 different strains, and the results
demonstrated that plant growth-promoting action is stress-dependent, not strain￾specific. However, it was observed that several of the microbes studied play a role
in plant adaptation to drought stress (Hussain et al. 2018). Plants’ mechanisms for
resisting tolerance are still unknown. (1) Production of phytohormones like
gibberellic acid, abscisic acid (ABA), and indole-3-acetic acid (IAA) to lower
ethylene levels in the roots, which is possible when plant ACC is broken down by110 M. Irfan et al.
bacterial ACC-deaminase; (2) production of 1-aminocyclopro pane-1-carboxylate
(ACC) deaminase to lower ethylene levels in the roots, which is possible during the
breakdown of plant.
Cell division, stem and root elongation, lateral and adventitious root initiation,
and root and shoot orientation in response to light and gravity are all influenced by
IAA. Some bacteria, such as Azospirillum spp. and Bacillus thuringiensis, have been
discovered to produce IAA, which aids plant survival by increasing root and root
hair formation. Similarly, Azospirillum lipoferum strains can affect stomatal closure
in their host plant maize by generating ABA and gibberellins, which can influence
water loss regulation (Vurukonda et al. 2016). Some PGPRs that can produce
ACC-deaminase can also help in drought tolerance. For example, treatment of
tomato and pepper seedlings with Achromobacter piechaudii ARV8 resulted in
reduced ET concentration as these bacteria are capable of producing
ACC-deaminase which is an enzyme capable of cleaving ACC into amine and
alpha-ketobutyrate instead of ET (Mayak et al. 2004). Epoxy polysaccharides having
architectural characteristics impart functionality to biofilms. These biofilms can
improve plants performance in drought stress. Pseudomonas spp. and Acinetobacter
spp. are EPS producing species which promoted drought tolerance in pepper plant by
imparting protection against desiccation by the formation of hydrophilic biofilm
around the roots (Kaushal et al. 2016).
All these mechanisms induced by PGPR and plant itself are reported in the
literature, but ample research is available to advocate the fact that soil microorgan￾isms can improve drought tolerance in plants.
5.3.2 Role of the Microbiome in Relieving Flooding
Flood frequency and severity are predicted to grow as a result of global climate
change, which has had a variety of effects on climatic conditions around the world.
Plants undergo numerous physiological and biological changes as a result of
prolonged submersion under soggy circumstances. Under soggy conditions, the
soil in which plants grow undergoes numerous physiological changes. The pores
in the soil allow gaseous exchange between the atmosphere, the soil, and the soil
microorganisms. This increased the synthesis of the stress hormone ethylene. By
manufacturing the enzyme 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate (ACC) deaminase,
many bacterial populations can control ethylene levels. ACC is a plant-produced
ethylene precursor that is cleaved by ACC-deaminase, reducing ethylene synthesis.
Basil plants infected with microorganisms that produce ACC-deaminase grew faster
than control plants. Pseudomonas putida UW4, an ACC-deaminase-producing
bacterium was used for proteomic profiling of the cucumber plant, and this plant
was grown in hypoxic conditions, which showed a shift in the protein profile of the
plant toward defense stress. Although this data showed the ability of microbiome in
flood stress tolerance, only very few studies are available. Continued study is needed
to unravel the mechanisms and plant microbiome interaction.5 Changes in Plant Microbiome in Response to Abiotic Stress 111
5.3.3 Role of the Microbiome in Relieving Salinity
Fulfilling the world’s food demand is the major challenge as the world population is
rapidly growing. So, for this purpose soil salinity is the major focus as it limits crop
production and growth in many areas of the world. Several approaches including soil
reclamation and management practices can be used to address this issue, but these
techniques are expensive and not so practical. Another environment-friendly
approach that uses plant microbiome as inoculum is gaining momentum (Hussain
et al. 2018). Microorganisms that are exposed to high levels of stress are thought to
develop characteristics that allow them to withstand the stress. In the case of salinity
stress, the same strategy is employed. Microorganisms that are salinity tolerant can
withstand a variety of salt concentrations and overcome them via various salinity
tolerant processes. Microorganisms that are saline tolerant can improve the health of
salinity-affected soils, sustain ecological functions, and encourage plant growth.
The accumulation of different solutes for osmoregulation, production of extra￾cellular proteases, and production of Na+/K+ antiporters, which is an integral
membrane protein and a cotransporter involved in the active transport of two or
more molecules, are all reported mechanisms by which salt tolerant bacteria over￾come the effect of salt (Mayak et al. 2004). Such salt tolerant bacteria can be used as
an inoculum in salt effected soil that will help crops in overcoming the stress. In one
of the study 130 rhizobacterial strains were isolated from wheat plants that were
sown in saline conditions. Out of these 130 isolates, 24 isolates tolerated the high
stress level of NaCl. The authors added that this stress tolerance is due to different
genes, hormones, and proteins (Mayak et al. 2004). According to some reported
data, arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (AMF) can help plants develop tolerance to salt
stress. Experiments showed that AMF plants inoculated with Glomus sp. have
increased growth in soil as compared to un-inoculated plants which might be
possibly due to increased K+ and decreased Na+ concentration in shoots (Giri and
Mukerji 2004). This treatment has shown improved salt tolerance in maize, mung
bean, cucumber, tomato, and clover plants. Hence the application of a salt-tolerant
microbiome can be beneficial for plants to grow in salt-affected soil. However, there
is a need to explore that which hidden mechanisms of microbiome are involved in
salt tolerance.
5.3.4 Role of the Microbiome in Relieving Extreme
Temperatures
Bacteria play an important role in the survival of most types of life on the planet. It’s
crucial to understand how people and other living things on Earth can adapt to
climate change by combining knowledge of many microbiomes. We need to under￾stand not just how microbiomes drive temperature change (via GHG production and
consumption), but also how climate change and other anthropogenic activities will112 M. Irfan et al.
affect them. The impact of climate change is predicted to be heavily influenced by
microbiome reactions, which are critical for achieving a green future. Despite the
fact that microbiomes are critical in the regulation of climate change, they are rarely
the focus of climate change research (Cavicchioli et al. 2019; Bakken and Frostegård
2017; Itakura et al. 2013; Ritchie et al. 2018).
Finding the genes that control agriculturally beneficial nitrogen, potassium, and
sulfur metabolism, and then improving the bacteria that carry these genes is one
strategy (Bakken and Frostegård 2017; Itakura et al. 2013). N2O emissions from
soybean have decreased as a result of the use of microbial strains with increased N2O
reductase activity, and both genetically modified and wild strains with increased
N2O reductase activity give prospects for reducing N2O emissions (Itakura et al.
2013). The programs that control the stomach microbiota and breeding of cattle, aim
for host genetic elements that change microbiome’s responses are options for
lessening methane emission from livestock.
Microbiomes have the greatest impact on carbon sequestration. As a result,
ecological changes that affect aquatic photosynthesis of microbiomes and, as a
result, carbon storage—fixed in waters—are a focus for the carbon cycle.
Microbiomes contribute significantly to GHG emissions through the biochemical
cycles of nitrogen, carbon dioxide, and methane. The local environment, the biome,
the food chain, and, most importantly, climate change all have an impact on the
balance of microbial GHG uptake versus release. GHG emissions, pollution, agri￾culture, and finally population increase all have an impact on microbiomes, and this
has a direct impact on climate change, hazardous waste, agricultural practices, and
disease spread (Venkatramanan et al. 2020a, b). Positive feedbacks will occur as a
result of anthropogenic activity that alters the carbon uptake-to-release ratio, has￾tening climate change. Microbiomes, on the other hand, have great promise for
easing anthropogenic concerns through enhanced agricultural results, biofuel pro￾duction, and pollution reduction. Targeted laboratory study using model bacteria
will be used to address specific microbiome challenges (Cavicchioli et al. 2019).
5.3.5 Role of the Microbiome in Relieving Heavy Metals
Heavy metal pollution of soil poses a threat to the natural environment and food
safety. Environmental pollution and social disclosure associated with heavy metals
are attributed to a variety of human-caused actions such as trade production and
mining. Around 50 million locations of soil pollution by heavy metals or metalloids
exist worldwide, with existing concentrations exceeding legal thresholds. Heavy
metal contamination of soil poses several risks to the environment and individuals,
as well as affecting food chain safety and the ability to use the land for agricultural
purposes, all of which have a significant impact on food security (Wuana and
Okieimen 2011).
Heavy metal pollution of soil poses a threat to the natural environment and food
safety. Environmental pollution and social disclosure associated with heavy metals5 Changes in Plant Microbiome in Response to Abiotic Stress 113
are attributed to a variety of human-caused actions such as trade production and
mining. Around 50 million locations of soil pollution by heavy metals or metalloids
exist worldwide, with existing concentrations exceeding legal thresholds. Heavy
metal contamination of soil poses several risks to the environment and individuals,
as well as affecting food chain safety and the ability to use land for agricultural
purposes, all of which have a significant impact on food security. The natural
environment and food safety are both threatened by heavy metal poisoning of soil.
Heavy metal contamination and social disclosure are linked to several human-caused
activities, including trade production and mining. Around 50 million sites worldwide
have been contaminated by heavy metals or metalloids, with concentrations exceed￾ing legal limits. Heavy metal pollution of soil provides a multitude of threats to the
environment and persons, as well as influencing food chain safety and land use for
agricultural reasons, all of which have a substantial impact on food security.
Bacterial processes can be divided into two categories: molecular and biochemical.
The first group consists of heavy metal resistance genes found on chromosomes or
plasmids. Microbes interact with extracellular soluble metals and have a role in
microbial tolerance through diverse chemical reactions, according to the latter.
The remediation of metals in soil is important to safeguard the natural environ￾ment and shield living organisms (Prasad 2021). Conventional remediation tech￾niques include chemical and physical methods. Correspondingly, biological
approaches are measured as an active technique for metal remediation, which
comprises: bioremediation, and phytoremediation (Suman et al. 2018). Bioremedi￾ation by microorganisms is an effective, efficient, and eco-friendly procedure that
lowers the cost of the cleaning process associated with the contamination of heavy
metals (Mishra 2017; Prasad et al. 2021). Contrary, phytoremediation, depends on
the conditions of water, soil, and climate, demonstrating to be a very sluggish and
seasonally effective method (Prasad 2022). In addition, interactions of plant–micro￾organism also perform a vital part in the adaptation to environments polluted with
heavy metals and therefore can be examined in depth to enhance microbe-assisted
methods of phytoremediation (Ianeva 2009; Spain and Alm 2003).
5.3.6 Role of the Microbiome in Relieving Nutrient Deficiency
Plants are part of a varied ecological unit in their natural habitat, which contains a
large number of microorganisms. However, research into a broad range of plant￾associated bacteria and their potential to replace synthetic agricultural inputs is still
in its early stages. The composition and dynamics of rhizosphere microbiomes have
lately made significant advances. Plants impact microbiome architecture, probably
through root exudates, and bacteria have evolved to thrive in the rhizosphere niche in
a variety of ways, according to evidence.
Plants contribute a considerable amount of carbon to the rhizosphere, which helps
soil microbes survive. So, what do the plants get in exchange? Although the N2
molecule contains a substantial amount of nitrogen in the atmosphere, the majority114 M. Irfan et al.
of nitrogen, potassium, and sulfur atoms are biologically bonded in soils. These
nutrient sources are only slightly accessible to plants due to differences in metabolic
capacity between plants and bacteria, but they can be digested by a variety of soil
microbes. This suggests that in natural ecosystems, microorganisms’ nitrogen fixa￾tion and nutrient mineralization activities are critical for plant nutrition, as these
reactions break down refractory forms of nitrogen, phosphorous, and sulfur to
release these elements for plant nutrition (Rovira 1965; van der Heijden et al.
2008). This long-held belief has recently been thrown into question, as many studies
have showed that plants may directly absorb various types of organic nitrogen.
Despite this, it is often considered that bacteria are the top competitors for organic
nitrogen molecules in soil due to their poor diffusivity. Furthermore, isotope labeling
tests often confirm the notion that most organic nitrogen is used first by microbial
species and then by plants (Kuzyakov and Xu 2013).
For years, researchers have established a list of microbial metabolic pathways
relevant to plant nutrition in terms of nitrogen, potassium, and sulfur in the literature
on soil microorganisms. The symbiotic connection between bacteria and legumes is
often used economically when inoculating field crops with nitrogen-fixing rhizobia
strains. But how can these phenomena be strengthened and improved for long-term
use in agricultural systems for nitrogen fixation in legumes and nutrition in
non-legume crops in terms of nitrogen, potassium, and sulfur? Assume that several
bacterial strains have varied metabolic capacities (Timm et al. 2015), along with the
vast amount of soil microbial genome sequencing data generated recently (Müller
et al. 2016). Finding the genes that control agriculturally beneficial nitrogen, potas￾sium, and sulfur metabolism, and then improving the bacteria that carry these genes
is one strategy.
5.4 Current Insights and Future Prospectives of Research
Plant-associated microbiomes are expanding in relevance as a major field of research
that enhances plant health, growth, and production. Plant-associated microbiomes
are intimately implicated in mechanisms that enable plants survive stressful circum￾stances, as explained in this chapter. Because of the heavy reliance on it, scientists
are now viewing the microbial genome as a plant genome. However, these conclu￾sions are preliminary, and additional research is needed to properly comprehend the
highly complex phenomenon of microbial communities. Stress management in
plants would be greatly aided by plant-associated microbiomes. One method could
be to create transgenic crops with microbe-derived beneficial genes. However,
molecular procedures are time-consuming, and there are a slew of other difficulties
that make it less accessible. The other strategy that could be more cost-effective and
environment-friendly is using microbial inoculants. Several studies have shown
beneficial and positive results in field conditions, while others find unsatisfied and
negative results (Nadeem et al. 2014). Another strategy could be the development of
a microbial consortium for ready-to-use formulations against specific abiotic5 Changes in Plant Microbiome in Response to Abiotic Stress 115
stresses. Therefore, the mechanisms by which microbes confer stress resistance to
plants need more research and understanding. If we develop our knowledge and if
we can decode and mimic the biological procedures of microorganisms and be able
to regulate them, then we can control these abiotic stresses. Recent trend provides
data on understanding the microbe–microbe and plant–microbe interactions that will
help us to use PGPM as a sustainable tool against these limiting factors.
5.5 Conclusion
Abiotic elements such as heavy metal, flooding, temperature, light, and drought all
have an impact on agricultural output around the world. Abiotic stresses cause plants
to respond in a variety of ways, but photosynthetic activity is one of the most
significant regulators of overall plant growth and productivity. Reactive oxygen
species (ROS) are formed in plants as a result of all of these abiotic stressors,
producing oxidative damage, and membrane instability. When RUBISCO activity
is decreased, plant photosynthetic efficiency is also diminished. Heavy metals have a
significant negative impact on pigment production and accumulation due to enzy￾matic degradation. Meanwhile, the temperature is progressively rising as a result of
several environmental circumstances, such as global warming. Temperatures beyond
the permissible threshold stress the plant, causing it to lose its cellular equilibrium
and limit its growth, development, and metabolism. As a result, plants’ and micro￾organisms’ ability to cope with these stressors differs substantially between species.
Agricultural yields still have a lot of room for improvement, despite substantial
advances in genetic technologies such as QTL mapping and transgenic approaches.
For example, genetic and environmental relationships are thought to be poorly
understood. Likewise, finding QTLs for one type of stress does not work for other
types of stress. As a result, problems with transgenic plants designed to combat stress
persist.
Acknowledgments The authors are thankful to Khola Tazeen for her help in the literature
collection and proofreading of this manuscript.
References
Abd El-Daim IA, Bejai S, Meijer J (2019) Bacillus velezensis 5113 induced metabolic and
molecular reprogramming during abiotic stress tolerance in wheat. Sci Rep 9(1):1–18
Ahanger MA, Aziz U, Alsahli AA, Alyemeni MN, Ahmad P (2020) Influence of exogenous
salicylic acid and nitric oxide on growth, photosynthesis, and ascorbate-glutathione cycle in
salt stressed Vigna angularis. Biomol Ther 10(1):42
Akula R, Ravishankar GA (2011) Influence of abiotic stress signals on secondary metabolites in
plants. Plant Signal Behav 6(11):1720–1731. https://doi.org/10.4161/psb.6.11.17613116 M. Irfan et al.
Amirjani M (2010) Effect of salinity stress on growth, mineral composition, proline content,
antioxidant enzymes of soybean. Am J Plant Physiol 5(6):350–360
Ansari MI (2018) Plant microbiome and its functional mechanism in response to environmental
stress. Int J Green Pharm 12:81–92
Bagheri N, Alizadeh O, Zadeh SS, Aref F, Ordookhani K (2019) Biochemical investigation of
potential of plant growth-promoting bacteria and auxin treatments to alleviate drought stress in
wheat (Triticum aestivum L.). Eurasia J Biosci 13(2):1225–1230
Bakken LR, Frostegård Å (2017) Sources and sinks for N2O, can microbiologist help to mitigate
N2O emissions? In: Microbiology E (ed) vol 19. Wiley Online Library, pp 4801–4805
Banerjee A, Roychoudhury A (2019) Cold stress and photosynthesis. In: Photosynthesis, produc￾tivity and environmental stress. Wiley, Chichester, pp 27–37
Barea JM (2015) Future challenges and perspectives for applying microbial biotechnology in
sustainable agriculture based on a better understanding of plant-microbiome interactions. J
Soil Sci Plant Nutr 15(2):261–282
Berg G, Grube M, Schloter M, Smalla K (2014) The plant microbiome and its importance for plant
and human health. Front Microbiol 5:1
Blom C, Voesenek L (1996) Flooding: the survival strategies of plants. Trends Ecol Evol 11(7):
290–295
Cavicchioli R, Ripple WJ, Timmis KN, Azam F, Bakken LR, Baylis M et al (2019) Scientists’
warning to humanity: microorganisms and climate change. Nat Rev Microbiol 17(9):569–586
Djanaguiraman M, Narayanan S, Erdayani E, Prasad PV (2020) Effects of high temperature stress
during anthesis and grain filling periods on photosynthesis, lipids and grain yield in wheat. BMC
Plant Biol 20(1):1–12
Etesami H (2021) Potential advantage of rhizosheath microbiome, in contrast to rhizosphere
microbiome, to improve drought tolerance in crops. Rhizosphere 20:100439
Fukao T, Bailey-Serres J (2008) Submergence tolerance conferred by Sub1A is mediated by SLR1
and SLRL1 restriction of gibberellin responses in rice. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 105(43):
16814–16819
Gago J, Daloso DM, Carriquí M, Nadal M, Morales M, Araújo WL et al (2020) The photosynthesis
game is in the “inter-play”: mechanisms underlying CO2 diffusion in leaves. Environ Exp Bot
178:104174. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envexpbot.2020.104174
Giri B, Mukerji KG (2004) Mycorrhizal inoculant alleviates salt stress in Sesbania aegyptiaca and
Sesbania grandiflora under field conditions: evidence for reduced sodium and improved mag￾nesium uptake. Mycorrhiza 14(5):307–312
Gratão PL, Polle A, Lea PJ, Azevedo RA (2005) Making the life of heavy metal-stressed plants a
little easier. Funct Plant Biol 32(6):481–494
Gupta S, Pandey S (2020) Enhanced salinity tolerance in the common bean (Phaseolus vulgaris)
plants using twin ACC deaminase producing rhizobacterial inoculation. Rhizosphere 16:100241
Hanjra MA, Qureshi ME (2010) Global water crisis and future food security in an era of climate
change. Food Policy 35(5):365–377
Hatfield J (2015) Temperature extremes: effect on plant growth and development. Weather Climate
Extremes 10:4–10. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wace.2015.08.001
He L, Yu L, Li B, Du N, Guo S (2018) The effect of exogenous calcium on cucumber fruit quality,
photosynthesis, chlorophyll fluorescence, and fast chlorophyll fluorescence during the fruiting
period under hypoxic stress. BMC Plant Biol 18(1):1–10
Hussain SS, Mehnaz S, Siddique KH (2018) Harnessing the plant microbiome for improved abiotic
stress tolerance. In: Plant microbiome: stress response. Springer, New York, pp 21–43
Ianeva O (2009) Mechanisms of bacteria resistance to heavy metals. Mikrobiolohichnyi Zhurnal
71(6):54–65
Itakura M, Uchida Y, Akiyama H, Hoshino YT, Shimomura Y, Morimoto S et al (2013) Mitigation
of nitrous oxide emissions from soils by Bradyrhizobium japonicum inoculation. Nat Clim
Chang 3(3):208–2125 Changes in Plant Microbiome in Response to Abiotic Stress 117
Jha Y, Subramanian R (2018) From interaction to gene induction: an eco-friendly mechanism of
PGPR-mediated stress management in the plant. In: Plant microbiome: stress response.
Springer, New York, pp 217–232
Kaushal M, Wani S, Ecosystems P, Environment (2016) Rhizobacterial-plant interactions: strate￾gies ensuring plant growth promotion under drought and salinity stress. Agric Ecosyst Environ
231:68–78
Khalid MF, Hussain S, Ahmad S, Ejaz S, Zakir I, Ali MA et al (2019) Impacts of abiotic stresses on
growth and development of plants. In: Plant tolerance to environmental stress. CRC Press, West
Palm Beach, FL, pp 1–8
Khan N, Ali S, Shahid M, Mustafa A, Sayyed R, Curá J (2021a) Insights into the interactions among
roots, rhizosphere and rhizobacteria for improving plant growth and tolerance to abiotic stresses:
a review. Cells 10:1551. s note: MDPI stays neu-tral with regard to jurisdictional claims in ...
Khan N, Ali S, Shahid MA, Mustafa A, Sayyed R, Curá JA (2021b) Insights into the interactions
among roots, rhizosphere, and rhizobacteria for improving plant growth and tolerance to abiotic
stresses: a review. Cell 10(6):1551
Khanna K, Jamwal VL, Gandhi SG, Ohri P, Bhardwaj R (2019) Metal resistant PGPR lowered Cd
uptake and expression of metal transporter genes with improved growth and photosynthetic
pigments in Lycopersicon esculentum under metal toxicity. Sci Rep 9(1):1–14
Kim SY, Slattery RA, Ort DR (2021) A role for differential Rubisco activase isoform expression in
C4 bioenergy grasses at high temperature. GCB Bioenergy 13(1):211–223. https://doi.org/10.
1111/gcbb.12768
Kumar A, Singh S, Gaurav AK, Srivastava S, Verma JP (2020) Plant growth-promoting bacteria:
biological tools for the mitigation of salinity stress in plants. Front Microbiol 11:1216
Kuzyakov Y, Xu X (2013) Competition between roots and microorganisms for nitrogen: mecha￾nisms and ecological relevance. New Phytol 198(3):656–669. https://doi.org/10.1111/nph.
12235
Liu H, Brettell LE, Qiu Z, Singh BK (2020) Microbiome-mediated stress resistance in plants.
Trends Plant Sci 25(8):733–743
Liu Y, Xu Q, Li W, Yang X, Zheng Q, Li B et al (2019) Long-term high light stress induces leaf
senescence in wheat (Triticum aestivum L.). Photosynthetica 57(3):830–840
Mayak S, Tirosh T, Glick BR (2004) Plant growth-promoting bacteria that confer resistance to
water stress in tomatoes and peppers. Plant Sci 166(2):525–530
Mishra GK (2017) Microbes in heavy metal remediation: a review on current trends and patents.
Recent Pat Biotechnol 11:88–196
Müller DB, Vogel C, Bai Y, Vorholt JA (2016) The plant microbiota: systems-level insights and
perspectives. Annu Rev Genet 50:211–234. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-genet￾120215-034952
Nadeem SM, Ahmad M, Zahir ZA, Javaid A, Ashraf M (2014) The role of mycorrhizae and plant
growth promoting rhizobacteria (PGPR) in improving crop productivity under stressful envi￾ronments. Biotechnol Adv 32(2):429–448
Naylor D, Coleman-Derr D (2018) Drought stress and root-associated bacterial communities. Front
Plant Sci 8:2223
Negrão S, Schmöckel S, Tester M (2017) Evaluating physiological responses of plants to salinity
stress. Ann Bot 119(1):1–11
Osei-Bonsu I (2020) Thermotolerance of photosynthesis in cowpea (Vigna unguiculata). (Ph.D.),
Michigan State University, Ann Arbor. https://www.proquest.com/dissertations-theses/
thermotolerance-photosynthesis-cowpea-em-vigna/docview/2394838223/se-2?accountid¼13
5034. ProQuest dissertations & theses global database. 27833893.
Pandey SN, Abid M, Khan M (2018) Diversity, functions, and stress responses of soil
microorganisms. In: Egamberdieva D, Ahmad P (eds) Plant microbiome: stress response.
Microorganisms for sustainability, vol 5. Springer, Singapore, pp 1–19118 M. Irfan et al.
Parvin S, Uddin S, Fitzgerald GJ, Tausz-Posch S, Armstrong R, Tausz M (2019) Free air CO2
enrichment (FACE) improves water use efficiency and moderates drought effect on N2 fixation
of Pisum sativum L. Plant Soil 436(1):587–606
Patel KS, Naik JH, Chaudhari S, Amaresan N (2017) Characterization of culturable bacteria
isolated from hot springs for plant growth promoting traits and effect on tomato (Lycopersicon
esculentum) seedling. C R Biol 340(4):244–249
Prasad R (2021) Environmental pollution and remediation. Springer. ISBN: 978-981-15-5499-5.
https://www.springer.com/gp/book/9789811554988
Prasad R (2022) Phytoremediation for environmental sustainability. Springer, Singapore. ISBN
978-9811656200. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-5621-7
Prasad R, Nayak SC, Kharwar RN, Dubey NK (2021) Mycoremediation and environmental
sustainability, vol 3. Springer International Publishing. 978-3-030-54421-8. https://www.
springer.com/gp/book/9783030544218
Raghuwanshi R, Prasad JK (2018) Perspectives of rhizobacteria with ACC deaminase activity in
plant growth under abiotic stress. Root Biol:303–321
Razad A, Sutariati GAK, Rakian TC, Mamangkey J, Silalahi M (2021) Bio-priming using indig￾enous Pseudomonas fluorescens to improve local upland rice (Padi Gogo) production of Paebiu
Kolopua and Pae Wuna cultivars. Int J Sci Technol Manag 2(5):1885–1899
Riesen O, Feller U (2005) Redistribution of nickel cobalt manganese zinc and cadmium via the
phloem in young and maturing wheat. J Plant Nutr 28(3):421–430
Ritchie H, Reay DS, Higgins P (2018) Potential of meat substitutes for climate change mitigation
and improved human health in high-income markets. Front Sustain Food Syst 2:16
Rovira AD (1965) Interactions between plant roots and soil microorganisms. Annu Rev Microbiol
19:241–266. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.mi.19.100165.001325
Sagar A, Sayyed R, Ramteke P, Sharma S, Marraiki N, Elgorban AM, Syed A (2020) ACC
deaminase and antioxidant enzymes producing halophilic Enterobacter sp. PR14 promotes the
growth of rice and millets under salinity stress. Physiol Mol Biol Plants 26(9):1847–1854
Salehi-Lisar SY, Bakhshayeshan-Agdam H (2016) Drought stress in plants: causes, consequences,
and tolerance. In: Drought stress tolerance in plants, vol 1. Springer, New York, pp 1–16
Sharma A, Kumar V, Shahzad B, Ramakrishnan M, Sidhu GPS, Bali AS et al (2019) Photosynthetic
response of plants under different abiotic stresses: a review. J Plant Growth Regul:1–23
Singh D, Raina TK, Kumar A, Singh J, Prasad R (2019) Plant microbiome: a reservoir of novel
genes and metabolites. Plant Gene. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plgene.2019.100177
Spaepen S, Vanderleyden J, Okon Y (2009) Plant growth-promoting actions of rhizobacteria.
World J Microbiol Biotechnol 51:283–320
Spain A, Alm E (2003) Implications of microbial heavy metal tolerance in the environment. Rev
Undergraduate Res 2:1–6
Subiramani S, Ramalingam S, Muthu T, Nile SH, Venkidasamy B (2020) Development of abiotic
stress tolerance in crops by plant growth-promoting. Phyto-Microb Stress Regul 125
Suman J, Uhlik O, Viktorova J, Macek T (2018) Phytoextraction of heavy metals: a promising tool
for clean-up of polluted environment? Front Plant Sci 9:1476
Tewari S, Mishra A (2018) Flooding stress in plants and approaches to overcome. In: Plant
metabolites and regulation under environmental stress. Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp 355–366
Timm CM, Campbell AG, Utturkar SM, Jun SR, Parales RE, Tan WA, Pelletier DA (2015)
Metabolic functions of Pseudomonas fluorescens strains from Populus deltoides depend on
rhizosphere or endosphere isolation compartment. Front Microbiol 6:1118. https://doi.org/10.
3389/fmicb.2015.01118
Tisarum R, Theerawitaya C, Samphumphuang T, Phisalaphong M, Singh HP, Cha-Um S (2019)
Promoting water deficit tolerance and anthocyanin fortification in pigmented rice cultivar
(Oryza sativa L. subsp. indica) using arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi inoculation. Physiol Mol
Biol Plants 25(4):821–8355 Changes in Plant Microbiome in Response to Abiotic Stress 119
Tosi M, Mitter EK, Gaiero J, Dunfield K (2020) It takes three to tango: the importance of microbes,
host plant, and soil management to elucidate manipulation strategies for the plant microbiome.
Can J Microbiol 66(7):413–433
van der Heijden MG, Bardgett RD, van Straalen NM (2008) The unseen majority: soil microbes as
drivers of plant diversity and productivity in terrestrial ecosystems. Ecol Lett 11(3):296–310.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1461-0248.2007.01139.x
van der Heijden MG, Hartmann M (2016) Networking in the plant microbiome. PLoS Biol 14(2):
e1002378
Venkatramanan V, Shah S, Prasad R (2020a) Global climate change and environmental policy:
resilient and smart agriculture. Springer, Singapore. ISBN: 978-981-329-855-2. https://www.
springer.com/gp/book/9789813298552
Venkatramanan V, Shah S, Prasad R (2020b) Global climate change and environmental policy:
agriculture perspectives. Springer, Singapore. ISBN: 978-981-13-9569-7. https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-981-13-9570-3
Vurukonda SSKP, Vardharajula S, Shrivastava M, SkZ A (2016) Enhancement of drought stress
tolerance in crops by plant growth promoting rhizobacteria. Microbiol Res 184:13–24
Wang Y, Li J, Gu W, Zhang Q, Tian L, Guo S, Wei S (2018) Exogenous application of
5-aminolevulinic acid improves low-temperature stress tolerance of maize seedlings. Crop
Pasture Sci 69(6):587–593. https://doi.org/10.1071/CP17401
Wuana RA, Okieimen FE (2011) Heavy metals in contaminated soils: a review of sources,
chemistry, risks and best available strategies for remediation. Int Schol Res Notices 2011:1–20
Xalxo R, Yadu B, Chandra J, Chandrakar V, Keshavkant S (2020) Alteration in carbohydrate
metabolism modulates thermotolerance of plant under heat stress. In: Wani SH, Kumar V (eds)
Heat stress tolerance in plants: physiological, molecular and genetic perspectives. Wiley, pp
77–115
Xu G, Singh SK, Reddy VR, Barnaby JY, Sicher RC, Li T (2016) Soybean grown under elevated
CO2 benefits more under low temperature than high temperature stress: varying response of
photosynthetic limitations, leaf metabolites, growth, and seed yield. J Plant Physiol 205:20–32.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jplph.2016.08.003
Yang X, Xu H, Li D, Gao X, Li T, Wang R (2018) Effect of melatonin priming on photosynthetic
capacity of tomato leaves under low-temperature stress. Photosynthetica 56(3):884–892
Zhang F, Lu K, Gu Y, Zhang L, Li W, Li Z (2020) Effects of low-temperature stress and
brassinolide application on the photosynthesis and leaf structure of tung tree seedlings. Front
Plant Sci 10:1767
Zhou Z, Wei C, Liu H, Jiao Q, Li G, Zhang J et al (2021) Exogenous ascorbic acid application
alleviates cadmium toxicity in seedlings of two wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) varieties by
reducing cadmium uptake and enhancing antioxidative capacity. Environ Sci Pollut Res Int
29:21739. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-021-17371-z121
Chapter 6
Functional Potential of Plant Microbiome
for Sustainable Agriculture in Conditions
of Abiotic Stresses
Sudhakar Srivastava and Divya Singh
Abstract The growth and yield of crop plants are threatened by a variety of factors
like soil and irrigation water quality, climate change, and abiotic and biotic stresses.
Among these, abiotic stresses like drought, salinity and metal(loid)s, such as arsenic
(As) and cadmium (Cd) constitute three major constraints inducing huge yield losses
and quality deterioration of crop produce throughout the world. To enable plants to
combat these stresses and to obtain sustainable increases in crop yields, the help is
required from its associated microorganisms. Microbiome constitutes all microor￾ganisms intricately linked to plants in above and below-ground part of plants.
Microbiomes affect plant growth, development, and yield both in normal and
under-stressed conditions via several mechanisms. These effects include changes
in bioavailability of essential and toxic metal(loid)s, nitrogen fixation, phosphate
solubilization, phytohormone synthesis, and water uptake. The microbiome func￾tions like an extended genome of plants and these microbial associations change
dynamically in presence of stress and also influence the effect of stresses on plants in
reverse. The research on this dynamic microbe–plant interaction has yielded valu￾able mechanistic information and identified potential microbes that can be used to
achieve sustainable crop production in coming years. The present chapter discusses
microbiome and its role in abiotic stresses.
Keywords Climate change · Drought · Salinity · Heat · Metal(loid)s · Microbes
6.1 Introduction
The plant and microbiome are intricately connected to each other and plant growth
and development are influenced strongly by the microbiome. The microbiome of
plant can be obtained from root surface, rhizosphere, of above ground parts like
S. Srivastava (*) · D. Singh
Plant Stress Biology Laboratory, Institute of Environment and Sustainable Development,
Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, UP, India
e-mail: sudhakar.iesd@bhu.ac.in
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2023
S. Chhabra et al. (eds.), Plant Microbiome for Plant Productivity and Sustainable
Agriculture, Microorganisms for Sustainability 37,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-19-5029-2_6122 S. Srivastava and D. Singh
leaves and also from inside the plant tissues. These microbiomes can be termed as
rhizosphere, phyllosphere, and endosphere (Berg et al. 2014; Bulgarelli et al. 2012;
Lundberg et al. 2012). Rhizosphere is studied with respect to microbiomes, plant–
soil, and plant–organisms interactions, which include archaea, bacteria, and fungi
and also protozoans, nematodes, and viruses; all playing important roles toward
plant growth and development.
The microbiome–plant association extends potential pool of proteins and metab￾olites and helps both mutualistic group of organisms in growth, development, and
stress tolerance. Microorganisms help in nutrient bioavailability, uptake, and assim￾ilation in plants, in providing stress-fighting metabolites, hormones, and proteins to
combat abiotic and biotic stresses and diseases (Berg et al. 2014). The plant
microbiome also assists in the remediation of contaminant present and can help in
phytoremediation efforts by enhancing its effectiveness and rate (Frossard et al.
2018). Nonetheless, abiotic and biotic stresses also influence the microbiome com￾position and functions and in turn influence their own effects on plants. Further
effects on microbiome are from agricultural use of chemicals that influence nutrient
composition of soil and thus the microbiome. Crop rotation, irrigation pattern,
weather changes, etc. also influence plant microbiome. Thus, plant–microbiome
interactions are highly dynamic in nature and therefore the research on this aspect
has increased in recent past. This is because it is now well understood that amidst
rising abiotic stresses, decreasing crop productivity and need of higher crop produc￾tion, microbiome interventions can be fruitful to sustain crop yields (Ambrosini et al.
2016; Frossard et al. 2018; Lareen et al. 2016; Naylor et al. 2017; Thiem et al. 2018;
Young et al. 2018; Prasad et al. 2018).
6.2 Role of Plant Microbiome in Metal(loid) Stress
Tolerance
Metals are present ubiquitously and life of all living beings is dependent on the
optimum presence and intake of some essential or beneficial ones. However, some
metals like cadmium (Cd), arsenic (As), and chromium (Cr) are toxic even in minute
quantities. The contamination of toxic metals influences plant microbiome in terms
of microbial diversity and operational taxonomic unit (OTU) counts (Gołębiewski
et al. 2014; Hur et al. 2011; Jiao et al. 2019; Sheik et al. 2012) or in terms of
abundance of specific bacterial species and genera (Berg et al. 2012). The effects of
beneficial, essential, and toxic metals on microbiome vary and there is variation in
effects due to metal species and crop plant (Gołębiewski et al. 2014; Hur et al. 2011).
In a study on Cd, it was found that microbial diversity decreased initially but
increased later on demonstrating that microbiome can adjust, tolerate, and revert to
normal or stress–tolerance roles within a crop cycle (Jiao et al. 2019). Microbiome
can consist of microbes that not only provide the stress tolerance but also comprise
of plant growth promoting microbes (PGPMs) and the appropriate application of6 Functional Potential of Plant Microbiome for Sustainable Agriculture... 123
PGPMs (Table 6.1) and stress–tolerant microbes can allow to attain sustainable and
quality crop yields even in stressed conditions (Chen et al. 2016; Gil-Martínez et al.
2018; Mnasri et al. 2017; Wang et al. 2016). Several researchers have identified
PGPMs with high tolerance to metal(loid)s like strains of Pantoea agglomerans,
Alcaligenes faecalis, and Bacillus cereus for cadmium (Cd), arsenate [As(V)], silver
(Ag), copper (Cu), lead (Pb), and zinc (Zn) (Luziatelli et al. 2020; El-Meihy et al.
2019; Abo-Amer et al. 2015).
6.3 Role of Plant Microbiome in Drought Stress Tolerance
Drought is a major environmental stressor in agriculture, which results in huge losses
in crop yields every year (Lesk et al. 2016). The research on drought has been going
on for several decades and a lot of information about its effects on plants, mode of
action, and tolerance mechanisms has been revealed. However, the drought-induced
changes in plant microbiome are yet to be understood (Bastida et al. 2017; Naylor
and Coleman-Derr 2018). As in case of other stresses, the interactions between
drought and microbiome are mutual, both affecting each other (Naylor et al. 2017)
(Table 6.2). Nonetheless, some microbes possess tolerance to drought and therefore,
their abundance is increased in drought conditions (Naylor et al. 2017). The mem￾bers of Proteobacteria, Bacteroidetes, and Firmicutes have been found to be nor￾mally drought tolerant (Soussi et al. 2016). Drought tolerant bacteria have been
identified from several drought affected regions (Armada et al. 2018) and focus has
been on to find bacteria that are able to not only grow themselves but also protect the
crop plant from drought effects. In a study, Acinetobacter and Pseudomonas bacteria
reduced growth inhibition of grapevines in drought conditions by minimizing effects
on photosynthesis through the synthesis of 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate
(ACC) deaminase (Rolli et al. 2015). One of the major influences of drought tolerant
bacteria on plants for reducing their proneness to drought is augmentation of plant
root growth and root water uptake (Armada et al. 2018; Gagne-Bourque et al. 2016;
Marasco et al. 2013; Rolli et al. 2015) that can be achieved through the synthesis of
various hormones.
6.4 Role of Plant Microbiome in Salinity Stress Tolerance
Salinity is another very important stress factor that causes major agricultural crop
losses. The presence of high salinity in agricultural field leads to high osmotic values
inhibiting water and nutrient uptake by the plants and thus decreasing plant photo￾synthesis and biomass (Yaish and Kumar 2015). The microbiome associated to
plants, especially roots, is also affected due to less water availability in prolonged
stress conditions. However, there are several environments, which are highly saline
like sea water and coastal areas and these are home to a number of microbes. Thus,(continued)
124 S. Srivastava and D. Singh
Table 6.1 Studies demonstrating the role of microorganisms in mitigation of metal(loid) toxicity in
plants
S
no.
Name of the
microorganisms Plant Effect References
1. Achromobacter
xylosoxidans
Brassica juncea Microbe inhibited the dam￾aging effect of Cu toxicity by
increasing length and dry
weight of shoot and root
Ma et al.
(2009)
2. Burkholderia sp. Lycopersicon
esculentum
This microbe protected the
host plant against Cd stress
and promoted relative plant
growth by reducing the Cd
absorption
Dourado
et al. (2013)
3. Psychrobacter sp. Ricinus
communis and
Helianthus
annuus
This microbe helped the
energy crops against Ni tox￾icity, enhanced fresh and dry
weight of plants; it improved
the availability of phospho￾rus and promoted the iron
content in both plants
Ma et al.
(2010)
4. Klebsiella pneumoniae Oryza sativa The microbial strain helped
in improving the overall
growth of the plant by
reducing the accumulation of
Cd in seedling
Pramanik
et al. (2017)
5. Bacillus spp. Cicer arietinum Bacillus helped host plants
to fight against Cr toxicity,
promoted the growth of all
parts of the plant including
nodules, maximum incre￾ment in chlorophyll and
leghemoglobin at 136 mg
Cr/kg soil was 23% and
143%, respectively
Wani and
Khan (2010)
6. Pseudomonas
aeruginosa and
Burkholderia gladioli
Lycopersicom
esculentum
These microbes fight against
Cd toxicity by enhancing the
osmolytes and phenolic
compounds in the host plant.
The activities of
antioxidative enzymes were
enhanced in presence of
microbes
Khanna
et al. (2019)
7. Penicillium janthinellum Solanum
lycopersicum
This endophytic fungus sig￾nificantly improved the
growth by improving the
shoot length, chlorophyll
content, shoot dry weight,
and stomatal conductance in
plant subjected to Cd stress
Khan et al.
(2014)Plant Effect References
(continued)
6 Functional Potential of Plant Microbiome for Sustainable Agriculture... 125
Table 6.1 (continued)
S
no.
Name of the
microorganisms
8. Achromobacter
xylosoxidans
Oryza sativa A. xylosoxidans excreted
indole-3-acetic acid, which
promoted overall growth of
the rice and reduced the
effects of As toxicity; it
reduced the concentration of
As in stem, leaves, bran and
grain of rice
Wang et al.
(2020)
9. Phyllobacterium
myrsinacearum
Sedum
plumbizincicola
This microbe helped in
mobilization of high con￾centration of Cd, Zn, and Pd
in soil and thus helped in
preventing the adverse
effects of their toxicity
Ma et al.
(2013)
10. Enterobacter sp.
(in combination with
zeolite)
Brassica napus This microorganism helped
in alleviating the Cd toxicity
in combination with zeolite.
The combination improved
the physiological attributes
such as chlorophyll content,
transpiration rate, or stomata
conductance of B. napus
Saeed et al.
(2019)
11. Bacillus sp. and
Stenotrophomoas sp.
Raphanus
sativus
These microbes reduced the
negative effects of
Ni-toxicity by improving
plant growth parameters,
total chlorophyll, and shoot
nitrogen content
Akhtar et al.
(2018)
12. Arbuscular mycorrhizal
fungus (with compost)
Medicago
sativa
This mixture helped in miti￾gating the stress caused by
Zn and Cd and reduced oxi￾dative stress, leading to bet￾ter plant development; the
application of mixture
improved the stomatal con￾ductance and sugar content
in the host and decreased
metal accumulation
Raklami
et al. (2020)
13. Enterobacter aerogenes Oryza sativa This microbe possessed high
degree of resistance toward
Cd, Pb, and As. This
microbe also exhibited some
important traits of PGPM
under high Cd stress. It
reduced the oxidative stress
through antioxidants and
decreased Cd uptake
Pramanik
et al. (2018)Plant Effect References
126 S. Srivastava and D. Singh
Table 6.1 (continued)
S
no.
Name of the
microorganisms
14. Proteobacter,
Alphaproteobacter,
Gammaproteobacter,
Rhizobiales, Rhizobium,
and Acidobacteria, etc.
Miscanthus
sinensis
These rhizospheric and
endophytic microbes helped
in growth of host plants
under metal stress.
M. sinensis showed resis￾tance toward As and Sb in
presence of these microbes
due to improved carbohy￾drate metabolism and bio￾synthesis of secondary
metabolites
Sun et al.
(2021)
15. Bacillus pumilus and
Pseudomonas
sp. (in combination with
leonardite)
Oryza sativa These microbes with
leonardite decreased the
accumulation of As in the
host plant. These microbes
also reduced oxidative stress
Dolphen
and
Thiravetyan
(2019)
salt-tolerant and halophytic microbes are known and have been found in highly
saline soils (Yan et al. 2015). The saline conditions have also been found to
negatively impact plant-mycorrhizal association; mycorrhizae are fungal associates
helping plants gain nutrients from soil (Thiem et al. 2018). Bacterial abundance and
diversity were also found to reduce in saline soils (Thiem et al. 2018; Yaish et al.
2016). The research over the years has screened, identified, and characterized
potential salinity tolerant PGPMs that have been applied either singly or in form
of different consortia (Table 6.3). Salt tolerant PGPMs have been found to possess
potential for production of exopolysaccharides, hormones (gibberellic acid, indole￾3-acetic acid), and siderophores (Fatima et al. 2020). A salt tolerant bacterium
Cellulomonas pakistanensis sp. nov. strain NCCP-11T was isolated from paddy
rice that was found to enhance nutrient availability to plants by the degradation of
organic matter via the production of cellulases and hemicellulases (Ahmed et al.
2014; Duy et al. 2016).
6.5 Sustainable Agriculture in the Future Scenarios
The global population has been continuously increasing over past several decades
and trend is proposed to be the same in near future. The same comment holds true for
climatic changes that have been worsening and projected increase in temperature and
disturbance in rainfall patterns are threatening. The need of sustainable crop plant
production becomes challenging in the face of these major pressures; population
growth and extreme climatic conditions (Lesk et al. 2016). The population growth
has also reduced the available lands and has increased the rate of depletion of naturalS. no Name of microorganism Effect References
(continued)
6 Functional Potential of Plant Microbiome for Sustainable Agriculture... 127
Table 6.2 Studies demonstrating the role of microorganisms in mitigation of drought and water
stress in plants
Name of
plant
1. Achromobacter
xylosoxidans and Bacillus
pumilus
Helianthus
annuus
This is an endophytic bac￾terium which helped in pro￾moting growth of sunflower
seedling under the influence
of water stress; it also pro￾duced silicic acid and
inhibited the growth of
pathogenic fungi
Forchetti
et al.
(2010)
2. Klebsiella variicola,
Raoultella planticola, and
Pseudomonas fluorescens
Zea mays These microbes induced a
positive effect on dry matter
weight of plants under
drought stress and increased
relative water content of
leaves
Gou et al.
(2015)
3. Micrococcus luteus Zea mays M. luteus was able to pro￾duce exopolysaccharides
which helped in surviving
under water stress; this
microbe showed positive
enhancement for root,
shoot, and number of leaves
of maize plant
Raza and
Faisal
(2013)
4. Bacillus subtilis Arabidopsis
thaliana and
Brassica
campestris
This microbe helped in tol￾erating water stress by
enhancing soil nutrients,
nitrogen fixation, and key
elements such as potassium,
phosphorus, and iron
Woo et al.
(2020)
5. Azospirillum lipoferum Triticum
aestivum
The microbe helped in alle￾viating the drought stress,
improved growth, relative
water content, leaf photo￾synthetic pigment, antioxi￾dant enzymes, and grain
yield
Agami
et al.
(2017)
6. Enterobacter sp. and Bacil￾lus sp.
Triticum
aestivum
These microbes mitigated
the drought stress by mak￾ing the root system more
branched and increased total
root length, surface area,
and number of root tips
Jochum
et al.
(2019)
7. Euphorbia trignisa, Bacil￾lus sp., Lysinibacillus,
Enterobacter,
Stenotrophomonas,
Lelliottia, and
Pseudomonas
Solanum
lycopersicom
Bacterization of the host
plant by these microbes led
to overall biomass incre￾ment and greater water
retention in foliage
Eke et al.
(2019)S. no Name of microorganism Effect References
128 S. Srivastava and D. Singh
Table 6.2 (continued)
Name of
plant
8. Streptomyces laurentii and
Penicillium sp.
Sorghum
bicolour
Both of these are P—Solu￾bilizing bacteria which
increased growth in all
parameters and also
increased chlorophylls, pro￾line, and glycine betaine
Kour et al.
(2020)
9. Pseudomonas flourescense
and Bacillus
amyloliquefaciens
Mentha
piperita
Plants treated with these
microbes had higher content
of phenol, osmolytes, and
antioxidants and showed
change in the root system
Chiappero
et al.
(2019)
10. Pseudomonas sp.,
Stenotrophomonas sp.,
Undibacterium and
Providencia sp.
Alhagi
sparsifolia
All these microbes helped in
improving the growth
capacity of inoculated
plants under drought stress
measured in terms of length
and weight of shoot and root
Zhang
et al.
(2020)
resources like water, nutrients, and clean air. All such factors reduce the crop growth
and productivity. Further stress on the agriculture comes from the xenobiotics, metal
(loid) contamination, and other abiotic stresses. The situation overall is quite gloomy
and sustainable crop production needs intensive research and inputs from all sectors
in near future. In this scenario, the role of microbiome has been considered to be
vital. Microbes are known to exist in extremes of environment and thrive. Even in
agricultural fields subjected to abiotic stress conditions, microorganisms thrive in
abundance and such microorganisms also possess key properties for augmenting the
growth of plants. Therefore, the use of such microbes, microbial consortia and
microbiome interactions, holds the key to the sustainable agriculture in future.
The increasing temperature is the most obvious effect of changing climate and
high temperature stress is known to restrict the growth and yield of plants owing to
multifaceted effects on water availability, rate of transpiration, stomatal movement,
photosynthetic efficiency, and optimal enzyme activities (Asseng et al. 2013; Wahid
and Close 2007; Ashraf and Hafeez 2004). The high temperature has been found to
decrease biomass of plants, spike and floret numbers, and seed setting, induce
scorching of leaves and twigs and early senescence of leaves (Ebrahim et al. 1998;
Fahad et al. 2016; Mitra et al. 2021). At 30 C, the floret sterility has been found to
increase owing to poor germination and shedding of pollens (Fahad et al. 2015,
2016). At cellular level as well, high temperature can cause protein breakdown (Xie
et al. 2003), and impair cell membrane structure and properties (Beney and Gervais
2001). In agricultural scenario, the microorganisms are supposed to be prone to high
temperatures, which can change the community and functions of microbes and
reduce PGPMs in the soil (Singh et al. 2019). The high temperature of the soil and
air disturbs evapotranspiration and water relations of soil and plants as well as6 Functional Potential of Plant Microbiome for Sustainable Agriculture... 129
Table 6.3 Studies demonstrating the role of microorganisms in mitigation of salinity stress in
plants
S. no.
Name of
microorganism Name of plant Effect References
1. Pseudomonas
fluorescens
Pseudomonas putida
Bacillus subtilis
Glycine max These microbes helped in
alleviating salt stress by
reducing germination time and
enhancing the length and fresh
weight of the upper plant
body. They promoted antioxi￾dant enzymes activity
Abulfaraj
and Jalal
(2021)
2. Bacillus
amyloliquefaciens
Mentha
piperita
This microbe helped plant in
harsh saline conditions by
enhancing total chlorophyll
content. It released acetoin as
one of the main components
which helped in increment in
length and dry weight of root
Cappellari
and
Banchio
(2020)
3. Arbuscular mycorrhi￾zal fungi (AMF) and
Pseudomonas
sp. (coinoculation)
Sulla
coronaria
They helped in the mitigation
of salt stress via various
mechanisms like reducing
shoot Na accumulation, elec￾trolyte leakage, and by lower￾ing level of malondialdehyde
in plants
Hidri et al.
(2019)
4. Stenotrophomonas
maltophilia
Arachis
hypogaea
It helped in escaping the salt
stress by protecting photosyn￾thetic pigments in peanut
plants. It also increased auxin
like growth enhancing
hormones
Alexander
et al.
(2020)
5. Bacillus subtilis Cicer
arietinum
It helped in alleviating the salt
stress by reducing accumula￾tion of sodium and promoting
the accumulation of potas￾sium, calcium, and magne￾sium in plant
Abd-Allah
et al.
(2018)
6. Bacillus licheniformis Triticum
aestivum
This microorganism directly
helped in plant growth by
supporting increment in length
of root, shoot, fresh weight,
and dry weight and by reduc￾ing sodium ion content
Singh and
Jha (2016)
7. B. subtilis and
Arbuscular mycorrhi￾zal fungi (AMF)
Acacia benth The microbiome helped the
plant to survive in saline stress
by increasing the accumula￾tion of important elements like
nitrogen, phosphorus, potas￾sium, magnesium, and
calcium
Hashem
et al.
(2016)
(continued)S. no. Name of plant Effect References
(continued)
130 S. Srivastava and D. Singh
Table 6.3 (continued)
Name of
microorganism
8. Piriformospora indica Hordeum
vulgare
This mutualistic fungus helped
in alleviating salt stress by
modulating ion accumulation
in colonized plants by
increasing the foliar potassium
(K+
)/sodium (Na+
) ratio. It
promoted Ca+ accumulation
Alikhani
et al.
(2013)
9. Trichoderma
harzianum
Cucumis
sativus
This microbe helped in miti￾gating the salt stress by
affecting antioxidant enzymes
including peroxidase, poly￾phenol oxidase phenylalanine
ammonia-lyase, catalase,
superoxide dismutase, ascor￾bate peroxidase and glutathi￾one reductase, proline, and
ascorbic acid. This microbe
increased the concentration of
K(+) ion and decreased that of
Na(+) ion and ethylene
Zhang
et al.
(2019)
10. Pseudomonas putida Arabidopsis
thaliana
It significantly improved the
germination rate of host plants
under salt stress. It also
upregulated the stress toler￾ance gene like LOX2
(jasmonic acid synthesis)
Chu et al.
(2019)
11. Bacillus licheniformis
and Pseudomonas
plecoglossicida
Helianthus
annuus
These PGPMs helped in
reducing oxidative stress and
improving height and root
length of plants. They also
upregulated the physiological
and biochemical functions at
high salinity levels
Yasmeen
et al.
(2020)
12. Azospirillum lipoferum Cicer
arietinum
It alleviated inhibitory impacts
of salinity on chickpea growth
via modulating osmolytes,
antioxidants machinery, and
stress related gene expression
El-Esawi
et al.
(2019)
13. Azospirillum brasilense Trifolium
repens
This microbe helped in
improvement of overall
growth of plant, leaf area and
chlorophyll content. It
increased the ratio of K+
/Na+
by decreasing the level of Na+
Khalid
et al.
(2017)S. no. Name of plant Effect References
6 Functional Potential of Plant Microbiome for Sustainable Agriculture... 131
Table 6.3 (continued)
Name of
microorganism
14. Bacillus licheniformis
and Enterobacter
asburiae
Chenopodium
quinoa
These microbes helped in
mitigating the salt stress by
producing IAA, siderophores,
hydrogen cyanide, ammonia,
and many extracellular
enzymes. They decreased the
concentration of Na ion under
saline stress
Mahdi
et al.
(2020)
microbes and affects overall crop growth and yield (Lamaoui et al. 2018).
Microbiome functions carry potential to deal with heat stress and other climatic
changes to sustain high crop yields in near future (Mahmud et al. 2021). Soil
microbes can be engineered to address soil fertility and crop production problems,
such as by enhancing nutrient availability. This is because microbes can evolve,
adapt, and influence to the climatic changes in real time and can also allow host
plants also to adapt slowly (Qiao et al. 2017). The future research needs to study
microbiome with respect to heat, drought, salinity, and other abiotic stresses and
climatic changes in isolation and in conjunction to engineer potential microbial
consortia for sustainable crop production.
Acknowledgments S.S. acknowledges funding support from Institute of Eminence, Banaras
Hindu University (Scheme no. 6031).
References
Abd-Allah EF, Alqarawi AA, Hashem A, Radhakrishnan R, Al-Huqail AA, Al-Otibi FON et al
(2018) Endophytic bacterium Bacillus subtilis (BERA 71) improves salt tolerance in chickpea
plants by regulating the plant defense mechanisms. J Plant Interact 13:37–44
Abo-Amer AE, El-Shanshoury AER, Alzahrani OM (2015) Isolation and molecular characteriza￾tion of heavy metal-resistant Alcaligenes faecalis from sewage wastewater and synthesis of
silver nanoparticles. Geomicrobiol J 32:836–845
Abulfaraj AA, Jalal RS (2021) Use of plant growth-promoting bacteria to enhance salinity stress in
soyabean (Glycine max L.) plants. Saudi J Biol Sci 28:3823–3834
Agami RA, Ghramh HA, Hasheem M (2017) Seed inoculation with Azospirillum lipoferum
alleviates the adverse effects of drought stress on wheat plants. J Appl Bot Food Qual 90:
165–173
Ahmed I, Kudo T, Abbas S, Ehsan M, Iino T, Fujiwara T et al (2014) Cellulomonas pakistanensis
sp. nov., a moderately halotolerant Actinobacteria. Int J Syst Evol Micrbiol 64:2305–2311
Akhtar MJ, Ullah S, Ahmad I, Abdul R, Nadeem SM, Khan MY et al (2018) Nickel phytoextraction
through bacterial inoculation in Raphanus sativus. Chemosphere 190:234–242
Alexander A, Singh VK, Mishra A (2020) Halotolerant PGPR Stenotrophomonas maltophilia BJ01
induces salt tolerance by modulating physiology and biochemical activities of Arachis
hypogaea. Front Microbiol 11:568289132 S. Srivastava and D. Singh
Alikhani M, Khatabi B, Sepehri M, Nekouei MK, Mardi M, Salekdeh GH (2013) A proteomics
approach to study the molecular basis of enhanced salt tolerance in barley (Hordeum vulgare L)
conferred by root mutualistic fungus Piriformospora indica. Mol BioSyst 9:1498–1510
Ambrosini A, de Souza R, Passaglia LMP (2016) Ecological role of bacterial inoculants and their
potential impact on soil microbial diversity. Plant Soil 400:193–207
Armada E, Leite MFA, Medina A, Azcon R, Kuramae EE (2018) Native bacteria promote plant
growth under drought stress condition without impacting the rhizomicrobiome. FEMS
Microbiol Ecol 94:fiy092
Ashraf M, Hafeez M (2004) Thermotolerance of pearl millet and maize at early growth stages:
growth and nutrient relations. Biol Plant 48:81–86
Asseng S, Ewert F, Rosenzweig C, Jones JW, Hatfield JL, Ruane AC et al (2013) Uncertainty in
simulating wheat yields under climate change. Nat Clim Chang 3:827–832
Bastida F, Torres IF, Andres-Abellan M, Baldrian P, Lopez-Mondejar R, Vetrovský T, Richnow
HH et al (2017) Differential sensitivity of total and active soil microbial communities to drought
and forest management. Glob Chang Biol 23:4185–4203
Beney L, Gervais P (2001) Influence of the fluidity of the membrane on the response of microor￾ganisms to environmental stresses. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 57:34–42
Berg J, Brandt KK, Al-Soud WA, Holm PE, Hansen LH, Sørensen SJ et al (2012) Selection for
Cu-tolerant bacterial communities with altered composition, but unaltered richness, via long￾term Cu exposure. Appl Environ Microbiol 78:7438–7446
Berg G, Grube M, Schloter M, Smalla K (2014) Unraveling the plant microbiome: looking back and
future perspectives. Front Microbiol 5:1–7
Bulgarelli D, Rott M, Schlaeppi K, van Themaat EVL, Ahmadinejad N, Assenza F et al (2012)
Revealing structure and assembly cues for Arabidopsis root-inhabiting bacterial microbiota.
Nature 488:91–95
Cappellari LR, Banchio E (2020) Microbial volatile organic compounds produced by Bacillus
amyloliquefaciens GB03 ameliorate the effects of salt stress in Mentha piperita principally
through acetoin emission. J Plant Growth Regul 39:764–775
Chen L, He L, Wang Q, Sheng X (2016) Synergistic effects of plant growth-promoting
Neorhizobium huautlense T1-17 and immobilizers on the growth and heavy metal accumulation
of edible tissues of hot pepper. J Hazard Mater 312:123–131
Chiappero J, Cappellari LR, Alderete LGS, Palermo TB, Banchio E (2019) Plant growth promoting
rhizobacteria improves the antioxidant status in Mentha piperita grown under drought stress
leading to enhancement of plant growth and phenolic content. Ind Crop Prod 139:111553
Chu TN, Tran BTH, Bui LV, Hoang MTT (2019) Plant growth promoting rhizobacterium Pseu￾domonas PS01 induces salt tolerance in Arabidopsis thaliana. BMC Res Notes 12:11
Dolphen R, Thiravetyan P (2019) Reducing arsenic in rice grains by leonardite and arsenic-resistant
endophytic bacteria. Chemosphere 223:448–454
Dourado MN, Martins PF, Quecine MC, Piotto FA, Souza LA, Franco MR et al (2013)
Burkholderia sp. SCMS54 reduces cadmium toxicity and promotes growth in tomato. Ann
Appl Biol 163:494–507
Duy MV, Hoi NT, Ve NB, Thuc LV, Trang NQ (2016) Influence of Cellulomonas flavigena,
Azospirillum sp. and Pseudomonas sp. on rice growth and yield grown in submerged soil
amended with rice straw. In: Sayyed RZ, Reddy MS, Al-Turki AI (eds) Recent trends in
PGPR research for sustainable crop productivity. Scientific Publishers, Delhi, pp 238–242
Ebrahim MK, Zingsheim O, El-Shourbagy MN, Moore PH, Komor E (1998) Growth and sugar
storage in sugarcane grown at temperatures below and above optimum. J Plant Physiol 153:
593–602
Eke P, Kumar A, Sahu KP, Wakam LN, Sheoran N, Ashajyothi M, Patel A et al (2019) Endophytic
bacteria of desert cactus (Euphorbia trigonas Mill) confer drought tolerance and induce growth
promotion in tomato (Solanum lycopersicum L.). Microbiol Res 228:1263026 Functional Potential of Plant Microbiome for Sustainable Agriculture... 133
El-Esawi MA, Al-Ghamdi AA, Ali HM, Alayafi AA (2019) Azospirillum lipoferum FK1 confers
improved salt tolerance in chickpea (Cicer arietinum L.) by modulating osmolytes, antioxidant
machinery and stress-related gene expression. Environ Exp Bot 159:55–65
El-Meihy RM, Abou-Aly HE, Youssef AM, Tewfike TA, El-Alkshar EA (2019) Efficiency of
heavy metals-tolerant plant growth promoting bacteria for alleviating heavy metals toxicity on
sorghum. Environ Exp Bot 162:295–301
Fahad S, Hussain S, Bano A, Saud S, Hassan S, Shan D et al (2015) Potential role of phytohor￾mones and plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria in abiotic stresses: consequences for changing
environment. Environ Sci Pollut Res 22:4907–4921
Fahad S, Hussain S, Saud S, Khan F, Hassan S, Nasim W et al (2016) Exogenously applied plant
growth regulators affect heat-stressed rice pollens. J Agron Crop Sci 202:139–150
Fatima T, Mishra I, Verma R, Arora NK (2020) Mechanisms of halotolerant plant growth promot￾ing Alcaligenes sp. Involved in salt tolerance and enhancement of the growth of rice under
salinity stress. 3 Biotech 10:361
Forchetti G, Masciarelli O, Izaguirre MJ, Alemano S, Alvarez D, Abdala G (2010) Endophytic
bacteria improve seedling growth of sunflower under water stress, produce salicylic acid, and
inhibit growth of pathogenic fungi. Curr Microbiol 61:485–493
Frossard A, Donhauser J, Mestrot A, Gygax S, Baath E, Frey B (2018) Long- and short-term effects
of mercury pollution on the soil microbiome. Soil Biol Biochem 120:191–199
Gagne-Bourque F, Bertrand A, Claessens A, Aliferis KA, Jabaji S (2016) Alleviation of drought
stress and metabolic changes in timothy (Phleum pratense L.) colonized with Bacillus subtilis
B26. Front Plant Sci 7:584
Gil-Martínez M, Lopez-García A, Domínguez MT, Navarro-Fernandez CM, Kjøller R, Tibbett M
et al (2018) Ectomycorrhizal fungal communities and their functional traits mediate plant-soil
interactions in trace element contaminated soils. Front Plant Sci 9:1682
Gołębiewski M, Deja-Sikora E, Cichosz M, Tretyn A, Wrobel B (2014) 16S rDNA pyrosequencing
analysis of bacterial community in heavy metals polluted soils. Microbial Ecol 67:635–647
Gou W, Zheng P, Chen F, Zhang L, Cui Z, Cao M et al (2015) Accumulation of choline and
gylcinebetaine and drought stress tolerance induced in maize (Zea mays) by three plant growth
promoting rhizobacteria (PGPR) strains. Pak J Bot 47:581–586
Hashem A, Abd-Allah EF, Alqarawi AA, Shah MA (2016) Induction of osmoregulation and
modulation of salt stress in Acacia gerrardii Benth. by arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi and
Bacillus subtilis (BERA 71). BioMed Res Int 2016:6294098
Hidri R, Mahmoud OMB, Farhat N, Cordero I, Pueyo JJ, Debez A et al (2019) Arbuscular
mycorrhizal fungus and rhizobacteria affect the physiology and performance of Sulla coronaria
plants subjected to salt stress by mitigation of ionic imbalance. J Plant Nutr Soil Sci 182:451–
462
Hur M, Kim Y, Song H-R, Kim JM, Choi YI, Yi H (2011) Effect of genetically modified poplars on
soil microbial communities during the phytoremediation of waste mine tailings. Appl Environ
Microbiol 77:7611–7619
Jiao S, Chen W, Wei G (2019) Resilience and assemblage of soil microbiome in response to
chemical contamination combined with plant growth. Appl Environ Microbiol 85:e02523–
e02518
Jochum MD, McWilliams KL, Borrego EJ, Kolomiets MV, Niu G, Pierson A et al (2019)
Bioprospecting plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria that mitigate drought stress in grasses.
Front Microbiol 10:2106
Khalid M, Bilal M, Hassani D, Iqbal HMN, Wang H, Huang D (2017) Mitigation of salt stress in
white clove (Trifolium repens) by Azospirillum brasilense and its inoculation effect. Bot Stud
58:5
Khan AL, Waqas M, Hussain J, Al-Harrasi A, Lee IJ (2014) Fungal endophyte Penicillium
janthinellum LK5 can reduce cadmium toxicity in Solanum lycopersicum (Sitiens and Rhe).
Biol Fertil Soil 50:75–85134 S. Srivastava and D. Singh
Khanna K, Jamwal VL, Sharma A, Gandhi SG, Ohari P, Bhardwaj R et al (2019) Supplementing
with plant growth promoting rhizobacteria (PGPR) alleviates cadmium toxicity in Solanum
lycopersicum by modulating the expression of secondary metabolites. Chemosphere 217:463–
474
Kour D, Rana KL, Kaur T, Sheikh I, Yadav AN, Kumar V, Dhaliwal HS, Saxena AK (2020)
Microbe-mediated alleviation of drought stress and acquisition of phosphorus in great millet
(Sorghum bicolour L.) by drought-adaptive and phosphorus-solubilizing microbes. Biocatal
Agricult Biotechnol 23:101501
Lamaoui M, Jemo M, Datla R, Bekkaoui F (2018) Heat and drought stresses in crops and
approaches for their mitigation. Front Chem 6:26
Lareen A, Burton F, Schafer P (2016) Plant root-microbe communication in shaping root
microbiomes. Plant Mol Biol 90:575–587
Lesk C, Rowhani P, Ramankutty N (2016) Influence of extreme weather disasters on global crop
production. Nature 529:84–87
Lundberg DS, Lebeis SL, Paredes SH, Yourstone S, Gehring J, Malfatti S et al (2012) Defining the
core Arabidopsis thaliana root microbiome. Nature 488:86–90
Luziatelli F, Ficca AG, Cardarelli M, Melini F, Cavalieri A, Ruzzi M (2020) Genome sequencing of
Pantoea agglomerans C1 provides insights into molecular and genetic mechanisms of plant
growth-promotion and tolerance to heavy metals. Microorganisms 8:153
Ma Y, Rajkumar M, Freitas H (2009) Inoculation of plant growth promoting bacterium
Achromobacter xylosoxidans strain Ax10 for the improvement of copper phytoextraction by
Brassica juncea. J Environ Manag 90:831–837
Ma Y, Rajkumar M, Vicente JAF, Freitas H (2010) Inoculation of Ni-resistance plant growth
promoting bacterium Psychrobacter sp. strain SRS8 for the improvement of phytoextraction by
energy crops. Int J Phytoremediation 13:126–139
Ma Y, Rajkumar M, Luo Y, Freitas H (2013) Phytoextraction of heavy metals polluted soil using
Sedum plumbizincicola inoculated with metal mobilization Phyllobacterium myrsinacearum
RC6B. Chemosphere 93:1386–1392
Mahdi I, Fahsi N, Hafidi M, Allaoui A, Biskri L (2020) Plant growth enhancement using
rhizospheric halotolerant phosphate solubilizing bacterium Bacillus licheniformis QA1 and
Enterobacter asburiae QF11 isolated from Chenopodium quinoa Wild. Microorganisms 8:948
Mahmud K, Missaoui A, Lee K, Ghimire B, Presley HW, Makaju S (2021) Rhizosphere
microbiome manipulation for sustainable crop production. Curr Plant Biol 27:100210
Marasco R, Rolli E, Vigani G, Borin S, Sorlini C, Ouzari H et al (2013) Are drought-resistance
promoting bacteria cross-compatible with different plant models? Plant Signal Behav 8:e26741
Mitra D, Rodriguez AMD, Cota FIP, Khoshru B, Panneerselvam P, Moradi S et al (2021)
Amelioration of thermal stress in crops by plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria. Physiol Mol
Plant Pathol 115:101679
Mnasri M, Janouskova M, Rydlova J, Abdelly C, Ghnaya T (2017) Comparison of arbuscular
mycorrhizal fungal effects on the heavy metal uptake of a host and a non-host plant species in
contact with extraradical mycelial network. Chemosphere 171:476–484
Naylor D, Coleman-Derr D (2018) Drought stress and root-associated bacterial communities. Front
Plant Sci 8:2223
Naylor D, DeGraaf S, Purdom E, Coleman-Derr D (2017) Drought and host selection influence
bacterial community dynamics in the grass root microbiome. ISME J 11:2691–2704
Pramanik K, Mitra S, Sarkar A, Maiti TK (2018) Alleviation of phytotoxic effects of cadmium on
rice seedlings by cadmium resistant PGPR strain Enterobacter aerogenes MCC 3092. J Hazard
Mater 351:317–329
Pramanik K, Mitra S, Sarkar A, Soren T, Maiti TK (2017) Characterization of cadmium resistance
Klebsiella pneumoniae MCC 3091 promoted rice seedling growth by alleviating phytotoxicity
of cadmium. Environ Sci Pollut Res 24:24419–24437
Prasad R, Gill SS, Tuteja N (2018) Crop improvement through microbial biotechnology. Elsevier.
ISBN: 97804446398826 Functional Potential of Plant Microbiome for Sustainable Agriculture... 135
Qiao Q, Wang F, Zhang J, Chen Y, Zhang C, Liu G et al (2017) The variation in the rhizosphere
microbiome of cotton with soil type, genotype and developmental stage. Sci Rep 7:3940
Raklami A, El Gharmali A, Rahou Y, Oufdou K, Meddich A (2020) Compost and mycorrhizae
application as a technique to alleviate Cd and Zn stress in Medicago sativa. Int J
Phytoremediation 23:190–201
Raza FA, Faisal M (2013) Growth promotion of maize by desiccation tolerant Micrococcus luteus￾chp37 isolated from Cholistan desert, Pakistan. Aust J Crop Sci 7:1693–1698
Rolli E, Marasco R, Vigani G, Ettoumi B, Mapelli F, Deangelis ML et al (2015) Improved plant
resistance to drought is promoted by the root associated microbiome as a water stress-dependent
trait. Environ Microbiol 17:316–331
Saeed Z, Naveed M, Imran M, Bashir MA, Sattar A, Mustafa A et al (2019) Combined use of
Enterobacter sp. MN17 and zeolite reverts the adverse effects of cadmium on growth, physi￾ology and antioxidant activity of Brassica napus. PLoS One 14:e0213016
Sheik CS, Mitchell TW, Rizvi FZ, Rehman Y, Faisal M, Hasnain S et al (2012) Exposure of soil
microbial communities to chromium and arsenic alters their diversity and structure. PLoS One 7:
e40059
Singh RP, Jha PN (2016) A halotolerant bacterium Bacillus licheniformis HSW-16 augments
induced systemic tolerance to salt stress in wheat plant (Triticum aestivum). Front Plant Sci 7:
1890
Singh RK, Masurkar P, Pandey SK, Kumar S (2019) Rhizobacteria–plant interaction, alleviation of
abiotic stresses. In: Sayyed R, Arora N, Reddy M (eds) Plant growth promoting rhizobacteria for
sustainable stress management. Springer, Singapore, pp 345–353
Soussi A, Ferjani R, Marasco R, Guesmi A, Cherif H, Rolli E et al (2016) Plant-associated
microbiomes in arid lands: diversity, ecology and biotechnological potential. Plant Soil 405:
357–370
Sun X, Song B, Xu R, Zhang M, Gao P, Lin H, Sun W (2021) Root-associated (rhizosphere and
endosphere) microbiomes of the Miscanthus sinensis and their response to the heavy metal
contamination. J Environ Sci 104:387–398
Thiem D, Gołębiewski M, Hulisz P, Piernik A, Hrynkiewicz K (2018) How does salinity shape
bacterial and fungal microbiomes of Alnus glutinosa roots? Front Microbiol 9:651
Wahid A, Close TJ (2007) Expression of dehydrins under heat stress and their relationship with
water relations of sugarcane leaves. Biol Plant 51:104–109
Wang Q, Chen L, He L-Y, Sheng X-F (2016) Increased biomass and reduced heavy metal
accumulation of edible tissues of vegetable crops in the presence of plant growth-promoting
Neorhizobium huautlense T1-17 and biochar. Agric Ecosyst Environ 228:9–18
Wang KT, Li YP, Wu YC, Qui ZQ, Ding Z, Wang X et al (2020) Improved grain yield and lowered
arsenic accumulation in rice plants by inoculating with arsenite-oxidizing Achromobacter
xylosoxidans GD03. Ecotoxicol Environ Saf 206:111229
Wani PA, Khan MS (2010) Bacillus species enhance growth parameters of chickpea (Cicer
arietinum L.) in chromium stressed soils. Food Chem Toxicol 48:3262–3267
Woo OG, Kim H, Kim J-S, Keum H-L, Lee KC, Sul WJ, Lee JH (2020) Bacillus subtilis strain
GOT9 confers enhanced tolerance to drought and salt stresses in Arabidopsis thaliana and
Brassica campestris. Plant Physiol Biochem 148:359–367
Xie C, Li YQ, Tang W, Newton RJ (2003) Study of dynamical process of heat denaturation in
optically trapped single microorganisms by near-infrared Raman spectroscopy. J Appl Phys 94:
6138–6142
Yaish MW, Kumar PP (2015) Salt tolerance research in date palm tree (Phoenix dactylifera L.),
past, present, and future perspectives. Front Plant Sci 6:348
Yaish MW, Al-Lawati A, Jana GA, Vishwas Patankar H, Glick BR (2016) Impact of soil salinity on
the structure of the bacterial endophytic community identified from the roots of caliph medic
(Medicago truncatula). PLoS One 11:e0159007
Yan N, Marschner P, Cao W, Zuo C, Qin W (2015) Influence of salinity and water content on soil
microorganisms. Int Soil Water Cons Res 3:316–323136 S. Srivastava and D. Singh
Yasmeen T, Ahmad A, Arif MS, Mubin M, Rehman K, Shahzad SM et al (2020) Biofilm forming
rhizobacteria enhance growth and salt tolerance in sunflower plants by stimulating antioxidant
enzymes activity. Plant Physiol Biochem 156:242–256
Young E, Carey M, Meharg AA, Meharg C (2018) Microbiome and ecotypic adaption of Holcus
lanatus (L.) to extremes of its soil pH range, investigated through transcriptome sequencing.
Microbiome 6:48
Zhang F, Wang Y, Liu C, Chen F, Ge H, Tian F et al (2019) Trichoderma harzianum mitigates salt
stress in cucumber via multiple responses. Ecotoxicol Environ Saf 170:436–445
Zhang L, Zhang W, Li Q, Cui R, Wang Z, Wang Y et al (2020) Deciphering the root endosphere
microbiome of the desert plant Alhagi sparsifolia for desert resistance-promoting bacteria. Appl
Environ Microbiol 86:e02863-19137
Chapter 7
The Beneficial Plant Microbial Association
for Sustainable Agriculture
Sivakumar Natesan, Shyamkumar Rajaram, Devaprakash Manoharan,
and Thirumalaivasan Ramachandran
Abstract Microbes are ubiquitous and can associate to colonize plants and exhibits
different modes of interactions. Plant beneficial microbes could colonize both the
phyllosphere and rhizosphere to promote the various aspect of plant growth and
other various compartments in plants. These beneficial microbes are generally called
plant growth-promoting microbes (PGPMs), they can become an excellent alterna￾tive to remove or reduce the use of various toxic agrochemicals including synthetic
chemical fertilizers and biocides. The association of PGPMs provides nutrients,
protection against pathogens as well as various environmental stress responses either
direct or indirect mechanisms. The soil and rhizosphere microbes beneficially
associate either the root surface or phyllosphere region of the plant and influence
the growth and health fitness of crops. Some microbes directly interact with the plant
to develop a symbiotic relationship (e.g., Rhizobium, mycorrhizal fungi), and few
can interact at the surface of the root with either associative symbiosis (Azospirillum)
or nonsymbiotic beneficial interactions such as nutrient acquisition, solubilization,
and translocation of minerals and water, vitamin and growth hormone synthesis,
mineralization of soil organic residues, inhibits harmful pathogens and nematodes,
production of iron siderophores to chelate ions, and provide induced resistance
against various biotic and abiotic stresses. This chapter describes the basic beneficial
microbial interactions on the rhizosphere, phyllosphere, and their beneficial effects
on the host for sustainable agriculture, specifically, bacterial nodulation, mycorrhizal
infection, microbial endophytes, development of bioinoculums, and their benefits to
the plant. Further, the functions of beneficial microbes to the plants and the soil have
been discussed. Besides, rhizosphere microbiome engineering and its role in sus￾tainable agriculture have been also discussed.
S. Natesan (*) · D. Manoharan · T. Ramachandran
Department of Molecular Microbiology, School of Biotechnology, Madurai Kamaraj
University, Madurai, Tamil Nadu, India
S. Rajaram
Department of Biotechnology, Kamaraj College of Engineering and Technology, Virudhunagar,
Tamil Nadu, India
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2023
S. Chhabra et al. (eds.), Plant Microbiome for Plant Productivity and Sustainable
Agriculture, Microorganisms for Sustainability 37,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-19-5029-2_7Keywords Beneficial microbes · Microbiome engineering · Phyllosphere microbial
association · Rhizosphere microbes · Sustainable agriculture
138 S. Natesan et al.
7.1 Introduction
Increasing the human population often drives-up demand for food, especially since
almost one in seven people around the world is continually hungry, lacking enough
food to be healthy. The Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) projects that by
2050, the world population will reach 9.2 billion, hence it is an urgent need to
increase the agricultural productivity up to 60–70% from the current levels (Pawlak
and Kołodziejczak 2020). In order to supply the growing demand for food, certain
factors are necessary to reach this goal including a suitable environment with the
climatic condition, good adequate fertile soil, and also suitable cultivation practices.
From the mid twentieth century to date, the majority of agricultural farmers use
chemical fertilizers and other agrochemicals to increase crop productivity. The
chemical fertilizers as well as the synthetic agrochemicals give sudden effects on
the yield; however, they continuously eradicate the soil beneficial microbes as well
as the soil health (Meena et al. 2020). In addition, extensive and improper use of such
chemicals causes environmental issues as well as health issues for humans and
animals.
The beneficial role of soil-borne microbes especially rhizosphere microbes has
been emphasized in many cases. They can play a vital role in earth biogeochemical
cycling that can maintain soil fertility and soil health (Basu et al. 2021). Hence, last
few decades scientists give more attention to screen, select, and identify the most
beneficial microbes from the environment of the various plant species, and studied
the real benefits toward the plant and our environment (Pawlak and Kołodziejczak
2020). There are various microorganisms including bacteria, actinobacteria, fungi,
and cyanobacteria have beneficially interacted with a wide range of plants either
symbiotically or nonsymbiotically. The major benefits of such microbial interactions
are usually either direct or indirect benefits such as mineral supply phosphorus (P),
nitrogen (N), potassium (K), and sulfur (S). Mineralization of organic waste and
inorganic substances provides enhanced nutrient uptake, synthesis of plant growth
hormone-like substances, quench pathogenic microbes including soil nematodes and
other insect vectors (biocontrol), decreases either biotic or abiotic stresses, detoxi￾fication of chemicals, reduction of heavy metal toxicity, and also reduces the impact
in global climatic change. Hence, scientists have begun to direct their interests
toward ensuring soil microorganisms and their sustainability in agricultural use, as
bio-inoculants as a suitable alternative for chemical fertilizers and biocides (Abdul
Rahman et al. 2021).
Among the various environment, rhizosphere soil and the phyllosphere have
more beneficially interacted with a large number of diverse microorganisms (Prasad
and Zhang 2022). Symbiotic, associative symbiotic, and nonsymbiotic modes
microbes are largely exploited the rhizosphere and phyllosphere region for their
surveillance (Sivakumar et al. 2020). For example, the most prominent and well-7 The Beneficial Plant Microbial Association for Sustainable Agriculture 139
known symbiotic microorganism that fixes atmospheric N2 in the form of ammonia
is Rhizobium in legume nodules; Azotobacter, Azospirillum, and Phosphobacter are
other well-known beneficial microbes being considered as biofertilizers for various
crops. In addition to the mycorrhizal fungi, Frankia can also mobilize various
minerals to the host plant and give protection against environmental stresses
(Oleńska et al. 2020).
Rhizosphere health is important for plant growth and development; it depends on
the diversity and abundance of beneficial microbes. For the sustainable agriculture, it is
necessary to maintain the rhizosphere microbiome through effective soil management,
which can define as the process of improving the nutrient efficiency in the soil to
enhance the nutrient availability to improve beneficial microbes for the growth and
yield of crops (Tahat et al. 2020). Generally, beneficial soil microbes enhance the
rhizosphere health through the multidimensional mechanism, which includes fixing the
N2, hydrolyzing complex organic waste residues to simple molecules, production of
siderophores, hydrogen cyanide, and organic acids, secreting enzymes to solubilize
phosphate and potassium, and production of vitamins and growth hormones, ultimately
it improves soil fertility. There are several research works undertaken to isolate many of
such beneficial microorganisms from the soil of both agriculture and forest that can
exhibit plant growth-promoting activities called, plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria
(PGPR) (Prasad et al. 2015). PGPR and mycorrhiza fungi are currently used as a tool
for food security and sustainable agriculture (Diagne et al. 2020).
Recent scientific discoveries gaining more and more information related to the soil
and rhizosphere microbiome and its complex architecture are used to design a new and
healthier environment for a specific type of crop in a particular soil is possible.
Through such microbial manipulation, the rhizosphere gets more benefits which
overcome the drawbacks of the single type of microbial supplement. This technology
is now called microbiome engineering or designing, specifically rhizosphere
microbiome engineering (Albright et al. 2021). This chapter describes the important
beneficial microbial associations in both the rhizosphere and phyllosphere region of
plants and their beneficial role mainly PGPR functions. In addition, the role of
beneficial microbes for the use of biofertilizers and biocontrol agents in sustainable
agriculture is analyzed. Further, microbiome engineering with beneficial microbes to
manipulate the rhizosphere microbiome for agricultural sustainability is also discussed.
7.2 Beneficial Microbial Interactions in Plants
Microbes are ubiquitous, they can survive and develop adaptation to any environ￾ment and establish their colonies in different niches. Plants have different micro￾habitats that hold several complex microbial communities such as bacteria, archaea,
and fungi, named microbiome (Bang et al. 2018). This microbiome of microbial
consortia develops a unique community structure in the various microhabitats of the
plants, generally by either epiphytic or endophytic association. Various studies
revealed this complex microbial colonization on different structural components of140 S. Natesan et al.
Fig. 7.1 Microbial associations on plant
plants such as phyllosphere (caulosphere (stems), phylloplane (leaves), anthosphere
(flowers), and carposphere (fruits)), and rhizosphere regions (Fig. 7.1), besides, the
spermosphere, a small area which surrounds a germination seed in the soil which has
a unique microenvironment for microbial diversity (van der Heijden et al. 2007;
Hodge and Fitter 2010).
7.3 Rhizosphere Microbiome Interaction
The soil is the natural and largest microbial reservoir for plants, contains 106 to 1011
microbial cells per gram and consists of 30,000 and above prokaryotic diversity
(Berendsen et al. 2012). The rhizosphere is the region where the plant roots are
firmly attached with soil particles for their stability, nutrients, and water. This region
is densely populated with both prokaryotic and eukaryotic microbes and nematodes.
In this region, plants secrete root exudates called rhizodeposits, consists of sugars,7 The Beneficial Plant Microbial Association for Sustainable Agriculture 141
Fig. 7.2 Factors determination of microbial interactions on plant
amino acids, organic and inorganic acids, siderophores, vitamins, nucleosides, and
polysaccharide (Cooper 2007; Odelade and Babalola 2019; Khan et al. 2021), which
chemotactically attract the microorganism to establish their associative/symbiotic
colonies on the surface (epiphytes) and inner tissues (endophytes) of root (Canarini
et al. 2019). The rhizosphere microbes heavily influence the soil nutrients recycling
(decomposition, N2 fixation, and solubilization of rock minerals) and make them
available for plants. Hence, the abundance and diversity of microbes in the rhizo￾sphere region are comparatively ~100 times greater than the nearby other soil habitat
(Backer et al. 2018). Several biotic and abiotic factors have determined the microbial
abundance and interaction with plant roots. Factors which include native microbes,
temperature, wind flow, light intensity, oxygen availability, soil fertility, heavy
metals, and agrochemicals (Fig. 7.2) have direct influences on beneficial microbial
interaction (Dastogeer et al. 2020). Further, the composition of rhizodeposits varied
in different plant species, which determines the microbial composition in the rhizo￾sphere soil (McNear 2013; Mendes et al. 2013; Paterson et al. 2007). For example,142 S. Natesan et al.
legume plants’ rhizosphere has a significant number of microbial diversity than
cereal crops due to its specialized chemoattractants (flavonoids and organic acids),
which interact with the symbiotic association of N2 fixing Rhizobium sp. that makes
nodules on its root (Cooper 2007). The exudates of roots are important to mobilize
and modulate the community of the microbiome in the rhizosphere, along with other
biotic and abiotic factors (Mendes et al. 2013; Korenblum et al. 2020). However,
some selected microbial taxa are common in specific plant species, which are always
detected in the similar plant species in the different environment called “core
microbes” (Jones et al. 2019). The core microbe of a specific plant species is usually
not disturbed by various agricultural practices including the long-term tillage and
crop rotations (Bziuk et al. 2021). Besides, the seed contains beneficial microbes,
after germination, it develops an endophytic association with plants (Shao et al.
2021) and also increases the sustainability of the crop (Zhang et al. 2019). In root,
Rhizobium, mycorrhizal fungi, and Frankia are symbiotically associated with a wide
range of plants and promote growth and yield. Further, Azotobacter, Azospirillum,
Phosphobacter, and other rhizosphere microbes beneficially assemble in the rhizo￾sphere microbiome and provide various health benefits to the host plant.
7.3.1 Rhizobium Nodulation: A Beneficial Microbe–Plant
Interaction
Nodulation is an important event for the biological N2 fixation in legumes. Rhizo￾bium is a genus of Gram-negative soil bacteria, the well-known nitrogen-fixing root
nodule bacterial symbiont of legumes and other flowering plants. The legume￾rhizobia symbioses mainly occur in three Leguminosae subfamilies, the
Caesalpinioideae, Mimosoideae, and Papilionoideae. According to the species￾specific interaction of Rhizobia in legumes further named Bradyrhizobium,
Ochrobactrum, Rhizobium, Ensifer, Mesorhizobium, Burkholderia, Neorhizobium,
Allorhizobium, Devosia, Phyllobacterium, Microvirga, Ochrobactrum, and
Pararhizobium (Andrews and Andrews 2017). The bacteria colonize plant cells
within root nodules, where they convert atmospheric nitrogen into ammonia by a
nitrogenase enzyme and then provide organic nitrogenous compounds such as
glutamine or ureides to the plant. Plant provides photosynthetically fixed organic
carbon for Rhizobium growth. During this association, both partners have mutually
benefited (Varma et al. 2020).
The root-nodulation process starts with a signal transduction process between the
host plant and its microsymbionts (Oldroyd 2013; Wang et al. 2018a). Under
nitrogen starvation, legume roots secrete a complex mixture of exudates (infection
flavonoids) into the rhizosphere, which stimulates nodulation (nod) genes to syn￾thesize nodulation factors, a lipochitooligosaccharidic signal that is essential for
initiating symbiotic development in most legumes (Oldroyd et al. 2011). Further,
rhizobia polysaccharides such as exo- (EPS), capsular- (KPS), and lipo-7 The Beneficial Plant Microbial Association for Sustainable Agriculture 143
Fig. 7.3 Stages of Rhizobium root nodule formation. (Adapted from Farssi et al. 2018)
polysaccharides (LPS) also have significant role in establishing symbiotic relation￾ship with legumes (Gibson et al. 2008). Exopolysaccharides have been shown to be
required for a rhizobial infection that can suppress plant defense and promote
nodulation. This mechanism was reported in different nodulating rhizobium species
such as Rhizobium leguminosarum, Sinorhizobium meliloti (Peck et al. 2006),
Bradyrhizobium japonicum, R. alamii, R. lentis, R. japonicum, R. metallidurans,
R. smilacinae, R. phaseoli, and R. trifolii (Breakspear et al. 2014).
Exopolysaccharides have been shown to be required for rhizobial infection that
can suppress plant defense and nodulation. Figure 7.3 described the mechanism of
root nodulation. Infection starts with recognition of the Nod signals in the root hair of
the specified host and induces the modification on the root hair growth, which looks
like curling at the tip of root hair results in a cork-screw structure. Rhizobia colonize
at the curled surface of root hair and infect, then enter into the root hair by
endocytosis. The invaded rhizobium is confined within a specialized infection tube
called infection thread which further progresses intracellularly to the cortex, where it
develops into a primordium, a newly forming nodule. Bacteria multiply within a
membrane-bound compartment named symbiosome, a unit of biological N2 fixation
where bacteria make symbiotic interaction with host cell for nutrients and ammonia144 S. Natesan et al.
Fig. 7.4 Morphology of legume nodule. (a) Alfalfa root with fingerlike nodule (Jensen et al. 2012);
(b) soybean root with round shape nodule (Rodríguez-Navarro et al. 2011)
exchange, within the nodule bacteria changing their shape (bacteroids). There are
two types of nodules identified in plants (Fig. 7.4). The first one appears as the
modified lateral root with a terminal apical meristem along with lateral vascular cells
called intermediate nodule (e.g., alfalfa, fingerlike in shape); the other one is the
determinate nodule of soybean (round shape), where the cortical cells divide and
expand to develop globular nodule structure. The development of this nodule is in a
radial pattern (Sulieman and Tran 2013).
The symbiotic nitrogen-fixation by the rhizobia-legumes comprises 14 genera
and more than 98 species (Berrada and Fikri-Benbrahim 2014). The N2 fixing ability
of the rhizobia in the nodule should vary with the associated species, nodule shape,
growth pattern, and also acidic or alkaline N compounds (Sprent 2009). There are a
number of regulatory processes involved in the N2 fixation in root nodules. the
following are some important components to regulate the N2 fixation; (1) enzymatic
regulation of C- and N-metabolism, (2) O2 availability regulated by a physical
barrier and leghemoglobin (Lb), (3) molecular control of nodule number, (4) pro￾duction of reactive oxygen species and reactive nitrogen species (RNS), and (5) sig￾nal mediated regulation of nitrogen-fixing (nif) gene expression (Sulieman and Tran
2013). Within the nodules, N2 is reduced to ammonia that is used to incorporate into
the plant component.
The quantity of N2 fixed by Rhizobium varies approximately 50–100 kg N/hect￾are with the species of legumes under different environmental conditions. Legumes
bioinoculated with Rhizobium increases the yield up to 35% (Amat et al. 2020).
Generally, for the formulation of commercial biofertilizer, Rhizobium is mixed with7 The Beneficial Plant Microbial Association for Sustainable Agriculture 145
suitable carriers such as lignite and charcoal peat, or in a liquid-based formulation
used with methylcellulose, polyethylene glycol (0.5%), gum arabic, and polyvinyl
pyrrolidone (0.5%) (Tittabutr et al. 2007) consist of 1010 to 1012 cfu/g. It is generally
used for economically important legume plants, and the dosage depends on the type
of crop, soil type, and environmental conditions (Barman et al. 2017). Table 7.1
represents the importance of Rhizobium inoculums for sustainable agriculture.
7.3.2 Azotobacter
Azotobacter is a free-living, nonsymbiotic N2-fixing bacterium abundant in soil and
plays an important role in the nitrogen (N2) and phosphorous (P) cycle
(Velmourougane et al. 2019; Rana et al. 2020). Several studies revealed that the
rates of N2-fixation in soil range from 15 kg/ha/year to 60 kg/ha/year (Romero￾Perdomo et al. 2017; Saha et al. 2017). In addition, Azotobacter accelerates the
mineralization of soil organic residues and also reduces heavy metals (Kizilkaya
2009; Din et al. 2019) and has the ability to produce vitamins. Azotobacter contrib￾utes ~0.06% to the rhizosphere microbiome (Hassen et al. 2020). Species of Azoto￾bacter such as A. chroococcum and A. vinelandii are most abundant in tropical soil,
A. insignis, A. beijerinckii, and A. macrocytogenes are present in a wide range of soil
pH, both acidic and alkaline soil (Kennedy et al. 2015). Azotobacter species is used
as a suitable biofertilizer for non-leguminous crops such as cotton, rice, vegetables,
sorghum, sugarcane, and potato (Ritika and Utpal 2014). Several reports suggested
that Azotobacter inoculum increases the yield of various crops (Wani and Ali 2013),
rapeseed and mustard (Dutta and Singh 2002), sugarcane (Kizilkaya 2009), etc.
Moreover, Azotobacter species are able to synthesize plant growth hormones such as
indole acetic acid (IAA), gibberellins, and cytokinins. Besides, Azotobacter strains
can also protect host plants indirectly from phytopathogens, prevent seedling mor￾tality, and regulate other beneficial rhizosphere microorganisms (Arora et al. 2018;
Ansari and Mahmood 2019a, b). Through the available literature, Azotobacter
influences overall plant growth, but the exact mechanism is not yet fully understood
(Sumbul et al. 2020). In addition, to fix nitrogen, they can solubilize phosphates and
also mineralize organic sulfur (El-Badry et al. 2016). The exopolysaccharide of
Azotobacter sp. solubilizes tricalcium phosphate (Yi et al. 2008).
However, soil organic matter acts as limiting components for Azotobacter sur￾veillance, poor growth of Azotobacter was reported in a reduced amount of soil
organic matter with other factors such as temperature, moisture content, salinity, and
soil pH (Andjelković et al. 2018). Azotobacter grows optimally at a pH of 7–7.5,
however, A. chroococcum survived at pH 9 (Andjelković et al. 2018). Further, the
plant growth-promoting activity of Azotobacter is mainly affected by soil salinity;
but Azotobacter salinestris is known to tolerate 8% of NaCl. Azotobacter is a
mesophilic bacterium that can grow at 25–30 °C, but it can develop cyst under
unfavorable temperature (45 °C), that germinate under favorable conditions (Saribay
2003).(continued)
146 S. Natesan et al.
Table 7.1 Applications of Rhizobium for sustainable agriculture
Strain Host plant Function References
Rhizobium leguminosarum
bv. viceae
Pisum
sativum L.
Soil inoculum increased pea
nodulation under short season
conditions
Begum et al.
(2001a)
Rhizobium leguminosarum Pisum
sativum
L. and Lens
culinaris
Flavonoids induced nod gene
expression and preactivated nod
genes
Begum et al.
(2001b)
Rhizobium spp. PchDMS
and Pch43
Chickpea Increased yield and antioxidant
activities and induced resistance
against Fusarium oxysporum
f. sp. ciceris (Foc)
Arfaoui et al.
(2005)
Rhizobium strains BARI
RPs-2001 and BARI
RPs-2002
Pisum
sativum
Soil inoculation increases pod
weight and length
Ahmed et al.
(2007)
Rhizobium sp. Lens
culinaris
Medik
Increased yield and seed quality Al-Karaki
(2008)
Sinorhizobium meliloti Medicago
sativa L.
The tripartite symbiosis of Rhi￾zobium, AM, and Lucerne can
improve the performance of
Lucerne in organic farming and
under dry conditions
Ardakani et al.
(2009)
Rhizobium sp. Pisum
sativum
Indigenous rhizobia increase the
seed quality
Agarwal and
Choure (2011)
Rhizobium japonicum Soybean Biocontrol agent against soil￾borne pathogens Fusarium
solani and Macrophomina
phaseolina
Al-Ani et al.
(2012)
Mesorhizobium spp. Cicer
arietinum L
Increased nutrient uptake and
yield of chickpea
Verma et al.
(2013)
Rhizobium sp. Glycine max
(L.) Merril
Reproductive growth stages on
shoot biomass and yield of
soybean
Lamptey et al.
(2014)
Rhizobium trifolii,
R. phaseoli,
R. leguminosarum and
Bradyrhizobium japonicum
Legume plant Inoculation of solid and liquid
biofertilizers resulted into
enhanced plant growth by pro￾viding balanced nutrient supply
Datta et al.
(2015)
Rhizobium spp. Pisum
sativum L.
Rhizobium coupled with soil
application of organic manures
could increase yield in pea
Olle et al.
(2016)
Rhizobium sp. Lens
culinaris
Medik.
Symbiotic efficiency of native
and exotic Rhizobium strains
nodulating lentil
Tena et al.
(2016)
Rhizobium sp. Phaseolus
vulgaris L.
Higher plant-growth-promoting
effects
Assefa et al.
(2017)
Rhizobium leguminosarum
bv. viceae
Pisum
sativum
Disease resistance against
Didymella pinodes
Ranjbar
Sistani et al.
(2017)7 The Beneficial Plant Microbial Association for Sustainable Agriculture 147
Table 7.1 (continued)
Strain Host plant Function References
Rhizobium sp. Glycine max
(L) Merril
Increased growth and yield Herliana et al.
(2019)
Rhizobium sp. and
Bradyrhizobium spp.
Phaseolus
vulgaris
L. and Gly￾cine max L.
Rhizobial inoculation improved
drought tolerance, biomass and
grain yields
Aserse et al.
(2020)
Rhizobium spp. Vicia faba L. Combined use of inoculant and
chemical fertilizer increased
growth and yield
Genetu et al.
(2021)
Azotobacter produces siderophores (Ansari et al. 2017), an iron (Fe) chelating
molecule, that can use the utilization of extracellular “Fe” molecules, and they act as
an important iron resource in the environment (Wichard et al. 2009). For example,
Azotobacter expresses iron-rich nitrogenases (Baars et al. 2016), through which they
can reduce nitrogen (N2 fixation). The Fe-siderophore complex of Azotobacter
shows antiphytopathogenic activities and can directly improve plant growth by
protecting plants from the pathogens attack (Hayat et al. 2010). In addition, it can
use molybdenum (Mo) or vanadium (V) for its nitrogenase activity and absorb heavy
metals like W and Zn (Kraepiel et al. 2009; Sumbul et al. 2020). Abo-Amer et al.
(2014) demonstrated heavy metals (Co2+, Ni2+, Zn2+, and Cu2+) absorbing efficiency
of Azotobacter using heavy metal contaminated soil. In addition, Azotobacter
provided good protection to the plants against pathogenic infections caused by
Rhizoctonia solani and Xanthomonas campestris and also inhibits root-knot nema￾tode Meloidogyne incognita (Akram et al. 2016; Sumbul et al. 2020). Besides,
Azotobacter can produce antibiotic-like substance anisomycin, a fungicidal com￾pound that inhibits the growth of Alternaria, Aspergillus, Curvularia, Fusarium,
Helminthosporium, Macrophomina, and Rhizoctonia (Jnawali et al. 2015). Further,
Azotobacter sp. has also been reported to degrade toxic pesticide compounds such as
2-chlorophenol, 4-chlorophenol, 2,6-dichlorophenol, 2,4-6-trichlorophenol, and
2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4-D) (Gaofeng et al. 2004; Kumar et al. 2016).
All such properties of Azotobacter sp. could be a promising character for considering
a potent biofertilizer for the benefits of crops, a few are highlighted in Table 7.2.
7.3.3 Azospirillum
A genus Azospirillum is a group of gram-negative, flagellated, slightly curved,
microaerophilic (or) facultative anaerobic diazotrophs, nonfermentative, and
nitrogen-fixing bacteria from the family of Rhodospirillaceae, the best-characterized
PGPR, able to colonize the roots of several plant species. Twenty-one species of
Azospirillum have been isolated from the rhizosphere of many types of grass and
cereals in tropical as well as in temperate climates, namely Azospirillum brasilense,148 S. Natesan et al.
Table 7.2 Effect of Azotobacter-based biofertilizers on yields of different crops
Strain Crop Effect on yield References
Azotobacter sp. Cabbage Yield increase 13.9% Sarkar et al. (2010)
Azotobacter sp. Capsicum annum L.
and Pisum
sativum L.
Yield increase 11.4;
decrease
Fusarium root rot
infection
Jaipaul et al. (2011)
Azotobacter Wheat Yield increase 14.3% Milošević et al. (2012)
Azotobacter sp. Cluster Bean Yield increases up to
16.6%
Deshmukh et al. (2014)
Azotobacter
chroococcum
Potato Yield increases 62.3% El-Sayed (2014)
Azotobacter sp. Broccoli Yield increase 17.3% Singh et al. (2014)
Azotobacter sp. Rice Yield increase up to
26.9%
Zayadan et al. (2014)
Azotobacter sp. Cucumber Yield increase up to
21%
Saeed et al. (2015)
Azotobacter sp. Chickpea Yield increase 35.5% Ansari et al. (2015)
Azotobacter sp. Tomato Yield increase 23.8% Singh et al. (2015a)
Azotobacter sp. Carrot Yield increase 34.2% Sarma et al. (2015)
Azotobacter sp. Cotton Yield increase 13% Romero-Perdomo et al.
(2017)
A. amazonense, A. irakense, A. lipoferum, A. largimobile, A. halopraeferens,
A. oryzae, A. canadensis, A. doeberinerens, A. melinis (Peng et al. 2006; Mehnaz
et al. 2007; Saharan and Nehra 2011), A. formosense (Lin et al. 2012),
A. fermentarium (Lin et al. 2013), A. humicireducens (Zhou et al. 2013), A. soli
(Lin et al. 2015), A. agricola (Lin et al. 2016), A. griseum (Yang et al. 2019),
A. palustre (Tikhonova et al. 2019), A. ramasamyi (Anandham et al. 2019),
A. thermophilum (Zhao et al. 2020), A. oleiclasticum (Wu et al. 2021), and
A. baldaniorum (dos Santos Ferreira et al. 2020). Among them, A. brasilense and
A. lipoferum are well-known species for their physiological and genetic character￾istics (Fibach-Paldi et al. 2012). The bacteria have a wide range of growth temper￾ature (5–42 °C) and pH (5.0–9.0) (Steenhoudt and Vanderleyden 2000). The
Azospirillum–plant root interactions are explained by four different aspects such as
habitat, plant root association, N2 fixation, and biosynthesis of phytohormones.
The beneficial growth-promoting role of Azospirillum ensures the biofertilizer
applications in various commercial crops. Other than the N2 fixation, Azospirillum
relies on the synthesis of phytohormones such as auxins (Spaepen and Vanderleyden
2015), abscisic acid (Cohen et al. 2009), cytokinins (Tien et al. 1979), ethylene
(Strzelczyk et al. 1994), gibberellins (Bottini et al. 1989), and salicylic acid (Sahoo7 The Beneficial Plant Microbial Association for Sustainable Agriculture 149
et al. 2014). Like Azotobacter sp., Azospirillum sp. can solubilize inorganic phos￾phates (Turan et al. 2012) and alleviate several abiotic stresses, such as drought and
salinity (Rodríguez-Salazar et al. 2009; García et al. (2017)), and also the heavy
metals (Bashan and de-Bashan 2010). The mechanisms involved in this process are
quite complex, where Azospirillum inoculum under high NaCl enhances K, Ca
uptake, and also increase chlorophyll a and b biosynthesis, and photoprotective
pigments such as carotenoids, violaxanthin, zeaxanthin, antheraxanthin, lutein, and
neoxanthin resulting in the production of soluble saccharides, proteins and other
osmolytes like proline and betaine, which improve salt stress resistance (Mehnaz
2015; Singh et al. 2015b). Azospirillum inhibits Na uptake, enhances the uptake of
Ca and K, and triggers nitrate reductase and nitrogenase activity in shoot and roots
(Hamdia et al. 2004). Azospirillum improves drought resistance in plants, through
the induction of jasmonic acid (JA) and salicylic acid (SA), which improves the
tolerance to drought and salinity stress (Kaushal and Wani 2016; Fukami et al.
2018). Further, Azospirillum lowers the synthesis of ethylene, which is related to
senescence processes induced by stress conditions (Kumari et al. 2018), and adjust￾ment of water loss by stomatal closure control (Kaushal and Wani 2016).
Azospirillum develops biofilm on the root surface (Molina-Favero et al. 2008),
which is another possible way to resist stress responses. In addition, Azospirillum
can reduce the biotic stress against the plant pathogens through a siderophore￾induced systemic resistance mechanism (Tortora et al. 2011) or cause alteration of
host physiology to induce several secondary metabolite synthesis that mediated
resistance against pathogens (Bashan and De-Bashan 2010). Some important
biofertilizer applications of Azospirillum sp. are listed in Table 7.3.
7.3.4 Actinorhizal (Frankia–Plants) Interaction
Actinorhizae are a symbiotic association between the actinomycete genus Frankia
and various dicotyledonous plant families including Betulaceae, Casuarinaceae,
Coriariaceae, Datiscaceae, Elaeagnaceae, Myricaceae, Rhamnaceae, and Rosaceae
(Diagne et al. 2013). In this association, Frankia develops nodules on actinorhizal
plants (morphologically distinct from legume-rhizobia nodules), able to fix nitrogen
up to 300 N2 kg/hectare/year (Shantharam and Mattoo 1997). Frankia is a gram￾positive, filamentous free-living, and nitrogen-fixing actinobacterium that usually
forms a symbiotic association with actinorhizal plants or in soil (Fig. 7.3a). Frankia
forms hyphae and multilocular sporangia which are located on hyphae either termi￾nal or intercalary (Obertello et al. 2003). The morphology of the Frankia in nodule
varies according to the host plant, and it forms the nodule in a perennial root,
wherein bacteria are hosted and nitrogen is fixed (Santi et al. 2013). In the genus
Frankia, 11 species such as Frankia alni, F. asymbiotica, F. canadensis,
F. casuarinae, F. coriariae, F. discariae, F. elaeagni, F. inefficax, F. irregularis,
F. saprophytica, and F. Torreyi (Nouioui et al. 2016, 2019) are able to make two
types of an actinorhizal nodule; they are (1) intracellular and (2) extracellular(continued)
150 S. Natesan et al.
Table 7.3 Use of Azospirillum sp. for sustainable agriculture
Strain Host plant Function References
Azospirillum brasilense ssp.
248
Triticum
aestivum
Improved nitrogen content and
counteract the effects of salinity
Alamri and
Mostafa
(2009)
Azospirillum brasilense Triticum
aestivum
Increasing grain yield Ardakani
and
Mafakheri
(2011)
Azospirillum brasilense Capsicum
annuum
Ameliorate the deleterious effect
of NaCl in a sweet pepper
Amor and
Cuadra￾Crespo
(2012)
Azospirillum brasilense
sp. 245
Lactuca
sativa L. cv.
Crimor
INTA
Overcome the negative effects of
aging on lettuce seeds
Carrozzi
et al. (2012)
Azospirillum lipoferum Zea mays L. Increased shoot and root fresh and
dry weight; shoot and root length
Bano et al.
(2013)
Azospirillum brasilense
sp. 245
Lactuca
sativa L.
Seed inoculation improved freshly
product quality but also extend
storage life in lettuce grown under
salt stress
Fasciglione
et al. (2015)
Azospirillum brasilense
sp. 245
Arabidopsis
thaliana
Improved plants seed yield, plants
survival, proline levels, and rela￾tive leaf water content under
drought
Cohen et al.
(2015)
Azospirillum brasilense Wheat Increased antioxidant activity Méndez￾Gómez
et al. (2015)
Azospirillum brasilense Urochloa
ruziziensis
Makes the plant more efficient at
removing reactive oxygen species
and protecting chlorophyll a
Bulegon
et al. (2016)
Azospirillum brasilense Zea mays
and Triticum
aestivum
Seed inoculation improves plant
growth and yield
Fukami
et al. (2016)
Azospirillum
brasilense + Bradyrhizobium
Glycine max
(L.)
Coinoculation stimulates an early
nodulation and maintenance of
nodule under drought; increased
the grain yield
Cerezini
et al. (2016)
A. brasilense Az39 Glycine max Microbial IAA increases plant
growth
Puente et al.
(2017)
Azospirillum brasilense Trifolium
repens
Salt stress resistance Khalid et al.
(2017)
Azospirillum sp. Zea mays Increased tolerance to osmotic and
salt stress
García et al.
(2017)
Azospirillum brasilense Zea mays Seed or leaf spray inoculum
increases plant growth through
phytohormones and eliciting
genes related to plant-stress
Fukami
et al. (2017)tolerance and defense against
pathogens
7 The Beneficial Plant Microbial Association for Sustainable Agriculture 151
Table 7.3 (continued)
Strain Host plant Function References
Azospirillum brasilense Zea mays Coculture-effective strategy to
mitigate salinity stress
Fukami
et al. (2018)
Azospirillum brasilense Fragaria
ananassa
Activation of systemic acquired
resistance against pathogens
Elías et al.
(2018)
infection (Pawlowski and Demchenko 2012). In this actinorhizal endosymbiotic
nodule, nitrogen is fixed and can be transported to the host, and reduced carbon
from the plant can be transferred to the Frankial partner (Franche and Bogusz 2012;
Gonzalez et al. 2015). However, little is known about the plant growth-promoting
(PGP) properties of Frankia, some of these strains have been found to solubilize
inorganic phosphate, and synthesize plant hormones, and siderophores (Tisa et al.
2016).
Morphology of actinorhizal nodule is varied in different host species, septate,
pear-shaped without stalk, or septate, elongated, or club-shaped (Berg 1994). The
symbiotic interaction starts with Frankial infection at the surface of root hair. The
intracellular infection starts with the deformation of root hairs with a signaling
molecule produced by Frankia. With Rhizobium infection, actinorhizal hyphae are
tangled by curled root hairs and few can enter into the infection site of folding, then it
invaded to develop infection thread formation. Within the structure, Frankial fila￾ments are encapsulated in plant cell-wall-based components. Frankial invasion
triggers cell divisions in the root cortex near to the infected root hair, forming a
mitotically active zone called the pre-nodule, penetrating the thin wall of the recently
expanded cortical cells, and enlarging wherein N2 can fix. During the infection
process, when the infected cell matures, the tips of the hyphae in due course
differentiate vesicles that will fix nitrogen (Newcomb and Wood 1987). Nitrogenase,
which is an oxygen-labile enzyme, is exclusively expressed in these vesicles, and
fixes the N2. Moreover, the periderm of the nodule acts as an oxygen barrier, wherein
the bacterial hemoglobin could also support shuttle oxygen to the sites of respiration
(Pawlowski et al. 2007). Figure 7.5 illustrates the structure and physiology of the
Frankia nodule.
Actinorhizal symbiosis generally gives resistance to plants against abiotic
stresses. Several reports suggested the impact of Actinorhizal nodule on dicotyle￾dons. Frankia is highly tolerant to salinity, hence it can be used for rehabilitation of
soil affected by salt, heavy metal, oil, etc. (Diagne et al. 2013). For example, the
symbiotic association between C. equisetifolia and Frankia can be widely used for
the recovery of saline soil (Ngom et al. 2016). The effect of bio-inoculation of
isolated Frankia sp. strains has been demonstrated to improve drought stress toler￾ance in tomato (Solanum lycopersicum L. cv. Pusa ruby) (Mohan Gupta et al. 2020),
which give an idea to use Frankia for sustainable agriculture.152 S. Natesan et al.
Fig. 7.5 Actinorhizal nodule. (a) Frankia nodule; (b) microscopic image of Frankial hyphae and
spore; (c) cross-section of young nodule; (d) schematic drawing of a mature actinorhizal nodule
lobe. (Adapted from Rascio and La Rocca 2008. Biological Nitrogen Fixation. Encyclopedia of
Ecology)
7.3.5 Mycorrhizal Interaction
Fungi are the second most diverse and abundant microbe in soil, which could exploit
very diverse substrates for their nutritional purpose, especially they do saprophytic
mode of life. A few fungal groups establish the mutualistic symbiont with its
associated host. Mycorrhizal fungi are a heterogeneous group of fungi that can
carry out their life cycle as free-living and also associate with the roots of higher
plants (over 90% of plant species). In mycorrhizal association both partners are
benefited, fungal partner improves the nutrient status of the host plant especially for
the mineral nutrients, water absorption, disease resistance, and growth, whereas the
host plant provides space and nutrients for the fungal growth and propagation
(Martin et al. 2008; Varma et al. 2017a, b, c). The fungal partners do an essential
role in mineral recycling through their mycelium, absorb soil nutrients, and feed
them to the plant. Moreover, fungal partners develop an extensive hyphal network in
the soil named web which can effectively connect the host plant and supply the
nutrients efficiently. Species of three major groups of fungi such as Ascomycota,7 The Beneficial Plant Microbial Association for Sustainable Agriculture 153
Basidiomycota (septate), and Glomeromycota (aseptate) develop either ecto- or
endo–mycorrhizas (Javot et al. 2007a, b).
7.3.5.1 Ectomycorrhizae
Ectomycorrhizas occur mainly in certain woody plants of gymnosperms and angio￾sperms, and it contributes 30% of the total microbial biomass in forest soil (Johnson
and Gehring 2007). More than 6000 species of ascomycetes (Cenococcum
geophilum, Tuber borchii, Scleroderma hypogaeum), basidiomycetes (Amanita
muscaria, Hebeloma cylindrosporum, Laccaria bicolor, Paxillus involutus,
Pisolithus tinctorius, Suillus bovinus, Xerocomus badius), and zygomycetes take
part in this ectomycorrhizal (EM) assemblage, where they colonize roots of trees,
such as pine (Pinaceae) and beech (Fagaceae) of the forest ecosystem. These fungi
form symbioses with lateral roots of plants and create a specialized characteristic
structure called “Hartig net” (labyrinthine structure), a network of inward-growing
hyphae that extends into the root penetrating between the epidermis and cortex cells
of its host plants. Due to this association, fungi can induce altered root architecture
including root hair modification or inhibition (Fig. 7.6a). The EM fungal hyphae
occasionally join together into macroscopic structures called sporocarps, similar to
the xylem, which serve in water uptake (Smith and Read 1997; Agerer 2001). EM
fungi are generally carried out saprotrophic and symbiotic modes of life. During
saprophytic life, EM fungi release many extracellular hydrolytic enzymes that can
use organic nutrient sources. EM fungi have an instance loss of plant cell wall
degrading enzymes, hence it restricts penetrating the intracellular space of plant root
(Martin et al. 2008).
7.3.5.2 Endomycorrhizae
Endomycorrhizas are further divided into orchid, ericoid, and arbuscular mycorrhi￾zas (AMs). The arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi are the most abundant of the
endomycorrhiza (Smith and Read 2008), they are obligate biotrophic symbionts
the hyphae penetrate the cells of the inner root cortex to form specialized branched
structures called “arbuscules” (Javot et al. 2007a, b), a specific nutrient transfer
interface of the symbiosis (Genre et al. 2005, 2008). However, arbuscules do not
penetrate the protoplast of plant cells, which can develop a new and distinct
periarbuscular membrane (PAM) continuous with the plasma membrane of the
cortical cell (Genre et al. 2005) (Fig. 7.6b). Several AM fungi form vesicles as
lipid-rich storage organelle, called vesicular-arbuscular mycorrhiza (VAM). AM
fungi are classified under the separate phylum Glomeromycota consisting of four
genera, Acaulospora, Gigaspora, Glomus, and Sclerocystis. In the case of Orchid
and Ericoid mycorrhiza, they can specifically make symbiotic colonization in
Ericales and Orchidaceae respectively. In orchids, the flow of carbon is from the154 S. Natesan et al.
Fig. 7.6 Schematic diagram of the main structural features of ectomycorrhiza (a) and AM
mycorrhiza (b). (Adapted from, Marschner 2012, Rhizosphere Biology, In: Marschner’s Mineral
Nutrition of Higher Plants)
fungus to the host which is entirely different from the other mycorrhiza, this is
essential for orchid seed germination (Smith and Read 2008).
7.3.5.3 Fungal Endophytes
Endophytic fungi are a group of fungi that live in almost all plant species to maintain
symbiotic life without causing symptoms of disease (Gazis and Chaverri 2010;
Porras-Alfaro and Bayman 2011). Most endosymbiotic fungi live at least part of
their life cycle away from the plant (Rodriguez et al. 2009). The members of
Ascomycota, Basidiomycota, and Mucoromycota are the major group of endosym￾bionts of plants, including Moeniiplasma glomeromycotorum, Rhizopus micro￾spores, Mortierella elongate, Mycoavidus cysteinexigens, Piriformospora indica,7 The Beneficial Plant Microbial Association for Sustainable Agriculture 155
Paracoinothyrium variabile (Bärenstrauch et al. 2020). However, fungi such as
Cladosporium, Curvularia, Colletotrichum, Cordana, Deightoniella, Fusarium,
Guignardia, Nigrospora, Periconiella, Phoma, and Verticillium are identified as
pathogenic endophytes (Photita et al. 2005; Cui et al. 2021). The endosymbiotic
colonization as well as the nutrient transfer mechanisms of such beneficial fungi is
not clearly understood when compared with mycorrhizal fungi (Saikkonen 2007;
Behie et al. 2012; Behie and Bidochka 2014).
In mutualistic symbiosis, both partners of endosymbionts benefit from this
association (Jia et al. 2016), where host plants provide shelters and other prolifera￾tion facilities to fungi, and fungi can alter the metabolic activities of host, such as
enhance growth, promote nutrient acquisition, and improve metal and drought
tolerance (Mejia et al. 2014; Poveda et al. 2021). In addition, they also enhance
the defense efficiency of host plants against pests as well as pathogenic microorgan￾isms (Cui et al. 2021).
7.3.6 Benefits of Fungal–Plant Interactions
Beneficial plant-associated fungi are broadly distributed and lead to benefits for the
plant nitrogen transfer, phosphate mobilization, drought resistance, salt stress, and
also the alleviator of biotic stresses. The major benefit of mycorrhizal association to
the plant is listed in Fig. 7.7.
7.3.6.1 Soil Health
Healthy soil is more productive; in sustainable agriculture management of soil is an
important event that increases the crop productivity. Healthy soil is nutrient rich and
abundant in microbial diversity with good texture and aeration. Soil is rich in fungal
diversity, especially mycorrhizal fungi form a complex networking between plant
and soil, which provide nutrient transport, decomposition of organic residues in soil,
regulation of microbial community, increase water holding ability, and aeration of
soil (Fig. 7.5). Arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM) fungi are the important microorganism
in agricultural soil, and they can significantly increase crop productivity (Bagyaraj
and Ashwin 2017; Frąc et al. 2018). The positive effect of fungi in the soil is to
maintain soil quality and plant health along with other PGPRs from soil microbiome.
However, a human activity heavily affects soil microbiome and affects the soil
texture, aeration, and water-holding capability. In grassland soil, basidiomycetes
dominate and actively involve in the decomposition and mineral recycling process
(Cassman et al. 2016; Yang et al. 2017). In a forest, ectomycorrhizal associations
strongly regulate soil texture and health. Moreover, soil organic matter could
regulate the diversity and abundance of fungi and other microorganisms. They are
the major energy source of soil microorganisms and maintain the nutritional quality
of soil (Jiménez-Morillo et al. 2016).Fig. 7.7 A diagrammatic representation of mycorrhizal functions to regulate various processes in the ecosystem and plant growth promotion under abiotic stress
conditions
156 S. Natesan et al. Mycorrhizal Fungi Nutrient uptake Water Storage & Filtraon Carbon Capture & Storage Microbial Diversity & Funcon Soil Aeraon Soil Nutrients Soil Health Oxidave stress Up-regulaon of anoxidant system Down regulaon of lipoxygenase  Drought Resistance  Saline resistance  ABA-responsive elements (ABREs)  Inducon of phytohormone synthesis  Regulaon of transcriponal factors Improved Stress Resistance & Enhanced yield Translocaon of minerals from soil to root through mycorrhiza symbiont Nutrient transport system Healthy crop7 The Beneficial Plant Microbial Association for Sustainable Agriculture 157
7.3.6.2 Nitrogen Uptake
Nitrogen is the most important nutrient needed for the primary productivity of the
plant, which is essential for plant growth, health, and yield. Generally, roots absorb
nitrogen in their inorganic forms such as nitrate (NO3
-) and ammonium (NH4
+
)
ions. In the atmosphere, a large amount of nitrogen exist, some can be readily
incorporated by soil containing nitrogen-fixing organisms, and some quantity may
be immobilized in organic forms like peptides, proteins, and amino acids. Through
the fungal decomposition of organic substances, nitrogen can be mineralized and
available for plant nutrition. Several soil fungi such as mycorrhizal fungi break down
the organic nitrogen by their extracellular proteases for their energy requirements
and provide nitrogen reserve to their host plant (Sinsabaugh 2010). Earlier studies
have reported that approximately 20–75% of the total N uptake of AM plants can be
transferred through the AM fungi to their hosts (Ahanger et al. 2014; Hashem et al.
2018a). For example, AM fungi and ectomycorrhizal fungi release proteases and
peptidases to hydrolyze polymers to simple monomers like nitrates (NO3) or ammo￾nium (NH4
+
), then absorbed by the extraradical mycelia and further synthesis of
amino acids (arginine) into intracellular mycelia. After its migration, the amino acid
arginine is broken down into ammonia via the urea cycle and transported to the plant
root (Ngwene et al. 2013). This mechanism helps to absorb a large amount of NH4
+
and NO3 via the fungal hyphae (Mian et al. 2009). This kind of nutrient transport is
mediated with a specialized cell structure developed by arbuscular mycorrhizae-root
in the symbiosis called PAM, which contains AMT family of ammonium trans￾porters (Kobae et al. 2010; López-Pedrosa et al. 2006) and high-affinity nitrate
transporters (NRT) (Kemppainen and Pardo 2013). Several studies highlighted the
impact of AM fungi on the ability to absorb and transfer N to the nearby plants or
host plants (Zhu et al. 2016; Battini et al. 2017; Turrini et al. 2018; Wang et al.
2018a, b; Liu et al. 2018a, b). Few examples are listed in Table 7.4.
7.3.6.3 Phosphate Transfer
Phosphorous is one of the growth-limiting nutrients for plants. Plants are unable to
use insoluble rock or organic phosphates from the soil (Ruttenberg 2003). In nature,
weathering process releases phosphate ions, orthophosphates, H2PO4
-, and HPO4
2-
are the primary forms of phosphorus taken up by plants and or root colonized
mycorrhiza (Yang et al. 2012). Fungal mycelium directly absorbs phosphates by a
translocation process and is transported into the cortical cells of the root in the form
of inorganic phosphates (Smith and Smith 2011). In addition, mycorrhiza secretes
enzymes such as phosphomonoesterases and phosphatases, they hydrolyze organic P
compounds in soil, and through this mechanism, phosphate can be a cycle in plant
nutrition. Unlike nitrogen transport, the absorption and transport of phosphate are
also mediated with a number of phosphate transporters in both mycorrhizal fungi and
plants, which are located in PAM of arbuscular mycorrhizal symbiosis (BenedettoNutrients Transporter References
158 S. Natesan et al.
Table 7.4 Mycorrhizal transporters in nutrient transport to plant
Mycorrhizal
species
Nitrogen GintAMT1,
GintAMT2,
GintAMT3
Glomus
intraradices
López-Pedrosa et al. (2006), Pérez￾Tienda et al. (2011), Calabrese et al.
(2016)
RiPTR2 Rhizophagus
irregularis
Belmondo et al. (2014)
Phosphorus GiPT Glomus
intraradices
Maldonado-Mendoza et al. (2001)
GmosPT Glomus
mosseae
Balestrini et al. (2007)
GigmPT Gigaspora
margarita
Xie et al. (2016)
GiPT Rhizophagus
irregularis
Yang et al. (2012)
Zinc GintZnT1 Glomus
intraradices
González-Guerrero et al. (2005)
GintZnT1 Rhizophagus
irregularis
Sugar GpMST1 Glomeromycota Schüßler et al. (2007)
RiMST2 Glomus sp. Helber et al. (2011)
RiMST2 Rhizophagus
irregularis
Helber et al. (2011)
RiMST5 Ait Lahmidi et al. (2016)
Arsenic RiArsAB Rhizophagus
irregularis
Maldonado-Mendoza and Harrison
(2018)
RiMT-11 González-Chávez et al. (2014)
Iron RiFRE1
RiFTR1-2
Rhizophagus
irregularis
Tamayo et al. (2014)
et al. 2005). Several studies reported that the expression of transporters in mycor￾rhizal fungi is high at symbiotic association and also under low phosphorous
conditions (Krajinski et al. 2014; Wang et al. 2014a, b). AM fungi inoculation
improved P contents in plant tissues (Jixiang et al. 2017; Garcés-Ruiz et al. 2017;
Wang et al. 2018a, b; Liu et al. 2018a, b; Chhabra and Dowling 2017; Chhabra
2019) by the expression of phosphate transporters during the mycorrhizal associa￾tion in plants, for example, Piriformospora indica and H. cylindrosporum associa￾tion in plant root under low soil phosphate conditions (Tatry et al. 2009; Yadav et al.
2010; Gill et al. 2016).
7.3.6.4 Other Soil Nutrients Transport
Along with nitrogen and phosphate transfer, AM and ectomycorrhizal fungi are able
to transfer potassium, sulfur, zinc, copper, and cesium (Cartmill et al. 2008; Nord
and Lynch 2009). The above nutrients are generally rich in most soil; however, the7 The Beneficial Plant Microbial Association for Sustainable Agriculture 159
plant cannot easily access these elementary nutrients in some soil. Like phosphate
mineralization, AM fungi and other mycorrhizal fungi solubilize and transfer such
soil nutrients to their host plant. Several gene expression studies disclosed the
efficiency of mineral uptake by the AM fungi, for example, the upregulation of
sulfate transporters in M. truncatula is due to fungal colonization (Casieri et al.
2012). Sulfur uptake in plant roots is directly connected with the phosphate content
of the soil, whereas low soil phosphate with fungal colonization increases both
phosphate and sulfate uptake (Garcia et al. 2014). Moreover, various reports
suggested that mycorrhizae have the ability to transfer both macro and
micronutrients such as N, P, K, Ca, Mg, Fe, Cu, and Zn from soil (Asrar et al.
2012; Berruti et al. 2016; Bati et al. 2015; Zaefarian et al. 2013; Ali et al. 2015).
Mycorrhizae can mobilize such minerals at a high level under stress conditions
(Asrar et al. 2012), for example, under salinity stress increases P, Ca, and K transport
in Euonymus japonica (Gómez-Bellot et al. 2015), and under drought stress P and Fe
transport in Pelargonium graveolens L. (Amiri et al. 2017). Under salt stress
conditions AM fungi-treated Cucumis sativus plants have absorbed a high amount
of P, Ca2+, N, Mg2+, and K+ (Hashem et al. 2018b). Few examples are listed in
Table 7.4. However, little information is available on the ability of endophytes to
transfer soil nutrients (Usuki and Narisawa 2007). Usually, fungal endophytes make
asymptomatic interactions with the plant without any beneficial nutrient transport
(Behie and Bidochka 2014).
7.3.6.5 Mutual Exchange of Minerals
AM fungi develop symbiosis with roots to obtain essential nutrients from the host
plant and reciprocally provide mineral nutrients, for example, N, P, K, Ca, Zn, and
S. Normally, readily available free carbon in the soil ecosystem is a limited one.
Primary carbon metabolites of plants fixed through photosynthesis are often simply
metabolized by fungi, which may be the reason fungi are able to colonize on the root
to reciprocally exchange the minerals (Smith et al. 2009). For example, the mycor￾rhizal fungi Glomus intraradices transfers phosphorus and nitrogen to the roots of
wild carrot (Daucus carota) in a reciprocal exchange of carbon (Liao et al. 2013;
Fang and St Leger 2010). In contrast, the decrease in available carbon delays the
overall rate of phosphate transfer, which indicates the need for the mechanism of
fungal interaction with plant roots. Moreover, different abiotic conditions can also
influence the nutrient exchange in between mycorrhizal symbiosis (Hoysted et al.
2021), where the atmospheric (CO2) influences the carbon-nutrient exchanges
between Mucoromycotina “fine root endophyte” (MFRE) fungi and vascular plant.
As a result, reciprocal nutrient exchange stabilizes the cooperative relationship
between the symbiotic partners because of the nutritionally mutualistic relation
(Field et al. 2015; Orchard et al. 2017). Several fungal associations on plant roots
essentially transfer nonlimiting nutrients from the soil through the reciprocal
exchange of ions and nutrients. In AM fungi, Glomus spp., the amount of carbon
received from the symbiotic association is directly related to the phosphate transfer160 S. Natesan et al.
(Bücking and Shachar-Hill 2005). However, endophytes take the photosynthetic
carbon from the plant without reciprocal exchange of nutrients. Very limited infor￾mation is available in the nonmycorrhizal fungal symbionts nutrient exchange
process (Behie and Bidochka 2014). These findings offer new insights into the
regulatory mechanism of mineral nutrient uptake by host plants from AM fungi.
7.3.6.6 Drought Resistance
Drought stress is multidimensional stress that can affect plant life and causes
changes in the morphological, physiological, biochemical, and molecular properties
of plants. Shortage of water induces oxidative stress (Impa et al. 2012;
Hasanuzzaman et al. 2013), which leads to giving deleterious effects on plant growth
by affecting enzyme activity, nutrient uptake, and assimilation (Ahanger and
Agarwal 2016; Ahanger et al. 2017a, b). Numerous studies reported that mycorrhizal
association alleviates drought stress in several crop plants such as barley, maize,
onion, soybean, strawberry, and wheat (Yooyongwech et al. 2016; Moradtalab et al.
2019). One such mechanism of drought resistance is enlarging the root surface by the
association of mycorrhizal fungi. Such a kind of symbiotic association regulates a
variety of physiological processes including osmotic regulation, increase proline and
glutathione levels, and stomatal conductance, and decreases transpiration rate which
plants get resistant to drought (Zhang et al. 2016; Rani 2016; Li et al. 2019).
Table 7.5 contains some representative evidence for fungal-induced drought resis￾tance in plants.
7.3.6.7 Salinity Stress Tolerance
Salts occur naturally within soils and water, salinization is the process of increasing
the salt content in the soil, which is an increasing environmental problem that creates
a cruel risk to global food safety. Salinity induces the generation of high-level
expression of reactive oxygen species that affects plant growth and productivity
(Ahanger et al. 2017a, b, 2018). However, mycorrhizal association mitigates
salinity-associated adverse effects on plants (Santander et al. 2019) and increases
crop productivity (Elhindi et al. 2017; Ait-El-Mokhtar et al. 2019) through the
modification of plant physiology and biochemical activities such as photosynthetic
rate, stomatal conductance, leaf water relations, and water use efficiency (El-Nashar
2017; Wang et al. 2018b) in Ocimum basilicum L. (Elhindi et al. 2017) and Allium
sativum (Borde et al. 2010).
In addition, support with mineral nutrient transport, mycorrhizal symbionts
enhance the synthesis of some plant metabolites, for example, jasmonic acid and
salicylic acid. Under salt stress, AM fungi inoculated plants showed higher resis￾tance to saline stress and improved nutrient transport, which may be due to enhanced
mineral absorption by the mycorrhizal symbiont (Hashem et al. 2018b), for example,
AM inoculation increases chlorophyll contents and regulate Na+ transport with(continued)
7 The Beneficial Plant Microbial Association for Sustainable Agriculture 161
Table 7.5 Mycorrhizal association on plant drought resistance
Fungus species Plant Responses References
Glomus deserticola Antirrhinum majus
L.
Increased shoot and
root length, leaf num￾ber, leaf area, water
content, Chl content,
and proline
Asrar et al.
(2012)
Funneliformis mosseae,
F. geosporus
Fragaria ananassa Increased shoot and
root biomass, water
use efficiency (WUE),
and plant survival
Boyer et al.
(2015)
F. mosseae and Rhizophagus
intraradices
Robinia
pseudoacacia L.
Increased dry biomass,
WUE, and
photosynthesis
Yang et al.
(2014)
R. irregularis,
G. intraradices
Lettuce and tomato Increased biomass,
strigolactone produc￾tion, and
ABA accumulation
Ruiz-Lozano
et al. (2015)
R. intraradices, F. mosseae Pelargonium
graveolens
Increase plant bio￾mass, and essential oil
content
Amiri et al.
(2015)
Septoglomusconstrictum,
Glomus spp. G. aggregatum
Glycine max Improved mineral
(N &P) uptake and
water content
Grümberg
et al. (2014)
G. intraradices, Gigaspora
gregaria, Scutellospora
gregaria
Vigna subterranea Increased mineral
absorption, soluble
sugars, and acid but
reduced proline
content
Tsoata et al.
(2015)
G. intraradices Hordeum vulgare Increased root volume
and P content
Bayani et al.
(2015)
R. intraradices Zea mays Increased uptake of P,
N, K, and Mg, plant
dry weight and WUE
Zhao et al.
(2015)
G. mosseae, G. fasciculatum,
Gigaspora decipiens
Triticum aestivum
L.
Increased plant growth
and total chlorophyll
content
Pal and Pandey
(2016)
R. intraradices Triticum durum Increased biomass,
mineral nutrition (Cu,
Fe, Mn, & Zn ), and
gliadins in grains
Goicoechea
et al. (2016)
Glomus spp. Ipomoea batatas Proline and soluble
sugars adjust osmotic
potential
Yooyongwech
et al. (2017)
F. mosseae, Paraglomus
occultum
Poncirus trifoliata Increased mineral
absorption, and leaf
water potential
Zhang et al.
(2018a)
R. intraradices,
Claroideoglomusclaroideum,
F. mosseae
Hordeum vulgare,
Hordeum vulgare
ssp. spontaneum
Increase root biomass
alleviation of drought
stress
Sendek et al.
(2019)162 S. Natesan et al.
Table 7.5 (continued)
Fungus species Plant Responses References
AMF Triticum aestivum
L.
Increased phosphorus
uptake, pigment bio￾synthesis, and accu￾mulation of plant
metabolites
Metwally et al.
(2019)
R. irregularis Malus hupehensis Enhanced drought by
regulating genes in the
MAPK pathway
Huang et al.
(2020)
R. irregularis Zea mays Improved photosys￾tem II activities, bio￾mass, and drought
tolerance in seedlings
Hu et al.
(2020)
Glomus spp. Saccharum
arundinaceum Retz.
Increased water
uptake, phenolics,
ascorbic acid, gluta￾thione, antioxidant
enzymes, and plant
biomass
Mirshad and
Puthur (2017)
support of Mg2+ and N nutrients in Capsicum annuum (Çekiç et al. 2012), and higher
biomass production, increased synthesis of proline, increased N uptake in lettuce
(Santander et al. 2019). In addition, the mycorrhizal fungi can improve some organic
acid synthesis in plants under saline stress, which increases betaine production and
substantiates osmoregulation (Begum et al. 2019) in maize plants (Sheng et al.
2011). Table 7.6 presents few examples of mycorrhizal association on the adaptation
of plant under saline stress.
7.3.6.8 Heavy Metal(s) Tolerance
Heavy metals are elements that generally produce common toxic effects on plants,
such as low biomass productivity, inhibition of growth and photosynthesis, chloro￾sis, altered water balance and nutrient assimilation, and senescence, which ultimately
cause plant death (Singh et al. 2016; Moghadam et al. 2016). Some heavy metals
(Co, Cu, Fe, Mn, Mo, Ni, V, and Zn) may require trace amounts for the normal
functioning of cells, when their concentration is excess it can become harmful.
Moreover, excess of such heavy metals affects soil properties, in particular, soil
pH, water-holding ability, mineral properties, soil aeration, and also microbial
diversity. When plants grow in such soil, growth and yield may be severally affected,
and accumulate toxic heavy materials in its root, leaf, fruits, and seeds (Yousaf et al.
2016). However, mycorrhizal association specifically, AM fungi reduces the toxic
effects of such heavy metals and inhibits their transport to the plant. Heavy metal
toxicity is typically reduced by chelation through immobilizing the metals in their
hyphae or hyphal mantle and storing them in vacuoles. Hence, the concentration of(continued)
7 The Beneficial Plant Microbial Association for Sustainable Agriculture 163
Table 7.6 Effect of mycorrhizal association on the adaptation of plant under saline and heavy
metal stresses
Fungus species Plant Responses References
Glomus fasciculate Acacia nilotica Improved root and shoot biomass as
well as P, Zn, and Cu contents
Giri et al.
(2007)
Glomus intraradices Solanum
lycopersicum L.
Improved dry matter, ion uptake,
growth parameters, and chlorophyll
content
Hajiboland
et al. (2010)
Glomus mosseae and
Paraglomus occultum
Citrus
tangerine
Higher antioxidant defense systems
response to salinity
Wu et al.
(2010)
Glomus intraradices Trigonella
foenumgraecum
Better plant growth, lower leaf
senescence, and decreased lipid per￾oxidation, higher osmolyte (glycine
betaine, sugars), and polyamines
concentration, and more and bigger
plastoglobules formation
Evelin et al.
(2012,
2013)
Glomus viscosum Medicago
sativa
Reduce salt toxicity, maintain the
yield attributes, and regulate antho￾cyanins enrichment in the pericarp of
grains
Campanelli
et al. (2013)
G. mosseae Kosteletzkya
virginica
Increased mineral nutrition and anti￾oxidant enzymes
Zhang et al.
(2014)
Claroideoglomus
etunicatum
Oryza sativa
(L)
Improved quantum yield of PSII
photochemistry, net photosynthetic
rate, stomatal conductance
Porcel et al.
(2015)
Claroideoglomus
etunicatum
Aeluropus
littoralis
Increased shoot and root dry mass,
stomatal conductance, soluble sugars,
free α-amino acids, and Na+ and
K+
uptake
Hajiboland
et al. (2015)
Claroideoglomus
etunicatum
Oryza sativa Root and shoot P, Na, and K content
and expression of genes with a role in
the uptake, transport, or compart￾mentation of Na/K
Porcel et al.
(2016)
Funneliformis
mosseae
Cicer arietinum Increased antioxidant enzymes and
modulated ascorbate-glutathione
(ASA-GSH) cycle
Garg and
Bhandari
(2016)
Rhizophagus
irregularis
Solanum
lycopersicum L.
Enhanced shoot fresh weight (FW),
leaf area, leaf number, root FW, and
levels of growth hormones
Khalloufi
et al. (2017)
G. mosseae Leymus
chinensis
Increased colonization rate, seedling
weight, water contents, and both P
and N
Jixiang
et al. (2017)
Glomus etunicatum,
Glomus intraradices,
Glomus mosseae
Cucumis
sativus L.
Increased biomass, photosynthetic
pigment synthesis, and enhanced
antioxidant enzymes
Hashem
et al.
(2018b)
R. irregularis Elaeagnus
angustifolia
Higher activities of superoxide
dismutase (SOD), catalase (CAT),
and ascorbate peroxidase (APX) in
the leaves of the mycorrhizal seed￾lings in response to salinity
Chang et al.
(2018)164 S. Natesan et al.
Table 7.6 (continued)
Fungus species Plant Responses References
R. intraradices Cicer arietinum
L.
Improving root biomass, root to shoot
ratio, and nutrient acquisition,
maintaining ion equilibrium, and
modulating carbohydrate metabolism
and reproductive yield
Garg and
Bharti
(2018)
heavy metals is diluted to the point of being inaccessible to the plants (Punamiya
et al. 2010; Garg and Chandel 2011; Kapoor et al. 2013; Audet 2014). In addition, at
the high concentration of heavy metals in soil, mycorrhizae increase their morphol￾ogy and biomass as well as uptake of maximum quantity of heavy metals and fix
their cells, hence it reduces their toxicity to plants (Miransari 2017). Several
researchers found the impact of AM fungal symbionts in various plant growth
under heavy metal stress. Generally, AM fungal mycelia show a high cation￾exchanging process through which it uptakes a large quantity of heavy metals
especially in the extra-radical mycelium and also detoxifies the heavy metals
(Kamal et al. 2010). For example, restoration of Cd in the extra-radical mycelium
of AM fungi binds to glomalin glycoprotein (Janoušková and Pavlíková 2010),
further, lowering the Cd level in both the vacuoles and cell wall, which brought
about Cd detoxification, observed in rice (Li et al. 2016) and give tolerance in alfalfa
(Wang et al. 2012). A few examples of heavy metal adaptation by mycorrhizal fungi
are listed in Table 7.7.
7.3.6.9 Adaptation Under High and Low Temperature
Soil temperature promotes either heat stress or cold stress to plants; it certainly
affects the growth and yield of crops through several physiology receptive stresses
including oxidative stress, abscission, and senescence, wilting and burning of leaves,
and inhibition of seed germination and growth (Bunn et al. 2009; Chen et al. 2013;
Hasanuzzaman et al. 2013). However, mycorrhizal association alleviates the stress￾ful effect of heat or cold through improving water–plant relationships strengthening
plant immunity, and also promoting sufficient protein expression (Zhu et al. 2010;
Begum et al. 2019). For example, AM fungi such as Rhizophagus intraradices,
Funneliformis mosseae, and F. geosporum increase plant growth by regulation of
stomatal conductance, and transpiration rate under high temperature in Zea mays
(Mathur et al. 2016), similarly, R. irregularis in Solanum lycopersicum (Calvo￾Polanco et al. 2016), Rhizophagus irregularis, Funneliformis mosseae,
F. geosporum, and Claroideoglo musclaroideumi on Triticum aestivum L. (Cabral
et al. 2016).7 The Beneficial Plant Microbial Association for Sustainable Agriculture 165
Table 7.7 Heavy metal adsorption by AM fungi
Metal Plant Fungi Activity References
Heavy
metal
Sesbania
rostrata
Glomus mosseae Stimulated formation of root
nodules, and increased N and
P contents
Lin et al.
(2007)
Cd and
Zn
Cajanus
cajan L.
Rhizophagus
irregularis
Improved root biomass,
nutrient status (P, N, Mg, Fe),
and proline biosynthesis
Garg and
Singh (2018)
Zn Medicago
truncatula
Rhizophagus
irregularis
Increased expression of
transporters and decreased
absorption of Zn
Nguyen et al.
(2019)
Cd Cajanus
cajan L.
Glomus mosseae Increase in biothiols (NPSH)
and glutathione (GSH), with a
larger pool of NP-SH which
strongly induced accumula￾tion of phytochelatins
Garg and
Aggarwal
(2012)
Lonicera
japonica
Glomus versiforme
(Gv) and Rhizophagus
intraradices (Ri)
Increased several
antioxidative enzymes and
decreased of shoot Cd
concentrations
Jiang et al.
(2016)
Trigonella
foenum￾graecum
L.
Glomus monosporum,
G. clarum, Gigaspora
nigra, and
Acaulospora laevis
Increased antioxidant enzyme
activities and
malondialdehyde content.
Abdelhameed
and Metwally
(2019)
7.4 Beneficial Microbial Association on Phyllosphere
The phyllosphere is defined as “the aerial part of the plant or the part of a plant above
the ground (leaves, stems, buds, flowers, and fruits), generally, the surface of leaves,
thought to provide a home for microorganisms,” a habitat for a variety of microor￾ganisms including bacteria, yeasts, and fungus (Yadav and Yadav 2019). Bacteria
are the most common microbial occupants exceeding 108 cells/cm2 of the
phyllosphere followed by archaea, filamentous fungus, and yeasts play a role in
phyllosphere microbial community formation, either epiphytic or endophytic
(Leveau 2015; Whipps et al. 2008). The epiphytic phyllosphere microbial commu￾nities are extremely complex, containing both culturable and unculturable organisms
(Müller and Ruppel 2014). Microbes in the phyllosphere zone have evolved to
insensible environmental conditions with epiphytic microbes, particularly vulnera￾ble to temperature, light, UV radiation, and a lack of water or nutrition availability,
which influences the richness and composition of the phyllosphere microbial com￾munity (Vorholt 2012). The interaction between plants and invading microbes are
also influencing the development and maintenance of plant–microbe or microbe–
microbe relationships such as commensalism, mutualism, and or antagonism
(Rastogi et al. 2013; Barrera et al. 2019). Depending on the association microbes
may have either beneficial or harmful effects on the host (Colston and Jackson
2016).166 S. Natesan et al.
Recent years, extensive research work has analyzed the health status of animals
based on individual microbiomes, emphasizing their need for microbiome analysis
in various ecosystems, such as soils, water, and plants (Alivisatos et al. 2015;
Dubilier et al. 2015; Thaiss et al. 2016). Figure 7.8 represents the various limiting
factors regulating the formation of the phyllosphere microbial community. In the
phyllosphere, microbes from air and soil, factors such as environmental conditions,
rainfall, agricultural practice, human intervention, seasonal variations, and plant
species are regulating microbial growth on the leaf surface (Beattie 2002). Moreover,
the cuticle layer of the leaf keeps moisture leaving from the interior of the leaf tissues
and regulates the amount of water that remains on the leaf surface (Neinhuis and
Barthlott 1997). Though, bacteria overcome the water demand by building aggre￾gates to develop biofilms and secrete extracellular polymeric substances (EPS) that
can withstand desiccation (Morris and Kinkel 2002; Afzal et al. 2019).
7.4.1 Phyllosphere Microbiome
The phyllosphere’s microbial communities are varied from one plant to another,
composed with different kinds of bacteria, filamentous fungus, yeasts, and algae, in
addition to cyanobacteria, protozoans, and nematodes (Morris and Kinkel 2002;
Lindow and Brandl 2003). Several recent cultivation-independent investigations
have provided new information about the phyllosphere microbial communities. It
is clear that these communities do not reflect random assembly of microorganisms,
but are rather subjected to selection, resulting in predictable microbial communities
with few dominating phyla and other subgroups (Vorholt 2012). Bacteria are the
dominant epiphytes (e.g., methylobacterium, methylophilus, methylibium, and
hyphomicrobium) followed by yeast and certain filamentous fungi, mostly present
as latent spores rather than active mycelia range between 102 and 108 CFU/g leaf
(Delmotte et al. 2009).
7.4.1.1 Phyllosphere Bacteria
The phyllosphere represents the largest bacterial habitat on Earth and maintained
either more prevalent epiphytic or endophytic life. Compare with the rhizosphere,
the phyllosphere is an extremely flexible habitat, where epiphytes are frequently
exposed to various growth-limiting environmental factors and antimicrobial com￾pounds (Laforest-Lapointe et al. 2016). However, endophytes complete their life
within the host plant with limited multiplication due to host defense (Singh and
Dubey 2018). The core phyllosphere bacterial biome comprised Proteobacteria,
Firmicutes, Actinobacteria, and Bacteroidetes (Vorholt 2012; Laforest-Lapointe
et al. 2016; Müller et al. 2016a). The microbiome assemblage on the phyllosphere
of distinct plant species could depend on the interaction of several environmental
factors (Andreote et al. 2014), and also the host (Müller et al. 2016b). Generally, they7 The Beneficial Plant Microbial Association for Sustainable Agriculture 167
Fig. 7.8 Phyllosphere microbiome. Factors controlling the phyllosphere microbiome formation
are derived from the air as well as from the seeds, soil, and water (Lemanceau et al.
2017). Several works highlighted that Alphaproteobacteria (Sphingomonas,
Methylobacterium), and Gammaproteobacteria (Pseudomonas) are the most abun￾dant phyla, followed by Firmicutes, and Actinobacteria (Müller et al. 2016b; Durand
et al. 2018; Carvalho et al. 2017). For example, Bacillus (Venkatachalam et al. 2016;
Thapa and Prasanna 2018), Citrobacter (Kecskeméti et al. 2016), Curtobacterium
(Steven et al. 2018), Enterobacteria (Thapa et al. 2017; Dong et al. 2019), Erwinia
(Thapa and Prasanna 2018), Exiguobacterium (Venkatachalam et al. 2016), Pseu￾domonas (Cid et al. 2016), Microbacterium (Toju et al. 2019; Knief et al. 2012),
Methylobacterium (Janakiev et al. 2020), Flavobacterium (Bodenhausen et al.
2013), Firmicutes (Mina et al. 2020), Rhizobium, Xanthomonas (Ottesen et al.
2013), Weissella sp. (Dong et al. 2019), and Streptomyces (Thapa and Prasanna
2018) are identified from the phyllosphere of crop plants. In addition, diazotrophic
bacteria such as Azotobacter, Beijerinckia, and Klebsiella and Cyanobacteria such as168 S. Natesan et al.
Nostoc, Scytonema, and Stigonema are also the inhabitant of the phyllosphere
(Bashir et al. 2022).
Compared with the rhizosphere the phyllosphere is a nutrient-poor environment
with a more dynamic structure. On the phyllosphere, plants release a very less
quantity of sugars generally fructose, methanol, sucrose, and also trace levels of
volatile organic compounds and amino acids, which can support the growth of
bacteria and develop microbial assemblage on a leaf (Tecon and Leveau 2016;
Quan and Liang 2017; Sivakumar et al. 2020). Methylotrophs such as
Hyphomicrobium, Methylobacterium, Methylibium, Methylophilus, Methylocapsa,
Methylocella, and Methylocysts are the dominant flora of the phyllosphere environ￾ment that can use methanol or methane as a sole source of carbon and energy and
also helps to plant growth (Abanda-Nkpwatt et al. 2006; Krishnamoorthy et al.
2018). The presence of such nutrients on the phyllosphere surface can facilitate
diverse bacteria; they are spatially distributed and interact with one another through
direct physical interaction (Tecon et al. 2018; Sivakumar et al. 2020).
7.4.1.2 Phyllosphere Fungi
Fungi are an important part of the leaf microbiome, having a significant role on their
host, and exhibit both epiphytic and endophytic life with a wide range of metabolic
activities including mineral nutrition and recycling, biotic and abiotic stress-resistant
and adaptation (Guerreiro et al. 2018; Yao et al. 2019). On the phyllosphere, yeast is
the most common epiphytic fungus followed by filamentous fungi. Cladosporium,
Colletotrichum, Chaetomium, Alternaria, Penicillium, Acremonium, Mucor, and
Aspergillus are the dominant group of filamentous fungi that make epiphytic and
also an endophytic association with phyllosphere (Inácio et al. 2002; Ripa et al.
2019; Dhayanithy et al. 2019). Sreekanth et al. (2017) isolated Alternaria alternata,
Setosphaeria sp., Cochliobolus sp., Alternaria sp. Phomaherbarum,
Davidiellatassiana, Botryosphaeria dothidea, Ulocladium alternariae, Phoma
macrostoma var. incolorata, Phoma exigua var. exigua, Cladosporium
cladosporioides, Botryospaeria sp., Guignardia mangiferae, Pyrenophora tritici￾repentis, Guignardia alliacea, and Rhizopus oryzae from Catharanthus roseus. This
multifungal group of such associations plays an essential role in the operation of
ecosystem function and maintaining complex food webs in the phyllosphere. Fungal
endophytes synthesize several metabolites including volatile organic compounds,
and secondary metabolites, which directly provide antipathogenic effects to the host
as well as induce plant immune functions.
7.4.1.3 Phyllosphere Actinomycetes
Along with bacteria, actinobacteria contribute considerable attention to the
phyllosphere. Some actinobacteria interact with the host plant to maintain symbiotic
life residing in plant tissues giving huge significance to the host through their7 The Beneficial Plant Microbial Association for Sustainable Agriculture 169
secondary metabolites (Singh and Dubey 2018). Various studies revealed that plants
at arid, semiarid, and mangrove contains a vast diversity of actinomycetes such as
Actinoplanes missouriensis, Actinoallomurus acaciae, A. coprocola, A. oryzae,
Actinomaduraglauciflava, Amycolatopsistolypomycina, Jishengella endophytica,
Kribbella sp., Microbisporamesophila, Microbispora sp., Micromonospora sp.,
Nocardioides sp., Nocardia alba, Nonomura earubra, Nonomuraea sp.,
Pseudonocardia sp., planotetraspora sp., Pseudonocardia endophytica,
P. halophobica, Streptomyces sp., and Streptomyces javensis (Chen et al. 2011;
Xie et al. 2011; Yadav 2017; Yadav and Yadav 2018; Yadav and Yadav 2019;
Sivakumar et al. 2020). The diversity and distribution of endophytic actinomycetes
in the phyllosphere are determined by the host plant physiology and their environ￾ment (Du et al. 2013; Dinesh et al. 2017; Nalini and Prakash 2017). Endophytic
actinomycetes have wide functional properties in their associated plants, including
protection and mineral recycling.
7.4.2 Functions of Phyllosphere Microorganism
for Sustainable Agriculture
7.4.2.1 Plant Nutrition Acquisition and Growth
The phyllosphere microbiome is being considered a vital component in plant
nutrient acquisition and has little impact on the host plant growth (Stone et al.
2018). Conversely, nitrogen-fixing bacteria present in the phyllosphere facilitate
microbial diversity formulation and improve the health status of the plant. Mecha￾nistic investigations revealed the essentials of plant phyllosphere nitrogen dynamics
in stress resistance and also the growth (Delmotte et al. 2009). Plant cells can absorb
the end products of nitrogen fixation (ammonia, nitrate, and nitrogen dioxide) more
easily in warm conditions because nitrogenous end products readily diffuse into the
leaf’s inner tissue. In the phyllosphere, numerous plant species colonized by che￾moautotrophic nitrogen-fixing bacteria have been found, particularly archaea (Abadi
et al. 2021; Qin et al. 2019). In humid tropical conditions, epiphytic microbes can fix
nitrogen, generally, tropical epiphytes grow in the plant phyllosphere to fix nitrogen
and are able to meet a significant portion of their nitrogen needs (Hietz et al. 2002;
Abril et al. 2005; Stanton et al. 2019). Several studies reported that α-proteobacteria,
β-proteobacteria, and γ-proteobacteria along with cyanobacteria (Oscillatoria
Microcoleus, Scytonema, and Stigonema) are significant nitrogen fixers of
phyllosphere (Freiberg 1998; Fürnkranz et al. 2008; Bao et al. 2020). In addition,
the presence of nitrifying bacteria in the phyllosphere of tropical forest plants
(Whipps et al. 2008; Maignien et al. 2014; Carrell and Frank 2014; Guerrieri et al.
2020) and crop plants has a significant impact on plant growth (Miyamoto et al.
2004). But the actual mechanism of nitrogen fixation on the phyllosphere is not yet
clear.170 S. Natesan et al.
Other than the nitrogen acquisition, phyllosphere microbes can solubilize phos￾phates and potassium. Various phyllosphere inhabitants such as Acetobacter
sp. Arthrobacter humicola, Bacillus alcalophilus, B. aryabhattai, B. thuringiensis,
Chryseobacterium sp., Cellulosimicrobium, Enterobacter sp., Klebsiella terrigena,
Methylobacterium extorquens, M. mesophilicum, M. radiotolerans, Paenibacillus
amylolyticus, Phyllobacterium, Pseudomonas fuscovaginae, P. fluorescens CHA0,
Psychrobacterfozii, Rhodococcus, and Serratia have been documented as phosphate
solubilizers used to promote plant growth and development (Kumar et al. 2013;
Verma et al. 2014; de Souza et al. 2013; Thapa et al. 2017). In order to solubilize
phosphates, some phyllosphere bacteria such as Bacillus mucilagenosus,
P. amylolyticus, and Psychrobacter sp. solubilize potassium (K) (Verma et al.
2014). In the same way, some phyllosphere microbiota takes part in the uptake of
micronutrients like zinc (Esitken et al. 2010), sulfur (Yu et al. 2013), and copper
(Esitken et al. 2010). Moreover, the contribution of the phyllosphere microbiome for
the growth of plant is comparably less than that of the microbiome of the rhizo￾sphere. Benefits of phyllosphere microbes to the growth of plant begin germination
of seeds. Many of the phyllosphere bacteria produce plant growth regulators includ￾ing cytokines (CKs), auxins. Microbial production of CKs on leaf surface facilitates
the transport of nutrients from the surface to inner tissues especially nitrogen
transport (Lemanceau et al. 2017). In these instances, the phyllosphere microbiome
may influence the total plant’s capacity to get nutrients, rather than just the foliage
(Bram et al. 2018).
7.4.2.2 Biological Control
Microbial association on phyllosphere protects their residing host through various
mechanisms. One such mechanism is changing nutrient distribution on leaf surfaces
can manipulate microbial communities against pathogens (Williams et al. 2013;
Manching et al. 2014). In some cases, phyllosphere microbes produce higher
biomass through which competitive mechanism can quench the pathogenic growth
(Pusey and Wend 2012), which was observed in rice (Ren et al. 2016) and lettuce
(Williams et al. 2013), and also fix nitrogen (Feng et al. 2003), this could be
important for agricultural sustainability (Gupta et al. 2018). Pseudomonas
fluorescens A506 crumb leaf blight disease-causing Erwinia amylovora through
competition for nutrients and space (Wilson and Lindow 1993). However, in
general, phyllosphere microbes produce antagonistic substances (antibiotic), which
can reduce both bacterial and fungal pathogenesis. Bacterial flora such as Pseudo￾monas spp. and Bacillus spp. residing in the phyllosphere could produce antibiotic￾like peptides, which induce systemic resistance of plants against various fungal
pathogens (Vorholt 2012; Ceballos et al. 2012; Griffin and Carson 2015). The use
of Bacillus spp. isolated from phyllosphere and soil has been largely exploited as a
biocontrol agent in agriculture (Fernando et al. 2007), due to its broad-spectrum
antagonistic activity it has been used as a biocontrol for sugar beet (Collins and
Jacobsen 2003), citrus (Huang et al. 2012), cotton, rice and amaranth leaves (Wang7 The Beneficial Plant Microbial Association for Sustainable Agriculture 171
et al. 2014a, b), strawberry (Wei et al. 2016), and cacao (Villamil Carvajal et al.
2015). The ability to produce endospores, secondary metabolites (Mendes et al.
2013), and proteins (Zhang et al. 2018b) by Bacillus sp. and the capability to induce
systemic resistance in a host are considered to be useful biocontrol agents for
phyllosphere pathogens (Lahlali and Peng 2014; Wei et al. 2016).
In addition, the interaction of microbes on the phyllosphere stimulates gene
expression of its residing host by signaling process, through this mechanism plants
can recognize (molecular recognition pattern) and distinguish the presence of path￾ogens (Hunter et al. 2010) and other beneficial microbes (Rastogi et al. 2012).
Similarly, the expression of pathogenesis-related proteins and antimicrobial proteins
by Sphingomonas melonis on the phyllosphere controls the potent plant pathogen
Pseudomonas syringae (Innerebner et al. 2011). Moreover, some phyllosphere
microbes can produce siderophores, by which epiphytic bacteria inhibit pathogens,
and reduce oxidative stresses (Fu et al. 2016; Thapa et al. 2017; Gupta et al. 2018;
Santos Kron et al. 2020). For example, Pseudomonas syringae pv. syringae has
pathogen quenching activity through siderophore production (Wensing et al. 2010).
Pseudomonas protegens CS1 produces enantio-pyochelin siderophore has the antag￾onistic activity against the plant pathogen Xanthomonas citri (Michavila et al. 2017).
In addition, some microorganisms could induce the systemic resistance of plants by
changing upregulation of various antioxidant enzymes, such as ascorbate peroxidase
(APX), catalase (CAT), peroxidase (POD), polyphenol oxidase (PPO), and super￾oxide dismutase (SOD) (Abd El-Gawad et al. 2015). Meanwhile, researchers could
suggest the use of native microorganisms as biocontrol agents due to their host￾specific association, colonization, and adaptation to local environmental conditions
(Kumar and Gopal 2015; Cruz-Martín et al. 2017), and shows multiple modes of
activity against pathogenic microbes. For example, representatives of the
Bacillaceae family isolated from Mussa spp. phyllosphere showed antifungal activ￾ity against black Sigatoka disease (Mycosphaerella fijiensis) (Poveda et al. 2010;
Cruz-Martín et al. 2017), also in Mussa spp., Bacillus pumilus showed chitinolytic
and glucanolytic activity against M. fijiensis (Cruz-Martín et al. 2018).
7.4.2.3 Anti-insect Activity
Endophytic microbes produce various secondary metabolites (alkaloids), within the
plant tissues, which can reduce or kill the plant-feeding insects and pest. The
alkaloids exhibit strong insecticidal activity mainly to inhibit the developmental
stages of insect larvae, affect feeding activities, reduce survival, and also the
egg-laying ability (Akutse et al. 2014; Martinuz et al. 2012; Resquín-Romero et al.
2016; Sánchez-Rodríguez et al. 2018). Endophytic alkaloids are toxic to plant￾feeding insects, for example, endophytic fungi such as Acremonium coenophialum
and Epichloe typhina interact with Lolium and Festuca grasses to produce multiple
loline, peramine, ergovaline, which have toxic effect to aphids (Siegel et al. 1990);
Tripterygium wilfordii produce cytotoxic alkaloid, cytochalasin (Wagenaar et al.
2000); Phomopsis sp. synthesize Phomapsichalasin (antimicrobial agent) (Horn172 S. Natesan et al.
et al. 1995); Streptomyces sp. produces 1-N-methyl albonoursin (antibiotic) in
perennial ryegrass (Gureny and Mantle 1993) are other few examples. In addition,
Beauveria bassiana reduces the damage caused by a poppy stem gall wasp (Iraella
luteipes) (Quesada-Moraga et al. 2009), Helicoverpa zea (Powell et al. 2009), and
Tuta absoluta (Klieber and Reineke 2016; Qayyum et al. 2015). Endophytic fungal
entomopathogens, B. bassiana and Metarhizium brunneum kill aphid such as
Aphidius colemani and Myzus persicae, hence it could be used as a biocontrol
agent to reduce the herbivorous damage on several crops such as tomato, potato,
sugarcane, and pea (De Sassi et al. 2006; Akutse et al. 2014; Qayyum et al. 2015;
Jaber and Araj 2018). Moreover, B. bassiana offers protection against plant viral
pathogens, Zucchini yellow mosaic virus (ZYMV) transmitted by aphid vector
(Jaber and Salem 2014). Hence, in agriculture, the pest management practices the
beneficial endophytic bacteria and fungi have been used to control disease transmis￾sion and insect pest-mediated crop damage.
7.4.2.4 Host Stress Tolerance
Microbial association in phyllosphere provides stress tolerance against various
environmental stresses such as extreme drought, UV rays, and temperature (Sun
et al. 2010; Meena et al. 2015). UV radiation causes damage to the genetic material,
which alters the physiology and growth of plants (Yurimoto et al. 2021). Some of the
plant’s defenses may be provided by bacterial EPS, which may protect it from
desiccation and UV radiation. It has been shown that the gel-like EPS matrix of
aquatic Pseudomonas aeruginosa biofilm helps to transport water and nutrients to
the plant. Biofilms presence in the phyllosphere may provide able to minimize the
loss of water to get more resistant to desiccation than biofilms in water (Chaturvedi
et al. 2016). Piriformospora indica, endophytic fungi alleviate drought stress￾induced oxidative stress in many plants (Waller et al. 2005; Sun et al. 2010).
Pseudomonas sp. is often a major element of the phyllosphere, indicating that
naturally existing biofilms give protection against desiccation and UV light.
Pigmented bacteria provide increased UV resistance than other bacteria. It is plau￾sible that phyllosphere microorganisms may give some UV protection to the plant
host via the creation of EPS and the pigmentation by UV-absorbing pigment (Jacobs
and Sundin 2001; Compant et al. 2019). In arid conditions, often result in an
increasing C:N ratios in leaves suggesting that one of the secondary impacts of
drought is nitrogen restriction, implying a possible function for the phyllosphere
microbiome alleviating drought-induced nitrogen limitation (Rico et al. 2014). Other
environmental stresses may also be tolerated by plants because of microbially
acquired tolerance (Vacher et al. 2016).
Ecological stress stimulates the plant to produce various reactive oxygen species
(ROS), hydrogen peroxide, hydroxyl radicals, and superoxide radicals, causing
oxidative damage to various cellular components such as proteins, nucleic acids,
and membranes (Das and Roychoudhury 2014; Lata et al. 2018; Huang et al. 2019).
Beneficial plant endophytes alleviate oxidative damages induced by both biotic and7 The Beneficial Plant Microbial Association for Sustainable Agriculture 173
abiotic stresses; they can stimulate the plant defense mechanism to protect them￾selves from such defects. There are several research outcomes highlighting the
endophytic or endosymbiotic association of both bacteria and fungi in phyllosphere
and rhizosphere induces plant defense responses through the expression of peroxi￾dase enzymes like superoxide dismutase and glutathione reductase (Egamberdieva
et al. 2017; Lata et al. 2018; Oukala et al. 2021). Endophytes could also produce
stress-responsive enzymes, which can also protect the plant cell from oxidative
damages, for example, the endophytic Enterobactes sp. contain several superoxide
genes, peroxidase, catalase, and hyperperoxide reductases (Taghavi et al. 2005). In
some cases, it can produce various antioxidant metabolites and accumulates in plant
tissues, for example, the presence of the endophytic fungus Epichloë coenophiala in
tall fescue grasses accumulates mannitol an antioxidative fungal metabolite, which
provides oxidative stress-related protection in plant (Lata et al. 2018); Pestalotiopsis
microspora produces pestacin and isopestacin in endosymbiotic interaction with
plant (Strobel and Daisy 2003).
Above all significant merits provide the use of beneficial phyllosphere
microbiome interaction on plant growth and its productivity guide us to use those
microbes for sustainable agriculture.
7.5 PGBs Bioinoculant Formulation for Sustainable
Agriculture
Bioinoculants are ecofriendly microbes having the ability to promote plant growth
and yield in a variety of mechanisms (Prasad et al. 2019). It is an excellent alternative
of chemical fertilizers, improves the soil nutrients, antagonist against phytopatho￾gens and soil nematodes, facilitator, stress relieving agent producer, and detoxifier,
as the whole, it enhances the crop production more economically and ecofriendly.
Several researches revealed the exploitation of PGPR as bioinoculant imparts suc￾cess in sustainable agriculture through the low-cost process. There are different
bioinoculant formulation are in agricultural practice which contains PGPBs such
as solid (e.g., powder) or liquid formulations, metabolite formulations, solid carrier￾based formulations, and synthetic polymer-based formulations. Efficiency of the
bioinoculant is based on the type of inoculums, their appropriate formulation,
production, and storage condition of microbial cells, where in some cases the
application is more efficient and it always maintains rich colony-forming units
(CFUs), either in the soil or in the phyllosphere (Orozco-Mosqueda et al. 2021),
and it shows some detectable antipathogenic activity against soil-borne pathogens.
On foliar application of such bioinoculants may interfere with the growth of path￾ogens causing infections in the aerial part of plant (Owen et al. 2015). Commonly,
the bioinoculant formulation process depends on the type of applications in the
larger field or in the small greenhouse conditions. Moreover, the time of inoculums
given, quantity, and the type of organism used along with environmental factors are174 S. Natesan et al.
influencing the efficiency of inoculums, which could kill or inhibits the propagation
of pathogens. Mostly they are applied to the field as prophylaxis, before observing
disease symptoms in crops to prevent the pathogenic attack and managing to protect
even the products during post-harvest (Sridhar et al. 2014).
Commercially available bioinoculants contain the beneficial microorganisms that
have plant growth-promoting activities and biocontrol along with fertilizer effects to
the plants. Some bioinoculants can be used to kill several larvae of harmful insects
and pest. For example, Bacillus thuringiensis control the larvae of several moths and
butterflies, Bacillus popilliae kill Japanese beetles, Nosema locustae control grass￾hoppers, and entomopathogenic fungi such as Beauveria bassiana, Metharhizum
anisopliae, and Isaria fumosorosea kill various insects (Maina et al. 2018).
Trichoderma sp. controls the growth of various plant fungal pathogens such as
Rhizoctonia, Fusarium, Verticillium, Pythium, and Phytophthora. The best choice
of bioinoculum application is on seed coat (seedlings), hence the beneficial microbes
start its interaction at the early stage of plant growth. For example, Bacillus and
Pseudomonas show its direct effect on plant growth and also eliminate pathogens
from its rhizosphere region (Hernández-León et al. 2015).
However, in the use of various beneficial microbes as bioinoculants, several
barriers could affect the effect and application including loss of biological activity,
physiological and agronomical factors affecting the survival of inoculants, lifetime
effect, etc. For example, when the spore form of Bacillus sp. is used for soil
application, which prolongs its shelf life (Santoyo et al. 2012). Some
non-sporulating traits required more specific and special formulations. Once it has
been inoculated, the bioinoculant maintains its persistence in the soil and makes
them colonize in the rhizosphere. Hence, it is our need to select a more appropriate
bioinoculum which can compete rhizosphere or phyllosphere microflora and also
able to colonize and perform beneficial activities in the microenvironment
(Hartmann et al. 2008; Berendsen et al. 2012; Liu et al. 2020).
For this reason, more research is required to evaluate abiotic factors on the
beneficial properties of each bioinoculant. However, prior to the development of
commercial bioinoculants, the following properties should be properly evaluated
which include (1) pathogenecity, (2) specificity, (3) interactions with other soil
microbes, (4) shelf life of the preparation, (5) longevity time in soil/crop, (6) perfor￾mance, (7) dosage level, and (8) cost effect (Arora et al. 2010). Some important
biocontrol and biofertilizer effects of beneficial microbes are listed in Table 7.8.
7.5.1 Microbial Consortium as Bioinoculum
In recent years, crop quality with higher nutrition and minerals is of increasing
concern with the prolonged demands from consumers (Timmusk et al. 2017). A soil￾native microbe significantly contributes to the health and development of plants
against nutritional deficiency and abiotic/biotic stress factors (Bakker et al. 2018;
Oyserman et al. 2018). Commercially available bioinoculants have limited success7 The Beneficial Plant Microbial Association for Sustainable Agriculture 175
Table 7.8 Microbial consortia and its beneficial role
Microbial consortia Beneficial effect References
Bacillus subtilis, R. tropici Reduced disease severity caused by Fusarium
solani, increase the yield of bean
De Jensen
et al. (2002)
Bradyrhizobium, G. mosseae Inhibits Cylindrocladium parasiticum,
increased production of soybean
Yao et al.
(2002)
AMF, Rhizobium, Azospirillum,
Bacillus, Pseudomonas
Increased nodulation, higher plant growth,
increased yield, increases systemic resistance
against stress responses, increased nutrient
uptake
Singh et al.
(2010)
Pseudomonas, Azotobacter,
Azospirillum
High nutrient intake, shoot, and root wet and
dry biomass, enhanced lycopene production,
increased antioxidants in tomato
Ordookhani
et al. (2010)
Bacillus cereus, B. subtilis,
Serratia
Enhanced photosynthetic efficiency, reduce
wilt symptoms, reduce mono￾dehydroascorbate, increased coat proline con￾tent, increase systemic resistance to plant
Wang
(2009)
Pseudomonas aeruginosa,
Trichoderma harzianum,
B. subtilis
Increased defense against sclerotinia rot,
induced systemic resistance
Jain et al.
(2012)
P. aeruginosa, Trichoderma sp.,
Rhizobium sp.
Activated physiological defense response
against color rot pathogen in chickpea
Singh et al.
(2013)
Pseudomonas fluorescens,
Trichoderma, Rhizobium
Increased antioxidant enzyme activity,
induced resistance of plant against biotic stress
Singh et al.
(2013)
Streptomyces spp. Pseudomo￾nas sp., P. flurescens,
G. intraradices
Increased plant growth, yield, and increased
drought resistance in Finger millet
Khadka
et al. (2016)
due to their formulation of either one or few microbial taxa. It is unlikely that it never
consolidates our entire basic requirement for commercial crop production (Hart et al.
2018). Hence, using the synthetic method to formulate microbial consortia (MC) that
could potentially replace and/or redesign the structure and function of plant
microbiome is a remedial measure to solve the disadvantages of conventional
biofertilizers (Qin et al. 2016; Hart et al. 2018; Kong et al. 2018). Several reports
highlighted the merits of such consortia of bioinoculants, coinoculation of rhizobia
with other PGPR enhances nodulation ability, nitrogen fixation, phytohormone
production, and growth of legumes (Bansal and Srivastava 2012; Gupta et al.
2015). Similarly, diazotrophic such as Azospirillum, Azotobacter, Bacillus, Pseudo￾monas, Enterobacter, and Serratia are a few PGPR that have been successfully
coinoculated with rhizobium (Tajini et al. 2012; Sekar et al. 2016). The
bioinoculums of microbial consortia often target to enhance the metabolite content
(sugars, ascorbic acid, folic acid, vitamin, and anthocyanin) and nutrients (N, Ca, P,
Mg, K, Na, Fe, Mn, Cu, Zn, and B) in crops. Hence, the inoculums of consortia are
formulated with PGPRs and AM fungi, which promotes the highest nutraceuticals in
the crops (Battini et al. 2016; Torres et al. 2016; Avio et al. 2017; Bona et al. 2015).
The efficiency of the beneficial microbes and their consortia on growth promotion
and productivity in the field condition in various crops have been accounted for in176 S. Natesan et al.
the formulation studies (Table 7.8). The following are the major components that
need to be evaluated for the consortia design and development: (a) compatible
strains with a different pattern of plant colonization, (b) compatible strains combined
with a broad spectrum of activity against pathogens, (c) compatible strains combined
with different mode of action, and (d) compatible strains combined with a geneti￾cally diverse group to adapt in a wide range of pH, temperature, moisture, and
relative humidity (Sekar et al. 2016).
7.6 Engineering Host Microbiome for Sustainable
Agriculture
The microbiome is defined as the collective genomes of the microbes such as
bacteria, fungi, protozoa, and viruses that live in a specified environment. Diverse
microbial community in the microbiome gives either beneficial or harmful effect on
its host and environment. Harmful microbial domination in a microbiome causes
diseases and disorders. Microbiome engineering is a kind of process to manipulate
the microbial abundance with the inoculation of one or more new beneficial
microbes in an adequate amount (Albright et al. 2021). However, the engineering
of microbiome can be used to modify microbial diversity and community structure
and could restore ecological balance, and has been employed for improving human
health and agricultural productivity. Researchers understand the relationships
between microbe–microbe and microbes–host, which creates novel insights into
microbiome engineering, where the new microbial community with a small number
of species can create a stable ecosystem. Plant microbiome is represented as the
microbiome in root and root-associated area. In agriculture, rhizosphere microbiome
engineering will impose green revolution to develop high yield in crops, which
greatly improved food security worldwide (Bano et al. 2021).
Microbiome engineering is an attempt to find and improve the function of an
ecosystem by manipulating the required composition of microbes (Albright et al.
2021). For sustainable agriculture, currently, selective beneficial microbes with
desirable properties could blend and formulate synthetically to establish complex
beneficial microbiome at the rhizosphere and phyllosphere to promote the growth
and fitness of the plant under various ecoclimatic conditions. Like animal probiotic
supplements, soil has been enriched with plant beneficial microbes that can colonize
and modulate the rhizosphere community through various interactions and signaling
processes. In the following section, the agricultural importance of rhizosphere
microbiome engineering has been discussed.7 The Beneficial Plant Microbial Association for Sustainable Agriculture 177
7.6.1 Rhizosphere Microbiome Engineering
The root-associated microbiome consists of different compositions of the microbial
communities represent in plant root and the rhizosphere they could share the
nutrients and space together with plants. In rhizospheres, several thousand bacterial
and fungal taxa including beneficial and harmful species are maintaining a complex
food web to develop a complex microbial community structure. Functionally, the
root-associated microbiome influences plant physiology and plays anti-pathogen
roles (Agler et al. 2016; Foo et al. 2017). However, the manipulation of root￾associated microbial composition and networking for highly efficient beneficial
microbes of PGPRs (nutrient mobilizers, antibiotics, siderophore, and plant growth
hormone producers) that promote growth, provide fitness and health of the plant as
well as enhance the yield.
In the microbiome engineering process, beneficial microbes are isolated from
healthy crops and analyzed for their microbial composition, nutritional and physio￾logical characteristics, role in the rhizosphere community, and environmental impor￾tance. This information has accounted for the effective formulation of rhizosphere
microbiome engineering. Rhizosphere microbiome engineering is a hot topic in
agriculture studies because of its unpredictable benefits to the agricultural crops
(Kumar and Dubey 2020). In natural environment, rhizosphere microbiome func￾tions are continuously changing due to unstable environmental conditions. In this
status, microbial communities both adapt and survive or failed to survive, that is the
reason behind the limited level of success of bioinoculants (biofertilizers and
biocontrol agents) in various environmental conditions. Thus, there is a need to
formulate and engineer the microbiome with highly adaptable traits with optimum
PGPR functions and maintain a healthy microbiome in various soil and environ￾mental conditions. This system of agriculture is called “microbiome-mediated smart
agriculture system (MiMSAS),” where the engineered microbiome has the ability to
withstand the various environmental stresses (Bano et al. 2021; Kaul et al. 2021).
Using the applications of new emerging techniques in the synthetic biotechnol￾ogy, microbes can be constructed based on the required characteristics capable to
adapt and effectively perform plant growth (Peng et al. 2016; Dubey et al. 2019).
Genetic manipulation of the desirable traits could be based on the conventional
features of plant-microbe intercellular communications, or intracellular metabolic
pathways, and also the composition of microbial communities that enhances plant
performance (Dubey et al. 2019). Figure 7.9 illustrated the microbiome engineering
for sustainable agriculture. The potential property used to engineer the microorgan￾ism is the desirable mutualistic character of the PGPR microbes. In addition,
engineered microbes make positive beneficial communication with unmodified
microbes there in the natural environment, which can facilitate syntrophic nutrition
within the microbiome makes enhanced plant growth (Ren et al. 2016; Muleta 2017;
Charubin and Papoutsakis 2019). After strengthening the characters through genetic
modification, large-scale field experiments can be performed with control experi￾ments in various soil and environmental stress responses such as drought, salinity,178 S. Natesan et al.
Fig. 7.9 A diagrammatic representation of microbiome engineering. The microbes are engineered
genetically in order to modify the characters of the plant–microbe intercellular interactions, or
microbial intracellular metabolic pathways, and to change the microbial composition. (Adapted
from Dubey et al. 2019, Biodivers Conserv. 28, 2405–2429)
pH, elevated level of carbon dioxide, and light on microbial community composition
and mutualistic benefits of inoculations (Dubey et al. 2019).
Rhizosphere microbiome engineering can alleviate the drought stress in plants
with the association of rhizospheric, endophytic, and symbiotic microbes, and
increases soil fertility which can reduce the use of commercial chemical fertilizers
for crop yield (Zolla et al. 2013). Reduced use of such chemicals and fertilizers could
retain the biodiversity in the soil or the engineered microbes synergistically interact
with other soil microbes to re-establish the healthy rhizosphere microbiome. The
main advantage of microbiome engineering is that their microbial composition is
controllable and easily detectable. In addition, engineered microbes can compete the
pathogen by multiple mechanisms and protect the plant against the infections. For
example, for the control of potato common scab and tobacco black root rot (Gopal7 The Beneficial Plant Microbial Association for Sustainable Agriculture 179
et al. 2013), five root-associated bacteria have been shown to protect Nicotiana
attenuata from a sudden-wilt disease (Santhanam et al. 2015). However, the devel￾opment of engineered microbiomes limits our understanding of the core microbiome
and only culturable microbes can be included in microbiome engineering
(Table 7.9).
7.7 Conclusion
Beneficial microbes that are associated with the plants are having plant growth￾promoting activities (PGPMs), as growth promoters, biofertilizers, or biocontrol
agents for sustainable agricultural practices. Microorganisms sustain a specific
microenvironment and provide various benefits to the soil, plant, and environment.
In the rhizosphere environment, many bacterial beneficial interactions have been
established by bacteria, fungi, actinomycetes, cyanobacteria, etc. Most significantly,
the symbiotic association between Rhizobium and mycorrhizal fungi provides
various nutrients through nitrogen fixation, transportation, solubilization of phos￾phates, and other insoluble minerals. Saprophytic microbes could decompose
organic waste material to enrich the soil nutrient and recycling process. The bene￾ficial microbes that are associated with the plant as endophytic and epiphytes of the
phyllosphere and rhizosphere have various biological functions to control patho￾genic infection and alleviate different environmental stresses (drought, salinity,
heavy metal, oxidative stresses) and control pest and nematode infections. Studies
of the microbiome in the phyllosphere and rhizosphere instigate the production of
bioinoculants. To overcome the setbacks of single conventional bioinoculants com￾bined microbes with better attributes could be used for species-specific microbiome
engineering mainly in rhizosphere region. Moreover, the knowledge generated
through modern technologies used to understand the functional role of individual
microbes in a microbiome and its impact on soil and plant health guide us to redesign
beneficial rhizosphere microbiomes that will improve soil health, and crop produc￾tivity through sustainable agriculture.
Acknowledgments The authors would like to thank the DST-PURSE facility, Madurai Kamaraj
University for providing internet facility and RUSA (MHRD) programs.(continued)
180 S. Natesan et al.
Table 7.9 Functions of microbiome transfer for sustainable agriculture
Microbiome method Functions and limitations References
Native root-associated microbiota
transplant
Inhibit plant diseases, resist envi￾ronmental stresses, and promote
growth;
Easy to manipulate; Limited by the
availability of functional native
microbiome
Gopal et al. (2013),
Zolla et al. (2013)
Synthetic microbiome: root￾associated microbiota transplant
Inhibit plant diseases, resist envi￾ronmental stresses, promote
growth;
Controllable customization of
microbial composition for benefi￾cial effects;
Limited by the understanding of
the core microbiome;
Only applicable to culturable
microbes
Santhanam et al.
(2015), Glick (2012)
Signaling molecules: Administra￾tion of root extrudates, e.g.,
salicylic acid
Resist environmental stresses,
promote growth;
Promote assembly of balanced
microbiome;
Limited by the availability of sig￾naling molecules
Lebeis et al. (2015)
Agricultural management: Organic
farming
Improve soil fertility Navarrete et al.
(2015)
Plant-based methods: Plant breed￾ing and cultivar selection
Enhanced production of exudates;
Influences the microbial diversity
by enhancing the growth of some
selected microbes present in the
rhizosphere
Dubey et al. (2019)
Alteration of plant resistance to
disease and environmental factors;
Improved tolerance toward to
resist adverse environmental con￾ditions (edaphic, biological, and
climatic)
Ryan et al. (2009),
Lynch and Neufeld
(2015)
Genetic modification: Change in
the amount of signaling molecules,
and organic exudates in soil
Plants are engineered to secrete
exudates that direct specific
microbial diversity for providing;
Plant induces microbiome for ben￾eficial functional traits like pro￾duction of siderophore, anti￾fungal, antimicrobial, antibiotics
acts as a biocontrol agent.
Improving resistance toward
adverse environment conditions.
Use in bioremediation of
contaminants
Bakker et al. (2012),
Imam et al. (2016),
Sharma et al. (2013)chapter and approved it for publication.
7 The Beneficial Plant Microbial Association for Sustainable Agriculture 181
Table 7.9 (continued)
Microbiome method Functions and limitations References
Genetic modification: Plants are
engineered for producing exudates
which modify properties
Plant growth is enhanced at acidic
or low pH, resistance salinity,
alkalinity and water stress.
Enhanced resistance towards Al3+.
Enhanced phosphate solublization.
Increase in shoot biomass, longer
and larger root hairs
Ryan et al. (2009),
Yang et al. (2007)
Meta-organism based management
and selection of complementary
microbiomes and plants
Crop rotation; Managing soil
diversity by induction of suppres￾sive soils; Improving physico￾chemical characteristics of the soil;
Elevation in organic carbon con￾tent and higher level of nutrients
cycling
Kumar et al. (2015)
Author Contributions All authors listed have made a considerable intellectual contribution to this
References
Abadi VAJM, Sepehri M, Rahmani HA, Dolatabad HK, Shamshiripour M, Khatabi B (2021)
Diversity and abundance of culturable nitrogen fixing bacteria in the phyllosphere of maize. J
Appl Microbiol 131(2):898–912. https://doi.org/10.1111/jam.14975
Abanda-Nkpwatt D, Musch M, Tschiersch J, Boettner M, Schwab W (2006) Molecular interaction
between Methylobacterium extorquens and seedlings: growth promotion, methanol consump￾tion, and localization of the methanol emission site. J Exper Botany 57(15):4025–4032. https://
doi.org/10.1093/jxb/erl173
Abd El-Gawad HG, Ibrahim MFM, Abd El-Hafez AA, Abou El-Yazied A (2015) Contribution of
pink pigmented facultative Methylotrophic bacteria in promoting antioxidant enzymes, growth
and yield of Snap Bean. Synthesis 2:4. https://doi.org/10.5829/idosi.aejaes.2015.15.7.12709
Abdelhameed R, Metwally R (2019) Alleviation of cadmium stress by arbuscular mycorrhizal
symbiosis. Int J Phytoremed 21(7):663–671. https://doi.org/10.1080/15226514.2018.1556584
Abdul Rahman N, Abdul Hamid N, Nadarajah K (2021) Effects of abiotic stress on soil
microbiome. Int J Mol Sci 22(16):9036. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms22169036
Abo-Amer AE, Abu-Gharbia MA, Soltan ESM, Abd El-Raheem WM (2014) Isolation and molec￾ular characterization of heavy metal-resistant Azotobacter chroococcum from agricultural soil
and their potential application in bioremediation. Geomicrobiol J 31(7):551–561. https://doi.
org/10.1080/01490451.2013.850561
Abril G, Guérin F, Richard S, Delmas R, Galy-Lacaux C, Gosse P, Tremblay A, Varfalvy L, Dos
Santos M, Matvienko B (2005) Carbon dioxide and methane emissions and the carbon budget of
a 10-year old tropical reservoir (Petit Saut, French Guiana). Wiley, London. https://doi.org/10.
1029/2005GB002457
Afzal I, Shinwari Z, Sikandar S, Shahzad S (2019) Plant beneficial endophytic bacteria: mecha￾nisms, diversity, host range and genetic determinants. Microbiol Res 221:36–49. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.micres.2019.02.001182 S. Natesan et al.
Agarwal S, Choure RG (2011) Use of indigenous Rhizobia as effective bioinoculants for Pisum
sativum. Int J Biotech Biosci 1(1):89–96. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2017.01961
Agerer R (2001) Exploration types of ectomycorrhizae. Mycorrhiza 11(2):107–114. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s005720100108
Agler M, Ruhe J, Kroll S, Morhenn C, Kim S, Weigel D, Kemen E (2016) Microbial hub taxa link
host and abiotic factors to plant microbiome variation. PLoS Biol 14(1):1002352. https://doi.
org/10.1371/journal.pbio.1002352
Ahanger M, Agarwal R (2016) Potassium up-regulates antioxidant metabolism and alleviates
growth inhibition under water and osmotic stress in wheat (Triticum aestivum L). Protoplasma
254(4):1471–1486. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00709-016-1037-0
Ahanger M, Hashem A, Abd-Allah E, Ahmad P (2014) Arbuscular mycorrhiza in crop improve￾ment under environmental stress. Emer Technol Manag Crop Stress Tol 2:69–95. https://doi.
org/10.1016/B978-0-12-800875-1.00003-X
Ahanger M, Tittal M, Mir R, Agarwal R (2017a) Alleviation of water and osmotic stress-induced
changes in nitrogen metabolizing enzymes in Triticum aestivum L. cultivars by potassium.
Protoplasma 254(5):1953–1963. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2019.01068
Ahanger M, Tomar N, Argal S, Agarwal R (2017b) Plant growth under water/salt stress: ROS
production; antioxidants and significance of added potassium under such conditions. Physiol
Mol Biol Plants 23(4):731–744. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12298-017-0462-7
Ahanger M, Alyemeni M, Wijaya L, Alamri S, Alam P, Ahmad AM (2018) Potential of exoge￾nously sourced kinetin in protecting Solanum lycopersicum from NaCl-induced oxidative stress
through up-regulation of the antioxidant system, ascorbate-glutathione cycle and glyoxalase
system. PLoS One 13(9):0202175. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0202175
Ahmed R, Solaiman ARM, Halder NK, Siddiky MA, Islam MS (2007) Effect of inoculation
methods of Rhizobium on yield attributes, yield and protein content in seed of pea. J Soil Nature
1(3):30–35
Ait Lahmidi N, Courty P, Brulé D, Chatagnier O, Arnould C, Doidy J, Berta G, Lingua G, Wipf D,
Bonneau L (2016) Sugar exchanges in arbuscular mycorrhiza: RiMST5 and RiMST6, two novel
Rhizopha gusirregularis monosaccharide transporters, are involved in both sugar uptake from
the soil and from the plant partner. Plant Physiol Biochem 107:354–363. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.plaphy.2016.06.023
Ait-El-Mokhtar M, Laouane R, Anli M, Boutasknit A, Wahbi S, Meddich A (2019) Use of
mycorrhizal fungi in improving tolerance of the date palm (Phoenix dactylifera L.) seedlings
to salt stress. Scia Hortic 253:429–438. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scienta.2019.04.066
Akram M, Rizvi R, Sumbul A, Ansari RA, Mahmood I (2016) Potential role of bio-inoculants and
organic matter for the management of root-knot nematode infesting chickpea. Cogent Food
Agricul 2(1):1183457. https://doi.org/10.1080/23311932.2016.1183457
Akutse KS, Fiaboe KK, Van den Berg J, Ekesi S, Maniania NK (2014) Effects of endophyte
colonization of Vicia faba (Fabaceae) plants on the life—history of leaf minerparasitoids
Phaedroto mascabriventris (Hymenoptera: Braconidae) and Diglyphusisaea (Hymenoptera:
Eulophidae). PLoS One 9(10):109965
Alamri SA, Mostafa YS (2009) Effect of nitrogen supply and Azospirillumbrasilense Sp-248 on the
response of wheat to seawater irrigation. Saudi J Biol Sci 16(2):101–107. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.sjbs.2009.10.009
Al-Ani RA, Adhab MA, Mahdi MH, Abood HM (2012) Rhizobium japonicum as a biocontrol agent
of soybean root rot disease caused by Fusarium solani and Macrophomina phaseolina. Plant
Prot Sci 48(4):149–155. https://doi.org/10.17221/16/2012-PPS
Albright MB, Louca S, Winkler DE, Feeser KL, Haig SJ, Whiteson KL, Emerson JB, Dunbar J
(2021) Solutions in microbiome engineering: prioritizing barriers to organism establishment.
ISME J 16:1–8
Ali N, Masood S, Mukhtar T, Kamran MA, Rafique M, Munis MFH, Chaudhary HJ (2015)
Differential effects of cadmium and chromium on growth, photosynthetic activity, and metal7 The Beneficial Plant Microbial Association for Sustainable Agriculture 183
uptake of Linumus itatissimum in association with Glomus intraradices. Environ Monit Asses
187(6):1–11. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10661-015-4557-8
Alivisatos AP, Blaser MJ, Brodie EL, Chun M, Dangl JL, Donohue TJ, Dorrestein PC, Gilbert JA,
Green JL, Jansson JK, Knight R (2015) A unified initiative to harness Earth’s microbiomes.
Science 350(6260):507–508. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aac8480
Al-Karaki GN (2008) Rhizobium and phosphorus influence on lentil seed protein and lipid. J Plant
Nutr 22:351–358. https://doi.org/10.1080/01904169909365632
Amat D, Thakur JK, Mandal A, Sahu A, Kiran Kumar Reddy K (2020) Production and utilization of
legume inoculants (Rhizobium) in India. Harit Dhara 3(2):28–31
Amiri R, Nikbakht A, Etemadi N (2015) Alleviation of drought stress on rose geranium [Pelargo￾nium graveolens (L.) Herit.] in terms of antioxidant activity and secondary metabolites by
mycorrhizal inoculation. Scia Hortic 197:373–380. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scienta.2015.
09.062
Amiri R, Nikbakht A, Etemadi N, Sabzalian MR (2017) Nutritional status, essential oil changes and
water-use efficiency of rose geranium in response to arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi and water
deficiency stress. Symbiosis 73(1):15–25. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13199-016-0466-z
Amor FMD, Cuadra-Crespo P (2012) Plant growth-promoting bacteria as a tool to improve salinity
tolerance in sweet pepper. Funct Plant Biol 39(1):82–90. https://doi.org/10.1071/FP11173
Anandham R, Heo J, Krishnamoorthy R, Senthil Kumar M, Gopal NO, Kim SJ, Kwon SW (2019)
Azospirillum ramasamyi sp. nov., a novel diazotrophic bacterium isolated from fermented
bovine products. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol 69(5):1369–1375. https://doi.org/10.1099/ijsem.0.
003320
Andjelković S, Vasića T, Radovića J, Babića S, Markovića J, Zornića V (2018) Abundance of
azotobacter in the soil of natural and artificial grasslands. Solut Proj Sustain Soil Manag 172.
https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2312-0251
Andreote F, Gumiere T, Durrer A (2014) Exploring interactions of plant microbiomes. Scientia
Agricola 71(6):528–539. https://doi.org/10.1590/0103-9016-2014-0195
Andrews M, Andrews M (2017) Specificity in legume-rhizobia symbioses. Int J Mol Sci 18(4):705.
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms18040705
Ansari RA, Mahmood I (eds) (2019a) Plant health under biotic stress: volume 1: organicstrategies.
Springer, Singapore. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-13-6043-5_8
Ansari RA, Mahmood I (eds) (2019b) Plant health under biotic stress: volume 2: microbial
interactions. Springer, Singapore
Ansari MF, Tipre DR, Dave SR (2015) Efficiency evaluation of commercial liquid biofertilizers for
growth of Cicer aeritinum (chickpea) in pot and field study. Biocat Agricult Biotechnol 4(1):
17–24. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bcab.2014.09.010
Ansari RA, Rizvi R, Sumbul A, Mahmood I (2017) PGPR: current vogue in sustainable crop
production. In: Probiotics and plant health. Springer, Singapore, pp 455–472. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.sjbs.2020.08.004
Ardakani MR, Mafakheri S (2011) Designing a sustainable agroecosystem for wheat (Triticum
aestivum L.) production. J Appl Environ Biol Sci 1(10):401–413
Ardakani MR, Pietsch G, Moghaddam A, Raza A, Friedel JK (2009) Response of root properties to
tripartite symbiosis between lucerne (Medicago sativa L.), rhizobia and mycorrhiza under dry
organic farming conditions. Am J Agricul Biol Sci 4(4):266–277. https://doi.org/10.3844/
ajabssp.2009.266.277
Arfaoui A, Sifi B, El Hassni M, El Hadrami I, Boudabbous A, Chérif M (2005) Biochemical
analysis of chickpea protection against Fusarium wilt afforded by two Rhizobium isolates. Plant
Pathol J 4(1):35–42. https://doi.org/10.3923/ppj.2005.35.42
Arora NK, Khare E, Maheshwari DK (2010) Plant growth promoting rhizobacteria: constraints in
bioformulation, commercialization, and future strategies. In: Plant growth and health promoting
bacteria. Springer, Berlin, pp 97–116. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-13612-2_5
Arora M, Saxena P, Abdin MZ, Varma A (2018) Interaction between Piriformospora indica and
Azotobacter chroococcum governs better plant physiological and biochemical parameters in184 S. Natesan et al.
Artemisia annua L. plants grown under in vitro conditions. Symbiosis 75(2):103–112. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s13199-017-0519-y
Aserse AA, Markos D, Getachew G, Yli-Halla M, Lindström K (2020) Rhizobial inoculation
improves drought tolerance, biomass and grain yields of common bean (Phaseolus vulgaris
L.) and soybean (Glycine max L.) at Halaba and Boricha in Southern Ethiopia. Arch Agron Soil
Sci 66(4):488–501. https://doi.org/10.1080/03650340.2019.1624724
Asrar AA, Abdel-Fattah GM, Elhindi KM (2012) Improving growth, flower yield, and water
relations of snapdragon (Antirhinum majus L.) plants grown under well-watered and water￾stress conditions using arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi. Photosynthetica 50(2):305–316. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s11099-012-0024-8
Assefa AH, Amsalu B, Tana T (2017) Response of common Bean (Pharsalus vulgaris L.) cultivars
to combined application of rhizobium and NP fertilizer at Melkassa, central Ethiopia. Int J Plant
Soil Sci 14(1):1–10. https://doi.org/10.9734/IJPSS/2017/30864
Audet P (2014) Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi and metal phytoremediation: ecophysiological
complementarity in relation to environmental stress. In: Emerging technologies and manage￾ment of crop stress tolerance. Academic, Amsterdam, pp 133–160
Avio L, Sbrana C, Giovannetti M, Frassinetti S (2017) Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi affect total
phenolics content and antioxidant activity in leaves of oak leaf lettuce varieties. Scia Hortic 224:
265–271. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scienta.2017.06.022
Baars O, Zhang X, Morel FM, Seyedsayamdost MR (2016) The siderophore metabolome of
Azotobacter vinelandii. App Env Microbiol 82(1):27–39. https://doi.org/10.1128/aem.
03160-15
Backer R, Rokem JS, Ilangumaran G, Lamont J, Praslickova D, Ricci E, Subramanian S, Smith DL
(2018) Plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria: context, mechanisms of action, and roadmap to
commercialization of biostimulants for sustainable agriculture. Front Plant Sci 9:1473. https://
doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2018.01473
Bagyaraj DJ, Ashwin R (2017) Soil biodiversity: role in sustainable horticulture. Biodivers Hortic
Crops 5:1–18
Bakker MG, Manter DK, Sheflin AM, Weir TL, Vivanco JM (2012) Harnessing the rhizosphere
microbiome through plant breeding and agricultural management. Plant Soil 360:1–13. https://
doi.org/10.1146/annurev.arplant.57.032905.105159
Bakker PAHM, Pieterse CMJ, de Jonge R, Berendsen RL (2018) The soil-borne legacy. Cell 172:
1178–1180. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2018.02.024
Balestrini R, Gómez-Ariza J, Lanfranco L, Bonfante P (2007) Laser microdissection reveals that
transcripts for five plant and one fungal phosphate transporter genes are contemporaneously
present in arbusculated cells. Mol Plant Microbe Interact 20(9):1055–1062. https://doi.org/10.
1094/mpmi-20-9-1055
Bang C, Dagan T, Deines P, Dubilier N, Duschl WJ, Fraune S, Hentschel U, Hirt H, Hülter N,
Lachnit T, Picazo D (2018) Metaorganisms in extreme environments: do microbes play a role in
organismal adaptation? Zoology 127:1–19. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.zool.2018.02.004
Bano Q, Ilyas N, Bano A, Zafar N, Akram A, Hassan F (2013) Effect of Azospirillum inoculation
on maize (Zea mays L.) under drought stress. Pak J Bot 45(S1):13–20
Bano S, Wu X, Zhang X (2021) Towards sustainable agriculture: rhizosphere microbiome engi￾neering. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 105(19):7141–7160. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jare.2020.
04.014
Bansal R, Srivastava JP (2012) Antioxidative defense system in pigeonpea roots under
waterlogging stress. Acta Physiol Plant 34(2):515–522. https://doi.org/10.1093/femsec/fiaa017
Bao L, Gu L, Sun B, Cai W, Zhang S, Zhuang G, Bai Z, Zhuang X (2020) Seasonal variation of
epiphytic bacteria in the phyllosphere of Gingko biloba, Pinus bungeana and Sabina chinensis.
FEMS Microbiol Ecol 96(3):17. https://doi.org/10.1093/femsec/fiaa017
Bärenstrauch M, Mann S, Jacquemin C, Bibi S, Sylla OK, Baudouin E, Buisson D, Prado S, Kunz C
(2020) Molecular crosstalk between the endophyte Paraconiothyrium variabile and the phyto￾pathogen Fusarium oxysporum—modulation of lipoxygenase activity and beauvericin7 The Beneficial Plant Microbial Association for Sustainable Agriculture 185
production during the interaction. Fungal Genet Biol 139:103383. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fgb.
2020.103383
Barman M, Paul S, Choudhury AG, Roy P, Sen J (2017) Biofertilizer as prospective input for
sustainable agriculture in India. Int J Curr Microbiol Appl Sci 6(11):1–177. https://doi.org/10.
20546/ijcmas.2017.611.141
Barrera SE, Sarango-Flóres SW, Montenegro-Gómez SP (2019) The phyllosphere microbiome and
its potential application in horticultural crops. A review. Rev Colomb Cienc Hortic 13(3):
384–396. https://doi.org/10.17584/rcch.2019vl3i3.8405
Bashan Y, De-Bashan LE (2010) How the plant growth-promoting bacterium Azospirillum pro￾motes plant growth—a critical assessment. Adv Agron 108:77–136. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0065-2113(10)08002-8
Bashir I, War AF, Rafiq I, Reshi ZA, Rashid I, Shouche YS (2022) Phyllosphere microbiome:
diversity and functions. Microbioll Res 254:126888. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.micres.2021.
126888
Basu S, Kumar G, Chhabra S, Prasad R (2021) Role of soil microbes in biogeochemical cycle for
enhancing soil fertility. In: Verma JP, Macdonald C, Gupta VK, Podile AR (eds) New and future
developments in microbial biotechnology and bioengineering: phytomicrobiome for sustainable
agriculture. Elsevier, pp 149–157
Bati CB, Santilli E, Lombardo L (2015) Effect of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi on growth and on
micronutrient and macronutrient uptake and allocation in olive plantlets growing under high
total Mn levels. Mycorrhiza 25:97–108. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00572-014-0589-0
Battini F, Bernardi R, Turrini A, Agnolucci M, Giovannetti M (2016) Rhizophagus intraradices or
its associated bacteria affect gene expression of key enzymes involved in the rosmarinic acid
biosynthetic pathway of basil. Mycorrhiza 26(7):699–707. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00572-016-
0707-2
Battini F, Grønlund M, Agnolucci M, Giovannetti M, Jakobsen I (2017) Facilitation of phosphorus
uptake in maize plants by mycorrhizosphere bacteria. Sci Rep 7(1):1–11. https://doi.org/10.
1038/s41598-017-04959-0
Bayani R, Saateyi A, Faghani E (2015) Influence of arbuscular mycorrhiza in phosphorus acqui￾sition efficiency and drought-tolerance mechanisms in barley. Int J Biosci 7(1):86–94. https://
doi.org/10.12692/ijb/7.1.86-94
Beattie GA (2002) Leaf surface waxes and the process of leaf colonization by microorganisms.
Phyllosphere Microbiol:3–26. https://doi.org/10.1094/MPMI.2002.15.12.1236
Begum AA, Leibovitch S, Migner P, Zhang F (2001a) Inoculation of pea (Pisum sativum L.) by
Rhizobium leguminosarum bv. viceae preincubated with naringenin and hesperetin or applica￾tion of naringenin and hesperetin directly into soil increased pea nodulation under short season
conditions. Plant Soil 237(1):71–80
Begum AA, Leibovitch S, Migner P, Zhang F (2001b) Specific flavonoids induced nod gene
expression and pre-activated nod genes of Rhizobium leguminosarum increased pea (Pisums
ativum L.) and lentil (Lens culinaris L.) nodulation in controlled growth chamber environments.
J Expl Bot 52(360):1537–1543. https://doi.org/10.1093/jexbot/52.360.1537
Begum N, Qin C, Ahanger MA, Raza S, Khan MI, Ashraf M, Ahmed N, Zhang L (2019) Role of
arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi in plant growth regulation: implications in abiotic stress tolerance.
Front Plant Sci 10:1068. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2019.01068
Behie SW, Bidochka MJ (2014) Nutrient transfer in plant–fungal symbioses. Trends Plant Sci
19(11):734–740
Behie SW, Zelisko PM, Bidochka MJ (2012) Endophytic insect-parasitic fungi translocate nitrogen
directly from insects to plants. Science 336(6088):1576–1577. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.
1222289
Belmondo S, Fiorilli V, Pérez-Tienda J, Ferrol N, Marmeisse R, Lanfranco L (2014) A dipeptide
transporter from the arbuscular mycorrhizal fungus Rhizophagus irregularis is upregulated in the
intraradical phase. Front Plant Sci 5:436. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2014.00436186 S. Natesan et al.
Benedetto A, Magurno F, Bonfante P, Lanfranco L (2005) Expression profiles of a phosphate
transporter gene (GmosPT) from the endomycorrhizal fungus Glomus mosseae. Mycorrhiza
15(8):620–627
Berendsen R, Pieterse C, Bakker P (2012) The rhizosphere microbiome and plant health. Trends
Plant Sci 17(8):478–486
Berg RH (1994) Symbiotic vesicle ultrastructure in high pressure-frozen, freeze-substituted
actinorhizae. Protoplasma 183(1-4):37–48
Berrada H, Fikri-Benbrahim K (2014) Taxonomy of the rhizobia: current perspectives. Microbiol
Res J Int 4(6):616–639
Berruti A, Lumini E, Balestrini R, Bianciotto V (2016) Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi as natural
biofertilizers: let’s benefit from past successes. Front Environ Sci 6:1559. https://doi.org/10.
3389/fmicb.2015.01559
Bodenhausen N, Horton M, Bergelson J (2013) Bacterial communities associated with the leaves
and the roots of Arabidopsis thaliana. PLoS One 8(2):e56329
Bona E, Lingua G, Manassero P, Cantamessa S, Marsano F, Todeschini V, Copetta A,
D’Agostino G, Massa N, Avidano L, Gamalero E (2015) AM fungi and PGP pseudomonads
increase flowering, fruit production, and vitamin content in strawberry grown at low nitrogen
and phosphorus levels. Mycorrhiza 25(3):181–193
Borde M, Dudhane M, Jite PK (2010) AM fungi influences the photosynthetic activity, growth and
antioxidant enzymes in Allium sativum L. under salinity condition. Notulae Sci Biol 2(4):64–71
Bottini R, Fulchieri M, Pearce D, Pharis RP (1989) Identification of gibberellins A1, A3, and iso-A3
in cultures of Azospirillum lipoferum. Plant Physiol 90(1):45–47
Boyer LR, Brain P, Xu XM, Jeffries P (2015) Inoculation of drought-stressed strawberry with a
mixed inoculum of two arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi: effects on population dynamics of fungal
species in roots and consequential plant tolerance to water deficiency. Mycorrhiza 25(3):
215–227
Bram WGS, Eric AW, Colin RJ (2018) The role of the phyllosphere microbiome in plant health and
function. Annual Plant Rev 1:1–24. https://doi.org/10.1002/9781119312994.apr0614
Breakspear A, Liu C, Roy S, Stacey N, Rogers C, Trick M, Morieri G, Mysore KS, Wen J, Oldroyd
GE, Downie JA (2014) The root hair “infectome” of Medicago truncatula uncovers changes in
cell cycle genes and reveals a requirement for auxin signaling in rhizobial infection. Plant Cell
26(12):4680–4701. https://doi.org/10.1105/tpc.114.133496
Bücking H, Shachar-Hill Y (2005) Phosphate uptake, transport and transfer by the arbuscular
mycorrhizal fungus Glomus intraradices is stimulated by increased carbohydrate availability.
New Phytol 165(3):899–912. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-8137.2004.01274.x
Bulegon LG, Guimarães VF, Laureth JCU (2016) Azospirillum brasilense affects the antioxidant
activity and leaf pigment content of Urochloaruziziensis under water stress. Pesqui Agro Pecu
Bras 46:343–349. https://doi.org/10.1590/1983-40632016v4641489
Bunn R, Lekberg Y, Zabinski C (2009) Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi ameliorate temperature stress
in thermophilic plants. Ecology 90(5):1378–1388. https://doi.org/10.1890/07-2080.1
Bziuk N, Maccario L, Straube B, Wehner G, Sørensen SJ, Schikora A, Smalla K (2021) The
treasure inside barley seeds: microbial diversity and plant beneficial bacteria. Environ
Microbiome 16:20. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40793-021-00389-8
Cabral C, Ravnskov S, Tringovska I, Wollenweber B (2016) Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi modify
nutrient allocation and composition in wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) subjected to heat-stress.
Plant Soil 408(1-2):385–399. https://doi.org/10.1007/S11104-016-2942-X
Calabrese S, Pérez-Tienda J, Ellerbeck M, Arnould C, Chatagnier O, Boller T, Schüßler A,
Brachmann A, Wipf D, Ferrol N, Courty PE (2016) GintAMT3—a low-affinity ammonium
transporter of the arbuscular mycorrhizal Rhizopha gusirregularis. Front Plant Sci 7:679.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2016.00679
Calvo-Polanco M, Sánchez-Romera B, Aroca R, Asins M, Declerck S, Dodd I, Martínez￾Andújar C, Albacete A, Ruiz-Lozano J (2016) Exploring the use of recombinant inbred lines
in combination with beneficial microbial inoculants (AM fungus and PGPR) to improve drought7 The Beneficial Plant Microbial Association for Sustainable Agriculture 187
stress tolerance in tomato. Environ Exp Bot 131:47–57. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envexpbot.
2016.06.015
Campanelli A, Ruta C, De Mastro G, Morone-Fortunato I (2013) The role of arbuscular mycorrhizal
fungi in alleviating salt stress in Medicago sativa L. var. icon. Symbiosis 59(2):65–76. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s13199-012-0191-1
Canarini A, Kaiser C, Merchant A, Richter A, Wanek W (2019) Root exudation of primary
metabolites: mechanisms and their roles in plant responses to environmental stimuli. Front
Plant Sci 10:157. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2019.00157
Carrell AA, Frank AC (2014) Pinus flexilis and Picea engelmannii share a simple and consistent
needle endophyte microbiota with a potential role in nitrogen fixation. Front Microbiol 5:333.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2014.00333
Carrozzi LE, Creus CM, Barassi CA, Monterubbianesi G, Di Benedetto A (2012) Reparation of
aged lettuce (Lactuca sativa) seeds by osmotic priming and Azospirillum brasilense inoculation.
Botany 90(12):1093–1102. https://doi.org/10.1139/b2012-087
Cartmill AD, Valdez-Aguilar LA, Bryan DL, Alarcón A (2008) Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi
enhance tolerance of vinca to high alkalinity in irrigation water. Scia Hortic 115(3):275–284.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scienta.2007.08.019
Carvalho M, Ma Y, Oliveira R, Freitas H (2017) Endophytic actinobacteria for sustainable
agricultural applications. In: Endophytes: crop productivity and protection. Springer, Cham,
pp 163–189. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-66541-2_8
Casieri L, Gallardo K, Wipf D (2012) Transcriptional response of Medicago truncatula sulphate
transporters to arbuscular mycorrhizal symbiosis with and without sulphur stress. Planta 235(6):
1431–1447. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00425-012-1645-7
Cassman NA, Leite MF, Pan Y, de Hollander M, van Veen JA, Kuramae EE (2016) Plant and soil
fungal but not soil bacterial communities are linked in long-term fertilized grassland. Sci Rep
6(1):1–11. https://doi.org/10.1038/srep23680
Ceballos I, Mosquera S, Angulo M, Mira JJ, Argel LE, Uribe-Velez D, Romero-Tabarez M, Orduz￾Peralta S, Villegas V (2012) Cultivable bacteria populations associated with leaves of banana
and plantain plants and their antagonistic activity against Mycosphaerella fijiensis. Microbial
Ecol 64(3):641–653. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00248-012-0052-8
Çekiç FÖ, Ünyayar S, Ortaş İ (2012) Effects of arbuscular mycorrhizal inoculation on biochemical
parameters in Capsicum annuum grown under long term salt stress. Turkish J Bot 36(1):63–72.
https://doi.org/10.3906/Bot-1008-32
Cerezini P, Kuwano BH, dos Santos MB, Terassi F, Hungria M, Nogueira MA (2016) Strategies to
promote early nodulation in soybean under drought. Field Crops Res 196:160–167. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.fcr.2016.06.017
Chang W, Sui X, Fan XX, Jia TT, Song FQ (2018) Arbuscular mycorrhizal symbiosis modulates
antioxidant response and ion distribution in salt-stressed Elaeagnus angustifolia seedlings. Front
Microbiol 9:652. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2018.00652
Charubin K, Papoutsakis ET (2019) Direct cell-to-cell exchange of matter in a synthetic Clostrid￾ium syntrophy enables CO2 fixation, superior metabolite yields, and an expanded metabolic
space. Metab Eng 52:9–19. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymben.2018.10.006
Chaturvedi H, Singh V, Gupta G (2016) Potential of bacterial endophytes as plant growth
promoting factors. J Plant Pathol Microbiol 7(9):1–6. https://doi.org/10.4172/2157-7471.
1000376
Chen M, Zhang L, Zhang X (2011) Isolation and inoculation of endophytic actinomycetes in root
nodules of Elaeagnus angustifolia. Mod Appl Sci 5(2):264. https://doi.org/10.5539/mas.
v5n2p264
Chen S, Jin W, Liu A, Zhang S, Liu D, Wang F, Lin X, He C (2013) Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi
(AMF) increase growth and secondary metabolism in cucumber subjected to low temperature
stress. Scia Hortic 160:222–229. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scienta.2013.05.039188 S. Natesan et al.
Chhabra S (2019) Phosphorus management in agroecosytems and role and relevance of microbes in
environmental sustainability. Sustain Green Technol Environ Manag:53–66. https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-981-13-2772-8_3
Chhabra S, Dowling DN (2017) Endophyte-promoted nutrient acquisition: phosphorus and iron. In:
Functional importance of the plant microbiome: implications for agriculture, forestry and
bioenergy, vol 2017. Springer, Cham, pp 21–42. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-65897-1_3
Cid F, Inostroza N, Graether S, Bravo L, Jorquera M (2016) Bacterial community structures and ice
recrystallization inhibition activity of bacteria isolated from the phyllosphere of the Antarctic
vascular plant Deschampsia antarctica. Polar Biol 40(6):1319–1331. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s00300-016-2036-5
Cohen AC, Travaglia CN, Bottini R, Piccoli PN (2009) Participation of abscisic acid and gibber￾ellins produced by endophytic Azospirillum in the alleviation of drought effects in maize.
Botany 87(5):455–462. https://doi.org/10.1139/B09-023
Cohen AC, Bottini R, Pontin M, Berli FJ, Moreno D, Boccanlandro H, Travaglia CN, Piccoli PN
(2015) Azospirillum brasilense ameliorates the response of Arabidopsis thaliana to drought
mainly via enhancement of ABA levels. Physiol Plant 153(1):79–90. https://doi.org/10.1111/
ppl.12221
Collins DP, Jacobsen BJ (2003) Optimizing a Bacillus subtilis isolate for biological control of sugar
beet Cercospora leaf spot. Biol Cont 26(2):153–161. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1049-9644(02)
00132-9
Colston TJ, Jackson CR (2016) Microbiome evolution along divergent branches of the vertebrate
tree of life: what is known and unknown? Mol Ecol 25(16):3776–3800. https://doi.org/10.1111/
mec.13730
Compant S, Samad A, Faist H, Sessitsch A (2019) A review on the plant microbiome: ecology,
functions, and emerging trends in microbial application. J Adv Res 19:29–37. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.jare.2019.03.004
Cooper JE (2007) Early interactions between legumes and rhizobia: disclosing complexity in a
molecular dialogue. J Appl Microbiol 103(5):1355–1365. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2672.
2007.03366.x
Cruz-Martín M, Acosta-Suárez M, Mena E, Roque B, Pichardo T, Alvarado-Capó Y (2017)
Antifungal activity of Musa phyllosphere Bacillus pumilus strain against Mycosphaerella
fijiensis. Trop Plant Pathol 42(2):121–125. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40858-017-0139-3
Cruz-Martín M, Acosta-Suárez M, Mena E, Roque B, Pichardo T, Alvarado-Capó Y (2018) Effect
of Bacillus pumilus CCIBP-C5 on Musa-Pseudocercospora fijiensis interaction. 3 Biotech 8(2):
122. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13205-018-1152-z
Cui R, Lu X, Chen X, Malik WA, Wang D, Wang J, Wang S, Guo L, Chen C, Wang X, Wang X
(2021) A novel raffinose biological pathway is observed by symbionts of cottonVerticillium
dahliae to improve salt tolerance genetically on cotton. J Agron Crop Sci 207(6):956–969.
https://doi.org/10.1111/jac.12556
Das K, Roychoudhury A (2014) Reactive oxygen species (ROS) and response of antioxidants as
ROS-scavengers during environmental stress in plants. Front Env Sci 2:53. https://doi.org/10.
3389/fenvs.2014.00053
Dastogeer KMG, Tumpa FH, Sultana A, Akter MA, Chakraborty A (2020) Plant microbiome—an
account of the factors that shape community composition and diversity. Current Plant Biol 23:
100161. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpb.2020.100161
Datta A, Singh RK, Tabassum S (2015) Isolation, characterization and growth of Rhizobium strains
under optimum conditions for effective biofertilizer production. Int J Pharm Sci Rev Res 32(1):
199–208
De Jensen CE, Percich JA, Graham PH (2002) Integrated management strategies of bean root rot
with Bacillus subtilis and Rhizobium in Minnesota. Field Crops Res 74(2-3):107–115. https://
doi.org/10.1016/S0378-4290(01)00200-37 The Beneficial Plant Microbial Association for Sustainable Agriculture 189
De Sassi C, Müller CB, Krauss J (2006) Fungal plant endosymbionts alter life history and
reproductive success of aphid predators. Proc R Soc B Biol Sci 273(1591):301–1306. https://
doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2005.3442
de Souza R, Beneduzi A, Ambrosini A, Da Costa PB, Meyer J, Vargas LK, Schoenfeld R, Passaglia
LM (2013) The effect of plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria on the growth of rice (Oryza
sativa L.) cropped in southern Brazilian fields. Plant Soil 366:585–603. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11104-012-1430-1
Delmotte N, Knief C, Chaffron S, Innerebner G, Roschitzki B, Schlapbach R, von Mering C,
Vorholt JA (2009) Community proteogenomics reveals insights into the physiology of
phyllosphere bacteria. Proc Natl Acad Sci 106(38):16428–16433. https://doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.0905240106
Deshmukh R, Sonah H, Patil G, Chen W, Prince S, Mutava R, Vuong T, Valliyodan B, Nguyen HT
(2014) Integrating omic approaches for abiotic stress tolerance in soybean. Front Plant Sci 5:
244. https://doi.org/10.3390/d12100370
Dhayanithy G, Subban K, Chelliah J (2019) Diversity and biological activities of endophytic fungi
associated with Catharanthus roseus. BMC Microbiol 19:22. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12866-
019-1386-x
Diagne N, Arumugam K, Ngom M, Nambiar-Veetil M, Franche C, Narayanan KK, Laplaze L
(2013) Use of Frankia and actinorhizal plants for degraded lands reclamation. Bio Med Res Int
2013:1–9. https://doi.org/10.1155/2013/948258
Diagne N, Ngom M, Djighaly PI, Fall D, Hocher V, Svistoonoff S (2020) Roles of arbuscular
mycorrhizal fungi on plant growth and performance: importance in biotic and abiotic stressed
regulation. Diversity 12(10):370. https://doi.org/10.3390/d12100370
Din M, Nelofer R, Salman M, Khan FH, Khan A, Ahmad M, Jalil F, Din JU, Khan M (2019)
Production of nitrogen fixing Azotobacter (SR-4) and phosphorus solubilizing Aspergillus niger
and their evaluation on Lagenaria siceraria and Abelmoschus esculentus. Biotechnol Rep 22:
e00323. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.btre.2019.e00323
Dinesh R, Srinivasan V, TE S, Anandaraj M, Srambikka H (2017) Endophytic actinobacteria:
diversity, secondary metabolism and mechanisms to unsilence biosynthetic gene clusters. Crit
Rev Microbiol 43(5):546–566. https://doi.org/10.1080/1040841x.2016.1270895
Dong CJ, Wang LL, Li Q, Shang QM (2019) Bacterial communities in the rhizosphere,
phyllosphere and endosphere of tomato plants. PLoS One 14(11):e0223847. https://doi.org/
10.1371/journal.pone.0223847
dos Santos Ferreira N, Hayashi Sant’ Anna F, Massena Reis V et al (2020) Genome-based
reclassification of Azospirillum brasilense Sp245 as the type strain of Azospirillum baldaniorum
sp. nov. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol 70(12):6203–6212. https://doi.org/10.1099/ijsem.0.004517
Du HJ, Zhang YQ, Liu HY, Su J, Wei YZ, Ma BP, Guo BL, Yu LY (2013) Allonocardiopsis
opalescens gen. nov., sp. nov., a new member of the suborder Streptosporangineae, from the
surface-sterilized fruit of a medicinal plant. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol 63:900–904. https://doi.
org/10.1099/ijs.0.041491-0
Dubey A, Mall MA, Khan F, Chowdhary K, Yadav S, Kumar A, Sharma S, Khare PK, Khan ML
(2019) Soil microbiome: a key player for conservation of soil health under changing climate.
Biodivers Conserv 28(8):2405–2429. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10531-019-01760-5
Dubilier N, McFall-Ngai M, Zhao L (2015) Microbiology: create a global microbiome effort. Nat
News 526(7575):631
Durand A, Maillard F, Alvarez-Lopez V, Guinchard S, Bertheau C, Valot B, Blaudez D, Chalot M
(2018) Bacterial diversity associated with poplar trees grown on a Hg-contaminated site:
community characterization and isolation of Hg-resistant plant growth-promoting bacteria. Sci
Total Environ 622-623:1165–1177. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2017.12.069
Dutta S, Singh MS (2002) Mustard and rapeseed response to azotobacter. Indian J Hill Farming 15:
44–46190 S. Natesan et al.
Egamberdieva D, Wirth SJ, Alqarawi AA, Abd_Allah EF, Hashem A (2017) Phytohormones and
beneficial microbes: essential components for plants to balance stress and fitness. Front
Microbiol 8:2104. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2017.02104
El-Badry MA, Elbarbary TA, Ibrahim IA, Abdel-Fatah YM (2016) Azotobacter vinelandii evalu￾ation and optimization of Abu Tartur Egyptian phosphate ore dissolution. Saudi J Pathol
Microbiol 1(3):80–93. https://doi.org/10.21276/sjpm.2016.1.3.2
Elhindi KM, El-Din AS, Elgorban AM (2017) The impact of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi in
mitigating salt-induced adverse effects in sweet basil (Ocimum basilicum L.). Saudi J Biol Sci
24(1):170–179. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sjbs.2016.02.010
Elías JM, Guerrero-Molina MF, Martínez-Zamora MG, Díaz-Ricci JC, Pedraza RO (2018) Role of
ethylene and related gene expression in the interaction between strawberry plants and the plant
growth-promoting bacterium Azospirillum brasilense. Plant Biol 20(3):490–496. https://doi.
org/10.1111/plb.12697
El-Nashar YI (2017) Response of snapdragon (Antirrhinum majus L.) to blended water irrigation
and arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi inoculation: uptake of minerals and leaf water relations.
Photosynthetica 55(2):201–209. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11099-016-0650-7
El-Sayed MT (2014) The response of Fusarium solani to Cd (II) and Cu (II) in pure culture. Egypt J
Microbiol 5:99–117. https://doi.org/10.21608/ejm.2014.244
Esitken A, Yildiz HE, Ercisli S, Donmez MF, Turan M, Gunes A (2010) Effects of plant growth
promoting bacteria (PGPB) on yield, growth and nutrient contents of organically grown
strawberry. Scia Hortic 124(1):62–66. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00572-011-0392-0
Evelin H, Giri B, Kapoor R (2012) Contribution of Glomus intraradices inoculation to nutrient
acquisition and mitigation of ionic imbalance in NaCl-stressed Trigonella foenum-graecum.
Mycorrhiza 22(3):203–217. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00572-011-0392-0
Evelin H, Giri B, Kapoor R (2013) Ultrastructural evidence for AMF mediated salt stress mitigation
in Trigonella foenum-graecum. Mycorrhiza 23(1):71–86. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00572-012-
0449-8
Fang W, St Leger RJ (2010) Mrt, a gene unique to fungi, encodes an oligosaccharide transporter and
facilitates rhizosphere competency in Metarhizium robertsii. Plant Physiol 154(3):1549–1557.
https://doi.org/10.1104/pp.110.163014
Farssi O, Mouradi M, Ghoulam C, Bouizgaren A, Berrougui H, Farissi M (2018) Genes and
molecular signals involved in legumes-rhizobia symbiosis. Ann West Univ Timiş Ser Biol
21(2):193–206
Fasciglione G, Casanovas EM, Quillehauquy V, Yommi AK, Goni MG, Roura SI, Barassi CA
(2015) Azospirillum inoculation effects on growth, product quality and storage life of lettuce
plants grown under salt stress. Scia Hortic 195:154–162. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scienta.2015.
09.015
Feng Y, Shen D, Dong X, Song W (2003) In vitro symplasmata formation in the rice diazotrophic
endophyte Pantoea agglomerans YS19. Plant Soil 255(2):435–444
Fernando WGD, Nakkeeran S, Zhang Y, Savchuk S (2007) Biological control of
Sclerotiniasclerotiorum (Lib.) de Bary by Pseudomonas and Bacillus species on canola petals.
Crop Protect 26(2):100–107. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cropro.2006.04.007
Fibach-Paldi S, Burdman S, Okon Y (2012) Key physiological properties contributing to rhizo￾sphere adaptation and plant growth promotion abilities of Azospirillumbrasilense. FEMS
Microbiol Lett 326(2):99–108. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1574-6968.2011.02407.x
Field KJ, Rimington WR, Bidartondo MI, Allinson KE, Beerling DJ, Cameron DD, Duckett JG,
Leake JR, Pressel S (2015) First evidence of mutualism between ancient plant lineages
(H. aplomitriopsida liverworts) and M. ucoromycotina fungi and its response to simulated
P. alaeozoic changes in atmospheric CO2. New Phytol 205(2):743–756. https://doi.org/10.
1111/nph.13024
Foo JL, Ling H, Lee YS, Chang MW (2017) Microbiome engineering: current applications and its
future. Biotechnol J 12(3):1600099. https://doi.org/10.1002/biot.2016000997 The Beneficial Plant Microbial Association for Sustainable Agriculture 191
Frąc M, Hannula SE, Bełka M, Jędryczka M (2018) Fungal biodiversity and their role in soil health.
Front Microbiol 9:707. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2018.00707
Franche C, Bogusz D (2012) Signalling and communication in the actinorhizal symbiosis. In:
Signaling and communication in plant symbiosis. Springer, Berlin, pp 73–92. https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-3-642-20966-6_4
Freiberg E (1998) Microclimatic parameters influencing nitrogen fixation in the phyllosphere in a
Costa Rican premontane rain forest. Oecologia 117(1-2):9–18. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s004420050625
Fu SF, Sun PF, Lu HY, Wei JY, Xiao HS, Fang WT, Cheng BY, Chou JY (2016) Plant growth￾promoting traits of yeasts isolated from the phyllosphere and rhizosphere of Droseraspatulata
Lab. Fungal Biol 120(3):433–448. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.funbio.2015.12.006
Fukami J, Nogueira MA, Araujo RS, Hungria M (2016) Accessing inoculation methods of maize
and wheat with Azospirillum brasilense. Amb Express 6(1):1–13. https://doi.org/10.1186/
s13568-015-0171-y
Fukami J, de la Osa C, Ollero FJ, Megías M, Hungria M (2017) Co-inoculation of maize with
Azospirillum brasilense and Rhizobium tropici as a strategy to mitigate salinity stress. Funct
Plant Biol 45(3):328–339. https://doi.org/10.1071/fp17167
Fukami J, Cerezini P, Hungria M (2018) Azospirillum: benefits that go far beyond biological
nitrogen fixation. AMB Expr 8:73. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13568-018-0608-1
Fürnkranz M, Wanek W, Richter A, Abell G, Rasche F, Sessitsch A (2008) Nitrogen fixation by
phyllosphere bacteria associated with higher plants and their colonizing epiphytes of a tropical
lowland rainforest of Costa Rica. ISME J 2(5):561–570. https://doi.org/10.1038/ismej.2008.14
Gaofeng W, Hong X, Mei J (2004) Biodegradation of chlorophenols, a review. Chem J Internet 10:
67. www.chemistrymag.on/cji/2004/
Garcés-Ruiz M, Calonne-Salmon M, Plouznikoff K, Misson C, Navarrete-Mier M,
Cranenbrouck S, Declerck S (2017) Dynamics of short-term phosphorus uptake by intact
mycorrhizal and non-mycorrhizal maize plants grown in a circulatory semi-hydroponic culti￾vation system. Front Plant Sci 8:1471. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2017.01471
Garcia K, Delteil A, Conéjéro G, Becquer A, Plassard C, Sentenac H, Zimmermann S (2014)
Potassium nutrition of ectomycorrhizal P inus pinaster: overexpression of the Hebeloma
cylindrosporum H c T rk1 transporter affects the translocation of both K+ and phosphorus in
the host plant. New Phytol 201(3):951–960. https://doi.org/10.1111/nph.12603
García JE, Maroniche G, Creus C, Suárez-Rodríguez R, Ramirez-Trujillo JA, Groppa MD (2017) In
vitro PGPR properties and osmotic tolerance of different Azospirillum native strains and their
effects on growth of maize under drought stress. Microbiol Res 202:21–29. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.micres.2017.04.007
Garg N, Aggarwal N (2012) Effect of mycorrhizal inoculations on heavy metal uptake and stress
alleviation of Cajanus cajan (L.) Millsp. genotypes grown in cadmium and lead contaminated
soils. Plant Growth Regul 66:9–26. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10725-011-9624-8
Garg N, Bhandari P (2016) Silicon nutrition and mycorrhizal inoculations improve growth, nutrient
status, K+/Na+ ratio and yield of Cicer arietinum L. genotypes under salinity stress. Plant
Growth Regul 78(3):371–387. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10725-015-0099-x
Garg N, Bharti A (2018) Salicylic acid improves arbuscular mycorrhizal symbiosis, and chickpea
growth and yield by modulating carbohydrate metabolism under salt stress. Mycorrhiza 28(8):
727–746. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00572-018-0856-6
Garg N, Chandel S (2011) Role of Arbuscular Mycorrhizal (AM) fungi on growth, cadmium
uptake, osmolyte, and phytochelatin synthesis in Cajanus cajan (L.) Millsp. under NaCl and
Cd stresses. J Plant Growth Regul 31(3):292–308. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2019.01068
Garg N, Singh S (2018) Arbuscular mycorrhiza Rhizophagus irregularis and silicon modulate
growth, proline biosynthesis and yield in Cajanus cajan L. Millsp. (pigeon pea) genotypes under
cadmium and zinc stress. J Plant Growth Regul 37(1):46–63. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00344-
017-9708-4192 S. Natesan et al.
Gazis R, Chaverri P (2010) Diversity of fungal endophytes in leaves and stems of wild rubber trees
(Hevea brasiliensis) in Peru. Fungal Ecol 3(3):240–254. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.funeco.2009.
12.001
Genetu G, Yli-Halla M, Asrat M, Alemayehu M (2021) Rhizobium inoculation and chemical
fertilisation improve faba bean yield and yield components in Northwestern Ethiopia. Agricul￾ture 11(7):678. https://doi.org/10.3390/agriculture11070678
Genre A, Chabaud M, Timmers T, Bonfante P, Barker DG (2005) Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi
elicit a novel intracellular apparatus in Medicago truncatula root epidermal cells before infec￾tion. Plant Cell 17(12):3489–3499. https://doi.org/10.1105/tpc.105.035410
Genre A, Chabaud M, Faccio A, Barker DG, Bonfante P (2008) Prepenetration apparatus assembly
precedes and predicts the colonization patterns of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi within the root
cortex of both Medicago truncatula and Daucus carota. Plant Cell 20(5):1407–1420. https://doi.
org/10.1105/tpc.108.059014
Gibson K, Kobayashi H, Walker G (2008) Molecular determinants of a symbiotic chronic infection.
Annu Rev Genet 42(1):413–441. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.genet.42.110807.091427
Gill SS, Gill R, Trivedi DK, Anjum NA, Sharma KK, Ansari MW, Ansari AA, Johri AK, Prasad R,
Pereira E, Varma A, Tuteja N (2016) Piriformospora indica: potential and significance in plant
stress tolerance. Front Microbiol 7:332. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2016.00332
Giri B, Kapoor R, Mukerji KG (2007) Improved tolerance of Acacia nilotica to salt stress by
arbuscular mycorrhiza, Glomus fasciculatum may be partly related to elevated K/Na ratios in
root and shoot tissues. Microbial Ecol 54(4):753–760. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00248-007-
9239-9
Glick BR (2012) Plant growth-promoting bacteria: mechanisms and applications. Scientifica 2012:
963401. https://doi.org/10.6064/2012/963401
Goicoechea N, Bettoni MM, Fuertes-Mendizabal T, González-Murua C, Aranjuelo I (2016) Durum
wheat quality traits affected by mycorrhizal inoculation, water availability and atmospheric CO2
concentration. Crop Pasture Sci 67(2):147–155. https://doi.org/10.1071/CP15212
Gómez-Bellot M, Ortuño M, Nortes P, Vicente-Sánchez J, Bañón S, Sánchez-Blanco M (2015)
Mycorrhizal euonymus plants and reclaimed water: biomass, water status and nutritional
responses. Scia Hortic 186:61–69. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scienta.2015.02.022
Gonzalez AJ, Larraburu EE, Llorente BE (2015) Azospirillum brasilense increased salt tolerance of
jojoba during in vitro rooting. Indusl Crops Prod 76:41–48. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indcrop.
2015.06.017
González-Chávez MDCA, Miller B, Maldonado-Mendoza IE, Scheckel K, Carrillo-González R
(2014) Localization and speciation of arsenic in Glomus intraradices by synchrotron radiation
spectroscopic analysis. Fungal Biol 118(5-6):444–452. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.funbio.2014.
03.002
González-Guerrero M, Azcon-Aguilar C, Mooney M, Valderas A, MacDiarmid CW, Eide DJ,
Ferrol N (2005) Characterization of a Glomus intraradices gene encoding a putative Zn
transporter of the cation diffusion facilitator family. Fungal Gen Biol 42(2):130–140. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.fgb.2004.10.007
Gopal M, Gupta A, Thomas GV (2013) Bespoke microbiome therapy to manage plant diseases.
Front Microbiol 4:355. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2013.00355
Griffin EA, Carson WP (2015) The ecology and natural history of foliar bacteria with a focus on
tropical forests and agroeco systems. Bot Rev 81(2):105–149. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12229-
015-9151-9
Grümberg B, Urcelay C, Shroeder M, Vargas-Gil S, Luna C (2014) The role of inoculum identity in
drought stress mitigation by arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi in soybean. Biol Ferti Soils 51(1):
1–10. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00374-014-0942-7
Guerreiro S, Dawson R, Kilsby C, Lewis E, Ford A (2018) Future heat-waves, droughts and floods
in 571 European cities. Environ Res Let 13(3):0340097 The Beneficial Plant Microbial Association for Sustainable Agriculture 193
Guerrieri R, Lecha L, Mattana S, Cáliz J, Casamayor EO, Barceló A et al (2020) Partitioning
between atmospheric deposition and canopy microbial nitrification into throughfall nitrate
fluxes in a Mediterranean forest. J Ecol 108(2):626–640
Gupta G, Parihar SS, Ahirwar NK, Snehi SK, Singh V (2015) Plant growth promoting rhizobacteria
(PGPR): current and future prospects for development of sustainable agriculture. J Microb
Biochem Technol 7(2):96–102. https://doi.org/10.4172/1948-5948.1000188
Gupta N, Vats S, Bhargava P (2018) Sustainable agriculture: role of metagenomics and
metabolomics in exploring the soil microbiota. In: Choudhary D, Kumar M, Prasad R, Kumar
V (eds) Silico approach for sustainable agriculture. Springer, Singapore. https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-981-13-0347-0_11
Gureny KA, Mantle PG (1993) Biosynthesis of 1-N-methylalbonoursin by an endophytic Strepto￾myces sp. isolated from perennial ryegrass. J Nat Prod 56(7):1194–1198
Hajiboland R, Aliasgharzadeh N, Laiegh SF, Poschenrieder C (2010) Colonization with arbuscular
mycorrhizal fungi improves salinity tolerance of tomato (Solanum lycopersicum L.) plants.
Plant Soil 331(1):313–327. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11104-009-0255-z
Hajiboland R, Dashtebani F, Aliasgharzad N (2015) Physiological responses of halophytic C4 grass
Aeluropus littoralis to salinity and arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi colonization. Photosynthetica
53(4):572–584. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11099-015-0131-4
Hamdia MAES, Shaddad MAK, Doaa MM (2004) Mechanisms of salt tolerance and interactive
effects of Azospirillum brasilense inoculation on maize cultivars grown under salt stress
conditions. Plant Growth Regul 44(2):165–174. https://doi.org/10.1023/B:GROW.
0000049414.03099.9b
Hart M, Antunes P, Chaudhary VB, Abbott L (2018) Fungal inoculants in the field: is the reward
greater than the risk? Funct Ecol 32:126–135. https://doi.org/10.1111/1365-2435.12976
Hartmann A, Rothballer M, Schmid M (2008) Lorenz Hiltner, a pioneer in rhizosphere microbial
ecology and soil bacteriology research. Plant Soil 312(1):7–14. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11104-
007-9514-z
Hasanuzzaman M, Gill SS, Fujita M (2013) Physiological role of nitric oxide in plants grown under
adverse environmental conditions. In: Plant acclimation to environmental stress. Springer,
New York, pp 269–322. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4614-5001-6_11
Hashem A, Abd-Allah EF, Alqarawi AA, Egamberdieva D (2018a) Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi
and plant stress tolerance. In: Plant microbiome: stress response. Springer, Singapore, pp
81–103. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-5514-0_4
Hashem A, Alqarawi AA, Radhakrishnan R, Al-Arjani, ABF, Aldehaish HA, Egamberdieva D,
Abd_Allah EF (2018b) Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi regulate the oxidative system, hormones
and ionic equilibrium to trigger salt stress tolerance in Cucumis sativus L. Saudi J Biol Sci 25(6):
1102–1114. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sjbs.2018.03.009
Hassen AI, Pierneef R, Swanevelder ZH, Bopape FL (2020) Microbial and functional diversity of
Cyclopia intermedia rhizosphere microbiome revealed by analysis of shotgun metagenomics
sequence data. Data Brief 32:106288. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dib.2020.106288
Hayat R, Ali S, Amara U, Khalid R, Ahmed I (2010) Soil beneficial bacteria and their role in plant
growth promotion: a review. Ann Microbiol 60(4):579–598. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13213-
010-0117-1
Helber N, Wippel K, Sauer N, Schaarschmidt S, Hause B, Requena N (2011) A versatile mono￾saccharide transporter that operates in the arbuscular mycorrhizal fungus Glomus sp is crucial
for the symbiotic relationship with plants. Plant Cell 23(10):3812–3823. https://doi.org/10.
1105/tpc.111.089813
Herliana O, Harjoso T, Anwar AHS, Fauzi A (2019) The effect of rhizobium and N fertilizer on
growth and yield of black soybean (Glycine max (L) Merril). IOP Conf Ser Earth Environ Sci
255:012015
Hernández-León R, Rojas-Solís D, Contreras-Pérez M, del Carmen Orozco-Mosqueda M, Macías￾Rodríguez LI, Reyes-de la Cruz H, Valencia-Cantero E, Santoyo G (2015) Characterization of
the antifungal and plant growth-promoting effects of diffusible and volatile organic compounds194 S. Natesan et al.
produced by Pseudomonas fluorescens strains. Biol Cont 81:83–92. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
biocontrol.2014.11.011
Hietz P, Wanek W, Wania R, Nadkarni NM (2002) Nitrogen-15 natural abundance in a montane
cloud forest canopy as an indicator of nitrogen cycling and epiphyte nutrition. Oecologia 131(3):
350–355. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00442-002-0896-6
Hodge A, Fitter AH (2010) Substantial nitrogen acquisition by arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi from
organic material has implications for N cycling. Proc Nat Acad Sci 107(31):13754–13759.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1005874107
Horn WS, Simmonds MSJ, Schwartz RE, Blaney WM (1995) Phomopsichalasin, a novel antimi￾crobial agent from an endophytic Phomopsis sp. Tetrahedron 51(14):3969–3978. https://doi.
org/10.1016/0040-4020(95)00139-Y
Hoysted GA, Kowal J, Pressel S, Duckett JG, Bidartondo MI, Field KJ (2021) Carbon for nutrient
exchange between Lycopodiellainundata and Mucoromycotina fine root endophytes is
unresponsive to high atmospheric CO2. Mycorrhiza 31:1–10. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00572-
021-01033-6
Hu Y, Xie W, Cen B (2020) Arbuscular mycorrhiza improved drought tolerance of maize seedlings
by altering photosystem II efficiency and the levels of key metabolites. Chem Biol Technol
Agricul 7(1):1–14. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00572-021-01033-6
Huang TP, Tzeng DDS, Wong AC, Chen CH, Lu KM, Lee YH et al (2012) DNA polymorphisms
and biocontrol of Bacillus antagonistic to citrus bacterial canker with indication of the interfer￾ence of phyllosphere biofilms. PLoS One 7(7):e42124. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.
0042124
Huang L, Yu LJ, Zhang X, Fan B, Wang FZ, Dai YS, Qi H, Zhou Y, Xie LJ, Xiao S (2019)
Autophagy regulates glucose-mediated root meristem activity by modulating ROS production in
Arabidopsis. Autophagy 15(3):407–422. https://doi.org/10.1080/15548627.2018.1520547
Huang D, Ma M, Wang Q, Zhang M, Jing G, Li C, Ma F (2020) Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi
enhanced drought resistance in apple by regulating genes in the MAPK pathway. Plant Physiol
Biochem 149:245–255. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plaphy.2020.02.020
Hunter PJ, Hand P, Pink D, Whipps JM, Bending GD (2010) Both leaf properties and microbe￾microbe interactions influence within-species variation in bacterial population diversity and
structure in the lettuce (Lactuca species) phyllosphere. Appl Environ Microbiol 76(24):
8117–8125. https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.01321-10
Imam J, Singh PK, Shukla P (2016) Plant microbe interactions in post genomic era: perspectives
and applications. Front Microbiol 7:1488. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2016.01488
Impa SM, Nadaradjan S, Jagadish SVK (2012) Drought stress induced reactive oxygen species and
anti-oxidants in plants. In: Abiotic stress responses in plants. Springer, New York, pp 131–147.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4614-0634-1_7
Inácio J, Pereira P, Carvalho DM, Fonseca A, Amaral-Collaco MT, Spencer-Martins I (2002)
Estimation and diversity of phylloplane mycobiota on selected plants in a Mediterranean-type
ecosystem in Portugal. Microbial Ecol 44(4):344–353. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00248-002-
2022-z
Innerebner G, Knief C, Vorholt JA (2011) Protection of Arabidopsis thaliana against leaf-patho￾genic Pseudomonas syringae by Sphingomonas strains in a controlled model system. Appl
Environ Microbiol 77(10):3202–3210
Jaber LR, Araj S-E (2018) Interactions among endophytic fungal entomopathogens (Ascomycota:
Hypocreales), the green peach aphid Myzus persicae Sulzer (Homoptera: Aphididae), and the
aphid endoparasitoid Aphidius colemani Viereck (Hymenoptera: Braconidae). Biol Control
116:53–61. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biocontrol.2017.04.005
Jaber LR, Salem NM (2014) Endophytic colonisation of squash by the fungal entomopathogen
Beauveria bassiana (Ascomycota: Hypocreales) for managing Zucchini yellow mosaic virus in
cucurbits. Biocont Sci Technol 24(10):1096–1109. https://doi.org/10.1080/09583157.2014.
9233797 The Beneficial Plant Microbial Association for Sustainable Agriculture 195
Jacobs JL, Sundin GW (2001) Effect of solar UV-B radiation on a phyllosphere bacterial commu￾nity. Appl Environ Microbiol 67(12):5488–5496. https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.67.12.
5488-5496.2001
Jain A, Singh S, Kumar Sarma B, Bahadur Singh H (2012) Microbial consortium-mediated
reprogramming of defence network in pea to enhance tolerance against Sclerotinia sclerotiorum.
J Appl Microbiol 112(3):537–550. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2672.2011.05220.x
Jaipaul SS, Dixit AK, Sharma AK (2011) Growth and yield of capsicum (Capsicum annum) and
garden pea (Pisum sativum) as influenced by organic manures and biofertilizers. Indian J Agri
Sci 81(7):637–642
Janakiev T, Dimkić I, Bojić S, Fira D, Stanković S, Berić T (2020) Bacterial communities of plum
phyllosphere and characterization of indigenous antagonistic Bacillus thuringiensis R3/3 isolate.
J Appl Microbiol 128(2):528–543
Janoušková M, Pavlíková D (2010) Cadmium immobilization in the rhizosphere of arbuscular
mycorrhizal plants by the fungal extraradical mycelium. Plant Soil 332(1):511–520
Javot H, Penmetsa RV, Terzaghi N, Cook DR, Harrison MJ (2007a) A Medicago truncatula
phosphate transporter indispensable for the arbuscular mycorrhizal symbiosis. Proc Nat Acad
Sci 104(5):1720–1725
Javot H, Pumplin N, Harrison MJ (2007b) Phosphate in the arbuscular mycorrhizal symbiosis:
transport properties and regulatory roles. Plant Cell Environ 30(3):310–322. https://doi.org/10.
1111/j.1365-3040.2006.01617.x
Jensen ES, Peoples MB, Boddey RM, Gresshoff PM, Hauggaard-Nielsen H, Alves BJR, Morrison
MJ (2012) Legumes for mitigation of climate change and the provision of eedstock for biofuels
and biorefineries. A review. Agron Sustain Dev 32(2):329–364
Jia M, Chen L, Xin HL, Zheng CJ, Rahman K, Han T, Qin LP (2016) A friendly relationship
between endophytic fungi and medicinal plants: a systematic review. Front Microbiol 7:906
Jiang Q, Zhuo F, Long S, Zhao H, Yang D, Ye Z, Li S, Jing Y (2016) Can arbuscular mycorrhizal
fungi reduce Cd uptake and alleviate Cd toxicity of Lonicera japonica grown in Cd-added soils?
Scie Rep 6:21805. https://doi.org/10.1038/srep21805
Jiménez-Morillo NT, González-Pérez JA, Jordán A, Zavala LM, de la Rosa JM, Jiménez-González
MA, González-Vila FJ (2016) Organic matter fractions controlling soil water repellency in
sandy soils from the Doñana National Park (Southwestern Spain). Land Degrad Dev 27(5):
1413–1423
Jixiang L, Yingnan W, Shengnan S, Chunsheng M, Xiufeng Y (2017) Effects of arbuscular
mycorrhizal fungi on the growth, photosynthesis and photosynthetic pigments of Leymus
chinensis seedlings under salt-alkali stress and nitrogen deposition. Sci Total Environ 576:
234–241. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.10.091
Jnawali AD, Ojha RB, Marahatta S (2015) Role of Azotobacter in soil fertility and sustainability—a
review. Adv Plants Agric Res 2(6):1–5
Johnson NC, Gehring CA (2007) Mycorrhizas: Symbiotic mediators of Rhizosphere and ecosystem
processes. Rhizosphere:73–100. https://doi.org/10.1016/b978-012088775-0/50006-9
Jones P, Garcia BJ, Furches A, Tuskan GA, Jacobson D (2019) Plant host-associated mechanisms
for microbial selection. Front Plant Sci 10:862. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2019.00862
Kamal S, Prasad R, Varma A (2010) Soil microbial diversity in relation to heavy metals. In:
Sherameti I, Varma A (eds) Soil heavy metals, vol 19. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pp 31–64
Kapoor R, Evelin H, Mathur P, Giri B (2013) Arbuscular mycorrhiza: approaches for abiotic stress
tolerance in crop plants for sustainable agriculture. In: Tuteja N, Gill SS (eds) Plant acclimation
to environmental stress. Springer Science+Business Media, Berlin, pp 359–401. https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-1-4614-5001-6_14
Kaul S, Choudhary M, Gupta S, Dhar MK (2021) Engineering host microbiome for crop improve￾ment and sustainable agriculture. Front Microbiol 12:1125
Kaushal M, Wani SP (2016) Plant-growth-promoting rhizobacteria: drought stress alleviators to
ameliorate crop production in drylands. Ann Microbiol 66(1):35–42196 S. Natesan et al.
Kecskeméti E, Berkelmann-Löhnertz B, Reineke A (2016) Are epiphytic microbial communities in
the carposphere of ripening grape clusters (Vitis vinifera L.) different between conventional,
organic, and biodynamic grapes? PLoS One 11(8):e0160852. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0160852
Kemppainen MJ, Pardo AG (2013) LbNrt RNA silencing in the mycorrhizal symbiont
Laccariabicolor reveals a nitrate-independent regulatory role for a eukaryotic NRT2-type nitrate
transporter. Environ Microbiol Rep 5:353–366
Kennedy C, Rudnick P, MacDonald ML, Melton T (2015) Azotobacter. In: Trujillo ME, Dedysh S,
DeVos P, Hedlund B, Kämpfer P, Rainey FA, Whitman WB (eds) Bergey’s manual of
systematics of archaea and bacteria. Atlanta, GA, American Cancer Society, pp 1–33. https://
doi.org/10.1002/9781118960608.gbm01207
Khadka K, Rachana D, Asis S, Laxmi R, Khem C, Shreeram S, Shrimala Y, Deepak U, Swikar K,
Ram R, Pashupati C (2016) Constraints and opportunities for promotion of finger millet in
Nepal. https://doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.2.13997.69606
Khalid M, Bilal M, Hassani D, Iqbal N, Wang H, Huang D (2017) Mitigation of salt stress in white
clover (Trifolium repens) by Azospirillum brasilense and its inoculation effect. Bot Stud 58:5
Khalloufi M, Martínez-Andújar C, Lachaâl M, Karray-Bouraoui N, Pérez-Alfocea F, Albacete A
(2017) The interaction between foliar GA3 application and arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi
inoculation improves growth in salinized tomato (Solanum lycopersicum L.) plants by modify￾ing the hormonal balance. J Plant Physiol 214:134–144. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jplph.2017.
04.012
Khan N, Ali S, Shahid MA, Mustafa A, Sayyed RZ, Curá JA (2021) Insights into the interactions
among roots, rhizosphere, and rhizobacteria for improving plant growth and tolerance to abiotic
stresses: a review. Cells 10(6):1551. https://doi.org/10.3390/cells10061551
Kizilkaya R (2009) Nitrogen fixation capacity of Azotobacter spp. strains isolated from soils in
different ecosystems and relationship between them and the microbiological properties of soils.
J Environ Biol 30:73–82
Klieber J, Reineke A (2016) The entomopathogen Beauveria bassiana has epiphytic and endo￾phytic activity against the tomato leaf miner Tutaabsoluta. J Appl Entomol 140:580–589.
https://doi.org/10.1111/jen.12287
Knief C, Delmotte N, Chaffron S, Stark M, Innerebner G, Wassmann R, von Mering C, Vorholt JA
(2012) Metaproteogenomic analysis of microbial communities in the phyllosphere and rhizo￾sphere of rice. ISME J 6(7):1378–1390. https://doi.org/10.1038/ismej.2011.192
Kobae Y, Tamura Y, Takai S, Banba M, Hata S (2010) Localized expression of arbuscular
mycorrhiza-inducible ammonium transporters in soybean. Plant Cell Physiol 51:411–1425
Kong Z, Hart M, Liu H (2018) Paving the way from the lab to the field: using synthetic microbial
consortia to produce high-quality crops. Front Plant Sci 9:1467
Korenblum E, Dong Y, Szymanski J, Panda S, Jozwiak A, Massalha H, Meir S, Rogachev I,
Aharoni A (2020) Rhizosphere microbiome mediates systemic root metabolite exudation by
root-to-root signaling. Proc Natl Acad Sci 117(7):3874–3883
Kraepiel AML, Bellenger JP, Wichard T, Morel FM (2009) Multiple roles of siderophores in free￾living nitrogen-fixing bacteria. Biometals 22(4):573
Krajinski F, Courty P-E, Sieh D, Franken P, Zhang H, Bucher M, Gerlach N, Kryvoruchko I,
Zoeller D, Udvardi M, Hause B (2014) The H+-ATPase HA1 of Medicago truncatula is
essential for phosphate transport and plant growth during arbuscular mycorrhizal symbiosis.
Plant Cell 26(4):1808–1817. https://doi.org/10.1105/tpc.113.120436
Krishnamoorthy R, Kwon S, Kumutha K, Senthilkumar M, Ahmed S, Sa T, Anandham R (2018)
Diversity of culturable methylotrophic bacteria in different genotypes of groundnut and their
potential for plant growth promotion. 3 Biotech 8(6):275. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13205-018-
1291-2
Kumar A, Dubey A (2020) Rhizosphere microbiome: engineering bacterial competitiveness for
enhancing crop production. J Adv Res 24:337–352. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jare.2020.04.0147 The Beneficial Plant Microbial Association for Sustainable Agriculture 197
Kumar B, Gopal D (2015) Effective role of indigenous microorganisms for sustainable environ￾ment. 3 Biotech 5(6):867–876. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13205-015-0293-6
Kumar V, Singh P, Jorquera M, Sangwan P, Kumar P, Verma A, Agrawal S (2013) Isolation of
phytase-producing bacteria from Himalayan soils and their effect on growth and phosphorus
uptake of Indian mustard (Brassica juncea). World J Microbiol Biotechnol 29(8):1361–1369
Kumar A, Dames JF, Gupta A, Sharma S, Gilbert JA, Ahmad P (2015) Current developments in
arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi research and its role in salinity stress alleviation: a biotechnolog￾ical perspective. Crit Rev Biotechnol 35:461–474
Kumar A, Trefault N, Olaniran AO (2016) Microbial degradation of 2, 4-dichlorophenoxyacetic￾acid: insight into the enzymes and catabolic genes involved, their regulation and biotechnolog￾ical implications. Crit Rev Microbiol 42(2):194–208
Kumari MER, Gopal AV, Lakshmipathy R (2018) Effect of stress tolerant plant growth promoting
rhizobacteria on growth of blackgram under stress condition. Int J Curr Microbiol App Sci 7(1):
1479–1487
Laforest-Lapointe I, Messier C, Kembel S (2016) Host species identity, site and time drive
temperate tree phyllosphere bacterial community structure. Microbiome 4(1):27. https://doi.
org/10.1186/s40168-016-0174-1
Lahlali R, Peng G (2014) Suppression of clubroot by C lonostachys rosea via antibiosis and induced
host resistance. Plant Pathol 63(2):447–455
Lamptey S, Ahiabor BDK, Yeboah S, Osei D (2014) Effect of Rhizobium inoculants and repro￾ductive growth stages on shoot biomass and yield of soybean (Glycine max (L.) Merril). J
Agricul Sci 6(5):44–54. https://doi.org/10.5539/jas.v6n5p44
Lata R, Chowdhury S, Gond SK, White JF (2018) Induction of abiotic stress tolerance in plants by
endophytic microbes. Let Appl Microbiol 66:268–276
Lebeis SL, Paredes SH, Lundberg DS, Breakfield N et al (2015) Plant microbiome. Salicylic acid
modulates colonization of the root microbiome by specific bacterial taxa. Science 349:860–864
Lemanceau P, Barret M, Mazurier S, Mondy S, Pivato B, Fort T, Vacher C (2017) Plant commu￾nication with associated microbiota in the spermosphere, rhizosphere and phyllosphere. Adv
Bot Res 82:101–133. https://doi.org/10.1016/bs.abr.2016.10.007. How plants communicate
with their biotic environment
Leveau JH (2015) Life of microbes on aerial plant parts. In: Principles of plant-microbe interactions.
Springer, Cham, pp 17–24
Li H, Luo N, Zhang LJ, Zhao HM, Li YW, Cai QY et al (2016) Do arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi
affect cadmium uptake kinetics, subcellular distribution and chemical forms in rice? Sci Total
Environ 571:1183–1190. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.07.124
Li C, Zhou J, Wang X, Liao H (2019) A purple acid phosphatase, GmPAP33, participates in
arbuscule degeneration during arbuscular mycorrhizal symbiosis in soybean. Plant Cell Environ
42(6):2015–2027
Liao X, Fang W, Lin L, Lu H-L, St. Leger RJ (2013) Metarhizium robertsii produces and
extracellular invertase (MrINV) that plays a pivotal role in rhizospheric interactions and root
colonization. PLoS One 8:1–11. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0078118
Lin A-J, Zhang X-H, Wong M-H, Ye Z-H, Lou L-Q, Wang Y-S, Zhu Y-G (2007) Increase of multi￾metal tolerance of three leguminous plants by arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi colonization.
Environ Geochem Health 29:473–481
Lin SY, Shen FT, Young LS, Zhu ZL, Chen WM, Young CC (2012) Azospirillum formosense
sp. nov., a diazotroph from agricultural soil. Int J syst Evol Microbiol 62(5):1185–1190
Lin SY, Liu YC, Hameed A, Hsu YH, Lai WA, Shen FT, Young CC (2013) Azospirillum
fermentarium sp. nov., a nitrogen-fixing species isolated from a fermenter. Int J syst Evol
Microbiol 63(10):3762–3768
Lin SY, Hameed A, Liu YC, Hsu YH, Lai WA, Shen FT, Young CC (2015) Azospirillum soli
sp. nov., a nitrogen-fixing species isolated from agricultural soil. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol
65(12):4601–4607198 S. Natesan et al.
Lin SY, Liu YC, Hameed A, Hsu YH, Huang HI, Lai WA, Young CC (2016) Azospirillum agricola
sp. nov., a nitrogen-fixing species isolated from cultivated soil. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol 66(3):
1453–1458
Lindow SE, Brandl MT (2003) Microbiology of the phyllosphere. Appl Environ Microbiol 69:
1875–1883. https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.69.4.1875-1883
Liu C, Ravnskov S, Liu F, Rubæk GH, Andersen MN (2018a) Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi
alleviate abiotic stresses in potato plants caused by low phosphorus and deficit irrigation/partial
root-zone drying. J Agric Sci 156:46–58. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0021859618000023
Liu Z, Beskrovnaya P, Melnyk RA, Hossain SS, Khorasani S, O’Sullivan LR, Haney CH (2018b) A
genome-wide screen identifies genes in rhizosphere-associated Pseudomonas required to evade
plant defenses. mBio 9(6):e00433-18. https://doi.org/10.1128/mBio.00433-18
Liu H, Brettell LE, Singh B (2020) Linking the phyllosphere microbiome to plant health. Trends
Plant Sci 25:41–844
López-Pedrosa A, Gonzalez-Guerrero M, Valderas A, Azcon-Aguilar C, Ferrol N (2006)
GintAMT1 encodes a functional high-affinity ammonium transporter that is expressed in the
extraradical mycelium of Glomus intraradices. Fungal Gene Biol 43:102–110. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.fgb.2005.10.005
Lynch MDJ, Neufeld JD (2015) Ecology and exploration of the rare biosphere. Nat Rev Microbiol
13:217–229
Maignien L, DeForce EA, Chafee ME, Eren AM, Simmons SL (2014) Ecological succession and
stochastic variation in the assembly of Arabidopsis thaliana phyllosphere communities. mBio 5
(1):e00682-13. https://doi.org/10.1128/mBio.00682-13
Maina UM, Galadima IB, Gambo FM, Zakaria D (2018) A review on the use of entomopathogenic
fungi in the management of insect pests of field crops. J Entomol Zool Stud 6(1):27–32
Maldonado-Mendoza IE, Harrison MJ (2018) RiArsB and RiMT-11: two novel genes induced by
arsenate in arbuscular mycorrhiza. Fungal Biol 122(2-3):121–130
Maldonado-Mendoza I, Dewbre G, Harrison M (2001) A phosphate transporter gene from the extra￾radical mycelium of an arbuscular mycorrhizal fungus. Mol Plant Microbe Interact 14(10):
1140–1148. https://doi.org/10.1094/MPMI.2001.14.10.1140
Manching HC, Balint-Kurti PJ, Stapleton AE (2014) Southern leaf blight disease severity is
correlated with decreased maize leaf epiphytic bacterial species richness and the phyllosphere
bacterial diversity decline is enhanced by nitrogen fertilization. Front Plant Sci 5:403. https://
doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2014.00403
Marschner P (2012) Chapter 15—rhizosphere biology. In: Marschner’s mineral nutrition of higher
plants, 3rd edn. Academic, San Diego, pp 369–388
Martin F, Aerts A, Ahren D, Brun A, Danchin EGJ, Duchaussoy F, Gibon J, Kohler A, Lindquist E,
Pereda V et al (2008) The genome of Laccariabicolor provides insights into mycorrhizal
symbiosis. Nature 452:88–92
Martinuz A, Schouten A, Sikora R (2012) Systemically induced resistance and microbial compet￾itive exclusion: implications on biological control. Phytopathology 102:260–266. https://doi.
org/10.1094/PHYTO-04-11-0120
Mathur S, Sharma MP, Jajoo A (2016) Improved photosynthetic efficacy of maize Zea mays plants
with arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (AMF) under high temperature stress. J Photochem Photobiol
B 180:149–154. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jphotobiol.2018.02.002
McNear DH Jr (2013) The rhizosphere—roots, soil and everything in between. Nat Educ Knowl
4(3):1
Meena RK, Singh RK, Singh NP et al (2015) Isolation of low temperature surviving plant growth–
promoting rhizobacteria (PGPR) from pea (Pisum sativum L.) and documentation of their plant
growth promoting traits. Biocat Agric Biotechnol 4:806–811
Meena RS, Kumar S, Datta R, Lal R, Vijayakumar V, Brtnicky M, Sharma MP, Yadav GS, Jhariya
MK, Jangir CK, Pathan SI, Dokulilova T, Pecina V, Marfo TD (2020) Impact of agrochemicals
on soil microbiota and management: a review. Land 9:34. https://doi.org/10.3390/land90200347 The Beneficial Plant Microbial Association for Sustainable Agriculture 199
Mehnaz S (2015) Azospirillum: a biofertilizer for every crop. In: Plant microbes symbiosis: applied
facets. Springer, New Delhi, pp 297–314
Mehnaz S, Weselowski B, Lazarovits G (2007) Azospirillum zeae sp. nov., a diazotrophic bacte￾rium isolated from rhizosphere soil of Zea mays. Int J Sys Evol Microbiol 57(12):2805–2809
Mejia LC, Herre EA, Sparks JP, Winter K, Garcia MN, Van Bael SA et al (2014) Pervasive effects
of a dominant foliar endophytic fungus on host genetic and phenotypic expression in a tropical
tree. Front Microbiol 5:479. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2014.00479
Mendes R, Garbeva P, Raaijmakers JM (2013) The rhizosphere microbiome: significance of plant
beneficial, plant pathogenic, and human pathogenic microorganisms. FEMS Microbiol Rev
37(5):634–663. https://doi.org/10.1111/1574-6976.12028
Méndez-Gómez M, Castro-Mercado E, Alexandre G, García-Pineda E (2015) Oxidative and
antioxidative responses in the wheat-Azospirillum brasilense interaction. Protoplasma 253:
477–486
Metwally A, Azooz M, Nafady N, El-Enany A (2019) Arbuscular mycorrhizal symbiosis alleviates
drought stress imposed on wheat plants (Triticum aestivum L.). Appl Ecol Environ Res 17
(6):13713–13727
Mian IA, Riaz M, Cresser MS (2009) The importance of ammonium mobility in nitrogen-impacted
unfertilized grasslands: a critical reassessment. Environ Pollut 157(4):1287–1293. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.envpol.2008.11.041
Michavila G, Adler C, De Gregorio PR et al (2017) Pseudomonas protegens CS1 from the lemon
phyllosphere as a candidate for citrus canker biocontrol agent. Plant Biol 19:608–617
Milošević N, Tintor B, Protić R, Cvijanovic G, Dimitrijević T (2012) Effect of inoculation with
Azotobacter chroococcum on wheat yield and seed quality. Romanian Biotechnol Lett 17(3):
7352–7357
Mina D, Pereira J, Lino-Neto T, Baptista P (2020) Epiphytic and endophytic bacteria on olive tree
phyllosphere: exploring tissue and cultivar effect. Microbial Ecol 80(1):145–157
Miransari M (2017) Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi and heavy metal tolerance in plants. In: Wu QS
(ed) Arbuscular mycorrhizas and stress tolerance of plants. Springer Nature, Singapore, pp
161–174. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-68867-1_4
Mirshad P, Puthur J (2017) Drought tolerance of bioenergy grass Saccharum spontaneum
L. enhanced by arbuscular mycorrhizae. Rhizosphere 3(1):1–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
rhisph.2016.09.004
Miyamoto T, Kawahara M, Minamisawa K (2004) Novel endophytic nitrogen-fixing clostridia
from the grass Miscanthus sinensis as revealed by terminal restriction fragment length poly￾morphism analysis. Appl Environ Microbiol 70(11):6580–6586
Moghadam SK, Bahadoran Z, Mirmiran P, Tohidi M, Azizi F (2016) Association between dietary
acid load and insulin resistance: tehran lipid and glucose study. Prev Nutr Food Sci 21(2):
104–109. https://doi.org/10.3746/pnf.2016.21.2.104
Mohan Gupta S, Kumar K, Kumar Joshi R, Gupta S, Bala M (2020) Frankia: a promising N-fixing
plant growth promoting rhizobacteria (PGPR) improved drought tolerance in crops at higher
altitude. In: Microbiological advancements for higher altitude agro-ecosystems & sustainability.
Springer, Singapore, pp 411–431
Molina-Favero C, Creus CM, Simontacchi M, Puntarulo S, Lamattina L (2008) Aerobic nitric oxide
production by Azospirillum brasilense Sp245 and its influence on root architecture in tomato.
Mol Plant Microbe Int 21(7):1001–1009
Moradtalab N, Roghieh H, Nasser A, Tobias EH, Günter N (2019) Silicon and the association with
an arbuscular-mycorrhizal fungus (Rhizophagus clarus) mitigate the adverse effects of drought
stress on strawberry. Agronomy 9:41. https://doi.org/10.3390/agronomy9010041
Morris CE, Kinkel LL (2002) Fifty years of phyllosphere microbiology: significant contributions to
research in related fields. In: Lindow SE, Hecht-Poinar EI, Elliott VJ (eds) Phyllosphere
microbiology. APS Press, St Paul, pp 365–375200 S. Natesan et al.
Muleta D (2017) Legume response to arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi inoculation in sustainable
agriculture. In: Zaidi A, Khan M, Musarrat J (eds) Microbes for legume improvement.
Springer, Cham
Müller T, Ruppel S (2014) Progress in cultivation-independent phyllosphere microbiology. FEMS
Microbiol Ecol 87:2–17. https://doi.org/10.1111/1574-6941.12198
Müller D, Vogel C, Bai Y, Vorholt J (2016a) The plant microbiota: systems-level insights and
perspectives. Annual Rev Gene 50(1):211–234
Müller T, Behrendt U, Ruppel S, von der Waydbrink G, Müller ME (2016b) Fluorescent pseudo￾monads in the phyllosphere of wheat: potential antagonists against fungal phytopathogens. Curr
Microbiol 72(4):383–389
Nalini MS, Prakash HS (2017) Diversity and bioprospecting of actinomycete endophytes from the
medicinal plants. Lett Appl Microbiol 64(4):261–270
Navarrete AA, Tsai SM, Mendes LW, Faust K et al (2015) Soil microbiome responses to the short￾term effects of Amazonian deforestation. Mol Ecol 24:2433–2448
Neinhuis C, Barthlott W (1997) Characterization and distribution of water-repellent, self-cleaning
plant surfaces. Annals Bot 79:667–677
Newcomb W, Wood SM (1987) Morphogenesis and fine structure of Frankia (Actinomycetales):
the microsymbiont of nitrogen-fixing actinorhizal root nodules. Int Rev Cytol 109:1–88. https://
doi.org/10.1016/s0074-7696(08)61719-2. PMID: 3323105
Ngom M, Gray K, Diagne N, Oshone R, Fardoux J, Gherbi H, Valérie H, Sergio S, Laurent L, Tisa
Louis S, Sy Mame O, Champion A (2016) Symbiotic performance of diverse Frankia strains on
salt-stressed Casuarina glauca and Casuarina equisetifolia plants. Front Plant Sci 7:1331
Nguyen TD, Cavagnaro TR, Watts-Williams SJ (2019) The effects of soil phosphorus and zinc
availability on plant responses to mycorrhizal fungi: a physiological and molecular assessment.
Sci Rep 9:14880. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-51369-5
Ngwene B, Elke G, Eckhard G (2013) Influence of different mineral nitrogen sources
(NO3-N vs. NH4+–N) on arbuscular mycorrhiza development and N transfer in a Glomus
intraradices–cowpea symbiosis. Mycorrhiza 23:107–117
Nord EA, Lynch JP (2009) Plant phenology: a critical controller of soil resource acquisition. J Exp
Bot 60:1927–1937
Nouioui I, Ghodhbane-Gtari F, Montero-Calasanz MD, Göker M et al (2016) Proposal of a type
strain for Frankia alni (Woronin 1866) Von Tubeuf 1895, emended description of Frankia alni,
and recognition of Frankia casuarinae sp. nov. and Frankia elaeagni sp. nov. Int J Syst Evol
Microbiol 66:5201–5210. https://doi.org/10.1099/ijsem.0.001496
Nouioui I, Cortés-albayay C, Carro L, Castro JF, Gtari M, Ghodhbane-Gtari F, Klenk H-P, Tisa LS,
Sangal V, Goodfellow M (2019) Genomic insights into plant growth-promoting potentialities of
the genus Frankia. Front Microbiol 10:1457. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2019.01457
Obertello M, Sy MO, Laplaze L et al (2003) Actinorhizal nitrogen fixing nodules: infection process,
molecular biology and genomics. African J Biotechnol. 2(12):528–538
Odelade KA, Babalola OO (2019) Bacteria, Fungi and Archaea domains in rhizospheric soil and
their effects in enhancing agricultural productivity. Int J Environ Res Public Health 16(20):
3873. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph16203873
Oldroyd GE (2013) Speak, friend, and enter: signalling systems that promote beneficial symbiotic
associations in plants. Nat Rev Microbiol 11:252–264. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrmicro2990
Oldroyd GE, Murray JD, Poole PS, Downie JA (2011) The rules of engagement in the legume￾rhizobial symbiosis. Annu Rev Genet 45:119–144. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-genet￾110410-132549
Oleńska E, Małek W, Wójcik M, Swiecicka I, Thijs S, Vangronsveld J (2020) Beneficial features of
plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria for improving plant growth and health in challenging
conditions: a methodical review. Sci Total Environ 743:140682
Olle M, Lepse L, Williams I (2016) Organic farming of pea in the northern hemisphere—a revieiv.
Acta Hortic 1123:137–141. https://doi.org/10.17660/ActaHortic.2016.1123.197 The Beneficial Plant Microbial Association for Sustainable Agriculture 201
Orchard S, Hilton S, Bending GD, Dickie IA, Standish RJ, Gleeson DB, Jeffery RP, Powell JR,
Walker C, Bass D, Monk J, Simonin A, Ryan MH (2017) Fine endophytes (Glomus tenue) are
related to Mucoromycotina, not Glomeromycota. New Phytol 213:481–486. https://doi.org/10.
1111/nph.14268
Ordookhani K, Khavazi K, Moezzi A, Rejali F (2010) Influence of PGPR and AMF on antioxidant
activity, lycopene and potassium contents in tomato. African J Agricul Res 5(10):1108–1116
Orozco-Mosqueda MC, Flores A, Rojas-Sánchez B, Urtis-Flores CA, Morales-Cedeño LR,
Valencia-Marin MF, Chávez-Avila S, Rojas-Solis D, Santoyo G (2021) Plant growth-promoting
bacteria as bioinoculants: attributes and challenges for sustainable crop improvement. Agron￾omy 11(6):1167. https://doi.org/10.3390/agronomy11061167
Ottesen A, González Peña A, White J, Pettengill J, Li C, Allard S, Rideout S, Allard M, Hill T,
Evans P, Strain E, Musser S, Knight R, Brown E (2013) Baseline survey of the anatomical
microbial ecology of an important food plant: Solanum lycopersicum (tomato). BMC Microbiol
13(1):114
Oukala N, Aissat K, Pastor V (2021) Bacterial endophytes: the hidden actor in plant immune
responses against biotic stress. Plants 10(5):1012
Owen D, Williams A, Griffith G, Withers P (2015) Use of commercial bio-inoculants to increase
agricultural production through improved phosphrous acquisition. Appl Soil Ecol 86:41–54
Oyserman BO, Medema MH, Raaijmakers JM (2018) Road MAPs to engineer host microbiomes.
Curr Opin Microbiol 43:46–54
Pal A, Pandey S (2016) Role of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi on plant growth and reclamation of
barren soil with wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) crop. Int. J Soil Sci 12(1):25–31
Paterson E, Gebbing T, Abel C, Sim A, Telfer G (2007) Rhizodeposition shapes rhizosphere
microbial community structure in organic soil. New Phytol 173(3):600–610
Pawlak K, Kołodziejczak M (2020) The role of agriculture in ensuring food security in developing
countries: considerations in the context of the problem of sustainable food production. Sustain￾ability 12:5488. https://doi.org/10.3390/su12135488
Pawlowski K, Demchenko KN (2012) The diversity of actinorhizal symbiosis. Protoplasma 249(4):
967–979
Pawlowski K, Jacobsen KR, Alloisio N et al (2007) Truncated hemoglobins in actinorhizal nodules
of Datisca glomerata. Plant Biol 9:776–785. https://doi.org/10.1055/s-2007-965258
Peck MC, Fisher RF, Long SR (2006) Diverse flavonoids stimulate NodD1 binding to nod gene
promoters in Sinorhizobium meliloti. J Bacteriol 188:5417–5427
Peng G, Wang H, Zhang G, Hou W, Liu Y, Wang ET, Tan Z (2006) Azospirillum melinis sp. nov.,
a group of diazotrophs isolated from tropical molasses grass. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol 56(6):
1263–1271
Peng XN, Gilmore SP, O’Malley MA (2016) Microbial communities for bioprocessing: lessons
learned from nature. Curr Opin Chem Eng 14:103–109. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.coche.2016.
09.003
Pérez-Tienda J, Testillano PS, Balestrini R, Fiorilli V, Azcón-Aguilar C, Ferrol N (2011)
GintAMT2, a new member of the ammonium transporter family in the arbuscular mycorrhizal
fungus Glomus intraradices. Fungal Genet Biol 48:1044–1055. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fgb.
2011.08.003
Photita W, Lumyong S, Lumyong P, McKenzie EHC, Hyde KD (2005) Are some fungi isolated as
endophytes of Musa acuminata latent pathogens? Fungal Divers 16:131–140
Porcel R, Redondogómez S, Mateosnaranjo E, Aroca R, Garcia R, Ruizlozano JM (2015)
Arbuscular mycorrhizal symbiosis ameliorates the optimum quantum yield of photosystem II
and reduces non-photochemical quenching in rice plants subjected to salt stress. J Plant Physiol
185:75–83. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jplph.2015.07.006
Porcel R, Aroca R, Azcon R, Ruiz-Lozano J (2016) Regulation of cation transporter genes by the
arbuscular mycorrhizal symbiosis in rice plants subjected to salinity suggests improved salt
tolerance due to reduced Na+ root-to-shoot distribution. Mycorrhiza 26(7):673–684202 S. Natesan et al.
Porras-Alfaro A, Bayman P (2011) Hidden fungi, emergent properties: endophytes and
microbiomes. Annu Rev Phytopathol 49:291–315
Poveda K, Jiménez MIG, Kessler A (2010) The enemy as ally: herbivore-induced increase in crop
yield. Ecol Appl 20(7):1787–1793
Poveda J, Eugui D, Abril-Urías P, Velasco P (2021) Endophytic fungi as direct plant growth
promoters for sustainable agricultural production. Symbiosis 85(1):1–19
Powell WA, Klingeman WE, Ownley BH, Gwinn KD (2009) Evidence of endophytic Beauveria
bassiana in seed-treated tomato plants acting as a systemic entomopathogen to larval Helicover
pazea (Lepidoptera: Noctuidae). J Entomol Sci 44(4):391–396
Prasad R, Zhang S-H (2022) Benefical microorganisms in agriculture. Springer, Singapore. https://
link.springer.com/book/9789811907326
Prasad R, Kumar M, Varma A (2015) Role of PGPR in soil fertility and plant health. In:
Egamberdieva D, Shrivastava S, Varma A (eds) Plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria
(PGPR) and medicinal plants. Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp 247–260
Prasad R, Kumar V, Kumar M, Choudhary D (2019) Nanobiotechnology in bioformulations.
Springer International Publishing. ISBN 978-3-030-17061-5. https://www.springer.com/gp/
book/9783030170608
Puente ML, Gualpa JL, Lopez GA, Molina RM, Carletti SM, Cassán FD (2017) The benefits of
foliar inoculation with Azospirillum brasilense in soybean are explained by an auxin signaling
model. Symbiosis 76:41–49
Punamiya P, Datta R, Sarkar D, Barber S, Patel M, Das P (2010) Symbiotic role of glomus mosseae
in phytoextraction of lead in vetiver grass [Chrysopogon zizanioides (L.)]. J Hazard Mater
177(1–3):465–447
Pusey PL, Wend C (2012) Potential of osmoadaptation for improving Pantoeaag glomerans E325
as biocontrol agent for fire blight of apple and pear. Biol Control 62(1):29–37
Qayyum MA, Wakil W, Arif MJ, Sahi ST, Dunlap CA (2015) Infection of Helicoverpa armigera by
endophytic Beauveria bassiana colonizing tomato plants. Biol. Control 90:200–207. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.biocontrol.2015.04.005
Qin Y, Druzhinina IS, Pan X, Yuan Z (2016) Microbially mediated plant salt tolerance and
microbiome-based solutions for saline agriculture. Biotechnol Adv 34(7):1245–1259
Qin C, Tao J, Liu T et al (2019) Responses of phyllosphere microbiota and plant health to
application of two different biocontrol agents. AMB Expr 9:42. https://doi.org/10.1186/
s13568-019-0765-x
Quan M, Liang J (2017) The influences of four types of soil on the growth, physiological and
biochemical characteristics of Lycoris aurea (L’ Her.). Herb Scie Rep 7(1):43284. https://doi.
org/10.1038/srep43284
Quesada-Moraga E, Munoz-Ledesma FJ, Santiago-Alvarez C (2009) Systemic protection of
Papaver somniferum L. against Iraellaluteipes (Hymenoptera: Cynipidae) by an endophytic
strain of Beauveria bassiana (Ascomycota: Hypocreales). Environ Entomol 38(3):723–730
Rana KL, Kour D, Kaur T, Devi R, Yadav AN, Yadav N et al (2020) Endophytic microbes:
biodiversity, plant growth-promoting mechanisms and potential applications for agricultural
sustainability. Antonie Van Leeuwenhoek 113:1075–1107
Rani B (2016) Effect of arbuscular mycorrhiza fungi on biochemical parameters in wheat Triticum
aestivum L. under drought conditions. Front Plant Sci 10:499. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2019.
00499. Doctoral dissertation, CCSHAU, Hisardrought stress in C3 (Leymus chinensis) and C4
(Hemarthria altissima) grasses via altering antioxidant enzyme activities and photosynthesis.
Ranjbar Sistani N, Kaul H-P, Desalegn G, Wienkoop S (2017) Rhizobium impacts on seed
productivity, quality, and protection of pisum sativum upon disease stress caused by
didymellapinodes: phenotypic, proteomic, and metabolomic traits. Front Plant Sci 8:1961.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2017.01961
Rascio N, La Rocca N (2008) Biological nitrogen fixation. In: Jørgensen SE, Fath BD (eds)
Encyclopedia of ecology. Academic, Oxford, pp 412–4197 The Beneficial Plant Microbial Association for Sustainable Agriculture 203
Rastogi G, Sbodio A, Tech JJ, Suslow TV, Coaker GL, Leveau JH (2012) Leaf microbiota in an
agroecosystem: spatiotemporal variation in bacterial community composition on field-grown
lettuce. ISME J 6(10):1812–1822
Rastogi G, Coaker GL, Leveau JHJ (2013) New insights into the structure and function of
phyllosphere microbiota through high-throughput molecular approaches. FEMS Microbiol
Lett 348(1):1–10. https://doi.org/10.1111/1574-6968.12225
Ren CG, Bai YJ, Kong CC et al (2016) Synergistic interactions between salt-tolerant rhizobia and
arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi on salinity tolerance of Sesbania cannabina plants. J Plant Growth
Regul 35:1098–1107. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00344-016-9607-0
Resquín-Romero G, Garrido-Jurado I, Delso C, Ríos-Moreno A, Quesada-Moraga E (2016)
Transient endophytic colonizations of plants improves the outcome of foliar applications of
mycoinsecticides against chewing insects. J. Invertebr Pathol 136:23–31. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.jip.2016.03.003
Rico L, Ogaya R, Terradas J, Peñuelas J (2014) Community structures of N2-fixing bacteria
associated with the phyllosphere of a Holm oak forest and their response to drought. Plant
Biol 16:586–593
Ripa F, Cao W, Tong S, Sun J (2019) Assessment of plant growth promoting and abiotic stress
tolerance properties of wheat endophytic fungi. Bio Med Resh Int 2019:6105865. https://doi.
org/10.1155/2019/6105865
Ritika B, Utpal D (2014) Biofertilizer, a way towards organic agriculture: a review. African J
Microbiol Res 8:2332–2343. https://doi.org/10.5897/AJMR2013.6374
Rodriguez RJ, Woodward C, Kim YO, Redman RS (2009) Habitat-adapted symbiosis as a defense
against abiotic and biotic stresses. In: White JF, Torres MS (eds) Defensive mutualism in
microbial symbiosis. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, pp 335–346
Rodríguez-Navarro D, Oliver M, Albareda Contreras J, Ruiz-Sainz E (2011) Soybean interactions
with soil microbes, agronomical and molecular aspects. Agron Sustain Dev 31(1):173–190.
https://doi.org/10.1051/agro/2010023.hal-00930474
Rodríguez-Salazar J, Suárez R, Caballero-Mellado J, Iturriaga G (2009) Trehalose accumulation in
Azospirillum brasilense improves drought tolerance and biomass in maize plants. FEMS
Microbiol Lett 296(1):52–59
Romero-Perdomo F, Abril J, Camelo M, Moreno-Galván A, Pastrana I, Rojas-Tapias D et al (2017)
Azotobacter chroococcum as a potentially useful bacterial biofertilizer for cotton (Gossypium
hirsutum): effect in reducing N fertilization. Rev Argent Microbiol 49:377–383. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ram.2017.04.006
Ruiz-Lozano J, Aroca R, Zamarreño Á, Molina S, Andreo-Jiménez B, Porcel R, García-Mina J,
Ruyter-Spira C, López-Ráez J (2015) Arbuscular mycorrhizal symbiosis induces strigolactone
biosynthesis under drought and improves drought tolerance in lettuce and tomato. Plant Cell
Environ 39(2):441–452
Ruttenberg KC (2003) The global phosphorus cycle. Treatise Geochem 8:585–643. https://doi.org/
10.1016/B0-08-043751-6/08153-6
Ryan P, Dessaux Y, Thomashow L, Weller D (2009) Rhizosphere engineering and management for
sustainable agriculture. Plant Soil 321(1-2):363–383
Saeed KA, Ahmed SA, Hassan IA, Ahmed PH (2015) Effect of bio-fertilizer and chemical fertilizer
on growth and yield in cucumber (Cucumis sativus L.) in green house condition. Am Eurasian J
Agric Environ Sci 15:353–358. https://doi.org/10.3923/pjbs.2015.129.134
Saha B, Saha S, Das A, Bhattacharyya P, Basak N, Sinha A et al (2017) Biological nitrogen fixation
for sustainable agriculture. In: Meena VS (ed) Agriculturally important microbes for sustainable
agriculture. Springer, Singapore, pp 81–128. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-5343-6_4
Saharan BS, Nehra V (2011) Plant growth promoting rhizobacteria: a critical review. Life Sci Med
Res 21(1):30
Sahoo RK, Ansari MW, Pradhan M, Dangar TK, Mohanty S, Tuteja N (2014) Phenotypic and
molecular characterization of native Azospirillum strains from rice fields to improve crop
productivity. Protoplasma 251(4):943–953204 S. Natesan et al.
Saikkonen K (2007) Forest structure and fungal endophytes. Fungal Biol Rev. 21:67–74
Sánchez-Rodríguez AR, Raya-Díaz S, Zamarreño ÁM, García-Mina JM, Del Campillo MC,
Quesada-Moraga E (2018) An endophytic Beauveria bassiana strain increases spike production
in bread and durum wheat plants and effectively controls cotton leafworm (Spodoptera
littoralis) larvae. Biol Control 116:90–102. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biocontrol.2017.01.012
Santander C, Sanhueza M, Olave J, Borie F, Valentine C, Cornejo P (2019) Arbuscular mycorrhizal
colonization promotes the tolerance to salt stress in lettuce plants through an efficient modifi￾cation of ionic balance. J Soil Sci Plant Nutr 19(2):321–331. https://doi.org/10.1007/s42729-
019-00032-z
Santhanam R, Luu VT, Weinhold A, Goldberg J, Oh Y, Baldwin IT (2015) Native root-associated
bacteria rescue a plant from a sudden-wilt disease that emerged during continuous cropping.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 112:E5013–E5020
Santi C, Bogusz D, Franche C (2013) Biological nitrogen fixation in non-legume plants. Annals Bot
111(5):743–767. https://doi.org/10.1093/aob/mct048
Santos Kron A, Zengerer V, Bieri M, Dreyfuss V, Sostizzo T, Schmid M, Lutz M, Remus￾Emsermann MN, Pelludat C (2020) Pseudomonas orientalis F9 pyoverdine, safracin, and
phenazine mutants remain effective antagonists against Erwinia amylovora in apple flowers.
Appl Environ Microbiol 86(8):e02620-19
Santoyo G, Orozco-Mosqueda MDC, Govindappa M (2012) Mechanisms of biocontrol and plant
growth-promoting activity in soil bacterial species of Bacillus and Pseudomonas: a review.
Biocontrol Sci Technol 22:855–872
Saribay GF (2003) Growth and nitrogen fixation dynamic of azotobacter chroococcum in nitrogen￾free and OMW containing medium [M.S.- Master of Science]. Middle East Technical
University.
Sarkar A, Mandal AR, Prasad PH, Maity TK, Chandra B, Viswavidyalaya K et al (2010) Influence
of nitrogen and biofertilizer on growth and yield of cabbage. J Crop Weed 6:72–73
Sarma I, Phookan DB, Boruah S (2015) Influence of manures and biofertilizers on carrot (Daucus
carota L.) cv. early nantes growth, yield and quality. J Ecofriendly Agric 10:25–27
Schüßler A, Martin H, Cohen D, Fitz M, Wipf D (2007) Arbuscular Mycorrhiza-Studies on the
geosiphon symbiosis lead to the characterization of the first Glomeromycotan sugar transporter.
Plant Signal Behavior 2(5):431–434
Sekar J, Raj R, Vaiyapuri PR (2016) Microbial consortia for sustainable agriculture: commercial￾ization and regulatory issues in India. In: Singh HB et al (eds) Agriculturally important
microorganisms. Springer Science, Business Media, Singapore, pp 107–131
Sendek A, Karakoç C, Wagg C et al (2019) Drought modulates interactions between arbuscular
mycorrhizal fungal diversity and barley genotype diversity. Sci Rep 9:9650. https://doi.org/10.
1038/s41598-019-45702-1
Shantharam S, Mattoo AK (1997) Enhancing biological nitrogen fixation: an appraisal of current
and alternative technologies for N input into plants. Plant Soil 194:205–216
Shao J, Miao Y, Liu K, Ren Y, Xu Z, Zhang N, Feng H, Shen Q, Zhang R, Xun W (2021)
Rhizosphere microbiome assembly involves seed-borne bacteria in compensatory phosphate
solubilization. Soil Biol Biochem 159:108273
Sharma S, Shukla KP, Singh V, Singh J, Devi S, Tewari A (2013) Plant-microbe symbiosis:
perspectives and applications. In: Arora NK (ed) Plant microbe symbiosis: fundamentals and
advances. Springer, New Delhi, pp 119–145
Sheng M, Tang M, Zhang F, Huang Y (2011) Influence of arbuscular mycorrhiza on organic solutes
in maize leaves under salt stress. Mycorrhiza 21:423–430. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00572-010-
0353-z
Siegel MR, Latch GCM, Bush LP, Fannin FF, Rowan DD, Tapper BA, Johnson MC (1990) Fungal
endophyte-infected grasses: alkaloid accumulation and aphid response. J Chemical Ecol 16(12):
3301–33157 The Beneficial Plant Microbial Association for Sustainable Agriculture 205
Singh R, Dubey AK (2018) Diversity and applications of endophytic actinobacteria of plants in
special and other ecological niches. Front Microbiol 9:1767. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.
2018.01767
Singh BP, Hatton BJ, Balwant S, Cowie AL, Kathuria A (2010) Influence of biochars on nitrous
oxide emission and nitrogen leaching from two contrasting soils. J Environ Qual 39:1224–1235.
https://doi.org/10.2134/jeq2009.0138
Singh A, Sarma BK, Upadhyay RS, Singh HB (2013) Compatible rhizosphere microbes mediated
alleviation of biotic stress in chickpea through enhanced antioxidant and phenylpropanoid
activities. Microbiol Res 168(1):33–40
Singh A, Maji S, Kumar S (2014) Effect of biofertilizers on yield and biomolecules of anti￾cancerous vegetable broccoli. Int J Bioresour Stress Manag 5:262. https://doi.org/10.5958/
0976-4038.2014.00565.x
Singh R, Jha P, Jha P (2015a) The plant-growth-promoting bacterium Klebsiella sp. SBP-8 confers
induced systemic tolerance in wheat (Triticum aestivum) under salt stress. J Plant Physiol 184:
57–67
Singh SK, Sharma HR, Shukla A, Singh U, Thakur A (2015b) Effect of biofertilizers and mulch on
growth, yield and quality of tomato in mid-hills of Himachal Pradesh. Int J Farm Sci 5:98–110
Singh S, Parihar P, Singh R, Singh VP, Prasad SM (2016) Heavy metal tolerance in plants: role of
transcriptomics, proteomics, metabolomics, and ionomics. Front Plant Sci 6:1143. https://doi.
org/10.3389/fpls.2015.01143
Sinsabaugh RL (2010) Phenol oxidase, peroxidase and organic matter dynamics of soil. Soil Biol
Biochem 42:391–404
Sivakumar N, Sathishkumar R, Selvakumar G, Shyamkumar R, Arjunekumar K (2020)
Phyllospheric microbiomes: diversity, ecological significance, and biotechnological applica￾tions. Plant Microb Sust Agricult. pp 113–172. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-38453-1_5
Smith SE, Read DJ (eds) (1997) Mycorrhizal symbiosis. Academic, London, p 13
Smith SE, Read DJ (2008) Mycorrhizal symbiosis, 3rd edn. Academic, London
Smith SE, Smith FA (2011) Roles of arbuscular mycorrhizas in plant nutrition and growth: new
paradigms from cellular to ecosystem scales. Annu Rev Plant Biol 62:227–250
Smith FA, Grace EJ, Smith SE (2009) More than a carbon economy: nutrient trade and ecological
sustainability in facultative arbuscular mycorrhizal symbioses. New Phytol 182:347–358
Spaepen S, Vanderleyden J (2015) Auxin signaling in Azospirillum brasilense: a proteome
analysis. In: Biological nitrogen fixation. Wiley, New York, pp 937–940. https://doi.org/10.
1002/9781119053095.ch91
Sprent JI (2009) Legume nodulation: a global perspective. Wiley, Hoboken, NJ. 1-4443-1639-7.
Sreekanth D, Kristin IM, Brett AN (2017) Endophytic fungi from Cathranthus roseus: a potential
resource for the discovery of antimicrobial polyketides. Nat Prod Chem Res 5:256
Sridhar K, Rajesh V, Omprakash S, Prathyusha C, Devi KS (2014) A critical review on organic
farming of vegetables. Int J Appl Biol Pharm Technol 5(1):216–221
Stanton DE, Batterman SA, Von Fischer JC, Hedin LO (2019) Rapid nitrogen fixation by canopy
microbiome in tropical forest determined by both phosphorus and molybdenum. Ecology
100(9):e02795
Steenhoudt O, Vanderleyden J (2000) Azospirillum, a free-living nitrogen-fixing bacterium closely
associated with grasses: genetic, biochemical and ecological aspects. FEMS Microbiol Rev
24(4):487–506
Steven B, Huntley R, Zeng Q (2018) The influence of flower anatomy and apple cultivar on the
apple flower phytobiome. Phytobiom J 2(3):171–179
Stone B, Weingarten E, Jackson C (2018) The role of the phyllosphere microbiome in plant health
and function. Annual Plant Rev:533–556
Strobel G, Daisy B (2003) Bioprospecting for microbial endophytes and their natural products.
Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 67:491–502
Strzelczyk E, Kampert M, Li CY (1994) Cytokinin-like substances and ethylene production by
Azospirillum in media with different carbon sources. Microbiol Res 149(1):55–60206 S. Natesan et al.
Sulieman S, Tran LSP (2013) Asparagine: an amide of particular distinction in the regulation of
symbiotic nitrogen fixation of legumes. Crit Rev Biotechnol 33:309–327
Sumbul A, Ansari RA, Rizvi R, Mahmood I (2020) Azotobacter: a potential bio-fertilizer for soil
and plant health management. Saudi J Biol Sci 27:3634–3640. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sjbs.
2020.08.004
Sun C, Johnson JM, Cai D, Sherameti I, Oelmüller R, Lou B (2010) Piriformospora indica confers
drought tolerance in Chinese cabbage leaves by stimulating antioxidant enzymes, the expression
of drought-related genes and the plastid-localized CAS protein. J Plant Physiol 167(12):
1009–1017. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jplph.2010.02.013
Taghavi S, Barac T, Greenberg B, Borremans B, Vangronsveld J, van Der Lelie D (2005)
Horizontal gene transfer to endogenous endophytic bacteria from poplar improved phyto￾remediation of toluene. Appl Environ Microbiol 71:8500–8505
Tahat MMM, Alananbeh KA, Othman YI, Leskovar D (2020) Soil health and sustainable agricul￾ture. Sustainability 12(12):4859. https://doi.org/10.3390/su12124859
Tajini F, Trabelsi M, Drevon JJ (2012) Combined inoculation with Glomus intraradices and
Rhizobium tropici CIAT899 increases phosphorus use efficiency for symbiotic nitrogen fixation
in common bean (Phaseolus vulgaris L.). Saudi J Biol Scie 19(2):157–163
Tamayo E, Gómez-Gallego T, Azcón-Aguilar C, Ferrol N (2014) Genome-wide analysis of copper,
iron and zinc transporters in the arbuscular mycorrhizal fungus Rhizophagus irregularis. Front
Plant Sci 2014(14):55
Tatry M, Kassis EE, Lambilliotte R, Corratgé C, Van Aarle I, Amenc LK, Alary R, Zimmermann S,
Sentenac H, Plassard C (2009) Two differentially regulated phosphate transporters from the
symbiotic fungus Hebeloma cylindrosporum and phosphorus acquisition by ectomycorrhizal
Pinus pinaster. Plant J 57:1092–1102
Tecon R, Leveau J (2016) Symplasmata are a clonal, conditional, and reversible type of bacterial
multicellularity. Scie Rep 6(1):31914
Tecon R, Ebrahimi A, Kleyer H, Erev Levi S, Or D (2018) Cell-to-cell bacterial interactions
promoted by drier conditions on soil surfaces. Proc Nat Acad Sci 115(39):9791–9796
Tena W, Wolde-Meskel E, Walley F (2016) Symbiotic efficiency of native and exotic rhizobium
strains nodulating lentil (Lens culinaris Medik.) in soils of Southern Ethiopia. Agronomy 6(1):
11. https://doi.org/10.3390/agronomy6010011
Thaiss CA, Zmora N, Levy M, Elinav E (2016) The microbiome and innate immunity. Nature 535:
65–74
Thapa S, Prasanna R (2018) Prospecting the characteristics and significance of the phyllosphere
microbiome. Ann Microbiol 68(5):229–245. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13213-018-1331-5
Thapa S, Prasanna R (2018) Prospecting the characteristics and significance of the phyllosphere
microbiome. Ann Microbiol 68(5):229–245
Thapa S, Prasanna R, Ranjan K, Velmourougane K, Ramakrishnan B (2017) Nutrients and host
attributes modulate the abundance and functional traits of phyllosphere microbiome in rice.
Microbiol Res 204:55–64
Tien TM, Gaskins MH, Hubbell D (1979) Plant growth substances produced by Azospirillum
brasilense and their effect on the growth of pearl millet (Pennisetum americanum L.). Appl
Environ Microbiol 37(5):1016–1024
Tikhonova EN, Grouzdev DS, Kravchenko IK (2019) Azospirillum palustre sp. nov., a
methylotrophic nitrogen-fixing species isolated from raised bog. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol
69(9):2787–2793
Timmusk S, Behers L, Muthoni J, Muraya A, Aronsson A-C (2017) Perspectives and challenges of
microbial application for crop improvement. Front Plant Sci 8:49. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.
2017.00049
Tisa LS, Oshone R, Sarkar I, Ktari A, Sen A, Gtari M (2016) Genomic approaches toward
understanding the actinorhizal symbiosis: an update on the status of the Frankia genomes.
Symbiosis 70:5–16. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13199-016-0390-2
Tittabutr P, Payakapong W, Teaumroong N, Singleton PW, Boonkerd N (2007) Growth, survival
andfield performance of Bradyrhizobial liquid inoculant formulations with polymeric additives.
Sci Asia 33:69–77. https://doi.org/10.2306/scienceasia1513-1874.2007.33.0697 The Beneficial Plant Microbial Association for Sustainable Agriculture 207
Toju H, Kurokawa H, Kenta T (2019) Factors influencing leaf- and root-associated communities of
bacteria and fungi across 33 plant orders in a Grassland. Front Microbiol 10:241. https://doi.org/
10.3389/fmicb.2019.00241
Torres N, Goicoechea N, Morales F, Antolín MC (2016) Berry quality and antioxidant properties in
Vitis vinifera cv. Tempranillo as affected by clonal variability, mycorrhizal inoculation and
temperature. Crop Pasture Sci 67(9):961–977. https://doi.org/10.1071/CP16038
Tortora ML, Díaz-Ricci JC, Pedraza RO (2011) Azospirillum brasilense siderophores with antifun￾gal activity against Colletotrichum acutatum. Arch Microbiol 193(4):275–286. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s00203-010-0672-7
Tsoata E, Njock SR, Youmbi E, Nwaga D (2015) Early effects of water stress on some biochemical
and mineral parameters of mycorrhizal Vigna subterranea (L.) Verdc (Fabaceae) cultivated in
Cameroon. Int J Agron Agric Res 7(2):21–35
Turan M, Gulluce M, von Wirén N, Sahin F (2012) Yield promotion and phosphorus solubilization
by plant growth–promoting rhizobacteria in extensive wheat production in Turkey. J Plant Nut
Soil Sci 175(6):818–826. https://doi.org/10.1002/jpln.201200054
Turrini A, Avio L, Giovannetti M, Agnolucci M (2018) Functional complementarity of arbuscular
mycorrhizal fungi and associated microbiota: the challenge of translational research. Front Plant
Sci 9:1407. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2018.01407
Usuki F, Narisawa K (2007) A mutualistic symbiosis between a dark septate endophytic fungus,
Heteroconium chaetospira, and a non mycorrhizal plant, Chinese cabbage. Mycologia 99:175–
184. https://doi.org/10.3852/mycologia.99.2.175
Vacher C, Hampe A, Porté AJ, Sauer U, Compant S, Morris CE (2016) The phyllosphere: microbial
jungle at the plant–climate interface. Annu Rev Ecol Evol Syst 47(1):1–24. https://doi.org/10.
1146/annurev-ecolsys-121415-032238
Van Der Heijden MGA, Bardgett RD, van Straalen NM (2007) The unseen majority: soil microbes
as drivers of plant diversity and productivity in terrestrial ecosystems. Ecol Lett 11:296–310.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1461-0248.2007.01139.x
Varma A, Prasad R, Tuteja N (2017a) Mycorrhiza: function, diversity and state-of-art. Springer
International Publishing. ISBN: 978-3-319-53064-2. http://www.springer.com/us/book/978331
9530635
Varma A, Prasad R, Tuteja N (2017b) Mycorrhiza: eco-physiology, secondary metabolites,
nanomaterials. Springer International Publishing. ISBN: 978-3-319-57849-1. http://www.
springer.com/us/book/9783319578484
Varma A, Prasad R, Tuteja N (2017c) Mycorrhiza: nutrient uptake, biocontrol, ecorestoration.
Springer International Publishing. ISBN: 978-3-319-68867-1. http://www.springer.com/us/
book/9783319688664
Varma A, Swati T, Prasad R (2020) Plant microbe symbiosis. Springer International Publishing.
ISBN: 978-3-030-36247-8. https://www.springer.com/gp/book/9783030362478
Velmourougane K, Prasanna R, Chawla G, Nain L, Kumar A, Saxena AK (2019) Trichoderma–
Azotobacter biofilm inoculation improves soil nutrient availability and plant growth in wheat
and cotton. J Basic Microbiol 59:632–644. https://doi.org/10.1002/jobm.201900009
Venkatachalam S, Ranjan K, Prasanna R, Ramakrishnan B, Thapa S, Kanchan A (2016) Diversity
and functional traits of culturable microbiome members, including cyanobacteria in the rice
phyllosphere. Plant Biol 18(4):627–637. https://doi.org/10.1111/plb.12441
Verma JP, Yadav J, Tiwari KN, Kumar A (2013) Effect of indigenous Mesorhizobium spp. and
plant growth promoting rhizobacteria on yields and nutrients uptake of chickpea (Cicer
arietinum L.) under sustainable agriculture. Ecol Eng 51:282–286
Verma P, Yadav AN, Kazy SK, Saxena AK, Suman A (2014) Evaluating the diversity and
phylogeny of plant growth promoting bacteria associated with wheat (Triticum aestivum)
growing in central zone of India. Int J Curr Microbiol Appl Sci 3(5):432–447
Villamil Carvajal JE, Viteri Rosero SE, Villegas Orozco WL (2015) Application of microbial
antagonists for the biological control of Moniliophthora roreri Cif & Par in Theobroma cacao208 S. Natesan et al.
L. under field conditions. Rev Fac Nac Agron Medellin 68(1):7441–7450. https://doi.org/10.
15446/rfnam.v68n1.47830
Vorholt JA (2012) Microbial life in the phyllosphere. Nat Rev 10:828–840. https://doi.org/10.1038/
nrmicro2910
Wagenaar MM, Corwin J, Strobel G, Clardy J (2000) Three new cytochalasins produced by an
endophytic fungus in the genus Rhinocladiella. J Nat Prod 63(12):1692–1695. https://doi.org/
10.1021/np0002942
Waller F, Achatz B, Baltruschat H, Fodor J, Becker K, Fisher M et al (2005) The endophytic fungus
Piriformospora indica reprograms barley to salt-stress tolerance, disease resistance, and higher
yield. PNAS 102:13386–13391
Wang S (2009) Molecular mechanism of plant growth promotion and induced systemic resistance
to tobacco mosaic virus by Bacillus spp. J. Microbiol Biotechnol 19:1250–1258
Wang Y, Jing H, Gao Y (2012) Arbuscular mycorrhizal colonization alters subcellular distribution
and chemical forms of cadmium in Medicago sativa L. and resists cadmium toxicity. PLoS One
7:3161–3164. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0048669
Wang X, Xue Y, Han M, Bu Y, Liu C (2014a) The ecological roles of Bacillus thuringiensis within
phyllosphere environments. Chemosphere 108:258–264. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
chemosphere.2014.01.050
Wang S, Zhang S, Sun C, Xu Y, Chen Y, Yu C, Qian Q, Jiang DA, Qi Y (2014b) Auxin response
factor (OsARF12), a novel regulator for phosphate homeostasis in rice (Oryza sativa). New
Phytologist 201:91–103. https://doi.org/10.1111/nph.12499
Wang P, Niu GY, Fang YH, Wu RJ, Yu JJ, Yuan GF, Pozdniakov SP, Scott RL (2018a)
Implementing dynamic root optimization in Noah-MP for simulating phreatophytic root water
uptake. Water Reso Res 54(3):1560–1575. https://doi.org/10.1002/2017WR021061
Wang Y, Wang M, Li Y, Wu A, Huang J (2018b) Effects of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi on growth
and nitrogen uptake of Chrysanthemum morifolium under salt stress. PLoS One 13(4):
e0196408. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0196408
Wani S, Ali T (2013) Potential use of Azotobacter chroococcum in crop production: an overview.
Curr Agric Res J 1:35–38. https://doi.org/10.12944/CARJ.1.1.04
Wei F, Hu X, Xu X (2016) Dispersal of Bacillus subtilis and its effect on strawberry phyllosphere
microbiota under open field and protection conditions. Scie Rep 6:22611. https://doi.org/10.
1038/srep22611
Wensing A, Braun SD, Büttner P, Expert D, Völksch B, Ullrich MS, Weingart H (2010) Impact of
siderophore production by Pseudomonas syringae pv. syringae 22d/93 on epiphytic fitness and
biocontrol activity against Pseudomonas syringae pv. glycinea 1a/96. Appl Environ Microbiol
76(9):2704–2711. https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.02979-09
Whipps JM, Hand P, Pink D, Bending GD (2008) Phyllosphere microbiology with special reference
to diversity and plant genotype. J Appl Microbiol 105:1744–1755. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.
1365-2672.2008.03906.x
Wichard T, Bellenger JP, Morel FM, Kraepiel AM (2009) Role of the siderophore azotobactin in
the bacterial acquisition of nitrogenase metal cofactors. Environ Sci Tech 43(19):7218–7224.
https://doi.org/10.1021/es8037214
Williams T, Moyne A, Harris L, Marco M (2013) Season, irrigation, leaf age, and escherichia coli
inoculation influence the bacterial diversity in the lettuce phyllosphere. PLoS One 8(7):e68642.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0068642
Wilson M, Lindow SE (1993) Interactions between the biological control agent Pseudomonas
fluorescens A506 and Erwinia amylovora in pear blossoms. Phytopathology 83(1):117–123.
https://doi.org/10.1094/Phyto-83-117
Wu QS, Zou YN, Liu W, Ye XF, Zai HF, Zhao LJ (2010) Alleviation of salt stress in citrus
seedlings inoculated with mycorrhiza: changes in leaf antioxidant defense systems. Plant Soil
Environ 56:470–475. https://doi.org/10.17221/54/2010-PSE
Wu D, Zhang XJ, Liu HC, Zhou YG, Wu XL, Nie Y et al (2021) Azospirillum oleiclasticum sp. nov,
a nitrogen-fixing and heavy oil degrading bacterium isolated from an oil production mixture of7 The Beneficial Plant Microbial Association for Sustainable Agriculture 209
Yumen Oilfield. Syst Appl Microbiol 44(1):126171. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.syapm.2020.
126171
Xie QY, Wang C, Wang R, Qu Z, Lin HP, Goodfellow M, Hong K (2011) Jishengella endophytica
gen. nov., sp. nov., a new member of the family Micromonosporaceae. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol
61(5):1153–1159. https://doi.org/10.1099/ijs.0.025288-0
Xie X, Lin H, Peng X, Xu C, Sun Z, Jiang K, Huang A, Wu X, Tang N, Salvioli A, Bonfante P,
Zhao B (2016) Arbuscular mycorrhizal symbiosis requires a phosphate transceptor in the
Gigaspora margarita fungal symbiont. Mol Plant 9(12):1583–1608. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
molp.2016.08.011
Yadav AN (2017) Agriculturally important microbiomes: biodiversity and multifarious PGP
attributes for amelioration of diverse abiotic stresses in crops for sustainable agriculture. Biomed
J Sci Tech Res 1(4):861–864. https://doi.org/10.26717/BJSTR.2017.01.000321
Yadav AN, Yadav N (2018) Stress-adaptive microbes for plant growth promotion and alleviation of
drought stress in plants. Acta Sci Agric 2(6):85–88
Yadav N, Yadav AN (2019) Actinobacteria for sustainable agriculture. J Appl Biotechnol Bioeng
6(1):38–41. https://doi.org/10.15406/jabb.2019.06.00172
Yadav V, Kumar M, Deep DK, Kumar H, Sharma R, Tripathi T, Tuteja N, Saxena AK, Johri AK
(2010) A phosphate transporter from the root endophytic fungus Piriformospora indica plays a
role in phosphate transport to the host plant. J Biol Chem 285:26532–26544. https://doi.org/10.
1074/jbc.M110.111021
Yang H, Knapp J, Koirala P, Rajagopal D, Peer WA, Silbart LK et al (2007) Enhanced phosphorus
nutrition in monocots and dicots over-expressing a phosphorus responsive type I H+-
pyrophosphatase. Plant Biotechnol J 5:735–745. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-7652.2007.
00281.x
Yang S-Y, Grønlund M, Jakobsen I, Grotemeyer MS, Rentsch D, Miyao A et al (2012)
Nonredundant regulation of rice arbuscular mycorrhizal symbiosis by two members of the
phosphate transporter1 gene family. Plant Cell 24(10):4236–4251. https://doi.org/10.1105/tpc.
112.104901
Yang Y, Tang M, Sulpice R, Chen H, Tian S, Ban Y (2014) Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi alter
fractal dimension characteristics of Robinia pseudoacacia L. seedlings through regulating plant
growth, leaf water status, photosynthesis, and nutrient concentration under drought stress. J
Plant Growth Reg 33:612–625. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00344-013-9410-0
Yang Y, Zhao J, Jiang Y, Hu Y, Zhang M, Zeng Z (2017) Response of bacteria harboring nirS and
nirK genes to different N fertilization rates in an alkaline northern Chinese soil. Eur J Soil Biol
82:1–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejsobi.2017.05.006
Yang Y, Zhang R, Feng J, Wang C, Chen J (2019) Azospirillum griseum sp. nov., isolated from
lakewater. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol 69(12):3676–3681. https://doi.org/10.1099/ijsem.0.003460
Yao ZY, Kan FL, Wang ET, Wei GH, Chen WX (2002) Characterization of rhizobia that nodulate
legume species of the genus Lespedeza and description of Bradyrhizobium yuanmingense
sp. nov. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol 52:2219–2230. https://doi.org/10.1099/ijs.0.01408-0
Yao H, Sun X, He C, Maitra P, Li X, Guo L (2019) Phyllosphere epiphytic and endophytic fungal
community and network structures differ in a tropical mangrove ecosystem. Microbiome 7:57.
https://doi.org/10.1186/s40168-019-0671-0
Yi Y, Huang W, Ge Y (2008) Exopolysaccharide: a novel important factor in the microbial
dissolution of tricalcium phosphate. World J Microbiol Biotechnol 24:1059–1065. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s11274-007-9575-4
Yooyongwech S, Samphumphuang T, Tisarum R, Theerawitaya C, Chaum S (2016) Arbuscular
mycorrhizal fungi (AMF) improved water deficit tolerance in two different sweet potato
genotypes involves osmotic adjustments via soluble sugar and free proline. Sci Hort. 198:
107–117. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scienta.2015.11.002
Yooyongwech S, Samphumphung T, Tisaram R, Theerawitaya C, Suriyan CU (2017) Physiolog￾ical, morphological changes and storage root yield of sweetpotato [Ipomoea batatas (L.) Lam.]210 S. Natesan et al.
under peg-induced water stress. Not Bot Horti Agrobo 45(1):164–171. https://doi.org/10.15835/
nbha45110651
Yousaf B, Liu G, Wang R, Zia-ur-Rehman M, Rizwan MS, Imtiaz M, Murtaza G, Shakoor A (2016)
Investigating the potential influence of biochar and traditional organic amendments on the
bioavailability and transfer of CD in the soil–plant system. Environ Earth Sci 75(5):374.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12665-016-5285-2
Yu X, Lund SP, Scott RA, Greenwald JW, Records AH, Nettleton D, Lindow SE, Gross DC,
Beattie GA (2013) Transcriptional responses of Pseudomonas syringae to growth in epiphytic
versus apoplastic leaf sites. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 110(5):E425–E434. https://doi.org/10.
1073/pnas.1221892110
Yurimoto H, Shiraishi K, Sakai Y (2021) Physiology of methylotrophs living in the phyllosphere.
Microorganisms. 9(4):809. https://doi.org/10.3390/microorganisms9040809
Zaefarian F, Rezvani M, Ardakani MR, Rejali F, Miransari M (2013) Impact of mycorrhizae
formation on the phosphorus and heavy-metal uptake of Alfalfa. Comm Soil Sci. Plant Anal
44:1340–1352. https://doi.org/10.1080/00103624.2012.756505
Zayadan BK, Matorin D, Baimakhanova GB, Bolathan K, Oraz GD, Sadanov AK (2014) Promising
microbial consortia for producing biofertilizers for rice fields. Microbiol 83(4):391–397. https://
doi.org/10.1134/S0026261714040171
Zhang HS, Qin FF, Qin P, Pan SM (2014) Evidence that arbuscular mycorrhizal and phosphate￾solubilizing fungi alleviate NaCl stress in the halophyte Kosteletzkya virginica: nutrient uptake
and ion distribution within root tissues. Mycorrhiza 24(5):383–395. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s00572-013-0546-3
Zhang H, Liu Z, Chen H, Tang M (2016) Symbiosis of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi and Robinia
pseudoacacia L. improves root tensile strength and soil aggregate stability. PLoS One 11(4):
e0153378. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0153378
Zhang F, He J, Ni Q, Wu Q, Zou Y (2018a) Enhancement of drought tolerance in trifoliate orange
by mycorrhiza: changes in root sucrose and proline metabolisms. Not Bot Horti Agrobot Cluj
46(1):270–276. https://doi.org/10.15835/nbha46110983
Zhang X, Han L, Wang Q, Zhang C, Yu Y, Tian J, Kong Z (2018b) The host actin cytoskeleton
channels rhizobia release and facilitates symbiosome accommodation during nodulation in
Medicago truncatula. New Phytol 221:1049–1059. https://doi.org/10.1111/nph.15423
Zhang J, Liu YX, Zhang N et al (2019) NRT1.1B is associated with root microbiota composition and
nitrogen use in field-grown rice. Nat Biotechnol 37:676–684. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41587-
019-0104-4
Zhao R, Guo W, Bi N, Guo J, Wang L, Zhao J, Zhang J (2015) Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi affect
the growth, nutrient uptake and water status of maize (Zea mays L.) grown in two types of coal
mine spoils under drought stress. Appl Soil Ecol 88:41–49. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsoil.
2014.11.016
Zhao ZL, Ming H, Ding CL, Ji WL, Cheng LJ, Niu MM et al (2020) Azospirillum thermophilum
sp. nov., isolated from a hot spring. Int J Syst Evol 70(1):550–554. https://doi.org/10.1099/
ijsem.0.003788
Zhou S, Han L, Wang Y, Yang G, Zhuang L, Hu P (2013) Azospirillum humicireducens sp. nov., a
nitrogen-fixing bacterium isolated from a microbial fuel cell. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol 63:2618–
2624. https://doi.org/10.1099/ijs.0.046813-0
Zhu XC, Song FB, Xu HW (2010) Arbuscular mycorrhizae improve low temperature stress in
maize via alterations in host water status and photosynthesis. Plant Soil 331:129–137. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s11104-009-0239-z
Zhu XC, Song FB, Liu SQ, Liu FL (2016) Arbuscular mycorrhiza improves growth, nitrogen
uptake, and nitrogen use efficiency in wheat grown under elevated CO2. Mycorrhiza 26:133–
140. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00572-015-0654-3
Zolla G, Badri DV, Bakker MG, Manter DK, Vivanco JM (2013) Soil microbiomes vary in their
ability to confer drought tolerance to Arabidopsis. Appl Soil Ecol 68:1–9. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.apsoil.2013.03.007211
Chapter 8
Microbiome of Plants: The Diversity,
Distribution, and Their Potential
for Sustainable Agriculture
Ajay Kumar Pandey, Shweta Mehta, Priyanka Bhati, and Sagar Chhabra
Abstract Plants contain associated microbiomes, which facilitate the plant’s pro￾ductivity by supporting their healthy growth in native niche. Globally, sustainable
food production is quintessential, wherein the growth-promoting abilities of plant￾associated microbes become vital. Recent literatures reveal significant structure and
dynamics on plant microbiome, which recognizes the regulation of plant fitness by
native microbiome. Henceforth, it is essential to practice modern microbial devel￾opments for strengthening crop production. Many of the environmental factors
modulate the microbiome organization. This chapter emphasizes the comprehensive
characterization of different niche’s microbiome and impact of differential influen￾tial factors such as genotype, microbial interactions, agricultural habits,
bioinoculants, and abiotic factors to microbial diversity and sustainable plant health.
Moreover, conventional and advanced approaches (omics/multi-omics) for studying
plant microbiome diversity and plant microbiome interactions are also discussed,
which would be helpful in developing novel microbial formulations for sustainable
agriculture.
Keywords Plant microbiome · Microbiome diversity · Niche · Agriculture ·
Bioinoculants
A. K. Pandey (*)
Department of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Chhatrapati Shahu Ji Maharaj University
(CSJMU), Kanpur, India, Uttar Pradesh
Division of Life Sciences, School of Basic & Applied Sciences, Galgotias University, Greater
Noida, Uttar Pradesh, India
e-mail: ajaykp4@csjmu.ac.in
S. Mehta · P. Bhati · S. Chhabra
Department of Biosciences, School of Basic and Applied Sciences, Galgotias University,
Greater Noida, Uttar Pradesh, India
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2023
S. Chhabra et al. (eds.), Plant Microbiome for Plant Productivity and Sustainable
Agriculture, Microorganisms for Sustainability 37,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-19-5029-2_8212 A. K. Pandey et al.
8.1 Introduction
Term “plant microbiome” describes “the microorganism’s community with the
potential of harboring a space in plant body as symbionts, commensal or pathogen.”
Plants harbor microbial hotspots along with soil as major natural microbial resource.
This microbial plethora is vital in promoting plant’s growth, health, and productiv￾ity. However, food productivity enhancement strategies (use of fertilizers, pesticides,
and agrochemicals), industrialization, and anthropogenic interventions led to an
enforced soil and microenvironment deterioration and attenuation in agriculture
lands (Compant et al. 2019). These factors cumulatively exert pressure on agro￾ecosystems and challenge the high-yielding economical and sustainable
agriproducts. In this background, plant microbiomes are potential tool for enhancing
agricultural productivity while maintaining sustainable ecosystem. The plant
microbiomes not only promote the growth of plants but also enhance the soil fertility
for facilitating sustainable agriculture. Moreover, microbiome aids in seed germina￾tion, growth, productivity, yield, adaptation, and stress resistance/tolerance of plants,
which impacts the fitness of the plant leading to the sustainable agriculture (Aamir
et al. 2021).
8.2 Plant Microbiome: Diversity, Composition,
and Distribution
Microbiomes possess high degree of diversity and are dispersed on soil, water, and
air, which can associate with the plant organs (Gupta et al. 2021). The microbiome
distribution on plant is majorly categorized into phyllospheric (present on aerial
parts such as stem, leaves, and flowers), endospheric (present on inner plant tissues),
and rhizospheric (present on below ground components such as roots and surround￾ing soil) (Fig. 8.1) (Aamir et al. 2021; Santos and Olivares 2021). In addition,
microbes also reside as epiphyte on plant surface (Compant et al. 2019). As
endophyte microbes penetrate the epidermis and colonize inter- and intracellularly.
In general, ectomycorrhizal fungi penetrate root spaces intracellularly after devel￾oping a mantle, which surrounds root tip. However, endomycorrhizal fungi develop
arbuscules for intracellular colonization (Santos and Olivares 2021). Naturally,
healthy plant harbors multifaceted diversity of microorganisms such as bacteria,
and fungi are foremost constituent associated with plants (Trivedi et al. 2020). Some
examples of plant-associated bacterial and fungal strains and their functional role in
normal/stressed environment are listed in Tables 8.1 and 8.2, respectively.
Generally, microbial dynamics is associated with the types of plant species, its
developmental stages, or genetic makeup. And, changes in host plant environment
during the different life stages play a crucial role and arbitrate the microbial diversity
by innate defense system stimulation of plant (Dastogeer et al. 2020; Gupta et al.
2021). Additionally, abiotic and biotic stresses-driven and -compromised defense8 Microbiome of Plants: The Diversity, Distribution, and Their Potential... 213
Fig. 8.1 Schematics of morphological, biochemical, and molecular characterization of plant
microbiome
system can also alter microbiome diversity. Henceforth, to study the biotic/abiotic
factors influencing microbial matrix at phylogenetic and functional level, it is
essential to estimate the plant microbiome’s heterogeneity individually and in
understanding different niches (Santos and Olivares 2021).
Recent studies and advances in the knowledge of plant microbiome have dem￾onstrated that plant-associated heterogenetic microbial consortia influence their
growth, development, and productivity (Bhatt et al. 2020; Singh et al. 2019;
Trivedi et al. 2020). The microbiome consists of some microorganisms, which can
interact with other species/host and influence theorganization microbial community.
Such microorganisms are known as “hub-microorganisms” of the microbiome
(Agler et al. 2016). Microbiome diversity and composition are majorly affected by
soil profile and physiochemical characteristics (texture, moisture proportion, pH,
temperature, salinity, organic matter, etc.). Moreover, microbe–microbe/plant–
microbe interaction, microbial/host secretome, anthropogenic factors, cultivation
exercises, and environmental changes also influence at a certain extent (Bhatt et al.
2020; Li et al. 2020; Oyserman et al. 2021).Strains Host-plant Activity and function References
214 A. K. Pandey et al.
Table 8.1 Examples of bacterial strains involved in plant microbiome assembly, their function and
relevance in normal and stressed conditions
Growth
parameters
Bacillus subtilis Zea mays,
Acacia
gerrardii
Nutrient
deficiency
and salinity
stress
Solubilization of supple￾ments (Mg, Ca, N, P, K)
and their delivery to plant
Hashem et al.
(2016),
Rodrigues
et al. (2016)
Pseudomonas
putida
Pennisetum
glaucum,
Hordeum
vulgare,
Citrus
macrophylla
Salt and
salinity
stress
Tolerance and enhanced
phytoremediation
Jodeh et al.
(2015)
Novosphingobium
sp.
Glycine max Normal Improved nitrogen diges￾tion and transport of
supplement
Hara et al.
(2019)
Pseudomonas
fluorescens
Oryza
sativa,
Citrus
aurantifolia
Drought
stress
Enhanced phosphate solu￾bilization, growth, and
chlorophyll content
Shahsavar
et al. (2016)
Enterobacter sp. Pennisetum
glaucum,
Brassica
juncea
Metal stress Enhanced phosphate solu￾bilization, growth, and
phytohormones
Durán et al.
(2018)
Klebsiella sp. Avena
sativa
Salt stress Enhanced salt tolerance Sapre et al.
(2018)
Acinetobacter
calcoaceticus
Agave
americana
Normal Improved growth and
sugar content
De La Torre￾Ruiz et al.
(2016)
Streptomyces sp. Pisum
sativum
Drought
stress
Improved salt tolerance,
seed germination, root/
shoot length, and ROS
gathering
Zahir et al.
(2008)
Saccharibacteria,
Verrucomicrobia
Firmicutes
Triticum
aestivum
Normal Antifungal property
against Microdochium,
Neoascochyta, and Fusar￾ium spp.
Kinnunen￾Grubb et al.
(2020)
Sinorhizobium and
Rhizobium
Hordeum
vulgare
Oils sand
mining
Increased plant growth,
improved resistance
against biotic/abiotic
stresses
Mitter et al.
(2017)
Acremonium sp.
Mesorhizobium
Mesorhizobium
ciceri
Cicer
arietinum
Normal Improved knob size, yield,
and nitrogen content.
Antifungal property
against Botrytis, Fusarium,
and Rhizoctonia solani
Alok et al.
(2020), Qin
et al. (2017)
Rhizobium
daejeonense
Agave
americana
Normal Enhanced growth, sugar,
and solubilization of
supplements.
De La Torre￾Ruiz et al.
(2016)Strains Host-plant Activity and function References
8 Microbiome of Plants: The Diversity, Distribution, and Their Potential... 215
Table 8.2 Examples of fungal strains involved in plant microbiome assembly, their function and
relevance in normal and stressed conditions
Growth
parameters
Penicillium
menonorum
Cucumis
sativus
Normal Plant-growth-promotion
activity via production
of siderophore and
indole-3 acetic acid and
phosphate
solubilization
Babu et al. (2015)
Acaulospora
scrobiculata,
Funneliformis
mosseae
Morus alba Normal Enhanced growth due to
increased chlorophyll
content and rate of pho￾tosynthesis. Improved
conductance of stomata.
Shi et al. (2016)
Rhizophagus
intraradices,
R. fasciculates,
Glomus
mosseae,
Scutellospora
sp., and
Gigaspora
margarita
Solanum
lycopersicum
Drought
and salt
stress
Enhanced water trans￾port, water pressure,
and phosphorous
aggregation.
Chitarra et al. (2016),
Mohumad Tahat
(2012), Padmavathi
et al. (2015),
Viscardi et al. (2016)
Rhizophagus
clarus
Sorghum
bicolor,
Capsicum
annuum
Normal Improved plant growth Lee and Eom (2015)
Glomus
etunicatum
Citrus
aurantifolia
Drought
stress
Improved plant growth,
chlorophyll and
photosynthesis.
Shahsavar et al.
(2016)
Glomus species Allium cepa Normal Improved plant growth,
chlorophyll, and
photosynthesis.
Shuab et al. (2014)
Funneliformis
mosseae,
Rhizoglomus
intraradices
Lactuca
sativa
Normal Enhanced zinc
absorption
Konieczny and
Kowalska (2016),
Zhang et al. (2020)
8.3 Approaches for Studying Plant Microbiome Diversity
Plant microbiome exhibits extensively wide-ranging diversity depending upon hab￾itat and plant organs such as phyllo/endo/rhizospheric regions. Plant microbiome
diversity investigation aims to unravel the structural/functional diverseness of a
specific host plant-associated microbial community in a definite habitat (Bhatt
et al. 2020; Dastogeer et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2019). The colonization of microbiome
is facilitated by the host’s secondary metabolite secretome and specialized structures
such as hairs and trichomes (Gupta et al. 2021).216 A. K. Pandey et al.
Conventionally, identification and characterization of plant microbiomes (bacte￾ria and fungi) consists of sequencing of universally conserved sequences and
bioinformatic analysis. Briefly, this method consists of different sequential
steps as: (1) microbial isolation from phyllo/endo/rhizosphere, (2) morphological
characterization (for phenotypic and microscopic characteristics), (3) biochemical
characterization (for biomolecules and enzymes), (4) Sanger’s sequencing (for 16S
rNRA/18S rRNA), and (5) Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST) analysis
using National Centre for Biological Information (NCBI) database.
These conventional methods give the outlook information only, henceforth
holistic approaches using modern biotechnological techniques to unwrap complete
multi-dimension information to understand the mechanistic component are essential.
In this context, during last few years various studies implemented advance tech￾niques to unwrap the microbiome exclusively and understand their interaction
mechanism with host (Fitzpatrick et al. 2020). It has been established that along
with the host and habitat, microbiomes are also affected by their environment and
developmental stages. In recent years, advanced modified Sanger’s sequencing
techniques including 454-pyrosequencing, Oxford nanopore, Illumina, Ion- torrent,
PacBio, and hybrid-platform were used to reveal rare microbial taxa in definite niche
(Bhatt et al. 2020; Gupta et al. 2021). These techniques extract complete genomic
information leading to comprehensive microbial diversity study in a given popula￾tion through phylogenetic and comparative genomics studies. Nevertheless, these
techniques fail to differentiate dead/live cells, which raises the possibility of errors in
estimation or hiked microbiome diversity, which are being addressed by managing
PCR error using specifically tagged DNA (Gupta et al. 2021).
Moreover, microbiome also contains enormous diversity in uncultivable
microbes, which makes it difficult to select a suitable method for their identification.
However, in recent years advanced culture-independent direct-environmental DNA
cloning, next generation sequencing, single strand conformation polymorphism,
denaturing/temperature gradient gel-electrophoresis, terminal restriction/restriction
fragment length polymorphism, and fatty acid methyl esters were reported for plant
microbiome studies (Bodor et al. 2020; Gupta et al. 2021; del Orozco-Mosqueda
et al. 2018).
Omics technologies (genomics/metagenomics, transcriptomics/meta￾transcriptomics, proteomics/meta-proteomics, and metabolomics) give a compre￾hensive genetic, structural, and functional information of the plant microbiomes
(Sharma et al. 2020). This information, coupled with the metabolic engineering at
cellular and/or molecular level, enhances the knowledge on dynamics of
microbiomes.8 Microbiome of Plants: The Diversity, Distribution, and Their Potential... 217
8.4 Factors Affecting Plant Microbiome Diversity
Microbiome consists of several microbes; however, various factors including
genome organization, microbial interactions, biotic/abiotic components, local agri￾cultural practices, environmental factors, and physiochemical factors greatly affect
plant microbiome organization in local habitat. Some important factors are described
below:
8.4.1 Impact of Genomic Organization
Plants benefit from capacities of their microbiome, which is the reason they devote
some fraction of their carbon sources toward the development and sustenance of the
microbiota. Plants with different genotypes perform distinctively toward metabolism
of roots, composition of root secretome, recognition system, and native defense
mechanism (Santos and Olivares 2021). Plant genotype alters the root metabolism
by modulating the metabolic intermediates (pyruvic acid, citric acid, malic acid,
lactic acid, etc.), nitrogenase activity, and reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation
(Shcherbakova et al. 2017). Genotype also modulates composition of root secretome
in terms of organic acids (citric, malic, and succinic), sugars (ribose, glucose,
galactose, and fructose), amino acids (glycine, serine, lysine, and histidine),
isoflavones, enzymes (chitinases, proteases, phytases), and phytoalexins
(Shcherbakova et al. 2017). Genotype mediates the localized/systemic immune
responses of plants by transcriptional changes leading to the elaboration of physical
barriers, synthesis of antimicrobial compounds, defense phytohormones, jasmonic
acid, salicylic acid, and gaseous ethylene (Lebeis et al. 2015).
Studies demonstrate that varieties of this nature can modify the design and action
of the plant microbiome, which thus follows up on development, sustenance, and
protection from biotic and abiotic stresses (Santos and Olivares 2021). Curlango￾Rivera et al. demonstrated the impact of genotype toward composition of root
microbiome, wherein cotton cultivars showed structural differences in their border
cells (Curlango-Rivera et al. 2013). These cells are shaped from meristematic cells
and were at first thought to be “dead” and answerable for the mechanical security of
the root tip. Today, it is realized that line cells are connected with colonization of the
root by microorganisms. Essentially, plant roots store high and low sub-atomic
weight compounds at the root–soil interface, the rhizodeposition, which might
shift as per their genotype. Along these lines, plants with various genotypes can
deliver compounds with various creations, advancing explicit microbial flagging and
colonization. While examining the seed microbiome, various creators distinguished
the effect of the plant genotype on the microbial synthesis of the seed. In the tomato
phyllosphere, a review uncovered that four of the nine genotypes tried had an
alternate microbial arrangement, which demonstrates that the hereditary elements
of the host plant might shape the related microbiota (Morella et al. 2020). In the218 A. K. Pandey et al.
rhizosphere, microorganisms from the families Solibacteraceae, Pseudomonadaceae,
Cytophagaceae, and Bacillaceae were more bountiful in Fusarium-safe bean culti￾vars (Mendes et al. 2019). Fusarium opposition formed the microbial gathering of
the rhizosphere and chose bacterial taxa with biocontrol action (Santos and Olivares
2021). In recent study, transplantation of rhizospheric soil from a Ralstonia
solanacearum-resistant tomato plant to a prone plant genotype stifled the suscepti￾bility (Kwak et al. 2018).
8.4.2 Impact of Agricultural Activities
Agricultural activities alter soil’s nutrient and physiochemical properties. Nutrient
properties act as selection pressure for selection of plant microbiome and altered
nutrition influences plant’s microbiome profile in negative way and reduces their
productivity. Several studies reported the change in microbiome in different agri￾cultural practices using green manure (Bergottini et al. 2017), organic manure
(Lupatini et al. 2017), mulch (Qin et al. 2017), nitrogen fertilizers (Cai et al. 2017;
Zhu et al. 2016), and crop rotation (Hong et al. 2020). Therefore, for achieving high
agricultural productivity, it is essential to comprehend the impact of feasible prac￾tices on the design of the plant’s microbiome referring native plants and vegetable/
animal residues (Santos and Olivares 2021).
8.4.3 Impact of Bioinoculants
Bioinoculant is a practical strategy to build crop efficiency while lessening the
utilization of synthetic chemicals, though information on its effect on the plant
microbiome is extremely scant. Subsequently, understanding the connection
among inoculated and native microbial networks in plants will add to the improve￾ment of natural products.
Microbial inoculants proficiency relies upon the inoculum characteristics and its
capacity to bridge local microbial contest or its layout in the rhizosphere.
Rhizospheric fitness (in terms of efficient microbial contents) is an essential factor
for promising plant responses (plant-microbe interactions), however, has been
explored below par. The cooperation between local miniature life forms of the
plant and miniature organic entities (called “transients”) can be competitive, para￾sitic, mutualistic, or predatory (Santos and Olivares 2021), wherein secretomes
containing probiotic/antimicrobial compounds selectively stimulate/inhibit the
growth of microorganisms (Pieterse et al. 2016). Taken together, the native micro￾bial organization of the host plant is urgent for the achievement of its colonization by
transient microbes. Different signalling routes between plants and microorganisms
as well as among microorganisms make up the base of the microorganisms in the
root area. During plant-microbe interactions the population density is managed by8 Microbiome of Plants: The Diversity, Distribution, and Their Potential... 219
releasing low atomic weight quorum sensing compounds such as acylated￾homoserine-lactones (Hartmann et al. 2014).
The impact of the bioinoculant is regarded as indirect when it causes changes in
the native microbiome structure and function by producing probiotic or antimicro￾bial compounds (Santos and Olivares 2021). Several reports stated the alteration in
endophytic population’s structure while using inoculants (Andreote et al. 2014;
Conn and Franco 2004). In another study, changes in the phenotype of the endo￾phytic potato were reported after Methylobacterium sp. inoculation to it, wherein
relative proportion of biocontrol regulators (Acinetobacter sp., Massilia sp., Phoma
sp., and Entyloma sp.) were also increased (Ardanov et al. 2016).
The bioinoculants effects are considered as direct if inoculum directly alters/
improves the metabolism of plant or root exudates profile, which in turn modulates
microbiome’s structure and function (Santos and Olivares 2021). Molecular
advanced technologies permit portraying the microbiome of various plants or
contrasting microbiome of plants treated with bio-inoculants. This information will
be helpful in developing novel bioinoculants, or shaping it as per the
agricultural need.
8.4.4 Impact of Pathogens
The endophytic plant community can harbor useful and destructive microbes in an
inactive state. These microbes can be “reactivated” by extrinsic factors including
pathogen’s attack (Santos and Olivares 2021). The endophytic community encour￾ages plant resistance either with the presence of resistance inducing microbes or
reactivation of endophytic population by entry of a microbial biocontrol strain/
abiotic stimulus (Podolich et al. 2015). Nevertheless, reactivation of inactive endo￾phytic microbes after pathogenic attack is more proficient (Santos and Olivares
2021). Agler et al. reported phyllosphere’s reformed colonization of endophytic
and endophytic bacteria by pathogenic fungi Albugo sp. and Dioszegia sp. (Agler
et al. 2016). Likewise, a decrease in the number of Bacillus species in roots, and
Streptomyces & Flavisolibacter in the rhizosphere of Chinese cabbage was observed
with the presence of pathogenic Plasmodiophora brassicae (Lebreton et al. 2019).
These findings show that the microbiome can protect plants against pathogenic
attacks, hence it is conceivable that it can change the microbiota of the host plant.
8.4.5 Impacts of Abiotic Factors
Plants and their microbiome are naturally exposed to different environmental vari￾ations including humidity, pH, temperature, salinity, and ultraviolet rays, which
straightforwardly or by implication alter the microbial composition. The microbiome
profiles of soil from various climate zones shows enormous taxonomic and220 A. K. Pandey et al.
functional variety, although arid conditions revealed the least functional variation
(Tripathi et al. 2017). Lower functional diversity in arid regions is associated with
the up-regulation of sporulation/dormancy-associated genes and down-regulation of
nutrient (N, P, and S) cycling and stress-associated genes (Tripathi et al. 2017). This
study has significant ramifications for understanding the effects of environmental
change on various microbiomes. In comparison of soil rhizospheric microbiome of
eight different countries, highly significant variation was displayed and credited to
difference in pH of different country’s soil (Simonin et al. 2020).
Water-stress/drought has maximum impact on plant microbiome (Santos and
Olivares 2021). Santos-Medellín et al. studied rice plants exposed to water pressure
had their root microbiome rebuilt, which can add to the endurance of plants in this
condition (Santos-Medellín et al. 2017). Soil heat (50–80 C) exposure influences
microbiome and disease resistance due to the reduction in antagonistic bacterial
loads of Mycobacteriaceae, Micrococcaceae, and Streptomycetaceae (van der Voort
et al. 2016). Likely, with routine exposure of plants to UV radiation due to DNA
damage phyllospheric microbiome stratification occurs; however, some bacteria
acquire UV protection by endospore formation, exo-polysaccharides, and pigments
such as melanin, xanthomonadine (Kumar et al. 2019).
Taken together, abiotic factor greatly influences the structure and diversity of
plant microbiomes.
8.5 Role of Plant Microbiome in Sustainable Agriculture
Plant microbiome influences agriculture via enhancing soil fertility and promotion of
plant growth. Microbes are diverse in nature and constitute of beneficial, harmful,
and pathogenic microorganisms.
Plant growth-promoting bacteria (PGPB) synthesize phytohormones (cytokinin,
auxin: indole-3-acetic acid, gibberellin, jasmonic acid, and salicylic acid), which act
as phytostimulant and enhances plant growth (Kaur 2020; Rastegari 2020; Santos
and Olivares 2021). Moreover, ethylene (a stress hormone) is regulated by the
enzyme 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate deaminase (ACC deaminase), which
breaks down the molecule ACC and stimulates plant development by lowering
ethylene levels (Glick 2014; Santos and Olivares 2021; Shahid et al. 2021). Some
common ACC deaminase producers are Pseudomonas spp., Bacillus spp.,
Paraburkholderia spp., Arthrobacter spp., and Pantoea spp. (Rastegari 2020; San￾tos and Olivares 2021). These genera exhibit various properties including phytohor￾mones, phosphate solubilization, and nitrogen fixation which enhances nutrient
uptake and stress tolerance. In contrast, some bacteria produce phytoactive com￾pounds, which cause disease symptoms in plants. Some common examples of
pathogenic bacteria are Pseudomonas syringae (infects tomato, tobacco, olive, and
green bean), Xylella fastidiosa (infects potato and banana), Erwinia amylovora
(infects ornamental plants), Xanthomonas spp. (infects banana), Ralstonia
solanacearum (infects banana and potato) (Gupta et al. 2021; Rastegari 2020).8 Microbiome of Plants: The Diversity, Distribution, and Their Potential... 221
Several bacteria directly facilitate essential nutrients (iron, nitrogen, phosphorus,
etc.) acquisition and promote plant development (del Orozco-Mosqueda et al. 2018).
Plant resistance is influenced by microorganisms which are present above and
below the soil due to alteration in plant defense system or commensal interactions
(Igiehon and Babalola 2018). Various biocontrol mechanism are involved in plant
resistance induction such as production of siderophores (chelating agents with
potential of insoluble ferric-ions sequestration), antibiotics
(2,4-diacetylphloroglucinol), enzymes (proteases, chitinases, phytases), lipopeptides
(bacillomycin-D, mycosubtilin, and iturin-A), volatile organic compounds, and
bacteriocins (del Orozco-Mosqueda et al. 2018; Santos and Olivares 2021).
Of note, microbiome not only induces plant growth by these biocontrol mecha￾nisms, but also these perform bio-fertilization (by controlled availability and attain￾ment of nutrients for plants) for regulating plant growth. Some typical examples of
biofertilization are symbiotic associations between Rhizobium (nitrogen-fixing bac￾teria), arbuscular-mycorrhizal fungi, and phosphate solubilizing bacteria to deliver
nitrogen and phosphorus, to plant, respectively (Santos and Olivares 2021). Some
examples of phosphate solubilizing bacteria are Rhizobium, Bacillus,
Microbacterium, Azotobacter, Erwinia, Serratia, Burkholderia, Enterobacter,
Beijerinckia, Flavobacterium, and Pseudomonas (Chhabra 2019; Chhabra et al.
2013; Chhabra and Dowling 2017; Kumar et al. 2019).
Rhizobium evolves with leguminous plants and has potential of directly fixing
atmospheric nitrogen, hence facilitates self-establishment of plants in low nitrogen
soils (Santos and Olivares 2021). Notably, along with Rhizobium, leguminous plants
also contain some nitrogen-fixing endophytic bacteria such as Azospirillum, Azoto￾bacter, Gluconacetobacter, and cyanobacteria (Calothrix, Nostoc, Anabena)
(Kumar et al. 2019). Moreover, there are some nitrogen-fixing microorganisms
(Bacillus, Beijerinckia and Klebsiella), which can fix nitrogen in non-leguminous
plant in their free form (Santos and Olivares 2021).
Taken together, above-mentioned characteristics of microbiome justify their
importance toward sustainable agriculture in terms of inducing crop’s nutrient
intake, disease resistance, harsh environment tolerance, growth, yield, and
productivity.
8.6 Current Trends and Future Perspectives
Continuously increasing global demand of food is challenging for the farmers,
wherein they have to tackle with various stresses such as changing hostile climate,
nutrient, water scarcity, and pollution. In this background, plant growth-promoting
potential natural resources such as plant microbiome become a viable alternative tool
for supporting plant health and sustainable agriculture. In plant microbiome estab￾lishment microbial diversity, their inter/intra generic interactions and environmental
factor are critical. Despite extensive microbiome knowledge to scientists, still
advances are needed for comprehensive information. In recent years, advanced222 A. K. Pandey et al.
biotechnological tools, bioinformatics, and meta-omics approaches together have
established pipelines for structural, genomic, and functional organization of plant
microbiomes and their interaction with plants. With such all-inclusive information, it
would be easy to improve native microorganisms at cellular or molecular level
leading to the more efficient bioinoculants development for improving crop’s yield
and productivity.
References
Aamir M, Samal S, Rai A, Kashyap SP, Singh SK, Ahmed M, Upadhyay RS (2021) Plant
microbiome: diversity, distribution, and functional relevance in crop improvement and sustain￾able agriculture. In: Microbiome stimulants for crops. Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp 417–436.
https://doi.org/10.1016/b978-0-12-822122-8.00001-7
Agler MT, Ruhe J, Kroll S, Morhenn C, Kim ST, Weigel D, Kemen EM (2016) Microbial hub taxa
link host and abiotic factors to plant microbiome variation. PLoS Biol 14:1–31. https://doi.org/
10.1371/journal.pbio.1002352
Alok D, Annapragada H, Singh S, Murugesan S, Singh NP (2020) Symbiotic nitrogen fixation and
endophytic bacterial community structure in Bt-transgenic chickpea (Cicer arietinum L). Sci
Rep 10:1–12. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-62199-1
Andreote FD, Gumiere T, Durrer A (2014) Exploring interactions of plant microbiomes. Sci Agric
71:528–539. https://doi.org/10.1590/0103-9016-2014-0195
Ardanov P, Lyastchenko S, Karppinen K, Häggman H, Kozyrovska N, Pirttilä AM (2016) Effects
of Methylobacterium sp. on emergence, yield, and disease prevalence in three cultivars of potato
(Solanum tuberosum L.) were associated with the shift in endophytic microbial community.
Plant Soil 405:299–310. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11104-015-2500-y
Babu AG, Kim SW, Yadav DR, Hyum U, Adhikari M, Lee YS (2015) Penicillium menonorum: a
novel fungus to promote growth and nutrient management in cucumber plants. Mycobiology 43:
49. https://doi.org/10.5941/MYCO.2015.43.1.49
Bergottini VM, Hervé V, Sosa DA, Otegui MB, Zapata PD, Junier P (2017) Exploring the diversity
of the root-associated microbiome of Ilex paraguariensis St. Hil. (Yerba mate). Appl Soil Ecol
109:23–31. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.APSOIL.2016.09.013
Bhatt P, Verma A, Verma S, Anwar MS, Prasher P, Mudila H, Chen S (2020) Understanding
Phytomicrobiome: a potential reservoir for better crop management. Sustainability 12:5446.
https://doi.org/10.3390/SU12135446
Bodor A, Bounedjoum N, Vincze GE, Erdeiné Kis Á, Laczi K, Bende G, Szilágyi Á, Kovács T,
Perei K, Rákhely G (2020) Challenges of unculturable bacteria: environmental perspectives.
Rev Environ Sci Bio/Technol 191(19):1–22. https://doi.org/10.1007/S11157-020-09522-4
Cai F, Pang G, Miao Y, Li R, Li R, Shen Q, Chen W (2017) The nutrient preference of plants
influences their rhizosphere microbiome. Appl Soil Ecol 110:146–150. https://doi.org/10.1016/
J.APSOIL.2016.11.006
Chhabra S (2019) Phosphorus management in agroecosytems and role and relevance of microbes in
environmental sustainability. In: Sustainable green technologies for environmental managment.
Springer, Singapore, pp 53–66. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-13-2772-8_3
Chhabra S, Dowling DN (2017) Endophyte-promoted nutrient acquisition: phosphorus and iron. In:
Functional importance of the plant microbiome. Implications for agriculture, forestry and
bioenergy. Springer, Cham, pp 21–42. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-65897-1_3
Chhabra S, Brazil D, Morrissey J, Burke JI, O’Gara F, Dowling ND (2013) Characterization of
mineral phosphate solubilization traits from a barley rhizosphere soil functional metagenome.
Microbiology 2:717–724. https://doi.org/10.1002/MBO3.1108 Microbiome of Plants: The Diversity, Distribution, and Their Potential... 223
Chitarra W, Pagliarani C, Maserti B, Lumini E, Siciliano I, Cascone P, Schubert A, Gambino G,
Balestrini R, Guerrieri E (2016) Insights on the impact of arbuscular mycorrhizal symbiosis on
tomato tolerance to water stress. Plant Physiol 171:1009–1023. https://doi.org/10.1104/pp.16.
00307
Compant S, Samad A, Faist H, Sessitsch A (2019) A review on the plant microbiome: ecology,
functions, and emerging trends in microbial application. J Adv Res 19:29–37. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.jare.2019.03.004
Conn VM, Franco CMM (2004) Effect of microbial inoculants on the indigenous actinobacterial
endophyte population in the roots of wheat as determined by terminal restriction fragment length
polymorphism. Appl Environ Microbiol 70:6407–6413. https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.70.11.
6407-6413.2004
Curlango-Rivera G, Huskey DA, Mostafa A, Kessler JO, Xiong Z, Hawes MC (2013) Intraspecies
variation in cotton border cell production: rhizosphere microbiome implications. Am J Bot 100:
1706–1712. https://doi.org/10.3732/ajb.1200607
Dastogeer KMG, Tumpa FH, Sultana A, Akter MA, Chakraborty A (2020) Plant microbiome—an
account of the factors that shape community composition and diversity. Curr Plant Biol 23:
100161. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpb.2020.100161
De La Torre-Ruiz N, Ruiz-Valdiviezo VM, Rincón-Molina CI, Rodríguez-Mendiola M, Arias￾Castro C, Gutiérrez-Miceli FA, Palomeque-Dominguez H, Rincón-Rosales R (2016) Effect of
plant growth-promoting bacteria on the growth and fructan production of Agave Americana
L. Brazilian J Microbiol 47:587–596. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bjm.2016.04.010
del Orozco-Mosqueda MC, del Rocha-Granados MC, Glick BR, Santoyo G (2018) Microbiome
engineering to improve biocontrol and plant growth-promoting mechanisms. Microbiol Res
208:25–31. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.MICRES.2018.01.005
Durán P, Tortella G, Viscardi S, Barra PJ, Carrión VJ, De La Luz Mora M, Pozo MJ (2018)
Microbial community composition in take—all suppressive soils. Front Microbiol 9:1–15.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2018.02198
Fitzpatrick CR, Salas-González I, Conway JM, Finkel OM, Gilbert S, Russ D, Teixeira PJPL, Dangl
JL (2020) The plant microbiome: from ecology to reductionism and beyond. Annu Rev
Microbiol 74:81–100. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-micro-022620-014327
Glick BR (2014) Bacteria with ACC deaminase can promote plant growth and help to feed the
world. Microbiol Res 169:30–39. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.MICRES.2013.09.009
Gupta R, Anand G, Gaur R, Yadav D (2021) Plant–microbiome interactions for sustainable
agriculture: a review. Physiol Mol Biol Plants 27:165–179. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12298-
021-00927-1
Hara S, Matsuda M, Minamisawa K (2019) Growth stage-dependent bacterial communities in
soybean plant tissues: Methylorubrum transiently dominated in the flowering stage of the
soybean shoot. Microbes Environ 34:446–450. https://doi.org/10.1264/jsme2.ME19067
Hartmann A, Rothballer M, Hense BA, Schröder P (2014) Bacterial quorum sensing compounds are
important modulators of microbe-plant interactions. Front Plant Sci 5:131. https://doi.org/10.
3389/FPLS.2014.00131/BIBTEX
Hashem A, Abd-Allah EF, Alqarawi AA, Al-Huqail AA, Wirth S, Egamberdieva D (2016) The
interaction between arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi and endophytic bacteria enhances plant
growth of Acacia gerrardii under salt stress. Front Microbiol 7:1–15. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fmicb.2016.01089
Hong S, Jv H, Lu M, Wang B, Zhao Y, Ruan Y (2020) Significant decline in banana Fusarium wilt
disease is associated with soil microbiome reconstruction under chilli pepper-banana rotation.
Eur J Soil Biol 97:103154. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.EJSOBI.2020.103154
Igiehon NO, Babalola OO (2018) Below-ground-above-ground plant-microbial interactions: focus￾ing on soybean, rhizobacteria and mycorrhizal fungi. Open Microbiol J 12:261. https://doi.org/
10.2174/1874285801812010261224 A. K. Pandey et al.
Jodeh S, Alkowni R, Hamed R, Samhan S (2015) The study of electrolyte leakage from barley
(Hordeum vulgare L) and pearlmillet using plant growth promotion (PGPR) and reverse
osmosis. J Food Nutr Res 3:422–429. https://doi.org/10.12691/jfnr-3-7-3
Kaur T (2020) Fungal endophyte-host plant interactions: role in sustainable agriculture. In: Sus￾tainable crop production. IntechOpen, London. https://doi.org/10.5772/INTECHOPEN.92367
Kinnunen-Grubb M, Sapkota R, Vignola M, Nunes IM, Nicolaisen M (2020) Wheat domestication
has dramatically affected the root-associated microbiome 1–23. https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs￾20588/v1
Konieczny A, Kowalska I (2016) The role of arbuscular mycorrhiza in zinc uptake by lettuce grown
at two phosphorus levels in the substrate. Agric Food Sci 25:124–137. https://doi.org/10.23986/
afsci.55534
Kumar I, Mondal M, Gurusamy R, Balakrishnan S, Natarajan S (2019) Plant-microbiome interac￾tion and the effects of biotic and abiotic components in agroecosystem. In: Microbial interven￾tions in agriculture and environment: volume 2: rhizosphere, microbiome and agro-ecology.
Springer, Cham, pp 517–546. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-13-8383-0_18
Kwak MJ, Kong HG, Choi K, Kwon SK, Song JY, Lee J, Lee PA, Choi SY, Seo M, Lee HJ, Jung
EJ, Park H, Roy N, Kim H, Lee MM, Rubin EM, Lee SW, Kim JF (2018) Rhizosphere
microbiome structure alters to enable wilt resistance in tomato. Nat Biotechnol 3611(36):
1100–1109. https://doi.org/10.1038/nbt.4232
Lebeis SL, Paredes SH, Lundberg DS, Breakfield N, Gehring J, McDonald M, Malfatti S, Del Rio
TG, Jones CD, Tringe SG, Dangl JL (2015) Salicylic acid modulates colonization of the root
microbiome by specific bacterial taxa. Science 349:860–864. https://doi.org/10.1126/
SCIENCE.AAA8764/SUPPL_FILE/PAPV2.PDF
Lebreton L, Guillerm-Erckelboudt AY, Gazengel K, Linglin J, Ourry M, Glory P, Sarniguet A,
Daval S, Manzanares-Dauleux MJ, Mougel C (2019) Temporal dynamics of bacterial and
fungal communities during the infection of Brassica rapa roots by the protist Plasmodiophora
brassicae. PLoS One 14:e0204195. https://doi.org/10.1371/JOURNAL.PONE.0204195
Lee EH, Eom AH (2015) Growth characteristics of Rhizophagus Clarus strains and their effects on
the growth of host plants. Mycobiology 43:444–449. https://doi.org/10.5941/MYCO.2015.43.
4.444
Li R, Feng Y, Chen H, Zhang C, Huang Y, Chen L, Hao Q, Cao D, Yuan S, Zhou X (2020) Whole￾genome sequencing of Bradyrhizobium diazoefficiens 113-2 and comparative genomic analysis
provide molecular insights into species specificity and host specificity. Front Microbiol 11:1–
17. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2020.576800
Liu F, Hewezi T, Lebeis SL, Pantalone V, Grewal PS, Staton ME (2019) Soil indigenous
microbiome and plant genotypes cooperatively modify soybean rhizosphere microbiome assem￾bly. BMC Microbiol 19:1–19. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12866-019-1572-x
Lupatini M, Korthals GW, de Hollander M, Janssens TKS, Kuramae EE (2017) Soil microbiome is
more heterogeneous in organic than in conventional farming system. Front Microbiol 7:2064.
https://doi.org/10.3389/FMICB.2016.02064/BIBTEX
Mendes LW, de Chaves MG, de Fonseca MC, Mendes R, Raaijmakers JM, Tsai SM (2019)
Resistance breeding of common bean shapes the physiology of the rhizosphere microbiome.
Front Microbiol 10:1–10. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2019.02252
Mitter EK, de Freitas JR, Germida JJ (2017) Bacterial root microbiome of plants growing in oil
sands reclamation covers. Front Microbiol 8. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2017.00849
Mohumad Tahat M (2012) The potential of endomycorrhizal fungi in controlling tomato bacterial
wilt Ralstonia solanacearum under glasshouse condition. African J Biotechnol 11:13085–
13094. https://doi.org/10.5897/ajb11.3629
Morella NM, Weng FCH, Joubert PM, Jessica C, Lindow S, Koskella B (2020) Successive
passaging of a plant-associated microbiome reveals robust habitat and host genotype-dependent
selection. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 117:1148–1159. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.19086001168 Microbiome of Plants: The Diversity, Distribution, and Their Potential... 225
Oyserman BO, Cordovez V, Flores SS, Leite MFA, Nijveen H, Medema MH, Raaijmakers JM
(2021) Extracting the GEMs: genotype, environment, and microbiome interactions shaping host
phenotypes. Front Microbiol 11:1–8. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2020.574053
Padmavathi T, Dikshit R, Seshagiri S (2015) Effect of Rhizophagus spp. and plant growth￾promoting Acinetobacter junii on Solanum lycopersicum and Capsicum annuum. Rev Bras
Bot 38:273–280. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40415-015-0144-z
Pieterse CMJ, de Jonge R, Berendsen RL (2016) The soil-borne supremacy. Trends Plant Sci 21:
171–173. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.TPLANTS.2016.01.018
Podolich O, Ardanov P, Zaets I, Pirttilä AM, Kozyrovska N (2015) Reviving of the endophytic
bacterial community as a putative mechanism of plant resistance. Plant Soil 388:367–377.
https://doi.org/10.1007/S11104-014-2235-1/FIGURES/2
Qin S, Yeboah S, Xu X, Liu Y, Yu B (2017) Analysis on fungal diversity in rhizosphere soil of
continuous cropping potato subjected to different furrow-ridge mulching managements. Front
Microbiol 8:845. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2017.00845
Rastegari AA (2020) Microbiomes for sustainable. Agriculture. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-
38453-1
Rodrigues AA, Forzani MV, de Soares RS, Sibov ST, Vieira JDG (2016) Isolation and selection of
plant growth-promoting bacteria associated with sugarcane. Pesqui Agropecuária Trop 46:149–
158. https://doi.org/10.1590/1983-40632016v4639526
Santos LF, Olivares FL (2021) Plant microbiome structure and benefits for sustainable agriculture.
Curr Plant Biol 26:100198. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpb.2021.100198
Santos-Medellín C, Edwards J, Liechty Z, Nguyen B, Sundaresan V (2017) Drought stress results in
a compartment-specific restructuring of the rice root-associated microbiomes. MBio 8:
e00764-17. https://doi.org/10.1128/MBIO.00764-17
Sapre S, Gontia-Mishra I, Tiwari S (2018) Klebsiella sp. confers enhanced tolerance to salinity and
plant growth promotion in oat seedlings (Avena sativa). Microbiol Res 206:25–32. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.micres.2017.09.009
Shahid M, Khan MS, Syed A, Marraiki N, Elgorban AM (2021) Mesorhizobium ciceri as biological
tool for improving physiological, biochemical and antioxidant state of Cicer arietinum (L.)
under fungicide stress. Sci Rep 11(1):1–18. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-89103-9
Shahsavar AR, Refahi A, Zarei M, Aslmoshtaghi E (2016) Analysis of the effects of Glomus
etunicatum fungi and Pseudomonas fluorescence bacteria symbiosis on some morphological
and physiological characteristics of Mexican lime (Citrus aurantifolia L.) under drought stress
conditions. Adv Hortic Sci 30:39–45. https://doi.org/10.13128/ahs-18700
Sharma M, Sudheer S, Usmani Z, Rani R, Gupta P (2020) Deciphering the omics of plant-microbe
interaction: perspectives and new insights. Curr Genomics 21:343–362. https://doi.org/10.2174/
1389202921999200515140420
Shcherbakova EN, Shcherbakov AV, Andronov EE, Gonchar LN, Kalenskaya SM, Chebotar VK
(2017) Combined pre-seed treatment with microbial inoculants and Mo nanoparticles changes
composition of root exudates and rhizosphere microbiome structure of chickpea (Cicer
arietinum L.) plants. Symbiosis 73:57–69. https://doi.org/10.1007/S13199-016-0472-1/
TABLES/4
Shi SM, Chen K, Gao Y, Liu B, Yang XH, Huang XZ, Liu GX, Zhu LQ, He XH (2016) Arbuscular
mycorrhizal fungus species dependency governs better plant physiological characteristics and
leaf quality of mulberry (Morus alba L.) seedlings. Front Microbiol 7:1–11. https://doi.org/10.
3389/fmicb.2016.01030
Shuab R, Lone R, Naidu J, Sharma V, Imtiyaz S, Koul KK (2014) Benefits of inoculation of
arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi on growth and development of onion (Allium cepa) plant. Environ
Sci 14:527–535. https://doi.org/10.5829/idosi.aejaes.2014.14.06.12347
Simonin M, Dasilva C, Terzi V, Ngonkeu ELM, Diouf D, Kane A, Béna G, Moulin L (2020)
Influence of plant genotype and soil on the wheat rhizosphere microbiome: evidences for a core
microbiome across eight African and European soils. FEMS Microbiol Ecol 96:1–18. https://
doi.org/10.1093/femsec/fiaa067226 A. K. Pandey et al.
Singh D, Raina TK, Kumar A, Singh J, Prasad R (2019) Plant microbiome: a reservoir of novel
genes and metabolites. Plant Gene. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plgene.2019.100177
Tripathi BM, Moroenyane I, Sherman C, Lee YK, Adams JM, Steinberger Y (2017) Trends in
taxonomic and functional composition of soil microbiome along a precipitation gradient in
Israel. Microb Ecol 74:168–176. https://doi.org/10.1007/S00248-017-0931-0/FIGURES/4
Trivedi P, Leach JE, Tringe SG, Sa T, Singh BK (2020) Plant–microbiome interactions: from
community assembly to plant health. Nat Rev Microbiol:607–621. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41579-020-0412-1
van der Voort M, Kempenaar M, van Driel M, Raaijmakers JM, Mendes R (2016) Impact of soil
heat on reassembly of bacterial communities in the rhizosphere microbiome and plant disease
suppression. Ecol Lett 19:375–382. https://doi.org/10.1111/ELE.12567
Viscardi S, Ventorino V, Duran P, Maggio A, De Pascale S, Mora ML, Pepe O (2016) Assessment
of plant growth promoting activities and abiotic stress tolerance of Azotobacter chroococcum
strains for a potential use in sustainable agriculture. J Soil Sci Plant Nutr 16:848–863. https://
doi.org/10.4067/s0718-95162016005000060
Zahir ZA, Munir A, Asghar HN, Shaharoona B, Arshad M (2008) Effectiveness of rhizobacteria
containing ACC deaminase for growth promotion of peas (Pisum sativum) under drought
conditions. J Microbiol Biotechnol 18:958–963
Zhang QM, Gong M, Liu K, Chen Y, Yuan J, Chang Q (2020) Rhizoglomus intraradices improves
plant growth, root morphology and Phytohormone balance of Robinia pseudoacacia in arsenic￾contaminated soils. Front Microbiol 11:1428. https://doi.org/10.3389/FMICB.2020.01428/
BIBTEX
Zhu S, Vivanco JM, Manter DK (2016) Nitrogen fertilizer rate affects root exudation, the rhizo￾sphere microbiome and nitrogen-use-efficiency of maize. Appl Soil Ecol 107:324–333. https://
doi.org/10.1016/J.APSOIL.2016.07.009227
Chapter 9
Decoding Beneficial Plant Microbe
Association with Latest Techniques
for Sustainable Agriculture
Bhawana Jangra, Pooja Bhadrecha, Pankaj Kumar, and Jitendra Kumar
Abstract One of the most precious treasures offered by mother nature to humans is
plants and to aid in their outstanding performances, plants maintain allelopathic
relationships with microorganisms, especially in roots and rhizosphere, along with
providing food, fodder, and employment. But plants have to face various detrimental
conditions such as abiotic and biotic stress conditions caused through pollution,
climatic situations, pathogenic microorganisms, competing herbs, and weeds. Asso￾ciation of beneficial microorganisms with the plant roots and rhizosphere provide
privilege to plant development, potential to resist stress, hence maximize yield even
in adverse environment. Therefore, researchers worldwide have concentrated their
attention toward exploring the rhizospheric microbiota with the help of conventional
methods as well as latest techniques like metabolomic tools and CRISPR/Cas
system. Here we discuss various beneficial and mutualistic relationships between
plants and associated rhizospheric microbiota and spotlight the latest research
techniques and findings aimed at understanding and utilizing microorganisms for
sustainable agricultural practices.
Keywords Omics technologies · GC-MS · Maldi TOF · NMR · Sustainable
agriculture
B. Jangra · P. Bhadrecha
University Institute of Biotechnology, Chandigarh University, Mohali, Punjab, India
P. Kumar
Department of Microbiology, Dolphin (PG) Institute of Biomedical and Natural Science,
Dehradun, Uttarakhand, India
J. Kumar (*)
Department of Biosciences, UIBT, Chandigarh University, Mohali, Punjab, India
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2023
S. Chhabra et al. (eds.), Plant Microbiome for Plant Productivity and Sustainable
Agriculture, Microorganisms for Sustainability 37,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-19-5029-2_9228 B. Jangra et al.
9.1 Introduction
The microbiome is native to the microbial population that exists in a particular
environment. The plant ecosystem is considered the ecological niches that foster in
their rhizosphere, phyllosphere, and endosphere, which carry a varied range of inter￾actions like beneficial, neutral, and harmful. The microorganisms syndicate with plants
and assist in the soil nutrients acquisition, stress tolerance, and disease surveillance that
promote plant growth and ecological fitness under the agricultural system. In ecosys￾tem various types of interaction exist between plant and microorganisms. However, the
interaction between the plant root and soil microorganism is essential, and the soil
microbes stimulated toward rhizosphere because of unveiling of root exudates.
Microbes exploit the root through varied plant growth-promoting (PGP) aspects.
Phyllospheric microbiomes are considered stress-tolerant microbes that have the
potential to tolerate UV exposure and torrid heat as compared to other microbiomes
(Liu et al. 2020). The endophytic microbiome is considered the most beneficial
microbiome due to the invasion of plant microbes in plant tissues like root, stem,
flower, fruits, and seeds (Rana et al. 2020; Prasad and Zhang 2022). The most limiting
element is nitrogen which is responsible for plant germination. However, microbes
(Rhizobium, Azospirillum, Gluconoacetobacter) adjunct with the plants and make
available the atmospheric nitrogen for plants. Furthermore, the use of some of these
microorganisms as biofertilizer (natural fertilizers that contain living microorganisms
(bacteria, fungi, and cyanobacteria) in the soil to provide nutrition to the plant source
has emerged as a sustainable technology for nitrogen fixation that promotes crop yield.
Phosphorus is another limiting element for plant development. The rhizospheric
microbiomes are often considered to have the best ecological approach to transform
insoluble inorganic phosphorous into soluble phosphorus, and also help in seed
germination and help in plant growth promotion under acidity/alkalinity, salinity,
drought, and foster the plants (Verma et al. 2013). Due to the inclusion of systematic
resistance, the defense system of plants activates furthermore which prevents plants
from initiating pathogen attack through niche competition, production of antimicrobial
eventually leading to release of secondary metabolites. The microbial population is
harmed by human arbitration like discerning procreation, and pumping of agrochem￾icals in the agricultural biosphere (White et al. 2019).
9.1.1 Microbiomes and Potential
The microbiome is a mass of microbes (bacteria, fungi, algae, yeast) that provide
nutrients to the plants. Various publications have mentioned its importance, and
researchers have studied different compartments of the plant to soil continuum for
sustainable agriculture (Bertola et al. 2021). Among all the plant organs, the most
studied organs are vegetative and reproductive, where the microorganisms can
colonize and establish. For last few decades, most focused research is on the9 Decoding Beneficial Plant Microbe Association with Latest Techniques... 229
Fig. 9.1 Plant–microbe interactions (Andreote et al. 2010)
rhizosphere and phyllosphere (Nelson 2018). However, habitats like spermosphere
(the zone where interaction between soil, microbes, and seed germination occurs)
and carposphere (the zone around the fruits where the microbes are present) are less
studied (Nelson 2018). The rhizobiome contributes to the plant in nutrient acquisi￾tion, phytohormone production, increases plant immunity and improves soil fertility
(Nwachukwu and Babalola 2021). Rhizosphere microbiota influences plant growth
through detrimental and beneficial microorganisms such as biocontrol microorgan￾isms bacteria and plant pathogenic fungi (Srivastava et al. 2014; Prasad and Varma
2014). Root exudates are the source for nutrient acquisition that produces different
inorganic and organic compounds known as rhizodeposits which provide an exclu￾sive environment and attract the microbes with high nutrient utility (Kohli et al.
2012). The multiple microbial colonies make effective soil because of releasing the
regulatory substrates that help many to survive in an extreme environment. The
rhizoderm cells consider organic acids, siderophores, inorganic acids, sugars, amino
acids, vitamins, purines, nucleosides, and polysaccharide mucilage-like compounds
that consider hundred times more microorganisms than aggregated soil.
Microorganisms can control nutrient acquisition and promote stress tolerance that
influences agricultural productivity. The diversity of microorganisms and species
evenness are the impact factors on agricultural productivity which are still not
defined. The current focus of research is on specific niches of plants and the
regulation of microbial communities. Understanding the phylogenetic and functional
perspectives should be heightened on the different parts of plant microbiome
individually. Microbiomes from rhizosphere, endosphere, and phyllosphere have
diverse microbial communities (Hirsch et al. 2013). Understanding the significance
of plant-associated microbiome preventing the plants from harmful pathogens
(Fig. 9.1). Mainly focus should be on the appropriate methodology for studying
the interaction between plants and microbes (Carvalhais et al. 2013).
The molecular techniques determine the effects incited through stress factors on
rhizospheric microbiome and interaction between microbes and plants in changing
environments. The main factor is improvement of microbial stress alleviation in
crops helps to understand the plant and microbe interaction (Barea 2015). Stress
factors such as salt stress, drought, nutritional deficit, impurity, diseases, pests affect
the plant and microbe interaction. Scientists discovered a new finding to improve230 B. Jangra et al.
aging factor of water and nutrient for essential crops. The important nutrients and
water acquisition occur through the roots. Therefore, understanding the regulation of
root branching is essential.
9.2 Abiotic and Biotic Stress Tolerance
9.2.1 Abiotic Stress and Microbial Potential
Regulation of plant–microbe interaction has an essential perspective toward a variety
of stress like metal pollution, drought, salt stress, and temperature (Muller et al.
2016).
9.2.2 Salt Stress and Heavy Metal Stress
In semiarid and arid conditions, high salt accumulation is present which is the major
abiotic stress for agriculture. In a study, the antioxidative Trichoderma asperelloides
was recognized with antioxidant properties against salt stress (Brotman et al. 2013).
In case of tomato, Azotobactor chroococcum was recognized with antioxidant
properties (Viscardi et al. 2016). The Plant Growth-Promoting Bacteria (PGPB)
and endophytic fungus promote PGP metabolite secretion, IAA production, and
ACC deaminase activity in saline conditions (Prasad et al. 2015). Usage of PGPB
was found promising for salinity tolerance in crops like wheat (Nadeem et al. 2016)
and maize (Sorty et al. 2016). The bacteria found in siderophore are used to reduce
the pollution due to heavy metal tolerance in canola, Indian mustard, and tomato
cultivation (Burd et al. 2000).
9.2.3 Thermal and Radiation Stress
As we know high temperature is the major issue in today’s environment due to
climate change or human indulging activities such as increase of CO2 by using CFC,
increment of industries which are affecting crop growth all over the world. Micro￾organisms are auspicious factor to reduce temperature stress. Pseudomonas putida,
Sphingomonas, Azospirillum brasilense, and Acinetobacter are stress-tolerant that
increase the maize plant biomass (Molina-Romero et al. 2017), whereas high
molecular weight proteins produced by using Pseudomonas are described in improv￾ing metabolites level in sorghum and wheat (Ali et al. 2011). Drought and
ultraviolet-B radiations are the strongest stress effector. Some bacteria like
Enterobacter cloacae in rice and Clavibacter michiganensis in groundnut were
found to prevent from the UV-B radiations (Rodriguez and Duran 2020).9 Decoding Beneficial Plant Microbe Association with Latest Techniques... 231
9.2.4 Drought Stress
Among all stresses drought is known as the major aspect for high loss of crop yield
(Barnawal et al. 2013), due to instability of water in plant (Pareek et al. 2009).
Various microbes act against abiotic stress. The microbiomes that are commonly
used are Raoultella planticola, Azospirillum lipoferum, Klebsiella variicola, Pseu￾domonas fluorescens, and Pseudomonas putida which can tolerate the drought stress
in maize crops (Ansary et al. 2012; Bano et al. 2013; Gou et al. 2015). Microorgan￾isms perform the essential role in the functions of maize like water potential,
stomatal closure, promotes hormonal potential by accumulating abscisic acid,
auxin, choline, gibberellin, and proline. Furthermore, the species like Azospirillum
brasilense reduce the osmotic stress in rice crops and make the better root growth
(de Souza et al. 2019). In the study of drought in wheat, some of the microbes are
used such as Rhizobium leguminosarum, Mesorhizobium ciceri, and Rhizobium
phaseoli (Hussain et al. 2014; Timmusk et al. 2014). Mostly PGPR is approached
in the pepper crop due to which rhizobia and the endosphere lead to the ability which
can tolerate the shortage of water through increment of roots (Rolli et al. 2015)
(Fig. 9.2).
9.3 Biotic Stress and Microbial Potential
Microorganisms play most essential role in reduction of biotic stress, and help in
improving plant growth and vegetative vigor and tolerate diseases (De Corato 2020).
For example, PGPR releases various significant biomolecules like 1-amino-cyclo￾propane-1-1-carboxylate (ACC) deaminase, hydrogen cyanide (HCN), phytohor￾mones, siderophores, which prevent the invasion of harmful phytopathogens (Kaur
et al. 2018). The species like Arthrobacternitroguajacolicus, B. cereus,
B. megaterium, B. mojavensis, P. azotoformans, and P. frederisksbergensis suppress
the Alternaria and Fusarium activity of wilt disease and mortality in tobacco
Fig. 9.2 Abiotic and biotic stress232 B. Jangra et al.
(Santhanam et al. 2015). Bacillus mojavensis is an endophytic pathogenic against
Fusarium verticillioides found in maize kernels and possesses growth-promoting
traits (Bacon and Hinton 2011). Along with disease, the pests can also be controlled
by using the microbes that contain activity like pathogen. Among all, the soil￾dwelling bacteria Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt) is most widely exploited for pest
suppression. Insects like Lepidoptera, Coleoptera, and Diptera are too degradative
for the plants and hence Bt. variants like Kurstaki, Tenebrionis, and Israelensis are
popularly employed. M. robertsii boosts the root growth of Panicum virgatum and
Phaseolus vulgaris (Sasan and Bidochka 2012). The most widely exploited endo￾phytic microbes reported are Lecanicillium and Akanthomyces (Nicoletti and
Becchimanzi 2020). The endophytic strain L. lecanii prevents the cotton plant
from aphids and Aphis gossypii (Nicoletti and Becchimanzi 2020). Lecanicillium
species act as anti-fungal against diseases which are caused by powdery mildew and
rust fungi (Jackson et al. 2012). Some fungal endophytes produce compounds which
act against pests like argot alkaloids, indole-diterpenes, lolines, and paramine
(Panaccione et al. 2014) (Fig. 9.2).
9.4 Modern Approaches for Sustainable Agriculture
Implementation of the modern approach in sustainable agriculture can help in
understanding the communications among plants and PGPR in terms of biomole￾cules and signals. Some of the OMIC tools that help in better understanding the plant
microbial interactions or the plant microbiome are: metabolome, proteome, genome,
transcriptome.
The genetic modification of microbe or plant and microbial consortia in sustain￾able cultivation can be handled by modern approaches; genomics approach is more
accurate compared to other approaches because of precise genomic sequences
without the insertion of foreign gene.
Metablomics is an advance technique in micrbiolgical world for decoding the
microbes however, its still lacking in accuracy and other various challenges. In
present situation, various modern tools and techniques like GC-MS (gas
chromatography-mass spectrometry) or LC-MS (liquid chromatography-mass spec￾trometry) are emerging whereas techniques like nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
are daunting (Fig. 9.3).
9.4.1 Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic
Repeats (CRISPR)/Cas System
In the current era of changing climate, the environmental effects impact negatively
on economic and agronomic level. To resolve this issue, new technologies are used9 Decoding Beneficial Plant Microbe Association with Latest Techniques... 233
Fig. 9.3 Latest techniques
for gene manipulation.
CRISPR clustered regularly
interspaced short
palindromic repeats, TALEN
transcription activator like
effector nuclease
in the field of biotechnology. This technique represents a new prospective for genetic
engineering and gene editing tools. It is based on the two main components: Cas
endonuclease (sgRNA) and single gRNA (Jinek et al. 2012). Its main function is the
modification of desired DNA fragment using molecular scissor (Kanchiswamy et al.
2016). About 11 CRISPR/cas systems divided as Type I-III have been reported
(Ma and Liu 2016). The most beneficial factor to use this technique is short
recognition sequence, i.e., protospacer adjacent motif (PAM) adjacent to gRNA.
In this technique, it is easy to use the sgRNA designing for target.
Cas9 is a DNA endonuclease mainly for inhibition of targeted foreign DNA using
RNA. Transcription and processing of CRISPR produce mature RISPR (cr) RNAs
that introduce the cleavage in the RNA/DNA of the attacker (Krishnakumar and
Kraus 2010; Sarma et al. 2021). CRISPR is popular for its specificity which is
sustained by gRNA. It permits the certain binding to targeted DNA. Binding of
upstream and downstream gRNA prevent the off target editing in the double nickase
system. Moreover, it is corrected by using immobilized cas9. Restriction enzyme
nuclease activity gets activated when upstream and downstream gRNA is in acces￾sibility (Guilinger et al. 2014). The addition and removal of gene of interest is done
by inclusion of DSBs in the target site (To et al. 2014). In the current scenario,
diverse computational tools are emerging such as CHOPCHOP, E-CRISPR, and
CRISPR designing tool which are used for identifying the probable sequence of
cleavage. The conclusion of this technique is that basically it helps to design the
gRNA (Hsu et al. 2013; Heigwer et al. 2014; Montague et al. 2014).
9.4.2 Gene Editing
Gene editing is the technique that has the ability to change the organism’s DNA.
This technique is useful for improve of different variety of crops so that higher yield
can be obtained, increased the stress tolerance, resist from pest and various diseases
and increased nutritional value. Crops can be improved followed by a few modifi￾cations among nucleotides present in the genome of living cells, and/or by editing
whole allele, or insertion of new gene at a target site in the genome. However, gene
editing is the best method for increasing the crops yield in the harsh climate. Genome234 B. Jangra et al.
editing can be done through three different ways such as alter few nucleotides,
replace an allele from already existing one, and insert new genes in predetermined
regions in the genome. Most of gene editing tools include the double strand breaks
named as CRISPR-Cas, Zinc finger nuclease (ZFN), and transcription activator like
effector nucleases (TALEN) which are corrected by non-homologous end joining
(NHEJ) or homologous directed repair (HDR) (Szankasi and Smith 1992).
9.4.3 Transcription Activator like Effector Nucleases
(TALEN)
TALEN are restriction enzymes that use TAL effector DNA binding domains to
break target DNA. An easy “code” that fits the 2-amino acid sequence in the 33–35
amino acid preserved target sequence aids selective targeting. Discovery of diverse
methods for facile synthesis and assembly of TALENs, as well as advancements in
gene editing tools, enables for productive editing at several sites. TALENs were used
to successfully knock out the HIV-resistant CCR5 gene in human cells, destroy the
disease related to rice gene (Ayala Garcia et al. 2012; Li et al. 2012), disrupt swine
LDL receptor (Carlson et al. 2012), and replace Zebra fish tyrosine hydroxylase gene
(Xiao et al. 2013).
9.5 Analytical Tools and Techniques
The techniques like NMR, LC-MS, GC-MS, HPLC, and DFI-MS, which are
approached for understanding the plant metabolome, are used for studying the
plant metabolome as they speed up metabolic profiling. The metabolome is a
group of metabolites in an organism which is used to characterize genetic and
environmental variations. Metabolomics plays a significant role in exploring
environment–gene interactions, mutant characterization, phenotyping, identification
of biomarkers, and drug discovery. Metabolomics is an approach to decipher various
metabolic networks that are linked with stress tolerance. Single analytical procedures
cannot sense all of the metabolites exist in a sample in plant metabolomics. Alter￾natively, a combination of approaches is needed to offer highest degree of metabolite
coverage (Razzaq et al. 2019). Metabolites research is generally based on the MS
techniques, such as MALDI, FTICR-MS, CE-MSIMS, GC-MS, and NMR (Bianchi
et al. 2018) (Fig. 9.4).9 Decoding Beneficial Plant Microbe Association with Latest Techniques... 235
Fig. 9.4 Latest analytical
techniques. GC-MS gas
chromatography-mass
spectrometry, CE-MS
capillary electrophoresis￾mass spectrometry, FTICR￾MS Fourier transform ion
cyclotron resonance-mass
spectrometry, NMR nuclear
magnetic resonance, MALDI
matrix-assisted laser
desorption/ionization
9.5.1 Gas Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry (GC-MS)
It is an analytical technique used to identify or quantify the tiny metabolites such as
amines, sterols, sugars, alcohols, amino acids, hydroxyl acids, and fatty acids (Guo
et al. 2019). Furthermore, different types of methods can also be used such as
acylation, trimethylsilylation, silylation, and alkylation. In this technique, there are
two major derivatization steps for the isolation and recognition of metabolites. The
initial step involves transforming all the carbonyl groups into corresponding oximes
through methoxyamine hydrochloride. In next step, the volatility of the derivative
metabolites increases through trimethylsilylation reaction using derivatizing
reagents such as N, O-bis-(trimethylsilyl) trifluoroacetamide (BSTFA), and
N-Methyl-N-(trimethylsilyl) trifluoroacetamide (MSTFA) (Harvey and Vouros
2020). GC-MS is used to identify the compounds with low molecular weight that
thermally stable and volatile metabolites through chemical derivatization before
research (Hall 2006).
GC-MS contains chemical ionization (CI) and electron ionization (EI). The GC
with TOF-MS is popular technique for metabolomic profiling because it contains the
ability of faster acquisition time, improved deconvolution, and higher mass accuracy
outcomes for compounded mixtures while the GC with EI detector attire with
individual quadrupole (Q) mass analyzer contains reproducibility, resolution, robust￾ness, and high sensitivity suffer from stagnant examine agility and with deprived
accuracy of mass (Kumar et al. 2016). Concluding all the metabolite techniques the
GC-MS is the superior approach due to its better working features such as produc￾tivity, standardization, and efficiency (Tsugawa et al. 2011).236 B. Jangra et al.
9.5.2 Capillary Electrophoresis-Mass Spectrometry
Capillary electrophoresis mass spectrometry used to evaluate diversity of classical
metabolites on the basis of charge and size proportion ratio (Obata and Fernie 2012).
Based on mass fragmentation, this technique characterizes the metabolites and the
outcomes come up with fast and high resolution (Salem et al. 2020). Capillary
Electrophoresis-mass spectrometry technique is time saving because capillary
mass spectrometry (CE-MS) metabolite analysis imbricates with GC-MS and no
need for derivatization. This technique is implemented in fused silica capillary tubes,
the ends dipped in the buffer solutions and across which high voltage is applied
(Jorge et al. 2016). The disadvantageous features of this technique are poor mitiga￾tion time, low sensitivity, lack of reference libraries, and reproducibility (Williams
et al. 2007). The advantageous features of this technique separation are done in small
amount which is suitable for plant metabolomics (Salem et al. 2020).
9.5.3 Fourier Transform Ion Cyclotron Resonance-Mass
Spectrometry (FTICR-MS)
This approach furnishes by means of high resolving power and mass specificity out
of all kinds of mass spectrometry (Nikolaev et al. 2016). It becomes the essential
technique for proteomics and metabolomics due to its specific analytical features.
FTICR-MS is used as a part of metabolomics procedures because of its ability to
furnish ultimate elevated resolution and elevated mass specific data (Jorge et al.
2016). This technique is also consistent with multi-stage mass spectrometry ana￾lyzers. The high cost is the only barrier to widespread application in plant
metabolomics (Ahmad et al. 2018).
9.5.4 Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption/Ionization (MALDI)
This non-targeted analytical approach is implemented for quantitative and qualita￾tive image of a broad range of metabolites (Baker et al. 2017). The componenets like
sugars, metabolites, and lipids from various parts of the plants such as leaves, stem,
roots, and flower most of the studies used the MALDI-MS technique (Jung et al.
2010). The plant tissues contain many peptides and proteins that can be analyzed
through this technique which involves the coating of a fine film of a matrix
comprising either sinapinic acid, alpha-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid (CHCA),
and 2, 5-dihydroxy benzoic acid (2,5-DHBA) on the tissue surface. The penetration
of laser beam through the matrix-coated tissue generates the mass spectrum. MALDI
is the most common method for protein/metabolites imaging, merged with the broad
varieties of various mass analyzers such as Fourier ICR transform (FT-ICR), QqToF9 Decoding Beneficial Plant Microbe Association with Latest Techniques... 237
(quadrupole time of flight), linear and spherical ion trap. Other emerging ionization
techniques like laser ablation electrospray ionization (LAESI), desorption
electrospray ionization (DESI), and secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) are
already studied (Dong et al. 2016).
9.5.5 Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR)
NMR is a technique that furnishes the qualitative or quantitative data from biological
extracts used to investigate the different types of plant metabolome (Kim et al.
2011). NMR approach is based on the electromagnetic radiation, occurs when the
atomic nuclei is placed in the strong magnetic field. Currently, the NMR is an
emerging technique because chromatic separation and sample derivatization needs
not much higher requirement to perform the technique (Foroutan et al. 2019). This
technique contains various advantages such as quick analysis, non-destructive
nature, and excellent repeatability, however, it is less sensitive than MS, rather it is
pH-sensitive. Buffered solutions are usually needed at stable pH (Deborde et al.
2017; Kim et al. 2011).
9.6 OMICS Approaches
9.6.1 Genomics
The study of genetic material is known as the genomics (Mulder et al. 2017). In this
field, various combinations of recombinant DNA are used such as the DNA sequenc￾ing method, bioinformatics to sequence, analyze, and assemble its genomic and
functional structure. Using the next-generation sequencing data generates the data
that permit faster and cheaper sequencing (Grelewska-Nowotko et al. 2018). The
functional and structural genomic approaches are the divisions of genomics, the
structural genomics reveals the complete sequence DNA of an organism and it is also
the preliminary phase of genome study. Moreover, assessing the function of gene the
genome sequence is used in functional genomic (Leister 2004). Genomics provides
information about the resistant gene in the plant genome along with its location on
the chromosome. For developing the new improved crop varieties, the advance
tactics for plant biotechnology allow specified and practicable approaches for
molecular plant breeding and marker-assisted selection (Wang et al. 2017). The
disease-resistant R gene or nucleotide-binding leucine-rich repeats are detected by
the RenSeq tool. In greenhouse conditions, The Rpi-amr3i gene was found that
completely prevented phytophthora in the transgenic potatoes (Witek et al. 2016).238 B. Jangra et al.
9.6.2 Transcriptomics
The transcriptome approach is the complete set of RNA transcripts of an individual’s
genome under specific conditions/specific cells. The technique like microarray
analysis is used in the transcriptomic approach. The microarray quantifies the
steady-state mRNA levels which are different from the total functional protein
present in the plant tissue. Based on the RNA-sequence, comparison of
transcriptomic data allows the recognition and better knowledge of varied expressed
gene patterns, splice variants, and uncommon genes in a particular cell type (Gao
et al. 2013; Peter et al. 2018). The RNA genome of some plant viruses is hard to
analyze through standard molecular techniques. Understanding the plant virus
interaction between plant and microorganisms transcriptomic approaches is
used such as Degradome sequencing, RNA sequencing and sRNA sequencing is
increasing tremendously (Zanardo et al. 2019). The RNA sequence is performed to
analyze the differential gene expression in the resistant cotton. Plant science has
transcriptomic applications such as the progress of molecular markers, identifying
the genes and pathways related to the stress, and searching the genes which are
responsible for secondary metabolism and plant growth. Instead of pathologically
important genes, transcriptomics analyzes the crops whose sequence is still not
discovered. This approach leads to the genes that improve the concerning traits
(Agarwal et al. 2014). This technique assists in the examination of genes that are
implied in basic growth and stress mechanisms (Zan et al. 2013).
9.6.3 Proteomics
Proteomics is an appropriate approach to understand the molecular mechanism of
plant development and its growth. Proteomics is popular because it enables deep
study of the molecular mechanism of plant growth and development (Chen and
Harmon 2006) through functional and structural proteomics and protein-protein
interaction analysis (PPI), presence of the sequence of primary amino acids of
proteins, post translocation modification state, estimation of their relative amounts
and protein function characterization and structure are identified (Rhee et al. 2006).
Determining the plant reactions to peripheral incentives such as ailment and insect
infestation helps in unraveling the functions of different proteins by protein expres￾sion profile. Furthermore, it helps in understanding the resistance mechanism of
plants, mode of action for insecticides and their biodegradation, supporting in the
progress of effective, and safe agricultural pests (Van Emon 2016).9 Decoding Beneficial Plant Microbe Association with Latest Techniques... 239
9.6.4 Metabolomics
It is an OMIC approach which measures all the metabolites and the molecules whose
molecular weight is lower in organisms, cells, and tissues (Castro-Moretti et al.
2020). To generate data in metabolomic approach, the nuclear magnetic resonance
and mass spectrometry are used (Winning et al. 2009). Metabolomics is easy to
study molecular mechanism of plant development under stress conditions and
normal conditions. Along with the improvements in metabolomic techniques, breed￾ing of plants have various applications and futuristic approaches toward the devel￾opment and resistance against cultivators (Fernie and Schauer 2009). The
expeditious testing of plant metabolomic responses to environmental and genetic
changes helps in screening individuals which are tolerant and resistant (Castro￾Moretti et al. 2020). Identification of several metabolites which are capable to
tolerate the stress in plants can be recognized. For instance, resistant and acquiescent
cultivation of rice are blighted with Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae, which causes
leaf blight, differs strikingly for different metabolites named lipids, xanthophylls,
alkaloids, acetophenone and carbohydrates (Sana et al. 2010). The Fusarium
graminearum-resistant agmatine coumaroyltransferase (ACT) gene was detected
through the analysis of hydrocinnamic acid amide compounds. In conclusion,
culturing based on metabolomics helps in developing new plant varieties resisted
to diseases (Hong et al. 2016) (Fig. 9.5).
9.7 Conclusion
Manipulating the genome to recruit a coding sequence of interest has made it
possible to achieve/enhance desired characteristics and to suppress/delete the
unwanted traits, all thanks to latest gene editing techniques. Regular developments
and updating of latest analytical tools and techniques are additional benefits to record
the effects gene editing by analyzing the production yield and quality of metabolites.
Ongoing research and development in techniques like CRISPR/Cas and OMICS will
surely be giving us excellency in applicational benefits of these approaches. Hence,
utilizing them to decode allelopathic relationships between a plant and rhizospheric
microbiome will bring about incredible results in terms of plant growth, yield,
Fig. 9.5 OMICS technologies240 B. Jangra et al.
production of metabolites beneficial to humans and with great applications in
industries, better survival and sustainability of the plants to withstand biotic and
abiotic conditions.
References
Agarwal P, Parida SK, Mahto A et al (2014) Expanding frontiers in plant transcriptomics in aid of
functional genomics and molecular breeding. Biotechnol J 9:1480–1492. https://doi.org/10.
1007/s10123-020-00140-2
Ahmad P, Ahanger MA, Singh VP et al (2018) Plant metabolites and regulation under environ￾mental stress. Academic, Amsterdam
Ali SZ, Sandhya V, Grover M et al (2011) Effect of inoculation with a thermotolerant plant growth
promoting pseudomonas putida strains AKMP7 on growth of wheat (Triticum spp.) under heat
stress. J Plant Interact 6:239–246
Andreote FD, Da Rocha UN, Araujo WL et al (2010) Effect of bacterial inoculation, plant genotype
and developmental stage on root-associated and endophytic bacterial communities in potato
(Solanum tuberosum). Antonie Van Leeuwenhoek 97:389–399. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10482-010-9421-9
Ansary MH, Rahmani HA, Ardakai MR et al (2012) Effect of pseudomonas fluorescent on proline
and phytohormonal status of maize (Zea mays L.) under water deficit stress. Ann Biol Res 3:
1054–1062
Ayala Garcia MA, Gonzalez Yebra B, Lopez Flores AL, Guani Guerra E (2012) The major
histocompatibility complex in transplantation. J Transp Secur 2012:842141. https://doi.org/
10.1155/2012/842141
Bacon CW, Hinton DM (2011) Bacillus mojavensis: its endophytic nature, the surfactins, and their
role in the plant response to infection by Fusarium verticillioides. In: Bacteria in agrobiology:
plant growth responses. Springer, New York, pp 21–39
Baker TC, Han J, Brochers CH (2017) Recent advancements in matrix-assisted laser desorption/
ionization mass spectrometry imaging. Curr Opin Biotechnol 43:62–69. https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-642-20332-9_2
Bano Q, Ilyas N, Bano A et al (2013) Effect of Azospirillum inoculation on maize (Zea mays L.)
under drought stress. Pak J Bot 45:13–20
Barea JM (2015) Future challenges and perspectives for applying microbial biotechnology in
sustainable agriculture based on a better understanding of plant-microbiome interactions. J
Soil Sci Plant Nutr 15:261–282. https://doi.org/10.4067/S0718-95162015005000021
Barnawal D, Maji D, Bharti N et al (2013) ACC deaminase-containing Bacillus subtilis reduces
stress ethylene-induced damage and improves mycorrhizal colonization and rhizobial nodula￾tion stress, in Trigonella foenum-graecum under drought stress. J Plant Growth Regul 32:809–
822
Bertola M, Ferrarini A, Visiolo G (2021) Improvement of soil microbial diversity through sustain￾able agricultural practices, food quality and human safety. Microorganisms 9:1400
Bianchi F, Ilag L, Termopoli V, Mendez L (2018) Advances in MS-based analytical methods:
innovations and future trends. J Anal Methods Chem 2018:1. https://doi.org/10.1155/2018/
2084567
Brotman Y, Landau U, Cuadros-Inostroza A et al (2013) Trichoderma-plant root colonization:
escaping early plant defense responses and activation of the antioxidant machinery for saline
stress tolerance. PLoS Pathog 9:e1003221. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.1003221
Burd GI, Dixon DG, Glick BR (2000) Plant growth-promoting bacteria that decrease heavy metal
toxicity in plants. Can J Microbiol 46:237–245. https://doi.org/10.1139/w99-1439 Decoding Beneficial Plant Microbe Association with Latest Techniques... 241
Carlson DF, Tan W, Lillico SG et al (2012) Efficient TALEN-mediated gene knockout in livestock.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 109:17382–17387. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1211446109
Carvalhais LC, Dennis PG, Tyson GW, Schenk PM (2013) Rhizosphere metatranscriptomics:
challenges and opportunities. In: Molecular microbial ecology of the rhizosphere, vol
2. Wiley-Blackwell, Hoboken, pp 1137–1144
Castro-Moretti FR, Gentzel IN, Mackey D, Alonso AP (2020) Metabolomics as an emerging tool
for the study of plant-pathogen interactions. Metabolites 10:52. https://doi.org/10.3390/
metabo10020052
Chen S, Harmon AC (2006) Advances in plant proteomics. Proteomics 6:5504–5516
De Corato U (2020) Soil microbiota manipulation and its role in suppressing soil-borne plant
pathogens in organic farming systems under the light of microbiome-assisted strategies. Chem
Biol Technol Agric 7(1):17. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40538-020-00183-7
de Souza EM, Galindo FS, Teixeira M et al (2019) Does the nitrogen application associated with
Azospirillum brasilense inoculation influence corn nutrition and yield? Rev Bras Eng Agricola e
Ambient 23:53–59
Deborde C, Moing A, Roch L et al (2017) Plant metabolism as studied by NMR spectroscopy. Prog
Nucl Magn Reson Spectrosc 102:61–97. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pnmrs.2017.05.001
Dong Y, Li B, Malitsky S et al (2016) Sample preparation for mass spectrometry imaging of plant
tissues: a review. Front Plant Sci 7:60. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2016.00060
Fernie AR, Schauer N (2009) Metabolomics-assisted breeding: a viable option for crop improve￾ment? Trends Genet 25:39–48. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tig.2008.10.010
Foroutan A, Goldansaz SA, Lipfert M, Wishart DS (2019) Protocols for NMR analysis in livestock
metabolomics. Metabol Mol Biol 1996:311–324. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4939-9488-5_
23
Gao Y, Xu H, Shen Y, Wang J (2013) Transcriptomic analysis of rice (Oryza sativa) endosperm
using the RNA-seq technique. Plant Mol Biol 81:363–378. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11103-013-
0009-4
Gou W, Tian L, Ruan Z et al (2015) Accumulation of choline and grycinebetaine and drought stress
tolerance induced in maize (Zea mays) by three plant growth promoting rhizobacteria (PGPR)
strains. Pak J Bot 47:581–586
Grelewska-Nowotko K, Zurawaska-Zajfert M, Zmijewska E, Sowa S (2018) Optimization and
verification of droplet digital PCR even-specific methods for the quantification of GM maize
DAS1507 and NK603. Appl Biochem Biotechnol 185:207–220. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s12010-017-2634-x
Guilinger JP, Thompson DB, Liu DR (2014) Fusion of catalytically inactive Cas9 to FokI nuclease
improves the specificity of genome modification. Nat Biotechnol 32:577–582. https://doi.org/
10.1038/nbt.2909
Guo Y, Tian D, Shen F, Yang G, Long L, He J, Song C, Zhang J, Zhu Y, Huang C, Deng S (2019)
Transparent cellulose/technical lignin composite films for advanced packaging. Polymers
(Basel) 11(9):1455
Hall RD (2006) Plant metabolomics: from holistic hope, to hype, to hot topic. New Phytol 169:453–
468. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-8137.2005.01632.x
Heigwer F, Kerr G, Boutros M (2014) E-CRISP: fast CRISPR target site identification. Nat
Methods 11:122–123. https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.2812
Hirsch PR, Miller AJ, Dennis PG (2013) Do root exudates exert more influence on rhizosphere
bacterial community structure than other rhizodeposits? In: de Bruijn FJ (ed) Molecular micro￾bial ecology of the rhizosphere, vol 1. Wiley, New York, pp 229–242. https://doi.org/10.1002/
9781118297674.ch22
Hong J, Yang L, Zhang D, Shi J (2016) Plant metabolomics: an indispensable system biology tool
for plant science. Int J Mol Sci 17:767. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms17060767
Hsu PD, Scott DA, Weinstein JA et al (2013) DNA targeting specificity of RNA-guided Cas9
nucleases. Nat Biotechnol 31:827–832. https://doi.org/10.1080/17429145.2010.545147242 B. Jangra et al.
Hussain MB, Zahir ZA, Asghar M (2014) Can catalase and exopolysaccharides producing rhizobia
ameliorate drought stress in wheat? Int J Agric Biol 16:3–13
Jackson D, Skillman J, Vandermeer J (2012) Indirect biological control of the coffee leaf rust,
Hemileia vastatrix, by the entomogenous fungus Lecanicillium lecanii in a complex coffee
agroecosystem. Biol Control 61:89–97. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biocontrol.2012.01.004
Jinek M, Chylinski K, Fonfara I et al (2012) A programmable dual-RNA-guided DNA endonucle￾ase in adaptive bacterial immunity. Science 80(337):816–821. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.
1225829
Jorge TF, Rodrigues JA, Caldana C et al (2016) Mass spectrometry-based plant metabolomics:
metabolite responses to abiotic stress. Mass Spectrom Rev 35:620–649. https://doi.org/10.1002/
mas.21449
Jung JH, Song Z, Liu Z et al (2010) High-spatial and high mass resolution imaging of surface
metabolites of Arabidopsis thaliana by laser desorption-ionization mass spectrometry using
colloidal silver. Anal Chem 82:3255–3265. https://doi.org/10.1021/ac902990p
Kanchiswamy CN, Maffei M, Malnoy M et al (2016) Fine-tuning next generation genome editing
tools. Trends Biotechnol 34:562–574. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tibtech.2016.03.007
Kaur A, Devi SR, Vyas P (2018) Stress-tolerant antagonist plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria
from Zea mays. J Plant Prot Res 58:115–123. https://doi.org/10.24425/119127
Kim HK, Choi YH, Verpoorte R (2011) NMR-based plant metabolomics: where do we stand,
where do we go? Trends Biotechnol 29:267–275. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tibtech.2011.02.001
Kohli A, Narciso JO, Miro B, Raorane M (2012) Root proteases: reinforced links between nitrogen
uptake and mobilization and drought tolerance. Physiol Plant 145:165–179
Krishnakumar R, Kraus WL (2010) The PARP side of the nucleus: molecular actions, physiological
outcomes, and clinical targets. Mol Cell 39:8–24. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2010.06.017
Kumar M, Kuzhiumparambil U, Pernice M et al (2016) Metabolomics: an emerging frontier of
systems biology in marine macrophytes. Algal Res 16:76–92. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.algal.
2016.02.033
Leister D (2004) Plant functional genomics. CRC Press, Boca Raton
Li T, Liu B, Spalding MH et al (2012) High efficiency TALEN-based gene editing produces disease
resistant rice. Nat Biotechnol 30:390–392. https://doi.org/10.1038/nbt.2199
Liu H, Brettell LE, Singh B (2020) Linking the phyllosphere microbiome to plant health. Trends
Plant Sci 25:841–844. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tplants.2020.06.003
Ma X, Liu Y-G (2016) CRISPR/Cas9-based multiplex genome editing in monocot and dicot plants.
Curr Protoc Mol Biol 115:31–36. https://doi.org/10.1002/cpmb.10
Molina-Romero D, Baez A, Quintero-Hernandez V et al (2017) Compatible bacterial mixture,
tolerant to desiccation, improves maize plant growth. PLoS One 12:e0187913. https://doi.org/
10.1371/journal.pone.0187913
Montague TG, Cruz JM, Gagnon JA et al (2014) CHOPCHOP: a CRISPR/Cas9 and TALEN web
tool for genome editing. Nucleic Acids Res 42:W401–W407. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/
gku410
Mulder N, Adebamowo CA, Adebamowo SN et al (2017) Genomic research data generation,
analysis and sharing—challenges in the African setting. Data Sci J 16:1–15. https://doi.org/10.
5334/dsj-2017-049
Muller DB, Vogel C, Bai Y, Vorholt JA (2016) The plant microbiota: systems-level insights and
perspectives. Annu Rev Genet 50:211–234. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-genet￾120215-034952
Nadeem SM, Ahmad M, Naveed M et al (2016) Relationship between in vitro characterization and
comparative efficacy of plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria for improving cucumber salt
tolerance. Arch Microbiol 198:379–387. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00203-016-1197-5
Nelson EB (2018) The seed microbiome: origins, interactions, and impacts. Plant Soil 422:7–34.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11104-017-3289-7
Nicoletti R, Becchimanzi A (2020) Endophytism of Lecanicillium and Akanthomyces. Agriculture
10:205. https://doi.org/10.3390/agriculture100602059 Decoding Beneficial Plant Microbe Association with Latest Techniques... 243
Nikolaev EN, Kostyukevich YI, Vladimirov GN (2016) Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance
(FT ICR) mass spectrometry: theory and simulations. Mass Spectrom Rev 35:219–258. https://
doi.org/10.1002/mas.21422
Nwachukwu BC, Babalola OO (2021) Perspective for sustainable agriculture from the microbiome
in plant rhizosphere. Plant Biotechnol Rep 15:259–278
Obata T, Fernie AR (2012) The use of metabolomics to dissect plant responses to abiotic stresses.
Cell Mol Life Sci 69:3225–3243. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00018-012-1091-5
Panaccione DG, Beaulieu WT, Cook D (2014) Bioactive alkaloids in vertically transmitted fungal
endophytes. Funct Ecol 28:299–314. https://doi.org/10.1111/1365-2435.12076
Pareek A, Sopory SK, Bohnert HJ et al (2009) Abiotic stress adaptation in plants. Springer,
New York. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-90-481-3112-9
Peter SC, Dhanjal JK, Malik V et al (2018) In: Ranganathan S, Grib-skov M, Nakai K, Schonbach C
(eds) Encyclopedia of bioinformatics and computational biology. Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp
661–676
Prasad R, Varma A (2014) Biology of underground root engineering. In: Bagde US, Jadhav BL,
Jadhav UA (eds) Current trends in life sciences. LAP LAMBERT Academic Publishing,
Germany, pp 5–8
Prasad R, Kumar M, Varma A (2015) Role of PGPR in soil fertility and plant health. In:
Egamberdieva D, Shrivastava S, Varma A (eds) Plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria
(PGPR) and medicinal plants. Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp 247–260
Prasad R, Zhang S-H (2022) Benefical microorganisms in agriculture. Springer, Singapore. https://
link.springer.com/book/9789811907326
Rana KL, Kour D, Kaur T et al (2020) Endophytic microbes: biodiversity, plant growth-promoting
mechanisms and potential applications for agricultural sustainability. Antonie Van Leeuwen￾hoek 113:1075–1107. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10482-020-01429-y
Razzaq A, Sadia B, Raza A et al (2019) Metabolomics: a way forward for drop improvement.
Metabolites 9:303. https://doi.org/10.3390/metabo9120303
Rhee SY, Dickerson J, Xu D (2006) Bioinformatics and its applications in plant biology. Annu Rev
Plant Biol 57:335–360. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.arplant.56.032604.144103
Rodriguez R, Duran P (2020) Natural holobiome engineering by using native extreme microbiome
to counteract the climate change effects. Front Bioeng Biotechnol 8:568. https://doi.org/10.
3389/fbioe.2020.00568
Rolli E, Marasco R, Vigani G et al (2015) Improved plant resistance to drought is promoted by the
root associated microbiome as a water stress dependent trait. Environ Microbial 17:316–331.
https://doi.org/10.1111/1462-2920.12439
Salem MA, de Souza L, Serag A et al (2020) Metabolomics in the context of plant natural products
research: from sample preparation to metabolite analysis. Metabolites 10:37. https://doi.org/10.
3390/metabo10010037
Sana TR, Fischer S, Wohlgemuth G et al (2010) Metabolomics and transcriptomic analysis of the
rice response to the bacterial blight pathogen Xanthomonas oryzae. Metabolomics 6:451–465.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11306-010-0218-7
Santhanam R, Weinhold A, Goldberg J et al (2015) Native root-associated bacteria rescue a plant
from a sudden-wilt disease that emerging during continuous cropping. Proc Natl Acad Sci 112:
E5013–E5020. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1505765112
Sarma H, Forid N, Prasad R, Prasad MNV, Ma LQ, Rinklebe J (2021) Enhancing phytoremediation
of hazardous metal(loid)s using genome engineering CRISPR–Cas9 technology. J Hazard
Mater. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2021.125493
Sasan RK, Bidochka MJ (2012) The insect-pathogenic fungus Metarhizium robertsii
(Clavicipitaceae) is also an endophyte that stimulated plant root development. Am J Bot 99:
101–107. https://doi.org/10.3732/ajb.1100136
Shrivastava S, Prasad R, Varma A (2014) Anatomy of root from eyes of a microbiologist. In: Morte
A, Varma A (eds) Root engineering, vol 40. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pp 3–22244 B. Jangra et al.
Sorty AM, Meena KK, Choudhary K et al (2016) Effect of plant growth promotion bacteria
associated with halophytic weed (Psoralea corylifolia L) on germination and seedling growth
of wheat under saline conditions. Appl Biochem Biotechnol 180:872–882. https://doi.org/10.
1007/s12010-016-2139-z
Szankasi P, Smith GR (1992) A DNA exonuclease induced during meiosis of Schizosaccharomyces
pombe. J Biol Chem 267:3014–3023. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0021-9258(19)50688-3
Timmusk S, IA AEI-D, Copolovici L et al (2014) Drought-tolerance of wheat improved by
rhizosphere bacteria from harsh environments: enhanced biomass production and reduced
emissions of stress volatiles. PLoS One 9:e96086. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.
0096086
To A, Durourek K, De Cian A, Concordet JP, Del Bene F (2014) Highly efficient CRISPR/Cas￾mediated knock-in in zebrafish by homology-independent DNA repair. Genome Res 24:142–
153. https://doi.org/10.1101/gr.161638.113
Tsugawa H, Tsujimoto Y, Arita M et al (2011) GC/MS based metabolomics: development of a data
mining system for metabolite identification by using soft independent modelling of class
analogy (SIMCA). BMC Bioinformatics 12:1–13. https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2105-12-131
Van Emon JM (2016) Theomic evolution in agricultural research. J Agric Food Chem 64:36–44.
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jafc.5b04515
Verma P, Yadav AN, Kazy SK et al (2013) Elucidating the diversity and plant growth promoting
attributes of wheat (Triticum aestivum) associated acidotolerant bacteria from southern hills
zone of India. Natl J Life Sci 10(2):219–227
Viscardi S, Ventorino V, Duran P et al (2016) Assessment of plant growth promoting activities and
abiotic stress tolerance of Azotobacter chroococcum strains for a potential use in sustainable
agriculture. J Soil Sci Plant Nutr 16:848–863. https://doi.org/10.4067/
S0718-95162016005000060
Wang S, Suh JH, Zheng X et al (2017) Identification and quantification of potential anti￾inflammatory hydroxycinnamic acid amides from wolfberry. J Agric Food Chem 65(2):
364–372. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jafc.6b0513665:364-372
White JF, Kingsley KL, Zhang Q et al (2019) Endophytic microbes and their potential applications
in crop management. Pest Manag Sci 7:2558–2565. https://doi.org/10.1002/ps.5527
Williams BJ, Cameron CJ, Workman R et al (2007) Amino acid profiling in plant cell cultures: an
inter-laboratory comparison of CE-MS and GC-MS. Electrophoresis 28:1371–1379. https://doi.
org/10.1002/elps.200600609
Winning H, Roldan-Marin E, Dragsted LO et al (2009) An exploratory NMR nutri-metabolomic
investigation reveals dimethyl sulfone as a dietary biomarker for onion intake. Analyst 134:
2344–2351. https://doi.org/10.1039/b918259d
Witek K, Jupe F, Witek AI et al (2016) Accelerated cloning of a potato late blight—resistance gene
using RenSeq and SMRT sequencing. Nat Biotechnol 34:656–660. https://doi.org/10.1038/nbt.
3540
Xiao A, Wang Z, Hu Y et al (2013) Chromosomal deletions and inversions mediated by TALENs
and CRISPR/Cas in Zebrafish. Nucleic Acids Res 41:e141. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkt464
Zan Y, Ji Y, Zhang Y et al (2013) Genome-wide identification, characterization and expression
analysis of populus leucine-rich repeat receptor-like protein kinase genes. BMC Genomics 14:
1–14. https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2164-14-318
Zanardo LG, de Souza GB, Alves MS (2019) Transcriptomics of plant—virus interactions: a
review. Theor Exp Plant Physiol 31:103–125. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40626-019-00143-z245
Chapter 10
Phosphate Solubilizing Microorganisms:
Multifarious Applications
Mahendra Kumar, Ajay Shankar, Shivani Chaudhary, and Vishal Prasad
Abstract Phosphorus is a key element for plant growth and development. Phos￾phate sources are available in soil present in both forms organic as well as inorganic.
Due to its highly reactive nature, phosphate forms insoluble complex with several
metal ions (Fe, Al, and Ca) and becomes unavailable for plant uptake and thus acts as
a major limiting factor. Phosphate solubilizing microorganisms (PSMs) such as
bacteria, fungi, and actinomycetes possess the ability to solubilize insoluble phos￾phate and convert into available form as orthophosphate ions thereby helping in
plant growth, crop yield, and simultaneously improve soil health. In addition, these
PSMs also play major role in various other key activities of environmental signifi￾cance. A few such activities include ecological restoration, heavy metal decontam￾ination and immobilization, promoting sustainable agricultural practices in saline￾alkaline and other unsuitable soils. Overall, these PSMs are evolving as worthy
candidates with multifarious application for environmental sustainability. This chap￾ter covers several aspects of phosphate solubilization and mobilization by PSMs in
the soil and further describes several other beneficial applications of these PSMs.
Keywords Phosphorus · Phosphatase · Phytase · PSM · Solubilization
10.1 Introduction
Phosphorus (P) is the second most essential macronutrient for plant growth and
development after nitrogen and it accounts for around 0.2% of plant dry weight (Lin
et al. 2006; Sharma et al. 2013). Phosphorus plays very crucial roles in several of the
metabolic processes such as synthesis of biomolecules, energy transfer reactions,
photosynthesis, cell division, plasma membrane components, signaling molecules,
nucleic acid components, flowers and seeds formation, enzyme activities regulation
M. Kumar · A. Shankar · S. Chaudhary · V. Prasad (*)
Institute of Environment and Sustainable Development, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi,
UP, India
e-mail: vp.iesd@bhu.ac.in
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2023
S. Chhabra et al. (eds.), Plant Microbiome for Plant Productivity and Sustainable
Agriculture, Microorganisms for Sustainability 37,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-19-5029-2_10246 M. Kumar et al.
by phosphorylation of serine, histidine, aspartate, threonine, and tyrosine amino
acids (Raghothama 1999). Plants absorb P as phosphate anions (HPO4
2¯ or H2PO4
¯
)
from soil (Rodriguez and Fraga 1999). However, these phosphate anions are highly
reactive in the soil and immediately form complex compound with metals ions like
Ca2+, Al3+, and Fe3+; and their precipitation reaction depends on pH of the soil. In
acidic soils, phosphate anions react with oxides and hydroxides of Al and Fe and
form insoluble complexes whereas in alkaline soils Ca reacts with these phosphate
anions and fixes the available P (Igual et al. 2001). Due to high reactivity of these
phosphate anions with metal cations, most soils are deficient in available P for the
plant uptake thus making it to act as a limiting factor for plant growth and develop￾ment in tropical and subtropical regions (Richardson 2001). To cope with this P
limitation, farmers apply synthetic fertilizer but approximately 70–90% of applied P
fertilizers get precipitated rapidly after their application in the soil (Mikanova and
Novakova 2002). Consequently, overuse of chemical fertilizer causes nutrient
imbalance and puts a burden on arable land which is a serious concern.
Soil microbiomes play essential role in P cycle. The P cycle in the biosphere is
considered as open or sedimentary because there are neither gaseous intermediary
forms nor any interchange between soil and air. This P cycle takes place by means of
oxidation and reduction of phosphorus compounds in which oxidation state of
phosphorus ranges from phosphine (3) to phosphate (+5) (Ohtake et al. 1996;
Behera et al. 2014). PSMs eventually increase the availability of soluble phosphate
in the soil and boost plant growth and development by enhancing the efficacy of
biological nitrogen fixation or enhancing the availability of other trace element such
as iron and zinc and by producing plant growth promoting regulators (Ponmurugan
and Gopi 2006). In the recent past, these PSMs have been explored for their various
other potentials like that of heavy metal removal, ecological restoration, organic
pollutant clean-up, and others. In this chapter, we focus on several aspects of
phosphate solubilization and mobilization by PSMs in the soil and extend our
discussion further to several other beneficial applications of these PSMs.
10.2 Phosphorus in Soil
Soil is a dynamic system and an ecological niche of various biological activities. The
inorganic phosphate (Pi) available for biosynthetic purposes depends not only on the
total amount of P in the environment but also on its availability as well as solubility.
Phosphorus is one of the most important macronutrients for plant growth and
development. The concentration of soluble P in soil is generally very low, normally
at level of 1 ppm or less (Goldstein 1994). Mineral forms of P are represented in soil
primarily by minerals such as apatite, hydroxyapatite, and oxyapatite and their main
characteristic is insolubility, though they can be solubilized under suitable condi￾tions and become available for uptake by microorganisms and plants. In soil, P exists
in both organic and inorganic form. In cultivated soil around 70–80% of P exist in
inorganic form applied in the form of P fertilizers (Foth and Foth 1990). Organic10 Phosphate Solubilizing Microorganisms: Multifarious Applications 247
forms of P may constitute 30–50% of the total P in most soil, although its concen￾tration may vary from as low as 5% to as high 95% (Paul and Clark 1988). Organic
form of P exists mainly as inositol phosphate (soil phytate) accounting for approx￾imately 50% of the total organic P. It is most stable form of organic P in the soil and
is synthesized by microorganisms and plants. The other organic P forms include
phosphomonoesters, phosphodiesters, phospholipids, phosphotriesters, and nucleic
acids.
10.3 Phosphate Solubilizing Microorganisms
Diverse types of microorganisms are the major players in various processes that are
linked with transformation of soil P and thus are an integral part of the soil P cycle.
Soil microorganisms play very crucial role in making the availability of P from
inorganic and organic pool of the total soil P by solubilization and mineralization
(Hilda and Fraga 1999). Evidences of naturally occurring rhizospheric PSMs date
back to 1903 (Khan et al. 2007). Microorganisms involved in phosphate solubiliza￾tion consist of mycorrhizal fungi, bacteria, and actinomycetes, among the microbial
population in soil, phosphate solubilizing bacteria (PSB) constitute 1–50%, while
phosphate solubilizing fungi (PSF) are only 0.1–0.5% in solubilization potential
(Chen et al. 2006). A considerably higher number of PSB are present in the
rhizospheric soil than in non-rhizospheric soil (Raghu and Mac Rae 1966). The
PSMs found in the plant rhizosphere are reported to be metabolically more active
(Vazquez et al. 2000). Population of PSB in soil depends on its physical and
chemical properties, organic matter, and P content (Kim et al. 1998). Strains from
bacterial genera Pseudomonas, Bacillus, Rhizobium, Enterobacter along with Pen￾icillium and Aspergillus from fungi are the most powerful phosphate solubilizers
(White la 2000). Bacteria such as Bacillus megaterium, Bacillus circulans, Bacillus
subtilis, Bacillus polymyxa, Bacillus sircalmous, Pseudomonas striata, and
Enterobacter are referred as most important phosphate-solubilizing strains (Kucey
et al. 1989). Among the soil bacterial populations, ectorhizospheric strains from
Pseudomonas and Bacillus and endosymbiotic rhizobia have been observed as
effective phosphate solubilizers (Igual et al. 2001). A fungus Arthrobotrys
oligospora has also been reported for its ability to solubilize the phosphate rocks
(Duponnois et al. 2006).
10.4 Need of Phosphate Solubilizing Microorganism
Chemical phosphatic fertilizers are made by a highly energy-intensive process that
consumes energy worth US $4 billion per annum in order to fulfill the global needs
(Goldstein et al. 1993). Further almost 75–90% of applied phosphatic fertilizers are
precipitated by certain metal ions due to complex formation in the soil and it has248 M. Kumar et al.
been estimated that the precipitated phosphates in agricultural soils are sufficient to
sustain crop production worldwide for nearly 100 years (Goldstein et al. 1993).
Microorganisms are reported to play very crucial role in soil P cycle and relocating P
between different soil P pools (Prasad et al. 2018). Hence it is evident to explore
sources of phosphate solubilizers. Under different soil and agro-climatic conditions,
these PSMs have proved to be an economical alternative to the more expensive
chemical phosphatic fertilizers with greater agronomic utility (Ngalimat et al. 2021).
The PSMs increase the availability of usable form of phosphate and can improve
plant growth and soil health by producing other plant growth promoting substances,
increasing biological N-fixation and enhancing the availability of other important
trace element like iron and zinc (Ponmurugan and Gopi 2006; Nath et al. 2018).
10.5 Mechanisms of Phosphate Solubilization
There are various mechanisms such as production of low molecular weight organic
acids, lowering of pH through H+ extrusion, production of inorganic acids, and
secretion of different enzymes like phosphatases, phytases, and phosphonatases for
solubilizing the insoluble phosphate by PSMs. The various ways of phosphate
solubilization by PSMs are summarized in Fig. 10.1. Based on the source of
insoluble P, the phosphate solubilization mechanism can be categorized into two
categories, i.e., inorganic P solubilization and organic P solubilization (Surange et al.
1995; Dutton and Evans 1996; Nahas 1996).
Fig. 10.1 Various mechanisms of phosphate solubilization by phosphate solubilizing
microorganisms10 Phosphate Solubilizing Microorganisms: Multifarious Applications 249
10.5.1 Inorganic Phosphate Solubilization
The principal mechanisms of inorganic phosphate solubilization involve production
of low molecular weight organic acids (Sperber 1957; Goldstein 1995; Buch et al.
2008). The organic acids produced by PSMs include acetic acid, malic acid, oxalic
acid, succinic acid, citric acid, gluconic acid, 2-ketogluconic acid, tartaric acid, and
many more (Kalayu 2019). The secretion of these organic acids by the microbial
cells brings about acidification of its surroundings. These organic acids produced are
consequently changed into ionic forms liberating proton (H+
) which replaces the
metal cations like Fe3+, Al3+, and Ca2+ from the insoluble phosphate complex and
makes available the soluble phosphate for plant uptake; or sometimes carboxylic
anions chelate cations and release phosphate anion (Rodriguez and Fraga 1999;
Hwangbo et al. 2003; Chen et al. 2006; Lin et al. 2006; Park et al. 2009; Kumar and
Rai 2015; Prasad et al. 2018). Among the various organic acids produced by PSMs,
gluconic acid and keto-gluconic acid are considered as major ones for P solubiliza￾tion by the lowering of pH in the rhizosphere. The pH of rhizosphere is also
supposed to be lowered through production of proton/bicarbonate release and
gaseous (CO2/O2) exchange. The bacterial strains which produce the above￾mentioned as well as several other organic acids are reported to belong to Pseudo￾monas (Park et al. 2009), Enterobacter (Hwangbo et al. 2003; Kumar et al. 2014),
and Burkholderia (Lin et al. 2006). Based on several studies where cloning and
characterization of the genes involved in organic acids production has been carried
out, it had been concluded that genes involved directly or indirectly in the synthesis
of organic acid or regulation of the expression of genes responsible for organic acid
synthesis are also responsible for inorganic phosphate solubilization (Rodriguez
et al. 2006; Buch et al. 2010; Chhabra et al. 2013). Some researchers also believe
that proton translocation ATPase play an important role in P mineralization as it
helps in proton extrusion to the outer surface as well as proton exchange for cation
uptake (Illmer and Schiner 1995). The organic acids produced by PSMs in the
medium can be identified and measured by using high performance liquid chroma￾tography technique (Park et al. 2009; Kumar and Rai 2015). Furthermore, the other
mechanism of inorganic P solubilization takes place as a result of nitrogen assimi￾lation (nitrate formation), evolution of carbon dioxide, and oxidation of sulfur. These
processes lead to the formation of nitric acid, carbonic acid, and sulfuric acid
(Sperber 1957). However, the efficiency and their impact on release of bound P in
soils seem to be less than organic acid production. The concept of organic acid
production and phosphate solubilization hardly have any correlation between the
concentration of organic acid and amount of solubilized phosphate in the culture
medium hence acidification could not be the sole mechanism of inorganic phosphate
solubilization (Parks et al. 1990). Solubilization of calcium phosphate has been
reported to occur even in the absence of organic acid (Illmer and Schiner 1992).
Furthermore, siderophores and exopolysaccharide synthesized by PSMs bring out
locked phosphate into soluble form mainly by charge-related interaction (Yi et al.
2008; Sharma et al. 2013). As can be seen from above interpretations the organic250 M. Kumar et al.
Table 10.1 Principal organic acids by phosphate solubilizing microorganisms for phosphate
solubilization
PSMs Organic acid References
Bacteria
Arthrobacter sp. Malonic acid, oxalic acid Banik and Dey
(1982)
Enterobacter
intermedium
2-ketogluconic acid Zaidi et al.
(2009)
Azospirillum sp. Citric acid, fumaric acid succinic acid, gluconic acid Kalayu (2019)
Enterobacter
ludwigii
Acetic acid, gluconic acid, succinic acid Tahir et al.
(2013)
Pseudomonas
cepacia
Gluconic acid, 2-ketogluconic acid Zaidi et al.
(2009)
Bacillus firmus Oxalic acid Banik and Dey
(1982)
Bacillus
megaterium
Gluconic acid Chen et al.
(2006)
Pseudomonas
fluorescence
Citric acid, malic acid, tartaric acid, gluconic acid Zaidi et al.
(2009)
Fungus
Aspergillus flavus Citric acid, gluconic acid, oxalic acid, succinic acid Rashid et al.
(2004)
Aspergillus
foetidus
Citric acid, gluconic acid, oxalic acid, succinic acid,
tartaric acid
Zaidi et al.
(2009)
Aspergillus
japonicus
Citric acid, gluconic acid, oxalic acid, succinic acid,
tartaric acid
Zaidi et al.
(2009)
Penicillium sp. Citric acid, gluconic acid, glycolic acid, malic acid,
oxalic acid, succinic acid
Sane and Mehta
(2015)
Penicillium
radicum
Gluconic acid Fenice et al.
(2000)
Penicillium
rugulosum
Citric acid, gluconic acid Reyes et al.
(2002)
acid as well as chelating and reducing molecules produced by PSMs are the key
factors responsible for inorganic phosphate solubilization and these organic acids are
also utilized as an alternate source of energy by PSMs resulting in the improved
biomass yield (Buch et al. 2010; Kumar and Rai 2015). Table 10.1 shows various
organic acids produced different PSMs.
10.5.2 Organic Phosphate Solubilization
The process of solubilization of organic phosphate is also known as mineralization
of organic phosphate. The mineralization of organic phosphate is performed by
different types of enzymes mainly phosphatases, phytases, and phosphonatases.10 Phosphate Solubilizing Microorganisms: Multifarious Applications 251
10.5.3 Phosphatase
Phosphatase (Phosphohydrolase) is an enzyme that acts by hydrolyzing
phosphoester and phosphoanhydride bonds of organic matter. Phosphatase enzymes
are classified into two types on the basis of their optimum pH: alkaline phosphatase
(pH > 7) and acidic phosphatase (pH < 6). Their predominance is determined by pH
of soil; in acidic soil acid phosphatases are predominant while in neutral and alkaline
soil alkaline phosphatases are predominant (Rodriguez and Fraga 1999; Sharma
et al. 2013). Table 10.2 shows some of the PSMs reported to exhibit acid and
alkaline phosphatase activities.
10.5.4 Phytase
Phytase is an enzyme which acts on inositol phosphate component of phytate and
releases utilizable phosphate. Phytate is the major source of inositol phosphate and
accounts for more than 50% of organic phosphate form present in the soil
(Rodriguez et al. 2006; Prasad et al. 2018). Phytate is synthesized by microorganism,
plant seeds, and pollen grains (Rodriguez and Fraga 1999). Primarily phytases were
used to improve animal nutrition; nevertheless, the contemporary approach may be
the use of phytase secreting PSMs to improve plant growth and development
(Richardson and Simpson 2011). Arabidopsis plants genetically engineered with
phytase gene from Aspergillus niger were capable to procure phosphate from
phytate. The growth and P content of the plants were equivalent to those plants
supplied with soluble phosphate (Richardson and Simpson 2011). Table 10.3 enlists
several of the phytase producing PSMs.
Table 10.2 List showing PSMs with phosphatase activity
Enzyme Microorganism References
Acid phosphatase Emericella rugulosa Yadav and Tarafdar (2007b)
Serratia marcescens Hameeda et al. (2006)
Chaetomium globosum Hameeda et al. (2006)
Serratia marcescens Ryu et al. (2005)
P. fluorescens Ryu et al. (2005)
Burkholderia cepacia Unno et al. (2005)
Pseudomonas sp. Richardson et al. (2001)
Enterobacter aerogenes Thaller et al. (1995)
Enterobacter cloacae Thaller et al. (1995)
Citrobacter freundii Thaller et al. (1995)
Alkaline phosphatase Bacillus flexus Patel (2016)
Bacillus megaterium Priya et al. (2014)
E. coli Bhattacharjee et al. (2018)252 M. Kumar et al.
Table 10.3 List showing PSMs with phytase activity
Enzyme Microorganism References
Phytase Discosia sp. Rahi et al. (2009)
Rhizobacteria Hariprasad and Niranjana (2009)
Rhizobacteria Patel et al. (2010)
Serratia marcescens Hameeda et al. (2006)
Pseudomonas sp. Hameeda et al. (2006)
Emericella rugulosa Yadav and Tarafdar (2007a)
Bacillus mucilaginous Li et al. (2007)
10.5.5 Phosphonatases
Phosphonatases and C-P lyases hydrolyze C-P bond of organo-phosphonates and
release phosphate (Rodriguez et al. 2006; Prasad et al. 2018). However,
phosphonatases are not the major contributors in soil due to limited availability of
their substrates (Rodriguez et al. 2006).
10.6 Application of Phosphate Solubilizing Microorganisms
There are several very important applications of PSMs in the arena of agriculture and
allied activities. The PSMs play considerable role in the various ways such as plant
growth and development promoters, salinity tolerance, drought tolerance, heavy
metal tolerance, soil health repair, and ecological restoration in the management of
agriculture (Malla et al. 2004; Prasad et al. 2018; Chhabra 2019). A few such
applications of PSMs are discussed below.
10.6.1 Phosphate Solubilizing Microorganisms as Plant
Growth Promoters
There are many PSMs present in soil but their numbers are not enough to compete
with other microorganisms commonly found in rhizosphere, therefore the amount of
phosphate released by these PSMs are generally not in enough quantity which is
required by plants for better growth and development. Therefore, inoculation with
selected microorganisms at a much higher concentration than that normally found in
soil is necessary to harness the benefit of their phosphate solubilizing ability for plant
yield increment (Singh and Kapoor 1998; Peix et al. 2001; Bharadwaj et al. 2008;
Babu et al. 2015). The effectiveness of PSMs under natural conditions depends on its
ability to persist and proliferate in the soil. In general, the density or population of
applied PSM decreases rapidly upon introduction into soil due to various10 Phosphate Solubilizing Microorganisms: Multifarious Applications 253
environmental factors (Ho and Ko 1985). The various factors that affect the survival
of the inoculant PSM include abiotic and biotic factors. Abiotic factors include
features such as soil composition, physiological condition, temperature and soil
moisture (Bashan et al. 1995; Prasad et al. 2018). The biotic factors such as
competition, predation, and root growth are the ones that facilitate substrate avail￾ability to the inoculated microorganisms (Mendes et al. 2013). These PSMs enhance
plant growth and yield by two mechanisms, i.e., direct and indirect mechanism. The
direct mechanism of growth promotion involves making the availability of nutrient
by phosphate solubilization, N-fixation, and production of phytohormones
(Rodriguez and Fraga 1999; Sharma et al. 2013; Chhabra 2019). Indirect mechanism
of growth promotion involves synthesis of antibiotics and siderophores which help
in prevention of deleterious effects of pathogenic microorganism (Rodriguez and
Fraga 1999; Sharma et al. 2013; Chhabra and Dowling 2017). Several researches
have been conducted to evaluate the biofertilization ability of different PSMs to
enhance crop productivity in different parts of the world. Growth and crop produc￾tion of mung bean was increased with the inoculation of Bacillus circulans (Singh
and Kapoor 1998), common bean with Burkholderia cepacia (Peix et al. 2001),
potato with Pseudomonas, Stenotrophomonas, Arthrobacter, Microbacterium, and
Pantoea (Bharadwaj et al. 2008; Babu et al. 2015). Enhanced production of peanut
(Dey et al. 2004), chickpea (Zaidi et al. 2003), radish (Antoun et al. 1998), maize
(Hameeda et al. 2008; Kaur and Reddy 2014), rice (Vasudevan et al. 2002), tomato
(Ghosh et al. 2015), and sugarcane (Sundara et al. 2002) has also been demonstrated
with the use of different PSMs as biofertilizers.
10.6.2 Phosphate Solubilizing Microorganisms in Ecological
Restoration and Phosphorus Cycling
Degraded ecosystems are characterized by extremely low levels of soil nutrients
including P (Li 2006). Restoring these ecosystems requires the recovery of soil P
cycling (Huang et al. 2012). Microbes play an integral role in soil P cycling, as they
mediate bioavailable soil P (Rodriguez and Fraga 1999; Richardson and Simpson
2011). A global meta-analysis of 173 terrestrial studies revealed that plant responses
in terrestrial ecosystems to P addition were not significantly different from those to N
addition (Elser et al. 2007). Despite such an observation, substantial variations in
plant responses to P and/or N addition were found between sub-habitats (e.g., forest,
grassland, tundra, and wetland) within terrestrial environments (Elser et al. 2007),
indicating that whether the soil is more limited to P or N is dependent on the specific
ecosystem considered. Further, another global meta-analysis of 50 terrestrial studies
showed that the plant responses in terrestrial ecosystems to P addition were more
pronounced under elevated than under ambient N, indicating that P limitation in
terrestrial ecosystems will become more pronounced under increasing atmospheric
N deposition in the future (Li et al. 2016). Therefore, mitigating terrestrial P254 M. Kumar et al.
Table 10.4 List of PSMs with active role in ecological restoration
Microorganism Process References
Arthrobacter sp. P cycling Banik and Dey (1982)
Enterobacter intermedium P cycling Zaidi et al. (2009)
Azospirillum sp. P cycling Kalayu (2019)
Enterobacter ludwigii P cycling Tahir et al. (2013)
Pseudomonas cepacia P cycling Zaidi et al. (2009)
Bacillus firmus P cycling Banik and Dey (1982)
Bacillus megaterium P cycling Chen et al. (2006)
Pseudomonas fluorescence P cycling Zaidi et al. (2009)
limitation is increasingly recognized as a major priority in ecosystem management
and restoration (Penuelas et al. 2013). A set of PSMs-derived enzymes, such as acid
phosphatase, alkaline phosphatase, phytase, phosphonatase, and C-P lyase are able
to release free orthophosphate ions from recalcitrant organic P forms (Rodriguez and
Fraga 1999; Richardson and Simpson 2011) and a variety of organic acids, including
citric acid, formic acid, gluconic acid, malic acid, oxalic acid, are involved in the
microbial solubilization of recalcitrant inorganic P forms (Rodriguez and Fraga
1999; Richardson and Simpson 2011). Several of the PSMs involved in ecological
restoration are listed in Table 10.4.
10.6.3 Phosphate Solubilizing Microorganisms
in Sustainable Agriculture
Mostly the challenge of P deficiency in agriculture is addressed by the application of
P fertilizers. However, the majority of the applied phosphatic fertilizer is not
available to plants and the addition of inorganic fertilizers in excess of the amount
that is commonly employed to overcome this effect can lead to environmental
problems such as groundwater contamination and waterway eutrophication (Kang
et al. 2011). It is therefore of great interest to investigate management strategies that
are capable of improving phosphate fertilization efficiency, increase crop yields, and
reduce environmental pollution caused by phosphate drainage from the soil. Soil
microorganisms enhance plant nutrient acquisition. They are involved in a wide
range of biological processes including the transformation of insoluble soil nutrients
(Babalola and Glick 2012). Several PSMs are capable of solubilizing and mineral￾izing insoluble soil phosphorus for the growth of plants. In the natural environment,
numerous PSMs in the soil and rhizosphere are effective at releasing phosphate from
bound soil phosphate through solubilization and mineralization (Bhattacharyya and
Jha 2012). Several salt-tolerant or halophilic soil microorganisms which also exhibit
the ability to solubilize insoluble phosphate holds promises for facilitation and
development of saline-alkali soil-based agriculture (Zhu et al. 2011). The inoculation
of soil or crop with PSMs is therefore a promising strategy for the improvement of10 Phosphate Solubilizing Microorganisms: Multifarious Applications 255
Table 10.5 List of PSMs involved in promotion of sustainable agriculture
PSM Test crop Result References
Aspergillus niger Wheat Improved growth Xiao et al. (2013)
Serratia sp. Wheat Increased growth Swarnalakshmi
et al. (2013)
Aspergillus awamoriS29 Mung
bean
Increased plant growth, total P
content, and plant biomass
Jain et al. (2012)
Azotobacter chroococcum
and Bacillus subtilis
Wheat Enhanced productivity of
wheat
Kumar et al.
(2014)
P. favisporus TG1R2 Soybeans Increased dry biomass Fernandez et al.
(2011)
plant absorption of phosphate and thereby reducing the use of chemical fertilizers
that have a negative impact on the environment (Alori et al. 2012). Mobilization of
soil inorganic phosphate and increasing its bioavailability for plant use by harnessing
soil PSM promotes sustainable agriculture, improves the fertility of the soil, and
hence increases crop productivity. Various PSMs which imparted positive effects on
crop production and promoted sustainable agriculture are listed in Table 10.5.
10.6.4 Phosphate Solubilizing Microorganisms
in Immobilization of Heavy Metals
Soil contaminated with heavy metals has become a severe problem in many parts of
the world (Li et al. 2014). Heavy metals are naturally occurring ingredient of the
earth’s crust (Pan et al. 2016); however, there are various anthropogenic activities,
like ore mining, e-waste recycling, and sewage irrigation that had greatly increased
the concentrations of heavy metals in the soil. Exposure of human to soil-heavy
metals mainly includes the leaching of heavy metals from soil into water and the
consumption of edible plants grown in the contaminated soil (Cao et al. 2009).
Addition of different kinds of phosphate-containing compound into contaminated
soil to immobilize heavy metals (like Pb, Zn, Cu, and Cd) has been well documented
because of the formation of highly insoluble metal–phosphate precipitates (Liang
et al. 2014), especially Pb–phosphate minerals, pyromorphites [Pb5(PO4)3X, where
X ¼ Cl¯, OH¯
, F¯
], which are the most thermodynamically stable and insoluble Pb
minerals over a broad pH and EC range. The efficiency of phosphate addition￾induced heavy metals immobilization depends on the solubility of both the heavy
metals and the added phosphate (Park et al. 2011a). Although soluble phosphate
compounds like sodium-, potassium-, and ammonium phosphates having high water
solubility had been widely applied to remediate heavy metals contamination and had
achieved high immobilization efficiency, they are relatively more expensive than
insoluble phosphate compounds and are more prone to cause eutrophication (Park
et al. 2011a, b). In soils, PSMs could produce organic acids and phosphate enzymes256 M. Kumar et al.
Table 10.6 Heavy metals immobilizing PSMs
Microorganism Heavy metals References
Achromobacter xylosoxidans Ax10 Cu Ma et al. (2009)
Azotobacter chroococcum HKN5,
Bacillus megaterium HKP-1,
Bacillus mucilaginosus HKK-1
Pb and Zn Wu et al. (2006)
Bacillus sp. PSB10 Cr Wani and khan (2010)
Bacillus subtilis SJ-101 Ni Zaidi et al. (2006)
Pseudomonas sp. M6, Pseudomonas jessenii
M15
Ni, Cu, and Zn Rajkumar and Freitas
(2008)
to enhance the solubilization of insoluble phosphate compounds (Chen et al. 2006),
and hence, PSMs have been widely used as inoculants to increase soil available
phosphate contents and thus act as a good heavy metal immobilizer (Rodriguez and
Fraga 1999). Microbial-immobilized remediation technology refers to using soil
microorganisms to immobilize heavy metals, causing heavy metals to precipitate
or be adsorbed and fixed in the soil, reducing their absorption by plants (Han et al.
2018). PSMs are capable of producing siderophore which is a metal-binding ligand
molecule and chelates with several heavy metals such as cadmium, nickel, lead,
arsenic, and many others that can help in adsorbing or absorbing these heavy metals
from the soil and minimize the toxic effect of heavy metal accumulation by
immobilizing them (Ma et al. 2009). Heavy metal-immobilizing bacteria have
been widely studied and applied as excellent heavy metal passivators. Heavy
metal-immobilizing PSMs not only immobilize heavy metals, alter the existing
state of heavy metals in soil, and reduce the absorption of heavy metals by crops,
but also promote the growth of crops and improve the quality of crops (Zhao et al.
2019). PSMs increased the growth and heavy metal resistance of vegetables by
producing indole acetic acid (IAA), siderophores, 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carbox￾ylate deaminase, and arginine decarboxylase (Teng et al. 2019). Table 10.6 enlists
some of the heavy metal immobilizing microorganisms. To cope with stress caused
by heavy metals, microorganisms have evolved mechanisms to overcome toxicity,
including metal reduction, cell permeability reduction, and extracellular isolation
(Noisangiam et al. 2011).
10.7 Conclusion
The current overuse of synthetic phosphatic fertilizers poses greater threats to the
environment and also creates soil nutrient imbalance. Therefore, the application of
PSMs is an eco-friendly and economically viable and efficient approach for the
utilization of fixed phosphate present in the soil. Application of PSMs on one hand
reduces the agricultural input cost by curtailing the use of highly priced synthetic
fertilizers and on the other gives a more organic and natural crop yield. These PSMs10 Phosphate Solubilizing Microorganisms: Multifarious Applications 257
with their additional qualities like that of heavy metal and salinity tolerance hold
great potential for future of environmental sustainability.
References
Alori E, Fawole O, Afolayan A (2012) Characterization of arbuscular mycorrhizal spores isolated
from Southern Guinea Savanna of Nigeria. J Agric Sci 4:13–19
Antoun H, Beauchamp C, Goussard N et al (1998) Potential of Rhizobium and Brady rhizobium
species as plant growth promoting rhizobacteria on non-legumes. Plant Soil 204:57–67
Babalola OO, Glick BR (2012) Indigenous African agriculture and plant associated microbes:
current practice and future transgenic prospects. Sci Res Essays 7:2431–2439
Babu AN, Jogaiah S, Ito S et al (2015) Improvement of growth, fruit weight and early blight disease
protection of tomato plants by rhizosphere bacteria is correlated with their beneficial traits and
induced biosynthesis of antioxidant peroxidase and polyphenol oxidase. Plant Sci 231:62–73
Banik S, Dey BK (1982) Available phosphate content of an alluvial soil as influenced by inocu￾lation of some isolated phosphate solubilizing microorganisms. Plant Soil 69:353–364
Bashan Y, Puente ME, Rodriquez MN et al (1995) Survival of Azorhizobium brasilense in the bulk
soil and rhizosphere of 23 soil types. Appl Environ 61(5):1938–1945
Behera BC, Singdevsachan SK, Mishra RR et al (2014) Diversity, mechanism and biotechnology of
phosphate solubilising microorganism in mangrove—a review. Biocatal Agric Biotechnol 3:97–
110
Bharadwaj DP, Lundquist PO, Alstrom S (2008) Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungal spore associated
bacteria affect mycorrhizal colonization, plant growth and potato pathogens. Soil Biol Biochem
40:2494–2501
Bhattacharjee M, Banerjee M, Mitra P (2018) Partial purification and characterization of periplas￾mic alkaline phosphatase from E. coli isolated from water sample. Biosci Biotechnol 9(1):
200–208
Bhattacharyya PN, Jha DK (2012) Plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria (PGPR): emergence in
agriculture. World J Microbiol Biotechnol 28:1327–1350. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s1127401109799
Buch A, Archana G, Kumar GN (2008) Metabolic channelling of glucose towards gluconate in
phosphate-solubilizing Pseudomonas aeruginosa P4 under phosphorus deficiency. Res
Microbiol 159:635–642
Buch A, Archana G, Kumar GN (2010) Heterologous expression of phosphoenol pyruvate carbox￾ylase enhances the phosphate solubilizing ability of fluorescent pseudomonads by altering the
glucose catabolism to improve biomass yield. Bioresour Technol 101:679–687
Cao XD, Wahbi A, Ma LN et al (2009) Immobilization of Zn, Cu, and Pb in contaminated soils
using phosphate rock and phosphoric acid. J Hazard Mater 164:555–564
Chen YP, Rekha PD, Arun AB et al (2006) Phosphate solubilizing bacteria from subtropical soil
and their tricalcium phosphate solubilizing abilities. Appl Soil Ecol 34:33–41
Chhabra S (2019) Phosphorous management in agroecosytems and role and relevance of microbes
in environmental sustainability. In: Shah S, Ramanan VV, Prasad R (eds) Sustainable green
technologies for environmental management. Springer, New York, pp 53–66. https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-981-13-2772-8
Chhabra S, Dowling DN (2017) Endophyte promoted nutrient acquisition: phosphorous and
iron. In: Doty S (ed) Functional importance of the plant microbiome: implications for agricul￾ture, forestry and bioenergy. Springer, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978331965897
Chhabra S, Brazil D, Morrissey J et al (2013) Characterization of mineral phosphate solubilization
traits from a barley rhizosphere soil functional metagenome. Microbiol Open 2:717–724. https://
doi.org/10.1002/mbo3.110258 M. Kumar et al.
Dey R, Pal KK, Bhatt DM et al (2004) Growth promotion and yield enhancement of peanut
(Arachis hypogaea L.) by application of plant growth promoting rhizobacteria. Microbiol Res
159:371–394
Duponnois R, Kisa M, Olenchette C (2006) Phosphate solubilizing potential of the nemato fungus
Arthrobotrys oligospore. J Plant Nutr Soil Sci 169:280–282
Dutton VM, Evans CS (1996) Oxalate production by fungi; its role in pathogenicity and ecology in
the soil environment. Can J Microbiol 42:881–895
Elser JJ, Bracken ME, Cleland EE et al (2007) Global analysis of nitrogen and phosphorus
limitation of primary producers in freshwater, marine and terrestrial ecosystems. Ecol Lett 10:
1135–1142
Fenice M, Selbman L, Federici F et al (2000) Application of encapsulated Penicillium variabile P16
in solubilisation of rock phosphate. Bioresour Technol 73:157–162
Fernandez BL, Silvani V, Colombo R et al (2011) Pre-symbiotic and symbiotic interactions
between Glomus intraradices and two Paenibacillus species isolated from AM propagules:
in vitro and in vivo assays with soybean (AG043RG) as plant host. Soil Biol Biochem 43:
1866–1872
Foth H, Foth HD (1990) Soil chemistry. In: Foth HD (ed) Fundamentals of soil science, 8th edn.
Wiley, New York, pp 164–185
Ghosh P, Rathinasabapathi B, Ma LQ (2015) Phosphorus solubilization and plant growth enhance￾ment by arsenic-resistant bacteria. Chemosphere 134:1–6
Goldstein AH (1994) Involvement of the quino protein glucose dehydrogenase in the solubilization
of exogenous phosphates by Gram-negative bacteria. In: Torriani-Gorini A, Yagil E, Silver S
(eds) Phosphate in microorganisms: cellular and molecular biology. ASM Press, Washington,
DC, pp 197–203
Goldstein AH (1995) Recent progress in understanding the molecular genetics and biochemistry of
calcium phosphate solubilization by Gram-negative bacteria. Biol Agric Hortic 12:185–193
Goldstein AH, Rogers RD, Mead G (1993) Mining by microbe. Nat BioTechnol 11:1250–1212
Hameeda B, Rupela OP, Reddy G et al (2006) Application of plant growth-promoting bacteria
associated with composts and macro fauna for growth promotion of Pearl millet (Pennisetum
glaucum L.). Biol Fertil Soils 43:221–227
Hameeda B, Harini G, Rupela OP et al (2008) Growth promotion of maize by phosphate–
solubilizing bacteria isolated from composts and macro fauna. Microbiol Res 163:234–242
Han H, Sheng XF, Hu JW et al (2018) Metal-immobilizing Serratia liquefaciens CL-1 and Bacillus
thuringiensis X30 increase biomass and reduce heavy metal accumulation of radish under field
conditions. Ecotoxicol Environ Saf 161:526–533
Hariprasad P, Niranjana SR (2009) Isolation and characterization of phosphate solubilizing
rhizobacteria to improve plant health of tomato. Plant Soil 316:13–24
Hilda R, Fraga R (1999) Phosphate solubilizing bacteria and their role in plant growth promotion.
Biotechnol Adv 17:319–359
Ho WC, Ko WH (1985) Effect of environmental edaphic factors. Soil Biol Biochem 17:167–170
Huang L, Baumgartl T, Mulligan D (2012) Is rhizosphere remediation sufficient for sustainable
revegetation of mine tailings? Ann Bot 110:223–238
Hwangbo H, Park RD, Kim YW et al (2003) 2-Ketogluconic acid production and phosphate
solubilization by Enterobacter intermedium. Curr Microbiol 47:87–92
Igual JM, Valverde A, Cervantes E et al (2001) Phosphate-solubilizing bacteria as inoculants for
agriculture: use of updated molecular techniques in their study. Agronomie 21:561–568
Illmer P, Schiner F (1992) Solubilisation of inorganic phosphates by microorganisms isolated from
forest soils. Soil Biol Biochem 24:257–263
Illmer P, Schiner F (1995) Solubilisation of inorganic calcium phosphates-solubilization mecha￾nisms. Soil Biol Biochem 27(3):257–263
Jain R, Saxena J, Sharma V (2012) Effect of phosphate-solubilizing fungi Aspergillus awamori S29
on mung bean (Vigna radiata cv. RMG 492) growth. Folia Microbiol 57:533–541. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s122230120167910 Phosphate Solubilizing Microorganisms: Multifarious Applications 259
Kalayu G (2019) Phosphate solubilizing microorganisms: promising approach as bio fertilizers. Int
J Agron 10:1–7
Kang J, Amoozegar A, Hesterberg D et al (2011) Phosphorus leaching in a sandy soil as affected by
organic and in composted cattle manure. Geoderma 161:194–201. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
geoderma.201012019
Kaur G, Reddy MS (2014) Influence of P-solubilizing bacteria on crop yield and soil fertility at
multi locational sites. Eur J Soil Biol 61:35–40
Khan MS, Zaidi A, Wani PA (2007) Role of phosphate-solubilizing microorganisms in sustainable
agriculture—a review. Agron Sustain Dev 27:29–43
Kim KY, Jordan D, Mc Donald GA (1998) Effect of phosphate solubilizing bacteria and vesicular￾arbuscular mycorrhizae on tomato growth and soil microbial activity. Biol Fertil Soils 26:79–87
Kucey RMN, Janzen H, Leggett M (1989) Microbially mediated increases in plant available
phosphorus. Adv Agron 42:199–228
Kumar A, Rai LC (2015) Proteomic and biochemical basis for enhanced growth yield of
Enterobacter sp. LCR1 on insoluble phosphate medium. Microbiol Res 170:195–204
Kumar S, Bauddh K, Barman SC et al (2014) Amendments of microbial bio fertilizers and organic
substances reduces requirement of urea and DAP with enhanced nutrient availability and
productivity of wheat (Triticum aestivum L.). Ecol Eng 71:432–437. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ecoleng.201407007
Li MS (2006) Ecological restoration of mineland with particular reference to the metalliferous mine
wasteland in China: a review of research and practice. Sci Total Environ 357:38–53
Li J, Xu L, Yang F (2007) Expression and characterization of recombinant thermostable alkaline
phosphatase from a novel thermophilic bacterium Thermus thermophilus XM. Acta Biochim
Biophys Sin 39:844–850
Li ZY, Ma ZW, van der Kuijp TJ et al (2014) A review of soil heavy metal pollution from mines in
China: pollution and health risk assessment. Sci Total Environ 468-469:843–853
Li Y, Niu S, Yu G (2016) Aggravated phosphorus limitation on biomass production under
increasing nitrogen loading. A meta-analysis. Glob Chang Biol 22:934–943
Liang Y, Cao XD, Zhao L, Arellano E (2014) Biochar and phosphate induced immobilization of
heavy metals in contaminated soil and water: implication on simultaneous remediation of
contaminated soil and groundwater. Environ Sci Pollut Res 21:4665–4674
Lin TF, Huang HI, Shen FT et al (2006) The protons of gluconic acid are the major factor
responsible for the dissolution of tricalcium phosphate by Burkholderia cepacia CC-A174.
Bioresour Technol 97:957–960
Ma Y, Rajkumar M, Freitas H (2009) Improvement of plant growth and nickel uptake by nickel
resistant-plant-growth promoting bacteria. J Hazard Mater 166(2):1154–1161
Malla R, Prasad R, Kumari R, Giang PH, Pokharel U, Oelmueller R, Varma A (2004) Phosphorus
solubilizing symbiotic fungus Piriformospora indica. Endocytobiosis Cell Res 15(2):579–600
Mendes R, Garbeva P, Raaijmakers JM (2013) The rhizosphere microbiome: significance of plant
beneficial, plant pathogenic, and human pathogenic microorganisms. FEMS Microbiol Rev
37(5):634–663. https://doi.org/10.1111/1574697612028
Mikanova O, Novakova J (2002) Evaluation of the P-solubilizing activity of soil microorganisms
and its sensitivity to soluble phosphate. Rostl Vyroba 48:397–400
Nahas E (1996) Factors determining rock phosphate solubilization by microorganism isolated from
soil. World J Microbiol Biotechnol 12:567–572
Nath M, Bhatt D, Bhatt MD, Prasad R, Tuteja N (2018) Microbe-mediated enhancement of nitrogen
and phosphorus content for crop improvement. In: Prasad R, Gill SS, Tuteja N (eds) Crop
improvement through microbial biotechnology. Elsevier, pp 291–301
Ngalimat MS, Hata EM, Zulperi D et al (2021) Plant growth-promoting bacteria as an emerging tool
to manage bacterial rice pathogens. Microorganisms 9(682):1–23. https://doi.org/10.3390/
microorganisms9040682260 M. Kumar et al.
Noisangiam R, Nuntagij A, Pongsilp N et al (2011) Heavy metal tolerant Metalliresistens
boonkerdii gen. nov, sp. nov, a new genus in the family Brady rhizobiaceae isolated from soil
in Thailand. Syst Appl Microbiol 34:166–168
Ohtake H, Kato J, Kuroda A et al (1996) Chemo lactic signal transduction in Pseudomonas
aeruginosa. In: Nakazawa T, Furukawa K, Hass D, Silver S (eds) Molecular biology and
biotechnology. American Society of Microbiology, Washington DC, pp 188–194
Pan LB, Ma J, Wang XL et al (2016) Heavy metals in soils from a typical county in Shanxi
Province, China: levels, sources and spatial distribution. Chemosphere 148:248–254
Park KH, Lee CY, Son HJ (2009) Mechanism of insoluble phosphate solubilization by Pseudomo￾nas fluorescens RAF15 isolated from ginseng rhizosphere and its plant growth-promoting
activities. Lett Appl Microbiol 49:222–228
Park JH, Bolan N, Megharaj M et al (2011a) Concomitant rock phosphate dissolution and lead
immobilization by phosphate solubilizing bacteria (Enterobacter sp.). J Environ Manag 92:
1115–1120
Park JH, Bolan N, Megharaj M, Naidu R (2011b) Isolation of phosphate solubilizing bacteria and
their potential for lead immobilization in soil. J Hazard Mater 185:829–836
Parks EJ, Olson GJ, Brickman FE (1990) Characterization of high-performance liquid chromatog￾raphy (HPLC) of the solubilization of phosphorus in iron one by a fungus. Indian J Microbiol 5:
183–190
Patel FR (2016) Purification and characterization of alkaline phosphatase from a halotolerant
facultative alkaliphile Bacillus flexus FPB17. Int J Pharma Sci Res 7(6):2641–2647
Patel KJ, Singh AK et al (2010) Organic acid producing phytate mineralizing rhizobacteria and their
effect on growth of pigeon pea (Cajanus cajan). Appl Soil Ecol 44(3):252–261
Paul EA, Clark FE (1988) Soil microbiology and biochemistry. Academic, San Diego, CA
Peix A, Mateos PF, Rodriguez-Barrueco C et al (2001) Growth promotion of common bean
(Phaseolus vulgaris L.) by a strain of Burkholderia cepacia under growth chamber conditions.
Soil Biol Biochem 33:1927–1935
Penuelas J, Poulter B, Sardans J et al (2013) Human-induced nitrogen-phosphorus imbalances alter
natural and managed ecosystems across the globe. Nat Commun 4:2934
Ponmurugan P, Gopi C (2006) In vitro production of growth regulators and phosphatase activity by
phosphate solubilizing bacteria. Afr J Biotechnol 5:348–350
Prasad V, Chaudhary S, Singh A (2018) Improving phosphorus fertility in soil through microbial
mediators. Int J Plant Env 4(2):74–80
Priya D, Mahesh Kumar DJ, Kalaichelvan PT (2014) Optimization and production of extracellular
alkaline phosphatase from Bacillus megaterium. Int J Chem Tech Res 6(9):4251–4258
Raghothama KG (1999) Phosphate acquisition. Annu Rev Plant Physiol Plant Mol Biol 50:665–
693
Raghu K, Mac Rae IC (1966) Occurrence of phosphate-dissolving microorganisms in the rhizo￾sphere of rice plants and in submerged soils. J Appl Microbiol 29:582–586
Rahi P, Vyas P, Sharma S et al (2009) Plant growth promoting potential of the fungus Discosia
sp. FIHB571 from tea rhizosphere tested on chickpea, maize and pea. Indian. J Microbiol 49(2):
128–133
Rajkumar M, Freitas H (2008) Influence of metal resistant-plant growth-promoting bacteria on the
growth of Ricinus communis in soil contaminated with heavy metals. Chemosphere 71(5):
834–842. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.200711038
Rashid M, Khalil S, Ayud N (2004) Organic acids production and phosphate solubilization by
phosphate solubilizing microorganisms (PSM) under in vitro conditions. Pakistan J Biol Sci 7:
187–196
Reyes I, Bernier L, Antoun H (2002) Rock phosphate solubilisation and colonization of maize
rhizosphere by wild and genetically modified strains of Penicillium rugulosum. Microb Ecol 44:
39–48
Richardson AE (2001) Prospects for using soil microorganisms to improve the acquisition of
phosphorus by plants. Aust J Plant Physiol 28:897–90610 Phosphate Solubilizing Microorganisms: Multifarious Applications 261
Richardson AE, Simpson RJ (2011) Soil microorganisms mediating phosphorus availability. Plant
Physiol 156:989–996
Richardson AE, Hadobas PA, Hayes JE et al (2001) Utilization of phosphorus by pasture plants
supplied with myo-inositol hexaphosphate is enhanced by the presence of soil micro-organisms.
Plant Soil 229:47–56
Rodriguez H, Fraga R (1999) Phosphate solubilizing bacteria and their role in plant growth
promotion. Biotechnol Adv 17:319–339
Rodriguez H, Fraga R, Gonzalez T et al (2006) Genetics of phosphate solubilisation and its potential
applications for improving plant growth-promoting bacteria. Plant Soil 287:15–21
Ryu CM, Hu CH, Locy RD et al (2005) Study of mechanisms for plant growth promotion elicited
by rhizobacteria in Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant Soil 268:285–292
Sane SA, Mehta SK (2015) Isolation and evaluation of rock phosphate solubilizing fungi as
potential biofertilizer. J Fertil Pestic 6:1–6
Sharma SB, Sayyed RZ, Trivedi MH (2013) Phosphate solubilizing microbes: sustainable approach
for managing phosphorus deficiency in agricultural soils, vol 2. Springer, Cham, pp 587–600.
https://doi.org/10.1186/2193-1801-2-587
Singh S, Kapoor KK (1998) Effects of inoculation of phosphate-solubilizing microorganisms and
an arbuscular mycorrhizal fungus on mung bean grown under natural soil conditions. Mycor￾rhiza 7:249–253
Sperber JI (1957) Solution of mineral phosphates by soil bacteria. Nature 180:994–995
Sundara B, Natarajan V, Hari K (2002) Influence of phosphorus solubilizing bacteria on the
changes in soil available phosphorus and sugarcane and sugar yields. Field Crops Res 77:43–49
Surange S, Wollum AG, Kumar N et al (1995) Characterization of Rhizobium from root nodules of
leguminous trees growing alkaline soils. Can J Microbiol 43:891–894
Swarnalakshmi K, Prasanna R, Kumar A et al (2013) Evaluating the influence of novel
cyanobacterial biofilmed biofertilizers on soil fertility and plant nutrition in wheat. Eur J Soil
Biol 169:123–133. https://doi.org/10.1007/s120100129967218661872
Tahir M, Mirza MS, Zaheer A et al (2013) Isolation and identification of phosphate solubilizer
Azospirillum, Bacillus and Enterobacter strains by 16S rRNA sequence analysis and their effect
on growth of wheat (Triticum aestivum L.). Aust J Crop Sci 7(9):1284–1292
Teng ZD, Shao W, Zhang KY et al (2019) Characterization of phosphate solubilizing bacteria
isolated from heavy metal contaminated soils and their potential for lead immobilization. J
Environ Manag 231:189–197
Thaller MC, Berlutti F, Schippa S et al (1995) Heterogeneous patterns of acid phosphatases
containing low-molecular-mass Poli peptides in members of the family Enterobacteriaceae.
Int J Syst Evol Microbiol 4:255–261
Unno Y, Okubo K, Wasaki J et al (2005) Plant growth promotion abilities and micro scale bacterial
dynamics in the rhizosphere of Lupin analysed by phytate utilization ability. Environ Microbiol
7(3):396–404
Vasudevan P, Reddy MS, Kavitha S et al (2002) Role of biological preparations in enhancement of
rice seedling growth and grain yield. Curr Sci 83:1140–1143
Vazquez P, Holguin G, Puente ME et al (2000) Phosphate solubilizing microorganism associated
with the rhizosphere of mangroves in a semiarid coastal lagoon. Biol Fertil Soils 30:460–468
Wani PA, Khan MS (2010) Bacillus species enhance growth parameters of chickpea (Cicer
arietinum L.) in chromium stressed soils. Food Chem Toxicol 48(11):3262–3267
White la MA (2000) Growth promotion of plants inoculated with phosphate solubilizing fungi. Adv
Agron 69:99–151
Wu CH, Wood TK, Mulchandani A et al (2006) Engineering plant-microbe symbiosis for
rhizoremediation of heavy metals. Appl Environ Microbiol 72(2):1129–1134
Xiao C, Zhang H, Fang Y et al (2013) Evaluation for rock phosphate solubilization in fermentation
and soil–plant system using a stress-tolerant phosphate-solubilizing Aspergillus niger WHAK1.
Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 169(1):123–133. https://doi.org/10.1007/s1201001299672262 M. Kumar et al.
Yadav BK, Tarafdar JC (2007a) Availability of unavailable phosphate compounds as a phosphorus
source for cluster bean (Cyamopsis tetragonoloba (L.) Taub.) through the activity of phospha￾tase and phytase produced by actinomycetes. J Ari Legu 4:110–116
Yadav BK, Tarafdar JC (2007b) Ability of Emericella rugulosa to mobilize unavailable P com￾pounds during Pearl millet (Pennisetum glaucum (L.) R.Br.) crop under arid condition. Indian J
Microbiol 47:57–63
Yi Y, Huang W, Ge Y (2008) Exopolysaccharide: a novel important factor in the microbial
dissolution of tricalcium phosphate. World J Microbiol Biotechnol 24:1059–1065
Zaidi A, Khan MS, Amil M (2003) Effect of rhizospheric microorganisms on yield and nutrient
uptake of chickpea (Cicer arietinum L.). Eur J Agron 19:15–21
Zaidi S, Usmani S, Singh BR et al (2006) Significance of Bacillus subtilis strain SJ-101 as a
bioinoculant for concurrent plant growth promotion and nickel accumulation in Brassica juncea.
Chemosphere 64(6):991–997
Zaidi A, Khan MS, Ahemad M et al (2009) Plant growth promotion by phosphate solubilizing
bacteria. Acta Microbiol Immunol Hung 56:263–284
Zhao XQ, Wang M, Wang H et al (2019) Study on the remediation of Cd pollution by the
biomineralization of urease-producing bacteria. Int J Environ Res Public Health 16:268–282
Zhu F, Qu L, Hong X et al (2011, 2011) Isolation and characterization of a phosphate solubilizing
halophilic bacterium Kushneria sp. YCWA18 from Daqiao Saltern on the coast of yellow sea of
China. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med:615032. https://doi.org/10.1155/2011/615032263
Chapter 11
Bacillus and Streptomyces for Management
of Biotic Stresses in Plants for Sustainable
Agriculture
A. Manikandan, R. Anandham, I. Johnson, R. Krishnamoorthy,
M. Senthilkumar, R. Raghu, N. O. Gopal, and P. K. Mukherjee
Abstract Plant pathogens cause various crop plant diseases and are considered one
of the biotic stresses, accounting for 20–40% of economic losses. Chemical-based
treatments are currently believed to be an effective and reliable agricultural man￾agement technique for disease control. Agrochemicals are highly effective and easy
to use, yet they pose a danger to the ecosystem. The use of microbial agents to
combat plant diseases is a good alternative to the use of chemicals, which are
harmful to the environment and human health. Members of the Bacillus and Strep￾tomyces genera are two of the most frequently used biocontrol agents to suppress
plant diseases. Plant growth-promoting (PGP) characteristics are shared by both
bacterial species. This chapter comprehensively reports the mechanisms used by
Bacillus and Streptomyces in their behavior as biocontrol and PGP agents. Also
discussed are the various commercial formulations made from these genera. The
application of biocontrol agents made from viable microbial strains to the field bodes
well for successful management of the disease for sustainable agriculture.
A. Manikandan · R. Anandham (*) · R. Raghu · N. O. Gopal
Department of Agricultural Microbiology, Tamil Nadu Agricultural University (TNAU),
Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu, India
I. Johnson
Department of Plant Pathology, Tamil Nadu Agricultural University (TNAU), Coimbatore,
Tamil Nadu, India
R. Krishnamoorthy
Department of Crop Management, Vanavarayar Institute of Agriculture, Pollachi, Tamil Nadu,
India
M. Senthilkumar
Agricultural College and Research Institute, Tamil Nadu Agricultural University (TNAU),
Eachangkottai, Tamil Nadu, India
P. K. Mukherjee
Nuclear Agriculture and Biotechnology Division, Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Trombay,
Mumbai, India
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2023
S. Chhabra et al. (eds.), Plant Microbiome for Plant Productivity and Sustainable
Agriculture, Microorganisms for Sustainability 37,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-19-5029-2_11Keywords Bacillus · Streptomyces · Gamma irradiation · PGPR · Plant defense
enzyme · Disease control · Biotic stress · Sustainable agriculture
264 A. Manikandan et al.
11.1 Introduction
11.1.1 General
Numerous biotic stresses that plants frequently experience are having an impact on
crop growth and yields. The existence of numerous pathogens, pests, and parasites is
what causes biotic stresses. Around 20–40% of the yield losses occur worldwide
only through the diseases caused by several plant pathogenic fungi, bacteria, viruses,
and various pests. Microorganisms could play an important role in adaptation
strategies and increase of tolerance to biotic stresses in agricultural plants
(Sobiczewski et al. 2017). Plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria (PGPR) mitigate
most effectively the impact of biotic stresses on plants through the production of
exopolysaccharides, biofilm formation, hydrolytic enzymes, lipopeptides,
siderophore production of volatile organic compounds, degradation of the ethylene
precursor ACC by bacterial ACC deaminase, and induction of systemic resistance in
plants (Prasad et al. 2015). Bacillus and Streptomyces genera are widely used as the
biological control agents due to their prevalence in the agro-ecological region’s
natural environment and a wide range of biocontrol mechanisms (Manikandan et al.
2022). In this chapter, the mode of actions, production of metabolites, and improve￾ment of biocontrol mechanisms by gamma-induced mutations and effective formu￾lations of these biocontrol agents are discussed.
11.2 Biotic Stress
Numerous biotic stresses that plants frequently experience are having an impact on
crop development and yields. Plant infections and biotic stresses are caused by the
abundance of pathogens, pests, and parasites. The major plant fungus is necrotrophic
(killing the host by producing toxins, for example, Sclerotinia sclerotiorum and
Fusarium spp.) and biotrophic (having a long-term relationship with the host for
feeding, for example, Basidiomycota and Ascomycota groups). They can cause leaf
spots, cankers, and vascular wilts in plants (Laluk and Mengiste 2010; Doughari
2015; Sobiczewski et al. 2017). The plant pathogenic bacteria also cause many
diseases and exhibit various types of symptoms which include galls, overgrowths,
soft rots, wilts, blights, leaf spots, and cankers. Nematodes also cause major soil￾borne diseases. They feed plant parts and cause stunted growth, wilting, and nutrient
deficiency (Lambert and Bekal 2002; Bernard et al. 2017; Osman et al. 2020).
Likewise, viruses also cause chlorosis and stunted growth in plants (Pallas and
García 2011). On the other hand, insects and mites can cause damage to plants by
feeding and also act as a vector for various bacteria and viruses (Schumann and11 Bacillus and Streptomyces for Management of Biotic... 265
D’arcy 2006). Plants have developed various immune systems to overcome biotic
stress (Rejeb et al. 2014). All the plants are having first-line defense mechanisms to
avoid pathogen and insect attacks, which also consist of physical barriers such as
wax, trichomes, and cuticle layer. Plants are also able to produce metabolite com￾pounds to protect from pathogens (Taiz and Zeiger 2006; Hammond-Kosack 2000).
Furthermore, stress reduction can be improved by having a detailed understanding of
the molecular mechanisms underpinning plant defense systems (Cheng et al. 2012;
Wang et al. 2019; Daayf et al. 2012).
Around 20–40% of the yield losses occur worldwide only through the diseases
caused by several plant pathogenic fungi, bacteria, viruses, and various pests
(Cabral-Pinto et al. 2020). To overcome these pests and diseases, farmers are
following various approaches to suppress the plant diseases. For control of plant
pathogens, they majorly depend on chemicals which include fungicides, pesticides,
and nematicides that arrest pests and plant pathogens. These chemicals effectively
control plant diseases; however, the excessive use of these chemicals could lead the
pathogen resistance against these chemicals and also harm the environment and
human health (Tilman et al. 2002). For example, captan, a fungicide which is banned
in Mexico because of its carcinogenic effect (González et al. 2018). On the other
hand, DTT (dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane), which is a synthetic pesticide effec￾tively used to control plant pathogens, was found to cause endocrine disorders and
genotoxicity in humans (Cohn et al. 2007). Hence, there is a need for the develop￾ment of alternative plant pathogen control strategies. Currently, the plant patholo￾gists focus their research on developing a new alternative that could eventually
replace the usage of chemicals in plant disease control. Apart from this, cultural
methods such as crop rotation and the system of planting in different plots might
reduce the occurrence of pests and diseases; however, these are not completely
effective (Sainju et al. 2016). Biocontrol agents as a promising solution to reduce
the adverse effects on agricultural yield and quality caused by various diseases
minimize the resistance of plant pathogens and reduce contamination of environ￾ments. This helps produce safe foods while also lowering agricultural production
costs (Tena et al. 2015).
The first biological control agent was used in the early 1800s, to control different
crop diseases by using living organisms or their byproducts (Badii and Abreu 2006).
The significance of a broad group of rhizosphere microorganisms in the management
of plant pathogenic organisms has been explored in recent years. These rhizosphere
organisms act as the plant’s front line of defense against plant pathogens, preventing
their development in the roots (Tejera-Hernández et al. 2011). Various direct and
indirect biocontrol methods have been observed in various biological control agents.
Bacillus and Streptomyces genera are widely used for biocontrol purposes because of
their abundance in nature in the agroecological region and owing to various biocon￾trol mechanisms shown in Fig. 11.1 (Jog et al. 2012; Tejera-Hernández et al. 2011).266 A. Manikandan et al.
Fig. 11.1 PGPR and biocontrol mechanisms of Bacillus and Streptomyces
11.3 Bacillus and Streptomyces
Bacillus is a genus of the Gram-positive group, rod-shaped, and spore-forming
bacterium belonging to the phylum Firmicutes which is found in mostly all types
of environments including soil rhizosphere region. Cultivation-dependent method
was conducted by Vargas-Ayala et al. (2000) and the results showed the occurrence
of several isolates that were phenotypically and phylogenetically related species of
Bacillus subtilis and Bacillus cereus with the range of 103 to 106 (CFU)/g of soil.
Bacillus is considered one of the most important and widely used biocontrol agents
against various groups of plant pathogens. It also produces numerous types of plant
growth-promoting characters and various hydrolytic enzymes and lipopeptides
which help to inhibit the plant pathogenic organisms and also improve the plant
growth and health. It forms endospore under the adverse climatic condition to remain
viable in all climatic conditions (Teixeira et al. 2010; Fira et al. 2018; Shafi et al.
2017; Verschuere et al. 2000; Cavaglieri et al. 2005).
Streptomyces is a group of Gram-positive, filamentous, aerobic, and non-motile
bacterium placed under the phyla of Actinobacteria, which are usually persistent in
soil; it accounts the ~10% of the total microbial load in the soil (Samac et al. 2003;
Hayakawa et al. 2004; Law et al. 2017; Schrey and Tarkka 2008). Streptomyces is
known for the production of a plethora of secondary metabolites including antibi￾otics; however, in recent years attention has been paid towards plant growth￾promoting promoting (PGP) characteristics such as IAA production, phosphate11 Bacillus and Streptomyces for Management of Biotic... 267
solubilization, siderophore production, volatile organic compounds (VOC), and
induced systematic responses (ISR) (Jog et al. 2012; Lehr et al. 2007, 2008).
Many Streptomyces strains have been used for the control of various plant pathogens
(Hanif et al. 2019; Hue et al. 2001; Inbar et al. 2005; Gopalakrishnan et al. 2014).
11.4 Antibiotics from Bacillus and Streptomyces
Bacillus species can produce numerous types of antimicrobial compounds. In their
total genomes, around 4–5% is employed only for the synthesis of antimicrobial
compounds (Stein 2005). Based on the biosynthesis nature, antimicrobial substances
are classified into two categories. One is lipopeptides, which are produced
non-ribosomally. Another one is bacteriocin, which is produced ribosomally
(Arnison et al. 2013; Ongena and Jacques 2008). The antimicrobial compounds
produced by the Bacillus sp. include bacillomycin, subtilin, bacilysin, mycobacillin,
iturin, surfactin, and fengycin, which have both antifungal and antibacterial activi￾ties. Recently lipopeptides are receiving more attention due to their nature of wide
antimicrobial ability, less toxic, easily degradable, and stable even in high temper￾atures (Meena and Kanwar 2015). Lipopeptides are cyclic, low molecular weight
compounds, which are divided into three major groups, namely, fengycin, surfactin,
and iturin (Kakinuma et al. 1969; Vanittanakom et al. 1986).
Fengycin is majorly produced by the B. subtilis and B. amyloliquefaciens (Steller
and Vater 2000; Hanif et al. 2019). Fengycin helps in plant growth (Deleu et al.
2005) and inhibits various plant pathogens including Fusarium oxysporum, F.
oxysporum Forma specialis spinaciae, F. solani, F. solani f. sp. radicicola, F.
verticillioides, F. graminearum, and Plasmodiophora. Surfactin is produced by
most of the Bacillus spp. and it is having antibacterial and antifungal properties
(Hanif et al. 2019; Hue et al. 2001). Surfactin has arrested the growth of various
fungal pathogens such as F. verticillioides, F. verticillioides, F. oxysporum, and
Colletotrichum gloeosporiodes (Fan et al. 2005; Dunlap et al. 2011; Snook et al.
2009; Geissler et al. 2017). Iturin is also mostly produced by the B. subtilis and B.
amyloliquefaciens species (Ongena and Jacques 2008; Nasir and Besson 2012). It
also shows antifungal activity against the Colletotrichum, Botrytis, F. graminearum,
F. oxysporum, Rhizoctonia solani, and Penicillium (Meena et al. 2014; Calvo et al.
2019; Zalila-Kolsi et al. 2016; Fujita and Yokota 2019). Surfactin and fengycin
lipopeptides also induce the systemic resistance of plants (Cawoy et al. 2014). A
dual plate assay was carried on Bacillus spp. against the Macrophomina phaseolina
pathogen. Results showed the stunted hyphal growth in the contact point of the
pathogen near the antagonistic organisms (Fig. 11.2).
Streptomyces is known for the production of versatile types of antibiotic com￾pounds, including antibacterial, antifungal, antiviral, insecticides, and herbicides
(Sharma et al. 2014). Oxytetracycline is produced from Streptomyces rimosus and
showed antagonistic activity against fire blight (Erwinia amylovora). Streptomycin
from Streptomyces griseus prevents plant diseases caused by Pseudomonas tabaci,268 A. Manikandan et al.
Fig. 11.2 Dual plate assay of Bacillus spp. against the Macrophomina phaseolina pathogen. (a)
SEM image was taken in the normal hyphal region of pathogen. (b) SEM image was taken in the
pathogen and antagonistic contact region
Xanthomonas oryzae, and Xanthomonas citri. Blasticidin-S of Streptomyces
griseochromogenes inhibits the rice blast (Pyricularia oryzae). Kasugamycin pro￾duced by Streptomyces kasugaensis arrests the leaf spot in sugar beet and mycostop
produced by Streptomyces sp. K61 inhibits the damping-off caused by Rhizoctonia
solani, Fusarium, and Phytophthora. Actinovate produced by S. lydicus WYEC
108 inhibits the soil-borne diseases, namely, Pythium, Fusarium, Phytophthora,
Rhizoctonia, and Verticillium (Aggarwal et al. 2016). Lipopeptides and antibiotics
produced from different Bacillus spp. and Streptomyces spp. are listed in Table 11.1.
11.5 Volatile Organic Compounds (VOCs)
Volatile organic compounds (VOCs) are a group of odorous, low molecular weight
(<300 Da) secondary metabolites produced by soil microorganisms. Many VOCs
can control the plant pathogens and induce the systemic resistance in the plants
(Kanchiswamy et al. 2015; Raza et al. 2016; Tahir Ha et al. 2017). Major chemicalSpecies Pathogens References
(continued)
11 Bacillus and Streptomyces for Management of Biotic... 269
Table 11.1 Lipopeptides and antibiotics produced from Bacillus spp. and Streptomyces spp.
Stains
name
Lipopeptide/
antibiotic
Bacillus
amyloliquefaciens
YN201732 Bacillomycin D Fusarium solani Jiao et al.
(2021)
B. velezensis S499,
FZB42
QST713
Fengycins
Iturins
Rhizoctonia variabilis Zihalirwa
Kulimushi
et al.
(2017)
B. subtilis 98S Fengycins Botrytis cinerea,
F. oxysporum
Pythium
aphanidermatum
Cawoy
et al.
(2015)
B. velezensis SQR9 Fengycins
Iturins
Surfactins
Bacillibactin
Verticillium dahliae
F. oxysporum,
Phytophthora parasitica
var. nicotianae
Sclerotinia sclerotiorum
Li et al.
(2014)
B. subtilis B9-5 Fengycins
Surfactins
R. stolonifer
F. sambucinum
Verticillium dahliae
DeFilippi
et al.
(2018)
B. velezensis QST713 Surfactins T. aggressivum f. sp.
europaeum
Pandin
et al.
(2019)
B.
amyloliquefaciens
SB-1 Surfactin, Iturin
A1, Bacillibactin,
Bacillaene,
Fengycin A,
Macrolactin E
F. oxysporum
F. moniliforme,
F. solani, Aspergillus
flavus, A. niger, and
Curvularia sp.
Shahid
et al.
(2021)
B. subtilis A-2 Surfactin Iturin
A1
Bacillibactin
Bacillaene
Bacillomycin D
Fengycin A
Macrolactin E
F. oxysporum
F. moniliforme,
F. solani, A. flavus,
A. niger, and Curvularia
sp.
Shahid
et al.
(2021)
B. tequilensis A-3 Surfactin, Iturin
A1
Bacillibactin,
Bacillaene
F. oxysporum,
F. moniliforme,
F. solani, A. flavus,
A. niger, and Curvularia
sp.
Shahid
et al.
(2021)
B.
amyloliquefaciens
A3 Surfactins, iturins,
and fengyins
Dickeya dadantii Hossain
et al.
(2020)
B. coagulans ATCC
7050
Lactosporin Micrococcus luteus and
Listeria monocytogenes
Riazi et al.
(2009)
B. tequilensis A-3 Iturins, fengycins,
macrolactins,
bacillomycin-D
F. moniliforme, F.
solani, A. flavus, A.
niger, and Curvularia sp.
Shahid
et al.
(2021)Species Pathogens References
270 A. Manikandan et al.
Table 11.1 (continued)
Stains
name
Lipopeptide/
antibiotic
Streptomyces
griseochromogenes
– Blasticidin-S Pyricularia oryzae Misato
et al.
(1959)
S. kasugaensis – Kasugamycin Venturia spp.,
Cercospora spp., M.
grisea
Hamada
et al.
(1965)
S. natalensis – Natamycin F. oxysporum Copping
and Duke
(2007)
S. rimosus – Oxytetracycline Erwinia amylovora,
Xanthomonas sp.
Copping
and Duke
(2007)
S. cacoai var.
asoensis
– Polyoxin B Sphaerotheca spp.
Botrytis cinerea
Sclerotinia sclerotiorum
Corynespora melonis
Alternaria alternata
Copping
and Duke
(2007)
S. griseus – Streptomycin Xanthomonas oryzae
X. citri
Pseudomonas tabaci
P. lachrymans
Copping
and Duke
(2007)
S. hygroscopicus – Validamycin R. solani and
Rhizoctonia
Copping
and Duke
(2007)
S. scabies – Macrolactin A F. oxysporum Copping
and Duke
(2007)
classes of microbial volatile organic compounds (mVOCs) are alcohols, ketones,
aromatic compounds, terpenes, organic acids, esters, aldehydes, sulphur compounds,
alkanes, and nitrogen compounds (Schenkel et al. 2015; Schmidt et al. 2017).
Approximately 2000 different types of VOCs with various synonyms have been
reported from the 1000 bacterial species (Lemfack et al. 2018).
Numerous volatile organic compounds with antifungal and antimicrobial proper￾ties are produced by Bacillus species (Leelasuphakul et al. 2008; Chen et al. 2008).
The first reported mVOCs 2,3-butanediol and acetoin produced by B. subtilis
enhance the growth and systemic resistance in Arabidopsis (Ryu et al. 2003). Wu
et al. (2019) reported the volatile compounds 2-nonanone and 2-heptanone produced
by Bacillus amyloliquefaciens, which effectively control the Fusarium wilt of
watermelon caused by F. oxysporum f. sp. niveum. The compounds acetoin and
2,3-butanediol help plant growth. Bacillus subtilis CF-3 produced 62 potential
VOCs and among these benzothiazoles, benzoic acid, 3-methylbutanal, 2,4-di-tert￾butylphenol, and 1-octanol showed the antagonism towards the Macrophomina
fructicola and Clostridium gloeosporioides (Gao et al. 2018). Benzenoids class of11 Bacillus and Streptomyces for Management of Biotic... 271
VOCs such as 1-butanol, 3-methyl-, hexanol, 2-ethyl decanal, 2-ethyl nonanal are
produced by the B. subtilis and effective against the F. oxysporum f. sp. lactucae, F.
oxysporum f. sp. cubense, R. solani, S. sclerotiorum. Similarly, sulphur-containing
volatiles such as carbon disulphide, dimethyl trisulfide, and thiophene showed
effectiveness against Colletotrichum gloeosporioide, Alternaria brassicae, A.
solani, Ascochyta citrullina, B. cinerea, Cercospora kikuchii, F. graminerum, F.
oxysporum.
Streptomyces genus produced nearly 10,000 secondary metabolites including
volatile compounds (VOCs) (Berdy 2005; Hopwood 2007; van Wezel et al. 2009).
Various groups of VOCs include alkanes, alkenes, alcohols, esters, ketones, geno￾mics, and sulphur compounds produced by the Actinomyces (Palaniyandi et al.
2014). Streptomyces albulus NJZJSA2 produced over 13 VOCs, and among these
4-methoxystyrene, 2-pentylfuran, and anisole showed the antifungal activity against
the Sclerotinia sclerotiorum and Fusarium oxysporum (Wu et al. 2015). The VOCs
produced from S. platensis F-1 effectively control the fungal pathogens including S.
sclerotiorum, R. solani, and Botrytis cinerea (Wan et al. 2008). Volatile compounds
produced by S. philanthi RM-1-138 effectively control R. solani (Boukaew et al.
2013). Streptomyces alboflavus TD-1 produced nearly 35 compounds and among
these benzenamine and dimethyl trisulfide exhibited the control of mycelial growth
of Aspergillus ochraceus (Yang et al. 2019). Wang et al. (2013) reported VOCs from
Streptomyces alboflavus and Streptomyces philanthi which inhibited the growth of
Fusarium moniliforme, Fusarium fujikuroi, Aspergillus flavus, Aspergillus
ochraceus, Aspergillus niger, and Penicillium citrinum.
11.6 Plant Growth-Promoting (PGP) Traits
Plant rhizosphere regions are populated with a wide range of plant growth￾promoting rhizobacteria (PGPR) and are involved in the various direct and indirect
mechanisms to help the plant development and also help in phytopathogen control.
PGPR includes the genera of Azospirillum, Bacillus, Pseudomonas, Rhizobium, and
Burkholderia (Glick et al. 1998; Solanki et al. 2017; Kalita et al. 2015). Furthermore,
actinobacterial strains including Streptomyces spp., Streptosporangium sp., and
Micromonospora sp. show the various PGPR and biocontrol activities (Gomes
et al. 2000; Sousa et al. 2008; Franco-Correa et al. 2010). PGPR and biocontrol
mechanisms of Bacillus and Streptomyces are shown in Fig. 11.1. Similarly, differ￾ent PGPR and biocontrol traits of Bacillus and Streptomyces were given in
Table 11.2.272 A. Manikandan et al. Table 11.2 PGPR and biocontrol traits of Bacillus and Streptomyces Species Strain Host plant PGP character Biocontrol of disease/pathogen References B. vallismortis RHFS10 – Siderophore production, IAA, Phosphate solubilization and hydrolytic activities M. phaseolina Castaldi et al. (2021) B. subtilis MF497446 Maize Siderophore and an increased amount of cata- lase (CAT), peroxidase (PO), and polyphenol oxidase (PPO) Cephalosporium maydis Ghazy and El-Nahrawy (2021) B. subtilis PM32 Potato Zinc and potassium solubilization, biological nitrogen fixation, ammonia, and siderophore production, and extracellular enzyme (cellulase, catalase, amylase, protease, pectinase, and chitinase) R. solani Mehmood et al. (2021) B. velezensis AK-0 Apple Antifungal activity and lipopeptides genes such as ituD and bacD were expressed C. gloeosporioides, F. solani, A. niger, and C. musae Kim et al. (2021) Bacillus sp. PM31 Potato Zinc and potassium solubilization, nitrogen fix- ation, siderophore, exopolysaccharides produc- tion, and extracellular enzyme activities F. solani Mehmood et al. (2021) B. amyloliquefaciens SB-1 – IAA, protease, lipase, and cellulase F. moniliforme, F. solani, A. flavus, A. niger, and Curvularia sp. Shahid et al. (2021) Bacillus sp. BA97, BN17, BN20, and BR20 Common bean Phosphate solubilization Siderophore, IAA M. phaseolina Bojórquez- Armenta et al. (2021) B. siamensis LZ88 Tobacco Peroxidase (PO) and polyphenol oxidase (PPO) Alternaria alternata Xie et al. (2021) B. amyloliquefaciens MBI600 – Siderophore P. syringae pv. tomato Dimopoulou et al. (2021) B. ginsengihumi M2.11 – Siderophore and IAA Fusarium sp. Itkina et al. (2021)(continued)
B. xiamenensis
PM14
Sugarcane Induced systemic resistance Red rot Mehmood
et al. (2021)
B. subtilis MML2490 Turmeric Production of lytic enzymes
IAA, P solubilization, ammonia production
R. solani, M. phaseolina, F.
graminearum
Chenniappan
et al. (2019)
B. velezensis XT1 Tomato
and
strawberry
Induced systemic resistance Botrytis cinerea Toral et al.
(2020)
B. pumilus HR10 Vegetables Induced systemic resistance and extracellular
polysaccharides (EPS)
R. solani Zhu et al.
(2020)
B. licheniformis POT1 Potato Activation of phenylpropanoid flavonoid
biosynthesis
Alfalfa mosaic virus Abdelkhalek
et al. (2020)
Streptomyces
pactum
A12 Cucurbits Induced systemic resistance Didymella bryoniae Zhao et al.
(2012)
S. albospinus CT205 Cucumber Chitinase, β-glucanase Fusarium Wang et al.
(2016)
S. enissocaesilis BYC Sugar beet K-solubilizing, auxin-producing, and inhibitory
activities
Fusarium spp. Aallam et al.
(2021)
S. bellus AYD Sugar beet K-solubilizing, auxin-producing, and inhibitory
activities
Fusarium spp. Aallam et al.
(2021)
S. saprophyticus DE2 Sugar beet K-solubilizing, auxin-producing, and inhibitory
activities
Fusarium spp. Aallam et al.
(2021)
S. tricolor HM10 – Siderophores, IAA, and P solubilization
C. gloeosporioides Rehan et al.
(2021)
Streptomyces spp. KS62 Chickpea Siderophore, protease and chitinase production
F. oxysporum f. sp. ciceris Amini et al.
(2016)
Streptomyces sp. MR14 Tomato IAA, siderophore, and ammonia production
F. moniliforme Kaur et al.
(2019)
S. griseorubens E44G Maize Protease activity
R. solani Abdelkhalek
et al. (2020)
11 Bacillus and Streptomyces for Management of Biotic... 273Table 11.2 (continued)
Species Strain Host plant PGP character Biocontrol of disease/pathogen References
Streptomyces spp. A20 Rice Siderophores, IAA, extracellular enzymes and
solubilizing phosphate
Burkholderia glumae Suárez￾Moreno et al.
(2019)
Streptomyces spp. SNL2 Tomato Hydrogen cyanide, IAA and siderophores,
chitinase and β-1,3-glucanase activities, P
solubilization
F. oxysporum f. sp. radicis Goudjal et al.
(2016)
Streptomyces spp. PM3 Tomato Induced system resistance, siderophore produc￾tion, P solubilization Soft rot in tomato Dias et al. (2017)
274 A. Manikandan et al.11 Bacillus and Streptomyces for Management of Biotic... 275
11.6.1 Indole Acetic Acid (IAA)
IAA is one of the most studied phytohormones which belongs to classes of auxin. It
helps in plant growth and root development. 80% of the soil rhizosphere microor￾ganisms are able to produce IAA (Neubauer et al. 2000). Microbial IAA is the
effective signaling molecule for the plant–microbe interaction and plant growth
(Matsuda et al. 2018). B. subtilis showed the IAA activity in various crops which
improved plant growth in rice, maize, and onion (Park et al. 2013; Ahmad et al.
2017; Reetha et al. 2014). Similarly, B. amyloliquefaciens displays the IAA produc￾tion in various crops such as banana, cucumber, rice, potato, and brassica (Wang
et al. 2016; Blom et al. 2012; Shao et al. 2015; Niazi et al. 2014). Manulis et al.
(1994) reported the IAA synthesis and its pathways in Streptomyces sp. including S.
griseus, S. violaceus, S. exfoliates, S. coelicolor, and S. lividans. El-Shanshoury
(1991) reported that Streptomyces sp. induces the IAA production in plants under
greenhouse conditions.
11.6.2 1-Aminocyclopropane-1-Carboxylic Acid Deaminase
(ACCd) Activity
According to Brandl and Lindow (1997), the plant hormone ethylene aids in the
growth and development of plants, but high levels can also cause defoliation and
lower plant metabolisms. PGPR has the enzyme 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxyl￾ate (ACC deaminase) which controls ethylene production. It converts ACC into
ammonia and α-ketobutyrate (Zahir et al. 2008). Bacillus subtilis Rhizo SF
48 exhibits the ACCd activity in tomatoes, significantly improving the plant growth
even under different stress conditions (Gowtham et al. 2020). Similarly, Misra and
Chauhan (2020) recorded ACCd activity in three Bacillus strains, namely, B. subtilis
NBRI 28B, B. subtilis NBRI33N, and B. safensis NBRI 12M, which mitigate the salt
stress in maize. Similarly, ACCd activity and exopolysaccharide-producing B.
cereus effectively reduced the heat stress in tomatoes (Mukhtar et al. 2020). Strep￾tomyces spp. show the various PGP activities including ACCd, improving the
growth of maize plants (Nozari et al. 2021). In a study done by Yoolong et al.
(2019), the acdS gene which is responsible for ACC deaminase was taken from S.
venezuelae ATCC 10712 and cloned into S. venezuelae. The mutants show a
significant improvement in salt stress alleviation in rice compared to wild strains.
Streptomyces sp. strain PGPA39 exhibits the ACCd activity and improved the
growth in Arabidopsis under in vitro condition (Palaniyandi et al. 2014).276 A. Manikandan et al.
11.6.3 Siderophore Production
Siderophore is a low molecular weight compound that chelates with iron (Fe3+) from
the environment (Jha and Saraf 2015). In the soil, iron is mostly existing in the ferric
iron form and it remains unavailable to support microbial growth and development
(Das et al. 2007). In order to prevent other microbes, notably harmful pathogens,
from obtaining the iron in the rhizosphere, PGPR Produces siderophores (Freitas
et al. 2015). Bacillus subtilis CAS15 can control the Fusarium wilt in pepper crops
and also exhibits siderophore production (Yu et al. 2011). Antagonistic bacterium
Bacillus licheniformis K11 that effectively inhibits Phytophthora capsici also pro￾duces the siderophore and cellulose (Jung et al. 2007). Shobha and Kumudini (2012)
revealed that the Bacillus spp. produced siderophore also shows antagonistic activity
against Fusarium oxysporum. Jog et al. (2012) reported that Streptomyces rochei, S.
carpinensis, and S. thermolilacinus effectively improve the plant growth and pro￾duce the siderophore. Similarly, siderophore-producing Streptomyces was tested in
the saline soil condition that improved the plant growth (Akram and Anjum 2011).
11.6.4 Induced Systematic Resistance (ISR)
PGPR can also control plant diseases through the indirect mechanism, the so-called
induced systematic resistance (ISR). ISR improves defense-related enzymes or pro￾teins against plant pathogens. ISR activates the plant defense response after the
pathogen attack (Pieterse et al. 2014). Niu et al. (2011) reported that PGPR Bacillus
cereus AR156 activates the ISR through the salicylic acid (SA) pathway in
Arabidopsis. B. subtilis increased the plant defense enzymes such as PAL, PPO,
and PO and chitinase activity against the various plant pathogens such as F.
oxysporum (Akram and Anjum 2011), Colletotrichum acutatum (Wang et al.
2014), Alternaria solani (Latha et al. 2009), and Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae
(Udayashankar et al. 2011). B. pumilus activates the phenolic compounds in pea
against the F. oxysporum f. sp. pisi (Benhamou et al. 1996). Streptomyces AcH
505 activates the ISR through SA and jasmonic acid pathway in oak trees against the
powdery mildew (Kurth et al. 2014). Similarly, Streptomyces strains activate the
SA/JA pathway in Arabidopsis to protect against fungal pathogens (Conn et al.
2008).
11.7 Mutation
Mutation is a commonly used tool for the enhancement of secondary metabolite and
biocontrol ability in various beneficial microorganisms (Spadaro and Gullino 2005).
Two types of mutation have been employed to create mutants: (1) physical and11 Bacillus and Streptomyces for Management of Biotic... 277
(2) chemical methods. The chemicals such as methyl methanesulfonate (MMS),
ethyl methanesulfonate (EMS), hydroxylamine (HA), and N-methyl-N0
-nitro-N￾nitrosoguanidine (MNNG) are widely used to create mutants. The physical mutation
was achieved by ultraviolet and gamma rays (Baltz 2001). Through gamma, irradi￾ation mutation was achieved in Bacillus thuringiensis NM101-19 to enhance the
chitinase production. Mutants showed a 2.6-fold higher chitinase activity compared
to wild-type strains. Also, mutants showed higher inhibitory activity against
Verticillium sp., Pythium sp., and Rhizopus stolonifer (Gomaa and El-Mahdy
2018). Khaliq et al. (2009) studied to improve the tylosin production through UV
and gamma irradiation in Streptomyces fradiae NRRL-2702. Similarly, gamma
irradiation was performed in Streptomyces rimosus strain CN08 to improve the
oxytetracycline antibiotic production, and the mutant S. rimosus γ-45 showed
19-fold increased antibiotic production (Lazim et al. 2010). Numerous studies
have been conducted in Trichoderma to improve the biocontrol ability through
gamma mutations against various phytopathogens including F. oxysporum f. sp.
radicis-cucumerinum (Sahampoor et al. 2020), Fusarium graminearum, Sclerotinia
sclerotiorum, Rhizoctonia (Soufi et al. 2021), Macrophomina phaseolina, and Rhi￾zoctonia solani (Abbasi et al. 2016). Afsharmanesh et al. (2013) reported that
enhanced biofilm production was achieved in Bacillus subtilis UTB1 by gamma
irradiation and also exhibited improved biocontrol ability towards Aspergillus
flavus. Similarly, Manikandan et al. (2022) reported that the enhanced biocontrol
ability in mutants of Bacillus subtilis BRBac4, Bacillus siamensis BRBac21, and
Streptomyces cavourensis BRAcB10 was achieved through gamma irradiation
against the Macrophomina phaseolina and Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. udum.
Repetitive element sequence-based polymerase chain reaction (rep-PCR) is a
genomic fingerprinting technique which is used for the identification of genetic
variants in the strains. The DNA primers used in this technique are corresponding
to naturally interspaced sequences in bacteria such as ERIC, BOX, and REP sites
(Versalovic et al. 1991). Moreover, it has been shown that random mutagenesis such
as gamma irradiation induces the rearrangement of chromosomal genome (Najafi
et al. 2011). In this case, rep-PCR is an effective tool for the identification of
diversity of mutants in comparison with wild and mutant strains (Kousar and Babu
2010). The rep-PCR fingerprinting technique is used to determine the genome
diversity and polymorphic bands between the mutants and wild-type strains Bacillus
subtilis UTB1 (Afsharmanesh et al. 2014), Trichoderma harzianum (Abbasi et al.
2016) (Sahampoor et al. 2020), Bacillus thuringiensis NM101-19 (Gomaa and
El-Mahdy 2018), Trichoderma aureoviride (Soufi et al. 2021), Bacillus subtilis
BRBac4, Bacillus siamensis BRBac21, and Streptomyces cavourensis BRAcB10
(Manikandan et al. 2022).278 A. Manikandan et al.
11.8 Formulations
The formulation is a commercially available product made from experimentally
competent biocontrol strains (Prasad et al. 2019). It is a major challenge for all
agro-based industries to make their product a success or failure. There are four types
of formulations that are commercially available in the market: liquid, powder,
granules, and slurry (Bashan et al. 2014; Bashan 1998). Furthermore, formulations
should be made from low-cost materials such as peat, charcoal, vermiculite, lignite,
and vermicompost (Catroux et al. 2001). All the biocontrol strains may not give the
same results as that in the laboratory conditions when comes to the field conditions,
which is a crucial factor in the development of bioinoculants for industrial purposes.
The biocontrol agent efficiency is affected by the soil pH, nutrient availability,
moisture level, and organic matter content of the soil. Differences in environmental
conditions also influence the efficiency of biofertilizer strain under greenhouse/field
conditions that are performed well in the laboratory conditions (Suprapta 2012).
Carrier is a transporter of bioinoculants from industry to field level (Bashan
1998). It has to maintain the right number of cell load and also give temporary
protection in the field conditions both physically and nutritionally (Arora et al.
2010). The carriers are classified into four types based on their origins: (1) Solid￾based inoculum includes soils (inorganic soil, peat, and coal), (2) plant-based
materials (farmyard manure, compost), (3) inert materials (vermiculite, perlite,
alginate beads, and ground rock phosphate), and (4) lyophilized bioinoculant cells,
liquid carriers, and pellets containing spore or cells (Bashan 1998). Dry inoculants
(powders) are produced from the soil and organic and inorganic carriers. Mostly dry
inoculants are formed from the peat. Granules are made from calcite or silica grain,
which is moistened with the adhesive material and mixed with powdered
bioinoculants. Granules are coated with the targeted bioinoculant/s (Stephens and
Rask 2000). The liquid formulation is based on broth culture, polymer-based
substance, and mineral/organic oil (Malusá et al. 2012; Xavier et al. 2004).
Liquid-based formulations are an easier way to handle and apply directly onto soil
or seeds (Stephens and Rask 2000; Xavier et al. 2004). Dried synthetic carriers
(lyophilized freeze-dried cells) stay dormant for a longer amount of time, although
they may induce cell death during dehydration (Bashan 1998). A list of commer￾cially available biocontrol agents of Bacillus and Actinobacteria is given in
Table 11.3.
11.9 Prospects and Conclusions
The use of biocontrol agents as a key to modern agriculture is fundamental, based on
its renewable, low-cost, and eco-friendly potential in ensuring sustainable agricul￾ture. Importantly, the application of biocontrol as an integral component of agricul￾tural practice in promoting plant yield has gained more attraction recently in meeting11 Bacillus and Streptomyces for Management of Biotic... 279
Table 11.3 List of commercially available Bacillus and Streptomyces biofertilizers
Strains Formulations Company Pathogen control
Bacillus subtilis WP STING
T. Stanes and
Company
Limited
Rhizoctonia, Botrytis, Oidiopsis,
Leveillula, Pythium, Alternaria,
Xanthomonas, Phakopsora, Sclerotium,
Phytophthora, Peronospora, Sclerotinia
Bacillus
megaterium var.
phosphaticum
WP SYMBION-P P solubilizers
Bacillus subtilis Liquid Samridhi™
Jaipur Bio
Fertilizers
It acts against deuteromycetes, oomycetes,
ascomycetes, and bacterial plant
pathogens
Streptomyces
K61
WP Mycostop®
AgBio, Inc.,
USA
Fusarium, Phytophthora, Alternaria, and
Pythium
Streptomyces
lydicus
Liquid Bio-Nata
Farmers
Bio-fertilizers
and Organics
Fusarium, Rhizoctonia, Pythium,
Phytophthora, Phytomatotricum,
Aphanomyces, Botrytis, Sclerotinia,
Postia, Verticillium and Geotrichum,
Monosporascus, Armillaria, Alternaria
solani, Pyricularia, Monilinia,
Colletotrichum, Cladosporium
Streptomyces
griseus
Liquid Green Marvel
Greenlife Bio￾tech Lab
Citrus canker, pomegranate bacterial
blight
the demand for food production. Employing Bacillus and Streptomyces in the
production of biocontrol agents for disease management has recorded success.
Moreover, the new technology which involves enhancing the shelf life of these
biocontrol agents with various organic and organic amendments in their growth
medium and the development of newer formulations such as lyophilized cells, spore
suspension, and metabolites are yet to be explored. However, an appropriate SCAR
(sequence characterized amplified regions) marker has to be developed to track the
introduced biocontrol strain formulation at the field level.
In conclusion, overdependence on the use of chemical fertilizers has encouraged
industries to produce chemicals that are toxic to human health, thus causing ecolog￾ical imbalances. These drawbacks are combined with a high cost of production
which is beyond the purchasing capacity of many farmers in the developing world.
The application of biocontrol agents is eco-friendly, relatively inexpensive,
nontoxic, and possesses the significant potential to increase plant yield. Thus, the
application of biocontrol agents made from viable microbial strains to the field bodes
well for the successful management of the disease for sustainable agriculture.
Acknowledgement The authors are thankful to the Government of India, Board of Research in
Nuclear Sciences (GoI-BRNS), Department of Atomic energy (DAE) for funding.280 A. Manikandan et al.
Funding Information This study was supported by the Government of India, the Board of
Research in Nuclear Science (GoI-BRNS), and the Department of Atomic Energy (DAE. 35/14/
17/2018-BRNS/10395).
Competing Interests The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.
References
Aallam Y, Maliki BE, Dhiba D et al (2021) Multiple potential plant growth promotion activities of
endemic Streptomyces spp. from Moroccan sugar beet fields with their inhibitory activities
against Fusarium spp. Microorganisms 9:1429
Abbasi S, Safaie N, Shams-Bakhsh M, Shahbazi S (2016) Biocontrol activities of gamma induced
mutants of Trichoderma harzianum against some soilborne fungal pathogens and their DNA
fingerprinting. Iran J Biotechnol 14:260
Abdelkhalek A, Al-Askar AA, Behiry SI (2020) Bacillus licheniformis strain POT1 mediated
polyphenol biosynthetic pathways genes activation and systemic resistance in potato plants
against Alfalfa mosaic virus. Sci Rep 10:1–16
Afsharmanesh H, Ahmadzadeh M, Javan-Nikkhah M, Behboudi K (2014) Improvement in bio￾control activity of Bacillus subtilis UTB1 against Aspergillus flavus using gamma-irradiation.
Crop Prot 60:83–92
Afsharmanesh H, Ahmadzadeh M, Majdabadi A, Motamedi F, Behboudi K, Javan-Nikkhah M
(2013) Enhancement of biosurfactants and biofilm production after gamma irradiation-induced
mutagenesis of Bacillus subtilis UTB1, a biocontrol agent of Aspergillus flavus. Arch
Phytopathol PFL 46:1874–1884
Aggarwal N, Thind SK, Sharma S (2016) Role of secondary metabolites of actinomycetes in crop
protection. In: Plant growth promoting actinobacteria. Springer, New York, pp 99–121
Ahmad Z, Wu J, Chen L, Dong W (2017) Isolated Bacillus subtilis strain 330-2 and its antagonistic
genes identified by the removing PCR. Sci Rep 7:1–13
Akram W, Anjum T (2011) Quantitative changes in defense system of tomato induced by two
strains of Bacillus against Fusarium wilt. Indian J Fund Appl Life Sci 1:7–13
Amini J, Agapoor Z, Ashengroph M (2016) Evaluation of Streptomyces spp. against Fusarium
oxysporum f. sp. ciceris for the management of chickpea wilt. J Plant Protection Res 56(3):
257–264
Arnison PG, Bibb MJ, Bierbaum G et al (2013) Ribosomally synthesized and post-translationally
modified peptide natural products: overview and recommendations for a universal nomencla￾ture. Nat Prod Rep 30:108–160
Arora NK, Khare E, Maheshwari DK (2010) Plant growth promoting rhizobacteria: constraints in
bioformulation, commercialization, and future strategies. In: Plant growth and health promoting
bacteria. Springer, New York, pp 97–116
Badii MH, Abreu JL (2006) Control biológico una forma sustentable de control de plagas (biolog￾ical control a sustainable way of pest control). Daena 1:82–89
Baltz RH (2001) Genetic methods and strategies for secondary metabolite yield improvement in
actinomycetes. Antonie Van Leeuwenhoek 79:251–259
Bashan Y (1998) Inoculants of plant growth-promoting bacteria for use in agriculture. Plant Soil
378:1–33
Benhamou N, Kloepper JW, Quadt-Hallmann A, Tuzun S (1996) Induction of defenserelated
ultrastructural modifications in pea root tissues inoculated with endophytic bacteria. Plant
Physiol 112:919–929
Bashan Y, De-Bashan LE, Prabhu SR, Hernandez J-P (2014) Advances in plant growth-promoting
bacterial inoculant technology: formulations and practical perspectives, pp 1998–120111 Bacillus and Streptomyces for Management of Biotic... 281
Berdy J (2005) Bioactive microbial metabolites. J Antibiot 58:1–26
Bernard GC, Egnin M, Bonsi C (2017) The impact of plant-parasitic nematodes on agriculture and
methods of control. In: Nematology-concepts, diagnosis and control, vol 10. IntechOpen,
London, p 192
Blom J, Rueckert C, Niu B, Wang Q, Borriss R (2012) The complete genome of Bacillus
amyloliquefaciens subsp. plantarum CAU B946 contains a gene cluster for nonribosomal
synthesis of iturin A. J Bacteriol 194(7):1845–1846
Bojórquez-Armenta YDJ, Mora-Romero GA, López-Meyer M et al (2021) Evaluation of Bacillus
spp. isolates as potential biocontrol agents against charcoal rot caused by Macrophomina
phaseolina on common bean. J Gen Plant Pathol 87:377–386
Boukaew S, Plubrukam A, Prasertsan P (2013) Effect of volatile substances from Streptomyces
philanthi RM-1-138 on growth of Rhizoctonia solani on rice leaf. BioControl 58:471–482
Brandl MT, Lindow SE (1997) Environmental signals modulate the expression of an indole-3-
acetic acid biosynthetic gene in Erwinia herbicola. Mol Plant-Microbe Interact 10:499–505
Cabral-Pinto MMS, Inácio M, Neves O et al (2020) Human health risk assessment due to
agricultural activities and crop consumption in the surroundings of an industrial area. Exposure
Health 12:629–640
Calvo H, Mendiara I, Arias E, Blanco D, Venturini ME (2019) The role of iturin A from
B. amyloliquefaciens BUZ-14 in the inhibition of the most common postharvest fruit rots.
Food Microbiol 82:62–69
Castaldi S, Petrillo C, Donadio G et al (2021) Plant growth promotion function of Bacillus sp strains
isolated from salt-pan rhizosphere and their biocontrol potential against Macrophomina
phaseolina. Int J Mol Sci 22:3324
Catroux G, Hartmann A, Revellin C (2001) Trends in rhizobial inoculant production and use. Plant
Soil 230:21–30
Cavaglieri L, Orlando J, Etcheverry M (2005) In vitro influence of bacterial mixtures on Fusarium
verticillioides growth and fumonisin B1 production: effect of seeds treatment on maize root
colonization. Lett Appl Microbiol 41:390–396
Cawoy H, Debois D, Franzil L, De Pauw E, Thonart P, Ongena M (2015) Lipopeptides as main
ingredients for inhibition of fungal phytopathogens by Bacillus subtilis/amyloliquefaciens.
Microb Biotechnol 8:281–295
Cawoy H, Mariutto M, Henry G et al (2014) Plant defense stimulation by natural isolates of Bacillus
depends on efficient surfactin production. Mol Plant-Microbe Interact 27:87–100
Chen H, Xiao X, Wang J, Wu L, Zheng Z, Yu Z (2008) Antagonistic effects of volatiles generated
by Bacillus subtilis on spore germination and hyphal growth of the plant pathogen, Botrytis
cinerea. Biotechnol Lett 30:919–923
Cheng X, Tian C-J, Li A-N, Qiu J-L (2012) Advances on molecular mechanisms of plant-pathogen
interactions. Yi Chuan Hereditas 34:134–144
Chenniappan C, Narayanasamy M, Daniel GM et al (2019) Biocontrol efficiency of native plant
growth promoting rhizobacteria against rhizome rot disease of turmeric. Biol Control 129:55–64
Cohn BA, Wolff MS, Cirillo PM, Sholtz RI (2007) DDT and breast cancer in young women: new
data on the significance of age at exposure. Environ Health Perspect 115:1406–1414
Conn VM, Walker AR, Franco CMM (2008) Endophytic actinobacteria induce defense pathways in
Arabidopsis thaliana. Mol Plant-Microbe Interact 21:208–218
Copping LG, Duke SO (2007) Natural products that have been used commercially as crop
protection agents. Pest Manag Sci 63:524–554
Daayf F, El Hadrami A, El-Bebany AF et al (2012) Phenolic compounds in plant defense and
pathogen counter-defense mechanisms. In: Recent advances in polyphenol research, vol 3, pp
191–208
Das A, Prasad R, Srivastava A, Giang PH, Bhatnagar K, Varma A (2007) Fungal siderophores:
structure, functions and regulations. In: Varma A, Chincholkar SB (eds) Microbial siderophores,
vol 12. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pp 1–42282 A. Manikandan et al.
Defilippi S, Groulx E, Megalla M, Mohamed R, Avis TJ (2018) Fungal competitors affect
production of antimicrobial lipopeptides in Bacillus subtilis strain B9–5. J Chem Ecol 44:
374–383
Deleu M, Paquot M, Nylander T (2005) Fengycin interaction with lipid monolayers at the air–
aqueous interface implications for the effect of fengycin on biological membranes. J Colloid
Interface Sci 283:358–365
Dias MP, Bastos MS, Xavier VB, Cassel E, Astarita LV, Santarém ER (2017) Plant growth and
resistance promoted by Streptomyces spp. in tomato. Plant Physiol Biochem 118:479–493
Dimopoulou A, Theologidis I, Benaki D et al (2021) Direct antibiotic activity of Bacillibactin
broadens the biocontrol range of Bacillus amyloliquefaciens MBI600. Msphere 6:e00376–
e00321
Dunlap CA, Schisler DA, Price NP, Vaughn SF (2011) Cyclic lipopeptide profile of three Bacillus
subtilis strains; antagonists of Fusarium head blight. J Microbiol 49:603
El-Shanshoury AR (1991) Biosynthesis of indole-3-acetic acid in Streptomyces atroolivacetls and
its changes during spore germination and mycelial growth. Microbios 67:159–164
Fan H, Leve EW, Scullin C et al (2005) Surfactant-assisted synthesis of water-soluble and
biocompatible semiconductor quantum dot micelles. Nano Lett 5:645–648
Fira D, Dimkić I, Berić T, Lozo J, Stanković S (2018) Biological control of plant pathogens by
Bacillus species. J Biotechnol 285:44–55
Franco-Correa M, Quintana A, Duque C, Suarez C, Rodríguez MX, Barea J-M (2010) Evaluation of
actinomycete strains for key traits related with plant growth promotion and mycorrhiza helping
activities. Appl Soil Ecol 45:209–217
Freitas MA, Medeiros FHV, Carvalho SP et al (2015) Augmenting iron accumulation in cassava by
the beneficial soil bacterium Bacillus subtilis (GBO3). Front Plant Sci 6:596
Fujita S, Yokota K (2019) Disease suppression by the cyclic lipopeptides iturin A and surfactin
from Bacillus spp. against Fusarium wilt of lettuce. J Gen Plant Pathol 85:44–48
Gao H, Li P, Xu X, Zeng Q, Guan W (2018) Research on volatile organic compounds from Bacillus
subtilis CF-3: biocontrol effects on fruit fungal pathogens and dynamic changes during fermen￾tation. Front Microbiol 9:456
Geissler M, Oellig C, Moss K, Schwack W, Henkel M, Hausmann R (2017) High-performance
thin-layer chromatography (HPTLC) for the simultaneous quantification of the cyclic
lipopeptides Surfactin, Iturin A and Fengycin in culture samples of Bacillus species. J
Chromatogr B 1044:214–224
Ghazy N, El-Nahrawy S (2021) Siderophore production by Bacillus subtilis MF497446 and
Pseudomonas koreensis MG209738 and their efficacy in controlling Cephalosporium maydis
in maize plant. Arch Microbiol 203:1195–1209
Glick BR, Penrose DM, Li J (1998) A model for the lowering of plant ethylene concentrations by
plant growth-promoting bacteria. J Theor Biol 190:63–68
Gomaa EZ, El-Mahdy OM (2018) Improvement of chitinase production by Bacillus thuringiensis
NM101-19 for antifungal biocontrol through physical mutation. Microbiology 87:472–485
Gomes RC, Semedo L, Soares RMA, Alviano CS, Linhares LF, RRR C (2000) Chitinolytic activity
of actinomycetes from a cerrado soil and their potential in biocontrol. Lett Appl Microbiol 30:
146–150
González FB, Beltan Camacho V, Del Carmen Colin Olmos M, Vandame R (2018) Highly
hazardous pesticides in Mexico. RAMPAM, México
Gopalakrishnan S, Vadlamudi S, Bandikinda P et al (2014) Evaluation of Streptomyces strains
isolated from herbal vermicompost for their plant growth-promotion traits in rice. Microbiol Res
169:40–48
Goudjal Y, Zamoum M, Sabaou N, Mathieu F, Zitouni A (2016) Potential of endophytic Strepto￾myces spp. for biocontrol of Fusarium root rot disease and growth promotion of tomato
seedlings. Biocontrol Sci Tech 26:1691–170511 Bacillus and Streptomyces for Management of Biotic... 283
Gowtham HG, Singh B, Murali M et al (2020) Induction of drought tolerance in tomato upon the
application of ACC deaminase producing plant growth promoting rhizobacterium Bacillus
subtilis Rhizo SF 48. Microbiol Res 234:126422
Hamada M, Hashimoto T, Takahashi T et al (1965) Antimicrobial activity of kasugamycin. J
Antibiot A 18:104–106
Hammond-Kosack K, 2000. Responses to plant pathogens. In Buchanan B, Gruissem W, Jones R
Biochemistry and molecular biology of plants, Wiley New York 1102–1109
Hanif A, Zhang F, Li P et al (2019) Fengycin produced by Bacillus amyloliquefaciens FZB42
inhibits Fusarium graminearum growth and mycotoxins biosynthesis. Toxins 11:295
Hayakawa M, Yoshida Y, Iimura Y (2004) Selective isolation of bioactive soil actinomycetes
belonging to the Streptomyces violaceusniger phenotypic cluster. J Appl Microbiol 96:973–981
Hopwood DA (2007) Streptomyces in nature and medicine: the antibiotic makers. Oxford Univer￾sity Press
Hossain A, Islam Masum MM, Wu X et al (2020) Screening of Bacillus strains in biocontrol of
pathogen Dickeya dadantii causing stem and root rot disease of sweet potato. Biocontrol Sci
Tech 30:1180–1198
Hue N, Serani L, Laprévote O (2001) Structural investigation of cyclic peptidolipids from Bacillus
subtilis by high-energy tandem mass spectrometry. Rapid Commun Mass Spectrom 15:203–209
Inbar E, Green SJ, Hadar Y, Minz D (2005) Competing factors of compost concentration and
proximity to root affect the distribution of streptomycetes. Microb Ecol 50:73–81
Itkina DL, Suleimanova AD, Sharipova MR (2021) Pantoea brenneri AS3 and Bacillus
ginsengihumi M2. 11 as potential biocontrol and plant growth-promoting agents. Microbiology
90:210–218
Doughari J (2015) An overview of plant immunity. J Plant Pathol Microbiol 6:11
Jha CK, Saraf M (2015) Plant growth promoting rhizobacteria (PGPR). J Agricult Res Dev 5:0108–
0119
Jiao R, Cai Y, He P et al (2021) Bacillus amyloliquefaciens YN201732 produces lipopeptides with
promising biocontrol activity against fungal pathogen Erysiphe cichoracearum. Front Cell Infect
Microbiol 11:598999
Jog R, Nareshkumar G, Rajkumar S (2012) Plant growth promoting potential and soil enzyme
production of the most abundant Streptomyces spp. from wheat rhizosphere. J Appl Microbiol
113:1154–1164
Jung H-K, Kim J-R, Woo S-M, Kim S-D (2007) Selection of the auxin, siderophore, and cellulase￾producing PGPR, Bacillus licheniformis K11 and its plant growth promoting mechanisms. Appl
Biol Chem 50:23–28
Kakinuma A, Hori M, Isono M, Tamura G, Arima K (1969) Determination of amino acid sequence
in surfactin, a crystalline peptide lipid surfactant produced by Bacillus subtilis. Agric Biol Chem
33:971–972
Kalita M, Bharadwaz M, Dey T, et al., 2015. Developing novel bacterial based bioformulation
having PGPR properties for enhanced production of agricultural crops
Kanchiswamy CN, Malnoy M, Maffei ME (2015) Chemical diversity of microbial volatiles and
their potential for plant growth and productivity. Front Plant Sci 6:151
Kaur T, Rani R, Manhas RK (2019) Biocontrol and plant growth promoting potential of phyloge￾netically new Streptomyces sp. MR14 of rhizospheric origin. AMB Express 9:1–14
Khaliq S, Akhtar K, Ghauri MA, Iqbal R, Khalid AM, Muddassar M (2009) Change in colony
morphology and kinetics of tylosin production after UV and gamma irradiation mutagenesis of
Streptomyces fradiae NRRL-2702. Microbiol Res 164:469–477
Kim YS, Lee Y, Cheon W et al (2021) Characterization of bacillus velezensis AK-0 as a biocontrol
agent against apple bitter rot caused by Colletotrichum gloeosporioides. Sci Rep 11:1–14
Kousar M, Babu GS (2010) Mutagenic effectiveness and efficiency of gamma rays, sodium azide
and their synergistic effects in urd bean (Vigna mungo L.). World J Agricult Sci 6:234–237284 A. Manikandan et al.
Kurth F, Mailänder S, Bönn M et al (2014) Streptomyces-induced resistance against oak powdery
mildew involves host plant responses in defense, photosynthesis, and secondary metabolism
pathways. Mol Plant-Microbe Interact 27:891–900
Laluk K, Mengiste T (2010) Necrotroph attacks on plants: wanton destruction or covert extortion?
Arabidopsis Book 8:e0136
Lambert K, Bekal S (2002) Introduction to plant-parasitic nematodes. Plant Health Instr 10:1094–
1218
Latha P, Anand T, Ragupathi N, Prakasam V, Samiyappan R (2009) Antimicrobial activity of plant
extracts and induction of systemic resistance in tomato plants by mixtures of PGPR strains and
Zimmu leaf extract against Alternaria solani. Biol Control 50:85–93
Law JW-F, Ser H-L, Khan TM et al (2017) The potential of Streptomyces as biocontrol agents
against the rice blast fungus, Magnaporthe oryzae (Pyricularia oryzae). Front Microbiol 8:3
Lazim H, Slama N, Mankai H, Barkallah I, Limam F (2010) Enhancement of oxytetracycline
production after gamma irradiation-induced mutagenesis of Streptomyces rimosus CN08 strain.
World J Microbiol Biotechnol 26:1317–1322
Leelasuphakul W, Hemmanee P, Chuenchitt S (2008) Growth inhibitory properties of Bacillus
subtilis strains and their metabolites against the green mold pathogen (Penicillium digitatum
Sacc.) of citrus fruit. Postharvest Biol Technol 48:113–121
Lehr NA, Schrey SD, Bauer R, Hampp R, Tarkka MT (2007) Suppression of plant defence response
by a mycorrhiza helper bacterium. New Phytol 174:892–903
Lehr NA, Schrey SD, Hampp R, Tarkka MT (2008) Root inoculation with a forest soil streptomy￾cete leads to locally and systemically increased resistance against phytopathogens in Norway
spruce. New Phytol 177:965–976
Lemfack MC, Gohlke B-O, Toguem SMT, Preissner S, Piechulla B, Preissner R (2018) mVOC 2.0:
a database of microbial volatiles. Nucleic Acids Res 46:D1261–D12D5
Li B, Li Q, Xu Z, Zhang N, Shen Q, Zhang R (2014) Responses of beneficial Bacillus
amyloliquefaciens SQR9 to different soilborne fungal pathogens through the alteration of
antifungal compounds production. Front Microbiol 5:636
Malusá E, Sas-Paszt L, Ciesielska J (2012) Technologies for beneficial microorganisms inocula
used as biofertilizers. Sci World J 2012:491206
Manulis S, Shafrir H, Epstein E, Lichter A, Barash I (1994) Biosynthesis of indole-3-acetic acid via
the indole-3-acetamide pathway in Streptomyces spp. Microbiology 140:1045–1050
Matsuda R, Handayani ML, Sasaki H, Takechi K, Takano H, Takio S (2018) Production of
indoleacetic acid by strains of the epiphytic bacteria Neptunomonas spp. isolated from the red
alga Pyropia yezoensis and the seagrass Zostera marina. Arch Microbiol 200:255–265
Meena KR, Kanwar SS (2015) Lipopeptides as the antifungal and antibacterial agents: applications
in food safety and therapeutics. Biomed Res Int 2015:473050
Meena KR, Saha D, Ramashish K (2014) Isolation and partial characterization of iturin like
lipopeptides (a bio-control agent) from a Bacillus subtilis strain. Int J Curr Microbiol App Sci
3:121–126
Manikandan A, Johnson I, Jaivel N, Krishnamoorthy R, Kumar S, Murugaiyan R, Rajasekaran G,
Olaganathan N, Mukherjee PK, Anandham R (2022) Gamma-induced mutants of Bacillus and
Streptomyces display enhanced antagonistic activities and suppression of the root rot and wilt
diseases in pulses. Biomolecular Concepts 13:103–118
Mehmood S, Khatoon Z, Ahmad AI et al (2021) Bacillus sp. PM31 harboring various plant growth￾promoting activities regulates Fusarium dry rot and wilt tolerance in potato. Archiv Agron
Soil Sci:1–15
Misato T, Ishii I, Asakawa M, Okimoto Y, Fukunaga K (1959) Antibiotics as protectant fungicides
against rice blast (2) the therapeutic action of Blasticidin S. Ann Phytopathol Soc Japan 24:302–
306
Misra S, Chauhan PS (2020) ACC deaminase-producing rhizosphere competent Bacillus spp.
mitigate salt stress and promote Zea mays growth by modulating ethylene metabolism. 3Biotech
10:11911 Bacillus and Streptomyces for Management of Biotic... 285
Mukhtar T, Smith D, Sultan T et al (2020) Mitigation of heat stress in Solanum lycopersicum L. by
ACC-deaminase and exopolysaccharide producing Bacillus cereus: effects on biochemical
profiling. Sustainability 12:2159
Najafi N, Hosseini R, Ahmadi AR (2011) Impact of gamma rays on the Phaffia rhodozyma genome
revealed by RAPD-PCR. Iran J Microbiol 3:216
Nasir MN, Besson F (2012) Interactions of the antifungal mycosubtilin with ergosterol-containing
interfacial monolayers. Biochim Biophys Acta 1818:1302–1308
Neubauer U, Nowack B, Furrer G, Schulin R (2000) Heavy metal sorption on clay minerals affected
by the siderophore desferrioxamine B. Environ Sci Technol 34:2749–2755
Niazi A, Manzoor S, Asari S, Bejai S, Meijer J, Bongcam-Rudloff E (2014) Genome analysis of
Bacillus amyloliquefaciens subsp. plantarum UCMB5113: a rhizobacterium that improves plant
growth and stress management. PLoS One 9:e104651
Niu D-D, Liu H-X, Jiang C-H et al (2011) The plant growth–promoting rhizobacterium Bacillus
cereus AR156 induces systemic resistance in Arabidopsis thaliana by simultaneously activating
salicylate-and jasmonate/ethylene-dependent signaling pathways. Mol Plant-Microbe Interact
24:533–542
Nozari RM, Ortolan F, Astarita LV, Santarém ER (2021) Streptomyces spp. enhance vegetative
growth of maize plants under saline stress. Braz J Microbiol 52(3):1371–1383
Ongena M, Jacques P (2008) Bacillus lipopeptides: versatile weapons for plant disease biocontrol.
Trends Microbiol 16:115–125
Osman HA, Ameen HH, Mohamed M, Elkelany US (2020) Efficacy of integrated microorganisms
in controlling root-knot nematode Meloidogyne javanica infecting peanut plants under field
conditions. Bullet Natl Res Centre 44:1–10
Palaniyandi SA, Damodharan K, Yang SH, Suh JW (2014) Streptomyces sp. strain PGPA39
alleviates salt stress and promotes growth of ‘Micro Tom’ tomato plants. J Appl Microbiol
117:766–773
Pallas V, García JA (2011) How do plant viruses induce disease? Interactions and interference with
host components. J Gen Virol 92:2691–2705
Pandin C, Darsonval M, Mayeur C, Le Coq D, Aymerich S, Briandet R (2019) Biofilm formation
and synthesis of antimicrobial compounds by the biocontrol agent Bacillus velezensis QST713
in an Agaricus bisporus compost micromodel. Appl Environ Microbiol 85:e00327–e00319
Park K, Park J-W, Lee S-W, Balaraju K (2013) Disease suppression and growth promotion in
cucumbers induced by integrating PGPR agent Bacillus subtilis strain B4 and chemical elicitor
ASM. Crop Prot 54:199–205
Pieterse CMJ, Zamioudis C, Berendsen RL, Weller DM, Van Wees SCM, PaHM B (2014) Induced
systemic resistance by beneficial microbes. Annu Rev Phytopathol 52:347–375
Prasad R, Kumar M, Varma A (2015) Role of PGPR in soil fertility and plant health. In:
Egamberdieva D, Shrivastava S, Varma A (eds) Plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria
(PGPR) and medicinal plants. Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp 247–260
Prasad R, Kumar V, Kumar M, Choudhary D (2019) Nanobiotechnology in bioformulations.
Springer International Publishing. ISBN 978-3-030-17061-5. https://www.springer.com/gp/
book/9783030170608
Raza W, Ling N, Yang L, Huang Q, Shen Q (2016) Response of tomato wilt pathogen Ralstonia
solanacearum to the volatile organic compounds produced by a biocontrol strain Bacillus
amyloliquefaciens SQR-9. Sci Rep 6:1–13
Reetha S, Bhuvaneswari G, Thamizhiniyan P, Mycin TR (2014) Isolation of indole acetic acid
(IAA) producing rhizobacteria of pseudomonas fluorescens and Bacillus subtilis and enhance
growth of onion (Allium cepa L.). Int J Curr Microbiol App Sci 3:568–574
Rehan M, Alsohim AS, Abidou H, Rasheed Z, Al Abdulmonem W (2021) Isolation, identification,
biocontrol activity, and plant growth promoting capability of a superior Streptomyces tricolor
strain HM10. Pol J Microbiol 70:245
Rejeb IB, Pastor V, Mauch-Mani B (2014) Plant responses to simultaneous biotic and abiotic stress:
molecular mechanisms. Plan Theory 3:458–475286 A. Manikandan et al.
Riazi S, Wirawan RE, Badmaev V, Chikindas ML (2009) Characterization of lactosporin, a novel
antimicrobial protein produced by Bacillus coagulans ATCC 7050. J Appl Microbiol 106:
1370–1377
Ryu C-M, Farag MA, Hu C-H et al (2003) Bacterial volatiles promote growth in Arabidopsis. Proc
Natl Acad Sci 100:4927–4932
Sahampoor L, Zaker Tavallaie F, Fani SR, Shahbazi S (2020) In vitro efficiency of Trichoderma
harzianum mutants in biocontrol of Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. radicis-cucumerinum. J Crop
Protect 9:285–300
Sainju UM, Lenssen AW, Allen BL, Stevens WB, Jabro JD (2016) Nitrogen balance in response to
dryland crop rotations and cultural practices. Agric Ecosyst Environ 233:25–32
Samac DA, Willert AM, Mcbride MJ, Kinkel LL (2003) Effects of antibiotic-producing Strepto￾myces on nodulation and leaf spot in alfalfa. Appl Soil Ecol 22:55–66
Schenkel D, Lemfack MC, Piechulla B, Splivallo R (2015) A meta-analysis approach for assessing
the diversity and specificity of belowground root and microbial volatiles. Front Plant Sci 6:707
Schmidt R, De Jager V, Zühlke D et al (2017) Fungal volatile compounds induce production of the
secondary metabolite Sodorifen in Serratia plymuthica PRI-2C. Sci Rep 7:1–14
Schrey SD, Tarkka MT (2008) Friends and foes: Streptomycetes as modulators of plant disease and
symbiosis. Antonie Van Leeuwenhoek 94:11–19
Schumann GL, D’arcy CJ (2006) Essential plant pathology. American Phytopathological Society
(APS Press), St Paul
Shafi J, Tian H, Ji M (2017) Bacillus species as versatile weapons for plant pathogens: a review.
Biotechnol Biotechnol Equip 31:446–459
Shahid I, Han J, Hanooq S, Malik KA, Borchers CH, Mehnaz S (2021) Profiling of metabolites of
Bacillus spp. and their application in sustainable plant growth promotion and biocontrol. Front
Sustain Food Syst 5:37
Shao J, Li S, Zhang N et al (2015) Analysis and cloning of the synthetic pathway of the
phytohormone indole-3-acetic acid in the plant-beneficial Bacillus amyloliquefaciens SQR9.
Microb Cell Factories 14:1–13
Sharma M, Dangi P, Choudhary M (2014) Actinomycetes: source, identification, and their applica￾tions. Int J Curr Microbiol App Sci 3:801–832
Shobha G, Kumudini BS (2012) Antagonistic effect of the newly isolated PGPR Bacillus spp. on
Fusarium oxysporum. Int J Appl Sci Eng Res 1:463–474
Snook ME, Mitchell T, Hinton DM, Bacon CW (2009) Isolation and characterization of Leu7-
surfactin from the endophytic bacterium Bacillus mojavensis RRC 101, a biocontrol agent for
Fusarium verticillioides. J Agric Food Chem 57:4287–4292
Sobiczewski P, Iakimova ET, Mikiciński A, Węgrzynowicz-Lesiak E, Dyki B (2017) Necrotrophic
behaviour of Erwinia amylovora in apple and tobacco leaf tissue. Plant Pathol 66:842–855
Solanki MK, Wang Z, Wang F-Y et al (2017) Intercropping in sugarcane cultivation influenced the
soil properties and enhanced the diversity of vital diazotrophic bacteria. Sugar Tech 19:136–147
Soufi E, Safaie N, Shahbazi S, Mojerlou S (2021) Gamma irradiation induces genetic variation and
boosting antagonism in Trichoderma aureoviride. Arch Phytopathol Plant Protect 54:1649–
1674
Sousa CDS, Soares ACF, Garrido MDS (2008) Characterization of streptomycetes with potential to
promote plant growth and biocontrol. Sci Agric 65:50–55
Spadaro D, Gullino ML (2005) Improving the efficacy of biocontrol agents against soilborne
pathogens. Crop Prot 24:601–613
Stein T (2005) Bacillus subtilis antibiotics: structures, syntheses and specific functions. Mol
Microbiol 56:845–857
Steller S, Vater J (2000) Purification of the fengycin synthetase multienzyme system from Bacillus
subtilis b213. J Chromatogr B Biomed Sci Appl 737:267–275
Stephens JHG, Rask HM (2000) Inoculant production and formulation. Field Crop Res 65:249–25811 Bacillus and Streptomyces for Management of Biotic... 287
Suárez-Moreno ZR, Vinchira-Villarraga DM, Vergara-Morales DI et al (2019) Plant-growth pro￾motion and biocontrol properties of three Streptomyces spp. isolates to control bacterial rice
pathogens. Front Microbiol 10:290
Suprapta DN (2012) Potential of microbial antagonists as biocontrol agents against plant fungal
pathogens. J ISSAAS 18:1–8
Tahir Ha S, Gu Q, Wu H et al (2017) Effect of volatile compounds produced by Ralstonia
solanacearum on plant growth promoting and systemic resistance inducing potential of Bacillus
volatiles. BMC Plant Biol 17:1–16
Taiz L, Zeiger E (2006) Plant physiology/by Lincoln Taiz and Eduardo Zeiger. Sinauer Associates,
Sunderland
Teixeira LCRS, Peixoto RS, Cury JC et al (2010) Bacterial diversity in rhizosphere soil from
Antarctic vascular plants of Admiralty Bay, maritime Antarctica. ISME J 4:989–1001
Tejera-Hernández B, Rojas-Badía MM, Heydrich-Pérez M (2011) Potentialities of the genus
Bacillus in the promotion of plant growth and the biological control of phytopathogenic
fungi. CENIC Magaz Biol Sci 42(3):131–138
Tena AR, Enríquez GR, Pérez LL, Martínez ZE, Aguilar EEQ (2015) Lucha entre microbios: una
herramienta para el control de enfermedades de plantas 16(11). ISSN 1607 –6079
Tilman D, Knops J, Wedin D, Reich P (2002) Plant diversity and composition: effects on
productivity and nutrient dynamics of experimental grasslands. In: Biodiversity and ecosystem
functioning: synthesis and perspectives. Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp 21–35
Toral L, Rodríguez M, Béjar V, Sampedro I (2020) Crop protection against Botrytis cinerea by
rhizosphere biological control agent Bacillus velezensis XT1. Microorganisms 8:992
Udayashankar AC, Nayaka SC, Reddy MS, Srinivas C (2011) Plant growth-promoting
rhizobacteria mediate induced systemic resistance in rice against bacterial leaf blight caused
by Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae. Biol Control 59:114–122
Van Wezel GP, Mckenzie NL, Nodwell JR (2009) Applying the genetics of secondary metabolism
in model actinomycetes to the discovery of new antibiotics. Methods Enzymol 458:117–141
Vanittanakom N, Loeffler W, Koch U, Jung G (1986) Fengycin-a novel antifungal lipopeptide
antibiotic produced by Bacillus subtilis F-29-3. J Antibiot 39:888–901
Vargas-Ayala R, Rodrı Guez-Kábana R, Morgan-Jones G, Mcinroy JA, Kloepper JW (2000) Shifts
in soil microflora induced by velvetbean (Mucuna deeringiana) in cropping systems to control
root-knot nematodes. Biol Control 17:11–22
Versalovic J, Koeuth T, Lupski R (1991) Distribution of repetitive DNA sequences in eubacteria
and application to fingerpriting of bacterial genomes. Nucleic Acids Res 19:6823–6831
Verschuere L, Rombaut G, Sorgeloos P, Verstraete W (2000) Probiotic bacteria as biological
control agents in aquaculture. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 64:655–671
Wan M, Li G, Zhang J, Jiang D, Huang H-C (2008) Effect of volatile substances of Streptomyces
platensis F-1 on control of plant fungal diseases. Biol Control 46:552–559
Wang C, Wang Z, Qiao X et al (2013) Antifungal activity of volatile organic compounds from
Streptomyces alboflavus TD-1. FEMS Microbiol Lett 341:45–51
Wang S, Liang Y, Shen T, Yang H, Shen B (2016) Biological characteristics of Streptomyces
albospinus CT205 and its biocontrol potential against cucumber Fusarium wilt. Biocontrol Sci
Tech 26:951–963
Wang X, Wang L, Wang J, Jin P, Liu H, Zheng Y (2014) Bacillus cereus AR156-induced resistance
to Colletotrichum acutatum is associated with priming of defense responses in loquat fruit.
PLoS One 9:e112494
Wang Z, Ma L-Y, Cao J et al (2019) Recent advances in mechanisms of plant defense to Sclerotinia
sclerotiorum. Front Plant Sci 10:1314
Wu Y, Yuan J, Yaoyao E, Raza W, Shen Q, Huang Q (2015) Effects of volatile organic compounds
from Streptomyces albulus NJZJSA2 on growth of two fungal pathogens. J Basic Microbiol 55:
1104–1117
Wu Y, Zhou J, Li C, Ma Y (2019) Antifungal and plant growth promotion activity of volatile
organic compounds produced by Bacillus amyloliquefaciens. Microbiol Open 8:e00813288 A. Manikandan et al.
Xavier IJ, Holloway G, Leggett M (2004) Development of rhizobial inoculant formulations. Crop
Manag 3:1–6
Xie Z, Li M, Wang D et al (2021) Biocontrol efficacy of Bacillus siamensis LZ88 against brown
spot disease of tobacco caused by Alternaria alternata. Biol Control 154:104508
Yang M, Lu L, Pang J et al (2019) Biocontrol activity of volatile organic compounds from
Streptomyces alboflavus TD-1 against Aspergillus flavus growth and aflatoxin production. J
Microbiol 57:396–404
Yoolong S, Kruasuwan W, Thanh Phạm HT, Jaemsaeng R, Jantasuriyarat C, Thamchaipenet A
(2019) Modulation of salt tolerance in Thai jasmine rice (Oryza sativa L. cv. KDML105) by
Streptomyces venezuelae ATCC 10712 expressing ACC deaminase. Sci Rep 9:1275
Yu X, Ai C, Xin L, Zhou G (2011) The siderophore-producing bacterium, Bacillus subtilis CAS15,
has a biocontrol effect on Fusarium wilt and promotes the growth of pepper. Eur J Soil Biol 47:
138–145
Zahir ZA, Munir A, Asghar HN, Shaharoona B, Arshad M (2008) Effectiveness of rhizobacteria
containing ACC deaminase for growth promotion of peas (Pisum sativum) under drought
conditions. J Microbiol Biotechnol 18:958–963
Zalila-Kolsi I, Mahmoud AB, Ali H et al (2016) Antagonist effects of Bacillus spp. strains against
Fusarium graminearum for protection of durum wheat (Triticum turgidum L. subsp. durum).
Microbiol Res 192:148–158
Zhao J, Xue Q-H, Shen G-H, Xue L, Duan J-L, Wang D-S (2012) Evaluation of Streptomyces spp.
for biocontrol of gummy stem blight (Didymella bryoniae) and growth promotion of Cucumis
melo L. Biocontrol Sci Tech 22:23–37
Zhu M-L, Wu X-Q, Wang Y-H, Dai Y (2020) Role of biofilm formation by Bacillus pumilus HR10
in biocontrol against pine seedling damping-off disease caused by Rhizoctonia solani. Forests
11:652
Zihalirwa Kulimushi P, Argüelles Arias A, Franzil L, Steels S, Ongena M (2017) Stimulation of
fengycin-type antifungal lipopeptides in Bacillus amyloliquefaciens in the presence of the maize
fungal pathogen Rhizomucor variabilis. Front Microbiol 8:850289
Chapter 12
Omic Route to Utilize Endophytes and Their
Functional Potentials in Plant Growth
Advancement
Charu Gupta, Dhan Prakash, Mohd Fadzelly Abu Bakar,
and Worapong Kitdamrongtham
Abstract Plant–bacteria associations have been studied for several decades. Con￾versely, a complete understanding of the mechanisms employed by plant growth￾promoting bacteria remained somewhat elusive. It is therefore difficult to take full
advantage of such complex relationships to reproducibly improve the growth of
plants in a pragmatic background. Endophytic microorganisms such as bacteria and
fungi are better adapted and protected by their host plants and are considered
superior to their rhizospheric counterparts. The current scenario is that bacteria can
positively impact plant growth and health while plants can select their microbiome in
order to have beneficial bacterial colonizers, including those living within the plant
tissues. They function by increasing the bioavailability of essential nutrients and
modulating hormone levels. It is assumed that endophytes have the potential to
replace or augment several chemicals currently used in agricultural practice includ￾ing fertilizers, pesticides and chemical remediation agents for a number of environ￾mental hazards. Therefore, the prime focus of this chapter is to describe the role of
endophytes in the production of phytohormones and the utilization of some of the
functional traits in plant growth promotion. Further, the emphasis would also be to
cover the ‘omic’ approach to unravel plant–endophyte communications under abi￾otic stress.
Keywords Endophytes · Plant growth promoting bacteria (PGPB) · Phyto￾hormones · Abiotic stress
C. Gupta (*) · D. Prakash
Amity Institute of Herbal Research and Studies, Amity University Uttar Pradesh, Noida, India
M. F. A. Bakar
Faculty of Applied Sciences and Technology, Universiti Tun Hussein Onn Malaysia (UTHM),
Johor, Malaysia
W. Kitdamrongtham
Faculty of Engineering and Technology, North-Chiang Mai University, Chiang Mai, Thailand
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2023
S. Chhabra et al. (eds.), Plant Microbiome for Plant Productivity and Sustainable
Agriculture, Microorganisms for Sustainability 37,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-19-5029-2_12290 C. Gupta et al.
12.1 Introduction
Endophytes are a group of symbiotic microorganisms that vastly spread through all
plants and they colonize the intra- and intercellular spaces of the host without
causing any substantial morphological modification or visual infection (Fouda
et al. 2019). They are mainly located in roots inside stems and in distinct compart￾ments of the plant (Compant et al. 2010). The structure and composition of endo￾phytes are determined by environment and plant-associated factors, such as the plant
genotype, developmental stage, phenology and edaphic properties (da Silva et al.
2016; Goulart et al. 2019).
The coexistence of microbes in the plant affects the health and growth perfor￾mance of the plant, which effectively improves the agricultural properties such as
root length and fresh and dry weight of shoot and root and improves yield, quality of
soils, and nutrient cycling (Habib et al. 2020; Soliman et al. 2019; Elkelish et al.
2020). A symbiotic linkage is formed between microorganisms and plants, which is
useful for both partners. The endophytic microbes produce secondary active metab￾olites that protect plants from phytopathogens, in addition to exo-enzyme produc￾tion, which could be supporting in plant colonization (Gill et al. 2016). Endophytes
may enhance plant growth by phytohormone production and support plant growth
under adverse biotic and abiotic stress (Eid et al. 2019). Endophytes can typically
interact with their hosts more effectively than their plant growth-promoting
rhizospheric counterparts (Rashid et al. 2012). A variety of endophytes have been
isolated from different tissue types in numerous species of plants, and often multiple
species of endophytes are found within a single plant (Kobayashi and Palumbo
2000). Recently, bacterial endophytes have been used in different biotechnological
sectors, such as biofertilizers to improve crop production and significantly reduce the
chemical input into the environment (ALKahtani et al. 2020), as well as in nano￾technology for the fabrication of various nanoparticles incorporated in different
applications (Fouda et al. 2020; Eid et al. 2020; Prasad 2017).
The genetic and biochemical factors that contribute towards successful endo￾phytic colonization and maintenance are not well understood. Nevertheless, there
have been a large number of studies that described the use of endophytic bacteria as
components of various phytoremediation schemes (Doty 2008). As a starting point,
it should be emphasized that all available evidence indicates that endophytic bacteria
employ similar plant growth promotion mechanisms to those used by rhizospheric
bacteria (Santoyo et al. 2016). The existing evidence suggests that endophytic
bacteria are more effective than similar non-endophytic bacterial strains in promot￾ing plant growth under a wide range of environmental conditions (Ali et al. 2012,
2014). In order to ensure their efficiency, the endophytes should ameliorate multiple
abiotic stresses and should be good plant colonizers with broad host ranges. They
should be good soil and plant competitors to compete with native soil and plant
microbes for entry into plant tissues, should not be pathogenic to plants or animals
when exogenously applied, and should not interfere with the functions of the plant
microbiome. Thus, the present chapter discusses the mechanism employed by12 Omic Route to Utilize Endophytes and Their Functional Potentials in... 291
growth-promoting bacteria to improve plant growth, the role of endophytes in the
production of phytohormones, and the utilization of functional traits in plant growth
promotion and furthermore emphasizes the ‘omic’ approach of plant–endophyte
communications under abiotic stress.
12.2 Role of Endophytes in Combating Abiotic Stress
Plant stress implies some adverse effects on the physiology of a plant induced upon a
sudden transition from some optimal environmental condition where homeostasis is
maintained to some suboptimal condition which disrupts this initial homeostatic
state.
Reactive oxygen species (ROS) may be considered endogenously produced
signal molecules or regulators produced by several plant organelles, including
mitochondria, chloroplast, or peroxisomes under stresses. ROS consists of a group
of chemically reactive oxygen molecules such as hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), super￾oxide radical (O2•–), hydroxyl radical (OH•
) and singlet oxygen (1O2
) and are
produced in plants under stress conditions (Peleg and Blumwald 2011). Abiotic
stress leads to the overproduction of ROS that must be managed in a homeostatic
pool; however, excess concentrations of ROS cause oxidative stress, which results in
denaturation of protein structure, lipid peroxidation and nucleotide disruption and
may affect plant physiology which ultimately leads to the death of plants
(Demidchik 2015; Nath et al. 2017).
Many plants have the capacity to tolerate a particular stress and hence are
considered to be stress resistant. Stress resistance requires that the organism exhibit
the capacity to adjust or to acclimate to the stress. Plants have various mechanisms
that allow them to survive and often prosper in the complex environments in which
they live.
In the plant system, mitigation of ROS excess concentrations generally leads to
activation of enzymatic or non-enzymatic antioxidant systems. Plants secrete several
enzymes, including catalase (CAT), ascorbate peroxidase (APX), superoxide
dismutase (SOD), glutathione reductase (GR), dehydroascorbate reductases
(DHAR) and monodehydroascorbate reductases (MDHAR); the non-enzymatic
system involves quenching of ROS via synthesis of ascorbic acid (AsA), glutathione
(GSH) and carotenoids, which quench free radicals and protect the plant cell from
oxidative stress (Hasanuzzaman et al. 2020; Kumari et al. 2020).
The endophytic microbiome shows mutualistic relations with the host plant in
maintaining health or vigour (Hardoim et al. 2015). Moreover, it is essentially
involved directly or indirectly in the growth and development of host plants via
secreting various growth-promoting attributes like phytohormone synthesis, nutrient
acquisition and siderophore production, antibiotic production, phosphate solubiliza￾tion and mitigation of various biotic and abiotic conditions (Shade et al. 2017).
However, this has been described in earlier studies on impacts of drought and
salinity stress on the effect of growth, productivity, or survivability of plants
(White and Torres 2010).292 C. Gupta et al.
Zhou et al. (2021) reported improved seedling growth of Pinus tabulaeformis
after inoculation of endophytic strain Phoma sp. under drought condition. Wu et al.
(2008) described decreased leaf area, photosynthetic pigments and photosynthetic
efficiency under drought stress. Higher salinity in soil affects the survivability of
plants by altering chemical, morphological and physiological processes (Otlewska
et al. 2020). Naveed et al. (2014) reported improved growth, water availability, and
photosynthetic activity in maize cultivars under drought after inoculation of endo￾phytic bacterial strains Burkholderia phytofirmans strain PsJN and Enterobacter
sp. FD17. The endophytes inoculation improved seedling growth, shoot and root
biomass and photochemical efficiency of PSII.
Yandigeri et al. (2012) demonstrated the potential of endophytic bacterial strains
Streptomyces coelicolor DE07, S. olivaceus DE10 and S. geysiriensis DE27, isolated
from arid and drought affected regions, to increase tolerance of plants to intrinsic
water stress and showed plant growth promotion after application to wheat seed￾lings. Additionally, the combined application of S. olivaceus DE10 + S. geysiriensis
DE27 strains showed synergistic effects and improved response in terms of stress
mitigation and growth promotion. Morsy et al. (2020) reported that the endophytic
fungal strains Ampelomyces sp. and Penicillium sp. isolated from stress inducing soil
(drought and high salinity) enhanced drought tolerance (Ampelomyces sp.) and
salinity tolerance (Penicillium sp.) in tomato.
Endophytic microorganisms present inside the host plant play an essential role in
host fitness, nutrient supply and stress tolerance. Endophytes are often used in
sustainable agriculture as biofertilizers, biopesticides and inoculants to mitigate
abiotic stresses including salinity, drought, cold and pH variation in the soil. Plants
experience stress conditions that involve endogenous boosting of their immune
system or the overexpression of their defensive redox regulatory systems with
increased reactive oxygen species (ROS). However, rising stress factors overwhelm
the natural redox protection systems of plants, which leads to massive internal
oxidative damage and death. Endophytes are an integral internal partner of hosts
and have been shown to mitigate abiotic stresses via modulating local or systemic
mechanisms and producing antioxidants to counteract ROS in plants. Endophytes
also provide support in acclimatizing crop plants under abiotic stress conditions,
growth promotion and management of phytopathogens and help in activating stress
responsive/induced genes of plants that are not usually activated under stress
conditions (Verma et al. 2021).
Thus microbial endophytes appear to be a suitable alternative for drought and
salinity stress management. In the recent past, various microbial strains have been
successfully utilized to increase drought tolerance. Inoculation of microbial endo￾phytes or exogenous supply of phytohormones significantly enhanced adaptive
behaviour of plants via improving photosynthetic activity, chlorophyll contents,
root growth, water status, antioxidant enzymes, phytohormone signalling and nutri￾ent uptake under drought conditions (Khan et al. 2016; Singh et al. 2018). Recent
advances of research on positive interaction between microbial endophytes and their
plant host under drought and salinity stress conditions are described and compiled in
Table 12.1.Mode of action Plant host
12 Omic Route to Utilize Endophytes and Their Functional Potentials in... 293
Table 12.1 Example of positive interaction amongst microbial endophytes and their plant host
under stress conditions adapted from Verma et al. (2021)
Endophyte: ameliorate stress and
beneficial effect
Phoma species (fungi) Increased proline peroxidase (POD),
catalase (CAT), superoxide dismutase
(SOD)
Pinus
tabulaeformis
Glomus mosseae, G. versiforme,
G. diaphanum (fungi)
Increase of peroxidase activity and
beneficial effects on soil structure
Poncirus
trifoliata
Endophyte consortia (Rhodotorula
graminis, Burkholderia
vietnamiensis, Rhizobium tropici,
Acinetobacter calcoaceticus,
Rahnella sp., Burkholderia sp.,
Enterobacter asburiae,
Sphingomonas yanoikuyae, Pseudo￾monas sp., Curtobacterium sp.)
(fungi + bacteria)
Reduced damage by reactive oxygen
species (ROS), increment of IAA
Populus sp.
Bacillus, Achromobacter, Klebsiella,
Citrobacter (bacteria)
Production of 1-aminocyclopropane-1-
carboxylate (ACC) deaminase
Capsicum
annuum
Burkholderia phytofirmans,
Enterobacter sp. (bacteria)
Reduced H2O2 induced damage Zea mays
Bacillus subtilis (bacteria) Upregulation of the drought-response
genes, such as DREB2B-like, DHN3-
like and LEA-14-A-like and modula￾tion of the DNA methylation genes,
such as MET1B-like, CMT3-like and
DRM2-like that regulate the process
Brachypodium
distachyon
Bacillus subtilis (bacteria) Enhanced level of ROS scavenging
antioxidant enzymes (superoxide
dismutase, peroxidase, catalase)
Cicer
arietinum
seedling
Curvularia sp. (fungi) Elevates antioxidant enzymes (SOD
and APX)
Poplar plant
Piriformospora indica (fungi) Enhanced plant growth and attenuated
the NaCl-induced lipid peroxidation,
metabolic heat efflux and fatty acid
desaturation in leaves. In addition,
significantly elevated the amount of
ascorbic acid and increased the activi￾ties of antioxidant enzymes catalase,
ascorbate peroxidase,
dehydroascorbate reductase,
monodehydroascorbate reductase and
glutathione reductase
Hordeum
vulgare
seedling294 C. Gupta et al.
12.3 Phytohormones Production by Endophytes
12.3.1 Auxin
Auxins are plant hormones that play vital roles in almost every step of life and daily
growth of a plant (Grossmann 2010). The most common naturally occurring auxin is
indole-3-acetic acid (IAA), which is produced by plants, bacteria and fungi through
at least three diverse tryptophan-dependent IAA production pathways (Duca et al.
2014). The type of pathway a bacterium uses (genetically and/or environmentally
dependent) to produce IAA within plants or in their close vicinity can determine the
nature of the resulting plant–microbe interactions. It is important to note that not all
the IAA producing bacteria are beneficial to plants. Interestingly, many plant￾beneficial bacteria produce IAA via the indole-3-pyruvate (IPyA) pathway, whereas
many pathogenic bacteria mainly synthesize IAA via indole-3-acetamide (IAM)
pathway (Hardoim et al. 2008).
The areas of activity of IAA mainly include, but are not limited to, cell division
and elongation, initiation of root systems, leaves, flowers, fruit development and
senescence (Phillips et al. 2011). Numerous PGPB, including both Gram-positive
and Gram-negative bacteria, have been reported to produce IAA (Rashid et al. 2012).
The prominent IAA producing endophytic bacterial genera include Pseudomonas,
Rhizobium, Azospirillum, Enterobacter, Azotobacter, Klebsiella, Alcaligenes,
Pantoea, Acetobacter, Herbaspirillum, Burkholderia, Bacillus, Rhodococcus and
Streptomyces (Duca et al. 2014; Rashid et al. 2012). Generally, plants are very
sensitive to the amount of IAA present in plant tissues at any particular time. Since
plants also produce IAA, in order to regulate plant growth, an IAA producing PGPB
must provide the appropriate amount of IAA when combined with the amount of
hormone produced by plant. In fact, phytopathogens are often characterized by their
ability to produce IAA at high concentrations (Kunkel and Chen 2006).
Numerous bacterial endophytes have been reported to promote plant growth by
their ability to biosynthesize IAA. For example, one study reported IAA production
as a common growth promotion trait in bacterial endophytes isolated from apple tree
buds, in which 8 of 18 isolates exhibited IAA production of 1.2–2.4 μg/mL (Miliūtė
and Buzaitė 2011). In another report, Vendan et al. (2010) investigated the various
plant growth-promoting capabilities, including IAA production, of bacterial endo￾phytes from ginseng (Panax ginseng C.A. Meyer). A total of 51 bacterial endophytes
were isolated from ginseng stem and clustered in four groups, namely, Firmicutes,
Actinobacteria, α-Proteobacteria and γ-Proteobacteria, with Firmicutes being the
most prominent group. Some 18 representatives of all groups were further charac￾terized, and 14 of these 18 endophytic isolates produced significant amounts of IAA
when supplemented with tryptophan as a precursor. The highest amount of IAA
(13.93 μg/mL) was produced by isolate E-I-4 (Micrococcus luteus) and was
followed by the isolates E-I-20 (Lysinibacillus fusiformis) and E-I-8 (Bacillus
cereus), which produced 7.23 and 4.61 μg/mL, respectively. The population diver￾sity and plant growth promotion effects of IAA produced by endophytic and12 Omic Route to Utilize Endophytes and Their Functional Potentials in... 295
epiphytic bacteria isolated from soybeans (cultivars: Foscarin and Cristalina) have
also been investigated. Isolates that presented plant growth promotion capabilities
were identified as belonging to genera Pseudomonas, Ralstonia, Enterobacter,
Pantoea and Acinetobacter. Moreover, endophytic soybean cultivars exhibited
more abundant IAA producing abilities (34%) than that of epiphytic population
(21%) (Kuklinsky-Sobral et al. 2004). Further seed endophytes were isolated from
12 different cultivars of soybeans and identified by amplified ribosomal DNA
restriction analysis (ARDRA) grouping and by partially sequencing of their 16S
rRNA gene. These endophytes were classified as Acinetobacter, Bacillus,
Brevibacterium, Chryseobacterium, Citrobacter, Curtobacterium, Enterobacter,
Methylobacterium, Microbacterium, Micromonospora, Pantoea, Paenibacillus,
Pseudomonas, Ochrobactrum, Streptomyces and Tsukamurella. They all produced
IAA in vitro at significant levels but only one strain (Enterobacter sp.) significantly
increased the root dry biomass when soybean seeds were pre-treated with this strain
(Assumpção et al. 2009). Moreover, endophytic bacteria were isolated from crops
like berseem clover or canola in rotation with rice using IAA production as a primary
screening trait. This study demonstrated plant growth-promoting features of seven
isolates and rice seedlings inoculated with any one of these isolates exhibited higher
shoot biomass, root length, and the number of colonizing bacteria than did control
plants inoculated with endophytic strains that did not produce IAA (Etesami et al.
2015).
12.3.2 Gibberellin
Gibberellins (GAs) stimulate a number of plant metabolic functions, which are
essential for plant growth and development (Khan et al. 2015) including seed
germination, stem elongation, flowering, fruit formation and senescence. To date,
there have been ~136 GAs identified (Bömke and Tudzynski 2009). Different GAs
are named according to their order of discovery (Khan et al. 2015). The full bacterial
gibberellin biosynthesis pathway has been described (Nett et al. 2017) but very little
is known about GA production by bacterial endophytes. Only a few studies have
described this potential plant growth-promoting trait of bacterial endophytes (Khan
et al. 2014a, b). Two bacterial endophytes, namely, Acetobacter diazotrophicus and
Herbaspirillum seropedicae, have been reported to produce gibberellins (GA1, GA3
and IAA). These bacteria establish an endophytic relationship with graminaceae
species where they promote growth and overall yield (Bastián et al. 1998). In
addition, Azospirillum lipoferum strain op 33 has been recognized as an endophyte
of grasses and a GA producer in vitro. The gibberellins produced by these bacterial
endophytes were measured in chemically defined media by capillary gas
chromatography-mass spectrometry (Bastián et al. 1998). In one study, spent culture
from 10 wild-type and mutant strains (including nod and fix
) of Rhizobium
phaseoli were screened for the presence of GAs and IAA by a high-performance
liquid chromatography (HPLC) immunoassay. The presence of GA1, GA4, GA9296 C. Gupta et al.
and GA20-like molecules was confirmed by combined gas chromatography mass
spectrometry; however, the GA20-like molecule was present only in some cultures
and not in all, and GA9 was detected only in small amounts compared to GA1 and
GA4 (Atzorn et al. 1988). The study of nod and fix
 mutants indicated that the
production of GAs was independent of genes involved in nodulation and nitrogen
fixation in Rhizobium phaseoli. In another study, a bacterial endophyte
Sphingomonas sp. LK11, originally isolated from the leaves of Tephrosia apollinea
(a legume native to parts of Asia and Africa), has shown the ability, by advanced
chromatographic and spectroscopic techniques, to synthesize physiologically active
GA4 and inactive GA9 and GA20 in culture media. Tomato plants inoculated with
Sphingomonas sp. LK11 displayed a significant increase in plant shoot length,
chlorophyll contents and shoot and root dry weights compared to control plants
(Khan et al. 2014a, b).
The other large group of endophytic microorganisms that produces GAs is fungi.
A number of fungi have been identified with the capacity to synthesize physiolog￾ically active GAs (Leitão and Enguita 2016). Hamayun et al. (2009a) recognized two
fungal endophytes Aspergillus fumigatus and Scolecobasidium tshawytschae, which
were isolated from a drought stressed cultivar (Hwangkeumkong) and a salt stressed
cultivar (Daewonkong) of soybean, respectively. Both strains were identified by
morphological characteristics and phylogenetic analysis of 18S ribosomal RNA
gene sequences. Scolecobasidium tshawytschae produced physiologically active
GA1, GA3, GA4 and GA7 and inactive GA15 and GA24, whereas Aspergillus
fumigatus synthesized active GA3, GA4 and GA7 along with physiologically
inactive GA5, GA19 and GA24.
Subsequently, rice and soybean plants that were treated with these fungal endo￾phytes showed a significant increase in plant length and plant fresh and dry weight
compared to plants treated with Gibberella fujikuroi, which is also a non-endophytic
gibberellin producing fungus and was used as control for these studies (Hamayun
et al. 2009a, b). In addition, the fungal endophyte Aspergillus fumigatus sp. LH02
facilitated soybean plant growth under salt stress (70 and 140 mM). The soybean
plants pre-treated with this fungus exhibit significant increase compared to control in
shoot length, shoot fresh, dry biomass, leaf area, chlorophyll contents and photo￾synthetic rate (Khan et al. 2011). It was argued that the treatment of plants with the
fungal endophyte, Aspergillus fumigatus sp. LH02, increased the plant’s levels of
proline, salicylic acid (SA) and jasmonic acid (JA) and lowered the abscisic acid
(ABA) concentration compared to control (Khan et al. 2011). Moreover, the treated
plants had a higher level of isoflavones, which was independent of the level of salt
stress, notwithstanding the fact that isoflavones are considered to be a factor in
helping soybean plants to cope with salt stress (Khan et al. 2011).
Similarly, a group of 11 fungal endophytes was isolated from the sand dune plant
Elymus mollis and screened for the production of GAs and their plant growth￾promoting capacities on Waito-C rice (GAs deficient rice) and Atriplex gmelinii
(saltbush). Altogether, 7 of 11 fungal endophytes promoted the growth of both plants
and one isolate, EM-7-1, showed significantly higher plant growth compared to
control plants (Afzal Khan et al. 2009). Screening of the culture filtrate of isolate12 Omic Route to Utilize Endophytes and Their Functional Potentials in... 297
EM-7-1 revealed the presence of GA1, GA3, GA4 and GA7 as well as physiolog￾ically inactive GA5, GA9, GA20 and GA24. Subsequently, this isolate was identi￾fied as Gliomastix murorum (Afzal Khan et al. 2009).
A similar study was reported by Khan et al. (2014a), who isolated and charac￾terized two fungal endophytes from the bark of Moringa peregrina (a tree indige￾nous to the Horn of Africa), Aspergillus caespitosus LK12 and Phoma sp. LK13, and
showed that these fungi could produce a variety of GAs in culture filtrate. Both
fungal strains promoted the growth of rice that lacks gibberellins biosynthesis (Khan
et al. 2014a). Furthermore, two GAs and IAA producing fungal endophytes Phoma
glomerata LWL2 and Penicillium sp. LWL3 have been shown to provide protection
to cucumber plants under salinity and drought stresses. The treated plants exhibited
significantly higher contents of a range of nutrients than the untreated control plants.
On the other hand, under salinity stress, treated cucumber plants upregulated SA
levels, altered JA levels, and downregulated ABA levels and glutathione, catalase,
peroxidase and polyphenol oxidase activities. This change in the metabolome of the
treated cucumber plants compared to uninoculated control plants is ascribed to the
endophytic fungus, which apparently ameliorated the detrimental effects of the stress
(Waqas et al. 2012). The effects of GAs producing strains of Penicillium sp. on
plants under salt stress was evaluated and the role of the fungus in overcoming the
stress incurred by salinity was evaluated (Leitão and Enguita 2016).
12.3.3 Cytokinin
Cytokinins are a group of hormones that promote cell division in plant roots, shoots
and growing buds. These hormones have been found in all complex plants as well as
mosses, fungi and bacteria. There are about 200 different natural and synthetic
cytokinins known to botanists today. Most cytokinins are produced in the meristem
of the roots and transported to the other parts of the plant through the xylem (vascular
system). Cytokinins have been reported to be present in the culture filtrate of a
number of bacteria including Azotobacter sp., Rhizobium sp., Pantoea agglomerans,
Rhodospirillum rubrum, Pseudomonas fluorescens, Bacillus subtilis and
Paenibacillus polymyxa (Glick 2014). Although these bacteria have been
documented as endophytes of different plants, little evidence has been found to
definitively link bacterial cytokinin production with plant growth promotion. One
study described the isolation, identification and characterization of bacterial endo￾phytes that produce cytokinin-like molecules (Bhore et al. 2010). In this study, three
bacterial endophytes were isolated from Sambung Nyawa [Gynura procumbens
(Lour.) Merr.] and identified as Pseudomonas resinovorans, Paenibacillus polymyxa
and Acinetobacter calcoaceticus. The ethyl acetate extract of bacterial culture media
was used to inoculate cucumber cotyledons in a greening bioassay. The assay
indicated positive results only for the strains Pseudomonas resinovorans and
Paenibacillus polymyxa with the suggestion that these bacterial endophytes might
be used as plant growth-promoting agents for Sambung Nyawa (Bhore et al. 2010).298 C. Gupta et al.
In a similar study, crude bacterial suspensions of 115 bacterial isolates from 72 dif￾ferent plant species were screened using the cucumber cotyledon greening bioassay
to investigate if these endophytes could produce cytokinins, but the study found that
none yielded better results than the control (Bhore and Sathisha 2010). Recently,
workers engineered a strain of Sinorhizobium meliloti to overproduce cytokinin by
expressing an Agrobacterium ipt gene under the control of the E. coli trp promoter
(Xu et al. 2012). Following a period of severe drought stress, alfalfa plants inocu￾lated with the engineered S. meliloti strain were significantly larger than plants
inoculated with the parental strain. This experiment indicates, despite the fact that
cytokinin-producing plant growth-promoting bacteria appear to be relatively uncom￾mon, that rhizobial strains synthesizing higher than normal levels of cytokinin may
improve plant tolerance to severe drought stress.
12.3.4 Endophytic ACC Deaminase Production
The microbial enzyme 1-aminocyclopropane 1-carboxylate (ACC) deaminase
(E.C. 4.1.99.4) is used as a dynamic enzyme in sustainable agriculture. ACC
deaminase is a multimeric enzyme that requires pyridoxal 50
-phosphate as an
essential co-factor for enzymatic activity (Glick 2014) and cleaves ACC to
α-ketobutyrate and ammonia, where ACC is the immediate precursor of phytohor￾mone ethylene. Thus, ACC deaminase lowers the levels of deleterious ethylene in
higher plants (Sun et al. 2009). Ethylene, like other phytohormones, is crucial for
plant growth, development and stress signalling (Glick 2004; Rashid et al. 2012).
Plant growth-promoting endophytes expressing the enzyme ACC deaminase have
been revealed to help protect plants from a number of different biotic and abiotic
stresses and to promote the growth of plants in the absence of stressful conditions.
For example, a group of 25 endophytes, originally isolated from tomato plants, that
contained ACC deaminase all demonstrated the ability to significantly promote
canola seedling growth compared to un-inoculated canola seedlings (Rashid et al.
2012). Several studies have defined the potential of ACC deaminase containing
endophytes in promoting plant growth in tomato (Abbamondi et al. 2016), rice
(Raweekul et al. 2016) and ginger (Jasim et al. 2014).
Further, the potential of the bacterial endophyte Burkholderia phytofirmans PsJN
was evaluated in a field study of switchgrass at two different soil sites over 2 years.
The inoculated switchgrass displayed enhanced biomass production, increased root
growth, tillering and greater early season plant growth vigor than that of untreated
control plants. Moreover, the plants grown on a low fertility soil site performed
better with bacterial endophyte treatment. These researchers suggested that the
mechanism of this plant growth promotion, especially at the poor soil site, might
include the possession of ACC deaminase by this endophyte and the interaction of
auxins and ethylene in response to the action of ACC deaminase (Lowman et al.
2015). In addition, it has been previously shown that a mutant of Burkholderia
phytofirmans PsJN that lacks the ability to produce ACC deaminase (i.e. acdS2)12 Omic Route to Utilize Endophytes and Their Functional Potentials in... 299
could not promote canola seedling growth in a growth pouch root elongation assay
(Sun et al. 2009). Complementing the mutant with exogenous DNA carrying the
ACC deaminase gene from wild-type strain restored the ability of the mutant to
promote canola root elongation, therefore proving the importance of this gene for the
observed growth promotion (Sun et al. 2009). Further, it was also found that
B. phytofirmans PsJN specifically promoted the growth of a certain genotype of
switchgrass, which led to the isolation and characterization of another bacterial
endophyte, Pantoea agglomerans strain PaKM, from the surface of sterilized
seeds of switchgrass (Kim-Dura et al. 2016). Strain PaKM was able to promote
the growth of at least eight varieties of switchgrass in in vitro conditions; subse￾quently, two of these varieties were screened more extensively in greenhouse and
field environments, and a significant difference in the biomass of endophytic treated
plants was observed (Kim-Dura et al. 2016). P. agglomerans strain PaKM was able
to protect switchgrass under salt and drought stress in in vitro conditions; however,
this endophyte does not contain ACC deaminase (Kim-Dura et al. 2016).
When the bacterial endophyte Pseudomonas migulae 8R6, an ACC deaminase
containing bacterium, was utilized as a biocontrol agent against yellow disease of
grapevines caused by phytoplasma, it significantly protected periwinkle, a model
plant hosting phytoplasma. The results have shown that the density of the phyto￾plasma inside the leaf tissue was unaffected by this bacterial endophyte; however,
the symptoms of the disease were significantly reduced in plants treated with wild￾type bacterium compared with either untreated or treated plants with an ACC
deaminase minus mutant (acdS2) of strain 8R6 (Gamalero et al. 2016). These trials
suggest that ACC deaminase played a key role in protecting the plant from the biotic
stress of phytoplasma infection. Moreover, ACC deaminase containing endophytes
have also been found to protect plants from salinity and other abiotic stress. The rice
endophyte Pseudomonas stutzeri A1501 has demonstrated rice seedling growth
promotion in moderate (0.12 M) and high (2 M) salt (i.e. NaCl) and in the presence
of 0.3 mM heavy metals (Cu, Co, Ni and Zn) (Han et al. 2015). In these experiments,
the bacterial treatment was given to surface-sterilized rice seeds and plant biometrics
were collected after 7 days. In order to validate that the ACC deaminase activity is
the main driving force in protecting and facilitating rice seedling growth in presence
of these abiotic stresses, a mutant of the acdS gene was constructed. It was observed
that the seeds treated with wild-type P. stutzeri A1501 displayed significantly longer
roots and higher fresh and dry weights compared to the plants either untreated or
treated with the mutant (Han et al. 2015). In another study, endophytic bacteria
isolated from date palm were assayed for growth promotion of canola roots in the
presence and absence of 100 mM salt. The majority of endophytes tested exhibited
canola root elongation under salt stress compared to un-inoculated control plants in
gnotobiotic conditions; however, the researchers pointed out that these endophytes,
in addition to ACC deaminase, could also produce IAA and increase the uptake of
nutrients that enable them to benefit the host under stress (Yaish et al. 2015).
Brachybacterium paraconglomeratum is an ACC deaminase producing salt-tolerant
bacterial endophyte, which was isolated from the surface-sterilized roots of the
medicinal plant Chlorophytum borivilianum (Barnawal et al. 2016). This bacterium300 C. Gupta et al.
promoted host plant growth by reducing oxidative and osmotic damages caused by
salinity (150 mM). Moreover, biochemical analysis of bacterially treated and
untreated plants, both grown in the presence of salt, revealed that there were high
amounts of ACC, proline, malondialdehyde (MDA) and abscisic acid (ABA) in
untreated controls. Increased levels of proline and MDA indicate osmotic and
oxidative stress, respectively, whereas increased ABA and ACC levels are thought
to be the consequence of osmo-oxidative damage (Barnawal et al. 2016). However,
plants treated with the wild-type endophyte (containing ACC deaminase) show
reduced levels of proline, MDA, ABA and ACC and increased total chlorophyll
contents, IAA levels and plant biomass compared to untreated controls (Barnawal
et al. 2016).
Additionally, the expression of five genes involved in the stress response
(CaACCO, CaLTPI, CaSAR82A and putative P5CR and P5CS) in pepper plants
(Capsicum annuum L.) was investigated. These plants were given a mild osmotic
stress in the presence and absence of two plant growth-promoting bacterial endo￾phytes, Arthrobacter spp. EZB4 and Bacillus spp. EZB8 (Sziderics et al. 2007). The
pepper plant gene CaACCO, which encodes the enzyme ACC oxidase that catalyses
the final step in the biosynthesis of ethylene, was strongly upregulated in
non-inoculated stressed plant root and leaf tissue. This gene was significantly less
upregulated in leaf tissue, unaffected in plant roots treated with strain EZB4, and
unaffected in the leaf and root tissue of plants treated with strain EZB8. The pepper
plant gene CaLTPI encodes a lipid transfer protein that may be induced by ethylene
in addition to a number of other stress factors (Jung et al. 2003). The gene expression
of CaLTPI was significantly upregulated under osmotic stress in non-inoculated
plants, unaltered in plants (leaves and roots) treated with strain EZB4 and the leaf
tissue of plants treated with strain EZB8, and significantly downregulated in the
roots treated with strain EZB8. The putative P5CR and P5CS are involved in proline
biosynthesis and were significantly downregulated in the leaves of plants treated
with both endophytic strains under stress conditions and remained unaffected in the
roots of stressed plants. The expression of pepper plant gene CaSAR82A, which is
also a stress-inducible gene, was not consistent under stress conditions in either leaf
or root tissues with bacterial treatments but was significantly upregulated in
non-inoculated stressed plants (Sziderics et al. 2007). Altogether, it was speculated
that because ethylene can act as signalling molecule and subsequently could regulate
the gene expression under stress conditions, the addition of endophytes that can
lower stress ethylene levels by functioning of ACC deaminase could ameliorate the
damage caused by such stress. Nonetheless, independent of the levels of altered gene
expression of above-mentioned genes, all of the pepper plants treated with bacterial
endophytes Arthrobacter spp. EZB4 and Bacillus spp. EZB8 showed significant
increases in biomass compared to the non-inoculated control plants under mild
osmotic stress (Sziderics et al. 2007).
In addition to plant growth facilitation under stressful environmental conditions,
ACC deaminase has also been documented to help endophytic colonization within
plants (Hardoim et al. 2008). Ethylene levels in plant tissues modulate plant colo￾nization by endophytes (Iniguez et al. 2005). The bacterial endophyte Klebsiella12 Omic Route to Utilize Endophytes and Their Functional Potentials in... 301
pneumoniae strain 342 can establish endophytic relationships with Medicago
truncatula; however, the colonization of plants by this endophyte was found to be
under the control of ethylene. In an ethylene-insensitive mutant of Medicago
truncatula, this endophyte hypercolonizes the plant compared to the wild-type
(Iniguez et al. 2005) Medicago truncatula, which displayed a low level of endo￾phytic colonization in the presence of ACC, and an increase in endophytic coloni￾zation was observed when the ethylene inhibitor 1-methylcyclopropene was
introduced to the plant (Iniguez et al. 2005). Since ACC deaminase is able to
lower the levels of ethylene by cleaving ACC, it may help some endophytes to
efficiently colonize plant tissues, thereby giving those endophytes an additional
advantage in their interaction with plants.
12.4 Plant Growth Promotion and Stress Management by
Endophytes
Endophytes provide support in acclimatizing crop plants under abiotic stress condi￾tions, growth promotion and management of phytopathogens and help in activating
stress responsive/induced genes of plants that are not usually activated under stress
conditions. The endophytic microbiome shows mutualistic relations with the host
plant in maintaining health or vigour (Hardoim et al. 2015). Moreover, they are also
essentially involved directly or indirectly in the growth and development of host
plants via secreting various growth-promoting attributes, namely, phytohormone
synthesis, nutrient acquisition and siderophore production, antibiotic and phosphate
solubilization and by mitigating various biotic and abiotic conditions (Shade et al.
2017). Various microbial strains have been successfully utilized to increase drought
tolerance. Inoculation of microbial endophytes or exogenous supply of phytohor￾mones significantly enhanced the adaptive behaviour of plants via improving pho￾tosynthetic activity, chlorophyll contents, root growth, water status, antioxidant
enzymes, phytohormone signalling and nutrient uptake under drought conditions
(Singh et al. 2018).
Naveed et al. (2014) reported improved growth, water availability, and photo￾synthetic activity in maize cultivars under drought after inoculation of endophytic
bacterial strains Burkholderia phytofirmans strain PsJN and Enterobacter sp. FD17.
The endophytes inoculation improved seedling growth, shoot and root biomass and
photochemical efficiency of PSII. Yandigeri et al. (2012) revealed the potential of
endophytic bacterial strains Streptomyces coelicolor DE07, S. olivaceus DE10 and
S. geysiriensis DE27, isolated from arid and drought affected regions, to increase
tolerance of plants to intrinsic water stress and showed plant growth promotion after
application to wheat seedlings. Additionally, the combined application of
S. olivaceus DE10 + S. geysiriensis DE27 strains showed synergistic effects and
improved response in terms of stress mitigation and growth promotion. Jayakumar
et al. (2020) reported that several endophytic bacterial strains, including Bacillus sp.,302 C. Gupta et al.
Providencia sp. and Staphylococcus spp., isolated from Ananas comosus, enhanced
drought tolerance and promoted growth and pathogen resistance. Likewise, Sandhya
et al. (2017) reported that several endophytic bacterial strains isolated from various
crops in which most of the strains conferred drought tolerance up to (1.02) matric
potential also had growth promotion potential. Chen et al. (2017) stated that endo￾phytic strain Pantoea alhagi isolated from Alhagi sparsifolia, after inoculation,
enhanced the growth of wheat seedlings under drought conditions. Additionally,
the endophyte-treated plant showed enhanced accumulation of soluble sugars and
decreased concentrations of malondialdehyde. In the grass Brachypodium
distachyon, drought stress was mitigated with the help of an endophytic bacterium
Bacillus subtilis B26, which also upregulated the stress responsive genes (Gagn￾é-Bourque et al. 2015). Morsy et al. (2020) described that endophytic fungal strains
Ampelomyces sp. and Penicillium sp., isolated from stress inducing soil (drought and
high salinity), enhanced drought tolerance (Ampelomyces sp.) and salinity tolerance
(Penicillium sp.) in tomato.
12.5 ‘Ome’ Approach of Plant-Endophyte Communications
Under Abiotic Strain
Endophytic microbes are known to modulate the genome, epigenome, proteome and
metabolome of their hosts after inoculation to cope with abiotic stress. Plants with
their modulated ‘ome’ after inoculation with endophytes bear better potential to
ameliorate various abiotic stresses including drought and salinity. The molecular
basis of endophytes in mitigating abiotic stress in crops is poorly understood. The
recent developments in high-throughput technologies of sequencing and mass￾spectroscopy based omics techniques have generated hopes for a detailed gene and
protein study of molecular insights into the interaction of plant-endophytes during
abiotic stress conditions.
Culture-independent sequencing approaches including metagenomics, meta￾transcriptomics and meta-proteomics have emerged as new tools for studying the
unexplored wealth of endophytes for conferring abiotic stress tolerance in plants.
Shotgun metagenome analysis of uncultured microbe communities of endophytic
bacteria revealed the population of Proteobacteria and Actinobacteria which can play
a role in plant growth promotion and abiotic stress tolerance (Hong et al. 2019). The
change in endophytic bacterial communities of wheat, as assessed by 16S rRNA
sequencing, was associated with the change in drought stress conditions (Žiarovská
et al. 2020). Not only the endophytes, but the ‘ome’ of plants is also modulated
during their interactions with endophytes while coping with abiotic stress. The
‘omics’ of endophytes also may be modulated by ‘horizontal gene transfer’ and
synergism while interacting with their host crop (Tiwari and Bae 2020). Coutinho
et al. (2015) reported that the influence of host crop Oryza sativa on gene expression
of endophytic Burkholderia kururiensis M130 was related to biofilm regulation and12 Omic Route to Utilize Endophytes and Their Functional Potentials in... 303
iron transport. Some of the endophytic Rhizobium and Xanthomonas sp. associated
with crops have shown the transfer of genes responsible for plant adaptation and
survival (Van Elsas et al. 2003). Comparative transcriptomics and proteomics
studies associated with Atractylodes lancea in response to endophytic fungus
Gilmaniella sp. AL12 revealed regulated plant metabolites, with upregulation in
terpene skeleton biosynthesis and upregulated genes annotated as β-farnesene
synthase and β-caryophyllene synthase (Yuan et al. 2019). Similarly, to understand
the interaction of endophytic Piriformospora indica and host Brassica napus, an
LC-MS/MS-based label-free quantitative proteome technique was used, revealing
the change in metabolic pathways and stress response and increase in stress adapting
metabolites after endophytic interactions (Shrivastava et al. 2018). Understanding
the roles of endophytes–plant interactions at a molecular level is crucial to under￾standing crop coping mechanisms to abiotic stress and may lead to more sustainable
agriculture. The uncultured microbiome of endophytes can also be exploited for
coping with the abiotic stress using the next generation of sequencing technologies.
12.5.1 Metaproteogenomics
Metaproteogenomics links proteome and genome of the environmental samples and
allows identification of more proteins (functions) than proteomics alone. It involves
combinatorial study of metagenome and metaproteome of the same sample. Knief
et al. (2012) have used metaproteogenomic approach to study microbial communi￾ties in the phyllosphere and rhizosphere of rice. The results showed that despite the
presence of nifH genes in both microenvironments, expression was found in rhizo￾sphere only. If such an approach could be applied to study the endosphere, more
significant data regarding endophyte functionality can be collected. Characterization
of the metaproteogenome is expected to provide data linking the genetic and
functional diversity of microbial communities. Proteins involved in plant endophyte
interactions that could not be studied in cultivated isolates are new targets for
functional studies. Plant associated bacterial protein secretion system can be suc￾cessfully used for determining plant bacterial interactions (Downie 2010). Delmotte
et al. (2009) have successfully used community proteogenomics to identify the
unique traits of phyllosphere bacteria. Bacterial proteogenomic pipeline and other
tools are available for proteogenomic analysis studies (Uszkoreit et al. 2014). The
technique offers insights into possible strategies adopted for an endophytic lifestyle.
The combined metagenome and metaproteome analysis would allow overcoming
the limitations of protein identifications as in the metaproteomic approach due to the
non-availability of closely related reference genomes (Kaul et al. 2016).304 C. Gupta et al.
12.5.2 Microarray-Based Techniques
Microarray technique has equipped the modern genome-based studies with the tools
for genome-specific gene expression, endophyte gene profiling, exploration of host
plant–symbiont interactions and many other transcriptome analysis (Felitti et al.
2006). Barnett et al. (2004) used the dual genome Symbiosis Chip based tool to
study symbiotic interactions. Symbiosis chip allow simultaneous analysis of gene
expression in both partners of the association and can easily be used to study the
endophyte–host interaction. Barnett et al. (2004) studied the coordinate differentia￾tion and response generated from signal exchange between two symbiotic partners
simultaneously, namely, α-proteobacterium Sinorhizobium meliloti and its legume
partner Medicago truncatula during nodule development. They designed a custom
Affymetrix Gene Chip with the complete S. meliloti genome and 10,000 probe sets
for M. truncatula.
Genomic interspecies microarray hybridization technique has proved to be useful
in the characterization of previously untouched genomes, provided that the genome
of a close relative has already been fully sequenced (Dong et al. 2001). Microarray
technique allows the identification of a number of genes in an uncharacterized
genome without the need for genome sequencing. However, reference selection is
a critical step in microarray studies as non-specific references may generate ambig￾uous results. Non-availability or limited access to the specific gene expression/
profiling databases has restricted such studies (Kaul et al. 2016) (Fig. 12.1).
Fig. 12.1 Summary of the ‘ome’ of the plant-endophyte interactions under abiotic stress12 Omic Route to Utilize Endophytes and Their Functional Potentials in... 305
12.6 Conclusions and Future Perspectives
Plants harbour and interact with a variety of microbial populations at various stages
of their lifetime; these dynamic interactions may be harmful, benign, or beneficial to
plants. Endophytism is a mutualistic plant–microbe interaction where plants provide
a safe home and secure supply of food to microbes and microbes, in return, benefit
the plants enormously. Microbial endophyte biology is a growing field of research
and a number of researchers have planned these beneficial interactions where
endophytes provide nutrients, act as growth regulators, fix nitrogen, antibiotics,
secondary metabolites, and protect plants from both abiotic and biotic stresses.
Moreover, endophytes are thought to be superior to their rhizospheric counterparts
in facilitating plant growth as they have the ability to colonize the interior of plants
where they can rapidly sense any environmental change and quickly respond to their
needs. Since endophytes are generally not host specific, they can be readily intro￾duced into plants other than their natural host.
The increasing research output over the past three decades shows that there has
been an increasingly growing interest in the study of endophytic microbes. A
significant knowledge has been accumulated on endophytic microbes and their
effects on plants. It is known that microbes colonize in shoots and roots of plants.
In many cases, microbes actually enter into plant cells and involve in the rhizophagy
cycle. This suggests that interaction between endophytic microbe and plant may be
to the extent of a direct protoplast interaction within plant cells. A deep understand￾ing of endophyte–host interactions is the need of the hour in order to realize the use
of endophytes as plant probiotics. The major areas of future research are the
knowledge of the intimate microbe cell to plant cell interactions or ‘cross talk’ that
results in beneficial effects in plants. The ‘signals’ expressed between endophytes
and host plant cells result in oxidative stress tolerance in plants. The signal sent to
host cells that triggers the oxidative response may be the key to understanding the
endophyte–host interaction. It is that crosstalk between endophyte and host which
determines if the plant recognizes the microbes as friendly endophyte or pathogen.
The complementary information generated through modern “omics” studies in
association with other system biological techniques is inevitable to build up models
for prediction and explain endophyte-mediated processes. Advanced techniques can
be used with accuracy for bacterial and fungal endophytes to reveal their genetic and
metabolic potential, ecology and evolution. The prime focus is on microbial endo￾phytes to improve plant/crop productivity and sustainable agriculture with minimum
or nil environmental degradation. In light of these considerations, the practice of
endophytes in agriculture can offer an economic means to achieve sustainable high
crop productivity.
Acknowledgements The authors are grateful to Dr. Ashok K. Chauhan, Founder President,
Dr. Atul Chauhan, Chancellor, Prof. Dr. Balvinder Shukla Vice Chancellor and Amity University,
UP, Noida, for the motivation, research facilities and ASEAN-India Science & Technology
Development Fund, Department of Science and Technology (DST-SERB), New Delhi India for
financial support.306 C. Gupta et al.
Conflict of Interest The author(s) confirm that this article content has no conflict of interest.
Ethical Issues There is none to be declared.
References
Abbamondi GR, Tommonaro G, Weyens N, Thijs S, Sillen W, Gkorezis P, Iodine C, Rangel WM,
Nicolaus B, Vangronsveld J (2016) Plant growth-promoting effects of rhizospheric and endo￾phytic bacteria associated with different tomato cultivars and new tomato hybrids. Chem Biol
Technol Agric 3:1
Afzal Khan S, Hamayun M, Kim H, Yoon H, Lee I, Kim J (2009) Gibberellin production and plant
growth promotion by a newly isolated strain of Gliomastix murorum. World J Microbiol
Biotechnol 25(5):829–833
Ali S, Charles TC, Glick BR (2012) Delay of flower senescence by bacterial endophytes expressing
1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate deaminase. J Appl Microbiol 113(5):1139–1144
Ali S, Charles TC, Glick BR (2014) Amelioration of high salinity stress damage by plant growth￾promoting bacterial endophytes that contain ACC deaminase. Plant Physiol Biochem 80:160–
167
ALKahtani MD, Fouda A, Attia KA, Al-Otaibi F, Eid AM, Ewais EE-D, Hijri M, St-Arnaud M,
Hassan SE-D, Khan N (2020) Isolation and characterization of plant growth promoting Endo￾phytic bacteria from desert plants and their application as bioinoculants for sustainable agricul￾ture. Agronomy 10:1325
Assumpção LDC, Lacava PT, Dias AC, de Azevedo JL, Menten JOM (2009) Diversity and
biotechnological potential of endophytic bacterial community of soybean seeds. Pesqui
Agropecu Bras 44(5):503–510
Atzorn R, Crozier A, Wheeler CT, Sandberg G (1988) Production of gibberellins and indole-3-
acetic acid by rhizobium phaseoli in relation to nodulation of Phaseolus vulgaris roots. Planta
175(4):532–538
Barnawal D, Bharti N, Tripathi A, Pandey SS, Chanotiya CS, Kalra A (2016) ACC-deaminase￾producing endophyte Brachybacterium paraconglomeratum strain SMR20 ameliorates
Chlorophytum salinity stress via altering Phytohormone generation. J Plant Growth Regul
35(2):553–564
Barnett MJ, Toman CJ, Fisher RF, Long SR (2004) A dual-genome Symbiosis Chip for coordinate
study of signal exchange and development in a prokaryote–host interaction. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A 101:16636–16641
Bastián F, Cohen A, Piccoli P, Luna V, Baraldi R, Bottini R (1998) Production of indole-3-acetic
acid and gibberellins A1 and A3 by Acetobacter diazotrophicus and Herbaspirillum
seropedicae in chemically-defined culture media. Plant Growth Regul 24(1):7–11
Bhore SJ, Sathisha G (2010) Screening of endophytic colonizing bacteria for cytokinin-like
compounds: crude cell-free broth of endophytic colonizing bacteria is unsuitable in cucumber
cotyledon bioassay. World J Agri Sci 6(4):345–352
Bhore SJ, Nithaya R, Loh CY (2010) Screening of endophytic bacteria isolated from leaves of
Sambung Nyawa [Gynura procumbens (Lour.) Merr.] for cytokinin-like compounds.
Bioinformation 5(5):191–197
Bömke C, Tudzynski B (2009) Diversity, regulation, and evolution of the gibberellin biosynthetic
pathway in fungi compared to plants and bacteria. Phytochemistry 70(15–16):1876–1893
Chen C, Xin K, Liu H, Cheng J, Shen X, Wang Y, Zhang L (2017) Pantoea alhagi, a novel
endophytic bacterium with ability to improve growth and drought tolerance in wheat. Sci Rep 7:
1–1412 Omic Route to Utilize Endophytes and Their Functional Potentials in... 307
Compant S, Clément C, Sessitsch A (2010) Plant growth-promoting bacteria in the rhizo- and
endosphere of plants: their role, colonization, mechanisms involved and prospects for utiliza￾tion. Soil Biol Biochem 42:669–678
Coutinho BG, Licastro D, Mendonça-Previato L, Cámara M, Venturi V (2015) Plant-influenced
gene expression in the rice endophyte Burkholderia kururiensis M130. Mol Plant-Microbe
Interact 28:10–21
da Silva KJ, de Armas RD, Soares CR, Ogliari JB (2016) Communities of endophytic microor￾ganisms in different developmental stages from a local variety as well as transgenic and
conventional isogenic hybrids of maize. World J Microbiol Biotechnol 32:189
Delmotte NL, Kniefa C, Chaffronb S, Innerabnera G, Roschitzkic B, Schlapbachc R et al (2009)
Community proteogenomics reveals insights into the physiology of phyllosphere bacteria. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 106:16428–16433
Demidchik V (2015) Mechanisms of oxidative stress in plants: from classical chemistry to cell
biology. Environ Exp Bot 109:212–228
Dong Y, Glasner JD, Blattner FR, Triplett EW (2001) Genomic interspecies microarray hybridiza￾tion: rapid discovery of three thousand genes in the maize endophyte, Klebsiella pneumoniae
342, by microarray hybridization with Escherichia coli K-12 open reading frames. Appl
Environ Microbio 67:1911–1921
Doty SL (2008) Enhancing phytoremediation through the use of transgenics and endophytes. New
Phytol 179(2):318–333
Downie JA (2010) The roles of extracellular proteins, polysaccharides and signals in the interac￾tions of rhizobia with legume roots. FEMS Microbiol Rev 34:150–170
Duca D, Lorv J, Patten CL, Rose D, Glick BR (2014) Indole-3-acetic acid in plant-microbe
interactions. Antonie Van Leeuwenhoek 106(1):85–125
Eid AM, Salim SS, Hassan SE-D, Ismail MA, Fouda A (2019) Role of endophytes in plant health
and abiotic stress management. In: Kumar V, Prasad R, Kumar M, Choudhary DK (eds)
Microbiome in plant health and disease: challenges and opportunities. Springer, Singapore, pp
119–144
Eid AM, Fouda A, Niedbała G, Hassan SE-D, Salem SS, Abdo AM, Hetta H, Shaheen TI (2020)
Endophytic Streptomyces laurentii mediated green synthesis of Ag-NPs with antibacterial and
anticancer properties for developing functional textile fabric properties. Antibiotics 9:641
Elkelish A, Qari SH, Mazrou YSA, Abdelaal KAA, Hafez YM, Abu-Elsaoud AM, Batiha GE-S,
El-Esawi MA, El Nahhas N (2020) Exogenous ascorbic acid induced chilling tolerance in
tomato plants through modulating metabolism, osmolytes, antioxidants, and transcriptional
regulation of catalase and heat shock proteins. Plan Theory 9:431
Etesami H, Alikhani HA, Hosseini HM (2015) Indole-3-acetic acid (IAA) production trait, a useful
screening to select endophytic and rhizosphere competent bacteria for rice growth promoting
agents. MethodsX 2:72–78
Felitti S, Shields K, Ramsperger M, Tian P, Sawbridge T, Webster T et al (2006) Transcriptome
analysis of Neotyphodium and Epichloe grass endophytes. Fungal Genet Biol 43:465–475
Fouda A, Hassan S, Eid AM, El-Din Ewais E (2019) The interaction between plants and bacterial
endophytes under salinity stress. In: Endophytes and secondary metabolites. Springer, Cham, pp
1–18
Fouda A, Hassan SED, Abdo AM, El-Gamal MS (2020) Antimicrobial, antioxidant and larvicidal
activities of spherical silver nanoparticles synthesized by endophytic Streptomyces spp. Biol
Trace Elem Res 195:707–724
Gagné-Bourque F, Mayer BF, Charron JB, Vali H, Bertrand A, Jabaji S (2015) Accelerated growth
rate and increased drought stress resilience of the model grass Brachypodium distachyon
colonized by Bacillus subtilis B26. PLoS One 10:e0130456
Gamalero E, Marzachì C, Galetto L, Veratti F, Massa N, Bona E, Novello G, Glick BR, Ali S,
Cantamessa S, D’Agostino G, Berta G (2016) An 1-Aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate (ACC)
deaminase-expressing endophyte increases plant resistance to flavescence dorée phytoplasma
infection. Plant Biosyst:1–10308 C. Gupta et al.
Gill SS, Gill R, Trivedi DK, Anjum NA, Sharma KK, Ansari MW, Ansari AA, Johri AK, Prasad R,
Pereira E, Varma A, Tuteja N (2016) Piriformospora indica: potential and significance in plant
stress tolerance. Front Microbiol 7:332. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2016.00332
Glick BR (2004) Bacterial ACC deaminase and the alleviation of plant stress. Adv Appl Microbiol
56:291–312
Glick BR (2014) Bacteria with ACC deaminase can promote plant growth and help to feed the
world. Microbiol Res 169(1):30–39
Goulart MC, Cueva-Yesquén LG, Hidalgo Martinez KJ, Attili-Angelis D, Fantinatti-Garboggini F
(2019) Comparison of specific endophytic bacterial communities in different developmental
stages of Passiflora incarnata using culture-dependent and culture-independent analysis.
Microbiol Open 8:e896
Grossmann K (2010) Auxin herbicides: current status of mechanism and mode of action. Pest
Manag Sci 66(2):113–120
Habib N, Ali Q, Ali S, Javed MT, Zulqurnain Haider M, Perveen R, Shahid MR, Rizwan M, Abdel￾Daim MM, Elkelish A et al (2020) Use of nitric oxide and hydrogen peroxide for better yield of
wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) under water deficit conditions: growth, osmoregulation and anti￾oxidative defense mechanism. Plan Theory 9:285
Hamayun M, Khan SA, Khan MA, Khan AL, Kang S, Kim S, Joo G, Lee I (2009a) Gibberellin
production by pure cultures of a new strain of Aspergillus fumigatus. World J Microbiol
Biotechnol 25(10):1785–1792
Hamayun M, Khan SA, Kim H, Chaudhary MF, Hwang Y, Shin D, Kim I, Lee B, Lee I (2009b)
Gibberellin production and plant growth enhancement by newly isolated strain of
Scolecobasidium tshawytschae. J Microbiol Biotechnol 19(6):560–565
Han Y, Wang R, Yang Z, Zhan Y, Ma Y, Ping S, Zhang L, Lin M, Yan Y (2015)
1-Aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate deaminase from pseudomonas stutzeri A1501 facilitates
the growth of rice in the presence of salt or heavy metals. J Microbiol Biotechnol 25(7):
1119–1128
Hardoim PR, van Overbeek LS, Elsas JD (2008) Properties of bacterial endophytes and their
proposed role in plant growth. Trends Microbiol 16(10):463–471
Hardoim PR, van Overbeek LS, Berg G, Pirttilä AM, Compant S, Campisano A, Döring M,
Sessitsch A (2015) The hidden world within plants: ecological and evolutionary considerations
for defining functioning of microbial endophytes. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 79:293–320
Hasanuzzaman M, Bhuyan MHMB, Zulfiqar F, Raza A, Mohsin SM, Al Mahmud J, Fujita M,
Fotopoulos V (2020) Reactive oxygen species and antioxidant defense in plants under abiotic
stress: revisiting the crucial role of a universal defense regulator. Antioxidants 9:681
Hong CE, Kim JU, Lee JW, Bang KH, Jo IH (2019) Metagenomic analysis of bacterial endophyte
community structure and functions in Panax ginseng at different ages. Biotech 9:1–8
Iniguez AL, Dong Y, Carter HD, Ahmer BMM, Stone JM, Triplett EW (2005) Regulation of enteric
endophytic bacterial colonization by plant defenses. Mol Plant-Microbe Interact 18(2):169–178
Jasim B, Joseph AA, John CM, Mathew J, Radhakrishnan EK (2014) Isolation and characterization
of plant growth promoting endophytic bacteria from the rhizome of Zingiber officinale. 3 Bio￾tech 4:197–204
Jayakumar A, Padmakumar P, Nair IC, Radhakrishnan EK (2020) Drought tolerant bacterial
endophytes with potential plant probiotic effects from Ananas comosus. Biologia 75:1769–1778
Jung HW, Kim W, Hwang BK (2003) Three pathogen-inducible genes encoding lipid transfer
protein from pepper are differentially activated by pathogens, abiotic, and environmental
stresses. Plant Cell Environ 26(6):915–928
Kaul S, Sharma T, Dhar MK (2016) “Omics” tools for better understanding the plant–endophyte
interactions. Front Plant Sci 7:955
Khan AL, Hamayun M, Kim Y, Kang S, Lee J, Lee I (2011) Gibberellins producing endophytic
Aspergillus fumigatus sp. LH02 influenced endogenous phytohormonal levels, isoflavonoids
production and plant growth in salinity stress. Process Biochem 46(2):440–44712 Omic Route to Utilize Endophytes and Their Functional Potentials in... 309
Khan AL, Waqas M, Hussain J, Al-Harrasi A, Al-Rawahi A, Al-Hosni K, Kim M, Adnan M, Lee I
(2014a) Endophytes Aspergillus caespitosus LK12 and Phoma sp. LK13 of Moringa peregrina
produce gibberellins and improve rice plant growth. J Plant Interact 9(1):731–737
Khan AL, Waqas M, Kang S, Al-Harrasi A, Hussain J, Al-Rawahi A, Al-Khiziri S, Ullah I, Ali L,
Jung H, Lee I (2014b) Bacterial endophyte Sphingomonas sp. LK11 produces gibberellins and
IAA and promotes tomato plant growth. J Microbiol 52(8):689–695
Khan AL, Hussain J, Al-Harrasi A, Al-Rawahi A, Lee I (2015) Endophytic fungi: resource for
gibberellins and crop abiotic stress resistance. Crit Rev Biotechnol 35(1):62–74
Khan Z, Rho H, Firrincieli A, Hung SH, Luna V, Masciarelli O, Kim SH, Doty SL (2016) Growth
enhancement and drought tolerance of hybrid poplar upon inoculation with endophyte consor￾tia. Curr Plant Biol 6:38–47
Kim-Dura S, Lowman S, Zhang S, Mei C (2016) Growth promotion of switch grass by bacterial
endophyte Pantoea agglomerans strain PaKM isolated from seeds. J Pathol Microbiol 1(2):
1007
Knief C, Delmotte N, Chaffron S, Stark M, Innerebner G, Wassmann R et al (2012)
Metaproteogenomic analysis of microbial communities in the phyllosphere and rhizosphere of
rice. ISME J 6:1378–1390
Kobayashi DY, Palumbo JD (2000) Bacterial endophytes and their effects on plants and uses in
agriculture. In: Bacon CW, White JF (eds) Microbial endophytes. Marcel Dekker, Inc,
New York, pp 199–233
Kuklinsky-Sobral J, Araújo WL, Mendes R, Geraldi IO, Pizzirani-Kleiner AA, Azevedo JL (2004)
Isolation and characterization of soybean-associated bacteria and their potential for plant growth
promotion. Environ Microbiol 6(12):1244–1251
Kumari M, Pandey S, Mishra SK, Giri VP, Agarwal L, Dwivedi S, Pandey AK, Nautiyal CS,
Mishra A (2020) Omics-based mechanistic insight into the role of bioengineered nanoparticles
for biotic stress amelioration by modulating plant metabolic pathways. Front Bioengg
Biotechnol 17:242
Kunkel BN, Chen Z (2006) Virulence strategies of plant pathogenic bacteria. In: Dworkin M
(ed) The prokaryotes. A handbook on biology of bacteria, ecophysiology and biochemistry.
Springer, New York, pp 421–440
Leitão AL, Enguita FJ (2016) Gibberellins in Penicillium strains: challenges for endophyte-plant
host interactions under salinity stress. Microbiol Res 183:8–18
Lowman JS, Lava-Chavez A, Kim-Dura S, Flinn B, Nowak J, Mei C (2015) Switch grass field
performance on two soils as affected by Bacterization of seedlings with Burkholderia
phytofirmans strain PsJN. Bioenergy Res 8(1):440–449
Miliūtė I, Buzaitė O (2011) IAA production and other plant growth promoting traits of endophytic
bacteria from apple tree. Biologija 57(2):98–102
Morsy M, Cleckler B, Armuelles-Millican H (2020) Fungal endophytes promote tomato growth and
enhance drought and salt tolerance. Plan Theory 9:877
Nath M, Bhatt D, Prasad R, Tuteja N (2017) Reactive oxygen species (ROS) metabolism and
signaling in plant-mycorrhizal association under biotic and abiotic stress conditions. In: Varma
A, Prasad R, Tuteja N (eds) Mycorrhiza. Springer International Publishing AG, pp 223–232
Naveed M, Mitter B, Reichenauer TG, Wieczorek K, Sessitsch A (2014) Increased drought stress
resilience of maize through endophytic colonization by Burkholderia phytofirmans PsJN and
Enterobacter sp. FD17. Environ Exp Bot 97:30–39
Nett RS, Montanares M, Marcassa A, Lu X, Nagel R, Charles TC, Hedden P, Rojas MC, Peters RJ
(2017) Elucidation of gibberellin biosynthesis in bacteria reveals convergent evolution. Nat
Chem Biol 13(1):69–74
Otlewska A, Migliore M, Dybka-Stepien K, Manfredini A, Struszczyk-Swita K, Napoli R,
Białkowska A, Canfora L, Pinzari F (2020) When salt meddles between plant, soil, and
microorganisms. Front Plant Sci 11:1429
Peleg Z, Blumwald E (2011) Hormone balance and abiotic stress tolerance in crop plants. Curr Opin
Plant Biol 14:290–295310 C. Gupta et al.
Phillips KA, Skirpan AL, Liu X, Christensen A, Slewinski TL, Hudson C, Barazesh S, Cohen JD,
Malcomber S, McSteen P (2011) Vanishing tassel2 encodes a grass-specific tryptophan amino￾transferase required for vegetative and reproductive development in maize. Plant Cell 23(2):
550–566
Prasad R (2017) Fungal nanotechnology: applications in agriculture, industry, and medicine.
Springer International Publishing. ISBN 978-3-319-68423-9. https://www.springer.com/gb/
book/9783319684239
Rashid S, Charles TC, Glick BR (2012) Isolation and characterization of new plant growth￾promoting bacterial endophytes. Appl Soil Ecol 61:217–224
Raweekul W, Wuttitummaporn S, Sodchuen W, Kittiwongwattana C (2016) Plant growth promo￾tion by Endophytic bacteria isolated from Rice (Oryza sativa). Thammasat Inter J Sci Technol
21(1):6–17
Sandhya V, Shrivastava M, Ali SZ, Sai Shiva Krishna Prasad V (2017) Endophytes from maize
with plant growth promotion and biocontrol activity under drought stress. Russ Agric Sci 43:
22–34
Santoyo G, Moreno-Hagelsieb G, del Carmen Orozco-Mosqueda M, Glick BR (2016) Plant
growth-promoting bacterial endophytes. Microbiol Res 183:92–99
Shade A, Jacques MA, Barret M (2017) Ecological patterns of seed microbiome diversity, trans￾mission, and assembly. Curr Opin Microbiol 37:15–22
Shrivastava N, Jiang L, Li P, Sharma AK, Luo X, Wu S, Pandey R, Gao Q, Lou B (2018) Proteomic
approach to understand the molecular physiology of symbiotic interaction between
Piriformospora indica and Brassica napus. Sci Rep 8:5773
Singh VK, Singh AK, Singh PP, Kumar A (2018) Interaction of plant growth promoting bacteria
with tomato under abiotic stress: a review. Agric Ecosyst Environ 267:129–140
Soliman M, Alhaithloul HA, Hakeem KR, Alharbi BM, El-Esawi M, Elkelish A (2019) Exogenous
nitric oxide mitigates nickel-induced oxidative damage in eggplant by upregulating antioxi￾dants, osmolyte metabolism, and glyoxalase systems. Plan Theory 8:562
Sun Y, Cheng Z, Glick BR (2009) The presence of a 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate (ACC)
deaminase deletion mutation alters the physiology of the endophytic plant growth-promoting
bacterium Burkholderia phytofirmans PsJN. FEMS Microbiol Lett 296(1):131–136
Sziderics AH, Rasche F, Trognitz F, Sessitsch A, Wilhelm E (2007) Bacterial endophytes contrib￾ute to abiotic stress adaptation in pepper plants (Capsicum annuum L.). Can J Microbiol 53(11):
1195–1202
Tiwari P, Bae H (2020) Horizontal gene transfer and endophytes: an implication for the acquisition
of novel traits. Plan Theory 9:305
Uszkoreit J, Plohnke N, Rexroth S, Marcus K, Eisenacher M (2014) The bacterial proteogenomic
pipeline. BMC Genomics 15:S19
Van Elsas JD, Turner S, Bailey MJ (2003) Horizontal gene transfer in the phytosphere. New Phytol
157:525–537
Vendan RT, Yu YJ, Lee SH, Rhee YH (2010) Diversity of endophytic bacteria in ginseng and their
potential for plant growth promotion. J Microbiol 48(5):559–565
Verma H, Kumar D, Kumar V, Kumari M, Singh SK, Sharma VK, Droby S, Santoyo G, White JF,
Kumar A (2021) The potential application of endophytes in management of stress from drought
and salinity in crop plants. Microorganisms 9:1729
Waqas M, Khan AL, Kamran M, Hamayun M, Kang S, Kim Y, Lee I (2012) Endophytic fungi
produce gibberellins and indole acetic acid and promotes host-plant growth during stress.
Molecules 17(9):10754–10773
White JF, Torres MS (2010) Is plant endophyte-mediated defensive mutualism the result of
oxidative stress protection? Physiol Plant 138:440–446
Wu QS, Xia RX, Zou YN (2008) Improved soil structure and citrus growth after inoculation with
three arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi under drought stress. Eur J Soil Biol 44:122–128
Xu J, Li X, Luo L (2012) Effects of engineered Sinorhizobium meliloti on cytokinin synthesis and
tolerance of alfalfa to extreme drought stress. Appl Environ Microbiol 78(22):8056–806112 Omic Route to Utilize Endophytes and Their Functional Potentials in... 311
Yaish MW, Antony I, Glick BR (2015) Isolation and characterization of endophytic plant growth￾promoting bacteria from date palm tree (Phoenix dactylifera L.) and their potential role in
salinity tolerance. Antonie Van Leeuwenhoek 107(6):1519–1532
Yandigeri MS, Meena KK, Singh D, Malviya N, Singh DP, Solanki MK, Yadav AK, Arora DK
(2012) Drought-tolerant endophytic actinobacteria promote growth of wheat (Triticum
aestivum) under water stress conditions. Plant Growth Regul 68:411–420
Yuan J, Zhang W, Sun K, Tang MJ, Chen PX, Li X, Dai CC (2019) Comparative transcriptomics
and proteomics of Atractylodes lancea in response to endophytic fungus Gilmaniella sp. AL12
reveals regulation in plant metabolism. Front Microbiol 10:1208
Zhou XR, Dai L, Xu GF, Wang HS (2021) A strain of Phoma species improves drought tolerance of
Pinus tabulaeformis. Sci Rep 11:7637
Žiarovská J, Medo J, Kyseľ M, Zamiešková L, Kačániová M (2020) Endophytic bacterial
microbiome diversity in early developmental stage plant tissues of wheat varieties. Plan Theory
9:266313
Chapter 13
Siderophore Production in Iron Uptake
and Plant Biofortification
Neerja Srivastava
Abstract Although iron (Fe) is present abundantly on the earth, its bioavailability to
plants is low and is dependent on the soil’s redox potential and soil pH. In aerobic or
alkaline soil, Fe is readily oxidized and usually forms insoluble complexes as ferric
oxides which make it unavailable for plant uptake. Beneficial microorganisms, such
as mycorrhiza and root endophytic fungi, dark septate fungi, and plant growth￾promoting rhizobacteria, have several functions and can increase mineral Fe uptake.
They have also been considered to have long-term efficiency once they are used in
the field. Under iron-limited surroundings, some iron chelating bacteria produce iron
chelating molecules siderophores to increase iron uptake as well as transport it to
their host plants. This chapter covers and describes the role of siderophore in iron
uptake and biofortification in plants.
Keywords Siderophores · Iron · Iron deficiency · Biofortification
13.1 Introduction
Micronutrient malnutrition is a serious threat to human health around the world,
mainly in developing countries (Kennedy et al. 2003). Iron deficiency is an
extremely predominant nutritional ailment affecting 2.5–5 billion people around
the world (Yip 2002), where underprivileged households, as well as preschool
children, are seriously affected because of the greater demand for iron (Benoist
et al. 2008). Iron is a co-factor for many enzymes executing primary functions in the
human body. An insufficient amount of iron causes disability and anaemia as well as
retards mental growth (Sheftela et al. 2011). The malnourishment of iron can be
reduced by enhancing the bio-available iron content through supplementation by
fortification of food (Rana et al. 2012a). Biofortification is a method for producing
N. Srivastava (*)
Department of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, School of Sciences, CSJM University,
Kanpur, India
e-mail: neerjasrivastava@csjmu.ac.in
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2023
S. Chhabra et al. (eds.), Plant Microbiome for Plant Productivity and Sustainable
Agriculture, Microorganisms for Sustainability 37,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-19-5029-2_13314 N. Srivastava
micronutrient-laden staple food through traditional breeding as well as transgenic
strategies (Murgia et al. 2012). Rhizobacteria promote plant growth, fortify food
crops for iron, and also improve the fertility of soil as well as crop yield via
siderophore production (Rana et al. 2012a). Siderophores are low molecular weight
organic substances that possess a high affinity for iron (Das et al. 2007). They form
very stable iron complexes as well as increase the dissolution of minerals that have
iron through coordination with an iron atom at the mineral surface. Rhizobacteria
produce siderophores and release them into the surroundings to dissolve the iron by
making iron chelate complex as well as translocate them to the plant through
growing roots. Transporter proteins present on the plasma membrane of plant
roots help in Fe uptake by forming iron–siderophore complexes (Boukhalfa and
Crumbliss 2002). Moreover, these rhizobacteria can also improve plant growth by
providing various advantageous features such as enhanced nitrogen fixation, solu￾bilization of phosphorus, phytohormone synthesis, and organic acid production with
decreased vulnerability for disease (Ahemad and Kibret 2014). According to Sharma
et al. (2013), the amount of iron in rice and grain was enhanced through the use of
plant growth-promoting bacteria (PGPR). Thus, plant biofortification by PGPR is
regarded as a safe method to increase iron content in various edible plant parts as
well as to remove malnutrition (Khalid et al. 2015).
13.2 Micronutrient Deficiency and Strategies for Control
of Micronutrient Malnutrition
To counter the deficiency of micronutrients in food crops, the biofortification
approach is a reasonable answer to maintaining an appropriate amount of vital
nutrients in the various edible portions of plants. Unfavourable environmental stress
conditions impede the micronutrient uptake from the soil into plants, and thus the
insufficient level of micronutrients is going to restrict plant growth and development,
causing malnutrition amongst the human population of the world. The modern
agriculture system aims to yield nutritiously safe food crops free from chemical
residues and with enhanced micronutrient level in the edible portion of plants. Most
of the human population is highly dependent on foods that are based upon crops for a
basic diet and if they take a diet with insufficient amounts of vital micronutrients,
they face severe health issues such as anaemia. Implementing of approach such as
biofortification is a better option for producing crops that possess an increased level
of required micronutrients. According to the available literature, biofortification of
food crops can be achieved mainly through three different ways: agronomic
biofortification, breeding approach and genetic modifications.
Although these strategies of agronomic as well as genetic biofortification to
supplement micronutrients in crops for removing micronutrient malnutrition are
regarded as profitable, they are unsuitable in developing countries where the rural
population is large (Mayer et al. 2008). Greater use of chemical fertilizers poses13 Siderophore Production in Iron Uptake and Plant Biofortification 315
several problems such as disruption of soil microbial ecology and loss of soil fertility,
which eventually can lead to drastic effects on both crop production and human health.
Thus, there is a clear demand for discovering other cheap alternate approaches in place
of genetic and agronomic strategies for achieving the goal of fortification. The
application of microorganisms, particularly those which promote plant growth, is
another alternate strategy for biofortification and is a better option in place of chemical
fertilizers (Singh et al. 2017a). Furthermore, the use of plant growth-promoting
rhizobacteria as bioinoculants can provide a cheaper and manageable option for
increasing the micronutrient level in plants (Shaikh and Saraf 2017). Soil inhabiting
microbiome promotes plant growth, preserves soil health, and enables the conversion
of complex micronutrients into a simple form that is eventually taken up by plants
(Singh and Singh 2017; Shah et al. 2018; Prasad et al. 2016). Plant-associated bacteria
induce the host plant growth by various means such as increased mobility, uptake, and
enhancement of nutrients in plants (Prasanna et al. 2016; Singh and Prasad 2014;
Chhabra et al. 2010, 2013). Plant growth-promoting bacteria (PGPB) increases crop
yield through several processes such as biological nitrogen fixation, solubilization of
insoluble minerals such as phosphorus, zinc, and calcium, phytohormone production,
and biocontrol of insect pests and plant pathogens (Glick et al. 1999; Singh et al.
2010a, b, c, 2011; Singh and Goel 2015; Prasad et al. 2015). Microbes can also affect
the availability of nutrients by several properties such as chelation, solubilization, and
oxidation or reduction activities (Khan 2005; Singh et al. 2013, 2018c). Soil, as well as
rhizosphere-associated microbes, assists in the enhanced nutrient acquisition of vital
micronutrients from the soil system to different plant parts. Therefore microbial￾assisted precise nutrient acquisition strategy makes microbes ideal candidates for
crop biofortification with essential nutrient elements such as Zn, Fe, and
Se. Different microbes such as bacteria, cyanobacteria, and fungi can be used for
growing plants effectively with enhanced nutrients level, which are achieved through
genetic and agronomic-based biofortification.
13.3 Need for Biofortification
Biofortification targets either enhanced storage of micronutrients in edible portions
of plants or increase in their bioavailability for plants. It is regarded as an inexpen￾sive approach that emphasizes removing malnutrition in developing nations. Iron is a
naturally present metalloid, which is needed in small quantities for humans and other
animals. It is a vital micronutrient for every microbe, plant, and animal. It is crucial
for plants as it plays a very important role in transporting oxygen, oxidative
metabolism, and cell proliferation as well as required in some physiological mech￾anisms such as N2 fixation and photosynthesis (Nair and Iyengar 2009). Iron is an
important micronutrient in biological systems and getting attention worldwide due to
growing reports on iron deficiencies in human populations and crops. Mineral and
vitamin deficiencies are responsible for about 7.3% of the global disease burden
(WHO 2002). Iron deficiency is amongst the most prominent micronutrient316 N. Srivastava
deficiencies and is affecting almost two billion people (McLean et al. 2009) It is one
of the major health issues for 39% of children below the age of 5 years, 48% of
5–14 years old children, and 42% of total women while 52% of expecting women in
developing countries are anaemic (Zimmermann and Hurrell 2007; Bersamin et al.
2008). In developing countries, legumes, vegetables, and cereal grains are the key
sources of nutrition. Today, plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria (PGPR) are
applied as substitutes for increased micronutrient uptake in plants. These bacteria
produce plant growth-promoting substances, which may have a significant role in
increasing enhancing with increasing plant growth through morphological changes
such as greater root surface area for nutrient uptake in the soil and also for protecting
crops against diseases (Rana et al. 2012b; Patel et al. 2020; Prasad et al. 2015)
13.4 Strategies for Biofortification
Biofortification approaches such as agricultural, plant breeding, genetic manipula￾tion and the use of microbial inoculants are the main processes for increasing the
concentration of nutrients in plants. ‘Agronomic biofortification’ is the process of
applying nutrient-laden fertilizers into the soil or on foliage to enhance the micro￾nutrient level in the edible portion of the crops and ultimately improve the use of
required micronutrients by users (Carvalho and Vasconcelos 2013). A significant
strategy for biofortification ‘plant breeding’ is being used by farmers for several
years whereas traditional plant breeding is the crossing of plants to yield offspring
having properties of both the parents (Garcia-Casal et al. 2016), and thus this
technique can be employed to produce progenies with a considerable amount of
required nutrients. Rice varieties having a greater amount of iron and zinc are
crossed with high-yielding rice species to get offspring having both properties
such as greater yield and a higher amount of micronutrients (Khush 2003).
Biofortification via ‘genetic modification’ takes a shorter time to produce crops
that express the trait of interest like nutritional content in a very refined manner
and permits the transfer of specific genes or genes of interest (Garcia-Casal et al.
2016). The utilization of microbial inoculants for biofortification is an inexpensive
strategy and provides a sustainable answer for increased micronutrient levels in
plants in an eco-friendly way. Useful soil microbes make possible nutrients available
to plants through several processes such as atmospheric N2 fixation, solubilization of
the nutrients fixed into the soil, and through the production of phytohormones (Yao
et al. 2008). These microbes facilitate further increase in the level of micronutrients
in plants because they have a prime role in the mineralization of organic material as
well as converting inorganic nutrients (Rana et al. 2012a; Upadhayay et al. 2018).
Each biofortification strategy is described in detail in the following section.13 Siderophore Production in Iron Uptake and Plant Biofortification 317
13.4.1 Agronomic Interventions
The application of mineral fertilizers to the soil for maintaining soil health and
enhancing plant quality is a very old practice (Rengel et al. 1999). It was seen that the
used nutrient transferred more noticeably when a particular element is deficient in
the soil or the properties of the specific element permit its quick utilization. Supple￾mentation of micronutrients by using chemical fertilizers is an efficient method
applied by farmers to get the highest crop production. Although, efficiency of
micronutrients utilization is very low in crops and only 2-5% of total applied dose
of fertilizer is used (Tian et al. 2008).
13.4.2 Genetic Approaches
Genetic biofortification includes traditional breeding methods for characterization
and exploitation of genetic differences such as by using novel strategies including
gene discovery and marker-assisted breeding (Grusak 2002). Hindu et al. (2018)
utilized genome-wide association studies (GWAS) for the recognition of various
genomic regions in maize for kernel zinc and iron biofortification. Velu et al. (2016)
proposed that genomic selection (GS) may be a possible breeding technique for iron
and zinc biofortification in wheat. There are various benefits of nutrition-oriented
breeding of crop plants based on sustainability. Current developments enable us to
modify signalling pathways. DNA markers and marker-assisted selection (MAS)
techniques are speeding up the growth of nutrient-rich genotypes. Kumar et al.
(2018) described quantitative trait loci (QTLs) for iron and zinc biofortification in
pearl millet via diversity array technology (DArT) and simple sequence repeat (SSR)
markers. There are various reports on Fe and/or Zn biofortified varieties of rice,
wheat, and maize which are released globally including in India to lessen malnutri￾tion. In addition to the genetic or plant breeding strategies, various trans￾genic approaches have also been used for fruitfully biofortifying food crops.
Transgenic methods allow the substitution of genes between completely unrelated
species or carry new genes into food or cash crops. Ramesh et al. (2004) devised a
new strategy for enhancing Zn and Fe content in seeds by overexpressing a zinc
transporter in Hordeum vulgare cv. Golden Promise assisted by a ubiquitin pro￾moter. Goto et al. (1999) succeeded in enhancing the Fe concentration three times
more in rice grains by Agrobacterium-mediated transfer of the whole coding
sequence of the ferritin gene of soybean plants. Lucca et al. (2002) produced
transgenic rice plants, with more Fe content, rich in phytase and cysteine peptides
which facilitated improved iron uptake and bioavailability. Vasconcelos et al. (2003)
manipulated the soybean ferritin gene expression regulated by glutelin promoter in a
selected Indica rice line with highly needed agronomic and field performance
characters. More amount of grain nutrition was reported in brown grains and
polished grains. Liu et al. (2004) through genetic engineering produced ferritin-318 N. Srivastava
containing rice varieties with 64% more iron amount in the milling where this ferritin
gene could be expressed at a higher level, particularly in the transgenic rice endo￾sperm. Genetic strategies might be tough work for breeders in soils typically having
fewer iron and zinc micronutrients. To get the full capacity of biofortified species,
simultaneous attention is required for additional aspects such as soil pH and organic
matter which affect root exudation as well as enzyme activities in the rhizosphere
and thus micronutrient intake and storage (Cakmak 2008).
13.4.3 Microorganisms and Plant-Based Strategies
The process of taking iron by higher plants in iron deficiency is classified into two
groups (Kobayashi and Nishizawa 2012; Römheld and Marschner 1986): strategy I
for non-graminaceous plants and strategy II for graminaceous plants. The two key
mechanisms in the strategy I response are (1) ferric chelate reduction at the root
surface by the assistance of the ferric reduction oxidase gene (FRO2) and (2) the
absorption of the produced ferrous ions through the root plasma membrane via iron￾regulated transporter gene (IRT1). Another mechanism included in strategy I is the
removal of proton and phenolic compounds by the roots to the rhizosphere, which
improves the solubility of ferric ions or supports the reduction capacity of ferric on
the root surface. Strategy II plants uptake iron in iron deficiency through the
excretion of phytosiderophores (PSs), which are low molecular weight Fe chelating
substances such as mugineic acids (MA) and nicotianamine (NA) having high
affinity for ferric and produce an iron–phytosiderophore soluble complex. The
iron–phytosiderophore complex is then transferred into root cells by a strong affinity
intake scheme. Suzuki et al. (2006) reported that barley plants secreted mugineic
acid (MA) phytosiderophore under Zn deficiency and formed Zn(II)–mugineic acid
complex and absorbed more Zn2+ by the roots of a Zn-deficient plant. The amounts
and kinds of phytosiderophores secreted by plants into the rhizosphere vary from
species to species (Mori 1999). A large concentration of iron and zinc is found in the
earth’s crust but not available to plants because they exist in the form of insoluble
salts. Plant-dependent intrinsic approaches such as the production of
phytosiderophore or organic acid and secretions of chelators are not every time
adequate for making micronutrients accessible in micronutrient-deficient soils. With
our enhanced knowledge of crosstalk between soils, plants, and microorganisms,
higher awareness of the rhizosphere environment has been achieved (De Santiago
et al. 2011; Mishra et al. 2011; Pii et al. 2015; Zaidi et al. 2003). Plant growth￾promoting microbes play a very important part in the fortification of macronutrients
in food crops through several processes such as siderophore production, transfor￾mations, nitrogen fixation, and phosphorus mobilization (Khan et al. 2019; Singh
et al. 2018b). Microbes play key roles in the zinc and iron biofortification in cereal
grains (Gosal et al. 2010; Rana et al. 2012a; Sharma et al. 2012). Both rhizospheric
and endophytic microbes prominently affect micronutrient bioavailability in plants.
Endophytic microorganisms are regarded as more promising agents to enhance iron13 Siderophore Production in Iron Uptake and Plant Biofortification 319
and zinc uptake and translocation because endophytic microbes can indirectly
influence the regulation of metal transporters (Reiter et al. 2002; Weyens et al.
2013). Bacterial and fungal endophytes have been implicated in the biofortification
of grains of wheat and rice with iron and zinc (Abaid-Ullah et al. 2015; Ramesh et al.
2014). Gosal et al. (2010) described an endophytic fungus Piriformospora indica as
having an important influence on plant growth, biomass, and micronutrient uptake.
Arthrobacter sulfonivorans (DS-68) and Enterococcus hirae (DS-163) improved
iron concentration and iron availability in wheat grains (Singh et al. 2017b, 2018b).
Rana et al. (2012a) reported that the iron amount in wheat grains improved consid￾erably because of inoculation of Providencia sp. PW5. There are several processes
by which microorganisms enhance the zinc and iron availability in soil and increase
their movement in plant parts or improve the bioavailability of iron and zinc in food
grains. These processes are: i) production of siderophores and other chelating sub￾stances, ii) secretion of organic acid and proton extrusion, iii) alteration in morphol￾ogy and anatomy of root, iv) overexpression of zinc and iron transporters,
v) decrease in phytic acids or anti-nutritional factors in food grains, vi) phenolics,
and its related reducing moieties secretion and vii) phytohormones such as signalling
molecules secretion.
13.5 Production of Siderophore and Other Chelating
Substances
Low molecular weight iron chelating compounds which possess a strong affinity for
Fe(III) (Ganz 2018) are called siderophores. It has been reported by several workers
that siderophores are secreted by various microorganisms to counter the iron scarcity
in soil (Schalk et al. 2011). Fe(III) is not soluble in soil, but siderophores make
siderophore–Fe(III) complexes that can improve the availability of iron in the
environment (Saha et al. 2012). Owing to their solubilizing influence on iron
hydroxides, the siderophores are produced in the rhizosphere, which is the crucial
microbial action for assisting plants in gaining iron (Desai and Archana 2011; Hayat
et al. 2012). Khalid et al. (2015) described that through inoculating siderophore￾generating fluorescent Pseudomonas, iron amount in chickpea grains can be
enhanced. In another previous field experiment, inoculation with siderophore gen￾erating endophytes Arthrobacter sulfonivorans DS-68 and Enterococcus hirae
DS-163 increased the iron content in grains of low and high iron storing wheat
genotypes by 67% and 46%, respectively. Singh et al. (2018b) observed a positive
connection between the production of siderophores and the iron storage in wheat
grains through endophytes, which shows the significant role of siderophores in
gaining iron and movement into the plant. However, its movement within the
plant, particularly to grains, involves various steps as well as processes such as
transport, remobilization, and accumulation mechanisms which are facilitated320 N. Srivastava
through membrane transporters, chelators, and regulatory proteins (Singh and
Prasanna 2020).
13.5.1 Siderophores Secreted by Mycorrhizal Fungi
Siderophore ferricrocin is produced by ectomycorrhizal fungus (EMF) Cenococcum
geophilum. When the fungus was grown in a less iron culture medium, certain
siderophores were produced in a culture medium where the key siderophore was
ferricrocin, which was confirmed by HPLC, FAB-mass spectrometry, and 1
H- and
13C-NMR spectra (Haselwandter and Winkelmann 2002). Two members in the
genus Suillus, S. granulatus and S. luteus, are generally EMF species, and they
produced cyclic and linear sideramine fusigen, ferrichrome, coprogen together with
triacetylfusarinine C in the culture medium (Haselwandter et al. 2011). Two fungi
Wilcoxina mikolae and W. rehmii are new fungi that can have a symbiosis with
certain members of the genus Pinus to create ectomycorrhizae. When three fungal
strains, W. mikolae CSY-14 and RMD-947 and W. rehmii CSY-85, were grown in a
pure culture medium with little iron, they secreted ferricrocin (Prabhu et al. 1996).
Several members of the genus Glomus can have a symbiosis with various food crops,
such as G. intraradices with wheat (Mohammad et al. 2004), G. mossae with lettuce
(Lactuca sativa) and onion (Allium cepa) (Garcia-Garrido et al. 1992), and
G. versiform with wheat (Luo et al. 2019). A new siderophore basidiochrome is
produced in the orchidaceous mycorrhizal fungi Ceratobasidium and Rhizoctonia
spp. (Haselwandter et al. 2006). When AMF infected Poncirus trifoliata seedlings in
loam and lime condition, there were no prominent changes in total root length as
well as specific root length in comparison to non-AMF seedlings, but shoots iron
level was noticeably greater than that of non-AMF seedlings (Treeby 1992). Addi￾tionally, siderophores produced through mycorrhizal fungi are vital for iron solubi￾lization. Watteau and Berthelin (1994) observed that ectomycorrhizal fungus Suillus
granulatus could solubilize Fe form goethite (ferric oxyhydroxide) and solubility
can be because of siderophores produced by the fungus. The widespread existence of
AMF causes the acidification of rhizosphere area due to the production of organic
acids and phenolic substances, with the enhancement of iron availability in soil
(White and Broadley 2009). Siderophores are produced by mycorrhizal varieties
such as ect-, ectendo-, and endomycorrhizal fungi with orchid mycorrhizal fungi. If
these mycorrhizal fungi can have a symbiosis with food crops, they are valuable for
iron biofortification.13 Siderophore Production in Iron Uptake and Plant Biofortification 321
13.5.2 Siderophores Produced by Dark Septate Fungi
and Root Endophytic Fungi
Dark septate fungi (DSFs) are usually studied for their role in plant growth promo￾tion, uptake of nutrition, and tolerance to abiotic and biotic stresses. Hydroxamate
siderophores are produced in DSF Phialocephala fortinii, which is an anamorphic
ascomycete belonging to the order Helotiales (Bartholdy et al. 2001). In the two
isolates of the fungus, the highest siderophore production was found at a pH in the
range of pH 4.0–4.5, and the optimal concentration of ferric iron was determined to
be between 20 and 40 μg/L iron(III) under the experimental conditions. In addition
to hydroxamate, ferrirubin and ferrichrome C are also produced in the two isolates.
Plant endophytic fungi are those fungi that can complete their life cycle partially or
entirely in an inter- and/or intracellular way in the host plant tissues and cause no
symptoms of infection in the host plants. Root endophytic fungi comprise a wide
variety of fungi having symbiosis with plants. Members of the genus Trichoderma
are usually employed in biofilm biofertilizers for plant growth and biocontrol. These
members produce and discharge several siderophores. For example, T. asperellum
(Segarra et al. 2010), T. longibrachiatum, and T. pseudokoningii synthesize
coprogen, ferricrocin with a coprogen derivative (Anke et al. 1991), T. virens
synthesizes ferricrocin (Mukherjee et al. 2018), and T. harzianum produces a new
siderophore harzianic acid (Vinale et al. 2013). Beauveria bassiana and
Metarhizium robertsii (M. anisopliae) are well-known entomopathogenic fungi,
but occasionally these two fungi develop into root endophytic fungi to increase
plant growth (Greenfield et al. 2016).
13.5.3 Siderophores Produced from PGPR
Plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria (PGPR) are very common in agriculture as
well in forestry production which increases plant growthas well as yield and is also
used as biocontrol agents (Adesemoye and Egamberdieva 2013; Durairaj et al. 2017;
Ferreira et al. 2019). Siderophores secreted by PGPR can work as plant growth
promoters, which has been even proven by evidence (Pahari et al. 2017). Members
of the genus Pseudomonas act as PGPR and they are popular for their functions.
These bacteria also produce siderophores, such as pyoverdine with pyochelin as in
the case of P. aeruginosa (Lehoux et al. 2000; Rossbach et al. 2000; Li et al. 2009)
and pyoverdine in P. fluorescens (Baysse et al. 2001; Visca et al. 2007).
P. aeruginosa also works like an opportunistic pathogen. In the bacterium,
siderophore-mediated signalling controls the production of virulence factors
(Lamont et al. 2002). In P. fluorescence, mutations in hemA and hemH genes affect
the biosynthesis of pyoverdine (Baysse et al. 2001), and the Fe-regulated PbrA
sigma factor controls the biosynthesis of the siderophore pseudobactin. Members of
the genus Bacillus are also prominent PGPR Bacillus subtilis CAS15 synthesized the322 N. Srivastava
catecholic siderophore bacillibactin and Fe inhibited siderophore productivity (May
et al. 2001; Yu et al. 2011). This bacterium also synthesizes siderophore AH18 (Woo
and Kim 2008), while B. licheniformis synthesizes a catecholic siderophore
(Temirov et al. 2003) and ferrisiderophores are produced by B. megaterium
(Arceneaux and Byers 1980). B. stratosphericus too synthesizes siderophores
(Durairaj et al. 2017). Serratia marcescens is also among the one of PGPR, and
one siderophore-deficient mutant of S. marcescens was identified in which one gene
entA homologue is inactivated (Hofte and Bakker 2007). The gene entA codes for
2,3-dihydro-2,3-dihydroxybenzoate dehydrogenase enzyme which is involved in the
biosynthetic pathway of enterobactin siderophore. The role of these siderophores
synthesized by PGPR is still unidentified for Fe uptake in host plants.
13.6 Effects of Siderophores Secreted by Beneficial
Microorganisms on Cellular Structures and Iron
Distribution in Host Plants
Siderophores produced by beneficial microorganisms influence cellular structures as
well as iron distribution in the roots of host plants. Recently, a study was done on
Pinus sylvestris using transmission electron microscopy together with energy￾dispersive X-ray spectroscopy. Mucha et al. (2019) described that metabolites
derived from the ectomycorrhizal fungus Hebeloma crustuliniforme entered and
interacted with P. sylvestris root cells and strongly altered the ultrastructure of root
cells. The triacetylfusarinine C and ferricrocin siderophore treatments noticeably
altered root cells’ ultrastructure. Meanwhile, substances produced through
H. crustuliniforme enhanced the iron level in the cell wall, cytoplasm, mitochon￾drion, nucleus, and the vacuole of host cells. There was almost 23 and 15 times
enhancement in iron in the cell wall and cytoplasm, respectively. When PGPRs
Arthrobacter sulfonivorans DS-68 and Arthrobacter sp. DS-179 infected wheat
seedlings, clear alterations in root anatomy were observed (Singh et al. 2018a).
The endodermis, cortical region, root hair extension, xylem and xylem vessels,
pericycle, and vascular bundles were more distinct and thicker in comparison to
control. These results oncluded that mycorrhizal fungi, as well as PGPR, increased
iron uptake of host plants through the production of siderophores with ultrastructural
alterations in host root cells. The same type of study is essential for food crops such
as maize, rice, and barley to understand in a better way the processes by which
mycorrhizal fungi, as well as PGPR, enhance iron uptake together with the
biofortification of food crops. Taken together, beneficial microorganisms increase
iron uptake through their host plants. Siderophore-secreting systems in beneficial
microorganisms have shown their capability in increasing iron bioavailability to
plants and thereby reducing iron fertilizer application. Moreover, beneficial micro￾organisms can also be employed for increased phytoremediation of iron polluted13 Siderophore Production in Iron Uptake and Plant Biofortification 323
soils (Guo et al. 2013; Abbaszadeh-Dahaji et al. 2016; Mishra et al. 2016; Sut et al.
2016; Liu et al. 2021).
13.7 Conclusion
It can be concluded that food-dependent crops with increased micronutrients level
are needed worldwide for removing hidden hunger. Plant-associated microorgan￾isms exist in the soil and root interface and increase uptake of macro- and
micronutrients for plant life. Several microbes proficient in the production of
siderophore were considered for improving iron in food crops. Microbial inoculants
can play a useful role in biofortification and help in decreasing dependency on
expensive strategies such as agronomic involvement and genetic modification for
increasing micronutrient level in the edible portions of crops. Microbes possess
several plant growth stimulating characters as well as various nutrient acquiring
mechanisms that can be utilized for the formulation of the biofortification approach.
Fe-biofortified plants can be a good source of iron to fulfill the daily needs of human
populations and can prevent the diseases caused by iron defciencies.
References
Abaid-Ullah M, Hassan MN, Jamil M, Brader G, Shah MKN, Sessitsch A, Hafeez FY (2015) Plant
growth promoting rhizobacteria: an alternate way to improve yield and quality of wheat
(Triticum aestivum). Int J Agric Biol 17:51–60
Abbaszadeh-Dahaji P, Omidvari M, Ghorbanpour M (2016) Increasing phytoremediation effi￾ciency of heavy metal-contaminated soil using PGPR for sustainable agriculture. In: Plant￾microbe interaction: an approach to sustainable agriculture. Springer, Singapore, pp 187–204
Adesemoye AO, Egamberdieva D (2013) Beneficial effects of plant growth-promoting
rhizobacteria on improved crop production: prospects for developing economies. In:
Maheshwari D, Saraf M, Aeron A (eds) Bacteria in agrobiology: crop productivity. Springer,
Berlin, pp 45–63
Ahemad M, Kibret M (2014) Mechanisms and applications of plant growth-promoting
rhizobacteria: current perspective. J King Saud Univ Sci 26(1):1–20
Anke H, Kinn J, Bergquist KE, Sterner O (1991) Production of siderophores by strains of the genus
Trichoderma. Biol Met 4(3):176–180
Arceneaux JE, Byers BR (1980) Ferrisiderophore reductase activity in Bacillus megaterium. J Bact
141:715–721
Bartholdy B, Berreck M, Haselwandter K (2001) Hydroxamate siderophore synthesis by
Phialocephala fortinii, a typical dark septate fungal root endophyte. Biometals 14:33–42
Baysse C, Matthijs S, Pattery T, Cornelis P (2001) Impact of mutations in hemA and hemH genes
on pyoverdine production by Pseudomonas fluorescens ATCC17400. FEMS Micro Lett 205(1):
57–63
Benoist BD, McLean E, Andersson M, Rogers L (2008) Iodine deficiency in 2007: global progress
since 2003. Food Nutr Bull 29(3):195–202
Bersamin A (2008) Nutrition and health info sheet: iron and iron deficiency anemia. UCANR
Publications, pp 1–6Das A, Prasad R, Srivastava A, Giang PH, Bhatnagar K, Varma A (2007) Fungal siderophores:
structure, functions and regulations. In: Varma A, Chincholkar SB (eds) Microbial siderophores,
vol 12. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pp 1–42
324 N. Srivastava
Boukhalfa H, Crumbliss AL (2002) Chemical aspects of siderophore mediated iron transport.
Biometals 15(4):325–339
Cakmak I (2008) Enrichment of cereal grains with zinc: agronomic or genetic biofortification? Plant
Soil 302(1–2):1–17
Carvalho SM, Vasconcelos MW (2013) Producing more with less: strategies and novel technolo￾gies for plant-based food biofortification. Food Res Int 54(1):961–971
Chhabra S, Hogan J, Ryan D, Burke J, Brazil D, Dowling D (2010) Analysis of microbial
communities under long-term conventional and reduced-input management of tillage soil. In:
Vilas AM (ed) Microorganisms in industry and environment, from scientific and industrial
research to consumer products. World Scientific Publications, Singapore, pp 8–11. https://doi.
org/10.1142/9789814322119_0002. ISBN: 978-981-4322-10-2
Chhabra S, Brazil D, Morrissey J, Burke J, O’Gara F, Dowling DN (2013) Fertilization manage￾ment affects the alkaline phosphatase bacterial community in barley rhizosphere soil. Biol Fert
Soils 49:31–39. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00374-012-0693-2
de Santiago A, Quintero JM, Avilés M, Delgado A (2011) Effect of Trichoderma asperellum strain
T34 on iron, copper, manganese, and zinc uptake by wheat grown on a calcareous medium.
Plant Soil 342(1–2):97–104
Desai A, Archana G (2011) Role of siderophores in crop improvement. In: Bacteria in agrobiology:
plant nutrient management. Springer, New York, pp 109–139
Durairaj K, Velmurugan P, Park JH, Chang WS, Park YJ, Senthilkumar P, Choi K-M, Lee J-H, Oh
BT (2017) Potential for plant biocontrol activity of isolated Pseudomonas aeruginosa and
Bacillus stratosphericus strains against bacterial pathogens acting through both induced plant
resistance and direct antagonism. FEMS Micro Lett 364(23):fnx225
Ferreira CM, Soares HM, Soares EV (2019) Promising bacterial genera for agricultural practices: an
insight on plant growth-promoting properties and microbial safety aspects. Sci Total Env 682:
779–799
Ganz T (2018) Iron and infection. Int J Hematol 107(1):7–15. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12185-017-
2366-2
García-Garrido JM, García-Romera I, Ocampo JA (1992) Cellulase production by the vesicular–
arbuscular mycorrhizal fungus Glomus mosseae (Nicol. & Gerd.) Gerd. and Trappe. New
Phytol 121(2):221–226
Garcia-Casal MN, Peña-Rosas JP, Pachón H, De-Regil LM, Tablante EC, Flores-Urrutia MC
(2016) Staple crops biofortified with increased micronutrient content: effects on vitamin and
mineral status, as well as health and cognitive function in the general population. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 8
Glick BR, Holguin G, Patten CL, Penrose DM (1999) Biochemical and genetic mechanisms used
by plant growth promoting bacteria. Imperial College Press, London
Gosal S, Karlupia A, Gosal S, Chhibba I, Varma A (2010) Biotization with Piriformospora indica
and Pseudomonas fluorescens improves survival rate, nutrient acquisition, field performance
and saponin content of micropropagated Chlorophytum sp. Indian J Biotechnol 9:289–297
Goto F, Yoshihara T, Shigemoto N, Toki S, Takaiwa F (1999) Iron fortification of rice seed by the
soybean ferritin gene. Nat Biotechnol 17:282–286
Greenfield M, Gómez-Jiménez MI, Ortiz V, Vega FE, Kramer M, Parsa S (2016) Beauveria
bassiana and Metarhizium anisopliae endophytically colonize cassava roots following soil
drench inoculation. Biol Control 95:40–48
Grusak MA (2002) Enhancing mineral content in plant food products. J Am Coll Nutr 21(suppl 3):
178S–183S
Guo W, Zhao R, Yang H, Zhao J, Zhang J (2013) Using native plants to evaluate the effect of
arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi on revegetation of iron tailings in grasslands. Biol Fert Soils 49(6):
617–62613 Siderophore Production in Iron Uptake and Plant Biofortification 325
Haselwandter K, Winkelmann G (2002) Ferricrocin—an ectomycorrhizal siderophore of
Cenococcum geophilum. Biometals 15:73–77
Haselwandter K, Passler V, Reiter S, Schmid DG, Nicholson G, Hentschel P et al (2006)
Basidiochrome—a novel siderophore of the orchidaceous mycorrhizal fungi Ceratobasidium
and Rhizoctonia spp. Biometals 19(3):335–343
Haselwandter K, Haninger G, Ganzera M (2011) Hydroxamate siderophores of the ectomycorrhizal
fungi Suillus granulatus and S. luteus. Biometals 24:153–157
Hayat R, Ahmed I, Sheirdil RA (2012) An overview of plant growth promoting rhizobacteria
(PGPR) for sustainable agriculture. In: Crop production for agricultural improvement. Springer,
New York, pp 557–579
Hindu V, Palacios-Rojas N, Babu R, Suwarno WB, Rashid Z, Usha R, Saykhedkar GR, Nair SK
(2018) Identification and validation of genomic regions influencing kernel zinc and iron in
maize. Theor Appl Genet 131:1443–1457
Hofte M, Bakker PAHM (2007) Competition for iron and induced systemic resistance by
siderophores of plant growth promoting rhizobacteria. In: Varma A, Chincholkar SB (eds)
Microbial siderophores. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pp 121–133
Kennedy G, Nantel G, Shetty P (2003) The scourge of “hidden hunger”: global dimensions of
micronutrient deficiencies. Food Nutr Agric 32:8–16
Khalid S, Asghar HN, Akhtar MJ, Aslam A, Zahir ZA (2015) Biofortification of iron in chickpea by
plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria. Pak J Bot 47:1191–1194
Khan AG (2005) Role of soil microbes in the rhizospheres of plants growing on trace metal
contaminated soils in phytoremediation. J Trace Elem Med Biol 18:355–364
Khan A, Singh J, Upadhayay VK, Singh AV, Shah S (2019) Microbial biofortification: a green
technology through plant growth promoting microorganisms. In: Sustainable green technologies
for environmental management. Springer, Singapore, pp 255–269
Khush G (2003) Productivity improvements in rice. Nut Rev 61(6 Pt 2):S114–S116. https://doi.org/
10.1301/nr.2003.jun.S114
Kobayashi T, Nishizawa NK (2012) Iron uptake, translocation, and regulation in higher plants.
Annu Rev Plant Biol 63:131–152
Kumar S, Hash C, Nepolean T, Mahendrakar M, Satyavathi C, Singh G, Rathore A, Yadav R,
Gupta R, Srivastava R (2018) Mapping grain iron and zinc content quantitative trait loci in an
Iniadi-derived immortal population of pearl millet. Genes 9(5):24
Lamont IL, Beare PA, Ochsner U, Vasil AI, Vasil ML (2002) Siderophore-mediated signaling
regulates virulence factor production in Pseudomonas aeruginosa. PNAS 99(10):7072–7077
Lehoux DE, Sanschagrin F, Levesque RC (2000) Genomics of the 35-kb pvd locus and analysis of
novel pvdIJK genes implicated in pyoverdine biosynthesis in Pseudomonas aeruginosa. FEMS
Micro Lett 190(1):141–146
Li W, Lyte M, Freestone PP, Ajmal A, Colmer-Hamood JA, Hamood AN (2009) Norepinephrine
represses the expression of toxA and the siderophore genes in Pseudomonas aeruginosa. FEMS
Micro Lett 299(1):100–109
Liu QQ, Yao QH, Wang HM, Gu MH (2004) Endosperm-specific expression of the ferritin gene in
transgenic rice (Oryza sativa L.) results in increased iron content of milling rice. Yi Chuan Xue
Bao 31:518–524
Liu C, Ye Y, Liu J, Pu Y, Wu C (2021) Iron biofortification of crop food by symbiosis with
beneficial microorganisms. J Plant Nut 44(18):2793–2810
Lucca P, Hurrel R, Potrykus I (2002) Fighting iron deficiency anemia with iron-rich rice. J Am Coll
Nutr 3:184S–190S
Luo W, Li J, Ma X, Niu H, Hou S, Wu F (2019) Effect of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi on uptake of
selenate, selenite, and selenomethionine by roots of winter wheat. Plant Soil 438(1):71–83
May JJ, Wendrich TM, Marahiel MA (2001) The dhb operon of bacillus subtilis encodes the
biosynthetic template for the catecholic siderophore 2,3-dihydroxybenzoate-glycine-threonine
trimeric ester bacillibactin. J Biol Chem 276(10):7209–7217326 N. Srivastava
Mayer JE, Pfeiffer WH, Beyer P (2008) Biofortified crops to alleviate micronutrient malnutrition.
Cur Opin Plant Biol 11(2):166–170
McLean E, Cogswell M, Egli I, Wojdyla D, de Benoist B (2009) Worldwide prevalence of anaemia,
WHO vitamin and mineral nutrition information system, 1993-2005. Public Health Nutr 12:
444–454
Mishra PK, Bisht SC, Ruwari P, Joshi GK, Singh G, Bisht JK, Bhatt JC (2011) Bioassociative effect
of cold tolerant Pseudomonas spp. and Rhizobium leguminosarum-PR1 on iron acquisition,
nutrient uptake and growth of lentil (Lens culinaris L.). Eur J Soil Biol 47:35–43
Mishra V, Gupta A, Kaur P, Singh S, Singh N, Gehlot P, Singh J (2016) Synergistic effects of
Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi and plant growth promoting rhizobacteria in bioremediation of
iron contaminated soils. Int J Phytoremediation 18(7):697–703
Mohammad A, Mitra B, Khan AG (2004) Effects of sheared-root inoculum of Glomus intraradices
on wheat grown at different phosphorus levels in the field. Agri Eco Env 103(1):245–249
Mori S (1999) Iron acquisition by plants. Curr Opin Plant Biol 2(3):250–253
Mucha J, Gabała E, Zadworny M (2019) The effects of structurally different siderophores on the
organelles of Pinus sylvestris root cells. Planta 249:1747–1760
Mukherjee PK, Hurley JF, Taylo JT, Puckhaber L, Lehner S, Druzhinina I, Schumacher R,
Kenerley CM (2018) Ferricrocin, the intracellular siderophore of Trichoderma virens, is
involved in growth, conidiation, gliotoxin biosynthesis and induction of systemic resistance in
maize. Biochem Biophy Res Comm 505(2):606–661
Murgia I, Arosio P, Tarantino D, Soave C (2012) Biofortification for combating ‘hidden hunger’ for
iron. Trends Plant Sci 17(1):47–55
Nair KM, Iyengar V (2009) Iron content, bioavailability and factors affecting iron status of Indians.
Ind J Med Res 130(5):634–645
Pahari A, Pradhan A, Nayak SK, Mishra BB (2017) Bacterial siderophore as a plant growth
promoter. In: Patra J, Vishnuprasad C, Das G (eds) Micro Biotech. Springer, Singapore, pp
163–180
Patel P, Bhatt S, Patel H, Saraf M (2020) Iron chelating bacteria: a carrier for biofortification and
plant growth promotion. J Biol Studies 3(3):111–120
Pii Y, Mimmo T, Tomasi N, Terzano R, Cesco S, Crecchio C (2015) Microbial interactions in the
rhizosphere: beneficial influences of plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria on nutrient acquisi￾tion process. A review. Biol Fertil Soils 51(4):403–415
Prabhu V, Biolchini PF, Boyer GL (1996) Detection and identification of ferricrocin produced by
ectendomycorrhizal fungi in the genus Wilcoxina. Biometals 9(3):229–234
Prasad R, Kumar M, Varma A (2015) Role of PGPR in soil fertility and plant health. In:
Egamberdieva D, Shrivastava S, Varma A (eds) Plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria
(PGPR) and medicinal plants. Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp 247–260
Prasad B, Kumar A, Singh AV, Kumar A (2016) Plant growth and seed yield attributes as
influenced by bacterial isolates under glass house. Prog Res 11(IV):2573–2576
Prasanna R, Nain L, Rana A, Shivay YS (2016) Biofortification with microorganisms: present
status and future challenges. In: Singh U, Praharaj C, Singh S, Singh N (eds) Biofortification of
food crops. Springer, New Delhi. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-81-322-2716-8_19
Ramesh SA, Choimes S, Schachtman DP (2004) Over-expression of an Arabidopsis zinc trans￾porter in Hordeum vulgare increases short term zinc uptake after zinc deprivation and seed zinc
content. Plant Mol Biol 54:373–385. https://doi.org/10.1023/B:PLAN.0000036370.70912.34
Ramesh A, Sharma SK, Sharma MP, Yadav N, Joshi OP (2014) Inoculation of zinc solubilizing
Bacillus aryabhattai strains for improved grand wheat cultivated in Vertisols of Central India.
Appl Soil Ecol 73:87–96
Rana A, Joshi M, Prasanna R, Shivay YS, Nain L (2012a) Biofortification of wheat through
inoculation of plant growth promoting rhizobacteria and cyanobacteria. J Soil Biol 50:118–126
Rana A, Saharan B, Nain L, Prasanna R, Shivay YS (2012b) Enhancing micronutrient uptake and
yield of wheat through bacterial PGPR consortia. Soil Sci Plant Nutr 58(5):573–58213 Siderophore Production in Iron Uptake and Plant Biofortification 327
Reiter B, Pfeifer U, Schwab H, Sessitsch A (2002) Response of endophytic bacterial communities
in potato plants to infection with Erwinia carotovora subsp. atroseptica. Appl Environ Microbiol
68:2261–2268
Rengel Z, Batten GD, Crowley DE (1999) Agronomic approaches for improving the micronutrient
density in edible portions of field crops. Field Crop Res 60:27–40
Römheld V, Marschner H (1986) Evidence for a specific uptake system for iron phytosiderophores
in roots of grasses. Plant Physiol 80(1):175–180
Rossbach S, Wilson TL, Kukuk ML, Carty HA (2000) Elevated zinc induces siderophore biosyn￾thesis genes and a zntA-like gene in Pseudomonas fluorescens. FEMS Micro Lett 191(1):61–70
Saha R, Saha N, Donofrio RS, Bestervelt LL (2012) Microbial siderophores: a mini review. J Basic
Microbiol 52:1–15
Schalk IJ, Hannauer M, Braud A (2011) New roles for bacterial siderophores in metal transport and
tolerance. Environ Microbiol 13:2844–2854
Segarra G, Casanova E, Aviles M, Trillas I (2010) Trichoderma asperellum strain T34 controls
Fusarium wilt disease in tomato plants in soilless culture through competition for iron. Micro
Eco 59:141–149
Shah S, Ramanan VV, Singh AV, Singh AK (2018) Potential and prospect of plant growth
promoting rhizobacteria in lentil. In: Singh AK et al. (eds) Scientific lentil production. Satish
Serial Publishing House, Delhi
Shaikh S, Saraf M (2017) Biofortification of Triticum aestivum through the inoculation of zinc
solubilizing plant growth promoting rhizobacteria in field experiment. Biocat Agri Biotech 9:
120–126. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bcab.2016.12.008
Sharma SK, Sharma MP, Ramesh A, Joshi OP (2012) Characterization of zinc-solubilizing Bacillus
isolates and their potential to influence zinc assimilation in soybean seeds. J Microbiol
Biotechnol 22:352–359. https://doi.org/10.4014/jmb.1106.05063
Sharma A, Shankhdhar D, Shankhdhar SC (2013) Enhancing grain iron content of rice by the
application of plant growth promoting rhizobacteria. Plant Soil Environ 59(2):89–94
Sheftela AD, Mason AB, Ponka P (2011) The long history of iron in the universe and in health and
disease. Biochim Biophys Acta Gen Subj 1820(3):161–187
Singh AV, Goel R (2015) Plant growth promoting efficiency of Chryseobacterium sp. PSR10 on
finger millet (Eleusine coracana). J Global Biosci 4(6):2569–2575
Singh AV, Chandra R, Reeta G (2013) Phosphate solubilization by Chryseobacterium sp. and their
combined effect with N and P fertilizers on plant growth promotion. Arch Agro Soil Sci 59
(5):641–651
Singh AV, Prasad B (2014) Enhancement of plant growth, nodulation and seed yield through plant
growth promoting Rhizobacteria in lentil (Lens culinaris Medik cv. VL125). Int J Curr
Microbiol Appl Sci 3(6):614–622
Singh D, Prasanna R (2020) Potential of microbes in the biofortification of Zn and Fe in dietary food
grains. A review. Agr Sustain Dev 40:15
Singh J, Singh AV (2017) Microbial strategies for enhanced phytoremediation of heavy metals
contaminated soils. In: Bharagava RN (ed) Environmental pollutants and their bioremediation
approaches. Taylor & Francis, London, pp 249–264
Singh AV, Agarwal A, Goel R (2010a) Comparative phosphate solubilization efficiency of two
bacterial isolates and their effect on Cicer arietinum seeds in indigenous and alternative soil
system. Environ Ecol 28:1979–1983
Singh AV, Prasad B, Shah S (2010b) Screening plant growth promotory rhizobacteria for improv￾ing seed germination and seedling vigor of lentil (Lens culinaris Medik). Environ Ecol 28:
2055–2058
Singh AV, Shah S, Prasad B (2010c) Effect of phosphate solubilizing bacteria on plant growth
promotion and nodulation in soybean (Glycine max (L.) Merr). J Hill Agri 1(1):35–39
Singh AV, Prasad B, Shah S (2011) Influence of phosphate solubilizing bacteria for enhancement of
plant growth and seed yield in lentil. J Crop Weed 7(1):1–4328 N. Srivastava
Singh J, Singh AV, Prasad B, Shah S (2017a) Sustainable agriculture strategies of wheat
biofortification through microorganisms. In: Kumar A, Kumar A, Prasad B (eds) Wheat a
premier food crop. Kalyani Publishers, New Delhi
Singh D, Rajawat MVS, Kaushik R, Prasanna R, Saxena AK (2017b) Beneficial role of endophytes
in biofortification of Zn in wheat genotypes varying in nutrient use efficiency grown in soils
sufficient and deficient in Zn. Plant Soil 416(1–2):107–116
Singh D, Geat N, Rajawat MVS, Mahajan MM, Prasanna R, Singh S, Kaushik R, Singh RN,
Kumar K, Saxena AK (2018a) Deciphering the mechanisms of endophyte-mediated
biofortification of Fe and Zn in wheat. J Plant Growth Regul 37(1):174–182
Singh D, Geat N, Rajawat MVS, Prasanna R, Kar A, Singh AM, Saxena AK (2018b) Prospecting
endophytes from different Fe or Zn accumulating wheat genotypes for their influence as
inoculants on plant growth, yield, and micronutrient content. Ann Microbiol 68(12):815–833
Singh AV, Prasad B, Goel R (2018c) Plant growth promoting efficiency of phosphate solubilizing
Chryseobacterium sp. PSR 10 with different doses of N and P fertilizers on lentil (Lens culinaris
var. PL-5) growth and yield. Int J Curr Microbiol App Sci 7(05):2280–2289
Sut M, Boldt-Burisch K, Raab T (2016) Possible evidence for contribution of arbuscular mycor￾rhizal fungi (AMF) in phytoremediation of iron-cyanide (Fe-CN) complexes. Ecotoxicology 25:
1260–1269
Suzuki M, Takahashi M, Tsukamoto T, Watanabe S, Matsuhashi S, Yazaki J, Kishimoto N,
Kikuchi S, Nakanishi H, Mori S, Nishizawa NK (2006) Biosynthesis and secretion of mugineic
acid family phytosiderophores in zinc-deficient barley. Plant J 48(1):85–97
Temirov YV, Esikova TZ, Kashparov IA, Balashova TA, Vinokurov LM, Alakhov YB (2003) A
catecholic siderophore produced by the thermoresistant Bacillus licheniformis VK21 strain. Rus
J Bio Chem 29(6):542–549
Tian X, Lu X, Mai W, Yang X, Li S (2008) Effect of calcium carbonate content on availability of
zinc in soil and zinc and iron uptake by wheat plants. Soil 40(3):425–431
Treeby MT (1992) The role of mycorrhizal fungi and non-mycorrhizal micro-organisms in iron
nutrition of citrus. Soil Biol Biochem 24(9):857–864
Upadhayay VK, Singh AV, Pareek N (2018) An insight in decoding the multifarious and splendid
role of microorganisms in crop biofortification. Int J Curr Microbiol App Sci 7(06):2407–2418
Vasconcelos M, Datta K, Oliva N, Khalekuzzaman M, Torrizo L, Krishnan S, Oliveira M, Goto F,
Datta SK (2003) Enhanced iron and zinc accumulation in transgenic rice with the ferritin gene.
Plant Sci 164:71–378
Velu G, Crossa J, Singh RP, Hao Y, Dreisigacker S, Perez-Rodriguez P, Joshi AK, Chatrath R,
Gupta V, Balasubramaniam A, Tiwari C (2016) Genomic prediction for grain zinc and iron
concentrations in spring wheat. Theor Appl Genet 129(8):1595–1605
Vinale F, Nigro M, Sivasithamparam K, Flematti G, Ghisalberti EL, Ruocco M, Varlese R,
Marra R, Lanzuise S, Eid A, Lorito M (2013) Harzianic acid: a novel siderophore from
Trichoderma harzianum. FEMS Microbiol Lett 347(2):123–129
Visca P, Imperi F, Lamont IL (2007) Pyoverdine synthesis and its regulation in fluorescent
Pseudomonads. In: Varma A, Chincholkar SB (eds) Microbial siderophores. Springer-Verlag,
Berlin, pp 135–163
Watteau F, Berthelin J (1994) Mineral dissolution of iron and aluminium from soil minerals:
efficiency and specificity of hydroxamate siderophores compared to aliphatic acids. Eur J Soil
Biol 30:1–9
Weyens N, Beckers B, Schellingen K, Ceulemans R, Croes S, Janssen J, Haenen S, Witters N,
Vangronsveld J (2013) Plant associated bacteria and their role in the success or failure of metal
phytoextraction projects: first observations of a field related experiment. Microbial Biotech 6:
288–299
White PJ, Broadley MR (2009) Biofortiication of crops with seven mineral elements often lacking
in human diets—iron, zinc, copper, calcium, magnesium, selenium and iodine. New Phytol 182:
49–84
Woo S-M, Kim S-D (2008) Structural identification of siderophore (AH18) from Bacillus subtilis
AH18, a biocontrol agent of Phytophthora blight disease in red-pepper. Korean J Microbiol
36(4):326–33513 Siderophore Production in Iron Uptake and Plant Biofortification 329
World Health Organization (2002) The world health report 2002—reducing risks, promoting
healthy life. World Health Organization, Geneva
Yao T, Yasmin S, Malik KA, Hafeez FY (2008) Potential role of Rhizobacteria isolated from
Northwestern China for enhancing wheat and oat yield. J Agri Sci 146(01):49–56. https://doi.
org/10.1017/S0021859607007356
Yip R (2002) Prevention and control of iron deficiency: policy and strategy issues. J Nutr 132(4):
802–805
Yu X, Ai C, Xin L, Zhou G (2011) The siderophore-producing bacterium, Bacillus subtilis CAS15,
has a biocontrol effect on Fusarium wilt and promotes the growth of pepper. Eur J Soil Biol
47(2):138–145
Zaidi A, Khan MS, Amil MD (2003) Interactive effect of rhizotrophic microorganisms on yield and
nutrient uptake of chickpea (Cicer arietinum L.). Eur J Agron 19(1):15–21
Zimmermann MB, Hurrell RF (2007) Nutritional iron deficiency. Lancet 370(9586):511–520331
Chapter 14
Plant Microbiome Diversity and Potential
for Crops and Sustainable Agriculture
Nazia Rifat Zaman, Farhana Tasnim Chowdhury, Haseena Khan,
and Mohammad Riazul Islam
Abstract Since the last few decades plants are not treated as single entities, rather
they are considered with association of different microbial communities known as
plant microbiome. These microbiomes are now known an extension of a plant
genome. Diversity of this microbial population is quite large including different
classes of bacteria, archaea, and fungi. They always preserve symbiotic relation with
a host plant by providing different growth promoting factors. It is well established
that plant microbiota are structured mainly by different plant compartments (e.g.,
different plant organs, and diverse between rhizosphere, phyllosphere, and
endosphere). These plant microbial groups show potential functions related to
probiotics and plant protection. They can help a plant with germination and growth,
as well as disease prevention, biotic, and abiotic stress resistance. Microbial diversity
has been discovered as an important role in disease prevention and could be used as a
biomarker in plant protection measures. The study of plant–microbiome interaction
has resulted in a paradigm shift in our knowledge of the microbiome’s involvement
in plant health and disease, with significant implications for biocontrol and growth
promotion.
Keywords Plant microbiome · Endophyte · Sustainable agriculture · Biofertilizers ·
Bioinoculant
N. R. Zaman
Department of Biochemsitry, Primeasia University, Dhaka, Bangladesh
F. T. Chowdhury · H. Khan · M. R. Islam (*)
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, University
of Dhaka, Dhaka, Bangladesh
e-mail: mriazulislam@du.ac.bd
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2023
S. Chhabra et al. (eds.), Plant Microbiome for Plant Productivity and Sustainable
Agriculture, Microorganisms for Sustainability 37,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-19-5029-2_14332 N. R. Zaman et al.
14.1 Introduction
Increase of global food production has been greatly disrupted due to rapid industri￾alization, anthropogenic interventions, climate change events, overgrazing, and
extensive uses of agrochemicals/fertilizers/pesticides (Raza et al. 2019). These
problems are getting worse with shrinking agricultural land, deterioration of soil
quality and nutrition profile, and recurring challenges due to several biotic and
abiotic stresses. The UN Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) has projected
to increase the food production 70% more by 2050 to meet the global needs of the
predicted population of nine billion people on earth (www.fao.org). To meet this
challenge a low-cost sustainable agro-ecosystem technology should be adopted.
For the last few decades, lots of approaches have been proposed to improve crop
production. Among them, the use of microorganisms to improve soil health, plant
growth has got much attention compared to the use of conventional chemical
stimulants and pesticides. These microorganisms are plant-associated microbes
residing in soil or plant tissues and commonly known as plant microbiome (Singh
et al. 2019). Different studies have shown that, use of plant microbiome has a great
potentiality in mitigating the challenges currently faced in agriculture. The microbial
components of a plant in the rhizosphere, phyllosphere, and endosphere have
important functions supporting plant growth and health (Vorholt 2012). Plant
microbiota consist of different types of organisms including fungi, archaea, and
bacteria. A deeper knowledge of the plant as a meta-organism and how plants can
benefit from their microbial partners can be gained by revealing the functioning of
plant–microbe interactions and elements involved in community assembly (Hardoim
et al. 2015; Hacquard 2016). Multiple factors influence the community structure and
dynamics of a host-associated microbial system, including host genotypes, surround￾ing environment, host–microbe, and microbe–microbe interactions. It has been
reported that the existence of diverse and well-balanced microbiome plays a crucial
role in crop improvement program by mitigating abiotic and biotic stress response
and management of nutrients supporting plant growth and productivity, and there￾fore reduces the need for chemical fertilizers and pesticides (Compant et al. 2019).
In this chapter, we have discussed the diversity of microbial populations residing
in plants, their secreted compounds used for host–microbe interactions, how plant
gets benefited through this relation, and their potential uses to increase crop
productions.
14.2 Plant Microbiome Diversity
There have been a number of studies identifying individual factors that drive the
microbiome composition of plants and their associated organisms and environments.
Plant microbiome is known to be mostly structured by plant compartments (e.g.,
different plant organs, and diverse between endosphere and ectosphere) (Trivedi14 Plant Microbiome Diversity and Potential for Crops and Sustainable Agriculture 333
Fig. 14.1 Plant microbiome diversity
et al. 2020). The makeup of both plant and soil microbiomes has been demonstrated
to be influenced by plant genotype and developmental phases (Wagner et al. 2016).
Plant microbiome composition has been demonstrated to be influenced by soil
microbiome composition (Cordovez et al. 2019), and plant pathogens and herbivores
produce compositional shifts in plant-associated microbial communities (Lareen
et al. 2016). However, we still know little about the relative strength of these factors
in shaping plant microbiomes.
Despite the plant microbiota’s taxonomic and functional overlap (Bai et al. 2015),
distinct microbiomes have been found for each plant organ and species (Vorholt
2012; Philippot et al. 2013; Hardoim et al. 2015) and plant species (Berg and Smalla
2009) (Fig. 14.1). The plant’s enrichment of microbes is not a random, but rather
deliberate. The function of both chemo-attractants and repellents is influenced by
differences in plant root exudates and plant components (Badri and Vivanco 2009).
Plant defense signaling plays a part in these processes as well (Doornbos et al. 2012).
Multi-omics methods provide significantly more detailed insights into the organiza￾tion of plant-associated microbial communities, extending and supplementing
existing information (Berg et al. 2016; Jansson and Baker 2016). In addition, the334 N. R. Zaman et al.
tools revealed novel roles of the plant microbiome as well as ecological
interconnections.
14.2.1 Rhizosphere Microbiome
The diversified habitat created by soil texture encourages the coexistence of a vast
variety of microorganisms, including bacteria, archaea, fungus, oomycetes, viruses,
and protists, all of which interact in complex trophic exchange networks (Compant
et al. 2019; Wei et al. 2019b). Microorganisms in the rhizosphere can be beneficial or
harmful to the host plant’s health (Yu et al. 2019). Plant development can be aided
by beneficial bacteria (including mutualistic microbes) that increase food availabil￾ity, produce plant hormones, and improve tolerance to biotic and abiotic challenges
(Haney et al. 2015; Jacoby et al. 2017; Yin et al. 2021).
Mycorrhizae, rhizobium bacteria, plant growth promoting rhizobacteria (PGPR),
and biocontrol microorganisms are the most often explored beneficial rhizosphere
species (Fig. 14.1). According to Gans, Wolinsky, and Dunbar (Gans et al. 2005),
1 g of soil might contain over a million different bacterial genomes. The potato
rhizosphere yielded 55,121 OTUs (operational taxonomic units), according to
İnceoğlu et al. (2011). The most common bacteria in the rhizosphere belong to the
Acidobacteria, Proteobacteria, Planctomycetes, Actinobacteria, Bacteroidetes, and
Firmicutes families (Bulgarelli et al. 2015; Uroz et al. 2010). The microbial com￾munity composition of bulk soil (soil not linked to the plant root) and rhizosphere
soil did not differ significantly as found in several investigations (Lundberg et al.
2012; Schlaeppi and Bulgarelli 2015).
Mycorrhizal fungi are widespread in the rhizosphere ecosystem, having been
discovered in over 200,000 plant species and believed to be associated with over
80% of all plants (van der Heijden et al. 2015). By controlling nitrogen and carbon
cycles, these mycorrhizae root connections have a significant impact in land eco￾systems. Mycorrhizae are vital to plant health because they provide up to 80% of the
N (nitrogen) and P (phosphorus) that plants require.
14.2.2 Phyllosphere Microbiome
The phyllosphere (the above-ground surface of plants) is home to a diverse range of
microorganisms, and this phyllosphere microbiome interacts with the host plant,
influencing its health and function. The phyllosphere’s environment is more
dynamic than the rhizosphere’s and endosphere’s. Microbial colonists are exposed
to diurnal and seasonal changes in temperature, humidity, and radiation. Further￾more, these environmental factors influence plant physiology (photosynthesis, res￾piration, water absorption, and so on) as well as microbiome composition indirectly.
Microorganisms in the phyllosphere, mostly bacteria and fungus, can function as14 Plant Microbiome Diversity and Potential for Crops and Sustainable Agriculture 335
mutualists, boosting plant growth and stress tolerance, commensals, utilizing the leaf
habitat for their own development and reproduction, or antagonistic pathogens
(Gong and Xin 2021).
Bacterial assemblages in the phyllosphere are often less species rich than those in
the rhizosphere or soil (Knief et al. 2012). On the leaf surface, alpha-proteobacteria
are extremely abundant, and these bacteria serve a variety of ecological activities
(Ruinen 1965; Innerebner et al. 2011) (Fig. 14.1). Gamma-proteobacteria have also
been found in phyllosphere bacterial community composition surveys (Redford et al.
2010; Vorholt 2012). Proteobacteria have a wide range of metabolic capabilities, and
bacteria that do methyltrophy, nitrification, nitrogen fixation, or anoxygenic photo￾synthesis are frequently found in the phyllosphere (Fürnkranz et al. 2008; Atamna￾Ismaeel et al. 2012; Watanabe et al. 2016). Bacteroidetes and Actinobacteria are the
next most prevalent bacterial lineages, and both of these phyla are also substantially
represented in the rhizosphere (Lauber et al. 2009; Philippot et al. 2013).
Fungi have a vital role in the microbiota of the phyllosphere. The fungal com￾munity is made up of organisms that play a wide range of ecological tasks, and
whose population levels vary according to the growth season and, eventually, leaf
senescence (Morris and Kinkel 2002). Before senescence, Ascomycota molds are
frequently the dominating fungus on the leaf surface (Bashir et al. 2022; Abdelfattah
et al. 2015). Yeasts from the Ascomycota and Basidiomycota families are also
notable fungi (Dickinson 2012). Following leaf senescence, filamentous fungi dom￾inate over the fungal microbiome (Voříšková and Baldrian 2013).
14.2.3 Endosphere Microbiome
The plant endosphere is inhabited by complex microbial communities and microor￾ganisms known as endophytes, which live in the plant interior for at least part of their
lives. They host a diversified microbiota in several compartments and tissues,
including vegetative organs such as roots, stems, and leaves, as well as reproduc￾tive/disseminating organs (flowers, fruits/seeds). Bacteria and, to a lesser extent,
Archaea, play a key role in endosphere communities. The plant immune system may
be able to regulate endophyte abundance and maintain the most “plant-friendly”
bacterial density in various organs (Liu et al. 2017). The root bacterial microbiome
has the greatest diversity of microorganisms (although not necessarily) (Amend et al.
2019). Acidobacteria, Verrucomicrobia, Bacteroidetes, Proteobacteria,
Planctomycetes, and Actinobacteria are the most commonly found taxa, and the
majority of them may also be found in the rhizosphere (Hardoim et al. 2015)
(Fig. 14.1). Other microorganisms, such as fungi or mycorrhizae-like fungi, as
well as microbial interactions, might affect the diversity of the root endophytic
microbiota (Deveau et al. 2018). Several bacterial taxa, including Azoarcus,
Gluconacetobacter, Herbaspirillum, and Klebsiella spp., have been shown to
occupy predominantly intercellular but also intracellular regions inside stems
(Turner et al. 2013). The epidermis, xylem vessels, ovary, ovules, and stigma, as336 N. R. Zaman et al.
well as, other organs including the floral receptacle, petal, sepal, and anthers with
their filaments, and pollen, have all been discovered to be colonized by bacteria
(Compant et al. 2011). Strains of Firmicutes, Actinobacteria, and Proteobacteria,
for example, have been isolated from these organs (Shi et al. 2010; Compant et al.
2011; Fürnkranz et al. 2012). Within the plant, the identity and diversity of the
endophytic microbiome differs between above- and below-ground tissues
(Dastogeer et al. 2020).
14.3 Plant and Soil Microbiome Interaction
Soil is an ecosystem which has the capacity to produce resources required for the
development of plants. The diverse groups of microorganisms (bacteria and fungi)
found in the soil are responsible for the decomposition of biomass and circulation of
biogenic elements. These allow for the availability of nutrients to plants making the
microbial communities in soils work as facilitators of plant processes (Pang et al.
2021). For example, they secrete hormones that change root growth; some microbes
help to uptake iron from the soil or solubilize phosphorus and make these nutrients
available to the plant. Non-pathogenic microorganisms are known to alter plant
immune responses, thereby giving protection against pathogens. Then there are the
nitrogen fixers which provide N for plant growth by converting atmospheric N2 to
NH3. Thus, co-evolution of plants with soil microorganisms serves a variety of
useful purposes. A large number of research findings have shown that, in almost all
cases, not a single microbe but rather a conglomerate of microorganisms is respon￾sible for the positive effects on plants.
The rhizosphere is a boundary between the plant roots and the soil and is
characterized by a dynamic community of microorganisms. The exudates together
with mucilages and cells which are shed from the plants influence strongly the soil
and its microbiome around the plant root (Turner et al. 2013). These microbial
populations form structured and interconnected networks. This leads to an active
communication not only between the microbes but between the plants and microbes
as well, enabled by molecular signals especially the secondary metabolites that the
plants produce (Pang et al. 2021). This cross-talk acts as the primary screen for the
microbes that inhabit the root as endophytes.
In such ecosystems, the soil health can be altered by cropping practices and
intensive land-use management, which can further impact soil functions. Earlier
studies on soil health in relation to agriculture were based on soil eco-functions that
looked into non-biological properties like the nutrient and structure of the soil. Only
in recent years have biological properties such as soil microorganism garnered
emphasis as an essential composition in soil health as well. Agricultural practices
also impact the plant microbiome composition and functions (Hartman et al. 2018)
with both negative and positive consequences on plant growth. Different cropping
systems, which include intercropping and tilling free farming, have been found to
increase the diversity of microbial population, yields in crop, and soil levels of14 Plant Microbiome Diversity and Potential for Crops and Sustainable Agriculture 337
organic carbon (Sergaki et al. 2018). Cultivation of a single crop or short rotations of
crops rapidly exhaust soil nutrients and increase plant species-specific soil pathogens
and root herbivores. This leads to a drastic decrease in crop yields. Following
microbial supplementation, some fungi were found to help plants augment resistance
against drought. Soil treatment with bacterial inoculants have helped to increase
plant tolerance to heat stress by reducing reactive oxygen species, enhanced plant
immunity and through assistance with drought stress.
Since relation between plants and soil microbes is significant for plant growth and
disease resistance, in recent years a lot of research has focused on understanding the
dynamics, assembly and functions of these microbial communities, the mechanism
of interactions and the forces that modulate the plant microbiome association.
However, the mode of action of such communications and the ways these modula￾tions are driven remain evasive. Exploiting the diverse benefits afforded by the plant
microbiome, more knowledge of this system is a viable strategy to promote sustain￾able agriculture. Understanding the key elements that determine the rhizosphere
microbiome assembly, as well as the mechanisms of reciprocal adaptation between
microbes and plants in response to changing environmental circumstances, may aid
in the identification of prospective breeding and management targets for future crops
(Sandrini et al. 2022).
Recent agricultural production strategies have given rise to the concept of “smart
agriculture.” It is based on intelligent agricultural management. Manipulation of
rhizospheric microbiota and its management strategies are now considered “smart
farming.” This involves the integration of beneficial plant microbiome traits, traits
that improve plant growth, resistance to diseases and stress tolerance leading to
sustainable agricultural production (Sandrini et al. 2022). How and to which extent
the different cropping practices permit the manipulation of soil and root microbiota
are the foci of many recent research groups. Land management and tillage intensities
influence the dominance or the connectivity between bacteria and fungi in both the
soil and the roots. Focus is now on how to define the microbiome functions that can
be manipulated through cropping practices.
Now researchers are suggesting that plant–soil feedbacks are shaped by microbial
bequests that plants leave in the soil. In bacterial communities, legacies fade away
rapidly and bacterial communities are influenced strongly by the current plant
(Hannula et al. 2021). However, both fungal and bacterial legacies are found
conserved inside the roots of the current plant species and their composition signif￾icantly correlate with plant growth. Microbial soil legacies present at the time of
plant establishment play a vital role in shaping plant growth even when these
legacies had faded away in the soil due to the growth of the current plant species.
The soil microbiome legacies have been found to be reversible and versatile.
Mendes and Raaijmakers (2015) have recently shown cross-kingdom similarities
in microbiome functions. This is truer for the root and gut microbiome, since the two
microbial communities exist under comparable conditions which are basically open
systems characterized by gradients of oxygen, water, and pH that create a whole
array of diverse niches. The microbial members of the two groups come from the
environment: food in humans and soil in plants, respectively. Both the systems are338 N. R. Zaman et al.
inhabited by a host of similar bacterial phyla (Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes,
Proteobacteria, and Actinobacteria). Research has shown that raw plant materials
are the source of some members of the gut microbiome. The microbial community of
both the gut and the root are known to synthesize essential amino acids, vitamins,
and many other secondary metabolites that modulate their host immune system: as
such, the plant and gut microbiomes can be considered as meta-organs with para￾mount importance for the health of their hosts. Furthermore, because of the food
connection, humans would benefit from consuming unprocessed organic food,
which contains beneficial bacteria as well as secondary metabolites. Research on
the integral role of microbiomes on their host’s metabolism and health should
therefore not stop at the human gut microbiome but expand to the microbiota of
plants and their function in plant growth and development.
As a result, it’s critical to better understand the activities and responsibilities of
the hundreds of distinct microbial species that interact with their hosts in a complex
network. The subject of how to create and maintain a healthy microbiome is also
crucial. Agriculture has consequences for studying microbiomes holistically rather
than one bacterium at a time (for example, utilizing tracking devices). However, in
spite of its importance, the complex, heterogenic and subterranean setting makes it
difficult to study soil microbiome. Fortuitously, emerging technologies, artificial
intelligence, advances in modeling biological systems, data interpretation are now
allowing us to understand the complex interlink between plants and microbial
community.
14.4 Microbiomes and Secreted Metabolites in Plant
Growth Promotion
Plant growth-promoting bacteria (PGPB) enhance plant development through a
variety of ways. For example, they secrete phytohormones, such as auxins that
change root growth. Some bacteria absorb iron and phosphorus, making these
minerals accessible to the plant. They can indirectly promote growth by forming a
biofilm that acts as a protective layer against pathogens or as a surface for improved
nutrient acquisition from soil (Weselowski et al. 2016). Particular non-pathogenic
microorganisms may even alter plant immune responses, thereby giving protection
against pathogens. Additionally, PGPR increase tolerance to abiotic stress in crops
such as salinity and drought (Lucke et al. 2020).
These mechanisms have been grouped into three clusters according to the plant
growth promoting effects on plant physiology. These groups are: (1) biofertilization
including biological fixation of atmospheric nitrogen, phosphate solubilization,
siderophores production, and exopolysaccharides production; (2) phytostimulation
including production of indole acetic acid, gibberellins, cytokinins, and ethylene;
and (3) biocontrol including induction of systemic resistance, competition for iron,14 Plant Microbiome Diversity and Potential for Crops and Sustainable Agriculture 339
Fig. 14.2 The role of microbial metabolites in plant growth promotion (Velivelli et al. 2014)
nutrient and space, production of antibiotics, lytic enzymes, hydrogen cyanide, and
volatile compounds (Mitter et al. 2013; Tsegay et al. 2016) (Fig. 14.2).
14.4.1 Phosphate Solubilization and Mobilization
Phosphorus is one of the vital plant nutrients essential for the proper functioning of
plants. Though soil is rich in insoluble phosphates of metal ion like iron, aluminum,
and calcium, the soluble form orthophosphate which can be absorbed by plants is
deficient which can severely restrict plant growth, development, and yield.
Applying phosphorus fertilizers in soil is the main input of inorganic P. About
75–90% of these added chemical P fertilizer is becomes fixed in soils as metal-cation
precipitation and has long-term impacts on the environment in terms of soil fertility
depletion, eutrophication, and carbon footprint (Sharma et al. 2013).
Phosphate solubilizing microbes (PSMs) are helpful bacteria that can hydrolyze
organic and inorganic insoluble phosphorus compounds into soluble P that plants
may easily absorb. PSM provides an eco-friendly and economically alternative to
phosphorus fertilizers to overcome the P scarcity (Kalayu 2019).
Several bacterial, fungal, and actinomycetes strains have been identified as PSM
for example strains of Pseudomonas, Bacillus, Rhizobium, Aspergillus, and Penicil￾lium are some known phosphate solubilizers (Table 14.1). In addition to supplying340 N. R. Zaman et al.
Table 14.1 List of potential phosphate solubilizing microorganisms (PSMs) (Kalayu 2019)
Types PSMs
Bacteria
Bacillus Bacillus circulans
Bacillus megaterium
Bacillus polymyxa; B. subtilis
Bacillus pulvifaciens
Bacillus coagulans; B. fusiformis; B. pumilus; B. chitinolyticus
Bacillus sircalmous
Pseudomonas Pseudomonas canescens
Pseudomonas putida
Pseudomonas calcis
Pseudomonas fluorescens
Pseudomonas koreensis
Pseudomonas striata
Others Thiobacillus ferrooxidans
Enterobacter cloacae
Pantoea agglomerans
Rhizobium meliloti
Rhizobium leguminosarum
Mesorhizobium mediterraneum
Burkholderia cepacia
Fungi
Aspergillus Aspergillus niger
Aspergillus clavatus
Aspergillus awamori
Aspergillus candidus; A. parasiticus; A. fumigatus; A. rugulosus
Aspergillus flavus
Aspergillus foetidus; A. nidulans; A. wentii
Aspergillus terreus
Aspergillus tubingensis
Aspergillus sydowii; A. ochraceus; A. versicolor
Penicillium Penicillium bilaii
Penicillium citrinum
Penicillium digitatum; P. lilacinum; P. balaji; P. funiculosum
Penicillium oxalicum
Penicillium simplicissimum; P. rubrum
Others Trichoderma viride
Arthrobotrys oligospora
Actinomycetes
Acinetobacter rhizosphaerae
Streptomyces albus; S. cyaneus; Streptoverticillium album
Cyanobacteria Calothrix braunii14 Plant Microbiome Diversity and Potential for Crops and Sustainable Agriculture 341
soluble P to plants, these microorganisms also promote plant growth by improving
the uptake of other nutrients, stimulating the production of some phytohormones and
helping the plant to manage biotic and abiotic stresses (Shrivastava et al. 2018; Mitra
et al. 2020).
PSMs apply different approach to make phosphorus accessible for plants to
absorb like secretion of organic acids thus lowering soil pH, enzyme production,
mineralization, and excretion of siderophores that can chelate the metal ions and
form complexes, making phosphates available for plant uptake (Zheng et al. 2017).
Organic acid production leading to lowering of soil pH and production of
chelating substances are the principal mechanisms adopted by PSB which result in
inorganic P solubilization. Alkaline soil with high pH restrict P acquisition by plants
(Zheng et al. 2017). Most Gram-negative bacteria show glucose dehydrogenase
activity that can solubilize phosphate by extracellular oxidation of glucose to
gluconic acid, when glucose is used as carbon source. The PSMs may release several
organic acids that can solubilize phosphates like citric, lactic, gluconic,
2-ketogluconic, oxalic, glyconic, acetic, malic, fumaric, succinic, tartaric, malonic,
glutaric, propionic, butyric, glyoxalic, and adipic acids; however, gluconic acid is
reported as the principal organic acid produced by phosphate solubilizing bacteria
(Kalayu 2019). Thus the PSMs have the ability to release such organic acids, through
which their hydroxyl and carboxyl groups chelate the cation bound to phosphate,
converting it to soluble forms.
Mineralization is another process for solubilizing soil phosphate (P). PSMs
mineralize soil organic P by producing phosphatases, which hydrolyze organic
forms of phosphate compounds, releasing inorganic phosphorus that will be
immobilized by plants.
14.4.2 Nitrogen Fixation
After water, nitrogen is the major factor limiting plant growth under most conditions.
Nitrogen is used to synthesize plant proteins and nucleic acids. Although, atmo￾spheric nitrogen is abundant, plants cannot use the available form (N2). Plants can
utilize if nitrogen are combined chemically with oxygen or hydrogen to form
different nitrogenous compounds. The commercially available fertilizers are nitrog￾enous compounds added to the soil in the form of ammonium (NH4
+
) and nitrate
(NO3
+
) like ammonia, nitric acid, ammonium nitrate, and urea (Ji et al. 2014).
Nitrogen is essential for plant growth and development during vegetative and
reproductive phases (Cheremisinoff 2010). For this reason common agricultural
practices make use of chemical nitrogenous fertilizers to maintain high crop yields.
PGPB retain more soil organic nitrogen and other nutrients in the plant–soil
system, thus reducing the need for fertilizers. Since N2 fixation is a prime requisite
for plant growth, N2 fixer bacteria, also called “diazotrophs” play a critical role in the
plant growth by reducing dinitrogen (N2) to ammonia (NH3) by the enzyme
nitrogenase.342 N. R. Zaman et al.
Many PGPB are capable of biological nitrogen fixation (BNF). Several bacteria
such as Azospirillum, Klebsiella, Burkholderia, Bacillus, and Pseudomonas have
been identified as PGPR through BNF, phosphate solubilization, phytohormone
production, and biological control of soil pathogens (Kuan et al. 2016; Fukami
et al. 2018a, b). Nitrogen-fixing rhizobacteria can promote plant growth; however,
the role of BNF in the promotion of plant growth has not been well documented still
(Pankievicz et al. 2015).
Nitrogen fixing organisms are generally categorized as (a) symbiotic N2 fixing
bacteria which form symbiosis with leguminous plants and non-leguminous trees
and (b) non-symbiotic (free living, associative, and endophytes) nitrogen fixing
forms. However, non-symbiotic nitrogen fixing bacteria provide only a small
amount of the fixed nitrogen to the host plant (Ahemad and Kibret 2014).
In legumes, its symbiotic soil rhizobial bacteria can provide N through biological
nitrogen fixation (BNF). However, most agricultural plants, especially grasses, lack
this ability (Charpentier and Oldroyd 2010). Endophytic nitrogen-fixing bacteria are
believed to contribute significant amounts of N to some gramineous crops such as
rice, maize, wheat, and barley (Ladha et al. 1997). Few examples of endophytic
diazotrophic bacteria are Lysinibacillus sphaericus (L1), Klebsiella pneumoniae
(S2), and Bacillus cereus (R2) reported in rice (Shabanamol et al. 2018), Pseudo￾monas aeruginosa PM389 in wheat (Amanullah and Fahad 2018), Bacillus spp. in
corn and banana (Amanullah and Fahad 2018). Endophytic diazotrophic bacteria
were also identified belonging to genera: Bacillus, Caballeronia, Paenibacillus, and
Pseudomonas in pine and spruce trees (Puri et al. 2018).
In order to reduce the excessive use of chemical nitrogenous fertilizer, agricul￾tural crops can be colonized by bacterial inoculants for a significant enhancement of
growth through BNF. BNF by PGPR has been reported to contribute up to 12–70%
of total N uptake in field crops like in maize, sugarcane, wheat, rice, and oil palm.
Generally, it has been estimated that up to 65% of N used in agriculture is contrib￾uted by biological nitrogen fixation, and it will be an increasingly key element for
more-sustainable agricultural practices in future plant-N management (Kuan et al.
2016; Fukami et al. 2018a, b); Montañez et al. 2009).
14.4.3 Potassium Solubilization and Mobilization
Potassium together with nitrogen and phosphorus is one of the most important
essential nutrients for plants and is the third key element in the standard commercial
fertilizers NPK (nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium) (Kour et al. 2020). It plays an
important role in the activation of several metabolic processes such as photosynthe￾sis, synthesis of proteins, and enzymes, as well as in resistance to diseases, pests, and
abiotic stresses (Teotia et al. 2016; Kumar et al. 2020). In addition, K is required to
activate over 80 different enzymes responsible for plant and animal processes
(Etesami et al. 2017). Since most of the soil potassium is not readily available for
uptake by the plants, potassium fertilizers majorly in the form of the muriate of14 Plant Microbiome Diversity and Potential for Crops and Sustainable Agriculture 343
potash (potassium chloride) or sulfate of potash are used to fulfill the needs of the
plants (Scherer 2005).
A wide range of potassium-solubilizing microbes (KSM) have been reported,
which include bacteria and fungi; the prominent are Bacillus spp. (B. megaterium,
B. mucilaginosus, B. edaphicus, B. circulans, Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans, Pseu￾domonas putida, Arthrobacter sp., and Paenibacillus sp.), Aspergillus spp., and
Aspergillus terreus, Burkholderia, Enterobacter, Pantoea, Flectobacillus, Klebsi￾ella, Microbacterium, Myroides, and Stenotrophomonas (Teotia et al. 2016; Kour
et al. 2020). Pseudomonas, Bacillus, and Aspergillus, among other rhizosphere
K-solubilizing microorganisms, produce organic acids that solubilize the inaccessi￾ble potassium and make it available to plant roots (Teotia et al. 2016). Currently
there is little information available on the strategy by which KSM can solubilize
K-bearing minerals and release K for improving the growth and yield of plant.
Similar to the mechanism of P solubilization, the major mechanism of K solubiliza￾tion is inorganic and organic acids production and production of protons (acidolysis
mechanism). Organic acid such as tartaric acid, citric acid, succinic acid,
α-ketogluconic acid, and oxalic acid can directly increase dissolution by a proton￾or ligand-mediated mechanism. Released protons can directly dissolve the mineral K
converting the insoluble K to soluble forms. Organic acids can also indirectly
increase dissolution by the formation of complexes in solution with reaction prod￾ucts (Etesami et al. 2017).
14.4.4 Microbial ACC Deaminase
Ethylene is a plant hormone involved in the regulation of various physiological
processes of plants like germination, fruit ripening, growth, and senescence. Abiotic
stress such as flooding, drought, salinity, wounding, and pathogen attack can induce
the increment in ethylene level secreted by plants and has been found in almost all
plants growing under stress conditions. Environmental stress-induced ethylene pro￾duction in plants cause a significant reduction in plant growth, root elongation and
lateral root emergence, and even result in plant death (Gupta and Pandey 2019).
1-Aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid (ACC) is the immediate precursor of the
hormone ethylene in plants. PGPB possess the ability to produce ACC deaminase
that can hydrolyze ACC to ammonia and α-ketobutyrate, thus reducing the indige￾nous ethylene level inside the plants, thereby increasing the root length and growth
and curbing the environmental stress induced ethylene production and its associated
harmful effect on plants (Raghuwanshi and Prasad 2018). PGPR containing ACC
deaminase thus make the plants more resistant to various abiotic stresses.
ACC deaminase has been widely reported in various species of plant growth
promoting endophyte bacteria like Agrobacterium genomovars, Azospirillum
lipoferum, Alcaligenes, Bacillus, Burkholderia, Enterobacter, Methylobacterium,
Pseudomonas, Ralstonia solanacearum, Rhizobium, Rhodococcus, Sinorhizobium
meliloti, Variovorax paradoxus (Saleem et al. 2007).344 N. R. Zaman et al.
Table 14.2 Inoculation with PGPR containing ACC deaminase and subsequent physiological
changes in plants (Saleem et al. 2007)
Plant species PGPR Comments
Brassica
campestris
Methylobacterium fujisawaense Bacterium promoted root elongation
in canola
Brassica
campestris
Bacillus circulans DUC1, Bacillus
firmus DUC2, Bacillus globisporus
DUC3
Bacterial inoculation enhanced root
and shoot elongation
Brassica
napus
Alcaligenes spp., Bacillus pumilus,
Pseudomonas spp., Variovorax
paradoxus
Inoculated plant demonstrated more
vigorous growth than the control
(uninoculated)
Brassica
napus
Enterobacter cloacae A significant increase in the root and
shoot lengths was observed
Dianthus
caryophyllus
L.
Azospirillum brasilense Cd1843 Inoculated cuttings produced longest
roots
Glycine max Pseudomonas cepacia Rhizobacterium caused an early soy￾bean growth
Pisum
sativum L.
Rhizobium leguminosarum bv. viciae
128C53K
Bacterium enhanced nodulation in
plants
Vigna
radiata L.
Pseudomonas spp., Bradyrhizobium sp. Bacterium promoted nodulation in
mung bean
Vigna
radiata L.
Pseudomonas putida The ethylene production was
inhibited in inoculated cuttings
Zea mays L. Enterobacter sakazakii 8MR5, Pseudo￾monas spp. 4MKS8, Klebsiella oxytoca
10MKR7
Inoculation increased agronomic
parameters of maize
Zea mays L. Pseudomonas spp. Bacterium caused root elongation in
maize
A number of studies show, a plant inoculated with bacteria containing ACC
deaminase exhibits more root growth (Saleem et al. 2007). Table 14.2 contains some
examples of inoculation with PGPR containing ACC deaminase that alter the
endogenous levels of ethylene and subsequently brings changes in plant growth.
14.4.5 Siderophores
Siderophores are iron-chelating peptide molecules with high affinity side chains and
functional groups for ferric iron (Das et al. 2007). They are low molecular weight
molecules and their molecular weights range from 400 to 1500 Da (Beneduzi et al.
2012). These macromolecules are one of the most effective binding agents for
soluble Fe3+ and they are released by microbes in response to iron deficiency so
they may gather iron from the surroundings and provide the required iron mineral to
the microbial cell (Kannahi and Senbagam 2014). Microbial siderophores can be
used by plants to obtain iron as well (Sessitsch et al. 2004). Several PGP (plant14 Plant Microbiome Diversity and Potential for Crops and Sustainable Agriculture 345
growth promoting) bacteria have been reported for growth promoting potentiality
through siderophore production in sugarcane (Saccharum spp.), rye grass (Lolium
perenne), Thai jasmine rice plant, and jute (Haidar et al. 2018). Iron deficient tomato
plants supplemented with microbial siderophores are also shown to produce higher
crop yields, and had increased chlorophyll and iron content in the leaves (Radzki
et al. 2013).
Siderophore-producing PGPR are mostly found closely to the surface of plant
roots and rhizosphere area. They not only provide iron nutrition to the plant, but also
act as the first defense against harmful parasites that mostly attack plant roots
(Sayyed et al. 2013). Siderophore-producing bacteria act as an antagonist against
phytopathogens by scavenging the necessary iron from the environment which is
needed for growth, nucleic acid synthesis, sporulation, and maintaining cell mor￾phology of the pathogen (Campbell et al. 1986; Pandya and Saraf 2014). Generally
the fungi are mostly affected by this iron deprivation as they cannot absorb the iron–
siderophore complex (Goswami et al. 2016). Thus PGPR secret the siderophores as
the weapons to win the battle to acquire maximum iron from the environment
(Balhara et al. 2016).
PGPR usually produce four types of siderophores: hydroxamate, catecholate,
salicylate, and carboxylate (Kannahi and Senbagam 2014). Among all the bacteria
studied for siderophore activity, Pseudomonas species produce the most potent
siderophore pyoverdines containing both hydroxamate and catecholate functional
groups acting as a growth inhibitor of bacteria and fungi in iron depleted media
in vitro (Beneduzi et al. 2012).
The most reported siderophore-producing bacteria are commonly a member of
the genus Pseudomonas, among them the most known are Pseudomonas fluorescens
and Pseudomonas aeruginosa which secret the siderophores pyochelin and
pyoverdine (Goswami et al. 2016). Some other important siderophore producing
bacteria are Bacillus spp., Escherichia coli, Azotobacter, Burkholderia sp., Rhizo￾bium radiobacter, Pantoea allii, and Mycobacterium species (Ferreira et al. 2019;
Beneduzi et al. 2012).
14.4.6 Phytohormones
Phytohormones are small organic signal molecules produced by plants in very low
concentration that regulates all the physiological processes in plants like growth,
development, pathogen defense, stress tolerance, and reproductive processes.
PGPR directly or indirectly influence plant growth by secreting secondary metab￾olites that in turn play role in plant hormone synthesis and obtaining nutrient from
soil. Almost all the PGPB have the ability to produce phytohormones like auxin, i.e.,
indole acetic acid (IAA), abscisic acid (ABA), gibberellic acid (GA), and cytokinins.
These phytohormones greatly play roles in plant root growth resulting a better
uptake of moisture and nutrients from soil (Fukami et al. 2018a, b).346 N. R. Zaman et al.
14.4.7 Volatile Compounds
The volatile compounds produced by the plant associated microbiome inhibit the
growth of plant pathogens and provide defense against them. They may also increase
the immunity of the plants by inducing systemic resistance. Bacillus
amyloliquefaciens YN201732, an endophytic bacterium found to be antagonistic
against 12 pathogenic fungi, was reported to reduce the effects of powdery mild dew
in tobacco, possibly by inducing the jasmonic acid/ethylene signaling pathway (Jiao
et al. 2020). Volatile organic compounds (VOCs) produced by Bacillus
amyloliquefaciens FZB42 and Bacillus atrophaeus LSSC22 showed inhibitory
activity against Ralstonia solanacearum, responsible for wilt disease. Benzaldehyde,
1,2-benzisothiazol-3(2 H)-one and 1,3-butadiene in particular exhibited prominent
negating effect, manifested by the significant inhibition in the colony size, cell
viability, and motility of the pathogens. Moreover, VOCs even genetically altered
the virulence and pathogenicity related genes of the pathogen and elicited the
upregulation of wilt resistance and pathogen defense related genes in the plant,
thus decreasing the wilt disease in tobacco (Tahir et al. 2017). Streptomyces
sp. CEN26, a root node endophyte of Centella asiatica (L.), was found to produce
2,5-bis(hydroxymethyl)furan monoacetate that impede conidial germination and
appressorium formation of the plant pathogenic fungi Alternaria brassicicola that
causes black spot disease on a broad range of hosts (Phuakjaiphaeo et al. 2016). The
Muscodor endophytic fungi are already considered to be promising biocontrol
agents owing to the VOCs they produce (Pena et al. 2019). Blue mold and gray
mold caused by Penicillium expansum and B. cinerea respectively were completely
diminished in M. albus inoculated fruits. 2-methyl-1-butanol and isobutyric acid
abundantly released by the fungi were suggested to be responsible for the disease
suppression (Kumar et al. 2021). The VOC emitted by Flavobacterium johnsoniae
strain GSE09, 2,4-di-tert-butylphenol, hindered the development of the pathogen
Phytophthora capsici (Sang and Kim 2012). In addition to increasing plant biomass
Trichoderma asperellum T1 VOCs impeded the growth of two leaf spot fungal
pathogens Corynespora cassiicola and Curvularia aeria. These VOCs also elicited
the host defense response as plant increases the activity of chitinase and β-1,3-
glucanase (Wonglom et al. 2020). Microbial VOCs also have the potential as
insecticides to control insect induced diseases from the roots as seen in case of
Paenibacillus polymyxa strain BMP-11 (Zhao et al. 2011).
14.4.8 Other Secondary Metabolites
Antibiotics are yet another strategy for microbes to communicate with one another.
Antibiotics are most commonly associated with medicine, but soil microbes need
them to live in a tough competitive environment (Cornforth and Foster 2015).14 Plant Microbiome Diversity and Potential for Crops and Sustainable Agriculture 347
PGPR strains’ biocontrol capabilities are mostly reliant on extensive root colo￾nization, the generation of systemic defense response in the host plant, and the
synthesis of antimicrobial chemicals. Antibiotics are a diverse collection of
low-molecular-weight, organic chemicals that prevent other microbes growth or
metabolic functions. Antibiotics work in different ways, like by blocking pathogen
cell wall synthesis, altering or deforming cellular membrane structures, slowing the
formation of initiation complexes on the ribosome, thereby preventing protein
biosynthesis, etc. (Beneduzi et al. 2012). Antibiotics also have an important role in
the induced systemic resistance (ISR) mechanism in plants, in addition to their direct
inhibitory activity (Kenawy et al. 2019).
Actinomycetes, ubiquitous bacteria that play important roles in soil ecology, are
sources of 70% of clinical antibiotics—a widely used example is streptomycin
(Tkacz and Poole 2021). PGPR belonging to Bacillus and Pseudomonas species
play an active role in the suppression of pathogenic microorganisms producing
antibiotics. These PGPR secrete this extracellular metabolites that are inhibitory to
plant pathogen even at low concentration (Goswami et al. 2016).
Phenazine, 2,4-diacetylphloroglucinol (DAPG), pyrrolnitrin, surfactin, iturin,
fengycin, viscosinamide, kanosamine, zwittermicin-A, polymyxin, circulin,
pantocin, subtilin, and subtilosin are some of the antibiotics synthesized by PGPR,
having potential biocontrol abilities (Kenawy et al. 2019).
Pseudomonads synthesize an antifungal drug phenazine, which has redox action
potential and can reduce plant infections by inhibiting plant pathogens like Fusarium
oxysporum and Gaeumannomyces graminis. The antibiotic DAPG, generated by
Pseudomonas fluorescens, has been found to be efficient in destroying the cellular
membrane of phytopathogen Fusarium oxysporum sp. niveum. Pyrrolnitrin, which is
similarly generated by Pseudomonads, can prevent Rhizoctonia solani from
infecting cotton plants during damping-off. Antibiotics, such as polymyxin, circulin,
and colistin, generated by most of the Bacillus spp., are effective against many
Gram-positive and Gram-negative microbes, as well as several pathogenic fungi.
Bacillus spp. additionally produces zwittermicin A and kanosamine antibiotics, that
help to inhibit pathogenic fungi and fungus-like bacteria in the soil environment
(Beneduzi et al. 2012).
The antibiotics produced by PGPR are divided into two categories: volatile and
non-volatile compounds. Alcohols, aldehydes, ketones, sulfides, and hydrogen
cyanide are volatile antibiotics, while polyketides, cyclic lipopeptide amino polyols,
phenylpyrrole, and heterocyclic nitrogenous substance are non-volatile antibiotics.
This class of non-volatile antibiotics has wide antimicrobial activity against a variety
of plant pathogens (Kenawy et al. 2019).
Several rhizobacteria produce hydrogen cyanide (HCN), a volatile compound that
has a significant inhibitory impact upon several species. The cyanide ion suppresses
metalloenzymes, particularly copper-containing mitochondrial cytochrome c oxi￾dases, preventing transfer of electrons and disrupting the cell’s energy supply,
resulting in the death of organisms. HCN synthesis is mostly attributed with
Gram-negative Pseudomonas spp., although several other bacteria species, such as
Alcaligenes, Aeromonas, Bacillus, and Rhizobium, can also synthesize the sameMicroorganism Stress response References
348 N. R. Zaman et al.
(Abd El-Rahman et al. 2019). P. putida has been reported to inhibit Fusarium solani
infection alfalfa plant by secreting HCN (Sarhan and Shehata 2014). Moreover,
black root rot disease which is caused by the phytopathogen Thielaviopsis basicola
(Kenneth et al. 2019) and Macrophomina phaseolina (Reetha et al. 2014) is also
found to be prevented by Pseudomonas fluorescens. Both siderophores and HCN are
recognized to have a role in a PGPR’s antifungal properties. Production of hydrogen
cyanide has been reported as an important antifungal trait of a good number of
rhizobacteria to control root infecting fungi (Bakthavatchalu et al. 2012).
14.5 Endophytes Contribute to Plant Stress Adaptation
Global warming of recent years, climate change, and many other environmental
adversaries cause hyper-salinities, water deficits, and extreme temperatures and have
become prevalent abiotic stress factors that attribute decreased crop production
globally. Studies have already revealed the microbiome of a plant to play an
important role behind it’s adaptability against many stress factors, directly or
indirectly inciting plant’s own physical and chemical mechanism to lead it toward
the ultimate objective of survival and growth. As the environmental disturbances
continue to increase the stresses, the microbiome and its ability to support plant
adaptation become all the more significant, for survival and sustenance (Table 14.3).
Table 14.3 Plant microorganisms alleviating different stress conditions in plants
Associated
plant
Achromobacter
piechaudii
ARV8
Pepper and
tomato
Increased drought tolerance by producing
ACC deaminase
(Patel
Priyanka
et al. 2019)
Solanum
lycopersicum
Elevated acquisition of phosphorus and potas￾sium under saline conditions
Mayak et al.
(2004a)
Pseudomonas
mendocina
Lettuce Reduced oxidative stress under drought con￾dition through antioxidant catalase activity
Kohler et al.
(2008)
Glomus
intraradices
Pseudomonas
fluorescens
Canola
(Brassica
spp.)
Enriched the plant with proteins related to
energy metabolism and cell division to help
tolerate salinity
Banaei-Asl
et al. (2016)
Pseudomonas
spp. AKM-P6
Sorghum At being inoculated, improved physiological
and metabolic performances under high heat
stress
Ali et al.
(2009)
Burkholderia
phytofirmans
PsJN
Grapevine Root inoculation resulted in improved root,
increased biomass, and enhanced physiologi￾cal activity at low temperature (4 C)
Ait Barka
et al. (2006)14 Plant Microbiome Diversity and Potential for Crops and Sustainable Agriculture 349
14.5.1 Hypersaline Habitat Adaptability
In saline conditions the excessive uptake of Na+ and Cl ions disrupts the Na+
homeostasis and nutritional balance, generating cytotoxicity, and fatally damaging
the plant (Table 14.3). Some rhizobacteria as well as endophytic microbes evidently
help maintain the Na+ homeostasis in saline conditions as they enhance Na+ exclu￾sion and K+
, Ca+ uptake thus improving the Na+
/K+ ratio and sustaining the Na+
homeostasis (Singh et al. 2021; Rojas-Tapias et al. 2012). Some plant growth
promoting rhizobacteria (PGPR) may achieve this through the secretion of
exopolysaccharides that bind cations and assist in biofilm production around root
surfaces to restrict the entry of Na+ (Ashraf and Harris 2004; Dodd and Pérez￾Alfocea 2012). Some have shown the ability to downregulate the expression of high
affinity K+ transporters (HKT1) in the roots limiting Na+ uptake, whereas inducing
their expression in the shoots promoting root to shoot Na+ recirculation and thus
improving Na+ homeostasis (Zhang et al. 2008). PGPR and endophytes are also
reported to improve N, P, K, Ca, Fe, and other nutrient uptake through fixing,
solubilizing, releasing siderophores, balancing nutrition in saline stress (Mayak
et al. 2004b; Upadhyay et al. 2016). Reactive oxygen species (ROS) produced due
to high salinity stress are also addressed by plant microbiome as they are seen to
interfere with expression of related genes to detoxify ROS (Kim et al. 2014;
Sukweenadhi et al. 2015). Even the volatile organic compounds (VOCs) produced
by this microbiome promote salt tolerance in plants. Two such VOCs, hexanedioic
acid and anoic acid, secreted by a Betaproteobacteria Alcaligenes faecalis
JBCS1294 induce salt tolerance in plant through reprogrammed auxin and gibber￾ellin pathways (Bhattacharyya et al. 2015). Colonized endophytes may provide salt
tolerance through their signaling molecules, hormones, and even microRNAs,
providing high amounts of osmolytes, decreasing water usage, and fighting produc￾tion and the effects of ROS (Azad and Kaminskyj 2016; Woodward et al. 2012).
Saline stress increases ethylene production in a plant that inhibits plant growth.
PGPR exhibit the ability to produce the ACC (aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate)
deaminase which restricts the production of ethylene (Glick et al. 2007). A plant’s
response to saline condition may vary in accordance with its associated microbiome.
14.5.2 Alleviating Temperature Stress
Increased temperature directly affects plant growth by reducing membrane perme￾ability, photosynthesis, respiration, and seed germination. These also enhance ROS
production resulting in cell death. Plant microbiome may mitigate the effects of heat
stress through Induced Systemic Tolerance (IST) (Table 14.3). Root endophytes
were found to confer heat tolerance to its host plant by inducing constitutive
chromatin modification (Shekhawat et al. 2021). The plant microbiome can alleviate
the heat stress effects through symbiosis as observed in tropical panic grass350 N. R. Zaman et al.
Dichanthelium lanuginosum and the fungus Curvularia protuberate (Márquez et al.
2007). Microbes also help plant growth and development in high temperature
through inducing decreased production of abscisic acid (ABA), increased production
of salicylic acid, increasing the generation of antioxidants, neglecting the effects of
ROS, etc. (Khan et al. 2020). Not just high temperatures, microbiome supports
plants in cold temperatures too. A psychrotolerant bacterial inoculation is reported
to reduce freezing injuries, ice nucleating activities, and lipid peroxidation while
lessening the effects of ROS (Tiryaki et al. 2019). Some microbes confer tolerance in
both higher and lower temperatures, for example, Burkholderia phytofirmans strain
PsJN provides heat tolerance in tomato but cold tolerance in grapevine (Issa et al.
2018; Miotto-Vilanova et al. 2016).
14.5.3 Drought Stress Reduction
Drought stress damages membranes, causes loss of photosynthesis, reduces leaf size,
root proliferation and even shoot extension, lessens water use efficiency along with
fatal accumulation of ROS. Plants showcase several mechanisms to counter these
effects but the importance of plant microbiome is manifested by the way plants may
have evolved to recruit drought specific microbes in prolonged drought conditions
(Farooq et al. 2009; Naylor and Coleman-Derr 2018). In response to drought, PGPR
have been reported to manipulate phytohormones such as Indole Acetic Acid (IAA),
ABA, cytokinins, induce the production of ACC deaminase, and decrease that of
ethylene (Poudel et al. 2021). Some root zone bacteria even produce osmotically
active molecules and osmo-solutes such as proline to impart drought tolerance
(Moreno-Galván et al. 2020). Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (AMF) enhance osmotic
balance through increased uptake of K+
, Ca+
, and other cations (Ruiz-Lozano 2003).
AMF also improve the water use efficiency and water status of a plant (Augé 2001).
Plant microbial VOCs confer drought tolerance by monopolizing the expression of
genes involved in maintaining the cell wall structure and affecting phytohormone
signaling pathways (Asari et al. 2016; Poudel et al. 2021). Apart from that, a plant
microbiome provides protection against the accumulation of ROS through enzy￾matic and non-enzymatic antioxidant system (Poudel et al. 2021).
Microbiome-associated plant adaptations against stress are adaptable themselves
as they differ in different stress conditions. One microbe may have the ability to
inaugurate different responses in different conditions and plants may recruit a
specific species of microbe to withstand a specific stress condition. No matter what
the case, in every stress condition prominence of plant–microbiome interactions is
substantiated.14 Plant Microbiome Diversity and Potential for Crops and Sustainable Agriculture 351
14.6 Applications of Microbiome Engineering
Microbial communities are so intricately connected to the host that there is a set of
“core microbiome” specific for the host that is determined at Operational Taxonomic
Unit (OTU) levels (Gopal et al. 2013). Any disruption in the composition or function
of the core microbiome can prove to be catastrophic for the host. And as the hosts are
interconnected in ecology so are the microbial communities. So, the effect does not
only extend to a particular host but the whole ecosystem, as they may bring about
physical, biochemical, and even genetic changes in the host and thus affecting the
productivity and efficiency of the whole ecosystem. The extensive impact and
potential of microbiome forces the focus of research around microbiome, with
both urgency and interest. And as microorganisms are easier to handle, they become
a convenient target for engineering to generate desired phenotypic and even genetic
changes in the host and consequently other biotic elements in the ecosystem. The
biotechnological advances regarding genome sequence, meta-omics tools, compu￾tational tools, genome wide functional genomics, etc. further encouraged
microbiome engineering, efforts to “customize” the microbiota to sustain agriculture
without damaging the environment by introducing biological ways to control,
fertilize, and stimulate, for the welfare of humankind.
Microbiome transfer and host-mediated microbiome engineering (HMME) and
synthetic microbiomes are widely used in microbiome engineering. Based on syn￾thetic biology bottom-up or top-down approaches are notably used to engineer
phytomicrobiomes (Ke et al. 2021). The bottom-up approach isolates the plant￾associated microbes from environmental microbes, modifies genome for them to
carry desired traits, and then reintroduces the synthetic microbial communities
(SynCom) to the host plant for it to then express the outcome of the engineering
(Toju et al. 2018; Vorholt et al. 2017). On the other hand, horizontal gene transfer
(HZT) is used in top-down approach to inaugurate the desired traits in a broad range
of hosts in situ. This can be achieved through incorporating mobile genetic elements,
developing bacteriophage system, or by other necessary strategies to introduce the
desired traits in the host (Ke et al. 2021).
Engineered microbiome may suppress different diseases of host as seen in the
case of ACC deaminase engineered banana endospheric bacterial cell wall promot￾ing suppression of Fusarium induced wilt disease (Kaul et al. 2021). Conferring
stress tolerance is one of the most desired applications of plant microbiome engi￾neering for sustainable food production. Microbes are specifically engineered to
confront stress conditions including drought and salinity (Jochum et al. 2019;
Mueller et al. 2021). Microbiome engineering can also be employed in biocontrol,
which can be exemplified through plant pathogen Burkholderia ambifaria that
produces a biocontrol component cepacin A. Various studies have proved that
engineered Burkholderia ambifaria that does not have virulence can be used as an
effective biocontrol agent (Coenye 2019; Mullins et al. 2019). Microbial system can
be engineered to produce novel biocontrol compounds as in the case of Serratia
fonticola and novel fungicidal phenazine (Greunke et al. 2018). Engineered352 N. R. Zaman et al.
microbiome exhibits excellent biofertilizer activity as demonstrated by Voigt and
colleagues, where engineering of nif gene clusters in microbiome resulted in nitrogen
fixation of a cereal crop (Ryu et al. 2020; Temme et al. 2012). Moreover,
microbiome engineered to generate specific phytohormones can elevate host’s
ability to resist stress, work as a biostimulant and even suppress disease
(Ke et al. 2021).
Biosafety, biosecurity, and biocontainments need to be evaluated before the field
application of microbiome engineering, but once applied may open the door to
exceptional advantages leading toward sustained agriculture and flourishing
ecosystem.
14.7 Application of Endophytes as Potential Biofertilizer
and Biocontrol
Chemical fertilizers serve a critical part in meeting the world population’s ever￾increasing food needs. Increased agricultural usage of chemical fertilizers, on the
other hand, has negative consequences for ecosystems. These fertilizers are leached
into water bodies due to poor absorption by plants, causing eutrophication. They can
also have a variety of negative consequences on soils, such as depletion of water
storage capacity and uneven soil fertility (Ongley et al. 2010). Another severe issue
is the widespread use of pesticides, many of which are toxic to both people and
animals, including pollinators (Sponsler et al. 2019). Pesticides may also change the
dynamics of soil microbial communities associated with plants (Meena et al. 2020).
As a result, finding ecologically acceptable alternatives is crucial.
For decades, microbiological tools such as biofertilizers and biocontrol agents,
which are bacteria and fungi, capable of promoting plant growth and health, respec￾tively, have been produced. Biofertilizers have the potential to increase agricultural
yields while also being ecologically beneficial (Mahanty et al. 2017; Giri et al.
2019). Biological nitrogen fixation, initiated by the endophytic bacteria Rhizobium
spp., colonizes and occupies the interior compartment of plant tissue with little or no
injury to the host plant, is one of the most prevalent ways. This category of
endophytic microbes can be used as a biofertilizer. Endophytic nitrogen-fixing
bacteria isolated from various plants and plant components were found to supply
around 48% of the nitrogen. Endophytes like Gluconacetobacter diazotrophicus,
Serratia marcescens, and Azoarcus sp. are suitable bioformulations/biofertilizers
and hence can be prepared to use in agricultural fields (Garima Gupta et al. 2012).
Moreover, nitrogen-fixing alpha-proteobacterial genera of Agrobacterium,
Allorhizobium, Azorhizobium, Bradyrhizobium, Mesorhizobium, Rhizobium,
Sinorhizobium, Methylobacterium, Ochrobactrum, and Phyllobacterium, as well
as beta-proteobacterial Burkholderia and Cupriavidus, have also been reported as
potential biofertilizers (Franche et al. 2009).14 Plant Microbiome Diversity and Potential for Crops and Sustainable Agriculture 353
Endophytic fungi have been rarely exploited as potential tools in agriculture, despite
their various favorable effects on plants and promise in biocontrol and biofertilization.
Piriformospora indica, which colonizes the roots of cereal plants like barley and maize,
is one of the most promising and well-studied endophytes (Waller et al. 2005; Malla
et al. 2004; Prasad et al. 2008, 2013; Mishra et al. 2014; Chadha et al. 2014, 2015; Gill
et al. 2016). The fungus can promote phosphate and sulfur intake, increase biomass
output, and stimulate early flowering and seed production (Oelmüller et al. 2009).
Effects of P. indica have been widely investigated and evaluated in over 150 different
plant species (Smriti Shrivastava and Varma 2014).
Biological control agents have shown the ability to colonize plants, or at the very
least form a close bond with them. The majority of biological control endophyte (BCE)
agents have been discovered in a variety of crops and have the ability to reduce major
pathogens. Bacterial endophytes lessen or prevent deleterious effects of plant patho￾gens through antibiosis (antibiotic production), growth promotion, inducing host
defenses (induced systemic resistance, ISR), parasitism, competition, and signal inter￾ference (quorum sensing) (Jorjani et al. 2012; Mansoori et al. 2013). A bacterial
endophyte Pseudomonas fluorescens PICF7 was found to suppress Verticillium wilt,
one of the most serious diseases affecting olive trees worldwide (Mercado-Blanco
et al. 2004). In glasshouse and field trials, Paenibacillus K165 isolated from tomato
root tips was demonstrated to minimize disease severity and symptoms caused by
Verticillium dahliae in potato and eggplant (Tjamos et al. 2004). Bacterial strains Y30
and E36 identified as Streptomyces virginiae were isolated from tomato plants and
found to suppress Ralstonia solanacearum, the causal agent of tomato bacterial wilt
(Tan et al. 2011). In a recent work by Chowdhury and Bae (2018) discovered an
endophyte Burkholderia stabilis EB159 (PG159) that has the strongest inhibitory
efficacy against B. cinerea—caused leaf spot disease. Bacillus cabrialesii TE3T, a
new Bacillus species identified as an endophytic bacteria associated with wheat, was
also found as a biological control agent against a developing wheat phytopathogen
(Bipolaris sorokiniana) in the Yaqui Valley, inducing spot blotch and lowering the
infection frequencies (Villa-Rodriguez et al. 2019). Several bacterial endophytes were
also found to inhibit pathogens during the post-harvest period. Aiello et al. (2019)
recently evaluated the biocontrol properties of Pseudomonas synxantha DLS65, an
isolated endophyte from kiwi fruit tissues, against Monilinia fructicola and Monilinia
fructigena, which are causal agents of post-harvest brown rot of fruit with bone and
found 100% of mycelial growth inhibition. Zaman et al. recently identified a novel
bacterial endophyte Burkholderia contaminans NZ from jute plant that substantially
suppress the growth of different fungal plant pathogens including Macrophomina
phaseolina (Zaman et al. 2021).
Several fungal endophytes were also reported to have potential biocontrol prop￾erties. Trichoderma species have been found to antagonize Sclerotinia sclerotiorum
and Rhizoctonia solani hyphae (Mukhopadhyay and Kumar 2020). Purpureocillium
lilacinum is a classic biocontrol agent of plant parasitic nematodes and insects
(Wang et al. 2016). In a study by Wei et al. (2019a) found that a novel Fusarium
strain (Fusarium solani CEF559) could protect cotton plants against wilt in green￾house tests with better than 60% control, similar to the control level (50%) reached354 N. R. Zaman et al.
by another F. solani strain (Bx215) in a greenhouse experiment. Non-toxigenic
strains of Aspergillus flavus have been demonstrated to have the capacity to control
mycotoxigenic Aspergillus in cereals in several investigations (Sarrocco and
Vannacci 2018).
Despite the strong antagonistic nature and capacity of endophytes to benefit the
host plant by inducing resistance and growth promotion, there are a number of
obstacles to overcome when generating or using endophytes as biofertilizers and
biocontrol agents. When administered to the roots, endophytes may encounter
competition from the varied diversity of indigenous soil microflora, as well as the
various degrees of their population densities, which are often influenced by envi￾ronmental factors. Furthermore, despite the fact that some endophytes have excellent
bioactivity in laboratory and greenhouse trials, they are not always used in the field,
possibly due to poor viability during storage, poor colonization, toxicity to
non-targeted organisms, or the fact that they are not suitable for large-scale applica￾tions due to low yield in cultures (Pirttilä et al. 2021; Kumar et al. 2017). Better
understanding of the mechanisms involved in the growth promotion and antagonistic
abilities of endophytes will lead to better crop production. Several approaches such
as the use of genomics, in vivo expression technology, fluorescence experiments,
and model plants can help achieve this objective.
14.8 Conclusion and Future Prospects
Plant microbe management is considered as an advanced approach in order to
increase nutrient absorption and control disease. Therefore, most of the current
researches are aimed at elucidating the processes of host–pathogen interaction in
order to promote sustainable agriculture. Exploiting interactions between plant and
soil microbial populations is a viable strategy for increasing food production for the
world’s rising population while minimizing ecological damage in the present climate
change situation. The development of potential microbial inoculants or the modifi￾cation of naturally occurring microbial populations are the two main techniques for
regulating the plant-microbiome. The formulation, biosafety maintainence, and
modalities of application of microbial inoculants are being given special attention.
Challenges arise mostly from the demand of characterizing a broad variety of
systems involving the complex microbial populations, where the majority of
which are unculturable species. A growing number of culture-independent
approaches are often used to unravel the unknown variety of microbes living in
plant, and soil environments, as well as to characterize the molecular basis of plant–
microbe interactions. Different forms of stressful conditions, such as salinity,
drought, diseases, and pests, have negative impact on plants’ functioning. So,
plant–microbiome interactions have huge role in growth and survival of plants in
stressful conditions by using a signaling network. Recognizing this network is
critical for developing biotechnological solutions to increase plant adaption mech￾anisms and soil microorganisms’ abilities to alleviate stress in crops. Several ways14 Plant Microbiome Diversity and Potential for Crops and Sustainable Agriculture 355
are now being investigated to see whether the plant microbiome may be manipulated
to promote beneficial species while preventing disease presence. As a rational
conclusion, numerous accomplishments have been made via the use of microbial
biotechnology in agriculture, but many problems and possibilities need to be inves￾tigated in order to ensure future agricultural sustainability.
References
Abd El-Rahman A, Shaheen HA, Abd El-Aziz RM, Ibrahim DS (2019) Influence of hydrogen
cyanide-producing rhizobacteria in controlling the crown gall and root-knot nematode,
Meloidogyne incognita. Egypt J Biol Pest Control 29(1):41
Abdelfattah A, Li Destri Nicosia MG, Cacciola SO, Droby S, Schena L (2015) Metabarcoding
analysis of fungal diversity in the phyllosphere and carposphere of olive (Olea europaea). PLoS
One 10(7):e0131069
Ahemad M, Kibret M (2014) Mechanisms and applications of plant growth promoting
rhizobacteria: current perspective. J King Saud Univ Sci 26(1):1–20
Aiello D, Restuccia C, Stefani E, Vitale A, Cirvilleri G (2019) Postharvest biocontrol ability of
pseudomonas synxantha against Monilinia fructicola and Monilinia fructigena on stone fruit.
Postharvest Biol Technol 149:83–89
Ait Barka E, Nowak J, Clément C (2006) Enhancement of chilling resistance of inoculated
grapevine plantlets with a plant growth-promoting rhizobacterium, Burkholderia phytofirmans
strain PsJN. Appl Environ Microbiol 72(11):7246–7252
Ali SZ, Sandhya V, Grover M, Kishore N, Rao LV, Venkateswarlu B (2009) Pseudomonas sp.
strain AKM-P6 enhances tolerance of sorghum seedlings to elevated temperatures. Biol Fertil
Soils 46(1):45–55
Amanullah K, Fahad S (2018) Nitrogen in agriculture: updates. BoD–Books on Demand,
Norderstedt
Amend AS, Cobian GM, Laruson AJ, Remple K, Tucker SJ, Poff KE et al (2019) Phytobiomes are
compositionally nested from the ground up. Peer J 7:e6609
Asari S et al (2016) Multiple effects of Bacillus amyloliquefaciens volatile compounds: plant
growth promotion and growth inhibition of phytopathogens. FEMS Microbiol Ecol 92(6):
fiw070
Ashraf M, Harris P (2004) Potential biochemical indicators of salinity tolerance in plants. Plant Sci
166(1):3–16
Atamna-Ismaeel N, Finkel O, Glaser F, von Mering C, Vorholt JA, Koblížek M et al (2012)
Bacterial anoxygenic photosynthesis on plant leaf surfaces. Environ Microbiol Rep 4(2):
209–216
Augé RM (2001) Water relations, drought and vesicular-arbuscular mycorrhizal symbiosis. Mycor￾rhiza 11(1):3–42
Azad K, Kaminskyj S (2016) A fungal endophyte strategy for mitigating the effect of salt and
drought stress on plant growth. Symbiosis 68(1):73–78
Badri DV, Vivanco JM (2009) Regulation and function of root exudates. Plant Cell Environ 32(6):
666–681
Bai Y, Müller DB, Srinivas G, Garrido-Oter R, Potthoff E, Rott M et al (2015) Functional overlap of
the Arabidopsis leaf and root microbiota. Nature 528(7582):364–369
Bakthavatchalu S, Shivakumar S, Sullia SB (2012) Identification of multi-trait PGPR isolates and
evaluation of their potential as biocontrol agents. Acta Biologica Indica 1(1):61–67
Balhara M, Chaudhary R, Ruhil S, Singh B, Dahiya N, Parmar VS et al (2016) Siderophores; iron
scavengers: the novel & promising targets for pathogen specific antifungal therapy. Expert Opin
Ther Targets 20(12):1477–1489356 N. R. Zaman et al.
Banaei-Asl F, Farajzadeh D, Bandehagh A, Komatsu S (2016) Comprehensive proteomic analysis
of canola leaf inoculated with a plant growth-promoting bacterium, Pseudomonas fluorescens,
under salt stress. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA)-Proteins Proteomics 1864(9):1222–
1236
Bashir I, War AF, Rafiq I, Reshi ZA, Rashid I, Shouche YS (2022) Phyllosphere microbiome:
diversity and functions. Microbiol Res 254:126888
Beneduzi A, Ambrosini A, Passaglia LM (2012) Plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria (PGPR):
their potential as antagonists and biocontrol agents. Genet Mol Biol 35(4):1044–1051
Berg G, Smalla K (2009) Plant species and soil type cooperatively shape the structure and function
of microbial communities in the rhizosphere. FEMS Microbiol Ecol 68(1):1–13
Berg G, Rybakova D, Grube M, Köberl M (2016) The plant microbiome explored: implications for
experimental botany. J Exp Bot 67(4):995–1002
Bhattacharyya D, Yu S-M, Lee YH (2015) Volatile compounds from Alcaligenes faecalis
JBCS1294 confer salt tolerance in Arabidopsis thaliana through the auxin and gibberellin
pathways and differential modulation of gene expression in root and shoot tissues. Plant Growth
Regul 75(1):297–306
Bulgarelli D, Garrido-Oter R, Münch PC, Weiman A, Dröge J, Pan Y et al (2015) Structure and
function of the bacterial root microbiota in wild and domesticated barley. Cell Host Microbe
17(3):392–403
Campbell R, Renwick A, Coe S (1986) Antagonism and siderophore production by biocontrol
agents, plant growth promoting organisms and the general rhizosphere population. In: Iron,
Siderophores, and plant diseases. Springer, New York, pp 179–188
Chadha N, Mishra M, Bandyoadhyay P, Agarwal A, Prasad R, Varma A (2014) Protocol for
production of the beneficial fungus Piriformospora indica for field applications. J
Endocytobiosis Cell Res 25:42–46
Chadha N, Prasad R, Varma A (2015) Plant promoting activities of fungal endophytes associated
with tomato roots from central Himalaya, India and their interaction with Piriformospora indica.
Int J Pharm BioSci 6(1):333–343
Charpentier M, Oldroyd G (2010) How close are we to nitrogen-fixing cereals? Curr Opin Plant
Biol 13(5):556–564
Cheremisinoff NP (2010) Handbook of pollution prevention and cleaner production vol 3. In: Best
practices in the agrochemical industry. William Andrew, Norwich
Chowdhury MEK, Bae H (2018) Bacterial endophytes isolated from mountain-cultivated ginseng
(Panax ginseng Mayer) have biocontrol potential against ginseng pathogens. Biol Control 126:
97–108
Coenye T (2019) Uncoupling virulence and biocontrol. Nat Microbiol 4(6):908–909
Compant S, Mitter B, Colli-Mull JG, Gangl H, Sessitsch A (2011) Endophytes of grapevine
flowers, berries, and seeds: identification of cultivable bacteria, comparison with other plant
parts, and visualization of niches of colonization. Microb Ecol 62(1):188–197
Compant S, Samad A, Faist H, Sessitsch A (2019) A review on the plant microbiome: ecology,
functions, and emerging trends in microbial application. J Adv Res 19:29–37
Cordovez V, Dini-Andreote F, Carrión VJ, Raaijmakers JM (2019) Ecology and evolution of plant
microbiomes. Annu Rev Microbiol 73:69–88
Cornforth DM, Foster KR (2015) Antibiotics and the art of bacterial war. Proc Natl Acad Sci
112(35):10827–10828
Das A, Prasad R, Srivastava A, Giang PH, Bhatnagar K, Varma A (2007) Fungal siderophores:
structure, functions and regulations. In: Varma A, Chincholkar SB (eds) Microbial siderophores.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pp 1–42
Dastogeer KM, Tumpa FH, Sultana A, Akter MA, Chakraborty A (2020) Plant microbiome—an
account of the factors that shape community composition and diversity. Curr Plant Biol 23:
100161
Deveau A, Bonito G, Uehling J, Paoletti M, Becker M, Bindschedler S et al (2018) Bacterial–fungal
interactions: ecology, mechanisms and challenges. FEMS Microbiol Rev 42(3):335–35214 Plant Microbiome Diversity and Potential for Crops and Sustainable Agriculture 357
Dickinson CH (2012) Microbiology of aerial plant surfaces. Elsevier, Amsterdam
Dodd IC, Pérez-Alfocea F (2012) Microbial amelioration of crop salinity stress. J Exp Bot 63
(9):3415–3428
Doornbos RF, van Loon LC, Bakker PA (2012) Impact of root exudates and plant defense signaling
on bacterial communities in the rhizosphere. A review. Agron Sust Dev 32(1):227–243
Etesami H, Emami S, Alikhani HA (2017) Potassium solubilizing bacteria (KSB): mechanisms,
promotion of plant growth, and future prospects. A review. J Soil Sci Plant Nutr 17(4):897–911
Farooq M et al (2009) Plant drought stress: effects, mechanisms and management. In: Sustainable
agriculture. Springer, Dordrecht, pp 153–188
Ferreira CM, Vilas-Boas Â, Sousa CA, Soares HM, Soares EV (2019) Comparison of five bacterial
strains producing siderophores with ability to chelate iron under alkaline conditions. AMB
Express 9(1):78
Franche C, Lindström K, Elmerich C (2009) Nitrogen-fixing bacteria associated with leguminous
and non-leguminous plants. Plant Soil 321(1):35–59
Fukami J, Cerezini P, Hungria M (2018a) Azospirillum: benefits that go far beyond biological
nitrogen fixation. AMB Express 8:73
Fukami J, Cerezini P, Hungria M (2018b) Azospirillum: benefits that go far beyond biological
nitrogen fixation. AMB Express 8(1):1–12
Fürnkranz M, Wanek W, Richter A, Abell G, Rasche F, Sessitsch A (2008) Nitrogen fixation by
phyllosphere bacteria associated with higher plants and their colonizing epiphytes of a tropical
lowland rainforest of Costa Rica. ISME J 2(5):561–570
Fürnkranz M, Lukesch B, Müller H, Huss H, Grube M, Berg G (2012) Microbial diversity inside
pumpkins: microhabitat-specific communities display a high antagonistic potential against
phytopathogens. Microb Ecol 63(2):418–428
Gans J, Wolinsky M, Dunbar J (2005) Computational improvements reveal great bacterial diversity
and high metal toxicity in soil. Science 309(5739):1387–1390
Gill SS, Gill R, Trivedi DK, Anjum NA, Sharma KK, Ansari MW, Ansari AA, Johri AK, Prasad R,
Pereira E, Varma A, Tuteja N (2016) Piriformospora indica: potential and significance in plant
stress tolerance. Front Microbiol 7:332. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2016.00332
Giri B, Prasad R, Wu Q-S, Varma A (2019) Biofertilizers for sustainable agriculture and environ￾ment. Springer International Publishing. ISBN 978-3-030-18932-7. https://www.springer.com/
gp/book/9783030189327
Glick BR, Cheng Z, Czarny J, Duan J (2007) Promotion of plant growth by ACC deaminase￾producing soil bacteria. In: New perspectives and approaches in plant growth-promoting
Rhizobacteria research. Springer, pp 329–339
Gong T, Xin XF (2021) Phyllosphere microbiota: community dynamics and its interaction with
plant hosts. J Integr Plant Biol 63(2):297–304
Gopal M, Gupta A, Thomas GV (2013) Bespoke microbiome therapy to manage plant diseases.
Front Microbiol 4:355
Goswami D, Thakker JN, Dhandhukia PC (2016) Portraying mechanics of plant growth promoting
rhizobacteria (PGPR): a review. Cogent Food Agric 2(1):1127500
Greunke C et al (2018) Direct pathway cloning (DiPaC) to unlock natural product biosynthetic
potential. Metab Eng 47:334–345
Gupta S, Pandey S (2019) ACC deaminase producing bacteria with multifarious plant growth
promoting traits alleviates salinity stress in French bean (Phaseolus vulgaris) plants. Front
Microbiol 1506
Gupta G, Panwar J, Akhtar MS, Jha PN (2012) Endophytic nitrogen-fixing bacteria as
biofertilizer. In: Sustainable agriculture reviews. Springer, New York, pp 183–221
Hacquard S (2016) Disentangling the factors shaping microbiota composition across the plant
holobiont. New Phytol 209(2):454–457
Haidar B, Ferdous M, Fatema B, Ferdous AS, Islam MR, Khan H (2018) Population diversity of
bacterial endophytes from jute (Corchorus olitorius) and evaluation of their potential role as
bioinoculants. Microbiol Res 208:43–53358 N. R. Zaman et al.
Haney CH, Samuel BS, Bush J, Ausubel FM (2015) Associations with rhizosphere bacteria can
confer an adaptive advantage to plants. Nat Plants 1(6):1–9
Hannula SE, Heinen R, Huberty M, Steinauer K, De Long JR, Jongen R et al (2021) Persistence of
plant-mediated microbial soil legacy effects in soil and inside roots. Nat Commun 12(1):1–13
Hardoim PR, Van Overbeek LS, Berg G, Pirttilä AM, Compant S, Campisano A et al (2015) The
hidden world within plants: ecological and evolutionary considerations for defining functioning
of microbial endophytes. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 79(3):293–320
Hartman K, van der Heijden MG, Wittwer RA, Banerjee S, Walser J-C, Schlaeppi K (2018)
Cropping practices manipulate abundance patterns of root and soil microbiome members paving
the way to smart farming. Microbiome 6(1):1–14
İnceoğlu Ö, Al-Soud WA, Salles JF, Semenov AV, van Elsas JD (2011) Comparative analysis of
bacterial communities in a potato field as determined by pyrosequencing. PLoS One 6(8):
e23321
Innerebner G, Knief C, Vorholt JA (2011) Protection of Arabidopsis thaliana against leaf￾pathogenic Pseudomonas syringae by Sphingomonas strains in a controlled model system.
Appl Environ Microbiol 77(10):3202–3210
Issa A et al (2018) Impacts of Paraburkholderia phytofirmans strain PsJN on tomato (Lycopersicon
esculentum L.) under high temperature. Front Plant Sci 9:1397
Jacoby R, Peukert M, Succurro A, Koprivova A, Kopriva S (2017) The role of soil microorganisms
in plant mineral nutrition—current knowledge and future directions. Front Plant Sci 8:1617
Jansson JK, Baker ES (2016) A multi-omic future for microbiome studies. Nat Microbiol 1(5):1–3
Ji SH, Gururani MA, Chun S-C (2014) Isolation and characterization of plant growth promoting
endophytic diazotrophic bacteria from Korean rice cultivars. Microbiol Res 169(1):83–98
Jiao R, Munir S, He P, Yang H, Wu Y, Wang J et al (2020) Biocontrol potential of the endophytic
Bacillus amyloliquefaciens YN201732 against tobacco powdery mildew and its growth pro￾motion. Biol Control 143:104160
Jochum MD et al (2019) Host-mediated microbiome engineering (HMME) of drought tolerance in
the wheat rhizosphere. PLoS One 14(12):e0225933
Jorjani M, Heydari A, Zamanizadeh HR, Rezaee S, Naraghi L, Zamzami P (2012) Controlling sugar
beet mortality disease by application of new bioformulations. J Plant Protect Res 52:303–307
Kalayu G (2019) Phosphate solubilizing microorganisms: promising approach as biofertilizers. Int J
Agron 2019:4917256
Kannahi M, Senbagam N (2014) Studies on siderophore production by microbial isolates obtained
from rhizosphere soil and its antibacterial activity. J Chem Pharm Res 6(4):1142–1145
Kaul S et al (2021) Engineering host microbiome for crop improvement and sustainable agriculture.
Front Microbiol 12:635917
Ke J, Wang B, Yoshikuni Y (2021) Microbiome engineering: synthetic biology of plant-associated
microbiomes in sustainable agriculture. Trends Biotechnol 39(3):244–261
Kenawy A, Dailin DJ, Abo-Zaid GA, Abd Malek R, Ambehabati KK, Zakaria KHN et al (2019)
Biosynthesis of antibiotics by PGPR and their roles in biocontrol of plant diseases. In: Plant
growth promoting Rhizobacteria for sustainable stress management. Springer, New York, pp
1–35
Kenneth OC, Nwadibe EC, Kalu AU, Unah UV (2019) Plant growth promoting rhizobacteria
(PGPR): a novel agent for sustainable food production. Am J Agric Biol Sci 14:35–54
Khan A et al (2020) Silicon and gibberellins: synergistic function in harnessing ABA signaling and
heat stress tolerance in date palm (Phoenix dactylifera L.). Plan Theory 9(5):620
Kim K, Jang Y-J, Lee S-M, Oh B-T, Chae J-C, Lee K-J (2014) Alleviation of salt stress by
Enterobacter sp. EJ01 in tomato and Arabidopsis is accompanied by up-regulation of conserved
salinity responsive factors in plants. Mol Cells 37(2):109
Knief C, Delmotte N, Chaffron S, Stark M, Innerebner G, Wassmann R et al (2012)
Metaproteogenomic analysis of microbial communities in the phyllosphere and rhizosphere of
rice. ISME J 6(7):1378–139014 Plant Microbiome Diversity and Potential for Crops and Sustainable Agriculture 359
Kohler J, Hernández JA, Caravaca F, Roldán A (2008) Plant-growth-promoting rhizobacteria and
arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi modify alleviation biochemical mechanisms in water-stressed
plants. Funct Plant Biol 35(2):141–151
Kour D, Rana KL, Kaur T, Yadav N, Halder SK, Yadav AN et al (2020) Potassium solubilizing and
mobilizing microbes: biodiversity, mechanisms of solubilization, and biotechnological impli￾cation for alleviations of abiotic stress. In: New and future developments in microbial biotech￾nology and bioengineering. Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp 177–202
Kuan KB, Othman R, Abdul Rahim K, Shamsuddin ZH (2016) Plant growth-promoting
rhizobacteria inoculation to enhance vegetative growth, nitrogen fixation and nitrogen
remobilisation of maize under greenhouse conditions. PLoS One 11(3):e0152478
Kumar M, Saxena R, Tomar RS (2017) Endophytic microorganisms: promising candidate as
biofertilizer. In: Microorganisms for green revolution. Springer, New York, pp 77–85
Kumar P, Tapan Kumar T, Singh S, Tuteja N, Prasad R, Singh J (2020) Potassium: a key modulator
for cell homeostasis. J Biotechnol 324:198–210. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbiotec.2020.10.018
Kumar A, Zhimo VY, Biasi A, Feygenberg O, Salim S, White JF et al (2021) Microbial volatiles:
prospects for plant defense and disease management. In: Food security and plant disease
management. Elsevier, pp 387–404
Ladha J, Barraquio W, Revilla L (1997) Isolation of endophytic diazotrophic bacteria from wetland
rice. In: Opportunities for biological nitrogen fixation in rice and other non-legumes. Springer,
New York, pp 15–24
Lareen A, Burton F, Schäfer P (2016) Plant root-microbe communication in shaping root
microbiomes. Plant Mol Biol 90(6):575–587
Lauber CL, Hamady M, Knight R, Fierer N (2009) Soil pH as a predictor of soil bacterial
community structure at the continental scale: a pyrosequencing-based assessment. Appl Environ
Microbiol 75(15):5111–5120
Liu H, Carvalhais LC, Crawford M, Singh E, Dennis PG, Pieterse CM et al (2017) Inner plant
values: diversity, colonization and benefits from endophytic bacteria. Front Microbiol 8:2552
Lucke M, Correa MG, Levy A (2020) The role of secretion systems, effectors, and secondary
metabolites of beneficial rhizobacteria in interactions with plants and microbes. Front Plant Sci
11:1718
Lundberg DS, Lebeis SL, Paredes SH, Yourstone S, Gehring J, Malfatti S et al (2012) Defining the
core Arabidopsis thaliana root microbiome. Nature 488(7409):86–90
Mahanty T, Bhattacharjee S, Goswami M, Bhattacharyya P, Das B, Ghosh A et al (2017)
Biofertilizers: a potential approach for sustainable agriculture development. Environ Sci Pollut
Res 24(4):3315–3335
Malla R, Prasad R, Kumari R, Giang PH, Pokharel U, Oelmueller R, Varma A (2004) Phosphorus
solubilizing symbiotic fungus Piriformospora indica. Endocytobiosis Cell Res 15(2):579–600
Mansoori M, Heydari A, Hassanzadeh N, Rezaee S, Naraghi L (2013) Evaluation of Pseudomonas
and Bacillus bacterial antagonists for biological control of cotton Verticillium wilt disease. J
Plant Protect Res 53(2):154
Márquez LM et al (2007) A virus in a fungus in a plant: three-way symbiosis required for thermal
tolerance. Science 315(5811):513–515
Mayak S, Tirosh T, Glick BR (2004a) Plant growth-promoting bacteria that confer resistance to
water stress in tomatoes and peppers. Plant Sci 166(2):525–530
Mayak S, Tirosh T, Glick BR (2004b) Plant growth-promoting bacteria confer resistance in tomato
plants to salt stress. Plant Physiol Biochem 42(6):565–572
Meena RS, Kumar S, Datta R, Lal R, Vijayakumar V, Brtnicky M et al (2020) Impact of
agrochemicals on soil microbiota and management: a review. Land 9(2):34
Mendes R, Raaijmakers JM (2015) Cross-kingdom similarities in microbiome functions. ISME J
9(9):1905–1907
Mercado-Blanco J, Rodrıguez-Jurado D, Hervás A, Jiménez-Dıaz RM (2004) Suppression of
Verticillium wilt in olive planting stocks by root-associated fluorescent Pseudomonas spp.
Biol Control 30(2):474–486360 N. R. Zaman et al.
Miotto-Vilanova L et al (2016) Burkholderia phytofirmans PsJN confers grapevine resistance
against Botrytis cinerea via a direct antimicrobial effect combined with a better resource
mobilization. Front Plant Sci 7:1236
Mishra M, Chadha N, Kumar V, Prasad R, Varma A (2014) Root endophytic fungi from two
extreme geographical regions of India. J Endocytobiosis Cell Res 25:20–26
Mitra D, Anđelković S, Panneerselvam P, Senapati A, Vasić T, Ganeshamurthy A et al (2020)
Phosphate-solubilizing microbes and biocontrol agent for plant nutrition and protection: current
perspective. Commun Soil Sci Plant Anal 51(5):645–657
Mitter B, Petric A, Shin MW, Chain PS, Hauberg-Lotte L, Reinhold-Hurek B et al (2013)
Comparative genome analysis of Burkholderia phytofirmans PsJN reveals a wide spectrum of
endophytic lifestyles based on interaction strategies with host plants. Front Plant Sci 4:120
Montañez A, Abreu C, Gill PR, Hardarson G, Sicardi M (2009) Biological nitrogen fixation in
maize (Zea mays L.) by 15N isotope-dilution and identification of associated culturable
diazotrophs. Biol Fertil Soils 45(3):253–263
Moreno-Galván AE, Cortés-Patiño S, Romero-Perdomo F, Uribe-Vélez D, Bashan Y, Bonilla RR
(2020) Proline accumulation and glutathione reductase activity induced by drought-tolerant
rhizobacteria as potential mechanisms to alleviate drought stress in Guinea grass. Appl Soil Ecol
147:103367
Morris CE, Kinkel LL (2002) Fifty years of phyllosphere microbiology: significant contributions to
research in related fields. Phyllosp Microbiol:365–375
Mueller UG et al (2021) Artificial selection on microbiomes to breed microbiomes that confer salt
tolerance to plants. Msystems 6(6):e01125–e01121
Mukhopadhyay R, Kumar D (2020) Trichoderma: a beneficial antifungal agent and insights into its
mechanism of biocontrol potential. Egypt J Biol Pest Control 30(1):1–8
Mullins AJ et al (2019) Genome mining identifies cepacin as a plant-protective metabolite of the
biopesticidal bacterium Burkholderia ambifaria. Nat Microbiol 4(6):996–1005
Naylor D, Coleman-Derr D (2018) Drought stress and root-associated bacterial communities. Front
Plant Sci 8:2223
Oelmüller R, Sherameti I, Tripathi S, Varma A (2009) Piriformospora indica, a cultivable root
endophyte with multiple biotechnological applications. Symbiosis 49(1):1–17
Ongley ED, Xiaolan Z, Tao Y (2010) Current status of agricultural and rural non-point source
pollution assessment in China. Environ Pollut 158(5):1159–1168
Pandya U, Saraf M (2014) In vitro evaluation of PGPR strains for their biocontrol potential against
fungal pathogens. In: Microbial diversity and biotechnology in food security. Springer,
New York, pp 293–305
Pang Z, Chen J, Wang T, Gao C, Li Z, Guo L et al (2021) Linking plant secondary metabolites and
plant microbiomes: a review. Front Plant Sci 12:300
Pankievicz VC, do Amaral FP, Santos KF, Agtuca B, Xu Y, Schueller MJ et al (2015) Robust
biological nitrogen fixation in a model grass–bacterial association. Plant J 81(6):907–919
Patel Priyanka J, Trivedi Goral R, Shah Rupal K, Saraf M (2019) Rhizospheric microflora: a natural
alleviator of drought stress in agricultural crops. In: Plant growth promoting rhizobacteria for
sustainable stress management. Springer, pp 103–115
Pena LC, Jungklaus GH, Savi DC, Ferreira-Maba L, Servienski A, Maia BH et al (2019) Muscodor
brasiliensis sp. nov. produces volatile organic compounds with activity against Penicillium
digitatum. Microbiol Res 221:28–35
Philippot L, Raaijmakers JM, Lemanceau P, Van Der Putten WH (2013) Going back to the roots:
the microbial ecology of the rhizosphere. Nat Rev Microbiol 11(11):789–799
Phuakjaiphaeo C, Chang C, Ruangwong O, Kunasakdakul K (2016) Isolation and identification of
an antifungal compound from endophytic Streptomyces sp. CEN 26 active against Alternaria
brassicicola. Lett Appl Microbiol 63(1):38–44
Pirttilä AM, H MPT, Baruah N, Koskimäki JJ (2021) Biofertilizers and biocontrol agents for
agriculture: how to identify and develop new potent microbial strains and traits. Microorganisms
9(4):81714 Plant Microbiome Diversity and Potential for Crops and Sustainable Agriculture 361
Poudel M et al (2021) The role of plant-associated bacteria, fungi, and viruses in drought stress
mitigation. Front Microbiol:3058
Prasad R, Bagde US, Pushpangdan P, Varma A (2008) Bacopa monniera L.: pharmacological
aspects and case study involving Piriformospora indica. Int J Integr Biol 3:100–110
Prasad R, Kamal S, Sharma PK, Oelmueller R, Varma A (2013) Root endophyte Piriformospora
indica DSM 11827 alters plant morphology, enhances biomass and antioxidant activity of
medicinal plant Bacopa monniera. J Basic Microbiol 53(12):1016–1024
Puri A, Padda KP, Chanway CP (2018) Evidence of endophytic diazotrophic bacteria in lodgepole
pine and hybrid white spruce trees growing in soils with different nutrient statuses in the west
Chilcotin region of British Columbia, Canada. For Ecol Manag 430:558–565
Radzki W, Mañero FG, Algar E, García JL, García-Villaraco A, Solano BR (2013) Bacterial
siderophores efficiently provide iron to iron-starved tomato plants in hydroponics culture.
Antonie Van Leeuwenhoek 104(3):321–330
Raghuwanshi R, Prasad JK (2018) Perspectives of rhizobacteria with ACC deaminase activity in
plant growth under abiotic stress. Root Biol:303–321
Raza A, Razzaq A, Mehmood SS, Zou X, Zhang X, Lv Y et al (2019) Impact of climate change on
crops adaptation and strategies to tackle its outcome: a review. Plan Theory 8(2):34
Redford AJ, Bowers RM, Knight R, Linhart Y, Fierer N (2010) The ecology of the phyllosphere:
geographic and phylogenetic variability in the distribution of bacteria on tree leaves. Environ
Microbiol 12(11):2885–2893
Reetha AK, Pavani SL, Mohan S (2014) Hydrogen cyanide production ability by bacterial
antagonist and their antibiotics inhibition potential on Macrophomina phaseolina (Tassi.)
Goid. Int J Curr Microbiol App Sci 3(5):172–178
Rojas-Tapias D, Moreno-Galván A, Pardo-Díaz S, Obando M, Rivera D, Bonilla R (2012) Effect of
inoculation with plant growth-promoting bacteria (PGPB) on amelioration of saline stress in
maize (Zea mays). Appl Soil Ecol 61:264–272
Ruinen J (1965) The phyllosphere: III. Nitrogen fixation in the phyllosphere. Plant Soil:375–394
Ruiz-Lozano JM (2003) Arbuscular mycorrhizal symbiosis and alleviation of osmotic stress. New
perspectives for molecular studies. Mycorrhiza 13(6):309–317
Ryu M-H et al (2020) Control of nitrogen fixation in bacteria that associate with cereals. Nat
Microbiol 5(2):314–330
Saleem M, Arshad M, Hussain S, Bhatti AS (2007) Perspective of plant growth promoting
rhizobacteria (PGPR) containing ACC deaminase in stress agriculture. J Ind Microbiol
Biotechnol 34(10):635–648
Sandrini M, Nerva L, Sillo F, Balestrini R, Chitarra W, Zampieri E (2022) Abiotic stress and
belowground microbiome: the potential of omics approaches. Int J Mol Sci 23(3):1091
Sang M, Kim KD (2012) The volatile-producing Flavobacterium johnsoniae strain GSE09 shows
biocontrol activity against Phytophthora capsici in pepper. J Appl Microbiol 113(2):383–398
Sarhan EA, Shehata HS (2014) Potential plant growth-promoting activity of Pseudomonas spp. and
Bacillus spp. as biocontrol agents against damping-off in alfalfa. Plant Pathol J 13(1):8–17
Sarrocco S, Vannacci G (2018) Preharvest application of beneficial fungi as a strategy to prevent
postharvest mycotoxin contamination: a review. Crop Prot 110:160–170
Sayyed R, Chincholkar S, Reddy M, Gangurde N, Patel P (2013) Siderophore producing PGPR for
crop nutrition and phytopathogen suppression. In: Bacteria in agrobiology: disease manage￾ment. Springer, New York, pp 449–471
Scherer H (2005) Fertilizers and fertilization. In: Hillel D (ed) Encyclopedia of soils in the
environment. Elsevier, Amsterdam
Schlaeppi K, Bulgarelli D (2015) The plant microbiome at work. Mol Plant-Microbe Interact 28(3):
212–217
Sergaki C, Lagunas B, Lidbury I, Gifford ML, Schäfer P (2018) Challenges and approaches in
microbiome research: from fundamental to applied. Front Plant Sci 9:1205362 N. R. Zaman et al.
Sessitsch A, Reiter B, Berg G (2004) Endophytic bacterial communities of field-grown potato
plants and their plant-growth-promoting and antagonistic abilities. Can J Microbiol 50(4):
239–249
Shabanamol S, Divya K, George TK, Rishad K, Sreekumar T, Jisha M (2018) Characterization and
in planta nitrogen fixation of plant growth promoting endophytic diazotrophic Lysinibacillus
sphaericus isolated from rice (Oryza sativa). Physiol Mol Plant Pathol 102:46–54
Sharma SB, Sayyed RZ, Trivedi MH, Gobi TA (2013) Phosphate solubilizing microbes: sustainable
approach for managing phosphorus deficiency in agricultural soils. Springerplus 2(1):1–14
Shekhawat K, Saad MM, Sheikh A, Mariappan K, Al-Mahmoudi H, Abdulhakim F et al (2021)
Root endophyte induced plant thermotolerance by constitutive chromatin modification at heat
stress memory gene loci. EMBO Rep 22(3):e51049
Shi J, Liu A, Li X, Feng S, Chen W (2010) Identification of endophytic bacterial strain MGP1
selected from papaya and its biocontrol effects on pathogens infecting harvested papaya fruit. J
Sci Food Agric 90(2):227–232
Shrivastava S, Varma A (2014) From Piriformospora indica to rootonic: a review. Afr J Microbiol
Res 8(32):2984–2992
Shrivastava M, Srivastava P, D’souza S (2018) Phosphate-solubilizing microbes: diversity and
phosphates solubilization mechanism. In: Role of rhizospheric microbes in soil. Springer,
New York, pp 137–165
Singh D, Raina TK, Kumar A, Singh J, Prasad R (2019) Plant microbiome: a reservoir of novel
genes and metabolites. Plant Gene. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plgene.2019.100177
Singh S, Singh UB, Trivdi M, Malviya D, Sahu PK, Roy M et al (2021) Restructuring the cellular
responses: connecting microbial intervention with ecological fitness and adaptiveness to the
maize (Zea mays L.) grown in saline–sodic soil. Front Microbiol 11:568325
Sponsler DB, Grozinger CM, Hitaj C, Rundlöf M, Botías C, Code A et al (2019) Pesticides and
pollinators: a socioecological synthesis. Sci Total Environ 662:1012–1027
Sukweenadhi J, Kim Y-J, Choi E-S, Koh S-C, Lee S-W, Kim Y-J et al (2015) Paenibacillus
yonginensis DCY84T induces changes in Arabidopsis thaliana gene expression against alumi￾num, drought, and salt stress. Microbiol Res 172:7–15
Tahir HAS, Gu Q, Wu H, Niu Y, Huo R, Gao X (2017) Bacillus volatiles adversely affect the
physiology and ultrastructure of Ralstonia solanacearum and induce systemic resistance in
tobacco against bacterial wilt. Sci Rep 7(1):1–15
Tan H, Zhou S, Deng Z, He M, Cao L (2011) Ribosomal-sequence-directed selection for endo￾phytic streptomycete strains antagonistic to Ralstonia solanacearum to control tomato bacterial
wilt. Biol Control 59(2):245–254
Temme K, Zhao D, Voigt CA (2012) Refactoring the nitrogen fixation gene cluster from Klebsiella
oxytoca. Proc Natl Acad Sci 109(18):7085–7090
Teotia P, Kumar V, Kumar M, Shrivastava N, Varma A (2016) Rhizosphere microbes: potassium
solubilization and crop productivity—present and future aspects. In: Potassium solubilizing
microorganisms for sustainable agriculture. Springer, New York, pp 315–325
Tjamos S, Antoniou P, Kazantzidou A, Antonopoulos D, Papageorgiou I, Tjamos E (2004)
Aspergillus Niger and Aspergillus carbonarius in Corinth raisin and wine-producing vineyards
in Greece: population composition, ochratoxin A production and chemical control. J
Phytopathol 152(4):250–255
Tiryaki D, Aydın İ, Atıcı Ö (2019) Psychrotolerant bacteria isolated from the leaf apoplast of cold￾adapted wild plants improve the cold resistance of bean (Phaseolus vulgaris L.) under low
temperature. Cryobiology 86:111–119
Tkacz A, Poole P (2021) The plant microbiome: the dark and dirty secrets of plant growth. Plants
People Planet 3(2):124–129
Toju H et al (2018) Core microbiomes for sustainable agroecosystems. Nat Plants 4(5):247–257
Trivedi P, Leach JE, Tringe SG, Sa T, Singh BK (2020) Plant–microbiome interactions: from
community assembly to plant health. Nat Rev Microbiol 18(11):607–62114 Plant Microbiome Diversity and Potential for Crops and Sustainable Agriculture 363
Tsegay Z, Gizaw B, Tefera G (2016) Pharmacobiology and medical sciences. Int J Curr Trend
Pharmacobiol Med Sci 1(2):37–44
Turner TR, James EK, Poole PS (2013) The plant microbiome. Genome Biol 14(6):1–10
Upadhyay S, Singh G, Singh D (2016) Mechanism and understanding of PGPR: an approach for
sustainable agriculture under abiotic stresses. J Plant Sci 134(2):24–75
Uroz S, Buée M, Murat C, Frey-Klett P, Martin F (2010) Pyrosequencing reveals a contrasted
bacterial diversity between oak rhizosphere and surrounding soil. Environ Microbiol Rep 2(2):
281–288
van der Heijden MG, Martin FM, Selosse MA, Sanders IR (2015) Mycorrhizal ecology and
evolution: the past, the present, and the future. New Phytol 205(4):1406–1423
Velivelli SL, Sessitsch A, Prestwich BD (2014) The role of microbial inoculants in integrated crop
management systems. Potato Res 57(3):291–309
Villa-Rodriguez E, Parra-Cota F, Castro-Longoria E, López-Cervantes J, de los Santos-Villalobos S
(2019) Bacillus subtilis TE3: a promising biological control agent against Bipolaris sorokiniana,
the causal agent of spot blotch in wheat (Triticum turgidum L. subsp. durum). Biol Control 132:
135–143
Vorholt JA (2012) Microbial life in the phyllosphere. Nat Rev Microbiol 10(12):828–840
Vorholt JA et al (2017) Establishing causality: opportunities of synthetic communities for plant
microbiome research. Cell Host Microbe 22(2):142–155
Voříšková J, Baldrian P (2013) Fungal community on decomposing leaf litter undergoes rapid
successional changes. ISME J 7(3):477–486
Wagner MR, Lundberg DS, Del Rio TG, Tringe SG, Dangl JL, Mitchell-Olds T (2016) Host
genotype and age shape the leaf and root microbiomes of a wild perennial plant. Nat Commun
7(1):1–15
Waller F, Achatz B, Baltruschat H, Fodor J, Becker K, Fischer M et al (2005) The endophytic
fungus Piriformospora indica reprograms barley to salt-stress tolerance, disease resistance, and
higher yield. Proc Natl Acad Sci 102(38):13386–13391
Wang G, Liu Z, Lin R, Li E, Mao Z, Ling J et al (2016) Biosynthesis of antibiotic leucinostatins in
bio-control fungus Purpureocillium lilacinum and their inhibition on Phytophthora revealed by
genome mining. PLoS Pathog 12(7):e1005685
Watanabe K, Kohzu A, Suda W, Yamamura S, Takamatsu T, Takenaka A et al (2016) Microbial
nitrification in throughfall of a Japanese cedar associated with archaea from the tree canopy.
Springerplus 5(1):1–15
Wei F, Zhang Y, Shi Y, Feng H, Zhao L, Feng Z et al (2019a) Evaluation of the biocontrol potential
of endophytic fungus fusarium solani CEF559 against Verticillium dahliae in cotton plant.
Biomed Res Int 2019:1
Wei F, Zhao L, Xu X, Feng H, Shi Y, Deakin G et al (2019b) Cultivar-dependent variation of the
cotton rhizosphere and endosphere microbiome under field conditions. Front Plant Sci 10:1659
Weselowski B, Nathoo N, Eastman AW, MacDonald J, Yuan Z-C (2016) Isolation, identification
and characterization of Paenibacillus polymyxa CR1 with potentials for biopesticide,
biofertilization, biomass degradation and biofuel production. BMC Microbiol 16(1):1–10
Wonglom P, Ito S-i, Sunpapao A (2020) Volatile organic compounds emitted from endophytic
fungus Trichoderma asperellum T1 mediate antifungal activity, defense response and promote
plant growth in lettuce (Lactuca sativa). Fungal Ecol 43:100867
Woodward C, Hansen L, Beckwith F, Redman RS, Rodriguez RJ (2012) Symbiogenics: an
epigenetic approach to mitigating impacts of climate change on plants. HortScience 47
(6):699–703
Yin C, Casa Vargas JM, Schlatter DC, Hagerty CH, Hulbert SH, Paulitz TC (2021) Rhizosphere
community selection reveals bacteria associated with reduced root disease. Microbiome 9(1):
1–18
Yu K, Pieterse CM, Bakker PA, Berendsen RL (2019) Beneficial microbes going underground of
root immunity. Plant Cell Environ 42(10):2860–2870364 N. R. Zaman et al.
Zaman NR, Chowdhury UF, Reza RN, Chowdhury FT, Sarker M, Hossain MM et al (2021) Plant
growth promoting endophyte Burkholderia contaminans NZ antagonizes phytopathogen
Macrophomina phaseolina through melanin synthesis and pyrrolnitrin inhibition. PLoS One
16(9):e0257863
Zhang H, Kim M-S, Sun Y, Dowd SE, Shi H, Paré PW (2008) Soil bacteria confer plant salt
tolerance by tissuespecific regulation of the sodium transporter HKT1. Mol Plant-Microbe
Interact 21(6):737–744
Zhao L-j, Yang X-n, Li X-y, Wei M, Feng L (2011) Antifungal, insecticidal and herbicidal
properties of volatile components from Paenibacillus polymyxa strain BMP-11. Agric Sci
China 10(5):728–736
Zheng B-X, Hao X-L, Ding K, Zhou G-W, Chen Q-L, Zhang J-B et al (2017) Long-term nitrogen
fertilization decreased the abundance of inorganic phosphate solubilizing bacteria in an alkaline
soil. Sci Rep 7(1):1–10365
Chapter 15
Endophytic Phytohormone Production
and Utilization of Functional Traits in Plant
Growth Promotion
Aahuti Sharma, Pankaj Kumar, Vikas Pahal, Jitendra Kumar,
and Shiv Shankar Pandey
Abstract Microorganisms such as bacteria, fungi, or actinomycetes play an impor￾tant role in plant growth and development. They are ubiquitous in nature. Endo￾phytes are beneficial microbes that live within host plant tissue without causing
harmful effects to their host. They are present in all plants species and show
symbiotic association with them. Population of the endophytes depends on region
where the host plant grows and also affected by climatic condition. Endophytic
microbes utilize various mechanisms to enhance plant growth and productivity and
also play important role in plant defense mechanism against different environmental
condition (biotic and abiotic stresses). Phytohormones are small molecule growth
regulators which are synthesized during the plant metabolism. The most common
phytohormones are auxins, cytokinin, gibberellin, abscisic acid, ethylene,
brassinosteroids, salicylic acid, jasmonates, and strigolactones. Endophytes also
produce phytohormones which promote plant growth and change the morphology
and physiology of the plant. During stress responses, biosynthetic and signaling
pathways of phytohormones play major role in coordinating the development of
plant. We have focused on endophytic phytohormone production and their role in
plant growth in this chapter.
A. Sharma · S. S. Pandey
Department of Biotechnology, CSIR-IHBT, Palampur, Himachal Pradesh, India
P. Kumar (*)
Department of Microbiology, Dolphin (PG) Institute of Biomedical and Natural Science,
Dehradun, Uttarakhand, India
V. Pahal
Department of Microbiology, Dolphin (PG) College of Science and Agriculture, Fatehgarh,
Punjab, India
J. Kumar
Department of Biosciences, UIBT, Chandigarh University, Mohali, Punjab, India
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2023
S. Chhabra et al. (eds.), Plant Microbiome for Plant Productivity and Sustainable
Agriculture, Microorganisms for Sustainability 37,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-19-5029-2_15Keywords Endophytes · Phytohormones · Auxin · Gibberellic acids · ACC ·
Jasmonic acid
366 A. Sharma et al.
Abbreviations
4-Cl-IAA 4-Chloroindole-3-Acetic Acid
ABA Abscisic acid
ACC 1-Aminocyclopropane-1-Carboxylic Acid
CPP Copalyl diphosphate
GA Gibberellic Acid
IAA Indole-3-Acetic Acid
IAld Indole-3-Acetaldehyde
IAM Indole-3-Acetamide
IAN Indole-3-Acetonitrile
IAOX Indole-3-Acetaldoxine
IBA Indole-3-Butyric Acid
ICS Isochorismate Synthase
IPA Indole-3-Pyruvic Acid
IPP Isopentenyl pyrophosphate
IPT Isopentenyl Transferase
JA Jasmonic Acid
MEP Methyl Erythritol Phosphate
MVA Mevalonic Acid
PAL Phenylalanine Ammonia-Lyase
SA Salicyclic Acid
TAM Tryptamine
Trp Tryptophan
15.1 Introduction
The term endophytes was first introduced by De Bary (1866), where endo means
inside and phytes means plants. It is defined as any organisms that grow within plant
tissue without harming their hosts (Yadav 2018). Endophytes exist in all plants and
live asymptomatically in the plant cellular environment. During mutualistic interac￾tion, endophytes perform specific function such as synthesis of secondary metabolite
or signaling molecules that function as external and internal signals (Tidke et al.
2018). Endophytes show complex interaction with their host plant which involves
mutualism and antagonism. Their association with plant can also be obligate and
facultative. Microorganisms which do not reproduce outside the plant tissue,
depends on plant metabolites for their survival are termed as obligate endophytes
(Hardoim et al. 2008). Endophytes that live freely in soil at a definite stage of their15 Endophytic Phytohormone Production and Utilization of Functional Traits... 367
life but they are usually entered to plants from the surrounding environment are
defined as facultative endophytes (Abreu-Tarazi et al. 2010). Endophytes show
symbiotic relationship with plants, which improve the physiological fitness and
metabolite profile of plants while the plants provide shelter and food for endophytes
(Chadha et al. 2015; Mishra et al. 2015; Kumar et al. 2017). Interaction of endo￾phytes with plants depends on the capacity of microorganisms to use the exudates
produced by the plant roots as their energy source. They are ubiquitous in nature and
present in all species of plants. Endophytes population in plants species is highly
variable and depends on different components such as host plant developmental
stage, inoculums density, and climatic conditions (Dudeja and Giri 2014). Types of
endophytes also vary from plant to plant and species to species. Endophytes are
generally isolated from the internal tissue of plants after surface sterilization by using
1–2% sodium hypochlorite and 70% ethanol (Sahu et al. 2022). The role of endo￾phytes is known to influence overall host plant growth, photosynthesis, nutrient
absorption and physiological processes. Beneficial endophytes produce many com￾pounds which are useful for protecting plants from environmental conditions,
increase plant growth and sustainability, while living inside the host plant (Sarkar
et al. 2021). Endophytic microbes also improve plant’s ability to tolerate various
stresses such as nutrient, temperature, salinity, drought and enhance the ability of
resistance against plant insects and pests (Joseph and Priya 2011; Prasad et al. 2013,
2018). Due to abiotic stresses, the endogenous levels of phytohormones, such as
auxins, gibberellins (GA), cytokinin, abscisic acid (ABA), jasmonic acid, and
salicylic acid (SA), alter the plant growth pattern and play crucial role in plant￾microbe interaction (Singh et al. 2021; Khan et al. 2014). Endophytic colonization
can be local or systemic; they colonize in the stems, bark, roots, petiole, fruits, buds,
seeds, and leaf segments with midribs (Specian et al. 2012; Stepniewska and Kuzniar
2013). They produce phytohormones and bioactive compounds which are useful in
industries, agriculture, and medical science (Singh et al. 2021). Phytohormones are
important growth regulators which have a prominent impact on plant metabolism
and they are synthesized in defined organs of the plant (Kazan 2013). Endophytes
secrete phytohormones and help in bidirectional nutrient transfer to improve
nutritional level and plant health by protecting against phytopathogens (Andreozzi
et al. 2019; Shen et al. 2019). Endophytes secrete various components such as
secondary metabolites, serves as biocontrol agents, antimicrobial agents and they
secrete antiviral compounds and also enhance natural antioxidants development,
antibiotics, and insecticidal product (Gouda et al. 2016; Varma et al. 2017a, b).
Endophytic microorganism helps in boosting plant growth through several mecha￾nism. The general mechanisms employed by endophytic bacteria and fungi are
indirect and direct mechanisms. In case of direct mechanisms microorgan￾isms directly provide the nutrients and other resources that are necessary for plant
growth or modulate plant hormonal levels. In indirect mechanisms, plant growth
inhibition thwart by endophytic microbes by producing of siderophores, lytic
enzymes, antibiotics, systemic resistance induction, alteration in ethylene levels,
and direct competition with phytopathogens (Glick 2012; Chhabra and Dowling
2017).368 A. Sharma et al.
15.2 Endophytic Phytohormones
15.2.1 Auxin
The first hormone discovered in plants was auxin. First time, Dutch botanist Fritz
W. Went (1928) isolated auxin from the tip of oat coleoptiles in the gelatin block.
Auxins are important plant hormones that play vital role in plant’s daily growth and
life (Grossmann 2010). It plays vital role in much of the early physiological
processes such as plant cell expansion. Auxin enhances plant cell division, cell
elongation, differentiation and extension, stimulates seed and tuber germination,
and increases the rate of development of root and xylem (Fadiji and Babalola 2020).
The most common natural auxin are indole-3-acetic acid (IAA), indole-3-butyric
acid (IBA), and 4-Chloroindole-3-acetic acid (4-Cl-IAA) (Fig. 15.1). Indole -3-
acetic acid (IAA) is the most common auxin, which is produced by plants and also
by bacteria and fungi. Structurally, IAA is related to the amino acid tryptophan
which is precursor for the biosynthesis of auxin (Duca et al. 2014). IAA production
by endophytes improved apical dominance and also stimulates adventitious and
lateral root development, also promotes plant root biomass, surface area, and
mediate resistance stress condition (Chen et al. 2014; Ali et al. 2017). All the IAA
producing bacteria are not beneficial to plants. Generally, at any particular time
plants are very sensitive to the amount of IAA present in plant tissue. IAA-producing
endophytes must provide appropriate concentration of IAA when combined with the
amount of the hormones produced by the plant. Less concentration of IAA produc￾tion by the endophytes can enhance plant growth, whereas the high amount of IAA
prevents growth and development (Malik and Sindhu 2011). Mostly IAA are
produced in young leaves and buds of plant. There are many ways by which IAA
helps the plant growth. In young stem, IAA helps to increase cell wall extensibility.
IAA productions have been reported in both Gram-negative and Gram-positive
bacteria. IAA-producing endophytic bacterial genera include Acetobacter, Rhizo￾bium, Azospirillum, Azotobacter, Klebsiella, Alcaligenes, Pantoea, Herbaspirillum,
Burkholderia, Pseudomonas, Bacillus, Enterobacter, Methylobacterium,
Citrobacter, Rhodococcus, and Streptomyces (Apine and Jadhav 2011; Sun et al.
2013). Some fungi (e.g., Colletotrichum acutatum, Fusarium proliferatum, F.
Fig. 15.1 Structure of three natural auxins15 Endophytic Phytohormone Production and Utilization of Functional Traits... 369
Fig. 15.2 Tryptophan-dependent pathways of IAA biosynthesis
fujikuroi, F. oxysporum, Muscodor cinnamomi, Piriformospora indica, Ustilago
esculenta, and U. maydis) mainly use tryptophan-dependent pathways for IAA
biosynthesis (Hilbert et al. 2012; Tsavkelova et al. 2012; Sun et al. 2014; Nutaratat
et al. 2016). Moreover, amount of IAA in plants can also determine whether bacterial
IAA promote or suppresses plant growth, as bacterial IAA production usually
benefits those plants that have low endogenous level of IAA (Glick 2012). Endo￾phytic bacteria produce IAA is the major effector molecule in pathogenesis,
phytostimulation, and plant–microbe interaction (Gao and Tao 2012). IAA in plants
is synthesized by different biosynthetic pathways. The main precursor for IAA
synthesis is tryptophan, which helps to alter the level of biosynthesis (Kundan
et al. 2015). IAA production is stimulated by tryptophan and it also regulates the
IAA synthesis by inhibiting anthranilate because it reduces the IAA synthesis
(Fig. 15.2). The types of pathway of IAA production by endophytes within plants
depend on the nature of the resulting plant–microbe interactions. In many plant￾beneficial bacteria, IAA production occurs via the indole-3-pyruvate pathway (IPA),
whereas in many pathogenic bacteria indole-3-acetamide pathways (IAM) were used
for the synthesis of IAA (Hardoim et al. 2008). Assumpção et al. (2009) reported
several endophytes from soybean seeds as Acinetobacter, Bacillus, Brevibacterium,
Enterobacter, Methylobacterium, Paenibacillus, Pseudomonas, Ochrobactrum,
Streptomyces, and Tsukamurella produced IAA in vitro but only Enterobacter
sp. increased the dry biomass of root of soybean. In another study, IAA-producing
bacterial endophytes (Bacillus cereus and B. subtilis) and fungal endophytes (Pen￾icillium crustosum and Penicillium chrysogenum) isolated from Teucrium polium
stimulated the plant growth and increased biomass of maize in comparison to
uninoculated plants (Hassan 2017). Chen et al. (2017) reported that endophytic
IAA producing Pseudomonas fluorescens Sasm05 promoted the growth and photo￾synthesis of Sedum alfredii.370 A. Sharma et al.
15.2.2 Gibberellic Acid
Gibberellins (GAs), are chemicals produced naturally by plants, are considered as
phytohormones. It is a large family of diterpenoids that are derived from tetracyclic
gibberellane carbon structure, which are arranged in either four or five ring structure.
GA was first identified in Japan in 1926, as a metabolic by-product of the plant
pathogen Gibberella fujikuroi (thus the name), which afflicts rice plants. Gibberella
fujikuroi causes Bakane or Foolish seedling disease in rice. Gibberellins stimulate a
number of plant’s metabolic functions, which are essential for plant development
and growth including seed germination, leaf growth promotion, stem elongation,
stimulation of flowering, fruit development, and senescence (Khan et al. 2015). They
also act as chemical messenger and help by breaking dormancy and stimulate the
enzyme (Alpha amylase) and help in hydrolysis of starch present in many seeds into
glucose to be used in cellular respiration (Kundan et al. 2015). There are many types
of GAs but the main types of GAs include molecules with 20 carbon atom (C20-GAs)
and other molecules with 19 carbon (C19-GAs), having variable fifth ring of a
lactone (Fig. 15.3). The biologically active gibberellin is GA1 which helps in
controlling the stem growth and development (Bömke and Tudzynski 2009; Sponsel
and Hedden 2010).
Gibberellin also plays an important role in mediating the effects of environmental
changes on plant growth. Environmental factors including temperature and photo￾period can change the level of active gibberellins by affecting gene transcription for
particular steps in biosynthetic pathway. The main precursor of gibberellins biosyn￾thesis is isoprene unit (5C). The basic isoprenoid unit is isopentenyl diphosphate
(IPP) which is generated by two ways: the mevalonic acid (MVA) and methyl
erythritol phosphate (MEP) pathway. MVA pathway occurs in cytoplasm whereas
the MEP pathway occurs in plastids (Hedden and Thomas 2012). Biosynthetic
pathway of gibberellins can be divided into three stages according to their different
cellular compartment and the enzyme involved (Fig. 15.4). First step is the produc￾tion of terpenoid precursors (ent- Kaurene) occur in plastids. In second step,
oxidation reaction occur in endoplasmic reticulum to form GA12 and GA53 and in
last step formation of all other gibberellins from GA12 and GA53 occur in cytosol
(Salazar-Cerezoa et al. 2018). Bacillus siamensis BE76 an endophytic bacteria
Fig. 15.3 Structure of C20-GAs and C19-GAs15 Endophytic Phytohormone Production and Utilization of Functional Traits... 371
Fig. 15.4 Gibberellin
biosynthetic pathway and
the enzymes involved in the
metabolic steps
isolated from stems of banana have the ability to produce a significant amount of
gibberellic acid which provides beneficial effects on crop yield and prevent envi￾ronmental pollution by avoiding excessive applications of chemical fertilizers372 A. Sharma et al.
(Ambawade and Pathade 2015). In Cicer arietinum the endophytic bacteria
B. cereus MEN8 produce maximum amount of GAs and increase seed germination
capacity and vegetative growth, i.e., root/shoot length and fresh/dry weight (Baliyan
et al. 2021).
15.2.3 Cytokinin
Cytokinins are plant growth hormones which are basic in nature. The first cytokinin
was discovered from degraded autoclaved Herring sperm DNA by Miller et al.
(1955). The first natural cytokinin was obtained from unripe maize grains or kernels
by Letham et al. (1964). It is also present in coconut milk. Cytokinin is known as
zeatin (6-hydroxy 3-methyl trans 2-butenyl amino-purine) (Fig. 15.5) or kinetin
(6-furfuryl amino-purine). 18 types of Cytokinins have been discovered till date.
Cytokinin promote cytokinesis (= cell division) either alone or in conjunction with
auxin. Skoog and Tsui et al. (1948) found that callus from intermodal segments of
Tobacco proliferate only when in addition to auxin, the nutrient medium is provided
with yeast extract, vascular tissues, coconut milk or DNA because of presence of
cytokinin in these sources. Cytokinin is also produced by endophytes which can be
used to prolong the shelf life of cut flowers, fruits, and leafy vegetables. In addition,
endophytes do have potential to produce many important pharmaceutically bioactive
compounds (Bhore et al. 2010). Cytokinins like compounds are not only produced
by plants but other prokaryotic and eukaryotic organisms also produce cytokinins
such as bacteria and fungi. Cytokinins are important group of phytohormones that
influence not only many aspects of plant physiology, growth, and development of
plant but also show the interaction with microorganisms, including pathogens
(Grosskinsky et al. 2016). Cytokinins help in plant to promote cell division of
roots and shoots but the main functions of cytokinins are cell growth. It also delay
the senescence or aging of tissue and thus effect the leaf growth, also inhibit the
premature senescence of leaf (Hwang et al. 2012) and affect the apical dominancy.
The farmers use it for increasing the overall yield and quality of crops.
Cytokinins are isoprenoid substituted adenine molecules. Under various environ￾mental stages, the activity and type of cytokinin molecules differ remarkably
Fig. 15.5 Cis and trans
-zeatin15 Endophytic Phytohormone Production and Utilization of Functional Traits... 373
Fig. 15.6 Cytokinin
synthesis pathway (Kieber
and Schaller 2014)
between divergent plant species and tissues at different developmental stages. For
the synthesis of cytokinins, the first enzyme is isopentenyl transferases (IPTs) which
are involved in catalyzing isoprenoid to other various types of cytokinins including
zeatin, N6
-isopentenyl-adenine (Fig. 15.6). The most common form of cytokinin in
plants is Trans - zeatin. Cytokinins are metabolized and inactivated through conju￾gation to sugars or through degradation by cytokinin oxidases (Akhtar et al. 2019).
Endophytic fungus Phomopsis liquidambari B3 can enhance cytokinin, auxin,
ethylene level by establishing a mutualistic symbiotic relationship with Oryza sativa
L. which enhanced nitrogen uptake, yield, and metabolism in rice (Li et al. 2018).
Cytokinin-producing bacterial endophytes Pseudomonas resinovorans and
Paenibacillus polymyxa were isolated from Sambung Nyawa (Gynura procumbens
(Lour.) Merr.) and can also be used as plant growth-promoter (Bhore et al. 2010).374 A. Sharma et al.
15.2.4 Ethylene
Ethylenes are compound which can be produced by almost all parts of higher plants,
although the rate of production of ethylene depends on the type of tissue of plant and
development stage of plants. The most active site for biosynthesis of ethylene is
meristematic region and nodal region of plant. During leaf abscission, root nodula￾tion, flower senescence, and fruit ripening, production of ethylene also increases
(Sun et al. 2016). The production of ethylene depends on its rate of production
versus its rate of escaping into the environment. It is produced more in dividing cells
mostly in dark (Kundan et al. 2015). The main precursor of ethylene (Fig. 15.7)
production is methionine, and ACC (1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid) acts
as an intermediate, which helps in the conversion of methionine to ethylene and
provides the nitrogen sources α-ketobutyrate and ammonia from the ethylene pre￾cursor ACC. Therefore, under nitrogen-limitation conditions the bacterial endo￾phytes can promote plant growth through the secretion of ACC deaminases (Sun
et al. 2009). Decrease in the level of ethylene in plant relies on the ability of the ACC
deaminase-positive bacteria to take up ACC before its oxidation by the plant ACC
oxidase (Fig. 15.8). ACC deaminase-inducing endophytes are good plant-growth
promoters, because they ameliorate plant stress by blocking ethylene production
(Santoyo et al. 2016).
Ethylene is the first gaseous hormone formed by breakdown of methionine
(amino acid) that is present in all the cells. The presence of ACC deaminase￾containing endophytic microorganisms promotes tolerance against both abiotic and
biotic stress that normally induces plant growth by inhibiting levels of ethylene.
ACC deaminase-containing plant growth-promoting bacteria can effectively protect
against growth inhibition by salinity, drought, flooding, cool, high levels of metals
and organic contaminants, the presence of fungal and bacterial pathogens, as well as
temperature stress (Gamalero et al. 2020). Under these stressed conditions, the
endogenous production of ethylene is induced more to have the adverse effect on
root growth and eventually on whole plant. Any type of wounds in plants can also
induce ethylene biosynthesis. Biotic and abiotic stresses result in an increased
ethylene production in plants that leads to inhibition of root elongation, formation
of root hair, and development of lateral roots (Afzal et al. 2019). The ACC deam￾inase expressing endophyte Pseudomonas spp. enhances NaCl stress tolerance by
reducing stress-related ethylene production, resulting in improved growth, photo￾synthetic performance, and ionic balance in tomato plants (Win et al. 2018). Khan
et al. (2016) isolated edophytic bacteria from Moringa peregrina having ability to
Fig. 15.7 Structure of
ethylene15 Endophytic Phytohormone Production and Utilization of Functional Traits. . . 375
Fig. 15.8 Biosynthetic pathway of ethylene synthesis from methionine (Adams and Yang 1979)
Fig. 15.9 Structure of
abscisic acid
produce indole acetic acid and ACC deaminase enhanced the the growth of Solanum
lycopersicum.
15.2.5 Abscisic Acid
Abscisic acid (ABA) is ubiquitous plant hormone present in vascular plants.
Abscisic acid (Fig. 15.9) is a signaling molecule mediating bud growth, seed
dormancy, and adaptation to various environmental stresses (Hauser et al. 2011).
ABA also protects plant by inducing stomatal closure and thereby reduces water loss
(Herrera-Medina et al. 2007). It is a derivative of sesquiterpenoid, which are group of
phytohormones that helps in the regulation of plant growth.
Under drought stress condition, ABA shows different effects on the growth of
root and shoot of the plant (Bano et al. 2012). ABA is required for the development
of desiccation tolerance in the developing embryo, the synthesis of storage proteins,
and the acquisition of dormancy (Nonogaki 2019). During abiotic stress the expres￾sion of stress responsive genes is regulated by ABA-induced and -mediated signal￾ing, leading to better elicitation of tolerance responses (Sah et al. 2016).
ABA biosynthesis takes place in plastid and cytosol, which begins with
isopentenyl diphosphate (as precursor of terpenoid) and leads to the synthesis of376 A. Sharma et al.
Fig. 15.10 Biosynthetic
pathway of abscisic acid
(Finkelstein 2013)
the C40Xanthophyll (i.e., oxygenated carotenoid) Violaxanthin. Violaxanthin syn￾thesis is catalyzed by Zeaxanthin epoxidase which convert Violaxanthin into C40
compound neoxanthin, which cleaved to form the C15 compound Xanthoxal, finally
Xanthoxal is converted to ABA via oxidative steps involving the intermediates ABA
aldehyde and the final step is catalyzed by aldehyde oxidases and synthesize ABA
(Fig. 15.10). Cohen et al. (2009) suggested that both ABA and gas producing
Azospirillum contribute to water-stress alleviation of plants. Seed born endo￾phytic B. amyloliquefaciens RWL-1 produce ABA under saline conditions signifi￾cantly increased the Oryza sativa growth (Shahzad et al. 2017).15 Endophytic Phytohormone Production and Utilization of Functional Traits... 377
15.2.6 Salicylic Acid
Salicylic acid (SA) is a phytohormone that plays a main role in plant defense under
biotic and abiotic stimuli through the alteration of antioxidative enzyme activities
(Ahmad et al. 2011; da Silva et al. 2017). SA is best known for endogenous
signaling, mediating host responses against pathogen infection. Its biosynthesis in
plants is not fully understood, but its role in plant defense activation has been well
established. The IUPAC name of salicylic acid is 2-hydroxybenzoic acid
(Fig. 15.11). SA is derived from two pathways, i.e., ICS and PAL pathway. Both
the pathways start from chorismate (Lefevere et al. 2020). SA modulates several
physiological processes involved in plant stress tolerance through stress-activated
signal pathways and response mechanisms (Ahmad et al. 2011; Janda et al. 2012).
SA treated plants showed better growth in terms of transcription, biomass accumu￾lation, and promotion of cell differentiation and also showed antioxidant enzyme
activity and higher photosynthetic rate of plant (da Silva et al. 2017).
Plants synthesize SA from cinnamate produced by the activity of phenylalanine
ammonia lyase (PAL). Genetic studies, on the other hand, indicate that the bulk of
SA is produced from isochorismate. In bacteria, SA is synthesized from chorismate
through two reactions catalyzed by isochorismate synthase (ICS) and isochorismate
pyruvate lyase (IPL). Arabidopsis contains two ICS genes but has no gene-encoding
proteins similar to the bacterial IPL. Thus, how SA is synthesized in plants is not
fully elucidated. Two recently identified Arabidopsis genes, PBS3 and EPS1, are
important for pathogen-induced SA accumulation. PBS3 encodes a member of the
acyl-adenylate/thioester-forming enzyme family and EPS1 encodes a member of the
BAHD acyltransferase superfamily. PBS3 and EPS1 may be directly involved in the
synthesis of an important precursor or regulatory molecule for SA biosynthesis
(Chen et al. 2009). A study reported that the SA-producing Pseudomonas
tremae EB-44 was most effective in suppressing tobacco wildfire disease and also
has potential for use as an alternative, eco-friendly control measure for this disease in
other crops (Islam et al. 2020).
15.2.7 Jasmonic Acid
Jasmonic acid (JA) is growth-regulating organic compound (Fig. 15.12). The mol￾ecule is a member of the jasmonate class of plant hormones. It is biosynthesized from
Fig. 15.11 Structure of
salicylic acid378 A. Sharma et al.
linolenic acid by the octadecanoid pathway. JA are lipid-derived signaling molecules
which are essential for the adaptation of plants to adverse environment (Campos
et al. 2014; Lefevere et al. 2020; Zhu et al. 2021). The exogenous application of JA
also has a regulatory effect on plant growth. During stress condition, JA shows
physiological responses including activation of antioxidant system and regulation of
stomatal opening and closing (Wang et al. 2020).
15.3 Endophytic Fungi
Endophytic fungi are ubiquitous to plants, produce large number of chemical
compounds which are essential for plant growth and development. First time, the
plant hormone Gibberellins had been isolated from fungus Gibberella fujikuroi.
These secondary metabolites are also present in different genera of fungi including
Aspergillus cadophora, Porosterum spadiceum, Penicillium, Neosartorya sp.,
Porostereum spadiceum (Hamayun et al. 2017; You et al. 2013). Endophytic fungi
include Aspergillus fumigatus, Scolecobasidium tshawytschae, Aspergillus
caespitosus, Porostereum spadiceum, Cadophora malorum produces salicylic acid
(SA), jasmonic acid (JA), and low concentration of abscisic acid (ABA) (Khan et al.
2011). The endophytic fungus Paecilomyces formosus LHL10 produced many
physiologically active and inactive GAs and IAA, which helped the rice plants to
grow well and significantly mitigated the negative impacts of salinity stress on
cucumber plants (Khan et al. 2012). The co-inoculation of the endophytic fungus
Paecilomyces formosus LHL10 and bacteria Sphingomonas sp. LK11 actively
contributed to the tripartite mutualistic symbiosis in Glycine max under heavy
metal stresses; this consortium could be used as an excellent strategy for sustainable
agriculture in the heavy metal-contaminated fields (Bilal et al. 2018). We have
summarized the various endophytic microorganisms (fungi and bacteria) having
abilities to enhance the growth of plants in Table 15.1.
Fig. 15.12 Jasmonic acidBacterial endophytes References
15 Endophytic Phytohormone Production and Utilization of Functional Traits... 379
Table 15.1 Various plant growth hormones produced by endophytes
Plant
hormones
Indole acetic
acid (Auxin)
Azospirillum, Azotobacter, Curtobacterium,
Paenibacillus, Alcaligenes, Herbaspirillum,
Enterobacter, Citrobacter, Pseudomonas,
Klebsiella, Rhizobium, Burkholderia,
Herbaspirillum, Enterobacter, Bacillus,
Acinetobacter, Serratia
Hauser et al. (2011), Rana
et al. (2020), Singh et al.
(2018), Zhao et al. (2018)
Gibberellins
(GAs)
Acetobacter diazotrophicus, Herbaspirillum
seropedicae, Bacilus, Pseudomonas,
Sinorhizobium, Rhizobium phaseoli,
Sphingomonas sp. Leifsonia soli
Ali et al. (2017), Shahzad et al.
(2016), Sandhya (2017)
Cytokinin
(CK)
Paenibacillus polymyxa, Pseudomonas
resinovorans, Bacillus subtilis, Pseudomo￾nas, Sinorhizobium, Klebsiella
Shahzad et al. (2017)
Abscisic acid
(ABA)
Bacillus amyloliquefaciens, Pseudomonas
resinovorans
Zhu and She (2018)
ACC
deaminase
Pseudomonas, Bacillus paralicheniformis,
Streptomyces niveus, Paenibacillus polymyxa
Islam et al. (2020), Borah and
Thakur (2020)
Salicylic acid
(SA)
Pseudomonas tremae, P. fluorescens,
P. aeruginosa and Serratia marcescens,
Curtobacterium herbarum
Chen et al. (2020), An and
Mou (2011)
Jasmonic acid
(JA)
Azoarcus olearius, Azospirillum spp. Khan et al. (2014a)
Fungal endophytes
Indole acetic
acid
Penicillium chrysogenum and Penicillium
crustosum
Hassan (2017)
Gibberellins Aspergillus, Porosterum spadiceum, Penicil￾lium, Neosartorya sp., Porostereum
spadiceum
Hamayun et al. (2017)
Cytokinin and
ethylene
Phomopsis liquidambari Li et al. (2018)
Salicylic acid
and Jasmonic
acid
Aspergillus, Cadophora, Porosterum Khan et al. (2011)
15.4 Conclusion
Endophytic microorganism supports plant development and growth by employing
different mechanisms of action, i.e., indirect and direct mechanisms. Endophytes
show mutualistic interaction with plants where the plants provide shelter and food to
microbes and in return microbes provide benefits to plants by producing phytohor￾mones and various secondary metabolites. Endophytes also have the ability to
protect plants from various environmental stresses, including abiotic and biotic stress
and resistance to pathogens by producing growth regulators, i.e., auxin, gibberellins,
salicylic acid, cytokinin in host plant tissue. Endophytic microbes have a great380 A. Sharma et al.
potential to be used as biofertilizers, biopesticides, and usually used in agricultural
field because they can synthesize and secrete chemical compounds which are useful
for the development and growth of plant.
References
Abreu-Tarazi MF, Navarrete AA, Andreote FD, Almeida CV, Tsai SM, Almeida M (2010)
Endophytic bacteria in long-term in vitro cultivated “axenic” pineapple microplants revealed
by PCR–DGGE. World J Microbiol Biotechnol 26:555–560
Adams DO, Yang SF (1979) Ethylene biosynthesis: identification of 1-aminocyclopropane-1-
carboxylic acid as an intermediate in the conversion of methionine to ethylene. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 76:170–174
Afzal I, Shinwari ZK, Sikandar S, Shahzad S (2019) Plant beneficial endophytic bacteria: mech￾anisms, diversity, host range and genetic determinants. Microbiol Res 221:36–49. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.micres.2019.02.001
Ahmad P, Nabi G, Ashraf M (2011) Cadmium-induced oxidative damage in mustard [Brassica
juncea (L.) Czern.& Coss.]plants can be alleviated by salicylic acid. South Afr J Bot 77:36–44.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sajb.2010.05.003
Akhtar S, Mekureyaw MF, Pandey C, Roitsch T (2019) Role of cytokinins for interactions of plants
with microbial pathogens and pest insects. Front Plant Sci 10:1777. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.
2019.01777
Ali S, Charles TC, Glick BR (2017) Endophytic phytohormones and their role in plant growth
promotion. In: Doty SL (ed) Functional importance of the plant microbiome: implications for
agriculture, forestry and bioenergy. Springer, Cham, pp 89–105
Ambawade MS, Pathade GR (2015) Production of gibberellic acid by Bacillus siamensis BE
76 isolated from Banana plant (Musa spp.). Int J Sci Res 4(7):394–398
An C, Mou Z (2011) Salicylic acid and its function in plant immunity. J Integr Plant Biol 53:412–
428. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1744-7909.2011.01043.x
Andreozzi A, Prieto P, Mercado-Blanco J, Monaco S, Zampieri E, Romano S (2019) Efficient
colonization of the endophytes Herbaspirillum huttiense RCA24 and Enterobacter cloacae
RCA25 influences the physiological parameters of Oryza sativa L. cv. Baldo rice. Environ
Microbiol 21:3489–3504. https://doi.org/10.1111/1462-2920.14688
Apine OA, Jadhav JP (2011) Optimization of medium for indole-3-acetic acid production using
Pantoea agglomerans strain PVM. J Appl Microbiol 110(5):1235–1244
Assumpção LDC, Lacava PT, Dias AC, de Azevedo JL, Menten JOM (2009) Diversity and
biotechnological potential of endophytic bacterial community of soybean seeds. Pesqui
Agropecu Bras 44(5):503–510
Baliyan N, Dhiman S, Dhiman S, Kumar S, Arora NK, Maheshwari DK (2021) Optimization of
gibberellic acid production in endophytic Bacillus cereus using response surface methodology
and its use as plant growth regulator in chickpea. J Plant Growth Regul. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s00344-021-10492-2
Bano A, Ullah F, Nosheen A (2012) Role of abscisic acid and drought stress on the activities of
antioxidant enzymes in wheat. Plant Soil Environ 58:181–185. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0052439
Bhore SJ, Ravichantar N, Loh CY (2010) Screening of endophytic bacteria isolated from leaves of
Sambung Nyawa [Gynura procumbens (Lour.) Merr.]for cytokinin-like compounds.
Bioinformation 5(5):191–197. https://doi.org/10.6026/97320630005191
Bilal S, Shahzad R, Khan AL, Kang SM, Imran QM, Al-Harrasi A, Yun BW, Lee IJ (2018)
Endophytic microbial consortia of phytohormones-producing fungus Paecilomyces formosus
LH10 and bacteria Sphingomonas sp. LK11 to Glycine max L. regulates physio-hormonal15 Endophytic Phytohormone Production and Utilization of Functional Traits... 381
changes to attenuate aluminum and zinc stresses. Front Plant Sci 9:1273. https://doi.org/10.
3389/fpls.2018.01273
Bömke C, Tudzynski B (2009) Diversity, regulation, and evolution of the gibberellins biosynthetic
pathway in fungi compared to plants and bacteria. Phytochemistry 70:1876–1893
Borah A, Thakur D (2020) Phylogenetic and functional characterization of culturable endophytic
actinobacteria associated with camellia spp. for growth promotion in commercial tea cultivars.
Front Microbiol 11:318
Campos ML, Kang JH, Howe GA (2014) Jasmonate-triggered plant immunity. J Chem Ecol 40:
657–675
Chen Z, Zheng Z, Huang J, Lai Z, Fan B (2009) Biosynthesis of salicylic acid in plants. Plant Signal
Behav 4(6):493–496. https://doi.org/10.4161/psb.4.6.8392
Chadha N, Prasad R, Varma A (2015) Plant promoting activities of fungal endophytes associated
with tomato roots from central Himalaya, India and their interaction with Piriformospora indica.
Int J Pharm BioSci 6(1):333–343
Chen B, Shen J, Zhang X, Pan F, Yang X, Feng Y (2014) The endophytic bacterium,
Sphingomonas SaMR12, improves the potential for zinc phytoremediation by its host, Sedum
alfredii. PLoS One 9:e106826. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0106826
Chen X, Marszałkowska M, Reinhold-Hurek B (2020) Jasmonic acid, not salicyclic acid restricts
endophytic root colonization of rice. Front Plant Sci 10:1758. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2019.
01758
Chen B, Luo S, Wu Y, Ye J, Wang Q, Xu X, Pan F, Khan KY, Feng Y, Yang X (2017) The effects
of the endophytic bacterium Pseudomonas fluorescens Sasm05 and IAA on the plant growth and
cadmium uptake of Sedum alfredii Hance. Front Microbiol 8:2538. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fmicb.2017.02538
Chhabra S, Dowling DN (2017) Endophyte promoted nutrient acquisition: phosphorous and
iron. In: Doty S (ed) Functional importance of the plant microbiome: implications for agricul￾ture, forestry and bioenergy. Springer, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-65897
Cohen AC, Travaglia CN, Bottini R, Piccoli P (2009) Participation of abscisic acid and gibberellins
produced by endophytic Azospirillum in the alleviation of drought effects in maize. Botany
87(5):455. https://doi.org/10.1139/B09-023
Da Silva AS, Suassuna JF, de Melo AS, Costa RR, de Andrade WL, da Silva DC (2017) Salicylic
acid as attenuator of drought stress on germination and initial development of sesame. Rev Bras
Eng Agríc Ambient 21:156–162. https://doi.org/10.1590/1807-1929/agriambi.v21n3p156-162
De Bary A (1866) Morphologieund Physiologieder Pilze, Flechtenund Myxomyceten, vol
2. Hofmeister’s Handbook of Physiological Botany, Leipzig
Duca D, Lorv J, Patten CL, Rose D, Glick BR (2014) Indole-3-acetic acid in plant-microbe
interactions. Antonie Van Leeuwenhoek 106(1):85–125
Dudeja SS, Giri R (2014) Beneficial properties, colonization, establishment and molecular diversity
of endophytic bacteria in legume and non-legume. Afr J Microbiol Res 8:1562–1572. https://
doi.org/10.5897/AJMR2013.6541
Fadiji AE, Babalola OO (2020) Elucidating mechanisms of endophytes used in plant protection and
other bioactivities with multifunctional prospects. Front Bioeng Biotechnol 8:467. https://doi.
org/10.3389/fbioe.2020.00467
Finkelstein R (2013) Abscisic acid synthesis and response. Arabidopsis Book 11:e0166. https://doi.
org/10.1199/tab.0166
Gamalero E, Favale N, Bona E, Novello G, Cesaro P, Massa N, Glick BR, Orozco-Mosqueda MC,
Berta G, Lingua G (2020) Screening of bacterial endophytes able to promote plant growth and
increase salinity tolerance. Appl Sci 10:5767
Gao D, Tao Y (2012) Current molecular biologic techniques for characterizing environmental
microbial community. Front Environ Sci Eng 6:82–97. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11783-011-
0306-6
Glick BR (2012) Plant growth-promoting bacteria: mechanisms and applications. Scientifica 2012:
963401382 A. Sharma et al.
Gouda S, Das G, Sen SK, Shin H-S, Patra JK (2016) Endophytes: a treasure house of bioactive
compounds of medicinal importance. Front Microbiol 7:1538. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.
2016.01538
Grosskinsky DK, Tafner R, Moreno MV, Stenglein SA, de Salamone IEG, Nelson LM, Novak O,
Strnad M, van der Graaff E, Roitsch T (2016) Cytokinin production by Pseudomonas
fluorescens G2018 determines biocontrol activity against Pseudomonas syringae in
Arabidopsis. Sci Rep 6:23310. https://doi.org/10.1038/srep23310
Grossmann K (2010) Auxin herbicides: current status of mechanism and mode of action. Pest
Manag Sci 66(2):113–120
Hamayun M, Hussain A, Khan SA, Kim HY, Khan Waqas M (2017) Gibberellins producing
endophytic fungus Porostereum spadiceum AGH786 rescues growth of salt affected soybean.
Front Microbiol 8:686
Hardoim PR, Van Overbeek LS, Elsas JD (2008) Properties of bacterial endophytes and their
proposed role in plant growth. Trends Microbiol 16:463–471
Hassan SE-D (2017) Plant growth-promoting activities for bacterial and fungal endophytes isolated
from medicinal plant of Teucrium polium L. J Adv Res 8(6):687–695. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jare.2017.09.001
Hauser F, Waadt R, Schroeder JI (2011) Evolution of abscisic acid synthesis and signaling
mechanisms. Curr Biol 21:R346–R355
Hedden P, Thomas SG (2012) Gibberellin biosynthesis and its regulation. Biochem J 444:11–25
Herrera-Medina MJ, Steinkellner S, Vieheilig H, Bote JAO, Garrido JMG (2007) Abscisic acid
determines arbuscule development and functionality in the tomato arbuscular mycorrhiza. New
Phytol 175:554–564
Hilbert M, Voll LM, Ding HJ, Sharma M, Zuccaro A (2012) Indole derivative production by the
root endophyte Piriformospora indica is not required for growth promotion but for biotrophic
colonization of barley roots. New Phytol 196:520–534. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-8137.
2012.04275.x
Hwang I, Sheen J, Muller B (2012) Cytokinin signaling networks. Annu Rev Plant Biol 63:353–380
Islam MN, Ali MS, Choi S-J, Park Y-I, Bae K-H (2020) Salicylic acid-producing endophytic
bacteria increase nicotine accumulation and resistance against wildfire disease in tobacco plants.
Microorganisms 8:31. https://doi.org/10.3390/microorganisms8010031
Janda K, Éva SGH, Kovác L, Janda T (2012) Salicylic acid may indirectly influence the photosyn￾thetic electron transport. J Plant Physiol 169:971–978. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jplph.2012.
02.020
Joseph B, Priya RM (2011) Bioactive compounds from endophytes and their potential in pharma￾ceutical effect: a review. Am J Biochem Mol Biol 1:291–309. https://doi.org/10.3923/ajbmb.
2011.291.309
Kazan K (2013) Auxin and the integration of environmental signals into plant root development.
Ann Bot 112:1655–1665. https://doi.org/10.1093/aob/mct229
Khan AL, Hamayun M, Ahmad N, Hussain J, Kang SM, Kim YH (2011) Salinity stress resistance
offered by endophytic fungal interaction between Penicillium minioluteum LHL09 and Glycine
max L. J Microbiol Biotechnol 21:893–902
Khan AL, Hamayun M, Kang SM et al (2012) Endophytic fungal association via gibberellins and
indole acetic acid can improve plant growth under abiotic stress: an example of Paecilomyces
formosus LHL10. BMC Microbiol 12:3. https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2180-12-3
Khan MIR, Asgher M, Khan NA (2014) Alleviation of salt-induced photosynthesis and growth
inhibition by salicylic acid involves glycine betaine and ethylene in mungbean (Vigna radiata
L.). Plant Physiol Biochem 80:67–74. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plaphy.2014.03.026
Khan AL, Waqas M, Hussain J, Al-Harrasi A, Al-Rawahi A, Al-Hosni K (2014a) Endophytes
Aspergillus caespitosus LK12 and phoma sp. LK13 of Moringa peregrina produce gibberellins
and improve rice plant growth. J Plant Interact 9:731–737
Khan AL, Hussain J, Al-Harrasi A, Al-Rawahi A, Lee I (2015) Endophytic fungi: resource for
gibberellins and crop abiotic stress resistance. Crit Rev Biotechnol 35(1):62–7415 Endophytic Phytohormone Production and Utilization of Functional Traits... 383
Khan AL, Halo BH, Elyassi A, Ali S, Al-Hosni K, Hussain J, Al-Harrasi A, Lee I (2016) Indole
acetic acid and ACC deaminase from endophytic bacteria improves the growth of Solanum
lycopersicum. Electron J Biotechnol 21:58–64
Kieber JJ, Schaller GE (2014) Cytokinins. Arabidopsis Book 12:e0168. https://doi.org/10.1199/tab.
0168
Kumar V, Teotia P, Tuteja N, Prasad R, Goyal P, Varma A, Bisht S, Singh J, Kumar M (2017)
Metabolomics-mediated characterization of endophytic species in recalcitrant tree species. In:
Varma A, Sharma AK (eds) Modern tools and techniques to understand microbes. Springer,
Cham, pp 251–257
Kundan R, Pant G, Jadon N, Agrawal PK (2015) Plant growth promoting Rhizobacteria: mecha￾nism and current prospective. J Fertil Pestic 6:155. https://doi.org/10.4172/2471-2728.1000155
Lefevere H, Bauters L, Gheysen G (2020) Salicylic acid biosynthesis in plants. Front Plant Sci 11:
338. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2020.00338
Letham DS, Shannon JS, McDonald IR (1964) Structure of zeatin factor inducing cell division.
Proceedings of the Chemical Society of London, p 230. (JUL)
Li X, Zhou J, Xu RS et al (2018) Auxin, cytokinin, and ethylene involved in rice n availability
improvement caused by endophyte Phomopsis liquidambari. J Plant Growth Regul 37:128–
143. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00344-017-9712-8
Malik DK, Sindhu SS (2011) Production of indole acetic acid by Pseudomonas sp.: effect of
coinoculation with Mesorhizobium sp. Cicer on nodulation and plant growth of chickpea (Cicer
arietinum). Physiol Mol Biol Plants 17:25–32
Miller CO, Skoog F, Okumura FS, von Saltza MH, Strong FM (1955) Structure and synthesis of
kinetin. J Am Chem Soc 77:2662–2663
Mishra M, Prasad R, Varma A (2015) Endophytic fungi: biodiversity and functions. Int J Pharm
BioSci 6(1):18–46
Nonogaki H (2019) ABA responses during seed development and germination. Adv Bot Res 92:
171–217
Nutaratat P, Srisuk N, Arunrattiyakorn P, Limtong S (2016) Indole-3-acetic acid biosynthetic
pathways in the basidiomycetous yeast Rhodosporidium paludigenum. Arch Microbiol 198:
429–437. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00203-016-1202-z
Prasad R, Kamal S, Sharma PK, Oelmueller R, Varma A (2013) Root endophyte Piriformospora
indica DSM 11827 alters plant morphology, enhances biomass and antioxidant activity of
medicinal plant Bacopa monniera. J Basic Microbiol 53(12):1016–1024
Prasad R, Gill SS, Tuteja N (2018) Crop improvement through microbial biotechnology. Elsevier.
ISBN: 9780444639882
Rana KL, Kour D, Kaur T, Sheikh I, Yadav AN, Kumar V, Suman A, Dhaliwal HS (2020)
Endophytic microbes from diverse wheat genotypes and their potential biotechnological appli￾cations in plant growth promotion and nutrient uptake. Proc Natl Acad Sci India Sect B Biol Sci
90:969–979
Sah SK, Reddy KR, Li J (2016) Abscisic acid and abiotic stress tolerance in crop plants. Front Plant
Sci 7:571. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2016.00571
Sahu PK, Tilgam J, Mishra S, Hamid S, Gupta A, Jayalakshmi K, Verma SK, Kharwar RN (2022)
Surface sterilization for isolation of endophytes: ensuring what (not) to grow. J Basic Microbiol
62:647. https://doi.org/10.1002/jobm.202100462
Salazar-Cerezoa S, Martínez-Montiela N, García-Sáncheza J, Pérez-y-Terrónb R, Rebeca D,
Contreras M (2018) Gibberellin biosynthesis and metabolism: a convergent route for plants,
fungi and bacteria. Microbiol Res 208:85–98. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.micres.2018.01.010
Sandhya V (2017) Endophytes from maize with plant growth promotion and biocontrol activity
under drought stress. Russ Agric Sci 43:22–34
Santoyo G, Moreno-Hagelsieb G, Orozco-Mosqueda M d C, Glick BR (2016) Plant growth￾promoting bacterial endophytes. Microbiol Res 183:92–99. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.micres.
2015.11.008384 A. Sharma et al.
Sarkar S, Dey A, Kumar V, Batiha GE-S, El-Esawi MA, Tomczyk M, Ray P (2021) Fungal
endophyte: an interactive endosymbiont with the capability of modulating host physiology in
myriad ways. Front Plant Sci 12:701800. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2021.701800
Shahzad R, Waqas M, Khan AL, Asaf S, Khan MA, Kang S-M, Yun B-W, Lee I-J (2016) Seed￾borne endophytic Bacillus amyloliquefaciens RWL-1 produces gibberellins and regulates
endogenous phytohormones of Oryza sativa. Plant Physiol Biochem 106:236–243
Shahzad R, Khan AL, Bilal S, Waqas M, Kang S-M, Lee I-J (2017) Inoculation of abscisic acid￾producing endophytic bacteria enhances salinity stress tolerance in Oryza sativa. Environ Exper
Bot 136:68–77. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envexpbot.2017.01.010
Shen FT, Yen JH, Liao CS, Chen WC, Chao YT (2019) Screening of rice endophytic biofertilizers
with fungicide tolerance and plant growth promoting characteristics. Sustainability 11:1133.
https://doi.org/10.3390/su11041133
Singh D, Geat N, Rajawat MVS, Mahajan MM, Prasanna R, Singh S, Kaushik R, Singh RN,
Kumar K, Saxena AK (2018) Deciphering the mechanisms of endophyte-mediated
biofortification of Fe and Zn in wheat. J Plant Growth Regul 37:174–182
Singh S, Kumar V, Datta S, Ramamurthy PC, Singh J (2021) Molecular mechanism and signaling
pathways interplay between plant hormones during plant-microbe crosstalk, microbial manage￾ment of plant stresses, pp 93–105. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-85193-0.00004-8
Skoog F, Tsui C (1948) Chemical control of growth and bud formation in tobacco stem segments
and callus cultured in vitro. Am J Bot 35:782–787
Specian V, Sarragiotto MH, Pamphile JA, Clemente E (2012) Chemical characterization of
bioactive compounds from the endophytic fungus Diaporthe helianthi isolated from Luehea
divaricata . Braz J Microbiol 43:1174 – 1182. https://doi.org/10.1590/
S1517-838220120003000045
Sponsel VM, Hedden P (2010) Gibberellin biosynthesis and inactivation. Plant hormones. Springer,
Dordrecht, pp 63–94
Stepniewska Z, Kuzniar A (2013) Endophytic microorganisms-promising application s in biore￾mediation of green house gases. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 97:9589–9596. https://doi.org/10.
1007/s00253-013-5235-9
Sun Y, Cheng Z, Glick BR (2009) The presence of a 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate (ACC)
deaminase deletion mutation alters the physiology of the endophytic plant growth-promoting
bacterium Burkholderia phytofirmans PsJN. FEMS Microbiol Lett 296:131–136
Sun H, He Y, Xiao Q, Ye R, Tian Y (2013) Isolation, characterization and antimicrobial activity of
endophytic bacteria from Polygonum cuspidatum. Afr J Microbiol Res 7:1496–1504. https://
doi.org/10.5897/AJMR12.899
Sun P-F, Fang W-T, Shin L-Y, Wei J-Y, Fu S-F, Chou J-Y (2014) Indole-3-acetic acid-producing
yeasts in the phyllosphere of the carnivorous plant Drosera indica L. PLoS One 9:e114196.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0114196
Sun L, Wang X, Li Y (2016) Increased plant growth and copper uptake of host and nonhost plants
by metal-resistant and plant growth-promoting endophytic bacteria. Int J Phytoremediation 18:
494–501
Tidke SA, Kiran S, Giridhar P, Gokare RA (2018) Current understanding and future perspectives of
endophytic microbes vis-a-vis production of secondary metabolites. In: Jha S (ed) Endophytes
and secondary metabolites. Reference series in Phytochemistry. Springer, Cham. https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-3-319-76900-4_12-1
Tsavkelova E, Oeser B, Oren-young L, Israeli M, Sasson Y, Tudzynski B, Sharon A (2012)
Identification and functional characterization of indole-3-acetamide-mediated IAA biosynthesis
in plant-associated Fusarium species. Fungal Genet Biol 49:48–57. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fgb.2011.10.005
Varma A, Prasad R, Tuteja N (2017a) Mycorrhiza: eco-physiology, secondary metabolites,
nanomaterials. Springer International Publishing. ISBN: 978-3-319-57849-1. http://www.
springer.com/us/book/978331957848415 Endophytic Phytohormone Production and Utilization of Functional Traits. . . 385
Varma A, Prasad R, Tuteja N (2017b) Mycorrhiza: nutrient uptake, biocontrol, ecorestoration.
Springer International Publishing. ISBN: 978-3-319-68867-1. http://www.springer.com/us/
book/9783319688664
Wang J, Song L, Gong X, Xu J, Li M (2020) Functions of Jasmonic acid in plant regulation and
response to abiotic stress. Int J Mol Sci 21:1446. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms21041446
Went FW (1928) Wuchesstoff and Wachstum. Rec Trav Bota Neerl 25:1–116
Win KT, Tanaka F, Okazaki K, Ohwaki Y (2018) The ACC deaminase expressing endophyte
Pseudomonas spp. enhances NaCl stress tolerance by reducing stress-related ethylene produc￾tion, resulting in improved growth, photosynthetic performance, and ionic balance in tomato
plants. Plant Physiol Biochem 127:599–607. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plaphy.2018.04.038
Yadav AN (2018) Biodiversity and biotechnological applications of host specific endophytic fungi
for sustainable agriculture and allied sectors. Acta Sci Microbiol 1:44
You YH, Yoon H, Kang SM, Woo JR, Choo YS, Lee IJ (2013) Cadophora malorum Cs-8-1 as a
new fungal strain producing gibberellins isolated from Calystegia soldanella. J Basic Microbiol
53:630–634
Zhao L, Xu Y, Lai X (2018) Antagonistic endophytic bacteria associated with nodules of soybean
(Glycine max L.) and plant growth-promoting properties. Braz J Microbiol 49:269–278
Zhu Y, She X (2018) Evaluation of the plant-growth-promoting abilities of endophytic bacteria
from the psammophyte Ammodendron bifolium. Can J Microbiol 64:253–264
Zhu L, Guo J, Sun Y, Wang S, Zhou C (2021) Acetic acid-producing endophyte Lysinibacillus
fusiformis orchestrates Jasmonic acid signaling and contributes to repression of cadmium uptake
in tomato plants. Front Plant Sci 12:670216. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2021.67021387
Chapter 16
Role of Endophytic Microorganisms
in Phosphate Solubilization
and Phytoremediation of Degraded Soils
Dipita Ghosh, B. S. Manisha Singh, Manish Kumar, Subodh Kumar Maiti,
and Nabin Kumar Dhal
Abstract Phosphorus (P) is considered as the second most important element in
plant nutrient profile after nitrogen. It primarily exists incorporated in organic
compounds or as mineral salts in soil. Despite these, phosphorus compounds are
disbursed abundantly in agricultural soil, and the majority of them are of insoluble
form. With the assistance of plant-associated bacteria, the inorganic phosphate
solubilization is one of the significant mechanisms for plant growth promotion.
The mechanism involves the solubilization of phosphate complexes into more
available forms such as orthophosphate ions by organic acid secreted by microbes.
The employment of plant growth promoting P bacterial inoculants as biofertilizers
can provide favourable alternative to replace chemical fertilizer to some extent.
Some examples of phosphate solubilizer are Bacillus, Pseudomonas and Aspergil￾lus, while the phosphate absorber includes arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi
(e.g. Glomus). Phytoremediation of heavy metals in association with phosphate￾solubilizing bacteria are known to overcome metal stress on plants due to the
contaminated substrate. In case of mine-degraded soils, endophyte assisted P-solu￾bilization enhances the bioavailability of insoluble P to plants which in turn
enhances the plant growth. Therefore, this chapter covers endophytes assisted
D. Ghosh · S. K. Maiti
Ecological Restoration Laboratory, Department of Environmental Science & Engineering,
Indian Institute of Technology (ISM), Dhanbad, Jharkhand, India
B. S. M. Singh
Environment Sustainability Department, CSIR-Institute of Minerals and Materials Technology,
Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India
Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), CSIR-Human Resource Development
Centre, (CSIR-HRDC) Campus, Ghaziabad, Uttar Pradesh, India
M. Kumar · N. K. Dhal (*)
Environment Sustainability Department, CSIR-Institute of Minerals and Materials Technology,
Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India
e-mail: nkdhal@immt.res.in
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2023
S. Chhabra et al. (eds.), Plant Microbiome for Plant Productivity and Sustainable
Agriculture, Microorganisms for Sustainability 37,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-19-5029-2_16388 D. Ghosh et al.
sustainable in-situ remediation of contaminated site which stimulates plant growth,
defence against metal toxicity and soil fertility.
Keywords Biofertilizers · Soil · Heavy metals · Amendment · Phytoremediation ·
Microbes
16.1 Introduction
Mining activity causes complete loss of soil profile, vegetation and the biodiversity of a
land. It also causes air and water pollution, disturbs drainage and permanently affects a
landform (Ghosh and Maiti 2020; Mohapatra et al. 2020). Mine spoil is characterized
by impoverished nutrient content, low organic content and cation exchange capacity
and disturbed ambient soil physicochemical and biological properties (Basu et al. 2015;
Ahirwal et al. 2021; Ghosh and Maiti 2021a). A degraded mine spoil is devoid of soil
organic matter, microbial activity and the enzymatic activities associated with the soil
fauna (Maiti 2013; Ghosh and Maiti 2021b). A mine spoil is devoid of essential soil
nutrients and often the storehouse of potentially toxic elements (Ahirwal and Maiti
2017; Ghosh and Maiti 2021c). Phosphorous (P) is a crucial component for overall
plant development and productivity (Rawat et al. 2021). Its properties constrain its free
accessibility and make it a restraining nutrient for vegetation development (Mehta et al.
2017). Thus, an efficient amendment technique is required for mitigation of phosphate
deficiency and heavy metal contaminations in mine spoils/tailings and technosol. Some
common restoration practices for post-mining coal mine degraded land are forestry,
agricultural practices, grass-legume seeding, fly ash amended plantation and biochar
aided plantation (Šebelíková et al. 2019; Shukla and Lal 2005; Kumari et al. 2022;
Świątek et al. 2019; Fellet et al. 2011; Ghosh et al. 2020).
In a natural soil ecosystem, plants interact with a number of symbiotic microorgan￾isms (Domka et al. 2019). The plant–soil interaction includes synergy of plants with
rhizobacteria and endophytic fungi (Maiti 2013; Domka et al. 2019; Varma et al.
2019a, b). Actinomycetes, bacterial and fungal endophytes perforate the plant through
root zones along with flower, leaf, stem and cotyledon (Li et al. 2012). The
microbiomes are such integral part of plants that they can be used as proxy to study
the phenotypic variation of the plant genotype. The knowledge of plant–microbiome
interactions can help improving the economic and environmental sustainability of mine
spoil restoration through agriculture and forestry. A reduction in inputs, in terms of
fertilizer, water, or chemical pesticides, would lead to significant cost savings (Prasad
2017, 2018; Prasad et al. 2021).
Endophytic microbes have the ability to grow throughout the host plant tissues and
releases phytochemicals that provide resistance to disease and help in nutrient miner￾alization for host plant (Maiti 2013). Some endophytic fungi can also solubilize P and
supply it to their non-mycorrhizal counterparts, encouraging its growth under nutrient
environment (Mehta et al. 2017; Rawat et al. 2021). Thus, they help in improving the
overall plant growth under stressed environmental conditions (Maiti 2013). Curvularia
geniculata isolated from Parthenium hysterophorus roots is a dark septate root16 Role of Endophytic Microorganisms in Phosphate Solubilization... 389
endophytic fungus which can improve plant growth by promoting P-solubilization and
certain phytohormone secretion (Priyadharsini and Muthukumar 2017). Another impor￾tant role played by endophytes includes resistance to heavy metals and assistance in
phytoremediation of a metal contaminated site. Endophyte-assisted phytoremediation
technology has been reported to be an efficient technique for in situ remediation of
potentially toxic elements contaminated soils (Mastretta et al. 2009; Domka et al. 2019;
Guerrero-Zúñiga et al. 2020). During the phytoremediation of polluted sites, heavy￾metal contamination enduring endophytes can also improve plant growth, reduce metal
phytotoxicity and influence translocation and accumulation of metal. Thus, this chapter
focuses on the beneficial role of endophytes for phosphate solubilization and heavy
metal remediation. In conclusion, this chapter provides an insight on how endophytes￾assisted phytoremediation enhances soil properties.
16.2 Role of Endophytes for Mine Spoil Reclamation
16.2.1 Phytostimulation and Nutrient Cycling
Essential nutrients such as C, N, H, O and P are absolutely necessary for plant
growth and development. These nutrients are in chemical form through atmosphere,
soil, water and organic matter. Endophyte facilitates the uptake of nutrients by the
roots of the plants (Nair and Padmavathy 2014). They have been reported to elicit
different modes of actions for plant adaptation in P-deficient soil and facilitation of N
uptake (Arachevaleta et al. 1989). Certain endophytic bacteria have been reported to
produce phytohormones such as cytokinins, auxins and gibberellic acids which are
essential plant growth regulators (Xin et al. 2009). Endophytes play vital role in
biodegradation of the debris of its host flora (Mehta et al. 2017).
16.2.2 Enzyme Production, Antimicrobial Activity and Source
of Bioactive
Soil micro-organisms are the source of a number of commercially important enzymes.
This quest for alternative source of enzyme production has led to the discovery of
certain endophytes which can produce vital enzymes. Endophytic fungi such as
Aspergillus japonicas, Cladosporium sphaerospermum, Nigrospora sphaerica, Peni￾cillium aurantiogriseum, P. glandicola and Xylaria sp. have been reported to produce
enzymes such as pectinases, cellulases, xylanases and proteases (Nair and Padmavathy
2014). Acremonium zeae, isolated from maize, has also been reported to produce the
enzyme hemicellulase (Bischoff et al. 2009). A number of isolated endophytes from
plants have been reported to possess antimicrobial activity (He et al. 2020). Most
endophytes show antimicrobial activity; however, the ones obtained from medicinal
plants affects a broad spectrum of pathogenic microbes (Nair and Padmavathy 2014).390 D. Ghosh et al.
16.2.3 Bioremediation
Bioaccumulation, bio-stimulation, bio-deterioration, bio-leaching, bio-reduction and
bio-sorption are some common bioremediation techniques used for heavy metal
contamination. Endophytes possess the ability to breakdown complex compounds.
Mastretta et al. (2009) reported that the inoculation of Nicotiana tabacum with
endophytes resulted in improved plant growth under Cd toxicity and the
phytoavailable Cd concentration was high in comparison with the one having no
endophytic growth. According to Basu et al. (2015), a number of microorganisms
catalyse the reduction of Cr (VI) to Cr (V) or Cr (III) in various environmental
conditions. Cr (VI) reduction is shown to be metabolic in some species of bacteria
but can also be dissimilatory/respiratory when exposed to anaerobic conditions.
Although, most microbes are sensitive to Cr (VI), some microbes are highly resistant
and can tolerate Cr (VI) toxicity in the soil. Metal reductase genes found on plasmids
and chromosomes impart the resistance to these microbes for growth in Cr
(VI) environment (Patra et al. 2017). Some common endophytes that have the
potential for Cr remediation include Acinetobacter, Arthrobacter, Bacillus spp.,
Cellulomonas spp., Escherichia coli, Enterobacter cloacae, Pseudomonas and
Ochrobactrum (Hossan et al. 2020). A review conducted by Pushkar et al. (2021)
reported that major bacterial communities found at chromium contaminated sites are
Gammaproteobacteria. Other bacteria reported to inhabit chromite contaminated
sites includes Serratia marcescens, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Alcaligenes faecal
and Klebsiella oxytoca.
16.3 Role of Endophytes for Phosphate Solubilization
Phosphorus is an essential macronutrient for the proper metabolism, growth and
plant development. Phosphorus is abundantly available in both inorganic and
organic forms in soil; however, due to the complex formation with metal ions in
soil, it is unavailable for plant uptake. Phosphate-solubilizing endophytes have the
ability to solubilize the complex phosphates in the soil by various mechanisms.
Some commonly used mechanisms used by these microbes include production of
enzymes, organic acids and siderophores that have the ability to chelate the heavy
metal ions and form complexes, making bioavailable phosphates for vegetation
uptake (Rawat et al. 2021). These endophytes also produce certain phytohormones
such as auxins, cytokinins and gibberellins which promote plant growth.
1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid deaminase produced by endophytes has
been reported to improve plant growth under stressful environment which improves
its resistance to heavy metal toxicity (Fig. 16.1). A few examples of endophytes,
their host plant and the role they play are given in Table 16.1.16 Role of Endophytic Microorganisms in Phosphate Solubilization... 391
Fig. 16.1 Mechanism by which endophytes promotes plant growth and phosphate solubilization
16.4 Role of Endophytes for Phytoremediation
A number of endophytes have been reported to be heavy metals resistant.
Endophyte-assisted phytoremediation is an effective technique for in situ remedia￾tion of contaminated soils (Prasad 2022). Microbes develop symbiotic relationships
with their plant hosts and promote phytoremediation. Some common
hyperaccumulating plants such as Brassica juncea (L.) Czern., Pteris vittata,
Sedum alfredii and non-hyper-accumulators, such as Arabidopsis thaliana, Brassica
napus and Glycine max have been reported to house a number of important endo￾phytes (He et al. 2020). During pollutant phytoremediation association of heavy￾metal-resistant endophytes can result in enhancement of plant development followed
by decrease in metal phytotoxicity and affect translocation of metals in plants. They
even produce certain enzymes which help in the degradation of contaminants that
reduces the phytotoxicity of the potentially toxic elements. Application of endo￾phytes for phytoremediation and their significance for the host plant growth has been
given in Table 16.2.
16.5 Case Studies
16.5.1 Fungal Root Endophytes in Metal-Polluted Tailings
Flores-Torres et al. (2021) conducted a research identifying and assessing the plant
and fungal root endophytes in bioremediation of polymetallic polluted tailings. The
study revealed the significant role of native plants such as Tagetes lunulata, Cerdia• From disinfected wheat
roots (3-7 mm root segments)
392 D. Ghosh et al. Table 16.1 Phosphate-solubilizing endophytes, their respective host, phosphate-solubilizing ability and their significance Endophyte Host Isolation of endophytes and colonization Phosphorous solubilized (μg mL-1) Significance References Serratia plymuthica BMA1 Vicia faba L. • Strain isolated from the extracted rock phosphate (RP) stockpiles (operated by the company of phosphate of Gafsa: CPG Tunisia). • Direct strain inoculation in plant at a cell concentration of approximately 3 × 106 CFU g-1 of soil 450 • Phosphorus uptake improved • Improved plant biomass and height Borgi et al. (2020) Pseudomonas sp. Triticum aestivum – 101 • Production of Siderophore • Improved biomass and dry matter Liu et al. (2019) Bacillus megaterium Brassica napus – 119 Phosphorus content and bio- mass production increased Zheng et al. (2019) Staphylococcus sciuri, Bacillus pumilus, Oryza sativa L. • From fresh soil (attached to roots of O. sativa) • Colonization of PSB in glucose based N-free medium for Azotobacter type free living N2 fixers 192 Enhanced phosphorus uptake in shoot, root, grains Rajapaksha and Senanayake (2011) Enterobacter asburiae Acinetobacter rhizosphaerae Zea mays L. • Rhizosphere of Hippophae rhamnoides • Charcoal based bacterial inoculants (CFU of approx. 107/ g) 750 • Plant height and root shoot length increased • Available ca and P content high in soil with endophytes. Gulati et al. (2010) Penicillium spp. Triticum aestivum – Plant fertility improved Wakelin et al. (2004)• Cultured in semiselective
medium for Penicillium spp.
(Dichloran, rose bengal, chlor￾amphenicol agar)
(continued)
Bacillus sp. Cicer arietinum • Pre isolated bacterial strain 753 • Improved phytohormones
• Dry weight of nodules,
root shoot biomass increment
Ditta et al.
(2018)
Pseudomonas putida Pisum sativum N-fixer isolation from nodules
of pea plants
Isolated and colonized in yeast
extract mannitol medium
+2.5% Congo red dye
319 • Shoot biomass increased
• High seed protein content
and increased phosphorus in
shoots
Ahmad et al.
(2013)
Penicillium oxalicum Triticum aestivum,
Zea mays L.
• Rhizospheric soil from
Jatropha curcas (rock phos￾phate landfills of Rajasthan
state mines and minerals Ltd)
• Fungi isolated in PVK agar
+50 mg P2O5/100 ml medium
586 • Shoot height enhanced 1.5
times compared to control
• 42% increase in yield of
wheat compared to control
• 82% increase in root shoot
biomass compared to control
Singh and
Reddy
(2011)
Streptomyces laurentii Sorghum bicolour
L Aerobic bacteria isolated from
rhizospheric soil (Amaranthus,
buckwheat, millets and maize
soil attached to roots) by serial
dilution method in growth
medium
206 Siderophore production, enzy￾matic activity potassium
solubilization
Kour et al.
(2020)
Pantoea vagans, Pseudomonas
psychrotolerans, Bacillus
subtilis, Bacillus safensis and
Pantoea agglomerans
Festuca arundinacea;
Solanum
lycopersicum and
Capsicum annuum
• Endophytes isolated from
plants grown in the foothills of
Appalachian Mountains of
USA (37.125372, 79.298415)
unfertilized soil.
• Sterilized random plants
were sectioned in root leaf and
274–372 • Promoted Festuca
arundinacea growth in vitro
• Promoted pepper and
tomato growth
• The extracellular enzymes
such as acid phosphatase and
phytase secreted by the
Mei et al.
(2021)
16 Role of Endophytic Microorganisms in Phosphate Solubilization... 393Table 16.1 (continued)
Endophyte Host
Isolation of endophytes and
colonization
Phosphorous
solubilized
(μg mL-1) Significance References
stem and they were individually
grounded followed by centrifu￾gation then 50 μL aliquot
spreader on Luria agar
bacteria helped in decomposi￾tion and nutrient cycling
– Enterobacter sp. J49 or
Serratia sp. S119
Zea mays, Glycine
max and Arachis
hypogaea L.
Isolated from cultivated peanut
plants
Two endophytic strains coloni￾zation was analysed by isolating
bacterial cells from internal tis￾sues of stem, leaves and roots of
peanut, soybean and maize
plants from the microcosm
assay.
• Promoted the growth of
maize and soybean plants and
contributed significantly P to
their tissues
• Root exudates of the three
produced changes in pectinase
and cellulase activities
• Potential sources for the
formulation of biofertilizers
Lucero et al.
(2021)
394 D. Ghosh et al.16 Role of Endophytic Microorganisms in Phosphate Solubilization... 395 Table 16.2 Application of endophytes for phytoremediation and their significance for the host plant growth Endophytes Heavy metals (mg kg-1
) Host plant Isolation of endophytes Significance References
Enterobacter
sp. CBSB1
(OGM – gene)
Cd (45.2);
Pb (876.7)
Brassica juncea • Strain was isolated from the surface￾sterilized B. juncea roots Improved shoot length. A decrease in Cd and Pb concentration was observed in shoot
biomass.
Qiu et al.
2014
Bacillus sp. Cd (5.9),
Zn (1236)
Pb (153)
Sedum
plumbizincicola
Isolated from the rhizospheric soil of
S. plumbizincicola by serial dilution
method
Plant biomass and chlorophyll content
increased. Increased Cd, Pb and Zn soil
bioavailability
Ma et al.
2015
Pseudomonas
azotoformans
Cd (400)
Ni (350)
Zn (500)
Trifolium
arvense
Strain isolated from the leaves of Ni
hyperaccumulator plant Alyssum
serpyllifolium (subsp. malacitanum)
Improved plant biomass and increased [Cd],
[Ni] and [Zn] in shoots
Ma et al.
2017
Pseudomonas
koreensis
AGB-1
As (827)
Cd (103)
Cu (396)
Pb (2431)
Zn (3991)
Miscanthus
sinensis
Isolated from fine roots of M. Sinensis
growing in the mine site soil following Sun
et al. (2010)
Improved shoot and root biomass, increased
chlorophyll, protein content. Decrease in
plant stress and increase in [As] and [Cd] in
roots
Babu et al.
2015396 D. Ghosh et al.
congestiflora and Lupinus campestris as well as the exotic plant species Asphodelus
fistulosus, and Cortaderia selloana in phytoextraction and/or phytostabilization of
Zn, Pb and Cd. Molecular studies of fourteen endophytic fungi isolated from root
inner zones of Pennisetum villosum and T. lunulata showed the prevalence of
Alternaria and other Pleosporales. The dominance of endophytes in several plant
root systems indicates the interaction and functioning of mycorrhiza in mine tailings.
Exotic invasive plants A. Fistulosus and P. villosum showed more than 50% root
colonization intensity by endophytes, which could ascertain its invasive capacity.
The study reported that these endophytes could facilitate the advancement of
Ambrosia artemisiifolia growing at polluted sites; therefore, mycorrhizal interac￾tions can help in promoting local adaptation and/or reducing environmental stress.
Thus, the study indicated that the employment of native endophytic fungi could
emphasize the establishment of plants for reclamation of mine waste in semi-arid
climate in biologically sustainable manner. Also, high efforts are needed to enhance
the vegetation practice of mine wastes under study, which can efficiently reduce, in
turn, their potential ecotoxicological impact on organisms, human populations and
agricultural areas.
16.5.2 Root Colonizing Endophytes for Succession in a Mine
Degraded Land
Kolaříková et al. (2017) studied the fungal community assembly during spontaneous
primary succession in Sokolov brown-coal mining in Czech Republic. The fungal
communities associated with the roots of Betula pendula and Salix caprea were
studied in a mine spoil chronosequence (12–50 years old sites) site. The study
showed that the fungal root endophytes, fungal plant pathogens and ectomycorrhizal
fungi changed significantly along the age of reclamation. Ectomycorrhizal fungi and
fungal plant pathogens communities have a direct impact on the development of the
vegetation cover and the properties of the reclaimed mine spoil. Thus, the study
concluded that plant community structure changed along the various stages of
succession which was directly impacted by the endophyte and pathogen communi￾ties of the soil. The study provided a better understanding of community assembly of
root-associated fungi and provided insight of fungal ecology in various stages of
succession.
16.6 Conclusion
Phytoremediation with endophyte assistance can be a promising technique for the
restoration of a degraded and contaminated soil. They are known to improve nutrient
uptake, enhance growth, decrease phytotoxicity of heavy metals and effect their16 Role of Endophytic Microorganisms in Phosphate Solubilization... 397
assimilation in plants body. These endophytes also solubilize the unavailable phos￾phorus in soil and restore the deficiency in soil. These endophytes also play a vital
role in phytoremediation of heavy metal contaminated sites. Thus, endophytes as a
mean to remediate contaminated sites should be explored for eco-friendly and
effective remediation of heavy metal contaminated sites. Selection of potent endo￾phytes with multifunctional role is essential for the commercialisation and reduction
of coast of restoration of mine-degraded land. Thus, future researches should be
done to develop and discover new strains from various ecological niches and for
employing in degraded soil restoration.
References
Ahirwal J, Maiti SK (2017) Assessment of carbon sequestration potential of revegetated coal mine
overburden dumps: a chronosequence study from dry tropical climate. J Environ Manag 201:
369–377. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2017.07.003
Ahirwal J, Kumari S, Singh AK, Kumar A, Maiti SK (2021) Changes in soil properties and carbon
fluxes following afforestation and agriculture in tropical forest. Ecol Indic 123:107354. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolind.2021.107354
Ahmad E, Khan M, Zaidi A (2013) ACC deaminase producing Pseudomonas putida strain PSE3
and Rhizobium leguminosarum strain RP2 in synergism improves growth, nodulation and yield
of pea grown in alluvial soils. Symbiosis 61(2):93–104. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13199-013-
0259-6
Arachevaleta M, Bacon CW, Hoveland CS, Radcliffe DE (1989) Effect of the tall fescue endophyte
on plant response to environmental stress. Agron J 81(1):83–90, Dissertation, Univ. of Georgia,
Athens. https://doi.org/10.2134/agronj1989.00021962008100010015x
Babu AG, Shea PJ, Sudhakar D et al (2015) Potential use of Pseudomonas koreensis AGB-1 in
association with Miscanthus sinensis to remediate heavy metal (loid)-contaminated mining site
soil. J Environ Manag 151:160–166. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2014.12.045
Basu A, Panda SS, Dhal NK (2015) Potential microbial diversity in chromium mining areas:
bulletin of environment. Pharmacol Life Sci 4:158–169
Bischoff KM, Wicklow DT, Jordan DB et al (2009) Extracellular hemicellulolytic enzymes from
the maize endophyte Acremonium zeae. Curr Microbiol 58(5):499–503. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s00284-008-9353-z
Borgi MA, Saidi I, Moula A et al (2020) The attractive Serratia plymuthica BMA1 strain with high
rock phosphate-solubilizing activity and its effect on the growth and phosphorus uptake by
Vicia faba L. plants. Geomicrobiol J 37(5):437–445. https://doi.org/10.1080/01490451.2020.
1716892
Ditta A, Imtiaz M, Mehmood S et al (2018) Rock phosphate-enriched organic fertilizer with
phosphate-solubilizing microorganisms improves nodulation, growth, and yield of legumes.
Commun Soil Sci Plant Anal 49(21):2715–2725. https://doi.org/10.1080/00103624.2018.
1538374
Domka AM, Rozpaądek P, Turnau K (2019) Are fungal endophytes merely mycorrhizal copycats?
The role of fungal endophytes in the adaptation of plants to metal toxicity. Front Microbiol 10:
371. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2019.00371
Fellet G, Marchiol L, Delle Vedove G, Peressotti A (2011) Application of biochar on mine tailings:
effects and perspectives for land reclamation. Chemosphere 83(9):1262–1267. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.chemosphere.2011.03.053
Flores-Torres G, Solis-Hernández AP, Vela-Correa G et al (2021) Pioneer plant species and fungal
root endophytes in metal-polluted tailings deposited near human populations and agricultural398 D. Ghosh et al.
areas in Northern Mexico. Environ Sci Pollut Res 28(39):55072–55088. https://doi.org/10.
1007/s11356-021-14716-6
Ghosh D, Maiti SK (2020) Can biochar reclaim coal mine spoil? J Environ Manag 272:111097.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2020.111097
Ghosh D, Maiti SK (2021a) Biochar assisted phytoremediation and biomass disposal in heavy metal
contaminated mine soils: a review. Int J Phytoremediation 23(6):559–576. https://doi.org/10.
1080/15226514.2020.1840510
Ghosh D, Maiti SK (2021b) Eco-restoration of coal mine spoil: biochar application and carbon
sequestration for achieving UN sustainable development goals 13 and 15. Land 10(11):1112.
https://doi.org/10.3390/land10111112
Ghosh D, Maiti SK (2021c) Effect of invasive weed biochar amendment on soil enzymatic activity
and respiration of coal mine spoil: a laboratory experiment study. Biochar 3(4):519–533. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s42773-021-00109-y
Ghosh D, Masto RE, Maiti SK (2020) Ameliorative effect of Lantana camara biochar on coal mine
spoil and growth of maize (Zea mays). Soil Use Manag 36(4):726–739. https://doi.org/10.1111/
sum.12626
Guerrero-Zúñiga AL, López-López E, Rodríguez-Tovar AV, Rodríguez-Dorantes A (2020) Func￾tional diversity of plant endophytes and their role in assisted phytoremediation. In: Bioremedi￾ation of industrial waste for environmental safety, pp 237–255. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
981-13-3426-9_10
Gulati A, Sharma N, Vyas P et al (2010) Organic acid production and plant growth promotion as a
function of phosphate solubilization by Acinetobacter rhizosphaerae strain BIHB 723 isolated
from the cold deserts of the trans-Himalayas. Arch Microbiol 192(11):975–983. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s00203-010-0615-3
He W, Megharaj M, Wu CY et al (2020) Endophyte-assisted phytoremediation: mechanisms and
current application strategies for soil mixed pollutants. Crit Rev Biotechnol 40(1):31–45. https://
doi.org/10.1080/07388551.2019.1675582
Hossan S, Hossain S, Islam MR et al (2020) Bioremediation of hexavalent chromium by chromium
resistant bacteria reduces phytotoxicity. Int J Environ Res Public Health 17(17):6013. https://
doi.org/10.3390/ijerph17176013
Kolaříková Z, Kohout P, Krüger C et al (2017) Root-associated fungal communities along a
primary succession on a mine spoil: distinct ecological guilds assemble differently. Soil Biol
Biochem 113:143–152. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.soilbio.2017.06.004
Kour D, Rana KL, Kaur T et al (2020) Microbe-mediated alleviation of drought stress and
acquisition of phosphorus in great millet (Sorghum bicolour L.) by drought-adaptive and
phosphorus-solubilizing microbes. Biocatal Agric Biotechnol 23:101501. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.bcab.2020.101501
Kumari S, Ahirwal J, Maiti SK (2022) Reclamation of industrial waste dump using grass-legume
mixture: an experimental approach to combat land degradation. Ecol Eng 174:106443. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoleng.2021.106443
Li HY, Wei DQ, Shen M, Zhou ZP (2012) Endophytes and their role in phytoremediation. Fungal
Divers 54:11–18. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13225-012-0165-x
Liu C, Mou L, Yi J et al (2019) The endogene of Burkholderia cenocepacia strain 71-2 is involved
in phosphate solubilization. Curr Microbiol 76:495–502. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00284-019-
01642-7
Lucero CT, Lorda GS, Anzuay MS et al (2021) Peanut endophytic phosphate solubilizing bacteria
increase growth and P content of soybean and maize plants. Curr Microbiol 78(5):1961–1972.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00284-021-02469-x
Ma Y, Oliveira RS, Wu L et al (2015) Inoculation with metal-mobilizing plant-growth-promoting
rhizobacterium Bacillus sp. SC2b and its role in rhizoremediation. J Toxic Environ Health A
78(13–14):931–944. https://doi.org/10.1080/15287394.2015.105120516 Role of Endophytic Microorganisms in Phosphate Solubilization... 399
Ma Y, Rajkumar M, Moreno A et al (2017) Serpentine endophytic bacterium Pseudomonas
azotoformans ASS1 accelerates phytoremediation of soil metals under drought stress.
Chemosphere 185:75–85. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2017.06.135
Maiti SK (2013) Ecology and ecosystem in mine-degraded land. In: Ecorestoration of the coalmine
degraded lands. Springer, India, pp 21–37. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-81-322-0851-8_2
Mastretta C, Taghavi S, Van Der Lelie D et al (2009) Endophytic bacteria from seeds of Nicotiana
tabacum can reduce cadmium phytotoxicity. Int J Phytoremediation 11(3):251–267. https://doi.
org/10.1080/15226510802432678
Mehta P, Sharma R, Putatunada C, Walia A (2017) Endophytic bacteria: role in phosphate
solubilization. In: Singh BP (ed) Advances in endophytic fungal research, fungal biology, pp
61–93. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-66544-3_4
Mei C, Chretien RL, Amaradasa BS et al (2021) Characterization of phosphate solubilizing
bacterial endophytes and plant growth promotion in vitro and in greenhouse. Microorganisms
9(9):1935. https://doi.org/10.3390/microorganisms9091935
Mohapatra S, Kumar M, Karim AA, Dhal NK (2020) Biochars evaluation for chromium pollution
abatement in chromite mine wastewater and overburden of Sukinda, Odisha, India. Arab J
Geosci 13(586). https://doi.org/10.1007/s12517-020-05532-2
Nair DN, Padmavathy S (2014) Impact of endophytic microorganisms on plants, environment and
humans. Sci World J 2014:1–11. https://doi.org/10.1155/2014/250693
Patra JM, Panda SS, Dhal NK (2017) Biochar as a low-cost adsorbent for heavy metal removal : a
review. Int J Res Biosci 6(1):1–7
Prasad R (2017) Mycoremediation and environmental sustainability, vol 1. Springer International
Publishing. ISBN 978-3-319-68957-9. https://link.springer.com/book/10.1007/978-3-319-
68957-9
Prasad R (2018) Mycoremediation and environmental sustainability, vol 2. Springer International
Publishing. ISBN 978-3-319-77386-5. https://www.springer.com/us/book/9783319773858
Prasad R (2022) Phytoremediation for environmental sustainability. Springer, Singapore. ISBN
978-9811656200. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-5621-7
Prasad R, Nayak SC, Kharwar RN, Dubey NK (2021) Mycoremediation and environmental
sustainability, vol 3. Springer International Publishing. ISBN: 978-3-030-54421-8. https://
www.springer.com/gp/book/9783030544218
Priyadharsini P, Muthukumar T (2017) The root endophytic fungus Curvularia geniculata from
Parthenium hysterophorus roots improves plant growth through phosphate solubilization and
phytohormone production. Fungal Ecol 27:69–77. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.funeco.2017.
02.007
Pushkar B, Sevak P, Parab S, Nilkanth N (2021) Chromium pollution and its bioremediation
mechanisms in bacteria: a review. J Environ Manag 287(November 2020):112279. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2021.112279
Qiu Z, Tan H, Zhou S, Cao L (2014) Enhanced phytoremediation of toxic metals by inoculating
endophytic Enterobacter sp. CBSB1 expressing bifunctional glutathione synthase. J Hazard
Mater 267:17–20. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2013.12.043
Rajapaksha CP, Senanayake AP (2011) Potential use of rock-phosphate- solubilizing bacteria
associated with wild rice as inoculants for improved rice (Oryza sativa). Arch Agron Soil Sci
57(7):775–788. https://doi.org/10.1080/03650340.2010.493878
Rawat P, Das S, Shankhdhar D, Shankhdhar SC (2021) Phosphate-solubilizing microorganisms:
mechanism and their role in phosphate solubilization and uptake. J Soil Sci Plant Nutr 21(1):
49–68. https://doi.org/10.1007/s42729-020-00342-7
Šebelíková L, Csicsek G, Kirmer A et al (2019) Spontaneous revegetation versus forestry
reclamation—vegetation development in coal mining spoil heaps across Central Europe. Land
Degrad Dev 30(3):348–356. https://doi.org/10.1002/ldr.3233
Shukla MK, Lal R (2005) Soil organic carbon stock for reclaimed mine- soils in northeastern Ohio.
Land Degrad Dev 16(4):377–386. https://doi.org/10.1002/ldr.669400 D. Ghosh et al.
Singh H, Reddy MS (2011) Effect of inoculation with phosphate solubilizing fungus on growth and
nutrient uptake of wheat and maize plants fertilized with rock phosphate in alkaline soils. Eur J
Soil Ecol 47:30–34. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejsobi.2010.10.005
Sun LN, Zhang YF, He LY et al (2010) Genetic diversity and characterization of heavy metal￾resistant-endophytic bacteria from two copper-tolerant plant species on copper mine wasteland.
Bioresour Technol 101:501e509. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2009.08.011
Świątek B, Woś B, Chodak M, Kumar S (2019) Geoderma fine root biomass and the associated C
and nutrient pool under the alder (Alnus spp.) plantings on reclaimed technosols. Geoderma 337:
1021–1027. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.geoderma.2018.11.025
Varma A, Swati T, Prasad R (2019a) Plant biotic interactions: state of art. Springer International
Publishing. ISBN 978-3-030-26657-8. https://www.springer.com/gp/book/9783030266561
Varma A, Swati T, Prasad R (2019b) Plant microbe interface. Springer International Publishing.
ISBN 978-3-030-19831-2. https://www.springer.com/gp/book/9783030198305
Wakelin SA, Warren RA, Harvey PR et al (2004) Phosphate solubilization by Penicillium spp.
closely associated with wheat roots. Biol Fertil Soil 40:36–43. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00374-
004-0750-6
Xin G, Zhang G, Kang JW et al (2009) A diazotrophic, indole-3-acetic acid-producing endophyte
from wild cottonwood. Biol Fertil Soils 45(6):669–674. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00374-009-
0377-8
Zheng BX, Ding K, Yang XR (2019) Straw biochar increases the abundance of inorganic phosphate
solubilizing bacterial community for better rape (Brassica napus) growth and phosphate uptake.
Sci Total Environ 647:1113–1120. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.07.454401
Chapter 17
Techniques to Study Plant–Microbe
Interactions that Lead to Efficient
Sustainable Agriculture
Nishra Joshi, Janki A. Ruparelia, Meenu Saraf, and Chaitanya Kumar Jha
Abstract Plant and microbes interact with each other at many levels of their life
cycle, which may be beneficial, harmful, or neutral, and these interactions can be
seen on multiple interfaces of the plant like root, shoot, stem, or leaves. If we have a
glance in the field of agriculture in this context, the demand of agriculture is rising
unprecedentedly and the conventional agriculture practices cannot keep pace with it
both economically and environmentally, and we as humankind need to execute new
strategies that are both economical and environment friendly. A strategy that is
gaining momentum these days is the use of plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria
(PGPR) in the field to get an increased amount of crop production, to improve the
nutrient profile of crops, to remove toxic compounds, or for elimination of patho￾gens. But to get ahead in this field, first we have to understand the complex
relationships between plant and microbes. Also, we need to examine the interspecies
relationship between microbes themselves as to how they are imparting beneficial or
harmful effects on plants. Only then will we be able to open the door to sustainable
agriculture to meet the rising demand of food, fuel, and fibers. It was a hefty task to
study the microbiomes some decades ago but thanks to techniques developed in
recent decades, such as polymerase chain reaction, enzyme-linked assays such as
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and radioimmunoassay (RIA),
nucleic acid sequencing (genome sequencing, 16S ribosomal RNA sequencing,
clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats [CRISPR]), and micro￾scopic techniques (fluorescence microscopy, video microscopy), it is now easy to
N. Joshi · J. A. Ruparelia
Microbiology Department, Gujarat Arts and Science College, Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India
Department of Microbiology and Biotechnology, University School of Science, Gujarat
University, Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India
M. Saraf
Department of Microbiology and Biotechnology, University School of Science, Gujarat
University, Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India
C. K. Jha (*)
Microbiology Department, Gujarat Arts and Science College, Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2023
S. Chhabra et al. (eds.), Plant Microbiome for Plant Productivity and Sustainable
Agriculture, Microorganisms for Sustainability 37,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-19-5029-2_17402 N. Joshi et al.
study the microbes and microbial interactions neatly. In this chapter, we will discuss
the microbial interactions at the plant interface and various techniques to study
microbiomes.
Keywords Plant microbiome · PGPR · Plant–microbe interface · Sustainable
agriculture
17.1 Introduction
Every organism on the planet depends on interactions with its surroundings to stay
alive. The term “interaction” merely brings up a mental image of two entities
actively interacting in a certain situation. Interaction derives from the Latin inter,
which means “between,” and ago, which means “to do” or “to act.” Since we human
beings and other animals are heterotrophic in nature, we mainly depend on the plants
for the food and fiber needs.
Crop production will be one of the primary challenges of the twenty-first century
to provide enough food for the growing human population, renewable energy, and
fundamental molecules in industrial processes. Farmers in the modern day can
benefit from microbial solutions since they can help meet the demand for more
sustainable farming approaches. Increased crop yields and a more sustainable
industry impact profile are possible outcomes of such solutions, resulting in more
food to feed a growing world and new chances to safeguard the environment (Jha
et al. 2011; Prasad et al. 2018; Kaushal and Prasad 2021).
Naturally, plants are inhabited by a myriad of microorganisms that perform a
range of associative functions with bacteria, fungi, algae, archaea, protozoa, and
viruses. The natural interaction between plants and microorganisms has long been
associated with higher plant growth, nutrition, and health (Berg and Smalla 2009).
For application of microbes in crop cultivation, we have to first address the ques￾tions: “How the microbes are affecting the plant or the crop?” “Is it beneficial or
detrimental to the plant?” “How microorganisms benefitted the plant?” “Whether it
benefits the plant by eliminating the pathogens, or by making the plant more stress
tolerant, or by aiding the plant in growth?” Consequently, we also have to address
the same questions like: “What microorganisms are doing?” “How they are
interacting with the plant?” “What is the effect of environmental stress on the
interaction?” “If plant microbial interactions are beneficial, how can we utilize the
beneficial interaction for sustainable agriculture?” “How we can help humankind to
survive sustainably by all these research?”
Application of helpful microorganisms in plant cultivation is required to engineer
a massive building of sustainable agriculture in order to increase soil fertility and
productivity. The study of interactions at the plant–microbe (PM) interface is a
critical component of environment-friendly agriculture (Varma et al. 2019a, b).
This chapter discusses and describes both conventional and emerging tools for
studying plant–microbe interactions.17 Techniques to Study Plant–Microbe Interactions that Lead to... 403
17.2 Agroecosystems and the Importance of Plants
and Microorganisms and Their Interactions
There is a growing desire for sustainable agricultural techniques that are capable of
maintaining optimum soil fertility, plant growth, and, eventually, keeping the crop
disease-free, which has driven growers to limit their use of chemical inputs. The use
of microbiological solutions such as plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria (PGPR)
has an alternative potential option to build eco-friendly techniques, which can be an
important moving force toward this end. In recent decades, agrobiologists have
concentrated their efforts on gaining a better understanding of the role of useful
microorganisms and harnessing diverse beneficial plant–microbe interactions, which
can be beneficial to agroecosystem’s productivity (Jha and Saraf 2015; Prasad et al.
2015).
Plants and bacteria are in naturally co-evolved symbiotic partnerships, and the
interfaces between host plants and microbes are one of the most important determi￾nants of crop health and productivity (Garg et al. 2019). The rhizosphere is the
region where plant and microbial interactions are most closely coordinated, and it
has the ability to provide a wide range of system properties such as rapid root
colonization, improved nutrient uptake, and resistance to biotic and abiotic influ￾ences. The plant–microbe interaction spectrum is vast, encompassing different
microbial communities and organisms, and the health of a plant is determined by
the establishment of plant–microbe interactions such as by positive and negative
influences on the host plant (Sharma and Pathak 2014). Plant–microbe interactions
have mostly been explored in terms of commensalism, mutualism, competition, and
parasitism among all plant–microbe interactions (Wu et al. 2009). The positive
typical contact via mutualism and commensalism is commonly known, in which
both or one member gets benefit from the interaction, respectively. The PGPRs are
potential candidates to contribute to sustainable crop production.
A wide range of symbiotic bacteria such as Rhizobium and Bradyrhizobium spp.,
or non-symbiotic bacteria such as Azospirillum, Bacillus, Pseudomonas, and Kleb￾siella spp., among others, are increasingly being employed to boost plant produc￾tivity around the world (Hayat et al. 2010). Mutual interactions between legumes and
N-fixing rhizobia and arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (AMF) species, which help host
plants obtain nitrogen and phosphorus in nutrient-deficient situations, are well￾known examples of beneficial plant–microbe interactions (Cao et al. 2017; Udvardi
and Poole 2013). When the detrimental bacteria infect plants, negative interactions
such as parasitism occur, causing collateral damage and obtaining resources from
their hosts, whereas competition arises when plants and microbes have similar
nutritional requirements (Shelake et al. 2019). An overview of the plant–microbe
interactions is given in Table 17.1.Description Reference
404 N. Joshi et al.
Table 17.1 Types of plant–microbe interaction
Type of plant–
microbe
interaction
Example of microbes
involved in interaction
Mutualism Both interacting species get
benefit from interaction; plants
and symbiotic or free-living
plant growth-promoting
rhizobacteria (PGPR) both get
benefit in this relationship
Rhizobia and Frankia,
Achromobacter, Corynebac￾terium, Derxia, Enterobacter,
Klebsiella, Pseudomonas,
Rhodospirillum,
Rhodopseudomonas
Saharan
and Nehra
(2011)
Commensalism Only one can benefit from this
interaction; usually, plant root
exudates provide the necessary
nutrients to the PGPR while
plants remain unaffected in this
interaction
Helicobacter pylori Hirsch
(2004)
Protocooperation Protocooperation is another
type of interaction where both
the interacting species get
benefitted, but the collaborat￾ing species do not rely on each
other for existence
Bacillus and Halobacillus Banik
et al.
(2018)
Parasitic Parasites colonize the host
plant, causing collateral harm
and may compete for nutri￾tional needs
Stachybotrys elegans Chamoun
et al.
(2015)
Pathogenic Pathogens can actively destroy
the host plant for their own
trophic advantage
Pectobacterium atrosepticum Chamoun
et al.
(2015)
17.3 Methods to Study Plant–Microbe Interaction
Morphological studies and biochemical testing were the main methods to study the
plant–microbe interactions a few decades ago. These methods are not only time￾consuming and laborious but also inaccurate at some points. The development of
advanced techniques such as enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), radio￾immunoassay (RIA), various gene-sequencing including DNA sequencing and RNA
sequencing, next-generation sequencing (NGS), and metagenomics gave way to
have an insight into a deep world of microorganisms. A simplified evolution of
study techniques of plant–microbe interactions is presented in Fig. 17.1.
17.3.1 Conventional Techniques
Conventionally, biochemical detection and microscopy were used to identify the
microbes. Biochemical identification includes isolation of the microbes by the use of17 Techniques to Study Plant–Microbe Interactions that Lead to... 405
Fig. 17.1 Evolution of approaches to study interactions at plant–microbe (PM) interface (Dass and
Mallick 2019; Prabhukarthikeyan et al. 2020)
agar media (routine, semi-synthetic, synthetic, semi-selective, selective, and special￾ized media), and studying colony morphology and biochemical characteristics. The
main limitation of these culture-dependent techniques is that it only allows limited
analysis of culturable microorganisms.406 N. Joshi et al.
17.3.1.1 Microscopy
Microscopy is the reason the whole microbiology exists today. Microscopy started
with a simple and then compound optical microscope.
Bright-field microscopy is a widely used microscopic technique mainly because
of its simplicity where the sample is illuminated by white light, suitable for observ￾ing stained or colored samples, while dark-field microscopy is useful for unstained as
well as living samples where the sample is illuminated by scattered light (Liu et al.
2014). Phase-contrast microscopy takes advantage of the different refractive indexes
of the subject and provides a better projection of the unstained subject making it
possible to distinguish between structures of similar transparencies. Phase-contrast
optics when used with a video microscope can be used to observe time-lapse
imaging of cell division or cellular movement (Hadjidemetriou et al. 2008).
In fluorescent microscopy, the shorter wavelength is used to illuminate the
specimen either stained with fluorescent dyes or, in some cases, inductively
expressed fluorescent proteins already present in cells or tissues, and a longer
wavelength is emitted by the specimen that is captured by the objective lens or
detector. This allows creative visualization as well as a resolution of the sample
(Sanderson et al. 2014). Confocal microscopy is developed to bypass some limita￾tions of conventional fluorescent microscopy by minimizing signal and maximizing
resolution with point illumination. Confocal microscopy was used to illustrate the
relationship between Azospirillum brasilense SP7 and wheat root by which bacteria,
root tissue, and mucilaginous layer can be localized precisely and XY or Z scan
image can be used to show them. It is also the first example of the use of confocal
microscopy in microbial ecology (Cardinale 2014).
Maximum magnification in optical microscopes is typically 1000× while electron
microscopy gave a new height to microscopy with a maximum magnification of
1,000,000× (Vernon-Parry 2000). Mainly, there are two types of electron micros￾copy: scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and transmission electron microscopy
(TEM). SEM creates a projection of the sample by scanning the surface of the
sample with an electron beam focused on it where the specimen excited by the
electron beam generates secondary electrons that will be captured by the detector to
create a three-dimensional (3D) image of the specimen. SEM also gives the depth
effect to the sample, which allows us to study the surface characteristics and shapes
of the microbes very easily (Vernon-Parry 2000; Elad et al. 1983). Hyphal interac￾tion of Trichoderma harzianum with Rhizoctonia solani during the infection of prior
on the latter was studied using SEM (Benhamou and Chet 1993). TEM, on the other
hand, transmits the electron through ultra-thin specimens and these transmitted
electrons are captured by the detector to create an image of the specimen. TEM
can also create a 3D micrograph of the specimen and can obtain a magnification of
up to 0.2 nm (Singh et al. 2021). TEM has been used to study the structure of the
Cucumber Mosaic Virus (CMV). For the study of the structure of viruses, TEM is a
better option (Khan et al. 2011).17 Techniques to Study Plant–Microbe Interactions that Lead to... 407
Though microscopy is one of the primitive techniques, it remains as important in
the modern world.
17.3.2 Biochemical Techniques
17.3.2.1 Immunoassays
Immunoassays can be categorized into two broad groups: (1) Labeled, and
(2) Direct.
Labeled Immunoassays
This includes enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), radioimmunoassay
(RIA), and immunofluorescence (Dass and Mallick 2019). Advance science many
times uses biochemical and serological methods such as ELISA, which is mainly
used for the detection and quantification of specific substances such as mycotoxins,
viral proteins/particles, and other such compounds that are able to perform an
antigen/antibody reaction (Zhang and Vrient 2020; Zheng et al. 2006). It is a
specific, sensitive, relatively rapid, and cheap technique (Zhang and Vrient 2020).
Mainly, three variations of ELISA exist: (1) direct, (2) indirect, and (3) sandwich.
ELISA mainly includes the use of: antibodies specific to the antigen or secondary
antibodies specific to primary antibodies; plant extract suspected to contain, or soil
sample containing, the target antigen; and a substrate and an enzyme that changes the
color of the substrate. When the enzyme is added, it changes the color of the
substrate and produces a spectrometric signal and the target compound is detected
by spectrophotometric determination. In direct ELISA, an antigen-containing buffer
solution is added to the microtiter plate, and enzyme-conjugated antibodies specific
to the target antigen are added subsequently, which creates an antigen–antibody
complex. The substrate when added, changes color if the target antigen is present in
the sample (Hema and Konakalla 2021; Fenner et al. 1987). The indirect ELISA, in
addition to direct ELISA, includes the addition of primary antibody after the antigen
has been added to microtiter wells. Enzyme-conjugated secondary antibodies will
then be added, which is specific to primary antibodies and changes the color of the
substrate added subsequently (Hema and Konakalla 2021; Varma and Singh 2020).
In sandwich ELISA, the first step is to add primary antibodies in the wells. Then the
suspected sample containing antibodies will be added, which follows enzyme
conjugates and the substrate and the result are interpreted the same as above,
spectrophotometrically (Varma and Singh 2020). It is also referred to as a triple￾antibody sandwich (TAS) when the secondary antibodies are used to detect the
primary antibody bound to the antigen. The sandwich ELISA technique can be
further divided into double-antibody sandwich (DAS) ELISA, triple-antibody sand￾wich (TAS) ELISA, and Protein A sandwich (PAS) ELISA (Fenner et al. 1987;408 N. Joshi et al.
Serçe and Ayyaz 2020). Many pathogens such as Phytophthora cinnamomi, the
causative agent of turf disease, Pythium spp., Rhizoctonia solani, and Sclerotinia
homoeocarpa are detected using ELISA (Dass and Mallick 2019).
Radioimmunoassay (RIA) is a technique similar to ELISA with the label of the
radioactive compound, commonly 125I but also 131I or tritium (3
H), instead of
enzymes in ELISA. Procedure and variations remain the same as ELISA involving
direct and indirect methods except for detection, which is made under gamma
counter as the radioactive label has been used (Kricka and Park 2014; Hema and
Konakalla 2021). Some pathogens including Botrytis cinerea are detected using RIA
(Dass and Mallick 2019).
Immunofluorescence is another much similar technique except that it uses
fluorophores instead of enzymes as label and fluorescence microscopy or confocal
microscopy is used to detect the labeled antibodies (Joshi and Yu 2017).
Direct Immunoassays
Direct immunoassays include immunoprecipitation, immunoagglutination, and
immunodiffusion.
Immunoprecipitation is used to detect a specific protein present in the sample.
Antibodies specific to the protein of interest are allowed to incubate with agarose
beads so that agarose beads become coated with antibodies. Now, these antibody–
agarose bead complexes are incubated with the sample so that the protein of interest
can make the complex with the antibodies added. Co-immunoprecipitation is also
used mainly to recognize the protein–protein interaction between the protein of
interest we have isolated and other proteins detected by immunoblotting (Pazour
2009). This technique is useful when we are looking for specific proteins such as
enzymes or hormones or toxins or antigens present in the pathogen and its interac￾tion with other proteins (Corthell 2014).
Immunodiffusion is the other simpler technique that involves pouring the antigen
in one and antibody in another well created on the agar media; they diffuse toward
each other due to porous nature of agar media (Licata et al. 2016) and form a
precipitation band in between the wells. This simple technique is used to check the
presence of specific pathogens in a sample (Fenner et al. 1987).
Microscopic carrier particles (referred to as latex) are coated with antibodies in
immune-agglutination protocol that are then incubated with the sample suspected for
containing the antigen. If the antigen is present, agglutination reaction takes place
here indicating the presence of the antigen. This method is called direct immune￾agglutination. Indirect immune-agglutination is performed by the immobilization of
antigen on latex particles and antibodies are detected based on the agglutination
reaction (Molina bolívar and Galisteo gonzález 2005).
Immunoassays are used when there are possibilities of antigen–antibody reaction,
mainly in plant pathology, which should indeed be an area of interest when we are
talking about agriculture. For better growth of commercially important plants and
better agricultural production, it is important to prevent infections in crops, and in17 Techniques to Study Plant–Microbe Interactions that Lead to... 409
this type of studies, immunoassays are very important for the detection of pathogens
in crops.
17.3.3 Molecular Techniques for Detection of Plant–Microbe
Interaction
The study of plant–microbe interactions is critical for the use of microbiomes, which
play a critical role in sustainable agriculture. Knowledge of the mechanisms under￾pinning plant–microbe interactions in the rhizosphere was previously limited due to
a lack of proper approaches; now, with advances in molecular biology, our under￾standing of the plant–microbe interaction is gradually becoming more transparent. In
this regard, some molecular diagnostic approaches have been deciphered in this area.
17.3.3.1 Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) Technique
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is a scientific technique invented by Kary Mullis
that revolutionized DNA research and led to numerous scientific breakthroughs such
as genome sequencing, gene expression in recombinant systems, and the study of
molecular genetic analysis (Singh et al. 2014). The polymerase chain reaction, also
known as molecular photocopying, is a simple and low-cost process for amplifying
or copying a specific piece of DNA (Singh et al. 2014).
The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) technology is extremely practical, and its
main premise is to multiply certain DNA sequences based on their molecular
structure. Denaturation, annealing, and the extension stage are the three simple
processes that make up the overall process. The single-stranded DNA molecules
are obtained in the denaturation step at 94 °C (Singh et al. 2014; Gachet et al. 1998).
At lower temperatures such as 55 °C, short DNA molecules named primers bind to
flanking regions of the target DNA during annealing. Finally, extension occurs at
72 °C, and new strands are synthesized with the assistance of DNA polymerase
(Gachet et al. 1998; Singh et al. 2014). The increase in target DNA sequences results
from a number of cycles carried out in a fully automated machine known as a
thermocycler, which is designed to modify the temperature of each phase and may
be finished in a couple of hours (Rajalakshmi 2017). Without PCR amplification,
studying large amounts of specific isolated bits of DNA at the genetic and molecular
levels in prokaryotic and eukaryotic organisms is nearly impossible.
Although procedures have altered with considerable increases in performance
that have contributed to the emergence of multiple PCR variants, the core concepts
of PCR have remained consistent over time. There have been several variations of
PCR available over the years based on their applications, but the most prevalent
varieties of PCR are reverse transcriptase-PCR (RT-PCR), real-time PCR, or410 N. Joshi et al.
quantitative PCR (qPCR), and RT-PCR/qPCR combined (Singh et al. 2014;
Rajalakshmi 2017).
PCR variants such as reverse transcriptase-PCR (RT-PCR), real-time PCR,
quantitative PCR (qPCR), and RT-PCR/qPCR combined have been created to
achieve simultaneous identification of several bacteria, and differentiation and
quantification of live bacterial cells. Quantitative PCR, often known as real-time
PCR, is a technique for amplification and measurement of PCR products generated
during each cycle of the process (Mo et al. 2012), while reverse transcriptase-PCR is
a refined PCR technique in which RNA molecules are transformed into complemen￾tary DNA (cDNA) molecules before being amplified by PCR (Mo et al. 2012). The
reverse transcriptase-quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR) technique represents a big step
forward in the field of PCR. It was created with the goal of quantifying RNA
expression using reverse-transcriptase PCR combined with qPCR (Singh et al.
2014).
17.3.3.2 16S rRNA Gene Sequencing for Bacterial Identification
The bacterial identification was harder to achieve in an evolutionary context than the
macro-organisms. Primarily, to identify the organisms standard approaches such as
changes in growth, shape, enzyme activity, and so on are typically used. However,
due to tiny size of microbes, their phenotypic characteristics have a limited range of
expression and typically fail because the phenotype is susceptible to interpretation
biases. The restrictions, in ordinary strategies, were eliminated by the new molecular
biology science procedures for bacterial identification. Notwithstanding, 16S ribo￾somal RNA (rRNA) genome sequencing has become a cornerstone for bacterial
identification as they can recognize as well as propose the phylogenetic connection
between microorganisms (Petti et al. 2005). Research of bacterial phylogeny and
taxonomy using 16S rRNA gene sequences is a common practice because of a
number of unusual properties like its presence in almost all bacteria, often as a
multigene family, or operons; its sequence is sufficiently conserved to accurately
evaluate random sequence changes in time (evolution) and contains areas of mod￾erated, variable, and hypervariable sequence regions. The 16S rRNA quality
(1500 bp) is sufficiently enormous to contain adequate data for identification and
phylogenetic examination (Janda and Abbott 2007). Standard PCR clone sequenc￾ing, as well as Sanger sequencing, 454 pyrosequencing, and the PhyloChip, a
specialized microarray for 16S surveys, are some of commonly used techniques
for bacterial identification and taxonomic classification of bacteria.
Throughout the most recent couple of years, various examination by researchers
have developed massive collection of genomically sequenced bacterial strains iso￾lated from plant roots or rhizosphere soil (Jacoby and Kopriva 2019). The discovery
of the plant microbiome allows building microbial networks to demonstrate stability
and adaptability allowing them to fulfill specific capacities. Sequenced rhizosphere
diversity might be explored to improve our functional knowledge of plant–microbe
interactions, which could then be utilized in the field to increase plant productivity.17 Techniques to Study Plant–Microbe Interactions that Lead to... 411
Due to a convergence of methodological advances, 16S is re-emerging as a
standalone molecular tool.
17.3.3.3 Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS)
With the headway in molecular biology, next-generation sequencing technology has
proven to be a revolutionary change in sequencing technology, allowing for greater
output reads and the production of enormous sequence data at a reduced cost.
Instruments utilized for NGS can be categorized as second-generation and third￾generation sequencing technologies (Liu et al. 2012). Second-generation sequencing
technology includes instruments from Roche 454, Illumina, and Life Technologies.
SOLiD—Sequencing by Oligonucleotide Ligation and Detection—and Ion Torrent
sequencers are the most common second-generation sequencing technologies. The
PacBio RS is the sole commercially available third-generation sequencing system
from Pacific Biosciences (Schadt et al. 2010; Kumari et al. 2017).
In the field of agrobiology, researchers can examine the microbiome associated
with the plant and the interconnection among them employing NGS, which can also
include utilizing transcriptomics, genomics, and metabolomics studies of microbes,
which will eventually enable the identification of the framework for their subsistence
and interconnections (Kumar and Sharma 2020). Many studies have underlined the
importance of NGS; for example, Gammaproteobacteria and Betaproteobacteria
were recognized in the soil to control Rhizoctonia solani infection, according to
NGS technology used on sugar beet (Kumari et al. 2017; Mendes et al. 2011). Using
NGS, taxonomic profiling investigations in the plant rhizosphere have attempted to
obtain varied information about plant species, genotype, soil type, different growth
stages, and various microbial community structures (Gupta et al. 2021).
17.3.3.4 CRISPR/Cas9
Understanding the basic concepts of the plant-specific microbiome seems to be a
viable technique for its application in agriculture, as the plant-associated microbiota
greatly influences the host’s phenotype. In addition, future plant microbiome appli￾cations will require research into microbial and plant genes implicated in plant–
microbe interactions (Shelake et al. 2019; Sarma et al. 2021).
Multiple intriguing genome-editing (GE) technologies (also known as genome
engineering) have evolved in recent years as a strong tool for changing an organism’s
genome to explore gene function with precision and efficiency. The targeted genome
editing is done by using programmed meganucleases to create double-stranded
breaks (DSBs) in specific genes of interest. The formation of nuclease-induced
double-stranded breaks (DSBs) is the starting point for targeted DNA modifications.
This event activates the cellular DNA repair mechanism, which works on the double￾stranded break to repair it by non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) or homology￾directed repair (HDR). Insertions, deletions, substitutions, and DNA recombination412 N. Joshi et al.
may occur during the process (Zhang et al. 2017). Specific-target genetic modifica￾tions can be achieved in a variety of ways, but transcription activator-like effector
nucleases (TALENs), zinc finger nucleases (ZFNs), and the clustered regularly
interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR)/CRISPR-associated (Cas) system
have been the most widely used meganucleases (Shelake et al. 2019). These
meganucleases, which include transcription activator-like effector nucleases
(TALENs), zinc finger nucleases, and others, can be used to make genetic modifi￾cations in the early stages of genome-editing technology (Razzaq et al. 2019). The
encroachment of genome-editing tools solves challenges such as time consumption
and the need for long processes to achieve target specificity. In comparison to ZFNs
and TALENs, CRISPR/Cas9 system is more adventurous in terms of simple design,
versatility, cost-effectiveness, greater efficiency, multiplexing, and specificity
(Razzaq et al. 2019).
CRISPR/Cas9 system has proven to be a game-changing genome-editing method
with a wide range of potential applications in agriculture around the world. The most
powerful genome-editing tool, CRISPR-associated 9 (Cas9) nuclease, is a newly
found nuclease that was first recognized as an RNA-mediated adaptive immune
mechanism in bacteria and archaea against viral invasion (El-Mounadi et al. 2020).
CRISPR/Cas systems are commonly split into two classes, the first of which consists
of multiprotein effector complexes further subdivided into types I, III, and IV, and
the second of which consists of a single effector protein (types II, V, and VI). The
Class 2 CRISPR/Cas9 system is one of the most well-known and widely employed
for nucleic acid alteration (Li et al. 2020). The widely known CRISPR/Cas9 system,
which relies on a single Cas protein that targets the specific DNA sequences and was
developed from Streptococcus pyogenes for genome editing, is the most commonly
used for the construction and usage of CRISPR-based tools due to its promising
efficiency (Li et al. 2020). CRISPR/Cas9 is an appealing gene-editing technique
because it targets specific DNA sequences. A single-stranded guide RNA (sgRNA)
and a Cas9 endonuclease are the two key components of the CRISPR/Cas9 system.
The sgRNA often contains a special 20-base-pair sequence that is meant to comple￾ment the target DNA site in a sequence-specific manner, and this must be followed
by a short DNA sequence upstream known as the “protospacer adjacent motif”
(PAM), which is essential for Cas9 protein compatibility (Li et al. 2020). Once
sgRNA attaches to the target sequence via Watson–Crick base pairing, Cas9 accu￾rately cleaves the DNA to cause a DSB. Following the DSB, DNA-DSB repair
mechanisms commence genome repair. The CRISPR/Cas9 system can be used to
make targeted genomic changes, such as small insertions and deletions, using the
NHEJ or high-fidelity HDR pathways (Li et al. 2020).
Nowadays, CRISPR-based technologies have been used in a variety of plant–
pathogen interaction investigations, including host responses to bacteria, fungi,
oomycetes, viruses, and so on (Shelake et al. 2019). CRISPR-Cas9 has been used
to improve: metabolic pathways; resistance to biotic stresses like fungal, bacterial, or
viral diseases or abiotic stressors like cold, drought, and salt; and the nutritional
content, yield, and crop quality (El-Mounadi et al. 2020). To understand better viral
infection in plants, the bacterial CRISPR-Cas system can also be used to constrain17 Techniques to Study Plant–Microbe Interactions that Lead to... 413
viral genetic material employing Cas9’s nuclease activity (Mahadevakumar and
Sridhar 2020). CRISPR/Cas9-based disease management is proved to be a novel
approach to plant disease control. The CRISPR/Cas9 technique was used to create
mutations in the OsSWEET13 coding area, which resulted in increased resistance to
Xoo infection caused by Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae (Prabhukarthikeyan et al.
2020). The CRISPR-Cas9 technology has also been used to better understand the
infection process of fungal infections through the creation of CRISPR-Cas9-assisted
endogenous gene tagging (EGT) techniques (Wang and Coleman 2019). CRISPR￾mediated editing of plant-microbe-associated genes involved in the production of
secondary metabolite pathway is a novel and intriguing method for enhancing stable
and bioactive secondary metabolite production. Today, many secondary metabolites
are being used as nutrition, medications, repellents, perfumes, tastes, and coloring
compounds since they are important in plant or microbial defense processes (Shelake
et al. 2019; El-Mounadi et al. 2020).
Overall, CRISPR (clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats)-
based genome editing (GE) is a good platform for learning the foundations of PM
interactions fast and enabling precise genetic alterations for increased crop produc￾tivity and disease resistance using genome-editing technology (Barrangou and
Notebaart 2019; Singh and Ramakrishna 2021).
17.3.3.5 Other Approaches to Study the Plant–Microbe Interface
Other than the genome-based studies, studying RNA, protein, and metabolites has
also nowadays evolved when it comes to identification as well as understanding the
function and interaction of the species with another species or the environment,
and the branches involved in the study is known as transcriptomics, proteomics, and
metabolomics (Tan et al. 2009). An overview of various “-omics” approaches and
their application for study of plant–microbe interface are given in Fig. 17.2.
The most popular among all the developing “-omics” approaches is
metagenomics. Entire genomic DNA is prepared from samples, irrespective of its
microbial composition, and is characterized by way of whole-genome sequencing in
metagenomics, which is also known as gene-centric environmental genomics.
Instead of relying on a single-genome-like traditional approaches, metagenomics
looks for all genes and genomes from a microbial community at once (Martí 2019;
Schloss and Handelsman 2005). The traditional genomic approach has been proven
accurate in the identification and analysis of disease caused by a single genotype but
when it comes to epidemiological studies, a single genomic approach might mask
the population of highly similar but still distinguishable individual genotypes that
may be responsible for the disease. Furthermore, a sample consisting of genotypes
from different bacterial, fungal, archaeal, or eukaryotic species is to be analyzed; a
single genomic approach would not be appropriate because not all the microbes are
cultivable (Martí 2019). Other than that, the discovery of infections involving
multiple microbes is increasing (Melcher et al. 2014). In both cases, the
metagenomic study is useful to reveal the actual nature of plant–microbe or in414 N. Joshi et al.
Fig. 17.2 Application of “-omics” approach to study PM interface
general host–microbe interactions (Martí 2019; Melcher et al. 2014). In spite of all
the advantages of metagenomics, it should be noted that the field of metagenomics is
still under development and next-generation sequencing techniques are changing the
outlook of metagenomics and hence new types of bioinformatics analysis tools are
expected in the future (Martí 2019). The diversity of endophytic bacteria present in
maize (Zea mays) plants was studied using metagenomics. Fungal endophytic
diversity of maize plants also has been revealed using metagenomics (Fadiji and
Babalola 2020).17 Techniques to Study Plant–Microbe Interactions that Lead to... 415
Apart from metagenomics, transcriptomics is also gaining momentum in the
modern era. Analysis and study of the entire set of transcripts including messenger
RNAs (mRNAs), microRNAs (miRNAs), and long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs),
also known as transcriptome, is called transcriptomics, which is also known as
quantitative gene expression profiling (Tan et al. 2009). Initially, transcriptomic
studies were carried out using the high-capacity microarray technique but using
microarray, it is very difficult to study transcriptome as it uses defined gene or
transcript probes. The next-generation sequencing technologies provide readings of
transcription boundaries precisely and unmapped transcripts without any predefined
gene or transcript. However, for transcriptome analysis, array-based technology is
still widely in use as the sequencing technology has some limitations including cost,
availability, complexity, and error vulnerability of sequence assembly (Metzker
2010). This approach can uncover gene expression, allow us to look into pathways
triggered due to biotic or abiotic stress conditions, and it can be used for diagnostics
and disease profiling (Garg et al. 2016; Wang et al. 2009; Tavassoly et al. 2018),
while for the study of the microbial community, meta-transcriptomics is used, where
transcriptome of the whole sample is analyzed in order to study the expression and
regulation profiling of complex microbial communities at a given moment and under
a specific condition (Aguiar-Pulido et al. 2016). Participation of small RNAs
(sRNAs) in environmental processes such as carbon metabolism and nutrient acqui￾sition was proved by the meta-transcriptomic study (Bharagava et al. 2019; Shi et al.
2009).
Like genomics, proteomics is a study of the entire protein content of a cell, tissue,
or organism, which is also known as proteomes, resulting in insights full of infor￾mation on protein expression and their modulation under a specific condition
(Yu et al. 2010; Holger Husi 2014). Initially, two-dimensional (2-D) gel electropho￾resis was used to study proteomes but nowadays mass spectrometry is used for the
proteomic study. Typically, there are two types of approaches in the study of
proteomes. The first is the bottom-up approach where protein is digested into
peptides and is used to study complex samples, and the approach is also known as
“shotgun proteomics.” One major limitation of this approach is the loss of important
information on post-translational modifications and limited protein sequence cover￾age by the identified peptides. Another approach is the top-down approach, where
the proteome is studied directly as intact proteins. Now, this method is suitable for
the simpler samples and it needs higher mass accuracy for analysis (Holger Husi
2014). Proteomics can be the reliable microscope to see enzymatic activity and how
it affects the plant–microbe interaction; it also helps in studying the pathogenicity of
a microbe and also the response of the host plant to the invading microbe. When the
pathogen Pseudomonas syringae was implanted in the leaves and Pseudomonas
fluorescens WCS417r-mediated induced systemic resistance (ISR) was inserted in
the roots, significant differences in transcript levels in Arabidopsis shoots were
observed (Sharma et al. 2020). Proteomics is an effective approach for studying
plant–fungus pathogenic interactions. Proteomic study of tomato–Cladosporium
fulvum interaction uncovers the first avirulence gene product (avr9) in fungi.
Tomato–Fusarium oxysporum pathosystem is another example where proteomic416 N. Joshi et al.
study allowed identification of first effector of root invading fungi (Six1) (Schottens￾Toma and de Wit 1988; Rep et al. 2004; Gonzalez-Fernandez and Jorrin-Novo
2012). Metaproteomics is an emerging side of proteomics. Like metagenomics,
metaproteomics is an analysis of the protein samples collected from the microbial
communities residing in a specific environment. Metaproteomics has the potential to
unravel the genetic diversity and microbial activities in environmental communities
and its impact on the ecosystem. However, uneven species distribution, large genetic
heterogeneity within the microbial communities, or the broad range of protein
expression levels within microorganisms are the main challenges for the
metaproteomic analysis (Bharagava et al. 2019). Metaproteomic study of field￾grown rice (Oryza sativa) showed that nitrogenase complexes containing bacteria
were mainly from type II methanotrophic bacteria from the family Methylocystaceae
(Bao et al. 2014).
Another reliable approach to study the plant–microbe interaction is
metabolomics. Metabolomics is the study of metabolomes, the term used for all
the metabolites present in an organism, tissue, or cell, which are the end products of
the cellular processes (Burgess et al. 2014). In the beginning, gas chromatography￾mass spectrometry (GC-MS) was used for metabolic profiling. Liquid chromatog￾raphy coupled with mass spectrometry and capillary electrophoresis is used in
metabolomic analysis (Burgess et al. 2014). Metabolomics holds useful applications
in pathway analysis, drug discovery, and pharmacogenomics. When analyzing the
environmental samples, metabolomics also includes analysis of metabolites secreted
by the organisms in the immediate environment. In this way, metabolomics can
demonstrate signaling processes between bacteria during communication in the
community such as quorum sensing (Aguiar-Pulido et al. 2016; Bharagava et al.
2019).
17.4 Conclusion
There is a range of possibilities lying in the diversity of microbes at the plant–
microbe interface and the interaction between plant and microbes as well as among
microbes themselves. There are many traits like nitrogen fixation, phosphorus
solubilization, pathogen resistance, or stress tolerance, which are either imparted
or enhanced, directly or indirectly, by the microbes interacting with the plant, and
ultimately resulting in the growth promotion of the plant. Thus, understanding those
interactions can be a game changer as it may allow us to mimic the nature for
imparting or enhancing particular characteristic of our interest. All the techniques
described above are trails leading us to understanding and ultimately enhancing the
growth promotion of plants, which can lead to economical as well as ecological
benefits.17 Techniques to Study Plant–Microbe Interactions that Lead to... 417
17.5 Future Perspective
From the era of agar media to the DNA writing era, humankind has not only
progressed outside the Earth to the Moon and Mars but also inside the micro
world, now that humankind has the capacity to edit the DNA. What seemed
impossible to study some decades ago is not just possible but affordable today.
Though we believe we have got way ahead in the field of science, what we have
fathomed might be just a few meters of a mile deep sea. We are expecting the same in
the interaction study at plant–microbe interface. We have so much data, research,
and knowledge on the plant–microbe interactions, but we still have so much to
explore. However, with the interaction studies opening the door of sustainable
agriculture, it is fair to expect it as the answer to sustainable agriculture and also
as the answer to sustainable development in the long run.
References
Aguiar-Pulido V, Huang W, Suarez-Ulloa V, Cickovski T, Mathee K, Narasimhan G (2016)
Metagenomics, metatranscriptomics, and metabolomics approaches for microbiome analysis:
supplementary issue: bioinformatics methods and applications for big metagenomics data. Evol
Bioinforma 12:EBO.S36436
Banik A, Pandya P, Patel B, Rathod C, Dangar M (2018) Characterization of halotolerant,
pigmented, plant growth promoting bacteria of groundnut rhizosphere and its in-vitro evaluation
of plant-microbe protocooperation to withstand salinity and metal stress. Sci Total Environ 630:
231–242
Bao Z, Okubo T, Kubota K, Kasahara Y, Tsurumaru H, Anda M, Ikeda S, Minamisawa K (2014)
Metaproteomic identification of diazotrophic methanotrophs and their localization in root
tissues of field-grown rice plants. Appl Environ Microbiol 80(16):5043–5052
Barrangou R, Notebaart RA (2019) CRISPR-directed microbiome manipulation across the food
supply chain. Trends Microbiol 27(6):489–496
Benhamou N, Chet I (1993) Hyphal interactions between Trichoderma harzianum and Rhizoctonia
solani: ultrastructure and gold cytochemistry of the mycoparasitic process. Phytopathology 83:
1062–1062
Berg G, Smalla K (2009) Plant species and soil type cooperatively shape the structure and function
of microbial communities in the rhizosphere. FEMS Microbiol Ecol 68(1):1–13
Bharagava RN, Purchase D, Saxena G, Mulla SI (2019) Applications of metagenomics in microbial
bioremediation of pollutants: from genomics to environmental cleanup. In: Microbial diversity
in the genomic era. Elsevier, San Diego, CA, pp 459–477
Burgess K, Rankin N, Weidt S (2014) Metabolomics. In: Handbook of pharmacogenomics and
stratified medicine. Academic Press, London, pp 181–205
Cao Y, Halane MK, Gassmann W, Stacey G (2017) The role of plant innate immunity in the
legume-rhizobium symbiosis. Annu Rev Plant Biol 68:535–561
Cardinale M (2014) Scanning a microhabitat: plant-microbe interactions revealed by confocal laser
microscopy. Front Microbiol 5:94
Chamoun R, Aliferis KA, Jabaji S (2015) Identification of signatory secondary metabolites during
mycoparasitism of Rhizoctonia solani by Stachybotrys elegans. Front Microbiol 6:353
Corthell JT (2014) Basic molecular protocols in neuroscience: tips, tricks, and pitfalls. Academic
Press, London418 N. Joshi et al.
Dass RS, Mallick R (2019) A concise compilation of the diverse detection methods to study plant￾microbe interfaces at the cellular and molecular level: the past, present and future. In: Plant
microbe interface. Springer, Cham, pp 291–308
Elad Y, Chet I, Boyle P, Henis Y (1983) Parasitism of Trichoderma spp. on Rhizoctonia solani and
Sclerotium rolfsii-scanning electron microscopy and fluorescence microscopy. Phytopathology
73(1):85–88
El-Mounadi K, Morales-Floriano ML, Garcia-Ruiz H (2020) Principles, applications, and biosafety
of plant genome editing using CRISPR-Cas9. Front Plant Sci 11:56
Fadiji AE, Babalola OO (2020) Metagenomics methods for the study of plant-associated microbial
communities: a review. J Microbiol Methods 170:105860
Fenner F, Bachmann P, Gibbs EPJ, Murphy FA, Studdert MJ, White DO (1987) Laboratory
diagnosis of viral diseases. Veterinary Virol 237–264
Gachet E, Martin G, Vigneau F, Meyer G (1998) Detection of genetically modified organisms
(GMOs) by PCR: a brief review of methodologies available. Trends Food Sci Technol
9(11–12):380–388
Garg R, Shankar R, Thakkar B, Kudapa H, Krishnamurthy L, Mantri N, Varshney RK, Bhatia S,
Jain M (2016) Transcriptome analyses reveal genotype-and developmental stage-specific
molecular responses to drought and salinity stresses in chickpea. Sci Rep 6(1):1–15
Garg N, Bharti A, Sharma A, Bhalla S (2019) Plant-mycorrhizal and plant-rhizobial interfaces:
underlying mechanisms and their roles in sustainable agroecosystems. In: Plant microbe inter￾face. Springer, Cham, pp 27–67
Gonzalez-Fernandez R, Jorrin-Novo JV (2012) Contribution of proteomics to the study of plant
pathogenic fungi. J Proteome Res 11(1):3–16
Gupta R, Anand G, Gaur R, Yadav D (2021) Plant–microbiome interactions for sustainable
agriculture: a review. Physiol Mol Biol Plants 27(1):165–179
Hadjidemetriou S, Gabrielli B, Pike T, Stevens F, Mele K, Vallotton P (2008) Detection and
tracking of cell divisions in phase contrast video microscopy. In: Proceeding of the third
MICCAI workshop on microscopic image analysis with applications in biology
Hayat R, Ali S, Amara U, Khalid R, Ahmed I (2010) Soil beneficial bacteria and their role in plant
growth promotion: a review. Ann Microbiol 60(4):579–598
Hema M, Konakalla NC (2021) Recent developments in detection and diagnosis of plant
viruses. In: Recent developments in applied microbiology and biochemistry. Elsevier,
London, pp 163–180
Hirsch AM (2004) Plant-microbe symbioses: a continuum from commensalism to parasitism.
Symbiosis 37(1–3):345–363
Holger Husi AA (2014) Proteomics. In: Padmanabhan S (ed) Handbook of pharmacogenomics and
stratified medicine. Academic Press, London, pp 147–179. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-
386882-4.00009-8
Jacoby RP, Kopriva S (2019) Metabolic niches in the rhizosphere microbiome: new tools and
approaches to analyse metabolic mechanisms of plant–microbe nutrient exchange. J Exp Bot
70(4):1087–1094
Janda JM, Abbott SL (2007) 16S rRNA gene sequencing for bacterial identification in the
diagnostic laboratory: pluses, perils, and pitfalls. J Clin Microbiol 45(9):2761–2764
Jha CK, Saraf M (2015) Plant growth promoting rhizobacteria (PGPR): a review. J Agric Res Dev
5(2):108–119
Jha CK, Aeron A, Patel BV, Maheshwari DK, Saraf M (2011) Enterobacter: role in plant growth
promotion. In: Bacteria in agrobiology: plant growth responses. Springer, Berlin, pp 159–182
Joshi S, Yu D (2017) Immunofluorescence. In: Basic science methods for clinical researchers.
Elsevier, San Diego, CA, pp 135–150
Kaushal M, Prasad R (2021) Microbial biotechnology in crop protection. Springer, Singapore.
ISBN: 978-981-16-0049-4. https://www.springer.com/gp/book/9789811600487
Khan S, Jan AT, Aquil B, Haq QMR (2011) Coat protein gene based characterization of cucumber
mosaic virus isolates infecting banana in India. J Phytology 3(2):94–10117 Techniques to Study Plant–Microbe Interactions that Lead to... 419
Kricka L, Park J (2014) Assay principles in CLinical pathology. In: Pathobiology of human disease:
a dynamic encyclopedia of disease mechanisms. Academic Press, Amsterdam, pp 3207–3221
Kumar P, Sharma PK (2020) Soil salinity and food security in India. Front Sustain Food Syst 4:174
Kumari A, Sumer S, Jalan B, Nongbri PL, Laskar MA (2017) Impact of next-generation sequencing
technology in plant–microbe interaction study. In: Microbial applications, vol 1. Springer,
Cham, pp 269–294
Li H, Yang Y, Hong W, Huang M, Wu M, Zhao X (2020) Applications of genome editing
technology in the targeted therapy of human diseases: mechanisms, advances and prospects.
Signal Transduct Target Ther 5(1):1–23
Licata NA, Mohari B, Fuqua C, Setayeshgar S (2016) Diffusion of bacterial cells in porous media.
Biophys J 110(1):247–257
Liu L, Li Y, Li S, Hu N, He Y, Pong R, Lin D, Lu L, Law M (2012) Comparison of next-generation
sequencing systems. J Biomed Biotechnol 2012:251364
Liu Z, Tian L, Liu S, Waller L (2014) Real-time brightfield, darkfield, and phase contrast imaging in
a light-emitting diode array microscope. J Biomed Opt 19(10):106002
Mahadevakumar S, Sridhar KR (2020) Plant-microbe interaction: current developments and future
challenges. In: Advances in plant microbiome and sustainable agriculture. Springer, Singapore,
pp 1–38
Martí JM (2019) Recentrifuge: robust comparative analysis and contamination removal for
metagenomics. PLoS Comput Biol 15(4):e1006967
Melcher U, Verma R, Schneider WL (2014) Metagenomic search strategies for interactions among
plants and multiple microbes. Front Plant Sci 5:268
Mendes R, Kruijt M, De Bruijn I, Dekkers E, van der Voort M, Schneider JH, Piceno YM, DeSantis
TZ, Andersen GL, Bakker PA (2011) Deciphering the rhizosphere microbiome for disease￾suppressive bacteria. Science 332(6033):1097–1100
Metzker ML (2010) Sequencing technologies—the next generation. Nat Rev Genet 11(1):31–46
Mo Y, Wan R, Zhang Q (2012) Application of reverse transcription-PCR and real-time PCR in
nanotoxicity research. Methods Mol Biol 926:99–112
Molina Bolívar J, Galisteo González F (2005) Latex immunoagglutination assays. J Macromol Sci
Polym Rev 45(1):59–98
Pazour GJ (2009) Immunoprecipitation to examine protein complexes. Methods Cell Biol 91:135–
142
Petti C, Polage CR, Schreckenberger P (2005) The role of 16S rRNA gene sequencing in
identification of microorganisms misidentified by conventional methods. J Clin Microbiol
43(12):6123–6125
Prabhukarthikeyan SR, Parameswaran C, Keerthana U, Teli B, Jagannadham PT, Cayalvizhi B,
Panneerselvam P, Senapati A, Nagendran K, Kumari S (2020) Understanding the plant-microbe
interactions in CRISPR/Cas9 era: indeed a sprinting start in marathon. Curr Genomics 21(6):
429–443
Prasad R, Kumar M, Varma A (2015) Role of PGPR in soil fertility and plant health. In:
Egamberdieva D, Shrivastava S, Varma A (eds) Plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria
(PGPR) and medicinal plants. Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp 247–260
Prasad R, Gill SS, Tuteja N (2018) Crop improvement through microbial biotechnology. Elsevier.
ISBN: 9780444639882
Rajalakshmi S (2017) Different types of PCR techniques and its applications. Int J Pharm Chem
Biol Sci 7(3)
Razzaq A, Saleem F, Kanwal M, Mustafa G, Yousaf S, Imran Arshad HM, Hameed MK, Khan MS,
Joyia FA (2019) Modern trends in plant genome editing: an inclusive review of the CRISPR/
Cas9 toolbox. Int J Mol Sci 20(16):4045
Rep M, Van Der Does HC, Meijer M, Van Wijk R, Houterman PM, Dekker HL, De Koster CG,
Cornelissen BJ (2004) A small, cysteine-rich protein secreted by fusarium oxysporum during
colonization of xylem vessels is required for I-3-mediated resistance in tomato. Mol Microbiol
53(5):1373–1383420 N. Joshi et al.
Saharan B, Nehra V (2011) Plant growth promoting rhizobacteria: a critical review. Life Sci Med
Res 21(1):30
Sanderson MJ, Smith I, Parker I, Bootman MD (2014) Fluorescence microscopy. Cold Spring Harb
Protoc 2014(10):pdb.top071795
Sarma H, Forid N, Prasad R, Prasad MNV, Ma LQ, Rinklebe J (2021) Enhancing phytoremediation
of hazardous metal(loid)s using genome engineering CRISPR–Cas9 technology. J Hazard
Mater. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2021.125493
Schadt EE, Turner S, Kasarskis A (2010) A window into third-generation sequencing. Hum Mol
Genet 19(R2):R227–R240
Schloss PD, Handelsman J (2005) Metagenomics for studying unculturable microorganisms:
cutting the Gordian knot. Genome Biol 6(8):1–4
Schottens-Toma IM, de Wit PJ (1988) Purification and primary structure of a necrosis-inducing
peptide from the apoplastic fluids of tomato infected with Cladosporium fulvum (syn. Fulvia
fulva). Physiol Mol Plant Pathol 33(1):59–67
Serçe ÇU, Ayyaz M (2020) Diagnosis of the casual viruses of crop plants. In: Applied plant
virology. Elsevier, pp 55–67
Sharma S, Pathak H (2014) Basic techniques of phytoremediation. Int J Sci Eng Res 5(4):584–604
Sharma M, Sudheer S, Usmani Z, Rani R, Gupta P (2020) Deciphering the omics of plant-microbe
interaction: perspectives and new insights. Curr Genomics 21(5):343–362
Shelake RM, Pramanik D, Kim J-Y (2019) Exploration of plant-microbe interactions for sustainable
agriculture in CRISPR era. Microorganisms 7(8):269
Shi Y, Tyson GW, DeLong EF (2009) Metatranscriptomics reveals unique microbial small RNAs in
the ocean’s water column. Nature 459(7244):266–269
Singh S, Ramakrishna W (2021) Application of CRISPR–Cas9 in plant–plant growth-promoting
rhizobacteria interactions for next green revolution. 3 Biotech 11(12):1–25
Singh J, Birbian N, Sinha S, Goswami A (2014) A critical review on PCR, its types and
applications. Int J Adv Res Biol Sci 1(7):65–80
Singh SS, Salem DR, Sani RK (2021) Spectroscopy, microscopy, and other techniques for
characterization of bacterial nanocellulose and comparison with plant-derived
nanocellulose. In: Microbial and natural macromolecules. Elsevier, pp 419–454
Tan KC, Ipcho SV, Trengove RD, Oliver RP, Solomon PS (2009) Assessing the impact of
transcriptomics, proteomics and metabolomics on fungal phytopathology. Mol Plant Pathol
10(5):703–715
Tavassoly I, Goldfarb J, Iyengar R (2018) Systems biology primer: the basic methods and
approaches. Essays Biochem 62(4):487–500
Udvardi M, Poole PS (2013) Transport and metabolism in legume-rhizobia symbioses. Annu Rev
Plant Biol 64:781–805
Varma A, Swati T, Prasad R (2019a) Plant microbe interface. Springer International Publishing.
ISBN 978-3-030-19831-2. https://www.springer.com/gp/book/9783030198305
Varma A, Swati T, Prasad R (2019b) Plant biotic interactions: state of art. Springer International
Publishing. ISBN 978-3-030-26657-8. https://www.springer.com/gp/book/9783030266561
Varma A, Singh MK (2020) Diagnosis of plant virus diseases. In: Applied plant virology. Elsevier,
pp 79–92
Vernon-Parry K (2000) Scanning electron microscopy: an introduction. III-Vs Rev 13(4):40–44
Wang Q, Coleman JJ (2019) CRISPR/Cas9-mediated endogenous gene tagging in Fusarium
oxysporum. Fungal Genet Biol 126:17–24
Wang Z, Gerstein M, Snyder M (2009) RNA-Seq: a revolutionary tool for transcriptomics. Nat Rev
Genet 10(1):57–63
Wu CH, Bernard SM, Andersen GL, Chen W (2009) Developing microbe–plant interactions for
applications in plant-growth promotion and disease control, production of useful compounds,
remediation and carbon sequestration. Microb Biotechnol 2(4):428–44017 Techniques to Study Plant–Microbe Interactions that Lead to... 421
Yu L-R, Stewart NA, Veenstra TD (2010) Proteomics: the deciphering of the functional
genome. In: Essentials of genomic and personalized medicine. Elsevier, pp 89–96
Zhang S, Vrient A (2020) Rapid detection of plant viruses and viroids. In: Applied plant virology.
Elsevier, pp 101–109
Zhang K, Raboanatahiry N, Zhu B, Li M (2017) Progress in genome editing technology and its
application in plants. Front Plant Sci 8:177
Zheng MZ, Richard JL, Binder J (2006) A review of rapid methods for the analysis of mycotoxins.
Mycopathologia 161(5):261–273423
Chapter 18
Plant Microbiome in Agroecosystems
for Sustainable Agriculture
and Environments
Songita Sonowal, Sagar Chhabra, Naga Raju Maddela, Narendra Tuteja,
and Ram Prasad
Abstract Plants are occupied by an assembly of microorganisms, cooperatively
called “microbiome.” These microbiomes occupy various niches in plants as com￾mensals, symbionts, or as pathogens. Microbes are referred to as phyllosphere
microorganisms when they are found on a plant leaf, and rhizosphere microbes
when they are present in the root system or at the soil-root interface. The microbes
have been associated with various applications and are a useful green technology
resource to attain Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Microbes are the main
participant in biogeochemical cycles and help in enhancing agroecosystems’ pro￾ductivity by overcoming biotic and abiotic stresses. Due to rapid increase in global
population, the microbiome engineering is considered useful for agriculture. This
chapter is mainly prepared to focus on potentiality of plant microbiome for sustain￾ability in agriculture and for sustainable developments.
Keywords Microbiome · Phyllosphere · Rhizosphere · Sustainability · Climate
change
S. Sonowal · R. Prasad (*)
Department of Botany, School of Life Sciences, Mahatma Gandhi Central University, Motihari,
Bihar, India
S. Chhabra
Department of Biosciences, School of Basic and Applied Sciences, Galgotias University,
Greater Noida, Uttar Pradesh, India
N. R. Maddela
Departamento de Ciencias Biológicas, Facultad de Ciencias de la Salud, Universidad Técnica de
Manabí, Portoviejo, Ecuador
N. Tuteja
International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Plant Molecular Biology
Group, New Delhi, India
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2023
S. Chhabra et al. (eds.), Plant Microbiome for Plant Productivity and Sustainable
Agriculture, Microorganisms for Sustainability 37,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-19-5029-2_18424 S. Sonowal et al.
18.1 Introduction
The word microbiome is a derivative of the ancient Greek word where “micro”
means small and “biome” means life (Berg et al. 2020; Santos and Olivares 2021).
Microorganisms can occupy various niches in plant; for example, huge numbers of
bacteria and fungi live on the surface of plants, which is known as phyllosphere, and
when they occupy the soil–root interface or roots, it is known as rhizosphere or root
microbiomes (Jansson and Hofmockel 2020). The region of rhizosphere is extended
to about 2–80 mm from the root system; in this region, the rate of microbial growth
and variation is very fast because of which it influences the root exudation of the
plant. The rhizospheric microbes have various applications, like they can fix atmo￾spheric nitrogen, help in solubilizing inorganic phosphate, help in improving iron
and zinc availability, support in formation of root nodule, and promote plant growth.
The microbes also help to resist against biotic and abiotic stresses and are associated
to degradation of harmful environmental contaminants. A survey of different types
of phyllosphere microbes has also recognized beneficial influences to plant because
they protect the plant from toxic ozone rays and protect the environment from
pollution (Liu et al. 2022). Microbes like Euonymus japonicus, Curtobacterium,
Marmoricola, Microbacterium, Cladosporium, and Alternaria are mostly tolerant
species to ozone exposure (Ding et al. 2019).
There are several latest technologies used to study plant microbiomes; for exam￾ple, the use of informatics and robotics technology is currently introduced in
agroecosystems to study microbiomes of plants to know the core of microbiomes
and their application (Toju et al. 2018). So are the uses of agricultural techniques to
solve the low agroecosystems’ productivity problem. Now, people use the hydro￾ponics system for the culture of agricultural crops apart from the conventional field
production (Sharma et al. 2018). Construction of floating treatment wetland is also
applicable in the agricultural practices. Though floating treatment wetland is mainly
used for the remediation of wastewater, but they can also be used for agricultural
purposes (Grosshans et al. 2019). To construct a floating treatment wetland, we first
have to select the plant and bacteria that can grow in wastewater and form a plant–
bacteria partnership because here microbes play main part in remediation of waste￾water. As microbes use mechanisms like adsorption, absorption, and sedimentation,
they can easily help in biofiltration of contaminants from water (Colares et al. 2020).
The plant microbiome helps in improving the growth of the plant, and is useful along
the plant breeding programs in maintaining agriculture sustainability (Gopal and
Gupta 2016). There are several Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) outlined by
the United Nations (UN), to be achieved by the year 2030, where microbiome can be
important to plants, agriculture sustainability and productivity, and environments.
This chapter is mainly focused on potentiality of plant microbiome for sustainability
in agriculture and for sustainable developments.18 Plant Microbiome in Agroecosystems for Sustainable Agriculture... 425
18.2 Microbiomes and Sustainability Concepts
Sustainability is a factor in economic development of a country without harming the
environmental resources for future generation. The history of sustainability concept
started from the time of Neolithic agricultural revolution (Dorin Paul 2008). Sus￾tainability has three pillars, i.e., social, environmental, and economic, and they are
dependent on each other (Purvis et al. 2019). The three pillars are depicted in
Fig. 18.1. The primary goal of sustainability is to end poverty and hunger from the
society and the main aim of sustainable development is to promote the kind of
development that minimizes the environmental problems (Tilman et al. 2011). There
are several Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) outlined by the United Nations
(UN), to be achieved by the year 2030, and microbiome’s potential has been
highlighted in several publications, for example in increasing the nutritious value
of food and decreasing the vulnerability of crops to disease, resulting in increased
yields, which is included under the SDG 2, i.e., “zero hunger.” SDG 3, such as
“healthy human consumption,” includes the improvement of human microbiota to
lower their risk of illness, including infectious and chronic diseases. SDG 6, “clean
Fig. 18.1 Three pillars of sustainability development426 S. Sonowal et al.
Fig. 18.2 Microbiome in sustainable development
water and sanitation,” is fulfilled with the help of microbiome by purifying the
contamination of water caused by the agricultural runoff. Microbiomes can play
critical roles to achieve Sustainable Development Goals 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13, and
15 (Fig. 18.2). In both developing and developed economies, the purpose of SDGs or
its implications is to remove poverty, and improve life, economic growth, industry
innovation, sustainable cities, etc., and plant microbiomes can help achieve most of
the SDGs in many ways. It is because the microbiomes are a crucial regulator of
ecosystems and environments (Timmis et al. 2017). In present days, studies on
microbiomes are increasing to have innovations and technologies on industrial
microbiology side or to create new jobs and new businesses that can manage the
unemployment.
18.3 Agriculture Productivity and the Constituent of Soil
Microbiome
As population is growing so rapidly, the demand for food is also increasing. To
attain the demand for food as a necessity, it is crucial to pay attention to agricultural
productivity. But traditional agricultural practices are unable to produce the desired
amount of crop because the crops cultivated by traditional processes are easily
affected by the diseases and pests. Also, with the scarcity of land due to rapid18 Plant Microbiome in Agroecosystems for Sustainable Agriculture... 427
growth of global population, it is not possible to produce the required amount of crop
and food to reduce the hunger of people. Therefore, various modern agricultural
techniques are applied to produce the crop. For example, techniques like genetically
modified technique, precision farming, hydroponics, terrace gardening, etc. have
evolved in recent era. In these techniques, the associations of microorganisms are
must and needed. Plant microbiome in agroecosystems helps in supplying nutrients
to plants, improving water uptake, and improving plant growth & productivity. The
microbes applied externally to the agroecosystem can help the plants to survive in
stress conditions (Jat et al. 2021).
18.3.1 Specialization of Microbes in Soil Fertility
and Improving Agricultural Productivity
Microbes strengthen the health of soil by increasing the physical and chemical
activities. The physical and chemical activities among the microbes and plants
regulate the pH and fertility of soil (Kumar and Verma 2019). The plant microbiome
of rhizospheric region, like mycorrhiza, helps in fixation of atmospheric nitrogen,
enhances the growth of crop in agriculture, and reduces the environmental pollution.
Plants need both macro and micro nutrients in a limited amount for the growth of
plants, and microbes like bacteria, fungi, mycorrhizae, and actinomycetes provide
those essential elements to the plant (Prasad et al. 2020). The rhizosphere region of
plants is known as the hot spot of microorganisms because in this region the diversity
of microorganism is very high. In this region microorganisms are united to form
colony or biofilms to increase the biogeochemical process (Shrivastava et al. 2014;
Prasad et al. 2015; Basu et al. 2021). Plants provide required nutrients like carbon
rich food and in return microbes mine the soil for mineral to the plants from which
both are equally benefited from each other in associations. Microbes like
Rhizobacteria, Cyanobacteria, Bacillus radiocola, etc. can fix the atmospheric
nitrogen in plants. As nitrogen is the base product of amino acid, protein, chloro￾phyll, hormones, and other vitamins, it is abundantly required by the plants. There
are only a few prokaryotic microbes that can fix the atmospheric nitrogen to the plant
(Pagano and Miransari 2016).
Like nitrogen, carbon is also another essential component for plant growth and
without carbon the survival of a plant is unimaginable. In most soils, microorgan￾isms help the soil to maintain their humus by decaying the soil organic matter like
cellulose, lignin, hemicellulose, chitin, and lipids into carbon. Soil organic carbon is
like a sink for the plant to supply nutrients (Khatoon et al. 2017) and microbes make
it available in soil by recycling the waste organic product. Phosphorus is another
essential element that is required by the plants in their metabolism and proper
functioning. But in environment it is found in organic and inorganic forms and
microbes can make it accessible such as by mineralization or solubilization process.
There are different types of bacteria and fungi available in the soil, which can428 S. Sonowal et al.
Table 18.1 Microbes that help in soil fertility
Name of microbes Role of microbes References
Bacillus circulans, Bacillus subtilis,
Bacillus sircalmous, Enterobacter,
Beggiatoa, Thiomargarita sp.,
Actinobacteria, and Micromonospora
Help in phosphorus
solubilization
Kumar et al. (2018)
Nitrosomonas europaea, Nitrosospira
briensis, Nitrosococcus oceanus,
Nitrobacter winogradskyi,
Thiobacillus denitrificans, and Micro￾coccus denitrificans
Help in nitrogen fixation Chen et al. (2003)
Actinomycetes, Streptomyces,
Nocardia, Trichoderma, and
Verticillium
Help in degradation of organic
matter like cellulose, hemicellu￾lose, lignin, lipid, etc.
Khatoon et al.
(2017)
Thiobacillus sp., Pseudomonas
plecoglossicida, Pseudomonas
aeruginosa, Pseudomonas
fluorescens, Aspergillus, Penicillium,
Rhizopus, Streptoverticillium, and
Saccharomyces
Help in removing heavy metal
from the contaminated soil
Macaskie et al.
(1992), Puranik and
Paknikar (1997)
solubilize the inorganic phosphorus or organic form of phosphorus. Some of the
microorganisms and their diversity are described in Table 18.1. The soil microbes
are the hidden manager and participate in nutrient cycle such N, P, S, etc., and have
the capacity to inhibit the soil-borne pathogens, which indirectly promotes the
agricultural productivity (Sathya et al. 2016).
Due to rapid use of petroleum and mining of fossil fuel, the remediation of
contaminated soil is necessary for environmental clean-up and healthy lifestyle or
for sustainable environments and microbes play crucial role in bioremediation of
contaminated environments (Masciandaro et al. 2013; Chhabra and Prasad 2020).
Microbes can also help improve the water-holding capacity of soil by absorbing the
moisture from the environment and thus help improve plant growth. Bacteria are one
of the abundantly found microbes that can help to hold the water molecules in soil. It
improves the soil quality by infiltration of contaminants and absorbing soil mois￾ture (Doula and Sarris 2016).
18.3.2 Role of Microbes in Greenhouse Gas Reduction
Global warming is a serious threat in today’s life because it negatively affects living
organisms of earth. Rapid increases in temperature and climate change are also
threats to the ecosystem, causing spread of disease, high mortality, and loss of
natural habitat, which are also some of the outcomes of global warming or green￾house effect (Kweku et al. 2018; Venkatramanan et al. 2020a, b). Greenhouse effect
mainly increases due to burning of fossil fuel and biomass burning. When fossil fuels18 Plant Microbiome in Agroecosystems for Sustainable Agriculture... 429
are used, it releases some toxic elements like chlorofluorocarbons, methane, and
carbon dioxide. But soil microbes can convert the greenhouse gases into the usable
form (Maximillian et al. 2019). The microorganisms release many enzymes that can
easily convert greenhouse gases into usable form for the plant and soil. For example,
microorganisms can convert CO2 into methane with the help of enzyme methyl
coenzyme M reductase; they can absorb the atmospheric methane and bring changes
in the climate (Dutta and Dutta 2016).
18.3.3 Impact of Microbes in Biotic and Abiotic Stress
Reduction in Plant
In agriculture, growth of plants is affected by the different types of stress like biotic
and abiotic stresses. Under biotic stress, the plant is mostly affected by the different
types of prokaryotic and eukaryotic microorganisms. Some pathogenic microbes
like bacteria, fungi, virus, nematodes, and actinomycetes infect the plants and cause
some lethal diseases that cause agricultural losses (Gull et al. 2019). For example, in
a report of 2020 it was said that approximately 21.3% crop losses every year were
due to the diseases caused by nematodes (Kumar et al. 2020). On the other side,
abiotic stresses like drought, salinity, water logging, extreme temperature, and
mineral toxicity also adversely impact on the plant and these cause losses in the
production of crops. Some man-made activities, like farmers using different types of
chemical fertilizers and pesticides to fertilize the soil and kill the pest, also negatively
affect the normal growth of plants (Gull et al. 2019). The plant growth-promoting
microbes help to lower the biotic and abiotic stresses in plant by stimulating different
types of plant hormones and enzymes. For example, presence of rhizobacteria in
xerophytic plant helps plants to tolerate the drought stress, stimulate the accumula￾tion of proline, and reduce glutathione reductase activity. Another example is the
bacteria associated with the foxtail millet that secrete 1-aminocyclopropane-1-car￾boxylic acid (ACC) deaminase and exopolysaccharide to survive in drought stress
(Niu et al. 2018). Normally, plant cannot survive in high temperatures, especially
above the 38 °C, but there are some microbes that can help plants survive at high
temperatures, and they help the host plant by changing their physicochemical
properties to adjust in adverse condition. Some of the examples of microbes that
help in stress reduction of plant are given below Table 18.2, with their role in host
plant. The stress tolerance potential of microbes are due to presence of stress proteins
that help the microbes resist oxidative stress, high temperature, low pH, and hypoxia,
but their role in plants is still unknown. A previous study revealed that common
stress proteins YdaA and YnaF from Salmonella typhimurium help in the hydrolysis
of adenosine triphosphate (ATP), cause cell membrane alteration, and cause chloride
sensing of plant in stress conditions (Bangera et al. 2015).Host plant References
430 S. Sonowal et al.
Table 18.2 List of microbes that help in stress tolerance
Name of
microbes
Role of microbiome in biotic and abiotic
stress
Pseudomonas
aeruginosa
Vigna radiata Helps plant to absorb water and nutrients Riseh et al.
(2021)
Bacillus sp. Megathyrsus
maximus
Helps in secretion of proline and glutathione
reductase activity at the time of drought
stress
Moreno￾Galván et al.
(2020)
Azotobacter sp. Triticum
aestivum
Helps in nitrogenous activity and in produc￾ing exopolysaccharide in drought stress
Saad et al.
(2020)
Curvularia
portuberata
Dichanthelium
lanuginosum
Helps its host plant in heat tolerance de Zelicourt
et al. (2013)
Azospirillum
brasilense
Arabidopsis
thaliana
Reduces drought stress by inducing abscisic
acid
Cohen et al.
(2015)
Proteus
penneri
Zea mays Reduces drought stress by supplying water,
protein, and sugar through the proline con￾tent to the host plant
Naseem and
Bano (2014)
Pseudomonas
aeruginosa
Alcaligenes
faecalis
Klebsiella sp. Saccharum
officinarum
Helps in secretion of indole acetic acid (IAA)
in extreme environmental conditions
Mishra et al.
Enterobacter (2017)
sp.
Bacillus sp. Momordica
charantia
Produces IAA to improve maize growth in
Cd-contaminated soil
Ahmad et al.
Leifsonia (2015) sp.
Enterobacter
sp.
18.4 Plant Microbial Associations for Sustainable
Agroecosystems and Productivity
Investigators give importance in their study to microbiomes because they have
potential applications like: they reduce antimicrobial growth, replace inorganic
fertilizers and pesticides in agriculture, improve waste treatment, improve soil,
help in carbon sequestration, help in biofuel production, resist and cure diet-related
non-communicable diseases of human, and create sustainable business opportunities
in market (Santos and Olivares 2021). Apart from this, microorganisms play a major
role in ecosystems on the earth. They help to degrade the unwanted material from the
earth and produce nutrients that are crucial for the growth of the plant (Hatzenpichler
et al. 2020). Some of the specialized microbiomes in plant portions are
described here.18 Plant Microbiome in Agroecosystems for Sustainable Agriculture... 431
18.4.1 Seed Microbiomes
Seed is the embryonic stage of a flowering plant. It is the source from where the
microbiota is transferred from the one generation to the next generation (Shade et al.
2017). Different types of fungal, bacterial, and oomycete microbes are found in seed.
Seed microbes are divided as endophytic (microbes growing on internal tissue) and
epiphytic (microbes growing on surface of the seed). The endophytic microbes are
transferred from one to the next generation (Brader et al. 2014; Nelson 2018).
Presence of microbiota on seed can help adapt genotype in adverse conditions. In
a previous study, it has been mentioned that the presence of microbes on seed
provides plant enormous resistance capacity to fight with the pathogen and improves
the metabolic activities in plant (Berg and Raaijmakers 2018). Microbes present in
seed have also been recognized with antifungal and antibacterial properties, which
keep the seed disease-free. For example, in a survey it was found that bacteria like
Sphingomonas and Methylobacterium can assist in the growth and development of
rice plant with disease-free adaptation (Eyre et al. 2019).
Among seed microbiome both pathogenic and beneficial microbes are present.
The pathogenic microbes like Pectobacterium carotovorum, Erwinia, and Pseudo￾monas viridiflava cause some necrosis in plants, like in Cucurbita pepo and other
plants. On the other hand, beneficial microbes like Lysobacter sp., Paenibacillus sp.,
etc. help in growth and high yield among crops (Adam et al. 2018). Apart from
helping in growth and development of plant, seed microbiome can help in the
management of weeds. Microorganisms present on seed help in germination and
formation of the shape and structure of the plant. As the seed is the source of many
microbes, it assists in the formation of immune system of a plant (Singh et al. 2020).
18.4.2 Rhizosphere Microbiomes
Many microbes exist in rhizosphere of plants. Plants secrete various kinds of
exudates in the soil, which are appropriate for the development of various microor￾ganisms. Plants provide required nutrients to the microbes and microbes provide
resistance capability against pathogen and also enhance the growth and development
of plants. For example, mycorrhizal organisms are an illustration of advantageous
relationship with underlying foundations of higher plants. The ecto- and
endomycorrhiza protect the plant root by absorbing the inorganic contaminants
like heavy metals from soil and on the other hand plants provide required nutrients
to mycorrhiza for the survival of the microbes (Galli et al. 1994). For the plants
growing in heavy metal contaminated soil, the arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi are
helpful in accumulation of nutrients and antioxidants from soil (Riaz et al. 2021).
Plant roots secrete a variety of exudates like sugars, mucilage, secondary metabo￾lites, etc. that influence the growth of different group of microbes in rhizosphere.
Most commonly found rhizospheric microbes in bacteria are Enterobacter,432 S. Sonowal et al.
Fig. 18.3 Mechanism of rhizosphere microbes to promote plant growth and development
Rhizobium, Pseudomonas, Azospirillum, and Burkholderia (Babalola et al. 2021;
Parray and Shameem 2020), but Gluconacetobacter diazotrophicus, Bacillus
amyloliquefaciens, and Pseudomonas putida are also common (Parray and
Shameem 2020). Among archaea, Thermoprotei, Methanomicrobia, Halobacteria,
and Methanobacteria are most commonly found as rhizospheric microbes (Murthy
and Naidu 2012). The rhizospheric microbes associated with plant root secrete
indole-3-acetic acid that later changes the plant hormone auxin and it passes to the
vascular tissue of root through the stem and increases the root length (Ali et al.
2010). These microbes are also associated with the production of antibiotics in plant,
which keeps away the phytopathogen from the plant and also increases the disease
resistance capacity (Fig. 18.3). Rhizosphere microbes are also responsible for the
release of phytohormones such as cytokinin that help in the expansion of leaf,
promotion of seed germination, and delay senescence of plant (Kaushal 2019).
Rhizospheric microbes assist in the phytoremediation of heavy metal contami￾nated soil by producing siderophores (Das et al. 2007; Rajkumar et al. 2010). The
endophytic bacteria have also been described in literature that are well known for
solubilization of minerals and release of root exudates, which help in
phytoextraction of inorganic contaminants (Rajkumar et al. 2009). Rhizosphere is
the hot spot that is responsible for different features and traits borne by the plants.18 Plant Microbiome in Agroecosystems for Sustainable Agriculture... 433
18.4.3 Phyllosphere Microbiomes
The microorganisms available in the aerial portion of the plant are known as the
phyllosphere microbiome. The aerial surface of the plant is a habitat of different
microbes and the microbes present in the aerial surface change the physiology and
functioning of the plant (Bashir et al. 2022). The phyllosphere microbes protect the
plants from the harmful ultraviolet radiation. For example, Methylobacterium
sp. helps in absorbance of ultraviolet rays and it is also applied in production of
pharmaceutical and cosmetic compounds (Kamo et al. 2018). Phyllosphere microbes
are also responsible for the texture of leaf structure because microbes prepare the leaf
surface according to their comfortability to accumulate nutrients. For example,
Pseudozyma antarctica secretes some enzymes like esterase and xylanase that
make the leaf of tomato plant thicker than the normal leaf surface and instigate the
growth of plant and its management (Ueda et al. 2018). Some functions of
phyllosphere microbes are given in Table 18.3. Figure 18.4 describes how
phyllosphere microbes promote plant growth by reducing biotic and abiotic stresses.
18.5 The Current Approaches and Prospects
of Microbiomes
Regular use of pesticides and chemical fertilizers in agricultural field causes adverse
impact on the environment and hazardous influences on living organisms entering
the food chain. The synthetic use of chemicals also increases soil erosion and
leaching, and has been associated with barren land and agroecosystem productivity
Table 18.3 List of some phyllosphere microbes with their function
Name of microbes Function of phyllosphere microbes References
Microbacterium sp. Improve growth and nutrient availability in
plants by stimulating indole acetic acid and fix￾ing atmospheric nitrogen
Abadi et al. (2020),
Madhaiyan et al.
(2015)
Stenotrophomonas
sp.
Methylobacterium
sp.
Pseudomonas sp. Provide disease resistance capacity in
Arabidopsis against Botrytis cinerea
Ritpitakphong et al.
(2016)
Cladophora sp. Help in N2 fixation in Hydrilla verticillata Bárta et al. (2021)
Pseudomonas
syringae
Promote the growth of tomato plant Ryffel et al. (2015)
Sphingomonas
melonis
Promote plant growth
Candida boidinii Support methanol assimilation in plant Kawaguchi et al.
(2011)
Methylobacterium
extorquens
Help in dinitrogen fixation in plant Knief et al. (2011)434 S. Sonowal et al.
Fig. 18.4 Role of phyllosphere microbiome on the growth of plant and stress resistance
problems. Today, people are trying to lessen the utilization of chemical substances
and pesticides and increase the use of green technology resources as an alternate
source. Plant microbiomes are beneficial and are associated with many functions as a
useful biological resource. Microbes produce different types of enzymes,
biosurfactants, and siderophores, and they have the antagonistic effect/activities
toward other pests and pathogenic microbes and against many abiotic stresses.
Microbes are useful to attaining the sustainable development and for achieving the
SDGs to overcome agroecosystems’ productivity problems, and for environments,
human health, and industrial production. The microbes are useful resource and shield
agriculture, climate change, and help in ozone stress reduction; they are also useful
for agriculture, industrial, and innovation purposes. The current approaches have
unraveled range or assembly of microbes and can help improve agroecosystems’
productivity and the environment for sustainable development.
References
Abadi VAJM, Sepehri M, Rahmani HA, Zarei M, Ronaghi A, Taghavi SM, Shamshiripour M
(2020) Role of dominant phyllosphere bacteria with plant growth–promoting characteristics on
growth and nutrition of maize (Zea mays L.). J Soil Sci Plant Nutr 20(4):2348–2363. https://doi.
org/10.1007/S42729-020-00302-1
Adam E, Bernhart M, Müller H, Winkler J, Berg G (2018) The Cucurbita pepo seed microbiome:
genotype-specific composition and implications for breeding. Plant Soil 422(1–2):35–49.
https://doi.org/10.1007/S11104-016-3113-9/FIGURES/7
Ahmad I, Akhtar MJ, Asghar HN, Ghafoor U, Shahid M (2015) Differential effects of plant growth￾promoting rhizobacteria on maize growth and cadmium uptake. J Plant Growth Regul 35(2):
303–315. https://doi.org/10.1007/S00344-015-9534-518 Plant Microbiome in Agroecosystems for Sustainable Agriculture... 435
Ali B, Sabri AN, Hasnain S (2010) Rhizobacterial potential to alter auxin content and growth of
Vigna radiata (L.). World J Microbiol Biotechnol 26(8):1379–1384. https://doi.org/10.1007/
S11274-010-0310-1
Babalola OO, Emmanuel OC, Adeleke BS, Odelade KA, Nwachukwu BC, Ayiti OE, Adegboyega
TT, Igiehon NO (2021) Rhizosphere microbiome cooperations: strategies for sustainable crop
production. Curr Microbiol 78(4):1069–1085. https://doi.org/10.1007/S00284-021-02375-2
Bangera M, Panigrahi R, Sagurthi SR, Savithri HS, Murthy MRN (2015) Structural and functional
analysis of two universal stress proteins YdaA and YnaF from Salmonella typhimurium:
possible roles in microbial stress tolerance. J Struct Biol 189(3):238–250. https://doi.org/10.
1016/J.JSB.2015.01.003
Bárta J, Pires De Paula CC, Rejmánková E, Lin Q, Kohoutová I, Sirová D (2021) Complex
phyllosphere microbiome aids in the establishment of the invasive macrophyte Hydrilla
verticillata (L.) under conditions of nitrogen scarcity. BioRxiv. https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.
01.11.426196
Bashir I, War AF, Rafiq I, Reshi ZA, Rashid I, Shouche YS (2022) Phyllosphere microbiome:
diversity and functions. Microbiol Res 254:126888. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.MICRES.2021.
126888
Basu S, Kumar G, Chhabra S, Prasad R (2021) Role of soil microbes in biogeochemical cycle for
enhancing soil fertility. In: Verma JP, Macdonald C, Gupta VK, Podile AR (eds) New and future
developments in microbial biotechnology and bioengineering: phytomicrobiome for sustainable
agriculture. Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp 149–157
Berg G, Raaijmakers JM (2018) Saving seed microbiomes. ISME J 12(5):1167–1170. https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41396-017-0028-2
Berg G, Rybakova D, Fischer D, Cernava T, Vergès MCC, Charles T, Chen X, Cocolin L,
Eversole K, Corral GH, Kazou M, Kinkel L, Lange L, Lima N, Loy A, Macklin JA,
Maguin E, Mauchline T, McClure R, Schloter M (2020) Microbiome definition re-visited: old
concepts and new challenges. Microbiome 8(1):1–22. https://doi.org/10.1186/S40168-020-
00875-0/FIGURES/7
Brader G, Compan S, Mitter B, Trognitz F, Sessitsch A (2014) Metabolic potential of endophytic
bacteria. Curr Opin Biotechnol 27:30–37. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.COPBIO.2013.09.012
Chhabra S, Prasad R (2020) Book review: sustainable green technologies for environmental
management. J Clean Prod. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.124754
Chen G, Zhu H, Zhang Y (2003) Soil microbial activities and carbon and nitrogen fixation. Res
Microbiol 154(6):393–398. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0923-2508(03)00082-2
Cohen AC, Bottini R, Pontin M, Berli FJ, Moreno D, Boccanlandro H, Travaglia CN, Piccoli PN
(2015) Azospirillum brasilense ameliorates the response of Arabidopsis thaliana to drought
mainly via enhancement of ABA levels. Physiol Plant 153(1):79–90. https://doi.org/10.1111/
PPL.12221
Colares GS, Dell’Osbel N, Wiesel PG, Oliveira GA, Lemos PHZ, da Silva FP, Lutterbeck CA, Kist
LT, Machado ÊL (2020) Floating treatment wetlands: a review and bibliometric analysis. Sci
Total Environ 714:136776. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.SCITOTENV.2020.136776
Das A, Prasad R, Srivastava A, Giang PH, Bhatnagar K, Varma A (2007) Fungal siderophores:
structure, functions and regulations. In: Varma A, Chincholkar SB (eds) Microbial siderophores.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pp 1–42
de Zelicourt A, Al-Yousif M, Hirt H (2013) Rhizosphere microbes as essential partners for plant
stress tolerance. Mol Plant 6(2):242–245. https://doi.org/10.1093/mp/sst028
Ding W, Jin W, Cao S, Zhou X, Wang C, Jiang Q, Huang H, Tu R, Han SF, Wang Q (2019) Ozone
disinfection of chlorine-resistant bacteria in drinking water. Water Res 160:339–349. https://doi.
org/10.1016/J.WATRES.2019.05.014
Dorin Paul B (2008) A history of the concept of sustainable development: literature review. Econ
Sci Ser 17(2):576–580
Doula MK, Sarris A (2016) Soil environment. Environ Dev 213–286. https://doi.org/10.1016/
B978-0-444-62733-9.00004-6436 S. Sonowal et al.
Dutta H, Dutta A (2016) The microbial aspect of climate change. Energ Ecol Environ 1:209–232.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40974-016-0034-7
Eyre AW, Wang M, Oh Y, Dean RA (2019) Identification and characterization of the core rice seed
microbiome. Phytobiomes J 3(2):148–157. https://doi.org/10.1094/PBIOMES-01-19-0009-R/
ASSET/IMAGES/LARGE/PBIOMES-01-19-0009-RT4.JPEG
Galli U, Schüepp H, Brunold C (1994) Heavy metal binding by mycorrhizal fungi. Physiol Plant
92(2):364–368. https://doi.org/10.1111/J.1399-3054.1994.TB05349.X
Gopal M, Gupta A (2016) Microbiome selection could spur next-generation plant breeding
strategies. Front Microbiol 7(DEC):1971. https://doi.org/10.3389/FMICB.2016.01971/
BIBTEX
Grosshans R, Lewtas K, Gunn G, Stanley M (2019) Floating treatment wetlands and plant
bioremediation: nutrient treatment in eutrophic freshwater lakes AN IISD-ELA AND PELICAN
LAKE, MANITOBA CASE STUDY. www.iisd.org/ela
Gull A, Lone AA, Wani NUI (2019) Biotic and abiotic stresses in plants. In: Bosco de Oliveira A
(ed) Abiotic and biotic stress in plants. IntechOpen. https://doi.org/10.5772/INTECHOPEN.
85832
Hatzenpichler R, Krukenberg V, Spietz RL, Jay ZJ (2020) Next-generation physiology approaches
to study microbiome function at the single cell level. Nat Rev Microbiol 18(4):241. https://doi.
org/10.1038/S41579-020-0323-1
Jansson JK, Hofmockel KS (2020) Soil microbiomes and climate change. Nat Rev Microbiol 18(1):
35–46. https://doi.org/10.1038/S41579-019-0265-7
Jat SL, Suby SB, Parihar CM, Gambhir G, Kumar N, Rakshit S (2021) Microbiome for sustainable
agriculture: a review with special reference to the corn production system. Arch Microbiol
203(6):2771–2793. https://doi.org/10.1007/S00203-021-02320-8
Kamo T, Hiradate S, Suzuki K, Fujita I, Yamaki S, Yoneda T, Koitabashi M, Yoshida S (2018)
Methylobamine, a UVA-absorbing compound from the plant-associated bacteria
methylobacterium sp. Nat Prod Commun 13(2):141–143. https://doi.org/10.1177/
1934578X1801300208
Kaushal M (2019) Climatic resilient agriculture for root, tuber, and banana crops using plant
growth-promoting microbes. In: Climate change and agricultural ecosystems: current challenges
and adaptation. Woodhead Publishing, Cambridge, MA, pp 307–329. https://doi.org/10.1016/
B978-0-12-816483-9.00012-8
Kawaguchi K, Yurimoto H, Oku M, Sakai Y (2011) Yeast methylotrophy and autophagy in a
methanol-oscillating environment on growing Arabidopsis thaliana leaves. PLoS One 6(9):
e25257. https://doi.org/10.1371/JOURNAL.PONE.0025257
Khatoon BHG, Khatoon H, Solanki P, Narayan M, Tewari L, Rai J, Hina Khatoon C (2017) Role of
microbes in organic carbon decomposition and maintenance of soil ecosystem Bio-remediation
of chlorpyrifos by bio-slurry reactor and its optimization by Data Enveloping and Response
Surface Methodology View project Enzyme and Microbial Technology View project Role of
microbes in organic carbon decomposition and maintenance of soil ecosystem. Int J Chem Stud
5(6):1648–1656. https://www.researchgate.net/publication/327051620
Knief C, Delmotte N, Chaffron S, Stark M, Innerebner G, Wassmann R, von Mering C, Vorholt JA
(2011) Metaproteogenomic analysis of microbial communities in the phyllosphere and rhizo￾sphere of rice. ISME J 6(7):1378–1390. https://doi.org/10.1038/ismej.2011.192
Kumar A, Verma JP (2019) The role of microbes to improve crop productivity and soil health.
Springer, Singapore, pp 249–265. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-13-0149-0_14
Kumar A, Kumar A, Patel H (2018) Role of microbes in phosphorus availability and acquisition by
plants. Int J Curr Microbiol Appl Sci 7:1344–1347. https://doi.org/10.20546/ijcmas.2018.
705.161
Kumar V, Khan MR, Walia RK (2020) Crop loss estimations due to plant-parasitic nematodes in
major crops in India. Natl Acad Sci Lett 43(5):409–412. https://doi.org/10.1007/S40009-020-
00895-2
Kweku D, Bismark O, Maxwell A, Desmond K, Danso K, Oti-Mensah E, Quachie A, Adormaa B
(2018) Greenhouse effect: greenhouse gases and their impact on global warming. J Sci Res
Reports 17(6):1–9. https://doi.org/10.9734/jsrr/2017/3963018 Plant Microbiome in Agroecosystems for Sustainable Agriculture... 437
Liu J, Song M, Wei X, Zhang H, Bai Z, Zhuang X (2022) Responses of Phyllosphere microbiome to
ozone stress: abundance, community compositions and functions. Microorganisms 10(4):680.
https://doi.org/10.3390/MICROORGANISMS10040680
Macaskie LE, Empson RM, Cheetham AK, Grey CP, Skarnulis AJ (1992) Uranium
bioaccumulation by a Citrobacter sp. as a result of enzymically mediated growth of polycrys￾talline HUO2PO4. Science 257(5071):782–784. https://doi.org/10.1126/SCIENCE.1496397
Masciandaro G, Macci C, Peruzzi E et al (2013) Organic matter–microorganism–plant in soil
bioremediation: a synergic approach. Rev Environ Sci Biotechnol 12:399–419. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s11157-013-9313-3
Madhaiyan M, Alex THH, te Ngoh S, Prithiviraj B, Ji L (2015) Leaf-residing Methylobacterium
species fix nitrogen and promote biomass and seed production in Jatropha curcas. Biotechnol
Biofuels 8(1):1–14. https://doi.org/10.1186/S13068-015-0404-Y/TABLES/4
Maximillian J, Brusseau ML, Glenn EP, Matthias AD (2019) Pollution and environmental pertur￾bations in the global system. In: Environmental and pollution science. Academic Press, London,
pp 457–476. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-814719-1.00025-2
Mishra SK, Khan MH, Misra S, Dixit VK, Khare P, Srivastava S, Chauhan PS (2017) Character￾isation of Pseudomonas spp. and Ochrobactrum sp. isolated from volcanic soil. Antonie van
Leeuwenhoek 110(2):253–270. https://doi.org/10.1007/S10482-016-0796-0
Moreno-Galván AE, Cortés-Patiño S, Romero-Perdomo F, Uribe-Vélez D, Bashan Y, Bonilla RR
(2020) Proline accumulation and glutathione reductase activity induced by drought-tolerant
rhizobacteria as potential mechanisms to alleviate drought stress in Guinea grass. Appl Soil Ecol
147:103367. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.APSOIL.2019.103367
Murthy PS, Naidu MM (2012) Sustainable management of coffee industry by-products and value
addition – A review. Resour Conserv Recycl 66:45–58. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.
2012.06.005
Naseem H, Bano A (2014) Role of plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria and their
exopolysaccharide in drought tolerance of maize. J Plant Interact 9(1):689–701. https://doi.
org/10.1080/17429145.2014.902125
Nelson EB (2018) The seed microbiome: origins, interactions, and impacts. Plant Soil 422(1–2):
7–34. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11104-017-3289-7
Niu X, Song L, Xiao Y, Ge W (2018) Drought-tolerant plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria
associated with foxtail millet in a semi-arid agroecosystem and their potential in alleviating
drought stress. Front Microbiol 8(JAN):2580. https://doi.org/10.3389/FMICB.2017.02580
Pagano MC, Miransari M (2016) The importance of soybean production worldwide. In: Abiotic and
biotic stresses in soybean production, vol 1. Academic Press, Amsterdam, pp 1–26. https://doi.
org/10.1016/B978-0-12-801536-0.00001-3
Parray JA, Shameem N (2020) Molecular mechanism of plant-microbe interactions. Sustain Agric
85–136. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-817109-7.00003-1
Prasad R, Kumar M, Varma A (2015) Role of PGPR in soil fertility and plant health. In:
Egamberdieva D, Shrivastava S, Varma A (eds) Plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria
(PGPR) and medicinal plants. Springer, Cham, pp 247–260
Prasad R, Chhabra S, Gill SS, Singh PK, Tuteja N (2020) The microbial symbionts: potential for
thecrop improvement in changing environments. In: Tuteja N, Tuteja R, Passricha N, Saifi SK
(eds) Advancement in crop improvement techniques. Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp 233–240
Puranik PR, Paknikar KM (1997) Biosorption of lead and zinc from solutions using
Streptoverticillium cinnamoneum waste biomass. J Biotechnol 55(2):113–124. https://doi.org/
10.1016/S0168-1656(97)00067-9
Purvis B, Mao Y, Robinson D (2019) Three pillars of sustainability: in search of conceptual origins.
Sustain Sci 14(3):681–695. https://doi.org/10.1007/S11625-018-0627-5/FIGURES/1
Rajkumar M, Ae N, Freitas H (2009) Endophytic bacteria and their potential to enhance heavy
metal phytoextraction. Chemosphere 77(2):153–160. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.
CHEMOSPHERE.2009.06.047
Rajkumar M, Ae N, Prasad MNV, Freitas H (2010) Potential of siderophore-producing bacteria for
improving heavy metal phytoextraction. Trends Biotechnol 28(3):142–149. https://doi.org/10.
1016/J.TIBTECH.2009.12.002438 S. Sonowal et al.
Riaz M, Kamran M, Fang Y, Wang Q, Cao H, Yang G, Deng L, Wang Y, Zhou Y, Anastopoulos I,
Wang X (2021) Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi-induced mitigation of heavy metal phytotoxicity
in metal contaminated soils: a critical review. J Hazard Mater 402:123919. https://doi.org/10.
1016/J.JHAZMAT.2020.123919
Riseh RS, Ebrahimi-Zarandi M, Gholizadeh Vazvani M, Skorik YA (2021) Reducing drought
stress in plants by encapsulating plant growth-promoting bacteria with polysaccharides. Int J
Mol Sci 22(23):12979. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms222312979
Ritpitakphong U, Falquet L, Vimoltust A, Berger A, Métraux JP, L’Haridon F (2016) The
microbiome of the leaf surface of Arabidopsis protects against a fungal pathogen. New Phytol
210(3):1033–1043. https://doi.org/10.1111/NPH.13808
Ryffel F, Helfrich EJN, Kiefer P, Peyriga L, Portais JC, Piel J, Vorholt JA (2015) Metabolic
footprint of epiphytic bacteria on Arabidopsis thaliana leaves. ISME J 10(3):632–643. https://
doi.org/10.1038/ismej.2015.141
Saad MM, Eida AA, Hirt H, Doerner P (2020) Tailoring plant-associated microbial inoculants in
agriculture: a roadmap for successful application. J Exp Bot 71(13):3878–3901. https://doi.org/
10.1093/JXB/ERAA111
Santos LF, Olivares FL (2021) Plant microbiome structure and benefits for sustainable agriculture.
Curr Plant Biol 26:100198. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CPB.2021.100198
Sathya A, Vijayabharathi R, Gopalakrishnan S (2016) Soil microbes: the invisible managers of soil
fertility. In: Microbial inoculants in sustainable agricultural productivity, Functional applica￾tions, vol 2. Springer, New Delhi, pp 1–16. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-81-322-2644-4_1
Shade A, Jacques MA, Barret M (2017) Ecological patterns of seed microbiome diversity, trans￾mission, and assembly. Curr Opin Microbiol 37:15–22. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.MIB.2017.
03.010
Sharma N, Acharya S, Kumar K, Singh N, Chaurasia OP (2018) Hydroponics as an advanced
technique for vegetable production: an overview. J Soil Water Conserv 17(4):364. https://doi.
org/10.5958/2455-7145.2018.00056.5
Shrivastava S, Prasad R, Varma A (2014) Anatomy of root from eyes of a microbiologist. In:
Morte A, Varma A (eds) Root Engineering, vol 40. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pp 3–22
Singh BK, Trivedi P, Egidi E, Macdonald CA, Delgado-Baquerizo M (2020) Crop microbiome and
sustainable agriculture. Nat Rev Microbiol 18(11):601–602. https://doi.org/10.1038/S41579-
020-00446-Y
Tilman D, Balzer C, Hill J, Befort BL (2011) Global food demand and the sustainable intensifica￾tion of agriculture. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 108(50):20260–20264. https://doi.org/10.1073/
PNAS.1116437108
Timmis K, de Vos WM, Ramos JL, Vlaeminck SE, Prieto A, Danchin A, Verstraete W, de
Lorenzo V, Lee SY, Brüssow H, Timmis JK, Singh BK (2017) The contribution of microbial
biotechnology to sustainable development goals. Microb Biotechnol 10(5):984–987. https://doi.
org/10.1111/1751-7915.12818
Toju H, Peay KG, Yamamichi M, Narisawa K, Hiruma K, Naito K, Fukuda S, Ushio M, Nakaoka S,
Onoda Y, Yoshida K, Schlaeppi K, Bai Y, Sugiura R, Ichihashi Y, Minamisawa K, Kiers ET
(2018) Core microbiomes for sustainable agroecosystems. Nat Plants 4(5):247–257. https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41477-018-0139-4
Ueda H, Kurose D, Kugimiya S, Mitsuhara I, Yoshida S, Tabata J, Suzuki K, Kitamoto H (2018)
Disease severity enhancement by an esterase from non-phytopathogenic yeast Pseudozyma
antarctica and its potential as adjuvant for biocontrol agents. Sci Reports 8(1):1–12. https://
doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-34705-z
Venkatramanan V, Shah S, Prasad R (2020a) Global climate change and environmental policy:
resilient and smart agriculture. Springer, Singapore. ISBN: 978-981-329-855-2. https://www.
springer.com/gp/book/9789813298552
Venkatramanan V, Shah S, Prasad R (2020b) Global climate change and environmental policy:
agriculture perspectives. Springer, Singapore. ISBN: 978-981-13-9569-7. https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-981-13-9570-3
