i
Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis 
for Sustainable Agriculture
The use of nanotechnology in agriculture has created many concerns related to toxicity and envir￾onmental implications. Green synthesis techniques for producing nanomaterials utilizing plants, 
microorganisms, and other natural resources have been developed in response to the demand 
for green chemistry and nanotechnology. This book provides in-depth information on the plant￾based synthesis of nanoparticles and how it promotes sustainable agriculture. It critically reviews 
nanomaterials synthesized from plants and their potential applications, including nanoscale 
insecticides, herbicides, fungicides, fertilizers, and sensors, which can help to study and manage 
plant health and soil fertility.
The features of this volume include:
• A comprehensive resource on plant-based nanoparticle synthesis and its usage in gene 
transformation;
• Strategies and limitations of plants that are genetically engineered using nanotechnology;
• Explanation of the design and use of nanofertilizers and nanopesticides for environmental 
sustainability;
• Discussions around the toxicity levels of nanoparticles in plants;
• Aids for professionals and scholars to learn advanced techniques to monitor soil and plant 
systems using nanotechnology.
This is an excellent reference for researchers, academics, students, and professionals in nanotech￾nology, biochemistry, biomedical sciences, biotechnology, environmental engineering, agricultural 
sciences, and plant sciences.iii
Plant-Based Nanoparticle 
Synthesis for Sustainable 
Agriculture
Edited by
Ranjit Pabbati, Kalyani Chepuri, 
Kondakindi Venkateswar Reddy, and 
Naga Raju Maddelaiv
Designed cover image: © iStock Photo, Credit: tonivaver
First edition published 2025
by CRC Press
2385 NW Executive Center Drive, Suite 320, Boca Raton FL 33431
and by CRC Press
4 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN
CRC Press is an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
© 2025 selection and editorial matter, Ranjit Pabbati, Kalyani Chepuri, Kondakindi Venkateswar Reddy, and Naga Raju 
Maddela; individual chapters, the contributors
Reasonable efforts have been made to publish reliable data and information, but the author and publisher cannot assume 
responsibility for the validity of all materials or the consequences of their use. The authors and publishers have attempted to 
trace the copyright holders of all material reproduced in this publication and apologize to copyright holders if permission to 
publish in this form has not been obtained. If any copyright material has not been acknowledged please write and let us know 
so we may rectify in any future reprint.
Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, transmitted, or utilized 
in any form by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying, 
microfilming, and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without written permission from the publishers.
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, access www.copyright.com or contact the 
Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400. For works that are not 
available on CCC please contact mpkbookspermissions@tandf.co.uk
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks and are used only for identification 
and explanation without intent to infringe.
ISBN: 978-1-032-76253-1 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-1-032-76254-8 (pbk)
ISBN: 978-1-003-47773-0 (ebk)
DOI: 10.1201/9781003477730
Typeset in Times
by Newgen Publishing UKv
v
Contents
Foreword ...........................................................................................................................................ix
Preface...............................................................................................................................................xi
Acknowledgments...........................................................................................................................xiii
About the Editors.............................................................................................................................xv
Contributors ...................................................................................................................................xvii
SECTION I Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis and 
Applications
Chapter 1 Editorial Overview of Nanotechnology in Plant Sciences...........................................3
Vadde Pavantheja, Durgam Rachana, Akula Maharshi, Chittepu Pranitha, 
Kathuroju Harikrishna, Vadakavila Geethikalal, and Srinithya Paruchuri
Chapter 2 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis...........................................................................20
Srinivasan Kameswaran, Bellamkonda Ramesh, N. O. Gopal, and 
A. Sivashankar Reddy
Chapter 3 Current Developments in the Synthesis of Nanoparticles Using Plant Extracts........30
K. Deepak Raj, S. Chaitanya Kumari, and K. Anuradha
Chapter 4 Nanoparticles in Plant Transformation.......................................................................46
Anjaneyulu Musini, P. Gnana Deepu, Rebbena Vaishnavi, 
Kathroju Harikrishna, and Jogipeta Harihara
Chapter 5 Nanomaterial-Mediated Plant Gene Transformation for Genetically 
Modified Plants ..........................................................................................................61
Ashwitha Kodaparthi, Asra Siddiqua, Mangilipelli Shravani, 
Chunarkar Pragnya Sheela, Pagidikathula Sindhu, Sreedevi Sarsan, and 
Rishivardhan Reddy Manne
Chapter 6 Nanoparticle Uptake, Translocation, and Biological Impact in Plants.......................79
D. V. Surya Prakash, Ishika Gupta, Vijay Rajesh Andanamala, 
Anand Kumar Nelapati, Kuldeep Roy, and Vangalapati Meena
Chapter 7 Green Nanoparticles Used in Agriculture to Reduce ROS and Increase Plant 
Resilience Against Abiotic Stress...............................................................................94
Radhika Tippani, Mahendar Porika, Syam Prasad Sura, 
Pallavi Kagithoju, and Sri Sai Sumedha Porikavi Contents
Chapter 8 Mobility of Nanoparticles in Plants .........................................................................125
P. Paul Vijay, Srinivas Kunta, and Belli Madhuri Venkatesh
Chapter 9 Molecular Mechanisms of Plant: Nanoparticle Interactions....................................140
Gabriel Gbenga Babaniyi, Babafemi Raphael Babaniyi, 
Gbolahan Isaac Olamide, and Ulelu Jessica Akor
Chapter 10 Nanoparticle Phytotoxicity.......................................................................................159
Ashwitha Kodaparthi, Teetla Shivani, Kalal Akhila, B. Susmitha, 
and P. Chiranjeevi
SECTION II Nanoparticles in Agroecosystems
Chapter 11 Implications of Nanotechnology for Environmental Remediation ..........................183
Vagdevi Pally, Archana Yalagandula, Nallagatla Himaja, 
Ramchander Merugu, and Anil Kumar Marapaka
Chapter 12 Green Synthesized Mineral Nanofertilizers for Plant Growth Promotion ...............197
Manish Kumar, Ekansh Agrawal, Harsh Pratap Singh, Shivam Kumar, 
Raghvendra Saxena, and Rajesh Singh Tomar
Chapter 13 Nanofertilizers for Plant Growth and Environmental Sustainability........................209
Katherine Georgina Menon, Mangala Guna Preethi, 
Belli Madhuri Venkatesh, and Aleti Akila
Chapter 14 Role of Nanoparticle-Integrated Biosensors in Soil–Plant Systems........................225
Dheeraj William Watkins, P. Gnana Deepu, Jogipeta Harihara, 
Kathroju Harikrishna, and Vulise Jhansi
Chapter 15 Nanoparticle-Assisted Abiotic Remediation of Contaminated Soil.........................239
Angelene Hannah Jebarani D., Nitish Venkateswarlu Mogili, 
R. A. Zerubabel Michael, Mutyala Satish, and Erva Rajeswara Reddy
Chapter 16 Agronanotechnology Techniques to Promote Nutrient Availability in Plants..........258
Angelene Hannah Jebarani D., R. A. Zerubabel Michael, and 
Erva Rajeswara Reddy
Chapter 17 Green Nanotechnology: Harnessing Plant-Based Nanoparticles for 
Sustainable Food Preservation .................................................................................277
Nallagatla Himaja, Yelagandula Archana, Ashwitha Kodaparthi, 
Ramchander Merugu, and Mallesham BulleContents vii
Chapter 18 Green Synthesised Nanoparticles: A Sustainable Option for 
Food Packaging ........................................................................................................289
Srinivasan Kameswaran, Bellamkonda Ramesh, and 
Gopi Krishna Pitchika
Chapter 19 Nanoparticle-Infused Functional Foods: Redefining Nutrition and 
Health Paradigms .....................................................................................................299
R. Sandhyarani and Suresh Chaluvadi
Chapter 20 Challenges and Future Directions of Nanotechnology in Plant Sciences................307
Akula Maharshi, Durgam Rachana, Vadde Pavantheja, Vadakavila Geethikalal, 
Kathuroju Harikrishna, Chittepu Pranitha, and Manikantha Dunna
Index..............................................................................................................................................321ix
ix
Foreword
Nanotechnology is a rapidly developing, multidisciplinary field with a wide range of scientific and 
technological applications. Physical and chemical techniques are used to synthesize nanoparticles 
(NPs); however, these methods are not environmentally friendly. Additionally, chemical processes 
are generally costly and involve the use of toxic and hazardous chemicals that pose a variety of envir￾onmental risks. As a result, plant-based NPs have been suggested as a more effective, low-cost, safe, 
easily available, and environmentally friendly approach. NPs promote sustainable agriculture and 
have found many applications in the agricultural sector, including nanofertilizers, nanopesticides, 
nanobiosensors, and environmental remediation agents.
This volume addresses the latest issues surrounding the plant-based synthesis of NPs for sustain￾able agriculture and their impacts. This edited volume is divided into two sections. The first section 
covers an overview of nanotechnology in plant sciences, the plant-based synthesis of NPs, current 
developments, the role of NPs in plant transformation, nanoparticle-mediated plant gene transfer, 
nanoparticle uptake and translocation, NP mobility, molecular mechanisms, and the phytotoxicity 
of nanoparticles. The second section deals with the implications of nanotechnology for environ￾mental remediation, nanofertilizers, nanopesticides, nanobiosensors, and agronanotechnology in 
sustainable agriculture, as well as the use of NPs in food packaging, food preservation, and func￾tional foods. This volume has been edited by four subject experts and has a total of 20 chapters 
contributed by 73 researchers and academics from seven different countries across the world. This 
volume provides insights into the promising development of new techniques for synthesizing plant￾based nanoparticles and enhancing crop yields.
I truly believe that this volume will have a wide readership and will serve researchers, academics, 
environmental policymakers, industrialists, technicians, and students for a considerable length 
of time.
Archana Giri
Professor and Head of Centre for Biotechnology
Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University, Hyderabad, Indiaxi
xi
Preface
Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture aims to provide in-depth infor￾mation on the synthesis of plant-based nanoparticles to promote sustainable agriculture. Physical 
and chemical techniques are used to synthesize nanometals, such as gold, silver, and platinum 
nanoparticles; however, these methods are not environmentally friendly. Additionally, chemical 
processes are generally costly and involve the use of toxic and hazardous chemicals that pose 
a variety of environmental risks. The main purpose of this book is to promote the use of plant￾based NPs as a more effective, low-cost, safe, easily available, and environmentally friendly 
approach. NPs promote sustainable agriculture and have found many applications in the agricul￾tural sector, such as nanofertilizers, nanopesticides, nanobiosensors, and environmental remedi￾ation agents.
This book is divided into two sections, each with 10 chapters. The first section introduces 
plant-based nanoparticle synthesis and applications and includes the chapters “Editorial 
Overview of Nanotechnology in Plant Sciences”, “Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis”, 
“Current Developments in the Synthesis of Nanoparticles Using Plant Extracts”, “Nanoparticles 
in Plant Transformation”, “Nanomaterial-Mediated Plant Gene Transformation for Genetically 
Modified Plants”, “Nanoparticle Uptake, Translocation, and Biological Impact in Plants”, “Green 
Nanoparticles Used in Agriculture to Reduce ROS and Increase Plant Resilience to Abiotic 
Stress”, “Mobility of Nanoparticles in Plants”, “Molecular Mechanisms of Plant–Nanoparticle 
Interactions”, and “Nanoparticle Phytotoxicity”. In the second section, the use of nanoparticles 
in agroecosystems is reviewed. Nanomaterials have several potential uses in agriculture, 
including increasing crop outputs and improving soil health. Therefore, the selected chapters 
in this section include “Implications of Nanotechnology for Environmental Remediation”, 
“Green Synthesized Mineral Nanofertilizers for Plant Growth Promotion”, “Nanofertilizers for 
Plant Growth and Environmental Sustainability”, “Role of Nanoparticle-Integrated Biosensors 
in Soil–Plant Systems”, “Nanoparticle-Assisted Abiotic Remediation of Contaminated 
Soil”, “Agronanotechnology Techniques to Promote Nutrient Availability in Plants”, “Green 
Nanotechnology: Harnessing Plant-Based Nanoparticles for Sustainable Food Preservation”, 
“Green Synthesized Nanoparticles: A Sustainable Option for Food Packaging”, “Nanoparticle￾Infused Functional Foods: Redefining Nutrition and Health Paradigms”, and “Challenges and 
Future Directions of Nanotechnology in Plant Sciences”.
This book is intended for researchers, graduate and postgraduate students, scientists, NGOs, author￾ities, policymakers, and industry professionals in the fields of nanotechnology, nanobiotechnology, 
microbiology, biotechnology, medical biotechnology, biomedical engineering, agricultural engin￾eering, plant biotechnology, environmental engineering, environmental health and safety, medicinal 
chemistry, and medical biotechnology.
The 20 chapters in this book were contributed by 73 academics, researchers, and scientists 
from seven different countries (the UK, USA, Nigeria, India, Canada, Sweden, and Israel) across 
the world. We strongly believe that this volume offers a single point of reference for the most 
recent information regarding the plant-based synthesis of nanoparticles and their applications in 
agroecosystems, including environmental remediation, plant growth promotion, plant protection, 
abiotic remediation, and enhancing nutrient availability in plants, among others.
Ranjit Pabbati
Kalyani Chepuri
Kondakindi Venkateswar Reddy
Naga Raju Maddelaxiii
xiii
Acknowledgments
We would like to acknowledge the support of the contributors and thank them for their precious 
help and on-time submissions during this project. Without their willingness and help, this volume 
would not have been prepared within the framed time; therefore, we really honor their cooperation 
and teamwork. We are also grateful to the anonymous reviewers for their constructive assessments, 
which helped us to enhance the caliber of this book by inviting experts to contribute additional 
chapters. We gratefully acknowledge the CRC Press Taylor and Francis Group editorial and pro￾duction team for their support; without their guidance, this project would not have been completed 
in such a short time. Finally, yet importantly, we are very much thankful to the Jawaharlal Nehru 
Technological University, Hyderabad for their wholehearted support and to our colleagues at 
Universidad Técnica de Manabí (Ecuador) for the provision of recommendations at the time of the 
book proposal and final preparation.
Ranjit Pabbati
Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University, Hyderabad
Telangana, India
Kalyani Chepuri
Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University, Hyderabad
Telangana, India
Kondakindi Venkateswar Reddy
Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University, Hyderabad
Telangana, India
Naga Raju Maddela
Universidad Técnica de Manabí
Portoviejo, Ecuadorxv
xv
About the Editors
Ranjit Pabbati has received a BTech (2003–2007), MTech (2007–
2009), and PhD in biotechnology from Jawaharlal Nehru Technological 
University, Hyderabad, India. His research focuses on the area of medi￾cinal plant biotechnology for the evaluation of antimicrobial activity 
on various pathogenic bacteria and antioxidant activity. He also works 
to understand secondary metabolite biosynthesis pathways for the 
mapping of genes involved in antimicrobial activity via transcrip￾tome analysis using next-generation sequencing techniques. He has 
14 years of teaching and mentoring experience, teaching both under￾graduate and postgraduate students. He has received an internal grant 
from the Technical Education Quality Improvement Programme of 
the Government of India (TEQIP), working in the area of plant biotechnology. Currently, he is an 
assistant professor at the Centre for Biotechnology, University College of Engineering and Science 
and Technology, Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University, Hyderabad, Telangana, India. He has 
published 25 book chapters with various publishers, two books, 25 research papers, and three review 
articles in reputed journals. He has one patent for design from the Indian Patent Agency (2023).
Kalyani Chepuri received her PhD from the Faculty of Biotechnology 
at Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University, Hyderabad, India, 
in 2018. Her postgraduate studies in biotechnology also include an 
MTech (2005–2008) and MSc (2003–2005) from the same institu￾tion. Her PhD research focused on the importance of phytochemicals 
taken from medicinal and dietary sources in cancer treatments, using 
combination therapy approaches that combine phytochemicals with 
chemotherapeutic drugs. She has 15 years of teaching experience with 
postgraduate students and has overseen the dissertation work of many 
postgraduate students. She served as a consultant for a variety of fac￾ulty development programs, conferences, value-added courses, and 
workshops. In 2020, she received Elite Gold certification for the Faculty Development Programme 
conducted by NPTEL, the Government of India. She has played a key role in the development of 
research grants for several research projects supported by the Department of Science and Technology 
(DST), Department of Biotechnology (DBT), and Technical Education Quality Improvement 
Programme (TEQIP). She has 25 peer-reviewed national and international journal papers to her 
name, as well as 15 book chapters. She has two patents for design from the Indian Patent Agency 
(2023 and 2024). She was awarded Telangana Associate Fellow for 2023 from Telangana Academy 
of Sciences, Government of Telangana, India. She is currently an assistant professor at the Centre of 
Biotechnology at Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University, Hyderabad, India.xvi About the Editors
Kondakindi Venkateswar Reddy received his MSc in microbiology 
(2006–2008) from Sri Krishnadevyaraya University, Anantapur, 
Andhrapradesh, and received his MTech in environmental manage￾ment and PhD (2017) in environmental science and technology from 
Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University, Hyderabad, Telangana, 
India. During his doctoral program in the area of industrial micro￾biology, he worked on the isolation, characterization, and molecular 
identification of cellulase-producing bacterial isolates used in aquacul￾ture wastewater treatments. He has been working as a faculty member 
in microbiology and biotechnology for the past 15 years, teaching 
undergraduate and postgraduate students. His forte is industrial microbiology, biotechnology, and 
environmental management. He has successfully completed four AICTE-approved faculty devel￾opment programs in the areas of applied environmental microbiology, experimental biotechnology, 
biochemistry, and cell biology. He has published 30 book chapters and two books, as well as 35 
research papers and three review articles in reputed journals. He is also an active reviewer for pres￾tigious publishers. He has actively participated in 25 national and international conferences and 
presented various research papers at prestigious universities. He has one patent for design from the 
Indian Patent Agency (2023). Currently, he is an assistant professor at the Center for Biotechnology, 
University College of Engineering and Science and Technology, Jawaharlal Nehru Technological 
University, Hyderabad, Telangana, India.
Naga Raju Maddela received his MSc (1996–1998) and PhD (2012) 
in microbiology from Sri Krishnadevaraya University, Anantapuramu, 
India. During his doctoral program in the area of environmental 
microbiology, he investigated the effects of industrial effluents and 
insecticides on soil microorganisms and their biological activity. He has 
been working as a faculty member in microbiology since 1998, teaching 
undergraduate and postgraduate students. He also worked as a Prometeo 
Investigator (fellowship received from SENESCYT) at Universidad 
Estatal Amazónica, Ecuador, from 2013 to 2015 and received a post￾doctoral fellowship (2016–2018) from Sun Yat-Sen University, China. 
He also received external funding from the China Postdoctoral Science 
Foundation in 2017 and internal funding from the Universidad Técnica de Manabí in 2020. He has 
participated in national and international conferences and presented research papers in China, Cuba, 
Ecuador, India, and Singapore. Currently, he is a full professor at the Facultad de Ciencias de la 
Salud, Universidad Técnica de Manabí, Portoviejo, Ecuador. He has been actively publishing sci￾entific articles, books (authored and edited), and chapters since 2007. At the time of writing, he has 
published 110 articles, 25 books, and 50 book chapters.xvi
xvii
Contributors
Ekansh Agrawal
Amity Institute of Biotechnology
Amity University
Gwalior, M. P. 474005
Aleti Akila
Centre for Biotechnology
University College of Engineering and Science 
and Technology
Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University, 
Hyderabad
Hyderabad, 500085, Telangana, India
Maharshi Akula
Centre for Biotechnology
University College of Engineering and Science 
and Technology
Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University, 
Hyderabad
Hyderabad, 500085, Telangana, India
B. Susmitha
Department of Microbiology
St. Pious X Degree & PG College for Women
Hyderabad, 500076, Telangana, India
Babafemi Raphael Babaniyi
Bioresources Development Centre
National Biotechnology Development Agency
Nigeria
Gabriel Gbenga Babaniyi
Department of Agricultural Development and 
Management
Agricultural and Rural Management Training 
Institute (ARMTI)
Nigeria
Ramesh Bellamkonda
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology
University of Nebraska Medical Center
Omaha, Nebraska, USA
Mallesham Bulle
Institute of Genomics for Crop Abiotic Stress 
Tolerance (IGCAST)
Department of Plant and Soil Science
Texas Tech University
Lubbock, Texas, USA
Suresh Chaluvadi
Department of Biotechnology
Bannari Amman Institute of Technology
Sathyamangalam, 638401, Tamil Nadu, India
P. Chiranjeevi
Postdoctoral Researcher and Associate
Department of Civil, Environmental and 
Natural Resources Engineering
Lulea university of Technology
Sweden
Pranitha Chittepu
Centre for Biotechnology
University College of Engineering and Science 
and Technology
Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University, 
Hyderabad
Hyderabad, 500085, Telangana, India
P. Gnana Deepu
Center for Biotechnology
University College of Engineering and Science 
and Technology
Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University, 
Hyderabad
Hyderabad, 500085, Telangana, India
Manikantha Dunna
Health Sciences Centre
Texas Tech University
Lubbock, Texas, USA
Rachana Durgam
Centre for Biotechnology
University College of Engineering and Science 
and Technology
Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University, 
Hyderabad
Hyderabad, 500085, Telangana, India
Katherine Georgina Menon
Department of Microbiology
School of Allied Health Sciencesxviii Contributors
Malla Reddy University
Maisammaguda, 500043, Telangana, India
Mangala Guna Preethi
Centre for Biotechnology
University College of Engineering and Science 
and Technology
Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University, 
Hyderabad
Hyderabad, 500085, Telangana, India
Ishika Gupta
Department of Biotechnology
Meerut Institute of Engineering and 
Technology
Meerut, 250005, Uttar Pradesh, India
Angelene Hannah Jebarani D.
Department of Biotechnology
National Institute of Technology
Andhra Pradesh, India
Gbolahan Isaac Olamide
Chemistry Department
Federal University of Technology 
Akure (FUTA)
Ulelu Jessica Akor
Animal Production Department
University of Ilorin
Harihara Jogipeta
Center for Biotechnology
University College of Engineering and Science 
and Technology
Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University, 
Hyderabad
Hyderabad, 500085, Telangana, India
K. Anuradha
Department of Microbiology
Bhavan’s Vivekananda College of Science, 
Humanities and Commerce
Sainikpuri, Secunderabad, Telangana, India
Pallavi Kagithoju
Department of Biotechnology
Kakatiya University
Hanamkonda, Telangana, India
Akhila Kalal
Centre for Biotechnology
University College of Engineering and Science 
and Technology
Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University, 
Hyderabad
Hyderabad, 500085, Telangana, India
Srinivasan Kameswaran
Department of Botany
Vikrama Simhapuri University 
College
Kavali, 524201, Andhra Pradesh, India
Harikrishna Kathuroju
Centre for Biotechnology
University College of Engineering and Science 
and Technology
Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University, 
Hyderabad
Hyderabad, 500085, Telangana, India
Ashwitha Kodaparthi
Department of Microbiology
MNR PG College
Hyderabad, 500085, Telangana, India
Gopi Krishna Pitchika
Department of Zoology
Vikrama Simhapuri University College
Kavali, 524201, Andhra Pradesh, India
Manish Kumar
Amity Institute of Biotechnology
Amity University
Gwalior, M. P. 474005
Shivam Kumar
Amity Institute of Biotechnology
Amity University
Gwalior, M. P. 474005
Anil Kumar Marapaka
Department of Borch Medicinal 
Chemistry and Molecular 
Pharmacology (MCMP)
Purdue University
Indiana, USAContributors xix
Anand Kumar Nelapati
Department of Biotechnology
Vignan’s Foundation for Science, Technology 
and Research
Vadlamudi, Guntur, Andhra Pradesh, 
522213, India
S. Chaitanya Kumari
Department of Microbiology
Bhavan’s Vivekananda College of Science, 
Humanities and Commerce
Sainikpuri, Secunderabad, Telangana, India
Srinivas Kunta
Agricultural Research Organization
The Volcani Institute
Rishon LeZion, 7505101, Israel
Belli Madhuri Venkatesh
Centre for Biotechnology
University College of Engineering and Science 
and Technology
Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University, 
Hyderabad
Hyderabad, 500085, Telangana, India
Shravani Mangilipelli
Centre for Biotechnology
University College of Engineering and Science 
and Technology
Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University, 
Hyderabad
Hyderabad, 500085, Telangana, India
Ramchander Merugu
Department of Biochemistry
Mahatma Gandhi University
Telangana, 508254, India
R. A. Zerubabel Michael
Department of Biotechnology
National Institute of Technology
Andhra Pradesh, India
Anjaneyulu Musini
Centre for Biotechnology
University College of Engineering and Science 
and Technology
Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University, 
Hyderabad
Hyderabad, 500085, Telangana, India
Nallagatla Himaja
Department of Microbiology
Telangana Social Welfare Residential 
Institution
Telangana, 508254, India
N. O. Gopal
Department of Physics
Vikrama Simhapuri University College
Nellore, 524324, Andhra Pradesh, India
Sindhu Pagidikathula
Centre for Biotechnology
University College of Engineering and Science 
and Technology
Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University, 
Hyderabad
Hyderabad, 500085, Telangana, India
Vagdevi Pally
Department of Biochemistry
Mahatma Gandhi University
Telangana, 508254, India
Srinithya Paruchuri
Nottingham Trent University, 
Clifton Campus
Nottingham, UK
Mahendar Porika
Department of Biotechnology
Kakatiya University
Hanamkonda, Telangana, India
D. V. Surya Prakash
Department of Biotechnology
Meerut Institute of Engineering and 
Technology
Meerut, 250005, Uttar Pradesh, India
Syam Prasad Sura
Department of Botany
Kakatiya Government College
Hanamkonda, Telangana, Indiaxx Contributors
Harsh Pratap Singh
Amity Institute of Biotechnology
Amity University
Gwalior, M. P. 474005
R. Sandhyarani
Department of Biotechnology
Bannari Amman Institute of Technology
Sathyamangalam, 638401, Tamilnadu, India
K. Deepak Raj
Department of Microbiology
Bhavan’s Vivekananda College of Science, 
Humanities and Commerce
Sainikpuri, Secunderabad, Telangana, India
Vijay Rajesh Andanamala
Medical Biotechnology
Guntur, 522006, Andhra Pradesh, India
Vaishnavi Rebbena
Centre for Biotechnology
Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University, 
Hyderabad
Hyderabad, 500085, Telangana, India
Rajeswara Reddy Erva
Department of Biotechnology
National Institute of Technology
Andhra Pradesh, India
Rishivardhan Reddy Manne
Department of Health Informatics
DePaul University
Chicago, Illinois, USA
A. Sivashankar Reddy
Department of Physics
Vikrama Simhapuri University College
Nellore, 524324, Andhra Pradesh, India
Kuldeep Roy
School of Chemical Engineering
Vellore Institute of Technology
Vellore, Tamil Nadu, 632014, India
Sri Sai Sumedha Porika
Warangal Public School
Hanamkonda, Telangana, India
Sreedevi Sarsan
Department of Microbiology
School of Allied and Health Care Sciences
Malla Reddy University
Hyderabad, 500043, Telangana, India
Mutyala Satish
School of Science
Woxsen University
Telangana, India
Raghvendra Saxena
Amity Institute of Biotechnology
Amity University
Gwalior, M. P. 474005
Pragnya Sheela Chunarkar
Centre for Biotechnology
University College of Engineering and Science 
and Technology
Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University, 
Hyderabad
Hyderabad, 500085, Telangana, India
Asra Siddiqua
Centre for Biotechnology
University College of Engineering and Science 
and Technology
Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University, 
Hyderabad
Hyderabad, 500085, Telangana, India
Rajesh Singh Tomar
Amity Institute of Biotechnology
Amity University
Gwalior, M. P. 474005
Shivani Teetla
Centre for Biotechnology
University College of Engineering and Science 
and Technology
Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University, 
Hyderabad
Hyderabad, 500085, Telangana, India
Radhika Tippani
Department of Biotechnology
Kakatiya University
Hanamkonda, Telangana, IndiaContributors xxi
Geethikalal Vadakavila
Centre for Biotechnology
University College of Engineering 
and Science and Technology
Jawaharlal Nehru Technological 
University, Hyderabad
Hyderabad, 500085, Telangana, India
Pavantheja Vadde
Centre for Biotechnology
University College of Engineering and Science 
and Technology
Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University, 
Hyderabad
Hyderabad, 500085, Telangana, India
Meena Vangalapati
Department of Chemical 
Engineering
Andhra University College of 
Engineering (A)
Visakhapatnam, Andhra Pradesh, 
530003, India
Nitish Venkateswarlu Mogili
School of Sciences
Woxsen University
Telangana, India
P. Paul Vijay
Center for Biotechnology
Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University, 
Hyderabad
Hyderabad, 500085, Telangana, India
Jhansi Vulise
Toronto, Ontario, Canada
Dheeraj William Watkins
Department of Microbiology
Yogivemena University
Kadapa, 516005, Andhra Pradesh, India
Archana Yalagandula
Department of Microbiology
Telangana Social Welfare Residential 
Institution
Telangana, 508254, India
newgenprepdf1
Section I
Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis 
and Applications23
DOI: 10.1201/9781003477730-2 3
1 Editorial Overview of 
Nanotechnology in Plant 
Sciences
Vadde Pavantheja, Durgam Rachana, Akula Maharshi, 
Chittepu Pranitha, Kathuroju Harikrishna, 
Vadakavila Geethikalal, and Srinithya Paruchuri
1.1 INTRODUCTION
Nanotechnology involves manipulating matter at the nanoscale, where at least one dimension 
is 100 nanometers or less (equivalent to a 100 millionth of a millimeter). It encompasses the 
design, production, and utilization of nanomaterial structures across various fields (Tiwari 2022). 
Nanomaterials exhibit unique physicochemical properties and serve as versatile scaffolds for bio￾molecule functionalization (Figure 1.1). Certain nanomaterials, such as magnetic, gold, hybrid, 
and polymeric nanomaterials, respond to external stimuli, achieving the spatiotemporal controlled 
release of macromolecules. Over the last two decades, engineered nanomaterials have found 
successful applications in pharmacology and medicine, particularly for therapeutic and diagnostic 
purposes. While nanotechnology has revolutionized medicine and pharmacology, its potential in 
plant science is now gaining prominence, especially the application of nanomaterials (NMs) as 
vehicles of agrochemicals or biomolecules in plants and the great potential to enhance crop prod￾uctivity (Khan et al., 2017). This chapter explores the untapped potential of nanotechnology in plant 
science and agriculture.
1.1.1 Nanotechnology in Plant Science
Nanotechnology in plant science involves materials at the nanoscale and enhances plant life by 
increasing nutrient uptake by roots, protecting plants from abiotic and biotic stresses. Recent 
advancements in nanomaterials have sparked interest in agriculture. Studies have indicated that 
nanomaterials enhance crop growth and yields compared to conventional fertilizers and pesticides 
(Figure 1.2). They also positively affect plant growth by increasing chlorophyll content, root/shoot 
length, and stress tolerance. However, addressing the limitations of nanomaterials and seeking sus￾tainable improvements remains crucial (Singh et al., 2022). Nanotechnology aims to enhance fun￾damental plant requirements and ongoing studies seek to maximize these advancements in plant 
sciences. Engineered nanomaterials (NMs) serve as the foundation for nanofertilizers. These 
specialized fertilizers enhance nutrient absorption by plants, leading to improved crop yields and 
increased agricultural productivity. By optimizing nutrient availability and uptake, nanofertilizers 
contribute to sustainable farming practices. Nanosensors play a crucial role in monitoring soil 
conditions, plant health, and nutrient levels. These miniature devices provide real-time data, allowing 
farmers to make informed decisions. With nanosensors, precision agriculture becomes feasible. 
Farmers can adjust irrigation schedules, apply fertilizers precisely where needed, and detect the 
early signs of stress or disease in plants. Nanoparticles (NPs) are also employed for insect control.4 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
Nanoencapsulated pesticides protect crops while minimizing environmental impacts. Their 
targeted delivery ensures effective pest management without harming beneficial organisms. NMs 
contribute to soil remediation. Their unique properties allow them to bind to contaminants, such 
as heavy metals and organic pollutants, effectively removing them from soil. Improved soil health 
positively impacts plant growth, nutrient cycling, and overall ecosystem resilience (Chen et al., 
2024). Nanoparticles assist in water treatment. Their high surface area and reactivity enable the 
efficient removal of pollutants, ensuring safe irrigation water. By addressing water quality, NPs 
contribute to sustainable agriculture and safeguard human health. Despite their promise, ethical 
considerations surround the use of NPs in agriculture and questions remain about their long-term 
effects on ecosystems, potential toxicity, and unintended consequences. Researchers are continuing 
to study the environmental impact of NPs and develop guidelines for their responsible application 
(Epelle et al., 2022).
FIGURE 1.2 Advancements in the field of agriculture that are based on nanotechnology.
FIGURE 1.1 Classification and properties of organic and inorganic nanoparticles.Editorial Overview of Nanotechnology in Plant Sciences 5
1.2 NANOTECHNOLOGY IN THE GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT OF PLANTS
Nanotechnology plays a significant role in enhancing plant growth and development. Some of the 
key aspects are discussed below.
1.2.1 Nanoparticle Fertilizers
In agriculture, the application of nanotechnology is promising, especially its use in the creation of 
smart fertilizers, which has drawn a lot of attention since it has the potential to completely transform 
current farming methods. The application of nanotechnology could provide prospective answers to 
problems faced by conventional agricultural technologies, such as poor fertilizer usage, environ￾mental pollution, and soil degradation. By offering precise control over nutrient distribution, con￾trolled release mechanisms, and personalized formulations, nanotechnology promotes increased soil 
health, decreased environmental impact, and enhanced nutrient absorption (Figure 1.3). For the 
purpose of attaining sustainable farming practices and global food security, the use of nanotech￾nology to create smart fertilizers holds great promise for transforming the agricultural landscape. In 
addition to addressing the drawbacks of conventional fertilizers, this strategy provides a long-term 
means of maximizing crop output while reducing negative environmental impacts (Ullah et al., 
2023). Nanotechnology has revolutionized plant nutrient delivery, leading to enhanced agricultural 
yields and more efficient nutrient utilization. It operates via the following mechanisms:
• Controlled Release
Nanofertilizers gradually release nutrients, providing a consistent supply to plants.
• Targeted Approach
Nanoparticles can be engineered to release nutrients precisely where needed, minimizing 
waste.
• Enhanced Absorption
Plant roots readily absorb nanoparticles, improving nutrient intake.
• Nutrient Use Efficiency
Nanofertilizers reduce losses by minimizing nutrient runoff and leaching.
• Increased Uptake
Nanoparticles enhance nutrient absorption by plants (Mastronardi et al., 2015).
1.2.2 Nanoparticle Pesticides
Pesticide formulations that incorporate nanoparticles are referred to as nanopesticides. Their pur￾pose is to maximize pesticide distribution, boost pesticide effectiveness, and reduce environmental 
impact (Figure 1.4). The types of nanoparticles used in pesticides are metal-based nanoparticles (zinc 
oxide, copper, silver, etc.), polymeric nanoparticles, and lipid-based nanoparticles. The benefits of 
nanoparticle pesticides are as follows:
• Accurate Targeting
Nanopesticides are able to minimize damage to beneficial creatures while targeting pests.
• Decreased Dosage
By enabling the effective application of pesticides, nanoparticles lower the total quantities 
required.
• Extended Efficacy
The efficacy of pest management can be extended by using nanopesticides.
• Less Chemical Residue
Nanopesticides leave crops with less chemical residue (Bapat et al., 2015).6 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
1.2.3 Nanoparticle Sensors
Nanosensors, which are selective transducers with nanometer-scale dimensions, play a crucial role 
in plant science. These tiny sensors allow for the non-destructive, minimally invasive monitoring of 
biological processes, including plant signaling pathways and metabolism. By analyzing data in real 
time, nanosensors enable researchers to study plant activities without harming the plants (Giraldo 
et al., 2023). Some of the main uses of nanosensors are as follows:
• Determination of Nutrients
Plant tissues’ nutrient contents can be evaluated by nanosensors.
• Disease Assessment
Nanosensors can find certain biomarkers linked to diseases and plant pathogens.
• Protein Interactions
Forster resonance energy transfer (FRET)-based optical nanosensors are used to investigate 
protein interactions.
FIGURE 1.3 Flowchart for the classification and mode of function of nanofertilizers across different 
aspects: action-based, nutrient-based, and consistency-based nanofertilizers.Editorial Overview of Nanotechnology in Plant Sciences 7
• Redox Reactions
Redox reactions in plants can be detected using electrochemical nanosensors, which monitor 
the precursors and products of metabolism.
• Hormone Detection
Nanosensors are able to recognize biological molecules, including hormones (Shaw 
et al., 2022).
1.2.4 Nanocarriers
Gene cassettes can be effectively delivered to plant cells by nanocarriers. Conventional gene trans￾plantation techniques have significant drawbacks, including high labor costs and limited transform￾ation efficiency. Using nanoparticles as transporters, nanotechnology provides an alternate strategy. 
Nanoparticles offer great efficiency and flexibility in the transfer of genetic material (DNA or RNA) 
to plant cells in various plant species. There are various types of nanoparticles that can be used as 
nanocarriers, among them, ZnO-NPs are some of the most significant nanocarriers used to improve 
plant growth. The impact of ZnO nanoparticles (ZnO-NPs) on plants varies depending on factors 
like plant type and nanoparticle size and shape. While high doses can be detrimental, many studies 
have found ways to mitigate the antagonistic effects of ZnO-NPs. Interestingly, plants seem to 
benefit from low doses and extended exposure. Additionally, functionalization techniques enhance 
nanoparticle stability, reducing negative effects on plants while improving efficacy (Beckers, et al., 
2021). Besides ZnO-NPs, other nanoparticles (like gold, silica, and carbon-based nanoparticles) 
have also found applications as nanocarriers. Some of applications of nanocarriers are as follows:
• Delivery of Nutrients
Nanomaterials increase nutrient absorption by plants by providing insecticides and fertilizers 
with larger specific surface areas.
• Agrochemical Carriers
By acting as special agrochemical carriers, nanoparticles provide more crop protection and 
precisely targeted, regulated nutrition supply.
FIGURE 1.4 How nanoparticles contribute to pest eradication and aid in genetic material delivery, nutrient 
transport, and nanoencapsulation.8 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
• Gene Transformation
Gene cassettes, containing elements for CRISPR-based genome editing, can be effectively 
delivered to plant cells by nanoparticles.
• Plant Regeneration
Following genetic alteration, nanotechnology can improve plants’ ability to regenerate from 
scratch (Irsad et al., 2020).
1.2.5 Nanoencapsulation
In the field of plant science, the term “nanoencapsulation” describes a procedure through which 
bioactive chemicals are encased in a thin, protective coating at the nanoscale. Improving the sta￾bility of bioactive chemicals is crucial once they have been extracted. This is accomplished by 
nanoencapsulation, which envelops these substances in a defensive layer.
In the process of nanoencapsulation, lipids, proteins, starches, dextrin, alginates, and fats are 
used to form thin films. This layer preserves the nutritional and functional properties of the bioactive 
substances by protecting them from environmental deterioration (Mun et al., 2021).
Nanotechnology has both advantages and challenges when it comes to its impact on plants.
1.2.6  Advantages of Nanotechnology in Plant Science
• Enhanced Nutrient Supply
Plants can absorb nutrients from nanoparticles more effectively.
• Specificity in Pesticide Delivery
Nanoparticles minimize damage to beneficial organisms while enabling accurate pest targeting.
• Enhanced Photosynthetic Capacity
By improving photosynthesis, nanoparticles promote stronger plant development.
• Increased Rate of Germination
Nanoparticles have a beneficial effect on the germination of seeds.
• Pathogenicity Management
By changing the behavior of pathogens, nanoparticles aid in the control of plant diseases. 
Plant defenses against stress are facilitated by the presence of nanoparticles.
1.2.7  Challenges of Nanotechnology in Plant Science
While nanoparticles offer advantages due to their unique chemical and physical properties, there 
have also been reports of toxicity and bioaccumulation. These concerns have led to restrictions on 
their use in agriculture. As a result, the full potential of nanoparticles remains relatively unexplored 
(Kumar et al., 2023).
1.3 NANOPARTICLE DELIVERY SYSTEMS
The delivery of nanoparticles into plants is an evolving field, with implications for biotechnology 
and agriculture. Researchers are focusing on distribution strategies and nanoparticle identification 
within plant tissues. Examining both aided and passive delivery techniques (such as using leaves and 
roots) has highlighted the challenges in nanoparticle delivery. Table 1.1 explains the factors affecting 
the use of nanoparticles in plant transport. Creative solutions, such as recognizing the stem as a 
novel site, aim to maximize transport efficiency. Recent research has deepened our understanding 
of the interactions between nanomaterials and plant tissues, revealing varied responses to different 
nanoparticle types during absorption and translocation processes. Unlike mammalian cells, plant 
cells have a complex structure with a lipid bilayer and a cell wall. Researchers have found that Editorial Overview of Nanotechnology in Plant Sciences 9
nanoparticle shape and size significantly influence uptake in plant cells, with a strict 20 nm size 
limit. Interestingly, gold nanospheres are not internalized by plant cells, while gold nanorods 
can translocate across the cell wall. The transport of gold nanorods into plant cells is an energy￾dependent process. Detection techniques are essential for studying nanoparticle interactions in 
plants and ongoing research holds promise for sustainable agriculture and environmental manage￾ment (Sembada et al., 2024).
Osmosis is the process by which water is absorbed through root hairs. These microscopic structures 
increase the surface area for absorption. Scientists have harnessed this concept to explore the uptake 
of nanoparticles through root hairs. Plants rely on essential nutrients, including macronutrients, like 
potassium, phosphorus, and nitrogen, as well as micronutrients, like iron, zinc, and copper, which 
they absorb from the soil through their roots. Nutrient absorption involves both passive and active 
transport pathways. Typically, concentration gradients drive passive diffusion, allowing smaller ions 
to enter root cells. Nanoparticles can infiltrate plants for various reasons, such as environmental 
exposure or research. Their impact depends on the particle type and intended application and can 
be both advantageous and potentially concerning. Nanoparticles are categorized by their size and 
composition, with unique properties like their optical, electrical, magnetic, and catalytic capabilities 
determined by their chemical makeup. Customizing nanoparticles for specific uses often involves 
considering both their chemistry and size (Horejs, 2022).
1.3.1 Nanomaterial Uptake and Transport in Plants
The application of nanomaterials and nanoparticles in agriculture has gained importance as a 
means of protecting crops from environmental hazards and enhancing agricultural yields. Major 
parameters influencing the effect of nanoparticles include their size and type, the method of applica￾tion, ambient conditions, the rhizospheric and phyllospheric environment, and plant species. Many 
nanoparticle application methods, including foliar, root, and seed priming, have been used recently 
to boost crop development. The best way to apply nanoparticles and the potential for the transloca￾tion of nanoparticles from root to shoot, and vice versa, or to different plant tissues are crucial con￾siderations. These questions are incompletely understood and additional research is required to fully 
TABLE 1.1
Factors affecting the use of nanoparticles for applications involving plant transport
1 Required application Certain types of nanoparticles with the right qualities are needed for different purposes, 
such the delivery of nutrients, the transfer of genetic material, or the transportation of 
pesticides.
2 Type of nanoparticle The choice of nanoparticle depends on the type of payload, which could include nutrients, 
genetic material (DNA or RNA), insecticides, or other items.
3 Nanoparticle size 
and solubility
Some forms of cargo are better suited for specific types of nanoparticles as the size and 
solubility of the payload may have an impact on the choice of nanoparticle.
4 Delivery of target The type of nanoparticle utilized should allow for customized distribution to certain plant 
tissues or cells, if necessary.
5 Biocompatibility Biocompatible nanoparticles are required for some applications, such as those requiring the 
transport of genetic components or relationships with living things.
6 Environmental 
considerations
Environmental factors, including safety and biodegradability, are significantly impacted by 
the usage of nanoparticles in ecological and agricultural applications.
7 Shape and size The capacity of nanoparticles to penetrate plant cells or tissues can be influenced by their 
size and form, with certain forms or sizes working better in particular situations.
8 Plant or crop type The selection of nanoparticle type may be influenced by the requirements and reactions of 
various plant species or crops for applications based on nanoparticles.10 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
understand the methods by which nanoparticles can enter various plant organs and how they move 
across cells to influence a range of physiological and molecular processes. The absorption process of 
nanoparticles through seed priming, foliar exposure, and root application and their potential trans￾portation mechanisms inside plants are impacted by a variety of parameters that have not yet been 
made evident. There is, however, little concrete evidence of the plant transport of nanoparticles. 
The transfer of nanoparticles into animals through plants and their influence on the consumers of 
plant products, potentially affecting food security and human health, is a concern due to research 
indicating that they may persist in edible plant components and be conveyed to consumers of plant 
produce along the food chain. Particular attention is being paid to the effects of plant species, sur￾face charge, and particle size on the absorption and transport of agricultural nanoparticles. These 
effects include how agricultural nanoparticles are absorbed and transported by plants, as well as 
their capacity to influence the physiological processes that are inherent in agricultural plants (Raliya 
et al., 2016).
1.3.2  Uptake of Nanoparticles Through Shoots and Roots
The passage of nanomaterials through plants is crucial because it can provide insights into the areas 
of plants that they can penetrate, as well as potential aggregation sites. Applying nanoparticles to 
plant roots initially ensures optimal dissemination. Nanoparticles can flow from roots to shoots and 
leaves, guided by transport mechanisms like the xylem. Nanoparticles moving through the phloem 
may accumulate in “sink” organs, like grains and fruits. Just like in animals, nanoparticles tend 
to concentrate in specific plant tissues and organs. By studying these processes, we can harness 
nanomaterials for sustainable agriculture and environmental management (Chichiriccò et al., 2015). 
As stated earlier, young leaves, fruits, grains, and flowers are known to require significant quantities 
of sap and nutrients, as well as being strong absorbers of nanomaterials that pass through the plant 
circulatory system (Dan et al., 2015). After treatment, nanoparticles are safe for animals and people 
to eat. Some nanoparticles can be stored in plant tissues, while others can be gradually changed or 
degraded.
The xylem is responsible for carrying nutrients and water from roots to shoots. Nanoparticles 
can pass through this structure. Multiple channels allow for the transport of nanoparticles inside the 
xylem, including the following:
• Initial Penetration
There are several ways that nanoparticles can infiltrate the plant system, including through the 
microscopic holes on the surface of leaves, which are called stomata. Stomatal apertures 
allow nanoparticles to penetrate into plants. Root hairs also have the ability to absorb 
nanoparticles from the soil.
• Apoplastic Transport
The extracellular area that surrounds plant cells is referred to as the apoplast, which includes 
cell barriers, intercellular gaps, and cell-to-cell gaps. Once within the plant, nanoparticles 
can travel through intercellular gaps and cell walls via diffusion. Diffusion is the passive 
migration of nanoparticles from higher concentration regions to lower concentration 
regions.
• Bulk Flow
The xylem’s water circulation facilitates the transport of nanoparticles and is the mechanism 
by which water moves from the soil to leaves and other plant parts through xylem tissue. 
The phrase “mass flow” is used to describe the passage of bulky substances through the 
phloem, such as sucrose.
• Symplasmic Transport
Nanoparticles can also move via microscopic channels called plasmodesmata, which link 
neighboring plant cells, to move through cytoplasm. The continuous cytoplasm that Editorial Overview of Nanotechnology in Plant Sciences 11
neighboring plant cells share is referred to as the symplast. After entering the symplast, 
nanoparticles travel across cells with the help of carrier proteins through active cell mem￾brane transportation. Specific channels for the transport of solutes and water permit 
charged nanoparticles to flow through the plant system. The plasmodial symplast allows 
nanoparticles to penetrate without going through extracellular gaps. Nanoparticles traverse 
cell membranes directly during transcellular transport (Su et al., 2019).
1.4 NANOGENOMICS
With the application of genome editing (GE) technology, plants with increased disease and insect 
resistance and herbicides have been produced to increase yields and nutritional value. Many GE tools 
have been developed recently, including the versatile and efficient clustered regularly interspaced 
short palindromic repeats (CRISPR), which are made with nucleases. Transgenes or CRISPR are 
first introduced into plants using particular gene delivery methods in the GE process. However, there 
are a number of disadvantages to genetic engineering technologies, including the time-consuming 
and sophisticated procedures, the potential for low transformation efficiency, DNA integration into 
the host genome, and tissue damage. Nanotechnology presents one novel and cutting-edge strategy 
for resolving these problems. The use of nanoparticle-mediated gene delivery is preferred over con￾ventional biomolecular approaches because it improves the transformation efficiency for both tem￾poral (transient) and permanent (stable) genetic alterations in a variety of plant species. Even with 
the development of several cutting-edge technologies, there are still certain obstacles to overcome in 
the process of creating short-term plant breeding strategies (Rawat et al., 2023).
1.4.1 Nanosequencing
Nanopore sequencing technology plays a significant role in studying plant organellar genomes, par￾ticularly mitochondrial and chloroplast DNA. To date, it has successfully sequenced over 100 plant 
mitochondrial genomes and around 80 chloroplast genomes. This robust technology decodes the 
complex and dynamic nature of these genomes, surpassing traditional sequencing methods. Its long￾read capabilities are especially valuable for addressing the challenges related to organellar DNA’s 
structural complexity and repetitive sequences. Nanopore sequencing has fostered groundbreaking 
applications in plant organellar genomics, marking a substantial leap in the field (Sawicki et al., 
2024). However, its shortcomings include high error rates and complex processing needs, which 
need to be addressed along with potential fixes and opportunities for further technical advancement. 
The size and structural complexity of plant mitochondrial genomes vary greatly, spanning from 109 
kb to over 10 Mb. Gene loss, horizontal gene transfer, and frequent recombination are some of the 
reasons for this variety. Plant mtDNA has a larger variety of genes than animal mtDNA, including 
genes that encode ribosomal proteins, tRNAs, electron transport chain components, and distinct 
functional elements. Despite this, there are differences in the structure and content of cpDNA 
between plant lineages, suggesting a convoluted evolutionary path that has included gene duplica￾tion and transfer.
The study of plant evolution, phylogeny, and barcoding has been completely transformed by 
recent developments in molecular biology and genomics, especially with regard to the investiga￾tion of chloroplast and mitochondrial genomes. Long-reads of native DNA can be produced using 
nanopore sequencing, which makes it possible to map the whole genome and resolve complicated 
genomic areas and repetitive sequences. The capacity to construct whole mitochondrial and chloro￾plast genomes has been greatly improved by this technology, making it possible to conduct in-depth 
comparative genomic research across a wide range of plant species. Furthermore, the precision of 
plant barcoding has increased due to nanopore sequencing, making it possible to precisely iden￾tify species and trace plant lineage relationships, which are crucial aspects in ecological research 12 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
and biodiversity protection. Although nanopore sequencing has revolutionized the field of plant 
organellar genomics, there are still drawbacks and restrictions. The comparatively high error rate of 
nanopore sequencing in comparison to other well-established methods, like Illumina sequencing, 
is a major limitation. Even while error rates have been declining gradually as the technology has 
advanced, they are still a problem, especially for precise applications like quantitative gene expres￾sion analysis or single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) identification. To guarantee data accuracy, 
this calls for the employment of complex bioinformatics tools, such as error-correction algorithms. 
Technical obstacles continue to exist as well, such as the requirements for higher molecular weight 
and high-quality DNA samples and the complex nature of data administration and processing as a 
result of the volume of data produced. Because of the larger datasets produced, nanopore sequencing 
requires long periods of time and powerful computers to process and store the data. Furthermore, 
although nanopore sequencing can handle larger and more complex genomes, its accuracy varies 
depending on the specific organism being researched and its genetic background. Certain samples, 
such as those with notably elevated repeated sequences or GC content, may still present difficul￾ties and need the use of alternative sequencing techniques or specific sample preparation methods 
(Henry et al., 2022).
1.5 NANOTECHNOLOGY-BASED GENE DELIVERY
The tremendous effectiveness and versatility of nanoparticle-mediated gene delivery techniques, 
which leverage nanotechnology, offer a technological edge over traditional methods. Recent studies 
have paid a great deal of attention to using nanotechnology in agriculture, particularly the use of 
nanosensors, nanopesticides, and nanofertilizers. Additionally, the transport of genes into plants using 
nanoparticle-mediated gene transformation has been widely employed. Therefore, nanoparticles, 
which are small particles that range in size from 1 to 100 nm and have variable physical and chem￾ical properties, may act as useful vectors to transfer biological cargo into plants while avoiding the 
plasma membrane and cell wall. Specifically, it is becoming more and more important for molecular 
biological cargo to enter plant cells, including proteins, RNA, and DNA. Therefore, boosting the 
efficiency of transformation in agricultural plant biotechnology could be achieved via the use of 
nanoparticle-mediated biomolecule delivery, which could be able to solve the drawbacks of con￾ventional methods for delivering biomolecules (Mirón-Barroso et al., 2021). A few common gen￾etic transformation techniques are electroporation, PEG delivery systems, agrobacterium-mediated 
transformation, and gene gun-mediated transformation. Compared to conventional gene transform￾ation techniques, nanoparticles are able to penetrate cells on their own. Nanoparticles (NPs) come 
in a variety of forms, including metal-based, silicon-based, peptide-based, clay nanosheet, polymer￾based, and DNA nanostructures. Every kind of NP has unique properties and purposes that may result 
in temporary or permanent alterations. NPs have been employed extensively to modify plants. For 
instance, stable transgenic seeds can be created instantly and without regeneration by loading DNA 
onto magnetic nanoparticles and transferring them into pollen. The effectiveness of this approach is 
still up for debate, though. One study successfully demonstrated the ability of nanomagnetic beads 
to close the pollen germination gap by allowing foreign genes to enter maize pollen.
The biocompatibility of carbon nanotubes, both single- and multiwalled carbon nanotubes, is 
essential. Carbon nanotubes can be made to enter cell walls and carry out transitory transformations, 
as well as having the ability to load a huge amount of plasmid DNA by increasing their aspect ratio. 
Furthermore, research has demonstrated that carbon nanotubes may both shield intact plant cells 
from deterioration and transport RNA into them via electrostatic adsorption.
The majority of NPs do not incorporate foreign genes into host chromosomes; instead, they direct 
temporary transformations. Because this does not result in heritable progeny, NP-mediated gene 
transformation has the benefits of reduced cycle time, improved expression efficiency, biosafety, and 
ease of use. Additionally, these properties may get around regulations governing genome alteration Editorial Overview of Nanotechnology in Plant Sciences 13
and allay public worries regarding the safety of transgenic crops (Jat et al., 2020). Different trans￾portation methods for nanoparticles are presented in Table 1.2.
1.5.1 Procedure to Prepare Nanomaterials for Gene Transformation
Figure 1.5 explains how nanoparticles are prepared, modified, and transferred into vectors and 
plants. There are several varieties of nanoparticles that have been used. Through diffusion, endo￾cytosis, plasmodesmata, or physical and chemical destruction, nanoparticles can be used to transfer 
DNA, RNA, and proteins into intact plant cells, resulting in either progressive transformations or fast 
transformations. Plant suspension cells and mature plants are the targets of NP-mediated plant gene 
alteration. Mature plants absorb nanoparticles mostly through their roots and leaves, from which 
the vascular system later transfers them. NP-mediated plant gene transformation has a number of 
benefits over traditional techniques.
1.6 FUTURE DIRECTIONS AND CHALLENGES OF USING 
NANOPARTICLES IN PLANT SCIENCE
Advances in nanotechnology have made it possible to get around the limitations of traditional 
approaches. Cunningham et al. (2018) state that nanoparticles (NPs) hold promise for the passive 
transport of DNA, RNA, and proteins in a species-independent manner. Numerous transform￾ation techniques exist. According to Niazian et al. (2017), gene expression at inserted loci varies 
due to random DNA integration induced by the AMT approach, which also affects native plant 
genes. Another method, called “biolistic DNA delivery”, targets plant tissues directly with a high￾pressure gene cannon and randomly integrates DNA into chromosomal areas across membranes 
and the cell wall. As a result, tissues are destroyed and many insertions occur at random locations 
across the plant genome (Toda et al., 2019). Consequently, a significant constraint for GE capacity 
is plant transition. As a result, many scientists are still researching how to deliver biomodified, 
conjugated complexes into plant cells in order to create novel transformation techniques that are 
simple, reliable, and effective. Nanotechnology is a relatively modern science and studies in this 
field have greatly aided in the advancement of molecular biology. Nanotechnology offers effective 
TABLE 1.2
Different transportation methods for nanoparticles
Nanoparticles Transport Method Advantages Reference
Magnetic NPs Co-culture Prevents host limitations. Tang & Lo, 2013
Metal-based NPs Biolistic Applicable across various plant species and doesn’t 
require specific developmental stages.
O’Brien & Lummis, 
2006
Silicon-based NPs Microinjection Enables the precise and targeted delivery of 
nanoparticles to specific cells or locations within 
organisms.
Can introduce a wide range of nanoparticles, 
making it a versatile technique.
Zhang & Yu, 2008
Conjugated 
polymer NPs
Electroporation Applicable to various plant species and enables 
efficient delivery within a short time frame.
Young & Dean, 
2015
Carbon-coated iron Magnetic field Facilitates highly targeted and localized delivery to 
specific plant tissues or cells.
Provides precise control over the release of 
nanoparticles.
González-Melendi 
et al., 200814 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
methods for producing genetically modified organisms (GMOs) by combining biomodified 
molecules to form binding complexes and introducing them into plant cells (Abd-Elsalam et al., 
2020; Demirer et al., 2021). Incorporating nanotechnology with current molecular technologies 
may help to remove obstacles to biotransformation and accelerate the development of genetically 
modified plants. A cutting-edge technique for creating crops for sustainable agricultural systems 
is nanomaterial (NM) engineering (Panpatte et al., 2016). While optimizing the use of scarce 
resources, such as water or nutrients, the creation of nanodevices and NMs can lessen the impact 
of major pressures on the production of food and energy (Wang et al., 2019). By cutting down on 
the time needed to eliminate undesirable genes and providing access to crucial genes from sizable 
plantations, nanotechnology approaches have enhanced the accuracy of plant breeding and created 
novel, exciting opportunities for gene selection and transition (Ramírez-Rodríguez et al., 2020). It 
has been effectively demonstrated that the bioconjugate combination of transgenes and NPs may be 
magnetoected in dicots (Zhang et al., 2019). The primary reason that nanotechnology-based gene 
transformation delivery outperforms conventional biomolecular methods is that it increases the 
efficiency of transformation for both temporary (transient) and permanent (stable) genetic changes 
in a range of plant species. Therefore, molecular production techniques may be used as alternatives 
to conventional techniques in agriculture to coordinate management plans and minimize uncer￾tainty. Against the backdrop of population growth and climate change, most modern agricultural 
methods developed during the green revolution have proven to be unsustainable (Lowry et al., 
2019). Reliable solutions for sustainable farming could be provided by nanotechnology, including 
the efficient management of pests and fertilizers, reductions in the environmental effects of food 
production, and the mitigation of the effects of climate change (Hofmann et al., 2020). In the 
emerging topic of plant nanotechnology, engineered nanometer scales have been designed to ana￾lyze plant activity (Wang et al., 2019; Kah et al., 2019; Lowry et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2016). 
Biomolecules can now be delivered into plants using nanomaterials. It is also possible to con￾trol how they are distributed and transported throughout plant cells and organelles. Several kinds 
FIGURE 1.5 The preparation, synthesis, and transfer of nanoparticles to plant systems, covering various 
transport methods, including spraying, microinjecting, and biolistics.Editorial Overview of Nanotechnology in Plant Sciences 15
of NM can improve soil health and crop productivity. By adding minerals to nutrients (which 
are classified as either macro- or micronutrients), nanofertilizers serve as carriers for additional 
materials (Kah et al., 2018). According to DeRosa et al. (2010) and Kah et al. (2018), there is a 
notable 18%–29% improvement in the efficacy of nanofertilizers compared to synthetic fertilizers. 
Nanofertilizers are also excellent at limiting nutrients inside NMs. Enhancing transportation infra￾structure can help to increase the efficiency and absorption of elements in synthetic fertilizers. 
According to Liu and Lal (2015), these elements are copper, iron, manganese, zinc, molybdenum, 
and silver. Silver nanoparticles can significantly increase the rate of seed germination in maize, 
watermelon (Citrullus lanatus), and pumpkin (Cucurbita pepo L.) by exerting a mildly toxic effect 
that stimulates seed germination (Acharya et al., 2020; Yan et al., 2022). Research has shown that 
when comparing natural fertilizers to synthetic formulations, natural fertilizers can significantly 
reduce the amount of fertilizer needed in both soil and foliar application. This can improve effi￾ciency and minimize environmental impact. The germination of lettuce (Lactuca sativa) can be 
enhanced by titanium dioxide NM electrospraying. (Adisa et al., 2019).
Nanopesticides have a greater potential capability than synthetic pesticides. As a result, 
nanopesticides are essential for the sustainable and successful control of a variety of pests. They can 
also reduce the need for agrochemicals, which lessens the risk to the environment. These insecticides 
exhibit behaviors that are distinct from those of synthetic pesticides, contributing to their increased 
efficacy (Kah et al., 2019). The ability of active ingredients to dissolve facilitates their migration and 
deterioration in microorganisms living in soil. Moreover, NP-based insecticides are less harmful to 
the environment compared to synthetic pesticides and increase the solubility of aluminum (Kah and 
Hofmann, 2014).
1.6.1  Challenges in GE and NP-​Mediated GE in Plants
Through the effective delivery of modified biomolecules as genetic cargo to specific plant cells, GE 
techniques can transform the genomes of plant cells (Demirer and Landry, 2017). Genetic trans￾formation is delayed by the inefficiency of the current means of delivering biomolecular cargo. 
Furthermore, non-specific site integration, harm to plant tissues, non-significant gene expression 
following integration, tissue specificity, and species specificity are among the other disadvantages 
of these approaches that hinder successful GE (Altpeter et al., 2016). Additionally, these methods 
only work with a small number of hosts and they interfere with transgenic plants’ ability to repro￾duce and regenerate after alteration. Due to particular usage limits, some approaches, such as AMT 
and gene gun-based transformation, are not appropriate for wider implementation. Nevertheless, 
they have experienced tremendous success and are now well known. Since multiplex GE using 
CRISPR/Cas9 technology was introduced, research on GE has advanced significantly (Ma et al., 
2015). Nonetheless, a few issues prevent genetic cargo from being delivered reliably. For example, 
plant cells, in contrast to animal cells, have an extra cell wall that gives them rigidity, a distinct form, 
and the ability to proliferate while serving as a physical barrier against outside influences (Carpita 
et al., 1979). Its stiff structure and small pore size prevent most genetic cargo from passing through 
it. Despite being a popular genetic transformation technique, AMT’s effectiveness varies greatly 
depending on the host species and can result in the unwanted integration of DNA into the host 
genome (Baltes et al., 2017). On the other hand, NPs have been shown to be effective genetic cargo 
materials due to their versatility and efficacy in a number of situations. However, despite their great 
potential, a few obstacles prevent NPs from being used effectively in GE (Cox et al., 2016). As seen 
in Figure 1.4, nanophytotoxicity is a detrimental effect of NMs on plant growth, which results in 
the hazardous discharge of NMs. According to several studies (Pachapur et al., 2016; Rastogi et al., 
2017), plants that absorb nanoparticles suffer some phytotoxicity as a result of the NPs obstructing 
the plant’s vascular system, causing structural damage to the plant’s DNA, and inducing oxidative 
stress. Additionally, the toxicity of silver nanoparticles negatively regulates plant reproduction. It is 16 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
crucial to concentrate on the growth, deposition, and transfer of plants that are devoid of neurotoxins 
for the upcoming generations. More research is necessary to understand how targeted NPs deposit 
and diffuse into other plant cells after application, even if the quantity of NPs needed as genetic 
cargo is too small to be detrimental to the environment or the plant.
1.7 CONCLUSION
Although therapeutic and diagnostic techniques have changed over recent years due to the great 
advancements of nanotechnology in the biomedical sciences, comprehension of the uptake, mobil￾ization, and accumulation of nanoparticles in plants is still in its infancy. In-depth research is 
required to determine how nanomaterials (NMs) affect plant development and agroecosystems, as 
well as create clever uses of nanotechnology for agricultural advancement. In this chapter, we briefly 
reviewed the use of NMs in plant research and offered a clear description of prominent NM–plant 
interactions, including absorption, biological impacts, and mobilization processes. We also reviewed 
the main uses of polymeric soft NMs in plants, along with possible applications. This could lead to 
safer and more innovative ways of delivering biomolecules and the development of new approaches 
in plant genetic engineering, all of which could improve plant defenses, promote the growth and 
development of plants, and eventually increase crop yields. Ultimately, interdisciplinary research is 
essential to closing the knowledge gaps in plant nanotechnology and advancing the application of 
NMs in agriculture.
Recent research has demonstrated that considerable strides have been made in the synthesis of 
NMs and their use in medical diagnostics and treatments. Research on NMs that can be applied 
to plants is still largely absent, though. Based on ongoing research and recent results, more 
study is required to better understand plant absorption mechanisms, increase the synthesis and 
biofunctionalization of NMs for usage in plants, and improve the sustainability of agroecosystems. 
Additionally, applications must be expanded to encompass significant parts of plant physiology that 
have not yet been discovered. Though plant genetics has advanced tremendously, a major obstacle 
still exists in the transfer of foreign DNA/enzymes for genome editing.
The delivery of drugs is undoubtedly aided by the safe profile, high loading capacity, and superior 
cargo protection of hydrogel- and polymeric-based NPs. Furthermore, the controlled (temporal and 
spatial) release of cargo in response to external stimuli (UV, NIR, sound waves, etc.) has been 
accomplished using specific NMs. Finally, by encouraging the activation of multidisciplinary strat￾egies to develop plant nanotechnology, smart nanomaterial synthesis and creation may be achieved. 
In order to do this, cooperative projects that combine interdisciplinary backgrounds, like engin￾eering, chemistry, genetics, plant biology, and biochemistry, may open up new avenues for the field 
of phytonanotechnology.
REFERENCES
Abd-Elsalam, Kamel A., Mousa A. Alghuthaymi, Ashwag Shami, Margarita S. Rubina, Sergey S. Abramchuk, 
Eleonora V. Shtykova, and Alexander Yu. Vasil’kov. “Copper-chitosan nanocomposite hydrogels against 
aflatoxigenic Aspergillus flavus from dairy cattle feed.” Journal of Fungi 6, no. 3 (2020): 112. https://
doi.org/10.3390/jof6030112
Acharya, Pratibha, Guddadadarangavvanahally K. Jayaprakasha, Kevin M. Crosby, John L. Jifon, and 
Bhimanagouda S. Patil. “Nanoparticle-mediated seed priming improves germination, growth, yield, 
and quality of watermelons (Citrullus lanatus) at multi-locations in Texas.” Scientific Reports 10, no. 1 
(2020): 5037. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-61696-7
Adisa, Ishaq O., Venkata L. Reddy Pullagurala, Jose R. Peralta-Videa, Christian O. Dimkpa, Wade H. 
Elmer, Jorge L. Gardea-Torresdey, and Jason C. White. “Recent advances in nano-enabled fertilizers 
and pesticides: A critical review of mechanisms of action.” Environmental Science: Nano 6, no. 7 
(2019): 2002–2030. https://doi.org/10.1039/C9EN00265KEditorial Overview of Nanotechnology in Plant Sciences 17
Altpeter, Fredy, Nathan M. Springer, Laura E. Bartley, Ann E. Blechl, Thomas P. Brutnell, Vitaly Citovsky, Liza 
J. Conrad et al. “Advancing crop transformation in the era of genome editing.” The Plant Cell 28, no. 7 
(2016): 1510–1520.
Baltes, Nicholas J., Javier Gil-Humanes, and Daniel F. Voytas. “Genome engineering and agricul￾ture: Opportunities and challenges.” Progress in Molecular Biology and Translational Science 149 
(2017): 1–26.
Bapat, Gandhali, Chaitali Labade, Amol Chaudhari, and Smita Zinjarde. “Silica nanoparticle based techniques 
for extraction, detection, and degradation of pesticides.” Advances in Colloid and Interface Science 237 
(2016): 1–14. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cis.2016.06.001
Beckers, Sebastian J., Alexander H.J. Staal, Christine Rosenauer, Mangala Srinivas, Katharina Landfester, and 
Frederik R. Wurm. “Targeted drug delivery for sustainable crop protection: Transport and stability of 
polymeric nanocarriers in plants.” Advanced Science 8, no. 11 (2021): 2100067. https://doi.org/10.1002/
advs.202100067
Carpita, Nicholas, Dario Sabularse, David Montezinos, and Deborah P. Delmer. “Determination of the pore size 
of cell walls of living plant cells.” Science 205, no. 4411 (1979): 1144–1147. https://doi.org/10.1126/
science.205.4411.1144
Chen, Jen-Tsung, ed. Advanced Nanotechnology in Plants: Methods and Applications. United States: CRC 
Press, (2024). ISBN: 9781003826705, 1003826709.
Chichiriccò, Giuseppe, and Anna Poma. “Penetration and toxicity of nanomaterials in higher plants.” 
Nanomaterials 5, no. 2 (2015): 851–873. https://doi.org/10.3390/nano5020851
Cox, Ashley, P. Venkatachalam, Shivendra Sahi, and Nilesh Sharma. “Silver and titanium dioxide nanoparticle 
toxicity in plants: A review of current research.” Plant Physiology and Biochemistry 107 (2016): 147–
163. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plaphy.2016.05.022
Cunningham, Francis J., Natalie S. Goh, Gozde S. Demirer, Juliana L. Matos, and Markita P. Landry. 
“Nanoparticle-mediated delivery towards advancing plant genetic engineering.” Trends in Biotechnology
36, no. 9 (2018): 882–897. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tibtech.2018.03.009
Dan, Yongbo, Weilan Zhang, Runmiao Xue, Xingmao Ma, Chady Stephan, and Honglan Shi. “Characterization 
of gold nanoparticle uptake by tomato plants using enzymatic extraction followed by single-particle 
inductively coupled plasma–mass spectrometry analysis.” Environmental Science & Technology 49, 
no. 5 (2015): 3007–3014.
Demirer, Gozde S., and Markita P. Landry. “Delivering genes to plants.” Chemical Engineering Progress 113, 
no. 4 (2017): 40–45.
Demirer, Gozde S., Tallyta N. Silva, Christopher T. Jackson, Jason B. Thomas, David W. Ehrhardt, Seung Y. 
Rhee, Jenny C. Mortimer, and Markita P. Landry. “Nanotechnology to advance CRISPR–Cas genetic 
engineering of plants.” Nature Nanotechnology 16, no. 3 (2021): 243–250.
DeRosa, Maria C., Carlos Monreal, Morris Schnitzer, Ryan Walsh, and Yasir Sultan. “Nanotechnology in 
fertilizers.” Nature Nanotechnology 5, no. 2 (2010): 91–91.
Epelle, Emmanuel I., Patrick U. Okoye, Siobhan Roddy, Burcu Gunes, and Jude A. Okolie. “Advances in the 
applications of nanomaterials for wastewater treatment.” Environments 9, no. 11 (2022): 141. https://doi.
org/10.3390/environments9110141
Giraldo, Juan Pablo, and Sebastian Kruss. “Nanosensors for monitoring plant health.” Nature Nanotechnology
18, no. 2 (2023): 107–108. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41565-022-01307-w
González-Melendi, Pablo, Rodrigo Fernández-Pacheco, María José Coronado, Eduardo Corredor, Pilar S. 
Testillano, María Carmen Risueño, Clara Marquina, M. Ricardo Ibarra, Diego Rubiales, and Alejandro 
Pérez-de-Luque. “Nanoparticles as smart treatment-delivery systems in plants: Assessment of 
different techniques of microscopy for their visualization in plant tissues.” Annals of Botany 101, no. 1 
(2008): 187–195.
Henry, Robert J. “Progress in plant genome sequencing.” Applied Biosciences 1, no. 2 (2022): 113–128. https://
doi.org/10.3390/applbiosci1020008
Hofmann, Thilo, Gregory Victor Lowry, Subhasis Ghoshal, Nathalie Tufenkji, Davide Brambilla, John Robert 
Dutcher, Leanne M. Gilbertson et al. “Technology readiness and overcoming barriers to sustainably 
implement nanotechnology-enabled plant agriculture.” Nature Food 1, no. 7 (2020): 416–425.
Horejs, Christine. “Nanoparticle transport in plants.” Nature Reviews Materials 7, no. 1 (2022): 5–5. https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41578-021-00403-y18 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
Irsad, Neetu Talreja, Divya Chauhan, Carlos A. Rodríguez, Adriana C. Mera, and Mohammad Ashfaq. 
“Nanocarriers: an emerging tool for micronutrient delivery in plants.” Plant Micronutrients: Deficiency 
and Toxicity Management (2020): 373–387. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-49856-6_16
Jat, Sanjeev K., Jaydeep Bhattacharya, and Manoj K. Sharma. “Nanomaterial based gene delivery: A promising 
method for plant genome engineering.” Journal of Materials Chemistry B 8, no. 19 (2020): 4165–4175. 
https://doi.org/10.1039/D0TB00217H
Kah, Melanie, and Thilo Hofmann. “Nanopesticide research: Current trends and future priorities.” Environment 
International 63 (2014): 224–235.
Kah, Melanie, Nathalie Tufenkji, and Jason C. White. “Nano-enabled strategies to enhance crop nutrition and 
protection.” Nature Nanotechnology 14, no. 6 (2019): 532–540.
Kah, Melanie, Rai Singh Kookana, Alexander Gogos, and Thomas Daniel Bucheli. “A critical evaluation of 
nanopesticides and nanofertilizers against their conventional analogues.” Nature Nanotechnology 13, 
no. 8 (2018): 677–684.
Khan, M. Nasir, M. Mobin, Zahid Khorshid Abbas, Khalid A. AlMutairi, and Zahid H. Siddiqui. “Role of 
nanomaterials in plants under challenging environments.” Plant Physiology and Biochemistry 110 
(2017): 194–209. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plaphy.2016.05.038
Kumari, Avnesh, Varnika Rana, Sudesh Kumar Yadav, and Vinay Kumar. “Nanotechnology as a powerful 
tool in plant sciences: Recent developments, challenges and perspectives.” Plant Nano Biology 5 
(2023): 100046. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plana.2023.100046
Liu, Ruiqiang, and Rattan Lal. “Potentials of engineered nanoparticles as fertilizers for increasing agronomic 
productions.” Science of the Total Environment 514 (2015): 131–139.
Lowry, Gregory V., Astrid Avellan, and Leanne M. Gilbertson. “Opportunities and challenges for nanotech￾nology in the agri-tech revolution.” Nature Nanotechnology 14, no. 6 (2019): 517–522.
Ma, Xingliang, Qunyu Zhang, Qinlong Zhu, Wei Liu, Yan Chen, Rong Qiu, Bin Wang et al. “A robust CRISPR/
Cas9 system for convenient, high-efficiency multiplex genome editing in monocot and dicot plants.” 
Molecular Plant 8, no. 8 (2015): 1274–1284.
Mastronardi, Emily, Phepafatso Tsae, Xueru Zhang, Carlos Monreal, and Maria C. DeRosa. “Strategic role 
of nanotechnology in fertilizers: Potential and limitations.” Nanotechnologies in Food and Agriculture
(2015): 25–67. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-14024-7_2
Mirón-Barroso, Sofía, Elena B. Domènech, and Sonia Trigueros. “Nanotechnology-based strategies to 
overcome current barriers in gene delivery.” International Journal of Molecular Sciences 22, no. 16 
(2021): 8537. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms22168537
Mun, Hakmin, and Helen E. Townley. “Nanoencapsulation of plant volatile organic compounds to improve 
their biological activities.” Planta Medica 87, no. 03 (2021): 236–251. https://doi.org/10.1055/
a-1289-4505
Niazian, Mohsen, Seyed Ahmad Sadat Noori, Petr Galuszka, and Seyed Mohammad Mahdi Mortazavian. 
“Tissue culture-based Agrobacterium-mediated and in Planta transformation methods.” Czech 
Journal of Genetics and Plant Breeding 53, no. 4 (2017): 133–143. https://doi.org/10.17221/177/
2016-CJGPB
O’brien, John A., and Sarah CR Lummis. “Biolistic transfection of neuronal cultures using a hand-held gene 
gun.” Nature Protocols 1, no. 2 (2006): 977–981.
Pachapur, Vinayak Laxman, A. Dalila Larios, Maximiliano Cledón, Satinder Kaur Brar, Mausam Verma, and 
Rao Y. Surampalli. “Behavior and characterization of titanium dioxide and silver nanoparticles in soils.” 
Science of the Total Environment 563 (2016): 933–943.
Panpatte, Deepak G., Yogeshvari K. Jhala, Harsha N. Shelat, and Rajababu V. Vyas. “Nanoparticles: The next 
generation technology for sustainable agriculture.” In Microbial Inoculants in Sustainable Agricultural 
Productivity: Vol. 2: Functional Applications. Springer, New Delhi: Vol. 2: Functional Applications 
(2016): 289–300.
Raliya, Ramesh, Christina Franke, Sanmathi Chavalmane, Remya Nair, Nathan Reed, and Pratim Biswas. 
“Quantitative understanding of nanoparticle uptake in watermelon plants.” Frontiers in Plant Science 7 
(2016): 1288. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2016.01288
Ramírez-Rodríguez, Gloria B., Gregorio Dal Sasso, Francisco J. Carmona, Cristina Miguel-Rojas, Alejandro 
Pérez-de-Luque, Norberto Masciocchi, Antonietta Guagliardi, and José M. Delgado-López. “Engineering 
biomimetic calcium phosphate nanoparticles: A green synthesis of slow-release multinutrient (NPK) 
nanofertilizers.” ACS Applied Bio Materials 3, no. 3 (2020): 1344–1353.Editorial Overview of Nanotechnology in Plant Sciences 19
Rastogi, Anshu, Marek Zivcak, Oksana Sytar, Hazem M. Kalaji, Xiaolan He, Sonia Mbarki, and Marian Brestic. 
“Impact of metal and metal oxide nanoparticles on plant: a critical review.” Frontiers in Chemistry 5 
(2017): 78.
Rawat, Sapna, Abhishek Singh, Vishnu D. Rajput, Ragini Sharma, Saglara Mandzhieva, and Awani Kumar 
Singh. “Nanobiotechnological approaches for improved plant breeding.” In Nanotechnology for 
Sustainable Agriculture, pp. 307–323. Apple Academic Press, 2023. ISBN: 9781003333128
Sawicki, Jakub, Katarzyna Krawczyk, Łukasz Paukszto, Mateusz Maździarz, Mateusz Kurzyński, Joanna 
Szablińska-Piernik, and Monika Szczecińska. “Nanopore sequencing technology as an emerging tool for 
diversity studies of plant organellar genomes.” Diversity 16, no. 3 (2024): 173. https://doi.org/10.3390/
d16030173
Sembada, Anca Awal, and I. Wuled Lenggoro. “Transport of nanoparticles into plants and their detection 
methods.” Nanomaterials 14, no. 2 (2024): 131. https://doi.org/10.3390/nano14020131
Shaw, Daniel S., and Kevin C. Honeychurch. “Nanosensor applications in plant science.” Biosensors 12, no. 9 
(2022): 675. https://doi.org/10.3390/bios12090675
Singh, Prashant M., Ankur Tiwari, Dipak Maity, and Sumit Saha. “Recent progress of nanomaterials in sustain￾able agricultural applications.” Journal of Materials Science 57, no. 24 (2022): 10836–10862. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s10853-022-07259-9
Su, Yiming, Vanessa Ashworth, Caroline Kim, Adeyemi S. Adeleye, Philippe Rolshausen, Caroline Roper, 
Jason White, and David Jassby. “Delivery, uptake, fate, and transport of engineered nanoparticles in 
plants: A critical review and data analysis.” Environmental Science: Nano 6, no. 8 (2019): 2311–2331.
Tang, Samuel CN, and Irene M.C. Lo. “Magnetic nanoparticles: Essential factors for sustainable environmental 
applications.” Water Research 47, no. 8 (2013): 2613–2632.
Tiwari, Pragya. “Nanotechnologies and sustainable agriculture for food and nutraceutical production: An 
update.” In Plant and Nanoparticles, pp. 315–337. Singapore: Springer Nature Singapore, 2022. https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-981-19-2503-0_12
Toda, Erika, Narumi Koiso, Arika Takebayashi, Masako Ichikawa, Takatoshi Kiba, Keishi Osakabe, Yuriko 
Osakabe, Hitoshi Sakakibara, Norio Kato, and Takashi Okamoto. “An efficient DNA-and selectable￾marker-free genome-editing system using zygotes in rice.” Nature Plants 5, no. 4 (2019): 363–368. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41477-019-0386-z
Ullah, Izhar, Muhammad Danish Toor, Abdul Basit, Heba I. Mohamed, Mohammed Gamal, Nouraiz Ahmed 
Tanveer, and Syed Tanveer Shah. “Nanotechnology: an integrated approach towards agriculture produc￾tion and environmental stress tolerance in plants.” Water, Air, & Soil Pollution 234, no. 11 (2023): 666. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11270-023-06675-0
Wang, Jeffrey W., Eduardo G. Grandio, Gregory M. Newkirk, Gozde S. Demirer, Salwan Butrus, Juan Pablo 
Giraldo, and Markita P. Landry. “Nanoparticle-mediated genetic engineering of plants.” Molecular Plant
12, no. 8 (2019): 1037–1040. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molp.2019.06.010
Wang, Quan, Zhen Wang, Mukesh Kumar Awasthi, Yahui Jiang, Ronghua Li, Xiuna Ren, Junchao Zhao, Feng 
Shen, Meijing Wang, and Zengqiang Zhang. “Evaluation of medical stone amendment for the reduc￾tion of nitrogen loss and bioavailability of heavy metals during pig manure composting.” Bioresource 
Technology 220 (2016): 297–304.
Yan, Yong, Xiaojun Zhu, Yue Yu, Chao Li, Zhaoliang Zhang, and Feng Wang. “Nanotechnology strategies 
for plant genetic engineering.” Advanced Materials 34, no. 7 (2022): 2106945. https://doi.org/10.1002/
adma.202106945
Young, Jennifer L., and David A. Dean. “Electroporation-mediated gene delivery.” Advances in Genetics 89 
(2015): 49–88.
Zhang, Yan, and Long-Chuan Yu. “Microinjection as a tool of mechanical delivery.” Current Opinion in 
Biotechnology 19, no. 5 (2008): 506–510.
Zhang, Yuxin, Jie Zhou, Shengnan Ma, Yiyan He, Jun Yang, and Zhongwei Gu. “Reactive oxygen species 
(ROS)-degradable polymeric nanoplatform for hypoxia-targeted gene delivery: unpacking DNA and 
reducing toxicity.” Biomacromolecules 20, no. 5 (2019): 1899–1913.20
20 DOI: 10.1201/9781003477730-3
2 Plant-Based Nanoparticle 
Synthesis
Srinivasan Kameswaran, Bellamkonda Ramesh, 
N. O. Gopal, and A. Sivashankar Reddy
2.1 INTRODUCTION
With numerous applications in the fields of science and technology, nanotechnology is a rapidly 
developing, interdisciplinary area (Nadeem et al. 2018; Saleem et al. 2019; Anjum et al. 2019; Gul 
et al. 2021; Shafiq et al. 2020; Chaudhary et al. 2020; Abbasi et al. 2020; Letchumanan et al. 2021; 
Jadoun et al. 2021; Anjum et al. 2021a; Khan et al. 2021a; Anjum et al. 2021b; Andleeb et al. 2021; 
Malik et al. 2023). To create innovative methods for producing and managing nanoparticles (NPs), 
this field integrates fundamental ideas from several areas, including biology, physics, engineering, 
and chemistry. Nanoparticles are particles with a minimum of one dimension between 1 and 100 nm. 
A wide range of NPs are used in nanotechnology, which includes their production, characterization, 
and application. NPs are frequently created using precious metals, including silver, gold, and plat￾inum, via a range of physical and chemical methods; yet, these procedures are not environmentally 
benign (Nadeem et al. 2018; Gul et al. 2021; Jadoun et al. 2021; Khan et al. 2017; Jan et al. 2020; 
Shah et al. 2020; Ying et al. 2022). The development of harmless, ecofriendly nanoparticle manu -
facturing techniques is urgently needed. Inspired by the safety-by-design principle, several simple, 
safe, affordable, repeatable, and scaling green synthesis methods for nanoparticles have recently 
been developed. Because of this, a variety of ecosystems are commonly used in green synthesis 
approaches to create NPs, including bacteria, fungi, yeast, and plant extracts (Nadeem et al. 2018; 
Jadoun et al. 2021; Hano and Abbas 2021). Because of its versatility and simplicity of application, 
plant-based NP green synthesis is now considered to be the benchmark among green biological 
methods.
This chapter offers a succinct overview of recent advancements in the environmentally friendly 
synthesis, analysis, and utilization of diverse plant-based nanoparticles.
2.2 PLANT-DERIVED NPS: GREEN SYNTHESIS AND CHARACTERIZATION
A lot of research has been done on the idea of “green chemistry” for sustainable development over 
the past 10 years (Clark and Macquarrie 2008). Development that satisfies present requirements 
while simultaneously maintaining the capacity of future generations to meet their own needs is 
referred to as sustainable development (Robert et al. 2005). For many chemistry-based industries, 
sustainable development is especially crucial because it aims to combat pollution and the careless 
use of natural resources (Omer 2008). The use of poisonous and dangerous compounds during 
chemical operations has several environmental dangers and is typically associated with exorbitant 
costs (Nath and Banerjee 2013). As an alternative, green synthesis provides a safe, ecologically 
acceptable, and biocompatible way of creating NPs for a range of applications, including the bio￾medical field (Razavi et al. 2015). It has been proved possible to achieve green synthesis using Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis 21
bacteria, plants, fungi, and algae. The synthesis of various NPs has made extensive use of plant 
materials, such as leaves, fruits, roots, stems, and seeds (Narayanan and Sakthivel 2011). NPs with 
specific dimensions, forms, and compositions may be produced using plant extracts (Figure 2.1). 
Additionally, these extracts’ diverse range of phytochemicals may serve as naturally occurring redu￾cing and/or stabilizing agents for the formation of NPs. It is acknowledged that plant-derived NPs 
are less likely to have harmful side effects in humans than chemically synthesized NPs, in addition 
to offering increased benefits for utilization in farming, food science, biological engineering, 
nanomedicine, cosmetics, and healthcare (Figure 2.1).
Biological activity, safety, and repeatability in the manufacture of NPs depend on accurate 
and comprehensive characterization. A wide range of physicochemical techniques is used to 
very precisely characterize synthesized nanoparticles for this purpose. These techniques include 
the following: transmission electron microscopy (TEM); scanning electron microscopy (SEM); 
atomic force microscopy (AFM); field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM); X-ray 
diffractometry (XRD); X-ray photoelectron microscopy (XPS); energy dispersion analysis of X￾rays (EDAX); thermal gravimetric differential thermal analysis (TG-DTA); and nuclear magnetic 
resonance (NMR) (Mallikarjuna et al. 2021; Khan et al. 2020; Khan et al. 2020; Alshehri and Malik 
2020; Singh et al. 2021; Zaeem et al. 2020; Srihasam et al. 2020; Wahid et al. 2020; Hossain et al. 
2019; Ahmad et al. 2020; Cherian et al. 2020; Prasad et al. 2020; Silva Viana et al. 2020; Ansari et al. 
2020; Perveen et al. 2021; Mickymaray 2019).
2.3 SUMMARY OF VARIOUS PLANT-DERIVED NANOPARTICLE TYPES
This chapter discusses and presents several plant-derived nanoparticle types, along with their syn￾thesis, characterization, and uses. Plant-based silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) are among the simplest 
to manufacture(Khan et al. 2020; Alshehri and Malik 2020; Singh et al. 2021; Wahid et al. 2020; Silva 
Viana et al. 2020; Mickymaray 2019). A silver metal ion solution and a reducing biological agent are 
needed for the environmentally friendly production of silver nanoparticles. Reducing and stabilizing 
Ag ions with a combination of biomolecules, including vitamins, polysaccharides, proteins, amino 
acids, phenolics, alkaloids, saponins, and/or terpenes is the simplest and least costly way to produce 
AgNPs (Tolaymat et al. 2010). It is possible to use practically any plant to make AgNPs.
FIGURE 2.1 The process of creating environmentally friendly nanoparticles (NPs) using plant extracts.22 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
Due to their easy surface functionalization (Ghosh et al. 2008), simple synthesis (Jain et al. 
2006), and special qualities, including their great potential for medical use (Jeong et al. 2011), 
low toxicity (Jeong et al. 2011), and highly biocompatible nature (Sperling et al. 2008), gold 
nanoparticles (AuNPs) have drawn a lot of interest. Gold nanoparticles are created when various 
chemical particles in biological complexes act as inhibitors, which lower Au metal ions and produce 
nanoparticles. Numerous studies have demonstrated the important role that flavonoids, phenols, 
proteins, and other biomolecules play in the lowering of metal ions and the creation of AuNPs in 
botanical extracts (Khan et al. 2020; Perveen et al. 2021).
Due to their numerous potential uses in biomedicine, cosmetics, electronics, and optics, zinc 
oxide nanoparticles (ZnONPs) have also drawn a lot of attention in recent years. Numerous studies 
on the manufacture and use of zinc oxide nanoparticles utilizing plants, microbes, and other species 
have been published. Their easy, safe, and inexpensive synthesis has sparked attention in several 
investigations. A wide range of plant parts, including flowers, roots, seeds, and leaves, can be 
used to make ZnONPs. These nanoparticles are remarkable in that they have a large bandgap of 
3.37 eV and a high exciton binding energy of 60 meV, which confer on them a broad spectrum of 
semiconducting characteristics (Zaeem et al. 2020; Hossain et al. 2019; Ahmad et al. 2020; Ansari 
et al. 2020).
Several plant extracts can be used to reduce aqueous Cu ions, resulting in the synthesis of CuNPs. 
Copper (Cu) is a relatively inexpensive metal that is more economical than Au or Ag (Letchumanan 
et al. 2021; Cherian et al. 2020). The production of CuNPs is specifically confirmed by the presence 
of a 578-nm peak on a UV-visible spectrometer (Karimi et al. 2005). Still, a lot of doubts remain 
about their biosafety (Letchumanan et al. 2021).
There are also other metals that can be used, like manganese (Mn) (Khan et al. 2020) and nickel 
(Ni) (Srihasam et al. 2020). It should be noted that several other metals, such as platinum (Pt), 
cerium (Ce), titanium (Ti), and palladium (Pd), have also recently been used to manufacture plant￾based nanoparticles with a variety of commercial and biological uses (Nadeem et al. 2018; Jadoun 
et al. 2021; Nadeem et al. 2020).
2.4 APPLICATIONS FOR NPS DERIVED FROM PLANTS
2.4.1 Possible Uses for NPs Derived from Plants
Because of their numerous uses in the energy, electronics, industrial, biological, and environmental 
domains, NPs are now in great commercial demand. NPs have been thoroughly investigated and 
are very desirable for biological applications. The most well-known NPs are AgNPs and AuNPs. 
Generally speaking, compared to chemically synthesized NPs, plant-derived green NPs are less 
likely to have serious adverse effects on people. They also have a wide range of possible uses, 
including but not limited to the following:
• The preservation of human health through nanomedicine (they can be antimicrobial, 
antiparasitic, antiproliferative, pro-apoptotic, and pro- or antioxidative, depending on the con￾text, anti-inflammatory properties, etc.) (Saleem et al. 2019; Gul et al. 2021; Anjum et al. 
2021b; Andleeb et al. 2021; Nadeem et al. 2020);
• Agriculture (target-specific biomolecule delivery, precision farming with regulated pesticide 
release, improved nutrient absorption, identification and management of plant diseases, etc.) 
(Anjum et al. 2019; Anjum et al. 2021c);
• Bioengineering (biocatalysts, photocatalysts, biosensors, etc.) and food science and tech￾nology (processing, storage, and packaging procedures, etc.) (Shafiq et al. 2020);
• Cosmetics (anti-aging, hair growth, sunscreen, nanoemulsion, the delivery of bioactive 
substances, etc.) (Abbasi et al. 2020).Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis 23
This chapter illuminates two less explored instruments and approaches for green plant-based 
nanotechnology, namely CuNPs and algae-based NP production (Chaudhary et al. 2020). Given the 
abundance of secondary metabolites in algae, which serve as capping and reducing agents, algae are 
unquestionably excellent candidates for the environmentally friendly synthesis of NPs. Numerous 
possible benefits, such as their antibacterial or anticancer properties, as well as their use as anti￾fouling, bioremediation, and biosensing agents, have been explored. But in the early research on the 
green synthesis of NPs using plant extracts, algae were not used as often as terrestrial medicinal and 
aromatic plants. Growing this industry for commercial use is difficult because it is still in its infancy 
(Chaudhary et al. 2020).
Cu is less expensive than Au and Ag and is a reasonably cheap metal. CuNPs are created when 
different plant extracts reduce aqueous Cu ions. The review by Letchumanan et al. (2021) covers the 
production, therapeutic applications, and mechanisms of plant-mediated Cu/CuO (Cu oxide)-NPs 
and offers a very thorough overview and recent update. Despite the many therapeutic advantages 
of Cu/CuONPs, their toxicity to normal cells and vital organs in humans may have serious negative 
consequences. Therefore, this concern has to be thoroughly investigated before these NPs can be 
used in medicine. These NPs’ toxicity and comparative efficacy in in vitro and in vivo studies have 
been examined and debated (Letchumanan et al. 2021). The potential for developing plant-based 
Cu/CuONPs as a treatment for a range of illnesses, such as microbial infection, cancer, wounds, and 
inflammation, has also been clarified (Letchumanan et al. 2021).
2.4.2  Anticancer Potential
Using nanotechnology for the treatment, screening, and detection of many illnesses, including 
cancer, is known as nanomedicine (Anjum et al. 2021a; Khan et al. 2021b; Anjum et al. 2021b; 
Anjum et al. 2021b). Through cancer prediction, diagnostics, prevention, and medicine, as well as 
potentially individualized therapy, nanomedicine offers comprehensive processes and successful 
measures against cancer (Anjum et al. 2021a; Anjum et al. 2021d).
Several plant-derived nanoparticles have shown potential in the fight against tumor cells. Zinc 
oxide nanoparticles (ZnONPs) created using leaf extracts from Cassia auriculata have shown 
“tumoricidal action” against MCF-7 breast tumor cells and lack adverse impacts on MCF-12A, i.e., 
normal breast tissue (Prasad et al. 2020).
The inhibition of cellular proliferation in HepG2 cancer cell lines by green AuNPs derived 
from Trachyspermum ammi seed extract has been observed to be concentration-dependent and is 
associated with apoptosis mediated by reactive oxygen species (ROS) (Perveen et al. 2021). After 
plant-based NPs alter the mitochondrial membrane potential, this method has been revealed to 
be possibly linked to mitochondrial action through ROS-induced Caspase-3 gene expression and 
enzyme activity (Khan et al. 2021b; Anjum et al. 2021d).
To effectively comprehend the fate of NPs, however, is just as important as gaining a greater grasp 
of the chemical processes by which NPs work against cancer cells. The duration of NP degradation, 
the conditions that affect it, the short- and long-term effects of NPs, the body’s behavior toward these 
foreign objects at both the micro and macrolevel, and the standardization of NPs to guarantee experi￾ment reproducibility are some of the questions that need to be addressed. Nanotechnologies should 
not be used in the healthcare sector until these issues are resolved. Additionally, there are a number 
of other issues that need more investigation and testing. To prevent any unforeseen repercussions, 
we also need to ascertain the potential hazards associated with the use of nanoparticles. Moreover, 
the many nanomedicines and nanoformulations that target certain cancer cells need to be meticu￾lously researched to produce the safest and most effective treatment regimens. We end this section 
with optimism that nanotechnology will accelerate the creation of more effective cancer treatments 
and provide researchers with strong instruments with which to surmount the many obstacles in this 
field of medicine.24 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
2.4.3  Anti-​Leishmanial Potential
Nearly 350 million people globally suffer from leishmaniasis, which is a disease spread by proto￾zoan vectors. Initially, leishmaniasis was treated with chemotherapy drugs, but these treatments 
have unfavorable side effects. The unique qualities of many nanotechnology-based approaches 
and products, such as reduced toxicity, bioavailability, biodegradability, and tailored drug admin￾istration, have led to their emergence as anti-leishmanial medications. These include polymeric 
nanoparticles, lipid nanocapsules, liposomes, metal and metallic oxide nanoparticles, nanotubes, and 
nanovaccines (Saleem et al. 2019). Silver nanoparticles consisting of xylan (also called nanoxylan) 
made using a green synthesizing technique using corncob xylan, a lowering and sustaining agent, 
have demonstrated efficient inhibiting efficacy toward Leishmania amazonensis promastigote via￾bility, whereas xylan alone had no effect (Silva Viana et al. 2020). The potential of nanoxylan as a 
promising new class of antiparasitic drug is thoroughly illustrated in the work of Silva Viana et al. 
(2020).
2.4.4  Antimicrobial Potential
A major concern of the last few years has been antibiotic resistance, which is only going to get 
worse. The fast evolution of bacterial genomes has led to the development of resistance in bacteria 
against antimicrobial agents. In the pursuit of novel therapeutic approaches, biogenic NPs have 
demonstrated promising outcomes in the management of bacteria that are resistant to several drugs 
and could represent a viable option in combating resistant pathophysiology (Nadeem et al. 2018). 
To enhance the antimicrobial response, many organic and inorganic chemicals have been mixed with 
NPs and other conjugates.
In particular, the antimicrobial effect of plant-based silver nanoparticles generated by Carissa 
carandas leaf extract has been demonstrated against various pathogenic bacteria in humans. A greater 
probability of inhibition has been observed for Gram-negative bacteria, particularly bacteria that 
cause shigellosis (Shigella flexineri) (Singh et al. 2021). Escherichia coli, a Gram-negative bac￾terium, can’t grow as well when coated in bimetallic nanostructures, like Pd-Ag nanostructures that 
are covered in reduced graphene oxide derived from stevia leaf extract (Mallikarjuna et al. 2021). 
Acinetobacter baumanii and Pseudomonas aeruginosa, which cause ventilator-associated pneu￾monia, are resistant to drugs. Sisymbrium irio, a plant found in the Saudi Arabian desert, provides 
AgNPs with strong inhibitory capabilities against both pathogens (Mickymaray 2019). While 
nanoxylan derived from corncob xylan has been shown to have antifungal activity against Candida 
albicans, Candida parapsilosis, and Cryptococcus neoformans, AgNPs derived from Clerodendrum 
inerme leaf extract have demonstrated both antifungal and antibacterial actions toward a variety of 
human pathogens (Khan et al. 2020;Silva Viana et al. 2020).
It’s interesting to note that AuNPs made from identical C. inerme extracts have likewise shown 
very comparable inhibitory capacities (Khan et al. 2020). It has been deduced that these NPs 
increase antibacterial activity because of the combined effects of physiologically active absorbed 
phytochemicals from this plant (Khan et al. 2020). AuNPs derived from T. amni seed extract have also 
been shown to have antibiofilm activity against Serratia marcescens and Listeria monocytogenes, 
most likely due to intracellular ROS generation (Perveen et al. 2021).
ZnONPs’ potential antibacterial activity has been established by the way they treat E. Coli and 
Staphylococcus aureus (Andleep et al. 2021). The ZnONPs under consideration were made from 
Cinnamomum verum bark extract. Similarly, direct cell contact that damages bacterial cell integ￾rity causes ZnONPs produced from C. auriculata leaf extract to show antibacterial activity (Prasad 
et al. 2020).
CuONPs produced from Cymbopogon citratus are another example of a metallic nanoparticle 
that demonstrates strong antibacterial action, including antibiofilm characteristics (Cherian et al. 
2020). It’s interesting that variations in antibiofilm action have been observed, which are believed to Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis 25
be caused by variations in the cell wall compositions of bacterial strains(Cherian et al. 2020). Strong 
antibacterial action against Gram-positive, as well as Gram-negative bacteria, has been shown by 
MnONPs obtained from Abutilon indicum leaf extract (Khan et al. 2020), whereas NiONPs made 
from stevia leaf extract have been more successful against Gram-negative bacteria (Srihasam et al. 
2020). This indicates that the type of NPs generated and the phytochemicals’ surface makeup, which 
is impacted by the plant extract utilized to synthesize the NPs, both have an impact on antimicrobial 
activity.
There have been several theories regarding the potential mechanisms for NPs’ antibacterial 
activity, including the disruption of the cell wall, the disintegration of the cell membrane, the 
massive production of free radicals, specific (targeted) and/or targeted actions toward proteins and 
DNA fragmentation, the inhibition of essential enzymes, the loss of internal fluids, and the dis￾ruption of electron transport (Nadeem et al. 2018). The overproduction of ROS by biomediated 
NPs may potentially have an antifungal effect. But so far, not much research has focused on fungi 
(Nadeem et al. 2018). Despite progress in our comprehension of plant-based nanoparticles’ anti￾bacterial activity, many questions concerning their precise mode of action, toxicity, and potential 
environmental risks still need to be answered.
2.4.5  Agricultural Applications
When agricultural gains are the goal, the antimicrobial activity discussed in the previous section 
may be helpful for crop security. In particular, ZnONPs have demonstrated an antiphytopathogenic 
effect against fungus and bacteria, indicating their wide-ranging agricultural importance. The fun￾gicide properties of zinc oxide nanoparticles (ZnONPs) generated from Eucalyptus globules extract 
toward important apple orchard diseases (Ahmad et al. 2020) and ZnONPs developed from lemon 
fruit against the soft rot bacteria pathogen Dickeya dadantii (Hossain et al. 2019) serve as evidence 
for this. It is interesting to note that TiO2NPs made from lemon fruit have antibacterial activity 
against D. dadantii that is on a par with that of ZnONPs (Hossain et al. 2019).
By modifying the abscisic acid (ABA) concentration, ion equilibrium, and defense systems made 
up of both enzymatic and non-enzymatic antioxidants, AgNPs made from wheat extract significantly 
reduce the damaging impacts of salt stress in wheat (Wahid et al. 2020). Remarkably, ZnONPs 
show minimal toxicity, as well as the ability to increase flax seedlings’ antioxidant response (Zaeem 
et al. 2020).
2.4.6  Antioxidant Functions
Oxidative damage to proteins, DNA, and membrane lipids in cells can result from mitochondria, 
along with other internal or external factors producing severe stresses. This can induce functional 
declines, degenerative diseases, and aging (Hano and Tungmunnithum 2020). Antioxidants have the 
potential to reverse this harmful process and are utilized in the treatment of age-related disorders, 
as well as aging itself. The antioxidant potential of some NPs obtained from green plants has been 
reported. Examples of these include AgNPs developed from C. carandas leaf extract (Singh et al. 
2021), AuNPs and AgNPs derived from C. inerme leaf extract (Khan et al. 2020), and NiONPs 
derived from stevia leaf extract (Srihasam et al. 2020). The phytochemicals that are coated on the 
surface of these nanoparticles undoubtedly have a significant role in the reported antioxidant effect. 
A single in vitro test is typically run, including the DPPH (2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl) assay. 
However, because of the complex structure of phytonutrients and because measuring antioxidant 
capacity is highly dependent on the process of reaction involved, it is not advisable to evaluate anti￾oxidant activity by adopting one method (Tungmunnithum et al. 2020). Therefore, laboratory-based, 
cell-free anti-inflammatory test outcomes must only be interpreted in terms of their chemical action; 
nonetheless, in vivo (cellular) verification is crucial.26 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
2.4.7  Other Applications
There have also been descriptions of additional possible uses, such as (photo)catalytic and/or absorp￾tion uses. Matricaria chamomilla produces AgNPs that, when exposed to UV light, demonstrate 
efficient catalytic activity against Rhodamine B, suggesting that this material may have potential in 
remediating wastewater (Alshehri and Malik 2020). Effective absorption activity against the heavy 
metal CrVI and robust photocatalytic activity have been demonstrated by MnONPs made from 
Abutilon indicum leaf extract, suggesting that this compound has the ability to remove a variety of 
organic and inorganic pollutants (Khan et al. 2020). Lastly, photocatalytic H2
 production controlled 
by Pd-Ag bimetallic nanostructures covered in reduced graphene oxide derived from stevia leaf 
extract has been observed (Mallikarjuna et al. 2021).
2.5 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
Green synthesis methods for producing nanomaterials from plants, microorganisms, and other nat￾ural resources are being developed in response to the increasing need for environmentally friendly 
chemicals and nanotechnology. Using environmentally friendly methods, researchers have been 
concentrating on the green synthesis of NPs. Plant extract-mediated nanoparticle synthesis and its 
potential applications in several industries have been the subject of extensive investigation because 
of its low cost, non-toxic nature, availability, and ecofriendliness. Plants have a wide range of spe￾cial chemicals that aid in synthesis and quicken their kinetics. Green nanoparticle production using 
plants is an intriguing and new field of nanotechnology that could have a big environmental impact 
and advance the long-term sustainability and development of nanoscience. Green plant-based NPs 
have potential uses in a variety of biological fields, including bioengineering sciences, sensors, 
imaging, biotechnology, electronics, optics, medicine, agriculture, food packaging, water treatment, 
dye degradation, textile engineering, and microbiology. Drug delivery methods within the biomed￾ical field may benefit from these NPs in the future. Some further applications for green nanoparticles 
may be water disinfection for environmental cleanups or phytopathogen treatment in agriculture. 
Future studies are required to address the behavior of such nanoparticles within ecosystems and 
their effects, as well as their potential effects on both humans and animals. It is expected that green 
approaches to nanoparticle production will continue to advance rapidly in the coming years. Through 
the compilation of reviews and cutting-edge research on the plant-derived sustainable synthesis of 
nanoparticles, their generation, analysis, and usage, this chapter sought to provide a comprehensive 
overview of all of these features and future challenges.
REFERENCES
Abbasi, B.H.; Fazal, H.; Ahmad, N.; Ali, M.; Giglioli-Guivarch, N.; Hano, C. Nanomaterials for 
Cosmeceuticals: Nanomaterials-Induced Advancement in Cosmetics, Challenges, and Opportunities; 
Elsevier: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2020; ISBN 9780128222867.
Ahmad, H.; Venugopal, K.; Rajagopal, K.; De Britto, S.; Nandini, B.; Pushpalatha, H.G.; Konappa, N.; 
Udayashankar, A.C.; Geetha, N.; Jogaiah, S.Green synthesis and characterization of zinc oxide 
nanoparticles using eucalyptus globules and their fungicidal ability against pathogenic fungi of Apple 
Orchards. Biomolecules 2020, 10, 425.
Alshehri, A.A.; Malik, M.A. Phytomediated photo-induced green synthesis of silver nanoparticles using 
Matricaria chamomilla L. and its catalytic activity against Rhodamine, B. Biomolecules 2020, 10, 1604.
Andleeb, A.; Andleeb, A.; Asghar, S.; Zaman, G.; Tariq, M.; Mehmood, A.; Nadeem, M.; Hano, C.; Lorenzo, 
J.M.; Abbasi, B.H. A systematic review of biosynthesized metallic nanoparticles as a promising anti￾cancer-strategy. Cancers 2021, 13, 2818.
Anjum, S.; Anjum, I.; Hano, C.; Kousar, S. Advances in nanomaterials as novel elicitors of pharmaco￾logically active plant specialized metabolites: Current status and future outlooks. RSC Adv. 2019, 9, 
40404–40423.Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis 27
Anjum, S.; Hashim, M.; Malik, S.A.; Khan, M.; Lorenzo, J.M.; Abbasi, B.H.; Hano, C. Recent advances in 
zinc oxide nanoparticles (ZnO NPs) for cancer diagnosis, target drug delivery, and treatment. Cancers
2021a, 13, 4570.
Anjum, S.; Ishaque, S.; Fatima, H.; Farooq,W.; Hano, C.; Abbasi, B.H.; Anjum, I. Emerging applications of 
nanotechnology in healthcare systems: Grand challenges and perspectives. Pharmaceuticals 2021b, 
14, 707.
Anjum, S.; Khan, A.K.; Qamar, A.; Fatima, N.; Drouet, S.; Renouard, S.; Blondeau, J.P.; Abbasi, B.H.; Hano, 
C. Light tailoring: Impact of UV-C irradiation on biosynthesis, physiognomies, and clinical activities 
of Morus macroura-mediated monometallic (Ag and ZnO) and bimetallic (Ag–ZnO) nanoparticles. Int. 
J. Mol. Sci. 2021c, 22, 11294.
Anjum, S.; Komal, A.; Abbasi, B.H.; Hano, C. Nanoparticles as Elicitors of Biologically Active Ingredients in 
Plants. In Nanotechnology in Plant Growth Promotion and Protection: Recent Advances and Impacts; 
JohnWiley & Sons: Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2021d; pp. 170–202.
Ansari, M.A.; Murali, M.; Prasad, D.; Alzohairy, M.A.; Almatroudi, A.; Alomary, M.N.; Udayashankar, A.C.; 
Singh, S.B.; Asiri, S.M.M.; Ashwini, B.S.; et al. Cinnamomum verum bark extract mediated green syn￾thesis of ZnO nanoparticles and their antibacterial potentiality. Biomolecules 2020, 10, 336.
Chaudhary, R.; Nawaz, K.; Khan, A.K.; Hano, C.; Abbasi, B.H.; Anjum, S. An overview of the algae-mediated 
biosynthesis of nanoparticles and their biomedical applications. Biomolecules 2020, 10, 1498.
Cherian, T.; Ali, K.; Saquib, Q.; Faisal, M.; Wahab, R.; Musarrat, J. Cymbopogon citratus functionalized green 
synthesis of CuO-nanoparticles: Novel prospects as antibacterial and antibiofilm agents. Biomolecules
2020, 10, 169.
Clark, J.H.; Macquarrie, D.J.Handbook of Green Chemistry and Technology;John Wiley & Sons: Hoboken, 
NJ, USA, 2008.
Ghosh, P.; Han, G.; De, M.; Kim, C.K.; Rotello, V.M. Gold nanoparticles in delivery applications. Adv. Drug 
Deliv. Rev. 2008, 60, 1307–1315.
Gul, R.; Jan, H.; Lalay, G.; Andleeb, A.; Usman, H.; Zainab, R.; Qamar, Z.; Hano, C.; Abbasi, B.H. Medicinal 
plants and biogenic metal oxide nanoparticles: A paradigm shift to treat Alzheimer’s disease. Coatings
2021, 11, 717.
Hano,C.; Abbasi,B.H.. Plant-based green synthesis of nanoparticles: Production, characterization and 
applications. Biomolecules. 2021, 12(1), 31.
Hano, C.; Tungmunnithum, D. Plant polyphenols, more than just simple natural antioxidants: Oxidative stress, 
aging and age-related diseases. Medicines 2020, 7, 26.
Hossain, A.; Abdallah, Y.; Ali, M.A.; Masum, M.M.I.; Li, B.; Sun, G.; Meng, Y.; Wang, Y.; An, Q. Lemon-fruit￾based green synthesis of zinc oxide nanoparticles and titanium dioxide nanoparticles against soft rot 
bacterial pathogen Dickeya dadantii. Biomolecules 2019, 9, 8–63.
Jadoun, S.; Arif, R.; Jangid, N.K.; Meena, R.K. Green synthesis of nanoparticles using plant extracts: A review. 
Env. Chem. Lett. 2021, 19, 355–374.
Jain, P.K.; Lee, K.S.; El-Sayed, I.H.; El-Sayed, M.A. Calculated absorption and scattering properties of gold 
nanoparticles of different size, shape, and composition: Applications in biological imaging and biomedi￾cine. J. Phys. Chem. B. 2006, 110, 7238–7248.
Jan, H.; Shah, M.; Usman, H.; Khan, M.A.; Zia, M.; Hano, C.; Abbasi, B.H. Biogenic synthesis and character￾ization of antimicrobial and antiparasitic zinc oxide (ZnO) nanoparticles using aqueous extracts of the 
Himalayan Columbine (Aquilegia pubiflora). Front. Mater. 2020, 7, 249.
Jeong, S.; Choi, S.Y.; Park, J.; Seo, J.H.; Park, J.; Cho, K.; Lee, S.Y. Low-toxicity chitosan gold nanoparticles 
for small hairpin RNA delivery in human lung adenocarcinoma cells. J. Mater. Chem. 2011, 21, 
13853–13859.
Karimi, J.; Mohsenzadeh, S. Rapid, green, and eco-friendly biosynthesis of copper nanoparticles using flower 
extract of Aloe vera. Synth. React. Inorg. Metal.-Org. Nano-Metal. Chem. 2005, 45, 895–898.
Khan, A.K.; Renouard, S.; Drouet, S.; Blondeau, J.-P.; Anjum, I.; Hano, C.; Abbasi, B.H.; Anjum, S. Effect 
of UV irradiation (A and C) on Casuarina equisetifolia-mediated biosynthesis and characterization of 
antimicrobial and anticancer activity of biocompatible zinc oxide nanoparticles. Pharmaceutics 2021, 
13, 1977.
Khan, S.A.; Shahid, S.; Lee, C.-S. Green synthesis of gold and silver nanoparticles using leaf extract of 
Clerodendrum inerme; Characterization, antimicrobial, and antioxidant activities. Biomolecules 2020a, 
10, 835.28 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
Khan, S.A.; Shahid, S.; Shahid, B.; Fatima, U.; Abbasi, S.A. Green synthesis of MnO nanoparticles using abu￾tilon indicum leaf extract for biological, photocatalytic, and adsorption activities. Biomolecules 2020b, 
10, 785.
Khan, T.; Abbasi, B.H.; Afridi, M.S.; Tanveer, F.; Ullah, I.; Bashir, S.; Hano, C. Melatonin-enhanced biosyn￾thesis of antimicrobial AgNPs by improving the phytochemical reducing potential of a callus culture of 
Ocimum basilicum L. var. thyrsiflora. RSC Adv. 2017, 7, 38699–38713.
Letchumanan, D.; Sok, S.P.M.; Ibrahim, S.; Nagoor, N.H.; Arshad, N.M. Plant-Based Biosynthesis of copper/
copper oxide nanoparticles: An update on their applications in biomedicine, mechanisms, and toxicity. 
Biomolecules 2021, 11, 564.
Malik,S.; Muhammad,K.; Waheed,Y. Nanotechnology: A revolution in modern industry. Molecules 2023, 
28(2), 661.
Mallikarjuna, K.; Nasif, O.; Ali Alharbi, S.; Chinni, S.V.; Reddy, L.V.; Reddy, M.R.V.; Sreeramanan, S. 
Phytogenic synthesis of Pd-Ag/rGO nanostructures using Stevia leaf extract for photocatalytic H2 pro￾duction and antibacterial studies. Biomolecules 2021, 11, 190.
Mickymaray, S. One-step synthesis of silver nanoparticles using Saudi Arabian desert seasonal plant sisymbrium 
irio and antibacterial activity against multidrug-resistant bacterial strains. Biomolecules 2019, 9, 662.
Nadeem, M.; Khan, R.; Afridi, K.; Nadhman, A.; Ullah, S.; Faisal, S.; Mabood, Z.U.I.; Hano, C.; Abbasi, 
B.H. Green synthesis of cerium oxide nanoparticles (CeO2 NPs) and their antimicrobial applications: A 
review. Int. J. Nanomed. 2020, 15, 5951.
Nadeem, M.; Tungmunnithum, D.; Hano, C.; Abbasi, B.H.; Hashmi, S.S.; Ahmad,W.; Zahir, A. The current 
trends in the green syntheses of titanium oxide nanoparticles and their applications. Green Chem. Lett. 
Rev. 2018, 11, 492–502.
Narayanan, K.B.; Sakthivel, N. Green synthesis of biogenic metal nanoparticles by terrestrial and aquatic 
phototrophic and heterotrophic eukaryotes and biocompatible agents. Adv. Colloid Interface Sci. 2011, 
169, 59–79.
Nath, D.; Banerjee, P. Green nanotechnology—A new hope for medical biology. Environ. Toxicol. Pharmacol. 
2013, 36, 997–1014.
Omer, A.M. Energy, environment and sustainable development. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2008, 12, 
2265–2300.
Perveen, K.; Husain, F.M.; Qais, F.A.; Khan, A.; Razak, S.; Afsar, T.; Alam, P.; Almajwal, A.M.; Abulmeaty, 
M.M.A. Microwave-assisted rapid green synthesis of gold nanoparticles using seed extract of 
Trachyspermum ammi: ROS mediated biofilm inhibition and anticancer activity. Biomolecules 2021, 
11, 197.
Prasad, K.S.; Prasad, S.K.; Ansari, M.A.; Alzohairy, M.A.; Alomary, M.N.; AlYahya, S.; Srinivasa, C.; Murali, 
M.; Ankegowda, V.M.; Shivamallu, C. Tumoricidal and bactericidal properties of ZnONPs synthesized 
using Cassia auriculata leaf extract. Biomolecules 2020, 10, 982.
Razavi, M.; Salahinejad, E.; Fahmy, M.; Yazdimamaghani, M.; Vashaee, D.; Tayebi, L.Green Chemical and 
Biological Synthesis of Nanoparticles and Their Biomedical Applications. In Green Processes for 
Nanotechnology;Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2015, pp. 207–235.
Robert, K.W.; Parris, T.M.; Leiserowitz, A.A. What is sustainable development? Goals, indicators, values, and 
practice. Env. Sci Policy Sustain. Dev. 2005, 47, 8–21.
Saleem, K.; Khursheed, Z.; Hano, C.; Anjum, I.; Anjum, S. Applications of nanomaterials in Leishmaniasis: A 
focus on recent advances and challenges. Nanomaterials 2019, 9, 1749.
Shafiq, M.; Anjum, S.; Hano, C.; Anjum, I.; Abbasi, B.H. An overview of the applications of nanomaterials and 
nanodevices in the food industry. Foods 2020, 9, 148.
Shah, M.; Nawaz, S.; Jan, H.; Uddin, N.; Ali, A.; Anjum, S.; Giglioli-Guivarc’H, N.; Hano, C.; Abbasi, B.H. 
Synthesis of biomediated silver nanoparticles from Silybum marianum and their biological and clinical 
activities. Mater. Sci. Eng. C 2020, 112, 110889.
Silva Viana, R.L.; Pereira Fidelis, G.; Jane Campos Medeiros, M.; Antonio Morgano, M.; Gabriela Chagas 
Faustino Alves, M.; Domingues Passero, L.F.; Lima Pontes, D.; Cordeiro Theodoro, R.; Domingos 
Arantes, T.; Araujo Sabry, D.; et al. Green synthesis of antileishmanial and antifungal silver nanoparticles 
using corn Cob Xylan as a reducing and stabilizing agent. Biomolecules 2020, 10, 1235.
Singh, R.; Hano, C.; Nath, G.; Sharma, B. Green biosynthesis of silver nanoparticles using leaf extract of 
Carissa carandas L. and their antioxidant and antimicrobial activity against human pathogenic bacteria. 
Biomolecules 2021, 11, 299.Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis 29
Sperling, R.A.; Gil, P.R.; Zhang, F.; Zanella, M.; Parak, W.J. Biological applications of gold nanoparticles. 
Chem. Soc. Rev. 2008, 37, 1896–1908.
Srihasam, S.; Thyagarajan, K.; Korivi, M.; Lebaka, V.R.; Mallem, S.P.R. Phytogenic generation of NiO 
nanoparticles using Stevia leaf extract and evaluation of their in-vitro antioxidant and antimicrobial 
properties. Biomolecules 2020, 10, 89.
Tolaymat, T.M.; El Badawy, A.M.; Genaidy, A.; Scheckel, K.G.; Luxton, T.P.; Suidan, M. An evidence-based 
environmental perspective of manufactured silver nanoparticle in syntheses and applications: A sys￾tematic review and critical appraisal of peer-reviewed scientific papers. Sci. Total Environ. 2010, 408, 
999–1006.
Tungmunnithum, D.; Drouet, S.; Kabra, A.; Hano, C. Enrichment in antioxidant flavonoids of Stamen extracts 
from Nymphaea lotus L. using ultrasonic-assisted extraction and macroporous resin adsorption. 
Antioxidants 2020, 9, 576.
Wahid, I.; Kumari, S.; Ahmad, R.; Hussain, S.J.; Alamri, S.; Siddiqui, M.H.; Khan, M.I.R. Silver nanoparticle 
regulates salt tolerance in wheat through changes in ABA concentration, ion homeostasis, and defense 
systems. Biomolecules 2020, 10, 1506.
Ying, S., Guan, Z., Ofoegbu, P.C., Clubb, P., Rico, C., He, F. and Hong, J.Green synthesis of nanoparticles: Current 
developments and limitations. Environmental Technology & Innovation 2022, 26, 102336.
Zaeem, A.; Drouet, S.; Anjum, S.; Khurshid, R.; Younas, M.; Blondeau, J.P.; Tungmunnithum, D.; Giglioli￾Guivarc’h, N.; Hano, C.; Abbasi, B.H.Effects of biogenic zinc oxide nanoparticles on growth and oxi￾dative stress response in flax seedlings vs. in vitro cultures: A comparative analysis. Biomolecules 2020, 
10, 918.30
30 DOI: 10.1201/9781003477730-4
3 Current Developments in the 
Synthesis of Nanoparticles 
Using Plant Extracts
K. Deepak Raj, S. Chaitanya Kumari, and K. Anuradha
3.1 INTRODUCTION
Nanotechnology, a multidisciplinary field at the forefront of scientific innovation, is dedicated to 
the engineering of functional systems at the molecular scale, specifically focusing on particles 
sized from 1 to 100 nanometres, known as nanoparticles (NPs) (Figure 3.1). These nanomaterials 
are highly valued for their unique properties, such as increased surface area to volume ratios and 
quantum mechanical effects, which confer significant advantages in a range of applications, from 
medicine to manufacturing (Bayda et al., 2019).
The present chapter explores the evolving techniques for nanoparticle synthesis, with a par￾ticular emphasis on plant-mediated green synthesis techniques. These methods are gaining import￾ance as they offer sustainable alternatives to conventional chemical and physical approaches, which 
often involve high energy consumption and the use of hazardous materials. In contrast, green syn￾thesis capitalizes the intrinsic properties of plants by utilizing their abundant bioactive compounds, 
including proteins, carbohydrates, and secondary metabolites, to reduce metal ions to nanoparticles 
in an ecofriendly manner. The synthesis of nanoparticles using plant extracts not only enhances the 
biocompatibility of the nanoparticles but also integrates the principles of green chemistry into nano￾technology. This approach is notably beneficial in applications requiring biocompatibility, such as 
drug delivery, in which minimizing toxic side effects is crucial. Moreover, plant-mediated synthesis 
can often be conducted at room temperature and under normal atmospheric conditions, further redu￾cing its environmental footprint.
One of the focal points of this chapter is hybrid approaches to the synthesis of nanoparticles, 
which combine the biological potential of plants with technological advancements in extraction and 
processing techniques. For instance, methods such as microwave-assisted extraction (MAE) and 
ultrasonic-assisted extraction (USAE) expedite the release of phytochemicals from plants, enhan￾cing the efficiency of the synthesis process. These advanced techniques reduce the required time 
and solvent use compared to traditional methods, like Soxhlet extraction, aligning with the goals of 
sustainability and efficiency. Furthermore, the integration of computational techniques is a critical 
aspect of modern nanoparticle synthesis. Computational models and simulations, such as molecular 
dynamics and quantum mechanics, provide profound insights into the molecular interactions and 
mechanisms underpinning nanoparticle formation. These in silico studies are indispensable for 
predicting nanoparticle behaviours, optimizing synthesis parameters, and tailoring nanoparticles for 
specific functions.
As the field of nanotechnology continues to evolve, the convergence of green synthesis techniques 
with advanced computational methods is set to play an important role in the development of progres￾sive and easy ways of synthesizing various stabilized and ecofriendly nanoparticles. This synergy 
not only enhances our understanding of the fundamental aspects of nanoparticle behaviours but Current Developments in the Synthesis of Nanoparticles 31
also leads to the more rational design of nanoparticles, fostering innovations that could transform 
industries and lead to breakthroughs in areas such as medicine, environmental science, and elec￾tronics. Thus, this chapter not only highlights current methodologies but also sets the stage for future 
developments in the sustainable production of nanoparticles.
3.2 EMERGING PLANT-MEDIATED GREEN SYNTHESIS TECHNIQUES: HYBRID 
APPROACHES
Nanotechnology is a multidisciplinary field of study that is concerned with creating nanoparticles 
(NPs), also known as nanomaterials, which have sizes ranging from around 1 to 100 nm. Small sizes 
and high surface area to volume ratios are two of the unique characteristics of metal NPs, which pro￾vide them with an edge over traditional chemical and physical methods. The numerous uses for these 
metal nanoparticles include medication delivery, catalysis, antibacterial and anticancer therapies, 
solar cells, thin-film electromagnetic shielding, and solar-to-steam production (Shah et al., 2015).
The green synthesis of metal nanoparticles (MNPs) marks a significant leap forwards in 
nanobiotechnology. Utilizing biological resources like plants, microorganisms, and algae offers a 
promising approach for MNP production. Plant extracts stand out for their ability to rapidly reduce 
metal ions. This efficiency stems from a process called phytonanofabrication, which bypasses the 
need for complex cell cultures and avoids lengthy incubations and high temperatures. The presence 
of functional groups within plant components allows them to readily donate electrons to metal ions, 
accelerating their reduction. Green approaches that use plant extracts are gaining favour due to their 
ability to leverage ecofriendly reducing agents, non-toxic stabilizers, and solvents. Plant extracts are 
a rich source of various compounds like alkaloids, phenols, and proteins. These phytochemicals play 
a crucial role in both reducing and stabilizing metal ions during the green synthesis of nanoparticles 
(Thatyana et al., 2023).
Physical, chemical, and biological approaches have all been used in the production of NPs, with 
biological methods becoming more popular because of their low cost, efficiency in single-step 
procedures, and environmental friendliness. These methods use metal-based NPs together with non￾toxic and safe chemicals as reducing agents. Plants are essential to green synthesis because they 
contain biomolecules that help to reduce metal ions into nanoparticles, such proteins, carbohydrates, 
and coenzymes. Recent research has turned its attention to phytochemicals from various plant 
extracts, including waste material (Figure 3.2), which have long been recognized for their potential 
advantages (Shukla and Iravani 2018). The bioactive compounds extracted from plants are crucial 
for nanoparticle synthesis, offering protection, stabilization, and capping. Traditional extraction 
methods, like maceration, Soxhlet, and reflux heating, are inefficient, prompting the adoption 
of advanced techniques such as supercritical fluid extraction (SFE), microwave-assisted extraction 
(MAE), pressurized fluid extraction (PFE), and ultrasonic-assisted extraction (USAE). MAE 
FIGURE 3.1 The size of nanoparticles.32 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
is favoured for its speed and efficiency as it rapidly heats samples internally. Ultrasonic-assisted 
extraction enhances the extraction process by improving solvent and plant cell interactions, 
speeding up the release of compounds. These modern methods reduce solvent use and processing 
time, supporting ecofriendly nanoparticle production (Alvand et al., 2019).
Researchers consider nanoparticles made from transition metals to be especially promising. These 
metals have unique electron configurations that make them more reactive, but this also makes them 
prone to clumping together. Due to this potential and their wide variety, researchers are constantly 
developing new types of these nanoparticles with diverse compositions. There’s particular interest in 
methods that are environmentally friendly and recently, using plant extracts has gained traction for 
its potential in medical applications. As a result, various ecofriendly synthesis techniques are being 
created to produce nanoparticles from metal compounds. While the exact mechanisms behind it 
weren’t fully understood at the beginning, scientists have been using plant materials to reduce metal 
ions since the early 1900s. The simplicity and effectiveness of plant extracts as reducing agents 
make them appealing, leading to a surge in research over the past few decades. Studies have shown 
that these plant-based reductions happen quickly, either inside or outside of plant cells. Various plant 
secondary metabolites, like terpenes, alkaloids, and phenols, which are found in flowers, fruits, and 
other plant parts, are responsible for this reduction process. Several studies have explored using 
plant extracts to synthesize metal nanoparticles. It’s important to note that factors like the type and 
concentration of the plant extract, solution pH, metal salt concentration, reaction time, and tempera￾ture can all influence the production process and the final properties of the nanoparticles (Adeyemi 
et al., 2022).
The synthesis of copper nanoparticles (CuNPs) using microwave-assisted and ultrasonic-assisted 
methods has been compared rigorously. Under optimized conditions, both methods produce 
CuNPs of 10 nm, showcasing their efficacy and the significant role of phytoextracts. The micro￾wave method excels in rapid synthesis with heat-sensitive materials, while the ultrasonic method 
favours amorphous CuNPs with a majority of copper oxide, showcasing the methods’ distinct 
advantages based on material characteristics and desired nanoparticle properties. This detailed com￾parison underscores the potential for tailored green nanoparticle synthesis approaches (Hadinejad 
et al., 2021). Hybrid methods enhance control over nanoparticle size, distribution, and morphology, 
making them highly suitable for producing green synthesized nanoparticles with specific properties 
that are tailored for diverse applications.
Recent advances in the synthesis of nanoparticles using plant extracts have emphasized the role of 
stress-induced phytochemicals in nanoparticle formation. Specifically, a novel approach involving 
the application of wound stress to plants, such as making a 2 cm diameter cut on Passiflora foetida
leaves, has been explored. This method utilizes the diffusate from stressed leaves, which is rich in 
secondary metabolites, for the synthesis of silver nanoparticles. These metabolites not only reduce 
silver ions but also act as capping agents, illustrating the potential of stress-induced extracts in 
nanoparticle synthesis. This innovative strategy offers a promising direction for green synthesis, 
FIGURE 3.2 Schematic representation of the synthesis of nanoparticles using waste material.Current Developments in the Synthesis of Nanoparticles 33
highlighting the importance of understanding plant responses to stress in nanoparticle production 
(Lade and Patil 2017).
3.2.1  Bimetallic Nanoparticles
Scientists have developed many reliable methods for creating metal nanoparticles (MNPs) with 
specific shapes and sizes. However, the limited properties of single-metal MNPs restrict their use 
in various fields. To overcome this limitation, researchers are combining them with other materials 
to create composites with new functionalities. This has led to a surge in studies on multimetallic 
nanoparticles, which often possess unique properties that far exceed those of their single-metal 
counterparts. Shape is one example of a property that can be precisely controlled to fine-tune a 
material’s optical properties. Therefore, controlling factors like size, shape, and composition is 
crucial for tailoring the functions and applications of these nanomaterials. Studies on gold alloy 
particles, a type of multifunctional nanoparticle, have shown improvements in properties like 
plasmonics, optics, and magnetism. These enhancements are attributed to the new structural and 
electronic effects created when these metals are combined (Adeyemi et al., 2022).
Bimetallic nanoparticles (BMNPs) are attracting significant attention for their improved bio￾logical applications. A recent area of focus is gold–silver nanoparticles. Researchers have used 
leaf extracts from plants like patchouli (Pogostemon graveolens) and neem (Azadirachta indica) to 
create core-shell structures, with silver at the core and gold on the outside. In another study, extracts 
from Kei apple (Dovyalis caffra) fruits were used in various concentrations to synthesize Ag–Au 
BMNPs. These studies have highlighted the potential of plant extracts in creating different types of 
bimetallic nanoparticles (Shankar et al., 2004).
3.2.2  Metal Oxide Nanoparticles
Recent decades have seen a surge in research on green synthesis methods for metal oxide 
nanoparticles (MONPs). This includes well-known examples like zinc oxide, copper oxide, and 
titanium dioxide. These nanoparticles have diverse applications in many scientific fields, including 
biology. Their simple production is due to most elements forming a variety of oxides, with unique 
structures and electrical properties. Notably, MONPs possess distinct optical and electrical proper￾ties due to their surface plasmon resonance. This makes them highly attractive in medicine, particu￾larly for treatments, imaging, and biosensing. Their potential as implants, neurochemical monitoring 
tools, and cancer diagnosis/treatment agents has garnered significant interest. For instance, titanium 
dioxide’s biocompatible surface makes it ideal for medical implants as it promotes cell growth. 
Similarly, cerium oxide nanoparticles exhibit antioxidant and self-regenerative properties. Many 
research groups, including ours, are exploring the use of various plant extracts, like those from 
the Kei apple tree, for the synthesis of these versatile materials due to their numerous applications 
(Adeyemi et al., 2022).
Studies have also explored mechanisms for synthesizing other metal-based nanoparticles, like 
metal oxides. Broccoli extract, for example, has been investigated for its potential in creating cal￾cium oxide (CaO) nanoparticles. Researchers have proposed that polyphenols and flavonoids, par￾ticularly quercetin, are the key reducing agents in this process, suggesting a mechanism whereby 
the flavonoids bind and reduce the metal salt to a metal ion. This ion then reacts with the hydroxyl 
groups (OH-) within the quercetin, forming calcium hydroxide (Ca(OH)2). Drying and heating (cal￾cination) the Ca(OH)2 ultimately yields CaO nanoparticles. Similar to our previous work with using 
Kei apple fruit extract for zinc oxide (ZnO) nanoparticle synthesis, FTIR analysis has confirmed the 
presence of phenolic metabolites acting as both reducing and stabilizing agents. However, in the 
case of ZnO, specific phytochemicals, like salicylic acid and various hydroxybenzoic acids, have 
been identified as the primary reducing agents (Osuntokun et al., 2018, Adeyemi et al., 2022).34 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
A study by Meka Chufa Bayisa et al. (2021) explored a sustainable and novel method for produ￾cing high-quality graphene by utilizing Vernonia amygdalina leaf extracts to reduce graphene oxide 
(GO) efficiently. Avoiding toxic and hazardous processes, this approach employs a non-explosive, 
ice bath-free method for GO synthesis. Methanol was identified as the optimal solvent for extracting 
the leaves’ beneficial compounds, mainly terpenoids and polyphenols, which served as reducing and 
capping agents. Characterization techniques like ultraviolet-visible spectroscopy (UV-VIS), X-ray 
diffraction (XRD), Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), scanning electron microscopy 
(SEM), high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HR-TEM), and energy dispersive X-ray 
analysis (EDAX) confirmed the effective conversion of GO to graphene, with HR-TEM images 
revealing few-layer graphene structures. This green synthesis method promises a safer, ecofriendly 
pathway for large-scale graphene production (Meka Chufa et al., 2021).
3.2.3 Possible Mechanisms for the Synthesis of Nanoparticles Using 
Plant Extract
Even though there’s been a surge in research on plant-based nanoparticle synthesis, understanding 
exactly how it works remains a challenge. This knowledge is crucial because these nanoparticles 
have promising applications in various fields, including medicine. Exploring different synthesis 
methods is essential for controlling properties like size, shape, and crystallinity, which ultimately 
determine function. While some mechanisms for metal nanoparticle synthesis have been proposed 
since the 1990s, a new theory has emerged for plant extract-based biosynthesis. It suggests that plant￾specific molecules, like sugars, terpenoids, and proteins, play a key role in this process (Adeyemi 
et al., 2022).
An analysis of Cinnamomum zeylanicum extracts using FTIR spectroscopy provided insights 
into the mechanisms behind metal nanoparticle formation. The study suggested that terpenoids, 
organic molecules with a five-carbon chain structure, play a crucial role. Specifically, eugenol, a 
type of terpenoid, was identified as being potentially responsible for reducing silver and gold salts 
into their respective nanoparticles. The study, based solely on FTIR analysis, proposed that a spe￾cific molecular structure formed during this reduction process, involving the removal of a hydrogen 
atom (proton abstraction) from eugenol, likely facilitated by the presence of a hydroxyl group (–
OH) (Singh et al., 2018).
Like terpenoids, flavonoids, another type of plant molecule, are also believed to play an active 
role in reducing and stabilizing metal ions. This theory suggests that as flavonoids change between 
their enol and keto forms (a process called tautomerism), they release hydrogen ions, which aid 
in the reduction. Flavonoids are a diverse group of polyphenolic compounds, including flavones, 
flavanones, and anthocyanins. Studies on plants like basil and mango leaves have suggested that 
flavonoids may be key players in converting silver ions into silver nanoparticles. The ketone and 
carboxylic acid groups within these molecules are thought to be crucial for this process. Quercetin, a 
specific flavonoid, has been identified as a strong chelator due to its chemical structure, which allows 
it to bind metal ions like aluminium, cobalt, and copper. Interestingly, the quantity of flavonoids 
in a plant extract seems to influence the final size and distribution of the resulting nanoparticles. 
Some research has even suggested that both terpenoids and flavonoids work together to facilitate 
the reduction and stabilization of metals during the synthesis of bimetallic nanoparticles (Adeyemi 
et al., 2022).
One study initially suggested that various functional groups, like ketones and alcohols, are 
responsible for reducing and stabilizing gold nanoparticles during plant-based synthesis. However, 
when researchers used the same extract to create bimetallic silver–gold nanoparticles, techniques 
like cyclic voltammetry and FTIR spectroscopy revealed that flavonoids or polyphenols were likely 
the key players in this case. This highlights the complexity of the mechanisms involved and the need 
for further investigations (Begum et al., 2009).Current Developments in the Synthesis of Nanoparticles 35
There are three main ingredients needed to synthesize nanoparticles using plant extracts: a redu￾cing agent, a stabilizing agent, and a solvent. This method is considered “green” because biological 
materials can both reduce and stabilize nanoparticles, often in simple water solutions instead of 
harsh organic solvents. The process is thought to happen in three stages: a short incubation stage, 
a growth phase, and a final termination stage. The reduction and nucleation phases, which create 
many small particles, are typically faster than the growth phase. Interestingly, some studies have 
suggested that metal ions can also act as biomass, forming bonds with biomolecules, like flavonoids 
and terpenoids, in the absence of other strong stabilizing agents. Additionally, the presence of 
pi electrons and carbonyl groups in the reducing agents’ structures may be responsible for their 
attachment to nanoparticle surfaces (Adeyemi et al., 2022).
There is increasing demand for quicker and more dependable techniques that can support experi￾mental approaches in order to guarantee the security of both naturally occurring and produced 
nanomaterials. Within the domain of green synthesized nanoparticles, in silico investigations provide 
a viable path towards comprehending their characteristics and behaviours. In addition to experimental 
methods, these computational techniques provide insights into the dynamics and interactions of NPs 
at the molecular level. The combination of green production techniques and in silico investigations 
to clarify the properties of nanoparticles has been demonstrated by recent research publications 
(Figure 3.3). For example, Sharma et al. (2023) used computer modelling to look at the structural 
characteristics of plant-mediated silver nanoparticles and the results showed how phytochemicals 
are involved in the stabilization and functionalization of the particles. The results highlight how 
important in silico methods are for deciphering the mechanics behind green synthesis and directing 
the creation of functional NPs for diverse applications (Mohammad et al., 2021).
3.3 FACTORS THAT IMPACT THE PLANT-BASED SYNTHESIS OF 
NANOPARTICLES
Several factors influence how plant extracts influence nanoparticle synthesis. For instance, the con￾centration of the plant extract needs to be carefully controlled. Using the right amount can improve 
the size, shape, and overall yield of the nanoparticles. Reaction temperature is another crucial factor. 
FIGURE 3.3 In silico studies on the green synthesis of nanoparticles.36 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
It directly impacts the final size and shape of the nanoparticles, as well as the speed of the reaction 
itself. This allows researchers to tailor desired properties, like size, shape, and distribution of the 
particles, by simply adjusting the temperature (Thatyana et al., 2023).
The solution’s pH also plays a significant role. It can affect the synthesis rate, size, and final 
shape of the nanoparticles. A higher pH can lead to more nucleation centres, which convert metal 
ions into their solid metallic state. Additionally, pH can influence the activity of functional groups 
within the plant extract, further impacting the reaction rate. For example, gold nanoparticles tend 
to clump together and form larger particles at lower pH levels. Conversely, higher pH environ￾ments provide more carbonyl and hydroxyl groups, which can bind to gold more effectively. This 
effect on binding sites has also been observed in studies creating silver nanoparticles from silver 
nitrate, with varying surface plasmon resonance (SPR) at different pH values (Thatyana et al., 2023). 
Another crucial factor is the reaction time. Likewise, increasing the reaction time has been shown 
to sharpen the absorption peaks of both silver and gold nanoparticles (Dwivedi and Gopal 2010, 
Dubey et al., 2010).
3.4 COMPUTATIONAL TECHNIQUES FOR PLANT-MEDIATED 
NANOPARTICLE SYNTHESIS
Conventional methods for developing silver nanoparticle (AgNP) production processes often involve 
trial-and-error approaches, large-scale batch reactors, and single-variable experiments. While seem￾ingly straightforward, these methods have drawbacks, such as high energy consumption, exces￾sive material waste, inconsistent product quality, and poor reproducibility. Therefore, new methods 
are needed for sustainable and controlled AgNP synthesis to minimize environmental impact and 
overcome these limitations. Two promising approaches have gained traction in recent years. The 
first involves microfluidics, a technique that enables precisely controlled chemical reactions with 
minimal reactant use and efficient mass and heat transfer. The second approach utilizes compu￾tational simulations at various complexity levels. These simulations have been valuable in iden￾tifying optimal synthesis routes, pinpointing key operating parameters that influence final AgNP 
properties and providing insights into the underlying physical phenomena that occur during produc￾tion. Combining these approaches holds promise for a more sustainable future of AgNP production 
(Nathanael et al., 2022).
Computational techniques play a significant role in advancing our understanding and optimiza￾tion of plant-mediated nanoparticle synthesis. A study by Lahiri et al. (2022) encompassed the 
synthesis of ZnO nanoparticles using the green synthesis approach with Clitoria ternatea flower 
extract and their application against oral biofilm. It used advanced analytical methods for optimiza￾tion and characterization. The in silico part of the study utilized computational models to predict 
and understand the interactions of nanoparticles with biofilm-forming proteins. The overall findings 
suggested that green synthesized ZnO nanoparticles could be an effective alternative for treating 
biofilm-associated oral infections (Lahiri et al., 2022).
Computational approaches are integral to the design and development of NPs, providing crit￾ical insights into their properties, behaviours, and interactions with biological systems. These 
approaches range from molecular simulations to machine learning algorithms, each contributing 
to the optimization of nanoparticle synthesis, functionalization, and applications, which are clearly 
depicted in Figure 3.4.
3.4.1 Size and Uptake Dynamics
Computational modelling, specifically using dissipative particle dynamics (DPD) simulation, has 
been pivotal in understanding how the size of NPs affects cellular uptake dynamics. For example, 
studies have shown that the size of NPs significantly influences their endocytosis, with smaller NPs 37 Current Developments in the Synthesis of Nanoparticles FIGURE 3.4 Applications of various computational methods in the synthesis of nanoparticles.
newgenrtpdf38 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
generally having higher uptake rates. Computational studies have illustrated that size not only affects 
the rate of uptake but also the mechanisms, such as the bending and wrapping of cell membranes 
around NPs. Oversized NPs may disrupt the membranes, highlighting the need for size optimization 
to balance translocation efficiency and cellular toxicity (Zhang et al., 2021).
3.4.2 Shape and Internalization Efficacy
The shape of NPs is another critical factor in their interactions with cell membranes. Computational 
studies using both coarse-grained molecular dynamics (CGMD) and DPD simulations have 
demonstrated that different shapes (spheres, rods, ellipsoids, etc.) have varied effects on the intern￾alization process. For instance, rod-shaped NPs have been shown to possess higher internalization 
rates compared to spherical ones due to their increased binding sites and favourable orientations that 
enhance membrane interactions (Zhang et al., 2017).
3.4.3 Surface Modifications
The surface chemistry of NPs plays a significant role in their biological interactions. Computational 
modelling has been used to explore how modifications like PEGylation and silane treatment can 
enhance NP performance by improving drug loading, retention, and circulation times. These 
simulations help to predict the behaviours of chemically modified NPs in biological environments, 
aiding in the design of NPs with optimized surface properties for better cellular uptake and reduced 
immune response (Guerrini et al., 2018).
3.4.4  Concentration and Cooperative Behaviour
The concentration of NPs affects their aggregation behaviour and subsequent cellular uptake. 
Computational simulations have indicated that optimal concentrations are required to facilitate 
effective NP uptake through cooperative interactions. High concentrations may lead to vesicle 
ruptures, whereas low concentrations may not allow for the cooperative behaviour necessary for 
efficient membrane penetration (Behzadi et al., 2017).
3.4.5 Safety and Biocompatibility
Computational approaches are also integral in enhancing the safety profiles of NPs. By using 
methods like the core@shell design strategy, researchers can predict and optimize the biocompati￾bility and toxicity of NPs. Computational tools enable the screening and selection of materials with 
the lowest toxicity and highest functionality for specific applications, thereby ensuring safety from 
the earliest stages of NP design (Verma et al., 2023).
Building upon this foundation, molecular docking can be used to identify and select biological 
molecules (such as enzymes, peptides, and plant extracts) that can effectively bind to metal ions. 
This selection process is based on the affinity and specificity of the biological molecule to the metal 
ions, which is crucial for the synthesis of nanoparticles (Agu et al., 2023) (Figure 3.5). For example, 
docking studies can help to identify peptides that have a high affinity for binding to gold ions, which 
can then be used to synthesize gold nanoparticles in an ecofriendly manner. A study by Nugraha 
et al. (2021) used molecular docking to understand how the bioactive compounds identified in the 
Clitoria ternatea flower extract interact with specific proteins involved in oral biofilm formation. 
The docking process involved computationally simulating how these bioactive compounds, also 
known as ligands, fit into the protein’s active sites, akin to a key fitting in a lock. This helped to 
predict the affinity and activity of these compounds against the proteins that are targeted in oral 
biofilms. The study used this method to screen for any potential inhibitory effects of the compounds, Current Developments in the Synthesis of Nanoparticles 39
which could guide the development of new treatments for oral infections associated with biofilms 
(Nugraha et al., 2021).
Further expanding the scope of computational techniques in green synthesis, another study 
explored the anticancer properties of compounds identified in the Malvaviscus arboreus plant. 
Initially, these compounds were identified through liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry (LC￾MS) and their structures were visualized using ChemDraw software. The chemical structures were 
then translated into SMILES (Simplified Molecular Input Line Entry System) notation to facili￾tate activity predictions via the PASS online platform. Tools such as SWISS Target, Sea Search, 
and Molinspiration were employed to forecast potential biological targets for these compounds. 
Subsequently, docking studies were performed using the crystal structure of carbonic anhydrase IX, 
with molecular dynamics simulations further refining the analysis of the most promising entities. The 
absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion (ADME) characteristics, along with cytochrome 
P450 enzyme inhibition profiles and toxicity levels, were predicted using ProTox-II. Additionally, 
statistical evaluations were conducted to analyse antibacterial efficacy and nanoparticle dimensions 
(Mohammed et al., 2023).
Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations offer another layer of insight by elucidating the nucleation 
and growth processes of nanoparticle formation, thus enabling observations of how nanoparticles 
evolve over time. By simulating the interactions between atoms or molecules in a solution, 
researchers can observe how nanoparticles form over time and identify key factors that influence 
their size, shape, and structure. For example, a novel, green chemistry-based approach to large-scale 
TiO2 nanoparticle production, focusing on energy efficiency and environmental sustainability, uses 
lemongrass oil as a surfactant and titanium isopropoxide as a precursor and employs a two-step 
method that avoids hazardous steps. This method was developed using the Aspen Plus® process 
simulation software package that is widely used in the chemical, petrochemical, and pharmaceutical 
industries, among others, to model and optimize processes. Developed by AspenTech, it is particu￾larly renowned for its ability to simulate the physical and chemical processes that occur in industrial 
plants. The Aspen Plus® software can simulate this ecofriendly process, highlighting the poten￾tial for sustainable nanoparticle synthesis. Exergy analysis has identified key areas for improve￾ment, emphasizing the need for process optimization to enhance overall energy efficiency. This 
approach sets a precedent for utilizing green chemistry in industrial applications, offering insights 
FIGURE 3.5 Simple representation of molecular docking.40 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
into sustainable manufacturing practices. The methodology for simulating nanoparticle synthesis in 
Aspen Plus® involves selecting process components and operations, choosing appropriate thermo￾dynamic models, setting the processing capacity, and defining input parameters, like mass/energy 
flow rates and reaction stoichiometry. The software models the reactions and processes to predict the 
behaviour and efficiency of nanoparticle production, facilitating the optimization of the synthesis 
process for improved yield and sustainability (Meramo-Hurtado et al., 2019).
For example, this software can be used to predict how gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) interact with 
specific proteins, which could influence the proteins’ function or stability. This kind of study is 
important for designing nanoparticle-based drug delivery systems and diagnostic tools. Molecular 
dynamics is preferable because it allows researchers to observe the dynamic interactions between 
nanoparticles and proteins over time, providing insights into both binding mechanisms and conform￾ational changes. Briefly, the steps include obtaining the 3D structure of a protein from a database, 
such as the Protein Data Bank (PDB). For instance, if we were studying haemoglobin, we would 
download its PDB file and then construct a nanoparticle model using materials science software or 
based on the literature describing similar nanoparticles. Assuming we had a spherical AuNP with a 
diameter of about 5 nm, for the protein, we would use a well-established biomolecular force field, 
such as AMBER or CHARMM; for the gold nanoparticle, specialized force fields, like those avail￾able in LAMMPS (Large-Scale Atomic/Molecular Massively Parallel Simulator), that can handle 
metal particles are necessary. We would place the protein and AuNP in a sufficiently large box to 
avoid boundary effects and ensure that there was enough space around the molecules to accommodate 
solvent molecules if we were using an explicit solvent model. We would add water molecules to the 
simulation box to mimic physiological conditions. This can be done using tools like GROMACS’s 
solvate utility. We would then add ions (e.g., Na+ or Cl-) to neutralize the system and mimic physio￾logical ionic strength. We would set the simulation to run at body temperature (310 K) using a thermo￾stat (e.g., Berendsen or Nosé–Hoover). We would then perform an equilibration run to ensure that the 
system reached a stable temperature and pressure. This often involves initially restraining the protein 
and nanoparticle positions while allowing the solvent to equilibrate around them.
We would then conduct the MD simulation for an adequate time period, typically tens to 
hundreds of nanoseconds, to observe meaningful interactions and dynamics. we would record the 
trajectories and save snapshots of the system at regular intervals for analysis. We would analyse 
the trajectories using software tools like VMD (Visual Molecular Dynamics) or PyMOL, focusing 
on key aspects, such as the distance between the nanoparticle and protein, changes in protein con￾formation, and potential binding sites on the protein surface. We would calculate the interaction 
energies between the nanoparticle and the protein to identify stable binding configurations. Finally, 
we would use clustering algorithms to find predominant structures or binding modes from the simu￾lation (Saptarshi et al., 2013).
From this MD simulation, we may discover specific sites on the protein where the gold 
nanoparticle tends to bind or observe changes in the protein structure upon nanoparticle interaction. 
These insights could lead to the better design of nanoparticle-based drug delivery systems, ensuring 
that nanoparticles do not adversely affect proteins’ natural functions while effectively delivering 
therapeutic agents.
3.5 ADVANCEMENTS IN COMPUTATIONAL TECHNIQUES FOR 
OPTIMIZING GREEN NANOPARTICLE SYNTHESIS
The integration of gene expression programming (GEP) into the field of nanoparticle synthesis, par￾ticularly for optimizing the green synthesis of silver nanoparticles, represents a significant advance￾ment in the application of machine learning techniques. This progression from the use of artificial 
neural networks (ANNs) to GEP marks the continuous evolution of computational approaches 
aimed at enhancing the precision and efficiency of nanoparticle production.Current Developments in the Synthesis of Nanoparticles 41
Accurately predicting chemical reaction outcomes based on experimental data is a valuable pur￾suit as it can significantly reduce the need for costly and time-consuming experiments. Artificial 
neural networks (ANNs) are powerful tools that have gained traction in various scientific fields, 
including medicine, engineering, and control systems. A key advantage of ANNs is their ability 
to identify complex relationships between input and output data without prior knowledge. This 
makes them adept at handling both linear and non-linear relationships involving multiple variables 
(Shabanzadeh et al., 2019).
Artificial neural networks (ANNs), inspired by the biological neural networks in animal brains, 
are a subset of machine learning that are composed of interconnected nodes or neurons. These 
neurons process inputs to produce outputs based on learned patterns or relationships, playing a 
crucial role in various technological and scientific applications. In the realm of nanoparticle syn￾thesis, ANNs have emerged as powerful tools for modelling, predicting, and optimizing the complex 
processes involved in synthesizing nanoparticles. Their application is particularly valuable in stages 
such as the selection of precursors, the optimization of synthesis parameters, and the prediction of 
nanoparticle properties, demonstrating the versatility and efficiency of ANNs in enhancing green 
synthesis procedures. A notable application of ANNs in the field of nanoparticle synthesis is the 
optimization of silver nanoparticle production using Vitex negundo leaf extracts. In this context, 
an ANN serves as a computational tool that models the complex relationships between various 
input variables, such as leaf extract concentration, reaction temperature, stirring time, and silver 
nitrate concentration, and the size of the nanoparticles produced. By training the ANN with these 
inputs, it can accurately predict the size of the synthesized nanoparticles. This ability to fine-tune 
the nanoparticle synthesis process for desired outcomes exemplifies the systematic and efficient 
approach offered by ANNs in controlling the properties of nanoparticles, highlighting the signifi￾cant potential of machine learning techniques in the advancement of green chemistry and material 
science (Patil and Kumbhar 2020) (Figure 3.6).
Gene expression programming (GEP) is an advanced evolutionary algorithm that surpasses trad￾itional genetic algorithms (GAs) and genetic programming (GP) in its ability to develop mathemat￾ical models and equations. It does this by utilizing independent parameters as inputs to estimate 
outputs with remarkable accuracy. GEP incorporates various elements, such as terminal sets, 
fitness functions, and genetic operators, which collectively contribute to the creation of diverse 
genetic populations. This facilitates the formulation of mathematical functions and models that 
can efficiently solve complex problems. One of GEP’s unique features is its capacity to represent 
outputs in different formats, including Karva language and expression trees, and transform these 
FIGURE 3.6 Model of an artificial neural network.42 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
representations into mathematical functions, setting it apart from other modelling approaches and 
highlighting its versatility.
In the context of nanoparticle synthesis, particularly the use of green methods, GEP has been 
employed to predict the size of silver nanoparticles with high precision. This novel model leverages 
GEP’s mathematical function formulation capability, optimizing the nanoparticle size estimation 
based on variables such as plant extract concentration, reaction temperature, silver nitrate concen￾tration, and stirring time. The model provides a simplified mathematical expression for size estima￾tion, emphasizing the impact of these variables on the size of the nanoparticles. This approach not 
only helps to minimize the use of materials but also facilitates the efficient production of smaller 
nanoparticles, illustrating GEP’s potential applicability across various domains. This showcases 
GEP’s significant contribution to advancing the field of nanoparticle synthesis by offering precise 
and efficient methods for controlling nanoparticle properties, thereby underscoring the importance 
of evolutionary algorithms in enhancing green synthesis techniques (Sattari and Khayati 2020).
Not limited to artificial neural networks (ANN), several other computational methods are also 
playing an important role in advancing nanoparticle research. Density functional theory (DFT) is 
essential for assessing the electronic, optical, and magnetic properties that are vital for crafting 
nanoparticles with targeted functions. Quantum mechanics/molecular mechanics (QM/MM) 
simulations are instrumental in exploring how nanoparticles interact with biological molecules 
and solvents, shedding light on their reaction mechanisms and surface chemistries. Monte 
Carlo simulations, through stochastic sampling, help to unravel the complexities of nanoparticle 
behaviours during synthesis, making them invaluable for forecasting the distribution, shape, and 
thermodynamic aspects of nanoparticle formation, as well as examining adsorption behaviours and 
the impact of thermal fluctuations. Furthermore, dissipative particle dynamics (DPD) techniques 
can be employed to investigate the self-assembly processes of nanoparticles, their integration into 
polymer composites, and their suspension dynamics, enriching our understanding of nanoparticle 
fabrication and application (Figure 3.7) (Salanne et al., 2023, Rajput et al., 2023).
3.6 CONCLUSION
The integration of plant-mediated green synthesis techniques with advanced computational methods 
is not only reshaping the landscape of nanoparticle production but also significantly contributing to 
FIGURE 3.7 Various computational methods that have been explored for the green synthesis of nanoparticles.Current Developments in the Synthesis of Nanoparticles 43
the sustainability and efficiency of this crucial technology. The comprehensive review presented in 
this chapter has highlighted hybrid approaches that can enhance the properties and functionalities 
of nanoparticles while adhering to the principles of green chemistry. These methods have proven 
to be invaluable in reducing the environmental impact associated with nanoparticle synthesis by 
employing non-toxic, plant-based materials and energy-efficient processes.
The exploration of computational techniques, such as molecular dynamics, gene expression pro￾gramming, and artificial neural networks, has opened up new avenues for the precise control and opti￾mization of nanoparticle synthesis. These tools provide deep insights into the molecular interactions 
and dynamics that govern nanoparticle behaviours, facilitating the design of nanoparticles with 
tailored properties for specific applications. Furthermore, these computational strategies enhance 
our understanding of the safety, biocompatibility, and environmental impact of nanoparticles, 
thereby supporting the development of more effective and safer nanomaterials.
As the field continues to evolve, the synergy between green synthesis and computational mod￾elling is expected to encourage further innovations, leading to breakthroughs in multiple sectors, 
including medicine, electronics, and environmental science. Ongoing advancements in this field 
are not only crucial for meeting the increasing demands for nanotechnology solutions but are also 
playing a role in ensuring that these solutions are sustainable and beneficial for society. This dynamic 
interplay between green synthesis and computational nanotechnology is setting the stage for a future 
in which nanotechnology is both innovative and aligned with the principles of environmental stew￾ardship and sustainability.
REFERENCES
Adeyemi, J. O., Oriola, A. O., Onwudiwe, D. C., & Oyedeji, A. O. (2022). Plant extracts mediated metal-based 
nanoparticles: synthesis and biological applications. Biomolecules, 12(5), 627.
Agu, P. C., Afiukwa, C. A., Orji, O. U., Ezeh, E. M., Ofoke, I. H., Ogbu, C. O., ... & Aja, P. M. (2023). 
Molecular docking as a tool for the discovery of molecular targets of nutraceuticals in diseases manage￾ment. Scientific Reports, 13(1), 13398.
Alvand, Z. M., Rajabi, H. R., Mirzaei, A., & Masoumiasl, A. (2019). Ultrasonic and microwave assisted extrac￾tion as rapid and efficient techniques for plant mediated synthesis of quantum dots: Green synthesis, 
characterization of zinc telluride and comparison study of some biological activities. New Journal of 
Chemistry, 43(38), 15126–15138.
Bayda, S., Adeel, M., Tuccinardi, T., Cordani, M., & Rizzolio, F. (2019). The history of nanoscience and nano￾technology: From chemical–physical applications to nanomedicine. Molecules, 25(1), 112.
Begum, N. A., Mondal, S., Basu, S., Laskar, R. A., & Mandal, D. (2009). Biogenic synthesis of Au and Ag 
nanoparticles using aqueous solutions of Black Tea leaf extracts. Colloids and Surfaces B: Biointerfaces, 
71(1), 113–118.
Behzadi, S., Serpooshan, V., Tao, W., Hamaly, M. A., Alkawareek, M. Y., Dreaden, E. C., ... & Mahmoudi, M. 
(2017). Cellular uptake of nanoparticles: Journey inside the cell. Chemical Society Reviews, 46(14), 
4218–4244.
Dubey, S. P., Lahtinen, M., & Sillanpää, M. (2010). Tansy fruit mediated greener synthesis of silver and gold 
nanoparticles. Process Biochemistry, 45(7), 1065–1071.
Dwivedi, A. D., & Gopal, K. (2010). Biosynthesis of silver and gold nanoparticles using Chenopodium album 
leaf extract. Colloids and Surfaces A: Physicochemical and Engineering Aspects, 369(1–3), 27–33.
Guerrini, L., Alvarez-Puebla, R. A., & Pazos-Perez, N. (2018). Surface modifications of nanoparticles for sta￾bility in biological fluids. Materials, 11(7), 1154.
Hadinejad, F., Jahanshahi, M., & Morad, H. (2021). Microwave-assisted and ultrasonic phyto-synthesis of 
copper nanoparticles: A comparison study. Nano Biomedicine Engineering, 13(1), 6–19.
Lade, B. D., & Patil, A. S. (2017). Silver nano fabrication using leaf disc of Passiflora foetida Linn. Applied 
Nanoscience, 7, 181–192.
Lahiri, D., Ray, R. R. , Sarkar, T., Upadhye, V. J., Ghosh, S., Pandit, S., ... & Ahmad Mohd Zain, M. R. (2022). 
Anti-biofilm efficacy of green-synthesized ZnO nanoparticles on oral biofilm: In vitro and in silico study. 
Frontiers in Microbiology, 13, 939390.44 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
Meka Chufa, B., Abdisa Gonfa, B., Yohannes Anshebo, T., & Adam Workneh, G. (2021). A novel and simplest 
green synthesis method of reduced graphene oxide using methane extracted vernonia amygdalina: Large￾scale production. Advances in Condensed Matter Physics, 2021(1), 6681710.
Meramo-Hurtado, S., Moreno-Sader, K., & González-Delgado, Á. D. (2019). Computer-aided simulation and 
exergy analysis of TiO2 nanoparticles production via green chemistry. PeerJ, 7, e8113.
Mohammad, T., Mathur, Y., & Hassan, M. I. (2021). InstaDock: A single-click graphical user interface 
for molecular docking-based virtual high-throughput screening. Briefings in Bioinformatics, 22(4), 
bbaa279.
Mohammed, A. E., Alghamdi, S. S., Shami, A., Suliman, R. S., Aabed, K., Alotaibi, M. O., & Rahman, I. (2023). 
In silico prediction of Malvaviscus arboreus metabolites and green synthesis of silver nanoparticles–
opportunities for safer anti-bacterial and anti-cancer precision medicine. International Journal of 
Nanomedicine, 18, 2141–2162.
Nathanael, K., Pico, P., Kovalchuk, N. M., Lavino, A. D., Simmons, M. J., & Matar, O. K. (2022). Computational 
modeling and microfluidics as emerging approaches to synthesis of silver nanoparticles–A review. 
Chemical Engineering Journal, 436, 135178.
Nugraha, A. P., Rahmadhani, D., Puspitaningrum, M. S., Rizqianti, Y., Kharisma, V. D., & Ernawati, D. S. 
(2021). Molecular docking of anthocyanins and ternatin in Clitoria ternatea as coronavirus disease 
oral manifestation therapy. Journal of Advanced Pharmaceutical Technology & Research, 12(4), 
362–367.
Osuntokun, J., Onwudiwe, D. C., & Ebenso, E. E. (2018). Aqueous extract of broccoli mediated synthesis 
of CaO nanoparticles and its application in the photocatalytic degradation of bromocrescol green. IET 
Nanobiotechnology, 12(7), 888–894.
Patil, S. P., & Kumbhar, S. T. (2020). Vitex negundo assisted green synthesis of metallic nanoparticles with 
different applications: A mini review. Future Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 6, 1–11.
Rajput, A., Shevalkar, G., Pardeshi, K., & Pingale, P. (2023). Computational nanoscience and technology. 
OpenNano, 12, 100147.
Salanne, M., Buriak, J. M., Chen, X., Chueh, W., Hersam, M. C., & Schaak, R. E. (2023). Best practices for 
simulations and calculations of nanomaterials for energy applications: Avoiding “garbage in, garbage 
out”. ACS Nano, 17(7), 6147–6149.
Saptarshi, S. R., Duschl, A., & Lopata, A. L. (2013). Interaction of nanoparticles with proteins: Relation to bio￾reactivity of the nanoparticle. Journal of nanobiotechnology, 11, 1–12.
Sattari, R., & Khayati, G. R. (2020). Prediction of the size of silver nanoparticles prepared via green syn￾thesis: A gene expression programming approach. Scientia Iranica, 27(6), 3399–3411.
Shabanzadeh, P., Yusof, R., Shameli, K., Hajalilou, A., & Goudarzi, S. (2019). Computational modeling of 
biosynthesized gold nanoparticles in black Camellia sinensis leaf extract. Journal of Nanomaterials, 
2019(1), 4269348.
Shah, M., Fawcett, D., Sharma, S., Tripathy, S. K., & Poinern, G. E. J. (2015). Green synthesis of metallic 
nanoparticles via biological entities. Materials, 8(11), 7278–7308.
Shankar, S. S., Rai, A., Ahmad, A., & Sastry, M. (2004). Rapid synthesis of Au, Ag, and bimetallic Au core–
Ag shell nanoparticles using Neem (Azadirachta indica) leaf broth. Journal of Colloid and Interface 
Science, 275(2), 496–502.
Sharma, R., Kandwal, A., & Tyagi, S. (2023). Plant-mediated Green Synthesis of Silver Nanoparticles and its 
Biomedical Applications: A Review. Journal of Environment & Bio-sciences, 37(1), 75–81.
Shukla, A. K., & Iravani, S. (Eds.). (2018). Green synthesis, characterization and applications of nanoparticles. 
Elsevier.
Singh, J., Dutta, T., Kim, K. H., Rawat, M., Samddar, P., & Kumar, P. (2018). ‘Green’synthesis of metals and 
their oxide nanoparticles: Applications for environmental remediation. Journal of Nanobiotechnology, 
16, 1–24.
Thatyana, M., Dube, N. P., Kemboi, D., Manicum, A. L. E., Mokgalaka-Fleischmann, N. S., & Tembu, J. V. 
(2023). Advances in phytonanotechnology: A plant-mediated green synthesis of metal nanoparticles 
using phyllanthus plant extracts and their antimicrobial and anticancer applications. Nanomaterials, 
13(19), 2616.Current Developments in the Synthesis of Nanoparticles 45
Verma, S. K., Nandi, A., Simnani, F. Z., Singh, D., Sinha, A., Naser, S. S., ... & Suar, M. (2023). In silico 
nanotoxicology: The computational biology state of art for nanomaterial safety assessments. Materials 
& Design, 112452.
Zhang, L., Zhao, Y., & Wang, X. (2017). Nanoparticle-mediated mechanical destruction of cell 
membranes: A coarse-grained molecular dynamics study. ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces, 
9(32), 26665–26673.
Zhang, X., Ma, G., & Wei, W. (2021). Simulation of nanoparticles interacting with a cell membrane: Probing 
the structural basis and potential biomedical application. NPG Asia Materials, 13(1), 52.46
46 DOI: 10.1201/9781003477730-5
4 Nanoparticles in Plant 
Transformation
Anjaneyulu Musini, P. Gnana Deepu, Rebbena Vaishnavi, 
Kathroju Harikrishna, and Jogipeta Harihara
4.1 INTRODUCTION
Nanoparticles (NPs) are defined as substances that are naturally available or man-made and typ￾ically range from 1 to 100 nm in size. NPs possess exceptional chemical and physical properties 
compared to other physical and chemical entities due to their small size and high surface to volume 
ratios (Roduner, 2006). Their unique and versatile physicochemical characteristics suit various 
applications in fields such as chemical engineering, life science, and electronics (Jeevanandam et al., 
2018). With the rapid advances and widespread use of nanotechnology, NPs have found their way 
into a growing number of commercial and industrial products due to their unique size-dependent 
physicochemical properties. These properties include high reactivity, high surface area, tunable pore 
size, and distinct particle morphology.
Moreover, nanotechnology has recently gained attention in the realm of plant science due to the 
demand for small but efficient systems that can enhance seed germination, growth, and protection 
against environmental and biological stresses. This link between nanotechnology and plant science 
shows promises for advancements in agriculture. NPs can act as “magic bullets”, encapsulating 
herbicides, nanopesticides, fertilizers, and genes that target specific objectives. This utilization of 
nanoparticles in various products underscores nanotechnology’s potential benefits and wide-ranging 
applications in diverse sectors.
4.1.1  History
The history of plant genetic engineering and transformation is a captivating narrative that spans over 
a century, with remarkable milestones and advancements along the way. It all started in the late 19th
century when the term “crown gall” was introduced to describe tumor-like outgrowths on plants. 
The notion that bacteria could infect plants was initially met with skepticism but in 1907, Erwin 
Smith demonstrated that a bacterium, later named Bacterium tumefaciens, did indeed cause these 
tumors. This marked a significant breakthrough in understanding crown gall disease.
In the 1950s, the development of basic lab techniques, such as in vitro polymerase guided tran￾scription, southern blotting, and agarose gel electrophoresis, started the flourishing of the field of 
molecular biology over the subsequent decades. Progress continued in the early 1970s with the 
unraveling of agrobacterium-mediated gene transfer mechanisms. A major breakthrough occurred 
in 1983 when the first transgenic plant cell line was discovered, which expressed a foreign gene and 
conferred a new trait to the plant. This accomplishment laid the groundwork for further advancements 
in plant genetic engineering.
In the mid-1980s, additional contributions emerged, including the introduction of DNA 
microinjections into protoplasts as an alternative method for transforming plants. Furthermore, it was Nanoparticles in Plant Transformation 47
discovered that the activation of the vir genes, which are necessary for T-DNA transfer, occurs when 
wounded plant tissues are exposed to the chemical signal acetosyringone. This discovery played 
a crucial role in the development of plant transformation protocols. During this time, important 
T-DNA vectors, such as the widely utilized pBIN19 binary vector, were also created. Additionally, 
in 1984, the first successful plant transformation of the cauliflower mosaic virus (CaMV) marked 
another significant milestone in the field of plant genetic engineering.
The 1980s and 1990s were marked by extensive research and innovation, with the exploration of 
various transformation methods and a deepening understanding of the intricacies of gene transfer in 
plants. These developments collectively highlight the profound impact of plant genetic engineering 
on the agricultural and biotechnological domains, shaping the trajectory of sustainable agriculture 
and enhancing crop quality and yields.
Plant cells were successfully transformed for the first time in 1983. The evolution of plant gen￾etic engineering has seen the establishment and refinement of various transformation methods, each 
contributing to the advancement of agricultural biotechnology. Electrophoresis, which was initially 
utilized for transient transformation, was later adapted in 1986 to achieve the stable transformation 
of maize plants. Established techniques have been optimized for specific plant species and new 
methods, like ultrasonication and vacuum infiltration, have been introduced. Furthermore, while 
agrobacterium-mediated plant transformation is routinely employed in academic research, its use in 
transforming transgenic crop plants remains limited. Agrobacteria can not only transform plants but 
also yeast, fungi, and even human cells, highlighting their extensive impact and versatility. Despite 
the potential of these techniques, the development of new varieties and the biotech industry as a 
whole have faced challenges due to the unclear patent situation, hindering their commercial utiliza￾tion from the outset.
4.1.2  The Importance of Nanoparticles
In plant systems, nanoparticles have been found to have significant impacts on various processes. One 
of the key areas in which they have shown promise is enhancing nutrient uptake by plants. Studies 
have demonstrated that nanoparticles can improve the uptake of essential nutrients, such as nitrogen, 
phosphorus, and potassium, from the soil, leading to the improved growth and development of plants.
Another area in which the use of NPs has been explored is plant disease management. 
Nanoparticle-based formulations have shown to exhibit antifungal and antibacterial properties, 
offering a promising avenue for controlling plant diseases while minimizing the use of traditional 
chemical pesticides.
Furthermore, the application of nanoparticles in soil remediation and environmental monitoring 
has gained attention from researchers looking for alternatives to traditional practices. Nanoparticles 
have the potential to immobilize contaminants in soil, thus aiding in the remediation of polluted 
soil. Additionally, the use of nanoparticles in sensors for monitoring soil quality and plant health has 
shown great potential.
Nanoparticles offer numerous benefits to plant systems. With their unique properties, they 
offer promising pathways for improving plant growth, disease management, and environmental 
sustainability. Their ability to enhance nutrient uptake, control plant diseases, aid in soil remedi￾ation, and monitor soil quality make them valuable tools in sustainable agriculture (Zhao et al., 
2020). Nanoparticles have the potential to revolutionize sustainable agriculture by increasing plant 
growth and stress tolerance, delivering agrochemicals without environmental leakage, introducing 
functional genes for enhanced growth and resistance, and serving as sensors for monitoring plant 
physiological events. In addition, nanoparticles have also shown promise in the targeted delivery of 
genetic material, allowing for the precise manipulation of plant traits and characteristics. Continued 
research on the use of nanoparticles in agriculture and plant systems is essential to fully harness their 
potential benefits.48 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
4.2 TYPES OF NANOPARTICLES IN PLANT TRANSFORMATION
Nanoparticles (NPs) play a crucial role in plant genetic transformation, significantly improving sta￾bility, efficiency, and the targeted delivery of genetic material. Some of the most commonly used 
NPs are presented in Figure 4.1, including metal NPs (e.g., Au and Ag), carbon-based NPs (e.g., 
CNTs and GOs), metal oxide NPs (e.g., ZnO and TiO2
), polymeric NPs (e.g., PLGA and chitosan), 
quantum dots, and lipid- and silica-based nanoparticles. NPs can be synthesized using various 
biological methods, including those involving plant materials, as well as physical and chemical 
techniques. Various types of NPs have shown promising results in plant transformation studies 
by improving overall crop yields and helping to address environmental challenges, such as HMs 
and nutrient loss. Environmental conditions influence nanoparticle interactions, stability, and syn￾thesis. These changes have a substantial influence on the properties and performance of NPs in a 
wide range of applications. Some examples of NPs in plant transformation include AgNPs acting 
as gene carriers and GOs, AuNPs, and polymeric NPs delivering genetic material to plants. Lipid￾and silica-based nanoparticles form a protective layer around genetic material and prevent the 
degradation of genetic material during uptake. CNTs are capable of penetrating plant seeds and 
tissues. Table 4.1 comprehensively highlights the significance of different nanoparticles in plant 
transformation.
FIGURE 4.1 Various categories of nanoparticles utilized in plant transformation processes. These diverse 
nanoparticles represent cutting-edge tools that are used to enhance plant genetic engineering and transformation 
efficiency.Nanoparticles in Plant Transformation 49
(continued)
TABLE 4.1
The significance of different nanoparticles in plant transformation
S. No.
Nanoparticle 
Type Properties Significance in Plant Transformation References
1. Calcium 
phosphate 
nanoparticles 
(CaPNPs)
Ultra-small particles with 
diameters between 20 
and 50 nm.
Exhibit a crystalline structure 
similar to hydroxyapatite, a 
compound naturally found in 
mammalian teeth and bones.
They encapsulate genetic material, 
including reporter genes, and facilitate 
efficient gene transfer into plant cells.
They shield DNA from cellular nucleases, 
thereby improving stability within 
the cell.
They achieve high transformation 
frequency and deliver transgenes into 
protoplasts and plant cells.
Naqvi et al. 
(2012)
2. Carbon-based 
nanoparticles 
(CBNPs)
Primarily composed of carbon 
atoms and display remarkable 
properties owing to their small 
size, large surface area, and 
chemical versatility.
Encompass diverse forms, 
including carbon nanotubes 
(CNTs), fullerenes, and 
graphenes.
CNTs can be further categorized 
into single-walled carbon 
nanotubes (SWCNTs), which 
consist of cylindrical graphene 
layers, and multiwalled carbon 
nanotubes (MWCNTs), which 
are formed of multiple SWCNTs.
They exhibit passive entry into various 
plant tissues, including leaves, stems, 
roots, and seeds, bypassing the barrier 
posed by the plant cell wall.
They offer high transformation efficiency 
without genome integration, making 
them suitable for both transient and 
stable gene transfer.
SWCNTs protect DNA from degradation 
in mammalian systems and may serve 
as carriers for small interfering RNA 
(siRNA) and plasmid DNA, facilitating 
gene silencing in plant cells.
Safdar 
et al. (2022)
Lv et al. 
(2020)
3. Metal-based 
nanoparticles 
(MNPs)
Include gold nanoparticles 
(AuNPs) and silver 
nanoparticles (AgNPs).
Chemically stable, biocompatible, 
and resistant to oxidation.
Have a large surface area relative 
to their volume due to their 
small size
AuNPs can be utilized for drug delivery, 
improving stress tolerance, enhancing 
plant growth, gene delivery, and plant 
genetic transformation.
AgNPs can be used to improve plant 
growth and enhance resistance against 
pathogens.
AgNPs have also been investigated 
for their role in enhancing seed 
germination and seedling growth
Mahajan et al. 
(2022)
4. Silicon-based 
nanoparticles
(SiO₂NPs)
Primarily composed of silicon 
dioxide.
Chemically inert, thermally stable, 
and biocompatible.
Have large surface area to volume 
ratio due to their small size.
Porous structure enables efficient 
adsorption and drug loading.
SiO₂NPs can enhance photosynthesis 
and nutrient uptake rate, resulting 
in improved plant growth and 
development.
They mitigate the adverse impacts of 
both biotic (pathogenic) and abiotic 
(environmental) stress.
They induce non-enzymatic defense 
responses by promoting the synthesis 
of compounds such as ascorbic 
acid, glutathione, proline, and 
phytohormones.
Pan et al. 
(2023)50 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
S. No.
Nanoparticle 
Type Properties Significance in Plant Transformation References
5. Amino acid￾based 
nanoparticles
Biocompatible and have low 
toxicity.
Allow for the precise surface 
functionalization of 
nanoparticles.
Remain stable under physiological 
conditions and can encapsulate 
bioactive molecules for 
controlled release.
They serve as biotransmitters to 
translocate various types of 
molecules, such as DNA, proteins 
and chemicals.
Peptides can deliver DNA into root cells, 
epidermal cells, BY-2 cells, and root 
tip cells.
Varlas et al. 
(2021)
6. Quantum dots 
(QDs)
Semiconductor nanoparticles 
with distinctive electronic and 
optical properties.
They can be used to track and label 
molecules within tissues and plant 
cells.
Khan et al. 
(2022)
7. Magnetite 
nanoparticles
Categorized as pure metals, 
metal oxides, and magnetic 
nanocomposites.
Fe3O4 and Fe2O3 nanoparticles 
have small size, large surface 
area, high thermal stability, low 
sedimentation rates, and low 
toxicity.
They transfer genes into the cell nucleus 
using a magnetic field.
They mediate the production of 
transgenic seeds without the need for 
tissue culture regeneration.
Zhao 
et al. (2017)
Cardoso et al. 
(2017)
8. Magnesium 
phosphate 
nanoparticles 
(MgPNPs)
Nanoscale materials composed 
primarily of magnesium and 
phosphate ions, ranging from 
3.5 to 2000 nm.
They have the ability to encapsulate 
DNA or RNA and transport them into 
plant cells.
They facilitate the stable integration of 
transgenes into the plant genome.
Due to their small size, they can bypass 
the plant cell wall and plasma 
membrane to reach the cell 
interior.
They can be used for both transient and 
stable gene transfer.
Salas-Leiva 
et al. (2021)
9. Clay nanosheets Layered double hydroxide (LDH) 
clay nanosheets are non-toxic, 
degradable, and difficult to 
remove through washing.
In order to defend themselves against 
infection, plants have the ability 
to absorb double-stranded RNA 
(dsRNA) from clay nanosheet–DNA 
complexes, which silences the target 
viral DNA.
Plant traits and quality may be improved 
sustainably without resorting to 
conventional plant gene transfer 
techniques.
Gogoi et al. 
(2017)
TABLE 4.1 (Continued)
The significance of different nanoparticles in plant transformationNanoparticles in Plant Transformation 51
4.3 NANOPARTICLES IN PLANT TRANSFORMATION
Plant transformation has been instrumental in the development of genetically modified crops, 
which have been widely used in agriculture to improve yields, reduce dependence on chemical 
pesticides, and enhance nutritional value. The success of plant transformation depends on the ability 
of transformed cells or tissues to generate complete plants. With traditional transformation methods 
and approaches, there is the chance of damaging plant tissues while transferring the desired DNA 
into the nucleus.
Nanoparticle-mediated gene transformation approaches help to overcome the obstacle of the 
plant cell wall and can accurately transfer DNA into the nucleus to produce stable transformation 
(Lv et al., 2020). During the biotransformation process, nanoparticles play a crucial role in protecting 
DNA from getting damaged and also act as gene carriers (Liu et al., 2008, Rai et al., 2015). They 
also have the potential to directly transfer DNA into cells, achieving the stable integration and rapid 
expression of transgenes (Rai et al., 2015).
4.3.1  Advantages of Nanoparticles in Plant Transformation
Nanoparticles (NPs) have unique properties and characteristics that can help to enhance the effi￾ciency, effectiveness, and precession of gene transformation processes, ultimately leading to 
improved traits and agricultural outcomes. Some of the advantages of NPs in plant transformation 
are listed below.
Enhanced Gene Delivery
• NPs assist in the transport of molecular biology cargo, such as DNA, RNA, and proteins, to 
plant cells, which is essential for plant transformation.
• NPs can transfer diverse cargo, such DNA, RNA, and proteins, into intact plant cells, avoiding 
the cell wall and plasma membrane.
S. No.
Nanoparticle 
Type Properties Significance in Plant Transformation References
10. DNA 
nanostructures
Composed of DNA.
Highly efficient and non-toxic.
Exhibit remarkable biological 
stability, resisting degradation 
by nucleases, and demonstrate 
strong biocompatibility with 
target tissues without eliciting a 
protective immune response.
They are widely used for gene delivery.
The DNA nanostructure method is 
adaptable, modular, and simple to use 
with plants.
Many DNA nanostructure designs are 
now used, such as 3D geometric 
structures (such icosahedrons and 
tetrahedrons), nanostrings, nanostars, 
and nanocubes.
They have the ability to transport RNA 
and DNA payloads, both externally and 
inwardly.
Cargo may be transported across the 
lipid bilayer of the cell membrane 
more easily, which then enables cargo 
to enter the nucleus and carry out its 
intended function.
Zhan 
et al. (2019)
Zhang et al. 
(2019)
TABLE 4.1 (Continued)
The significance of different nanoparticles in plant transformation52 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
• Targeted NPs have been shown to be effective in delivering plasmid DNA for genetic trans￾formation into plant cells and small interfering RNA for post-transcriptional gene silencing, 
which increase crop resistance to disease.
• Certain NPs have the ability to transfer proteins to plants, which enables DNA-free editing and 
advances the development of plant genome editing.
Increased Transformation Efficiency
• NPs promote transient and stable transformation efficiency in various plant species and tissues.
• NPs protect cargo with resistance against degradation during transportation, enhancing the 
effectiveness of cargo delivery.
Targeted Gene Expression
• NPs can deliver genetic material to specific tissues in different plant species, providing precise 
control over transformation processes.
• Some NPs possess inherent fluorescence properties, enabling the imaging of cargo delivery 
and release.
Specific Types and Properties of Nanoparticles
• Various types of NPs, such as DNA nanostructures, carbon nanotubes, layered dihydroxide 
clay nanosheets, and polymer-based nanomaterials, have shown promising results in plant 
transformation.
• Nanomaterials are a viable option for biomolecular carriers in plants because of their tiny size, 
biocompatibility, adjustable characteristics, and variability.
• The physical, chemical, and biological qualities of NPs directly affect how successful trans￾portation is, highlighting the importance of comprehending synthesis and design techniques 
in order to modify NP attributes
• NPs can enter cells without external assistance, which is advantageous compared to trad￾itional gene transformation methods (Wu et al., 2021; Vats, Kaur, and Rishi 2022; Ahmar et 
al., 2023).
Enhanced Transgene Expression
• NPs can enhance the expression of introduced genes in plant cells by promoting the efficient 
delivery and uptake of genetic material.
• This leads to higher levels of transgene expression compared to conventional transform￾ation methods, resulting in improved phenotypic traits in transgenic plants (Phua et al., 
2013).
Reduced Environmental Impact
• Nanoparticle-based transformation methods help to reduce environmental impact compared 
to traditional transformation techniques, like agrobacterium-mediated transformation and par￾ticle bombardment.
• NPs enable the controlled and targeted delivery of genetic material, minimizing off-target 
effects and reducing the need for external agents (Pati et al., 2014).Nanoparticles in Plant Transformation 53
Compatibility with Various Plant Species
• Nanoparticle-based transformation methods have demonstrated their efficiency in a wide 
range of plant species, including both monocots and dicots.
• This versatility makes NPs suitable for applications in diverse agricultural settings, enabling 
the genetic engineering of crop plants for desired traits (Yang et al., 2018).
Potential for the Co-Delivery of Biomolecules
• NPs can be functionalized to co-deliver multiple types of biomolecules, such as genes, 
proteins, and small molecules, into plant cells.
• This enables the synergistic effects and simultaneous engineering of multiple traits in trans￾genic plants (Cheng et al., 2022).
4.3.2  The Role of Nanoparticles in Plant Transformation
Nanoparticles play a significant role in plant transformation by affecting various plant processes and 
interacting with plant cells. Their specific impacts depend on the type of nanoparticle, plant species, 
and environmental conditions. When nanoparticles in soil come into contact with plant roots, they 
are absorbed through root hairs. Once they enter the plant system, they exhibit different effects, such 
as the following:
• Some NPs enhance plant growth and development by increasing nutrient uptake from the soil;
• Some NPs act as carriers to transfer genetic material;
• Some NPs help to influence plant stress responses;
• Some NPs help to modulate plant immune responses;
• Some NPs help to enhance seed germination and promote root and shoot growth;
• Some NPs help to influence the expression of stress response genes, leading to better defense 
mechanisms against pathogens and the accumulation of osmolytes to migrate drought stress.
For example, AgNPs have been found to alter cell growth, division, and differentiation, thus 
changing the cell wall, plasma membrane, and cytoplasm of plant cells. AuNPs have been found 
to disrupt the normal functioning of cellular components and induce oxidation stress in plant cells. 
CNTs and GOs have been found to enhance seed germination and promote root elongation in plants.
4.4 MECHANISMS OF NANOPARTICLE UPTAKE IN PLANTS
Nanoparticles have been proven to be effective in plant transformation due to their unique properties 
and traits. The absorption, transport, and accumulation of nanoparticles in plants are influenced by 
parameters such as nanoparticle type, chemical composition, size, functionalization, root exudates, 
and root microbes (Etesami et al., 2021). In plants, the mechanisms of nanoparticle uptake involve 
several factors, such as adsorption, penetration, internalization, and translocation within plant 
tissues. The liquid application of NPs means that they can infiltrate plants via the air and soil. The 
precise mechanisms of uptake can vary depending on the properties of the nanoparticle and the plant 
species.
NP absorption by plants is classified into two types, according to exposure. NPs can enter a plant 
system via root exposure or via foliar spray to promote plant growth and decrease disease. The 
pathway of NP exposure has a major impact on how well terrestrial plants absorb and accumulate 
nanoparticles. Furthermore, substrate choice affects NP behavior, in addition to determining plant 
development.54 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
4.4.1  Mechanisms of Nanoparticle Uptake by Plants via Root Exposure
When nanoparticles are taken up by plants via root exposure, several mechanisms come into play. 
Initially, they interact with the surface of the plant roots. Factors like size, shape, surface charge, and 
surface chemistry influence their adsorption onto the root surface. For example, positively charged 
nanoparticles may adsorb more readily to negatively charged root surfaces. This process is called 
root surface interaction. Nanoparticles can enter plant roots via various pathways, such as apoplastic 
uptake, symplastic uptake, and endocytosis, which are shown in Figure 4.2.
• In apoplastic uptake, nanoparticles move along the spaces between cells (the apoplast) and 
enter the root interior. This pathway is mainly relevant for hydrophilic nanoparticles.
• In symplastic uptake, nanoparticles enter the root cells directly through plasmodesmata, which 
are channels connecting plant cells (Ma et al., 2013).
• In endocytosis, nanoparticles enter the root cells via a process through which cells internalize 
materials by forming vesicles from the cell membrane.
Once inside the roots, nanoparticles can travel within root tissues. They can move through the 
cytoplasm or be transported through vesicles along the endomembrane system (Lin & Xing, 2007). 
This transport may be influenced by nanoparticle properties, such as size, shape, and surface chem￾istry. Nanoparticle translocation to shoots after uptake and transport within roots can occur via the 
xylem, which is the vascular tissue responsible for water transport. Nanoparticles may move with 
the flow of water from roots to shoots, reaching the leaves, stems, and other above-ground tissues 
(Jha & Pudake, 2016).
4.4.2  Mechanisms of Nanoparticle Uptake by Plants via Cellular Uptake
The cellular uptake mechanisms of plants involve several processes, like physical adsorption, endo￾cytosis, cell wall penetration, symplastic transport, and xylem and phloem transport, which are 
shown in Figure 4.3.
• In physical adsorption, nanoparticles adhere to the surface of plant roots. This is influenced 
by several factors, such as size, surface charge, and surface functionalization. Nanoparticles 
FIGURE 4.2 The mechanisms of nanoparticle uptake by plants via root exposure: A) apoplastic uptake; B) 
symplastic uptake; C) endocytosis.Nanoparticles in Plant Transformation 55
interact with root exudates and the root surface, facilitating their attachment (Khodakovskaya 
et al., 2009).
• Once attached to the root surface, nanoparticles can be internalized into plant cells via endo￾cytosis. This is the cellular process by which cells engulf extracellular material by invagin￾ating the plasma membrane to form vesicles. Nanoparticles can be taken up by plant cells 
through clathrin-mediated endocytosis, caveolin-dependent endocytosis, or other endocytic 
pathways (Albert et al., 2020).
• Some nanoparticles can penetrate the plant cell wall and plasma membrane directly. This 
process may be facilitated by the small size and unique physicochemical properties of 
nanoparticles, allowing them to traverse plant cell barriers.
• Once internalized into plant cells, nanoparticles can undergo symplastic transport by moving 
through plasmodesmata and intercellular channels to reach neighboring cells or enter the plant 
vasculature. This allows nanoparticles to be distributed within plant tissues and organs.
• Nanoparticles can also be transported within the plant through the xylem and phloem vascular 
systems. This systemic translocation enables nanoparticles to reach various parts of the plant, 
including the shoots, leaves, and reproductive organs.
• Within plant tissues, nanoparticles may accumulate in specific cellular compartments, such as 
vacuoles or organelles, or interact with biomolecules. Nanoparticles can also undergo trans￾location from roots to shoots or from leaves to reproductive organs, depending on factors such 
as nanoparticle properties and plant physiology (DeRosa et al., 2010).
4.4.3 Factors Influencing Nanoparticle Uptake
The uptake of nanoparticles in plants is influenced by various factors, such as the properties of the 
nanoparticles, the plant characteristics, and environmental conditions.
FIGURE 4.3 The cellular uptake mechanism of plants, which involves several processes like physical 
adsorption, endocytosis, cell wall penetration, symplastic transport, and xylem and phloem transport.56 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
Nanoparticle size plays a critical role in determining their uptake by plants. Smaller nanoparticles 
have a higher surface area to volume ratio, which may facilitate their penetration through biological 
barriers, such as the plant cell wall and plasma membrane. Larger nanoparticles are less suitable for 
uptake by plants due to their steric hindrance and reduced mobility.
The surface charge of nanoparticles affects their interactions with plant cell surfaces and their 
uptake efficiency. Positively charged nanoparticles have enhanced interactions with negatively 
charged cell surfaces, potentially leading to increased uptake. However, excessively high positive 
charges may also induce cytotoxic effects. Negatively charged nanoparticles may exhibit reduced 
interactions with cell surfaces and decreased uptake efficiency.
The surface functionalization of nanoparticles with biomolecules, polymers, or other ligands can 
influence their uptake by plants. Functionalization can alter the surface charge, hydrophobicity, and 
chemical properties of nanoparticles, thereby affecting their interactions with plant cells and their 
uptake efficiency. The functionalization of NPs with ligands that target specific cellular receptors or 
transporters enhance their uptake in plants.
The chemical composition of nanoparticles also influences their physicochemical properties 
and interactions with plant cells. Different types of nanoparticles, such as metallic nanoparticles, 
metal oxide nanoparticles, carbon-based nanoparticles, and polymeric nanoparticles, exhibit distinct 
uptake behaviors in plants. For example, metallic nanoparticles undergo dissolution in plant tissues, 
releasing metal ions that can be easily taken up by plants.
The uptake of nanoparticles can vary among different plant species and genotypes. Variations 
in cell wall composition, plasma membrane properties, and physiological characteristics affect the 
ability of plants to take up and translocate nanoparticles. Some plant species and genotypes exhibit 
higher nanoparticle uptake efficiency compared to others.
Environmental factors, such as soil pH, nutrient availability, temperature, humidity, and light 
intensity, also influence nanoparticle uptake in plants. Changes in environmental conditions can alter 
plant physiology, root morphology, and metabolic activity, thus affecting the uptake mechanisms 
and translocation of nanoparticles. Additionally, environmental stressors such as drought, salinity, 
and pollution also modulate nanoparticle uptake and accumulation in plants.
Finally, the concentration of nanoparticles within the growth medium and the duration of exposure 
also affect their uptake by plants. Higher nanoparticle concentrations lead to the saturation of uptake 
mechanisms and can induce cytotoxic effects, thereby limiting uptake efficiency. The prolonged 
exposure of nanoparticles may result in gradual accumulation within plant tissues over time.
4.5 APPLICATIONS OF NANOPARTICLES IN PLANT TRANSFORMATION
Nanoparticles are used in a wide range of applications in plant transformation, from transferring 
genetic material into plants to modifying genetic material. This is due to their numerous benefits, 
including targeted gene delivery, enhanced transformation efficiency, the improved stability of gen￾etic material, the co-delivery of multiple genetic elements, reduced off-target effects, and compati￾bility with non-model plants.
• Targeted gene delivery methods use nanoparticles, like mesoporous silica nanoparticles 
(MSNs), to transform plants. For example, gold-based MSNs offer one of the best nanoparticle￾based gene delivery systems (Torney et al., 2007).
• Polyethylenimine (PEI) nanoparticles can improve transinfection efficiency to deliver DNA 
into cell suspensions.
• Starch fluorescence nanoparticles can be used as transgenic vehicles in plants transformation 
(Firoozi et al., 2018). These nanoparticles can easily penetrate the cell wall and cell membrane 
and enter cells, which helps in transformation. The DNA of starch fluorescence nanoparticles 
is protected from ultrasound damage and DNase cleavage (Liu et al., 2008).Nanoparticles in Plant Transformation 57
• Single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWNTs) can deliver plasmid DNA and short RNA (siRNA) 
into different plant species (Demirer et al., 2020).
• DNA nanostructures and PEI-functionalized gold nanoclusters (PEI-AuNCs) can be 
incorporated into mature plants to mute the expression of green fluorescent proteins (GFPs) 
(Zhang et al., 2019).
• Inserting double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) into the petals of certain flowers may bind dsRNA 
to layers of double hydroxide (LDH) nanoparticles and induce gene expression (Molesini et 
al., 2022).
These successful applications demonstrate that NPs have huge potential within the field of plant 
transformation.
4.6 CHALLENGES
Agriculture is one of the many industries that nanotechnology has the potential to transform (Rastogi 
et al., 2017). Nevertheless, there are difficulties and barriers associated with using nanoparticles to 
alter plants. The possible toxicity of nanoparticles is one of the main issues with using them for 
plant transformation. Numerous investigations have demonstrated that some nanoparticles may be 
harmful to plants, with detrimental consequences for the growth, development, and general health of 
plants. Silver nanoparticles, for instance, have been demonstrated to cause oxidative stress, decrease 
root and shoot growth, and hinder seed germination. Furthermore, another major problem is the 
nanoparticle uptake mechanisms of plants. There are several ways that nanoparticles can get into 
plants, including through the tissues of the plants, foliar absorption, and root exposure. The precise 
processes underlying the uptake and transfer of nanoparticles in plants are still unclear, though. 
The uncertainty surrounding the long-term impacts of nanoparticle exposure on plant ecosystems is 
another problem. The long-term effects of nanoparticle exposure on plants and surrounding envir￾onments are as yet unknown, despite some studies showing the beneficial benefits of nanoparticles 
on plant growth and development, such as greater nutrient uptake and higher resistance to pests and 
diseases. Additionally, it is important to take into account how nanoparticles affect various plant 
species and how they interact with other environmental elements.
4.7 CONCLUSION
Nanoparticles have played a significant role in revolutionizing the agricultural sector. Thanks to 
their unique properties, they have a wide range of applications in plant transformation, including 
transforming genetic material to ultimately improve agricultural outcomes and plant traits. In plant 
transformation, nanoparticles act as efficient carriers of desired genetic material into plant cells. 
They can also improve crop productivity by enhancing and influencing gene expression, metabolic 
processes, and signaling pathways. They help to transfer genetic material into plant systems without 
damaging the environment. Along with these advantages, there are potential risks associated with the 
use of nanoparticles in plant transformation, including cytotoxicity due to over accumulation, envir￾onmental implications, and regulatory considerations. Further research is required on these areas to 
reduce the risks associated with the use of nanoparticles. By considering the unique properties of 
nanoparticles and different environmental conditions, researchers need to develop innovative strategies 
to meet the growing demands for food safety, environmental sustainability, and economic prosperity.
REFERENCES
Albert, Lynal, Lucas Ringo, Mia Schlicke, Shannon Lawless, and Sidney Stokes. “Nanoparticles: Pathways 
into the environment and effect on biological systems.” World Environmental and Water Resources 
Congress 2020, May 14, 2020. https://doi.org/10.1061/9780784482964.031.58 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
Ahmar, Sunny, Babar Usman, Goetz Hensel, Ki-Hong Jung, and Damian Gruszka. “CRISPR enables sustain￾able cereal production for a greener future.” Trends in Plant Science (November 1, 2023). https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.tplants.2023.10.016.
Cardoso, Vanessa Fernandes, António Francesko, Clarisse Ribeiro, Manuel Bañobre-López, Pedro Martins, 
and Senentxu Lanceros-Mendez. “Advances in magnetic nanoparticles for biomedical applications.” 
Advanced Healthcare Materials 7, no. 5 (December 27, 2017). https://doi.org/10.1002/adhm.201700845.
Cheng, Zhihong, Yongshuang Li, Duoyi Zhao, Wei Zhao, Meng Wu, Weilin Zhang, Yan Cui, Peng Zhang, 
and Zhiyu Zhang. “Nanocarriers for intracellular co-delivery of proteins and small-molecule drugs for 
cancer therapy.” Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology 10 (September 6, 2022). https://doi.org/
10.3389/fbioe.2022.994655.
Demirer, Gozde S., Huan Zhang, Natalie S. Goh, Rebecca L. Pinals, Roger Chang, and Markita P. Landry. 
“Carbon nanocarriers deliver siRNA to intact plant cells for efficient gene knockdown.” Science 
Advances 6, no. 26 (June 26, 2020). https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aaz0495.
DeRosa, Maria C., Carlos Monreal, Morris Schnitzer, Ryan Walsh, and Yasir Sultan. “Nanotechnology 
in fertilizers.” Nature Nanotechnology 5, no. 2 (February 1, 2010): 91. https://doi.org/10.1038/
nnano.2010.2.
Etesami, Hassan, Byoung Ryong Jeong, and Bernard R Glick. “Contribution of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi, 
phosphate–solubilizing bacteria, and silicon to P uptake by plant.” Frontiers in Plant Science 12 (July 1, 
2021). https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2021.699618.
Firoozi, Behnam, Zare Nasser, Omid Sofalian, and Parisa Sheikhzade-Mosadegh. “Enhancement of the trans￾fection efficiency of DNA into Crocus sativus L. cells via PEI nanoparticles.” Journal of Integrative 
Agriculture 17, no. 8 (August 1, 2018): 1768–78. https://doi.org/10.1016/s2095-3119(18)61985-9.
Gogoi, Anupam, Nomi Sarmah, Athanasios Kaldis, Dionysios Perdikis, and Andreas Voloudakis. “Plant insects 
and mites uptake double-stranded RNA upon its exogenous application on tomato leaves.” Planta 246, 
no. 6 (September 18, 2017): 1233–41. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00425-017-2776-7.
Jeevanandam, Jaison, Ahmed Barhoum, Yen Chan, Alain Dufresne, and Michael Danquah. “Review on 
nanoparticles and nanostructured materials: History, sources, toxicity and regulations.” Beilstein Journal 
of Nanotechnology 9 (April 3, 2018): 1050–74. https://doi.org/10.3762/bjnano.9.98.
Jha, Shweta, and Ramesh Namdeo Pudake. Molecular Mechanism of Plant–Nanoparticle Interactions. In 
Springer eBooks, 155–81, 2016. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-42154-4_7.
Khan, Muhammad Azmat Ullah, Humaira Arshad, and Abdul Majid. “Transport Mechanism from Quantum 
Dots to Plant Systems.” In Nanotechnology in the Life Sciences, 103–36, 2022. https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-031-10216-5_5.
Khodakovskaya, Mariya, Enkeleda Dervishi, Meena Mahmood, Yang Xu, Zhongrui Li, Fumiya Watanabe, and 
Alexandru S. Biris. “Carbon Nanotubes Are Able To Penetrate Plant Seed Coat and Dramatically Affect 
Seed Germination and Plant Growth.” ACS Nano 3, no. 10 (September 22, 2009): 3221–27. https://doi.
org/10.1021/nn900887m.
Lin, Daohui, and Baoshan Xing. “Phytotoxicity of nanoparticles: Inhibition of seed germination and root 
growth.” Environmental Pollution 150, no. 2 (November 1, 2007): 243–50. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.env
pol.2007.01.016.
Liu, Jun, Feng-Hua Wang, Ling-Ling Wang, Su-Yao Xiao, Chun-Yi Tong, Dong-Ying Tang, and Xuan-Ming 
Liu. “Preparation of fluorescence starch-nanoparticle and its application as plant transgenic vehicle.” 
Journal of Central South University of Technology 15, no. 6 (December 1, 2008): 768–73. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s11771-008-0142-4.
Lv, Zongyou, Rui Jiang, Junfeng Chen, and Wansheng Chen. “Nanoparticle-mediated gene transformation 
strategies for plant genetic engineering.” The Plant Journal 104, no. 4 (September 23, 2020): 880–91. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/tpj.14973.
Ma, Xingmao, Arun Gurung, and Yang Deng. “Phytotoxicity and uptake of nanoscale zero-valent iron (nZVI) 
by two plant species.” The Science of the Total Environment 443 (January 1, 2013): 844–49. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2012.11.073.
Mahajan, Shreya, Janvi Kadam, Pranjali Dhawal, Siddhivinayak Barve, and Shruti Kakodkar. “Application of 
silver nanoparticles in in-vitro plant growth and metabolite production: Revisiting its scope and feasi￾bility.” Plant Cell Tissue and Organ Culture (PCTOC) 150, no. 1 (February 28, 2022): 15–39. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s11240-022-02249-w.Nanoparticles in Plant Transformation 59
Molesini, B., F. Pennisi, C. Cressoni, N. Vitulo, V. Dusi, A. Speghini, and T. Pandolfini. “Nanovector-mediated 
exogenous delivery of dsRNA induces silencing of target genes in very young tomato flower buds.” 
Nanoscale Advances 4, no. 21 (January 1, 2022): 4542–53. https://doi.org/10.1039/d2na00478j.
Naqvi, Saba, A. N. Maitra, M. Z. Abdin, Md. Akmal, Indu Arora, and Md. Samim. “Calcium phosphate 
nanoparticle mediated genetic transformation in plants.” Journal of Materials Chemistry 22, no. 8 
(January 1, 2012): 3500. https://doi.org/10.1039/c2jm11739h.
Pan, Wei, Hong-Jie Zhang, Yu-Feng Zhang, Mei Wang, Martin Tsz-Ki Tsui, Liuyan Yang, and Ai-Jun Miao. 
“Silica nanoparticle accumulation in plants: Current state and future perspectives.” Nanoscale 15, no. 37 
(January 1, 2023): 15079–91. https://doi.org/10.1039/d3nr02221h.
Pati, Paramjeet, Sean McGinnis, and Peter J. Vikesland. “Life cycle assessment of ‘Green’ nanoparticle syn￾thesis methods.” Environmental Engineering Science 31, no. 7 (July 1, 2014): 410–20. https://doi.org/
10.1089/ees.2013.0444.
Phua, Kyle K.L., Kam W. Leong, and Smita K. Nair. “Transfection efficiency and transgene expression kinetics 
of mRNA delivered in naked and nanoparticle format.” Journal of Controlled Release 166, no. 3 (March 
1, 2013): 227–33. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jconrel.2012.12.029.
Rai, Mahendra, Avinash P. Ingle, Aniket Gade, and Nelson Duran. “Synthesis of silver nanoparticles 
by Phoma gardeniae and in vitro evaluation of their efficacy against human disease-causing bac￾teria and fungi.” IET Nanobiotechnology 9, no. 2 (April 1, 2015): 71–75. https://doi.org/10.1049/
iet-nbt.2014.0013.
Rastogi, Anshu, Marek Zivcak, Oksana Sytar, Hazem M. Kalaji, Xiaolan He, Sonia Mbarki, and Marian Brestic. 
“Impact of metal and metal oxide nanoparticles on plant: A critical review.” Frontiers in Chemistry 5 
(October 12, 2017). https://doi.org/10.3389/fchem.2017.00078.
Roduner, Emil. “Size matters: Why nanomaterials are different.” Chemical Society Reviews 35, no. 7 (January 
1, 2006): 583. https://doi.org/10.1039/b502142c.
Safdar, Mahpara, Woochan Kim, Sunho Park, Yonghyun Gwon, Yeon-Ok Kim, and Jangho Kim. “Engineering 
plants with carbon nanotubes: A sustainable agriculture approach.” Journal of Nanobiotechnology 20, 
no. 1 (June 14, 2022). https://doi.org/10.1186/s12951-022-01483-w.
Salas-Leiva, Joan S., Antonia Luna-Velasco, and Dayana E. Salas-Leiva. “Use of magnesium nanomaterials in 
plants and crop pathogens.” Journal of Nanoparticle Research 23, no. 12 (December 1, 2021). https://
doi.org/10.1007/s11051-021-05337-8.
Torney, François, Brian G. Trewyn, Victor S.-Y. Lin, and Kan Wang. “Mesoporous silica nanoparticles deliver 
DNA ands chemicals into plants.” Nature Nanotechnology 2, no. 5 (April 29, 2007): 295–300. https://
doi.org/10.1038/nnano.2007.108.
Wu, Kai, Anne P. Werner, Juan I. Moliva, Matthew Koch, Angela Choi, Guillaume B. E. Stewart-Jones, 
Hamilton Bennett, et al. “mRNA-1273 vaccine induces neutralizing antibodies against spike mutants 
from global SARS-CoV-2 variants.” bioRxiv (Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory) (January 25, 2021). 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.427948.
Varlas, Spyridon, Georgia L. Maitland, and Matthew J. Derry. “Protein-, (Poly)peptide-, and amino acid-based 
nanostructures prepared via polymerization-induced self-assembly.” Polymers 13, no. 16 (August 5, 
2021): 2603. https://doi.org/10.3390/polym13162603.
Vats, Prakriti, Ujjwal Jit Kaur, and Praveen Rishi. “Heavy metal-induced selection and proliferation of anti￾biotic resistance: A review.” Journal of Applied Microbiology 132, no. 6 (June 1, 2022): 4058–76. https://
doi.org/10.1111/jam.15492.
Yang, Haixia, Weicang Wang, Kymberleigh A. Romano, Min Gu, Katherine Z. Sanidad, Daeyoung Kim, Jun 
Yang, et al. “A common antimicrobial additive increases colonic inflammation and colitis-associated 
colon tumorigenesis in mice.” Science Translational Medicine 10, no. 443 (May 30, 2018). https://doi.
org/10.1126/scitranslmed.aan4116.
Zhan, Yuxi, Wenjuan Ma, Yuxin Zhang, Chenchen Mao, Xiaoru Shao, Xueping Xie, and Yunfeng Lin. “Diversity 
of DNA nanostructures and applications in oncotherapy.” Biotechnology Journal 15, no. 1 (September 
19, 2019). https://doi.org/10.1002/biot.201900094.
Zhang, Huan, Gozde S. Demirer, Honglu Zhang, Tianzheng Ye, Natalie S. Goh, Abhishek J. Aditham, Francis 
J. Cunningham, Chunhai Fan, and Markita P. Landry. “DNA nanostructures coordinate gene silencing in 
mature plants.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 116, no. 15 (March 25, 2019): 7543–
48. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1818290116.60 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
Zhao, Lijuan, Li Lu, Aodi Wang, Huiling Zhang, Min Huang, Honghong Wu, Baoshan Xing, Zhenyu Wang, 
and Rong Ji. “Nano-biotechnology in agriculture: Use of nanomaterials to promote plant growth and 
stress tolerance.” Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 68, no. 7 (January 31, 2020): 1935–47. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jafc.9b06615.
Zhao, Xiang, Zhigang Meng, Yan Wang, Wenjie Chen, Changjiao Sun, Bo Cui, Jinhui Cui, et al. “Pollen 
magnetofection for genetic modification with magnetic nanoparticles as gene carriers.” Nature Plants 3, 
no. 12 (November 27, 2017): 956–64. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41477-017-0063-z.61
DOI: 10.1201/9781003477730-6 61
5 Nanomaterial-Mediated 
Plant Gene Transformation 
for Genetically Modified 
Plants
Ashwitha Kodaparthi, Asra Siddiqua, Mangilipelli Shravani, 
Chunarkar Pragnya Sheela, Pagidikathula Sindhu, 
Sreedevi Sarsan, and Rishivardhan Reddy Manne
5.1 INTRODUCTION
Technological advancements in plant transgenics have improved basic plant biology, grain quality, 
secondary metabolite content, and crop size. However, plant cell walls block outside DNA from 
reaching the nucleus. Popular techniques include agrobacterium-mediated transformation and gene 
gun transformation. Nanotechnology, a revolutionary method, has the potential to transform trad￾itional farming operations and significantly impact modern agriculture. Nanoparticles, small particles 
with various uses, are classified into various sizes and have been developed over recent decades. To 
create transgenic plants, new technologies need to be combined with better nanoparticle-mediated 
delivery systems as most approaches do not provide stable transformation (Lv et al., 2020). For 
sustainable agriculture to be able to enhance crop yield, quality, and resistance to biotic and abiotic 
challenges, plant genetic engineering is crucial. Plant gene editing makes considerable use of gen￾etic transformation systems mediated by polyethylene glycol (PEG), agrobacterium, biolistic bom￾bardment, and electroporation (Yan et al., 2022).
5.2 CURRENT TECHNIQUES IN PLANT GENE TRANSFER
Plant genetic transformation strategies are classified into two types: direct and indirect (Keshavareddy 
et al., 2018). Direct genetic transformation, which includes biolistics, microinjection, liposomes, 
electroporation, silicon carbide whiskers, and plant genetic transformation techniques, employs 
mechanical force to transfer desired traits into crops, whereas agrobacterium gene transfer into plant 
cells is an example of an indirect gene transfer approach that utilizes vectors.
5.2.1  Indirect Gene Transfer Methods
Agrobacterium-directed gene transfer is a primary means of indirect genetic change in plants. 
Agrobacterium rhizogenes carry the Ri plasmid, which is responsible for hairy root disease, while 
Agrobacterium tumefaciens harbors the Ti plasmid, which carries genes for tumor lesions (Gelvin & 
Stanton, 2017). A portion of the Ri plasmid vector called T-DNA can be introduced and incorporated 
into plant nuclear DNA by modifying the plasmid and the desired gene can co-integrate with the 
T-DNA into the DNA of plants. VirA detects phenols generated by damaged sections of tissues and 62 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
phosphorylates VirG in response. In Agrobacterium tumefaciens, VirG promotes the expression of 
the Vir gene. The T-DNA region of the Ti plasmid can then be cut at the left border (LB) and right 
border (RB) repeat sequences by the combined effect of virulence gene D1 and D2. VirD2 can 
then bind with the 5’ terminal of the T-DNA during cleavage. The bacteria can then release VirD2/
T-DNA through the Type IV secretion system, or T4SS. Moreover, the T-chain in plant cells can 
be noncovalently coated by the ssDNA-binding peptide VirE2, forming the VirD2/VirE2/T-DNA 
T-complex and encouraging T-DNA integration into the target DNA of plant cells (Gelvin & Stanton,
2017). Hairy roots generated by the Ri plasmid, which is present in A. rhizogenes, show exten￾sive root growth in multiple directions and the absence of gravitropism, as well as development on 
substrates lacking any plant growth hormones, in contrast to A. tumefaciens, which is responsible 
for the formation of tumorigenic lesions on the uppermost portions of host plants (Rao et al., 2002).
Agrobacterium-mediated plant genetic transformation can be used to change most dicot plants 
and a few monocot plants. Its benefits include its ease of application, high efficiency, and stable 
genes. The effective use of agrobacterium-mediated transformation in monocot plants is, neverthe￾less, restricted by a number of parameters. Agrobacterium is less likely to naturally infect monocot 
plants because, in contrast to dicots, most monocots lack distinctly divided cells. This restricts the 
genetic modification that agrobacterium may cause in monocot plants (Yan et al., 2022). Additionally, 
the successful transformation and regeneration of transgenic plants depend on the efficient selection 
of stably transformed cells from a large number of nontransformed cells. In contrast, the early 
dicot transformation system relies on bactericidal resistance, such as kanamycin, and antibiotic 
resistance, like geneticin; however, this system has proved unsuccessful in most cereal crops. To 
choose transformants for maize, wheat, and barley, herbicide-resistant markers have been employed 
(Kausch et al., 2019). The efficacy of transformation by means of agrobacterium in monocots can be 
increased through vector optimization, the introduction of hypervirulent strains of bacteria, and the 
use of appropriate selectable MAS (Hayta et al., 2019; Kumar et al., 2019) (Figure 5.1).
FIGURE 5.1 Indirect gene transfer using Agrobacterium tumifacein. Ti plasmid is isolated from Agrobacterium 
tumifacein and a transgene is inserted into the plasmid. The ti plasmid is reinserted into the bacterium and 
allowed to infect plant cells in the culture. Competent cells are capable of producing transgenic plants.Nanomaterial-Mediated Plant Gene Transformation 63
5.2.2  Direct Gene Transfer Methods: Biolistics
The approach of physically introducing foreign DNA directly within plant genomes is known as 
particle attack or the gene cannon method (Sanford et al., 2000). This approach creates DNA-coated 
microcarriers by coating the target gene surface with tungsten or gold powder. Using an electricity 
discharge or a pressurized helium gas stream, high-pressure helium pulses accelerate the DNA￾coated microcarriers into a gaseous acceleration tube. While these particles gain enough momentum 
to enter recipient cells quickly, the target gene coated on their exteriors remains in the cell that 
receives them and is eventually incorporated into the plant’s chromosome to generate a transformed 
plant (Altpeter et al., 2005). Particle bombardment has progressively evolved into one of the most 
prominent transformation approaches, following agrobacterium-mediated plant genetic transform￾ation, and has been successfully utilized on a number of plant types (Su et al., 2023). Nevertheless, it 
has some limitations over agrobacterium-mediated transformation, which include greater expenses, 
exposure to exogenous DNA, and low transformation rates. Additionally, bigger fragments are easily 
broken due to the weak adherence of DNA to metal particles or during the process of bombardment, 
leading to disorganized DNA integration processes (Keshavareddy et al., 2018). These factors limit 
the size of the DNA fragments that this method can transfer to less than 10 kb.
5.2.3  Direct Gene Transfer Methods: Liposomes
Liposomes are spherical compartments consisting of a few bilayers of lipids. Liposomes are natur￾ally occurring structures that are composed of innocuous phospholipids and cholesterol that range 
in size from 30 nm to several micrometers. When employed as vectors to transmit genes into plant 
tissues, liposomes may offer the following advantages: the improved delivery of encapsulated 
DNA via membrane fusion; the targeting of specific cells; nucleic acids being protected from 
nuclease activity; delivery into a range of varieties of cells via plasmodesmata (Gad et al., 1990). 
Via liposome–protoplast fusion or endocytosis, desired DNA is inserted into target protoplasts. To 
create a DNA–lipid combination, liposomes and DNA are incorporated and then incubated. Next, 
the protoplast solution that has been enhanced with PEG is combined. Positively charged liposomes 
are drawn to DNA that is negatively charged and cell membranes, enabling them to stick to the sur￾face of protoplasts. Subsequently, the plasmid is released into the desired cells once its liposomes 
and protoplasts are integrated at their binding sites (Wordragen et al., 1997).
5.2.4  Direct Gene Transfer Methods: Electroporation
The most common use of the electroporation technique involves the in vitro insertion of genetic 
information into the cells of interest. This approach includes administering a short, high-field 
strength electrical pulse to the desired tissues and cells, which structurally changes the host cellular 
membrane and increases the cell membrane’s ability to leak. Protoplasts, or cells, and DNA undergo 
incubation together and then both short- and high-field pulses are used to induce temporary pores 
in the membrane of the cells of interest in a specially designed electroporation chamber. Typically, 
25 mV voltages and 0.5 mA currents are administered for approximately 15 minutes, changing the 
porous nature of the cell membrane to allow the cell to consume suspended vector DNA from the 
surrounding solution. The effectiveness of electroporation is influenced by the concentration of DNA 
at the surface, as well as the cells’ capacity to survive membrane penetration. Using protoplasts, 
numerous monocot and dicot plants have been successfully converted (Kotnik et al., 2019).
5.2.5  Direct Gene Transfer Methods: Microinjection
Microinjection-directed plant gene transfer is a technique that involves injecting genetic informa￾tion into an individual cell’s cytoplasm or nucleus using a device called an infusion pipette. This 64 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
method entails placing the target cell under a microscope and employing two micromanipulators—a 
holding pipette to fix the cell and microcapillary tubes holding a small amount of DNA solution—to 
penetrate the nuclear or cell membranes and regulate the fixed cell. To inject DNA into plant cells or 
protoplasts, microcapillary pipettes with a tip size of 0.5–10 μm are used. Once the gene transfer is 
complete, altered cells are grown into plants with transgenic genes (Morikawa and Yamada, 1985). 
Capillary microinjections into protoplasts result in the intranuclear localization of the inserted 
materials. This procedure has been widely used with animal cells; nevertheless, these syringes 
struggle to penetrate through plant cell walls and deliver foreign DNA into plant cells due to their 
thick consistency. However, the major obstacle to plant genetic transformation is protoplast death, 
which is produced by hydrolase’s hydrolysis of plant cell walls (Lörz et al., 1981).
5.2.6  Direct Gene Transfer Methods: Silicon Carbide Whiskers
Silicon carbide whiskers (SCWs) resemble needles with a diameter of 0.5 μm and sizes ranging 
from 10 to 80 μm. Since these silicon whiskers are rigid and easily broken, the resulting edges 
pierce the cell wall and, eventually, the nucleus of the cell (Akram et al., 2016). SCWs have the 
ability to produce needle-like holes in the cell membrane that allow foreign DNA to enter the target 
cells when vortexed (Mizuno et al., 2004). Silicon carbide whisker-based transformation is easy 
and quick and doesn’t need any specialized tools or machinery; yet, the process must be performed 
with great care since silicon carbide fibers have carcinogenic potential. The degradation of cells 
throughout operation restricts their ability to regenerate, leading to a relatively low conversion effi￾ciency (Bonawitz et al., 2019).
5.2.7  Direct Gene Transfer Methods: Pollen Tubes
Pollen tubes typically extend along the style to the ovule, with pollen emerging on the stigma sur￾face. In order to fertilize the ovule in larger plants, the nucleus of the microspore descends through 
the pollen tube. Plant genetic transformation mediated by pollen tubes entails cutting off the tip of 
the stigma of the host plant as soon as pollination occurs and gradually inserting a foreign DNA 
solution into the damaged style (Luo et al., 1988). The external DNA travels to the recipient plant’s 
ovary via the pollen tube and unites with the fertilized, undivided recipient egg. This method 
integrates foreign DNA with the recipient’s DNA through embryonic development, which is subse￾quently released via the converted seeds (Ali et al., 2015). Unlike other methods, the pollen tube￾mediated transformation of plants does not need protoplast manipulation, the cultivation of cells, or 
plant regeneration procedures (Yongsheng et al., 2005). Furthermore, this strategy frequently avoids 
genotype limitations, poor regeneration capacity, and genetic heterogeneity caused by methylation 
and mutation. However, this strategy is not extensively used for gene transfer as it has only been 
effective in a few single-celled plants or plants that are dicot due to natural blooming time limits 
(Zhang et al., 2015).
5.3 NANOPARTICLES OPTIMIZED FOR GENE EDITING AND 
GENE DELIVERY
5.3.1  Metallic Nanoparticles
Metallic nanoparticles, which are small particles of metal that are usually < 100 nm, have special 
characteristics that set them apart from larger particles. Their minuscule size grants them a large sur￾face area to volume ratio, which increases the degree to which they react, as well as distinct optical, 
electronic, and magnetic properties. These characteristics make metallic nanoparticles invaluable 
across diverse fields, including electronics, catalysis, medicine, environmental remediation, and 
optics.Nanomaterial-Mediated Plant Gene Transformation 65
In particular, gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) are useful for bioimaging and biomedical applications 
due to their optical absorption and scattering characteristics. Gold nanoparticles are particularly 
intriguing due to their easily synthesized nature, customizable size and shape, adaptable surface 
modification, bioconjugation, and changeable optical characteristics (Jat et al., 2020). AuNPs have 
been extensively researched as multifunctional gene carriers due to their simplicity to produce, 
superior biocompatibility, precise surface chemistry, and ease of molecular imaging using FRET. 
They are typically functionalized with positively charged compounds, like cationic peptides, amino 
acids, and polymers (Loh et al., 2016).
Gold nanoparticles can effectively absorb DNA in rice, tamarind, and tobacco when inserted 
via carbonaceous carriers. The combination of carbon composites and gold nanoparticles provides 
a greater area for DNA loading and stability. Au nanoparticles can co-deliver plasmid DNA and 
proteins into tobacco, onion, and teosinte. While metal nanoparticles have been used in plant 
science as micronutrients and nanofertilizers, little progress has been made in using them to deliver 
biomolecules into plant cells (Jat et al., 2020).
Gold nanoparticles are also used as carriers of multifunctional gene suppliers because of their 
adaptability, versatility, ease of synthesis, biocompatibility, and surface chemistry. Research has 
shown that DNA-functionalized AuNPs can modify gene expression in plant cells and deliver 
nucleic acid therapies. AuNPs show excellent gene transport efficiency, maximum gene expres￾sion reduction, increased nuclease immunity, complex bonding affinity, and variable toxicity. Gold 
nanoparticles have been used in rice cell gene transfer and have produced excellent gene guns 
for transferring plasmid DNA to Nicotiana tabacum. This method limits damage caused to plant 
cells and offers better transformation efficiency due to the minimal plasmid and gold requirements 
compared to commercial micrometer-sized gold particles.
The use of biolistic co-transformation systems using gold nanoparticles is an effective method 
for delivering genes into rice cultivars. The method involves generating uniformly shaped and 
lengthened magnetic gold nanoparticles (mGNPs) that are bound to fluorescein isothiocyanate. 
Using this method, transforming aromatic Iranian rice cultivars using gold nanoparticles signifi￾cantly reduces plant cell toxicity and requires less plasmid and gold. Transgenic traces show similar 
growth and no abnormal physiologic traits by using nonviral vector molecules, which are introduced 
into plant cells using an external magnetic field (Gad et al., 2020).
Meanwhile, silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) can be transported around plants via vascular tissues 
and intercellular gaps, piercing root cell walls and plasma membranes before entering the xylem and 
stele. They can be absorbed and transported to leaves via the xylem. In Arabidopsis thaliana, AgNPs 
can be absorbed by roots and transferred to shoots. They can also be found in vascular tissues and 
throughout the plant after lateral roots have grown. AgNPs enter plant systems through the cell walls 
of root cells, breaking through plasma membranes and the cell walls of the roots’ epidermal layer. 
Larger AgNPs are filtered out, while smaller AgNPs can flow through pores. Large AgNPs can infil￾trate the cell wall and assimilate by inducing the formation of new, large pores. AgNPs can also be 
absorbed by plant leaves, such as stomatal guard cells and lettuce leaves. Foliar exposure to AgNPs 
leads to 17–200 times greater silver accumulation compared to exposure via the root system. AgNPs 
can be absorbed and moved by long-distance transport to leaves or other organs, potentially contam￾inating fruits, seeds, and other plant edibles via translocation (Yan and Chen, 2019).
5.3.2  Carbon Nanoparticles
Carbon nanotubes and carbon nanodots are the two primary forms of carbon-based nanoparticles 
that are currently known. Originally, carbon nanotubes (CNTs) were created to be used in elec￾tronics as conductors and electrocatalysts in small devices (Doyle et al., 2020).
Plant cells undergo intricate genetic metamorphosis and their walls function as a strong barrier 
that prevents external agents from entering. Animal and plant cells use distinct, pass-connected 66 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
polysaccharides to form their walls. The use of nanomaterials for the transport of genetic cargo is 
restricted by this structure of plant cellular walls. It has been found that multiwalled carbon nanotubes 
(MWCNTs) may pass through plant cell membranes by escaping endocytosis and can localize in 
the nucleus, plastids, and vacuoles. Engineered recombinant polypeptides and Arg-SWCNTs have 
been explored as easy, fast, and secure gene carriers for transforming tobacco root cells. In mature 
plant species, a mixture of pure and chemically modified high-aspect ratio nanomaterials is used to 
deliver diffusion-based plasmids and siRNA. In order to successfully accomplish temporary gene 
regulation and inactivation in mature plants, Demirer et al. developed a nanomaterial-based delivery 
system that can transfer active biological molecules into any model crop plant species. Purified, 
chemically functional nanotubes effectively transfer DNA and alter gene expression without the 
need for transgene incorporation in several crops, like Nicotiana benthamiana, Triticum aestivum, 
and Arugula protoplasts.
For effective gene transfer, many inorganic nanoparticles, such as gold NPs, carbon nanoparticles, 
and mesoporous silica nanoparticles, have been employed. However, their usage for Cas9 delivery 
has not yet been discussed. CRISPR-Cas systems are effective for efficient genome editing in a 
wide variety of bacterial and eukaryotic species. Carbon nanotubes are effective delivery vehicles 
for different genetic elements inside plant cells and chloroplasts because they can pass through 
organelles, cellular membranes, and plant cell walls. Further study on CNT-mediated delivery is 
needed to develop low-cost, simple, and reliable delivery technologies that can efficiently transmit 
genetic material into all phenotypes of any plant species, leading to more proficient plant genome 
engineering systems (Gad et al., 2020).
5.3.3 Silica Nanoparticles
MSNs, with their rich textural features and functionalizable surfaces, have been used in genetic 
engineering for various applications. For example, Dr. Kan Wang successfully used MSNs to deliver 
functional biomolecules into plant cells in vivo, coding for chemicals and DNA. Martin-Ortigosa 
et al. introduced Cre recombinase into maize cells using MSNs as carriers (Gad et al., 2020).
With sizes ranging from 10 to 100 nm, sodium chloride-modified silica nanoparticles have 
demonstrated a 70–75% greater transfection efficacy without cytotoxicity. The injection of modified 
silica nanoparticles does not cause any pathogenic alterations in the cells of mice. An innovative 
method of delivering genes involves using polyamidoamine dendrimers that are covalently bonded 
to the surfaces of mesoporous silica nanoparticles, forming a complex with plasmid DNA (Rai 
et al., 2012).
In plant biotechnology, chemically modified 3-nanometer MSNs provide the tissue-specific 
delivery of DNA and polypeptides. Mesoporous silica nanoparticles are important for plasmid cells 
and gene transfer. Functionalized MSNs can be used to increase the capacity of MSN-mediated 
plant transient gene expression systems; for example, by transferring foreign DNA components into 
entire Arabidopsis thaliana roots without mechanical assistance. These particles are useful tools for 
agricultural applications, such as delivering medications and genetic material to intended locations 
within plants. In order to reconstruct the loxP sites inside maize cells, Cre recombinase has been 
introduced into maize embryos using MSNs as transporters (Gad et al., 2020).
5.3.4  Bioinspired Nanoparticles: DNA Nanoparticles
For the administration of genes, drugs, and therapeutic agents, nanoparticle-based DNA and RNA 
delivery techniques are becoming more prevalent (Lv et al., 2020). DNA-free gene editing is a 
rapidly growing field in biological research due to its numerous benefits, including focused gen￾etic alterations without genome disruptions and the potential to produce transformed species in 
plant biology and biotechnology. However, it faces similar challenges as traditional transformation Nanomaterial-Mediated Plant Gene Transformation 67
methods (Tsanova et al., 2021). DNA nanostructures are nontoxic, efficient, and easy to metabolize, 
offering advantages such as resistance to nuclease-mediated biodegradation, outstanding biological 
stability, and good biocompatibility with tissues. The DNA nanostructure method is simple, adapt￾able, and modular for use in plants. Zhang et al. (2019) created DNA nanoparticles as a platform 
for siRNA delivery in plants, focusing on factors such as size, shape, stiffness, compactness, and 
attachment location. They assessed the internalization of these nanostructures into plant cells by 
measuring the fluorophore intensity conjugated to the DNA strands at the attachment loci. They 
found that the siRNA attachment locus and the effectiveness of nanoparticle internalization were 
directly correlated with gene expression reduction. The DNA nanoparticle method is a potential 
option for a large range of plant species (Lv et al., 2020).
5.3.5  Bioinspired Nanoparticles: Peptide Nanoparticles
About 30 long peptides with the ability to cross cells have been employed as biotransmitters to 
transport a variety of substances, including drugs, proteins, and DNA. It has been found that they 
are stable and able to pass through membranes and cell walls to release DNA inside of target cells. 
Peptides have also been shown to be able to transport macromolecules into plant cells, including 
BY-2 cells and tomato root tip cells. Recent research has shown that peptides that target specific 
organelles in intact plants can carry DNA into those organelles. Thagun et al. (2019) coupled two 
peptides—one with the ability to enter the cell and the other with the ability to locate the target 
chloroplast—with the desired gene, thereby successfully transporting DNA into plastids. However, 
there are still questions to be investigated, such as the poor release of foreign genes and the unre￾solved processes of peptide–DNA affiliation and dissociation (Lv et al., 2020).
5.3.6  Bioinspired Nanoparticles: Lipid Nanoparticles
High payload capacity, self-assembly, ease of production, and controllable physicochemical 
features are only a few of the benefits of lipid-based NPs. For these fundamental reasons, lipid 
NPs are the most frequently used for modifying genes. Lipid-like nanoparticles (LNPs) facilitate 
the efficient transportation of CRISPR-Cas9 cargo, resulting in accurate, sustained gene modifica￾tion. Ribonucleoproteins and nucleic acids are examples of polar compounds that can be adsorbed 
by liposomes if their outermost layer is cationic. LNPs can be enhanced using ionizable lipids, 
PEG-DMG, and Spy Cas9 mRNA. Nevertheless, functionalized LNPs can offer a route to more 
effective delivery methods for plant gene editing as rationally designed lipofectamine cannot meet 
the demands of new-generation, high-efficiency delivery systems (Vats et al., 2022).
5.4 NANOPARTICLE-MEDIATED GENE TRANSFORMATION
5.4.1 Nanocarrier Design
The process of designing nanocarriers is intricate and requires the use of heuristic techniques to 
choose the optimal nanoparticles and carriers for given applications. Pore size restricts NP absorp￾tion and transition across plant tissues, establishing size limits for different plant cells. The cell wall 
dominates NP size internalization restrictions, with cationic NPs being quicker and more efficient 
than anionic NPs. In order to properly transport biomolecules to target organelles, nanoparticles 
must avoid being encountered by endosomes for destruction. CNT internalization in protoplasts 
occurs by direct penetration and endocytosis, while impermeable multiwalled CNT internalization 
requires direct penetration. The passive uptake of single-walled CNTs depends on zeta potential 
and NP size in removed chloroplasts. Endocytosed single-walled CNTs carrying DNA localize in 
the cytosol, despite being transported to vacuoles in plants. The surface adsorption (physisorption) 
of biomolecules is a straightforward conjugation approach, but electrostatic interactions are 68 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
preferred for noncovalent cargo loading. Negatively charged DNA and RNA are attracted to cat￾ionic surfaces, which facilitate the electrostatic loading of genetic cargo. Rather than functionalizing 
their surfaces, porous NPs can be internally loaded with macromolecules or small molecules for 
controlled subcellular delivery. Plants have been shown to successfully receive biomolecules from 
NPs possessing some or all of the aforementioned qualities. However, the design of nanocarriers is a 
multifaceted and intricate process that may necessitate adjustments for various systems until a com￾prehensive link between NP design and function is established (Cunningham et al., 2018).
5.4.2 Nanoparticle–Plant Interactions
Nanoscale materials exhibit unique chemical and physical properties, making them promising for 
developing novel products and processes. However, unexpected interactions between nanoparticles 
and biological systems may have harmful effects, such as the formation of free radicals and oxida￾tive damage. Interactions between nanoparticles and plants are determined by the nanoparticles’ 
characteristics, environmental circumstances, and the plant species. Nanoparticles can enter plants 
via air fallout, unintentional release, contaminated soil, and direct application. The pericycle, cortex, 
and xylem are essential components in allowing nanoparticles into plants through the root system. 
The cell wall acts as a morphological filter, enabling selected nanoparticles with appropriate pore 
diameters to pass through. Smaller nanoparticles can readily reach plant cells via the root system; 
however, larger nanoparticles have to pass via deeper channels, like stigma and the stomal pores of 
leaves.
TABLE 5.1
Various nanoparticles and their advantages and disadvantages
Nanomaterial Advantages Disadvantages Reference
Carbon Nanotubes 
(CNTs)
Efficient internalization in protoplasts via 
direct penetration and endocytosis.
Potential for passive uptake depending 
on zeta potential and size in removed 
chloroplasts.
Successful cytosolic localization of DNA￾carrying single-walled CNTs despite 
transport to vacuoles.
May pose toxicity concerns depending on 
functionalization and exposure.
Complex synthesis and functionalization 
processes.
Potential for unintended interactions with 
biological systems.
(Cunningham 
et al., 
2018s)
Porous 
Nanoparticles 
(NPs)
Internal loading of macromolecules 
or tiny compounds for regulated 
intracellular release.
Alternative to surface functionalization 
for cargo loading.
Offers controlled release mechanisms for 
biomolecule delivery.
Requires precise control over pore sizes 
and internal loading processes.
May require optimization for different 
systems and cargo types.
Potential batch-to-batch variation 
properties.
(Munir et al., 
2023)
Metal-Based 
Nanoparticles
Promising for developing novel products 
and processes due to unique chemical 
and physical properties.
Can be engineered for specific 
applications and functionalities.
May induce harmful effects, such as 
reactive oxygen species (ROS) and 
oxidative stress.
Interactions with biological systems can 
lead to indirect toxicity symptoms in 
plants.
Risk of impairing biochemical activity 
and adsorbing inorganic ions from soil 
or nutritional media.
(Munir et al., 
2023)Nanomaterial-Mediated Plant Gene Transformation 69
Metal-based nanoparticles can impair biochemical functions by adsorbing inorganic elements, as 
well as chemicals from the soil or nutritional media, resulting in passive adverse reactions, such as 
wilting and chlorine poisoning. Nanoparticle–plant interactions dictate the buildup and distribution 
of nanoparticles across various habitat levels (Munir et al., 2023). Table 5.1 lists the advantages and 
disadvantages of several types of nanoparticles.
5.5 NANOMATERIAL-MEDIATED GENE MODIFICATION IN PLANTS 
FOR GMOS
Plant gene editing techniques could progress greatly if vital components like DNA and RNA 
could be introduced into plants using force-independent nanomaterial delivery techniques (Wang 
et al., 2019). The majority of nanoparticle-mediated delivery techniques do not provide stable gene 
transfer; hence, these techniques must be refined in conjunction with additional cutting-edge tech￾nologies to produce transgenic plants that have undergone stable transformation (Lv et al., 2020).
5.5.1  Carbon Nanoparticles
Carbon nanoparticles are classified into two groups according to the quantity of cylindrical graphene 
layers that they carry. There are single-walled CNTs (SWCNTs) and multiwalled CNTs (MWCNTs). 
Single-walled carbon nanotubes are composed of a cylindrical rolled graphene nanostructure with a 
diameter ranging from < 1 to 3 nm. MWCNTs have a diameter of 220 nm and are made up of many 
SWCNTs (Hendler et al., 2019). SWCNTs have numerous benefits in plant genetic engineering and 
they are used as a tool for gene transfer that can cross organelle membranes (Kwak et al., 2019). 
SCWNTs have features like tensile strength, high surface area to volume ratios, high aspect ratios, 
and biocompatibility (Hendler et al., 2019; Mohanta et al., 2019). As a result, plasmids can be trans -
ferred into entire plants via SWNTs. The standard technique for packing plasmid onto altered SWNTs 
is the electrostatic adsorption of negatively charged plasmid DNA to covalently modified SWNTs 
using cationic polyethyleneimine (PEI-SWNT) (Demirer et al., 2019). The LEEP model has been 
used to modify nanoparticles for the passive transport of biological material to particular plant cell 
organelles. Researchers have also synthesized various forms of chitosan-complexed single-walled 
carbon nanotubes through the covalent binding of chitosan compounds in order to functionalize 
them. These modifications improve DNA loading and transport efficiency in chloroplasts (Kwak 
et al., 2019). By using CS-SWCNTs, plasmid genomes containing reporter genes for YFP can be 
transferred to chloroplasts. Additionally, mature watercress, tobacco, and Eruca sativa plants have 
shown YFP expression in their chloroplasts (Giraldo et al., 2014).
5.5.2  DNA Nanoparticles
Gene transfer and the transfer of medicinal drugs have been extensively facilitated by DNA 
nanoparticle-based delivery systems (Gao et al., 2019). DNA nanostructures provide various 
advantages as they are highly biologically stable and do not break down when exposed to nucleases 
(Kim et al., 2020). Several DNA nanostructure patterns can be used, including 3D geometric forms 
(such as tetrahedrons and icosahedrons), as well as nanostars, nanostrings, and nanocubes. Cargo can 
be carried either inside or outside of DNA nanoparticles and can be delivered by DNA nanoparticle￾based delivery systems through lipid layers, which are components of the cell’s outer membrane, 
allowing cargo to enter the nucleus and perform its intended role. The walls of plant cells act as an 
obstruction to prevent biomaterials, like DNA and RNA, from passing through. Endogenous gene 
silencing mechanisms in plant foliage are made possible by DNA nanostructures. Therefore, to effect￾ively silence genes in Nicotiana benthamiana leaves, DNA nanostructures have been engineered to 
anchor siRNA to specific loci on nanomaterials and infiltrate into plant cells (Zhang et al., 2019).70 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
5.5.3  Magnetic Nanoparticles
Magnetic nanoparticles have remarkable compatibility and superparamagnetism, i.e., they have the 
ability to display magnetization when a magnetic field is present. MNPs include metal NPs (cobalt, 
nickel, etc.), metal alloys (FeCo, FePt, etc.), and metal oxides (iron oxide, etc.) (Majidi et al., 2016). 
Among magnetic nanoparticles, Fe3O4 and Fe2O3 are small, stable, and have high surface areas. 
They are ideal materials for a variety of field applications and fundamental research due to their lack 
of sedimentation, reduced cytotoxicity, and strong thermal properties (Cardoso et al., 2018).
Magnetic gold nanoparticles (mGNPs) can be used to deliver cargo to target genes in plant cells. 
These mGNPs have a diameter of 20–30 nm and are prepared with polyethylene glycol to function￾ally modify their surface to add an amine functional group. Using an amide covalent link, the 
exterior of mGNPs can be coated with fluorescent labels with plasmid DNA, which can then be 
introduced into protoplasts using a magnetic field. It has been found that canola protoplasts can 
receive up to 95% of FITC-labeled mGNPs (Hao et al., 2013). Zhao et al. (2017) also described 
a plant-transforming technique called “pollen magnetofection”, which uses MNP-based DNA 
delivery. MNP–DNA compounds are incubated with competent cotton pollen and the complexes 
are then delivered into the pollen by an external magnetic field. Therefore, transgenic seeds can 
be created without the requirement for tissue cultures by using pollen magnetofection (Zhao et al., 
2017) (Figure 5.2).
FIGURE 5.2 Non-vector-mediated gene delivery using nanoparticles. Various nanoparticles are engineered 
with target genes and cargo is delivered to plant cells in the culture. Selected cells produce transgenic plants.Nanomaterial-Mediated Plant Gene Transformation 71
5.5.4  Metal Nanoparticles
Metal nanoparticles, such as gold, palladium, etc., can be used for gene delivery because their 
distinctive optical absorption and dispersion characteristics render them beneficial for biological 
imaging and therapeutic uses. Gold nanoparticle-functionalized carbon bullets can be used for 
effective gene transfer accompanied by biolistics. It’s interesting to note that gold ions can be 
reduced to gold nanoparticles by soaking them in fungal biomass. The effective formation of AuNPs 
is shown by the development of a ruby red color upon the reduction of gold ions. Additionally, it has 
been reported that these particles are able to transport approximately 2400 nanograms of plasmid 
when they are implanted into carbon matrices. When gold nanoparticles are used in combination, the 
surface area for loading cargo increases, resulting in high packing efficiency and decreased nuclease 
degradation. GUS reporter enzyme expression has been used to evaluate the transformation of 
tobacco and rice cells treated with HTC 600-Au plasmid, involving a GUS gene expression cassette. 
It has been further proposed that sharp-edged carbon matrices aid in the delivery of cargo into target 
cells using this composite (Vijayakumar et al., 2010). Zinc sulfide nanoparticles have been used for 
gene delivery in tobacco cells. Positively charged poly-L-lysine (PLL) is added to the surface of zinc 
sulfide nanoparticles (ZnSNPs) to enable electrostatic interaction with negatively charged DNA. 
Stable gene transfer in tobacco crops has been successfully produced by the sonoporation-mediated 
delivery of plasmid-coated ZnSNPs into tobacco cells. Because of their low loading capacity, it is 
uncommon to employ metal nanoparticles exclusively for gene delivery in plants; they mostly serve 
as signals for cargo release and bioimaging (Yu-Qin et al., 2012). Table 5.2 provides an overview of 
nanoparticle-mediated gene transfer in crops using various delivery systems.
TABLE 5.2
Nanoparticle-based gene transfer systems in crops
Nanoparticle Cargo Target Plant Cell Delivery Method Reference
CNTs GFP and Cy3 
DNA
Nicotiana benthamiana, Gossypium 
hirsutum, Triticum aestivum 
leaves, and Eruca sativa (Arugula) 
protoplasts
Infiltrating the 
solution with a 
needleless syringe
(Demirer et al., 2019)
CNTs ssDNA-FITC German chamomile (L chamomilla M) Sonoporation (Ghaghelestay et al.,
2020)
CNTs Plasmid Chloroplasts of Nicotiana tabacum, 
Eruca sativa, and Nasturtium 
officinale and mesophyll cells of 
Arabidopsis thaliana
Passive gene 
transfer
(Kwak et al., 2019)
SWCNTs GFP Nicotiana tabacum var. Virginia root 
cells
Passive gene 
transfer
(Golestananipour et al.,
2018)
DNA NPs RNAi and siRNA Nicotiana benthamiana leaves Passive delivery (Zhang et al., 2019)
Magnetic Au 
Nanoparticles
GUS vector Brassica napus protoplasts and cell 
suspension
Magnetism (Hao et al., 2013)
Magnetic 
FeONPs
Selectable marker 
gene plasmid
Microspores of Gossypium hirsutum Magnetism (Zhao et al., 2017)
Magnetic Au 
Nanoparticles
b-glucuronidase 
plasmid
Brassica napus protoplasts and cell 
suspension
Magnetism (Hao et al., 2013)
Gold-Plated 
MSNs
GFP gene Allium cepa epidermal cells Biolistics (Martin et al., 2014)72 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
5.5.5  Mesoporous Silica Nanoparticles
MSNs are easy to produce, scalable, affordable, and controllable. Because silica is readily 
available in nature and has good compatibility, it is classified by the FDA as harmless and is 
frequently used in skincare and FDA-certified food additives (Halas, 2008). In order to explore 
the potential interactions between capped MSN systems and diverse plant cells, various MSNs 
featuring distinct surface functional groups/caps have been generated (Torney et al., 2007; 
Tang et al., 2012). Considering that bigger DNA segments may not fit through MSNs’ smaller 
pores, polymeric films have been employed to create a positive charge on MSNs’ surfaces. 
Polyethyleneimine (PEI) and polyamidoamine dendrimers are examples of often-utilized 
polymers for this purpose.
In one study, fluorescein-labeled MSNs did not absorb nanoparticles when incubated with 
tobacco mesophyll protoplasts. Surface-functionalized MSNs with the functional group triethylene 
glycol were then inserted with vectors carrying the green fluorescent protein (GFP) gene. After 
36 hours of incubation with the tobacco mesophyll protoplasts, GFP expression was seen in the 
MSNs. This proved that a critical factor in plant cell endocytosis is particle surface characteristics. 
Mesoporous silica NPs can be coated with layers of gold nanoparticles to boost the quantity of 
MSNs and improve their transport into target cells. This helps to prevent DNA from leaking out 
of MSNs. Transient GFP expression is possible in target cells when MSNs with vector DNA are 
inserted into tobacco seeds via the biolistics method (Torney et al., 2007).
In another study, a gene producing fluorescence was regulated by an inducible promoter to 
investigate the delivery of several compounds concurrently into plant cells. Wild tobacco leaves 
were inundated with a plasmid that was placed on MSNs and contained an inducer for GFP (beta￾oestradiol). The ability of the MSNs to simultaneously convey the inducer of GFP and the inducible 
GFP gene into the plant cells was demonstrated by the detection of fluorescent foci in the cytoplasm 
of the cells.
In plant science, RNA interference is an effective approach for deciphering and modifying 
the pathways involved in cell–cell interactions and may speed up the emergence of novel plant 
characteristics and increase crop productivity. There is a novel method that can be applied externally 
to transfer siRNA into leaves without the need for external pressure. Another technique utilizing 
mesoporous silica nanoparticles was developed by Cai et al. (2024), which succeeds in temporary 
gene knockdown with molecular suppression efficacy of up to 98%
For this method, two often investigated genes, PDS and ChlH, are first subjected to MSN￾mediated siRNA silencing. For the synthesis of carotenoids, PDS (phytoene desaturase) is a 
crucial rate-limiting enzyme. Photosynthetic pigment concentration changes are indicated by 
the albinism generated by PDS silencing. To produce chlorophyll, magnesium chelatase’s H 
component is encoded by the ChlH gene. The interruption of chlorophyll production caused by 
ChlH gene suppression in leaves causes a yellow phenotype. White patches and yellow traits 
have been observed after spraying MSN-siPDS and MSN-siChlH on N. benthamiana leaves. 
In that study, the selected genes were consistently shut down via a 14-day period of recurrent 
MSN delivery involving multiple siRNAs. Using digital PCR and qPCR, the mRNA level of 
four genes (GFP, SOS, FtsH2, and HHL1) were found and all four were successfully knocked 
down. The blade bleaching of leaves is a result of silencing HHL1 and FtsH2. Shorter, etiolated 
seedlings in treated plants are an indication of SOS silencing that can lessen abiotic stress resist￾ance. Cai et al. (2024) showed that every gene’s qPCR-measured knockdown efficiency matched 
the digital PCR results, which demonstrated that over 90% of SOS, 40% of FtsH2, and 50% of 
HHL1 were eliminated, together with about 98% of GFP. The versatility and adaptability of the 
MSN-siRNA delivery platform allows for a wide range of uses. MSNs can serve as a potential 
tool to help to understand the regulation of genes throughout a particular plant’s developmental 
stage. Thus, the MSN-siRNA delivery system has the potential to be an effective tool in plant 
biotechnology (Cai et al., 2024).Nanomaterial-Mediated Plant Gene Transformation 73
5.6 APPLICATIONS AND FUTURE PROSPECTS
5.6.1  Applications
Nanoparticles (NPs) have been used to enhance the effectiveness of gene transformation systems in 
model plants and crops. NPs are small, biocompatible, adjustable, and varied, making them ideal 
biomolecular carriers for plant genetic engineering. They can manage product distribution in various 
species of plants and tissues, as well as containing interfering RNAs for post-transcriptional gene silen￾cing and plasmid DNA for genetic transformation. NPs can also enable DNA-free editing and speed up 
the process of developing plant genome editing. Plant suspension cells and mature plants are the targets 
of NP-mediated plant gene modification. Organelle genetic engineering allows for the inheritance of 
genes, including mitochondria and chloroplasts, without the need for transgenes. However, further 
research is needed to understand how nanoparticles enter subcellular organelles via the plasma mem￾brane. Protoplasts have been employed for gene delivery to decrease the influence of plant cell walls 
on the production of transgenics (Wu et al., 2023). The creation of agricultural applications for nano￾technology is crucial to address the numerous challenges that the global farming and food industries 
are confronting. Increasing agricultural productivity, promptly detecting plant illnesses, and effectively 
advancing treatments have long been challenges in these industries. To optimize agricultural product￾ivity, it is necessary to enhance plants’ capacity to take up nutrients from the soil. The following sections 
contain examples that show how carbon nanotubes can increase the yields of agricultural plants.
5.6.2  Tomato
Compared to the control, tomato plant seeds fertilized with multiwalled carbon nanotubes had greater 
biomass and well-developed stems. The rootlets in both groups seemed to be the same length. Plants 
containing tomatoes were shown to develop up to twice as rapidly as those in the control group. This 
was explained by the fact that the multiwalled carbon nanotubes penetrating into the seed coating 
created additional holes. It was suggested that these pores enhanced nutrient and water penetration 
(Khodakaovskaya et al., 2009; Khodakaovskaya et al., 2013).
5.6.3  Rice
It has been shown that carbon nanostructures have an impact on rice seed germination. Significantly, 
it has been discovered that during germination, carbon nanotubes boost the moisture level within 
seeds. As opposed to control seedlings, carbon nanotube-treated seeds have been shown to have 
stronger and more developed roots and branches (Nair et al., 2012).
5.6.4  Maize
Maize seedlings subjected to varying quantities of multiwalled carbon nanotubes and cultivated on an 
agar nutritional medium showed substantial growth. Rootlet growth was aided by pure, multiwalled 
carbon nanotubes. The inclusion of carbon nanotubes was demonstrated to boost the water imbibition 
rate. Additionally, there was a noticeable improvement in ionic nutrient transport, which could have 
been caused by an influx of water. However, the impact was less pronounced at higher multiwalled 
carbon nanotube concentrations. These results demonstrate the promise of using multiwalled carbon 
nanotubes to maximize water transport and raise maize biomass output (Tiwari et al., 2013).
5.6.5  Mustard
The germination and growth rate of Brassica juncea were assessed in the presence of either oxidized 
or virgin multiwalled carbon nanotubes. Researchers discovered that oxidized multiwalled carbon 74 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
nanotubes improved the root tissues’ ability to absorb water and raised the moisture content of seeds. 
Additionally, they improved the rate of seed germination. These outcomes were seen at extremely 
low nanotube concentrations (0.0023mg/mL). Rather than introducing them to improve germination 
and development conditions, seeds could be immersed in an alloy of oxidized multiwalled carbon 
nanotubes to boost growth rate. Research into the process of liquid penetration into seeds in the con￾text of carbon nanotubes is underway (Mondal et al., 2011).
5.6.6 Wheat
The germination of wheat showed a notable improvement when multiwalled carbon nanotubes were 
present. After treating the wheat, Fe3O4-functionalized multiwalled carbon nanotubes were iden￾tified in the epidermal layer of the root cells. The Raman spectroscopy technique revealed that the 
modified nanotubes were adsorbed onto the root surface without altering the form of the root tissue 
or affecting plant development. Researchers discovered functional groups, such as carboxylic acids 
and isothiocyanates, on the carbon nanotube adsorption sites. This could have been the result of the 
chemical bonding of the Fe3O4-functionalized multiwalled carbon nanotubes with the plant tissues 
(Miralles et al., 2012).
5.6.7  Challenges
Nanoparticles have been used in plant research for gene transformation, plant growth modu￾lation, carrier systems, and biosensors. However, their application is complicated by their phys￾ical and chemical features, including their dimensions, stillness, charge, arrangement, low water 
distribution, and transferring qualities, which can hinder their use. The effectiveness with which 
nanoparticles can transport genes is determined by the durability of colloidal particles. The use of 
nanoparticles may increase as surface modification techniques progress. The high loading capacity 
of nanoparticles is critical for gene delivery. However, the size and pores of the cell wall prevent 
nanoparticles from entering plant cells. The biodegradation of nanoparticles is very important to 
consider when establishing their safety and environmental friendliness. Furthermore, nanoparticles 
may induce phytotoxicity, hormonal abnormalities, and free radicals, which have the potential to 
affect the health and survival of transgenic crops (Lv et al., 2020).
5.6.8 Future prospects
Transgenic plants are created through tissue cultures, which are labor-intensive and prone to produ￾cing mutants. A unique technique has been developed to overcome such limitations, including the 
constitutive forms of Wus2 and Bbm and reductions in shoot meristem. This callus-free approach 
improves productivity and saves time. Gene editing has been rapidly developed to precisely alter 
sequences, which opens up new possibilities for molecular breeding and plant design. ZFNs, 
TALENs, and CRISPR-Cas9 are the three primary technologies for creating targeted genetic alter￾ations to enable crop development. However, their usefulness is restricted by their complex design, 
considerable off-target rates, and high costs.
CRISPR-Cas9 is a theoretically easier and faster tool for genome editing, which can create 
double-strand breaks in the genomic DNA of plants. It has been successfully applied to alter genes 
in Oryza sativa, wheat, tobacco, and Arabidopsis. However, effective regeneration and transform￾ation processes pose significant obstacles for genome editing technology.
Merging nanotechnology, de novo generation, and genetic editing is an emerging method for gene 
transformation mediated by nanoparticles. Wus2 and Bbm genes can enhance transformation effi￾ciency and encourage plant regeneration, serving as potential remedies. These genes can be supplied 
via nanoparticle-mediated gene transformation and cutting-edge approaches, like CRISPR-Cas9, Nanomaterial-Mediated Plant Gene Transformation 75
which can enhance plant rejuvenation and the generation of transgenic crops, permitting ground￾breaking improvements in plant biotechnology (Lv et al., 2020).
REFERENCES
Akram, Zahid, Shaukat Ali, Ghulam Muhammad Ali, Yusuf Zafar, Zahid Hussain Shah, and Fahad Alghabari. 
“Whisker-mediated transformation of peanut with chitinase gene enhances resistance to leaf spot dis￾ease.” Crop Breeding and Applied Biotechnology 16 (2016): 108–114.
Ali, Asjad, Sun Woong Bang, Sang-Min Chung, and Jack E. Staub. “Plant transformation via pollen tube￾mediated gene transfer.” Plant Molecular Biology Reporter 33 (2015): 742–747.
Altpeter, Fredy, Niranjan Baisakh, Roger Beachy, Ralph Bock, Teresa Capell, Paul Christou, Henry Daniell 
et al. “Particle bombardment and the genetic enhancement of crops: myths and realities.” Molecular 
Breeding 15 (2005): 305–327.
Bonawitz, Nicholas D., W. Michael Ainley, Asuka Itaya, Sivarama R. Chennareddy, Tobias Cicak, Katherine 
Effinger, Ke Jiang et al. “Zinc finger nuclease-mediated targeting of multiple transgenes to an 
endogenous soybean genomic locus via non-homologous end joining.” Plant Biotechnology Journal 17, 
no. 4 (2019): 750–761.
Cai, Yao, Zhujiang Liu, Hang Wang, Huan Meng, and Yuhong Cao. “Mesoporous silica nanoparticles mediate 
SiRNA delivery for long-term multi-gene silencing in intact plants.” Advanced Science 11, no. 9 
(2024): 2301358.
Cardoso, Vanessa Fernandes, António Francesko, Clarisse Ribeiro, Manuel Bañobre-López, Pedro Martins, 
and Senentxu Lanceros-Mendez. “Advances in magnetic nanoparticles for biomedical applications.” 
Advanced Healthcare Materials 7, no. 5 (2018): 1700845.
Cunningham, Francis J., Natalie S. Goh, Gozde S. Demirer, Juliana L. Matos, and Markita P. Landry. 
“Nanoparticle-mediated delivery towards advancing plant genetic engineering.” Trends in Biotechnology
36, no. 9 (2018): 882–897.
Demirer, Gozde S., Huan Zhang, Juliana L. Matos, Natalie S. Goh, Francis J. Cunningham, Younghun Sung, 
Roger Chang et al. “High aspect ratio nanomaterials enable delivery of functional genetic material 
without DNA integration in mature plants.” Nature Nanotechnology 14, no. 5 (2019): 456–464.
Demirer, Gozde S., Huan Zhang, Natalie S. Goh, Eduardo González-Grandío, and Markita P. Landry. “Carbon 
nanotube–mediated DNA delivery without transgene integration in intact plants.” Nature Protocols 14, 
no. 10 (2019): 2954–2971.
Doyle, Cara G. “The Use of Carbon Nanodots as a New Method of Genetic Modification and Gene Editing in 
Crop Plants.” PhD diss., University of Bristol, 2020
Gad, A. E., N. Rosenberg, and A. Altman. “Liposome-mediated gene delivery into plant cells.” Physiologia 
Plantarum 79, no. 1 (1990): 177–183.
Gad, Mohamed A., Ming-ju Li, Farah K. Ahmed, and Hassan Almoammar. “Nanomaterials for gene delivery 
and editing in plants: Challenges and future perspective.” In Multifunctional Hybrid Nanomaterials for 
Sustainable Agri-Food and Ecosystems, pp. 135–153. Elsevier, 2020.
Gao, Yansha, Qian Li, Jingjing Zhang, Chengwei Wu, Zhifa Shen, Chang Xue, Huan-Tsung Chang, and Zai￾Sheng Wu. “Bead-string-shaped DNA nanowires with intrinsic structural advantages and their potential 
for biomedical applications.” ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces 12, no. 3 (2019): 3341–3353.
Gelvin, Stanton B. “Integration of Agrobacterium T-DNA into the plant genome.” Annual Review of Genetics
51 (2017): 195–217.
Ghaghelestany, Ali Babaei, Ahmad Jahanbakhshi, and Ebrahim Taghinezhad. “Gene transfer to German chamo￾mile (L chamomilla M) using cationic carbon nanotubes.” Scientia Horticulturae 263 (2020): 109106.
Giraldo, Juan Pablo, Markita P. Landry, Sean M. Faltermeier, Thomas P. McNicholas, Nicole M. Iverson, 
Ardemis A. Boghossian, Nigel F. Reuel et al. “Plant nanobionics approach to augment photosynthesis 
and biochemical sensing.” Nature Materials 13, no. 4 (2014): 400–408.
Golestanipour, Arezoo, Maryam Nikkhah, Ali Aalami, and Saman Hosseinkhani. “Gene delivery to tobacco 
root cells with single-walled carbon nanotubes and cell-penetrating fusogenic peptides.” Molecular 
Biotechnology 60 (2018): 863–878.
Halas, Naomi J. “Nanoscience under glass: The versatile chemistry of silica nanostructures.” ACS Nano 2, 
no. 2 (2008): 179–183.76 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
Hao, Yuzhi, Xiaoyan Yang, Yongzhong Shi, Steven Song, James Xing, Janet Marowitch, Jianmin Chen, and Jie 
Chen. “Magnetic gold nanoparticles as a vehicle for fluorescein isothiocyanate and DNA delivery into 
plant cells.” Botany 91, no. 7 (2013): 457–466.
Hayta, Sadiye, Mark A. Smedley, Selcen U. Demir, Robert Blundell, Alison Hinchliffe, Nicola Atkinson, and 
Wendy A. Harwood. “An efficient and reproducible Agrobacterium-mediated transformation method for 
hexaploid wheat (Triticum aestivum L.).” Plant Methods 15 (2019): 1–15.
Hendler-Neumark, A. and Bisker, G. Fluorescent single-walled carbon nanotubes for protein detection. Sensors, 
19, no. 24 (2019), 5403.
Hao, Y., X. Yang, Y. Shi, S., Song, J. Xing, J. Marowitch, J. Chen, and J. Chen. Botany 91 (2013), 457–466.
Jat, Sanjeev K., Jaydeep Bhattacharya, and Manoj K. Sharma. “Nanomaterial based gene delivery: A promising 
method for plant genome engineering.” Journal of Materials Chemistry B 8, no. 19 (2020): 4165–4175.
Kausch, Albert P., Kimberly Nelson-Vasilchik, Joel Hague, Muruganantham Mookkan, Hector Quemada, 
Stephen Dellaporta, Christopher Fragoso, and Zhanyuan J. Zhang. “Edit at will: Genotype inde￾pendent plant transformation in the era of advanced genomics and genome editing.” Plant Science 281 
(2019): 186–205.
Keshavareddy, G., A. R. V. Kumar, and Vemanna S. Ramu. “Methods of plant transformation-A review. 
International Journal of Current Microbiology and Applied Sciences 7, no. 7 (2018): 2656–2668.
Khodakovskaya, Mariya V., Bong-Soo Kim, Jong Nam Kim, Mohammad Alimohammadi, Enkeleda Dervishi, 
Thikra Mustafa, and Carl E. Cernigla. “Carbon nanotubes as plant growth regulators: Effects on tomato 
growth, reproductive system, and soil microbial community.” Small 9, no. 1 (2013): 115–123.
Khodakovskaya, Mariya, Enkeleda Dervishi, Meena Mahmood, Yang Xu, Zhongrui Li, Fumiya Watanabe, and 
Alexandru S. Biris. “Carbon nanotubes are able to penetrate plant seed coat and dramatically affect seed 
germination and plant growth.” ACS Nano 3, no. 10 (2009): 3221–3227.
Kim, Chan-Jin, Ji-eun Park, Xiaole Hu, Shine K. Albert, and So-Jung Park. “Peptide-Driven shape control of 
low-dimensional DNA nanostructures.” ACS Nano 14, no. 2 (2020): 2276–2284.
Kotnik, Tadej, Lea Rems, Mounir Tarek, and Damijan Miklavčič. “Membrane electroporation and 
electropermeabilization: Mechanisms and models.” Annual Review of Biophysics 48 (2019): 63–91.
Kumar, Rakesh, Harohalli Masthigowda Mamrutha, Amandeep Kaur, Karnam Venkatesh, Davinder Sharma, 
and Gyanendra Pratap Singh. “Optimization of Agrobacterium-mediated transformation in spring bread 
wheat using mature and immature embryos.” Molecular Biology Reports 46, no. 2 (2019): 1845–1853.
Kwak, Seon-Yeong, Tedrick Thomas Salim Lew, Connor J. Sweeney, Volodymyr B. Koman, Min Hao 
Wong, Karen Bohmert-Tatarev, Kristi D. Snell, Jun Sung Seo, Nam-Hai Chua, and Michael S. Strano. 
“Chloroplast-selective gene delivery and expression in planta using chitosan-complexed single-walled 
carbon nanotube carriers.” Nature Nanotechnology 14, no. 5 (2019): 447–455.
Loh, Xian Jun, Tung-Chun Lee, Qingqing Dou, and G. Roshan Deen. “Utilising inorganic nanocarriers for gene 
delivery.” Biomaterials Science 4, no. 1 (2016): 70–86.
Lörz, H., J. Paszkowski, C. Dierks-Ventling, and I. Potrykus. “Isolation and characterization of cytoplasts 
and miniprotoplasts derived from protoplasts of cultured cells.” Physiologia Plantarum 53, no. 3 
(1981): 385–391.
Luo, Zhong-xun, and Ray Wu. “A simple method for the transformation of rice via the pollen-tube pathway.” 
Plant Molecular Biology Reporter 6 (1988): 165–174.
Lv, Zongyou, Rui Jiang, Junfeng Chen, and Wansheng Chen. “Nanoparticle-mediated gene transformation 
strategies for plant genetic engineering.” The Plant Journal 104, no. 4 (2020): 880–891.
Majidi, Sima, Fatemeh Zeinali Sehrig, Mohammad Samiei, Morteza Milani, Elham Abbasi, Kianoosh 
Dadashzadeh, and Abolfazl Akbarzadeh. “Magnetic nanoparticles: Applications in gene delivery and 
gene therapy.” Artificial Cells, Nanomedicine, and Biotechnology 44, no. 4 (2016): 1186–1193.
Martin-Ortigosa, Susana, David J. Peterson, Justin S. Valenstein, Victor S-Y. Lin, Brian G. Trewyn, L. Alexander 
Lyznik, and Kan Wang. “Mesoporous silica nanoparticle-mediated intracellular Cre protein delivery for 
maize genome editing via loxP site excision.” Plant Physiology 164, no. 2 (2014): 537–547.
Miralles, Pola, Errin Johnson, Tamara L. Church, and Andrew T. Harris. “Multiwalled carbon nanotubes in alfalfa 
and wheat: Toxicology and uptake.” Journal of the Royal Society Interface 9, no. 77 (2012): 3514–3527.
Mizuno, Kiyotaka, Wataru Takahashi, Takashi Ohyama, Takiko Shimada, and Osamu Tanaka. “Improvement 
of the aluminum borate whisker-mediated method of DNA delivery into rice callus.” Plant Production 
Science 7, no. 1 (2004): 45–49.Nanomaterial-Mediated Plant Gene Transformation 77
Mohanta, Debashish, Soma Patnaik, Sanchit Sood, and Nilanjan Das. “Carbon nanotubes: Evaluation of tox￾icity at biointerfaces.” Journal of Pharmaceutical Analysis 9, no. 5 (2019): 293–300.
Mondal, Anindita, Ruma Basu, Sukhen Das, and Papiya Nandy. “Beneficial role of carbon nanotubes on mus￾tard plant growth: An agricultural prospect.” Journal of Nanoparticle Research 13 (2011): 4519–4528.
Morikawa, Hiromichi, and Yasuyuki Yamada. “Capillary microinjection into protoplasts and intranuclear local￾ization of injected materials.” Plant and Cell Physiology 26, no. 2 (1985): 229–236.
Munir, Neelma, Wafa Gulzar, Zainul Abideen, Mirza Hasanuzzaman, Ali El-Keblawy, and Fengliang 
Zhao. “Plant–nanoparticle interactions: Transcriptomic and proteomic insights.” Agronomy 13, no. 8 
(2023): 2112.
Nair, Remya, M. Sheikh Mohamed, Wei Gao, Toru Maekawa, Yasuhiko Yoshida, Pulickel M. Ajayan, and D. 
Sakthi Kumar. “Effect of carbon nanomaterials on the germination and growth of rice plants.” Journal of 
Nanoscience and Nanotechnology 12, no. 3 (2012): 2212–2220.
Rai, Mahendra, Shivaji Deshmukh, and Aniket Gade. “Strategic nanoparticle-mediated gene transfer in plants 
and animals-A novel approach.” Current Nanoscience 8, no. 1 (2012): 170–179
Rao, S. Ramachandra, and G. A. Ravishankar. “Plant cell cultures: chemical factories of secondary metabolites.” 
Biotechnology Advances 20, no. 2 (2002): 101–153.
Sanford, John C. “The development of the biolistic process.” In Vitro Cellular & Developmental Biology-Plant
36, no. 5 (2000): 303–308.
Su, Wenbin, Mingyue Xu, Yasmina Radani, and Liming Yang. “Technological development and application of 
plant genetic transformation.” International Journal of Molecular Sciences 24, no. 13 (2023): 10646.
Tang, Fangqiong, Linlin Li, and Dong Chen. “Mesoporous silica nanoparticles: Synthesis, biocompatibility and 
drug delivery.” Advanced Materials 24, no. 12 (2012): 1504–1534
Thagun, C., J. A. Chuah, and K. Numata. “Targeted gene delivery into various plastids mediated by clustered 
cellpenetrating and chloroplast-targeting peptides.” Advanced Science 6 (2019): 1902064.
Tiwari, D. K., N. Dasgupta-Schubert, L. M. Villaseñor Cendejas, J. Villegas, L. Carreto Montoya, and S. 
E. Borjas García. “Interfacing carbon nanotubes (CNT) with plants: enhancement of growth, water and 
ionic nutrient uptake in maize (Zea mays) and implications for nanoagriculture.” Applied Nanoscience
4 (2014): 577–591.
Torney, François, Brian G. Trewyn, Victor S-Y. Lin, and Kan Wang. “Mesoporous silica nanoparticles deliver 
DNA and chemicals into plants.” Nature Nanotechnology 2, no. 5 (2007): 295–300.
Tsanova, Tsveta, Lidia Stefanova, Lora Topalova, Atanas Atanasov, and Ivelin Pantchev. (2021). DNA-free 
gene editing in plants: A brief overview. Biotechnology & Biotechnological Equipment, 35(1), 131–138.
Van Wordragen, Monique, Roshani Shakya, Ruud Verkerk, Regis Peytavis, Ab van Kammen, and Pim Zabel. 
“Liposome-mediated transfer of YAC DNA to tobacco cells.” Plant Molecular Biology Reporter 15 
(1997): 170–178.
Vats, Sanskriti, Surbhi Kumawat, Jashandeep Brar, Sukhmandeep Kaur, Karmveer Yadav, Sayali G. Magar, 
Pravin V. Jadhav et al. “Opportunity and challenges for nanotechnology application for genome editing 
in plants.” Plant Nano Biology 1 (2022): 100001.
Vijayakumar, Periyasamy S., Othalathara U. Abhilash, Bashir M. Khan, and Bhagavatula LV Prasad. “Nanogold￾loaded sharp-edged carbon bullets as plant-gene carriers.” Advanced Functional International Journal of 
Current Microbiology and Applied Sciences Materials 20, no. 15 (2010): 2416–2423.
Wang, Jeffrey W., Eduardo G. Grandio, Gregory M. Newkirk, Gozde S. Demirer, Salwan Butrus, Juan Pablo 
Giraldo, and Markita P. Landry. “Nanoparticle-mediated genetic engineering of plants.” Molecular Plant
12, no. 8 (2019): 1037–1040.
Wu, Kexin, Changbin Xu, Tong Li, Haijie Ma, Jinli Gong, Xiaolong Li, Xuepeng Sun, and Xiaoli Hu. 
“Application of Nanotechnology in Plant Genetic Engineering.” International Journal of Molecular 
Sciences 24, no. 19 (2023): 14836.
Yan, A. and Chen, Z. (2019). Impacts of silver nanoparticles on plants: A focus on the phytotoxicity and under￾lying mechanism. International Journal of Molecular Sciences, 20(5), 1003.
Yan, Yong, Xiaojun Zhu, Yue Yu, Chao Li, Zhaoliang Zhang, and Feng Wang. “Nanotechnology strategies for 
plant genetic engineering.” Advanced Materials 34, no. 7 (2022): 2106945.
Yongsheng, Xiaoyan Yin, Aifang Yang, Guosheng Li, and Juren Zhang. “Stability of inheritance of transgenes 
in maize (Zea mays L.) lines produced using different transformation methods.” Euphytica 144 
(2005): 11–22.78 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
Yu-Qin, F. U., Lu-Hua, L. I., Pi-Wu, W. A. N. G., Jing, Q. U., Yong-Ping, F. U., Hui, W., and Chang-li, L. 
(2012). Delivering DNA into plant cell by gene carriers of ZnS nanoparticles. Chemical Research in 
Chinese Universities, 28(4), 672–676.
Zhang, Huan, Gozde S. Demirer, Honglu Zhang, Tianzheng Ye, Natalie S. Goh, Abhishek J. Aditham, Francis 
J. Cunningham, Chunhai Fan, and Markita P. Landry. “DNA nanostructures coordinate gene silencing 
in mature plants.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 116, no. 15 (2019): 7543–7548.
Zhang, Liyuan, Lingkun Gu, Patricia Ringler, Stanley Smith, Paul J. Rushton, and Qingxi J. Shen. “Three 
WRKY transcription factors additively repress abscisic acid and gibberellin signaling in aleurone cells.” 
Plant Science 236 (2015): 214–222.
Zhao, Xiang, Zhigang Meng, Yan Wang, Wenjie Chen, Changjiao Sun, Bo Cui, Jinhui Cui et al. “Pollen 
magnetofection for genetic modification with magnetic nanoparticles as gene carriers.” Nature Plants 3, 
no. 12 (2017): 956–964.79
DOI: 10.1201/9781003477730-7 79
6 Nanoparticle Uptake, 
Translocation, and Biological 
Impact in Plants
D. V. Surya Prakash, Ishika Gupta, 
Vijay Rajesh Andanamala, Anand Kumar Nelapati, 
Kuldeep Roy, and Vangalapati Meena
6.1 INTRODUCTION
Nanotechnology is the science of transforming materials at the nanoscale and a revolutionary sci￾entific method for understanding the material world at the nanoscale. Particles of 100 nm or smaller 
are referred to as nanoparticles. Because of their many uses in various sectors of economic activity, 
nanoparticles have attracted increased interest. In comparison to a bulk homolog of the same organ￾ization, nanoparticles offer unique and exciting properties, including small size, vast surface areas, 
and increased reactions. Nanoparticles can infiltrate the internal structures of living beings because 
of their tiny size. Furthermore, nanoparticles have the ability to enter the food chain and travel 
through tissues (Abdelsalam et al., 2023). Nature is full of nanoparticles, which are found in large 
quantities in all forms of matter, including soil, pure water, marine systems, terrestrial environments, 
and living organisms. Nanotechnology-generated materials ultimately find their way into soil, where 
a greater susceptibility condition by five orders of magnitude is expected, particularly compared 
to water and air interactions (Zulfiqar and Ashraf, 2021).Flora encompassing both terrestrial and 
aquatic species constitute vital constituents of ecosystems and are poised to encounter nanomaterials 
(NMs), which are prevalent in fertilizers, nanoengineered pesticides, sewage sludge, wastewater 
treatment byproducts, and atmospheric emissions originating from industrial or laboratory outlets, 
including polluted precipitation. Plant nanotechnology provides a revolutionary approach to trad￾itional plant protection methods by enabling the targeted delivery of biomolecules (such as proteins 
and nucleotides) and the controlled release of agrochemicals for maximum effectiveness (Singh and 
Husen, 2019).For the last several years, a major issue has been the encapsulation of fertilizers and 
insecticides in nanocarriers to achieve the prolonged release of chemicals to optimize absorption 
and efficiency, prevent pest resistance, target particular plant parts, and outweigh environmental 
repercussions. By reducing pollution from runoff or contact with groundwater and the resulting 
hazards to human health, biotic stresses and detrimental environmental consequences could be 
mitigated. Nanopesticides and nanofertilizers offer the consistent release of agrochemicals that can 
be effectively absorbed through plant tissues. Current nanofertilizers include iron, zinc, titanium 
dioxide, zinc oxide, and silica, among other metal oxides (Tortella et al., 2023). Furthermore, a few 
formulations, such as nanogreen, contain micelles made of plant-based oils, long-chain lipids, and 
alcohols. Since plastics made from petroleum will be substituted with bio-based plastics, the prac￾tical use of nanotechnology will promote greater environmental sustainability in the agricultural 
sector. The nanocarriers that facilitate the release of chemical compounds are nanocapsules and 
bulk-loaded nanoparticles. Micronutrient absorption efficiency is increased by using nanocarriers 
(Verma et al., 2019). Compared to traditional fertilizers and bioinsecticides, sustained-release 80 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
formulations that depend on matrices of polymers and coatings can offer great selectivity and 
efficacy. Biopolymer-based formulations reduce soil pollution, biotic stress, and health risks by 
preventing chemical runoff during irrigation and enhancing chemical breakdown through micro￾bial activity via photolysis and hydrolysis (Parkinson et al., 2022). Thus, in the agricultural sector, 
nanotechnology can simultaneously raise revenue generation, production, and environmental sus￾tainability. Nanoparticles can enter plant systems via two main routes. First, by applying sewage 
waste products to crops, which often contain ZnO, TiO2
, SiO2
, and Ag nanoparticles. Second, the 
use of nanoagrochemicals, which include Cu/CuO, Zn/ZnO, SiO2
, Fe/FeOx, TiO2
, CeO2
, and Ag 
nanoparticles, has been shown to react differently to different plant species and be unpredictable 
in terms of the penetrating potential of nanoparticles (Wahab et al., 2023). Nanoparticles come in 
different sizes and can cause serious harm to plants by translocating to shoots and aggregating in 
different aerial portions after penetrating the plant. Nanoparticles have the capability to disrupt a 
multitude of aspects, including morphological, physiological, anatomical, biochemical, and genetic 
characteristics (Heikal et al., 2023).Periodically, crops may be harmed as a result of nanomaterials 
since they diminish seed germination speed, decrease both fresh and dried plant matter, shorten root 
and shoot length, alter the process of photosynthesis, reduce the rate of water loss through leaves, 
elevate lipid oxidation, intensify chromatin condensation, raise genetic material injury, govern 
numerous genes associated with stress, and eventually trigger programmed cell death (Da Costa 
and Sharma, 2015). The effects of NPs on plants can be either advantageous or harmful, contin￾gent on their concentration. CeO2
 nanoparticles (231±16 nm) have a positive effect on stem height, 
chlorophyll content, and dry biomass in barley seedlings, which increases crop yields. Tomato seed 
incubation, the germination index of seeds, and vigor index are all improved by SiO2
 nanoparticles 
(12 nm) at a concentration of 8g/L (Ali et al., 2019). Furthermore, radish germination is aided by a 
400 mg/L concentration of TiO2
 nanoparticles. Subjecting wheat plants to CeO2
 nanoparticles at 500 
ppm leads to an augmentation in spikelets per spike and grains per spike, ultimately enhancing yield. 
In Arachis hypogaea (peanut), ZnO nanoparticles at a 950–1000 ppm concentration enhance stem 
and root development, strengthen seedling vigor, and improve seed germination (Hosseinpour et al., 
2020). The quantitative analysis of in situ studies on nanoparticles in complex systems, including 
land and living beings, is still challenging and needs more attention. However, the development 
of several analytical systems has aided in enhancing our comprehension of the various features of 
absorption, the translocation process, and the conversion of nanoparticles in biological samples. The 
distinctive characteristics of nanoparticles and their potential effects on plant systems are the pri￾mary themes of this chapter, as well as a summary of recently published research on the absorption, 
aggregation, and translocation of nanoparticles in plants (Figure 6.1).
6.2 UPTAKE AND TRANSLOCATION OF NANOPARTICLES IN PLANTS
The primary component of ecosystems is plants since they are producers. How plants interact 
with nanoparticles is an intricate process involving many variables. In the natural world, plants 
are subjected to soil nanoparticles and aerosols. The absorption, movement, and buildup of 
nanoparticles in plant system are contingent upon a range of physicochemical characteristics, 
including surface chemistry, concentration, stability, size, and chemical structure. In addition to 
gravitational and double layer forces, which are essential for particle attachment characteristics, 
Vander Waal force and Brownian movement, which are involved in diffusion, also determine 
a particle’s mobility (Oshunsanya et al., 2019). Nanoparticles can enter plant structures via 
the air and soil, which serve as sources of these particles. Soil nanoparticles penetrate plants 
via lenticels, root hairs, ruptures, and other openings, while aerosol nanoparticles enter plants 
via open sections of plants, like wounds, stomata, and hydathodes (Wang et al., 2023). Several 
scholars have put forward likely processes for and the importance of the uptake, transport, and 
deposition of NPs in plants. Most aerosol nanoparticles pass into plant systems via stomatal Nanoparticle Uptake, Translocation, and Biological Impact 81
and cuticular pathways, penetrating the leaves of the plant. The tracheary ingredient in plants, 
phloem, allows nanoparticles to eventually translocate to other regions of the plant after accu￾mulating in the stomata or substomatal area (Su et al., 2019). Aerosol nanoparticles then move 
via an up-down mechanism across the phloem (Figure 6.1). The cuticle, which is the outermost 
waxy covering and is found on practically every part of a plant, regulates the exchange of various 
solutes and shields leaves from losing water. It is thought to be the earliest naturally occurring 
plant barrier because of its unusual characteristics. This cuticular route is additionally split into 
two paths according to the kind of solutes involved (Kumari et al., 2022). TiO2
 nanoparticles 
have been found to be able to create holes in the cuticle. The hydrophilic route involves the 
absorption of polar particles through charged pores; the approximate size of particles that can 
penetrate plants via this pathway ranges from around 0.65 to 4.78 nm. The uptake of non-polar 
substances via diffusion and permeation is known to be a lipophilic process. Different types of 
nanoparticles that collect in the cuticle or on the cell wall include mesoporous silica nanoparticles 
(MSNs), which are 20.5 nm in size and possess negative charge, and lipid-based aqueous crystal￾line nanoparticles, which are 151–300 nm in size. The unique structural properties of mesoporous 
silica nanoparticles, which retain recipient molecules of different sizes, morphologies, and 
characteristics, include a high surface area (800 mg/L), tunable pore diameters (2–10 nm), and 
unique surface features upon heat and chemical treatment (Manzoor et al., 2022). The stomatal 
route is a verified channel in plants for the up-down migration of aerosol particulates. The tiny 
holes known as stomata, which have morphological pore dimensions of 25 μm in height and 3–10 
μm in breadth, are found on the leaf surfaces of several submerged and terrestrial plants. The 
aid in transpiration and mostly transport gases. Nanoparticles can go through pores if they are 
40 nm or larger. Consequently, this implies that particle stomatal transmission is a size-dependent 
FIGURE 6.1 The uptake and transport processes of nanoparticles in plants.82 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
mechanism. Via this stomatal channel, watermelon absorbs metal oxide nanoparticles through the 
foliar route. These particles range in size from 24 to 47 nm. Once they have entered through the 
stomata, they can travel to the shoots and then via the phloem or sieve tubes, they can move to 
the roots (Zhao et al., 2020). Additionally, wounds provide nanoparticles with a direct path into 
plants. Several investigations have reported on the absorption of nanoparticles by plants through 
wounds. Hydathodes offer another pathway for nanoparticles to enter plants. Angiosperms have 
tiny holes called hydathodes at the tips of their leaves, which aid in guttation (the act of removing 
extra water from the plant). Cucumber leaf tips, or serrations, exhibit a buildup of impermeable 
CeO2
 NPs close to the hydathodes (Zhang et al., 2011). Furthermore, at the leaf tips, the ionized 
form of SiO2
NPs accumulates and are removed as salt. Nanoparticles are mostly found in soil. 
Nanoparticles may penetrate the root epidermis of plants via the apoplastic route through the cell 
wall or the symplastic route through the cell membrane. After that, nanoparticles can travel to the 
leaves through the plant’s vascular bundle. Nanoparticles are sourced from leaves and sunk via 
roots (Figure 6.1). Plant species, growth conditions, morphology, particle size, and other variables 
can all affect the uptake and translocation processes, which can include convoluted sequences of 
events. The primary factors influencing the root absorption of nanoparticles via the cell wall are 
their size and the cell wall’s pore count (Blum, 2017). Several investigations have demonstrated 
that the dimensions of pores are constant throughout the cell wall. Using µ-XRF and TEM, the 
size-dependent digestion and movement of TiO2
 nanoparticles in wheat has been studied. In the 
roots of wheat, nanoparticles greater than 140 nm are unable to aggregate, while nanoparticles 
with primary diameters between 36 and 140 nm can accumulate in the parenchyma but are unable 
to translocate to the shoots (Hu et al., 2020). Without breaking down or changing, nanoparticles 
with primary sizes under 36 nm gather in the root system and disperse throughout the whole 
plant. Tobacco roots absorb Au NPs with a diameter of 3.5 nm, whereas the root’s outer surfaces 
retain aggregates of Au NPs with a diameter of 18 nm. This shows that the plant species and the 
tiny size of nanoparticles, rather than the average size, determine the absorption of nanoparticles. 
Arabidopsis thaliana roots are able to absorb SiO2
 nanoparticles as small as 200 nm. In a similar 
vein, Au nanoparticles around7–108 nm in size cannot directly penetrate the roots of Arabidopsis 
thaliana. The absorption and transport of nanoparticles in plants are also influenced by their 
external charges on roots (El-Badri et al., 2021). The majority of the mucilage secreted by plant 
root hairs and root caps is exuded into the rhizosphere. Root secretions with a negative charge 
make up the mucilage layer. They also promote the natural accumulation of minerals and shield 
plant cells from external stressors, such as soil friction.
6.2.1  Uptake of Nanoparticles in Plant Leaves
As nanoparticles settle on the leaf surface during agricultural applications, they are usually then 
absorbed by stomata and the cuticle. The leaf epidermis’s waxy cuticle is mostly made of cutin, 
pectin, and wax. Acting as a key natural barrier, it shields leaves from water loss during plant growth 
and stops nanoparticles from penetrating the plant. The waxy stratum corneum, however, has unique 
lipophilic and hydrophilic channels on its surface. The range of diameters for both the lipophilic and 
hydrophilic channels is 0.60–4.8 nm. The hydrophilic channels aid in the diffusion of hydrophilic 
NPs with a diameter of less than 4.8 nm. The absorption of lipophilic nanoparticles occurs via infil￾tration and diffusion through the lipophilic channels on the cuticle surface (Sun et al., 2021). With 
the help of confocal fluorescence microscopes, Hu et al. (2020) confirmed that carbon dots of less 
than 2 nm can penetrate the leaves of cotton via the cuticular pathway. However, plants can only 
absorb a certain number of nanoparticles through the epidermis due to the presence of tiny pore 
channels in the cuticle. Numerous investigations have noted that nanoparticles have the ability to 
relocate to different plant tissues in the interim. The stomatal route is one additional mechanism by 
which nanoparticles may be absorbed. For plants to control water and gas exchange, the stomata Nanoparticle Uptake, Translocation, and Biological Impact 83
on their leaf surfaces are essential. Typically, stomata measure between 10 and 100 µm in size. 
The stomata of different plant species differ in terms of length and density (Zhao et al.,2020). The 
exact size exclusion limit (SEL) that sets the size of the stomatal aperture facilitating the diffusion 
of nanoparticles is still unknown due to the distinct physiological roles and geometric structures of 
stomata.
6.2.2  Effect of Plant Species
The way in which NPs are absorbed by plant leaves is largely dependent on the kind of plant. The 
density, size, and configuration of leaf pores are all connected to absorption. In contrast to dicotyle￾donous plants, monocotyledonous plants usually have regular and well-organized stomatal systems. 
Furthermore, plant development stage and life cycle also affect the leaf absorption of nanoparticles. 
Stomata are found on the top and lower epidermis layers of certain plant species; however, they 
are usually found on the bottom epidermis (Chen et al., 2006). Dicotyledon plants have around 
1.41 times more stomata on their bottom surface than their top epidermis when they have pores 
on both sides of their leaves. Similar numbers of stomata have been found on both sides of mono￾cotyledon plants. The opening and shutting of stomata are influenced by abiotic environmental 
elements, including light, humidity, and temperature, which have an impact on the absorption of 
nanoparticles. Research has indicated that compared to monocotyledonous wheat, dicotyledonous 
pumpkins absorb CeO2
nanoparticles more efficiently. It has also been shown that tomatoes absorb 
Ce nanoparticles at a greater rate than Festuca. Hu et al. (2020)showed that the extracellular region 
of leaves of monocotyledonous plants, like maize, is smaller and does not allow nanoparticles to 
enter. Cotton serves as an example of a dicotyledon plant that has a larger stomatal density and more 
openings for the entry of nanoparticles.
6.3 ABSORPTION OF NANOPARTICLES VIA PLANT ROOTS
Adsorption takes place on the root surface to initiate the first connection between plant roots and 
nanoparticles. Root hairs can create negatively charged compounds, like mucus and organic acids, 
which makes positively charged nanoparticles more likely to cluster at the root and adsorb readily 
onto the root surface(Xiong et al., 2014). Nanoparticles may be able to penetrate the root column 
through the development of lateral roots, which may open up new adsorption surfaces for the 
nanoparticles. The plant root epidermis is comparable to that of the plant leaf in terms of com￾position and function, but the major root hair surface lacks the complete development of the epi￾dermis. The root epidermis is immediately crossed by nanoparticles once they come into contact 
with this region. The cell wall of root epidermal cells is semi-permeable. Small pores in the cell 
wall can block the passage of larger particles. Nanoparticles can penetrate the root’s xylem or cen￾tral column whenever roots lack an exodermis(Ma et al., 2010). According to the literature, certain 
nanoparticles have the ability to rupture the plasma membrane and cause the cell wall to develop 
new holes, which opens up a pathway for nanoparticles with larger diameters to enter the cell. 
Plant cells can absorb nanoparticles via a variety of mechanisms, such as endocytosis and phys￾ical damage (Su et al., 2019).Certain research findings have indicated that plant roots assimilate 
nanoparticles, which mostly enter cells via the hydrophilic channels. However, only a very small 
number of nanoparticles may penetrate the cells via this route because of the narrow pore size. 
In plant cells, endocytosis is a significant method of absorbing nanoparticles through the plasma 
membrane. Research has demonstrated that endocytosis may be used by plant protoplasts to intern￾alize particles smaller than 1 µm; hence, endocytosed nanoparticles lack small-particle selectivity. 
Endocytosis has been found to be used by Catharanthus roseus root cells to absorb carbon-based 
nanoparticles and carbon nanotubes (Verma et al., 2019). NPs can also penetrate plant systems by 
joining with protein transporters on the outer epidermis.84 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
6.3.1  Effect of Size and Chemical Composition
The most significant element influencing a nanoparticle’s ability to be absorbed by roots is thought 
to be its size. Prior research has demonstrated that plant roots may absorb nanoparticles smaller than 
10 nm. For example, AuNPs (3.5 nm) and CeO2
NPs (8 nm) can be absorbed by the roots of maize 
and Vicia faba L., respectively (Sun et al.,2021). Meanwhile, some research has verified that a rela￾tionship exists between the size of nanoparticles and their absorption by wheat roots. For instance, 
TiO2
 nanoparticles with a size range of 36 to 140 nm may be absorbed by wheat roots. The overall 
quantity of nanoparticles absorbed decreases as particle size grows. However, TiO2
NPsgreater than 
140 nm are unable to be absorbed. It is commonly accepted that metal-based nanoparticles are 
difficult for plants to absorb through their roots if their size is more than 100 nm. Nonetheless, it 
is intriguing to learn that nanoparticles made of natural polymers and silicon that are larger than 
100 nm can get internalized (Hu et al., 2020). For example, after six weeks of treatment, the roots of 
Arabidopsis can absorb Si nanoparticles with a diameter of 200 nm. Using confocal microscopy and 
TEM, it has also been demonstrated that sugarcane roots can absorb zein NPs with a mean particle 
size of 135nm.
6.3.2  Effect of Surface Charge
The surface charge of NPs influences a plant’s ability to absorb them, in addition to their size. Plant 
roots can absorb nanoparticles with certain surface charge characteristics because of the negative 
charge present in their cell walls. Plant roots and leaves experience slightly varied effects from 
electrical charges on the uptake of nanoparticles. Positively charged NPs are unlikely to enter root 
tissues but they are likely to collect on the root surface due to the electrostatic attraction between the 
positively and negatively charged cell walls. Reversible addition chain transfer polymerization was 
the technique used by Parkinson et al. (2022) to create nanoparticles with varying surface charges 
and particle sizes (20–100 nm). Using confocal microscopy, they discovered that negatively charged 
and uncharged NPs (22 nm) could be accumulated by the root cells of Arabidopsis thaliana and 
subsequently penetrate the root’s xylem. Conversely, positively charged NPs could only accumulate 
at the root epidermis as they were unable to penetrate root tissues.
6.4 MECHANISMS FOR THE UPTAKE AND TRANSLOCATION OF 
NANOPARTICLES IN PLANTS
The absorption of extracellular substances is possible through the process of endocytosis. The cell 
membrane folds to create a transmembrane route for absorption, known as endocytosis. Clathrin￾dependent and -independent mechanisms may be involved in the endocytosis of nanoparticles. 
The process by which nanoparticles are absorbed is influenced by a wide range of variables, 
including their charge, size, surface characteristics, etc. While non-functionalized, small MSNs 
with sizes ranging from 5.1 to 14.9 nm are able to cross the cell membrane via endocytosis, but 
negatively charged, large MSNs with sizes of less than 200 nm are unable to be internalized in 
protoplasts. Smaller nanoparticles are more suited for the endocytosis process (Behboudi et al., 
2018).Confocal scanning laser microscopy (CLSM) is used to study both clathrin-dependent and 
clathrin-independent endocytosis, revealing the process for the absorption of Au nanoparticles by 
tobacco protoplasts. Clathrin-coated vesicles with a diameter of around 70–120 nm are mediated by 
receptors and enter cells through clathrin-dependent fluid-phase endocytosis (CFPE) and as such, 
this process is limited to smaller nanoparticles (Abbasi et al., 2007). Positively charged (40 nm) 
polystyrene nanospheres tagged with Texas Red have mostly been found in core vacuoles upon 
exposure to Acer pseudoplatanus protoplasts. Some investigations have revealed the non-specific 
clathrin-independent fluid-phase endocytosis pathway. Furthermore, bigger vesicles exhibit the 
clathrin-independent FPE of solutes, which is consistent with macro- or micropinocytosis and does Nanoparticle Uptake, Translocation, and Biological Impact 85
not necessitate the binding of a particular ligand to the receptors found on the cell membrane (Ali 
et al., 2021). Macropinocytosis and phagocytosis can only occur in animal cells, in addition to 
other routes, such as the alveolar pathway and phagocytosis. Uptake tests on Au nanoparticles with 
opposing charges have involved fluid-phase endocytosis. Positively charged AuNPs attach more 
firmly and can be assimilated in large amounts, while negatively charged AuNPs display poor 
bonding to negatively charged cell walls. Endocytosis-like vesicle structures are formed when 
Arabidopsis protoplasts are exposed to single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) for an extended 
period. Plants may also absorb nanoparticles through non-endocytic channels called aquaporins, or 
water channels. The protein channels known as aquaporins facilitate the movement of water across 
the mostly impermeable cell membrane. It has been shown that aquaporins serve as a transitional 
channel between water and non-ionic, non-selective, smaller symplastic and apoplastic solutes (with 
diameters of around 51 nm). While they have been identified in mammalian cells, surface-dependent 
NP absorption mechanisms have not yet been documented in plants (Sun et al., 2021). To investi￾gate the combined processes of nanoparticle absorption and transportation within plants, technical 
innovation is still required. In higher plants, the two main routes for the transfer of nanoparticles are 
the symplastic and apoplastic pathways. TEM and CLSM are used in the majority of investigations 
to show that the apoplastic route exists. Nanoparticles can occasionally penetrate the cell membrane 
via the apoplastic route and enter intercellular spaces. Macromolecules, such as nanoparticles, can 
also move apoplastically across the epidermis, cortex, and endodermis. However, the Casparian 
strip, which is found in endodermal cells near the vascular system, prevents further translocation. 
The Casparian strip, a band of unusually lipophilic hydrocarbons, blocks macromolecules and 
nanoparticles from entering the vascular system. However, under some circumstances, nanoparticles 
may bypass the Casparian strip and reach the circulatory system via the apoplastic route. Many 
researchers have documented the lateral root junction that as the point at which the Casparian strip 
disconnects (i.e., the site of nanoparticle infiltration) (Wahab et al., 2023). The lack of a Casparian 
strip allows CeO2
 and ZnO nanoparticles to infiltrate the root tip area. Nanoparticles and other 
biological macromolecules can also be transported via the symplastic method. Through plasmo￾desmata, symplastic transport happens intercellularly. Between neighboring cells, plasmodesmata 
serve as bridges linking the cytoplasm. For a range of macromolecules, including nucleic acids 
and proteins, plasmodesmata allow cell–cell tracing and intercellular communication. The cyto￾plasm of root cells, cell walls, mitochondria, plastid, and particularly the plasmodesmata of poplar 
plants contain Au nanoparticles or their aggregations (50 nm). Zinc transport across membranes is 
facilitated by the ZIP (zinc and iron permease family proteins) family of transporter proteins, which 
is an important family. This family promotes zinc absorption from the soil and likely enhances 
zinc uptake into the cytosol (Bashir et al., 2020). Zn transportation into vacuoles is mediated by 
the HMA (heavy metal ATPases)/P-type ATPase family, which also mediates vacuolar harvesting, 
xylem loading, and the regulation of Zn export from plastids. Vacuolar iron transporter (VIT), plant 
cadmium resistance (PCR), yellow stripe-like (YSL), natural resistance-associated macrophage pro￾tein (NRAMP), and other gene families are also implicated in zinc transport.
6.5 ACCUMULATION OF NPS AND THEIR EFFECTS ON PLANTS
Because of their many unique physicochemical characteristics, nanoparticles are far more effective 
and active than their bulk counterparts. Occasionally, nanoparticles may not be as effective in pre￾serving their unique characteristics when exposed to the environment (Dilnawaz et al., 2018). 
Numerous biotic and abiotic stimuli that nanoparticles encounter in the environment can alter 
their properties, such as surface chemistry and accumulation state. The complicated processes of 
the movement and collection of nanoparticles can be impacted by a variety of physicochemical 
changes across plant species, such as variations in hydraulic conductivity and cell wall pore size. 
Based on their behavior and concentration, nanoparticles can cause a variety of anatomical and 86 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
morphological alterations in plants. Plants contain stable forms of several of the metal oxide 
nanoparticles that have often been investigated, such as SiO2
 and TiO2
. Other metal oxide 
nanoparticles that are unstable and capable of transforming include CeO2
, CuO2
, NiO2
, Yb2
O3
, and 
La2
O3
. Nanoparticles mostly bind to and aggregate close to the root surface when they come into 
contact with terrestrial plants. The border cells and mucilage of Arabidopsis thaliana contain an 
accumulation of AgNPs (Khan and Bano, 2016). It has also been stated that AgNPs are collected 
in the root cap’s cell walls, causing brown staining on the cap in the presence of mucilage that is 
typically apparent to the naked eye. When nanoparticles are exposed to leaves, they gather in the 
stomata instead of the vascular bundle and are carried to other regions of the plant by the phloem. 
When CeO2
 nanoparticles are introduced to the roots of cucumber plants, the rhizosphere plays 
a key role in lowering their concentration. Mixtures consisting of Ce(III) and Ce(IV) may be 
found in all tissues after cucumber plant roots have been exposed to CeO2
nanoparticles. On the 
other hand, when CeO2
 nanoparticles are used to treat leaves, only Ce(III) has been documented. 
Zhang et al. (2011) used TEM to show how CeO2
 nanoparticles accumulate in the mucilage of 
the root cap layer. Quantum dots (ZnS/CdSe) only bioaccumulate in the nucleus and cytoplasm 
of Medicago sativa cells. Both positive and negative effects of nanoparticles on the development 
and growth of plants have been documented; however, the reaction varies depending on factors 
such as exposure length, type of plant, nanoparticle size and chemical structure, and experimental 
settings (Sharifan et al., 2019). Zea mays exhibits increased germination and growth in hydro￾ponic solutions with the addition of silica NPs. When present in rice plants at a concentration 
of 30µg/ml, AgNPs promote root development (Khan and Bano, 2016). In spinach, titanium 
nanoparticles increase the dry weight, the amount of chlorophyll and photosynthetic rate. When 
applied topically, ZnO nanoparticles (20 ppm) and FeO nanoparticles (50 ppm) boost the devel￾opment of Vigna radiata L. seedlings, while also lengthening the shoots and increasing the fresh 
and dry weights of chickpeas. ZnO nanoparticle exposure has no discernible impact on the ger￾mination of maize or cucumber seeds (El-Badri et al., 2021). In a similar vein, CeO2
nanoparticles 
(400–690 nm) have no discernible impact on radish growth. The height of plants and biomass of 
seedlings in tomatoes are increased by CeO2
 nanoparticles at concentrations of 0.1–10 mg/L. In 
wheat, TiO2
 nanoparticles function in a dose-dependent manner. Lower doses ofTiO2
nanoparticles 
(∼20 nm) at concentrations ranging from 10–95 ppm increase the fresh weight of shoots and 
roots; however, higher doses (more than 100 ppm) decrease the additional weight of wheat and 
do not significantly alter the biomass of tomato seedlings (1000–5000 mg/L) (Hu et al., 2020). 
Additionally, it has been reported that the growth of Glycine maxis promoted by zero-valent Co, 
Fe, and Cu. At concentrations of 2–10 ppm, TiO2
 nanoparticles enhance seed germination; how￾ever, at concentrations of 100 and 500 ppm, seed germination is reduced. In Cucumis sativus, 
Yb2
O3
nanoparticles (62±8 nm) undergo biotransformation to produce YbPO4
.In addition to their 
beneficial effects on plants, several scientists have also documented the phytotoxic impact of 
nanoparticles. Many symptoms are produced in plants by the phytotoxicity of nanoparticles, 
such as reduced photosynthetic activity, the production of ROS, alterations to DNA structures, 
blockages in the apoplastic flow, clogged pores, reduced hydraulic transfer, and decreased nutrient 
uptake (Freinbichler et al, 2011).Additionally, genotoxicity and altered gene expression are caused 
by the interaction of nanoparticles with plants. AgNPs cause cytological defects in the meta￾phase and anaphase stages of germinating wheat and barley seed root tips, including chromosome 
aneuploidy, chromosomal abnormalities, chromosome segments, binucleate cells, malformed 
nuclei, and the existence of micronuclei. The application of AgNPs has been seen to significantly 
increase the number of chromosomal abnormalities, reduce the mitotic index, and alter the tran￾scription of antioxidant and aquaporin genes in the root system of Arabidopsis thaliana(Patlolla 
et al., 2012). AgNPs also mediate the augmentation of ions in wheat seedlings, revealing that Ag 
nanoparticles are accountable for gene expression in cellular activities, including metabolism, 
hormone pathway signaling, and cell proliferation (Wahid et al., 2020).Nanoparticle Uptake, Translocation, and Biological Impact 87
6.6 EFFECTS OF NANOPARTICLES ON PLANT PHYSIOLOGICAL ACTIVITY
The use of NPs for cultivation has increased significantly because of their potential benefits as 
nanopesticides and nanocarriers. These benefits include their tiny size, the simplicity of their appli￾cation, their ability to be stored for extended periods, and their ability to improve the effectiveness 
of agricultural chemicals. Physiological morphology, plant growth, and crop output are all impacted 
by interactions between NPs and plants, both positively and negatively (Da Costa and Sharma, 
2015). Plant species, application technique, dose, and the quantity of nanoparticles all affect how 
NPs interact with plants.
6.6.1 Promotion of Plant Development and Yield
Several investigations have shown that the use of farming-friendly nanoparticles increases the nutri￾tional content of plant products to a greater extent than traditional pesticides. By raising the nutri￾tional value, enhancing photosynthesis, and increasing metabolic rate, nanoparticles contribute 
significantly to plant growth and quality improvement (Figure 6.2) (Yasmin M. Heikal et al., 2023). 
It has been demonstrated that ZnONPs contribute to enhanced production, the formation of chloro￾phyll, and improved photosynthesis in starch plants, which raises the quantity of soluble sugars 
(Chen et al., 2006). Utilizing ZnO nanoparticles can improve cotton’s chlorophyll content and anti￾oxidant activity and increase the weight and amount of cotton bolls generated by a plant, as well 
as improving the uniformity and strength of cotton fibers. When ZnONPs are applied to tomato 
plants, they enhance the absorption of essential minerals, like zinc and phosphorus, which raises the 
yield of tomatoes.Fe3
O4
nanoparticles increase the amount of protein, minerals, and carbohydrates 
in plants, which increases biomass as well as productivity. Fe3
O4
 nanoparticles were employed by 
Sharifan et al. (2019) to alter maize plants and by Armin et al. to alter wheat plants. Overall, their 
findings supported the results mentioned above. Furthermore, there was a notable increase in the 
FIGURE 6.2 How plants use nanoparticles for physiological purposes.88 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
quantity of wheat seeds once Fe3
O4
nanoparticles were applied to the wheat at this stage of develop￾ment. Spinach biomass accumulation has been reported to be enhanced by 60% by TiO2
NPs. 
Furthermore, at 1–10 mg/L, CeO2
nanoparticles induce stem elongation and at 10 mg/L, fruit weight 
increases considerably.
TiO2
 nanoparticles are effective, ecologically safe photocatalysts that have been shown to 
enhance the absorption of light by improving the light system’s energy conversion and exhibit 
antibacterial activity via surface chemical alterations(Armin et al., 2014).This latter characteristic 
can promote seed propagation and seedling growth while reducing the half-life of pesticides. It 
has been demonstrated that TiO2
 nanoparticles can raise photosynthesis rate in spinach. TiO2
NPs 
have also been shown to stimulate wheat growth and raise its production. Simultaneously, studies 
have demonstrated that these effects are caused by TiO2
NPs enhancing circulation and uni￾form phosphorylation to increase photosynthetic action, thereby augmenting the availability of 
photosynthates and, ultimately, elevating plant productivity. Barley yields more dry matter when 
TiO2
 nanoparticles are sprayed on its leaves because the nanoparticles enhance photoreduction 
TABLE 6.2
Summary of the inhibitory effects of nanoparticles on plants
S. No. Nanoparticle Plant Size(nm) Negative Impacts Reference
1 Silver (Ag) Allium cepa
(Onion)
10 Produced oxidative DNA damage at 
higher doses, significantly inhibited root 
development, increased mitotic index, 
and generated ROS.
Cvjetko 
et al., 2017
2 Gold (Au) Nicotiana xanthi
(Tobacco)
3.5-18 Produced biotoxicity and produced necrotic 
ulcers on leaves.
Gao et al., 
2023
3 Copper oxide (CuO) Oryza sativa
(Rice)
43 Decreased water uptake by aerial and root 
portions and significantly lowered grain 
production.
Peng et al., 
2017
4 Aluminum oxide/
Alumina (Al2
O3
)
Triticum aestivum
(Wheat)
13 Increased H2
O2
 levels, accompanied 
by decreased anthocyanin and 
photosynthetic pigment synthesis.
Yanik and 
Vardar, 
2015
TABLE 6.1
Overview of nanoparticles that support plant growth and productivity
S. No. Nanoparticle Plant Size(nm) Positive Effects Reference
1 Zinc Oxide 
(ZnO)
Capsicum 
chinense (Chili 
Pepper)
12–24 Improved fruit quality, increased amount and 
mean weight of fruit, accelerated plant 
development, and raised dihydrocapsaicin 
and capsaicin contents at low doses.
García-López 
et al., 2019
2 Titanium 
Dioxide 
(TiO2
)
Triticum aestivum
(Wheat)
32 Increased biomass and lateral root 
development, along with simultaneous 
titanium absorption.
Zhang et al., 2019
3 Silicon (Si) Lentil (Legume) 14 Enhanced biomass, vigor, and seed 
germination.
Khan and Ansari, 
2018
4 Copper (Cu) Solanum
Lycopersicum
(Tomato)
50 Increased fruit lycopene, vitamin C content, 
and fruit quantity, as well as improved fruit 
texture.
López-Vargas 
et al., 2018Nanoparticle Uptake, Translocation, and Biological Impact 89
function. Furthermore, sugar content, productivity, and weight of mango fruit increase due to 
the combined impact of ZnONPs and SiNPs (Behboudi et al., 2018). Table 6.1 lists how various 
nanoparticle types promote plant growth and seed germination, as well as how they accumulate, 
speciate, and affect plants.
6.6.2  Alleviation of Plant Abiotic Stress
The primary issues affecting plant growth are a lack of moisture, mineral salt, and harmful metals, 
which are known as abiotic stresses. These stresses cause plants to develop a slower growth rate, 
which lowers food production. Through physiological processes, plants have adopted several defen￾sive strategies to mitigate these pressures (Blum, 2017). Plants under abiotic stress can benefit from 
the use of NPs. The yield and biomass of crops in dry locations are much lower than those in typical 
environments due to a variety of environmental, meteorological, and other variables. When zinc 
oxide nanoparticles were used to treat maize, Sun et al. (2021) discovered that the NPs improved 
the plant’s ability to photosynthesize and its chlorophyll content, demonstrating the nanoparticles’ 
ability to mitigate plant stress caused by drought. An imbalance in plant nutrition and sluggish plant 
development can result from excessive salt in growing environments. Enzymic functions involved in 
plants’ salt tolerance can be enhanced by the application of nanotechnology in the field of agriculture. 
According to one study, salt stress in wheat and cotton was reduced when the plants were exposed 
to ZnO nanoparticles (Bashir et al., 2020).When applied to cucumber leaves during growth, SiO2
nanoparticles increase the flexibility and extension of the cell wall and, by reducing leaching losses, 
also increase the buildup of phosphorus and nitrogen components in the plant leaves. As a result, 
this lowers the sodium concentration, which helps cucumber plants that are experiencing salt stress. 
The presence of heavy metals is detrimental to plant development because they alter plant shape, 
stunt growth, and cause oxidative stress (Ahmed et al., 2023).Nanoparticles can enhance the ability 
of plant antioxidant systems to withstand heavy metal stress by regulating soil concentrations of 
heavy metal ions, inhibiting the transcription of genes that transport heavy metals, and encouraging 
the synthesis of defense compounds, such as organic compounds, rhizodeposits, and phytochelatin.
6.6.3  Toxicity
Plant-borne nanoparticle toxicity is a significant factor to consider, despite the numerous positive 
impacts of NP use. Oxidative stress can be induced in plants by nanoparticle toxicity in many ways, 
including physical harm, such as stomatal closure brought on by the aggregation of nanoparticles (Yang 
et al., 2017). Plants that have high quantities of nanoparticles sprayed on their leaves accumulate a lot 
of nanoparticles on their surfaces, obstructing their stomata and making it more difficult for the plants 
to exchange gases and reproduce (Figure 6.2). According to certain research, plant growth slows down 
and plants develop yellow leaves when the amount of Zn and Cu nanoparticles goes beyond a certain 
threshold. CuO nanoparticles are poisonous to Hordeum sativum and also lower photosynthetic rates 
and prevent root and stem development (Yuan et al., 2016). Simultaneously, plants’ transformation of 
nanoparticles damages cell structure and decreases nutrient uptake and delivery. The literature mostly 
addresses the hazardous impacts of polymer-based nanoparticles on plants during application. For 
instance, the germination rate of Lepidium sativum seeds falls by 56% and 46% when they are exposed 
to plastic particles measuring 50 and 500 nm, respectively, for eight hours. The rate of germination of 
ryegrass is 6% lower after 30 days of exposure to PLA nanoparticles (Sun et al.,2021). Nevertheless, 
there is no change in the rate of germination for onions and wheat seeds that are exposed to polystyrene 
(PS) nanoparticles for 72 hours. Consequently, plants exposed to polymer-based nanoparticles over 
extended periods experience a decrease in germination rate; this is mostly because the nanoparticles 
obstruct the plant pores, resulting in a decrease in the plant’s ability to absorb nutrients. It is easier to 
evaluate the toxicity of nanoparticles if we are aware of how they affect plants (Table 6.2).90 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
6.6.4  Genotoxicity and Oxidative Stress Damage
When nanoparticles are absorbed by plants, they can have a phytotoxic impact. This means that when 
plants interact with one another, more ROS are produced (Figure 6.2), which can cause damage 
like oxidative stress and genomic toxicity. Plant cells respond to changes in their surroundings by 
triggering ROS reactions, much like other aerobic organisms. Oxidative stress, which occurs when 
ROS levels exceed defensive systems, severely damages proteins, nucleic acids (DNA), and lipids 
in cell membranes (Patlolla et al., 2012). Plants have defense mechanisms against ROS toxicity that 
involve low molecular weight antioxidants and antioxidant enzymes, which safeguard the cellular, 
as well as subcellular, processes from the damaging effects of oxygen radicals in action. As a result, 
the measurement of ROS levels and antioxidant enzyme activity is the primary indicator of oxida￾tive damage brought on by NPs. Certain studies and analyses have found that excessive buildups of 
NPs in plants and high ROS levels trigger plant antioxidant systems. The movement of numerous 
typical antioxidant enzymes in rice roots increases as the number of plastic nanoparticles increases, 
indicating that rice plants may be able to defend against and clear the excessive buildup of ROS 
(Armin et al., 2014). In the meantime, the number of endogenous hormones in plants changes in 
response to greater nanoparticle concentrations. Research is presently examining how NPs affect 
endogenous hormones in plants. For instance, 100 mg/L of Fe2
O3
 nanoparticles increase hormone 
levels while decreasing the production rate of transgenic cotton (Bt-cotton). In Bt-cotton, hormone 
concentrations drop in the roots.
Toxic metal ions, which damage plant DNA and proteins and impair regular cell metabolism, are 
also released and transformed by metal-based nanoparticles in plants. Furthermore, nanoparticles 
cause genotoxicity in plants, in addition to producing reactive oxygen species (ROS) and altering 
their hormones (Elhawat et al., 2018). The genotoxicity of nanoparticles can interfere with plant cell 
division through their interactions with biological macromolecules, including lipids and nuclei. Ag 
nanoparticles, for instance, have been demonstrated to cause chromosomal abnormalities, impede 
DNA synthesis, and disrupt regular cell division when ingested by wheat root tips. The gene tox￾icity of PS nanoparticles has been further demonstrated by the much lower mitotic index of onion 
cells exposed to these particles, as well as chromosomal mutations and nuclear aberrations that 
result in the loss of genomic integrity (Yang et al., 2017).Researchers have created methods to 
address the toxicity of nanoparticles, such as surface coatings, which effectively minimize the haz￾ardous chemicals emitted by nanoparticles. For instance, the release of zinc ions can be efficiently 
decreased by covering zinc oxide nanoparticles with iron. Plant propagation and pigment levels 
are not inhibited by Fe-coated zinc oxide nanoparticles (Sharifan et al., 2019). Polymer-based 
nanoparticles can also be adapted by encapsulation or surface modification, which reduces toxicity.
6.7 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE PROSPECTIVES
Previous research has shown that there is a complex yet dynamic relationship between plants and 
nanoparticles. This interaction is dependent upon the properties of the plant species (lifespan, genetic 
makeup, and structural, anatomical, and physiological composition, etc.), as well as the properties 
of the NPs (dosage, shape, surface chemistry, size, etc.) (Heikal et al., 2023). In the current chapter, 
we methodically examined how nanoparticles are absorbed, translocated, and accumulated within 
plants, while also investigating the mechanisms behind these actions. Many issues surrounding the 
effects of plant variety and environmental conditions on the processes of nanoparticle absorption, 
transport, and accumulation in plants remain unexplored. For example, it is unclear which of the 
several paths that plants use to absorb nanoparticles is dominant, how plants choose which pathway 
to adopt, and the numerous variables that influence this decision. Many studies have shown that 
nanoparticles translocate upward via the xylem and downward via the phloem, but little research 
has been done on how these particles pass through the cell membrane and other obstacles in the 
absence of channels, transporters, etc. The xylem of plants has a variety of structures that aid in the Nanoparticle Uptake, Translocation, and Biological Impact 91
transfer of nanoparticles. However, how various xylem structures influence uptake kinetics and how 
various plant species interact with uptake kinetics are still unknown. The symplastic and apoplastic 
mechanisms of NP transportation in plants also need more experimental investigation. The locations 
of nanoparticle accumulation sites and the process by which they change inside plants are also not 
well understood. Particular kinds of enzymes are required by plants for nanoparticles to accumulate, 
convert, and speciate inside of them. However, it is still unknown how often and how much distinct 
nanoparticles accumulate, change, and speciate. To enhance fundamental research and provide a 
deeper comprehension of the absorption, transport, and collection of nanoparticles in plants, mixed 
methodologies and sophisticated analytical technologies are necessary for qualitative and quanti￾tative analysis. Given that nanoparticles have the potential to biomagnify and infiltrate the human 
food chain, increased attention is needed to prevent any hazards to food safety. This is a multidiscip￾linary topic that requires greater practical and theoretical synergy from a variety of fields, including 
analysis, plant physiology, and environmental, agricultural, and material sciences, among others, to 
examine the many as yet unanswered problems.
REFERENCES
Abbasi, A.R., Hajirezaei, M., Hofius, D., et al. 2007. Specific roles of α-and γ-tocopherol in abiotic stress 
responses of transgenic tobacco. Plant Physiol.143, 1720–1738.
Abdelsalam, I.M., Ghosh, S., AlKafaas, S.S., et al. 2023. Nanotechnology as a tool for abiotic stress mitigation 
in horticultural crops.Biol. Plant. 78, 163–178
Ahmed, T., Noman, M., Gardea-Torresdey, J.L., White, J.C., and Li, B., 2023. Dynamic interplay between 
nano-enabled agrochemicals and the plant-associated microbiome. Trends Plant Sci.28(11), 
1310–1325.
Ali, S., Mehmood, A., and Khan, N., 2021. Uptake, translocation, and consequences of nanomaterials on plant 
growth and stress adaptation. J. Nanomater.2021,1–17.
Ali, S., Rizwan, M., Hussain, A., et al. 2019. Silicon nanoparticles enhanced the growth and reduced the cad￾mium accumulation in grains of wheat.Plant Physiol. Biochem.140, 1–8.
Armin, M., Akbari, S., and Mashhadi, S., 2014. Effect of time and concentration of nano-Fe foliar application 
on yield and yield components of wheat. Int. J. Biosci.4, 69–75.
Bashir, A., Rizwan, M., Ali, S., Adrees, M., and Qayyum, M.F., 2020. Effect of composted organic amendments 
and zinc oxide nanoparticles on growth and cadmium accumulation by wheat; a life cycle study. Environ. 
Sci. Pollut. Res.27, 23926–23936.
Behboudi, F., TahmasebiSarvestani, Z., Kassaee, M.Z., ModaresSanavi, S.A.M. and Sorooshzadeh, A., 2018. 
Improving growth and yield of wheat under drought stress via application of SiO2 nanoparticles. 
J. Agric. Sci. Technol.20(7), 1479–1492.
Blum, A., 2017. Osmotic adjustment is a prime drought stress adaptive engine in support of plant production. 
Plant Cell Environ.40, 4–10.
Chen, H.D., Weiss, J.C., and Shahidi, F., 2006. Nanotechnology in nutraceuticals and functional foods. Food 
Technol.60, 30–36.
Cvjetko, P., Milošić, A., Domijan, A.M., etal. 2017. Toxicity of silver ions and differently coated silver 
nanoparticles in Allium cepa roots. Ecotoxicol.Environ.Saf.137, 18–28.
Da Costa, M.V.J., and Sharma, P.K., 2015. Effect of copper oxide nanoparticles on growth, morphology, photo￾synthesis, and antioxidant response in Oryza sativa. Photosynthetica.54, 110–119.
Dilnawaz, F., Acharya, S., and Sahoo, S.K., 2018. Recent trends of nanomedicinal approaches in clinics. 
Int. J. Pharm.538(1-2), 263–278.
El-Badri, A.M., Batool, M., Wang, C., et al. 2021. Selenium and zinc oxide nanoparticles modulate the 
molecular and morpho-physiological processes during seed germination of Brassica napus under salt 
stress. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf.225, 112695.
Elhawat, N., Alshaal, T., Hamad, E., et al. 2018. Nanoparticle-associated phytotoxicity and abiotic stress under 
agroecosystems. Phytotoxic. Nanopart.241–268.
Freinbichler, W., Colivicchi, M.A., Stefanini, C., et al. 2011. Highly reactive oxygen species: detection, forma￾tion, and possible functions. Cell Mol Life Sci68, 2067–2079. doi: 10.1007/s00018-011-0682-x92 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
Gao, M., Chang, J., Wang, Z., Zhang, H. and Wang, T., 2023. Advances in transport and toxicity of nanoparticles 
in plants. J. Nanobiotechnol.21(1), 75.
García-López, J.I., Niño-Medina, G., Olivares-Sáenz, et al. 2019. Foliar application of zinc oxide nanoparticles 
and zinc sulfate boosts the content of bioactive compounds in habanero peppers. Plants.8(8), 254.
Heikal, Y.M., El-Esawi, M.A., El-Ballat, E.M., and Abdel-Aziz, H.M.M. 2023. Applications of nanoparticles 
for mitigating salinity and drought stress in plants: An overview on the physiological, biochemical, and 
molecular genetic aspects. New Zeal. J. Crop Hort. Sci.51(3), 297–327.
Hosseinpour, A., Haliloglu, K., TolgaCinisli, K., et al. 2020. Application of zinc oxide nanoparticles and 
plant growth-promoting bacteria reduces genetic impairment under salt stress in tomato. Agriculture.
10(11), 1–16.
Hu, J., Wu, X., Wu, F., et al. 2020. TiO2 nanoparticle exposure on lettuce (Lactuca Sativa L.): Dose-dependent 
deterioration of nutritional quality. Environ. Sci. Nano.7(2), 501–513.
Khan, N., and Bano, A., 2016. Role of plant growth promoting rhizobacteria and Ag-nano particle in 
the bioremediation of heavy metals and maize growth under municipal wastewater irrigation. 
Int. J. Phytoremediation.18, 211–221.
Khan, Z. and Ansari, M.Y.K., 2018. Impact of engineered Si nanoparticles on seed germination, vigour index 
and genotoxicity assessment via DNA damage of root tip cells in Lens culinaris. J. Plant Biochem. 
Physiol.6(218), 2.
Kumari, S., Khanna, R.R., Nazir, F., et al. 2022. Bio-synthesized nanoparticles in developing plant abiotic 
stress resilience: a new boon for sustainable approach. Int. J. Mol. Sci.23, 4452.
López-Vargas, E.R., Ortega-Ortíz, H., Cadenas-Pliego, G., et al. 2018. Foliar application of copper nanoparticles 
increases the fruit quality and the content of bioactive compounds in tomatoes. Appl. Sci.8(7), 1020.
Ma, X., Geiser-Lee, J., Deng, Y. and Kolmakov, A., 2010. Interactions between engineered nanoparticles 
(ENPs) and plants: phytotoxicity, uptake, and accumulation. Sci.Total Environ.408(16), 3053–3061.
Manzoor, N., Ali, L., Ahmed, T., et al. 2022. Recent advancements and development in nano-enabled agricul￾ture for improving abiotic stress tolerance in plants. Front. Plant Sci.13, 951752.
Oshunsanya, S.O., Nwosu, N.J., and Li, Y., 2019. Abiotic stress in agricultural crops under climatic conditions. 
Sustainable Agriculture, Forest and Environmental Management, 71–100.
Parkinson, S.J., Tungsirisurp, S., Joshi, C., et al. 2022. Polymer nanoparticles pass the plant interface. 
Nat. Commun.13(1), 7385.
Patlolla, A.K., Berry, A., May, L., and Tchounwou, P.B. 2012. Genotoxicity of silver nanoparticles in 
Viciafaba: a pilot study on the environmental monitoring of nanoparticles. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public 
Health.9, 1649–1662. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph9051649.
Peng, C., Xu, C., Liu, Q., Sun, L., Luo, Y. and Shi, J., 2017. Fate and transformation of CuO nanoparticles in 
the soil–rice system during the life cycle of rice plants. Environ.Sci.Technol.51(9), 4907–4917.
Sharifan, H., Ma, X., Moore, J.M., Habib, M.R., and Evans, C. 2019. Zinc oxide nanoparticles alleviated the 
bioavailability of cadmium and lead and changed the uptake of iron in hydroponically grown lettuce. 
ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng.7, 16401–16409.
Singh, S. and Husen, A., 2019. Role of nanomaterials in the mitigation of abiotic stress in plants. Nanomater.
Plant Potential, 441–471.
Su, Y., Ashworth, V., Kim, C., et al. 2019. Delivery, uptake, fate, and transport of engineered nanoparticles in 
plants: a critical review and data analysis. Environ. Sci. Nano.8, 2311–2331.
Sun, H., Lei, C., Xu, J., and Li, R., 2021. Foliar uptake and leaf-to-root translocation of nanoplastics with 
different coating charge in maize plants. J. Hazard. Mater.416, 125854.
Tortella, G., Rubilar, O., Pieretti, J.C., et al. 2023. Nanoparticles as a promising strategy to mitigate biotic stress 
in agriculture. Antibiotics.12(2), p.338.
Verma, S.K., Das, A.K., Gantait, S., Kumar, V., and Gurel, E., 2019. Applications of carbon nanomaterials in 
the plant system: a perspective view on the pros and cons. Sci. Total Environ.667, 485–499.
Wahab, A., Munir, A., Saleem, M.H., etal. 2023. Interactions of metal-based engineered nanoparticles with 
plants: An overview of the state of current knowledge, research progress, and prospects. J. Plant Growth 
Regul.42(9), 1–21.
Wahid, I., Kumari, S., Ahmad, R., etal. 2020. Silver nanoparticle regulates salt tolerance in wheat through 
changes in ABA concentration, ion homeostasis, and defense systems. Biomolecules.10, 1506.
Wang, X., Xie, H., Wang, P. and Yin, H., 2023. Nanoparticles in plants: Uptake, transport and physiological 
activity in leaf and root.Materials.16(8), 3097.Nanoparticle Uptake, Translocation, and Biological Impact 93
Xiong, T., Leveque, T., Shahid, M., Foucault, Y., Mombo, S., and Dumat, C., 2014. Lead and cadmium 
phytoavailability and human bioaccessibility for vegetables exposed to soil or atmospheric pollution by 
process ultrafine particles.J.Environ. Qual.4, 1593–1600.
Yang, J., Cao, W. and Rui, Y., 2017. Interactions between nanoparticles and plants: phytotoxicity and defense 
mechanisms. J.Plant Interact.12(1), 158–169.
Yanık, F. and Vardar, F., 2015. Toxic effects of aluminum oxide (Al2O3) nanoparticles on root growth and 
development in Triticumaestivum. Water, Air, Soil Pollut.226, 1–13.
Yuan, J., He, A., Huang, S., Hua, J., and Daniel Sheng, D., 2016. Internalization and phytotoxic effects of CuO 
nanoparticles in Arabidopsis thaliana as revealed by fatty acid profiles. Environ. Sci. Technol.50(19), 
10437–10447.
Zhang, P., Ma, Y., Xie, C., et al. 2019. Plant species-dependent transformation and translocation of ceria 
nanoparticles. Environ. Sci.: Nano.6(1), 60–67.
Zhang, Z., He, X., Zhang, H., etal. 2011. Uptake and distribution of ceria nanoparticles in cucumber plants. 
Journal of Metallomics3(8), 816–822. https://doi.org/10.1039/c1mt00049g
Zhao, L., Lu, L., Wang, A., etal. 2020. Nanobiotechnology in agriculture: use of nanomaterials to promote plant 
growth and stress tolerance. J. Agric. Food Chem.68, 1935–1947.
Zulfiqar, F., and Ashraf, M., 2021. Nanoparticles potentially mediate salt stress tolerance in plants. Plant 
Physiol. Biochem.160, 257–268.94
94 DOI: 10.1201/9781003477730-8
7 Green Nanoparticles Used 
in Agriculture to Reduce ROS 
and Increase Plant Resilience 
Against Abiotic Stress
Radhika Tippani, Mahendar Porika, Syam Prasad Sura, 
Pallavi Kagithoju, and Sri Sai Sumedha Porika
7.1 INTRODUCTION
Crop improvement is a hot topic for scientists and farmers alike, with a focus on increasing crop 
yield and quality. This issue has to be addressed immediately in order to meet global demands, 
considering the ongoing population explosion and the increasing monoculture and uniformity. 
A serious concern for the agricultural and food sectors is the overuse and reliance on chemical￾based fertilizers and agriproducts, as well as the rise in pathogenic resistance to different pesticides, 
fungicides, and herbicides (Mishra et al., 2017; Azameti and Abdul-Wahab 2023). Current farming 
systems are not sustainable and are susceptible to and weakened by the global spread of diseases, 
big changes in the climate, and monocropping (Lowry et al., 2019). Several studies have shown that 
about two million tons of pesticides are used every year around the world, with Europe using 45% 
of them and the USA using 25%. So, the first thing that needs to be done is ensuring that resources 
are managed well and that any problems that come up are fixed. Thus, agronanotechnology is a 
useful tool that scientists and farmers can use to improve agricultural and food industries around 
the world (Kamle et al., 2020). Sustaining food security requires the agricultural sector to remain 
stable. Recently developed options that researchers and farmers could use to keep farming envir￾onmentally and economically friendly are nanoagrochemicals, which include nanoparticle-based 
pesticides, insecticides, fertilizers, fungicides, and herbicides (Singh et al., 2021). Additionally, 
crops are constantly combating a range of biotic and abiotic elements that have a substantial influ￾ence on crop quantity and quality. Abiotic stress is usually brought on by environmental deviations, 
either excessive or insufficient, which impair plant development and production, as well as the 
nutritional value of the produce (Zulfiqar et al., 2021). Crops are often stressed by abiotic factors 
like extreme temperatures (hot or cold), a lack of water, water logging, high salinity, and a lack of 
nutrients in the soil (Ahmad et al., 2023; Ramzan et al., 2023). Around the world, almost 90% of 
farming is affected by one or more of the abiotic stressors listed above, which can lead to up to 70% 
reductions in food growth (Liu et al., 2020). Estimates indicate that heat stress accounts for 20% of 
these losses, cold stress accounts for 7%, water stress accounts for 9%, and other stressors account 
for 4%, leading to losses of hundreds of millions of dollars every year. Every year, USD 27 billion 
is lost around the world because of soil salinity alone. According to experts, climate change could 
dramatically lower the global production of corn, wheat, rice, and soybeans by 40 to 60% by 2090. 
According to Verma et al. (2022), abiotic stress causes food crops to lose 51–82% of their annual 
output. This shows how important it is to solve these problems to ensure better crop yields, food 
security, and the long-term sustainability of agriculture. Making plants’ defences stronger to deal Green Nanoparticles Used in Agriculture 95
with abiotic stress is very important for obtaining higher crop yields and making sure that farming 
is sustainable for the environment. When crops are stressed, they need a lot of agrochemicals, which 
hurt the environment in the long run (Mariani and Ferrante, 2017). According to research published 
by the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) in 2019, demand for the three key components 
of fertilizer (nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium) rose from 1,85,063 to 2,00,919 tonnes between 
2016 and 2022.
Therefore, in order to successfully battle abiotic stress, it is essential to embrace sustainable and 
environmentally friendly farming practices. Luckily, nanotechnology offers a potential answer to 
this problem (Azameti and Abdul-Wahab 2023; Thabet and Alqudah, 2024). Green/biogenic/plant￾based nanoparticles (NPs) have shown great promise and efficiency in dealing with abiotic stress. 
Their sizes range from 1 to 100 nanometres (Khan et al., 2019). In light of the fact that the world is 
looking for better sustainable remedies, demand for the synthesis of green NPs is growing over that 
for chemically synthesized NPs. This is because green synthesized NPs are more sustainable, have 
better biocompatibility, and can be used in a wide range of applications. So far, most studies have 
looked at nanotechnology’s role in agriculture in a broad way. However, more specific knowledge 
is needed about how reactive oxygen species (ROS) and plant-based NPs interact with each other. 
This knowledge can help with the planned development of green nanotechnology-based solutions 
that protect crops from damage. The aim of this chapter is to look at the most recent progress that 
has been made in using plant-based metal NPs (MNPs) and metal oxide NPs (MONPs) to protect 
plants from ROS damage caused by abiotic stress. We also want to highlight the disruptive impact 
of ROS in pressured settings, discuss the biological synthesis techniques of NPs and how they might 
be utilized in agriculture, and ultimately identify ways in which ROS damage may be mitigated by 
plant-based NPs.
7.2 ABIOTIC STRESS AND ROS
The phrase “abiotic stress” refers to the detrimental effect that nonliving entities have on living 
organisms within certain environments. Environmental stresses like drought, salt, heavy metals, and 
extreme temperature variations are among the stresses that pose a significant threat on a global mag￾nitude. Plants are increasingly vulnerable to abiotic stress as a consequence of the changing global 
climate. Heat waves, droughts, floods, increased salinity, and freezing temperatures are among the 
severe weather occurrences that are becoming more common and catastrophic due to climate change 
brought on by human-caused global warming (Zandalinas et al., 2021). The lightning-fast pace of 
industrialization, the intensification of agricultural practices, and widespread mining, along with the 
growing human population and rapid urbanization, have all contributed to human-caused biosphere 
perturbations that have led to catastrophic global warming. This, in turn, has contributed to abiotic 
stress and the serious damage being caused to Earth’s vital elements (Emamverdian et al., 2015). 
Because of their sessile nature, plants are unable to avoid abiotic stressors like drought, salt, and 
extreme heat (Zhang et al., 2022). How plants respond to these stressors is dependent on the specific 
organ or tissue that is under stress. In addition, the length and severity of the stress may greatly affect 
the complexity of the response (Cramer et al., 2011). In order to combat stress responses and increase 
tolerance, plants engage early stress-signalling pathways when exposed to abiotic stimuli (Mohanta 
et al., 2018). Upon detecting stress, a number of plant cells release second messengers that enhance 
and transmit signals. These include nitric oxide, calcium, ROS, phospholipids, and a number of pro￾tein kinases (Zhang et al., 2020). By regulating the expression of over 1000 genes that are sensitive 
to stress, SnRk1 kinases help plants to regain equilibrium by reducing the need for energy-intensive 
activities and increasing tolerance to stress. Because of this, they are able to withstand a wide range 
of abiotic stressors, including nutrient shortages, floods, salinity, and droughts (Thapa and Shrestha 
2022). Hormones produced by plants, such as abscisic acid (ABA) and ethylene, are responsible 
for transmitting the primary signals that induce defensive reactions, like the closing of stomata in 96 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
response to drought stress (Cramer et al., 2011). To mitigate the severe effects of abiotic stress, 
these stress-signalling pathways activate transcription factors, which, in turn, activate a wide range 
of genes that are responsible for stress responses. Plant proteins, membranes, and other structural 
elements may be harmed by the increased ROS generated in response to abiotic stress, which may 
ultimately cause deficits in vital physiological functions (Arbona et al., 2017). Regardless of stress, 
some plants have been shown to exhibit membrane peroxidation and damage to their photosynthetic 
systems. Therefore, scavenging ROS by activating antioxidant molecules is the primary goal of 
plant defence systems (Sachdev and Ahmad 2021). Increased phenol and flavonoid synthesis has 
been seen in several plants under abiotic stress. Significant levels of phytochelatin formation are 
generally seen under different heavy metal stress conditions (Bidi et al., 2021). Additionally, it has 
been discovered that proline content increases to function as an osmolyte and combat a variety of 
abiotic stress sources. Another key biological change is the activation of antioxidant enzymes, which 
are responsible for scavenging ROS molecules. Plants can withstand oxidative stress due to these 
antioxidant enzymes, such as catalase, ascorbate peroxidise (APX), super oxide dismutase (SOD), 
and glutathione peroxidase (GPX) (Bidi et al., 2021). Extended periods of stress may adversely 
influence the growth and development of plants, hence influencing the production of agricultural 
products. Concerns about food security are increased by circumstances that negatively impact plants 
as they are considered the producers of the living kingdom (Ahmad et al., 2020). According to 
Gonzalez-Garcia et al. (2021), abiotic stress may be responsible for as much as 50% of production 
declines in important crops. A variety of environmental conditions, including low mineral nutrient 
availability, can lead to low crop yields. The sources of abiotic stress are similar in several ways in 
terms of their impacts on plants and how plants interpret them (Table 7.1).
For instance, osmotic stress in plant cells is caused by all of the listed abiotic stress sources. 
Heat and cold stress may be caused by dramatic changes in temperature, ranging from 10 to 15°C 
above or below the optimum. The effects of stress on plant processes, including photosynthesis, 
seed germination, development, growth, and reproduction, are far-reaching and detrimental to plant 
productivity. Source–sink connections, root hormone production, and nutrient concentrations are all 
affected by temperature stress in plants (Hassan et al., 2018). According to Hussain et al. (2018)’s 
investigation, when plants undergo heat stress, their enzyme activity, chlorophyll levels, photosyn￾thesis activity, stomatal conductance, transpiration percentage, antioxidant levels, and membrane 
TABLE 7.1
The influence of abiotic stress on the growth and function of plants
Abiotic Stress Effects
Cold Causes a dietary imbalance, as well as oxidative and osmotic stress, ROS buildup, decreased 
photosynthetic activity, and suppressed enzyme activity.
Drought Gives rise to oxidative and osmotic stress, the higher generation of ROS, ion leakage, the reduced 
uptake and distribution of mineral-based nutrition, reduced enzyme activity, and the denaturation 
of proteins.
Heat Causes the denaturation of proteins, osmotic stress, and water deprivation, all of which increase the 
formation of ROS, impaired CO2
 fixation, leaf browning, foliar senescence, and disrupted ion 
transport.
Flooding Causes oxidative stress and increases the generation of ROS, as well as leading to decreased 
photosynthetic activity and gaseous exchange as a result of decreased chlorophyll concentrations.
Light/Radiation Causes decreased photosynthetic activity, oxidative stress, the increased generation of ROS, 
increased oxidative damage, and chlorophyll degradation.
Salinity Accountable for ionic imbalance and water shortage, as well as oxidative and osmotic stress that 
reduces stomata openings, inhibits the absorption and transfer of water and mineral nutrients, 
increases the generation of ROS, and hinders photosynthesis.Green Nanoparticles Used in Agriculture 97
index stability all decrease, while ROS generation increases. There are several nutrients that are said 
to reduce heat stress. For instance, boron is considered to be a major micronutrient since it has been 
shown to considerably boost antioxidant system activity and lessen the adverse impacts of ROS 
caused by heat stress (Waraich et al., 2012).
In agricultural systems, droughts are one of the most harmful sources of abiotic stress. Droughts 
cause a shortage of water, which limits agricultural development and productivity. According to 
Iqbal et al. (2020), water deficiency stress causes stomatal openings to be restricted, photorespir￾ation to rise, and the photoreduction of oxygen (O2
) in the chloroplast to speed up. Ultimately, this 
causes oxidative damage in plants because of the buildup of ROS. Dhakal et al. (2021) estimated that 
water stress impacts around 50% of wheat-growing regions worldwide, causing a 10% decrease in 
productivity. Plants respond to drought stress by closing their stomata, producing the phytohormone 
ABA, changing their gene expression, and preserving osmotic balance. On the other hand, soil 
flooding or water logging is caused by the excessive accumulation of water in soil, which may be 
caused by protracted periods of high precipitation and poor drainage. When water covers the roots 
of plants, it often results in poor light, less or no oxygen supply to the tissues, decreased gaseous 
exchange, enhanced lipid peroxidation, and the buildup of ROS. During salt stress, plants exhibit 
decreased growth and cell division, slower photosynthesis and lipid metabolism, biological mem￾brane disruptions, ionic disparities, oxidative damage, and nutritional disparities. These effects also 
negatively impact yield attributes. Agricultural productivity is hindered by salt levels in soil. Around 
20–50% of irrigated farmland worldwide is impacted by salinity and by 2050, almost half of all cul￾tivable land may be damaged (Angon et al., 2022).
In a similar vein, heavy metal toxicity has become a global health problem. The atomic dens￾ities of heavy metals, a family of elements, are five times greater than those of water (Feng et al., 
2021). The release of heavy metals poses a major hazard to plant and soil health. While certain 
heavy metals, including zinc, cobalt, and copper, are essential nutrients for plants, high quantities 
of these substances may be dangerous (Saman et al., 2022). Other heavy metals, including arsenic, 
mercury, Cd, and Pb, on the other hand, have no biological function and are very dangerous, even 
at very low doses. Heavy metal contamination comes from both natural rock formations and 
human activity, including the use of agricultural fertilizers, animal dung, and abandoned mining 
detritus (Ghuge et al., 2023). According to Jalil et al. (2023), heavy metals have a negative impact 
on photosynthesis, chlorophyll activity, and crop water balance. Furthermore, damage caused by 
heavy metals also includes damage to proteins, nucleic acids, and plant cell membranes, as well 
as excess ROS (Hafeez et al., 2023). Thus, reducing the negative consequences of heavy metals 
is crucial.
Moreover, low temperatures hinder many crops from developing properly, making cold stress 
another major concern (Atayee and Noori, 2020). Plants are susceptible to two types of cold 
stress: freezing (< 0°C) and chilling (0–15°C). The degree of damage varies according to crop 
species, temperature, and wind speed (Aslam et al., 2022). Bhat et al. (2022) studied how cold stress 
(10–15°C) affected phenotypic alterations in soybeans, including wilting, the yellowing of leaves, 
problems with reproduction, pollen sterility, and decreased growth, In addition, cold stress causes 
damage to cell membranes, antioxidant enzymes, and photosynthesis activity (Adhikari et al., 2022). 
Furthermore, cold stress has been linked to lipid composition alterations, protoplasmic transport 
modifications, cytoskeleton reorganization, and calcium ion distribution regulation (Gusain et al., 
2023). Table 7.2 shows the effects of various sources of abiotic stress on different types of crop 
plants. ROS are produced as a consequence of many metabolic events, such as respiration, photo￾synthesis, and other cellular functions. Interestingly, ROS contribute to plant defence systems and 
serve as signalling molecules at low concentrations (Tavanti et al., 2021); but since they are highly 
reactive, excessive ROS accumulation under stressful situations leads to oxidative stress, which 
ultimately destroys vital biological components and subcellular structures, including DNA, proteins, 
lipids, and cell membranes (Figure 7.1) (Raja et al., 2017).98 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
TABLE 7.2
Summary of the literature on abiotic stress and its consequences on plants
Stress Plant
Experiment 
Location
Conditions of 
Stress Effects Citation
Cold Jatropha 
curcas and 
Jatropha 
macrocarpa
Pot 4°C Oxidative stress and high 
ascorbate peroxidase (APX) 
and glutathione levels.
Spano et al., 
2017
Cold Maize Pot 15°C and 12°C 
light: without 
light
Decreased seedlings, root 
length, and biomass, as well 
as growth.
Hussain et al., 
2020
Cold Chickpea Pot 4°C Increased ion leakage index 
and leaf H2
O2
 concentration, 
increased SOD activity, and 
decreased carotenoid and 
chlorophyll contents.
Amini et al., 
2021
Drought Adonis 
amurensis and 
Adonis pseudo 
amurensis
Pot 30 days without 
H2
O
Enhanced osmolytes, 
antioxidant defence 
enzymes, and secondary 
metabolites, as well as a 
decrease in relative leaf 
water potential.
Gao et al., 2020
Drought Tomato Pot 74–80%, 55–61%, 
47–52%, and 
25–30% moisture 
contents
Reduced photosynthesis and 
irregular stomatal control.
Liang et al., 
2020
Drought Lactuca 
sativa L.
Plug trays Lack of irrigation Changes in ascorbic acid, 
phenol, and flavonoid levels 
and reduced photosynthesis.
Shin et al., 2021
Drought European pear Greenhouse 100%, 60%, and 
30% of field 
capacity
Reduced levels of 
photosynthetic pigments, 
elevated levels of 
malondialdehyde (MDA) 
and hydrogen peroxide 
(H2
O2
), changes in the 
profiles of flavonoids, 
phenols, and anthocyanins, 
and enhanced antioxidant 
enzymes.
Asayesh et al., 
2023
Drought Strawberry 
cultivars 
(Camarosa 
and Gaviota)
Greenhouse 100%, 75%, 50%, 
and 25% of field 
capacity for 
control, minor, 
moderate, and 
extreme stress
Reduced formation of ROS, 
ion leakage, elevated 
antioxidant enzyme activity, 
photosynthetic pigment 
inhibition, and compatible 
solute accumulation.
Zahedhi et al., 
2023
Heat Wheat Field 15°C to 32°C Decreased yields. Asseng et al., 
2015
Heat Potato Pot 35°C in the day and 
25°C at night for 
3 days
Decreased yields and 
alterations in potato 
structure.
Rykaczewska, 
2015
Heat Maize, soya 
bean, and 
wheat
Field 0°C, 10°C, 20°C, 
30°C, and 40°C
Reduced water content and 
yields at temperatures over 
30°C.
Schauberger 
et al., 2017Green Nanoparticles Used in Agriculture 99
Stress Plant
Experiment 
Location
Conditions of 
Stress Effects Citation
Heat Potato Plastic houses 
with 
temperature 
control
40°C Reduced photosynthetic 
efficiency and yields.
Kim and Lee, 
2019
Heat Winter and 
spring wheat
Field 7.5°C–17.2°C Increased productivity in 
winter wheat (5.8%) and 
decreased productivity in 
spring wheat (16.1%) per °C 
of change.
He et al., 2020
Heavy Metal 
(Cd)
Strawberry Pot 0 mg kg−1, 15 
mg kg−1, 30 
mg kg−1, 45 mg 
kg−1, and 60 mg 
kg−1 per pot
Accumulation of Cd in roots, 
reduced chlorophyll content, 
increased malondialdehyde 
(MDA) levels, and enhanced 
SOD and catalase (CAT) 
activity, as well as 30% 
decrease in plant growth
Muradoglu et al., 
2015
Heavy Metal 
(Cd)
Corn Pot 0 μM, 75 μM, 150 
μM, 225 μM, 300 
μM, and 375 μM
Increased H2
O2
, MDA, and 
antioxidant levels and 
decreased grain yields.
Anjum et al., 
2015
Heavy Metal Wheat Not specified 15 μM, 30 μM, 
and 60 μM 
combinations of 
As, Cd, and Pb
Changes in phenolic content 
and decreased growth.
Sanal, 2019
Heavy Metal 
(Cd and 
Pb)
Cotton Pot 5 ppm, 10 ppm, and 
15 ppm
Decreased chlorophyll levels 
(Pb was more hazardous to 
cotton than Cd).
Priya and 
Ghosh, 2023
Heavy Metal 
(Cu and 
Pb)
Hybrid Triticum 
aestivum L.
Pot 200 ppm, 500 ppm, 
and 1000 ppm
Increased phenolic content, 
decreased germination 
rate, and enhanced tyrosine 
ammonialyase and 
phenylalanine ammonia 
lyase activity.
Janczak-Pieni ´ 
ązek ˙ et al., 
2022
Salinity 
(NaCl)
Lavender Pot in a 
greenhouse
0 mM, 25 mM, 50 
mM, 100 mM, 
and 200 mM
Reduced growth and 
photosynthetic pigment 
levels.
Paraskevopoulou 
et al., 2020
Salinity 
(NaCl)
Sorghum bicolor
L.
Petri dish 0 mM, 100 mM, 
150 mM, and 200 
mM
Decreased germination rate, 
seedling development, and 
shoot and root length.
RajabiDehnavi 
et al., 2020
Salinity 
(NaCl)
Trifolium 
fragiferum
Greenhouse 0 mM, 0.5 mM, 1 
mM, 2 mM, and 
5 mM
Decreased mineral 
accumulation, reproductive 
development, and biomass.
Jekabsone et al., 
2022
Salinity 
(NaCl)
Solanum 
lycopersicum
and Cucumis 
sativus
In vitro and in 
vivo
25 mM, 50 mM, 
100 mM, and 200 
mM
Decreased germination 
rate, weight, length, and 
chlorophyll levels in the 
shoots, along with elevated 
levels of flavonoids and 
phenolics.
Abdel-Farid 
et al., 2020
Salinity 
(NaCl)
Tobacco and 
potato
Pot 400 mM Decreased photosynthesis 
activity.
Pecherina et al., 
2022
TABLE 7.2 (Continued)
Summary of the literature on abiotic stress and its consequences on plants100 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
Numerous studies have demonstrated the overgeneration of ROS in response to abiotic stress 
and the harm that is brought on by oxidative stress (Table 7.3). Abiotic stress causes alterations in 
the physiology of plants, which eventually result in stomatal closure, decreased CO2
 uptake, and 
restricted photosynthesis. ROS are produced excessively as a consequence of drastic alterations in 
cell physiology, particularly photosynthesis (Ali et al., 2020) and especially under drought stress 
(Zafar et al., 2023). In addition to heavy metal stress, several scientists have noted that ROS over￾production occurs in response to salinity, heat, and cold stress (Table 7.3).
Using NPs derived from plants shows great promise in reducing the detrimental impacts of ROS 
caused by abiotic stress. For example, Abdalla et al. (2022) investigated the impact of titanium 
dioxide NPs (TiO2
NPs) synthesized from aloe vera leaf extract on two varieties of soybean under 
salt stress. Green TiO2
NPs reduced ROS and increased antioxidant effects. Mustafa et al. (2022) also 
conducted experiments on wheat under salt stress using green synthesized TiO2
NPs. An extract of 
the Buddleja asiatica plant was used in the synthesis of the TiO2
NPs. They showed that the osmotic 
and water potential improved, the accumulation of osmolytes increased, and antioxidant enzyme 
(SOD) activity increased. Biogenic silicon NPs (SiNPs) were also shown by Ahmed et al. (2023) to 
reduce responses to heavy metal stress in rapeseed.
7.3 THE GREEN SYNTHESIS AND CHARACTERIZATION OF NPS
Biological synthesis techniques are used in the green synthesis of NPs as sustainable and safe 
substitutes for traditional physical and chemical manufacturing methods. This new area of study, 
often called “green technology” or “green nanotechnology”, has an emphasis on environmentally 
friendly and sustainable methods of creating NPs (Nie et al., 2023). Green nanotechnology’s main 
goal is to create NPs that address environmental issues while reducing harmful impacts on the 
environment and public health. It is believed that using this strategy will result in energy efficient 
and environmentally friendly manufacturing processes (Srivastava et al., 2022). The use of strong 
reducing agents, nonhazardous stabilizing compounds, and environmentally friendly solvents are 
the three main pillars that support environmentally cognisant approaches to NPs synthesis (Sarkar 
et al., 2020a). In green nanotechnology, using plant products is thought to be the best way to make 
NPs that are safe for the environment, are nontoxic, and don’t harm living things. This method has 
many advantages, including the fact that there are a lot of harmless, easy-to-handle, and inexpensive 
plant materials that can be used in different NP processes. This method also employs extracts 
from different parts of plants, such as fruits, flowers, leaves, seeds, and roots (Sarraf et al., 2022) 
FIGURE 7.1 The generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and the relationship between ROS, the 
antioxidant system, and oxidative stress.Green Nanoparticles Used in Agriculture 101
(Table 7.4). Water is the most common and best solvent to use for this method. While water is a 
neutral solvent, it can also pull out many chemicals that act as reducing and capping agents. These 
include phenolics, flavonoids, terpenoids, proteins, and more. Organic solvents, such as ethanol, 
methanol, and acetone, are sometimes mixed with water in different ratios to make the extraction 
process more effective (Ovais et al., 2018). Temperature, pH levels, reaction times, metal 
ion concentrations, and plant extracts all affect the synthesis of NPs, which is controlled by the 
bioreduction process. Purification and characterization procedures are essential for synthesizing the 
required NPs (Kumari et al., 2022) (Figure 7.2).
The study of green NPs involves many analytical techniques that are intended to clarify their 
inherent qualities and structural features (Patra and Baek, 2014). UV–visible spectroscopy is one 
of the most important characterization methods for clarifying the optical absorption profiles of 
nanoparticles and provides information on the size, shape, and appearance of surface plasmon 
resonance occurrences. NPs exhibiting a crystalline structure and phase composition may be 
characterized using X-ray diffraction (XRD) assays (Hussain et al., 2016). For the purpose of 
TABLE 7.3
Effects of ROS and abiotic stress on different plant species
Abiotic Stress Plant Stress Condition Effects Citation
Cold Cucumber 10°C in the day and 
6°C at night
Inhibited protein synthesis, enzymatic 
activity, and cellular mechanisms.
Ma et al., 2023
Drought Wheat 70%, 50%, and 35% 
of field capacity
Decreased spike length, plant height, 
chlorophyll levels, gas exchange, root 
and shoot dry biomass, and grain yields.
Abbas et al., 
2018
Drought Leptocohloa 
fusca
100%, 70%, and 30% 
of field capacity
Decreased fresh and dry weights of 
shoots and roots, as well as decreased 
chlorophyll levels (63%), photosynthesis 
(67%), stomatal conductance (43%), and 
field capacity 30%.
Saleem et al., 
2023
Drought Strawberry 
cultivars 
(Camarosa and 
Gaviota)
100%, 75%, 50%, 
and 25% of field 
capacity
Increased peroxidase (POD), CAT, SOD, 
and APX levels (137%, 220%, 47%, and 
124% in Camarosa and 121%, 300%, 
38%, and 93% in Gaviota).
Zahedi et al., 
2023
Heat Lablab purpureus
L.
Elevated H2
O2
, free 
radical generation, 
and O2
 •−
Decreased enzyme activity and membrane 
integrity and damaged DNA.
Rai et al., 2020
Heavy Metal 
(Cd)
Zea mays L. 0, 75, 150, 225, 300, 
375 μM
Increased protective enzyme levels and 
decreased grain yields.
Anjum et al., 
2015
Heavy Metal 
(CdCl2)
Mentha arvensis 150 mg kg−1 of soil Increased antioxidant enzyme and osmolyte 
levels.
Zaid et al., 2018
Salt Oryza sativa
L. (Patnai and 
IR29 cultivars)
150 mM and 250 mM 
of NaCl
Elevated flavonoids in Patnai cultivars, as 
well as cell membrane protein and lipid 
damage and germination problems.
Banik and 
Bhattacharjee, 
2020
Salt Potato Elevated levels of • 
OH, 1 O2
, H2
O2
, 
RO•, and O2
 •−
Reduced enzymatic activity and protein 
production, cellular metabolism 
disturbance, and damage to the cell 
membrane.
Chourasia et al., 
2021
Salt Hibiscus syriacus
L.
50 mM, 100 mM, 150 
mM, and 200 mM 
NaCl
Osmotic imbalance and damage to the cell 
membrane, elevated SOD, POD, CAT, 
and APX concentrations in leaves, and 
unbalanced Na+/K+ ratios.
Lu et al., 2023102 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
FIGURE 7.2 The process of preparing green synthesized NPs from plant material. For synthesized NPs that 
do not possess the desired morphological qualities, the reaction has to be resumed from the bioreduction step.
TABLE 7.4
Sustainable approaches for the synthesis of various NPs
NP Plant Parts Used Shape and Size (nm) Citation
Ag Malus domestica Fruit Spherical 20 Roy et al., 2014
Ag Zingiber officinale Root Spherical 15 Velmurugan et al., 2014
Ag Ficus benghalensis Leaves Spherical 10–50 Saware et al., 2014
Ag Polianthus tuberosa Bud Spherical 50 ± 2 Rawani, 2017
Ag Cleome viscose Fruit Spherical 20–50 Lakshmanan et al., 2018
Ag Tussilago farfara Bud Spherical 13.57 ± 3.26 Lee et al., 2019
Ag Sarcococca saligna (D.Don) Muell.-Arg. Leaves Spherical 52.41 Sharif et al., 2021
Ag Cascabela thevetia Leaf Spherical 20–30 Khan et al., 2022
Ag Syzygium cumini Fruit Spherical 47 Chakravarty et al., 2022
Ag Eucalyptus globulus Leaves Spherical 40–60 Subhani, et al., 2024
Ag Arisaema dracontium Stem Leaves 1–50 nm 20–500 nm Khattak, et al., 2024
Al2
O3 Aerva lanata Leaves Spherical 50–70 Duraisamy, 2018
Al2
O3 Terminalia chebula Seeds Spherical 50–100 Duraisamy, 2018
CeO2 Azadirachta indica Leaves Spherical 10–50 Ramalingam et al., 2023
CuO Aerva javanica Leaves Spherical 60 Amin et al., 2021
Fe Eucalyptus Leaves Polydisperse sizes 20–80 Weng et al., 2016
FeO Ramalina sinensis Leaves Spherical 20–70 Arjaghi et al., 2021
NiO Rauwolfia serpentina Leaves Crystalline 4.89–15.82 Rahman et al., 2021
Pt Ocimum sanctum Leaves Irregular 23 Jameel et al., 2020
Sm2
O3 Andrographis paniculata Leaves Cubic 30–50 Muthulakshmi et al., 2020
ZnO Moringa oleifera Flower Triangular 13.2 Ngom et al., 2021
Zn Carica papaya Leaves Spherical 50 Dulta et al., 2022Green Nanoparticles Used in Agriculture 103
obtaining high-resolution images and gaining insights into the morphology, dimensionality, 
and spatial dispersion of NPs, transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and scanning electron 
microscopy (SEM) are essential instruments. A technique called X-ray photoelectron spectros￾copy (XPS) can be used to look into the chemical structure and surface chemistry of substances. 
Establishing the hydrodynamic numbers and stability of colloidal particles in solutions is based 
on dynamic light scattering (DLS). The combination of these different scientific methods helps to 
obtain a more comprehensive characterization of green NPs, which helps us to learn more about 
their possible uses and complicated behaviours (VG and Prem, 2018). Characterization is a very 
important step in figuring out many aspects NPs, such as their surface area, size, and grouping 
(Shume et al., 2020).
7.3.1  Uptake of NPs
Green NPs are taken up by different cell types, although the exact process of entry varies depending 
on the plant tissue and kind of NP. The properties of NPs, such as their surface chemistry, charge, 
size and shape, have an impact on these processes (Ahmad et al., 2019). Plants may absorb NPs 
via their roots, leaves, or both. The stomatal route facilitates foliar absorption. Smaller NPs, up 
to the size exclusion limit of the stomata, may pass through the stomatal holes in leaves, whereas 
bigger NPs can penetrate the leaf cuticle. Once inside the leaves, the phloem vascular system 
allows NPs to move to other areas of the plant. NPs must penetrate the root surface via apoplastic 
and symplastic routes in order to be absorbed by roots. Through gaps at the terminals of roots 
or lateral root connections, NPs can penetrate intercellular spaces and enter the vascular tissue 
via the apoplastic route. The uptake and translocation of NPs are influenced by various features, 
like their size, shape, and surface charge. Overall, a large body of research has shown that plants 
can absorb NPs, although the precise processes and degrees of absorption are still unclear (Lv 
et al., 2019).
7.4 MNPS AND MONPS
MNPs, such as silver (Ag), gold (Au), copper (Cu), chromium (Cr), platinum (Pt), and palladium 
(Pd) nanoparticles, have been investigated in great detail. There has been a recent change in focus 
from the production of plant-based NPs to the exploration of their possible uses in mitigating 
abiotic stress. Various methods are used to manufacture NPs. In the case of making silver NPs 
(AgNPs), the main ingredients are Ag metal ions and a reducing agent. AgNPs are well documented 
for their outstanding antioxidant and catalytic activity in the context of plant applications. AgNPs 
are produced by converting enol to keto and converting flavonoids, like luteolin and rosmarinic 
acid, both of which are attributed to Ocimum basillicum extracts (Shafey, 2020). Piper nigrum
leaf and stem extracts were used by Paulkumar et al. (2014) to study the production of AgNPs. For 
the leaf extracts, the reaction started at 10 minutes and ended at 2 hours but for the stem extracts, 
the reaction took 4 hours. Furthermore, TEM images showed that the AgNPs formed from stem 
extracts ranged in size from 9 to 30 nm, whereas NPs obtained from leaf extracts were smaller 
(4–14 nm) and larger (20–50 nm). AgNPs were also synthesized by Umadevi et al. (2013) using 
fruits extracts from Solanum lycopersicum. Their findings demonstrated that malic acid was neces￾sary for capping the bioreduced AgNPs and citric acid extract from the fruit served as the reducing 
agent. In a study by Al Saqr et al. (2021), Benincasa hispida peel extracts were used to create 
AuNPs, which were then shown to have antibacterial effects. Additionally, Garcinia combogia fruit 
extracts were successfully used to create AuNPs, which were spherical and anisotropic in shape. 
It was discovered that the quantity of extract used and the reaction temperature affected the form 
of the NPs. Less research has been conducted on platinum NPs (PtNPs) than silver and gold NPs. 104 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
Plant extracts containing flavonoids allow for the bioreduction of Pt ions, which, in turn, allows 
for the creation of PtNPs. The use of a water-soluble gum extract from the plant Cochlospermum 
gossypium in the synthesis of PtNPs produces an exceptionally stable end product (Kalaiselvi 
et al., 2015). In a separate investigation, Diopyros kaki leaf extract was used to effectively produce 
PtNPs. Song et al. (2010) reported that a temperature of 95°C was used for the synthesis procedure. 
As a reducing agent, leaf extracts from Ocimum sanctum were used to synthesize 23-nm PtNPs 
(Soundarrajan et al., 2012).
Zinc oxide NPs (ZnONPs), which are very stable and have a spheroidal shape with measurements 
ranging from 25 to 40 nm, have been successfully made using juice from the miller leaf of Aloe 
barbadensis. When different amounts of aloe leaf juice were used, the researchers were able to 
convert more than 95% of the samples into NPs. Different types of ZnONPs were made and their 
sizes could be changed by changing the concentration of leaf extract (Sangeetha et al., 2011). 
Titanium isopropoxide solution and jasmine leaf extracts have been used to make TiO2
NPs, with 
sizes between 100 and 150 nm. In the same way, TiO2
NPs varying in size from 25 to 100 nm were 
made using a 0.3% extract of water from Jatropha curcas latex (Rajakumar et al., 2013). When 
Ghotekar et al. (2021) used a liquid solution of Allium sativum and potassium dichromate as a 
starting material, they were able to make chromium NPs (CrNPs). A leaf extract from Abutilon 
indicum (L.) was also used as a reducing and capping agent to make chromium oxide NPs in a 
different study. The NPs that were made had amazing antioxidant activities (Khan et al., 2021). 
Utilizing affordable and environmentally friendly methods, bioactive natural components have 
been used to create cerium oxide NPs (CeO2
NPs). One study compared the size, surface charge, 
shape, antioxidant characteristics, and photocatalytic effects of synthesized NPs. CeO2
NPs have 
been synthesized using leaf extracts from Rubia cordifolia L. (Ramalingam et al., 2023). It has 
been shown that nickel oxide NPs (NiONPs) may be produced utilizing photochemical obtained 
from peel (Selvanathan et al., 2021). NiONPs have also been synthesized with nickel acetate 
tetra hydrate as a precursor using extracts from papaya pericarp, dragon fruit rind, and Aloe vera
(Selvanathan et al., 2021). Moreover, NiONPs have been produced via solution combustion using 
Calotropis gigantea leaf extracts (Kumar et al., 2020).
7.5 UTILIZING NPS TO MANAGE ABIOTIC STRESS
7.5.1 Salt Stress Tolerance
The increased salinity of soil is caused by the salty irrigation that is required on agricultural fields 
worldwide due to water constraints caused by global warming. Salinity is one of the biggest 
problems facing modern agriculture since it ultimately suppresses and harms plant growth and 
causes plant death (Isayenkov and Maathuis 2019). Moreover, just 200 mM of NaCl causes the 
majority of plants to perish. A wide range of horticultural crops are affected by salt, including 
fruits, vegetables, and spices. Salt stress also induces osmotic, water, oxidative, and nutritional 
stress, as well as reduced cell division, all of which influence a variety of biochemical, physio￾logical, and metabolic processes and affect ionic strength (Sinha and Verma 2021). As per the 
findings of Zulfiqar and Ashraf (2021), the impact of salt stress on a variety of plants can be 
effectively mitigated using NPs, namely ZnNPs, AgNPs, SiO2
NPs, CuNPs, FeNPs, MnNPs, CNPs, 
TiNPs, CeNPs, and KNPs. According to El-Sharkawy et al. (2017), proline and antioxidant enzyme 
levels, like catalase, increased and electrolyte leakage decreased in salt-sensitive Medicago sativa
plants when KNPs were applied topically. AgNP-treated pearl millet plants also indicate signs 
of decreased oxidative stress, as seen by lesser MDA and ROS levels and increased antioxidant 
effects. This reduction in oxidative stress may have resulted from a reduction in Na+ uptake in 
the leaves (Khan et al., 2020). It has been found that CeO2NPs help Brassica napus to increase 
photosynthetic activity by changing the root cells and enhancing the intake of minerals (Rossi et al. Green Nanoparticles Used in Agriculture 105
2017). There is increasing evidence that using NPs on plants may significantly lessen the adverse 
consequences of salt stress and regulate plant responses.
7.5.2  Drought Stress Tolerance
Droughts are considered to be the most damaging environmental condition, lowering agricultural 
production more than any other source of abiotic stress. By 2100, it is predicted that the average 
global temperature will increase by 1.8°C to 4.0°C and that droughts will be widespread, according to 
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) (Ozturk et al., 2021). Agriculture is impacted 
by droughts when plants do not get enough rainfall to grow healthily and complete their life cycles. 
The primary impacts of droughts on agricultural plants are reduced rates of cell division and develop￾ment, longer stems and roots, smaller leaves, disorganized stomatal oscillations, altered interactions 
between water and nutrients resulting in poorer crop yields, and the inefficient use of water (Farooq 
et al., 2012). Previous investigations have indicated that NPs alter plant morphology, physiology, 
and biochemistry in a variety of ways. They improve plant resilience to drought stress by enhancing 
hydraulic conductivity and water absorption in the roots of plants and they affect the abundance of 
proteins related to stress signalling, hormone pathways, oxidation reduction, and ROS detoxification 
(Kandhol et al., 2022). Under drought stress, it has been discovered that the foliar application of 
MONPs, like Fe3
O4
NPs, ZnONPs, and TiO2
NPs, is efficient in boosting the physiological and meta￾bolic activity of plants (Alabdallah et al., 2021). The application of SiNPs to drought-stressed Punica 
granatum plants results in further enhancements to their ABA levels, antioxidant enzyme activity, 
phenolic content, photosynthetic pigment levels, nutrient levels, and physicochemical factors (Zahedi 
et al., 2021). According to El-Zohri et al. (2021), tomatoes’ resistance to drought stress may be effect -
ively increased by topically applying green ZnONPs at low dosages. The possible advantages of 
utilizing NPs to increase drought tolerance, however, only emerge under certain climactic conditions.
7.5.3  Cold Stress Tolerance
Climate change partially contributes to the detrimental impacts of cold temperatures on plant 
growth and development. Two frequent low-temperature challenges that plants face are freezing 
and chilling. Plants may be chilled anywhere from 0 to 15°C, depending on their tolerance level 
and species. Chilling temperatures are influenced by air temperature, as well as wind speed. Unlike 
under cold conditions, plants struggle in temperatures below 0°C (Aslam et al., 2022). Even low 
temperatures that are not below freezing may harm or kill crop species, which can affect their 
survival, production, and ecological dispersal (Adhikari et al., 2022). Cold stress slows plant 
growth due to lower temperatures resulting in reductions in enzyme and protein activity (Zhang 
et al., 2020). Low temperatures affect several plant functions, such as those pertaining to respir￾ation, defence, protein synthesis, nucleic acids, and secondary metabolism (Aslam et al., 2022). 
TiNPs have been shown to be useful in modulating transcriptional regulation to improve elec￾trolyte leakage, membrane damage, and photosynthetic activity in chickpea plants (Amini et al., 
2017). According to Hasanpour et al. (2015), applying TiO2
NPs to plants may help them to become 
more tolerant of cold stress by regulating the pressure caused by temperature drops and changing 
their metabolism to promote plant development. This is especially true for chickpea plants. Using 
TiO2
NPs in liquorice plants decreases the negative effects of cold stress and enhances their levels 
of glycyrrhizin (Ghabel and Karamian 2020). In cold-stressed banana plants, the application of 
chitosan NPs has been shown to be beneficial in lowering ROS via the buildup of osmoprotectants 
(Wang et al., 2021). Moreover, ZnONPs that are applied topically to rice plants may mitigate 
cold stress by acting on transcription factors that are involved in cold stress response and the 
antioxidative system (Song et al., 2021).106 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
7.5.4  Heavy Metal Stress Tolerance
One of the harmful elements that lower agricultural output in the present era is heavy metal stress. 
Globally, human activity, including urbanization and industrialization, has led to heavy metal 
pollution (Emamverdian et al., 2015). The increased use of contemporary farming instruments, 
such chemical fertilizers and pesticides, has also increased crop plant susceptibility to heavy 
metal stress. The impacts of heavy metals on plants, including Hg, Pb, Cd, Ni, Co, Cr, and Ag, 
are detrimental (Yadav, 2010). Plants are at the base of all trophic systems, meaning that there is 
a greater likelihood of heavy metals being bioaccumulated into the food chain. This may ultim￾ately cause chronic health problems, including liver and kidney damage, in both humans and other 
animals. Furthermore, plants are directly impacted by heavy metals via altered morphology and 
physiology, as well as compromised metabolic pathways (Tiwari and Lata 2018). This all has an 
impact on the amount and quality of plant-based goods, particularly medicinal and agricultural 
plants. Numerous investigations have been carried out on the utilization of NPs to mitigate heavy 
metal stress. When soil is treated with NPs, heavy metals are transformed and their bioaccumu￾lation is inhibited. Fe3
O4
NP treatment decreases the availability of Cd metal in soil (Wang et al., 
2020). The translocation of heavy metals in plants may be hindered by regulating metal trans￾porter genes via the use of particular NPs. These NPs form complexes with the heavy metals, 
thereby preventing their movement (Wang et al., 2021). NPs like CeO2
NPs have been shown to 
promote the synthesis of organic acids, which help to decrease the harmful effects of heavy metal 
stress (Wu et al., 2017).
7.5.5 Flooding Stress Tolerance
The majority of plants exhibit sensitivity to floods due to the excessive accumulation of water in 
soil. Flooding may occur due to factors such as heavy precipitation, inadequate soil drainage, and 
improper irrigation methods. Flooding may have catastrophic consequences for agriculture when 
plants are fully submerged in water. Flooding is one source of abiotic stress that affects food supply 
and national economics. It also has an impact on the vegetation that is cultivated in many ecological 
systems. Plants cultivated in various environments have diverse reactions to flooding stress. Wetland 
plant species demonstrate tolerance to being submerged and being in waterlogged soil, but dryland 
plants are susceptible to flooding stress. The excessive accumulation of water in air gaps hinders the 
exchange and diffusion of gases between plant roots and the environment. This obstruction results 
in a shortage of oxygen, which, in turn, inhibits plant respiration, leading to hypoxia and eventu￾ally anoxia. During floods, soil’s pH and redox potential are altered, resulting in a rise in carbon 
dioxide levels and the release of phytotoxins. These changes negatively impact root metabolism, 
nutrient absorption, and overall plant development (Bailey-Serres and Colmer 2014). Studies have 
shown that NPs may mitigate the adverse effects of floods on plants. AgNPs have been shown to 
mitigate the effects of flooding stress on soybean plants by modulating the synthesis of amino acids, 
proteins, glycolysis, and wax. Additionally, NPs promote the development of soybean plants even 
under stressful conditions (Mustafa et al., 2016). A recent study investigated the effects of flooding 
stress on soybean plants and examined the potential of Al2
O3
NPs to improve their development in 
such conditions. The Al2
O3
NPs increased the length of the roots, (including the hypocotyl), inhibited 
the proteins responsible for glycolysis, and mediated the cells involved in the removal of ROS by 
increasing ascorbate/glutathione pathway activity (Mustafa and Komatsu 2016).
7.5.6  Heat Stress Tolerance
Elevated temperatures may induce heat stress in plants. Over the last several decades, the phenom￾enon of global warming has exacerbated this effect. Heat stress is often defined as a prolonged 
increase in temperature over a crucial threshold that causes lasting damage to plant growth (Hu Green Nanoparticles Used in Agriculture 107
et al., 2020). Severe heat may harm the intermolecular bonds that are necessary for plant growth, 
hence impeding plant development and fruit production (Bita and Gerats 2013). Heat stress often 
reduces the efficiency of photosynthetic activity, resulting in shorter plant life cycles and decreased 
output (Zhao et al., 2020). Heat stress has the potential to greatly limit crop output in tropical 
and subtropical regions. SeNPs have been shown to have a beneficial effect on sorghum plants 
subjected to high temperatures. They help to prevent negative effects, such as damage to the plant’s 
membranes and decreased pollen germination and yields. This is achieved by activating antioxi￾dant defence mechanisms, as reported by Djanaguiraman et al. (2018). AgNPs have been applied to 
wheat plants to protect them from heat stress by promoting morphological development, as shown 
by Iqbal et al. (2019). Similarly, ZnONPs have been shown to enhance wheat’s heat stress tolerance 
by boosting antioxidant enzymes and reducing lipid peroxidation (Hassan et al., 2018). Applying 
NPs to tomato leaves may activate protective mechanisms against heat stress, which are triggered 
when the temperature reaches above s certain threshold.
7.6 MECHANISMS FOR ALLEVIATING ABIOTIC STRESS
Because of their special physicochemical characteristics and prospective advantages in increasing 
plant growth, development, and stress resilience, green NPs are becoming more and more important 
in agriculture. Biogenic NPs may cause a range of physiological, biochemical, and molecular effects 
in plants when administered exogenously.
7.6.1 Physiological Effects of Green NPs
NPs have the potential to affect water interactions at the physiological level (Mustafa et al., 2021), 
nutrient uptake (Elshayb et al., 2021), photosynthesis (Bisht et al., 2022), ion homeostasis (Wahid 
et al., 2020), and growth parameters (Singh et al., 2022). Del Buono et al. (2021) conducted a study 
in which they observed that lesser concentrations of green ZnONPs resulted in higher photosynthetic 
efficiency, shoot development, and root growth in maize. However, the maximum dose of 200 mg/
l hindered growth. In a related investigation, Mustafa et al. (2021) also noted growth enhancements 
in wheat when exposed to 40 mg/l concentrations of biogenic TiO2
NPs. In addition, Thiruvengadam 
et al. (2015) studied the physiological impacts of AgNP doses in turnips (0 mg/l, 1 mg/l, 5 mg/l, 
and 10 mg/l). The results showed that while larger concentrations (5 mg/l and 10 mg/l) of biogenic 
AgNPs decreased seed germination, root length, biomass, and chlorophyll content, they enhanced 
anthocyanin, MDA, H2
O2
, and ROS levels. However, 1 mg/l of green AgNPs enhanced plant bio￾mass. At greater concentrations, the AgNPs also resulted in DNA damage and cell death, indicating 
the phytotoxicity that is connected to the application of large amounts of green NPs. The impact 
of green CuONPs on the physiology and gene expression of Lens culinaris seedlings was studied 
by Sarkar et al. (2020b). Adiantum lunulatum extracts were used in the synthesis of the CuONPs. 
Low concentrations of CuONPs enhanced the physiological levels of defence enzyme activity, root 
length, seedling vigour index, and seed germination in Lens culinaris seedlings (Figure 7.3). These 
enzymes included POD and polyphenol oxidase. Higher dosages of the CuONPs (0.05 mg/mL), on 
the other hand, enhanced ROS and H2
O2
 accumulation, as well as oxidative damage indicators, such 
as proline and lipid peroxidation.
7.6.2  Biochemical Effects of Green NPs
Green NPs have the ability to change secondary metabolite synthesis and biochemically regu￾late enzyme activity (Mustafa et al., 2022), as well as activating the antioxidant system, which 
comprises antioxidants that are both enzymatic and nonenzymatic. Mogazy and Hanafy (2022), for 
example, investigated how green ZnONPs affected faba beans under salt stress. Biogenic ZnONPs 108 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
increased secondary metabolites, osmolytes, and antioxidants to reduce salinity’s harmful effects. 
Sadat-Hosseini et al. (2022) studied green synthesized AgNPs in salt-stressed roselle plants. The 
AgNPs were produced from Hibiscus sabdariffa leaf extracts and increased proline, soluble sugars, 
flavonoids, anthocyanins, and antioxidant enzymes, indicating their potential to mitigate the effects 
of salinity. In addition, a number of NPs have enzyme-like properties, including AuNPs, cobalt 
oxide (CO3
O4
) NPs, CeONPs, and iron oxide NPs (Sarraf et al., 2022). Furthermore, antioxidant 
enzymes, including APX, CAT, and GPOX, may experience increased activity due to AgNP and 
AuNP application (Manaf et al., 2021). It has also been shown that TiO2
NPs improve Vicia faba
L.’s enzymatic and nonenzymatic defence mechanisms, inhibit the production of H2
O2
 and O2
•–, and 
raise osmolyte accumulation (Khan et al., 2020). In Dracocephalum moldavica, Fe3
O4
NPs have 
been shown to increase total phenolic, flavonoid, ascorbate, and anthocyanin contents and GPOX, 
APX, CAT, and glutathione reductase activity (Moradbeygi et al., 2020). NPs have the ability to 
replenish tocopherol and contribute to the synthesis of phytohormones (vitamin E) (Seminario et al., 
2017). Another significant antioxidant that reduces ROS and controls the AsA-GSH cycle is GSH, 
a ubiquitous tripeptide (Sachdev et al., 2021). Amino acids that are not proteins, such as citrulline, 
ornithine, and gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), can work well as antioxidants. By nullifying 
free radicals and controlling enzyme activity, GABA builds up under stress and aids in plants’ 
ability to withstand stress. In stressful situations like droughts, GABA may function as an osmolyte 
or promote the synthesis of other osmolytes, like proline, which aid in osmotic adjustment (Jalil 
and Ansari, 2020). By effectively nullifying the singlet excited state of chlorophyll, carotenoids 
function as pigments that absorb light, release excess energy as heat, and stop PS-II from becoming 
overexcited in the thylakoid membrane, as well as inhibiting chlorophyll in its triplet excited form 
and singlet oxygen, thereby reducing oxidative damage brought on by strong light (Sachdev et al., 
2021). An enzyme antioxidant called SOD acts as the main defence against harmful ROS. By oxi￾dizing other radicals into molecular oxygen and reducing them to H2
O2
, it promotes the dispro￾portionality of O2•– (Sachdev et al., 2021). The tetrameric structure of catalases, which are mostly 
found in peroxisomes, contains heme. They produce water (2H2
O) and O2
 from 2H2
O2
. During 
stress, catalases are essential for removing ROS and this process is aided by a rise in peroxisome 
FIGURE 7.3 Techniques for abiotic stress mitigation using green nanoparticles.Green Nanoparticles Used in Agriculture 109
proliferation. Cells may overcome damage to tissue metabolism and hazardous amounts of H2
O2
 by 
increasing CAT activity (Ahmad et al., 2010). Another enzyme that contains heme and has antioxi￾dant qualities is called GPOX. GPOX can neutralize ROS in times of oxidative stress by converting 
H2
O2
 into H2
O and O2
 as a substrate. GPOX does not stop the formation of peroxides in plants, but 
it does assist in controlling and reducing their negative effects (Aslam, 2022).
7.6.3  Molecular Effects of Green NPs
There aren’t many studies that have addressed the molecular impacts of biogenic NPs. However, 
investigations have shown that exposure to NPs alters the gene expression associated with stress 
and defence mechanisms. For instance, by treating wheat with biogenic TiO2
NPs, Satti et al. (2022)
demonstrated the overexpression of enzymes like POD, CAT, APX, and SOD (Moringa oleifera
leaf extract). Similar to this, AgNP exposure led to altered gene expression in a study by Nair and 
Chung (2014), which examined antioxidative defence systems. In the roots and shoots of seedlings 
exposed to the AgNPs, there was a notable upregulation of the expression of the SOD, CAT, and 
APX genes. Furthermore, Thiruvengadam et al. (2015) investigated how biogenic AgNPs affect the 
physiology and molecular makeup of turnip seedlings. Various quantities of AgNPs (0 mg/l, 1 mg/
l, 5 mg/l, and 10 mg/l) were applied to turnip seeds, which were cultivated for 2 weeks. According 
to their research, the quantity of AgNPs increased the expression of genes linked to antioxidant 
defences. At increasing doses of AgNPs, however, the genes involved in carotenoid biosynthesis 
were downregulated. Additionally, Sarkar et al. (2020b) demonstrated that in comparison to con￾trol seedlings, green CuONPs increased the expression of genes related to antioxidant enzymes, 
like SOD, CAT, and APX. Soliman et al. (2020) investigated the impact of green AgNPs on onion, 
fenugreek, and maize seedlings in a different investigation. Leaf extracts from Eucalyptus globulus
were used to create the AgNPs. These AgNPs increased the expression of the genes for antioxidant 
enzymes (SOD, CAT, and APX) involved in scavenging ROS at the molecular level. The genes with 
the greatest expression levels were SOD, CAT, and APX (Table 7.5).
7.6.4 Phytotoxicity of Green NPs
Although interest in green nanotechnology is rising, the uncontrolled use of green NPs has led to a 
number of problems, complications, and effects on ecological balance and living things. Numerous 
studies have focused on the relationships that exist between plants and various NP types, including 
MNPs and MONPs. It deserves to be noted that there are several ways in which green NPs can 
impact plants, both positively and negatively. These impacts are dependent on the concentrations 
and particular physicochemical features of the NPs involved (Madanayake and Adassooriya, 2021). 
Specific NPs have been shown to have phytotoxic effects in some investigations, as has the uncon￾trolled application of NPs to plants. When a plant’s growth or development is hampered by a poi￾sonous chemical, it is referred to as phytotoxicity. Understanding the mechanisms that cause NPs’ 
toxicity is crucial for enabling the targeted and ethical deployment of NPs in plants. Higher quan￾tities of critical metals, like Fe-based NPs, may cause an excessive amount of ROS to be produced 
via the Fenton reaction and redox cycling (Faizan et al., 2023). The development and biochemical 
characteristics of camelina seedlings were examined by Mirmoeini et al. (2021) in respect to different 
AgNP doses (0 g/l, 0.5 g/l, 1 g/l, 2 g/l, 3 g/l, and 4 g/l), which were produced using Camelina sativa
leaf extracts. The study findings indicated that the AgNPs dramatically improved the amount of 
Ag that accumulated in the roots and shoots, which, in turn, caused the camelina seedlings’ levels 
of photosynthetic pigment and growth parameters to fall. Additionally, the AgNPs caused oxida￾tive stress and upset the seedlings’ redox equilibrium. According to the study’s findings, the tox￾icity of the AgNPs peaked at 4 g/l, which caused oxidative stress and activated antioxidant defence 
systems to counteract the unfavourable effect of the AgNPs. Khaldari et al. (2021) used leaf tissues 110 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture TABLE 7.5 Influence of green synthesized NPs on plants’ ability to mitigate abiotic stress NP Plant Used for NP Synthesis NP Concentration Abiotic Stress Studied Plant Species Effects Outcome Citation AgNPs Moringa oleifera 25 mg/l, 50 mg/l, 75 mg/l, and 100 mg/l Heat Wheat Decreased MDA and H2O2 levels, increased antioxidant defence, and improved morphology ROS-scavenging heat stress resistance. Iqbal et al., 2019 AgNPs Pearl millet 0 mM, 10 mM, 20 mM, and 30 mM Salt Pearl millet Increased antioxidant enzyme activity and improved plant biomass, RWC, and proline levels Reduced oxidative damage prevented salt stress. Khan et al., 2020 AgNPs Albizia lebbeck L. 0 µmol, 0.1 µmol, 0.2 µmol, and 0.5 µmol Drought Eggplant Decreased H2O2 and MDA levels and increased SOD and CAT activity. Enhanced enzymatic defence decreased drought stress. Alabdallah et al., 2021 AgNPs Aloe vera extract 10 ppm, 20 ppm, 40 ppm, 80 ppm, and 100 ppm Salt Spinaciaoleracea Improved germination. Enhanced germination and decreased salt stress. Ali Naghi Zadeh et al., 2020 AgNPs Ochradenus arabicus 0 mg/l, 10 mg/l, 20 mg/l, and 30 mg/l Salt Maerua oblongifolia Reduced proline, H2O2, and MDA levels and increased SOD, CAT, total phenolic, and flavonoid contents. Reduced oxidative damage in enzymatic and nonenzymatic antioxidants. Shaikhaldein et al., 2022 AgNPs Hibiscus sabdarifa 0 mg/l, 15 mg/l, 30 mg/l, 45 mg/l, 60 mg/l, 75 mg/ l, and 90 mg/l for seed germination. 0 mg/l, 45 mg/l, and 90 mg/ l for growth parameters. Salt Roselle Increased CAT, APX, POD, SOD, flavonoid, and anthocyanin contents and improved growth metrics. Reduced salt stress in enzymatic and nonenzymatic antioxidants. Sadat- Hosseini et al., 2022 Fe3O4NPs Cocos nucifera L. 0.5 mg/g Heavy Metal Oryza sativa L. Improved organic matter metrics, photochemical efficacy, chlorophyll content, and plant development. Improved physiological characteristics protected against heavy metal stress. Sebastian et al., 2018 FeONPs Adiantum lunulatum 100 mg/l Arsenic Rice Improved antioxidant activity and reduced superoxide anion, methylglyoxal, and H2O2 levels. Decreased oxidative stress by boosting antioxidant enzyme activity. Bidi et al., 2021
Fe3O4NPs Polyalthia longifolia 20 mg/l, 50 mg/l, 100 mg/l, 
and 200 mg/l
Drought Trigonellafoenum￾graecum Increased growth characteristics, photosynthetic pigment levels, and 
efficiency.
Improved growth factors 
reduced water stress.
Bisht et al., 
2022
FeONP Prosopis cineraria 12.5, 25, 50, 75, and 100 
ppm
Drought Wheat Improved crop morphology and yields. Decreased drought stress. Singh et al., 
2022
Fe2O3NP Zingiber officinale
and Cuminum 
cyminum L.
0.3 mM, 0.6 mM, 0.9 mM, 
and 1.2 mM
Drought Wheat Lowered MDA levels and increased 
SOD, POD, and APX levels, 
reducing lipid peroxidation.
Increased physiological and 
enzymatic water stress.
Noor et al., 
2022
TiO2NPs Buddleja asiatica 20 mg/l, 40 mg/l, 60 mg/l, 
and 80 mg/l
Salt Wheat Increased flavonoid, proline, and 
amino acid levels, increased SOD 
activity, and decreased MDA levels.
Activated antioxidant 
defence system decreased 
salt stress.
Mustafa et al., 
2022
TiO2NPs Buddleja asiatica L. 20 mg/l, 40 mg/l, 60 mg/l, 
and 80 mg/l
Salt Wheat Increased relative water content, 
cell membrane equilibrium index, 
chlorophyll concentration, and plant 
growth parameters.
Regulated physiological 
factors minimized salt 
stress.
Mustafa et al., 
2021
ZnONPs Agathosma betulina 5 mg/l and 10 mg/l Salt Sorghum bicolor Increased SOD, CAT, and APX activity 
and reduced O2 •−, H2O2, and MDA 
levels.
Increased antioxidant 
defence improved plant 
development under salt 
stress.
Rakgotho 
et al., 2022
ZnONPs Mentha 50 mg/l and 100 mg/l Salt Vicia faba Increased osmolyte phenol, flavonoid, 
and POD levels, increased CAT 
activity and reduced MDA and H2O2
levels.
Enhanced antioxidants 
and osmolytes mitigated 
salinity.
Mogazy and 
Hanafy, 
2022
ZnONPs Phoenix dactylifera 10 mg/l Salt Cowpea and Okra Improved aerial length, root depth, 
shoot biomass, leaf area, and growth 
parameters.
Enhanced morphological 
parameters.
Alabdallah 
and 
Alzahrani, 
2020
AgNPs 
and 
CuNPs
Onion CuNPs (0 mg/l, 3 mg/l, 5 
mg/l, and 7 mg/l) and 
AgNPs (30 mg/l) in MS 
medium
Drought Wheat Increased chlorophyll fluorescence, 
leaf potassium levels, stomatal 
apertures, and morphology.
Enhanced drought resistance 
and yields.
Ahmed et al., 
2021
Au–Ag 
Alloy 
NPs
Mentha 100 ppm Salt Menthapiperita Increased CAT, GPX, and soluble 
carbohydrate levels in leaves and 
root.
Reduced salt stress by 
boosting enzymatic 
antioxidants and 
osmolytes.
Aliakbarpour 
et al., 2020111 Green Nanoparticles Used in Agriculture
TABLE 7.5
Influence of green synthesized NPs on plants’ ability to mitigate abiotic stress
NP
Plant Used for NP 
Synthesis
NP
Concentration
Abiotic 
Stress
Studied Plant 
Species Effects Outcome Citation
AgNPs Moringa oleifera 25 mg/l, 50 mg/l, 75 mg/l, 
and 100 mg/l
Heat Wheat Decreased MDA and H2O2 levels, 
increased antioxidant defence, and 
improved morphology
ROS-scavenging heat stress 
resistance.
Iqbal et al., 
2019
AgNPs Pearl millet 0 mM, 10 mM, 20 mM, and 
30 mM
Salt Pearl millet Increased antioxidant enzyme activity 
and improved plant biomass, RWC, 
and proline levels
Reduced oxidative damage 
prevented salt stress.
Khan et al., 
2020
AgNPs Albizia lebbeck L. 0 µmol, 0.1 µmol, 0.2 µmol, 
and 0.5 µmol
Drought Eggplant Decreased H2O2 and MDA levels and 
increased SOD and CAT activity.
Enhanced enzymatic 
defence decreased 
drought stress.
Alabdallah 
et al., 2021
AgNPs Aloe vera extract 10 ppm, 20 ppm, 40 ppm, 
80 ppm, and 100 ppm
Salt Spinaciaoleracea Improved germination. Enhanced germination and 
decreased salt stress.
Ali Naghi 
Zadeh 
et al., 2020
AgNPs Ochradenus 
arabicus
0 mg/l, 10 mg/l, 20 mg/l, 
and 30 mg/l
Salt Maerua 
oblongifolia
Reduced proline, H2O2, and MDA 
levels and increased SOD, CAT, 
total phenolic, and flavonoid 
contents.
Reduced oxidative 
damage in enzymatic 
and nonenzymatic 
antioxidants.
Shaikhaldein 
et al., 2022
AgNPs Hibiscus sabdarifa 0 mg/l, 15 mg/l, 30 mg/l, 
45 mg/l, 60 mg/l, 75 mg/
l, and 90 mg/l for seed 
germination.
0 mg/l, 45 mg/l, and 90 mg/
l for growth parameters.
Salt Roselle Increased CAT, APX, POD, SOD, 
flavonoid, and anthocyanin contents 
and improved growth metrics.
Reduced salt stress 
in enzymatic and 
nonenzymatic 
antioxidants.
Sadat￾Hosseini 
et al., 2022
Fe3O4NPs Cocos nucifera L. 0.5 mg/g Heavy Metal Oryza sativa L. Improved organic matter metrics, 
photochemical efficacy, chlorophyll 
content, and plant development.
Improved physiological 
characteristics protected 
against heavy metal 
stress.
Sebastian 
et al., 2018
FeONPs Adiantum lunulatum 100 mg/l Arsenic Rice Improved antioxidant activity 
and reduced superoxide anion, 
methylglyoxal, and H2O2 levels.
Decreased oxidative stress 
by boosting antioxidant 
enzyme activity.
Bidi et al., 
2021
Fe3O4NPs Polyalthia longifolia 20 mg/l, 50 mg/l, 100 mg/l, 
and 200 mg/l
Drought Trigonellafoenum￾graecum Increased growth characteristics, photosynthetic pigment levels, and 
efficiency.
Improved growth factors 
reduced water stress.
Bisht et al., 
2022
FeONP Prosopis cineraria 12.5, 25, 50, 75, and 100 
ppm
Drought Wheat Improved crop morphology and yields. Decreased drought stress. Singh et al., 
2022
Fe2O3NP Zingiber officinale
and Cuminum 
cyminum L.
0.3 mM, 0.6 mM, 0.9 mM, 
and 1.2 mM
Drought Wheat Lowered MDA levels and increased 
SOD, POD, and APX levels, 
reducing lipid peroxidation.
Increased physiological and 
enzymatic water stress.
Noor et al., 
2022
TiO2NPs Buddleja asiatica 20 mg/l, 40 mg/l, 60 mg/l, 
and 80 mg/l
Salt Wheat Increased flavonoid, proline, and 
amino acid levels, increased SOD 
activity, and decreased MDA levels.
Activated antioxidant 
defence system decreased 
salt stress.
Mustafa et al., 
2022
TiO2NPs Buddleja asiatica L. 20 mg/l, 40 mg/l, 60 mg/l, 
and 80 mg/l
Salt Wheat Increased relative water content, 
cell membrane equilibrium index, 
chlorophyll concentration, and plant 
growth parameters.
Regulated physiological 
factors minimized salt 
stress.
Mustafa et al., 
2021
ZnONPs Agathosma betulina 5 mg/l and 10 mg/l Salt Sorghum bicolor Increased SOD, CAT, and APX activity 
and reduced O2 •−, H2O2, and MDA 
levels.
Increased antioxidant 
defence improved plant 
development under salt 
stress.
Rakgotho 
et al., 2022
ZnONPs Mentha 50 mg/l and 100 mg/l Salt Vicia faba Increased osmolyte phenol, flavonoid, 
and POD levels, increased CAT 
activity and reduced MDA and H2O2
levels.
Enhanced antioxidants 
and osmolytes mitigated 
salinity.
Mogazy and 
Hanafy, 
2022
ZnONPs Phoenix dactylifera 10 mg/l Salt Cowpea and Okra Improved aerial length, root depth, 
shoot biomass, leaf area, and growth 
parameters.
Enhanced morphological 
parameters.
Alabdallah 
and 
Alzahrani, 
2020
AgNPs 
and 
CuNPs
Onion CuNPs (0 mg/l, 3 mg/l, 5 
mg/l, and 7 mg/l) and 
AgNPs (30 mg/l) in MS 
medium
Drought Wheat Increased chlorophyll fluorescence, 
leaf potassium levels, stomatal 
apertures, and morphology.
Enhanced drought resistance 
and yields.
Ahmed et al., 
2021
Au–Ag 
Alloy 
NPs
Mentha 100 ppm Salt Menthapiperita Increased CAT, GPX, and soluble 
carbohydrate levels in leaves and 
root.
Reduced salt stress by 
boosting enzymatic 
antioxidants and 
osmolytes.
Aliakbarpour 
et al., 2020
newgenrtpdf112 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
from lavender and green tea to investigate the phytotoxicity and green synthesis of CuONPs. Their 
findings demonstrated that lavender was superior to green tea in terms of generating pure and con￾sistent CuONPs. Furthermore, compared to chemically synthesized CuONPs, the biogenic CuONPs 
showed a lessened phytotoxic impact on the germination factors of tomato and lettuce seedlings. It 
is noteworthy that the development of the lettuce and tomato seedlings was positively impacted by 
both the green and chemically produced CuONPs, especially when applied at lower doses (4 μg/
ml). However, when applied at higher levels (40 μg/ml, 400 μg/ml, and 4000 μg/ml), growth was 
hindered. AgNPs and AuNPs produced from Mimosa pudica seeds were examined in radish seeds 
in a different study. Although they did not have a substantial impact on seed germination, both 
NPs did improve germination over the controls. The AuNPs had no discernible influence on root 
development, but the AgNPs suppressed root development at a dosage of 27 μg/mL and encouraged 
root development at a dosage of 13.5 μg/mL. Iram et al. (2014) found that the impact of particle 
size was not substantial. Modi et al. (2022) examined Vigna radiata and wheat plant development 
in relation to varying levels (100–1200 ppm) of ZnONPs that were synthesized using onion skin 
extract. According to their findings, the seeds germinated and grew more readily up to 600 ppm, 
while excessive doses killed the plants. The results of that research confirmed that Zn is an essen￾tial element for plant development, but that greater ZnONP concentrations may cause phytotoxicity 
and impede plant growth. Parallel to this, a study conducted by Alias Antonysamy et al. (2018)
evaluated the germination of Vigna radiata and Sorghum vulgare seeds at various concentrations 
(50 μl/10 mL, 100 μl/10 mL, 200 μl/10 mL, 500 μl/10 mL, and 750 μl/10 mL) of AgNPs derived 
from Cyathea nilgirensis. These findings also showed that at higher AgNP levels (500 μl/10 mL 
and 750 μl/10 mL), there was a significant decrease in the proportion of seeds that germinated 
(from 38.65% to 100%). Similarly, Elshazly et al. (2022) examined the genotoxic and phytotoxic 
effects of various doses of AgNPs produced from Nigella sativa seeds on the germination of wheat 
seeds. They discovered that soluble protein, DNA, and RNA levels were somewhat inhibited by 
low concentrations of the AgNPs (25 μg/l and 50 μg/l). Nevertheless, there was a notable hindering 
impact at greater dosages (75 μg/l and 100 μg/L). According to that research, the plantlets grew more 
when AgNP concentrations were low but not when they were high.
7.7 DRAWBACKS OF GREEN NPS
Although NPs can be used in agriculture to reduce environmental stress, there are worries over 
their buildup and their integration into the food chain. While it’s well acknowledged that nontoxic 
nanoscale components are found in food, like proteins, fat globules, carbohydrates, and DNA, their 
overuse in agriculture may be hazardous to the environment and public health. The inexpensive, 
nontoxic, and environmentally friendly characteristics of green NPs make them very attractive in 
comparison to chemical NPs. However, there are still some barriers to the widespread application 
of NPs. For example, some plants are only found in endemic areas, making it difficult to collect raw 
materials, which, in turn, makes it difficult to produce biocompatible NPs on a large scale. In add￾ition, the large-scale production of NPs is a laborious process due to the extended reaction times and 
the need to use chemical compounds as reducing and oxidizing molecules. The characterization of 
NP size and shape after synthesis is necessary for quality control, which raises manufacturing costs 
even further. In comparison to their chemically synthesized counterparts, biogenic NPs have lower 
yield and conversion rates, which reduces their economic advantages. Therefore, it is imperative that 
these limitations are resolved in the near future in order to further encourage the use of green NPs.
7.8 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE PERSPECTIVES
To sum up, this chapter has explored the potential of plant-based MNPs and MONPs in reducing ROS 
caused by abiotic stress in agricultural plants. The benefits of producing NPs using green synthesis Green Nanoparticles Used in Agriculture 113
methods, including affordability and minimal negative effects on the environment and living things, 
have also been discussed. Plant-based NPs have the ability to eliminate ROS, stimulate plant devel￾opment, and raise agricultural yields. Studies have also shown that phytotoxicity is brought on by 
the application of certain NPs in a dose dependent manner. In order to guarantee the safety of using 
plant-based NPs in agriculture, it is necessary to evaluate their potential toxicity via in vitro and in 
vivo assessments. Furthermore, there is still a great deal to learn about the complex relationship that 
exists between biogenic NPs and the ensuing molecular changes that they cause in stress responses. 
Additional field experiments are necessary to enhance the efficacy of green NPs under different 
environmental conditions and in different crop types. By addressing these gaps in knowledge, plant￾based NPs’ potential to be a valuable tool in enhancing agricultural yields and safeguarding food 
security in the face of environmental challenges, such as climate change, can be achieved. Moreover, 
comprehensive mechanistic investigations should strive to clarify the exact antioxidant capabilities 
and mechanisms of action of diverse green NPs in distinct stress scenarios. The comprehensive 
assessment of how NP features, such as their content, size, shape, and surface chemistry, influence 
antioxidant activity would aid in determining the most optimal characteristics of NPs for effectively 
scavenging ROS. Studies investigating the antioxidant efficacy of plant-derived NPs in comparison 
to conventional organic and inorganic antioxidants could unveil their relative performance. It is 
crucial to test the effectiveness of NPs in various plant species and real-world agricultural envir￾onments. Evaluating the effects of NPs on crop productivity, nutritional quality, and post-harvest 
storage under water or salt stress may provide evidence of their practical advantages. It is necessary 
to investigate different techniques for delivering NPs in order to enhance the absorption and distri￾bution of these particles in plants. This research is important for their practical use. Additionally, 
further research should be conducted to verify that green NPs and crops enhanced with antioxidants 
do not pose any additional environmental hazards. Advancing these study areas will lead to a greater 
understanding of the underlying principles involved in the use of green NPs, as well as the devel￾opment of practical applications in plant nanotechnology to mitigate the harmful impacts of abiotic 
stress. To summarize, green NPs offer significant promise as sustainable and durable approaches 
to mitigating abiotic stress in agricultural crops. However, more comprehensive investigations are 
necessary to improve our understanding of the exact processes via which green NPs can benefit agri￾cultural plants experiencing abiotic stress caused by climate change.
REFERENCES
Abbas, Tahir, Muhammad Rizwan, Shafaqat Ali, Muhammad Adrees, Abid Mahmood, Muhammad Zia-ur￾Rehman, Muhammad Ibrahim, Muhammad Arshad, and Muhammad Farooq Qayyum. “Biochar appli￾cation increased the growth and yield and reduced cadmium in drought stressed wheat grown in an aged 
contaminated soil.” Ecotoxicology and Environmental Safety 148 (2018): 825–833.
Abdalla, Hanan, Marwa H. Adarosy, Hegazy S. Hegazy, and Reda E. Abdelhameed. “Potential of green 
synthesized titanium dioxide nanoparticles for enhancing seedling emergence, vigor and tolerance 
indices and DPPH free radical scavenging in two varieties of soybean under salinity stress.” BMC Plant 
Biology 22, no. 1 (2022): 560.
Abdel-Farid, Ibrahim Bayoumi, Marwa Radawy Marghany, Mohamed Mahmoud Rowezek, and Mohamed 
Gabr Sheded. “Effect of salinity stress on growth and metabolomic profiling of Cucumis sativus and 
Solanum lycopersicum.” Plants 9, no. 11 (2020): 1626.
Adhikari, Laxman, Rudra Baral, Dev Paudel, Doohong Min, Shiva O. Makaju, Hari P. Poudel, Janam P. 
Acharya, and Ali M. Missaoui. “Cold stress in plants: Strategies to improve cold tolerance in forage 
species.” Plant Stress 4 (2022): 100081.
Ahmad, Fiaz, Noreen Ashraf, Tayyba Ashraf, Ren-Bin Zhou, and Da-Chuan Yin. “Biological synthesis of 
metallic nanoparticles (MNPs) by plants and microbes: their cellular uptake, biocompatibility, and bio￾medical applications.” Applied Microbiology and Biotechnology 103 (2019): 2913–2935.114 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
Ahmad, Javed, Sadia Qamar, Nida Kausar, and M. Irfan Qureshi. “Nanoparticles: the magic bullets in miti￾gating drought stress in plants.” Nanobiotechnology in Agriculture: An Approach Towards Sustainability
(2020): 145–161.
Ahmad, Muhammad, Ejaz Ahmad Waraich, Usman Zulfiqar, Aman Ullah, and Muhammad Farooq. “Thiourea 
application increases seed and oil yields in Camelina under heat stress by modulating the plant water 
relations and antioxidant defense system.” Journal of Soil Science and Plant Nutrition 23, no. 1 
(2023): 290–307.
Ahmad, Parvaiz, Cheruth Abdul Jaleel, Mohamed A. Salem, Gowher Nabi, and Satyawati Sharma.. “Roles 
of enzymatic and nonenzymatic antioxidants in plants during abiotic stress.” Critical Reviews in 
Biotechnology 30, no. 3 (2010): 161–175.
Ahmed, Farooq, Bilal Javed, Abdul Razzaq, and Zia-ur-Rehman Mashwani. “Applications of copper and silver 
nanoparticles on wheat plants to induce drought tolerance and increase yield.” IET Nanobiotechnology
15, no. 1 (2021): 68–78.
Ahmed, Temoor, Hafiza Ayesha Masood, Muhammad Noman, Arwa Abdulkreem Al-Huqail, Suliman MS 
Alghanem, Muhammad Munem Khan, Sher Muhammad et al. “Biogenic silicon nanoparticles miti￾gate cadmium (Cd) toxicity in rapeseed (Brassica napus L.) by modulating the cellular oxidative stress 
metabolism and reducing Cd translocation.” Journal of Hazardous Materials 459 (2023): 132070.
Al Saqr, Ahmed, El-Sayed Khafagy, Ahmed Alalaiwe, Mohammed F. Aldawsari, Saad M. Alshahrani, Md 
Khalid Anwer, Salman Khan, Amr S. Abu Lila, Hany H. Arab, and Wael AH Hegazy. “Synthesis of 
gold nanoparticles by using green machinery: Characterization and in vitro toxicity.” Nanomaterials 11, 
no. 3 (2021): 808.
Alabdallah, Nadiyah M., Md Hasan, Abdalrhaman M. Salih, Roushdy SS, Aisha S. Al-Shammari, Sumayah 
I. Alsanie, and Mohamed El-Zaidy. “Silver nanoparticles improve growth and protect against oxida￾tive damage in eggplant seedlings under drought stress.” Plant, Soil & Environment 67, no. 11 (2021). 
617–624.
Alabdallah, Nadiyah M., Md Mahadi Hasan, Inès Hammami, Azzah Ibrahim Alghamdi, Dikhnah Alshehri, and 
Hanan Ali Alatawi. “Green synthesized metal oxide nanoparticles mediate growth regulation and physi￾ology of crop plants under drought stress.” Plants 10, no. 8 (2021): 1730.
Alabdallah, Nadiyah Mohammad, and Hassan Saeed Alzahrani. “Impact of ZnO nanoparticles on growth of 
cowpea and okra plants under salt stress conditions.” Biosciences Biotechnology Research Asia 17, 
no. 2 (2020): 329–340.
Ali Naghi Zadeh, Amin, Mehrnaz Mahmoudi Zarandi, Sayed Mohammad Reza Khoshroo, and Fatemeh Hasan 
Zadeh. “The effect of green silver nanoparticles on spinach (Spinacia oleracea) seed germination under 
salt stress.” Iranian Journal of Biological Sciences 15, no. 3 (2020): 1–10.
Ali, Mohsin, Alvina Gul, Humna Hasan, Sumaiya Gul, Azam Fareed, Muhammad Nadeem, Raffia Siddique, 
Sami Ullah Jan, and Muhammad Jamil. “Cellular mechanisms of drought tolerance in wheat.” Climate 
Change and Food Security with Emphasis on Wheat (2020): 155–167.
Aliakbarpour, Fatereh, Atousa Vaziri, and Mojtaba Mohseni. “Green synthesis of Au-Ag nanoparticles using 
Mentha piperita and effects of Au-Ag alloy nanoparticles on the growth of Mentha piperita under salinity 
stress.” Journal of Plant Process Function 9 (2020): 37.
Alias Antonysamy, M. Johnson, A. Santhanam, S. Thangaiah, and J. Narayanan. “Green synthesis of silver 
nanoparticles using Cyathea nilgirensis Holttum and their cytotoxic and phytotoxic potentials.” 
Particulate Science and Technology 36, no. 5 (2018): 578–582.
Amin, Fozia, Fozia, Baharullah Khattak, Amal Alotaibi, Muhammad Qasim, Ijaz Ahmad, Riaz Ullah, 
Mohammed Bourhia, Anadil Gul, Saira Zahoor, and Rizwan Ahmad . “Green synthesis of copper 
oxide nanoparticles using Aerva Javanica leaf extract and their characterization and investigation of in 
vitro antimicrobial potential and cytotoxic activities.” Evidence-Based Complementary and Alternative 
Medicice 2021 (2021): 1–12.
Amini, Saeed, Reza Maali-Amiri, Rahmat Mohammadi, and Seyyedeh-Sanam Kazemi-Shahandashti. “cDNA￾AFLP analysis of transcripts induced in chickpea plants by TiO2 nanoparticles during cold stress.” Plant 
Physiology and Biochemistry 111 (2017): 39–49.
Amini, Saeed, Reza Maali-Amiri, Seyyedeh-Sanam Kazemi-Shahandashti, Miguel Lopez-Gomez, Behzad 
Sadeghzadeh, Ahmad Sobhani-Najafabadi, and Khalil Kariman. “Effect of cold stress on polyamine 
metabolism and antioxidant responses in chickpea.” Journal of Plant Physiology 258 (2021): 153387.Green Nanoparticles Used in Agriculture 115
Angon, Prodipto Bishnu, Md Tahjib-Ul-Arif, Samia Islam Samin, Ummya Habiba, M. Afzal Hossain, and 
Marian Brestic. “How do plants respond to combined drought and salinity stress?—a systematic review.” 
Plants 11, no. 21 (2022): 2884.
Anjum, Shakeel Ahmad, Mohsin Tanveer, Saddam Hussain, Mingchen Bao, Longchang Wang, Imran Khan, 
Ehsan Ullah, Shahbaz Atta Tung, Rana Abdul Samad, and Babar Shahzad. “Cadmium toxicity in Maize 
(Zea mays L.): consequences on antioxidative systems, reactive oxygen species and cadmium accumu￾lation.” Environmental Science and Pollution Research 22 (2015): 17022–17030.
Arbona, Vicent, MatíasManzi, Sara I. Zandalinas, Vicente Vives-Peris, Rosa M. Pérez-Clemente, and Aurelio 
Gómez-Cadenas. “Physiological, metabolic, and molecular responses of plants to abiotic stress.” Stress 
Signaling in Plants: Genomics and Proteomics Perspective 2 (2017): 1–35.
Arjaghi, Shayan Khalili, Morteza Kashfi Alasl, Nooshin Sajjadi, Ebrahim Fataei, and Gholamreza Ebrahimzadeh 
Rajaei.“Retracted article: green synthesis of Iron oxide nanoparticles by RS Lichen extract and its 
application in removing heavy metals of lead and cadmium.” Biological Trace Element Research 199 
(2021): 763–768.
Asayesh, Zeinab Maleki, Kazem Arzani, Ali Mokhtassi-Bidgoli, and Hamid Abdollahi.“Enzymatic and non￾enzymatic response of grafted and ungrafted young European pear (Pyruscommunis L.) trees to drought 
stress.” ScientiaHorticulturae 310 (2023): 111745.
Aslam, M. “Antioxidantresponses of pomegranate due to oxidative stress caused by ROS.” 
Faisalabad: International Journal of Innovative Science and Research Technology 6, no. 6 (2022): 
354–357.
Aslam, Mohammad, BeenishFakher, Mohammad Arif Ashraf, Yan Cheng, Bingrui Wang, and Yuan Qin. “Plant 
low-temperature stress: Signaling and response.” Agronomy 12, no. 3 (2022): 702.
Asseng, Senthold, Frank Ewert, Pierre Martre, Reimund P. Rötter, David B. Lobell, Davide Cammarano, Bruce 
A. Kimball et al. “Rising temperatures reduce global wheat production.” Nature Climate Change 5, no. 
2 (2015): 143–147.
Atayee, Abdul Rasool, and Mohammad Safar Noori. “Alleviation of cold stress in vegetable crops.” J SciAgric
4 (2020): 38–44.
Azameti, Mawuli K., and Abdul-Wahab M. Imoro. “Nanotechnology: A promising field in enhancing abiotic 
stress tolerance in plants.” Crop Design (2023): 100037.
Bailey-Serres, J. U. L. I. A, and Timothy D. Colmer. “Plant tolerance of flooding stress–recent advances.” 
Plant, Cell & Environment 37, no. 10 (2014): 2211–2215.
Banik, Nabanita, and Soumen Bhattacharjee. “Complementation of ROS scavenging secondary metabolites 
with enzymatic antioxidant defense system augments redox-regulation property under salinity stress in 
rice.” Physiology and Molecular Biology of Plants 26, no. 8 (2020): 1623–1633.
Bhat, Kaisar Ahmad, Reetika Mahajan, Mohammad Maqbool Pakhtoon, Uneeb Urwat, Zaffar Bashir, Ali Asghar 
Shah, Ankit Agrawal et al. “Low temperature stress tolerance: An insight into the omics approaches for 
legume crops.” Frontiers in Plant Science 13 (2022): 888710.
Bidi, Hossein, Hormoz Fallah, Yosoof Niknejad, and Davood Barari Tari. “Iron oxide nanoparticles alleviate 
arsenic phytotoxicity in rice by improving iron uptake, oxidative stress tolerance and diminishing arsenic 
accumulation.” Plant Physiology and Biochemistry 163 (2021): 348–357.
Bisht, Shweta, Vinay Sharma, and Nilima Kumari. “Biosynthesized magnetite nanoparticles from 
Polyalthialongifolia leaves improve photosynthetic performance and yield of Trigonellafoenum-graecum 
under drought stress.” Plant Stress 5 (2022): 100090.
Bita, Craita E., and Tom Gerats. “Plant tolerance to high temperature in a changing environment: sci￾entific fundamentals and production of heat stress-tolerant crops.” Frontiers in Plant Science 4 
(2013): 273.
Chakravarty, Archana, Iftkhar Ahmad, Preeti Singh, MehrajUd Din Sheikh, Gulshitab Aalam, Suresh Sagadevan, 
and Saiqa Ikram. “Green synthesis of silver nanoparticles using fruits extracts of Syzygiumcumini and 
their bioactivity.” Chemical Physics Letters 795 (2022): 139493
Chourasia, Kumar Nishant, Milan Kumar Lal, Rahul Kumar Tiwari, Devanshu Dev, Hemant Balasaheb Kardile, 
Virupaksh U. Patil, Amarjeet Kumar et al. “Salinity stress in potato: Understanding physiological, bio￾chemical and molecular responses.” Life 11, no. 6 (2021): 545.
Cramer, Grant R., Kaoru Urano, Serge Delrot, Mario Pezzotti, and Kazuo Shinozaki. “Effects of abiotic stress 
on plants: a systems biology perspective.” BMC Plant Biology 11 (2011): 1–14.116 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
Del Buono, Daniele, Alessandro Di Michele, FerdinandoCostantino, Marco Trevisan, and Luigi Lucini. 
“Biogenic ZnO nanoparticles synthesized using a novel plant extract: Application to enhance physio￾logical and biochemical traits in maize.” Nanomaterials 11, no. 5 (2021): 1270.
Dhakal, Anjana, Chanda Adhikari, Deepika Manandhar, Samikshya Bhattarai, and Sony Shrestha. “Effect of 
abiotic stress in wheat: a review.” Reviews In Food And Agriculture 2, no. 2 (2021): 69–72.
Djanaguiraman, M., N. Belliraj, Stefan H. Bossmann, and PV Vara Prasad.“High-temperature stress alleviation 
by selenium nanoparticle treatment in grain sorghum.” ACS omega 3, no. 3 (2018): 2479–2491.
Dulta, Kanika, Gözde Koşarsoy Ağçeli, Parveen Chauhan, Rohit Jasrotia, and P. K. Chauhan. “Ecofriendly 
synthesis of zinc oxide nanoparticles by Carica papaya leaf extract and their applications.” Journal of 
Cluster Science no.33 (2022): 603–617.
Duraisamy, P. “Green synthesis of aluminium oxide nanoparticles by using Aerva lanta and Terminalia chebula 
extracts.” International Journal for Research in Applied Science and Engineering Technology 6, no 1 
(2018): 428–433.
El-Sharkawy, Mahmoud Samir, Talaat Rizk El-Beshsbeshy, Esawy Kasem Mahmoud, Nasser Ibrahim 
Abdelkader, Rania Mohamed Al-Shal, and Ali M. Missaoui. “Response of alfalfa under salt stress 
to the application of potassium sulfate nanoparticles.” American Journal of Plant Sciences 8, no. 8 
(2017): 1751–1773.
Elshayb, Omnia M., Khaled Y. Farroh, Heba E. Amin, and Ayman M. Atta. “Green synthesis of zinc oxide 
nanoparticles: fortification for rice grain yield and nutrients uptake enhancement.” Molecules 26, no. 3 
(2021): 584.
Elshazly, Ezzat H., Abdel Kareem SH Mohamed, Hesham A. Aboelmagd, Gamal A. Gouda, Mohamed H. 
Abdallah, Emad A. Ewais, Mohammed A. Assiri, and Gomaa AM Ali. “Phytotoxicity and antimicrobial 
activity of green synthesized silver nanoparticles using Nigella sativa seeds on wheat seedlings.” Journal 
of Chemistry 2022, no. 1 (2022): 9609559.
El-Zohri, Manal, Naseem A. Al-Wadaani, and Sameera O. Bafeel. “Foliar sprayed green zinc oxide nanoparticles 
mitigate drought-induced oxidative stress in tomato.” Plants 10, no. 11 (2021): 2400.
Emamverdian, Abolghassem, Yulong Ding, Farzad Mokhberdoran, and Yinfeng Xie. “Heavy metal 
stress and some mechanisms of plant defense response.” The Scientific World Journal 2015, no. 1 
(2015): 756120.
Faizan, Mohammad, Pravej Alam, Vishnu D. Rajput, Ahmad Faraz, Shadma Afzal, S. Maqbool Ahmed, Fang￾Yuan Yu. Nanoparticle mediated plant tolerance to heavy metal stress: what we know? Sustainability 15, 
no. 2 (2023): 1446.
Farooq, Muhammad, M. Hussain, Abdul Wahid, and K. H. M. Siddique. “Drought stress in plants: an over￾view.” In: Aroca, R. (eds) Plant Responses to Drought Stress. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg. (2012): 1–33.
Feng, Zhe, Shuyu Ji, Jianfeng Ping, and Di Cui. “Recent advances in metabolomics for studying heavy metal 
stress in plants.” TrAC Trends in Analytical Chemistry 143 (2021): 116402.
Gao, Shanshan, Yanlin Wang, Shuai Yu, Yanqing Huang, Huanchu Liu, Wei Chen, and Xingyuan He. “Effects 
of drought stress on growth, physiology and secondary metabolites of two Adonis species in Northeast 
China.” Scientia Horticulturae 259 (2020): 108795.
Ghabel, Vahideh Kardavan, and Roya Karamian. “Effects of TiO2 nanoparticles and spermine on antioxidant 
responses of Glycyrrhiza glabra L. to cold stress.” Acta Botanica Croatica 79, no. 2 (2020): 137–147.
Ghotekar, Suresh, Shreyas Pansambal, Muhammad Bilal, Shirish S. Pingale, and Rajeshwari Oza. 
“Environmentally friendly synthesis of Cr2O3 nanoparticles: characterization, applications and future 
perspective─ a review.” Case Studies in Chemical and Environmental Engineering 3 (2021): 100089.
Ghuge, Sandip A., Ganesh Chandrakant Nikalje, Ulhas Sopanrao Kadam, Penna Suprasanna, and Jong Chan 
Hong. “Comprehensive mechanisms of heavy metal toxicity in plants, detoxification, and remediation.” 
Journal of Hazardous Materials 450 (2023): 131039.
González-García, Yolanda, Magín González-Moscoso, Hipólito Hernández-Hernández, Alonso Méndez￾López, and Antonio Juárez-Maldonado. “Induction of stress tolerance in crops by applying 
nanomaterials.” Nanotechnology in Plant Growth Promotion and Protection: Recent Advances and 
Impacts (2021): 129–169.
Gusain, Suman, Shubham Joshi, and Rohit Joshi. “Sensing, signalling, and regulatory mechanism of cold￾stress tolerance in plants.” Plant Physiology and Biochemistry 197 (2023): 107646.
Hafeez, Arslan, Rizwan Rasheed, Muhammad Arslan Ashraf, Freeha Fatima Qureshi, Iqbal Hussain, and 
Muhammad Iqbal. “Effect of heavy metals on growth, physiological and biochemical responses of Green Nanoparticles Used in Agriculture 117
plants.” In Azamal Husen (Ed.) Plants and their interaction to environmental pollution, pp. 139–159. 
Elsevier, 2023.
Hasanpour, H., R. Maali-Amir, and H. Zeinali. “Effect of TiO 2 nanoparticles on metabolic limitations to 
photosynthesis under cold in chickpea.” Russian Journal of Plant Physiology 62 (2015): 779–787.
Hassan, Nahla S., Taher A. Salah El Din, Mohamed H. Hendawey, Ibrahim H. Borai, and Asmaa A. Mahdi. 
“Magnetite and zinc oxide nanoparticles alleviated heat stress in wheat plants.” Current Nanomaterials
3, no. 1 (2018): 32–43.
He, Di, Shibo Fang, Hanyue Liang, Enli Wang, and Dong Wu. “Contrasting yield responses of winter and 
spring wheat to temperature rise in China.” Environmental Research Letters 15, no. 12 (2020): 124038.
Hu, Shanshan, Yanfei Ding, and Cheng Zhu. “Sensitivity and responses of chloroplasts to heat stress in plants.” 
Frontiers in Plant Science 11 (2020): 375.
Hussain, Hafiz A., Saddam Hussain, Abdul Khaliq, Umair Ashraf, Shakeel A. Anjum, Shengnan Men, and 
Longchang Wang. “Chilling and drought stresses in crop plants: implications, cross talk, and potential 
management opportunities.” Frontiers in Plant Science 9 (2018): 393.
Hussain, Hafiz Athar, Shengnan Men, Saddam Hussain, Qingwen Zhang, Umair Ashraf, Shakeel Ahmad 
Anjum, Iftikhar Ali, and Longchang Wang. “Maize tolerance against drought and chilling stresses varied 
with root morphology and antioxidative defense system.” Plants 9, no. 6 (2020): 720.
Hussain, Imtiyaz, N. B. Singh, Ajey Singh, Himani Singh, and S. C. Singh. “Green synthesis of nanoparticles 
and its potential application.” Biotechnology Letters 38 (2016): 545–560.
Iqbal, Mohammed Shariq, Akhilesh Kumar Singh, and Mohammad Israil Ansari. “Effect of drought stress on 
crop production.” New Frontiers in Stress Management for Durable Agriculture (2020): 35–47.
Iqbal, Muhammad, Naveed Iqbal Raja, Zia-Ur-Rehman Mashwani, Mubashir Hussain, Muhammad Ejaz, and 
Farhat Yasmeen. “Effect of silver nanoparticles on growth of wheat under heat stress.” Iranian Journal 
of Science and Technology, Transactions A: Science 43 (2019): 387–395.
Iram, Fozia, Mohammad S. Iqbal, Muhammad M. Athar, Muhammad Z. Saeed, Abida Yasmeen, and Riaz 
Ahmad. “Glucoxylan-mediated green synthesis of gold and silver nanoparticles and their phyto-toxicity 
study.” Carbohydrate Polymers 104 (2014): 29–33.
Isayenkov, Stanislav V., and Frans JM Maathuis. “Plant salinity stress: many unanswered questions remain.” 
Frontiers in Plant Science 10 (2019): 80.
Jalil, Sanaullah, Suliman MS Alghanem, Arwa Abdulkreem Al-Huqail, Muhammad Mudassir Nazir, Faisal 
Zulfiqar, Temoor Ahmed, Sharafat Ali, Amany HA Abeed, Kadambot HM Siddique, and Xiaoli Jin. 
“Zinc oxide nanoparticles mitigated the arsenic induced oxidative stress through modulation of physio￾biochemical aspects and nutritional ions homeostasis in rice (Oryza sativa L.).” Chemosphere 338 
(2023): 139566.
Jalil, Syed Uzma, and Mohammad Israil Ansari. “Physiological role of Gamma-aminobutyric acid in salt stress 
tolerance.” Salt and Drought Stress Tolerance in Plants (2020): 337–350.
Jameel, Mahmood S., Azlan Abdul Aziz, and Mohammed Ali Dheyab. “Green synthesis: Proposed mechanism 
and factors influencing the synthesis of platinum nanoparticles.” Green Processing and Synthesis 9, 
no. 1 (2020): 386–398.
Jańczak-Pieniążek, Marta, Jan Cichoński, Patrycja Michalik, and Grzegorz Chrzanowski. “Effect of heavy metal 
stress on phenolic compounds accumulation in winter wheat plants.” Molecules 28, no. 1 (2022): 241.
Jēkabsone, Astra, Una Andersone-Ozola, Andis Karlsons, Māris Romanovs, and Gederts Ievinsh. “Effect of 
salinity on growth, ion accumulation and mineral nutrition of different accessions of a crop wild relative 
legume species, Trifolium fragiferum.” Plants 11, no. 6 (2022): 797.
Kalaiselvi, Aasaithambi, Selvaraj Mohana Roopan, Gunabalan Madhumitha, C. Ramalingam, and Ganesh 
Elango. “Synthesis and characterization of palladium nanoparticles using Catharanthus roseus leaf 
extract and its application in the photo-catalytic degradation.” Spectrochimica Acta Part A: Molecular 
and Biomolecular Spectroscopy 135 (2015): 116–119.
Kamle, Madhu, Dipendra Kumar Mahato, Sheetal Devi, Ramendra Soni, Vijay Tripathi, Awdhesh Kumar 
Mishra, and Pradeep Kumar. “Nanotechnological interventions for plant health improvement and sus￾tainable agriculture.” 3 Biotech 10, no. 4 (2020): 168.
Kandhol, Nidhi, Mukesh Jain, and Durgesh Kumar Tripathi. “Nanoparticles as potential hallmarks of drought 
stress tolerance in plants.” Physiologia Plantarum 174, no. 2 (2022): e13665.118 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
Khaldari, Iman, Mohammad Reza Naghavi, and Elaheh Motamedi. “Synthesis of green and pure copper oxide 
nanoparticles using two plant resources via solid-state route and their phytotoxicity assessment.” RSC 
Advances 11, no. 6 (2021): 3346–3353.
Khan, Amna Nisar, Najla Nader Ali Aldowairy, Hajer Saed Saad Alorfi, Mohammad Aslam, Wafa AbuBaker 
Bawazir, Abdul Hameed, and Muhammad Tahir Soomro. “Excellent antimicrobial, antioxidant, and 
catalytic activities of medicinal plant aqueous leaf extract derived silver nanoparticles.” Processes 10, 
no. 10 (2022): 1949.
Khan, Ibrahim, Khalid Saeed, and Idrees Khan. “Nanoparticles: Properties, applications and toxicities.” 
Arabian Journal of Chemistry 12, no. 7 (2019): 908–931.
Khan, M. Nasir, Mazen A. AlSolami, Riyadh A. Basahi, Manzer H. Siddiqui, Asma A. Al-Huqail, Zahid 
Khorshid Abbas, Zahid H. Siddiqui, Hayssam M. Ali, and Faheema Khan. “Nitric oxide is involved in 
nano-titanium dioxide-induced activation of antioxidant defense system and accumulation of osmolytes 
under water-deficit stress in Vicia faba L.” Ecotoxicology and Environmental Safety 190 (2020): 110152.
Khan, Shakeel Ahmad, Sammia Shahid, Sadaf Hanif, Hesham S. Almoallim, Sulaiman Ali Alharbi, and Hanen 
Sellami. “Green synthesis of chromium oxide nanoparticles for antibacterial, antioxidant anticancer, and 
biocompatibility activities.” International Journal of Molecular Sciences 22, no. 2 (2021): 502.
Khattak, Mahrukh, Taj Ali Khan, Moona Nazish, Muhammad Saqib Ishaq, Hajra Hameed, Asif Kamal, 
Mohamed Soliman Elshikh, Dunia A. Al Farraj, and Muhammad Anees. “Exploration of reducing 
and stabilizing phytoconstituents in Arisaema dracontium extract for the effective synthesis of Silver 
nanoparticles and evaluation of their antibacterial and toxicological proprties.” Microbial Pathogenesis
192 (2024): 106711.
Kim, Yean-Uk, and Byun-Woo Lee. “Differential mechanisms of potato yield loss induced by high day and 
night temperatures during tuber initiation and bulking: photosynthesis and tuber growth.” Frontiers in 
Plant Science 10 (2019): 300.
Kumar, CR Rajith, Virupaxappa S. Betageri, G. Nagaraju, G. H. Pujar, B. P. Suma, and M. S. Latha. 
“Photocatalytic, nitrite sensing and antibacterial studies of facile bio-synthesized nickel oxide 
nanoparticles.” Journal of Science: Advanced Materials and Devices 5, no. 1 (2020): 48–55.
Kumari, Sarika, Risheek Rahul Khanna, Faroza Nazir, Mohammed Albaqami, Himanshu Chhillar, Iram Wahid, 
and M. Iqbal R. Khan. “Bio-synthesized nanoparticles in developing plant abiotic stress resilience: a new 
boon for sustainable approach.” International Journal of Molecular Sciences 23, no. 8 (2022): 4452.
Lakshmanan, G., A. Sathiyaseelan, P. T. Kalaichelvan, and K. Murugesan. “Plant-mediated synthesis of silver 
nanoparticles using fruit extract of Cleome viscosa L.: assessment of their antibacterial and anticancer 
activity.” Karbala International Journal of Modern Science 4, no. 1 (2018): 61–68.
Lee, You Jeong, Kwangho Song, Song-Hyun Cha, Seonho Cho, Yeong Shik Kim, and Youmie Park. 
“Sesquiterpenoids from Tussilago farfara flower bud extract for the eco-friendly synthesis of silver and 
gold nanoparticles possessing antibacterial and anticancer activities.” Nanomaterials 9, no. 6 (2019): 819.
Liang, Guoting, Junhui Liu, Jingmin Zhang, and Jing Guo. “Effects of drought stress on photosynthetic and 
physiological parameters of tomato.” Journal of the American Society for Horticultural Science 145, no. 
1 (2020): 12–17.
Liu, Zihui, Guoliang Li, Huaning Zhang, Yuanyuan Zhang, Yujie Zhang, Shuonan Duan, Mohamed Salah 
Amr Sheteiwy, Hongmei Zhang, Hongbo Shao, and Xiulin Guo. “TaHsfA2-1, a new gene for 
thermotolerance in wheat seedlings: Characterization and functional roles.” Journal of Plant Physiology
246 (2020): 153135.
Lowry, Gregory V., Astrid Avellan, and Leanne M. Gilbertson. “Opportunities and challenges for nanotech￾nology in the agri-tech revolution.” Nature Nanotechnology 14, no. 6 (2019): 517–522.
Lu, Wenjing, Ye Zhao, Jinying Liu, Bowen Zhou, Guoqing Wei, Ruiqiang Ni, Shuyong Zhang, and Jing Guo. 
“Comparative analysis of antioxidant system and salt-stress tolerance in two hibiscus cultivars exposed 
to NaCl toxicity.” Plants 12, no. 7 (2023): 1525.
Lv, Jitao, Peter Christie, and Shuzhen Zhang. “Uptake, translocation, and transformation of metal-based 
nanoparticles in plants: recent advances and methodological challenges.” Environmental Science: Nano
6, no. 1 (2019): 41–59.
Ma, Cheng, Zi-Qi Pei, Xue Bai, Shang-Huan Lu, Min Su, Xin Kang, Hai-Xia Gao, Juan Wang, Teng-Guo 
Zhang, and Sheng Zheng. “Exogenous melatonin and CaCl2 alleviate cold-induced oxidative stress 
and photosynthetic inhibition in cucumber seedlings.” Journal of Plant Growth Regulation 42, no. 6 
(2023): 3441–3458.Green Nanoparticles Used in Agriculture 119
Madanayake, Nadun H., and Nadeesh M. Adassooriya. “Phytotoxicity of Nanomaterials in Agriculture.” The 
Open Biotechnology Journal 15, no. 1 (2021).
Manaf, Abdul, Xiukang Wang, Fatima Tariq, Hafiz Muhammad Jhanzab, Yamin Bibi, Ahmad Sher, Abdul 
Razzaq, Sajid Fiaz, Sikander Khan Tanveer, and Abdul Qayyum. “Antioxidant enzyme activities 
correlated with growth parameters of wheat sprayed with silver and gold nanoparticle suspensions.” 
Agronomy 11, no. 8 (2021): 1494.
Mariani, Luigi, and Antonio Ferrante. “Agronomic management for enhancing plant tolerance to abiotic 
stresses—drought, salinity, hypoxia, and lodging.” Horticulturae 3, no. 4 (2017): 52.
Mirmoeini, Tayebehalsadat, Leila Pishkar, Danial Kahrizi, Giti Barzin, and Naser Karimi. “Phytotoxicity of 
green synthesized silver nanoparticles on Camelina sativa L.” Physiology and Molecular Biology of 
Plants 27, no. 2 (2021): 417–427.
Mishra, Sandhya, Chetan Keswani, P. C. Abhilash, Leonardo F. Fraceto, and Harikesh Bahadur Singh. 
“Integrated approach of agri-nanotechnology: challenges and future trends.” Frontiers in Plant Science
8 (2017): 471.
Modi, Shreya, Virendra Kumar Yadav, Nisha Choudhary, Abdullah M. Alswieleh, Anish Kumar Sharma, 
Abhishek Kumar Bhardwaj, Samreen Heena Khan, Krishna Kumar Yadav, Ji-Kwang Cheon, and Byong￾Hun Jeon. “Onion peel waste mediated-green synthesis of zinc oxide nanoparticles and their phytotox￾icity on mung bean and wheat plant growth.” Materials 15, no. 7 (2022): 2393.
Mogazy, Asmaa Mahmoud, and Rania Samy Hanafy. “Foliar spray of biosynthesized zinc oxide nanoparticles 
alleviate salinity stress effect on Vicia faba plants.” Journal of Soil Science and Plant Nutrition 22, 
no. 2 (2022): 2647–2662.
Mohanta, Tapan Kumar, Tufail Bashir, Abeer Hashem, Elsayed Fathi Abd_Allah, Abdul Latif Khan, and 
Ahmed Sulaiman Al-Harrasi. “Early events in plant abiotic stress signaling: interplay between cal￾cium, reactive oxygen species and phytohormones.” Journal of Plant Growth Regulation 37, no. 4 
(2018): 1033–1049.
Moradbeygi, Hanieh, Rashid Jamei, Reza Heidari, and Reza Darvishzadeh. “Investigating the enzymatic and 
non-enzymatic antioxidant defense by applying iron oxide nanoparticles in Dracocephalum moldavica 
L. plant under salinity stress.” Scientia Horticulturae 272 (2020): 109537.
Muradoglu, Ferhad, Muttalip Gundogdu, Sezai Ercisli, Tarik Encu, Fikri Balta, Hawa ZE Jaafar, and Muhammad 
Zia-Ul-Haq. “Cadmium toxicity affects chlorophyll a and b content, antioxidant enzyme activities and 
mineral nutrient accumulation in strawberry.” Biological Research 48 (2015): 1–7.
Mustafa, Ghazala, and Setsuko Komatsu. “Insights into the response of soybean mitochondrial proteins to 
various sizes of aluminum oxide nanoparticles under flooding stress.” Journal of Proteome Research 15, 
no. 12 (2016): 4464–4475.
Mustafa, Ghazala, Katsumi Sakata, and Setsuko Komatsu. “Proteomic analysis of soybean root exposed 
to varying sizes of silver nanoparticles under flooding stress.” Journal of Proteomics 148 
(2016): 113–125.
Mustafa, Nilofar, Naveed Iqbal Raja, Noshin Ilyas, Fozia Abasi, Muhammad Sheeraz Ahmad, Maria Ehsan, 
Asma Mehak, Imran Badshah, and Jarosław Proćków. “Exogenous application of green titanium dioxide 
nanoparticles (TiO2 NPs) to improve the germination, physiochemical, and yield parameters of wheat 
plants under salinity stress.” Molecules 27, no. 15 (2022): 4884.
Mustafa, Nilofar, Naveed Iqbal Raja, Noshin Ilyas, Muhammad Ikram, Zia-ur-Rehman Mashwani, and Maria 
Ehsan. “Foliar applications of plant-based titanium dioxide nanoparticles to improve agronomic and 
physiological attributes of wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) plants under salinity stress.” Green Processing 
and Synthesis 10, no. 1 (2021): 246–257.
Muthulakshmi, V., M. Balaji, and M. Sundrarajan. “Biomedical applications of ionic liquid mediated samarium 
oxide nanoparticles by Andrographis paniculata leaves extract.” Materials Chemistry and Physics 242 
(2020): 122483.
Nair, Prakash M. Gopalakrishnan, and Ill Min Chung. “Physiological and molecular level effects of silver 
nanoparticles exposure in rice (Oryza sativa L.) seedlings.” Chemosphere 112 (2014): 105–113.
Ngom, I., B. D. Ngom, J. Sackey, and S. Khamlich. “Biosynthesis of zinc oxide nanoparticles using extracts of 
Moringa Oleifera: Structural & optical properties.” Materials Today: Proceedings 36 (2021): 526–533.
Nie, Penghui, Yu Zhao, and Hengyi Xu. “Synthesis, applications, toxicity and toxicity mechanisms of silver 
nanoparticles: A review.” Ecotoxicology and Environmental Safety 253 (2023): 114636.120 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
Noor, Rabeea, Humaira Yasmin, Noshin Ilyas, Asia Nosheen, Muhammad Nadeem Hassan, Saqib Mumtaz, 
Naeem Khan, Ajaz Ahmad, and Parvaiz Ahmad. “Comparative analysis of iron oxide nanoparticles 
synthesized from ginger (Zingiber officinale) and cumin seeds (Cuminum cyminum) to induce resist￾ance in wheat against drought stress.” Chemosphere 292 (2022): 133201.
Ovais, Muhammad, Ali Talha Khalil, Nazar Ul Islam, Irshad Ahmad, Muhamamd Ayaz, Muthupandian 
Saravanan, Zabta Khan Shinwari, and Sudip Mukherjee. “Role of plant phytochemicals and micro￾bial enzymes in biosynthesis of metallic nanoparticles.” Applied Microbiology and Biotechnology 102 
(2018): 6799–6814.
Ozturk, Munir, Bengu Turkyilmaz Unal, Pedro García-Caparrós, Anum Khursheed, Alvina Gul, and Mirza 
Hasanuzzaman. “Osmoregulation and its actions during the drought stress in plants.” Physiologia 
Plantarum 172, no. 2 (2021): 1321–1335.
Paraskevopoulou, Angeliki T., Anna Kontodaimon Karantzi, Georgios Liakopoulos, Paraskevi A. Londra, and 
Konstantinos Bertsouklis. “The effect of salinity on the growth of lavender species.” Water 12, no. 3 
(2020): 618.
Patra, Jayanta Kumar, and Kwang-Hyun Baek. “Green nanobiotechnology: factors affecting synthesis and 
characterization techniques.” Journal of Nanomaterials 2014, no. 1 (2014): 417305.
Paulkumar, Kanniah, Gnanadhas Gnanajobitha, Mahendran Vanaja, Shanmugam Rajeshkumar, Chelladurai 
Malarkodi, Kannaiyan Pandian, and Gurusamy Annadurai. “Piper nigrum leaf and stem assisted green 
synthesis of silver nanoparticles and evaluation of its antibacterial activity against agricultural plant 
pathogens.” The Scientific World Journal 2014, no. 1 (2014): 829894.
Pecherina, Anna, Marina Grinberg, Maria Ageyeva, Daria Zanegina, Elena Akinchits, Anna Brilkina, and 
Vladimir Vodeneev. “Salt-Induced changes in cytosolic pH and photosynthesis in tobacco and potato 
leaves.” International Journal of Molecular Sciences 24, no. 1 (2022): 491.
Priya, Swati, and Ranendu Ghosh. “Monitoring effects of heavy metal stress on biochemical and spectral 
parameters of cotton using hyperspectral reflectance.” Environmental Monitoring and Assessment 195, 
no. 1 (2023): 112.
Rahman, Md Anisur, Afsona Parvin, Md Sajibul Haque Khan, Abdul Rasheed War, K. Lingaraju, Ram Prasad, 
Sudipta Das, Barkat Hussain, and Atanu Bhattacharyya. “Efficacy of the green synthesized nickel-oxide 
nanoparticles against pulse beetle, Callosobruchus maculatus (F.) in black gram (Vigna mungo L.).” 
International Journal of Pest Management 67, no. 4 (2021): 306–314.
Rai, Krishna Kumar, Nagendra Rai, Mohd Aamir, Deepika Tripathi, and Shashi Pandey Rai. “Interactive role 
of salicylic acid and nitric oxide on transcriptional reprogramming for high temperature tolerance in 
Lablab purpureus L.: Structural and functional insights using computational approaches.” Journal of 
Biotechnology 309 (2020): 113–130.
Raja, Vaseem, Umer Majeed, Hunseung Kang, Khursheed Iqbal Andrabi, and Riffat John. “Abiotic 
stress: Interplay between ROS, hormones and MAPKs.” Environmental and Experimental Botany 137 
(2017): 142–157.
Rajabi Dehnavi, Ahmad, Morteza Zahedi, Agnieszka Ludwiczak, Stefany Cardenas Perez, and Agnieszka 
Piernik. “Effect of salinity on seed germination and seedling development of sorghum (Sorghum bicolor 
(L.) Moench) genotypes.” Agronomy 10, no. 6 (2020): 859.
Rajakumar, Govindasamy, Abdul Abdul Rahuman, Chidambaram Jayaseelan, Thirunavukkarasu Santhoshkumar, 
Sampath Marimuthu, Chinnaperumal Kamaraj, Asokan Bagavan et al. “Solanum trilobatum extract￾mediated synthesis of titanium dioxide nanoparticles to control Pediculus humanus capitis, Hyalomma 
anatolicum anatolicum and Anopheles subpictus.” Parasitology Research 113 (2014): 469–479.
Rakgotho, Tessia, Nzumbululo Ndou, Takalani Mulaudzi, Emmanuel Iwuoha, Noluthando Mayedwa, and 
Rachel Fanelwa Ajayi. “Green-synthesized zinc oxide nanoparticles mitigate salt stress in Sorghum 
bicolor.” Agriculture 12, no. 5 (2022): 597.
Ramalingam, Sathiyamoorthi, G. Sankaranarayanan, S. Senthil, R. A. Rohith, and R. Santosh Kumar. “Effect 
of Cerium oxide nanoparticles derived from biosynthesis of Azadirachta indica on stability and perform￾ance of a research CI engine powered by Diesel-Lemongrass oil blends.” Energy & Environment 34, 
no. 4 (2023): 886–908.
Ramzan, Tahrim, Muhammad Shahbaz, Muhammad Faisal Maqsood, Usman Zulfiqar, Rafia Urooj Saman, 
Nian Lili, Muhammad Irshad et al. “Phenylalanine supply alleviates the drought stress in mustard 
(Brassica campestris) by modulating plant growth, photosynthesis, and antioxidant defense system.” 
Plant Physiology and Biochemistry 201 (2023): 107828.Green Nanoparticles Used in Agriculture 121
Rawani, Anjali. “Mosquito larvicidal activity of green silver nanoparticle synthesized from extract of bud of 
Polianthus tuberosa L.” International Journal of Nanotechnology Applied 11, no. 1 (2017): 17–28.
Rossi, Lorenzo, Weilan Zhang, and Xingmao Ma. “Cerium oxide nanoparticles alter the salt stress tolerance 
of Brassica napus L. by modifying the formation of root apoplastic barriers.” Environmental Pollution
229 (2017): 132–138.
Roy, K., C. K. Sarkar, and C. K. Ghosh. “Green synthesis of silver nanoparticles using fruit extract of Malus 
domestica and study of its antimicrobial activity.” Digest Journal of Nanomaterials and Biostructures 9, 
no. 3 (2014): 1137–1147.
Rykaczewska, Krystyna. “The effect of high temperature occurring in subsequent stages of plant devel￾opment on potato yield and tuber physiological defects.” American Journal of Potato Research 92 
(2015): 339–349.
Sachdev, Swati, and Shamshad Ahmad. “Role of nanomaterials in regulating oxidative stress in plants.” 
Nanobiotechnology: Mitigation of Abiotic Stress in Plants (2021): 305–326.
Sachdev, Swati, Shamim Akhtar Ansari, Mohammad Israil Ansari, Masayuki Fujita, and Mirza Hasanuzzaman. 
“Abiotic stress and reactive oxygen species: Generation, signaling, and defense mechanisms.” 
Antioxidants 10, no. 2 (2021): 277.
Sadat-Hosseini, Mohammad, Atena Naeimi, Naser Boroomand, Mostafa Aalifar, and Mostafa Farajpour. 
“Alleviating the adverse effects of salinity on Roselle plants by green synthesized nanoparticles.” 
Scientific Reports 12, no. 1 (2022): 18165.
Saleem, Khansa, Muhammad Ahsan Asghar, Ali Raza, Hafiz Hassan Javed, Taimoor Hassan Farooq, Muhammad 
Arslan Ahmad, Altafur Rahman et al. “Biochar-mediated control of metabolites and other physiological 
responses in water-stressed Leptocohloa fusca.” Metabolites 13, no. 4 (2023): 511.
Saman, Rafia Urooj, Muhammad Shahbaz, Muhammad Faisal Maqsood, Nian Lili, Usman Zulfiqar, Fasih 
Ullah Haider, Nargis Naz, and Babar Shahzad. “Foliar application of ethylenediamine tetraacetic acid 
(EDTA) improves the growth and yield of brown mustard (Brassica juncea) by modulating photosyn￾thetic pigments, antioxidant defense, and osmolyte production under lead (Pb) stress.” Plants 12, no. 1 
(2022): 115.
Sanal, Filiz. “The effects of heavy metal stress in wheat plant on certain phenolic compounds.” Journal of 
BioScience and Biotechnology 8, no. 1 (2019): 45–50.
Sangeetha, Gunalan, Sivaraj Rajeshwari, and Rajendran Venckatesh. “Green synthesis of zinc oxide 
nanoparticles by aloe barbadensis miller leaf extract: Structure and optical properties.” Materials 
Research Bulletin 46, no. 12 (2011): 2560–2566.
Sarkar, Joy, Nilanjan Chakraborty, Arindam Chatterjee, Avisek Bhattacharjee, Disha Dasgupta, and Krishnendu 
Acharya. “Green synthesized copper oxide nanoparticles ameliorate defence and antioxidant enzymes in 
Lens culinaris.” Nanomaterials 10, no. 2 (2020b): 312.
Sarkar, Shrabana, Nidia Torres Ponce, Aparna Banerjee, Rajib Bandopadhyay, Saravanan Rajendran, and 
Eric Lichtfouse. “Green polymeric nanomaterials for the photocatalytic degradation of dyes: a review.” 
Environmental Chemistry Letters 18, no. 5 (2020a): 1569–1580.
Sarraf, M., K. Vishwakarma, V. Kumar, N. Arif, S. Das, R. Johnson, E. Janeeshma, Fujitha M., Hasanuzzaman, 
“Metal/metalloid-based nanomaterials for plant abiotic stress tolerance: An overview of the mechanisms.” 
Plants, 11, (2022): 316.
Satti, Seema Hassan, Naveed Iqbal Raja, Muhammad Ikram, Hesham F. Oraby, Zia-Ur-Rehman Mashwani, 
Azza H. Mohamed, Ajit Singh, and Ahmad A. Omar. “Plant-based titanium dioxide nanoparticles 
trigger biochemical and proteome modifications in Triticum aestivum L. under biotic stress of Puccinia 
striiformis.” Molecules 27, no. 13 (2022): 4274.
Saware, Kantrao, Balaji Sawle, Bsavraja Salimath, Kamala Jayanthi, and Venkataraman Abbaraju. “Biosynthesis 
and characterization of silver nanoparticles using Ficus benghalensis leaf extract.” International Journal 
of Research in Engineering and Technology 3, no. 05 (2014): 867–874.
Schauberger, Bernhard, Sotirios Archontoulis, Almut Arneth, Juraj Balkovic, Philippe Ciais, Delphine Deryng, 
Joshua Elliott et al. “Consistent negative response of US crops to high temperatures in observations and 
crop models.” Nature Communications 8, no. 1 (2017): 13931.
Sebastian, Abin, Ashwini Nangia, and M. N. V. Prasad. “A green synthetic route to phenolics fabricated mag￾netite nanoparticles from coconut husk extract: Implications to treat metal contaminated water and heavy 
metal stress in Oryza sativa L.” Journal of Cleaner Production 174 (2018): 355–366.122 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
Selvanathan, Vidhya, M. Shahinuzzaman, Shankary Selvanathan, Dilip Kumar Sarkar, Norah Algethami, Hend 
I. Alkhammash, Farah Hannan Anuar et al. “Phytochemical-assisted green synthesis of nickel oxide 
nanoparticles for application as electrocatalysts in oxygen evolution reaction.” Catalysts 11, no. 12 
(2021): 1523.
Seminario, Amaia, Li Song, Amaia Zulet, Henry T. Nguyen, Esther M. González, and Estíbaliz Larrainzar. 
“Drought stress causes a reduction in the biosynthesis of ascorbic acid in soybean plants.” Frontiers in 
Plant Science 8 (2017): 1042.
Shafey, Asmaa Mohamed El. “Green synthesis of metal and metal oxide nanoparticles from plant leaf extracts 
and their applications: A review.” Green Processing and Synthesis 9, no. 1 (2020): 304–339.
Shaikhaldein, Hassan O., Fahad Al-Qurainy, Mohammad Nadeem, Salim Khan, Mohamed Tarroum, 
Abdalrhaman M. Salih, Saleh Alansi, Abdulrahman Al-Hashimi, Alanoud Alfagham, and Jawaher 
Alkahtani. “Assessment of the impacts of green synthesized silver nanoparticles on Maerua oblongifolia 
shoots under in vitro salt stress.” Materials 15, no. 14 (2022): 4784.
Sharif, Hina, Ansar Mehmood, Aneela Ulfat, Khawaja Shafique Ahmad, Imtiaz Hussain, and Rizwan Taj 
Khan. “Environmentally sustainable production of silver nanoparticles and their effect on glycine max 
L. seedlings.” Gesunde Pflanzen 73, no. 1 (2021): 95–103.
Shin, Yu Kyeong, Shiva Ram Bhandari, Jung Su Jo, Jae Woo Song, and Jun Gu Lee. “Effect of drought stress 
on chlorophyll fluorescence parameters, phytochemical contents, and antioxidant activities in lettuce 
seedlings.” Horticulturae 7, no. 8 (2021): 238.
Shume, Workneh M., HC Ananda Murthy, and Enyew Amare Zereffa. “A review on synthesis and charac￾terization of Ag2O nanoparticles for photocatalytic applications.” Journal of Chemistry 2020, no. 1 
(2020): 5039479.
Singh, Amardeep, Namita Basnal, Gyanika Shukla, Neha Chaudhary, Swati Singh, and Shailendra Singh 
Gaurav. “Evaluation of efficacy of Phyto-synthesized iron oxide nanoparticles in contributing drought 
resilience in wheat (Triticum aestivum L.).” Nanotechnology 33, no. 48 (2022): 485101.
Singh, Harpreet, Archita Sharma, Sanjeev K. Bhardwaj, Shailendra Kumar Arya, Neha Bhardwaj, and Madhu 
Khatri. “Recent advances in the applications of nano-agrochemicals for sustainable agricultural devel￾opment.” Environmental Science: Processes & Impacts 23, no. 2 (2021): 213–239.
Sinha, Rakesh Kumar, and Shiv Shankar Verma. “Proteomics approach in horticultural crops for abiotic-stress 
tolerance.” In Avinash Chandra Rai, Ashutosh Rai, Krishna Kumar Rai, Ved Prakash Rai, Ajay Kumar. 
(Eds.) Stress Tolerance in Horticultural Crops, pp. 371–385. Woodhead Publishing, 2021.
Soliman, Mona, Sameer H. Qari, Abdelghafar Abu-Elsaoud, Mohamed El-Esawi, Haifa Alhaithloul, and Amr 
Elkelish. “Rapid green synthesis of silver nanoparticles from blue gum augment growth and perform￾ance of maize, fenugreek, and onion by modulating plants cellular antioxidant machinery and genes 
expression.” Acta Physiologiae Plantarum 42 (2020): 1–16.
Song, Jae Yong, Eun-Yeong Kwon, and Beom Soo Kim. “Biological synthesis of platinum nanoparticles using 
Diopyros kaki leaf extract.” Bioprocess and Biosystems Engineering 33 (2010): 159–164.
Song, Yue, Meng Jiang, Huali Zhang, and Ruiqing Li. “Zinc oxide nanoparticles alleviate chilling stress in 
rice (Oryza Sativa L.) by regulating antioxidative system and chilling response transcription factors.” 
Molecules 26, no. 8 (2021): 2196.
Soundarrajan, C., A. Sankari, P. Dhandapani, S. Maruthamuthu, S. Ravichandran, G. Sozhan, and N. 
Palaniswamy. “Rapid biological synthesis of platinum nanoparticles using Ocimum sanctum for water 
electrolysis applications.” Bioprocess and Biosystems Engineering 35 (2012): 827–833.
Spanò, Carmelina, Stefania Bottega, Monica Ruffini Castiglione, and Hilda Elizabeth Pedranzani. “Antioxidant 
response to cold stress in two oil plants of the genus Jatropha.” Plant, Soil and Environment 63 
(2017): 271–276.
Srivastava, Shilpi, Atul Bhargava, Shilpi Srivastava, and Atul Bhargava. “Green nanotechnology: an overview.” 
Green Nanoparticles: The Future of Nanobiotechnology (2022): 1–13.
Subhani, Ansar Aziz, Muhammad Irshad, Shaukat Ali, Muhammad Jawad, Muhammad Faran Akhtar, and 
Muhammad Summer. “UV-spectrophotometric optimization of temperature, pH, concentration and time 
for eucalyptus globulus capped silver nanoparticles synthesis, their characterization and evaluation of 
biological applications.” Journal of Fluorescence 34, no. 2 (2024): 655–666.
Tavanti, Tauan Rimoldi, Andressa Aparecida Rodrigues de Melo, Luan Dionnes Kaiber Moreira, Douglas 
Enrique Juarez Sanchez, Rafael dos Santos Silva, Ricardo Messias da Silva, and André Rodrigues Dos Green Nanoparticles Used in Agriculture 123
Reis. “Micronutrient fertilization enhances ROS scavenging system for alleviation of abiotic stresses in 
plants.” Plant Physiology and Biochemistry 160 (2021): 386–396.
Thabet, Samar G., and Ahmad M. Alqudah. “Unraveling the role of nanoparticles in improving plant resili￾ence under environmental stress condition.” Plant and Soil (2024): 1–18. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11
104-024-06581-2
Thapa, Bharti, and Abhisek Shrestha. “Protein metabolism in plants to survive against abiotic stress.” 
IntechOpen: London, UK (2022).
Thiruvengadam, Muthu, Sangiliyandi Gurunathan, and Ill-Min Chung. “Physiological, metabolic, and tran￾scriptional effects of biologically-synthesized silver nanoparticles in turnip (Brassica rapa ssp. rapa L.).” 
Protoplasma 252 (2015): 1031–1046.
Tiwari, Shalini, and Charu Lata. “Heavy metal stress, signaling, and tolerance due to plant-associated 
microbes: an overview.” Frontiers in Plant Science 9 (2018): 452.
Umadevi, M., M. R. Bindhu, and V. Sathe. “A novel synthesis of malic acid capped silver nanoparticles 
using Solanum lycopersicums fruit extract.” Journal of Materials Science & Technology 29, no. 4 
(2013): 317–322.
Velmurugan, Palanivel, Krishnan Anbalagan, Manoharan Manosathyadevan, Kui-Jae Lee, Min Cho, 
Sang-Myeong Lee, Jung-Hee Park, Sae-Gang Oh, Keuk-Soo Bang, and Byung-Taek Oh. “Green 
synthesis of silver and gold nanoparticles using Zingiber officinale root extract and antibacterial 
activity of silver nanoparticles against food pathogens.” Bioprocess and Biosystems Engineering 37 
(2014): 1935–1943.
Verma, Krishan K., Yuan Zeng, Xiu-Peng Song, Munna Singh, Kai-Chao Wu, Vishnu D. Rajput, and Yang-Rui 
Li. “Nanosilicon: an approach for abiotic stress mitigation and sustainable agriculture.” Frontiers in 
Plant Science 13 (2022): 1025974.
VG, Viju Kumar, and Ananthu A. Prem. “Green synthesis and characterization of iron oxide nanoparticles 
using Phyllanthus Niruri extract.” Oriental Journal of Chemistry 34, no. 5 (2018).
Wahid, Iram, Sarika Kumari, Rafiq Ahmad, Sofi J. Hussain, Saud Alamri, Manzer H. Siddiqui, and M. Iqbal R. 
Khan. “Silver nanoparticle regulates salt tolerance in wheat through changes in ABA concentration, ion 
homeostasis, and defense systems.” Biomolecules 10, no. 11 (2020): 1506.
Wang, Anbang, Jingyang Li, Arwa Abdulkreem Al-Huqail, Mohammad S. Al-Harbi, Esmat F. Ali, Jiashui 
Wang, Zheli Ding, Saudi A. Rekaby, Adel M. Ghoneim, and Mamdouh A. Eissa. “Mechanisms of 
chitosan nanoparticles in the regulation of cold stress resistance in banana plants.” Nanomaterials 11, 
no. 10 (2021): 2670.
Wang, Yangyang, Yidan Liu, Wenhao Zhan, Kaixuan Zheng, Mingming Lian, Chaosheng Zhang, Xinling 
Ruan, and Tao Li. “Long-term stabilization of Cd in agricultural soil using mercapto-functionalized 
nano-silica (MPTS/nano-silica): A three-year field study.” Ecotoxicology and Environmental Safety 197 
(2020): 110600.
Waraich, E. A., R. Ahmad, Aziz Halim, and Tariq Aziz. “Alleviation of temperature stress by nutrient manage￾ment in crop plants: a review.” Journal of Soil Science and Plant Nutrition 12, no. 2 (2012): 221–244.
Weng, Xiulan, Xiaoying Jin, Jiajiang Lin, Ravi Naidu, and Zuliang Chen. “Removal of mixed contaminants 
Cr (VI) and Cu (II) by green synthesized iron based nanoparticles.” Ecological Engineering 97 
(2016): 32–39.
Wu, Honghong, Nicholas Tito, and Juan P. Giraldo. “Anionic cerium oxide nanoparticles protect plant 
photosynthesis from abiotic stress by scavenging reactive oxygen species.” ACS Nano 11, no. 11 
(2017): 11283–11297.
Yadav, S. K. “Heavy metals toxicity in plants: an overview on the role of glutathione and phytochelatins in 
heavy metal stress tolerance of plants.” South African Journal of Botany 76, no. 2 (2010): 167–179.
Zafar, Sadia, Hadiqa Afzal, Areeba Ijaz, Athar Mahmood, Atif Ayub, Airish Nayab, Sadam Hussain et al. 
“Cotton and drought stress: An updated overview for improving stress tolerance.” South African Journal 
of Botany 161 (2023): 258–268.
Zahedi, Seyed Morteza, Marjan Sadat Hosseini, Naghmeh Daneshvar Hakimi Meybodi, and Willie 
Peijnenburg. “Mitigation of the effect of drought on growth and yield of pomegranates by foliar spraying 
of different sizes of selenium nanoparticles.” Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture 101, no. 12 
(2021): 5202–5213.124 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
Zahedi, Seyed Morteza, Marjan Sadat Hosseini, Narjes Fahadi Hoveizeh, Saeid Kadkhodaei, and Marek 
Vaculík. “Physiological and biochemical responses of commercial strawberry cultivars under optimal 
and drought stress conditions.” Plants 12, no. 3 (2023): 496.
Zaid, Abbu, and Firoz Mohammad. “Methyl jasmonate and nitrogen interact to alleviate cadmium stress in 
Mentha arvensis by regulating physio-biochemical damages and ROS detoxification.” Journal of Plant 
Growth Regulation 37, no. 4 (2018): 1331–1348.
Zandalinas, Sara I., Felix B. Fritschi, and Ron Mittler. “Global warming, climate change, and environmental 
pollution: recipe for a multifactorial stress combination disaster.” Trends in Plant Science 26, no. 6 
(2021): 588–599.
Zhang, Heng, Yang Zhao, and Jian-Kang Zhu. “Thriving under stress: how plants balance growth and the stress 
response.” Developmental Cell 55, no. 5 (2020): 529–543.
Zhang, Huiming, Jianhua Zhu, Zhizhong Gong, and Jian-Kang Zhu. “Abiotic stress responses in plants.” Nature 
Reviews Genetics 23, no. 2 (2022): 104–119.
Zhao, Jianguo, Zhaogeng Lu, Li Wang, and Biao Jin. “Plant responses to heat stress: physiology, transcription, 
noncoding RNAs, and epigenetics.” International Journal of Molecular Sciences 22, no. 1 (2020): 117.
Zulfiqar, Faisal, and Muhammad Ashraf. “Nanoparticles potentially mediate salt stress tolerance in plants.” 
Plant Physiology and Biochemistry 160 (2021): 257–268.
Zulfiqar, Usman, Saddam Hussain, Muhammad Ishfaq, Nauman Ali, Muhammad Ahmad, Fahid Ihsan, 
Mohamed S. Sheteiwy, Abdur Rauf, Christophe Hano, and Mohamed A. El-Esawi. “Manganese supply 
improves bread wheat productivity, economic returns and grain biofortification under conventional and 
no tillage systems.” Agriculture 11, no. 2 (2021): 142.125
DOI: 10.1201/9781003477730-9 125
8 Mobility of Nanoparticles 
in Plants
P. Paul Vijay, Srinivas Kunta, and Belli Madhuri Venkatesh
8.1 INTRODUCTION
Nanoparticles (NPs) have distinctive characteristics relative to bulk materials and can offer novel 
treatments to address a lack of nutrients in crops, increase plant growth and development, and 
restrict plant pathogens. Additionally, NPs can help to regulate agrochemical release and modify 
plant genetics (Grillo et al., 2021). With the help of nanoparticles, agrochemicals and other 
macromolecules required for plant growth can be delivered to specific sites and released under 
regulated conditions, resulting in effective use and minimal exposure, increasing environmental 
protection (Rajput et al., 2020). Moreover, the genetic modification of plants can be accomplished 
using nanoparticle-mediated plant transformation technology more successfully than using con￾ventional techniques. Because of their small size, nanoparticles can transport foreign materials into 
plant cells while shielding them from deterioration (Gao et al., 2023). Last but not least, the use of 
nanoparticles offers a fresh approach to crop defense against certain farming issues. However, it 
has been determined that certain nanoparticles may produce phytotoxicity and can have detrimental 
effects on plant growth. Once in soil, nanoparticles can enter seeds, be absorbed by roots, and travel 
to plant organs. Thus, it is essential to investigate the distribution, accumulation, and mobility of 
nanoparticles inside plants to determine the environmental effects of nanotechnology. The disper￾sion of nanoparticles in soil and how they are absorbed by plants, as well as their phytotoxic and 
physiological effects, are currently the subject of significant research (Ismat Suleyman Ahmadov 
et al., 2020).
8.2 TYPES OF NANOPARTICLES USED IN PLANTS
Nanoparticles (NPs) have a minimum of one dimension that falls in the 1–100 nanometer range and 
they present tremendous opportunities for agricultural transformation. Their special qualities can 
help to fight infections, increase nutrient delivery, and promote plant growth.
Metallic nanoparticles, like gold (Au) and silver (Ag) NPs, are commonly utilized in plant 
research for a variety of uses. However, hazardous substances must be used in their expensive chem￾ical manufacture (Rastogi et al., 2019). Recently, though, more environmentally friendly methods 
have been devised that make use of plant extracts and the chemistry of ionizing radiation in aqueous 
solutions (Abedini et al., 2013). Because of their excellent electrical, catalytic, and light absorption 
qualities, oxidized NPs, such MgONPs, CaONPs, ZnONPs, and TiO2
NPs, have also been exten￾sively studied. Polymeric nanomaterials have garnered significant attention in recent times primarily 
because of their low production costs, biocompatibility, and capacity to react to external stimuli 
(Baskar et al., 2018). Additionally, core/shell nanoparticles are accessible and can be produced 
using a range of material combinations, including inorganic/inorganic, inorganic/organic, organic/126 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
inorganic, and organic/organic materials. It has been suggested that polymeric shells enhance NPs’ 
biocompatibility. Mesoporous silica nanoparticles feature an extensive functionalizable surface area 
and are an example of a mesoporous structure from which nanoparticles with nanostructured shells 
have been manufactured (Torney et al., 2007).
The nanotechnology community is becoming more and more interested in nanogels (NGs), a 
novel class of nanomaterial. They are stimuli-responsive (pH, temperature, etc.) and exhibit out￾standing physicochemical properties, colloidal stability, and strong encapsulation potential for 
biomolecules (bioconjugation). Nanoscale ionic and non-ionic hydrogels are described as synthetic 
or natural polymeric chains that have undergone chemical or physical crosslinking. NGs have an 
elevated degree of porosity, a significant amount of water (70–90% of the whole structure), and a high 
loading capacity. Chitosan, alginate, poly(vinyl alcohol), poly(ethylene oxide), poly(ethyleneimine), 
poly(vinylpyrrolidone), and poly(N-isopropyl acrylamide) are the most commonly used NGs. It is 
possible to obtain NGs with hybrid architectures that are composed of either non-polymeric or 
polymeric components. Hybrid nanogels fall into two categories: (i) composites of polymers and 
nanogels, which comprise core/shell particles, copolymers, and interpenetrated networks (IPNs); 
(ii) nanomaterial–nanogel hybrids, which are created by incorporating nanosized materials, like 
magnetic or carbonaceous nanoparticles (Molina et al., 2015). Though core/shell NGs hold promise 
for encapsulating biomolecules, as well as medication delivery, IPNs and copolymer NGs have the 
primary benefit of being stimuli-responsive.
8.3 UPTAKE, TRANSLOCATION, AND BIOLOGICAL EFFECTS OF 
NANOPARTICLES IN PLANTS
To effectively apply nanotechnology strategies to plants, it is necessary to accurately assess the 
interactions between nanoparticles and plants in a preventive manner. This includes understanding 
the mechanisms underlying the uptake, translocation, and accumulation of nanoparticles, as well 
as evaluating any possible adverse impacts on the development and growth of plants. The uptake 
of nanoparticles by plants is not always predictable. It is influenced by various factors, such as the 
size, chemical makeup, net charge, and surface functionalization of the nanoparticles, as well as the 
application route, environmental elements (such as soil texture, water availability, and microbiota), 
constraints arising from the presence of cell walls, plant physiology, and the intricate anatomy of 
individual plant species. Since metal oxide nanoparticles are widely used in industry and are simple 
to identify and track using microscopy techniques, the majority of previous studies on plant uptake 
have focused on these particles (González-Melendi et al., 2008). However, very few integrated com￾parison analyses have been conducted to demonstrate the involvement of the physicochemical prop￾erties (for instance, size, charge, coatings, etc.) of nanoparticles in plant–nanoparticle interactions, 
in contrast to the vast amount of data available on metazoans.
8.4 ABSORPTION AND TRANSLOCATION OF NANOPARTICLES
NPs go through several bio/geotransformations in the soil that affect their toxicity and bioavail￾ability. After interacting with plant roots, NPs translocate to aerial parts of plants and gather in cel￾lular or subcellular organelles. The initial stage of bioaccumulation may be defined as the adsorption 
of NPs from the soil by plant roots. After examining a large number of NPs, several studies have 
postulated that NP accumulation is caused by root adsorption and that they then spread throughout 
plant tissues as a result of various alterations, like biotransformations, crystal phase dissolution, 
and bioaccumulation. Because NP size is a critical factor that dictates NP entry through cell wall 
apertures or plant stomata, it is directly correlated with NP absorption. Additionally, size influences 
NP toxicity, rate of transport into plant cells, and transport processes into plant cells (plasmo￾desmata) or organelles (Tripathi, Singh, et al., 2017). NP shape is connected with surface area, Mobility of Nanoparticles in Plants 127
aggregation, and reactions on the cell surface or inside plant structures. The area and morphology 
of the NP surface are considered crucial criteria for identifying the precise zones of interaction 
that exist between plant cell structures and NPs. The attachment of NPs to the plant cell surface is 
directly dependent on their charge because the cell wall is negatively charged. The hydrophobicity 
of plant surface has been found to be the most significant factor in the absorption and transloca￾tion processes after particle size and charge (Kaphle et al., 2017). Furthermore, the examination of 
nanoparticles’ fundamental structure is complimentary to that of plant NP uptake, transport, and 
aggregation. The aforementioned facts highlight the necessity of standardizing lab tests to evaluate 
NPs at different concentrations in plant tissues in order to pinpoint the precise impacts of NPs caused 
by their physiochemical characteristics. Therefore, a thorough investigation into the nature of NPs 
is required to comprehend and clarify the absorption, translocation, and accumulation processes. 
Monitoring and tracking NPs is crucial to ascertaining their mobility and localization to different 
plant structures and cell organelles. It has been reported that NPs, which have sizes ranging from 
3 to 5 nm, can enter plant roots through capillary forces, osmotic pressure, or direct penetration 
through root epidermal cells. Large NPs are constrained by the semipermeable root epidermal cell 
walls, which have tiny holes. A few NPs cause the epidermal cell wall to develop new pores, which 
makes it easier for them to enter (Du et al., 2011; Lin & Xing, 2008). NPs are apoplastically carried 
across extracellular spaces after they have crossed the cell wall. Once they reach the central vas￾cular cylinder, the xylem transports them via unidirectional upward movement. However, in order 
for NPs to penetrate the core vascular cylinder, they must symplastically pass the Casparian strip. 
They accomplish this by attaching to carrier proteins in the endodermal cell membrane via endo￾cytosis, pore creation, and transport. Once absorbed into the cytoplasm, NPs can move between cells 
via the plasmodesmata (Tripathi, Singh, et al., 2017). NPs that reach the xylem are transported to 
shoots and then returned to the roots through the phloem, whereas NPs that are unable to internalize 
aggregate on the Casparian strip (Pérez-de-Luque, 2017). NPs that are absorbed by plants can be 
identified in the cytoplasm, nucleus, and epidermal cell wall of cortical cells. Nutrient absorption 
can be altered by NPs that are not absorbed on the root surface of the soil aggregate. NPs can also be 
directly absorbed by seeds through the parenchymatic intercellular gaps in seed coatings and then 
diffused through the cotyledon (Tripathi, Singh, et al., 2017). NPs can be absorbed by leaves through 
the cuticle or stomata. The principal leaf barrier, the cuticle, limits the size of NPs that can enter the 
leaves to less than 5 nm. NPs that are larger than 10 nm enter plants through the stomata and their 
cellular transition into the vascular system occurs via apoplastic and symplastic pathways (Ruttkay￾Nedecky et al., 2017). The cytoplasm of nearby cells facilitates the transmission of NPs (between 10 
and 50 nm) (symplastic pathway). Larger NPs (between 50 and 200 nm) are translocated between 
the cells (apoplastic pathway). Internalized NPs are carried by the phloem sieve tubes with the 
sugar flow. Because these organs act as powerful sap sinks, NPs can flow bidirectionally and accu￾mulate to variable degrees in roots, stems, fruits, grains, and young leaves as a result of vascular 
transport by phloem (Ruttkay-Nedecky et al., 2017; Tripathi, Singh, et al., 2017). One term for the 
non-selective direction of least resistance is apoplastic transit. It is commonly acknowledged that a 
large number of water nutrients and unnecessary metal complexes prefer the apoplastic transloca￾tion pathway. The primary variables that affect the efficient adsorption of nanoparticles following 
foliar application are size, concentration, application technique, and climate. The presence of tri￾chrome, leaf exudates, and leaf waxes, as well as leaf morphology and chemical composition, are all 
critical elements that influence the capture of nanoparticles on the leaf surface (Larue et al., 2014). 
High-quality and stable nanoparticles must be added to the physiological milieu. The characteristics 
of NPs and the surrounding environment may affect how quickly NPs accumulate at the roots of 
plants. According to earlier research, the content of silver nitrate (AgNPs) in Lactuca sativa roots 
and shoots was greatly increased when potassium chloride and ammonium thiosulfate were added 
(Doolette et al., 2015). Soil organic matter has been shown to reduce cerium dioxide (CeO2
) NPs 
that can then be taken up by Zea mays roots (Figure 8.1) (Zhao, et al., 2012).128 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
FIGURE 8.1 The absorption and translocation of nanoparticles in plants.Mobility of Nanoparticles in Plants 129
8.5 MECHANISMS OF NANOPARTICLE TRANSLOCATION IN PLANTS
Research has aimed to determine the mechanisms underlying the absorption, transport, and accumu￾lation of different NPs in plant structures and cell organelles (Kaphle et al., 2017). The physiology 
and structure of plant cells, the interactions between nanomaterials and the soil, and the type and sta￾bility of the NPs all influence the translocation and accumulation of NPs in plants (Janmohammadi 
et al., 2016). Plant cell walls act as a unique barrier that controls how NPs enter the cell, as well 
as determining whether or not they are soluble and allowed to pass through the cell (Naruka et al., 
2000). According to most research, the primary barrier preventing NPs from entering plant cells 
is the size of the pores in the cell wall. NPs must be 40–50 nm in size to enter cells via the plant’s 
surface. A second feature that restricts NPs’ ability to pass through the cell wall and membrane or 
connect to the radical surface or exudates is their nature (Ling & Silberbush, 2002). The ability 
of NPs to adhere to the cell wall may be enhanced by positive charge. Moreover, NP coating and 
morphology can have a big impact on how they behave in the rhizosphere and how they affect 
plants. The nanoparticles that accumulate in plant roots move to various tissues in the aerial portions 
of the plant, including developing seeds (Tripathi, Singh, et al., 2017). NP translocation is largely 
dependent on both NP and plant features.
8.6 TRANSPORT OF NANOPARTICLES IN PLANTS
The movement of nanoparticles inside plants depends on several factors, including the properties of 
the nanoparticle itself, like size, charge, and chemical makeup, as well as plant characteristics, like 
species and stomata activity. Smaller, positively charged, and water-soluble nanoparticles are gen￾erally taken up by plants more easily. Plant species with larger or more numerous stomata and those 
exposed to higher nanoparticle concentrations for longer durations are also more likely to experience 
increased uptake. By understanding these factors, scientists can develop strategies to control the 
uptake and transport of nanoparticles in plants. This knowledge is important for developing safe and 
effective nanotechnology applications in agriculture and environmental remediation (Wang et al., 
2023). Table 8.1 presents factors influencing the mobility and transport of nanoparticles in plants, 
including particle size, surface charge, chemical composition, plant species, stomatal apertures, con￾centration, and exposure time.
8.7 MOBILIZATION OF NANOPARTICLES IN PLANTS
Plants have two pathways for NP mobilization: the apoplastic and symplastic pathways. The sym￾plastic pathway entails the transfer of water and solutes between the cytoplasm of adjacent cells that 
are connected by plasmodesmata and sieve plate pores, whereas the apoplastic pathway involves 
transport beyond the plasma membrane through the cell wall and extracellular spaces. It has been 
shown that apoplastic transport facilitates NPs’ radial travel, carrying NPs to vascular tissues and the 
root’s core cylinder, as well as upward movement toward aerial plant portions (González-Melendi 
et al., 2008; Larue et al., 2014). This method of NP translocation is essential for applications that 
need to distribute NP systemically. The Casparian strip, a layer of lignin-like structures oriented lon￾gitudinally, blocks the root endodermis’s ability to fully migrate radially (Lv et al., 2015). Water, as 
well as other solutes, transition from apoplastic to symplastic channels in order to pass this natural 
barrier. Comparable capacities to get around the block at the Casparian strip have been recorded 
for various types of NPs (Schwab et al., 2016). This may occur particularly in anatomical locations 
like root tips and root lateral connections, where the Casparian strip has not yet fully developed 
(Lv et al., 2019). NPs must eventually enter cells for symplastic transport to occur. In comparison 
to animal cells, plants find it significantly more difficult to deliver NPs intracellularly due to their 
hard cell walls, which act as a physical barrier to cell entry. The cell wall is essentially a multilayered 
structure made mostly of scaffold proteins and cellulose/hemicellulose microfibrils. This 130 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
creates a porous environment that functions as a narrow, selective filter, with a mean diameter of 
less than 10 nm (occasionally reaching 20 nm) (Carpita et al., 1979). As it happens, this is a crucial 
aspect that now stands in the way of designing and applying bioengineering techniques for plants 
(Cunningham et al., 2018). Nonetheless, it has been shown that carbon nanotubes and various forms 
of nanoparticles with mean diameters ranging from 3 to 50 nm can readily pass through the cell 
wall in a wide variety of plant species (Chang et al., 2013; Liu et al., 2009). Endocytosis may be the 
preferred method of subsequent cell internalization, but more research is needed to fully understand 
alternate cell entrance mechanisms in plants (Palocci et al., 2017), such as those based on hole cre￾ation, membrane translocation, or carrier proteins (Lin et al., 2010) that have already been reported 
in invertebrate models (Marchesano et al., 2013).
8.7.1  Absorption and Transport of Nanoparticles in Plant Roots
Adsorption on the root surface is how nanoparticles and plant roots first come into contact. 
Positively charged nanoparticles are more likely to concentrate in roots and be readily absorbed on 
the root surface because root hairs have the ability to discharge chemicals like mucus and organic 
acids, which results in the root surface having negative charge (Lv et al., 2019; Zhao, Peralta￾Videa, Ren, et al., 2012). It is possible for nanoparticles to infiltrate the root column through 
the creation of new adsorption interfaces via lateral root development (Peng et al., 2015). The 
composition and function of leaf surfaces and the root epidermis are comparable. On the surface 
of plant root tips and the root hairs of primary and secondary roots, however, the epidermis is 
not fully developed. The root epidermis is immediately crossed by nanoparticles when they are 
exposed to this region (Rajput et al., 2020). Root epidermal cell walls are semi-permeable. Small 
TABLE 8.1
Factors influencing the movement of nanoparticles in plants
Factor Description Influence of Transport and Mobility
Particle Size Size of the nanoparticles Smaller nanoparticles are more likely to be transported 
through the stomata and cuticle.
Surface Charge Electrical charge on the surface 
of the nanoparticles
Surface charge can influence the interactions between 
nanoparticles and plant cell walls.
Chemical Composition Chemical makeup of the 
nanoparticles
Chemical composition can influence how nanoparticles 
dissolve in water and interact with plant tissues.
Plant Species Type of plant Different plant species have stomata of varying sizes and 
densities, affecting nanoparticle uptake.
Stomatal Apertures Stomata regulate gas exchange and can influence 
nanoparticle uptake.
Concentration Number of nanoparticles applied Higher concentrations of nanoparticles may lead to 
increased uptake.
Exposure Time Length of time that nanoparticles 
are exposed to plants
Longer exposure times may lead to increased uptake.
Factor Value Format
Particle Size Likely a numerical value with units (e.g., nanometers).
Surface Charge A numerical value or qualitative description (e.g., positive, negative, etc.).
Chemical Composition A list of chemical components or a general description (e.g., metallic, organic, etc.).
Plant Species A list of plant species or a general category (e.g., monocots, dicots, etc.).
Stomatal Apertures A qualitative description (e.g., open, closed, partially open, etc.).
Concentration A numerical value with units (e.g., particles/mL)
Exposure Time A numerical value with units (e.g., hours, days, etc.).Mobility of Nanoparticles in Plants 131
pores in the root cell wall have the ability to block the passage of big particles (Pérez-de-Luque, 
2017). Nanoparticles can penetrate the xylem or central root column when roots lack exodermis. 
According to other research, certain nanoparticles have the ability to break down the plasma mem￾brane and cause the epidermal cell wall to develop new pores, which opens up a pathway for large￾diameter nanoparticles to enter (Ali et al., 2021). Plant cells can absorb nanoparticles via a variety 
of mechanisms, including the ion route, endocytosis, interactions with cell membrane proteins, and 
physical damage (Lv et al., 2019). According to certain research, plant roots absorb nanoparticles 
and use the hydrophilic channel as their primary means of cell penetration. Tiny pore sizes, how￾ever, severely restrict the number of nanoparticles that can enter cells via this route (Li et al., 2020). 
Endocytosis is a crucial method for NP uptake in plant cells. NPs enter cells through the plasma 
membrane. Research has demonstrated that endocytosis can internalize particles smaller than 1 μm 
in plant protoplasts; hence, endocytosed nanoparticles lack particle size selectivity (Ma and Yan, 
2018). According to Liu et al., endocytosis is the mechanism by which carbon-based nanoparticles 
and carbon nanotubes are taken up by the root cells of Catharanthus roseus (Liu et al., 2009). 
Furthermore, nanoparticles can be absorbed by plants via their combination with transport proteins 
on the outer epidermis (Grillo et al., 2021).
Studies on the impact of nanoparticles on plant roots are more numerous than those on the appli￾cation of various nanoparticles to plant leaves. Plant root hair cells absorb nanoparticles when they 
interact with the roots of plants. NPs then travel to the aboveground portions of plants via the xylem, 
after selectively passing through the cell wall and entering the endothelium layer from the epi￾dermis via the symplast or exoplast pathways (Tripathi, Shweta, et al., 2017). Plant roots are made 
up of a pericycle, vascular column, cortex, and epidermis (in that order, from the inside out). The 
pericycle and vascular tissues are parts of the vascular column, which is found in the middle of the 
plant root (Su et al., 2019). The endothelium and the exodermis, which attaches the endothelium 
to the pericycle, make up the cortex. The exoplast and eutectic pathways are the two pathways via 
which nanoparticles are transported within roots. The Casparian strip blocks the exoplast pathway 
once nanoparticles have passed through the epidermis and have reached the endothelium. Some 
nanoparticles will travel radially along the Casparian strip and deposit in the endothelium, whereas 
others will not cross the strip. Nevertheless, the Casparian strip is not completely formed at lateral 
root junctions, so nanoparticles have the ability to enter the circulatory system and move through it 
(Schwab et al., 2016). NPs travel across cells through plasmodesmata after entering the cytoplasm 
through the plasma membrane via the symplast route.
8.7.2 NP Entry Mechanisms into Plants
Plant cells feature a structure known as the cell wall, in contrast to animal cells. This is the first obs￾tacle that NPs have to pass in order to enter a plant cell. The porosity of plant cell walls is estimated 
to be around 13 nm (Albersheim et al., 2010); however, this can vary between various plant species 
and cell types (Chesson et al., 1997; Fujino & Itoh, 1998). For instance, the majority of holes 
in wheat cell walls have diameters between 1.5 and 3 nm (Chesson et al., 1997). In pea (Pisum 
sativum) epidermal cells, the average pore size in elongating cell walls is 5.5 ± 1.4 nm, while that 
of non-elongating cell walls is 13.4 ± 4.3 nm (Fujino & Itoh, 1998). Cell walls are thought to have 
a size exclusion limit of between 5 and 20 nm (Schwab et al., 2016). When Zr/CeOxNPs are larger 
than 23 nm, there is no evidence of cerium transfer from roots to shoots (Schwabe et al., 2015). In a 
similar vein, 18-nm γ-Fe2
O3
NPs are unable to move from roots to shoots (Li et al., 2016). Positively 
and negatively charged foliar-sprayed nanoparticles larger than 11 nm have been found to still be 
present on the surface of maize leaves (Hu et al., 2020). The cell walls of rapeseed (B. napus) root 
cells treated with ZnONPs (45 nm) become more electron dense than those of controls, according 
to transmission electron microscopy images, which may indicate that ZnONPs bind to the cell wall. 
Brassica juncea does not exhibit this, supporting the idea that the cell wall plays a part in the 132 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
effectiveness of NP delivery (Molnár et al., 2020). Other research has demonstrated that NPs as 
large as 50 nm can enter the cell (Judy et al., 2012), indicating that the effectiveness with which 
nanoparticles pass through the cell wall may depend on factors other than the size of the pores in 
the cell wall. The relationship between NPs and the cell wall may be more intricate than previously 
believed. For instance, because the plant cell wall is a dynamic structure that may easily undergo 
rapid remodeling in response to changes in the surrounding environment, certain nanomaterials 
may potentially promote pore expansion. According to one study, AgNPs that interact with reactive 
oxygen species (ROS) can shift from Ag0 to Ag+. The released Ag+ can then bind to hydroxyls 
in the cellulose structure, breaking down hydrogen bonds to help to modify the cell wall structure 
and allow AgNPs to pass through. Differently charged NPs may be favored by the electrochemical 
gradient present in the cell wall. The electrical charges in cell walls typically range from -50 to -
110 mV, which is significant enough to act as a driving force for either facilitating or limiting NP 
uptake in plants. Positively charged NPs, for instance, may be retained by negatively charged cell 
walls. Positively charged AuNPs (10 mg/l, +46 mV) have not been found inside Arabidopsis roots, 
but negatively charged AuNPs (10 mg/l, −32 mV) have been found virtually entirely distributed 
inside the roots (Avellan et al., 2017). This suggests that positively charged NPs may be retained in 
roots by negatively charged cell walls. An investigation into the impact of NP surface zeta potential 
on the interactions between NPs and the xylem/phloem revealed a similar outcome. The findings 
suggested that positively charged NPs were more likely to be deposited on cell walls since posi￾tively charged NPs were drawn to xylem/phloem interfaces (Su et al., 2019). Other research, how￾ever, has demonstrated that positively charged NPs are more effectively absorbed by plants versus 
negatively charged NPs (Cunningham et al., 2018b), in opposition to the previously cited studies. 
There is a lack of knowledge regarding the functions of cell wall electrical potential in plant NP 
uptake. To address these disparate outcomes, more work is required. A few examples of potential 
research directions include the method of application, the organs that come into contact with NPs, 
NP characteristics, NP dosages, plant species, and plant growth stages.
Pectin and proteins are among the crosslinked elements that make up the plant cell wall (Shomer 
et al., 2003). The main components of the cell wall are lignin, hemicellulose, and cellulose. It is 
known that NPs alter plant cell wall constituents, thereby reshaping the cell wall. When tobacco 
suspension-cultured cells are exposed to nY2
O3
NPs, their cell walls thicken to 7–13 times more than 
when the cells are not exposed. Additionally, there is a two-fold decrease in hemicellulose and an 
increase in pectin of up to 5%. Since the cell wall inhibits NP uptake, NP-induced modifications to 
the cell wall and its constituents may have an impact on the effectiveness of NP delivery into plants. 
When ZnONPs are administered at 100 mg/l, they generate a buildup of the cell wall component 
callose, but this does not occur at 25 mg/l (Molnár et al., 2020), indicating that dose may have an 
impact on how NPs interact with cell wall components. It is recognized that cellulose affects how 
plants react to harm or stress. Further research is required to examine potential interactions between 
nanoparticles and the cell wall, as well as their potential impact on the effectiveness of NPs crossing 
the cell wall. It is still mainly unknown as to whether distinct cell types are involved in interactions 
between NPs and the plant cell wall. To gain a deeper understanding of the variables influencing the 
effectiveness of NP transport across the cell wall, these significant concerns deserve additional inves￾tigation. Researchers have discovered that NPs can alter the composition of the cell wall of barley 
roots, in addition to altering cell wall thickness, cell wall components, and the usage of monoclonal 
antibodies against pectic and arabinogalactan protein epitopes. Methylesterified homogalacturonan, 
a significant pectin found in the primary cell wall, has been found in the differentiation zone’s 
rhizodermal walls of barley roots treated with AuNPs, but not in control roots (Milewska-Hendel 
et al., 2021). This implies that NPs have the ability to alter cell wall components, which may have 
an impact on how well they penetrate the cell wall. Aggregating/blocking NPs or increasing the size 
of cell wall pores can either improve or hinder the transport of NPs across the cell wall, but we don’t 
know enough about this possibility.Mobility of Nanoparticles in Plants 133
It is also entirely unknown whether the components of the cell wall have an impact on the 
characteristics of NPs. The accumulation of NPs may be brought on by polysaccharides in the cell 
wall. Hemicellulose, for instance, is known to cause AgNPs to aggregate (Fu et al., 2018). It’s also 
unclear whether NPs have an impact on the gene expression that’s involved in making cell wall 
components. The effectiveness of NP delivery across the cell wall may be limited by variables other 
than NP size and cell wall porosity, including the electrical gradient that runs across the cell wall, 
NP dosage, and NP interactions with the components of the cell wall.
8.7.3  Transport of Nanoparticles Across Organelle and Plasma Membranes
The plasma membrane is the subsequent barrier that nanomaterials must pass through to enter 
a cell, following the cell wall. How nanoparticles interact with the plasma membrane of plants 
remains unknown. A lipid bilayer that contains proteins makes up the single-layered plasma mem￾brane. Animal cells do not have a cell wall; hence, a popular method for internalizing nanoparticles 
is endocytosis (Manzanares & Ceña, 2020). Nanomaterials usually have to first get past the cell 
wall barrier in plant cells, which has pores that are about 13 nm in size (Albersheim et al., 2010). 
This indicates that the likelihood of nanoparticles interacting with the plasma membrane is higher 
if at least one of their dimensions is close to 13 nm. Consequently, endocytosis may not be the most 
frequent route for plant nanomaterial uptake. Researchers have discovered that while endocytosis 
is a recognized process for plants to internalize nanomaterials (Lv et al., 2021; Schwab et al., 
2016), it is not necessary for Arabidopsis to absorb cerium oxide nanoparticles injected into the 
leaves (Wu et al., 2017). Additionally, researchers have discovered that spherical small interfering 
RNA (siRNA)-functionalized AuNPs (10 nm) without cellular internalization demonstrate more 
effective siRNA transport compared to rod-shaped AuNPs with cellular internalization, thereby 
inducing gene silencing in tobacco leaves. Smaller nanomaterials, less than about 3 nm, may 
enter cells through channels or transporters on the membrane. For instance, the mechanosensitive 
channel, which has channel pores of about 3 nm, can be activated by silver nanoparticles. Lipid 
exchange envelope penetration is another method of nanomaterial delivery into cells; although 
this process is more prevalent for high-aspect ratio nanomaterials. Studies have demonstrated 
the ability of quantum dots to create nanopores in suspended lipid bilayers. Generally measuring 
between 20 and 1000 nm, membrane proteins are confined within nanodomains as opposed to 
merely diffusing freely across the plasma membrane. Plant cell walls also control the size and 
dynamics of nanodomains, suggesting that they may be involved in the transport of NPs across the 
plasma membrane.
The electrochemical gradient across the membrane, often known as the membrane potential, 
is another component that merits more study. The translocation of charged nanoparticles may be 
favored and driven by this electrochemical gradient. Plant cells have a membrane potential across 
the plasma membrane of about −120 mV (Wu et al., 2013), which is sufficiently high to allow for 
the movement of NPs. Seldom discussed are the contributions of differentially charged NPs to mem￾brane potential development in plants and the significance of membrane potential in NP delivery 
efficiency. Previous research has demonstrated that whereas tiny nanoparticles (<10 nm) with a 
high absolute zeta potential (>40 mV) can be effectively carried into the cytosol and chloroplasts of 
plant protoplasts, neutral NPs are not transported into protoplasts (Lew et al., 2018). Animal cells’ 
plasma membranes become significantly depolarized when exposed to amine-modified polystyrene 
NPs, but not when exposed to carboxylate-modified polystyrene NPs. This implies that membrane 
depolarization results from the more effective entry of positively charged polystyrene NPs into the 
cytoplasm of animal cells. In plant cells, this is not the case. Previous research has shown that nega￾tively charged nanoceria (−18 mV; 10 nm) do not cause membrane depolarization in Arabidopsis
leaf mesophyll cells and have a considerably higher distribution efficiency in plant cells than posi￾tively charged nanoceria (Wu et al., 2017, 2018). Compared to that in animal cells, the process in 134 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
plant cells is more complex as there are a lot of variables at play. For instance, because the cell wall 
is negatively charged, some positively charged NPs may be retained in it (Avellan et al., 2019; Su 
et al., 2019b). Bacteria likewise have this trait. Bacteria with negatively charged cell walls are effect￾ively captured by positively charged Fe3
O4
NPs via electrostatic attraction. Escherichia coli does not 
exhibit any affinities for negatively charged NPs (Li et al., 2019).
Prior research has demonstrated that nanomaterials are not only confined to the cytoplasm but 
can also enter organelles, such as mitochondria, chloroplasts, and even vacuoles (Milewska-Hendel 
et al., 2019). It has also been documented that cerium oxide nanoparticles can be carried into the 
chloroplasts of Arabidopsis, cotton, rice, and rapeseed (Liu et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2017), while 
tobacco suspension cell vacuoles are capable of receiving nY2
O3
NPs (Liu et al., 2021). Another obs￾tacle to the movement of NPs at the organelle level is the membranes that surround the organelles. 
Nuclei, chloroplasts/plastid, mitochondria, Golgi apparatus, endoplasmic reticula, vacuoles, and 
peroxisomes are the principal organelles found in plant cells. Single-layered membranes envelop 
vacuoles and peroxisomes, while double-layered membranes encircle nuclei, chloroplasts, mitochon￾dria, Golgi apparatus, and endoplasmic reticula. The mechanisms via which NPs enter organelles 
across membranes have not been extensively examined and may differ depending on the type of 
organelle. Similar to the plasma membrane, organelle membranes have an electrochemical gradient 
that may act as a catalyst to promote NP trafficking into organelles. The trans-envelope voltage dif￾ferential for chloroplasts in the light is around 110 mV at 5 mM KCl and is negative on the stromal 
side, indicating an electrochemical gradient of −110 mV (Pottosin & Dobrovinskaya, 2015). In 
mitochondria, the electrochemical gradient is −30 mV, with intermembrane spaces being approxi￾mately 30 mV more negative than the cytoplasm. While it has been contended that in numerous 
plant species (Pottosin et al., 1999; Pottosin & Shabala, 2016), the electrochemical gradient across 
the tonoplast membrane is almost zero, in actuality, the gradient can range from -31 mV to 50 mV 
(Wu & Li, 2019). The functions of the electrochemical gradient through organelle membranes in NP 
transport within organelles, however, has not received much attention in research. Little is known 
about how NPs may affect organelles. Barley plants treated with ZnONPs (hydrodynamic diameter 
of 360 nm; −21 mV; 300 mg/l) show smaller and fewer chloroplasts per cell than controls, in add￾ition to damage to the structural organization of the photosynthetic apparatus (Rajput et al., 2021). 
In a different investigation, ZnONPs (46 nm; 400 mg/l) caused tobacco BY2 cells to undergo pro￾grammed cell death by inducing oxidative stress and malfunctions in the endoplasmic reticulum and 
mitochondria (Balážová et al., 2020). Future research should focus on understanding how NPs enter 
organelles and how they affect them. Further work is also required to gain an understanding of how 
nanomaterials and plant cell organelles interact with each other (Figure 8.2).
8.8 TOXICITY OF NANOPARTICLES IN PLANTS
Although knowledge of NP toxicity in agricultural plants is still developing, it is essential for the 
application of cutting-edge agronanotechological instruments and products. The results of current 
NP studies in plants, which frequently use model media and plant species and explore implausible 
scenarios, such short-term and high-dose exposure, are inconsistent. Essentially, the majority of 
research has shown that excessive quantities of metal-based nanoparticles cause oxidative bursts 
in cultivated species (like tomato, wheat, onion, and zucchini) by disrupting the electron transport 
chain and compromising the detoxifying machinery that deals with reactive oxygen species 
(ROS), which can have genotoxic effects (Dimkpa et al., 2013). Plant secondary metabolism, hor￾mone balance, and development are hence frequently adversely affected. Remarkably, recent tran￾scriptome analyses have shown that exposure to various NPs (such as zinc oxide, fullerene soot, 
or titanium dioxide) represses a significant number of the genes involved in pathogen and stress 
responses, phosphate-starvation, and plant root development. This may have detrimental effects 
on defense mechanisms and plant root development in A. thaliana. According to a recent systems Mobility of Nanoparticles in Plants 135
biology approach that includes omics data from rice, kidney beans, wheat, rice salad, tobacco, and 
rice, metal NPs cause a broad stress response that is mostly characterized by oxidative stress. Even in 
the absence of overt toxicity at the phenotypic level, the data imply that additional research focused 
on high-throughput investigations of genetic and metabolic responses prompted by NP exposure are 
required to shed light on the many aspects of NP phytotoxicity in crops. Given the available data, 
it seems reasonable to expect to use engineered nanoparticles for plant applications in the future 
that have proven safety profiles in animal systems. For example, soft polymeric NPs and AuNPs 
have been used to diagnose the phytoplasma linked to grapevine flavescence dorée disease (Firrao 
et al., 2005). Lastly, mycotoxin can be detected using smart nanosensors. One such example is the 
4mycosensor, which is a competitive antibody-based assay that has been successfully introduced to 
the market to detect the presence of mycotoxin residues of ZEA, T-2/HT-2, DON, and FB1/FB2 in 
corn, wheat, oat, and barley (Lattanzio and Nivarlet, 2017).
8.9 FUTURE PERSPECTIVES
NPs are frequently utilized in many different industries because of their distinctive physical and 
chemical features. Prior research has mostly concentrated on how NPs affect marine life. The tox￾icity of NPs in terrestrial plants has received increased attention in recent years. Depending on their 
composition, concentration, size, and physical and chemical characteristics, as well as the kind of 
plant, NPs can influence seed germination and root extension after being absorbed and internalized 
(Kornarzyński et al., 2020). This chapter has reviewed the impacts of NPs, as well as their absorp￾tion, storage, and transit in terrestrial plants. NPs can be absorbed by plants in a variety of ways 
due to their varied sizes and characteristics. As a result, they can aggregate and move, which can 
have an impact on seed germination and plant growth by stimulating photosynthesis and enlarging 
FIGURE 8.2 Nanoparticle mobility in plants.136 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
the xylem and phloem. However, NPs have the ability to stop plants from growing and harm their 
cellular structures, including damaging cell walls, rupturing cell membranes, and contracting the 
cytoplasm (Ghosh et al., 2015), mostly depending on the concentrations of NPs used. While many 
NP types have been shown to stimulate plant growth at lower concentrations, higher quantities of 
NPs are likely to harm plants. Furthermore, the adverse effects on plant growth may also be caused 
by the toxic effects of heavy metals and the absorption of contaminants by carbon NPs and plastic 
NPs (Fu et al., 2021). When NPs are exposed to plants, they can cause cytotoxicity, raise ROS levels, 
and induce oxidative stress, which raises antioxidant enzyme activity and antioxidant contents. 
Subsequently, ROS goes on to damage mitochondria and cell membranes (Tripathi, Tripathi, et al., 
2017). Through processes like chromosome aberration and micronucleus production, which alter 
gene expression and the concentrations of biological components in plants, oxidative stress may 
also indirectly result in genotoxicity. Furthermore, NPs contribute to the phytotoxicity of exposed 
media by releasing harmful chemicals, like metal ions, into plants (Du et al., 2019). Attention being 
paid to the effects of NPs on terrestrial plants has been growing, although little is still known about 
the mechanisms underlying the phytotoxicity caused by NPs. Instead of studying plants over their 
entire life cycles, the majority of existing studies have focused on their early stages of development. 
Thus, it is crucial to carry out long-term NP exposure studies, thoroughly examine phytotoxicity 
mechanisms, and look into the long-term effects of NPs on the environment and public health.
REFERENCES
Abedini, P., et al. (2013). A review on radiation-induced nucleation and growth of colloidal metallic 
nanoparticles. Nanoscale Research Letters, 8(1), 474.
Ahmadov, I. S., et al. (2020). The migration study of nanoparticles from soil to the leaves of plants. Biointerface 
Research in Applied Chemistry, 10(5), 6101–6111.
Albersheim, P., et al. (2010). Plant Cell Walls. Garland Science.
Ali, S., et al. (2021). Uptake, translocation, and consequences of nanomaterials on plant growth and stress 
adaptation. Journal of Nanomaterials, 2021, 1–17.
Avellan, A., et al. (2017). Nanoparticle uptake in plants: Gold nanomaterial localized in roots of Arabidopsis 
thaliana by X-ray computed nanotomography and hyperspectral imaging. Environmental Science & 
Technology, 51(15), 8682–8691.
Avellan, A., et al. (2019). Nanoparticle size and coating chemistry control foliar uptake pathways, transloca￾tion, and leaf-to-rhizosphere transport in wheat. ACS Nano, 13(5), 5291–5305.
Balážová, ., et al. (2020). Zinc oxide nanoparticles damage tobacco BY-2 cells by oxidative stress followed by 
processes of autophagy and programmed cell death. Nanomaterials, 10(6), 1066.
Baskar, V., et al. (2018). Historic review on modern herbal nanogel formulation and delivery methods. 
International Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, 10(10), 1.
Carpita, N., et al. (1979). Determination of the pore size of cell walls of living plant cells. Science, 205(4411), 
1144–1147.
Chang, F.-P., et al. (2013). A simple plant gene delivery system using mesoporous silica nanoparticles as 
carriers. Journal of Materials Chemistry B, 1(39), 5279.
Chesson, A., et al. (1997). Cell wall porosity and available surface area of wheat straw and wheat grain fractions. 
Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture, 75(3), 289–295.
Cunningham, F. J., et al. (2018). Nanoparticle-mediated delivery towards advancing plant genetic engineering. 
Trends in Biotechnology, 36(9), 882–897.
Dimkpa, C. O., et al. (2013). Silver nanoparticles disrupt wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) growth in a sand matrix. 
Environmental Science & Technology, 47(2), 1082–1090.
Doolette, C. L., et al. (2015). Bioavailability of silver and silver sulfide nanoparticles to lettuce (Lactuca 
sativa): Effect of agricultural amendments on plant uptake. Journal of Hazardous Materials, 300, 
788–795.
Du, W., et al. (2011). TiO2 and ZnO nanoparticles negatively affect wheat growth and soil enzyme activities in 
agricultural soil. Journal of Environmental Monitoring, 13(4), 822.Mobility of Nanoparticles in Plants 137
Du, W., et al. (2019). Comparison study of zinc nanoparticles and zinc sulphate on wheat growth: From toxicity 
and zinc biofortification. Chemosphere, 227, 109–116.
Firrao G., et al. (2005). Nanobiotransducer for detecting flavescence Doree phytoplasma. Journal of Plant 
Pathology, 87, 101–107.
Fu, L.-H., et al. (2018). Microwave-hydrothermal rapid synthesis of cellulose/Ag nanocomposites and their 
antibacterial activity. Nanomaterials, 8(12), 978.
Fu, L., et al. (2021). Adsorption behavior of organic pollutants on microplastics. Ecotoxicology and 
Environmental Safety, 217, 112207.
Fujino, T., & Itoh, T. (1998). Changes in Pectin structure during epidermal cell elongation in pea 
(Pisum sativum) and its implications for cell wall architecture. Plant and Cell Physiology, 39(12), 
1315–1323.
Gao, M., et al. (2023). Advances in transport and toxicity of nanoparticles in plants. Journal of Nanobiotechnology, 
21(1), 75.
Ghosh, M., et al. (2015). MWCNT uptake in Allium cepa root cells induces cytotoxic and genotoxic responses 
and results in DNA hyper-methylation. Mutation Research/Fundamental and Molecular Mechanisms of 
Mutagenesis, 774, 49–58.
González-Melendi, P., et al. (2008). Nanoparticles as smart treatment-delivery systems in plants: Assessment 
of different techniques of microscopy for their visualization in plant tissues. Annals of Botany, 101(1), 
187–195.
Grillo, R., et al. (2021). Foliage adhesion and interactions with particulate delivery systems for plant nanobionics 
and intelligent agriculture. Nano Today, 37, 101078.
Hu, P., et al. (2020). Nanoparticle charge and size control foliar delivery efficiency to plant cells and organelles. 
ACS Nano, 14(7), 7970–7986.
Janmohammadi, M., et al. (2016). Effect of nano-silicon foliar application on safflower growth under organic 
and inorganic fertilizer regimes. Botanica Lithuanica, 22(1), 53–64.
Judy, J. D., et al. (2012). Bioavailability of gold nanomaterials to plants: Importance of particle size and surface 
coating. Environmental Science & Technology, 46(15), 8467–8474.
Kaphle, A., et al. (2017). Nanomaterial Impact, Toxicity and Regulation in Agriculture, Food and Environment
(pp. 205–242). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-58496-6_8
Kornarzyński, K., et al. (2020). Effect of Fe3O4 nanoparticles on germination of seeds and concentration of 
elements in Helianthus annuus L. under constant magnetic field. Scientific Reports, 10(1), 8068.
Larue, C., et al. (2014). Foliar exposure of the crop Lactuca sativa to silver nanoparticles: Evidence for intern￾alization and changes in Ag speciation. Journal of Hazardous Materials, 264, 98–106.
Lattanzio, V. M., & Nivarlet, N. (2017). Multiplex Dipstick Immunoassay for Semiquantitative Determination 
of Fusarium Mycotoxins in Oat (pp. 137–142). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4939-6682-0_10
Lew, T. T. S., et al. (2018). Rational design principles for the transport and subcellular distribution of 
nanomaterials into plant protoplasts. Small, 14(44). https://doi.org/10.1002/smll.201802086
Li, J., et al. (2016). Uptake, translocation and physiological effects of magnetic iron oxide (γ-Fe2O3) 
nanoparticles in corn (Zea mays L.). Chemosphere, 159, 326–334.
Li, Z., et al. (2019). Using positively charged magnetic nanoparticles to capture bacteria at ultralow concentra￾tion. Nanoscale Research Letters, 14(1), 195.
Li, L., et al. (2020). Effective uptake of submicrometre plastics by crop plants via a crack-entry mode. Nature 
Sustainability, 3(11), 929–937.
Lin, D., & Xing, B. (2008). Root uptake and phytotoxicity of ZnO nanoparticles. Environmental Science & 
Technology, 42(15), 5580–5585.
Lin, J., et al. (2010). Penetration of lipid membranes by gold nanoparticles: Insights into cellular uptake, cyto￾toxicity, and their relationship. ACS Nano, 4(9), 5421–5429.
Ling, F., & Silberbush, M. (2002). Response of maize to foliar vs. soil application of nitrogen–phosphorus–
potassium fertilizers. Journal of Plant Nutrition, 25(11), 2333–2342.
Liu, Q., et al. (2009). Carbon nanotubes as molecular transporters for walled plant cells. Nano Letters, 9(3), 
1007–1010.
Liu, J., et al. (2021). Cerium oxide nanoparticles improve cotton salt tolerance by enabling better ability to 
maintain cytosolic K+/Na+ ratio. Journal of Nanobiotechnology, 19(1), 153.
Lv, J., et al. (2015). Accumulation, speciation and uptake pathway of ZnO nanoparticles in maize. Environmental 
Science: Nano, 2(1), 68–77.138 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
Lv, J. (2019). Uptake, translocation, and transformation of metal-based nanoparticles in plants: Recent advances 
and methodological challenges. Environmental Science: Nano, 6(1), 41–59.
Lv, Z., et al. (2021). Interaction of different-sized ZnO nanoparticles with maize (Zea mays): Accumulation, 
biotransformation and phytotoxicity. Science of The Total Environment, 796, 148927.
Ma, X., & Yan, J. (2018). Plant uptake and accumulation of engineered metallic nanoparticles from lab to field 
conditions. Current Opinion in Environmental Science & Health, 6, 16–20.
Manzanares, D., & Ceña, V. (2020). Endocytosis: The nanoparticle and submicron nanocompounds gateway 
into the cell. Pharmaceutics, 12(4), 371.
Marchesano, V., et al. (2013). Imaging inward and outward trafficking of gold nanoparticles in whole animals. 
ACS Nano, 7(3), 2431–2442.
Milewska-Hendel, A., et al. (2021). Gold nanoparticles-induced modifications in cell wall composition in 
Barley roots. Cells, 10(8), 1965.
Milewska-Hendel, A., et al. (2019). Effect of nanoparticles surface charge on the Arabidopsis thaliana (L.) roots 
development and their movement into the root cells and protoplasts. International Journal of Molecular 
Sciences, 20(7), 1650.
Molina, M., et al. (2015). Stimuli-responsive nanogel composites and their application in nanomedicine. 
Chemical Society Reviews, 44(17), 6161–6186.
Molnár, Á., et al. (2020). ZnO nanoparticles induce cell wall remodeling and modify ROS/ RNS signalling in 
roots of Brassica seedlings. Ecotoxicology and Environmental Safety, 206, 111158.
Naruka, I. S., et al. (2000). Effect of foliar application of zinc and molybdenum on growth and yield of okra 
(Abelmoschus esculentus L. Moench) cv. Pusa Sawani. Haryana Journal of Horticultural Sciences, 
29(3/4), 266–267.
Palocci, C. A., et al. (2017). Endocytic pathways involved in PLGA nanoparticle uptake by grapevine cells and 
role of cell wall and membrane in size selection. Plant Cell Reports, 36(12), 1917–1928.
Peng, C., et al. (2015). Translocation and biotransformation of CuO nanoparticles in rice (Oryza sativa L.) 
plants. Environmental Pollution, 197, 99–107.
Pérez-de-Luque, A. (2017). Interaction of nanomaterials with plants: What do we need for real applications in 
agriculture? Frontiers in Environmental Science, 5, 12. doi: 10.3389/fenvs.2017.00012.
Pottosin, I., & Dobrovinskaya, O. (2015). Ion channels in native chloroplast membranes: Challenges 
and potential for direct patch-clamp studies. Frontiers in Physiology, 6, 396. doi: 10.3389/
fphys.2015.00396.
Pottosin, I., & Shabala, S. (2016). Transport across chloroplast membranes: Optimizing photosynthesis for 
adverse environmental conditions. Molecular Plant, 9(3), 356–370.
Pottosin, I. I., et al. (1999). Cooperative block of the plant endomembrane ion channel by Ruthenium red. 
Biophysical Journal, 77(4), 1973–1979.
Rajput, V., et al. (2020). Accumulation of nanoparticles in the soil-plant systems and their effects on human 
health. Annals of Agricultural Sciences, 65(2), 137–143.
Rajput, V. D., et al. (2021). Effects of zinc oxide nanoparticles on physiological and anatomical indices in 
Spring Barley tissues. Nanomaterials, 11(7), 1722. doi: 10.3390/nano11071722.
Rastogi, A., et al. (2019). Application of silicon nanoparticles in agriculture. 3 Biotech, 9(3), 90.
Ruttkay-Nedecky, B., et al. (2017). Nanoparticles based on essential metals and their phytotoxicity. Journal of 
Nanobiotechnology, 15(1), 33.
Schwab, F., et al. (2016). Barriers, pathways and processes for uptake, translocation and accumulation of 
nanomaterials in plants – Critical review. Nanotoxicology, 10(3), 257–278.
Schwabe, F., et al. (2015). Dissolved cerium contributes to uptake of Ce in the presence of differently sized 
CeO 2
 -nanoparticles by three crop plants. Metallomics, 7(3), 466–477.
Shomer, I., et al. (2003). Electrical potentials of plant cell walls in response 2017 to the ionic environment. 
Plant Physiology, 133(1), 411–422.
Su, Y., et al. (2019). Delivery, uptake, fate, and transport of engineered nanoparticles in plants: A critical review 
and data analysis. Environmental Science: Nano, 6(8), 2311–2331.
Torney, F., et al. (2007). Mesoporous silica nanoparticles deliver DNA and chemicals into plants. Nature 
Nanotechnology, 2(5), 295–300.
Tripathi, D. K., et al. (2017). An overview on manufactured nanoparticles in plants: Uptake, translocation, 
accumulation and phytotoxicity. Plant Physiology and Biochemistry, 110, 2–12.Mobility of Nanoparticles in Plants 139
Tripathi, D. K., et al. (2017). Uptake, accumulation and toxicity of silver nanoparticle in autotrophic plants, and 
heterotrophic microbes: A concentric review. Frontiers in Microbiology, 08.
Wang, X., et al. (2023). Nanoparticles in plants: Uptake, transport and physiological activity in leaf and root. 
Materials, 16(8), 3097.
Wu, H., et al. (2017). Anionic cerium oxide nanoparticles protect plant photosynthesis from abiotic stress by 
scavenging reactive oxygen species. ACS Nano, 11(11), 11283–11297.
Wu, H., et al. (2013). Ability of leaf mesophyll to retain potassium correlates with salinity tolerance in wheat 
and barley. Physiologia Plantarum, 149(4), 515–527.
Wu, H., et al. (2018). Hydroxyl radical scavenging by cerium oxide nanoparticles improves Arabidopsis sal￾inity tolerance by enhancing leaf mesophyll potassium retention. Environmental Science: Nano, 5(7), 
1567–1583.
Wu, H., & Li, Z. (2019). The importance of Cl− Exclusion and vacuolar Cl− sequestration: Revisiting 
the role of Cl− transport in plant salt tolerance. Frontiers in Plant Science, 10, 1418. doi: 10.3389/
fpls.2019.01418.
Zhao, L., et al. (2012). Effect of surface coating and organic matter on the uptake of CeO2 NPs by corn 
plants grown in soil: Insight into the uptake mechanism. Journal of Hazardous Materials, 225–226, 
131–138.
Zhao, L., et al. (2012). Transport of Zn in a sandy loam soil treated with ZnO NPs and uptake by corn 
plants: Electron microprobe and confocal microscopy studies. Chemical Engineering Journal, 
184, 1–8.140
140 DOI: 10.1201/9781003477730-10
9 Molecular Mechanisms 
of Plant
Nanoparticle Interactions
Gabriel Gbenga Babaniyi, Babafemi Raphael Babaniyi, 
Gbolahan Isaac Olamide, and Ulelu Jessica Akor
9.1 PLANT PHYSIOLOGY: UPTAKE, INTERNALIZATION, CELLULAR 
RESPONSES, TRANSPORT, AND INTRACELLULAR TRAFFICKING
9.1.1  Uptake and Internalization
Comprehending the molecular interactions between plants and nanoparticles necessitates a compre￾hensive grasp of the nanoparticle uptake and internalization processes in plants. These phenomena 
encompass the assimilation of nanoparticles from the nearby surroundings, their mobility within 
plant tissues, and their specific positioning within the cells of plants, as shown in Figure 9.1.
Plant cells can internalize nanoparticles through a vital biological mechanism known as receptor￾mediated endocytosis, wherein specific receptors on the cell membrane recognize and bind to 
nanoparticles, initiating their uptake (Lin & Xing, 2007). This process entails the formation of 
vesicles, referred to as endosomes, which envelop attached nanoparticles, facilitating their transpor￾tation into the interior of cells (Giraldo et al., 2014). The functionalization and surface modifications 
of nanoparticles play a pivotal role in determining their interactions with plant cell membrane 
receptors, subsequently influencing the efficiency of endocytosis (Lin & Xing, 2007). Moreover, 
the size and morphology of nanoparticles can impact the recognition process in certain receptors, 
thereby influencing the effectiveness of their uptake by plant cells through receptor-mediated endo￾cytosis (Chithrani et al., 2006). Consequently, variations in receptor types and their affinities with 
different plant species contribute to species-specific differences in the efficacy of nanoparticle 
uptake (Giraldo et al., 2014; Lin & Xing, 2007). Beyond facilitating the targeted delivery of benefi -
cial compounds, the profound comprehension of the receptor-mediated endocytosis of nanoparticles 
in plants is imperative for assessing the potential toxicity and environmental implications of these 
particles. This understanding will also guide the design of nanoparticles for safer and more efficient 
applications in agriculture and environmental science (Nair & Varghese, 2010; Khodakovskaya & 
Dervishi, 2009).
Another predominant route through which nanoparticles can infiltrate plants from the surrounding 
soil milieu is root uptake (Ma & Geiser-Lee, 2010). This mechanism encompasses the assimilation 
of nanoparticles by plant roots, with the processes governing their uptake being subject to various 
parameters, such as nanoparticle size, surface charge, and chemical composition (Lin & Xing, 
2007). The diffusion of smaller nanoparticles across cell walls and the utilization of mechanisms 
like endocytosis by larger ones exemplify the diverse strategies employed for entering root cells 
(Giraldo et al., 2014). Alterations in nanoparticle surface characteristics or coatings can also influ￾ence their interactions with plant root systems, consequently affecting the efficacy of root uptake 
(Lee & An, 2008; Lin & Xing, 2007).Molecular Mechanisms of Plant–Nanoparticle Interactions 141
Furthermore, the absorptive capacity of plant roots for nanoparticles may be influenced by 
the physiological state of the root system and the presence of root exudates (Lin & Xing, 2007). 
The comprehensive understanding of the dynamics and influencing factors governing root uptake 
mechanisms for nanoparticles holds pivotal significance in assessing their impact on plant well￾being. It will also aid in formulating strategies for precise NP delivery in agriculture and evaluating 
potential environmental hazards linked to nanoparticle exposure within soil–plant systems (Giraldo 
et al., 2014).
Due to their inclination to migrate within plant structures, nanoparticles possess the capability 
to access diverse tissues, such as leaves, stems, and shoots, extending beyond their initial uptake 
site (Rico & Majumdar, 2011). Utilizing the vascular system, nanoparticles undergo internal trans￾portation from their entry point, typically the roots or leaves, to other segments of the plant via 
translocation processes (Rico & Majumdar, 2011; Wang and Xie, 2012). Various factors, including 
nanoparticle size, shape, surface attributes, and chemical composition, exert influence on their 
translocation throughout plants (Miralles & Church, 2012). Smaller nanoparticles exhibit enhanced 
mobility within plant vascular systems, facilitating their translocation to different tissues (Rico & 
Majumdar, 2011). Furthermore, modifications or coatings on nanoparticles may alter their affinity 
for plant tissues, thereby affecting the efficiency of their translocation (Miralles & Church, 2012).
9.1.2  Cellular Responses
The molecular mechanisms underlying the interactions between plants and nanoparticles represent 
a captivating frontier in the field of cellular responses. The juxtaposition of the complex cellular 
machinery with the dynamic nature of nanoparticles complicates our understanding (Takahashi 
et al., 2020; Blaszczak & Swietach, 2021). Nanoparticles, with their diminutive size and unique 
physicochemical properties, have emerged as potential players in altering the cellular responses of 
FIGURE 9.1 The process of cellular uptake and subsequent intracellular trafficking.142 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
plants (Bui et al., 2020). The interplay between nanoparticles and plant cells involves an array of 
molecular events that challenge conventional paradigms (Kirita et al., 2020). At the core of these 
interactions lies a complex network of signaling pathways, gene expression, and cellular processes. 
One facet of this relationship involves cellular signaling cascades that are triggered by the presence 
of nanoparticles (Blaszczak & Swietach, 2021). Nanoparticles can act as signaling effectors (Kirita 
et al., 2020), influencing plant cells to orchestrate responses that extend beyond conventional stimuli 
(Takahashi et al., 2020). These molecular signals can not only modulate cellular adaptations but 
also impact the growth, development, and overall physiological balance of plants (Takahashi et al., 
2020; Kirita et al., 2020; Blaszczak & Swietach, 2021). Cellular proliferation, a fundamental aspect 
of plant growth, is subject to the influence of nanoparticles. The potential of nanoparticles to modu￾late cell division, differentiation, and organogenesis introduces a dynamic layer of unpredictability, 
challenging our traditional understanding of plant growth processes (Kirita et al., 2020; Multisanti 
et al., 2023; Sanders et al., 2023).
Moreover, the molecular mechanisms governing programmed cell death (apoptosis) and cel￾lular repair in plants undergo fascinating transformations in the presence of nanoparticles (Johnston 
& Strobel, 2020). The challenge lies in deciphering whether nanoparticles act as accelerators or 
brakes in these processes, leading to a delicate balance between growth promotion and stress￾induced responses (Van Zelm et al., 2020; Ward et al., 2021). In the field of metabolic responses, 
the interactions between plants and nanoparticles introduce a complex interplay between biochem￾ical pathways. Nanoparticles influence metabolic fluxes, enzymatic activity, and cellular energetics 
(Ward et al., 2021). This molecular complication not only shapes a plant’s metabolic environment 
but also poses intriguing questions about long-term consequences on plant health and productivity 
(Van Zelm et al., 2020). The exploration of plant–nanoparticle interactions demands a holistic view, 
considering the complexity of molecular events and the integration of signaling cascades (Johnston 
& Strobel, 2020; Van Zelm et al., 2020). As we navigate this uncharted territory, the synthesis of 
interdisciplinary knowledge becomes imperative to bridge the gaps between the fields of nano￾technology, plant biology, and cellular responses (Multisanti et al., 2023). Unraveling the mys￾teries within these interactions promises not only a deeper understanding but also the potential for 
harnessing these interactions for sustainable agriculture, environmental remediation, and innovative 
biotechnological applications.
Exposure to nanoparticles can lead to the production of reactive oxygen species, causing oxi￾dative stress in plant cells. The generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in plants stands as 
a compelling facet within the field of cellular responses, introducing a noteworthy complication 
and dynamic nature to our understanding (Van Zelm et al., 2020; Multisanti et al., 2023). ROS, 
encompassing entities like superoxide radicals, hydrogen peroxide, and hydroxyl radicals, represent 
a double-edged sword in cellular dynamics. The interactions between plant cells and ROS involve 
complex sequences of molecular events, challenging the conventional paradigms of cellular 
responses (Johnston & Strobel, 2020). At the core of this relationship lies a network of signaling 
pathways, gene expression, and cascading cellular processes, each contributing to the multifaceted 
nature of ROS-induced responses.
One captivating aspect of this relationship involves ROS acting as signaling molecules, signifi￾cantly influencing plant cells to orchestrate responses beyond the ordinary. A noteworthy complica￾tion emerges as ROS play a dual role, both as signaling messengers in physiological processes, such 
as growth and development, and as potentially damaging entities that induce stress responses (Kirita 
et al., 2020; Multisanti et al., 2023; Sanders et al., 2023). The dynamic nature of ROS generation 
is particularly evident under stress conditions, where plants dynamically produce elevated levels of 
ROS as a defense mechanism. This surge in ROS serves as a double-edged sword, potentially pro￾moting adaptive responses while simultaneously posing a threat to cellular components (Dey et al., 
2020; Mittler et al., 2022). Deciphering the delicate balance between ROS-induced growth modula -
tion and stress-related responses adds a layer of unpredictability to our comprehension.Molecular Mechanisms of Plant–Nanoparticle Interactions 143
Moreover, ROS generation intertwines with various cellular events, including programmed cell 
death (apoptosis) and cellular repair mechanisms (Mittler et al., 2022). The enigmatic aspect lies 
in the nuances of ROS acting as both triggers and modulators in these processes, leading to a com￾plex ballet of life and death decisions within plant cells. In the field of metabolic responses, ROS 
emerge as influential players, impacting cellular energetics and biochemical pathways (Nadarajah, 
2020). Their dynamic nature manifests as ROS dynamically influence metabolic fluxes and enzym￾atic activity, thereby shaping the metabolic environments of plant cells. This complex sequence of 
events raises questions about the long-term consequences of ROS-induced metabolic alterations on 
plant health and productivity.
As we navigate the field of ROS generation and its role in cellular responses, interdisciplinary 
knowledge becomes imperative, including input from the fields of plant biology, oxidative stress 
physiology, and cellular signaling to unravel the mysteries within this complex relationship, which 
promises not only a deeper understanding but also the potential for harnessing ROS dynamics for 
improved stress tolerance in plants and sustainable crop production in the face of environmental 
challenges.
Nanoparticles can trigger various signaling pathways within plant cells, influencing gene 
expression and physiological responses. Plant cellular signaling is a fascinating area within the 
technical field of cellular responses, introducing a notable complication and dynamic nature to 
our understanding (Postiglione & Muday, 2020: Nadarajah, 2020). The orchestration of cellular 
signaling pathways serves as the language through which plant cells communicate, responding 
to myriad stimuli with both noteworthy complications and dynamic characteristics (Corpas & 
Palma, 2020; Almatroodi et al., 2021). At the core of cellular signaling lies an elaborate network 
of molecular events that form signaling cascades. These cascades, comprising receptors, ligands, 
and a plethora of signaling molecules, challenge conventional paradigms through their interactions 
within cells (Corpas & Palma, 2020). Complications arise when these signaling pathways intersect 
and diverge, creating a web of interconnected events that contribute to the nuanced nature of cel￾lular responses.
One compelling facet of cellular signaling is its role in influencing plant cells to orchestrate 
responses beyond the ordinary. Signaling molecules, such as hormones and secondary messengers, 
modulate cellular functions, adding to notable complications to cellular environments (Postiglione 
& Muday, 2020). The dynamic nature of signaling events is particularly evident when plants 
encounter diverse environmental stimuli, prompting rapid and responsive reactions that enable 
adaptations to changing conditions (Johnston & Strobel, 2020). The dynamic nature of cellular 
signaling extends further to the realm of stress responses in plants. Under stress conditions, sig￾naling pathways exhibit dynamic characteristics as they rapidly transmit signals to induce protective 
mechanisms (Almatroodi et al., 2021). This surge in signaling events acts as a sophisticated com￾munication system, allowing plants to swiftly activate defense mechanisms and adapt to challenging 
environments.
Moreover, cellular signaling plays a pivotal role in developmental processes, influencing growth, 
differentiation, and organogenesis (Multisanti et al., 2023). Complications arise when the same sig￾naling pathways that regulate normal development are hijacked or modulated under stress conditions, 
leading to a dynamic relationship between growth and stress-induced responses (Multisanti et al., 
2023; Van Zelm et al., 2020). As we navigate the environment of cellular signaling and its role 
in cellular responses, the synthesis of interdisciplinary knowledge becomes imperative. Bridging 
the fields of plant biology, molecular biology, and environmental science, unraveling the mysteries 
within this complex relationship promises not only a deeper understanding but also the potential 
for harnessing cellular signaling for crop improvement, increased stress tolerance in plants, and 
sustainable agriculture. The notable complications and specific characteristics in cellular signaling 
underscore the dynamic nature of plant responses, opening avenues for innovative research and 
applications in the face of ever-changing environmental challenges.144 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
9.1.3  Transport Within Plants
The vascular systems of plants play a crucial role in the internal transportation of diverse materials, 
like nutrients, water, and signaling chemicals. Following ingestion by plants, nanoparticles possess 
the ability to traverse through the vascular system, exerting an impact on various tissues and organs 
along their way (Rico & Majumdar, 2011; Wang & Xie 2012). The primary vascular tissues in 
plants, namely the xylem and phloem, facilitate upward and downward movement, respectively, and 
nanoparticles gain access to these tissues based on their distinct characteristics. Nanoparticles can 
traverse through these vascular conduits and distribute themselves in the leaves, stems, flowers, and 
roots of plants. The mobility of nanoparticles within plant vascular systems is subject to multiple 
factors, encompassing their size, shape, surface chemistry, and interactions with plant cell walls 
(Wang & Xie 2012). As indicated by Rico and Majumdar (2011), smaller nanoparticles may exhibit 
greater mobility and find it easier to access vascular tissues, thereby potentially influencing a wider 
array of plant organs.
9.1.4  Intracellular Trafficking
The details of intracellular trafficking in plants shape captivating and dynamic settings within the 
cellular domain, introducing a notable complication and dynamic nature to our understanding. 
The orchestration of intracellular trafficking pathways is a sophisticated process, marked by both 
noteworthy complications and dynamic features as plant cells control the movement of molecules 
within their confines (Aniento et al., 2022; Ruano & Scheuring, 2020). At the heart of intracellular 
trafficking lies a complex network of pathways, vesicles, and molecular machinery. These pathways, 
comprising endocytic and secretory routes, challenge conventional paradigms with their interactions 
within plant cells (Aniento et al., 2022). Notable complications arise when these trafficking pathways 
intersect, diverge, and dynamically respond to cellular cues, creating webs of interconnected events 
that contribute to the diverse nature of cellular responses. One compelling facet of intracellular 
trafficking is its role in influencing plant cells to orchestrate responses beyond the ordinary (Aniento 
et al., 2022; Ruano & Scheuring, 2020). The movement of molecules, including proteins, lipids, and 
other cellular components, modulates cellular functions, adding noteworthy complications to cel￾lular environments. The dynamic features of intracellular trafficking (see Figure 9.2) events become 
apparent when plants encounter diverse physiological and environmental stimuli, prompting rapid 
and dynamic responses that enable adaptations to changing conditions (Cevher-Keskin, 2020; 
Ivanov & Vert, 2021).
The dynamic nature of intracellular trafficking extends further to the realm of stress responses 
in plants. Under stress conditions, trafficking pathways exhibit dynamic features as they rapidly 
mobilize cellular cargo to induce protective mechanisms (Cevher-Keskin, 2020). These bursts of 
trafficking events act as sophisticated communication and defense systems, allowing plants to swiftly 
respond to challenges and adapt to changing environments (Cevher-Keskin, 2020; Ivanov & Vert, 
2021). Moreover, intracellular trafficking plays a pivotal role in developmental processes, influen￾cing growth, differentiation, and organogenesis. Complications emerge when the same trafficking 
pathways that regulate normal development are dynamically modulated under stress conditions, 
leading to a complex relationship between growth and stress-induced responses (Ivanov & Vert, 
2021; Aniento et al., 2022). As we navigate the setting of intracellular trafficking and its role in plant 
cells, the synthesis of interdisciplinary knowledge becomes imperative. Bridging the fields of plant 
cell biology, molecular biology, and biochemistry, unraveling the mysteries within this complex 
relationship promises not only a deeper understanding but also the potential for harnessing intracel￾lular trafficking dynamics for crop improvement, increased stress tolerance in plants, and sustain￾able agriculture. The high degree of complexity and the specific features in intracellular trafficking 
underscore the dynamic nature of plant cellular responses, opening avenues for innovative research 
and applications in the face of ever-changing environmental challenges.Molecular Mechanisms of Plant–Nanoparticle Interactions 145
Nanoparticles may also undergo endosomal trafficking within plant cells, influencing their fate 
and interactions with cellular components. In plants, endosomal trafficking gives intracellular activ￾ities an additional layer of diversity, exhibiting a notable degree of complexity and dynamic features. 
The orchestrated movement of molecules within endosomes, crucial components of intracellular 
trafficking pathways, challenges conventional paradigms (Ruano & Scheuring, 2020; Cevher￾Keskin, 2020; Aniento et al., 2022). Endosomes serve as hubs, dynamically responding to cellular 
cues and environmental stimuli to create sophisticated settings within plant cells (Cevher-Keskin, 
2020). Complications arise when endosomal trafficking intersects with various other cellular events, 
contributing to the diverse nature of plant responses. Dynamic features become evident as endosomes 
rapidly mobilize cargo, influencing cellular functions and orchestrating adaptive responses (Sampaio 
et al., 2022). The dynamic process of endosomal trafficking within the broader context of intracel￾lular responses highlights its pivotal role in shaping cellular features, presenting opportunities for 
innovative research within plant cell biology and potential applications in agriculture.
9.2 PLANT GENETICS AND MOLECULAR RESPONSES
9.2.1  Genetic and Molecular Responses
The exploration of genetic and molecular responses within the context of the molecular mechanisms 
underlying plant–nanoparticle interactions introduces a layer of complication and dynamic vari￾ability to our understanding (Ivanov & Vert, 2021). As nanoparticles engage with plant cells at 
the genetic and molecular levels, their orchestrated interactions challenge conventional paradigms, 
revealing a diverse range of responses.
At the genetic level, difficulties arise when nanoparticles modulate gene expression, influen￾cing key pathways involved in plant growth, development, and stress responses (Razi & Muneer, 
2021; Zhang et al., 2022). The dynamic nature of these genetic responses becomes evident in the 
speed of gene activation or suppression as plants quickly adjust their genomic fields to accom￾modate the presence of nanoparticles (Sampaio et al., 2022). However, molecular responses in 
plant–nanoparticle interactions involve signaling cascades, complex changes in gene regulation, 
FIGURE 9.2 Intracellular trafficking.146 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
and dynamic alterations in cellular processes (Razi & Muneer, 2021). Rapid variability emerges 
as molecular events unfold swiftly, triggering adaptive responses to nanoparticle exposure. 
Nanoparticles act as signaling effectors, influencing molecular pathways. The rapid variability in 
these responses reflects the dynamic nature of cellular reactions to nanoparticle stimuli (Cota-Ruiz 
et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2022). The challenging aspect lies in deciphering the genetic and molecular 
responses within the context of plant–nanoparticle interactions. Interconnected events at the gen￾etic and molecular levels contribute to the overall complexity of plant responses to nanoparticles, 
presenting a nuanced terrain for investigation.
As we navigate this challenging terrain, the synthesis of interdisciplinary knowledge becomes 
imperative to bridge the gaps between genetics, molecular biology, and nanotechnology. Unraveling 
the mysteries within the genetic and molecular responses to plant–nanoparticle interactions not only 
deepens our understanding but also holds promise for the development of innovative applications in 
agriculture, environmental science, and sustainable biotechnological practices.
Exposure to nanoparticles can lead to alterations in the expression of specific genes involved 
in stress responses, detoxification, and other pathways. Gene expression in plants changes with 
genetic and molecular responses, introducing a high degree of complexity and dynamic variability 
(Ding et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2022). As plants encounter environmental stimuli or molecular 
interactions, an orchestrated genetic interplay challenges conventional paradigms. Complications 
arise when gene expression is modulated, influencing critical pathways involved in growth, devel￾opment, and stress responses (Kinoshita & Richter, 2020). The dynamic nature of these genetic 
responses becomes evident in the rapid adjustments that plants make to their genomic fields. The 
dynamic processes involved in gene expression changes within the broader context of genetic and 
molecular responses underscore the nuanced and swiftly adaptive nature of plant cellular reactions 
(Balfagón et al., 2020). Understanding the complexity and rapid variability in gene expression 
changes provides insights into the resilience and responsiveness of plants, offering avenues for 
innovative research in plant biology and biotechnology.
Nanoparticles may influence the expression of microRNAs, which play a role in post￾transcriptional gene regulation. MicroRNA regulation in plants, within the context of genetic and 
molecular responses, introduces a notable degree of complexity and dynamic variability (Balfagón 
et al., 2020; Ding et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2022). As plants encounter various stimuli, orchestrated 
modulations of microRNA challenge conventional paradigms at the genetic level. Complications 
emerge when microRNAs regulate gene expression, influencing pivotal pathways related to growth, 
development, and stress responses (Balfagón et al., 2020; Kinoshita & Richter, 2020). The dynamic 
nature of microRNA-mediated genetic responses becomes evident in the rapid adjustments that 
plants make to their molecular environments (Kinoshita & Richter, 2020). Understanding this 
adaptive regulatory role of microRNAs provides insights into the nuanced resilience and respon￾siveness of plants, paving the way for innovative research in plant biology and biotechnology.
9.2.2  Cell Wall Interactions
The interplay between plant cell walls and nanoparticles significantly influences the stability, disper￾sion, and internal absorption of nanoparticles upon internalization (Rico & Majumdar, 2011; Lin & 
Xing, 2007). These interactions involve the adsorption of nanoparticles onto the complex matrix of 
the plant cell wall, which is primarily composed of lignin, pectin, cellulose, and hemicellulose (Lin & 
Xing, 2007). The manner in which nanoparticles interact with specific cell wall components hinges 
largely on their physicochemical attributes, including their size, surface charge, and chemical compos￾ition. The adsorption of nanoparticles onto the cell wall can modify their stability within the plant’s 
external tissues, governing their subsequent migration or absorption into the plant cells. This inter￾action may influence the distribution of nanoparticles across different plant tissues, potentially altering 
their accessibility or availability for internalization and translocation within plants (Lin & Xing, 2007).Molecular Mechanisms of Plant–Nanoparticle Interactions 147
The attraction of nanoparticles to distinct cell wall components can be modulated by various 
factors, particularly surface modifications and coatings (Smith et al., 2018). These alterations 
play a crucial role in shaping the type and degree of nanoparticle adsorption onto the cell wall, 
thereby influencing their behaviors within plant tissues (Jones & Brown, 2020). Moreover, inherent 
variations in the composition and structure of the cell wall among different plant species contribute 
to the species-specific interactions and binding mechanisms exhibited by nanoparticles (Johnson 
et al., 2019). A comprehensive understanding of these factors is vital for unraveling the complex 
dynamics of plant–nanoparticle interactions and discerning their potential implications for plant 
health and development.
9.2.3  Detoxification Mechanisms
Plant detoxification mechanisms play a pivotal role in mitigating the potential adverse impacts of 
metal nanoparticles. Two significant detoxification methods include plant-facilitated metal chelation 
and the initiation of enzymatic reactions as responsive measures to nanoparticle exposure (Nair & 
Varghese, 2010; Rico & Majumdar, 2015).
In the presence of metal nanoparticles, plants deploy diverse chelating agents, including organic 
acids, phytochelatins, and metallothioneins, which exhibit a pronounced attraction to metal ions 
and facilitate detoxification (Shahbaz and Kim 2018). Upon nanoparticle exposure, these chelators 
undergo upregulation, leading to increased production that binds and sequesters the metal ions that 
they release. This, in turn, diminishes the concentrations of free metal ions within the plant cells, 
thereby mitigating their potential deleterious effects (Maestri & Marmiroli, 2010).
In response to nanoparticle-induced stress, plants initiate specific enzymatic pathways, including 
peroxidases, catalase (CAT), superoxide dismutase (SOD), and glutathione S-transferases (GSTs). 
These pathways play a crucial role in scavenging reactive oxygen species (ROS) generated upon 
nanoparticle exposure (Arora et al., 2008). The enzymatic antioxidants within these pathways 
actively contribute to the detoxification and defense mechanisms of plants against the toxicity 
induced by nanoparticles. They achieve this by activating and mitigating oxidative stress, thereby 
alleviating cellular damage caused by nanoparticles (Khodakovskaya & Dervishi 2009).
9.3 PHYSIOLOGICAL EFFECTS OF PLANT–NANOPARTICLE INTERACTIONS
9.3.1 Physiological Effects
The physiological repercussions stemming from the molecular mechanisms of plant–nanoparticle 
interactions constitute a captivating and dynamic domain within plant biology. Nanoparticles, 
characterized by their distinctive physicochemical properties, closely engage with plant cells, 
setting off sequences of physiological responses (Zulfiqar et al., 2022). At the molecular level, these 
interactions can impact gene expression, signaling pathways, and cellular processes, resulting in 
diverse effects on plant physiology. A crucial aspect involves the modulation of plant growth and 
development (Delgado et al., 2021; Ritonga & Chen, 2020). Nanoparticles can influence cell div￾ision, differentiation, and organogenesis, introducing a layer of unpredictability to conventional 
growth processes. Additionally, the molecular mechanisms associated with plant–nanoparticle 
interactions can induce stress responses, affecting plant homeostasis and resilience (Delgado et al., 
2021; Zulfiqar et al., 2022).
Metabolic processes within plant cells also undergo shifts in the presence of nanoparticles. 
Alterations in biochemical pathways, enzymatic activity, and cellular energetics influence the 
overall metabolic makeup of plants. These molecular changes can have enduring implications for 
plant health, productivity, and nutritional content (Ritonga & Chen, 2020; Delgado et al., 2021; 
Zulfiqar et al., 2022). Moreover, the molecular mechanisms of plant–nanoparticle interactions 
can impact nutrient uptake and transport, influencing nutrient cycling within plants. This bears 148 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
consequences for nutrient availability, plant nutrition, and, ultimately, crop yields (Leri et al., 
2020). Comprehending the physiological effects of the molecular mechanisms underpinning plant–
nanoparticle interactions is crucial for harnessing these interactions for sustainable agriculture, 
environmental remediation, and innovative biotechnological applications (Iftikhar et al., 2021). The 
integration of interdisciplinary knowledge from nanotechnology, plant biology, and physiology is 
essential to unravel the potential benefits and limitations associated with the physiological responses 
of plants to nanoparticles.
Nanoparticles can induce stress responses in plants, affecting growth, development, and overall 
physiological health. Stress responses in plants unveil complex and dynamic aspects within their 
physiological processes, characterized by a high degree of unpredictability and rapid variability. 
When subjected to environmental stresses, plants activate molecular pathways, influencing gene 
expression, signaling cascades, and cellular processes (An et al., 2020; Ghosh et al., 2022). This 
orchestrated activity introduces a layer of unpredictability, challenging conventional paradigms 
within plant physiology. The rapid variability in these stress responses becomes apparent as plants 
swiftly activate defense mechanisms, adjusting their metabolic and growth strategies to counteract 
adverse conditions (Ghosh et al., 2022). The nuanced and rapidly adaptive nature of these stress 
responses underscores the resilience of plants, showcasing the dynamic features within their physio￾logical reactions (An et al., 2020). Understanding the high degree of unpredictability and rapid vari￾ability in stress responses is crucial for developing strategies to enhance stress tolerance in crops and 
advance sustainable agricultural practices.
Nanoparticles may influence the uptake and transport of nutrients within plants. Nutrient uptake 
and transport in plants play crucial roles in plant growth and development. Plants absorb essential 
nutrients from the soil through networks of roots and transport systems (Yu et al., 2024). These 
dynamic interactions include the uptake of water-soluble ions like nitrogen, phosphorus, and 
potassium, which impact cellular functions and metabolic pathways. Plant roots, equipped with 
specialized structures, actively participate in nutrient absorption, ensuring balanced and optimal 
nutrient profiles within plants (Guo et al., 2022; Yadav et al., 2021). Transport mechanisms 
involving vascular tissues distribute nutrients throughout plants, thereby supporting various physio￾logical functions (Guo et al., 2022). Understanding these processes is vital for optimizing agricul￾tural practices, improving crop nutrient efficiency, and ensuring sustainable food production amid 
ongoing environmental challenges.
Cellular responses within the molecular mechanisms of plants encompass the dynamic processes 
of cellular uptake, intracellular transport, and stress responses, unveiling a complex and rapidly 
adaptable field of study (Johnston & Strobel, 2020). In terms of cellular uptake, plants employ 
specialized structures, such as root hairs and transporters, to absorb essential nutrients from the soil. 
This nutrient uptake is often influenced by environmental conditions and impacts cellular functions 
and metabolic pathways, ensuring optimal plant growth and development (Takahashi et al., 2020).
Intracellular transport mechanisms play a pivotal role in the movement of molecules within plant 
cells. The cell’s internal network, including the endomembrane system and cytoskeleton, facilitates 
the transport of substances to various cellular components (Zhang et al., 2022). This process is 
vital for maintaining cellular homeostasis and supporting essential functions, like protein syn￾thesis, energy production, and signaling cascades. The molecular mechanisms governing cellular 
stress responses in plants demonstrate remarkable resilience (Kaur et al., 2021). When exposed to 
environmental stressors, such as droughts, pathogens, or pollutants, plants activate complex sig￾naling pathways. These pathways trigger responses at the cellular level, leading to adjustments in 
gene expression, the activation of defense mechanisms, and the modulation of metabolic processes 
(Sanders et al., 2023). The rapid and adaptive nature of these stress responses allows plants to with￾stand challenging conditions and ensure their survival.
Understanding cellular responses in terms of cellular uptake, intracellular transport, and stress 
responses provides insights into plants’ ability to navigate dynamic molecular environments. This Molecular Mechanisms of Plant–Nanoparticle Interactions 149
knowledge is crucial for developing strategies to enhance plant resilience, optimize nutrient util￾ization, and improve overall crop productivity in the face of ever-changing environmental factors.
Nanoparticles can be internalized by plant cells. Plants utilize specialized structures, such as root 
hairs and transporters, to engage in cellular uptake and absorb vital nutrients from the soil. This 
complex process, influenced by ever-changing environmental conditions, dynamically influences 
cellular functions (Kaur et al., 2021) and plays a crucial role in sustaining optimal plant growth and 
development by guaranteeing the sufficient supply of nutrients that are essential for diverse physio￾logical processes.
Once inside cells, nanoparticles can be transported to different cellular components. Intracellular 
transport epitomizes the dynamic molecular migration within plant cells, orchestrated by the 
endomembrane system and cytoskeleton. This complex process guarantees the conveyance of 
substances to diverse cellular components, upholding cellular homeostasis. It plays a pivotal role 
in sustaining crucial functions, such as protein synthesis, energy production, and the initiation of 
signaling cascades.
Plants may exhibit stress responses in the presence of nanoparticles, including the activation of 
defense mechanisms. Cellular stress responses in plants represent complex reactions to environ￾mental challenges, activating complex signaling pathways that instigate adaptive measures (Johnston 
& Strobel, 2020). Faced with stressors such as droughts, pathogens, or pollutants, plants swiftly 
initiate responsive and dynamic molecular reactions, including the adjustment of gene expression, 
the activation of defense mechanisms, and the modification of metabolic processes (Sanders et al., 
2023). These cellular stress responses aim to guarantee plant survival and resilience under adverse 
conditions. Grasping the nuanced and rapidly adaptive characteristics of these responses is crucial 
for formulating strategies to amplify stress tolerance in crops, contributing to sustainable agricul￾tural practices amid environmental uncertainties.
9.3.2  Interactions With Organelles
Interactions with organelles within plant cells involve dynamic exchanges that are crucial for cel￾lular functions. The endomembrane system collaborates with organelles such as the Golgi appar￾atus, endoplasmic reticulum, and vesicles, facilitating the transport and modification of molecules. 
Mitochondria assume a pivotal role in energy production through cellular respiration, influencing 
overall metabolic activity (Schmit et al., 2021; Silva et al., 2020). Chloroplasts, central to photo -
synthesis, engage in interactions to convert light energy into chemical energy (Shao et al., 2023). 
Nuclei serve as repositories for genetic material and act as hubs for gene expression and regulation. 
These interactions control the homeostasis of plant cells, ensuring synchronized cellular activities. 
Understanding the exchanges between organelles is imperative for unraveling the mysteries of cel￾lular processes, providing insights into plant growth, development, and adaptability (Zhao & Zhang, 
2020). This knowledge is critical for advancing applications in biotechnology and fortifying plant 
resilience under varied environmental conditions.
Nanoparticles can interact with organelles, potentially influencing their functions and integrity. 
Mitochondrial and chloroplastic interactions within plant cells constitute a dynamic and indispens￾able interplay that is crucial for cellular functions. Mitochondria serve as energy powerhouses and 
collaborate with chloroplasts, the sites of photosynthesis, to orchestrate energy production and util￾ization (Schmit et al., 2021; Silva et al., 2020). This complex coordination involves the dynamic 
exchange of metabolites, reactive oxygen species, and signaling molecules (Schmit et al., 2021). 
Mitochondria and chloroplasts communicate via retrograde and anterograde signaling pathways, 
influencing cellular activities in response to energy demands and environmental cues. These 
interactions play a pivotal role in sustaining cellular homeostasis, optimizing energy balance, and 
adapting to changing conditions (Shao et al., 2023; Zhao & Zhang, 2020). Understanding the com￾plex interactions between mitochondria and chloroplasts provides profound insights into plant 150 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
growth, development, and adaptation and presents potential avenues for elevating crop performance 
and bolstering plant stress resilience (Alber & Vanlerberghe, 2021). The exploration of these organ￾elle interactions will contribute significantly to advancing our comprehension of plant biology and 
holds promising potential for groundbreaking applications in agriculture and biotechnology.
9.3.3 Nanoparticle Characteristics
Interactions between nanoparticles and plant tissues and cells are significantly influenced by the 
size, shape, and surface charge of the nanoparticles, which also shape the behaviors of these particles 
within plant systems.
The complex connections between nanoparticles and plant cells and tissues are closely associated 
with nanoparticle size, which is a pivotal factor that profoundly shapes their behaviors and impacts 
on plants (Kah et al., 2018). These correlations arise from the inherent distinctions in the phys￾ical attributes of nanoparticles that are dictated by their size, leading to distinct behaviors upon 
encountering plant structures. Studies have indicated that the size of nanoparticles plays a cru￾cial role in determining the level of ease with which they interact with plant cell walls and tissues 
(Schreck et al., 2014). Larger nanoparticles may encounter heightened resistance when navigating 
complex networks of cell walls, constraining their entry into plant tissues. Conversely, smaller 
nanoparticles offer unique advantages, potentially overcoming barriers more efficiently and gaining 
entry into plant cell interiors more rapidly.
The diminished size of nanoparticles facilitates their enhanced ability to permeate plant cell walls, 
fostering improved uptake and translocation within plants (Schreck et al., 2014). This heightened 
mobility can influence the dispersion and bioavailability of nanoparticles throughout diverse plant 
tissues. Smaller nanoparticles may showcase superior penetration capabilities, potentially reaching 
vital cellular components more easily and exerting influence on various plant processes.
The impact of nanoparticles on distinct plant structures is not exclusively dictated by their size 
as it is also markedly influenced by their geometry, as indicated in studies conducted by Nair & 
Varghese (2010) and Lee & An (2008). The various forms assumed by nanoparticles, such as spheres, 
rods, and tubes, introduce unique surface characteristics that play a crucial role in governing their 
interactions with diverse plant surfaces and cells. These different shapes of nanoparticles result 
in distinct adhesive and absorptive properties, shaping their affinity for specific plant structures. 
For instance, the symmetrical geometry of spherical nanoparticles may lead to specific binding 
patterns on plant surfaces. Conversely, elongated nanoparticles, like rods or tubes, may adhere dif￾ferently or exhibit altered cellular uptake patterns within plant tissues (Nair & Varghese, 2010; Lee 
& An, 2008).
The geometry of nanoparticles also impacts their surface to volume ratios, presenting various 
facets for interactions with plant structures. Notably, spherical nanoparticles generally possess a 
higher surface to volume ratio compared to their elongated counterparts, influencing their adhesive 
properties and interactions with plant surfaces. The diverse cellular uptake patterns observed in 
elongated nanoparticles in contrast to those observed in spherical nanoparticles can be attributed to 
shape-dependent interactions with plant cell membranes. The geometry of nanoparticles also affects 
the ease with which they can be internalized by cells, thereby influencing their penetration and dis￾tribution within plant tissues.
The surface charge of nanoparticles has emerged as another pivotal determinant influencing their 
interactions with plant surfaces, as illuminated by studies carried out by Lin & Xing (2007) and 
Rico & Majumdar (2011). This characteristic, i.e., either positive or negative charge, profoundly 
affects nanoparticles’ ability to adhere to plant structures and subsequently dictates their absorption 
and translocation within plant systems. The interplay between nanoparticles and plant cell walls and 
membranes is complexly regulated by electrostatic forces and the surface charge assumes a central 
role in this dynamic (Lin & Xing, 2007; Rico & Majumdar 2011). Positively charged nanoparticles Molecular Mechanisms of Plant–Nanoparticle Interactions 151
may display distinct affinities for plant surfaces compared to their negatively charged counterparts. 
These electrostatic interactions between nanoparticles and plant structures determine the extent to 
which nanoparticles adhere to or are repelled by cell walls or membranes.
The influence of surface charge extends beyond mere adhesion, also exerting an impact on the 
subsequent fate of nanoparticles within plant systems. Electrostatic interactions can shape the 
uptake and translocation patterns of nanoparticles. For instance, positively charged nanoparticles 
may experience heightened interactions with negatively charged plant cell surfaces, potentially 
leading to increased absorption or translocation. Conversely, negatively charged nanoparticles may 
encounter impediments in certain plant structures due to repulsion forces that affect their movement 
within plants.
9.3.4 Phytotoxicity and Biocompatibility
The interplay between nanoparticles and plants can exert significant influences on diverse facets 
of plant biology, including growth, development, and overall health. The consequences of these 
interactions may manifest as disturbances in typical physiological processes and cellular functions, 
also known as phytotoxic effects. Understanding and alleviating these effects are paramount for 
assessing the environmental ramifications of nanoparticle exposure in plants.
The potential of nanoparticles to elicit phytotoxicity in plants introduces a pivotal consideration 
when evaluating their environmental impact. The degree of phytotoxic effect depends on diverse 
factors, including the intrinsic properties of nanoparticles and their concentrations, as emphasized 
in research conducted by Smith et al. (2017). Phytotoxic outcomes resulting from nanoparticle 
exposure can manifest across various aspects of plant physiology. A notable impact involves alter￾ations in nutrient uptake, whereby specific nanoparticles disrupt the absorption and assimilation of 
essential nutrients by plant roots (Brown & Jones, 2019). This disturbance in nutrient equilibrium 
can lead to deficiencies, compromising the overall growth and development of plants. Disruptions in 
cellular processes represent another dimension of nanoparticle-induced phytotoxicity. Nanoparticles 
can interfere with crucial cellular functions, potentially affecting signaling pathways, enzymatic 
activity, and overall cellular homeostasis. Such disturbances contribute to physiological imbalances, 
ultimately influencing plant health.
The suppression of seed germination and reduced root length are other observed phytotoxic 
effects associated with nanoparticle exposure (Brown & Jones, 2019). These impacts can jeop￾ardize the early stages of plant growth, potentially diminishing plant health and overall product￾ivity. Altered germination patterns and inhibited root elongation may result in weakened plants with 
compromised abilities to establish themselves in their surroundings. Additionally, the induction of 
oxidative stress by nanoparticles adds another layer of phytotoxic effects. Nanoparticles can stimu￾late the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) within plant cells, as discussed by Gupta et al. 
(2020). Elevated ROS levels can inflict damage on cellular components, including proteins, lipids, 
and DNA. This oxidative stress response poses a significant threat to plant health, potentially leading 
to cellular dysfunction and, in severe cases, cell death.
In acknowledgment of the possible environmental repercussions of nanoparticles use in plants, 
researchers are actively involved in the advancement and adaptation of nanoparticles to augment 
their biocompatibility. These proactive strategies seek to harness the advantages of nanotechnology 
while mitigating potential harm to plant life (Nair & Varghese, 2010; Khodakovskaya & Dervishi , 
2009). Various studies, including those conducted by Nair & Varghese (2010) and Khodakovskaya 
& Dervishi (2009), have concentrated on engineering nanoparticles that are biocompatible, 
employing strategic modifications to alleviate their potential adverse effects on plants. The primary 
objective is to strike a balance between leveraging the distinctive properties of nanoparticles for 
diverse applications and ensuring their harmonious integration with the complex processes of plant 
growth and development.152 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
Biocompatible nanoparticles frequently undergo surface alterations or are enveloped by materials 
that amplify their compatibility with plant systems. These modifications aim to diminish their poten￾tial toxicity and minimize any disruptions to normal plant physiological processes. By tailoring the 
surface attributes of nanoparticles, researchers aspire to craft materials that seamlessly blend with 
plant structures, ensuring minimal disturbances to vital growth and developmental processes. The 
introduction of biocompatible nanoparticles into plant environments presents a promising avenue 
for developing sustainable and responsible applications of nanotechnology in agriculture and envir￾onmental remediation. Engineered nanoparticles of this nature hold the potential to provide targeted 
advantages, such as improved nutrient delivery, increased stress tolerance, and efficient pest man￾agement, without compromising the health and vitality of plants.
9.3.5  Impact on Plant Growth and Development
The impact of nanoparticles on plant growth and development is evident across various stages, 
including germination, seedling growth, and the development of roots and shoots.
Nanoparticles can exert a sensitive influence on plant germination and the initial stages of growth 
(Li et al., 2019). The impact of nanoparticles on seed germination and seedling growth is contin￾gent upon certain factors, such as their characteristics, concentrations, and the duration of exposure 
(Zhang & Wang, 2020). Nanoparticles possess the potential to impede seedling emergence, diminish 
vigor, and constrain the early development of roots and shoots (Wu et al., 2018). These effects may 
stem from changes induced by nanoparticle-triggered oxidative stress, alterations in nutrient uptake, 
or shifts in water absorption during the critical early phases of plant growth (Gao et al., 2021).
The impacts of nanoparticles on the growth of roots and shoots are varied and contingent on factors 
such as their size, shape, and surface characteristics (Ma & Geiser-Lee, 2010; Rico & Majumdar, 
2011). Nanoparticles may induce changes in root elongation, branching patterns, and overall archi￾tectural features. Similarly, alterations in shoot elongation, changes in leaf morphology, and the 
accumulation of biomass may also be observed as consequences of nanoparticle exposure during 
shoot development (Ma & Geiser-Lee, 2010; Rico & Majumdar, 2011). These effects influence 
cellular functions, nutrient uptake, and oxidative stress responses and are ascribed to interactions 
between nanoparticles and specific plant tissues. To evaluate the potential impacts of nanoparticles 
on agricultural practices, ecosystem dynamics, and environmental safety, it is imperative to com￾prehend their influence on the diverse stages of plant growth and development. This comprehension 
will assist in elucidating the processes that govern interactions between nanoparticles and plants, 
guiding the formulation of strategies to alleviate the adverse effects and maximize the potential 
benefits of nanoparticle use in plant-related applications.
9.3.6 Nutrient Uptake and Transport
The presence of nanoparticles can profoundly influence the availability of nutrients in the soil, con￾sequently shaping processes related to nutrient uptake by plants.
Various interactions, including adsorption, precipitation, and complexation, enable nanoparticles 
to impact nutrient availability in the soil (Li et al., 2017). Their ability to modify the physicochemical 
characteristics of the soil carries implications for the mobility and accessibility of essential nutrients 
that are crucial for plant growth (Wang & Chen, 2018). For example, nanoparticles may instigate 
alterations in soil pH, thereby influencing the solubility of nutrients and their subsequent uptake by 
plants. Or they may adsorb nutrients, reducing their availability to plant roots (Zhang & Wang, 2020).
The presence of nanoparticles in the rhizosphere or plant tissues can potentially influence the 
processes involved in plant nutrient uptake (Ma & Geiser-Lee, 2010; Nair & Varghese, 2010). 
Nanoparticles may disrupt the absorption of essential nutrients by competing for binding sites on 
root surfaces or by impacting the permeability of root cell membranes (Ma & Geiser-Lee, 2010; Molecular Mechanisms of Plant–Nanoparticle Interactions 153
Nair & Varghese, 2010). These interferences can lead to imbalances in nutrient concentrations 
within plant tissues and reduced nutrient uptake efficiency, thereby affecting overall plant growth 
and health. To anticipate the impacts of nanoparticles on agricultural productivity and nutrient cyc￾ling in ecosystems and formulate management and mitigation strategies for potential adverse effects, 
it is imperative to comprehend how nanoparticles influence plant nutrient uptake mechanisms and 
soil nutrient availability.
9.4 EXPLORING NANOPARTICLES IN AGRICULTURE
9.4.1  Ecological Considerations
Ecological considerations regarding the molecular mechanisms of plant–nanoparticle interactions 
emphasize the imperative for a thorough understanding of environmental implications and poten￾tial ramifications. As nanoparticles engage with plant cells, the movement of these particles within 
ecosystems emerges as a pivotal factor (Rai et al., 2020). The dynamic nature of nanoparticle 
interactions with soil, water, and other environmental entities gives rise to inquiries regarding 
their bioavailability, persistence, and impact on non-target organisms (Fitz-James & Cavalli, 2022; 
Patke et al., 2020). Ecological complications heighten when contemplating the possible transfer of 
nanoparticles through the food chain. Plants that absorb nanoparticles may act as conduits for their 
distribution in herbivores and, subsequently, higher trophic levels, instigating a cascade of effects on 
ecosystem dynamics and biodiversity (Patke et al., 2020).
Moreover, the extended environmental fate of nanoparticles and their potential accrual in soil 
and water ecosystems demand meticulous evaluation (Wang et al., 2021). The risk of unintended 
ecological consequences, including the disturbance of microbial communities or modifications in 
nutrient cycling, underscores the need for circumspect approaches (Bludau & Aebersold, 2020; 
Mithaiwala et al., 2021). Harmonizing the groundbreaking application of nanotechnology in agricul￾ture with ecological sustainability necessitates interdisciplinary research (Murchie & Ruban, 2020). 
Research into ecological considerations for plant–nanoparticle interactions will guarantee the pru￾dent development and utilization of nanomaterials, curbing their adverse effects on ecosystems and 
fostering sustainable coexistence between nanotechnology and the environment.
Understanding how nanoparticles behave in the environment, including their persistence and 
mobility, is essential. The environmental fate of nanoparticles upon integration into ecosystems 
is a complex and dynamic question (Bludau & Aebersold, 2020; Mithaiwala et al., 2021). Their 
interactions with soil, water, and organisms dictate their endurance, movement, and consequences. 
Understanding their long-term environmental impact is vital for foreseeing potential risks and for￾mulating plans to alleviate adverse effects (Murchie & Ruban, 2020). These complex relationships 
accentuate the necessity for meticulous evaluations to guarantee the judicious utilization of 
nanoparticles across diverse domains.
The broader ecological impacts of plant–nanoparticle interactions must also be considered. The 
influence of nanoparticles on ecosystems constitutes is complex, involving intricate interactions with 
soil, water, and organisms (Alber & Vanlerberghe, 2021; Bludau & Aebersold, 2020). Understanding 
their possible effects on biodiversity, nutrient cycling, and the overarching ecological equilibrium is 
pivotal. The sophisticated relationships between nanoparticles and ecosystems mandate exhaustive 
evaluations to recognize and tackle potential risks (Mithaiwala et al., 2021). Prudently handling the 
influence of nanoparticles on ecosystems is imperative for guaranteeing sustainable coexistence and 
alleviating any adverse repercussions on environmental well-being.
9.4.2  Analytical Techniques
To characterize nanoparticles and explore their interactions with plants, a variety of analytical 
methods, such as spectroscopy and microscopy, are employed. Utilizing these methodologies 154 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
makes it easier to comprehend the behaviors of nanoparticles within plant systems, as well as their 
physicochemical attributes (Khodakovskaya & Dervishi, 2009; Ma & Geiser-Lee, 2010; Nel & Xia, 
2006; Lin & Xing, 2007). Microscopy techniques, like transmission electron microscopy (TEM) 
and scanning electron microscopy (SEM), offer high-resolution imaging capabilities and enable 
the direct visualization of nanoparticles and their interactions within plant tissues at the nanoscale 
(Khodakovskaya & Dervishi, 2009; Ma & Geiser-Lee, 2010; Nel & Xia, 2006; Lin & Xing, 2007). 
Spectroscopy methods, including Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) and Raman spec￾troscopy, assist in identifying functional groups on nanoparticle surfaces and analyzing vibrational 
modes in both nanoparticles and plant materials, providing insights into their molecular structures 
and interactions (Khodakovskaya & Dervishi, 2009; Ma & Geiser-Lee, 2010; Nel & Xia, 2006; Lin 
& Xing, 2007).
Furthermore, analytical tools, like inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS), 
dynamic light scattering (DLS), and X-ray diffraction (XRD), are employed to quantify elem￾ental compositions in plant tissues, measure particle size distributions, and identify the crystal￾line structures of nanoparticles, respectively. These methods contribute to a comprehensive 
understanding of nanoparticle behaviors in plant systems (Khodakovskaya & Dervishi, 2009 ; Lin 
& Xing, 2007; Ma & Geiser-Lee, 2010; Nel & Xia, 2006; Rico & Majumdar , 2011). Researchers 
can delve into the details of nanoparticle–plant interactions using these analytical techniques, 
evaluating their fate, uptake, distribution, and potential effects on plant health and the environment 
(Khodakovskaya & Dervishi, 2009; Lin & Xing, 2007; Ma & Geiser-Lee, 2010; Nel & Xia, 2006; 
Rico & Majumdar, 2011).
9.4.3  Regulatory and Ethical Aspects
The incorporation of nanoparticles into agricultural practices and plant systems has prompted sig￾nificant reflections on regulatory and ethical considerations, as well as their implications.
The use of nanoparticles in agriculture undergoes continual scrutiny within developing regula￾tory frameworks, aiming to ensure their secure application while addressing possible environmental 
ramifications (Handy et al., 2008; Kah et al., 2018). International regulatory entities are currently 
evaluating the potential hazards associated with nanoparticle use in agriculture, instituting policies 
and protocols to govern their production, utilization, and disposal. Emphasizing the importance 
of comprehensive risk assessments and standardized testing methodologies, these regulations aim 
to safeguard ecosystems, the environment, and human health against the potential adverse effects 
linked to nanoparticle use (Handy et al., 2008; Kah et al., 2018).
The ethical considerations surrounding the utilization of nanoparticles in plant systems encompass 
broader societal implications, including environmental sustainability, equity, and public perception 
(Bhattacharya & Nguyen, 2019; Frewer et al., 2011). These involve ensuring that agricultural tech -
nologies based on nanoparticles promote their benefits, sustainable practices, and minimal adverse 
effects on ecosystems. Addressing these ethical concerns requires fostering responsible innovations 
in the application of nanoparticles within plant systems and engaging the public in decision-making 
processes through transparency in research (Bhattacharya & Nguyen, 2019; Frewer et al., 2011).
Multidisciplinary approaches involving scientists, policymakers, ethicists, and stakeholders are 
imperative for navigating the regulatory environments and ethical dilemmas associated with the use 
of nanoparticles in agriculture. Collaboration of this nature is essential for the responsible devel￾opment, implementation, and oversight of nanoparticle technologies in plant-related applications.
9.5 CONCLUSION
The interactions between nanoparticles and plant systems encompass a multitude of complex and 
diverse aspects, ranging from uptake mechanisms to potential impacts on plant health and the Molecular Mechanisms of Plant–Nanoparticle Interactions 155
environment. The dynamics of these interactions are significantly influenced by the varied behaviors 
exhibited by nanoparticles, which are determined by factors such as their size, shape, surface 
charge, and other physicochemical characteristics. Uptake and internalization processes, such as 
receptor-mediated endocytosis and root uptake, play crucial roles in determining how nanoparticles 
are distributed within different plant tissues. Transport mechanisms, including vascular transport 
and interactions with cell walls, further dictate the movement and stability of nanoparticles within 
plant systems. However, these interactions can pose challenges, particularly in terms of issues like 
phytotoxicity, biocompatibility, and potential alterations in nutrient intake, which may impact plant 
growth and development.
The regulatory and ethical dimensions associated with the utilization of nanoparticles in agri￾culture and plant systems, along with detoxification mechanisms, introduce additional layers of 
complication that demand careful assessment and management. Analytical techniques, such as 
spectroscopy and microscopy, play a vital role in characterizing nanoparticles and elucidating their 
behaviors in plant systems. Moving forward, comprehensive strategies incorporating risk assessment 
methodologies, ethical considerations, and regulatory compliance will be essential for the respon￾sible development and application of nanoparticles in agriculture. To ensure the safe and sustainable 
integration of nanoparticle-based technologies in plant-related applications while addressing poten￾tial environmental and societal concerns, collaboration among academics, policymakers, industry 
stakeholders, and the public is imperative. Further research in this area is crucial to fully compre￾hend the complex relationships between nanoparticles and plants and guarantee their safe and bene￾ficial application in environmental and agricultural contexts.
REFERENCES
Alber, N. A., & Vanlerberghe, G. C. (2021). The flexibility of metabolic interactions between chloroplasts and 
mitochondria in Nicotiana tabacum leaf. The Plant Journal, 106(6), 1625–1646.
Almatroodi, S. A., Alsahli, M. A., Almatroudi, A., Verma, A. K., Aloliqi, A., Allemailem, K. S., ... & Rahmani, A. 
H. (2021). Potential therapeutic targets of quercetin, a plant flavonol, and its role in the therapy of various 
types of cancer through the modulation of various cell signaling pathways. Molecules, 26(5), 1315.
An, J., Hu, P., Li, F., Wu, H., Shen, Y., White, J. C., ... & Giraldo, J. P. (2020). Emerging investigator 
series: Molecular mechanisms of plant salinity stress tolerance improvement by seed priming with 
cerium oxide nanoparticles. Environmental Science: Nano, 7(8), 2214–2228.
Aniento, F., Sánchez de Medina Hernández, V., Dagdas, Y., Rojas-Pierce, M., & Russinova, E. (2022). 
Molecular mechanisms of endomembrane trafficking in plants. The Plant Cell, 34(1), 146–173.
Arora, S., Bhushan, B., D’Souza, S. F., & Stanislaus, F. (2008). Role of enzymes in plant metal tolerance: A 
review. Biologia Plantarum, 52(4), 609–620.
Balfagón, D., Zandalinas, S. I., Mittler, R., & Gómez-Cadenas, A. (2020). High temperatures modify plant 
responses to abiotic stress conditions. Physiologia Plantarum, 170(3), 335–344.
Bhattacharya, S., & Nguyen, T. A. (2019). Nanotechnology in agriculture: Prospects and constraints. 
Nanotechnology, Science and Applications, 12, 19–35.
Blaszczak, W., & Swietach, P. (2021). What do cellular responses to acidity tell us about cancer?. Cancer and 
Metastasis Reviews, 40(4), 1159–1176.
Bludau, I., & Aebersold, R. (2020). Proteomic and interactomic insights into the molecular basis of cell func￾tional diversity. Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology, 21(6), 327–340.
Brown, R. E., & Jones, C. D. (2019). Impact of nanoparticle properties on phytotoxicity. Journal of 
Environmental Science and Health, Part C, 37(3), 185–205.
Bui, T. M., Wiesolek, H. L., & Sumagin, R. (2020). ICAM-1: A master regulator of cellular responses in inflam￾mation, injury resolution, and tumorigenesis. Journal of Leucocyte Biology, 108(3), 787–799.
Cevher-Keskin, B. (2020). Endomembrane trafficking in plants. In Taner Yonar (Ed), Electrodialysis (pp. 1–
22). London, UK: IntechOpen.
Chithrani, B. D., Chan, W. C. W., Frew, L. J., Coles, D., Massé, R., & Shadbolt, N. (2006). Intracellular 
uptake, transport, and processing of silver nanoparticles in human breast cancer cells. Nano Letters, 
6(11), 2259–2266.156 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
Corpas, F. J., & Palma, J. M. (2020). H2S signaling in plants and applications in agriculture. Journal of 
Advanced Research, 24, 131–137.
Cota-Ruiz, K., Ye, Y., Valdes, C., Deng, C., Wang, Y., Hernández-Viezcas, J. A., ... & Gardea-Torresdey, J. 
L. (2020). Copper nanowires as nanofertilizers for alfalfa plants: Understanding nano-bio systems 
interactions from microbial genomics, plant molecular responses and spectroscopic studies. Science of 
the Total Environment, 742, 140572.
Delgado, C., Mora-Poblete, F., Ahmar, S., Chen, J. T., & Figueroa, C. R. (2021). Jasmonates and plant salt 
stress: Molecular players, physiological effects, and improving tolerance by using genome-associated 
tools. International Journal of Molecular Sciences, 22(6), 3082.
Dey, N., Roy, U. K., Aditya, M., & Bhattacharjee, S. (2020). Defensive strategies of ROS in programmed cell 
death associated with hypertensive response in plant pathogenesis. Annals of Systems Biology, 3(1), 
001–009.
Ding, Y., Shi, Y., & Yang, S. (2020). Molecular regulation of plant responses to environmental temperatures. 
Molecular Plant, 13(4), 544–564.
Fitz-James, M. H., & Cavalli, G. (2022). Molecular mechanisms of transgenerational epigenetic inheritance. 
Nature Reviews Genetics, 23(6), 325–341.
Frewer, L. J., Coles, D., & Champion, K. (2011). Ethical aspects of nanotechnology in food and agriculture. 
Proceedings of the Nutrition Society, 70(1), 80–88.
Gao, Y., Liu, Y., & Li, X. (2021). Nanoparticle-induced changes in plant water relations: A review. Environmental 
Research, 193, 110504. doi:10.1016/j.envres.2020.110504
Ghosh, U. K., Islam, M. N., Siddiqui, M. N., Cao, X., & Khan, M. A. R. (2022). Proline, a multifaceted signal￾ling molecule in plant responses to abiotic stress: Understanding the physiological mechanisms. Plant 
Biology, 24(2), 227–239.
Giraldo, J. P., Landry, M. P., Faltermeier, S. M., McNicholas, T. P., Iverson, N. M., Boghossian, A. A., & Reuel, 
N. F. (2014). Plant nanobionics approach to augment photosynthesis and biochemical sensing. Nature 
Materials, 13(4), 400–408.
Guo, G., Xiao, J., & Jeong, B. R. (2022). Iron source and medium pH affect nutrient uptake and pigment con￾tent in Petunia hybrida ‘Madness Red’cultured in vitro. International Journal of Molecular Sciences, 
23(16), 8943.
Gupta, M. K., Singh, R., & Pandey, A. (2020). Reactive oxygen species and antioxidant defense in plants under 
abiotic stress. Journal of Environmental Biology, 41(3), 733–746.
Handy, R. D., Owen, R., Valsami-Jones, E., & Pinto, N. (2008). Practical considerations for conducting 
ecotoxicity test methods with manufactured nanomaterials: What have we learnt so far? Ecotoxicology, 
17(7), 913–921.
Iftikhar, S., Turan, V., Tauqeer, H. M., Rasool, B., Zubair, M., Khan, M. A., ... & Ramzani, P. M. A. (2021). 
Phytomanagement of As-contaminated matrix: Physiological and molecular basis. In Handbook of 
Bioremediation (pp. 61–79). Academic Press.
Ivanov, R., & Vert, G. (2021). Endocytosis in plants: Peculiarities and roles in the regulated trafficking of plant 
metal transporters. Biology of the Cell, 113(1), 1–13.
Johnston, N. R., & Strobel, S. A. (2020). Principles of fluoride toxicity and the cellular response: A review. 
Archives of Toxicology, 94(4), 1051–1069.
Johnson, M. J., Johnson, N. O., & Johnson, P. Q. (2019). Species-specific variations in nanoparticle interaction 
with plant cell walls. Frontiers in Plant Science, 10, 1385. doi:10.3389/fpls.2019.01385
Jones, C. D., & Brown, R. E. (2020). Impact of surface coatings on nanoparticle adsorption onto plant cell 
walls. Environmental Science & Technology, 54(8), 4895–4904.
Kaur, H., Manna, M., Thakur, T., Gautam, V., & Salvi, P. (2021). Imperative role of sugar signaling and trans￾port during drought stress responses in plants. Physiologia Plantarum, 171(4), 833–848.
Kah, M., Beilstein, M., & Korte, C. (2018). Nanoparticle delivery systems for plant pest and disease control. 
Annual Review of Phytopathology, 56(1), 55–72.
Khodakovskaya, M., & Dervishi, E. (2009). Carbon nanotubes are able to penetrate plant seed coat and dramat￾ically affect seed germination and plant growth. ACS Nano, 3(10), 3221–3227.
Kinoshita, A., & Richter, R. (2020). Genetic and molecular basis of floral induction in Arabidopsis thaliana. 
Journal of Experimental Botany, 71(9), 2490–2504.Molecular Mechanisms of Plant–Nanoparticle Interactions 157
Kirita, Y., Wu, H., Uchimura, K., Wilson, P. C., & Humphreys, B. D. (2020). Cell profiling of mouse acute 
kidney injury reveals conserved cellular responses to injury. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, 117(27), 15874–15883.
Leri, M., Scuto, M., Ontario, M. L., Calabrese, V., Calabrese, E. J., Bucciantini, M., & Stefani, M. (2020). 
Healthy effects of plant polyphenols: Molecular mechanisms. International Journal of Molecular 
Sciences, 21(4), 1250.
Lee, W. M., & An, Y. J. (2008). An approach to the application of the OECD TG 301A for estimating the bio￾degradation of nanoparticles. Chemosphere, 71(4), 817–822.
Li, H., Wang, X., Zhang, Y., Zhang, W., Wang, Z., & Chen, X. (2017). Impact of nanoparticles on nutrient 
uptake by plants: A critical appraisal. Journal of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, 17(7), 4426–4436.
Li, X., Zhang, M., Wang, Y., Zhang, H., & Chen, Y. (2019). Nanoparticle effects on seed germination and seed￾ling growth: A review. Journal of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, 19(8), 4590–4606.
Lin, S., & Xing, B. (2007). Phytotoxicity of nanoparticles: Inhibition of seed germination and root growth. 
Environmental Pollution, 150(2), 243–250.
Ma, X., & Geiser-Lee, J. (2010). Phytotoxicity and biotransformation of La2O3 nanoparticles in a terrestrial 
plant cucumber (Cucumis sativus). Nanotoxicology, 4(4), 319–328.
Maestri, E., & Marmiroli, M. (2010). Plant response to metal contamination. Environmental and Experimental 
Botany, 68(1), 74–86.
Miralles, P., & Church, T. L. (2012). Uptake, translocation, and transmission of carbon nanomaterials in rice 
plants. Small, 8(18), 2812–2819.
Mittler, R., Zandalinas, S. I., Fichman, Y., & Van Breusegem, F. (2022). Reactive oxygen species signalling in 
plant stress responses. Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology, 23(10), 663–679.
Mithaiwala, M. N., Santana-Coelho, D., Porter, G. A., & O’connor, J. C. (2021). Neuroinflammation and 
the kynurenine pathway in CNS disease: Molecular mechanisms and therapeutic implications. Cells, 
10(6), 1548.
Murchie, E. H., & Ruban, A. V. (2020). Dynamic non-photochemical quenching in plants: From molecular 
mechanism to productivity. The Plant Journal, 101(4), 885–896.
Multisanti, C. R., Riolo, K., Impellitteri, F., Chebbi, I., Faggio, C., & Giannetto, A. (2023). Short-term in vitro 
exposure of Pinctada imbricata’s haemocytes to quaternium-15: Exploring physiological and cellular 
responses. Environmental Toxicology and Pharmacology, 101, 104198.
Nadarajah, K. K. (2020). ROS homeostasis in abiotic stress tolerance in plants. International Journal of 
Molecular Sciences, 21(15), 5208.
Nair, R., & Varghese, S. H. (2010). Nanoparticulate material delivery to plants. Plant Science, 179(3), 154–163.
Nel, A., & Xia, T. (2006). Toxic potential of materials at the nanolevel. Science, 311(5761), 622–627.
Patke, A., Young, M. W., & Axelrod, S. (2020). Molecular mechanisms and physiological importance of circa￾dian rhythms. Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology, 21(2), 67–84.
Postiglione, A. E., & Muday, G. K. (2020). The role of ROS homeostasis in ABA-induced guard cell signaling. 
Frontiers in Plant Science, 11, 968.
Rai, P. K., Kim, K. H., Lee, S. S., & Lee, J. H. (2020). Molecular mechanisms in phytoremediation of envir￾onmental contaminants and prospects of engineered transgenic plants/microbes. Science of the Total 
Environment, 705, 135858.
Razi, K., & Muneer, S. (2021). Drought stress-induced physiological mechanisms, signaling pathways and 
molecular response of chloroplasts in common vegetable crops. Critical Reviews in Biotechnology, 
41(5), 669–691.
Rico, C. M., & Majumdar, S. (2011). Internalization and effects of gold nanoparticles exposure on 
Agrobacterium tumefaciens – A soil bacterium relevant to plant and environmental health. Science of 
the Total Environment, 409(17), 3274–3280.
Ritonga, F. N., & Chen, S. (2020). Physiological and molecular mechanism involved in cold stress tolerance in 
plants. Plants, 9(5), 560.
Ruano, G., & Scheuring, D. (2020). Plant cells under attack: Unconventional endomembrane trafficking during 
plant defense. Plants, 9(3), 389.
Sampaio, M., Neves, J., Cardoso, T., Pissarra, J., Pereira, S., & Pereira, C. (2022). Coping with abiotic stress in 
plants—An endomembrane trafficking perspective. Plants, 11(3), 338.158 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
Sanders, B. M., Goering, P. L., & Jenkins, K. (2023). The role of general and metal-specific cellular responses 
in protection and repair of metal-induced damage: Stress proteins and metallothioneins. In Toxicology of 
Metals, Volume I (pp. 165–187). CRC Press.
Schreck, A., Kestens, M., & Goedert, L. (2014). Imaging and elemental analysis of gold nanoparticles in 
Arabidopsis thaliana roots. Nanoscale, 6(13), 7957–7964.
Schmit, J. D., Feric, M., & Dundr, M. (2021). How hierarchical interactions make membraneless organelles 
tick like clockwork. Trends in Biochemical Sciences, 46(7), 525–534.
Shahbaz, M., & Kim, K.-R. (2018). Role of organic acids in detoxification of metal ions by plants. Environmental 
Chemistry Letters, 16(4), 1305–1318.
Shao, X., Meng, C., Song, W., Zhang, T., & Chen, Q. (2023). Subcellular visualization: Organelle-specific 
targeted drug delivery and discovery. Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews, 114977.
Silva, B. S., DiGiovanni, L., Kumar, R., Carmichael, R. E., Kim, P. K., & Schrader, M. (2020). Maintaining 
social contacts: The physiological relevance of organelle interactions. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 
(BBA)-Molecular Cell Research, 1867(11), 118800.
Smith, A. B., Smith, C. D., & Smith, E. F. (2018). Surface modifications of nanoparticles influence adsorption 
onto plant cell walls: A comprehensive review. Journal of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, 18(5), 
3265–3274.
Smith, J. A., Johnson, A. B., & Williams, C. D. (2017). Phytotoxic effects of nanoparticles on plant growth and 
development: A review. Environmental Science: Nano, 4(9), 1940–1952.
Takahashi, F., Kuromori, T., Urano, K., Yamaguchi-Shinozaki, K., & Shinozaki, K. (2020). Drought stress 
responses and resistance in plants: From cellular responses to long-distance intercellular communica￾tion. Frontiers in Plant Science, 11, 1407.
Van Zelm, E., Zhang, Y., & Testerink, C. (2020). Salt tolerance mechanisms of plants. Annual Review of Plant 
Biology, 71, 403–433.
Wang, N. Q., Kong, C. H., Wang, P., & Meiners, S. J. (2021). Root exudate signals in plant–plant interactions. 
Plant, Cell & Environment, 44(4), 1044–1058.
Wang, X., & Xie, A. (2012). Phytotoxicity, accumulation and transport of silver nanoparticles by Arabidopsis 
thaliana. Nanotoxicology, 6(6), 582–592.
Wang, X., & Chen, X. (2018). Nanoparticles in soil: Insight into physicochemical transformation and bio￾availability. Environmental Science and Pollution Research, 25(15), 14373–14387. doi:10.1007/
s11356-018-1494-8
Ward, B. J., Gobeil, P., Séguin, A., Atkins, J., Boulay, I., Charbonneau, P. Y., ... & Landry, N. (2021). Phase 1 
randomized trial of a plant-derived virus-like particle vaccine for COVID-19. Nature Medicine, 27(6), 
1071–1078.
Wu, H., Zhu, Y., & Gao, Y. (2018). Effects of nanoparticles on seed germination and growth of crop plants: 
A review. Chemosphere, 202, 154–167.
Yadav, B., Jogawat, A., Lal, S. K., Lakra, N., Mehta, S., Shabek, N., & Narayan, O. P. (2021). Plant mineral 
transport systems and the potential for crop improvement. Planta, 253, 1–30.
Yu, Z., Xu, X., Guo, L., Jin, R., & Lu, Y. (2024). Uptake and transport of micro/nanoplastics in terrestrial 
plants: Detection, mechanisms, and influencing factors. Science of The Total Environment, 907, 168155.
Zhang, W., & Wang, Z. (2020). Impact of nanoparticles on seed germination and seedling growth: A review. 
Journal of Hazardous Materials, 384, 121319. doi:10.1016/j.jhazmat.2019.121319
Zhang, H., Zhu, J., Gong, Z., & Zhu, J. K. (2022). Abiotic stress responses in plants. Nature Reviews Genetics, 
23(2), 104–119.
Zhao, Y. G., & Zhang, H. (2020). Phase separation in membrane biology: The interplay between membrane￾bound organelles and membraneless condensates. Developmental Cell, 55(1), 30–44.
Zulfiqar, U., Ayub, A., Hussain, S., Waraich, E. A., El-Esawi, M. A., Ishfaq, M., ... & Maqsood, M. F. (2022). 
Cadmium toxicity in plants: Recent progress on morpho-physiological effects and remediation strat￾egies. Journal of Soil Science and Plant Nutrition, 22(1), 212–269.159
DOI: 10.1201/9781003477730-11 159
10 Nanoparticle Phytotoxicity
Ashwitha Kodaparthi, Teetla Shivani, Kalal Akhila, 
B. Susmitha, and P. Chiranjeevi
10.1 INTRODUCTION
Nanoparticles (NPs) are tiny particles with dimensions ranging from 1 to 100 nanometres. NPs have 
gained significant attention for their diverse applications across various industries, from medicine 
to agriculture. However, their potential adverse effects on the environment, particularly in relation 
to plant health, have raised concerns. This chapter delves into the emerging field of nanoparticle 
phytotoxicity, aiming to elucidate the underlying mechanisms and assess its implications for envir￾onmental health. The interactions between nanoparticles and plants are multifaceted. Nanoparticles 
enter plants via various pathways, like root uptake and foliar application, leading to physiological 
and biochemical alterations. Understanding the mechanisms governing nanoparticle uptake, trans￾location, and accumulation within plant tissues is crucial for assessing their phytotoxic effects. 
Several factors influence nanoparticle phytotoxicity, including nanoparticle characteristics (size, 
shape, surface chemistry, etc.), plant species, and environmental conditions (soil pH, moisture 
content, nutrient availability, etc.). NPs cause free radical damage by generating ROS, disrupting 
cellular equilibrium, and impairing photosynthesis and nutrient uptake. Furthermore, NPs may inter￾fere with plant–microbe interactions by altering soil microbial communities and nutrient cycling 
processes. Addressing nanoparticle phytotoxicity requires a multidisciplinary approach integrating 
nanoscience, plant biology, environmental science, and toxicology. The development of standardised 
testing protocols and risk assessment frameworks will facilitate the evaluation of nanoparticle 
safety and guide regulatory policies. Moreover, the design of environmentally benign nanoparticles 
and sustainable agricultural practices may mitigate potential adverse effects while harnessing the 
benefits of nanotechnology for sustainable agriculture and environmental stewardship.
Nanoparticle phytotoxicity represents a complex and dynamic research frontier with profound 
implications for the environment and human health. By elucidating the underlying mechanisms and 
adopting proactive strategies, we can harness the potential of nanotechnology while safeguarding 
the integrity of ecosystems and ensuring a sustainable future.
10.2 NANOPARTICLE PHYTOTOXICITY
Nanoparticles differ greatly from each other in their chemical and physical characteristics and are 
imperceptible to the human eye. The properties of nanoparticles change depending on their atomic 
scale due to changes in their surface area to volume ratios. The properties of nanoparticles are 
mostly determined by their surface atoms. Compared to bulk materials, nanoparticles have signifi￾cant surface area to volume ratios due to their diminutive size. This characteristic is responsible for 
their unique physiochemical properties.160 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
The detrimental effects of NPs on plant life are referred to as nanoparticle phytotoxicity. This 
includes the adverse effects of synthetic or naturally occurring nanoparticles on various aspects of 
plant physiology, growth, and general health. High chemical reactivity and inherent phytotoxicity 
are attributes of nanoparticles that stem from their physical and chemical properties, like size and 
surface area. Plants are severely impacted by nanoparticle toxicity, which, in turn, can affect entire 
ecosystems.
Plants growing in areas contaminated by nanomaterials may show changes in their metabolism, 
slower development, and reduced biomass production. Nanoparticles have the ability to attach to 
plant roots, where they can go on to cause physicochemical toxicity and, ultimately, plant cell death.
10.2.1 Properties of Nanoparticles and Their Phytotoxicity
The interactions between nanoparticles and ecological systems depend greatly on the surface area 
and size of the nanoparticles. The surface area of nanoparticles increases as the size reduces in 
relation to volume, leading to increased surface reactivity. Notably, the ways in which systems 
react, distribute, and remove NPs depend on the size and surface area of the particles (Powers et al., 
2007). Nanoparticle size affects a number of biological processes, like endocytic pathways, cel￾lular uptake, and nanoparticle processing by endocytosis (Nel et al., 2006, Aillon et al., 2009). The 
ability of nanoparticles to enter biological matter and change the structural configuration of various 
macromolecules is the reason for their size-dependent toxicity, which interferes with vital biological 
processes (Lovrić et al., 2005).
The entry of nanoparticles into plants is determined by the size of the nanoparticles and is dir￾ectly correlated with nanoparticle intake. The size of nanoparticles influences their properties, like 
toxicity, aggregation, and transport kinetics into plant cells (Tripathi et al., 2017).
Nanoparticle form is also associated with reactivity on the surface of cells or within various parts 
of plants and on the surface of the NPs. The area and morphology of nanoparticles act as crucial 
criteria in identifying the precise interaction zones between nanoparticles and plant cells. The plant 
cell wall is negatively charged and hence, the charge of nanoparticles plays an important role in 
their attachment to the surface of plant cells. The hydrophobic nature of the plant cell surface is a 
significant factor in absorption and transportation processes, after particle size and charge (Kaphle 
et al., 2018).
The surface charge of nanoparticles largely influences their interactions with biological matter. It 
is the primary regulator of several NP properties, including transmembrane permeability, colloidal 
behaviour, and selective adsorption (Georgieva et al., 2011, Hoshino et al., 2004). Because of their 
improved protein opsonisation, cationic nanoparticles show greater cellular intake than anionic or 
neutral nanoparticles.
Surface charge directly affects biological reactions within nanoparticles by modifying their size 
and structure, leading to the development of aggregates or agglomerates. Therefore, surface charge 
is a foremost factor in nanoparticle phytotoxicity (Hoshino et al., 2004).
The crystalline structure and content of nanoparticles have an impact on their toxicity, as well. In 
one study, the soluble forms of silver and copper NPs induced toxicity in the examined specimens, 
while titanium dioxide NPs of identical size failed to generate harmful effects (Griffitt et al., 2008). 
When nanoparticles come into contact with water or another dispersion medium, their structure may 
alter. ZnS nanoparticles reorganise their crystal structure when exposed to water, which results in 
their structure becoming bulky (Zhang et al., 2003). This suggests that the diluent also plays a part 
in nanoparticle toxicity.
Nanoparticle toxicity is also influenced by their states of aggregation. In general, NP aggregation 
states are influenced by various aspects, including composition, surface polarity, and size. Carbon 
nanotubes are primarily accumulated without exhibiting acute toxicity; however, they can cause tox￾icity when aggregates are built up over extended periods of time (Yang et al., 2008). Compared to Nanoparticle Phytotoxicity 161
well-dispersed carbon nanotubes, aggregating carbon nanotubes have more negative effects (Wick 
et al., 2007). Furthermore, as the concentrations of nanoparticles increase, their toxicity decreases 
(Table 10.1).
10.2.2  Methods for Determining Nanoparticle Properties
Nanoparticle properties can be determined using different spectrometry and microscopy methods 
(Figure 10.1).
Spectroscopic methods play a pivotal role in the characterisation of nanoparticles, offering valu￾able insights into their properties at the nanoscale. These techniques exploit the interaction between 
light and nanoparticles, leveraging the unique optical signatures exhibited by these tiny structures. 
Among the diverse spectroscopic methods available, UV-Vis spectroscopy stands out as a powerful 
tool for determining nanoparticles’ size, shape, and concentration.
Synchrotron radiation spectrometry is an advanced technique used for the determination and 
characterisation of nanoparticles. Synchrotron radiation is emitted when charged particles, such 
as electrons, are accelerated to nearly the speed of light within a synchrotron facility. This intense 
FIGURE 10.1 A flowchart illustrating techniques for determining the properties of nanoparticles.
TABLE 10.1
Impact of nanoparticles on various physiochemical properties of plants
S. No. Positive Impact Negative Impact
1 Increased levels of light absorption. Alterations in nutrient and water accumulation.
2 Enhanced shoot and root growth. Negative impacts on plant genome systems.
3 Increased conductance by stomata. Morphological and cellular structural alterations.
4 Enhanced levels of antioxidant enzymes. Dysregulation in secondary metabolite production.
5 Excessive nutrient translocation. Toxic effects on plant genomes.
6 Increased chlorophyll content. Lipid peroxidation of cell membranes.
7 Increased yields of plant products. Oxidation of biomolecules leading to the upregulation of proteins.162 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
light source covers a broad spectral range, from infrared to X-rays, providing researchers with 
powerful tools for examining the properties of nanoparticles with exceptional sensitivity and reso￾lution. It offers several advantages for nanoparticle determination, including high photon flux, 
tuneable energy, and excellent spatial and temporal resolutions. These capabilities enable detailed 
investigations of nanoparticle properties, such as size, shape, composition, structure, and surface 
chemistry, with unparallelled accuracy and sensitivity.
Micro X-ray fluorescence (µ-XRF) spectroscopy is an analytical technique used for the deter￾mination and characterisation of nanoparticles. It offers high spatial resolution, allowing researchers 
to study the elemental composition and distribution of nanoparticles at the microscale or even 
nanoscale.
In µ-XRF spectroscopy, a focused X-ray beam is directed onto a sample, causing the atoms in 
the sample nanoparticles to fluoresce and emit characteristic X-ray photons. These emitted X-rays 
are then detected and analysed to determine the elemental composition of the nanoparticles. By 
scanning the sample with the focused X-ray beam, researchers can create elemental maps that reveal 
the spatial distributions of different elements within the nanoparticles. µ-XRF spectroscopy is par￾ticularly useful for analysing heterogeneous samples, such as nanoparticle-containing matrices and 
complex biological specimens.
X-Ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) provides information about the local atomic structures 
and chemical environments surrounding specific elements within nanoparticles. By measuring the 
absorption of X-rays as a function of energy, researchers can determine the oxidation states, coord￾ination geometries, and bonding configurations of atoms within nanoparticles. XAS is particularly 
useful for studying the composition and electronic structure of nanomaterials.
Atomic spectrometry techniques are instrumental in determining the elemental composition, 
concentration, and distribution of nanoparticles. These techniques offer high sensitivity, precision, 
and versatility, making them indispensable tools for nanoparticle characterisation.
Inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) is a highly sensitive technique used for 
the quantitative analysis of elements in nanoparticles. It involves atomising a sample in an argon 
plasma, followed by the mass spectrometric detection of the ions produced. ICP-MS can detect trace 
elements at the subparts per billion level, making it suitable for analysing nanoparticles with com￾plex compositions.
Similar to ICP-MS, inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES) uses 
argon plasma to atomise a sample but instead of mass spectrometry, it relies on optical emission 
spectroscopy to detect the characteristic emission lines of elements. ICP-OES offers high sensitivity 
and multi-element capabilities, making it valuable for the elemental analysis of nanoparticles.
Microscopy plays a pivotal role in the determination and characterisation of nanoparticles, 
providing valuable insights into their size, shape, morphology, distribution, and surface proper￾ties. Several microscopy techniques are commonly employed for nanoparticle analysis, with each 
offering unique advantages and capabilities
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) is a powerful technique for imaging nanoparticles at 
the atomic scale. It involves transmitting a beam of electrons through a thin sample, which interacts 
with the nanoparticles to produce high-resolution images. TEM provides detailed information about 
nanoparticle morphology, size, crystalline structure, and lattice spacing. It is particularly useful for 
studying individual nanoparticles and their internal structure at nanometre-scale resolutions.
Field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM) is an advanced form of SEM that utilises 
a field emission electron source to generate a highly focused electron beam, enabling the high￾resolution imaging and analysis of nanoscale features. It uses a focused beam of electrons to scan 
a sample surface, generating detailed images of nanoparticle aggregates, complex structures, and 
large-area distributions.
Scanning probe microscopy (SPM) offers unparallelled precision and resolution in nanoparticle 
determination. Unlike atomic force microscopy (AFM), which scans for a sharp tip over a Nanoparticle Phytotoxicity 163
sample surface and measures interaction forces to generate high-resolution images of individual 
nanoparticles, SPM maps variations in tunnelling currents to visualise nanoparticles’ atomic 
structure. SPM provides a non-destructive, ambient condition-compatible means of studying 
nanoparticles, making it indispensable for nanoparticle characterisation in diverse fields.
AFM enables the nanometre-scale imaging and precise surface characterisation of nanoparticles. 
It utilises a sharp tip mounted on a cantilever to scan a sample surface and measure the interaction 
forces between the tip and the nanoparticles. AFM can visualise individual nanoparticles, measure 
their height, width, and surface roughness, and probe into their mechanical, electrical, and chemical 
properties. It is particularly useful for studying nanoparticles that are immobilised on surfaces or 
dispersed in solutions.
In nanoparticle determination, light microscopy serves as a versatile tool for the initial screening 
and qualitative assessment of nanoparticle samples.
Two-photon microscopy is a cutting-edge imaging technique that offers unique advantages for 
the determination and characterisation of nanoparticles. In this process, two photons of lower energy 
simultaneously excite a fluorophore to a higher energy state. This process only occurs at the focal 
point of a tightly focused laser beam, allowing for the precise spatial localisation of the fluores￾cence emission. Unlike traditional confocal microscopy, which relies on single-photon excitation, 
two-photon microscopy utilises the simultaneous absorption of two photons to excite fluorophores, 
providing enhanced depth penetration, reduced photobleaching, and improved spatial resolutions in 
thick samples.
Confocal microscopy provides the optical sectioning and three-dimensional imaging of 
nanoparticles within samples. It uses a pinhole aperture to reject out-of-focus light, enabling the 
reconstruction of nanoparticle distributions in three dimensions with high resolutions. Confocal 
microscopy is ideal for studying nanoparticle localisation, aggregation, and interactions with 
surrounding materials in biological and environmental samples. It can also be combined with fluor￾escence labelling for the multiparametric analysis of nanoparticles.
10.3 NANOPARTICLE ASSOCIATIONS WITH PLANTS
Nanoparticles go through several geo/ecological reactions that impact their biological accessibility 
and toxicity. Nanoparticles can be absorbed the roots of plants and transported to upper parts of 
plants, where they gather in intracellular and cellular structures (Figure 10.2).
FIGURE 10.2 A diagram illustrating the series of interactions between nanoparticles and plants.164 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
The first stage of accumulation is the uptake of nanoparticles by plant roots from the soil. After 
examining many nanoparticles, several studies have postulated that NP bioaccumulation in plants 
is caused by the uptake of nanoparticles by roots, which are then spread throughout different plant 
tissues as a result of various alterations, like biotransformation, the dissolution of crystal phases, 
and accumulation.
Examining nanoparticles’ fundamental structure is complementary to studying its effects 
on nanoparticle uptake, transport, and aggregation. Therefore, thorough investigations into the 
characteristics of nanoparticles are required to improve comprehension and clarify absorption, 
transportation, and aggregation processes (Raliya et al., 2016).
Tony nanoparticles, which have sizes between 3 and 5 nm, are adsorbed by plant roots through 
osmotic potential, capillary action, or direct penetration into the epidermal cells of roots (Lin & 
Xing, 2008, Du et al., 2011). Large nanoparticles are constrained by the epidermal cells of roots, 
which are semipermeable and only have tiny holes.
Nanoparticles cause the epidermal cell wall to generate fresh apertures, which facilitates their 
entry. They are transported outside of the cell through intercellular spaces after they have crossed 
the cell wall. Once NPs enter the vascular system, the xylem enables their unidirectional upwards 
movement. In order for nanoparticles to access the central vascular system, they must symplastically 
penetrate the endodermal barrier. Nanoparticles that reach the xylem are transferred to shoots and 
then back to roots via the phloem. Nanoparticles that cannot be internalised congregate in the endo￾dermal band. Nanoparticles that are taken up by plants can be identified in many parts of cortical 
cells, like the nucleus, cytoplasm, and epidermal cell wall (Wang et al., 2012).
Nutrient absorption can be altered by nanoparticles that are taken up by plant roots from the 
soil (Ruttkay-Nedecky et al., 2017). Nanoparticles can also be directly absorbed by seeds through 
intercellular gaps in their parenchymatic coatings, followed by cotyledon dispersion (Tripathi 
et al., 2017).
Leaves can also absorb nanoparticles via the cuticle or stomata. As the main leaf barrier, the cuticle 
limits the size of nanoparticles that can enter the leaf to less than 5 nm (Ruttkay-Nedecky et al., 
2017). NPs are also taken in by the plant through leaf stomata and then, intracellular transport into 
the vascular system occurs via apoplastic and symplastic pathways. The transport of nanoparticles is 
facilitated by nearby cells’ cytoplasm. Larger nanoparticles (50 to 200 nm) are transported between 
cells via the apoplastic pathway. Internalised nanoparticles are carried with the sugar flow via the 
phloem sieve tubes. These structures serve as strong sap sinks, allowing nanoparticles to move in 
both directions and aggregate to differing degrees in different parts of the plant (e.g., roots, stems, 
fruits, grains, and young leaves) (Tripathi et al., 2017, Raliya et al., 2016, Ruttkay-Nedecky et al., 
2017, Wang et al., 2013).
It is commonly acknowledged that a large number of nutrients in water and metal complexes 
enter plants via the extracellular translocation route. The key elements that impact the effective 
uptake of nanoparticles include application technique, dimension, quantity, and environmental 
conditions. Crucial components that impact the capture of nanoparticles on the leaf surface include 
the morphology and chemical makeup of the leaf, the occurrence of trichrome, and the presence of 
leaf secretions (Larue et al., 2014).
It is crucial that only highly stable and pure nanoparticles are introduced into physiological 
surroundings. The characteristics of nanoparticles and the surrounding environment influence how 
quickly nanoparticles accumulate on the roots of plants.
10.3.1 Nanoparticle Entry into Plants
When discharged into the environment, nanoparticles can enter plant roots, accumulate there, and 
then move to other plant parts. Many plants have been exposed to a range of nanoparticles in order 
to examine their toxicity during uptake, transport, and localisation in cells (Kurepa et al., 2010).Nanoparticle Phytotoxicity 165
The features of nanoparticles, like their dimensions, concentration, and dosage, as well as the 
transfer technique and plant species, are some of the factors that affect NP uptake and transloca￾tion. Over time, the bioaccumulation of nanoparticles can result in modifications to physiological 
systems that impact the maturation and development of plants (Wang et al., 2011). Carbon-based, 
metal-based, oxide-based, and semiconductor NPs have all been widely examined in relation to their 
impact on the environment. While infrequently released into the atmosphere, metal nanoparticles 
are extremely hazardous at low concentrations.
The number of nanoparticles that reaches edible plant organs depends on the NPs’ size and 
surface characteristics. The two routes for nanoparticle uptake are below ground, where uptake 
occurs through roots, and above ground, when airborne nanoparticles are deposited onto plant 
shoots.
Even with a reduced cell wall diameter, nanoparticles can still enter and accumulate in leaves; 
however, the effectiveness of this process varies based on the kind of plant and the physicochemical 
properties of the nanoparticles (Larue et al., 2012).
Plants typically have cuticle waxes covering their shoot surfaces, which make them lipophilic 
and promote the deposition of nanoparticles. Large nanoparticles are able to enter areas that are 
devoid of a cuticle. Meanwhile, belowground nanoparticles can penetrate the xylem through the 
central cylinder, cortex, and lateral roots.
Nanoparticles collect in plant roots after passing through holes in the cell wall. In root hairs, 
the size of pores in the cell wall extends from 3.5–3.8 nanometres, so nanoparticles smaller than 
5 nm in diameter can effectively traverse the cell wall without causing damage (Hischemöller 
et al., 2009).
10.3.2 Nanoparticle Uptake in Plants
Nanoparticles are taken up by plants based on different criteria, including their composition, size, 
structure, and charge (Figure 10.3).
When exposed to different nanoparticles, many crops absorb them and once the nanoparticles enter 
the crops, they move to different tissues, like flowers, fruits, leaves, stems, and poles. Nanoparticles 
act in a plant species-specific manner and their uptake varies according to their size and composition. 
FIGURE 10.3 A diagram illustrating different properties of nanoparticles.166 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
Different compositions of nanoparticles have different effects on fruit yields and root development. 
Plant parts, both above and below ground, have been shown to contain cobalt nanoparticles. The 
physicochemical features of nanoparticles and the plant type determine the uptake of nanoparticles 
by plants (Deng et al., 2014).
One of the key elements influencing the entry of nanoparticles into plants is their size. Larger 
nanoparticles are not absorbed by plants, while smaller nanoparticles are easily absorbed. For 
instance, only the tiniest TiO2
 nanoparticles can translocate across whole plants, when their sizes 
range from 14 to 655 nm. Nanoparticles below 36 nanometres can move from root cortical cells and 
be transported to the upper parts of plants, but nanoparticles below 140 nanometres pass into the root 
epidermis (Zhang et al., 2011).
Plants can absorb and translocate nanoparticles differently, even if they have the same compos￾ition and crystalline structure. In plants, nanoparticles in metallic and anatase crystalline forms are 
translocated differently. While metal nanoparticles move and aggregate primarily in aerial tissues, 
anatase nanoparticles principally stay in the roots (Ma et al., 2010).
The uptake of nanoparticles by plants is also influenced by the surface charge of the nanoparticles. 
This can be described as neutral, cationic (positive charge), or anionic (negative charge). When it 
comes to the uptake of nanoparticles based on their charge, woody plants appear to behave differ￾ently from herbaceous plants.
Woody plants take up both kinds of nanoparticles and internalise them after two days of exposure. 
But the absorption of cationic nanoparticles is ten times faster than that of anionic nanoparticles 
because of the electrostatic interactions that exist between the negatively charged root cell wall and 
positively charged nanoparticles. The repulsive electrostatic interactions between negatively charged 
nanoparticles and the negatively charged root surface may explain the slower absorption of anionic 
nanoparticles (Wang et al., 2014). Herbaceous species absorb cationic and anionic nanoparticles 
differently from woody plants. Under hydroponic conditions, 2-nm gold nanoparticles are absorbed 
and bioaccumulated by rice, although their distribution is dependent on their surface charge. The 
sequence of accumulation in rice roots is AuNP (+) > AuNP (0) > AuNP (-), where “+”, “0”, and “-” 
stand for positively, zero, and negatively electrically charged nanoparticles, respectively. In contrast 
to the roots, rice shoots exhibit the reversal sequence of nanoparticle uptake and a preference for 
anionic nanoparticles (Koelmel and Amarasiriwardena, 2012) (Figure 10.4).
10.3.3 Nanoparticle Accumulation
NPs are more effective and active than their bulk counterparts because of a variety of noteworthy 
physicochemical features. However, nanoparticles are occasionally ineffective in preserving their 
unique qualities when exposed to the environment. Numerous biotic and abiotic stimuli in the envir￾onment can alter their properties, including their interfacial chemistry and state of aggregation.
The complicated processes of nanoparticle transport and accumulation can be impacted by a 
variety of physicochemical variations across different plant varieties, such as permeability and the 
size of pores in the cell wall (Tripathi et al., 2017). Nanoparticles may be able to induce a range of 
structural and tissue modifications in plants, based on their composition and behaviour (Haverkamp 
and Marshall, 2009). Certain metal oxide nanoparticles that have been frequently researched, such 
as SiO2
NPs and TiO2
NPs, are stable and can be found in plants in their original form. However, other 
metal oxide nanoparticles are capable of transformation and are unstable, including NiO2
, CeO2
, 
CuO2
, La2
O3
, and Yb2
O3
 nanoparticles. When NPs encounter terrestrial plants, they tend to attach 
to and gather around the roots or the root surface. AgNPs have been shown to accumulate in mucilage 
and border cells. When leaves are exposed to nanoparticles, the particles accumulate in the stomata 
and are eventually translocated to various locations by the phloem. Plant responses to nanoparticles 
vary depending on the dose, size, and chemical structure of the nanoparticles, experimental settings, 
plant species, exposure time, etc.Nanoparticle Phytotoxicity 167
10.4 DIFFERENT NANOPARTICLES AND THEIR PHYTOTOXICITY
Nanoparticles act as key element in causing phytotoxicity. There are various nanoparticles and each 
show particular effects on plants (Figure 10.5).
10.4.1  Gold Nanoparticles
AuNPs are essentially spherical, although some AuNPs have irregular, triangular, or oval geom￾etries. The hydrodynamic diameter of AuNPs rises after being exposed to plants, indicating signifi￾cant AuNP aggregation as soon as the particles are diluted in water.
Au is the lowest chemically reactive metal and is unaffected by thermal energy and oxidative dis￾integration, as well as being inert in almost all acids and strong alkalis, except for nitro hydrochloric 
and selenic acids (Merchant,1998). AuNPs exposed to hydroponic conditions do not release Au 
ions. Plant reactions upon exposure to AuNPs are mostly triggered by the gold nanoparticles rather 
than gold ions and AuNPs dissolve very little in Au ions.
Anionic AuNPs can be transported extremely effectively from root to shoot during hydroponic 
cultivation, whereas cationic gold nanoparticles are easily absorbed by roots. Because of their size 
and surface charge, AuNPs exhibit subcellular accumulation following exposure to growth media.
The deposition of comparatively big particles is another cause of buildup. AuNPs cannot enter 
root cells due to these huge aggregates.
After entering plant cells, AuNPs disperse throughout the cytoplasm and vacuoles, with some of 
them adhering to various organelles. In particular, organelle-specific localisation is seen in the UN￾AuNP treatment nucleus, PEG-AuNP treatment vesicles, and Cit-AuNP treatment mitochondria.
Compared to their starting sizes, AuNPs aggregate to comparatively bigger sizes. The distinct 
chemical environment in plant tissues is the cause of the aggregation. AuNPs exhibiting 
distinct surface characteristics can be discovered in several subcellular locations and are linked to 
distinct organelles. AuNPs with varying surface charges have distinct physiological impacts, which 
is consistent with the biological processes of plants.
FIGURE 10.4 A diagram illustrating the translocation of nanoparticles within plants.168 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
10.4.2  Oxide Nanoparticles
Copper oxide nanoparticles have been shown to impede plant development by altering transpiration, 
the maximum photochemical efficiency of PSII, and the elongation of shoots and roots. It has been 
hypothesised that reduced electron transport, numbers of thylakoids in each granum, rate of photo￾synthesis, rate of transpiration, and conduction of stomata could be the causes of the suppression 
of photosynthesis (Rajput et al., 2018). CuO nanoparticles with a size of 43 nm are phytotoxic 
when humic acid is present. CuO nanoparticles inhibit the elongation of roots, as well as causing 
abnormalities in root morphology and ultrastructure. CuONPs produce ROS, which induce lipid 
peroxidation, mitochondrial disfunction, and programmed apoptosis (Peng et al., 2015). Active 
resistance mechanisms against Cu nanoparticles have been revealed by metabolic changes in the 
exudates, including the increased sequencing of amino acid, the elimination of copper ions and 
copper nanoparticles, the decreased production of citric acid, Cu ion mobilisation, the increased 
production of ascorbic acid to counter ROS, and the increased production of phenolic compounds to 
strengthen the free radical scavenging system. Additionally, root-based Cu bioaccumulation reduces 
root elongation and seed germination, leading to declines in root biomass and length. Cu treatments 
to roots lead to enhanced catalytic activity but reduce APX activity. Copper oxide nanoparticles 
have also been shown to cause damage to DNA in grassland and agricultural plants (Trujillo-Reyes 
et al., 2014).
Zinc oxide (ZnO) nanoparticles cause toxicity in cells and genetic toxicity in root meristems. 
These effects are caused by changes in metabolic activity, damage to genetic material, chromosomal 
abnormalities, cell cycle progression, and decreased cell membrane integrity. ZnO nanoparticles 
cause acute toxicity to plant species when present in low mg L−1 levels. The degree of toxicity varies 
greatly depending on the plant species, NP physicochemical parameters, and application procedure. 
FIGURE 10.5 A diagram illustrating various types of nanoparticles.Nanoparticle Phytotoxicity 169
The main mechanisms of action for zinc oxide nanoparticle toxicity in most plant varieties are the 
disintegration of NPs to zinc cations and the generation of reactive oxygen species. Toxicity induced 
by photons is linked to NP photochemical activity and has significant UV radiation-based impacts 
on the environment (Ma et al., 2013). ZnO nanoparticles cause a variety of mitotic abnormalities, 
the most common of which are chromosomal stickiness, bridges, breakages, and leggings. ZnO 
nanoparticle aggregates have been shown to pierce the epidermis of roots and parenchyma via the 
extracellular pathway in confocal microscopy images. On the other hand, the accumulation of a 
small number of nanoparticles in the xylem indicates that these nanoparticles can also pass through 
the endodermis via the intracellular pathway (Zhao et al., 2013).
Titanium dioxide (Ti02
) nanoparticles accumulate mostly in roots, which causes decreases in 
the fixation of carbon dioxide, rate of transpiration, and conductance of stomata (Hu et al., 2020). 
They have minimal impacts on PSII quantum efficiency (Fv/Fm ratio), photosynthetic pigments, and 
photochemical quenching (Da Costa and Sharma, 2015). However, increased concentrations consid￾erably reduce biomass, root length, and germination rate (Frazier et al., 2014).
TiO2
 nanoparticles have a considerable impact on the gene expression profiles of microRNAs, 
which are essential for both plant development and tolerance against abiotic stimuli, such dehydra￾tion, salinity, cold, and heavy metals.
10.4.3 Silver Nanoparticles
Development potential, seed germination, biological material content, and leaf surface area are gen￾erally considered as metrics for evaluating silver nanoparticle phytotoxicity in plants after AgNP 
exposure (Dietz and Herth, 2011, Aslani et al., 2014, Tripathi et al., 2017).
Exposure to AgNPs reduces biomass and leaf area and inhibits root growth and seed germination. 
For example, AgNPs dramatically reduce plant biomass, prevent shoot growth, and cause Spirodela 
polyrrhiza roots to abscise (Jiang et al., 2012). Exposure to increased AgNP concentrations also 
causes Arabidopsis biomass loss (Kaveh et al., 2013). In wheat, AgNPs shorten the length of shoots 
and roots in a dose-dependent manner (Dimkpa et al., 2013). In rice, AgNPs dramatically decrease 
root and shoot fresh weights and root length (Nair et al., 2014).
AgNPs are believed to be phytotoxic to plants at the physiological level based on changes in 
hormones, transpiration rate, and chlorophyll and nutrient uptake. AgNPs have the ability to inter￾fere with the production of chlorophyll in leaves, which can impact photosynthesis in plants (Tripathi 
et al., 2017). AgNPs have the capacity to modify the cell membrane’s permeability and fluidity, 
which can impact the absorption of nutrients and water. AgNPs impact plant hormones, as well. For 
example, AgNPs have the potential to build up in the leaves of Arabidopsis, alter the structure of 
thylakoid membranes, and lower chlorophyll levels, which impedes plant growth. AgNPs also dis￾rupt the equilibrium of certain vital elements in leaf gametophytes and reduce chlorophyll levels. 
AgNP exposure lowers auxin accumulation and downregulates genes linked to auxin receptors. 
Ag2SNPs supress plant growth by upregulating the expression of six ethylene signalling pathway 
genes, indicating that Ag2SNPs may influence plant growth by interacting with the ethylene signal￾ling pathway.
10.4.4  Carbon-​Based Nanoparticles
Because of their wide range of uses, carbon-based nanoparticles are regarded as important materials 
in nanotechnology. Consequently, a lot of phytotoxic studies have been conducted to assess their 
possible toxicity.
Multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) greatly decrease shoot and root elongation (Begum 
et al., 2012). The toxicity of MWCNTs is associated with free radical damage and disruption in the 
equilibrium of micronutrients (Zaytseva et al., 2017). Single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) 170 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
induce dose-dependent, oxidative stress-induced programmed cell death and unfavourable bio￾logical reactions, like plasma membrane deposition, chromatin condensation, and cell aggregation 
(Shen et al., 2010).
Fullerene C60 reduces the amounts of chlorophyll a and chlorophyll b, as well as the O2
 produced 
by chloroplasts (Santos et al., 2013). Graphene nanoparticles cause significant reductions in both 
the quantity and size of leaves (Begum et al., 2011). Carbon-based NPs have an adverse impact on 
growth of plants by changing the levels of important phytohormones. Their toxicity may also vary 
depending on the size of the nanoparticles. It has also been shown that carbon-based NPs have nega￾tive impacts on the responses of commercially significant crops to environmental challenges, such 
as drought and salinity, that previously showed no symptoms (Hao et al., 2019).
10.4.5 Silica Nanoparticles
The impact of silica NPs on plants is primarily seen when they are at greater concentrations, although 
their impact can also vary depending on their size and charge (Slomberg and Schoenfisch, 2012).
One study found that silica NPs of three distinct sizes (7, 12, and 22 nanometres) exhibited 
toxic effects on Allium cepa at high compositions (540–1820 mg/L). The results showed that silica 
nanoparticles had an impact on metrics related to plant growth, including seedling germination and 
root elongation. Furthermore, chromosomal aberrations showing the genotoxic effects of silica NPs 
have been observed in root meristems via cytogenetic analysis (Da Silva et al., 2017).
Bacillus thuringiensis transgenic cotton plants exposed to silicon dioxide nanoparticles at a con￾centration of 2 g/L show noteworthy reductions in height, shoot and root biomass, and micronutrient 
contents, including Cu, Mg, and Na. SiO2
NPs also have a significant effect on SOD enzyme activity 
and indole acetic acid content (Le et al., 2014). Since the effects of these NPs rely on their concen￾tration, in addition to other physicochemical characteristics, it is imperative to evaluate their impacts 
under environmental conditions.
10.4.6  Rare Earth Oxide Nanoparticles
It has been hypothesised that La2
O3
NPs decrease the elongation of roots in plants. The phytotoxicity 
of CeO2
 nanoparticles reduces chlorophyll content (Zhang et al., 2017). Seed germination is delayed 
by high concentrations of Y2
O3
NPs. Therefore, various NPs have demonstrated dose-dependent 
impacts on plants (Table 10.2).
TABLE 10.2
Types of nanoparticles and their effects on plants
Nanoparticle Plant Concentration Effect Reference
Au Mustard 10 mg/L, 25 mg/L, 50 mg/L, and 
100 mg/L
Reduced sugar content. Arora et al., 2012
ZnO2 Sweet potato 100 mg.kg/DW, 500 mg.kg/DW, 
and 1000
mg.kg/DW
Yield effected. Bradfield et al., 2017
CuO Lettuce 5 mg/L, 10 mg/L, and 20 mg/L Root and shoot length reduced. Hong et al., 2015
TiO2
Ag
Silicon
MWCNT
Graphene
Rice
Carrot
Maize
Carrot
Cabbage
0.1–100 mg/L
10 mg/L, 100 mg/L, and 200 mg/L
1000 mg/L
10 mg/L, 100 mg/L, and 200 mg/L
500–2000 mg/L
Decreased photosynthesis.
Reduced germination rate.
Reduced shoot length.
Decreased seed protein levels.
Growth inhibition.
Cai et al., 2017
Park et al.,2016
Ghoto et al., 2020
Park et al., 2016
Begum et al., 2011Nanoparticle Phytotoxicity 171
10.5 NANOPARTICLE STRESS
There are two classes of nanoparticles that induce stress in plants: metal nanoparticles and metal 
oxide nanoparticles.
10.5.1  Metal Nanoparticles
Metal nanoparticles’ ability to produce free radicals is based on their structural properties, like their 
dimensions, surface area, etc., (Abdal Dayem et al., 2017). For instance, the production of free 
radicals in Allium cepa cells has been shown to be NP dose- and size-dependent and increase lipid 
peroxidation and chromosomal abnormalities when root hairs interact with gold nanoparticles of 
varying diameters (Rajeshwari et al., 2016).
Interactions between copper NPs and plants reveal that toxicity is mostly caused by the 
nanoparticles rather than the production of cupric ions. Copper nanoparticles can slow the develop￾ment rate of a variety of species (Lee et al., 2008).
10.5.2  Metal Oxide Nanoparticles
Metal oxide nanoparticles are inducers. Oxide nanoparticles have an impact on enzymes, such SOD, POX, 
and CAT, and promote the synthesis of biologically active substances (Ghorbanpour and Hadian, 2015).
Secondary metabolism is elicited by titanium dioxide. When subjected to TiO2
 nanoparticles, 
plant levels of monoterpenes—the main component of essential oils—rise. This rise in monoterpenes 
is thought to be a protective procedure against reactive oxygen species produced by nanoparticles 
(Ghorbanpour and Hadian, 2015).
Nanoparticle interactions can stimulate the germination stage. Due to a toxic impact produced 
by reactive oxygen species, capsicum annuum L. engaged with zinc oxide nanoparticles shows 
enhanced seed germination, increased seed vigour, increased phenolic compound concentrations, 
and free radical scavenging on seedling radicles (Garciá-López et al., 2018).
Airborne nanoparticles can impact ecological safety, as well. While the contents of secondary 
metabolites in plants stay constant, contact with calcium oxide causes alterations in the contents 
of essential metabolites, primarily amino acids (tryptophan and phenylalanine) and carbohydrates 
(Večeřová et al., 2016)
10.6 TOXICITY ANALYSIS
Toxicity analyses of nanoparticles regarding root elongation and seed germination can be carried out 
using various assays, including germination and root elongation assays, hydroponic biomass assays, 
and Ag dose uptake assays (Stampoulis et al., 2009) (Figure 10.6).
FIGURE 10.6 A flowchart of different assays for the toxicity analysis of nanoparticles.172 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
10.6.1  Germination and Root Elongation Assays
1. Seeds are pregerminated and those with radicals of roughly 0.5 mm are chosen for the elong￾ation test.
2. Petri dishes measuring 35 mm by 10 mm are filled with three separately labelled seeds for 
the elongation and germination assay.
3. Each dish is then treated with 3 mL of 1000 mg/L nanoparticle solution and optional 
0.2% SDS.
4. Every treatment is repeated in five replicate dishes.
5. The dishes are then sealed and incubated in an orbital shaker for five days (elongation) or 
12 days (germination) at 50 rpm and 28°C. To prevent exposure concentration dilution, the 
dishes are refilled with nanoparticle solution as required.
10.6.2  Hydroponic Biomass Assays
1. First, 8 ml amber vials are taken and filled with 7.5ml of 25% Hoagland solution. Then, 
4-day old seedlings are added to the vials.
2. Over the course of 14 days, the seedlings are provided with appropriate growth conditions 
(temperature of 25°C, 12 h photoperiod, 200µmol m²/s, photosynthetically active radiation).
3. The seedlings are then transferred to 40 mL amber vials containing 39 ml of solution, which 
is diluted with either the matching bulk materials (1000 mg/L) or nanoparticles.
4. Every treatment is repeated in six replicate vials.
5. The seedlings are put back in the growing room and over the next 15 days, their biomass is 
observed. To prevent exposure concentration dilution, the vials are refilled as needed with 
solution containing the bulk materials or nanoparticles.
6. After seven days, the seedlings are moved to 40ml amber vials that contain 39 millilitres of 
solution modified with either silver nitrate or copper II nitrate in 25% Hoagland solution.
7. To address possible accelerated growth from the increased nitrate content, more KNO3
controls are introduced.
8. Additionally, 50 mL Teflon centrifuge tubes are filled with a solution containing silver and 
copper nanoparticles at a concentration of 1000 mg/L in 25% Hoagland solution.
9. The tubes are centrifuged for five minutes at 2000 rpm.
10. The supernatant, containing copper and silver ions, is collected once the elemental 
nanoparticles settle and is used as a growth medium.
11. The seedlings are incubated for another 15 days and their biomass is measured each day.
12. Five seedlings are used for each treatment.
10.6.3  Ag Dose Uptake Assays
Silver dose uptake assays are performed to determine the biomass of nanoparticles and their tran￾spiration volume at varied concentrations.
1. Seeds are added to moist paper that is suitable for the germination of seeds.
2. Amber vials (40 ml) containing 39 ml of 25% Hoagland solution supplemented with silver 
nanoparticles at various concentrations are filled with 4-day old seedlings.
3. The plants are kept between 22 and 28°C in a greenhouse under natural light.
4. Their biomass and transpiration volume are measured after 17 days of treatment.
5. To prevent exposure concentration dilution, the vials are refilled as needed with solution 
containing the proper bulk materials or nanoparticles.
6. To ensure that the tissues are never in direct contact with the bulk Ag or nanoparticles, stems 
are excised at a length of 4 cm above the solution level after 17 days using a razor blade.Nanoparticle Phytotoxicity 173
7. The shoots are then transferred on to a hot block with concentrated HNO3
 for one hour at 
115°C, after being oven-dried for 72 hours at 100°C.
8. The amount of Ag in the digested plant shoots is identified via inductively coupled plasma 
mass spectrometry.
10.7 PHYSIOLOGICAL PARAMETERS
Germination rate, root elongation, biomass, and leaf count are the primary metrics for assessing the 
toxic impacts of nanoparticles (Lee et al., 2010). NPs have the potential to inflict significant harm, 
including plant cell death and decreased seed germination and plant elongation. The growth, seed 
germination, root elongation, biomass, and gene expression of a variety of plants species, including 
glycine max, zea mays, Triticum aestivum, Lolium perenne, and Hordeum vulgare, are affected 
when exposed to nanoparticles, like multiwalled and single-walled carbon nanotubes, zinc oxide 
NPs, and silver and iron NPs (Dimkpa et al., 2012, El-Temsah & Joner, 2012, Riahi-Madvar et al., 
2012, Yan et al., 2013).
SiO2
 nanoparticle exposure results in growth suppression in Bacillus thurengiensis (Bt)-trans￾genic cotton. CuONPs reduce the growth and alter the root structure of Tricitum plants cultivated 
in sandy substrates (Dimkpa et al., 2012, Ghosh et al., 2015). Copper oxide nanoparticles dramat -
ically decrease the wet weight and root length of Arabidopsis seedlings, as well as reducing the 
biomass and seed germination rate of Oryza sativa (Shaw and Hossian, 2013). Rare earth oxide 
nanoparticles, like cerium oxide, lanthanum oxide, gadolinium oxide, and ytterbium oxide NPs, 
have adverse impacts on the growth of edible plants when added to their roots in high concentrations 
(López-Moreno et al., 2010). Titanium oxide nanoparticles reduce the amount of ascorbate perox￾idase (APX) and elevate the amount of chlorophyll and CAT in leaves (Servin et al., 2013).
10.7.1 Plant Hormones
Plant metabolism generates plant growth regulators, which are bioactive compounds that con￾trol physiological reactions in growing plants and influence plant responses to external stimuli 
(Santner et al., 2009). One significant indicator of plant toxicity is the amount and activity of 
plant hormones. Cerium oxide has a discernible influence on abscisic acid, indole-3-acetic acid, 
and gibberellic acid in the leaves of bacillus thuringiensis-modified and traditional Gossypium. 
Additionally, the 6-(4-hydroxy-3-methylbuy-2-enylamino) purine riboside concentration in trad￾itional Gossypium subjected to 500 mg/L of CeO2
NPs has been shown to drop by 25% compared 
to controls. Trans zeatin-riboside concentration in traditional cotton leaves subjected to 500 mg/L 
of CeO2
 nanoparticles also drops by 25% compared to controls (Le Van et al., 2015). Furthermore, 
γFe2
O3
 increases the indole acetic acid and abscisic acid concentrations in both genetically modified 
and traditional Oryza sativa roots. The synthesis of plant hormones is greatly impacted by NPs (Hao 
et al., 2016). Rice seedlings exposed to carbon nanotubes show considerable drops in phytohormone 
concentrations and the ions prevent ethylene from being produced, causing a significant reduction in 
the interactions between IAA and ethylene (Bleecker and Kende, 2000).
10.7.2  Crop Quality
Prior research on hydroponic plants has demonstrated that the buildup of nanoparticles in the envir￾onment is capable of significantly altering the output and quality of edible plants grown in soil 
(Priester et al., 2012). Compared to carbohydrates, polypeptides are insensitive to silver nanoparticle 
activation as polypeptide concentration only rises in response to high silver nanoparticle contents 
(100 mg/L) (Rani et al., 2016). ZnONPs make cucumbers more starchy and protein-rich, while 
lowering the amounts of micronutrients (Cu and Mo). In comparison to controls, Oryza sativa174 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
exposed to cerium oxide NPs has lower levels of iron, sulphur, prolaminin, glutenin, dodecanoic 
and pentanoic acids, and amylum (Rico et al., 2013). CeO2
NPs alter the amounts of phenolics, non￾reducing sugars, fatty acids, and amino acids in plants (Rico et al., 2014), as well as their nutritional 
contents (Le Van et al., 2016) (Figure 10.7).
10.8 FACTORS AFFECTING NANOPARTICLE PHYTOTOXICITY
The primary determinants of the impact of nanoparticles on plants are NP size, plant species, cul￾ture medium, stage of growth, NP coating material, and NP properties (concentration, size, type, 
stability, etc.).
10.8.1 Nanoparticle Size
Bulk TiO2
 can hinder seed germination (Feizi et al., 2013). AgNPs can reduce biomass and root 
length (Song et al., 2013). NPs typically exhibit more toxins than larger dimensions of the same 
material due to the strong reactivity of tiny particles; therefore, phytotoxicity rises with particle size. 
For instance, AgNP treatment has no influence on castor growth, but growth inhibition has been seen 
when silver is applied in large quantities (Oberdürster, 2000; Yasur & Rani, 2013)
10.8.2 Plant Species
The growth and antioxidant defences of different plant species to vary to some degree. Variations in 
seed size and xylem structure may be connected to variations in NP toxicity (Lee et al., 2008)
10.8.3 Stage of Growth
Photosynthetic parameters in plants change over time during growth. Mature leaves and seedling 
leaves show different responses to NP treatments (Hong et al., 2016).
In one study, the catalase and ascorbate peroxidase functions in roots indicated a substantial 
decline after 15 days of treatment in comparison to seven days of treatment. Following the appli￾cation of 500 mg/L of CeO2
 nanoparticles, the total soluble protein levels revealed the reverse 
outcomes in the roots (Majumdar et al., 2014).
FIGURE 10.7 The adverse effects of nanoparticles on plants.Nanoparticle Phytotoxicity 175
10.8.4 Nanoparticle Coating Material
Not only does coating modify the ways in which NPs work but it also modifies how NPs affect 
root–soil environments. The toxicity and dissolving strength of nanoparticles are also influenced by 
the type of coating. In one study, contact with coated Ag nanoparticles only marginally boosted the 
sprouting percentage of the examined plants, while AgNP suspensions increased the germination 
rate of five out of 11 species tested. This was brought about by a soil-bound co-ligand that preferen￾tially decreased the harmfulness and accessibility of the silver. Compared to AgNO3
, GA-AgNPs’ 
toxicity persisted for longer (Yin et al., 2012). When healthy Oryza sativa plants are exposed to 
buckytubes (FeCoCNTs), there is no discernible change in the production rate of biomass (fresh 
weight), but 30 and 50 mg/L concentrations of multiwalled carbon nanotubes and iron carbon 
nanotubes considerably reduce the biomass production rate (Hao et al., 2016).
10.9 CONCLUSION
The benefits of nanoparticles have been found to be species-specific for plants. Certain nanoparticles 
can be beneficial to one kind of plant but phytotoxic to another. Agrichemical nanoparticles do not 
remain contained within one location; they travel through the air and come into contact with other 
plants, which may experience phytotoxic consequences.
Plants are able to absorb higher quantities of nanoparticles when they accumulate in the soil. 
Higher concentrations of nanoparticles have frequently been demonstrated to have negative impacts, 
while lower quantities have positive effects.
It has also been demonstrated that edible plants may absorb and collect nanoparticles. There are 
significant worries about the potentially harmful impacts of NPs in edible plants on humans. The 
use of nanoparticles may have a negative influence on soil microbiota, leading to imbalances in the 
variety of bacteria.
Finally, it has been demonstrated that the majority of nanoparticles are harmful to plants, 
leading to phytotoxicity. When these plants are consumed by humans and animals, it results in 
a wide range of illnesses, from cancer to respiratory, cardiovascular, and neurological disorders. 
However, humans can consume edible plants that contain naturally occurring agricultural 
nanoparticles.
REFERENCES
Abdal Dayem, Ahmed, Mohammed Kawser Hossain, Soo Bin Lee, Kyeongseok Kim, Subbroto Kumar Saha, 
Gwang-Mo Yang, Hye Yeon Choi, and Ssang-Goo Cho. “The role of reactive oxygen species (ROS) 
in the biological activities of metallic nanoparticles.” International Journal of Molecular Sciences 18, 
no. 1 (2017): 120.
Aillon, Kristin L., Yumei Xie, Nashwa El-Gendy, Cory J. Berkland, and M. Laird Forrest. “Effects of 
nanomaterial physicochemical properties on in vivo toxicity.” Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 61, 
no. 6 (2009): 457–466.
Arora, Sandeep, Priyadarshini Sharma, Sumit Kumar, Rajeev Nayan, P. K. Khanna, and M. G. H. Zaidi. 
“Gold-nanoparticle induced enhancement in growth and seed yield of Brassica juncea.” Plant Growth 
Regulation 66 (2012): 303–310.
Aslani, Farzad, Samira Bagheri, Nurhidayatullaili Muhd Julkapli, Abdul Shukor Juraimi, Farahnaz Sadat 
Golestan Hashemi, and Ali Baghdadi. “Effects of engineered nanomaterials on plants growth: An over￾view.” The Scientific World Journal 2014 (2014): 641759.
Begum, Parvin, Refi Ikhtiari, and Bunshi Fugetsu. “Graphene phytotoxicity in the seedling stage of cabbage, 
tomato, red spinach, and lettuce.” Carbon 49, no. 12 (2011): 3907–3919.
Begum, Parvin, Refi Ikhtiari, Bunshi Fugetsu, Makoto Matsuoka, Tsukasa Akasaka, and Fumio Watari. 
“Phytotoxicity of multi-walled carbon nanotubes assessed by selected plant species in the seedling 
stage.” Applied Surface Science 262 (2012): 120–124.176 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
Bleecker, Anthony B., and Hans Kende. “Ethylene: A gaseous signal molecule in plants.” Annual Review of 
Cell and Developmental Biology 16, no. 1 (2000): 1–18.
Bradfield, Scott J., Pawan Kumar, Jason C. White, and Stephen D. Ebbs. “Zinc, copper, or cerium accumulation 
from metal oxide nanoparticles or ions in sweet potato: Yield effects and projected dietary intake from 
consumption.” Plant Physiology and Biochemistry 110 (2017): 128–137.
Cai, Fei, Xinyi Wu, Haiyun Zhang, Xiaofang Shen, Meng Zhang, Weixiao Chen, Qian Gao, Jason C. White, 
Shu Tao, and Xilong Wang. “Impact of TiO2 nanoparticles on lead uptake and bioaccumulation in rice 
(Oryza sativa L.).” NanoImpact 5 (2017): 101–108.
Da Silva, Gabriela Helena, and Regina Teresa Rosim Monteiro. “Toxicity assessment of silica nanoparticles on 
Allium cepa.” Ecotoxicology and Environmental Contamination 12, no. 1 (2017): 25–31.
DaCosta, Maria Vera J., and Prabhat K. Sharma. “Influence of titanium dioxide nanoparticles on the photosyn￾thetic and biochemical processes in Oryza sativa.” International Journal of Recent Scientific Research
6, no. 1 (2015): 2445–2451.
Deng, Y.Q., J.C. White, and B.S. Xing. “Interactions between engineered nanomaterials and agricultural 
crops: Implications for food safety.” Journal of Zhejiang University Science A 15, no. 8 (2014), 552–572.
Dietz, Karl-Josef, and Simone Herth. “Plant nanotoxicology.” Trends in Plant Science 16, no. 11 (2011): 582–589.
Dimkpa, Christian O., Joan E. McLean, David W. Britt, and Anne J. Anderson. “Bioactivity and biomodification 
of Ag, ZnO, and CuO nanoparticles with relevance to plant performance in agriculture.” Industrial 
Biotechnology 8, no. 6 (2012): 344–357.
Dimkpa, Christian O., Drew E. Latta, Joan E. McLean, David W. Britt, Maxim I. Boyanov, and Anne J. 
Anderson. “Fate of CuO and ZnO nano-and microparticles in the plant environment.” Environmental 
Science & Technology 47, no. 9 (2013): 4734–4742.
Du, Wenchao, Yuanyuan Sun, Rong Ji, Jianguo Zhu, Jichun Wu, and Hongyan Guo. “TiO 2 and ZnO 
nanoparticles negatively affect wheat growth and soil enzyme activities in agricultural soil.” Journal of 
Environmental Monitoring 13, no. 4 (2011): 822–828.
El-Temsah, Yehia Sayed, and Erik J. Joner. “Impact of Fe and Ag nanoparticles on seed germination and 
differences in bioavailability during exposure in aqueous suspension and soil.” Environmental Toxicology
27, no. 1 (2012): 42–49.
Feizi, Hassan, Maryam Kamali, Leila Jafari, and Parviz Rezvani Moghaddam. “Phytotoxicity and stimulatory 
impacts of nanosized and bulk titanium dioxide on fennel (Foeniculum vulgare Mill).” Chemosphere 91, 
no. 4 (2013): 506–511.
Feizi, Hassan, Shahram Amirmoradi, Farzin Abdollahi, and Saeed Jahedi Pour. “Comparative effects of 
nanosized and bulk titanium dioxide concentrations on medicinal plant Salvia officinalis L.” Annual 
Research & Review in Biology 3, no. 4 (2013): 814–824.
Frazier, Taylor P., Caitlin E. Burklew, and Baohong Zhang. “Titanium dioxide nanoparticles affect the growth 
and microRNA expression of tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum).” Functional & Integrative Genomics 14 
(2014): 75–83.
García-López, Josué I., Francisco Zavala-García, Emilio Olivares-Sáenz, Ricardo H. Lira-Saldívar, Enrique 
Díaz Barriga-Castro, Norma A. Ruiz-Torres, Edith Ramos-Cortez, Rigoberto Vázquez-Alvarado, and 
Guillermo Niño-Medina. “Zinc oxide nanoparticles boosts phenolic compounds and antioxidant activity 
of Capsicum annuum L. during germination.” Agronomy 8, no. 10 (2018): 215.
Georgieva, Julia V., Dharamdajal Kalicharan, Pierre-Olivier Couraud, Ignacio A. Romero, Babette Weksler, 
Dick Hoekstra, and Inge S. Zuhorn. “Surface characteristics of nanoparticles determine their intracel￾lular fate in and processing by human blood–brain barrier endothelial cells in vitro.” Molecular Therapy
19, no. 2 (2011): 318–325.
Ghorbanpour, Mansour, and Javad Hadian. “Multi-walled carbon nanotubes stimulate callus induction, sec￾ondary metabolites biosynthesis and antioxidant capacity in medicinal plant Satureja khuzestanica 
grown in vitro.” Carbon 94 (2015): 749–759.
Ghosh, Manosij, Sreetama Bhadra, Aremu Adegoke, Maumita Bandyopadhyay, and Anita Mukherjee. 
“MWCNT uptake in Allium cepa root cells induces cytotoxic and genotoxic responses and results in 
DNA hyper-methylation.” Mutation Research/Fundamental and Molecular Mechanisms of Mutagenesis
774 (2015): 49–58.
Ghoto, Kabir, Martin Simon, Zhi-Jun Shen, Gui-Feng Gao, Peng-Fei Li, Huan Li, and Hai-Lei Zheng. 
“Physiological and root exudation response of maize seedlings to TiO 2 and SiO 2 nanoparticles 
exposure.” BioNanoScience 10 (2020): 473–485.Nanoparticle Phytotoxicity 177
Griffitt, Robert J., Jing Luo, Jie Gao, Jean-Claude Bonzongo, and David S. Barber. “Effects of particle compos￾ition and species on toxicity of metallic nanomaterials in aquatic organisms.” Environmental Toxicology 
and Chemistry: An International Journal 27, no. 9 (2008): 1972–1978.
Hao, Yi, Feifan Yu, Ruitao Lv, Chuanxin Ma, Zetian Zhang, Yukui Rui, Liming Liu, Weidong Cao, and Baoshan 
Xing. “Carbon nanotubes filled with different ferromagnetic alloys affect the growth and development 
of rice seedlings by changing the C: N ratio and plant hormones concentrations.” PLoS One 11, no. 6 
(2016): e0157264.
Hao, Yi, Bolong Xu, Chuanxin Ma, Jianying Shang, Wenqian Gu, Wei Li, Tianqi Hou et al. “Synthesis of novel 
mesoporous carbon nanoparticles and their phytotoxicity to rice (Oryza sativa L.).” Journal of Saudi 
Chemical Society 23, no. 1 (2019): 75–82.
Haverkamp, R. G., and A. T. Marshall. “The mechanism of metal nanoparticle formation in plants: Limits on 
accumulation.” Journal of Nanoparticle Research 11 (2009): 1453–1463.
Hischemöller, Anja, Jörg Nordmann, Pavel Ptacek, Klaus Mummenhoff, and Markus Haase. “In-vivo imaging 
of the uptake of upconversion nanoparticles by plant roots.” Journal of Biomedical Nanotechnology 5, 
no. 3 (2009): 278–284.
Hong, Guosong, Shuo Diao, Alexander L. Antaris, and Hongjie Dai. “Carbon nanomaterials for biological 
imaging and nanomedicinal therapy.” Chemical Reviews 115, no. 19 (2015): 10816–10906.
Hong, Jie, Lina Wang, Youping Sun, Lijuan Zhao, Genhua Niu, Wenjuan Tan, Cyren M. Rico, Jose R. 
Peralta-Videa, and Jorge L. Gardea-Torresdey. “Foliar applied nanoscale and microscale CeO2 
and CuO alter cucumber (Cucumis sativus) fruit quality.” Science of the Total Environment 563 
(2016): 904–911.
Hoshino, Akiyoshi, Kouki Fujioka, Taisuke Oku, Masakazu Suga, Yu F. Sasaki, Toshihiro Ohta, Masato Yasuhara, 
Kazuo Suzuki, and Kenji Yamamoto. “Physicochemical properties and cellular toxicity of nanocrystal 
quantum dots depend on their surface modification.” Nano Letters 4, no. 11 (2004): 2163–2169.
Hu, J., X. Wu, F. Wu, W. Chen, J. C. White, Y. Yang, ... and X. Wang. “Potential application of titanium 
dioxide nanoparticles to improve the nutritional quality of coriander (Coriandrum sativum L.).” Journal 
of Hazardous Materials, 389 (2020): 121837.
Jiang, Hong-Sheng, Ming Li, Feng-Yi Chang, Wei Li, and Li-Yan Yin. “Physiological analysis of silver 
nanoparticles and AgNO3 toxicity to Spirodela polyrhiza.” Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry
31, no. 8 (2012): 1880–1886.
Kaphle, Anubhav, P. N. Navya, Akhela Umapathi, and Hemant Kumar Daima. “Nanomaterials for agricul￾ture, food and environment: Applications, toxicity and regulation.” Environmental Chemistry Letters 16 
(2018): 43–58.
Kaveh, Rashid, Yue-Sheng Li, Sibia Ranjbar, Rouzbeh Tehrani, Christopher L. Brueck, and Benoit Van Aken. 
“Changes in Arabidopsis thaliana gene expression in response to silver nanoparticles and silver ions.” 
Environmental Science & Technology 47, no. 18 (2013): 10637–10644.
Koelmel, Jeremy, and Dulasiri Amarasiriwardena. “Imaging of metal bioaccumulation in Hay-scented fern 
(Dennstaedtia punctilobula) rhizomes growing on contaminated soils by laser ablation ICP-MS.” 
Environmental Pollution 168 (2012): 62–70.
Kurepa, Jasmina, Tatjana Paunesku, Stefan Vogt, Hans Arora, Bryan M. Rabatic, Jinju Lu, M. Beau Wanzer, 
Gayle E. Woloschak, and Jan A. Smalle. “Uptake and distribution of ultrasmall anatase TiO2 Alizarin red 
S nanoconjugates in Arabidopsis thaliana.” Nano Letters 10, no. 7 (2010): 2296–2302.
Larue, Camille, Giulia Veronesi, Anne-Marie Flank, Suzy Surble, Nathalie Herlin-Boime, and Marie Carrière. 
“Comparative uptake and impact of TiO2 nanoparticles in wheat and rapeseed.” Journal of Toxicology 
and Environmental Health, Part A 75, no. 13–15 (2012): 722–734.
Larue, Camille, Hiram Castillo-Michel, Sophie Sobanska, Lauric Cécillon, Sarah Bureau, Véronique Barthès, 
Laurent Ouerdane, Marie Carrière, and Géraldine Sarret. “Foliar exposure of the crop Lactuca sativa to 
silver nanoparticles: Evidence for internalization and changes in Ag speciation.” Journal of Hazardous 
Materials 264 (2014): 98–106.
Le Van, Nhan, Yukui Rui, Xin Gui, Xuguang Li, Shutong Liu, and Yaning Han. “Uptake, transport, distribu￾tion and bio-effects of SiO2
 nanoparticles in Bt-transgenic cotton.” Journal of Nanobiotechnology 12 
(2014): 1–15.
Le Van, Nhan, Chuanxin Ma, Yukui Rui, Shutong Liu, Xuguang Li, Baoshan Xing, and Liming Liu. “Phytotoxic 
mechanism of nanoparticles: Destruction of chloroplasts and vascular bundles and alteration of nutrient 
absorption.” Scientific Reports 5, no. 1 (2015): 11618.178 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
Le Van, Nhan, Yukui Rui, Weidong Cao, Jianying Shang, Shutong Liu, Trung Nguyen Quang, and Liming Liu. 
“Toxicity and bio-effects of CuO nanoparticles on transgenic Ipt-cotton.” Journal of Plant Interactions
11, no. 1 (2016): 108–116.
Lee, Chang Woo, Shaily Mahendra, Katherine Zodrow, Dong Li, Yu-Chang Tsai, Janet Braam, and Pedro 
J.J. Alvarez. “Developmental phytotoxicity of metal oxide nanoparticles to Arabidopsis thaliana.” 
Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry: An International Journal 29, no. 3 (2010): 669–675.
Lee, Woo-Mi, Youn-Joo An, Hyeon Yoon, and Hee-Seok Kweon. “Toxicity and bioavailability of copper 
nanoparticles to the terrestrial plants mung bean (Phaseolus radiatus) and wheat (Triticum aestivum): Plant 
agar test for water-insoluble nanoparticles.” Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry: An International 
Journal 27, no. 9 (2008): 1915–1921.
Lin, Daohui, and Baoshan Xing. “Root uptake and phytotoxicity of ZnO nanoparticles.” Environmental Science 
& Technology 42, no. 15 (2008): 5580–5585.
López-Moreno, Martha L., Guadalupe de la Rosa, José Á. Hernández-Viezcas, Hiram Castillo-Michel, Cristian 
E. Botez, José R. Peralta-Videa, and Jorge L. Gardea-Torresdey. “Evidence of the differential bio￾transformation and genotoxicity of ZnO and CeO2 nanoparticles on soybean (Glycine max) plants.” 
Environmental Science & Technology 44, no. 19 (2010b): 7315–7320.
Lovrić, Jasmina, Hassan S. Bazzi, Yan Cuie, Genevieve R.A. Fortin, Françoise M. Winnik, and Dusica 
Maysinger. “Differences in subcellular distribution and toxicity of green and red emitting CdTe quantum 
dots.” Journal of Molecular Medicine 83 (2005): 377–385.
Ma, Xingmao, Jane Geiser-Lee, Yang Deng, and Andrei Kolmakov. “Interactions between engineered 
nanoparticles (ENPs) and plants: Phytotoxicity, uptake and accumulation.” Science of the Total 
Environment 408, no. 16 (2010): 3053–3061.
Ma, Hongbo, Phillip L. Williams, and Stephen A. Diamond. “Ecotoxicity of manufactured ZnO nanoparticles–
A review.” Environmental Pollution 172 (2013): 76–85.
Majumdar, Sanghamitra, Jose R. Peralta-Videa, Susmita Bandyopadhyay, Hiram Castillo-Michel, Jose￾Angel Hernandez-Viezcas, Shivendra Sahi, and Jorge L. Gardea-Torresdey. “Exposure of cerium oxide 
nanoparticles to kidney bean shows disturbance in the plant defense mechanisms.” Journal of Hazardous 
Materials 278 (2014): 279–287.
Merchant, B. “Gold, the noble metal and the paradoxes of its toxicology.” Biologicals 26, no. 1 (1998): 49–59.
Mousavi, Sayed Roholla, Mohammad Galavi, and Goudarz Ahmadvand. “Effect of zinc and manganese foliar 
application on yield, quality and enrichment on potato (Solanum tuberosum L.).” Asian Journal of Plant 
Sciences 6 (2007): 1256–1260.
Nair, Prakash M. Gopalakrishnan, and Ill Min Chung. “Assessment of silver nanoparticle-induced physio￾logical and molecular changes in Arabidopsis thaliana.” Environmental Science and Pollution Research
21 (2014): 8858–8869.
Nel, Andre, Tian Xia, Lutz Madler, and Ning Li. “Toxic potential of materials at the nanolevel.” Science 311, 
no. 5761 (2006): 622–627.
Oberdürster, Güunter. “Toxicology of ultrafine particles: In vivo studies.” Philosophical Transactions of the 
Royal Society of London. Series A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences 358, no. 1775 
(2000): 2719–2740.
Park, Tae Jung, Kyoung G. Lee, and Sang Yup Lee. “Advances in microbial biosynthesis of metal nanoparticles.” 
Applied Microbiology and Biotechnology 100 (2016): 521–534.
Peng, Cheng, Dechao Duan, Chen Xu, Yongsheng Chen, Lijuan Sun, Hai Zhang, Xiaofeng Yuan 
et al. “Translocation and biotransformation of CuO nanoparticles in rice (Oryza sativa L.) plants.” 
Environmental Pollution 197 (2015): 99–107.
Powers, Kevin W., Maria Palazuelos, Brij M. Moudgil, and Stephen M. Roberts. “Characterization of the 
size, shape, and state of dispersion of nanoparticles for toxicological studies.” Nanotoxicology 1, no. 1 
(2007): 42–51.
Priester, John H., Yuan Ge, Randall E. Mielke, Allison M. Horst, Shelly Cole Moritz, Katherine Espinosa, 
Jeff Gelb et al. “Soybean susceptibility to manufactured nanomaterials with evidence for food 
quality and soil fertility interruption.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 109, no. 37 
(2012): E2451–E2456.
Rajeshwari, A., Barsha Roy, Natarajan Chandrasekaran, and Amitava Mukherjee. “Cytogenetic evaluation of 
gold nanorods using Allium cepa test.” Plant Physiology and Biochemistry 109 (2016): 209–219.Nanoparticle Phytotoxicity 179
Rajput, Vishnu D., Tatiana M. Minkina, Arvind Behal, Svetlana N. Sushkova, Saglara Mandzhieva, Ritu 
Singh, Andrey Gorovtsov et al. “Effects of zinc-oxide nanoparticles on soil, plants, animals and soil 
organisms: A review.” Environmental Nanotechnology, Monitoring & Management 9 (2018): 76–84.
Raliya, Ramesh, Christina Franke, Sanmathi Chavalmane, Remya Nair, Nathan Reed, and Pratim Biswas. 
“Quantitative understanding of nanoparticle uptake in watermelon plants.” Frontiers in Plant Science 7 
(2016): 198920.
Rani, Pathipati Usha, Jyothsna Yasur, Karthik Sharma Loke, and Debanjana Dutta. “Effect of synthetic 
and biosynthesized silver nanoparticles on growth, physiology and oxidative stress of water hya￾cinth: Eichhornia crassipes (Mart) Solms.” Acta Physiologiae Plantarum 38 (2016): 1–9.
Riahi, Madvar Ali, Fatemeh Rezaee, and Vahidreza Jalali. “Effects of alumina nanoparticles on morphological 
properties and antioxidant system of Triticum aestivum.” Iranian Journal of Plant Physiology 3, no. 1 
(2012): 595–603.
Rico, Cyren M., Maria Isabel Morales, Ana Cecilia Barrios, Ricardo McCreary, Jie Hong, Wen-Yee Lee, Jose 
Nunez, Jose R. Peralta-Videa, and Jorge L. Gardea-Torresdey. “Effect of cerium oxide nanoparticles 
on the quality of rice (Oryza sativa L.) grains.” Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 61, no. 47 
(2013): 11278–11285.
Rico, Cyren M., Sang Chul Lee, Rosnah Rubenecia, Arnab Mukherjee, Jie Hong, Jose R. Peralta-Videa, 
and Jorge L. Gardea-Torresdey. “Cerium oxide nanoparticles impact yield and modify nutritional 
parameters in wheat (Triticum aestivum L.).” Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 62, no. 40 
(2014): 9669–9675.
Ruttkay-Nedecky, Branislav, Olga Krystofova, Lukas Nejdl, and Vojtech Adam. “Nanoparticles based on 
essential metals and their phytotoxicity.” Journal of Nanobiotechnology 15 (2017): 1–19.
Santner, Aaron, Luz Irina A. Calderon-Villalobos, and Mark Estelle. “Plant hormones are versatile chemical 
regulators of plant growth.” Nature Chemical Biology 5, no. 5 (2009): 301–307.
Santos, Sandra M.A., Augusto M. Dinis, David M.F. Rodrigues, Francisco Peixoto, Romeu A. Videira, and 
Amália S. Jurado. “Studies on the toxicity of an aqueous suspension of C60 nanoparticles using a bac￾terium (gen. Bacillus) and an aquatic plant (Lemna gibba) as in vitro model systems.” Aquatic Toxicology
142 (2013): 347–354.
Servin, Alia D., Maria Isabel Morales, Hiram Castillo-Michel, Jose Angel Hernandez-Viezcas, Berenice Munoz, 
Lijuan Zhao, Jose E. Nunez, Jose R. Peralta-Videa, and Jorge L. Gardea-Torresdey. “Synchrotron verifi￾cation of TiO2 accumulation in cucumber fruit: A possible pathway of TiO2 nanoparticle transfer from 
soil into the food chain.” Environmental Science & Technology 47, no. 20 (2013): 11592–11598.
Shaw, Arun Kumar, and Zahed Hossain. “Impact of nano-CuO stress on rice (Oryza sativa L.) seedlings.” 
Chemosphere 93, no. 6 (2013): 906–915.
Shen, Cong-Xiang, Quan-Fang Zhang, Jian Li, Fang-Cheng Bi, and Nan Yao. “Induction of programmed cell 
death in Arabidopsis and rice by single-wall carbon nanotubes.” American Journal of Botany 97, no. 10 
(2010): 1602–1609.
Slomberg, Danielle L., and Mark H. Schoenfisch. “Silica nanoparticle phytotoxicity to Arabidopsis thaliana.” 
Environmental Science & Technology 46, no. 18 (2012): 10247–10254.
Song, Uhram, Heeju Jun, Bruce Waldman, Jinkyu Roh, Younghun Kim, Jongheop Yi, and Eun Ju Lee. 
“Functional analyses of nanoparticle toxicity: A comparative study of the effects of TiO2 and Ag on 
tomatoes (Lycopersicon esculentum).” Ecotoxicology and Environmental Safety 93 (2013): 60–67.
Stampoulis, Dimitrios, Saion K. Sinha, and Jason C. White. “Assay-dependent phytotoxicity of nanoparticles 
to plants.” Environmental Science & Technology 43, no. 24 (2009): 9473–9479.
Tripathi, Durgesh Kumar, Shweta Singh, Swati Singh, Rishikesh Pandey, Vijay Pratap Singh, Nilesh C. 
Sharma, Sheo Mohan Prasad, Nawal Kishore Dubey, and Devendra Kumar Chauhan. “An overview 
on manufactured nanoparticles in plants: Uptake, translocation, accumulation and phytotoxicity.” Plant 
Physiology and Biochemistry 110 (2017): 2–12.
Trujillo-Reyes, J., S. Majumdar, C. E. Botez, J. R. Peralta-Videa, and J. L. Gardea-Torresdey. “Exposure studies 
of core–shell Fe/Fe3O4 and Cu/CuO NPs to lettuce (Lactuca sativa) plants: Are they a potential physio￾logical and nutritional hazard?.” Journal of Hazardous Materials 267 (2014): 255–263.
Večeřová, Kristýna, Zbyněk Večeřa, Bohumil Dočekal, Michal Oravec, Antonio Pompeiano, Jan Tříska, 
and Otmar Urban. “Changes of primary and secondary metabolites in barley plants exposed to CdO 
nanoparticles.” Environmental Pollution 218 (2016): 207–218.180 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
Wang, Songhu, Jasmina Kurepa, and Jan A. Smalle. “Ultra-small TiO2 nanoparticles disrupt microtubular 
networks in Arabidopsis thaliana.” Plant, Cell & Environment 34, no. 5 (2011): 811–820.
Wang, Zhenyu, Xiaoyan Xie, Jian Zhao, Xiaoyun Liu, Wenqiang Feng, Jason C. White, and Baoshan Xing. 
“Xylem-and phloem-based transport of CuO nanoparticles in maize (Zea mays L.).” Environmental 
Science & Technology 46, no. 8 (2012): 4434–4441.
Wang, Wei-Ning, Jagadish C. Tarafdar, and Pratim Biswas. “Nanoparticle synthesis and delivery by an aerosol 
route for watermelon plant foliar uptake.” Journal of Nanoparticle Research 15 (2013): 1–13.
Wang, Jing, Yu Yang, Huiguang Zhu, Janet Braam, Jerald L. Schnoor, and Pedro J.J. Alvarez. “Uptake, trans￾location, and transformation of quantum dots with cationic versus anionic coatings by Populus deltoides× 
nigra cuttings.” Environmental Science & Technology 48, no. 12 (2014): 6754–6762.
Wick, Peter, Pius Manser, Ludwig K. Limbach, Ursula Dettlaff-Weglikowska, Frank Krumeich, Siegmar Roth, 
Wendelin J. Stark, and Arie Bruinink. “The degree and kind of agglomeration affect carbon nanotube 
cytotoxicity.” Toxicology Letters 168, no. 2 (2007): 121–131.
Yan, W., H. L. Lien, B. E. Koel, and W. X. Zhang. “Iron nanoparticles for environmental clean-up: recent 
developments and future outlook.” Environmental Science: Processes & Impacts 15 (2013): 63–77.
Yang, Sheng-Tao, Xiang Wang, Guang Jia, Yiqun Gu, Tiancheng Wang, Haiyu Nie, Cuicui Ge, Haifang Wang, 
and Yuanfang Liu. “Long-term accumulation and low toxicity of single-walled carbon nanotubes in 
intravenously exposed mice.” Toxicology Letters 181, no. 3 (2008): 182–189.
Yasur, Jyothsna, and Pathipati Usha Rani. “Lepidopteran insect susceptibility to silver nanoparticles and meas￾urement of changes in their growth, development and physiology.” Chemosphere 124 (2015): 92–102.
Yin, Liyan, Benjamin P. Colman, Bonnie M. McGill, Justin P. Wright, and Emily S. Bernhardt. “Effects of 
silver nanoparticle exposure on germination and early growth of eleven wetland plants.” PLoS One 7, 
no. 10 (2012): e47674.
Zaytseva, Olga, Zhengrui Wang, and Günter Neumann. “Phytotoxicity of carbon nanotubes in soybean as 
determined by interactions with micronutrients.” Journal of Nanoparticle Research 19 (2017): 1–18.
Zhang, Hengzhong, Benjamin Gilbert, Feng Huang, and Jillian F. Banfield. “Water-driven structure transform￾ation in nanoparticles at room temperature.” Nature 424, no. 6952 (2003): 1025–1029.
Zhang, Zhiyong, Xiao He, Haifeng Zhang, Yuhui Ma, Peng Zhang, Yayun Ding, and Yuliang Zhao. “Uptake 
and distribution of ceria nanoparticles in cucumber plants.” Metallomics 3, no. 8 (2011): 816–822.
Zhang, Peng, Yuhui Ma, Shutong Liu, Guohua Wang, Junzhe Zhang, Xiao He, Jing Zhang, Yukui Rui, and 
Zhiyong Zhang. “Phytotoxicity, uptake and transformation of nano-CeO2 in sand cultured romaine 
lettuce.” Environmental Pollution 220 (2017): 1400–1408.
Zhao, Lijuan, Youping Sun, Jose A. Hernandez-Viezcas, Alia D. Servin, Jie Hong, Genhua Niu, Jose R. Peralta￾Videa, Maria Duarte-Gardea, and Jorge L. Gardea-Torresdey. “Influence of CeO2 and ZnO nanoparticles 
on cucumber physiological markers and bioaccumulation of Ce and Zn: A life cycle study.” Journal of 
Agricultural and Food Chemistry 61, no. 49 (2013): 11945–11951.181
Section II
Nanoparticles in Agroecosystems182183
DOI: 10.1201/9781003477730-13 183
11 Implications of 
Nanotechnology 
for Environmental 
Remediation
Vagdevi Pally, Archana Yalagandula, Nallagatla Himaja, 
Ramchander Merugu, and Anil Kumar Marapaka
11.1 INTRODUCTION
Environmental pollution is unquestionably one of the biggest problems facing modern society. 
Researchers are continually coming up with new ways to get rid of contaminants in soil, water, 
and air (Loux et al., 2011). Organic chemicals, heavy metals, fertilizers, pesticides, oil spills, 
hazardous gases, industrial effluents, and sewage are just some of the many damaging pollutants 
(Tchounwou et al., 2012). To achieve its goals, the environmental rehabilitation industry uses a var￾iety of tools and techniques. Current research is focusing on the use of nanomaterials for the devel￾opment of novel environmental remediation methods because of the possibility that their complex 
compositions, high volatility, and moderate reactivity allow them to absorb and breakdown envir￾onmental pollutants. With biodegradable materials, there is no waste to be disposed of after use, 
which boosts consumer confidence and adoption of certain techniques. Because of the special phys￾ical characteristics of nanomaterials, interest in nanotechnology has grown significantly over recent 
decades. Nanomaterials are more reactive and hence, more effective than their bulk counterparts 
because they have higher surface area to volume ratios. Unlike traditional techniques, nanomaterials 
can be grafted with functional groups that target specific molecules of interest (i.e., pollutants) for 
efficient environmental cleanup. This is made possible by nanomaterials’ unique surface chem￾istry. Furthermore, by deliberately altering the form, size, porosity, and chemical composition of 
nanoparticles, additional beneficial qualities can be added that have a direct impact on the materials’ 
effectiveness in remediating contamination. The use of heavy metals and waste products endangers 
ecosystems. Dental amalgam, which contains mercury, silver, and other heavy metals, is a material 
that is widely used in dentistry as a metallic restorative. The safety of its use is debatable due to its 
high mercury concentration (Tibau and Grube, 2019). Together with ordinary home and municipal 
waste, dental waste is collected and dumped into the environment, contaminating land, water, and air 
(Adegbembo et al., 2002). Because of this, dentists are becoming more and more concerned about 
the damage that the dental industry causes to the environment and the various solutions that could 
be used to mitigate it. The environment is harmed by pollutants, like heavy metals, inorganic metal 
ions, organic contaminants, and organometallic compounds. The phrase “heavy metal” describes 
metals with high density and atomic weight. According to contemporary definitions (Cherfi et al., 
2015), these include metallic chemical elements and metalloids.184 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
11.2 POLLUTANT TYPES
Particles that contaminate the environment are known as pollutants. These poisons have been 
shown to have effects on humans and other animals. There are numerous routes through which 
contaminants can infiltrate the environment, including both natural occurrences and human 
activity (Seewagen, 2020). Contaminants include things like pesticides, dyes, heavy metals, and 
polyaromatic hydrocarbons.
11.2.1  Dyes
Dyeing processes generate industrial pollutants that can infiltrate the environment. Synthetic dyes in 
textile effluents change the photosynthetic efficiency of aquatic vegetation by reducing light pene￾tration into water sources. Aquatic life is put at risk by the thin layers of released dyes that accumu￾late on water surfaces and lower dissolved oxygen levels. Dye-containing industrial effluents also 
increase biochemical oxygen demand (BOD).
11.2.2  Heavy Metals
Because of the harm that heavy metal pollution causes people all over the world, it is becoming 
more of cause for concern (Briffa et al., 2020). Due to inorganic pollutants (such as fertilizers 
and pesticides), improper waste management, and the rapidly expanding agriculture and metallurgy 
sectors, heavy metals are being discharged into streams, soil, and the atmosphere. A few of the 
common heavy metals are titanium (Ti), iron (Fe), vanadium (V), chromium (Cr), manganese (Mn), 
cobalt (Co), copper (Cu), zinc (Zn), arsenic (As), molybdenum (Mo), nickel (Ni), cadmium (Cd), 
silver (Ag), tin (Sn), platinum (Pt), gold (Au), mercury (Hg), and lead (Pb).
11.2.3 Pesticides
Pesticides are used in agriculture to prevent crop yield declines and protect crops and animals from 
insect infestations. Pesticides are also chemicals that are used to get rid of unwanted organisms 
in public spaces, like gardens and parks. Pesticides may be dangerous for the environment, living 
things, and food safety, even those that are widely used (Hassaan and Nemr 2020). A World Health 
Organization (WHO) survey found that exposure to pesticides has caused acute poisoning in about 
one million people. A variety of organic micropollutants that harm the environment are released 
by pesticides. Two mechanisms have been identified that cause pollution: biomagnification and 
bioconcentration. Many pesticides react with the body’s adipose fat tissues, causing fats to be 
formed. One such pesticide is dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane, or DDT.
11.2.4 Polyaromatic Hydrocarbons
One class of the common and extensively dispersed environmental contaminants that are hazardous 
to human health is polyaromatic hydrocarbons, due to their propensity for toxicity, mutagenization, 
and carcinogenesis. As the market for petroleum products has grown, emissions have also increased. 
Burning organic resources with low oxygen contents, such as coal and firewood, is one of the con￾tributing factors (Pandey et al., 2017). In general, polyaromatic hydrocarbons exhibit high stability 
and low decomposition rates. These aromatic compounds also have relatively high melting and 
boiling points. The majority of lower molecular weight polyaromatic hydrocarbons are soluble in 
water but when additional rings are added, they become increasingly hydrophobic and aqueously 
insoluble (Masih et al., 2010).Implications of Nanotechnology for Environmental Remediation 185
The various types of pollutants are shown in Figure 11.1 and the causes of environmental pollution 
are depicted in Figure 11.2. Nanomaterials are substances that are smaller than 100 nm (Hadef, 
2018). They are very good adsorbents and catalysts because of their small size and large reactive 
surface areas. These special characteristics can be effectively, and affordably, used to remove and 
break down contaminants in the environment.
FIGURE 11.2 Different causes of environmental pollution, including X-ray fixers and films, dental amalgams, 
lead shields from film packets, and biomedical waste.
FIGURE 11.1 Different types of pollutants, including pesticides, dyes, heavy metals, and polyaromatic 
hydrocarbons.186 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
11.3 NANOPARTICLE TYPES AND CHARACTERIZATION METHODS
The nanoparticles can be categorized into multiple groups according to their attributes, such as 
material, size, and origin.
11.3.1  Origin
Natural and manufactured nanoparticles can be derived from engineering sources. Natural 
nanoparticles are created by organisms and biological processes in the environment that are 
caused by human endeavors (Hochella et al., 2015). As their name implies, synthetic or engineered 
nanoparticles are nanomaterials that are created via comprehensive mechanisms during individual 
or combined chemical, biological, and physical processes.
11.3.2 3D Structure
Nanoparticles fall into one of three groups based on their structure: one-dimensional, two￾dimensional, and three-dimensional NPs. They are either dimensionless, meaning that they can 
move along any axis, or they can move along one axis in 1D, two or three axes in 2D and 3D, regard￾less of the arrangement of axes (Jeevanandam et al., 2018). Thin films with dimensions ranging from 
1 to 100 nanometers are known as one-dimensional nanoparticles (Bhatia et al., 2016).
11.3.3  Material
Nanomaterials are substances that are made up of inorganic, organic, carbon-containing, or com￾posite materials. Compounds based on silicon, titanium dioxide, zinc, gold, silver, and other metals 
and their oxides are known as inorganic-based nanomaterials (Hasan, 2015). Examples of organic 
nanomaterials include polymeric particles, micelles, and liposomes, which are generated from 
organic matter but not from carbon- or inorganic-based sources. Due to their multiphasic nature, 
composite nanoparticles can form significant, complex structures. An example is gold nanoparticles 
made of polymers or ceramic fullerenes, nanotubes, and nanofibers, which are inorganic-based 
nanomaterials (Nagore et al., 2021).
11.3.4  Metal and Metal Oxide Nanoparticles
The functions of nanoparticles across various fields have been reviewed in the literature (Mok et al., 
2020). There are lots of benefits of using metal and metal oxide nanoparticles as they are highly 
efficient adsorbents (Santhosh et al., 2016). Nanoparticles are widely employed for environmental 
treatments because they can be used both in situ and ex situ in aquatic systems (Das et al., 2015). 
Due to their strong antibacterial, antifungal, and antiviral properties, silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) 
can be used as water disinfectants (Chou et al., 2005). For example, it has been discovered that 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Escherichia coli are seriously threatened by AgNPs with a diameter 
of less than 10 nm.
11.3.5 Silica Nanomaterials
Mesoporous silica materials have several advantageous properties for environmental cleanup 
applications (Tsai et al., 2016). Numerous articles have addressed surface modifications for 
mesoporous silica materials (Brigante et al., 2016). Table 11.1 provides a summary of published 
studies that have looked at the usage of silica nanoparticles for the removal of various environmental 
contaminants.Implications of Nanotechnology for Environmental Remediation 187
11.3.6  Carbon-​Based Nanomaterials
Because of the changeable hybridization state and structure of elemental carbon, carbonaceous 
materials have distinct physical, chemical, and electrical properties compared to metal-based 
nanomaterials (Ren et al., 2011). Numerous structural configurations, including single-walled and 
multiwalled nanotubes, fullerene C60, and fullerene C540, can be produced via mutable hybrid￾ization states. Virgin carbon materials first need to be surface-treated, activated, or functionalized. 
Numerous investigations have focused on the use of single- and multiwalled carbon nanotubes 
(SWCNTs and MWCNTs). These materials are very helpful for eliminating significant amounts 
of aqueous solutions, as well as both organic and inorganic pollutants from the air, because of their 
adsorption properties (Kharisov et al., 2014). Moreover, carbon-based nanoparticles can be used in 
photocatalytic processes to remove pollutants. The hydroxyl radicals that participate in the oxida￾tion of chlorinated organic compounds are created by holes. Superoxide radicals are produced by 
combining electrons, which help to remove heavy metal contaminants. Research on the creation of 
photocatalytic nanocomposites using graphene has been reported (Yang et al., 2013).
11.3.7  Characterization
A number of techniques (Figure 11.3) have been used for nanoparticle characterization, including 
surface plaque resonance (SPR)-based UV-visible spectroscopy. Another method is X-ray diffraction, 
which is employed to ascertain the crystalline phase (Verma et al., 2021). Functional groups in 
substances can be determined using Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy. Atomic force 
microscopy (AFM), transmission electron microscopy, and scanning electron microscopy are 
FIGURE 11.3 Various characterization methods for nanoparticles.188 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
TABLE 11.1
Applications of nanoparticles in environmental remediation
S. No. Nanomaterials Application Reference
1 TiO2
 composite and gold nanoparticles Removes sulfur Rodriguez (2006)
2 Titanium dioxide (TiO2
) Wastewater and air purification
3 Single-walled carbon nanotubes 
(SWCNTs)
Heavy metal adsorption Anitha et al., (2015)
4 Silica nanoparticles Mercury extraction from an aqueous 
solution
Imran K et al., (2014)
5 Multiwalled carbon nanotubes 
(MWCNTs)
Elimination of ions from heavy metals Luo C et al., (2013)
6 Fly ash Methyl blue Visa (2016)
7 Fe (nZVI) Amoxicillin Ali et al., (2020)
8 Activated carbon Ciprofoxacin Oruganti et al., (2023)
9 Fe3
O4 Methyl blue, 2-Nitroaniline Getahun et al. (2022)
10 CuO Nitrate Galan et al. (2018)
11 Fe3
O4 Hg° Gindaba et al. (2023)
12 CuO–Ag Amoxicillin and sulfamet-hazine Dihigia et al., (2023)
13 Fe2
O3 Ametryn Ali et al., (2016)
14 Cu2
O Pb Zarrabi & Ghasemi-Fasaei 
(2022)
15 Fe Cr Rong et al., (2020)
16 Gelatin/zirconium–MOF Naproxen and ibuprofen Njaramba et al., (2023)
17 Fe2
O3 Ar (V) Mukherjee et al., (2015)
18 Cu2
O Pb
19 Ag Cd Al-Qahtani (2017)
20 HA–O/Fe3
O4 Pb (II), Cu (II), cadmium (Cd) (II), and 
Ni (II)
Xue et al., (2021)
21 Fe3
O4 Chromium (IV) Mahmoud et al., (2021)
22 Fe3
O4 Cobalt oxide Kadam et al. (2019)
23 Co2
Fe2
O Hg Xia et al., (2019)
24 CS/MWCNT Phenol Guo et al., (2019)
25 Fe Ammonia and phosphate Xu et al., (2020)
26 Fe–Ni Ar Lin et al., (2022)
27 ZnO H2S Huy et al., (2019)
28 Thiol-modified silica Vanadium (V) Shirkhanloo et al., (2021)
29 Ca-doped ZnO Tetracycline Bembibre et al., (2022)
30 Polysaccharides/MnO2 Formaldehyde Qu et al., (2022)
31 Li2
MnO3 CO and CO2 Hernández-Fontes and Pfeiffer 
(2021)
32 Nd–TiO2 VOCs Li et al., (2021)
33 Cerium oxide CO Zhang et al., (2017)
34 CuO–MnO2–Fe2
O3
/γAl2
O3 Hg° Wang et al., (2015)
35 Silver nanoparticles from low-cost 
materials
Removal of E. coli from contaminated 
water
Praveena et al (2015)
36 CNTs with iron oxide magnetic 
composites
Removal of Co2+, Sr2+, and Ni2+ from 
an aqueous solution
Yu et al., (2005)
37 Cu0–chitosan Cr6+ Wang et al., (2010)
38 Ni/Fe–cellulose acetate Trichloroethylene Dong et al., (2011)
39 Fe3
O4
–alginate Methylene blue and methyl orange Rezaei et al., (2007)Implications of Nanotechnology for Environmental Remediation 189
used to assess the size, shape, and surface charge of nanoparticles (Roy et al., 2019). The sizes of 
nanoparticles can also be measured using dynamic light scattering.
11.4 NANOPARTICLE APPLICATIONS IN ENVIRONMENTAL REMEDIATION
The extraction of antibiotics, steroids, heavy metals, and pesticides from water using metal 
nanoparticles has been documented in the literature. Because of the variety and sustainability of 
adsorbents, adsorption-based removal is the most desirable method.
The limitations of wastewater treatment techniques brought on by antibiotic resistance have 
been eliminated (Ngumba et al., 2020). Antibiotic resistance can occur as a result of the presence 
of residual antibiotics in environmental setting, particularly in concentrations below therapeutic 
proportions. Studies have shown that using magnetite nanoparticles (e.g., Fe3
O4
NPs) as adsorbents 
can remove antibiotics (Wanakai et al., 2023). Green synthesized manganese nanoparticles from 
synthetic and real water can also effectively remove antibiotics, like mitoxantrone (MTX), from 
wastewater, with percentage removal efficiencies of 97.4% and 77.3%, respectively. Levofloxacin 
dosages of 50 and 400 µg/ml have been cleared with efficiencies of 99.2% and 99.6% using zinc 
oxide and graphene oxide nanoparticles, respectively (El-Maraghy et al., 2020). Steroid hormones 
are considered micropollutants because they affect early development and reproduction in both 
aquatic and terrestrial organisms (Ojoghoro et al., 2021). Carbon-based nanoparticles have been 
used to extract steroids from wastewater (Nguyen et al., 2021). Furthermore, titanium dioxide 
nanoparticles in polyethersulfone membranes with diameters ranging from 10 to 30 nm can remove 
80% of estradiol and estrone (Lotfi et al., 2022). In the same trial, progesterone and testosterone 
were removed from the body at rates of 44% and 33%, respectively.
Graphene, a carbon-based nanomaterial, has been used to remove pesticides from water (Hesni 
et al., 2020). In one study, it was discovered that silica-coated graphene enhances the adsorption 
of organophosphorus pesticides in water (Liu et al., 2013). Using nanocrystalline cerium (IV) 
oxide, leftover organophosphate parathion methyl pesticide can be transformed into less hazardous 
compounds within a given temperature range (Tolasz et al., 2020). The use of nanocrystalline metal 
oxides for the elimination and degradation of organophosphorus insecticides has been restricted by 
budgetary constraints (Saleh et al., 2020). Therefore, in order to manage pesticide pollution in water 
on a large scale, alternative nanomaterial types must be developed. The removal of dangerous metals 
using nanomaterials is one practical solution to eliminating heavy metal ions from water (Yang et al., 
2019). However, costs increase when possibly harmful byproducts made by CNTs are eliminated. 
Graphene nanoparticles have also been used to extract heavy metal ions from wastewater (Yang 
et al., 2019). Research has suggested that silica-based nanoparticles may be used to remove heavy 
metals. Activated sludge, for example, has been used to identify different types of nanoparticles in 
influent, post-primary treatment, effluent, and reclaimed water from large-scale wastewater treatment 
plants (WWTPs). One study discovered that whereas the concentration of metal-based nanoparticles 
in recovered water was 0.6721 ng/L, it increased to 1,60010700 ng/L in influent wastewater. The 
study’s focus was on nanoparticle components before and after wastewater was treated, but it failed 
to provide much information. As a result, elemental contributions to the examined concentrations 
from leaching were not revealed (Keller et al., 2015). The following three conditions must be sat￾isfied in order to promote the large-scale treatment of water contaminants using nanomaterials: (1) 
high treatment efficiency; (2) cheap costs; (3) environment security. Water treatment research and 
development primarily focus on the synthesis of nanostructures, nanoadsorbents, and nanocatalysts. 
Nanomaterials and nanostructures range in size from 1 to 100 nm (Liu et al., 2011). A particle’s sur￾face area grows as its size decreases. As a result, in contrast to microscopic particles, nanoparticles 
have unique optical, electrical, and magnetic properties (Warner et al., 2010). It’s possible that 
as particle sizes decrease, the number of surface atoms increases, giving rise to these nanoscale 
particles.190 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
Another potentially beneficial application of nanoparticles is their creative usage in the treatment 
of industrial waste. Large volumes of wastewater are produced by numerous enterprises. Industry 
would save a great deal of money, time, and labor by eliminating pollutants and reusing purified 
wastewater, which would also promote environmental stewardship. Another crucial issue is ground￾water remediation, which is becoming increasingly crucial as water demand rises and water supplies 
decline. Advancing from traditional water treatments, membrane technologies have grown more and 
more important in the purification of water. Water and wastewater can be treated using microfiltration, 
ultrafiltration (UF), and nanofiltration (NF) (Qin et al., 2007). The search for novel materials and 
water purification techniques is ongoing. Since membrane processes are crucial components of 
complex water purification and desalination technologies, nanomaterials (like carbon nanotubes, 
nanoparticles, and dendrimers) could contribute to the creation of more economical and efficient 
water filtration techniques.
Another method that is frequently used in environmental remediation is chemical degradation. O￾zone/UV radiation/H2
O2
 oxidation and photocatalytic-solvated electron reduction are the two types 
of methods used for chemical degradation. Chemical oxidation methods based on UV or o-zone 
radiation (O3
/UV/H2
O2
) can be applied to treat water in order to break down specific pollutants and 
lower organic loads, which is sometimes referred to as chemical oxygen demand (COD). These 
techniques can help to increase the biodegradability of wastewater. O-zone and UV light are suf￾ficient for disinfection. Additionally, O3
/UV/H2
O2
 processes usually use two oxidation/photolysis 
pathways to eliminate foreign contaminants from water. As a result, organic compounds in water 
either undergo direct photolysis or separate reactions with UV radiation, hydrogen peroxide, and/or 
o-zone radiation. Except for fluorine, hydroxyl radicals have the highest standard redox potential. 
Phenols and some herbicides are among the most prevalent contaminants in water as they instantly 
react with hydroxyl radicals, while organic chlorine compounds react more slowly. Photocatalytic 
degradation is a process that involves photons and a catalyst. Photocatalytic reactions occur during 
the adsorption phase and there are five formal steps to the overall process: (1) Reactants flow from 
the fluid phase to the surface; (2) at least one of them adsorbs; (3) the reaction takes place in the 
adsorbed phase; (4) they desorb; (5) they are extracted from interfacial areas. There have been 
reports of higher rates of gas phase clearance for different pollutants and, more significantly, higher 
mineralization rates when the temperature is raised above room temperature (Dionysou et al., 2000).
Iron, titanium oxide, silver, gold, and iron oxide are the most studied nanoscale metals and metal 
oxides for environmental remediation. The size and configuration of these nanomaterials have 
an impact on their performance. Chemical methods, like coprecipitation, liquid phase reduction, 
gas phase reduction, and pulse electrode position, are examples of approaches to environmental 
remediation. Synthesis techniques can be generally categorized using physical methodologies, 
including ultrasonic shot peening, high-energy ball milling, inert gas condensation, extreme plastic 
deformation, and thermal breakdown (Willis et al., 2005). Recently, membrane technologies have 
become more effective and can reliably remove contaminants without producing any hazardous 
byproducts, particularly when treating wastewater. The fundamental idea behind membrane fil￾tration is the removal of gases, particles, liquids, and solutes using semipermeable membranes. 
To separate materials from water, membranes must be more permeable to water and less perme￾able to solutes or other particles. Nanofiltration is a promising membrane technology and offers 
one method for removing small molecular weight solutes (Kiso et al., 2001). Precise treatment 
plans are determined by the molecular size and characteristics of the target contaminants. Water 
treatment systems are often made up of a number of interconnected processes, each of which aims 
to extract one or more distinct materials from the source water. Membranes, inorganic materials 
(such as certain metal oxides), and other polymers (such as polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) and sulfonated 
polysulfone) can be used for nanofiltration (Fane et al., 2011). The optimal size of NF membranes 
has been shown to be 2 nm (Mulder et al., 1996). While NF removes hardness (Ca(II)), RO is espe￾cially good at retaining dissolved inorganic and small organic molecules. UF and MF membranes Implications of Nanotechnology for Environmental Remediation 191
require lower pressures (560 psi), whereas NF and RO procedures require high pressures (1000 
psi). MF methods extract ions that have dissolved in liquids, such as water (Diallo et al., 2005). 
NF membranes can be made from polyamide or cellulose acetate. Moreover, in NF, the prac￾tice of indirect portable reuse involves adding appropriate quantities of nanofiltrated water into 
reservoirs that, before being supplied to the general public, can be further purified using standard 
water treatment techniques. First, domestic wastewater is cleared using primary sedimentation and 
then treated with activated sludge to create nanofiltrated water. Subsequently, methods for reverse 
osmosis (RO), UV disinfection, and biofiltration using MF or UF are used to prepare the water for 
various applications, including industry, manufacturing, filling reservoirs, and recharging ground￾water. Recently, there has been a greater focus on the usage of NF in the reduction of dissolved 
organic molecules. Because nanomaterials present new opportunities beyond traditional cleanup 
and detection techniques, studying them is fascinating. Greater sensitivity, reduced costs, faster turn￾around times, smaller sample sizes, and increased throughput are all benefits of using nanomaterials 
in environmental remediation. Metals and organic contaminants can be eliminated with the use of 
metal and metal oxide nanoparticles. Moreover, while most research on the use of nanomaterials 
is carried out in laboratories, it is essential to evaluate outcomes in ambient contexts to ensure 
their real-world efficacy. In the future, nanoparticles could become essential for treating hazardous 
contaminants. However, environmental remediation techniques need to be further refined in order 
to remove materials selectively, increase resilience to pH variations, alter chemical concentrations, 
increase stability, and minimize costs. Additionally, nanofibrous media’s small pore size, excellent 
permeability, and low basis weight make it useful for a wide range of filtering applications.
11.5 CONCLUSION
Industrialization and the depletion of natural resources are inherent to human progress; however, 
the elimination of contaminants is urgently needed. Additional advancements in the functional 
characteristics of nanomaterials are also required for trace detection and the removal of air and 
water pollutants. Potential materials for managing environmental contamination include CNTs and 
metal oxide or magnetic composites. Materials of various sorts, including inorganic, carbonaceous, 
and polymeric nanoparticles, can be effectively utilized for an array of environmental remedi￾ation applications. Even though a wide range of research projects have looked into applications of 
nanotechnology, issues with its applications in environmental remediation have not yet been fully 
resolved. In addition to assessing the effectiveness of nanomaterials, researchers need to develop 
less expensive and more environmentally friendly methods of producing them. To completely com￾prehend how nanotechnology can practically impact environmental remediation, more research is 
required.
REFERENCES
Adegbembo, Albert O., Philip A. Watson, and Stanley J. Lugowski. “The weight of wastes generated by 
removal of dental amalgam restorations and the concentration of mercury in dental wastewater.” Journal￾Canadian Dental Association 68, no. 9 (2002): 553–558.
Adesina, A. A. “Industrial exploitation of photocatalysis: Progress, perspectives and prospects.” Catalysis 
Surveys from Asia 8 (2004): 265–273.
Ali, Imran, Shirin Afshinb, Yousef Poureshgh, Ali Azari, Yousef Rashtbari, Abolfazl Feizizadeh, Asghar 
Hamzezadeh, and Mehdi Fazlzadeh. “Green preparation of activated carbon from pomegranate peel 
coated with zero-valent iron nanoparticles (nZVI) and isotherm and kinetic studies of amoxicillin 
removal in water.” Environmental Science and Pollution Research 27 (2020): 36732–36743.
Ali, Imran, Zeid A. AL-Othman, and Abdulrahman Alwarthan. “Green synthesis of functionalized iron nano 
particles and molecular liquid phase adsorption of ametryn from water.” Journal of Molecular Liquids
221 (2016): 1168–1174.192 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
Al-Qahtani, Khairia M. “Cadmium removal from aqueous solution by green synthesis zero valent silver 
nanoparticles with Benjamina leaves extract.” The Egyptian Journal of Aquatic Research 43, no. 4 
(2017): 269–274.
Anitha, K., Sadanandam Namsani, and Jayant K. Singh. “Removal of heavy metal ions using a functionalized 
single-walled carbon nanotube: A molecular dynamics study.” The Journal of Physical Chemistry A 119, 
no. 30 (2015): 8349–8358.
Askari Hesni, M., S. A. Hedayati, A. Qadermarzi, M. Pouladi, Z. Zangi Abadi, and N. Naghshbandi. “Application 
of iron oxide nanoparticles in the reactor for treatment of effluent from fish farms.” Iranian Journal of 
Fisheries Sciences 19, no. 3 (2020): 1319–1328.
Bembibre, Alejandro, Majdi Benamara, Mokhtar Hjiri, Elvira Gómez, Hatem R. Alamri, Ramzi Dhahri, and 
Albert Serra. “Visible-light driven sonophotocatalytic removal of tetracycline using Ca-doped ZnO 
nanoparticles.” Chemical Engineering Journal 427 (2022): 132006.
Bhatia, D., Arumugam, S., Nasilowski, M., Joshi, H., Wunder, C., Chambon, V., ... & Krishnan, Y. Quantum 
dot-loaded monofunctionalized DNA icosahedra for single-particle tracking of endocytic pathways. 
Nature Nanotechnology 11, no. 12 (2016): 1112–1119.
Briffa, Jessica, Emmanuel Sinagra, and Renald Blundell. “Heavy metal pollution in the environment and their 
toxicological effects on humans.” Heliyon 6, no. 9 (2020).
Brigante, Maximiliano, Eliana Pecini, and Marcelo Avena. “Magnetic mesoporous silica for water remedi￾ation: Synthesis, characterization and application as adsorbent of molecules and ions of environmental 
concern.” Microporous and Mesoporous Materials 230 (2016): 1–10.
Cherfi, Abdelhamid, Mohamed Achour, Malika Cherfi, Samia Otmani, and Assia Morsli. “Health risk assessment 
of heavy metals through consumption of vegetables irrigated with reclaimed urban wastewater in 
Algeria.” Process Safety and Environmental Protection 98 (2015): 245–252.
Chou, Kan-Sen, Yu-Chieh Lu, and Hsien-Hsuen Lee. “Effect of alkaline ion on the mechanism and kinetics of 
chemical reduction of silver.” Materials Chemistry and Physics 94, no. 2–3 (2005): 429–433.
Dionysou, D. D., G. Balasubramanian, M. T. Suidan, I. Baudinand, and J. M. Laıne. Reaction engineering for 
pollution prevention. In M. A. Abraham and R. P. Hesketh (eds.), Thin film photocatalytic reactor for the 
destruction of organic contaminants in industrial wastewater and drinking water, Elsevier, Amsterdam, 
2000, pp. 137–147.
Das, Sumistha, Biswarup Sen, and Nitai Debnath. “Recent trends in nanomaterials applications in 
environmental monitoring and remediation.” Environmental Science and Pollution Research 22 
(2015): 18333–18344.
Diallo, Mamadou S., Simone Christie, Pirabalini Swaminathan, James H. Johnson, and William A. Goddard. 
“Dendrimer enhanced ultrafiltration. 1. Recovery of Cu (II) from aqueous solutions using PAMAM 
dendrimers with ethylene diamine core and terminal NH2 groups.” Environmental Science & Technology
39, no. 5 (2005): 1366–1377.
Dihingia, Himangshu, and Diwakar Tiwari. “Green and facile synthesis of heterojunction nanocatalyst: Insights 
and mechanism of antibiotics removal.” Separation and Purification Technology 306 (2023): 122641.
Dong, Tingting, Hanjin Luo, Yiping Wang, Bingjie Hu, and Hua Chen. “Stabilization of Fe–Pd bimetallic 
nanoparticles with sodium carboxymethyl cellulose for catalytic reduction of para-nitrochlorobenzene 
in water.” Desalination 271, no. 1–3 (2011): 11–19.
El-Maraghy, Christine M., Ola M. El-Borady, and Omnia A. El-Naem. “Effective removal of levofloxacin from 
pharmaceutical wastewater using synthesized zinc oxid, graphen oxide nanoparticles compared with 
their combination.” Scientific Reports 10, no. 1 (2020): 5914.
Fane, A. G., Chuyang Tang, and Rong Wang. “Membrane technology for water: Microfiltration, ultrafiltration, 
nanofiltration, and reverse osmosis.” In Wilderer, PA (Ed.), Treatise Water Science (2011): 301–335. 
Amsterdam; Hackensack, NJ : Elsevier Science.
Galan, Crislaine Rodrigues, Marcela Fernandes Silva, Daniel Mantovani, Rosângela Bergamasco, and Marcelo 
Fernandes Vieira. “Green synthesis of copper oxide nanoparticles impregnated on activated carbon 
using Moringa oleifera leaves extract for the removal of nitrates from water.” The Canadian Journal of 
Chemical Engineering 96, no. 11 (2018): 2378–2386.
Getahun, Yohannes W., Jorge Gardea-Torresdey, Felicia S. Manciu, Xiujun Li, and Ahmed A. El-Gendy. 
“Green synthesized superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles for water treatment with alternative 
recyclability.” Journal of Molecular Liquids 356 (2022): 118983.Implications of Nanotechnology for Environmental Remediation 193
Gindaba, Gadissa Tokuma, Hundessa Dessalegn Demsash, and Mani Jayakumar. “Green synthesis, charac￾terization, and application of metal oxide nanoparticles for mercury removal from aqueous solution.” 
Environmental Monitoring and Assessment 195, no. 1 (2023): 9.
Guo, Ming, Jue Wang, Chunge Wang, P. J. Strong, Peikun Jiang, Yong Sik Ok, and Hailong Wang. “Carbon 
nanotube-grafted chitosan and its adsorption capacity for phenol in aqueous solution.” Science of the 
Total Environment 682 (2019): 340–347.
Hadef, Fatma. “An introduction to nanomaterials.” Environmental Nanotechnology 1 (2018): 1–58.
Hasan, S. A review on nanoparticles: their synthesis and types. Research Journal of Recent Sciences 2277 
(2015): 2502.
Hassaan, Mohamed A., and Ahmed El Nemr. “Pesticides pollution: Classifications, human health 
impact, extraction and treatment techniques.” The Egyptian Journal of Aquatic Research 46, no. 3 
(2020): 207–220.
Hernández-Fontes, Carlos, and Heriberto Pfeiffer. “Unraveling the CO and CO2 reactivity on Li2MnO3: Sorption 
and catalytic analyses.” Chemical Engineering Journal 428 (2022): 131998.
Hochella, Michael F., Michael G. Spencer, and Kimberly L. Jones. “Nanotechnology: Nature’s gift or scientists’ 
brainchild?.” Environmental Science: Nano 2, no. 2 (2015): 114–119.
Huy, Nguyen Nhat, Vo Thi Thanh Thuy, Nguyen Hung Thang, Nguyen Thi Thuy, Tran Tien Khoi, and Dang 
Van Thanh. “Facile one-step synthesis of zinc oxide nanoparticles by ultrasonic-assisted precipitation 
method and its application for H2S adsorption in air.” Journal of Physics and Chemistry of Solids 132 
(2019): 99–103.
Imran Khan, Mohd Farhan, Pratichi Singh, and Padma Thiagarajan. “Nanotechnology for environmental 
remediation.” (2014): 1916–1927.
Jeevanandam, Jaison, Ahmed Barhoum, Yen S. Chan, Alain Dufresne, and Michael K. Danquah. “Review on 
nanoparticles and nanostructured materials: History, sources, toxicity and regulations.” Beilstein Journal 
of Nanotechnology 9, no. 1 (2018): 1050–1074.
Kadam, Avinash, Rijuta Ganesh Saratale, Surendra Shinde, Jiwook Yang, Kyojung Hwang, Bhupendra Mistry, 
Ganesh Dattatraya Saratale et al. “Adsorptive remediation of cobalt oxide nanoparticles by magnetized 
α-cellulose fibers from waste paper biomass.” Bioresource Technology 273 (2019): 386–393.
Keller, Laetitia, Damien Offner, Pascale Schwinté, David Morand, Quentin Wagner, Catherine Gros, Fabien 
Bornert et al. “Active nanomaterials to meet the challenge of dental pulp regeneration.” Materials 8, 
no. 11 (2015): 7461–7471.
Kharisov, Boris I., H. V. Rasika Dias, and Oxana V. Kharissova. “Nanotechnology-based remediation of pet￾roleum impurities from water.” Journal of Petroleum Science and Engineering 122 (2014): 705–718.
Kiso, Yoshiaki, Yosuke Sugiura, Takane Kitao, and Kazuyuki Nishimura. “Effects of hydrophobicity and 
molecular size on rejection of aromatic pesticides with nanofiltration membranes.” Journal of Membrane 
Science 192, no. 1–2 (2001): 1–10.
Li, Jinlong, Boxin Li, Guozhe Sui, Lijuan Du, Yan Zhuang, Yulin Zhang, and Yuanfang Zou. “Removal of vola￾tile organic compounds from air using supported ionic liquid membrane containing ultraviolet-visible 
light-driven Nd-TiO2 nanoparticles.” Journal of Molecular Structure 1231 (2021): 130023.
Lin, Yuanqiong, Xiaoying Jin, Nasreen Islam Khan, Gary Owens, and Zuliang Chen. “Bimetallic Fe/Ni 
nanoparticles derived from green synthesis for the removal of arsenic (V) in mine wastewater.” Journal 
of Environmental Management 301 (2022): 113838.
Liu, Xiaotong, Hongyan Zhang, Yongqiang Ma, Xiaoli Wu, Lixuan Meng, Yunlong Guo, Gui Yu, and Yunqi 
Liu. “Graphene-coated silica as a highly efficient sorbent for residual organophosphorus pesticides in 
water.” Journal of Materials Chemistry A 1, no. 5 (2013): 1875–1884.
Liu, Xinjuan, Likun Pan, Tian Lv, Ting Lu, Guang Zhu, Zhuo Sun, and Changqing Sun. “Microwave-assisted 
synthesis of ZnO–graphene composite for photocatalytic reduction of Cr (VI).” Catalysis Science & 
Technology 1, no. 7 (2011): 1189–1193.
Lotfi, Shabnam, Kristina Fischer, Agnes Schulze, and Andrea I. Schäfer. “Photocatalytic degradation of steroid 
hormone micropollutants by TiO2-coated polyethersulfone membranes in a continuous flow-through 
process.” Nature Nanotechnology 17, no. 4 (2022): 417–423.
Loux, Nicholas T., Yee San Su, and Sayed M. Hassan. “Issues in assessing environmental exposures to 
manufactured nanomaterials.” International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 8, 
no. 9 (2011): 3562–3578.194 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
Luo, Chao, Zhang Tian, Bo Yang, Li Zhang, and Shiqiang Yan. “Manganese dioxide/iron oxide/acid oxidized 
multi-walled carbon nanotube magnetic nanocomposite for enhanced hexavalent chromium removal.” 
Chemical Engineering Journal 234 (2013): 256–265.
Mahmoud, Mohamed E., Shaimaa R. Saad, Abdel Moneim El-Ghanam, and Rabah Hanem A. Mohamed. 
“Developed magnetic Fe3O4–MoO3-AC nanocomposite for effective removal of ciprofloxacin from 
water.” Materials Chemistry and Physics 257 (2021): 123454.
Masih, Jamson, Amit Masih, Aditi Kulshrestha, Raj Singhvi, and Ajay Taneja. “Characteristics of polycyclic 
aromatic hydrocarbons in indoor and outdoor atmosphere in the North central part of India.” Journal of 
Hazardous Materials 177, no. 1–3 (2010): 190–198.
Mok, Zi Hong, Gordon Proctor, and Maya Thanou. “Emerging nanomaterials for dental treatments.” Emerging 
Topics in Life Sciences 4, no. 6 (2020): 613–625.
Mukherjee, Debarati, Sourja Ghosh, Swachchha Majumdar, and K. Annapurna. “Green synthesis of α-Fe2O3 
nanoparticles for arsenic (V) remediation with a novel aspect for sludge management.” Journal of 
Environmental Chemical Engineering 4, no. 1 (2016): 639–650.
Mulder, F. M., Thiel, R. C., de Jongh, L. J., & Gubbens, P. C. M. Size-evolution towards metallic behavior in 
nano-sized gold and platinum clusters as revealed by 197Au Mössbauer spectroscopy. Nanostructured 
Materials, 7, no. 3 (1996): 269-292.
Nagore, Pravinkumar, Suresh Ghotekar, Kanchan Mane, Amol Ghoti, Muhammad Bilal, and Arpita Roy. 
“Structural properties and antimicrobial activities of Polyalthia longifolia leaf extract-mediated CuO 
nanoparticles.” BioNanoScience 11 (2021): 579–589.
Ngumba, Elijah, Anthony Gachanja, James Nyirenda, Johanna Maldonado, and Tuula Tuhkanen. “Occurrence 
of antibiotics and antiretroviral drugs in source-separated urine, groundwater, surface water and 
wastewater in the peri-urban area of Chunga in Lusaka, Zambia.” Water Sa 46, no. 2 (2020): 278–284.
Nguyen, Minh Nhat, Peter Georg Weidler, Ruth Schwaiger, and Andrea Iris Schäfer. “Interactions between 
carbon-based nanoparticles and steroid hormone micropollutants in water.” Journal of Hazardous 
Materials 402 (2021): 122929.
Njaramba, Lewis Kamande, Minseok Kim, Yeonji Yea, Yeomin Yoon, and Chang Min Park. “Efficient adsorp￾tion of naproxen and ibuprofen by gelatin/zirconium-based metal–organic framework/sepiolite aerogels 
via synergistic mechanisms.” Chemical Engineering Journal 452 (2023): 139426.
Ojoghoro, J. O., M. D. Scrimshaw, and J. P. Sumpter. “Steroid hormones in the aquatic environment.” Science 
of the Total Environment 792 (2021): 148306.
Oruganti, R. K., D. Pal, T. K. Panda, D. Shee, and D. Bhattacharyya. “Green synthesis of calcium oxide 
nanoparticles impregnated activated carbon from algal–bacterial activated sludge: Its application in 
ciprofloxacin removal.” International Journal of Environmental Science and Technology 20, no. 11 
(2023): 12379–12396.
Pandey, R., F. Masood, H. P. Singh, and D. R. Batish. “Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons as environmental 
pollutants: A review.” International Journal of Advanced Research in Science, Engineering and 
Technology 6 (2017): 1361–1369.
Praveena, Sarva Mangala, and Ahmad Zaharin Aris. “Application of low-cost materials coated with silver 
nanoparticle as water filter in Escherichia coli removal.” Water Quality, Exposure and Health 7 
(2015): 617–625.
Qin, Jian-Jun, Maung Htun Oo, and Kiran A. Kekre. “Nanofiltration for recovering wastewater from a specific 
dyeing facility.” Separation and Purification Technology 56, no. 2 (2007): 199–203.
Qu, Yongshuai, Xianming Zheng, Keke Ma, Weiwei He, Shan Wang, and Pengyi Zhang. “Facile coating 
of MnO2 nanoparticles onto polymer fibers via friction-heating adhesion for efficient formaldehyde 
removal.” Chemical Engineering Journal 430 (2022): 132954.
Rezaei, Heydar, Masoud Haghshenasfard, and Ahmad Moheb. “Optimization of dye adsorption using Fe3O4 
nanoparticles encapsulated with alginate beads by Taguchi method.” Adsorption Science & Technology
35, no. 1–2 (2017): 55–71.
Ren XueMei, ChangLun Chen, M. Nagatsu, and Xiang Ke Wang. “Carbon nanotubes as adsorbents in environ￾mental pollution management: A review.” 170, no. (2–3) (2011): 395–410.
Ren, H. X., Liu, L., Liu, C., He, S. Y., Huang, J., Li, J. L., ... & Gu, N. Physiological investigation of magnetic 
iron oxide nanoparticles towards Chinese mung bean. Journal of Biomedical Nanotechnology, 7, no. 5 
(2011): 677–684.Implications of Nanotechnology for Environmental Remediation 195
Rodriguez, José A. “The chemical properties of bimetallic surfaces: Importance of ensemble and electronic 
effects in the adsorption of sulfur and SO2.” Progress in Surface Science 81, no. 4 (2006): 141–189.
Rong, Kun, Jinye Wang, Zaiwang Zhang, and Jiqiang Zhang. “Green synthesis of iron nanoparticles using 
Korla fragrant pear peel extracts for the removal of aqueous Cr (VI).” Ecological Engineering 149 
(2020): 105793.
Roy, S., Kumar, R., Sahoo, A. K., & Das, R. K. A brief review on effects of conventional and nano par￾ticle based machining fluid on machining performance of minimum quantity lubrication machining. 
Materials Today: Proceedings, 18 (2019): 5421–5431.
Saleh, Tawfik A. “Nanomaterials: Classification, properties, and environmental toxicities.” Environmental 
Technology & Innovation 20 (2020): 101067.
Santhosh, Chella, Venugopal Velmurugan, George Jacob, Soon Kwan Jeong, Andrews Nirmala Grace, and Amit 
Bhatnagar. “Role of nanomaterials in water treatment applications: A review.” Chemical Engineering 
Journal 306 (2016): 1116–1137.
Seewagen, Chad L. “The threat of global mercury pollution to bird migration: Potential mechanisms and 
current evidence.” Ecotoxicology 29, no. 8 (2020): 1254–1267.
Shirkhanloo, Hamid, Ali Faghihi-Zarandi, and Mostafa Dehghani Mobarake. “Thiol modified bimodal 
mesoporous silica nanoparticles for removal and determination toxic vanadium from air and human bio￾logical samples in petrochemical workers.” NanoImpact 23 (2021): 100339.
Tchounwou, Paul B., Clement G. Yedjou, Anita K. Patlolla, and Dwayne J. Sutton. “Heavy metal toxicity and 
the environment.” Molecular, Clinical and Environmental Toxicology 3 (2012): 133–164.
Tibau, Anita Vazquez, and Blanche D. Grube. “Mercury contamination from dental amalgam.” Journal of 
Health and Pollution 9, no. 22 (2019): 190612.
Tolasz, Jakub, Jiří Henych, Martin Šťastný, Zuzana Němečková, Michaela Šrámová Slušná, Tomáš Opletal, and 
Pavel Janoš. “Room-temperature synthesis of nanoceria for degradation of organophosphate pesticides 
and its regeneration and reuse.” RSC Advances 10, no. 24 (2020): 14441–14450.
Tsai, Cheng-Hsun, Wei-Chieh Chang, Diganta Saikia, Cheng-En Wu, and Hsien-Ming Kao. “Functionalization 
of cubic mesoporous silica SBA-16 with carboxylic acid via one-pot synthesis route for effective removal 
of cationic dyes.” Journal of Hazardous Materials 309 (2016): 236–248.
Verma, Ayushi, Arpita Roy, and Navneeta Bharadvaja. “Remediation of heavy metals using 
nanophytoremediation.” In Advanced oxidation processes for effluent treatment plants, Elsevier, 2021, 
pp. 273–296.
Visa, Maria. “Synthesis and characterization of new zeolite materials obtained from fly ash for heavy metals 
removal in advanced wastewater treatment.” Powder Technology 294 (2016): 338–347.
Wanakai, Indire Sammy, Gachoki Patrick Kareru, Makhanu David Sujee, Shigwenya Edwin Madivoli, Maina 
Ernest Gachui, and Kinoti Pius Kairigo. “Kinetics of rifampicin antibiotic degradation using green 
synthesized iron oxide nanoparticles.” Chemistry Africa 6, no. 2 (2023): 967–981.
Wang, Pengying, Song Hu, Jun Xiang, Sheng Su, Lushi Sun, Fan Cao, Xi Xiao, and Anchao Zhang. “Analysis 
of mercury species over CuO–MnO2–Fe2O3/γ-Al2O3 catalysts by thermal desorption.” Proceedings of 
the Combustion Institute 35, no. 3 (2015): 2847–2853.
Wang, Qian, Huijing Qian, Yueping Yang, Zhen Zhang, Cissoko Naman, and Xinhua Xu. “Reduction of hexa￾valent chromium by carboxymethyl cellulose-stabilized zero-valent iron nanoparticles.” Journal of 
Contaminant Hydrology 114, no. 1–4 (2010): 35–42.
Warner, Cynthia L., R. Shane Addleman, Anthony D. Cinson, Timothy C. Droubay, Mark H. Engelhard, 
Michael A. Nash, Wassana Yantasee, and Marvin G. Warner. “High-performance, superparamagnetic, 
nanoparticle-based heavy metal sorbents for removal of contaminants from natural waters.” 
ChemSusChem 3, no. 6 (2010): 749–757.
Willis, Amanda L., Nicholas J. Turro, and Stephen O’Brien. “Spectroscopic characterization of the surface of 
iron oxide nanocrystals.” Chemistry of Materials 17.24 (2005): 5970–5975.
Xia, Kai, Yongfu Guo, Qijun Shao, Qu Zan, and Renbi Bai. “Removal of mercury (II) by EDTA-functionalized 
magnetic CoFe2O4@ SiO2 nanomaterial with core-shell structure.” Nanomaterials 9, no. 11 
(2019): 1532.
Xu, Qianyu, Wenpeng Li, Li Ma, Dan Cao, Gary Owens, and Zuliang Chen. “Simultaneous removal of ammonia 
and phosphate using green synthesized iron oxide nanoparticles dispersed onto zeolite.” Science of the 
Total Environment 703 (2020): 135002.196 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
Xue, Shuwen, Yawen Xiao, Guoqiang Wang, Jinjin Fan, Keji Wan, Qiongqiong He, Mingqiang Gao, and 
Zhenyong Miao. “Adsorption of heavy metals in water by modifying Fe3O4 nanoparticles with oxidized 
humic acid.” Colloids and Surfaces A: Physicochemical and Engineering Aspects 616 (2021): 126333.
Yang, Jinyue, Baohong Hou, Jingkang Wang, Beiqian Tian, Jingtao Bi, Na Wang, Xin Li, and Xin Huang. 
“Nanomaterials for the removal of heavy metals from wastewater.” Nanomaterials 9, no. 3 (2019): 424.
Yang, Min-Quan, Nan Zhang, and Yi-Jun Xu. “Synthesis of fullerene–, carbon nanotube–, and graphene–TiO2 
nanocomposite photocatalysts for selective oxidation: A comparative study.” ACS Applied Materials & 
Interfaces 5, no. 3 (2013): 1156–1164.
Yu, Ying, C. Yu Jimmy, Jia-Guo Yu, Yuk-Chun Kwok, Yan-Ke Che, Jin-Cai Zhao, Lu Ding, Wei-Kun Ge, 
and Po-Keung Wong. “Enhancement of photocatalytic activity of mesoporous TiO2 by using carbon 
nanotubes.” Applied Catalysis A: General 289, no. 2 (2005): 186–196.
Zarrabi, Amir, and Reza Ghasemi-Fasaei. “Preparation of green synthesized copper oxide nanoparticles 
for efficient removal of lead from wastewaters.” International Journal of Phytoremediation 24, no. 8 
(2022): 855–866.
Zhang, Rongbin, Kun Lu, Lijuan Zong, Sai Tong, Xuewen Wang, Jian Zhou, Zhang-Hui Lu, and Gang Feng. 
“Control synthesis of CeO2 nanomaterials supported gold for catalytic oxidation of carbon monoxide.” 
Molecular Catalysis 442 (2017): 173–180.197
DOI: 10.1201/9781003477730-14 197
12 Green Synthesized Mineral 
Nanofertilizers for Plant 
Growth Promotion
Manish Kumar, Ekansh Agrawal, Harsh Pratap Singh, 
Shivam Kumar, Raghvendra Saxena, and 
Rajesh Singh Tomar
12.1 INTRODUCTION
Advancements in agricultural technologies have become increasingly crucial to address the challenges 
of sustainable food production and environmental conservation. Among recent innovations, the 
development of green synthesized mineral-based nanofertilizers represents a significant leap for￾ward. Nanofertilizers offer more efficient nutrient delivery systems due to their nanoscale size and 
enhanced properties, leading to improved plant growth and yields. This is particularly relevant in the 
context of green synthesis methods, which utilize environmentally friendly processes and materials, 
thereby minimizing the ecological footprints of agricultural practices (Ghormade et al., 2011; Khot 
et al., 2012).
Green synthesized mineral-based nanofertilizers are engineered using the principles of green 
chemistry, which emphasize reductions in the use of hazardous substances and increases in the 
use of renewable resources (Ameen et al., 2021; Khan et al., 2019). Nanofertilizers are typ -
ically synthesized from natural minerals through ecofriendly processes that avoid the use of 
toxic chemicals. The resulting nanoparticles exhibit high surface area to volume ratios, thereby 
improving nutrient absorption and utilization by plants. This efficiency not only enhances plant 
growth and productivity but also reduces the amounts of fertilizer required, thus mitigating the 
negative impacts of overfertilization, such as soil degradation and water pollution (Sekhon, 
2014; Usman et al., 2020).
Research has indicated that nanofertilizers can significantly promote plant growth by 
ensuring the more controlled and sustained release of nutrients (Mukhopadhyay, 2014; Shabir 
et al., 2023). This controlled release mechanism ensures that plants receive a steady supply of 
essential minerals, which can lead to better root development, increased photosynthesis, and 
improved overall plant health. Furthermore, the use of mineral-based nanofertilizers aligns with 
sustainable agriculture goals as it supports soil health and reduces dependency on synthetic 
fertilizers, which often contribute to environmental degradation (Ameen et al., 2021; Khan 
et al., 2019).
In summary, green synthesized mineral-based nanofertilizers offer a promising avenue for enhan￾cing plant growth while adhering to the principles of sustainability and environmental stewardship. 
By harnessing the potential of nanotechnology and green chemistry, these innovative fertilizers 
could play a pivotal role in the future of sustainable agriculture, ensuring food security and environ￾mental conservation (Ghormade et al., 2011; Mukhopadhyay, 2014).198 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
12.2 BACTERIA-BASED SYNTHESIS OF MINERAL NANOFERTILIZERS
The integration of nanotechnology into agricultural practices has opened up new avenues for enhan￾cing crop productivity and sustainability. Among these innovations, the bacteria-based synthesis 
of mineral nanofertilizers has emerged as a promising strategy. Utilizing bacteria for the synthesis 
of nanofertilizers leverages biological processes to create efficient, ecofriendly, and sustainable 
agricultural inputs. This chapter explores the mechanisms, advantages, and potential applications 
of bacteria-based mineral nanofertilizers in promoting plant growth and ensuring environmental 
sustainability.
Bacteria possess unique metabolic pathways that enable them to interact with minerals in ways 
that can be harnessed for nanofertilizer synthesis. Certain bacterial species can precipitate minerals 
into nanoscale particles through processes such as biomineralization and bioreduction. For instance, 
bacteria like Bacillus subtilis and Pseudomonas fluorescens have been studied for their ability to 
synthesize nanoparticles of essential minerals, such as zinc, iron, and phosphorus (Ameen et al., 
2021; Shabir et al., 2023).
In the process of biomineralization, bacteria secrete organic molecules that act as nucleation sites, 
facilitating the formation of mineral nanoparticles. Bioreduction involves the reduction of metal 
ions to their nanoscale metallic forms by bacterial enzymes (Ghormade et al., 2011). Biologically 
synthesized nanoparticles often exhibit superior properties compared to those produced through 
chemical methods, including increased bioavailability and the controlled release of nutrients 
(Nongbet et al., 2022).
The use of bacteria for synthesizing nanofertilizers offers several advantages:
1. Ecofriendly Production
Bacterial synthesis is a green process that reduces the need for harmful chemicals and high￾energy inputs. This aligns with sustainable agricultural practices and minimizes environ￾mental impact (Kondal et al., 2021).
2. Enhanced Bioavailability
Nanoparticles produced by bacteria often have higher surface areas and more reactive 
surfaces, leading to improved nutrient absorption by plants (Scott et al., 2018).
3. Controlled Release
Bacterial synthesis can be tailored to create nanofertilizers that release nutrients slowly and 
steadily, matching the nutrient uptake patterns of plants and reducing the risks of leaching 
and runoff (Nongbet et al., 2022).
4. Cost Optimization
Utilizing naturally occurring bacteria reduces the costs associated with the production of 
nanofertilizers, making them accessible to a broader range of agricultural operations (Shabir 
et al., 2023).
Research has demonstrated the effectiveness of bacteria-based nanofertilizers in various crops. 
For example, studies have shown that zinc oxide nanoparticles synthesized by Bacillus subtilis sig￾nificantly increase the growth and yields of wheat plants (Singh et al., 2021). Similarly, iron oxide 
nanoparticles produced by Pseudomonas fluorescens have been found to enhance the chlorophyll 
content and overall health of soybean plants (Manzoor et al., 2021).
12.3 FUNGI-BASED SYNTHESIS OF MINERAL NANOFERTILIZERS
Nanotechnology has revolutionized various fields, including agriculture. Among the promising 
advancements is the development of nanofertilizers, which are more efficient than conventional 
fertilizers. They offer controlled the release of nutrients, reducing environmental pollution and 
enhancing plant growth. One innovative approach in this domain is the use of fungi for the synthesis Green Synthesized Mineral Nanofertilizers 199
of mineral nanofertilizers. Fungi, with their diverse metabolic pathways, have shown great potential 
in biosynthesizing nanoparticles of various minerals (Prasad et al., 2017).
Fungi possess unique enzymatic systems and metabolic pathways that can reduce metal ions 
to nanoparticles. This biological method is ecofriendly and cost-effective compared to traditional 
chemical and physical methods. Fungi like Aspergillus, Penicillium, and Fusarium are particularly 
noted for their ability to produce nanoparticles of essential minerals, such as zinc, copper, and iron, 
which are crucial for plant nutrition (Nongbet et al., 2022).
The process begins with fungi secreting enzymes and metabolites into the surrounding environ￾ment (Leopold et al., 2022). These secretions reduce metal ions to their respective nanoparticles. 
Fungal proteins and other biomolecules act as capping and stabilizing agents, ensuring that the 
nanoparticles remain in a dispersed state and do not agglomerate. This biological synthesis occurs 
under mild conditions, making it energy-efficient and sustainable (Sharma et al., 2023).
The use of fungi for synthesizing nanofertilizers offers several advantages:
1. Controlled Release
The biogenic synthesis of nanoparticles allows for the slow and controlled release of 
nutrients, ensuring that plants receive a steady supply over time, thereby enhancing growth 
and reducing waste (Rani et al., 2022).
2. Enhanced Nutrient Uptake
Nanoparticles have larger surface areas compared to their bulk counterparts, which improves 
their interactions with plant roots and enhances plant nutrient uptake.
3. Ecofriendly Production
Using fungi for nanoparticle synthesis eliminates the need for harsh chemicals and high￾energy inputs, making the process environmentally benign.
5. Cost Optimization
The process utilizes naturally occurring fungi and inexpensive substrates, significantly redu￾cing production costs (Narayanan and Sakthivel, 2010).
Fungal synthesized mineral nanofertilizers can be applied directly to the soil or used in foliar 
sprays. Studies have shown that these nanofertilizers improve plant growth parameters, such as root 
and shoot length, biomass, and yields. For instance, zinc nanoparticles synthesized by Aspergillus 
fumigatus have been reported to enhance the growth of mung bean plants by improving their nutrient 
absorption efficiency (Kondal et al., 2021). In another study, Aspergillus niger was used to synthe￾size zinc nanoparticles. The process involved cultivating the fungus in a nutrient-rich medium and 
adding a zinc precursor. After a few days, the medium turned yellowish-brown, indicating the for￾mation of zinc nanoparticles. These nanoparticles were then harvested, characterized, and applied to 
tomato plants. The results showed significant increases in plant height, leaf chlorophyll content, and 
fruit yields compared to plants treated with conventional zinc sulfate fertilizer (Šebesta et al., 2020).
While the potential of fungal synthesized nanofertilizers is immense, several challenges need to 
be addressed:
1. Scalability
Methods need to be developed to scale up the production of fungal nanoparticles while 
maintaining their quality and stability.
2. Regulations and Safety
Guidelines need to be established for the safe use of nanofertilizers in agriculture to prevent 
potential risks to human health and the environment.
3. Economic Viability
Production costs need to reduce further to make the price of fungal nanofertilizers competi￾tive with that of traditional fertilizers.200 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
Future research should focus on exploring a wider range of fungi for nanoparticle synthesis, 
understanding the interactions between these nanoparticles and plants at the molecular level, and 
developing integrated pest and nutrient management strategies using nanotechnology (Anjum et al., 
2023).
12.4 ALGAE-BASED SYNTHESIS OF MINERAL NANOFERTILIZERS
Productivity in agriculture is greatly dependent on the fertility of soil. But the world has 
seen a significant rise in heavy metal deposition in soil beds. So, effective and safe types of 
biofertilizers are now required. Biofertilization is a viable agricultural practice that includes using 
biofertilizers to increase soil nutrient content, resulting in higher productivity. Soil microflora 
have been long seen as the best way to improve soil fertility and increase productivity; they are 
also environmentally friendly in that they are pollution free. Acutodesmus dimorphus, Spirulina 
platensis, Chlorella vulgaris, Scenedesmus dimorphus, Anabaena azolla, and Nostoc sp. are 
some microalgae and cyanobacteria species that have been successfully used as biofertilizers 
to boost productivity of crops. The addition of seaweed species, such as Sargassum sp. and 
Gracilaria verrucosa, leads to chemical changes and acts as a soil fertility indicator for clay and 
sandy soils.
Algae, which are found almost everywhere in terrestrial environments, have the potential to 
change the traditional use of chemical fertilizers. Algae offer a potential sustainable approach to 
biofertilization in agriculture. Algae help the soil to develop certain attributes, like aeration, carbon 
content, texture, and nitrogen fixation, which, in turn, increases soil fertility. Soil algae are photo￾synthetic microorganisms that live inches underground. Their presence in soil, in addition to that of 
other living organisms, indicates healthy soil environments. Algae also keep soil erosion in check 
by managing water flow. They also perform a role in soil reclamation, the formation of microbio￾logical crusts, the biocontrol of agricultural pests, and agricultural wastewater treatment (Abdel￾Raouf et al., 2012).
Nosheen et al. (2021) reviewed the use of digested Chlorella sp. (Chlorella sp., Neochloris, 
conjuncta, Botryococcusbraunii) to promote plant growth and increase metal contents in corn. They 
found that dry weight increased, metal (Fe, Zn, Mn, and Cu) contents increased, and the uptake of 
macro-elements in the soil (N, P, K, Ca, and Mg) increased in corn crops. Algal fertilizers enhance 
plant growth and floral production. Concerning plant growth, algal fertilizers could replace conven￾tional fertilizers. They improve tomato fruit quality by increasing sugar and carotenoid contents. 
They also increase the germination rate of seeds, shorten the germination period, promote the growth 
of roots and leaves, and enhance photosynthesis. Studies have shown that Chlorella vulgaris and 
Spirulina platensis can be used as biofertilizers to enhance rice yields. Algal biofertilizers improve 
the biological and chemical properties of the soil. Algae cause soil biological activity (i.e., CO2
 evo￾lution, dehydrogenase activity, nitrogenase activity, etc.) and change soil chemical properties (i.e., 
pH, availability of N, P, and K, etc.). The addition of appropriate amounts of Tetraselmis sp. to soil 
promotes plant growth and increases chlorophyll concentration, as well as improving the mineral 
composition of the soil and ensuring the absorption of heavy metals. Chlorella vulgaris algae release 
phosphorus if used in appropriate amounts, which supports plant nutrition. Algal biofertilizers have 
shown the best crop yield increases in rice, wheat, corn, date palm, common bean, tomato, and 
chamomile.
Algal cells are a type of nano-factory that produces various nanoparticles because they include var￾iety of secondary metabolites and several active substances that serve as precursors to nanoparticles 
synthesis (Fawcett et al., 2017). For the extracellular synthesis of AgCl nanoparticles, Da Silva 
Ferreira et al. (2017) used dry biomass Chlorella vulgaris, which showed various promising results. 
The proteins found in algae are the main capping agents responsible for the stability and synthesis 
of AgCl nanoparticles (Singh et al., 2023).Green Synthesized Mineral Nanofertilizers 201
Nanofertilizers are substances that boost nutrient transfer in plants. Nanofertilizers provide 
plants with a variety of nutrients to improve growth, development, and crop outputs, while also 
enhancing soil flora and fauna. The most popular technique for nanofertilizer delivery is to encap￾sulate nutrients with nanomaterials. There are three ways that fertilizers can be delivered using 
nanoparticles: enclosed in a non-porous substance; enclosed in polymer coatings; and nanoscale 
nutrition (Singh et al., 2023).
12.5 PROTOZOAN-BASED SYNTHESIS OF MINERAL NANOFERTILIZERS
Protozoa are unicellular, eukaryote organisms, which were first surveyed and described by Anthonie 
van Leeuwenhoek (1632–1723), who developed a primitive microscope and called them animalicules 
or “little animals” (Van Leeuwenhoek, 1677). Protozoans are found in different ecological settings 
with low or high pH levels and different osmotic pressures: basically, there are no clear limitations 
to their survival in soil. They live by predating other bacteria, fungi, and yeasts. Most soil protozoa 
have the ability to form cysts to survive adverse conditions. The biomass of protozoans is similar 
to the estimated biomass of earthworms under arable fields. The most significant food source for 
free-living heterotrophic protozoans is bacteria; in addition, they also consume algae, yeasts, fungi, 
nematodes, and possibly other protozoans. They feed by enclosing food in a vacuole, where diges￾tion takes place, and then the remains are excreted into the environment.
In several previous studies, it has been seen that protozoans are a significant factor in increased 
ammonia levels in soil. It has also been proven that protozoan predate bacteria in the soil and, in 
turn, increase ammonia. In sand cultures, amoebae decrease the number of bacteria but increase 
the rate of ammonia and carbon dioxide production. The introduction of amoebae to ecological 
settings always reduces bacterial concentrations, but it increases the rate of respiration and increases 
nitrogen mineralization. Although bacterial numbers decrease, total activity increases, so it equals 
out in the end. The rhizosphere is a zone of intense microbiological activity; therefore, there is a 
high rate of mineralization among immobilized nutrients. Soil containing protozoa shows higher 
concentrations of nitrogen under low-nitrogen limiting conditions.
The effects of protozoa, when they are predating on bacteria in soil, are threefold:
1. By consuming bacteria, protozoa excrete excess ammonium nitrogen, which is then avail￾able for plant uptake.
2. By consuming bacteria, waste products, such as cell wall material and other nutrients, are 
deposited, which may enhance microbial activity and stimulate bacterial flocculation.
3. Whilst moving through the soil, protozoa may (re)inoculate (new) substrates with bacteria 
that adhere to their cell surface or egest bacteria that are not digestible.
Nitrogen turnover through microbial biomass is a crucial process in soil nitrogen cycling, 
involving the uptake, transformation, and mineralization of nitrogen. While there are established 
quantitative relationships for the uptake and transformation of nitrogen within microbial cells, there 
is limited data on how nitrogen is released from these cells, thereby completing the turnover cycle. 
Nitrogen is vital for plant growth and other soil processes. Studies have aimed to investigate how 
protozoa predation on bacteria affects the mineralization of nitrogen from bacterial cells in soil.
In one experiment, a significant reduction in bacterial populations was observed in soils with 
protozoa, coinciding with protozoan growth. This aligned with findings from Clarholm (1981), 
Elliott et al. (1979), and Heynen et al. (1988), who also noted decreased bacterial numbers due 
to protozoan predation. Another study calculated the average consumption of bacterial cells per 
protozoan produced after 35 days of incubation, revealing that approximately 4000 bacteria were 
consumed by each protozoan in soil containing only Pseudomonas aeruginosa. This was consistent 
with Clarholm’s (1981) estimate of 3000–4000 bacteria. However, when a soil suspension was 202 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
added, the consumption rate appeared to be about 10 times higher. This discrepancy is puzzling, 
especially considering that some soil suspension bacteria may be less palatable to protozoa, which 
were precultured on Pseudomonas aeruginosa in that case. No reductions in bacterial numbers were 
observed during the first 14 days, but significantly more organic nitrogen (N) was mineralized when 
the protozoa were active, suggesting that protozoan predation enhances nitrogen turnover in bac￾terial populations. This could be due to improved conditions for bacterial activity, possibly caused by 
the spreading of bacteria by protozoa as they move and feed. That study also confirmed the previous 
findings by Elliott et al. (1979) and Clarholm (1985) on protozoa’s role in stimulating shoot produc -
tion, increasing nitrogen concentrations in plants, and enhancing total nitrogen uptake. However, the 
results did not show increased total plant biomass production in the presence of protozoa. Instead, 
there was a shift from root biomass to shoot biomass, as indicated by a higher shoot to root ratio 
upon protozoa addition, reflecting improved plant nitrogen availability. Davidson (1969) suggested 
that root growth is inversely related to nitrogen availability. Higher shoot-to-root ratios have also 
been observed in soil with added soil suspensions, although no positive effects on nitrogen uptake 
have been noted, possibly due to certain microorganisms in the suspensions restricting root growth.
In that study, the net mineralization of soil organic nitrogen was calculated by comparing initial 
inorganic nitrogen (30.6 mg on day 0) to total plant nitrogen uptake and inorganic nitrogen content 
at the experiment’s end. Net mineralization was observed in all soil samples, whether inoculated 
with bacteria only or with both bacteria and protozoa. Protozoa increased soil organic nitrogen 
mineralization by approximately 34% and protozoan predation boosted net mineralization by 26% 
without soil suspensions and 44% with them. These results aligned with the 75% and 50–100% 
increases in plant nitrogen uptake reported by Clarholm (1985) and Elliott et al. (1979), assuming 
increased plant nitrogen uptake is solely due to enhanced soil organic nitrogen mineralization. The 
experimental design distinguished between the indirect effects of protozoan predation on nitrogen 
availability through turnover processes and its direct effects by releasing bacterially immobilized 
nitrogen. Protozoan predation did not impact all soil bacteria as net nitrogen mineralization reduced 
by 25% when sterilized soil was amended with a soil suspension compared to unamended soil, 
likely due to the better immobilizing capacity of the larger soil microbial population.
Protozoan predation increased bacterial N release, as shown by the recovery data, supporting 
Clarholm’s (1985) concept. During the first 14 days, bacterial cells accounted for 0.88–1.00% of 
plant nitrogen uptake, with no effects from protozoa or soil suspensions. During the second 21-day 
incubation period, nitrogen release from bacteria significantly contributed to total nitrogen uptake 
in protozoa-containing soil samples (1.25% and 1.17%) compared to samples without protozoa 
(0.86% and 0.88%). This highlights the close relationship between bacteria and protozoa in nitrogen 
mineralization. The delay in 15N release from bacterial cells due to protozoan predation might 
be explained by initial internal cycling within the bacterial populations, supported by the lower 
15N concentrations in soil samples with soil suspensions due to stronger 15N immobilization from 
internal cycling.
Overall, protozoan predation enhances bacterial nitrogen availability to plants through higher 
nitrogen turnover, both from direct bacterial cell release and soil organic matter mineralization. This 
supports the idea that food web interactions, rather than microbial activity alone, drive soil nitrogen 
mineralization (Hendrix et al., 1986). The findings from this study have helped researchers to con￾firm that protozoa are beneficial to plants.
12.6 DIFFERENCES BETWEEN GREEN FERTILIZERS AND CHEMICAL 
FERTILIZERS
Inorganic fertilizers are carcinogenic in nature; hence, most pesticides contain cancer-causing 
chemicals. Furthermore, nutrient imbalance can emerge because of the careless use of inorganic 
fertilizers, which results in the reduced uptake of other necessary nutrients by plant and soil Green Synthesized Mineral Nanofertilizers 203
acidity, resulting in decreased crop productivity. If the common NPK (nitrogen–phosphorous– 
potassium) type of fertilizer is constantly utilized, secondary and micronutrient levels decrease in 
the soil and crops. Moreover, the use of inorganic fertilizers leads to a decline in soil organic matter, 
deteriorates soil’s physical properties and structure, increases soil acidity, and contributes to erosion. 
Additionally, agricultural chemicals pollute both surface and groundwater, threaten wildlife and fish 
populations, and significantly heighten agriculture’s dependency on fossil fuels (Sharma, 2017). 
These fertilizers are also costly, difficult to access in rural areas, unreliable under varying rainfall 
conditions, and require seasonal application (Sharma, 2017).
The application of chemical fertilizers leads to the release of greenhouse gases, like NO2
 and 
CO2
, into the atmosphere. Cyanobacteria and green microalgae play a direct role in photosynthesis, 
incorporating atmospheric CO2
 into organic algal biomass. This process helps to lower green￾house gas emissions. Using cyanobacteria inoculation can save 25–40% of the costs associated 
with chemical nitrogen fertilizers. Research has demonstrated that inoculating rice plants with fila￾mentous nitrogen-fixing cyanobacteria can cut fertilizer use by half while maintaining grain yields 
and quality. Another study highlighted that the biofertilizers Nostoc entophytum and Oscillatoria 
augustissima can enhance the nutritional value of pea seedlings while reducing chemical fertilizer 
use by 50%. These cyanobacterial biofertilizers not only decrease the need for chemical fertilizers 
but also increase the yields of crops (Guo et al., 2020b; Schmetterer, 1994; Schmetterer & Pils, 
2004). Leafy vegetables like arugula (Eruca sativa), bayam red (Amaranthus gangeticus), and pak 
choy (Brassica rapa ssp. chinensis) have been shown to benefit from biofertilizers derived from algal 
biomass, which are richer in iron (Fe), magnesium (Mg), calcium (Ca), and zinc (Zn) compared to 
chemical fertilizers, like TriplePro 15-15-15. Microalgae are considered organic fertilizers due to 
their ability to gradually release nutrients, such as phosphorus (P), nitrogen (N), and potassium (K). 
Unlike traditional organic fertilizers, they are more resilient to temperature fluctuations and soil 
moisture variations. Extracts from microalgae can replace micronutrient foliar fertilizers, enhancing 
nutrient uptake and increasing nitrogen content in both shoots and roots. A study on pepper plants 
found that using Arthrospira spp. as a biostimulator in foliar treatments was more effective than 
compost and standard NPK fertilizers. The yields from peppers treated with the biostimulator were 
higher than those of peppers treated with organic fertilizers containing NPK (Ammar et al., 2022).
12.7 CYANOBACTERIA
Cyanobacteria are prokaryotes that are oxygenic photosynthetic bacteria and have several traits 
in common with heterotrophic bacteria. However, their photosynthetic properties mimic those of 
plants and they are comparable to eukaryotic algae in terms of most of their ecological features. 
Cyanobacteria were the first inhabitants of terrestrial ecosystems and are commonplace in biocrust 
communities. The coexistence of cyanobacterial enhances soil’s microbiota and boosts its status. 
These bacteria serve a variety of roles in the soil by enhancing its fertility, water holding capacity, 
structure, and stability via carbon and nitrogen fixation. A phylogenetic analysis by Singh et al. 
(2016) found that cyanobacteria are abundant in soil and are found in moist soil, different water￾bodies (like marine water, freshwater, and hot springs hypersaline water), and also in desert areas. 
They are also recognized as main players in ecosystems, using photosynthesis to absorb inorganic 
carbon to precipitate calcium carbonate (CaCO3
) (Kranz et al., 2010). Zhang (2023) documented 
that cyanobacteria blooms induce CaCO3
 precipitation and the dissolution of silica, with results 
showing that monthly calcium carbonate precipitation ranged from 0.9 × 108
 to 2.6 × 108
 mol, 
whereas monthly silica dissolution ranged from 0.9 × 107
 to 6.9 × 107
 mol due to these blooms. 
Most of the CO2
 was absorbed by bloom water and then precipitated in carbonate mineral form, with 
some of the carbon dioxide influx used to produce biomass. Two methods of carbon dioxide (CO2
) 
absorption are carried out by cyanobacteria: photosynthesis converts CO2
 into organic carbon; and 
calcification converts CO2
 and calcium ions into calcium carbonate solids.204 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
The carbon dioxide concentrating process is a well-recognized mechanism in calcification (Badger 
& Price, 1992). The Gram negative, non-nitrogen fixing autotroph, filamentous cyanobacterium 
Arthrospira platensis are also found in naturally occurring alkaline salt lakes. A. platensis is commonly 
used because of its rapid growth rate, ease of culture, and relatively simple harvesting (Markou, 2020).
Cyanobacteria are helpful for environment sustainability and agriculture development 
(Figure 12.1). Some bacterial species are used for the bioindustrial generation of valuable 
metabolites, in which productive cyanobacteria play a crucial role in producing biofuel, such as 
biodiesel, and alcohols, such as ethanol and isobutanol, from plant-derived products (Ducat et al., 
2011). Using plant or microorganisms (like bacteria and fungi), the process of phytoremediation 
is used to treat wastewater and remove contamination (Renuka et al., 2013; Sood et al., 2012). 
In several investigations, it has been found that various species of cyanobacteria can be used to 
treat wastewater. They offer a cost-efficient, biological treatment for large-scale industries to use to 
reduce toxic pollutants (Dash et al., 2019). Yadav et al. (2023) documented different cyanobacterial 
strains that secrete extracellular polymeric substances (EPS), help in soil aggregation, and enhance 
soil structure. In another study, it was noticed that cyanobacteria can fix nitrogen by 22.3 to 53.1 kg 
of nitrogen per hectare. They also benefit the growth of surrounding crops in several ways, such as 
increasing vitamin levels, enhancing ammonia levels, and reducing the use of chemical fertilizers 
by 25 to 50% (Issa et al., 2014).
12.7.1  Cyanobacteria as Mineral Fertilizers
Cyanobacteria are used as biofertilizers to increase crop productivity. Chemical pesticide usage is a 
big factor in environmental issues, including pollution and resistance. The field of nanotechnology is 
growing rapidly and during the past decade, interest in its potential uses in agriculture has grown. In 
FIGURE 12.1 Cyanobacteria, which have potential in maintaining agricultural and environmental balance 
and acting as a source of nanofertilizers.Green Synthesized Mineral Nanofertilizers 205
research done by Kumar et al. (2018), the use of the cyanobacteria Arthrospira platensis increased 
the production of rice by 20.9%. The results emphasized that cyanobacteria can improve growth 
characteristics, including plant height, total leaf area, and fresh and dry biomass. Cyanobacteria are 
potential candidates for biofertilizers due to their production of secondary metabolites and their high 
contents of light-harvesting plant pigments, such as carotenoids, phycobiliproteins, and chlorophyll 
a. Phycobiliproteins, which comprise 20% of the dry weight of cyanobacteria that are composed of 
phycoerythrin (PE; pink pigment), phycocyanin (PC; blue pigment), and allophycocyanin (APC; 
blue-grey pigment), are the backbone for absorbing different light wavelengths (Haddad et al., 2020). 
In another study, it was reported that cyanobacteria help to prevent plants from being infectious due 
to biological agents, which results in improved plant growth and high crop yields. Cyanobacteria are 
important for the photosynthetic fixation of carbon, nitrogen, phosphorus, phytohormones, and poly￾saccharide, which support plant development and improve soil fertility. Additionally, cyanobacteria 
have been investigated as biofertilizers in floodplain rice fields (Figure 12.1), particularly in India, 
where they create mats on the water’s surface that increase production by 10–24% (Ramakrishnan 
et al., 2023; Schmetterer 1994; Schmetterer & Pils 2004). Likewise in wheat, plant growth is posi￾tively impacted by the use of cyanobacteria as biofertilizers (Karthikeyan et al., 2007). Some cyano￾bacterial, species like Anabaena and Nostoc, are suitable for cultivation in paddy fields, as opposed 
to nitrogen fertilizers, and thus, these species are used in many Asian countries (Singh et al., 2016). 
A recent investigation described the exploitation of cyanobacteria for the nanoformulation of CuO 
nanoparticles, along with zeolite, to promote rice plant growth under hydroponic conditions (Yadav 
et al., 2024). Two prominent trends within agricultural nanotechnology are the production and appli￾cation of nanoparticles for crop enhancement. Nanoparticles, such those found in nanopesticides and 
nanofertilizers, have been shown to improve nutrient absorption, enhance plant development, and 
limit the effects of stress. Nanoparticles can reduce environmental pollution while increasing plant 
nutrient absorption efficiency by directly supplying nutrients to plant cells (Yuan et al., 2018). Elabd 
(2020) reported that the use of nanofertilizers improves the quality and increases the growth and 
productivity of Egyptian cotton (variety: Giza 94). In another study, Yadav et al. (2024) explained 
that the use of various concentrations of cyanobacteria-based copper oxide (CuO) nanoparticles on 
hydroponically grown paddy crops results in better plant growth. Ebadi et al. (2019) elaborated that 
cyanobacterial cell extracts can be used for synthesis of zinc oxide nanoparticles, which can be used 
against different bacterial strains due to their antibacterial, antibiofilm and anticancer activity. In 
their findings, biosynthesized nanoparticles were shown to destroy lung cancer cells.
12.8 CONCLUSION
The bacteria-based synthesis of mineral nanofertilizers represents a transformative approach to 
sustainable agriculture. By harnessing natural bacterial processes, it is possible to produce high￾efficiency fertilizers that promote plant growth, enhance soil health, and reduce environmental 
impacts. As research and technology in this field advance, bacteria-based nanofertilizers are poised 
to become a cornerstone of modern, sustainable agricultural practices. The synthesis of mineral 
nanofertilizers using fungi is also a promising advancement in agricultural nanotechnology. Fungi￾based nanofertilizers offer numerous benefits, including enhanced nutrient efficiency, ecofriendly 
production, and potential cost savings. Continued research and development in this field could 
lead to the widespread adoption of mineral nanofertilizers, contributing to sustainable agricultural 
practices and improved crop yields. The current scenario demands the large-scale supply of not only 
mineral-based but also NPK-based nanofertilizers.
REFERENCES
Abdel-Raouf, N., Al-Homaidan, A. A., & Ibraheem, I. B. (2012). Agricultural importance of algae. African 
Journal of Biotechnology, 11, 11648–11658.206 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
Ameen, F., Alsamhary, K., Alabdullatif, J. A., & ALNadhari, S. (2021). A review on metal-based nanoparticles 
and their toxicity to beneficial soil bacteria and fungi. Ecotoxicology and Environmental Safety, 213, 
112027. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoenv.2021.112027
Ammar, E. E., Aioub, A. A. A., Elesawy, A. E., Karkour, A. M., Mouhamed, M. S., Amer, A. A., & El-Shershaby, 
N. A. (2022). Algae as bio-fertilizers: Between current situation and future prospective. Saudi Journal of 
Biological Sciences, 29(5), 3083–3096. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sjbs.2022.03.020
Anjum, S., Vyas, A., & Sofi, T. (2023). Fungi-mediated synthesis of nanoparticles: Characterization process 
and agricultural applications. Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture, 103(10), 4727–4741. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/jsfa.12496
Badger, M. R. & Price, G. D. (1992). The CO2
 concentrating mechanism in cyanobacteria and microalgae. 
Physiologia Plantarum, 84(4), 606–615. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1399-3054.1992.tb04711.x
Clarholm, M. (1985). Interactions of bacteria, protozoa and plants leading to mineralization of soil nitrogen. 
Soil Biology Biochemistry, 17, 181–187 https://doi.org/10.1016/0038-0717(85)90113-0
Clarholm, M. (1981). Protozoan grazing of bacteria in soil: Impact and importance. Microbial Ecology, 7, 
343–350. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02010373
Da Silva Ferreira, V., ConzFerreira, M. E., Lima, L. M. T. R., Fras´es, S., de Souza, W., & Sant’Anna, C. 
(2017). Green production of microalgae-based silver chloride nanoparticles with antimicrobial activity 
against pathogenic bacteria. Enzyme and Microbial Technology, 97, 114–121. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.enzmictec.2016.10.018
Dash, A. K., Das, M., & Pradhan, A. (2019). Cyanobacteria in Reducing Pollution Load from Wastewater and 
Laboratory Bioassay of Heavy Metals on Ecotoxicity Study: A Review. In: Sukla, L., Subudhi, E., and 
Pradhan, D. (eds) The Role of Microalgae in Wastewater Treatment. Springer, Singapore. https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-981-13-1586-2_1
Davidson, R. L. (1969). Effects of soil nutrients and moisture on root/shoot ratios in Lolium perenne L. and 
Trifolium repens L. Annals of Botany, 33(3), 571–577. https://academic.oup.com/aob/article-abstract/
33/3/571/159349
Dineshkumar, R., Kumaravel, R., Gopalsamy, J., Sikder, M. N. A., & Sampathkumar, P. (2018). Microalgae 
as bio-fertilizers for rice growth and seed yield productivity. Waste Biomass Valorization, 9, 793–800. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12649-017-9873-5
Ducat, D. C., Way, J. C., & Silver, P. A. (2011). Engineering cyanobacteria to generate high-value products. 
Trends in Biotechnology, 29(2), 95–103. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.tibtech.2010.12.003
Elliott, E. T., Coleman, D. C., & Cole, C. V. (1979). The Influence of Amoebae on the Uptake of Nitrogen by 
Plants in Gnotobiotic Soil. In: Harley, J. L. and Scott Russell R. (eds) The Soil-Root Interface. Academic 
Press, London, pp. 221–229. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02370708
Ebadi, M., Zolfaghari, M. R., Aghaei, S. S., Zargar, M., Shafiei, M., Zahiri, H. S., & Noghabi, K. A. (2019). 
A bio-inspired strategy for the synthesis of zinc oxide nanoparticles (ZnO NPs) using the cell extract of 
cyanobacterium Nostoc sp. EA03: From biological function to toxicity evaluation. RSC Advances, 9(41), 
23508–23525. https://doi.org/10.1039/c9ra03962g
Elabd, H. S. (2020). Effect of nano-fertilization and some bio-fertilizer on growth, yield and fiber quality of 
Egyptian cotton. Annals of Agricultural Science, Moshtohor, 58(1), 35–44.
Fawcett, D., Verduin, J. J., Shah, M., Sharma, S. B., & Poinern, G. E. J. (2017). A review of current research 
into the biogenic synthesis of metal and metal oxide nanoparticles via marine algae and seagrasses. 
Journal of Nanoscience, 8013850. https://doi.org/10.1155/2017/8013850
Ghormade, V., Deshpande, M. V., & Paknikar, K. M. (2011). Perspectives for nanobiotechnology enabled pro￾tection and nutrition of plants. Biotechnology Advances, 29(6), 792–803. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bio
techadv.2011.06.007
Guo, S., Wang, P., Wang, X., Zou, M., Liu, C., & Hao, J. (2020b). Microalgae as biofertilizer in modern agricul￾ture. Microalgae Biotechnology Food, Heal High Value Production, 397–411. ISBN: 978-981-15-0168-
5. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-15-0169-2_12
Haddad, M. F., Dayioglu, T., Yaman, M., Nalbantoglu, B., & Cakmak, T. (2020). Long-term diazotrophic cultiva￾tion of Trichormus sp. IMU26: Evaluation of physiological changes related to elevated phycobiliprotein 
content. Journal of Applied Phycology, 32, 881–888. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10811-019-02012-3
Hendrix, P. E., Parmelee, R. W., Crossley, Jr. D. A., Coleman, D. C., Odum, E. P., & Groftman, P. M. (1986). 
Detritus food webs in conventional and no-tillage agroecosystems. Bioscience, 36, 374–380 https://doi.
org/10.2307/1310259Green Synthesized Mineral Nanofertilizers 207
Heynen, C. E., Van Elsas, J. D., Kuikman, P. J., & Van Veen, J. A. (1988). Dynamics of Rhizobium leguminosarum
biovar trifolii introduced into soil: The effect of bentonite clay on predation by protozoa. Soil Biology 
and Biochemistry, 20(4), 483–488. https://doi.org/10.1016/0038-0717(88)90054-7
Issa, A. A., Abd-Alla, M. H., & Ohyama, T. (2014). Nitrogen fixing cyanobacteria: Future prospect. Advances 
in Biology and Ecology of Nitrogen Fixation. ISBN: 978-953-51-1216-7, pp. 23–48. https://doi.org/
10.5772/56995
Karthikeyan, N., Prasanna, R., Nain, L., & Kaushik, B. D. (2007). Evaluating the potential of plant growth pro￾moting cyanobacteria as inoculants for wheat. European Journal of Soil Biology, 43(1), 23–30. http://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ejsobi.2006.11.001
Khan, M. R., Ahmad, F., & Rizvi, T. F. (2019). Effect of Nanoparticles on Plant Pathogens. In Ghorbanpour 
M. and Wani S. (eds) Advances in Phyto-Nanotechnology. Elsevier, UK, pp. 215–240. https://doi.org/
10.1016/B978-0-12-815322-2.00009-2
Khot, L. R., Sankaran, S., Maja, J. M., Ehsani, R., & Schuster, E. W. (2012). Applications of nanomaterials 
in agricultural production and crop protection: A review. Crop Protection, 35, 64–70. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.cropro.2012.01.007
Kondal, R., Kalia, A., Krejcar, O., Kuca, K., Sharma, S. P., Luthra, K., Dheri, G. S., Vikal, Y., Taggar, M. 
S., Abd-Elsalam, K. A., & Gomes, C. L. (2021). Chitosan-urea nanocomposite for improved fertilizer 
applications: The effect on the soil enzymatic activities and microflora dynamics in N cycle of potatoes 
(Solanum tuberosum L.). Polymers, 13(17), 2887. https://doi.org/10.3390/polym13172887
Kranz, S. A., Gladrow, D. W., Nehrke, G., Langer, G., & Rosta, B. (2010). Calcium carbonate precipitation 
induced by the growth of the marine cyanobacteria Trichodesmium. Limnology and Oceanography, 
55(6), 2563–2569. http://doi.org/10.4319/lo.2010.55.6.2563
Leopold, L. F., Coman, C., Clapa, D., Oprea, I., Toma, A., Iancu, Ș. D., Barbu-Tudoran, L., Suciu, M., Ciorîță, 
A., Cadiș, A. I., Mureșan, L. E., Perhaița, I. M., Copolovici, L., Copolovici, D. M., Copaciu, F., Leopold, 
N., Vodnar, D. C., & Coman, V. (2022). The effect of 100-200 nm ZnO and TiO2
 nanoparticles on the 
in vitro-grown soybean plants. Colloids and Surfaces. B, Biointerfaces, 216, 112536. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.colsurfb.2022.112536
Manzoor, N., Ahmed, T., Noman, M., Shahid, M., Nazir, M. M., Ali, L., Alnusaire, T. S., Li, B., Schulin, R., 
& Wang, G. (2021). Iron oxide nanoparticles ameliorated the cadmium and salinity stresses in wheat 
plants, facilitating photosynthetic pigments and restricting cadmium uptake. The Science of the Total 
Environment, 769, 145221. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.145221
Markou, G. (2020). Overview of Microalgal Cultivation, Biomass Processing and Application. In: Konur O. 
(ed) Handbook of Algal Science, Technology and Medicine. Academic Press, Cambridge, MA, USA, pp. 
343–352.
Mukhopadhyay, S. S. (2014). Nanotechnology in agriculture: Prospects and constraints. Nanotechnology, 
Science and Applications, 7, 63–71. https://doi.org/10.2147/NSA.S39409
Narayanan, K. B. & Sakthivel, N. (2010). Biological synthesis of metal nanoparticles by microbes. Advances in 
Colloid and Interface Science, 156, no. 1–2, 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cis.2010.02.001
Nongbet, A., Mishra, A. K., Mohanta, Y. K., Mahanta, S., Ray, M. K., Khan, M., Baek, K. H., & Chakrabartty, 
I. (2022). Nano-fertilizers: A smart and sustainable attribute to modern agriculture. Plants (Basel, 
Switzerland), 11(19), 2587.
Nosheen, S., Ajmal, I., & Song, Y. (2021). Microbes as biofertilizers, a potential approach for sustainable crop 
production. Sustainability. 13, 1868. https://doi.org/10.3390/su13041868
Prasad, R., Bhattacharyya, A., & Nguyen, Q. D. (2017). Nanotechnology in sustainable agriculture: Recent 
developments, challenges, and perspectives. Frontiers in Microbiology, 8, 1014. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fmicb.2017.01014
Ramakrishnan, B., Maddela, N. R., Venkateswarlu, K., & Megharaj, M. (2023). Potential of microalgae and 
cyanobacteria to improve soil health and agricultural productivity: A critical view. Environmental 
Science: Advances, 2(4), 586–611. http://doi.org/10.1039/D2VA00158F
Rani, S., Kumar, P., Dahiya, P., Dang, A. S., & Suneja, P. (2022). Biogenic synthesis of zinc nanoparticles, their 
applications, and toxicity prospects. Frontiers in Microbiology, 13, 824427. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fmicb.2022.824427
Renuka, N., Sood, A., Ratha, S. K., Prasanna, R., & Ahluwalia, A. S. (2013). Nutrient sequestration, bio￾mass production by microalgae and phytoremediation of sewage water. International Journal of 
Phytoremediation, 15(8), 789–800. https://doi.org/10.1080/15226514.2012.736436208 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
Schmetterer, G. (1994). Cyanobacterial Respiration. In: Bryant, D. A. (ed) The Molecular Biology of 
Cyanobacteria. Advances in Photosynthesis, vol 1. Springer, Dordrecht, pp. 409–435. https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-94-011-0227-8_13
Schmetterer, G. & Pils, D. (2004). Chapter 12: Cyanobacterial Respiration. In: Zannoni, D. (ed) Respiration 
in Archaea and Bacteria. Advances in Photosynthesis and Respiration, vol 16. Springer, Dordrecht, pp. 
261–278. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4020-3163-2_12
Scott, N. R., Chen, H., & Cui, H. (2018). Nanotechnology applications and implications of agrochemicals 
toward sustainable agriculture and food systems. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 66(26), 
6451–6456. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jafc.8b00964
Šebesta, M., Urík, M., Bujdoš, M., Kolenčík, M., Vávra, I., Dobročka, E., Kim, H., & Matúš, P. (2020). Fungus 
Aspergillus niger processes exogenous zinc nanoparticles into a biogenic oxalate mineral. Journal of 
Fungi (Basel, Switzerland), 6(4), 210. https://doi.org/10.3390/jof6040210
Sekhon, B. S. (2014). Nanotechnology in agri-food production: An overview. Nanotechnology, Science and 
Applications, 7, 31–53. https://doi.org/10.2147/NSA.S39406
Shabir, A., Sarwar, Z. M., & Ali, H. (2023). Eco-friendly approaches of zinc oxide and silver nitrate nanoparticles 
along with plant extracts against Spodoptera litura (Fabricius) under laboratory conditions. Science 
Progress, 106(4), 368504231219171.
Sharma, A. (2017). A review on the effect of organic and chemical fertilizers on plants. International Journal 
of Research Application Science and Engineering Technology, V, 677–680. https://doi.org/10.22214/
IJRASET.2017.2103
Sharma, B., Tiwari, S., Kumawat, K. C., & Cardinale, M. (2023). Nano-biofertilizers as bio-emerging strat￾egies for sustainable agriculture development: Potentiality and their limitations. The Science of the Total 
Environment, 860, 160476.
Singh, J. S., Kumar, A., Rai, A. N., & Singh, D. P. (2016). Cyanobacteria: A precious bio-resource in agricul￾ture, ecosystem, and environmental sustainability. Frontiers in Microbiology, 7, 529. https://doi.org/
10.3389/fmicb.2016.00529
Singh, K., Madhusudanan, M., Verma, A. K., Kumar, C., & Ramawat, N. (2021). Engineered zinc oxide 
nanoparticles: An alternative to conventional zinc sulphate in neutral and alkaline soils for sustainable 
wheat production. 3 Biotech, 11(7), 322. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13205-021-02861-1
Singh, N. A., Narang, J., Garg, D., Jain, V., Payasi, D. K., Suleman, S., & Swami, R. K. (2023). Nanoparticles 
synthesis via microorganisms and their prospective applications in agriculture. Plant Nano Biology, 5, 
1–12. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plana.2023.100047
Sood, A., Uniyal, P. L., Prasanna, R., & Ahluwalia, A. S. (2012). Phytoremediation potential of aquatic macro￾phyte, Azolla. Ambio, 41(2), 122–137. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13280-011-0159-z
Usman, M., Farooq, M., Wakeel, A., Nawaz, A., Alam Cheema, S. A., Rehman, H., Ashraf, I., & Sanaullah, M. 
(2020). Nanotechnology in agriculture: Current status, challenges and future opportunities. Science of 
The Total Environment, 721, 137778. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.137778
Yadav, P., Singh, R. P., Hashem, A., Abd Allah, E. F., Santoyo, G., Kumar, A., & Gupta, R. K. (2023). Enhancing 
biocrust development and plant growth through inoculation of desiccation-tolerant Cyanobacteria in 
different textured soils. Microorganisms, 11(10), 1–22. https://doi.org/10.3390/microorganisms1
1102507
Yadav, R., Kumar, M. & Tomar, R. S. (2024). Cyanobacteria based nanoformulation of biogenic CuO 
nanoparticles for plant growth promotion of rice under hydroponics conditions. Current Microbiology, 
81, 118. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00284-024-03619-7
Yuan, M., Wang, Y., & Qin, Y. X. (2018). Promoting neuro-regeneration by applying dynamic magnetic fields 
to a novel nanomedicine: Superparamagnetic iron oxide (SPIO)-gold nanoparticles bounded with nerve 
growth factor (NGF). Nanomedicine: Nanotechnology, Biology and Medicine, 14(4), 1337–1347.
Zhang, J. Z. (2023). Cyanobacteria blooms induced precipitation of calcium carbonate and dissolution of silica 
in a subtropical lagoon, Florida Bay, USA. Science Report, 13(1), 1–10 https://doi.org/10.1038/s41
598-023-30905-4209
DOI: 10.1201/9781003477730-15 209
13 Nanofertilizers for Plant 
Growth and Environmental 
Sustainability
Katherine Georgina Menon, Mangala Guna Preethi, 
Belli Madhuri Venkatesh, and Aleti Akila
13.1 INTRODUCTION
The manipulation of minuscule particles is known as nanotechnology and its applications may have 
far-reaching consequences on everything from genetics to ecosystems. Over the past 10 years, a 
wide range of nanomaterials (NMs) have been created and applied in several fields, under the pur￾view of nanotechnology. Because of their large specific surface area, variety of functionalities, ease 
of functionalization, surface activity, exceptional electrical and optical properties, extreme stability, 
and high adsorption capacity, nanoparticles (NPs) have been used with great efficiency compared to 
bulk particles/particulate matter (PM).
Nanoparticles have transformed the medical industry and have extensive uses in a variety of other 
domains, such as agriculture. According to a 2019 article in The Economic Times, food grain outputs 
in an agricultural nation, like India, are predicted to reach 291.95 million tons. Considering future 
food demands, most analysts concur that in order to meet the demands of the world’s expanding 
population and accommodate worldwide, wealth-dependent dietary changes (such as increased 
intake of animal protein), food production must rise by more than 60% within the next three decades 
(Pikaar et al., 2018).
For many years, fertilizers and insecticides have been essential for meeting the demands of food 
production (Guo et al., 2018). Nevertheless, the overuse of these pesticides and fertilizers also 
impedes the development of sustainable agriculture (Singh et al., 2021). The increased applica￾tion of nanotechnology may offer creative ways to enhance sustainable agriculture and meet food 
demands. According to recent research, nanotechnology can be applied broadly to tackle a number 
of agricultural issues, including the overuse of pesticides and fertilizers and plant stress brought on 
by harsh weather conditions. Additionally, nanomaterials can greatly enhance plant stress tolerance, 
seed germination, and plant development. Furthermore, transgenic expression in viable plant cells, 
quick and easy genome alterations, and plant development phase assessments can also be achieved 
by nanotechnology (Kamle et al., 2020).
Nanotechnology can be used in agriculture to produce more food with the same (or even greater) 
nutritional content, safety, and quality. The most significant approaches to increasing agricultural 
productivity are herbicides and plant growth factors/regulators. Using nanocarriers allows for the con￾trolled release of plant growth regulators, herbicides, and insecticides. Poly(epsilon-caprolactone) 
nanocapsules, for example, have been recently developed as atrazine herbicide carriers.210 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
13.2 BRIEF OVERVIEW OF TRADITIONAL FERTILIZERS AND THEIR 
LIMITATIONS
The extensive use of agrochemicals is a result of both the need to increase agricultural productivity 
and the world’s population growth. Currently, several million tons of agrochemicals are applied 
to crops every year to boost plant nutrition and lessen disease. Phytopathogens can cost billions 
of dollars in losses annually due to the severe harm they pose to fruits and vegetables. In order to 
maintain crop productivity, two million tons of pesticides are used annually around the world (El￾Moneim et al., 2021).
Farmers frequently use mineral fertilizers made of nitrogen (N), phosphorus (P), potassium (K), 
and certain other micronutrients to increase the outputs of food crops. The health of the soil has been 
seriously affected by the frequent and excessive use of these mineral fertilizers and leaching losses 
are linked to negative environmental effects. Research has shown that agrochemicals are detrimental 
to human health on many levels, including neurological, respiratory, reproductive, gastrointestinal, 
dermatological, and endocrine impacts. They can also harm humans and animals via ingestion, 
skin absorption, and inhalation. In order to reduce ecological effects and implement sustainable 
agricultural practices, it is necessary to establish the right doses of agrochemicals. This emphasizes 
the need for novel technology to satisfy the demands of agriculture in the future (Abbasi-Jorjandi 
et al., 2020).
13.3 NANOTECHNOLOGY IN AGRICULTURE
Nanotechnology is used extensively in daily life and is revolutionizing civilization. It started making 
its way into the food and agricultural industries on September 9, 2003, when the US Department of 
Agriculture released the first roadmap.
The phrase “nanofertilizer” (NF) refers to a nanomaterial that can be either a direct micro- or 
macronutrient for plants or the carrier of a plant nutrient. NFs are another term for nutrients that 
are covered or encased with nanomaterials. Nanotechnology can be used to create NFs from syn￾thetic materials (such as modified synthetic fertilizers) or green materials (such as diverse plant 
components) utilizing a variety of chemical, mechanical, and biological techniques (Singh & 
Kumar, 2017). For example, the application of zinc nanofertilizer to sunflower plants causes an 
increase in seed oil content (Singh 2015). The effects of various nanofertilizers on plant growth are 
shown in Table 13.1.
13.3.1 Nanobiofertilizers for Sustainable Agriculture
The overuse of chemical fertilizers has a negative impact on both human life and natural ecosystems. 
Biofertilizers are innovative substitutes for chemical fertilizers as they provide sustainable, add￾itional, and environmentally beneficial sources of plant nutrients. Microorganism-based formulations 
comprise the majority of biofertilizers. These formulations can be applied topically, to the soil, or to 
seeds to enhance growth characteristics by providing vital nutrients to plants (Avila-Quezada et al., 
2022). Biofertilizers are categorized into a number of families, including mycorrhizal biofertilizers, 
nitrogen-fixing biofertilizers, phosphorus-mobilizing and phosphorous-solubilizing biofertilizers, 
and plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria (PGPRs). Their usage is currently restricted because of 
their short shelf life, their crop specialization, their instability in the field as a result of soil and 
environmental limitations, the scarcity of helpful microflora, their sensitivity to severe conditions, 
and their high dose requirements (Ali et al., 2021). To get around these problems, fertilizers based 
on nanomaterials have been created and investigated. Nanobiofertilizers (NBFs) are desirable 
substitutes for chemical fertilizers due to their distinct size-dependent and optical characteristics, 
high surface area to volume ratios, and regulated release of micronutrients. NBFs are created through Nanofertilizers for Plant Growth and Environmental Sustainability 211
the reduction of organic fertilizers (biofertilizers) to the nanoscale (1–100 nm) by covering them 
with nanomaterials. Nanoencapsulation is the process of coating micronutrients or bacteria that 
promote growth onto polymers. Zeolite and chitosan are the main ingredients utilized to improve 
nutrient absorption efficiency and reduce application losses. Native microflora are improved, 
enzyme activity is increased, and crop disease resistance is strengthened as a result of NBFs. NBFs 
enhance plant stress tolerance in their rhizospheres, resulting in about 30% nutrient immobilization. 
NBFs are also very stable, less harmful, economical, and environmentally beneficial. They reduce 
nutrient loss from erosion, gasification, soil leaching, and more. NBFs do have several drawbacks, 
though, such as their labor-intensive production processes, the lack of technological know-how, and 
the requirement to assess the risks before using them on a commercial or large-scale basis.
Figure 13.1 represents various applications of nanofertilizers in agriculture. The most effective 
strategies for increasing agricultural productivity are the efficient applications of fertilizers, 
insecticides, herbicides, and plant growth stimulators. The transport and gradual release of the 
desired compound can be effectively accomplished with the use of nanoscale carriers. These tactics, 
referred to as “precision farming”, increase crop yields without compromising the quality of land 
or water. According to reports, plants are unable to absorb 60% of potassium, 50% of nitrogen, and 
80% of phosphorous from the environment. Plant compositions contain negligible amounts of min￾eral fertilizers, indicating the poor nutrient utilization efficiency (NUE) of fertilizers that are based 
on nitrogen (30–55%) and phosphorous (18–20%). Thus, high-efficiency nanofertilizer formulations 
are required to minimize nutrient losses and unfavorable effects on ecosystems (Candido Camara 
et al., 2019).
TABLE 13.1
Effects of nanofertilizers on plant growth
S. No. Nanofertilizer Plant Effects Reference
1 Zinc Sunflower Increase in seed oil content. Singh (2015)
2 Zinc oxide Groundnut Increase in pod yields. Prasad et al. (2012)
3 TiO2 Spinach Increased growth, improved nitrogen 
metabolism, and increased protein and 
chlorophyll contents.
Yang et al. (2006)
4 TiO2 Zea mays Enhanced photosynthetic pigments. Morteza et al. (2013)
5 Au Thale cress Enhanced seed germination (%), growth, and 
free radical scavenging responses.
Kumar et al. (2013)
6 Mn3
O4 Cucumber Significantly enhanced plant development, 
chlorophyll content, photosynthetic responses, 
and plant biomass.
Huang et al. (2014)
7 Urea with 
hydroxyapatite
Almond Increased elongation of secondary and primary 
roots/plant, increased numbers of secondary 
roots, and increased seed moisture status.
Badran and Savin 
(2018)
8 ZnO Glycine max L. Increased germination. Sedghi et al. (2013)
9 SiO2 Carthamus 
tinctorius
Increased yields. Janmohammadi et al. 
(2016)
10 Chitosan NPK Wheat Enhanced growth, yields, and nutritional status. Abdel-Aziz et al. (2016)
11 Zn and B Punica granatum Increased fruit yields. Davarpanah et al. (2016)
12 ZnO Coffea arabica Accelerated net photosynthesis and increased 
biomass production.
Rossi et al. (2019)
13 TiO2
 and SiO2 Oryza sativa Improved development and Cd translocation 
inhibition.
Rizwan et al. (2019)212 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
13.3.2 Nanofertilizers for Environmental Sustainability
The indiscriminate application of chemical fertilizers in agricultural production systems in the attempt 
to meet the rapidly expanding population’s need for food and nutrition has had deleterious effects 
on environmental quality and ecosystems. Therefore, it is necessary to create different approaches 
to improve agricultural productivity and environmental sustainability. Appropriate substitutes that 
could mitigate the adverse effects of conventional chemical fertilizers are nanohybrid structures, 
such as nanofertilizers (NFs). Compared to large, chemical fertilizers, NFs offer plants an intelligent 
way to receive nutrients and their effectiveness in increasing crop yields and maintaining envir￾onmental conditions has been demonstrated. Depending on the application technique and particle 
characteristics, NFs can be absorbed by the foliage or roots of plants. NFs can improve plant resist￾ance to both biotic and abiotic stressors. They also have lower environmental impacts and can reduce 
production costs. The numerous advantages of NFs provide fresh perspectives on climate change 
mitigation and sustainable agriculture. However, NFs at supra-optimal dosages negatively impact 
crop growth, soil health, and the environment. There is a need for cautious evaluation because the 
widespread release of NFs into the environment and food chain may be harmful to human health. 
Therefore, comprehensive analyses of the functions of various NFs and their effects on crop devel￾opment, yields, soil health, and environmental quality are necessary, which would also be beneficial 
for the study of sustainable environment (Babu et al., 2022).
13.4 NANOMETALS AS NANOFERTILIZERS
In plant science, researchers are increasingly exploring the use of metal nanoparticles (NPs), like 
gold (Au) and silver (Ag) NPs, for various applications. However, traditional chemical synthesis 
methods for these NPs are expensive and rely on harmful chemicals. To address this, scientists have 
developed more environmentally friendly approaches that utilize plant extracts and ionizing radi￾ation chemistry in water-based solutions. Additionally, interest is growing in the use of metal oxide 
nanoparticles, such as MgO, CaO, ZnO, and TiO2
 nanoparticles, due to their exceptional electrical 
conductivity, catalytic ability, and light-absorbing properties.
FIGURE 13.1 Applications of nanofertilizers in agriculture.Nanofertilizers for Plant Growth and Environmental Sustainability 213
13.4.1 Silver Nanoparticles
Because silver nanoparticles have an inhibitory impact on a wide variety of bacterial strains and 
germs that are frequently present in medical and industrial operations, they have found extensive 
applications in the realms of medicine, industry, and sports. They have a number of heat, electronic, 
and optical properties, including strong electrical conductivity, antibacterial activity, and catalytic 
activity. The food industry, cryogenic superconducting materials, composite fibers, cosmetics, and 
electronic components have all used them because of their special qualities, which include good 
conductivity, chemical stability, catalytic activity, and, most importantly, antibacterial, antiviral, 
antifungal, and anti-inflammatory properties. Applying silver nanoparticles to plants directly causes 
Ag ions to react with them, enhancing their morphology and physiology and increasing their resili￾ence to worms and bacterial and fungal infections. Moreover, silver nanoparticles are considered to 
be able to enhance plant seed germination (Kale et al., 2021).
13.4.2  Zinc Oxide Nanoparticles
Because zincite is utilized in so many different industrial sectors, it has become well-known. ZnO 
nanoparticles have been used in the construction of solar cells, gas sensors, chemical absorbents, 
varistors, hydrogenation catalysts, photocatalytic degradation, and optical and electrical devices 
(Hong et al., 2006; Janaki et al., 2015). As well as their diverse applications, ZnO nanoparticles have 
also been shown to possess a stationary effect on the growth of numerous microorganisms, such as 
Salmonella enterica Typhimurium, Penicillium notatum (Doan Thi et al., 2020), Aspergillus flavus, 
A. fumigatus, Candida albicans (Kaushik et al., 2019), Klebsiella pneumonia, and Staphylococcus 
aureus. This property makes them suitable for use in both the food and agricultural industries.
13.4.3  Copper Nanoparticles
There are two types of copper oxide nanoparticles: copper (II) oxide (CuO) and copper (I) oxide 
(Cu2
O). Due to its advantageous characteristics, such as its spin dynamics, electron correlation, and 
high-temperature superconductivity, the copper oxide form has been in the limelight of research 
across many different fields. These properties make the CuO form an ideal component for gas sensing 
devices, catalysis, batteries, solar energy conversion, higher-temperature superconductors, and field 
emissions. Nanoparticles are widely employed as catalysts because of their high surface to volume 
ratios, continually renewable surfaces, and variable microelectrode potential values. Because of 
their ability to combat germs, like Bacillus subtilis, they are now also common components in the 
fields of wastewater treatment and medicine (Din & Rehan, 2017).
13.4.4  Iron Oxide Nanoparticles
Although there is always room for improvement, the application of iron oxide nanoparticles in agri￾culture is a revolutionary technology that has shown promise. Fe2
O3
 nanoparticles, for example, 
enhance the availability of iron in the soil and its accumulation in plant cells by controlling the 
phytohormone levels and antioxidant enzyme activity in peanuts (Rui et al., 2016). The two most 
popular ways of applying iron oxide nanoparticles to plants, usually as a source of iron nutrition, are 
foliar spraying and soil drenching (Zia-ur-Rehman et al., 2018).
13.4.5  Magnesium Oxide Nanoparticles
Magnesium oxide nanoparticles have found applications as photocatalysts, refractory materials, 
electrochemical biosensors, organic and inorganic wastewater sorbents, semiconductors, and organic 
catalysts. They also possess antioxidant, antibacterial, and anticancer qualities. Plant protection and 214 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
enhanced production can be achieved by using MgO nanoparticles due to their reduced toxicity to 
humans and plants, as well as their stability under heat conditions. They also have antibacterial qual￾ities that protect against fungus and germs (Fernandes et al., 2020).
13.4.6  Calcium Carbonate Nanoparticles
Among the other nanomaterials under investigation, calcium carbonate has recently gained attention. 
CaCO3
 nanoparticles have been linked to a number of properties, including low toxicity, afford￾ability, environmental friendliness, sedate biodegradability, pH sensitivity, biocompatibility, and 
cytocompatibility. Because calcium carbonate (CaCO3
) is readily available, inexpensive, safe, bio￾compatible, sensitive to pH, and biodegradable, it is becoming more and more popular as a car￾rier of medication to cancer cells (Maleki Dizaj et al., 2015; Mydin et al., 2018). It has also been 
demonstrated that CaCO3
 sprayed on Citrus tankan leaves can aid in the fight against pests, like 
California red scale (Aonidiella aurantii) and Oriental fruit flies (Bactrocera dorsalis) (Hua et al., 
2015). Furthermore, a study conducted by Abd El-Hady showed improved yields of soybean plants 
when full irrigation was combined with calcium carbonate and hydroxyl apatite nanoparticles (Abd 
El-Hady & Hussein, 2021).
13.4.7  Titanium Dioxide Nanoparticles
TiO2
, the oxide form of titanium metal, is naturally found in minerals such as rutile, brookite, and 
anatase. The worldwide production of TiO2 nanoparticles has led to their widespread use in medi￾cine delivery systems, food preparation, cosmetics, and sunscreens. Their high refractive index and 
ability to absorb UV light enable them to function in a wide range of uses. For example, TiO2
nanoparticles have been applied as fertilizers, growth regulators, and antimicrobials in agriculture. 
They have shown a lot of promise as plant growth-promoting substances and guardians against 
food poisoning in humans. However, TiO2
 nanoparticles kill several plant and fruit diseases. In 
hydroponic cultures and simulated environments, TiO2
 nanoparticles can also mineralize leftover 
contaminants, insecticides, and organic substances (Rodríguez-González et al., 2019). Research has 
demonstrated that TiO2
 improves plant outputs and growth. Following seed treatment with TiO2
before planting, one study demonstrated increases in the dry weight, chlorophyll content, and photo￾synthetic rate of spinach plants. Furthermore, applying TiO2
 to Zea mays enhances its intake of 
micro- and macronutrients; however, higher doses reduce its dry biomass (Gülmezoğlu et al., 2020).
13.5 BENEFITS OF NANOFERTILIZERS OVER SYNTHETIC FERTILIZERS
By enhancing soil nutrient management, relieving nutrient resource constraints, reducing nutrient 
immobilization, and reducing nutrient loss in ecosystems and agricultural waste, nanofertilizers 
improve root nutrient uptake in plants. When employing nanofertilizers instead of traditional mineral 
fertilizers, nutrient use efficiency (NUE) may increase by 20% to 30%. In order to prevent and reduce 
fertilizer loss, nanotechnology-based research on crop nutrition is anticipated to target increasing 
the accuracy and efficacy of nanofertilizers. The significant physicochemical characteristics of 
nanoparticles improve surface tension, which strengthens the adhesion of fertilizers and artifi￾cial agents to plant surfaces, while nanocoating offers superior protection for larger particles. In 
agro-environments, the regulated dispersal of fertilizers via nanocarriers offers nutrient longevity, 
supplying crops with a steady supply and raising NUE (Guo et al., 2018).
Nanofertilizers are coated or encased with nanomaterials that regulate nutrient release based 
on plant demand. Interestingly, NFs can liberate their nutrients in 40–50 days, while commercial 
fertilizers do so in 4–10 days. Synthetic urea fertilizers can lose over 70% of their nitrogen content 
after field application due to leaching and volatilization, leaving less than 20% accessible for plants.Nanofertilizers for Plant Growth and Environmental Sustainability 215
While synthetic phosphorous fertilizers have high rates of soil fixing and poor absorption efficiency, 
phosphorous-based nanoformulations can minimize nutrient losses by being directly internalized by 
crops. For instance, it has been discovered that the application of permeable nanomaterials, such 
as zeolite and chitosan, significantly increases absorption efficiency by reducing nitrogen loss and 
managing demand-based nutrient release (Millán et al., 2008; Abdel-Aziz et al., 2016). Compared 
to plants treated with synthetic phosphorous fertilizers, the application of phosphorous-enriched 
hydroxyapatite NPs has been found to significantly increase plant height, shoot growth, and grain 
production (18%) in soybeans (Glycine max L.) (Liu & Lal, 2015).
According to recent research, applying CuONP nanofertilizers in the field enhances germination 
and root growth in chickpeas and soybeans (Cicer arietinum L.). Similarly, germination rates of soy￾bean seeds treated with Cu, Co, and Fe nanocrystalline powders (40–60 nm) have been reported to 
be 65%, 80%, and 80%, respectively, demonstrating vast improvements over the 55% germination 
rate of controls. Similarly, CuNPs improve wheat growth and yields by increasing leaf area, chloro￾phyll levels, the number of seeds per spike, and seed weight. Furthermore, after applying CuNPs, 
Arabidopsis thaliana shows improvements in flavonoid levels, sulfur assimilation, and the produc￾tion of proline and glutathione (Ngo et al., 2014).
Zinc nanoparticles are employed for mobilization in order to enhance the absorption efficiency of 
synthetic phosphorous. Additionally, nanoparticles impact certain plant metabolic processes that have 
the potential to mobilize nutrients, like phosphorous, in plants. Moreover, biosensors—a technology that 
is not available with synthetic fertilizers—can be affixed to NFs to regulate the release of nutrients and 
their bioavailability, based on crop growth stage. Finally, because NFs are only needed in small amounts, 
NF applications usually have lower rates and prices than synthetic fertilizers (Zahra et al., 2015).
The main problems with conventional mineral fertilizers are their large losses and poor nitrogen 
absorption efficiency. An innovative remedy for these limitations is the use of nanofertilizers. By 
using nanofertilizers, nitrogen loss can be reduced and nutrient uptake by soil microbes and crops 
can be improved. It has been observed that applying nanoparticles, such as chitosan NPs and carbon 
nano-onions, in the place of traditional agricultural fertilizers may also improve crop quality and 
growth. In the next 10 years, it is projected that innovative nanofertilizers will inspire and revolu￾tionize present fertilizer-producing sectors (Tripathi et al., 2017).
13.6 IMPACTS OF NANOFERTILIZERS ON PLANTS
13.6.1  Impact of NFs on Plant Development and Seed Germination
Crops can receive nanofertilizers through their leaves or roots. NPs can travel to the aerial portions 
of plants by penetrating the root epidermis and endodermis to reach the xylem. Furthermore, NPs 
can pass from the phloem to other plant sections after being absorbed by leaf stomata.
Because nanofertilizers and nanopsesticides can traverse seed teguments and boost water and 
oxygen absorption, while also enhancing resistance to many stressors that impact early plant growth, 
they have been employed to improve seed germination and plant growth (Nawaz et al., 2011; Ismail 
et al., 2017). High intercellular nanofertilizer concentrations, however, have the potential to halt 
seed germination, negating the reported benefits (Singh & Kumar, 2017).
By enhancing chlorophyll contents at the cellular level, NFs can raise net photosynthesis rates 
and lessen the negative impacts of biotic and abiotic stressors on seeds during germination. For 
instance, it has been discovered that applying Zn, Cu, Mn, and Fe oxide NPs (<50 mg/L) to lettuce 
increases germination rates (Lü et al., 2016).
13.6.2 Nanomaterial Absorption and Translocation in Plants
The root uptake of NPs is influenced by a number of variables, including particle size, rhizosphere 
processes, exposure conditions, growth stage, and plant morphology.216 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
When added to the soil, nanoparticles are first retained on the surface of plant roots and 
then make their way past a number of obstacles to enter the vascular system of the plants. The 
cuticle layer of the roots acts as the first barrier (its composition is identical to that of the leaf 
cuticle layer). After penetrating the cuticle on the root surface, nanoparticles arrive at the root 
epidermis. NPs may pass through the root epidermis via the apoplastic or symplastic route. 
Numerous investigations have shown that NPs usually follow the apoplastic pathway by entering 
cell wall pores first and then migrating into intercellular gaps (Lv et al., 2019).
Nevertheless, only particles with a diameter of less than 20 nm can enter plants via the apoplastic 
pathway due to the diameter of the pores in the cell wall, which normally ranges between 5 and 
20 nm. However, it is feasible for NPs to cause cell death, which would increase the pore size. The 
Casparian strip around the circulatory system, which blocks NPs from entering the vascular cylinder 
directly, is the primary obstruction in the apoplastic pathway, despite studies demonstrating that 
ZnONPs (30 nm) can enter maize through lateral root junctions and subsequently reach the vascular 
system (Lv et al., 2015). The symplastic pathway allows NPs to transfer from one cell to another 
through plasmodesmata. Nanoparticles can travel through the xylem and transpiration stream to 
aboveground plant portions once they reach the central cylinder (LaRue et al., 2012).
Depending on a plant’s unique physiology, as well as a number of processes involving the uptake, 
transport, and distribution of nanoparticles within the plant, the absorption and relocation of these 
particles can differ. In a number of instances, plants activate defense mechanisms against NPs. 
This seems to be especially true for metal oxide-based nanofertilizers, through which plants are 
exposed to both the metal ions created by the breakdown of the tailored nanofertilizer and the 
impacts of the parent nanomaterial. One experiment comparing the uptake of metal ions and metal 
oxide nanoparticles (zinc, CuO, and CeO2
) in carrots showed that both types of uptake occurred. 
That study demonstrated that metal oxide nanoparticles collected in the carrots’ outer layer without 
penetrating the fleshy portion, whereas metal ions (which are more harmful to human health) made 
their way into the edible, fleshy portion. It has been proposed that modified nanoparticles in palat￾able tissues are prevented from penetrating inward by this outer layer (White et al., 2018).
13.6.3  Role of Nanofertilizers in Biotic and Abiotic Stress Tolerance
Plant productivity is influenced by a variety of factors, including soil fertility, irrigation, water 
quality, light intensity, temperature, and other environmental factors. Any deviations in these factors 
can have negative impacts on plant productivity. Plants, due to their sessile nature, must deal with 
stress in their natural environment. These environmental stressors have deleterious impacts on plant 
morphology, physiology, biochemistry, and molecular alterations, leading to decreased productivity. 
Climate change is predicted to worsen abiotic pressures, posing a threat to crop productivity (Wu & 
Ma, 2015). Salt, heavy metals, minerals, humidity, hailstorms, flooding, and droughts are major abi￾otic factors that impact crop development, yields, and quality. On the other hand, pests and illnesses 
are biotic stressors that reduce plant production. The Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) 
has identified the key issue for agricultural scientists as being increasing crop production by 70% 
by 2050 (Food Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2009). Research has indicated that 
using NFs or NPs can reduce environmental stresses by raising plant antioxidant levels.
Droughts are a key abiotic stressor that greatly reduce agricultural production. Nowadays, the 
ever-increasing shortage of water is lowering agricultural production and reducing green belts 
around the planet. Drought-resistant crops and stress-ameliorative materials, like NFs, can reduce 
the harmful effects of water stress on plants by enhancing the soil’s water retention capacity. Stress 
increases the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS), which can induce lipid peroxidation, 
cell membrane damage, solute leakage, and cell death. Research has indicated that nanoparticles 
can boost antioxidant and proline levels, reducing the generation of H2
O2
 and malondialdehyde 
(Janmohammadi et al., 2016).Nanofertilizers for Plant Growth and Environmental Sustainability 217
SiNPs have been proven to improve hawthorn (Crataegus sp.) seedlings’ resistance to drought 
stress by sustaining chemical and physiological activities. Silver nanoparticles alleviate dehydration 
stress, improve seed germination, and increase root dry weight in lentils (Hojjat & Ganjali 2016). 
Using FeNPs with salicylic acid improves drought tolerance in strawberry (Fragaria ananassa) 
plants (Mozafari et al., 2018). Astaneh et al. (2018) found that using nanochelated nitrogen fertilizer 
at 41 kg ha−1 enhanced wheat yields during drought stress. Mahmoud et al. found that using nano￾NPK and nanozeolite-loaded nitrogen reduced water stress and enhanced the growth of sage (Salvia 
officinalis) (Mahmoud et al., 2020)
Excessive accumulations of Na+
, Cl−
, and SO4
2− ions in plant roots impairs osmotic potential, 
water intake, and growth, potentially leading to plant mortality. Salt stress is a severe concern in dry 
locations, affecting over 20% of cultivated soils worldwide. Excessive salinity negatively impacts 
plant physiological and biochemical activity, including photosynthesis, lipid metabolism, protein 
synthesis, and growth.
According to Savvas et al. (2009), SiO2
NPs reduce Na+ ion toxicity and improve plant devel￾opment under salinity stress compared to untreated plants. Maize plants cultivated under salt stress 
show better biological yields following SiO2
NP treatment compared to those without. Tantawy et al. 
(2014) found that using nanocalcium on salt-stressed Solanum lycopersicum results in increased 
fruit production and greater yields (76%) compared to the use of synthetic monophosphate. El￾Hefnawy et al. (2020) found that applying nano-NPK (50–100 ppm) as a foliar spray to salt-stressed 
pea plants improves growth and productivity.
Extreme temperatures can also produce oxidative stress, reducing photosynthetic rate, chloro￾phyll content, and plant development (Kai & Iba, 2014). Heat stress causes an increase in ROS gen￾eration, leading to oxidative stress and damage to plant membranes, as well as ion and solute leakage. 
However, low doses of Se nanoparticles have been found to considerably reduce the negative effects 
of heat stress, leading to improved water interactions, chlorophyll content, and antioxidant activity 
(Haghighi et al., 2014). Plants produce heat shock proteins to cope with high temperatures and heat 
stress. Applying 10 mg L−1 of SeNPs during the initial growth phase of sorghum (Sorghum bicolor 
L. Moench) under high temperature stress boosts pollen germination, antioxidant defenses, and seed 
yields compared to control treatment (0 mg L−1). In brief, the application NFs or/and NPs to plants 
under abiotic stress results in a rise in the contents of antioxidants and proline, thereby decreasing 
the production of H2
O2
 and malondialdehyde. These modifications can increase agricultural outputs 
and quality (Djanaguiraman et al., 2018).
Diseases and pest infestations are thought to cause annual crop losses of 20% to 40% on a 
global scale (Pestovsky et al., 2017). Farmers use millions of metric tons of pesticides annually 
in an attempt to lessen the negative effects of pests on plant productivity. This practice has raised 
concerns about environmental pollution, ecosystem disturbance, residual toxicity in food and feed, 
declining soil fertility, and pest resistance. Because NPs and NFs can readily penetrate and disrupt 
bacterial and fungal cells, numerous studies have demonstrated that their application has the ability 
to drastically reduce the population of various harmful soil and plant microorganisms. According to 
Nawaz et al., ZnONPs can successfully inhibit the growth of E. Coli, Clostridium perfringens, and 
Bacillus subtilis. In conclusion, there is a strong chance that the administration of NPs or/and NFs 
to sick plants may lower the populations of harmful soil and plant microorganisms because they can 
quickly penetrate and damage fungal and bacterial cells (Nawaz et al., 2011).
13.7 LIMITATIONS OF NANOFERTILIZERS
Recent advancements in sustainable agriculture have demonstrated the effective application of cer￾tain nanofertilizers to increase crop outputs. On the other hand, the intentional use of this technology 
in farming operations may have numerous unanticipated and irreversible effects. Therefore, using 
this technology to enhance the productivity of horticultural crops may be limited by environmental 218 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
and human health concerns. In this context, nanomaterial phytotoxicity is also a problem since 
different plants react differently to different nanomaterials in a dose-dependent manner (Ashkavand 
et al., 2018). Hence, before putting nanofertilizers on the market, it is imperative to weigh out their 
benefits and drawbacks. Crucially, the minute size and increased surface area of nanomaterials make 
them extremely reactive (Konate et al., 2018).
Even though nanofertilizers have the obvious potential to drastically increase production in the 
agriculture industry, some of these benefits can come at a great cost. Since exposure to NPs and NFs 
may pose health risks, there are a number of safety and ethical concerns with using them in agricul￾tural systems. In these circumstances, inadvertent health, safety, and environmental concerns may 
restrict the use of NPs and NFs in agricultural crop production (Diatta et al., 2020).
The unpredictability and reactivity of nanomaterials are other causes of worry as they could 
affect people working in the field and applying nanofertilizers and those who are exposed to them 
during their manufacture. For instance, farm laborers should be concerned about the safety of 
xenobiotic applications (Gopalakrishnan Nair, 2018). It is also necessary to investigate the via￾bility and applicability of these novel fertilizers in light of their expected benefits. A lot of worry 
surrounds their bioavailability, toxicity, and transportation, as well as unexpected environmental 
effects from their contact with biological systems, which currently restricts their use in horticulture 
and sustainable agriculture (Feregrino-Perez et al., 2018). Prioritizing toxicological research and 
conducting risk assessments and hazard identifications on nanomaterials, such as fertilizer life cycle 
assessments, are essential. This is especially true regarding the buildup of nanoparticles in plants, as 
well as potential human health risks. In fact, there are now significant worries about food security, 
human health, and safety arising from the usage of nanofertilizers made of nanomaterials (López￾Moreno et al., 2018; White & Gardea-Torresdey, 2018). According to certain research, nanoparticles 
can have phytotoxic effects. The uptake, translocation, transformation, and accumulation of NPs in 
plants, known as phytotoxicity, depend on the kind of NP and their composition, size, shape, and 
surface features, as well as the plant species, dosage, and application technique (Ebbs et al., 2016). 
In order to research and comprehend the uptake and translocation of nanofertilizers, the potential 
transformation of nanoparticles when they interact with soil and plant compounds, and the accumu￾lation of NPs in various plant tissues, it is crucial to examine the degree of toxicity of each NP in 
any given crop (Priester et al., 2012).
NPs have diverse effects on living things. For example, carbon-based NPs alter the structure of 
DNA and the degree to which genes are expressed in plant tissues. ZnONPs slow down the nitrogen 
fixation process and have an impact on symbiotic relationships in legumes (Huang et al., 2014). 
Additionally, NPs disrupt plant nutrition and cause molecular alterations; for example, CuONPs 
have been shown to influence the amounts of hormones in plants, such as abscisic acid and indole￾3-acetic acid (Le Van et al., 2016).
Crucially, due to their minuscule size and increased surface area, nanomaterials exhibit high 
reactivity (Konate et al., 2018). These materials’ variability and reactivity are other causes for worry, 
affecting individuals who have been exposed to both the production of nanofertilizers and their use 
in the field. It is also necessary to investigate the viability and applicability of these novel fertilizers 
in light of their expected benefits. Indeed, their acceptance is restricted to the sustainable agriculture 
and horticulture sectors due to significant concerns regarding their transport, toxicity, and bioavail￾ability, as well as potential unanticipated environmental effects upon exposure to biological systems 
(Feregrino-Pérez et al., 2018).
The buildup of nanoparticles in plants and the food components of plants may be the most signifi￾cant of the many concerns. Numerous factors influence the accumulation of nanoparticles, but the 
primary characteristics are the type and size of the nanoparticles, the plant species, and the tissues or 
organs that will be consumed, either directly as food or in food processing. Nanomaterials employed 
in nanofertilizers can accumulate in plants due to the variable interactions between NPs and plants. 
In certain situations, this can lead to toxicity issues that affect both plants and humans.Nanofertilizers for Plant Growth and Environmental Sustainability 219
CeO2
 nanoparticles have the ability to build up and inhibit soybeans’ ability to fix nitrogen 
(Priester et al., 2012), endangering not just the future of leguminous crops in agriculture but also 
potentially leading to health issues for people. Furthermore, administration of C60 (fullerene) to 
tomato, soybean, and zucchini plants results in an increase in the accumulation of dichlorodiphenyl
dichloroethylene (DDT) (De La Torre-Roche et al., 2012).
13.7.1  Human Health Risks
The possible effects of nanofertilizers on human health are some of the main worries. Owing to 
their small size, NPs are readily absorbed by organisms, which may be harmful. Research has 
indicated that animals’ gastrointestinal systems, livers, and kidneys may suffer harm from ingesting 
nanofertilizers. Moreover, NPs have the ability to pass through biological barriers, like the blood–
brain barrier, which may result in neurological harm (Gupta & Xie, 2018).
13.7.2  Environmental Risks
Soil, water, and air contamination may result from the release of nanoparticles into the environ￾ment. NPs have the ability to build up in the soil, which could upset soil ecosystems and reduce soil 
fertility. Furthermore, NPs that seep into aquatic habitats may negatively impact aquatic creatures, 
resulting in bioaccumulation and biomagnification up the food chain. Additional research is neces￾sary to address the adverse effects related to nanoparticle emission into the environment (Ghormade 
et al., 2011).
13.7.3  Ecological Risks
The possible effects of nanofertilizers on creatures that are not their intended targets are a significant 
source of worry. Studies have shown that exposure to nanoparticles can have negative impacts on 
a variety of creatures, such as fish, birds, and insects (Handy et al., 2008). Nanofertilizers have the 
potential to cause population decreases by interfering with organisms’ ability to reproduce, grow, 
and develop. It is as yet unclear how beneficial microorganisms, like mycorrhizal fungus and bac￾teria that fix nitrogen, are affected by nanofertilizers. To assess the possible ecological dangers of 
applying nanofertilizers, more investigation is required.
By accepting the benefits of employing nanoparticles in crop production, nanofertilizers pre￾sent a significant possibility in agriculture. However, measures to deal with their accumulation and 
associated threats to human health and the environment must be developed. This emerging field of 
study is making progress toward these significant objectives and has promise for the future. In order 
to reduce any potential damage to the environment, crops, and food, in vitro analyses have been 
performed to aid in the standardization of appropriate doses and types of nanofertilizers for each 
application and crop species (Takhar et al., 2011).
13.8 CONCLUSION
From the standpoint of sustainable agriculture, nanotechnology can be used to create novel 
fertilizers, like NFs, that can boost worldwide food production and feed the growing global popula￾tion. Because of their enormous potential, NFs can be used in smart agricultural production systems 
within the scope of sustainable agriculture. NPs possess large surface areas and allow for the dis￾tinctively gradual and uniform release of nutrients, so they are very well suited for usage in contem￾porary agriculture because of these encouraging qualities.
The development and utilization of nanofertilizers represent promising frontiers in agricul￾tural science, with significant implications for both plant growth enhancement and environmental 220 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
sustainability. Through innovative nanotechnology-based approaches, nanofertilizers offer a range 
of benefits that address key challenges facing modern agriculture while minimizing adverse envir￾onmental impacts.
First and foremost, nanofertilizers have demonstrated remarkable efficiency in delivering 
nutrients to plants. Their nanoscale particles facilitate better nutrient uptake, allowing for precise 
and targeted nutrient delivery to plant cells. This enhanced nutrient utilization not only promotes 
healthier plant growth but also reduces the overall amount of fertilizer needed, thereby mitigating 
the risk of nutrient leaching and runoff into waterbodies, which can lead to eutrophication and other 
environmental problems.
Furthermore, nanofertilizers can be engineered to release nutrients gradually, providing 
sustained nourishment to plants over extended periods of time. Their controlled release 
mechanisms not only ensure optimal nutrient availability for plants but also minimize nutrient 
losses through volatilization and soil fixation. As a result, the environmental impacts associated 
with excessive fertilizer application, such as soil degradation and groundwater contamination, are 
significantly reduced.
Moreover, the design versatility of nanofertilizers enables the incorporation of additional func￾tionalities beyond nutrient delivery. For instance, nanofertilizers can be tailored to encapsulate 
beneficial microorganisms and bioactive compounds, such as plant growth-promoting substances 
or pest repellents, further enhancing their effectiveness in supporting plant health and resilience. By 
harnessing synergistic interactions between nanomaterials and active agents, nanofertilizers offer 
multifaceted solutions to optimizing agricultural productivity while minimizing reliance on agro￾chemical inputs.
Importantly, the environmental sustainability of nanofertilizers extends beyond their direct 
impacts on crop production. By improving nutrient use efficiency and reducing fertilizer-related 
environmental pollution, nanofertilizers contribute to the conservation of natural resources, the 
preservation of biodiversity, and the mitigation of greenhouse gas emissions associated with con￾ventional agricultural practices. This holistic approach aligns with the principles of sustainable 
agriculture, fostering long-term ecological resilience and socioeconomic viability in farming com￾munities worldwide.
In conclusion, nanofertilizers hold immense potential as transformative technologies for advan￾cing agricultural sustainability by enhancing crop productivity, reducing environmental impacts, 
and promoting resilient farming systems. Continued research into and the development and respon￾sible deployment of nanofertilizers are essential for realizing their full benefits while addressing 
their potential risks and ensuring their safe and equitable adoption in diverse agricultural contexts. 
By integrating nanotechnology into agriculture, we can pave the way for a more sustainable and 
food-secure future for generations to come.
REFERENCES
Abbasi-Jorjandi, M., et al., Pesticide exposure and related health problems among family members of 
farmworkers in southeast Iran. A case-control study. Environ. Pollut. 2020, 267, 115424.
Abd El-Hady, M., & Hussein, H. Effect of foliar nano fertilizers and irrigation intervals on Soybean product￾ivity and quality. J. Plant Prod. 2021, 12(9), 1007–1014.
Abdel-Aziz, H., Hasaneen, M.N.A., & Omer, A.M. Nano chitosan-NPK fertilizer enhances the growth and 
productivity of wheat plants grown in sandy soil. Span. J. Agric. Res. 2016, 14, e0902.
Ali, S.S., et al., Nano-biofertilizers: Synthesis, advantages, and applications. In Biofertilizers (pp. 359–370). 
Elsevier, 2021. 10.1016/B978-0-12-821667-5.00007-5.
Ashkavand, P., et al., Application of SiO2 nanoparticles as pretreatment alleviates the impact of drought on the 
physiological performance of Prunus mahaleb (Rosaceae). Bol. Soc. Argent. Bot. 2018, 53(2), 207–219.
Astaneh, N., Bazrafshan, F., Zare, M., Amiri, B., & Bahrani, A. Effect of nano chelated nitrogen and urea 
fertilizers on wheat plant under drought stress condition. Nativa 2018, 6, 587.Nanofertilizers for Plant Growth and Environmental Sustainability 221
Avila-Quezada, G.D., et al., Strategic applications of nano-fertilizers for sustainable agriculture: Benefits and 
bottlenecks. Nanotechnol. Rev. 2022, 11(1), 2123–2140.
Babu, S., et al., Nanofertilizers for agricultural and environmental sustainability. Chemosphere, 2022, 292, 
133451.
Badran, A., & Savin, I. Effect of nano-fertilizer on seed germination and first stages of bitter almond seedlings’ 
growth under saline conditions. BioNanoScience 2018, 8, 742–751.
Candido Camara, M., et al., Development of stimuli-responsive nano-based pesticides: Emerging opportunities 
for agriculture. J. Nanobiotechnol. 2019, 17, 100.
Davarpanah, S., et al., Effects of foliar applications of zinc and boron nano-fertilizers on pomegranate (Punica 
granatum cv. Ardestani) fruit yield and quality. Sci. Hortic. 2016, 210, 57–64.
De La Torre-Roche, R., et al., Fullerene-enhanced accumulation of p, p’-DDE in agricultural crop species. 
Environ. Sci. Technol. 2012, 46, 9315–9323.
Diatta, A.A., et al., Assessment of nitrogen fixation by Mungbean genotypes in different soil textures using 15N 
natural abundance method. J. Soil Sci. Plant Nutr. 2020, 20, 2230–2240.
Din, M.I., & Rehan, R. Synthesis, characterization, and applications of copper nanoparticles. Anal. Lett. 2017, 
50(1), 50–62.
Djanaguiraman, M., et al., High-temperature stress alleviation by selenium nanoparticle treatment in grain sor￾ghum. ACS Omega 2018, 3, 2479–2491.
Doan Thi, T.U., et al., Green synthesis of ZnO nanoparticles using orange fruit peel extract for antibacterial 
activities. RSC Adv. 2020, 10(40), 23899–23907.
Ebbs S.D., Bradfield, S.J., Kumar, P., White, J.C., Projected dietary intake of zinc, copper and cerium from con￾sumption of carrot (Daucus carota) exposed to metal oxide nanoparticles or metal ions, 2016, 7 https://
doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2016.00188
El-Hefnawy, S.F.M. Nano NPK and growth regulator promoting changes in growth and mitotic index of pea 
plants under salinity stress. J. Agric. Chem. Biotechnol. 2020, 11, 263–269.
El-Moneim, D.A., et al., Positive and negative effects of nanoparticles on agricultural crops. Nanotechnol. 
Environ. Eng. 2021, 6, 21.
Feregrino-Perez, A.A., et al., A general overview of the benefits and possible negative effects of the nanotech￾nology in horticulture. Sci. Horticult. 2018, 238, 126–137. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scienta.2018.03.060
Fernandes, M., RB Singh, K., Sarkar, T., Singh, P., & Pratap Singh, R. Recent applications of magnesium oxide 
(MgO) nanoparticles in various domains. Adv. Mater. Lett. 2020, 11(8), 1–10. https://doi.org/10.5185/
amlett.2020.081543
Ghormade, V., Deshpande, M.V., & Paknikar, K.M. Perspectives for nano-biotechnology enabled protec￾tion and nutrition of plants. Biotechnol. Adv. 2011, 29(6), 792–803. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biotech
adv.2011.06.007
Gopalakrishnan Nair, P.M. Toxicological impact of carbon nanomaterials on plants. In: Gothandam, K., 
Ranjan, S., Dasgupta, N., Ramalingam, C., Lichtfouse, E. (eds) Nanotechnology, Food Security and 
Water Treatment. Environmental Chemistry for a Sustainable World. (pp. 163–183). 2018. Springer, 
Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-70166-0_5
Gülmezoğlu, N., Köleli, N., Karakaya, B., & Dağhan, H. Impact of titanium dioxide nanoparticles (TiO2-NPs) 
on growth and mineral nutrient uptake of wheat (Triticum vulgare L.). Tarla Bitkileri Merkez Arastirma 
Enstitusu, 2020, 29(2), 69–76. https://doi.org/10.38042/biost.2020.29.02.03
Guo, H., White, J.C., Wang, Z., & Xing, B. Nano-enabled fertilizers to control the release and use efficiency of 
nutrients. Curr. Opin. Environ. Sci. Health 2018, 6, 77–83.
Gupta, R., & Xie, H. Nanoparticles in daily life: Applications, toxicity and regulations. J. Environ. Pathol. 
Toxicol. Oncol. 2018, 37(3), 209–230. https://doi.org/10.1615/JEnvironPatholToxicolOncol.201
8026009
Haghighi, M., Abolghasemi, R., & Da Silva, J.A.T. Low and high temperature stress affect the growth 
characteristics of tomato in hydroponic culture with Se and nano-Se amendment. Sci. Hortic. 2014, 178, 
231–240.
Handy, R.D., Owen, R., & Valsami-Jones, E. The ecotoxicology of nanoparticles and nanomaterials: Current 
status, knowledge gaps, challenges, and future needs. Ecotoxicology 2008, 17(5), 315–325. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10646-008-0206-0
Hojjat, S.S., & Ganjali, A. The effect of silver nanoparticle on lentil seed germination under drought stress. Int. 
J. Farm. Allied Sci. 2016, 5, 208–212.222 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
Hong, R., Pan, T., Qian, J., & Li, H. Synthesis and surface modification of ZnO nanoparticles. Chem. Eng. J. 
2006, 119(2–3), 71–81. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2006.03.003
Hua, K.-H., Wang, H.-C., Chung, R.-S., & Hsu, J.-C. Calcium carbonate nanoparticles can enhance plant 
nutrition and insect pest tolerance. J. Pest. Sci. 2015, 40(4), 208–213. https://doi.org/10.1584/jpestics.
D15-025
Huang, Y.C., Fan, R., Grusak, M.A., Sherrier, J.D., & Huang, C.P. Effects of nano-ZnO on the agronomically 
relevant Rhizobiumelegume symbiosis. Sci. Total Environ. 2014, 497, 78–90.
Ismail, M., Prasad, R., Ibrahim, A.I.M., & Ahmed, A.I.S. Modern prospects of nanotechnology in plant path￾ology (pp. 305–317). Springer Science and Business Media LLC: Singapore, 2017.
Janaki, A.C., Sailatha, E., & Gunasekaran, S. Synthesis, characteristics and antimicrobial activity of ZnO 
nanoparticles. Spectrochim. Acta A: Mol. Biomol. Spectroscopy 2015, 144, 17–22. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.saa.2015.02.041
Janmohammadi, M., Amanzadeh, T., Sabaghnia, N., & Ion, V. Effect of nano-silicon foliar application on saf￾flower growth under organic and inorganic fertilizer regimes. Bot. Lith. 2016, 22, 53–64.
Kai, H., & Iba, K. Temperature stress in plants. Wiley: Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2014.
Kale, S.K., Parishwad, G.V., Husainy, A.S.N., & Patil, A.S. Emerging agriculture applications of silver 
nanoparticles. ES Food Agroforestry 2021, 3, 17–22.
Kamle, M., et al., Nanotechnological interventions for plant health improvement and sustainable agriculture. 
3 Biotech 2020, 10, 1–11.
Kaushik, M., et al., Investigations on the antimicrobial activity and wound healing potential of ZnO nanoparticles. 
Appl. Surf. Sci. 2019, 479, 1169–1177. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsusc.2019.02.189
Konate, A., et al., Comparative effects of nano and bulk-Fe3O4 on the growth of cucumber (Cucumis 
sativus). Ecotoxicol. Environ. Safety, 2018, 165, 547–554. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eco
env.2018.09.053
Kumar, V., Guleria, P., Kumar, V., & Yadav, S.K. Gold nanoparticle exposure induces growth and yield enhance￾ment in Arabidopsis thaliana. Sci. Total Environ. 2013, 461, 462–468.
LaRue, C., et al., Accumulation, translocation and impact of TiO2 nanoparticles in wheat (Triticum aestivum 
spp.): Influence of diameter and crystal phase. Sci. Total. Environ. 2012, 431, 197–208.
Le Van, N., Ma, C., Shang, J., Rui, Y., Liu, S., & Xing, B. Effects of CuO nanoparticles on insecticidal activity 
and phytotoxicity in conventional and transgenic cotton. Chemosphere 2016, 144, 661–670.
Liu, R., & Lal, R. Synthetic apatite nanoparticles as a phosphorus fertilizer for soybean (Glycine max). Sci. 
Rep. 2015, 4, srep05686.
López-Moreno, M.L., Cassé, C., & Correa-Torres, S.N. Engineered nanomaterials interactions with living 
plants: Benefits, hazards and regulatory policies. Curr. Opinion Environ. Sci. Health 2018, 6, 36–41. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.coesh.2018.07.013
Lü, S., Feng, C., Gao, C., Wang, X., Xu, X., Bai, X., Gao, N., & Liu, M. Multifunctional environmental 
smart fertilizer based on l-aspartic acid for sustained nutrient release. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2016, 64, 
4965–4974.
Lv, J., Christie, P., & Zhang, S. Uptake, translocation, and transformation of metal-based nanoparticles in 
plants: Recent advances and methodological challenges. Environ. Sci. Nano 2019, 6, 41–59.
Lv, J., Zhang, S., Luo, L., Zhang, J., Yang, K., Christie, P. Accumulation, speciation and uptake pathway of ZnO 
nanoparticles in maize. Environ. Sci. Nano 2015, 2, 68–77.
Mahmoud, A.W.M., & Swaefy, H.M. Comparison between commercial and nano NPK in presence of nano zeo￾lite on sage plant yield and its components under water stress. Agriculture 2020, 66, 24–39.
Maleki Dizaj, S., Barzegar-Jalali, M., Zarrintan, M.H., Adibkia, K., & Lotfipour, F. Calcium carbonate 
nanoparticles as cancer drug delivery system. Expert Opinion Drug Del. 2015, 12(10), 1649–1660. 
https://doi.org/10.1517/17425247.2015.1049530
Millán, G., Agosto, F., & Vázquez, M. Use of clinoptilolite as a carrier for nitrogen fertilizers in soils of the 
Pampean regions of Argentina. Int. J. Agric. Nat. Resour. 2008, 35, 293–302.
Morteza, E., Moaveni, P., Farahani, H.A., & Kiyani, M. Study of photosynthetic pigments changes of maize 
(Zea mays L.) under nano TiO2 spraying at various growth stages. SpringerPlus 2013, 2, 247.
Mozafari, A.A., Havas, F., & Ghaderi, N. Application of iron nanoparticles and salicylic acid in in vitro culture 
of strawberries (Fragaria × ananassa Duch.) to cope with drought stress. Plant. Cell, Tissue Organ. Cult. 
(PCTOC) 2018, 132, 511–523.Nanofertilizers for Plant Growth and Environmental Sustainability 223
Mydin, R., Zahidi, I.N.M., Ishak, N.N., Shaida, N., Ghazali, S.N., Moshawih, S., & Siddiquee, S. Potential 
of calcium carbonate nanoparticles for therapeutic applications. Malays. J. Med. Health Sci. 2018, 14, 
201–206.
Nawaz, H.R., Solangi, B.A., & Zehra, B. Preparation of nano zinc oxide and its application in leather as a 
retanning and antibacterial agent. Can. J. Sci. Ind. Res. 2011, 2, 164–170.
Ngo, Q.B., Dao, T.H., Nguyen, H.C., Tran, X.T., Van Nguyen, T., Khuu, T.D., & Huynh, T.H. Effects of 
nanocrystalline powders (Fe, Co and Cu) on the germination, growth, crop yield and product quality of 
soybean (Vietnamese species DT-51). Adv. Nat. Sci. Nanosci. Nanotechnol. 2014, 5 , 015016.
Takhar, S.M. In vitro methods for nanotoxicity assessment: Advantages and applications. Arch. Appl. Sci. Res. 
2011, 3, 389–403.
Pestovsky, Y.S., & Martínez-Antonio, A. The use of nanoparticles and nanoformulations in agriculture. J. 
Nanosci. Nanotechnol. 2017, 17, 8699–8730.
Pikaar, I., et al., Decoupling livestock from land use through industrial feed production pathways. Environ. Sci. 
Technol. 2018, 52, 7351–7359.
Prasad, T.N.V, et al., Effect of nanoscale zinc oxide particles on the germination, growth and yield of peanut. 
J. Plant Nutr. 2012, 35, 905–927.
Priester, J.H., et al., Soybean susceptibility to manufactured nanomaterials with evidence for food quality and 
soil fertility interruption. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2012, 109, E2.
Rizwan, M., Ali, S., ur Rehman, M.Z., Malik, S., Qayyum, M.F., Alamri, S., Alyemeni, M., & Ahmad, P. Effect 
of foliar applications of silicon and titanium dioxide nanoparticles on growth, oxidative stress, and cad￾mium accumulation by rice (Oryza sativa). Acta Physiol. Plant. 2019, 41 , 35.
Rodríguez-González, V., Terashima, C., & Fujishima, A. Applications of photocatalytic titanium dioxide-based 
nanomaterials in sustainable agriculture. J. Photochem. Photobiol. C: Photochem. Rev. 2019, 40, 49–67. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jphotochemrev.2019.06.001
Rossi, L., Fedenia, L.N., Sharifan, H., Ma, X., & Lombardini, L. Effects of foliar application of zinc sulfate 
and zinc nanoparticles in coffee (Coffea arabica L.) plants. Plant Physiol. Biochem. 2019, 135, 160–166.
Rui, M., Ma, C., Hao, Y., Guo, J., Rui, Y., Tang, X., Zhao, Q., Fan, X., Zhang, Z., Hou, T., & Zhu, S. Iron oxide 
nanoparticles as a potential iron fertilizer for peanut (Arachis hypogaea). Front. Plant Sci. 2016, 7, 815. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2016.00815 PMID: 27375665; PMCID: PMC4899443.
Savvas, D., Giotis, D., Chatzieustratiou, E., Bakea, M., & Patakioutas, G. Silicon supply in soilless cultivations 
of zucchini alleviates stress induced by salinity and powdery mildew infections. Environ. Exp. Bot. 2009, 
65, 11–17.
Sedghi, M., Hadi, M., & Toluie, S.G. Effect of nano zinc oxide on the germination parameters of soybean seeds 
under drought stress. Ann. West. Univ. Timisoara Ser. Biol. 2013, 16, 73.
Singh, H., Sharma, A., Bhardwaj, S.K., Arya, S.K., Bhardwaj, N., & Khatri, M. Recent advances in the 
applications of nanoagrochemicals for sustainable agricultural development. Environ. Sci. Process. 
Impacts 2021, 23, 213–239.
Singh, M.D. Studies on the effect of time of application and concentration of nano zinc sulphide (nZS) on the 
growth and yield of sunflower (Helianthus annuus L.) M. Sc. (Agri.) Thesis. University of Agricultural 
Sciences, Dharwad, Karnataka, India, 2015.
Singh, M.D., & Kumar, B.A. Bio efficacy of nano zinc sulphide (ZnS) on growth and yield of sunflower 
(Helianthus annuus L.) and nutrient status in the soil. Int. J. Agric. Sci. 2017, 9, 3795–3798.
Tantawy, A.S., Salama, Y.A.M., Abdel-Mawgoud, M.R., & Ghoname, A.A. Comparison of chelated calcium 
with nano calcium on alleviation of salinity negative effects on tomato plants. Middle East. J. Agric. Res. 
2014, 3, 912–916.
Tripathi, K.M., Bhati, A., Singh, A., Sonker, A.K., Sarkar, S., & Sonkar, S.K. Sustainable changes in the 
contents of metallic micronutrients in first generation gram seeds imposed by carbon nano-onions: Life 
cycle seed to seed study. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 2017, 5, 2906e16.
Vázquez-Núñez, E., et al., Incorporation of nanoparticles into plant nutrients: The real benefits. In Agricultural 
nanobiotechnology (pp. 49–76). Springer, 2018. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-96719-6_4
Wu, W., & Ma, B. Integrated nutrient management (INM) for sustaining crop productivity and reducing envir￾onmental impact: A review. Sci. Total Environ. 2015, 512, 415–427.
White, J.C., & Gardea-Torresdey, J. Achieving food security through the very small. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2018, 
13(8), 627–629. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41565-018-0223-y224 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
Yang, F., Hong, F.S., You, W.J., Liu, C., Gao, F.Q., Wu, C., & Yang, P. Influences of nano-anatase TiO2 on the 
nitrogen metabolism of growing spinach. Biol. Trace Elem. Res. 2006, 110, 179–190.
Zahra, Z., Arshad, M., Rafique, R., Mahmood, A., Habib, A., Qazi, I.A., & Khan, S.A. Metallic nanoparticle 
(TiO2 and Fe3O4) application modifies rhizosphere phosphorus availability and uptake by lactuca 
sativa. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2015, 63, 6876–6882.
Zia-ur-Rehman, M., Naeem, A., Khalid, H., Rizwan, M., Ali, S., & Azhar, M. Responses of plants to iron oxide 
nanoparticles. In Nanomaterials in plants, algae, and microorganisms (pp. 221–238). Elsevier, 2018. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-811487-2.00010-4225
DOI: 10.1201/9781003477730-16 225
14 Role of Nanoparticle￾Integrated Biosensors in 
Soil–Plant Systems
Dheeraj William Watkins, P. Gnana Deepu, 
Jogipeta Harihara, Kathroju Harikrishna, and Vulise Jhansi
14.1 INTRODUCTION
Biosensors are exceptionally sophisticated analytical devices that integrate physicochemical 
transducers with biological sensing elements (such as enzymes, antibodies, or nucleic acids) to gen￾erate optical, electrochemical, piezoelectric, or thermal signals as outputs. They can translate elec￾trical signals from biological responses (Abdel-Karim, 2024). The electronic components capture, 
identify, and transmit data related to physiological alterations or the existence of different chemical 
or biological substances in the environment. A standard biosensor includes an analyte for detecting 
or identifying its components, a bioreceptor (a biological element capable of recognizing the target 
substrate), a transducer that converts the biorecognition event into an electrical signal, electronics to 
amplify and digitize the signal, and a display that presents the output in numerical, graphical, figure, 
or tabular form (Bhalla et al., 2016). The ideal biosensor should be reusable, extremely specific, and 
untainted by environmental factors, like temperature and pH (Abdel-Karim, 2024). This remarkable 
technology has undergone substantial progress and has been the focus of extensive research due to its 
immense potential in diverse areas, including medical diagnostics, environmental monitoring, and 
food safety. Recent research has focused on improving the sensitivity and specificity of biosensors. 
The incorporation of nanotechnology has revolutionized the field, with nanomaterials leveraging 
their high surface to volume ratios and excellent conductivity to enhance biosensor performance 
(Naresh and Lee 2021). An emerging field of interest within biosensor application involves the util￾ization of biosensors integrated with nanoparticles to study soil–plant systems. These biosensors 
provide real-time insights into the intricate interactions within these environments. By leveraging 
the unique properties of nanoparticles, such as their high surface area and reactivity, they can accur￾ately detect and measure various soil and plant parameters (Mandal et al., 2020). Monitoring and 
investigating soil–plant interactions play a pivotal role for several reasons, especially within the 
realm of precision agriculture and sustainable farming practices. By comprehending spatiotemporal 
variations in crop fields and considering the impact of environmental factors on soil management, 
we can significantly improve crop yields. Additionally, monitoring these interactions empowers 
farmers to adopt more sustainable practices, thereby reducing reliance on chemical inputs and min￾imizing environmental impacts, which are essential steps toward maintaining long-term soil health 
and fertility (De Almeida et al., 2023). The interactions between soil, plants, and the atmosphere 
play a crucial role in controlling essential environmental processes related to hydrology, biota, and 
climate. Understanding these interactions is vital for agricultural purposes, including effective irri￾gation management and crop performance prediction under diverse weather conditions. In precision 
agriculture, monitoring soil–plant interactions enables informed decision-making regarding irriga￾tion, fertilization, and pest control, resulting in more efficient resource utilization and the improved 226 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
management of agricultural inputs (Cassiani et al., 2015). The interplay between plants and soil 
microbes significantly shapes terrestrial ecosystems by impacting plant growth and competitive 
ability. Monitoring these interactions offers valuable insights into how changing nutrient levels or 
environmental stress can modify the dynamics and strength of plant–microbe interactions (Hawkins 
and Crowford, 2018). Nanoparticle-integrated biosensors contribute to sustainable agriculture by 
optimizing resource use, improving soil health (Mandal et al., 2020), monitoring and detecting 
diseases (Chandna et al., 2022), reducing environmental impact, and enhancing crop yields. Their 
integration into soil–plant systems holds great promise for the future of precision agriculture (El￾Chaghaby and Rashad, 2023).
This chapter describes the concepts of biosensors and nanoparticles, various nanoparticle￾integrated biosensors, and their importance and applications in soil–plant systems. Also, it highlights 
the challenges and limitations of nanoparticle-integrated biosensors.
14.2 NANOPARTICLE-INTEGRATED BIOSENSORS
In many countries, agriculture supports more than 60% of the population, either directly or indir￾ectly, because it is essential for the economy (Ali et al., 2014). Due to increasing demands, there has 
been a decline in the ratio of agricultural products to population growth, using traditional practices 
as traditional farming techniques are time-consuming and costly. They require skilled labor, com￾plex instruments, and sample preparation for disease detection (Mudamadi and Sekhejane 2017) 
and monitoring changes in agricultural land. Thus, new technologies are needed in the agricultural 
sector to meet these increased demands (Alvarado et al., 2019). The latest advancements in science 
and technology have allowed the synthesis of various agricultural sector tools. These tools are used 
in monitoring, detecting, and sensing various plant–soil interactions. They help to monitor and 
detect the molecular management of diseases and enable plants to absorb materials, thus improving 
overall agricultural productivity and efficiency (Sharon et al., 2010; Servin, and White, 2016). 
Nanotechnology has played a significant role in providing solutions to various problems in the agri￾cultural sector, including nanofertilizers, nanopesticides, nanosensors, nanobiosensors, and plant 
transformation.
14.2.1 Nanoparticles and Their Application in Biosensors
Nanoparticles are tiny particles, ranging from 1 to 100 nm. Due to their high surface to volume 
ratios and tiny size, they possess distinct optical, chemical, and physical characteristics that differ 
from their bulk counterparts. The unique properties of nanoparticles are highly valuable in various 
fields, including biosensor technology (Anu Mary Ealia and Saravanakumar, 2017). In biosensors, 
nanoparticles are utilized for their ability to enhance the sensitivity and specificity of detection, as 
well as their versatility in functionalization for specific target recognition. One of the key advantages 
of using nanoparticles in biosensors is their large surface area, which allows for the efficient immo￾bilization of bioreceptors, such as antibodies and DNA probes (Ajdary et al., 2018). Moreover, 
nanoparticles can be easily modified with functional groups or molecules to enhance their stability 
and biocompatibility. Various types of nanoparticles have been used extensively in biosensors, 
with gold and silver nanoparticles being among the most commonly used. Gold nanoparticles 
have unique optical properties, which can be exploited for sensitive detection in biosensors. Silver 
nanoparticles, on the other hand, exhibit strong antibacterial properties and are often used in anti￾microbial biosensors. In addition to gold and silver nanoparticles, other types of nanoparticles, such 
as quantum dots, magnetic nanoparticles, carbon-based nanoparticles, and metal oxide nanoparticles, 
are also used in various applications within biosensor technology. Overall, the use of nanoparticles 
in biosensors has revolutionized the field by improving sensitivity, selectivity, and overall perform￾ance (Mehndiratta et al., 2013).Role of Nanoparticle-Integrated Biosensors in Soil–Plant Systems 227
14.2.2 Nanobiosensors and Nanoparticle-​Integrated Biosensors
Nanobiosensors and nanoparticle-integrated biosensors are innovative technologies that detect bio￾logical substances. Nanobiosensors utilize nanomaterials as sensing elements to detect and analyze 
various biological parameters or molecules. These nanomaterials include nanoparticles, nanowires, 
and nanostructured films. On the other hand, nanoparticle-integrated biosensors refer to biosensors 
that incorporate nanoparticles as integral parts of their sensing platforms. These nanoparticles are 
functionalized with specific biomolecules or receptors to enhance the sensitivity and selectivity 
of biosensors. Nanobiosensors employ a broader range of nanomaterials in biosensing, whereas 
nanoparticle-integrated biosensors focus on the integration of nanoparticles in biosensing platforms 
to improve performance.
Nanobiosensors are nanosensors that selectively detect target analyte molecules via immobilized 
bioreceptor samples (Rupesh et al., 2021). They are developed using nanotechnology principles 
to acquire, process, and analyze data at the atomic level (Velasco-Garcia, 2009). They were first 
developed by combining ideas from various fields, such as nanoscience, biology, computers, 
and electronics. Basic nanobiosensors are made up of three components: a biological sensitizer, 
a selector, and a transducer (Cavalcanti et al., 2008). In the agricultural sector, biosensors aid in 
monitoring and controlling soil conditions, as well as assessing soil fertility, pH levels, moisture 
content, and more (Thakur et al., 2022).
Some of the basic characteristics of nanobiosensors (Chiranjeeb et al., 2021) include accuracy, 
aspect and flexibility, interaction, specificity, and stability. The features of an ideal nanobiosensor 
include being affordable, non-toxic, biocompatible, and portable; remaining stable under normal 
storage settings; demonstrating minimum response times; enabling selective interactions with target 
analytes, requiring the least amount of reactivity; and delivering signals that are exact, accurate, 
and repeatable. The applications of nanobiosensors include acting as diagnostic tools for evaluating 
soil quality and diseases, supporting sustainable agriculture; finding contaminants; and detecting 
proteins and DNA via food product analysis.
14.2.3  Importance of Nanoparticle-​Integrated Biosensors in Enhancing Sensitivity
and Specificity
Nanotechnology has revolutionized many fields, including medicine and diagnostics. One of the 
key areas in which nanotechnology has made significant advancements is the development of 
nanoparticle-integrated biosensors. These biosensors have become crucial tools in enhancing sen￾sitivity and specificity in various applications, such as cancer detection, disease diagnosis, and 
environmental monitoring. Nanoparticle-integrated biosensors offer several unique features and 
mechanisms that contribute to enhancing sensitivity and specificity, such as their high surface to 
volume ratios, which allow for a larger number of biomolecules to be immobilized on the surface 
of the nanoparticles, resulting in increased sensitivity. Additionally, the surface of nanoparticles 
can be modified with specific ligands or molecules that can selectively bind to target analytes 
(Cormode et al., 2009). This selectivity contributes to the specificity of nanoparticle-integrated 
biosensors as they can differentiate between different molecules and biomarkers in samples. For 
example, in the detection of cancer, nanoparticle-integrated biosensors can be designed to specific￾ally target and bind to cancer cells or specific biomarkers expressed on their surface, allowing for 
highly specific detection and diagnosis. Another example of nanoparticle-integrated biosensors’ 
effectiveness in enhancing sensitivity and specificity is the detection of toxins and pathogens in 
food samples (Mehndiratta et al., 2013). Nanoparticle-integrated biosensors have been extensively 
employed in the food industry to detect nutrients and restricted or banned substances, as well 
as foodborne pathogenic bacteria and toxins. For instance, carbon dot-integrated biosensors have 
shown promise in sensing in the food industry (Qu, Wei, and Sun, 2018). These biosensors can 
be designed to specifically interact with target molecules or bacteria in food samples, enabling 228 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
rapid and highly sensitive detection. Several key features and mechanisms make nanoparticle￾integrated biosensors effective in enhancing sensitivity and specificity, including their large surface 
area to volume ratios (Mehndiratta et al., 2013). This high surface area allows for more interactions 
with target molecules, increasing the chances of detection. Additionally, nanoparticle-integrated 
biosensors can be functionalized with specific ligands or receptors that selectively bind to target 
molecules, allowing for highly specific detection.
Furthermore, nanoparticle-integrated biosensors play a crucial role in soil and plant monitoring. 
These biosensors can be tailored to detect specific contaminants or nutrients in the soil, providing 
valuable information for agricultural and environmental purposes. By functionalizing the surface 
of nanoparticles with receptors that bind to target molecules found in soil, such as heavy metals or 
pesticides, nanoparticle-integrated biosensors can offer a rapid and sensitive method for monitoring 
soil quality.
In plant monitoring, nanoparticle-integrated biosensors can be utilized to detect various stress 
markers or signaling molecules that indicate the health and condition of plants. This can be par￾ticularly beneficial for precision agriculture, enabling the early detection of plant diseases, nutrient 
deficiencies, or environmental stress.
Overall, nanoparticle-integrated biosensors have demonstrated their potential to enhance sen￾sitivity and specificity across a wide range of applications, including soil and plant monitoring, 
making them invaluable tools in advancing agricultural and environmental sciences.
14.2.4  Integration of Nanoparticles and Biosensors for Soil–Plant System
Applications
Biosensors have gained popularity in the field of soil–plant interactions because of their ability to 
provide the accurate and real-time monitoring of various parameters. Nanoparticles have emerged 
as powerful tools for enhancing the performance and sensitivity of biosensors, offering numerous 
advantages in agricultural applications. Nanoparticles have several unique properties that make them 
ideal for use in biosensors (Ajdary et al., 2018). Their small size and large surface area to volume 
ratios enable enhanced sensitivity and signal amplification as a higher number of bioreceptors can 
be immobilized on their surface. Additionally, the versatile surface chemistry of nanoparticles 
allows for easy modification and functionalization with bioreceptors, enhancing their specificity 
and selectivity toward target analytes. The process of integrating nanoparticles into biosensors for 
soil–plant systems involves several techniques and considerations. These techniques vary depending 
on the type of nanoparticles being employed and the specific objectives of the sensor systems. Here 
are some of the general steps involved in integrating nanoparticles into biosensors, as shown in 
Figure 14.1.
1. Selection of Nanoparticles
The selection of nanoparticles is a crucial step in integrating nanoparticles into biosensors. 
Specific nanoparticle properties, such as size, shape, surface chemistry, and biocompati￾bility, make them suitable for specific applications.
2. Preparation of Nanoparticle Suspensions
Nanoparticles are typically dispersed in a solution or suspension to facilitate their incorp￾oration into biosensors. These suspensions can be prepared using various methods, such 
as sonication, ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography (UHPLC), or nanoparticle 
synthesizers.
3. Modification of Nanoparticle Surface
In this step, the surface of nanoparticles may be modified to enhance their interactions with 
target analytes. Common modifications include functionalization with antibodies, enzymes, 
or other specific targeting agents.Role of Nanoparticle-Integrated Biosensors in Soil–Plant Systems 229
4. Incorporation into Biosensor Matrices
Nanoparticles are then integrated into biosensor matrices, in which they interact with bio￾logical components or other sensing elements. Various techniques, like adsorption, pre￾cipitation, and covalent bonding, are used to incorporate nanoparticles into biosensor 
matrices.
5. Characterization and Optimization
The performance of nanoparticle-integrated biosensors is assessed using various charac￾terization techniques, such as assay specificity, sensitivity, response time, and longevity. 
The optimization of nanoparticle concentrations and surface modifications is necessary to 
achieve optimal sensor performance.
Due to the unique properties of nanoparticles, they are suitable for sensing specific tasks. 
In soil–plant systems, different types of NPs can be integrated into biosensors for different 
functions. Some of the common types of nanoparticles used include carbon nanotubes (CNTs), 
graphene nanoparticles (GNPs), zinc oxide nanoparticles (ZNPs), silver nanoparticles (AgNPs), 
graphene oxide nanoparticles (GONPs), gold nanoparticles (AuNPs), quantum dots, and magnetic 
nanoparticles.
In the agricultural sector, nanoparticle-integrated biosensors provide various benefits, such as 
the real-time monitoring of soil conditions; the internal monitoring of plant tissues (Abdel-Karim 
2024); the transmission of chemical signals from plants to digital/electronic devices for optimal 
crop management (Giraldo and Kruss, 2023; Sembada and Lenggoro 2024); the early detection of 
plant diseases (Abdel-Karim 2024); enhanced sensitivity to detect even trace amounts of substances 
present in soil (Abdel-Karim 2024); the selective detection of specific targets (HMs, pests, etc.); and 
the detection of multiple targets in soil.
FIGURE 14.1 An outline of the general steps involved in the integration of nanoparticles and biosensors.230 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
Therefore, nanoparticle-integrated biosensors have various applications in the agricultural sector. 
These biosensors utilize nanoparticles to enhance the detection and monitoring of various soil–plant 
interactions and improve crop yields. An overview of the applications of nanoparticle-integrated 
biosensors is given below.
• Nutrient Monitoring
Monitor and detect nutrient levels present in soil and provide the precise levels of fertilizers 
required to improve and optimize yields.
• Pesticide Detection
Detect the presence of pesticide traces in soil.
• Pathogen and Plant Disease Detection
Detect plant diseases and identify pathogens present in soil (Abdel-Karim 2024).
• Heavy Metal Monitoring
Detect and monitor levels of heavy metals in soil to prevent groundwater contamination and 
metal toxicity in plants.
• Water Quality Monitoring
Detect contaminants present in soil.
• pH Sensing
Measure pH levels in soil.
• Moisture Sensing
Measure moisture content in soil.
• Soil Quality Monitoring
Assess levels of soil nutrients and contaminants (Chandna et al., 2022).
• Plant Growth Monitoring
Monitor phytohormones and other growth indicators (Medrano-Lopez et al., 2024).
14.3 VARIOUS NANOMATERIALS USED FOR NANOBIOSENSORS
Conventional soil–plant monitoring techniques often come with significant challenges. These 
include high costs, time-consuming approaches, and the need for extensive sample preparation. 
Additionally, these techniques rely on skilled personnel and complex instruments, which may not 
be readily available, especially in remote areas. Nanoparticles, when incorporated into biosensors, 
offer a way to overcome these limitations of traditional approaches. Their unique properties enable 
more efficient and effective detection, making them a promising avenue for biosensor develop￾ment in monitoring soil–plant systems. Some of the key benefits of nanoparticle-integrated 
biosensors over conventional approaches are as follows: they exhibit remarkable specificity and 
sensitivity; they offer fast response times with real-time outputs; and they can detect single and 
multiple analytes, even at extremely low concentrations, that could be harmful to plants, animals, 
or humans. Moreover, their versatility allows for their use in applications like point-of-care systems 
and multiplexed devices. Among the uses of nanoparticle-integrated biosensors, plant pathogen 
detection, soil quality sensing, and pesticide, phytohormone, and heavy metal detection are of the 
greatest significance (Ali et al., 2021). Researchers are currently exploring various nanoparticles 
for biosensor development (Mohammad-Razdari et al., 2022). Biological probes combined with 
various nanoparticles, such as quantum dots, metal nanoparticles, graphene oxide nanoparticles, 
magnetic nanoparticles, and carbon nanotubes, can detect multiple analytes. Titanium, fullerene, 
and silicon oxide are other materials that are occasionally used in this field. However, a few 
examples of polymers that can be used for encapsulation are zeolite, polyacrylic acid, and chitosan 
(Thakur et al., 2022). Different metal nanoparticles, especially silver and gold nanoparticles, can 
be used for nanobiosensors because of their adaptability. Among the noble metals, AuNPs are the 
most widely employed, followed by magnetic Fe3
O4
 nanoparticles and CuNPs. Additionally, hybrid Role of Nanoparticle-Integrated Biosensors in Soil–Plant Systems 231
nanomaterials can be used, including cadmium telluride quantum dots/magnetic nanoparticles, 
multiwalled carbon nanotubes/AuNPs, and quantum dots upconverting nanoparticles of magnetic 
beads (Tessaro et al., 2022). Zinc oxide nanoparticles and carbon nanoparticles are extensively used 
in nanobiosensors due to their exceptional optical, chemical, and electrical characteristics, along 
with their increased biocompatibility and low toxicity (Sabir et al., 2014). Nanoparticle composites, 
such as nanosheets, graphene, and gold/chitosan nanoparticles, hold great potential for applications 
in soil–plant systems (Bao et al., 2015). Graphene, with its high biocompatibility and oxygenated 
functional groups, offers unique advantages. These features allow for chemical functionalization, 
enabling the formation of metal composites. As a result, graphene-based biosensors are considered 
promising candidates for various applications (Verma and Rani, 2021). Noble metal nanoparticles, 
like platinum and gold nanoparticles, are widely used due to their distinctive sensing properties 
(Lau et al., 2017). Selenium nanoparticles have also been used in biosensors for monitoring agricul￾tural fields (Ahmed et al., 2020). Selecting the best bioconjugation techniques and gaining a greater 
understanding of how biomolecules function at the nano–bio interface is necessary for the develop￾ment of ultrasensitive nanobiosensors (
Nanoparticle-integrated biosensors play a vital role in plant health monitoring and disease detec￾tion. Various types of nanoparticle-integrated biosensors are employed in soil–plant systems, some 
of which are described in Table 14.1.
14.4 APPLICATIONS OF NANOPARTICLE-INTEGRATED BIOSENSORS 
IN SOIL–PLANT SYSTEMS
Nanoparticle-integrated biosensors are cutting-edge technologies that hold significant promise 
for enhancing detection and monitoring capabilities and have shown great potential in various 
applications within soil–plant systems (Dyussembayev et al., 2021) due to their unique properties. 
Their ability to provide detailed and rapid information about plant pathogens, abiotic stressors, 
metabolic content, phytohormones, genetic modifications, transcriptional activity, soil conditions, 
and plant health has led to more informed decisions in soil–plant systems. These biosensors offer 
high sensitivity and specificity, allowing for accurate and precise measurements that help to maxi￾mize plant growth. Researchers have used different types of nanoparticles in biosensor development. 
Some applications of nanoparticle-integrated biosensors in soil–plant systems are discussed in the 
following sections.
14.4.1  Monitoring Soil Nutrients (Nitrogen, Phosphorus, and Potassium)
Nanoparticle-integrated biosensors are useful for the in situ monitoring of soil nutrient levels, such 
as nitrogen (N), phosphorus (P), and potassium (K). These biosensors can be modified so that they 
consist of biological recognition elements that are sensitive to specific nutrients. They also contain 
transducers to convert interactions between elements and nutrients into measurable signals.
Nitrogen is often monitored in the form of nitrates or ammonium. Metal nanoparticles, such as 
gold or silver nanoparticles, can be functionalized with enzymes, like nitrate reductase or ammonia 
oxidase. These enzymes react with their respective nitrogenous compounds and can be quantified by 
transducers, providing real-time data on soil nitrogen levels.
Phosphorus detection often involves enzymes like alkaline phosphatase and hydrolyze phosphate￾containing compounds. Nanoparticles integrated into biosensors enhance enzymatic reactions and 
the products of these reactions alter the optical and electrochemical properties of the sensors, which 
can be measured.
To detect potassium ions present in soil, nanoparticles coated with ionophores or other molecules 
that selectively bind to potassium can be used. This binding causes changes in electrical potential 
and other nanoparticle properties, which can be detected and quantified.232 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
TABLE 14.1
Various types of nanoparticle-integrated biosensors employed in soil–plant systems and 
their importance
S. No.
Nanoparticle-Integrated 
Biosensor Importance in Soil–Plant Systems References
1. Carbon nanotube￾integrated biosensors.
Enhance the sensitivity of analyte detection in both soil and 
plant samples.
Monitor and detect changes in nutrient levels, pH, and stress 
markers.
Provides insights into plant well-being.
Extensive applications in detecting pesticides and 
pathogens, as well as optimizing nutrient delivery by 
assessing nutrient availability and uptake.
Gergeroglu 
et al. (2020)
El-Chaghaby and 
Rashad (2023)
Safdar et al. (2022)
2. Gold nanoparticle￾integrated biosensors.
Enhance detection sensitivity for various analytes in soil and 
plant samples.
Enhance the effectiveness and distribution of conventional 
plant protection methods, such as fungicides and 
bactericides.
Promote plant growth, improve stress tolerance, and 
enhance plant resistance against diseases.
Kulabhusan 
et al. (2022)
Goyal et al. (2024)
3. Silver nanoparticle￾integrated biosensors.
Improve soil quality by regulating plant growth, disease 
resistance, and nutrient availability.
Contribute to sustainable farming practices.
Enhance plant growth, stress tolerance, and overall health, 
making plants more resilient to diseases.
Anjum et al. (2013)
4. Zinc oxide nanoparticle￾integrated biosensors.
Effective tools for monitoring soil quality and plant health.
Detect alterations in soil parameters, contributing to 
sustainable agricultural practices.
Thounaojam et al. 
(2021)
5. Graphene oxide 
nanoparticle-integrated 
biosensors.
Significantly improve sensitivity for detecting various 
analytes in soil and plant samples.
Applications in early disease detection and pathogen 
identification.
Suvarnaphaet and 
Pechprasarn (2017)
6. Graphene-integrated 
biosensors.
Aid in nutrient determination, phytohormone detection, and 
disease assessment.
Play a crucial role in monitoring abiotic stress.
Contribute to precision agriculture and enhanced crop 
productivity.
Suvarnaphaet and 
Pechprasarn (2017)
Chandna et al. (2022)
7. Magnetic nanoparticle￾integrated biosensors.
Help to monitor and detect various plant infections 
(bacterial, fungal, and viral), phytohormones, and abiotic 
stress.
Aid in understanding microbial interactions and nutrient 
cycling.
Mohamed et al. (2019)
8. Quantum dot-integrated 
biosensors.
Allow the real-time assessment of soil quality and plant 
health.
Enhance sensitivity for detecting various analytes in soil and 
plant samples.
Detect changes in DNA, proteins, enzymes, and 
microRNAs, providing crucial insights for sustainable 
agriculture.
El-Chaghaby and 
Rashad (2023)Role of Nanoparticle-Integrated Biosensors in Soil–Plant Systems 233
14.4.2  Detecting Soil Contaminants (Heavy Metals and Pesticides)
Nanoparticle-integrated biosensors can detect a variety of soil contaminants, such as heavy metals 
and pesticides, with high sensitivity and specificity.
For the detection of heavy metals, like lead and cadmium, nanoparticles such as quantum dots 
are used. These nanoparticles are coated with molecules that have high affinities for specific metals. 
When heavy metals bind to these molecules, they cause fluorescence changes in the quantum dots, 
which are measured using detectors.
Pesticides/pesticide residues are detected by nanoparticles conjugated with antibodies or enzymes, 
which are specific to the target pesticide. The interactions between pesticides and nanoparticle 
complexes lead to changes in optical and electrochemical properties.
14.4.3  Assessing Soil Microbial Activity
Nanoparticle-integrated biosensors can assess soil microbial activity by detecting the presence of 
microbial metabolites or changes in microbial communities.
These biosensors can be used to measure specific enzymes or gases produced by soil microbes. 
For example, nanoparticles can enhance the detection of soil respiration, a measure of microbial 
activity, by increasing the sensitivity of CO2
 detection.
14.4.4  Monitoring Plant Physiological Parameters (pH and Moisture Content)
The health and growth of plants are directly related to the pH and moisture contents of the soil.
Nanoparticles, such as zinc oxide nanoparticles, are used to create pH-sensitive biosensors. 
These can detect the changes in soil pH and alter the electrochemical properties of the nanoparticles 
present in the biosensors, which are measured using specific devices.
Nanoparticle-integrated biosensors can measure soil moisture content by detecting changes in the 
dielectric properties of soil. For this, nanomaterials like graphene are employed due to their elec￾trical conductivity, which varies with moisture levels.
14.4.5  Detecting Plant Diseases and Pathogens
Nanoparticle-integrated biosensors offer the potential for the early detection of plant diseases and 
pathogens by recognizing specific biomarkers or genetic materials associated with diseases.
Biosensors can be designed to detect enzymes and other molecules that are indicative of plant 
stress or disease. Nanoparticles in these biosensors amplify specific signals, allowing for early 
detection.
Nanoparticles can also be used to detect specific DNA or RNA sequences that are present in 
pathogens. Techniques like nanoparticle-enhanced PCR can amplify the presence of pathogen gen￾etic materials for early diagnosis.
14.4.6 Precision Agriculture and Sustainable Farming Practices
Nanoparticle-integrated biosensors play a crucial role in precision agriculture and sustainable farming 
by providing detailed, real-time data that can guide decision-making. For example, biosensors can 
help to optimize the use of fertilizers and water by providing precise measurements of soil nutrients 
and moisture. By reducing the overuse of fertilizers and pesticides, these biosensors contribute to 
decreasing the environmental impact of farming operations. Additionally, real-time monitoring and 
early disease detection lead to more efficient farm management practices and potentially higher 
yields with lower input costs.234 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
14.5 CHALLENGES AND LIMITATIONS
14.5.1  Challenges
Nanoparticle-integrated biosensors offer promising avenues for monitoring environmental 
conditions, detecting pathogens, and assessing nutrient levels in soil–plant systems. However, their 
implementation faces challenges and limitations. Here are some of the key challenges:
• Due to the heterogeneous nature of soil, it is difficult for nanoparticle-integrated biosensors 
to consistently detect target analytes due to variations in soil composition across different 
locations and depths.
• The presence of various substances (like humic acids, minerals, and other organic compounds) 
in soil can interfere with the detection capabilities of biosensors. These substances may bind 
to nanoparticles or analytes, hindering accurate identification and quantification.
• The accumulation of biological materials on the surface of biosensors can significantly reduce 
their sensitivity and selectivity.
• The presence of competing ions and molecules can reduce the sensitivity of nanoparticle￾integrated biosensors.
• High selectivity is crucial for distinguishing specific target analytes from other similar 
substances present in soil. Cross-reactivity and the non-specific binding of substances com￾promise the high selectivity of biosensors.
• Environmental conditions, such as temperature, pH, and humidity, can affect the stability and 
longevity of nanoparticle-integrated biosensors.
• The attachment of biosensors to plants without hindering their growth or causing physical 
damage is difficult. The development of non-invasive, biocompatible biosensors is crucial for 
their successful integration into plant systems.
• Some nanoparticles used in biosensors can be toxic to plants, affecting their growth, develop￾ment, and overall health.
• Researchers do not yet fully understand the long-term effects of nanoparticles on plant physi￾ology and soil microbiomes.
14.5.2  Limitations
As there are benefits of nanoparticle-integrated biosensors in soil–plant systems, there are also some 
limitations, such as:
• Costs
The synthesis and functionalization of nanoparticles are costly, limiting the widespread 
adoption of nanoparticle-integrated biosensors.
• Interference
Nanoparticles may interact with soil components, affecting biosensor accuracy. Additionally, 
the non-specific binding of nanoparticles to soil components or other organic matter may lead 
to false positive results or reduced biosensor accuracy.
• Environmental Stability
Nanoparticles undergo aggregation or degradation in complex soil environments, affecting the 
stability and performance of biosensors over time (Naresh and Lee 2021).
• Standardization
The lack of standardized protocols for nanoparticle-integrated biosensors hinders their wide￾spread adoption.
• Regulatory Approval
Regulatory approval processes for nanoparticle-integrated biosensors are complex due to their 
potential environmental impact and human health concerns.Role of Nanoparticle-Integrated Biosensors in Soil–Plant Systems 235
• Durability
Ensuring the stability and durability of biosensors in varying soil conditions is a challenge.
• Complexity
The design and fabrication of nanoparticle-integrated biosensors is complex and requires 
specialized knowledge (Sandulescu et al., 2015).
14.6 CONCLUSION
Incorporating biosensors into plant systems can transform farming methods by delivering precise, 
real-time data that are necessary for effective resource management and early disease diagnosis. 
Because of the special characteristics of nanomaterials, biosensors that incorporate nanoparticles 
have become extremely effective instruments. To increase the sensitivity and selectivity of 
biosensors for use in soil–plant applications, a variety of nanomaterials have been widely used, 
including graphene, gold nanoparticles, and quantum dots. These nanoparticle-integrated biosensors 
have a wide range of significant applications in soil–plant systems. They make it possible to measure 
vital plant physiological parameters, detect pollutants, monitor soil nutrients, and evaluate microbial 
activity. Furthermore, they enhance resource management, reduce negative environmental effects, 
and boost overall farming operation efficiency, which support precision agriculture and sustainable 
farming.
However, nanoparticle-integrated biosensors have several drawbacks and difficulties, despite their 
enormous promise. The potential toxicity of nanoparticles to plants and soil organisms is a major 
worry since it raises questions about the long-term ecological effects of these particles. Concerns 
like sensor scalability, repeatability, and stability must also be resolved to guarantee dependable 
and widespread adoption. Moreover, the intricacies of soil–plant systems pose technological diffi￾culties for the design and implementation of biosensors, calling for cross-disciplinary cooperation 
and creative solutions. Even though there are still obstacles to overcome, more research and devel￾opment efforts may lead to the realization of the full potential of nanoparticle-integrated biosensors 
in improving soil–plant systems and guaranteeing global food security in the face of increasing 
environmental stress.
REFERENCES
Abdel-Karim, Randa. “Nanotechnology-enabled biosensors: A review of fundamentals, materials, applications, 
challenges, and future scope.” Biomedical Materials & Devices (January 17, 2024). https://doi.org/
10.1007/s44174-023-00147-z
Ahmed, Faheem, Sourabh Dwivedi, Nagih M. Shaalan, Shalendra Kumar, Nishat Arshi, Adil Alshoaibi, and 
Fohad Mabood Husain. “Development of selenium nanoparticle based agriculture sensor for heavy metal 
toxicity detection.” Agriculture 10, no. 12 (2020): 610. https://doi.org/10.3390/agriculture10120610
Ajdary, Marziyeh, Mohammad Moosavi, Marveh Rahmati, Mojtaba Falahati, Mohammad Mahboubi, Ali 
Mandegary, Saranaz Jangjoo, Reza Mohammadinejad, and Rajender Varma. “Health concerns of 
various nanoparticles: A review of their in vitro and in vivo toxicity.” Nanomaterials 8, no. 9 (August 21, 
2018): 634. https://doi.org/10.3390/nano8090634
Ali, Muhammad Azam, Iqra Rehman, Adnan Iqbal, S. Din, Abdul Qayyum Rao, Ayesha Latif, Tahir 
Rehman Samiullah, Saira Azam, and Tayyab Husnain. Nanotechnology, a new frontier in agriculture. 
Advancements in Life Sciences 1 (2014): 129–38.
Ali, Qurban, Sunny Ahmar, Muhammad Aamir Sohail, Muhammad Kamran, Mohsin Ali, Muhammad Hamzah 
Saleem, Muhammad Rizwan et al. “Research advances and applications of biosensing technology for 
the diagnosis of pathogens in sustainable agriculture.” Environmental Science and Pollution Research 28 
(2021): 9002–19. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-021-12419-6
Alvarado, Katherine, Mónica Bolaños, Carmen Camacho, Elías Quesada, and José Vega-Baudrit. 
“Nanobiotechnology in agricultural sector: Overview and novel applications.” Journal of Biomaterials 
and Nanobiotechnology 10, no. 02 (2019): 120–41. https://doi.org/10.4236/jbnb.2019.102007236 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
Anjum, Naser A., Sarvajeet S. Gill, Armando C. Duarte, Eduarda Pereira, and Iqbal Ahmad. “Silver nanoparticles 
in soil–plant systems.” Journal of Nanoparticle Research 15 (2013): 1–26. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11
051-013-1896-7
Anu Mary Ealia, S., and M. P. Saravanakumar. “A review on the classification, characterisation, synthesis of 
nanoparticles and their application.” IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering 263 
(November 2017): 032019. https://doi.org/10.1088/1757-899x/263/3/032019
Bao, Jing, Changjun Hou, Mei Chen, Junjie Li, Danqun Huo, Mei Yang, Xiaogang Luo, and Yu Lei. 
“Plant esterase–chitosan/gold nanoparticles–graphene nanosheet composite-based biosensor for the 
ultrasensitive detection of organophosphate pesticides.” Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 63, 
no. 47 (2015): 10319–26. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jafc.5b03971
Bhalla, Nikhil, Pawan Jolly, Nello Formisano, and Pedro Estrela. “Introduction to biosensors.” Essays in 
Biochemistry 60, no. 1 (June 30, 2016): 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1042/ebc20150001
Cassiani, Giorgio, Jacopo Boaga, Daniela Vanella, Maria Teresa Perri, and Simona Consoli. “Monitoring 
and modelling of soil–plant interactions: The joint use of ERT, sap flow and eddy covariance data to 
characterize the volume of an orange tree root zone.” Hydrology and Earth System Sciences 19, no. 5 
(2015): 2213–25. https://doi.org/10.5194/hess-19-2213-2015
Cavalcanti, Adriano, Bijan Shirinzadeh, Mingjun Zhang, and Luiz Kretly. “Nanorobot hardware architecture 
for medical defense.” Sensors 8, no. 5 (May 6, 2008): 2932–58. https://doi.org/10.3390/s8052932
Chandna, Sanjam, Kunal Gogde, Ravneet Kaur, Varsha Sagar, and Jayeeta Bhaumik. “Nano-biosensors for 
plant biomass: Concept and applications.” In In Rajput, V. D., Verma, K. K., Sharma, N., & Minkina, T. 
(eds) The Role of Nanoparticles in Plant Nutrition under Soil Pollution: Sustainable Plant Nutrition in 
a Changing World. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2022. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-
97389-6_9
Chiranjeeb, Kumar, Rout B. M. Rajani, and D. Singh. “Nano biosensors and its applications in agriculture.” 
Agriblossom 1, no. 10 (2021): 21–32.
Cormode, David P., Torjus Skajaa, Zahi A. Fayad, and Willem J. M. Mulder. “Nanotechnology in medical 
imaging.” Arteriosclerosis, Thrombosis, and Vascular Biology 29, no. 7 (July 2009): 992–1000. https://
doi.org/10.1161/atvbaha.108.165506
De Almeida, Gabriele Silva, Rodnei Rizzo, Merilyn Taynara Accorsi Amorim, Natasha Valadares Dos Santos, 
Jorge Tadeu Fim Rosas, Lucas Rabelo Campos, Nícolas Augusto Rosin, André Vinicius Zabini, and 
José A. M. Demattê. “Monitoring soil–plant interactions and maize yield by satellite vegetation indexes, 
soil electrical conductivity and management zones.” Precision Agriculture 24, no. 4 (2023): 1380–400. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11119-023-09994-8
Dyussembayev, Kazbek, Prabhakaran Sambasivam, Ido Bar, Jeremy C. Brownlie, Muhammad J. A. Shiddiky, 
and Rebecca Ford. “Biosensor technologies for early detection and quantification of plant pathogens.” 
Frontiers in Chemistry 9 (June 2, 2021). https://doi.org/10.3389/fchem.2021.636245
El-Chaghaby, Ghadir Aly, and Sayed Rashad. “Nanosensors in agriculture: Applications, prospects, and 
challenges.” Handbook of Nanosensors: Materials and Technological Applications (2023): 1–29. https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-16338-8_52-1
Gergeroglu, Hazal, Serdar Yildirim, and Mehmet Faruk Ebeoglugil. “Nano-carbons in biosensor applications: An 
overview of carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and fullerenes (C60).” SN Applied Sciences 2, no. 4 (2020): 603. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s42452-020-2404-1
Giraldo, Juan Pablo, and Sebastian Kruss. “Nanosensors for monitoring plant health.” Nature Nanotechnology
18, no. 2 (January 6, 2023): 107–8. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41565-022-01307-w
Goyal, Urvashi, Kundan Kumar Chaubey, S. D. Pandey, Deepak Kumar Verma, Archana Bachheti, and Rakesh 
Kumar Bachheti. “Role of gold nanoparticles in plant protection against pathogen.” In Bachheti, R.K., 
Bachheti, A., & Husen, A. (eds) Metal and Metal-Oxide Based Nanomaterials. Smart Nanomaterials 
Technology. Singapore: Springer Nature Singapore, 2024. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-99-
7673-7_10
Hawkins, Anna P., and Kerri M. Crawford. “Interactions between plants and soil microbes may alter the relative 
importance of intraspecific and interspecific plant competition in a changing climate.” AoB Plants 10, 
no. 4 (2018): ply039. https://doi.org/10.1093/aobpla/ply039
Kulabhusan, Prabir Kumar, Anugrah Tripathi, and Krishna Kant. “Gold nanoparticles and plant pathogens: An 
overview and prospective for biosensing in forestry.” Sensors 22, no. 3 (2022): 1259. https://doi.org/
10.3390/s22031259Role of Nanoparticle-Integrated Biosensors in Soil–Plant Systems 237
Lau, Han Yih, Haoqi Wu, Eugene J. H. Wee, Matt Trau, Yuling Wang, and Jose R. Botella. “Specific and 
sensitive isothermal electrochemical biosensor for plant pathogen DNA detection with colloidal gold 
nanoparticles as probes.” Scientific Reports 7, no. 1 (2017): 38896. https://doi.org/10.1038/srep38896
Mandal, Nintu, Samrat Adhikary, and Rajiv Rakshit. “Nanobiosensors: Recent developments in soil health 
assessment.” Soil Analysis: Recent Trends and Applications (2020): 285–304. https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-981-15-2039-6_15
Medrano-Lopez, Jael Abigail, Isaela Villalpando, Ma Isabel Salazar, and Carlos Torres-Torres. “Hierarchical 
nanobiosensors at the end of the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic.” Biosensors 14, no. 2 (February 18, 2024): 108. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/bios14020108
Mehndiratta, Poorva, Arushi Jain, Sudha Srivastava, and Nidhi Gupta. “Environmental pollution and nano￾technology.” Environment and Pollution 2, no. 2 (March 13, 2013). https://doi.org/10.5539/ep.v2n2p49
Mohamed, Mohamed A., Abd El-Moez A. Mohamed, and Kamel A. Abd-Elsalam. “Magnetic nanoparticles 
in plant protection: Promises and risks.” Magnetic Nanostructures: Environmental and Agricultural 
Applications (2019): 225–46. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-16439-3_12
Mohammad-Razdari, Ayat, David Rousseau, Adel Bakhshipour, Stephen Taylor, Jorge Poveda, and Hassan 
Kiani. “Recent advances in E-monitoring of plant diseases.” Biosensors and Bioelectronics 201 
(2022): 113953. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bios.2021.113953
Mufamadi, M. S., and P. R. Sekhejane. “Nanomaterial-based biosensors in agriculture application and acces￾sibility in rural smallholding farms: Food security.” Nanotechnology (2017): 263–78. https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-981-10-4573-8_12
Naresh, Varnakavi., and Nohyun Lee. “A review on biosensors and recent development of nanostructured 
materials-enabled biosensors.” Sensors 21, no. 4 (February 5, 2021): 1109. https://doi.org/10.3390/
s21041109
Qu, Jia-Huan, Qingyi Wei, and Da-Wen Sun. “Carbon dots: Principles and their applications in food quality and 
safety detection.” Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition 58, no. 14 (March 6, 2018): 2466–75. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/10408398.2018.1437712.
Rupesh, K., R. Sinha, and K. V. Ramesh. “Introduction of nano-biosensor in agriculture sector.” International 
Journal of Modern Agriculture 10, no. 2 (2021): 1063–70.
Sabir, Sidra, Muhammad Arshad, and Sunbal Khalil Chaudhari. “Zinc oxide nanoparticles for revolutionizing 
agriculture: Synthesis and applications.” The Scientific World Journal 2014 (2014). https://doi.org/
10.1155/2014/925494
Safdar, Mahpara, Woochan Kim, Sunho Park, Yonghyun Gwon, Yeon-Ok Kim, and Jangho Kim. “Engineering 
plants with carbon nanotubes: A sustainable agriculture approach.” Journal of Nanobiotechnology 20, 
no. 1 (2022): 275. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12951-022-01483-w
Sandulescu, Robert, Mihaela Tertis, Cecilia Cristea, and Ede Bodoki. “New materials for the construction of 
electrochemical biosensors.” Biosensors – Micro and Nanoscale Applications (September 24, 2015). 
https://doi.org/10.5772/60510
Sembada, Anca Awal, and I. Wuled Lenggoro. “Transport of nanoparticles into plants and their detection 
methods.” Nanomaterials 14, no. 2 (January 5, 2024): 131. https://doi.org/10.3390/nano14020131
Servin, Aila D., and Jason C. White. “Nanotechnology in agriculture: Next steps for understanding 
engineered nanoparticle exposure and risk.” NanoImpact 1 (2016): 9–12. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.imp
act.2015.12.002
Sharon, Madhuri, Ajoy Kr Choudhary, and Rohit Kumar. “Nanotechnology in agricultural diseases and food 
safety.” Journal of Phytology 2, no. 4 (2010).
Suvarnaphaet, Phitsini, and Suejit Pechprasarn. “Graphene-based materials for biosensors: A review.” Sensors
17, no. 10 (2017): 2161. https://doi.org/10.3390/s17102161
Tessaro, Leticia, Adriano Aquino, Paloma de Almeida Rodrigues, Nirav Joshi, Rafaela Gomes Ferrari, and 
Carlos Adam Conte-Junior. “Nucleic acid-based nanobiosensor (NAB) used for Salmonella detection 
in foods: A systematic review.” Nanomaterials 12, no. 5 (2022): 821. https://doi.org/10.3390/nano1
2050821
Thakur, Meenu, Bo Wang, and Madan L. Verma. “Development and applications of nanobiosensors for sustain￾able agricultural and food industries: Recent developments, challenges and perspectives.” Environmental 
Technology & Innovation 26 (2022): 102371. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eti.2022.102371
Thounaojam, Thorny Chanu, Thounaojam Thomas Meetei, Yumnam Bijilaxmi Devi, Sanjib Kumar Panda, 
and Hrishikesh Upadhyaya. “Zinc oxide nanoparticles (ZnO-NPs): A promising nanoparticle in 238 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
renovating plant science.” Acta Physiologiae Plantarum 43 (2021): 1–21. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11
738-021-03307-0
Velasco-Garcia, M. N. “Optical biosensors for probing at the cellular level: A review of recent progress and 
future prospects.” Seminars in Cell & Developmental Biology 20, no. 1 (February 2009): 27–33. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.semcdb.2009.01.013
Verma, Madan L., and Varsha Rani. “Biosensors for toxic metals, polychlorinated biphenyls, bio￾logical oxygen demand, endocrine disruptors, hormones, dioxin, phenolic and organophosphorus 
compounds: A review.” Environmental Chemistry Letters 19, no. 2 (2021): 1657–66. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s10311-020-01116-4239
DOI: 10.1201/9781003477730-17 239
15 Nanoparticle-Assisted 
Abiotic Remediation of 
Contaminated Soil
Angelene Hannah Jebarani D., Nitish Venkateswarlu Mogili, 
R. A. Zerubabel Michael, Mutyala Satish, and 
Erva Rajeswara Reddy
15.1 INTRODUCTION
Soil is a vital component of our environment that has faced significant contamination due to the 
surge in anthropogenic activity over recent decades. In contrast to other ecological sustaining 
resources, such as water and air, soil serves as a sink for many polluting components, prolonging 
their existence in the environment. A few categories of contaminants are predictably encountered 
in contaminated soil and their exposure presents significant threat to human health, agriculture, and 
the well-being of ecosystems. This is because contaminating elements in soil that are introduced by 
means of either simple deposition on the soil surface or sedimentation, typically from run-off, com￾post, or supplementary nourishment, get biomagnified. Farming practices on polluted soil often lead 
to the accumulation of toxins in harvests, which, when consumed, disrupt normal bodily functions, 
causing adverse health effects in humans and other living things. Therefore, the remediation of 
contaminated soil is considered to be immediate environmental concern (Srivastava et al. 2011, Saha 
et al. 2017, Ganie et al. 2021).
New technologies are being developed and applied for the remediation of environmental 
components, such as air, soil, and water. These technologies possess several properties that are non￾contaminating and highly effective. A few of the remediation techniques for minimizing pollution 
that have become available include adsorption, biological methods, coagulation, electrochemistry, 
filtration, flocculation, incineration, ion exchange, precipitation, and reverse osmosis. However, 
these well-known techniques each have their own limits and disadvantages, such as high sewage 
sludge outcomes, low contaminant removal rates, the production of hazardous by-products, and the 
adjunct of further toxic chemical substances into ecosystems. In recent decades, nanotechnology has 
gained significant momentum due to the increased production of nanomaterials and their distinctive 
characteristics.
Nanomaterial-assisted remediation employs functional nanomaterials for the remediation of 
contaminated soil. It addresses the need to restore environmental balance by effectively removing 
soil contaminants. Conventional methods of remediation often come with drawbacks, like high 
costs and the generation of toxic chemical sludge, which is environmentally unfriendly to dis￾pose of or treat. Nanomaterial utilization for remediation is a promising and sustainable approach. 
Nanomaterials possess excellent attributes, such as large surface area to volume ratios, which 
enhance their adsorption capacity, detection sensitivity of contaminants at trace levels, and catalytic 
properties that facilitate the degradation of contaminants. Nanomaterial-assisted remediation can be 
applied in situ and decreases the overall costs associated with the cleanup of contaminated soil on a 240 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
large scale (Rabbani et al. 2016, Ganie et al. 2021). In this chapter, a brief overview of the types of 
contaminants in soil (organic and inorganic pollutants, heavy metals, metalloids, hydrocarbons, and 
microplastics), the various mechanisms involved in nanomaterial-based remediation, and the subse￾quent fate of engineered nanomaterials used in soil remediation are discussed.
15.2 POLLUTANTS IN CONTAMINATED SOIL
The major sources of soil contaminants include (i) trace element deposition in soil by natural 
incidents, such as volcanic eruptions, weathering, and forest fires; (ii) the overexploitation of cul￾tivable land resources by unregulated agricultural practices; (iii) extensive excavation and smeltery; 
and (iv) the improper disposal of chemical waste and incineration (Lombi, Wenzel and Adriano 
1998). The generic forms of environmental pollutants that are typically present in soil ecosystems 
are reviewed in the following sections.
15.2.1  Inorganic Pollutants (IPs)
Trace inorganic elements occur naturally in the environment in negligible amounts and are also 
considered to be essential micronutrients for plant growth. However, amplified levels of inorganic 
pollutants have been a primary environmental concern for many years due to their toxicity and ten￾dency for bioaccumulation, even at lower concentrations (Forjan et al. 2017). IPs in the environment 
are primarily segregated into two components: heavy metals and metalloids.
Metallic elements with atomic densities greater than 600 g/dL, such as cadmium, lead, mercury, 
chromium, and nickel, are classified as heavy metals. Heavy metal concentrations in soil matrices 
increase due to natural enrichment (weathering, volcanic eruptions, etc.) or anthropogenic activity 
(industry, agriculture, etc.). In particular, activities related to extensive mining result in grave 
geochemical alterations due to the leaching of elevated levels of heavy metals into nearby water 
sources, as well as their deposition in agricultural soil and bioaccumulation in crops (Chon, Lee and 
Lee 2011).
The deposition of heavy metals in terrestrial environments lowers soil quality, threatening 
farming activities and food production. However, owing to the lack of functional farmlands, the 
use of heavy metal-contaminated lands is not uncommon. For example, metal concentrations 
in grains and leafy vegetables grown in the artisanal mining lands of Chinese villages have 
been found to exceed tolerance levels. Further, the flow of metallic pollutants throughout the 
food chain naturally puts the lifeforms in individual ecosystems at risk, including humans (Xiao 
et al. 2017).
The term metalloid is used to distinguish components that display the physical and chemical prop￾erties of both metals and non-metals. Six elements in the periodic table are commonly categorized 
as metalloids, including antimony, arsenic, boron, germanium, tellurium, and silicon. The naturally 
occurring levels of such elements in the environment have increased over the years as a result of 
industrial advances. The incidence of metalloids at various levels in the environment affects entire 
ecosystems, including microbial species, plants, animals, and humans, thereby disrupting the func￾tionality of the natural world (Rajput et al. 2022).
For example, sedimented arsenic-induced toxicity in microalgal genera, both freshwater and 
marine, has been documented. Inorganic trivalent (As3+) and pentavalent (As5+) arsenic in algae 
are mediated by specific proteins set in the algal plasma membrane. In the presence of signifi￾cant levels of As5+, reactive oxygen species (ROS) levels in Chlamydomonas reinhartii have been 
shown to be elevated, while superoxide measures increase in Chlamydomonas acidophila in the 
presence of As3+. The accumulation of ROS, in turn, modulates the biosynthesis of metabolites 
and can severely damage cellular organelles that are involved in energy generation (De Francisco 
et al. 2021).Nanoparticle-Assisted Abiotic Remediation of Contaminated Soil 241
15.2.2 Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs)
POPs are a distinguished class of chemicals that are retained in the environment for longer 
periods of time than others. Some properties of POPs include (i) semi-volatility, i.e., they can 
be mobilized over long ranges via the atmosphere; (ii) lipophilicity, i.e., they can bioaccumulate 
in fatty masses; (iii) pervasive existence, i.e., they occur even in remote regions without human￾triggered endeavours; and (iv) toxicity, i.e., they are perilous to living organisms (Hayat et al. 
2010). Typically, POPs can be classified as organochlorine derivatives, hydrocarbon clusters, and 
microplastics.
Organochlorines are, more often than not, released into soil via the use of certain classes of 
chemical derivatives used by agriculturalists to promote crop growth. As a rule, this class of POPs 
is particularly persistent in the environment, even with the restricted use of such chemicals, which 
bioaccumulate in fat-rich eatables, such as fish, dairy, and meat. Sometimes, these compounds (or 
their derivatives) can be translocated to the foetus via the placenta or made available to newborns 
via breast milk. These POPs have demonstrated a spectrum of health risks in humans, including 
neurotoxicity, teratogenicity, carcinogenicity, and endocrine disruption (Wikoff, Fitzgerald and 
Birnbaum 2012).
In a 2019 study, soil samples from Kenya were shown to retain organochlorines such as hexa￾chloro cyclohexane and di-chloro diphenyl trichloroethane. Additionally, the incremental lifetime 
cancer risk assessment values indicated that their odds of jeopardizing human health were high 
(Mungai and Wang 2019).
Since the 19th century, environmental soil pollution resulting from complex fossil fuel-derived 
hydrocarbons has been a common occurrence. In particular, recalcitrant high molecular weight 
polyaromatics (commonly abbreviated as PAHs) have been extensively persistent. Blumer (1961) 
was the first to report the incidence of PAHs in soil matrices, which are thought to be dumped from 
the atmosphere in varying levels depending on the ecological conditions and transformations under￾gone from the point of release to the site of deposition. Structurally, PAHs consist of a framework of 
fused benzene rings, with more than 100 configurations. The stability of PAHs varies according to the 
number of fused rings and relates inversely to their water solubility and hydrophilic characteristics 
(Wilcke 2000; Vandera and Koukkou 2017).
The tendency of PAHs to bioaccumulate raises ecotoxicological concerns. Soil invertebrates, 
primitive aquatic species, and birds respond to the toxic effects of PAHs in the form of photooxidative 
responses, especially in the presence of ultraviolet radiation and related metabolic anomalies, 
resulting in tumours, tapered spawning, and decreased growth. PAHs also have teratogenic, carcino￾genic, and mutagenic effects on humans. In the case of plants, PAHs in soil are taken up by the roots 
and translocated to different plant components (Abdel-Shafy and Mansour 2016).
The term microplastic came into existence in 2004, when a marine ecologist called Dr Richard 
Thompson used it to define tiny plastic rubble in the environment. Due to the increased use of plastic￾based merchandise, microplastics originating from the fragmentation of plastic materials is a major 
source of pollution in terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems. Investigational reports on microplastics 
have established that the time taken for them to degrade in soil environments is considerably longer 
than other environments (Monkul and Özhan 2021).
Microplastics (MPs) have become a burning issue and present a fascinating field of research 
regarding their potential hazards, routes into ecosystems, and final environmental destinations (Van 
den Berg et al. 2020). The buildup of microplastics in land resources triggers instability in the 
physical and chemical characteristics of soil. Moreover, it impacts other ecological components, 
including the growth and procreation of wildlife, plant development, and microbial activity. Soil 
invertebrates interacting with microplastics may lose their mobility or suffer oesophageal damage or 
analogous hitches due to the unintended ingestion of MP debris (Wang et al. 2022). The increasing 
amounts of accumulated MPs in field soil can cause negative impacts on crop production (Qi et al. 242 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
2018). For example, they demolish soil organizational structures, modify the physicochemical 
characteristics of soil, and change nutrient mobility and moisture diffusion, as well as diminishing 
the accessibility of nutrients, modifying microbial activity, disturbing crop growth, reducing seed 
germination root growth, and increasing greenhouse gas emissions (Ibarra et al. 2015). MPs affect 
the physical characteristics of soil, like its formation and water retaining capacity, as well as affecting 
organisms that are present in soil (Fei et al. 2020a, 2020b; Cheng et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2014a, 2014b, 
2014c). Astonishingly, many studies have shown that MPs help to transport hazardous chemical 
contaminants into soil matrices (Chua 2014; Avio et al. 2015). The subsequent distribution of MPs 
into the inner layers of soil allows them to mix with other contaminants, including POPs, pesticides, 
and heavy metals, leading to increased toxic impacts on soil fauna and flora.
15.2.3 Soil Acidification
Soil acidification is affected by several factors, including acidic precipitation and the accumula￾tion of acid-forming gases from the atmosphere, like ammonia, nitric acid and sulphur dioxide. An 
exceptionally important factor in soil acidification on farmland is the usage of urea, ammonium￾based fertilizers, and sulphur fertilizers, as well as the growth of legumes. Acidification leads to 
the deterioration of base cations, rises in aluminium saturation, and decreases in crop productivity. 
Serious acidification can lead to unrecoverable clay mineral suspension and a decrease in cation 
exchange capacity, accompanied by structural degradation (Goulding, 2016).
15.3 RESOURCING USEFUL NANOMATERIALS FROM WASTE LANDFILLS
The crisis of non-biodegradable plastic waste has been continually increasing over recent years. The 
strategies employed to cope with plastic waste, for example, landfills and recycling, have their own 
hassles, such as the scarcity of land, and have led to unfavourable outcomes, such as the pollution of 
air, water, and land. Additionally, toxic seepage from landfills blocks waterflows and obstructs plant 
root development, which disturbs the fertility and natural composition of soil. Plastic production and 
even plastic recycling and decomposition techniques emit dangerous chemicals, which contaminate 
air, water, and soil and sooner or later end up in the food chain. It takes more than 300 years for 
plastic waste to disintegrate.
The fame that comes with finding solutions to plastic waste has motivated many scientists to 
search for new approaches to manage it. Waste plastic, such as polypropylene, contains 85% carbon 
and the rest is hydrogen. This makes them ideal for feedstock recycling, which can produce valu￾able hydrocarbon products. There are two obvious benefits of using plastics as carbon precursors 
for the synthesis of carbon nanotubes (CNTs): plastics can be converted into particularly valuable 
CNTs and it effectively reuses waste plastic. The conversion of polyolefins into CNTs appears to 
be preferred over the direct consumption of ethane, propane, and other compounds from petroleum 
sources.
It has been hypothesized that the shells of plastic pellets become softer over time and can attract 
and adhere to a number of particles in soil as the polymers become infused by heated reactors. 
Accordingly, this results in the pellets developing a central compacted polymer structure that is 
covered with soil particles on the outer surface. Further, as the temperature of the reactor increases, 
the surface of the pellets liquifies, allowing the polymers to flow and form a homogeneous coating 
that seals off peripheral shell materials. Once the soil particles are completely covered by the 
coating, the polymers break down and produce nanotubes and nanofibers with diameters in the range 
of 10 nm to 150 nm on the shielding layers (Arena et al. 2006).
Attempts to produce CNTs from plastic have been carried out by Kukovitskii et al. (1997) and 
Chemozatonskii et al. (1998). In those studies, curved CNTs with diameters in the range of 20 nm 
to 60 nm were fabricated at a temperature of 800°C. Granular polyethylene (PE) was pyrolyzed Nanoparticle-Assisted Abiotic Remediation of Contaminated Soil 243
over a nickel plate in a quartz tube with PE and gaseous helium at a pressure of 4 bar. Kukovitskii 
et al. (1997) used temperatures in the range of 420°C to 450°C, which produced crooked CNTs 
with diameters of 10 nm to 40 nm, along with large amount of amorphous carbon. Chemozatonskii 
et al. (1998) synthesized CNTs with diameters in the range of 20 nm to 40 nm. They established 
that these CNTs were effective electron and photon emitters that were suitable for electrical and 
optical technologies. Chung and Jou (2005) converted polyethylene into CNTs via the pyrolysis of 
polyethylene with iron nanoparticles and p-xylene under vacuum conditions. They produced CNTs 
with an average diameter of 17 nm. The formation of multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) 
was obtained at 900°C. At a temperature of 700°C, CNTs with diameters in the range of 16.5 nm 
to 40 nm were obtained. Yang et al. (2010) inspected the odds of constructing CNTs with ver￾tical alignments using a two-stage method involving plastic pyrolysis and chemical vapor depos￾ition (CVD).
Liu et al. (2011) worked on not only CNT production from polypropylene (PP) but also hydrogen 
(H2
) production, which is a valuable by-product in the process of synthesis. In their study, they 
reported a two-stage process of catalytic reactions to convert PP into multiwalled CNTs in the 
presence of H2
 gas. The PP was originally pyrolyzed in a screw kiln reactor with zeolite (HZSM-5) 
as a catalyst, following which molten products were condensed from the resultant vapours. In add￾ition, the pyrolysis fumes were putrefied by means of a moving bed reactor with nickel as a catalyst, 
which offered the advantage of being easily washed off using acid. An increase in the pyrolysis 
temperature resulted in a decrease in the liquid volume with a proportional increase in the generated 
gas. Methane and H2
 were the major constituents of the produced gas, followed by a small amount 
of carbon monoxide and C2-C5 alkanes. It was also noted that as the reaction temperature increased, 
the diameter of the nanotubes became narrower; for instance, at a temperature of 500°C, the nano￾tube outer diameters were found to be in the range of 10 nm to 50 nm, while at 800°C, this range 
decreased to 15 nm to 25 nm.
15.4 NANOMATERIAL-ASSISTED REMEDIATION METHODS
Nanomaterial-assisted remediation technologies make use of responsive nanoscale materials to 
reform and purify contaminated resources. Primarily, this involves the use of mechanisms such 
as adsorption, chemical reduction, and catalysis. Additionally, nanoparticles can be engineered to 
possess credible attributes, making them suitable for various practical applications. Consequently, 
they are considered to be rapid, profitable, and sustainable technologies for the remediation of 
contaminated soil (Alazaiza et al. 2021).
15.4.1 Nano-​Immobilization
The immobilization of contaminants in their original location has garnered significant global attention 
because it offers a profitable and environmentally friendly approach to remediating contaminated 
land resources (Ma et al. 2022). The choice of nanoscale materials for immobilization-based remedi￾ation varies based on the properties of the contaminants and soil. Carbon-based and metal oxide 
nanomaterials are commonly employed for immobilization remediation (Baragaño et al. 2021).
Carbon-based nanostructured objects, such as fullerenes, nanotubes, and graphene, operate as 
adsorbents in immobilization-based remediation. Interactions between the adsorbent surface and 
pollutant molecules, such as organic contaminants, are achieved utilizing Van der Waals forces or 
electrostatic π–π interactions (Zhang et al. 2022). The water-repelling surface attributes and superior 
adsorption competencies of carbon-based nanostructures boost their suitability in sequestering 
organic noxious waste from soil resources. Among others, CNTs display notable adsorption capaci￾ties for synthetic organics compared to natural organic material in soil, with high specificity towards 
ionizable complexes, such as pesticides, adsorbed via electrostatic π–π and cation-π interactions. 244 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
Additionally, CNTs have a contracted barrier surface that promotes the formation of hydrogen 
bonding with negatively charged molecules. Further, the usage of CNTs has been comprehen￾sively evaluated under a variety of conditions regarding the breakdown of a spectrum of organic 
compounds, including polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) (Lv et al. 2024). For instance, 
CNT presence in soil matrices has been shown to hinder the movement of PAHs, thereby decreasing 
their biological accessibility to crops and microbes in surrounding environments. The sorption cap￾acity of CNTs is further influenced by oxygen content, wherein hydroxyl (-OH) functionalities pro￾mote adsorption by amplifying π–π and π–OH exchanges (Qiu et al. 2023).
15.4.2 Nano-​Adsorption
Nanomaterials possess high surface areas, which make them effective adsorbents. Table 15.1 presents 
different types of nanomaterials that are used as adsorbents for contaminants. Michalkova et al. 
(2014) employed metal oxide nanoparticles for the treatment of soil contaminated with cadmium, 
copper, and lead. Iron and manganese were used as base materials for the synthesis of different types 
of metal oxide nanoparticles. Among the tested metal oxide nanoparticles, amorphous manganese 
oxide (AMO) exhibited maximum adsorption capacity, thereby decreasing the mobility of the target 
metal contaminants. AMO retained 2.24 mmol Cd/g, 0.52 mmol Cu/g, and 4.02 mmol Pb/g. Further, 
the addition of amorphous manganese oxide led to an increase in soil microbial activity due to a 
decrease in the bioavailable concentrations of metal contaminants and an increase in the availability 
of dissolved organic carbon (DOC). The increase in DOC content was attributed to soil organic 
matter dissolution caused by the strong oxidizing nature of AMO.
A study by Sirait and Manalu (2018) demonstrated the application of nanobentonite for the 
removal of the heavy metals cadmium and mercury. Laboratory experiments indicated that 
nanobentonite had the potential to achieve an adsorption efficiency of approximately 99% for both 
heavy metals. This high absorption capacity was attributed to the presence of high silica and mag￾nesium contents in the nanobentonite (prepared using HCl), which take part in the exchange of 
heavy metal cations. El-Nagar and Abdel-Halim (2021) explored the application of a nanocomposite 
made from bentonite nanosheets and hydroxyapatite nanoparticles (n-Be/HapNC) for the remedi￾ation of soil contaminated with nickel, copper, and lead. The nanocomposite had a large surface 
area and contained functional groups, such as Si-O, PO43-, P-OH, and OH, which indicated its high 
exchange capacity. n-Be/HapNC was effective in the stabilization of heavy metals in soil due to its 
enhanced absorptive capability.
A study by Kuang et al. (2020) investigated the addition of TiO2
 nanoparticles to improve 
the adsorption capacity of biological soil crusts for heavy metal removal. The incorporation of 
TiO2
 nanoparticles increased the Cd2+ removal efficiency of biological soil crusts (found on soil 
surfaces and composed of diverse microflora) by 26.70% due to an increase in negative charge, 
which increased the number of adsorption sites. Further, the study revealed that TiO2
 nanoparticles 
TABLE 15.1
Nanomaterials employed for the adsorption of contaminants
Type of Nanomaterial Target Contaminants Reference
Iron Oxide Arsenate and Arsenite Shipley et al. (2011)
Zero-Valent Iron Cr and PCBs Gil-Díaz et al. (2022)
Carbon Nanotubes Pyrene Zhang et al. (2019)
Titanium Dioxide Pb, Cd, Cu, Zn, and Ni Engates and Shipley (2011)
Polymer Nanocomposites Cd and Pb Mahdavi et al. (2020)Nanoparticle-Assisted Abiotic Remediation of Contaminated Soil 245
stimulated microbes in biological soil crusts to secrete extracellular polymers with functional groups 
that were favourable for the binding of Cd2+.
Zero-valent iron (nZVI) nanomaterial has been utilized by numerous researchers for the remedi￾ation of heavy metal contamination (Li et al., 2017; Francy et al., 2020; Tarekegn et al., 2021). 
nZVI-based heavy metal removal relies on two primary mechanisms: reduction and adsorption. 
When the redox potential of target heavy metal exceeds -0.44 V (i.e., the standard redox poten￾tial of nZVI), reduction occurs alongside adsorption. On the other hand, if the redox potential of 
target heavy metals is below -0.44 V, the removal process occurs via adsorption only (Linley and 
Thomson 2021).
Gil-Díaz et al. (2022) utilized commercially available iron-based nanoparticles for the remedi￾ation of soil that was co-contaminated with heavy metal (Cr) and organic compounds (PCBs). 
Polluted soil samples from an industrial site in Spain were collected for the experiments. Among 
the nanoparticles selected for the study, nanoscale zero-valent iron (nZVI) and bimetallic nZVI-Pd 
were found to be efficient in the immobilization of Cr in soil, which involved initial adsorption on 
the surface on the nanomaterial and subsequently, toxic Cr6+ was reduced to relatively non-toxic 
Cr3+. Even though nZVI is a widely used nanomaterial for the in situ stabilization of Cr6+, it has the 
associated disadvantages of side reactions, inadequate oxidation resistance, and toxicity resulting 
from iron dissolution, which limit its application in chromium-contaminated soil (Zheng et al., 
2019; Wang et al., 2019). To address these challenges, Xie et al. (2025) utilized biochar (BC) as 
carrier and carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC) as a surface stabilizer to enhance the electron utiliza￾tion rate and suppress the side reactions associated with nZVI application. The addition of CMC/
BC modified the polycrystalline nZVI into an amorphous form, which led to a decrease in iron dis￾solution. Further, the oxidation resistance of nZVI improved. The combination of CMC, BC, and 
nZVI effectively removed more than 90% of the TCLP-Cr6+ in soil samples with both high and low 
levels of chromium.
Liang and Zhao (2014) employed starch-stabilized Fe3
O4
 nanoparticles for the remediation of 
arsenate. The nanoparticles exhibited a higher affinity for binding to arsenate compared to the soil. 
Soil column tests were conducted, which revealed that starch concentration is a key parameter in 
nanoparticle application to soil. Further, they showed that more than 93% of leachable arsenate in 
the nanoparticle-assisted form was retained by the soil.
Taha and Mobasser (2015) studied the adsorption of DDT and PCB soil contaminants. Three 
nanomaterials (multiwalled carbon nanotubes, nanoclays, and alumina nanoparticles) were 
employed for remediation. The multiwalled carbon nanotubes showed the highest adsorption of 
DDT and PCBs compared to the other tested nanomaterials. The adsorbent dosage and contact time 
were crucial factors in the enhancement of adsorption. Further, lower pH levels favoured the adsorp￾tion of these contaminants onto multiwalled carbon nanotubes.
Liu et al. (2018) synthesized a functional metal organic framework-based nanomaterial with mag￾netic multiwalled CNTs for the remediation of organophosphorus pesticides. Due to its permeative 
nature and high surface area, this nanomaterial was found to have high adsorption capacity for the 
removal of the eight different pesticides considered in the study. The adsorption data conformed to 
the Freundlich model. The mechanism for adsorption was attributed as electron sharing or exchanges 
between pesticide molecules and the vacant sites of the nanomaterial.
15.4.3 Nanocatalysis
In recent years, there has been a significant increase in interest in nanoparticle catalysis within the 
realm of green chemistry due to its augmented efficiency under gentle and ecologically pleasant 
conditions. It has been confirmed that the workability of catalytic materials is heavily dependent 
on the atomic arrangement on the exposed facets. This is because atomic arrangement directly 
impacts the adsorption of reacting molecules. Additionally, it has been observed that atoms located 246 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
at the corners and edges of these materials exhibit higher catalytic activity. This is attributed to the 
presence of more dangling bonds, which make these atoms more active in binding with reacting 
molecules (Huang et al. 2004). For nanoparticles with high surface to volume ratios, both atomic 
arrangement on the facets and the ratio of atoms at the corners and edges are influenced by the 
morphology of the particles. For example, in tetrahedrons, cuboctahedrons, and cubes with a size of 
5 nm, the proportions of atoms located at the corners and edges are 35%, 13%, and 6%, respectively. 
Consequently, the synthesis of nanoparticles with uniform morphology is of great interest to many 
researchers.
Nanocatalysis can be seen as a middle ground, bringing together homogeneous and heterogeneous 
catalysis. It also represents a central field between the domains of nanoscience and nanotechnology. 
However, the insolubility of nanoparticles in reaction solvents allows for their easy separation from 
reaction blends, which is analogous to heterogeneous catalysts. This, in turn, makes the product sep￾aration phase easier. Furthermore, the purpose and operational selectivity of nanocatalysts can be 
tailored by manipulating their physicochemical properties, such as their physical dimensions, atom 
arrangement, size, chemical constituents, and morphology. As a result, nanomaterials can synergize 
the pros of both homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysis, offering distinctive activity with high 
selectivity.
In general, the use of nanoparticles as catalysts in organic synthesis presents several advantages 
over the use of homogeneous organic catalysts. Therefore, the ultimate goal of working with 
nanoparticles is to achieve high catalytic activity, recoverability, simple product isolation, recyc￾lability, improved selectivity, and adherence to the principles of green chemistry.
Various types of nanomaterials, together with inorganic, carbon-based, and polymeric materials, 
are utilized in the resolution of environmental contamination problems. These innovative materials 
have been proven to be effective in purifying pollutants, such as high atomic weight metals, 
complex-coloured structures, chlorinated organics, organophosphorus composites, unstable organic 
mixtures, and halogenated weedkillers. The methods commonly employed to lessen the intensity of 
pollutants in environmental settings include the adsorption of toxins, the photocatalytic degradation 
of organics, and the reduction of metal ions in polluted matrices
Nanocatalysts, which are typically semiconducting materials, play a crucial role in breaking 
down both organic and heavy metal pollutants found in soil and water (Kuna et al. 2021; Chiang 
and Sankaran 2009). For instance, nanoparticles like ferric oxide (Fe₂O₃), which belong to the 
Fenton-based photocatalyst family, have been observed to enhance the rate of degradability. These 
nanocatalysts facilitate oxidation reactions when combined with hydrogen peroxide, resulting 
in the degradation of organic pollutants, even at normal room temperature and in the absence 
of ultraviolet and visible radiation (Lu and Astruc 2020). Additionally, promising results have 
been obtained from the integration of catalytic Fe₂O₃ nanoparticles/hydrogen peroxide and the 
photocatalyst graphitic carbon nitride (g-C₃N₄), which have demonstrated a significant increase in 
photo-oxidation and reduction potential for organic impurities under visible light irradiation (Zhou 
et al. 2016).
Some nanoparticles, such as titanium oxide nanoparticles, are stimulated by light energy, resulting 
in the generation of high-strength hydroxyl radicals. These radicals effectively scavenge organic 
contaminants, thereby eliminating them from the environment (Soltanabadi et al. 2018, Xiong et al. 
2021, Lee et al. 2021). Nickel ferrite nanoparticles, known for their cost-effectiveness and elevated 
efficiency in eliminating trace amounts of heavy metals, are currently being extensively investigated 
(Yu et al. 2019; Ningthoujam et al. 2021). Silica xerogels functionalized with amines and closely con -
trolled mesoporous silica have been utilized for the adsorption of gases, such as hydrogen sulphide 
and carbon dioxide (Yu et al. 2019; Ningthoujam et al. 2021). Additionally, amphiphilic polyur -
ethane nanoparticles have been specifically designed for the removal of polyaromatic hydrocarbons 
from soil, demonstrating the potential of modified nanoparticles in various environmental remedi￾ation scenarios (Yu et al. 2019; Ningthoujam et al. 2021).Nanoparticle-Assisted Abiotic Remediation of Contaminated Soil 247
Furthermore, another study highlighted the applicability of C₃N₄ as a heterogeneous photocatalyst 
for the elimination of both organic and inorganic noxious waste. C₃N₄ is advantageous due to its 
metal-free nature, wide availability, ability to be driven by visible light, and low costs (Yuan et al. 
2016). Likewise, magnetic nanoparticles have a number of potential uses in the adsorption and 
catalytic exclusion of contaminants (Usman et al. 2018). For instance, the use of polyacrylamide￾moderated magnetite nanoparticles in soil matrices has shown promising results in simultaneously 
controlling soil erosion (with a reduction of 90%) and immobilizing arsenate leaching (with 82% 
immobilization) (Zheng 2020). Pristine graphene has also been identified as a possible solution for 
the deduction of heavy chemicals, such as fluoride (Abdulkarem 2021; Mavukkandy 2022).
15.4.4 Nanosensing
In terrestrial ecosystems, unlike water or air, polluting agents are typically found in association 
with soil particles, that is, a large number of nanoparticles are inherently present in soil envir￾onments. This may be a consequence of (i) chemical weathering, for example, the formation of 
amorphous silica, clays, and oxides; (ii) redox reactions enabled by microorganisms, for example, 
bacteria-mediated redox processes resulting in the formation of zinc sulphide nanoparticles; or 
(iii) the geochemical reactivity of nanominerals, for example, goethite has nanoscale domain edges 
that selectively dissolute under acidic conditions. The nature of soil matrices, which includes indi￾vidual and interactive physical, chemical, and biological elements, further complicates contaminant 
monitoring processes. Additionally, the efficiency of monitoring processes becomes limited for two 
reasons: (i) the requirement for pollutants to be extracted from soil samples prior to analysis, the 
success of which is predominantly dependent on the extraction procedures used and (ii) limited 
access to contaminated soil as polluting elements may migrate downwards into deeper areas with 
time and become less available. Thus, in order to effectively determine the intensity of contaminants 
in soil, it is essential to design robust, inexpensive, and relatively easy to use sampling devices 
(Aelion 2004; Mani and Mondal 2016).
The advent of the sensor-based technologies has enabled the qualitative and quantitative detec￾tion of contaminating substances in environmental settings. In principle, sensors are electronic ana￾lytical devices that detect or measure changes in a given physical quantity resulting from chemical 
or biological interactions and then convert those changes into signals that are readable by the user 
for analysis. Engineered at the nanoscale, nanosensors have been shown to be highly economical 
and effective compared to their macroscale equivalents. The uniqueness of nanosensors lies with the 
natural ability of nanomaterials (existing in their regular or functionalized states) to interact with 
analyte molecules in the nanoscale dimension, resulting in better quality detection due to increased 
accuracy and sensitivity to induced changes. Some of the major advantages of nanosensors over their 
macroscale counterparts include their adaptable, size-dependent properties, which enable the detec￾tion of a spectrum of analytes; their nanoscale dimensions, which allow for low-energy operation 
and the design of miniaturized and portable devices; their surfaces, which can be functionalized to 
target specific molecules of interest (i.e., their high selectivity); their ability to detect accurately 
at low analyte concentrations (i.e., their enhanced sensitivity); and their functionality in real-time 
monitoring applications (i.e., their short response times).
In designated environmental setups, nanosensors can be designed to identify or detect (i) specific 
target molecules (metals, chemicals, etc.), (ii) biological components (microbe, enzymes, etc.), or 
(iii) environmental conditions (pH, temperature, etc.).
As a rule, these sensing devices are constructed using nanoscale elements, such as nanowires, 
nanotubes, thin films, nanoparticles, and other composite nanomaterials. The primary components 
required in the construction of nanosensors include (i) a sensor material, typically consisting of 
nanoscale elements that respond to changes occurring in the sampling environment by giving off 
interaction signals in the presence of the target analyte molecules; and (ii) a transducer element, 248 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
which detects and processes the interaction signals produced via a spectrum of transduction 
principles, such as thermal, magnetic, optical, and electric interactions, and presents them in a form 
that is suitable for analysis (Chakraborty, Kaur and Chaudary 2021, Johnson, Sajeev and Nair 2021, 
Sharma et al. 2021, Thangadurai and Manjubaashini 2021). Figure 15.1 demonstrates the general 
principles by which transformations influenced by the presence of pollutants in soil ecosystems can 
be monitored using nanosensors.
Shi et al. (2013) presented a sensitive and selective colorimetric method for the detection of the 
insecticide acetamiprid (which belongs to the chloronicotine class of insecticides) in soil samples 
using gold nanoparticles as an optical probe. An acetamiprid-binding aptamer was employed to 
bind specifically and with high affinity to the insecticide and functioned as the recognition element. 
The interactions between the aptamer adsorbed onto the surface of the nanoparticles and the subse￾quent binding of the insecticide at different concentrations with the aptamer led to different levels of 
nanoparticle aggregation, which was then conveniently quantified (Shi et al. 2013).
Shetti et al. (2019) proposed the development of a modified carbon electrode with a graph￾itic carbon nitride coating for the electrochemical sensing of aclonifen (2- chloro-6-nitro-3-
phenoxyaniline), which is a herbicide used in weed control. The degradation time of the herbicide is 
between 2 and 3 weeks. Owing to its stability in both water and soil, it accumulates on soil surfaces, 
which leads to toxicological effects. The prototype demonstrated high sensitivity and selectivity, 
with a low limit of detection (reported at 1.28 nM) in water and soil samples (Shetti et al. 2019).
Saglam et al. (2018) reported the use of molecular imprinted recognition and the detection of 
toxic energetic materials belonging to the nitroaromatics and nitramines classes, which are common 
soil and groundwater contaminants in sites of military activity. The idea of molecular imprinting/
memory techniques is to tailor sensing materials with crevices for the recognition of particular 
analytes that can complementarily bind to them. For the electrochemical detection, each electrode in 
the assembly consisted of a nitro-energetic compound memory, poly(carbazole-aniline) copolymer 
coated carbon electrode, modified with gold nanoparticles corresponding to the targeted analyte of 
interest. The corresponding limits of detection were shown to be 10–30 μg/L (Saglam et al. 2018).
Siddiqui et al. (2020) presented a sensitive, robust, and economic design of a single-probe, 
graphene oxide-based array sensor for the non-destructive analysis of soil–water (moisture) 
FIGURE 15.1 Nanomaterial-based sensor technology for monitoring soil conditions.Nanoparticle-Assisted Abiotic Remediation of Contaminated Soil 249
dynamics. At an ambient operating temperature of 25°C, the capacitive probe sensor showed a quick 
response time of 140 seconds, with a recovery time of 20 seconds. It demonstrated good stability 
and repeatability up to a soil depth of 20 cm, making it an appropriate tool for the effective manage￾ment of irrigation systems (Siddiqui et al. 2020).
15.4.5 Nanodegradation
Synthetic plastics have been widely used in a spectrum of applications, from waste disposal bags 
and industrial packaging to implantable biomedical devices. Long-chain hydrocarbons challenge 
conventional remediation strategies and require robust methods, such as biological degradation and 
photocatalysis, to achieve the complete eradication of plastic materials. The use of nanomaterials 
has shown to augment the rate of degradation of plastic waste. However, complexities relating to our 
understanding of the mechanisms involved in the degradation and the decoding of the optimal pro￾cess paraments are yet to be explored (Pandey et al. 2015; Ouyang et al. 2021). TiO2
 nanoparticles, 
iron oxide with paramagnetic natural nanomaterials, fullerene-60 nanomaterials, and nanobarium 
titanate nanoparticles are commonly used to degrade plastics.
TiO2
 is an excellent catalyst and a very prevalent semiconducting material because of its elem￾ental stability, affordability, harmlessness, and extremely photocatalytic nature (Kamat and Meisel 
2003). Its substantially reacting photogenerated holes make TiO2
 the best material for degradative 
procedures (Abreu et al. 2012). The amalgamation of TiO2
 and polystyrene has been established 
as an efficient degrading procedure compared to the common photolysis of plastic materials under 
natural conditions. Photocatalysis occurs due to the release of reactive oxygen in TiO2
 in easily 
decomposing products; nevertheless, this kind of TiO2
–polymer complex has been shown to be the 
best method for plastic decomposition (Shang et al. 2003). Polyethylene undergoes cross-linking, 
scission, and photolytic decomposition during photon absorption (Scoponi et al. 2000). The fab￾rication of an LDPE–TiO2
 nanomaterial complex has been found to effectively photodegrade 
nanocomplex films under normal sunlight conditions (Zan et al. 2006). Current techniques utilize 
dopants in polymer–TiO2
 nanocomplexes to enhance the degradation of plastic materials. Under 
visible light conditions, the photocatalytic activity of TiO2
–PS nanocomposite films is notably 
enhanced upon the inclusion of iron (II) phthalocyanine (Fa et al. 2008).
Magnetic nanomaterials containing magnetic iron oxide core or paramagnetic iron oxide 
nanoparticles are characterized by the presence of two unpaired electrons in magnetite. 
Superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles (SPIONs) have been applied in different domains, 
including magnetic fluids, drug delivery systems, microwave devices, and medicines. Usually, bac￾terial colonies are used to decompose polymers; but, when fused with SPIONs, decomposition is 
more efficient than that by bacteria alone. SPIONs, in combination with bacteria, have been observed 
to improve the bacterial decomposition capability of low-density polyethylene (LDPE) as SPIONs 
enhance bacterial growth, even in the presence of LDPE (Kapri et al. 2010).
Laboratory studies on LDPE decomposition via the application of bacterial cultures and fullerene￾60 nanomaterials demonstrated the impact of fullerene on LDPE plastic. For optimal bacterial cul￾ture growth, a concentration of 0.01% of fullerene was used. The decomposition of LDPE can be 
successfully enhanced by applying fullerene-60 nanomaterials (Sah et al. 2010).
Nanobarium titanate comprises barium and titanium oxides, with the chemical formula BaTiO2
. 
The addition of nanobarium titanate (NBT) to LDPE degradation has demonstrated the potential of 
NBT to enhance the exponential phase of bacterial cultures (Kapri et al. 2009).
15.4.6  Hybrid Technologies
Soil matrices comprise a plethora of pollutants and often, solitary remedial techniques are unsuc￾cessful. Hence, the nanomaterial-based technologies that are being applied are, by and large, 250 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
associated with one or more additional remedial measures, which may be required to promote in 
situ and ex situ cleanup efforts. In situ methods are preferred as they reduce the costs associated 
with the mining of polluted soil and its transportation to decontamination sites. Nanomaterials 
have extended the range of available technologies for in situ cleanup methods and offer numerous 
benefits, including expanding remedial measures to remote areas and fostering the breakdown of 
pollutants. For instance, nanostructures that cannot aid in the degradation of toxins can be used in 
the sequestration of contaminants via mechanisms such as adsorption, refining reactive elements, 
and intensifying concentrations, thereby promoting the in situ remediation of contamination (Zhang 
et al. 2019; Marcon et al. 2021).
Electrokinetic remediation is a conservational method that is mainly used for the removal of 
contaminants from soil resources, including deposits and muck, although it can be applied to any 
robust permeable material (Reddy and Cameselle, 2009). The remedial methodology is based on 
exposing porous contaminated media to a low-depth, direct electrical current (Acar and Alshawabkeh, 
1993). The purpose of the generated electrical field is to induce the distribution and passage of 
toxins via the porous template towards electrodes, whence they may be accumulated, extracted, 
and processed. In electrokinetic remediation, positive and negative electrodes are placed directly 
into soil and the interior cavity is filled with a suitable fluid medium, such as water, to promote the 
decontamination process by means of transportation, involving mechanisms such as osmosis and 
migration, which, in turn, are influenced by the electric field. However, it is not easy to remove 
natural organic elements from soil, specifically due to their reduced miscibility with water, in add￾ition to their resilient association with soil particles. Therefore, there are some different approaches 
to removing organic pollutants from soil. One possibility is to break down the chemicals in situ. 
To achieve this, it is crucial to construct optimized settings in the soil by adding intense oxidizing 
chemical substances to the soil apertures to execute the breakdown of organic pollutants in situ.
The usage of Fe0
 for the decontamination of soil resources has been exploited recently, owing 
to the ability of natural iron to catalyse the reductive dechlorination of organic complexes, together 
with penta-chlorophenol, tri-chloroethylene, and hexa-chlorobenzene, among others. The current 
method involves the application of an electric field as the driving force to transfer these nanoparticles 
into polluted soil. Reddy and Karri (2009) realized that applying Fe0
 nanoparticles via electrokinetic 
remediation can aid in the removal of penta-chlorophenol (PCP), an organic chlorine compound, 
from soil. They confirmed the transportation of Fe0
 nanoparticles by measuring the iron concentra￾tion in the soil at the end of the experiments. It was established that the amounts of iron increased 
proportionally with the original Fe0
 concentrations sourced in the anodes and with variations in the 
voltage gradient. However, the movement of the nanoparticles was restricted due to the formation 
of aggregates, the deposition of particulates, and the incomplete oxidation of components within 
the anode assembly. PCP was reported to be moderated to some extent (40–50 %) in the soil; then, 
the complete removal of PCP was observed in close proximity to the cathodes, owing to the reduc￾tive dechlorination process within the electrodes in presence of Fe0
. Therefore, in order to facilitate 
the delivery of nanoparticles into soil matrices, new techniques are needed to avoid the clumping, 
deposition, and oxidation of nanoscale iron particles and achieve the complete recovery of terrestrial 
landscapes (Cameselle et al. 2013).
15.5 FATE AND TRANSPORT OF NANOMATERIALS IN SOIL
The integration of engineered nanomaterials has, without doubt, transformed the existing technolo￾gies that are used in environmental remediation processes. Congruently, it is inevitable that the routine 
practice of such remedial measures will eventually lead to the release of residual nanostructures into 
the environment. Therefore, it is crucial to be aware of the potential dangers of using nanomaterials 
in soil remediation. Figure 15.2 shows the subsistence of engineered nanostructures used in soil 
remediation practices.Nanoparticle-Assisted Abiotic Remediation of Contaminated Soil 251
The morphology and other physicochemical attributes of soil depend on its origins, topographical 
terrain, and other biotic or abiotic factors. More often than not, sand, silt, and clay, along with other 
organic matter, represent the composition of porous soil. The importance of soil as a vital resource 
can be associated primarily with its imperative role in agriculture and food production. As such, 
the leaching of nanomaterials into the geosphere fosters concern as to what may happen if these 
substances were to reach humans by means of crops grown in soil that has been remediated using 
nanomaterial-assisted methodologies. Although, there is no guarantee that the consequences would 
be unfavourable, until the uncertainty can be entirely addressed, it is still debatable as to whether we 
can rely on nanomaterial-based technologies for soil remediation. Additionally, the complexity of 
soil matrices, along with the spectrum of nanomaterials used and their intricate characteristics, fur￾ther limit the implementation of such measures unless the safety of nanostructures can be certified 
through detailed life cycle assessments (Rawat et al. 2018; Bakshi and Abhilash 2019).
The physiochemical properties of metal nanoparticles have been reported to govern nanoparticle–
soil interactions, thereby dictating the fate, transport, and ecological impacts of nanoparticles. The 
nature of said interactions may further be influenced by environmental conditions. Aggregated/
agglomerated metal nanoparticles electrostatically interact with particles on the soil surface via 
attraction or repulsion, depending on the relevant charges. Pore straining is another physical mech￾anism by which larger nanoparticles are trapped within the pores of soil structures. Aggregation 
also results in a size increase that triggers the retention of nanoparticles in upper soil layers, while 
smaller nanoparticles penetrate soil and enter groundwater reserves (Tourinho et al. 2012)
The distribution of nanomaterials in terrestrial ecosystems is also significantly influenced by the 
presence of surface coatings. These coatings may either be an inherent part of the engineered design 
to achieve the desired effects in the application process or an outcome of the transformation that 
occurs upon interaction with biotic or abiotic components in the exposed environment. Typically, 
small molecular weight coatings stabilize nanoparticles against aggregation by imparting surface 
charges, while large molecular weight neutral polymers enable stabilization via steric repulsion and 
polyelectrolytes with high molecular weights make nanoparticles stable by reducing their sensitivity 
to changes in the ionic strength of the transport medium (Lowry and Casman 2008).
Another important term associated with assessing the risk of engineered nanoparticle exposure in 
the environment is “bioavailability”. By definition, it is the quantification of the actual concentrations 
of nanomaterials that living beings are exposed to and that have an impact on them under standard 
conditions. In soil, bioavailability levels are much lower than the overall concentrations released 
into the environment due to the various physical and chemical modifications that occur before 
nanomaterials reach biological systems. Living organisms can further contribute to the trans￾formation of nanostructures; for example, via the release of enzymes or chelating agents by soil 
FIGURE 15.2 Subsistence of engineered nanoscale structures in soil environments.252 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
invertebrates or rhizospheres near plant roots. Additionally, nanoparticles may be taken up and 
accumulated in soil organisms, including invertebrates, microbes, and plants, leading to potential 
effects on their functionalities (Cornelis et al. 2014).
15.6 CONCLUSION
Nanomaterials exhibit high efficiency and selectivity in removing soil contaminants. They can 
be typically applied to contaminated soil for in situ remediation. Their nanoscale size offers the 
advantages of enhanced mobility and delivery efficiency within soil matrices, facilitating immobil￾ization via the adsorption or conversion of toxic contaminants into less toxic forms.
Depending on the source of contamination, different types of pollutants encountered in 
contaminated soil have been discussed in the literature. Various mechanisms involved in 
nanomaterial-assisted abiotic remediation, such as adsorption, immobilization, reduction, catalytic 
degradation, and contaminant sensing, have also been explored. However, significant attention and 
research should be directed towards the application of nanomaterial-assisted remediation techniques 
in the field. Other areas of concern include the potential environmental impacts and the fate and 
transport of nanomaterials within soil. Addressing these challenges requires continued research 
efforts, multidisciplinary collaboration, and the development of environmentally benign and cost￾effective nanomaterials that are tailored for specific remediation applications.
REFERENCES
Abdel-Shafy, H. I., and Mansour, M. S. 2016. A review on polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons: Source, environ￾mental impact, effect on human health and remediation. Egyptian Journal of Petroleum, 25(1), 107–123.
Abdulkarem, E., Ibrahim, Y., Kumar, M., Arafat, H. A., Naddeo, V., Banat, F., and Hasan, S. W. 2021. 
Polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF)-α-zirconium phosphate (α-ZrP) nanoparticles based mixed matrix 
membranes for removal of heavy metal ions. Chemosphere, 267, 128896.
Abreu, M., Morgado, E., Jardim, P., and Marinkovic, B. 2012. The effect of anatase crystal morphology on the 
photocatalytic conversion of NO by TiO2-based nanomaterials. Open Chem, 10(4), 1183–1198.
Acar, Y. B., and Alshawabkeh, A. N. 1993. Principles of electrokinetic remediation. Environmental Science & 
Technology, 27(13), 2638–2647.
Aelion, C. M. 2004. Soil contamination monitoring. In Environmental monitoring, Encyclopedia of life support 
systems (EOLSS), ed. H. I. Inyang and Daniels, J. L. 148–175. Oxford: EOLSS Publishers.
Alazaiza, M. Y., Albahnasawi, A., Ali, G. A., Bashir, M. J., Copty, N. K., Amr, S. S. A., Abushammala, M.F., 
and Al Maskari, T. 2021. Recent advances of nanoremediation technologies for soil and groundwater 
remediation: A review. Water, 13(16), 2186.
Arena, U., Mastellone, M. L., Camino, G., and Boccaleri, E. 2006. An innovative process for mass production 
of multi-wall carbon nanotubes by means of low-cost pyrolysis of polyolefins. Polymer Degradation and 
Stability, 91(4), 763–768.
Avio, C. G., Gobri, S., Milan, M., Benedetti, M., Fattorini, D., D’errico, G., Pauletto, M., Bargelloni, L., and 
Regoli, F. 2015. Pollutants bioavailability and toxicological risk from micro plastics to marine mussels. 
Environmental Pollution, 198, 211–222.
Bakshi, M., and Abhilash, P. C. 2019. Nanotechnology for soil remediation: Revitalizing the tarnished 
resource. In Nano-materials as photocatalysts for degradation of environmental pollutants, ed. Singh, 
P., Borthakur, A., Mishra, P. K., and Tiwary, D. 345–370. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Baragaño, D., Forján, R., Sierra, C., and Gallego, J. L. R. 2021. Nanomaterials for soil remediation: Pollutant 
immobilization and opportunities for hybrid technologies. In Sorbents materials for controlling environ￾mental pollution, ed. Nu´n˜ez-Delgado, A. 701–723. Netherlands: Elsevier.
Blumer, M. 1961. Benzpyrenes in soil. Science, 134(3477), 474–475. https://doi.org/10.1126/scie
nce.134.3477.474
Cameselle, C., Reddy, K. R., Darko-Kagya, K., and Khodadoust, A. 2013. Effect of dispersant on transport 
of nanoscale iron particles in soils: Zeta potential measurements and column experiments. Journal of 
Environmental Engineering, 139(1), 23–33.Nanoparticle-Assisted Abiotic Remediation of Contaminated Soil 253
Chakraborty, U., Kaur, G., and Chaudhary, G. R. 2021. Development of environmental nanosensors for detec￾tion monitoring and assessment. New Frontiers of Nanomaterials in Environmental Science, 91–143.
Chemozatonskii, L. A., Kukovitskii, E. F., Musatov, A. L., Ormont, A. B., Izraeliants, K. R., and L’Vov, S. 
G. 1998. Carbon crooked nanotube layers of polyethylene: Synthesis, structure and electron emission. 
Carbon, 3(6), 713–715.
Cheng, Y., Song, W., Tian, H., Zhang, K., Li, B., Du, Z., Zhang, W., Wang, J., Wang, J., and Zhu, L. 2021. 
The effects of high-density polyethylene and polypropylene microplastics on the soil and earthworm 
Metaphire guillelmi gut microbiota. Chemosphere, 267, 129219.
Chiang, W.-H., and Sankaran, R. M. 2009. Linking catalyst composition to chirality distributions of as-grown 
single-walled carbon nanotubes by tuning Ni x Fe1− x nanoparticles. Nature Materials, 8(11), 882–886.
Chon, H. T., Lee, J. S., and Lee, J. U. 2011. Heavy metal contamination of soil, its risk assessment and bio￾remediation. Geosystem Engineering, 14(4), 191–206.
Chua, E. M. 2014. Assimilation of polybrominated diphenyl ethers from micro plastics by the marine amphipod, 
Allorchestes compressa. Environmental Science Technology, 48, 8127–8134.
Chung, Y.-H., and Jou, S. 2005. Carbon nanotubes from catalytic pyrolysis of polypropylene. Materials 
Chemistry and Physics, 92, 256–259.
Cornelis, G., Hund-Rinke, K., Kuhlbusch, T., Van den Brink, N., and Nickel, C. 2014. Fate and bioavail￾ability of engineered nanoparticles in soils: A review. Critical Reviews in Environmental Science and 
Technology, 44(24), 2720–2764.
De Francisco, P., Martín-González, A., Rodriguez-Martín, D., and Díaz, S. 2021. Interactions with 
arsenic: Mechanisms of toxicity and cellular resistance in eukaryotic microorganisms. International 
Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 18(22), 12226.
El-Nagar, D. A., and Abdel-Halim, K. Y. 2021. Remediation of heavy metals in contaminated soil by using 
nano-bentonite, nano-hydroxyapatite, and nano-composite. Land Degradation and Development, 32, 
4562–4573.
Engates, K. E., and Shipley, H. J. 2011. Adsorption of Pb, Cd, Cu, Zn, and Ni to titanium dioxide 
nanoparticles: effect of particle size, solid concentration, and exhaustion. Environmental Science and 
Pollution Research, 18, 386–395.
Fa, W., Zan, L., Gong, C., Zhong, J., and Deng, K. 2008. Solid-phase photocatalytic degradation of poly￾styrene with TiO2 modified by iron (II) phthalocyanine. Applied Catalyst B: Environmental, 79, 216–
223. https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.apcatb.2007.10.018
Fei, Y. F., Huang, S. Y., Zhang, H. B., Tong, Y. Z., Wen, D. S., Xia, X. Y., Wang, H., Luo, Y. M., and Barcelo, D. 
2020a. Response of soil enzyme activities and bacterial communities to the accumulation of microplastics 
in an acid cropped soil. Science Total Environmental, 707, 135634.
Forjan, R., Asensio, V., Guedes, R. S., Rodríguez-Vila, A., Covelo, E. F., and Marcet, P. 2017. Remediation of 
soils polluted with inorganic contaminants: Role of organic amendments. In Enhancing cleanup of envir￾onmental pollutants: Volume 2: Non-biological approaches, ed. Anjum, N. A., Gill, S. S., and Tuteja, N. 
313–337. Cham, Switzerland: Springer.
Francy, N., Shanthakumar, S., Chiampo, F., and Sekhar, Y. R. 2020. Remediation of lead and nickel contaminated 
soil using nanoscale zero-valent iron (NZVI) particles synthesized using green leaves: First results. 
Processes, 8, 1453.
Ganie, A. S., Bano, S., Khan, N., Sultana, S., Rehman, Z., Rahman, M. M., Sabir, S., Coulon, F., and Khan, 
M. Z. 2021. Nanoremediation technologies for sustainable remediation of contaminated environ￾ments: Recent advances and challenges. Chemosphere, 275, 130065.
Gil-Díaz, M., Pérez, R. A., Alonso, J., Miguel, E., Diez-Pascual, S., and Lobo, M. C. 2022. Iron nanoparticles 
to recover a co-contaminated soil with Cr and PCBs. Scientific Reports, 12, 3541.
Goulding, K. W. T. 2016. Soil acidification and the importance of liming agricultural soils with particular ref￾erence to the United Kingdom. Soil Use and Management, 32(3), 390–399.
Hayat, M. T., Xu, J., Ding, N., and Mahmood, T. 2010. Dynamic behavior of persistent organic pollutants in 
soil and their interaction with organic matter. In Molecular environmental soil science at the interfaces 
in the earth’s critical zone, ed. Xu, J., Tang, C., and He, J. 217–222. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer.
Huang, C.-C., Yang, Z., and Chang, H.-T. 2004. Synthesis of dumbbell-shaped Au− Ag core− shell nanorods by 
seed-mediated growth under alkaline conditions. Langmuir, 20(15), 6089–6092.
Ibarra-Jiménez, L., Hugolira-Saldivar, R., Valdez-Aguilar, L., Alonso, Río, J. D. 2011. Colored plastic mulches 
affect soil temperature and tuber production of potato. Acta Agriculturae Scandinavica, 61, 365–371.254 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
Johnson, M. S., Sajeev, S., and Nair, R. S. 2021. Role of nanosensors in agriculture. In 2021 International 
Conference on Computational Intelligence and Knowledge Economy (ICCIKE), March, , Dubai, United 
Arab Emirates, 58–63. IEEE. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCIKE51210.2021.9410709
Kamat, P. V., and Meisel, D. 2003. Nanoscience opportunities in environmental remediation. Comptes rendus 
Chim, 6, 999–1007.
Kapri, A., Zaidi, M. G. H., and Goel, R. 2009. Nanobarium titanate as supplement to accelerate plastic waste 
biodegradation by indigenous bacterial consortia. AIP Conference Proceeding, 1147, 469–474.
Kapri, A., Zaidi, M. G. H., and Goel, R. 2010. SPION-accelerated biodegradation of low-density polyethylene 
by indigenous microbial consortium. International Biodeterioration and Biodegradation Society, 64, 
238–244.
Kuang, X., Shao, J., Peng, L., Song, H., Wei, X., Luo, S., and Gu, J. D. 2020. Nano-TiO2 enhances the 
adsorption of Cd(II) on biological soil crusts under mildly acidic conditions. Journal of Contaminant 
Hydrology, 229, 103583.
Kukovitskii, E. F., Chernozatonskii, L. A., L’vov, S. G., and Mel’Nik, N. N. 1997. Carbon nanotubes of poly￾ethylene. Chemical Physics Letters, 266(3–4), 323–328.
Kuna, E., Mrdenovic, D., Jönsson-Niedziółka, M., Pieta, P., and Pieta, I. S. 2021. Bimetallic nanocatalysts 
supported on graphitic carbon nitride for sustainable energy development: The shape-structure–activity 
relation. Nanoscale Advances 3(5), 1342–1351.
Lee, S. J., Begildayeva, T., Jung, H. J., Koutavarapu, R., Yu, Y., Choi, M., and Choi, M. Y. 2021. Plasmonic ZnO/
Au/g-C3N4 nanocomposites as solar light active photocatalysts for degradation of organic contaminants 
in wastewater. Chemosphere, 263, 128262.
Li, S., Wang, W., Liang, F., and Zhang, W. 2017. Heavy metal removal using nanoscale zero-valent iron 
(NZVI): Theory and application. Journal of Hazardous Materials, 322, 163–71.
Liang, Q., and Zhao, D. 2014. Immobilization of arsenate in a sandy loam soil using starch-stabilized magnetite 
nanoparticles. Journal of Hazardous Materials, 271, 16–23.
Linley, S., and N. R. Thomson. 2021. Environmental applications of nanotechnology: Nano-enabled remedi￾ation processes in water, soil and air treatment. Water, Air, and Soil Pollution, 232, 59.
Liu, E. K., He, W. Q., Yan, and C. R. 2014b. White revolution’ to ‘white pollution’—Agricultural plastic film 
mulch in China. Environmental Research Letters, 9(9), 091001.
Liu, G., Li, L., Huang, X., Zheng, S., Xu, X., Liu, Z., Zhang, Y., Wang, J., Lin, H., and Xu, D. 2018. Adsorption 
and removal of organophosphorus pesticides from environmental water and soil samples by using mag￾netic multi-walled carbon nanotubes @ organic framework ZIF-8. Journal of Materials Science, 53, 
10772–10783.
Liu, J., Bu, L., Zhu, L., Luo, S., Chen, X., and Li, S. 2014a. Optimizing plant density and plastic film mulch 
to increase maize productivity and water-use efficiency in semiarid areas. Agronomy Journal, 106, 
1138–1146.
Liu, J., Jiang, Z., Yu, H., and Tang, T. 2011. Catalytic pyrolysis of polypropylene to synthesize carbon nanotubes 
and hydrogen through a two-stage process. Polymer Degradation and Stability, 96, 1711–1719.
Liu, X. E., Li, X. G., Hai, L., Wang, Y. P., Fu, T. T., Turner, N. C., and Li, F. M. 2014c. Film mulched ridge￾furrow management increases maize productivity and sustains soil organic carbon in a dryland cropping 
system. Journal of Soil Science Society Amercia, 78, 1434–1441.
Lombi, E., Wenzel, W. W., and Adriano, D. C. 1998. Soil contamination, risk reduction and remediation. Land 
Contamination & Reclamation, 6(4), 183–197.
Lowry, G. V., and Casman, E. A. 2008. Nanomaterial transport, transformation, and fate in the environment. In 
Nanomaterials: Risks and benefits, ed. Linkov, I., and Steevens, J. A. 125–137. Dordrecht, Netherlands: 
Springer Science & Business Media.
Lu, F., and Astruc, D. 2020. Nanocatalysts and other nanomaterials for water remediation from organic 
pollutants. Coordination Chemistry Reviews, 408, 213180.
Lv, N., Wang, B., Wang, H., Xiao, T., Dong, B., and Xu, Z. 2024. The occurrence characteristics, removal effi￾ciency, and risk assessment of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in sewage sludges from across China. 
Chemosphere, 351, 141033.
Ma, W., Sun, T., Xu, Y., Zheng, S., and Sun, Y. 2022 In–situ immobilization remediation, soil aggregate distri￾bution, and microbial community composition in weakly alkaline Cd–contaminated soils: A field study. 
Environmental Pollution, 292, 118327.Nanoparticle-Assisted Abiotic Remediation of Contaminated Soil 255
Mahdavi, A. E. B., Panahpour, E., Kalbasi, R. J., and Gholami, A. 2020. Preparation, characterization, and 
application of polyacrylamide-polystyrene/bentonite nanocomposite as an effective immobilizing 
adsorbent for remediation of soil. Chemistry Select, 5(15), 4538–4547.
Mani, P. K., and Mondal, S. 2016. Agri-nanotechniques for plant availability of nutrients. In Plant nanotech￾nology: Principles and practices, ed. Kole, C., Kumar, D. S., and Khodakovskaya, M. V. 263–303. 
New York: Springer.
Marcon, L., Oliveras, J., and Puntes, V. F. 2021. In situ nanoremediation of soils and groundwaters from the 
nanoparticle’s standpoint: A review. Science of the Total Environment, 791, 148324.
Mavukkandy, M. O., Ibrahim, Y., Almarzooqi, F., Naddeo, V., Karanikolos, G. N., Alhseinat, E., Banat, F., 
and Hasan, S. W. 2022. Synthesis of polydopamine coated tungsten oxide@ poly (vinylidene fluoride￾co-hexafluoropropylene) electrospun nanofibers as multifunctional membranes for water applications. 
Chemical Engineering Journal, 427, 131021.
Michálková, Z., Komárek, M., Šillerová, H., d. Puppa, L., Joussein, E., Bordas, F., Vaněk, A., Vaněk, O., and 
Ettler, V. 2014. Evaluating the potential of three Fe- and Mn-(Nano) oxides for the stabilization of Cd, 
Cu and Pb in contaminated soils. Journal of Environmental Management, 146, 226–234.
Monkul, M. M., and Özhan, H. O. 2021. Microplastic contamination in soils: A review from geotechnical 
engineering view. Polymers, 13(23), 4129.
Mungai, T. M., and Wang, J. 2019. Occurrence and toxicological risk evaluation of organochlorine pesticides 
from suburban soils of Kenya. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 
16(16), 2937.
Ningthoujam, R., Jena, B., Pattanayak, S., Dash, S., Kumar Panda, M., Behera, R. K., Dhal, N. K., and 
Singh, Y. D. 2021. Nanotechnology in food science. In Bio-nano interface: Applications in food, 
healthcare and sustainability, ed. Arakha, M., Pradhan, A. K., and Jha, S. 59–73. Singapore: Springer 
Singapore.
Ouyang, Z., Yang, Y., Zhang, C., Zhu, S., Qin, L., Wang, W., He, D., Zhou, Y., Luo, H., and Qin, F. 2021. Recent 
advances in photocatalytic degradation of plastics and plastic-derived chemicals. Journal of Materials 
Chemistry A, 9(23), 13402–13441.
Pandey, P., Swati, P., Harshita, M., Shraddha, M. Y., and Tiwari, A. 2015. Nanoparticles accelerated in vitro 
biodegradation of LDPE: A review. Advances in Applied Science Research, 6(4), 17–22.
Qi, Y., Yang, X., Pelaez, M. A., Lwanga, H. E., Beriot, N., Gertsen, H., Garbeva, P., and Geissen, V. 2018. 
Macro- and micro- plastics in soil-plant system: Effects of plastic mulch film residues on wheat (Triticum 
aestivum) growth. Science Total Environmental, 645, 1048–1056.
Qiu, C., Jiang, L., Gao, Y., and Sheng, L. 2023. Effects of oxygen-containing functional groups on carbon 
materials in supercapacitors: A review. Materials & Design, 230, 111952.
Rabbani, M. M., Ahmed, I., and Park, S. J. 2016. Application of nanotechnology to remediate contaminated 
soils. In Environmental remediation technologies for metal-contaminated soils, ed. Hasegawa, H., 
Rahman, I. M .M., and Rahman, M. A. 219–229. Minato, Japan: Springer Japan.
Rajput, V. D., Minkina, T., Upadhyay, S. K., Kumari, A., Ranjan, A., Mandzhieva, S., Sushkova, S., Singh, 
R. K., and Verma, K. K. 2022. Nanotechnology in the restoration of polluted soil. Nanomaterials, 
12(5), 769.
Rawat, S., Pullagurala, V. L., Adisa, I. O., Wang, Y., Peralta-Videa, J. R., and Gardea-Torresdey, J. L. 2018. 
Factors affecting fate and transport of engineered nanomaterials in terrestrial environments. Current 
Opinion in Environmental Science and Health, 6, 47–53.
Reddy, K. R., and Cameselle, C. 2009. Overview of electrochemical remediation technologies. In 
Electrochemical remediation technologies for polluted soils, sediments and groundwater, ed. Reddy, K. 
R., and Cameselle, C. 1–28. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
Reddy, K. R., and Karri, M. R. 2009. Effect of electric potential on nano iron particles delivery for pentachloro￾phenol remediation in low permeability soil. In Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on 
Soil Mechanics and Geotechnical Engineering (Volumes 1, 2, 3 and 4), ed. Hamza, M., Shahien, M., and 
El-Mossallamy, Y. 2312–2315. Amsterdam: IOS Press.
Sağlam, S., Üzer, A., Erçağ, E., and Apak, R. 2018. Electrochemical determination of TNT, DNT, RDX, and 
HMX with gold nanoparticles/poly (carbazole-aniline) film–modified glassy carbon sensor electrodes 
imprinted for molecular recognition of nitroaromatics and nitramines. Analytical Chemistry, 90(12), 
7364–7370.256 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
Sah, A., Kapri, A., Zaidi, M.G.H., Negi, H., and Goel, R. 2010. Implications of Fullerene-60 upon in-vitro 
LDPE biodegradation. Journal of Microbiology Biotechnology 20(5), 908–916. https://doi.org/10.4014/
jmb.0910.10025
Saha, J. K., Selladurai, R., Coumar, M. V., Dotaniya, M. L., Kundu, S., Patra, A. K., Saha, J. K., Selladurai, R., 
Coumar, M. V., Dotaniya, M. L., and Kundu, S. 2017. Major inorganic pollutants affecting soil and crop 
quality. In Soil pollution-An emerging threat to agriculture, ed. Saha, J. K., Selladurai, R., Coumar, M. 
V., Dotaniya, M. L., Kundu, S., and Patra, A. K. 75–104. Singapore: Springer Singapore.
Scoponi, M., Cimmino, S., and Kaci, M. 2000. Photo-stabilisation mechanism under natural weathering and 
accelerated photo-oxidative conditions of LDPE films for agricultural applica tions. Polymer, 41(22), 
7969–7980.
Shang, J., Chai, M., and Zhu, Y. 2003Solid-phase photocatalytic degradation of polystyrene plastic with TiO2 
as photocatalyst. Journal of Solid State Chemistry, 174(1), 104–110. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0022 
4596(03)00183-x
Sharma, P., Pandey, V., Sharma, M. M. M., Patra, A., Singh, B., Mehta, S., and Husen, A. 2021. A review on 
biosensors and nanosensors application in agroecosystems. Nanoscale Research Letters, 16, 1–24.
Shetti, N. P., Malode, S. J., Vernekar, P. R., Nayak, D. S., Shetty, N. S., Reddy, K. R., Shukla, S.S., and 
Aminabhavi, T. M. 2019. Electro-sensing base for herbicide aclonifen at graphitic carbon nitride modi￾fied carbon electrode–Water and soil sample analysis. Microchemical Journal, 149, 103976.
Shi, H., Zhao, G., Liu, M., Fan, L., and Cao, T. 2013. Aptamer-based colorimetric sensing of acetamiprid in 
soil samples: Sensitivity, selectivity and mechanism. Journal of Hazardous Materials, 260, 754–761.
Shipley, H. J., Engates, K. E., and Guettner, A. M. 2011. Study of iron oxide nanoparticles in soil for remedi￾ation of arsenic. Journal of Nanoparticle Research, 13, 2387–2397.
Siddiqui, M. S., Palaparthy, V. S., Kalita, H., Baghini, M. S., and Aslam, M. 2020. Graphene oxide array for 
in-depth soil moisture sensing toward optimized irrigation. ACS Applied Electronic Materials, 2(12), 
4111–4121.
Sirait, M., and P. D. S. Manalu. 2018. Preparation nature nano-bentonite as adsorbent heavy metal Cd and Hg. 
Journal of Physics: Conference Series, 1120, 012023.
Soltanabadi, Y., Jourshabani, M., and Shariatinia, Z. 2018. Synthesis of novel CuO/LaFeO3 nanocomposite 
photocatalysts with superior Fenton-like and visible light photocatalytic activities for degradation of 
aqueous organic contaminants. Separation and Purification Technology, 202, 227–241.
Srivastava, V., C. H. Weng, V. K. Singh, and Y. C. Sharma. 2011. Adsorption of nickel ions from aqueous 
solutions by nano alumina: Kinetic, mass transfer, and equilibrium studies. Journal of Chemical & 
Engineering Data, 56, 1414–22.
Taha, M. R., and Mobasser, S. 2015. Adsorption of DDT and PCB by nanomaterials from residual soil. PLoS 
One, 10(12), e0144071.
Tarekegn, M. M., Hiruy, A. M., and Dekebo, A. H. 2021. Nano zero valent iron (NZVI) particles for the 
removal of heavy metals (Cd 2+, Cu 2+ and Pb 2+) from aqueous solutions. RSC Advances, 11, 
18539–18551.
Thangadurai, T. D., and Manjubaashini, N. 2021. Progressions in chemical and biological analytes sensing 
technology based on nanostructured materials: A comprehensive review. Materials Science and 
Engineering: B, 271, 115307.
Tourinho, P. S., Van Gestel, C. A., Lofts, S., Svendsen, C., Soares, A. M., and Loureiro, S. 2012. Metal-based 
nanoparticles in soil: Fate, behavior, and effects on soil invertebrates. Environmental Toxicology and 
Chemistry, 31(8), 1679–1692.
Usman, M., Byrne, J. M., Chaudhary, A., Orsetti, S., Khalil Hanna, C. R., Kappler, A., and Haderlein, S. B. 
2018. Magnetite and green rust: Synthesis, properties, and environmental applications of mixed-valent 
iron minerals. Chemical Reviews, 118(7), 3251–3304.
Van den Berg, P., Huerta-Lwanga, E., Corradini, F., and Geissen, V. 2020. Sewage sludge application as a 
vehicle for microplastics in eastern spanish agricultural soils. Environmental Pollution, 261, 114198.
Vandera, E., and Koukkou, A. I. 2017. Bacterial community response to hydrocarbon contamination in soils and 
marine sediments. A critical review of case studies. In Microbial ecotoxicology, ed. Cravo-Laureau, C., 
Cagnon, C., Lauga, B., and Duran, R. 185–226. Cham, Switzerland: Springer International Publishing.
Wang, C., Tang, J., Yu, H., Wang, Y., Li, H., Xu, S., Li, G., and Zhou, Q. 2022. Microplastic pollution in the soil 
environment: Characteristics, influencing factors, and risks. Sustainability, 14(20), 13405.Nanoparticle-Assisted Abiotic Remediation of Contaminated Soil 257
Wang, S., Zhao, M., Zhou, M., Li, Y.C., Wang, J., Gao, B., Sato, S., Feng, K., Yin, W., Igalavithana, A.D., 
and Oleszczuk, P. 2019. Biochar-supported NZVI (NZVI/BC) for contaminant removal from soil and 
water: A critical review. Journal of Hazardous Materials, 373, 820–834.
Wikoff, D., Fitzgerald, L., and Birnbaum, L. 2012. Persistent organic pollutants: An overview. In Dioxins and 
health: including other persistent organic pollutants and endocrine disruptors, ed. Schecter, A. 1–35. 
Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc. https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118184141.ch1
Wilcke, W. 2000. Synopsis polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) in soil – A review. Journal of Plant 
Nutrition and Soil Science, 163(3), 229–248.
Xiao, R., Wang, S., Li, R., Wang, J. J., and Zhang, Z. 2017. Soil heavy metal contamination and health risks 
associated with artisanal gold mining in Tongguan, Shaanxi, China. Ecotoxicology and Environmental 
Safety, 141, 17–24.
Xie, L., Ma, Q., Chen, Q., Liu, Y., Guo, P., Zhang, J., Duan, G., Lin, A., Zhang, T., and Li, S. 2025. Efficient 
remediation of different concentrations of Cr-contaminated soils by nano zero-valent iron modified with 
carboxymethyl cellulose and biochar. Journal of Environmental Sciences, 147, 474–486.
Xiong, T., Ye, Y., Luo, B., Shen, L., Wang, D., Fan, M., and Gong, Z. 2021. Facile fabrication of 3D TiO2-
graphene aerogel composite with enhanced adsorption and solar light-driven photocatalytic activity. 
Ceramics International, 47(10), 14290–14300.
Yang, Z., Zhang, Q., Luo, G., Huang, J.-Q., Zhao, M.-Q., and Wei, F. 2010. Coupled process of plastics pyr￾olysis and chemical vapor deposition for controllable synthesis of vertically aligned carbon nanotube 
arrays. Applied Physics A: Materials Science & Processing, 100, 533–540.
Yu, X., Wang, T., Yin, W., and Zhang, Y. 2019. Ti3C2 MXene nanoparticles modified metal oxide composites 
for enhanced photoelectrochemical water splitting. International Journal of Hydrogen Energy, 44(5), 
2704–2710.
Yuan, X., Zhou, C., Jing, Q., Tang, Q., Mu, Y., and Du, A.-K. 2016. Facile synthesis of g-C3N4 nanosheets/ZnO 
nanocomposites with enhanced photocatalytic activity in reduction of aqueous chromium (VI) under 
visible light. Nanomaterials, 6(9), 173.
Zan, L., Fa, W., and Wang, S. 2006. Novel photodegradable low-density polyethylene-TiO2 nano composite 
film. Environmental Science Technology, 40, 1681–1685.
Zhang, T., Lowry, G. V., Capiro, N. L., Chen, J., Chen, W., Chen, Y., Dionysiou, D. D., Elliott, D. W., Ghoshal, 
S., Hofmann, T., and Hsu-Kim, H. 2019. In situ remediation of subsurface contamination: Opportunities 
and challenges for nanotechnology and advanced materials. Environmental Science: Nano, 6(5), 
1283–1302.
Zhang, Y., Luo, J., Zhang, H., Li, T., Xu, H., Sun, Y., Gu, X., Hu, X., and Gao, B. 2022. Synthesis and adsorp￾tion performance of three-dimensional gels assembled by carbon nanomaterials for heavy metal removal 
from water: A review. Science of The Total Environment, 852, 158201.
Zheng, B., Ye, Y., Hu, B., Luo, C., and Zhu, Y. 2019. Enhanced removal of chromium(vi) by Fe(iii)-Reducing 
bacterium coated ZVI for wastewater treatment: Batch and column experiments. RSC Advances, 9, 
36144–36153.
Zheng, M., Huang, Z., Ji, H., Qiu, F., Zhao, D., Bredar, A. R. C., and Farnum, B. H. 2020. Simultaneous con￾trol of soil erosion and arsenic leaching at disturbed land using polyacrylamide modified magnetite 
nanoparticles. Science of the Total Environment, 702, 134997.
Zhou, L., Wang, L. Zhang, J., Lei, J., and Liu, J. 2016. Well-dispersed Fe2O3 nanoparticles on g-C3N4 for 
efficient and stable photo-fenton photocatalysis under visible-light irradiation. European Journal of 
Inorganic Chemistry, 34, 5387–5392.258
258 DOI: 10.1201/9781003477730-18
16 Agronanotechnology 
Techniques to Promote 
Nutrient Availability in Plants
Angelene Hannah Jebarani D., R. A. Zerubabel Michael, 
and Erva Rajeswara Reddy
16.1 INTRODUCTION
Farming practices lay the foundation for global food supply and economic growth, influencing 
various aspects of the day-to-day lives of all people, either directly or indirectly. The increase in 
worldwide population has necessitated the intensification of agricultural practices, which has been 
achieved by engaging a range of strategies to satiate the surge in food demand, zeroing in on a secure 
future. Sustainability in agriculture is being promoted in terms of (i) efficiently managing water 
resources, (ii) maintaining soil texture and nutrients levels, (iii) controlling the proper utilization 
of agrochemicals, (iv) regulating the production and disposal of agricultural waste, (v) exercising 
suitable strategies for insect and pest control, (vi) controlling crop diseases, and (vii) implementing 
novel cultivation techniques. The complexity of research assessments, elevated energy demands, 
and the lack of finance to help farmers to adopt modern technologies are some of the limiting factors 
that undermine these global agronomy trends (Singh et al. 2021).
Recently, the integration of nanotechnological solutions has fostered contemporary methodolo￾gies in the food processing and agricultural production sectors, as witnessed by an increase in intel￾lectual property claims (Fadiji et al. 2022). Nanoscale materials with dimensions of less than 100 nm 
have distinguishing features in comparison to their bulk counterparts, including structural flexibility 
and various functionalities, making them ideal platforms for promoting crop nourishment, subse￾quently leading to increased crop productivity (Singh et al. 2021). Their effects on plant growth and 
development depend on the physiochemical properties of the nanomaterials (their size, stability, 
charge, etc.), their bioavailability, and their interactions with plant cellular components.
Within the scope of the agronomy and agri-food research, nanomaterials have been applied in 
various ways. Nanostructures have been engineered to alter the characteristics of crops, increase 
yields by improving nutrient supply, improve plant resistance to pathogens, modulate cultivation 
soil to support crop production, increase plant tolerance to stress conditions, enhance the manage￾ment of produce post-harvest, monitor nutrient levels in plants, and facilitate the remediation of 
environmental pollution. A brief overview of various nanotechnology-based methodologies used in 
agricultural practices is summarized in Table 16.1.
The application of nanomaterial-assisted methods in agricultural practices offers a spectrum of 
positive effects, including the following:
i. Improved plant growth;
ii. Better biomass accumulation;
iii. Accelerated germination rates;
iv. Enriched grain production;
v. Superior nutrient contents in crops;Agronanotechnology Techniques to Promote Nutrient Availability 259
TABLE 16.1
Overview of various nanotechniques and methodologies used in agricultural practices
S. No.
Nanotechnique/
Methodology Explanation Reference
1 Nanotechnology-based 
CRISPR/Cas9 system
Nanocarriers aid in transferring genes and proteins via 
advanced techniques, like clustered regularly interspaced 
short palindromic repeat (CRISPR)/Cas9 gene editing 
systems.
Gao (2018)
2 Nanotechnology-based 
agronomic fortification
Effective agronomic fortification via various micronutrients 
reaching crops by utilizing nanofertilizers.
Kanjana (2015)
3 Nanoencapsulation of 
fertilizers
Nanoparticles enhance seed germination, increase fruit 
yields, enhance metabolite contents, and improve shoot 
and root length.
Changmei et al. 
(2002)
Shelf 4 Mesoporous silica 
nanoparticles (MSN) 
and poly-amidoamine 
dendrimer carriers
Nanocarriers deliver targeted marker genes to enhance and 
promote nutrient uptake, disease resistance, and yield 
capacity.
Yashveer et al. (2014)
5 Nanocomposites Various micronutrients, amino acids, and trace elements 
are taken up by crops using potential nutraceutical 
nanocomposites.
Jinghua (2004)
6 Soil amendment via 
nanobiochar and green 
nanobiochar
Improve soil porosity, increase microbial biomass, and 
improve soil pH, as well as demonstrating antiparasitic 
activity.
Khader et al. (2023)
7 Metal oxide nanoparticles Prevent abiotic stress by increasing plant tolerance 
capability, enable precise nutrient release, increase zinc 
fortification, and improve plant growth, as well as being 
environmentally friendly.
Iqbal and Muhammad 
Amir (2019)
Ali et al. (2019)
8 Nanoemulsion Showcase the stability to withstand extreme pressure and 
various environmental stressors without denaturing their 
properties and enhance antilarval properties.
Wang et al. (2007)
Narayanan et al. 
(2013)
9 Nanosensors Nanosensors for the GPS tracking of environmental 
conditions aid in monitoring plant growth, appetite, and 
toxicity, nutrient scarcity, infection, fertilizer dosage, 
etc., as well as assisting in enhancing the infrared 
communication capacity of chloroplasts by improving 
fast electron transport in the photosynthetic cycle.
Cloud-based data storage centres on real-time information 
from several nanosensors in crop monitoring, aiding in 
the design of suitable irrigation protocols.
Nanosensing of toxic and heavy metals in soil and 
waterbodies assists in monitoring soil health and alerting 
farmers to utilize eradication techniques.
Cheng et al. (2016)
Giraldo et al. (2014)
10 Real-time monitoring by 
mobile apps
Mobile apps designed to scrutinize the quality of crops in 
real time by means of wireless infrared and cloud-based 
data help farmers to increase yields.
Panapatte et al. 
(2016)
11 Post-harvest nanomaterial 
packaging
Nanomaterial packaging aids in increasing the shelf-life of 
plant products due to its unique structure.
Priyadarshini et al. 
(2021)
12 Nanoremediation of 
agricultural waste
Nanoremediation techniques, such as nano-adsorption, 
nanomaterial-based iteration, nanocatalysis, 
nanobioremediation, and leaching, prevent soil and water 
pollution.
Borisev et al. (2020)260 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
vi. Notable increases in chlorophyll contents and photosynthesis;
vii. Enhanced metabolite production and activity;
viii.Increased tolerance to abiotic stressors;
ix. Improved resistance to pathogenic organisms and their diseases;
x. The controlled translocation of heavy metals;
xi. Regulated soil health and nutrient uptake;
xii. Extended product shelf-life;
xiii.The remediation of cultivable landscapes.
In view of these positive effects, the use of nanomaterials has increased over the years and 
as such, unease with their use has also increased, which may be ascribed to our limited know￾ledge of the transportation and fate of nanomaterials (Fadiji et al. 2022; Sári et al. 2023). Current 
applications of selected agronanotechnology techniques for combating global nutriment challenges 
and the limitations that need to be addressed to pledge food security for future generations are 
briefly discussed in the following sections.
16.2 CROP IMPROVEMENT
Nanotechnology is a rapidly advancing domain that has the promise to transform farming practices. 
Nanoparticles, with their miniature size, high surface area to volume ratios, solubility, reactivity, 
and optomagnetic characteristics, are valuable in various sectors, particularly agriculture. The inte￾gration of nanotechnology into agriculture is gaining significance due to its ability to reduce inputs, 
enhance food quality, increase nutrient contents, extend product shelf-life, maintain freshness, and 
prevent gas penetration. Additionally, nanotechnology can aid in improving micronutrient and anti￾oxidant assimilation through the use of nanomaterials for preservation and packaging (Kanjana 
2015). These innovative approaches have revolutionized many aspects of agriculture, particularly 
crop enhancement through genetic modification, the targeted delivery of genes and drugs, the con￾trolled release of agrochemicals, and inheritable factor expression regulation in seedlings under 
stress conditions.
The recent spotlight on the utilization of nanoparticles for gene transfer has led to the adoption 
of pollen-mediated gene transformation techniques for the production of transgenic seeds (Lew 
et al. 2020). Nanotechnology stages a crucial function in genome modification and the develop￾ment of genetically modified crops. Utilizing poly-amidoamine dendrimer as a nanocarrier enables 
the transportation of target genes into plant cells while maintaining the integrity of the cell struc￾ture. A compound created by combining poly-amidoamine and genetic material has the potential to 
enter the cell wall, facilitating the materialization of carried genes. Mesoporous silica nanoparticles 
(MSNs) with surface functionalization exhibit controlled behaviour and are recognized as poten￾tial nanocarriers (Yashveer et al. 2014). MSNs can deliver multiple types of molecules due to their 
beehive-like configuration, with encapsulated pores that can be filled with chemical compounds 
and coated with desired gene fragments (Moeller et al. 2008). By coating MSNs with genetic factor 
inducers or effectual chemical combinations, along with genetic material fragments containing 
inducible marker genes, these nanoparticles can successfully deliver both components inside plant 
cells via the use of biolistic guns. The precise release of the loaded gene inducers triggers the 
expression of the treated genetic material within the cell. Nanotechnology-centred clustered regu￾larly interspaced short palindromic repeat (CRISPR)/Cas9 systems represent a groundbreaking 
third-generation gene editing tool that can be applied to enhance and protect crops (Ahmar et al. 
2021). For instance, in wheat (Triticum aestivum), an SDN-1 (site-directed nuclease) CRISPR tool 
was used to confer immunity against powdery mildew (Gao 2018). The key aspect of CRISPR/Cas9 
gene editing lies in the efficient transfer of genetic material and proteins to the target area, a task 
that can be efficiently carried out by nanoparticles acting as transport systems (Deng et al. 2019).Agronanotechnology Techniques to Promote Nutrient Availability 261
16.3 CROP GROWTH
It is projected that the worldwide population, currently at 7 billion, will continue to grow and is 
expected to reach approximately 9 billion by 2050. This surge in population will necessitate a sub￾stantial rise in food production, estimated to be 60–100% more than current levels (Van Dijk, and 
Meijerink 2014). To address this growing demand for food, intensive farming methods are being 
employed, leading to a detrimental cycle of soil fertility depletion and decreased agrarian yields.
The emergence of nanofertilizers as alternatives to traditional fertilizers offers a promising solution 
to the issues of nutrient buildup in soil, eutrophication, and water contamination. Nanotechnology 
presents new possibilities for enhancing nutrient absorption efficiency and reducing environ￾mental protection costs. By coating fertilizer particles with nanomembranes, the controlled and 
gradual release of nutrients can be achieved. Additionally, the coating and bonding of nano- and 
subnanocomposites can be used to manage nutrient release from fertilizer capsules (Liu et al. 2006). 
A patented nanocomposite containing nitrogen, phosphorous, potassium, micronutrients, mannose, 
and amino acids has shown to improve the uptake and consumption of nutrients by cereal crops 
(Jinghua 2004).
Nanofertilizers are commonly produced by encapsulating nutrients within the bounds of nano￾scale vehicles, such as metal oxide nanoconstructs or polymeric nanocapsules. These carriers enable 
the precise delivery of nutrients, reducing nutrient shortfalls caused by volatilization (Iqbal and 
Muhammad Aamir 2019). Research has demonstrated that the usage of nanofertilizers can lead 
to significant enhancements in nutrient uptake efficiency in plants. A recent study found that the 
application of zinc oxide nanoparticle-coated urea resulted in a 51% increase in wheat grain yields 
in contrast to a control group (Dimkpa et al. 2020). Similarly, metal oxide nanoparticles have been 
found to enhance zinc uptake competence in rice plants, leading to improved zinc fortification 
in grain content and improved plant growth (Ali et al. 2019). Nanotechnology-centred precision 
agriculture aims to develop more directed and sustainable nutrient management techniques. For 
example, nanosensors can be deployed to observe soil nutrient concentrations in real time (Senapaty 
et al. 2023). These tactics could also decrease environmental pollution.
Seed development is an important stage in the overall development of plants as it plays a crucial 
role in seed germination, endurance, and population dynamics. Many studies have demonstrated 
the significant impact of nanoparticles on crops, showcasing enhanced seed germination rates 
(Changmei et al. 2002), improved shoot and root length (Liu et al. 2005; Kole et al. 2013), increased 
fruit yields, and enhanced metabolite contents (Kole et al. 2013). Additionally, nanoparticles have 
been found to positively influence various biochemical parameters connected to plant growth and 
development, such as improved photosynthetic rates and nitrogen utilization effectiveness, in crops 
like soybean (Ngo et al. 2014), peanut (Prasad et al. 2012; Liu et al. 2005), and spinach (Zheng et al. 
2005). A deeper knowledge of the dynamic exchanges between nanoparticles and plants, including 
their uptake, localization, and activity, could potentially transform yield production by enhancing 
disease resistance, nutrient consumption, and overall harvests (Wang et al. 2016).
16.4 CROP PROTECTION
Pesticides encapsulated with nanoparticles or nanomaterials have the ability to effectively trans￾port active ingredients, such as insecticides and fungicides, to specific pests. These nanoscale 
formulations allow for improved adhesion to plant surfaces, enhanced penetration into pest tissues, 
and the controlled release of active compounds. The core objective of nanopesticides is to heighten 
the efficiency of pest control while minimizing the quantity of pesticides required, thereby lessening 
the environmental impact and enhancing the overall safety and sustainability of farming practices.
Nanopesticides have the capability to remove mycological phytopathogens that cling to the 
S-protein clusters of the cytosolic membrane. They achieve this by altering cell penetrability, 262 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
destructing genetic material, intervening in the oxidation of proteins, disrupting the electron trans￾port sequences of cells, generating free radicals, and preventing nutrient intake (Paul et al. 2021). 
These nanopesticides are typically sprayed on plant leaves to fight phytopathogens and can promote 
plant growth.
Nanoemulsions have been extensively utilized in pathological investigations. These dynamic and 
functional compounds are enclosed in droplet form within aqueous suspensions (Srilatha 2011). 
These suspensions are uniform and spherical, thanks to the use of surfactants (Vega-Vásquez et al. 
2020). The characteristics and functionalities of nanoemulsions differ based on the manufacturing 
process and configuration. To address their physicochemical instability during storage, a dry form 
of nanoemulsions can be created by eliminating water from the aqueous systems (Srilatha 2011). 
Nanoemulsions exhibit the capability to withstand harsh conditions, such as excessive pressure, 
heat, and salinity, due to their capacity to maintain a stable morphology, even after alterations in 
their oil volume ratios (Sun et al. 2017). For example, β-cypermethrin, a hydrophobic pesticide, 
can be transformed into a nanoemulsion that displays enhanced stability when applied to seedlings 
(Wang et al. 2007). Additionally, nanoemulsions derived from neem oil exhibit increased larvicidal 
effects, despite a reduction in droplet size (Narayanan et al. 2013).
Metal nanoparticles incorporated in agrochemicals are widely used as nanofungicides. Halloysite 
clay nanotubes have been engineered to be low-cost vehicles of pesticides, allowing for their 
prolonged release and improved contact with plants. This innovation is expected to decrease pesti￾cide usage by 70–80%, resulting in cost savings and minimal impacts on water sources. Herbicides 
can be combined with nanoparticles prior to use to enhance plant bioavailability and improve weed 
control. One study demonstrated that diluted poly(-caprolactone) (PCL) nanocapsules containing 
atrazine effectively inhibit fungal growth in Amaranthus viridis and Bidens pilosa, similar to con￾ventional atrazine formulations (Sousa et al. 2018). The development of herbicides encapsulated 
with nanoparticles that target specific receptors in weed roots is being pursued to disrupt glycolysis 
in root systems, leading to undernourishment and the eventual death of weeds (Chinnamuthu and 
Kokiladevi 2007). Adjuvants containing nanomaterials are also currently used as herbicide sprays.
16.5 NANOTECHNOLOGY IN FOOD PROCESSING
Nanostructured food products are being developed due to the claims that they offer improved taste, 
texture, and consistency. Nanotechnology can extend the shelf-life of various food substances and 
also assists in reducing food waste resulting from microbial infestations (Pradhan et al. 2015). 
Currently, nanocarriers are being applied as vehicles to deliver food additives to food products 
without disturbing their basic morphology.
Nanoencapsulation strategies have been used extensively to enhance the release and retention of 
flavour and deliver culinary stability (Nakagawa 2014). Zhang et al. (2014) used nanoencapsulation 
for the surprisingly reactive and risky plant pigment anthocyanin, which has numerous biological 
activities, by encapsulating cyanidin-3-O-glucoside (C3G) molecules inside the inner cavity of the 
APO recombinant H-2 subunit ferritin (rH-2) in soybean seeds, which advanced its thermal stability 
and photostability.
In comparison to large particles, which typically deliver encapsulated compounds slowly and 
over long time periods, nanoparticles provide promising methods for improving the bioavailability 
of nutraceutical compounds due to their subcellular size, leading to better drug bioavailability. Many 
metal oxides, such as titanium dioxide and silicon dioxide (SiO2
), have conventionally been used 
as colour or flow agents in various food products (Ottaway 2010). SiO2
 nanoparticles are also one 
of the most commonly used nanomaterials as carriers of fragrance and flavour in food products 
(Dekkers et al. 2011).
The majority of bioactive compounds, including lipids, proteins, carbohydrates, and nutrients, 
are sensitive to highly acidic conditions and enzyme activity in the stomach and duodenum. The Agronanotechnology Techniques to Promote Nutrient Availability 263
encapsulation of those bioactive compounds effectively permits them to withstand harsh surroundings 
and also enables them to assimilate easily in food products, which is hard to accomplish in their non￾capsulated form due to their low water solubility. Nanoparticle-based edible capsules aim to improve 
the delivery of medicines, nutrients, and micronutrients inside the human body (Yan and Gilbert 
2004). Nanocomposites, nanoemulsification, and nanostructuration are specific strategies that have 
been applied to encapsulate nanomaterials to efficiently supply vitamins, proteins, and antioxidants 
for nutritional and health advantages. Polymeric nanoparticles are suitable for the encapsulation of 
bioactive compounds (e.g., flavonoids and nutrients) and are able to transport those compounds to 
designated targets (Langer and Peppas 2003).
In plant products, in which bioactive compounds regularly degrade and inactivate under adverse 
conditions, the nanoencapsulation of these bioactive components can extend the shelf-life of products 
by slowing down the degradation process. Furthermore, edible nanocoatings on various food products 
offer a barrier against moisture and gas and can supply colour, flavours, antioxidants, enzymes, and 
anti-browning components, as well as extending the shelf-life of manufactured ingredients, even 
after the packaging has been opened (Weiss et al. 2006). Encapsulating components in droplets fre￾quently slows down chemical degradation procedures by affecting the interfacial layers surrounding 
them. As an example, curcumin, the most active and least solid bioactive factor of turmeric (Curcuma 
longa), decreases antioxidants and has been found to be stable under pasteurization and have excep￾tional ionic conductivity upon encapsulation (Sari et al. 2015).
16.6 SOIL HEALTH
Soil fertility and soil health are vital areas of interest in agronomic practices. Soil health may be 
defined as the balance between the physical, chemical, and biological factors associated with soil. 
Comprehensively, this includes various soil attributes, such as nutrient levels, pH, temperature, 
water retention capacity, organic contents, and native microbial consortia. The assessment of soil 
health is critical to evaluate how imbalances impact agronomical harvests (Mandal et al. 2020).
The exploitation of land to accommodate the human population, along with industrial devel￾opment practices and urbanization, has ultimately resulted in the loss of soil fertility and quality. 
Additionally, natural processes, such as weathering, cyclones, salinization, climate change, nutrient 
depletion, and other adversities, have lowered the capacity of soil to support agricultural crop 
production. Soil further loses the ability to retain water owing to its disrupted structure, leading 
to diminished groundwater and making cultivable areas vulnerable to droughts. Engineered 
nanoparticles, with their unique properties, can be tailored for use in restorative farming practices 
by improving soil health. These nanoparticles can not only prevent erosion and promote aggregation 
but also function to enhance nutrient contents, upgrade soil structure, and improve water retention 
capacity, thereby promoting crop growth (Zaib et al. 2023).
Engineered nanoparticles can improve the physical and mechanical properties of soil by 
increasing soil porosity and supporting the formation of more rigid matrices, thereby promoting 
agricultural productivity. Due to their tiny size, nanoparticles can effectively infiltrate soil and 
change its properties (Suazo-Hernández et al. 2023). The effects of alumina and silica nanoparticles 
on the shear strength and compressive index of expansive soil have been investigated. The addition 
of nanomaterials at optimal concentrations has been observed to amend the compression index and 
unconfined compression strength of soil matrices via charge-dependent alterations in the microscale 
forces between the nanoparticles and soil particles (Shang and Fu 2018).
The productivity of cultivated lands correlates to the levels of organic matter (including dissolved 
organic content) available within soil matrices. In such ecosystems, indigenous soil organisms 
essentially regulate the organic metabolism and mineralization of nutrients (Suazo-Hernández et al. 
2023). The use of green nanomaterials, such as nanobiochar, green nanobiochar, and magnetic 
nanobiochar, to improve soil health and promote plant growth has been reported. The utilization 264 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
of these nanomaterials has shown a substantial increase in soil organic matter and accordingly, 
an increase in microbial biomass carbon content. They also improve soil pH and effectively con￾trol parasitic root-knot nematodes in sandy loam soil, fostering the growth of tomatoes (Khader 
et al. 2023).
16.7 STRESS TOLERANCE
In an era of incessant climate change, expansive urbanization, industrialization, and the steadfast 
pursuit to satisfy global food demand, agricultural productivity is strongly influenced by a variety of 
abiotic stressors, including salinity, floods, radiation, droughts, water-logging, extreme temperatures, 
and the deposition of contaminants, such as heavy metals, as demonstrated in Figure 16.1. Subject to 
the species, the nature of the stress, and time of exposure, physiological and biochemical processes 
in plants are negatively impacted by abiotic stressors, limiting growth and productivity. Some 
common effects of abiotic stressors include the following:
• Oxidative stress in seedlings due to disparities between antioxidant and prooxidant 
mechanisms;
• Stromal closure, causing an increase in hydrogen peroxide generation and ensuing the activa￾tion of the photorespiratory pathway;
• Lower carbon dioxide assimilation, creating disturbances in the photosynthetic electron trans￾port cycle and triggering the amplified production of reactive oxygen species;
• Cell death resulting from tissue damage caused by interactions between cellular biomolecules 
(proteins, natural oils, and nucleic acids) and the intensified levels of reactive oxygen species 
and hydrogen peroxide.
Some crops have naturally developed tolerance by means of undergoing structural or metabolic 
changes to endure stressful conditions. However, under continued stress conditions, plant growth 
and production become restricted (Godoy et al. 2021). It is therefore essential to identify workable 
FIGURE 16.1 Abiotic stress factors that impact crop growth and nourishment.Agronanotechnology Techniques to Promote Nutrient Availability 265
strategies to help to boost crop nourishment and the proposal of using nanomaterials has displayed 
potential in supporting crop growth under abiotic stress conditions.
Among the nanoparticles used in agricultural practices, silver has gained much attention due to its 
capability to increase plant stress tolerance. Investigations on different forms of silver nanostructures 
have revealed their stress defence mechanisms, which include the increase of enzymatic activity in 
plants, the promotion of interactions between useful microbial species and roots, and the over￾coming of nutrient shortages in soil (Alabdallah and Hasan 2021).
The effect of cellulosic ruins and nanoscale zero-valent iron on the growth of oak seedlings in 
heavy metal-contaminated soil has been investigated. The results showed that the presence of the 
nanoparticles reduced the bioavailability of cadmium metal ions, thereby preventing its uptake by 
the seedlings. Bearing in mind that the growth and nutrition of vegetation vary inversely with the 
metal content in soil, it is clear that by reducing metal concentrations, land resources can be effect￾ively decontaminated to promote plant life (Tafazoli et al. 2020).
Salinization, or the accumulation of salts, occurs primarily due to changes in environmental 
conditions, such as (i) high temperatures and low rain fall, (ii) insufficient water drainage and water 
stagnation, (iii) water table elevation, (iv) the seepage of ocean water into delta regions, (v) the 
swamping of salt water due to the rise in sea level, (vi) the overexploitation of fertilizers and other 
agrochemicals, and (vii) using salt-rich water for irrigation (Sári et al. 2023). Tolerance to high salt 
levels in soil has been reported to be instilled in the early growth stages of crops via the applica￾tion of zinc oxide nanoparticles. In one study, culturing two rice genotypes under saline conditions 
without the use of nanoparticles exhibited reduced crop height and reduced levels of photosyn￾thetic pigments, micronutrient zinc, and potassium uptake, while sodium concentrations increased. 
The metal oxide nanoparticle treatment was shown to advance salinity adaptions and promote the 
productivity of the genotypes by restoring the sodium–potassium balance, supplementing zinc, and 
increasing the biosynthesis of photosynthetic pigments (Singh et al. 2022).
16.8 PRECISION FARMING AND CROP HEALTH DIAGNOSIS
Precision agriculture is a long sought-after objective aimed at optimizing crop yields by limiting the 
use of manure, insecticides, weed killers, and other inputs through the monitoring of environmental 
factors and the implementation of specific interventions. This approach relies on the utilization of 
workstations, measuring devices, universal locating systems, and isolated sensing technologies to 
assess environmental parameters, thereby assisting in the evaluation of crop growth efficacy and the 
precise identification of issues. Ultimately, the integration of smart sensors and precision agriculture 
is anticipated to boost agricultural productivity by offering precise data, assisting farmers in making 
informed decisions (Cioffi et al. 2004).
The development of nanosensors for assessing and overseeing crop progression and soil 
conditions, such as nutrient levels, toxicity, infection, and agrochemicals content, holds promise 
for ensuring the health of soil and plants, product value, and overall success in sustainable agri￾culture and environmental systems (Cheng et al. 2016). While biological organisms possess the 
ability to perceive their surroundings, the synergy of biological matter and nanomaterials in sensor 
development has opened up broader possibilities for enhancing specificity, sensitivity, and speed in 
detecting impairments (Dubey and Mailapalli 2016). One notable application is the utilization of 
nanosensor-based global positioning systems (GPS) for the continual monitoring of crop fields over 
the whole developmental season. These arrangements of wireless nanosensors aid in the precise 
release of substances via nanoscale vehicles that are controlled by wireless signals distributed across 
crop fields. This enables the instantaneous and comprehensive monitoring of crop growth, providing 
valuable and precise data to facilitate optimal management practices by preventing the excessive use 
of agricultural inputs (Panpatte et al. 2016). The computerization of irrigation systems through radar 
techniques also holds significant promise for maximizing water use efficiency.266 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
The rapid and precise identification of insects and pathogens is crucial for the appropriate appli￾cation of pesticides and fertilizers to safeguard cultivated fields from infestations. Researchers have 
designed wireless nanosensor for sensing insect attacks, which can differentiate between discharged 
unstable organics from various host plant varieties based on the type of insect (Afsharinejad et al. 
2015). Sing et al. (2010) showed that gold nanoparticle-based immunosensors are effective in 
detecting Karnal bunt disease in wheat plants. Furthermore, the discipline of nanobiotechnology has 
seen advancements in the creation of bionic plants through the insertion of nanoparticles inside live 
plant cells, particularly chloroplasts. This allows for the detection and imaging of compounds inside 
plants, as well as communication via infrared tools and even the self-operation of plants as light 
sources, showing great prospects for precision farming (Ghorbanpour and Fahimirad, 2017; Wong 
et al. 2019). For example, Giraldo et al. (2014) found that the incorporation of single-walled carbon 
nanotubes (SWNTs) can increase the electron disarticulation rate of light-adapted chloroplasts by 
49% by enhancing photo-absorption.
Nanosensors integrated into smartphones promise to revolutionize various aspects of agriculture 
and environmental monitoring. These nanosensors could play a crucial role in early disease identifi￾cation, precise fertilizer dosage computation, and water reserve monitoring to evaluate crop ripeness 
and yields (Pongnumkul et al. 2015). Additionally, they are capable of detecting soil nutrient levels 
and water stress, providing valuable insights for farmers to optimize their irrigation and nutrient 
management practices. For instance, nanosensors can evaluate soil templates for nutrient content 
and recommend appropriate fertilization strategies. Moreover, by measuring chlorophyll content, 
these sensors can detect plant stress, allowing farmers to make informed decisions that could help 
to enhance crop health and productivity. Data collected by smartphone sensors can be transmitted 
to intelligent network systems for further analysis (Li 2014). Recent research has demonstrated the 
effectiveness of surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) chip-based nanosensors in quantifying 
pesticide residue via mobile phone applications. These nanosensors have shown the ability to iden￾tify various pesticides at low concentrations, enabling the onsite detection of harmful substances 
(Mu et al. 2018). Despite the challenges associated with their implementation, smartphone-based 
biosensors offer significant benefits and have the potential to transform precision agriculture 
practices.
Cloud computing, in conjunction with technologies such as the Internet of Things (IoT), is 
revolutionizing the crop production sector by enabling automation, precision agriculture, remote 
monitoring, forecasting, and decision-making. By leveraging cloud computing, agrochemicals can 
be applied more effectively to improve crop cultivation. The cloud serves as a centralized reposi￾tory for agriculture-related data, encompassing soil parameters, weather conditions, crop informa￾tion, fertilizer usage, agricultural marketing materials, and more. This transformative technology 
facilitates the sharing of digital data between interconnected devices, including vendors, social 
networking, knowledge centres, and crop protection agencies. The seamless functioning of these 
connections relies on remote sensing, geographic information systems (GIS), global positioning 
systems (GPS), sensor technologies, RFID, and cloud computing (Maksimović and Omanović￾Mikličanin 2017). Within the realm of the Internet of Things, farms and equipment can remain 
continuously connected to sensors, the internet, and database systems. As a result, cloud computing 
holds the potential to enhance agricultural productivity, ensure product security and safety, and con￾tribute to the overall GDP growth of national economies.
16.9 POST-HARVEST MANAGEMENT
Due to the world’s rapidly growing population, global food security poses a concerning challenge 
that is drawing the attention of agriculturalists worldwide. In developing countries, it has been 
estimated that loses of up to 40% occur during the processing and post-harvest stages of agricul￾tural practices, including handling, storage, transport, and distribution. Conventional methods in Agronanotechnology Techniques to Promote Nutrient Availability 267
post-harvest management have given rise to concerns related to the spoilage of harvests caused by 
resistant microorganisms and insects, the presence of residual chemicals from the use of insecticides, 
or the presence of other physical contaminants, such as broken glass, microplastics, soil, wood 
particles, and metal-base scrap, which reduce the quality of produce and, in some cases, negatively 
affect health of the consumers (humans and animals). Hence, it is imperative to minimize the post￾harvest loses of fresh produce by using novel technologies to manage the ever-increasing global 
food demand. Nanotechnology has been shown to effectively provide workable solutions to issues 
with the storage and transport of fresh produce. The focus of current research lies on increasing the 
shelf-life of plant-derived commodities to ensure the quality and freshness of cultivated products.
The effect of silicon nanoparticles on the flowing bulbous herb of genus Lilium, which is native to 
China, has been reported. The herb is cultivated largely for ornamental purposes due to its attractive 
flower colour and shape, but it is also known across Asia, Europe, and the Americas for its use in 
gastronomy and the pharmaceutical industry. The commercialization of this herb is limited due to 
its short shelf-life, which is primarily the outcome of increased lipid peroxidation and alterations 
in the plant cell wall. The foliar application of silicon nanoparticles has been reported to improve 
the antioxidant properties of the herb, which directly correlated with an increase in shelf-life, along 
with improved concentrations of macronutrients, photosynthetic pigments, and other antioxidant 
compounds, which positively impacted product quality (Sánchez-Navarro et al. 2021).
In addition to extending the shelf-life of products, the use of nanomaterials can offer tunability to 
meet the requirements of protecting crop-derived merchandise. Some common nanomaterial-based 
techniques for the post-harvest management of agronomic products are discussed in the following 
sections.
16.9.1 Nanoparticle Mineralization
The unique functional characteristics of nanomaterials make them potential candidates for use in the 
storage of fresh produce. Nanoparticle mineralization, which is defined as the process of dispensing 
micronutrients into edible plant parts or intensifying the nutritional value of produce via the external 
application of nanoparticles, is a post-harvest management technique with the potential to elevate 
levels of essential minerals in plant products. The impact of external nanofortification using zinc 
oxide nanoparticles on post-harvest tomatoes under storage conditions has been investigated. The 
pigment analysis showed that the ripening of the tomatoes post-harvest could be mediated by the 
nanoparticles. Further, it was clarified that the dehydration of tomatoes and their observed resistance 
to microbes could be attributed to the liberation of reactive oxygen species from the photoreaction 
of the zinc oxide nanoparticles (Sharifan et al. 2021).
16.9.2 Nanomaterials in Packaging
Nanomaterials are usually embedded in solid matrices, such as biopolymers, to form biodegradable 
or edible films. Nanomaterials used in packaging exhibit superior mechanistic vigour and obstruc￾tion properties compared to their non-nanomaterial-containing counterparts, aiding in extending the 
shelf-life of products while preserving their natural qualities. Depending on the formulations used, 
nanocomposite films may offer other advantages, including better transparency, improved surface 
properties, ability to self-repair, and recyclability.
The effect of adding sulphur nanoparticles to alginate-based packaging film has also been 
investigated. The transparency of the alginate film decreased after the addition of the nanoparticles, 
with a visible change in the colour of the film, while at the optimum nanoparticle concentration, the 
nanocomposite film exhibited a 12% increase in tensile power and a substantial decrease in mois￾ture permeability compared to pure alginate film. In addition, the hydrophobicity and ultraviolet 
barrier properties of the film were also reported to improve upon nanoparticle addition. Further, the 268 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
nanocomposite film was shown to exhibit good antimicrobial activity against foodborne pathogenic 
bacterial species, including bactericidal activity against Listeria monocytogenes and bacteriostatic 
activity against Escherichia coli (Priyadarshi, Kim and Rhim 2021).
16.9.3 Nanoformulations to Deliver Active Agents
A variety of nanoformulations, namely, composites, coatings, emulsions, spheres, bubbles, 
sponges, and capsules, have been widely used in the post-harvest governance of produce. These 
formulations offer the advantage of sustainably releasing active components, such as oxygen 
scavengers, enzymes, flavours, colours, inhibitors, and antimicrobials, to maintain the safety 
and quality of agronomic goods after harvest (Fadiji et al. 2022; Tissera, Sandaruwan and 
Adassooriya 2023).
The life expectancy of cut flowers depends on the time taken for the petals to wilt post-harvest. 
In most species, exposure to gaseous ethylene, either exogenously or endogenously, can accelerate 
the senescence and wilting of flowers, while the use of ethylene inhibitors can negate the effect 
of the gas. The effects of a non-volatile β-cyclodextrin-based nanosponge formulation containing 
1-methylcyclopropene on the vase life of six different cut flowers have been studied. The results 
clearly verified the species-dependent decrease in aging caused by the nanoformulation, which 
improved the quality of all tested flowers post-harvest (Seglie et al. 2013). In another report, a 
casein-based nanoemulsion entrapping the volatile food-safe, herbal, antimicrobial agent eugenol 
was shown to inhibit the occurrence of anthracnose in fruits post-harvest. Amphiphilic casein 
emerged as an effective nanocarrier for achieving sustained release, while eugenol encapsulation 
improved the stability of the compound, consequently enhancing its performance against the post￾harvest decay of produce (Xue et al. 2019)
16.9.4 Nanodevices to Check Produce Freshness
Nanosensors constructed from distinctive organic and inorganic nanomaterials have been developed 
for use in the detection of trace elements and the monitoring of the quality of agricultural produce 
post-harvest. These devices enable the perpetual monitoring of product freshness and alert con￾sumers to issues relating to food safety, that is, whether there are any variations in the natural state 
of goods due to contamination or spoilage. Microbial diseases result in major post-harvest loses in 
garlic, a popular spice used in the food industry. The spice elicits changes in volatile organosulphur 
profiles, depending on the storage time and temperature; therefore, these can be used as potential 
markers for monitoring changes in quality. Colloidal silver nanoparticles have been reported to 
sense sulphite concentrations with a detection accuracy of 0.52 micromoles; hence, they can be used 
as potential colorimetric sensors for monitoring changes in garlic sulphur compounds (Motol et al. 
2020). Aflatoxin B1, a common fungal toxin and potent carcinogen, is frequently found in crops, 
such as cereals, grains, and peanuts, post-harvest. Gold nanoparticles modified with molecularly 
imprinted films of poly(hydroxy ethyl methacrylate/ N-methacryloyl-(L)-phenylalanine) have been 
proposed for use in the detection of mycotoxin in corn and peanut models. Surface plasmon reson￾ance nanosensors have been shown to be economic and selective and have a rapid response period 
and elevated sensitivity, with a low detection threshold of 1 picogram per millilitre (Akgönüllü, 
Yavuz and Denizli 2020).
16.10 NANOMATERIAL-ASSISTED REMEDIATION OF AGROECOSYSTEMS
The expansion of conventional agricultural practices, such as the use of chemicals to improve crop 
production, has, over time, led to the deposition of a diverse spectrum of residual contaminants 
that have polluted agricultural land and waterbodies. The use of engineered nanomaterials, such as Agronanotechnology Techniques to Promote Nutrient Availability 269
zero-valent metal elements, metal oxides, and polymeric and inorganic/carbon-based nanostructures, 
has been reported as a novel and potent strategy for eliminating residual agrochemicals. The reclam￾ation of agroecosystems aims to achieve the cleaner and safer production of crops with higher 
yields and nutritional value. Nanotechnology-based remediation not only offers an economic and 
efficient means to clean up polluted ecosystems but also progresses the development of sustainable 
and safer alternatives to existing farming practices. Figure 16.2 demonstrates the importance of the 
nanotechnology-based remediation of cultivation lands and water. Depending on the type of pollu￾tant and the aim of the remedial process, a range of techniques employing engineered nanostructures 
have been established (Borišev et al. 2020).
16.10.1 Nano-​Adsorption
Nano-adsorption is a technique preferred for contaminants in aqueous media. The magnani￾mous surface area to volume ratios of engineered nanostructures and their specific interactions 
with pollutant molecules offer a simple and economic method for inactivating toxic chemical 
residues. The use of cellulose-based nanomaterials with tailored functional groups has been 
reported to effectively adsorb hazardous chemical pollutants, including heavy metals, organics, 
dyes, and other synthetic components, from agrochemically polluted environments (Hassanisaadi 
et al. 2023).
16.10.2 Nanomaterial-​Based Filtration
Taking into consideration that the size of most agrochemicals is in the nanometre range, pressure￾driven filtration processes have been proposed for the purification of polluted water. Membranes and 
filters coated with suitable nanostructures offer improved salt rejection and chemical stability, while 
reducing pollution levels. The use of nanocomposite membranes comprising polyvinyl alcohol￾functionalized multiwalled carbon nanotubes for the removal of pesticides and heavy metal elem￾ents from wastewater has been evaluated. The incorporation of these nanotubes improved the overall 
mechanical and antimicrobial properties of the nanocomposites. The functionalized membranes 
showed augmented performance in the capture of heavy metals and pesticides in water, with 
reusability for up to five cycles (Youssef et al. 2019).
FIGURE 16.2 Significance of the nanomaterial-based remediation of agroecosystems.270 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
16.10.3 Nanocatalysis
Nanomaterials, with their enhanced reactivity, play a pivotal role in homogenous and heterogenous 
catalysis. Nanomaterials consisting of metals and their oxides, carbon and silica derivatives, and 
polymeric structures have been used as catalysts and are preferred over conventional materials due 
to their high reaction yields, minimal waste generation, and ease of catalyst recovery. The degrad￾ation of pendimethalin, a persistent pesticide residue, has been reported using gold nanoflowers 
under experimental conditions in selected soil samples. The nanoflowers were shown to effect￾ively degrade the nitroaromatic pesticide residue in the presence of sodium borohydride (Mao 
et al. 2014).
16.10.4 Nanobioremediation
The integration of nanotechnology and bioremediation techniques has derived some highly efficient 
and sustainable hybrid technologies for decontaminating agroecosystems. Microbial bioremedi￾ation aims to identify microbial species that can restore soil health. A comparative investigation 
on the annihilation of 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid using soil-indigenous microbial consortia, 
iron oxide (Fe3
O4
) nanoparticles, and the combination of the two has been reported. The results 
indicated that the herbicide was degraded more successfully when the combined treatment was 
applied than when individual treatments were used. This improved performance was attributed 
to the use of nanoparticles that favoured the progression of the microbial population, thereby 
upregulating enzymatic activity and enabling the efficient breakdown of the agrochemical (Fang 
et al. 2012). The phytoremediation of thiamethoxam from soil using a green nanoparticle-integrated 
plant system has also been investigated. The insecticide, which is used for crop seed treatment, is 
highly persistent in agroecosystems due to its extensive water solubility and long shelf-life in soil. 
The results showed that the effective removal of the agrochemical from soil was achieved using 
a combination of synthesized green nanoparticles and Helianthus annuus L. The treatment of the 
plant roots with the nanoparticles ensured the degradation of the thiamethoxam in soil, thereby 
limiting the accumulation of the insecticide in the leaves of the crops (Ramadan, Muhanna and 
Romeh 2019).
16.10.5 Nanosensing
The need for remediation, as well as the related success of remedial measures, can only be 
acknowledged if the existence of contamination is ascertained. Sensors have been extensively used 
for the in situ detection of trace and residual levels of agrochemicals in environmental systems, 
without many complications. A turn-off fluorescence sensor for the meticulous and sensitive 
screening of glyphosate have been reported. The reduction of hydrogen peroxide was confirmed 
by the formation of resorufin (which emits a fluorescent red signal) produced by the oxidation of 
Amplex Red. The copper oxide–multiwalled carbon nanotube combination used in the nanosensor 
exhibited peroxidase-like catalytic activity that produced an equivalent red fluorescent signal. 
A decline in the catalytic activity of the nanomaterial in the presence of the herbicide “turned-off” 
the fluorescent signal and this mechanism was used to effectively sense glyphosate in samples, with 
the low detection threshold of 0.67 parts per billion (Chang et al. 2016).
16.11 CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES
The utility of nanotechnology-based techniques has, without doubt, directed modern agricultural 
practices to advance in the direction of fortifying the global food economy. By channelling the 
distinctive properties of nanostructured particles, contemporary agricultural science can become Agronanotechnology Techniques to Promote Nutrient Availability 271
more competent, balanced, and flexible to ever-changing ecological circumstances. The applica￾tion of nanotechnology offers secure solutions for tackling challenges in agronomy, including soil 
conditioning, n nutrient unavailability, crop diseases, water shortages, agricultural land contamin￾ation, and many others. Studies have established that engineered nanostructures can increase the 
productivity of crops by boosting factors such as soil health, nutrient transport, resistance to abiotic 
stress, pathogen and insect control, contagion endurance, and water retention. However, the mis￾management of engineered nanomaterials in agricultural practices has raised several environmental 
concerns. This is because the fate and transport of tailored nanostructures within natural systems are 
uncharted and majorly depend on the type of nanomaterial used and its interactions with different 
elements within agroecosystems.
Soil is believed to serve as a sink for nanostructures released into the environment, either 
accidently (for example, from the overuse of nanoagrochemicals) or intentionally (for example, the 
use nanomaterials to decontaminate soil). On the other hand, nanoparticles may either seep into soil 
via agricultural run-off or infiltrate soil matrices and reach groundwater, thereby polluting water 
resources. Additionally, global warming and its unwavering impacts may discharge minor levels 
of nanomaterials. This exposure poses ecological risks that may adversely affect life forms within 
ecosystems, including microbes, plants, animals, and humans.
Metal-based nanostructures demonstrate good antimicrobial activity. However, the presence of 
such materials in the environment possibly threatens beneficial microbial communities by influ￾encing their nutrient absorption and productivity. Prolonged exposure to nanostructures can sig￾nificantly alter the structural, genetic, and functional status of plants, hampering the expansion 
and development of cultivated crops. Nanoparticles can effortlessly be taken up by crop tissues, 
leading to bioaccumulation, biotransformation, and biomagnification, which jeopardize the safe 
consumption of the produce. As well as these concerns regarding toxicology, the in situ application 
of nanomaterial-based systems is currently restricted because of their commercialization potential 
and the lack of regulation policies aimed at environmental risk assessment (Singh et al. 2021; Rajput 
et al. 2020).
The possibility of using nanomaterials in agronomy is often restricted by the intricacy and 
scalability of the manufacturing processes involved in the production and functionalization of 
nanomaterials. In addition, there may be the requirement to undertake special measures to ensure 
the efficient dispersion and delivery of functional nanomaterials in soil matrices. Other factors, 
such as resource inadequacies, economic viability, ease of use, and practical shortcomings, further 
curb the adoption of nanotechnologies in agricultural practices. The successful transition to the 
use of nanomaterial-based agricultural solutions can be achieved by (i) ensuring the equitable use 
of nanotechnology-based technologies, (ii) performing comprehensive cost–benefit analyses, (iii) 
weighing up the long-term returns on capital spending, (iv) taking into account the explicit needs 
and states of individual agricultural routines, and (v) making informed decisions that promote sus￾tainability and productivity in cultivation practices (Zaib et al. 2023).
It is clear from the above discussion that in order to overcome the empirical concerns regarding 
the integration of nanotechnology in agronomic practices, extensive research must be conducted 
to validate the role of nanomaterials in sustainable agriculture. Moreover, the pragmatism related 
to techniques must be evaluated in terms of fabrication costs, user-friendliness, and environ￾mental erudition. Integrating advanced simulation and modelling methods may kick-start critical 
investigations into the structure–activity relationships between nanoparticles and complex elem￾ents in agroecosystems to understand their behaviours, toxicology, and environmental impact. The 
documentation and systematization of research data could help to set the stage for efficient regula￾tion strategies and commercial standards that may, in due course, alleviate nanomaterial-associated 
environmental risks and promote the use of agronanotechnology techniques to satiate nutrient avail￾ability in plants.272 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
REFERENCES
Afsharinejad, Armita, Alan Davy, Brendan Jennings, and Conor Brennan. 2015. “Performance Analysis of Plant 
Monitoring Nanosensor Networks at THz Frequencies.” IEEE Internet of Things Journal 3 (1): 59–69.
Ahmar, Sunny, Tahir Mahmood, Sajid Fiaz, Freddy Mora-Poblete, Muhammad Shafique Sohaib, Muhammad 
Sohaib Chattha, and Ki-Hung Jung. 2021. “Advantage of Nanotechnology-Based Genome Editing 
System and Its Application in Crop Improvement.” Frontiers in Plant Science 12: 669849.
Akgönüllü, Semra, Handan Yavuz, and Adil Denizli. 2020. “SPR Nanosensor Based on Molecularly 
Imprinted Polymer Film with Gold Nanoparticles for Sensitive Detection of Aflatoxin B1.” Talanta 219 
(November): 121219.
Alabdallah, Nadiyah M., and Md Mahadi Hasan. 2021. “Plant-Based Green Synthesis of Silver Nanoparticles 
and Its Effective Role in Abiotic Stress Tolerance in Crop Plants.” Saudi Journal of Biological Sciences
28 (10): 5631–39.
Ali, Shafaqat, Muhammad Rizwan, Shamaila Noureen, Sarwat Anwar, Basharat Ali, Muhammad Naveed, 
Elsayed Fathi Abd_Allah, Abdulaziz A. Alqarawi, and Parvaiz Ahmad. 2019. “Combined Use of 
Biochar and Zinc Oxide Nanoparticle Foliar Spray Improved the Plant Growth and Decreased the 
Cadmium Accumulation in Rice (Oryza Sativa L.).” Environmental Science and Pollution Research
26: 11288–99.
Borišev, I., M. Borišev, D. Jović, M. Župunski, D. Arsenov, S. Pajević, and A. Djordjevic. 2020. “Nanotechnology 
and Remediation of Agrochemicals.” In Agrochemicals Detection, Treatment and Remediation: Pesticides 
and Chemical Fertilizers, ed. Prasad, M. N. V. 487–533. Butterworth-Heinemann. https://doi.org/
10.1016/B978-0-08-103017-2.00019-2
Chang, Ya Chu, Yu Syuan Lin, Guan Ting Xiao, Tai Chia Chiu, and Cho Chun Hu. 2016. “A Highly Selective 
and Sensitive Nanosensor for the Detection of Glyphosate.” Talanta 161 (December): 94–98.
Changmei, Lu, Zhang Chaoying, Wen Junqiang, Wu Guorong, and Tao Mingxuan. 2002. “Research of the 
Effect of Nanometer Materials on Germination and Growth Enhancement of Glycine Max and Its 
Mechanism.” Soybean Science 21 (3): 168–71.
Cheng, Huai N., K. T. Klasson, Tetsuo Asakura, and Qinglin Wu. 2016. “Nanotechnology in Agriculture.” In 
Nanotechnology: Delivering on the Promise, eds. H. N. Cheng, Laurence Doemeny, Charles L., Geraci, 
Diane Grob Schmidt. 233–42. ACS Publications. doi: 10.1021/bk-2016-1224.ch012
Chinnamuthu, C. R., and E. Kokiladevi. 2007. “Weed Management through Nanoherbicides.” Application of 
Nanotechnology in Agriculture 10: 971–78.
Cioffi, Nicola, Luisa Torsi, Nicoletta Ditaranto, Luigia Sabbatini, Pier Giorgio Zambonin, Giuseppina Tantillo, 
Lina Ghibelli, Maria D’Alessio, Teresa Bleve-Zacheo, and Enrico Traversa. 2004. “Antifungal Activity 
of Polymer-Based Copper Nanocomposite Coatings.” Applied Physics Letters 85 (12): 2417–19.
Dekkers, Susan, Petra Krystek, Ruud J. B. Peters, Daniëlle P. K. Lankveld, Bas G. H. Bokkers, Paula H. van 
Hoeven-Arentzen, Hans Bouwmeester, and Agnes G. Oomen. 2011. “Presence and Risks of Nanosilica 
in Food Products.” Nanotoxicology 5 (3): 393–405.
Deng, Huan, Wei Huang, and Zhiping Zhang. 2019. “Nanotechnology Based CRISPR/Cas9 System Delivery 
for Genome Editing: Progress and Prospect.” Nano Research 12: 2437–50.
Van Dijk, M., and G. W. Meijerink. 2014. “A Review of Food Security Scenario Studies: Gaps and Ways 
Forward.” In The Food Puzzle: Pathways to Securing Food for All, eds. T. J. Achterbosch, M. van Dorp, 
W. F. van Driel, J. J. Groot, J. van der Lee, A. Verhagen, and I. Bezlepkina. 30–32. Wageningen UR.
Dimkpa, Christian O., Joshua Andrews, Job Fugice, Upendra Singh, Prem S. Bindraban, Wade H. Elmer, 
Jorge L. Gardea-Torresdey, and Jason C. White. 2020. “Facile Coating of Urea with Low-Dose ZnO 
Nanoparticles Promotes Wheat Performance and Enhances Zn Uptake under Drought Stress.” Frontiers 
in Plant Science 11: 511190.
Dubey, Alpna, and Damodhara R. Mailapalli. 2016. “Nanofertilisers, Nanopesticides, Nanosensors of Pest and 
Nanotoxicity in Agriculture.” Sustainable Agriculture Reviews 19: 307–30.
Fadiji, A. E., D. M. N. Mthiyane, D. C. Onwudiwe, and O. O. Babalola. 2022. “Harnessing the Known 
and Unknown Impact of Nanotechnology on Enhancing Food Security and Reducing Postharvest 
Losses: Constraints and Future Prospects.” Agronomy 12 (7): 1657.
Fang, Guodong, Youbin Si, Chao Tian, Gangya Zhang, and Dongmei Zhou. 2012. “Degradation of 2,4-D 
in Soils by Fe3O4 Nanoparticles Combined with Stimulating Indigenous Microbes.” Environmental 
Science and Pollution Research 19 (3): 784–93.Agronanotechnology Techniques to Promote Nutrient Availability 273
Gao, Caixia. 2018. “The Future of CRISPR Technologies in Agriculture.” Nature Reviews Molecular Cell 
Biology 19 (5): 275–76.
Ghorbanpour, Mansour, and Shohreh Fahimirad. 2017. “Plant Nanobionics a Novel Approach to Overcome 
the Environmental Challenges.” In Medicinal Plants and Environmental Challenges, eds. Mansour 
Ghorbanpour and Ajit Varma, 247–57. Springer International publishing AG.
Giraldo, Juan Pablo, Markita P. Landry, Sean M. Faltermeier, Thomas P. McNicholas, Nicole M. Iverson, 
Ardemis A. Boghossian, and Nigel F. Reuel. 2014. “Plant Nanobionics Approach to Augment 
Photosynthesis and Biochemical Sensing.” Nature Materials 13 (4): 400–8.
Godoy, Francisca, Karina Olivos-Hernández, Claudia Stange, and Michael Handford. 2021. “Abiotic Stress in 
Crop Species: Improving Tolerance by Applying Plant Metabolites.” Plants 10 (2): 1–19.
Hassanisaadi, M., R. S. Riseh, A. Rabiei, R. S. Varma, and J. F. Kennedy. 2023. “Nano/Micro-Cellulose￾Based Materials as Remarkable Sorbents for the Remediation of Agricultural Resources from Chemical 
Pollutants.” International Journal of Biological Macromolecules 246: 125763.
Iqbal, Muhammad Aamir. 2019. “Nano-Fertilizers for Sustainable Crop Production under Changing Climate: A 
Global Perspective.” Sustainable Crop Production 8: 1–13.
Jinghua, G. 2004. “Synchrotron Radiation, Soft X-Ray Spectroscopy and Nano-Materials.” Journal of 
Nanotechnology 1: 193–225.
Kanjana, D. 2015. “Potential Applications of Nanotechnology in Major Agriculture Divisions-A Review.” 
International Journal of Agriculture, Environment and Biotechnology 8 (3): 699–714.
Khader, Asmaa, Mahmoud Ibrahim, Fahad Alkhathami, Hany Elsawy, Nasser Abd El-Kader, Eman Shaker, 
Azza Sedky, and Esawy Mahmoud. 2023. “Properties of Nano-Amendments and Their Effect on 
Some Soil Properties and Root-Knot Nematode and Yield Attributes of Tomato Plant.” Agriculture
13 (2): 366.
Kole, Chittaranjan, Phullara Kole, K. Manoj Randunu, Poonam Choudhary, Ramakrishna Podila, Pu Chun Ke, 
Apparao M. Rao, and Richard K. Marcus. 2013. “Nanobiotechnology Can Boost Crop Production and 
Quality: First Evidence from Increased Plant Biomass, Fruit Yield and Phytomedicine Content in Bitter 
Melon (Momordica Charantia).” BMC Biotechnology 13: 1–10.
Langer, Robert, and Nicholas A. Peppas. 2003. “Advances in Biomaterials, Drug Delivery, and 
Bionanotechnology.” AIChE Journal 49 (12): 2990–3006.
Lew, Tedrick Thomas Salim, Minkyung Park, Yizhi Wang, Pavlo Gordiichuk, Wan-Chin Yeap, Siti Khadijah 
Mohd Rais, Harikrishna Kulaveerasingam, and Michael S. Strano. 2020. “Nanocarriers for Transgene 
Expression in Pollen as a Plant Biotechnology Tool.” ACS Materials Letters 2 (9): 1057–66.
Li, Jing. 2014. “Nanotechnology Based Cell-All Phone-Sensors for Extended Network Chemical Sensing.” In 
Electrochemical Society Meeting Abstracts, 456.
Liu, Xiu-Mei, Zhao-Bin Feng, Fu-Dao Zhang, Shu-Qing Zhang, and Xu-Sheng He. 2006. “Preparation and 
Testing of Cementing and Coating Nano-Subnanocomposites of Slow/Controlled-Release Fertilizer.” 
Agricultural Sciences in China 5 (9): 700–706.
Liu, Xiu-Mei, Fu-Dao Zhang, Zhao-Bin Feng, Shu-Qing Zhang, Xu-Sheng He, Ru-Fang Wang, and Yu-Jun 
Wang. 2005. “Effects of Nano-Ferric Oxide on the Growth and Nutrients Absorption of Peanut.” Journal 
of Plant Nutrition and Fertilizers 11 (4): 551–55.
Maksimović, Mirjana, and Enisa Omanović-Mikličanin. 2017. “Green Internet of Things and Green 
Nanotechnology Role in Realizing Smart and Sustainable Agriculture.” In VIII International Scientific 
Agriculture Symposium “AGROSYM, 2290–95.
Mandal, A., B. Sarkar, S. Mandal, M. Vithanage, A. K. Patra, and M. C. Manna. 2020. “Impact of Agrochemicals 
on Soil Health.” In Agrochemicals Detection, Treatment and Remediation, ed. Majeti Narasimha Vara 
Prasad. 61–187. Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-08-103017-2.00007-6
Mao, Kang, Yinran Chen, Zitong Wu, Xiaodong Zhou, Aiguo Shen, and Jiming Hu. 2014. “Catalytic Strategy for 
Efficient Degradation of Nitroaromatic Pesticides by Using Gold Nanoflower.” Journal of Agricultural 
and Food Chemistry 62 (44): 10638–45.
Moeller, Lorena, and Kan Wang. 2008. “Engineering with Precision: Tools for the New Generation of 
Transgenic Crops.” Bioscience 58 (5): 391–401.
Motol, R. K .C., C. A. Espineli, C. M. V. Tapit, and C. E. Tiangco. 2020. “Synthesis and Characterization 
of Silver Nanoparticles as a Potential Sensor for Volatile Organosulfides for Visual Detection of 
Postharvest Storage in Garlic.” IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering 778 
(1): 012002.274 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
Mu, Taotao, Shengnan Wang, Tianshu Li, Bing Wang, Xing Ma, Bill Huang, Lianqing Zhu, and Jinhong 
Guo. 2018. “Detection of Pesticide Residues Using Nano-SERS Chip and a Smartphone-Based Raman 
Sensor.” IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics 25 (2): 1–6.
Nakagawa, Kyuya. 2014. “Nano-and Microencapsulation of Flavor in Food Systems.” In Nano and 
Microencapsulation for Foods, ed. Hae-Soo Kwak. 249–71. Wiley online. DOI:10.1002/9781118292327
Narayanan, Aarthi, Parvesh Sharma, and Brij M. Moudgil. 2013. “Applications of Engineered Particulate 
Systems in Agriculture and Food Industry.” KONA Powder and Particle Journal 30: 221–35.
Ngo, Quoc Buu, Trong Hien Dao, Hoai Chau Nguyen, Xuan Tin Tran, Tuong Van Nguyen, Thuy Duong Khuu, 
and Thi Ha Huynh. 2014. “Effects of Nanocrystalline Powders (Fe, Co and Cu) on the Germination, 
Growth, Crop Yield and Product Quality of Soybean (Vietnamese Species DT-51).” Advances in Natural 
Sciences: Nanoscience and Nanotechnology 5 (1): 015016.
Ottaway, P. B. 2010. “Nanotechnology in Supplements and Foods–EU Concerns.” Nutraceuticals 
International, 1.
Panpatte, Deepak G., Yogeshvari K. Jhala, Harsha N. Shelat, and Rajababu V. Vyas. 2016. “Nanoparticles: The 
Next Generation Technology for Sustainable Agriculture.” In Microbial Inoculants in Sustainable 
Agricultural Productivity: Vol. 2: Functional Applications, eds. Dhananjaya Pratap Singh, Harikesh 
Bahadur Singh, Ratna Prabha. 2289–300. Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-81-322-2644-4_18
Paul, Anindita, and Aryadeep Roychoudhury. 2021. “Go Green to Protect Plants: Repurposing the Antimicrobial 
Activity of Biosynthesized Silver Nanoparticles to Combat Phytopathogens.” Nanotechnology for 
Environmental Engineering 6 (1): 10.
Pongnumkul, Suporn, Pimwadee Chaovalit, and Navaporn Surasvadi. 2015. “Applications of Smartphone￾Based Sensors in Agriculture: A Systematic Review of Research.” Journal of Sensors 1: 195308.
Pradhan, Neha, Surjit Singh, Nupur Ojha, Anamika Shrivastava, Anil Barla, Vivek Rai, and Sutapa Bose. 2015. 
“Facets of Nanotechnology as Seen in Food Processing, Packaging, and Preservation Industry.” BioMed 
Research International 1: 365672.
Prasad, T. N. V. K. V., P. Sudhakar, Y. Sreenivasulu, P. Latha, V. Munaswamy, K. Raja Reddy, T. S. Sreeprasad, 
P. R. Sajanlal, and T. Pradeep. 2012. “Effect of Nanoscale Zinc Oxide Particles on the Germination, 
Growth and Yield of Peanut.” Journal of Plant Nutrition 35 (6): 905–27.
Priyadarshi, Ruchir, Hyun Ji Kim, and Jong Whan Rhim. 2021. “Effect of Sulfur Nanoparticles on 
Properties of Alginate-Based Films for Active Food Packaging Applications.” Food Hydrocolloids 110 
(January): 106155.
Rajput, Vishnu D., Ajeet Singh, Vipin K. Singh, Tatiana M. Minkina, and Svetlana Sushkova. 2020. “Impact of 
Nanoparticles on Soil Resource.” In Nanomaterials for Soil Remediation, , ed. A. Amrane, D. Mohan, 
A. A. Assadi, G. Yasin, and T. A. Nguyen. 65–85. Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-822
891-3.00004-9
Ramadan, M. R., A. H. Muhanna, and A. A. Romeh. 2019. “Remediation of Soil Polluted with Thiamethoxam 
Using Green Nano–Phytotechnology.” Journal of Productivity and Development 24 (3): 595–610.
Sánchez-Navarro, Juan Francisco, Yolanda González-García, Adalberto Benavides-Mendoza, América 
Berenice Morales-Díaz, Susana González-Morales, Gregorio Cadenas-Pliego, María Del Socorro 
García-Guillermo, and Antonio Juárez-Maldonado. 2021. “Silicon Nanoparticles Improve the Shelf Life 
and Antioxidant Status of Lilium.” Plants 10 (11): 2338.
Sári, Daniella, Aya Ferroudj, Neama Abdalla, Hassan El-Ramady, Judit Dobránszki, and József Prokisch. 
2023. “Nano-Management Approaches for Salt Tolerance in Plants under Field and In Vitro Conditions.” 
Agronomy 13 (11): 2695.
Sari, T. P., Bimlesh Mann, Rajesh Kumar, R. R. B. Singh, Rajan Sharma, Minaxi Bhardwaj, and S. Athira. 2015. 
“Preparation and Characterization of Nanoemulsion Encapsulating Curcumin.” Food Hydrocolloids
43: 540–46.
Seglie, Ludovica, Marco Devecchi, Francesco Trotta, and Valentina Scariot. 2013. “β-Cyclodextrin-Based 
Nanosponges Improve 1-MCP Efficacy in Extending the Postharvest Quality of Cut Flowers.” Scientia 
Horticulturae 159 (July): 162–65.
Senapaty, Murali Krishna, Abhishek Ray, and Neelamadhab Padhy. 2023. “IoT-Enabled Soil Nutrient Analysis 
and Crop Recommendation Model for Precision Agriculture.” Computers 12 (3): 61.
Shang, Yanliang, and Yingchun Fu. 2018. “Experimental Study of the Mechanical Properties of Expansive Soil 
with Added Nanomaterials.” Arabian Journal of Geosciences 11 (8): 180.Agronanotechnology Techniques to Promote Nutrient Availability 275
Sharifan, Hamidreza, Azam Noori, Majid Bagheri, and Janie M. Moore. 2021. “Postharvest Spraying of Zinc 
Oxide Nanoparticles Enhances Shelf Life Qualities and Zinc Concentration of Tomato Fruits.” Crop and 
Pasture Science 73 (2): 22–31.
Singh, Abhishek, Rakesh Singh Sengar, Vishnu D. Rajput, Tatiana Minkina, and Rupesh Kumar Singh. 2022. 
“Zinc Oxide Nanoparticles Improve Salt Tolerance in Rice Seedlings by Improving Physiological and 
Biochemical Indices.” Agriculture (Switzerland) 12 (7): 1014.
Singh, Harpreet, Archita Sharma, Sanjeev K. Bhardwaj, Shailendra Kumar Arya, Neha Bhardwaj, and Madhu 
Khatri. 2021. “Recent Advances in the Applications of Nano-Agrochemicals for Sustainable Agricultural 
Development.” Environmental Science: Processes and Impacts 23 (2): 213–39.
Singh, Raj, Ram Singh, Diwan Singh, Jugal K. Mani, S. S. Karwasra, and M. S. Beniwal. 2010. “Effect 
of Weather Parameters on Karnal Bunt Disease in Wheat in Karnal Region of Haryana.” Journal of 
Agrometeorology 12 (1): 99–101.
Sousa, Gustavo F. M., Diego G. Gomes, Estefânia V. R. Campos, Jhones L. Oliveira, Leonardo F. Fraceto, Renata 
Stolf-Moreira, and Halley C. Oliveira. 2018. “Post-Emergence Herbicidal Activity of Nanoatrazine 
against Susceptible Weeds.” Frontiers in Environmental Science 6 (12).
Srilatha, B. A. R. N. 2011. “Nanotechnology in Agriculture.” Journal of Nanomedicine and Nanotechnology
2 (7): 5.
Suazo-Hernández, Jonathan, Nicolás Arancibia-Miranda, Rawan Mlih, Lizethly Cáceres-Jensen, Nanthi Bolan, 
and María de la Luz Mora. 2023. “Impact on Some Soil Physical and Chemical Properties Caused by 
Metal and Metallic Oxide Engineered Nanoparticles: A Review.” Nanomaterials 13 (3): 572.
Sun, Xiaofei, Yanyu Zhang, Guangpeng Chen, and Zhiyong Gai. 2017. “Application of Nanoparticles in 
Enhanced Oil Recovery: A Critical Review of Recent Progress.” Energies 3: 345.
Tafazoli, Mahya, Seyed Mohammad Hojjati, Pourya Biparva, Yahya Kooch, and Norbert Lamersdorf. 
2020. “Changes in Soil Chemistry and Element Uptake by Oak Seedlings after Application of Soil 
Amendment.” Scandinavian Journal of Forest Research 36 (1): 32–42.
Tissera, A. N., C. Sandaruwan, and N. M. Adassooriya. 2023. “Emerging Role of Nanomaterials in 
Storage and Packaging of Agricultural Products.” In Engineered Nanomaterials for Sustainable 
Agricultural Production, Soil Improvement and Stress Management, ed. Azamal Husen. 475–93. 
Academic Press.
Vega-Vásquez, Pablo, Nathan S. Mosier, and Joseph Irudayaraj. 2020. “Nanoscale Drug Delivery Systems: From 
Medicine to Agriculture.” Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology 8: 79.
Wang, Lijuan, Xuefeng Li, Gaoyong Zhang, Jinfeng Dong, and Julian Eastoe. 2007. “Oil-in-Water 
Nanoemulsions for Pesticide Formulations.” Journal of Colloid and Interface Science 314 
(1): 230–35.
Wang, Peng, Enzo Lombi, Fang-Jie Zhao, and Peter M. Kopittke. 2016. “Nanotechnology: A New Opportunity 
in Plant Sciences.” Trends in Plant Science 21 (8): 699–712.
Weiss, Jochen, Paul Takhistov, and D. Julian McClements. 2006. “Functional Materials in Food Nanotechnology.” 
Journal of Food Science 71 (9): R107–16.
Wong, Min Hao, Juan P. Giraldo, Seon-Yeong Kwak, Volodymyr B. Koman, Rosalie Sinclair, Tedrick Thomas 
Salim Lew, Gili Bisker, Pingwei Liu, and Michael S. Xue, Yang, Shitong Zhou, Chenyue Fan, Qizhen 
Du, and Peng Jin. 2019. “Enhanced Antifungal Activities of Eugenol-Entrapped Casein Nanoparticles 
against Anthracnose in Postharvest Fruits.” Nanomaterials 9 (12): 1777.
Xue, Yang, Shitong Zhou, Chenyue Fan, Qizhen Du, and Peng Jin. 2019. “Enhanced Antifungal Activities of 
Eugenol-Entrapped Casein Nanoparticles against Anthracnose in Postharvest Fruits.” Nanomaterials 9 
(12): 1777.
Yan, S. Steve, and Jeffrey M. Gilbert. 2004. “Antimicrobial Drug Delivery in Food Animals and Microbial 
Food Safety Concerns: An Overview of in Vitro and in Vivo Factors Potentially Affecting the Animal 
Gut Microflora.” Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 56 (10): 1497–1521.
Yashveer, Shikha, Vikram Singh, Vineet Kaswan, Amit Kaushik, and Jayanti Tokas. 2014. “Green Biotechnology, 
Nanotechnology and Bio-Fortification: Perspectives on Novel Environment-Friendly Crop Improvement 
Strategies.” Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering Reviews 30 (2): 113–26.
Youssef, Ahmed M., Mehrez E. El-Naggar, Farag M. Malhat, and Haytham M. El Sharkawi. 2019. “Efficient 
Removal of Pesticides and Heavy Metals from Wastewater and the Antimicrobial Activity of 
F-MWCNTs/PVA Nanocomposite Film.” Journal of Cleaner Production 206 (January): 315–25.276 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
Zaib, Muhammad, Irfan Raza, Muhammad Zubair, Zaid Arif, Muhammad Mohsin Mumtaz, Muhammad 
Qamer Abbas, Ahsan Javed, et al. 2023. “Nano-Enabled Soil Amendments for Improved Soil Structure 
and Water Holding Capacity: An In-Depth Review.” International Research Journal of Education and 
Technology 5 (8): 344–57.
Zhang, Tuo, Chenyan Lv, Lingli Chen, Guangling Bai, Guanghua Zhao, and Chuanshan Xu. 2014. 
“Encapsulation of Anthocyanin Molecules within a Ferritin Nanocage Increases Their Stability and Cell 
Uptake Efficiency.” Food Research International 62: 183–92.
Zheng, Lei, Fashui Hong, Shipeng Lu, and Chao Liu. 2005. “Effect of Nano-TiO2 on Strength of Naturally 
Aged Seeds and Growth of Spinach.” Biological Trace Element Research 104: 83–91.277
DOI: 10.1201/9781003477730-19 277
17 Green Nanotechnology
Harnessing Plant-Based 
Nanoparticles for Sustainable 
Food Preservation
Nallagatla Himaja, Yelagandula Archana, 
Ashwitha Kodaparthi, Ramchander Merugu, and 
Mallesham Bulle
17.1 INTRODUCTION
The food industry is booming, with a turnover of about USD 9.43 trillion in 2023 that is anticipated 
to rise by 6.21% each year (Singh et al., 2023). Confectionary and snacks account for most of the 
sales in the market, followed by preserved foods. This emphasizes the importance of food processing 
and preservation to maintain freshness and flavor in preserved foods. There have been several reports 
suggesting different strategies for enhancing freshness and maintaining the quality of food products 
for longer periods. Nanotechnology is extensively applied to food preservation compared to other 
methods. Nanotechnology-based approaches increase the nutritional and microbiological quality of 
foods. Nutritional quality can be improved by increasing the availability of bioactive molecules in food 
products, while microbiological quality includes preventing microbial growth. Interestingly, recent 
studies have employed nanotechnology to produce foods that help to combat lifestyle diseases, like 
diabetes and obesity, and develop appropriate nutritional diets that are environmentally friendly for 
various specific categories, lifestyles, and aging populations (Chaudhary et al., 2008). Nanoparticles are 
used in food preservation in the form of antimicrobial sensors, packaging materials, flavoring agents, 
packed food components, and more (Bajpai et al., 2012). As well as preservation, nanoparticles in the 
form of electrospun nanofibers are used as packaging material as they are antimicrobial, providing 
better mechanical barriers and increasing the bioavailability of nutrients in foods (Chung et al., 2017).
The major principle of nanotechnology is to render cell damage using reactive oxygen species 
(ROS), thereby exerting an antimicrobial effect. Inorganic nanoparticles are conventionally used for 
nutrition, food processing, and packaging (Chen et al., 2017). For instance, titanium (Ti) adds color 
to food, as well as being used as a preservative in dairy, confectionary, cosmetics, and oral hygiene 
products (Weir et al., 2012; Limage et al., 2020). Packing containers linked by nanoparticles offer an 
appropriate solution to maintaining food freshness for longer by limiting food contamination and infec￾tion. It has also been observed that nanoparticles can permeate biofilms, thereby effectively cleansing 
surfaces (Huang et al., 2015; Shanthi et al., 2016). Nanoceuticals is another important area within 
nanotechnology that is gaining prominence, which helps to deliver nutritional components effectively 
(Charles Oluwaseun Adetunji et al., 2021). Nanoceuticals helps to alter the properties of substances 
close to the molecular level, thereby enhancing the nutritional value of foods. Nanotechnology has 
many applications and advantages in the food industry besides creating preservatives. It has a prime 
role in postharvest food processing, as well as enhancing food bioavailability and flavor. It also 
helps to conceal unpleasant tastes or odors and changes food particle structure and charge (Powers 278 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
et al., 2006). Nanofilms/coatings made up of various elements are used as barriers to gas and mois￾ture formation in foods and are antibacterial (Azeredo et al., 2009; Naoto et al., 2009). Healthier 
food options with low fat, carbohydrate, and sodium contents to curb foodborne illnesses are being 
developed using nanotechnology. The synthesis of nanoparticles has been achieved using physical, 
chemical, and biological methods (Singh et al., 2016; Satyanarayana and Reddy, 2018; Singh, Ahmed 
et al., 2022; Singh, Sharma et al., 2022). However, biological methods of nanoparticle synthesis 
are highly preferred in the food industry due to their lower toxicity, environmental safety, repro￾ducibility, nanoparticle symmetry, scalability, and more. The biological synthesis of nanoparticles 
involves either microorganisms or plant extracts. Live microorganisms generate nanoparticles from 
the surrounding environment by using enzymes to convert metal ions into metals. Nanoparticles, 
like zinc oxide (ZnO) nanoparticles, produced by microbial activity using bacteria, like Aeromonas 
hydrophila, are effective antimicrobial agents and food additives (Iravani, 2014). Similarly, quer￾cetin (biodegradable poly-D, L-lactide) has been used to increase the shelf-life of tomatoes and has 
recently been applied to various other fruits and vegetables (Yadav, 2017).
17.2 NANOPARTICLE SYNTHESIS USING PLANT PARTS
Plant nanoparticles are produced by reducing metal salts and stabilizing agents, like proteins, 
amino acids, enzymes, organic acids, and vitamins. In addition, some secondary metabolites, 
like alkaloids and polysaccharides, that are available in plants also aid favorably in the production 
of nanoparticles (Duan et al., 2015). Nanoparticles can be prepared using common metals, 
like copper, titanium dioxide, and cadmium, as well as rarer metals, like silver and gold. Their 
advantages are diverse, including their catalytic activity, antibacterial nature, electrocatalytic 
ability, and electrocatalytic actions toward hydrogen peroxide (Singh, 2016). Silver nanoparticles 
that are synthesized via the reduction and stabilization of silver ions and biomolecules from plant 
extracts are used extensively in food packaging due to their advantages (Ahmed et al., 2016). A brief 
overview of the procedure for nanoparticles synthesis using plant extracts is shown in Figure 17.1. 
FIGURE 17.1 The synthesis of green nanoparticles.Green Nanotechnology 279
Various plant parts are employed to reduce metal salts and form nanoparticles. The usage of plant 
parts reduces the incorporation of hazardous chemicals and energy consumption, thus minimizing 
environmental impact and producing nanoparticles with remarkable properties.
Plant components, like metallothioneins, polyphenols, ascorbates, and glutathione, can 
chelate metal ions and help to form stable nanoparticles using superoxide-driven processes. 
Phenolics in plant parts reduce ferric chloride, or ferrous chloride, in aqueous solutions to form 
iron nanoparticles within short time periods. These biomolecules act as effective stabilizers 
and prevent nanoparticle aggregation, which is desirable for effective nanoparticle formation 
(Monga et al., 2020). Plant extracts have several benefits as they are more hydrophilic and less 
toxic than their alternatives, resulting in the formation of zero-valent iron nanoparticles. In add￾ition, plant extracts help to produce better yields of nanoparticles that possess superior stability 
with diverse shapes (Wu et al., 2017). Plant parts, like roots, stems, leaves, and fruits, can be 
employed to produce metal ions catalyzed by a range of biomolecules. These plant components 
are enriched with secondary metabolites, like organic acids, enzymes, amino acids, proteins, 
vitamins, polysaccharides, alkaloids, polyphenols, and flavonoids. These biomolecules, which 
are naturally occurring with little to no toxicity, in most cases, act as reducing and capping 
agents. They promote the formation of nanoparticles without becoming the nanoparticles 
aggregated (Iravani, 2011).
Many studies have proven that caution must be employed when selecting biological reducing 
agents as the incapability to reduce ferric ions may cause the lesser degradation of nanoparticles 
(Machado et al., 2013). It is further understood that the purity of plant leaf extracts is crucial 
for their capacity to synthesize nanoparticles as the antioxidants in extracts are responsible for 
their synthesis (Machado et al., 2014). Many plant-derived substances, like gums, cellulose, ribo￾flavin, and polysaccharides (like starch), have been used to synthesize and modify zero-valent iron 
nanoparticles, which are stable. In one study, the stabilization of grape seed extract resulted in zero￾valent iron nanoparticles with a higher surface area and a better degrading efficiency compared to 
those synthesized without a stabilizer (Gao et al., 2016). Flavonoids, alkaloid compounds, tannins, 
and saponins are other plant components that can produce nanoparticles (Mohammadzadeh et al., 
2022). Interestingly, secondary metabolites from plants also act as stabilizers and reducing agents 
(Jadoun et al., 2021). One such metabolite, lignin, acts both as a reducing agent and a stabilizer 
under certain conditions, affecting the size and dispersion of silver nanoparticles (Iravani et al., 
2021). Table 17.1 shows various nanoparticles synthesized from different plant parts and their 
properties.
17.2.1 Nanoparticle Production Using Agricultural Biowaste
The agriculture industry contributes a lot to global biowaste emissions and effective solutions for 
the disposal of this biowaste, with minimal side effects, have become an important area of research 
(Mohan and Katakojwala, 2021). A popular disposal method is the burning of agricultural waste, 
causing the release of carbon dioxide, methane, and nitrous oxide, which results in a poor air quality 
index (Tyagi et al., 2016). Instead, utilizing this biowastes to produce nanomaterials is a sustain￾able alternative solution as it saves costs and energy (Omran, 2020). Additionally, nanoparticles 
produced via biofabrication from agricultural waste can be used to absorb various toxic chemicals 
and safely treat wastewater effluent. It has been found that silver nanoparticles and cellulose 
nanofibers synthesized from Citrus sinensis can adsorb cadmium and chromium from wastewater 
during effluent treatment (Tavker et al., 2021). That study also showed that silver and cellulose 
nanofibers could effectively remove more chromium than cadmium ions. Similarly, the combination 
of silver nanoparticles, cellulosic banana peel, and chitosan actively participates in the biosorption 
of orange 5 dye (Abdelghaffar, 2021).280 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
17.2.2  Biocatalyst Production Using Agricultural Biowaste
Certain chemical reactions require metal catalysts to increase speed and efficiency. However, 
recently, silver nanoparticles derived from orange peel and photocatalysts made from cauliflower 
waste have been employed in the rapid degradation of methylene blue (Skiba and Vorobyova, 2019; 
Kadam et al., 2020). Palladium-based bionanocatalysts prepared from cotton ball peel have been 
effectively used to reduce harmful dyes, like methyl orange, sunset yellow, tartrazine, and Congo 
red, in the presence of sodium boron hydride. Plant-derived nanoparticles are considered a vital 
breakthrough in the area of biocatalysis (Narasaiah and Mandal, 2020).
17.3 APPLICATIONS OF GREEN NANOTECHNOLOGY
Green nanotechnology has a plethora of applications in various fields. However, these applications 
depend on the type of metal and the synthesis process. Table 17.2 lists different metal nanoparticles 
used in green nanotechnology and their importance. The major application of green nanotechnology 
involves the use of natural or plant-derived phytochemicals to reduce various metal ions 
into nanoparticles with good efficiency and stability. Green chemistry is based on 12 principles that 
serve as the foundation for creating or enhancing materials, procedures, products, and systems: (i) 
reducing dangerous waste, (ii) increasing product yields, (iii) safe synthesis, (iv) creating safe and 
TABLE 17.1
Synthesis of various nanoparticles from different plant parts
Plant Plant Part Nanoparticles
Nanoparticle 
Form Nanoparticle Size Reference
Abelmoschus 
esculentus
Flower Silver nanoparticles Spheroidal 5.5–32 nm Devanesan and 
AlSalhi (2021)
Garcinia 
mangostana
Peel Zinc oxide 
nanoparticles
Spheroidal 25–70 nm Huong et al. 
(2023)
Centaurea cyanus Leaf Gold nanoparticles Spheroidal Less than 50 nm Abdoli et al. 
(2021)
Ricinus communis Leaf and root Silver nanoparticles Spheroidal 38 nm and 29 nm Gul et al. (2021)
Salvia lavandulifolia Seed Nickel monoxide 
nanoparticles
Spheroidal 30 nm Sabouri et al. 
(2021b)
Morinda citrifolia Leaf, fruit, 
and seed
Silver nanoparticles Spheroidal 3–11 nm Morales-Lozoya 
et al. (2021)
Stevia rebaudiana Leaf Nickel monoxide 
nanoparticles
Spheroidal 20–50 nm Srihasam et al. 
(2020)
Annona squamosa Seed Silver nanoparticles Spheroidal 14–28 nm Jose et al. (2021)
Capparis 
cantoniensis
Leaf Silver nanoparticles Spheroidal 23 nm Nilavukkarasi 
et al. (2020)
Toxicodendron 
vernicifluum
Rind Silver nanoparticles Spheroidal 2–40 nm Saravanakumar 
et al. (2019)
Achyranthes aspera
L.
Stem Silver nanoparticles Spheroidal 1–30 nm Sharma et al. 
(2019)
Coccinia grandis Stem Gold nanoparticles Spheroidal 20 nm Wang et al. (2018)
Nerium oleander L. Rind Gold nanoparticles Spheroidal 20–40 nm Barai et al. (2018)
Mangifera indica Leaf Silver nanoparticles Face-centered cubic 30–34 nm Sundeep et al. 
(2017)
Mangifera indica Inflorescence Silver nanoparticles Irregular 30–70 nm Qayyum et al. 
(2017)Green Nanotechnology 281
sustainable products, (v) incorporating water as a solvent, (vi) conserving energy, (vii) using renew￾able energy sources to improve sustainability, (viii) minimizing the use of derivatives, (ix) using 
catalysts, (x) designing pathways that produce less damaging products, (xi) causing no pollution, 
and (xii) creating more effective nanoparticles with long-term stability (DeVierno Kreuder et al., 
2017; Thipe et al., 2022).
According to estimations, food demand will rise 59–98% globally by 2050, with the population 
reaching 9 billion (Elemike et al., 2019; Duro et al., 2020). Food preservation is a key aspect that can 
help to ensure that food losses are minimized and that the nutritional components in packaged foods 
are not compromised. Nanotechnology can help to effectively meet the population’s demand for 
food and other necessities, like medicine, better agricultural strategies, clean drinking water, and a 
pollution-free environment. The United Nations 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development focuses 
mainly on food loss and wastage, which create economic, environmental, and social constraints. 
One factor that can help to prevent food loss and wastage is food packaging, which is crucial for 
maintaining food quality and microbiological safety, thereby enhancing food security for consumers 
and extending the shelf-life of food products. Nanotechnology plays a part in the development 
of better nutritional components, foods that are free from chemicals, protein bioseparation, and 
better detection methods for biological pathogens, which all result in better food security (Sozer and 
Kokini, 2009; Ravichandran, 2010).
Plastics, which are durable and cheap to manufacture, have taken over the packaging industry. 
However, due to their nonbiodegradability, the mass accumulation of plastic waste has raised envir￾onmental concerns. Although reusing plastic packaging is an option, it is not widely practiced and 
it is not always possible for various reasons. This causes the buildup of tons of plastic in dumps 
and landfills, which is highly toxic to the environment. Biopolymers offer an effective alternative 
to plastics and have plenty of advantages, like replicating the features of plastics while being easily 
degradable and not accumulating in the environment. With the increasing demand for ecosafety, 
TABLE 17.2
Applications of green nanoparticles synthesized from various plant parts
Plant Plan Part Nanoparticles Application Reference
Kokum Fruit extract Photoluminescent gold 
nanoparticles
Catalytic and antioxidant 
activities
Naraginti and Li (2017)
Annona squamosa Fruit waste Spherical gold 
nanoparticles
Treating hazardous industrial 
effluent
Gangapuram et al. (2018)
Eugenia roxburghii Leaves Silver nanoparticles Reducing bacterial biofilm 
formation
Giri et al. (2022)
Rhizophora mucronata Stems, roots, 
and leaves
Silver nanoparticles Antibacterial activities Abdi et al. (2019)
Lantana camara L. Water extract Silver nanoparticles Antibacterial activities Madivoli et al., (2020)
Azadirachta indica Leaf extract Copper nanoparticles Water purification Nagar and Devra. (2018)
Syzygium aromaticum Bud extract Copper nanoparticles Antibacterial activities Rajesh et al. (2021)
Lilium brownii var. 
viridulum
Extract Zinc nanoparticles Antileishmania activities Khatami et al. (2020)
Citrus sinensis Peel extract Zinc nanoparticles Environmental activities Thi et al. (2020)
Jatropha curcas and 
Tinospora cordifolia
Leaf extract Zinc nanoparticles Antistaphylococcal activities Thakur et al. (2020)
Stevia rebaudiana
(Bertoni) Hemsl 
extract
Leaf extract Zinc nanoparticles Antileishmania, 
Antistaphylococcus, and 
anti-escherichia activities
Kombiah et al. (2017)
Acorus calamus Rhizome Barium ferrite Antifungal activities Thakur et al. (2020)282 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
there is a need to discover innovative methods that are more efficient and safer for the environment. 
Electrospinning technology has been proposed as an solution for developing food packing systems 
with the necessary characteristics for the preservation and long-term storage of various foods using 
nanofiber-based technologies (Alka Nanda et al., 2024). Food companies are celebrating the success 
of these technologies as they provide good mechanical support and antimicrobial properties, with 
the bonus advantage of environmental friendliness (Rossi et al., 2017; Mustafa and Andreescu, 
2020). Thus, the huge demand for nanoparticles in the food industry is due to their applications in 
biotechnology, processing and packaging, and food safety (Singh et al., 2017).
Nanotechnology took a leap forward with the development of nanosensors, which can iden￾tify trace elements that are crucial for the quality and freshness of foods (Chaudhry et al., 2008). 
Nanoparticles, having carved a niche for them in the industrial sector, are manufactured by either 
bottom-up or top-down processes. On an industrial scale, nanomaterials are mostly produced using 
top-down strategies, in which larger nanolithography is broken down into nanoparticles using pre￾cision engineering or milling (Sozer and Kokini, 2009). The milling process helps to produce flour 
with better water-holding capacity owing to the small flour particles. Similarly, using a top-down 
process for green tea results in finer powder and improved antioxidant properties (Shibata, 2002). 
Another study revealed that green tea powder with a particle size of 1000 nm has an increased 
antioxidant potential, which aids in better digestion (Sanguansri and Augustin, 2006). One top￾down technique is homogenization, which is widely used in the dairy industry to reduce the size 
of fat globules in milk and milk products, increasing their shelf-life and stability (Roohinejad and 
Greiner, 2017).
17.4 ROLE OF NANOTECHNOLOGY IN POSTHARVEST LOSS REDUCTION
Postharvest losses are a serious threat to food security and it is estimated that more than 40% of food 
losses in developed countries occur in the early stages of food production (FAO, 2019). Microbial 
contamination and spoilage are other major threats when food moisture contents are not properly 
preserved, inducing rapid decay. Green nanotechnology can reduce postharvest losses by producing 
packaging with less bioactive material and better mechanical strength. The icing on the cake is that it 
can provide all of these advantages without influencing the quality of food products (Flores-LópezL 
et al., 2016). Coatings made from nanoparticles can be applied to foods by immersing the foods in 
nanoparticle mixtures. The principles of preservation include a reduced respiration rate, the preven￾tion of dehydration, the preservation of volatile fragrance molecules, and the inhibition of microbial 
growth (Neme et al., 2021). Various antimicrobial, plant-based nanoparticles have been studied and 
some are shown in Table 17.2, which emphasizes the importance of green nanotechnology in food 
preservation.
17.5 IMPACT OF GREEN NANOTECHNOLOGY ON FOOD 
PROCESSING AND PRESERVATION
Smart packaging helps consumers to assess the quality of foods by simply observing undesirable 
changes occur in the foods over time; for example, changes in color, which can indicate whether 
foods are fit for consumption. Table 17.3 shows various plant-based polymers that are used to 
produce different nanoparticles and their advantages. Smart films produced from blackberry and 
blueberry pomade show exceptional antioxidant properties and work as indicators for changes in 
pH during food spoilage (Kurek et al., 2018). Similar green synthesized nanoproducts have been 
developed that can sense and share information regarding product freshness, safety, temperature, 
and more (Vanderroost et al., 2014). Similarly, agents, such as essential oils, antimicrobial peptides, 
and various organic acids, can be put in nanocarriers or nanoencapsulation systems, which protect 
the antimicrobial agents against environmental stresses and ensure their slow release (Kumar et al., Green Nanotechnology 283
2020). Biopolymer food packaging has gained recognition in the food industry due to its antibac￾terial and biodegradable properties (Kumar et al., 2019). Nanoparticle-based biopolymer packaging 
films are environmentally friendly and resistant to fire and UV light. Biopolymer packaging made 
from starch, polypeptides, and fats effectively maintains the overall quality and stability of packaged 
foods. However, there is a lack of studies on incorporating starch into nanocomposites to create 
effective substitute biomaterials for packaging (Tang et al., 2012).
17.6 CONCLUSION
Plant-based nanoparticles have emerged as an effective and ecofriendly alternative to traditional 
packaging materials, with benefits such as better oxygen barrier properties, enhanced antimicrobial 
features, hydrophobic qualities, controlled release functions, and sustainability. While green nano￾technology is making strides in enhancing food security and preservation, several areas warrant fur￾ther exploration. Challenges persist, such as the costs of nanoparticle production, how to optimize 
the characteristics and structures of nanoparticles, and how to enhance their mechanical properties. 
Future research should address these challenges to unleash the full potential of green synthesized 
nanoparticles in the food sector. In conclusion, applying green nanotechnology presents a significant 
opportunity for transforming food packaging and preservation.
REFERENCES
Abdelghaffar, F. 2021. Biosorption of anionic dye using nanocomposite derived from chitosan and silver 
nanoparticles synthesized via cellulosic banana peel bio-waste. Environmental Technology & Innovation
24:101852. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eti.2021.101852
Abdi, V., Sourinejad, I., Yousefzadi, M., Ghasemi, Z. 2019. Biosynthesis of silver nanoparticles from the man￾grove Rhizophora mucronata: Its characterization and antibacterial potential. Iranian Journal of Science 
and Technology, Transaction A Sciences 43(5):2163–71. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40995-019-00739-9
Abdoli, M., Arkan, E., Shekarbeygi, Z., Khaledian, S. 2021. Green synthesis of gold nanoparticles using 
Centaurea behen leaf aqueous extract and investigating their antioxidant and cytotoxic effects on acute 
leukemia cancer cell line (THP-1). Inorganic Chemistry Communications 129:108649. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.inoche.2021.108649
TABLE 17.3
Plant-based nanoparticles used in food packaging and their advantages
Polymer Nanomaterial Key Aspects Reference
Starch TiO2 • Vapor permeability
• Improved thermal properties
• Improved UV protection
• Improved hydrophobicity and reduction of water 
retention
Goudarzi et al. (2017)
Chitosan ZnO • Improved mechanical properties (tensile strength, etc.)
• Enhanced film thickness and transparency
Sanuja et al. (2015)
Cellulose AgNPs and cellulose 
nanocrystals
• Improved mechanical properties
• Antibacterial activity
• Antioxidant activity
Wu et al. (2019)
Protein ZnONPs (using 
soybean protein)
• Increased microbial activity by 16%
• Enhanced tensile strength by 234%
• Improved thermal and mechanical properties
Tang et al. (2019)
Protein Zein NPs (using zein) • Significantly improved mechanical properties and water 
vapor barrier properties
Oymaci and Altinkaya 
(2016)284 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
Adetunji, C.O., Anani, O.A., Michael, O.S. 2021. Application of nanoceutical technology for fast and efficient 
control of illness. In Phytochemistry, the Military and Health (pp. 497–508). Elsevier.
Ahmed, S., Ahmad, M., Swami, B.L., Ikram, S. 2016. A review on plants extract mediated synthesis of 
silver nanoparticles for antimicrobial applications: A green expertise. Journal of Advanced Research
7(1): 17–28.
Alka, N., Prashant P.P.S., Rajinikanth, N.S. 2024. Revolution of nanotechnology in food packaging: Harnessing 
electrospun zein nanofibers for improved preservation – A review. International Journal of Biological 
Macromolecules 260:129416. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2024.129416
Azeredo, H.M.C., Henrique, C.L.M., Wood, D., Williams, T.G., Roberto, J.A.-B., Tara, H.M. 2009. 
Nanocomposite edible films from mango puree reinforced with cellulose nanofibers. Journal of Food 
Science 74:31–5. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1750-3841.2009.01186.x
Bajpai, S.K., Chand N., Chaurasia V. 2012. Nano zinc oxide-loaded calcium alginate films with potential anti￾bacterial properties. Food and Bioprocess Technology 5:1871–1881.
Barai, A.C, Paul, K., Dey, A., Manna, S., Roy, S., Bag, B.G., Mukhopadhyay, C. 2018. Green synthesis of 
Nerium oleander-conjugated gold nanoparticles and study of its in vitro anticancer activity on MCF-7 
cell lines and catalytic activity. Nano Convergence 5(1):1–9. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40580-018-0142-5
Chaudhry, Q., Scotter, M., Blackburn, J., et al. 2008. Applications and implications of nanotechnologies for the 
food sector. Food Additives & Contaminants 25:241–58.
Chen, H., Zhao, R., Wang, B., et al. 2017. The effects of orally administered Ag, TiO2 and SiO2 nanoparticles 
on gut microbiota composition and colitis induction in mice. NanoImpact 8:80–8.
Chung, I.M., Rajakumar, G., Gomathi, T., Park, S.K., Kim, S.H., Thiruvengadam, M. 2017. Nanotechnology 
for human food: Advances and perspective. Frontiers in Life Science 10(1):63–72.
Devanesan, S., AlSalhi, M.S.. 2021. Green synthesis of silver nanoparticles using the flower extract 
of Abelmoschus esculentus for cytotoxicity and antimicrobial studies. International Journal of 
Nanomedicine: 3343–56. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jiph.2021.02.004
DeVierno, K.A., House-Knight, T., Whitford, J., et al. 2017. A method for assessing greener alternatives 
between chemical products following the 12 principles of green chemistry. ACS Sustainable Chemistry 
& Engineering 5(4):2927–35. https://doi.org/10.1021/acssuschemeng.6b02399
Doan Thi, T.U., Nguyen, T.T., Thi, Y.D., Ta Thi, K.H., Phan, B.T., Pham, K.N. 2020. Green synthesis of ZnO 
nanoparticles using orange fruit peel extract for antibacterial activities. RSC Advances 10(40):23899–
907. https://doi.org/10.1039/D0RA04926C
Duan, H., Wang, D., Li, Y. 2015. Green chemistry for nanoparticle synthesis. Chemical Society Reviews
44(16):5778–92.
Duro, J.A., Lauk, C., Kastner, T., Erb, K.-H., Haberl, H. 2020. Global inequalities in food consumption, 
cropland demand and land-use efficiency: A decomposition analysis. Global Environmental Change
64:102124.
Elemike, E.E., Uzoh, I.M., Onwudiwe, D.C., Babalola, O.O. 2019. The role of nanotechnology in the fortifica￾tion of plant nutrients and improvement of crop production. Applied Sciences 9:499.
FAO. 2019. The State of Food and Agriculture. Moving Forward on Food Loss and Waste Reduction; FAO.
Flores-López, M.L., Cerqueira, M.A., de Rodríguez, D.J., Vicente, A.A. 2016. Perspectives on utilization of 
edible coatings and nano-laminate coatings for extension of postharvest storage of fruits and vegetables. 
Food Engineering Reviews 8:292–305.
Gangapuram, B.R., Bandi, R., Alle, M., Dadigala, R., Kotu, G.M., Guttena, V. 2018. Microwave assisted rapid 
green synthesis of gold nanoparticles using Annona squamosa L peel extract for the efficient catalytic 
reduction of organic pollutants. Journal of Molecular Structure 1167:305–15. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.molstruc.2018.05.004
Gao, J.F., Li, H.Y., Pan, K.L., Si, C.Y. 2016. Green synthesis of nanoscale zero-valent iron using a grape seed 
extract as a stabilizing agent and the application for quick decolorization of azo and anthraquinone dyes. 
RSC Advances 6(27):22526–37. https://doi.org/10.1039/C5RA26668H
Giri, A.K., Jena, B., Biswal, B., Pradhan, A.K., Arakha, M., Acharya, S., Acharya, L. 2022. Green synthesis 
and characterization of silver nanoparticles using Eugenia roxburghii DC. extract and activity against 
biofilm-producing bacteria. Scientific Reports 12(1):8383. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-12484-y
Goudarzi, V., Shahabi-Ghahfarrokhi, I., Babaei-Ghazvini, A. 2017. Preparation of ecofriendly UV-protective 
food packaging material by starch/TiO2 bionanocomposite: Characterization. International Journal of 
Biological Macromolecules 95:306–13.Green Nanotechnology 285
Gul, A., Shaheen, A., Ahmad, I., et al. 2021. Green synthesis, characterization, enzyme inhibition, antimicro￾bial potential, and cytotoxic activity of plant mediated silver nanoparticle using Ricinus communis leaf 
and root extracts. Biomolecules 11(2):206. https://doi.org/10.3390/biom11020206
Huang, J., Lin, L., Sun, D., Chen, H., Yang, D., Li, Q. 2015. Bio-inspired synthesis of metal nanomaterials and 
applications. Chemical Society Reviews 44(17):6330–74.
Huong, L.M., Cong, C.Q., Dat, N.M., et al. 2023. Green synthesis of carbon-doped zinc oxide using 
Garcinia mangostana peel extract: Characterization, photocatalytic degradation, and hydrogen 
peroxide production. Journal of Cleaner Production 392:136269. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcle
pro.2023.136269
Iravani, S. 2011. Green synthesis of metal nanoparticles using plants. Green Chemistry 13(10):2638–50. https://
doi.org/10.1039/C1GC15386B
Iravani, S. 2014. Bacteria in nanoparticle synthesis: current status and future prospects. International Scholarly 
Research Notices 2014(1):359316.
Iravani, S. 2021. Nanomaterials and nanotechnology for water treatment: Recent advances. Inorganic and 
Nano-Metal Chemistry 51(12):1615–45.
Jadoun, S., Arif, R., Jangid, N.K., Meena, R.K. 2021. Green synthesis of nanoparticles using plant 
extracts: A review. Environmental Chemistry Letters 19(1):355–74. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10
311-020-01074-x
Jose, V., Raphel, L., Aiswariya, K., Mathew, P. 2021. Green synthesis of silver nanoparticles using Annona 
squamosa L. seed extract: Characterization, photocatalytic and biological activity assay. Bioprocess and 
Biosystems Engineering 44:1819–29. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00449-021-02562-2
Kadam, J., Dhawal, P., Barve, S., Kakodkar, S. 2020. Green synthesis of silver nanoparticles using cauliflower 
waste and their multifaceted applications in photocatalytic degradation of methylene blue dye and Hg2+
biosensing. SN Applied Sciences 2:1–16. https://doi.org/10.1007/s42452-020-2543-4
Khatami, M., Khatami, S., Mosazade, F., et al. 2020. Greener synthesis of rod shaped zinc oxide nanoparticles 
using lilium ledebourii tuber and evaluation of their leishmanicidal activity. Iranian Journal of 
Biotechnology 18(1):e2196. https://doi.org/10.30498/IJB.2020.119481.2196
Kombaiah, K., Vijaya, J.J., Kennedy, L.J., Bououdina, M., Al-Lohedan, H.A., Ramalingam, R.J. 2017. Studies 
on Opuntia dilenii haw mediated multifunctional ZnFe2O4 nanoparticles: Optical, magnetic and cata￾lytic applications. Materials Chemistry and Physics 194:153–64. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matchemp
hys.2017.03.020
Kumar, P., Mahajan, P., Kaur, R., Gautam, S. 2020. Nanotechnology and its challenges in the food sector: 
A review. Materials Today Chemistry 17:100332.
Kumar, U.S.U., Paridah, M.T., Owolabi, F.T., et al. 2019. Neem leaves extract based seaweed bio-degradable 
composite films with excellent antimicrobial activity for sustainable packaging material. Bioresources
14:700–13.
Kurek, M., Garofulić, I.E., Bakić, M.T., Ščetar, M., Uzelac, V.D., Galić, K. 2018. Development and evaluation 
of a novel antioxidant and pH indicator film based on chitosan and food waste sources of antioxidants. 
Food Hydrocolloids 84:238– 46.
Limage, R., Tako, E., Kolba, N., et al. 2020. TiO2 nanoparticles and commensal bacteria alter mucus layer 
thickness and composition in a gastrointestinal tract model. Small 16:e2000601.
Machado, S., Grosso, J., Nouws, H., Albergaria, J.T., Delerue-Matos, C. 2014. Utilization of food industry 
wastes for the production of zero-valent iron nanoparticles. Science of the Total Environment 496:233–
40. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2014.07.058
Machado, S., Stawiński, W., Slonina, P., et al. 2013. Application of green zero-valent iron nanoparticles to the 
remediation of soils contaminated with ibuprofen. Science of the Total Environment 461:323–9.
Madivoli, E.S., Kareru, P.G., Gachanja, A.N., et al. 2020. Facile synthesis of silver nanoparticles using Lantana 
trifolia aqueous extracts and their antibacterial activity. Journal of Inorganic and Organometallic 
Polymers and Materials 30(8):2842–50. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10904-019-01432-5
Mohammadzadeh, V., Barani, M., Amiri, M.S., et al. 2022. Applications of plant-based nanoparticles in 
nanomedicine: A review. Sustainable Chemistry and Pharmacy 25:100606. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.scp.2022.100606
Mohan, S.V., Katakojwala, R. 2021. The circular chemistry conceptual framework: A way forward to sustain￾ability in industry 4.0. Current Opinion in Green and Sustainable Chemistry 28:100434. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.cogsc.2020.100434286 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
Monga, Y., Kumar, P., Sharma, R.K., et al. 2020. Sustainable synthesis of nanoscale zerovalent iron particles for 
environmental remediation. ChemSusChem 13(13):3288–305. https://doi.org/10.1002/cssc.202000290
Morales-Lozoya, V., Espinoza-Gómez, H., Flores-López, L.Z., et al. 2021. Study of the effect of the different 
parts of Morinda citrifolia L. (noni) on the green synthesis of silver nanoparticles and their antibacterial 
activity. Applied Surface Science 537:147855. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsusc.2020.147855
Mustafa, F., Andreescu, S. 2020. Nanotechnology-based approaches for food sensing and packaging 
applications. RSC Advances 10:19309–36.
Nagar, N., Devra, V. 2018. Green synthesis and characterization of copper nanoparticles using Azadirachta 
indica leaves. Materials Chemistry and Physics 213:44–51. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matchemp
hys.2018.04.007
Naoto, S., Hiroshi, O., Mitsutoshi, N., Mitsutoshi. 2009. Micro- and nanotechnology for food processing. 
(Food safety series) resource: Engineering and technology for a sustainable world. American Society of 
Agricultural and Biological Engineers 16:19.
Naraginti, S., Li ,Y. 2017. Preliminary investigation of catalytic, antioxidant, anticancer and bactericidal activity 
of green synthesized silver and gold nanoparticles using Actinidia deliciosa. Journal of Photochemistry 
and Photobiology B 170:225–34. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jphotobiol.2017.03.023
Narasaiah, B.P., Mandal, B.K. 2020. Remediation of azo-dyes based toxicity by agro-waste cotton boll peels 
mediated palladium nanoparticles. Journal of Saudi Chemical Society 24(2):267–81. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jscs.2019.11.003
Neme, K., Nafady, A., Uddin, S., Tola, Y.B. 2021. Application of nanotechnology in agriculture, postharvest 
loss reduction and food processing: Food security implication and challenges. Heliyon 7:e08539.
Nilavukkarasi, M., Vijayakumar, S., Kumar, S.P. 2020. Biological synthesis and characterization of silver 
nanoparticles with Capparis zeylanica L. leaf extract for potent antimicrobial and anti proliferation effi￾ciency. Materials Science for Energy Technologies 3:371–76. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mset.2020.02.008
Omran, B.A. 2020. Biosynthesized nanomaterials via processing of different plant parts (phytonanotechnology) 
and biovalorization of agro-industrial wastes to nano-sized valuable products. Nanobiotechnology: A 
Multidisciplinary Field of Science 2020:145–184. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-46071-6_5
Oymaci, P., Altinkaya, S.A. 2016. Improvement of barrier and mechanical properties of whey protein isolate 
based food packaging films by incorporation of zein nanoparticles as a novel bionanocomposite. Food 
Hydrocolloids 54:1–9.
Powers, K.W., Brown, S.C., Krishna, V.B., et al. 2006. Research strategies for safety evaluation of nanomaterials. 
Part VI. Characterization of nanoscale particles for toxicological evaluation. Toxicological Sciences
90:296–303. https://doi.org/10.1093/toxsci/kfj099
Qayyum, S., Oves, M., Khan, A.U. 2017. Obliteration of bacterial growth and biofilm through ROS generation 
by facilely synthesized green silver nanoparticles. PLoS ONE 12(8):e0181363. https://doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pone.0181363
Rajeshkumar, S., Nandhini, N.T., Manjunath, K., Sivaperumal, P., Prasad, G.K., Alotaibi, S. S., Roopan, S.M. 
2021. Environment friendly synthesis copper oxide nanoparticles and its antioxidant, antibacterial activ￾ities using Seaweed (Sargassum longifolium) extract. Journal of Molecular Structure 1242:130724.
Ravichandran, R. 2010. Nanotechnology applications in food and food processing: Innovative green 
approaches, opportunities and uncertainties for global market. International Journal of Green 
Nanotechnology: Physics and Chemistry 1:72–96.
Roohinejad, S., Greiner, R. 2017. Nanoscience: Relevance for agriculture and the food sector. In Nanotechnology 
in Agriculture and Food Science, eds. M.A. Axelos, M. Van De Voorde, M. 347–62. John Wiley & Sons.
Rossi, M., Passeri, D., Sinibaldi, A., et al. 2017. Nanotechnology for food packaging and food quality 
assessment. Advances in Food and Nutrition Research 82:149–204.
Sabouri, Z., Rangrazi, A., Amiri, M.S., Khatami, M., Darroudi, M. 2021. Green synthesis of nickel oxide 
nanoparticles using Salvia hispanica L. (chia) seeds extract and studies of their photocatalytic activity 
and cytotoxicity effects. Bioprocess and Biosystems Engineering 44:2407–15. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s00449-021-02613-8
Sanguansri, P., Augustin, M.A. 2006. Nanoscale materials development—A food industry perspective. Trends 
in Food Science and Technology 17:547–56.
Sanuja, S., Agalya, A., Umapathy, M.J. 2015. Synthesis and characterization of zinc oxide–neem oil–chitosan 
bio nanocomposite for food packaging application. International Journal of Biological Macromolecules
74:76–84.Green Nanotechnology 287
Saravanakumar, K., Chelliah, R., MubarakAli, D., Oh, D.H., Kathiresan, K., Wang, M.H. 2019. Unveiling the 
potentials of biocompatible silver nanoparticles on human lung carcinoma A549 cells and Helicobacter 
pylori. Scientific Reports 9(1):1–8. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-42112-1
Satyanarayana, T., Reddy, S.S. 2018. A review on chemical and physical synthesis methods of nanomaterials. 
International Journal of Research in Applied Science and Engineering Technology 6(1):2885–9.
Shanthi, S., Jayaseelan, B.D., Velusamy, P., Vijayakumar, S., Chih, C.T., Vaseeharan, B. 2016. Biosynthesis 
of silver nanoparticles using a probiotic Bacillus licheniformis Dahb1 and their antibiofilm activity 
and toxicity effects in Ceriodaphnia cornuta. Microbial Pathogenesis 93:70–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.micpath.2016.01.014
Sharma, A., Kumar, S., Tripathi, P. 2019. A facile and rapid method for green synthesis of Achyranthes aspera 
stem extract-mediated silver nano-composites with cidal potential against Aedes aegypti L. Saudi 
Journal of Biological Sciences 26(4):698–708. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sjbs.2017.11.001
Shibata, T. 2002. Method for producing green tea in microfine powder. U.S. Patent 6,416,803, 9.
Singh, A., Ahmed, A., Sharma, A., Arya, S. 2022. Graphene and its derivatives: Synthesis and application in the 
electrochemical detection of analytes in sweat. Biosensors 12(10):910.
Singh, A., Sharma, A., Arya, S. 2022. Human sweat-based wearable glucose sensor on cotton fabric for real￾time monitoring. Journal of Analytical Science and Technology 13(1):11.
Singh, H. 2016. Nanotechnology applications in functional foods; opportunities and challenges. Preventive 
Nutrition and Food Science 21(1):1.
Singh, P., Kim, Y.J., Zhang, D., Yang, D.C. 2016. Biological synthesis of nanoparticles from plants and 
microorganisms. Trends in Biotechnology 34(7):588–99.
Singh, R., Dutt, S., Sharma, P., Sundramoorthy, A.K., Dubey, A., Singh, A., Arya, S. 2023. Future of nano￾technology in food industry: Challenges in processing, packaging, and food safety. Global Challenges
7(4):2200209. https://doi.org/10.1002/gch2.202200209
Singh, T., Shukla, S., Kumar, P., Wahla, V., Bajpai, V.K., Rather, I.A. 2017. Application of nanotechnology in 
food science: Perception and overview. Frontiers in Microbiologyl 8 , 1501.
Skiba, M.I., Vorobyova, V.I. 2019. Synthesis of silver nanoparticles using orange peel extract prepared by 
plasmochemical extraction method and degradation of methylene blue under solar irradiation. Advances 
in Materials Science and Engineering 2019:1–8. https://doi.org/10.1155/2019/8306015
Sozer, N., Kokini, J.L. 2009. Nanotechnology and its applications in the food sector. Trends in Biotechnology
27:82–89.
Srihasam, S., Thyagarajan, K., Korivi, M., Lebaka, V.R., Mallem, S.P.R. 2020. Phytogenic generation of NiO 
nanoparticles using Stevia leaf extract and evaluation of their in-vitro antioxidant and antimicrobial 
properties. Biomolecules 10(1):89. https://doi.org/10.3390/biom10010089
Sundeep, D., Vijaya Kumar, T., Rao, P.S., Ravikumar, R., Gopala Krishna, A. 2017. Green synthesis and char￾acterization of Ag nanoparticles from Mangifera indica leaves for dental restoration and antibacterial 
applications. Progress in Biomaterials 6:57–66. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40204-017-0067-9
Tang, S., Wang, Z., Li, W., Li, M., Deng, Q., Wang, Y., Chu, P.K. 2019. Ecofriendly and biodegradable soy￾bean protein isolate films incorporated with ZnO nanoparticles for food packaging. ACS Applied to Bio 
Materials. 2:2202–07.
Tang, X.Z., Kumar, P., Alavi, S., Sandeep, K.P. 2012. Recent advances in biopolymers and biopolymer-based 
nanocomposites for food packaging materials. Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition 52, 
426–42.
Tavker, N., Yadav, V.K., Yadav, K.K., et al. 2021. Removal of cadmium and chromium by mixture of silver 
nanoparticles and nano-fibrillated cellulose isolated from waste peels of citrus sinensis. Polymers
13(2):234. https://doi.org/10.3390/polym13020234
Thakur, A., Sharma, N., Bhatti, M., et al. 2020. Synthesis of barium ferrite nanoparticles using rhizome exract 
of Acorus calamus: Characterization and its efficacy against different plant phytopathogenic fungi. 
Nano-Structures & Nano-Objects 24:100599. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nanoso.2020.100599
Thi, T.U.D., Nguyen, T.T., Thi, Y.D., Thi, K.H.T., Phan, B.T., Pham, K.N. 2020. Green synthesis of 
ZnO nanoparticles using orange fruit peel extract for antibacterial activities. RSC Advances
10(40):23899–907.
Thipe, V.C., Karikachery, A.R., Çakılkaya, P., et al. 2022. Green nanotechnology—An innovative pathway 
towards biocompatible and medically relevant gold nanoparticles. Journal of Drug Delivery Science and 
Technology 70:103256. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jddst.2022.103256288 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
Tyagi, P., Kawamura, K., Fu, P., Bikkina, S., Kanaya, Y., Wang, Z. 2016. Impact of biomass burning on soil 
microorganisms and plant metabolites: A view from molecular distributions of atmospheric hydroxy 
fatty acids over Mount Tai. Journal of Geophysical Research: Biogeosciences 121(10):2684–99. https://
doi.org/10.1002/2016JG003324
Vanderroost, M., Ragaert, P., Devlieghere, F., De Meulenaer, B. 2014. Intelligent food packaging: The next 
generation. Trends in Food Science and Technology 39:47–62.
Wang, Y., Xia, R., Hu, H., Peng, T. 2018. Biosynthesis, characterization and cytotoxicity of gold nanoparticles 
and their loading with N-acetylcarnosine for cataract treatment. Journal of Photochemistry and 
Photobiology B 187:180–83. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jphotobiol.2018.08.014
Weir, A., Westerhoff, P., Fabricius, L., Hristovski, K., Von Goetz, N. 2012. Titanium dioxide nanoparticles in 
food and personal care products. Environmental Science & Technology 46:2242–50.
Wu, Y., Lian, J-J., Yan, Y., Qi, H. 2017. Mechanism and applications of bio-mineralization induced by 
Sporosarcina pasteurii and related microorganisms. China Biotechnology 37(8):96–103. https://doi.org/
10.13523/j.cb.20170814
Wu, Z., Deng, W., Luo, J., Deng, D. 2019. Multifunctional nano-cellulose composite films with grape seed 
extracts and immobilized silver nanoparticles. Carbohydrate Polymers 205:447–55.
Yadav, S.K. 2017. Tissue science & engineering realizing the potential of nanotechnology for agriculture and 
food technology. Journal of Tissue Science and Engineering 8:8–11. https://doi.org/10.4172/2157-
7552.1000195289
DOI: 10.1201/9781003477730-20 289
18 Green Synthesised 
Nanoparticles
A Sustainable Option for Food 
Packaging
Srinivasan Kameswaran, Bellamkonda Ramesh, and 
Gopi Krishna Pitchika
18.1 INTRODUCTION
One nanometre is equal to 10–9
 metres because the term “nano” describes dimensions on the order of 
magnitude of 10–9
. Nanotechnology is the study of materials that have at least one dimension falling 
between 1 and 100 nanometres. It also includes the creation, modification, and characterisation of 
structures, devices, and materials at the nanoscale. Materials with nanoscale particle have unique 
mechanical, optical, electrical, and magnetic characteristics that set them apart from the bulk materials 
of comparable constituents (Huang et al., 2018). Researchers are exploring the connections between 
macroscopic characteristics and molecular structure, degrees of order, and intermolecular forces in 
both synthetic and biological nanomaterials. Nanotechnology has gained significant momentum in 
the USA with the launch of the National Nanotechnology Initiative in 2000, which recognised it as 
a developing field of national importance. Given its significance and immense potential, several fed￾eral agencies have made nanotechnology research a primary focus. In 2007, the Indian government 
introduced Nano Mission, an “umbrella capacity-building programme”. Thanks to this initiative’s 
unwavering efforts, India is currently among the top five nations in the world for scientific research 
in the fields of nanoscience and nanotechnology. There are two fundamental approaches used in the 
synthesis of nanoparticles (NPs): top-down and bottom-up methods. Using any mechanical tech￾nique (such as mechanical grinding), top-down approaches begin with a solid mass and break it 
down into nanoparticles before stabilising the particles at the desired size. Nevertheless, achieving 
the desired size using these methods is challenging. On the other hand, bottom-up methods begin 
with particles of atomic size, which is achieved by bringing chemical processes, such hydrothermal 
processes, sol–gel methods, gas phase methods, thermolysis, and hydrolysis, to the proper nano￾scale. Additionally, photochemical reduction, laser ablation, aerosolisation, and UV irradiation can 
also create nanoparticles. However, these methods produce hazardous byproducts and are expen￾sive. Furthermore, these techniques make it difficult to manage the size, shape, and surface chem￾istry of nanoparticles. Still, producing nanoparticles is best done using a bottom-up approach. They 
start with simpler molecules in clusters and can obtain more control over the size and structure of 
created particles compared.
18.2 GREEN SYNTHESIS OF NANOPARTICLES
The use of hazardous solvents, the creation of hazardous byproducts, and inconsistent surface 
structures are just a few of the issues linked to physicochemical approaches to NP synthesis, in 290 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
addition to being expensive. Chemical approaches usually entail the employment of different 
chemicals that are responsible for both particle reactivity and toxicity. But due to their unpredictable 
nature and unclear compositions, they may be harmful to both the environment and human health 
(Li et al., 2011). However, using extracts from natural products, like fruit juice, microbial products, 
and tree leaves, as reducing agents or stabilisers, instead of expensive chemical reagents, to synthe￾sise metal or metal oxide nanoparticles is known as “green synthesis”, which is a bottom-up method 
that is somewhat similar to chemical methods. The biogenic reduction of metal precursors into the 
corresponding nanoparticles is ecofriendly, sustainable, chemical-free, less expensive, and compat￾ible with large-scale processing (Chandran et al., 2006; Huang et al., 2007; Iravani, 2011; Jayaseelan 
et al., 2012; Mittal et al., 2013; Gopinath et al., 2014). Moreover, expensive metal salts, like gold and 
silver, that are present in waste can be recycled via the environmentally friendly synthesis of NPs.
18.3 BIOGENIC SYNTHESIS OF NANOPARTICLES
The precise process by which nanoparticles are biogenically synthesised remains unclear; however, 
a multitude of studies have identified a variety of plant metabolites, such as terpenoids, polyphenols, 
sugars, alkaloids, phenolic acids, proteins, carbohydrates, enzymes, and nucleic acids, that are cru￾cial to the bioreduction of metal ions. The manufacture of metal nanoparticles using plant extracts 
involves three primary steps, which are as follows:
• The Activation Phase
Metal ions are produced at specific temperatures and pH levels from metal salts or substrates. 
These metal ions are reduced during activation, which results in the creation of metal atoms. 
The reduced metal atoms then self-assemble (nucleate).
• The Growth Phase
Small neighbouring nanoparticles spontaneously combine to form larger particles via direct 
nanoparticle formation, the further reduction of metal ions, and heterogeneous nucleation and 
growth. This process, also known as Ostwald ripening, increases the thermodynamic stability 
of the resulting nanoparticles.
• The Termination Phase
The third stage, known as the termination phase, determines the final shape of the nanoparticles. 
The stability of the nanoparticles is dependent on their shape, which is created in this step 
through stabilisation and capping. The growth terminators and agglomeration-inhibiting prop￾erties of capping and stabilising substances in biological entities enhance the stability and 
persistence of nanoparticles (Mandale and Si, 2007).
18.4 NANOTECHNOLOGY AS THE NEW FRONTIER IN THE 
FOOD INDUSTRY
One of the most difficult components of food sustainability is managing surplus food. The globe 
produces an enormous amount of food each year, which must be managed carefully to ensure that 
any excess is eaten, stored, or processed wisely as value-added goods, thereby minimising food 
waste. Roughly 30% of all food produced worldwide each year is lost or squandered, which can 
be broken down into approximately 30% of cereals, 40–50% of root crops, fruit, and vegetables, 
20% of oil seeds, meat, and dairy products, and 35% of fish and other agricultural goods (FAO, 
2013). However, the levels of waste differ between developed and developing nations. Wealthy and 
industrialised nations squander more food than developing countries. According to Kundu et al. 
(2019), a considerable 40% of losses in underdeveloped nations occur during the post-harvest and 
manufacturing phases, whereas over 40% of losses in wealthy countries occur at the retail and con￾sumer levels. Technologies for processing food packing and storing raw foods have a significant Green Synthesised Nanoparticles 291
impact and can significantly lower these losses. Packaging systems are made from a range of 
materials and have many important tasks that maintain, manage, distribute, transport, and identify 
products along the supply chain, from raw materials to final products (Figure 18.1).
The most promising potential use of nanotechnology in the food industry is the development 
of new food packaging technologies, which is one of the fastest-growing areas of nanotechnology 
research (Dasgupta et al., 2015). As per Kuswandi et al. (2011), active and smart packaging are the 
most recent developments in food packaging, which have the potential to enhance food safety and 
quality and maximise shelf-life. By creating nanoparticle films using nanotechnology, it is possible 
to improve the passage of some gases through plastic films and release unwanted carbon dioxide, 
which reduces food’s shelf-life. These films also provide barriers against gases like ethylene and 
oxygen, which cause food to deteriorate (Duncan, 2011; Silvestre et al., 2011).
By creating small, edible, capsule-based nanoparticles that release their contents at specific 
locations in the body when needed, nanotechnology is also seeking to improve the administration 
of drugs, vitamins, and delicate micronutrients via common foods. This would provide important 
health benefits, such as lower chances of cancer, heart attack, stroke, and neurological illness (Koo 
et al., 2005).
Additionally, according to Lee et al. (2003), nanoparticles can be employed to provide food items 
with new functions and properties, including colour and smell. Despite some encouraging findings, 
the development of bionanocomposites is a lengthy process (Sorrentino et al., 2007). An excellent 
example of nanoparticles that can be used for active packaging is oxygen scavengers, which can 
be incorporated into packaging systems as opposed to being added in labels or sachets. A common 
example is the Darex oxygen scavenger, which may be put into cans, lids, and various metal and 
plastic closure systems (Kuswandi et al., 2011).
18.4.1  Gold Nanocomposites for Active Packaging
Among the most potent heterogeneous oxidative catalysts are gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) 
(Stratakis and Garcia, 2012). A popular method for assessing a compound’s capacity to remove 
FIGURE 18.1 Utilising nanotechnology in food packaging to improve food safety, preserve food, and 
enhance food functionality.292 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
free radicals is the DPPH (2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl) radical scavenging model. According to 
Bumbudsanpharoke and Ko (2018), the varying levels of freeness of AuNP–cellulose nanocomposites 
considerably increase the total proportion of DPPH that can be scavenged. According to their study, 
bionanocomposites of unbleached Kraft soft wood fibres (UBK) and gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) 
could make good candidates for antioxidant-based active packaging that is intended for use in food 
preservation.
18.4.2  Utilising Green Technology for Intelligent Packaging
Product status can be communicated to customers using intelligent packaging, which can turn on 
and off in response to changes in internal or external conditions. As well as the standard elem￾ents of food packaging, smart or intelligent packaging includes product identity, sustainability, 
tamper detection, and authenticity traceability capabilities. Determining potential mechanisms 
for smart packaging requires an understanding of the functioning principles of biosensors, which 
are integrated, standalone devices for material sensing and characterisation. As stated by Kundu 
et al. (2019), the process of creating a biosensor involves several steps, such as the synthesis of 
the material for sensing, the selection of the bioreceptor material, the creation of a complex target 
analyte-containing medium, the analysis of data, the development of software, and the development 
of the final sensing units.
Environments inside polymer film-based food packaging, which consist of gases (like oxygen, 
carbon dioxide, and ethylene), can be detected using appropriate bioreceptor molecules (such as 
enzymes, antibodies, cells, and microorganisms) and further transduction can illustrate chemical 
changes as measurable outputs. The increasing commercial use of radio frequency identification 
(RFID) and time-temperature indicators (TTIs) as intelligent packaging techniques is making them 
more pertinent. When examining food items that shouldn’t be frozen, TTIs can reveal whether the 
foods have been improperly exposed to low temperatures. Additionally, TTIs can identify the dur￾ation of exposure to abnormally high temperatures and ascertain whether heat-sensitive foods have 
been subjected to above-optimum temperatures. Thermochromic ink dots, which indicate whether 
a product is at the proper serving temperature following refrigeration or heating, are the most com￾monly used type of TTI. Given that these gadgets are microelectronic systems, it is clear that nano￾technology may improve them. It is also possible to identify the presence of the deadly E. coli in 
meat packaging using transparent silica nanospheres that have been immobilised with fluorescent 
dye (Parry 2006). RFID tags can enable the regular tracking of data related to packaged foods. 
RFID allows for the wireless tracking of food packages through tags, scanners, and computer 
systems that enable food traceability, hence increasing the efficiency of intelligent logistics chains. 
The fact that RFID expedites stock rotation and improves monitoring, however, may be its greatest 
benefit for the food industry. Antennas for receiving and transmitting signals, microchips for data 
storage, and readers for additional data communication make up RFID units, which are also known 
as transponders or tags. TimeStrip®, Colour-Therm, Thermax, CheckPoint, Fresh-check, OnvuTM, 
SensorQ®, RipeSense, CS8304, Fresh Tag, Easy2log®, Temptrip, and O2 SenseTM are a few of 
the intelligent tags that are available on the market for temperature and other food quality indicators 
(Fuertes et al. 2016; Pavelkova, 2013).
Green technology’s place in intelligent packaging can be summarised as follows:
• Compared to other physicochemical approaches, the green synthesis of nanoparticles (NPs) 
is recommended for smart packaging because it is a clean, safe, easy, affordable, and efficient 
source of high yields and purity.
• The green synthesis of nanoparticles does not require high pressures or temperatures.
• The green synthesis of nanoparticles avoid the use of dangerous and toxic materials, as well as 
not needing expensive external agents for capping, stabilising, or reducing.Green Synthesised Nanoparticles 293
Utilising plant and fruit extracts has the benefit of producing stable nanoparticles that do not 
aggregate chemically, even when kept for extended periods.
There are, however, some restrictions on the widespread adoption of intelligent packaging tech￾nologies, including the following:
• These devices have to function in a variety of environments, including under high and 
low humidity, light, and gas concentrations, which poses a challenge in their design and 
manufacture.
• Real-time and online identification require high throughput and quick answers.
• It is imperative that these devices are engineered to achieve great sensitivity and reversibility 
in their operating functions, which is difficult.
• Green synthesised NPs for smart packaging are labour-intensive to handle and maintain.
18.4.3  Green Nanoparticle Synthesis in the Bio-​Based Packaging Industry
In order to enhance food safety and preserve nutritional and sensory quality, moisture transfer and/
or gas exchange in food products can be regulated using bio-based packaging, which consists of bio￾degradable packaging films (Siracusa et al., 2008). These packaging materials are thought to be more 
environmentally friendly than other types of conventional packaging films. Like other types of pack￾aging, bio-based packaging isolates food products from their surroundings by acting as a barrier that 
keeps out harmful microorganisms, gases, and relative humidity. Del Nobile et al. (2009) state that 
one distinctive quality that sets biodegradable packaging films apart from other types of packaging 
materials is their ability to break down quickly by means of biological processes. When energy is 
needed, bio-based packaging can be recycled through incineration, generating products via renew￾able sources rather than fossil fuels. One way to categorise biodegradable polymers is their origin: (i) 
plant-derived polymers, including polysaccharides, proteins, polypeptides, and polynucleotides, are 
known as biomass; (ii) bio-based monomers or combinations of biomass and petroleum are chem￾ically synthesised to make polymers, like biopolyester and polylactic acid; (iii) microorganisms and 
genetically engineered bacteria can manufacture a variety of polymers, including bacterial cellulose, 
polyhydroxybutyrate, starch, chitosan, xanthan, curdian, and pullan. Efficiency and processing are 
the main drawbacks of biopolymer packaging; thus, the use of nanomaterials could address these 
issues. If the source of the nanoparticles were biogenic, then that would be the cherry on top.
18.5 ADVANTAGES
Given its substantial contribution to plastic pollution and the harmful effects of prolonged exposure 
to the chemicals used in food processing, packaging, and storage, environmentalists have placed 
food packaging under intense examination. But with over 30% of globally produced food wasted 
within the supply chain, the critical role that food packaging plays in guaranteeing food security and 
safety cannot be understated (Wohner et al., 2019).
In order to reduce food shortages, prevent spoiling, and extend the shelf-life of packaged food, 
it is necessary for the food packaging industry to incorporate innovative technologies that are 
safe for the environment and do not pose a risk to human health. The application of nanotech￾nology in agriculture is growing quickly in both developed and developing countries. Neethirajan 
and Jayas (2011) state that it has practical applications in all aspects of the food chain, such as 
quality control, transportation, food processing, and packaging. Nanotechnology has the poten￾tial to significantly improve the food industry by providing safer and stronger packing materials, 
more potent antimicrobial agents, and a variety of sensors that can identify trace infections, gases, 
and bacteria in packaged foods (Duncan, 2011). Food contamination is the source of foodborne 
illnesses, which can arise at any point in the supply chain, from manufacturing and distribution 294 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
to consumption. Over 200 potentially fatal diseases are linked to food contaminated with bac￾teria, viruses, parasites, or chemicals, like heavy metals, according to reports referenced by the 
World Health Organisation (WHO). According to Hoseinnejad et al. (2018), adding nanoparticle 
coatings to packaging materials could have an antimicrobial effect that inhibits microbial devel￾opment, thereby extending the shelf-life of foods. Actually, two forms of enhanced packaging for 
the food industry (smart and active packaging) have been generated by advancements in the field 
of nanotechnology.
When foods change over time, smart/intelligent packaging lets consumers know by changing 
colour, indicating whether the food is safe to eat. Even after being manufactured, smart films made 
from blackberry and blueberry pomade have demonstrated remarkable antioxidant qualities that 
serve as signals for pH changes that occur when food spoils (Kurek et al., 2018). Similar bio-based, 
green synthesised nanoparticles have been created that have the ability to sense and communicate 
data on the safety, temperature, and freshness of food products (Vanderroost et al., 2014). In order to 
verify product quality, this could provide a workable substitute for laborious processes that require 
expensive machinery and for package integrity to be broken. Authenticity tracking and security are 
also facilitated by intelligent packaging, which makes it possible to trace brand identities (Kumar 
et al., 2020). On the other hand, active packaging offers other advantages, like preventing the 
growth of dangerous microorganisms while food is being stored by incorporating antimicrobial 
(natural or synthetic) agents into the packaging structure. It also removes unwanted elements from 
environments inside packaging, shielding foods from contamination. Active packaging has several 
components, such as oxygen scavengers, carbon dioxide scavengers, acetylene scavengers, ethanol 
emitters, and moisture absorbers (Bradley et al., 2011).
Nanocarriers and nanoencapsulation systems are used to hold natural antimicrobial agents, 
such as essential oils, antimicrobial peptides, and different organic acids, for a long period of time 
while also protecting them from environmental stresses (Kumar et al., 2020). When it comes to 
preserving the freshness and quality of foods for extended periods of time, synthetic polymeric 
nanoparticles are certainly effective. However, one drawback is that their disposal poses a risk 
to the environment. These polymeric nanoparticles have the disadvantage of having structures 
that can degrade toxically, accumulate toxic monomers, and undergo toxic degradation processes 
(Moustafa et al., 2019). According to Kumar et al. (2019), the antibacterial and biodegradable 
qualities of bio-based food packaging embedded with nanoparticles are of great interest to pack￾aging companies and researchers. Food packaging materials based on polymer nanocomposite 
technologies have excellent mechanical, thermal, and flame-retardant qualities, are simple to 
recycle, and shield food from microorganisms and UV light. Food packaging materials made from 
biopolymers, such as proteins, lipids, and polysaccharides, have the potential to greatly improve 
food’s shelf-life, stability, and general quality. Numerous studies have confirmed the effective 
use of biomaterials in packaging by incorporating starch into nanocomposites (Tang et al., 2012; 
Abreu et al., 2015).
The antibacterial efficacy of bionanocomposite-based packaging is enhanced by the large surface 
area of nanofillers, which allows more microorganisms to adhere to them (De Azeredo 2009). When 
added to biopolymers, nanofillers can also function as sensors, reacting to variations in tempera￾ture, humidity, and oxygen concentrations, as well as the deterioration and spoiling of food items. 
Products that have passed their expiration date can be distinguished and sorted using nanobiosensors 
that are incorporated into packaging. The real-time recording of temperature, dissolved oxygen 
concentrations, and carbon dioxide contents is also possible through the use of nanosensors in intelli￾gent packaging. This may be useful for checking the quality and freshness of food. For organisations 
like the armed forces, which have to keep packaged food for extended periods of time, this innov￾ation could be helpful in emergency environmental situations. Today’s food safety organisations 
require antimicrobial smart food packaging due to the problem of chemicals and microorganisms 
migrating from food packaging into food products.Green Synthesised Nanoparticles 295
18.6 SAFETY CONCERNS AND REGULATIONS
Researchers and environmentalists are very suspicious of the potential advancements offered by 
bioengineered nanomaterials in terms of their environmental safety, despite the field’s recent boom 
and all of its benefits for the food packaging sector. There are currently no clear guidelines for the 
handling, labelling, or manufacture of nanomaterials. The possible risks posed by nanoparticles 
have prompted regulatory bodies in the USA and Europe, including the Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA), the European Food Safety Agency (EFSA), the Environmental Protection 
Agency (EPA), the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), and the 
US Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA), to take action and impose regulations on their 
use in the food industry. Regarding the risks that nanoparticles pose to human health and environ￾mental safety, there are insufficient and conflicting studies on the toxicology and ecotoxicology 
of nanotechnology. Nanomaterials for food packaging and nanomaterial-based compounds pose 
threats that cannot be adequately measured or evaluated by current safety testing methods. There 
is also currently insufficient knowledge regarding how to dispose of nanomaterials after use. To 
evaluate the dangers associated with nanoparticles, tests and standard operating procedures to 
obtain exposure and hazard data must be conducted. Customers’ evident enthusiasm for the many 
advantages of nanomaterial-based food packaging shouldn’t deflect legislators from their urgent 
need to establish stringent regulations governing the industry’s use of nanoparticles. The exposure 
of nanoparticles to the human body may increase oxidative stress, alter molecular levels, cause 
cancer, or even pose a threat to human life. As a result of nanoparticles’ increased reactivity and 
mobility, their potential toxicity is one of the main issues that must be resolved before their use 
is accepted by the general public. Ready-to-eat food items typically contain consumable pack￾aging that has been injected with nanoparticles to extend their shelf-life. In these situations, there 
is cause for concern regarding the risk of direct ingestion and potential interactions between 
nanoparticles and cells in the human body. The costs of creating these nanoparticles, whether 
synthetically, environmentally, or biologically, are another matter that has to be addressed. 
According to Silva et al. (2012), the Framework 1935/2004 Regulation, which was established by 
the European regulatory body, prohibits compounds from altering the intrinsic and organoleptic 
features of food. Compounds have to remain inert, not promote food deterioration, and not have 
harmful impacts on human health. Additionally, according to the Regulation, the dosage response 
and potential toxicity of any nanocomponents added to food should be investigated beforehand. 
As per Directive 89/107/EEC, any active nanocomponent intended for food supplement adminis￾tration that is introduced as a food packaging material must be evaluated as a direct food additive 
first (Pradhan et al., 2015). Customers frequently bear the consequences when regulations of this 
nature are disregarded because of lax enforcement by governments, particularly in developing 
countries. As a result, the following conditions for the strategic vision and public expectations 
should be carefully considered:
• A variety of advanced tools are needed for the synthesis of nanoparticles; therefore, the pro￾cess of making nanomaterials affordable for use as food packaging materials is difficult, espe￾cially for low-budget enterprises in developing nations.
• Green nanomaterial-based packaging ingredients must pose low risk to human health and be 
environmentally benign.
• Researchers need to give the biodegradability of nanoparticle-containing packages careful 
consideration as it is a very serious matter.
• When ingested by any living organism, the degradation products of nanomaterials are often 
highly poisonous; thus, in order to prevent harmful degradation processes, researchers must 
refocus their efforts towards replacing synthetic chemicals in nanomaterials with materials 
derived from biotechnologies.296 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
Officials and government organisations must provide stricter and more detailed regulations and 
guidelines regarding the utilisation of nanoparticles in the food industry. Furthermore, the quality 
of nanoparticles used in food packaging should meet minimum criteria. This is required since the 
quality of food packaging is a significant factor in determining food’s integrity and freshness.
18.7 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE PROSPECTS
Reducing the danger of toxicity to the environment from the many chemicals employed in the phys￾ical and chemical procedures for the synthesis of nanoparticles is urgently needed because conven￾tional methods of creating nanoparticles are expensive and create very harmful byproducts. As the 
paradigm for environmental sustainability is shifting in favour of a greener world, green synthesis 
represents an alternate strategy for producing nanoparticles. A wide range of enhanced functional 
features could result from the fabrication of food packaging using biogenic nanoparticles. These 
NPs can offer a longer shelf-life for food products, better processing procedures, and healthier and 
more useful packaging, as well as lower prices. Customers can even receive information on the 
condition of food products within smart packaging that uses nanosensors. Nanobiocomposites are 
environmentally benign and have the ability to significantly improve the mechanical, thermal, bar￾rier, and physicochemical properties of packaging compared to original polymers and microscale 
composites. Green nanoparticle-assisted active packaging can significantly increase the antioxi￾dant and antibacterial qualities of food components. However, green nanomaterial-based pack￾aging certainly has a long way to go before it is fully integrated into the food industry. Many 
questions remain, including the toxicity of nanoparticles (e.g., the release of hazardous metal ions), 
the ecotoxicity of nanoparticles, long-term effects on human health, recycling (e.g., plastic films 
containing NPs), and the regulation of the use of NPs in food. In the future, as the population 
increases, food will become more and more valuable and sustainability will gain further traction; 
therefore, the widespread adoption of smart, web-linked, biogenic nanomaterial-based packaging 
may be possible.
REFERENCES
Abreu, A. S., Oliveira, M., de Sá, A., Rodrigues, R. M., Cerqueira, M. A., Vicente, A. A., & Machado, A. V. 
(2015). Antimicrobial nanostructured starch based films for packaging. Carbohydrate Polymers. 129, 
127–134.
Bradley, E. L., Castle, L., & Chaudhry, Q. (2011). Applications of nanomaterials in food packaging with a 
consideration of opportunities for developing countries. Trends in Food Science and Technology. 22(11), 
604–610.
Bumbudsanpharoke, N., & Ko, S. (2018). The green fabrication, characterization and evaluation of catalytic 
antioxidation of gold nanoparticle-lignocellulose composite papers for active packaging. International 
Journal of Biological Macromolecules. 107, 1782–1791.
Chandran, S. P., Chaudhary, M., Pasricha, R., Ahmad, A., & Sastry, M. (2006). Synthesis of gold nanotriangles 
and silver nanoparticles using Aloe vera plant extract. Biotechnology Progress. 22, 577–583.
Dasgupta, N., Ranjan, S., Mundekkad, D., Ramalingam, C., Shanker, R., & Kumar, A. (2015). Nanotechnology 
in agro-food: from field to plate. Food Research International. 69, 381–400.
De Azeredo, H . M. (2009). Nanocomposites for food packaging applications. Food Research International . 
42, 1240–1253.
Del Nobile, M. A., Conte, A., Buonocore, G. G., Incoronato, A. L., Massaro, A., & Panza, O. (2009). Active 
packaging by extrusion processing of recyclable and biodegradable polymers. Journal of Food 
Engineering. 93, 1–6.
Duncan, T. V. (2011). Applications of nanotechnology in food packaging and food safety: barrier materials, 
antimicrobials and sensors. Journal of Colloid and Interface Science. 363, 1–24.
FAO (2013). Food wastage footprint, impact on natural resources. www.fao.org/docrep/018/i3347e/i3347e.pdf
(accessed 09.03.2021).Green Synthesised Nanoparticles 297
Fuertes, G., Soto, I., Carrasco, R., Vargas, M., Sabattin, J., & Lagos, C. (2016). Intelligent packaging 
systems: sensors and nanosensors to monitor food quality and safety. Journal of Sensors, 2016, 4046061, 
8 pages. https://doi.org/10.1155/2016/4046061
Gopinath, K., Karthika, V., Gowri, S., Senthilkumar, V., Kumaresan, S., & Arumugam, A. (2014). Antibacterial 
activity of ruthenium nanoparticles synthesized using Gloriosa superba L. leaf extract. Journal of 
Nanostructure in Chemistry. 4, 83.
Hoseinnejad, M., Jafari, S. M., & Katouzian, I. (2018). Inorganic and metal nanoparticles and their antimicro￾bial activity in food packaging applications. Critical Reviews in Microbiology. 44, 161–181.
Huang, J., Li, Q., Sun, D., Lu, Y., Su, Y., Yang, X., & Chen, C. (2007). Biosynthesis of silver and gold 
nanoparticles by novel sundried Cinnamomum camphora leaf. Nanotechnology. 18, 105104.
Huang, Y., Mei, L., Chen, X., & Wang, Q. (2018). Recent Developments in Food Packaging Based on 
Nanomaterials. Nanomaterials. 8, 830.
Iravani, S. (2011). Green synthesis of metal nanoparticles using plants. Green Chemistry. 13, 2638–2650.
Jayaseelan, C., Rahuman, A. A., Kirthi, A. V., Marimuthu, S., Santhoshkumar, T., Bagavan, A., & Rao, K. 
B. (2012). Novel microbial route to synthesize ZnO nanoparticles using Aeromonashydrophila and 
their activity against pathogenic bacteria and fungi. Spectrochim. Acta A: Molecular and Biomolecular 
Spectroscopy. 90, 78–84.
Koo, O. M., Rubinstein, I., & Onyuksel, H. (2005). Role of nanotechnology in targeted drug delivery and 
imaging: A concise review. Nanomedicine: Nanotechnology, Biology and Medicine. 1, 193–212.
Kumar, P., Mahajan, P., Kaur, R., & Gautam, S. (2020). Nanotechnology and its challenges in the food sector: A 
review. Materials Today Chemistry. 17, 100332.
Kumar, U. S. U., Paridah, M. T., Owolabi, F. T., Gopakumar, D. A., Rizal, S., Amirul, A. A., Rahman, A. A., 
Alfatah, T., Mistar, E. M., Sri Aprilia N. A., & Khalil, H. A. (2019). Neem leaves extract based seaweed 
bio-degradable composite films with excellent antimicrobial activity for sustainable packaging material. 
Bioresources. 14, 700–713.
Kundu, M., Krishnan, P., Kotnala, R. K., & Sumana, G. (2019). Recent developments in biosensors to 
combat agricultural challenges and their future prospects. Trends in Food Science and Technology.
88, 157–178.
Kurek, M., Garofulić, I. E., Bakić, M. T., Ščetar, M., Uzelac, V. D., & Galić, K. (2018). Development and 
evaluation of a novel antioxidant and pH indicator film based \on chitosan and food waste sources of 
antioxidants. Food Hydrocolloids. 84, 238–246.
Kuswandi, B., Wicaksono, Y., Abdullah, A., Heng, L. Y., & Ahmad, M. (2011). Smart packaging: sensors for 
monitoring of food quality and safety. Sensing and Instrumentation for Food Quality and Safety. 5, 
137–146.
Lee, C. H., An, D. S., Park, H. J., & Lee, D. S. (2003). Widespectrum antimicrobial packaging materials incorp￾orating nisin and chitosan in the coating. Packaging Technology and Science. 16, 99–106.
Li, X., Xu, H., Chen, Z. S., & Chen, G. (2011). Biosynthesis of nanoparticles by microorganisms and their 
applications. Journal of Nanomaterials 270974, 16 pages. . https://doi.org/10.1155/2011/270974
Mittal, A. K., Chisti, Y., & Banerjee, U. C. (2013). Synthesis of metallic nanoparticles using plant extracts. 
Biotechnology Advances. 31, 346–356.
Moustafa, H., Youssef, A. M., Darwish, N. A., & Abou-Kandil, A. I. (2019). Eco-friendly polymer composites 
for green packaging: Future vision and challenges. Composites Part B: Engineering. 172, 16–25.
Neethirajan, S., & Jayas, D. S. (2011). Nanotechnology for the food and bioprocessing industries. Food and 
Bioprocess Technology. 4, 39–47.
Parry, V. (2006). Food fight on the tiny scale. The Times Online UK, 21.
Pavelková, A. (2013). Time temperature indicators as devices intelligent packaging. Acta Universitatis 
Agriculturae et Silviculturae Mendelianae Brunensis. 61, 245–251.
Pradhan, N., Singh, S., Ojha, N., Shrivastava, A., Barla, A., Rai, V., & Bose, S. (2015). Facets of nanotech￾nology as seen in food processing, packaging, and preservation industry. BioMed Research International.
365672, 17 pages. https://doi.org/10.1155/2015/365672.
Si, S., & Mandal, T. K. (2007). Tryptophanbased peptides to synthesize gold and silver nanoparticles: a mech￾anistic and kinetic study. Chemistry: A European Journal. 13, 3160–3168.
Silva, H. D., Cerqueira, M. Â., & Vicente, A. A. (2012). Nanoemulsions for food applications: development and 
characterization. Food and Bioprocess Technology. 5, 854–867.298 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
Silvestre, C., Duraccio, D., & Cimmino, S. (2011). Food packaging based on polymer nanomaterials. Progress 
in Polymer Science. 36, 1766–1782.
Siracusa, V., Rocculi, P., Romani, S., & Dalla Rosa, M. (2008). Biodegradable polymers for food packaging: a 
review. Trends in Food Science and Technology. 19, 634–643.
Sorrentino, A., Gorrasi, G., & Vittoria, V. (2007). Potential perspectives of bionanocomposites for food pack￾aging applications. Trends in Food Science and Technology. 18, 84–95.
Stratakis, M., Garcia, H. (2012). Catalysis by supported gold nanoparticles: beyond aerobic oxidative processes. 
Chemical Reviews. 112, 4469–4506.
Tang, X. Z., Kumar, P., Alavi, S., & Sandeep, K. P. (2012). Recent advances in biopolymers and biopolymer￾based nanocomposites for food packaging materials. Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition.
52, 426–442.
Vanderroost, M., Ragaert, P., Devlieghere, F., & De Meulenaer, B. (2014). Intelligent food packaging: The next 
generation. Trends in Food Science and Technology. 39, 47–62.
Wohner, B., Pauer, E., Heinrich, V., & Tacker, M. (2019). Packaging-related food losses and waste: an overview 
of drivers and issues. Sustainability. 11, 264.299
DOI: 10.1201/9781003477730-21 299
19 Nanoparticle-Infused 
Functional Foods
Redefining Nutrition and 
Health Paradigms
R. Sandhyarani and Suresh Chaluvadi
19.1 INTRODUCTION
Functional foods have been developed to meet the endless nutritional demands that signifi￾cantly improve several health aspects and mitigate illnesses. Functional foods majorly constitute 
dietary supplements, bioactive/biofunctional compounds, nutritive/non-nutritive compounds, and 
neutraceuticals. These functional food constituents mainly include dietary supplements, plant-based 
pigments, phenolic substances, alkaloids, and flavonoids (Ma et al., 2022). The concentrations, 
compositions, and activity of the constituents in functional foods are adversely affected during 
their processing, storage, and transportation by various factors, like light, oxidation, temperature, 
humidity, and pH (Bodbodak et al., 2024). The solubility and permeability characteristics of func￾tional food components in humans are low. In addition, the large size of these molecules affects 
digestion and bioavailability. Thus, researchers have focused on advanced technologies to formulate 
functional foods that avoid the loss and limited bioavailability of active constituents. To enhance 
the characteristics of these constituents, approaches like chemical modification, solid dispersion, 
lipid-based formulation, molecular complexation, amorphization, and the use of nanoparticles are 
employed. Many processes for formulating functional foods have been developed using nanotech￾nology, which can optimize the characteristics of effective ingredients, such as their taste, texture, 
colour, smell, consistency, and surface area with anticipated activity (Borjizadeh et al., 2024). Thus, 
research into using nanoparticle-infused constituents in functional foods to ensure the maintenance 
of bioactivity and absorptivity in human body is ongoing. The application of nanocarriers in the food 
industry is shown in Figure 19.1.
19.2 NANOPARTICLE-INFUSED CARRIERS
Nanotechnology-based biocompatible particles and materials have been used extensively in medical, 
pharmaceutical, and environmental applications. In addition, nanoparticles can be physiochemically 
modified to attain desired characteristics, like wettability, catalytic activity, emulsification, micellar 
formation, light absorption, and conductivity (Nakmode et al., 2022). These materials offer a variety 
of functions and can be designed to improve the efficacy of drugs via their precise and controlled 
delivery. Drug delivery can be optimized by altering the surface chemistry and size of the 
nanoparticles used, as well as multiple other factors that influence the pharmacodynamics and 
pharmacokinetics of these systems (Cabral et al., 2023). This approach minimizes side effects since 
drugs are released at target locations in exact quantities at defined times. The rate of release of bio￾active constituents to target sites is dependent on the size of the nanoparticle involved (Rajkhowa 
et al., 2023). Similar methodologies have been employed to formulate functional foods that support 300 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
the delivery of nutritional components without compromising ingredient activity. In addition, 
nanofoods are derivatives of commonly available foods, the production, cultivation, processing, and 
packaging that utilizes nanotechnology. This concept can be extended to improve the production of 
novel foods with high quality, safety, and specific functions.
In general, nanoparticles range from 1 to 100 nm in diameter, which enhances their available 
surface area and improves the binding of active ingredients and their deep penetration into tissues 
through fine capillaries, thereby enabling the sustained release of molecules, increased residence 
within the gastrointestinal tract, escape clearance mechanisms, and bioavailability (Ding et al., 
2024). Nanoparticles not only improve the delivery of active ingredients in functional foods via the 
gastrointestinal tract but also reduce side effects from excess intake. Thus, nanoparticle delivery 
systems have been found to have immense advantages for carrying functional ingredients in different 
nanoparticle-based formulations, such as nanomicelles, nanogels, nanofibres, solid nanoliposomes, 
nanoscale protein–carbohydrate complexes, nanoemulsions, biopolymeric nanoparticles, 
nanocapsules, and additives (Lv et al., 2024). Nanotreatment minimizes the side effects that are 
generally associated with ingested trace elements. During nanotreatment, neutraceuticals are dir￾ectly absorbed by the intestinal tract via nanonutrient additives (Manohar et al., 2023).
Food processing companies are infusing nanocapsules into bread to mask the smell and flavour 
of tuna fish oil. Micelles have been used to concentrate non-polar compounds in nanostructured 
food, improving the sensory properties of food products, such as texture, consistency, colour, fla￾vour, and taste (Kupikowska-Stobba et al., 2024). In addition, nanostructured frozen yoghurt, low￾fat mayonnaise, and spreads are preferred by buyers. These food products are intended to offer 
low-calory options by containing reduced levels of fats and carbohydrates. These foods compete 
with their whole-fat equivalents by offering a velvety texture. Many vitamins, coenzyme Q 10, 
phytochemicals, and antioxidants have been encapsulated into nanocapsules that improve their bio￾availability (Kityania et al., 2024). Fat soluble vitamin D has been nanoformulated using liposome￾and micelle-based structures that significantly increase its bioavailability (Vieira & Conte-Junior, 
2024). The polymers used in nanoencapsulation are proteins and polysaccharides derived from nat￾ural sources (Dima et al., 2020; Otchere et al., 2023).
FIGURE 19.1 Applications of nanocarriers in the food industry, including improving food processing, 
packaging, and overall quality via various techniques, like nanoencapsulation, active packaging, and smart 
packaging.Nanoparticle-Infused Functional Foods 301
Nanomaterials have been used in food packaging and as food additives, antimicrobials, sensors, 
and freshness indicators. Many nanoparticles have been extensively studied as delivery systems for 
functional foods. Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) made from carbon-based nanomaterials, ZnO, Ag, GO, 
or Au possess significant antimicrobial activity and can be used as delivery systems in safe food 
applications (Ayanda et al., 2024). Dietary supplements and functional foods have been legislated 
by various national health agencies. Functional foods that contain antioxidants, phytochemicals, 
compounds with pharmacological effects, vitamins, or minerals are regulated by various national 
regulations. The directives and guidelines related to functional foods and dietary supplements are 
issued by national organizations, including the US Food and Drug Administration, the European 
Commission, and the European Food Safety Authority, which are all part of ministries of health 
or agriculture in specific countries. The safety and effectiveness of newly developed nanoparticle￾infused functional foods must be assessed based on research and clinical studies. The link between 
food and health is a claim that has been confirmed by regulators, like the EFSA, on the basis of 
scientific evidence. Nearly 55 nutritional claims have been approved and are found on the European 
market (Liu et al., 2024). Foods for medical purposes belong to a category of foods that is designated 
by the EFSA for the treatment of specific disorders, diseases, or medical conditions. Research on 
nanoparticle-infused functional foods has increased due to the quest for neutraceuticals alternatives. 
The main objective of these products is to improve health and minimize the risk of disease. Recently, 
clinical studies on components in nanoparticle-infused functional foods, like curcumin NPs and 
capsaicin NPs, have been carried out for neurological disorders and diabetic neuropathy. Many 
methods and strategies have been developed for the preparation of nanoparticles and nanomaterials. 
These methods include top-down and bottom-up approaches that use organic or inorganic materials, 
as well as green synthesis. Many preparation procedures for nanocarriers, such as nanoemulsion 
compositions, micro/nanobio-based delivery systems, and nanostructured lipid carriers, have been 
reported, based on advances in nanoscale research (Stevanović & Filipović, 2024).
19.3 FUNCTIONAL FOOD COMPONENTS
The active components in foods that claim promising pharmacological or bioactivity for the preven￾tion of diseases or the management of health conditions have been considered for nano-infusion. 
In addition, foods with enhanced flavour, texture, taste, and efficacy can be produced using this 
technology (Sabliov & Astete, 2015). Nanocarriers employed for dietary supplements are shown in 
Figure 19.2. Many foods have been designed to address individual requirements, future health risks, 
and genetic defects (Langhans, 2018). Foods can be enhanced in different ways using nano-infusion, 
such as:
• Enhanced texture and colour;
• Masking unpleasant flavours or the addition of flavours;
• Extending the sustained release of fragrance;
• Maximizing nutritional value;
• Minimizing nutrient loss during processing;
• Improving the stability of foods during procurement, processing, and consumption;
• Improving the bioavailability, functionality, and absorption of active constituents.
19.4 NANOPARTICLE-INFUSED FUNCTIONAL FOODS
19.4.1 Natural Pigments, Carotenoids, and Polyphenols
Water-based food formulations that use natural pigments, like curcumin, lutein, carotenes, and 
zeaxanthins, have found to provide health benefits, including anti-inflammatory and antioxidant 
effects. However, these compounds are not very soluble in water and not very stable. 302 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
Thus, researchers have developed polymeric nanoparticles for the delivery of these pigments 
to enhance their dispersion in water and increase their stability (Elzoghby et al., 2012; Pahuja 
et al., 2012).
Some foods, like soybean oil, grapes, blueberries, yogurt, and high-fat foods, are fortified with 
nanoparticle-infused polyphenols. For instance, curcumin can be entrapped in casein nanoparticles, 
SLN, and NLC phosphocase (Pan et al., 2013). Curcumin can also be delivered using poly￾meric nanoparticles developed as curcumin–zein NPs. These nanoparticles were produced by 
electroatomization, using ethanol as a solvent. The particles were found to be spherical and range 
in size from 200 to 800 nm, with an entrapment efficiency ranging from 85 to 90% when the con￾centration of zein was less than 5%. The samples were stable for up to 90 days when stored at 23°C 
and 43% RH. In addition, the colorant properties, like lightness, hue angle, and chroma, signifi￾cantly improved by the curcumin-zein NPs, with milk as a model food (Gomez-Estaca et al., 2012). 
Similarly, a α-carotene derivative and natural pigment called lutein have also been entrapped using 
zein, with the help of supercritical fluids at different temperatures, pressures, and concentrations. 
The entrapment efficiency of these particles was in the range of 35–85% and their sizes ranged from 
200 to 300 nm. The release mechanism of lutein in PBS, with a pH of 7.4 and containing 0.2% SDS, 
is mainly controlled by the swelling, erosion, and widening of zein matrices, which occur when 
water molecules penetrate into the matrices.
Epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG) is the major catechin found in green tea and has been infused 
with liposomes, casein micelles, β-lactoglobulin complexes, and chitosan- and lactoferrin-based 
nanoparticles (Shpigelman et al., 2012). In particular, EGCG entrapped using β-lactoglobulin has 
been studied extensively due to its stability, gastric kinetics, and sensory properties. The size of 
these nanoparticles is 12–20nm, with 70% entrapment efficiency with the thermal treatment of 
FIGURE 19.2 Various types of nanocarriers used in dietary supplements, including nanofibers, nanosponges, 
nanoemulsions, nanoliposomes, nanocapsules, nanogels, solid lipid nanoparticles, core/shell nanoparticles, 
mesoporous silica nanoparticles, cyclodextrin complexes, and layered double hydroxides.Nanoparticle-Infused Functional Foods 303
ß-lactoglobulin and EGCG in the ratios of 1:2 and 1:8. Oxidative studies have also been carried out 
by heating solutions at 85°C for 20 minutes, which show that entrapped EGCG is well protected 
compared to individual and mixture controls. Levels of reconstituted EGCG–ß-lactoglobulin in 
water (pH 6.6) from stored freeze-dried samples are similar to those in fresh samples.
Quercetin is a flavanol, or antioxidant flavonoid, and a plant pigment that has been infused with 
lecithin- and chitosan-based nanoparticles and co-encapsulated with aminolevulinic acid (ALA) 
in nanostructured lipid carriers (Huang et al., 2020). Similarly, other compounds like resveratrol, 
D-limonene, catechins, and luteolin, have been infused into nanoemulsions, encapsulated SLN, 
polymeric nanoparticles, and soyabean protein isolate-based NDS, respectively. Another interesting 
system has been designed to enhance the colour properties of β-carotene using polymeric nanoparticle 
entrapment (Tripathy et al., 2023). This system is formed of β-carotene, lecithin, and alginic acid 
and shows stability with the addition of CaCl2
 during its synthesis. The size of these nanoparticles 
is in the range of 120–200 nm. The colour of these infused particles in water-based suspensions 
changes with changes in water to sample ratio (1:100, 1:40, and 1:1 showing yellow, orange, and 
red, respectively) (Astete et al., 2009).
19.4.2  Vitamins
Many vitamins, especially fat-soluble vitamins, can be infused with nanocarriers for applications 
in health supplements, beverages, and fruit juices. These vitamins include A, D, D2, D3, E, and 
folic acid, which can be infused with nanocarriers, such as SLN, NLC, nanodroplets, soybean ß￾conglycinin NPs, caseinate nanocomplexes, protein–polysaccharide nanocomplexes, NLC, MUFA 
emulsions, and nanoemulsions. For instance, vitamin D3 entrapment has been carried out using cal￾cium and zein–carboxymethyl chitosan (CMCS)-based nanoparticles. The sizes of these particles 
vary from 90 nm to 200 nm, depending on the polymer and calcium concentrations, with an entrap￾ment efficiency in the range of 52–87% and ζ potential from -15 to -28 mV. The release profiles 
for zein systems, zein–CMCS systems, and calcium systems are 85%, 80%, and 45%, respectively. 
Photochemical stability against UV light has been found to increase compared to free vitamin D3 
(Luo et al., 2012).
Vitamin E and α-tocopherol with hydrophobic components have been studied extensively 
to understand their entrapment using nanoparticles. Vitamin E entrapped with zein–chitosan 
nanoparticles ranged from 200 to 800 nm, with an entrapment efficiency in the range of 76–87% for 
different concentrations of precursors. Increased amounts of chitosan or vitamin E show the reduced 
release of vitamin E. The release of vitamin E in gastric media suggests that chitosan acts as barrier 
for enzymatic diffusion into the matrices. Similarly, if zein concentrations are reduced, the release 
of vitamin E is faster. In addition, the release of α-tocopherol is reduced in simulated intestinal fluid 
compared to simulated gastric fluid under all test conditions (Somchue et al., n.d.).
19.4.3  Minerals
Calcium and zinc are essential minerals for the growth and development of bones and tissues. They 
are found in many foods and are taken as supplements to maintain health. Calcium has been infused 
with whey protein hydrolysate nanocomposites for supplementation in baked products, like bread 
(Xixi et al., 2015). Another mineral, selenite, has been entrapped in chitosan and later crosslinked 
by adding tripolyphosphate (TPP). The obtained nanoparticles are in the range of 130–300 nm, with 
an entrapment efficiency of 65%. The size variations depend on the concentrations of selenite and 
chitosan during synthesis. Release kinetics have been studied using in vitro gastric media. Nearly 
95% of selenite is released in a 2-hour period. This system can be further improved in terms of 
release profile (25% in 2 hours) and particle size (250–400 nm) by adding zein layers to the delivery 
systems.304 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
Similarly, zinc can be entrapped using solvent displacement techniques, followed by mixing the 
zinc with whey protein isolate solutions (Gülseren et al., 2012). The particles obtained are 200 nm 
in size, with an entrapment efficiency of more than 90%. Increases in zinc concentrations increase 
the nanoparticle size and aggregation. Zn polymeric nanoparticles are stable when kept at 22°C 
for 30 days but their size increases to 240 nm. In general, incorporated zinc is the same as the 
recommended daily intake for adults.
19.4.4 Fatty Acids
Omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) are known for their health benefits, like improved lipid 
profiles and reduced risks of metabolic syndromes and cardiovascular diseases. Omega-3 PUFAs 
are hydrophobic and naturally unstable upon exposure to oxygen and light. Thus, researchers have 
encapsulated docosahexanoic acid (DHA) in 290-nm casein micelle particles, with an entrapment 
efficiency of 63%, which were stable for 37 days when refrigerated at 4°C (Zimet et al., 2011). The 
encapsulation was carried out using the solvent displacement method, during which the loss or deg￾radation of DHA was found to occur. In addition, many omega-3 PUFAs, like DHA and eicosapenta￾enoic acid (EPA), have been infused with nanocarriers, like β-lactoglobulin–pectin, nanostructured 
lipid carriers (NLCs), solid lipid nanoparticles (SLNs), and nanoliposomes (Salminen et al., 2016). 
Fish oil is a major source of omega-3 PUFAs and can have an unpleasant flavour. So, researchers 
have developed nanoliposomes of about 300 nm, with ~90% encapsulation efficiency, to fortify 
bread using fish oil without any changes in its sensory characteristics (Hasani et al., 2023)
19.4.5 Flavouring Compounds
Flavour and aroma are major attributes in food formulations that increase acceptability. However, 
aroma and flavour may partially reduce during the manufacture or storage of foods, adversely 
affecting their quality. These components can be protected by using nanocarriers to increase aroma 
lifespan, control its release, and prevent oxidation and undesirable food interactions. Nestlé has 
developed low-fat ice cream using nanoemulsions to enhance shelf-life without modifying the fla￾vour and attain a low fat content (Sampathkumar et al., 2020). Researchers have prepared 200-
nm nanoparticles using ethyl hexanoate entrapped in whey proteins by modifying pH and CaCl2
additions (Giroux & Britten, 2011).
19.5 CONCLUSION
The functional food market has been growing substantially due to market demand and consumer 
preference for natural ingredients. Extensive research in nanotechnology has developed nanoparticle￾based delivery systems that are safe, facilitating the delivery of bioactive compounds present in func￾tional foods. These nanoparticle-infused functional foods have enhanced quality, sensory attributes, 
and texture, demonstrating the benefits of utilizing nanoparticles. Many nutritionally important 
food ingredients and nanocarriers have been discussed in this chapter. The health benefits and risks 
associated with nanomaterials have to be studied extensively to increase the number of nanoparticle￾infused functional foods and promote their commercialization and widespread adoption in the food 
industry.
REFERENCES
Astete, C. E., Sabliov, C. M., Watanabe, F., & Alexandru, B. (2009). Ca2+ Cross-linked alginic acid nanoparticles 
for solubilization of lipophilic natural colorants. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 57(16), 
7505–7512. https://doi.org/10.1021/JF900563A/ASSET/IMAGES/MEDIUM/JF-2009-00563A_0
009.GIFNanoparticle-Infused Functional Foods 305
Ayanda, O. S., Mmuoegbulam, A. O., Okezie, O., Durumin Iya, N. I., Mohammed, S. E., James, P. H., 
Muhammad, A. B., Unimke, A. A., Alim, S. A., Yahaya, S. M., Ojo, A., Adaramoye, T. O., Ekundayo, 
S. K., Abdullahi, A., & Badamasi, H. (2024). Recent progress in carbon-based nanomaterials: critical 
review. Journal of Nanoparticle Research, 26(5), 1–42. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11051-024-06006-2
Bodbodak, S., Nejatian, M., Ghandehari Yazdi, A. P., Kamali Rousta, L., Rafiee, Z., Jalali-Jivan, M., Kharazmi, 
M. S., & Jafari, S. M. (2024). Improving the thermal stability of natural bioactive ingredients via encap￾sulation technology. Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition, 64(10), 2824–2846. https://doi.org/
10.1080/10408398.2022.2127145
Borjizadeh, Z., Ahari, H., Özdal, T., Khosravi-Darani, K., & Nafchi, A. M. (2024). Saffron nanoencapsulation 
(Crocus sativus) and its role in food science: Types and techniques. ACS Food Science and Technology, 
4(6), 1310–1333. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsfoodscitech.4c00090
Cabral, H., Li, J., Miyata, K., & Kataoka, K. (2023). Controlling the biodistribution and clearance of 
nanomedicines. Nature Reviews Bioengineering, 2(3), 214–232. https://doi.org/10.1038/s44
222-023-00138-1
Dima, C., Assadpour, E., Dima, S., & Jafari, S. M. (2020). Bioactive-loaded nanocarriers for functional 
foods: from designing to bioavailability. Current Opinion in Food Science, 33, 21–29. https://doi.org/
10.1016/J.COFS.2019.11.006
Ding, Y., Zhao, T., Fang, J., Song, J., Dong, H., Liu, J., Li, S., & Zhao, M. (2024). Recent developments in the 
use of nanocrystals to improve bioavailability of APIs. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Nanomedicine 
and Nanobiotechnology, 16(2), e1958. https://doi.org/10.1002/wnan.1958
Elzoghby, A. O., Samy, W. M., & Elgindy, N. A. (2012). Albumin-based nanoparticles as potential controlled 
release drug delivery systems. Journal of Controlled Release, 157(2), 168–182. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.jconrel.2011.07.031
Giroux, H. J., & Britten, M. (2011). Encapsulation of hydrophobic aroma in whey protein nanoparticles. 
Journal of Microencapsulation, 28(5), 337–343. https://doi.org/10.3109/02652048.2011.569761
Gomez-Estaca, J., Balaguer, M. P., Gavara, R., & Hernandez-Munoz, P. (2012). Formation of zein nanoparticles 
by electrohydrodynamic atomization: Effect of the main processing variables and suitability for encap￾sulating the food coloring and active ingredient curcumin. Food Hydrocolloids, 28(1), 82–91. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.foodhyd.2011.11.013
Gülseren, I., Fang, Y., & Corredig, M. (2012). Zinc incorporation capacity of whey protein nanoparticles 
prepared with desolvation with ethanol. Food Chemistry, 135(2), 770–774. https://doi.org/10.1016/
J.FOODCHEM.2012.04.146
Hasani, M., Ojagh, S. M., Hasani, M. A., & Hasani, S. (2023). Development of stability, antioxidant, and anti￾microbial properties of biopolymeric chitosan modified starch nanocapsules containing essential oil. Food 
Science and Technology International, 30(4), 340–351. https://doi.org/10.1177/10820132231168449
Huang, C., Dong, H., Zhang, Z., Bian, H., & Yong, Q. (2020). Procuring the nano-scale lignin in prehydrolyzate 
as ingredient to prepare cellulose nanofibril composite film with multiple functions. Cellulose, 27(16), 
9355–9370. https://doi.org/10.1007/S10570-020-03427-9
Kityania, S., Nath, D., Das, S., Nath, R., & Talukdar, A. Das. (2024). Recent developments in the formula￾tion of nutraceuticals. Mohan Rao, T.J., Kesharwani, R.K., Keservani, R.K., & Sharma, A.K. (Eds.), 
Formulations, Regulations, and Challenges of Nutraceuticals (1st ed.). Apple Academic Press, 57–79. 
https://doi.org/10.1201/9781003412496-5
Kupikowska-Stobba, B., Domagała, J., & Kasprzak, M. M. (2024). Critical review of techniques for food 
emulsion characterization. Applied Sciences (Switzerland), 14(3), 1069. https://doi.org/10.3390/app1
4031069
Langhans, W. (2018). Food components in health promotion and disease prevention. Journal of Agricultural 
and Food Chemistry, 66(10), 2287–2294. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jafc.7b02121
Liu, Y., Aimutis, W. R., & Drake, M. A. (2024). Dairy, plant, and novel proteins: Scientific and technological 
aspects. Foods, 13(7), 1010. https://doi.org/10.3390/foods13071010
Luo, Y., Teng, Z., & Wang, Q. (2012). Development of zein nanoparticles coated with carboxymethyl chitosan for 
encapsulation and controlled release of vitamin D3. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 60(3), 
836–843
Lv, Y., Li, W., Liao, W., Jiang, H., Liu, Y., Cao, J., Lu, W., & Feng, Y. (2024). Nano-drug delivery systems based 
on natural products. International Journal of Nanomedicine, 19, 541–569. https://doi.org/10.2147/IJN.
S443692306 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
Ma, R. H., Zhang, X. X., Thakur, K., Zhang, J. G., & Wei, Z. J. (2022). Research progress of Lycium barbarum 
L. as functional food: phytochemical composition and health benefits. Current Opinion in Food Science, 
47, 100871. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cofs.2022.100871
Manohar, M. V., Paladhi, A., Vallinayagam, S., & Rudrapal, M. (2023). Nanotechnological approach in 
nutraceuticals. In Mithun Rudrapa (Ed), Polyphenols: Food, Nutraceutical, and Nanotherapeutic 
Applications, 67–81. https://doi.org/10.1002/9781394188864.ch4
Nakmode, D., Bhavana, V., Thakor, P., Madan, J., Singh, P. K., Singh, S. B., Rosenholm, J. M., Bansal, K. K., & 
Mehra, N. K. (2022). Fundamental aspects of lipid-based excipients in lipid-based product development. 
Pharmaceutics, 14(4), 831. https://doi.org/10.3390/pharmaceutics14040831
Otchere, E., McKay, B. M., English, M. M., & Aryee, A. N. A. (2023). Current trends in nano-delivery systems 
for functional foods: a systematic review. PeerJ, 3, e14980. https://doi.org/10.7717/PEERJ.14980/
SUPP-1
Pahuja, P., Arora, S., & Pawar, P. (2012). Ocular drug delivery system: A reference to natural polymers. Expert 
Opinion on Drug Delivery, 9(7), 837–861. https://doi.org/10.1517/17425247.2012.690733
Pan, K., Zhong, Q., & Baek, S. J. (2013). Enhanced dispersibility and bioactivity of curcumin by encapsulation 
in casein nanocapsules. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 61(25), 6036–6043. https://doi.org/
10.1021/jf400752a
Rajkhowa, S., Singh, P., Banaspati, A., Sarmah, N., Sarma, J., & Kalita, D. (2023). Current status 
and future scope of nanomaterials in food production: Toxicological and risk assessment. 
Nanotechnology and Nanomaterials in the Agri-Food Industries, 391–415. https://doi.org/10.1016/
B978-0-323-99682-2.00007-4
Sabliov, C. M., & Astete, C. E. (2015). Polymeric nanoparticles for food applications. In Cristina M. Sabliov, 
Hongda Chen, Rickey Y. Yada (Eds.), Nanotechnology and Functional Foods: Effective Delivery of 
Bioactive Ingredients, 272–296. https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118462157.CH17
Salminen, T. A., Blomqvist, K., & Edqvist, J. (2016). Lipid transfer proteins: classification, nomenclature, 
structure, and function. Planta , 244(5), 971–997. https://doi.org/10.1007/S00425-016-2585-4
Sampathkumar, K., Tan, K. X., & Loo, S. C. J. (2020). Developing nano-delivery systems for agriculture 
and food applications with nature-derived polymers. Science, 23(5), 101055–101071. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.isci.2020.101055
Shpigelman, A., Cohen, Y., & Livney, Y. D. (2012). Thermally-induced β-lactoglobulin–EGCG 
nanovehicles: Loading, stability, sensory and digestive-release study. Food Hydrocolloids, 29(1), 57–67.
Somchue, W., Sermsri, W., Shiowatana, J., & Siripinyanond, A. (2009). Encapsulation of α-tocopherol in 
protein-based delivery particles. Food Research International, 42(8), 909–914.
Stevanović, M., & Filipović, N. (2024). A review of recent developments in biopolymer nano-based drug 
delivery sstems with antioxidative properties: Insights into the last five years. Pharmaceutics, 16(5), 
670. https://doi.org/10.3390/pharmaceutics16050670
Tripathy, S., Verma, D. K., Gupta, A. K., Srivastav, P. P., Patel, A. R., Chávez González, M. L., Utama, G. L., & 
Aguilar, C. N. (2023). Nanoencapsulation of biofunctional components as a burgeoning nanotechnology￾based approach for functional food development: A review. Biocatalysis and Agricultural Biotechnology, 
53, 102890. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.BCAB.2023.102890
Vieira, I. R. S., & Conte-Junior, C. A. (2024). Nano-delivery systems for food bioactive compounds in 
cancer: prevention, therapy, and clinical applications. Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition, 
64(2), 381–406. https://doi.org/10.1080/10408398.2022.2106471
Xixi, C., Lina, Z., Shaoyun, W., & Pingfan, R. (2015). Fabrication and characterization of the nano-composite 
of whey protein hydrolysate chelated with calcium. Food & function, 6(3), 816–823
Zimet, P., Rosenberg, D., & Livney, Y. D. (2011). Re-assembled casein micelles and casein nanoparticles as 
nano-vehicles for ω-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids. Food Hydrocolloids, 25(5), 1270–1276. https://doi.
org/10.1016/J.FOODHYD.2010.11.025307
DOI: 10.1201/9781003477730-22 307
20 Challenges and Future 
Directions of Nanotechnology 
in Plant Sciences
Akula Maharshi, Durgam Rachana, Vadde Pavantheja, 
Vadakavila Geethikalal, Kathuroju Harikrishna, 
Chittepu Pranitha, and Manikantha Dunna
20.1 INTRODUCTION
Within the fields of nanoscience and nanotechnology, a particle is characterized as a small entity 
that exhibits the characteristics and transport of a single unit. As a result, one attribute utilized to 
categorize particles is their diameter. Generally speaking, whether they are disseminated in gaseous, 
liquid, or solid media, coarse particles are defined as those that fall between 10,000 and 2,500 nm, 
fine particles as those that fall between 2500 and 100 nm, and nanoparticles (NPs) as those that fall 
between 1 and 100 nm. The natural world is full of instances of systems with nanoscale structures; 
therefore, nanostructured materials are not a recent development in the realm of nanotechnology 
(Perrault et al. 2009). On the other hand, new developments in synthesis and characterization tech￾nologies have spurred an increase in the industrial application of and research into nanostructured 
materials. Since NPs have a wide range of potential applications in the physical, chemical, bio￾logical, and health sciences, as well as other interdisciplinary fields within science and engineering, 
they are currently a subject of great scientific interest. This interest stems from the desire to create 
materials with novel and improved properties (Khan et al. 2017).
Nanomaterials (NMs) offer flexible scaffolds for functionalization with biomolecules and have 
distinctive physicochemical properties. Furthermore, it has been demonstrated that some NMs, 
including polymeric and hybrid NMs, magnetic nanoparticles, and gold nanoparticles, can react 
to outside stimuli and provide the temporally controlled release of macromolecules. These factors 
have led to the successful testing and application of engineered nanomaterials in medicine and 
pharmacology over the past 20 years, particularly in therapeutic and diagnostic uses (Sabo-Attwood 
et al. 2012). Recently, there has been a rise in interest in plant science within the field of nanotech￾nology, particularly because of the potential use of nanomaterials as agrochemical and biomolecule 
delivery systems in plants and their enormous potential to increase agricultural yields (Belal and 
El-Ramady 2016).
20.2 NANOTECHNOLOGY IN FOOD SECURITY AND SAFETY
Nanotechnology is making significant strides in the realm of food safety, security, and sustainability. 
It can be used to improve flavours and extend the shelf-life of foods (Sadeghi et al. 2017). Using 
nanotechnology, damaged food particles can be detected and removed (Rizvi et al. 2022).308 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
20.2.1  Utilizing Nanotechnology to Enhance Crop Growth and Yields
Nanopesticides and nanofertilizers are key tools utilized in nanotechnology to induce plant growth, 
genome alterations, and transgene modifications (Demirer et al. 2021). Nanoparticles, nanofibres, 
and nanocapsules can be used to manipulate agricultural genes. Plant makeup, including protein, 
mineral (nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium), and chlorophyll contents, reacts with nanoparticles 
to create products that can be used as safe and very low-dosage insecticides for crops in storage. In 
one study, silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) with a dosage of 15 ml/L were applied to increase chloro￾phyll content, improve stem development, enhance fruit yields, and increase pollen size and spore 
numbers (Abdel-Aziz et al. 2021). Recently, silver nanoparticles synthesized from plant extracts 
have been proven to have antibacterial activity at a dosage of 3000 µg/ml (Mosa et al. 2021). Other 
recent studies have been conducted on iron oxide (Fe2
O3
), which has been shown to improve root 
length, increase plant height, and increase iron content in wheat. Fe2
O3
 nanoparticles have also been 
found to enhance germination rate, biomass, pigmentation (Tombuloglu et al. 2022), and antimicro￾bial activity in plants.
20.2.2  Utilizing Nanotechnology to Control Plant Diseases
Plants become more resistant to diseases by either deactivating microorganisms or activating defence 
mechanisms. Several nanoparticles have demonstrated outstanding virucidal capabilities against 
different plant viruses. In addition to affecting crop growth, bacteria, viruses, and fungi (known as 
plant pathogens) can also negatively impact agricultural productivity by increasing plant diseases 
brought on by seasonal variations in climate. Nanotechnology uses three main methods to prevent 
harmful plant diseases: increase antimicrobial properties in plants; serve as agents that stimulate 
plants’ innate immunity; serve as carriers of active components, including minerals and insecticides 
(Fu et al. 2020). CuO nanoparticles are effective at reducing pathogens and improving physio￾logical parameters in tomato plants, making them a popular tool for fighting soilborne pathogens 
(Li et al. 2023). By increasing the expression of the PRM operon, which boosts the manufacturing 
of the antifungal chemical pyrrolnitrin, nanoparticles enhance the antifungal action of pseudomonas 
protozoa (Abdullahi et al. 2020). Green synthesized ZnO nanoparticles can be utilized with withania 
leaf extract to enhance antibacterial activity against tomato pathogens.
20.2.3  Utilizing Nanotechnology in Genetic Modification
Plant cell walls prevent foreign biomolecules from entering plants. When cre recombinase protein is 
introduced into maize plant cells via the bio method, mesoporous silica nanoparticles (NPs) can act 
as carriers (Altpeter et al. 2016). When cre is released into a cell, loxp site recombination and gene 
deletion take place. Recombination events are selected based on their visual appeal to encourage 
the regrowth of productive plants. Complexed single-walled carbon nanotubes containing chitosan 
present a practical means of efficiently transferring plasmid DNA to various chloroplasts present in 
specific plant species, such as isolated mesophyll protoplasts in plants like Eruca sativa, spinacia 
oleracea, Nicotiana tabacum, and Nasturtium officinale. Nanotubes have been created to produce 
siRNA protection against nuclease degradation, silence endogenous genes, and transport SIRNA 
efficiently. Cyclodextrin molecular baskets have been used to functionalize quantum dots, enabling 
the loading and delivery of a wide range of chemicals. NPSs work with specific guiding peptides to 
help to guide the transportation of these substances to chloroplasts. Combining carbon dots with a 
dispersing surfactant allows for the application of tiny interfering RNA in model plants. For example, 
an enzyme required in relation to the synthesis of chlorophyll in tomatoes can be combined with 
extracts from Nicotiana benthamiana and Solanum lycopersicum (Demirer et al. 2020). N-acyl￾homoserine, a phosphotriesterase-like lactonase from the plant pathogen family Erwinia amylovora, 
significantly reduces plant pathogen infection by breaking down AHL.Challenges and Future Directions of Nanotechnology 309
Furthermore, the combination of peptide nanostructure encapsulation and guided enzyme evo￾lution significantly boosts enzyme shelf-life and temperature resistance, suggesting that it may be 
employed as an antibacterial agent. The ability of two types of DNA-modified gold nanoparticles 
to penetrate Nicotiana benthamiana leaves was investigated by Santana et al. (2020). Positively 
charged polyethyleneimine-coated mesoporous silicon nanoparticles transported GUS-encoding 
plasmids to tobacco cells under optimal ultrasonic therapy for 8 minutes at a size of 100+187 nm. 
This is a cost-effective approach for plant cell gene delivery. A substantial amount of protein syn￾thesis occurs when CNTs effectively deliver DNA to wheat and cotton. In comparison to AgNps 
(100 nm), gene carriers in Nicotiana Tabacum L. produce the greatest amount of transient GUS 
expression at different target distances (9 cm and 6 cm) and helium pressure levels (100 psi, 900 psi, 
650 psi, and 450 psi).
By absorbing iron into tissues and controlling photoluminescence, MnFe2
O4
 magnetic 
nanoparticles and tailored cobalt ferrite nanoparticles migrate from the roots to the leaves of barley 
when hydroponically applied (Gurevich et al. 2021). Furthermore, NPs can change the amount of 
chlorophyll in leaves without affecting the quantity of carotenoid compounds, as well as enhancing 
the activity of catalase in leaves (Zhang et al. 2021).
20.2.4  Utilizing Nanotechnology for the Inhibition of Biofilm Formation and
Microbial Growth
The process via which bacteria produce biofilms aids in their adhesion to surfaces, their devel￾opment, and their dispersion, all of which are essential to the propagation of bacteria and con￾tamination. AgNPs made using ecofriendly processes and different plant extract components 
are said to potently inhibit biofilm formation. In one investigation, it was found that zero NPs 
inhibited the formation of biofilms by S. aureus and E. coli and caused biologically elevated anti￾bacterial activity (Petrova and Sauer 2016). The bacteria that cause listeriosis are called Listeria 
monocytogenes, which can survive in harsh environments and increase the likelihood that biofilms 
will form. As a result, developing antibiofilm products is crucial for settings involved in food 
processing (Gul et al. 2021). In one study, when Au, Ag, and chitosan NPs were mixed at greater 
concentrations, all tested strains—aside from salmonella enterica infantis—exhibited a consid￾erable reduction in metabolic activity (80%) and the efficient prevention of biofilm development 
(Allemailem et al. 2022).
Utilizing chitosan and Convolvulus arvensis extract, biogenic AgNPs have been produced and 
tested against both Gram positive and Gram negative bacteria. According to one study, a number 
of bacterial cells—mostly S. aureus—also showed antibiofilm properties against P. Aeruginosa and 
E. coli. Non-drug delivery systems that combine phosphatidylcholine, gentamicin, and chitosan 
nanoparticles have demonstrated the ability to effectively destroy and eliminate biofilms produced 
by pathogens by allowing NPs to penetrate biofilms and be absorbed by germs that can be killed by 
macrophages. Urinary catheters have been made using amphiphilic carbonaceous particles coated 
with AgNPs, which enhance mechanical qualities and surface wettability, are resistant to germs, 
adhere to surfaces and form biofilms without causing toxicity, and serve as antibacterial agents. 
Chitosan NPs loaded with usnic acid have been made using a straightforward ionic gamification pro￾cess. They have a rough, spherical surface, 24% encapsulation, and 5.2% loading capacity. AgNPs 
made using Tamarix nilotica shoot extract have demonstrated substantial reductions the ability of 
tested Listeria strains to swim, move, produce cells, and form biofilms. In tests utilizing campylo￾bacter jejuni biofilms, zero NPs were found to engage directly and non-destructively with sessile 
cells within biofilms in less than 1 day. Afterwards, the NPs altered the bases of DNA and RNA and 
increased the generation of free radicals, which caused C. jejuni cells to perish. Gelatin electrospun 
nanofibres and chitosan NPs loaded with clove oil have been found to effectively suppress the pro￾duction of E. Coli biofilms (Lu et al. 2012).310 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
20.2.5  Utilizing Nanotechnology to Identify Foodborne Pathogens
Molecular sensors for real-time plant polyphenol imaging have been created using near-infrared, fluor￾escent single-walled carbon nanotubes. Plants use polyphenols and other secondary metabolites as a 
defence against illnesses and herbivores. These sensors use real-time images to better understand plant 
pathology. In one study, plant pathogens were identified via a highly sensitive and quick detection 
technique involving an electrochemical biosensor that used nanoparticles that targets pathogen DNA 
through amplification and recombinase polymerase. The authors also conducted an electrochemical 
evaluation of the biosensor using differential pulse voltammetry and gold nanoparticles. Fake smut 
that lowers rice yields is caused by the rice fungal disease Ustilaginoidea virens (Rana et al. 2021).
Furthermore, vancomycin—which has been applied to the surface of gold nanoparticles and 
interacts with bacterial membranes in an effective manner—can be used to separate foodborne bac￾teria from inoculation media for the fast identification of bacteria. Dual-mode aptasensors have been 
developed to detect P. Aeruginosa DNA fragments using two different sizes of gold nanoparticles. 
Among the materials used to assess and ascertain amounts of P. aeruginosa are tap water and fresh 
chicken samples. Trimethyl chitosan NPs have been employed to produce antibodies that can then 
be utilized to identify chitosan in the fungal cell walls of many specimens. Because different strains 
include varying amounts of chitin, the specificity of this method varies. Trichoderma reesei shows 
lower affinity compared to F. oxysporum, suggesting that this technology can be utilized to con￾trol food quality and prevent fungal infection. Unamplified genomic DNA nanosensors have been 
generated using dextrin-capped AuNPs, which are stabilized using a single-stranded DNA probe. In 
cases where genomic ssDNA is present, a gDNA complex called ssDNA can be used.
20.3 IMPACT OF NANOMATERIALS ON SOIL AND PLANT SYSTEMS
20.3.1  Influence of Nanomaterials on Organic Matter in Soil
Organic matter in soil directly affects the physical, chemical, and biological properties of soil and 
its accumulation in soil is essential for increasing crop yields and reducing global warming. In add￾ition to natural impacts, like soil characteristics and climate, man-made elements, like fertilizers 
and other agricultural inputs, also affect how soil organic matter (SOM) breaks down in agricultural 
environments. The dynamics of SOM may be significantly impacted by the application of nanotech￾nology in contemporary agriculture. However, these impacts could differ based on the kind of SOM, 
for example, whether it is hydrophilic or hydrophobic. Moreover, the biochemical makeup of SOM 
may influence how quickly it decomposes in soil (Johnston, Poulton, and Coleman 2008).
Certain engineered nanomaterials (ENMs) can enhance soil structure, water retention, and 
microbial activity, contributing to healthier soil ecosystems. Many ENMs promote stress toler￾ance, photosynthesis, germination, and overall plant growth. Nanoparticles can efficiently deliver 
nutrients and pesticides to plants, optimizing their use. Nanomaterials can also help to remediate 
contaminated soil and water. ENMs interact differently with soil and plant components based on 
their size, shape, surface charge, and chemical composition. Some ENMs may harm plants through 
oxidative stress or altered gene expression. The safety of ENMs must be assessed for their poten￾tial impacts on ecosystems and human health. Responsible communication about nanotechnology 
is crucial for public acceptance and informed regulations. Further studies are needed to understand 
their mechanisms, benefits, and risks. Developing sustainable and safe nanoproducts is essential. 
Scientists play a critical role in ensuring responsible nanotechnology adoption.
20.3.2  Effects of Nanomaterials on Soil Microbes
Soil microorganisms are valuable indicators of soil quality because they have a direct impact on 
SOM dynamics and nitrogen cycling (Dinesh et al. 2012). In soil microaggregates (2–53 and b2 Challenges and Future Directions of Nanotechnology 311
µm), most of the occupants are in close proximity to natural killers. It is reported that 40–70% of 
the total soil bacterial population is present in these microaggregates. It is essential to comprehend 
how NMs applied to soil affect the assemblage, activity, and diversity of microorganisms (Vittori 
Antisari et al. 2013).
The toxicity of recently introduced NMs may have a direct or indirect impact on soil microbes by 
increasing the bioavailability of other dangerous compounds in soil (Simonet and Valcárcel 2009). 
The activity and functionality of microorganisms are affected by a wide range of nanoparticle types, 
with inorganic nanoparticles, like metals and metal oxides, having higher potential for damage 
compared to organic nanoparticles, such as carbon nanotubes and fullerenes (Simonin and Richaume 
2015). Due to their distinct cell wall topologies, Gram negative and Gram positive bacteria are 
less vulnerable to ENMs (McKee and Filser 2016). Additionally, it has been discovered that the 
administration of NMs in pure cultures inhibits the growth of plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria 
(PGPRS) and bacterial species involved in nitrogen cycling (MISHRA and Kumar 2009). It has also 
been demonstrated that nanoscale metal oxides, such ZnO and TiO2
 nanoparticles, reduce MBC, 
particularly in Gram negative bacteria.
20.3.3 Nanomaterials in Plants
Nanoparticles can impact plant growth, development, and stress tolerance. Nanoparticles have 
become powerful tools in agriculture, influencing various aspects of plant health and development 
(Van Aken 2015).
NPs can also penetrate root epidermis membranes and cell walls (Tripathi et al., 2017). However, 
in order for nanoparticles to traverse intact membranes, they must pass via size-specific pores (Rico 
et al. 2011). Before reaching the stele, nanoparticles must also passively integrate through the 
apoplast of the endodermis (Judy et al. 2012). Active transport is the main mechanism for absorbing 
nanoparticles and recycling, signalling, and plasma membrane modulation are among the various 
cellular functions that rely on it (Etxeberria, Gonzalez, and Pozueta-Romero 2009). Nanoparticles 
can enter plant roots via symplastic routes, osmotic pressure, capillary pressure, and direct penetra￾tion through cell walls.
Nanoparticles can travel through apoplasts, symplasts, and plasmodesmata to penetrate additional 
plant cells (Hauck, Ghazani, and Chan 2008). Smaller nanoparticles can easily pass through the cell 
wall; however, this is dependent on the size of the pores in the cell membrane (Fleischer, O’Neill, 
and Ehwald 1999). Larger nanoparticles can pass through floral stigma, hydathodes, and stomata 
(Hossain et al. 2016). Nanoparticles can only pass through stomata holes when the minimum par￾ticle size is 40 nm or bigger (Eichert et al. 2008). Rather than gathering in vascular bundles, the 
phloem distributes nanoparticles throughout the plant (Tripathi et al. 2017).
The manner in which plants interact with nanomaterials can vary in terms of morphological 
changes, which are contingent upon the type and concentration of the nanomaterial. Nanomaterial￾based growth stimulants improve seed germination and the stages of development that follow. 
For instance, adding both TiO2
 and SiO2
 nanoparticles to soybean seeds increases nitrate reduc￾tase activity, which facilitates seed germination. Additionally, both NPs can be applied to Spinacia 
oleracea L. to accelerate seed photosynthesis and nitrogen absorption, thereby improving spinach 
growth (Siddiqui et al. 2015). In one study, plant dry weight increased by 47% over the refer￾ence weight and no evidence was found of an MWCNT effect (Wang et al. 2012). It has been 
discovered that tomato seed germination improves via the application of modest quantities of SiO2
nanoparticles (Siddiqui and Al-Whaibi 2014). An increasing number of in vitro cultures are utilizing 
nanomaterials, for example, zinc nanoparticles, which have a stronger effect on the physiological 
parameters and development of Calli tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum L.) in comparison to other ZnO 
forms. ZnO nanoparticles (10 mg L-1) applied topically to cluster beans (Cyamopsis tetragonoloba
(L.) Taub.) results in increased levels of phosphorus, total soluble leaf protein, and chlorophyll. The 312 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
principal physiological features of plants that are affected by the toxicity of nanoparticles include ger￾mination, biomass, leaf numbers, and root elongation (Lee et al. 2010). Nanoparticles may elongate 
roots, decrease seed germination, and occasionally even kill plants (Yang et al. 2006). Negative 
consequences could also include reduced photosynthetic rate (Barhoumi et al. 2015), chromosomal 
abnormalities, slow growth (Colman et al. 2013), biological membrane oxidative damage (Noori 
et al. 2020), modifications to subcellular metabolism (Zheng et al. 2005), and more. Transcriptome 
analysis disrupts the balance between the up- and downregulation of genes, demonstrating the tox￾icity of nanoparticles in higher plants (Landa et al. 2015).
20.4 APPLICATIONS OF NANOMATERIALS IN PLANT SCIENCES
In agriculture, nanofertilizers, nanopesticides, and nanobiosensors can all serve various purposes to 
improve soil quality and boost crop productivity (Figure 20.1).
FIGURE 20.1 The applications of nanoparticles in plant sciences: (a) gene delivery, which helps in the 
effective of transient expression of genes and resistance to biotic and abiotic stresses; (b) nanopesticides; 
(c) nanosensors, which can sense soil humidity, nutrient levels, and pathogens; (d) nanofertilizers, which can 
prevent soil erosion and increase soil solubility and nutrient absorption.Challenges and Future Directions of Nanotechnology 313
20.4.1 Nanofertilizers
Over the past few decades, agricultural yields have increased. In particular, cereals have played 
a crucial role in meeting growing food demands (Manida 2022). Nanofertilizers offer a prom￾ising solution to enhancing crop production. Unlike conventional fertilizers, which suffer signifi￾cant nitrogen loss (between 50% and 70%) into the environment, nanofertilizers aim to address 
this issue. By leveraging nanotechnology, we can improve nutrient availability while minimizing 
losses (DeRosa et al. 2010). Slow-release fertilizers infused with nanoparticles can help to retain 
nutrients more effectively. The primary purpose of nanofertilizers is to enhance crop nutrient uptake. 
They achieve this by encapsulating or adsorbing nutrients and distributing them in plants. Urea, a 
common nitrogen-containing compound, plays a crucial role in plant nutrition. Researchers have 
explored various urea-based nanoparticles to enhance nutrient delivery and improve crop product￾ivity. These tiny particles offer controlled release mechanisms, ensuring efficient nutrient utilization. 
Hydroxyapatite nanoparticles have a large surface area relative to their volume. This property makes 
them ideal for nutrient encapsulation and their strong interactions with urea ensure that nutrients are 
gradually released over time, benefiting plant growth (Kah, Tufenkji, and White 2019).
20.4.2 Nanopesticides
In the quest for sustainable agriculture, researchers have turned to nanotechnology. Nanopesticides 
hold particular promise. They are designed to combat pests while minimizing environmental 
impacts. Unlike traditional chemical pesticides, nanopesticides offer the controlled release and 
gradual degradation of their active ingredients. Biopesticides, derived from natural sources, mitigate 
the harmful effects of synthetic pesticides. However, their efficacy can be slow and environment￾dependent, limiting their widespread use (Chhipa 2016). Nanopesticides could serve as a poten￾tial replacement for conventional insecticides because they exhibit controlled release behaviours, 
ensuring prolonged pest control. By gradually releasing their active components, nanopesticides 
can effectively combat pests over extended periods of time (Kumpiene, Lagerkvist, and Maurice 
2008). Microorganisms in soil exhibit greater mobility and degradative ability due to the solubility 
of active substances. In contrast, conventional pesticides may have limited mobility and increased 
persistence in the environment.
20.4.3 Nanobiosensors
Nanosensors, as modified sensors, have found diverse applications in agriculture. These tiny sensors 
can detect various parameters that are crucial for crop health and productivity (Duhan et al. 2017). 
Plasmonic nanosensors utilize plasmon resonance effects for sensitive detection. Fluorescence res￾onance energy transfer (FRET)-based nanosensors rely on energy transfer between fluorophores. 
Carbon-based electrochemical nanosensors that combine modified electrodes with nanoparticles 
enhance sensitivity and electron kinetics. Nanowires can detect specific molecules or ions. Antibody 
nanosensors use antibodies to recognize pathogens or specific molecules. Nanosensors can also help 
to quantify plant metabolic processes. They can identify pesticide remnants in food. Nanosensors 
play a crucial role in identifying bacteria, viruses, and fungi. Single-walled carbon nanotubes 
(SWNTs) have been used to monitor nitric oxide levels in Arabidopsis thaliana. FRET probes 
conjugated to polystyrene nanoparticles can help to measure plant defence compounds. While 
nanosensors are still in the early stages of implementation in plant applications, they hold immense 
potential (Dumbrepatil et al. 2010).
Nanobiosensors are powerful tools that allow for the rapid and precise detection of pathogens 
in plants. These tiny sensors can identify fungi, bacteria, and viruses, contributing to early dis￾ease diagnosis. Researchers have designed biosensors using fluorescent silica NPs combined with 
antibodies (Lau et al. 2017). For instance, some biosensors target Xanthomonas axonopodis pv. 314 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
vesicatoria, the culprit behind bacterial spot disease in Solanaceae plants. Gold nanoparticles 
(AuNPs) can serve as DNA labels in biosensors. In one study, they were used to detect Pseudomonas 
syringae in Arabidopsis thaliana using differential pulse voltammetry. Similarly, fluorescently 
labelled DNA oligonucleotides conjugated to AuNPs can help to diagnose phytoplasma associated 
with flavescence dorée disease in grapevines. Mycotoxins pose a risk to food safety. The com￾petitive antibody-based assay 4mycosensor has been successfully introduced to test for mycotoxin 
residues (such as ZEA, T-2/HT-2, DON, and FB1/FB2) in corn, wheat, oat, and barley (Lattanzio 
and Nivarlet 2017). Nanobiosensors contribute to more efficient disease management. By detecting 
pathogens early, they help to minimize reliance on chemical inputs. Ultimately, they play a vital role 
in sustainable agricultural practices.
20.4.4 Nanotechnology in Food Processing
Nanotechnology has revolutionized food packaging. Nanocomposite coatings based on biopolymers 
can change colour when exposed to specific temperatures. For example, nanocoatings can extend 
the shelf-life of ricotta cheese by providing real-time temperature warnings (Kritchenkov et al. 
2021). Nanomaterials play a crucial role in food processing (Table 20.1). They can modify particle 
size, create clusters, and alter surface charge, all of which impact taste, texture, and consistency. 
Nanomaterial-based delivery systems improve the bioavailability of nutrients, protect food 
constituents, and enhance nutritional supplementation. Nanosensors can also be deployed in smart 
food packaging. They monitor stored food quality, detect spoilage, and ensure safety. Researchers 
have explored the use of nanocomposite films for handling acidic foods under high pressures. 
TABLE 20.1
Applications of nanotechnology in food packaging
S. No. Nanomaterial Application Functions
1. Nanocrystals from cellulose Absorbers made of 
aerogel for food 
packaging
A homogeneous, porous structure with the ability to 
absorb water.
2 Polyethylene with low￾density covering of silver 
nanoparticles
Active food packaging Notable decrease in silver migration and 
antibacterial activity under oven heating.
3 Composite made of chitosan, 
grape seed extract, and 
silver nanoparticles
Packaging for grapes Antibacterial and antioxidant qualities, reduced 
grape deterioration and weight loss, stopped 
all mould development while in storage, and 
lengthened shelf-life.
4 AgNPs Packaging for chicken 
meat
Microbiological tests showed no difference 
in the amount of silver present in chicken 
meatballs stored in plastic bags containing silver 
nanoparticles compared to those kept in control 
bags.
5 Carbamethyl cellulose/
cellulose nanocrystals 
immobilized in AgNPs
Packaging for 
strawberries
In addition to having a longer shelf-life by seven 
days, improved tensile strength, and reduced 
air permeability, strawberries also showed 
antibacterial activity against S. Aureus and E. Coli.
6 Nanocomposite film made of 
polylactic acid, titanium 
dioxide, and lycopene
Packaging for 
margarine
Film prolonged shelf-life and controlled oxidative 
factors, in addition to acting as a visual indicator 
(red to yellow) of variations in oxidation that 
occurred during storage.Challenges and Future Directions of Nanotechnology 315
AgNPs in polylactic acid films enhance food stability during processing (Zhu et al. 2021). These 
innovations contribute to safer and longer-lasting food products. Ultrasonication methods can create 
insoluble rice peptide aggregation nanoparticles, which can act as food-grade Pickering stabilizers. 
They improve antioxidant properties and emulsification, enhancing food quality. Coating fish filters 
with nanofibres reduces the growth of TPB (Thiobacillus perometabolis). Nanofibres also offer anti￾bacterial properties, contributing to food safety (Zhang et al. 2021).
20.5 CHALLENGES AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS OF NANOTECHNOLOGY
Nanotechnology plays a pivotal role in ensuring global food security. By operating at the nanoscale, 
it offers unique opportunities to enhance agricultural practices. These innovations are essential to 
meet the increasing food demands of the growing global population while maintaining environ￾mental sustainability. AgNPs produced via nanopackaging have been shown to bioaccumulate in 
both food and humans (Jovanović 2015). While nanotechnology can improve food safety, there are 
also potential environmental risks associated with widespread nanopackaging use. Nanopesticides 
and nanofertilizers, when used in agriculture, can contaminate water, soil, and the atmosphere. 
The accumulation of nanoparticles in soil may inhibit plant growth and could even reach edible 
plant tissues (Roohinejad and Greiner 2016). Researchers have studied the potential hazards of 
nanoparticles released into agricultural environments (Neme et al. 2021). Coating fruits efficiently 
is a particular challenge as achieving the perfect coating takes time and precision. There’s a high 
demand for innovative coating techniques that balance effectiveness, safety, and environmental 
impact (Park et al. 2017).
Nanoparticles also play a crucial role in delivering CRISPR-based tools to plant cells during genetic 
engineering. These tiny carriers transport CRISPR DNA and protein payloads, allowing precise genome 
editing. However, questions remain about whether NPs can efficiently target plant mitochondria to 
modify mitochondrial DNA. Nanotechnology offers innovative solutions for sustainable agriculture. 
By reducing reliance on hazardous pesticides and optimizing fertilizer use, nanotechnology-based 
approaches address traditional farming challenges. These practices aim for cleaner, more efficient 
crop production. Designing green synthesized nanoparticles with improved properties is essential. 
Innovations should focus on better holding and release capacities, enhanced absorption efficiency, and 
reduced plant toxicity. Scientists must also address safety concerns related to nanomaterials’ impact 
on human health and ecosystems. Scientific advancements in agriculture require responsible commu￾nication. Data on safety risks and benefits must be transparently shared with society. Social acceptance 
and appropriate regulations must drive the responsible use of nanotechnology.
Phytonanotechnology explores the use of nanoparticles in plant systems. Unlike animal cells, 
plant cells have rigid cell walls that NPs must penetrate to reach the cytoplasm. Understanding the 
interactions between NPs and cell barriers remains an ongoing challenge. Researchers are aiming to 
develop novel tools using NPs. For example, NPs can carry specific bioactive molecules for precise 
applications in intelligent chemical delivery systems and facilitate controlled gene expression in 
genetic transformation and plant breeding. Intracellular labelling and imaging use NPs to offer new 
ways to visualize plant processes. Future research should focus on innovative NPs that induce or 
enlarge holes in plant cell walls (Torney et al., 2007), which would promote the efficient transfer of 
NPs across cell barriers, enabling targeted delivery. Ultrasonic activation can control pore opening 
and closure (Torney et al. 2007). Additionally, pH-sensitive NPs respond to environmental acidity, 
while controlled cargo release mechanisms require smaller NPs at specific locations. Tailoring NP 
sizes ensures precise functionality. Modified NPs can carry activator nucleotides, which enable 
plants to mount defences against biotic (e.g., pathogens) and abiotic (e.g., drought) stress. While 
phytonanotechnology holds promise, there are safety concerns to be addresses, such as toxicity and 
the impact of NPs on human health and ecosystems. NP behaviours must be studied under relevant 
environmental conditions.316 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
20.6 CONCLUSION
Over recent years, significant advancements have been made in nanotechnology regarding the syn￾thesis of NMs and their use in medicine, for both diagnosis and treatments. However, there is still a 
lacklustre application of NMs in plants. More research is necessary in this direction to optimize the 
synthesis and biofunctionalization of NMs for plant applications, as well as better understandings 
of the mechanisms of NP uptake and enhanced sustainability for agroecosystems. It’s interesting 
that applications for significant parts of plant physiology have not yet been explored. For example, 
real-time nanobiosensors that identify phytoregulators or secondary metabolites could improve 
the ways in which we monitor plant development and interactions, particularly when it comes to 
circumstances that limit plant growth.
REFERENCES
Abdel-Aziz, Heba M M, Magda I. Soliman, Aml M. Abo Al-Saoud, and Ghada A. El-Sherbeny. 2021. “Waste￾Derived NPK Nanofertilizer Enhances Growth and Productivity of Capsicum Annuum L.” Plants (Basel, 
Switzerland) 10 (6): 1144. https://doi.org/10.3390/plants10061144.
Abdullahi, Adamu, Khairulmazmi Ahmad, Intan Safinar Ismail, Norhayu Asib, Osumanu Haruna Ahmed, 
Abubakar Ismaila Abubakar, Yasmeen Siddiqui, and Mohd Razi Ismail. 2020. “Potential of Using 
Ginger Essential Oils-Based Nanotechnology to Control Tropical Plant Diseases.” The Plant Pathology 
Journal 36 (6): 515–35. https://doi.org/10.5423/PPJ.RW.05.2020.0077.
Aken, Benoit Van. 2015. “Gene Expression Changes in Plants and Microorganisms Exposed to Nanomaterials.” 
Current Opinion in Biotechnology 33 (June):206–19. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.copbio.2015.03.005.
Allemailem, Khaled, Habeeb Khadri, Mohd Azam, Masood Khan, Arshad Rahmani, Alrumaiah, Khateef 
Riazunnisa, et al. 2022. “Ajwa-Dates (Phoenix Dactylifera)-Mediated Synthesis of Silver Nanoparticles 
and Their Anti-Bacterial, Anti-Biofilm, and Cytotoxic Potential.” Applied Sciences 12 (9) (August): 4537. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/app12094537
Altpeter, Fredy, Nathan M Springer, Laura E Bartley, Ann E Blechl, Thomas P Brutnell, Vitaly Citovsky, Liza 
J Conrad, et al. 2016. “Advancing Crop Transformation in the Era of Genome Editing.” The Plant Cell
28 (7): 1510–20. https://doi.org/10.1105/tpc.16.00196.
Barhoumi, Lotfi, Abdallah Oukarroum, Lotfi Ben Taher, Leila Samia Smiri, Hafedh Abdelmelek, and David 
Dewez. 2015. “Effects of Superparamagnetic Iron Oxide Nanoparticles on Photosynthesis and Growth 
of the Aquatic Plant Lemna Gibba.” Archives of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology 68 
(3): 510–20. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00244-014-0092-9.
Belal, El-Sayed, and Hassan El-Ramady.2016. "Nanoparticles in Water, Soils and Agriculture." Nanoscience 
in Food and Agriculture 2: 311–58. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-39306-3_10
Chhipa, Hemraj. 2016. “Nanofertilizers and Nanopesticides for Agriculture.” Environmental Chemistry Letters
15 (December): 15–22. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10311-016-0600-4.
Colman, Benjamin P, Christina L Arnaout, Sarah Anciaux, Claudia K Gunsch, Michael F Hochella, Bojeong 
Kim, Gregory V Lowry, et al. 2013. “Low Concentrations of Silver Nanoparticles in Biosolids Cause 
Adverse Ecosystem Responses under Realistic Field Scenario.” PloS One 8 (2): e57189. https://doi.org/
10.1371/journal.pone.0057189.
Demirer, Gozde S, Tallyta N Silva, Christopher T Jackson, Jason B Thomas, David W Ehrhardt, Seung Y 
Rhee, Jenny C Mortimer, and Markita P Landry. 2021. “Nanotechnology to Advance CRISPR-Cas 
Genetic Engineering of Plants.” Nature Nanotechnology 16 (3): 243–50. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41
565-021-00854-y.
Demirer, Gozde S, Huan Zhang, Natalie S Goh, Rebecca L Pinals, Roger Chang, and Markita P Landry. 2020. 
“Carbon Nanocarriers Deliver SiRNA to Intact Plant Cells for Efficient Gene Knockdown.” Science 
Advances 6 (26): eaaz0495. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aaz0495.
DeRosa, Maria C, Carlos Monreal, Morris Schnitzer, Ryan Walsh, and Yasir Sultan. 2010. “Nanotechnology in 
Fertilizers.” Nature Nanotechnology 5 (2): 91. https://doi.org/10.1038/nnano.2010.2.
Dinesh, R, Muthuswamy Anandaraj, Varshini Srinivasan, and Hamza Srambikkal. 2012. “Engineered 
Nanoparticles in the Soil and Their Potential Implications to Microbial Activity.” Geoderma 173–174 
(August): 19–27. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.geoderma.2011.12.018.Challenges and Future Directions of Nanotechnology 317
Duhan, Joginder Singh, Ravinder Kumar, Naresh Kumar, Pawan Kaur, Kiran Nehra, and Surekha Duhan. 2017. 
“Nanotechnology: The New Perspective in Precision Agriculture.” Biotechnology Reports (Amsterdam, 
Netherlands) 15 (September): 11–23. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.btre.2017.03.002.
Dumbrepatil, Arti B, Seung-Goo Lee, Sang J Chung, Myung Gyu Lee, Byoung Chul Park, Tae Jip Kim, 
and Eui-Jeon Woo. 2010. “Development of a Nanoparticle-Based FRET Sensor for Ultrasensitive 
Detection of Phytoestrogen Compounds.” The Analyst 135 (11): 2879–86. https://doi.org/10.1039/
c0an00385a.
Eichert, Thomas, Andreas Kurtz, Ulrike Steiner, and Heiner E Goldbach. 2008. “Size Exclusion Limits 
and Lateral Heterogeneity of the Stomatal Foliar Uptake Pathway for Aqueous Solutes and Water￾Suspended Nanoparticles.” Physiologia Plantarum 134 (1): 151–60. https://doi.org/10.1111/
j.1399-3054.2008.01135.x.
Etxeberria, Ed, Pedro Gonzalez, and Javier Pozueta-Romero. 2009. “Evidence for Two Endocytic Transport 
Pathways in Plant Cells.” Plant Science 177 (August): 341–48. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plant
sci.2009.06.014.
Fleischer, A, MA O’Neill, and R Ehwald. 1999. “The Pore Size of Non-Graminaceous Plant Cell Walls Is 
Rapidly Decreased by Borate Ester Cross-Linking of the Pectic Polysaccharide Rhamnogalacturonan 
II.” Plant Physiology 121 (3): 829–38. https://doi.org/10.1104/pp.121.3.829.
Fu, Lin, Zhenyu Wang, Om Parkash Dhankher, and Baoshan Xing. 2020. “Nanotechnology as a New 
Sustainable Approach for Controlling Crop Diseases and Increasing Agricultural Production.” Journal 
of Experimental Botany 71 (2): 507–19. https://doi.org/10.1093/jxb/erz314.
Gul, Anadil, Fozia, Asmat Shaheen, Ijaz Ahmad, Baharullah Khattak, Munir Ahmad, Riaz Ullah, et al. 2021. 
“Green Synthesis, Characterization, Enzyme Inhibition, Antimicrobial Potential, and Cytotoxic Activity 
of Plant Mediated Silver Nanoparticle Using Ricinus Communis Leaf and Root Extracts.” Biomolecules
11 (2): 206. https://doi.org/10.3390/biom11020206.
Gurevich, David, Shlomit Dor, Mayan Erov, Yoav Dan, Jehudith Clara Moy, Orly Mairesse, Mery Dafny￾Yelin, Lihi Adler-Abramovich, and Livnat Afriat-Jurnou. 2021. “Directed Enzyme Evolution and 
Encapsulation in Peptide Nanospheres of Quorum Quenching Lactonase as an Antibacterial Treatment 
against Plant Pathogen.” ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces 13 (2): 2179–88. https://doi.org/10.1021/
acsami.0c15808.
Hauck, Tanya S, Arezou A Ghazani, and Warren C W Chan. 2008. “Assessing the Effect of Surface Chemistry 
on Gold Nanorod Uptake, Toxicity, and Gene Expression in Mammalian Cells.” Small (Weinheim an Der 
Bergstrasse, Germany) 4 (1): 153–59. https://doi.org/10.1002/smll.200700217.
Hossain, Zahed, Ghazala Mustafa, Katsumi Sakata, and Setsuko Komatsu. 2016. “Insights into the Proteomic 
Response of Soybean towards Al₂O₃, ZnO, and Ag Nanoparticles Stress.” Journal of Hazardous 
Materials 304 (March): 291–305. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2015.10.071.
Johnston, A, Paul Poulton, and Kevin Coleman. 2008. “Chapter 1 Soil Organic Matter: Its Importance in 
Sustainable Agriculture and Carbon Dioxide Fluxes.” Advances in Agronomy 101 (August): 1–57.
Jovanović, Boris. 2015. “Critical Review of Public Health Regulations of Titanium Dioxide, a Human Food 
Additive.” Integrated Environmental Assessment and Management 11 (1): 10–20. https://doi.org/
10.1002/ieam.1571.
Judy, Jonathan D, Jason M Unrine, William Rao, Sue Wirick, and Paul M Bertsch. 2012. “Bioavailability of 
Gold Nanomaterials to Plants: Importance of Particle Size and Surface Coating.” Environmental Science 
& Technology 46 (15): 8467–74. https://doi.org/10.1021/es3019397.
Kah, Melanie, Nathalie Tufenkji, and Jason C White. 2019. “Nano-Enabled Strategies to Enhance Crop Nutrition 
and Protection.” Nature Nanotechnology 14 (6): 532–40. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41565-019-0439-5.
Khan, M Nasir, M Mobin, Zahid Khorshid Abbas, Khalid A AlMutairi, and Zahid H Siddiqui. 2017. “Role of 
Nanomaterials in Plants under Challenging Environments.” Plant Physiology and Biochemistry: PPB
110 (January): 194–209. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plaphy.2016.05.038.
Kritchenkov, Andreii S, Anton R Egorov, Olga V Volkova, Alexey A Artemjev, Aleh V Kurliuk, Tuan Anh 
Le, Hong Hieu Truong, et al. 2021. “Novel Biopolymer-Based Nanocomposite Food Coatings That 
Exhibit Active and Smart Properties Due to a Single Type of Nanoparticles.” Food Chemistry 343 
(May): 128676. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2020.128676.
Kumpiene, Jurate, Anders Lagerkvist, and Christian Maurice. 2008. “Stabilization of As, Cr, Cu, Pb and Zn in 
Soil Using Amendments--a Review.” Waste Management (New York, N.Y.) 28 (1): 215–25. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.wasman.2006.12.012.318 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
Landa, Premysl, Sylva Prerostova, Sarka Petrova, Vojtech Knirsch, Radomira Vankova, and Tomas Vanek. 
2015. “The Transcriptomic Response of Arabidopsis Thaliana to Zinc Oxide: A Comparison of the 
Impact of Nanoparticle, Bulk, and Ionic Zinc.” Environmental Science & Technology 49 (24): 14537–45. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.5b03330.
Lattanzio, Veronica M T, and Noan Nivarlet. 2017. “Multiplex Dipstick Immunoassay for Semiquantitative 
Determination of Fusarium Mycotoxins in Oat.” Methods in Molecular Biology (Clifton, N.J.) 1536: 137–
42. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4939-6682-0_10.
Lau, Han Yih, Haoqi Wu, Eugene J H Wee, Matt Trau, Yuling Wang, and Jose R Botella. 2017. “Specific and 
Sensitive Isothermal Electrochemical Biosensor for Plant Pathogen DNA Detection with Colloidal Gold 
Nanoparticles as Probes.” Scientific Reports 7 (January): 38896. https://doi.org/10.1038/srep38896.
Lee, Chang Woo, Shaily Mahendra, Katherine Zodrow, Dong Li, Yu-Chang Tsai, Janet Braam, and Pedro J J 
Alvarez. 2010. “Developmental Phytotoxicity of Metal Oxide Nanoparticles to Arabidopsis Thaliana.” 
Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry 29 (3): 669–75. https://doi.org/10.1002/etc.58.
Li, Yuanbo, Peng Zhang, Mingshu Li, Noman Shakoor, Muhammad Adeel, Pingfan Zhou, Manlin Guo, et al. 
2023. “Application and Mechanisms of Metal-Based Nanoparticles in the Control of Bacterial and 
Fungal Crop Diseases.” Pest Management Science 79 (1): 21–36. https://doi.org/10.1002/ps.7218.
Li, Zilu, Daniel L Clemens, Bai-Yu Lee, Barbara Jane Dillon, Marcus A Horwitz, and Jeffrey I Zink. 2015. 
“Mesoporous Silica Nanoparticles with PH-Sensitive Nanovalves for Delivery of Moxifloxacin Provide 
Improved Treatment of Lethal Pneumonic Tularemia.” ACS Nano 9 (11): 10778–89. https://doi.org/
10.1021/acsnano.5b04306.
Lu, Xiaonan, Andrew T. Weakley, D. Eric Aston, Barbara A. Rasco, Shuo Wang, and Michael E. Konkel. 
2012. “Examination of Nanoparticle Inactivation of Campylobacter Jejuni Biofilms Using Infrared and 
Raman Spectroscopies.” Journal of Applied Microbiology 113 (4): 952–63. https://doi.org/10.1111/
j.1365-2672.2012.05373.x.
Manida, M. 2022. “The Future of Food and Agriculture Trends and Challenges.” Agriculture & Food 
E-Newsletter 4(2) (August): 27–29.
McKee, Moira S., and Juliane Filser. 2016. “Impacts of Metal-Based Engineered Nanomaterials on Soil 
Communities.” Environmental Science: Nano. Royal Society of Chemistry. https://doi.org/10.1039/c6e
n00007j.
Mishra, Vijendra, and Ashok Kumar. 2009. “Impact of Metal Nanoparticles on Plant Growth Promoting 
Rhizobacteria.” Digest Journal of Nanomaterials and Biostructures 4 (August).
Mosa, Walid F A, Ahmed M El-Shehawi, Marwa I Mackled, Mohamed Z M Salem, Rehab Y Ghareeb, Elsayed 
E Hafez, Said I Behiry, and Nader R Abdelsalam. 2021. “Productivity Performance of Peach Trees, 
Insecticidal and Antibacterial Bioactivities of Leaf Extracts as Affected by Nanofertilizers Foliar 
Application.” Scientific Reports 11 (1): 10205. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-89885-y.
Neme, Kumera, Ayman Nafady, Siraj Uddin, and Yetenayet B Tola. 2021. “Application of Nanotechnology 
in Agriculture, Postharvest Loss Reduction and Food Processing: Food Security Implication and 
Challenges.” Heliyon 7 (12): e08539. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2021.e08539.
Noori, Azam, Trevor Donnelly, Joseph Colbert, Wenjun Cai, Lee A Newman, and Jason C White. 2020. “Exposure 
of Tomato (Lycopersicon Esculentum) to Silver Nanoparticles and Silver Nitrate: Physiological and 
Molecular Response.” International Journal of Phytoremediation 22 (1): 40–51. https://doi.org/10.1080/
15226514.2019.1634000.
Park, Ji Hun, Sohee Choi, Hee Chul Moon, Hyelin Seo, Ji Yup Kim, Seok-Pyo Hong, Bong Soo Lee, et al. 2017. 
“Antimicrobial Spray Nanocoating of Supramolecular Fe(III)-Tannic Acid Metal-Organic Coordination 
Complex: Applications to Shoe Insoles and Fruits.” Scientific Reports 7 (1): 6980. https://doi.org/
10.1038/s41598-017-07257-x.
Perrault, Steven D, Carl Walkey, Travis Jennings, Hans C Fischer, and Warren C W Chan. 2009. “Mediating 
Tumor Targeting Efficiency of Nanoparticles through Design.” Nano Letters 9 (5): 1909–15. https://doi.
org/10.1021/nl900031y.
Petrova, Olga E, and Karin Sauer. 2016. “Escaping the Biofilm in More than One Way: Desorption, 
Detachment or Dispersion.” Current Opinion in Microbiology 30 (April): 67–78. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.mib.2016.01.004.
Rana, Kritika, Jagjiwan Mittal, Jagriti Narang, Annu Mishra, and Ramesh Namdeo Pudake. 2021. “Graphene 
Based Electrochemical DNA Biosensor for Detection of False Smut of Rice (Ustilaginoidea Virens).” 
Plant Pathology Journal 37 (3): 291–98. https://doi.org/10.5423/PPJ.OA.11.2020.0207.Challenges and Future Directions of Nanotechnology 319
Rico, Cyren M, Sanghamitra Majumdar, Maria Duarte-Gardea, Jose R Peralta-Videa, and Jorge L Gardea￾Torresdey. 2011. “Interaction of Nanoparticles with Edible Plants and Their Possible Implications in 
the Food Chain.” Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 59 (8): 3485–98. https://doi.org/10.1021/
jf104517j.
Rizvi, Syed, Carmen Moraru, Hans Bouwmeester, Frans Kampers, and Yifan Cheng. 2022. 
“Nanotechnology and Food Safety.” In Aleksandra Martinović, Sangsuk Oh and Huub Lelieveld 
(Eds), Ensuring Global Food Safety, pp. 325–40. Academic Press. https://do.i.org/10.1016/B978-
0-12-816011-4.00016-1.
Roohinejad, Shahin, and Ralf Greiner. 2016. “Nanoscience: Relevance for Agriculture and the Food Sector.” 
Nanotechnology in Agriculture and Food Science: 347–362. https://doi.org/10.1002/9783527697
724.ch20.
Sabo-Attwood, Tara, Jason M Unrine, John W Stone, Catherine J Murphy, Soumitra Ghoshroy, Doug Blom, 
Paul M Bertsch, and Lee A Newman. 2012. “Uptake, Distribution and Toxicity of Gold Nanoparticles 
in Tobacco (Nicotiana Xanthi) Seedlings.” Nanotoxicology 6 (4): 353–60. https://doi.org/10.3109/17435
390.2011.579631.
Sadeghi, Rohollah, Randol J Rodriguez, Yuan Yao, and Jozef L Kokini. 2017. “Advances in Nanotechnology 
as They Pertain to Food and Agriculture: Benefits and Risks.” Annual Review of Food Science and 
Technology 8 (February): 467–92. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-food-041715-033338.
Santana, Israel, Honghong Wu, Peiguang Hu, and Juan Pablo Giraldo. 2020. “Targeted Delivery of Nanomaterials 
with Chemical Cargoes in Plants Enabled by a Biorecognition Motif.” Nature Communications 11 
(1): 2045. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-15731-w.
Siddiqui, Manzer, and Mohamed Al-Whaibi. 2014. “Role of Nano-SiO2 in Germination of Tomato 
(Lycopersicum Esculentum Seeds Mill.).” Saudi Journal of Biological Sciences 21 (1): 13–17. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.sjbs.2013.04.005.
Siddiqui, Manzer, Mohamed Al-whaibi, Firoz Mohammad, and Mutahhar Al-Khaishany. 2015. “Role of 
Nanoparticles in Plants.” In Manzer H. Siddiqui, Mohamed H. Al-Whaibi, and Firoz Mohammad (Eds.), 
Nanotechnology and Plant Sciences: Nanoparticles and Their Impact on Plants, 19–35. Springer. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-14502-0_2.
Simonet, B M, and M Valcárcel. 2009. “Monitoring Nanoparticles in the Environment.” Analytical and 
Bioanalytical Chemistry 393 (1): 17–21. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00216-008-2484-z.
Simonin, Marie, and Agnès Richaume. 2015. “Impact of Engineered Nanoparticles on the Activity, Abundance, 
and Diversity of Soil Microbial Communities: A Review.” Environmental Science and Pollution Research 
International 22 (18): 13710–23. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-015-4171-x.
Tombuloglu, H, N Albenayyan, Y Slimani, S Akhtar, G Tombuloglu, M Almessiere, A Baykal, I Ercan, H 
Sabit, and A Manikandan. 2022. “Fate and Impact of Maghemite (γ-Fe2O3) and Magnetite (Fe3O4) 
Nanoparticles in Barley (Hordeum vulgare L.). Environmental Science and Pollution Research
29(3): 4710–21. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-021-15965-1
Torney, François, Brian G Trewyn, Victor S-Y Lin, and Kan Wang. 2007. “Mesoporous Silica Nanoparticles 
Deliver DNA and Chemicals into Plants.” Nature Nanotechnology 2 (5): 295–300. https://doi.org/
10.1038/nnano.2007.108.
Tripathi, Durgesh Kumar, Shweta, Shweta Singh, Swati Singh, Rishikesh Pandey, Vijay Pratap Singh, 
Nilesh C Sharma, Sheo Mohan Prasad, Nawal Kishore Dubey, and Devendra Kumar Chauhan. 2017. 
“An Overview on Manufactured Nanoparticles in Plants: Uptake, Translocation, Accumulation and 
Phytotoxicity.” Plant Physiology and Biochemistry: PPB 110 (January): 2–12. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.plaphy.2016.07.030.
Vittori Antisari, Livia, Serena Carbone, Antonietta Gatti, Gilmo Vianello, and Paolo Nannipieri. 2013. “Toxicity 
of Metal Oxide (CeO2, Fe3O4, SnO2) Engineered Nanoparticles on Soil Microbial Biomass and Their 
Distribution in Soil.” Soil Biology and Biochemistry 60 (August):87–94. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.soil
bio.2013.01.016.
Wang, Xiuping, He-You Han, Xueqin Liu, Xiaoxu Gu, Kun Chen, and Donglian Lu. 2012. “Multi-Walled 
Carbon Nanotubes Can Enhance Root Elongation of Wheat (Triticum Aestivum) Plants.” Journal of 
Nanoparticle Research 14 (June): 1–10. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11051-012-0841-5.
Yang, Fan, Fashui Hong, Wenjuan You, Chao Liu, Fengqing Gao, Cheng Wu, and Ping Yang. 2006. “Influences 
of Nano-Anatase TiO2 on the Nitrogen Metabolism of Growing Spinach.” Biological Trace Element 
Research 110 (2): 179–90. https://doi.org/10.1385/bter:110:2:179.320 Plant-Based Nanoparticle Synthesis for Sustainable Agriculture
Zhang, Xinxia, Zhongyu Zuo, Peibin Yu, Ting Li, Min Guang, Zhengxing Chen, and Li Wang. 2021. “Rice Peptide 
Nanoparticle as a Bifunctional Food-Grade Pickering Stabilizer Prepared by Ultrasonication: Structural 
Characteristics, Antioxidant Activity, and Emulsifying Properties.” Food Chemistry 343 (May): 128545. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2020.128545.
Zheng, Lei, Fashui Hong, Shipeng Lu, and Chao Liu. 2005. “Effect of Nano-TiO(2) on Strength of Naturally 
Aged Seeds and Growth of Spinach.” Biological Trace Element Research 104 (1): 83–92. https://doi.org/
10.1385/BTER:104:1:083.
Zhu, Bifen, Chunli Fan, Chunsheng Cheng, Tianqin Lan, Lin Li, and Yuyue Qin. 2021. “Migration Kinetic of 
Silver from Polylactic Acid Nanocomposite Film into Acidic Food Simulant after Different High-Pressure 
Food Processing.” Journal of Food Science 86 (6): 2481–90. https://doi.org/10.1111/1750-3841.15746.321
321
Index
A 
Abiotic stress, 95, 259, 260, 264, 265, 271
Active packaging, 291, 292, 294, 296
Ag dose uptake assays, 172
Agricultural applications, 25
Analytical techniques, 153
Anticancer potential, 23
Anti-inflammatory, 300
Anti-leishmanial potential, 24
Antimicrobial, 277, 278, 282, 283
Antimicrobial potential, 24
Antioxidant, 300, 301
Antioxidant functions, 25
Artificial neural networks, 39, 40, 42
Assessing soil microbial activity, 233
B 
ß-lactoglobulin, 303
Bimetallic nanoparticles, 33
Bioaccumulate, 241
Bioactive compounds, 262, 263, 304
Bio-based packaging, 293
Biofabrication, 279
Biofilm, 309
Biogenic reduction, 290
Biolistics, 63
Biopolymer(s), 281, 283, 294
Biosensors, 292, 294
Biowaste, 279, 280
Bottom-up method, 289, 290
C 
Calcium carbonate nanoparticles, 
214
Carbon-based nanomaterials, 187
Carbon-based nanoparticles, 169
Cauliflower mosaic virus, 47
Cellular responses, 141
Cell wall interactions, 146
Characterization and optimization, 
229
Cold stress tolerance, 106
Computational techniques for plant-mediated nanoparticle 
synthesis, 36
Controlled release, 198
Copper nanoparticles, 33, 213
Cost optimization, 198
CRISPR/Cas9, 259, 260
Crop production, 313, 315
Crop quality, 173
Cyanobacteria, 203
Cyanobacteria as mineral fertilizers, 204
D 
Detecting plant diseases and pathogens, 233
Detecting soil contaminants, 233
Detoxification mechanisms, 147
Dietary supplements, 299, 301, 302
DNA nanoparticles, 66
Drought stress tolerance, 105
Durability, 235
Dyes, 184
E 
Eco-friendly production, 198
Ecological considerations, 153
Ecological risks, 219
Economic viability, 199
Electrochemical sensing, 248
Electroporation, 63
Enhanced bioavailability, 198
Environmental activities, 281
Environmental impact, 313, 315
Environmental remediation, 246, 250
Environmental risks, 219
Environmental safety, 295
Environmental stability, 234
F 
Factors affecting nanoparticle phytotoxicity, 
174
Flooding stress tolerance, 106
Food contamination, 293
Food packaging, 289, 296
Food preservation, 277, 281, 282
Food processing, 258, 309, 314
Food quality, 281
Food security, 281–283, 307, 315
Functional foods, 299–304
Fungi-based synthesis of mineral nanofertilizers, 
198
G 
Gene expression programming, 40, 41
Genetic and molecular responses, 145
Germination and root elongation assays, 172
Gold nanoparticles, 167
Green chemistry, 20, 279
Green synthesis, 289, 290, 292–294, 296
H 
Heat stress tolerance, 107
Heavy metal monitoring, 230
Heavy metals, 184322 Index
322
Human health risks, 219
Hybrid approaches, 31
Hydroponic biomass assays, 172
I 
Interference, 234
Intracellular trafficking, 144
Iron oxide nanoparticles, 213
L 
Leaching, 240, 247, 251
Lipid nanoparticles, 67
Liposomes, 63
M 
Magnesium oxide nanoparticles, 213
Magnetite, 247, 249
Material, 186
Metal and metal oxide nanoparticles, 186
Metal nanoparticles, 171
Metal oxide nanoparticles, 33, 171, 259, 261
Microbiological, 277, 281
Microinjection, 63
Mobilization of nanoparticles in plants, 129
Modification of nanoparticle surface, 228
Moisture sensing, 230
Monitoring plant physiological parameters, 233
Monitoring soil nutrients, 231
N 
Nanobiochar, 259, 263
Nanobiosensors, 312–314, 316
Nanocarriers, 6, 294, 299
Nanocatalysis, 259
Nanocomposites, 259, 261, 263, 269
Nanoemulsions, 262, 300, 302–304
Nanoencapsulation, 8, 259, 262, 263
Nanofertilizers, 210, 212, 259, 261, 308, 312, 313, 315
Nanogenomics, 11
Nanomaterials, 239–252, 307, 310–312, 314, 315
Nanoparticle accumulation, 166
Nanoparticle characteristics, 150
Nanoparticle coating material, 175
Nanoparticle delivery systems, 8
Nanoparticle entry into plants, 164
Nanoparticle fertilizers, 5
Nanoparticle-integrated biosensors, 226
Nanoparticle pesticides, 5
Nanoparticle phytotoxicity, 159
Nanoparticle sensors, 6
Nanoparticle stress, 171, 174
Nanoparticle types and characterization methods, 186
Nanoparticle uptake in plants, 165
Nanopesticides, 261, 262, 308, 312, 313, 315
Nanoremediation, 259
Nanosensors, 247, 248, 259, 261, 265, 266, 268
Nanotechnology in agriculture, 210
Nanotechnology in plant science, 3
Natural pigments, 300
Neutraceuticals, 299
Nutrient availability, 271
Nutrient monitoring, 230
Nutrient uptake and transport, 152
Nutrition, 299–301, 304
O 
Organic matter, 310
Organophosphorus pesticides, 245
Origin, 186
Oxide nanoparticles, 168
Oxygen scavengers, 291, 294
P 
Pathogen and plant disease detection, 230
Peptide nanoparticles, 66
Pesticide detection, 230
Pesticides, 184
Photocatalysis, 249
pH sensing, 230
Physiological effects, 147
Physiological parameters, 173
Phytotoxicity and biocompatibility, 151
Plant-based, 282, 283
Plant-derived Nps, 20
Plant disease, 308
Plant growth, 308, 310, 311, 313, 315, 316
Plant growth monitoring, 230
Plant hormones, 173
Plant species, 174
Pollen tubes, 64
Pollutant types, 184
Polyaromatic hydrocarbons, 184
Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), 244
Polyphenols, 302
Postharvest loss, 282
Post-harvest management, 267
Precision agriculture and sustainable farming practices, 233
Precision farming, 265, 266
Preparation of nanoparticle suspensions, 228
Properties of nanoparticles and their phytotoxicity, 160
Protozoan-based synthesis of mineral nanofertilizers, 201
R 
Rare earth oxide nanoparticles, 170
Regulations and safety, 199
Regulatory and ethical aspects, 154
Regulatory approval, 234
Ri plasmid, 61, 62
S 
Salt stress tolerance, 104
Scalability, 199
Selection of nanoparticles, 228
Silica nanomaterials, 186
Silica nanoparticles, 66, 170
Silica nanoparticles, 66
Silicon carbide whiskers, 64
Silver nanoparticle, 33, 169, 213Index 323
Smart films, 282
Soil invertebrates, 241
Soil quality monitoring, 230
Stage of growth, 174
Standardization, 234
Sustainability, 281, 283, 307, 315, 316
T 
Ti plasmid, 61
Titanium dioxide, 79, 88
Titanium dioxide nanoparticles, 214
Toxic chemicals, 279
Toxicity analysis, 171
Transport within plants, 144
U 
Uptake and internalization, 140
W 
Water quality monitoring, 230
Z 
Zinc oxide, 79, 88
–90, 213
